The Age of Lewis XIV, Vol. 2 (Voltaire, 1751)
==========================================================
Voltaire's Siècle de Louis XIV (1751) - the book that invented 'philosophical' history of civilization; the age as the unit of history. The 1753 English translation, 2 vols. Vol. 2 of 2.

Tranſlated from the FEN of - | 8
a | 'P, | 2 _—
M. DE VOLTAIRE, 34

*

VOLUME THE SECOND;

6 L480 ‚ 2
Printed by k. Us 7
For HEN AV ArrxEns, at Mr. Sravrn' top;
= n. D III. C

f - * _ TT * - — " "2
* *
4+
af * -
% » :
, "1
2 War 1 - #003 42 —
. * - x * ov ” -
, '% 8
. - 4 C 5 4

AGE OF LEWIS XIV.

CH 4 2 1 IJ Bx. 1

PARTICULARS and Augcporzs of
the Re16N of LEWIS XIV.

EWIS XIV, in his court as well as in
his reign, a appeared with ſuch eclat and
# magnificenee, that the moſt minute: par-
ticulars of his life ſeem intereſting to poſterity, as
they excited the curioſity of all the courts of Eu-
rope, and of the age he lived in.
The ſplendor of his government diffuſed itſelf
over the ſmalleſt of his actions. There is a ſtronger
deſire, eſpecially in France, to know the little inci-
dents in his court, than the revolutions of ſome o-
ther countries: ſuch is the effect of a high reputa-
tion. We find more pleaſure in knowing what paſ-
ſed in the cabinet and court of Auguſtus than in
the moſt exact account of the W ALE of Attila
or Tamerlane |
And this is the reaſon, why ſcarce any hiſtori-
an has omitted to relate the firſt inclinations of
Lewis XIV. for the baroneſs de Beauvais, for Ma-

demoiſelle d'Argencourt, for the niece of cardinal
Vor. II. 8 $03 A |

—
* on % * Y 1 .
2 . * >
4 I a. - A
C3 4
"

* Ga
THE AGE or "a

Mazarin, who was married to the count de Soiſ-
ſons, father of prince Eugene, and particularly for
Maria Mancini his ſiſter, who afterwards way. mar-
ried to the conſtable Colonne” |
He had not yet the regal power in his own
hands, when theſe amuſements employed the inac-
_ tivity in which cardinal Mazarin, who governed ar.
bitrarily, ſuffered him to languiſh, His particular
fondneſs for Maria Mancini was a ſerious affair;
for he loved her well enough to be tempted to mar.
ry her, yet was ſufficiently maſter of himſelf to be
able to ſeparate from her. The victory which he gain-
ed over this paſſion was the firſt evidence he gave of
the greatneſs of his ſoul; though he gained over
himſelf another conqueſt of ſtill greater importance
and difficulty, by ſuffering abſolute authority to
continue in/ the hands of Mazarin; gratitude pre-
venting him from ſhaking off the yoke, which be-
gan to preſs heavy upon him. It was an anec-
dote well known at court, that after the death of
the cardinal, he was heard to fay, I know not
& what I ſhould have done if he ling lived any

“ longer.
He employed his leiſure in ding books of en-
tertainment, particularly with the conſtable's lady,
who had wit and ſpirit like all her ſiſters. He was
pleaſed with poetry and romances, which. by pictures
of gallantry and heroiſm ſecretly flattered his'own
character. He read the tragedies of Corneille, and
formed in himſelf that taſte which ariſes only from
good ſenſe, and the ready diſcernment of a ſound
underſtanding. The converſation of his mother
and the ladies of hg — wi, not. a little
{3 ter i, ing

7 << & S655 5.02.4 *9

„ ©

—

3

ch. 24; ILE WIS MV.

politeneſs, which began then to diſtinguilb the court,
Ann of Auſtria had introduced into it a certain e-
levated and noble gallantry, which reſembled the
Spaniſh genius of thoſe times, and joined with it
that elegance, ſoftneſs, and decent freedom, which
was no where to be found but in France.” The
king made a greater progreſs in this ſchool of plea-
ſure, from his eighteenth to his twentieth” year, than
he had done in that of the ſciences under his prece-
ptors the abbe de Beaumont, and the preſident de
Perigni. Under them he had learned hardly any
thing; though it were to be , wiſhed they had at
leaſt inſtructed him in hiſtory, particularly the mo-
dern part: but the books then extant on. this ſub.
ject were very ill written. It was a lamentable
conſideration, that nothing but uſeleſs romances
had been well compoſed, and that all uſeful and.
inſtructive writings were wrote in a diſagreeable
manner. A tranſlation of Caeſar's commentaries
was printed under his name, and one of Florus
under his brother's; but theſe princes were no o-
ther ways concerned in them, than in having tran-
ſlated, to very little purpoſe, ſome pallages from
thoſe authors, for their exerciſes. |

The two perſons who directed the education of
the king, under his governor the marechal de Ville,
roi, were ſuch as ſhould be choſen, men at once
both learned and amiable, Perigni was one of the
fineſt wits of France, and is the. author of theſe
verſes, afterwards ſet to muſic by Lully.

A. 2

TA * » 4
\ 4 N
— of 4
I 1 "ox
- * PL.
* A
p 3
3 +

4 P * ou

4 THE AGE. or cs 200

Dans wos concerts norden, Muſes, fits entnive
A Pempire Francois ce quil doit efperer, ©
Ai monde entier ce qu'il doit admirer.
Aux Reis er quiils dotvent apprendre.

Aonian maids reſound, in lofty ſong,  _, -
What glorious hopes to Gallia now belong
Inform the world what prince it ſnould _— \
wines emulating figlse.

Their pupil, however, made but lite progreſs
PEN them. The civil wars were the cauſe, and
Maxarin was gatisfied that the king ſhould know
but Iittle.. His paſſion for Maria Mancini made
him eaſily learn 4 nns, and at the time of his
marriage he applied himſelf to Spaniſh, but with.
leſs ſucceſs. The neglect of his ſtudies when a
| youth, a timidity which aroſe from the fear of ex-

poſing himfelf, and the ignorance in which cardi-
nal Mazarin kept him, made the court imagine he
would be always govern'd like Lewis XIII. 5
father. |
har hits wok one occaſion on which thoſe a
can foreſee things at a diſtance, diſcovered whit
he would be. This was in the year 1 665; the
civil wars were then at an end, he had made his
firſt campaign, and the ceremony of his coronati-
on had been performed: the parliament was ll
inclined to continue its affemblies on account of
ſome edicts. The king, who was not then ſeven-
teen years old, left Vincennes in his hunting · dreſs,
followed by all his court, entered the parliament
in his great boots and a whip in his hand, and
pronounced theſe words; © 'The miſchievous con-
« ſequences of your allemblies are well known; 1

France, could not yet be called an art: But tragedy,

3 9 n yo: V- ww 4 « COL. a *., ue 1 * / * ” * a, Wa - a * — 2 — =y — — 1 ,

Ch. 24. LEWIS IVC 3
« therefore order theſe which are met to diſcuſs my
« edicts, be now at an end: You, Mr. Preſident,
« ] command you no longer to fuffer theſe aſſem-
blies, and forbid all the W
« them. 1.

The nijcfty of s Nate the Swi ts |
countenance, and the commanding air and tone of
voice with which he fpoke, ſtruck them more than
the authority of his ſtation, which till then, had
been but little reſpected. But this firſt bloom of
his greatneſs ſeemed inſtantly to vaniſh, and the
fruit never appeared till the death of the cardinal.

The court, after the triumphant return of Ma-
zarin, was entirely engaged in gaming, dancing and
comedy; which laſt being then in its infaney in

through the genius of Peter Corneille, was even
then exhibited in great perfection. A pariſh. pri
of St. Germain VAuxerrois, inclining to the rig
rous notions of the Janſeniſts, had often written to
the queen againſt theſe exhibitions, from the firſt
years of her regency. He pretended; that to be pre-
fent at them was a damnable ſin, and even pro-
cured this anathema to be ſigned by ſeven doctors
of the Sorbonne; but the abbe de Beaumont, the
king's preceptor, being ſupported by the approbati-
on of a greater number of doctors than what had
concurred in the cenſure with the ſtern prieſt, quiet-
ed the ſcruples of the queen: and when he became
archbiſhop of Paris, he authoriſed that opinion,

which he had defended when he was only an abbot.

It is neceſſary to obſerve, that from the time
cardinal Richlieu had introduced into * Ore
AS 4: |

k 28 * FA q TR hs » I 5 q x CLE} * e *

_— F no od 2 * A 7 4 * . Z% a 1 K . J

H + MIS „ 4 N * 1 2 19 2 « 1 * « * 0 N

p o A ; 4 1 : Þ l * 1 R 1
— By N 2
= - = , l \
* ö $
. .
_
* .

's _ THE AGE OF G2
theſe regular dramas which have made Paris the ri-
val of Athens, he had not only a bench there for
the academy, in whoſe body there were many ec-
clefiaſtics, ' but had alſo e
biſhops.

In the years 1646 and 1654, Cardinal Mars.
rin introduced Italian operas upon the theatre of
the royal palace, and the little Bourbon near the
Louvre, and had them performed by ſingers which
he had ſent for from Italy. Florence had very
lately given birth to this new diverſion, a country
at that time equally favoured by nature and for-
tune, and to which was owing the revival of many
arts which were for whole ages utterly forgotten;
as well as the invention of many others not known
before. In France there were ſtil ſome remains
of its former barbarity, which appeared in oppoſ-
ing the eſtabliſhment of theſe arts.

The Janſeniſts, whom the cardinals Richlieu and
Mazarin were deſirous to ſuppreſs, revenged them-

ſelves upon the pleaſures theſe two miniſters pro-
cured for the nation. The Lutherans and Calvi.
niſts had behaved in the ſame manner, in the time
of Leo X. Indeed, a pretended auſterity is fre-
quently all that is neceſſary for the propagation of
new doctrines. The ſame perſons, who would o-
verturn a ſtate to eſtabliſh an opinion often very
abſurd, anathematiſe the innocent amuſements ne-
ceſſary for a great city, and the arts which contri«
bute to the ſplendor of a nation. The abolition
of dramatic entertainments would have been a de-
ſign more worthy the age of Attila than that of,

Lewis XV. 2
Dancing, which may even be Kt Wt” among

©”
— ra

<< ESC 3 0 11

KR 1

r r e 4 9-5, 4 31 tos

ch. 24. LEWIS XIV.” 7

the arts, fince it is the to rules; and; gives:
gracefulneſs to the body, was one of the greateſt |

amuſements of the court. Lewis XIII. had never

danced but once in 162 5, at à ball of ſo toarſe/

and inelegant a taſte, as gave no room to gueſs

what the arts would be thirty years after. Lewis
XIV. excelled in ſerious dances, which ſuited the

majeſty of his figure, and did not hurt the digni-
ty of his character. His running at the ring, which
was ſometimes performed, and in which great mag-
nificence was diſplayed, diſcovered with advantage
the dexterity he was maſter of in all his exerciſes.
The elegance and magnificence, now riſing. in
France, appeared in every thing; and though but

bttle in compariſon to what was ſeen when the

king took the power into his own hands, yet it was
ſufficient to raiſe admiration after the horrors of a
civil war, and the gloomy and retired life of Lewis
XIII. That prince, a ſickly and peeviſh man, had
neither the houſes, attendants, nor furniture of a
king. The jewels then belonging to the crown
were not valued at more than a hundred thouſand

crowns. Cardinal Mazarin left but to the value

of twelve hundred thouſand, and now they are
rated at more than twenty millions of livres.
At the marriage of Lewis XIV every thing af-

ſumed a yet higher air of taſte and magnificence,
which was from that time always improving. When

he made his public entry, with the queen his con-

ſort, all Paris beheld with a tender and reſpectful
admiration, this young princeſs, who was extreme-
ly handſome, carried in a magnificent chariot of a

new invention. The king on horſeback by her '
lide, adorned with every thing which art could

#

* THE AGE or . 21

give to his heroic and manly beauty, —
W nere |

At the end of the alleys of vine .
en » uin ab arch; deſigned by Claude” Per-
rault, the baſe of which was. of ſtone: But they
had not time fufficient to finiſh it with durable ma.

terials.” It was completed only with plaiſter, and
has been ſince totally demoliſhed. The gate of St.
Anthony was alſo rebuilt on the fame occaſion;
which, though a ſtructure of but indifferent taſte;
is, however, adorned with pieces of tolerable ſcul-
pture. 'Thoſe who, on the day that the battle of
St. Anthony was fought, had ſeen great numbers
of "their dead and dying citizens brought bach
through this gate, then decorated like a herſe;
when they beheld an entry ſo different, bleſſed
heaven, and gave thanks for ſo happy a change.
Mazarin, to celebrate this marriage, had an Ita.
lan opera repreſented at the Louvre, entitled Ercole
amante but it did not pleaſe the French; all che
ſatisfaction it gave them, aroſe from ſeeing the king
and queen dance in it. The cardinal was willing
to diſtinguiſh himſelf by giving a repreſeatation
more to the taſte of the nation. De Lione, ſecres
tary of ftate, undertook to have a kind of allego-
Tica} tragedy, compoſed in the manner of Ewropa, in
which Richlieu bad been concerned. It was lucky
for the great Corneille, that he was not choſen to
execute this diſagreeable taſk. The ſubject was
Lifis and Heſperia ; Spain was meant by Heſperia,
and France by Lit. The piece was to be com.
poſed by Quinaut, who had juſt gained a great 8
putation by the Falſe Tiberinus, a piece, Which
though bad,; met with prodigious ſucceſa- H

95 * tm my

=.

„ =, = za ww za” EE  -A © 3

. -
. -

Qs

—
*

A 8, FFK KFA

.

rer S 8

—
—

2

ch. 24. LEWIS MV. 9

ad not the ſame fortune; t was played ar the”
Louvre, but had nothing beuutiful, except the min ·
hinery. De Riex, Marquis of Soardae, towhorm _
rance afterwards owed" the” eſtabliſhrnent of the -
dera, had at the ſame time, the Colubm fledts, la
Toiſin dor, of Corneille, performed, with uf its"

machines, at his own experice in bis eaftle of New.

bourg.  Quinaut, a young man of am agreeable!
nce, was ſupported by the court, and Cor
eile by his character and the French nation; '""
From the time of the king's marriage, there wa
nothing but a continual ſeries of feaſts, pleuſure,
and gallantry ; which was redoubled at the marr"

ge of the prince his brother with Henrietta of Eng-.

land, ſiſter of Charles II. and was never interru-
pted till the death of cardinal Mararin; in 1 66 f.

Some months after that miniſter's death, there
happened an affair, the parallel of which is not to be

met with in hiſtory ; and what is not leſs ſtrange,

all the hiſtorians ſeem to have been ignorant of it.
'Fhere was ſent with the utmoſt ſecrecy to the caſtle
of the iſland of St. Margaret, on the coaſt of Pro-
vence, a priſoner unknown, of a ſtature above the
ordinary fize, young, and of a moſt noble and
the road a maſque, of which the lower part had
fteel ſprings, contrived ſo that he eouldeat WIR.
cut taking it off. Orders were given, that H he
ſhewed any inclination to diſcover Himſelf, he
ſhould be immediately killed. He" remained i
this Mand, till St. Mars, governor of Pignerol, an
officer of great traſt, being made governor of the
Baſtile, in the year 1 690, went and brought Mm
from the iſſe of St. Margaret, to the Baſtile, obs

3

-

; a 5 *

10 THE AGE OF c

ſerving always to keep his face maſked. The mars

quis of Louyois went to ſee him in the iſland, be-
fore his removal, where he ſpoke to him ſtanding,
and apparently with great reſpett. This ſtranger,
being carried to the Baſtile, had the beſt accommo-
dations which that caſtle could. afford: nothing
which he defired was refuſed him. His ſtrongeſ}
paſſion was for linen of extraordinary fineneſs, and

for lace. His table was always ſerved in the moſt

elegant manner; and the governor ſeldom ſat down
in his preſence. An old phyſician of the Baſtile,
who had often attended this remarkable perſon-in
his diſorders, declared that he had never ſeen his
face, though he had often examined his tongue
and other parts of his body. The phyſician faid
he was very finely. ſhaped, his ſkin i ſomewhat.
brown, his voice agreeable and engaging.. He ne-
ver complained of his condition, nor gave the leaſt
hint who he was. A famous furgeon, Who was
ſon · in- aw of this phyſician, can atteſt the truth of
this narrative ; which has alſo often r
ed by Bernaville, who ſucceeded St. Mars.

This unknown perſon died in 1704. al =
buried in the night, in the pariſh of St, Paul,
What increaſes the wonder is, that at the time
when he was ſent to the iſland of St. Margaret, uo
conſiderable perſon diſappeared in Europe. Cha-
millard was the laſt miniſter who knew this ſtrange
ſecret. The ſecond marſhal de Feuillade, who
married his daughter, has told me, that when his
father-in-law was dying, he conjured him, on his
knees, to tell him who this perſon was, wha had.
been known by no other name than that of the u
with the iron maſk, Chamillard anſwered him, g

P_ mn.qcz i > « A 2a as i as” £A == as

wy -

A SS ETHEL ERS? SESESET SIS SESES

—

24 Bs 20Vt TI
the ſecret of ſtate, and be had ſworn never to

| ved it.

ccc

the pleaſures that ſuited his age, and the duties that

to his ſtation. He had a council every
day, and afterwards conferred with Colbert. Their
private conferences produced the fall of the famous
Fouquet, in which were involved the ſecretary of
ſtate, Guenegaud, Peliſſon, Gourville, and many
others. The fall of that miniſter, who perhaps
did not deſerve to be reproached ſo much as cardi-
nal Mazarin, ſufficiently proves, that the faults
which are allowed in one, will in another be pu-
niſhed. His fall had been determined when the
king accepted that magnificent entertainment which
Fouquet gave him in his fine houſe named Vaux.
This palace, and the gardens had coſt bim eighteen
million of livres, which are near equal to thirty
ſix of the preſent curreney. He had built it twice
over, and had purchaſed three entire villages, the
ground of which was incloſed in his immenſe gar-
dens; part of which were laid out by le Notre,
and were then conſidered as the fineſt in Europe.
His water - works, which, ſince the erection of thoſe
at Verſailles, Marly and St. Clou, are not worthy
of notice, were then regarded with wonder; but
notwithſtanding the beauty of the houſe, the ex-
pence of eighteen millions, the accounts of which
are ſtill to be ſeen, proves that he was ſerved with
as little oeconomy as he had ſerved the king. St.
Germains, and Fountainbleau, which were the on-
ly pleaſure-houſes the king then had, were certain-
ly very far inferior to this of Fouquet's; of which
the king was ſenſible, and it diſpleaſed him. In

i THE AGE OF c
every part of the houſe were diſplayed the amm
and motto of Fouquet, which were a ſquirrel wich
thele words: 249-1449 gſcendum; To what bdight
ſhall I net aſcend *- The king ordered the device
to be explained to him; and the ambition which it
expreſſed, did not contribute to appeaſe bum. l
was remarked by the courtiers, that in theſe am
of Fouquet, the ſquirrel wes drawn purſued by 4
adder, which was the arms of Colbert, This feaſt
was ſuperior to thoſe which Mazarin had made; not
only in magnificence, but in elegance of taſte. Wl
NMoliere's comedy called les Facheux, was repreſent
ed for the firſt time upon this oc iq The pre-
lague, which was greatly admired, was Written by
ſo often congegled or prepared under the diſguiſe ol
public entertainment; that, had it not been for the
preſence of the queen mother, Fouquet would have
been arreſted at his own houſe, together with Pe,
| liflon, on the very day of the entertainment. It
heightened the reſentment of the king to find, that

Mademoiſelle de la Valiere, for whom he began to
feel a real paſſion, had excited the tranſient ardour
of Fouquet, who ſpared no expence to gratify his
inclinations. He had made that lady an offer of two
hundred thouſand livres; but his propoſal was re-
ceived with indignation, even before ſhe had any
deſian upon the king's beart. Fouquet, having af
terwards diſcovered what a powerful rival he had,
endeavoured to make himſelf the confident of her
whom be bed not been ute to reel, and by" wil
attempt he gave new provocation.
be king, who in the firſt heat Ab
on, had been tempted to have Fouquet arteſted ia

Ch. 24. LEWIS NV. 13

the midſt of the entertainment, which he was then
receiving at his houſe, afterwards made uſe of more
diſſunulation than was neceſſary; and it might be
aid, that this prince, whoſe power was unlimited,
was nevertheleſs afraid of the party which had been
gained by Fouquet. | |

He was procureur- general of the parliament, and
that intitled him to the privilege of being tried by
Wan aſſembly of the chambers : but after ſo many
Princes, marſhals, and dukes, had been tried only
ey commiſſioners, a ſimple magiſtrate might eaſily
have been treated in the ſame manner, eſpecially
ince it was reſolved to make uſe of ſuch extra-
ordinary methods, which, though not unjuſt, are
erer without ſuſpicion of injuſtice.

Colbert induced him, by an artifice not very ho-
nourable, to ſell his poſt, which he did ſor twelve
undred thouſand livres, which is more than two
villions of the preſent currency. The exceſſive
price of places in the parliament, ſo greatly dimi-
Wiſhed ſince, proves what conſideration this body
fun preſerved even in its declining ſtate. The
duke of Guiſe, great chamberlain to the king, ſold
this office of the crown to the duke de Bouillon, on-
ly for eight hundred thouſand livres.

Fouquet, though he had ſquandered the revenues
of the ſtate, and uſed them as his own proprety,
was not, however, without greatneſs of ſoul; his
depredations on the public had been committed on-
ly for the ſake of magrificence and liberality ; and
though he put into the treaſury the. money which
he received from the ſale of his poſt, yet this noble
action did not ſave him, They made uſe of an
Vor. II. B |

ASS ZS S FSS AES = SS ©

14 THE AGE OF Ch. 24

artifice to draw to Nantz a man who might have
been ſeized at Paris by a petty officer and two
guards. The king juſt before his diſgrace treated
him with an appearance of particular kindneſs. Moſt
princes, I know not for what reaſon, generally af-
fect to deceive, by falſe ſhews of regard, thoſe of

their ſubjects whom they intend to ruin. Diſſimu-

lation is in this inſtance inconſiſtent with true great.
neſs; It can never be a virtue, for in any degree
commendable, but when it is abſolutely neceſlary,
Here Lewis XIV. ſeemed to depart from his character;
but he had been informed, that Fouquet had erected
great fortifications at Belleifle, and that perhaps he
might have too many confederates both within and
without the kingdom. But after he was arreſted,
and carried to the Baſtile and to Vincennes, it ap-
peared, that his influence was only in the avarice
of ſome courtiers, and women who received pens
ſions from him, and who forgot him as ſoon as he
bad no longer any thing to give. He had no friends
remaining, but Peliſſon, Gourville, Mademoilelle

cudery, thoſe who ſhared in his diſgrace, and logs
men of letters.

The verſes of Hainault, the tranſlator of Lucre-
tius, againſt Colbert the perſecutor of Fouquet, are
well known: |

Miniſtre avare et lache, eſclave malbeureux,
Qui gemis ſous le prids des affatres publiques,
Vietime devoue aux chagrins politiques,
Fantome revere ſous um titre onereux, |

I az combien des grandeurs le comble eſt dangereux;
Contemple de Fouquet les funeſtes reliques,..
Et tandis qu a /a pe. te en ſecret tu tappleques,

— 1 „ a CS A. "2

Ch. 24. LEWIS NV. ys

Crains qu' on ne te prepare un deſtin plus affreux.
Sa chute quelque jour te peut etre commune.”
Crains ton poſte, ton rang, la cour et la fortune.
Nul ne tombe innocent d ou Pon te voit monte,
Ceſſe donc danimer ton prince a ſon ſupplice,

Et pret d avoir beſoin de toute ſa bonte,

Ne le fais pas uſer de toute ſa juſtice.

Vain tool of greatneſs, arrogant and baſe;
The wretched ſlave of power, and power's diſgrace,
Vile drudge ! devoted to the toils of ſtate,
Groaning beneath the burden they create,

Poor phantom, by an odious name rever'd ;

At once deteſted, prais'd, admir'd, and fear d:
Contemplate the remains of loſt Fouquet;

There view the dangers of a pow'r too great;
And while thy ſecret arts the fall'n purſue,

Fear the ſwift ruin may o'ertake thee too:

Like his, one day, may be thy wretched ſtate;
Fear then thy poſt, thy rank, the cgurt, and fate.
None, at that heighth where envy ſees thee elimb,
Stands without foes, or falls without a crime.
Ceaſe then to urge thy prince's vengeance on,
Thyſelf fo near the thunders of the throne :

Such guilt is thine, as mercy ſcarce can ſpare;

Oh teach not juſtice to reject thy prayer.

When theſe injurious lines were mentioned to
Colbert, he aſked, whether the king was offended
at them ? and being told that he was not; Nor I
neither, ſaid he. |

It is certain, that to form a charge againſt Fcu-

B 2

*
”P +»

Ft
|
1
'

8
N
14
Ws

* N
16 THE AGE OF ch. 24.

quet, was to accuſe the memory of Mazarin. The
molt enormous depredations on the revenne had
been committed by him. He had appropriated, as
a ſovereign, ſeveral branches of the-public income;
he had ſupplied the army in his own name, and for
his own profit; “ he exacted (ſays Fouquet, in his
« defence) extraordinary ſums, by letters de cachet,
« from the generalities: which had never been
« done but by him, and for his advantage, and
« which is puniſhable with death by the laws.” By
ſuch means had the cardinal heaped together vaſt
wealth, of which he himſelf knew not the amount,

I have heard the late Monſieur de Coumartin,
intendant of the finances, ſay, that, when he was a
young man, ſome years after the death of the car-

dinal, he was at the Mazarin palace, where the

duke his heir, and the ducheſs Hortenſia then liv-
ed; that he ſaw, there, a large and deep cheſt of
drawers, which filled one fide of a cloſet, from top
to bottom. The keys had long been loſt, and no
one had ever opened the drawers. Monſieur de
Coumartin, amazed at ſuch negligence, told the
ducheſs, that perhaps ſomething curious might be
found in the drawers : in conſequence of this they
were opened, and were found full of doubloons,
gold counters, and medals, which Madam Mazarin
threw by handfuls out of the window, to the poo
ple, for eight days together,

Cardinal Mazarin's abuſe of his unlimited autho-
rity was no juſtification of Fouquet; but the irre-
gularity of the proceedings againſt him, the length
of his trial, time, which extinguiſhes the public
dium, and raiſes compaſſion for the unfortunate;
and finally, the repeated ſolicitations, which abe Af

—

„ „ wa «a = XXX

Fame A. -

> & KN >

82

* * . 7 8

?P SR AN NFS 88. N „ BS A8 AKE.

Ch. 24. 'L E W 18 "RV. 17
ways urged in favour of the unhappy, with more
ardour than intrigues are carried on for their de-
ſtruction; all theſe concurred to fave his life. His
ſentence was not paſſed, till three years after, in
1664, when of twenty two judges who gave their
ſuffrages, nine only condemned him to death, and
the other thirteen, ſome of whom had taken pre-
ſents from Gourville, ſentenced him to perpetual
exile. This puniſhment the king commuted for
another more ſevere, by confining him in the caſtle
of Pignerol, in which, all hiſtorians unanimouſly
ſay, that he died in 1680; but it is certain,
that before his death, he had liberty to retire
to an eſtate, belonging to his wife, of which I was
aſſured, long ago, by the counteſs de Vaux, his
daughter-in-law, and it has been ſince confirmed
by the memoirs of Gourville.

Guenegaud, ſecretary of ſtate, who ſold his poſt
to Colbert, was not the leſs vigorouſly proſecuted
by the chamber of juſtice, which took from him the
greateſt part of his eſtate. .

St, Evermond, who was connected with Fou-
quet, was involved likewiſe in his diſgrace. Col-
bert, who was indefatigable in his ſearch for evi-
dence againſt a man whom he wanted to deſtroy,
ordered ſome papers to be ſeized, that were in the
hands of Madam du Pleſs-Bellievre, in which was
found a manuſcript letter of St. Evermond's, on
the peace of the Pyrenees. The letter, which con-
tained nothing but mere pleaſantry, was read to
the king, and conſtrued into a crime àgainſt the
government, Colbert, who thought it below him
to take vengeance of ſo obſcure a man as Hainault,

18 THE AGE OF Ch. 24.

confined his perſecution -to- St. Evermond, whom
he hated as the friend of Fouquet, and dreaded as
a man of wit. The king was ſo extremely ſevere,
as to puniſh with baniſhment an innocent piece of
raillery, made long before upon the cardinal, whom
he himſelf did not regret, and againſt whom, all-the
court, for ſome years, had, without the leaſt cen.
fure, vented reproaches and invectives. Of a thou- Nc
ſand papers written againſt that miniſter, that only
was puniſhed, which was the leaſt ſevere; 1 this
too, after his death. |

St. Evermond retired to England, and paſſed the
remainder of his days amongſt a free and philoſo-
phical, people. The Marquis de Miremont, his
friend, told me ſormerly at London, that there
was another cauſe of his diſgrace, which St. E.
vermond would never reveal. **

The new miniſter of the revenues, with the plain
title of comptroller general, juſtified the ſeverity of
his proſecutions, by re- eſtabliſhing that regularity
which his predeceſſors had deſtroyed, and by labour:
ing inceſſantly to increaſe the power of the ſtats,

The court became the centre of pleaſure, and
the model of other courts; the king took a pride
in giving entertainments, which might obliterate the
memory of Fouquet's. Nature ſeemed then to
take a pleaſure in giving France the greateſt men in

every art, and in aſſembling at the court of Lewis
LIV, the molt beautiful and graceful perionages *
both ſexes.

The king ſurpaſſed all his courtiers by the ſupe
rior dignity of his perſon, and the majeſtic beauty
of his countenance, The tone of his voice, which
u as inſinuating and noble, gained the hearts of thoſe

— .c-

na aw oa ed OA \ Aa CHIY wich £ x $639) rs fun

1. 24. LE WIS XIV. 19

hich his preſenee intimidated.” His manner of
alking was ſuitable only to his own rank and per-
on, and in any other would have been ridiculous.
The confuſion into which he threw thoſe who
ſpoke to him, flattered him with a pleaſing convi-
tion of his own ſuperiority. The old officer, who,
hen he came to aſk a favour of him, was fo dif-
Weconcerted, that he ſtammered and could not finiſh
Whis diſcourſe, but could only fay, © May it pleaſe
your majeſty to believe, that I do not tremble thus
before your enemies; found no difficulty to ob-
Vin his requeſt, wen

= Polite converſation was not yet brought to per.
Wfection at court. Anne of Auſtria, the queen mo-
rer, began to love retirement. The queen con-
ort ſcarcely underſtood French, and her innate
oodneſs was her only merit. The king's ſiſter- in-
aw, the princeſs of England, introduced into the
ourt the charms of an agreeable and ſprightly con-
Wvcriation, which ſhe improved ſoon afterwards, by
the reading of good authors, and by a juſt and re-
fined taſte. She alſo made herſelf perfe& in the
language which ſhe could not write with propriety
at the time of her marriage. She inſpired a new
emulation of wit, and introduced into the court
ſuch grace and politeneſs, as the reſt of Europe had
yet ſcarcely an idea of, This lady had all the wit
of Charles II. her brother, embelliſhed with the
charms of her own ſex, and with the deſire and
power of pleaſing, A decent gallantry reigned in  *
the court of Lewis; that of Charles II. was more
free and unreſerved, and its pleaſures were diſho-
noured by indecency and impoliteneſs. R
There paſſed at firſt between this lady and the

FS FOE AE ASRD $

7

aS AS

. s 8 .

5 7

as I tes

20 THE AGE OF d. ad
king, ſome of thoſe coquetiſh ſallies of wit, and
that ſecret ſympathetic correſpondence, which is
frequently the conſequence of little parties often re-
peated. The king ſent her letters in verſe, which
ſhe anſwered. The marquis de Dangeau was the
confident both of the king and the princeſs in this
ingenious correſpondence. He was imployed by
the king to write for him, and the princeſs alſo en-
| gaged him to compoſe anſwers for ber; thus be
ſerved them both, without ſuffering either to ſu·
ſpect that he was intruſted by the other; and this
was one of the chief cauſes of his good fortune.
This intimacy alarming the royal family, the king
changed their correſpondence into a ſolid eſteem
and friendſhip, which continued to the laſt. When
the princeſs afterwards ſet Racine and Corneille to
write the tragedy of Berenice, ſhe had in her eye
not only the rupture between the king and the com
ſtable Colonne's lady; but the reſtraint likewiſe
which ſhe had put upon her own inclinations, leſt
they ſhould become dangerous. Lewis XIV. 3
ſufficiently pointed out in theſe two lines of Berenice.

—

mn, wn, — — © 4 — 2

Q en quelque obſcurite, gue le ciel Neut ait naitre;
Le monde, en le voiant, eut reconnu fon maitre.

Howe'er obſcure thy birth by heav'n's decree,
The gazing world had own'd its lord in thee. ».

mn, of.

| _ Theſegallantries gave place to a paſſion more ſe-
rious and laſting, for Mademoifelle de la Valiert,
maid of honour to the princeſs. With this lady
the king experienced the uncommon happineſs of
being loved for his own ſake, She was for 1w6

7

-

—

h. 24. LEWIS MV. ' 2

rears the ſecret object, to whom all the gay amuſe-
and treats the king gave, were dedicated. A
young man, named Belloc, one of the king's valets
e chambre, compoſed ſeveral recitatives, which
ey introduced into their dances, at the queen's, or
at the princeſs Henrietta's; and in theſe verſes they
yſteriouſly expreſſed the ſentiments of their hearts,
hich did not long continue a ſecret.
All the public diverſions the king gave, were 0
any marks of reſpect paid to his miſtreſs. In 1 66a,
W great carouſal or tournament was held, not in
Hoe place royal, (as we are told in the hiſtory of de
2 Hode, or la Motte, under the name of Martiniere ;
is place was not fit for it,) but over againſt the
ulleries, in a large incloſure which is ſtill called the
place of the Carouſal. There were five troops of
orſe repreſenting ſo many different nations; the
ing was at the head of the Romans, his brother
eaded the Perſians, the prince of Conde the Turks,
he duke d' Enguien, his fon, the Indians, and the
duke of Guiſe the Americans. This duke of Guiſe
as grandſon to Balafre, and had made himſelf fa-
mous in the world, by that unfortunate bravery,
by which he attempted the conqueſt of Naples.
His confinement, his duels, his romantic amours,
his extravagance, and his adventures, made him ſo
ſingular every way, that he appeared a man of a dif-
ferent age, Thoſe who ſaw him running againſt
the great Conde, cried out, Behold the heroes of
biſtory and fable. | :
The queen mother, the queen conſort, and the
queen of England, widow of Charles I. who, up-
on this occaſion, ſuſpended her afflictions, were
ſeated under a canopy to behold the entertainment.

So RAS S Fe

8

22 THE AGE OF Ch. 24 =
-The count de Sault, ſon to the duke de Leſt:

guieres, won the prize, which he received from the
hands of the queen mother. Theſe entertainment

revived more than ever the taſte for emblems and
devices, which tournaments had formerly introdue
ed, and which had ſubſiſted long after them.

An antiquary, named d'Ouvrier, invented an em
blem for Lewis XIV. it was a ſun darting WM
rays upon a globe, with theſe words, Nec pluribul

impar. This thought was in ſome meaſure copiet ] |

from a Spaniſh device made for Philip II. and
more ſuitable to this monarch, who poſſeſſed the
fineſt part of the new world, and ſo many territ-
ries in the old, than to a young king of France,

who had yet given nothing bat hopes of his gran

deur. The device, however, was highly appro
ed; the arms of the king, the furniture of "the
crown, the tapiſtry and ſculptures, were all ado
ed with it; but the king never bore it in the carou-iſf

fal. Lewis XIV. has been unjuſtly reproached wit

the vanity of this device, as though it had been is
own invention. The device itſelf has been, pet:
haps, more juſtly the ſubject of criticiſm. Thi
emblem did not plainly repreſent, what the motto
ſignified ; nor was the ſenſe of the motto ſufficient-Wl
ly clear and determined: what may be explained

different ways, does not merit any explanation «yn

all. Devices, which are remains of antient chivak
ry, may be proper in feſtivals, when the alluſions
are new, juſt, and ſtriking; but it is better not
have them at all, than to have ſuch as are poor and
low; like that of Lewis XII. who bore a hedgt-
hog, with theſe words, Qui s'y frotte, 3% piqut.
He who touches me, pricks himſelf. Devices

1. 24. LEWIS XIV, Rn” 23

24.
(© WS inſcriptions, what maſquerades are, whaw com-
red with magnificent ceremonies. .

The feaſt of Verſailles in 1 664, exceeded thn of.
e carouſal, in ſingularity, in magnificence, and
the rational entertainments, which being mingled
ith the ſplendor of theſe diverſions, gave them an
Wegance of taſte, with which they had not been a-
Worned before. Verſailles began to be a delightful
ace, though it did not approach the grandeur
Which it has ſince diſplayed.

and On the 5th of May, the king came there, with
court compoſed of fix hundred perſons, whoſe

pences, together with all their attendants, he de-
Wayed, and alſo of thoſe who were employed in the
eparations for theſe enchanting entertainments.
oching was wanting in theſe feſtivals, but laſting

WWitices, raiſed on purpoſe for them, ſuch as were

Wilt by the Greeks and Romans; but the expedi-

on with which theatres, amphitheatres, and porti-
os were erected, decorated with equal elegance
Wd magniticence, was a wonder which heightened
Sc illuſion; and by being diverſified afterwards a

ouſand ways, increaſed the charm of theſe delight-
entertainments.
At firſt there was a kind of carouſal, wherein
oſe who were to run, appeared the firſt day, as
a review, preceded by the herald at arms, pages
nd ſquires, who carried their devices and buck-
rs; and upon their bucklers were written, in gold
ters, ſome verſes compoſed by Perigni and Ben-
rade, the laſt of whom eſpecially had a particular
alent for theſe little pieces of gallantry, in which
e always made lively and delicate alluſions to the
haracters of perſons, the heroes of antiquity, or the

24 THE AGE OF Ch. 24
taſte of the court. The king repreſented Roger;
and in his character, all the diamonds of the crown
glittered upon his habit, and upon the horſe on
which he was mounted. The queens, with three
hundred ladies, ann
held this entry.

The king, amongſt all the eyes that e
on him, diſtinguiſhed none but thoſe of Mademgi.
ſelle de la Valiere. The entertainment was made
for her alone, and though ſhe was not diſtinguiſhed
from the croud, ſhe lecretly enjoyed the honour
of it.

The cavalcade was followed by a gilded chariot, |
eighteen feet in height, fifteen wide, and twenty
four in length, repreſenting the chariot of the fun, MW
the golden, the ſilver, the brazen, and the iron
ages; the celeſtial ſigns, with the ſeaſons and hours, i
followed the chariot on foot; every thing was in
character: ſhepherds brought in their hands pieces i
of the pallifades, which they placed regularly to
the ſound of trumpets, to which, by intervals,
ſucceeded bagpipes, and violins. Some perſons
who followed the chariot of Apollo came forward,
and repeated to the queen, verſes alluding to the
place, the perſons, and the time. The races be-
ing finiſhed, and the day at an end, four thouſand
large flambeaux illuminated the ſpace in which the
feaſt was prepared. The tables were ſerved by two
hundred perſons, repreſenting the ſeaſons, the
fauns, the ſylvans and dryads, with ſhepherds, res-
pers and grape-gatherers. Pan and Diana appeat-
ed upon a moving mountain, and deſcended to
place upon the tables the greateſt rarities the fields

>

2
>

e332

bh

=2.2 F 4

5”
.

10

Es 3 FF FA

ch. 24. DDr
and foreſts produced. In a ſemi - circle, behind
theſe tables, was raiſed all at once, a theatre covex-
ed with muſicians; the arches which encompaſſed
the tables, and the theatre, were aderned with
five hundred branches of green and ſilver, filled
wax-candles, and the vaſt encloſure was encompal:
ſed with a gilt baluſtrade.

The feaſts, ſo ſuperior . tn. ro-
mance, laſted ſeven days. The king gained the
prize in the games four times, and afterwards re-
linquiſhed them, to be diſputed for by the a
knights.

The comedy of the princeſs Ede, though 1 it is

not one of Moliere's beſt pieces, yet made one of

the moſt agreeable additions to theſe diverſions; *
an infinite number of fine allegories to the
of the age, and by temporary alluſions, which con-
ſtitute the pleaſure of theſe entertainments, but
which are loſt to poſterity. The cqurt was, ſtill in-
fatuated with the notion of judicial, aſtrology | ma,
ny of the princes, through a ſuperſtitious. p
ſuppoſed, that nature, to diſtinguiſh them, had 75
their deſtiny in the ſtars. Victor Amadeus duke
of Savoy, father to the ducheſs of Burgundy, bad
an aſtrologer always with him, even after his abdi-
cation, Moliere ventured to attack this e
on in his piece.

A court fool was alſo introduced! into it. Thoſe
wretches were ſtill very much in faſhion, and were
the remains of that barbarity which continued long-
er in Germany, than any other place. The want
of amuſements, and the impoſſibility of procuring
thoſe that were polite and agreeable, i in times of

You. II. CG

W

26 THE AGE OT d
4gnorance and bad taſte, made them cont this
wretched diverſion, which is a diſgrace to the hu:
man underſtanding. The foot who was then re-
tained by Lewis XIV. was called Angeli, and had
formerly belonged to the prince of Conde. Count
de Grammont once ſaid, that among all the fools
that had followed the prince, not one excepti
Angeli had made his fortune. This buffoon was
Not deſtitute of wit. It was he who ſaid, That he
never went to hear ſermons, becauſe he hated noify
Hiſtourſe, and did not underſtand argument. ©
The farce, called The forced marriage, was likes
wiſe ated upon this occaſion ; but what truly de-

- ſerved admiration, was the firſt repreſentation of

the three firſt acts of Tartuffe. The king was 16
deſirous of ſeeing this excellent piece, that he would
not walt till it was finiſhed: he afterwards protect.
ed it againſt the falſe devotees, who would have
engaged heaven and earth in its ſuppreſſion : but it

Will ſubſiſt, as we have already obſerved in another

place, as long as taſte and hypocriſy ſhalt remain

in France.
The greater part &f theſe brilliant ſolemnities

are Ren deſigned only for the eyes and ears.
Mere pamp and magnificence is but the wonder of

a day, but when ſuch a maſter-piece of art as Tar-

tuffe makes one of the ornaments of theſe feaſts,

the rememberance of them is never wholly erazed.
Many ſhining ſtrokes in the allegories of Bens

ſerade, which adorned the balls of thoſe times, are

ſtill remembered; among which I will here only
dite thoſe verſes made for the king, when r_

ing the ſur

7 ade LY >

d Sat... - + 5 FS

1

wy A nn — w% wo = „ „ as

W

2

*

* 24 LEWIS — | __ |

his ”
au- Je doute- qu/aw — lt
re- De Daphne ni de Phaeton," )
vad Lui trop ambitieux, elle trop inbumaine,
int Dl reſt point la de piege, ou vous Puiſſiez donner';
ols Le moien de-s' 4maginer,  - |
ing Os une fenme vous lite s quun homme vous mere?
vas 171
he No Phaeton, nor us 2 0357

Their pride or coldneſs blind, N
To be ſo daring, or ſevere, .
So raſh, or ſo unkind; JS;
That this can never be your fate,

Requires no pains to prove

What man would dare to graſp your ſtate,

Or woman fly your love ? 21 nt

The chief glory of theſe amuſements, which
brought the learning, the politeneſs, and the taſte»
of France to perfection, was, that they did not in
the leaſt incroach upon the aſſiduous labours of the
monarch ; without theſe labours, he would have
known only to keep a court, not how to reign.
And if the magnificent pleaſures of this court had
inſulted the miſeries of the people, they could not
have failed of being 'odious. But the ſame man,
who gave theſe entertainments, ſupplied the people:
with bread in a time of famine. In 1662, he
procured the importation of corn, which was ſold:
to the rich at a low price, and was diſtributed to
the poor for nothing, at the gate of the Louvre.

He alſo remitted the payment of three millions of

taxes. No part of the adminiſtration at home was.
C2 2a) 2] N

——

228 —— — -

Fl
AY
4 12
.
4
"14
*

!

|
= 1
$

\ |
+}
(4
© 4
"1
1
11
14
1

1.

9

$

,
.
ws
Ll
4
*
4
0
_

% 8 76
— ad :

04 * > = * Y 4 i. = ky 4
* 1 N
1
nn a A N
Vo * by .

28 THE AGE OF ch. 24
neglected; abroad he was every where regarded.
The king of Spain was obliged to yield him pre-
cedence; the pope forced to give him ſatisfaction,
and Dunkirk was added to the kingdom, at a price
glorious to the purchaſer, and ſhameful to the ſel.
ler: ina word, from the time he held the reins of
himſelf, all his actions were either uſe-
ful or noble, and therefore he might make theſe en.
tertainments with a good grace.
Chigi, nephew of pope Alexander VI. the le.
gate a latere, who came to Verſailles in the midiT of

all theſe rejoicings, to make the king ſatisfaction WW

for an inſult of the pope's guards, exhibited a new
appearance to the court. Such great ceremonies
as theſe are entertainments to the public. The ho-
nours paid to the legate made the ſatisfaftion which
he rendered more conſpicuous. He, under a ca-
nopy, received the compliments of all the ſuperior

_ courts, and bodies of the city and clergy; he enters

ed Paris amidſt the roar of cannon, having the
great Conde on his right hand, and the fon of that
prince on his left. In this manner he came to hams
ble himſelf, Rome, and the pope, before à king
who had not yet drawn his ſword. After audience,
he dined with his majeſty, and all the buſineſs now
was to procure him pleaſures, and treat him with
magnificence. The doge of Genoa was treated af-
terwards with fewer honours, but with the ſame at-
tenticn to pleaſe, which the king always 1
with his acts of power.

All this gave the court of Lewis XIV. an air of
grandeur, which eclipſed every other court in Eu-
rope. He was deſirous that this luſtre ſhould reflect

from his own perſon, down to his brother and the

ch. 24. LEWIS XIV. 29

prince, and to all about bim; that the preateſt per-
ſons in his court ſhould all have honour, but none
have power. Wich this intention he determined
in favour of the peers, their antient diſpute wich
the preſidents of the parliament, who claimed a right
of giving their opinion before the peers, and had
been put in poſſeſſion of that privilege,- He deter ·
mined in an extraordinary council, that the peers
ſhould give their opinion before the preſidents, in
preſence of the king, as if they received this privi-
lege merely from his preſence, and left the old cu:
ſtom ſtill ſubſiſting in the aſſemblies.

To diſtinguiſh his principal courtiers, he invent-
ed large blue coats, embroidered with gold and fil
ver. Thoſe therefore, in whom vanity was predo-
minant, thought it a very great fayour, if they ob-
tained permiſſion to wear them, and they were ſol-
licited with at leaſt as much eagerneſs as the collar
of an order. It may be obſerved, ſince we are now
ſpeaking of little particulars, that the dreſs of theſe
days was a coat, with a waiſtcoat under it, adorned
with ribbands; over this coat was a belt, at which
the ſword hung: they wore a kind of laced band,
and a hat with two ros of feathers. - This faſhion,
which laſted till the year 1684, became general all!
over Europe, except in Spain and Poland. They
piqued themſelves almoſt every where in imitating
the court of Lewis XIV. |

The order he eſtabliſhed in his bouſhold; conti-
nues to be obſerved. He made new regulations in
ranks and employments; he created new: poſts a-
bout his perſon, ſuch as that of grand maſter of his
Wardrobe z and revived and augmented the tables in-

1 0 3 een

. . r r

r Keen e aA AS 8.

N W | 7 "3

30 THE AGE or Ch. 243
| Niituted by Francis I. He had twelve officers which |

eat at court, ſerved with as much profuſion and e-

legance as thoſe of many ſovereigns, to which he

ordered all ſtrangers ſhould be invited; which was
carefully obſerved throughout his reign. He gave
another inſtance of ſtill greater politeneſs. When
the pavillions of Marli in 1679 were built, all the
ladies found a complete toilet in their apartments;
nothing either for conveniency or magnificence was
forgot. Whoever attended him in any excurſion;
was able to give a repaſt in his own apartment, and
was ſerved with the ſame elegance as his maſter.
Theſe little things are only eſtimable, when they
are ſupported and dignified by greater. A grandeus
and generoſity was to be ſeen in all his actions,
To the daughters of his miniſters, at-their marri-
age, he made a preſent of two hundred thouſand
franks. 2220

What made his reputation ſhine moſt in Europe,
was 4 liberality without example, which was firſt
excited in him by a converſation with the duke de
St. Aignan, who told him, that cardinal Richlieu
had ſent preſents to ſome learned foreigners, who
had written in his praiſe. The king did not ſtay to

be praiſed, but being certain that he ſhould deſerve

it, he recommended it to his miniſters Lionne' and
Colbert, to chuſe a certain number of French and
Foreigners, diſtinguiſhed for literature, on whom
he might beſtow ſome marks of his generoſity. Li-

onne having written into foreign countries, and in-

formed himſelf as well as he could in ſo nice a-mats
ter, wherein one cotemporary was ta be preferred
to another; a liſt was then made out of ſtxtq pet
ſons, ſome of whom hag preſents, and others pelts

* Er

r NUTT TSS TR TIT '

„ © -& yy wir mW NG = py ws Frm

8 — —

—
—

„„ K „ 4 r 1 4 WH HH 2" 7

b. 24. LEWIS XIV, 31

ons, according to their rank, their merit, or
eir neceſſities. Allati, keeper of the Vatican li-
Wray, count Graziani, ſecretary of ſtate to the duxe
Wor Modena, the celebrated Viviani, mathematician

Wo the grand duke of Florence, Voſſius, hiſtgrio»
Worapher to the United Provinces, Huygins, the il-
Wuſrious mathematician, a Dutch envoy in Sweden,

ö

the profellors even of Alton and Helmſtad, cities
uimoſt unknown to the French, were aſtoniſhed at
Wrecciving letters from Colbert, in which they were
Winformed, that though the king was not their ſove-
Preign, yet he intreated them to permit him to be
Wtheir benefactor. Theſe letters were conceived in
terms agreeable to the dignity of the perſons, and
Leere all accompanied with penſions or conſiderable
Wpreſents.

Among the French, they had the ſagacity to di
ſtinguiſh Racine, Quinaut, and Flechier, ſince bi-
hop of Nimes, at that time very young; and all
Wtheſe received preſents, Chapelain and Cotin had
indeed penſions ; but Chapelain was the perſon
whom Colbert chiefly conſulted. Theſe two men,
though decried for their poetry, were not without
merit, Chapelain had great learning, and what is
more ſurpriſing, had great juſtneſs of taſte, and
was one of the beſt critics of his time. There is
an immenſe diſtance. between this and genius;
learning and diſcernment direct an artiſt, but never
make one. No-body in France had more reputa ·
tion in their time than Ronſard and Chapelain: for
the nation, in the time of Ronſard, was in a ſtate
of barbarity, out of which it was but juſt emerg-
ing, in that of Chapelain. Coſtar, the fellow-ſtus

S BAS 8A N78

I.

BT 8

SS - 88S oy.

u

= * — = .

32 THE AGE OF ch
dent of Balſac and Voiture, * W the
| firſt of heroic poets,
Boileau had no ſhare in theſe mme He
had yet compoſed nothing but ſatires; and it was
known, that in theſe very ſatires he had attacked
the very men of learning whom the miniſter had
diſtinguiſhed. The king, however, without aſking
any one's opinion, took notice of him ſome years
"FS MITE |
The preſents beſtowed on foreigners were ſo
conſiderable, that Viviani built a houſe at Flor-
ence, with the bounty he received from Lewis
XIV. Upon the front of it theſe letters were en-
graved in gold; aedes a Deo datae : in alluſion to
the furname of Dieu- donne, or God's gift, the
name by which the public voice had-diſtinguiſhed
Lewis XIV. at the time of his birth. 1
It is eaſy to imagine the effect ſuch extraordina.

ry magnificence produced in Europe; and if ve
refle&t upon the great actions the king ſoon after
performed, the moſt ſevere and cenſorious tempers
may admit the immoderate praiſes which were la.
viſhed on him. It was not the French alone who
celebrated him; twelve panegyrics were pronouns
ed on Lewis XIV. in as many different cities of k
taly, and were ſent to him bound, and richly or-
namented with gold, by the marquis Zampieri.-
That he continued to diffuſe his bounty upon
letters and arts, his particular gratuities to Racine
which amounted to four thouſand louisd'ors, the
fortune of Deſpreaux, that of Quinaut, but mort
eminently that of Lulli, and all the artiſts who ded>
cated their labours to him, are ſufficient proofs. He
even gave a thouſand louisd'ors to Benſerade, 80

24. LEWIS XIV. IS:
y for ingraving the Pete Cs
hoſis, tranſlated in roundo's 5 a bounty, Which,
ough it ſerved to ſhew the generoſity of the
ince, was certainly but ill applied; and might
ather be conſidered as a reward for ſome ſmall ey
Wit which he had ſhewn in his balls. |
ic is difficult after this to perceive, upon what
Woundation ſome writers have reproached this mo-
arch with avarice: a prince who has lands abſo-

utely diſtin&t from the revenues of the ſtate may
covetous, like a private man ; but a king of
France, who is in reality only the diſtributer of the
Wubjet's money, can ſcarcely be ever charged with
Nacht a vice. Such a prince may, indeed, want a
egard to merit, and a diſpoſition, to. reward ; but
ewis XIV. could not be reproached with this.
Even at the ſame time, when he began to en-
durage genius by his liberality, the count de Buſfi
as ſeverely puniſhed for the uſe he made of his:
e was ſent to the Baſtile in 1664. The amours
Pf the Gauls was the pretence of his impriſonment;
Put the true cauſe was the ſong, in which the king
as treated with too much freedom, and which,
upon this occaſion, was brought to rememberance,
; to ruin Buſſi, the reputed author of it. —

8

Que Deodatus eft heureux,
Die baiſer ce bec amoureux,

Dui Pune oreille a Þ autre va?

How great is Deodatus' bliſs,
That am'rous little mouth to kiſs,
Which runs from ear to car!

* | THE AGE OF Ch. 25

His works were not good enough to compenſate

for the miſchief they did him. He ſpoke his own
language with'purity, he had ſome merit, but more
conceit; and he made no uſe of the merit he had
but to make himſelf enemies.
Lewis would have acted generouſly, if he hal
pardoned him. He revenged his perſonal injury by
ſeeming to give way to the public clamour; never.
theleſs the count de Buſſi was releaſed, at the end

of eighteen months; but he was in diſgrace all the

reſt of his life; in vain proteſting a regard for Lewis
XIV. which nelther the king nor any other fete |
ads lincere.

CHAPTER XV.

g

A 1. of che FEAT Noa. and A
NECDOTES, |

O the glory, the pleaſures, the gallantry, and
grandeur, which engaged. the firſt years of

s government, Lewis XIV. was deſirous t6 add
the ſweets of friendſhip; but it is difficult for #
king to make a happy choice. Of the two men in
whom he repoſed the greateſt confidence, the: one
betrayed him baſely, and the other abuſed his favour.
The firſt was the marquis de Vardes, whom the
king made confident of his paſſion for Madam de
la Valiere. The intrigues of the court made him
endeavour, as it is known, to ruin Madam de a
Valiere, whoſe ſituation muſt raiſe envy, but whole
character ought to have preſerved her from enemies.
He is known to have ventured, in concert with WE

293. LEWIS AV. 35
nt de Guiche, and the counteſa de Soiſſons, to
rite to the queen conſort a counterfeit letter, in the
ame of the king of Spain her father: this letter in-
ormed the queen of what ought to have been kept
om her knowlege; and could have no other effect
han to diſturb the peace of the royal family. He
aded to this treachery, the wickedneſs of making
e king's ſuſpicions fall upon the beſt perſons about
e court, the duke and ducheſs de Navailles; and
Wis innocent nobleman and his lady were ſacrifices
> the reſentment of the deluded monarch. The
trocious practices of Vardes were diſcovered too
te, and guilty as he was, he ſuffered no greater
uniſhment than thoſe whom he had falſely accuſed,
ho had been obliged to reſign their employments,
Wand retire from it. |
= The other favourite was the count, afterwards.
WWuke of Lauſun, at one time the king's rival, in his
ambling amours, at another, his confident; and
Wamous ſince for having aſpired too publicly to a
Wnarriage with Mademoiſelle, which he afterwards ſe-
| * contracted, notwithſtanding the promiſe he
ade his maſter to the contrary.
The king, deceived in both theſe choices; ſaid,
at he had ſought for friends, but had found only
en of intrigue. This lamentable knowlege of men,
hich is always acquired too late, made him alſo
ay, That every time he gave away a vacant employ-
ent, he made a x perfons diſcontented, and
pne ungrateful,

The war of 1666, gave no interruption either
o the pleaſures of the court, the decorations of Pa-
is, or the palaces, or to the king's attention to the
government of the kingdom. \

2

ſate

EAT

36 THE AGE OF .
Fe did not leave off dancing in the balls
court, till 1670, at which time he was two ar
thirty years old. The tragedy of Britannicus be
ing acted before him and at St. Germain, he wi
ſtruck with theſe lines: | |

Pour merite premiere, pour vertu ſinguliere,
Il excelle a trainer un char dans la carriere,
A diſputer des prix indigne de ſe mains,

A ſe donner lui-meme en ectacle aux romains,

" See his chief merit, ſee his nobleſt praiſe:
He drives a chariot in the duſty race
Diſputes a prize unworthy of his hand,
And is the ſport of thoſe he ſhould command

From that time he never danced in public; i
poet reformed the king. His connection with Mail
dam de la Vahere always continued, notwithſtand

ing the frequent infidellties he was guilty of. [Ther
infidelities indeed coſt him but little trouble: &
found few women that were able to reſiſt him

and always returned to her, who by her engaging
converſation, and ſweetneſs of temper, by an un
diſſembled love, and even by the force of habit
had made herſelf miſtreſs of his heart, without tie
help of artifice. But in the year 1669, ſhe per.
' ceived that madam de Monteſpan had gained "the
aſcendant. She oppoſed her with her uſual ſoft
neſs, and ſupported a long time, almoſt without
complaint, the mortification of ſeeing her rival
triumph. She thought herſelf happy in her misfot-
tune, as ſhe was ſtill treated with reſpect by
king, whom ſhe continued to love, and full

15. LEWIS NV. 37

yed bis — —_ ann longer bes
ved by a. 001 been 01
At length, 1 67s, be bad ee the
ſt relief of tender minds, which are not ſubdued
— profound reflections. She thought that the
art which had been engaged by her lover, ought
-nceforth to be dedicated only to heaven; Her
pnverſion was as eminent as her fondneſs ; ſhe
wrned Carmelite at Paris, and ſteadily continued to
ear a hair-cloth, to walk "barefoot, to faſt with
eat ſeverity, and to fing whole nights in the
oir, in an unknown tongue; all which was born
ithout ſhrinking, by the delicacy of a woman,
vo had long lived in much ſplendor, luxury, and
eaſure. In theſe auſterities ſhe continued from
675 to 1710, under the name of ſiſter Louiſa,
la Miſericorde. A king, who ſhould puniſh the
oft atrocious criminal in this manner, would be
Wuilty of tyranny; yet many women have volunta-
iy ſentenced themſelves to this puniſhment, for
e crime of love. There are few inſtances of po-
ticians, who have taken this rigorous courſe, and
et the crimes of ſtate ſeem to require greater ex-
diations than the weakneſſes of love; but they that
oe the government of fouls have little wings,
Nut over weak minds.
M hen ſiſter Louiſa was told of the death of the
uke de Vermandois, whom ſhe had by the king,
e ſaid, I have reaſon to lament his birth, even
ore than his death. She had likewiſe a daughter
y the king, who of all his children was moſt like
im. She married the prince Armand de Conti,

grand nephew to the famous Conde. In the mean
Vor. IL D

ch. 17, LEWIS XIV. 39
ic than a king of — never , 120 hate
ne flaves. —

The princeſs gave all her by e at
twenty millions, to the count de Lauſun, together
with four duchies, the ſovereignty of Dombes, he
county d' Eu, and the palace of Orleans, called the
Luxembourg. She kept nothing in her own hands,
but reſigned herſelf wholly to the pleaſure of giv-
ing the man ſhe loved a greater fortune than ever
any king had given to a ſubje&.. The contract
was drawn up, and Lauſun, for a ſingle day, was
duke of Montpenſier. Every thing was ready, and
nothing remained but to ſign; when the king, ſet
upon by the princes, miniſters; and enemies of a
man whoſe happineſs they regarded as too great,
retracted his word, and forbad the alliance. He
had written to foreign courts to declare the marri-
age, and now he wrote to ſignify that it was brok-
en off, He had been blamed for permitting it, and
now he was blamed for forbidding it. He wept for
the affliction which he cauſed the princeſs; but
the ſame prince, whom his breach of , promiſe had
ſo affected, impriſoned Lauſun in November 167 1,
in the caſtle of Pignerol, for having married in ſe-
cret the princeſs, whom, a few months before he
had given him leave to marry in public. He was
kept a priſoner ten years. There are ſeveral king-
doms where this power is not in the hands of the
prince; but thoſe, who, though they have this power,
make no uſe of it, are more ſecure of their peo-
ple's love. Ought a ſubject, who commits no
crime againſt the laws of the community, to be pu-
nilhed with ſo much ſeverity by him who acts as

D 2

, & > =

S AS FTS S-

S ESA EH LAK SB

40 THE AGE OF *

the repreſentative of that community ? Is not thy
difference very great, between diſpleaſing the ſove,
reign and betraying him? Or, ought the king to
treat any man with —_—
fer from he laws ?-
Thoſe authors have done more regs to this
re who ſay, 4 that madam de Monteſpan,
after having prevented the marriage, enraged a
gainſt the count de Lauſun, for his violent re-M
proaches, demanded this revenge of Lewis XIV.?
It would have been at once an act both of tyranny
and meanneſs, to ſacrifice to the anger of a v
man, a brave man, one who had been his favous
rite, and who was deprived by him of a great for- Wi
tune, without having commited any other crime than
that of complaining too freely of madam de Mon-
teſpan. The reader muſt pardon theſe reflections
the rights of human nature force them from met
but at the ſame time, ſince Lewis never, throughout
his whole reign, did an action of this kind, he cans
not, without partiality, be accuſed of ſuch crucky
and injuſtice. It is enough that he puniſhed with
ſo much ſeverity a clandeſtine marriage, an innoecnt
union, which it had been better to have ſeemed. ig
norant of. To withdraw his favour from the count
was natural, but to impriſon him was cruel. - +
Thoſe, who doubt of this ſecret marriage, need
only read with attention the memoirs of Madems
oiſelle, from which we learn more than ſhe tells

| The original of this imputation, which we find in Þ
many hiſtorians, ariſes from the Segraiſſana, a poſthamous A
eollection of ſome converſations of Segrais, which have almoſt
all been forged. The book is full of contradiQtions ; ; and in-
deed none of theſe Aua deſerve credit. |

z. LEWIS MV. 41
ve there ſee, chat chis princeſs, who had
Te »mplained ſo birterly to the king of the breaking
og g ver marriage, durſt make no eomplaint of the
ſul· N priſonment of her huſband. She confeſſes that
ey believed her to be married, and does not ſay,
this WW: ſhe was not; and though we could find onlx
an, Wh cſc words, I neither can nor ought to alter my

3 2

hoice, they would be ſufficient to-decide the ——
tion. F
= Lauſun and Fouquet were farprifed to meet
ach other in the ſame priſon; particularly Fou-
zuet, who in the height of his glory and power
ad beheld Piquelin at a diſtance, among the croud, .
a2 country gentleman of no fortune; and now
ought him mad, when he related to him, that he
ad been the favourite of the king, and was once
-rmitted to marry the grand-daughter of Henry
V. with all the nn titles 1
Wo! Montpenſier.
= After having languiſhed ten years in priſon, 1
as at laſt releaſed, but not till madam de Mon-
en had firſt prevailed on the pririceſs to beſtow
he ſovereignty of Dombes, and the earldom d'Eu,,
n the duke du Maine, then an infant, who en-
joyed them after the death of this princeſs. Her-
motive for theſe donations, was the hope that Mon-
ſieur de Lauſun would be acknowleged for her
huſband; but ſhe was deceived : the king only: -
permitted her to give this ſecret and unfortunate
huſband, the lands of St. Fargeau and Thiers, with
other revenues, which, though conſiderable, were
not ſufficient for Lauſun. She was reduced to the
mortification of being his wife in ſecret, and of
D- 3

—
=

SSSE SS

8 A 8 SS?

ERP FT ©,

42 THE AGE OF Chas
being ill treated in public, for that reaſon. Equi
ly unhappy. at court, and at home, Which is the
common effect of violent — She 2 in
1693. Þ 8
T be count de Lauſun went afterwards to > Eg
land, in the year 1688. Always deſtined for ex
traordinary adventures, he conducted the queen of
James II. into France, with her fon, then in the
cradle. He was created a duke, and commanded
in Ircland, but with little ſucceſs, and returned in
more reputation for his adventures than the perſs
nal re gard paid to him. He died in extreme old
age, and quite forgotten, as it generally happens
to all thoſe who have experienced great changes of
fortune, without having performed any great aft
ons. In the mean time, madam de Monteſpan
was in poſſeſſion of boundleſs power, from the be.
ginning of the intrigues of which we have been
ſpeaking. Ro
Athenais de Mortimar, wife of the marquis "
Monteſpan, her eldeſt ſiſter, the marchioneſs de
Thiange, and her youngeſt, for whom ſhe obtain
ed the abby of Fontevraud, were the moſt beauti
ful women of their time, and all three added to
this advantage a turn of wit particularly agreeable,
The duke de Vivonne, their brother, who was g
marſhal of France, was one of the courtiers who

was moſt diſtinguiſhed for his reading and tale;

—

r

e eee re toll!

} At the end of her memoirs is printed a hiſtory of h
mours of Mademoiſelle and Lauſun. It is the work of Jos
valet de chambre, to which are added verſes worthy of the Wh
tory, and of fuch impertinencies * me oy the ene
A in een |

Ch. 25. LEWIS XIV. 43

t was he whom the king one day aſked, what ſig-
nified reading? to which the duke replied, Reading
ss to the mind, what your partridges are to my
heels: the duke's face was nen pany and
freſh coloured.

Theſe four perſons were univerſally 5
for a ſingular turn of converſation, a certain mix-
ture of pleaſantry, eaſe, and elegance, which was
called at that time, the ſpirit of the Mortimars.
They all wrote with remarkable livelineſs, and a
particular grace ; and from hence it appears, how
ridiculous the ſtory is, which I have lately heard re-
vived, that Monteſpan was obliged to employ ma-
dam Scarron to write her letters to the king, who
owed to this her ſucceſsful rivalſhip of madam de
Monteſpan.

Madam Scarron, afterwards madam de Mainte-
non, had indeed more knowlege acquired by read-
ing, her converſation was more ſoft and inſinuat-
ing ; there are letters of hers remaining, written
with ſurpriſing elegance: but madam de Monteſpan
had no occaſion to borrow from any perfon, and
was a favourite long before madam de Maintenon
was preſented to him.

The glory of madam de Monteſpan was diſ-
played in the journey the king made to Flanders in
1670, when the ruin of the Dutch was concerted
in the midſt of pleaſure. The whole was a con-
tinual entertainment, . with the utmoſt
magnificence.

The king, who had travelled in all bis military
journeys on horſe-back, went now for the firſt time
in a coach, Poſt chaiſes were not then invented;
the queen, the ducheſs of Orleans, bis ſiſter- in-

uv, and the marchioneſs de Monteſpan, were iu dl

44 THE ACE Or cha

magnificent equipage, followed by many others}
and when madam de Monteſpan went alone, ſhy
had four of the life-guards at the doors of he
coach. The Dauphin came afterwards, with hi
court, and Mademoiſelle with hers: this was before
the fatal adventure of her marriage; ſhe they
peaceably enjoyed all theſe triumphs, and ſaw, with
a ſecret ſatisfaction, her lover, then à favourite
with the king, at the head of his company of guard
The fineſt furniture belonging to the crown "was
brought into the villages where they lay; in every
town was a ball, maſquerade, or fireworks: all the
troops of the houſhold accompanied the king, and
all the attendants of the houſnold went before t
followed him. The tables were ſerved as at .
Germains, and the king in this ſplendid manner,
viſited all the conquered cities. The principal
dies of Bruſſels and Ghent, who came to have't
fight of this magnificence, were invited by the king
to his table, and he made them preſents in the moſt
genteel manner. All the officers. of the troops
garriſon likewiſe received preſents. It often coſt
him fifteen hundred louisd'ors a day in different
bounties,

All honours, ell reſpects, were paid to madam
de Monteſpan, except what duty. gave to the
queen. That lady, however, knew not his ſe-
crets; the king made a proper diſtinction deten
his pleafures and the affairs of ſtate,

Madame, ſolely intruſted with the comme
to tranſact the union of the two kings, and the
deſtruction of Holland, embarked with part of
French court at Dunkirk, on board the ae d-

—

„ 25, DE WIS WV. 48

»k with her Mademoiſelle de Kerowal, after -
ards ducheſs of Portſmouth, whoſe beauty equal ·
| that of madam de Monteſpan, and was after /
ards in England (but with more influence) what
onteſpan was in France. Charles II. was go»
ned by her, even to the laſt moment of his life;
ad though he was often inconſtant to her, he
is always under her direction. No woman ever
eſerved her beauty longer: at the age of neat
enty years, her perſon ſtill appeared noble, a-
eeable, and even unimpaired by dme.
Madame went to Canterbury to meet her bro-
er, and returned with the glory of having ſue-
eded, for which ſhe was ſtill rejoicing, when a
dden and lamentable death ſnatched her away
t the age of ſix and twenty, the zoth of June
672. The conſternation and grief of the court
as augmented by the manner of her death. It
Fas generally believed ſhe was poiſoned 3; Monta-
e the Engliſh embaſſador was perſuaded of it,
e court did not doubt it, and all Europe pubs
ly proclaimed it. One of her huſband's old do-
eſtics has told me the perſon, who, according to
im, gave the poiſon. « The man,” ſaid he,
who was not rich, withdrew immediately after ·
wards into Normandy, where he bought an e-
ſtate, on which he lived ith grandeur a long
time : the poiſon, added he, was powder of
diamond mixed inſtead of ſugar with ſtrawber-
ries.” The court and city believed the princeſs
ad been poiſoned with a glaſs of water of ſucoo-
after which ſhe felt terrible pains, and ſoon af.

r died in convulſions; but the natural malignity

=> SS Fa FA KZ FSF

27 75

N 5

zarles II. king of England, her brother; ſhe

TRE, N
* *
- * *

46 THE r _

of mankind, and a fondneſs for exrdnry
cidents, were the only inducements to this g
perſuaſion. The glaſs of watey Couid m 0
ſoned, ſince madam de la Faiete and another
ſon drank what remained, without receiving th
leaſt injury from it; and the powder of diar
has no more venom in it, than the powder of a
ral. The princeſs had been a long time ill ofa
abſceſs, which had formed itſelf in the liver.
laboured under an ill ſtate of health, and had bee
delivered of a child abſolutely putrefied : her hu
band, too much ſuſpected in Europe, had neithe
before nor after this incident been guilty of am
wicked action; and criminals who have committed
but one great crime are ſeldom found: human n
ture would be too wretched, if it was as common
to commit enormities as to believe them.

It is pretended that the chevalier de Lorrain, the
favourite of the duke of Orleans, to revenge the
baniſhment and impriſonment which his miſbehayi
our to the princeſs drew upon him, was indueed
to commit this horrid crime. It ought to be 00
ſerved, that the chevalier de Lorrain was then
Rome, and that it is a very difficult thing fora
knight of Malta, but twenty years old, at that d-
ſtance, to procure the death of a great pine at
Paris.

It is but too certain, that the weakneſs and indiſ-
cretion of the viſcount de Turenne were the iin
cauſe of all theſe odious reports, which people fil
take pleaſure in reviving. He was, at the age of
ſixty, the lover and the dupe of madam de Coat
quen, as he had been of madam de Longuevill:
To that lady he revealed the ſecret of ſtate, M

| -

256 LEWIS XIV. 47
been concealed from the king's brother. Ma-
: de Coatquen, who loved the-chevalier de Lor-
n, told it to him, and he informed the duke of
rleans of it, The family of this prince became
ims to the bitterneſs of reproach and- jealouſy.

ou
E
w
<©

ge to England, and redoubled at her return. The
rious paſſions of the duke of Orleans, the quar-

SS

1
2 8 8
1 © 2 =

ſs, filled the houſe with confuſion and grief, The
inceſs, ſome time before her death, gently re-
oached the marchioneſs de Coatquen with the
iſeries of which ſhe had been the cauſe : this la-
y, throwing herſelf on her knees at her bed-ſide,
athed her hands with tears, and only replied with
heſe verſes of Vanceſlas, _m_ | |

Fallais j etats———l amour a
Sur moi tant d'empire
Je m'egare, Madame, et ne puis que

Vous dire.

I was going I was
Love rules in my breaſt with ſuch abſolute ſway,
That my thoughts are confuſs d, and I nothing

can ſay.

The chevalier de Lorrain, author of theſe diſ-
lenſions, was firſt ſent by the king to Pierre Enciſe;
the count de Marſan, of the family of Lorrain,
and the marquis, ſince marſhal de Villeroi, were
baniſhed. To conclude, the natural death of this

ſequence of theſe diſturbances. $1
5

heſe troubles broke out before the princeſs's voy-

ls of his favourites with the friends of the prin-

unhappy princeſs was conſidered as the criminal cons -

5 — — — a'̃—
— * = — . *

* 5 — — —
* * — . ˙¹¹ y ͥàt Dä —_—
4 ©
- s

| What. confirmed the public in the opinion\4
her being poiſoned, was, that this crime now fir

ſons. Confeſſion, the greateſt reſtraint of human

* * . < 1 <
* > q _ * "*E
. |

% 1 * | * . * * 1
' > id * 2
40 THE AGE Of - a |
: ” : 4 iy 6

began to be known in France. This revenge
cowards was never practiſed amidſt the horrors
a civil war. But this crime, through a fatal find
gularity, infected France at the time when the man
ners of the people were ſoftened by pleaſures and
glory; and it inſinuated itſelf thus into antlent
Rome in the happieſt days of that republic.

Two Italians, one of whom was named Exili
laboured a long time with a German apothecary
named Glaſer, in ſearch of what they called the
philoſopher's ſtone : in this ſearch, the two Italian
loſt all the little they were poſſeſſed of, and ende
voured by guilt to repair the misfortune their folly
had brought upon them. They ſecretly fold pak

wickedneſs, (but of which thoſe make a very il
uſe, who believe, that the power of thus expiating
crimes, gives them liberty to commit them) con
feſſion, I ſay, diſcovered to the grand penitentiary
of Paris, that ſome perſons had died by poilon.
He gave information of this to the government;
the two ſuſpected Italians were ſent to the Baſlile,
where one of them died. Exili continued there
without being convicted, and from the dark recelles
of his priſon diſperſed theſe fatal ſecrets throughout
Paris, which coſt the life of the lieutenant d Au-
brai and his family, and at laſt cauſed the court of
Poiſons to be erected, called la chambre ardente.
The ſource of theſe horrible events was love:
The marquis de Brinvilliers, ſon-in-law of the Lew
tenant d' Aubrai, invited St. Croix, a captain
his regiment to lodge in his houſe. His too agree

ble perſon alarmed the virtoe of che marchioneſs;
ſhe endeavoured to Inſpire her huſband with a fear
of the conſequenees, but he obſtinately perſiſted iu

conceived a paffion for each other. The lieuten-
ant, father to the marchioneſs, was ſevere and im-
prudent enough to ſollicit a letter de cachet; and
got the captain ſeur to the Baſtile, who ſhould
only have been ſent to his regiment. f St. Croix

ili. This Italian taught him how to revenge him-
ſelf : the ſequel, which cannot be heard without

any attempt on the life of her huſband, who ex cu
ed the paſſion himſelf had cauſed; but the fury of
revenge excited her to poiſon her father, her t]
brothers and ſiſter. Amidſt ſo many erimes, ſtie
had ſome religion, and went often to confeſſion;
and when ſhe was arreſted at Liege, there was found
4 general confeſſion wtitten with” her own hand;
which furniſhed preſumptions againſt her, but not
evidence. It is not true, that ſhe had firſt tried theſe
poiſons in the hoſpitals, as was commonly reported,
and as is faid in the cauſes celebres, a work' of an
advocate without practice, and written only for
common readers. But it is true, that both ſhe and
dt. Croix held a private correſpondenee with per

l ;

Li The hiſtory of Lewis XIV. under the name of Martin-
er, calls him the abbe de la Croix. This hiſtory, OY when
day. confounds names; dates and events. och
Vor. IL eta c

|

yz TEE nv 49

keeping this young man it the houſe with his wife;
ho was young, handſome, and tender: that

which was naturally to be expected happened, the

was unhappily put into the ſame chamber with Ex-

horror, is known. The marchioneſs did not make ,

w

| 90 THE AGE Of h. 1
ſons accuſed afterwards of the ſame. criza
ar A debeaded, and, ng rd Po
but from. 679, when, Exili had, begun to.
pound poiſons, to 1 660, this crime inſected Par
It cannotbe denied that Pennautier the receiver ge
neral of the clergy, and friend of that lady, wa Was
accuſed ſome time | afterwards. of having practiſed
ber ſecrets; and di colt fig Mir hi ſubſtan

LaVgiko A a pef named 1800 .

and others, practiſed the ſecrets of Exili, under
pretence of ſatisfying inquiſitive and weak - minds
by predictions and apparitions of ſpirits, / The t
erime was believed to be more general than it really”
was. The chambre ardenię, or burning chamber; 1
was, eſtabliſhed at the Arſenal, - near the Baſlile ,i 1 6
1680. . Perſons of the greateſt quality were eie
to appear before it; among others, two nieces of
cardinal Mazarin, the ducheſs of Bouillon, and- the
- counteſs de Soiſſons, mother of prince Eugen
They were not ordered into cuſtody, as we an
told in the hiſtory, of Reboulet.. This author is e.
qually deceived in ſaying, that the ducheſs de Bow,
ulon appeared with ſo many friends before the
judges, that ſhe had nothing to apprehend, | even
though ſhe had been guilty, What friends in thele
times would have been able to reſcue . any perlon
from juſtice? The ducheſs de Bouillon was acculed
only of a ridiculous curioſity, - Things of a molt
ſerious nature were charged upon the 9 de
Soiſſons, who. retired to Bruſſels, The marſhal
de Luxembourg was confined in the Baſtile,.and
ſubmitted to a long examination, after which
Femained fourteen months in priſon, It'is off

- p02 x; mm A _wf OO wow mo, Kim NN q4_J3

4285 LEWIS NIV.

52

ns gave riſe to in Paris. The puniſhment of la
oiſin and his accomplices, who died at the ſtake;
but an end to crimes and enquiries.” 'This;abomi-
able wickedneſs was confined to à few individuals
only, and did not corrupt the better and much
more general manners of the nation; but it left in
he minds of men a fatal propenſiry” pe Aa —
tural deaths of violenteQ.
What was believed to be the wing Rar «
madam Henrietta of England, was afterwards
thought to be her daughter's Maria Louiſa, who
was married in 1 679 to Charles II. king of Spain:
This young princeſs fet out with regret for Ma-
did. Mademoiſelle had often ſaid to Monſieur;
the king's brother, Do not bring your daughter fe
often to court, ſhe will be too nnſerable hr other plas
ces, This young princeſs was deſirous of marry-
ing the Dauphin. I make you queen of Spain, (aid
the king to her, what could I dv more for: my daught
ter * Ah, replied ſhe," it #s in yotir power 10 15
more for your nicee. She was ſnatched from the
world in 1 689, at the ſame age as her mother. It
was undoubtedly believed, that the Auſtrian mini-
ſters of Charles II. would get rid of her, becauſe
the loved her own country, and might prevent the
king her huſband from declaring for the "allies a:
gainſt France ; they even ſent her from Verſailles
what they believed to be a counter poiſon, which
was a very uncertain precaution ; for as there is no
fuch thing as an univerfal antidote,” what might
cure one diſtemper, may ſtrengthen another. This
imaginary n arrived been Thoſe,
E * f | DIE FTI |

dle to conceive the ſhocking reports theſe accuſati- *

2 l & .
*
o . * * * 7
, ”
”

52 THE 40 Or

who read the memoirs compiled by the marquis

nnn
at ſupper. © The queen of Spain is dead, pok
« ſoned by eating of an Eel pye; and che count;
« de Pernits, and the Cameriſts, Zapeita and Ning
« ho eat of it after her, are alſo dead of the
« ſame poiſon. .

Aker ceading ſuch a ſtrange anecdote in the
manuſcript memoirs, faid to be compoſed with
great care by a courtier, who during forty year
was almoſt always with Lewis XIV ; I ſhould e.
vertheleſs doubt the truth of this. I inquired of
ſome of the king's old domeſties, whether it was
true, that the monarch, ho was always. circum
ſpect in his diſcourſe, had ever {poke ſuch imp
dent wards ? They all aſſured me that nothing
could be more falſe. 1 alſo aſked ſome conlider-
able perſans who came from Spain, whether it was
true, that thoſe three ladies had died with the
queen; they proteſted; to me, that all chree has
ſyrvived their miſtreſs a long time. To conclude,

I am convinced that the marquis de Dangeau

memoirs, which have been looked upon as 12"
Juable monument, was nothing but the reports &f
the day, written by one of bis domeſtics; and
dare fay, this will | ſufficiently appear by the tig
the trifles, and the falſhood with which that coll:
tion is filled. After all theſe melancholy ideas
into which we bave been led by the death 0
Henrietta of England, we will now return 40
the adyentures which happened at court alter
her death.

The princeſs. Palatine ſacreedad * 2
terwands, and was mother of the duke of Orleans

28 Ch. 23. IE WIS NV. 53

Se gent of the kingdom. To enable her to m
ords onſieur, there was à neceſſity for her renduncing

Calviniſm; but the always preſerved for her former
eligion, that ſecret reſpect which it is Jifficule
to ſhake off, when it has been ingraſies. .
heart in childhood.

The unfortunate adventure of one of the
queen's maids of honour in the year 1673,
was the cauſe of a new eſtabliſhment at court.
This difaſter is known by a ſonnet of L'Avorton,
whoſe verſes have been ſo often quoted. 4

Toi que Pamour fit har un crime, | öò 5

Et que Phonneur defait par um crime 'a ſor feu,
Funeſte cuvrage de Pamour, |
De Phonneur funeſte victime. etc.

Thou who by love waſt criminally form'd,
Deſtroy'd by guilty honour in its turn,
Of love the fatal iſſue we ſhould mourn,
The victim dire of honour, to be ſcorn d, etc.

The dangers inſeparable from the ſtation of a
maid of honour, in 'a gay and voluptuous court,
determined them to change the twelve maids of
honour which adorned the queen's court, for
twelve ladies of the palace; and from that time
the queen's houſhold has always been thus com-
poſed. This eſtabli made the court more
numerous and magnificent, by adding to it the re-
lations and huſbands of theſe ladies, which im-
proved its ſociety, and produced greater 'opulence.

The pric.ccſs of Bavaria, wife of the

E 3

r D NN SBEDSADLESSEEREE FER SES FEES:

_ 2 2 ub s 0 "
2 F wo x . ?
| = .

: 4

1

54 THE AGE OT &
at her firſt appearance at court, diffuſed into g
new ſplendor and vivacity; yet the marchioneſs de
Monteſpan continued to attract the greateſt atten:
tion: but at laſt, ſhe alſo ceaſed to pleaſe, and
the haughry and inſolent ſallies of her grief "=
not reclaim a heart which had forſaken her.
vertheleſs, ſhe ſtill remained at court, where ©
had an important employment, which was ſuperit
tendant of the queen's houthold, and ſtill preferyet
fome intereſt with the king by her children, by ha.
bit, and by a long eſtabliſhed aſcendent.
All the appearances of friendſhip and reſpeft
continued to be ſhown" to ber, which, however,
did not appeaſe her; for the king, though concen
ed at her extreme uneaſineſs, of which he was the
cauſe, yet being carried away by other indinations,
he began to taſte a pleaſure in the converſation of
madam de Maintenon, which he no lenger enjoyed
with his former miſtreſs. He was at once divided
| between madam de Monteſpan, whom he was not
able to quit, Mademoiſelle de Fontange; whom he
loved, and madam de Maintenon, whoſe converlatis
on became neceſſary to his diſquieted mind. Theſe
three rivals for his favour held all the court in ſi⸗
ſpence. It appears to the honour of Lewis XIV.
that none of his intrigues had any influence” on
public affairs; and that love, which agitated the cult
never cauſed the leaſt diſturbance in the govern
ment. In my opinion nothing can better prove
that Lews XIV. had a ng as great as * — **
tender. 1990
I mould even think, that 'theſe ooch Wage
which are foreign to the ſtats, ought ne
have a place in hiſtory, did not the name of

/

e 7 j 4 l 7 * 4 by
L
1 4 1 Fu
8
*
*

. 26. 1 XIV. 39

25

0 1 wis XIV. make every thing intereſting ; and
not the fame myſteries been unveiled by fo
ny hiſtorians, * in 2 have” bracts wed

nted them..

PEI

CHAP TER XXVI. _

1 The Continuation. of the Ax RO ES.
pelt ADAM de Fontange became with child in
ver, 1680, and was created a duchels; but

id not long enjoy her good fortune She died a
ear after, of an illneſs contracted in her lying 1 in,

ns, d the ſon ſhe had by the king did not ſurvive his
r ocher.

yed The marchioneſs de Montefpan, though ſhe had
ded ow no declared rival, no longer poſſeſſed a heart

not jeary of her and her complaints, Almoſt all men,
he ben they have loſt the ſprightlineſs of youth,
ad occaſion for the fociety of an eaſy and complai-
ent woman. The weight of buſineſs in particular
fu- akes this conſolation neceſſary. The new favou-

te madam de Maintenon, who was ſenſible of the
cret power which ſhe was daily increaſing, behav-
d with that art which is natural to women, and
ot unpleaſing to men. Y
She wrote one day to madam de Frqntenac, her
duſin, in whom ſhe repoſed an abſolute confi-
ence, « T fend him away always in affliction,
but never in deſpair.” At this time, when her
wour was increaſing, and that of Madam de Man-
pan was upon the* decline, theſe two rivals faw-

7

y J

56 THE AGE OF Ok

each other every day, ſometimes with * |
ted, at other times with a tranſient confiden
which the neceſlity of ſpeaking, and —
conſtraint, introduced into their
They agreed each of them to write memoirs of
that paſſed at court. This work was not cant
to any great length. Madam de Monteſpan, in i
laſt years of her life, uſed to divert herſelf wi
reading ſome paſſages out of theſe memoirs to hy
friends. Devotion, which mingled itſelf in all the
ſecret intrigues, confirmed madam de Mainten
in favour, and removed madam de Montelp
The king reproached himſelf for his paſſion) *
married woman, and felt the force of this ſe
the more, as he no longer felt the paſſion of loi
This perplexing ſituation laſted till 168 5, 4
memorable for the revocation of the edict of N
that time exhibited very different ſcenes ; the delpa
and flight of one part of the nation on one
on the other, new feaſts at Verſailles. The p
of Trianon and Marli were built, and nature
ed to make theſe places delightful with gar
wherein all the powers of art were exhauſted;
* The marriage of the grandſon of the great Gl
de with Mademoiſelle de Nantes, the king's daug
ter by madam de Monteſpan, was the laſt rium
of this miſtreſs, who then began to withdraw fi
court. The king afterwards married two
children he had by her; Mademoiſelle de Blois ton
duke de Chartres, whom we have ſince ſeen gg
of the kingdom; and the duke de Maine, to Lou
ſa Benedicta of Bourbon, grand-daughter of
great Conde, and ſiſter of Monſieur the dull
princeſs celebrated for ber wit, and her tales

\ © IT; 4 0

— — -

'TILEL

ade uſe of the abbe de Bois, under : ptæceptor to
duke de Chartres, to complete the negociation,
at this abbe ſucceeded with difficulty, and de-
anded a cardinal's hat for a regompence. What-
er concerned the court, is in many hiſtories re-
in this manner.

Before the celebamion.of <be.martiage. af Mane -
the duke with Mademoiſelle de Nantes, the
arquis de Segnelai gave the king an entertain.
ent on this occaſion, worthy, of that monarch, in
egardens de Sceaux, laid out by. Le Notre, with
much taſte as thoſe. of Verſailles. In theſe gar-
ns was performed Lidylle de la paix, written by
acine. There was a new .carouſal in Verſailles,
d after the marriage the king diſplayed an uncoms
don magnificence ; the firſt hint of which cardi-
I Mazarin had given in 1656. In the great hall
f the palace at Mark four ſhops were formed, and
urniſhed with all that the induſtry and ingenuity
f the beſt artiſts in Paris could produce, either
ch or curious, Theſe. four ſhops were ſo many
rb ornaments, which repreſented the four {eas
dus of the year. Madam de Monteſpan was n

ke,
in

7 vs

58 THE AGE "OF = Ch. 20
one of them, with the Dauphin. Her rival wal
another, with the duke of Maine; the two
married perſons had each one: Monſieur the Gul
was with madam de Thiange, and the Ducke
whoſe youth would not allow her with deceneyt
have a man with her, was with the ducheſs
Chevreuſe. The ladies and gentlemen; named
this excurſion, drew lots for the jewels with whit
ſhops were furniſhed; and thus the king made
ſents to all the court in a manner worthy of himſe|
The lottery made by Cardinal Mazarin was Tels
genious and lefs fplendid : ſuch lotteries were
ctiſed formerly by the Roman emperors; dut n 200
of them grated their magrificence with = mud
8 as Lewis XIV. .
After the marriage of her dale? nei]
Monteſpan appeared no more at court, but ln
with great dignity at Paris. She had a great few
nue, though but for her life : the king paid her
penſion of a thouſand louisdors 4 month f
went every year to drink the waters of Hourbos
and uſed to marry the girls about that place, an
give them portions. She was no longer at that ig
when her imagination could be ſtruck with tud
forcible impreſſions, as to ſend wen into a nunery;
ſhe died at Bourbon in 1707. ; 2:44 262
The ſame year in which and de Nantdl
was married to Monſieur the duke, the prince
Conde died at Chantilli, aged ſixty-ſix years, F
Hineſs was occaſioned by an effort he made tf
and fee the ducheſs, at that time ill of "the find
pox. One may judge by this ſolicitude,
coſt him his life, Whether he had any diflike wi

marriage of his grandſon with this daughter

26. - LEWIS- XIV. 59

gs by madam de Monteſpan, as, was related in
the lying gazettes, with which Holland was then
efted, We ere allo told in a, hiſtory of the
ince of Conde, produced in the fame ſeminary
ignorance. and- impoſture, that the king took a
zaſure on every occaſion to mortify this pri nce,
id that at the marriage oo the princeſs of Conti,
ughter of madam de Valiere, 115 ſecretary ry of
ate refuſed. to give him the title of high. and agb. :
lord, as if this was the title given to the | 5
the blood. The author who. compoſed the hi-
dry of Lewis XIV. at Avignon, partly upon
eſe wretched memoirs, muſt have been very igno-
nt of the world and the manners of our court,
d relate ſuch falſehoods.
In the mean time, after the marriage E. Madam
e ducheſs, after the total eclipſe of the mother,
e victorious madam de Maintenon gained ſuch an
cendant, and inſpired Lewis XIV. with ſo much
dndneſs and ſo many ſcruples, that the king, fol-
ing the advice of father de la Chaiſe, ſecretly
darricd her in 1686, in a little chapel, at the end
an apartment, ſince uſed by the duke of Bur-
ndy, The marriage was performed without the
aſt contract or ſtipulation whatever. The arch-
hop of Paris, Harlai de Chamvalon, gave them
e nuptial benediction; ; the confeſſor was preſent
t the ceremony, and Montchevreuil and Bontems
rſt valets de chambre, attended as witneſſes, The
inowlege of this fact cannot now be ſuppreſſed, - *
nce it is related by ſo many authors; who never-
eleſs are ignorant with reſpect to Names, places,
Id datcs, Lewis XIV. was then in the, forty

ichth year of his age, and the lady he married | in

.

"a = D
* ** * - 9
7 0 , —

e 9

Wy

ber fifty ſecond. The prince, who was ©
with glory, was deſirous to refleve the fidgde |
ent by the innocent pleaſures of a'prival
1 This marriage engaged Him irt notfling wt
worthy of his rank. Tt was always diſputed þ
court whether madam de Maintenon was triartis
or not : they regarded her as the king's thoi
without paying her the reſpe& due to a queen.
| The fate of this lady among us appeared vi
ſtrange, although hiſtory url many examples ä
fortunes ſtill greater, and more diſtinguiſtied, whid
have aroſe from leſs beginnings. The Matthionel
de St. Sebaſtian, whom Victor Amadeus, king
Sardinia, married, was not above madam de Main
tenon, and the empreſs Catharine was greatly” bs.

low her.

Madam de Maintenon was deſcended: from's we
ry ancient family; ſhe was the grand daughter d
Theodore Agrippa d' Aubigne, gentleman in ord
nary of the chamber to Henry IV. Her fathe
Conſtantius d Aubigne, being deſirous to ſettle
Carolina, and having addreſſed himſelf to the E
liſh for that purpoſe, was impriſoned” in the vil
Trompette, and was delivered from thence by the
daughter of the governor, called Cardillac, à gets
tleman of Bourdelois. Conſtantius d' Aubigne
married his benefractreſs in 1627, and took” Ie
with him to Carolina, At the end- of fome years
they returned to France, and were both, by an of
der from court, confined at Niort in Poitou. I
was in this priſon, in the year 1635, that France
d' Aubigne, deſtined to experience all the cruelue
and all the favours of fortune, was horn: ſhe ws
arried to America when an infant of thiree yes

N —

*

left by the careleſſneſs of a ſerving on the
, was near being devoured there by a ſerpent,
; brought back an orphan at twelve years of age,
| was educated with the greateſt ſeverity by ma-
de Neuillant, her relation, mother to the du-

thought very happily diſpoſed of, when, in
51, ſhe married Paul Scarron, who lodged near
in the ſtreet called Hall. Scarron was of an
tient family in the parliament, made illuſtrious
great alliances; but the burleſque, which he
de his profeſſion, leſſened his character, though
gained him friends. It was, however, conſider-
as a great acquiſition for mademoiſelle d' Aubignè
gain for a huſband, a man, who was disfigured
nature, impotent, and very little inriched by
ne. Before her marriage ſhe abjured Calvi-

ors. Her wit and beauty made her ſoon be di-
nguiſhed, and eagerly ſought after by the beſt
mpany in Paris; and theſe days of her youth
re doubtleſs the happieſt part of her life. After

ar 1660, ſhe was a long time a ſolicitor to the
g for a ſmall penſion of fifteen hundred livres,
hich Scarron had enjoyed, After ſome years, the
ng at laſt gave her two thouſand, ſaying at the
e time, „Madam, I have made you wait a
long time; but you have ſo many friends, that
was reſolved to have this merit with you on my
own account.

This fact was told me by cardinal de Fleury,

Vol. II. F

26, LEWIS e - @

els de Nauallles. After all theſe ' hardſhips, ſhe

m, which was her religion and that of her an- -

e death of her huſband, which happened in the

ho took a pleaſure in often repeating it, becauſe _

"-þ

62 - THE AGE-OF | Chia
he faid Lewis XIV. had made him the fame ch
pliment when he gave him the biſſiopric of HH

In 1671, the birth of the duke of Main
not yet made public. The prince, „

a year old, had a deformed foot; the | firſt:
ſician d' Aquin, who was in the ſecret, .
it neceſſary that the child ſhould be Pegs to t
waters of Barege. A perſon of fidelity was ſoug
for, who would take the charge of ſuch wal
ſieur de Louvois went fecretly to Paris to propa
this journey to her. From that time ſhe had
care of the duke of Main's education, and-
named to this employment by the king, and nt
by madam de Monteſpan, as bas been ſaid:
wrote to the king immediately; her letters cum
ed him; and this was the origin of her fortune
her merit effected all the reſt. The king k
her the lands of Maintenon in 1679, which
the only eſtate ſhe ever had.
 Herelevation: was to her only a retreat: ues m
in her apartment, which was upon the ſame
with the king's, ſhe confined herſelf to the f it
of two or three ladies as retired as herſelf, and
ven theſe ſhe faw but ſeldom. The king camel
her apartment every day after dinner, befote al ©
after ſupper, and continued there till midnight, H
he did buſineſs with his miniſters, while made
de Maintenon employed herſelf at the ſame timeil
reading or needle work, never ſhewing any fol
neſs for talking of ſtate affairs, often ſeem}
wholly ignorant of them, and carefully ava
whatever had the leaſt appearance of cabal a
trigue, She ſtudied more to pleaſe him whogh

\ 26. LEWIS MV. =
rned, than to govern and preſerved her credit
never employing it but with the utmoſt circum-
ection. She did not make uſe of her power to
ve the greateſt dignities and employments among
r own relations, Her brother the count d' Au- |
jone, a lieutenant general of long ſtanding, was |
ot even made a marſhal of France; a blue ribband
nd ſome private ſhare in the farms of the reve-
ue were all his fortune. He told the marſhal de
ivonne, the brother of madam de Monteſpan, that
> had received the ſtaff of marſhal in ready mo-
jey. It was rather a high fortune for the daugh-
er of this count, to marry the duke de Noailles
an an advantage to the duke. Two other nieces
e Madam de Maintenon, the one married to the
arquis de Caylus, the other to the marquis de
illette, had ſcarce any thing. A ſmall penſion
hich Lewis XIV. gave to madam de Caylus, was
almoſt all her fortune: and madam de Villette had
little elſe beſides expectations. This lady afterwards
married the viſcount Bolingbroke, famous for his
miniſtry, his eloquence, and his diſgrace. She has
often told me, that ſhe reproached her aunt for
doing ſo little for her family; and that ſhe had
told her in her paſſion, & You take a pleaſure in
« your moderation, and in ſeeing your family the
victim of it.” Madam de Maintenon ſubmitted
every thing to her fears of doing what might be
contrary to the king's ſentiments; ſhe even dared
not to ſupport the cardinal de Noailles againſt fa-
ther le Tellier, She had a great friend(hip ſor Ra-
cine, but had not courage enough to protect him a-
* a ſlight reſentment of the king's. One day,
2 | | 45 1h

7

moved with the eloquence with which he had

de Maintenon was not ignorant of it; yet ſhe na

whom the rough temper of the marquis de Lowyoi

| beſides this ſhe had not any exterior appearance of

the whole court, given herſelf the merit of a h

* 4 9 e
ws If
* E” * ” Fy a 7 Y
/ _
:

„„  THE/AGE OF © | an

ſcribed to her the people's miſeries in 1 69 8, mi
'Tries which, though always exaggerated, were fi
that time carried to a deplorable extremity; they
fired her friend to draw up a memorial, whit
might at once ſhew the evil and the remedy:
king read it, and expreſſing ſome or gon 0
had the weakneſs to tell him the author, and th
of not defending him: Racine, ſtill weaker tha
her, felt an aflition for it, which cauſed his deat

The fame natural diſpofition, which made be
incapable of conferring benefits, prevented her all
from doing injuries. The abbe de Choiſi ſays tl
the miniſter Louvois threw himſelf at the feet
Lewis XIV. to hinder his marriage with Scarron}
widow : if Choifi knew this circumſtance, madan

only pardoned this miniſter, but pacified the King

often threw into ſudden fits of anger.

Lewis XIV. in marrying madam de Maintenon,
acquired an agreeable and ſubmiſſive companion,
The only public diſtinction which made it believet
ſhe was married, was, that at maſs ſhe ſat in on
of the two little galleries or gilt domes, which appear
ed to be only deſigned for the king and 3

grandeur. That devotion with which ſhe had in
ſpired the king, and which ſhe made uſe of to effett
her marriage, by degrees became a ſincere and feb
tled diſpoſition of mind, which age and afflidtion
confirmed. She had already, with the king and

dreſs, by aſſembling a great number of young wo⸗

1 LEWIS MV. 65
en of quality at Noiſiz and the king had already
ſtined the revenues of the abby of St. Dennis for
ze maintenance of this riſing community. : S. Cyr
as built at the end of the park at Verſailles in 1 686.
e then gave a form to this eſtabliſhment, and to-
ether with Gadet Deſmarets, biſhop of Chartres,
ade the rules, and was herſelf ſuperior of the con-
ent. Thither ſhe often went to paſs away ſome
ours : and when I fay that melancholy determin-
d her to theſe employments, I only ſpeak her own
yords, We may read what ſhe wrote to madam
le la Maiſonfort, of whom mention is made in
e chapter of Quietifm : |
„Why can I not give you my canes
« Why cannot I make you ſenſible of that unea-
* ſineſs which preys upon the great, and the diffi-
* culty they labour under to employ their time
Do not you ſee that I am dying with melancho-
, in a heighth of fortune which once my ima-
* gination could ſcarce have conceived ? I have
been young and beautiful, have had a high reliſh
* of pleafure, and have been the univerſal object
„of love. In a more advanced age, I have paſt
years in intellectual pleaſures: I have at laſt riſ-
« en to favour: but I proteſt to you, my dear
girl, that every one of theſe conditions leaves in
« the mind a diſmal vacuity.”

If any thing could ſhew the vanity of ambition,
it would certainly be this letter. Madam de Main-
tenon, who could have no other uneaſineſs than
the uniformity of her manner of living with a great
king, ſaid once to the count d' Aubigne her bro-
ther, « I can hold i it no longer; I-wiſh I was dead.”

F 90 <

:
f

hy
66 THE AGE OF City

\The anſwer he made her is well known: .
then a promiſe to marry the Almighty.
When the king died, he rired wholly
Cyr, Minds Gurpriling bs, that Leafs CNRS
no certain proviſion for her, and only recommier
ed her to the duke of Orleans. She would Xe
of no more than an annual penſion of cighty 4
ſand Jivres, which was exactly paid her a
death, which happened the 1 5 th of april
In her epitaph, they too much affefted to obl
the name of Scarron. "This nome hh wh dil
rere malt
thought ſo.
Tbe court, no leſs gay, en a
the king began to live a retired life with madam i
Maintenon, and the conſiderable illneſs he had
1686, contributed ſtill more to make him ſoſe ih
taſte for feaſts and gallantry, by which almoſt e
year had been diſtinguiſhed. He was ſeiſed with?
fiſtula in the lower part of his inteſtines. - Doug
the art of ſurgery had made greater progreſs he
under this reign than in all the reſt of Europ,
diſtemper was not yet well known. Carding
Richlieu's death was occaſioned by his being u
{kilfully treated in the ſame caſe. The king's dat
ger alarmed all France: the churches were fle
with innumerable crouds, who with tears in
eyes implored bis cure from Heaven. This u
verſal expreſſion of tenderneſs, reſembles that id
happened in our days, when his ſucceſſor was
danger of death at Metz in 17 4 4. These woe
pochas will always teach kings what they
nation that is capable of ſuch affection.
When Lewis XIV, felt the firſt attacks of th

. 26. LEWIS XIV,  ., 3
„Felix, his chief ſurgeon, went through all
bee ook for ptiene a the ſane iden
: he conſulted the beſt ſurgeons, and with their
Titance invented inſtruments for ſhortening the
adured it without complaining, and the ſame day
de his miniſters do buſineſs at his bed-ſide. And
nat the news of his danger might make no altera-
on in the courts of Europe, he gave audience the
ext day to the ambaſſadors-. To this ſtrength” of
ind was added, the magnanimity with which he
ewarded Felix : he gave him an eſtate, which
t that time was b N e
rowns.
After this, the 155 vent no more to public
liverſions. The Dauphinels of Bavaria, who grew
elancholy, and was ſeized wich a languiſhing ill-
eſs, of which ſhe died in 1 690, denied herſelf
ll manner of diverſions, and continued obſlinately
Wn her apartment. She was fond of letters, and
| even written ſome verſes ; but in her melan-
holy ſhe loved nothing but ſolitude. LOT

It was the convent of St. Cyr that anda ice
aſte for works of genius. Madam de Maintenon
intreated Racine, who had 'renounced the theatre
for Janſeniſm and the court, to compoſe a tragedy
t to be played by theſe noviees, and to take the
ubject from the Bible. Racine compoſed Eſther, :
his piece, having been firſt repreſented at the houſe |
of St. Cyr, was afterwards acted ſeveral times at
Verſailles before the king, in the winter of 1 689.
The prelates and Jeſuits eagerly deſired to ſee this
common piece. It appears to me very remarkable,
thatit had then univerſal fucceſs; and that two years

er

8

Be

7 *

68 THE AGE OF Ch. 20
after, Athaliah, though performed by the ſame perk
had none. It happened quite contrary when the
pieces were played at Paris, long after the death
the author, and when partiality had ceaſed a- 8
liah, repreſented in 1717, was received as it
ſerved; with tranſport; and Eſther, in 1721,
ſpired nothing bit coldneſs, and never, appeared
gain. But at that time there were no courtie
who complaiſantly acknowleged Efther in mad
de Maintenon; and with equal malignity ſaw Val
ti in madam de Monteſpan; Haman in-monſieurg
Louvois; and above all, the perſecution of f
'Huguenots by this miniſter, in the proſcription«
the Hebrews, The impartial public ſaw . nothing
in it but an unintereſting and improbable ſtory: 1
ſtupid prince, who had lived fix months with l
wife without knowing what ſhe was; who, with

out the leaſt pretence for it, commanded a who

nation to be murdered; and, with as little reaſon, af

'terwards hanged his favourite. But notwithſtanding

the badneſs of the ſubject, thirty verſes of Eſther an
' of more value than many tragedies which have had
great ſucceſs, Theſe ingenious amuſements wer
revived for the education of Adelaida of Savey,
ducheſs of Burgundy, who was brought into Franc
at eleven years of age.

it 5s cap of the-contradk8ions in cus wh or
that as on one fide there are ſome remains of inf
my ſtill annexed to all dramatic entertainmenti ic
on the other, theſe repreſentations are conſiderts
as the nobleſt and beſt amuſements for [perſons
royal blood. A little theatre was erected in ma
de Maintenon's apartment; and the duchels  R
n the duke of Orleans, and ſome (owes Wl

h. 2 6. LEWIS XIV. 69
rſons about the court, who had the beſt talents
vr it, acted there. The famous actor Baron in-
uſted them in their parts, and performed with
em. Moſt of the tragedies of Duche, the king's
let de chambre, were compoſed for this theatre:
nd the abbot Genet, almoner to the ducheſs of
orleans, compoſed others for the ducheſs of Maine,
bich were performed by that princeſs and her
ourt,

Theſe diverſions improved the mind, and en
ened converſation, How then could the marquis
e la Fare ſay in his memoirs, That after the death
Madame, there was nothing but gaming, con-
uſion and impoliteneſs * They gamed a good deal
n the journeys to Marli and Fountainbleau, but
jever at madam de Maintenon's, and the court
vas at all times the model of the moſt perfect po-
jteneſs: the ducheſs of Orleans, then ducheſs of
Thartres, the ducheſs of Maine, the princeſs of
onti, and Madam the ducheſs, prove the contra-
of what is advanced by the marquis de la Fare.
his man, who was indulgent in the higheſt de-
ree to thoſe with whom he converſed, has written
Wcarce any thing but ſatire. He was diſſatisfied
ith the government, and paſſed his life in a ſoci-
ty that made a merit of condemning the court :
is ſociety turned a moſt amiable x man into an hi-
orian not ſtrictly juſt.

Neither he, nor any of thoſe who have cenſur-
d Lewis XIV. with ſo much freedom, can deny
hat he was, to the day on which the battle of
ochſtet was loſt, unrivalled in power, in magni-
cence, and almoſt in every kind of greatneſs:
or although there were heroes, ſuch as John So-

— * een
7⁰ THE AGE OF Chi
| bieſky, and the kings of Sweden, who eclipſed e
as a warrior, none ever eclipſed him as a mom
It muſt be likewiſe confeſſed, that he ſupported
misfortunes, and repaired them. He had failing
he committed faults; but would thoſe who '&
demn him have equalled him in the ſame. ſiquation
The ducheſs of Burgundy increaſed daily bali”):
in merit and favour, The praiſes that were er
ſtowed upon her ſiſter in Spain, inſpired her
an emulation, which redoubled her power of pled
ing. She was not indeed a perfect beauty, buy
had an aſpect like her ſon, a fine perſon, and n
ble air, Theſe advantages were adorned by i |
wit, and ſtill more by ber extreme delire of men”
ing the good opinion of every body. Like egg
etta of England, ſhe was the idol and the wow!
of the court, but with a higher rank, for ſhe tlounn®**
next to the throne, France expected from wy”
duke of Burgundy a government like that wing” ©
the ſages of antiquity have conceived, the aulterint*
of which would be ſoftened by the graces df
princeſs, which were better formed to reach f
heart than the philoſophy of her buſband, Ta”
world knows how all the hopes were deeeived, -|
was the fate of Lewis to ſee all his family pig
in France by untimely death: bis wife at ive ui
forty years of age, his only ſon at fifty; and
April 1712, a year after this loſs, he {aww
grandſon the dauphin duke of Burgundy, the 6
phineſs bis wife, and their eldeſt ſon the due!
Bretagne, carried in the ſame funeral car $08
Dennis, while the laſt of their children, who
ſince aſcended the throne, was in His cradle ag
point of death, The duke of Berry, brotha"

26 LEWIS NV. 7

| _= of Burgundy, followed them two years
- and his _ daughter, at the ſame time, was

Fo Goon her cradle to her coffin;  * |
Theſe times of deſolation left ſo deep an impreſ-
on in the hearts of the people, that in the ming- =
ty of Lewis XV. I have ſeen many perſoris who
zuld not ſpeak of theſe loſſes without tears. In
xe midſt of ſo many ſadden deaths, none ſeemed =
much to deſerve compaſſion as his who was neff.
ſt aſcending the throne,
The ſame ſuſpicions which the deaths of Na-
ame, and of Maria Louiſa, queen of Spain, had
:foned, now revived with a fury that had no
xample. The exceſs of the public forrow might -
we been almoſt an excuſe for ſuch a calumny, if
had been excuſable, ' It was madneſs to think,
hat any one had murdered ſo many of the royal
amily, and left that ſingle perſon alive who alone
ad power to revenge them. The ſickneſs which
arried off the dauphin of Burgundy, his wife and
on, was an epidemic purple fever. Above five
undred perſons died of this diſeaſe in lefs than a
onth at Paris. The duke of Bourbon, grandſon
of the prince of Conde; the duke de la Trimouille;
adam de la Vrilliere, and madam de Liſtens, were
eized with it at court. The marquis de Gondrin,
lon of the duke d' Antin, died of it in two days;
and his wife, afterwards counteſs de Toulouſe, was
at the point of death. This diſtemper ran through *
all France, and in Lorrain deſtroyed the elder bro-
thers of Francis duke of Lorrain, ordained 'one day
td be emperor, and to reſtore the houſe of Auſtria.
Nevertheleſs, a phyſician named Bouden, a man
of 83 ignorant and 2 having uttered

72 THE AGE OF © av?

theſe words: We underſtand nothing of ul
« diſeaſes: this was enough. to ſe EY my
free from reſtraint.

A certain prince had a kbvdentory, and amoy
other arts, ſtudied chemiſtry; This was cool e
ed as a proof not to be conteſted. + The pul
outcry. was ſo terrible, one muſt have been a
neſs of it to have believed it. Many writings, a
ſome wretched hiſtories of Lewis XIV. would pe
petuate theſe ſuſpicions, if thoſe who are trulj j
formed did not take care to deſtroy them. I
venture to ſay, that as I have long been ſenſi
of the injuſtice of mankind, I have taken
pains to know the truth, What follows has þ
often repeated to me by the marquis de Can
one of the honeſteſt men in the kingdom, and i
timately acquainted with the ſuſpected prince, d
whom he had afterwards much reaſon to complai
The marquis, in the midſt of this public clamour
went to ſee him in his palace. He found him &
tended on the floor, ſhedding tears, and diſtraftti
with deſpair. ' His chemiſt Homberg ran to ſurren
der himſelf priſoner at the Baſtile ; but they ref
ed to receive him, without orders. The prindt
himſelf, (could it be believed?) in the exceſs.of N
ſorrow, demanded to be put in priſon, that his i
nocence might be cleared by judicial forms, HM
mother alſo requeſted the ſame cruel Juſtification
The letter de cachet was made out, but not fig
ed: and the marquis de Canilac alone, amidſt thek
violent emotions, preſerved moderation enough N
be ſenſible of the conſequences of ſuch a delperats
ſtep. He prevailed upon the prince's mother
oppoſe this ignominious letter de cachet. Theme

” S 8

han too violent, completed the diſguſt. One

PLS PSEESESTRSE.cT

26. LEWIS MV. 73
irch who granted it, and his nephew who de.
anded it, were both equally wretched. 5
Lewis in public ſuppreſſed his grief. W
avoured to appear as uſual: but in ſecret, the
fection of ſo many miſeges pierced him to the
art, and threw him into convulſions. He was
fitted with all theſe domeſtic loſſes at the end
f an unſucceſsful war, before he was ſure of peace,
nd at a time when famine deſolated the kingdom;
t he was never ſeen to ſink a moment under his
fictions,

The reſt of his life was very melancholy.
iforder of the finances, which it was not in __
wer to remedy, alienated people's hearts; and the
tire confidence he repoſed in father le Tellier, a

hing was very remarkable; the public, which par-
oned him all his miſtreſſes, could not forgive him
is confeſſor. He loſt in the three laſt years of
is life, in the opinion of moſt of his ſubjects, all
hat he had done great or memorable. _

Deprived of almoſt all his children, his fondneſs
or the duke of Maine and the count de Tou-
duſe, his natural ſons, redoubled, and induced
im, in 1715, to give them the rights, honour,
ank and name of princes of the blood, by an edict
vhich was regiſtered without any remonſtrance,
dy this edift he confirmed the crown to their fa-
lies, on failure of all the princes of the blood

Pf France, thus moderating by the natural Jaw, the

everity of poſitive laws; which deprive children
Dorn out of marriage of all right to paternal ſuc-
elion. Kings diſpenſe with that law. He ima»
Vor. II. 19

|
T

7

he might carry in favour of two of bis e

murmurs were raiſed. The ſoit that was

2 8 | | * 4 *
74 THE AE Or Wah

gined that he might do for his own blood
had done for ſeveral of his ſubjects; at leaſt

what had paſſed the parliament without opplalith
for the princes of the houſe of Lorrain. Howell

wards commenced by the princes of the - blood
gainſt the legitimated princes, is well known, Th
have however preſerved to themſelves and
children the honours given them by Lewis.
fate of their poſterity muſt depend upon. tral
on merit, and upon fortune.

Lewis XIV. at his return from Mark about f
middle of Auguſt 1715, was ſeized with that
neſs which ended his days. His legs ſwelled; ;aul
a mortification began to ſhew itſelf, The eat g
Stair, ambaſſador from England, laid a wager, #6
cording to the cuſtom of his country, that ils
king would not live out the month of September
The duke of Orleans, who in his journey to
li had been abſolutely alone, was now furrounde
by all the court. An empyric, in the laſt days
the king's illneſs, gave him an elixir which
ed his ſtrength: he eat, and the quack affirmed
would cure him. The croud which had enare
the duke of Orleans inſtantly diſappeared, * *

Ie

« the king eats a ſecond time,” ſaid the "au laid
« we ſhall have no-body with us. The dill”
however, was mortal, Meaſures were takemu *

give the regency, with abſolute authority, tout
duke of Orleans. The king, by his laſt will, Ae
ſited in parliament, had left it him under great l
mitations, or ra ther placed him only at the head
of the council o regency, in which he was on!

> —_ _

„ 26% DE WIS xv 78

uin 7 3
5 *
*
- —
- \

have the caſting voice. Let he told him, have _

cured to you allthe rights given you by your birth,
e did not think that there was a fundamental law,
hich gave the preſumptive” heir to the crown an
nlimited power during a minority. This ſupreme -
thority, which may be abuſed, is dangerous: but
ivided power is yet more ſo. He imagined, that
aving been ſo well obeyed in his life, he ſnould be
qually abſolute after his death, and forgot that
will of his father had been diſregardet.

It is generally known with what greatneſs of
pul he beheld the approach of death. I thought,
aid he to madam de Maintenon, it more difficult
die. To his domeſtics he ſaid, hy do you weep ?
lid you believe me immortal? He gave orders with
great tranquillity. concerning many things, even
or his funeral ſolemnity. Whoever has many

itneſſes of his death always dies with courage.
is XIII. in his laſt illneſs, had ſet the de pra-
fundis to muſic, which was to be ſung at his fu-

neral, The greatneſs. of ſoul with which Lewis
XIV. approached his laſt moments, was diveſted of
that oſtentation diffuſed over his whole life; and
te carried this ſo far as even to confeſs his faults,
7 ſucceſſor has always preſerved in writing, at the
head of his bed, the remarkable words this monarch
ſaid to him, holding him between his arms as he lay

in his bed. They are not ſuch as have been
related in all the hiſtories. The following iS, a
faithful copy of them: < You are ſoon going to
de king over a great kingdom: what I moſt ear-
« neſtly recommend to you is, never to forget the
cbligations you have to God: remember n it
G a2 t 71d | 1

1

P Oy a 8 * " 4
5 , T4 WW" ? N 1 | *
0 ea {i * a . 222
*

— deaths hh5 his aaa |
26 THE AGE. OF - Git
is to him you owe every thing. Endeayous
« preferye peace with your neighbours: 1
been too fond of war: imitate me not in
& no more than in my too great expences.
advice in all things; and endeavour to diltingui
the beſt, that you may always follow it. R
« lieve your people as foon as you can, and

. NT Pee Og
able to do myſelf,” |

It is probable that theſe words did oct
contribute towards that peace which, thirty
after, Lewis XV. gave to all his enemies. W
then ſaw a victorious king reſtore all he had g
quered, to keep his word, re-eſtabliſh. all his al
and become the arbitrator of Europe, ein
| difintereſtedneſs than his victories.
8 - Although both the life and death of Levis 0
- - were glorious, he was not regretted ſo much as
. deſerved. The love of novelty; the approach

à minority, wherein every one promiſed himilera

fortune; the affair of the conſtitution; which

aſperated peoples minds, all contributed to make the
news of his death be received with ſentiments wing
went farther than indifference. The ſame peo
who in 1686 begged of heaven with tears the kings
recovery, followed his funeral pomp with very
19 ferent expreſſions. It is pretended, that the queen
his mother ſaid to him one day when he was wer

3 young, My ſon, endeavour to be like "yout
« grandfather, and not like your father.” It
king having aſked her the reaſon, « It is, faid Be
« becauſe that at the death of Henry IV. the
« ple wept, and laughed at that of Lewis WE
However this might be, it appears that time, will

. 26. LEWIS MY.” 77
\tures the opinions of men, has ſtamped its ſeal
don his reputation; and notwithſtanding all that
bes. againſt him, his name will never be
onounced without reſpect, nor without reviving
idea of an age for ever memorable.

If we conſider him in his private life, we ſee him
good ſon, without being governed by his mo-
er; a good huſband, even without being faith-
; © good fuenf een _
iable with dignity.

I have already. obſerved in another + plack, that
> never ſpoke thoſe words which have been im-
uted to him, when the firſt of his
hamber and the grand maſter of his wardrobe diſ-
uted with each other for the honour of ſerving
im; What does it Jignify which of my valets ſerve
e? Such coarſe language could never proceed
rom a perſon ſo polite and ſo attentive to his be-
aviour ; and does not agree with what he ſaid to
in one day concerning his debts; iy do not -
ou ſpeak to your friends. This ' was an expreſ-
on of a very different kind, and was of itſelf
pf great value; but was accompanied with 2
reſent of fifty thouſand ' crowns: it is not e-
en true that he wrote to the duke de Rochefou-
ault, « F make you my compliments as your
friend, upon the employment of great maſter of
the wardrobe, which 1 give you as your king.“

Hiſtorians. have praiſed him for this letter, not per-
ning how enn

1 Alt this is taken from anecdotes printed among the mi-
Les of the ſame author, nm
0 3 N

9 — 2 N Py 3 0 * hk N = - . a \
II = J ; c NY * tes tha. TY -
y * L g - g 9 -
* * y . q 2 * F
+ * *
- * , — " -
l
. 8

* 8
-

—

% - THE AGE or ia

tell one that he is His maſter, although he is W.

might have been proper in a letter to a rechen

ſüudbject, and-might have been ſaid by Henry TVy
5 the duke of Maienne, before they were wholly

conciled. Rofe, the ſecretary of the privy coun

eil, wrote this letter, and the king had too juſt

taſte to ſuffer it to be ſent. It was this juſtneſʒ

taſte that made him ſuppreſs the vain- glorious inſei

ptions, which Charpentier, of the French —

had put on the pictures of le Brun in the gallery

Verſailles; ſuch as the incredible paſſage © of” 1

_ Rhine, the wonderful conqueſt of Valenciennes, eig

WW - The king was ſenſible, that to fay only, the taking

th of Valenciennes, the' paſſage of the Rhine, exprelle

enough. Charpentier was in the right to adorm iq

monuments of our own country with inſcriptions

in our own language. The only fault was Hatte

ry in the execution. | 7 I

Some anſwers and ſayings of this prince have

been cbllected, which amount to little. Tt was

faid, that when he had reſolved to aboliſh Calvi-

niſm in France, he-faid, « My grandfather loved

« the Huguenots, and did not fear them; my fas

« ther feared them, but did not love chem;

« for me, I neither love them nor fear them.”

| He always expreſſed himſelf nobly, and with great

exaQneſs, ſtudying to ſpeak as well as to act i

public like a ſovereign. | When the duke of Amjou

went to reign in Spain, the king, ro expreſs the

union which was from that time to join the two

nations, ſaid to him; « Remember there are nou

« no Pyrences.” |

Lewis XIV. had more di 110 e

fr ightlineſs | in Fs genius. A * ang 3

34

/

7 * *

n
„ LEWIS Mv. 7
ther do than ſay memorable things. Whoever is
an exalted ſtation, ſhould ſuffer no perſon to
ve their preſence diſcontented, and ſhould malte
emſelves agreeable to all thoſe; who approach
em, It is not poſſible to confer favours every
oment ; but it is always eaſy to ſay things which
iſe : this Lewis XIV. had happily made habitual ,
> him. Between him and his court there was a
onſtant interchange of all the graciouſneſs which
najeſty could ſhew, without being degraded ;- and
ill the arts which eagerneſs to ſerve, and ſolicitude
o pleaſe, could produce, without meanneſs. With
e women particularly he had a delicacy and polite-
eſs, which ſtill more” increaſed-that of his courti-
rs; and with the men he never loſt an opportu-
ity of ſaying thoſe things which flatter ſelf. love,
xcite emulation, and which make a * im-
preſſion.
The ducheſs of Burgundy, when he was _
oung, ſeeing an officer at ſupper who was ex-
tremely ugly, was very loud in her ridicule of his
perſon. Madam,” ſaid the king to, her, ſtill.
touder, „I think him one of the handſomeſt men
in my kingdom; for he is one of the braveſt.“
The count de Marivaux, a lieutenant-general,
one whoſe manners were a little brutal, and who
had not corrected them even in the court of: Lewis
XIV. had loſt an arm in an action, and complained
to the king, who had however recompenſed him as
much as the loſs of an arm can be recompenſed: I
wiſh, ſaid he, that I had loſt the other, that I
might ſerve your majeſty no more, I ſhould
* then be ſorry,” faid Lewis, « both for yowand,
« for myſelf.” Theſe words were followed by

—

[

* n n
* * 2
- » - I . -
\

O * t 8 D |
& +: THE-AGE OF
the grant of a favour. ' He was fo far from
— ©" U
while private perſons every day Pacht the
miſchievous and cruel.
* He bad nl and took a pleaſure in Bade pl
of wit, in extemporary ſallies and ſongs; andf 1

times rde um
n fuch as this:

Chez mon cadet de frere,  -
Le. chanceler ſerrant 93
Meeſt pas trop neceſſtire;

Et le ſage boifrand - |
n

And ths which ke made one dy as be ll

— - 3* ©

| Ie conſeil a ſes yeux 4 hs ted
 Sitot qu'il voit ſa chienne, il quitte tout Peu
Rien ne peut Parreter,, ' r

Quand la chaſſe Pappelle.

— to limbs kn}
le once fees h dug hel e
Affairs of ev'ry kind muſt yield,
The chaſe now calls him to the fed.

- Theſe trifles ſerve at leaſt to ſhow, that Intell
tual amuſements made one of the pleaſures: of
court, that he entered into theſe pleaſures
and that he knew bow to act che man in dg

* wells te monarch, upon heave
the world, |,
His letter to de e of Rheims ho
ning the marquis de Barbeſieux, although writ A
a ſtile extremely negligent, does more honour. 4
his character, than the moſt ingenious thoughts |
»uld have done to his wit. He had given this
ung man, the poſt of ſecretary of war, which
marquis de Louvdis his father had enjoyed.
ing ſoon diſguſted at the behaviour of his new ſe-
tary, he was deſirous to correct him without
ortifying him too much. With | this view, he
dreſſed himſelf to his uncle the arch-biſhop of
heims: he intreated him to , adviſe his nephew;
ſpeaks like a muſics ke Era ng ng:
ith the tenderneſs of a. father. J
« I know, ſaid he, sene 3
of Louvois, but if your nephew does not alter
his conduct, I ſhall be forced to do what I ſhall. -
be forry for; but it will be neceſſary. .' He has
talents, but he does not make a good uſe of
them; he entertains the princes too often at
ſupper, inſtead of doing - buſineſs; he neglefts
the public affairs for his pleaſures, makes the of-
ficers wait too long in his anti- chamber, and
ſpeaks to them haughtily, and ſome times harſh-
ly.” This is all chat my memory furniſhes me
vith of this letter, the original of which I have,
ormerly ſeen : it proves plainly, that Lewis' was
dot governed by his miniſters, as has been believed,
ut that he knew how to govern them. -
He loved praiſes, and it is to be wiſhed that 2
prince may love them, becauſe he vill then endea-
our to delerve them: but Lewis XIV. would not
|

8a THE AGE' or Ax

always approve them, when they were tool
When our academy, which always gave him 4
count of the ſubjects they propoſed for their þ
| ſhewed him this: Which e all the virtues if i
king merits the preference ? the king bluſhed,
would not fuffer ſuch a ſubje& to be treated.
permitted the prologues of Quinaut, but this x
when his glory was greateſt, at a time when his vanih
might be excuſed by that of the nation. Vir _ua
and Horace, through gratitude; and Ovid, mf
a deſpicable meanneſs, laviſhed on Auguſtus, prail
ſtil more groſs, and if we think on the proſer mn
ons, more undeferved. ar
The duke d Antin diſtinguiſhed bimſelf in th
age by a very ſingular art, which conſiſted it in nd
ſaying agreeable things, but in doing them.
king went to lye at Petit bourg, and found f -
with a large walk of trees, which concealed the ili”
er from view; the duke d' Antin cauſed them all ui'*
be cut down in the night. The king, on
waking was ſurpriſed that he no longer faw- Wn
trees he had diſliked :” «It is becauſe your: mi
„has condemned them, that they are deen e -
« more,” replied the. duke. 5
Me have related in another place, chat the 40
duke obſerving a large wood at the endo
canal at Fountainbleau, was not agreeable to
king, he in the minute when the king went d
to take a walk, having every thing prepared hefe
ordered the wood to be cut down, and inſtantly
che trees fell together. This behaviour ſhewel b.
ingenious courtier, rather than the flatterer. *
Lewis XIV. has been accuſed of an inſſ
pride; becauſe the baſis of his ſtatues in Ks”

4. LEWIS XIV: 8

Victoirets, and that of Vendome, are ſurround-
im Caves in chains: but it was not him who
ſed thoſe ſtatues to be erected. That of the
uare des Victoires is a monument of the greatneſs
ſoul, and the gratitude-of the firſt marſhal de la

ed thouſand livres, which'\makes near a million at

eſent, and the city doubled this ſum to make the
uare regular. I have been always diſguſted at
ze injuſtice done to Lewis XIV, in imputing to
1 the pride of this ſtatue, and at the negligence

ib germ in noe ding e d the e
arſhal.

They were only conſidered as four Wes but
ey expreſſed the vices he ſubdued, rather than

im, and hereſy deſtroyed: and the inſcriptions
WF fficiently prove this. They alſo celebrate the u-
on of the ſeas and the peace of Nimeguen, and
beak of nothing but benevolent actions; nor has
dne of theſe ſlaves any thing that characteriſes the
deople conquered by Lewis NIV: belides, it is an
ntient cuſtom in ſculptures, to put ſlaves at the
eet of the ſtatues of kings. It would be better
ndeed, if they repreſented free and happy citizens
ere; but ſlaves may be ſeen at the feet of the
good Henry IV. and Lewis XIII. at Paris; they are
plſo to be ſeen at Leghorn, under the feet of Fer-
linand de Medicis, who certainly never enſlaved
any nation, and at Berlin, under the ſtatue of an e-
lector who repulſed the Swedes, but never gue
any conqueſts, .

The neighbours of the French, as well as them-

"= ->

BRANE Fae: ==2

ulllade to his maſter. He expended in it fivehun- .

he nations be conquered: duelling aboliſhed by

ſelves, have with great injuſtice made Lewis XIV. 7

immenſe palace, the walls of which were alrea

„% THE AGE OF | Ui
anſwerable for this cuſtom ; the inſcription, u
$mortals, to the immortal man, has been 4
of idolatry; as if it ſignificd any thing but ch
mortality of his glory. Be dura iow.

. y
=; 1 1 4 0
r. 1 Aue be uu, |
tad er: * „ at bs: yu.

| A houſe given by God, It DI

"(2:19

„ DS ate
pon nog. to 52s Rarommes: of Drona BY
gift, and to the verſe of Virgil, Deus nobis
otra fecit.
With reſpect to; the; e In, be fan
Vendome, it was the city which erected. it. Th
king had deſtined the buildings. of this ſquare ſ

his public library. The ſquare was very large, al
had at firſt three fronts ; which were thoſe of

| [sf

built, when the public. misfortunes in 17 0444
bliged the city to build houſes. for private perſons
upon. the ruins of this unfiniſhed palace : for
ſame reaſon the Louvre was never finiſhed': and i
fountain and obeliſk, which Colbert intended to i
over-againſt the gate of Perrault, have never q
peared but in a drawing. This was the cauſe wi
the beautiful gate of St. Gervais remained. unſiniꝶ
ed, and that moſt of the monuments of Patiscak
not be regarded but with regret. roy
The nation was deſirous that Lewis XIV. oll
prefer his Louvre and his capital to Verfassen
which the duke de Crequi called a favourite ii
merit. Poſterity admires with gratitude hg

—

26. LEWIS RW. 85
gs he has done for the public: but we cenſure
ell as admire, when we ſee the rr er

defects of his palace in the country. 8
From what we have related, it appears, that

vis XIV. in every thing loved grandeur and
A prince who ſhould do as great things as
is XIV. and ſhould till continue modeſt,
zuld be the firſt of kings, and Lewis XIV, the
ond. |
If on his death-bed he e of having for
pht reaſons engaged in war, it muſt be confeſſed
at he did not judge by the events of them: for
all his wars, the moſt juſt and indiſpenſable
as that of 1701, and that alone was unſuc-
ſsful.
By his marriage, beſides the dauphin, he had
o ſons and three daughters, who all diedꝭ in their
Wfancy. His amours were more happy: only two
his natural children died in the cradle; eight o-
ers lived, were legitimated, and five had poſteri-
Beſides theſe, he had a daughter, whom he
d not acknowlege, by a young woman belonging
WD madam de Monteſpan. This daughter he marri-
| to de la Queue, a gentleman in the neighbour-
Wood of Verſailles, A nun of the convent of Mo-
t was with great probability ſuſpected to be his
wughter : ſhe was extremely brown, and in other
eſpects reſembled him. The king, when he plac-
d her in this convent, gave her, twenty thouſand
rowns. The notion ſhe had of her birth inſpir-
d her with a haughtineſs, of which her ſuperiors
omplained. Madam de Maintenon, in a journey

o Fountainbleau, called at the convent of Moret,
Vo I. II. H

SSD EE SFESESEE -

86 THE ACE 4 1

and being deſirous to make this nun combi nod
ſhe did what ſhe could to make her abandon the
pinion which cauſed her pride. Madam
the nun to her, “ the trouble a lady of you
& rank has taken to come hither on purpoſe 80 |
me I am not the king's daughter, —
« that I am.” The conyent of Moret ſtillre
ber this anecdote. |

So many particularitles may e ae
philoſophical reader; but curioſity, that” x
ſo common to mains, deſerves a 2

when it is employed pon times and perſons
poſterity regards with reſpect and admiration.

CHAPTER XXVII.

The Interior GovexNMENT, COMMER®
Laws, PoLice, Military D416 cr
MARINE, ee. 'f; WE.

* "IF 4
Py o
Fa

E ought, in juſtice to thoſe men in 3 pub

lic ſtation, who have done ſervice, to'tix

age in which they lived, to conſider the ſtat
things at the time when they obtained the dire&ia

of affairs, that we may be the better able to form
true judgment of the improvements which they tu
made in their country: and poſterity is for ever®
bliged to them for the examples which they ma
given, even though they ſhould be ſurpaſſed by 6
thers. The glory which they juſtly receive from
hence is their only recomperige. . It is | CErtally. th

27. LEWIS "XIV. 87
we of this glory animated Lewis XIV. and at
time when he began to govern alone, made
n deſirous to reform his kingdom, adorn his
rt, and bring the arts to a degree of perfection.
He not only impoſed it upon himſelf as a duty
do buſineſs regularly with each of his miniſters,
me It every perſon of character might obtain audi-
Nee of him; and all his ſubjects had the liberty to
eſent to him both their petitions and projects. The
titions were received by a maſter of requeſts,
ho returned them with his remarks; they were
terwards ſent to the miniſters. Projects, when
ey were ſuch as deſerved conſideration, were ex-
ined in council, and their authors were frequent-
admitted to diſcuſs their ſchemes with the mini-
ers in the king's preſence. And thus, notwith-
tanding the deſpotic power of the prince, a corre-
pondence ſubſiſted between the throne and the
eople.
Lewis XIV. formed and accuſtomed himſelf to
abour ; and this labour was ſo much the more
painful, as it was new to him, and becauſe he
ight eaſily have been ſeduced by the allurements
df pleaſure. He wrote the firſt diſpatches to his
mbaſladors himſelf: he frequently wrote down
e ſubſtance of the moſt important letters with his
dun hand; and none were ever written in his name
ithout being read to him.

Colbert, after the removal of Fouquet, had ſcarce
reſtored order in the finances, when the king diſ-
charged all thoſe taxes which were owing to him
rom the year 164 7 to 1656; particularly three
millions of the land tax. The ſubject was alſo re-
H 2 ;

7 «

Oy FER ,
88 THEAGE OF Oz
lieved from many burdenſome taxes, in eu of
the ſum of five hundred thouſand crowns pal
nually: and it appears from hence, that the
de Choiſi was either miſinformed, or very unjuf
his aſſertion, that the taxes were not diminilhe
for it.is certain that they were diminiſhed by
diſcharges, though by the good order an
introduced, the revenue was augmented. 98
The eſtabliſnment of the general boſpial
owing to the care of the firſt preſident, de Bellie
aided by the liberality of the ducheſs d' Aiguilla
and ſeveral citizens: and this eſtabliſtument
augmented by the king; who alſo cauſed) others
the fame kind to be erected in * the rang
ties in the kingdom.
The great roads, which till e Wen alnel 1
impaſſable, were no longer ſuffered to be negleteſ 25
and, by degrees, they became what they now
under Lewis XV. the admiration of all foreigue
Go out of Paris which way you will now, you mij
travel near forty leagues on well paved walks, bor
dered with trees: and though the antient-Remat

ways were more durable, they were not mot a
ſpacious or more beautiful. | 51:14 *

Colbert applied his genius more pardculays .
commerce, which was but -weaklycaltivates By
and the firſt principles of which were unten Bl

The Engliſh, but more eſpecially the Dutch, m

ed on almoſt the whole commerce of Franc it

their ſhips 3 the Dutch in particular loaded er ;

veſſels with our commodities, and retailed them al

over Europe. But the king, in 1 662; began
exempt his ſubjects from an impoſt, called the right

of freight paid by all foreign vellels ; = * en.

27. | L E WIS XIV. 89

ed them to tranſport their merchandizes them
ves at a leſs expence, which made our maritime

mmerce ſoon begin to increaſe. The council of
Immerce, which till ſubſiſts, was then eſtabliſh-

y * ; and the king preſided in it every fifteen days.
ch Dunkirk and Marſeilles were declared free ports;

hd this privilege ſoon drew the commerce of the
evant to n er that of the North to
Dunkirk,

A Weſt-India company was formed in 1664;
nd alſo one for the Eaſt-Indies the fame year. Till
hen, the luxury of France had been tributary to
he induſtry of Holland. The timid, ignorant, and
arrow-thoughted partizans of the old oeconomy,
n vain declaimed againſt a commerce, wherein mo-
ney, which is permanent, was continually exchang-
d for goods, which are periſhable. They did not
conſider, that theſe India commodities, being become *
fna neceſſary, would have been purchaſed of foreigners
LT. a higher price, It is true, that more money is
man
107

carried to the Eaſt-Indies than is brought from
thence, and that Europe is impoveriſhed by this com-
merce: but then this comes from Peru and Mexi-
co; it is the price of our commodities, which are
tranſported from Cadiz thither; and more of this
money remains in France, than is — by the
Eaſt. Indies.

The king gave more than ſix millions of our
preſent money to this company, and excited per-
ſons of fortune to engage in it. The queens, the
princes, and the whole court furniſhed two millions -
of the money of account of that time, The ſupe-
rior courts furniſhed twelve, hundred thouſand

H 3

8

e . ST:

— —ͤ—ũVm—w—̃——f—j ß ———x— —x—õ ßV—— ↄ.ↄ, — — —
* :

Eaſt- Indies declined; yet in our days, this g

himſelf, and the greateſt of his nobles, in imitatia

90 THE AGE OF  @Q1
livres, the financers two millions, the body
merchants, ſix hundred and fifty . thouſand ling
in fine, the whole nation imitated the n
their king.
This company bas conſtantly fublilted,
ſince that time: for though the Dutch took N
dicherry in 169 4, after which the commerce of!

merce has revived with greater vigour. Pondich
ry is become the rival of Batavia; and this Ind
company, which was with great difficulty found
by the indefatigable labour of the great Colbe
being revived in our time, through ſome very e
traordinary revolutions, is now become one of i
greateſt reſources of the kingdom. The king all
formed a northern company in 1 669, and eſtablil
ed funds for its ſupport, in the ſame manner as i
the Indies, It evidently appeared then, that con
merce was not diſhonourable: for the monard

of his example, ntergſhen themſelves in its eſtablil
ment. P,

The Weſt-India company was not leſs encos
raged than the others: and of all the funds tht
king furniſhed the tenth,

He granted a bounty of thirty franks per ton
upon exportation, and forty upon importation
and whoever built ſhips, in any of the ports oft
Kingdom, received five livres for every / ton wich
their veſſels were capable to carry.

We cannot help being ſurprized, chat the ally
de Choiſi ſhould condemn theſe eſtabliſhments
his memoirs, which ſhould be read with die
We are now perfectly ſenſible of what the A

—

b 27. LEWIS NV. 91

bert did for the good of che kingdom: but then
y knew it not, He laboured for the ungrateful;
ſuch an animoſity was raiſed againſt bim in
is, for the ſuppreſſion of ſome annuity upon
Hotel de Ville, which has been acquired at 3
ill price ſince the year 1.656, and for the diſere-
into which the exchequer orders fell, by their
ing been laviſhed under the preceding miniſtry,
all the good which he did to the public in
neral could not counterbalance.. There were
dre cits than good citizens; few perſons extend-
their views ſo far as the public good. No-one
ignorant, how much private intereſt faſcinates
e eyes, milleads the underſtanding, and obſtructs
e intereſt, not only of a beginner in trade, but of
company, and even a whole city. 'The coarſe
ply made by a merchant named Hazon (who be-
g conſulted by this miniſter, ſaid : Tow foumd the
achine overturned on one fide, and you have overs
rned it on the other,) was cited with applauſe -
hen I was young; and this anecdote may be {till
pund in Moreri. That philoſophical ſpirit which
as at laſt introduced into France, corrected the
gar prejudices, and perfect juſtice was at laſt
one to the memory of this great man. He had
e ſame regularity as the duke de Sully, and his
jews were much more extenſive» The former
as ſkilled only in oeconomy; the latter was the
under of very great and uſeful eſtabliſhments.
Almolt every thing was either repaired or created
new in his time. The reduction of intereſt in
665, demonſtrated the largeneſs of our circulati-
Mn. Lewis XIV. was deſirous to render his king.
om richer and more populous: to effect this, mar.

1 | ;

92 THE AGE OF Oy
riages in the provinces were encouraged; by &
empting all thoſe who ſhould marry at the dg
twenty, from paying any taxes for the ſpate
five years: and every father of a family, havin
ten children, was exempted for his whole life,
cauſe he contributed more to the ſtate, by his d
dren's labour, than he could have done by payin
the tax. This rule ought to have been for
obſerved without alteration. |
From the year 1663, to 1672, every year(
his miniſtry was diſtinguiſhed by the eſtabliſhment
of ſome manufacture. Fine clothes, which befor
had been purchaſed of the Engliſh and Dutch, were
made at Abbeville. The king advanced two tho
ſand livres to the manufacturer, for every loo
which he employed, beſides other conſiderable ga
tifications. In 1669, it was computed, that fort
four thouſand and two hundred men were employ:
ed in manufacturing of wool, The manufatturs
of ſilk being brought to great perfection, produce
a commerce of more than fifty millions of that time;
and the profit ariſing from it, was not only ges
ly ſuperior to the purchaſe of the neceſſary lik
but by the culture of filk-worms, the manufattus
ers were enabled to do without foreign ſilk, for ut
chain of their ſtuffs,
In the year 1666, as fine glaſſes began gl
made as thoſe of Venice, which till then had
ſtantly furniſhed all Europe; and they wereoot
after made of a ſize and beauty ſuperior $68
made elſewhere. The carpets of Turkey and
fia were ſurpaſſed in the Savonnerie ; and then
ſtries of Flanders were exceeded by thoſe mans
Etured at the Gobelins. This vaſt incl

+4 :
*
.

1. 27. LEWIS MV. 93
e Cobelins, was at that time filled with upwards
f eight hundred workmen, of which three hun-
red were lodged in the place. The works were
ireted by the beſt painters, either after their own
eins, or thoſe of the old Italian maſters': and
ies the tapeſtries, many curious kinds of Moſaic .
vorks were made, and the art of inkying was
rought to perfection.

Another manufacture of Speis beſides chis of
he Gobelins, was alſo eſtabliſhed at Beauvais; the
panager of which had the direction of ſix hundred
yorkmen, and he received a preſent from the king
pf ſixty thouſand livres.

Sixteen hundred women and girls v were ep.
d in making laces: .thirty of the moſt ſxilful of
hom, were brought from Venice, and two hun-
Ired out of Flanders; and they were encouraged
dy a preſent of thirty ſix thouſand livres.

The manufacture at Sedan for cloth, and that
df tapeſtries at d' Aubuſſon, which were in a 771
ling ſtate, were reſtored. |
The miniſtry purchaſed in England the e of

t ingenious machine, by means of which ſtock-
ngs are made, ten times quicker than by the knit-
ing needles. - Tin, ſteel, fine earthen-wares, Mo-
occo leather, which had always been brought from .
abroad, were made at home. But certain Calviniſts,
ho were poſſeſſed of the ſecret of tin and ſteel,

W ggcamied it out of the kingdom with them in 1 68 6,
t and communicated it to other nations.

The king every year purchaſed ſome of all the

fineſt of theſe manufactures, to the amount of a-
A dout four hundred thouſand livres; ; of which be

made perſents. 1 ubs

|

94 THE AGE OF (Ch
Tbe city of Paris was then greatly inferia
What it is now; it was neither well lighted,
ed, nor cleaned: neceſſary funds were wanted
the continual cleaning of the ſtreets, for the
nation formed every night by five thouſand hy
For paving the whole city, for building d
gates, repairing the old ones, and for eſtablithin
continual watch, both of horſe and foot for the
curity of the city, The king took the cut
this, and eſtabliſhed funds to defray the neece(h
expences. In 1 667, he created a | m piſtrat
whole ſole duty was to preſide over the civil go
ment of the city. Moſt of the great cities off
rope have ſcarce imitated theſe examples all
after, and none have equalled them. There hg
a city paved ſo well as Paris, and Rome itſelſ i
lighted at all, N „
All things advanced to ſuch perfection, that il
ſecond of the lieutenants of the police of Pans
quired in that poſt a- reputation, which placed Ws
in the rank of thoſe who have done /honour tl
age: he was indeed a man whoſe genius was
able of every thing. He was afterwards
miniſtry, and would have made a good com
in the army, The place of lieutenant oF mem
lice was beneath his birth and merit: ' nevertho
he gained greater reputation in it, than in
and confined miniſtry which he obtained to
the end of his life. | fo
It may be proper here to obſerve, that mou
d'Argenſon was by no means the only perion >
the antient nobility, who acted as a mf
France is almoſt the only kingdom in Europe's
which the antient nobility have frequently f

27. LEWIS MV. 95
the long robe: almoſt all the other nations,
ugh a remainder of Gothic barbarity, ſeem _ |
be ignorant of the dignity of this profeſſion.
The king, from the year 1661, conſtinitly car
d on his buildings at the Louvre, St. Germains,
4 Verſailles; and private perſons, in imitation
his example, raiſed a thouſand beautiful and
odious edifices in Paris; the number of which
2s ſo prodigiouſly increaſed, that adjacent to the
lace royal, and St. Sulpieius, two new cities were
ied in Paris, greatly ſuperior to the old. Mag-
cent coaches, adorned with fine glaſſes, and hung
the moſt eaſy manner by ſprings, were then in-
nted ; ſo that a citizen of Paris might go about
js great city with more pomp; and luxury, than
is diſplayed by the firſt Romans when they went
triumph to the capitol. The cuſtom, which was
ſt begun in Paris, was ſoon introduced into all
2 nations of Europe, and becoming N is
dw no longer conſidered as luxury.
Lewis XIV. had a taſte for aretitecture, gar-
ning and ſculpture: and his taſte in all theſe was
eat and noble. In 1664, when the comptrol-
r general Colbert obtained the direction of the
ldings, which is properly the direction of the
s, he applied himſelf to ſecond his maſter's de-
us. The firſt work neceſſary to be done, was
finiſh the Louvre. Francis Manſard, one of
ie greateſt architects France ever had, was choſen
conſtruct the vaſt edifiees which were projected;
it he refuſed the employ, unleſs he might have li-
Tty to do over again what ſhould appear to him
| wy in the execution, This diffidence of him-
i, which might have occaſioned great expences,

-

*

. N 5 * 0 e g A" \ * 0
om — "IA" ES *
* * * * ” : by
0 - . * 7
% 1 7

A

ps THE 40 E ar - vt

cauſed him to be excluded; and the chevalierk
nini was ſent for from Rome: his name; wage
brated for the colonnade which ſurrounds the
before the porch of St, Peter's church, for the
ſtrian ſtatue of Conſtantine, and for the Nag
fountain. He was furniſh with equipageſuſ
journey, and was conducted to Paris as a
who came to do honour to the kingdom.

five louisd'ors a- day, which were Paid kinn dl ho
eight months he ſtayed in France, he received am
ſent of fifty thouſand crowns, a penſion q
thouſand crowns, and one of five. hundred fork
ſon. This generoſity of Lewis XIV. to Ben
was greater even than that of Francis I. toil
Bernini, through a principle of gratitude,
wards made the equeſtrian ſtatue, of the king 4
Rome, which is ſtill to be ſeen at Verſailles. 1p
on his arrival at Paris with ſo much ceremony, 4
the only perſon: worthy to be employed by bent
XIV; he was greatly ſurpriſed to ſee the delignd
the front of the Louvre, on the ſide of St, Gm
I' Auxerrois, which became ſoon after, in the e
cution, one of the moſt; auguſt monuments ot
chĩitecture in the world. The deſign bad d
made by, Claudius Perrault, and was exe,
Lewis le Vau and d' Orbay. He alſo invented l:
machines by which to convey thoſe ſtanes of Af
two feet in length, of which the front of this majel
edifice is formed. We ſometimes go a great wil
ſearch of what we have at home. Theres
one of the palaces at Rome, whoſe enterance We
parable to this of the Louvre; for which Wears
bliged to this Perrault, whom Boileau — 0
turn into ridicule. Thoſe which are ſo

E271 Eis . "vp
r © the caſtle of Maifons, which Francis Manſard
ult at ſo ſmall an enpence. Bernini was magni»
ently rewarded though be did not deſerve it;
xr he only gave deſigns which were never exe -
ted |

The king, at the ſame time when he carried
n the works at the Louvre, the completion of
ich was ſo ardently deſired, when he was build»
ng a city at Verſailles, near that caſtle which has
oft ſo many millions, when he was building Tria»
on, Marli, and embelliſhing ſo many other edi-
ces ; alſo completed the obſervatory, which had
en commenced in 1 666, at the time when he e-
ſabliſhed the academy of ſciences. But the monu-
ent which for its uſefulneſs, greatneſs, and diffi»
ulty, is the moſt glorious, was the canal of Lan-
e port of Cette, conſtructed purpoſely to receive

ns 8
8

— h

—

ts waters. All theſe works were commenced in
664, and they were continued without interru-
tion to 1681; The foundation of the invalids,
ad the chapel of that building, which is the moſt
eautiful in all Paris; and the eſtabliſhment of St.
s, which is the laſt of the numerous works ere»
ee by this monarch, are alone ſufficient to ren-
e dis name revered. Four thouſand ſoldiers and
eit great number of officers, who in one of theſe
rest aſylums find comfort in their old- age, and
eief for their wounds and their wants ; two hun-
ed and fifty female children of noble parents, who
r the other receive an education fuitable to their
eh, are ſo many voices which celebrate the name
ted, Vor. II. 1 | = 2 Tn

—
* | * 7
*

96 THE AGE or cy

of Lewis KIV. The eſtablicment-5f ge! Cyr wil
be ſurpaſſed by that which Lewis X V. is ww.
3h for the education of five hundred gentlemen; 4

this, inſtead of obliterating the memory of 8
Cyr, revives it. It is the art of doing good whid
is brought to perfection.
Lewis XIV. was at the ſame time deſuo m
ee of greater and more general uſe; bu
execution of which was more difficult. He wiſhediy
reform the laws, and directed the chancellor Seguꝶ
Lamoignon, Talon, Bignon, and more particularly. -
counſellor of ſtate Pouſort, to uſe their endeavour
for this purpoſe. He preſided ſometimes inthe
aſſemblies, and the year 1 667, was at once thes
pocha o his firſt laws and his firſt conqueſts.” Thy
eivil ordinance appeared firſt, then the l
the waters and foreſts, then the ſtatutes fl
all manufactures, the-criminal ordinance; the cont
mercial code, that for the marine: all theſe ſas
ceeded one another annually. There was even rc;
new juriſprudence eſtablithed in favour of the e 1
groes of our colonies; a kind of men, whoku
not before enjoyed the rights of humanity. © oon

A profound knowlege in the laws is not to orn.
acquired by a ſovereign. But the king being ini. i:.
ted in the principal, he poſſeſſed the ſpirit of area
and knew when to execute or reſtrain them prope of 7
ly. He frequently judged the \cauſes of HN
jects, not only in the council of the ſecretaris armi
ſtate, but in that which is called the council of M bad
ties. We have two celebrated judgments of it v.
wherein he decided againſt himſelf, orde
The firſt was a cauſe in 1680; bret colo!

and certain inhabitants of Paris, who had built if

N. 27. b, LEWIS NV. 99
u his ground. He gave ſentence in their favour,
adjudging the houſes to remain in their poſſeſ-
on, together with his ground, which he gave to them.
The other was concerning a Perſian named Rou-
li, whoſe merchandizes had been ſeized by the
ing's officers in 168 7. He ordered every thing
0 be reſtored. to him, and made him a preſe nt of
ree thouſand crowns. Roupli carried his admi-
tion and gratitude into his own: country. And
hen the Perſian ambaſſador, Mehemet Rizabeg, was
t Paris, we found that the fame of this action bad
eached his ears long before.
The abolition of duelling was. one of the great-
| ſervices done to the nation. Tbeſe combats
jad formerly been authoriſed by our kings, by the
arliament itſelf, and even by the church; and
ough they had been forbid ſince the reign of Hen-
IV, this barbarous cuſtom continued to be more
ommon than ever. The famous duel of the la
Frettes, of four againſt four, in 1663, determin-
d Lewis XIV. no longer to ſuffer them. His ſea -
ſonable ſeverity, by degrees, corrected not only his
dyn kingdom, but even his neighbours, who con-
formed to this good example, after having long i-
mitated our bad ones. Duels in Europe are a hun-
ired times leſs common ee under n
Wot Lewis XIII.

He was the legiſlator both of his people *
armies. It is ſtrange, that before his time, we
had no notion of uniformity in clothing the troops.
It was he, who in the firſt year of hisadminiſtration,
ordered each regiment to be diſtinguiſhed” by the
colour of its clothing, or other different marks;

I 20 |

ES = SS = a R >. 2

=> SS 8 8 = ﬆx

oo THE AGF oT Gai
and this regulation was ſoon followed by all of
nations. He it was, who inftitated brigadiers u
troops, which ſtill continue. He made a compatiy(
muſqueteers of cardinal Mazarin's guards, and fi
ed the number of men at five hundred in the ta
companies, to which he gave the uniform 4
they ſtill wear. $377 FL 5 Rs
Under his reign the office of Conſtable ug
en away, and after the death of the duke d
non, there were no more colonel- generals of it
infantry : their power approached too near to thi
which Lewis XIV. was defirous of and ought i
have himſelf. The marſhal de Grammon, wis
was only camp maſter of the French guards undd
the duke d' Epernon, and took his orders frog
this colonel-general, no longer took them from wy
but the king, and was the firſt who had the title &
colonel of the guards. He made theſe colon
himſelf at the head of their own regiment, by i
mg them with his own hand a gilt gorget aud p
and a ſpontoon when the uſe of pikes was ab
ed. He inſtituted the grenadiers, at firſt only
the number of four in each company in the kung!
_ regiment, which was of his own creation : ae
wards he formed a company of grenadiers in ta
of the regiments of infantry, and two in the Frend
guards, which now have three. He great
mented the dragoons, and gave them a colonels
neral. We cannot here omit to mention the eln
bliſhment for breeding of horſes in 1 667, wid
had been abſolutely negle&ed before, and w
of the greateſt ſervice. in remounting the c

The uſe of the bayonet at the end of the f

. - *

—

—

„ 2 Weis Nr.
wet was introduced by him. It was ſometimes
ed before, but this was only in a few companies,

cw
_

will of the general, and pikes were conſidered
5 the moſt formidable weapon, The firſt regi
nent which had bayonets, and were exercifed in
he uſe of them, was that of the fuſiliers, eſtabliſhs

in 1671.
The manner in which the artillery is now ſerved

or it at Douai, and afterwards at Metz, and Stras-

Jourg: and the regiment of artillery was at laſt
el with officers who were almoſt all capable to

onduct a ſiege. All the magazines of the king»
Jom were ftored, and were annually furniſhed
vith eight hundred thouſand pounds of powder. He
2rmed a regiment of bombardiers and another of
uſſars; before his time, huſſars were entirely un-
own, except among the troops of our enemies.
In 1688, he eſtabliſhed thirty regiments of mi-
itia, which were raiſed and equipped by the com-

ie, at times when it would not retard their quite
ation of the land.

Companies of cadets were . in moſt
ff the frontier towns, where they were taught the
mathematics, drawing, and all the exerciſe; and
ud the duty of ſoldiers. But this continued only
n years; for the difficulty of bringing ſuch 1
umber of youth under diſcipline at laſt deſtroyed
be inſtitution, But the corps of engineers which
e king formed, and to which he gave rules, which
kill obſerves, will always — The art of

a: 1+ 7

„F TEST SS_CSSSTST TH ES TEST ENT ERNEST FIEHoTTSYTMT

*
Tor

d not with regularity. Its uſe was entirely at

munities, and were practiſed in the military exer-

entirely owing to him. He inſtituted academies

] "I
102 THE AGE OF d.
fortifying towns was brought to perfection undeti
reign by the marſhal de Vauban and his pupils, wh
bees count Pagan. He either conſtructed
repaired the fortifications of a n and fi
Ay”
| To ein military diſcipline, he appoints
enn and afterwards directors, ]
duty was to review, and give an account of tel
troops: and from their reports it appeared, wie
ther the military commiſſioners had done their duty
He inſtituted the order of St. Lewis, an hong
which is frequently more deſired than peeuni
rewards, The hoſpital for invalids completed hi
endeavours to deſerve the being well ſerved.
It was owing to theſe regulations, that in
year- 1672 he had one hundred and' eighty thow
ſand regular troops, which he continued to ag
ment, in proportion as the number and poweroflis
enemies increaſed,” till at laſt he had four hundred
and fifty thouſand men in arms, including marines
Such numerous armies had never before bet
ſeen, His enemies oppoſed him with troops wid
were almoſt as numerous; but they were not
\ ſtrongly united: he ſhewed what France ad
could do; and he had always either great —
or great reſources.
The fame care which he took to form numero
and well-diſciplined land armies, even before he w
engaged in war, he alſo ſhewed in gaining the d
minion of the ſea. The few ſhips which cardind "=
Mazarin had ſuffered to rot in the ports, were mg ume
mediately repaired ; others were prifchaſed in H
land and Sweden; and in the third year of lis 0
vernment he made trial of his maritime face ff

h. 27. LEWIS XIV. 103
eri upon the coaſt of Africa. The duke of Beau-
ort cleared the ſeas of pirates in the year 1665;
Ind two years after France had ſixty ſhips of war
n its ports. And though this was only a beginning,
et theſe new regulations and efforts inſpired Lew-
$ XIV. with ſuch a ſenſe of his increaſing power,
What be would not ſuffer his ſhips to lower their
ag before thoſe of England. The council of
ing Charles II. in vain inſiſted upon this right,
hich force, induſtry and time had given to the
Englim. Lewis XIV. wrote to his ambaſſador,
the count d' Eſtrade, to this effect: « The king of
_ England and his chancellor may ſee my ſtrength,
but they do not ſee my heart. I regard my ho-
© 'nour more than all other things.”

He ſaid no more than what he was reſolved to
ake good: in conſequence of which, the Engliſh
ſurpation ſubmitted to the natural right and reſolu-
jon of Lewis XIV: an exact equality was obſerv-
d in every thing at ſea between the two nations.
But while Lewis thus inſiſted upon an equality with
ngland, he maintained his ſuperiority in regard to
Spain, and obliged the Spaniſh admirals to lower
their flag before his, in virtue of the ſolemn pre-
cedency granted in 1662.

In the mean time, efforts were every where uſed
for the eſtabliſhment of ſuch a naval force, as might _
juſtify theſe high ſentiments. The town and port
of Rochefort was built at the mouth of the Cha-
rente. The failors, which were to ſerve ſome.
times in the merchant-ſhips, and ſometimes in the
royal fleets, were regiſtered and claſſed, and ſoon '
amounted to ſixty thouſand men.

Councils were eſtabliſhed in the ports; to give

SEES ECTS CESSES: 5-5: ©

8 fn} 9 y . * p k *
wy 4 * 5 OT - f N. a
2 * 1 9 K 2
* . 4 = . L f 4 q
* 3

204 THE AGE OF al

directions for building ſhips in the moſt advan” *
geous manner, Five marine arſenals were er
at Breſt, Rochefort, Toulon, Dunkirk, and Me
de- grace. In the year 1672, we had ſixty e
of the line, and forty frigates : and in 1681 uy ei
had one hundred and ninety eight ſhips of war, iu
cluding tenders, and thirty gallies in the pon
Toulon, either armed, or ready to be armed.
leven thouſand regular troops ſerved on board
men of war, and three thouſand in the g
One hundred and ſixty- ſix thouſand men wer"
claſſed for the various ſervices in the marine, re
the following years there were computed one
thouſand gentlemen, or boys of good families, why
did the duty of ſoldiers on board the veſſels, an
in the ports learned every thing which is neceſſary
in the art of navigating or rigging of a ſhip. Thel
gentlemen compoſed our marine guards; and they
were by ſea what the cadets were by land. They
had been inſtituted in 1672, though then only
few in number. They have formed the ſchod
which has produced our beſt and moſt +
officers.
Hitherto there had been no marſhals of Fran
in the marine, which is a proof how greatly the
eſſential part of the ſtrength of France had been
neglected. John d' Etree was the firſt marſhal it
2681. Lewis XIV. in every thing ſhewed, that
his chief care was to raiſe that ſpirit of nn
without which every thing languiſnes.
The French — gained the advantaged
all their naval engagements, till the battle 0
Hogue in 1692, when the count de Tourville,
obedience d... from court, with forty fe

8

FESSTERSY FFS. 3 ES

27. LEWIS AV. tos.
irs. The French were forced to fubmit to fuck
perior force, and they loſt fourteen of their larg-
ſt ſhips; which were ſunk and burnt, to prevent
eir falling into the hands of the enemy. Yet,
maritime force: but it declined in the war about
ie fucceſfion, and we did not begin effectually to
ſtore it till 17 51, in the time of a happy peace,
ich is the only time proper to eſtabliſh a good
mine; for in time of war, we have neither lei-
Ire nor power to do it. * |
Theſe naval forces ſerved to protect the come
xd Canada, which before had been in a languilh»
ng condition, flouriſhed : not indeed to ſuch a de»
pree as they do now, but yet better than had till then
deen hoped: for from 1635 to 1665, theſe eſta»
lihments had rather been a burden than otherwiſe.
In 1664, the king ſent a colony to Cayenne,
and another ſoon after to Madagaſcar. He uſed e-
very means in his power to repair the error and
misfortune under which France had ſo long la-
doured, by a negle& of the ſea, while her neigh»
dours had been forming empires in the moſt diſtant
parts of the world. | |
From this ſingle view it appears, what changes
were made in the ſtate by Lewis XIV. They were
advantageous changes, becauſe they ſtill ſubſiſt; and
his miniſters were emulous to ſecond him in them:
the diſpoſition and execution was doubtleſs owing
to them ; but the general plan was formed by the
king, It is certain, that the magiſtrates would not
have reformed the laws; that order would not have

|
|

Z & w a #2 ©

S. XA F

ESA

1K

. "2 Y ag * ** Y *
— * | I 1 : * y

| et

106 THE AGE Or (by
been reſtored in the finances; diſcip line would
have been introduced into the troops, nor a gy
tal civil policy throughout the kingdom; d |
e c. had no fleets: that the arts wo] g
have been encouraged: —
at the ſame time, with perſeverance; and und
different miniſters, if there had not been à ſoverιπ
who had in general all theſe deſigns inne |
firm reſolution to put them in execution.

Fe always conſidered his own glory as in,,
rable from the good of his kingdom; and be
not regard it in the ſame light that a private
man conſiders his eſtate, out af which he gets an
much as he can only to live-in pleaſures, Ew
He had no Colbert, nor no Louvois, when abou”
the year 1698, for the inſtruction of the duke«
Burgundy, he ordered each of the intendants Wn"
draw up a particular deſcription 1 pu
By this means an exact account of the ki
would be obtained, and a juſt enumeration be he
inhabitants. It was a uſeful work; though all tl *
intendants had not the capacity and attention
monſieur de Lamoignan de Baville. Had what
king directed been as well executed in regard to
very province, as it was by this magiſtrate in
account of Languedoc, the collection would ha
been one of the moſt valuable monuments of the aq
Some of them are well done: but the plan was i
gular and imperfect, becauſe all the intendant ve
not reſtrained to one and the ſame method; "Wl ©*
were to be wiſhed, that each of them had givenil
columns the number of inhabitants in each ele
the nobles, the citizens, the labourets, the Af

* S*
ti # >

41k

de mechatics; the cattle of every kind; | the
od, the indifferent, and the bad lands; all 'the

* — and thoſe of the communitie..

All theſe heads, in moſt of their accounts, are
onfuſed and imperfect: and it is frequently neceſ-
iry to ſearch with great care and pains to find -
bat is wanted; and which ſhould have been fo
WEipoſed, that a miniſter might ſee at one glance the
orces, the neceſſities, and the reſources. The
deſign was excellent, and would have been of the
reateſt uſe, had it been executed with judgment
and uniformity. | in 83
Thus we have given a general view of what
Lewis XIV. did, and attempted to do, to render
iis kingdom more flourithing :- and we cannot;
urely, behold all theſe achievements and efforts
without ſome gratitude, nor vithout being canis
mated with that love for the public good which in-
ſpired tbem. We may compare in our minds the
ſtate of the kingdom, in the time of the Fronde,
with its preſent ſtate. Lewis XIV, did more for
the ſervice of his kingdom than twenty of his pre-
deceſſors together, though he was far from doing
all that he might have done. But the war which
was ended by the peace of Ryſwic, began the ruin
of that great commerce which Colbert had' efta»
bliſhed; and the war about the ſucceſſion complet» -
Wr „bein Moot 9.7 40 «

Had Lewis XIV. employed thoſe immenſe ſums
to adorn Paris, and complete the Louvre, which
he expended in the aquedudts and works of Main
tenon, to bring waters to Verſailles, which were
frequently interrupted; and are now become fruit

i

% # 4 8
N * E 5 *
. - «at . P "W's -
* * 1 . * Y
| « 0
1
1 . 9 ö

THE ACE or ©:
leſs ; had he expended in Paris the fifth pant
of what: it caſt him to force nature at Verfall
Paris would now have been as beautiful as it
that ſide next the Tuilleries and the P
— eta
world.

To reform the laws, wetting > cd
but juſtice was not able to deſtroy chicane.
government once thought of —
prudence uniform. It is ſo in criminal
in commerce, in proceſſes; and it might” ini ve
in the laws which regard the property of the
jet. It is a very great inconvenience, that oil
and the ſame tribunal muſt give judgment in un
than a hundred cauſes on different ſubjects.” N
to lands, which are either equivocal, N
otherwiſe inconvenient to ſociety, ſtill ſubſiſt ei
are the remains of that foedal government, e.
is now no more. They are the rubbiſh of a G
building, which is deſtroyed, Uniformity in nt 10
part of the admĩniſtration is a virtue; but te e
ficulties in this en have! In
tempt from being made.
Lewis XIV. might have more eaſily. A ne
mare ay
taxes, to which he was compelled by his ce
anticipation of his revenues, as will par n
chapter on-the finances. gu

If he had not thought his will a ſufficient wa *
to make a million of people change their religa
e _— a
s. mmm

8 See the chapter upon. Calviniſan,

27: LEWIS MV. og
its civil diſſention and loſſes, is at this day the
flouriſhing upon earth; becauſe all the good
ich it was difficult to avoid in the times of trou-
„has been repaired, Poſterity, which is the
ige of all kings, and whoſe judgments they ſhould
rays have before their eyes, will confels, after
ture conſideration of the virtues and weakneſ-
of this monarch, that though he might have
n too highly extolled in his life-time, he ought
vertheleſs to be for ever praiſed and honoured z
d that he was worthy of the ſtatue erected for
1 at Montpellier, with a Latin inſcription, the
eaning of which was: To Lewis the great after
is death. 4a g
All theſe changes in the government, and the
Feeral orders of the ſtate, of which we have here
ven an account, neceſfarily produced a very con-
derable change in our manners. That ſpirit of.
Con, rage, and rebellion, which had poſſeſſed
We nation from the time of Francis II. was chang-
into an emulation to ſerve the prince. The lords,

ho poſſeſſed great eſtates, being no longer can-
dned in them; the governors of the provinces,
aving no longer any important poſts to beſtow,
ery one endeavoured to deſerve favours only from

e ſovereign, and the ſtate became one entire and
egular body, where every line tended to the
enter, | :

By thismeans, the court was freed from thoſe fa-
lons and conſpiracies, which had diſturbed the ſtate

Jor ſo many years, Under the adminiſtration of

evis XIV. there was only one conſpiracy, in 1 67 4,
Vor. II. K :

—

110 THE AGE OT N.
which was formed by la Truaumont, a Norman
tleman, who was overwhelmed in debaucheries d
debts; in which he was joined by one bf the lod
of Rohan, who by the ſame conduct ' had"redued
himſelf to the ſame indigence. The only perſon q
ſides, who entered into this conſpiracy, was the of
valier de Preaux, the nephew of la Truaumont, wii
being ſeduced by his uncle, he alſo ſeduced his
ſtreſs, madam de Villiers. Their deſign nei
was nor could be to gain a party in the kinpdomt
they only intended to fell and deliver up Quilldy
to the Dutch, and introduce the enemy into Not
mandy. It was not fo properly a conſpiracy; wt
baſe act of treachery, ill contrived. The only en
ſequence of this fruitleſs and abſurd deſign” v
the puniſhment of thoſe concerned in it; and the
memory of their crime is now almoſt forgotten.
There were, perhaps, ſome few ſeditions in tl
provinces; but theſe were only inconſiderable ps
pular tumults, which were eaſily ſuppreſſed. Tie
Huguenots themſelves always continued peaceable
to the time when their places of worſhip were &
moliſhed. In a word, a people which till tha
had been remarkably turbulent, the king render
peaceable, and dangerous only to their enemies
ter having been ſo to their ſovereigns for moe ia
an hundred years before. Our manners were Þ6
liſhed, and our courage not abated. |
The houſes, which the nobility built or purdi
ed in Paris, where their ladies lived with digit
formed ſchools of politeneſs, which by de
drew our youth from that tavern life, which tut
ſo long been the mode, and which only tended®
increaſe debauchery and impudence, Manners

b. 27. LEWIS MV. 111
overned by inconſiderable things: the. cuſtom of
ding on horſe-back, in Paris, had produced a diſ-
ation to frequent quarrels, which ceaſed as foon
e are principally obliged to the ladies, who aſſem-
ed company at their houſes, rendered converlati-
n and ſociety more agreeable; and reading at laſt
ndered them more ſolid. Treaſon, and other a-
xcious crimes, by which, in times of faction and
ouble, men do not think themſelves diſhonoured,
ere now in a manner unknown. The crimes of
invilliers and Voiſins, could be conſidered only as
ecting ſtorms, in a ſky which was otherwiſe clear
id ſerene : and it would be as unreaſonable to
dndemn a nation for the glaring crimes of a few
articular perſons, as it would be to canonize it for
de reformation of la Trappe.

All the different ſtations of life were before di-
inguiſhable, by certain faults which characterized
jem. Thoſe in the military ſervice, and the young
jen deſigned for the profeſſion of arms, had an o-
bearing vivacity : the lawyers had a diſagreeable
avity, to which the cuſtom of always appearing
their gowns, even at court, did not contribute
little, It was the ſame with regard to the uni-
riities and the phyſicians, Merchants ſtill continued
wear their gowns when they aſſembled or went
the miniſter ; and the moſt eminent traders were
en very unpoliſhed : but the houſes, the theatres,
Id the public walks, which bagan to be frequent-
| for the ſake of more agreeable ſociety, by de-
ees rendered the exterior of all-perſons almoſt a-
e. Politeneſs now appears from the higheſt ſta-
K 2 |

Ps.

5 EEE & ES:

— —

==.

IS=S= => 5oqS=u2aS*c*r=o£vuSo i ARS 5

PY 3 | | is 4
112 THE AGE Or We.
1 |
tions, down to the tradeſman's ſhop ; and time!
introduced theſe changes into the provinces!» |
Luxury is at laſt confined to taſte and &
ence; and the croud of pages and domeſtics ii
very has diſappeared, to introduce more eat
elegance into the houſes of the great. Vain'poni
and the pride of exterior ſhow, is reſigned 1060 the
nations, which yer regard nothing but theirpubl
appearance, and where they are ant ewa
the true art of living.
The great eaſe introduced into the cornmeret
the world, affability, ſimplicity, and an improw
ment of the underſtanding, have rendered Pans
city, which, for the agreeable manner of living
probably much ſuperior to Rome or a
in the heighth of their glory.
Some people complain of no longer teh en
deur and dignity aſſumed at court, as former
In reality, there are now none of thoſe petty
rants, which we had in the time of the Fron
under Lewis XIII. and in the preceding Wis
true greatneſs is now reſtored among our numero
gentry, which had ſo long been degraded. 971
ing thoſe powerful ſubjects. Gentlemen and «
rens, who formerly would have thought thenuens
honoured in being the domeſtics of theſe lordy
now become their equals, and frequently thei
periors in the military ſervice; and the more
vices prevail in every thing over aalen n
ſtate is flouriſhing.
The age of Lewis XIV. has been compare
that of Auguſtus, Not that the power of Hefe
ſonal actions can be compared: Rome and A
ſtus were ten times more conſiderable in the N

hh, 28. LEWIS XIV. 443
an Lewis XIV. and Paris. But we muſt remem-
er, that Athens was equal to the Roman empire in
thoſe things which do not derive their excel -
-nce from ſtrength, and power. We. muſt alſo
onſider, that if there is nothing now in the world
ike Rome and Auguſtus, nevertheleſs all Europe
ogether is greatly ſuperior to the whole Roman
empire. Under Auguſtus there was only one na-
jon; but now there are ſeveral, which are learned,
martial, and polite, and which poſſeſs arts unknown
o the Greeks and Romans; and among theſe na-
ions, there is not one that has been more diſtin
puiſhed in every thing, for about a century, than
the nation which was, in ſome meaſure, formed
by Lewis XIV.

CHAPTER XXVIIL
FINAN CES.

we eompare the adminiſtration of Colbert

with that of all the miniſters who went before
him, poſterity cannot enough revere the memory
of that great man; whoſe body, after his death,
the mad multitude would have torn in pieces. The
French are, without queſtion, indebted to him for
their induſtry and commerce, and, of conſequence,
for that opulence, the ſources of which are-ſome-
umes ſtopped in time of war; but never fail to o-
pea themſelves again with abundance during peace.
K 3 |

* Cn <a dn Es * 3 N 7 n ' 4 e | A |
c * * r * 4 * 139 4 | a
: a | { _ *
N
*
f -
114 THE AGE'OF |-@vy

And yet, in he year 1702, France wail
grateful enough to blame Colbert for the d
that began to be felt in the exchequer. A f
of Normandy publiſhed about this mne 4 W
the revenue of France, in two {mall volumes yrs

tending, that ſince the year 1 660, everything bf

been in a declining ſtate. But the very contrary f
this was true, for France was 1

as from the death of cardinal Mazarin" to dhe N
of 1689; and even in that war, the body of
ſtate, which already began to feel decay, Mill hu
ported itſelf by the vigour which Colbert diff
into all its members. The author of the detail'pr6
tends, that ſince the year 1 660, the funds of ily
kingdom had funk in real value fifteen *ihdrel
millions. This account was ſo far from being trug
that it had not even the leaſt air of probability,
Yet his captious arguments were received as ſo ms
ny demonſtrations, by thofe who had reſolved ts
ſwallow this ridiculous paradox. Thus in E.
land, in the moſt flouriſhing times, papers are cots
tinually coming out, to prove that the W
undone.
It is eaſier in France than in en 2
to ruin the ſuperintendant of the finances in ide
minds of the people. That office is of the moſt o
dious kind, becauſe taxes are always ſo s beſides
there reigns in general in the affairs of the revenut,
no leſs prejudice and eres than in matter d
philoſophy. , ©, 298 163.0
So far were we * having a perfect kee

of this ſubject, that even in our own days ſo lt
as the year 1718, the parlament was heard toe)
the duke of Orleans in a body, that the i

th, 28. « LEWIS NAV. 115
ualue of a mark of. ſiluer is frve und twenty livres ;
zrerent from that of weight and ſtandard: and
ne duke of Orleans, with all his penetration, ſeems
xot to have been aware of this miſtake of the par»
jament. * nem 4 5p £2: ich
It is true, Colbert did not do all he might
ave done, much lefs all he would have done. The
ate of the revenue was not then ſo well under.
bod; and in large kingdoms there are always ma-
y and great abuſes. The arbitrary nature of
Nes; the multiplicity of exemptions; the cuſtom
n goods from province to province, which beget
m eſtrangement, nay often an enmity between the
reral parts of the kingdom; che inequality of
meaſures in different cities; with twenty other dif-
orders incident to the body politic, conld not be re-
medied, | [4:4 ito Mike Sv Bee 19
Colbert, to anſwer at once the "continual ex-
pence of wars, buildings, and pleaſures, was ob-
liged to revive in the year 1 672, what at firſt he
bad reſolved to aboliſſi for ever; proviſional im
poſts, annuities, new places, augmentations of ſa.
laries, with ſuch other expedients as relieve a ſtate
for the preſent; and plunge it into debt for many
years to come. | THT BIKES Ny at 3H ESP
He found it impoſſible to adhere to the meaſures
bis own judgment approved; for it appears ſuffici-
ently, by all his inſtructions which remain; chat he
was perſuaded the true riches of à country conſiſts.
ed in the number of inhabitants, the culture of
the lands, the induſtry of the people, and the pro-
ſperous ſtate of commerce. | He ſaw that the king
polleſſed very few crown-lands, and being no more

"28

=
VE 34

EE

EA AFS FKS cCSS

116 THE AGE OF ch 1 I,
than the ſteward of his people's wealth, «could o t
- otherwiſe be truly rich, than by min
lect, and equally proportioned. |

He was ſo apprehenſive of delivering the kurt
to the hands of the farmers of the revenue, thy
ſome: time after the diſſolution of the chamber d
juſtice, which he had cauſed to be erected agi
them, he procured an arret of council,  declarin
it capital for any one to advance money upon neg
taxes. By this threatening decree, which howen
was never printed, he meant to keep the office
of the cuſtoms in awe: yet ſoon after he was d
liged to have recourſe to their aid, even without u
voking the arret of council. The king's wan
were preſling, and ways and means for a a
muſt be found.

This expedient, brought from Italy 1 into Fram
by Catherine de Medicis, had ſo totally corruptd
the government, by the pernicious facility with
which it anſwered any ſudden demand, that afin
having been aboliſhed in the happy days of Henn
IV. it appeared again during the whole reign d
Lewis XIII. and greatly infected the latter time d
Lewis XIV.

Six years after Colbert's death, in 1 689, Franet
was ſuddenly plunged into a war, which ſhe ws
obliged to maintain againſt all the powers of Europe
without having any funds in reſerve. Pellets
who was then at the head of the finances; hoped u
find a remedy for this in the diminution of lux
ry. An ordinanee was publiſhed, requiring n
all the maſly plate, which was then in great qua
tity in the houſes of the great, and conſidered 31
proof of wealth and abundance, ſhould be broug!

. 28. LEWIS XIV. 117
o the mint. The king himlſelf ſet the example,
y reſigning all his tables of ſolid plate, his filver
ſtands, corbels, and large branched candleſtics, his
large canopy beds of maſly ſilver, and all the eu-
nous chaſed work belonging to his houſhold, which
were the maſterpieces of the ingenious Balin, a
man ſingular in his way, and executed after the
deſigns of le Brun. They coſt originally upwards
of ten millions; but on this occaſion produced on-
ly three. The wrought plate belonging to particular
perſons yielded about three more: but this altoge-
ther was but an inconſiderable refource.

Towards the years 1691, and 1692, the fi
nances were perceived to be in extreme diſorder.
Thoſe who attribute the decay of the public reve-
nue to the profuſion of Lewis XIV. in his build-
ings, upon the arts, and upon his pleaſures, ſeem
not to be ſenſible, that on the contrary, the expen-
ces that tend to promote induſtry, ſerve to enrich
a ſtate, It is only war that neceſſarily impoveriſhes
a ſtate, unleſs whaye the ſpoils of the vanquiſhed
ſerve to enrich it. © Since the time of the antient
Romans, I know of no nation that has enriched
telf by its victories. Italy, in the ſixteenth cen-
tury, owed its wealth entirely - to its commerce.
Holland would have ſubſiſted but a very ſhort time,
had it looked no farther than the ſeizure of the
Spaniſh plate fleets, and had not the Eaſt-Indies been
the ſupport of its power. England is always im-
poveriſhed by war, even when it is moſt ſucceſsful
againſt the naval armies of France, and owes all
ts grandeur to its commerce. The Algerines,
who ſupport themſelves ſolely by their piracies, are
very wretched people. |

206
| ont

8:

EEE -S3Sa3ZE8sSF =.

S- =. 8

. z'

*

F r

1 THE AGE OF | auf

_ _ Amongſt the European nations, war, after 4
certain term of years, reduces the conqueror to th
ſame diſtreſs with the conquered. It is a gulf
that ſwallows up all the channels of plenty. Ready
money, that principle of all good and of all ej
levied with ſo much difficulty in the | provinces
flows into the coffers of a hundred ſtock-jobben
and farmers of the revenue, who advance the ſuny
demanded by the ſtate, and by theſe advances, pu
chaſe the privilege of plundering the nation in th
name of the ſovereign. The people in con
quence of this, regarding the government as ther
enemy, conceal their wealth, and want of circuly
tion throw the kingdoms into a languiſhing cop
dition, |
No ſuddenly deviſed expedient can anſwer the
purpoſes of a fixed and known eſtabliſhment,
long ſtanding, and calculated with an eye to the
moſt remote contingencies. The comptrollergs
neral Pontchartrain, in the year 1696, fold pz
tents of nobility for two thouſand crowns. Abou
five hundred perſons purchaſed on this occaſion:
the reſource was tranſient, the infamy laſting, 4
ordinance appeared, requiring all the nobility, at
tient and modern, to regiſter their coats of arms
and to pay for the permiſſion of uſing them in ſeab
ing their letters. The officers of the cuſtoms bat
gained for this tax, and advanced the money. Tit
miniſter ſcarce ever had recourſe but to ſuch lov
expedients, in a kingdom capable of furniſhing 0
thers far more conſiderable. Fare

It was not till the year 17 10, that the goyem
ment ventured to impoſe the tax of the tent
penny. This tenth penny coming upon the ned

n. 28. LEWIS V. 119
f ſo many other burdenſom taxes, appeared to be
p oppreſſiwe, that it was not thought adviſable to
y it with rigour. The government did not gain
renty-five millions yearly from it, at forty livres
he mark. |

Colbert made very few attempts to alter the va-
e of the coin. It were indeed better, never to
ake any ſuch attempt at all. Silver and gold,
he common ſtandards of exchange, ought to be
carded as invariable meafures. The value of a.
ark of ſilver in his time was fixed at fix and
enty livres, nor did he increaſe it to more than
yen and twenty; but after him, in the latter
ears of Lewis XIV. we find it valued at no lefs
an forty imaginary livres; a fatal expedient,

5-2

S Fa EEE SS AGSG;RES.

de rich eaſed the king for a time, to ruin him after-
rds: for inſtead of a mark of ſilver, he received
de more than half that value. He who in 1683
red twenty ſeven livres, paid a mark; and he
So in 17 10, owed forty livres, paid a mark like»

ſe, The diminutions which followed foon af.
gave a no leſs ſevere ſhock to the little com-
terce that remained, than the augmentations had
one before. |
Areal ſource might have been found in a well
ntrived bank, with notes of credit; but to
nder ſuch a bank uſeful in different conjunctures,
ought to be eſtabliſhed in a time of proſperity.
The miniſter, Chamillard, began in the year
706, to make payments in bank bills, in billets
f ſubſiſtence, and in billets of free quarters; but
this paper money was not received at the exche-
er, its credit was deſtroyed almoſt as ſoon as it
peared, The government was neceſſitated to

SSELESSESEZ

D

BB 9

130 THE AGE OF 004
eontinue the practice of burdenſome loans, and
anticipate four years of the royal revenue,
The comptroller-general des Marets, -nephewell8-:
the illuſtrious Colbert, ſucceeding Chamillard pi;
1708, found it impoſlible to heal a. diſorh
which all circumſtances” concurred to render q
curable. | | | 6. 4.23 me
Nature conſpired with fortune to overwhelms
ſtate. The cruel winter of 1709, forced- te
king to remit nine millions of taxes to his pe
at a time when he had not wherewithal to payhi
troops. The ſcarcity of proviſions was ſo ex
ſive, that it coſt five and (forty millions for Hv
ſubſiſtence of the army. The expences of th
year 1709 amounted to two hundred and twenhy
one millions; and the king's ordinary reven cee
ſcarce produced forty nine. Thus was the ſat
unavoidably ruined, in order to prevent its falli
under the power of its enemies. The diſorda
encreaſed to ſuch a degree, and fo little was doit
to repair it, that long after the peace, in the WW ext
ginning of the year 171 5, the king was obliged |
negotiate bills to the amount of thirty two mill
ons for eight millions in ſpecie. In ſhort, he HN
at his death, a debt of two thouſand ſix hunde fix:
milions, at twenty eight livres to the mark, * mu
cording to the value of the coin at that Un" des
which makes about four thouſand five hundred Wil yea.
lions of our money as it ſtood in 1750. |
It is aſtoniſhing, yet true, that this imme is :
debt would have been no inſupportable burden up
the Nate, had France at that time been pollelſed
flouriſhing commerce, an eſtabliſhed bank, ®
wealthy companies capable of ſupporting the a*®

ch. 28. LEWIS MY. 121
of itsbills, as in Sweden, England, venice and Holland.
For when the debts of a powerful ſtate center wholly
in itſelf, circulation and public credit always furniſh
means of payment. But France at that time was
far from being in a capacity to put ſo vaſt and com-
* plicated a machine in motion, r +6."
WS which it lay in a manner cruſhed. | |
Lewis XIV. during his reign, expended eigh-
teen thouſand millions; which one time with ano-
ther comes to three hundred and thirty millions
yearly of preſent money, allowing for the various
zugmentations and diminutions of value it ne.
went.

Under the adminiſtration of the great Colbert,
the ordinary revenues of the crown did not ex-
ceed a hundred and ſeventeen millions, at twenty
ſeven livres to the mark. The ſurplus therefore
was always furniſhed by extraordinary methods of
ſupply. Colbert, for inſtance, during the war of
1672, was obliged to raiſe four hundred millions
extraordinary, in ſix years time.

Thoſe who have taken the trouble to compare
the revenues of Lewis XIV. with thoſe of Lewis
XV. have found, in confiniug themſelves to the
fed and current revenue, that Lewis XIV. was
much richer in 1683, the epocha of Colbert's
death, with a hundred and ſeventeen millions of
yearly revenue, than his ſucceſſor Lewis XV. in
1730, with almoſt two hundred millions: and this
1s an undoubted truth, if we conſider only the fixed
and ordinary rents of the crown. For a hundred
and ſeventeen millions, at twenty ſeven livres to
be mark, makes a greater ſam than two hundred

Yi... 1 0 Wi, 3

—

122 THE AGE OF | Oat
millions, when the mark is valued at forty mine
vres, which was the caſe in 17 30; not to mens
tion the load of debt the crown then lay undd
But the king's revenues, I mean thoſe of the ſy
have ' conſiderably encreaſed ſince that time; and
the conſtitution of the finances is now ſo well u
derſtood, that in'the ruinous war of 1741, th
public eredit was never once at a ſtand, The ni
"niſtry have fallen upon the way of eſtabliſhing pub
lic funds, as among the Engliſh: it was found ne
ceſſary to adopt in part the ſyſtem of their ren
nue as well as their philoſophy ; and were it pd
ſible, in a government purely monarchical, to is
troduce a circulation of paper money, which dow
bles at leaft the riches of England, France wou
attain its higheſt pitch of power and grandeur,
The current coin of the kingdom, in /168z
might amount to about five hundred millions:
which may be about twelve hundred millions
cording to the preſent valuation of money. bu
the computation of our time is almoſt double va
it was in the time of Colbert; ſo that France 8
not above a ſixth richer in ſpecie ſince the geaths
that miniſter, It is otherwiſe in reſpect of gol
and gold plate, and the various implements of lus
ury. The amount of theſe in 1690 ſcarce.camt
to four hundred millions preſent money; wheres
they are now rated equal to the current coin of tl
kingdom. Nothing can demonſtrate more cleatly
how much commerce, whoſe ſources were fitſt o
pened by Celbert, has encreaſed ſince the conclul
on of the wars, Induſtry continued to flour
notwithſtanding the loſs of ſo many artifieers, d-
perſed by the revocation of the edict of Nantes

b. 23. LEWIS MV. 123

and this induſtry ſtill improves every day. The
nation is capable of as great, nay of greater things
than under Lewis XIV. becauſe genius and com-
merce, when duely encouraged, never fail to receive
new acceſſions of ſtrengtn.

To ſee the affluence in which private perſons
live, the prodigious number of fine houſes built in
Paris and the provinces, the multitude of equipages,
the conveniencies and refinements of luxury, one
can hardly forbear thinking, that the wealth of
France muſt have encreaſed at leaſt twenty fold.
All this, however, is the fruit of an ingenious in-
duſtry, ſtill more than of our riches. It ſcarce
colts more at preſent, to be accommodated with a
hand ſome houſe, than with a wretched one in the
days of Henry IV. The large plates of glaſs, ma-
nufactured at home, adorn our houſes at a far leſs
expence, than did formerly thoſe ſmall ones import -
ed from Venice. Our rich and curious ſtuffs come
cheaper than thoſe of foreign countries, and even
exceed them in goodneſs. In reality, it is not
gold and ſilver that procure the accommodations
of life, but genius and induſtry. A people pol-
ſeſſed only of theſe two metals would-be very mi-
ſerable. On the other hand, a people deſtitute of
the metals, but who know how to manufacture
properly all the productions of the earth, would
be the truly wealthy nation. France enjoys this
advantage, with a much greater quantity of gold
and ſilver, than is neceſſary for the mere purpoſes
of circulation. 1

The country remains in pretty much the ſame
ſituation as formerly. Nature ſeems to have im-

L 2

124 THE AGE OF Quay
poſed upon far the greateſt part of mankind/an
folute neceſſity of labour. The proportion eh
bliſhed in the taxes, inſtead. of that arbitrary n
thod which prevailed in almoſt all,-the,.provines
has only introduced a more equitable  afſe(ſment
and eaſed the peaſants a little, who ought-not ty

manner Fa

miſerable. tin

The middle order of people are grown rich 1 en

virtue of their induſtry : the miniſters and-couni Wc

ers have rather ſuffered in this general reyolution; at

becauſe the value of the coin being diminiſhed co

"oi moſt one half, their ſalaries and penſions continus me
: the ſame, and the price of proviſions is more than no
| double. By this means we ſee leſs opulence than WW th
formerly among the great, and more among tho at

of inferior rank, which has brought the people v

nearer to a level. In ſhort, after whatever manner its

the finances are adminiſtered, France, in the indi- ha

ſtry of more than twenty millions of een to

| poſſeſſes an ineſtimable treaſure. | re
4 _ , 4 be
| 5 70
CHAPTER XXIX.

| le

SCIENCES and ARTS. ar

W

HIS happy age, which beheld fo wonddf

a revolution in the mind of man, ſeemed

not to have been deſtined to ſuch an, event. For to
begin with philoſophy, there was but little appearance,
in the time of Lewis XIII. that it would be able be

—

1. 29. LEWIS NV. 125
xtricate itſelf from the darkneſs in which it was in-
-olved. The inquiſition in Italy, Spain, and Por-

gal, had linked the errors of philoſophy with the
loctrines of religion. The civil wars in France,
and the diſputes raiſed by Calviniſm, were as little
ealculated to cultivate human reaſon, as was the
Fanaticiſm that prevailed in England in Cromwell's
time, If a canon of Thorn had revived the anti-
ent planetary ſyſtem of the Chaldeans, exploded
for ſo many ages, that truth had been condemned
at Rome: and the congregation of the holy office,
conliſting of ſeven cardinals, having declared the
motion of the earth, without which there can be
no true aſtronomy, not only heretical, but abſurd ;
the great Galileo having been obliged to aſk pardon
at the age of ſeventy, for being in the right, there
was but little appearance that truth would make.
its way in the world. The lord chancellor Bacon
had pointed out at a diſtance the courſe we were
to purſue: Galileo had made ſome diſcoveries in
relation to the deſcent of heavy bodies: Torricelli
began to aſcertain the weight of the air that ſur-
rounds us: and ſome experiments had been made
at Magdeburg. But theſe were only feeble eſſays:
the world ſtill continued in ignorance, and the
ſchools abounded with abſurdities. Deſcartes then
appeared; who by a conduct the very reverſe of
what he ought to have purſued, inſtead of ſtudying
nature, fell to unravelling her operations by con-
jecture. He was the greateſt geometrician of his
age; but geometry commonly leaves the imaginati-
on as it finds it. That of Deſcartes had a ſtrong
byals to invention. The prince of mathematicians
* 3

mg
en
%
f

126 THE AGE OF h. 29,
was little more than a romancer in phileſophy,” 4
man who diſdained making experiments, who ne.
ver once quoted Galileo, who was at no pains tg
furniſh himſelf with materials, could dan only
caſtles in the air.

What was purely romantic in his foſter faced
ed; and the few truths mixed with theſe philos
phical chimeras were at firſt oppoſed. * But thek
few truths at laſt, by virtue of the' method he in
troduced, began to pierce the gloom that overſtz.
dowed the human mind: for before him, there wa
no clue to lead through this labyrinth of error
and he at leaſt furniſhed one, which ferved to guide
others, after it was known that he himſelf had loſt
his way. It was a preat point gained, to deſtroy
the chimeras of the Peripatetic philoſophy, though
by other chimeras no leſs vain, Theſe two phantoms
for ſome time kept the field ; and falling one after
the other, reaſon erected her throne upon their
ruins, There was at Florence an academy for ex
periments, under the name of the academy d
cimento, founded by cardinal Leopold de Medidis, in
the year 1605. It was perceived already in this
parent country of the arts, that there was no Way
of comprehending any thing in the grand edifee
of nature, but that of examining the whole itru-
cture by particular parts. The academy del c
mento, after the days of Galileo and Torricelli, 00
great ſervice.

Some philoſophers of England, under the gloomy
adminiſtration of Cromwell, agreed to meet &
mong themſelves in ſearch of truth, at a time
when all truth lay oppreſſed by the ravages of en-
thuſiaſm. Charles II. being recalled to the throne

ul 29- 0 | LE W1 8 XIV. 127

of his anceſtors, by the repentance and inconſtan-
cy of the nation, granted letters patent to this riſing
academy: but this was all the encouragementit re-
ceived from the government. The royal ſociety,
or rather the incorporated ſociety of London, was
inſtigated by the ſole motive of promoting know-
lege. To this illuſtrious body we are indebted for
the late diſcoveries relating to light, the principle
of gravitation, the motion of the fixed ſtars, the
geometry of tranſcendental quantities, and a hun-
dred other inventions; which, in this reſpect, might
juſtly denominate the age of which we ſpeak, the
age of the Engliſh, as well as that of Louis XIV.

In 1 666, Mr. Colbert, jealous of this new glo-
ry, was reſolved the French ſhould have a ſhare in
it; and at the requeſt of ſeveral learned men,
brought Louis XIV. to agreee to the eſtabliſhment
of an academy of ſciences. It became an incor-
porated ſociety in 1 669, like that of-London, and
the French academy. Colbert brought Dominico
Caſſini from Italy, and Huygens from Holland, by
the offer of large penſions. To them we owe the
diſcovery of Saturn's ſatellites and ring. Huygens
was the inventor of pendulum clocks. By degrees,
a genuine knowlege in all the different branches of
true phyſics began to prevail, and the chimeras of
the ſyſtematic philoſophy were exploded. The
public beheld with wonder a chemiſtry, in which no
mention was made of the philoſopher's ſtone, or the
art of prolonging life beyondits natural bounds ; an
altronomy that pretended not to foretel future e-
vents; medicine independent of the phaſes of the
moon. Corruption was no longer the parent of

mimals and plants; nor was philoſophy filled with

= = XX => > - S W »* -

n
- -

Re > ©

- bu ©” > OO , a» 1 > *T_ Xx 3 >

„ ww 8, Mk I.

128 THE ACE OF © as
— 2 e e to wanne

2 — was now ſtudied in all her 1
Geography received amazing improvements.
ſooner was an obſervatory built, by the order of

is XIV. than Dominico Caſſini, and Picart, began
meridian line in 1669. It was continued non
ward, in 1683, by la Hire; and in fine Cui
in 1700, carried it as far as the —
fillon, It is the fineſt monument of:
extant, and ſufficient of itſelf to immortal
age.

In the year 1672, a number e
raliſts were ſent to Caienne, for the ſake of mai
uſeful obſervations. This voyage gave riſe tot
diſcovery of a new law of nature, which was aft
wards demonſtrated by the great Sir Iſaac Newton
and paved the way to thoſe ſtill more famous vp
ages, which have given ſuch a luſtre to A

Lewis XV.
In the year 1700, Tournefort was ſcat to the
| Levant, where he collected an infinite number d

new plants, to enrich the royal garden, before i
moſt quite abandoned, but thenceforward held il
honour, and is become at this day worthy the eu
oſity of all Europe. The royal library, altes
well ſtored, was increaſed under Lewis XIV. V
more than thirty thouſand volumes; and this &
ample has been ſo well followed ſince, that it cs
tains at preſent upwards of a hundred and fol
ſcore thouſand. The ſchool of civil law wasagl
opened, after it had been ſhut for almoſt a cen
ry. A profeſſor of French law was eſtabliſhed in
very univerſity of the kingdom: * wo

LA
+>

MS IF WS :

29. LEWIS MY. 129

| ſcems to direct that no other ſhould be allow-
|. and that the beſt Roman inſtitutions, being in-
rporated with thoſe of the country, ſhould be
med into one complete body of laws for the

ation. |

Under this prince were the literary journals firſt

| abliſned. It is well known, that the Journal

5 Sayans, which began in x 665, is the parent of
the ſeveral productions of this kind, with which
urope now abounds, and into which many abuſes
ave crept, as is but too common in the moſt uſe-
| inſtitutions, 21
The academy of Belles Lettres, compoſed of
dme members of the French academy, was inſti-
ted in 1663, to tranſmit to poſterity by medals
te actions of Lewis XIV. and became of conſider-
le utility to the public, when they no longer con-
ed themſelves merely to the monarch, but apply-
dg their reſearches to antiquity, began an imparti-
al criticiſm of opinions and facts. They did
early the ſame ſervice to hiſtory, which the acade-
y of ſciences did to natural philoſophy : they diſ-
pated error, | | |
The ſpirit of good ſenſe and criticiſm, which
ow began to prevail more and more, deſtroyed in-
ally many ſuperſtitions. To theſe firſt dawn-
gs of reaſon we owe that celebrated declaration
the king in 1672, forbidding the tribunals of
ſtice, to receive any ſimple accuſations of witch-
paſt, Such a ſtep, in the reign of Henry IV. or
"WIS XIII. might have been attended with danger-
us conſequences; and though perhaps there have

en ſome accuſations of this kind, ſince the pub-

ang of that declaration, yet it does not appear

130 THE AGE. or . a
that the judges ever condemned perſons fo ak
ed, unleſs where an open profanation of x
and the uſe of * Was dearly pro pi
them.

It was a very common practice before this 0
to try ſorcerers by throwing them into à ponl
bound hand and foot with ropes. If they had

misfortune to ſwim, it was looked upon as inf
lible demonſtration of guilt. Theſe trials had be

eſtabliſhed by the judges in ſeveral provinces, u of
they continued long in uſe among the people. | 0
very ſhepherd was a ſorcerer: amulets and man .
rings were in great requeſt in the cities. The efſed
attributed to the hazle ſwitch, which was to
to diſcover thieves, treaſures: and the moſt hide. *
things, paſſed for certain; and to this day n .
with a great deal of credit in many conlideraw
provinces of Germany. It was the univerſal H, o
ctice for perſons to caſt their horoſcope. Nothin. .

was talked of but magical ſecrets; all ranks of p
ple were infected with the illuſion. Magiſtrates
learned men had written ſeriouſly upon ws
jects, inſomuch that there was a certain Claſs of
thors diſtinguiſhed by the name of Tron *
Rules were laid down for diſtinguiſhing 55 4
magicians from the falſe : and thoſe that were
ly poſſeſſed from thoſe that were not ; in won
thing had hitherto been adopted from 1
but errors of every kind. nor

| Theſe ſuperſtitious notions had taken ſuch cer
root, that ſo late as the year 1 680, the app®
ance of a comet gave uniyerſal terror. It wu
ven dangerous to oppoſe this popular ap
__ Bernoulli, a conſiderable

b. 29 I. E WI S NV. 131
x in his anſuer to thoſe who contended for the
ninous nature of planets, ſays, that the body of
e comet cannot be a ſign of the Divine wrath,
cauſe it is eternal; but the tail, he allows, may:
evertheleſs, neither the body nor tail of the co-
et are eternal. Bayle attacked this yulgar preju-
ice, in a book which was celebrated at that time,
ut which the progreſs of human reaſon has render-
4 uſeleſs now.
Few can be induced to believe, that ſovereigns
ve under any great obligation to philoſophers, It
« nevertheleſs certain, that the philoſophic ſpirit,
phich has gained ſo much upon all ranks of people,
e mere vulgar excepted, has contributed not a
le to ſtrengthen and ſecure the rights of princes.
Thoſe quarrels, which in former ages would have
roduced excommunications, interdicts, and ſchiſms,
ave no ſuch effects at preſent. It has been com-
only ſaid, that mankind would be happy, if they
ad philoſophers for their kings: with equal ju-
ice may we ſay, that kings are much the happier,
for having a great many of their ſubjects philoſe-
phers,
It muſt indeed be acknowleged, that the rea-
ſonable ſpirit which begins to prevail in the educati-
dn of youth in the greater towns, had not been
dle to ſtop the extravagancies of fanaticiſm in the
Cerennes, nor prevent the infatuation of the lower
people of Paris round the tomb of St. Medard,
nor quiet the warm and frivolous diſputes which
have ariſen among men who ought to have been
wer, But before this period, theſe diſputes had
cauſed troubles in the ſtate; the miracles of St.
Medard had gained credit with the moſt conſider-

3

=

= T

© YL

SE

EEE

2 :

tz: THE 4er or

able citizens; and the fanaticiſm which .
ſhut up amongſt the mountains of the Chem
had fpread itſelf over the towns and province:
All the ſeveral ſubjects of ſcience and literatun
were exhauſted during this period; and ſuck
multitude of writers appeared, eminent for HM uit
diſcoveries and knowlege, that thoſe who in dne
ages would have paſſed for prodigies of leamii en
are now ſcarce regarded in the eroud. Their ger
is not conſpicuous, becauſe of their number; by
the glory of the age is thereby much the greataiſet !

ARrs.

True philoſophy made not the ſame progreſsit
France, as it did in England, and at Florence;
and though the academy of ſciences was of very
great ſervice to the human mind, yet it gave 10
France any advantage in this reſpect over other ws
tions: all the great diſcoveries, all the leading
truths in philoſophy, took their riſe elſewhere.

But in eloquence, in poetry, in polite learning
in books of morality and entertainment, the Frend e
may be conſidered as the legiſlators of Europe. unn
taly was no longer diſtinguiſhed for its good tali woe
this way. True eloquence was every where Wen .
known ; nothing could be more prepoſterous that
the language of the pulpit; nothing more ride bun
lous than the pleadings at the bar. The preachen |
quoted Ovid and Virgil; the lawyers St. Aufi to
aud St. Jerome. A genius had not yet ariſen, cp M
able of giving a delicate turn, harmony, propriety)
and dignity of expreſſion to the French tongie

b. 20. LEWIS NV. 133
zome verſes of Malherbe had indeed made it ap-

ear, that the language was capable of grandeur
force; but that was all. The fame writers,

.
bo had ſucceeded ſo. well in Latin, as the preſident
e Thou, and the chancellor de! Hoſpital, ſeemed
ite other men when they engaged with their own
e enguage, which was altogether intractable in their
nd. The French as yet had nothing to recom-
Ne end it, but a certain air of ſimplicity, which con-
be ituted the whole merit of Joinville, of Amiot,

f Marot, of Montagne, of Regnier, and of the

—
A

Satire Menippee. This ſimplicity was not without
f conſiderable ſhare of irregularity and ruſticity.
John de Lingendes, bilhop of Macon, unknown
o the preſent age, becauſe his works were never
printed, was the firſt orator who ſpoke in the ſu-
lime taſte, His ſermons and funeral orations,
though not wholly free from the ruſt of the times,
ſerved as a model to the orators who imitated and
ſurpaſſed him. The funeral oration” of Charles E-
manuel, duke of Savoy, ſurnamed the great in his
dun country, ſpoke by Lingendes in 1630, was
of ſuch maſterly ſtrokes of eloquence, that
Flechier, a long time after, took the whole exor-
lum, with the text, and ſeveral conſiderable paſ-
ages, to embelliſh his juſtly admired funeral orati-
on of the vicount de Turenne. |

About the ſame time, Balzac gave numbers and
harmony to the French proſe. His letters, it muſt
be owned, are penned in a ſtile that is ſomewhar
bombaſt, He writes to the firſt cardinal of Retz:
Iu have juſt been aſſuming the ſceptre of kings and
the livery of reſes. He writes to a friend from
Vor. II. NM

134 THE AGE OF G
Rome, ſpeaking of perfumed waters: I bete
eſcaped by ſtwimming in my —_— —
cean of perfumes. With an thefe Faults be cha
the ear. Eloquence has fo great power U Has.
that Balzac was admired in bis time, for having
F m
neglected art, which confifts in the har mon
choice of words; and even for having exerted
talent improperly on many occaſions. '
Voiture gave ſome idea of the ſuperficidly "
of that epiſtolary ſtile, which is by no means
beſt, becanſe it aims at nothing Maher tal
ſantry and amuſement. , His two volumes of
ters are the mere rolfime of a wanton imaging
in which we meet not with one that is in{trud
not one that flows from the heart, that paints
manners of the times, or the characters of me!
they are rather an abuſe than exerciſe of vit.

The language by degrees began to attain pu
ty, and aſſume a fixed and ſteddy form. Th
was in great meafure owing to the labour of ros
French academy, but more particularly to V 5
las. His tranſlation of Quintus Curtius, tud
appeared in 1646, was the firft good book
ten with true purity of ſtile; inſomuch wy Our
few of the expreſſions or phraſes are yet be
obſolete.

Olivier Patru, who followed ſoon after, bet
very much to refine the language, and red Wl tot:
under a grammatical form; and though he go |
Paſs for a profound lawyer, yet we are warm
to him for juſt difpoſition, perſpiculty, dem © t
and elegance of diſcourſe, talents that wert gf the
unknown at the bar before his ume. |

5. 2%½ LEWIS NV. 135

But the performance which contributed moſt to
rm the taſte of the nation, and give 1 a true re-
of propriety and correctneſs, was the Goall
plleftion of maxims written. by Francis duke of
echefoucault. Though there is but one truth
xs through this whole piece, viz. that /@lf-lave
the foring of all our ac bians and determinations,
t this thought preſents ĩtſelf under ſuch a variety
2 never fail to ſtrike with new ſurprize.
* ſo properly a boek itſelf, as a ſet of ma-
* to embelliſh a book. This little collection
much read and admired: it aceuſtomed our
quthors to think, and to comprize their thoughts
12 lrely, correct, and delicate turn of phraſe.
[his was a merit utterly unknown to any Euro-
dean writer before him, ſince the revival of letters.
gut the firſt book of genius, which appeared in proſe,
was the collection of provincial letters in 1 650.
Examples of all the various ſpecies of eloquence
we to be found in this work. Though it has been
dow written almoſt a hundred years, yet not a
bogle word occurs in it, favouring of that viciſſi-
tude, to which living languages are ſo very ſub-
ect. Here then we are to fix the epocha, when
our language may he faid to have aſſumed. a ſettled
form, The biſhop of Lucon, ſos of the cele-
vated Buſſy, told me, that aſking-one day the bi-
hop of Meaux, what work he would covet moſt
to be the author of, ſuppoſing his own performan-
ces ſet aſide, Boſſuet replied, The prquincial letters.
The good taſte which, xeigns from. the beginning
the end of this book, and the vigorous ſtrain of
the laſt letters, did not however baniſh immediate-
M 2

136 T H E 1 E G7 | _ Gy

ly, that effeminate, diffuſe, incorrect, 460 ua er
tered ſtile, which had ſo long ade! aof : Bot
our writers, preachers, and pleaders. vit
One of the firſt who diſplayed in the pubit nl
uniform maſculine eloquence, was father Bow
loue, towards the year 1668. He was a h
light to the age. We have had other pulpit o re⸗
tors ſi ince, as father Maſſillon, biſhop of Clermot tin
who have thrown more graces into their ſermon
and embelliſhed them with finer and more mas you
ly paintings of life and manners; but not one di
theſe have obliterated his merit. In his ſtile, mat
nervous than florid, and which ſeems to deſpiſe ear.
tinſel ornaments of a glowing imagination, he Wi"
bours rather to convince than inflame, and nem Lete
amuſes himſelf with the vain ambition of pleaſa he.
It were perhaps to be wiſhed, that in baniſhing Wl pail
from the pulpit the bad taſte which had ſo long &
| baſed the diſcourſes of our divines, he had Hei ion:
baniſhed that ſilly cuſtom of preaching only up Pre!
one text. In reality, to ſpeak for a long time uw mil
on a citation of a ſingle line or two, to ha
one's ſelf in ſquaring the whole diſcourſe” to tie
ſubject of that line, ſeems a practice little becoming Bor
the gravity of a miniſter, The text by this mei cou
becomes a device, or rather enigma, ' which the d ner.
courſe is to explain. This practice was not know
to the Greeks or Romans: it was in the dedline d ver
ſetters that it firſt came into uſe ; and time ee
ſtabliſhed its authority.
' The method of dividing always into to in
three heads, ſubjects that either require no _
at all, as morality, or that would require à
on more minute and complex, as points of cu

—

—
=

EE S535 5 6

MST”

= ==

b. . LEWIS MV. 137
very, is likewiſe an arbitrary cuſtom, which father
Bourdaloue found eſtabliſhed before his time, and
with which he thought it neceſſary to comply.
- Boſſuet, afterwards biſhop of Meaux, had di-
ſlinguiſhed himſelf as a preacher before Bourdeloue.
This famous divine, who at laſt became one of the
greateſt ornaments of the age, was originally de-
ſtined to the bar; and had engaged, when he was ve-
ry young, to marry mademoiſelle Desvieux, a
young lady of uncommon merit. His talents for
divinity, and that ſpecies of eloquence in which he
ſo particularly excelled, diſcovered themſelves fo
early, that his parents and friends reſolved to breed
him a churchman. Mademoiſelle Desvieux herſelf
determined him to this choice, preferring the glory
he muſt acquire as a preacher, to the happineſs of
paſſing her life with him. This was what gave riſe
to the report of his being married ; which though
long believed among a few, who have a vanity in
pretending to be acquainted with the fecrets of fa-
milies, had neither truth nor probability to ſupport
it. He preached when very young before the king
and queen-mother, in 1662, long before father
Bourdaloue began to be taken notice of. His diſ-
courſes, enforced by a noble and affecting man-
ner, were the firſt which had been heard at court
that carried any reſemblance of the ſublime, and
vere ſo well received, that the king ordered a letter
do de written in his name to his father, the intendant
of Soilſons, to congratulate him on his happineſs

in having ſuch a ſon.
Nevertheleſs, when Father Bourdaloue appear-
ed, monſieur Boſſuet no longer paſſed for the firſt
M 3 |

preacher in France. Boſſuet had diſtinguiſhed hin
felf for his genius in funeral orations; a ſpece a
eloquence that requires a ' vigorous Iinaginaticy
with a certain grandeur and majeſty of diction, 0
ſembling poetry: for from this laſt the orator mi :1!
always borrow ſome aid, though with a prudent ni.
ſerve, when he aims at the ſublime. The funenl
oration of the queen mother, which he ſpokein ba
x 667, procured him the biſhopric of Condom; re
yet this diſcourſe came not up to the reputation of Wi ot!
his other performances of this kind; and according ed
ly was never printed, any more than his ſermons I.
The funeral elogium on the queen of England By v!
widow of Charles I. which he pronounced in 16% th:
was univerſally allowed to be a maſter - piece. The ic
ſubjects are happy in theſe pieces of eloquence, in
proportion to the misfortunes of the deceaſed pers
ſons whoſe praiſes they celebrate. It is in theſe u
in tragedy, where the ſufferings of the -principd
perſonages conftitute what is chiefly intereſting in
the performance. The funeral elogium of the dw
eheſs of Orleans, who was carried off in the floyet
of her age, and may be faid to have died in I
arms, had the great and uncommon effect of mel
ing the whole court into tears. He was obliged w
ſtop after theſe words: O fatal night! O night i
horror ! en which was heard, like @ clap of thu?
the dreadful found, Madame is expiring, Madant
#5 no more, etc. The audience burſt forth int
tears and ſobs, and the orator was interrupted by
their ſighs and lamentations. e
The French were the only people who ſucces
ed in this ſpecies of eloquence. Some time ,

F C8 E83 8 24 8 F 8

b. 29. LEWIS MV. 139

he ſame great genius invented another, of a chara-
ger entirely new, which perhaps could have ſueceed-
ed in no hands but his own., He applied the ora-
tor's art to hiftory itſelf, which ſeems to exclude
all ornaments of this kind. His diſcourſe upon u-
niverſal hiſtory, compoſed for the uſe of the dau-
phin, was neither copied after any model, nor has yet
had an imitator. If the ſyſtem which he adopts, to
reconcile the chronology of the Jews, with that of
other nations, has met with oppoſition from learn-
ed men, his ſtile is nevertheleſs admired by all.
The world was aſtoniſned at that majeſtic energy,
wherewith he deſcribes manners, affairs of ſtate,
the riſe and fall of great empires; and at thoſe ma-
ſterly ſtrokes of expreſſive truth, which appear in
his characters and judgments of nations.

Almoſt all the productions which did fo much
honour to this age, were of a character unknown
to antiquity. Telemachus is of this number. Fe-
nelon, the diſciple, the friend of Boſſuet, and who
decame afterwards, in fpite of himſelf, his rival
and enemy, was the author of this admirable piece,

ho which partakes equally of romance and poetry, and

ſubſtitutes a meaſured proſe in place of verſifieati-
uo on. One would be tempted to think, that he
meant to treat romances as monſieur de Meaux had

treated hiſtory, by giving it a dignity, and charms
of which it had been judged incapable ; and above
, by extracting from theſe fiftions a moral uſeful
vs 2 mankind, a moral utterly neglected in the fa-

bulous inventions of antiquity. It has been com-
ee WY monly believed, that he compoſed this work to
dee as themes and leſſons of inftruftion, to the

yy _— *
j \ - »” FRY:
T9 3 \ - 3 \ [5
- * * — .
** F , 7
(4
-

140 THE AGE OR: at
uke of Burgundy, and his brothers, to whom\y
was appointed preceptor, as Boſſuet had dran ij
his idea of univerſal hiſtory for the uſe of th
dauphin. But the marquis de Fenelon. his nephey
who inherited the virtues of this great man, a
who was killed at the battle of Racou, aſſured ns
of the contrary. And indeed it ſeems incongny
ous to ſuppoſe, that the amours of Calypſo af
Eucharis ſhould be the firſt leſſon given by a pril
.to the ſons. of France.

This work was not compoſed till after his by
niſhment from court, when he received orders th
retire to his archbiſhopric. As he was well re
in the ancients, and as nature had bleſſed himmwith
a lively glowing imagination, he from them ſom
ed his ſtile in a manner peculiar to himſelf,-whid
glided copiouſly from its fountain. I have ſeen
his original manuſcript, and there was ſcarce-tet
eraſements in the whole. We are told, that one d
| his. domeſtics ſtole a copy, and cauſed it to be printed
If fo, the archbiſhop of Cambray is indebted'to-that
infidelity, for all the reputation he has acquiredin
Europe. But he owes likewiſe his entire dilgfact
at court to the ſame cauſe. Moſt people imagined
they could trace, in Telemac hus, an indirect critidin
on the government of Lews XIV. Seſoſtris, who
triumphed with ſo much haughtineſs over vanquil-
ed kings, Idomeneus, who introduced luxury into
Salentum, and neglected to provide necellaties,
were ſuppoſed to be portraits of the king. Hs
miniſter Louvois appeared, in the eyes of the di
contented,. to be characteriſed under the name of
Proteſilaus, as vain, obſtinate, haughty, and an e

LEWIS Mv. r4r

jemy to the great generals de to ſewe ite
te rather than the miniſter,

The allies, who in the war of 1688 un a-
bainſt Lewis XIV. and who afterwards, in the
var of 1710, ſhook his throne, were overjoyed
to trace his character in the-ſtory of Idomeneus,
hoſe pride rendered him odious to all his neigh-
bours. Theſe alluſions made the ſtronger impreſ-
fon, on account of that harmonious ſtile, which
ſo gently inſinuates moderation and concord. Not
only ſtrangers, but the French themſelves, weary
of ſo many wars, ſaw with malicious joy, a ſatire
of this kind, couched in a performance deſigned as
a leſſon of virtue. The editions it paſſed through
were innumerable; I have ſeen no leſs than four.
teen tranſlations of it into Engliſh. Indeed after
the death of this monarch, ſo dreaded, ſo envied,
ſo reſpected by all, and ſo hated by ſome, when
malice ceaſed to take a pleaſure in pretended alluſi-
ons, that ſeemed to cenſure his conduct, the ſever-
er judges treated Telemachus with ſome rigour.
They blamed the length of the epiſodes, the cir-
cumſtantial details, the little connection in the ad-
ventures, the too frequent and too uniform deſeri-
ptions of a country-life; but the book has never-
theleſs been always regarded as one of the fineſt
monuments of a flouriſhing age.

The characters of La Bruiere deſerve likewiſe
to be ranked among the extraordinary productions
of this age. Antiquity furniſhes as few examples
of ſuch a work, as of Telemachus. A ſtile rapid, con-
eiſe, and nervous; expreſſions animated and pictur-
eſque; à uſe of language altogether new, yet
without offending againſt any of its eſtabliſhed

= @

7 Kn 8 FS HKS TTA FEI

** ruck * . d: * —
which occur in almoſt, every page, completed iy
ſuccels; When La Bruiere ſhowed the wort in
manuſcript to Maleſieux, this laſt wid him, tha
the piece would have many readers, and raiſy. hin
up. many. enemies. The book funk ſomewhat ig
the opinion of men, when that entize generation
whoſe follies it attacked, was entinct: but u
contains things applicable to all times and places,
iu mond tap big ie will mT.
gotten.

Telemachus bas den nematped Ai
tors 5» the characters of La Bruiere have prod
ſeveral. It is eaſier to draw ſhort pictures of thin
that ſtrike us, than to write a long werk of in
gination, that pleaſes and inſtructs at the lane
time. The happy art of introducing even phil
ſophy to the acquaintanee of the graces,” Wag we
ther new attempt, of which the ura of wid
gave the firft example; but an example | of a du
gerous kind, becauſe the proper dreſs of Fele
phy conſiſts, in order, perſpiouity, and abe
in truth. What alone will binder this ingeniow
performance from being placed by. poſterity in un
b& of our claſſic works, is, that it is founded i
part on the chimerical vortices, of des Cartes.

To theſe productions of à character entirely
new, let us add, that memorable one of Bale
who gave us a kind of dictionary for reaſoning
It is the firſt work of the kind, in which 489
may learn to think. We muſt indeed abandon l
the fate of ordinary books, thoſe, articles ' of 8
collection, which contain only a detail, of m
facts, unworthy cither of Bayley ax undes,

. cn pron —
;mong the writers who did honour to the age of

Lewis XIV. notwitchſtantling his being a refugee in
Holland, I only conform to the decree of the par-
lament of Thoulouſe; which, when it declared his
will valid in France, maugre the rigour of the laws,
expreſsly faid, that uch a man could not be confi
dered as a foreigner.
We ſhall not tire the readers patience, with an
enumeration of all the good books this age produe-
ed; we ſhall only fpeak of thoſe new and ſin-
gular productions which particularly characteriſe,
and ſerve to diſtinguiſh it from other ages. The
eloquence of Boſſuet, and Bourdaloue, for in-
ſtance, neither was nor could be the ſame with that
of Cicero. If there be any thing in our language
reſembling the Roman orator, it is the three me-
morials of Peliſon, compoſed in behalf of Fouquet.
They are like many of -Cicero's orations: à mix»
ture of judicial and ſtate affairs, treated with an
art void of oftentation, and with all the ornaments
of an affecting eloquence,

We have had hiſtorians; but not 2 Livy: The
file of the conſpiracy of Venice is comparable to
that of Salluſt. It is evident the abbe de St. Real
wok him for his model; and perhaps he has ſur. -
paſſed him. All the other compoſitions of which
ve have been ſpeaking are of a new and original
caſt, It is this eſpecially which characteriſes in ſo
Ciſtinguiſhing a manner the age of Lewis XIV: for
as to learned men and commentators, the fixteenth
and ſeventeenth centuries produced them in abun-
dance; but true genius had not then begun to ſhew
itſelf in any kind.

=  -@  Sa82S5a40244 2»

K ESSETSES.

LEE FAS

144 THE ACE OFT 89

works in proſe would probably never have exiſt
had they not been preceded by poetry? Yet ſuchi
the deſtiny of the human mind in all nations: yelb
vas every where the ſirſt offspring of genius, in
the parent of eloquence, -

I: is the ſame with the people in 4 U
with particular men. Plato and Cicero began
making verſes, The few good ſtanzas of Malherly
were known by heart, at a time when we could m
quote a ſingle ſublime paſſage in French- proſe:
and it is more than probable, that without Pete
Corneille, the genius of our proleiwrites would
never have been able to diſplay itſelf. -

This man the more deſerves our admiration; h
that when he firſt began to write tragedies, he had
none but the very worſt models before him. What
ſeemed ſtill further likely to prevent him from ſue
ceeding, theſe wretched models were in very gret
eſteem; and, to complete his misfortune, were ft
voured by cardinal Richlieu, the protector of men
of letters, not of good taſte. He recompenled
ſcriblers of no merit, who are uſually men #4
cringing ſpirit ; and from haughtineſs of mind hap
pily. applied on other occaſions, he was deſirous u
humble thoſe in whom he ſaw (not without ſome
degree of vexation) a vein of true genius, vic
rarely ſtoops to dependence. It is ſeldom that 1
man of power ſincerely patronizes good artſy
when he happens to be ſo himſelf.

Corneille was cbliged to ſtruggle with the b
taſte of the age, the eſtabliſhed reputation of lis
rivals, and the partiality of cardinal Richlieu, [
ſnall not 5 here all that has been written it

1 29. LEWIS Mv. 145

dation to the Cid. Suffice it to remark, that the
ademy, in their judicious deciſions between Cor-
elle and Scuderi, ſeem to have carried their com-
hiſance for the carditial too far, in condemning
he paſſion of Chimene, To love the murderer of
er father, and yet perſiſt in the deſign to revenge
hat murder, was a maſterly ſtroke in the poet. To
ave overcome her paſſion, would have been a ca-
ital defect in the tragic art, which conſiſts chiefly
painting the ſtruggles of the heart. But art was
en utterly unknown to the French writers, our
uthor excepted.

The (id was not the only work of Corneille,
which cardinal Richlieu was deſirous to depreciate.
Ve learn from the abbe d' Aubignac, that this mi-

a, iter diſapproved likewiſe of Polieuct᷑es.
That The Cid, after all, was a beautiful imitation of
lain de Caſtro, and, in many places, a tranſla-

ion, Cinna, which followed next, was a maſter-

reat
eee, An antient domeſtic of the houſe of Conde
ald me, that the great Conde, at the age of twen-

ty, being preſent at the firſt repreſentation of this
ragedy, ſhed tears upon hearing theſe words of
weouſtus :

Je fuis maitre de moi, comme de Þ univers ;

Je le ſuis, je veux Petre. O ſiecles ! O memaire!
Cinſervez a jamais ma nouvelle victoire.

Je tri omphe aujeurd* hui dn plus juſte caurroux,
De qui le ſeuvenir puifſe aller Judi a Vous.
Serons Amis, Cinna; C'eſt moi qui t ey convie.

vor. Il. N

4

146 TRE AGE OF id

— ——It is reſolved,
I'm maſter of myſelf, as of the world.
Preſerve, O time, ye fartheſt ages, keep -
In memory this my new victory.
To-day I triumph o'er the juſteſt wrath,
The fame of which may even reach to you,
Chana, let's be friends; it's Caeſar aſks it

; Theſe were indeed the tears of a kh

great Corneille, forcing tears of admiration fig
the great Conde, forms a very memorable epod
in the hiſtory of human genius,

The great number of indifferent pieces he p
liſhed afterwards, did not hinder the nation fa
regarding him as a writer of the firſt claſs; a
more than the conſiderable faults, imputed to H
mer, have prevented his paſſing for a ſublime poet
is the privilege of true genius, and above al d
that genius which is original, to commit great ſau
with impunity.

| We owe Corneille to the force of his own}
ais alone: but Lewis XIV. Colbert, _Sophodt
and Euripides, all contributed to the formitfga
Racine, An ode which he compoſed at the ;
of eighteen, on occaſion of the king's mam
procured him a preſent he did not expect, and6
termined him to the purſuit of poetry. Hs
putation hath increaſed with time, and that d
Corneille is upon the decline. The reaſon les
to be, that Racine, in all his works after his A
ander, is ever elegant, correct, natural; and peil
to the heart: whereas the other is often defekt
in all theſe reſpects. Racine greatly ſurpaſſed v0

b. 29. LEWIS XIV. 147

Greeks and Corneille in the knowlege of the
aſſions, and carried the harmony of verſification,
d the graces of poetic diction, to the higheſt point
perfection they were capable of. Theſe two
lebrated geniuſes taught the nation to think, to
, and to expreſs themſelves: and their audience,
truſted only by them, became at laſt ſevere judg-
„ able to criticize even the performances of their
aſters

In the time of cardinal Richlieu, 3 were i
ry few perſons in France capable of diſcerning
e defects of the Cid; and in 1702, when Atha-
h, the maſter- piece of the theatre, was repre-
nted at the houſe of the ducheſs of Burgundy,
2 courtiers had confidence enough in their own
dzment to condemn that admirable tragedy. Time
done the author juſtice; but that great man
id not live to ſee the ſucceſs of this his capital
formance, A numerous party always affected
d decry Racine, and refuſe him the praiſe due to
1s merit, Madam de Sevigne, the firſt perſon of
er age for the epiſtolary ſtile, and the talent of
lating trifles with gracefulneſs and propriety, ne-
r believed that Racine would arrive at any laſting
ame. She judged of him as of coffee, with re-
ard to the virtues of which. ſhe was wont to lay,
de public would ſoon be undeceived. It requires
Ime to bring the reputation. of an . to ma-
urity.

The ſingular deſtiny of this age 1 Mo-
ere contemporary with Corneille and Racine. It
not true that Moliere, when he firſt began to
ite, found the ſtage utterly deſtitute of good
N 2

148 THE AGE OF Ch. 2

comedies. Corneille himſelf had given the Mena
a piece of character and intrigue, after the man
of the Spaniſh theatre; and only two of Molle
beſt plays had appeared, when the public was ent
tained with the Coguet-Mother of Quinaut; a p
not only of character and intrigue, but even t&
model of intrigue, It was acted in 1664; andy
the firſt comedy which paints that ſpecies of n
afterwards called Marquiſes, Moſt of the gu
lords of the court of Lewis XIV. endeavoured
reſemble their maſter in that air of dignity a
grandeur, for which he was fo remarkable: tha
of inferior rank copied their fuperiors; and may
of them puſhed this conceited air, and predominat
affectation of dignity, to the moſt ridiculous a
treme, |
This humour long prevailed at court. Moi
attacked it often; and contributed to free the pi
lic from theſe important ſubalterns, as well as ff
the affectation of prudes, the pedantry of learn
females, and the unintelligible jargon of lawya
and phyſicians. Moliere was, if one may uſe i
expreſſion, a legiſlator of politeneſs to the Work
I ſpeak here only of the ſervices he did to the i
he lived in; his other merits are ſufficiently kno
We may ſurely pronounce it a period wol
the attention of future ages, when the heroes
Corneille and Racine; the perſonated charattes(
Moliere; the muſic of Lully, in a taſte altoge*
new to the nation; and (ſince we are here ſpeak
ing only of the arts) the eloquence of Boſſuet u
Bourdaloue, were taken notice of by Lewis XI)
by the ducheſs of Orleans, ſo celebrated for
fine taſte; by a Conde, a Turenne, a Colbert, ®

Ch, 29. LE MIS XIV.” 20

bat croud of illuſtrious men which then adorned
de court. We muſt never again expect to ſee the
ime, when a duke de la Rochefoucault, author of
be 1axims, after enjoying the converſation of a
cal and an Arnauld, ſhall repair to the theatre
1. pf Corneille. |
dy Deſpreaux raiſed himſelf to the rank of theſe
ma eat men; not by his firſt ſatires, for poſterity
gere not likely to be much entertained with his de-
ed 8Wcription of the confuſton and buſtle of Paris, or
e names of Caſſaigne and Cotin ; but by the in-
ructions contained in his excellent epiſtles; and,
maß dove all, in his art of poetry, where even Cor-
uu eile might have found many uſeful leſſons.
S el La Fontaine, lefs chaſte in his ſtile, leſs correct
In his diction, but inimitable in his plainneſs, and
e graces peculiar to himſelf, by his manner of
parrating the moſt ſimple things, he nearly equalled
e reputation of theſe ſublime geniuſes.
aun Quinaut, in a manner of writing altogether new,
and the more difficult for its ſeeming eaſineſs, de-
Jerves likewiſe a place among theſe illuſtrious co-
temporaries, It is well known, with how little
juſtice Boileau endeavaured to depreciate this poet.
baileau, though admirable in other reſpects, had
ſever learned to ſacrifice to the graces. It was in
en that he ſought all his life to humble a man,
I" boſe acquaintance with them was his diſtinguiſhing
acellence, The trueſt elogium of a poet is, when
bs verſes are thought worthy the regard of poſteri-
muß This has happened to whole ſcenes of Qui-
palt; an advantage which no Italian opera ever
1 tt attained, The French muſic has continued in
N 3 |

& * 0 , . - . - 4
7 :
*
-

1 50 THE AGE OF Chi. .

a ſtate of ſimplicity, which is not to the taſte q
any nation. But the artleſs and inimitable fu rve
of nature, which frequently appear with ſo my
charms in Quinaut, till pleaſe, in all parts of py
rope, thoſe who underſtand our language, and n
poſſeſſed of a refined taſte. Did antiquity fur
ſuch a poem as Armida, with what veneratiullihier:
would it be received? But Quinaut is a modem

All theſe great men were known and patronia
by Lewis XIV. except La Fontaine. His exten dart.
{implicity, which proceeded even to a degree
{clf-forgetfulneſs, kept him at a diſtance from cour
where he had no ambition to appear. But his ms
rit did not paſs unobſerved by the duke of h
gundy; and he received, in his old age, ſewer
favours from that prince. He was, with all th
elegance of genius, of à mind no leſs artleſ ere
the heroes of his own fables. Father Puget think
it no ſmall merit to have treated this man, ſo &
itinguiſhed by the innocence of his manners, #
if he had had to do with a Brinvilliers or a V6
fin. His tales are for the moſt part thoſe of Fog:
gius, Arioſto, or the queen of Navarre: Lode
ideas may be dangerous, but it is not agreeable la
lies of wit, that inſpire them. We may apply v
Fontaine his own admirable fable of the animui
ſick of the plague, where the ſeveral parties pony” 0
duce their accuſations: the lions, the wolves, ad
the bears are pardoned every thing; and an inne
cent creature is ſacrificed, for having eat a lite
graſs. | |

In the ſchool of theſe geniuſes, deſtined to ds
licht and inſtruct the ages to come, a-number of
agreeable writers was formed, who have left be

Th. 29. LEWIS XIV. 151

ind them a great variety of elegant pieces, that
eve to amuſe people of taſte; juſt as we have had
any painters whoſe performances pleaſe, though
ey are far from equalling the reputation of Pou-
n, Le Sueur, or Le Brun.

But towards the end of the reign of Lewis XIV.
here were two men that raiſed themſelves above
e rank of ordinary writers, and acquired a very
onſiderable reputation: the one, La Motte Hou-
art, of a ſolid and comprehenſive, rather than
f a ſublime genius. He wrote in proſe with de-
icacy and method; but his poetry is often deſti-
tute of fire and elegance, and ſometimes too of
hat exactneſs, which is never to be diſpenſed. with
but in favour of the ſublime. His firſt eſſays were
rather beautiful ſtanzas than finiſhed odes; and he
even loſt much of his ſpirit in the ſequel : but a
umber of elegant pieces of his which ſtill remain,
will always hinder him from paſſing for an author
of the loweſt claſs. He is an example to prove,
that there may be a ſecond rank of good writers,

The other was Rouſſeau, inferior to the former
in genius, and the art and eaſe of compoſition ;
but who far excelled him in the talent of verſifica-
tion, His odes, it is true, did not appear till after
thoſe of La Motte; but they are more beautiful,
more diverſified, and abound more with images.
In his hymns, he equals the harmony and devotion
obſervable in the ſpiritual ſongs of Racine. His e-
Pigrams are finiſhed with greater care than thoſe of
Marot, He was not ſo ſucceſsful in operas, which
require ſenſibility; nor in comedies, which cannot
ſueceed without gaiety, In both theſe he was de-

fl

S KSS

* 2, FT

152 THE AGE OF Gy
ficient; and therefore failed in both, as being iq
_ reign to his genius.

He would have quite corrupted the Fre
tongue, had the antiquated ſtile of Marot, by
he affected to introduce into his ſerious, compaſii
ons, been imitated by ſucceeding writers. By
happily that mixture of the purity of our tongy
with the ruſt of what was ſpoken about two hu
dred years before, was a mode that did not obta
long. Some of his epiſtles are imitations of By
leau; but the conſtraint is manifeſt, and be
not clear in his conceptions, nor is the nature d
the truths on which he grounds his reflections d
vious: and nothing can be beautiful but what | i
Irue.

He degenerated very much in foreign counties
whether it was, that age and misfortune had in,
paired his genius, or that his principal merit conlil:
ing in a happy choice of words, and delicate tum
of expreſſion, (a talent of greater conſequenc,
and not ſo common as moſt people imagine) he tad
not abroad the ſame advantages in this reſpect, |
may be conſidered as one of the evils attending lis
baniſhment from his native country, that he ws
no longer under the eye of ſevere critics.

His long misfortunes had their ſource in an ut
governable felf-love, in which jealouſy and animo
ſity were predominant. His example ought to ſerie
as a ſtriking leſſon to men of genius and ts
lents; but we only conſider him here as à ve
whole performances have done no ſmall honour w
letters, \

Very few eminent geniuſes wad ariſen ſince tr
flouriſhing days of theſe illuſtrious artiſts, and -

h. 30 LE WIS XIV. 153

ut the time of the death of Lewis XIV. nature
-emed to repoſe herſelf. 54g NS)
The way was difficult at the beginning of this
ige, becauſe it had been trod by none; it is be-
tome ſo now, becauſe ſuch multitudes have gone
fore us. The great men of the preceding cen-
ury have taught us to think and ſpeak ; and have
old us what we did not know before. We that
ome after them can find but little to ſay that is
ew. In ſhort, the great number of finiſbed piec-
s they gave, has occaſioned a kind of fatiety in
he literary world : and the paſt age having been a
preceptor to the preſent, it is become ſo eaſy to
write common things, that we have been oppreſſed
with an inundation of trifling books; which ren-
ders it now no leſs neceſſary. to give ſome little
check to literature, than it was in the beginning
of the ſeventeenth century to promote and en-
courage it. ;

CHAPTER XXX.

Sequel of ART s.

WI regard to thoſe arts which do not de-
pend abſolutely upon the mind, as muſic,
panting, ſculpture, and architecture, they had
ter, WY "ade but ſmall progreſs in France before the time
ru ich we call e age of Lewis XIV. Mulic was
then only in its infancy ; a few ſongs, with ſome
we for the violin, the guitar, and the theordo,
w of them compoſed in Spain, were all we knew

154 THE AGE OF Guy
of the art. Lully aſtoniſhed the world by liz
quiſite taſte and {kill, He was the firſt who'int
duced the baſſes, tenor, and fugues into Fu
His compoſitions, which at preſent appear fo ing
and eaſy, could not be executed at firſt withay
ſome difficulty, There are a thouſand perſons x
France now, who underſtand muſic, for one thy
underſtood it in the time of Lewis XIII ; and the
art, by degrees, has been brought to perſeco
There is not a conſiderable city in the Kkingdon
without its public concerts; whereas even Paris it
ſelf had none at that time. Four and twenty yis
lins belonging to the king, was all the muſic w
then had in France. |
The various parts of knowlege appertaining u
muſic, and the arts depending upon it, made fud
a great progreſs, that towards the end of the re
of Lewis XIV. the art of pricking down dance
was invented; ſo that now it may be truly a
we dance by book. |
We had very good architects under the regen
of Mary of Medicis. That princeſs, to do honour
to her own country, and embelliſh ours, built ttt
palace of Luxembourg, in the Tuſcan taſte. Tit
fame Deſbroſſes, to whom we are indebted for the
portal of St. Gervais, was likewiſe the architect d
that queen's palace, which ſhe never enjoſes
Cardinal Richlieu, who equalled her in greatnel
of ſoul, did not equal her in taſte. The cardinh
palace, which is now the palace royal, is a proof
of this. We conceived the greateſt expeCtations
when we beheld the elevation of that beautifi
front of the Louvre, which at preſent we ſo mud
regret to ſee unfiniſhed. A great number of di

„ bene 155
ens have built magnificent houſes; but they are

=

or diſtinguiched by their interior elegance, than
= y the taſte diſplayed in their exterior decorations;
" and are rather deſigned to gratify private luxury,
* than to be an ornament to the city.

Colbert, the Mecenas of all the arts, founded an
xcademy of architecture in 1671. It is not ſuffi-
jent to have architects equal to Vitruvius, there
muſt alſo be an Auguſtus to employ them.

The municipal magiſtrates ſhould alſo be men
of public ſpirit, and ſome taſte. Two or three
nayors like the preſident Turgot, would have pre-
rented the reproaches ſo juſtly caſt upon the city
of Paris, for the ill ſituation, and till worſe taſte
ff the town-houſe : for the ſmallneſs and irregula-

s—38&@

* ity of the public ſquare, famous only for executi-
m and bonfires; for the narrownels of the ſtreets
dhe moſt frequented quarters of the city; and

or thoſe remains of barbarity, which ſtill ſubſiſt a-
midſt all our grandeur, and in the very boſom of
he arts,
Painting began with Pouſſin, under Lewis XIII:
or our painters before his time are not worthy of
notice, though ſome of them might be tolerable.
Put from that period, we have never been without
aminent artiſts; not indeed in that abundance to
which Italy owes a conſiderable ſhare of its wealth :
ut to ſay nothing of a Le Sueur, who had no o-
er maſter than himſelf, or a Le Brun, who equal.
e the Italians themſelves in deſign and compo-
ſrion; we can boaſt of upwards of thirty painters,
who have left pieces behind them worthy the at-
non of men of taſte. Foreigners begin to pur-
Cale them of us. I have ſeen in the palace of a

EB:

EE ESE K KK AKASA

156 THE AGE OF. Ch, 8c:
great king, galleries and apartments adorned yi
pictures from our country, whoſe merit we, perhay
were not ſufficiently apprized of. I have ſeh
twelve thouſand livres refuſed in. France for a f.
cture of Santerre. The moſt ſtupendous pig
ing now in Europe, is the cieling done by Le Aan
at Verſailles; and perhaps it is alſo one of the nu
beautiful.

We have a painter at preſent in France, whon
even foreigners allow to be the firſt in Europe, Cal
bert not only gave the academy of painting i
preſent form, but in 1667, he perſuaded Len
XIV. to eſtabliſh one at Rome. A palace wy
bought in that metropolis for lodging the direco
Scholars repair thither to ſtudy, who have frequent
ly gained the annual prizes in the academy at Paris
They are ſent and maintained at the king's expend
and employed chiefly in deſigning after antiques, d
ſtudying the works of Raphael and Michael Ang
lo. It is a noble homage, which the deſire of
mitation induces us to pay to antient and moda
Rome; and this homage ſtill continues; thouy
the immenſe collections of Italian pictures made ich
the king and the duke of Orleans, and the malldWnatur;
pieces of ſculpture produced in our own count!
have ſet us above the neceſſity of having recourk!
foreign maſters for aſſiſtance. WT
But it is in ſculpture chiefly that we have 4
celled, and the art of caſting coloſſal equeſtrian
gures in one plece.

Should ſome future diſtant period diſcover,
ried under heaps of ruins, ſuch maſter-pieces of:
as the baths of Apollo, expoſed to all the int
of the weather in the groves of Verlailles; ©

ment
brſt ap
Y;

n Prat
Preater
lone th
often b
Vo

ch. 0. LE WIS MV. 157

tomb of cardinal Richlieu in the chapel of the Sor-
donne, too little known to the public; the eque-
frian ſtatue of Lewis XV. made at Paris to adorn
Bordeaux; the Mercury ſent by this prince as a
preſent to the king of Pruſſia, and fo many other
works of the ſame kind, which are not inferior:
theſe productions of the preſent age might, per-
haps, be compared with the moſt finiſhed remains
of antient Greece,

In our medals we have equalled the antients.
Varin was the firſt who raiſed this art abave the
degree of mediocrity, towards the end of the reign
of Lewis XIII. The number and variety of theſe
which we ſee ranged in hiſtorical order, in that
part of the gallery of the Louvre appropriated to
the artiſts, is amazing: there are at leaſt two mil.
lions, the greateſt part of which are maſter-pieces
in their kind.

The art of engraving on precious ſtones has
Ikewiſe been very ſucceſsfully cultivated among us.
That of multiplying pictures, of perpetuating them
dy means of copper-plates, and of tranſmitting
vith caſe to poſterity all the various appearances in
nature and art, was but very imperfectly known
n France before this age. It is one of the moſt
lefu! and agreeable of human arts. We owe the
Invention of it to the Florentines, among whom it
iſt appeared about the middle of the fifteenth cen-
uy; but it has been brought to greater perfection
n France, than in the place of its nativity, as a much
paater quantity of that kind of work has been
lone there, The king's collections of prints have
ten been conſidered as the moſt magnificent of
Vo I. II. Oo

158 THE AGE: OT GA

his preſents to foreign ambaſſadors. Chaſing j A
gold and in ſilver, which equally requires invent
on and taſte, has been carried to the utmoſt pe
fection of which the hand of man is capable,
Having thus run through all the arts which con.
tribute to the delight of particular perſons, and th
glory of the ſtate, there till remains one to be tak.
en notice of, which, as it is by far the moſt uſe
ſo it is that in which the French excel all the nat.
ons of the world: I mean ſurgery, whoſe propre
during this period was ſo rapid, and ſo celebrated
that people came to Paris from all parts of Europ
for the performance of thoſe cures and operation
that required an uncommon dexterity. Beſides thi
good ſurgeons were ſcarce any where to be me
with but in France, it was in this country alone
that the inſtruments neceſſary in the art were mad
in perfection. From hence were all neighbouring
nations ſupplied : and I remember to have bee
told by Mr. Cheſelden, a celebrated Engliſh ſurgeon,
that he was the firſt who employed people to makt
chirurgical inſtruments at London, about the yea
1715. Phyſic, which ſerves to perfect ſurger
did not make greater advances in France than i
England, and in Holland under the famous Bur
haave : but we may ſay of it as of philoſophy: it
attained to perfection among us by the uſe »
made of the diſcoveries of our neighbours.
Thus have I given a general and faithful deſc
ption of the progreſs of learning and arts duriy
this age, which began under cardinal Richliey, and
ended with our times. It will be difficult to ſur
paſs it: but if this ſhould ever happen, it will ſu

it {

Ec

q bene thoſe more fortunate eee which
i {ball have given birth.

.ONs

the CHAPTER. :XXIXL

take

Sr cc. IAS TICAL AFFAIRS: Memor
au mT

0 rable DIS PUT EsõV.

tel

* F the three orders which compoſe the ſtate,

the leaſt numerous, which is the church, is
that which has always exacted from the ſovereign
a conduct mixed with the higheſt delicacy and art.
o preſerve at the ſame time a good underſtand-
ing with the ſee of Rome, and maintain the liber-
1 ties of the Gallican church, which are no other than

thoſe of the antient church: to know how to make
ede bilhops obey as ſubjects, without incroaching
upon the rights of the epiſcopal character; to ſub-
ect them to the civil power in many things, and
leave them judges in others; to make them contri-
dute to the neceſſities of the ſtate, without violat-
Ing their privileges: all this requires a mixture of
relolution and addreſs, which Lewis XIV. was al-
ways maſter of,

The clergy of France was, by degrees, brought
Into a ſtate of order and decency, from which the
ail wars, and the licentiouſneſs of the times, had
Ccalioned it to deviate very much. The king
would no longer permit laymen to hold benefices in
commendam, or ſuch as were not in prieſt's or-
O2

1 60 THE AGE OTC *

ders, to poſſeſs biſhoprics; like cardinal

who, though not even a ſub-deacon, had been i
welded with the biſhopric of Metz; and the uk
de Verneuil, who had likewiſe held it, though
layman.

The ſum paid to the king by the clergy o
France, and the conquered countries, amounte
one year with another + to about two million and
five hundred thouſand livres; and ſince the increaf
of the numerical value of the ſpecies, they hare
aided the government with about four million
yearly, under the name of tenths, extraordinary
ſubſidies, and free gifts. This title and 'privilegt
of free gift is ſtill preſerved, and is a remnant of
that antient cuſtom, according to which all the
lords of fiefs ufed to contribute by voluntary dons
tions to our kings, in the exigencies of the ſtate
The biihops and abbots, being lords of fiefs, were
only bound to furniſh their proportions of troops
in the times of feudal anarchy. The kings then
like other lords, lived upon the revenues of thei
own domains. In the univerſal change that fol
lowed, the clergy ſtill continued on their former
footing, and retained the cuſtom of aiding the ſlate
by free gifts.

To this antient cuſtom, which a body that aſſem-
bles frequenily eaſily preſerves, and which one that
never aſſembles muſt neceſſarily loſe, we are to:
join the immunity claimed by the church, and the
maxim, that its revenues are the revenues of I
poor. not that it pretends to a total exemption from
the demands of the ſtate, of which it holds every

- + Sce the ſtate of France, and Puffendorf.

E >.
Y 1208 #;

Ch. 31. LEWIS NV. 161
thing; for the publie, when, its neceſſities are ur-
pleads the privilege of aiding only by voluntary
ſupplies ; and Lewis XIV. always exacted theſe
ſupplies in ſuch a manner, as to run no hazard of
eeting with a refuſal. |
It is matter of aſtoniſhment to all Europe, as
ell as to France, that the clergy ſhould pay fo
little, ſeeing they are ſuppoſed to poſſeſs a third
pf the revenue of the whole kingdom. Was this
e caſe, it is paſt diſpute that they ought to bear
ikewiſe a third of the public charge, which one
year with another would come to near thirty mil-
jons, independent of the taxes on periſhable com:
nodities, which they pay in common with the reſt
pf the ſubjects, But error and prejudice prevail in
moſt every thing. The church is ſuppoſed to
jollels a third of the whole annual revenue of the
ingdom ; juſt as we ſay at random, that Paris con-
nins a million of inhabitants. Were we but to
ke the trouble of computing the revenues of the
ihoprics, it would appear by the leaſes granted a-
out fifty years ago, that their whole annual a-
nount, at that time, was not ſuppoſed to exceed
our millions; and the commendatory abbies were
ted at four millions and five hundred thouſand li-
nes, It is true, the eſtimation of the leaſes was
bout a third below the real value; and if to this
ſe add the increaſe of the landed revenue ſince,
be total ſum of the rents of all the conſiſtorial
enefices will make about ſixteen millions: but we
upht to remember, that a conſiderable part of this
n goes yearly to Rome, which never returns,
O 3

= FN FS. 2x

—

S8.

* * N. - we * . l 1 4
_ ö *. 4 4 l g *
mee N = g
1 1
* "

THE AGE OF * c.
and is ſo much abſolutely loſt to the nation
muſt be allowed a great inſtance of Iiberalityin ty
king towards the holy ſee, to ſuffer it to plundy
the ſtate of more than four hundred thouſand may
of ſilver in the ſpace of a century; which in tive
could not fail to impoveriſh the kingdom, did net
commerce abundantly repair the los. ;

To theſe benefices which pay annats to Rove
we muſt join the curacies, convents, collegj
churches, communities, and all the other benehcs
together. If we compute them at fifty million
yearly upon the whole, I _ we _ come
pretty near the truth. _

Thoſe who have examined this matter with he
utmoſt exactneſs and attention, have not been able
to extend the revenues of the whole Gallien
church, ſecular and regular, beyond fourlce
millions. The fum is far from being exorbitant
when we conſider it as deſtined to ſupport ninety
thouſand monks and mans, and about an hundred
and ſixty thouſand eccleſiaſtics, which was the n
ber in 1700, If we divide it equally, it come
nearly to three hundred livres a head. There at
conventual monks who do not coſt their monaliery
two hundred livres a year: there are regular 4.
bots, whoſe income exceeds two hundred thouſand
Hvres. It is this enormous diſproportion that 0
eaſions ſo many complaints and murmurs. We u
concerned for a country curate, wheſe- laborious
diſcharge of the duties of his profeſſion entitle
him only to a ſcanty income of three, four, or bit
hundred livres, while a lazy monk, not the oy
zy for being made an abbot, enjoys an 1
fortune, and exacts pompous titles from thoſe u.

th. 37. LEWIS XV. 163

his juriſciRtion. Theſe abuſes are much more

ring in Flanders, in Spain, and eſpecially in the
. ſtates of Germany, where we ſornetimes a
meet with monks that are princes. |

Abuſes, by degrees, paſs into laws in almoſt all
countries. Was a number of the wifeſt men to
aſſemble, with deſign to compoſe a body of laws,
where is the ſtate whoſe form would remain en-
tirely the fame ? The clergy of France always pur-
fue a very chargeable method, when they aid. the
king with a free gift of ſeveral millions for 2 cer-
tin term of years: they borrow the money, and
after paying intereſt for ſome time, reimburſe the
apital to the creditors, which is paying twice. It
would be more for their own and the public ad-
vantage, as well as more agreeable to reaſon, to
ad the ſtate by contributions proportioned to the
value of their ſeveral benefices. But men can ne-
ver be brought to part with ancient forms. It is
from the fame ſpirit, that the clergy, though they
allemble every five years, yet have never had any
public hall, nor other accommodations proper for
ſuch a body, It is apparent, however, that they
might, even with leſs expence to themſelves, have
both aſſiſted the king more effectually, and have
built a palace in Paris which would have been an
additional ornament to that capital.

The maxims of the French clergy, i in the mino-
ty of Lewis XIV. were not entirely purged from
that mixture of prejudice, which had been intro-
luced during the time of the league. We find in
the firſt years of Lewis XIII. and in the laſt aſſem-
bly of the ſtates in 1 61 4, that the moſt numerous
pty of the nation, known by the name of the

EE aEE==

IE

5

3

1100s

164 THE AGE OF G. z
third eſtate, and which indeed conſtitutes the m
body of the ſtate, demanded in vain, though f
conded by the parliament, that it ſhould be g
bliſhed as a fundamental law; “ That no {pity
« power can deprive kings of their ſacred g
« which they hold of God alone, and that jt j
“ high treaſon to teach the doctrine of depolin
« and killing kings.” This was in expreſs temy
the demand of the nation, while the blood of Heu
the Great was ſtill ſmoaking. And yet a French h
ſhop, born within the kingdom, the cardinal d
Perron, violently oppoſed this propoſition, .unde
pretence. that, it did not belong to the third eſtate
to propoſe laws which had any relation to the «
fairs of the church. Why then did not he himſel,
in conjunction with the clergy, do what was pro
poſed by the third eſtate ? But ſo far was he fun
any ſuch deſign, that he even ſaid publicly on tha
occaſion ; “ That the power of the pope was pl
« nary and without controul, direct in ſpifituals
« indirect in temporals; and that he was commil
« ſioned by the clergy to declare, that they would
« excommunicate ſuch as ſhould dare to-mdlntaln
« that the pepe had not a power to depoſe kings-
The nobility was gained over, and the third eſtatt
was obliged to deſiſt from their demand. Tit
parliament renewed their antient decrees, declaring
the crown independent, and the perſon of the king
ſacred. The eccleſiaſtical chamber, allowing dle
king's perſon to be ſacred, ſtill perſiſted in malt
taining that the crown was dependent. The Jam
ſpirit actuated them on this occaſion, vbich had be
fore produced the depoſition of Lewis the deo
naire. This ſpirit prevailed to ſuch a degree, 8

th, 315 LE WIS MV. 165

de court, unable to ſttuggle with te ang Gigs
2s obliged to impriſon the printer, who had pub.
hed the arret of the parliament, under the title
the fundamental law. This ſtep, it was pre-
-nded, was neceſſary for the ſake of public peace:
at it was in effect to puniſh thoſe who furniſhed

— 1
— _

5 FP

*
=”

ing crown with defenſive arms. There were no ſuch
mo iturbances at Vienna; France, at that time, was
ad of the pope, and the pope dreaded the power
c the houſe of Auſtria.

8 The cauſe which was given up at this time by

e court of France, was in reality ſo much the
auſe of all kings, that James I. king of England,
rote a book againſt cardinal Perron, which is by
Ir the beſt of that monarch's works. It was alſo
te cauſe of the people, whoſe repoſe requires,
tat their ſovereigns be independent of any foreign
wer, By degrees reaſon has prevailed ; and Lew-
KV, ſupported by the weight of his authority,
und no great difficulty in making the voice of
bat reaſon be heard.

Antonio Perez had recommended three things
ticularly to Henry IV. Koma. Conſejo, Pielaga.
ewis XIV, had attained to ſuch a ſuperiority in
ie two laſt, that he had no occaſion for the firſt.

le was particularly attentive to preſerve the right
appealing to the parliament, from the decrees
eccleſiaſtical courts, in all caſes where theſe de-
ſees affected the prerogative royal. The clergy
nen complained of this proceeding, and ſometimes
mmended it. For if on one fide theſe appeals
ported the national privileges againſt the epiſco-
Authority, on the other, they ſtrengthened that

authority, by maintaining the privileges of the

ESERE FeEegG EE AS ESEeAEHTESS SACS S

5 _— a a R .
4 TE x i * c F Pa _ Ry ma *
a 4

166 THE AGE OT NN
Gallican church againſt the pretenſions of the wall”
of Rome: inſomuch, that the biſhops have at &
ferent times conſidered the parliament as their Wi”
nemies and protectors; and the government we
always careful to prevent theſe religious qui
from running beyond the proper bounds on e 0
ſide. It is with the power of different orders af
companies in a ſtate, as with the various inte:
eſts of trading cities ; the legiſlature muſt take cat erg)
to hold the balance.

The moſt important and delicate affair of thi
kind, was that of the regale. Ir is a right belonp
ing to the kings of France, to enjoy the revenus
of biſhoprics, and to preſent to the benefices
pendent thereon, during the vacancy of the ſes *
This prerogative is pecular to the kings of Franc
but every ſtate has its privileges. The kings «
Portugal are entitled to a third of the revenues i
the biſhoprics in their dominions. The empent
has the right of firſt fruits; and claims the pr
lege of diſpoſing of all benefices, the firſt time tp ..
become vacant after his acceſſion. The kings d Ff
Naples and Sicily have ſtill, greater privilegs
Thoſe claimed by the court of Rome are for tt
moſt part founded in cuſtom, rather than in p uſed
mitive authentic titles.

The kings of the Merovingian race confernl
biſhoprics and livings by their own ſole authorith: aſs,
It ſeemed reaſonable that they ſhould be indulge boſed
in the inconſiderable privilege, of enjoying the 16 Wpon
venue, and preſenting to ſome vacant benefes
a ſee, during the ſhort ſpace that intervenes — lane
che death of the biſhop, and the regiſtering of

_ oath of fidelity taken by his ſucceſſor. 10

*

jt LEWIS XIV. 167

ops of ſeveral cities reunited to the crown under
e third race, could not be prevailed with to ac-
owlege this right, which their former lords had
ind themſelves too weak to maintain. The popes
»lared for the biſhops; and the pretenſions of
he ſeveral parties always remained obſcure. In
bos, under Henry IV, the parliament declared
he regale to extend over the whole kingdom. The
ergy murmured; and the king, who found it
vr his intereſt to keep fair with the biſhops and the
ourt of Rome, brought the affair before the coun.
il of ſtate, but without any intention to decide it.
The cardinals Richlieu and Mazarin iſſued ſeveral
ders of council, by which the biſhops, who pre-
ended to be exempt from the regale, were obliged
o ſhew upon what they grounded their titles. The
fair ſtill remained undetermined in 1673; and
e king durſt not at that time confer a ſingle bene-
Ice, in almoſt any dioceſe beyond the Loire, dur-
ig the vacancy of the ſee. |

At laſt, in 167 3, the chancellor Michel le Tel.
ter iſſued an edit, by which all the biſhoprics of
e kingdom were declared ſubje& to the regale.
wo biſhops, who unfortunately were the two
hoſt virtuous men of the nation, obſtinately re-
uſed to comply with the edict. Theſe were Pavil-
on biſhop of Alet, and Caulet biſhop of Pamiers.
hey defended themſelves at firſt with very plauſible
ſeaſons ; to which others no leſs ſtrong were op-
old. When men of underſtanding diſpute long

8. = 3 2.554. 2.5

—
wn

1
ben any point, it is more than probable, that the
* queſtion is not clear. This was indeed very ob-

ſcure: but it was evident, that neither religion nor
890d order were concerned to hinder a king from

168 THE AGE OT "1
doing that in two dioceſes, which he did in all
reſt, Meantime the two biſhops continued
flexible: neither of them had cauſed his oath of |
delity to be regiſtered; and the king thought ti
ſelf intitled to diſpoſe of all the vacant benefices |
their ſees. | 8

The two biſhops excommunicated thoſe wh
were preſented in virtue of the regale. Both Heer
been ſuſpected of Janſeniſm, and on that occaſia
found Innocent X. their enemy ; but when
declared in oppoſition to the pretenſions of tl"
king, Innocent XI. Odeſcalchi immediately eſpou ti
ed their cauſe. This pope, virtuous and obi ne
nate like themſelves, engaged warmly in al
quarrel, ft

The king at firſt contented himſelf with ban ent
ing the principal officers belonging to the bi e
He diſcovered greater moderation than two me”
who affected a more than ordinary reputation ay” !*
ſanctity. The biſhop of Alet was ſuffered to an” f.
in peace, out of regard to his great age. Thel
ſhop of Pamiers ſtill reſiſted, nor could be ſhake
by any remonſtrances or menaces. He redvubled
his excommunications, and perſiſted in refuling i
regiſter his oath of fidelity, from a perſuaſion, tt ont
by ſuch an oath, he too much ſubjected the chu g
to the monarchy. The king ſeized his temporaſis ge
The pope and the Janſeniſts ſo indemnified his lol y t
that he was rather a 'gainer by being
of his revenues. He died in 1 680, fully cog"
vinced that he had ſupported the cauſe of God v
gainſt the king. His death did not put an end ,
the quarrel : the canons named by the king cf ©
to take poſſeſſion; the monks, who pretendes 7

„ LEWIS MV. 169

et the ſame time eanons and grand - vicars, obliged
hem do quit the church, and excommunicated
jm. Montpeſat archbiſhop of Toulouſe, the
petropolitan, to whom it of right belonged to
ake cogniſance of the affair, in vain gave ſentence
zinft theſe pretended” grand-vicars. They ap-
xaled to Rome, in conſequence of a cuſtom of
ering to that court eccleſiaſtical cauſes determin+
{ by the archbiſhops of France, a cuſtom direct-
y contrary to the liberties of the Gallican church:
but all human governments are made up of contra»
itions. The parliament ifſued decrees. A monk
umed Cerle, who was one of theſe grand-viears,
ad the inſolence to repeal not only the ſentence
ff the metropolitan, but the decrees of the parlia-
ment. This laſt tribunal condemned him to be
aun upon a (ledge, and beheaded for contuma-
He was executed in effigy : but nothing diſ-
mayed by all this appearance of ſeverity, be inſult-
d from the place of his retreat both the archbiſhop
and the king. The pope openly ſupported him:
uy he did ſtill more; perſuaded, like the biſhop
if Pamiers, that the right of the regale is an abuſe
n the church, and that the king had no title to
onfer vacant livings in that dioceſe, he reverſed
We ordonnances of the archbiſhop of Toulouſe, and
communicated the new grand-vicars nominated
that prelate, with all that enjoyed benefices in
ute of the regale, or favoured the pretenſions of
erlons ſo indufted, | + |
The king convened an aſſembly of the clergy,
tnliſting of thirty five biſhops, and a like number

if deputies of che ſecond order. The Janſeniſts,
V O L. II. P
i

1500 TEE AGE OT "Gy

pope; now at variance with the king, favoured
Janſeniſts, though be was far from being cordul
their friend. He made a merit of oppoſing th
monarch upon all occaſions; and ſome time aft
in 1689, joined with the allies againſt ling jam
for no other reaſon but becauſe Lewis XIV, h
declared himſelf bis protector; inſomuch that |
was a common ſaying at that time, that to pu
final period to the troubles which diſturbed Euq
and the church, it was neceſſary for king James
turn Huguenot, and the pope to become a
tholic. 3
Meantime the aſſembly of the clergy in 1681
unanimouſly declared for the king. Tbe pal
was {till engaged by another quarrel, which, to .:
inconſiderable in the beginning, grew by dende
to be very important. The election to a -priory
the ſuburbs of Paris ſet the king and the pope
variance. The Roman pontiff had repealed an
donnance of the archbiſhop of Paris, and annul
his nomination to that priory. The paxliament
pealed agaiaſt this as an abuſe of the papal auff
ty. The pope, by a bull, ordered the inquilit
to burn the parliament's decree; and the parliame
enjoined the fuppreſſion of the bull. Theſe c
teſts have, for ſeveral ages, been the ordinary teme
neceſſary conſequence of that ancient mixture
the natural liberty which every country claims
governing within itſelf, and of ſubmiſſion to à ger
reign power. and thy
The aſſembly of the clergy took a courſe, u
{hows that men of prudence can yield with dg"
to their ſovereign, without the intervention of

2

th, 31. LEWIS NIV. 171

her power. They conſented that the right of
he regale ſhould extend over the whole kingdom;
ut this conſent was as much a conceſſion on the
part of the clergy, who dropped their pretenſi-
ons out of regard to their protector, as a for-
mal avowal of any abſolute right in the crown.
The aſſembly excuſed themſelves to the pope
by a letter, in which there is a paſſage, which
ought to ſerve as an eternal and invariable rule
of conduct in all diſputes of this kind: It ts
ktter (ſay they) to ſacrifice a part of” one's rights,
fan to endanger the public peace, The king,
the Gallican church, and the parliament, were ſa-
tied. The Janſeniſts wrote ſome libels : the
dope continued inflexible. He reverſed by a brief
l the reſolutions of the aſſembly, and wrote to
the biſhops to retraCt their conceſſions. Here was
ound enough to ſeparate for ever the church of
France from that of Rome. There had been ſome
alk, under the cardinals Richlien and Mazarin, of
erecting a patriarch, It was the ardent deſire of
U the magiſtrates, that France ſhould no langer
py amats to Rome: that the pope, ſhould not
we the privilege of -preſenting to the benefices
if Bretagne during fix months of the year; and
lat the biſhops of France ſhould no longer ftile
bemſelves biſhops by the permiſſion of the holy ſee.
ad the king been inclined to take this ſtep, the leaſt
WJ ination of his pleaſure was ſufficient. He was
auer of the voices in the aſſembly of the clergy,
ud ine nation was in bis intereſt. Rome would have
oſt all by the inflexibility of a virtuous pope, who
nc, of all the pontiffs of that age, could not
TW j-: 42

4 = R TY * C . 1. N * by __
- / * "TTY

172 THE AGE OF ' "Gy
comply with the times. But there "are cer
antient boundaries, which cannot be paſſed without
_ cauſing violent ſhocks. It required greater intereſ,
ſtronger paſſions, and the minds of the pech
wrought up to a more violent pitch, to break al
at once with Rome; nor could ſuch a feparation
have been eaſily effected, while they perſiſted in
the deſign of extirpating Calviniſm. It was even
looked upon as a bold ſtep, to publiſh the fonr fi
mous detiſions of this very aſſembly of the clergy in
1682, the ſubſtance of which was as follows.

1. God has not given to Peter and his ſuccel. WW" *
fors, any power, direct or indirect, in tempor
matters, | |

2. The Gallican church approves thecounci
of Conſtance, which declares general councils ſu-
perior to the pope in ſpirituals. e Ye

3. The rules, uſages, and cuſtoms received ue
the kingdom, and in the Gallican church, ought
always to remain without variation.

4. The decifions of the pope, in matters of
faith, are not binding, till after the church has a+
cepted them. | *

All the courts of juſtice, alt the faculties of
theology regiſtered theſe four propoſitions' in ther

utmoſt latitude; and an edit appeared, forbid

ing any one to maintain the contrary. © =

This firmneſs was regarded at Rome as an ef
fort of rebellion; and by all the proteſtants of Fu-
rope, as a feeble attempt of a church naturally

free, whoſe reſolution had enabled her on 0

break four links of her chains, 3
Theſe four maxims were at firſt maintained

with a kind of enthuſiaſm in the nation ; but bf

*
* 3

SKF. S. 2.

22.

th, 31. LEWIS XIV. 173
legrees it began to abate. Towards the end of
the reign of Lewis XIV. they were conſidered as
queſtions liable to diſpute; and cardinal Fleury has
ice cauſed them to be in part diſavowed by an aſ-
kmbly of the clergy, without the leaſt noiſe a-
fling from ſuch a diſavowal. The reaſon is, that
de minds of men were not then ſo much heated,
ind becauſe under the miniſtry of cardinal Fleury
nothing was done with eclat. |
Meantime Innocent XI. was exaſperated more
than ever : he refuſed bulls to all the biſhops,. and
to all the commendatory abbots nominated by the
king; inſomuch that at the death of this pope in
1689, there were no leſs than nine and twenty
dioceſes in France without biſhops. Theſe pre-
ktes, it is true, were not the leſs entitled to their
rerenues; but they durſt not be conſecrated, or
exerciſe any of the epiſcopal functions. The pro-
polal of creating a patriarch was again renewed.
The quarrel about the rights of ambaſſadors at
Rome, which ſerved to widen the breach ſtill more,
made many believe, that the time was at laſt come,
for eſtabliſhing a Catholic apoſtolic church in France,
wich ſhould no longer bear the title of Roman.
The procurator general De Harlai, and the advo-
ate general Talon, gave reaſon enough to con-
lim this perſuaſion, by appcaling, in 1 6 8 7, from the
bull againſt the franchiſes, and exclaiming againſt
be obſtinacy of the pope, in ſuffering ſo many
Qurches to remain without paſtors. But the king
would never be brought to agree to this propoſal,
Vich though bold in outward: appearance, would
proved eaſy enough in the execution. |
P 3

174 THE AGE OF Ch. 14 7
the cauſe of the holy ſee. The four propos
ons adopted by the clergy of France attached
phantom of the pope's infallibility, (which then
far from being beheved, is nevertheleſs. vum
ſupported at Rome) and the real power attached
that phantom. Alexander VIII. and Innocent Xif
followed the ſteps of their intractable predeceſ
Odeſcalchi, though with leſs vigour. They cn
| firmed the ſentence paſſed againſt the aſſend|
of the clergy ; they refuſed. to fend: bulls to f
biſkops; in fine, they did too much, becauſe Len
XIV. had not done enough. The biſhops, tit
of a bare nomination by the king, without . the ſl. |
berty of exerciſing their functions, applied to f
court of France for permiſſion. to - appeaſe tho:
court of Rome. | 4 8055
The king, whoſe firmneſs began to be ſhaket
no longer oppoſed the reconciliation defied.
cordingly they wrote every one ſeparately to t
pope, cxpreſſing their diſlike of the proceed on
of the aſſembly, and declaring that they did nc
conſider themſelves as bound by what had beg
there decided and decreed. -. Pignatelli, (Innocei
XII.) more placable than Odeſcalchi, was fatis
with this declaration. The four propoſitions wii
nevertheleſs {till taught in France: but when dec
ters were appeaſed, the eagerneſs of content e,
ceaſed, and the diſpute remained in a kind of ,
certainty, without any poſitive deciſion, as almoſt
ways happens in caſes of this nature, when 4 1
has no fixed and invariable principles to go Ne |
Thus ſometimes we oppoſe, ſometimes yield 108
encroachments of the court of Rome, according

\

131. LEWIS XIV. 275

te racicty of __— different characters
WT our governors, - or the particular intereſts of
oe who influence their determinations. _
Levis XTV. had no quarrel beſides this with the
rt of Rome in eccleſiaſtical matters, nor ever
oenenced the leaſt oppoſition from his clergy in
coral concerns.
nder him the clergy became venerable, by a
u rency of behaviour unknown to the barbariſm of
i: two firſt races of our kings, and the {till more
erous times of the ſeudal government, Nor
ve meet with the leaſt traces of it during the
i wars, the commotions in the reign of Lewis
el or the agitations occaſioned by the Fronde,
ee fer particular inſtances excepted, for which
| wance muſt always be made, whether we ſpeak
the prevailing vices or virtues. of a nation. |
lt was then firſt that ' endeavours began to be
xd, to open the eyes of the people in relation to
0 e uperſtitions they are fo apt to mingle with their
ne en. It was no longer accounted criminal to
, (whatever ſentiments the parliament of Aix,
ber the Carmelites might entertain,) that Lazarus
Cary Magdalen had never been in Provence.
 benedictines could gain na credit to their aſ-
on, that Dionyſins the Areopagite had. govern-
te church of Paris. Suppoſed faints, pretended
des, falſe relics, began to loſe repute. Sound
u, which had produced fuch a reformation in
ogy, penetrated every where, though ſlow-
jad with difficulty.
lhe bihop of Chalons, Gaſton Lewis de No-
8 drother to the cardinal, joined ſo much
Klenſe to his piety, that in 1702, he cauſed

ket

9

1976 THE AGE OF @y

take away and deſtroy a relic preſerved widygra

| care for many ages in the church of Notre-Dane
and adored under the name of the navel of Jef
Chriſt. All Chalons murmured againſt the bill
Preſidents, counſellors, kings, officers, treafure

of France, merchants, principal citizens, canons
curates, proteſted unanimouſly and in form agu

the attempt of the biſhop, demanding to have the
holy navel reſtored, and alleging the robe of J;
ſus Chriſt preſerved at Argenteuil, his handker
chief at Turin and at Laon, one of the nails c
the croſs at St. Denis, and his prepuce at Rome,
But the prudent firmneſs of the biſhop” previ
ed in the end over the credulity of the people
Some other ſuperſtitions, attached to reſpett
ed uſages, ſtill ſubſiſt : the proteſtants triumph
this account; but at the fame time are forced tt
acknowlege, that there is no Catholic country
where theſe abuſes are leſs common, or treated
with more contempt than in France. ©

The truely philoſophical ſpirit, which did not
prevail till towards the middle of this age, »
not capable of extinguiſhing the ancient and m-
dern diſputes of divines, which come not
perly within its province. We ſball now ſpeak
of theſe diſſentions, which are ines a ſcandiſ
to human reaſon.

ul

+ %

n. LEWiSxXWV 277

CHAPTER XXXII.

Of CALVINISM.

T is doubtleſs a melancholy conſideration, that
the Chriſtian church has always been torn
by diſentions, and that ſo much blood ſhould
me been ſhed for ſo many ages, by hands, deſtin-
d to carry the ſymbols of the God of peace.
This furious zeal was unknown to paganiſm. It
Indeed covered the earth with darkneſs, but it ſcarce
xr occaſioned any blood to be ſpilt, except that
if animals; and if ſometimes, as among the Jews
ind heathens, human victims were offered to the
ity; theſe ſacrifices, horrible as they were, never
produced civil wars. The religion of the hea-
tens conſiſted wholly in morality and feſtivals,
Morality, which is the ſame at all times, and in
ll places, and feſtivals, which were no more than
lic rejoicings, could never diſturb the peace of
mankind,

The dogmatic ſpirit introduced among men that
furious zeal which gave riſe to religious wars. LI
tare often endeavoured to find out, from whence
i ſhould proceed, that this dogmatical ſpirit which
Wiced the ſchools of antiquity among the hea-
liens, without cauſing the leaſt diſturbance, ſhould
e productive of ſo many fatal diſorders among
- This cannot be the effect of fanaticiſm alone;
the Gymnoſophiſts and Bramins, the moſt fa-

Sg SEES EEE SEES

178 T HE AGE OP Ch. 42

natic of men, never did hurt to any but then
ſelves. We are more likely to find the origin «
this new peſt which has laid waſte the world, i
the republican ſpirit that animated the firſt churchs
Thoſe ſecret aſſemblies, which from their caves in
receſſes, braved the authority of the Roman em
rors, formed by degrees a ſtate within a ſtate. It U
in reality a concealed republic within the empire. Ca
ſtantine drew it from its retreat under ground,
place it on a level with the throne. In a ſhort time,
authority, attached to the great ſees, was found
run counter to that popular ſpirit, which had
then animated all the aſſemblies of Chriſtians,
frequently happened, that when the biſhop of an
tropolis uttered a ſentiment, a ſuffragan biſhop,
prieſt, or a deacon, maintained the direct conty
ry. The ancient opinions, ſince revived by Lui
Zwinglius, and Calvin, tended in a great mea
to deſtroy the epiſcopal authority, and even n
narchical power itſelf. This, though a ſecret,
yet one of the principal cauſes, which procuret
ready a reception for theſe opinions in the 30
of Germany, where the grandeur of the pops!
gan to give offence, and people dreaded be
brought under ſervitude by the emperors. | In N
den and Denmark, where the people enjoy al
ſhare of liberty under their monarchs, theſe
tions were ſeen in a' particular manner to trum

The Engliſh, whom nature has tinftured
2 ſtrong ſpirit of independence, adopted, ſoit h
ed, and formed them into a religion for theme
They penetrated into Poland, and made great
preſs in thoſe cities only, where the people were
reduced to a ſtate of ſlavery. Switzerland, 1

th. 32. LE WITS NIV. 179

ns n republican country, made no ſcruple to re-
ire them. They were upon the point of being
Uibliſhed at Venice for the ſume reaſon; and
goubtleſs would have taken root there, had not
hat city been ſo near Rome ; and had not the go-
ment, as there is reaſon to believey+ dreaded a
Wemocracy, which was the great point aimed at by
theſe pretended reformers. The Dutch did not
mbrace this religion, till after they had ſhaken off
he yoke of Spain. Geneva, in ſubmitting to Cal-
niſm, became a popular ſtate. The houfe of
uſtria took all imaginable pains: to check the
rowth of theſe ſets in their dominions. Spain
from the very firſt kept them at a diſtance : nor do
we find that they occaſioned any great troubles in
France during the reigns of Francis I. and Henry
IL, who were in a manner abſolute princes. But
wen the government became weak and divided,
be quarrels about religion roſe to a violent height.
be Condes and Colignis declaring themſelves Cal-
wiſts, becauſe the Guiſes ſided with the Catholics,
wolved the kingdom in confuſion. The natural
filty and impetnoſity of the nation, joined to the
we of novelty and enthuſiaſm, changed us, for
fury years together, from a polite and  civiliz-
oF" people, to a nation of barbarians.

i: leary IV. born in this ſect, which he really
ed, without being in any degree a bigot, found
Linpoſſible, notwithſtanding all his victories and
ſoft ues, to get poſſeſſion of his kingdom without
Mndoning Calviniſm. After he became a Catho-
ty ö gratitude would not permit him to ſeek the de-
ere ion of a party, naturally the enemy of kings,
to which he was indebted for his-crown; and

5 180 T HE A6 E OF G. 14

0

even had he been inclined to make i the attempt, l
would have miſcarried. He therefore chere 7.
protected, and reſtrained it. w

The Huguenots in France did not at that tiny
make above a twelfth of the nation. But a g of
many powerful lords were of their party: en
cities were proteſtant. They had made war ag De
their ſovereigns, who had been conſtrained to of
into their hands ſeveral places of ſtrength for thei
ſecurity. Henry III. had granted them no leſs n
fourteen in Dauphiny only; Montauban and Nm in:
in Languedoc; Saumur, and above all, Roche cu
which formed a republic of itſelf, and by its e «n!;
merce and alliance with England, was like to H Far
come very powerful, In fine, Henry IV, ſceme tg"
to act conformably to his own inclination, as de
as from a principle of policy and gratitude, ini
granting them the famous edict of Nantes, in 15% i
This edict was in reality no more than a conſimij ent
on of the privileges which the proteſtants of F -
had extorted from former princes ſword in he ti
and which Henry the great, when he was fm lig
ſettled on his throne, ſecured to them by a wo tt
tary grant. | b it
By this edict, which the name of Henry d
has rendered more famous than any other, e '!
lord of a fief, whoſe power extended to capi
offences, was permitted the free and unreſtrait deni
exerciſe of the pretended reformed religion viii
his own caſtle: every lord, without capital jutl ks 8
&ion, might have thirty perſons preſent at div
worſhip in his family. The full and plenary =
erciſe of this religion was authorized in all pl -
0!

under the immediate juriſdiction of a parliame

ch. 32. LEWIS XIV, r3r

The Calviniſts might print books, without ap-
phing to their ſuperiors for a licence, in all cities
vhere the exerciſe of their religion was permitted.
They were declared capable of all the ſeveral
offices and dignities of the ſtate, and, in fact, en-
pyed their ſhare, the king having created the lords
De la Trimouille, and De Roni, dukes and peers
of France,

A particular chamber was formed in the par-
ment of Paris, confiſting of a preſident and
ſateen counſellors, to whom were referred all
euſes in which Huguenots were concerned, not
caly in the immenſe diſtri& of the juriſdiction of
Paris, but likewiſe in that of Normandy and Bre-
bone, This court was entitled, the chamber of
the edict, Indeed there never was above one Cal-
nniſt admitted among the counſellors of this juriſ-
dition : but as the main deſign of it was to pre-
rent thoſe vexations of which the party complain-
td, and as men always value themſelves on the
kithful diſcharge of a truſt by which they are di-
ſinguiſhed ; this chamber, though compoſed of
atholics, always rendered the moſt exact juſtice
b the Huguenots, as they themſelves acknow-
Ned.

They had a kind of little parliament at Caſtres,
nlependent en that of "Feulouſe. They had
keviſe courts of juſtice at Grenoble and Bour-
tur, whoſe judges were one half Roman-catho-
ks, and the other Calviniſts. Their churches were
emitted to aſſemble in ſynods, in the ſame man-
Rr as the Gallican church. Theſe privileges, and
| feat many others, incorporated the Calviniſts

Vor. II. Q

-

182 THE AGE OF wh

into a diſtin body among themſelves. - It 'was,
effect, ſuffering enemies to league together: butth
authority, the addreſs, and the equal behaviour &
this great monarch, kept them within bounds tir
ing his life. | BAR.
After the dreadful fall, and never enough to
lamented death of Henry IV. during the weaknd
of a minority, and under a divided court, i wi
hardly poſſible for the republican ſpirit of the Rt
formed, not to abuſe their privileges, or fort
court, feeble as it was, not to attempt the reſtraj
ing them. The Huguenots had already eſtablih
Circles in France, in imitation of thoſe in Gem
ny. The deputies of thoſe circles were frequent
men of a turbulent ſpirit; and ſeveral lords of tl
party were noted for an unbounded ambitior
The duke of Bouillon, and above all the duke
Rohan, who ſtood in the firſt degree of credit Me
mong the Huguenots, ſoon hurried the reſtleſs |
rit of the preachers, and the blind zeal of the len
ple, into an open revolt. The general aſſem e
of the party, in 1615, had the aſſurance to ice.
ſent a remonſtrance to the court, in which amo te!
other injurious articles, they demanded that an
king's council ſhould be changed. In « 616, n
took up arms in ſeveral places; and the audacoult.: t
behaviour of the Huguenots, joined to the digte :
ons of the court, the hatred againſt the favourites
and the unquiet ſtate of the nation, filled all pray on
for ſome time with confuſion and diſorder. N
thing was to be ſeen but ſeditions, intrigues, hol
confederacics, inſurrections, treaties concluded Wit...
haſte, and broken as ſoon as ſigned ; which me
the celebrated cardinal Bentivoglio, at that t

„„ r

cio in France, ſay, that during his reſidence, the
Aae had produced nothing but ſtorms,
ur on m the year 1 62 1, the Calviniſt churches of
France offered Leſdiguieres, that ſoldier of fortune
ho was afterwards made conſtable, the command
a hci armies, and a hundred thouſand crowns
ne nonth. But Leſdiguieres, more clear-ſighted in
is ambition than they in their factions, and who
e ew them perfectly, as having commanded them
fore, choſe rather at that time to fight againſt
them, than be at their head; and, inſtead of accept-
liſh Ing their offers, turned Catholic. The Huguenots .
hen addreſſed themſelves to the marſhal duke de
aa ion, who returned for anſwer, that he was
5 old, In fine, they conferred that unhappy
employment upon the duke of Rohan, who joint-
7 with his brother Soubiſe, had the inſolence to
mke war upon the king of France.
's 1 The fame year the conſtable de Luines carried
Levis XIII. from province to province. He ſub-
med upwards of fifty cities, almoſt without reſiſt-
ce; but miſcarried before Montauban, whence
mate king had the mortification of being obliged to
at "mp. Rochelle was beſieged in vain; being no
ts indebted for its reſiſtance to its own ſtrength,
en en to the ſuccours it received from England; and
le duke of Rohan, guilty of the crime of high
teaſon, concluded a peace with his ſovereign, as
10 one crowned head had been treating with ano-

After this peace, and after the death of the con-
le de Luines, the war broke out anew, and the
ing vas again obliged to lay ſiege to Rochelle, al-
Q2

194 THE AGE OF Gp

ways in league againſt its ſovereign with the Eng.
gliſh, and the Calviniſts of the kingdom. A wo.
man (the mother of the duke of Rohan) defends]
this city a whole year againſt the royal army, »,
gainſt the activity of cardinal Richlieu, and agzinſ
the intrepidity of Lewis XIH, who braved death
more than once at this ſiege. The city ſuffered
all the conveniences of the moſt extreme famine;
and did not ſurrender at laſt, but in conſequence
of that prodigious mole of five hundred fea
long, which cardinal Richlieu ordered to be made
in imitation of that which Alexander the Grey
formerly raiſed before Tyre. It was begun by
Frenchman named Tiriot, finiſhed by Pompey Tu.
gon, and ſubdued the ſea and the Rochellers. The
mayor Guiton, who ſought to bury himſelf unde
the ruins of Rochelle, had the boldneſs, after ſur:
rendering at diſcretion, to appear with his guards
before cardinal Richlieu; the mayors of the prind-
pal Huguenot cities being permitted the privilege ol
guards. Guiton's were taken from him, and the
city was diveſted of its privilege. The duke 0
Rohan, chief of the rebellious heretics, ſtill co0
tinued the war againſt his prince; and being aban
doned by the Engliſh, though Proteſtants, entere
into an alliance with the Spaniards, though Roman
catholics. But the firmneſs of cardinal Ricki
- forced the Huguenots at laſt, after ſeeing theme. |;
defeated on all ſides, to ſubmit without reſerve.
All the edicts, granted them before this time, bat
been ſo many formal treaties: with their ſovereigu
Richlieu was reſolved, that the one yielded to then
on this occaſion ſhould be called the edict of $4
The king in it ſpeaks in the ſtile of a prince un

00 32. LEWIS MV. 185
ardons. The exerciſe of the new religion was
ſubid in Rochelle, the Iſle of Rhee, Oleron, Pri-
ws, and Pamiers; in all other points, Lewis XIII.
bought proper to confirm the edift of Nantes,
which the Calviniſts always regarded as their fun-
mental law. | |
Many thought it ſtrange, that cardinal Rich--
ſev, ſo abſolute and bold in all his proceedings,
ad not totally aboliſh this famous edict; but at
hat time he had other views, more difficult, per-
haps, in the execution, yet not Jeſs conformable to-
the extent of his ambition, and the hight of his de-
ens, He aimed at the glory of ſubduing the
rinds of men, which he imagined himſelf able to
xcompliſh, by the ſuperiority of his underſtand--
ty, of his power, and of his politics. His pro-
kt was to gain the miniſters ; to bring them firſt-
v:cknowlege, that the Roman- catholic worſhip was:
ut criminal in the ſight of God; to lead them
ſerwards, by degrees, to give up ſome points of
ie importance, and to appear in the eyes of the
wurt of Rome as if he had yielded nothing at all.
le flattered himſelf with the hopes of dazzling
me party of the reformed ;. of ſeduoing another
V preſents and penſions ;. and of uniting them
1 at leaſt in outward appearance, to the church,
king it to time to accompliſh the reſt, and feed-
ky tis ambition with the glorious proſpect of hav-
ly either effected or paved the way to this great
wrt, and paſſing with poſterity for the author of
L The famous father Joſeph on one fide, and
0 miniſters he had gained on the other, charged
lenſelves with this negotiation. But i appeared}
Q 2 |

that cardinal Richlieu had carried his expectauom
too far, and that it is more difficult to adjult the
differences of divines, than to raile moles in the
ocean. 1th n de

Kichkeu, finding himſelf diſappointed; reſolved
entirely to cruſh the Calviniſts; but other carta in

terpoſing, prevented the execution of this deſign, R
He found himſelf under a neevſſity of combating id
at the ſame time the grandees of the kingdom, e vio
royal family, the whole houſe of - Auſtria, and oro (c
ten Lewis XIII. himſelf. He died at- laſt amid vera!
all theſe ſtorms, ſuddenly, before he was able ars
complete any of bis deſigns, ing behind bim i mene
name rather dazzling than dear and venerable. lig o
Mean time, after the taking of Rochelle, Co
the edift of grace, the civil wars ceaſed; and e, 2
animoſity of the two parties vented itſelf only ber
diſputes and controverſy. Then ere produce pet
thoſe voluminous compoſitions, which-no-body nod tt
takes the trouble to read. The elergy, and eſpe off
cially the jeſuits, aimed at converting the Huge deg
nots. The Huguenot preachers endeavoured de olo
bring over ſome Catholics to their opinions. Ie th
king's council was employed in iſſuing arrets about Fad the
burying-ground, which the two parties were eupulitting,
ing in a village; about a chapel built on ſome landWſrc:!
formerly belonging to the church; about ce.
the juriſdiction of caſtles, interments, belli; N Wt cot
the Reformed ſeldom gained their ſuit. Theſet y
fling conteſts were all that now remained, after t ble ga
former devaſtations and ravage. The Huguen Wan ti
ſince the duke of Rohan, and the diveſting © ad cha
houſe of Bouillon of the ſovereignty of Seca only
had no leader qualified to take the charge of .

-

00. 32. LEWIS NV. 187
ars. They even valued them not a little on the
of the Fronde, and the civil wars excited by the
winces of the blood, the parliaments, and the bi-
hops, when they pretended to make the king an
fer of their ſervice againſt cardinal Mazarin. |
Religion had no part in the quarrels that diſtra-
ded the kingdom during the life of this miniſter ;
ibo far from being tenacious on that article, made
wo ſeruple to beſtow the place of comptroller- ge-
xeral of the finances upon a Huguenot of Engliſh
traction, named Hervard; and admitted the Hu-
quenots, without reſerve, into all the offices depend
ig on the revenue. FEE
Colbert, who revived the induſtry. of the nati-
en, and whom we ought to look upon as the fa-
ber and founder of our commerce, employeds a
feat number of Huguenots in arts, manufactures,
nd the navy. Theſe uſeful engagements, which
{oroſſed the greateſt part of their time, ſoftened
V degrees the prevailing rage of controverſy; and
te glory which for fifty years together ſurrounded
te throne of Lewis XIV. joined to his power,
ad the firmneſs and vigour of his adminiſtration,
Winguiſhed in the Calviniſt party, as it did in the
feral! orders of the ſtate, the leaſt idea of re-
lance, The magnificent feaſts of a gay and gal-
at court, threw an air of ridicule upon the pe-
any of the Huguenots,. In proportion as good
le gained ground, the pſalms of Marot and Beza
un to loſe their credit. Theſe plalms, which
Wd charmed the court of Francis II. appeared to
ay calculated for the populace under Lewis
. Sound philoſophy, which began to make its.

way in the world towards the middle of this a,
helped ftill more to put men out of conceit with
religious diſputes. a
But while reaſon was gradually extending her is
fluence over men, the ſpirit of controverſy itſelf
became inſtrumental in preſerving the tranquillity of
the ſtate. For the Janſeniſts, beginning about this
time to appear with ſome reputation, engroſſed z
conſiderable ſhare of the attention of thoſe who
were fond of fuch fubtilties. They wrote at the
fame time againſt the Jeſuits and Huguenots: theſe
laſt employed themſelves in anſwering the Janſe
niſts and Jeſuits : the Lutherans in the province of
Alſace attacked all the three, A paper war amongſt
fo many different fects, at a time when the fate
was engaged in great deſigns, and the governmen
was powerful and flouriſhing, could not faibof þ
coming, in a few years, the mere amuſement of
the idle part of the nation, which ſooner or late
always dwindles into indifference,  — +
Lewis XIV. was exaſperated againſt the fett
ries, by the continual remonſtrances of the der
by the infinuations of the Jeſuits, by the court c
Rome, and, in fine, by the chancellor Le Teller
and Louvois his ſon, both enemies to Colbert, and
who had reſolved to extirpate the Reformed as le
bels, becauſe Colbert protected them as uſefulſul
jects. Lewis XIV. wholly a ſtranger to the func
mentals of their doctrine, regarded them, not wk
out ſome reaſon, as old revolters, who bore ©
yoke-with reluctance. He applied himſelf firſt f.
| undermine by degrees the whole fabric of their rel
gion, Churches were taken from them on in
molt ſlender pretexts. They were forbid to m

Cb. 32. LEWIS AV. 189

de daughters of Catholics; of which, however, the
be, policy does not ſo well appear; as it ſeems to ar-
in zue an ignorance of the power of a ſex, which the
court in other reſpects knew ſo perfeftly. The in-
* endants and biſhops, by the molt plauſible contriv-

ces, endeavoured to get the children of the Hu-
oss into their hand. Colbert had orders, in
163r, not to admit any perſon of this religion
into the employments of the revenue. They were
excluded, as much as poſſible, from the mechanic
nd trading corporations. The king, amidſt a con-
tt ſo rigorous, did not always make them feel
te whole weight of their ſervitude. Edicts ap-
xared, forbidding all violence againſt them; inſi-
mations were mingled with ſeverities; and the
wreſſions they laboured under, were at leaſt co-
ered over with a form of juſtice.

One very efficatious inſtrument of converfion
ws particularly uſed ; I mean money. But this
apedient was not puſhed ſo far as it might. Pe-
Won had the charge of this ſecret ſervice; the ſame
mo is fo well known by his long adherence to Cal-
mim, by his writings, by his copious eloquence,
ad by his attachment to the ſuperintendant Fou-
et, whoſe ſecretary, favourite, and victim he
k. He had the good fortune to be convinced of
errors, and to change his religion, at a time
Men that change opened his way to fortune and
ſeferment, He took the | eccleſiaſtical habit, ob-
ed ſeveral benefices, and a place of maſter of re-
Felt, The king, towards the year 1 67 7, intruſt-
{lim with the revenues of the abbies of St. Ger-
wn des Pres, and Cluni, to be employed in ef-
converſions. Cardinal Camus, biſhop of

190 THE AGE OF Ch, 32;
Grenoble, had. already purſued the ſame courk
Peliſſon, charged with this negotiation, ſent money
into the provinces. Endeavours were uſed to et
fect many converſions at a moderate expence;
ſmall ſums, diſtributed to the indigent, ſwelled the
liſt which Peliſſon every three months preſented to
the king, and. contributed to perſuade bim, that
every thing gave way to his power or his gene

rolity. W Y |

The council, encouraged by this ſmall ſuccek
which time might have rendered more confider.
able, adventured, in 1681, to publifh a declars
tion, by which children were permitted to re
nounce their religion at the age of ſeven years. lt
_ conſequence of this declaration, great numbers of

children were ſeized in the provinces, with a viey 1
to make them abjure; and troops were quarterec C
upon their parents. 3 Y
| This precipitation of the chancellor Le Teller"
and. Louvois his ſon, was the occaſion thut 1
1681, a great many families of Poitou, Suintonge ©
and the neighbouring provinces, abandoned deff
kingdom: and ftrangers with eagerneſs took ad ten
vantage of it. | .
The kings of England and Denmark, and | ode
cially the city of Amſterdam, invited the Calviail A
of France to take refuge in their territories, fr ag
miſing to provide amply for their ſubſiſtence.” Am 9
ſterdam alone undertook to build a thouſand houle A
for their reception. *
The council perceived the dangerous com *
quences of a too early uſe of authority, and ha *
ed to find in that very authority a remedy for i C

evil, They were ſenſible how neceſſary-artWa

00. 32. LEWIS NV. 191
and ſeamen were, in a country where commeree
gourilhed, and at a time when deſigns were on foot
to eſtabliſh a naval power, The puniſhment of
be gallies was denounced againſt all of theſe pro-
{ſions who ſhould attempt to quit the kingdom.
lt was obſerved, that a great number of Calvi-
lt families ſold their eſtates. Immediately a pro-
damation appeared, confiſcating all thoſe eſtates,
in caſe the ſeller ſhould leave the kingdom within
the pace of a year, The perſecution was now
doubled againſt the miniſters ; their churches
were taken from them upon the moſt frivolous
retences; and all the rents left by will to their con-
iſtories, were applied to the hoſpitals of the king-
dom, .
The maſters of Calviniſt ſchools were not per-
nited to receive boarders. The miniſters were
baded with taxes. Proteſtant mayors were de-
pied of their privileges. The officers of the
king's houſhold, and the king's ſecretaries who
dere proteſtants, had orders to reſign their places.
None of this religion were admitted either among
le notaries, ſollicitors or advocates.

lt was ſtrongly recommended to all the clergy,
bbe very diligent in making proſelytes; and the
rateſtant miniſters were forbid to make any, un-
& pain of perpetual baniſhment. All theſe or-
Winces were publicly ſollicited by the clergy of
ine, who tiled themſelves the children of the
wuſbold, that were reſolved to have no part with
tage children introduced by force. a
eliſon continued to expend conſiderable ſums
u making converts. But madam Hervard, widow
C the comptroller-general of the finances, ani-

” 4
-

5 5 & FF -»- my

2 = 8 »>

WI

* _

92 THE AGE OF Gy

mated with that zeal for her religion which hy
been obſerved in all ages to belong to the ſex,
ſent as much money into the provinces to aan
"theſe converſions, as Peliſſon had done to x
them.
At laſt the Huguenots had the courage to dif
bey in ſome provinces. They aſſembled in the
Vivares and in Dauphiny, near the places wt
their churches had been demoliſhed. .
attacked, and they defended themſelves. But & hi
was only a ſmall ſpark of the fire of our anten
civil wars. Two or three hundred miſerabl
wretches, without a leader, without places of
ſtrength, and even without deſigns, were diff
in a quarter of an hour. Their puniſhment immed
ately followed their defeat. The intendant of Dau
phiny cauſed the grandſon of the miniſter Chamier of t
who had drawn up the edit of Nantes, to bebrok
upon the wheel. He is accounted one of the mo
famous martyrs of the ſet; and the name «
Chamier has long been held in veneration by tt
proteſtants.
The intendant Baville, in Languedoc, cauſe
the miniſter Chomel to be broke alive upon
wheel. Three more were ſentenced to the ſais it c
puniſhment, and ten to be hanged ; but they ec.
en the execution by flight, and ſuffered only in elly
All this inſpired terror, and at the ſame t
ſerved to confirm men in an obſtinate —
their opinions. It is well known, that our aan
ment to any religion grows ſtronger, in propori Mich t
as we ſuffer for its ſake.
About this time it was inſinuated to the kinn f
chat after having ſent nſfionaries into f

. 32. LEWIS XIV. 193
jinces, it behoved him likewiſe to ſend dragoons.
Theſe violences, which ſeem to have been very ill
imed, were a conſequence of the ſpirit which
hea prevailed at court, that every thing ought to
ſübmit to the will of Lewis XIV. It was not
conſidered, that the Huguenots were no longer the
ame as at Jarnac, Moncontour, and Coutras:
hat the rage of civil war was extinguiſhed ; that
de malady which had fo long afflifted the nation
yas almoſt ſpent ; that every thing among men has
is period ; that if the fathers had been rebels un-
&r Lewis XIII. their ſons were become good ſub-
ets under Lewis XIV. It appeared in England,
u Holland, in Germany, that many different ſects,
who had torn one another to pieces during the laſt
ve, now lived peaceably together within the walls
of the ſame city. Every thing proved, that an
blolute king might be equally well ſerved by Ca-
docs and by Proteſtants. The Lutherans of
llece demonſtrated this beyond all contradiction.

Lewis XIV. who, upon ſeizing Straſburg in
1681, engaged to protect Lutheraniſm, might
me acted in the ſame manner with reſpect to Cal-
iſm, and left it to time to aboliſh it inſenſibly;
81t every day diminiſhes the number of Luthe-
as in Alſace. Could it be imagined, that in
ring a great number of his ſubjects to abandon
ter religion, he would not loſe many more, who
a ſpite of all his edits and guards, would find
mans to withdraw themſelves from a violence,
ich they termed a horrible perſecution ? Why
| ould a million of people be compelled to hate a
> Ln lo dear and precious, and to which both
e or. II. R

194 THE AGE OF Gy
Proteſtants and Catholics, Frenchmen and ftrans
ers, had agreed to join the epithet of Great? 90
licy itſelf ſeemed to require a toleration of the Ci
viniſts, in order to oppoſe: them to the continy
pretenſions of the court of Rome. The king |
bout this very time had openly quarrelled with l
nocent XI. the avowed enemy of France, By
Lewis XIV. equally attached to the intereſts of hi
religion and his grandeur, was reſolved to humbly
the pope with one hand, and cruſh Calviniſm vid
the other.

He conſidered theſe two enterprizes as produfti
of that luſtre of glory, of which he was in al
things fond even to idolatry. The biſhops, man
intendants, the whole council, made him believe
that the bare appearance of his troops was ſufficien
to complete what his liberalities and miſſions had al
ready begun. He thought he did no more than e
ert his authority; but thoſe, to whom that 2
thority was committed, proceeded with extrem
rigour.

Towards the end of the year 1 68 4, and in
beginning of 1 68 5, when Lewis XIV, (till povet
fully armed, had nothing to apprehend from al
of his neigkbours, troops were ſent into all
cities and caſtles where the proteſtants were m0
numerous; and as the dragoons, who at that in
were very ill diſciplined, committed the greats
exceſſes, this execution obtained the name of tl
Dragonade.

The frontiers were guarded with all poſſi
care, to prevent the flight of thoſe who were 0
- ſipned to be re. united to the church. It wi

(h, 32. LEWIS MV. 195
ind of chace carried on within a large enclo-
ure,

| A biſhop, an intendant, a ſubdelegate, a cu-.
nte, or ſome other perſon in authority, march-
ed at the head of the ſoldiers. The principal
Calriniſt families were afſembled, thoſe eſpecially
who were judged moſt likely to ſubmit. They
renounced their religion in the name of the reſt;
ind ſuch as continued obſtinate were given up
b the mercy of the ſoldiers, who had every li-
ence except that of killing: yet many were
rated with fo much cruelty, as to die ſoon after
of the uſage they had received. The poſterity of
he refugees, in foreign countries, ſtill exclaim
zin this perſecution of their fathers; com-
pring it to the moſt violent the church ſuſtained
8 the primitive ages of chriſtianity.

It afforded a ſtrange contraſt, to behold loch
mel and mercileſs orders iſſued from the boſom
of a voluptuous court, eminent for ſoftneſs of
manners, the graces, and all the endearing charms
& ſocial life. The inflexible character of the
tarquis de Louvois appears conſpicuous in this
wole affair; and points out to our obſervation
le ſame genius which had propoſed to bury Hol-
and under the waves, and afterwards laid the Pa-
kinate. in aſhes. There are fill extant ſeveral let-
fs under his own hand, dated in the year 16 85, and
onceived in theſe terms: * It is his majeſty's plea-
* ſure, that ſuch as refuſe to conform to his reli-

gion be proceeded againſt with the utmoſt rigour,
"and that thoſe who affect the fooliſh glory of be-

* ih |

196 T HE AGE 0F 1
6 ing the laſt 10 comply, hall be puſhed the

« extremity.”
Paris was not expoſed to theſe vexations: the
cries of the ſufferers would have made themſchy
heard too near the throne,
| +. While the churches of the Reformed were thug
demoliſhed in all parts, and abjurations were
wanded in the provinces with an armed Foun h
edict of Nantes was at laſt revoked in the month
of October 1685; whith completed the ruin «
the Proteſtant cauſe, already weokened and un
dermined on all ſides.

The chamber of the edict had been ſuppreſſe
ſome time before, and the Calviniſt counſellors ir
parliament were ordered to reſign their places
Arrets of council appeared, one upon the neck o
another, to extirpate the remains of the proſeribedWecict
religion. That which proved the moſt fatal wa
the order for ſeizing the children of the pretendec
Reformed, and putting them into the hands ol
their neareſt catholic relations; an order again
which the voice of nature cried fo loudly, that it
was never put in execution.

But in this celebrated edi, which revoket
that of Nantes, the way was paved to an event
directly contrary to what was intended The g
vernment aimed at reuniting the Calviniſts to UK
national church. Gourville, a man of à d
and piercing judgment, counſelled Louvols, *
is well known, to impriſon all the miniſters, ant
releaſe. only ſuch as, being gained by ſecret _
ons, would agree to abjure in public, and mig)
thereby contribute more to the projected reunion
than the miſſionaries and ſoldiers. But inſtead o

ch. 32. LEWIS XIV. 197
flowing this politic advice, an edict appeared,
ordering all the miniſters who refuſed to renounce
their religion to quit the realm in fifteen days.
u was blindneſs to imagine that in driving away
de paſtors, a great part of the flock would not
follow. It was preſuming unreaſonably upon
over, and argued very little knowlege of man-
bad, to believe that ſo many ulcerated hearts, fo
mh many imaginations warmed with the idea of mar-
dom, eſpecially in the ſouthern parts of France,
would not run all hazards to go and publiſh their
conſtancy and the glory of their exile among
ſtrangers, when ſo many nations, envious of the
s inf fortune of Lewis XIV. were ready with open
ems to receive them.
The old chancellor Tellier, when he ſigned the
elit, cried with an air of joy: Nunc dimittis ſer-
wm tuum, Domine, quia viderunt oculi mei ſalutare
um. He did not imagine that what he then ſigned
ei "ould be productive of the greateſt miſchief to
an baance.
at i Louvois his ſon no leſs deceived himſelf in be ·
lering, that a bare order from his hand was ſuffi-
wei cent for the guard of the frontiers, and all the ſea
rent elt, and to prevent the eſcape of ſuch as thought
rr duty obliged them to fly. Induſtry, when
ployed to elude the law, always proves an over-
Witch for authority, The gaining over fore few
the guards ſufficed for the eſcape of a multitude
l refugees. Near fifty thouſand families, within
le pace of three years, left the kingdom, and were
Merwards followed by others, who introduced their
zones manufactures, and riches among ſtrangers. Al-
R 3

moſt all the north of Germany, a country hitheni
rude, and void of induſtry, received a new f
from the multitudes of refugees tranſplanted+hither,
who peopled intire cities. Stuffs, lace, hats, ſtock
ingz, formerly imported from France, were no
made in thoſe countries. A part of the ſuburhs of
London was peopled intirely with French manuks
cturers in ſilk: others carried thither the art of m
ing chryſtal in perfection, which was about this tim
loſt in France. The gold which the refugees brought
with them, is ſtill very frequently to be met vii
in Germany. Thus France loſt about five-hundred
thouſand inhabitants, a prodigious quantity of f
cies, and above all, the arts with which her enemie
enriched themſelves. Holland gained excellent of
cers and ſoldiers. The prince of Orange had entin
regiments of refugees. Some ſettled even at ti
Cape of Good-hope, The nephew of the celebrate
du Queene, lieutenant general of the marine, found
ed a colony at that extremity of the earth.
It was to no purpoſe to fill the priſons and gu
lies with thoſe who had been caught endeayour
ing to make their eſcape. What could: be dor
with ſuch a multitude of wretches, whom
hardſhips they ſuffered ſerved only to confirm
their belief? How could perſons bred to the h
or infirm old men, be made to ſerve in the
lies? Some hundreds embarked for America.
laſt the council imagined, that by leaving the fro!
tiers open, deſertions would become leſs freque
as men won!d no longer be inſtigated by the ſecr
pleaſure of diſobeying. But this was found to
a miſtake; and after leaving the paſſages pet
guards were a ſecond time planted to no pwpol

. 32. LEWIS XIV. 199
After demoliſhing- all the churches of the re-
formed, and baniſhing their paſtors, the great
int was, to retain in the Roman communion
ach as through perſuaſion or fear had quitted
their religion. There were about four hundred
thouſand of theſe in the kingdom, who were ob-
hoed to go to maſs and communicate. Some,
who after embracing the catholic religion, re ·
reed the hoſt, were ſentenced to be burnt alive.
The bodies of ſuch as refuſed to receive the ſa-
ments at their death, were drawn upon a hurdle,
und denied Chriſtian burial.

Perſecution never fails to make pxoſelites, eſ-
cially when it is exerted during the heat of the
enthuſiaſm. The Calviniſts aſſembled to ſing their
palms, though the penalty of death was denounced
wanſt all who ſhould be found at ſuch aſſemblies.
Miniſters returning into the kingdom were like ·
vie to ſuffer death, and a reward of five thouland
tne hundred livres was to be given to whoſoeves
ould inform againſt them. Several returned,
jo were either hanged or broke upon the wheek

The ſect, though cruſhed in appearance, till
lbliſted, It vainly flattered itſelf, in the war of
1689, that king William, who had dethroned
ls father-in-law for being a catholic, would ſup-
port Calviniſm in France. But in the war of
1701, fanaticiſm produced a rebellion in Lan-
Medoc,

It was now ſome conſiderable time, fince in
be mountains of Cevennes and Vivares; certain
krſons had appeared, who pretended to the gifts
* inpiration and propheſy, An old Huguenot,
kmed De Serres, had there kept a ſchool of pro»

*
.

200 THE AGE of ch.;

phets. He directed children to thoſe word i:
ſcripture which ſay, © That where two or thr
« are met together in my name, my ſpirit (hal
« be in the midſt of them; and if you had m en
„like a grain of muſtard feed, you would Me
e able to remove mountains.” He  afterwari8hiol
received the ſpirit, fell into extaſies, convulhlior out
and change of voice: remained immoveable, ui er
his hair ſtanding on end, and with all the ſymptom en
of a man belide himſelf, according to the ancien N
uſage of all nations, and the rules of prophet
madneſs tranſmitted from age to age. The you ene
under his care were foon ſeized with the ſame pi
pheſying humour; and if they were not able n
remove mountains, it was becauſe they had fu
enough to receive the ſpirit, but not to work mi
racles: accordingly they redoubled their feu
for the obtaining of this laſt gift. d d
While the Cevennes were thus become a ſcho tb

of enthuſiaſm, ſome of the miniſters, whom th
called aps/#les, returned ſecretly to preach amony
the people. -
Claude Brouſſon, of a conſiderable family it
Nimes, a man of eloquence, of great zeal,
in the higheſt reputation among foreigners, M th
turned to preach ir his own country in 1 698. .
was found guilty, not only of preaching coniHfI⁰ r
to the edicts, but of having about ten years beet
fore, held intelligence with the enemies of 0p
ſtate. The intendant Baville condemned bim tc
be broke upon the wheel, He died after the man
ner of the firſt martyrs. All thoſe of his own
all foreign proteſtants, forgetting that he was #*

4

th, 32. ä LEWIS MV. 201

nal of ſtate, conſidered him only as a faint, who
ud ſcaled the faith with his blood.

Upon this, prophets multiplied, and the ſpirit of
tenzy redoubled. Unhappily in 1703. an abbe of
ge houſe of Chailat, an overſeer of the miſſions in
hoſe parts, obtained an order from the court, to
but up in a convent two daughters of a gentleman
ttely converted. The abbe, inſtead of conducting
hem to the convent, carried them firſt to his own
alle. The Calviniſts flocked together, forced the
tes, and delivered the two young ladies, beſides
ame other priſoners. The ſedition encreaſing, they
ned the abbe du Chailat; but offered him his life,
In condition he would change his religion. The
tbe refuſed ; upon which one of their prophets
ried, Die then, the ſpirit condemns you, your ſin be
uw your own head: and immediatly he was ſhot
death, Soon after, they ſeized the receivers
j the capitation tax, and hanged them with their
juls about their necks. Then they fell upon all
be prieſts they met, maſſacring them without diſtin-
on. Troops being ſent in queſt of them, they re-
d amids the woods and rocks. Their number
creaſed, Their prophets and propheteſſes foretold,
n the part of the Almighty, the re-eſtabliſhment
Nt Jeruſalem, and the fall of Babylon. The abbe de
hure appeared unexpectedly at their head, amidſt
ele ſavage retreats, and furniſhed them with mo-
5) and arms.

tle was ſon of the marquis de Guiſcard, the
s ſub- -governor, who was one of the wileſt
en in the kingdom. This young nobleman, little
muy of ſuch a father, having fled into Holl-
on account of ſome crime, endeavoured to

202 THE AGE OF Gy

excite a revolt in the Cevennes. Some time af
he repaired to London, where he was arreſted &
betraying the Engliſh miniſter, as he had beſo
betrayed his country. When he was brought d.
fore the council, he fnatched from the table one
thoſe long pen knives with which a murder may}
committed, and wounded the lord treaſurer Hare
This occaſioned his being ſent to priſon, and loa
ed with irons, where he prevented the puniſher
he muſt otherwiſe have undergone, by a volunt:
death. This was the man, who in the name «
the Engliſh, the Dutch, and the duke of Savoy
came to encourage the fanatics, and promiſe the
powerful ſuccours. |
Great part of the country favoured them
cretly. Their cry was, Liberty of conſcience and
taxes; which ſeduced the populace every whe
and juſtified Lewis XIV's deſign of extirpatit
Calviniſm. But without the revocation of the ed
of Nantes, theſe madmen would never have tali
up arms. |
The king firſt ſent the marſhal de Mont. e
with ſome troops, who made war upon tht
wretches in the manner they deſerved, by ord
ing the priſoners to be burnt alive, or broke
on the wheel. But the ſoldiers that fell into th
hands were likewiſe made to expire amidſt t
moſt cruel torments. The king, who had-fo 1
ny enemies upon his hands, could only ſend a f
troops againſt them. It was difficult to ſurp
them amidſt almoſt inacceſſible rocks, in cat
in woods whither they retired by unfrequen
paths, and whence they fallied like wild be!
They even defeated in a ſet battle the regimen

0 LEWIS MV. 203

marines. Three marſhals of France were ſucceſ-
"IM ſly employed againſt them, Marſhal Mont-revel
s in 170 4. ſucceeded by Marſhal Villars.

As it was more difficult to find them out than
© defeat them, the marſhal de Villars, after ren-
Ming bimfelf ſufficiently formidable to them, pro-
7 ſed a general pardon, Some among them find-
ig themſelves diſappointed of the ſuccours pro-
nicd by the duke of Savoy, thought proper to
xcept of the offer. |

Na 7c moſt conſiderable of their chiefs, and in-
ked the only one who deſerves to be mentioned,
wog. Cavalier, I have ſeen him ſince in Holland
x 5 England, He was a fair man, of. ſmall ſta-
ture, and a very agreeable engaging countenance.
Re was called David by thoſe of his party; and
fom a baker's ſon, at the age of twenty three,
kd raiſed himſelf to be chief over a great multi-
tude of people, partly by his courage, and partly
dj means of a propheteſs, who procured him to be
Knowleged as ſuch, in conſequence of an expreſs
der ofthe Holy Ghoſt, Marſhal Villars found
Wn at the head of eight hundred men, whom he
ul formed into a regiment. When the amneſty
ks propoſed, he demanded hoſtages, which were
M-ringly ſent. He came to Nimes, attended by
* 4 of the chiefs, where he treated with marſhal

ſs,

= te undertook to form the revolters into four
ments, who were to ſerve the king under four
Wonels, of which he was to be the firſt himſelf,
Pa the privilege of naming the other three. Theſe
ments were to be permitted the free exerciſe
cer religion, like the foreign troops in the

204 THE AGE OF 63
pay of France; but this freedom Was | allowed |
where elle, |

Theſe conditions were accepted, 1

ries arrived from Holland, who 2
prevent their being carried into execution by py
fents and promiſes. They drew off the molt «

fiderable of the fanatics from their ene |

Cavalier, who having paſſed his word to the ma
ſhal Villars, was reſolved to keep it. He accep
the commiſſion of a colonel, and began to for
his regiment with a hundred and thirty men, y
ſtill continued attached to him.

I have heard the marſhal Villars often relate
that aſking this young man, how at his years |
could acquire ſo much authority among a ben
ſtrong undiſciplined rabble; he received for a
fwer, that when at any time they refuſed to obe
his propheteſs, whom they termed the Great
was inſtantly ſeized with a fit of inſpiration, u
condemned the refractory, who were put to deat
without form of tryal. This paſſage is to be four
in the real memoirs of the marſhal Villars: d
firſt tome is certainly his; it is agreeable to f
manuſcript which I have ſeen; the two other tome
are of another hand, and quite different. Hain
myſelf afterwards put the ſame queſtion to Cayalie
he returned me the ſame anſwer,

This ſingular negociation happened after t
battle of Hochſtet. Lewis XIV. who had
haughtily proſcribed Calviniſm, concluded # peat
under the name of an amneſty, with a journey
baker's ſon; and marſhal Villars preſented him wit
the commiſſion of colonel, and a brief * a e
of twelve hundred livers. |

1 37 L EWIS XV. * 205

The new colonel went to Verſailles to receive
b orders of the minifter of war. The king ſaw him
4 ſhrugged up his ſhoulders. The miniſtry kept
watchful eye on Cavalier; who, diſtruſting them,
hdrew into Piedmont, whence he paſſed into
wind and England. He ſerved in Spain, where
bad the command of # regiment. He died a'ge-
wal officer, and gövernor of the iſle of Guernſey,
ith 2 great reputation for valour, retaining no-
ting of his former tranſports but courage, and
ming by degrees ſubſtituted prudence in the place
f fanaticiſm, which was no ed ound by
umple.

Marſhal Villars, being tontiled 20M Larguhdoay
5 replaced by marſhal Berwick. The ill ſucceſs
f the king's arms had emboldened the fanatics of
Languedoc, who expected ſuccours from Heaven,
nd received them from the allies. Money was re-
pitted to them by the way of Geneva: they had a
romiſe of officers from Holland and England; and
eld intelligence in all the towns in the province.
We may rank in the number of their greateſt
mſpiracies, that which they formed to ſeize
ie duke of Berwick, and the intendant Baville
Nimes, to cauſe Languedoc and Dauphine to
kit, and to introduce the enemy into theſe pro-
aces, The ſecret was kept by upwards of 'a
end conſpirators. The indiſeretion of a
id ge perſon brought all to light. More than
2 8 cen died by the hands of the execution-
ym: * Marſhal Berwick ſpared none of theſe un-
wi wretches that came in his way. Some died

e their arms in their hand; others upon wheels
Vor. II. 8

F

*

206 THE AGE OF 65

or amidſt flames. A few, more given to provi
ſy than fighting, found means to eſcape into H,
land. The French refugees there . received ther
as meſſengers from Heaven. They came for!
to meet them chanting pſalms, and ſtrewing th

way with boughs of trees. Theſe prophets wen
afterwards to England; but finding that the e

copal church there had too much — vit
that of Rome, they ſtrove to make their own he
ſway. Their confidence was ſo ſtrong, that nc
doubting but with a great deal of faith, great mi
racles might be wrought, they offered to iſe
perſon from the dead, and even any one choſe
at pleaſure. The people are every where t
ſame, and the preſbyterians might have join
the fanatics in oppoſition to the church of Eng
land, The Engliſh miniſtry took the courſe whic
ſhould | always be taken with workers of n
racles. They were allowed to take up a da
body. in the church-yard of the cathedral, I.
place was ſurrounded with guards; every. tl
paſſed juridically and in form; and the {cet
ended with ſentencing the prophets to. ſtand |
the pillory.
Mean while in France, time, the 2200
the government, and the progreſs of realon, be
by degrees rendered the Calviniſts quiet: the
number is diminiſhed, and the rage of their e
thuſiaſm abated,

FFA FERS>S 0 8

IQ

6. E WISs WV. 20

> * EY

CHAPTER n

Of Jax ᷣö

UCH was the nature of Calviniſm; that it
neceſſarily produced civil wars, and ſhook
the foundation of ſtates. Janſeniſm could only
niſe theological diſputes, - and paper wars; for -
the reformers of the fifteenth century having broken
ill the ties whereby the Romiſh church held man-
ind; having treated what ſhe eſteemed moſt ſa-
ned as idolatry ; having thrown open her cloi-
lers, and given up her treaſures into the hands of
he laity, it followed of conſequence, that one of
he two parties muſt be ſubdued by the other: and
te religion of Luther and Calvin never appeared
u reality in any nnn .
of dlood- ſhed.
But the Janſeniſts aid not attack the nds
by ſtriking at her fundamental points, nor by
aning at her wealth; but writing upon abſtract-
d queſtions, ſometimes againſt the Calviniſts, ſome-
mes againſt the Catholics, and againſt the Pope's
leres, they at laſt loſt all credit; and their ſect
now deſpiſed, though it has been ſupported by
3 perſons eminent for their characters and

ties, | * |
Even at the time * the Huguenots attracted
ſerious attention, Janſeniſm rather made a noiſe
u France than any real diſturbance. The diſ-
8 2

|

208 THE AGE OT & 13
putes about this doctrine, like many others, ha
their riſe abroad. A certain doctor of Louvain
named Michael Bay, called Baius, according i
the pedantic” humour of thoſe times, in 1552
took upon him to maintain ſome propoſitions w
on grace and predeſtination. This queſtion, lik
almoſt all others in metaphyſics, had its origin
the intricate, mazes of fatality and free-will; where
all, ages have been bewildered, and in which mi
king have no guide to conduct them.
An inquiſitive temper has been implanted. is
us for good purpoles, by the Author of nature
it is a necellary incitergent to promote our it
fruttior ; but it often tranſports us beyond th
proper bounds; in the {ame manner as many obe
paflions of the ſoul, which, if unable to c
to ſuch an extravagant length, would nat pe
be ſufficient to carry us far enough. |
Thus diſputes have riſen, upon what is underſtood
and what is not underſtood ;: but the controverig
wong the ancient philoſophers were alwayspec
able; whereas thoſe of our divines are oſten hoc
and always tusbu len.
The Cordeliers, who did not underſtand d
dark points better than Michael Baius, imaginec
that free-will was thereby deſtroyed, and dhe wio
doctrine. of Scot endangered. Being like wife e
aſperated againſt Baius, on account of another di
pute almoſt of the ſame nature, they accuſel lin
of ſeventy-ſix heretical articles before pope B
V. It was Sixtus Quintus, then general of iht
Cordeliers, who drew up the bull of candems
tion in 1567; and this I believe was d

wherein opinions, without being g partly
afied, were condemned. 5
Thus either from a Fear rhe |
Fom a diſguſt of examining ſuch ſubtilties, or from
in indifference or contempt of the theſis, at Lou-
rin they condemned the ſeventy-· ſix propoſitions
n general, as being either abſolutely heretical, -or _
towards hereſy. The divines of Lou-
rio heſitated a little in receiving the bull. There
uns in it one ſentence, in which the poſition of a
comma in one of two places, either condemned or
nlerated ſome opinions of Michael Baius. The
miverſity ſent deputies to Rome, to know of his
lolineſs where the comma muſt be placed. The
court of Rome, which was then buſied in other af -
firs, ſent as an anfwer x copy of the bull, in which
there was no comma. This bull was depoſited:
mongſt their records. Morillon, the grand vi-
ar, ſaid the pope's bull ought to be received,
een though it ſhould be erroneous, Morillon was:
0 the right, in regard to policy; for certainly it
ns better to receive a hundred erroneous bulls;.
wn to reduce a hundred towns to aſhes, as hap-
ned in the quarrel betwixt the Huguenots and
lier adverſaries. Baius be to ** _
ﬀeanted peaceably. 5 11 2
dome years after, Spain, no o le ſercile ae
alic authors than barren in good writers, pro-
iced Molina, a „who imagined he had
ſrſectly — how God acts upon his crea--
as, and how they reſiſt bis influence. He dif--

210 THE AGE OF 8 3
preventive and co-operating grace. He v
inventor of that ſuppoſed concurrence bein
termeditte ſcience and congruiſm;” two very u
dbommon ideas. By the former, God''carefully:
f ilfully confults the human will, to diſcovery
man will do when endowed” with grace; and the
according to the uſe he foreſees a free 2 s
wake thereof, he forms his decrees to
human agents; and theſe diſpoſitions make 0
is called congruiſm.
The Spaniſh Dominicans, whis aided
expiication as little as the Jefuits,” and were e
'tremely jealous of them, affirmed in their writing
tat Molina's book was the“ wan

. tichriſt.? “ 2
The court of Rome: wok this Mifpuatbiiel
As, which had already been before the gat
inquiſition, who very prudently-enjoined ſilence
the two parties; dur neither of men
decree. a
-Fhey- at laſt diſputed the b wad
Elerent VIII.; and to the reproach of humanu
derſtanding, all Rome became a party in the cauſ
One Achilles Gaillard, a Jeſuit, aſſured the pe
that he had certain means to reſtore peace to' ti
church; and with an air of gravity he propol

to accept of free predeſtination, on 1
the Dominicans admitted the intermediate!
and that they ſnould reconcile theſe two 00

ia the beſt manner they could. The Dominica

| however, would not agree to this ge”
Achilles Gaillard. Their famous Lemos m ntal
ed tte preventive concurrencez.and an aogompli
wen thereof by: afra ins. The congregatic

0. 33. LEWIS MV. 2142
re increaſed by theſe diſputes, but nobody un-
Food thbeãe. Fre ATT PRIOR
Clement VIII. died before he could bring the
nguments on each ſide to 4 clear and determined
fnſe. Paul V. reſumed the diſpute: but as he
kppened to have a more important affair with the
republic of Venice, he diſſolved all the congre-
mtions which they then did, and ſtill do, call de
fuxiliis, They gave them this name, of itſelf as
unintelligible as the points in diſpute, becauſe the
word ſignifies aſſiſtance, and the controverſy turn-
ed upon the aſſiſtance which God gives to the weak
vill of mankind. Paul V. finiſhed the affair, by
ordering the two parties to Ive in peace.
- Whilſt the Jeſuits eſtabliſhed their mediate ſci-
ence and congruiſm, Cornelius Janſenius, biſhop'of
Ipres, brought up again ſome notions of Baius,
n a large volume on St. Auguſtine, which was
dot publiſhed till after his death; ſo that he be-
ame head of a ſect, without ever dreaming of
ch an event. Very few read the book, which
tas cauſed ſo much diſturbance. But du Verger
& Haurane, abbot of St. Cyran, a friend of Jan
ſnius, a man of as warm a temper, as he is à prolix
nd obſcure writer, came to Paris, and gained to
ls party ſeveral young doctors, and ſome old wo-
nen. The Jefuits demanded at Rome the con-
&mnation of Janſenius's book, as containing no»
king but the heretical doctrine of Baĩus, and ob-
aned it in 1641. But the faculty of divines at
Fas, and all thoſe who argued on the ſubject, were
Gided, It was, methinks, gaining nothing, to think
"it Janſenius, that God commands impoſlibilities;
&s is neither philoſophical ner conſolatory. But

212 THE AGE OP 6

the ſecret pleaſure of being in a party, hatred
gainſt the Jeſuits, the deſire of a figu
and reſtleſſneſs of mind, formed a ſect. ret
| The- faculty. condemned: ,, If al
Janſenius, by a majority of votes: theſe five pi
politions were extracted out of the - book nn
faithfully, as to the ſenſe, but not as to the ne
words. Sixty doctors appealed to parliament, a
complained of an abuſe. The Chambre des.
cations ſummoned the two parties to appear; bi
they did not make their appearance, On
fide a doctor named Habert, inveighed again
the doctrine of Janſenins with great wart
On the other ſide, the famous Arnauld; a
of St. Cyran, defended Janſeniſm with the me
nervous eloquence. He hated the Jeſuits me
than he loved efficacious grace, and was {till me
hated by them, as the ſon of a man, Who bai
been bred up to the bar, had pleaded warmly %
the univerſity againſt their eſtabliſhment, Hl
anceſtors had acquired great reputation by A
ſword, as well as the gown. | His genius and
ticular ſituation determined him to become
controverſial writer, and to make himſelf head «
a party; «kind of, amor, HOO
others diſappear. He carried on the e
againſt - the Jeſuits and the Duden 69
eightieth year. He publiſhed no leſe than
hundred and four volumes, of which there
hardly one that can be ranked amongſt thoſe di
kcal books, . which do honour to the age 0 16
XIV. and are depoſited in the libraries of ff
rent nations, All his works were in high v0

bn LEWIS uV. 213

or, and that eagerneſs for diſputes then fo pre-
nent. People however grew more cool by de-
s, and theſe books are now intirely forgotten.
Kall his writings, none are now regarded but
ve upon reaſoning; ſuch as his treatiſe upon
gmetry, his rational grammar, and his logic,
| which ſubjects he very much ſtudied. No
un bad ever, perhaps, a greater turn for philo-
ical enquiries ; but his philoſaphy was vitiated
r that party ſpirit which, hurried him away, and
lich, for ſixty years, involved a genius, formed
) enlighten mankind, in ſcholaſtic diſputes, and
thoſe evils ſo ſtrongly connected with obſti-
wy of opinion. „ll 4 *
The univerſity was divided about theſe five fa-
ws propoſitions, as were likewiſe the biſhops.
ity-cight of che French bilkops wrote in a
dy to Innocent X. intreating him to decide the
kr; and eleven others wrote to his holineſs, to
js he would leave it undetermined. Innocent X.
b it into conſideration ; he condemned each ot
fre propoſitions ſeparately, but without quot-
| the pages from whence they were extracted,
vhat went before or followed.
This omiſſion, which would not have been done
uy civil affair at the loweſt court of judicature,
committed by the faculty of Sorbonne, by the
Neniſts as well as Jeſuits, and by his-bolineſs,
i ſenſe of the propoſitions which were con-
med, is plainly in Janſenius. If we only open the
Q volume, page 1 38. of the Paris edition 1 641.
ba find theſe words: „ Tout cela demontre
0 lenement & evidemment, qu il neſt rien de
WT" certain & de plus fundamental dans la do-

214 12 AGE or G

cc
c«c
4

« fideles & aux juſtes, malgre leurs volontes
leur efforts, ſelon les forces qu ils ont; & G

(40

60
40
c«c
c«

clergy unanimouſly to receive the pope's bull

ſtanding their will and efforts, according tot

ctrine de Saint Auguſtin, qu'll y à certsins d
mandemens impoſſibiles, non ſeulement aux i
fideles, aux aveugles, aux endures; "mais x

la grace, qui peut rendre ces conimandeme
poſſibles, leur manque.“ „All this demonſtra
fully and evidently, that there is nothing mc
certain and more fundamental in the dochine
St. Auguſtine, than that there are” ſome eo
mandments impoſlible, not only to the unbelie
ing, the blind, and hardened part of manki
but alſo to the faithful and righteous, notwi

ſtrength they poſſeſs; and that grace, which
able to render ſuch commandments p
fails them.” We may likewiſe read in page 1988
Que Jeſus Chriſt-n'eſt pas, ſelon Saint Ain .
mort pour tous le hommes: « That JelusC
NN to St. Avgulin, did not die =
men. Unc
Cardinal Mazarin obliged the aſemy « ref

.
ICAO

had then a very good underſtanding with his _

— de Liancourt, becauſe it-was rpc

neſs: he did not love the Janſeniſts, n =.
reaſon hated all controverſies. ' 7

The church of France ſeemed now to b Ronki

ſtored to peace: but the Janſeniſts wrote ſo wan...
letters, ſo often quoted St. Auguſtin, and gig i.
ſuch a number of female proſelytes, that after & m;
bull was received there were more Janſenill * eaſt
ever.

A prieſt of 8t. Sulpice refuſed abloluion

7 33. L E WIS XIV. 215

; kt he did not believe the five propoſitions were
n in Janſenius, and that he entertained heretics.
1 1 dis houſe. This was a new ſcandal, and fur-
Led freſh matter for diſpute. Doctor Arnauld
tfinguiſhed himſelf in an epiſtle addreſſed to a
al or fictitious duke and peer; he maintained that
te propoſitions which had been condemned, were
t to be found in Janſenins, but that they were
i St. Auguſtin and ſeveral other fathers. He ad-
1, « that St. Peter was a righteous man, in whom
mace, without which we can do nothing, was
vanting.“ a S
lt is true, that St. Auguſtin and St. John Chry.
nom had ſaid the ſame thing; but a word too
uch or one too little, and the circumſtances of
te time which make an alteration in every thing,
ade Arnauld guilty. It was faid to be neceſſa-
w mix ſome water with the wine of the good
bers; for what is to one party a matter of ſeri-
js concern, is to another the ſubject of mirth
ad pleaſantry. The faculty was aſſembled, and
Wncellor Seguier took his place there, as the king's
hreſentative. Arnauld was condemned and expel-
kl the college of Sorbonne in 1654. The preſence,
(the chancellor, amongſt the divines, carried ſuch
Lir of deſpotic power, that it greatly diſpleaſed
de public; and the care taken to fill the hall with
ki mendicant doctors, who had never before
Meared there in ſuch numbers, made Paſcal ſay
L lis provincials, il etart plus aiſe de trouver
© mines que des raiſonc. „ That it was much
*aler to find monks than arguments.”

loft of theſe monks did not admit of congru-
©, intermediate ſcience, nor the neceſlitating grace

216 THE AGE OF "ay

of Molina: bur they maintained a ſufficient 4 F
to which the will may conſent, though it nel.
does; an efficacious grace which à man may; .
er bak; and this they pretended to & 11
plain clearly, by ſaying that this grace might |
| reſiſted in dhe divided but not in the eoripou 5
ſenſe. _
Theſe ſublime henties' we chili L,
gether confonant to human reaſon; and the ng
tions of Arnauld and the Janſeniſts ſeem too mud
to agree with pure Calvinifm ; for the controver TC
ſy betwixt the Gomariſts and Arminians was ju
the ſame. Holland was divided by it, 4s Frail >
was by Janſeniſm. The affair however; in "fe %
land, became rather a political facton than a UM
pute of mere theoriſts ; and penſionary Barneve "
fuffered on a ſcaffold upon this account. In Fran 1
it produced only edicts, bulls, lettres de cache ,
and pamphlets; for they were then engaged | 100

diſputes of much greater

Arnauld was then only excluded from the f
culty. This flight perſecution procured” him
mamber of friends; but he and the Janet K
always the dune and the pope againſt tt
One of the firft things done' by Alexander |
ſacceffor of Innocent X. was to renew the” cel
ſores on the five propoſitions. The biſhops «
France, who had already drawn up a formular}
now framed one anew, which concluded withth
exprefſions : © I condemn with my heart and mou
« the doctrine of the five propoſitions, contain
e in the book of Cornelius Jauſcnius, which
« not the doctrine of St. Auguſtin, for Janſeni
« has perverted the meaning.” F

@. 33. LEWIS Wer 21 7
#23 now ſubſeribed as an artiele of faith; and the
hops ſent it to all ſuſpected perſons in their di-
des. They wanted likewiſe to have it ſigned by
il the nuns belonging to Port- royal of Paris, and
port · royal des Champs: theſe two houſes were the
kndtuary of Janſeniſm, for St. Oyren and Arnauld
ere the governors of them ꝶ⸗
There was another religious houſe © eſtabliſhed-
jar the monaſtry of Port- royal des Champs; His
ther many learned and pious perſons. had retired,
ſrongly prejudiced to their own opinions, and linked
wether by a conformity of ſentiments. There
bey educated ſome choſen youth, and here it was
tat Racine, the moſt corre ct and eloquent poet,
keeived his education; Paſcal, the firſt of ſatiriſts,
fr Deſpreaux muſt be conſidered only the ſecond,
ned in great intimacy with theſe illuſtrious and
lngerous recluſes. The above formulary being
weſented to the nuns of Port- royal de Paris and
lor · rcoyal des Champs, in order to be ſigned, they
mde anſwer, That they could not, in conſcience,
now, with the pope and biſhops, that the five" pro-
wlitions were in Janſenius's book, which they had
wer read; that certainly his meaning had been
liſtzken ;' and though the five propoſitions might be
froneous, yet thatJanſenius might not be miſtaken.
duch obſtinacy exaſperated the court. Mr. d Au-
r, the lieutenant- civil (for there was not yet a
tenant de police) went to Port. royal des Champs,
dot out the religious who had retired thither,
ad all their pupils likewiſe, * They threatened alſo
b ſuppreſs the two monaſtries: but they were
by a miracle. 9 ele
Vor. II. T

*% „ EYY
TY

*

218 THE 4E os 43

. - Maderpoiſelle Petrier, who belotiged to the mn
nery of Part-royal de Paris, niece" ito the famout
Paſeal, had a diſorder in one of her eyes.” At be
monaſtery they happened to be perſorming the
remony of killing a thorn of the crown which had
been formerly put upon the head of Our Sariour
this thorn had long been depoſited at Horta
but it is no eaſy matter to prove how it had ber
preſerved and conveyed from Jeruſalem ſ0 the fu
burb of St. James. Among the reſt of the nur
Paſcal's niece kiſſed the thorn z ſhe happenei t
recover of her diſorder ſome time after, and upot
this affirmed ſhe had been inſtanthy curedd of a mo
dangerous fiſtula lachrymalis. This young wa
man did not die till the year 1528, and feren
perſons O were acquainted with her, have aut
zd me, that it was a conſiderable time before be
cure Vas effected, which is extremely mY
but it is far from being ſo, that the divine bei
who does not work miracles to convert three ſ
of che world; to whom)our religion is Anker a
known or abhorred, ſnould break through the cor
of mature, in favour of an inſignificant girl, an
for. the ſake of a dozen ſemale enthuſiaſts, whoy
tended that Cornelius Janſenius did not vrite ſon
lines. which, were imputed. to him, or that he ha
written them with a meaning WG a 1445
was generally eonceivetdt. }* 1
be miracle, however, made 10 * a noiſ
that the Jeſuits durſt not deny it; the only cou
they could now follow, was to work miracles
their fide ; but they were not regarded: ſot 00
thoſe of he Jacen, were then | in falnion. 1

140

K

. S=Y EY E

* 8

% 73 "OWNS MP” 8 ary

years after they wrought another miracle: one of
he ſiſters at Port- royal, named Gertrude, was-cur-
4 of a ſwelling in her leg. This prodigy, how-
ver, had not the deſwed' ſucceſs: the time was
eapſed ; and mne
her uncle. 206 4944
The Jeſuits, . they had the” popes and
kings on their ſide, yet they were dectied by the
xeople, who brought up afreſh. againſt them all the
tient ſtories of the - aſſaſſination of Henry the
neat, contrived by Barriere, and executed by Cha-
kl, one of their diſciples; the punithment-of fa.
ter Guignard, and their baniſhment from France
nd Venice; in ſhort, ' nothing was omitted that
emed likely to make them appear in the moſt odĩ-
ous colours, Paſcal went farther, / and made them
te ſubject of ridieule. His provincial letters, pu-
lied at that time, may be conſidered as a model
of eloquence and humour. The beſt comedies of
Noliere have not more wit than the firſt part of
theſe letters; and the ſublimity of the latter part
of them is equal to any thing in Boſſuet.
[t is true indeed that the Whole boo was: built
won a falſe foundation; for the extravagant not»
ns of a few Spaniſh and Flemiſh Jeſuits were art» -
filly afcribed to the whole fociety. | Many abſurdi-
tes might have likewiſe been diſcovered amongſt
de Dominican and Franciſcan i caſuifts;1 but this
would not have anſwered the purpoſe; for the whole
Rillery was levelled only at the Jeſuits. 'Theſe
liters were deſigned to prove that ibe Jeſuits had
Ra a defign which
P<R nor fockoryt nee nor can haue. But
Vin fi; 12 roared

220 THE AGE OT . @y
to be in the right was m
intended was to divert the public.

The Jeſuits, Who bad then non 5
their party, could not turn off the ridicule thrown
upon them by one of the beſt written-books ever
publiſhed in France. But in theſe diputesalmoſ
the ſame thing happened to them as did formechy
Barbancons had made all France laugh at the cardi-
nal's expence, n he was maſter of the king,
dom.

The We nuns were 8 . the ably
| of Port- royal de Paris by, 200 guards, and diſperl.
ed into other convents: thoſe only were allowed
to remain, who were willing to ſign the formula.
ry. All Paris became intereſted in this affair, 8
ſter Perdreu and ſiſter Paſſart, who: ſubſcribed this
formulary, and got others to follow their example
were made the ſubject of ridicule and humorous
ſongs, with which the town was filled by a kind of
indolent perſons, who ſee nothing but the ridieu-
lous ſide of things, and who always make them.
ſelves merry, whilſt ſincere believers are afflicted
adverſaries declaim, and the nnn takes ſuck
meaſures as ſeem proper.

The Janſeniſts gained frength by penfermties
Four prelates, Arnauld biſhop of Angers brother
to the doctor, Buzenval of Beauvais, Pavillon
Alet, and Caulet of Pamiers, the ſame who after
wards oppoſed Lewis XIV. in the affair of the
regale, declared themſelves againſt the formulary;
There was a new one compoſed by pope Alexalt
der VII, alike in ſenſe. to the former, xeceivedl8
France by the biſhops, and even by the parlament

00 Th LEWIS MV. 221
vis holineſs, being moved with indignation, named
ine French biſhops, to commence a proceſs againſt
the four Who had been refractory. Then it was,
ht the ſpirit of the 8 to a W
gee of animoſity than ever | tl

But when the diſpute wa cried on with the ut
moſt warmth, in order to know whether the five
wopolitions were really in Janſenius or not; Ro-
higlioſi, who became pope under the name of
(Cement IX. reſtored peace for ſome time. He
xevailed on the biſhops to ſign the formula ſincere-
inſtead of purely and ſimply. Thus it ſeemed
lowed to believe, that though the five propoſitions
were condemned, they might not be extracted
tom Janſenius. The four biſhops. gave likewiſe
me ſmall explication thereupon: the Italian com-
iſance by this means allayed the French vivacity.
word ſubſtituted in place of another, brought about.
tis peace, which is called he peace of Clement IX.
ad even peace of the chureh though the whole
uimolity had only been about a diſpute either un-
Town or deſpiſed by the other parts of Chriſten-
m. Ever ſince the time of Baius, the popes had.
ly2ys endeavoured to ſuppreſs theſeounimtelligible
untroverſies, and to bring the two parties to preacoẽem
y morality, which every one underſtands : no-
king ſeemed more agreeable to reaſon4;- but whos
a account for ther behaviour of weak mortals ?"
Ide government ſet at liberty the Janſeniſts who
ud been confined in the Baſtile, and amongſt the
lt daci, author of a verſion of the teſtament.
They likewiſe recalled from exile ſeveral religious
dle, who dgned che formula ſincerely; and be-
0!!! 3p; Ad 551 FS 3 * ren

cuud the miniſter, a controverſy im which en

aa THE AGE OT Gy
lie ved they gained the victory by this Mr
Arnauld now came forth from bis retreat,
he had been concealed, arid was preſented 0 the
king, 'kindly received by the pope's nustich an
by the public, eſteemed à father of the church
From that time he refolved to enter the liſts oh!
againſt the Calvinifts, for ſuch was his. temper, thy
he muſt neceſſarily carry on war "againſt fone
party or other. In this time of ranqun l

publiſhes his book, intitted, Le perpetuite db le fi
in which he was alfifted by Nicole; and thi ow
riſe to that grand controverſy  betwixt dm an

party, according to euſtom, believed itſelf victoriou
The peace of Clement IX. having been g

to fuch reſtleſs turbulent fpirits, proved but a thr
truce. Secret cabals, anid man;
carried on, and r - Len on

ſides. d
The Juckeſs of 6npetevils Fſter to 4
Conde, ſo well known in the chil e
noted for her amours, being now old, and wit
out any employment, became a votary to relig
en; and as (he hated the court, and loved i
trigue, ſhe turned Janſeniſt. She built 8 win
to the Port- royal de Champs, whither. ſhe ret
ſometimes with the religious. Then was their due
flouriſhing time. Arnauld, Nicole, Le Mai
Herman, Saci, and ſeveral other perſons, Wit
though leſs ſawong} had conſiderable merit and u
putation, aſſembled at her hoüſt. Inſtead of th
wprightly wit, deſplayed by tbe ducheßß de E

ville in the palace ef Rumhbouiller, heya
more ſolid converſationz ſupported with mak en

„ TSR ES ESILELTSW]

=

LEWIS XIV." 223
nous, and anhmated ſenſe, which o remarkably
abe meir writings and diſcourſen. They
pntribarec} not a little to diffuſe true taſte and clo»
ence in Frande but unfortutately they were
nore zealous to ſpread their opinions. They them-
Gres ſeemed to be a' proof of the doctrine of fa-
uity, with which they were reproached. One
yould have ſald that they wete conſtrained by an
refitible determination to draw upon themſelves
riſecution for mere chimerical notions, when they
xight have acquired. confiderable- reputation, and
mjoyed a happy ene * r _
fivdlons diſputes,

The faction of Jefuits,! being Auy vroveked
y the provinciab letters, practiſed every art they
wuld deviſe againſt the oppoſite party. Madam
& Longueville, being no longer able to ſorm any
abal in favour of the anti- eourtiers; uſed all her
tlorts for Janſeniſmy and accordingly there were
kequent meetings of that ſect in Paris; ſometimes
ther houſe, and often at Arnauld d. The king,
wo had already reſolved to extirpate Calviniſm,
id not chooſe to fee # new feft ariſe. - He threaten-
ed the party; and at laſt Arnauld dreading ene-
wes armed with ſovereign authority; and being
fyrived of the ſupport; of Madam Longueville,
Who was dead, reſolved to quit France ſor ever;
agp to he in the Netherlands, unknown, with-
at fortune, and even withont- domeſtics. His
bey had been miniſter! of ſtate, and he hinaſelf
ſight have been a cardinal ; but the pleaſure of
mung with freedom, ſeemed to bim preferable
i exery other thing. He lived to the yeat 1094,
ba retreat obſcure to the world, and known only

. 33/

illuſtrious e eee, e

ailles, demanded divine faith for the fact.
would have been better perhaps to have turned
the book itſelf, and n os page wee

224 THE AGE OF on |
to his friends, always writing, always ſupport
the character of a philoſopher, / ſuperior 7
verſe fortune, and, to his laſt moments, piving

ſhaken conſtan e.. m

His party was ene parc in the eathil j
Netherlands; called the country of obediSnee, whe
the pope's bulls are ſovereign _ i
Ain more haraſſed in France. 194

One thing very cavity ti 0 5
ſtion, „whether the five propoſitions were re:
«in Janſenius ? was always the only pretence {
theſe little civil broils. The diſtinction of a fal
and de jure was now introduced: in 1701 te
propoſed a theological queſtion which was call
le cas de conſtience par excellence; „ Whether t
« ſacrament could be given to a man, hU thouy
« he ſigned the formula, believed in his heart, tir
« the pope, and even the church, might be miſtak 4
« in facts?“ Forty doctors atteſted with wg
hands that — . e W W
perſon. 1 *
- Upon this the deu *hwliel *
-pope and biſhops inſiſted they ſhould be
with regard to facts. The archbiſnop of 1
Noailles, determined that we ſhould believe !
divine faith de Jure. and human Faith de fal
Some others, and theſe Fenelon; the arc
biſhop of Cambray, who ene pleaſed with Ne

Lever done.
Pope Clement KI. in 1 17056 | publiſhed A

1 33. LEWIS MV. 225

ie facto, without ne en n 1
deine or human fait.
It was a e ee eee tha .
make women ſign theſe bulls, This reſpect was
qi paid to the nuns of Port- royal de Champs;
u cardinal Noailles was obliged to cauſe carry
to them to try them. They ſigned it without
acting any thing from the peace of Clement IX.
xd confining themſelves. to a. A ſilence in
mrd to the caſe de facto. 0
We hardly know which to coalider as wy” ex-
2 ordinary ; whether the confeſſion inſiſted on from
e nuns, that the "five propoſitions were contains
lin a Latin book, or their obſtinate refuſal; ©,
The king ſollicited a bull from the pope for the
en reſſon of their monaſtery. | Cardinal de No-
os deprived them of the ſacraments, and their
ue ocate was confined in the Baſtile. All the nuns
re removed, and each of them put into ſeparate
ch vents that were leſs refractory. The lieutenant
1 police | in 1709, ordered. their houſe to be de-
puſhed, and in 1711 all the bodies in the church-
„ and within the church were removed from
ee, and interred elſewhere, ©. The troubles;
W er, did not end with this monaſtery. The
eniſts were till for preſerving the ſpirit —
e Jeſuits deſired till to appear neceſſary.
Ne Father Quenel, a prieſt of the oratory, an in
Mate friend of the celebrated Arnauld, and who
Empanied him in his retreat to his laſt moments,
11071, bad compoſed a book of pious refleQions
L the text of the new teſtament.

Tis book contained fame maxims which appear:

ed vineam Domini, by which he injoined a be-

ed favourable to Janſeniſm; but cheſe were jun
with fuch 2 multitude of pious ſentiments, and
abounded in that ſoft perſuaſion which win g
heart, that the work was received with univerſal a
every where evident, and the faults were diffici
to be found. Several bifops- beſtowed" hiph e
comiums on the piece, when imperſect, which ih
repeated and confirmed hen the author had fil
ed it. I know for certain, that the abbe Renaud
one of the moſt learned men in Franee, being
Rome the firſt year of Clement XI's. pontifieat
went one day to wait upon this popes who lo#
men of letters, and was himſelf 2 mam of erin
and found him reading father QuenePs book, «
© is (faid his holineſs) am exeellent performance: 1
have no one at Rome capable of writing it t
* manner; I wiſhTconld have the author near me
We muſt not, however, look upon dheſe
eomiums of Clement XI. and the con!
which followed afterwards, as a contrad tien. At
one may at the firſt reading be ſtruck with the be
ties of a work; and yet afterwards condemn t
faults, which before eſcaped notice; The prelate Ba...
France, who ſhewed the ſtrongeſt and mot nee ..
approbation of this book, was cardinal de NoLVMĨ̃
archbiſhop of Paris. He declared himfelf the path, :.
of it when biſhop of Chalons, and the book Nrn.
dedicated to him. The cardinal was no lefs el
nent for his learning, thatr the many virtues be PW; .
ſeſſed: he was a perſon of the ſweeteſt and m
peaceable diſpoſition; he protected ſereril of
Janſeniſts, thorgh not of their perſuaſon; ti!

1 SST => WY

„ LEWIS XIV. 227

houg! he had no great afſeAtion for the Jeſuits
he ws eicher prejudicial do den nor feared

The power of the Jeſuits became forte,
den father de la Chaife, having the conſcience
| Levis XIV. at his diſpoſal, was in effect the
dad of the Gallican church. Father Quenel,
ediog their power, bach retired to Bruſſels with
learned benedictin Gerberon, a prieſt named
ſipode, and ſeveral others of the fame party.
er the death of Arnauld, he became the head
Ihe Janſeniſts, and like him enjoyed the pleaſing
try of eſtabliſtüng bimſelf in a ſovereignty in-
Hendent of princes, of reigning over conſciences,
ul being the ſoul of à party compoſed of the
belt geniuſes. The Jeſuits, being more pow-
nul and prevalent, ſoon difturbed Quenel in his
tude. They perſecuted him with Philip V.
mo was ſovereign of the Low Countries, as they
kl before done Arnauld his maſter with Lewis
IV. They obtained an order from the king of
Yan to ſeize theſe religious exiles. Quenel was
wodingly put in priſon in the archbiſhopric of
echlin, A gentleman, who believed he e wou
qatly raiſe himſelf by means of the Japſeniſts, if
k delivered their chief} broke through the walls, by
ſich means Quenel, having made his eſcape, fled
1 where he died in 1719. in an ex-
me old age, after having ſettled ſome Janſeniſt
huches in Holland; Wepper, the ſect was weak,
Wl dvindled daily.

ben Quenel was ſetzed, they alſo ſecured all
V apers in which. were found all the diſtin-
Med ſigns of a formed party. There was 2

228 THE AGE OT c;;
copy of an ancient contract made by the Jan
niſt with Antonetta Bourignon, the celebrat
fanatic, a woman of great wealth, who, in 6
name of her confeſſor, had putchaſed the ile
Nordſtrand, near Holſtein, as a place of reſidend
for thoſe whom ſhe deſigned to aſſoclate into
new myſtical ſect, which ſhe intended to eſtabli
This Bourignon had printed at her own expence
nineteen large volumes of pious reveties, and b.
| expended half of her fortune to make proſelyte
However, ſhe ſucceeded in nothing but renderit
herſelf ridiculous, and had even ſuffered perſecutisi
which is the conſequence of eyery innovation.
laſt, deſpairing to make any ſettlement in her il
ſhe ſold it again to the Janſeniſts; hut they wet
alſo unable to form any eſtabliſhment there.
_. Amongſt the manuſcripts of Quenel, there y
diſcovered a project of a more criminal nature, h
it not been extravagantly fooliſh. ; Lewis NIV.
1684. having ſent the count d'Avaux inte He
land, to grant a truce of twenty years t alf ti
powers willing to accept of it, the Janſenilts,
der the name of the diſciples of St. Auguſtine,
intended to get themſelves included in this trea
as if they were a party as conſiderable as the
viniſts had been ſo long. This chimerical ſchem
however, was not carried into execution; then
at laſt the propoſitions of a peace betwixt the q
ſeniſts and the king of France had been drawn
in writing. By this project, they had certain
deſign to make themſelves too conſiderable: f
was ſufficient to render them culpable; and Lev
XIV. was eaſily perſuaded that they were a da
gerous party,. Mo i

4. 33. LEWIS MV. 229
flad his majeſty been properly inſtructed, he
ud have known that empty, ſpeculative no-
dus will vaniſh of themſelves, when left to take
Ir natural courſe ; and to treat them as matters
r was paying them a reſpect they did not
. It was no difficult matter to make father
= book appear culpable, after the author had
ken treated as à ſeditious perſon. The Jeſuits pre-
fuld on the king himſelf to petition for the con.
Ennation of this bock at Rome. This was ini fact
meuring the condemnation of cardinal Noailles,
o had been the moſt zealous defender of that
rk, They flattered themſelves, and not without
ſon, that pope Clement XI. would embrace this:
wortunity to mortify the archbiſhop of Paris.
Fe it may not be unneceſſary to take notice, tha
den Clement XI. was only cardinal Albani, he
kblſted a book entirely on the Moliniſt principles,
nen by his friend cardinal de Sfrondate, and that
I, de Noailles had cenſured it as heretical. Tt was
frefore natural to think, that Albani, being now
e, would make reprifals, by paſſing ſentence of
demnation on Quenel's production, upon which |
s had laviſlied ſo many encomiums.

Nor were they deceived in their expectations;
IK Clement XI. in 1 708. publiſhed a decree againſt
Hels performance: but the ſituation of temporal
Eirs, at that time, prevented this ſpiritual affair
I had been ſollicited from having the expectea
els, The court was piqued at Clement XI. who
E :cknowleged the arehduke Charles for king of
FW, after having acknowleged Philip V. The
Wty of the decree was objected againſt, and it
You, II. 7 U

| * e
230 THE AGE OF ©.
was rejected in France. Theſe, controverſies |
dormant till the death of father de la Chile,
king's confeſſor, a man of a ſweet temper; who
ways endeavoured to promote peace and harmon
and who always preſerved a good underſtandi
berwixt cardinal de Noailles, and * relation m
dam de Maintenon.
The Jeſuits had a right to appoint 40 king
confeſſor, as well as almoſt all the other Cath
princes in Europe. This privilege belongs to thi
order, from the nature of their inſtitution, by whi
they renounce all eccleſiaſtical dignities: thus wt
their founder eſtabliſhed through humility, is becc
the means of grandeur. The more Lewis Xl
advanced in age, the more important was the off
of confeſſor. The perſon promoted to this hone
was father le Tellier, ſon to an attorney of Vire
the Lower Normandy, a gloomy, fiery, vehemt
and inflexible mortal, who had many private in
ries to revenge. The Janſeniſts had got one of
books on the Chineſe ceremonies condemned
Rome. He had likewiſe a perſonal; quarrel vi
cardinal de Noailles: he knew not how-to mat
any affair with moderation, and ſoon raiſed
ſturbances in the hole church of France, In 17
he drew up letters and mandates, to be ſigned
the biſhops. Theſe ſecret practices, however, v
ſoon diſcovered, but the ſucceſs af: cbm not |
vented. _
The king's conſcience was As ! hari
his confeiſor, as Eis authority ſeemed to be fi
at by a rebehious ficken. Cardinal Noaille
vein err of bis ma 1e zuſf ee ſor 6;
1. ies in mit. 25 e Sihl . a,”

0 33: LEWIS NV. 231

ut he made uſe of human means to bring about
tings of a divine nature; and as indeed he defend-
d the papal authority, and the unity of the church,
de whole affair had a favourable appearance. The
wdinal applied likewiſe to the Dauphin duke of
bwoundy, but found him prepoſſeſſed by the let-
{and friends of the archbiſhop of Cambray, The
bf of men are ſubje& to human frailties. Fenelon -
ot yet philoſopher enough to forget that car-
i Noailles had contributed to have him cenſured;
nd Quenel ſuffered then for madam Guion.

The cardinal did not ſucceed better from the
tereſt of madam de Maintenon. 'This affair alone
ky be ſufficient to diſplay the true character of
it lady, who had but few ſentiments, of her own,
d made it her ſole ſtudy to conform to thoſe of
te king, A few lines of hers to cardinal Noailles,
enable us to form a judgment of her, and of
e intrigue of father le Tellier, and will ſerve like-
lt to he us the king's ſentiments on this occa-
n, and give us a juſt idea of the preſent affair.
lon are ſufficiently acquainted with me (faid ſhe
n her letter) to know my private opinion on the
he diſcovery; but I have many reaſons to re-

I
1 [rin me from ſpeaking. It is not my buſineſs
© judge or to condemn: I muſt be ſilent, and

for the church, for the king and you. I have

Elvered your letter to his majeſty, and it has

ken read: this is all I can ſay to you about it

King oppreſſed with ſorrow.”

illes - cardinal archbiſhop, being thus injuriouſly
aed by a Jeſuit, took away the power of preach-

und conſeſſing from all the Jeſuits in France,

| U 2 |

5

-

232 THE AGE Or *;

excepting only a few of the moſt moderate «
ciſerect. - By his place he had likewiſe 'a ig
though a dangerous one, to hinder le Tellier fre
comfeſſing the king: but he durſt not venture
irritate bis fovereign to ſuch a degree, and be
him reſpectfully in the bands of his enemy. « 1;
« afraid” (faid he in a letter to madam Maintend
«. that I (hew too abject a ſubmiſſion to the kir
by leaving him in the power of one ſo-unwort
ſuch a truſt, 1 pray God may open his ex
« ti3t he may ſee the danger he is in, by int
« his ſoul to a man of ſuch a character.

It is mentioned in ſeveral hiſtories, that father
Telber ſaid, that he muſt either loſe his place,
the cardinal his. It is not unlikely that he thou
ſo; but it is highly improbable that he ſhould OM
ex2refs hiniſelf. When two parties ate heated w
animoſity, both often take dangerous ſteps.

The partiſans of father le Tellier, andthe biſe
who afpired at a cardinalihip; endes vouted al
make uſe of the royal authority to b. u
ſparks of fedition, vhich might have been ſo eiſ
extinguiſhed. Inſtead of imitating Rome, wich
ſeveral times impoſed ſilence on the to parti
inſtead of reſtraining the ſeditious Jeſuit, and
perly adviſing the cardinal; inſtead of profiibit
theſe controverſies in the ſame manner 48 d
and thereby making the clergy uſeful as well a
nobility, without being dangerous: in ſhort,
of bearing down the two parties by the weigh
ſovereign authority, ſupported by reaſon and Þ
the magiſtrates, Lewis XIV. took a quite die
courſe; he himſelf ſolicted Rome for an open
claration of war, and procured the famous 69

(þ. 33. LEWIS XIV. 233

ation which filled the W
wuble and affliction. 1 e
father le Tellier le e ee an
kandred and three propoſitions to be condemned,
of which the holy office ſound an hundred and one
kretical. This bull, which was given in the month
September 171 3. raiſed a flame throughout the
wole kingdom. The king had demanded it in or-
kr to prevent a ſchiſm, which on the contrary it
kemed likely to produce. A general clamour pre ·
ried; becauſe among theſe, hundred and one pro-
ltions, there were ſeveral which appeared to every
hody to carry the moſt innocent meaning. There
rs a numerous aſſembly of biſhops held at Paris
WJ this occaſion: ſorty necepted the bull, for: the
ue of peace; but at the-ſame time they qualifieg
t vith certain explications, to quiet the ſcruples of
te public. The direct and unreſerved acceptation
ns ſent to the pope, and the interpretations there ·
von were reſerved for the people. By this means
key thought to ſatiafy at once the pope, the king,
ud the people. But cardinal de Noailles, and ſeven
ter diſhops of the aſſembly, refuſed both the bull
ul the explications : they wrote to the pope, and
neſted to have theſe favourable explanations from
Fiolineſs himſelf. This was offering him an af+
int with an appearance of reſpect. The king,
ever, prevented it, for he would not fuffer the
ſer to be ſent; and he ordered the bilhops to-
Kr dioceſes, and forbad Noailles to appear at court.
i perſecution of the archbiſhop increaſed his re-
Faton with the public. The ſeyen other biſhops
ined him. r er
| n Aer” en

F
—

234 THE AGE OF &;
in the hierarchy,” amongſt all the clergy, as vel!
the religious orders. Every body allowed; that f
diſpute was not about the fundamentals of religion
yer à Civil diſſention was raiſed in peoples mind
and barried on with as much heut as if Chriſtiani
itſelf had been in danger; and as many ſprings «
policy were put in motion on both ſides, as in t
moſt profane of civil affaliftfs.
| Every art was uſed to get the conſtitution f
ceived by the college of Sorbonne. A majority «
votes were againſt it, yet it was regiſtered the
The miniſtry could not, without difficulty, proct
the letters de cachet "which were neceſſary to cc
fine or baniſn thoſe who oppoſed Grune
This bull had likewiſe been regiſtered in parl
went; always, however, reſetving the ordinary rig
of the crown, and the privileges of the Gall
church, with the power and juriſdiction of the |
ſhops; but the voice of the public always diſclain
ed any -obedience'to it. Cardinal Riſt, one of t
moſt ſtrenuous defenders of the bull, declared
one of his. letters, that it ud not have met v
greater indignity at Geneva; than it had received
Daus 0 i von zen ee

The public animoſity was greateſt againſt fal
6 Tellier. Nothing is more apt to raiſe our inc
nation, than to ſee: a religious perſon aſſume
much of: civil power; it feems à violation of
vows; but if he abuſes this power, he is utt
deteſted. Le Tellier' preſumed ſo much on WY
fluence, that he even propoſed the depoſing of ol
dinal de Noailles, in à -natiobal coun⁰e TW
to gratify his reſentmedty and yet I have (iſ

= SES EFESERESESST_ ESE ©

—
4

this |

0. 33. LEWIS MV. 235
ſons to believe; that he was an honeſt,” well-
neaning man; fo much are men apt to be blinded
vith zeal and prejudice for their opinions.
In order to prepare this council, which was to
&poſe a man become the idol of Paris and of the
whole kingdom, by the purity of his morals, his
mable character, and more {till by his perſecu-
ian; they prevailed on Lewis MV. to order a des
ckration to be regiſtered in parliament, by. which
nery biſnop, ho had not received the bull picre+
h ard ſimply, ſhould be obliged to ſubſcribe it, and
that every one who refuſed to do fo, ſhould: be pro-
keuted as a rebel by the advocate+-general.-» Chan-
xllor Voiſin, ſecretary at war, a rigid and arbitrary
un, had drawn up this edict. D'Agueſſeau, the
Mocate · general, much better verſed in the laws of
be realm than Voiſin, and having that courage
el ich youth naturally inſpires, peremptorily re-
ud to undertake this affair. Fhe preſident of the
ff t wuncil remonſttated to the king likewiſe, and
jointed out the cunſequences of ſuch a proceeding.
The affair was thus protracted. The king was at
Ved WY 5 time extremely ill, and theſe unhappy diſputes
: neatly troubled him, and haſtened his end. His
nercileſs confeſſor ſtill continued to harraſs him in
is languid condition, by repeated exhortations to
unſummate a work, which would not have en-
ared his memory. The king's domeſtics twice re-
uſed him acceſs to his chamber, and at laſt earneſt-
q conjured him not to ſpeak to his majeſty about
be conſtitution; Soon after, the king died, and 1
wole face of affairs was changed.

The duke of Orleans, regent of the kingdaen,
hing at once changed the whole form of Lewis

1 e—o—_ 9 a

likewiſe a council of conſcience, and made cardin

1 . * *

236 THE AGE OT M

XIV's, government, and having ſettled cνναι «|
in the offices of the ſecretaries of ſtate, erect il «-

de Noailles the preſident. They baniſhed
le Tellier, hated by the public,/ and even ut h-
A ee
bre bidops, who oppoſed the den Ben.
Sb end ibid web The.
bonne, the clergy of the dioceſe of Paris, and whol
bodies of the religious orders, appealed likewiſe
T717.; but he did not at firſt intend to publiſh it
however, it was printed contrary to his inclinatior
The church of France remained divided into tut
parties, the fcceptants, and Recuſants+ the for
eonſiſted of an hundred biſhops,. who had ur
themſelves, under Lewis XIV. with the Jefuits anc
Capuchins: the latter was compoſed of fifteen bi
ſhops, and the whole nation in general. The Ac}
ceptants prevailed at Rome; the-Recuſants had i
univerſities, the parliament and the people on thei
fide. Volume upon volume, and letter upon let
was printed, and each parry teproached te oha
{chiſmatics and hereties.
| An archbiſhop of Rheims, named: Mail a gre
and ſucceſful partiſan of Rome, had fublebed
—_— |
to be burned by the The archbühor
having been e
be ſung, to thank God for having bean ut e
riouſly treated by ſchiſmatics. God rewarded bt
and he was made a cardinal, The biſhop of Soong
having undergone the ſame treatment from the par
*

len
e be
(ar

0. 33 LEWIS UV. 227

« belong to them to judge even in caſes of high
« treaſon,” He was condemned to pay a ſine oi
en thouſand livres. The regent, however; remitted

ardinal alſo, N 201 . ACE * 2 |
The court of Rome vented itſelf in reproaches;
nuch tiwe was ſpent in negotiations; they appealed
nd re-appealed, and all this upon a few paſlages,
now forgot, of a book written by à prieſt in his,
both year, who lived on charity at Amſterdam.
The extravagant project concerning the funds,
contributed, more than was imagined, to reſtore
race to the church, The whole nation engaged
vith ſo much eagerneſs in the public ftocks ; and
de avarice of mankind, attracted by the proſpect
of inmenſe gain, became ſo prevalent, that thoſe
vo ſtill continued to talk about Janſeniſm or the
bull, could find no- body to give the leaſt attention.
They were as little regarded, as the war which was
tried on in the frontiers-ofiSpain. Phe immenſe
fortunes fo ſuddenly made at that juncture, and
wury and voluptuouſneſs carried to the higheſt
excels, made all the eccleſiaſtical diſputes ceaſe: thus
jleaſure did what Lewis XIV. could not eſſect.
The duke of Orleans ſeized this occaſion to re-
mite the church of France. In this his policy was
Intereſted ; for he dreaded the having againſt him
tome, Spain, and an hundred biſhops. bY
He was to prevail on cardinal Noailles, not only
o receive the conſtitutian, which he looked upon as
ſandalous, but alſo to withdraw his appeal, which
te eſteemed lawful. He muſt obtain more of him
tan his bene factor Lewis XIV. had in vain de-
uanded. The duke of Orleans bad reaſon to ex-

\

233 THE AGE OF; Gay

pect great oppoſition from the parliament, wich he 1
had baniſned to Pontoiſe. Tet, notuithilandhgf e
theſe obſtacles, he gained his point. 4 bh *
doctrine was compoſed, which partly ſatisfied both
parties; and a promiſe was procured from the ear |
dinal that he would at laſt accept it. The del *
of Orleans went himſelf to the grand council, vin =.
the princes of the blood and nobles, to get an edi
regiſtered, which injoined the acceptance of the pale
bull, ſuppreſſion of all appeals, peace and unanimi- 0
ty. The parliament, which had been mortiſied by |
edicts being carried to the grand council; which *
belonged to them to receive, and being allo ef ,
tened to be removed from Pontoiſe to Blois, regi 1 1
ſtered what had paſſed in che council; but away "
with the cuſtomary reſervations, that is, the pre 1
ſervation of the privileges of the Gallican church q of
and the laws of the realm. + "oY
The cardinal archbiſhop, who bad — fn
retract when the patlĩament ſhould obey; wis nor 4
neceſſitated to keep his promiſe. The inſtrumen ®
of ene e N Au
guſt 1720. 90
Dubois, the new archbiſhop! of Cinbray for fn,
to an apothecary of Brive la Gaillard, afterwards *
cardinal and prime miniſter, had the greateſt hand t.
in this affair, in which the power ef Lewis ba Wo.
failed. The ſentiments, morals, 'and-behaviou =
of this miniſter are well known; Phe _—_— wes
Dubois overcame the pious Noailles. |
It is ſtill remembered, with what contempt ne : don

duke of Orleans and his miniſter ſpoke of oo
diſputes which they appeaſed and what
they threw upon this controverſial quarrel-.

17 , 0
j

& 33. LEWIS XIV: 239

This contempt and ridicule' contributed not a
jule to the reſtoring of peace. People grew at
pf tired of ſuch conteſts, as afforded. en
bject of laughter, |
From this time, all that was > dancers 1 in 3
the name of Janſeniſm, Quietiſm, as well as all
de controverſies about theological points and bulls,
ndually declined. Some biſhops, who had ap-
xaled, remained een attached to their *
ions.
Under the miniſtry of. * — they
nanted to extirpate the remains of the party, by
kyoling one of the moſt ſtubborn: prelates, They
ned for an example, on old Soarin, | biſhop of
ke little town of Senes, a man equally pious and
lſexible, but of no family nor influence. |
He was condemned by the little provincial coun-
a of Embrun in 1728, ſuſpended from his office
c bihop and prieſt, and baniſhed by the court to
lurergne, when above eighty years old. This. ri-
pur occaſioned ſome fruitleſs complaints. There
not at preſent. any nation which murmurs more,
keys better, and forgets ſooner than the French.
dome remains of fanaticiſm ſtill ſubſiſted amongſt
mall number of the people in Paris. Certain
aufaaſts imagined, that a deacon named Paris,
ber of a counſellor in parliament; one who had
, deled and re-appealed, who lay buried in the
yard of St. Medard, was to perform mi-
" Wis. some of the party, who went to pray
WT” i tomb, had their imagination ſo worked
, that their diſordered organs produced flight
dul WI rulions, Upon this, crouds of people flocked
be tor: b bot? day and nicht. Thoſe who a-

5
|
!
þ
|
?

all other books were loſt, and this only was to

240 THE AGE OF d. 4

ſcended-the tomb, ſhook their bodies in ſuch's mar
ner that they themſelves believed it a mirade
The ſecret ſticklers for the party encouraged thi
frenzy. They prayed at the tomb in the vage
language, and now nothing was talked ef but thy
deaf hearing ſome words, the blind ſeeing, and the
lame having walked upright for ſome moments
The government left this epidemical 3 fe
a month to itſelf; but the concourſe! of
growing greater and greater, and the winde
creaſing, they were at liſt obliged to ſhut up th
church-yard, and place guards there; theſe enthuſ
aſts then went to work' their miracles” in houſe
This tomb of the deacon of Paris was in effet th
of Janſeniſm, in the opinion of all ſenſible perſon
Theſe farces would have had ſerious conſequenc
in more ignorant times, but thoſe who encourage
them ſeemed ignorant of the age in which they live

The fuperſtition, however, was carried ſo fa
that a counſellor of parliament bad the madneſs
preſent the king with a collection of theſe mirack
atteſted by a conſiderable number of evidences,

main, poſterity would imagine that. our age v
the moſt ignorant and barbarous of all others.

Theſe extravagancies were, in France, the e
piring ſighs of a ſect, which being no longer lol
ported by an Arnauld, à Paſcal, nor a Nap
and having nothing but convulſionaries, fell 18
utter contempt.

N „% TDEWLS =: 241

CHAP TE R XXXIV.

Of. Quit TISM.

MIDST. the factions of Calviniſm, and the

controverſies of the Janſeniſts, there hap-
xned another diviſion in France upon Quietitm :
n unhappy conſequence of the progreſs of the hu-
man genius in the age of Lewis XIV. that it ex-
ated efforts to go beyond the limits of our know-
kre; or rather perhaps, it was a proof that far-
her advances were to be made.
The controverſy about Quietiſm is one of thoſe
gtravagances of imagination and theological ſub-
lues, the memory of which would have been ut-
ly obliterated among mankind, had it not been
or the names of two illuſtrious rival diſputants.
\woman of no credit, nor underſtanding, who
kd only an overheated imagination, ſet by the ears
woof the greateſt men in the church, This wo-
tn was Bouvieres de la Motte. Her family was
iginally of Montargis. She had been married to
e ſon of the undertaker of the canal of Eriaire;
ut being left a widow in the bloom of youth, with
fat wealth, beauty, and a temper formed for the
LT POmerce of the world, ſhe became poſſeſſed with
WT "tis called ir ituality. A Barnabite of the coun-
; j ot Geneva, one La Combe, was her director. This
noted for what is common enough, a medly of
Voss and religion, and who died diſtracted, fill-
Vor. II. X

F

242 THE AGE OF Ch. 34

ed the brain of his penitent with myſtical reveries
which ſhe had before begun to imbibe. The
ſtrong deſire of being a S. Thereſia in France, pre
vented her from ſeeing the vaſt difference betwix
the genius of the French and Spanlards, and mad
her even proceed farther than Thereſia. The am
bition of gaining diſciples, the ſtrongeſt perhaps o
any ſpecies of ambition, intirely took polleſſion c
her heart. erke

She and her confeſſor went into that ſmall te
ritory where the titular biſhop of Geneva reſide:
She gained conſiderable authority there by her ex
tenſive charity, and held ſeveral meetings. 8
prgached up an intire ſelf-renunciation, the trat
quillity of the foul, and the annihilation of all i
| faculties, inward worſhip, and pure diſintereſte
love, fuch as is neither moved by fear, nor ar
mated by the hope of reward.

Tender and flexible | imaginations, eſpecial
thoſe of women, and ſome young eeccleliaſtie
who rather loved than believed ſuch doctrines fro
the mouth of a fine woman, were eaſily touch
with an eloquence of words, the only thing nec
ſary to perſuade minds favourably diſpoſed. SW
made proſelytes, but was driven away by the
{hbop, together with her confeſſor. They vel
thence to Grenoble, where ſhe publiſhed a li
picce intitled, Le mien court, The ſhort way, ©
another under the name of Torrens, both penned
the ſame Pile ſhe preached : but ſhe was likew
obiived to retire from Grenoble. |

Pleaſed already with the thoughts of being ral
changes the number of holy confeſſors, the 1
a on, and prophefied. She ſent ber prop!

ch. 34. LEWIS XIV. 243
o father La Combe, „All hell, faid ſhe, ſhall

4 unite to ſtop the progreſs of the inward ſpirit,
and the formation of Jeſus Chriſt in ſouls,

« The ſtorm ſhall be ſuch, that not one ſtone

« hall remain upon another; and I foreſee that
« throughout the whole earth, there will be.

& troubles, wars, and revolutions. The woman
« ſhall be pregnant with the inward ſpirit, and
« the dragon ſhall ſtand up before her.”

The prediction was verified; for upon her re-
wn with father La Combe, her confeflor, to Paris,
where both endeavoured to ſpread their tenets
1687, De Chanvallon, archbiſhop: of Harlai, ob-
uined an order from the king to confine La Combe
$2 ſeducer, and to ſhut up in a convent Madam
(uion as a perſon of a difordered mind, whom
t was neceſſary to cure. But madam Guion,
efore this, had gained ſuch intereſt, as now prov-
of ſervice to her. In the palace of St. Cyr,
ben only in its infancy, ſhe had a couſin named
mdam de la Moiſon-Fort, a favourite of madam
luintenon. She had likewiſe gained the good
mces of the ducheſſes of Chevreuſe and Beauril-
ler, All theſe friends complained loudly, that
be archbiſhop of Harlai, noted for having too
peat love for women, ſhould perſecute one for
mching up the love of God. |

By the powerful intereſt of madam Maintenon
be archbiſhop of Paris was ſilenced, and madam
Won reſtored to liberty. She then went to Ver-
llles, and was admitted into St. Cyr, where, after
Wing dined with madam Maintenon and another

on, the made one at the religious meetings

X 2

4
Fl
\

TEY

244 THE AGE' OF Ch. 34,

held by the abbot of Fenelon. - The princes of
Harcourt, with the ducheſſes of Chevreuſe, Beau.
villiers and Charot, belonged alfo to ' this myſtical

ſociety. N

The abbot Fenelon, 4 Necepaer to the *
children of France, was the moſt engaging man 10
belonging to the court. He had naturally a ten- |
der heart, with a ſweet and lively imagination,
and his mind had been cultivated with letters; He blo
was a man of taſte, had many amiable 'qualitic, WW...
and preferred the affecting and ſublime in divinity, WW. 0
to what was gloomy and abſtruſe. Beſides, he WM...
had a certain romantic turn of mind, which in- WM; .:
fpired him, not with the reveries' of madam Guion, Wl Ci
but with ſuch ideas of ſpirituality, as were not ve- T
ry unlike thoſe of that lady. ad

His imagination was heated with candour and _
virtue; as others are inflamed by their paſſions. WM.1.;;
He loved God purely for himſelf, He ſaw, in er.
madam Guion, a ſoul fraught with the ſame noi - g.
ons as his own, and therefore without any heft d
tion united with her. It was ſtrange that he ſboudf le,
be thus led away by a woman who pretended 108 tin,
revelations, to propheſies, and other Jargon ; who 11
ſtifled inward grace, as neceſſaty to be given up nme.
who diveſted, as ſhe ſaid, herſelf of all ſuperabundii c
ance of grace, in order the more to encreale n bot
body of the elect who were gathered about her a priy:
But Fenelon, in his friendſhip and ffyſtical no Cen,
ons, was as a perſon in love: he excuſed the er ther
rors, and became attached to that conformity o d
ſentiments with which he had been taken. be bo,

Madam Guion, elevated and emboldened by th

1 LEWIS XV. 245

| of acquiſition of ſuch a.difciple; whom ſhe called her
au. ba, and reckoning likewiſe upon madam Main-
ical non, propagated her notions in St. Cyr. Godet,
op of Chartres, in whoſe dioceſe St. Cyr is,
the s alarmed and complained loudly. The arch-
aan nbop of Paris threatened again to renew his form-
en- er proceeding. | 338
on, Madam Maintenon intending St. Cyr for a peace-
He BN ble abode, knowing likewiſe: how much the king
%s an enemy to all novelty, having no occaſion
ity, 8 :: put herſelf at the head of a ſect to gain influence,
de nad in ſnort having her own credit and repoſe only
in. n tic, (he broke off all commerce with madam
on, boion, and diſcharged her from St, Cyr.
de. The abbot de Fenelon ſaw the ſtorm gathering,
id was afraid of being diſappointed of the great
employments which he aſpired at. He therefore
arited his female friend to put herſelf in the hands
0 the famous Boſſuet biſhop of Meaux, who was
regarded as a father of the church. She accord-
tly ſubmitted herſelf to the decifions of this pre-
ate, and after having received the ſacrament from
un, ſ:e gave up all her writings to his examination.
The biſhop of Meaux, by the king's permiſſion,
med, as aſſiſtants in this affair, the biſhop of
Ulons, afterwards. cardinal de Noailles, and the
Wot Tronſon ſuperior of St. Sulpice. They had
private meeting at the village of Iſſi, near Paris.
lznvallon archbiſhop of Paris, piqued that any
aber perſons ſhould ſet themſelves up as judges in
dioceſe, | immediately paſſed a public cenſure on
de books they examined. Madam Guion retired
b the city of Meaux itſelf; ſhe ſubſcribed n

No 4 229.57 22088

246 THE AGE OF Ch, 34,
Boſſuet demanded, and promiſed to dogmatiſe n
Mean while Fenelon was promoted to the ard
biſhopric of Cambray in 169 5, and conſecrated
by the bihop of Meaux. One would have imagin

ed, that the late affair, being now dormant, ud £
having been only the ſubject of ridicule, would noi & |
ver be revived. But madam Guion being accuſe nel
of continuing to utter her doctrines after ſhe H of þ
promiſed ſilence, was ſeized by order of the kin :[ce:
in the ſame year 1695, and confined in priſon of t
Vincennes, as if ſhe had been a perſon dangerou bin
to the ſtate. She could not poſſibly be ſo; an ſub
her pious frenzies did not merit the ſovereign's a vo
tention. At Vincennes ſhe compoſed a large 9 tis
lume of "myſtic poetry, more wretched even tu nut
her. proſe. She wrote parodies upon verſes out oi brea
operas, and often repeated the following lines: le
” l Ma

L' amour pur et par fait va plus lain qu on ne penſe wi
On ne fait pas, lorſquil commence, ' frer
Tout ce qu'il doit couter un jour, Foul

Men cœur naurait connu Vincennes ni fouffranel ©:
Sil neut connu le pur amour. ord

| | and
The opinions of mankind depend chiefly up \vo!
time, place, and circumſtances. | While mad tad
Guion was kept in priſon, who, in one of her aj
zies, had ſuppoſed herſelf married to Jeſus Chr ele:
and from that time never invoked the ſaints, Gyn Thi
that the miſtreſs of the family-ought not to addr hn
herſelf to her domeſtics ; at this time, B- ah, we kr
canonized Marie d' Agreda at Rome, ho had 5 BH
more viſions and revelations than all the myſtics Wy ned

ch. 34. LEWIS XIV. 247

gelber; and as a further inſtance of thoſe contra-
ions in which the world ſo much abounds, at
he Sorbonne they proſecuted as a heretic this very
{4greda, whom they deſired to make a faint in .
Crain, " $24 alt asit bet ad 1 3)
. who had for a conſiderable time look-
d upon himſelf as the father and maſter of Fe-
ae belon, became jealous of the credit and reputation
of his diſciple ; and wanting always to preſerve that
icendant he had over all his brethren, demanded
of the new archbiſhop of Cambray, that he ſhould
jin with him in condemning madam Guion, and
WT fub(cride his paſtoral inſtructions. Fenelon, however,
u yould not ſacrifice to him neither his friend nor
> vol his ſentiments, Conceſſions were | propoſed, and
Jl mutual promiſes made. Each accuſed the other of
ut on breach of faith. The archbiſhop of Cambray, when
es : e departed for his dioceſe, printed at Paris, his
Maxims of the ſaints ; a work in which he endea-
wured to obviate all that was objected againſt his
fiend, and to reveal the orthodox notions of de-
wut contemplatiſts, who raiſe themſelves above the
ance fenſes, and aim at a ſtate of perfection to which
xdioary ſouls ſeldom aſpire.” The biſhop of Meaux
ud his adherents exclaimed loudly againſt this
wok, They complained of it to the king, as if it
ad been as dangerous as it was unintelligible,” His
mieſty ſpoke of it to Boſſuet, whom he greatly
lremed for his reputation and underſtanding.
s prelate, throwing (himſelf at the feet of his
darch rue, aſked pardon for not having before in-
e med bim of the fatal hereſy of the archbiſhop of
d Da Gmbray. The king and madam Maintenon im-
tics  iediately conſulted father de la Chaiſe upon this

248 THE ACE OF @y

affair. The Confeſſor anſwered, that the ard;
ſhop's book was an excellent piece, which had great
ly edified all the Jeſuits, and that the Janſeniſts on-
ly diſapproved of it. The biſhop of Meaux was no
a_Janſeniſt, but he had read their beſt writings, and
from thence had imbibed ſome of their principle,
He had no UNECE" the JET nor hw. for
him. -
The court and city were divided; and- al the
attention of the public being turned upon this affair
the Janſeniſts had a little reſpite.
. Boſſuet wrote againſt Fenelon, and both ſen
their works to pope Innocent XII. ſubmitting them
ſelves to his deciſion. The circumſtances did not
appear favourable to Fenelon ; for but a little be
fore they had abſolutely condemned at Rome, it
the perſon of Molinos the Spaniard, the Quietiſ
of which the archbiſhop of Cambray was now ac
euſed. Cardinal d'Etrees, the French ambaſſador at
Rome, was the perſon who had proſecuted 'Molinos
This cardinal, whom we have ſeen in his old age
more engaged in the pleaſures of ſociety than i
theology, had proceeded againſt Molinos merely te
pleaſe the enemies of that unfortunate prieſt,” He
had even engaged the king to ſollicit his condemna
tion at Rome, which was eaſily obtained! ſo'tha
Lewis XIV. found himſelf, without knowing it *
the moſt formidable N of the yr * . the F "4a
myltics. bent
In ſuch ſubtle S rcnneeh e nothing ismo |
eaſy than to point out paſſages in a bod under cot * Ak
ſideration, reſembling thoſe in one already/condem aſe,
ned. Fenelon had on his ſide the Jeſuits, and car EE |
dinal de Buillon, lately ambaſſador. from Franc"

keuted,
tie dec
ing an
mecdot
ber de
&r for |
fired tc
le abbc
le you

6 314 TDEW1S Mu. 249

ame. The biſhop of Meaux had his own great
ame, and the chief prelates of France as his adhe-
«nts. He. carried to the king the ſigns manual of
ny of the biſhops, and a great number of the
tors, who all expreſſed their diſapprobation of
te Maxims of the ſaints.

Such was the authority of the biſhop of Meats
%t father de la Chaiſe durſt not vindicate the arch-
op of Cambray to the king his pehitent, and
wdam Maintenon intirely abandoned her friend.
The king wrote to pope Innocent XII. that having
kd the archbiſhop's book laid before him as a dan-
uus work, he had put it into the nuncio's hands,

nd earneſtly ſollicited his 2 to give _
pon it.

p was inſinuated, nay, even publicly affirmed at

tome, and there are ſome. who ſtill credit the re-
unt, that the archbiſhop of Cambray was thus per-
keuted, for no other reaſon but becauſe he oppoſed
de declaration of the ſecret marriage betwixt the
ing and madam Maintenon. The inventors of
necdotes pretended, that this lady had engaged fa-
ter de la Chaiſe to preſs the king to acknowlege
&r for bis queen; that the Jeſuit had artfully con-

ed to make this dangerous commiſſion fall upon
te abbot de Fenelon; but that this preceptor of
le young princes, preferring the honour of his
wintry, and his royal pupils to his private intereſt,
kd thrown himſelf at the feet of Lewis XIV. to
rent ſuch an extraordinary marriage, which would
ne injured his memory more with poſterity than
— gratifications in life could recom-

Me,

This tale is ſtill to'be found i in the hiſtory of

250 THE 40 E or E
Lewis XIV. printed at Avignon. Thoſe who h
had acceſs to that monarch and madam TT

know the great abſurdity of this ſtory. But i !
true that Fenelon having continued his education ¶ xn
the duke of Burgundy after his promotion to f 1
archbiſhopric of Cambray; and che hing, dum dat
this interval, having heard ſome confuſed talk abo nal
Fenelon's connection with madam Guion, and me
dam de la Maiſon-Fort; apprehended that Fen 4008
might infuſe into his pupil maxims too rigid, ac:
fuch principles of government and morals, as woulll 7
perhaps one day become an indirect cenſure up in
that air of grandeur, that ambition for glory, the ronec
wars undertaken on the moſt frivolous occaſion end
and that taſte for luxury and pleaſures, which Eben
characterized his reign. _ 13th
The king was deſirous to have ſome cc Tl

don with the new archbiſbop-'upan 1 2
principles. Fenelon, full of his ideas, diſcovered |
the king ſome part of the principles, which he
terwards publiſhed in thoſe paſſages of Telemach
where he treats upon government; principles whi
might rather be applied to the imaginary repub
of Plato, than to the manner in which mankit
muſt be governed. The king, after his diſee
with him, faid, that he had been converſing wi
the fineſt, and moſt chimerical genius in his ki
dom. The duke of Burgundy was informed
theſe expreſſions of the king, and the duke aft
wards told them to Mr. de Maleſieux, his maſter
geometry, I was told this by Mr. de Malifieux,
the truth of it was afterwards. confirmed to me
cardinal Fleury.
It is certain, that after this converſation, ge

9. 34: LEWIS XIV. 251

«diy believed, that Fenelon was NT TOI
a political notions.

The holy office named a Dominican, a Jeſuit; a
nedictin, two Cordeliers, a Feuillant, and an Au-
ſto to take cogniſance of the affair, Theſe are
what they call at Rome the conſultors. The -car-
lnals and prelates generally leave to theſe monks
te ſtudy of theology, whilſt they give themſelves
wp to politics, intrigues, n in-
lent life,

The conſultors, in thirty ſeven clinics EX>
mined as many propoſitions, and judged them er-
meous by a majority of voices. The pope, at the
kad of a congregation of cardinals, condemned
hem by a bull Fünen
13th of March 1 699.

The biſhop of Meaux triumphed; but the arch-
op of Cambray gained a more glorious victory,
y his defeat. He fubmitted himſelf voluntarily,
nd without reſtriction or reſerve. He even mounted
he pulpit at Cambray, to condemn his own book,
nd would not allow any of his friends to defend it.
This ſingular example of condeſeention in a man
if learning, who might have gained a conſiderable
ty even by his proſecution, and his candour and
teenuity, gained him univerſal love, and made every
me almoſt hate his victorious antagoniſt. He aftep-
fards always lived in his dioceſe like a good arch-
Wop, and a man of letters. That lenity and fweet-
ie of temper which diſplayed itſelf in his conver-
lion as well as writings, made all who had the
flue of knowing him his affectionate friends.
lhe perſecution he met with, and his Telemachus,
fined fim veneration through all Europe. The En-

252 T HE AGE OF Ch, 3

gliſh, in particular, though they catried their
into his dioceſe, were the moſt eager to ſhew hi
their reſpect: the duke of Marlborough took pa
ticular care that his lands ſhould be ſpared: He h:
always the affections of his pupil the duke of Bu
gundy; and had this prince lived, he would ha
had a ſhare in the adminiſtration; '
In his philoſophical and honourable retiremen
we have a proof of the difficulty which a man b
to diſengage himſelf from court. He always en
preſſed himſelf upon this head in ſuch a manne
that his inclination and concern could be perceive
through his outward appearance of reſignation, [
his retreat, he wrote ſeveral pieces upon philoſoph
theology, and polite literature. The duke of Orlean
afterwards regent of the kingdom, uſed to conſ
him upon certain difficult points, which concern
mankind, and yet are ſeldom thought of by an

He aſked him, whether the exiſtence of a De V
could be demonſtrated ; if this delty required vc

ſhip; what worſhip he moſt approved of; and w D
ther a miſtaken choice was offenſive to the Divit
Being? He ſtarted many other queſtions of the li
nature, as a philoſopher who enquired for inſt Uh
tion; and the archbiſhop anſwered him like + 4
able philoſopher and divine, a
..- After his being worſted in the ſcholaſtic diſput 1 n
it would have been better had he not intermedliñ.
in the diſputes of Janſeniſm; nevertheleſs he e by
gaged in them. Cardinal Noailles had forme *
taken the ſtrongeſt ſide againſt him; and no
archbiſhop took the ſame courſe againſt Noalll A
He always flattered himſelf, that he e ſhould be R

called to court, and conſulted Un it 1s

(h, 34. LEWIS MV. 253

de human mind to diſengage itſelf from thoſe af-
firs in which it has been accuſtomed to be em-
loyed. His deſires, nevertheleſs, were moderate as
tis writings; and when on the decline of life, he at
it deſpiſed all diſputes, reſembling in this one par-
icular Huet biſhop d'Avranches,one of the moſt learn-
emen in Europe, who in his latter days acknow-
ered the vanity of almoſt all ſcience, and the human
underſtanding itſelf. The archbiſhop of Cambray
abo would imagine it !) thus turned an air of Lulli :

Feune, j etais trop ſage,
Et vculais trop ſavoir ;
fe ne veux en partage
Que badinage,

Et touche au dernier age,
Sans rien prevar.

When young, I to wiſdom aſpir'd,
And thought myſelf wondrous wile,
But in age, find that all I've acquir'd

Is to know, man in ignorance dies.

He compoſed theſe verſes in the preſence of his
tepiew the marquis de Fenelon, afterwards am-
ulador at the Hague, from whom I had them, and
an warrant the truth of this fact. This circum-
lance would of itſelf be of little importance, did it
wt afford us a ſtrong proof, that in the grave tran-
Wlity of old age, we often view.in a different light,
Wat appeared to us ſo great and intereſting in our
Puthful days, when the active mind is kurried
My by its deſires, and deluſions. |

Vor. II. *

254 THE AGE OF . 35

After
extenſiy'

| | 4 i c
D1isPVUTES upon the Cn 1 281 6
CEREMONIES. 1 whom t
HE 4 he ruſt. +
; ps Ie. the miſſi
minds, that we diſputed at the end of ſever pF
teen hundred years upon the articles of our o . obſer
religion, but we muſt likewiſe introduce into 0 The!
quarrels thoſe of the Chineſe. This diſpute, boi .. bun
ever, did not produce any great diſturbance; b ime the
it ſerved more than any other to characterize i acren
reſtleſs, wrangling, and contentious fprrit, whic bin that
prevails in our climates, | 8 ers in me
Matthew Ricci the Jefuit, towards the end. ne call (
the ſeventeenth century, had been one of the dug t
miſſionaries to China. The Chineſe Were the ws four
and are ſtill almoſt the fame in płñloſophy and Every
terature, that we were about two hundred Je Aemble
ago. Their reſpect for their ancient maſters pi net pul
ſcribes them certain bounds, which 'they dare » Fe
paſs. A progreſs in the ſciences is the work Qi i
time and boldneſs of genius. But morals and cy ca
licy, being more eaſy to comprehend than bun wa
ſciences, and theſe being brought to perfect Whom th
amongſt them before other arts, It has appel til fever
that the Chineſe, who have continued more b |
200 years within the ſame boundaries | lteſe cere
at firſt attained, have alſo remained but indit only

0 0 1 ; | 1 a
proficients in the ſciences; but they are the

0. 35. LEWIS UV. 255

xople in the world in morals and policy, as well
$ the moſt ancient.

After Ricci, many other Jeſuits went into this
gxtenſive empire; and, by means of the European
fences, they ſecretly ſcattered ſome ſeeds of
(hriſtianity amongſt the children of that people,
mom they took all proper opportunities to in-
ruct. Some Dominicans, who were concerned in
he miſſion, accuſed the Jeſuits of permitting ido-
kry, whilſt they preached up Chriſtianity. This
ms a delicate point, as was likewiſe the conduct to
tk obſerved in China.

The laws and tranquillity of this great empire
xe founded upon the moſt natural and at the ſame
ine the moſt ſacred right, the reſpe& due from
dildren to their parents. To this reſpect alſo they
pin that which they think due to their firſt teach-
ts in morality, and eſpecially to Con-fu-tze, whom
e call Confucius, an ancient philoſopher, who had
wwght them virtue 500 years before Chriſtianity
ms founded. |

Every family has particular days, on which they
iſemble to honour their anceſtors; and the learned
det publicly to honour Con-fu-tze. On theſe oc-
alons they proſtrate themſelves, according to their
tanner of ſaluting their ſuperiors, which was for-
terly called adoration throughout all Aſia, They
bum wax tapers and frankincenſe. The colaos, |
wom the Spaniards call mandarins, twice a year
ul ſeveral animals, near the hall where Con-fu-tze
honoured, and afterwards feaſt on them, Are
leſe ceremonies to be accounted idolatry, or eſteem- |
only as civil inſtitutions? Do they hereby ac-
Y 2

- 0
» of
8

256 THE AGE OF Ges

knowlege their parents and Con-fa-tze for deities ribunal
or are they even invoked as our ſaints?” Is this, * l
ſhort, a mere political cuſtom, fich ſome of we by F
Chineſe abuſe by a ſuperſtitious extravagance? Thit be ind
was a point which could not be eaſily determined .
in China by ſtrangers, and which we were unable to _
r rig

decide in Europe.
The Dominicans brought the affair before the
inquiſition of Rome in 1 645. The holy office
from their repreſentation, declared againſt the Chi-
neſe ceremonies, till the pope ſhould give a deciſion.

The Jeſuits defended the Chineſe and their ce-
remonies, which they ſaid muſt be allowed, other
wiſe the Chriſtian religion conld never gain ad:
mittance in an empire ſo jealous of its cuſtoms
They gave ſtrong reaſons for their opinion on thi
ſubject. In 1 656, the inquiſition permitted that thi
learned might continue to revere Con-fu-tze, ane
the Chingſe children to honour their anceſtors; bu
proteſted at the ſame time againſt all fuperſtitiou
adoration, if there was any. 85

The affair being yet undetermined, and the milY
ſionaries always divided, a final deciſion was fron
time to time ſolicited at Rome. Mean while all
Jeſuits at Pekin ſo far gained the favour of the em
peror Camhi, by their mathematical knowlege, thal
this prince, ſo much celebrated for his virtue ang
benevolence, accepted of them as miſſionaries, an

then in
cars inte
gions of
out of 1
the Chin
(onon,
frenchm
declared

ous and

ed Chine
lruggle
wainſt th
ed at Ro
Chineſe
Ns urge
nitted or
ined, w
0s, and t
tudently
td that th
ten don
quainte

allowed them publicly to teach Chriſtianity. It mA e to ur

not be unneceſſary to obſerve, that this deſpou zconfide
monarch, grandſon to the conqeror of Chins, v0. Jelvit

however ſubject by cuſtom to the laws of the em Lees.

pire; that he could not by his own authority alon
ſuffer Chriſtianity, and was obliged to ſolicit

* F , 92

0. 35: LEWIS XIV. 257

—
.

ribunal for that purpoſe; and that he himſelf drew
p two petitions in the name of the Jeſuits. At laſt,
in 1692. Chriſtianity was permitted in China, by
he indefatigable pains and addreſs of the Jeſuits
done. *
There is at Paris a ſeminary eſtabliſhed for fo-
rign miſſions, and ſome prieſts educated here were
ben in China. The pope, who ſends apoſtolic vi-
ars into all the countries which they call the re-
jons of infidelity, choſe a prieſt named Maigrot,
out of this ſeminary, to go to preſide as vicar in
be Chineſe miſſion, and gave him the biſhopric of
Conon, a little Chineſe province in Fokien. This
Frenchman being now a biſhop in China, not only
&clared the rites performed for the dead ſuperſtiti-
ous and idolatrous, but alſo pronounced the learn-
l Chineſe, atheiſts, Thus the Jeſuits had now to
ſruggle againſt their brother miſſionaries, more than
giinſt the mandarines and people. They repreſent-
ed at Rome, that it was highly inconſiſtent that the
Chineſe {© ould at once be atheiſts and idolaters. It
ns urged againſt theſe learned men, that they ad-
nitted only matter; and yet how could this be main-
lined, when they invoked the ſouls of their anceſt-
us, and that of Con-fu-tze. One of theſe reproaches
bidently deſtroyed the other, unleſs it was pretend-
cd that they admitted contradictions in China, as is
len done with us. But it was neceſſary to be well
vuinted with their language and manners, in or-
& to unravel this difficulty, The affair remained
conſiderable time before the court of Rome: and
* were in the mean time attacked on all

13

V

258 THE AGE OF G

Father le Comte, one of their moſt learned mil.
vera in his hiſtory of China, That
e this people had amongſt them, for 2000 years,
«. knowlege of the true God; that they had ſ⸗
4 ficed to their Creator in the moſt ancient temple
« of the world; and that China had prafiifed the
« pureſt leſſons of morality, when os was!
4 darkneſs and corruption.“

It is not impoſſible, bu” dh ati Wilma!
might be in the right; for in effect, if this natior
goes up, by an authentic hiſtory, and a ſueceſſi
of thirty-ſix great and atteſted eclipſes, even to thi
time where we place the deluge; it is not impro4
bable, that they may have had the knowlege of ont
ſupreme being longer than any other nation: ne
vertheleſs, as there was ſomewhat in theſe aſſertie
contrary to the received notions, they were attack
ed in the Sorbonne. The abbot de Bottean, brothe
to Deſpreaux, as great a critic as his brother, ane
a greater enemy to the Jeſuirs, in 1700. declare
this encomium on the Chineſe to be a dowhrigh
blaſphemy. The abbot de Boileau was a man of
lively and peculiar genius, who wrote humourouſ
upon the moſt ſerious matters. He publiſhed a book
entitled, Flage!lantes, and ſome other pieces of tha
kind, He ſaid he wrote them in Latin, to av
being cenſured by the biſhops. His brother Day
preaux ſaid of him, „That if he had not been
doctor of the Sorbonne, he would have been
« door of the Italian comedy.” He declaimed me
violently againſt the Jeſuits and the Chineſe, and dq
gan by laying, (That the encomiums on that peat
« ple had ſhook his Chriſtian brain.” Others in |
aſſenbly ſeemed likewiſe to have their brains equa

= 8B = NY. © ®, © DT IB

ch. 35. LE WIS XIV. 259

jy diſordered. They had ſome debates upon the
ſubjet. A reverend doctor named Le Sage, was
of opinion, that twelve of his brethren, of the
frongeſt conſtitution, ſhould be ſent to the empire
of China to inſtru themſelves in every particular.
The affair was debated upon with great warmth;
hut at laſt, the college of Sorbonne declared the
encomiums given to the Chineſe, falſe, ſcandalous,
aſh, impious and heretical,
This diſpute, being carried on with great acri-
nony, inflamed that about the ceremonies : and
pope Clement XI. the year after, ſent a legate to
china on this occafion. The perſon fixed upon was
Thomas Maillard de Tournon, titular patriarch of
Antioch, who did not arrive in China till-z 70:5.
The court of Pekin were till that time ignorant,
that they had been under trial at Rome and Paris.
The emperor Camhi at firſt received the patriarch
de Tournon with great civility ; but it may be eaſily
conceived what was his ſurprize, when the legate's
interpreters informed him, that the Chriftians, who
preached up their religion in his empire, did not
wree amongſt themſelves, and that this legate
ame to decide a diſpute, which the court of Pe-
lin had never before heard of. The legate gave
im to underſtand, that all the miſſionaries, except
de Jeſuits, condemned the ancient cuſtoms of his
empire, and that they ſuſpected even his Chineſe
majeſty, and all the | literati, of being atheiſts,
who admitted only of a material heaven. He
Wed, that he had in his dominions the learned
ibop of Conon, who would explain every par-
teular fully, if his majeſty would condeſcend to
fre him a hearing. The monarch was ſtill more

6

26 THE AGE OF Gy

ſurprized, when he was informed of having hi.
ſhops in his empire; and the reader muſt be no
leſs ſo, when he finds this prince ſo- indulgent a;
even to permit the biſhop of Conon to come 10
him to talk againſt his religion, againſt the-cuſtoms
of his kingdom, and againſt himſelf. The biſhop
of Conon was admitted to an audience: he kney
very little of the Chineſe language, The emperor
at firſt deſired him to explain four characters dran

in gold above his throne. Maigrot could-only ed
two; but he maintained that the words Ming · tien
which the emperor himfelf had written in his 1
pocket · book, did not ſignify adore the Lord *
Heaven. The emperor had the patience to explain r
to him, that it was the preciſe meaning of theſe Ck
words. He condeſcended, moreover, to enter in 3
to a long argument: in which he vindicated the Thi
honours paid to the dead. The biſhop, however, *
remained inflexible; and it may be well believed "
that the Jeſuits had more intereſt at court than he. ad pr
The emperor, who by the laws could have puniſhed arty
him with death, contented himſelf with only ba- bop:
niſhing him. He decreed likewiſe, that all the Fu _ .
ropeans, willing to remain in his empire, ſhould after woiſh
this be obliged to have his letters of protection, and . - :
undergo an examination. a of
As for the legate de Tournon, he was ordered *
to quit the capital. As ſoon as he came to Nan- —
kin, he publiſhed a mandate, which entirely con .. 8
demned all the Chineſe rites, in regard to the dead, doe
and forbad the uſing that expreſſion which the em- due

peror uſed, to ſignify the God of Heaven.
The legate upon this was confined in Macao, of

:
|
which the Chineſe always retain the ſovereignty 1

0. 35. LEWIS NV. 261

hough they allow the Portugueſe to have a go-
ernor there. Whilſt the legate was in his con-
nement there, the pope Tent him a hat; but this
ly ſerved to make him die a cardinal. - He ended
tis days in 1710. The enemies of the Jeſuits -
lid his death to their charge: they might have
ontented themſelves, however, with imputing
kniſhment to them.

duch diviſions, awongſt ſtrangers who came to
uſtruft the empire, greatly diſcredited the religion
key profeſſed, It was ſtill more contemned, when
be court, who began to ſtudy the Europeans with
mention, diſcovered that not only the miſſionaries
were divided, but that likewiſe amongſt the trad-
as who came to Canton, there were Many. ſects
ſrorn enemies. to each other, 5

The emperor Camhi did not ſhew any 8
o the Jeſuits, but ſhewed a great deal to Chriſtia-
ity. His ſucceſſor baniſhed all the miſſionaries,
ad proſcribed the Chriſtian religion. This was
pry the effects of thoſe diſputes, and that pre-
imptuous boldneſs, with which ſtrangers had pre-
tnded to know better than the emperor and the
magiſtrates, in what, ſenſe the Chineſe honoured
heir anceſtors. Theſe diſputes, ſo long the ob-
kt of attention at Paris, as well as many others
ning from a buſy ſort of idleneſs, are utterly for-
ptten, And people are now ſurprized, , that they
ver produced ſuch animoſities ; and the ſpirit of
piloſophy, which daily gains ground, promiſes to
kure the public tranquillity.

ba — — 1 — — Wa — 1

8

Cd

262 THE AGE, OF

: . - :
E 207 WEIS: T0

: ' «I ADDY
' f 2.
1 in

_ Cnitpren of LOUIS My.

| 28 to th
E married Maria Thereſa of Auſtria, bore ic
in 1638, the only danghter of Philip 1 Louis
by his firſt marriage with Elizabeth of France, an Le
ſiſter to Charles II. and Margaret Thereſa, whon ded i
Philip IV. had by his ſecond marriage with Mari Ma
Anne, of Auſtria, The nuptials of Lewis XW nic
were celebrated the th of June 1 660, and Mari irs i
Thereſa died in 168 3. „
He had by her, 1 |
Lewis Dauphin, Monſeigneur, who died 2
Meudon the 14th of April, 1711. Who b Lr
by Maria · Anne Chriſtiana- Victoria of Bavaria, v bo d
died the 2 0th of April 1 690, i Les
1. Lewis, Duke of Burgundy, who died di Denn:
18th of February 1712, and had by Maria-AdQ 168 3
laida of Savoy, who died in the 1 2th of Februa | Ley
1712, N. Duke of Bretagne, who died in 170 4 buſe,
Lewis, Duke de Bretagne, who died in 1712 Lot
and Lewis XV, born the 1. 5th of February 1710 felled
2. Philip, Duke of Anjou, and King of Spa bord.
who died the 9th of July 1746. W Lo
3. Charles, Duke of Berry, who! died the 4908 © 7:
of May 1714. Fra
Lewis XIV had alſo. two ſons and three daugll . Bic
re

ters, who died young.

LEWIS XIV. 263

py the Dutcheſs de la Valliefe, who entered in-
o the order of Carmelites the 2d of June 1 T4
mde her profeſſion the 4th of June 1675, and

Penn e years,
Louis XIV had

Lewis of Bourbon, count de 8 who
ted in 168 3,

Maria-Anne, called Madamoiſelle de Blois, and
narried to Lewis-Armand, Prince of com ; She
ded in 1739.

Other legitimated and 2 Children.

Lewis-AucusTvs of Bourbon, Duke of Main,
who died in 1736.

Lewis-Caeſar, Count de Vexin, Abbot of St.
Dennis and St. Germain des Pris, who died in
1683.

Lewis-Alexander of Bourbon, Count de Tou-
buſe, who died in 1737.

Louiſa-Frances of Bourbon, called Madamoi-
file de Nantes, married to Lewis III. Duke of
bourbon-Conde. She died in 1743.

W Louiſa-Maria of Bourbon, called Madamoi ſelle
urs, who died 1 68 1.

frances- Maria of Bourbon, called Madamaz/elle
& Heis, married to Philip II. Duke of Orleans,
ad regent of France. She died in 1749.

Two other ſons who died young.

264 THE AGE OF

 Cotemporary Sovereigus.

Es. Phy

Urban Vin. 1 2 died ; in bf Phi
It was this Pope who conferred _- par

of Eminence on a

Innocent op 9 * 3 fot

Alexander VII. | Al

Clement IX. DIED: o *
6 Jt

Innocent XI.

Alexander VIII.

Innocent XII,

Clement XI. ha

The Ottoman Houſe.

Jan
$ 1 Wi
Ibrahim, died in 2
Mahomet IV. Go :
Soliman III.

Achmet II.
Muſtapha II.

Achmet III. depoſed,

Emperors of Germany.

. Frec
Ferdinand III. died in
Leopold I. |
Joſeph _ I.

Charles VI.

LEWIS XY.

1 15 died in 1 665
charles I. 1746
6, Philip 4 on

Kings of Portugal.

hn IV. Duke of Braganza, died in 1656
Alphonſo-Henry, dethroned in 1667. 168 3

:
w

66 Peter II. 1706
2 bon V. 1750

X | Kings of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

/ Hi Charles I. died in 1649
Charles Il. i685
ſanes II. dethroned in 1688. 1701
Wiam III. I 702

li 2 aa 1714
eorge ; I.72

bo | 18 1727

69

Kings Denmark.

70 |
7 0 Chritian IV. died in 1648

Irederick III. 1670
i titan V. 3 1699
p 5 trederick IV. 1670
0 4 |
b Kings of Sweden.

lrfina, abdicated in 1654, died in 1689
Vor, II. Wo

266 THE A0 E Or

Charles-Guſtavus, died in 1660 Francis
Charles „ * 169% Th. d-
Charles XII. F - 17188 Urbain

| U | Charles
Kings of Poland. Charles
| | Anthor

Ladiſlas Sigiſmond, died in 164% jon P
John Caſimer, abd. 166% !h. de
Michel Wieſnowiſki died in 167 ii. de.
John Sobieſkt, 160 0 Henry
Frederick-Auguſtus, Eleftor of r, 1737 1
Staniſlaus, ohn d

Kings of Pruſſia. Caeſar

| | Jolas ©

Frederick I. died in Nic. N.

Frederick William, a

Anthon

Czars. ſames 0

*rE | Charles

Michael-Faederowitz, died in Henry

Alexis-Michaelowitz, Janes ]

Facdor-Alexiowitz, - a | Am. N

C Iwan-Alexiowitz, 5 4 Lewis !

3 Peter-Alcxiowitz, Celar P

Ph. de

Marſhals of France. James (

John de

Nict: olas de I Hopital, Duke de Ving, rab.

died in 164% Fr. de

Hon. d' Albert de Chaulnes, _ 1 6488 6&rnard

Gaſp. de Coligni, called marihal de Chatillon, Levis c
grand-ſon to the Admiral, .

james Nompar de Caumont de la Force,
Francis de Baſſompierre,

LEWIS MV. 267
francis-Annibal d' Etrees, died in 1670
Th. d'Epinai de Saint-Luc, 1644
Urbain de Maille de Brezee, 1650
Charles de Schomberg d'Halluin, 1656
Charles la Porte de la Meilleraie, 1664
Anthony de Grammont, 1678
ſokn Bapt. Budes de Guebriant, 1643
ſh, de la Motte Houdancourt, 1657
Fi. de l' Hopital de Ronay, 1660,
Henry de la Tour d' Auvergne, Viſcount de

Turenne, 1675
John de Gaſſion, 1647
(zefar de Choiſeul du Pleſſs-Pralin, 1675
ſoſias de Rantzau, 1650
Ve. Neuville de Villeroy, Com of Lewis

XIV. 168 5
anthony d' Aumont, 1669
mes d'Eſtampes, 1668
Charles de Monchi d'Hoquincourt, 1658
Henry de Seneterre de la Ferte, 1681
James Rouxel de Grancei, 1680
um. Nompar de Caumont de la Force, 1675
Lewis Faucault, 1659
Car Phaebus d' Albert, 1676
th. de Clerambault, 1665
James Caſtlenau, | 1658
John de Schulemberg de Montdejeu, 1671
Abrah. de Faber, 1662
fr. de Crequi, 1687
lemardin de Gigault de Bellafons, 1694
Lewis de Crevant d' Humieres, 1694
Godfrey d' Eſtrades, 1686
. de Montault Benac de Navailles, 1684

22

268 THE AGE OF

Frederick de Schomberg, died in 1 690

James Henry de Durfort de Duras, 1704 great A.
Lewis- Victor de Rochechouart, called Duke |

de Vivonne, 908 1688
Francis d' Aubuſſon de la Feuillade, 1091 Armar
Francis-Henry de Montmorency Luxem- ſer, chie
bourg, 1695 nation ar

H. Lewis d'Alongni de Rochefort, | 1670 BY tiled at
Gui Aldonce de Durfort-de Lorges, 1702 1646.
John d' Etrees, 1707 Anne
Claudius de Choiſeul, ii nt of t
Fr. de Neuville de V N. Gov. of Lewis I rligned i
| XV. 1730 Cacfar,
J. Armand de Joyeuſe, 17108 mand-ma
L. Fr. de Boufflers, | 171188 migatior
Ann Hillarion de Conſtantin de Tourville, 1701 Franc
Ann Julius de Noailles, 170 ba of c
Nicholas de Catinat, | 1712 ee: 5th
Lewis Hector de Villars, 1734 lewis
Noel Bouton de Chamili, 1715 ne legi
Victor Mari de Etrees, ; * 1737 nun in
Fr. Lewis Rouſſelet de Chateau-Renaud, 5 1716 years, }
Seb. le Pretre de Vauban, 1707 % Lewis-
Conrade de Roſen, | ir France,
Nic. du Ble d'Uxelles, | 17 % Led in 1
Rene Froullai de Tele, 1725Y

Nic. Aug. de la Baume de Mont-Revel, 1 7108 en
Camillus d'Hoſteen de Tallard, 1728

Henry d'Harcourt, | 1718

Fred. de Marſin, 1706 Arman
James de Fitz James de Barwick, 1734 rer of F
Ch. Aug. Gorgon de Matignon, 1

James Baſin de Bezons,
Peter de Monteſquiou,

LE WIS uV. - 269

Great Admiral of France 4 the ni of
"oe XIV. |

oy de Malle Marquis a Bread grand-ma-
ſer, chief and ſuperintendant-general of the navi-
ation and commerce of France in 1643, was
killed at ſea dy g canon * the 14th of *
1646. 5

Anne of Auſtria, Quake: an: Agena
unt of the ſeas of France in F646; which ſhe
reigned in 1 650.

Caeſar, Duke of Vendome and Beaufort,
nand-maſter, and fuperintendant-general of the
migation and commerce of France in 1 650.

Francis de Vendome, Duke of Beaufort, the
ſon of Caeſar, killed in the engagement of Candy,
te 25th of June 1679.

Lewis of Bourbon, Count de Vermandois,
made legitimate of the royal blood of France, ad-
niral in the month of Auguſt 1 669, aged two
fears, He died in 168 3. |

Lewis-Alexander of Bourbon, legitimated of

rnce, Count de Touloufe, admiral in 1 68 3,
Wed in 1737. |

benerals F the Gallies of France, __ the on
. of Lies XIV.

Armand John du Pleſſis, Duke de Richelieu,
er of France in 1 64 3, in the life time of Fran-
& tis father. He reſigned this poſt in 1 667.
Francis n and

2 3

270 THE AGE OF

reſigned in 1669, a year after he had been nomiĩ-
nated: a marſhal of Fran te.
Lewis Victor de Fechechewet, Conn and af.
terwards Duke de Ne e Frings of Ker
rente in 1669 |
Lewis de Wees Duke be: 8
during his father's life. 15 r third of AJ
pril 1698. r 373 Tor 5
Lewis-Auguſtus of Bourblbuh legitimate of i
France, Prince de Dombes, Nuke du Maine and
>tAumale, in 1638, and reſigned in 1 694. |
Lewis Joſeph, Duke de Venda Wr He
died in 1712 |
Rene Sire de Froullai, Count 40 Tee, Mee
of France in 1 712, reſigned in 21316. ö
The Chevalier de Orleans, in 17 16. He died
in 1748, after whoſe — this eee e f

united to the admiralty. *
.
| 10
Charles de PAnbepine de Chateauneuf, keep- Vw __
er of the ſeals, be ied in 655Y .
peter Seguir, | 2
Mathew Mola, G. D. S. g 2
tephen d' Aligre, +4
Michael le Teller, : un
Lewis Boncheraa ,,

Lewis Phelipeaux de Toawhirinin. He EX
erciſed this employ till x 74, died 8 in 17279

Dy Francis Vain, „ ot, hamper

=
| 9946811 0-1

| e | I 2411 2
Mazarin, Cardinal, Prime Miſter :
«4 died in 166 of the |

LEWIS MV. 271

Super intendants * the Finanees. 9
0. Bouthillier, „N: | Sed; m 16 5¹
abel Servien, 1659
d. de Meſmes, Count 3 | 1650
Nicholas Bailleul, 1652
Charles de la Vieuville, | 1653
Emery, (his name was Michael Perticelli) |
Rene de Longueil de Maiſons, 1677

Nicholas Fouquet, | 1680

Secretaries of State.
Henry- My de n de Brienne,

died in 1666
a, . n nt, | 1653
Lewis Phelipeaux de la: V rilliere, 2681
Abel Servien,. ſupexintendant, | 1659
Leon Bouthillier de Chavigni, 1632
Fr. Sublet der Noyers, ſuperintendant of the.
buildings, 1645
fl. de Guenegaud de Pins, 1676
Michel de Tellier, chancellor, 1685
Lewis Phelipeaux de la Vrilliere, reſigned in 1699
Hugh de Lĩionne, 1072
Renry-Lewis de Lomenie de Brienne, 1683
lohn Bept, Colbert Comptroller-genera, 1663

Join Bapt. Colbert de Seignelai,

Ir, Michel de Tellier de Louvois,

(i. Colbert de Croiſſi,

im. Arnauld de Pompone,

Mt, Phelipeaux de Chateauneuf,
Lewis Fr. Marie de Tellier de Barbeſieus,

When N. Fouquet was ſeized, the roll of reisten
de finances was 1 |

— — — — — — 2 — = — =
* - =
1 « a 3 ＋ — 31 „ — — — * C5 MM” ry T — _
2 — — - :
I — — 2 — 2 = 2 => = i
— 32 — - 0 — — -
2 — by =
— | —— = - Lo 1 2 _ — — —
— = Z, a — 2 - - : l
m5 = =_ > Prey _ 3 — > —
N = 2 — I: ä
* N

. Ad.
2

272 THE AGE OO

Lewis Phelipeaux de Pontchartrain, chan- Ac
cellor, died in 1727 fer;
Dan. Fr. Voiſin, chancellor, diy Al
Lewis Phelipeaux de la Vrilliere, 1725 Roue!
Michel Chamillard, Comptroller-general of He! al pic
_ finances, : 1721 cuſtor
Jerome Phelipeaux de Pontchartrain, reſigned ed fro
in 1 725, | v 993 Am
J. Dapt. Colbert de Torci, Nit d 2 .
Writers : ſeverals of whom have been ornaments to memo
the age. te ra
Abadie (James) was born in Beary,. in 1381 Ws
He was celebrated for his Treatiſe upon the Chriſtian ally k
Religion, but he afterwards diſcredited that work Wi"
by his opening of the ſeven ſeals. He died in Ire- n
land in 1727. | 1663,
Abadie or PAbadie (John) was born in Guienne 199.
1610. He was by turns a Jeſuit, a Janfeniſt, anda Pro- Anc
teſtant, and at laſt was deſirous to form a ſect off En
his own, and unite with Bourignon. But Bou- Warles
rignon rejected his overture, ſaying, that every one 1
had his particular ſhare of the holy ſpirit, and that A |
her's was greatly ſuperior to Abadie's. We have "hy
thirty one volumes of fanaticiſm written by bim. *
He is placed here only as an inſtance of the great 1
weakneſs of the human underſtanding. He asg *
not without his diſciples. He died at Altena iu .
1674.
Ablancourt (Nicholas Perrot d') of an antientÞ wa
family of the parliament of Paris, was born a. *
Vitri in 1606. He was an elegant tranſlator, ec cf,

of whoſe performances of this kind was called
beautiful infidel. He died poor in 16 64.

LEWIS NV. 273

Acheri (Luc. d') a Benedictine, was a great com-
fler; he was born in 1609, and died in 1685, -
Alexander (Noel) a Dominican, was born at
Rouen in 1639. He has compoſed many theologi-
al pieces, and has had great diſputes concerning the
uſtoms of China, againſt the Jeſuits who return-
from thence. He died in 1724.

Amelot de la Houſaie (Nicholas) was born at
Orleans in 16 34, His tranſlation with political notes,
nd his hiſtories, are very much valued; but his
nemoirs, in the alphabetical order, are very faulty,
le died in 170 6.

Amelot (Dionyſius) was born in Saintonge in
1606, He belonged to the oratory; and is princi-
ally known by a very good tranſlation of the new
teament, He died in 1678,

Amontons (William.) He was born at Paris in
1663, and was an excellent muſician, He died in
9, ; | ;

Ancillon (David) was born at Metz in 161 7.
e was a Calviniſt, and, together with his ſon
I Curles, who died at Berlin in 1 7 1 5. gained ſome
Wl iterary reputation.

Anſelm, an Auguſtin Monk. He was the firſt
no compiled a genealogical hiſtory of the great
licers of the crown, which has been continued
ad augmented by du Fourni, auditor of accounts.
er notions concerning what conſtitutes theſe great
(bers are very confuſed. Some ſuppoſe they are
boſe who by their office bear the title of grand, as
te grand maſter of the horſe, the grand cup-bearer.
kt the Conſtable, the Marſhals, and the-Chancel-
0. re alſo great officers, and yet do not bear the
le of great, and there are others who do bear this

274 THE AGE OF

title, and nevertheleſs are not ranked in the number
of great officers. The captain of the guards, the
firſt gentleman of the chamber, are in fact become
great officers, though they are not reckoned by fi-
ther Anſelm. We have nothing certain on this ſub
jet, and indeed, there is as great confuſion and
uncertainty in regard to all rights and titles ir ;
France, as there is order in the adminiſtration. He J
died in 1 69 4.

Arnauld (Anthony) „ e aß Sock f
born in 1612. and the twentieth fon of that Ar
nauld who pleaded againſt the Jeſuits. Nothing
is more univerſally known than his eloquence, his
learning, and his diſputes, which rendered him (aff
celebrated and at the fame time ſo unfortunate; ac
cording to our ordinary ideas, which annex mil
fortune to exile and poverty; without conſidering
that glory, many. friends, and an healthy old ag
were the portion of this celebrated man. He died;
in 1694.

Arnauld d' Andilly (Robert) the eldeſt |
of the preceding, was born in 1588. He 4
one of the great writers of Port Royal. His tran
flation of 7oſephus, which is the moſt eſteemed ol
all his works, he preſentcd to Lewis IV. at the ago
of 85 years. He was father of Simon Arnaueyy
marquis de Pompone, and miniſter of ſtate. Buß
this miniſter was unable to prevent either the dil
putes or the diſgrace of his uncle the dolor a 0 |
Sorbonne. He died in 1674. |

Aubignac (Francis d') was born in 1604. Hg
never had any other maſter but himſelf. He aß
attached to cardinal Richelieu, and was an 2
Corneille. His Pratique det Theatres is fill comp

LEWIS NAV. 175
nended; but he proved, by his tragedy of Zenobie,
tat genius is not acquired by knowlege, He died
in 167 0.

Aubri (Anthony) was born in 1616. We have
de les of cardinal Richelieu and Mazarin written
by him, which are but indifferent pieces. He died
01695.

The Countefs d'Aunoi. Her memoirs and tra-
its into Spain, together with ſome romances writ-
tn in an eaſy manner, have gained her ſome repu-
tation. She died iu 1705.

Baillet (Adrian) was born near Beauvais in
1649, He was a celebrated critic.' He died in
1706,

Baluze (Stephen) of Anita was born in
1631, He formed the collection of manuſcripts
in Colbert's library, He applied to his ſtudies to
de age of eighty eight years. We are indebted to
tim for feven volumes of ancient monuments.
fe was baniſhed for defending the pretenſions of
the cardinal de Bouillon, who pretended to be in-
dependant of the King. He died in 1718.

Balzac (John Lewis) was born in 159 4. He was
conſiderable for his eJoquence, and was the firſt who
funded the prize of eloquence. He had the patent
 hiſtoriographer of France and counfellor of ſtate,
wich he called ſplendid tries. He died in 1654.

Barbayrac (John) was born at Beziers in 1674.
le was a Calviniſt, was profeſſor of law and hiſto-
at Lauſanne, and was the tranſtator and com-
nentator of Puffendorf and Grotius. Theſe trea-
fles upon the laws of nations, and upon peace and
var, which have never been ſerviceable in any trea-
of peace,n or in any declaration of war, nor to

wy

276 THE AGE O F

ſecure the right of any perſon, ſeem to be a 3
tion to the people, for the evils which have been
done by force and policy. They give us ſuch an
idea of juſtice, as we receive of celebrated perſons
whom we cannot ſee, from viewing their portraits,
He died in 1729.
Barbier Daucourt (John) was known among
the Jeſuits by the name of the Advocate Sacru;f
and in the world by his Criticiſin upon the dia.
logues of father Bouhours, and by his excellent.
pleading for an innocent perſon who was put toff
the rack, He was long protected by Colbert, udo
made him comptroller of the king's buildings; bulif |
having loſt his protector, he died in miſery in
1694.
Barbier (Madamoiſelle) was the author of ſome |
tragedies, [
Baſnage (James) was born at Rouen in 1653
He was a Calviniſt and a paſtor at the Hague; bu
he was fitter to be a miniſter of ſtate than of
pariſh. Of all his books, his hiſtory of the Jews]
of the united provinces, and of the church, are thi |
moſt eſteemed.
Books upon temporary ſubjects are forgott
with the affair which produced them ; but work
of general utility are more durable. He died ut
1723.
Baſnage de Beauval (Henry ) of Roue, was am
niſter in Holland, but he was a philoſophical mini
ſter, and wrote upon Tokration in Religion. H
was a man of great induſtry: He publiſhed an cd
tion of Furetiere's Dictionary with additions.
died in 1740.
Baudran (Michael) was born in Paris in 1633

LEWIS NAV. 277
ge was a Geographer, but not in ſuch eſteem as
vnſon, He died in 17000.
Bayle (Peter) was born at Carlat in the abt 4
of Foix in 1647. He retired into Holland rather
$ 2 Philoſopher than a Calviniſt. He was perſe-
ated in his lifetime by Jurieux, and after his-death
the enemies of philoſophy, If he could have fore-
ten how univerſally his dictionary would be read,
e would have made it more uſeful, by retrenching -
he obſcure, and by increaſing the number of il-
uſtrious names. He lived and died like a wiſe man.
de Maiſeaux has written his life, of which he has
made a large volume, though it ſhould have been
WJ omprized in leſs than ſix pages; for the life of a
entary writer is in his works, He died in 1706.
Beaumont de Perefix (Hardouin) was the pre-
Wl tor of Lewis XIV. and archbiſbop of Paris. His
tory of Henry the Fourth, which is only an
drigement, inſpires us with a love for that great
xince, and is proper to form a good king. He
wnpoſed it for the uſe of his pupil. Mezerai was
ad to have had a hand in it. There is indeed a
od deal of Mezerai's manner in it; but Mezerai
rs not maſter of that lively ſtyle, in many places
TT" vorthy of the prince whoſe life Perefix wrote,
Wl of him to whom he addreſſed it: Theſe excel-
tat counſels for governing alone were not inſerted
l the ſecond edition, after the death of cardinal
kin. Henry the fourth is better known from
0 2ruſal of this hiſtory than from Daniel, who
Ws written his life but in a dry manner, in which
t has ſaid too much about Pere Coton, and too
tle concerning the great qualities of Henry the
Vor. II. A a |

—

4 — * oo
* * 1 af ”
* : DP % l *

q :

THE AGE or

278

fourth, r B
lent king. Perefix affects every ſenſible heart; le
excites adoration of the memory of this: . nen
whoſe weakneſſes were only thoſe of an amiable was
man, and vhoſe virtues were thoſs of a "great one WJ [rut
He died in 1670. 166
Benſerade (Ifaac de) was born in Normandy B
ay He filled his little houſe. at Genn te ; Paris
which be retired towards the end of his life, with Poet
inſcriptions in verſe, which were of mote worth tha 5 ſo m
his other works. -It is pity the were never oller fuo1
ed together. He died in 169 . B
* en N had the title of binonograpbelf a vas
= e is more known-by his curiou tranſ
Hiſtary ' of the great Reads of the Roman Emir W 166
which are now ſurpaſſed by ours in beauty chougi - ©
not in ſolidity. His ſon put the finiſbing hand 1d He v
this uſeful work, and printed i it under the reign 0 was i
Lewis XIV. He died in 162 3. ache
Bernard (Miſtreſs) has written ſome dramatiſ T
pieces, in conjunction with the celebrated Ber Cam!
aard de Fontenelle. = how
Bernard (James) of basta was born ii mo
1658, He was a man of learning, and his Jour na unt
have been eſteemed. He died in Holland in 171988 ½
| Bernier (Frances) ſurnamed the Mogul, was bor coul
at Angers about the year 162 5. fle was eig * {in
years Phyſician to the emperor of the Indies. Hi reflec
voyages are curious. He died in 1 688, B
BgBignon (Jeremiab) was born in 1 390. He bas let vs -
a name greater than his works. He lived before litera leave
ture arrived to a ſtate of perfection in France. I *

$

parliament to which he was advocate-general, wi
teaſon reveres his memory, He died in 1656.

LE VIS XV. 279

Bochard (Samuel) was horn at Roan in 1 599.
He was a Calviniſt, and one of the moſt learned
men in Europe in Languages and in Hiſtory. He
vas one of thoſe who went into Sweden to in-
ſruct and admire queen Chriflina. He died in
1667.

Boileau Deſpreaux (Nicholas was born at
Paris in 1636. He is the moſt correct of all our
Poets. His works have been commented upon
ſ much that any encomium would here be Taper
fuous, He died in 1711.

Boileau (Giles) was born at Paris in 1 6 31. He
was elder brother to the famous Boileau. His
tranſlations are better than his poetry. He died i in
1669.

, Boivin (John) was born in be in 16 33
1 the brother of Lewis Boivin, and like him
was ſerviceable in ſhewing the beauties of the Greek
authors, He died in 1726.

The Abbe de Bos. His Hiſtory of the 3 if
Cambray is profound, political, and intereſting. It
ſhews the cuſtoms and manners of the age, and is
a model in its kind. All our artiſts read with ad-
rantage his reflectiens upon Poetry, Painting, and
Miſic. Nevertheleſs he did not underſtand muſic,
could never write poetry, and was not poſſeſſed of
a ſingle picture. But he had read, ſeen, heard and
reflected a great deal,

Boſſu (Rene le) was born at Paris in 1631. He
was a regular Canon of Saint Genevieve. He en-
deavoured to reconcile Ariſtotle with Deſcartes, not
knowing that they ought both to be abandoned.
His Treatiſe upon the Epic Pam has great reputa-

14.0 |

e THE ACE OF

tion, but it will never form a ml He died in
1680.

Boſſuet (James Beniguc) of Dijon, was born
in 1627, was biſhop of Condam, and afterwards
of Meaux. We have 51 different works by him;
but his funeral Orations and his diſcourſe upon uni.
verſal Hiſtory are the pieces which have conducted
him to immortality. He died in 1704.

Bouchenu de Valbonnai (John Peter) was born

at Grenoble in 1651. He travelled in his youth, Bou
and was on board the Engliſh fleet in the battle of le wa
Solbay. He was afterwards firſt preſident of the &ed ir
chamber of accounts in Dauphiny. His memory is Thi
held in eſteem at Grenoble for the good which he ou
did there, and the learned are obliged to him for be KU
his labours. He wrote his Memoirs concerning te
Dauphiny, when he was blind, and had the authors WM "2!
which were neceſſary in that work read to him. He maſter
died in 1730. Wl the ti
Boudier. He is the tbc of 8 verſes which petty
are ſimple and natural. He wrote his own Epitaph had 8
at the age of 8 6 years, juſt before he died. *
| A | ;
Petais poete, hiſtorien- | te m

Et maintenant, je ne ſiis rien. =_ *

1 1 8 10 930

T was a poet and ons ' act

But now am nothing. 9.1 | wy
Bouckier. Preſident of the Lee of Dion. ere
He rendered himſelf celebrated by his erudition. 1 a lor
He tranſlated ſome pieces from the old Latin *

poets, into French verſe. It was his opinion that

|

LEWIS XIV. 281 ;

dey ought not to be tranſlated otherwiſe; but he
teved how difficult it is to ſueceed in the attempt.
Bouhours, (Dominick) the ! Jeſuit was born at
kris in 1628. Language and good taſte are much
"ebted to him. He has publiſhed ſome” very ex-
gent works, on which we have ſome very good
eiticiſms : eæ PR odlis bc pid +2 He
ted in 170 2.
Bouillaud ( Imaet) of Loud, was born in 160 5.
ge was (killed in hiſtory and the . He
ed in 169 4. |
The Count de Boulainvilliers 55 the houſe of
(rouy. He was the moſt learned gentleman in
be kingdom in hiſtory, and the moſt” capable to
wite that of France, if he had not been too ſy-
ſematic. He calls the Feudal government, The
mſter-piece of human underſtanding. He regrets
he times wherein the people being the ſlaves to
eity tyrants, who were ignorant and barbarous,
ud neither induſtry, commerce, nor property: and
te thinks that a hundred lords, who were oppreſſors
> the lands, and enemies to the king, compoſed
be moſt perfect of all government. Yet notwith-
landing this opinion, he was an excellent citizen;
8 notwithſtanding his weakneſs with regard to ju-
(al aſtrology, he was a philoſopher in that philo-
boy which eſteems life as an inconſiderable thing,
awbich deſpiſes death. His writings, which ſhould
e read with precaution, are profound and uſeful.
bog memoir is printed at the end of his work,
wender the king of France richer than all other:

Wnarchs bee. This piece plainly GE not
Aa 3

* — — - . - = — — - — - *
—— — — — 1 — —_—
al — 7 2 p — A — —_ 2 — a *
. — —
3 1 — TY

yy —— — — — —
2 2 — hs —

1

> oi THE AGE or

—

to be written by the Count de Boulaimilliers, 4
died about 1720, | b wad. th
iBinkifaloue, wad bets e, |
was 4 Jeſuit, and the firſt of good ren
rope. He died in 1704.
Bourſeis, (Amable) was born in n
160 6. He was author of ſeveral political en N
troverſial pieces. He and Silhon are -fuſpectet| off
have conipoſed the Teſtameni pblitigue, attributed
0 cardinal Richlieu. He died in 167
Bourſaut, (Edmond) was born in Burgundy in
1638. His Letters to Babet, which were eſteemed
in his time, are, like all other letters of the ſam
kind, become the amuſement only of youth in tha
country. His comedy of Aeſop ſüll continues te
be zcted. He died in 17o-.t. |
Brebeuf, (William) was born in Na |
1638. He is known by his tranſlation of the Pha
ſalia; but it is not generally known that he is th]
author of Lacan traveſtie. He died in 1661, |
Breteuil, Marchioneſs de Chatelet (Gabriel Emilia ti prin
was born in 170 6. She has illuſtrated Leibnitz, anq i wplicd -
tranſlated Newton with -a commentary: a uſelel Wy itentio
merit at court, but which is eſteemed by all nation temen
which pretend to knowlege, and ſnie is admired bY
them for the greatneſs. of her-genius and eloquence
Of all the women which have diſtinguiſhed France
ſtze had the moſt real wit and-good ſenſe, and
feed them the leaſt. She died in 1749.
Brienne, (Henry- Auguſtus de Lomenie de) f
eretary of ſtate, He is the author of ſome Mm
Such writings, by miniſters, would be uſeful works
but then they ſhould be ſuch as 9 which hav

LEWIS XIV.

een Lately e wroteon.” 4; He
lied in 1666. oft x 7 18 Fay

Le Brulere, (John) was, phos at Dod

644. It is eectain tliat in his characters he de
{ribed real perſons of conſiderable rank; His work
ws produces ay dad Nr _ * a

6, 43 OL 3897 292
" (Peter le) the: Lehn; His Thearret *
Grecs,, is eſteemed the beſt and moſt perfect work
of the kind. Buti be has ſhewn' that. it is much
aſier to tranſlate and ſhew the beauties oF the an-
gents, than to equal our moſt cdebrated __—
by his own. productions. L

Brun (Peterde) vn born at Aix in adit, .
o the oratbry; > tis criticiſm upon ſuper iti cus
/:ms has been regarded: but he may be compared
o 2 phyſician who underſtands the nature. of but
ew diſtempers; He died in 2729,

Buffer, (Claudius) a jeſuit. His arrifielit hiv
nory is of great fervice to thoſe h would retain
tte principal facts in hiſtory in their minds, He has
wplied verſe (I cannot ſay poetry) to its original
ntention, that of imprinting in the minds of men
remembrance of thoſe events which GO .
vorthy to be preſer ve.

Buſſy Rabeuin, . Comir 250 es dads in
Nivernois in 1618. He wrote with correctneſt and

purity, His misfortunes: as well as his works are

ficiently known, He died at Autun in 1693.
Calprenede, (Gautier de la) was born at Cahors

bout the year 1612. He was gentleman in ofdi-

wary to the king. He was the firſt that raiſed a
alte for long romances, . He died in 1663,
Campiſtron (John) was born at Thoulouſe in

7 Ff
. 7 7 Mer 7.
„ *

2843: -

*
— — — _ =
_= — — — — —
1 = , 2 6 — * — — — — 2 — - - = — — —— — - _— — — —
_ 2 — 2 — - — — — — — »—— — — ——
3 P 3 — 83 * ＋ 2 Ar —— — — > * - as 8 E 5% py = —
— of r — = —— — | — 1 — 3 8 — -
_— _ o _ — S — — — — 2 8 A : : x
a — — = . — — * 75 - = — —
— — 1 XY — # 0 * - _ Y — =
— * 2 — — 2 r1 . Z Rees, 21 2 2 DCs p
42 83 -_ — * 8 —— — PR _ — — — — — — — _ —
— , : : = — Cy * 2 — — —
* 3 —_— 4 — 2 - -” 2, x 4 Z — — oe ne . — x7 <4 p ”
N — = - { - 2 — — 2 MFI * * * — —— * — — = _ __— —— — po i _
- - - — — — - — — — - — * *
- - . — — —
—

— ä De —

p ——ͤ—e— Rr TF
7 — 2 < >” As * N —z -
— wn 4 + — — a «CWP
\ —_— — —
— — — —
_— - — -
—— — — 9 2 Fs a”

| 5
284 THE AGE OF.
1656. He was the pupil and imitator of Racine.
The duke de Vendome, to whom he was ſecretary,
made his fortune, and the comedian Barun part
of his reputation. Some of His pieces are affecting,
but they want force and dignity of expreſſion: the
language, however, is cotrett; and after him the
language of dramatic pieces was ſo neglected, that
we have at laſt written in a ſtyle abſolutely barba-
rous. This was lamented by Boileaw/at the time
of bis death. Campiſtron died 172 3. 21 oi
Du Cange, (Charles du Freſne) was born at
Amiens in 1610. The uſefulneſs. of his two PW
Gloſſaries for the explanation of the cuſtoms of I ine in
the later empire, and the ſucceeding ages, is well 1658,
known.. FAS HATH 3 yhogs or 1-92)
He died in 1688. . dot fo
Caſſini, John Dominick) was benni coun- *
ty of Niece in 1625, and being taken notice of N auch me
by Colbert in 1666, be became one of the greatelt N dcr. Ch.
aſtronomers of his time; but ende track nr
with aſtrology, He died in 1712 40
Catrou. He was a Jeſuit, and was born in — „den
He wrote, in in conjunction with father Rouille, the a their t
Roman Hiſtory, in twenty volumes. They bave A vo imp
endeavoured at eloquence, but have not ſhewn BW: erm
preciſion. He died in 1737, , W. Raf
Du Cerceau, a Jeſuit. He wrote ſonte; pieces 10 lis fi
poetry which are natural: they are of the midling . ſyle;
kind; yet ſome of the verſes are he happy. He ale, _
died in 1730. WW it four |
Le Chambre, (Marin Cureau de) was born at Nb b, 2
Mons in 1.594. He was one of the firſt academi. N bes no
cians. He died in 1669. wann have Chapel]

gained ſome reputation.

Chan
He was
who hel
he has g
that- the
after Hi
ample th
torted u
this mig
Chantere
ſorians.
nſtitutec

Chape

IL. E WIS NV. 25
ne (Lewis le Fevre) was born ii 1 598.
He was a man of great learning, and one of the firſt
who helped to clear up the hiſtory of France: but
he has given a ſanction to a great error, Whieh i,
bat the herereditary fiefs did not commence till
ner Hugh Capet. Though we had no other ex-
ample than that of Normandy, given or rather ex-
vrted under the title of an hereditary fief in 912,
tis might be ſufficient to diſprove the opinion of
(hantereau, which has been adopted by ſeveral hi-
forians. It is however, certain, that Charlemagne
nſtituted proprietory fiefs in France, and that
lis form of government was known before his
ine in Lombardy and Germany. He died 12
1658, - *
Chapelain, (John) was born in 159 5. Wen
| not for the Pucelle, he would have had reputa-
ton with the learned: yet this bad poem coſt him
mch more pains than the Iliad did Homer. Hows,
ver, Chapelain is uſeful from his learning. der
led in 1 67 4. 1 25
la Chapelle, recelver-general of the Dadam
s che author of ſome tragedies which had ſucceſs
WT" their time. He was one of thoſe who endeavour-
to imitate Racine; for Racine, without intending
formed a ſchool like the great painters. But he
ns a Raphael, who never formed a Julio Romino':
ſt his firſt diſciples wrote at leaſt with correctneſs
i {yle; whereas in the declenſion which has ſince
alued, tragedies have appeared wherein there are
Nt four lines together without ſome” groſs faults : |
b by are we ſunk, and ſo exceſſive bad are our
ices now, though we have had ſuch great models.
Chapelle, (Claudius VHuillier,) natural ſon bf

WW

286 T HE AGE OF
| VHuiller, lo Dre ;

a 1 Moi qui ne vous fis jamais rien

. to the reputation of his pieces. It is known th:

* "The, Niyle of the ane i very ate rn

'
:

be; was the firſt who introduced repeated rhimesff
DAflouci. e hogs n his * even vil
n faces. 19.8 9 2 |
gages N ger 855 4 tient 4 Ks
Quand la Charite vous impoſe
Le Loi d aimer voire prbobhain,
Pouvez vaus me hair | fans cauſe;

Abl pour mon honneur je vois bien
Qs il faut vous favs 7 choſe. etc.

Chapelle faccteded better thari, others i in that pe
cies of poetry whoſe excellence conſiſts in gn
and harmony; but herein he has ſometimes. pre
ferred. a barren ſuperfluity of rhimes to the ju
neſs of thought and expreſſion. His voluptuou de
life, and inconſiderable pretenſions, contributes

in his voyage to Montpellier, there are many pal
ages on Bachaumont, ſon of the preſident Coigneu
and one of the moſt amiable men of his im
Chapelle was allo one of the beſt of Gallendis| 8
pan. He died in 168 6. Et |

Charleval, (John Faucon de Ris)! one of thol |
hd gained reputation by his fine genius, vithou
proſtituting himſelf to the public, The 50
converſation between marſhal d Hoquincourt 2 |
Father Canaye, which is printed in the works q
Saint Evremont, is written by Charleval, excepun
only the little diſſertation upon Janſeniſm and did
liniſm, which, is added to it by Saint Evremony

*DEWIS XIV; 207

5 "7 han, ws poli —
A Carleval's piece, in WF his own hand writing.” We
ad in Moreri, that the preſident de. Ris, the ne-
jew of -Charleyal, would not print his unde's

orks, leſt his being an author ſhould be conſidered

z : blemiſh upon his family. But his underftand-
ag and condition muſt be very abject who ſhould

WT ance fuch a notion in this age. This pride, in a

nan of the long robe, might have been excuſable
n the military and barbarous times, wherein ſtudy
nas abandoned entirely to thoſe of the 2 rough
ontempt both for them and learning. 12

Chardin, (John) was born at Paris in 1643. No
nyeller has left more curious memoirs behind him
han his. He died at London in 1713. 5

Charpentier, (Francis) was born at Paris in 1620.
e was an uſeful academician. We have a tranſla-
ion of the Cyropedia by him. He ſtrongly main-
zined the opinion, that the inſcriptions on the pub-
ic monnments of France, - ought to be in French.
ln reality it is degrading a language which is ſpoken
In all Europe, not to make uſe of it; and the de-
len of theſe inſcriptions is fruſtrated by ſpeaking
o the public in a language which three parts in
four do not underſtand. He died in 1702.

La Chatre, (Edme Marquis de) was the author
of ſome memoirs. He died in 1 G45.

Chalien, (William) was born. in Normandy in
1639. He is remarkable for the eaſe and negili-
Knce of his poetry, and for the bold and voluptu-
%s beauties which it contains. He died in 4 f

Cheminais, a Jeſuit. He was called the Racine
i preachers, and Bourdaloue the Corndille.'

188 THE AGE Or

Cherron, (Elizabeth) was born at Paris in 164ʃ.
She. was celebrated for en- on .
She died in 1711. r94 SHOTS: |

. Chevreau, (Urban) was born at orb mt 1613,
He was a man of wit,and Lana fac bad ger
reputation- He died in 1701.

; Chifflet, (John James) was We Beſancavin
1588. We have ſeveral curious enquiries by him.
He died in 1 660. "There bave den ien wiiken |
of this name.

Choiſi, (Francis Ye) was born at Rents, 1644,
He was ſent envoy to Siam, and has given us a re-
lation of that voyage. He is the author of ſeveral
hiſtories, 'a. Tranſlation of the imitation of - Jeſus
Griſt, dedicated to madam de Maintenon, with this
epitaph, concupiſcet rex decorem tuum: and ſome
Memoirs of the Counteſs des n which Counteſs
he was himſelf, | |

Claude, (John) was born i in . in 1619.
He was a Calviniſt miniſter in Holland, He was
the oracle of his party, and had the honour to
combat Arnauld, Nichole, Boſſuet, etc. He died in

1687,

Le Comte, (Charles) was dan at Troies in 1611,
He was of the Oratory. His Eccleſiaſtical annals,
printed at the Louvre by order of the king, is an
uſeful work, He died in 1681. |
Coyllet, (Philbert) was born at Dombes in 1643i

He was a lawyer, and a man of free ſentiments
He was excommunicated by the archbiſhop of LyY
ons for a parochial quarrel, . and he wrote againſt
* ex communication. He declaimed againſt the
recluſe lives of prieſts and nuns; and in his treatiſe
upon uſury, he ſtrongly maintained the cuſtom au

LEWIS XIV. 289

horized in Breſſe, of ſtipulating the intereſt with
the capital, which cuſtom is authorized in the
geateſt part of Europe, and practiſed in the other
by all merchants, etc. notwithſtanding the Jaws to
the contrary, He alſo affirmed that the tenths which
xe paid to the clergy are not of divine inſtitution.
He died in 1718.

Colomiez, (Paul) the time of his birth is un-
own; and moſt of his works begin to be ſo:
but they are of uſe to thoſe who love literary en-
quiries. He died at London in 1692.

Commire, a Jeſuit, He had ſucceſs among thoſe
yho think that good Latin verſes may be compoſed,
nd who imagine that the age of Auguſtus may be
reſtored by ſtrangers, in a language which they can-
not even pronounce.

Cordemoi, (Geraud) was born at Paris. We are
ndebted to him for diſſipating the chaos which
reigned in the accounts of the two firſt races of our
kings; and this uſeful enterprize was owing to the
duke de Montauſier, who engaged Cordemoi to
wite the hiſtory of Charlemagne for the education
of Mon/ezgneur, In the old authors he found little
more than abſurdities and contradictions: but the
ficulty encouraged him, and he at laſt develloped
tie two {rſt races. He died in 1684.

Corneille (Peter) was born at Rouen 1606,
Though not more than four or five pieces are
tow acted out of thirty three of which he is the au-
thor, he will always be regarded as the father of the
ſage, He was the firſt who raiſed. the genius of the
nation. It is ſaid his tranſlation of the imitation of
klus Chriſt, has been printed 32 times, It is as

Vai. II. B b g

—  —_ — — — _ —
— - — — —— — —

viſt
Fl
zi
1

1
9

290 THE AGE OF
diſſicult to believe this, as it is to read the book once.
He received a gratuity from the king in his
ſickneſs. He died in 1684. po
Corneille (Thomas) was born at Rouen 162 5
He was a man who would have had a great reputa
tion, if he had had no brother. We have of him
34 dramatic pieces. He died in 1 709. |
| Couſin (Lewis) was born at Paris in *.
He was preſident in the court of Monies. W
are indebted to him for many tranſlations of weh
Grecian hiſtorians, which only he has done wall
He died in 1707.
Dacier (Andrew) was born at Caſters i in 16510 ;
He was a Calviniſt as well as his wife, and lik
her became a Catholic. He was library-keeper in
the king's cabinet at Paris, which employment nal
longer ſubſiſts. He was rather a man of learning
than an elegant writer, but his tranſlations and
notes will be for ever uſeful. He died at the Louvre |
in 1722.
Danchet (Anthony) by the aſſiſtance of muſe
ſucceeded in ſome operas, which are not uo bad f
as his tragedies. 5
Danet (Peter) was one of thoſe men whole re
putation has not been ſo great as his uſefulneſs
His dictionaries of the Latin tongue and of antiquiY
ties are of the number of thoſe memorable book:
compoſed for the education of the Dauphin, an
which, if they did not make this prince a man Ol
learning, have greatly contributed to increaſe th
knowlege of France. He died in 1709.
Dangeau (Lewis Abbe de) was born in 16436
He was an excellent academician, He died it
1723.

LEWIS XIV. 291

Daniel (Gabriel) the Jeſuit. He was hiſtori-
ographer of France, and has corrected the errors of
Mezeray in regard to the firſt and ſecond races of
dur kings. He has been reproached in that his di-
tion is not always ſufficiently pure, that his ſtile
b too weak, that he does not intereſt his readers,
hat he is no painter, and that he has been too con-
ae in regard to our laws, cuſtoms, and manners.
Nevertheleſs he has ſhewn himſelf well informed,
xcurate, judicious, and ſincere: and if he cannot
te ranked among our great writers, he may at leaſt
de clafſed with our beſt hiſtorians; nor have we
my hiſtory of France preferable to his. Father
Daniel in vain pretends that the firſt ages of the
liſtory of France are more intereſting than thoſe
of Rome, becauſe Clovis and Dagobert had a greater
extent of territory than Romulus and Tarquin, He
was not ſenſible that the weak beginnings of what-
ever becomes great, will always intereſt mankind :
ve love to trace the low origin of a people to whic 1
france became only a province, and which extended
ts empire to the banks of the Elbe, the Euphrates;
and the Niger. It muſt be confeſſed that our hi-
ſtory as well as thoſe of other nations, from the fifth
century to the fifteenth of the vulgar aera, can be
conſidered as little better than a chaos of barbarous
adventures, under barbarous names.

Dargonne (Noel) was born at Paris in 1634.
le was a Carthuſian at Gaillon, and the only one
af that order who has cultivated literature. His
Manges or Miſcellanies, under the name of Vig-
teul de Marville, are full of curious bold anecdotes.
tle cicd in 170 4.

Bb 2

292 THE AGE OP

Deſcartes (Rene) was born in Touraine in

1596. He was the ſon of a counſellor in the par-

Fament of Bretagne. He was the greateſt mathe-
matician of his age, but a philofopher who under-
ſtood nature the leaſt, if we compare him with thoſe
who have ſueceeded him. He ſpent the greateſt part

of his life out of France, to purfue his philoſophi
cal ſtudies at liberty, in imitation of Saumaiſe, whe
had done the fame Like many other philoſophers

be was accuſed of atheiſm, after having proved the

exiſtence of a God better than any of them.
died ↄt Stockholm in 1650.
Deſmarets de Saint Sorlin (John) was born at.
Paris in 159 5. He took great pains with cardinal
de Rickelieu's tragedy of Mirame. His comedy off
Vifionaries was regarded as a maſter- piece, but it
was becauſe Moliere had not then appeared. Hal
was comptroller general extraordinary for miliy
tary affairs, and ſecretary of the marine for the
Levant. Towards the end of his life he was more
remarkable for his fanaticiſm than bor his
He died in 1676. jo
Domat. He was a celebrated yer: His book
vpon the civil laws is in great eſteem. |
Doujat (John) was born at Thoulouſe in 16394
He was a lawyer, and a man of learning. He pub
liſhed a book, and got his wife with child eve
year. The Journal des Scavans calls him a rea
man. But this title ſhould not be laviſned upot
him too freely. He died in 1688. |
Dubois (Gerard) was born at Orleans in 16298
He was of the Oratory. He has compoſed a ty
ſtory of the Church of Paris. He died in 16961
Duche, Valet de Chambre to Lewis XIV, com

MX

LEWIS Mv. 293
oſed ſome tragedies for the court, taken from the

ſcriptures in imitation of Racine, but not with
de fame ſucceſs, © 1000 7 I

Duchene (Andrew) was born in Touraine in
64. He was hiftoriographer to the King, and

uthor of many hiſtories and genealogical enquiries.
He has been called the father of the hiſtory of
France. He died in 1640. |

| Dufrenoi (Charles) was born at Paris in 1611.
e was both a painter and a poet. His Poem up-
bs painting has been approved by thoſe who can
read other Latin verſes beſides thoſe of the age of
Auguſtus: he died in 1665. 1

Dufrent (Charles) was born at Paris in 1648.
e paſſed for the grandſon of Henry IV. whom he
reſembled. His father had been groom of the
chambers to Lewis XIII. and the ſon had the ſame
poſt under Lewis XIV. who, norwithſtanding his ir-
Y egularities, beſtowed many favours upon him;
WT but be could not prevent him from dying poor.
Tough he had great wit, and other talents of a
bod writer, he was never able to compoſe any re-
or piece. He is the author of many comedies,
n moſt of which there are very ſingular and di-
erung ſcenes, He died in 172 4.

Dupleix (Scipio) of Condom, thongh born in
so, may be included in the age of Lewis XIV.
ser he was {till living under his reign. He is the firſt
iſtorian who has cited his authorities in the margin;
rich precaution is abſolutely neceſſary in writing
be hiſtory of paſt times. His hiſtory of France is no
lnger read, becauſe we have others written ſince in a

— — —— — — — — — —
* — — K - - — = ts >
_— — _— — wv
— aq = - ==

-» PR — mw, JL ca p P P 2 3 = 4 þ =

— — — 88 - 3 2 — 4
— x — — — — 2 — — A — —
2 — — — — — — — — — — - — =
— — A — — — —
9

i
I

E * -
— — —
— — — —

74 4 aw — - —
s >a —

— —

- — 2 a -

— Y : P * -

B b 3

.

294 THE AGE OF
better and more agreeable manner. He died in |

1661. 4
Eſprit (James) was born as Bergis in 1611.
He was the author of a book upon Zhe falſity of 8 f

human virtues, which is nothing more than a com-
mentary upon the duke de la Rochefoucault, The k

chancellor Seguier, who was pleaſed with his parts,
procured him the place of counſellor of ſtate, He
died in 1678. |

The Marquis de la Fare, e by bis Memoirs ll
and by ſome agreeable verſes. His talent for poe- -
try did not appear till he was near ſixty years old.
It was madam de Cailus, one of the moſt amiable MW
ladies of this age both for her wit and beauty, up-
on whom he wrote his firſt verſes, which, perhaps,
are the moſt delicate of all that he has written. |

1

Mabandonnant un jour a la triſteſſe

Sans efperance et meme ſans deſirs,

Fe regrettais les ſenſibles plaiſirs

Dont la douceur enchanta ma jeuneſſe :

Sont-ils perdus, diſais je, ſans retour,
Et n'eſt-tu pas cruel, amour! 5
Toi que j'ai fait de mon enfance,
Le maitre de mes plus beaux jours,
Den laifſer terminer le cours
Are ennueuſe indifference ?
Alors pappercus dans leſs azrs nn

L enfant maitre de Punivers, ll iv
Me dit en feuriant, Tircis ne te plains plus, J
Fe vais mettre fin a ta peine, „

Je te promets un regard de Cailus. t bo

%

LEWIS XIV. 295

Jbandon'd to grief, on my pillow reclin'd,
Paſt all the ſweet hopes and warm wiſhes of love; ;

1.6 [ regretted their loſs, and in ſecret repined, ;
| of = That the raptures of youth Inolonger could prove,
The And are they quite gone? will they never return?
= O Cupid! I cry'd, thy ill nature behold:

el

devoted my youth on thy altars to burn;
And now thou wilt leave me inſenſibly cold.

4 This ſaid, I perceived hov'ring up in the air

** be ly little tyrant who governs mankind, _
"WY Who, with an arch look, cry'd, good Thyrſis

5 forbear,

P, WM For Caelia ſhall cure thee with looks that are
kind.

ke died in 1713.

La Faiette (Mary Magdalen de la Vergne Coun-
teſs de) her Princeſi of Cleves and her Zaide were
the firſt romances, wherein juſtneſs of behaviour
and natural adventures are deſcribed with grace.
before her time theſe pieces were written in a bom-
baſt ſtile and filled with things which were incre-
able. She died in 1 59 3.

Felibien, (Andrew) was born at Chartres in
1619, He is the firſt who gave Lewis XFV. the
lurname of Great, in the inſcriptions in the Hotel
de Ville. His Dialogues upon the lives of the pain-
lers, is the work which has done him the greateſt
bonour, It is elegant, and profound; and the
noſt excellent taſte is every where ſhewn through-
out the whole. But Pl ſays too little in too many

296 THE AGE OF
words, and is abſolutely without method. He di.
ed! in 1695, 5
Fenelon (Francis de Salignac) Archbiſhop of Cam. if
bray, was born in Perigord in 1651. He is the
author of fifty five different works. They all
come from a heart endued with the higheſt virtue,
but his Telemachus inſpires it. He has been vainly MW
blamed by Guendeville and the Abbe Faidit. He Wl
died at Cambray in 1715. |
Ferrand, Counſellor of the court of aids. He
is the author of ſome very good poetry. |
Feuquieres de Pas (le marquis de) was born at
Paris in 1648, He was perfectly ſkilled in the

art of war; and was an excellent guide, though Y
perhaps he was too ſevere a critic, He died in W |
1711. e

Le Fevre (Tannegui) was born at Caen in
1615. He was a Calviniſt, a profeſſor at Sau-
mur, deſpiſed thoſe of the ſect, though he al-
ways continued among them. He was rather a
Philoſopher than an Huguenot. He wrote Latin i
as correctly as a dead language can be written, and
was the author of ſome Greek verſes which ſhould WW
have had but few readers. Learning is indebted to
him the moſt for having produced madam Dacier.
He died in 1678.

La Fevre (Anne) Madam Dacier; © Born a Cal-
viniſt at Saumur in 1651: IBuſtrious for her learn -
ing. The Duke de Montauſier ſet her to work if
upon one of thoſe Claſſics publiſhed for the uſe of
the Dauphin; Florus with the Latin notes was
| hers. Her tranſlations of Terence and Homer do
ber immortal honour. She could be blamed for

nothing, but for having togghigh an opinion of If

LEWIS NV. 297

beer own tranſlations. La Motte attacked her with
uit, but ſhe defended herſelf with 2 Sie
lied at the Lovre in 1720.
= Flcchier (Eſprit) of Avignon, was born! in £6 324
all ge was biſhop of Lauvar and afterwards of Nimes.
tue, he was a poet, both in Latin and French, an hi-
nly WY forian, and a preacher ; and he is particularly ce:
He WY |ebrated for his fine funeral orations. His hiſtory of
MY Theodofius was written for the education of Mon-
He cur. The Duke de Montauſier engaged the
MH zott eminent geniuſes in France by their writings
at WY to falicitate this education. He died in 1710.

the Fleury (Claudius) was born in 1640. He was

gh ſub-preceptor to the duke of Burgundy, and con-
in WY flor to his fon Lewis XV. Though he lived at
court, he ſpent his life in ſtudy and retirement:

written, and the prelimmary Diſcourſes are even
detter than the hiſtory. He died in 1723.

La Fontaine (John) was born at Chateau- Thier
in 1621. He had the greateſt ſimplicity of all
men; and though - careleſs and unequal, he was
admirable in his way. He was the only great man
of the age who did not partake of the generoſity
of Lewis XIV. to which he had certainly a right
both by his merit and poverty. He died in 169 5.

Forbin (Claudius Chevalier de) was a commo-
dore in the ſervice of France, and high; admiral to
the King of Siam. | He left behind him ſome curi-
ous Memoirs, which have been reviſed and pub-
liſhed, A comparifon may be drawn between hing
and Gue-Trouin. |

La Foſſe (Anthony) was born in 1658. Man-

x 8 & . * >

fis hiſtory of the church is the beſt that has been

lug is his beſt theatrical piece. He died in 1708.

_ — —— — —— -

0 it
*
1
4
4
1
p
4 l
4
13
*
k 3 30
”
9
I
*
; J
=
4
18
*
my
11
10
%
i
+
14
.
my
1 *
9
4
p *
* 4
Ty
* 1
my
| >
1
. 1
# SFU
41
HUE
. 4»
Ui
K
1 Lai
6
1
7 q
al
1
.
1h;
, '+ 8]
9
71
9
I.
1
6

= ny Cs ——— — .! OE TO
.! ——— —„ u —ͤ— — es

2 „6
— 2 —
——
— 2 22 pa —

298 THE AGE OF

. | Fraguier (Claudius) was born at Paris in 1666, 0
He was a man of learning and great ' taſte, th
He is the author only of ſome Latin verſes and dif. Wl
ſertations. He died in 1728. W SRI
PFeuretiere (Anthony) was born in 1 620. He BY |<
is celebrated for his Dictionary and his Diſputes. Wl '
He died in 1688. .
Gallant (Anthony) was born in Picardy, in ke
1646. He learnt the oriental languages at Con. Wl "*
ſtantinople, and tranſlated part of the Arabian en
Tales, which are known under the title of Mi in
et une nuit, or Arabian nights entertainments. He ot
died in 1715. e 6
Gacon (Francis) was born at Lions in 1667, Wl ©
He is placed by father Niceron in the catalogue of
Mluſtrious men, though he has been famous only
for bad ſatires. He was principally concerned in
that collection of coarſe pleaſantries which is called
the Breves de la Calotte. . Theſe obſcenities had
their ſource from I know not what aſſociation call- W
ed the regiments of fools and de la Calotte. They W
are certainly not the product of good taſte. Men
of ſenſe regard ſuch works and their authors with
contempt ; and they cannot be cited but as an ex-
ample to be deteſted. He died in 1725.
Abbe Gallois (John) was born at Paris in 1632.
His learning was univerſal. He was the firſt who
publiſhed the Journal de Scavans, in conjunction
with the counſeller Clerk Sallo, who had formed
the deſign of this work. He afterwards taught 2 Wl '
little Latin to Colbert the miniſter of ſtate, who Wl *
notwithſtanding his buſineſs thought he had time e. 0
nough to learn this language: he took moſt of the 3
leſſons in his coach, in his journies from Verſailles

LEWIS Au. 299

o Paris. It was ſaid, not without probability,
that he learnt Latin with a view of being chancel-
lor. We may here obſerve, that the two men
who have been the greateſt patrons of learning;
Lewis XIV, and Colbert, neither of them under-
food Latin. He died in 1707.

Gaſſendi, (Peter) was born in Provence in 1 59 0.

| fe revived part of the philoſophy of Epicurus.. He

sus convinced of the neceſſity of atoms and a va-

aum: and what was affirmed by Gaſſendi has
ace been demonſtrated by Sir Iſaac Newton and

others. He had leſs reputation than Deſcartes,

WT becauſe he was more reaſonable, and did not form

my hypotheſis : but he was accuſed of atheiſm as

oel as Deſcartes. It was the opinion of ſome,

that he who admitted a vacuum, as Epicurus, with
tim alſo denied the exiſtence of a God. This is
W the reaſoning of calumniators. In Provence, where
none were jealous of him, Gaſſendi was called a
vous divine; but at Paris he was called incredulous
ty thoſe who envied him. He died in 1 656,

Gedouin, canon of the holy chapel at Paris.
He is the author of an excellent tranſlation of
Gintilian, etc.

Abbe Geneſt, was born in 1635. He was al-
© honer to the ducheſs of Orleans, wife to the re-
gent. He is the author of ſeveral tragedies. His
tenelope had great ſucceſs, He died in 1719.

Le Gendre, (Lewis) was born at Rouen in
1655. He has written a hiſtory of France. To
te this hiſtory well, would require the pen and
tte liberty of a preſident de Thou; and even then
t would be very difficult to make the firſt ages in-
Kreliing, He died in 1733.

- »

300 THE AGE. or

Abbe Girard. His book {ynonyniou |
words is of great uſe. W |
': Godeau, (Anthony) one of thoſe who "Fay |
eſtabliſh the French academy, He was a poet, an
orator, and an hiſtorian. He turned the Benedicit
into verſe, and for this play of wordt, Cardinal!
Richlicu gave him the biſhoprie of Graſſe. His ec-
cleliaſtical hiſtory in proſe was more eſteemed than
his poem upon the Faſti of the church. He wif
deceived in imagining he could equal Ovid's Faſi:
neither his ſubjeft nor his genius were equal to it.
It is a great miſtake to imagine that ſubjects taken
from chriſtianity can be as proper for poetry asf
thoſe taken from paganiſm, the mythology of 8
which, as agreeable as it is falſe, animates all nature:
He died in 1672. J
Godefroi, (Theodorus) was the ſon of Diony-
ſius Godefroi, a Pariſian. He was born at Gene-
va in 1580, and was a man of learning. He was
hiſtoriographer of France under Lewis XIII. andi
XIV. He applied himſelf particularly to titles
and ceremonies. He died in 1649. © c
Godefroi, (Dyonyſius) his ſon, was born at Pa
ris in 1615. He was hiſtoriographer of France at
well as his father. He died in 1681, |
Gombarville, (Marin) was born at Paris in 1600.8
He was one of the firſt Academicians. He was the
author of ſome very long romances before good ln.
taſte prevailed. He died in 1674. ;
Condi, (John Francis) cardinal de Retz, was born
in 1613, and in his youth lived like Catiline, and
like Atticus in his old age Several parts of hight
memoirs are worthy of Salluſt; but the whole i ©
not equal. He died in 1679.

LEWIS MV. 30 t

Gourville, was valet de chambre to the Duke de
k Roche foucault, became his. friend, and even a
fiend of the great Condes. He was hanged in
efigy at Paris, and at the ſame time ſeat ambaſſa-
dor by the King into Germany. He was after-
wards propoſed as a ſucceſſor to the great Colbert
in his miniſtry. He has written memoirs of his
life, which are plain and artleſs, and wherein he
peaks of his birth and fortune with indifference,

Le Grand, (Joachim) was born in Normandy in
1653. He was a pupil of father le Cointe, He was
noſt profoundly read in hiſtory, He died in 1 7 32.

Guerret, (Gabriel) was born at Paris in 1641.
He was known in his time by his Parnaſſus reform-
ed, and by the battle of the authors. He had
ome taſte : but his diſcourſe, whether the empire
if eloquence' is ſuperior to that of love, will not
xrove him poſſeſſed of the former. He compoſed
the journal of the palace in conjunction with Blon-
beau: this journal of the palace is a collection of
he arrets of the parliaments of France, wherein
liferent decrees are frequently given in celebrated
auſes. Nothing better ſhews the neceſſity of a re-
2 formation in our laws, than this neceſſity for a
W collection of theſe arrets. He died 1688.

Du Guet, (James Joſeph) was born in Forez in
1649, He was one of the beſt writers among the
haſeniſts. His book upon the education of a
ling, was not compoſed for the King of Sardinia, -
&has been ſaid. He died in 1733.

Du Gue-Trouin, from commander of a priva-
rer became lieutenant- general of the naval forces.
le was one of the greateſt men in his profeſſion,
| Vor. II- Cc

302 THE AGE OF
He bas written ſome memoirs in the ſtile of a ſol.
dier, which are proper — emtinden in his
countrymen,” | a
Du Hamel, (John Baptiſt) of Nerat was
born in 162 4. He was ſecretary to the |
of ſciences. Though a philoſopher he was a good M
divine: but the improvements in philoſophy ſince
his time have diſcredited his works: yet his name
has been preſerved. He died in 1706. =
Count de Hamilton, (Anthony) was born at
Caen. He is the author of ſome excellent poems;
and he is the firſt who wrote romances, with hu-
mour, yet without the burleſque of Scarron. i
Harduin, (John) a-Jeſuit. He had great know -
lege in hiſtory; but his ſentiments were chime ·
rical. :
Henaut, known by the found of Aue en 8
by other pieces. He would have gained great re.
putation, had the three firſt books of his tranſlati-
on of Lucretius, which were loft, been preſerved,
and been equal to what we have of this work. Po
ſterity muſt not confound him with another perſon
of the ſame name, and of ſuperior merit; to who
we are indebted for one of the ſhorteſt and beſt chro-
nological hiſtories of France. This, perhaps, is tn
only manner in which all great hiſtories elde |
be written: for the multiplicity of facts and writing
is become ſo great, that they muſt all neceſſarily
be ſoon reduced to extracts and dictionaries. Bu
it will be difficult to imitate the author of thay
chronological abrigement, by going to the bottom
of ſo many things, and yet appear only to tou
flighly upon them. |
D'Herbelot, (Bartholomew) was born at Paris iq

SR OE PH = 2 Fr-

£-

32

*
-

-

8 2

3248s +

32 323

=

LEWIS XIV. 393

162 5 : he was the firſt among the French who une
derſtood the oriental languages and hiſtory :- he
was at firſt but little regarded in his own country:
he was received by Ferdinand the ſecond, Duke of
Tuſcany, with a diſtinftion which taught France
to know his merit: he was afterwards recalled and
encouraged by Colbert, who encouraged every
ting : his Oriental Library is CN? LAM
profound: he died in 169 5.

Hermant, (Godfrey) was born at Beauvais in
1617 : his works are merely polemical,. and have
ſunk into oblivion with the diſputes which produc-
ed them: he died in 1690.

Le Hire, (Philip) was born at Paris i in 1 1641 : :
he was the ſon of a good painter, was a great ma-
thematician, and greatly contributed to the famous
French meridian : he died in 1718.

L'Hopital, (Francis Marquis de) was born in
1662 : he was the firſt who wrote in France upon
Sir Iſaac Newton's calculations, which he called les
infiniment petits: this was then regarded as a pro-
py: he died in 1704.

D'Hoſier, (Peter) was born at Marſeilles in 1 1592: :
he was the fon of a lawyer: he was the firſt who
regulated genealogies, and formed them into a ſci-
ence, Lewis XIII. made him Maitre d'Hotel, and
gentleman in ordinary of his chamber. Lewis XIV.
made him a counſellor of ſtate. True great men
have frequently leſs recompenſed. Their
lbours were not ſo neceſſary to human vanity : he
lied in 1 660,

Des Houlieres, (Antoinetta de la Garde) of all
Ge French ladies who have ſtudied poetry. ſhe has
C e 2

304 THE AGE OF
ſucceeded the beſt, for her verſes ſtill continue to be
more read than any other of her ſex the died | in
1694.

'+ Huet, (Peter Daniel) was | born at Caen in 1 630
be was a man of univerſal learning, and preſerved
his love for ſtudy to the age of ninety one: he
was ſent for to Stockholm by Queen Chriſtina:
he was'afterwards one of thoſe illuſtrious men who
contributed to the education of the Dauphin. No
prince ever had ſuch maſters. Huet entered into
prieits orders at the age of forty ; and had the Bi-
ſhopric of Avranche, which he afterwards abdicat-
ed to apply himſelf entirely to his ſtudies in retire- M
ment. Of all his works, thoſe upon The commerce
and ;;auigation of the ancients, and upon the origin
of romances, are of the greateſt uſe : his Treatiſe
apan the weahkneſs of the human underſtanding, bas
made a great noife, and has been thought by ſome
to contradict his Evangelical demonſtration : he on
ed in 1721.

Jacquelot, fazc) was born in Champagne in W
I 1 he was a Calviniſt, and was a paſtor at the
Hague and at Berlin: he is the author of ſome i
pieces upon religion: he died in 1708.

Joli, (Gui) counſellor of the Chatelet, and ſe- |
cretary to Cardinal Mazarin, is the author of ſome I
memoirs, which compared with thoſe written by W
the Cardinal, are what the domeſtic is compared
with his maſter ; yet there are ſome curious thing :
in them. |

De IIIſle, cWilliam) w was born at Paris in 1675: W
he reformed geography, which will long have occali-
on to be improved. It was he who changed the
whole poſition of our hemiſphere with regard to

LEWIS XIV. - 30

longitude: he taught geography to Lewis XV, and
never had a better pupil. This monarch, after his
maſter's death, wrote a treatiſe upon the courſes of
rivers. William de IIſle was the firſt who had the
title of principal geographer to the king: he died
in 172 6. |

L'abbe, (Philip) was born at Bourges i in 160 7: he
was a Jeſuit : he has done great ſervice to kiſtory,
and is the author of ſeventy ſix different works:
he died in 1667. i

Le Laboureur, (John) was born at Montmoren-
ey in 162 3: he has contributed greatly to enlight-
en hiſtory. It is pity he is the author of the po-
em upon Charlemagne : he died in 167 5.

Laine, or Lainez, (Alexander) was born in
Hainault in 1650: his poetry is ſingular, ſome of
tis lines are very happy, but theſe are not nume-
tous: he died in 1710.

Lambert, (Anne Thereſa de Marguenat de Cour-
«les, Marchioneſs de) was born in 1647: ſhe was
a lady of great wit, and has written ſome pieces
pon moral ſubjects, which are very uſeful, and
the ſtile of them agreeable : her treatiſe upon
ſiendſhip ſhews ſhe deſerved to have friends. The
number of ladies who adorned this illuſtrious age,
k one of the greateſt proofs of the progreſs of the
human underſtanding.

Le donne fon venute in eccellenza, _
Di ciaſcun' arte ave hanno poſto cura. Axkiosr.

dbe died at Paris in 1733.
Lami (Bernard) was born at Mons in 1640: he
C 3

306 THE AGE OF |

was of the Oratory : he was learned in many things:
he compoſed his elements of Mathematics on 8
journey, which he performed on oy from Gre-
noble to Paris > he died in 1715. |
Lancelot (Claudins) was born it Paris in der :
he was concerned in ſome very uſeful works, ohh
were undertaken by the recluſes'of Port-Royal, for
the education of youth: he died in 269.
De Larrey (Iſaac) was born in Normandy in
1638: his hiſtory of England was eſteemed before
the publication of Rapin's ; but his hiſtory of Lew-
is XIV. never was: he died at Berlin in 171g,
Launai (Francis) was born at Angers in 1612 :
he ſtudied the law, and was a man of learning : W
he was the firſt who taught the French law at Pa-
ris: he died in 169 3. |
Launoy HJohaq was born at Normandy in 1609:
he was a doctor of divinity : he was a man of leatn-
ing, indefatigable, and an intrepid critic: be ex-
ploded ſeveral errors, particularly concerning the
faints, whoſe exiſtence he denied. We may judge
whether he was likely to have enemies. A curate
of Saint Roch is known to have ſaid theſe words: WM
1 ahuays male profeund obeiſancr to him, for fear
he ſhould deprive me of my Saint * he died WI
in 1678,
Lauriere (Euſebins) was born at Paris in 1659:
he was a lawyer. No one ever gained a greater
knowlege in jurifprudence and the origin of laws:W
he drew up the plan for the collection of the ordi ·
nances; which is an immenſe work, and diſuin-
guiſhes the reign of Lewis XV: he died in 1728,
Lemery (Nicholas) was born at Rouen in 1645:
he was the firſt reaſonable Chymiſt,and the firſt who

gave 2 univerſal Pharmacopoeia : he died in 715.
Lenfant (James) was born in Beauſſe in 1661:
he was a Calviniſt : his hiſtory of the council of
Conſtance is his beſt work: he died at Berlin in 272 8.

Des Lions (John) was born at Pontciſe in 16151

he was a doctor of the Sorbonne, an extraordinary
man, and the author of ſeveral polemical pieces:
he endeavoured to prove that the rejoicings at the
feaſt of kings are profanations, and that the world
would ſoon be at an end: he died in 1700. |

Le Long (James) was born at Paris in 1655
he was of the Oratory: His hiſtorical library of
France, if we except ſome errors, is a very curious
and uſeful work: he died in 1721. |
De Longuerue (Lewis du Four) was bora at Char-
leville in 1652 : he was Abbe of Jard. Beſides the
learned languages, he underſtood all thoſe of Eu-
rope and univerſal hiſtory. It is ſaid, that he
compoſed from his memory the hiſtorical and geo-
graphical deſcription of France antient and modern:
he died about the year 172 4.

Longueval (James) was born in $681 : he was
a Jefuit : he has written eight volumes upon the
hiſtory of the Gallican church, which have been
continued by father Fontenay : he died in 1735.

De la Loubere (Simon) was born at Toulouſe
in 1643, and was ſent to Siam in 1687, We have
memoirs of this country written by him, which are
better than his ſonnets and odes : he died in 2729.
Madillon (John) was born in Champagne in
1632 : he was a Benedictine. It was he, who,
deing appointed to ſhew the treaſury of Saint Den-
nis, aſked leave to reſign that employ, becauſe he
could not bear to tell fabulous Rories with real

38 THE AGE OF.
truths: he has made ſome profound enquiries,
Colbert employed him in enn antient titles:
we in 1707.
Maignan (Emanuel) was- boen at Toulouſe in
wy he was a Religious of the Minime order: he
| was one of thoſe who learned mathematics without
a a maſter : he was profeſſor of mathematics atRomie,
where there has always ſince been a French mathe-
matical tank he died. at Tou-
louſe in 1676.
_ -  Malebranche (Nicholas) was ; born at ; Paris 1 in
1638: he was one of the Oratory : he was one of
the moſt profound thinkers that ever wrote. Being
animated with that ſtrength of imagination, which
gains more proſelytes than truth, he had ſeveral, in
dis time, who were called Malebranchiſts : he has
moſt admirably demonſtrated the errors of the ſenſes
and the imagination; but when he attempted to
diſcover the nature of the ſoul, he loſt himſelf in
an abyſs, as others had.done before him. Like Des
Cartes, he was a great man, from whom, never.
theleſs, very little is to be learned: he died in 271 5.
Malezieux (Nicholas) was born at Paris in 12650.
The Duke of Burgundy's elements of geometry
are the leſſons which he gave that prince: he gain-
ed reputation by his profound learning. The Du-
cheſs of Maine made his fortune: he died in 1727.
De Marca (Peter) was born in 1594: being a
' widower and having ſeveral children, he embraced
an eccleſiaſtical life, and was preſented to the arch-
; biſhopric of Paris: his book zpor the unity betwixt
church and ſtate is eſteemed: he died in 16 62.
De Maroles (Michael) was born in Touraine in
2000: he was the ſon of the celebrated Claudius

LEWIS MV. 309
de Maroles, captain of the hundred Switzers, well
known by his combat with Marivaux at the head
of the army of Henry IV. Michael, Abbe of Vit
leloin, compoſed 69 works, ſeveral of which were
tranſlations, and uſeful in their time: he died in
1681.
Marſolliers (James) was n at Paris i in 16 35 :
he was a regular canon of Saint Genevieve; and is
known by ſeveral hiſtories, which are well written ;
he died in 172 4.

Martignac (Stephen) was bed in 1628: he-was
the firſt who gave a tolerable proſe tranſlation of
Virgil, Horace, etc. . I queſtion whether it is poſ-
ible to tranſlate them well into verſe. To render
them with equal ſpirit would not be ſuificient. The
difference of the two languages is an obſtacle,
which is almoſt unſurmountable: he died in 169 8.
La Marre (Nicholas) was born at Paris in 1647:
he was commiſſary of the Chatelet :- he is the au-
thor of a work, which was proper to one in his
ſtation : this was, the hiſtory. of the Police. But
it is uſeful only to the Pariſians, and more proper
to conſult than to read. As a recompenſe for this
work, he had a ſhare in the profits ariſing from the
theatre, which, however, he never enjoyed: it
would have been juſt to as much purpoſe to have
aligned a penſion to the comedians to be e out
of the wages of the watch.

Maſcaron (Julius) of Marſeilles, was bonn i in
1634: he was biſhop of Tulles, and afterwards
of Agen: his | funeral orations, at firſt, were
tought to equal thoſe of Boſſuet; but now they
only ſerve to ſhew what a way man Boſſuet was :
te died in 170-3. we '

Q tw UW O06 v3 = Www Wy FR =

-
*

r SE. I EEdCA

SS

ra
I

1 |
THE AGE OF

_ Maſkilon, was born in Provence in 2663 1 he
was. of the Oratory, and biſhop of Clermont: he
was a preacher, who knew the world better than
molt men: be was more flowery than Bourdaloue,
and more agreeable ; and his eloquence at ones
. ſhewed a man of ſenſe, of the court, and of the
academy: he was 2 man of '2 philoſophical turn,
was moderate in his opinions, Ain
tion: he died in 1742.

Maucroix (Francis) was born at Noyen in ito
he was an hiftorian, a poet, and a man of learning.
Menage (Giles) of Angers, was born in 1613
he has ſhewn that it is eaſter to write verſes in Ita-
han than in French : his Italian poetry is eſteemed
even in Italy, and our language is greatly indebted to
bim: he was learned in many things: be died in 1692.
Mienetrier (Chudius Francis) was born in 16317
he has contributed greatly to the ſcience of heraldry,
emblems and devices; he dicd in 170 5. I

Meri (John) was born in Berry in 1645 he d
ſtinguiſhed himſelf in furgery ; and is the. author
of fome uſeful obſervations : be died in 1722.
Mezeray (Francis) was born at Argentan in Nor-
mandy in 1610: his hiſtory of France is well
known: his other writings not ſo much: he loſt
his falary for having faid what he believed to be
truth: be is leſs accurate than bold in his aſſernons,
and his ſtile is unequal: he died in 1683, g
De Moine (Peter) a Jeſuit, was born in 1602:
his Devotion aiſee rendered him ridiculous. But be
might have become a great man by his Loniftade:
be had a prodigious imagination. What could be
the reaſon, then, that he did not ſucceed ? it was
becauſe he wanted taſte, did not underſtand the

a P ahot a a a ano aa. d

=>

«a 0-2

LEWIS Uv. 217

genius of the language, and wanted friends who
would tell hirn the truthe he died in 1671
Mobiere (john Baptiſt) was born at Paris in 1620
he was the beſt comic poet that ever hved in any
gation, The difficulty which happened concerning
his interment is a reproach to France. This article
engaged us in 2 review of the ancient comic. poets.
And it oauſt be confeſſed, that if we compare the
xt and regularity of our theatre with the irvegu-
lr ſcenes of the antients, their weak intrigues,
the ſtrange practioe of declaring by aRtors, in cold
and unnatural monodies, what they had done, and
what they would do; it muſt be confeſſed, I fay,
that Moliere retrieved Comedy out of chaos, as
Corneille had Tragedy; and that the French have
den ſuperior is aufe to. apr Ig
earth: he died in 167 3.

Mongaut, Preceptor to the Dube of Orleans
ſon of the Regent: his tranſlation of Cicero's e-
piſtles, and his notes upon than, 258 in great
eſteem.

La Meanelectzend) ung nem fn 26400 he
was a man of great learning: he died in 27 32.
Montfaucon (Bernard) was born in 1655: be
was a Benedictine, and one of the moſt learned
antiquarians in Europe: he died in 1741.
Montpenfier (Anne Maria Louiſa d Orleans)
known by the name of Madamaiſelle, daughter of
Gaſton d'Ovieans, was born at Paris in 1627: her
memoirs are rather thoſe of a woman, full of her-
lf, than of one who was 2 witneſs of the affairs
of Europe; but many curious particulars are con ·
tained in them: ſhe died in 1 69 3.

Moreri (Lewis) was born in Provence in 1643.

F CCS.

9:
g.

—
5

SB SAY

9

: *

ſ
312 THE AGE OUT
It was not expected, that the author of the Pais
Famour, and the tranſlator of Noderiques, would
in bis youth undertake the firſt dictionary of ' fats
that ever appeared. This great work coſt him his
life. The work, which is now corrected and great -
ly augmented, ſtill bears his name, though he can
ſcarce now be conſidered as the author of it. It is
a' new city built upon an old plan. Too many
doubtful genealogies have injured this uſeful works
he died in 1680,

Morin (Michael John Baptiſt) was born in Beau.
jolois in 1583: he was a phyſician, a mathemati-
cian, and from the prejudices of the times an a.
ſtrologer ; he caſt the nativity of Lewis XIV. Yet;
notwithſtanding theſe ridiculous e be was
a man of learning. |

Morin (John) was born at Blois i in 15915 he
was a great critic, and had great knowlege of the
oriental languages: he died at the Oratory in 1659.

Morin (Simon) was born in Normandy in 162 3:
he is mentioned here only to deplore his fatal fol-
ly, and that of Saint Sorlin Deſmarets his accuſer.
Saint Sorlin was a Fanatic, and accuſed another of
being ſo. Morin, who ſhould only have been ſent
to Bedlam was buried alive in 1663, before philo-
ſophy had made a ſufficient progreſs to prevent
men of learning from being ann Judges

from being ſo cruel.
La Motte-Houdart (Anthony) was born at Paris

in 1672 : he was celebrated for his works, and a-
miable for his manners: he had many friends; that
is to ſay, many perſons were pleaſed with his con-
verſation. But I ſaw him die in 1731 not 2
ſingle friend attended his *

BFE.

Aer

* YL 8-0:

2

A7

|
|
|

LEWIS NV. 313

De Motteville (Frances Bertaut) was born in
Normandy in 161 Ff. This lady is the author of
ſome Memoirs, which particularly concerned queen
Anne the mother of Lewis XIV. Many little facts
are contained in them, which are related with great
appearance of ſincerity. She died in 1669t..
Le Nain de Tillemont (Sebaſtian) ſon of John
le Nain, maſter of requeſts, was born at Paris in
1637. He was the pupil of Nichole, and was one
of the moſt learned writers of Port-Royal. His hi-
ſtory of the emperors, and his ſixteen. volumes of
eccleſiaſtical hiſtory, are written with as much truth
as compilations from ancient authors can be. But
biſtory, before the invention of printing, being fel-
dom contradicted, was very Inaccurate, He died in
1698.

Naude, (Gabriel) was born at Paris in 1 600;
He was a phyſician, but a better philoſopher. He
was firſt attached to cardinal Barberini, at Rome,
afterwards to cardinal Richelieu, then to Mazarin,
and at laſt to queen Chriſtina, of whoſe learned
court he for ſome time made one. He finally re-
tired to Abbeville, where he died as ſoon as he en-

| joyed perfect independence. Of all his works, bis

Apslogy for the great men accuſed of magic, is al-
moſt the only one now regarded. A larger work
than this might be compoſed upon the great men
accuſed of impiety, ſince the days of Socrates,

vd | | R |
Populus nam ſolos credit habendas
Eſſe deos ques * colit. 5

He ain in 1653. |
Vor. II. D d

313 THE 46 E Or

Nemours, (Mary de Longueville Ducheſs of )
was born in 1625. She is the author of ſome
memoirs, which contain. ſome particulars of the
unhappy times of the Fronde. She died in 170.
Nevers (Philip duke of) wrote ſeveral pieces of
poetry in a very ſingular taſte: his genius and ta-
tents rn
He died in 1907.

Niceron, (John Peter) af chr vrminty; .
at Paris in 168 5. He wrote Memoirs of perſons
illuſtrious in literature : all learned men are not
illuſtrious; but he ſpeaks of each with propriety,
and does not call a goldſmich a great man, He de-
ſerves to be ranked among thoſe men of learning
who have been uſeful. He died in 1738. |

Nicole, (Father) was born at Chartres in 1 62 5,
He was one of the beſt writers in Port-Royal. His
writings againſt the-Jeſuits are now but little read;
but his Moral Eſſays, which are of uſe to mankind,
will never periſh. In particular the chapter upon the
means of preſerving peace in ſociety is a maſter piece,
which cannot be equalled by any thing on the fame W
ſubject in all antiquity. - But this peace is perhaps
as difficult e ;
Peter. He died in 169 5. v4 *

D'Orleans, (Joſeph) a Jeſuit, He. was the firſt |
en ee ee for the ſubjects of his hiſtories.
Theſe of England by him are written in an eloquent
ſtyle, But to the reign of Henry VIII. it is rather
fine writing than a juſt relation, He died in 1698.

Ozanam, (James) a Jew by birth, was born near
Dombes in 1640. He learnt geometry without a
maſter at the age of fifteen, He was the firſ*-who B
compiled a Mathematscal dictionary. His Mathe-

F PR CSIC EDS in IGST ES. i

„ £ 3

E

rn
2
10t
ty,
de-
ng

.
75
x
7
5
3
-
&

4
5
4 1
:
:
8

S Fe

„ LEST MOTT”

r

N

LEWIS VV. 4315

matical recreations have ter elteemed. He
died in 1717.

Pagi, (Anthony) dahin bann in 162 4.
He was a Franciſcan. He corrected Baronius, and
ee eee He
died in 1699.

Papin, (Iſaac) was hern at Blois in 14. He
was a Calviniſt; but afterwards changing this per-
ſuaſion, he wrote againſt it. He died in 1709.

Pardies, (Ignatius Gaſton) a Jeſuit, was born at
Po in 1638, He made himſelf known by his Ele-
ments of Geometry, and by his book upon the Souls
of beaſts. He died in 167 3.

Parent, (Anthony) was born at Paris in 1666.
He was a good mathematician. He was another of
thoſe who learnt geometry without a maſter. What
is moſt remarkable in him is, that he lived happily
along time at Paris upon leſs than ten POUNGs a year.
He died in 1716. |

Paſcal, (Blaiſe) ſon of the firſt intendant. eſta-
bliſhed at Rouen, was born in 162 3. He was a man
of a forward genius, the ſuperiority of which he was
for uſing as kings uſe their power, by ſubyecting
every thing to its force. Language and eloquence
are greatly indebted to him. He died in 1662.

Patin, (Guy) was born at Houdan in 1601, He
was a phyſician, but was leſs celebrated for his {kill
in phyſic, than for his letters which were read with
eagerneſs, becauſe they contained new anecdotes of
ſuch things as every body loves, and ſatires which
are liked ſtill more. He ſerves to ſhew what uncer-
tain guides in hiſtory thoſe writers are who incog-
liderately write down the news of the day. Such

TAY D d 2 7210 1 5

3656 THE AGE OF
relations are frequently falſe, or perverted by the
malignity of mankind; and ſuch a multitude of
petty facts are ſeldom conſidered as valuable _ by
little minds. He died in 1672
Patin; (Charles) was born at Paris in 1 6555 He
was the ſon of Guy Patin. His works are read by
men of learning, as bis father's letters are by men
of leiſure. Charles Patin, who was a very great
antiquary, quitted n and died nn = phy:

10 at Padua, i in 169 3.

Patru (Oliver) was barn at Paris in our! He
was the firſt who introduced correctneſs of language
in pleadings at the bar. In his laſt ſickneſs he re-
ceived a gratuity from Lewis XIV. who was told
that n „
1681. Nisan

Pavillon, (Stephen) e bee at paris in 8
He was Wwe der of the parliament of Metz,
and diſtinguiſhed himſelf by ſome poetical pieces
which are natural: he died in 1705, |

Pelifſon Fontanier, (Paul) was born at Beziers in

162 4: he was an indifferent poet, but was a man of
great eloquenee and learning, and was firſt clerk to
the ſuperintendant Fouquet; after which he was
maſter of accounts, and maſter of requeſts, and was
appointed to employ the revenue of the oeconomates
to make the Hugonets quit their religion, which he
bad quittedhimſelf. He is the author of many pieces
among which are prayers for the time of mals, a
treatiſe upon the euchariſt, a collection of pieces of
gallantry, ete. But what gained him the greateſt ho-
nour, are his diſcourſe for Fouquet, and his hiſtory
of the conqueſt of Franche-Comte. The proteſ-

ants have pretended- that he died with ſeeming in-

*

po ws we — mM AS mac TT; ĩ a F=.

BE = > & S I «@ ©@4

LEWIS XIV. 0

difference in regard to religion: but the catholles
have affirmed the contraty: he died in 169 3.
Perrault, (Claudius) was born at Paris in 1613.
He was a phyſician; but he practiſed only among
his friends. He, without a. maſter, gained his (kill
in all thoſe arts which relate to deſigning and me-

chanics. He was a good phyſician, and a great ar-
chitect. He encouraged the arts under the pro-
tection of Colbert, and gained reputation NOD
ſtanding Boileau: he died in 1688.
Perrault, (Charles) was born in 162 6. He was .
the brother of Claudius. He was comptroller- ge-
neral of the buildings under Colbert, and formed the
academies of paimtivg, ſculptuxe and architecture.
He was uſeful. to men of letters, who ſhewed a
reſpect for him during the life-time of his protectoß,
but abandoned him after his death. He bas been!
proached with having found too many faults
the ancienis; but his great fault was the having cri-
ticiled them injudiciouſſy. e died in 70 3.

Petau, (Dennis) was born at Orleans in 158 f.
He was a Jeſuit. He has corrected chronology; He
E exeatn emo ens *
in 1652

Petis de la Croix, (Francis), was, one. of thaſs
whoſe merit was, encouraged. and rewarded by the
great miniſter Colbert. Læwis XIV. ſent him into
Turky and Perſia at the age oſ ſixteen to learn the
oriental languages. Who would imagine that he
vrote part of the life of Lewis XIV. in Arabic, and
that this work is eſteemed in the Eaſt? he wrote
he hiſtory; of Gengiſlan and Tamerlane, compiled
tom ancient Arabian writers. — .

detitrü ff. n ens

that jt is eafjer to write verſes in Lada un n

3 IE 40 ꝙο
of ſeveral other uſeful works, but his trauſiattom of
the Mite er in feu, n u mn i OE Pal
N ni ad ire ar winnen Ms 4s 3
I Bemme oft ds Oder bur berms | |
Singh pt! e 1 ne A _

DM 11 ES: 267) (8 lv - 4 11 . | 14

. ng yrs
Put falihood's*chaftis thee" paffiots" always fire.
rr eee |
he died in 1713. n e e 1s Þ
Petit (peter) dur deen ur Paris in 1617 e
» philoſopher and aan of learning He wrote ohly BY *
in” Latin.” He died in 1687. 1 D ent |
1

perton (Phu) of thi order of Citezux, was born
in Bretagne in 1639. He was a great antiquitry, ind
woes indefarigable in tracing the origin of the lin.
Loh — Goths: he died in 1706. e :
Da Pitt (Louie) was born fr? 1 637. He walk BY |
doctor ef $6tbormne, His Ibrary of ecdefiaſtica BY «
writers has gained Him wer ref neten iind fowe 8
0

f

Deines. He died n 1711.

La Placette (John) of Bearn, ee 76
Be was & proteſtant miniſter at Copetihagen and in
Holland. He was eſteemed for 1 He ©
ted at Utrecht in 15 4. SS

De Potignae (Melchoit) Cardinal, en
walay in 1662. He was as good a Latin poet 8
ean be in a dead language, and was very eloquent
in his own. He was one of many who bave en

French: he died in 1741. |
Poree (Charles) was bern in Normaady hi bg.
He was a jefuit, and was onè of thoſe ſew proſtſors
who have been celebrated ng perſons of quality.

IE WIS NM 319

—ü—ü— dame was'k
port, and a mh of great wit. His greareſt most
r
his diſciples i he died ĩn 174.

De Puy Segur dacht be ha geen us the
art of war, as Bolleau las that of poetry.

| Quenah(Paqeimbawanbaiy ils —
of the oratury. He was unfortunate in being the
ſubjett of a great diviſion between his countrymen.
were ſevere, a5 ure thoſe of all O are engaged
only in enn The changing and ſokening of
xy eee, bur he would then hve
been leſs celebrated: he died in 1719. =;
— — NS was
a Dottiſnican, and a man of great learning. He ap-
phed hinaſclf greatly 10 che ſtudy. of the Eaſtern
churches, and that of England. He in- particular
wrote againſt Courayer upon ihe validity of che
ordinations of che Engliſh biſhops. But the Engliſh
pay ne. more regard to theſe 'diſpures>rhun the
Turks do to the. difſertations upon the Seen
church 2 he died in 1703.

Quinaut (Philip) was born at Paris in 8
He was audnor of accounts, and Was celebrated
for his lyric poetry und for the 'mildneſs with
which he oppoſed the moſt unjuſt ſatires of Boi.
kau, He bad a ſhare, with the other great men, of
the rewards en by Leet Alf be ed"
1088,

La Quintinie (John) was dorn at Poldiers in
1626. He improved the art of gardening and
ranſphaning weg. His procepts have deen fol-

320 THE AGE Or
lowed by all Europe, and his abilities were mag

The marquis de Quincy, was

of the artillery, and author iof the military hiſtory ;
of Lewis XIV, wherein. he enters into very long
details, which are of uſe to thoſe who in their

reading purſue all the operations of | a campaign.

Theſe details might ſerve for examples, provided
parallel caſes were drawn: but ſuch are never found,
neither in war nor other affairs. The reſemblance

is always imperfect, and the difference conſtantly

hn of hazard. fi id £1 ; 0043142490, el 11924

Racine (John) was born at la Ferte-Milon in |;
. and educated at Port- royal. He ſtill wore :

the eecleſiaſtical habit, when he wrote the tragety

oſ Theagenes, which he preſented ta Moliere, and

that of the Freres ennemis, the ſubject of which
was given him by Moliere. In the privilege of the

Andromac ha he is ſtyled Prior de l'Epinai. Levis
XIV. was ſenſible of his great merit, made him one
of the gentlemen in ordinary, named him ſometimes

to make the journies to Marly, made him lye in his
nber in one of his illneſſes, and doaded him wih

favours. Nevertheleſs Racine died of chagrin, or
of the dread which he felt for having diſpleaſed him.

He was a greater poet than philoſopher. It was long 5
before petfect juſtice was done to him. We have i
been affected, ſays Saint - Evremont, by Mariam,

by Sopbenisba, by Alcionee; by Hudromacha, and by

Britannicus. Thus it was common not only to

compare the wretched Saphonisba of Corneille,

Haently: rewarded by Lewis XI Vx be died in 11699;

games which depend upon art: they are learnt on-
I by long practice: and days of action are always

Ss TB ETF JAA

W of a nation wherein few write without being actu-
Y 4 by the ſpirit of party: be died ar Weſel in

S8SASARFRSEFIRERBEESH =

*

LEWIS MV. I

but even thoſe impertinent pieces Arionee and Na-
riamne, with theſe immortal maſter · pieces of Racine.
During the lives of celebrated artiſts droſs is mixed
with their gold, and the * is . by dealt:
he died in 1699.

Rance (John de Bouthillier) was vob in 162 6.

F His firſt work was a tranflation of Anacreon, and

he inſtituted the dreaded"reformation de la Trappe

n 1664, He, as a legiſlator, diſpenſed with the
u, which obliges thoſe who live in this retirement,
oo de ignorant of what paſſes in the world. He
vrote with eloquence: he died in 1700.

Rapin (Rene) was born at Tours in 1621. He

N a Jeſuit; and was known by his poem upon
W gardens in Latin, and by _ other merry —
be died in 1687.

Rapin de Thoiras (Paul) Was ;iborw at Caſtres in
1661. He was a refugee in England, and ſerved
long in the armies as an officer. England is indebted
to him for the beſt hiſtory of that kingdom that
has yet appeared, and the only one that is impartial,

1725.
Regis (Silvan) was born at A 008 in 1632.

; His philoſophical works have been diſregarded, in
WJ conſequence of the great diſcoveries which have
7 lnce been made: he died in 1707. |

Regnard (Francis) was born at Paris in 1647.

x fe had been famous for his voyages. He was the
WJ it Frenchman that went into Lapland. He cut

the following line upon a rock: Si/timus hic tan-
Gem nobis ubi defkit orbit. He was taken in the
la of Provence by the Barbary Corſairs, made a

9a THE AGE Of

flave at Algiers, was ranſomed, and was made trea.
ſurer of France, and lieutenant of the waters ang
foreſts. He lived like a philoſopher and a voluptu.
ary. He was born with a genius that was lively, W
gay, and truly comic. His comedy of the Gameſter
is compared with thoſe of Moliere. Thoſe who
imagine he ſtole this piece from Dufreni muſt be
very little acquainted with the talent and genius of

authors. He dedicated the comedy called Menechnies WY
to Deſpreaux, and afterwards wrote againſt him,
becauſe that poet did not do him juſtice. This man,
though of ſuch gaiety of humour, died of chagrin
in the 52d year of bis age. It is even ſaid that he
contributed — UNION n n
1699.

Regier Deſmarets (Seraphin) was born be ban
in 1632, He has done great fervice to language,
und is the author of ſome poetry in French and
Italian. He made one of his Italian pieces paſs for
Petrarch's, But he could not have made his French
verſes paſs for thoſe of any great French poet: iry
died in 1713.

 Renandot (Theophraſtus) was a phyſician, and af
man of great learning in many things, He
c he 80 ins
I 679,

Renaudot (Euſebius) was born in 1 646, He
very learned in the Oriental hiſtory and languages.
He may be reproached with having prevented Bayle's 1
dictionary from being printed in France: he died it
1720.

Richelet (Caeſar Peter) was the firſt who nf
ed a dictionary almoſt entirely ſatirical: his 14
is more dangerous than uſeful.

e ee near elt

re

Pas.

IL. E WIS NV. 323
Du Rier (Peter) was born at Paris in 1 60 .
ne was ſecretary to the king and hiftoriographer
Jof France: but he was poor notwithſtanding his
WJ places. He is the author of nineteen dramatic, pieces
ind thirteen tranſlations, which were all well re ·
ceived in his time: he died 1658.
La Rochefoucault — dey ens dern
in 1613. His memoirs are ſtill read, andhis m
ims are known by heart, He died in 1 680.

S JFK

fr Fx Gen

S

*

Rohaut (James) was born in Amiens in 1620.”
an, WY He abriged and explained the philoſophy of Deſ-
rin WY <ortes with clearneſs and method. But this philo-

ſophy, which was erroneous almoſt in every thing,
has now no other merit than that of having cor-
rected the errors of the ancients. He died in 1675.
Rollin (Charles) was born at Paris in 1661.
He was rector of the univerſity, and the firſt of
that body who wrote French with correctneſs and
dignity. Though the laſt volumes of his ancient
hiſtory, which are written in too great a hurry are
not equal to the firſt; it is nevertheleſs the beſt com-
WJ pilacion that has yet appeared in any language, be-
aauſe it is ſeldom that compilers are eloquent, and
Rollin was remarkably ſo. He died in 1741.
Y KRotrou (John) was born in 1609. He was the
By founder of the theatre. The firſt ſcene and part of
SY the fourth act of Venceſlas are excellent. Cor-
beille called him his father. Every one knows how
greatly the ſon ſurpaſſed the father. Venceſlas was
not written till after the id. He died in 1 650,
Rouſſeau (John Baptiſt) was born at Paris in
1669. Some very good verſes, great faulte, and
long misfortunes, rendered him very famous. Thoſe
couplets which were the cauſe of his baniſhment,

. $_
*
pos: WE -
ere nn b // Ear

324 THE AGE Of

and which are like ſeveral which he owned, muſt
either be imputed to him, or the two tribunals
which pronounced ſentence upon him muſt be di-
ſhonvured. Not that two tribunals, and even more
numerous bodies may not unanimouſly commit
very great acts of injuſtice, when the ſpirit of
party prevails. There was a very, violent party W
againſt Rouſſeau. Few, men have excited and felt
the effects of hatred ſo much. He died, overwhelmed
with misfortunes, at Bruſſels, in 1 7 40. | J
De la Rue (Charles) was born in 1643. He was
a Jeſuit, a poet both in Latin and French, and a
preacher. He was one of thoſe who had the care
of the editions of the claſſics known under the name
of the Dauphins, for the education of Monſeigneur, 1
Virgil was publiſhed by him. He died in 1725.
De la Sabliere (Anthony, de Rambouillet) his W
Madrigals are yyritten with delicacy, without ex-
cluding what is natural. He died in 1680.
Sacy le Maitre (Lewis Iſaac) was born in 1613,
He was one of the good writers of Port Royal.
He publiſhed Royaumont's Bible, and a tranſlation We
of the comedies of Terence. He died in 1684.
Le Sage, was born in 1667. His, romance of
Gil Blas, ſtill continues to be read, becauſe he has
imitated nature in it. He died in 1747. .
+ Saint Aulaire (Francis Joſeph de Beaupoil mar-
quis de). It is remarkable that his beſt verſes were W
written when he was upwards of ninety years of W
age. He, like the marquis de la Fare, ſcarce wrote
any poetry at all till he was upwards of ſixty. W
Among the firſt which were written by him, the
following lines were attributed to de la Fare,

{LEWES NN 225

9 muſe legere & facile, 5 2
ner e
Fintes offrir au vieil Anacreon' 1, /
Cet art charmant, of art delle
Qui [ai rendre douce & tranguile
La plus incommode ſaiſon ;
Vous qui de tant de fleurs fur le Parnaſſe eoloſes
Orniez a ſes cotes les graces & les i, + |
Et qui cachiez ſes cheveux gris -
Sous tant dc couronnes de roſes, etc.

Muſe, inconſtant, airy, light, | WOT
Who to Helicon's clear ſtreams |
Old Anacreon do'ſt invite,
And inſpire with wanton dreams;
Who with flowers from that fair hill _
Decks the. graces in his eye;
His grey hairs concealing till,
Which under crowns of roles lie, etc.

4 ” was received into the academy for this lens,
ich Boileau alleged as a reaſon why this favour
bould not be granted to him, He died in 1742,
:ged near 100 years, others ſay a hundred and two.
Wen he was upwards of ninety five he once
upped with the ducheſs of Maine, who called him
Apollo, and deſired him to tell her a certain ſecrers:
1 to which he replied: |
4 14 divigite 9. qui 45 N

A me demander mon ſecret,
$i fetais Apollon ne ſerott point ma_mu oe ;

Elle feroit Thetis & le jour finiroit.
Vor. -K. ni 1 Ze llc 841 52

E ann * f
p 2 kay * Cs es RY 1 o FF ö I 2 * * N — "WIE * * d * 7 4 *s * 1 ws

;

ä

326 THE AGE OF

Were I Apollo, O Auneß "fate,
Who deipns err friend,
You ſhould not be my muſe; but 1 Aale
You r the day ſhould ;

Anacreon himſelf, whin Wa was 2 great deal
younger, wrote much worle things, If the Greek i
writers had been equal to our good authors, they Ml
would have been ſtill more vain, and we ſhould MW
now applaud them with {till more reaſon, - :
Sainte - Marthe. This family for more than an y
hundred years has been fruitful in men of letters.
The firſt Gaucher de Sainte- Marthe had a fon :
named Charles, who was remarkable 5 his elo- W
quence. He died in 1555. |
Scevole, the nephew of Charles 3 |
himſelf in learning and bufinefs, He ſubjected
Poitiers to Henry IV. He died at Loudun in
162 3, and his funeral oration. was made by the
famous Vrban Grandier., |
Abel de Sainte-Marthe his ſon appel bimſelr to A
literature, like bis father, and died 1652. His ſon,
named Abel after kim, walked in his erg. He died :
in 17960, :
Scevole and Lewis de Sainte-Marthe were twin-
brothers, and ſons of the firſt Sceugle, They were
both interred at Saint Severin in Pas. in the ſame
grave. They diſfinguifhed "theraſtlves by their
knowlege, and in corzüs chen eompoſed the Ca.
lia Chriffiann. OLE
Dennis de Sainte Marthe bei brach complet: |

ed that work, and died at Paris in 1723.9

*

© 22 929 —— — = ——— - a4 8 — a 1 3 =

od T” Tz

LEWIS NV. .
Peter Scevole de dainte · Marthe; the elder: bro»
wer of the laſt Scevole, was r 3.9 of
France, and died in 1 690.

Saint Pierre (VAdbe de) contributes by his writ-
nge to eſtabliſh the proportional tax. His —
W notions were not always chimerical, - =
= Saint Evremont (Charles) was born in Norman- |
dy in 1613. & voluptuous morality, with ſome 1
W ltters written to perſons at court, at a time when
W the word court was pronounced with emphaſis by
W cvcry body, and ſome very indifferent verſes, which |
were called Society verſes, written in illuſtrious aſ- 1 |
ſemblies; theſe, joined to great wit, contributed to |
the reputation of his works. A perſon, named De/- |
HY 1nizeaux, printed an edition of them, with a life |
of the author, which of itſelf makes a large volume; |
W but it does not contain four pages chat are of con- |
ſequence. It is made up only wich the ſame things |
which are in Saint Evremont's. works. This is a
dookſeller's triek, and an abuſe of editorſhip. By
ſuch arrifices books are multiplied without end,
and without improvement. Saint Evremont's exile;
iis philoſophy, and his works, are well known. Be-
ing aſked at his death, whether he was willing to be
reconciled to his country, he replied} 1 would
gladly be reconciled to my appetite. He is interred
at Weſtminſter among the kings and illuſtrious men
of England, Fe died in 1 3.

Saint Pavin (Dennis Sanguin de) was one of
thoſe men of merit, confounded by Deſpreaux in
his ſatires with bad! writers. The little we have of
his, is eſteemed: for his delicacy and: taſte.” His per-
fora merit may ur- from the following: flap,
75 OBE "x

328 THE AGE OT

written for him, by Fieubet, waſter-of requeſts
and one of the fineſt wits of this ge. |

Sous ce tembeau git Saint · pain:
Donne des larmes a ſa fin.
T1 fus de ſes amis peut - etre?
Pleure ton fort & le ſien.

* | Tu-xen fas pas? pleur le tien

'  Paſſant, d avoir manque den etre.

Beneath this ſtone Saint-Pavin lies;
Deplore his loſs with weeping eyes, d
Wert thou his friend, thou wouldſt, I know;
If not, lament thou wert not ſo. |

He died in 1 670. ;
- Sallo (Dennis) was born in 1 626. He was
- counſellor of the parliament of Paris, and the in-
ventor of journals, which Bayle brought to per-
fection, and which were afterwards diſhonoured by
other journals, which were publiſhed by avaricious Wl
and needy bookſellers, and were written by obſcure W
authors, who filled them with erroneous extracts,
abſurdities and lies. Nothing has been of greater
diſſervice to literature, propagated bad taſte more,
or more confounded truth with falſhood. He died .
in 266g, '
Sandras de Courtils was born -at Montargls in
1644. He is inſerted here to ſhew the French, but
more eſpecially foreigners, how much they ought |
to be upon their guard againſt theſe falſe memoirs
printed in. Holland. Courtils was one of thoſe who
were moſt culpable in this reſpect, - He overſpread
Europe with fictions, under the name of hiſtories.

His ww r ee _o> 3

LEWIS XIV. 329
It was ſhameful, that a captain in the regiment of
Champagne ſhould go into Holland to vend falſe ·
hood to the bookſellers. He and his imitators, who
have written ſo many libels againſt their own coun-
try, againſt good princes, who diſdained to be re-
venged on them, and againſt ſubjects who could

not, have deſerved public contempt and deteſtation.

He compoſed, The conduct of France ſince the peace

N of Nimegen, and the reply to it. The ſtate of France

under Lewts XIII. and XIV. The conduct oy 4
in the wars of Holland. The amorous conqueſts of

Alexander the great. The amorous intrioues of
France, The life of Turenne. That of adore! Co-
ligny. The memnwirs of Rochefort, of Artagnan, of.

4 Monbrun, ' of Vordac, of the marchioneſs du Frene.

The political will of Colbert, and many other works,

; which have amuſed and 4 weak minds. He

died at Paris in 1712.
Sanſon (Nicholas) was born at | Abbeville in
1600, He was the father of geography, before

W Willam de L'Ifle. He died in 1667. His two ſons
inherited his merit.

Santeuil (John Baptiſt) was ny at Paris in
1600, He was an excellent. Latin poet, if there-
an be one; and yet he could not write poetry in

French. His hymns are ſung in the churches, He

died in 169 7.
Sarraſin (John Francis) was born near Caen in
160 5. He has written agreeable things both in
proſe and verſe. He died in 1655.

Saumaiſe (Claudius) was born in Burgundy

in om 0 ole e en Kaen Werne

Ee 3
1 94) gi

4

3 TRE ACE or

liberty « he was mme. for kis learning: be
died in 1 65 3.

0 Seen (Jelept) was bos bt bahhecbe bug 699;
He learned the elements of geometry without a
maſter: he was one of the firſt who calculated the
advantages and diſadvantages of the games of ha-
zard: he affirmed; that whatever one man was
capable of doing in mathematies, any other was

equally capable to do the ſame. But this muſt be

underſtood of thoſe who learn, and not of inven-
tors: he had deen dumb to che age of ſeven ears:
he died in 1:7 16.

Scaron (Paul) fon of a counſellor of the ed
chamber, was born in 1598. His comedies are
rather burleſque than comical. His Virgil truveſtie
is excuſable only in a buffon. His comical ro-
mance is almoſt the only work of his, which ſtill
continues to be liked by perſons of taſte. This
was foretold by Boileau. He died in 1 660.

Scuderi (George de) was born at Havre de

Grace in 1603. Being favoured by cardinal

Richlieu, he, for ſome time, balanced the reputa--

tion of Corneille. His name is better "known

_ © than his works: he died in 166.
Scuderi (Magdalen) the ſiſter of George, was
horn at Havre in 1607. She is now more known I
by ſome pretty verſes which ſhe wrote, than by

her enormous romances of Clella\ and "Cyrus.

Lewis XIV. gave her à penſton, and! received her

in a diſtinguiched manner: ſhe died in 1701.
Segrais (John) was born at Caen in 7 62 5.
Ma damoiſclle calls him, a ſort q a uit, but bt
was, indeed, a very great wit, and a man of real
learning. He was obliged to quit the ſervice of

1E WIG AVL. 35.

or Gee ——
lation of Virgil were eſteemed, hut now they are
not read; ' It is remarkable, that Breboeuf v Phar-
ſalia is till read, while Segraiss Aneid is emirely
neglected. Nevertheleſs Beileau praſſes Segrais ;
and depreeiates Breboeuf : he died in 1270 17.
Seneca, firſt Valet de chambre to Maria The-
reſt, He was a poet of à ſingular imagination.
His tale of Kavmae, ſome few paſſuges excepted,
is a diſtinguiſhed: work. "It is a proof that a tale
may be told in à manner very different from Fon-
tain. It may here be obſerved, ther this piece,
which is the only one good thing written by him,
is the b
works.

Sevigne (Mary de Rabutin) was dove iv r62 6.
Her letters, which are filled with ancedores, writ-
ten with freedom, and in a lively animated (tie;
are an excellent eriticiſm-upen-ſtudied/letrersof wit,
and MII more thoſe Rctitious letters, where-
in it is endeavenred! t6-imitate the epiſtolary ſtile,

by a rebita? of falſe ſentiments and ſeigned ad-

ventures to imaginary 2 3
in 1696.

Simon (Richard) was born in 1638. He was
of the oratory, and was an excellent critic. * His
hiſtory of the riſe and progreſs of eccleſiaſtieaf re-
venues, and his critical hiſtory ef the Old Feſta-
ment, ete. are read by: all men of OT be
died at Dieppe in 1712

Sorbieres (Samuel) e in Dauplüny in
1610. He was one of thoſe who had the title of

Hiſterlegrapher of Frünse: Being a friend of

|
|
|

ie - DUE eder

Pope Clement IX, before his elevation to the pa-
pal dignity, and receiving but poor marks of the
generoſity of this Pontiff, he wrote thus to him:
« Moſt holy father, you ſend ruffles to a man who
« is without a ſhirt.“ He had ſome knowlege in
many ſciences : he died in 1670. |

De la Suze (the Counteſs Henrietta de Coligni)
was celebrated i in her time by her wit and her ele.
gies. She turned Catholic, becauſe her huſband.
was a Huguenot, and at laſt ſeparated from him,
ſaid Queen Chriſtina, that ſhe might never more
fee her huſband neither in this world nor the o-
ther: ſhe died in 167 3.

Tallemant (Francis) was born at Rochelle | in
1620. He was the ſecond tranſlator of Plutarch:
he died in 1693.

Tallemant (Paul) was born at Paris in 3
Though he was grandſon of the rich Monteron,
and ſon of a maſter of requeſts, who had had
two hundred thouſand livres a year of our preſent
money, he remained almoſt without any fortune.
Colbert made ſome proviſion for him, as be did
to other men of letters. He was principally con-
cerned in the hiſtory of the king by e be
died in 1712.

- Talon (Omer) advocate- general of the parlia-
ment of Paris, has left ſome uſeful memoirs, which
are worthy of a good magiſtrate and a good citizen:
he died in 1652.

Tarteron, the Jeſuit. He tranſlated iba ſatires
of Horace, Perſius, and Juvenal; and ſuppreſſed
thoſe groſs obſcenities, with which it is  ſurpril-
mg that Juvenal, and more particularly Horace,
ſhould diſgrace their works. In doing this, be.

LEWIS Av. 333

had a regard to youth, for whoſe uſe he thought
he did them. But his tranſlations are not literal
enough for them: he gives the ſenſe, but not an
equivalent for the words.

Terraſon (the Abbe) was a philoſopher both
in his life and death. There are ſome excellent

things 1 in his Sethas. His tranſlation of Diodorus

is uſeful, but his examination of Homer n

of all taſte: he died 1750.

Thiers, (John Baptiſt) was born at Chartres
in 1641. He is the author of many diſſertations.
It was him who wrote againſt the inſcriptions on
the convent of the cordeliers at Rheims, To God
and Saint Francis, who were both crucified : he
died in 1703,

Thomaſſin, (Lewis) of the Oratory, was born
in Provinde in 1619. He was a man of pro-
found learning, and was the firſt who wrote dia,
logues-upon the fathers, upon councils, and upon
hiſtory. Towards the end of his life he forgot
every thing which he had known, and remember-
ed nothing of what he hed written: he died
in 1695.

Thoynard Nicholas) was hea at Orleans i in

1629. It is ſaid he had a great ſhare in o_—_
nal Norris's treatiſe upon Syrian Epochas. Hi
concordance to the four cvangeliſts in Greek, ys
regarded as a curious work, He was only a man
of learning, but he was p profoundly ſo: be died
in 1706.

Toureil, ( James) was born at Thouloufe in
1656. He was celebrated for his tranſlation of
Demoſthenes : he died in 1715.

Tournefort (Joſeph Pitton de) was born in Pro-

|

a .
It
|
|

— — ——ꝛ-᷑ —— — —

*
— — —  c — —— —

THE AOP or

534

K 1656. He was the greateſt botaniif
his time. He was ſent by Lewis NIV. into

Spain, England, Helhand, Greece, and Afia, to

perfect Natural hiſtory. He brought into France

1336 new ſpecies of plants, and be taught us

the nature of our own: he died in 1708.

Te FTourneaux was born | in 2640. His u.
finn Tear is in the hands of many, although it is
inſerted in the catalogue of prohibited” books at
Rome, and perhaps this is the reafon for Its being
fo : : he died in 1686.

Friſtan PHermite, genfleman to Gaſton or.
leans, the brother of Lewis XIII. The prodigious
and continued ſucceſs of his tragedy of Marianne,
was occaſioned by the ignorance which then pres
vailed, There were no better; aud when the re.
putation of this piece was eſtabliſhed, more than
one tragedy of Corneifte was neceſſary to deftroy
it. There are nations ſtill where very indifferent
pieces are thought excellent, becauſe they have not

deen furpaſſed by any fuperior genius. It is not

generally known that Friſtan verfifiec the office for
the holy Virgin, nor is it ſtrange that we ſhould
be ignorant of it: he died in 1655.
Vaillant (John Foy) was born at Beauvais in
1632. The public is indebted to him for the
fcience of medals, and the King for one half of his
cabinet. The miniſter Colbert ſent him into
Italy, Greece, Egypt, Turkey, and Penſia, Some
Algerine corſairs took him in -1 67 4, together witft
Deſgodets the architect. They were both ranſom-
ed by the King, No man of learning ever went
through more dangers : he died in 1706.
Vaillant, (John Francis) his ſon, was born at

D =

W
te
til
H
th

* — = — wa . A” a” —

* e his. father's trapcks. Us
alſo was an antiquary, and died. in 1 70 f.

Valincourt, (John Babtiſt Henry du Frouller de)
was born in Picardy in 165 3. An epilite.
to him by Deſpreaux gained him hisgreateſt reputa-
tion. He is the author of ſome inconſiderable pieces.
He was a man of learning, but if he had been no-
thing elſe, he would not have made ſo. great 2
fortune as he did: he died in 1730. -
Varignon, (Peter) was born at Caen in 1654.
He was a celebrated mathematician 49d, 0g; |
1723. Lal „ 8) ll i»

Varillas, (Anthony) 7 in Marche | in
1624. He was a more agreeable than accurate
hiſtorian: he died in 1-696, ..

Le Valor, (Michel) of the Oratory. . He was a
refugee in England. His hiſtory of Lewis XIII.
which is diffuſe, tedious, and fatirical, has been
read for the ſake of many ſingular facts which ie
contains: he died in 1718.

Vauban, (he Marſnal de) uns born in 1636. |
His ſcheme for real tenths was never put in. exgcu-
tion, and is indeed impracticable. He is the au-
thar of ſeveral tracts which are wouby of ls good
a citizen: he died in 17979.

Vaugelas, (Claudius Favre 400 Ty = "Y
chambetry in 1.58 5. He vas one of the fink |
who corrected and regulated language, He could

write verſes in Italian, but not in French. He
continued to correct bis tranſlation of Quiptus
Curtius for thirty years. Whoever, would writg
well ought. to eee bin lt W
in 165809. TOSS

Vayaſeur, was born in Charolois i in 12 "He |

7.
> 7

.

336 HE Ad Or

was a'Jeſuit, and a man of great learning. Ie Was
the firſt who ſhewed that the Greeks ard Romans
knew nothing of the burleſque ſtile, 'which'is the
remains of barbariſm': he died in 168 1.

Le Vayer, (Francis) was born at Paris in 1 588.
He was preceptor to Monſeur the brother of
Lewis XIV. and taught the King himſelf during
one year. He was Hiſtoriographer of France, and
counſellor of ſtate. He was a ſtrong Pirrhoniſt,
and known as ſuch. But this did not prevent fo
important an education from being intruſted to him:
A great deal of knowlege and good ſenſe is'ſhewh
in his works, which, however, are too diffuſe. ;
he died in 1672 1
Vergier, (James) was born at Paris in 1675;
Compared with Fontaine, he is what Campiſtron is
to Racine. He was a faint but natural imitator.
He was aſſaſſinated at Paris by robbers in 1720;
We are told in Moreri that he wrote a parody a-
gainſt a powerful prince who cauſed him to be kill-
ed. But this ſtory is falſe and abſurd.
Vertot, (Rene Aubert) was born in Normandy
in 1655. He is an agrecable and elegant hiſtoria:
he died in 1735.
|  Vichart de Saint Real, (Caeſar) was WE at

Chamberri, but educated in France. His hiſtory

of the conſpiracy at Venice is an excellent piece,
His life of Chriſt is L gs different : he died
in I 69 n 83

Villars de Montfaucon, (the Abbe de) was born
in 1635. He was celebrated for his Count de Ga-
balis, which is a part of the antient mythology of
the Perſians. The author was killed in 167 3, by
Iz CI IE ene DT OICOU 33 9 4s > f

LEWIS XIV: 337

a piſtol ſhot. . nn
for having revealed their myſterie.

Villars, (the. Marſhal Duke de) was born in
1652. The firſt volume of the memoirs which
paſs under his name is entirely his own. He died
in 1734.

Villedieu, (Madame de) her Romanees gained
her great reputation. Not that we would here
be thought to ſet any value upon thoſe romances,
with which France has been, and ſtill continues to
be, over-run :. almoſt all of them, except Zaide,
are the productions of weak minds, who eaſily
write ſuch things as are not worthy to be read by
perſons of ſenſe, They are even, for the mot
part, void of imagination, and there is more in
four pages of Anioſto than in all theſe inſipid
writings put together, which ſpoil the taſte of our
youth. She died in 1 683.

Voiture, (Vincent) was born at Amiens in
1598, He was the firſt in France diſtinguiſhed
for being what is called a bel efprit ; and this'is
all his merit in his writings, from which we ſhould
not form our taſte ; but this merit was then ve-
ry uncommon. We have ſome fine lines writ»
ten by him, but they are bat few: Thoſe which
he wrote for Anne of Auſtria, and which are not
printed in his works, are a memorial of chat
free gallantry which reigned in the court of that
Queen, whoſe ſweet temper and rr good-
neſs was tried by the Frondeurs.

| L. ze ails dein yo ft

*

338 THE AGE Or

— — 3 l ahn

— — nr
ae Cardinnl; VETS $ 05) | 94 38

- entend celui de la valette

Pouvait voir Peclat fans egal

Dans lequel maintenant vous etes, F_»-.

Pentens celui de la beaute.. . 1

Car aupres ge" n'eſtime guere, -

Cela ſoit dit ſans vous deplaire,

Tout Peclat de la majeſte.

He alſo wrote verſes in Italian and N with
ſucceſs. He died in 1 0 48,

5 4 4 62>;

*G?

_ Celebrated of WY og „ Hers hs
MUSICIANS. l
N . 1+ 14 ET

The French muſic, at leaſt the vocal part, is not
agreeable to any other nation; nor can be ſo, be-
cauſe the French proſody is different from that of
all Europe. We always accent upon the laſt ſy
lable, whereas the Italians and all other nations do
this upon the penultima, or the antepenultima. Our

language is the only one which has words ending
with e mute, and theſe e's which are not pronounced
in common diſcourſe, are pronounced in regular
| declamation, and that in a uniform manner, as
4 gloi-reu, victei- reu, barbari-eu, furi- eu. And this
is what renders moſt of our airs and recitatives in-

ſupportable to every one not accuſtomed to 4bem.

+ At that time it was the cuſtom in poetry to ſuppreſs 7
final letters, which were ſometimes inconvenient, as vous ele
| for vous etes. This is done by the Italians and Engliſh, French
| poetry is too confined and frequently too proſaic. |

* cw RD wo La 3 — 3 ts |] hg LA wy 0

LEWIS XIV. 339
Our — IPO voice
poſſeſſed by. the Italians... We do not practiſe that
cuſtom which is common at Rome, and in the other
Italian courts, of depriving- men of their virility to
make their voices more muſical than that of women.
All this, joined to the ſlowneſs of our muſic, which
makes an odd contraſt wich our national vivacity,
conſtantly renders the French muſic r oy.
to themſelves.

Yet notwithſtanding all this, Cake; who have
lived long in France, confeſs that our muſicians, by
adapting their muſic to the words, have produced
excellent compoſitions; and that our regulated de-
clamation has frequently a moſt admirable effect
but this is only to ears extremely well accuſtomed.
to them; and even then the execution muſt be
quite correct.

Our inſtrumental muſic N ſomewhat of
that monotony, and flowneſs for which the vocal
is accuſed z but many of our ſymphonies, and par-
ticularly our minuets, have been very well liked by
other nations, They are performed in many. of the
Italian operas. There are ſcarce any other than theſe
in a nation whoſe ſovereign has one of the beſt
operas in Europe, and who among the number of
his other ſingular talents, has condeſcended alſo to
cultivate that for muſic with the greateſt care.

John Baptiſt Lulli was born at Florence in 1635,
brought into France at the age of 14 years, and
though he could then only play upon the violin, he
became the father of the true French muſic. , He
knew how to adapt his art to the genius of the
language, which was the only way enn It

©. ore and

340 THE -AGE- OP

may here be obſerved, chat the Italian muſic was not
then very different from that gravity and noble fim-

pliciry which we admire in the recitatives of Leit.

After him, all our muſicians, ſuch as Colaſſ,

Campra, Deſtouches, and others, have been his imj-
tators; till, at laſt, there appeared a man, who raiſed:

.. RTE
and who new modelled the art of muſic.

With regard to church muſic, though there 10
many in France eelebrated for their ſkill in it; yet
their compoſitions have not been ann
other nation. |

of Painters n en , Engravers, te.

It is not the ame! in mand to Painting ay to

Muſie. A nation may have a harmony agreeable
only to itſelf, becauſe the genius of its language
will admit no other: but it is the buſineſs of painters
to repreſent nature, which is the fame in all coun-
rn,
eyes.

For a painter to gain a juſt reputation, his works
muſt be eſteemed by foreigners. It is not fufficient

his works muſt be bought.

That which ſometimes confines the talents. of
Ester, is what ſhould ſerve rather to extend
them, Tt is the method they obſerve in imitating
the maſters which they ſtudy. Academies, no doubt,
are extremely uſeful to form pupils, eſpecially when
the maſters are ſuch as work in the grand taſte; bur
when the maſter is one who works in the petty

fo have a party, and be praiſed in rifling books; |

»w = wn = © of ON

ps mv © ®@ © ry _ a

LEWIS MV. 44t
gout, and 'whoſe manher is dry and laboured, If
his figures are unnaturul, and his painting like that
upon fans; the pupils, being ſubjected to imitation,
and to the defire of pleaſing a bad maſter, entirely
loſe the Idea of natural truth and beauty. There
is 'a' fatality attends academies. ' No work of any
kind called academical has yet been a work of ge-
nius. Shew me an artiſt who is poſſeſſed with the
fear of not imitating his maſters, and his productions
will be weak and confined. | Give me a man of a
free genius, filled with the idea of nature which he
copies, and he ſhall ſucceed. Almoſt all the great
artiſts have flouriſhed either before the eſtabliſh-
ment of academies, or have worked In a taſte dife
ferent from that which prevailed in them.

Corneille, Racine, Deſpreaux, Le Moine, all
not only purſued a manner different from other
writers, but they had almoſt all of them for their
enemies.

Nicholas Pouſſin, hes at Andelis in Norman-
dy in 1 599, was the pupil of his own genius, which
he perfected at Rome. He was called the painter
for men of ſenſe. He may alſo be called the painter
for men of taſte. His only fault is the having height-
ened the colouring of the Roman fcheol too much.
He wis the greateſt palnter in Europe in his time.
Being recalled from Rome to Paris, he ws there
overpowered by the force of envy and eubals ; which
determined him to retire. This has been the caſe
of other artiſts. Pouſ/iz returned to Rome, where
he lived poor but contented. His philoſophy placed
him above the reach of fortune. He died in 1 665.

un le Sueur was born at Paris in * 7.

Ff 3 . ä

LEAST „„

342 THE AGE OF
Though Vouet, was his only maſter, he;"neverthe-
leſs became an excellent painter. He had carried
his art to the higheſt degree of e
died, aged 38 years in 1655. 4

Bourdon and le Valentin have been ecledrathd
Three of the beſt pictures, which adorn: the church
of Saint Peter at e are by Ponſſr Ew
and Valenting' -+ | /

Charles Le * ben Parigtin I 619. He
had ſcarce made his genius appear, when the ſu -
perintendant Fouquet, one of the moſt generous
and moſt unfortunate men that ever lived, gave him
a penſion of twenty four thoufand livres of our
preſent money. It is remarkable, that his painting
of the Family of Darius, which is at Verſailles, is
not ſurpaſſed by the colouring of the picture of
Paul Veroneſe, which is placed over againſt it; and
that it is greatly ſuperior to it in deſign, compoſi-

tion, dignity, expreſſion, and the juſtneſs of the

Caſtime. The prints from his pictures of the Bat-
tles of Alexander, are even more eſteemed than the
Battles of Conſtantin, by Raphael and Julie Romano.
He died in 1690.

Peter Mignard, born at Troies in b
in 1610, was, for ſome time, tne rival of Le Brun;
but he is no longer ſo in the eyes of poſterity. He
died in 2695.

Joſeph Parefel was born in 1648. He was a
good painter, and furpaſſed by his ſon. He died
in 1704.

John Joxvenet was, born at Rouen in 1 64 4.
He was the pupil of Le Brun, and though a good
painter, was inferior to his maſter. He has painted
aimolt all objects of a yellow colour, of which co-

/

hap, bas

ww

5” ay @ aA fo e

1

5

1 eee e ere

> A 4

CY WY

LEWIS MV. . 348

lour they appeared to him, through a particulat con-
formation of his organs of fight. ' He died in 1717.
John Baptift Santerre, has left ſome Eaſel- pieces,
finiſhed and coloured in the moſt admirable man-
ner. Hj piſtuee of d a e.

fineſt in Europe. oft N

La Foſſe is diſtinguiſhed. by a mer new te
ſame with the preceding.

Bon Boulogne, was an * — a proof
of vbich i that his paintings are ſold at a very high
price. , |

Lewis Bologne. His inden which do not
want merit, are leſs valued than thoſe of his brother,

Raous, was a painter whoſe performances were
unequal, but nnen
brand. |
| Rigaut. Though he chiefly diſtinguiſhed him-
ſelf in painting portraits, yet the great picture,
wherein he has repreſented the cardinal de Bouillon
opening the holy year, is a maſter-piece equal. to
the beſt works of Rubens.

De Troie worked in the ſtyle of Rigaut.

Vateau. He was in the graceful manner what
Teniers was in the groteſque, He had diſciples
whoſe pictures are very highly eſteemed. |

Le Moine has perhaps ſurpaſſed all our painters
by the compoſition of the Salon of Hercules at
Verſailles. This apotheoſis of Hercules was a com-
pliment to the cardinal, Hercules de Fleuri, who
had nothing that could be compared with the Her-
cules of the fable. A repreſentation of the apothe-
oſis of Henry the IV, would have been more pro-
per in the ſalon of a king of France, Le Moine
being envied by thoſe. of bis profeſſion, and not

344 THE AGE OF
thinking - n
Cardinal, uiled himſelf in deſpir.

Sone ces have tucelled" in pelsting arbsh
2 Defense and Only ; hers Have” factedBed in
miniature; and ſeveral in portraits. Seme of our
painters now diſtinguiſh themſelves by piinfings of
a higher kind; „
be loſt among us. N Py
Sculpture was brought to nerfotidn under Lewis
Mv, and continues the fame under Lewis XV.

James Sarraſin, was born in 1 598, executed ma-

ny excellent pieces of ſculpture at Rome for Cle.

ment VIII. — No.
— — He died in 1 660. " 849

Peter Puget, was born in 1662. He was n

. a ſculptor, and a painter. He was chiefly

Croloniate. He died 1695. * a

Le Gros and Theodon have adorned Tray with |

their works,
Francis Girardan, born in 1 62 7, in his bats of

Apollo and the tomb of cardinal Richelieu, has
equalled the fineſt remains of antiquity. He died

in 1715. „ e
The Cyviſevaux and the Couſtonx were remarka-

ble; but they are now furpaſſed by four or five of |

our preſent ſculptors.
Caveau, Mantevil, Melan, Audran, Hedeling,

Le Clerc, the Drevets, Polily, Picart, du Change

and others, have ſucceeded in Engravings, and their

prints adorn the cabinets of thoſe in Europe who

cannot be at the expence of paintings. .
Workers in gold and ſilver have alſo merited to

be placed among our moſt celebrated urtiſts, by the.

celebrated for the Andromeda and or the Min

ra,

rann NAV. 345
execution,

S -.
grand gout for architecture to ſhew his talents, as.
it is for other artiſts to ſhew theirs: Such a perſon
is unable to raiſe faperb ſtructures, unleſs be is em-

ployed by a prince. Many a good architeCt has pof-

ſeſſed talents which have been entirely uſelels. ©

Francis Manſard, was one of the beſt architects

in Europe. The caſtle or rather the palace of Mai-
ens, near Saint Germain, is a maſter-piece, becauſe

he had entire liberty to follow his genius.

Julius Hardouin Manſard, his nephew, made an
immenſe fortune under Lewis XIV, and was ſuper-
intendant of the buildings.

The works conſtructed after the deſigns of Per-
rault, Levau, and Dorbay, are well known.

The agreeable part of Gardening was brought
to perfection by Le Notre, and the uſeful by La
Luintynie.

Engraving upon precious ſlones, ſtriking of me-
dals, and letter founding, for the printing of books,
were all produced in conſequence of the rapid pro-
preſs made by other arts.

Clock-makers, who may be conſidered as practi-

cal natural philoſophers, have cauſed an admiration

of their genius and labour.

Silks and ſtuffs, and even the gold by which they
are enriched, have been adorned, with ſuch uncom-
mon taſte and knowlege, that veſtments which have
been worn only through luxury, have deſerved to
be preſerved as monuments of induſtry.

We began to make Porcelaine at Saint Cloud,

before it was made in any other part of Europe.

246 T HE 4e ete.

Io conclude, the laſt age has enabled the preſent
to collect and tranſmit to poſterity, all the arts and
ſciences, each of them brought to as great a degree

of perfection as human induſtry is capable of: and
to do this is at preſent the intention and endeavours

of a ſociety of men of learning eminent for their ge-

nius and knowlege. This immenſe and immortal p
work ſeems to accuſe he brevity of human life.
; 4 | * er iq |
f f 4 ;
- + A |
== |
EL ED VP END of Vol. 14 Gran 4
3:14 424 24? [
- E 5 24 l
4 f
| l
1
T% /
f 1 0 ves 1
+ 4 * 5 /
7 4 f
1
/
|
i t
| /
15
4
þ
F,
/
i | þ
623072,
i * 1 85 . * 4 A

—

” wi 155 LA '»; 1 2th; * 2
TS 4 41 Den oy 4A

% « * Na * 8 „ * 7 * 1 * * 1 3.4 . 14 N "IF. -
" 1 . 4 .
- ' . # 1 4 A
* . * * * A * * af 1
” 7 - 4 * 0 N : * * _ 9 1 A
FR 4 ® . * 9 1
2 % , by P . — z, 1 1 þ "
# þ i * | ze * 4 - 1 i 2 — . - 0 ——— £
*
— .
*2 *

ABRANTES > (Dub of) I. Page 261.

Academy of Cimento, II. 126. Of London, 125. Of ſciences
at Paris ibid. The French, ibid. 134. Of the Belles Letters,
129. Of Architecture, 155. Of 1 at Paris and Role,
ISS, 156.

Ages (remarkable) in the hiſtory of the world, I, 1, a. 1 113.

Albemarle C General) I. 357, ete.

Alberoni (Cardinal) I. 377.

Albuquerque (Duke) I. 43.

Alexander VII. (Pope) II. 216.

Alexander VIII. (Pope) II. 274.

Algiers, I. 193, 197. |

Allati, library-keeper of the Vatican, II. 31.

Alphonſus, King of Portugal, I. 128.

Alſace, I. 91, 164, 173. |

Amſterdam, I. rg, 10.

Ancre (Marſbaleſs d') I. 33.

Au eli, the fool, II. a6.

Anne of Auſtria, Queen Regent of France, I. 35, 36, 45, $0, SI,

94. II. 76.

Anne, Queen of England, I. 2 10, 267, 348, et etc.

Antin (Duke de) II. 82.

Architecture, I 2. | 5

Argencourt (Mademoiſelle d') II. t. ee...

Argenſon (Monſieur d') II. 94. |

Arnold (Dr.) II. 212, 215, 222. His FT the Biſhop of
Angers, II. 220.

Arras I. 74.

Arriere Ban, I. 172.

Artillery, II. ror.

Asfeld (Baron d') I. 526.

Aſoph, I. 232.

Aſtrology, I. 32.

Atlone (Count d') I. 286.

1

248 INDE Xx
Avaux (Count d) I. 213.

Aubigne (Count d') II. 63. 65.

Aubray (lieutenant of the police) II. 48, etc,
Auguſtus, Emperor of Rome, I. 3. II. 33.

Auguſtus, Elector of Saxony, and king of Poland, I. 251, my
Auſtria (the houſe of) I. 9, 375, 384, ete.

Raden (Lewis prince. of). I. 488, 30.
II. 133. |

Barbarini (Cardinal) I. 25.

Barbeſfteux (Marquis de) I. 236, 270. II. 838.

Battle of Leipſic, I. 12. Of Lutzen, ibid. Of Roeroh 37. Of
Fribourg, 40. Of Norlingen, 47. Of Lens, 42. Of Lawingen,
43. Of Somerhauſen, ibid. Of Badajox, ibid. Of Tabor, 44.
Of Retel 55. Of Blenau, 63. Of St. Anthony, 66. Of Dunes,
81. Of St. Gotherd, 110 Of the Villa Vieioſa, ibid. Of
Solbay, 151. Of Sintzheim, 163. Of Mulhauſen, 164. Of
Truckheim, ibid. Of Senef, 166. Of Conſarbruck, 273. Of
Cockerſberg, 180. Of Rheinfield, ibid. Of Montcaſſel, ibid.
Of Agouſte, 183. Of St. Denis 187. Of the Boyne, 215.
Of the Hogue, 218. II. 104. Of Valcourt, I. 227. Of Staf-
farde, 229. Of Flurus, 230. Of Lenſes, z3z. Of Steinkirk,
231. Of Nerwind, 235. Of Ter, 236. Of Zant, as». Of
Luzara, 281. Of Fredlingen, 288. Of Hockſtet, 2.91, 294,
etc. Of Spire, 291. Of Ekern, 293. Of Donawert, 284. Of
Malaga, 304. Of Caſſano, 308. Of Caſſinata, ibid. Of Ra-
millies, 309. Of Turin, 316. Of Caſtiglione, 39. Of Al

manza, 323. Of Oudenarde, 328. Of Malplaquet, 338. Of Bri:
Saragoſſa, 343. Of Denain, 358, Of Bitonts, 381 . Of Veles Bro
tri, 387. Of Dettingen, ibid. Of Om. _ of _ Bro

12 | Bru

feld, ibid,
Batavia, I. 19.
' Bateville, or Watteville, — de) I. 104. The Abbot his bros
ther, I. 122. 4 |
Bavaria (Elector of) I. 51. HI,»
Bavaria (the Prince of) intended King of Spain, 2.6.
Bavaria (Elector of) the F France, I. 289.

f
a.
F-
„
＋
＋
＋
d.
5.
f-
k,
*＋
+$
Jf
Y
l
F
e·
u-

IND E X.

Baville (Moignou de) Intendant of Languedoc, II. 106.

Bay (Marquis de) I. 344 5

Bay, or Baius (Michael) Dr. 9 Louvain, II. 206.

Bayle, II. 142.

Bayonet invented, II. 100.

Beauvais (Baroneſs de) II. 1.

Beaufort (Duke de) I. $1, 53. II. 103.

Beaumont (Abbe de) Preceptor to Lewis XIV. II. 3.

Beck (the Spaniſh General) I. 42

Belle-ile (Marſhal) I. 387. |

Benſerade, II. 23. 3 -

Bernini, II. 96.

Berry (Duke of) II. 30.

Berwick (Marſhal de) I. 320, 323.

Blake (Admiral) I. 73, 81.

Boileau, II. 32, 149.

Boileau (Abbe) II. 258.

Boisjourdan (Capt.) I. 172.

Bombs, firſt uſed, I. 193.

Boſſuet, II. 135, etc. 247, 251.

Boufflers, I. 223, 234, 238, etc. 286, 293, 329, 349.

Bouillon (Duke de) I. 31. II. 182.

Bourdaloue, II. 136.

Bourlie (Abbe de) II. 3201.

Bournonville, (Prince of) I. 164.

Bourignon, II. 228.

Bozzoli, I. 277.

Braganza (Duke of) I. ry, 110.

Brandenbourg (Elector of) I. 10.

Breſt, I. 193. II. 104.

Brinvilliers (Marquis of) II. 48.

Brouſſel (Counſellor) in oppoſition to the court, I. 47.

Brouſſon, a Calviniſt preacher, II. 200.

Bruyere, II. 141.

Brun (le) II. 155.

Bruxelles, I. 240.

Burgundy (Duke of) I. 286, 291, 327, 356. II. 70.

Burgundy (Ducheſs of) II. 68, 70.

Buſſy (Count) II. 34.

Buzenval (Biſhop of Beauvais) a Janſeniſt, II. 240.
VoL. II. G xg

Caicnne, a Erench Colony, II. 105.
_ Callieres, I. 248.
Calviniſm, its progreſs and revolutions in 5 II. e
Camhi, Emperor of China, II. 256. |
Caprara, General of the Emperor, I. 163.
Cara-Muſtapha, Grand- Viſier, I. 193, 196.
Carlos (Don) I. 371, 381.
Caſimir, King of Poland, L 129.
Caſſini, II. 127.
Catalonia, I. 28, 44, 367.
Catinat (General) I. 223, 228, 236, 245, $74»
Cavalier, chief of the Camiſards, II. 203.
Caulet, Biſhop of Pamiers, II. 167, 220.
Cerles, the grand Vicar, II. x69.
Cevennes, the wars there for religion, I. 292. II. r3t, 200.
Chailat (Abbe du) II. 201.
Chaieſ (de la) a Jeſuit confeſſor to Lewis XIV. II. 227, 430.
Chamillard, miniſter of ſtate, I. 4270, 485, 333. II. 119.
Chapelain, II. 31.
Charles V. (Emperor) I. 14.
Charles VI. (Emperor) I. 30, 320, 331; 20K, 370, —4
Charles VII. (Emperor) I. 385, etc.
Charles II. (King of Spain) I. 260.
Charles I. (King of England) I. 20, 68.
Charles II. (King of England) I. 76, 78, 94, tos, 13. 160,206.
Charles XI. King of Sweden, I. 246. |
Charles XII. King of Sweden, I. 253.
Charles Emmanuel, King of Sardinia, I. 376.
Charles IV. Duke of Lorrain, I. 43, 65; 94, 168. 140, 16.
Charles V. Duke of Lorrain, I. 179, 186, 226, 249+
Charnace, a French envoy to the Dutch, I. 30.
Chateau Renaud, I. 213.
Chigi. Legate a latere, I. 107. II. 28.
Chineſe, IT. 254.
Chirurgery, its progreſs in France, I. 66, 138.
Choiicul (General) I. 246.
Choiſi (Abbe de) II. 88, .
Chomel, a Calviniſt preacher, II. 192.

a .
IN Der | 3

Chriſtina, Queen of Sweden, I. 7d. 77, 8s, 476.
Cities taken, or given up: |
Aloſt, I. 192. Armentieres, 117. Arnheim, 144. Ah, 127% ;
Bailleul, 185. Barcelona, 30g, 366. Beſkncon, la, 162.
Bommel, 144. Bonne, 292. Boucbein, 19s; 185. . Brifac,
164, 248. Bruges, 330. Cambray, go, 176. 183. Candy,
13m. Chapelle, 80. Charmagnol, 229. Carpi, 314. Cartha-
gena, 243. Caſal, yr, 152. Caſſel, 185. Caſtro, x07, Char-
lemont, 185. Charleroi, 117, 185. Comacchio, 331. Conde,
17s, 180, 185. Corbie, 28. Corregio, 314. Courtray, 43,
197. Cremona, 377. Crevecocur, 144. Dantaick, 319. Dix-
mude, 197. Doesburg, 144. Dole, 123. Doway, 117. Dun»
kirk, 71, 82. Frankendol, 224. Fribourg, 180. Friedlingen,
289. Furnes, 119. Gant, 179, 18s, 330. Gibraltar, 303.
Gironne, 236. Gravelines, 43. Hannau, 174. Heidelberg,
223. Huy, 292. Kehl, 180, 248. Landau, 43, 301. Lerida,
323. Lille, 117, 329, 341. Limbourg, 185. Limerick, 218.
Luxembaurg, 197. Mayence, 41, 226. Manheim, 224. Mar-
fal, 108. Maeſtricht, 259, 180, 387. Maubeuge, 185. Menin,
92. Mcſſing, 182. Mons, 249, 341. Montalban, 329. Naer-
din, 159, 145. Namur, 331. Nanci, 94, 286. Naples, 44,
323. Nerwind, 235. Nimiguen, 144. Nice, 229. Noremberg,
144. Openheim, 224. Orſoi, 221. Oudenarde, ga, 185. Paſ-
fav, 293. Philipsbourgh, 4r, 164, 179, 224. Picgaia, 25,
Propering, 185. Prague, 32. Quenoy, 358. Ratisbon, 200.
Reggio, 314. Rhinberg, 441. Rochelle, II. 184. Ronche
glione, I. 109. St. Omers, 92. Lalins, 122. Sintzheim, 163,
Zinck, 144. Spire, 224. Strasbourg, 191. Suza, 229, Thiva-
ville, 40. Tournay, 117. Trabach, 301. Treves, 324. Va-
lenciennes, 80, 175, 119, 185. Vellaine, 22g. Veldentz, 191.
Villa Franca, 229. Utrecht, 144. Weſel, 14m. — 124.
Ypres, 179. Zutphen, 144.
Clement VIII. (Pope) II. 270.
Clement IX. (Pope) I. 126. II. 221.
Clement XI. (Pope) I. 33m. II. 224, 229.
Clerambault. (Marquis de) I. 298.
Clergy of France, their revenues, II. 167, 293, 273+.
Coatquen (Madam de) II. 47.
Cogni (General) I. 387.
G g. 2

*

352 IN DBB X.

Colbert, miniſter of ſtate, I. 115, 194. II. 87, 97, 9s, 157 115
156, 187.
Coligniſts (the) II. 159.
Coligni (Count de) I. 74, 109. =D
Cologne (Elector of) I. 135. | | STS
Commerce (French) II. 88. | |
Companies of the Eaſt and Weſt-Indies, IT. 89. Of the North,
II. go. :
Comte (le) a Jeſuit, IT. 258. E820 |
Conde (the Prince of) I. 37, 40, $1, $5—$7, 61, 63, etc. 74,
80, 94, 138, 141, 166, 167, 173. II. 58.
Conde, the grandſon of the preceding, I. 233. II. 56.
Conti (Prince of) I. 31, $6.
Conti {Armand de) grand nephew of the grand Conde, I. 23 3,
Corneilte (Peter) II. 9, 144. |
Cotin, II. 31. 881
Crecy, Miniſter of France, I. 248, |
Crequi (Duke de) Ambaſſador of France at Rome, I. 105.
Crequi (Marſhal de) I. 117, 177, 179. |
Cromwel (Oliver) Protector of England, I. ar, 76, 77.
Cromwel (Richard) his ſon, I. 84.

D

Damfreville, I. 197.

Dangeau (Marquis of) II. 20, 52.

Darmſtadt (Prince of) Miniſter of the Arch-dnke Charles, in
Spain, I. 283, 306. *

Denmark, I. 26, 27.

Desbroſſes, a French Architect, II. 154.

Deſcartes, I. 86. II. 125.

Peſmarets (Miniſter of State) I. 334. II. 120.

Dhona (Count) the Swediſh ambaſſador in — I. _

Dieppe, I. 237.

Doſſeri, I. 141.

Dragonade, II. 194.

Dubois, firſt miniſter in France, 1. 238. ET

Dubourg, (General) I. 298, 341. |

Duche, II. 69.

Duels, I. 32. II. 99. Py 3 4

Dugue-Trouin, I. 243, 352

14

(

|

\

Dunkirk, I. 47, 72, 87, 208, 337% 385, 364. II. 28, 104.
Dupas, I. 159.
Duquene, Lieutenant - General of the Navy, I. 182, 193, 9
2 his nephew, II. 198.

Duras (Marſhal de) I. 223.

E

Edict of Nants, II. 180, 185, 196.

Edict of Grace, II. 184.

England, I. 20, 113.

Engineers of France, II. 101.

Entragues ( Chevalier d') I. 278.

Epernon (Duke d') II. 100.

Eſtevan de Gamara (a Spaniſh General) I. 55. |

Eſtrade (Count d') Ambaſſador of France in Holland, I. 30,
104.

Etree (John d') Vice-Admiral of France, I. 157, 213, 219. II.
104.

Etree (Cardinal d') Ambaſſador of France at Rome, I. 203. II.
248.

Eugene (Prince) grandſon of Charles Emmanuel Duke of Savoy,
born in France, which he left to ſerve the Emperor, I. 272
Serves in Hungary, 273. Beats the Turks at Zant, 252. Car-
ries the war into Italy againſt the French, 274. Takes Cre-
mona, 277. Commands the armies of Germany, 294. Defeats
the French at Hockſtet, 297. Is beaten by them in Italy,
308. Beats them before Turin, 316. His deſigns on Tou-
lon and Marſeilles, 324. Gains the battle of Oudenarde, 328.
Oppoſes the Peace, 336, 353. His victory at Malplaquet, 338.
Takes Quenoy, 354. His army is defeated at Denain, 357»
Concludes the peace at Raſtadt, 36z. Beats the Turks twice,
370. His elogy, 273.

Exili, II. 48.

F

Fare (Marquis de la) II. 69.
Felix, ſurgeon to Lewis XIV. II. 67.
Fenelon, II. 139, 140, 244, 246, 248, 250.
Ferdinand II. (Emperor) L 11.
Gg3

_ 1 n DEH.

Ferdinand III. (Emperor) I. 12323. f
Ferte (Marſhal de la) I. 74, 80. |
Feuillade (Marſhal de la) I. 109, 131, 332. II. 83.

The Duke his ſon, I. 311.

Feuquieres (Marquis de) I. 238, 291, 297

Flanders, I. 113. 125, 127, 185, 248.

Flechier, II. 3t.

Fleury (Cardinal) Prime Miniſter of Lewis XV. I. 373, 386. II.
173. ”

Florence, I. 26.

Fontaine (de la) II. 149, 50.

Fontange (the Ducheſs de) I. $$.

Fontenelle, II. 142.

Forbin-janſon, I. 326.

Fouquet (fuperintendant) II. 13, etc.

Fourilles, (Chevalier de) I. 139.

France, I. 28, 111, 128. II. 108, 111, 114.

Franche Comte, I. 122, etc. 262, 185.

Francis I. King of France, I. 2, 5.

Frederic II. King of Pruſſia, I. 388.

Frederic Prince of Heſſe, afterwards King of Sweden, J 291,
317.

Fuentes (Count de) a Spanifh general, I. 39.

Furſtemberg (Prince of) I. 186. 2

G
Gace (Count de) a French general, 326. —
Gaillard (Achilles) a Jeſuit, II. 210. f
Galloway (Lord) I. 321, etc.
Gaſton, Duke of Orleans, brother to Leuis XIII. I. 36, ete. 59,
67.
Genoa, I. 198, 388.
Genet (Abbe) II. 69.
Germany, I. 9. II. 158.
Glen (General of the Imperialiſts) I. 41.
G ammont (Marſhal de) I. 42.
Grandicr (Urbain) I. 33,
Graziana (Count) II. 31.

Guebriant (Marſhal) a French general, I. 2g,
Guiche (Count de) I. 142.

IN D X.

Guion (la) II. 243; 445.
Guiſcard (Count de) I. 239.
Guiſe (Duke of) I. 44. '
Guſtavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, I. 13, on

H

Hanover the (houſe of) I. 360.

Harcourt (Count de') a French general, J. 29, 43, 459.

Harley, Miniſter of France at Ryſwick, I. 248.

Harley de Chanvallon, II. 59, 245.

Harley, Lord Treaſurer of England, II. 203.

Haro (Don-Lewis de) a Spaniſh 2 I. 76, .

Hainault, II. 14.

Harrac, the Emperor's Ambaſſador at Madrid, I. 260.

Heinſius, grand penfionary of Holland, I. 284, 336.

Henry IV. King of France, I. 5. II. 179, ec.

Henrietta of England, married to the Duke of Orleans, 1 133.
II. 44. etc.

Hervard, a Calviniſt, Comptroller- General, H. 287. 191.

Hire (la) II. 128.

Hoquincourt (Marſhal de) I. —

Holland, I. 17, 73, 111, 132, 159, 160. II. 1298.

Homberg, II. 72.

Hopital (I) Chancellor of France, II. 133.

Humieres (Marquis de) a French general, 127, Bare mung
Huygens, II. 31, 127.

1

James I. King of Scotland, I. 220.

James I. King of England, II. 165.

James II. King of England, I. 206, 210, etc. 264.

James, the Pretender to the crown of England, I. 220. 325.
Janſeniſm; its rife, progreſs, and 2 II. 20% —44.Ʒi. |
Janſenius (Cornelius) II. 211. f
Jeſuits, TI. 219, 256.

Imperiale Leſcaro, Doge of Gennes: I. 200.
Innocent X. (Pope) II. 213. 1
Innocent XI. (Pope) I. 202. II. 168, etc... |
Innocent XII. (Pope) II. 174.

- Jobn Sobieski, King of Poland, I. 196.

356 | I nun X.

Joſeph (the Emperor) I. 3or, 318, 331, 344, 352.
Joſeph (Father) II. 185.

Iſabella, Wife of Philip IV. King of Spain, I. 94.
Italy, I. 2, as, 26s. |;
John (Don) of Auſtria, I. 80, etc.

K

Kiuperli, Grand Viſier, I. 109, 131.
Konigſmarck, (Count de) General of the Swedes, | £ 72.

L
Lavardin, (Marquis de) Ambaſſador of France at Rome, I.

203. ete.
Laumont du Chatelet (Connt de) I. 239.
Lauſon (Count and afterwards Duke de) II. 35, 39, 42.

Law (John) I. 37. II. 237.
Leopold (the Emperor ) I. 42, 88, 109, 157, 195, 254, 265.
Leopold, Duke of Lorrain, I. 249.

Leſdiguieres (Conſtable) II. 183.

Lingendes (John) II. 133.

Lockhart, Ambaſſador of Cromwel, I. 82. 95.

London, I. 113. 11. 198.

Loraine (Chevalier de) II. 47.

Lorrain, I. 43, $4, 140, 249, 384.

Longueville {Duke de) I. 51, 56, 143.

Longueville (Ducheſs of) I. 55. II. 222.

Lorges (de) a French general, I. 171, 176, 236.

Lewis XIII. King of France, I. 30, etc. II. 184.

Lewis XIV. King of France, troubles during his minority, I. 35.
etc. Comes of age, 67, 68. Is maſter of the kingdom, 73.
Falls ſick, 89. His marriage, 93. II. 7. Loſes Mazarin,
and laments him, I. 97. Governs by himſelf, 100. Gains
the precedence of Spain, 104. Humbles the Pope, 107.
Purchaſes Dunkirk and Mardyke, 10). Fortifies Dun-
kirk, ibid. Obtains Marſal, ibid. Succours the Emperor,
109 The Portugueſe, 110. The Dutch, 112. His con-
queſts in Flanders, 114, etc. 230, etc. In French Compte,
124, 162. The peace of Aix la-Chapelle, 126. His ſecrep.
treaty with England, 134. And with the enemies of the Dutch,

235. His paſſage over the Rhine, 143. His conqueſts in Hol

IN D E X. 357

land, 144. His triumphal entry into Utrecht, ibid. Loſes
Holland, and returns to France, 153, etc. His negotiations
with all the princes, 166. He calls the Arriere-Ban, 172.
His advantages by ſea, 182. The peace at Nimegnen, 186.
He receives the name of Grand, 188. His acquiſitions in
time of peace, 190. etc. His revenge upon Algiers, 197. And
upon the Genoeſe, 198. Receives an embaſſy from Siam, 200.
Humbles the Pope, 203. Protects the king of England, 208,
213, 217, Makes the peace of Reſwick, 248. His pretenſions
to the crown of Spain, 254. His reverſe of fortune in Ger-
many, 292, etc. 317, etc. In Spain, 303, 31), etc. He ſues
for peace, 334, 342, 333. His affairs are re-eſtabliſhcd, 356,
etc. The peace of Utrecht ſigned, 361. The order which he
eſtabliſhed in his houſhold, II. 29. His buildings, and the
eſtabliſhments which he made, 97. He reforms the laws, 98.
Abcliſhes duelling, 99. The diſcipline of his armies, ibid. etc.
An idea of his forces at ſea, I. 192. II. 102. Of his land
forces, I. 161, 222, IT. 102. His liberality to men of learn-
ing, 30. His eſtabliſhments in their favours, 127. His amours,
I, 2, 19. His attachments to Madam Maintenon 39, ete. His
poſterity, 85, 262. His ſickneſs, 74, etc. His laſt words, 75,
His death, 96. His portrait, 18. His character, 27, 77, ete.
Debts which he left at his death, 120. His expences, 121.

Lewis XV. King of France, I. 388. II. 36.

Louvois, miniſter of ſtate, I. 115, 147, 154, 175, 191, 194, II.
38, 64, 195.

Low Countries, I. 9.

Luines (de) Conſtable, II. 183.

Lully, II. 154.

Luneville, I. 250.

Luxemburg (Marſhal de) I. 122, 138, 153, 173, 179, 187, 227,
231, 232, 235.

:%

Mademoiſclle, I. 66. II. 38, 40.

Maigrot, the Miſſionary, II. 257, 260.

Mailli, archbiſhop of Rheims, II. 236.

Maine (the Duke du) II. 56, 6a, 73.

Maintenon (Madam) I. 270, 300. II. 43. 34, $5, 60, etc. 237.

Man with the mask, II. 9.

258 TS»

Mancini: (Mary) II. 2.

Manſard, II. 35. | N „

Mardike, I. 43, 108, 36464. |

Maria Louiſa, Queen of Spain, II. 51.

Maria Thereſa, married to Lewis XIV. I. 93, 96.

Marivaus, Lieutenant general, II. 79.

Marine (the) under Mazarine, I. 30, 73. II. 102. Under Colbert, : 1
I. 187, 194. II. 102. etc. Sinks to its firſt eſtate, I. 305, 396, 1
Is re- eſtabliſhed. II. 10g.

Marlborough (Earl and afterwards Duke of) a FOR, of King

James, whom he abandons, I. 20g. Is declared general of 1
the Engliſh and Dutch armies, 283. His ſucceſs in Flanders, 3
295, 292. Is made Duke, 286. His victory at Donawert,
293. At Blenheim, 296. His rewards, 301. Defeats the
Freneh at Ramillies, 310. Would fain continue the war, 336.
Contributes to the victory at Malplaquet, 338. Is diſgraced,
350. Deprived of his employs, 354. His character, 283, 348,
349.

Marlborough (Ducheſs of) I. 348, ete.

Marian (Count de) II.

Marſin (Marſhal de) I. 297, 316.

Martinet, I. 139.

Maſſillon, II. 136.

Maurice of Saxe, a Marſhal of Franee, 389.

Mezarine (Cardinal) firſt Miniſter, I. 45. Is obliged to leave
France, 57. Returns, 58. Is proſcribed by the parliament.
59. Leaves France a ſecond time, 69. Is recalled, 50. Can · ,
cludes the peace of Weſtphalia, y1. Attributes to himſelf the
honour of the victory at Arras, 75. Continues the Spaniſh
war, 76, Makes an alliance with Cromwel, y8. Gives up
Dunkirk to his ambaſſador, 82. His quarrel with Tureanc,
ibid. Endeavours to make Lewis XIV. Emperor, 88. Makes
peace with Spain, and obtains the Infanta for Lewis XIV. 91.
etc. Brings the king and the new queen to Paris, 98. The
ſtate of the Marine under his miniſtry, 30, 73. II. 102. His
death diſtinguiſhed by a memorable eſtabliſhment, I. 96. The
honours rendered to his memory, p. His character, 46, 77,

82.

Medavy-Grancy (Count de) I. 317.

Medici (the) I. 26.

Mello (Don Franciſco de) a Spaniſh general, I. 37.

ws
_ IX

kN D E K. 335

*

Merci, « geheral of the Auſtrians, Lo _:

Nethuen (Mr. now ir Paul) the Engl ns- u the Dake
of Savoy, I. 316.

Militia under Lewis XIV. II. 10+

Military (the) before —_ * Vader Lovi
XIV. 88, etc

— II. 1a, ag, 147.

Molina, a Spatiiſh Jeſuit, 299. |

Morillon, Grand Vicar of Louvain, II. 20g.

Monaldeſchi, an Eſquire of queen Chriſtina, I. 67.

Monſeigneur, only ſon of the King, I. azz, 236, 366.

Monſieur, brother of the King, I. 180. II. p, $3.

Montecuculi, a general of the Emperor, I. 109, 860, 168, 171,
173.

Monteroy, governor of the Low Countries, I. 133, 154, 176.

Monteſpan Madam de) II. 36, 38, 40, $7.

Montpeſat, archbiſhop of Toulouſe, II. 169.

Mont Revel (Count de) I. 123. II. 203.

Mortemar, duke of Vivonne, general of the Gallies, I. 199,
381.

Mortemars (their ſpirit) II. 42.

Muſcovy, I. 26.

Motte-Houdart, II. 181.

Muley Aſſein, King of Morocco, I. 283.

Munſter ( Biſhop of) I. 112, 135.

N

Navailles (Marſhal) I. 181. II. 3s.

Nemond, I. 213.

Newfoundland, I. 240.

Nitard, a Jeſuit, firſt miniſter of Spain, I. 416.
Noailles {Lewis Anthony de) II. 233, 236, 239, 245-
Noailles (Gaſton Lewis de) II. 173.

Noailles ( Marſhal) I. 236.

O

Olivares, the Spaniſh Miniſter, I. rs, 29
Orange (the Prince of) Captain General of the Dutch Army,

„

_— ——— ——

— — —

:
.
:
:

.
—

” w— —yLIL„[E— . —2—i1mᷓ—ꝛx ct —

—— ww

260 i 1 N D E X.

I. 139. Is made Stadtholder, 147. Saves Holland, 18 t. His
negotiations with the ſeveral powers, 152. He oppoſes France,
x54. His victories, 160. The battle at Senef, 166. He is
beaten at Montcaſſel, 180. Gives battle at St. Denis, 185.
Dethrones King James, 210. Is made King of England, by
the name of William III. ibid. The battle of the Boyne,
where he is wounded, 215. He is defeated at Steinkirk, 231.
And at Nervind, 235. Retakes Namur. 238. Is acknowleged
King by France, 248. His Death, 266. His Character, x40,
266. N

Orange (the Princes of) have made the Dutch good Soldiers,
I. 18. Are in the rank of the greateſt generals, 29.

Orkney (Earl of) I. 299.

Orleans (Philip Duke of) I. 315. 323, 345, 369. II. 72, 235.

Ormond (Duke of) I, 355. ;

Ouvrier (d') an Antiquary, II. 22.

Oxenſtern (Count d') I. 29.

Palatine (the Elector) I. 163

Palatinate (the) I. 10, 16s, 224.

Paris, I. 31. II. 94, 95, 113.

Parma (Duke of) I. 25, 107.

Paſchal, II. 14s, 219.

Patru (Oliver) II. 134.

Pavillon, biſhop of Alet, IT. 167, 220.

Peliſſon, I. 139. II. 189. wy
Pelletier, Miniſter of State, II. r16.

Peres (Anthony) II. 165.

Perigni, preceptor to Lewis XIV. II. 3.

Perrault (Claudius) II. 8, 96.

Perriere (Mademoiſelle) II. 218.

Perron (Cardinal) II. 164.

Peterborough (Earl of ) I. 305, 323.

Peters, the Jeſuit, confeſſor to King James, I. 208.
Phalk-Conſtance, miniſter of the King of Siam, I. 206.
Philip IT. King of Spain, I. 14.

Philip III. King of Spain, I. 14.

Philip IV. King of Spain, I. 15, 76, 113.

1 a a 36x

Philip V. King of Spain, I. 302, 307, 340, 322, 343, 348, 370,
376.”

Picart, II. 128.

Picolomini, I. 29.

Pius V. (Pope) II. 208.

Peter, King of Portugal, I. 283.

Peter Alexowitz, Czar of Muſcovy, I. 253, 375.

Plelo { Count de) I. 379.

Pointis (Admiral) I. 240.

Poliguac (Cardinal) I. 251.

Poland I. 26, 250.

Pontchartrain, miniſter of State, I. 219. II. 118.

Ponticheri, a French Colony, I. 240.

Poxtocarero (Cardinal) I. 258.

Portugal, I. 9, 17.

Potier, miniſter of ſtate, 45.

Pouſlin, II. 155.

Pralin (Marquiſs de) I. 279.

Q

Quenel (Father) II. 225.
Quinaut, II. 9, 31, 248, 149.

R

Racine, II. 3r, 57, 63, 64. 147.

Ragotski (Prince) I. 293, 344-

Ranucci, (the Pope's Nuncio) I. 203.

Regale (the) II. 167.

Renaud (littte) I. 194.

Retz (Cardinal de) I 47, 56, 69.

Ricci (Mathew) a jeſuit miſſionary, II. 254.

Richlieu (Cardinal) firſt miniſter of Lewis XIII. I. s, 29, 33,
35. 36. II 144, 184.

Richlicu (Marſhal) I. 387.

Reincourt, I. 36.

Ripperda the Spaniih miniſter, I. 373.

Robert (Intendant) I. 160.

Rochfort (Marſhal) I. 173.
VoL. II. H l.

362 1 N D E X.

Rochfort, I. 193. II. 103.

Rochefoucault (Duke of) II. 135, 149.

Rohan Duke de) II. 183.

Rome, I. 21.

Rouille, miniſter of France, at Utrecht, I. 337.
Roupli, the Perſian, II. 99. |
Rouſcau, II. 151. |

Rouſillon, I. 15. 28, 44, 92.

Ruiter, the Dutch Admiral, I. 117, 149, 151, 182.
Ruſſcl, the Engliſh Admiral, I 218.

Sa, brother to the Portugueſe Ambaſſador in England, I. yy.
Sage (le) II. go.

Saint Amour (Count) I. 123.

Saint Cyr (the houſe of) II. 6s, 98.
Saint Hillary, Lieutenant-General of the Artillery, I. 109.
Saint Domingo, a French Colony, I. 240.

St. Evremond, II. 17, 18.

St. Olon, Ambaſſador of France at Genoa, I. 199.
St. Real (Abbe) II. 143.

Santerre, II. 156.

Scarron (Paul) II. 61.

Schomberg (Marſhal) I 110, 176.

Seguier (Chancellor) II. 98.

Seignelai (Marquiſs de) I. 199, 214, 219. II. 37.
Serres, a Propheteſs of the Cevennes, II. 199.
Sicily, I. 281, 268.

Soanin, biſhop of Sens, II. 239.

Soiſſons (the Counteſs of) II. 3. 50.

Sourdiac (Marquiſs of) II. 9.

Sourdis, archbiſhop of Bourdeaux, I. 30.

Spain, I. 9, 14.

Spectacles, or ſnews in France, II. 6.

Stanhope, an Engliſh General, I. 348.

Staniſlaus, King of Poland, I. 377. ctc. 383.
Staremberg, Viceroy of Spain, 343, 348.

Stafford (Earl of) I. 353.

Styrum (Count) I. 290.

Sweden, I. 26.

”

T NN DB

sueur (le) II. 133.
Swiſs, I. 30. 162.

y

Tallard (Marſhal) I. 291, 294, etc.

Tellier (Chancellor) II. 190, 197.

Tellier (Father) II. 230, 231, 432, 234.

Temple (Sir William) I. 125.

Teſſe {Count de) I. 245, 304, etc.

Thou (de) II. 133.

Tilly, the Imperial General, I. 12.

Toll-huis, I. 142. |

Torci Colbert, miniſter of France, I. 334. ete.

Tories, the party ſo called, I. 351.

Torſtenſon, a Swediſh General, I. 37, 43-

Toulon I. 193. 324. [I. 104.

"Toulouſe, Admiral-General of France, I. 304, 307. II. 53.

Tournefort, II. 128.

Tournon (Thomas Maillard de) Patriarch of Antioch, II. 259,

Tourville, vice-admiral of France, I. 213, 218. II. 104.
Treaty of Weſtphalia, I. 71. Of the Pyrenees, 91. Of Aix la

| Chapelle, 126. Of Nimeguen, 186. Of Ausbourg, 206. Of

Loretto, 245. Of Reſwick, 246. Of Carlowitz, 252. Of Ut-

recht, 358. Of Aix le Chapelle, 387.

Treves (Elector of) I. 43.

Trianon, II. 56.

Tripoly, I. 197.

Trump (Admiral) I. 73.

Tunis, I. 197

Turks, I. 27, top, 130, 195, 252+

Turenne (Marſhal) I. 41, 43, $$, 62, etc. 75, 80, 115, 138,

154, 16o, ete. II. 46.
Turin (the Siege of) I. 312.

U

Valbelle, I. 182.

Valette (Cardinal de la) I. 30.

Valiere (Madamoiſelle de la) II. 20.

Van-Beunning, a Dutch Miniſter in France, I. 126.
Vardes (Count de) II. 34, etc.

Varin, I. 187.
