The Age of Lewis XIV, Vol. 1 (Voltaire, 1751)
==========================================================
Voltaire's Siècle de Louis XIV (1751) - the book that invented 'philosophical' history of civilization; the age as the unit of history. The 1753 English translation, 2 vols. Vol. 1 of 2.

Tranſlated from the FRENCH of

-

M. DE VOLTAIRE. E

VOLUME THE FIRST,

.

-

G LAS G6 0 Wt:

Printed by R. Une;
For Hexay Arrxzns, at Mr. STauxs's ſhop,

M. DCC. LIII.

<7

—

11

* * +
o * 2 1
, 1 FLLEEY ;

„

d 9 T

ADVERTISEMENT. |

THE publithers of this edition of the
Age of Lewis XIV. wrote by the cele-
brated M. de VoLTAIRE, have ſpared
no pains to render it as correct as poſſi-
ble; and, in order to give the true mean-
ing of the author, the beſt editions of the
original French have been made uſe of,
and, where difficulties occurred, perſons
moſt knowing in that language conſulted.
Some hundreds of miſtakes in the Lon-
don editions are here rectified, and, in
many places, whole paragraphs ſupplied,
which in them are intirely omitted:
and though the publiſhers cannot pretend
to ſay that this edition is quite free from
a 2

| 11
miſtakes; yet it is hoped there are but
few; and if any ſuch occur, that the
reader will excuſe them. Theſe conſi-
derations, t together with its being ſold
at a much more moderate price, it is
expected, will recommend it to the fa-
your of the public.

n o % "4
EDITOR'S PREFACE.

* HE manuſcript of this work bav-
ing been put into my hands by the
author, I read it with very great atten-
tion: I obſerved i in it an extreme love of
truth, and a perfect impartiality i in regard
toall the affairs related in it. Theſe, prin-
cipally, were the reaſons which made me
conſider it as my duty to print it, under.
the auſpicious protection of a monarch,
to whom truth is not leſs dear than glo-
ry; and who; with the general conſent of
all Europe, is equally capable to inſtruct
mankind, aud to judge of their works.
thought ſuch an edition as this would
be preferable to one larger, and more
pompous: and I dare affirm, that theſe
A 2

v PREFACE.

two volumes contain more intereſting
facts, and curious anecdotes, than are in
any of the immenſe collections which
have hitherto been publiſhed _ the
reign of Lewis XIV.

And though the cancluſion of this
work contains ſuch things as have been
done by Lewis XV. and though more
than one eſtabliſhment of Lewis XIV.
has been perfected by his ſucceſſor, it ap-
_ peared, nevertheleſs, that the title of
Tre AGE or LEw1s XIV. ſhould ſtill
continue; not only becauſe it was the
hiſtory of about eighty years, but be- |
cauſe moſt of the great changes related
in it were begun under this reign:

N

CONTENTS
| OF THE |
CHAPTER

IN THE

FIRST VOLUME.

CHAPTER L

INTRODUCTION. / Page 1

Cray, II. The minority of Lewis MV. The victo-
ries of the French under the great Conde, then
duke d'Enguien. 35

Caray, III. The civil war. 45

Cuar. IV. Continuation of the civil war, to the end
of the rebellion in 1654, 58

Cuar. V. The ſtate of France to the death of car-
dinal Mazarin, in 1661, 71

Cnar. VI. Lewis XIV. gaverns alone: he forces
the Spaniſh- Auſtrian branch to give him the pre-

vii CONTENTS OF VOL, I.
cedence in all places; and the court of Rome ts
mate him ſatisfattion : he buys Dunkirk : he aſſiſts
the Emperor, Portugal, the States-general; and
- renders his kingdom flauriſhing and farmidas
ble, Page 100

Cnar, VII. The conqueſt of Flanders, * | 113

Cuar. VIII. The congueſt of Franche«Comte :| the
peace of Aix-la-Chapelle. 120

Chae, IX. The magnificence of Lewis XIV. the
conqueſt of Holland, | _..- aa

Char. X. The evacuation of Holland; and the ſe-
cond conqueſt of Franche-Comte. ©; "a

>
Cnar. XI. The fine campaign, and death of the
: marſhal de Turenne, 163

Caar. XII. From the death of Turenne to the peace
of Nimepen, in 1678, © 175

Cnar. XIII. The taking of Strasbourg, and the
' bombarding of Algiers : the embaſſy from Siam:
the pope humbled : The electorate of Cologn diſ⸗
puted. | 190

Cnar. XIV. King James dethroned by his ſon in-
law William HI. and protected by Lewss XIV.

| 205

Cnar. XV, What paſſed on the continent, whilſt _
William fork poſſeſſion of Seotland, Englund, and
 dreland, to 1697, 221

CONTENTS OF” VOL. E

Cnar, XVI. The peace of Ryfwick: the ſtate c
France, and Europe the death, and laſt will, of
Charles II. king of Spain, Page 2 44

Wy Ry =. =»

Cuar. XVII. The war of 1701, Tze conduct of
prince Eugene, marſbal Villeroi, the duke tle Ven-
dome, the duke of Marlborough, and the marſhal
de Villars, to 170 3, 272

cuar XVII. The It of the battle of Blenheim, or
Hochſtet; and its conſequences, 292

Car, XIX. Loſſes in Spain: the loſs of the battles
of Ramillies and Turin; and. their Conſequences,

' ©

Cuar. XR, Continuation of the digraces of France
and Spain: the humiliation, - conſtancy, and re-
ſources Lewis MV. The battle-of Malplaguet,
317

CHar, XXI. Lewis NIV. continues to aft peace,

and to defend himſelf: the duke de Vendome places
the king of Spain upon his throne, 341

Cnar. XXII, The victory of marſhal Villars at De-
nain : the re-eſtabliflnment of affairs : the general
Peace. 353

Cuar. XXIII. I view . the peace of
Utrecht to 1750. 4 367

7
£
4
ö 1
;

— x

.
bu
:
=
A
[
x
a
2
L ”
A
2
*
5 q
F]
*

rr

5 - - —— —

* CONTENTS OF vol. I

= - p

VOLUME I.
Cray, XXIV. Particulars and anecdotes of the
reign of Lewis XIV, „
Cnar, XV. Continuation of the anecdotes 34
Char. XXVI, Concluſion of the anecdotes, 55

Cnar. XXVII. Interior government, commerce, po-
lice, laws, military diſcipline, and marine, 86

Cnar, KXVII. 18 wy 113
car. XXIX. Arts and ſciences, 1424 |
Car. XXX Continuation of the arts. I5 3 :
Cuar, XXXI. Eccleſiaſtical affairs, Memorable ©
"OR 39 .
Cuar. XXXI. Of Calvimſm, | 177
nas. XXXII, Of Janſenifm, 207 4
Cnar, XXIV. Of Quietifm. =_
a

Caar, XXV. Diſputes upon Chineſe cer

.

AGE Oo F LEWIS S XIV,

THE.

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION.

UR intention in this work is not merely
() to write the life of Lewis XIV; the defign
is more extenſive. We would endeavour
to repreſent to poſterity, not the actions of a ſingle
man only, but the genius of an age, of all ogy
the moſt enlightened. |
Every age hath produced heroes and politclans:
all nations have ſuffered revolutions; and all hiſto-
ries are equally entertaining to him who wants to
treaſufe up in his mind facts only. But whoever
reflects, and, what is more uncommon, whoever
has a taſte, will reckbn only four ages in the hiſtory
of the world. The four happy ages are thoſe wher&
in the arts were perfected, and which, ſerving as an
aera of the greatneſs of the human mind, are a uw
tern to all poſterity,
The firſt of theſe ages, to which true glory is
annexed, is that of Philip and Alexander; or of

Pericles, r 1 —_ EY
Vor. 1, B

a7;
a

SS 1NTRODUCTION.
Phidias, and Praxiteles; and this honour was con-
fined to Greece: the reſt of. the world was unci-
vilized.
The ſecond age is that of Caeſar and Anand
which. is likewiſe diſtinguiſhed by the names pf
Lucretius, Cicero, Livy, Virgil, Horace, Ovid,
Varro, and Vitruvius. |

The third is that which followed the taking of
_ Conſtantinople by Mahomet II. At that time a fa-
. mily of plain citizens appeared in Italy, who did ſuch
things as ſhould have been undertaken by the kings
of Europe: the Medici drew to Florence the arts,
which the Turks drove out of Greece. This was
the period in which the glory of Italy ſhone bright-
eſt. All the ſciences refumed new life. TheTtalians
honoured them with the name of Vertu, as the firſt
Greeks had characterized them with that of iſdom.
Every thing tended towards perfection. The Mi-
chael Angelos, the Raphaels, the Titians, the Taſſos,
and the Arioſtos, flouriſhed. Engraving was invent-
ed, beautiful architecture appeared again, even more
admirable than in Rome when in its greateſt glory:
and Gothigbarbarity, which in all things had disfigur-
ed Europe, was driven quite out of Italy, to dier
place to good taſte.

The arts, continuing to be tranſplanted from
Greece into Italy, found themſelves in a favourable
ſoil, where they grew and improved very faſt. France,
England, Germany, and Spain, were deſirous in their
turns to taſte of theſe fruits; but they either never
came into theſe climates, or degenerated ſoon after,

Francis the firſt indged encouraged-men of leatity
ing, but they were N earning only: he h
ſome architects ai but be had neither Mis

. . ] .. IO .

8

SKA AN. Fs

AA AF 8 FAA

INTRODUCTION 3.

chael Angelos nor. Palladios. He endeavoured in
yain to eſtabliſh ſchools of painting; for the Italian

' painters, whom he called, tfained up no French ſcho-

lars under them. Some epigrams, and a few: looſe
tales, made up the whole of our poeſy, and Rabelais
was our only faſhionable author in proſe under we
reign of Henry the ſecond. |

In a word, the Italians had every thing, except
muſic, which was then very imperfect; and experis
mental philoſophy, which was every-where equally
unknown,

. Finally, the fourth is that which is called The age
of Lewis XIV. and it is, perhaps, of the four, that
which approaches the neareſt to perfection. Being
enriched with the diſcoveries of the preceding ages,
it made a greater progreſs in ſome things than the
three others together. . Indeed, all the arts were never
carried to a greater degree of perfection than under
the ages of the Medici's, the Auguſtus's, and the
Alexander's: but human reaſon, in general, was in
this brought nearer to perfection. Sound philoſophy
was diſcovered only in this age: and it may with
truth be ſaid, that, from the laſt years of cardinal
Richlieu to thoſe that followed the death of Lewis
XIV. there happened a general revolution, not on-
ly in our government, but in our arts, minds, and
manners; which ought to be an eternal epocha of
the true glory of our country. And this happy in-
fluence was not confined to France, but extended
into England, where it excited the emulation which
that ſenſible and thinking nation then wanted. It
carried taſte into Germany, and the ſciences into
Muſcovy; it even re-animated the EINE {tate

B 2

—

p 4% _— * 4 KT 2 . — . 1 N So ow . & 'A
. J : + "I
— * : Y

1 TNTRODUCTION

of Italy; and Europe, in general, owes ts politeneſs
to the court 'of Lewis XIV. 0

Before this time, the Italians called all hols a
eee the name of
barbatians; and it muſt be conſeſſed, that the
French, in ſome degree merited this reproachful
appellation. Our anceſtors, to the romantic gal-
kntry of the Moors, joined the rude barbarity of
the Goths: they knew ſcarce any of the amiable
arts; and this proves, that the uſeful ones were
likewiſe neglected: for when thoſe, which are nes
eeſſary, are once brought to a degree of perfection,
the beautiful and the agreeable ſoon ſucceed ; and
it is not ſurpriſing, that poetry, painting, ſcul-
pture, eloquence, and philofophy, were almoſt ins
tirely unknown to a nation, which, though it had
ports upon the ocean and the Mediterranean, was
nevertheleſs deftitute of ſhips; and which, though
haxurious to exceſs, was poſſeſſed only of a few of
the moſt ordinary manufactures. |

The Jews, the Genoeſe, the Venetians, the Pore
tugueſe, the Flemings, the Hollanders, and the
Engliſh, by turns carried on our commerce, of
which we knew not the principles. Lewis XIII.
at his acceſſion to the crown, had not a ſingle ſhipz
Paris did not contain 400,000. men, and was not
ornamented with four tolerable edifices. The other
towns of the kingdom reſembled thoſe which are
now on the other ſide of the Loire. All the gens
try and nobility, being cantoned up and down the
country, in caſtles ſurrounded with moats, oppreſſed
thoſe who cultivated the lands. The great roads were
almoſt impaſſable; the towns were without laws, the.

INTRODUCTION.

Nate without money, and the government almoſt
conſtantly deſtitute of eredit among foreign nations.
It muſt be confeſſed, that, from the declenſion of

*
n

or lefs under this weakneſs, becauſe it ſcarce ever
enjoyed the happineſs of a good government.
To make a ſtate powerful, the people ſhould
either have a liberty founded upon the laws, or the
regal authority ſhould be eſtabliſhed without con
troul.

In France, the people were ſlaves till about the
time of Philip Auguſtus; the lords were tyrants
till the reign of Lewis XI; and the kings, conſtantly
engaged in maintaining their authority againſt their
vaſſals, had neither leiſure to think about the good
of their ſubjects, nor power to make them happy.
Lewis XI, did a great deal in favour of the royal
authority, but nothing for the happineſs —_—_ glory
of his people. :
Francis I. encouraged commerce, navigation, ler
ters, and all the arts; but he was too unfortunate
to be able to make them take INT and
they all periſhed with him. |
Henry the great was meditating the means to
free France from thoſe calamities, and that barbarity
in which it had been plunged by thirty years dif-
cord; when he was aſſaſſinated in his capital, in the
midſt of the people na happineſs he was con-
ſulting.

Cardinal Richlieu, being employed in humbling
the houſe of Auſtria, and the great lords, and in
preventing the increaſe of Calvinif, was t00 ma
B 3

n » * i 7 +

- mw 6 be * * Weow

r AAS. A. _  ” ©.

- b. "=? '
v. * q "
= wo.
*
- 9
, Z
p —
= =
1
=
_—

the family of Charlemagne, France languiſhed more

— C

6 INTRODUCTION; *'

engaged in theſe affairs, to reform the nation; how
ever he at leaſt began this happy work. y

Thus for the ſpace of nine hundred years, our
genius has been almoſt always obſcured under 2

Gothic government, in the midſt of diviſions and
civil wars: we had neither laws nor cuſtoms that
were fixed: the language changed almoſt every

century, and yet always continued barbarous: the
nobles were without diſcipline, always in a ſtate of
war or idleneſs, and unſkilled in every other thing:
the eccleſiaſtics lived in diforder and ignorance;
and the people, being without evg were po
and miſerable. |
And this diſcovers the * why the French
had no ſbare either in the great diſcoveries, or the
admirable inventions of other nations; printing,
gun-powder, glaſs, teleſcopes, the compaſs, the air-
pump, the true ſyſtem of the univerſe; theſe were
diſcoveries none of which were made by them.
They paſſed their time in tournaments, while the
Portugueſe and Spaniards were diſcovering and

conquering new regions both to the eaſt and weſt.

of the known world. Charles the fifth had begun
to laviſh the treaſures of Mexico, in Europe, before
the ſubjects of Francis the firſt had diſcovered the
uncultivated country of Canada: but even by the
little which the French did in the beginning of the

ſixteenth century, we may perceive how much they

are capable of, when properly conducteec.
In this hiſtory, it is deſigned to ſhew them as

they were under Lewis XIV; and may the deſcend-
ents of this monarch, and thoſe of his people, be-
ing equally animated with a happy and glorious:
emulation, endeavour to ſurpaſs their anceſtors! *?

as mo. a od eas wo So SS .anm ar .. aa& aa wu == => _ a ca

vv waa — „*

J re

*F Ld - — Y m n "> wa

= ©, xc». 9.23. 4. LE a... ©. RD.

INTRODUCTION. 7

accounts of wars undertaken in this age. We-are
obliged to leave to the annaliſts, the care of colleft-

only ſerve to divert our attention from the principal

and countermarches of armies, the days when the
trenches were opened before towns, when they were

ſurrendered and given up by treaties. A thouſand
circumſtances, which were intereſting to cotempo-
raries, diſappear, and are loſt to the eyes of poſte-
rity, and only thoſe great events are brought into

view, which have determined the fate of empires.
Every thing that is done does not deſerve to be

recorded. We ſhall confine ourſelves therefore;
in this hiſtory, only to what merits the atten»
tion of all ages, to what may deſcribe the genius
and manners of men, to what may ſerve for in-

arts, and our country.

We ſhall endeavour to ſhew the ſtate of France,
and the other nations of Europe; before the birth
of Lewis XIV; after which we ſhall relate the
great, political, and- military events in his reign.
The interior government of the kingdom, which
is of the greateſt conſequence to the people, ſhall
be treated ſeparately. The private life of Lewis
XIV. and the particularities of his court and reign,

other articles for the arts, the ſciences, and the pro-

No one muſt expect to find here the almoſt endleſs

object. Is is their buſineſs to relate the marches.

taken and retaken by arms, and when they were

greſs of the human underſtanding in this age. Fi-
nally, we ſhall ſay ſomething concerning the church,
which has been ſo long united „

ing with accuracy all theſe little facts, which would * ;

ſtruction, and to enforce the love of _ the

will make a conſiderable part. We ſhall alſo have

8

Of the States of Euro- before

of the world. It is upon thefe principles, that the

+ that they are agreed touching the pre-eminence and

« Abs

. THE ACT OF: i. lh. ff

ſtrengthens it; and which, though inſtituted to
teach religion and morality, often gives — 1
— and human paſſions. | |

A

Lewis XIV.

HE Chriſtian part of Europe (excepting Muſ-

covy) had long been in ſuch a ſituation, that
it might be conſidered as one great republic, divid-
ed into ſeveral ſtates, ſome monarchical, and others
mixed; ſome ariſtocratical, others popular; but all
correſponding with one another : all having the fame
foundation for their religion, though divided into
ſeveral ſets; and all having the ſame principles of
political and natural law, unknown in the other parts

Wor ey Www 4 A. +» was ..

te

European nations never make their priſoners ſlaves;
that they refpe& the embaſſadors of their enemies;

particular rights of certain princes, as the emperor
the kings, and other inferior potentates; and that
more eſpecially, they are unanimous in regard to the
wiſe policy obſerved in preſerving, as near as poſs
ſible, an equal balance of power; inceſſantly em-
ploying negotiations, even in the midſt of war, and
reciprocally maintaining embaſſadors, or leſs ho-
nourable ſpies, in their ſeveral courts, who may
warn all the others of the defigns of any one, give
at once the alam to Europe, and preſerve the weaker

SS na S'e g TT

ready to make. *
Ae the ads os Gelees B bag

This puiſſant houſe, towards the end of the yeap =
3 630. was miſtreſs of Spain, Portugal, and the trea-
fures of America; the Low- Countries, the Milaneſe;
the kingdom of Naples, Bohemia, Hungary, and
even Germany (if we may be permitted to fay ſo);
were become her patrimony ; and, if alt theſe ſtates
had been united under one head of this houſe, it is
probable all Europe would at laſt have been. ſubs
aer .

Of GERNM ANT. | "a

THE empire of Germany is the moſt powerful
neighbour of France: it is nearly of the ſame en-
tent, leſs rich perhaps in money, but more abounds
ing in a people robuſt, and patient of labour. The
German nation, in a great meaſure, is governed as
France was under the firſt Capetian kings,” who
were chiefs, frequently but ill obeyed by ſeveral of
their great vaſſals, and even by ſome of their leſſer
ones, At this day, ſixty free cities, which are called
imperial, about the ſame number of ſecular foves
reigns, near forty. eccleſiaſtical princes, either bi -
ſhops or abbots, nine electors, in which are included
three kings, and, finally, the emperor, who is the
bead of all theſe potentates, compoſe this vaſt Ger-
manic body, which, throngh the national phlegm,
fubliſts almoſt with as much order, as there was
formerly of confulion in the government of France.

nme his

irc. n . eee eee

;nclined-too much in mur ul A houſe of Sad Ex

» > a4z

| . 5
f * z

THE AGE OF Ch. 11
* and his obligations; and the difficult
; nene
9 conteſted, makes, what they call in Germany, the
* ee eee cr e
celebrated. a\4
I The emperor himſelf, wink non; ee
much more powerful, or more rich, than a doge of
Venice. Germany, being divided into free cities and
principalities, leaves to the chief of all theſe ſtates
only the pre-eminence, with very great honours ins
deed, but without dominions, or money; and, con-
ſequently, without power. By the title of emperor
he does not poſſeſs a ſingle village: the city of Bams
berg alone is aſſigned for his reſidence, when he has
no other. Nevertheleſs, this dignity, altogether as
vain as it is ſupreme, was become ſo powerful in the
bands of the Auſtrians, that it was often feared they
| 2
ſolute monarchy.
10 Two panics at that thue divided, dnd at this dey
do till divide, Europe, and more particularly Ger-
many. The firſt is that of the Catholics, ſubjected
more or leſs to the pope; the ſecond is that of the
enemies of the ſpiritual and temporal power of the
pope, and the catholic prelates. Thoſe of this laſt
party are called by the general name of Proteſtants,
though they are divided into Lutherans, Calviniſts,
and others, ee eee eee,
as they hate Rome.
In Germany, the Lutheran religion, which they
call Evangelical, is profeſſed in Saxony, Brandenburg
the Palatinate, part of Bohemia, Hungary, the ſtates
of the houſe of Brunſwick, and Wirtemberg..Alkhe
free imperial cities have embraced this ſect, un.

Weng —

— W ao. Ad. 1 1

—— a hoc >. am a ans aa was

I
_

1

9% a

r F<<AmGGO.TAT.70Mm m4 —

ch. 1, "LE WS PR .
was conſidered as more ſuſtable than'the cabal
religion to people jealous of their liberties... |

The Calviniſts, being diſperſed among the La 24
therans, who are the moſt numerous, make ony aa
inconſiderable body: the Catholics compoſe the reſt
of the empire; and, having at their head the houſe
of Auſtria, ey were 2 the moſt power ·
ful. N

Not only . but all the Chriſtian ſtates,
ſtill bled at the wounds which they had received in
theſe religious wars; a madneſs peculiar to Chriſt-
ians, but to which idolaters are ſtrangers; and is the
unhappy conſequence of that dogmatical ſpirit
which has ſo long been introduced into all parties.
There are few points of controverſy which have not
been the cauſe of a civil war; and foreign nations
(perhaps our own poſterity) will one day be unable
to comprehend how it was poſlible, that our fore-
fathers could kill one another for ſo many years
together, and yet, at the lens INS
patience,

In 1619. the emperor Matthias dying without
children, the Proteſtant party exerted itſelf. ro de-
prive the houſe of Auſtria of the imperial di-
gnity, and prevent it from deſcending -upon any
of the Roman communion ; but Ferdinand, arch-
duke of Gratz, the couſin of Matthias, was never- +
theleſs elected emperor... He was before king of
Bohemia and Hungary, by the abdication of Mat-
thias, and by the forced. „
theſe two kingdoms made of him. |

This Ferdinand II. continued to perſecute on
weaken the Proteſtant party. He was, for ſome
time, the moſt powerful and the moſt happy-me-

4

* nn A
. - * "I — A 9 4 A a 9
of *

0 * ” bs "3 =
"i" . 43

02 TAE AGE or c.
arch in Chriſtendom; not fo much by his own
merit, as by the fucceſs of his two great generals;
Walſtein and Tilly; for he followed the example of
many of che princes of the houſe of Auſtria, 'who
happy through the merit of thoſe whom they ems
ployed. His power had long menaced both the Pro-
teſtants-and Catholics with ſlavery: the alarm was
ſpread even as far as Rome, over which this title of
emperor, and king of the Romans, gives chimerical
Tights, which the leaſt occaſion may render but tos
real. "Rome, which, on its ſide, anciently pre
tended to a ſtill more chimerical right over the
empire, at this time united with France againſt the
houſe of Auſtria. The money of France, the in-
trigues of Rome, and the complaints of all the Pro-
teſtants, at laſt drew out of the heart of Sweden
Guſtavus Adolphus, the only king of that time
who could pretend to the name of hero, and the
,
power. 4
| The er Cuterars Gemsen cheese
face of Europe. In 2531. he defeated gener
Tilly in the battle of Leipſick, ſo celebrated for
the new methods of war which this king put in
practice, and which are ftill conſidered as ſome af
the maſter-pieces in the military art. *
| The emperor Ferdinand, in 4632. was on the

of lofing Bohemia, Hungary, and che .
pire; but he was ſaved by bis good fortune: Guſta-
vus Adolphus was killed at rhe battle of Lutren, ia
the midſt of his victory; and the death of this
RW Ge

alone hare deſtroyed.

Ea $7 g. 2 8

nen A wy we am,

oh of [2* wud

Ch. r. LEWIS MY.” 13
The policy of the houſe of Auſtria, which had
funk under the arms of Adolphus, faund itſelf ſu-
perior to every thing elſe. It detached the moſt
powerful princes of the empire from the alliance
with Sweden: and theſe victorious troops, being
abandoned by their allies, and deprived of their
king, were defeated at Norlingen; and though they
were afterwards more ſucceſsful, yet they were al-
ways leſs to be feared than under Guſtavus.” |
Ferdinand II. dying in this conjuncture of affairs,
left all his dominions to his ſon Ferdinand III. who
inherited his policy, and, like him, cartied on the
war in his cabinet. He reigned during the mino-
rity of Lewis XIV.

Germany was not at that time ſo flouriſhing as it
is become fince: luxury was unknown in it, and
the conveniencies of life were yet very rare among
the greateſt lords. They were not introduced till
= rowards the end of 1 68 6. by the French refugees;
W who fled thither, and eſtabliſhed their manufacto-
both of commerce and money: the gravity of man-
ners, and the ſlowneſs natural to the Germans, de-
prived them of thoſe" pleaſures and agreeable arts,
which the Itaſian ſagacity had cultivated for ſo many
years, and which the French induſtry; from that
ime, began to bring to perfection. The Germans,
ich within theraſelves, were poor abroad: and this
pove joined to the difficulty of ſuddenly re-unit-
; ſo many different people under the fame ſtand-
64 laid them almoſt, as at this day, under an
wunpotibility of carrying and maintaining a war

Fo
Vor. I. C 5

*

e ere? (> @ rr eee

9

14 THE AGE OE Ch. b.
And it has therefore been almoſt always in the em-
pire, that the French have made war againſt the
empire. The difference of genius and government
os akon whe wht; hari
the Germans for a defence. |

*

Of ne

THE Spaniards, em by u
branch of the houſe of Auſtria, after the death of

Charles the fifth, had ſpread more terror than the
Germans. The kings of Spain were incompatably
more rich and abſolute. The mines of Mexico and
Potoſi ſeemed to furniſh them wherewith to pare
chaſe the liberties of Europe. The project of uni-
verſal monarchy over the Chriſtian world, which had
been formed by Charles the fifth, was immediately
adopted by Philip II. who, immured in the Eſcurial
yet, by negotiations, and by war, endeavoured the
ſubjection of Chriſtendom. He invaded Portugal
ravaged France, and menaced England. But being;
perhaps, fitter to traffic for ſlaves at à diſtance,
than to combat his enemies in perſon, he added no
conqueſt to the eaſy invaſion of Portugal: he volun-
tarily facrificed fifteen hundred millions, which
make near three thouſand millions of our preſem
money, to ſubject France, and regain Holland: but
his treaſures only ſerved to enrich the cant |
was deſirous to ſubdue.

Philip III. his fon, bring fill leſs martial and les
wiſe than his father, had but few of the virtues &
quiſite in a king. Superſtition, the vice of weak
minds, tarniſhed his reign, and enfeebled the "Spas
niſh monarchy, His kingdom began to be dep#

LTT. WW

5

LETT SE FESSTEDOESEATETMY

<tr LEWIS þV.:

63 # 7.

- _ © "VP 4 4 e * *
* 6 Po << 2 *

15
pulated by the numerous colonies, which avarice
tranſplanted into the new world; and it was in theſe
circumſtances, that he droye out of his kingdom
near eight hundred, thouſand Moors, though, on the
contrary, he ought rather to have invited more to
come into it, if it is true that the number of ſubjects
conſtitutes the wealth and ſtrength of monarchs.
Spain after this, became almoſt a deſert: the indo-
lence and pride of the inhabitants ſuffered the riches.
of the new world to paſs into other hands: the gold
of Peru became the property of all the merchants of
Europe: and it is in vain that other nations are pro-
hibited enterance into the ports of Spaniſh America
by ſevere laws; for the factors of France, Eng-
land, and Italy, load the galleons with their own
merchandizes, enjoy the chief profits ariſing there
from, and. for them, nm
conquered.

The Spaniſh greatnelß under Phip ILL. was there:
fore nothing more than a vaſt body without life or
ſubſtance, n
its ſtrength.

Philip IV. who inherited his father's 3
loſt Portugal by his own negligence, Rouſillon by
the weakneſs of his arms, and Catalonia by the
abuſe of deſpotiſm. It was this king, to whom
the count duke d'Olivares, his favourite and his
miniſter, gave the name of Great, at his acceſſion
to the crown, perhaps with deſign to excite him
to deſerve that title; of which, however, he was
ſo unworthy, that, though he was king, no one ever
gave it him. Such kings could not long be ſucceſſ-
ful in their wars againſt France. And if our divi-

C 2 .

= - 4 d
— 2 1
ä
EA oY
. - 4

16 THE AGE OF _
Lions and miſtakes gave them ſome advantages, they
loſt the fruits of them by their incapacity. Beſides;
. they commanded a people, who, by their privileges,
aſſumed a right to ſerve them ill. The Caſtillans
had the prerogative of not ſerving in the wars out
of their own country; the Arragonians were per-
perually. diſputing their liberty againſt -the--royal
council; and the Catalans, who conſidered” theit
kings as their enemies, did not even permit them
to raiſe forces in their pruvinces. Thus this fine
kingdom had then but very little power abroad,
and was miſerable at home. The gifts of nature ia
theſe happy climates were ſeconded by no induſtry.
Neither the ſilks of Valentia, nor the fine-cloths
of Andaluſia and Caſtille, were manufactured by the
hands of Spaniards. Fine linens were a” luxury
but very little known. The manufactories of Flans
ders, the monumental remains of the houſe of Bur»
gundy, furniſhed Madrid with every thing they
then knew of magnificence. Stuffs of gold and
filver. were prohibited in this monarchy, as they
would have been in an indigent republic that feared
being impoveriſhed. In reality, notwithſtanding
the mines of the new world, Spain was fo poor,
that the miniſtry of Philip IV. were reduced to the
neceſſity of coining braſs money, on which a value
was fet almoſt as great as upon ſilver. It became
neceſſary for the maſter of Mexico and Peru to make
falſe money, to defray the expences of the ſtate}
for if the ſage Gourville may be credited, they
dared not to impoſe perſonal taxes, becauſe neither
the citizens nor the people of the country, as they
had ſcarce any effects, could have been made 8
pay. Such was the ſtate of Spain; yet neverthes

oft

—_ a > 3a as i oa tMo id © A: a=. io as

„ R89Þwwes

1 A ww ww

* © = < ,

© K 8 R An RE BRAG YT THR GOBLEOP OGG SEuWw Ro

ch. 1. LEWES NV. 17
leſs, being reunited with the empire, ———
1 reed see, 4

Of PorTusAl. r YT

PORTUGAL ee time ee |
an independent kingdom. John duke of Braganza,
who paſſed for a weak prince, had forced this province
out of the hands of a king weaker than himſelf: and
the Portugueſe, through neceſſity, cultivated that
commerce. which the Spaniards neglected through
pride. In 1641. they leagued with, France and
Holland againſt Spain. This revolution of Portu-
gal was of greater advantage to France than the moſt
ſignal victories could have been; and the French
miniſtry, which had contributed in nothing to this
event, did, without difficulty, obtain the greateſt
advantage that can be gained over an opponent,
neee
concileable enemy.

Portugal, ihaking oCthe poke of Sooin, emtend-
ing its commerce, and increaſing its power, natu-
rally brings into our mind the idea of Holland,
which enjoyed the ſame advantages in a very —
ent manner.

.COE:Hoarame

THIS little ſtate of Seven united provinces, bar-
ren, unhealthy, and almoſt overwhelmed by the
ſea, was, for about half a century, almoſt the only
example upon earth of what may be eſſected by the
love of liberty, and an indefatigable une

G 3

A * 2 82 3 p - «he a A i Fe — n 4 2
* n | n 2 - of y—_—_ "IT *
— 1 WS x o - l * * *
* * : 4
\ a . a *
9 N —
> ,

1% THE A0 OP 6a.

Theſe poor people; far from being numerous: meh
Teſs martial than the worſt of the 'Spaniſty forces
and who as yet were of no conſideration in Europe,
reſiſted the whole force of their maſter and. tyrant
Philip II. eluded the deſigns of ſeveral princes, who
would have aſſiſted them with a view to ſubject
them, and laid the foundations of a power, which
has ſince been ſeen to balance that of Spain itſelſ.
The deſpair, which is infpired by tyranny; armed
them at firſt ; liberty raiſed their eourage's the prins
ces of the houſe of Orange made them excellent
foldiers; and ſcarce had they become the conquers
ors of their maſters, when they eſtabliſned a form
of government, which preſerves, as much as poſſi-
ble, that equality, which is the m of man ·
kind. ' einn
The mildneſs of this government, and the bens
ration of all ſects of religion, dangerous perhaps
in other ſtates, but neceſſary here, peopled Ho“
land with vaſt numbers of foreigners; eſpecially
Walloons, whom the inquifition perſecuted in their
own country, and who from faves, * this chang
became free citizens.
The doctrines of Calvin, prevailing In nana
ſerved ſtill more to increaſe its power. This eoum
try, which was then ſo poor, would not have been
able either to ſupport the grandeur of prelates, ot
to maintain religious orders; neither could a na-
tion, which was in want of inhabitants, admit thoſe
to live among them, who ſhould engage themſelves

by oath, as far as was in their power, to ſuffer the

human ſpecies to''periſh. They had before them
the example of England, which, after the eceleſis-
ſtics were permitted to enjoy the ſweets of marriaghy

bh . 959

A wv 1ac nc = © '

a ww fr. ts a +. wa ws Noam A <t* hw A Jy, Alb

8 © =

n LE WIs A 149

and aasee families were no longer buried in
the celibacy of a amn
lous by one- third. |
-» While the Hollanders; bond in hand, a
ed their new government, they ſupported it hy oom ·
merce. They went to the fartheſt parts of  Afia,
there to attack their maſters, Who then enjoyed the
diſcoveries of the Portugueſe; and they too from
them thoſe iſlands where the choiceſt ſpices are pro-
duced; which are as real treaſures as thoſe of Peru,
and the cultivation of which is as conducive to the
— OE CI In
detrimental to it.

The Eaſt-India b eſtablied in .
gained, in 1620. near three hundred per cent.
which gain increaſed every year; ſo that this ſo-
ciety of merchants, ſoon becoming a formidable
power, built the city of Batavia in the iſle of Ja-
va, made it the moſt beautiful in all Aſia, and the
centre of commerce, wherein reſide five thouſand
Chineſe, and to which all the nations of the worſd
repair. The company in this city can arm thirty
ſhips of war, of forty guns, and at leaſt 20, o0 men.
A common merchant, when governor of this colony,
appears here with all the pomp of the greateſt king;
nor does this Aſiatio grandeur corrupt the frugal
ſimplicity of the Hollanders in Europe. This com-
merce, and this frugality, W the grandeur
of the Seven provinces. | i
Antwerp, which kakfo eee
ſtate, and which had ſwallowed up the commerce of
Venice, now became a mere deſert; and Amſter.
dam, notwithſtanding the inconveniencies of its
port, grew, in its turn, the magazine-of the world,

an 8 ern e eee eee ee

* =
— r 8 * "3, here, l KP:
= ' — b = 8 * — . * A = 7 K 5 I
m_— —— _—— — — - TY | s 8 * _ : TY . 22 8 - —
1 8 - — FEN — ** — — An . — — n —_ 2 — *
* | x AID 5 — a
R * * _ . * 4 F —_— - — *
* 214 N C
Ly
-

- — PI

2 _ THE AGE OF ch.

by immenſe labours. The waters of the ſea wert
confined by double banks. Canale, cut in all the
large quays, ornamented with fine trees; and barks,
laden with merchandizes, came to the doors of the
inhabitants; ſo that now foreigners are always ſtrucł
with admiration at this ſingular mixture, formed by
the houſes, the tops of the trees, and the fireamets
of the ſhips, which at once, and in the fame plact
exhibit a view of the city, the country and the ſes

This ſtate, of ſo new a kind, was, from its fours
dation intimately attached to France: they were

united by intereſt ; they had the ſame | enemies;

and Henry the Great rr
r ne ee | —_

Of ENGLAND. M

ENGLAND, being much more powerful, a-
fected the ſovereignty of the ſeas, and pretended th
hold the balance between the powers of Europe: but
Charles I. who aſcended the throne in 1 62 5. was bb
far from being able to fapport the weight of this
balance, that he found the preſervation of his on
ſelf deſirous to reader his power in England inde-

pendent of the laws, and to change the religion in
Scotland. He was too obſtinate to deſiſt from theſe
deſigns, and too weak to execute them. He was 8
good huſband, a good maſter, a good father, and
an honeſt man; but he was an an ill- adviſed king
and engaged bhimſelf in a civil war, which at laſt

bs.
* 4

—

& Ho ee. aA ee - Mt

ALANA IST

PETS TH

an.

b. . LE wis N.. e
S2 |

. £43 a +. 12

minority of Lewis XIV. prevented England, for a
time, from concerning idelf with the affairs of its
neighbours. She loſt her weight together with her
good fortune; her commerce was interrupted, and
ſhe was regarded by the other nations of Europe as
buried under ber own ruins, till the time when ſhe,
on a ſudden, became more formidable than ever, un-
der the dominion of Cromwell, who ſubjected her, by
bearing the ſcriptures in one hand, the ſword in the
other, and the maſk of religion upon his counte ·
nance; and who, in his government; under the qua-
lities of a great king, covered all che crimes of an

k ok g
» 4 P; 4 * i
*

Of Ron z.

THAT balance which England had long flattered
herſelf ſhe maintained between the ſovereigns of
Europe by her power, the court of -Rome attempt-
ed to hold by her policy. Italy was divided, as'at
this day, into ſeveral ſovereignties. What the pope
polleſſes, is conſiderable enough to render him re-
ſpected as a prince; but not ſufficiently ſo to make
him formidable. The nature of his government
does not increaſe the people of his territories, who,
beſides, have but little money or commerce i his ſpi-
ritual authority, in hich there is always ſome thare
of temporal, is deſpiſed and rejected among one
half of the Chriſtian powers; and if, in the other,
he is regarded as a father, yet his children have
lomctimes reaſon to oppoſe him, and frequently do

unparalleled. a :
This crit wos, wile duns benen n F

n r
22 THE AGE OF Gt
it with ſucceſs. The maxim of France is to regand
him as a ſacred, but enterpriſing perſon; whoſe tos
it is neceſſary to kiſs, but whoſe hands it is fame»
times proper to bind. In all the catholic countries
the ſeps may ſtill be ſeen which the court of Rome

has formerly taken towards univerſal monarchy, F

All the princes of the Catholic religion, at their acs
ceſſion, ſend embaſſies of obedience, as they are call
ed, to the pope. Each crown has in Rome a cars
dinal, who aſſumes the title of protector. The
pope grants bulls for all biſhoprics, and therein
expreſſes himſelf, as though he conferred theſe dis
gnities by his ſole power. All the Italian, Spaniſh,
Flemiſh, and even ſome French biſhops are ſo call
ed, by the divine permiſſion, and that of the holy
ſee. There is no kingdom wherein there are not
many benefices in his nomination ; and he receives
the firſt year's revenues of the conſiſtorial benefices,
as a tribute.
' Thercdligious orders, whoſe chiefs reſide at Rome
are likewiſe ſo many immediate ſubjects to the
popes, diſperſed in every ſtate. Cuſtom, which
does every thing, and which is the cauſe that the
world is governed by abuſes, as well as by laws, bas
not always permitted princes intirely to remedy thele
abuſes, which, in other reſpects, have a- conneCtion
with things uſeful and facrcd. To take an oath 0
any other than one's lawful ſovereign, is conſidered
as high-treaſon among the laity, and yet in a cloilter
it is an act of religion. "The difficulty of knowing;
how far one ought to obey this foreign ſovereigh
the eaſineſs of being ſeduced, the pleaſure of ſhaking
off a natural yoke to put on another, vbich

+» wy ot of © + = ©. bu

=: A 6 4X Hood

|
\
|
k
0

r At Docs

LEWIS xv.” 23

| vaten engaged whote orders of religions inthe
ſervice of Rome againld her b,, *
The enlightened fpirit which bas reigned in
France for more than a century paſt, and which is
diſperſed among all ranks and conditions, has proved
the beſt remedy of this abuſe. Good books, writ- -

the kings and people; and one of the great changes,
which by this means has been made in our manners,
under Lewis XIV. is the perſuaſion which all the
religious orders begin to entertain, that they are ſub-
jects to the king, rather than ſervants to the pope-
Nevertheleſs, juriſdiftion, that eſſential mark of ſo-
vereignty, ſtil continues with the Roman pontiff:
and France herſelf, notwithſtanding all the liberties
of the Gallican church, permits appeals in eccleſi-
aſtical cauſes to be finally made to the pope. |
If a perſon would annul his marriage, eſpouſe
bis couſin or his niece, or be abſolved from his
vows, it is to Rome, and not to his biſhop, that
he muſt addreſs himſelf. Services of this kind are
.
— EBT

privileges, which are regarded by ſome
* raggrtern'=— the greateſt
abuſes, and, by others, as being the remains of the
Rome preſerves its credit with as much policy, as
was ever ſhewn by the od Roman republic in ch
quering one half of the known world.

No court ever better underiited/bow un dihaye
according to perſons and times. The popes are al-
moſt always Italians, perfectiy wen killed in af-

Bre LISLE EEE FIT

and the unhappineſs of the times, have but.

ten upon this ſubject, are real ſervices done both to f

PF . 9 a i > ae. 9
4 * _ —

24 THE AGE OF .

fairs, without being blinded by their paſſions: their
council is compoſed of cardinals, who reſemble
them, and who are all animated with the - ſame
ſpirit. From this council are iſſued thoſe orders
which extend even to China and America; ſo that;
in this ſenſe, it preſides over the univerſe; and one
may ſay of it what a ſtranger formerly ſaid of the
ſenate of Rome, I have ſeen a conſiſtory of kings;
Moſt. of our writers have, with reaſon, exclaimed
againſt the ambition of this court: but I do not
find one who has done ſufficient juſtice to her pru-
dence. I am in doubt whether any other nation
could, for ſo long a courſe of time, have preſerved
in Europe ſo many prerogatives, which have 'ak
ways been oppoſed and conteſted. Any other nas
tion would perhaps have loſt them, either by its
pride or weakneſs, by its flowneſs or vivacity : but
Rome, having almoſt continually behaved with 3
proper firmneſs or compliance, has preſerved every
thing which there was a poſlibility of preſerving.
She was rampant under Charles the fifth, terrible
to our Henry III. an enemy and a friend by turts
to Henry IV. artful towards Lewis XHI. openly
oppoſed to Lewis XIV. at the time when he was
moſt to be feared, and frequently a ſecret enenty
to the emperors, of whom the was more du
than of the fultan of the Turks.

A few rights, many pretensons, policy,” and
patience, are all that now remain to Rome of that
ancient power, which, fix centuries before, v
forming deſigns ro fobjeR the expire, and alla
rope to the triple crown.
Naples is a teſtimony which ll ſubfiſts of th
right which the popes formerly with fo much 8

LEWES HIT 2
grandeur aſſumed, in ceatig· and beſtowing
But the king of Spain, who n 00
poſſeſſor of this ſtate, hath left che court of
r
> powerful vaſſal.

Of the reſt of ITALY. 4 'n

Hed bets AR
happy tranquillity; which had been interrupted
only by an inconſiderable war between the Barba«
ini cardinals, nephews of pope Urban VIII; and
duke of Parma; and this was neither bloody
zor of long duration, but was fach as might be
mann muſt neceſſarily be comformable to the na«
of their government. Cardinal Barbarini, the
uthor of thefe troubles, marched with indulgences
t the head of his little army.” The greateſt bartle
nat was fought, was between four or ſive hundred
men of each party, The fortreſs-of Piegaia, as
don as the artillery approached, which conſiſted
pnly of two culverins, furrendered at diſcretion.
Nevertheleſs, more negotiations were neceſſary to
put an end to theſe troubles, which ſcarce deſerve
o be mentioned in hiſtory, than if ancient Rome
and Carthage had been concerned in them. This
ent is mentioned here only to ſnew the genius of
2odern Rome, which conchades every thing by ne-
jotiation, contrary to ancient Rome, which decided
all by the fword.
The other provinces of Italy were influenced by
a10us intereſts. Venice feared e Turks and the
Dif xo 641-1 N

MEE NASN FA FST SS FSA

8 2

RS Mx

26 TRE AGE OF G.
tes on the Terra firma, againſt the pretenſions of
Germany, and che invaſions of the Grand Seignot
She was now no longer that ancient Venice, miſtrek
of the commerce of the world, who an hundred and
fifty years before had excited the jealouſy of ſo ma»
ny kings. The wiſdom of her government ſubſiſſ⸗
ed; but the loſs of her immenſe commerce had a
moſt deprived her of all force; and the city of vt
nice, by its ſituation, was incapable of being ſubdued,
— — mk congulel

-* The ſtate of Florence, under the government
the Medici's, enjoyed tranquillity and abundances
introduced, ſtil flouriſhed ; and Tuſcany was then
in Italy, what Athens had been in Greece.

Savoy, torn by a civil war, and by the French
and Spaniſh troops, had at laſt re-united intirely in
. bn ip
minution of the Auſtrian power.

The Switzers, as at this day, preſerved UM
berty, without attempting the oppreſſion of atiy
"They fold their troops to their more rich neigh»
bours. They were themſclves poor, ignorant of the
Friences, and of all the arts which luxury inne-
duces; but they were wile and happy, ©

Of the States of the Nox Tm

THE northern nations of Europe, Poland
Sweden, Denmark, and Muſcovy, were like tht
ether powers, always in a ſtate of jealoufy an
ſpicion, or at open war with one another. I

hand, 25 at this day, the manners and governantll

F  - —- ao % weaUGg .

th. 7. Drin my. © 27
Ff the Goths and Franks "prevailed; an "eleflive #
ing a nobility that divided his power, a people
E a cavalry compoſed of
ne nobles, no fortified towns, and ſcarce any com-
nerce. This nation was ſometimes attacked by
the Swedes or Muſcovites, and ſometimes by
the Turks. The Swedes, who, by their conſtitu-
tion, enjoy greater liberty than the Poles, admit-
ated monde ot =
he ſtares, being, however, at this time, more fub-
J Ito their kings than Poland, were almoſt always
nctorion: Denmark, which had formerly been
ormidable to the Swedes, was then no- longer To
0 any nation. As to Muſcovy, it could be conf
dcred only as a nation of mere barbarians. *

Of the Torts. | -

2

Fo Ef At SFESREA ld

THE Turks were not what they had been un-
der the Selims, the Mahomets, and the Solimans:
without baniihing crnelty from it; and the ſultans,
though the moſt defpotic of fovertigns, were the
leaſt ſecure of their thrones, and their lives. Ofmity
and Ibrahim had been ſtrangled; Muſtapha had been
twice depoſed; and the Turkiſh empire, haken b
theſe revolutions, was alfo attacked by the Perus;
but when they gave it time to take breath, and the
revolutions in the ſeraglio were ſubſided, this em-
pre again became formidable to Chriſtendom ; for,
from the mouth of the Borifthenes, as far 2s the
fates of Venice, Mouſcovy, Hungary, Greece, and the
n turns been a prey to the Turkiſh arms:
92 .

|

N

Air

N TORE. yo 1

. ; —_— \ AO | ” G v2 bs 4 Wasn TIF —
2 I _ * => P — * « * a * . \ l 9 1 N —
F 3 N "if . : CP 2 Py %. . 1 33 & Þ
2 N 0 * I q : \ * w e S. * |
© o „ * - 4 28 c* fF d
+ <A as hy . ;
- | * .
ö

28 THE AGE OF MY
and, from the year 1640. they were indefatigable
* the war of Candy, ſo fatal to the Chriſtians.

Such were the ſituation, the forces, and the in-

7

The ſtate en + +

FRANCE, having for allies, Sweden, " Holand,
Savoy, and Portugal; and the other nations, which
remained neuter, being alſo favourably diſpoſed to-
wards her; maintained a war againſt the Empire
and Spain, which proved deſtructive to both partie,
and fatal to the houſe of Auſtria, This war r&
ſembled all thoſe which, for ſo many ages, have
been carried on between the Chriſtian princes;
wherein millions of lives have been ſacrificed, an
Provinces laid waſte, only to obtain, at laſt, a fen
inconſiderable frontier towns, the poſſeſſion of
NEED my: rarely; grenedt adequme ry the rap
pence of the conqueſt.
5 The generals of Lewis XIII, had taken Rouſib
lon; and the Catalans had thrown themſelves in
the arms of France, as the protector of that liberty
which they defended againſt their kings: theſe ſus-
_ ceſſes did not however prevent the enemy from
taking Corbie, in 1637. nor from penetrating even
to Pontoiſe, Fear had driven from Paris one half
of its inhabitants; and cardinal de Richelicy, in the
midft of his vaſt projets for humbliag the Auſtrian
power, was reduced to lay a tax on the # Pm
Cocheres of Paris to furniſh each a lackey to gots!

® Portes Cocheres, every houſe which hade gu;
Ame n |

"Oe, 2A

4 «< ww = — „ „„ o»a K = 9g ©& = 9 A. '

*” en wo to wo a 4@4.., wm

FK >

as 88S S. 4 ET SES TT RS

„ 1 e MV,” 25

of the city. ir
The French, therefore, 3
and Germans a great deal of miſchief; but not
without ſuffering as much themſelves.

Manners of the AGE.

' SOME illuſtrious generals were produced by the
wars: ſuch as a Guſtavus Adolphus, a Walſtein,
a duke of Weymar, Picolomini, John de Wert, the
marſhal de Guebriant, the princes of Orange, and the
count d Harcourt. Nor was the age leſs remark-
able for miniſters of ſtate ; the chancellor Oxen-
ſtiern, the count duke d'Olivares, and, in particular,
the cardinal duke de Richelieu, drew upon them the
attention of Europe. There is no age, indeed, but
what has produced men remarkable for their abili-
ties, in war and politics; for, unhappily, arms and
intrigue ſeem to be the two profeſſions moſt nataral
to mankind; and we are always under a neceſſity,
either to negotiate or fight. But thoſe, who are the
molt ſucceſsful, are often regarded as the greateſt;
and the public frequently attributes that to merit,
which is the effect only of good fortune.

Wars were not carried on then in the man-
ner we have ſeen them, under the reign of Lewis
XIV. The armies were not ſo. numerous; no
general, ſince the ſiege. of Metz, by Charles the
fifth, had ever been at the head of fifty thouſand
men; and towns were attacked and defended with
» leſs numerous train of enillery 1 —
Ployed. ien

N

30 THE AGE OF _ kW
fancy]; harquebuſes and pikes were not laid aſides
and the fword, which is now become, in a manner;
„ unneceſſary, was then in great uſe. Of the ancient
las of nations, there ſtill remained that of declaring
war by an herald. Lewis XIII. was the laſt "who
obſerved this cuſtom : he ſent an herald at arms to
Bruſſels, in 1635. to declare war againſt Spain,
Nothing was then more common, than to be-
hold prieſts at the head of armies: the cardinal in-
fant, the cardinal of Savoy, Richelieu, la Valette,
and Sourdis archbiſhop of Bourdeaux, all had put
on the cuiraſs, and ſerved, perſonally, in the wars;
The pope, ſometimes, menaced theſe martial prieſts
with excommunication : Urban VIII. being eriraged
| againſt France, cauſed cardinal de la Valette to be
told, that he would diveſt him of his dignity, as a
eardinal, if he did not quit the military ſervice; but
being afterwards reconciled to France, he wb
him with favours. |
n The e en alſo who une no ü
of peace than the eccleſiaſtics, made no ſeruple to
ſerve in the armies of thoſe allied powers, to whom
they were tent: Charnace, envoy from France, in
Holland, commanded a regiment there, in 1 637%
and, even ſince, the ambaſſador d'Eftrade has bead
2 colonel in their ſervice:

The forces of France did not, in the whole,
amount to more than about eighty thouſand- effes
ctive men. The marine, which, for ages, had been

| Intirely neglected, though ſomewhat reſtored under
cardinal de Richelieu, was again ruined under Ma-
was not more than about forty-five millions; i
deed ſilver was then valued at about twenty - N

PLE FF co. cc cv WO ß * 4 EF «7

a. a @i 6c [i —

= .
1

» 1. LEWIS XIV. 31
s the mark; fo that theſe forty-five millions a-
mounted to about ſeventy millions of the preſent
money of France. The arbitrary value of the mark
of ſilver, is, at this day, forty-nine imaginary livres;
which is very exorbitant, and what, conſiſtent with
juſtice and the public good, can never be increaſed;
Commerce, which is now univerſally underſtood,
was then in very few hands, and the interior go-

5 3&2 33 £L0

which is a certain proof of a bad adminiſtration.
Cardinal de Richelieu, who was attentive to his own
glory, as connected with that of the ſtate, had be»
gun to render France formidable abroad; but with-
out having, as yet, been able to make her very
flouriſhing at home. The great roads were neither
repaired nor guarded; but were infeſted by robbers;
and ſo were the ſtreets of Paris, which were alſo
narrow, ill paved, and filled with offenſive naſtineſs.
It appears, from the parliamentary regiſter at that
time, that the watch of rhis city amounted to no
more than forty-five men; thoſe too but ill paid,
and ſuch as, in truth, did not do their duty. -
Ever ſince the death of Francis II. France had
been continually diſturbed by factions, or torn in
pieces by civil wars. The yoke had never been borne
in a peaceable and voluntary manner. The nobility
were, educated in conſpiracies; which was then
the character of the court, nnn; to
pleaſe the ſovereign.

This ſpirit of diſcord and ſaction had diffuſed
itſelf, from the court, into the moſt inconſiderable
towns, and had engaged all orders in the king»
dom : every thing was diſputed; becauſe nothing
was fixed or regulated: even the pariſhes of Pars

FTF AF 7

S

LEE EFT:

—_ TT 7 % &S 7&8

vernment of the kingdom was intirely negleted;

32 THE AGE OF my

came to blows with one another; and proceſliong
encountered for the honour of their banners, The
Chapelle, were often together by the ears; and the
parliament of Paris, and the chamber of accompys,

*%.. & vo ,,* ©

quarrelled for the precedency, in the church of
Notre Dame, on the day when Lewis XIII. put
sg
e

a onen it the kingdom weng n aut
nay, almoſt every individual breathed nothing bu
che ſpirit of rage and duelling. This Gothic ber-
barity, which had been formerly authorized by the
kings themſelves, and which was become the cha-
rafter of the nation, contributed as much as the
dom: and it will not be ſaying too much to affirm,
that, in the courſe of twenty years, of which eg
were embroiled by-wars, more Frenchmen were
killed by the hands of one another, than by. their
Enemies. / 1 444

We ſhall fay nothing here concerning the mag
ner in which the arts and ſciences were cultivated:
ehis part of the hiſtory of our manners will be found
in its proper place. We ſhall only obſerve, that
the French nation was plunged in ignorance, vii.
ng
abe vulgar.

Aſtrologers were confulted, and delieved, Alt
the accounts of thoſe times, io begin with the li-
ory of the preſident de Thou, are full of pred
tions. The grave and ſevere duke de Sully fer
ouſly relates thoſe which were told to Henry IV-
This credulity, which is the moſt infallible mark of

* vs * = 4
: '
3 1
*
,

* * ; -
LEWIS NV.

F
2

1 Eh. 1. | |
lion e, was ſo common, and in ſuch credit, that,
I the birth of Lewis XIV. care was taken o m-
* eral an e near the e en,
| the Anne of Auſtria.
* What is related by Vittorio Siri, a well-informed

cotemporary writer, will ſcarce” now be believed:
he ſays, that Lewis XIII. was, from his infancy,
ſurnamed the Juſt ; becauſe he was born under the -
ſign of the balance. 1
. ene contic:enake
abſurd chimera, judicial aſtrology, alſo occaſioned
the belief of ſorcery and witchcraft ; which were
made an article of religion ; and there was nothing
ſeen but prieſts a-conjuring of devils. Courts of ju-
ſtice, compoſed of magiſtrates who ought to have
bad more ſenſe than the vulgar, were employed in
trying perſons accuſed of witchcraft. The memory
of cardinal de Richelieu will always be reproached
with the death of that famous curate of Loudus,
Urban Grandier, who, by a commiſion from the
council, was condemned to be burnt, as a magician:
who but muſt conceive indignation againſt the mi-
niſter, and judges, for having been ſo weak, as 0
give credit to the devils of Londun, or fo barbarous
as to cauſe an innocent perſon to expire in the
flames? Lateſt poſterity muſt hear with aſtoniſh-
ment, that the marſhaleſs deAncre was burnt at the
Greve, as a ſorcereſs: this unfortunate woman,
when queſtioned by counſellar Courtip, concerning
the kind of ſorcery ſhe had uſed, to influence the
will of Mary de Medicis, having anſwered, She had
uſed that power only, which great ſtult akways have
over weak minds ; this reply ſerved only to preci-
pitate the decree of her-death. |

rr EF GAGE G Fr EEEE SY

—

; } | & 3 5 , | % "x
* THE Ar OF” hl
In ſome of the regiſters in the Chatelet, the pig.

ee are! ll eb be ſeen, ih U Gi, commenced
min 1 60 1. concerning a horſe, which an induſtries
maſter had dreſſed, nearly in the ſame manner in
which they are now ſometimes ſeen in a fair: the
people were for burning both the maſter and hh
horſe, as ſorcerers.

I beſe inſtances are ſufficient, in general, to (hah

the genius and manners yds ſen

"that of Lewis K
This univerſal want of the lch of tur

1 produced many ſuperſtitious practices -amang

the beſt of the people; which were a diſhonour 0

religion. The Calviniſts, confounding the reaſor

able worſhip of the Catholics with thoſe abult
which were introduced into it, were thereby more
ſtrengthened in their hatred of our church. To
our popular ſuperſtitions, which are frequently filled
with abuſes and debaucheries, they oppoſed a bars
batous ſeverity, and ſavageneſs of manners; which,
indeed, is the character of almoſt all Reformen

Thus the fpirit of party divided the nation, and

rendered it contemptible : and that ſpirit of ſods

ableneſs, for which this nation is now ſo celebrated,
and fo amiable, was then abſolutely unknown.

"There were no houſes where perſons of merit

might aſſemble, for the ſake of converſation and

mutual information; no academies; no theatres,

In ſhort, our manners, laws, arts, ſociety, religion,

peace, and war, were noneof them then, what they

have ſince appeared, in- oe ene

the age of Lewis XIV.

d 4. „ Ore 8 . N % -
LEWIS V. "i
* 4 * * 9 - 4
" # a . — 4 * * 7
C I * 4 5 1 WF
CHAPTER. IEP

ae minority of Lewis XIV.; and the vi
Qories gained by the French, under the
great Conde, then duke d' Enguien.

Th -vY
-
wy

HE cardinal de Richelieu, and Lewis XIII.
were both dead; the one, though hated, yet
admired, and the other already forgotten. They
had left the French, then in a- ſtate of great dif-
quiet, filled with averſion for the bare name of
miniſter, and with but very little reſpe& for the
throne. Lewis XIII. by his will, appointed a council
of regency; and the monarch, who was but ill obey-
ed in his life-time, flattered himſelf with having more
reſpect paid to him after his death: but the firſt
ſep taken by his widow, Anne of Auſtria, was, to
cauſe the will of her deceafed huſband to be an-
nulled, by a decree of the parliament of Paris (a).
This body, which had long oppoſed the court,
and which, under Lewis, had ſcarce preſerved the

liberty of making remonſtrances, annulled the will

of its king with the ſame facility it would have
determined the cauſe of a common citizen. Anne

of Auſtria addreſſed herſelf to this body, to obtain

the regency unlimired ; becauſe Mary of Medicis,

after the death of Henry IV. had done the ſame»

and Mary of Medicis had ſet this example, be- ;
cauſe every cther way would have been tedious and 4
uncertain; as the parllament, furrounded * * 4

' 0 Auguſt 16. 145 ·

ISA a9 EFZEZ IIA

.

at

ASS ASS SST aA K

©” * W * 2 hy -— Fin. of 12 = %
"Y N of * ä Es W —
* oth 6 1 n
— | 5 n i N

436 THE AGE OF © . /
guards, could not refuſe to do what he delired;
and becauſe a decree paſſed in parliament, and by
the peers, ſeemed to ſecure to ber an inconteſtable
right f.
"aſton therefore, by which the regency k gi
to the king's mother, then appeared to the French
a law almoſt as fundamental as that which exchades
women from the crown. The parliament of Paris,
having twice given judgment upon this queſtionz
that is to ſay, having, of its own accord, by its
arrets, given a ſanction to this right of the me:
thers; it, in effect, ſeemed to have given the 8.
gency ; conſidered itſelf, not without ſome appears
ance of reaſon, as the tutor and guardian of their
kings; and each particular counſellor thought hims
ſelf a part of the ſovereignty. By the ſame; artet,
Gaſton, duke of Orleans, brother to the late king,
had the empty title conferred upon him, of lieus
tenant-general of the kingdom, under the abſolutꝶ
regency of the queen. .
| Anne of Auflsia was forced, at firſt, 0.
| the war againſt her brother Philip IV. king &
Spain, whom ſhe loved. It is difficult preciſely 4
give the reaſon, why this war was carrĩed on agaialt
him: nothing was required of Spain; not ee
- Navarre, which ſhould have been the patrimony

of the kings of France. Both nations had been

war with each other, ever ſince the year. 1635

becauſe ir had been the will of Cardinal de Richelieu

"I + Reincourt, in his biſtory of Lewis XIV. ſays, the will of

*W Lewis XIII. was confirmed in parliament. In reality, Lewis
a XIII. kad, in bis will, declared the queen regent, and this was
confirmed ; but he had bat ber authority, which ne
mulled: and this ſeems to be what has niifled this writer.

bh. 2. LEWIS. AV. 37
ad it appears probable, that he would have it ſo;
o make himſelf neceſſary. He united with Sweden
zgainſt the Emperor; and with duke Bernard de
gaxe Weymar, one of thoſe generals whom the
Italians call condottieri; that is, thoſe who ſell their
roops. He alſo attacked the Auſtrian-Spaniſh branch,
In thoſe ten provinces which we, in general, call by
the name of Flanders; and he divided with the Hol-
anders, who were then our allies, this Flanders,
hich no one ever conquers.

The heat of the war was ih Flanders: the Spa-
niſh troops, to the number of twenty fix thou-
ſand men, quitted the frontiers of Hainault, under
the command of an old experienced general, named
Don Franciſco de Mello. They ravaged the bor-
ders of Champagne, attacked Rocroi, and ima-
gined they ſhould ſoon be able to penetrate as far
as the gates of Paris, as they had done eight years
before. The death of Lewis XIII. and the weak-
neſs of a minority, animated their hopes; and
when they ſaw themſelves oppoſed by an army in-
ferior in numbers, and commanded by a young man
not more than 21 years of age, their hopes were
changed into certainty.

This unexperienced young man, whom they de-
ſpiſed, was Lewis of Bourbon then duke d'En-
guin, afterwards known by the name of the great
Conde. Moſt great generals have become ſuch by
degrees; but this prince was born a general: the
art of war in him appeared to be a natural inſtinct;
and, in all Europe, thete were only he and Tor-

tenſon the Swede, who, at OY years of Ber bad
Yor. I. E

iir SAE FSE

|

38 THE AGE OF ch.
that natural genius, which makes Wr W
unneceſſary. ö
The duke d'Enguien, with the news of the dal
of Lewis XIII. had received orders not to hazard
battle. The marſhal de I'Hopital, who had bee
given him as a counſellor to adviſe and dire
him, by his circumſpection ſeconded theſe tim
orders: þut the prince regarded neither the marſhal
nor the court: he communicated his deſign only
Gaſſion marſhal de camp, who was worthy to be
confulted by him ; and they obliged the — to
find a battle ehr
It is remarkable, that the prince, having reguligh
every thing on the evening (6) before the engage
ment, flept ſo profoundly, that it was neceſſary
wake him in the morning to begin it. The fams
thing is ſaid of Alexander: it is natural for a young
man, wearied by the fatigues which a proper db
poſition for ſo important an engagement neceſſarily
requires, afterwards to fall into a deep ſleep: and
it is alſo as natural, that a genius formed for war,
acting without perturbation, ſhould leave the body
fufficient tranquillity for repoſe. The prince, 'by
his quickneſs in perceiving at once both the dange
and the remedy, and by his activity free from dil
order, which carried him to all places at the ver
inſtant when his preſence became neceſſary, 1
manner gained the victory himſelf. It was he who,
with the cavalry, attacked that Spaniſh infantry,
ell then invincible, which was as ſtrong, and'Þ
cloſely united, as the celebrated ancient phalam
and which opened itſelf with an agility chat p,
lanx had not, to make way for the _ of

(b) May 29.

” %

a aA VX@ HJH@ YO tHe won tf a

„

h e . _ © as tows FR

1 RSS Ä ˙ aA $9. 2

—

Ch. 2. LEWIS NAV. 39
eighteen pieces of cannon, which were concealed in
the centre of it. The prince ſurrounded and attacked
it three times: and he was ſcarce victorious, before
be endeavouerd to put a ſtop to the (laughter. The
Spaniſh officers threw themlelyes at his fret, to gain
from him an aſylum againſt the fury of the con-
quering ſoldiers; and the duke d'Enguien took as
great pains for their preſervation, ah.
to eonquer them.

The old count de Fuentes, who commanded this
Spaniſh infantry, died of his wounds; and Conde,
being told of it, ſaid, that he would have chaſen to
die like bim, if he had not conquered.

The dread, which ſtill remained in Europe of the
Spaniſh arms, was now greatly diminiſhed ; and
people began to reſpect thoſe of France, which, for
an hundred years before, had not gained fo cele-
brated a battle; for that bloody one of Marignano,
diſputed rather than gained by Francis the firſt
apainſt the Switzers, had been the work of the Ger-
man black-bands, at leaſt as much as of the French
troops,

The battles alſo of Pavia and Saint Quintin were
epochas fatal to the reputation of France. It was
the misfortune of Henry IV. to gain remarkable
advantages only over his own people. Indeed, un-
der Lewis XIII. the marſhal de Guebriant had fome
little ſucceſs: but this was always balanced by pro-
portionable loſſes. Such grand: victories, as ſhake
the foundations of empires, and for ever remain
memorable, were obtained in that age only by Gu-
ſtavus Adolphus.

This battle of Rocroi became an epocha of the

E 2

5
4120 THE AGE OF Ch. 2
glory of France, and of Conde: he knew both hoy
to conquer, and to reap the benefit of his victory,
His letters to the court carried his reſolution to be-
ſiege Thionville, which cardinal: de Richelieu had
not dared to hazard; and his courtiers, at their tc
turn, found every thing prepared for that expedition,
The prince of Conde croſſed the enemy's cou
try, deceived the vigilance of general Beck, and at
laſt took Thionville (c). From thence he haſtened
to beſiege Cirq, of which he alſo made himſelf ma-
ſter. He forced the Germans to repaſs the Rhine
which he alſo paſſed after them, with deſign to re
venge the defeats, and repair the loſſes; which the
French had ſuffered upon theſe frontiers after the
death of the marſhal de Guebriand. He found
Fribourg taken, and general Merct under its walls
with an army even fuperior to his own. Conde
had under him two marſhals of France, one d
which was Grammont, and the other that Turenne,
who had been made a marſhal a few months before,
after baving ſucceſsfully ſerved in Piedmont again
the Spaniards. It was upon this occaſion that be
laid the foundations of that great reputation which
be afterwards obtained. The prince, with. thele
two generals, attacked the camp of Merci (HH, which
was intrenched upon two eminences. The e
gagement was renewed three times, on three {&
veral days. It is faid, the duke d'Enguien' threw
his ſtaff of command into. the enemy's trenches,
and marched fword in hand to regain it, at the head
of the regiment of Conti. Theſe bold actions are
perhaps neceſſary to animate troops to ſuch 4

(c) Auguſt 8. 1643.
(4) Auguit 31. 1644.

h. 2. LEWIS MV. 41
racks. This battle of Fribourg, rather bloody
| deciſive, was the ſecond victory gained by the |
prince of Conde. Merci decamped four days after-
rds, and Philipsbourgh and Mayence ſurrendered,
hich at once gave both the proof, and the fruits
of his victory. |
The duke d'Enguien, after this, returns to Paris,
receives the acclamations of the people, and de-
mands a recompence at court, leaving his army
under the command of the marſhal de Turenne.
But this general, notwithſtanding his abilities, was
defeated at Mariendal (e). Whereupon the prince
again flew to the army, reſumed the command,
and to the glory of once more commanding over
Turenne, joined that of effacing the diſhonour of
his defeat. He attacked Merci in the plains of
Norlingen (V, and gained a complete victory. The
marſhal de Grammont was taken by the enemy ;
but general Gleen, who commanded under Merci,
was alſo taken priſoner, and Merci himſelf was
among the number of the ſlain. This general, who
was regarded as one of the greateſt men of the age,
was interred upon the field of battle; and the fol-
lowing inſcription was engraved upon his tomb:
Sta, viator, heroem calcas : Stop, traveler, thou
treadeſt upon an hero. ,
The name of the duke d'Enguien now eclipſed
all other names. After this, he beſieged Dunkirk in
light of the Spaniſh army ; and he was the firſt who
brought this place under the dominion of France(g).
Theſe great ſucceſſes and ſervices, which were

+ (ce) April 1643. ( Auguſt 3. 1645. (g) October 3»

3646,
E 3

WOE CTY EaSRTHSDSSST EATERS

42 THE AGE OP a
rather ſuſpected than recompenſed by the eou
made him dreaded by the miniſtry, as much a
the enemy: he was therefore withdrawn from
theatre of his conqueſts, and his glory; and »
ſent with a parcel of pitiful ill- paid troops, ini
Catalonia (45), where he inveſted Lerida, but
obliged to raiſe the ſiege. He was accuſed, upa!
this occaſion, in certain books, of a bravado,
having opened the trenches with the muſic of violins
but theſe writers were ignorant, that this was the
cuſtom of Spain.

The unſteady ſituation of affairs ſoon oblige

the court to recall Conde into Flanders; whe
the archduke Leopold, the emperor's brother, had
beſieged Lens in Artois : but Conde being again
at the head of troops, who, under him, had always
been victorious, marched with them directiy +
gainſt the archduke; and this was the third im
that he gave battle under the diſadvantage of inf
rior numbers. The whole of the harangue when
he made to his ſoldiers was contained in thel
words: My friends, remember Nocroi, Fribourg,
and Norlingen. This battle of Lens completed bi
glory (7).

He himfelf relieved and ſupported the marſhal
de Grammont, who, with the left wing, began t6
give ground: general Beck he took priſoner; and
the archduke, together with the count de Fuenlak
dagne, with difficulty eſcaped. The Imperialiſfs
and Spaniards, who compoſed this army, were db
perſed, with the loſs of upwards of an hundred
colours, and thirty-eight pieces of cannon; Which
at that time, was a great number, Five thoulalls

(b) 1647, (i) Auguſt 20. 1648.

—

LF TLTASSA 8

yhere
again
ways
y +
time
infe-
hich
theſe

Ph. 2. LEWIS XIV. v8

rere made priſoners, three thouſand were killed,
ind the reſt deſerted; fo that the archduke remain-
ed without an army. F

While the prince of Conde +was thaje nuraber-
ing the years of bis youth by victories, and while
the duke of Orleans, brother to Lewis XIII. was
alſo ſupporting the reputation of a ſon of Henry
IV. and of France, by the taking of Gravelins,
Courtray, and Mardyke (4); the viſcount du Tu-
renne likewiſe took Landau, drove the Spaniards
out of Treves, and re-eſtabliſhed the elector (H.

He alſo, in conjunction with the Swedes, gained
the battles of Lavingen and Sommerhauſen; and
forced the duke of Bavaria, at the age of near 8 o
years, to quit his dominions (m). The count de
Harcourt alſo took Balaguier, and defeated the Spa-
niards. In Italy, they loſt Portolongoni; and twen-
ty ſhips and twenty gallies of France, which com-
poſed almoſt the whole of our naval force, as re-
ſtored by Richelieu, defeated the Spaniſh fleet upon
the coaſt of Italy (i).

But this was not all: for the French troops alſo
took Lorrain from duke Charles IV. a prince of a
martial ſpirit, but inconſtant, imprudent, and un-
fortunate; who, at one and the ſame time, was de-
prived of his dominions by the French, and kept
priſoner by the Spaniards. 'The allies of France di-
ſtreſſed the Auſtrian power both in the north and
ſouth. The duke d'Albuquerque, general of the
Portugueſe, gained the battle of Badajox againſt
the Spaniards, Tortenſon defeated the imperialiſts

} His father died in 2646.
(i) July 1644. (1) Nov. 1644. (n) 1645. (n) 1646,

1 THE AGE OP ch. A

near Tabor, and gained a compleat victory (o). The
prince of Orange, at the head of the nen
penetrated into Brabant (p).

The king of Spain, being defeated on all ſides
beheld Rouſillon and Catalonia in the hands of the
French. Naples, having rebelled againſt him, had
put itſelf under the protection of the duke of Guile,
the laſt branch of that houſe, ſo fruitful in illaſtriots
and dangerous princes. This duke of Guile, who
Was called only a bold adventurer, becauſe he did
not ſucceed, at leaſt obtained the glory of landing
alone in a ſmall bark, in the midſt of the Spaniſh
fleet, and of defending Naples, without any other
aſſiſtance than his own courage.

To behold ſo many misfortunes ſhowered down
upon the houſe of Auſtria, ſo many vi&tories acct
mulated by the French, and ſeconded by the ſuc
ceſſes of their allies, one would be inclined to be
lieve, that Vienna and Madrid only waited for the
moment when they were to open their gates; and
that the emperor and the king of Spain were almoſt
without dominions. Nevertheleſs, five years of
glory, which had ſcarce ever been diſturbed by
any misfortune, had gained but very few real ad-
vantages; and though there was a great deal of *
bloodſhed, it produced no revolution. If, indeed, 3
any revolution was to be feared, it was rather in 7
France; which, though in the midſt of apparent f b.
proſperity, was really upon the brink of deſtru-
ction. | *
(0) May 3644. (p) Mar. 1645. | m

N. 4; LEWIS XIV.

23

CHAPTER HII.
be n War: :.-

NNE of Auſtria, being abſolute regent, had
FN made cardinal Mazarin the maſter of France,
and of herſelf. He had obtained that power over
er, which an artful man will acquire over a wo-
man, born with weakneſs enough to be governed,
yet with reſolution to perſiſt in her choice.

In ſome of the memoirs of that time we read,
that the queen repoſed her confidence in Mazarin,
only for want of Potier biſhop of Beauvais, whom
at firſt he had choſen for her miniſter. This bi-
ſhop is characterized as a man that wanted capa-
city; which indeed is probable, and that he was
employed for ſome time by the queen, for a'blind,
that ſhe might not ſhock the nation by an imme-
diate choice of a ſecond cardinal, who was a fo-
reigner. But we cannot believe that Potier began
his ſhort miniſtry, by declaring to the Hollanders,
that if they hoped to continue in alliance with France,
they muſt become catholics. He ſhould, in this caſe,
have made the ſame declaration to the Swedes.
This abſurdity is related by almoſt all hiſtorians,
becauſe they have read it-in the memoirs of the
courtiers, and in thoſe of the Frondeurs. Theſe me-
moirs contain but too many facts, which are either
miſrepreſented by paſſion, or founded only upon
Popular reports, What is weak and puerile, ſhould
not be quoted; and what is abſurd, cannot be believed.
Mazarin at firſt uſed his power with moderation.

d As. La BSC iETLT TFE HESSE

MU

46 THE AGE OF Qh.y
It would be neceſſary to have lived long with
miniſter to paint his character, to ſay what was thi
degree of his courage or his weakneſs, and how fa
he was a wiſe and prudent man or a cheat. | Inſtead
therefore, of pretending to ſa what Mazarin w
we ſhall only relate what he did. In the beginning
of his greatneſs he as much affected ſimplicity,
Richelicu' had ſtate and grandeur. He was ſo fa
from having guards, and parading with the pc
of royalty, that his retinue at firſt was very modeſt
Affability, and even familiarity, were ſhewn Mee»
upon all thoſe occaſions, wherein his x c
had diſplayed an inflexible pride and haughtinek
The queen was deſirous to make her regency and
her perſon beloved both by the court and people;
and in this ſhe ſucceeded. Gaſton duke of Orleans
brother to Lewis XIII. and the prince of Conds
ſupported her power, and had no emulation but n
ſerving the ſtate.
Taxes became neceſſary to ſupport the wa
againſt Spain and the empire: ſome therefor
were impoſed, very moderate, no doubt, in
pariſom with thoſe we have ſince paid; and yet is
fuffcient to ſupply the neceſſities of the ſtate;
The parliament, being in uſe to confirm the
edicts for theſe taxes (4), ſtrongly oppoſed the edit
of the tariffs, and gained the confidence of We
people, by the oppoſition with when they pt
plexed the miniſtry.
At laſt, Daene of maſt
of requeſts, and the non-payment of about eight}
thouſand crowns ſalary to fome of the ſenior conr
1 canſed the whole body of GO

(a) 1647.

b. 3. LE WIS MV. 47
i e with them all Paris; ſo that what in our times

Would ſcarce have furniſhed ſubject for a novel;
as then the cauſe of a civil war. ft
Brouſſel, counſellor and clerk of the great cham-
r, a man without the leaſt capacity, and who had
zo other merit, than that of always oppoſing the |
burt, being ſeized, it cauſed more affliftion among ,
he people, than they ever ſhewed for the death of *
good king. The barricadoes of the league were
Je cncwed; the fire of ſedition in an inſtant burſt
orth into flames, difficult to be extinguiſhed; and
they were ſtirred up, and their fury increaſed, by a
oadjutor, afterwards the cardinal de Retz, who
vas the firſt biſhop that carried on a civil war, with-
out the maſk of religion. This extraordinary man
has drawn his own character in his memoirs, which
are written with fuch an air of grandeur, impetuo-
ſity of genius, and inequality, as gives us a very
ſtrong repreſentation of his conduct. He was a
man, who, from the greateſt degree of debauch-
ery, and ſtill languiſhing under its conſequences,
preached to the people, and made himſelf adored
by them. He breathed nothing but the ſpirit of
faction and ſedition. At the age of 23 years, he
had been at the head of a conſpiracy againſt the
hte of Richelien. He was the author of the bar-
ricadoes, precipitated the parlament into cabals,
and the people into ſeditions. What appears ſur-
priſing, is, that the parliament ſhould be fo miſled
dy kim, as to ſet up the ſtandard againſt the court,
eren before they had gained the ſupport of any one
prince.
This body had long been regarded in a very dif-
ferent manner by the court-and the people : if we

"IIDLILS TI;

ET 6

BEER J

48 THE AGE OF
may credit the general voice of the court, and
our miniſters, the parliament of Paris was no'more
than a court of juſtice, for the deciſion of d
cauſes between private perſons: that this prerogs
tive depended abſolutely upon the will of the kings:
that it had no pre-eminence over the other parlias
ments of the kingdom, except that of ſeniority;
and the being compoſed of more conſiderable per
ſons: that it was the court of peers, only becauſe
the court reſided at Paris: that it had no more
right to make remonſtrances than the others, not tu
mention that the right itſelf was only a favour;
that it had ſucceeded thoſe parliaments which andi
ently repreſented the French nation; but that
had nothing left of theſe ancient aſſemblies more
than the name: and, as an inconteſtable proof of
all this, it was ſaid, that the ſtates general were
ſubſtituted in place of theſe national aſſemblies; and
thar the -parliament of Paris no more reſembled

thoſe parliaments held by our ancient kings, than th
a conſul of Smyrna or Aleppo reſembles a conlul Wl ”':
of ancient Rome, c
This ſingle error in the name was the pretext for th
the ambitious pretenſions of a body of lawyers; BW *:
who, becauſe they had purchaſed their employ: Wi ©*
ments, thought to aſſume the privileges of the Bl
conquerors of Gaul, and the lords who held fie
of the crown. This body had, in all ages, abuled s
KM

that power which is neceſſarily aſſumed by a chief
- tribunal, continually ſubſiſting in a capital. It had
dared to publiſh an arret againſt Charles VII. and
to baniſh him the kingdom: it had commenced#
criminal proceſs againſt Henry III. it had at al
times reſiſted its ſovereign as much as was in

F

n. „

2 7
1 ” q
SF .
- * 4

Lo n „

wer; and in hy of Lewis XIV; under
he mildeſt of governments, and the moſt indul-
ent of queens, it would have carried on a civil
var againſt its prince, in imitation of the parlia-
nent of England, which at that time kept its king
priſoner, and afterwards beheaded him. Such
vere the private ſentiments, and the pane diſ-
durſe of the court.

But the citizens of Paris, ind all thoſe 2 be-
longed to the long robe, conſidered the parliament
as an auguſt court, which had adminiſtered juſtice
ith an integrity that deſerved to be honoured and
reſpected, which defired nothing ſo much as the
happineſs of the ſtate, and which endeavoured to
promote this happineſs at the hazard of its own
property ; which confined its ambition to the glory
of reſtraining the ambition of favourites, and
which, in all things, endeavoured to ſhew an equal
regard to the rights both of king and people: and,
therefore, without examining into the origin of its
rights and power, the people, when they beheld
chem ſupport their cauſe againſt miniſters whom
they deteſted, attributed to them the moſt ſacred
rights, and a power the moſt- inconteſtable : they
called the parliament the father of the /tate, and
made but very little difference between that right ©
nich gives the crown to the kings, and that which
gave the parliament. the you g moderating their
lings deſires.

It was impoſſible to fix = a juſt mean be-
tween theſe two extremes; for, in reality, there
was no law abſolutely obeyed, except that of time

ad opportunity. Under a vow government the
EO;

B55 3

ol
—
=

EEEES 28

EECELEEESSSD DD

6 Fa L "4 — 4 ? "> % a
: - 9 *
—_— :
— "ST ,

50 THE AGE OF ca.
parliament was nothing, but under a weak king
was every thing; and what Monfieur de Guime
faid to them, when they complained under T
XIII. of being preceded by the deputies from f
nobility, might now be applied: "Gentlemen,
will take a ſufficient revenge unter # minority,
We ſhall not here repeat all that has been v
concerning theſe troubles, nor copy books to pit
the reader a relation of affairs, which, though i
tereſting and important then, are now almoſt fer
gotten : but we ſhall, however, relate what U
ceſſary to charaQterize the genius and diſpoſition i
the nation at that time; and, paſſing over fu
things as are common to all civil wars, confine our
ſelves only to what peculiarly diſtinguiſhes d
called the Fronde.

| Two powers, conſtituted by the nation ſolely w
maintain peace, namely, an archbiſhop, and à par
hament of Paris, having commenced diſturbante
the people conſidered all their outrages as juſtified.
The queen could not appear in public, without
ing inſulted: they called her only by the name
Lady Anne; and if any other epithet or title wa
added, it contained ſomething injurious or unman-
nerly. They, with violence, reproached her 28%
crificing the nation to her friendſhip for Mau
and, what was yet more inſupportable, ſhe heard
ſongs and ballads ſung in almoſt all places, defigned
to perpetuate the ſuſpicion which was univerlallyer
"tertained of her virtue, and to be moments af

the wit and malignity of the times.
She fled from Paris to St. Germains (6), accom
pazicd by ber children, her "miniſter, the une
Jan. 6. 1649. ;

Mw, a. . 00

Ss :.aqO& On

bd. 3. LEWES. XIV. 51

Orleans, brother of Lewis XIII. and the great
onde himſelf, They were reduced to pawn the
Is of the crown; and the king himſelf often
ated neceſſaries. They were forced to diſmiſs.
ie pages of the queen's chamber, becauſe they
ere unable to maintain them. At this very time,
zen the aunt of Lewis XIV. daughter to Henry
he great, and wife to the king of England, hav-
ng taken refuge in Paris, was there reduced to the
xtremities of poverty; and her daughter who was
fterwards married to the brother of Lewis XIV.
y in bed for want of fire to warm her. The
zeople of Paris, being intoxicated by their rage
and fury, paid no regard to the diſtreſſes of fo
many royal perſonages.
The queen, with tears in her eyes, begged the
prince of Conde to be the king's protector. The
victor of Rocroi, Fribourg, Lens, and Norlingen,
could not but a& conformable to ſo many pait
ſervices; and he was flattered with the honour of
defending a court, which he thought ungrateful,
2gainſt the Fronde, which ſought his ſupport. But
the parliament, though it had the great Conde to
oppoſe, yet dared to purſue the war.

The prince of Conti, younger brother to the
great Conde, and as jealous of him as he was in-
capable to equal him; the duke de Longueville, the
duke de Beaufort, and the duke de Bouillon, being
deſirous of change; animated alſo by the factious
ſpirit of the coadjutor; flattered with the hopes of
railing themſelves upon the ruins of the ſtate, and
vith making the wild proceedings of the parliament
advantageous to their own private intereſts; came

Fa |

—

35 THE AGE OP Ch. 3
and offered their ſervices to that body. Generib
were appointed in the great chamber to command
an army, which they had not. Every individu
impoſed a tax upon himſelf to raiſe troops. The
were in the parliament twenty counſellors provid
ed with new places by cardinal de Richelieu, 'upon
whom the reſt of their brethren, through a men
neſs of ſpirit, of which every ſociety is ſuſceptible,
ſeemed to perſecute the memory of that miniſter,
They loaded them with affronts, refuſed to regard
them as members of the partiament; and made
each of them pay 1 5,000 livres towards defraying
the expences of the war, and to purchaſe the toler
tion of their brethren.

The great chamber, the inqueſts, the requelts,
the chamber of accompts, the court of aids, which
had exclaimed wirh ſuch violence againſt an ineon-
ſiderable and neceſſary impoſt, which did not .
mount to more than an hundred thouſand crowns,
raiſed the ſum of near ten millions of our preſent
money, for the deſtruction of their country. Twelve
thouſand men were raiſed by arret of 3
Every great gate furniſhed a man and horſe; an
this cavalry was therefore called the cavalry of the
great gates. The coadjutor had a regiment "under
his own command, which was called the regiment
of Corinth, becauſe the coadjutor was titular arch
biſhop of Corinth. |

Had it not been for the names of the king of
France, the great Conde, and the capital of the
kingdom, this war of the Fronde would have been
as ridiculous as that of the Barbarini : no one could
fay why they were in arms. The prince of Conde
beſieged five hundred thouſand citizens with eight

— 0

"ot

"v5 Da HE i AA ww .

ww /

. 3. LEVIS XIV. 53

thouſand ſoldiers. The Pariſians quitted the city,
and came out into the fields, many of them dreſſed
up with feathers and ribbands. Their exerciſes were
te jeſt of the n thaape Upon the approach
of only two hundred of the royal army, they would
take to flight. Every thing was turned into ridicule.
The regiment of Corinth being defeated by a ſmall
party, this check was called the f:r/t epiſtle to the
Corinthians.

Thoſe twenty counſellors, who had each of
them furniſhed fifteen thouſand livres, gained no
other honour than that of being called the ruenty
fifteens.

The duke of Beaufort was the idol of the people,
ard the inftrument employed in working them up
to this ſtate of ſedition : he was a popular prince;
but his capacity was inconſiderable, and he was the
public object of the raillery of the court; and even
of the Fronde itſelf. He was never mentioned but
by the name of king of the city-companies. The
Pariſian troops, which marched out of Paris, and
always returned defeated, were received with laugh-
ter and deriſion; and were the occaſion of many
rerles and epigrams. The taverns, and other places
of public entertainment, were the tents where they
held their councils of war, in the midſt of their
duſſoonries, ſongs, and the moſt diſſolute mirth.
The licentiouſneſs became ſo great, that one night
the principal officers of the Fronde having met the
boly facrament, which was carrying through the
{treet to a perſon whom they ſuſpected to be Ma-
zrin, they beat the prieſts with their ſwords, and
cd them to return.

£4:

N03: 2-9 2-2

2 3 5

had

PEP 4&5

*
r.

FA

FFK F.

54 THE AGE OP _ CY
. The coadjutor himſelf, archbiſhop of | Paris
took his feat in parliament, with a poniard in his
pocket; the handle of which being peretivad;
ſeveral perſons preſent cried out, See! there is an
archbiſbop s breviary.
In the midſt of all this confuſion, the nobility
aſſembled in a body, at the Auguſtines, appoint
ed the fyndics, and had public regular meet
ings: fo that it might have been ſuppoſed, their
deſign was to remedy theſe diſorders, and afſemble
the ſtates-general. Nevertheleſs, the only cauſe of
their meeting was a tabouret, which the queen had
granted to madame de Pons. Perhaps there never
was ſo ftrong a proof given of that lightneſs of
mind, with which the French are reproached.

The civil diſſenſions which reigned in England,
preciſely at the fame time, may ſerve extremely
well to ſhew the characters of the two nations.
The Engliſh, in their civil diſcords, ſhewed * me-
lancholy cruelty, and a ſenſible madneſs:
battles were bloody; they decided all things 2
the fword; ſcaffolds were erected for the van-
quiſhed: their king, being taken priſoner, was
brought before a court of juſtice; queſtioned con-
cerning the abuſe of his power, with which he had
been accuſed; condemned to loſe his head; and was
executed in preſence of all his people, with great
order, and the ſame formality of juſtice, as if it had
been the execution of one of his ſubjects : nor was
London, in the courſe of theſe horrid - diſorders,
ever in the leaſt ſenſible of, or affected by, the c
lamities, which are the conſequence of civil wars,

The French, on the contrary, precipitated thems
ſelves into ſeditions, through wantonneſs a

cs e © 9

.

jce: women were at the head of factions, and ca-
als were formed, and diſſipated, by love. The
jucheſs de Longueville engaged Turenne, then
uſt made a marſhal of France, to cauſe the army
hich he commanded for the king, to revolt. Tu-
enne did not fucceed in this; but quitted that
umy, of which he was general, like a fugitive, to
pleaſe a woman, who laughed at his paſſion. From
deing a general to the king of France, be became
leutenant to Don Eſtevan de Gamara, with whom
he was defeated at Retel, by the royal troops.
Every body has heard of the marſhal d'Hoquin-
court's letter to the ducheſs de Montbazon ; Pe-
ronne eſt a la belle des belles: Peronne is fubjedted
to the faireſt among the fair. Thoſe verſes allo are
well known, which were written by the duke de la
Rochfaucault to the ducheſs de Longueville, when,
in the battle of Saint Antony, he received a muſ-
quet-ſhot, which, for ſome time, deprived him of
his ſight ; |

Pour meriter ſon cœur, powr plaire a ſes beam
yeux,

Jai fait la guerre aux raus, & Jaurais faite aux
Dieux.

The war was ended and renewed ſeveral differ ·
ent times; and there was ſcarce any one who did
not change parties more than once. The prince
of Conde having ſacceſsfully \defended the court,
and conducted it in triumph into Paris, gave him-
ſelf up to the pleaſure of deſpiſing it; and, not
finding that he was rewarded in proportion to his
gory and ſervices, he was the firſt to turn Mazarig

558 T HE AGE OF Ch. 4

into ridicule, to brave the queen, and inſult thy
government which he diſdained. It is ſaid;” tha
he wrote to the cardinal, with this ſuperſcriptlon
A Pilluſtrifſimo Signor Faquino : and that; being one
day in his company, when he took his leave; he
faid, Adieu, Mars. He encouraged the marquis d
Jarſai to make a declaration of love to the queen
and was diſguſted at her daring to be offended at
it. He leagued with his brother the prince d
Conti, and the duke de Longueville, who aba
doned the party of the Fronde. The duke of Beau
fort's faction, at the beginning of the regency, had
been called that of the Importants: Conde's was
named the party of Petits-maitres ; becauſe their de-
fire was to become maſters of the ſtate. The only
memorials, now remaining of theſe troubles, are the
name of petit-maitre ; which, at this day, is applied
to our youths of good families, but bad educations;
and the name of Frondeurs, which is appar to al
cenſurers of the government.

The coadjutor, who had declared himſelf an im-
placable enemy to the miniſter, ſecretly reunited
with the court, to obtain a cardinal's cap; and {a-
erificed the prince of Conde to the reſentment. of
Mazarin: and that prince, who had defended the
ſtate againſt its enemies, and the court againſt re-
dels; that Conde, who was at the height of glory,
having, upon all occaſions, behaved like: an hero
and ever ſhewn himſelf a man of great abilines;
was ſeized and impriſoned, together with the prince
of Conti, and the duke de Longueville. He might
have governed the ſtate, if he would have conde-
ſcended to the arts of pleaſing; but he rather chole
to be admired. The people of Paris, who had

F3 LEWIS XIV. 97

ewed their barricadoes, in defence of an old fu-
derannuated counſellor, made the greateſt rejoicings,
hen the hero, and the defender of France, was
onfined in the caſtle of Vincennes. |
One year after, theſe very Frondeurs, whe had
ſold the great Conde, and the princes, to the timid.
revenge of Mazarin, forced the queen to open their -
priſons, and baniſh her prime miniſter out of the
kingdom: and Conde, on his re-appearance in
public, received the acclamations of thoſe very
people, whoſe hatred againſt him had been fo
violent : but his n renewed the cabals and
diſſenſions.
= The kingdom combanade] in this ſtate of diſorder
and confuſion ſome years longer. The govern-
ment always purſued meaſures that were weak
and uncertain; and it ſeemed probable it would,
at laſt, be ſubverted : but the malecontents were in
a conſtant ſtate of difunion, which preſerved the
court. The coadjutor, who was ſometimes a friend,
and ſometimes an enemy, to the prince of Conde,
irritated part of the parliament and people againſt
him; had the impudence to make the queen the
inſtrument of his oppoſition, and, at the ſame time,
to affront her, by obliging her to baniſh cardinal
Mazarin, who retired to Cologne. The queen,
through a contradiftion too common in weak go-
vernments, was obliged, alternately, to receive his
ſervices, and his offences, and to nominate this ve-
ry coadjutor for a cardinal, who had been the pro-
moter of the barricadoes, and had compelled the
royal family to retire out of the capital, and to
deliege it,

ET SRO SET ROPES »

a W ”"
*
+ IR
ſ þ *
#4

59 TRE AGE OF Guy

cHAPTER Iv. a

Continuation of the civil war, to the end
of the rebellion in 1654

FYONDE at laſt reſolved- to begin a war, which,
to have become maſter of the ſtate, he ſhould
have commenced in the time of the Fronde; but
which, if he had been a good ſubject, he wou
never have commenced at all. He quitted Pans
and went to raiſe forces in Guienne, Polton, and
Anjou; and to beg aſſiſtance againſt France from
the Spaniards, to whom he had been the moſt ter
rible ſcourge.
Nothing can better ſhew the madneſs of tholt
times, and the abſurdity or caprice which deter
mined all affairs, than what now happened to thi
prince. A courier was ſent to him from Pars
with propoſals to engage him to peace, and tu ts
turn. The courier made a miſtake, and, inſheld
of going to Angerville, where the prince was, be
went to 4ugervitle. The letter, by this mi
arrived too late; and Conde only ſaid; that, if it
had received it ſooner, he would have accepted
the propofals of peace; but that ſinee he was new
at 2 great diſtance from Paris, it was not worth bl
while to return thither. And thus this miſtake
the courier, and the mere caprice of the pris
again plunged France into a civil war. -* 2

And now cardinal Mazarin, who even in b
at Cologne had governed the court, re-entered

LEWIS MY.

th. 4.

ſame bis poſt, as ike u forercign we vewelk
offeſfon of his domini ons ( he wasedltertcd by
= e
n expence, or, vacher, at che expence of fre
e.. be had oppropelined Whey RE AGES
4 J x uſe.

in a declerntion peblithad'e Shar Me l. ee cl
he kingFtbat Mazarin had 'aQuually Teiſed thele
troops with his own money; 'which:imuſt confarethe
opinion of thoſe who twve ufſinned, chan; at his nut
retirement out of the kingdom, he hall bern in a
ate of indigener. He gave che command of iis
ittle army to the marſtal d Hequmceurt. All the
officers wore green ſcarfs, which was the colour f
the cardinal's very. Each party had, indeed, its
ſcarf. The king's was white: the prinee of Condeu
was the Iſabella colour. It is ſurpriſing, that cardi-
nal Mazarin, who till then had affected fo much
modeſty, ſhould have the boldneſs to make an army
wear his livery, as thouph he had a party different
from his maſter's : but he could not reſiſt the vaniny
of it, in which he was countenanced by the queen.
The king, ae was now of aye, WIDE Wh Us
brother, went to meet him.
Upon the firſt advice of his return, Gaſton d'Or-
leans, the brother of Lewis XIII. who had demand-
ed the baniſhment of Mazarin, vaiſed troops in
Paris, without well knowing wherein to «employ
them. The parliament renewed its urrets, pro-
ſcribed Mazarin, and ſet a price upon bis head. It
was neceſſary to ſearch the regiſters, to find what
vas the price ſet upon the head of an enemy” wo the

6) December, "1652.

uch,
Duld
but
ould
ariz
and
rom
ter ·
hoſe
er.
this
ary,
| Tex
ead
be
ake,
F he
pred
now
1
e of
cc,
ile
the

CY
1
— * * *

. ˙ aniaifier ho ami ws

' 0

„ *
"RE , *
.

60 THE AGE OF | G. j
kingdom. It appeared, that, under Charles it
fifty thouſand crowns had been promiſed | to wh
ever ſhould bring admiral Coligny either dead
alive; and it was thought proper to proceed with
great ſeriquſneſs and regularity, in putting the ſam
price upon the aſſaſſination of the cardinal- prin
miniſter. But this proſcription tempted no onę
an acquiſition df the fifty thouſand crowns, which
after all, would not have been paid. In any og
nation, and at any other time, ſuch an atret would
probably have been executed; but this became
only the ſubject of new pleaſantries. The Blot
and the Marignys, wits of that time, who diffuled
gaiety and mirth into theſe tumults and troubles
cauſed papers to be fixed up in Paris, promiſing aq
hundred and fifty thouſand livres, to be divided
much to whoever ſhould ſlit the cardinal's noſe
much for an ear; ſo much for an eye; and ſo mud
for making him an eunuch. This ridicule was the
only effect of the proſcription. Nor did the cardinal
on his ſide, employ either poiſon or aſlaſlinayen
againſt his enemies; and notwithſtanding the inve
teracy and violence of ſo many different parties an
the private animoſities which ſubſiſted, there v
not many great crimes committed. The,chiefsd
the parties were not cruel, nor the people. aun
bor this was not a religious war.
That infatuation, which was ſo ata at py
time, ſo intirely poſſeſſed the whole body of lt
parliament of Paris, that, after having ſolemniy de
creed an aſſaſſination, which was laughed at, it iſſued
an arret, by which ſeveral counſellors were to
port themſelves upon the frontiers, to cpp
army of cardinal Mazarin; that is, the royal

Ky

4. LEWIS MV. 6 |
Two counſellors were ſo imprudent as to go with
>me peaſants to break down the bridges over which
he cardinal was to paſs; and were made priſoners
y the king's troops; but they were preſently re-
aſed, and became the Jelena CIR EINE
ies.

At the ſame time when the parliament proceeded
> theſe extremities againſt the king's miniſter, it
Jeclared the prince of Conde, who had taken arms
dnly againſt this miniſter, guilty of high-treaſon ;

nd, through a contradiction which all the former
proceedings render credible, it ordered the new-raiſed
roops of Gaſton duke of Orleans to march againſt *'
lazarin; and, at the fame time, prohibited the

FESEESEeEEs

eaag of any money out of the public treaſury to
H day them.

3 Indeed, nothing better could be expected from a
auch

ompany of magiſtrates, who thus acted out of
ar ſphere, not knowing either their rights, or their

-

ah ea power; unſkilled both in politics and war; af-

00 enblng and deciding in tumult; and ſiding with 4
inve⸗ darties which the day before they had not thought

ani

df, and at which they were themſelves afterwards
aſtoniſhed,

The parliament of Bordeaux was at this time at
he devotion of the prince of Conde; but it ob-
erved a more uniform conduct: for, being much
arther from court, it was leſs * * :
Ing parties.

_ more conſiderable objects now intereſted the
kingdom of France.
Conde, being leagued with the Spaniards, had

en the field againſt the king; and Turenne,
Vor. I. G i

Were

3
88

g * .
- 11
1

62 TRE AGE OF
having quitted thoſe Spaniards with vhom he l
been defeated at Netel, had made his peace wit
The exhauſted- condition of the finances did g
permit either party to have numerous forces: bit
the fate of the kingdom was as much decided
leſſer numbers. There are rimes when an
thoufand men are ſcarce able to take two tow
in à campaign: and there are others, where
t between ſeven or eight thouſand Wil
be ſufficient to overturn or eſtabliſh a crown.
Lewis XIV. who was brought up in adverſity
went, together with his mother, his brother; 1
cardinal Mazarin, from province to proviriee, "Wt
having near ſo many troops about his perſon,
afterwards had in times of peace for his or
guard: and five or fix thouſand men, part of then
ſent from Spain, and the reſt raiſed by the par
of the prince of Conde, purſued him into the heat
of his kingdom.
The prinee of Conde, in the mean time, mad
ed from Bordeaux to Montauban, took many
towns, and every-where increaſed his party.
All the hopes of the court were centered in i
' marſhal de Turenne. The royal army was e
camped near Gien, upon the river Loire. I
of the prince of Conde was at ſome fegt
diſtance, under the command of the duke de Ne
mours, and the duke of Beaufort. The
ty, ſubſiſting between theſe two generals, v
near being fatal to the prince's party. TI
of Beaufort was incapable of the leaſt oomitnend
and the duke de Nemours was rather eſtgemed
his amiableneſs and bravery, than for lis Wn

|

I = *
_—

Nh 4. LEWIS WV”

A birween them, this ruliwad
wit ir army. The ſoldiers knew. that the great
rmy Wor - was at an hundred leagues diſtance, and had
- eady conſidered themſelves as in- a ſtate of de»
rution; when, at the dead of night, a courier
1&opcared in the foreſt of Orleans before the ad-
xced gnards. The centinels preſently*diſcovered,
that this courier was no other than the prince of
Conde himſelf, who, through a thouſand dangers
ad 2drentures, had come in diſguiſe fram Agen,
to put himſelf at the head of his army. |
His preſence alone did @ great deal, and tids un»
expected arrival much more. He knew, that what»
ever is ſudder, and unhoped for, animates and
ranſports mankind; and he therefore, in{tantly
took advantage of that courage and confidence
which he bad inſpired. The great talent of this
prince in war conſiſted in forming the boldeſt reſo»
lutions in an inſtant, and in executing them with
equal prudence and celerĩty.
The royal army was ſeparated into two bodies.
Conde (5) fell upon that which was at Blenau, com -
manded by the marihal d' Hoquincourt; and this
body was diſperſed almoſt as ſoon as attacked.
Turenne could not be informed of it; and Mazarin
ran in a fright, and in the middle of the night, to
Gien, to wake the king, who was aſleep, and tell
dim what had happened. The news threw his little
court into the greateſt conſternation z and it was at
alt propoſed to fave the king by Bight, and pri-
vatcly conduct him to Bourges. The victorious
Pe Gon nets os lis IR

(0) April 1652.

63

SS £4

EE 28585

II ELKILKSILM

G 2

-
4

= THE AGE or ©.

| creaſed- the dread and deſpair of the courts |
Turenne encouraged them by bis firmneſs, —
ſaved them by the prudence of his conduct: fort
made ſo good a diſpoſition of his little-remains d
troops, and took his advantage of the ſituation a
time ſo happily, that he prevented Conde from pup
ſuing his advantage. It was difficult, upon hal
occaſion, to decide which gained the greateſt bo
ur: Conde, in being victorious, or. Turenne, ig
depriving him of the fruits of his victory." It
true, that, in this battle of Blenau, ſo long cee
brated in France, there were not four hundred me
killed; but the prince of Conde was not the leh
near making himſelf maſter of the whole royal i
mily, and of getting into his power his enem e
dinal Mazarin. Greater intereſts, or a more imm
nent danger, could ſcarce ever depend on ſo ingon:
ſiderable an engagement. 1
Conde, who did not flatter himſelf he Mold in
priſe Turenne, as he had ſurpriſed Hoquincourt
cauſed his army to march ſpeedily towards Pans
there to enjoy his glory in the favourable diſpolinont
of a blind people. Their admiration of this laſt ha
tle, all the circumſtances of which were exaggent
ed, their hatred againſt Mazarin, and the name and
preſence of the great Conde, ſeemed at firſt to e
der him abſolute maſter of the capital. But d
fion reigned in the minds of all, and each patty
was ſubdivided into factions, which generally hap
pens in all troubles, The coadjutor, who was bun
become cardinal de Retz, being in appearance i
conciled to the court, which was afraid of him and
in which he did not confide, was no longer i,
ſter of the people, nor the principal leader al

* *
Fd

2, ns
—

—

he court, the duke of Orleans, and the prince;
but all were unanimous in exclaiming againſt Ma-
rin: every one "ſecretly purſued his private in-
creſts: the people was a tempeſtuous ſea; the waves
f which were toſſed about by ſo many ' contrary
vinds, The ſhrine of St. Genevieve was carried
2ugh Paris in proceſſion, to obtain the expulſion
pf the cardinal miniſter ; and the populace made no
Joubt the ſaint would work. this mth, 2
grant rain.

Nothing was gender PIER between the
chiefs of the parties, deputations from the parlia-
ment, aſſemblies of the chambers, ſeditions among
the people, and the whole country in arms. They
kept guard before the gates of monaſtries. The
prince had called in the Spaniards. to his aſſiſtance.
Charles IV. that duke of Lortain, who was driven
out of his dominions, and whoſe ſole remainder of
power or fortune was an army of eight thouſand
men, which he ſold annually to the king of Spain,
came to Paris with this army. Cardinal Mazarin
offered him more money to return than the prince
of Conde had given him to come; and therefore
the duke of Lorrain ſoon retired out of France,
bring laid it waſte in his paſſage, and carried =P
with him the money of both parties. |

Conde now ses Wes eat
diminiſhed daily, and an army yet more weak.
Turenne cunducted the king and his court towards
the capital; and the king, at fifteen years of age,
from the ſummit of Charonne, beheld the battle
G 3.

ES wi

*
4

ZA ESEESDSST

ſed Conde: . YN

| | mo a5: fe

64 THE AGE OF Op
creaſed che dread and deſpair of the courts N
Turenne encouraged them by his firmneſs, "ax
ſaved theni by the of his conduct: forks
made ſo good a diſpoſition of his little-remains«
troops, and took his advantage of the ſituation
time fo happily, that he prevented Conde from pu
ſuing his advantage. It was difficult, upon ths
occaſion, to decide which gained the greateſt hg
nour: Conde, in being viftorious, or 'Turenne, is
depriving him of the fruits of his victory. Its
true, that, in this battle of Blenau, ſo long cc
brated in France, there were not four hundred n
killed; but the prince of Conde was not the ts
near making himſelf maſter of the whole royal &
mily, and of getting into his power his enemy e
dinal Mazarin. Greater intereſts, or a more ius
nent danger, could ſcarce ever drang
ſiderable an engagement. Ch
Conde, who did not fatter himſelf be modi *
priſe Turenne, as he had ſurpriſed Hoquincourt
cauſed his army to march ſpeedily towards Fans...
there to enjoy his glory in the favourable diſpolinou By ....
of a blind people. Their admiration of this aH -
tle, all the circumſtances of which were exaggent
ed, their hatred againſt Mazarin, and the name aol --
preſence of the great Conde, ſeemed at firſt to rem}.
der him abſolute maſter of the capital. But (vl
fion reigned in the minds of all, and each pay
was ſubdivided into factions, which generally hap
pens in all troubles. The coadjutor, who was 0" 7.
become cardinal de Retz, being in appearance i
conciled to the court, which was afraid of B
in which he did not confide, was no longer We

dem. He governed the duke of Orleans, and op- ,
oſed Conde. The ———½ʃ

ut al were unanimous in exclaiming « an a

„
Ys
—
Ch. |
.

- ©

b which were toſſed about by ſo many
winds, The ſhrine of St. Genevieve was 5 —
. Wann,

joubt dee faint would work this miracle, as vel a

2 at rain.

Nothing was dem ben banc the

hb mens nom npamoepmnnn ==
ment, aſſemblies of the chambers, ſeditions among
he people, and the whole country in arms. They
* guard before the gates of monaſtries. The
prince had called in the Spaniards to his aſſiſtance.
Charles IV. that duke of Lortain, who was driven
out of his dominions, and whoſe ſole remainder of
power or fortune was an army of eight thouſand
men, which he ſold annually to the king of Spain,
came to Paris with this army. Cardinal Mazarin :
offered him more money to return than the prince
of Conde had given him to come; and therefore
Be duke of Lorrain ſoon retired out of France,
{rig laid it waſte in his paſſage, and carried away
ith him the money of both parties. 0
Conde now remained in Paris with a power which
Eminiſhed daily, and an army yet more weak.
Turenne cunducted the king and his court towards
de capital; and the king, at fifteen years of age,
om the ſummit of Charonne, beheld tte battle
Cs]

n —

—
_—

LY: STASILLE

66 THE AGE OF aq
of St. Amp, wherein theſe two generals
fo ſew troops perſormed ſo great things, that}
to be increaſed, were yet more exalted by th
 'Fhe prince of Conde, with a few lords of ly
party, followed by 2 fmall body of ſoldiert f
tained and reputed the anack of the royal amy
The king and Mazarin beheld this engage
from an eminence. The duke of Olen be
doubtful what party to embrace, remained ili
palace of Luxembourg. Cardinal de Retzwiadihl
toned in his archbiſhopric. The parliament wait
ed the event of the battle, befote they publithel
any decree. The people who, upon this on
equally feared the troops both of the king and
prince, had cloſed the city-pates, and would fail
none either to enter or go out; while the'greatel
perfonages in France were engaged in battle, and
ſhedding their blood in the ſuburbs. It was heit
where the duke of Rochfaucault, fo Yluſtrious for
his courage and fine genius, received a ftrokebe
low his eyes, which made him loſs his fight for ſome
time. There was nothing to be feen but young
blemen killed or wounded, whom they were a
ing o the gate of $t. Antony, which thoſe wh
refuſed to open.
At laſt Madernotielle(e), the daghner G
eſpouſed the party of Conde, whom her fail
dared not to aſſiſt; cauſed the gates to be opted
to receive the wounded, and had the boldnels 10
—_————— ——
the king's troops. The royal army rem
all that Conde gained was glory: but Maden
| (<) July, 165.

=

8.  Þ -

a = F>xXKaa#Frx Xx

as
ze king ber couſiny and Cardinal Mararin, who
her extreme deſire to eſpouſe a crowned head,
yon this oben, ſaid, Theſe am have filled
busband.

Moſt of our hiſtorians give their readers nothing
wut relations of battles, and the prodigies of :cou-
ge and policy: but whoever knows what ſhame ·
ul reſources were uſed upon this occaſion, intd
hat miſery the people were phinged, and to
what meanneſſes the chiefs of both parties were
educed, will regard the heroes of that time ta ·
her with pity than admiration. We may be en»
bled to judge of this from what is related by
durville, who was attached to the prince. He
onfeſſes, that, to obtain money, he had robbed
the receivers office, and that he ſeized a certain
poſt-maſter in his lodgings, and made him pay a
ranſom for his liberty; and theſe violences, he aſ-
ſures us, were very common.

After the bloody and fraitlefs battle of St.
Antony, the king was unable to re-enter Paris;
and the prince could not continue in it long. A
popular tumult, joined to the murder of ſeveral
citizens, of which he was believed to be the author,
rendered dim odious to the people. Nevertheleſs,
he had his party in the parliament. This body;
being then but little intimidated by a court which
wandered about, and was th 4 manner driven out
of its capital, and which was diſtreſſed by the ca ·
bels of the duke of Orleans, and the prince, by an
arret (4), declared the duke of Orleans lieatenant-
(0) July, 20, 2652.

+ -
—

LTL EO TESESPERESEG EEE =

| t0

II

ferred to Pontoiſe; which only ſome of the dh

. Go * * "Y 4 W
y

age The faine tide-had bers tles es

Mayenne in the time of the League. The prineed
Conde was ſtiled generaliſſimo of the armies. N
court, in a rage, ordered the parliament to be tranf

ſellors obeyed : ſo that now there were two park
ments, who diſputed each other's authority
have rendered themſelves contemptible to the pes
ple, had not they always continued unanimous i
demanding the expulſion of Mazarin: ſo much
CO GT CRIT Ro
eſſential duty in a Frenchman. : 7 1
| There were none af the:pirdes_ ribs Wl
what were in a weak condition: that of the c
was as weak as any of them: they were all in want
both of men and money: tumults and faftions in
creaſed; and engagements between the parties hal
only produced loſſes and vexation. The court u
again forced to ſacrifice Mazarin (e), whom the whole
nation accuſed as the cauſe of the troubles, though
he was really only the pretence. He quirtedithe
kingdom a ſecond time; and, to encreaſe the ſhame
of it, the king publiſhed a declaration, wherein he
acknowieged, that, though he parted with his
OTE Joes: ei
ted his exile.

Charles the firſt, king of England, had lob

F. Z. 3 F 4 0 6HR9 5 ROMS.

head upon a ſcaffold, for having, at the beging
of the troubles, ſacrificed the blood of his" friend
Strafford to his parliament. Lewis NIV. ons
eontrary, became the peaceable maſter of his king
dom, by ſuffering the exile of Mazarin. A

e Augult 12. 1653. F

2 . g.

Fe.

=
—

4 LEWIS NAV. 69
e ſame weakneſſes were the cauſes of very differ ·
t effects. The king of England, by abandoning
Wi: favourite, emboldened a people, who breathed
othing but war, and who hated kings: but Lewis
V. (or rather the queen-mother) by baniching
ze cardinal, took away all pretence for ſedition
rom a people they yore, Ee Is
ere lovers of regal dominion.
The cardinal was no foondrtned et
ich was the place of his new retreat, than the
itizens of Paris voluntarily ſent a deputation to the
ting, to beg his majeſty would return into his ca-
tal, He accordingly entered it, and every thing
ppeared ſo peaceable, that it was difficult to ima-
pine how a few days before every thing could have
1 in ſuch confuſion. Gaſton of Orleans, unfor-
tunate in bis enterprizes, which he never knew how
to execute, was confined at Blois, where he paſſed _
the remainder of his days in repentance; and was
the ſecond of the ſons of Henry the great, who died
vithout obtaining great glory. Cardinal de Retz;
who perhaps was as imprudent as he was lofty and
audacious, was ſeized in the Louvre; and, after
deing removed from priſon to priſon, he wandered
about a long time, and at laſt ended his days in a
retreat, in which he acquired thoſe virtues, to which
tis great courage, in the variety and agitation of
lis actions and fortunes, had rendered him a ſtran-
ger.

Some counſellors, who had the moſt remarkably
abuſed their power, were puniſhed for their beha-
Hour by exile: others confined themſelves within

the bounds of their employment as magiſtrates;
os of thee returned to their duty, in conſi-

225 *

In

SAS KA TCH RY 3-0 ETSSS 3

7 "== *
/ bs 4.
a
*
4
9

—

*
* F
*

70 THE AGE OF
deration of an annual ſum of five hundred t
which were privately paid them by Fouquetz
DN nn
In the mean time, the prince of Conde, thouy
abandoned by almoſt al bis partiſans in France, f
but ill aſſiſted by the Spaniards, continued an u
ſucceſsful war upon the frontiers of +. mpag
Some diſturbances alſo continued in Bourdeaux;

they u ere ſoon quelled.
The: cranquillty of ce” kingdery wa till
by the baniſſiment of cardinal Mazarin: neverthelck
though he had been forced to retire by the un
fal clamours of the people, and by an expreſi d
claration from the king, yet Lewis preſently af
ſending for him (/), Mazarin returned, and was a
niſned to find that he entered Paris with the fame
power as before, and without the leaſt diſturbanm
Lewis XIV. received him as his father, and the
people as their maſter. An entertainment was ma
for him in the Hotel-de-ville, in the midſt of the
acclamations of the citizens; and, on this accalion,
be threw money among the populace: but it's
faid, that, in his joy for ſo happy an exchange, bs
expreſſed a contempt for our inconſtancy. Tit
parliament, though it had before ſet a price ug
his head, as upon a public robber, now ſent dept»
ties to compliment him: and this very parkiament
ſoon after condemned the prince of Conde to loi
his life for contumacy. Such changes are commot
in fuch circumſtances; but this was more mori
ing than uſual, 23, by their arrets, they condemned
a perſon in whoſe crimes they le
Jong participated.
+ Memoirs de Gourville, 7 March 1653 ·

. F. LEWIS NV. 71
The cardinal, who baſtened this condemnat o
Conde, ſoon after married one of his nieces to
e prince of Conti, Conde's brother; which-was
ane „

2 boundleſs. | :

CHAP TER V.

he ſtate of France, to the death of Can.
dinal Mazarin, in 1661. |

HILE the ftate had been thus diſtracted
and torn within, it had been attacked and
rezkened from without. The fruits of the battles
pf Rocroi, Lens, and Norlingen, were all loft.
he important fortreſs of Dunkirk was retaken by

IEEE

e Spaniards, who alſo drove the French out of
nad WWE arcciona, and retook Caſal in Italy (2). Yet not»
f de vichſtanding the diſorders of a civil, and the bur»
den of a foreign war, Mazarin was ſo happy as to

conclude that celebrated peace of Weſtphalia (H, by
which the emperor and the empire ſold to the king
and crown of France the ſovereignty of Allace, for
three millions of livres, payable to the archduke;
which ſum makes ſox millions of the preſent money
of France. By this treaty alſo, which became the
daſs of all future treaties, a new electorate was
created in favour of the houſe of Bavaria. The
rights of all the princes, the imperial towns, and
the privileges of the moſt inconſiderable of the Ger ·
mans, were confirmed. The emperor's power was
rr

fe) 1652, 1.0 1648: -

IAA TS

=

_

72 THE AGE OF d
being united with the Swedes, became the le
tors of Germany. But this glory, .
France, was due, at leaſt in part, to the arm
sweden; for Guſtavus Adolphus had given the fi
ſhock to the imperial power; and his generals N
puſhed their conqueſts very conſiderably under g
government of his * ar n
neral, Wrangel, alſo was upon the point of en
ing Auſtria: and count Konigſmark had t
maſter of one half of the city of Prague a
was beſieging the other, when this peace wa
concluded. And, to humble the emperor i
this manner, coſt France very little more than 1
million, paid annually to the Swedes. - Swede,
by theſe treaties, did, indeed, gain greater ab
vantages than France; for ſhe obtained 'Pomers
nia, together with many towns, and a confiderabl
fum of money. She alſo forced the emperor
transfer certain benefices, which belonged to the
Roman catholics, into the hands of the Lutherans
Rome exclaimed againſt this as an impiety, and d
clared that the cauſe of God was betrayed. But
the Proteſtants, on the contrary, boaſted they had
ſanctified the peace by thus robbing the Papills
All mankind ſpeak as they are prama ifi;
intereſts.

Spain was not included in this peace, and fe
good reaſons; for, perceiving that France
plunged in civil wars, the Spaniſh miniſter hoped
7 to reap advantage from our diviſions: and the G
1 man troops, being now diſengaged, became an 8
| ditional ſuccour to the Spaniards, r
four years time from the peace of Weſtphalia, canh
ed near thirty thouſand men to mare Mf

b. 5. LEWIS NV. 71
which was a manifeſt violation of the treaties;
indeed, treaties are ſeldom executed otherwiſe.
In this treaty of Weſtphalia, the miniſters of the
ourt of Madrid had the addreſs to conclude a ſe-
arate peace with Holland; and the Spaniſh mon-
rchy at laſt thought itſelf happy in acknowleging
ſovereigns, and no longer having for its ene-
nies, thoſe whom it had ſo long treated as rebels,
worthy of pardon. - Theſe republicans increaſed
cir riches, and ſtrengthened their peace and their
dower, by concluding a peace with Spain, without
breaking with France.
They became ſo powerful, that, in a War which
they had ſome time after with England, (c) they ſent
put a fleet of an hundred ſhips of the line; and the
cory frequently remained doubtful between Blake
the Engliſh admiral, and the Dutch admiral Tromp,
who were by ſea, what the Condes and Turennes
were by land. France, at that time, had not ten
ſkips of fifty guns in a condition to put to ſens
and ber marine was declining daily.
Lewis XIV. therefore in 1 653. found himſelf ab-
ſolute maſter of a kingdom, which was not yet reco-
rered from the ſhocks it had received ; which was fill-
ed with diſorders in every part of the adminiſtration,
but which nevertheleſs had'great reſources; deſtitute
even of one ſingle ally, except Savoy, to enable him
to maintain an offenſive. war; and having no longer
any foreign enemies, except Spain, which was then
even in a worſe condition than France. All the
people of France, who had been engaged in the
Gvil war, were ſubjected, or returned voluntarily to

te) 1653.
3 L, H

Tt MS” er

their duty, except the prince of Conde, and
few of his. partiſans; one or two of which
pued conſtant to him through friendſhip, or gi I
neſs. of foul; ſuch. as the counts de Coligii
Bouteville;z and the others, becauſe the cou
mne of
Conde, now become general of the. Spaniſh. as
nie 2es-uvchle a9 refiene ©. pert bhi
himſelf weakened, by the deſtruction of their iq
fantry in the battles of Rocroi and Lens. He fought
at che head of new forces, of which he was hut
maſter, againſt the old French regiments, which hal
learned - to conquer n kin, ang WIG
—— Ny Frrane,
. ˙ ——
orgs vidortows, when they u-, ahaha
the French, and to be vanquiſhed when they com
manded the Spaniards. Turenne, when from ge
neral to the king of France, he had made himlel
lieutenant to Don Eſtevan de Gamarra, had-ſcarae
been..able do ſave. the m anne ng
niſh army in the battle of Retel.
| The prince of Conde had the fone fon tell
Arras (4): he and the archduke beſieged that dj
Turenne attacked them in their camp, and forced
their lines: the troops of the archduke were put to
fight; and Conde, with rwo regiments of Frend
and Lorrainians, alonce ſuſtained the efforts of Tu
renne's army; and while the archduke was thing
he defeated the marſhal de Hoquincourt, repulſed
the marſhal de la Ferte, and retreated vidtorioull
bimſelf, by covering the retreat of the vanquilhed
Spaniards. The Hug of Spain, in kN
(4) Auguſt 25. 2654.

„ 11 WI nv, If

, after this engagement, had theſe words: 7
we been informed that every thing was loft, nd

hat you have ſaved all. —
eee eee
xr loſes battles; but it is certain, that Conde was
ne of the greateſt genius's in war that the world
er produced, and that the archduke and his conn-
; | reuled 10 do any thing which Conde propoſe

1 this engagement.

| The relieving of Arras; the fording of the ney
md the defeat of the archduke, crowned Turenne
vich glory: but it is remarkable, that in the let
ter written in the king's name to the parliament +,
on occaſion of this victory, the whole ſucceſs of the
zampaign was attributed to Mazarin, and that the
name of Turenne was not even mentioned. The
cardinal had, indeed, been at ſome leagues diſtance
from Arras, with the king; and he had even en-
tered into the camp, at the ſiege of Stenai, which
Turenne had taken, before he ſuccoured Arras.
Councils of war had alfo been held im his preſence;
and, on this foundation, he aſſumed to himſelf the
honour of theſe great actions; but this vanity made
him appear ſo ridiculous, that all the authority of
is miniſtry could not efface it.

The king was not preſent in the battle of Arras,
though he might have been there. He had ap-
peared in the trenches at the ſiege of Stenai; but.
Mazarin would not ſuffer him further to expoſe his

perſon, whereon the repoſe of the ſtate, and the
miniſter's power, ſeemed abſolutely to depend.
On one ſide, Mazarin, the abſolute maſter of

t Datcd from Vincennes, e Ws
H 2 |

ESE BEES Takns=.

+
S

16 THE AGE OF ki

France, and of the young king; and, on the otha
Philip IV.; continued the war, under their maſſa
names, though but with little vigour on either pan;
Lewis XIV. was not yet known in the won
and the king of Spain had never been rematkable
There was not —
who had any ſhare of perſonal glory. (Chriſtin
queen of Sweden was the only —
verned by herſelf, and fupported the dignity of be
throne, though abandoned, diſregarded or u
known, in the other nations of Europe.
Charles II. king of. England, who was a fugitie
in France, with his mother and brother, brought
with him his misfortunes, and his hopes. England
Scotland, and Ireland, were ſubjected by 8 primate
perſon; and Cromwell, an uſurper, worthy t»
reign, had aſſumed the title of protector, and not
that of king; becauſe the Engliſh knew bo far
the prerogative of their kings ſhould extend, but
were ignorant of the bounds to the authority of
protector.
He eſtabliſhed his power, by knowing when i
was proper to reſtrain it: he made no attempts a
thoſe privileges, of which the people were jealous:
ſoldiers were never quartered in the city of Low
don: he impoſed no taxes, that might occakion
murmurs: he did not offend the eyes of the puts
lic, by appearing with too great pomp and gran
deur : he did not indulge himſelf in any pleaſures
he accumulated no treaſures: and he took care
have juſtice adminiſtered with that ſtrict impart
lity, which makes no diſtinction between the ge
and the ſmall.

b. 5. LEWIS MV. 77

The brother of Pantaleon, embaſſador in Eng-
and from the court of Portugal, thinking” his li-
entiouſneſs would paſs unpuniſhed, becauſe the
ﬀerſon of his brother was facred, inſulted certain
Stizens of London, and cauſed one of them to be
aſſinated, to revenge the reſiſtance of the others:
ut he was condemned to be hanged; and Cromwell,
ough he might have pardoned him, fuffered him
o be executed; nnn
ith the embaſſador.

Commerce had never been fo flouriſhing, or ſo
free, before; and England had never before been
ſo rich. Her victorious fleets made her name re-
ſpetted throughout the world; while Mazarin, be-
ing ſolely engaged in enriching himſelf, and in-
ereaſing his own power, ſuffered the juſtice, the
commerce, the marine, and even the finances, of
France, to languiſh and decay. Being maſter 'of |
France, as Cromwell was of England after the civil
war, he might have done that for the country which
he governed, which Cromwell had done for his: but
Mazarin was a foreigner ; and, as he had not the
barbarity, neither had he the Tres of ſoul, which
Cromwell poſſeſſed.

All the nations of Europe, which had neglected
the alliance of England, under the reigns of James I.
and Charles, follicited it under the protector: and
queen Chriſtina herſelf, though ſhe deteſted the
murder of Charles I. entered into an alliance with
te tyrant whom ſhe eſteemed.

Mazarin and Don Lewis de Haro ufed all their

ts of policy, to unite themſelves with the pro-
tector; and Cromwell, for ſome time, enjoyed thr
H 3

—

SE ES EES

LIZ

Fs

—

79 THE AGE OF .
ſatisfaction of ſeeing himſelf courted by the
moſt powerful kingdoms, in Europe. 1
The Spaniſh miniſter offered to aſſiſt him
taking Calais: Mazarin propoſed to him the fie
of Dunkirk, and the putting of that place ls
poſleflion: and thus Cromwell had his choice d
the keys both of France and Flanders. He
alſo follicited by the prince of Conde; but he
fuſed to negotiate with 2 prince, who had nothing
left but his title, and who was without a party |
France, and without power among the Spaniards
The protector declared himfclf, at ſt, for France;
but without concluding any particular treaty, u
without making any previous partition of conqueſt;
for he propoſed to make his ufurpation remarkable
by greater enterprizes. His deſign was, to deprive
the Spaniards of America; but they received m
ty notice of it. Cromwel['s admirals, neverthelck,
took Jamaica from them ce); which iſland the
Engliſh ſtill poſſeſs, and which fecures their com-
merce in the new world. It was not till after the
expedition to Jamaica, that Cromwell figned bs
treaty with the king of France; which be &.
without making as yet any mention of Dunk.
The protector treated with him as his equal, and
forced the king to acknowlege his title of pro-
tector. His ſecretary ſigned the treaty, before we
plenipotentiary of France; and he acted like a red
fuperior, by cbiiging the king of France to c
Charles I. ard the duke of York, who” were the
grandſons of Henry IV. and to whom Fran
owed an aſylum, to depart out of his domi
hte dn ——_— —

(<) May 2655.

— *

8 0

„Fer gg r . ES 2 -

—

. ©@

ve

BB =@ o&, © KT,

80 THE AGE OF Ch.
and hnman, and all honour and religion, to the
murderer of a king; and who had baniſhed out d
France Charles II. and the duke of York who wer
the couſins of Lewis XIV. to pleaſe their father
executioner. In anfwer to theſe exclamations of the
Spaniards; only the offers were produced, whidy
they themſelves had made to the protector. |
The war in Flanders conſtantly continued with
various ſucceſs. Turenne having, in conjundtion
with the marſhal de la Ferte, beſieged Valenciennes
he experienced the ſame reverſe of fortune, which
Conde had ſuffered before Arras. The- prince;
being ſeconded, upon this occaſion, by Don Joby
of Auſtria, who was more worthy to fight by hs
ſide than the archduke, (F)) forced the lines of mar
ſhal de la Ferte, took him priſoner, and _
Valenciennes. «
Turenne now did what Conde had formal
done, in a defeat of the ſame kind. He faved
the vanquithed army, and every-where ſuſtained
the attacks of the enemy; and, even in a moni
after, he beſieged and took the little town of, 14
Capelle; which, perhaps, was the firſt time a van-
quiſhed army dared to undertake a ſiege. This
celebrated march of Turenne, after which la C.
pelle was taken, was eclipſed by another march
ffi more glorious, by the prince of Conde: Tur
renne had no ſooner beſieged Cambray, than Conde
at the head of two thouſand cavalry, pierced through
the army of the beſiegers; and, having vanquiſhed
whoever offered to oppoſe his paſſage; (g) he tres
himſelf into the city; the inhabitants of wha
received their deliverer upon their knees. "W

22 July 17. 1656. (8) May 30. 1658.

Þ. 5. LEWIS XIV. 8.

ſe two great generals, being oppoſed againſt
ch other, diſplayed the various reſources of their
genius. They were admired in their - retreats, as
yell as in their victories, in their good conduct,
and even in their errors, which they always knew
bow to repair. Their abilities, by turns, put a
op to the progreſs of both parties; but the diſ-
order which reigned in the finances, both of France
and Spain, . „ ſuc-
cels.

The alliance conthaded with 8 at laſt;
gained France a more diſtinguiſhed ſuperiority:
on one ſide admiral Blake burnt the Spaniſh, gal-
leons, near the Canaries, - and | deprived them of
the only treafures with which the war could be
ſupported : on another ſide, twenty Engliſh ſhips
blocked up the port of Dunkirk; and Turenne's
army was reinforced by fix thouſand veterans, who
bad effected the revolution in England. ct

Dunkirk, which was the moſt important fortreſs
in Flanders, was beſieged, both by ſea and land.
Conde and Don John of Auſtria, having aſſembled
their forces, appeared to relieve the place, The
eyes of all Europe were fixed on this event. Car-
dinal Mazarin conducted Lewis XIV. near the
teatre of war; but would not ſuffer him to enter
upon it, though he was now near twenty years old.
hie was at Calais, while his army attacked that of
Spain, near the Dunes, and gained the moſt glo-
nous victory that had been obtained ſince the
battle of Rocroi (4). |

The genius of the prince of Conde could not,
an this occaſion, do any thing againſt the nn

(>) June 14. 1658.

=

nes;
hich
nee;
E
7 bus
nar*
ered
erh
ved
ned
nth
1a
au-
Tus
Ca-
ch.
u-
de,
gh
ed
"W
ch
us

cs -

p, : * n, _ * N * N
. . *
1 ain i +» * Ls 8 * 5 1 a 0 7 CY 9 1 * = - l 9
3 - SS :
= = ſ \

* 4.

17 THE AGE OF any
troops of France and England. The Spaniſh am
was deſtroyed; and Dunkirk ſoon after ſures
—_— The king haſtened, with his miniſter, 1

ſte the garriſon march out. The cardinal a
not permit Lewis XIV. to appear either as a go
neral, or à king: he had no money to diſtribu#
among the troops; nor had ſcarce a- houſhold'
his own: for, when he was in the army, he wy
always at the tables either of Mazarin or Tures

This negle& of the royal dignity did not
Lewis XIV. proceed from any contempt of pra
deur; but from the confuſed - ſtare of his atfiing
— — RR
dor and authority in himſelf. - ' #1
Lewis entered Dunkirk, only to deliver it up
Lockhart, the embaſſador of Cromwell. Max
rin attempted, by his fineſſe, to elude the treat,
and avoid giving up the place: but Lockhart m6
naced ; and Engliſh reſolution got the better of in
kan addreſs. |

It is affirmed by many perſons, that the er
Anal, who attributed the affair of Arras to hinnfel,
endeavoured alſo to make Turenne cede to him
the honour of the battle of Dunes. It is ſaid, that
Du Bec-Crepin, count de Moret, came from ie
miniſter, to propoſe to the general the writing d
a letter, wherein it ſhould appear, that the car
had, himſelf, regulated the whole plan of tit
operations: but Turenne rejected this propels
with contempt, and refuſed to ſay that whidl
would only have brought ſhame upon himlelh'#
general, and ridicule upon the cardinal, as a churdy
man: and My n deen ag

F

th. 5. LEWIS VL. L
weakneſs, had alſo that of continuing to be at vari-
ence with Turenne, as long as he lived.
Some time after the ſiege of Dunkirk, Cromwell
died, aged 55 years, in the midſt of the projedts
he was forming to ſtrengthen his own power, and
increaſe the glory of his nation, He had humbled
olland, forced a treaty upon Portugal, vanquiſh;
d Spain, and obliged France to ſolicit his ſup»
port. Not long before he died, being told with
That haughtineſs his admirals had behaved at Life
don, he ſaid ; I would have the Engliſh republic re
wefted as much as the Roman republic was of old,
t is not true, that he affected the enthuſiaſt and the
falſe prophet at his death, as has been reported by
ſome writers: and it is certain, that, in his death,
xe ſhewed the ſame unſbaken firmneſs of foul,
xhich he had always manifeſted in every action of
his life. He was interred like a lawful- monarch,
nd left behind him the reputation of a great king,
der which he covered the crimes of an uſurper.
Sir William Temple ſays, that Cromwell, before
is death, was deſirous to unite with Spain againſt
France; and, with the aſſiſtance of the Spaniſh
orces, to obtain Calais, as he had Dunkirk by the
plliſtance of the French. Such a deſign was, in-
leed, agreeable to his character and policy; and he
would have rendered himſelf the idol of the peo-
le of England, by thus depriving of their princi-
Ern
Te equally hated by his own, But death put a
r
ar of England.

Vena Abend en
ett into mourning for Cromwell, except Ma-

F aA =ES 2 =

EARS

Fi

*
u

-

*
4 = *
ou

NT *
„ <7
|; TI

- *
84 THE AGE Or "7
a W:
who "had "murdered a king that” was her f rat
tion. 1 re
Richard Cromwell ſucceeded — 1
without oppoſition, to the protectorſtip of

father, in the ſame manner as a prince of Wag i
would have fucceeded to a king of England.
Richard ſhewed, that the fate of a ſtate may it
quently depend upon the character of a ſingle um
His diſpoſition was quite different from that of"!
Oliver Cromwell. He had all the gentleneſs of rio
ſocial virtues, and none of that intrepid feroay ne
which ſacrifices all things to its own intereſt. "Hl!
might have preſerved the inheritanee wich bis Hof
ther's labour had obtained, if he would have pu but
to death three or four of the principal officers ut

* the army, who oppoſed his elevation: but he n
ther choſe to reſign the government, than reign He
committing aſſaſſinations. He retired and r
privately, and in a manner unknown, to the age
of go years, in a country, of which, foria fe
days, he had been the ſovereign,  Inimediatey
after his reſignation of the proteCtorſhip, he ven
into France: and it is known, that, at Montpellier
the prince of Conti, brother to the great Cond⸗
happening one day to converſe with him, without
knowing him, faid: Oliver Cromwell was a grid
man ; but his ſon Richard was a wreteh, not is h
hew to enjoy the fruits of his father's crimes. "Ne
vertheleſs, Richard lived happily, 7 bs 15

never had done.

Some time before this, France beheld yet
remarkable example of the contempt" of oyal

' «4 "4% - b

- ;
»-- a
*

42
9

1 — LEWIS NV. v5
iſtina, queen of Sweden, eame to Paris. She
was a young queen, who was regarded with admi-
ration, for having, at the age of twenty ſeven
rears, renounced a ſovereignty of which-ſhe was
rorthy, for the ſake of freedom and tranquillity.”
t is ſcandalous in the proteſtant writers to have
id, without the leaſt foundation, 'that-ſhe reſigned
her crown, only becauſe ſhe was unable to preſerve
t any longer. She had conceived" the deſign at the
age of twenty years, and waited ſeven years to
bring it to maturity, Such a reſolution, ſo ſupe-
rior to vulgar ideas, and which ſhe had ſo long
meditated, ought to ſilence thoſe who reproach her
with fickleneſs, and an involuntary abdication. One
of theſe reproaches does indeed deſtroy the other:
but the actions of great ſouls are always ſure to —
attacked by little minds.

o diſcover the peculiar genius of this queen,
we need only read her letters. In that which ſhe
wrote to Chanut, formerly embaſſador to her from
France, ſhe expreſſes herſelf. thus: “I have poſ-
ſelſed without vanity or oſtentation; and I reſign
« with chearfulneſs: therefore, have no fears about
me; for my happineſs is above the power of
fortune.“ To the prince of Conde ſhe wrote
in theſe terms: « I think myſelf as much honoured
in your eſteem, as by the croun which 1 have
* worn. If, after having reſigned it, you think
me leſs worthy of it, I will then confeſs, that the
* repoſe I have ſo ardently deſired, coſts me dear:
* but I ſhall not, however, repent the having pur-
* naſed it, even at the expence of a crown; nor

« vill ever ſos an e which te to me n
V 9 1. I. 1 A

> 7 = FEATS Ba

IBLTITEELSE:

4
VM

« *
a.
©. ,

Tur 50 or ©

| n be leech, bh a cncan nd-weckr e,
and if you ſhould condemn me, all that I
« offer in my juſtification, is, that I. hould Ja
have diſregarded the favours which fortune tut
« ſhowered upon me, had I thought them ned
« faty-to my happineſs; and that I might ha
& pretended even to the empire of the world, if
r d
3 as the great Conde.?ꝰ̃

Such was the genius of this ſingular 6
ani] ſuch was her ſtile in writing French, though
ſhe. had ſeldom ſpoken it. She underſtood-eight
languages: ſhe had been the friend and di
of Deſcartes, who died in her palace at Sto
holm, after having been unable to obtain ſo mud
as a penſion in France, where his works were em
prohibited, only for the good things which they
contained. She had drawn all thoſe ingenious pe-
ſons of the age into Sweden, who could in any
manner contribute to her information. The da
grin of not finding any ſuch among her own-ſub
jects, had given her a diſguſt againſt reigning/ore
a people who were mere ſoldiers, | She thought
better to live with men who cultivated their rationd
faculties, than to command over thoſe what
Hlliterate, and without genius. She had-ſhudied at
the ſciences in a climate where they were then us
known. Her deſign was to retire into the c
of them in Italy; and ſhe came intq France ont
her way thither ; for the arts had then made but ii
progreſs among us. Her taſte determined. her
fix at Rome; and, with this deſign, ſue gute
me Lutheran religion for the Catholics u
indifferent with regard to either, n

of ©

. , * | 3

> mY +.4Xxx 4
P _ of —
» ade *

N
*

= "> 8 4
* N 1 E
a

\ "_
- „ i
—

nd publicly performed the ceremony of her abju-
tion at-Infpruck. She was well received by the
court of France, though there was not a woman in

it with a genius equal to her own. The king ſaw

= 5 EEES

ſpoke to her: for, being brought up in ignorance,
the e rendered

Moſt of the women, Ad eee af b eee
could perceive nothing farther in this philoſophical
queen, than that her head was not dreſſed in the
French faſhion, and that ſhe danced ill. The moſt
ſenſible people condemned her only for the murder
of Monaldeſchi, her gentleman uſher, whom, in a
ſecond journey which ſhe made to Paris, ſhe cauſed

have been his crime with regard to her, as ſhe had
renounced her throne, ſhe had no longer any right
to do herſelf juſtice in this manner, It was not a
queen that puniſhed a crime againſt the ſtate, but
a woman who finiſhed an amour by a murder, The
ſhame and cruelty of this action tarniihed that phi-
loſophy which had made her reſign her crown. In
England ſhe would have been puniſhed; but, in

France, this inſult on the-king's authority, againſt
the laws of nations, and appar * was

palled over in ſilence. |

After the death of ln and the Jepoſi
don of his ſon, England for the ſpace of a year,
vas in the confuſion of DW Charles Guſta-
17 |

SS ECEELSESAEEFEASSaERESSES

2

1
i —
. +
a”
=

u 7 C ; \ * EY L 8
2 9 „ _— a *
= » v FY * . 44 =
I a x, Sd.
— 4 F 5 —_ MS. . „ e
* 4 2 , l W. 0 4
* * =
8 Ty.”
45 | ug
* 5 :
— 5 _
le to conform in ſent
rur to a N

ments of the people with whom ſhe intended to
paſs her life. She reſigned her croum in 1694.

her, and paid her great honours; but he ſcarce

him timid. e

to be aſſaſſinated at Fontainebleau. Whatever might

*
2»

5 - _ G * e * + <F 1 4 . * _ 2 > 4 * 9 1 .
* 4 4 by e 4 * —— * . F
= 4 * \ * — n p< N
k * e — Y
4 : we ©
8 | i

2 : o „
* 2 + ww * -{ ,
* 1 *Y
a a * . * 1
k $ *
4 »
| = 2

* a
THE AGE oF at

of Sweden, rendered himſelf formidable in Mn
North, and in Germany. The Emperor n
dinand had died in 1657. and his ſon Leopold
aged 17 years, who was king of Hungary
Bohemia, had not been elected king of the Roman ca:
in his father's life-time. - Mazarin was deſirom 9
make Lewis XIV. emperor: but the deſign wa
chimerical; as it would be neceſſary either torfoig
or corrupt the eleftors: and France was neither pri
rich enough to purchaſe the empire, nor ſtraw t'<
enough to obtain it by force. Accordingiy f din
firſt overtures made at Frankfort by the marſhal in
Grammont and Lionne were rejected as ſon b.
propoſed. Leopold was elected: and all that . cor
zarin's policy could effect, was the conchaſion df
league with the German princes, for the obſervation
of the treaties of Munſter, and to curb W
ror's authority over the empire. " an

France, after the battle of — mo
abroad, by the glory of its arms, and by the l
condition of the other European powers: , def
home it was exhauſted of ma Gann 100
need of peace.

The inhabitants of the ſeveral W IA
rope have ſcarce ever any intereſt in the warsd
their ſovereigns. Mercenary armies, raiſed by ut
order of a miniſter, and commanded by a gene |
who blindly obeys him, often make ſeveral ruinow hy **
campaigns, while the ings: in whoſe names the
fight, conceive not the leaſt hope, or even dey
to deprive one another of their daminions. The
victors, though they are at ever ſo much e

never „ „ wa

2 1 *
- p «a.

>  TEWHR AY”
or ill ſucceſs of their arms they are equally ſufferers; -
and peace is almoſt as neceſſary to them after the
molt ſignal victory, as when their enemies have ta-
ken their frontier towns,

Two things were neceſſary to be * the
cardinal to crown his miniſtry with fucceſs; and
theſe were to conclude a peace, and to ſecure
the tranquillity of the ſtate, by marrying. the
king. After the campaign of Dunkirk, this
prince had been taken ſo dangerouſly ill, that
they were in great fears for his life. The car-
dinal, who was. not beloved by the king's brother,
in this danger, took the neceſſary meaſures ta ſecure
his immenſe riches, and his retreat. On all theſe
conſiderations he determined to have Lewis XIV.
married immediately, T'wo matches offered; the
daughter of the king of Spain, and the princeſs of
Savoy : but the king's affections were engaged an-
other way: he was paſſionately in love with Made-
moiſelle Mancini, one of the cardinal's nieces :
and as he was born with a tender heart, and a firm-
neſs in his reſolutions, having alſo an high ſpirit,
and being without experience, it was more than
proxable he might reſolve to marry his miſtreſs.
Madam de Motteville, who was the favourite of
the queen-mother, and whoſe memoirs have a great
ar of truth, pretends, that Mazarin was tempted
to favour the king's paſſion, in hopes to place his
niece upon the throne. He had before married an-
other niece to the prince of Conti, and another to
tie duke de Mercoeur; and ſhe with whom Lewis
IV. was enamoured, had been demanded in mar-
nage by the king of England. Theſe were all fo

13

3

LET ESD ea Cn AAAS EB SaEnSEATRS

TT oa.

e

* # ws a a
a
* *

& THE AGE OFF
many titles which might juſtify his ambition;* Bs
contrived artfully to found the queen-mother ow this
bead: I amr afraid, faid he to her, that the
_ paſſion will hurry him on to marry my niece. The
queen, who was perfectly acquainted with the mj-
nifter, perceived, that in his heart, he wiſhed wh
he pretended to fear: and ſhe anſwered him wit
the dignity'of a princeſs of the Auſtrian blood who
was the daughter, wife, and mother of kings; aud
with the indignation with which-ſhe had for ſum
time been inſpired by this miniſter, who affefted
no longer to depend upon her: F the ling was
capable of committing ſo diſhowourable an action, 1
world put myſelf, and my ſecond fon, at the head ef
the whole nation, aguinſt you and the king.

Mazarin, it is faid, never pardoned the queen
for making this reply: but his prudence determit-
ed him to conform to her ſentiments; and be 4
famed to himſelf a kind of honour and merit from
oppoſing the paſſion of Lewis XIV. though, indeed,
his power did not want ſupport from a queen's
his own blood: beſides, he feared the character u
his niece; and therefore concluded he ſhould elit
bliſh his power more firmly, by flying from te
Auen glory of railing his houſe tor e
degree of elevation.

He had ſent Lionne into Spain, in the-year 0h
to ſolicit peace, and demand the infanta in m.
riage for the king; but Don Lewis de Haro, being
perſuaded that France was altogether as weat #
Spain, had rejected the cardinal's offers. The in.
fanta, who was the king of Spain's daughter by'W
firſt marriage, was deſigned for young
" "The king of Spain, at the time of his ſecong wr

:
—

X LE WIS Mv. _
had only one ſon, whoſe unheakby infancy
.dangered his life. It was therefore determined,
x — whe might probably become the
heireſs of ſuch great domains, ſhould carry her right
into the bouſe of Auſtria, and not into the houſe
of an enemy. But at laſt Philip IV. having another
ſon, Don Philip Profper, and his wife being again
with child, the danger of giving the infanta to the
king of France appeared leſs imminent,” and the
battle of Dunes rendered peace in a manner ne-
ce

— Spaniards promiſed the infanta, and de»
manded a ſuſpenſion of arms. Mazarin and Don
Lewis met in the iſle of Pheaſants, upon the fron»
tiers of France and Spain: but though the mar-
nage of a king of France, and a general peace,
were the object of their conferences, yet above a
month was ſpent in adjuſting the difficulties which
aroſe in regard to precedency, and other ceremo»
nies, Cardinals conſidered themſelves as equal
in dignity to kings, and fuperior to leſſer ſove
reigns: and France . pretended, with the greateſt
appearance of juſtice, to a pre-eminence over other
kings: nevertheleſs, Don Lewis de Haro inſiſted
on an equality between himſelf and the cardinal,
and between France and Spain.
The conferences continued four months; and
Mazarin and Don Lewis diſplayed the utmoſt
ſtrength of their policy. The cardinal's _—_—_
in cunning, Don Lewis's in circumſpeftion. The

ktter ſcarce ever ſaid any thing; and what the for-
mer ſaid was always equivocal. The genius of the
Italian miniſter diſplayed itſelf in wanting to gain

rantage by ſurpriſe, and that of the 2 |

* 4
hy .
ir _

n

Kr

| o C5 6 4. 4 v * , C N > 0 2 "I = N
EE FS, «2 | - ed * 1 A ' | .
y 4 . "I — 4 N : 9 8 * 1

a. PZ * . * by
p * W + o 4 0
. | . [ :
9 E 0 F ö > | e
8 a 1
| - ' 4s vo

avoiding being ſurpriſed. It is pretended Don Lea
ſaid of the cardinal, he is guilty of a great e
politics, in that he always ſtudies how-to deen
Buch is the viciſſitude of all human affairs; hu
not even two articles now ſubſiſt of this famay
Pyrenean treaty. The king of France ret
Rouſillon, which he always would have done with
out this peace. In regard to Flanders, the Sel
niſh monarchy no longer poſſeſſes any thing there,
We were at that time neceſſarily the friends of Por
tugal; but now we are ſo no longer. All thing
are changed. And if Don Lewis de Haro then
ſaid, the cardinal could deceive, we have ourſelng
ſince found, that he could foreſee. He had long
meditated an alliance between France and Spain;
as a proof of which that famous letter of his; wit
ten during the negotiations of Munſter, is cited
« If the moſt Chriſtian king could obtain the
« Low-Countries and Franche-Comte, as a dowry
« with the infanta, then, notwithſtanding any +
&« nunciation ſhe may be obliged to make, we
« might aſpire to the Spanlſh ſucceſſion 3 50
« would this be a very diſtant expectation, as there
« is only the life of the prince her brother that cn
« exclude her from it.” This prince was Balis.
zar, who died in 1649.

The cardinal was palpably deceived in ſuppoſing,
that the Low Countries and Franche-Comte might

be given in marriage with the infanta: for not een pr
a ſingle town was ſtipulated as her dowry. On toe Wl th
contrary, a reſtitution was made to, the Spanill mi
' monarchy of ſeveral conſiderable towns, which has Ar
been conquered; as St. Omer, Ypres, Meninz Ou e.
denarde, and others. Some of . towns allo be

6
*

o

»

L r WIS A og

retained, The cardinal was not miſtaken in
magining the renuneiation- would one day be uſe-
eſs; but then thoſe, who attribute honour to him
for this prediction, do alſo make him foreſee; that
xrince Balthazar would die in 1649. ; that, after»
rards, his three children, by his ſecond marriage,
ould all die in their infaney; that Charles, the
fifth of all theſe male children, would die without
oſterity ; and that this Auſtrian king would one
day make a will in favour of a grandſon of Lewis
XIV. Mazarin, however, did foreſee the conſe»
quence of renunciations, in caſe the male poſte»
rity of Philip IV. ſhould become extin&; and
the reaſonableneſs of his conjectures was juſtified
by very ſtrange — II _
fifty years after.

It being probable, chat Maria- Thereſa —
have thoſe towns for her dowry, which were given
up by France, ſhe, by her marriage - contract, had
only five hundred thouſand crowns, though the ex-
pence of receiving her upon the frontiers coſt the
king a larger ſum. ;.' Theſe five hundred thouſand
crowns, which were then equal to two millions five
hundred thouſand livres, were, nevertheleſs, the
ſubject of great diſputes between the two miniſters;
and all that France received at laſt, amounted to
no more than one hundred thoufand franks.
This marriage was fo far from bringing any other
preſent or real advantage, beſides that of peace,
that the infanta renounced all ber right which ſhe
might ever have to any of her father's dominions.
And this renounciation was ratified in the moſt ſo-
lemn manner by Lewis XIV. who alſo cauſed it to
be regiſtred in the parliament.

9
_—

r

ors

r

** * a
5

IA | * oh - * * F- 1
. L : , = 4 f N *
RN 2 * F? |
904 TH. E 40 E. o We
. * 7

& any part: fo that it does not appear there was thi

"WM
* >

Theſe renunciations, and theſe five hunted du
| ſand crowns, ſeem to be the ordinary coriditienz
marriage between the infantas of Spain u
kings of France. Anne of Auſtria, the dug
of Philip III. was married to Lewis XIII. on W
donditions: and when Iſabella, the daugum
Henry IV. was married to Philip IV. king of Sp
no more was ſtipulated for her dowry than five d
dred thouſand crowns, of which he never teu

any advantage in theſe grand matches; and
daughters of ings. wire arti LR
| lect. nutifhry angeel preſent, s

Charles IV. duke of Lorrain, of Goes Mun
and Spain had grest cauſe to cmnplain, de wil
who had himſelf great reaſon to complain of then
was compriſed in this treaty ; but he was indlude
as an unfortunate prince, whom they puniſhed d
cauſe he could not make himſelf reſpected. Han
reſtored him his territories, but demoliſhed Nane)
and forbad him to have any forces. Don Levi &
| Haro obliged cardinal Mazarin to get the prince
Conde pardoned, and again received into favout
by threatening to give him the ſovereignty of 86
croi, Catalet, and other places of which he
in poſſeſſion. And thus France gained theſe town,
and recovered the great Conde, both rogethe;
Conde had loſt his poſt of of the
king's houſhold, and returned deſticure: of r
thing but glory.

Charles II. titular king of 'Englandy who ws
then more unfortunate than the duke ef Loan,
came within a ſmall diſtance of the Pyrens

where this peace was negotiating z/-apd

T LEWIS XIV. dg

deer Lis and Men He flats
i himſel, that their maſters, who- were his

x -
=,

W&ou5n-germans, being reconciled, would at laſt dare
hier ——ůů ho digecied bee:
css as their common cauſe; more eſpecially as

romwell was now no more: but he could not fo
nuch as obtain an interview, either with Mazarin
r Don Lewis. Lockbart, the embaſſador of
>mwell, was at St. John de Luz, and made him-
elf (till reſpected even after the proteQor's death;
pfend this embaſſador, refuſed to ſee Charles II.
They thought his reſtoration impoſſible; and that
the Engliſh parties, though divided among them-
ves, would unanimouſly agree never again to ac-
zowlege kings. But they were both miſtaken z
or fortune, a few months after, did that which
beſe tu o- miniſters might have had the glory of
undertaking. Charles was recalled into his domi-
ions by the Engliſh ; and not a ſingle potentate of
Europe ever endeavoured to prevent the father's
murder, or favour the reſtoration of his ſon. He
ras received at Dover by twenty thouſand of his
ubjects, who fell upon their knees before him: and
I tave been told by ſome old men, who were of
s number, that hardly any of thoſe who were
preſent could refrain from tears. Perhaps there
never was ſo tender a ſcene between a king and his
people, or a more ſudden revolution. It was over
in much leſs time than was employed in the conclu«
don of the Pyrenean treaty; and Charles II. was

n peaceable poſſeſſion of Logland, * W
XIV. was married even by proxy |

. 1 Pt with the Big

==

rc

-- THE AGE or” Ag
and the new queen. A father, who ſhould/has
married his ſon without ſuffering him to pate
his patrimony, would not haye done otherwiſe tha
Mazarin did upon this occaſion : he returned mon
powerful, and more jealous of his power, and eve
of his honour, than ever. He no longer" pat
precedency to the princes of the blood, as-forme
ly; and he, who had treated Don. Lewis de Han
as his equal, now treated the great Conde a8 hi
inferior. He appeared, upon all occaſions; with the
grandeur and pomp of royalty, having, beſides hi
other guards, a company of foot, which is now the
king's ſecond company of muſqueteers. Accels'to
him was no longer free and open; and if an ob
was fo bad a courtier, as to beg a favour of the
king, he was ruined. The queen-mother, who had
ſo long been the obſtinate protectreſs of Maui

againſt France, was deprived of her power as ſoon

as he found he had no longer any occaſion for her.

The king her ſon, being brought up in a blindiſub

miſſion to the miniſter, was unable to ſhake off that

yoke which ſhe had impoſed both upon him and
herſelf. She repented what ſhe had done; and

Lewis XIV. while the cardinal lived, _ * to

reign. * leat

A miniſter is excuſable for the evilwhich be dog ſup
when the government is forced into his hands Ne

a tempeſt; but, in a calm, he is culpable for not do dea

ing all the good which he might have done. Mar |

zarin did ſervice only to himſelf, either dixedtly, o ing
in his family, Eight years of abſolute powely ot

undiſturbed repoſe, from the time of h

to that of his death, were not diſtinguiſhed by e

* or uſeful eſtabliſhments BEI 4

*
*

he four nations was the effe@@only'of his beg n
He governed the finances like the intendant of a
lord that was greatly indebted to him.

The king ſometimes demanded money of Fou.
wet, whoſe anſwer was this: Sire, there is none in
zur majeſty's coffers; but the cardinal will lend yore
ime, Mazarin had amaſſed near two hundred
millions of our preſent money. And we find it
affirmed in ſeveral memoirs, that he gained part of
it by ſuch means as were beneath the dignity of his
place, We are told by theſe writers, that he ſhared
the profits ariſing from prizes taken by privateers.
This, however, was never proved; yet the Hol-
landers ſuſpected him of it; and they would never
have ſuſpected cardinal Richelieu.

It is ſaid, that, at his death he had ſome ſcruplles;
though he affected an appearance of courage. He was
at leaſt under apprehenſions for his riches, of which
he made an intire donation to the king; hoping,
that his majeſty would reſtore them to him. And
in this he was not deceived; for the king returned
tim the donation at the end of three days. At laſt,
however, the cardinal died; and none but the king
ſeemed to regret his loſs; for this prince had already
learned to diſſemble. The yoke beßza to be in-

=

EFF

3
S

does BN portable to him; and he was impatient to reign.
$ by Nevertheleſs, he affected to appear grieved at that
$00 death which put him in poſſeſſion of his throne.

Mr. Lewis XIV. and the court, appeared in mourn-
dae ing for the death of Mazarin; an honour that was

not common, though Henry IV. had ſhewn it to
the memory of Gabriel d'Etrees.

We ſhall not here enter into an examination,
Vor. I. WE | |

4 ls. * 199. E
Wh” £ 1 —
Fr * 3 14
9 | 7 %

03 THE AGE OF i
whether the cardinal was a great miniſter,” or na
this actions will declare what he was; and |
muſt form their judgment from them. But e
not refrain from combating the opinion, which uy
poſes prodigious abilities, and a genius almoſt &
vine, in thoſe who have governed empires wit
ſome degree of ſucceſs. It is not a ſuperior pets
tration that makes ſtateſmen ; it is their charattr
Mankind, however inconſiderable their ſhare
ſenſe may be, all ſee their own intereſts nearly alike
A citizen of Bern or Amſterdam, in this relpet
equal to Sejanus, Ximines, Buckingham, Richeliey
or Mazarin; but our conduct, and our enterprizs,
depend abſolutely on our zahn
our ſucceſs depends upon fortune.

For example: Were Rochelle to have best
ken by a genius like pope Alexander VI. or Bom
his fon, he would; under the ſanction of the mo
ſacred .oath, have drawn the principal inhabitzas
into his camp, and there put them to death Ns
zarin would have got poſſeſſion of the place two «
three years later, by corrupting the inhabitants, and
ſowing diſcord among them. Don Lewis de Hard
would not have riſked the hazard of an attempt.
Richelieu, in imitation of Alexander, raiſed a di
or bank croſs the ſea, and entered Rochelle likes
conqueror: but had the ſea been a little more tur
bulent, or the Engliſh a little more diligent, Ro.
chelle might have been ſaved, and Richelieu eilt
raſh and inconſiderate.

We may judge of the characters of manxind ffn
their enterprizes: and we may, without ſcruple
affirm, that pride and revenge were predominant i
the ſoul of Richelieu; and that Mazarin =

h. F. LEVIS XIV. 3 yo
lent, artful, and greedy of riches. But, to diſ-

over the degree of genius in a miniſter, it is ne-
eſſary either to hear him often-ſpeak, or to read
is writings. What we daily ſee among courtiers
general, often happens among miniſters: he, whe
has the greateſt genius, frequently fails; while he,
whoſe character is diſtinguiſhed by a greater degree
pf patience, fortitude, tractableneſs, and confider-
ation, generally ſucceeds.

In reading the letters of cardinal Mazarin, and
the memoirs of cardinal de Retz, it may eaſily be
perceived, that de Retz was the ſuperior genius.
et Mazarin was all-powerful, and de Retz was
proſcribed. In ſhort, it is certain, that frequently,
> make a powerful miniſter, nothing more is ne-
ſary than an indifferent genius, common ſenſe,
and good fortune: but, to make a good miniſter,
the ruling paſſion ſhould be, a love of the public
good. The truly great ſtateſman is he who leaves
behind him immortal monuments of the ſervice he
did to his country, |

K 2

* * N * -
1 . \ 4 I p R
L_ N * og. 2-4 A "x4
| a | 2
. . ö « : — * *
| \ © wm
_ n 4 *
—
DOTS N 2 +»

- - — 1 0 * . N * F
py. » - * * 8 N 7 1 4
.

c HAPTE RA NIL.

Lewis XIV. governs alone. He forces the
- Spaniſh-Auſtrian branch to give bim ddt
precedency, and the court of Rome g
make him ſatisfaction. He purchaſes Du
Kirk. He aſſiſts the Emperor, Portugal,

and the States general; and renders hi

kingdom flouriſhing and formidable.

HERE never was in any court a greater w
p riety of hopes, and intrigues than when cats
dinal Mazarin approached his laſt moments, The l
dies, who had any claim to extraordinary charms, flat
tered themſelves with the hopes of governing a prince
of twenty-two years of age, whom love had already
ſo far ſeduced, as to make him. offer his croun
his miſtreſs. The young courtiers hoped to i
the reign of favourites revived ; and every partic
lar miniſter was in expectation of being placed it
the head of affairs; for no one imagined, that #
king, brought up in ignorance of every thing wid
concerned the buſineſs of the ſtare, would dare i
take upon him the weight of government. Mr
zarin had ſtudied to prolong the infancy of i
monarch, It was very late before he in

him; and did it at laſt only, becauſe the king nu
ed upon it, x ;
expect

People were ſo far from any hope or e
tion of being governed by their g

A
*, . 42

Ch, 6. LEWIS MV. 101
among all thoſe who had acted under the firſt mi -
niſter, there were none who aſked the king, when
he would hear them: on the contrary, the univer-
fal queſtion to him was, To whom muſt we addreſs
ourſelves ? to which Lewis XIV. conſtantly replied,
To me: and the ſurpriſe was increaſed, when it
appeared, that he perſevered in this reſolution. He
had, for ſome time, conſidered his. abilities, and
had ſecretly made trial of his genius for govern-
ment. When he had once taken a reſolution, he
always perſevered in it to the laſt moment of his
life. He preſcribed to each of his miniſters the
extent of their power; made them give him an ac-
count of all their proceedings, at ſtared times; re-
poſed in them ſuch a confidence, as was neceſſary
to give a ſanction to their miniſtry; and kept a
watchful eye over them, that they might not abuſe
their truſts, He began his reign, by regulating
the finances, which were greatly diſordered by a
long courſe of rapine.

' Diſcipline was reſtored among the troops, as
well as order in the finances: magnificence and de-
cency adorned his court: brilliancy and grandeur
appeared even in its pleaſures: all the arts were
encouraged ; and all contributed to the glory of
the king, and of France.
This is not the proper place to repreſent him in
dis private life, nor in the interior part of his go-
vernment: we (hall conſider theſe in another place.
It is ſufficient here to ſay, that his people, who,
lnce the death of Henry the Great, had never be-
held a real king, and who deteſted the government
of a firſt miniſter, were filled with admiration, and
K 3

102 THE AGE OF At

pleaſing hopes, when they beheld Lewis XIV. d
that at twenty-two years of age, which Henry hui
done at fifty, If Henry IV. had had a prime mi
ſter, he would have been ruined ; becauſe the haut
which, in a manner, naturally ariſes againſt ſug
a perſon, would have revived a number of 100
powerful and dangerous factions. If Lewis Mei
had not had a miniſter, ſuch a prince, whoſe be
and diſtempered body enervated the vigour of hi
mind, would have ſunk under the weight of g
vernment. Lewis XIV. might, without dane ie
either have had, or been without, a prime miniſter: N Ch
for not the ſmalleſt traces now remained of the for if
mer ſactions; and France now contained only de ſin
maſter, and his ſub;e&s. He, at firſt, ſhewed him
ſelf ambitious of every kind of glory; and that ie
would make himſelf as much reſpected abroad, , I.
abſolute at home. al!

The ancient kings of Europe pretend to an #>
ſolute equality, in regard to one another; which d
certainly very juſt and natural; but the kings d F.
France have always claimed a precedency, to wid
the antiquity of their race and kingdom init
them: and, if they have ceded the pre-eminenc
to the emperors, it is, becauſe mankind are fare
ever hardy enough to diſpute a right eſtabliſhed
ancient cuſtom. The chief of the German republic
who is an elective prince, of inconſiderable power un =
himſelf, has, without diſpute, the precedency of
all the other European fovereigns, on account >
his title of Caeſar, and Charlemagne's heir. f
German chancery did not even give the other
tentates the title of majeſty. Nevertheleſs, the an
of France might diſpute the precedency. with i

b. . LEWIS IV.” 103

»rs; for France was the firſt founder of the
weſtern empire, of which the name only ſub-
as in Germany. They had, in their favour, not
only the ſuperiority of an hereditary crown over
n elective dignity, but the advantage alſo of being
deſcended, in a direct line, from ſovereigns, who
reigned over a great monarchy, ſeveral centuries
before any of thoſe houſes, which are now in poſ-
ſeſion of crowns, were arrived at any degree of
elevation. They were: deſirous, at leaſt, to precede
the other potentates of Europe. The title of moſt
Chriſtian was alleged in their favour; but Spain,
to this title, oppoſed that of Catholic; and, ever
ſince Charles V. had had a king of France priſoner
at Madrid, the Spaniſh pride had always been very
far from relinquiſhing its pretenſions to this rank.
The Englith, and the Swedes, who do not now
allege any of theſe ſurnames, avoid, as mach as
they can, any acknowlegement of this ſuperiority.
Theſe pretenſions were formerly debated at
Rome: the popes, who aſſumed a right to confer
kingdoms by their bulls, imagined, with a greater
appearance of reaſon, that they had a right to re-
gulate the precedency of crowned heads. This
court, where every thing is done with great cere-
mony, was the tribunal before which theſe vanities
of greatneſs were decided. France, when ſhe was
more powerful than Spain, had always had the ſu-
periority in theſe diſputes; but, after the reign of
Charles V. Spain had neglected no opportunity of
placing herſelf upon an equality. Their preten-
lions remained undetermined : a ſtep mote or leſs
in a proceſſion, a chair placed near an altar, or op-
pole to a pulpit, were conſidered as triumphs,

1
5% io

5 TEAS ESSESS.SFCST

—

—

YT EASIEST A ST 5 => = 3

104 THE AGE or

and as giving them a right to this pre-eminen
The chimerical point of honour, in theſe "my
at that time, carried to the greateſt exceſs, be
crowned heads; as it was alſo in regavs to
between private perſons. F
At the entrance of a Swediſh embalſador i
London (a), the count d'Eſtrade, the French en
baſſador, and the baron de Watteville, the em
ſador of Spain, diſputed the precedeney. The Sp
niard, by greater Jiberality, and a more numerou
retinue, gained the Englith populace in his favour
and the coach-horſes of the French embafſador wer
immediately killed: preſently after which, the re
tinue of the count d'Eſtrade being wounded and
diſperſed, the Spaniards proceeded? in ann with
their ſwords drawn.
Lewis XIV. being informed of this inſult,
called his embaſſador from Madrid; ordered that
of Spain to quit France; broke off the conferences
which were ſtill continued in Flanders, concerning
the limits; and directed his father-in-law, Philip IV.
to be told, that, if he did not acknowlege the fu-
periority of the crown of France, and repair this
affront by a ſolemn ſatisfaction, the war ſhould bt
renewed. Philip IV. was unwilling again to plunge
his kingdom into a new war, for the ſake of prect-
dency in an embaſſador; and he therefore ſent the
count de Fuentes to declare to the king at For
tainbleau, in preſence of all the foreign miniſten
that were in France, That the Spaniſh mini len
Should never, for the future, have any diſputes with
theſe of France. This, indeed, was not a direct
acknowlegement of the ſuperiority of France; "=

(4) 1661. ;

* 0 „ *
* 3
v A
=
,
+ 2 |
=

U. 6. LEWIS XY.” 10 5
was, howeyer, a plain confeſſion of the weakneſs
f Spain. This court, which ſtill retained its pride
d haughtineſs, long murmured at its humiliation,
of the Spaniſh miniſters afterwards retiew-
d their ancient pretenſions; and, at Nimegen, they
obtained an equality: but Lewis XIV. at the fame
ime, by his firmneſs, gained a real ſuperiority in
urope, by making it appear how much he was to
de feared,
ie had ſcarce concluded this ſmall affair, Pick
to bis own honour, when he appeared ſtill greater
on an occaſion wherein his glory ſeemed to be leſs
intereſted, The youth of France, in the wars
which had long been carried on in Italy againſt
Spain, had imprinted in the minds of the jealous
and circumſpect Italians the idea of an impetuous
people. Italy regarded all the nations round her
as barbarous, and even the French as barbarians,
who, though gayer than the others, were yet more
dangerous; and who, in the pleaſures they intro»
duced, ſuewed much contempt, and to their de-
baucheries added inſult. They were feared in al
99% and no-where more than in Rome. '
Ihe duke de Crequi, embaſſador to the DOPE,
ſhocked the Italians, by the haughtineſs of his be-
beriour; and his domeſtics, a ſort of people who
imitate their maſters follies as far as they are able,
vere guilty of the ſame diforders in Rome, which
were committed by our undiſciplined youth in Paris;
who, at that time, uſed, every night, to attack
tie watch appointed for the ſecurity of the city;
and imagined, theſe exploits diſtinguiſhed them as
men of honour and ſpirit. |
Some of the duke de Crequi's ſervants having

KEZ

2

KAAN TA. FFA A F

=

1206 THE AGE OF a
taken it into their heads to attack 2 ſmall company
of Corſicans (who are the guards of Rome)
put theſe wretches to flight. The whole body d
Corſicans, being enraged at this, and ſecretly aum
in arms, and beſieged the embaſſador's houſe, fire
upon his lady's coach, who was juſt then entering
the palace, killed one of her pages, and wounded
ſeveral domeſtics (6). The duke de Crequi quitted
Rome, accuſing the pope's relations, and the pope
himſelf, with having favoured this aſſaſſination. The
pope deferred making any ſatisfaction, as long as be
could, being perſuaded, it was only neceſlary ty
temporize with the French, and that every thing
would de forgotten. At the end of four mont
he canſed a Corſican, and one of the Sbirri, tot
hanged; and ordered the governor, who was i
ſpected of having authorized the action, to retin
out of Rome. But the pope was, preſently after
in the greateſt conſternation, to hear, that te
king menaced Rome with being beſieged; that be
had already directed troops to march into ah
and that the marſhal du Plefſis-pralin was appointel
to command them. The affair, on both ſides, bv
came a national quarrel; and the king was reſolved
to make his own fide reſpected. The pope, before
he made the ſatisfaction which was demanded, i
plored the mediation of all the Catholic princes;
and did all that was in his power to animate then
againſt Lewis XIV. But the circumſtances of a

fairs were not favourable to the pope: the Empire
| (5) Auguſt 20. 1663. path

6. LEWIS AV. oy
4 —— GaN .
a in an unſucceſsful war againſt Portugal. -

heſe were diſregarded now, and even ridiculed.
It became neceflary for the pope to ſubmit; and

quality of legate a latere, to
faction; to diſband the Corſican
ret a pyramid in Rome, with
giving an account of the injury,
ration. Cardinal Chigi was the firſt |
ſent from the court of Rome to beg pardon: they
uſed to come to. preſcribe laws, and to impoſe
temns. The king did not reſt ſatisſied with tran-
bent ceremonies, as a ſatisfaction for the inſult he
bad received, nor with monuments, which were
equally vain and impermanent (for he, ſome years
after, permitted the demolition of the pyramid):
te forced the court of Rome to relinquiſh Caſtro
and Ronciglione to the duke of Parma; and obliged
tre pope to make the duke of Modena ſatisfaction,
in regard to his right to Comaccio: and thus, by
tis infult, he gained the real honour of being the
protector of the Italian princes.

At the ſame time that he thus maintained his
denity, he did not omit to encreaſe his power.
fs firances, which were excellently managed by
Calbert, enabled him to purchaſe Dunkirk and

. * N * a
* he the 2 - 9 ** 3 - She. \ » e a 1 —
* © * — 5 — * *
0 o » * . R : 0
* : * - *
-

x08 THE AGE OFT
Mardyke of the king of England, for the ſum
five millions of livres, at twenty-ſix livres and q
ſols the mark (c). Charles II by his prodigalit a
poverty, incurred the ſhame of ſelling that far m
ney, which had coſt the Engliſn the price of
His chancellor Hyde, who was accuſed of hu
either counſelled or permitted this weak aQio
was afterwards baniſhed- by the parliament of Eng
land; which often puniſhes the faults of favourites
and ſometimes even judges its kings.
(d) Lewis cauſed thirty thouſand men to wait
upon the fortifications of Dunkirk, both to the land
and ſea ſides; and, between the town and the citadd
a large baſon was formed, capable to contain thin
ſhips of war: ſo that this place became a terror u
the Engliſh almoſt as ſoon as they had fold it.
(e) The king ſoon. after forced the duke of L
rain to give up to him the ſtrong town of Mani
This unfortunate prince, Charles IV. who hat
gained conſiderable honours in the field, but wa
weak, inconſtant and imprudent; had entered int
a treaty, by which he gave up Lorrain after bs
death, to the crown of France; upon condition, thi
the king ſhould permit him to raiſe a million, up!
the territories which he thus abandoned to him;
and that the princes of the blood of Lorrain ſuoul
be reputed princes of the blood of France. Thi
treaty, which in vain had the approbation of it
parliament of Paris, only proved the caule of
freſh inconſtancy in the duke of Lorrain; who
was afterwards glad to give up Marſal, and ſubm
himſelf intirely to the king's clemene7ĩ7,
Lewis augmented his dominions, even during th
le) October 27. 1662. (4) 1663. (e) Augalt ganas

11

b. 6. LEWIS XV. 10%

ce; and kept himſelf always ready for war, by for-
fying his frontiers, diſciplining his troops, increaſ-
g their number, and frequently reviewing them.
The Turks were,” at that time, very formidable
Europe; and had attacked the emperor of Ger-
any and the Venetians together. Since the reign
f Francis I. it has always been the policy of the
ings of France to be in alliance with the Turks,
oth for the ſake of commerce,” and'to reſtrain the
ower of the houſe of Auſtria: nevertheleſs, a
iſtian king could not refuſe the emperor aſſiſt-
ice, when he was in great danger: and, indeed,
t is the intereſt of France, that the Turks ſhould
arraſs Hungary; but not that they ſhould ſubdue
t. And beſides, France, by its treaties with the
pire, was obliged, in honour, to grant its aſſiſt-
, when it became neceſſary. France therefore
ent ſix thouſand men into Hungary, under the
ommand of the count of Coligny, the only perſon
emaining of the houſe of Coligny, formerly ſs ce-
Iedrated in our civil wars, and who, perhaps by his
ourage and virtue, merited as high renown as the
elebrated admiral of his name. He had been attach-
d to the great Conde, through friendſhip; and all
e offers of cardinal Mazarin could never make
tim abandon his attachment. He took with him
ie flower of the French nobility, and, among
others, the young la Feuillade, a man who had an
Mterpriſing genius, and a great deſire of eminence
nd glory. (/) This body of French troops marched
no Hungary, to ſerve under Montecuculi, who,
it that time, oppoſed the grand viſier Kiuperli,
» {f) Auguſt 1664. rl | |

Vo be Bo! r

—

e
110 THE AGE OT if

lanced the reputation even of Turenne. A
battle was fought at St. Gothard, upon the
of the Raab, between the emperor's forces and &
Turks; and the French, upon this'occafion; be
formed prodigies of valour; inſomuch that
Germans themſelves, who did not like them; col
not refuſe to do them juſtice: but it would nt
doing juſtice to the Germans, to affirm, as has ba
done in fo many books, that the honour of they
tory ought to be aſcribed to the French alone.
The king, at the fame time that he employ
his power in openly ſuccouring the emperor, a
increaſing the reputation of his arms, alſo'empk
ed his policy in ſecretly ſupporting Portugal
gainſt Spain. Mazarin had formally abandoud
the Portugueſe, by the Pyrenean treaty; in wha
ſeveral little tacit infractions had been made by
Spaniards. But the French made one that
both bold and deciſive: the marſhal de gh
berg, who was a foreigner, and a Huguenot, ve
into Portugal with four thouſand French troo
whom he paid with the money of Lewis II
though he pretended to maintain them in the nam
of the king of Portugal. Theſe four tu
French troops, being joined to the Pom⁰g
forces, obtained a complete victory at Villa Vw":
ofa; which fixed the crown in the houſe of Bonpo"
ganza: and thus Lewis XIV. already made wongs"
ſelf regarded as a martial and political prince; u. *{
he was dreaded in Europe, even before he had we"

It was this policy which, in ſpite of Bs FO
miſes, made him avoid joining the few fs

w:
L

l
VI

b. 6. LEWIS MV. 111
en had to the fleets of Holland. He had entered
\to an alliance with the Dutch in 1662. This
public, about that time, renewed the war againſt
land; the cauſe of which was the vain and
;idiculous competition for the honour of the flag,
id their rights to the commerce of the Indies.
wis, with pleaſure, beheld theſe two maritime
owers annually ſending out fleets againſt each
ther, compoſed of more than an hundred men of
, and mutually deſtroying one another, by the
noſt obſtinate combats that were ever ſeen; all the
Fuit of which was only the weakening of both
arties. One of theſe engagements laſted during
intire days (g). It was in theſe encounters that
uyter gained the reputation of being the greateſt
javal commander that ever lived. It was he who
it the fineſt of the Engliſh ſhips, even in their
pwn ports, and within foor leagues of London it»
if, He, in ſhort, rendered Holland triumphant
pn the ſeas, the dominion of which the Engliſh
ways had before; and whereon Lewis XIV. was,
s yet, of no conſequence.

The ſovereignty of the ſeas was, for ſome time,
annded between theſe two powers: and the art of
ullding ſhips, and employing them in commerce,
id in war, was well known only by them. France,
der the miniſtry of Richelieu, thought herſelf
powerful at ſea, becauſe, out of about ſixty veſſels,
ich ſhe computed in her ports, ſhe could put to
2 about thirty; of which only one carried ſeventy
guns. Under Mazarin, the few ſbips we had were
hated of the Dutch. We were in want of ofli
(x) June 11, 12, 13. 1666.

L222 |

*

112 THE AGE OF @i
cers, ſailors, manufactures, and, in ſhort, every i
which is neceſlary in the conſtruction and
ment of ſhipping. The king undertook t
the ruinous condition of-kis marine, and to fupgj
France with every thing of this kind which it
ed, with incredible diligence. Yet, in 1664; al
1665. while the Engliſh and Dutch covered
ocean with near three hundred large ſhips of x
Lewis had not then more than fifteen or ſixteen
the loweſt rates, which the duke of Beauſbrt eus
manded againſt the Barbary corſairs; and, wi
the ſtates general preſſed him to join his fleet i
theirs, there was only a fingle fire- ip in th
port of Breſt, which it was ſhameful to ſeni d
and which, nevertheleſs, at the repeated ſolids
tions of the Dutch, was ſent to them. Hut Leu
XIV. uſed his utmoſt efforts to efface the ſhah
8 this in the woſt ſudden and effeCtualmannet, |
F  -— He ſuccoured the ſtates more eu
honourably with his land- forces. He ſent” then
ſix thouſand men, to defend them againſt ut
biſhop of Munſter, Chriſtopher Bernard van Ghala
a warlike prelate, and their implacable enemy, wit
was hired by England, to attack and ravage the dc
ritories of the Dutch. But Lewis made them pi
dear for his aſſiſtance, and treated them Ike's
powerful perſon, who ſells his protection tg d-
lent merchants. Colbert placed to their accompt 10
only the pay of theſe troops, but even charged then
vith the expences of an embaſſy ſent into England
to negotiate their peace with Charles II. Sue
4 were never given with fo ill a grace, nor
: leſs gratefully.
The king, having thus rendered hi rout

\

N. 7. LEWIS XIV.” 113
the art of war, formed new generals in Hungary,
Jolland, and Portugal; and, having obtained ſatiſ-
Action and reſpect in Rome, he no longer beheld
ſingle potentate whom he had any reaſon to fear.
he devaſtation made in England by the plague,
e burning of London, of which the Catholics
vere unjuſtly accuſed, and the continual prodiga-
ty and indigence of Charles II. which were as
geſtructive to his affairs as the contagion, or the
Fre, placed France in perfect ſecurity, with regard
to the Engliſh. The emperor had not yet reco-
rered that ſtrength, which he had loſt in his war
againſt the Turks: and Philip IV. king of Spain,
deing in a languiſhing ſtate of body, and his mon-
archy being as feeble as himſelf, Lewis, XIV. was
the only great and formidable monarch: and be
was young, rich, perfectly well ſerved, implicitly
obeyed, and ſhewed an impatience to Dee
himſelf, and become a conqueror.

CHAPTER VII.
The Conqueſt of FLAN PD ERSõ.

ES ſoon preſented itſelf to
2 king who anxiouſly ſought for it. His fa-
ther-in-law Philip IV. died, By his firſt wife, who
vas the ſiſter of Lewis XIII. he had had the prin-
cls Maria-Thereſa, who was married to Lewis
XV. by which marriage the Spaniſh monarchy at
aſt came into the houſe of Bourbon, which had fo

L 3 | |

ed by the laws of nations before an impartial tn-

114 ＋ H AGE OFF On
Mary-Anne of Auſtria, he had had Charles Ii.y
weak and unhealthy child, who was the heir to U
crown, and the only one remaining of three m
children, of which two had died in their infang
Lewis XIV. pretended, that Flanders and Franche
Comte, which were provinces of the kingdom of
Spain, ought, according to the laws of theſe pro
vinces, to revert to his wife, notwithſtanding
tenunciation. Were the cauſes of kings determins

bunal, the affair might have been doubtful” -

Lewis directed his pretenſions to be examined ij
his council, and by the doctors in theology, by
whom they were declared inconteſtable; but"they
were pronounced quite the contrary by the coundl
and confeſſor of Philip the fourth's widow.” Sit
had one very ſtrong argument in her favour; ic
was an expreſs law of Charles V. but very little
regard was paid to the laws of Charles V. by the
court of France.

One of the pretexts, which were alleged by tit
king's council, was, that the five hundred thouſand
crowns, granted as a dowry with his wife, had never
been paid: but they forgot, that the dowry dt
Henry the fourth's daughter remained till unpaid
as well as this. The altercations between France ſel
and Spain were commenced in writings, hren
the calculations of a banker, and the arguments of By ©
a lawyer, were amply diſplayed ; but reaſons of fate
were the only reaſons to which any regard u
paid. +, ,
| The king, depending more upon his forces than
his argumeats, marched into Flanders, to the Af

*

b. 7. LEWIS NV. > 113
e head of thirty-five thouſand men; another body
Ff eight thouſand was ſent towards Dunkirk, and |
mother of four thouſand towards I
urenne under him, was the general of his army;
Colbert had multiplied the reſources neceſſary to de-
fray the expence of theſe troops. Louvois, the
new miniſter for military affairs, had made immenſe
preparations for the campaign, He diſtributed ma-
guines of all kinds upon the frontiers, and was
the firſt who introduced that advantageous method,
which the weakneſs of the government had before
rendered impracticable, of ſubſiſting the armies by
means of magazines. Whatever ſiege the king
undertook, or on whatever fide he turned his
arms, ſuccours and ſubſiſtence were always ready,
the quarters for the troops marked out, and their
marches regulated. Diſcipline, which, by the in-
flexible auſterity of the miniſter was rendered
daily more ſevere, kept all the officers to their
duty: and the preſence of a young king, who was
the idol of his army, rendered the ſtriftneſs of this
duty not only eaſy, but delightful, The military
employment began, from that time, to be conſidered
as an honour much ſuperior to that of birth, Ser-
vices, and not families, were regarded; which had
ſeldom been obſerved before. By this means, an
officer, though of very inconſiderable birth, was
encouraged; and, at the ſame time, thoſe of the
higheſt rank had no cauſe to complain. The in-
fantry, upon which, ſince the diſuſe of landes,
the whole weight of the war had fallen, ſhared in
the advantages t by the Ro and the

ANESTY Sx

—1

EFFI.

2 KE #=

—

Aar

3 * "4 — CP

"8x6 THE AGE OF Wy}
_ troops, in general, were inſpired with new coung
by the new maxims in the government.
' . The king being poſſeſſed of a miniſter, andy
general, whoſe abilities were equally: greatz wiz
were both jealous of each other, and who, for thy
reaſon, ſerved him the better; having alſo an a
compoſed of the beſt troops in Europe, and having
entered into an alliance with Portugal; he, withdl
theſe advantages, attacked a province of a h
dom that was depopulated and ruined. He ha
only his mother-in-law to oppoſe; and ſhe waz
weak woman, whoſe unhappy government had reps
dered the Spaniſh monarchy defenceleſs. - Philip th
fourth's widow had made her confeſſor, who ws:
German Jeſuit, named Father Nitard, her prime mi
niſter. He was as capable to govern the will of tis
penitent, as he was incapable to govern the ſlate;
having none of the qualities of a miniſter, or a prick
except pride and ambition. He had the boldaes
one day to tell the duke of Lerma, even before he
held the reins of government, you ought to reel
me, for I have your Cod in my hands, aud your que
at my feet, every day. With this haughtinels, which
is ſo oppoſite to true greatneſs of mind, he ſtſfered
the treaſury to be without money, the fortifications
throughout the kingdom to fall into ruin, and de
ports to be without ſhips, the troops without dic
" pline, deſtitute of officers, ill-paid, and till work
commanded: and theſe troops were to oppoſe
enemy, which enjoyed all the advantages Spail
The art of attacking towns, as it is now Þ#
Qtiſed, was not then brought to perfection, ber
the art of fortifying and defending them was 8*

*

OR w
—f wy O©

S 2 co LY wHuCyCCYCYHpUUONYCESESD HT

$.7 i ee AT. np
oy e e *. 1 7

PK DEG is
he entered Charleroi as he would have entered Pa-
ris: Ath and Tournay were taken in two days;
nor did Furnes, | Armentieres, or Courtrai, hold 4
out longer (). He appeared in the trenches beſore

Douai (5), and it ſurrendered the next day. Liſle (ch, 2
the moſt flouriſhing city-in allthis country the on
one that was well fortified, and which had a gariſon
of ſix thouſand men, capitulated after nine days ſiege.
The Spaniards had only eight thouſand men to op-
poſe the victorious troops; and the rear of this lit-
tle army was attacked and cut in pieces by the ma
quis, afterwards the marſhal de Crequi (4); and ſhe
remainder fled under the walls of Mons and Brulſels,
E a conqueror without fighting
being made in the midſt'of the

bY plenty of every thing, and its ſucceſs be-
ing ſo ſudden, and fo eaſy, it appeared rather like'a
tour made by the court for their diverſion :” and
pleaſures of every kind, and all the luxury of the
table, were then introduced into our armies, even
at the very time when diſcipline was improving.
The officers did their duty much more exattly,
but their conveniences were much greater than
formerly, Marſhal Turenne, for a long time,” was
ſerved in the field only upon plates of iron. The
marital d'Humieres was the firſt, who, at the ſiege
of Arras, in 1658. was ſerved in filver in the
trenches, and had ragouts and entremets ſerved

(4) July 6. 16679. (3) Auguſt 27. ce) abe 77.
(4) Auguſt 31. 4 14

ciel,
ines
re he
2
rer
hich.
ered
3005
| the
o-
orle
» 20
pain
pre”
wie
not

' 218 a> 10 5 "a
up to his table. But, in this campaign of 100
wherein a young king, who loved grandeum 1
magnificence, diſplayed that of his court in
tigues of war, every one as emulous, in initaton
of the royal example, to ſhew his taſte and grand
deur, in” his table, his dreſſes,” and his equi
This luxury, which is a certain ſign” of riches in
great kingdom, and is frequently the caufe df fu
in a little ſtate, was nevertheleſs but

compared to what we have ſeen ſince. The tiny
vous of the army on horſeback; whereas,” now,
there is not even a captain of horſe, nor the ſee
tary of a general officer, who"does not go i
poſt· chaiſe, more and with greater
eaſe, eee
of Paris to another. | N LI

The delicacy of the officers did. wont
vent them from appearing in the trenches with the
ſecurity of the helmet and cuiraſs : of wich d
king himſelf gave an example, by going thus int
the trenches before Douai and Liſte. This priident
precaution has preſerved the lives of many gen
men. But it has ſince been too much neglected by
young men, who are not over-robaſt, and who;
though effeminate, are full of courage, and feem'to
be more afraid of fatigue than danger.

The rapidity of theſe conqueſts filled Braffes
with alarms; and the citizens began to- remove
their effects to Antwerp. The conqueſt of al
Flanders might have been the work of a-{ingle cm
paign. The king only wanted a ſufficient number
of troops to garriſon the towns which were every:

where ready to open their gates on his —_

®. 7 LEWIS Ny.” erg
Louvois adviſed his majeſty to put ſtrong gariſons
in the towns already taken, and to fortify them.
Vauban, one of thaſe great men, and great geniuſes,
who appeared in this age for the ſervice of Lewis
XIV. was directed to conſtruct theſe, fortifications;
which he did according to his own new method,
which is now become a rule to all good engineers.
People were aſtoniſhed to behald towns ſurrounded
by works which were almoſt even on a level with
the open country. High and menacing fortifications
were only ſo much the more expoſed to deſtruction
from the artillery ; and the more he made them level,
the leſs liable they were to be deſtroyed or taken.
He conſtructed the citadel of Liſle upon theſe prin-
ciples, In France, the government of a city had
never yet been ſeparated from that of the fortreſs:
but an example of this was now given in favour of
Vauban, who was the firft governor of a citadel.
We may farther obſerve here, that the firſt plan of
fortification, in relievo, which is to be ſeen in the
gallery of the Louvre, was of the fortifications of
Lille.

The king haſtened to return, and to enjoy the
ꝛcclamations of his people, the adorations of his
courtiers, and miſtreſſes, and the pleaſure of thoſe
entertainments which he gave to his court.

>. 2

#835 F

IEEE STESOT 5

S SIA

© 23 T = 8 ©

4 | " * Z "FRA
w-Y E n 9
© _ ” © I - * 4 %

ru a o 4

rab OW" N % ;1* 4 4060 „ hg. ue N
et Ri eee eee

T2 11 AER VII 24

$3 [5 7 aN - of

The conqueſt of Franche-Comd\ald the
5 peace of Ala Chapelle n

RE court was intirely engaged 1 n
at St. Germains, when, in the month of
nuary (a), and the feverity of winter, the” won
was aſtoniſhed to behold troops marching"on
ſides, ſome one way, ſome another, through the
roads of Champagne, in the three biſhoprids
Trains of artillery and ammunition-wagfons #
peared, under divers pretences, in the roads W
lead from Champagne into Burgundy. This part d
France was univerſally in motion, yet the cauſe its
tirely unknown. Strangers, as being intereſted therein

and the courtiers through curioſity, formed various!
conjectures upon it; Germany was alarmed; hut

real motive to all theſe preparations, and theſe i
gular marches, was unknown to all the world.
crecy in a conſpiracy was never better obſerved tha
in this enterprize of Lewis XIV. who, at laſt, a
the ſecond of February, quitted St. Germains, be
ing accompanied by the young duke "d'Engmien,
ſon of the great Conde, and ſome others of tis
court; the reſt of the officers being with the troops
He went on horſeback, and, in a very ſhort time
arrived at Dijon: and twenty thouſand men, col
lected from twenty different places, appeared at
the ſame time in France-Comte, a few leg

(4) 1668,

1. . LEWIS XIV. f2t .
om Beſancon having at their head the great
onde, whoſe principal lieutenant- general was his
jend Bouteville- Montmorency, who was become
luke of Luxembourg, and who had always been
ttached to him in his good and bad fortune. Lux-
nbourg had been inſtructed in the art of war un-
Jer Conde; and, by force of merit, he obliged the
ing to employ him, though be did not love him.
The true motives to this ſudden and unexpected
terprize were theſe: the prince of Conde was
ealous of the glory of Turenne; and Louvois, of
is favour with the king: Conde's jealouſy was that
pf an hero, and Louvois that of 'a miniſter. The
prince, being governor of Burgundy, which joins
o Franche-Comte, formed the delign to make
himſelf maſter of that province in the winter, in
leſs time than Turenne the ſummer before had
onquered French Flanders. He immediately com ·
municated his deſign to Louvois, who entered into
it with eagerneſs, in order to have Turenne remov-
d and rendered unneceſſary, and, at the fame time,
to ſerve his maſter.

This province, which was then poor enough with
regard to money, but was exceeding fruitful and
populous, forty leagues in length; and twenty in
breadth, was not only called Franche, or free, but
eally was ſo. The kings of Spain were rather its
protectors than its maſters. And though the province
delonged to the government of Flanders, it depend-
ed but- very little upon it. The whole adminiſtra»
tion was divided and diſputed between the parlia- -
ment and the governor of Franche-Comte. The
people enjoyed great privileges, and were always ,
You, I, M

N 5
Bt
6. « .& g

=. =

2 3 = 2. ER

e

122 THE AGE OF &@&f
reſpected by the court of Madrid, wicht paid +
ference to a province jealous of its rights, and
the neighbourhood of France. No people e
lived under a more gentle government; nor
any people ever more ſtrongly attached to its þ
vereigns. Their love for the houſe of Auf
continued even for two generations; though ti
might rather be called the love of their Ihertis.

In ſhort, Franche-Comte, though poor, was hap
py; and as it was a kind of republic, it was nd
without factions: and, notwithſtanding whats f
by Peliſſon, force was not the only means uſed'y

Some of the principal inhabitants, by promi
and preſents, were gained at firſt ; particularly, i
abbe John de Batteville, the brother of him, why
having infulted the French embaſſador at Londay
had, by that outrage, cauſed the humiliation of the
Spaniſh-Auftrian branch. This abbe, who hal
formerly been an officer, then a Carthuſian, aftes
wards a Turk, and at laſt an eccleſiaſtic, had it
promiſe of grand dean, and other benefices.

governor's nephew, count de St. Amour, was #
fo corrupted; nor did the himfelf at A
prove inflexible. Some of the counſellors of thet
parliament were likewiſe purchaſed at no very c
ſiderable expence. Theſe ſecret intrigues were W
fooner commenced than they were ſupported i
twenty thouſand men; and Beſancon, the capid
of the province, was inveſted by the prince d
Conde. Luxembourg appeared alſo before n
and the next day both theſe places
The only article of capitulation, deſired forthe fi
render of Beſancon, was the preſervation of nj

bh. 8. LEWIS MV.” 123
hrowd, which was very highly revered in that
jificulry. The king arrived at Dijon; and Lou-
ois, who had ſecretly repaired to the frontiers to
rect all theſe marches, came to inform him, that
xeſe two places had been beſieged and taken. The
king immediately haſtened to appear, where for-
une did every thing in his favour. |

He marched in perſon to beſiege Dole, which
was reputed ſtrong, and was commanded by the
dunt de Montrevel, who, through a certain great-
eſs of ſoul, was faithful to the Spaniards, whom he
hated; and to the parliament, which he deſpiſed. His
ariſon conſiſted only of four hundred ſoldiers and
citizens; and he nevertheleſs dared to make a de-
fence. The trenches, which were not carried on in
form, were ſcarce opened, when a croud of young
volunteers, who had followed the king, ran to attack
the counterſcarp, wherein they made a lodgment.
The prince of Conde, whoſe courage was rendered
calm and unruffled by age and experience, ſupport-
ed them properly, and joined them in their dan-
ger, to extricate them out of it. The prince was
preſent in all places, accompanied by his ſon; and
afterwards came to give an account of every thing
to the king, as though he had been an officer who
had his fortune to make. The king, in his quar-
ters, rather ſhewed the dignity of a monarch in
lis court, than any impetuous ardour, which was
then not neceſſary. All the ceremonial of St.
Germains was obſerved, He had an apartment for
lis repoſe, his great officers to wait upon him,
courles regularly ſerved to his table, and a draw-
M2

- p a * * 4 :
we. N N a 1
1 "dt = ö o - en
* A o l
4 -
; *

121 THE AGE or 1

ing · room, all within his tent: nor was the p
of the throne in any thing laid aſide; eff
having his general officers and aids-de-camp dine g
his table. He, in the toils of war, did not they
the impetuous courage of Francis I. and Henry
who ſought all the various ſpecies of danger,”
was fatisfied in not fearing them himſelf, and inen
gaging all others to precipitate themſelves thaw
in, with ardour, to ſerve him. He entered Dose
at the end of four days ſiege,” and twelwe d
after his departure from St. Germains: and it
Mort, in leſs than three weeks all Pranche-Conie
was ſubjected to him. The council of Spain bs
ing aſtoniſhed and incenſed at the little reſiſtang
that was made, wrote to the governor; « That the
« king of France, inſtead of going in perſon, might
« as well have ſent his laqueys to nm
« the province.”

Such good fortune, and ſuch great Ae
rouſed Europe from its lethargy. The empero
began to raiſe troops, and the empire itſelf to
pear in motion. The Switzers, who are the neig
bours of Franche-Comte, and whoſe ſole good
their liberty, began to tremble for it. The reſt d
Flanders was liable to be invaded the enſuing ſpring:
and the Dutch, to whom it had always appeared d
conſequence to have the French for their friends
dreaded the having them for their neighbours.
Spain now had recourſe to theſe very Hollanders
and was, in fact, protected by this little nation
which before it had only def] n. and conſider
as a country of rebels.

Holland was governed by John de Wit, who

(b) February 14. 1668.

—

- +

Pn ©

22

BE . 8 434 BARE

ls LEWSS BY.” 125

at the age of twenty-five, had been elected grand
penſionary. He regarded the liberties of his couns . -
try as much as his perſonal grandeur : agreeable to
the frugality and modeſty of his republic, he had
only one man and one maid-ſervant, and upon all
occaſions, walked on foot through the ſtreets of: the
Hague, while, in the negotiations of Europe, his
name was numbered with thoſe of the moſt power-
ful monarchs: he was indefatigable in buſineſs, and
ſhewed great order, prudence, and application, in
the management of affairs, an excellent citizen, a
great politician, yet he was nevertheleſs afterwards
very unfortunate, e

He contracted a friendſhip, which is uncommon
among miniſters of ſtate, with Sir William Temple,
the Engliſh embaſſador at the Hague. Temple
was a philoſopher, who united buſineſs with litera»
ture, Though biſhop Burnet has reproached him
with atheiſm, he was a very good man, was born
with the genius of a wiſe republican, loved Holland
a5 his own country, becauſe it was free, and was as
jealous of its liberties as the grand penſionary him-
ſelf, Theſe two ſtateſmen united with the count
de Dhona, the embaſſador of Sweden, in order to
ſtop the progreſs of the king of France.

The rapidity of the events, which happened about
this period, is what chiefly diſtinguiſhes it. Flanders,
which we call French Flanders, had been taken in
three months, Franche-Comte in three weeks, and
the treaty between Holland, England, and Sweden,
to preſerve the balance of Europe, and put-a ſtop
to the ambition of Lewis XIV. was propoſed and
concluded in five days. |

M 3

121 THE ACE OF lt
ing · room, all within his tent: nor was the Gini
of the throne in any thing laid aſide, exepei
having his general officers and aids-de-camp dine
his table. He, in the toils of war, did not they
the impetuous courage of Francis I. and Henry N
who ſought all the various ſpecies of danger.

was fatisfied in not fearing them himſelf, and ine WH:
gaging all others to precipitate themſelves than nat
in, with ardour, to ſerve him. He entered Do ful
at the end of four days ſiege, and twee de
after his departure from St. Germains: and che
Mort, in leſs than three weeks all Franche- Umm cre
was ſubjected to him. The council of Spain er
ing aſtoniſhed and incenſed at the little reſiſtang
that was made, wrote to the governor; « T m
« king of France, inſtead of going in perſon, might the
eee wa
« the province. ” tur
Such good fortune, and ſuch great ambition Wl "i
wit

rouſed Europe from its lethargy. The emperat
began to raiſe troops, and the empire itſelf tio q
pear in motion. The Switzers, who are the nes
bours of Franche-Comte, and whoſe ſole good
their liberty, began to tremble for it. The reſt d
Flanders was liable to be invaded the enſuing ſpring: Will 'i*
and the Dutch, to whom it had always appeared d
conſequence to have the French for their friend, Wl *
dreaded the having them for their neighbours hl d
Spain now had recourſe to theſe very Hollands thr
and was, in fact, protected by this little nation e
which before it had only deſpiſed, and conſider BY 70
as 2 country of rebels.
Holland was governed by Ichs de ui, us. 2

(3) February 14. 1668.

—

2; ILE WIS MV.” 125

t the age of twenty-five, had been elected grand
enſionary. He regarded the liberties of his coun-
rv as much as his perſonal grandeur : agreeable to
e frugality and modeſty 'of his republic, he had
oaly one man and one maid-ſervant, and upon all
DCCz ions, walked on foot through the ſtreets of the
Hague, while, in the negotiations of Europe, his
name was numbered with thoſe of the moſt power-
ful monarchs: he was indefatigable in buſineſs, and
ſhewed great order, prudence, and application, in
the management of affairs, an excellent citizen, a
great politician, yet he was nevertheleſs afterwards
very unfortunate.

He contracted a friendſhip, which is uncommon
among miniſters of ſtate, with Sir William Temple,
the Engliſh embaſſador at the Hague. Temple
was a philoſopher, who united bufineſs with litera-
ture, Though biſhop Burnet has reproached him
with atheiſm, he was a very good man, was born
with the genius of a wiſe republican, loved Holland
25 his on country, becauſe it was free, and was as
jealous of its liberties as the grand penſionary him-
elf. Theſe two ſtateſmen united with the count
de Dhona, the embaſſador of Sweden, in order to
kop the progreſs of the king of France.

The rapidity of the events, which happened about
tzis period, is what chiefly diſtinguiſhes it. Flanders,
which we call French Flanders, had been taken in
tree months, Franche-Comte in three weeks, and
tte treaty between Holland, England, and Sweden,
to preſerve the balance of Europe, and put-a ſtop
to the ambition of Lewis XIV. was propoſed and
concluded in five days. |

M 3

d of
ends,
Ours.
ders,
£10%,
Jered
who,

126 THE AGE OF @

Lewis XIV. was filled with indignation, 4g
hold ſuch a little ſtate as Holland forming dg
to ſet bounds to his and be the abr
kings; and his indignation was increaſed, vn
found chat this little ſtate was able to do this.” Sud
an enterprize of the United provinces was an o
rage he could not bear, though he affected to di
gard it; and, from that time, he meditated ee

Notwithſtanding his ambition, his power, and N
rage, he diſſipated the form which ſeemed wh
riſing in all parts of Europe, by propoſing a peat
himſelf, France and Spain fixed upon Aix-· a
pelle, as the place to hold the conferences; and; ke
mediator, choſe the new pope, Roſpiglioi, who wn
named Clement IX.

The court of Rome, to conceal its real weakne
under an appearance of credit, fought, by all m
ner of means, to have the honour of being the +
biter of Europe; in which deſign it had not ben
able to ſucceed in the Pyrenean treaty : but i U
traſt appeared to have gained this in the treaty d
Aix-la-Chapelle. A nuncio was ſent to the congret
to be the ſhadow of an arbiter between the ſhadows
of plenipotentiaries. The Hollanders, who had lug;
been jealous of their glory, refuſed to divide the bv
nour of concluding what they had commenced. Al
the negotiations were really carried. on at St, Ge
mains, by means of their embaſſador Van-Beunning,
What was privately granted by him was ſent to Au-
k-Chapelle, to be ſigned in form by the minilier
aſſembled at the congreſs. Who would, thirty qe
before, have imagined, that a citizen of Holland ſhould
force France and Spain to receive his mediation?

This Van-Beunning, who was a burgomaller d

pocgrRroPpPEbe=at an56029aR87TLMESFTT7 22

127
boined to the pride of a Spaniard. He, upon every |
ccaſion, took a pleaſure in ſhocking the imperious
grandeur of the king; and, to the tone of ſuperio-
rity, which the miniſters of France began to aſſume,
be oppoſed republican inflexibility. Mall you not
believe what the king ſays ? faid Monſieur de Lionne
10 him, in a conference. I de not know what the
king will do, replied Van-Beunning ; but I know what
he can do. In ſhort, a peace was concluded, in
an authoritative manner, by a burgomaſter, at the
court of the moſt fuperb of monarchs: by which
the king was forced to reſtore Franche-Comte.
The Hollanders would have been much better
pleaſed, if he had reſtored Flanders, and fo have de-
livered them from fo formidable a neighbour. But
all the nations of Europe thought the king ſhewed
ſufficient moderation, in relinquiſhing Franche-
Comte (/). He, in the mean time, gained more by
keeping the towns of Flanders; and he opened the
ports of Holland, whoſe deſtruction he meditated
at the very time when he ſeemed to comply with
all its demands, |

9. LEWIS xv.”

CHAPTER IX.

The magnificence of Lewis XIV. The con-
queſt of Holland.

E WIS XIV. compelled, for ſome time, to

remain in peace, continued, as he had begun,

to regulate, to fortify, and to adora his kingdom.
{f) May 3. 2668.

mn KAAN TT FAA

128 THE ACE OF ©g .
He ſhewed, that an abſolute monarch, who i
diſpoſed, may effect every thing. He had
to command, and ſucceſs in the adminiſtration wy
as rapid as his conqueſts had been. It was rel
wonderful to behold the ſea- ports, which befor
were deſerted and in ruins, now ſurrounded by
works which were at once both their ornament anf
their defence; covered alſo with ſhips and mariney
and containing already near ſixty large men of wa,
New colonies, under the protection of his flag
were ſent from all parts into America, the Eaſt»
dies, and to the coaſts of Africa. In the mean tin
many thouſand men were employed in France, ut
der his immediate inſpection, in the conſtrudion
of immenſe edifices, and in the exerciſe of il
thoſe arts which architecture introduces. And, in
the interior of his court and capital, the nobler
and more ingenious arts acquired France that
glory and elegance, of which the preceding age
had not even the idea. Literature flouriſhed. The
| barbarity of the ſchools was corrected by ,good
ſenſe and good taſte. But a full account of be
glory and happineſs of the nation ſhall be given in
its proper place in this hiſtory : here we ſhall ſpeak
only of general or military affairs. |
Portugal, about this time, exhibited an extraor-
dinary ſcene to Europe. Don Alphonſo, who was
an unworthy ſon of the happy Don John of Bu-
ganza, reigned over that kingdom. He was fu-
rious and of a weak judgment. His wife who ws
a daughter of the duke de Nemours, being in lot
with Don Pedro, Alphonſo's brother, {he ſormed a |
deſign to dethrone her huſband, and eſpouſe bet
lover. Her huſband's barbarity juſtified the Au-

b. 9. DEWI We.” 125

jouſneſs of this attempt. His ſtrength of body was
more than common. He had publicly kept a miſtreſs,
eged: and he had long cohabited with the queen.
She, nevertheleſs, accuſed him of impotence and
wing, by ber prudent conduct, obtained that au-
thority in the kingdom which her huſband had loſt
y his furious behaviour, ſhe cauſed him to be con-
fined; after which ſhe ſoon obtained a bull from
Rome to eſpouſe her brother-in-law. It is not fur-
priſing, that Rome ſhould grant this bull; but it is
ſo, that thoſe who were all-powerful ſhould,” never
theleſs, have occaſion for it. This event, which
only cauſed a revolution in the royal family; and
not in the kingdom of Portugal, producing no
change in the affairs of Europe, deſerves our no-
tice in this place only for its ſingularity, © +
France, ſoon after (a), received a king, who
quitted his throne in a different manner. John
Caſimir, king of Poland, renewed the example of
queen Chriſtina, Wearied by the fatigues and
perplexities of government, and deſirous to live
in a happy tranquillity, he choſe a retreat at
Paris, in the abbey of St. Germains, of which he
was abbot, Paris, which, for ſome years, had
been the ſeat of all the arts, was a delightful re-
ſdence to a king, who ſought the ſweets of ſo-
ciety, and was a lover of learning. He had been
a Jeluit, and a cardinal, before he was a king; and,
being equally diſguſted with royalty and the church,
he now ſought only to live in a philoſophical re-
tirement, and would never permit the title of ma-
klty to be given him at Paris. .
(4) September 1668.

. . K KFA FFF SFA

a A Fee 38S

#30 THE AGE OT a
But a mare intereſting affair, at this time, cm
manded the attention of all the Chriſtian prince,
the Mabomets, the Selims, and the Solimans by
ſtill dangerous and formidable through out did
all the forces of their empire. And it is hard 9
ſay which was moſt aſtoniſhing, the long and yiges
ous defence made by the Venetians, or their bs
ing abandoned by the other potentates of Eu
Ihe times were greatly changed. Formerly wha
Chriſtendom was in a ſtate of barbarity, a pope; «
even a monk, could engage millions of Chriſtians»
go and combat the Mahometansin their own empire;
and the nations of Europe were exhauſted both u
men and money, for the conqueſt of the wretchel
and barren province of Judaea: but now, though
the iſle of Candy, which was reputed the bub
wark of Chriſtendom againſt the  infidels, ws
overpowered by ſixty thouſand Turks; yet the
powers of Europe regarded the loſs with w
difference. The gallies of Malta, and a few d
the pope's, were the only force which defenc
ſenate of Venice, whoſe impotence was as great #
its wiſdom, was unable, with mercenary troops, an
ſuch weak aſſiſtance, to reſiſt the grand viſier N-
perli, who was a good miniſter, and a better gene
ral; was maſter of the Turkiſh empire, at the head
of formidable forces; and even had good engineer.
The king, in vain, ſet the other powers of Eu-
rope an example for the relief of Candy. | His git
lies, and the new ſhips which be had juſt bull n
the port of Toulon, failed thither with jel

—” —

£25

but

|

.

d ty

ES

L

e,

ASF Ki Far zäiFCIT TIA

as mon von

nouſand men, under the command of che duke
e Beaufort; but this fuccour was infufficient in ſs
imminent a danger, becauſe this generoſity of the
French was not imitated by any other nation in
E The F . -# #44 +
— a private gentleman of France, per-
formed an action upon this occaſion, of which there
was no example but in the times of chivalry, He
brought near three hundred gentlemen to the relicf
of Candy, at his own expence, though he was not
rich, Had any other nation of Europe given 3
ſupply equal to this ſent by Feuillade, it'is probable
Candy would have been ſaved. But this ſuccout
only ſerved to retard the taking of it ſome days,
and to be the cauſe of unneceſſary bloodſhed.
The duke of Beaufort was ſlain in a ſally; and
Kiuperli at laſt (6), by capitulation, entered the
place, which was now no better than a- heap of
rvins, _

The Turks, in this ſiege, ſhewed themſelves ſu-
perior to the Chriſtians even in the knowlege of the
military art. The largeſt cannons, which had yet
been ſeen in Europe, were caſt in their camp.
They, for the firſt time, drew parallel lines in the
trenches; and we are obliged to them for the know-
lege of this; but they were themſelves indebted
for it to an Italian engineer. It is certain, that ſuch
conquerors as the Turks, who had experience, cou-
rage, riches, and that conſtancy in fatigues, which
was then their diſtinguiſhed! character, might have
conquered Italy, and made themſelves maſters of
Rome in a very ſhort time. But the weak emperors
which they had afterwards, their bad generals, and

(+) September 16, 1669.

. _—
\ 7 * 4
* * 7 %
7 *

7 |
132 THE AGE OF | Gy
the error of their government, have been the fe
rity of Chriſtendom. % XX 7O RSS
The king, being but little affected by theſe q;
ſtant revolutions, matured his great deſign of ac
queſt of the Low Countries, which he intended g
commence by that of Holland. The-opportanity
ruled upon the ſeas; but nothing could be weaker
by land. Being allied with Spain and England, and
in peace with France, ſhe repoſed too great a ton
fidence in the ſecurity of treaties, and the ladyan-
tages of an immenſe commerce: in proportion u
her naval armaments became diſciplined and ins
vincible, her land- forces were poor and contenipti
ble. Their cavalry was compoſed only of citizens
who never quitted their houſes, and paid mer,
which they got out of the dregs of the people, ts
do the duty for them. The infantry. was nearly
upon the ſame footing. The officers, and even the
governors of the fortified towns, were either bo;
or the relations of burgomaſters, brought up in in
activity and inexperience, and regarding theit puis
in the ſame light in which prieſts regard their ben
fices. The penſioner John de Witt uſed his ender
vours to correct theſe abuſes ; but he did not at
with ſufficient vigour and reſolution; which v
one of the great faults of this republican. © * un

The firſt thing neceſſary to be done, was to de. Pr
tach England from its alliance with Holland. Ibe Wi”
United provinces being once deprived of this fur Wh "©
port, their deſtruction appeared inevitable. Leu tas
XIV. did not find it difficult to engage CharlesIb
in his deſigns. The Engliſh king had not, inde
ſthewn hunſe}f very ſenſible of the diebe

b. 9 LEWIS MV. 133
ich his reign and nation had received, in the
urning of his ſhips, even in the Thames, by the
dutch fleet. He breathed neither revenge nor con-
eſts: his paſſion was rather to enjoy his plea-
ures, and reign with a power leſs conſtrained:
nd to flatter this diſpoſition, therefore, was the
noſt effeftual way to ſeduce him. Lewis, who,
o have money, then needed only to ſpeak, pro-
niſcd a great ſum to king Charles, who could never
get any without the conſent of his parliament. The
ecret treaty, concluded between the two kings;
as imparted, in France, only to Madame, the ſiſter
ff Charles II. and wife of Monſreur, the king's on-
ly brother, to Turenne, and to Louvois.
A princeſs, of twenty-ſix years of age, was the
plenipotentiary for the concluſion of this treaty
with king Charles, The pretence for her going
into England was a tour, which the king deter-
mined to make, in his new conqueſts, towards
Dunkirk and Liſle, The pomp and grandeur of
the ancient kings of Aſia did not equal the ſplen-
dor of this tour: the king was preceded, or fol-
lowed, by thirty thouſand men, ſome of which
vere deſtined to reinforce the garriſons in the con-
quered countries, others to work upon the forti-
heations, and others to level the roads. The
king took with him the queen his wife, and all the
princeſſes, and moſt beautiful ladies in his court.
Madame ſhone in the midſt of them; and her heart
vas elated with the pleaſure, | and the glory, of all
ttis preparation, which was made only upon her
«count, The journey appeared to be one conti-

ved entertainment from Saint Germains to Lille.
Vol. I. N 1

S S TFF

r ASN NFA KTS

S

E & E .

2. a 1

134 THE ACE OF | al
I The king, who was deſirous to gain the
tions of his new ſubjects, and deceive' the atten
of his neighbours, was every where profuſe in
liberalities; and gold and diamonds: were laviſh
upon all, who had the leaſt pretence to the hong
of ſpeaking to the monarch. The princeſs Hey
etta embarked at Calais, to ſee her brother,
was at Canterbury to receive her: and Charles, |
ing ſeduced by his friendſhip for his ſiſter, andy
money of France, ſigned every thing Lewis A
_ deſired; and prepared the deſtruction of Holland
in the midſt of diverſions and entertainments.
The loſs of Madame, who died ſuddenly, u

in an extraordinary manner, ſoon after her ret
raiſed ſome ſuſpicions prejudicial to Monſieur; by
they cauſed no change in the reſolutions of the tw
kings. The ſpoils of the republic, which was'ty
be deſtroyed, were already divided, by the ſect
treaty, between the courts of France and England
in the ſame manner as Flanders had been dividet
with the Dutch in 1635. Thus projects, allies; and
enemies, are perpetually changing, and great
are frequently rendered vain and deluſive. A
mour of the approaching enterpriae began to de
ſpread; but Europe liſtened to it in ſilence. Ie
emperor being employed in quelling the ſedition
of Hungary, Sweden immerſed in negotiations, and
Spain being always weak, irreſolute, and-flow; # det

free and unlimited career was given to the ambition .
of Lewis XIV. | C

Holland, to complete its misfortune; was d-
vided into two factions; one, of rigid republicans
to whom the leaſt ſhadow of deſpotic power" Bl ©
peared a monſter, contrary to the laws of *

b. 9. LEWIS XIV. 133
e other, of moderate republicans, who were for
inſtating, in the poſts of his anceſtors, the young
rince of Orange, who became afterwards ſo cele-
ated, under the name of William the Third.
he grand penſionary John de Witt, and Cornelius
is brother, were at the head of the rigid partiſans
f liberty; but the party of the young prince began
o prevail: and the republic, being thus more en-
paged in its domeſtic diſſenſions, than attentive to

by

— =
&- 5

e danger, contributed to its own ruin.

land Lewis not only purchaſed the king of England,
Mut alſo gained the elector of Cologne, and Van-

(BC halen biſhop of Munſter, who thirſted for wars,

tun greedy of ſpoils, and was naturally an enemy

o the Hollanders. Lewis had formerly aſſiſted
em againſt this biſhop; but now he united with
im for their deſtruction. Sweden, which had
joined the Dutch in 1668. to put a ſtop to pro-
preſſes which did not concern her, now, when they
were menaced with ruin, abandoned them; and re-
newed her ancient alliance with France, in conſi-
deration of the uſual ſubſidies.

It is ſingular, and deſerves to be remarked, that,
among all the enemies, which were going to fall
upon this little ſtate, there was not one who could
alege any pretence for a war. The enterprize
might, indeed, be juſtly compared to the league.
between Lewis XII. the emperor Maximilian, and
the king of Spain, who had formerly planned the
deſtruction of the Venetian republic; becauſe ir was
nich and proud. | be
The ſtates-general, in a great conſternation, wrote
0 the king, humbly intreating his majeſty to tell

N 24-4 -

-

4 K

LISTE

_
—

r

" 2 8
q
y
he 5

236 THE AGE OF "Wl
them, whether the great preparations he way my
ing were really deſtined againſt them, his and
and faithful allies? wherein they had offended hin)
and what reparation he required? He reply
That he ſhould employ his troops in ſuch
« manner as his dignity might demand, which i
« not require him to give an account of it
one.“ All the reaſon given by his miniſter-wg
that the Dutch gazette had been too infolent;
becauſe Van-Beunning was ſaid to have ſtruc
medal, injurious to Lewis XIV. Van-Beunning
chriſtened name was Joſhua. A taſte for mom
and devices prevailed at that time in France. I
fun had been given as a device to Leu
with theſe words, Nec pluribus impar. It was fail
that Van-Beunning had cauſed himſelf to be reps
ſented, with a ſun, and theſe words for a moth
In conſpectu meo ſtetit fel : The ſun ſtood fill at m
appearance. But this medal never really exiſted. The
ſtates had, indeed, cauſed a medal to be firuck; u
which they had expreſſed all the glorious ateew
ments of the republic: A/ertis legibus, enendati
facris, adjutis, defenſis, conciliatis\regibis, indica
marium libertate, ſtabilita orbis Europae quietes Tt
laws eſtabliſhed, religion amended, kings ſuccourth
defended, and reconciled, the liberty of the ſeas if
ſerted, and the peace of Europe ſettled, | |
In reality, they boaſted of nothing which ie
had not done: nevertheleſs, they cauſed this meds
to be deſtroyed, to appeaſe Lewis XIV.

The king of England, on his ſide, reproached
them with diſreſpect, becauſe their feet had 10
lowered its flag before an Engliſh ſhips-and h
were alſo accuſed in regard to a certain picture

. 9. LEWIS MV. 137

herein Cornelius de Witt, the brother of the pen-
nary, was painted with the attributes of a con-
meror. Ships were repreſented, in the back ground
pf the piece, either taken or burnt. Cornelius de
itt, who had really had a great ſhare in the mari-
ime exploits againſt England, had permitted this
triling memorial of his glory: but the picture,
ahich was in a manner unknown, was depoſited
in a chamber wherein ſcarce any body ever enter-
ed. The Engliſh miniſters, who preſented the com-
plaints of their king againſt Holland, in writing,
therein mentioned certain abu/rve pictures. The
ſtates, who always tranſlated the memorials of em-
baſſadors into French, having rendered abuſrve, by
the word fautifs, trompeurs, they replied, that they
did not know what theſe roguesſh pictures (ces ta-
bleaux trompeurs) were. In reality, it never in the
eaſt entered into their thoughts, that it concerned
this portrait of one of their citizens, nor did they
erer conceive this could be a pretence for declaring
war. |

All that human prudence and ambition is capable
of contriving for the deſtruction of a nation, was
prepared by Lewis XIV. And we have no example,
In all hiſtory, of ſuch formidable preparations for
ſo inconſiderable an enterprize: for, among all the
conquerors who have ſubjected any part of the
world, no one ever began his conqueſts with ſo
many regular troops, nor ſo much money, as were
employed by Lewis XIV. to ſubject this little ſtate
of the United provinces. Fifty millions, which
makes ninety-ſeven millions of the preſent French
money, were expended in the preparations. Thirty
N 3 |

FASL EASE MSDE ES SS ESHESE

138 THE AGE OF *&
ſhips of fifty guns joined the Engliſh feet
hundred ſail. The king, with his brother
peared upon the frontiers of Spaniſh Flanders ay
Holland, near Maeſtricht and Charleroy, at the hai
of upwards of one hundred and twelve thouſu
men. The biſhop of Munſter, and the elector d
Cologne, had near twenty thouſand. The genenk
of the | king's army were Conde and  Turenne;
Luxembourg commanded under them: Vauba
was to conduct the ſieges. Louvois appeared it
all places, with his uſual vigilance.” A fine;
and, at the ſame time, a better diſciplined am
had never been ſeen. In particular, the king
houſhold troops, as newly reformed, made a m
gallant appearance. They were compoſed of fou
troops of life-guards, each containing three hun-
ered gentlemen; among whom there were many
young cadets, without pay, ſubject, with the relh
to the regular duty of the ſervice: two hundrel
light horſe, two hundred gendarmes, five hunde
muſqueteers; all choſen gentlemen, in the flower
of their youth; twelve companies of gendarment,
which were afterwards augmented to ſixteen; even
the hundred Switzers accompanied the king, ad
his regiments of French and Switzers mounted
guard before his houſe, or before his tent. Thel
troops, which, in general, were covered with. gold
and ſilver, were, at once, an object both of terror By **
and admiration, in the eyes of a people to whom ©"
magnificence of every kind was entirely unknown-
A diſcipline, more ſtrict than formerly, had inte- ©
duced new order among the troops. There were,
as yet, no inſpectors of the cavalry and infant;
which we have ſince had. Two perſons only Wee a

9. LEWIS NV. 139
appointed to do this ſervice, Martinet, at that
time, brought the infantry under the diſcipline ir
which it ſtill continues: the chevalier de Fourilles
did the ſame thing in the cavalry, Martinet, about
2 year before, had introduced the bayonet into
ſome few regiments; before which time, it had
never been uſed in a general and uniform manner.
This laſt effort of military invention, which, per-
haps, is the moſt terrible of all others, though
known before, was but little practiſed; becauſe the
uſe of pikes, as yet, prevailed. He alſo modeled
the conſtruction of copper boats, which might be
eaſily tranſported from one place to another, upon
carriages, or upon mules. The king with all theſe
advantages, being certain of the increaſe of his
glory and power, carried with him an hiſtorian,
to write a relation of his victories: this was Pelif-
ſon, whoſe genius enabled him to write well, but
did not prevent him from flattering his hero. We
wall ſay more of him in the article concerning the
fine arts. | By

Againſt Turenne, Conde, Luxembourg, Vauban,
an hundred and thirty thouſand ſoldiers, a prodi-
tous train of artillery, and plenty of money, with
which attempts were made to corrupt the fidelity
of the governors of the enemy's towns, all that
Hollard had to oppoſe was a young prince of a
weak conſtitution, who had never feen a ſiege,
dor a battle, and about twenty-five thouſand bad
folciers, who conſtituted the whole guard of the
country, Prince William of Orange, aged twenty-
tro years, had been elected captain-general of the
bad forces, by the almoſt unanimous voice of the
uon: and John de Witt had conſented: to it

LL

A8 ATA TSA TT KITTS

” e Ns :wf. % RES a *
—
”

out oſtentation, ambitious without pride, born wit

every thing, the reverſe of Lewis XIV.

forces were too inconſiderable, and even his power
Aimited by the ſtates, The French arniy fell ſub

140 THE ACE OF Gy
through neceſſity. The prince of Orange, und
the phlegmatic diſpoſition of a Dutchman,

a ſtrong ambition, and an ardent thirſt of glay
which afterwards appeared upon all . occaſions i
his conduct, but never in his converſation; "ti
temper was cold and ſevere, though his part
were quick, active, and penetrating : his - couray
which was undaunted, made his body, which wy
weak and languiſhing, ſupport fatigues that war
ſuperior to his ſtrength. He was courageous with

VP

B B S Z.

=
— —

3

S?

a phlegmatic obſtinacy proper to combat adverſity,
fond of bulineſs and war, unacquainted with the
pleaſures attendant upon greatneſs, or even thal
annexed to humanity; and, in ſhort, almoſt i

He was as firſt unable to make any oppolition tv
the torrent which burſt in upon his country; his

» PeOSOSSBSTSTMPCSE

denly upon Holland, which none would ſneccour,
The iĩimprudent · duke of Lorrain, ho attempt
to raiſe forces, and join his fortunes to thoſe of this
republic, beheld the whole province of Lomi
ſeized by the French troops, with the ſame. facility

3 8 2

that Avignon is ſeized, when the French are at i N n:
riance with the pope. | in

In the mean time, the king cauſed his troops w in
advance towards the Rhine, in thoſe provinces wich BW vp
border upon Holland, Cologn, and Flanders. He d-
ſtributed money in all the villages, to repair the d. 2
mages which might be done by his troops: and it BW «
any gentleman of the neighbourhood came to mae o
complaints, he was ſure to receive a preſent. A fe

th. 9. LEWIS NV. 141
ſon being ſent from the governor of the Low Coun-
ries, to make complaints concerning ſome diforders
committed by the troops, the king, with his =
hands, gave him his portrait, enriched with diamonds,
valued at more than twelve thouſand franks. Such
2 behaviour drew npon him the admiration of the
people, and increaſed the dread of his power.
The king was at the head of his houſhold, troops,
and others which were efteemed the choiceſt of his
forces, to the number of thirty thouſand men
which Turenne commanded under him. The prince
of Conde had the command of another army as
ſtrong as this, The other troops, fomerimes com-
manded by Luxembourg, and ſometimes by Cha-
mill, were to compoſe ſeparate armies, as.occaſjon
might require, or to join theſe, if neceſſary. The
operations were commenced by the ſiege of four
towns at once, whoſe names, were it not upon this
occaſion, would ppt deſerve to be mentioned in hi»
ſtory: theſe towns were Rhinberg, Orſoi, 'Weſel,
and Burick; and they were taken almoſt as ſoon
as inveſted, Rhinberg, which the king intended to
beliege in perſon, did not wait the firing of a ſingle
cannon; for, to be the more certain of taking it,
the lieutenant of the place, who was an Iriſhman,
named Doſſary, had been corrupted; and, after be-
ing guilty of the baſeneſs to ſell himſelf, had the
mprudence to retire to Maeſtricht, where the

$ FS FA ara

ach prince of Orange puniſhed him with death.
c. All thoſe towns, which bordered upon the Rhine
a/ and the Iſſel, ſurrendered. Some of the governors

ſent their keys, upon a diſtant appearance only of
one or two {ſquadrons of French troops; ſeveral
acers fled out of the towns in which they were in

1

A N * 4 n 6 1
8 * * * an - LES * 4 * =
, tc. oi | r er ng
1 4 dds — \ th... th >, * N p * * = MN.
4 * 0 e <YJ 2 8 by - mp 4 . a» 2 . . _ * .
8 * - "I l . , — „ - * ,
o IT» »” > g . * 2 =; W *
A ,” %
:

nn

a

142 THE AGE OF *W@
gariſon, even before the enemy appeared; au
had not troops ſufficient to appear in the field
Holland expected to be ſubdued, as ſoon a
king ſhould have paſſed the Rhine. The prince
Orange, in haſte, cauſed lines to be drawn on
other {ide of that river; and, after they were finite
ed, perceived the impoſlibility of keeping them. A
therefore, they now wanted to know, was, whe
the French would form their bridge of 'boats, i
order, if poſſible to prevent their paſſage. Tbe king
real deſign was to paſs the river over a bridge co
poſed of thoſe little copper boats invented by Ma
tinet. Some of the people of the country; upon ths
occaſion, told the prince of Conde, that the 'drynd
of the ſeaſon had rendered a branch of the Rhine
fordable, oppoſite to an old tower, which was uſel
as a kind of cuſtom or toll-houſe, and was calledby
the Dutch ?o/[-buzs. The king ordered the place u
be ſounded by the count de Guiche. Actors
ing to Peliſſon's letters, who was an eye-witnels; it
was found there were not more than forty or fi
paces in the middle of the river, in this part, ta
required ſwimming. This was conſidered as 10
thing, becauſe the horſe would interrupt the c
rent, which, beſides, was far from being ' rapid.
The paſſage therefore was eaſy, and, on the obe
ſide, there were only four or five hundred cavalry
and two weak regiments of infantry, without an
cannon. The French artillery fired upon het
forces in flank, while the king's houſhold-troops
and the beſt of the cavalry, croſſed without any
danger, to the number of about fifteen thouſand
[The prince of Conde appeared by the fide of many

*- *

* 0. rei IV.” e

juring the paſſage, in one of the copper boats.
e Dutch cavalry,” having ſcarce made a faint at-
-mpt to oppoſe, "inſtantly fled before the multi-
de which was coming after them. Their infantry,
alſo laid down their arms, and begged for quarter.
No lives were loſt in the paſſage, except ſome of
the cavalry, who, having intoxicated themſelves
rich drinking, did not take care to keep in the
fordable part; and not a ſingle perſon would have
been killed, had it not been for the imprudence of
the young duke de Longueville (c). It is faid, that,
his head being filled with the fumes of wine, he
fired a piſtol upon thoſe of the enemy, who begged
their lives upon their knees, crying out to them,
No quarters to fach ſcoundrels, The ſhot killed one
of their officers; upon which the Dutch infantry,
in deſpair, inſtantly retook to their arms, and made
a diſcharge, by which the duke de Longueville was
killed, A captain of horſe, named Offembrouk,
who had not fled with the others, ran up to the
prince of Conde, who, having croſſed the river,
was then mounting his horſe, and clapped his piſtol
o his head. The prince, by a ſudden movement,
changed the direction of the ſhot, which wounded
dim in the wriſt; and this was the only wound the
prince of Conde ever received in all his campaigns.
The French, being enraged at this, put all the in-
fantry to the ſword which had taken to flight. Lewis
IV. paſſed the river with his army upon a bridge
of boats. |

Such was this peculiar and extraordinary paſſage
of the Rhine, which was celebrated then as one of
ole great actions which muſt for ever remain me-

(£) June 12. 1672.

—

, ©&:-.-

nc
us
id.
het
ry
nf
ele
2
ny
nd.
m

- _—
” —

144 THE AGE OF A

morable to mankind. That air of grandeur aj
the adoration of his courtiers, and, finally, thei
Pariſians, have to exaggeration, joined to thath
norance of war which is univerſal in great dg
made this paſſage of the Rhine be regarded; at Pay
as a prodigy. The notion of it, which genen
prevailed, was, that all the forces had palled d
river by ſwimming, in preſence of an army whid
was intrenched on the other ſide, and amidf} te
fire of artillery from an impregnable fortreſs cala
the Thelus. It is certain, this paſſage was regarded
by the enemy as almoſt impoſſible; and, indeed
if they had had a ſtrong body of good troops d
the other ſide, the attempt might have been wy
As foon as the troops had paſſed the Riu
they took Doeſbourg, Zutphen, Arnheim, Ne
rembourg, Nimegen, Skenk, Bommel, Crevecne
etc. and there were but few hours in the ap
wherein the king did not receive an account
ſome conqueſt. An officer, neneC Ie
this requeſt to Tureane : If you will: ſend 1
 _ a, : cc wi
« three towns.”

Utrecht ſent its keys, and capitulated; wp
with all the province wich bears its name. Leu
made his triumphal entry into that city, bang *
tended by his grand almoner, his confeſſor, and it
ritular biſhop of Utrecht. The great chu u
given up to the Catholics with great ſolemaiy7
and the biſhop, who had dans

+. 9. LEWIS WW. 145

d empty title, was, for ſome time, eſtabliſted in
real dignity. - - The religion of Lewis XIV. made
queſts as well as his arms; by which; in the
pinion of the” Catholics, be gained a right to ,
—

The provinces of Utrecht, Oreriſſel, and Guil-
rs, were ſubjected; and Amſterdam expected the
oment of its ſlavery or ruin was at hand. The
ys, eſtabliſhed in it, were earneſt in offering to
zarville, the intendant and friend of the prince-of
ade, tuo millions of florins, to ſecure them-
res from being plundered.

Naerden, in the neighhourhood of Amſterdam,
s already taken. Four only of the cavalry, who
ent out a marauding, advanced as far as the gates
f ?uiden, where the ſluices are, which may be
pened to drown the country, and which is only
we league from Amſterdam. The magiſtrates of
ſuiden, being under the greateſt dread and-conſter-
ation, came and preſented their keys to theſe four
lciers; but, at ft, obſerving the reſt of the troops
not come up, they took back their keys, and
ut their gates. A moment's diligence would have
ut the king in poſſeſſion of Amſterdam: and this
Ep! bang orce taken, not only the republic would
de periihed, but the nation of Holland would no
bore have exiſted, and even the land itſelf would
502 have diſappeared. The richeſt families, and
oc who were moſt deſirous of liberty, prepared
D embark for Batavia, and fly even to the extre-
mics of the world, The ſhips capable to make
5 voyage were numbered, and a calculation made
Wer enn
OL. Lis un - v2

5

Nin

146 THE AGE OT wh

that fifty thouſand families might take refugę q
their new country. The Dutch would no Jong
have exiſted but in the moſt diſtant part of tha
Indies; and theſe European provinces which fh
only by their Aſian riches, their commerce, aud
a Frenchman may ſay ſo, by their liberty, W
on a ſudden, have been ruined and depopulated
Amſterdam, which is the warehouſe: and the n
gazine of Europe, wherein commerce and the a
are cultivated by three hundred thouſand men;
would preſently have become only one vaſt habe
All the adjacent lands require immenſe ,expence
and many thouſands of men, to raiſe and maintain
their banks: and they would probably at once have
wanted the ſupport both of men and | money, and
would at laſt have been overwhelmed by the ſez
leaving Lewis XIV. only the wretched glory of hay
ing deſtroyed one of the fineſt and 'moſt«extraor:
dinary monuments of human induſtry.
Ihe diſtreſſes of the ſtate were increaſed hy e
diviſions which commonly ariſe among unhappy
people, who endeavour to caſt the blame of public
calamities upon one another. The grand petifion-
ary de Witt thought the remainder of his county
could be ſaved only by begging peace of the cor
queror. De Witt, being both a ſtrong
and jealous of his own particular authority, u
always more afraid of the prince of Orange's cle
- vation than of the conqueſts of the king of France:
he had even made this prince ſwear to obſerve 3
perpetual edict, by which he was-excluded from
the dignity of ſtadtholder. The ſpirit of part
honour, intereſt and authority, all excited de Wit
to take care, that this oath was obſerved; and br

23% „%%% „4 T—2ͤ — —

4

OC

.

therefore rather choſe to > fer his 8 ſubjected
by a victorious king, tins W the wn of
a ſtadtholder.

On the other ſide, ee Siren being
25 much attached to his country, more ambitious
than de Witt, more patient under the public cala-
mities, and hoping every thing from time, and the
obſtinacy of his perſeverance, was ardent in his en-
deavours to prevent a peace, and to obtain the
ſadtholderſhip, And though the ſtates reſolved to
ſue for peace in ſpite of the prince, yet the prince
vis elevated to the dignity of ſtadtholder in ſpite of
the de Witts.

Fouf deputies came to the king's- camp, to im-
plore his clemency in the name of a republic,
which, ſix months before, had thought itſelf the
arbitrator between kings, The deputies were not
received by the miniſters of Lewis XIV. with that
politeneſs ſo peculiar to the French, who, even in
the ſeverity of government, retain their civility and
complaiſance, Louvois, who was proud and mo-
roſe, and more capable to ſerve bis maſter well,
than to render him beloved, received theſe ſuppliants
yith haughtineſs, and even with the inſult of rail-
lery, They were made to return ſeveral different
tines: but at laſt the king ordered his determina-
bon to be declared to them; which was, that the
lates ſhould give up to him all they poſſeſſed on the
other ſide of the Rhine, comprehending Nimigen,
tozether with ſeveral other towns and forts in the
teart of their territories: that they ſhould pay him
wenty millions: that the French ſhould be maſters
cl the great roads of Holland both by land and

1 Seth +. he

 BEPESESSES ST SES 5ST

2

BAFA

F 8

128

323
FS

: 9 * Ws...

148 THE AGE OF A
water, without paying toll: that the Catholitnd
gion ſhould be every-where reſtored: that the n
public ſhould every year ſend an embaſladbr ex
ordinary to France with à gold medal, wha
mould be engraved an acknowlegement, that thy
held their liberties af Lewis XIV. and, final
that they ſhould alſo make ſatisfaction to the tay
of England, and the princes of the emp pu
ticularly hot of Colagn an
Holland ſtill continued to be ravaged. '
Thefe conditions of a peace, which appro
fo near to flavery, appeared intolerable; and ta

die in defence of their liberty. The hearts al
the hopes of the nation were all turacd-upon tte
prince of Orange. The people became
againſt the grand penſionary, who had fucd in
peace; and their feditious fury ſoon joined the &
ſigns and animoſity of the prince's party.
tempt was immediately made againſt the lit ui i
grand penſionary John de Witt; and Coe
brother, being afterwards accuſed of an attrays
againſt the prince's life, was put to the rack; =
in his torments, recited the firſt lines of this odet
Horace, Fu/tzm & tengcem ; which was applica
to the condition he was then in, and to his c
and which, for the fake of thoſe who do not 1
ſand Latin, is thus tranſlated - 1. ?

The man, iz conſcious virtue bold,
Unſlaken hears —

Aud the impetus tyrant's angry raw eſs.
Fiat Howe,

LDSSENISSEI ESSE NNNSLC__ELESS.CsSs -.

KA
others in the Hague: one of whois kad governed
he ſtate for nineteen years wick greut integrity,
and the other ſignally ferved it With his' word.
All thoſe violences were committed upon their
bleeding bodies, of which the fury of an enraged
multitude is capable. Such horrid actions are
common to all nations; and the French, in parti-
cular, have been guilty of them, in regard to the
marſhal d Encre, the admiral Coligny, etc. for the
populace is nearly the ſame in all places. The
friends of the penſionary were alſo purſued; an
even Ruyter himſelf, the admiral of the repnblic,
who was the only one that then fought for her with
ſucceſs, bebeld himſelf ſurrounded with aſſaſſins in
the city of Amſterdam. |
In the midft of theſe diſorders and devaſtations,
the magiſtrates manifeſted virtues, which are ſeldom
ſen but in republics. Thoſe of the inhabitants,
vdo were poſſeſſed of bank-notes, ran in cronds to
te bank of Amſterdam; and it was apprehended
try would lay violent hands upon the public trea-
fure. Every one was eager to get his money out
& te little which it was ſuppoſed there ſtill re-
mined, The magiſtrates opened the cellars where
dis trezſure was depoſited ; and it was found in-
tre, juſt as it had been depoſited ſinty years be-
fore: and the filver was even ſtill black from the
e525 of the fire, by which the ſtadthouſe had been
e=ſumed long before. The bank-notes, till now,
E conſtantly been and this treaſure
rer touched. But now, thoſe, theme: «+;

(4) Auguſt 20. 1672,
0 3 *

Lodi LSE 2 +06

ph n * 8
2 Saks i De. ! 7 an
AX p % » / A /"

150 THE AGE. or .

having: dein money, were paid out of Suck
«diſtinguiſhed good faith, and ſuch great'reſourcs
were then ſo much the more admirable, as Cu
the ſecond, king of England, to defray. the ex
pences of his pleaſures, and his war againſt the
Dutch, not being ſatisfied with the money he gu
from France, had, juſt at that time, become a bank
Tupt to his ſubjects, And it was as diſhonourable
to this king, thus to violate the public faith, 25 it
was glorious in the magiſtrates of Amſterdam to
preſerve it, at a time when a failure might have ap
Peared pardonable.
E To this republican virtue they joined that ws
rage of mind, which, for redreſs in -irremediabl
misfortunes, flies to extremes. They cauſed the
banks, which kept out the ſea, to be cut; and
the country-houſes, which are innumerable about
Amſterdam, the villages, and the neighbouring
towns, ſuch as Leyden and Delft, were laid ur
der water. The country-people did not repine 2
ſeeing their herds of cattle drowned in the fields
Amſterdam appeared like a vaſt fortreſs in ihe
midſt of the ſea, ſurrounded with ſhips of war,
which had depth of water ſufficient to make then
be ſtationed round the city. There was the greatel
ſcarcity among the inhabitants; eſpecially of frei
water, which was ſold for ſix-pence a pint: but
they conſidered theſe neceſſities as more tolerable
than ſlavery. It is worthy the obſervation of po-
ſterity, that Holland, when thus overwhelmed ot
land, and, as it were, no longer a ſtate, yet com-
tiaued formidable at ſea; which, indeed, is the true
Aan of this people.
, While Lewis XIV. croſſed the Rhine, and ſb

-—— BX

=

eh „ e RR” >0Q OO RU =

2 W fu ad ab fun 9

3. ELAN FAS

22

5 AFI

a
2

A8 ETA

*

b. 9. LEWIS mv.” 151

jected three provinces; admiral Ruyter, with about
an hundred ſhips of war, and more than fifty fire-
ſhips, went upon the coaſts of England, in ſearch
of the fleet of the two kings; whoſe united force
had not been able to put to ſea a naval armament
ſuperior to that of the republic. The Engliſh-and
Dutch fought like nations accuſtomed to diſpute
the empire of the ocean. The battle, called the
Solbay, laſted one intire day (e). Ruyter, who firſt
gave the ſignal, attacked the ſhip" of the Engliſh
admiral, in which was the duke of York, the king's
brother. The victory, in the engagement between
theſe two admirals, was gained by Ruyter. The
duke of York, being obliged to change his ſhip,
did not again appear before the admiral of Holland.
The thirty French ſhips had very little ſhare in the
ation; and the conſequence of this engagement
was, that the coaſts of Holland were rendered ſe-
cure,

After this, Ruyter, notwithſtanding the fears,
and the oppoſition of his countrymen, brought the
fleet of India merchantmen into the Texel; and
thus, on one ſide, defended and enriched his coun-
ty, while, on the other, it was deſtroyed. The
Dutch even continued their commerce; and no
flags but theirs were ſeen in the Indian ſeas. A
conſul of France one day telling the king of Perſia,
that Lewis XIV. had conquered almoſt all Hol-
land; Hau can that he? replied the Perſian mon-
arch; ſince for one French ſhip in the port of Ormus,
there are a:ways twent 'y Dutch,

The prince of Orange, in the mean time, had
be ambition of ſhewing himſelf- a good citizen.

(fe) June 7. 1672.

-

152 THE avs or 8 "I"
He offered the ſtate the revenue of his poſts, un
his whole fortune for the defenee of liberty. þþ
covered with inundations all thoſe paſſages throw
which the French might penetrate into the reſt of
the country. By the quickneſs and ſecrecy of ty
negotiations he rouſed the emperor, the \enpin,
the council of Spain, and the governor-of Fla
ders, from their lethargy; and even diſpoſed Fug
land towards peace. To conclude, the king hat
entered Holland in the month of May, and @
July, all Europe began to conſpire againſt him.
Monteroy, governor of Flanders, ſecretly canſel
ſome regiments to march to the relief of the Unitel
provinces. The council of the emperor Leopold ſen
Montecuculi, at the head of near twenty thouſand
men; and the elector of Brandenbourg, who had
twenty-five thouſand ſoldiers in his pay, marchel
with them under his command. |

As no more conqueſts could be made in a c
try overwhelmed with water, the king now 'quitted
his army H. The preſervation of the conqueral
provinces was difficult, and Lewis was for keeping
a certain glory. Satisfied with having taken Þ
many towns in two months, he returned do ff
Germains in the midſt of ſummer; and lem
Turenne and Luxembourg to complete the wat,
he enjoyed the glory of his triumph. Monuments
of his conqueſts were erected, while the powers &
—_——

60 July 1673.

—
_— * "oo

4. 10. : LE WI 8 MV.

1 . |
7 .
CHAPTER X.
" , > Bo ge yy £7 "7 - 7 N

The evacuation of Holland: ; and the ſecond
conqueſt of er ee

7 E think it i ee
who may read this work, that it is not
merely a narrative of campaigns, but rather an hi-
ſtory of the manners of men. There are books
enough which contain all the minute particulars of
martial exploits, and relations of human madneſs
and miſery, The deſign of chis eſſay is to paint
the principal characters in theſe revolutions, and to
exclude the multitude of little facts, in order to
ew only thoſe which are conſiderable, and (if that
zn, which uy are com-
dutted,
France was then at the height of its glory. The
mme of its generals imprinted veneration, '- Its
miniſters were regarded as geniuſes ſuperior to the
eounſellors of other princes; and Lewis ſeemed to
de the ſole king in Europe. In reality, the empe-
ror Leopold never appeared perſonally in his ar-
mies. Charles II. king: of Spain, ſon of Philip
IV. was as yet in his infancy; and the king of
— never ſhewed any ng
ſures.

Al heſe princes, and thelr idem es
of great faults. England acted contrary 0 the
Tue maxims of ſtate-policy, in uniting with France

\ : *
o 1 d 4 4 4 „1 „ 0

22a, „LIF aA

. GAA ASA

' : a 1. ' "HIER
154 T THE AGE OF _ Wn
for the elevation of a power, which it was rate
her intereſt to humble. I
The emperor, the empire, and the council
Spain, were yet more to blame, in not i
oppoſing the torrent. But, however, Lewis XIV,
was guilty of an error as great as all theirs, in na
purſuing ſuch eafy conqueſts with ſufficient rapidity.
Conde and Turenne were for demoliſhing moſt d
jetted by gariſons, but by armies; and that living
preſerved only one or two places for a retreat, the
troops ought to march with the utmoſt rapidity, u
complete the conqueſt. Louvois, on the contrary,
was every-where for having fortifications and gar
ſons. This was his humour; and it was al the
king's. Louvois, by this means, had more" ens
ployments in his gift, extended the power of hi
. miniſtry, and took a pleaſure in acting conitrary to
the opinions of the two greateſt generals of the
age. Lewis confided in him, and was deceived, &
he afterwards confeſſed. He neglected the por.
tunity he had to enter the capital of Holland;
weakened his army by diſtributing it into too many”
- Places; and gave his enemy time to take breath
The hiſtory of the greateſt princes is frequently's
relation of the univerſal faults of mankind:*
After the king's departure, affairs began to put
on a different aſpect. Turenne was forced to marc
towards Weſtphalia, to oppoſe the Imperialiſts.
Monterey, the gove-nor of Flanders, without being
authorized by the timid council of Spain, reinforced
the prince of Orange's little army with about i
thouſand men; which enabled this princi feli
the French till winter, and in a great f

rn OE OR NO oP
. 10. LEWIS NV. 155
bahnce the ſcale of fortune. Winter at laſt arriv-
ed, and the inundations of Holland were covered
with ice. And now Luxembourg, who. commanded

15 in Utrecht, carried on a new kind of war, unknown
uy to the French, c
> 2 manner as before.

19 He, one night, aſſembled near 1

foot ſoldiers from the gariſons, for
whom ſkaits had been prepared; and, putting him-
ſelf, at their head, he ſkaited- with them over the ice
towards Leyden and the Hague: but a thaw com-
ing on, it preſerved the Hague; and his army,
being ſurrounded with water, unable to get off the
ice, and deſtitute of proviſions, was ready to pe-
nb, In order to get back to Utrecht, they were
forced to march upon a narrow and muddy bank,
which could ſcarce admit four to walk in front.
Neither could they get at this bank but by attack-
ing a fort, which, without artillery, ſeemed impre-
able. Had this fort ſtopped the army only a ſingle
day, it would have been almoſt deſtroyed with
hunger and fatigue. Luxembourg was without re-
ource; but fortune, which had ſaved the Hague,
ned his army by the cowardice of the commander
of this fort, who abandoned his poſt without any
rzſon. A thouſand things are done in war, as well.
a in common life, which are incomprehenſible :
ad this was certainly of the number. All the
mit of this enterprize was a cruelty which ren-
&red the French completely odious in this coun-
ty. Bodegrave and Swamerdam, two. rich and
populous towns, which might be compared to many
& our cities of the middle kind, were abandoned
o be plundered by the ſoldiers, as a reward for

—
.

A F . A F

s &

2 N

A *

3

1327
m3

S WA F. A

*

es 6a le "> *
156 THE AGE OF 0 4
cheir fatigues. They ſet theſe two townyion-fing
and, by the light of the flames, committedall kink
of cruelty and debauchery: It is aſtoniſhing; thy
the French foldiers ſhould ſhew' thernfelues hire
barous, being commanded by a prodigious minke
of officers, who had very juſtly acquired the eU.
tation of being truly couragious and humane. The
exceſſes they committed were ſo exaggerated'hy
the inhabitants, that I have ſeen Dutch books, abore
forty years afterwards, wherein children were lean-
ed to read, containing a relation of this a, and
drawn up with a deſign to inſpire ſucceeding gens
rations with hatred and deteſtation of the French
(a) In the mean time, the king, by his nepotiations

Influenced the councils of all the Enropean princes
He gained the duke of Hanover. The eleftor df
Brandenbourg, in the beginning of the war, cons
cluded a treaty; but it was ſoon after" broken,
There were none of the German couris wherein
Lewis had not his penſioners. His 'emiffaries it
Hungary fomented the troubles of that"provinge)
which was ſeverely treated by the eouneil of Venn

Money was laviſhed upon the king of England, w

engage him to continue the war againſt Holland
notwithſtanding the univerſal exclamations of the
Engliſh nation, which was filled with-indignation at
being made to ſerve the ambition of Lewis MV,
which on the contrary it wanted to eurb, The
repoſe of Europe was diſturbed by the arms and
negotiations of Lewis; and, at laſt, he couldnt
prevent” the emperor, the empire, and Spain, from
joining the Dutch, and ſolemnly declaring wr
againſt him, He had changed the cou ef affairs
_ © 4) i696) Hmm”

" *h
a.

Fs -PY . * on

SKS $$ © -- =&

2

8 AKS SS FFS AFS. EES FT 2

Aa %

Ch. 10. LEVIS MV. 157
ſo intirely, that the Dutch, who were his natural
allies, were become the friends of Spain. The
emperor Leopold ſent tardy fuccouts; but he ſhew-
ed great animoſity. It is ſaid, that when he went
to ſce the troops at Egra, which he had cauſed to
be aſſembled there, he received the communion upon
the road, and immediately after took a crucifix in
his hand, and called upon God to bear witneſs to
the juſtice of his cauſe. There- might have bcen
propriety in ſuch an action in the time of the croi-
ades: but Leopold's prayer did not now prevent
the progreſs of the king of France's arms. -
It immediately appeared how. greatly his marine
was improved. Inſtead of thirty ſbips, which had
been joined the year before to the Engliſh fleet,
now forty were joined, without including the fire-
ſhips, The officers had learned the excellent rules
of fighting practiſed by the Engliſh, by which they
had combated thoſe of their enemies the Dutch.
The duke of York, afterwards James the ſecond,
ws the firſt who invented the art of giving orders
at ſea, by means of the various movements of flags.
Before that time, the French did not know how to
draw up a fleet in order of battle. The whole of
their experience conſiſted in fighting one ſhip againſt
another: they were unſkilled to make many move
in concert, and imitate at ſea the evolutions of land-
amies, whoſe ſeveral diviſions mutually ſuccour
ind ſupport each other. They did what the Ro-
mans had done before them, who, in one year's
une, learned of the Carthaginians the art of naval
combats, and equalled their maſters.

The vice-admiral d'Etree, and Martel his lieu-
Vor. I. oF.

, Ee.

Find

r58. THE AGE OF | G6

tenant, did honour to the military induſy
the French nation, in three ſucceſſive n
gagements, which happened in the month of qu
between the Dutch fleet and that of France ai
England (6). Admiral Ruyter was more admin
than ever in theſe three actions. D'Etree, in lis
letter to Colbert, had theſe words: I would b
« loſt my life to have obtained the glory vid
de Ruyter has acquired.” And d'Etree deſerved q
be thus ſpoken of by Ruyter. The courage an
conduct on both ſides were ſo equal, that the ;
ctory always remained undecided. _

Lewis, who, by the endeavours of Colben
made his people ſeamen, by the induſtry of Vas
ban, rendered the art of war by land ftill mon
perfect. He went in perſon to beſiege Maeſtricht
at the ſame time when theſe three naval engage
ments happened at fea. Maeſtricht was to him
key to the Low Countries, and the United Pit
vinces. The place was ſtrong, and defended ly
an intrepid governor, named Farjaux, ho was4
Frenchman, and had entered into the ſervice d
Spain, and afterwards into that of Holland. The.
gariſon was compoſed of five thouſand men,” Vat
ban, who conducted the ſiege, for the firſt iin
uſed thoſe parallels, invented by the Italian engin
eers in the ſervice of the Turks at the ſiege d
Candy: and he added to them the places of am
which are made in the trenches, to draw up
troops in order of battle, and the better to ralh
them, in caſe of ſallies from the beſieged. Leu
in this ſiege, ſkewed himſelf more exact and labe-
rious than he had been before. By his e ie

{b) The 7. 14. and 21. of June ,

tt 1
0 J * _—
* 4

1
- _—_—
2 * 8 2 P

cb. 10. LEWIS MV. 159
; ured his troops, till then accuſed of a haſty cou-

rage, which was ſoon diſſipated by fatigue, to pa-
tence in labour. een ſurrendered at the end
of eight days (c).

te ſhened a ſeverity which appeared even too
great, in order to ſtrengthen and improve his mi-
tary diſcipline. The prince of Orange, who, to
oppoſe his rapid conqueſts, had only officers with-
out emulation, and foldiers without courage, made
them better by the- rigour of his puniſhments;-
for he cauſed all thoſe who abandoned their poſts
to be hanged. The king alſo uſed chaſtiſements.
A very brave officer, named Dupas, ſurrendered
Nzerdin to the prince of Orange, which was the
firſt time the king loſt a town (d). Indeed, the
prince kept it only four days; but the king did
not regain it till after an engagement which laſted
tre hours; which was fought to avoid a general
aſault upon bad fortifications, which a weak and
ſatiqued gariſon would not have been able to ſu-
lain. The king, being incenſed at the firſt affront
which his arms had received, condemned Dupas
to be led through Utrecht, with a ſhovel in his
ad, and his ſword to be broken. This was an
only, which, perhaps, is unneceſſary with re-
gard to the French officers, who are ſenſible enough
of glory, not to be governed by the fear of ſhame,
ie governors of fortified towns are indeed oblig-
x, by their rules, to ſuſtain three aſſaults; but this

a number of thoſe ys which are ſeldom
doſe

The endeavours of the king the genius of Vau-
(c) June 24. 1673, (4) Sept. 14. 1673.

| P'2

y

—

166 THE AGE Or iis

dan, the ſtrict vigilance of Louvois, the experience
and the great ſkill of Turenne, and the en
activity of the prince of Conde, could not all N
pair the error which had been committed in kee.
ing too many towns, weakening the army, and n
glecting the opportunity of entering Amſterdam,

be prince of Conde in vain endeayoured tops
netrate into the heart of Holland, when overwheln-
ed with waters. Turenne could neither prevent the
junction of Montecuculi and the prince of Orange,
nor hinder the prince of Orange from raking Bonn,
The biſhop of Munſter, who had fworn the deſtry
ction of the States general, was himſelf attacked by
the Dutch (e), |

The parliament of England forced its King N
enter ſeriouſly into negotiations of peace, and ceil
to be the mercenary inſtrument of the grandeut d
France. And now it became neceſſary to abandon
the three provinces of Holland, with as much expe
dition as they had been conquered. But this, hoy-
ever, was not done without their being .ranſomed
The intendant Robert drew out of the ſingle pro
vince of Utrecht ſixteen hundred and fixty-cight
thouſand florins in one year. The French were i
ſuch a hurry to evacuate the country which. we
had taken with ſuch rapidity, that twenty -g
thouſand Dutch priſoners were releaſed at acom
a man. The triumphal arch of the gate of St. Dew
and the other monuments of theſe conquelts, ver
ſcarce finiſhed, when the conqueſts themſelves wt
abandoned. The Hollanders, in the courſe of
invaſion, had the glory to diſpute the enipire of lr
ſea, and the addreſs to tranſport the theatre of be

(e) Nov. 1673. *

*

— —

= tn nn ne. 4 4 Q

r PWT =>

a A Fry =&© = > ta ow pp eo = > =y

cb 10. LEWIS MV. 16: g

war by land out of their own country. Lewis IV.
vas regarded, in Europe, as having been too preci-
ber and preſfumptuousin the ſplendor of la an-
tory triumph. The fruits of this enterprize were a
r
and Holland, united; the being abandoned by
England, and at laſt by Munſter, and even Co-
logne; and the leaving more hatred than admira-
tion of him, in thoſe territories, the conqueſt of |
which he was forced to relinquiſh. _ .

The king alone ſuſtained the efforts of all the
enemies which he had raiſed againſt himſelf, His
power, and the wiſdom of his government, were
yet more conſpicuous, when it became neceſlary for
him to defend himſelf againſt ſo many united
powers, and the greateſt generals, than when he
had forced French Flanders, Franche-Comte, and
ne half of Holland, out of the hands of ences
eſs enemies.

The advantage which an abſolute wonarch, whoſe
finances are well managed, has over other kings,
was more particularly remarkable: he, at one and
the ſame time, cauſed an army of about twenty-three
thouſand men, to march, under Turenne, againſt
the Imperialiſts; and another of forty thouſand,
under Conde, againſt the prince of Orange : a con-
ſderable body of troops was alſo aſſembled upon
the frontiers of Rouſillon; and a fleet, filled with
blllers, was ſent to carry the war againſt the Spa- |
nlards, even as far as Meſſina. He marched him-
kf a ſecond time to make hijaſelf maſter of Franche-
Comte; and he every-where defended himſelf, and
atacked others at the fame time.

NY

= 43

EZ 3.

2

elm.

TIES Et

SFA AKS KS. SLIT.

162: T HE. A GE |; OF C 10.
In this enterprize upon Franche- Comte the
fuperiority of his government appeared. I wy
neceſſary for him to gain to his intereſt, ou
leaſt to render neuter, the Switzers; a people who
are as formidable as they are poor, who are always

armed, jealous to the laſt degree of their liberty,
invincible upon their own frontiers, and who'had
begun already to take umbrage at © ſeeing Lewis
XIV. again in their neighbourhood. The emperor
and Spain ſolicired the thirteen cantons to grant, at
leaſt, a free paſſage to their troops, for the relief of
Francbe-Comte; which, through the negligence
of the Spaniſh miniſtry, had been left without de.
fence. The king, on his ſide, preſſed the Switzer
to refuſe this paſſage. But the Empire and Span
uſing nothing more than arguments andientfeaties
the king with a million of money paid dom, and
a promiſe of ſix hundred thouſand Hvres, deter-
mined the Switzers to do as he deſired; and the
paſſage was refuſed. Lewis, accompanied by his
brother, and the ſon of the great Conde, belieged
Beſancon. The king loved ſieges, underſtood them
perfectly well, and therefore cammitted the care of
the army in the field to Conde and Turenne. hut,
indeed, he never (beſieged a town without being
morally certain to take it. Louvois prepared all
things fo effectually, the troops were ſo well fur-
wia. ed, and Vauban, who conducted almoſt all the
tiezes, was fo great a maſter in the art of taking
towns, that the king's glory was in perfect ſecu-
rity. Vauban directed the attacks at Beſancon, ich
was taken in nine days (V); and, at the end of {ix
weeks, all Fronche-Comte was ſubjetted tothe

? , 1,6 20, TOTS

F F. FE

"

0,

the
Was
1
tho
.
ty,
had
wi
ror
At
2
ace
te
ers
an
05
nd
er
he
his
ed
em
of
ut,
19
al
I-
he
ng
Us
ch
ix
be

* *
# \ * 5
* .

Dir

king: after which it hath-continued under the do-
nn
ir; and remains as a monument of the weakneſs of
he Auſtran-Spaniſh miniſtry, Np .
that of Lewis XIV. 8

c HAT TEN N.
The fine campaign, and death of Marſhal

2 Turenne.

HILE the Ce ks
Franche-Comte, with that facility and eclat
which (till attended upon his fortune; Turenne,
who only defended the frontiers on the fide of the
Rhine, diſplayed every thing that is greateſt, and
moſt conſummate, in the art of war. Men ſhew
their abilities by the difficulties they ſurmount; and
it was this which gained Turenne ſo high a reputa-
tion in this campaign.

He, at firſt, made a us and rapid march,
paſſed the Rhine at Philipſbourg (a), marched all
night to Sintzheim, forced that place, and, at the
lame time, attacked and defeated Caprara, the em-
peror's general, and the old duke of Lorrain, Charles
IV. who had ſpent all his life in loſing his territo-
ries, and raiſing troops, and who had lately united
his little army with part of the emperor's. Tu-
renne, after having defeated him, purfued him, and
again defeated his cavalry at Ladimbourg (); from
vhence he haſtened to the prince de Bournonville,

(4a) June 1614. (b) July 1674.

l "RATS * * n
P a 4

164 THE AGE O "=

another general of the Imperialiſts, who only
for freſh troops to open himſelf a paſſage into 4
face. - Turenne prevented the junction of heb

troops, attacked Bournonville, and forced him

quit the field of battle (c). |

The empire aſſembled all its forces againſt kin
ſeventy thouſand Germans entered Alſace, where
they beſieged Briſſac and Philipſbourg. Turene
had not more than twenty thouſand effective men a
moſt. The prince of Conde ſent him a ſmall body
of cavalry from Flanders; after which he traverſe
vaſt mountains covered with ſnow, and, on a ſud
den, appeared in upper Alſace, in the midſt of the
enemy's quarters, who imagined he was quiet is
Lorrain, and thought the campaign was at an end
He defeated thoſe troops which oppoſed him a
Mulhauſen (d), and took two thouſand priſanem
He then marched to Colmar, where the clecdor of
Brandenbourg, who was called the grand eleftor, and
was then general of the Imperial armies, had tis
quarters. He arrived juſt at the time when this
prince and the other generals were ſitting down to
table; ſo that they had only juſt time to elcapy,
and the field became covered with fugitives.

Tureane, who thought he had done nothing, ſo
long as there remained any thing to do, poſted
himſelf near Turkheim (e), in order to attack a part
of the enemy's infantry. The advantageous fitw-
tion of the poſt which he had choſen rendered his
victory certain: he defeated this infantry ; and, at
laſt, this whole army of ſeventy thouſand men ws
vanquiſhed and diſperſed even without any cout
derable engagement. Alſace remained to the king
(c) October 2674. (A) Dec. 1674. (e) Jai. $+ 2915

„

S. DSE FSC SB. a 8 BME A

Gn. E 7 oy.

nd the Imperial generals were compelled 46 repaſ
the Rhine. |
411 theſe ſucreſſiveaftions, purfied with fach
perſeverance, conducted with ſo much art, and
executed with ſo great expedition, were equally ad-
mired by the French and the enemy. The glory
of Turenne was even increaſed, when it was known,
that every thing be had done, in this campaign,
had been againſt the will of the court, and con-
trary to the repeated orders ſent by Louvois in the
king's name. To reſiſt the all powerful Louvois,
and be anſwerable for the confequence, notwith-
ſanding the exclamations of the court, the orders
of the king, and the hatred of the miniſter, was not
CN OE On
the leaſt exploit of the campaign.
It muſt be confeſſed, that thoſe, whole humaniity
was ſuperior to their eſteem of military exploits, la-
mented the glory of this campaign. It was cele-
brated as much through the miſeries of the people,
25 the expeditions of Turenne. After the battle of
Sintzheim, he put the Palatinate, which was a fine
and fertile country, full of towns and vil-
lages, to fire and ſword. The elector Palatine,
from the top of his caſtle at Manheim, beheld two
towns, and five-and-twenty villages in flames; a
hefiacte wich" ar Shaw tacked Lakes Bl
and deſpair, and made him challenge Turenne to
lingle combat, by a letter which be ſent to him,
hlled with reproaches. Turenne having ſent this
letter to the king, who commanded him not to ac-
cept the challenge, he anſwered the elector's com-
plaints and defiance, only by a vague and inſignifi-
ant compliment, It was the ſtile and manner of

* py * b 7
- o % 7 —
e A 7
3 *

166 THE AGE OF 1

4 , * + \ * &
ry - * %Y
* 1 4
: 70
=

_=

Turenne always to expreſs himſelf with moderation
and ambiguity.

He, with the ſame indifference, deltroyed'tt

- ovens, and laid waſte part of the 'country»of Al

face, to prevent the enemy from ſubſiſting. He

afterwards permitted his cavalry to ravage Lorain,
where they committed ſuch diſorders, that the in-

tendant, who, on his ſide, ruined. Lorrain with his

pen, frequently wrote and ſent to him to put atop

to theſe exceſſes, Turenne always coldly replied;
J will ſend him an anſwer at a proper time. He n-
ther choſe to be called the father of the- ſoldiers,
who were entruſted to him, than of the people;
who, according to the laws of war, are always
crificed to them. All the miſchief done by him ap-
peared neceſſary: his glory covered every thing:
and, beſides, the ſeventy thouſand Germans, which
he had prevented from penetrating into France,

would have committed a great deal more miſchief

there than he had done in Allace, Lau, and the
Palatinate.
The prince of Conde, on his ſide, fought a battle

in Flanders, which was much more bloody than all”

theſe actions of the viſcount de Turenne, but v
leſs ſucceſsful, and leſs deciſive; either becauſe the
ſituation of the places was leſs favourable to him,
or becauſe he had not taken his meaſures ſo well;

or rather, becauſe he had abler generals, and better

troops, to oppoſe. This battle was that of Senef
The marquis de Feuquieres is for having It called
only a combat; becauſe the action was not between
two armies regularly drawn up, and becauſe all f

corps did not act. eren

— OY

=> > S. S 37 S A Q © &- &- B {3

4 1, EEwas mn” iy
— lin alienate
laly drawn up, all the little corps of which ſhould

f an action which always determines its name.
The prince of Conde was to keep the field with
about forty-five thouſand men, againſt the prince of
Orange, who had ſixty thouſand.” He waited for
the enemy's army to paſs a defile at Senef, near
Mons; attacked part of the rear, compoſed of Spa-
viards; and gained a great advantage. The prince
of Orange was blamed for not having taken a ſuffi-
cent precaution in the paſſage of the defile; but
the manner in which he remedied the diſorder was
zdmired; and Conde was blamed for renewing the
combat afterwards, againſt enemies who were too
ſecurely intrenched, The engagement was renewed

lzed their courage, and their preſence of mind.
Of all the battles fought by the great Conde, he
expoſed his own life and the lives of his ſoldiers
more upon this occaſion than any other. He had
tice horſes killed under him; and was deſirous, after
liree bloody attacks, to hazard a fourth. It ſeemed,
lzys an officer who was preſent, as if the prince of

cxtraordigary in this action is, that the troops on

r e Woe 9 7: SE 8 T0 OE EO

(ſts, being ſeized with a panic terror, took to flight
i the night; and the next day the two armies re-
lred, each on its own ſide, neither of them having
fined the field of battle, or the victory, and both
qully weakened and vanguiſhed. There were near
ben thouſand killed, and five thouſand taken pri-

act, would be only a combat. It is the importance

three ſeveral times. The two generals, in this con-
ſuſon of errors, and great actions, equally ſigna-

Conde alone was deſirous of fighting. What is moſt

both ſides after the bloodieſt and moſt obſtinate con-

-. e a \ tt * * k = *
„ " 1 0 PSY
r + tt : : * r
a a *

= =

x68 THE AGE OF | Wn,
ſoners, on the ſide of the French; and the ks o
the enemy was nearly the ſame. So: much blood
ſhed, without any advantage, prevented both a
mies from undertaking any thing conſiderable; ye
it was of ſuch conſequence for the prince of Orange
to give reputation to his arms, that, to make-it he
lieved he had gained the victory, he belieged Oude
narde: but the prince of Conde proved he had nat
loſt the battle, by cauſing the ſiege to be inumedi
ately raiſed, and by purſuing the prince of Orange.

Both France and the allies, upon this occaſion, ob-
ſerved the vain ceremony of thankſgiving to heaven
for a victory which neither of them had obtained,
This practice has been introduced, to encourage the
people, whom it is always neceſſary to deceive.

Turenne, in Germany, with a ſmall army, cont
nued thoſe progreſſes which were the effect of lis
genius. The council of Vienna, no longer daring

to truſt the fortune of the empire to princes wio f
had but ill defended it, again placed, at the bend d il f.
its armies, Montecuculi, who had defeated tle By .
Turks in the battle of St. Gothard; and he n n
ſpite of Turenne and Conde, had joined the prin np
of Orange, and ſtopped the ſucceſſes of Lewis By .
XIV. after his conqueſt of three provinces of Hor f 5.

It has been remarked, that the greateſt genera d uh
the empire have frequently been Italians, Italy, in in BN ..
declenſion and ſlavery, ſtil produces men, who fie dot!
quently revive the rememberance of what ſhe was the
old. Montecuculi was the only man worthy to be ..
oppoſed againſt Turenne. They had both reduced 22

war into an art. They ſpent four months in fo-
lowing and obſerving each other in delt mache

*
"Tn

44

—
_
#

283 5 = A —a

EZ. LFS SAE.

B Ut
8. =,

er

01 LEWIS v. 165

and encampments; which were more « spplanded than
nictories both by the officers of France and the Em-
fire. Fach of them penetrated the other's deligns, by
what he would himſelf have done in the ſame ſitua-
on; and they were never deceived. They oppoſed
each other with patience, ſtratagem, and activity;
and were at laſt upon the point of coming to an
engagement and ſtaking their reputations upon the
hazard of a battle, near the village of  Saltzbach ;
when Turenne, in going to chooſe a place whereon
to erect a battery, was killed by a cannon-ſhot (7).

No one is ignorant of the circumſtances of his death:
but we cannot here refrain a review of the principal
of them, for the ſame reaſon that they are ſtill
alked of every day. It ſeems as if one could not
too often repeat, that the ſame bullet which Killed
tim, having ſhot off the arm of Saint Hilaire, lieu-
tenant-general of the artillery, his ſon came and be-
mailed his misfortune with many tears: but the fa-
ther looking towards Turenne, ſaid; It is not I,
but that great man who ſhould be 7 7 Theſe
words may be compared with the moſt heroic ſay-
ings recorded in all hiſtory ; and, are the beſt elogy
that could be beſtowed upon Turenne. It is uncom-
non under a deſpotic government, where people
re actuated only by their priyate intereſts, for thoſe
vho have ſerved their country, to die regretted by
de ptblic. Nevertheleſs, Turenne was lamented
both by the ſoldiers and people; and Louvois was
te only one who rejoiced at his death. The honours
vtich the king ordered to be paid to his memory,
ve known to every one; and that he Was interred

| uly 2
vote OJ 74k a

A **
i}

170 THE-AGE oF A

at Saint Denis, in the ſame manner as the conſtabb
du Gueſclin, above whom he was eleyated by the
voice of the pablic, as rued 33 the age of Teas
e to the age of the conſtable,”
Turenne had not always been fucceſiful l in hi
wars: he had been defeated at Mariendal, Retel
and Cambray: he had alſo committed errors, and
was himſelf ſo great a man as to confeſs them, He
never made great and celebrated conqueſts, nar
ever gained thoſe great and important victoties by
which nations are ſubjected: but having always re-
paired his defeats, and done a great deal with
little, he was regarded as the, greateſt general in
Europe, at a time when the art of war was more
ſtudied and better underſtood- than ever, More-
over, though he was reproached for his infidelity
in the wars of the Fronde; though at the age of
near ſixty years, love made him reveal the Ceres
of the ſtate; and though he had exerciſed cruelits
in the Palatinate, which did not appear neceſſary;
yet he had always the happineſs to preſerve the re-
putation of an honeſt, wiſe, and moderate man;
becauſe his virtues, and his great abilities, Wich
were peculiar to himſelf, made thoſe errors and
weakneſſes pardonable in him, which he had in com-
mon with the reſt of mankind. If he could be com.
pared to any one, we preſume, that, among all the vera
generals of preceding ages, Gonzalyo de Condon,
ſurnamed the great general, is the man whom be
moſt reſembled.

He was born a Calviniſt, a changed that re
gion for the catholic, in 1 668. no proteſtant, 0
even no philoſopher imagined, that perſuaſion alone
had made that change in a warrior, or in 4

nn. LEWIS N 171

of fifry years of age, who, at that very time, had his
niſtreſſes. It was well known that Lewis XIV. on
waking bim marſhal-general of his armies, uſed this
expreſſion mentioned in the letters of Peliſſon and
dſewhere; I wiſh you would oblige me to do fome-
bing more for you. Theſe words (according to them)
night in time work a converſion, and the office of
conſtable might tempt an ambitious mind. It is poſ-
ſble, however, that this converſion was ſincere, It
fequently happens, that policy, ambition, the weak-
reſſes of love, and religious ſentiments, meet toge-
ther in the human heart. The Catholics, who tri-
umphed on this change, did not believe the great
foul of Turenne capable of diſſimulation.

What happened in Alface, immediately after his
&:th, rendered the loſs of him ſtill more ſenſibly
kt, Montecuculi, who, by the {kill of the French
general, had been kept three whole months on the
other ſide of the Rhine, paſſed that river the mo-
nent he was informed he had no longer Turenne
to fear, He fell upon a part of the army, which
kad not yet recovered its conſternation on the loſs
> Turenne, under the command of Lorges and
Yzuban, two lieutenant-generals, who were at va-
fance with each other; and though the troops made
Lygorous defence, they could not prevent the Im-
eraliſts from penetrating into Alſace; which Tu-
cane had always hindered them from entering.
The army not only wanted a general to command
b but one alſo who might repair the recent de-
ſat of the marſhal de Crequi, a man of an en-
kprilng courage, capable of the greateſt and
be raſheſt enterprizes, and dangerous to his coun-

Q 2

R N * 2

F FE AFA AKI ISE

_

S a &

H

122 THE AGE OF 4

y, as well as to the enemy. He hal hen
vanquiſhed, through his own miſconduc, at Con-
ſarbruck. A body of twenty thouſand, Germans
who laid ſiege to Treves, defeated, and cut to pieces
the little army of Crequi; and he with difficulty ef
caped, g the fourth time: after which, he haſtene
through new perils, to throw himſelf into Trers;
which he defended with his courage, when he ought
rather to have {1 uccoured it by his prudence, He
was for burying himſelf under the ruins of the
place; for after the breach was practicable, he il
perſiſted in its defence. But the gariſon quitiniel
and captain Bois-jourdan, at the head of them, went
to capitulate at the breach. A baſe action was.never
before ſo audaciouſly committed. He threatened
the marſhal with death, if he refuſed to Gon the
treaty : but Crequi, with ſome officers/who conti
nued faithful to him, retired into the church, and
rather choſe to be taken at diſcretion, than yg
pitulate.

To replace the men which France had wy in 90

many ſieges and battles, Lewis XIV. wag adviſed
not to rely, as uſual, upon the reervits out of de
militia, but to cauſe the ban and arriere-ban to
march.

By an ancient cuſtom, which i is now diſuſed, the
polleſſors of fiefs were obliged to go to the wah
at their own expence, for the ſervice of their ſove-
reign lord, and to continue in arms a certain number
of days, In this ſervice conſiſted. the greateſt part
of the laws of the nations of Europe, when in!
tate of barbarity: but now all things are changed;
and the moſt inconſiderable ſtate raiſes troops, whic

(Y Auguſt 12. 1675.

A ETSY E@ASSEYI_MPSIFTPFrOcHtSISLSEEBCEEHHRn FF TU qd >

—
© »
-

BFF AKA

db. 1. LEWIS MV. 173

r conſtattly hefe in pa, and are formed 1 into re ·
guar diſciplined pe. „ bones 4

\ Lewis: XIII. once —— the nobleſſe of kis
4 The nobleſſe, being aſſembled ne caſe)
marched under the command of the marquis, after-
wards the marſhal de Rochefort, to the frontiers
of Flanders, and afterwards upon thoſe of Ger-
many: but this corps was neither conſiderable nor
uſeful, nor could be rendered ſo.” Thoſe gentle-
men, who loved war, and were capable of the ſer-
rice, were already officers in the army: thoſe
whom age or diſguſt confined, never quitted their
abodes ; and the others, whoſe ordinary occupation
was the cultivation of their eſtates, went, againſt
their inclination, to the number of about four thou-
ſand, Nothing could leſs reſemble a military corps:
being all mounted and armed differently, without
experience, and without diſcipline, unable and un-
viling to do regular ſervice, they only cauſed. con-
fulon, and we were diſguſted with them for ever,
Theſe were the laſt traces we have ſeen in our re-
gular troops, of that ancient chivalry, which for-
merly compoſed theſe troops, who, with the cou-
tage natural to the nation, nevesendde war fas
ngbt manner.

Turenne being dead, Crequi defeated, and a
piſoner, Treves taken, and Montecuculi raiſing
contributions in Alſace; the king concluded the
prince of Conde could alone reanimate the troops,
which were diſcouraged by the death of Turenne.
Conde therefore left the marſhal de Luxembourg in
Flanders there to ſupport the fortune of DT

23

174 THE AGE OF Gy
went to ſtop the progreſs of Montecuculi;
patience now appeared as great as his\impetuaſiy
had done at Senef. His genius, which was e
to every thing, diſplayed the ſame art as Tureme
By two encampments he ſtopped the progreſs o
the German troops, and forced Montecucuſ g
raiſe the ſieges of Hanau and Saverne. After thi
campaign, which was leſs brilliant than that of &.
nef, but more eſteemed, the prince of Conde ceaſal
to appear in the wars. He was deſirous to have
his ſon command, and offered to be his counſellor; I
but the king did not chooſe to have either young |
men or. princes to be his generals: and had, even
with difficulty, | prevailed on himſelf to accept the
ſervice of Conde himſelf. Louyois's jealouſy of Tu /
renne had contributed as much as the name of
Conde, to place him at the head of the armies. Wl”
The prince retired to Chantilli, from whence he Wl *'
very rarely came to Verſailles, to behold his glory U
eclipſed, in a place where the courtier never regard il *
any thing but favour. He paſſed the remainder Wil *

4 WW ooo 2 — e > —
- - uw diets” A 3 — => -

of his days, tormented with the gout, relieving fo
the ſeverity of his pains, and employing the 4 Will ©
ſure of his retreat, in the converſation: of men 4

of genius of all kinds, with which France then
abounded. He was worthy of their converſation; n
| as he was not unacquainted with any of thole arts -
| | | or ſciences in which they ſhined. He continued 10 '
| be admired even in his retreat: but, at laſh tat BY
devouring fire, which, in his youth, had made a
bim an hero, impetuous and full of paſſions, har: %

ing conſumed the ſtrength of his body, which was
naturally rather agile than robuſt, he: decline be,
fore his time; and the ſtrength of his mind de.

%

b 12. LE WIS V. | 175

g with that of We mains
Fr the great Conde, during the two laſt;
3 s of his life: he: died in i 690. and Monte-
culi retired from the ſervice of the emperor,
the ſame time when eee
1 n of France. 24:3 10411 IN

- 4 * =
yy 1 — | 4 1038 401 3 I
- —

- © 4
a" 11

—

\ ” *
: +. 4%

ena r EA xt.

From the death of Turenne to the Mis *
Nimegen, in 1678. cls:

| „ anne 1
FTER the death of Tonne and the retreat
A of the prince of Conde, the king continued
the war againſt the Empire, Spain, and Holland,
with as much ſucceſs as before. He was ſerved
by officers, who had formed themſelyes under theſe
two great men. He had Louvois, who was of
greater ſervice to him than a general; becauſe his
foreſight enabled the generals ro undertake what»
erer they had a mind. The troops, which had long
deen victorious, continued to be animated by the
lame ſpirit, which the preſence of a king, who was
conſtantly ſucceſsful, always inſpires. 42
In the courſe of this war, he, in perſon, took
Conde (a), Bouchain, (6) Valenciennes, (c) and Cam-
ray (d). He was accuſed at the ſiege of Bouchain,
of being afraid to give battle to the prince of Orange,
who appeared at the head of fifty thouſand men,
and attempted to throw fuccours into the place: and
(a) April 26. 1676. (2) May 2. m (c) Mar. 27.
16%. (4) April 3. 1677. 5

FA AK FSA FAT

176 T. H E AGE OF E *

dhe prince of Orange ws alſo reproathed: for not
giving battle to Lewis MV. when he Mig haw
done it: for ſuch is the fate of kings, and of gene-
rals; chat they are always blamed both for whatthey
do, and for what they do not do: but neither the
king nor the prince of Orange were blameable; The
prince did not give battle though he wiſhed todo it,
becauſe Montery, governor of the Low Countrie,

who was in the army, wo de expoſe. his go-
vernment to the hazard of e event: and

— —
In regard to Valenciennes, it was taken by al-
fault, through one of thoſe ſingular: events which
eharafterize he prunes CI French
nation.
| The lung, in the extrying en of Gs g fol
with him his brother, and five marſhals of France;
which were d Humieres, Schomberg, Ia Feuillade,
Luxembourg, and' de Lorges. The marſhals had
each of them their day of command by turns. Al
the operations were directed by Vauban.
They had not as yet taken any of the outworks
of the place. The firſt thing neceſſary to be done,
was to attack two half-moons ; behind which there
was alſo a greatcrown-work, paliſaded, ſtrengthened
with a row of pointed takes, and ſurrounded by 1
ditch, with ſeveral croſs-ways. In this crown
work there was alſo another work, furrounded dy
another ditch. After the taking of all theſe in.
trenchments, there was a branch of the Scheld to
get over, and then another work, called a pate:
behind which ran the great ſtream ofthe Schell

zz x = aa a. a» © a=

—
—
S.

ES STERLRSAaSE) EESSE LE Fit tr RAISES

Ch, 12. LEWIS XIV. 177

which was deep and rapid, and ſerved as a ditch to
he wall. Finally, the wall. itſelf was defended by
large ramparts; the works in general covered with
annon; and the gariſon conſiſting of three thouſand

men, who were prepared with every thing n
to make a long defence.

The king heb 6 Gesel war ber the n
the outworks. It was uſual always to make - theſe
attacks in the night, in order to approach the enemy
vithout being perceived, and to ſpare the blood of
the ſoldiers. Vauban propoſed to make this attack
in the day- time: but all the marſhals of France diſ-
approved this propoſal; and Louvois condemned it
ao: nevertheleſs, Vauban perſiſted in it; with the
confidence of a man who is certain of the reaſon-
ableneſs of what he advances, ©« You are deſirous,
aid he, “ to ſpare the blood of the ſoldiers: you
« will do this moſt effectually by making the attack
"in the day-time, when they may fight without
( confuſion and diſorder, and without any danger
« of their firing upon one another; which happens
but too often in the night. You deſire alſo to
* ſurpriſe the enemy, who always expect, and are
prepared for, our attacks in the night: we ſhould
therefore effectually ſurpriſe them by making
* the attack in the morning with our freſh troops,
* after theirs have been fatigued by watching in
* the night. And, belides, if, among our troops,
© there ſhould chance to be ſome whole courage is
* but inconſiderable, the night fayours their timi-
* ity; but, in the day, the eye of the monarch
9 courage, and raiſe em dbone chan

des.“ | 119: batt! 4

The king was perſuaded by theſe arguments uf

178 THE AGE OF @yp
Vauban, though they were contrary to the opinion
of Louvois, and five marſhals of France.
At nine in the morning, the two companies of
muſqueteers, one hundred grenadeers, à battalion
of the guards, and one of the regiment of Picardy,
mounted, on all ſides, upon this great eos
work. Their orders were only to lodge themſehes
in it; to do which was conſidered as a great deal:
but ſome of the black muſqueteers having found
means to penetrate by a ſmall by-path as far as the
interior intrenchment within this work, they imme
diately made themſelves maſters of it. The gy
muſqueteers got into it at the fame time another
way, and were followed by the battalions of the
guards. The beſieged were purſued, and feveral of
them killed; and the muſqueteers letting down the
draw-bridge, which joined this work to the other,
they followed the enemy from one intrenchment
to another, both over the little branch and grand
ſtream of the Scheld ; fo that the muſqueteers were
got into the city, and the guards very near being ſo,
before the king knew whether they had taken the
firſt work they had been ordered to attack.
But this is not what appears the moſt extraord-
nary in this action. It was to be apprehended, that
a company of young muſqueteers, fluſhed with the
ardour of ſucceſs, would fall indiſcriminately upon
the gariſon and inhabitants, which they might meet
in the ſtreets; and that either they would themſelves
be overpowered, or the city be plandered by them:
but theſe young men, being commanded by 2 cr.
net, named Moiſſac, ranged theniſelves in onde
behind ſome carts; and while the other troops we
coming up, and forming themſelves without Peer

QT _D_NCMNTqRR_NNDNLLFEMHHAELET.TS

Ch. 12. _ E-W I'S NA. 179

cipitation- Or diſorder, others of the muſqueteers
by their fire, they protected thoſe who were in the
freets: and thus every thing was done with great
regularity : hoſtages were given on both ſides; the
town-council aſſembled ; and deputies were ſent to
the king: and all this was done without plunder-
ing, confuſion, or faults of any kind, The king
made the gariſon priſoners of war; and entered
Valenciennes, aſtoniſhed at being the maſter of it.
The ſingularity of this aftion is what has engaged
vs in this detail. e $562.

He had alſo the glory of taking Ghent (e) in
four days, and Ypres ( in ſeven. Theſe were the
zfions which he atchieved himſelf; and his ſuc-
ceſſes by his generals were ſtill greater. 1
Indeed, the marſhal duke de Luxembourg, at
irſt, ſuffered Philipſbourg to be taken in his ſight;
endeavouring in vain to ſuccour it with an army
of fifty thouſand men. The general, who took
Plplbourg, was Charles V. the new duke of
Lorain, the heir of his uncle Charles IV. and, like
im, diveſted of his territories. He had all the
rod qualities of his unfortunate uncle, without his
als. He long commanded the Imperial armies
at glory; but, notwithſtanding the taking of
alpſbourg, and though he was at the head of
iy thouſand men, he was never able to regain
ſſeion of his territories. He, in vain, diſplayed
on his ſtandards the words, Aut nunc, aut nun-
AM; nau, or never: for the marſhal de Crequi,
xg releaſed from his impriſonment, and become
are prudent by his defeat at Conſarbruck, con-
(e) Mlarch 9. 1 . March ag. 1678.

FREAREEBA ReaFEA5 FEST s £

rdi-
hat
the
Jon
ect
ves
M
N-

——-

Luxembourg and d'Humieres commanded the i.

180 THE AGE OF @ mn,
ſtantly baffled all his attempts to enter Lori
He defeated him in the little combat of Kokerſbey
in Alſace (g). He harraffed and fatigued him con
nually; took Fribourg (5) in his fight, and, ſome tine
after, again defeated a detachment of his A
Rheinfeld (1). He paſſed the river Kim in Hs pre.
ſence, purſued him towards Offembourgh; and -
tacked/ him in his retreat; and, having immediate.
Iy after taken the fort of Kehl, ſword. in hand, he
went to burn the bridge of Straſpourgh, by with
that city, which was ſtill free, had ſo oſten given 2
paſſage to the Imperial arms. Thus the marſhal de
Crequi repaired the temerity of one day, by a long
courſe of fucceſs, due only to his prudence; and,
if he had lived, would, perhaps, have acquired
reputation equal to that of Tarenne,
The prince of Orange was not more fortunate
than the duke of Lorrain : he was not only forcel
to raiſe the ſiege of Maeſtricht and Charleroi, but,
after having ſeen Conde; Bouchain, and Valen-
ciennes, ſubjected to the power of Lewis XIV. he,
in endeavouring to ſuccour St. Omer, loſt the battle
of Montcaſſel, againſt Monſieur. ' The marſhals de

S E. = = Q PSS FSS E „ 8. RE,

my under Monſieur; and it is faid, that an error,
committed by the prince of Orange, joined to a ju-
dicious movement made by Luxembourg, were
what gained the victory. Monſieur began the at.
tack with a courage and preſence of mind, whict
were not in the leaſt expected in a prince ſo effem-
nate as he was. A greater example was never gien,
to prove that courage is not incompatible with del-
cacy and ſoftneſs: for the prince, who was almoſt

(g) OR. 7. 1677, (b) Nov. 14. 1677. (4) July 16%

.

Ch. 12. LEWIS Mv. ö 181
always dreſſed like a woman, who had che inclin.
ez 1 that ſex, who lay in che ſame night · eaps
dich they wear, and Who painted and patched as
i WY they do; upon this occaſion, behaved like a
neral,-and a 2 ſoldier.” ie is fd, the king his'brother
was ſomewhat jealous: of his glory. It is certain,
ke aid but little to him on occaſion of his victory;
and eren did not go to look at the field of battle,
though he was juſt by it ((). Some of Monſieur's
ſervants, who were more penetrating than the others,
upon this occaſion, told him, that he would never
more command the army: and ny, were not mi-
ſtaken in their prediction.

The taking of ſo many nouns, and the n
of {© many battles in Flanders, and in Germany,
were not the only ſucceſſes of Lewis XIV. in this
war, The marſhal de Navailles defeated the Spa-
niards in the Lampourdan ; at the foot of the Wader,
and they were attacked even in Sicily,' '

Sicily, ever ſince the ũme of the tyrants of Syra-
eaſe, under whom it had at leaſt been conſidered as
ſomething in the ang has always been under the
dominion of foreigners: they have beeti ſucceſſively
ſubjeCted to the — me Vandals, the Arabs,
the Normans under valſalage to the popes, the
French, the Germans; and the Spuniards; and they
tare almoſt always hated their maſters; revolted
from them, without making any laudable efforts
to regain their liberty; and continually” en =
Gtions only to exchange their fetrers, - N

The magiſtrates of Meſſina had ee ng the
ms of civil-war againſt their governors, 9 and had

Much rr. ic ff..

— Ry: + wer nd d

Tau. I.

* oth WY
*

182 THE AGE or Ph

called France to their aſſiſtance, | Their pom wa
blocked up by a Spaniſh fleet; and (hey won es
duced to the extremities of famine,”
T The chevalier de Valbelle came firſt to thi wie
with a few frigates; with which he ventured throw
the Spaniſh fleet, and brought proviſions, troops,
and arms, into Meſſina. After, him 2 2
Vivonne arrived, with ſeven men of war of fixy
guns, two of eighty, and ſeveral fireſhips; ith
which, he defeated the enemy's r and entered
Meſſina in triumph (0).
Spain, for the defence of Sicily, w was now force
to implore the aſſiſtance of her ancient enemies the
Dutch, who were always regarded as the maſters of
the ſea. Ruyter ſailed with ſuccours from the: Zuy-
derzee, through the ſtreights; and, to twenty Spe-
niſh veſſels, joined twenty-three large ſhips of war.
And now the French, who formerly, in conjun-
ction with the Englith, had not been able to defeat
the fleets of Holland alone, gained alone the victory
over the united fleets of Spain and the republic (n)
The duke de Vivonne being obliged to continue in
Meſſina, to pacify the people, who were already di.
ſatisfied with their defenders, ſuffered this battle to
be fought by Duquene, lieutenant general of the n4-
val forces: he was a man as ſingular as Ruyter, and
who, like him, had obtained command by force of
merit; but he had not as yet commanded fleet,
and had hitherto lgnalized Han
mander of a privateer than an admiral. But who-
ever once. gets the command, having the geg
quiſite in his art, will paſs with rapidity,, and
out difficulty, from the moſt inconſiderable to the

February 9. 1675, (n. Jan. f. 1676.

r *

= S „ FN FA FFF FFF TTR

l. 12. LEVIS XV. 183
geateſt things, Duquene appeared a great com-
mander even againſt Ruyter : for it was certainly
hewing himſelf ſuch to gain only an inconſiderable
advantage over this Hollander. He gave battle a
ſecond time to the two fleets of the enemy near
gouſta; wherein Ruyter received a wound, which
put an end to his glorious life (). He is one of
thoſe men, whoſe memory is ſtill held in the great-
et veneration in Holland. He had, at firſt, been no-
thing more than a common ſhip or cabin-boy; and
for this he was the more to be reſpected: nor is the
ume of the princes of Naſſau held in greater eſtima-
ton than his. The council of Spain conferred upon
tim the title and patent of a duke; a dignity which
ws foreign and frivolous to a republican, But
ticle patents did not arrive till after his death; and
te children of Ruyter, who were worthy of their
kther, refuſed that title; the acquiſition of which
b ſo ardently defired in monarchies, but which is
nt preferable to the title of a good citizen.
Duquene, the Ruyter of France, attacked the
ro fleets a third time after the death of the Dutch
amiral, and funk, burnt, and took, ſeveral of their
lips. The marſhal duke de Vivonne had the
ammand in chief in this engagement; but it was
Iuquene, nevertheleſs, who obtained the victory.
Lurope, with aſtoniſhment, beheld France become,
m 2 ſudden, as formidable by fea as at land. But,
Wceed, theſe armaments, and theſe victories, only
Ted to alarm the nations round. The king of
gland, who had commenced the war for the in-
gelt of France, was at laſt upon the point of en-
% March 12. 1676.

g-. ARF Aa. F K KBE

1
S

ER

R 2

* 4
4
5

A

194 THE AGE OF win

tering into a Jeague with the prince of Orange, who
had eſpouſed his piece. The glory, acquired in &
aly, was the price of too great treaſutes andthe
French, at laſt, evacuated Meſſina at the very time
when it was generally believed they would "make
themſelves maſters of the whole iſland. Lewis XIV.
was highly blamed for. having commenced enter-
prizes in this war, without carrying them through;
and for having abandoned Meſſina, as well as Hd
land, after the acquiſition of uſeleſs victories.

. However, to have no other misfortune than
that of not preſerving all his conqueſts, was cr-
tainly to be very formidable. His enemies, in
every part of Europe, felt the extent of his power.
The war in Sicily had coſt him much leſs than it
had coſt Spain, which was exhauſted and-defeated
in all places. He raiſed new enemies againſt the
houſe of Auſtria : he fomented the troubles in Hur
gary; and his embaſſadors at the Otroman Port
were earaeſt in their endeavours to make the Turn
carry the war into Germany, notwithſtanding i
ſhoutd himfelf, to fave appearances, ſend ſome ſuc
cours againſt the Turks, whom policy excited hin
to draw into the empire. He. was alone ſupend
to all his enemies: for Sweden, which was his on
ally, was engaged in nothing but an aniuceess
war againſt the elector of Brandenbourg. This ©
or, who was the father of the firſt king of Fruft
began to give to his country a power and Way:
which has ſince been greatly increaſed; and be, 2
that time, deprived the Swedes of Pomerann. *
is remarkable, that, in the courſe of this war, ct
ferences for a peace were almoſt always op; *
firſt at Cologne, by the ineffectual mediation ©

w

a 1B SERENE ET

oe a2” ES ORG gES PF greg F

2 5 *
24 - 5 *

ated
the
Jun-
Port
uris
g be
(ac
Tim
ener
only

ch. 11 LEWIS XIV. 185

gueden; and afterwards at Nimegen, by that of
England. But the Engliſh mediation was a cere-

mony almoſt as vain as the pope's arbitration in the
peace of Aix-la-Chapelle; for Lewis XIV. was the
only real arbitrator, He made his propoſals on the
gth of April 167 8. in the midſt of his conqueſts,
and gave his enemies till the tenth of May, to ac-
cept of them. He alſo granted a farther time of fix

weeks to the States ANPUEREI In 5 3nd
ed it of him.

He ambicion was nc fttegitriatant nmbadalicls
Lond. This republic had been ſo fortunate, or ſo
cunning, as no longer to appear but as an auxiliary
in 2 war, which had been commenced for ber de-
frution, The empire and Spain, who at firſt had
qly been auxiliaries, at laſt became the principal
parties concerned.

The king, in the conditions which he impoſed,
froured the commerce of the Dutch: he reſtored
to them Maeſtricht, and alſo gave up ſome towns
to we Spaniards, which: were to ſerve as a barrier
vo te United Provinces; ſuch as Charleroi, Cour-
ti, Oudenarde, Ath, Ghent and Limbourg: but
& reſerved Bouchain, Conde, Ypres, Valenciennes,
(zmbrai, Maubeuge, Aire, Saint Omer, Caſſel,
Carlemont, Popering, Baillenl, &c. which, all
wgetner, made a confiderable part of Flanders:
a to which he alſo added Franche-Comte, which
i conquered twice; and theſe might be conſidered

* ſufncient compenſation for the toil and expence
the war.

from the Empire he only defired Fribourg or
Fipbourg, and left the choice io the 'emperor..
R 3

786 THE AGE OF a
He cauſed the two brothers Furſtemberg to be mw
ſtated in their eſtates, and the biſhopric of
bourg, of which they had been deprived" bythe
emperor, and one of them impriſoned. e
which had always continued firmly attached 9
France, was to reap great advantages by this eat
in particular, a part of Pomerania, which the had
toſt, was to be ceded by the cr
to qa king of Sweden.

In regard to Lorrain, he offered to re-eſtabli
the new duke Charles V. therein: but he inſiſted on
remaining maſter of Nancy, and all the great roads,

Theſe conditions, though prefcribed with the
haughtineſs of a conqueror, were not however, ſo
unreaſonable as to make his enemies deſperate, and
compel them, as a laſt effort, to reunite againſt him;
he dictated to Europe as a maſter ; but, at the ſame
time, he acted with prudence and good policy.

In the conferences at Nimegen, he found means
to excite jealoufy among the allies. The Dutch
were extremely defirous to ſign the treaty, not

vithſtanding the prince of Orange, who was 15
continuing the war at any rate. The Dutch alleged,
that in caſe they did not ſign, the Spaniards were
too weak to aſſiſt them.

When the Spaniards ſaw the Dutch had accepted
the conditions of peace, they accepted them allo;
declaring, that the Empire did not exert itſelf ſuf-
ficiently in the common cauſe.

Finally, the Germans, being abandoned by Hol-
land and Spain, ſigned the treaty laſt; relinquiſt-
ing Friboutg to the king, and confirming the tes
ties of Weſtphalia.

No alterations were made in the condition pre

4 .

— ;
8 4

= 4

> IE

2

ads,
the
*
and
im:
me
2ans
tch
Not-
for
32d,
ſere
ied

lo;

=

8

Ei.

en. LEWIS . 209

ried by Lewis XIV. and Europe received both
u [4s and its peace from his hands; except only
1 of Lorrain, who rejected a treaty, which
he conſidered as odious and diſhonourable to him -
{if; and rather choſe to be a fugitive prince in the
Empire, than a ſovereign in his own dominions,
vithout honour or power. He hoped for a better
fortune from the event of time, and the effect of
his own courage and conſtaney. |
During the conferences at Nimegen, and four
days after the plenipotentiaries of France and Hol-
and had ſigned the peace, the prince of Orange
hewed Lewis XIV. what a dangerous enemy he
hid in him. The marſhal de Luxembourg, who
had inveſted Mons, received information of the
ſoning of this treaty ; after which he went in per-
feſt ſecurity to the village of St. Denis, and there
dined with the intendant of the army. The prince
of Orange, with all his forces, attacked the mar-
ſhal's quarters; which he forced, and a long, obſti-
nate, and bloody engagement enſued ; from which
the prince, with reaſon, expected to gain a diſtin-
puſhed victory: for he not only made the attack,
which is itſelf an advantage, but he attacked troops,
who confided in the ſecurity of the treaty. The
marſhal de Luxembourg, with great difficulty, re-
filed: and whatever advantage was gained in this
engagement was in favour of the prinee of Orange;
ag infantry remained maſters of the- field of
tile.

Did the ambitious ſet a value upon the blood of
others, the prince of Orange would not have made
tis attack. He undoubtedly knew, that the peace
vas ſigned, or ſoon would be; and he knew, that

. , 7 *
« -

288 THE AGE

OF Com
this peace was advantageous to his country: never.
theleſs, be endangered his own life, and the lives
of many thouſand 'men, as the firſt fruits of a pe.
neral peace, which was ſo far advanced, that he
could not have prevented it, even by defeating the
French. This action, which appeared great, but
was certainly very inhuman, and was more ad-
mired than blamed at that time, produced no new
article of peace, and coſt the lives of two thouſand
French, and as many of the enemy, in vain,” In
this peace it appeared how intirely projects are di
concerted by events. Holland, againſt whom only
the war. had been undertaken,. and which was to
have been deſtroyed, loſt nothing by it; and, on
the contrary, gained a barrier: but all the other
powers, who had protected it from deſtrudtion,
were loſers. .
The king was now at the height of glory and
greatneſs. He had been victqrious ever ſince he
began to reign; had never deſieged any place with
out taking it; had ſhewed himſelf ſuperior, upon
all occaſions, to his enemies united; had been the
terror to Europe for fix years together; was at
laſt its arbitrator and peace-maker; and therein add-
ed Franche-Comte, Dunkirk, and half of Fan-
ders, to his own dominions:. but what ſhould be
conſidered as the greateſt of his honours, is, that
be was king over a people who were happy at that
time, and were the model of other natiens. The
hotel-de-ville of Paris, in 1680. which was Jome
time after the concluſion of this peace, applied the
title of Great to him, in the moſt folemn manner;
and ordered, that, for the future, that title only
ſnould be uſed in all public monuments. Soon alen

ESSE Ss FY

2.
er ·
ves
ge.
be
the
but
ad-
ew
1nd
In
di
nly
to
on
her
on,
md
be
the
on
the

=>
or

B BS T5 ©

great Taſſo. Alexander the Great is no longer

G, 12+ LEWIS IV. 199
de year 1673. ſome medals had been caſt with this
ſurname; and Europe, though jealous, did not re-
fuſe to acknowlege the honour. Nevertheleſs, the
ume of Lewis XIV. has prevalled in the world over
tat of Creat, All things are governed by cuſtom.
Henry, who was ſo juſtly ſurnamed the Great after
his death, is now commonly called Henry IV.
ind this ſufficiently diſtinguiſhes him. The prince
of Conde is always called the great Conde, not
only upon account of his heroic actions, but from
the eaſe of diſtinguiſhing him by his farname
from the other princes of Conde. If he had been
alled Conde the great, he would not have pre-
ſerved the title. We ſay the great Corneille, to
diſtinguiſh him from his brother: but we never
ky the great Virgil, the great Homer, nor the

known but by the name of Alexander. Charles V.
whoſe ſucceſſes were more diſtinguiſhed than thoſe
of Lewis XIV. never had the title of great.
Charlemagne is now only. conſidered as a proper
ume. Titles are of no conſequence to poſterity;
ad the bare name of a man, who has done great
things, carries more reſpect than rents, jeg
lt can be added to it. 25

4 | 2 —
= 0 r - 8 * * ”
* 2 — * JF

=

190 THE AGE OF any

CHAPTER MI.

The taking of Strasbourg; the bombarding
of Algiers; the ſubmiſſion of the Geno
eſe; the embaſſy from Siam; the pope
humbled; and the eleRorate of Cologne
diſputed. |

HE ambition of Lewis XIV. was in no way
reſtrained by this general peace. The Em.

pire, Spain, and Holland, diſbanded their extracr-
dinary troops: but Lewis kept all his; and made
the ſeaſon of peace a time for conqueſts. He v
then ſo certain of his power, that he eſtabliſhed ju-
riſdictions in Metz and Briſſac, to reunite all thoſe
territories to his crown, which might formerly have
depended upon Alface, or the three biſhopries; but
which, from time immemorial, had been under other
maſters. Many princes of the Empire, the eleftor
Palatine, and the king of Spain himſelf, who were
poſſeſſed of ſome bailiwicks in this country, were
cited to appear before the chambers which were eſta·
bliſhed to render homage to the king of France, ot
to behold the confiſcation of their poſſeſſions. No
prince, ſince the time of Charlemagne, had afted
ſo much like a maſter, and a judge among love-
reigns, nor conquered countries by arrets, Ike
Lewis XIV. | :
The elector Palatine, and the eleftor of Tees
were diveſted of the ſeigniories of Falkembowy,

—

En LEWIS MV. 191

F Cemarſheim, Valdentz, etc, and it was in vain
cy made complaints to the empire, in the aſſem-
by at Ratibon: 2
S ˙ ina ne-line ho Wen
&ture of ten free cities of Alſace, under the ſame
itle by which the emperor had held them: for now
they no longer dared to talk of liberty in any of
theſe cities. Straſbourg ſtill preferved its freedom:
it was a large and rich city, was miſtreſs of the
Rhine by means of its bridge over that river, and,

of itſelf, formed a powerful republic, famous for
r

eie ſubject

tis place to his maſter. Money, intrigue and ter-
ror, by which he had opened the gates of ſo ma-
u towns, prepared Louvois an entrance into
draſdourg. The magiſtrates were corrupted ; and
te people were aſtoniſhed to behold their ramparts
once ſurrounded by 20, ooo French troops; their
lots, which defended them upon the Rhine, in-
fulted and taken in an inſtant; Louvois at their
pes, and their burgomaſters talking of a ſurren-
&, The prayers, tears, and deſpair of the citizens,
do were enamoured of their liberties, did not
erent a treaty for a ſurrender from being pro-
ned by the magiſtrates, nor Louvois from enter-
vs their city the ſame day (a). Vauban, by the far-
Wations with which he afterwards ſurrounded it,
ered it the ſtrongeſt barrier of France.  _ ©,
The king did not behave with more ceremony
viacs Spain ; in the Low Countries he demanded
(a) September 39, 2691.

8 % © a

> PROT HORNE SS PTE TY

192 THE AGE" Or G@y
the town of Aloſt, and all its beliwick} which

the miniſters had forgot, as they ſaid; to inſen ij

the conditions of peace: and Spain delng dle)
in its compliance with this demand, he caufed the

= 7. a

city of Luxembourg to be inveſted. . C
He, at the ſame time, purchaſed the Qrong tom 1

of Caſal of the duke of Mantua; à petty prince; Wil en
who, rd *
have ſold all his territories, 1
The alarm in Europe was rovivelt} what Rebe for
held Lewis XIV. thus extending his power on 4 ud
fides, and gaining more in a time of peace than tu 7
of his predeceſſors had acquired in all their v tip
The Empire, Holland, and even Sweden, having tre:
taken umbrage at the king, entered into an all vai.
ance. The Engliſh menaced, the Spaniards ſeemeſ ii un
diſpoſed for war, and the prince of Orange did lte
utmoſt to get it declared: but none of the als
powers, at that time, dared to ſtrike the firſt blow :
The king, who was already feared in all place t i!
Y thought of nothing but making himſelf ſtill mor ul t
dreaded, He, at laſt, raifed his marine to a degre N terri
of force, which exceeded the hopes of France; an vic
increaſed the fears of Europe. He had ſixty thou Ther
ſand ſailors; and his regulations for their diſcipline rene
which were as ſevere as thoſe for the land-armyI vio,
kept all theſe rough and untractable people iti n x
the bounds of their duty. Even the maritimans Code
powers, England and Holland, had neither fp,
many ſailors, nor ſuch excellent laws. Companieſſ tarir
of cadets in the frontier- towns, and marine gu te i
in the ports, were inſtituted; and compoſed on nur

young men, who were inſtructed in alt the arts ne
(5) 1680, 1687, 102

Fa.. LEWIS NV. 193

teſary in their profeſſion, dy maſters who were
nid at the public expence. 525

The port of Toulon, upon the Mediterranean,
vas conſtructed at an immenſe expence, in ſuch a
manner as to contain one hundred men of war, to-
gether with an arſenal, and very large and magnifi-
cent magazines, The port of Breſt, upon the ocean,
was formed upon as extenſive a plan. Dunkirk and
Hyre-de-Grace, were filled with ſhips; and Roche-
fort, in ſpite of nature, was made a place of trade,
and naval force.

In ſhort, the king had upwards of one hundred
ſhips of the line, ſeveral of which carried an hun-
red guns, and ſome even more: nor did they re-
main unactive in the ports; for ſquadrons were fent
out under the command of Duquene, which cleared
the ſeas, infeſted by the corſairs of Tripoli and
Algiers. He was revenged upon Algiers by means
ca new art; the diſcovery of which was owing
vo that care which he took to excite the efforts of
Ul the geniuſes of his age. This admirable, but
terrible art, was that of bomb-veſſels, by means of
which maritime towns may be reduced to aſhes.
There was a young man, named Bernard Renaud,
Faerally known by the name of Little Renaud,
Wo, without having ever been in the ſervice, was
nexcellent mariner, through the ſtrength of genius.
Cobert, who diſtinguiſhed merit, though in obſcu-
ty, had frequently called him to the council of the
bine, even in the king's preſence: and it was by
tte (kill and care of Renaud, that a new, more re-
der, and eaſy method in the building of ſhips,

* ſoon after bud. He ventured in council,
01. I, S8

#5 © &

=

IL 2-H-0"L 8

: , N * 4 .
CF , | *

to propoſe to bombard Algiers with a fleet. We
had then no idea how it was poſſible to fix mortar
for the caſting of bombs in any manner but up
ſolid ground: his propoſal was therefore rejected; 2
and he experienced all that raillery and contradiftiog
which every inventor muſt expect; but his continy. by
ing to perſiſt in his opinion, joined to that eloquence
which men generally have, who are ſtrongly prepoſ pt
ſeſſed in favour of their own inventions, determined
the king to permit this new experiment to be made
Renaud directed five veſſels to be built, ſmaller
than the ordinary ſize, but ſtronger in wood, with-
out decks, and with a falſe deck in the hold, upon
which hollow places were made, in which the mor-
tars were put. With this equipage he ſet fail, un-
der the command, of old Duquene, to whom the
conduct of the enterprize was committed, and who
did not expect any ſucceſs from it: but Duquene
and the Algerines were aſtoniſhed at the effect of the
bombs, Part of the town was demoliſhed (c), and
conſumed : but the art, which was afterwards car.
ried into other nations, only ſerved to multiply bu.
man calamities; and, more than once, became tet
rible to France where it had been invented,
The marine, which was brought to this degree

of perfection in a very few years, was the fruit d A
Colbert's care. Louvois, through a ſpirit, of emuls *
tion, cauſed more than one hundred citadels to be tey
fortified. The fortreſſes of Huningen, Sar-Levüg .. ws
Mont-roial, Straſbourg, etc. were built under bis d 18
rection; and while the kingdom gained ſuch ge 4.
exterior ſtrength, all the fine arts flouriſhed at home d.

and the nation abounded in riches and pleaſure
e) October 28. 1682. 1 & |

ch. 13. LEWIS XIV. 195
foreigners came in erouds to admire the court of
Lewis XIV. and his name was known in all the
nations of the world.

His power and his glory were ſtill more increaſed
by the weakneſs of moſt of the other potentates,
and by the misfortunes of their people. The em-
peror Leopold was at that time under apprehenſions
from the Hungarian rebels, but more particularly
from the Turks; who, being called by the Hunga-
fans to their aſſiſtance, were on the point of enter-
ing Germany. The policy of Lewis made him per-
ſecute the Proteſtants in France, becauſe he thought
ke ought to render them incapable to hurt him;
but he ſecretly ſupported the Proteſtants in Hun-
gary, becauſe he thought they might be of ſervice
to him. His embaſſador at the Porte had preſſed
the armament of the Turks; and the Ottoman
troops, to the number of two hundred thouſand
men, augmented alſo by the Hungarian forces, in
their paſſage, found neither fortified towns, ſuch as
ae in France, nor any number of troops capable to
oppoſe their paſſage : ſo that they penetrated even
to the gates of Vienna, after having ruined every
tling in their paſſage.

The emperor Leopold, upon the approach of
the Turks, quitted Vienna with precipitation, and
retired to Lintz; and when he was informed, that
they had inveſted Vienna, he fled ſtill farther off,
eren as far as Paſſau, leaying the duke of Lorrain
i the head of a little army, which had been already
lefeated by the Turks, to ſupport the fortunes of
be empire as he might.

It was , believed, the grand viſier Cara-

387%

* * * 3
. 2

196 THE AGE OF Gy,
Muſtapha, who commanded the Ottoman troops
would ſoon make himſelf maſter of the weak and
petty capital of Germany, which is regarded by the
Imperialiſts as the capital of the Chriſtian world,
They were indeed upon the brink of the mal
terrible revolution. „

Lewis XIV. with reaſon, expected that Germany,
being ravaged by the Turks, and having a chief
whoſe flight had increaſed the general conſterns-
tion, would be obliged to have recourſe to the
protection ꝓf France. He had an army upon the
frontiers of the empire, ready to defend it againſ
theſe very Turks, whom he had brought thither by
his negotiations: and thus he hoped to become the
protector of the empire, and to make his ſon king
of the Romans. 114: th

It was the maſter-piece of his politics to appear
generous in the conduct of theſe great intereſts
When the Turks approached Vienna, he raiſed the
blockade of Luxembourg. I deſire only to pro
« mote the happineſs of Chriſtendom,” faid he to
the Spaniards; „ and I will never attack a Chriſtian
« prince when the Turks are in the empire, nor
« prevent Spain from ſuccouring the emperor.”
Thus he reconciled his politics with his glory: but,
contrary to the univerſal expectation, Vienna wi
relieved. The preſumption of the grand vile),
and his brutal contempt of the Chriſtians, proved
his ruin. His not preſſing the ſiege as he ought gt
time for the arrival of John Sobieſki; who, being
joined by the duke of Lorrain, had only to preſent
himſelf before the Ottoman multitude, to put then
in confuſion (4). The emperor returned into is c-

e, September 12. 1683.

—
—
-

KSFE

FAA S Fs F S&EFSCSFFSESSS

2

an LEWIS 0. 297

under the ſhame of haying quitted it; and
made his entrance at the time when. his deliverer
yas coming out of the church, where they had been
ſnging Te Deum, and where the preacher, for his
text, had taken theſe words: There was a man ſent
frm God, whoſe name was John. No monarch was
erer more happy, or more humbled, than Leopold.

And now the king of France, having no langer
ay meaſures to obſerve, renewed his pretenſions,
and recommenced his hoſtilities. He bombarded,
belieged, and took Luxembourg, Courtrai, and
Dixmude, in Flanders. He ſeized upon Treves,
and demoliſhed its fortifications; and all this, it was
ſaid, was to execute the treaties of Nimegen. The
Imperialiſts and Spaniards negotiated. with him at
Ratilbon, while he was taking their towns; and
the violated peace of Nimegen was changed into a
truce for twenty years; by which the king kept
Luxembourg, and all its principality.

He was ſtill more formidable upon the coaſts of
Africa; where the French, till then, had been
known only from ſuch of them as theſe barbarians
had made ſlaves.

Algiers, which was twice bombarded, ſent depu-

tes to beg pardon, and receive peace (e). They re-

leaſed all the Chriſtian ſlaves, and alſo paid a ſum
of money; which is the ſevereſt puniſhment that
an be inflicted on theſe corſairs.

Tunis and Tripoli made the ſame ſubmiſſions.
lt may not be amiſs here to take notice, that when
Danfreville, captain of the ſhips, came into Al-

Hers to deliver all the Chriſtian flaves in the name *

(e) April 1684,
n

[ F if ** * | Y _-
7 Y * i N *
5

198 THE AGE OF &

of the king of France, a great number of Englid
was found among them; who, being got on board
his ſhips, inſiſted to Damfreville, that it was in con
ſideration of the king of England that they had bel
ſet at liberty. Upon this, the French captain ſemt
for the Algerines; and cauſing the Engliſh to be
again fet on ſhore; The/e men, ſaid he, pretend they
have gained their freedom only in the name of their
king : mine, therefore, will not take the liberty to
effer them his protection: I put them again into yur
hands, aud you may now ſhew what regard you have
fer the king of England, All theſe Engliſh were
again put in irons: and this action at once declared
the pride of the Engliſh, the weakneſs of the go-
vernment of Charles II. and the reſpe& which all
nations paid to Lewis XIV, ' COT”

So great was this univerſal reſpect, that new ho-
nours were granted to his embaſſador at the Ottoman
Porte, ſuch as thoſe ſhewn to the ſophy of Perſa;
though at the ſame time, he was humbling the peo-
ple of Africa, who are under the protection of the
grand ſignor. IE.

The republic of Genoa humbled itſelf before
him ſtill more than that of Algiers. The Genoele
had ſold bombs and gunpowder to the Algerines;
and were building four gallies for the ſervice of
Spain, The king, by his envoy, Saint-Olon, who
was a private gentleman, commanded them not i
launch thoſe gallies, and threatened them with !
ſpeedy chaſtiſement, in cafe of difobedience to i
will. The Genoeſe, being incenſed at this outrage
upon their liberties, and depending too much upon
the aſſiſtance of Spain, neglected to do what Lew»
XIV. had ordered, Fourteen large ſhips, Went

th. 13. LEWIS NIV. 199

es, ten bomb · veſſels, and ſeveral frigates, imme-
25 failed out of the port of Toulon. Seig-
nelai, the new ſecretary of the marine, which"em-
ployment his father, the famous Colbert, had made
tim exerciſe before his death, was himſelf on board
this fleet. This young man was full of ambition,
courage, ſpirit, and activity; was deſirous to be at
once both a general, and a miniſter; was anxious for
every kind of glory; ſanguine in all his purſuits;
and mixed pleaſures with his buſineſs in fuch a man-
ner as not to injure or neglect it. Old Duquene
commanded the men of war, and the duke de
Mortemar the gallies; but they were both obedient
to the ſecretary of ſtate. They arrived before Ge-
noa (V); the ten galliots threw fourteen thouſand
bombs into the city, and reduced to an heap of
ruins part of thoſe marble edifices, which have
gained Genoa the name of the Superb. Four thou-
ſand ſoldiers, being landed, advanced up to the
rates of the city, and burnt the ſuburbs of St. Peter
Arena, And now it became neceſſary for the
Genoeſe to humble themſelves, in order to prevent
a total ruin. The king inſiſted, that the doge of
Genoa, and four of the principal ſenators, ſhould
come and implore his clemency in his palace at Ver-
ſailles: and, to prevent the Genoeſe from eluding
this catisfaQion, or depriving him of any part of
bis glory, he declared, that the doge, who ſhould
be ſent to beg his pardon, ſhould be continued in
lis dignity, notwithſtanding that perpetual law of
Genoa, by which the dages are deprived of that
Ugnity, whenever they abſent themſelves a moment
from the city.

(Cf) March 157. 1084.

200 THE AGE OF.
| Imperialo Leſcaro, doge of Genoa, with the f.

nators Lomeling, Garebardi, Durazao, and. $4.8

vago, came to Verſailles to make the king ſuch {,
tisfaction as he ſhould require of them. The doge
in his ceremonial habit, ſpoke, covered with a c
of red yelvet, which he frequently pulled off, His
ſpeech, and his marks of ſubmiſſion, were dd
by Seignelai. The king gave him audience, ſeate]
and covered: but as, in all the actions of his life
and the ſenators with as much goadnels as gran
deur, The miniſters Louvois, Croiſſi, and Scig-
nelai, behaved towards them with more pride and
haughtineſs: and this difference of behaviour made
the doge ſay; The king, by his manner of receiving
us deprives us of our liberty: but bis minaſters re
flere it. This doge was a man of great wit; and
bim what he thought moſt extraordinary at Ver-

ſailles, is generally known: he anſwered, it js in fr
be extreme paſſion which Lewis XIV. had for
every thing which appeared with an eclat, ws {ll
more flattered by the embaſſy which he received
from Siam; a country where, till that time, ej
were ignorant that ſuch a kingdom as France ex-
iſted. It had happened, through one of thoſe
ſingular incidents which prove the ſuperiority of the
Europeans over other nations, that a Greek, the ſon
of an innkeeper of Cephalonia, named Phalk-Cor-
Nance, was become Barcalon, that is, prime mun-
dier, or grand viſier, of the kingdom. of fim,
This man, in the deſign which he bad conceived
to make himſelf king, and in his want of fore

ts
+

4 -
"& . "

& 13,

Sto 6 =  94e fa

ag,
N
His
ateg
ated
lie
uo,
ran.
eig
and
ade
ng
2
and
ked
er-
fe

DBRS F. E BRFNTRBAA ESN

ch. 13. LEWIS Wav. 907

iſiſtance, had not dared jo. conlide richer in the
Engliſh or Duteh; they are too dangerous neigh-
hours in the Indies. The French had eſtabliſhed
atories upon the coaſts of Coromandel, and had
carried their king's reputation into theſe diſtant
regions of Aſia, Conſtance regarded Lewis XIV.
a a perſon whoſe vanity he might flatter, by pay-
ing bim an unexpected homage from ſo diſtant a
place. Religion, which is made the univerſal tool
of politics from Siam even to Paris, ſerved Conſtance
upon this occaſion. He ſent a ſolemn embally (e), in
the name of this maſter the king of Siam; with very
great preſents, to Lewis XIV, and to give him to
underſtand, that this Indian monarch, admiring the
glory and ſplendor of his reign, would conclude no
treaty but with the French nation; and eyen that
he intended ſoon to become a Chriſtian, The king's
glory being flattered, and his religion deceived, he
was prevailed on to ſend two embaſſadors; and fix
ſeſuits, to the king of Siam; and to theſe he after-
wards added ſome officers, with eight hundred ſol-
ders. But the. eclat of the Siameſe embaſſy was
the only fruit of it, Conſtance fell a victim to- hjs
ambition, and the few French which remained about
him were maſſacred ; others were obliged to fly;
ad his widow, after having been on the point of
becoming queen, was condemned by the ſucceſſor
of the king of Siam, to ſerve in his kitchen; for
viich employment ſhe was born. |
This thirſt of glory, which excited Lewis XIV.
to diſtinguiſh himſelf in every thing from other
monarchs, again appeared in the haughty behaviour
Wiich he affected towards the court of Rome.

(e) 1684.

s 8 5 " 4
- * i.
: | l
- 113

202 THE AGE OF Gn

ch.
Odeſealei, the ſon of a banker in the Milaneſe/y | . *
that time poſſeſſed the papal dignity, under the name ul
of Innocent XI. He was a man of virtue, and, Eng
good pope, though he knew little of theology: nil. ©
he was a couragious, firm, and magnificent prince, -
He ſuccoured the empire and Poland againſt the f
Turks with his money, and the Venetians with his 3 r
gallies. He very highly condemned the conduft 5
of Lewis XIV. for uniting with the Turks againt . ;
the Chriſtians. People were aſtoniſhed to behold . .
pope with ſuch earneſtneſs eſpouſe the cauſe of the
emperors, who call themſelves kings of the Roman, 8
and would, if they could, reign in Rome. gu ge.
Odeſcalchi was born under the Auſtrian dominion; 2
and had made two campaigns in the troops of te -
Milaneſe. Cuſtom and diſpoſition govern mi ,
- kind. His pride was piqued at the king; who, oi .
his ſide, mortified him in every thing that a king of Bi .
France is capable of towards a pope, without brei- ..

ing communion with him (/). An abuſe had long
reigned in Rome, which was difficult to correct, be. ..
cauſe it was founded upon a point of honour, where-
on all the catholic kings piqued themſelves. Ther 5,
embaſſadors at Rome extended their right of fre-. g.
dom and aſylum, affected by all their maſters, to 288 .
very great diſtance, which was called their quarters
"Theſe pretenſions, which were conſtantly maintained A |
rendered one half of Rome a certain aſylum to il 4
ſorts of criminals. And, by another abuſe, har .
ever entered Rome under the name of the embal-

th
ſadors, never paid any duty. By this cuſtom the of
commerce of the city ſuffered, and the ſtate vis
impoveriſhed. | * W

(f) 1685. 1686. 1687, 1688,

ch. 1 3. LEWIS MV. 203

At laſt, Innocent XI. prevailed on the emperor,
de kings of Spain, Poland, and the new king of
England, James II. who was a catholic prince, to
renounce theſe odious rights. The nuncio Ra-
nucei propoſed to Lewis XIV. to concurr with
the other kings in promoting tranquillity. and good
order in Rome. But Lewis, being greatly diſſatiſ-
fed with the pope, replied, “ that he had never
made the conduct of others an example to him-.
« ſelf; but, on the contrary, would make-himſelf
« an example to others.” After this he ſent the
marquis de Lavardin as his embaſſador to Rome, to
brave the pope. Lavardin entered Rome, notwith-
landing the pope's prohibition, eſcorted by four
hundred marine guards, four hundred volunteer
officers, and two hundred ſervants, all armed. He
took poſſeſſion of his palace, his quarters, and the
church of Saint Lewis, round which he poſted cen-
tinels, who did regular duty, and were relieved 1 in
the ſame manner as in a fortified place. The pope
5 the only ſovereign. to whom ſuch an embaſſy can
be ſent: for the ſuperiority which he affects over
crowned heads, always makes them deſirous to
humble him; and, through the weakneſs of his
ſtate, he is always inſulted with impunity. All
that Innoceat XI. could do in oppoſition to the mar-
quis de Lavardin, was to employ his excommuni-
ations; a ſort of arms which are, indeed, as little
regarded at Rome as elſewhere; but which, never-
lacleſs, through ancient cuſtom, are employed like
tte pope's ſoldiers, who bear arms only for the ſake
of form,

The cardinal d'Etree, who was a man of wit, bur
Ws frequently an unſucceſsful negotiator, was, at

- 1

chat time, charged with the affairs of Frante «
Rome. D*Etree, having been obliged
to ſee the marquis de Lavardin, could not after
wards be admitted to an audience of the pope
without firſt receiving abſolution : and it was i.
vain that he oppoſed it; for Innocent XI. perliſted
in giving it to him, that he might till continue to
preſerve that imaginary power, by continuing 10
practiſe thoſe cuſtoms on which it is founded.
Lewis, in the ſame authoritative manner, but il.
ways ſupported by the arts of policy, endeavoutel
to direct the choice of an elector of Cologne. His
ſote deſign being to oppoſe or divide the Empire
he endeavoured to raiſe to his electorate the card.
nal de Furſtemberg, biſhop of Straſbourg, who ws
his creature, had ſuffered for ſerving his intereſt,
and was an irreconcileable enemy to the emperor,
who in the laſt war had made him a priſoner, 28 1
German who had fold himſelf to the ſervice of
The chapter of Cologne, like all the other chap
ters of Germany, has a right to nominate jts biſhop,
who, by that means, becomes elector. The perſon,
who filled this ſee, was Ferdinard of Bavaria, who,
like many other princes, had formerly been an ally,
but was now an enemy to the king, He was very
dangerouſly ill: and, at that juncture, the king
diſtributing his money very liberally among the ci:
nons, and uſing promiſes and intrigues at the ſame
time, he got the cardinal de Fuſtemberg to be
elected as coadjutor; and, after the death of Fer
dinand, he was elected a ſecond time, by a plurality
of ſuffrages. The pope, by the German concordat
has a right to confer the biſhopric upon the perſon

. * * %
1 8 ——
*

b 14 LCEWTS N. 205

dected, and the emperor has that of confirming
tim in the electorate. The emperor and Innocent
II. being perſuaded that to let Furſtemberg poſ-
Eels the electoral dignity, would, in a manner, be
king Lewis XIV. poſſeſs it, they united to be-
ſow this principality upon the young prince of
Bavaria, brother of the deceaſed elector. The
king was revenged upon the pope, by depriving
tin of Avignon (g); and he prepared for war againſt
the emperor. At the fame time he diſturbed the
repoſe of the elector Palatine, upon occaſion of the
rphts of Madame, the princeſs Palatine, and ſe-
cond wife to Monſieur; which rights, by her mar-
age · contract, ſhe had renounced, The war car-
ned on againſt Spain, in 1667, in favour of the
rohts of Maria-Thereſa, notwithſtanding a pa-
nlel renuntiation, ſufficiently proves, that con-
talts are deſigned only for private perſons. Thus
the king, at the height of his glory and greatneſs,
offended, deſpoiled or humbled, almoſt all the

SS & & * 7 ==, +.

=> 2878 =#s ©&a 5

up- princes round him; but, at the ſame time, he alſo
oþ, WA made almoſt all of them unite and conſpire againſt
fon, kim. |
ho,

CHAPTER XIV.

lng James dethroned by his ſon in- law Wil-
lam III. and protected by Lewis XIV.

3 prince of Orange, more ambitious than
Lewis XIV. had formed vaſt deſigns, and

(2g) October 1688.
Vo "Md T gh

———

*
* |
--vY

206 THE A0 E oT Gu

ſuch as might appear chimerical in a ſtadtholder of
Holland; yet theſe he carried into execution by his
dexterity and courage. He was bent upon hun.
bling the French king, and intended to dethrone the
king of England. Without great difficulty he, by
degrees, formed a league in Europe againſt France,
The emperor, part of the Empire, Holland, and
the duke of Lorrain, were the firſt who ſecret
joined themſelves at Augſbourg; and this alliance
was ſoon after ſtrengthened by the acceſſion of
Spain and Savoy. The pope, though he did not
avow himſelf one of the confederates, yet, by his | do:

fn. 2 TT RR Dow ., -

intrigues he animated the whole. Venice favoured WY no
them alſo, though ſhe had not declared openly ; an N tho
all the Italian princes were likewiſe in their-iptereſt. WA li
In the north, Sweden was then attached to the Im- of
perialiſts; and Denmark, though an ally of France, cou
incapable of doing her any ſervice, There were, A que
this juncture, too, above ſix hundred thouſand Pro- plit
teſtants, who had been obliged to flee from the per: ¶ two
ſecution of Lewis. Theſe, having left their natively : co
country, carried along with them their riches, ther gil vic
induſtry, and an implacable hatred againſt their king: It
wherever they ſettled, they became an addition toi n F
the enemies of France, and greatly inflamed tholegilt Sec
powers already inclined to war, We ſhall ſpeak o lute;
this flight of the Proteſtants, in the chapter con only
cerning Religion. Thus the king was on all ide pcop!
beſet with enemies; James being his only friend. ay
James ſucceeded his brother Charles II. as King and t
of England, They were both Roman Catholic WY li.
but Charles never declared himſelf till towards tht -
10

end of his life, and even then intirely out of com
plzifance to his miſtreſſes and brother; for, in a

ond

= E 2,

I

EF

E 2 2

Wm. -

TENA

a1 Dr 407
ty, his only religion was deiſm. He had always
new n the utmoſt indifference in thoſe controverted
points of religion, which are apt to divide man-
kind; and this contributed not a little to that
peaceable reign which he enjoyed. James, on the
other hand, had been attached to the Romiſh church
from his early years from principle; and he eſpouſed
her cauſe with the moſt extravagant zeal. Had he
deen a Mahometan, or had he followed the doctrine
of Confucius, the Engliſh would never have difturb-
ed his reign : but he deſigned to eſtabliſh, in his king-
doms, the Roman Catholic religion; than which
nothing could be more deteſtable in the eyes of
thoſe republican royaliſts, who account it the re-
lgion of flaves. It is ſometimes, indeed, a matter
of no great difficulty to change the religion of a
country, Conſtantine, Clovis, Guſtavus Vaſa, and
queen Elizabeth, each by diferent methods, accom-
plied this. But, in order to affect fuch alterations,
tro things are abſolutely requiſite; deep policy, and
zconcurrence of lucky circumſtances: by neither of
wich was James - favoured. - |
It nettled him not a little to ſee ſo many princes
n Europe reigning with a deſpotic ſway : thoſe of
dieden and Denmark had lately too become abſo-
ute; in ſhort, England and Poland were now the
oy remaining kingdoms where the liberty of the
people and monarchy ſubſiſted together. Lewis
Ny. encouraged him to aim at abſolute power;
nd the Jeſuits puſhed him on to re-eſtabliſh their
religion and their credit. He accordingly endea-
ured to carry theſe points; but every ſtep he took
n ſo unfortunate or unpolitic, that he only inflam-
T 2 |

208 THE AGE OP . 1
ed the whole nation. At his firſt ſetting out, he a6
tertaining publicly at his court the pope's nundo, the
Jeſuits and Capuchin friers; putting in priſon ſev
Engliſh biſhops, whom he ſhould rather, if poſſible,
have gained over to his intereſt; taking away the
privileges of the city of London, which he ought
rather to have encreaſed ; and, in an arbitrary mans
ner, trampling upon the laws, which he ſhould rather
bave ſecretly undermined: in ſhort, his whole con-
duct was fo indiſcreet, that the cardinals of Rome hw
morouſly ſaid, « that they ought to excommunicate
« him as a man who was going to deſtroy that little
« of the Catholic religion which remained in Eng-
te land.” Pope Innocent XI. had not the leaſt hopes
from James's projects; and conſtantly refuſed him 4
cardinal's cap, which he folicited for father Peters,
his confeſſor. This Jefuit was a man of a forward
and impetuous diſpoſition ; he had ſtrongly Battered
himſelf with the thoughts of being a cardinal, and
primate of England; and, in order to gratify his
ambition, puſhed on his maſter to the utmoſt ex-
tremities. The heads of the nation, being reſolyed
to defeat the king's deſigns, formed themſelves into
a ſecret confederacy : they ſent a deputation to the
prince of Orange; and all their meaſures were con-
ducted with ſo much diſcretion and ſecrecy, that
the court had not the leaſt ſuſpicion.

A fleet, ſufficient to contain fourteen or fifteen
thouſand men, was accordingly fitted out by the
prince of Orange; who, at this juncture, could be
conſidered only as a private perſon, of an illuſtnous
rank; for his yearly income was ſcarce five hundred
thouſand livres; yet ſuch were the effects of his po

n TT ESFREARERESES SAS an TITTEN

>, 14. LEWIS NV. 209

jcy, that the ſtates general were devoted to his in-
tereſt, and their navy and treaſure at his command.
He became, indeed, a king in Holland, by his (kilful
aadreſs; whilſt James, by a precipitate conduct,
ceaſed to be ſo in England. It was at firfl given
out, that this fleet was deſigned againſt France;
ind the ſecret was kept by above two hundred
jerſons. Barillon, the French embaſſador then at
London, a man of pleaſure, and better verſed in
the intrigues of James's miſtreſſes than the affairs
of Europe, was firſt deceived. Lewis, however,
vas not: he offered ſuccour to his ally, who at
firſt refuſed it, from a notion of his ſecurity. James
ſoon after ſolicited his aſſiſtance; but it proved
then too late, the prince of Orange's fleet being
under fail: every thing failed him at once, as he
ws wanting to himſelf. His ſhips allowed thoſe of
the enemy to paſs them; ſo that now his only re-
ſource was to defend himſelf by land. His army
conſiſted of twenty thouſand men; had he led them
mmediately to battle, without giving time for re-
ſection, in all probability they would have fought ;
but he left them leifure to determine themſelves;
ad, accordingly moſt of the chief officers deſerted
ln (a). Amongſt theſe was the famous Churchill,
fatal afterwards to Lewis as James; who became
illuſtrious under the title of duke of Marlborough.
ge had been a particular favourite of James; and
oed to him all his promotion: his own ſiſter was
the king's miſtreſs, and he himſelf was his lieutenant-
general; yet notwithſtanding all this, he left him,
ad joined the prince of Orange. The prince of
(«) 1688,

T 3

*

210 THE AGE OF, Ch. 1%
Denmark, James's ſon-in-law, nay even his own Wl ye
daughter the princeſs Anne, forſook him alſo. of
Being thus attacked and perſecuted by one ſon- f.
in-law, and abandoned by the other, his two daugt- p
ters, as well as his intimate friends, having become
his enemies, and being hated by his ſubjects, he fel
into the utmoſt deſpair, and betook himſelf to
flight; the Iaſt reſource of a prince when con-
quered; but he had recourſe thereto without fight-
ing. He was ſtopt, however, in his flight by the
populace, who behaved to him very diſreſpectfuly,
and conducted him back to London. In ſhort, after
having received the orders of the prince of Orange
in his own palace, after having feen his own guards
turned out to make room for thoſe of another, be-
ing driven from his own houſe, and made a priſoner
at Rocheſter, he made ufe of the liberty which was
given him to quit his kingdom, and went to ſetk
refuge in France, 3 "HOY
This was the true aera of Engliſh liberty: the
nation, repreſented by its parliament, now fixed the
ſo long conteſted bounds betwixt the prerogative
of the crown, and the rights of the people: they
preſcribed the terms of reigning to the prince af
Orange, and chofe him for their ſovereign, in con-
junction with his conſort Mary, James's daughter.
Henceforth this prince was acknowleged in the
greateſt part of Europe, as William HI. lawful king
of England, and accounted the deliverer of the
nation; but, in France, he was only ſtiled prince of
Orange, and looked upon as the uſurper of his fe
ther-in-law's dominions. $3 *
The fugitive prince, with his queetꝭ dhe duke of
Modena's daughter, add the prince of Walen a5

*
—
4

2

TH._MMECFST 5

ch. 14. LEWIS XIV. 211

yet an infant, accordingly implored the protection
of Lewis XIV. The queen of England, who ar-
rived before her huſband (5), was aſtoniſhed at the
ſplendor of the French court, and that magnificent
profuſion which ſhe beheld at Verſailles: above all,
ſhe was ſtruck with the grandeur of her own recep-
tion. Lewis himſelf conducted her to Chatou, thus
expreſſing himſelf on the occaſion : « The office F
perform at preſent, Madam, is a ſorrowful one;
« but I hope ſoon to do you others more important
« and agreeable.” He went with her to the caſtle
of St. Germain, where ſhe was entertained with as
much grandeur as if ſhe had been queen of France;
being ſupplied with every thing which convenience
or luxury could require, and having many noble
preſents given her in gold and ſilver plate, jewels,
and the richeſt ſtuffs: ſhe found likewiſe upon her
toilet a purſe of ten thouſand Lewis-d'ors.

James, who arrived next day after his queen, was
treated alſo with the ſame reſpect and magnificence :
be had ſix hundred thouſand livres ſettled for the
expence of his houſho!d, beſides the innumerable
preſents he received, and was attended by the king's
offcers and guards. All this pomp appeared how-
erer but inconſiderable, compared with the prepa-
ntions made to re-eſtabliſh him in his kingdom.
Lewis never appeared ſo great; but James made a
ſorry figure, his reputation being very low, both
it court, and in the city, amongſt thoſe who ſettle
the characters of others. He ſaw nobody almoſt
but Jeſuits, and often zlighted at their houſes in the
dtreet of St. Anthony. He told them he was a je-
ſuit himſelf: and what was extraordinary, it was -

*

00 January 1689.

- 22 THE AGE OF G 14;
certainly a fat; for, by his own command, when
he was duke of York, , he had been initiated with
certain ceremonies into this order by four Engl
Jeſuits. Such meanneſs of ſoul in a prince, and the
manner in which he had loſt his crown, made hin
appear in fo contemptible a light, that the courtiers
often amuſed themſelves with making ſongs at lis
expence. Chaced from England, he became the fub-
ject of ridicule in France: nor did his being a Ro-
man Catholic ſtand him in any ſtead: the archbiſhop
of Rheims, brother of Louvois, ſaid aloud, in his
drawing-room at St. Germains, « There's a ſumple
cc ton, who has thrown away three kingdoms for 1
« maſs.” From Rome he received nothing but
indulgencies and paſquils. His religion, in ſhort,
was of ſo little ſervice to him, that when the prince
of Orange, the head of the Calviniſts, ſet fail in order
to dethrone his father-in-law, the Spaniſh embaſſ-
dor at the Hague ordered maſs to be performed for
his ſucceſs. |
Amidiſt theſe diſtreſſes of this exiled prince, and
the many kindneſſes conferred on him by Lewis
XIV. it may not be unworthy of our attention to
ſee James touching for the king's-evil at the little
Engliſh convent; the king's of England either ab
ſuming this wonderful power from a right they
pretend to the crown of France, ar that it had
been a ceremony eſtabliſhed ſince the reign of £6
ward I. >
| Lewis made all poſſible diſpatch to ſend
over to Ireland, where there were a formidable body
of Roman Catholics in his intereſt. A fleet 0
thirteen ſhips of the firſt rate was in the road at
Breſt, and all the officers, courtiers, and even priets

*

+”

5 8

2

EPEES,TEFESRAEEFREFSTCCBSERTFETFTEE

V

S FSA JA TEST FAKE

irrer

ch. 14. LEWIS XIV. 23

who had come to attend him at St. Germains, were
conducted thither at Lewis's expence. Mr. d'Avaux,
being named embaſſador to the dethroned prince,
frniſhed with plenty of arms and ammunition :;
ind there was likewiſe put on board ordinary and
ich furniture of all ſorts : Lewis himſelf went to
ake his leave of James at St. Germains; and, hav-
ing given him his coat of mail as his laſt preſent, he
embraced him with theſe words: The beſt thing I
can wiſh you, is, that I may never ſee you more.”
No ſooner had James landed in Ireland, with theſe
forces, than he was followed by another fleet of
three-and-twenty men of war, with a conſiderable
zumber of tranſport-ſhips, under the command of
Chateau Renaud (4). This ſquadron having, in the
nage, met with an Engliſh fleet, forced it to ſheer
of, and then landed all the forces in ſafety. In
their return, they took ſeven merchant-ſhips, be-
bnging to the Dutch; and thus arrived again at
elt, victorious over the Engliſh, and loaded with
tte ſpoils of Holland.

Soon after, there was a third embarkation at Breſt, |
Toulon, and Rochefort (e). The ports of Ireland,
10 the Chanel, were now covered with French
bps, Tourville, the French vice-admiral, having
ider his command ſeventy- two ſhips, fell in with a
Dutch and Engliſh fleet of ſixty ſail; and a deſperate
iat enſued, which laſted ten hours (J). Tourville,
Cateau Renaud, d*Etrees, and Nemond, greatly
Winguiſhed themſelves on this occaſion : by their
wage and {kill France procured an honour to
Mich ſhe had not been accuſtomed: for the Eng :

May 14. 1689. (e] March 1690. (f) July 169

214 THE AGE OF Gn,
liſh and Dutch, hitherto lords of the ocean; m nt
from whom the French had but lately learned the WW rc
method of fighting at ſea in line of battle, were ur bat
terly defeated; ſeventeen of their ſhips, being dg bc:
abled, were partly ſtranded, and partly burnt, by
themſelves: the remainder of the fleet took refuge i bm
in the Thames, or amongſt the banks of Holland xt
Thus what Lewis XIV. had ſo ardently deſired for fur
twenty years, and what appeared fo improbable, now Wi nd
happened; the late victory, which had not coſt te of
French one ſhip, having procured him the empie 6
of the ſea; an empire, however, which proved but":
of ſhort duration. It muſt be owned, indeed, th rig
the enemy's ſhips at preſent fled before his triumpꝰ v
ant fleets. Soon after, Seignelai, a bold enter it
priſing miniſter, ordered to ſea a number of galliee
from Marſeilles: and this was the firſt time the Eng-
liſh coaſts were viſited by theſe veſſels; by-mean
of which the French made a deſcent at Tinmouth,
and deſtroyed, in the bay, above thirty merchant-
ſhips. The privateers of St. Malo's and Dunkirk
were continually taking prizes; doing great ſervic
thereby to the public, and enriching themſelves
In ſhort, for two years, the French were ſole me
ſters at ſea.

But though Lewis had been ſo proſperous in bis
undertakings, James could not boaſt of ſucceſs in
Ireland. He had with him about ſix thouland
French, and fifteen thouſand Iriſh ; the Boyne rut
ning betwixt his army and that of king Willa
This river was fordable, being under the height of
man's ſhoulders: but, after paſſing this, the enemy
muſt alſo have marched over a morals, next to whicl
there was a riſing- ground, which formed a n

—

0b. 14. LEVIS XIV,” 215

atrenchment. King William, having forded the
rer with his army in three different places, gave
attle (g). The Iriſh, who ſhew themſelves the
waveſt ſoldiers in France and Spain, have always
khaved at home ſhamefully. Amongſt nations,
ome ſeem, as it were, formed to be under the ſub-
eftion of others: the Engliſh have always had a
ſuperiority over the Irith in genius, as well as arms
and riches; nor has Ireland ever been able to ſhake
of the yoke, ſince ſhe was firſt ſubdued by an Eng-
i baron. The French fought at the battle of
the Boyne; the Iriſh fled; and James, their ſove-
xign, without once heading them, or the French,
vas the firſt who quitted the field, This monarch
titherto had always given proofs of the higheſt va-
bur; but there are certain occaſions when a kind of
remor ſeizes the ſpirits, and enervates the whole
ko. King William, who had had his ſhoulder
mzed by a cannon-bullet before the engagement,
das reported, in France, to be dead. This falſe
ters was received at Paris with a ſhameful and un-
becoming tranſport. The populace and citizens,
2 the inſtigation of ſome inferior magiſtrates, made
luminetions; they rung their bells; they burnt the
fance of Orange in effigy, in ſeveral parts of the
Wy, in the ſame manner as the pope is often burnt
a London; nay, they even fired the Baſtille guns
@ the occaſion. This, however, was not done by
be king's orders; but was owing to the inconſide-
ſite zeal of an inferior officer. One may be apt
b infer, from theſe demonſtrations of joy, and from
be authority of ſo many writers, that this extrava-
Fat tranſport, at the pretended death of an enemy,

(5) July 12690.

ou

26 THE AGE OF G 14,
from that exceſſive fear which he hay
excited; for all the French, as well as foreign hid.
encomium on king William: yet, if we conſider
attentively the circumſtances and character of ta
times, we ſhall find that it was not fear which
produced thoſe extravagancies: the citizens, and
lower people, have no notion of dreading an enemy
till he threatens their city: nay, ſo far were they
from being terrified at the name of William, that
they unjuſtly held him in the utmoſt contempt. He
had been almoſt always worſted by the French ge-
nerals: nor were the common people ſenſible of the
glory this prince had acquired even in his defeat;
and though he had conquered James in Ireland, yet,
in the eyes of the French, he did not appear an
enemy worthy of Lewis XIV. Paris adored her
prince, and believed him invincible; fo that thele
rejoicings were not the effects of fear, but hatred,
The Pariſians, having moſt of them been born un-
der the reign of Lewis, and inured to the yoke of
abſolute monarchy, eſteemed a king as a divinity,
and looked upon an ufurper as a ſacrilegious wk
lain. The lower claſs of people, who had often ſeen
James go to maſs, conceived an affection for him
as a pious prince, whilſt they deteſted William as an
heretic. The idea of a ſon-in-law and daughter,
who had driven their father into exile, of a Prote-
ſtant reigning in the room of a Catholic, and, in
ſhort, of an enemy of Lewis XIV. had tranſported
the Pariſians to a pitch of phrenſy; but wiſe people
were more moderate in their ſentiments. |
James, having returned to France, left his rival
to gain new victories in Ireland, and to eſtabliſh

<.14 LEWIS. XV; 217
tinſelf more firmly on his throne. Lewis's fleets
vere now employed in bringing over the French,
who had fought to no purpoſe, as well as great num-
bers of Iriſh catholic families, who, living but poor-
Vin their own country, choſe rather to go over
to France to live on the king's bounty.

We may eaſily perceive, that fortune had bit
little ſhare in the beginning or end of this revolu-
tion; ſince every part of it may be accounted for
from the different characters of James and Wil-
lam. Thoſe who diſcover the cauſes of events,
in the different conduct of men, will here obſerve,
that king William, after his victory, proclaimed a
general pardon ; and that James, after his defeat,
pling through the little town of Galloway, order-
ed ſome of the inhabitants to be hanged, becauſe
they had been for ſhutting the gates againſt him.
Of two men, whoſe conduct was fo different, it
b ealy to ſee which would prevail.

James had yet ſome towns remaining in Ireland
mongſt others was Limerick, where he had above
tvelve thouſand ſoldiers. The French king, who
vas [till reſolved to ſupport James, embarked three
bouſand regular troops for Limerick: nor did he
lop here ; for he ſent over a large ſupply of all ne-
ceſaries for the inhabitants as well as ſoldiers. Forty
tan{port-ſhips ſailed for Ireland, under the convoy of
were men of war; containing all kinds of ſuccours,
amen, arms, and all other requiſites; engineers, gun»
ders, dombardicrs, and two hundred maſons; ſaddles,
des, and houſings, for above twenty thouſand
terſe; a great number of cannon, with their car-
apes; fuſces, piſtols, and ſwords, ſufficient to arm

Vor. I. U

—— ow

ST OC

b * . K ; i
F 0 -
P

2158 THEAGE OF "a

twenty-ſix thouſand men; proviſions, cloath ant
twenty-ſix thouſand pair of ſhoes.'" Limerick ws
ſoon afterwards beſieged ; and, as the per wa
ſo ſtrongly reinforced, the inhabitants expeftedh
king would appear in their defence. James, how.
ever, not coming, the town ſurrendered” The
French fleet returned to France, bringing over with
them no leſs than twenty thouſand wk, __ oo tic
well as other refugees.

It ĩs not a little aſtoniſhing, that, —
all theſe rebuffs, Lewis was not yet diſcouraged;
for though he at that time maintained a heayy war
againſt almoſt all Europe, yet he reſolved to make
another grand effort in favour of James, by making
a deſcent on England with twenty thouſand met
'They were accordingly aſſembled betwixt Cher
bourg and La Hogue ; and three hundred tranf
port-ſhips were got ready at Breſt. Tourville, vit
forty-four men of war, waited for them on the
coaſts of Normandy; and d'Etrees was on his va
from Toulon with another ſquadron of thirty fai
As there are misfortunes which ariſe from bad con
duct, ſo there are likewiſe others which can be im
puted only to ill-fortune. The wind, which ws
at firſt favourable to d'Etrees's ſquadron, choppe
about; which prevented his joining Tourville, wit
was attacked by the united fleets of England an
Holland, of near an hundred fail. Superiority
number obtained the victory; and the French ven

W

obliged to ſheer off, after an obſtinate fight of tet ©
hours. Ruſſel, the Engliſh admiral, purſued the ; 4
two days: fourteen of their largeſt ſhips, two © 1

which mounted an hundred and four guns,
ed on the coaſt; and the captains, knowing the

22

S£

== 5

4

cb. 14. LEWIS NV. 219
nuſt be deſtroyed by the enemy, with their own
nds fired them. King James, who was himſelf
i ſpectator of this calamity: from the ſhore, loſt all

is was the firſt check which the maritime power
of Lewis received. Seignelai, who, following the
ſteps of his father Colbert, had greatly improved
the marine of France, died about the end of the year
1690. Pontchartain, preſident of Britany, ſucceed-
ed him as ſecretary of naval affairs: he likewiſe
kept up the maritime power with equal vigilance;
and the whole French miniſtry promoted it with
the fame ſpirit; ſo that the. very year after the de-
feat at La Hogue, the French navy was as numer-
ous as ever. Tourville was foon at the head of
ſixty (hips of the line, and d'Etrees had thirty under
tis command, excluſive of thoſe which lay in the
tarbours : nay, about four years after, the king
equipped a ſquadron more numerous than any of
tie former, to convoy James to England, with
trenty thouſand French. But this fleet only ſhew-
«itſelf; the meaſures, purſued by James's friends,
being as ill conducted at London, as they had been
well concerted in France by his protector.

The dethroned prince's party, having no other
rſource, had now at laſt recourſe to forming
plots againſt his rival's life. Almoſt all thoſe,
Wo were concerned in theſe conſpiracies, ſuffered
death: and though they had even ſucceeded, it is
dot likely that James would ever have recovered his
kingdom, He ſpent the remainder of his days at
d. Germains, where he lived upon the bounty of
Lewis, and a yearly penſion of ſeventy-two thou-

U 2

220 THE AGE OF © dN
ſand livres, which he was ſo mean as to receive {.
cretly from his daughter Mary, by whom be had
been dethroned, He died at St. Germains, in the
year 1700.; and it was pretended by ſome Iriſh
Jeſuits, that there were miracles wrought at bis
tomb: there was even a report, that Rome in-
tended to canonize this prince after his death, whom Wl *"
ſhe had intirely forſaken during his life. | al
Few princes had been more unfortunate than WW f
James; nor have we any inſtance in hiſtory of a fi- .
mily ſo unhappy for ſuch a number of years. The
firſt of his anceſtors, who reigned over Scotland, Ml
and was likewiſe named James, after having been
eighteen years a priſoner in England, was, together
with his queen, murdered by his own. ſubjefts,
James II. his ſon, was killed in a battle againſt the
Englith, at the age of nineteen. James III. being Wl 11”
firſt impriſoned by his people, was afterwards killed
in the field by the rebels. James IV. likewiſe loſt
his life in an unſucceſsful battle. Mary Stuart,
his grand daughter, having been driven from ber
throne, took refuge in England; where, after kn-
guiſhing in priſon eighteen years, ſhe was con-
demned to death by Engliſh judges, and accord-
ingly beheaded. Charles I. her grandſon, King
of Scotland, as well as England, being fold by
the Scots, was ſentenced to death by the Engliſh,
and ſuffered on a ſcaffold. James his ſon, the BY f.
ſeventh of the name, and ſecond of England, the 1
ſubject of this part of our hiſtory, was driven out 1
of his three kingdoms; and, as a further aggra. U
vation of his misfortunes, even the legitimacy of bo
his ſon was diſputed. This ſon likewiſe made ef
forts to regain the throne of his anceſtors; but

(hi 15. LEWIS XIV. 121t
hey proved fruitleſs, and were only the occaſion
of many of his friends ſuffering death by the hands
of public executioners, We have alſo lately ſeen
prince Charles-Edward exerting the virtues of his*
royal anceſtors, and the courage of his mother's
father king John Sobieſki: forming great exploits,
ind undergoing the moſt incredible hardſhips; but
al to no purpoſe. If any thing can juſtify the
opinion of thoſe who believe in a fatality, from
which nothing can eſcape, it is this continued feries
of misfortunes, which has perſecuted the Stuart fas
mily for above three hundred years. |

>;

CHAPTER XV.

What paſſed on the continent, whilſt William
took poſſeſſion of Scotland, England, and

Ireland, to the year 1697.

O far I have been unwilling to break the thread
8 of the affairs in England; I now return to
thoſe on the continent.

The king had certainly increaſed his naval ſtrength
to ſuch a degree, as no nation ever exceeded: he
tad to encounter with the emperor, the Empire,
Pain, the two maritime powers of England and
Holland, become now more formidable by being
inder one head, beſides Savoy, and almoſt all
Italy, One only of theſe enemies, ſuch as Eng-
knd or Spain, would have been ſufficient formerly.
lo cruſh France; and now, altogether, could

U 3 *

E SES ESESRERD SEASRARAGSARPE BEESFERXr

222 - THE AGE OF Ch: 15
hardly ſtruggle wich her. Lewis had generally
five armies in the courſe of this wat; ſometimes
ſix, and never leſs than four. | Thoſe in Ger.
many and Flanders often amounted to an hundred
thouſand ſoldiers, beſides gariſons kept up in the
frontier towns. The French monarch had at one
time, including his naval forces, four hundred
and fifty thouſand men in pay. Neither the Turk.
iſh empire, ſo powerful in Europe, Aſia, and Afi
ca, nor the Roman, ſtill greater, had ever more

nor ſo many wars to ſupport at one and the me uin
time. Even thoſe who blamed Lewis XIV. fo that
drawing upon himſelf ſo many enemies, could noi nan
help admiring the meaſures he took to oppoſe, a r.
rather to prevent them. mar
His enemies were not yet intirely declared, noi troc
were they all united. The prince of Orange ue
not yet ſailed out of the Texel in erder to di to «
his father-in-law from his dominions; and Franc ind
had already armies on the frontiers of Holland vas
and on the Rhine. Lewis had ſent his ſon ti init
Dauphin who was called Monſeigneur, into Ger
many, with an army of an hundred thouſand men te
'T his young prince greatly reſembled the queen ii upo
mother, in the ſweetneſs of his diſpoſition, and mo bad
deſty of his behaviour. He was then twenty · ee His
years of age; and this was the firſt time of his b te.
ing entruſted with the command; which was noi cone
- done, till he had eſtabliſhed ſuch a character WJ vic
ſhewed him highly worthy of this honour. I Out
king faid to him in public, at his departure (4) the
« My ſon, in fending you. to command my armic 200
« I give you an opportunity to diſplay your mer *
|

(a) September 23. 368 8,

ch. 15: -LEWI1S xv. 223

go and ſhew it to all Europe; ſo that when I
0 hall come to die, I may appear to be ſtill living
4 in you.”

The prince had a ſpecial commiſſion - 3 out
fr his command in the ſame manner as if he had
deen any other general whom the king had choſen.
His father directed to him thus: « To my ſon the
« Dauphin, my lieutenant-general, and commander
« of my armies in Germany.“

Every thing was ſettled and diſpoſed with the
utmoſt carefulneſs, for the campaign in Germany,
that the ſon of Lewis, who honoured it with his
name and preſence, might not meet with any diſ-
grace, The marſhal de Duras, in reality, com-
manded the army. Bouflers headed a body of
troops on this fide the Rhine; and marſhal d'Hu-
mieres was poſted with another towards Cologne,
to obſerve the motions of the enemy. Heidelberg
and Mentz were taken: the ſiege of Philipſbourg
vas likewiſe begun; an undertaking always thought
firſt neceſſary, when France carried on a war in
Germany. Vauban conducted the ſiege; and all
the ſcenes of action, which fell not to him, devolved
upon Catinat, the lieutenant-general; a man who
tad courage and abilities equal to any enterprize,
His royal highneſs the Dauphin arrived ſix days
iter the trenches. were opened: he imitated the
conduct of his father, expoſing himſelf to danger,
vhen neceſſary, with great intrepidity, though with-
out raſbneſs; affable to every body, and liberal to
the ſoldiers. The king felt a ſincere joy in having
aſon, who imitated without eclipſing him, and who,
Vithout raiſing the jealouſy of his father, made him-
klf univerſally beloved.

n
Aw

224 T THE ACH Ar . rg
Fhilpſbourg was taken in nineteen days (, Man

heim in three, and Frankendal in two; Spies 4
Treves, Worms, and Oppenheim, nn as 2

foon as the French appeared before their gates (c), 1
The king had refolved to make a perfect deſart .
of the Palatinate, as ſoon as the towns ſhould be *
taken: his deſign in this was rather to cut off all 1
ſubſiſtence from his enemies, than to revenge him-
ſelf of the elector Palatine, who had indeed done E
nothing but his duty, in entering into a league with *
the reſt of Germany againſt France. There eame A
an order from Lewis, ſigned Louvois, to reduce all "
to aſhes. The French generals, being obliged to fer
obey, accordingly gave notice to the citizens of mil
thoſe towns, but lately repaired, and then ſo flou- Wl;
riſhing, to the inhabitants of the villages, and to n

the owners of above fifty caſtles, that they mult
immediately quit their habitations, though it hap-
pened then to be the dead of winter; for that all
was to be deſtroyed by fire and ſword (4). Men
and women, old and young, accordingly moved off
in the utmoſt trepidation : ſome wandering about in
the fields, ard others took refuge in the neighbour-
ing countries, whilſt the ſoldiery, who generally ex-
ceed the orders of ſeverity, and come ſhort of thoſe
of clemency, burnt and ſacked the eountry of this

wretched people. They begun with Manheim, the EC
reſidence of the electors: their houſes and palaces Gli
were raſed to the ground; nay, the very gravel; .
were ranſacked by the rapacious ſoldiery; who, Fran
imagining they ſhould find treaſures there, diſturbed idee
the aſhes of the dead. This was the ſecond time üfe
that beautiful country was laid waſte under Levis are 2
O Nov. 2. 1688. (e) Nov, rg. 16888. () Feb. 89: i Nine

6:5, "LEWIS XIV.” 4
Ny. but the flames, with which Turenne had de-
royed two towns and twenty villages of the Palati-
nate, were but ſparks in compariſon of this laſt ter-
dle deſtruction, which all Europe looked upon
rich horror. The officers themſelves, who executed
theſe orders, were aſhamed at being the inſtruments
of fuch ſeverity. They highly reflected on the
marquis de Louvois, who, from a long miniſtry,
ad contracted an inhumanity and hardneſs of
heart: he it was, indeed, who adviſed theſe cruel
neaſures; but Lewis had it in his power not to
follow them. Had the king beheld this tragical
tene, with his own hands he would have extin-
miſhed the flames: but when he i gned the des
ſruction of a whole country, he was ſeated in his
own palace at Verfailles, ſurrounded with pleafuresz
nd it appeared there only a lawful act of power,
and the unfortunate right of war. Had he viewed
be affair itſelf, it muſt have filled him with the ut-
noſt horror, Nations, who had hitherto only blam-
cc whilſt they admired his ambition, now exclaimed
woud againſt his barbarity, and highly condemned
lis policy; for if his enemies could have penetrated
no bis dominions, after his own example, they
vould have reduced his towns to aſhes.

This danger was to be feared; for Lewis, by
wrering his frontiers with an hundred thouſand
kldiers, had taught Germany to make the like ef-
forts. This country, being more populous than
Ince, was able to furniſh greater armies: . theſe,
tdeed, are raiſed, aſſembled, and paid, with more
Weulty ; ; it requires likewiſe more time before they
re able to make a figure in the field; but their diſci-
Flac, and patience of fatigue, renders them, towards

i as SP LN |
the end of the campaign, as formidable as the French
are at the beginning. Charles V. duke of Lorri,
then commanded them: this prince, always ſtrip.
ped of his dominions by Lewis XIV. and never
able to regain them, had preſerved the empire tc
the emperor Leopold, and gained ſeveral victories
over the Turks and Hungarians, - He came noy,
together with the eleftor of Brandenbourg, to op-
poſe the French power: he retook Bonn and Mentz,
two inconſiderable, though regularly fortified, places,
Bonn held out three months and fourteen days, and
then ſurrendered (e); when the-chief commander,
baron d'Asfield, was mortally wounded, in a gene-
ral aſſault. Ki

The marquis d'Uxelles, afterwards a marſhal of
France, a man of the utmoſt ſagacity and forelight
made ſuch excellent diſpoſitions for the defence of
Mentz, that his gariſon was but flightly fatigued
notwithſtanding the long duty they had performed
nor was his activity confined within the town; for
he made one-and-twenty ſallies, and killed above
five thouſand of the enemy; he fometimes made
two fallies in broad day: in fine, he at laſt fur
rendered at the end of ſeven weeks; and this he w:
obliged to do for want of powder. The defenct
of this town merits a place in hiſtory, not only
upon its own account, but becauſe of the unyul
cenſure of the public on this occaſion. Paris, tit
vaſt city, ſo full of idle perſons, who pretend tt
judge of every tranſaction, that city, which, with {
many tongues, and ſo many ears, has ſo few eye
condemned d'Uxelles as a man who had neitht
courage nor judgment. This gentleman, who

(ec) October 12. 1689, k

*

cb. 15. LEWIS XV. 227
juſtly praiſed by all the moſt able-officers, at his re-
tum from the campaign, happening to go to the
theatre, was hooted and hiſſed by the houſe, who
called aloud Mentz ! He was obliged to withdraw;
ſpiſing, as all ſenſible perſons muſt, a people who
hewed themſelves fuch bad judges of merit, and of
vbom, nevertheleſs, every one almoſt is ambitious
of receiving the applauſes. |

About this time , the marſhal d'Humieres was
defeated by prince Waldeck in the Netherlands, at
Valencour on the Sambre: but this overthrow,
tough it hurt the marſhal's reputation, yet it de-
taſted but little from the glory of the French
ums. Louvois, his friend and patron, was obliged
to take from him the command of that army;
Neither the king nor Louvois had any affection for
Luxembourg ; but as both had the honour of France
i heart, they inveſted him with the command, con-
tary to their natural inclination. He was accord-
noly appointed general in the Low Countries; for
Louvois either at firſt made a proper choice, or,
when miſtaken, rectified his error by a ſpeedy al-
tration, Catinat had the command in Italy. The
marſhal de Lorges made a good defence in Ger-
many; and the duke de Noailles had ſome ſucceſs
n Catalonia; but the army in Flanders, com-
manded by Luxembourg, and that in Italy under
(atinat, had a continued flow of ſucceſs. Theſe
wo generals were, at that time, the moſt renowned
0 Europe, | |

The marſhal duke de Luxembourg had, in his
Garatter, ſome reſemblance of the great Conde,
uder whom he had learned the art of war: he was

{f) June 1689. ?

7

7 2

228 THE AGE OF "up

of a forward enterpriſing ſpirit, and quick in di.
cerning and executing, of a genius eager after know.
lege; but unbounded and irregular; of an amorous
diſpoſition, which continually ingaged him in in-
trigues; and, though of a deformed perſony as well
as diſagreeable countenance, yet he often met with
a return of love from the fair ſex: in ſhort; his
Comes were rather thoſe of an hero than a lage

Catinat was a perſon of ſuch application and ac
iy, that he was equal to the moſt arduous enter
prizes, yet never piqued himſelf on any of his actions
He would have made a good miniſter, or chancellor
as well as an excellent general. He had been at fir
a counſellor, but had quitted his profeſſion twenty
three years ago, from a diſguſt he conceived at the
loſs of a cauſe, which had been unjuſtly determined
He then went into the army, and ſerved at firſt a
an enſign in the French guards. In the year 1667
at the attack of the counterſcarp of Liſle, in Sp.
of the king, he performed an exploit, which
quired both courage and conduct. His majeſty re
marked him particularly; and his fortune commer
ced from that time; for he was raiſed by dey
without the leaſt ſolicitation. He was a perfect
loſopher in the midſt of grandeur and war, the tw
moſt dangerous rocks to moderation; and fre
from all prejudices, without affecting too much ti
deſpiſe them. In regard to gallantry, and oth
courtly 1 intrigues, he was utterly ignorant; but
cultivated friendſhip with great ſincerity, and alway
behaved with the ſtricteſt honour. As he was |!
tirely free from pride, ſo was he likewiſe from
narrow ſelfiſhneſs: 1 in ſhort, he ſhewed himſelf a

—

al philoſopher throughout all his life, as well as at
tis death. 2 Was lo alyhs 205 Hits 313-2
Catinat commanded then in Italy. He was op-
oſed by Victor Amadeus, duke of Savoy; a prince
equally famous for his wiſdom, policy, and misfor-
4unes: he was a courageous general, headed his own
mies, expoſed himſelf as a common ſoldier, and was
perfectly acquainted with that ſort of war generally
arried on in confined and mountainous countries,
ſuch as his was: he was a perſon of great activity
well as vigilance, and a remarkable lover of order;
but, with all his qualifications, he was often. guilty
of miſconduct both as a prince and as a general. It
s faid, he was guilty of an error in the diſpoſition
of his army againſt that of Catinat. The French ge-
eral took advantage of this, and gained a complete
fictory, in ſight of Saluces, near the abbey of Sta-
farde, from whence the battle was named. When
dere happens to be a great number ſlain on one fide,
nd but a few on the other, this is an inconteſtable
proof, that the vanquiſhed army fought ina ſituation
iterein they muſt unavoidably be defeated. The
trench army loſt only three hundred men, though
lat of the allies, under the duke of Savoy, had four
bouſand killed on the ſpot. After this battle, all
Hoy, except Monmelian, was ſubjected. Catinat
ken marched into Piedmont; forced the enemy's
renches ncar Suſa; took that place, Villafranca,
Jlontalban, Nice, which was reckoned impregnable,
Vallane, Carmagnole (g), and returned again to
lonmelian, which he took, after an obſtinate ſiege.
Alter this great ſucceſs, the French miniſter

(2) 1691.
Vor. I. X

2 30 THE AGE OF ch 15
thought proper to diminiſh the army under .
command, whilſt the duke of Savoy augmented 1;
Catinat, now weaker. than his 4anquiſhed enemy
was obliged, for a conſiderable time, to act only oi
the defenſive; but, having at laſt received a rein
forcement, he deſcended from the Alps to Mar
ſeilles, and there gained a ſecond pitched battle (h)
which wag the more glorious, as prince Eugene «
Savoy was one of the enemy's commanders,
On the other fide of France towards the Lox
Countries, marſhal Luxembourg gained the battle
of Fleurus. This victory, as all the officers acknoy
leged was chiefly owing to the ſuperior genius of
the French commander over the prince of Waldeck
then general of the allied army. In this action, eig
thouſand of the enemy were made priſoners, and
fix thouſand killed ; two hundred of their ſtandard:
with all their artillery and baggage, were likewile
taken, and their whole army, in ſhort, completely
routed, and put to flight (i).
King William, having vanquiſhed his father
in-law, was me to the continent: he had
genius ſo fruitful in reſources, that he often drey
more advantage from a defeat, than the Fredi u
did from their victories: and though he was obligec
to have recourſe to all manner of intrigues and ne
gotiations, to raiſe money and forces to carry on
war againſt a prince, whoſe word was a law; ye
ſoon after the defeat of Fleurus, he appeared at the
head of an army as ſtrong as the French, to oppol
Luxembourg (().
The two armies conſiſted each of about eight)
thouſand Men. Mons was inveſted by Luxem
(% Ot. 4. 1691. (i) June 30. 1690. ( Sept. 19» 1690.

cb. 15. LEWIS XV. 231

jourg (7), before king William believed the French
ud moved out of their winter-quarters. Lewis
linſelf was preſent at the ſiege; and entered the
town on the ninth day after the trenches were open-
cd, in fight of the allied army. Immediately after,
te departed for Verſailles, leaving Luxembourg
o carry on that campaign, which was finiſhed by the
attle of Leuſes (m); a moſt extraordinary action, in
which eighteen ſquadrons of the houſhold troops of
France, and the gendarmery, defeated ſeventy-five
huadrons of the enemy.

Lewis again appeared at the ſiege of Namur, the
frongeſt place in the Netherlands, by its fituation
u the confluence of the Sambre and Maeſe, and the
length of its citadel built upon the rocks. He took
tis city in about a week, and the forts in twenty-
wo days (); whilſt the duke of Luxembourg was
poſted near the Mehaigne with twenty-four thouſand
nen, to hinder the paſſage of William, who had
gity thouſand, and prevent his attempting to raiſe
ke ſiege. After this conqueſt the king again return-
uo Verſailles, and left Luxembourg to oppoſe the
wnfederate army. About this time happened the
kttle of Steenkirk, famous for ſtratagem and valour.
The enemy having difcovered a French ſpy in their
amy obliged him, before they put him to death,
b write falſe advice to marſhal Luxembourg; in
wnſequence of which, the French general took
ch meaſures as promiſed ſucceſs; but as the in-
Eligence was falſe they had a contrary effect: his
my was attacked by day-break, before the troops
"are awake: a whole brigade was put to flight be-

(1) April 9. i691, (m) Sept. 1691. (n) June 1692.

%

1

. AGE OF Gi

ch.
fore the marſhal ſcaree knew of the enemy's ar N
rival: and all would have been utterly deſtroyed f
if not prevented by the moſt UNI _ .
and valour. L
To be a great general is not falficient to pre .
vent a defeat, without diſciplined troops capable of a
rallying, and general officers both able and vil I
ing to retrieve the diſtreſs; for one ſuperior office .
alone, who had been willing to take advantage 0 5
this confuſion, in order to bring about his general? 5
defeat, might have done it cow without being d *
covered. *
Luxembourg was at this time (2) indiſpoſed; 2 de
untortunate circumſtance at a juncture which re 00
quired new ſtrength and vigour. The ſenſe of the |
preſent danger, however, rouſed his ſtrength, T
prevent a defeat, he muſt perform wonders; and ht ind

did ſo: he changed his ground, in order to give hi
army another and more convenient ſituation for a
engagement; he recovered the right brigade, whic
was in the utmoſt diſorder; he thrice rallied hi
forces, and thrice charged the enemy at the head
the houſhold troops; and all this in leſs than tut
hours. He had then in his army the duke d.
Charters, afterwards regent of the kingdom,
grandion of France, not above fifteen years 0
age: it was not to be expected, that ſuch a youti
could be of ſervice in any deciſive ſtroke; the ligh
however, of a grandſon of France, at ſuch an ag
charging at the head of the houſhold troops
wounded in battle, and, notwithſtanding that, Je
continuing in the combar, Fay animated the ſc
diery. |

(9) Auguſt 3. 1692.

*

ch. 15. LEWIS XIV. 233

There were likewiſe a grandſon and a grand · nephew
of the great Conde, who both ſerved as lieutenant-
generals: one was Lewis duke de Bourbon, the
ather Armand prince of Conti, rivals to each other
n courage, ſpirit, ambition, and reputation: the
luke was of a temper more reſerved than the other,
ind had, perhaps, more ſolid qualities, whilſt the
mince had more ſhining ones: they had been both
alled upon by the public voice to the command of
xmies, and both had a paſſionate deſire for ſuch a
glory; but neither of them ever arrived at it; for
Lewis, who knew their ambition to be as great as
their merit, always remembered that the prince of
Conde had declared war :againſt him.

The prinee of Conti was the firſt who contributed
to retrieve the diforder, by rallying the brigades,
nd making others advance to their ſuccour. The
duke performed his duty with the ſame ſpirit, not
een requiring emulation to ſpur him on. The
duke de Vendome, grandfon of Henry IV. was
allo a lieutenant- general in this army: he had ſerved
from the. age of twelve years; and, though then in
tis fortieth, yet he had never commanded in chief:
te was accompanied by his brother the grand-prior.

All theſe princes were obliged to head the houſhold
troops, in order to diſlodge a body of Engliſh,
plted in an advantageous place; and on this the
ſucceſs of the battle depended. The houſhold
oops, and the Engliſh, were then the beſt in. the
world, A moſt dreadful ſlaughter enſued: the
trench, however, animated by the preſence of ſo
many princes and nobles,, who fought round the
general, at laſt gained the advantage; and the

* 3

—

234 THE AGE OF Cr;

Engliſh being defeated, the reſt of the confederate

army were forced to give ground.
Bouflers, after band a m4 of ns

happened to be ſome miles from the field of battle
during the action, came up, at this juncture, with
his dragoons, and completed the victory. King
William, having Joſt ſeven thouſand: men, retired
with as much order as he had attacked; and, though
defeated, yet always to be feared, he ſtill kept the
field. This victory, won by the valour of theſe
young princes, and the very flower of the French
nobility, produced ſuch an effect at court, at Paris,
and in the provinces, as no other had ever done before,
The duke de Bourbon, the prince of Conti, the
duke de Vendoiae, with his brother and all their
friends at their return, found the roads lined with
the populace, who received them with loud accla-
mations, and a joy that proceeded almoſt to mad-
neſs: all the women preſſed forward, with the ut-
moſt eagerneſs, to ſee and be ſeen by theſe heroes,
It was at that time the faſhion amongſt the men tc
wear laced cravats, which they 2 took ſom
pains and time to put on properly: the princes, har.
ing dreſſed themſelves in a hurry for the battle,
thrown them careleſly about their necks: the .
upon this, wore handkerchiefs in that taſte, w
they called /teenkirks ; all the new trinkets were
made a la ſteenkerque ; and any young fellow; a A
had been at the late battle, was received every
where with the higheſt e The people croude
from all parts about the princes, who were univer
ſally beloved; and the more, becauſe their k
at court was or from being equal to their gory.
The ſame general, with the ſame princes, and ii

DSF A FFF E . 8 g. 8 . A 8

ch. 15: LEWIS XIV. 233

of victorious, at Steenkirk, the following cam-
pign, attacked king William, after a march of
ode · and twenty miles, and .defeated him at Ner ·
vinde, a village near the Guette, ſome leagues from
wruſſels. William had juſt time to draw up bis
my in order of battle, Luxembourg, and the
inces, twice carried the village ſword in hand:
wut the enemy as often retook it, as ſoon a8
Luxembourg turned to another quarter: the French,
however, at laſt gained it a third time, and the
battle ended in their favour (p). Few battles were
wer more bloody: there were killed on the ſpot,
in all, twenty thouſand men; twelve thouſand of
he allies, and eight thouſand French, On this oc-
alon it was faid, they ought rather to have ſung
De profundis than Te Deum.

All theſe victories procured great glory, but little
advantage, The allies, though defeated at Fleurus,
Steenkirk, and Nerwinde, had not yet been effectu-
ally worſted. King William always made excellent
retreats; and, about fifteen days after one battle,
mother generally followed, in order to determine
who ſhould keep the field. The cathedral of Paris
was hung round with the enemy's colours; which
fave occaſion to the prince of Conti to call Luxem-
bourg the uphol/terer of Notre-Dame. There was
wthing now talked of but victories. Lewis XIV.
kad formerly conquered the half of Holland and
Flanders, and all Frapche-Comte, without fight-
vg a ſingle battle: but now, after ſo many grand
torts, and bloody victories, he could not penetrate
nto the united provinces, nor lay ſiege to Bruſſels.

(fp) July 29. 1693.

8

Is KLEE TE EFEL RS RG Fr

TE

8

* _

236 THE AGE OT n

' The marſhal de Lorges had alſo gained a conſ.
derable victory near Spierbach (9): be had even
taken priſoner the 61d duke de Wittembergz, an
penetrated into the heart of his country; but; after
all this ſucceſs, he had been forced to retire.” The
Dauphin had twice taken and ſacked Hei
which the enemy as often retook: ſo that his high.
neſs was at laſt obliged to act 1 on the defenſe
againſt the Imperialiſts.

Marſhal de Catinat, after the vidtory at Sen,
and the conqueſt of all Savoy, could not even fave
Dauphine from an irruption of the duke of Savoy;
neither was he able, after his victory at Marſeilles
to preſerve the important town of Cafat; '!

In Spain the marſhal de Noailles alſo gained
battle near the banks of the river Ter (7) He'took
Girona, and ſome other inconſiderable places: but
he had only a weak army, and was obliged after his
victory, to retire from before Barcelona. The
French, victorious on all ſides, and weakened with
ſucceſs, found the allies to be an hydra, always
ſpringing up afreſh. It began now to be ſomewhat
difficult to muſter up recruits in France, and more
fo to raiſe money. The ſeverity of the ſeaſon (s),
having deſtroyed the fruits of the earth, brought on
a famine alſo at this time; ſo that, in the midſt of
their Te Deums and rejoicings, the French were pe-
riſhing with want and miſery. Their wonted ſpirit
and notion of ſuperiority, the very ſoul of the French
troops, began likewiſe to ſink apace. Lewis had
ceaſed to command them; Louvois was dead (?),
and they were highly dilſatisfied with his ſon Bar-

(q) Sept. 1. & 2. 1692, (r) May 27. 1694. (5) 1653.
(t) 1691. | |

ch. 15. LEWIS NV. 2335
ſeſeux: finally, the death of marſhal Luxem-
jourg (), under whom the ſoldiers thought them-
flves invincible, ſeemed to put an end to the rapid
courſe of France's victories. |
The art of bombarding maritime towns with
hips, was now uſed againſt its inventors: that in-
fernal machine, with which the Engliſh attempted
to deſtroy St. Malo, and which blew up too ſoon
to do execution, did not owe its original to the in-
genuity of France: theſe fire-ſhips had been uſed
n Europe a conſiderable time before; but it is
the art of throwing bombs with as much certainty
from a moving veſſel as from the ſolid ground,
which the French claim as their invention: and it
was by this art that Dieppe, Havre-de-grace, St.
Malo, Dunkirk, and Calais, were bombarded by the
Engliſh fleets (x). Dieppe, being the moſt acceſſible,
was the only one which ſuffered conſiderable da-
mage, This town now ſo agreeable by the regu-
larity of its buildings, which owes its preſent beauty
tits former deſtruction, was almoſt intirely reduced
to aſhes. In Havre-de-grace there were only about
twenty houſes deſtroyed ; but the fortifications of
the harbour were utterly demoliſhed. In this ſenſe
then, the medal ſtruck in Holland is founded on
ruth, though the French hiſtorians have exclaimed
2anſt its falſity. The exergue is in Latin, to this
purpoſe ; The harbour of Havre burnt and demo-
bed, &c. This inſcription does not ſay the town
ws deſtroyed, which would have been falſe ; but
bat the harbour was deſtroyed, which was the real
truth, >
Soon after, we again loſt Namur. In France

(% January 16953. (x) July 1694. & 1695.

238 THE AGE OF Ch. 75
they had beſtowed the higheſt encomiums on Lew,
XIV. for taking this place; nor had they been leg
profule of their raillery, and indecent xeſlections
againſt William, for not being able to relieve it with
an army of eighty thouſand men. |
William made himfelf maſter of the place, in the
fame manner he had feen it taken. He attacked
it in ſight of an army much ſtronger than that he
commanded, when Lewis beſieged Namur. He
found there many new fortifications, raiſed by Vau-
ban: the French gariſon, which defended it, was a
real army ; for, during his preparations to inveſt
the place, marſhal Bouflers had thrown himſelf into
the town with ſeven regiments of dragoons: thus,
Namur was defended with ſixteen thoufand men,
and every moment expecting to be relieved by an
hundred thouſand more. Marſhal de Bouflers was
an active and indefatigable general, and a true pa-
triot; employing his whole thoughts for the ſervice
of his country, which he loved as much as life itſelf,
The marquis de Feuquieres, in his Memoirs,
blames Bouflers for many pieces of miſconduft in

S =

=FFESESEI, ET ST TAE Sz

n

his defence of the town and citadel of Namur; H |
nay, he even reflects upon him for his defence of 1
Liſle, which redounded ſo much to his honour. .
The writers of Lewis XIV.'s reign have all ſerviley *
copied the marquis for affairs of war, as they have 10
the abbe de Choiſi for private hiſtories. They dd Bl
not, or, perhaps had not an opportunity to know, U
that Feuquieres, though an excellent officer, who bo
knew the practice and theory of war, was a man of 1
no leſs chagrin than brightneſs of genius, the Ar Bl

ſtarchus of generals, and ſometimes the Zoilus.
He miſrepreſents facts, in order to have the plex”

4.15. LEWIS XIV. 239

re of cenſuring faults : he reproached every body
Jmoſt, and, in his turn, was alſo univerſally re-
oached ; thence be was ſaid to be the braveſt man
in Europe, becauſe he ſlept every night amidſt an
hundred thouſand enemies. His merit not having
teen diſtinguiſhed with a marſhal's ſtaff, he there-
fore employed, againſt all the officers of ſtate, his
whole wit and talents; which might have been of
neat ſervice to the public, had he been as happy in
lis temper as he was active, diſcerning and bold.
He reproaches marſhal de Villeroi with more and
peter miſconduct than Bouflers. Villeroi, at the
tead of eighty thouſand men, was to have ſuc-
wired Namur: but, had even the two marſhals
lone all in their power, the ſituation of the ground
ns ſuch, that Namur could not have been relieved,
ud muſt have ſurrendered ſooner or later: and
te army poſted on the banks of the Mehaigne, in
te ſame manner as that which had before obſtructed
Viliam, now neceſſarily proved the like hindrance
v marſhal de Villerot's army.

Marſhal de Bouflers, the count de Guilcard, go-
nor of Namur, the count de Laumont de Cha-
tet, commander of the infantry, together with all
be officers and ſoldiers, defended the town with
wnderful obſtinacy and valour; but all did not re-
ad its being taken above two days. When a town
ihelieged by a ſuperior army, the works properly
anducted, and the ſeaſon favourable, one may gueſs
Fetty nearly in what time it will be taken, though
WI defence be ever ſo vigorous. King William car-
ſed the city and citadel of Namur; but this exploit
al dim a little more time than it had done Lewis XIV.
The king, at che time when he loſt Namur,

my
2

. . FA EE EAFSREEBBES SE  ErEAS ES Beg

240 THE AGE OF Guy
ordered Bruſſels to be bombarded (y): a fruitleſ u
venge which he took on the king of Spain, for the
towns lately bombarded by the Engliſh. It was
equally ruinous and fatal to both parties. re
It is now two centuries ſince the reſtleſs ſpirit e
the Europeans, not contented to confine their fury
within their own continent, have carried the deſola-
tions of war to the moſt diſtant countries. We now
drain ourſelves of money and men, to go todeſtroy
one another in the remoteſt parts of Aſia and Ame-
rica, The Indians, whom we have obliged, by force n:«
or artifice, to receive our ſettlements; and the Ame
ricans, of whom we have butchered ſuch number; nn
and driven from their poſſeſſions, look upon us ep.
enemies of the human race, who come from the id
fartheſt parts of the world to cut their throats, an ir
then to plunge our ſwords into each other's boſoms

The French had, at this time, no other colony i
the Eaſt Indies but Ponticherry, which Colbert had wir
eſtabliſhed at an immenſe expence; but no advan
tage could be reaped from it for ſeveral years, The
Dutch eaſily took it; and thus ruined the commercQll pit
of France in India, when in its infancy. |

The Engliſh deſtroyed the French ſertiement a
St. Domingo (2). A privateer from Breſt ravage4Qnini
the Engliſh colony at the iſle of Gambia in Afric (aun
The privateers of St. Malo had likewiſe carried fi
and ſword into their poſſeſſions in the eaſt ſide o'r,
Newfoundland, which they poſſeſſed. Their ilanQtinir
of Jamaica had been alſo haraſſed by our ſquadrons d
their veſſels taken and burnt, and their coaſts plungWMiter:
dered. | 4 KY

Pointis (5), the commander of the ſquadron, wi

] Sept. 1693. (2) 1695, (4) 1696. (0) 169 N V.

d. 15. L E WIS NIV. 243
\ conſiderable number of the king's ſhips, and ſome

American corſairs, went beyond the line to ſurpriſe

he town of Carthagena (c), the magazine of all the
reaſure which Spain brings from Mexico, The da-
mage he did there, was computed at twenty millions
of livres, and his gain at ten millions: but ſome-
what is always to be abated in theſe calculations;
hough nothing in thoſe extreme calamities ariſing
tom ſuch glorious expeditions,

The Dutch and Engliſh merchantmen were daily
made prizes by the French privateers, but eſpecially
by Dugue-Trouin, a man of a ſingular genius, who
xanted only the command of fleets to gain him the
reputation of a Dragut, or a Barberoſſe. The enemy
6d not take ſo many of the French merchant-ſhips;
for they had fewer to take; their commerce being
neatly declined by the war, and the death of Colbert.

The reſult of theſe ſea and land expeditions was
miverſal calamity. Thoſe who have more huma
iy than policy will certainly take notice, that, in
fs war, Lewis was in arms againſt the king of
an, his own nephew; againſt the elector of Ba-
rrla, whoſe ſiſter had been married to the Dau-
jun; and againſt the elector Palatine, whoſe do-
nintons he laid waſte by fire and ſword, after he had
rariedmonſieur to the princeſs Palatine. King James
is dethroned by his own ſon-in-law and daugh-
&, We even afterwards ſaw the duke of Savoy
Ming in a league againſt France, where one of

WW daughters was dauphineſs, and againſt Spain,

Were another was queen. In ſhort, moſt of the

(c) May 1697.
Vor. I.

244 THE AGE' OF "ak

$1

wars. amongſt * princes, are 4 kind of dit
wars.
The moſt criminal under in al this war, 3
was the moſt ſucceſsful one; for William ſucceed. "
ed in every thing in England and Ireland; on the Fr
continent the ſucceſſes were pretty equally balanced Ml...
When 1 call this undertaking criminal, I do not ol
pretend to examine, whether the Engliſh nation, 5.
after having ſpilt the father's blood, was in the right 18
or in the wrong to proſeribe the fon, and to de
fend their religion and liberty; I ſay only, if there n
is any ſuch thing as juſtice upon earth, ſurely it vu n
repugnant thereto, for the ſon-in-law and daughteſ i ure
of James to drive him from his dwelling houſe, *
| Wray
tey
ix

CHAPTER XV

The peace of Ryſwick; the ſtate of Europe =
and of France in particular; the death and

teſtament of Charles II. king of _

RANCE till preſerved the 3 ove
F all her enemies. She had intirely cruſhed ſom
of them, as Savoy and the Palatinate; and had com
menced hoſtilities on the frontiers of others: ſhe wa |
a ſtrong and powerful body, but fatigued by a lon
reſiſtance, and exhauſted by her victories. One bloul
ſtruck properly, would have made her ſtagger. Wh
ever has a number of enemies at once, cannot, in tg
end. be ſafe, but by a peace, or by their 3
both which Lewis XIV. ſoon after brought about

00. 16, LEWIS XIV. 245

Victor Amadeus, duke of Savoy, .of all the al-
jed princes, knew beſt what meaſures to take, when
te found it conducive- to his intereſt to break his
engagements: It was to him then that the court of
France firſt applied. The count de Teſſe, afterwards
narnal of France, a nobleman of an amiable diſ-
wlcion, as well as great abilities, and remarkable
for his affability, a talent highly requiſite in carry-
ng on negotiations, was accordingly ſent to Turin,
v ſound matters privately : and marſhal Catinat, a
mn equally formed for the affairs of peace or war,
wught the matter to a concluſion. There was no
xeellity, indeed, for two ſuch able ſtateſmen to
termine the duke of Savoy to accept of offers fo
drantageous, They reſtored him his dominions ;
try gave him money, and propoſed a marriage be-
mt tze young duke of Burgundy, the Dauphin's
ba, hcir to the crown of France, and his daughter.
8 (fort, tne affair was foon agreed upon: the duke

pegel Catinat concluded the treaty at Notre Dame
an! Loretto (a), waither they went under pretence

« 2 religious pilgrimage; but almoſt every body
ir through their deſign. Innocent XII. the pope
that time, was extremely deſirous of entering in-
as negotiation. His deſign was at once to de-
lay from the invaſions of the French, and the
nual taxes exatted by the emperor for the pay-
Lot bis armies: he wanted the Imperialiſts to
= italy neuter; and the duke of Savoy accord-
WL cogaged to procure him this neutrality by the
WW. The emperor at firſt ſtood out; for the
of Vienna ſeldom came to a determination till
(4) July 1698.

22

246 THE AGE OF 16

the laſt extremity. The duke of Savoy then join- ;
ed his army to the French; and, in leſs than 3
month, this prince from being the-generaliſſimo o 1
the emperor became that of Lewis XIV. His daugh 0
ter was carried into France, at eleven years of geil |;
to be married to the duke of Burgundy, who wa 4
only thirteen. After the duke of Savoy had gon 5.
off from the league, it happened then, as before i by
the peace of Nimegen, that each of the allies beg ...
to treat ſeparately. The emperor was the firſt, andi ,..
accepted of the neutrality of Italy. The Dutch pre

poſed the caſtle of Ryſwick, near the Hague, to hol ;..
the conferences in, for a general peace. The fou 50
armies, which Lewis had then in the field, haſtenec 6
matters to a concluſion : he had twenty-four thou ;..
ſand men in Flanders, under Villeroi; marſhal dg .,
Choiſeul was at the head of forty thouſand, on . ;..
banks of the Rhine; and Catinat commanded as m- g
ny in Piedmont. The duke de Vendome, who, fron A
a volunteer in the king's guards, had gone throug Le.
all the different ſtations in the army, was now at lay be
head general in Catalonia, where he had gained a vl de
ctory, and taken Barcelona. Theſe new and ſuc |
ful efforts were efficacious mediators for the peace wear
The court of Rome offered her mediation ; but to
was rejected, as before at Nimegen. Charles te
king of Sweden, was pitched upon as moda *
The peace, in ſhort, was at laſt concluded (6); U aeg
not with ſuch loftineſs, nor on ſuch adyantageol roh
conditions, as had formerly diſtinguiſhed the gra 4.
deur of Lewis XIV.; for, on the contrary, c/o 7
thing came from his ſide with a remarkable m mod ler

ration and condeſcenſion. This he conſidered
(5) September, October 1679.

Ch. 16. LEWIS XIV. 247

good policy, and as neceſſary to make him we
and more powerful than ever.

The king of Spain, having been worn out by a
complication of diſtempers before his fortieth-year,
was now near his end: after his death, the poſterity
of Charles the fifth would be extinct; for he had no
more children. Lewis XIV. had a natural right to
the Spaniſh crown, as being grandſon to Philip III.
by Anne of Auſtria; and the Dauphin was equally
ntitled by Maria-Thereſa, as grandſon to Philip
the fourth.

The great aim of Lewis, as it really ought to have
teen, was to prevent the ſucceſſion of all that vaſt
monarchy of his own, and his ſon's grandfather, from
falling wholly into the other branch of the Auſtrian
family. He hoped, that the houſe of Bourbon
would be able, at leaſt, to lay hold of ſome por-
on thereof; and that, at laſt, ſhe might perhaps
get the whole into her poſſeſſion. The ſolemn
rnunciations of his mother and wife appeared to
Lewis as formal trifles, that ought to be aboliſhed
when new cireumſtances aroſe. In rhis ſcheme for
te aggrandizing of France, or the houſe of Bour-
bon, it was neceſſary, however, to put on an ap-
jearance of moderation to Europe, not to provoke
o many jealous powers. The peace now gave him
lme to procure new allies, to re-eſtabliſh his. former
finances, as well as to create others which ſeemed
teedful, and to train up a new ſoldiery. He thought
oper, therefore, ta make ſome conceſſions, in hopes
i gaining thereby more conſiderable advantages.

The king reſtored to the Spaniards all he had
ten near the Pyrenees, in the late war; as he did

Y 3

-2 48 THE AGE OF 16
alſo Luxembourg, Mons, Ath, and Covrtral, in

Flanders. He acknowleged William as lawful king
of England, hitherto ſtiled only prince of Orange,
and -accounted a tyrant and uſurper: he * 2
likewiſe to give no aſſiſtance to his enemies.

James, who was not even mentioned in the En
remained at St. Germains, living on the empty title

of king, and Lewis's penſion. He ſent nothing ic
now againſt his rival but manifeſtoes: his protector ind
was obliged to ſacrifice him; and he wal Wendy to
forgotten in Europe. lin
The decrees paſſed by the neben of Briſa coc
and Metz againſt ſo many ſovereigns, and the e die
unions made near Alſace, thoſe monuments of =_
power, and dangerous tyranny, were aboliſhed re.
and all the juriſdictions which had been' ſeized, were Wl tie!
alſo returned to the lawful proprietors. the
Beſides theſe conceſſions, Lewis reſtored Fri i:
bourg, Briſac, Kheil, and Philipſbourg, to th i!
Empire. He alſo agreed to demolith the fortiſiea Fur
tions of Straſbourg on the Rhine, Fort Lei jr
Traerbach, and Mont- royal; works on which Va Fra.
ban had exhauſted his art, and the king his trei le
ſures. All Europe became aſtoniſhed, and Fran fett
was moved with indignation, that Lewis ſnoulꝗf N
agree to ſuch a peace as if he had been conn n
quered. Harlai, Creci, and Callieres, who hal fore
ſigned it, durſt not ſhew themſelves at court, nah *
in the city; every body loaded them with ſarcaſi « o
and reproaches, as if they had taken a ſtep not o tent
dered by the miniſtry. The court bitterly reflecta c
upon them for having betrayed the honour of Franc; ap
en

The courtiers, having more zeal than penetratio on

ere - Saint * — treaty, fo ſhameful in
gpcarance;, Lewis intended to found: bis grandeur,
It was by this-txeaty that France reſtored Lorrain
v the family which! had enjoyed it ſeven hundred
jears. Duke Charles V. ho had been the ſupport
of the Empire, and had conquered the Turks, was
lad; his fon Leopold, at the peace of Ryſwick,
wok poſſeſſion of his ſovereignty; though ſtripped,
indeed of his juſt rights; for he was not permitted
to fortify his capital: but they could not deprive
tim of a more glorious. right, that of acting for the
god of his ſubjects; a right which no prince ever
uſed ſo worthily as Leopold.
It were to be wiſhed, indeed, it could be re-
membered to lateſt poſterity, that one of the pet-
teſt princes of Europe was he who did moſt for
the benefit of his people. He found Lorrain de-
ſlate and abandoned, which he repeopled and en-
iched: he preſerved it always in peace, whilſt all
Europe was ravaged by war: his conduct was ſo
prudent, that he was always on good terms with
france, and was at the fame time beloved in the Em»
pre; happily keeping that juſt medium, which a
petty prince is ſcarce ever able to preſerve betwixt
to formidable powers. He procured his people
n abundance, which they had never known be-
fore; and the nobility of Lorrain, who had been
duced to extreme. miſery, were raiſed to a ſtate
af opulence by his acts of generoſity. If he ſaw a
fentleman's houſe in ruins, he immediately had it

bolt at his own expence: he paid their debts, and

took care ro have their daughters properly married.
fe was profuſe in his preſents; and his manner of
bing was even ſuperior to his bounty; for he

* * . N
-
: :

250 THE AGE OF Ch. 16.

ſhewed, in all his gifts, at once, the magnificence
of a prince, and the politeneſs of a friend. The arts
being honoured in his little province; produced x
new circulation, which makes the riches of a ſtate:
His court was formed after the model of France:
and one who had come from thence to Luneville
would almoſt imagine himſelf ſtill at Verſailles, Af.
ter the example of Lewis, he made learning flouriſh:
he eſtabliſhed an univerſity at Luneville for true
literature, without pedantry; and thither the youngl
nobility of Germany went to receive their education,
There the true and uſeful ſciences were taught; and
the principles of natural philoſophy ocularly demon-
ſtrated by the moſt curious machines. He ſearchedf
for men of genius and talents, - even in the loweſt
ſtations, and moſt obſcure retreats; and, when hel
found ſuch, he always encouraged and brought
them to light. In ſhort, during his whole reign, his I
only employment was the care of procuring to his
people tranquillity, riches, knowlege, and pleaſure. ]
« I would quit my throne to-morrow, faid he, if 1}
« could do no more good.” Thus he enjoyed they
pleaſure of being univerſally beloved; and, long
after his death, 1 myſelf have ſeen his ſubjects ſhea
tears, when his name was mentioned. In ſhort, hey
left an example to the greateſt princes; and, by hi
behaviour, not a little paved the way for his ſon
to the Imperial diadem,
About the time when Lewis was ſettling the peace
of Ryſwick, with a view to the ſucceſſion of Spaing
the crown of Poland became vacant. This crowng
was the only elective one in the world; and fc
reigners, as well as Polanders, might put in theiey
claim. There were two ways to procure it, eithK

0. 16, LEWIS NV. 251

y merit that was conſpicuous, and ſupported with
"tereſt, to carry the votes (as was the caſe of John
gobieſki, the laſt king), or by treaſure ſufficient to
purchaſe this kingdom, which is generally put up
to a kind of auction.

The abbe de Polignac, afterwards cardinal, had,
it firſt, addreſs enough to carry the votes in favour
of the prince de Conti, ſo well known for his gal-
nt behaviour at Steenkirk and Nerwind : he had
never, however, commanded in chief, nor been ad-
mitted into the king's privy-council: the duke of
Bourbon, was reputed equal to him in warlike
ofairs; and the duke de Vendome was a man of
greater renown for martial abilities. Nevertheleſs,
tis fame eclipſed that of the other two. This was
owing to his art of pleaſing, and diſplaying his ta-
ents to the beſt advantage; an art which no- body
ever poſſeſſed to an higher degree than Conti. Po-
linac, who had that of perſuading, firſt determined
the electors in that prince's favour, By his eloquence
and promiſes, he counterbalanced the treaſure which
Auguſtus, eleftor of Saxony, had laviſhed with ſuch
profuſion, Conti was elected by a conſiderable ma-
rity (c); and accordingly proclaimed by the pri-
mate of the kingdom. Two hours after Auguſtus
vas likewiſe choſen, by another party, much leſs in
number; but he was a powerful prince, and had
troops in readineſs on the frontiers of Poland. The
prince of Conti was abſent, without money, without
troops, and without power: he had nothing but his
name, and the cardinal de Polignac. Lewis ought
certainly either to have prevented his accepting of
tle offer of the crown, or to have ſupplied him

| (e) June 27. 1693.

— 15
* TT.
-3
-
_
>»
.
- .
4 .

; ö
——
5 . * Sic
1

252 THE AGE OF ch 16

(6,
with a ſufficient force to carry it againſt his el ®
The French miniſtry was thought to have done tool ,
much in ſending the prince of Conti; and too little Afr
in giving him only a ſmall convoy, and a few bil Ne

ent

of exchange, with which he came into the road o
Dantzick. This method of beginning affairs, and
dropping them, is a kind of policy frequently pra-
Etiſed by the French miniſtry. The- prince of Conti
was not even admitted into Dantzick ; and his bills
were proteſted. The intrigues of the pope, thoſe
of the emperor, and the money and troops off
Saxony, had already ſecured the crown to his rival.

He returned with the glory only of having been
elected; and France had the mortification to find li
that ſhe was unable to make a king of Poland.
-. The diſgrace of the prince of Conti did not d-
ſturb the peice of the North amongſt the Chriſtians.
The South of Europe was reſtored to quiet by the
treaty of Ryſwick ; ſo that there was now no other
war remaining, but that which the Turks carried on
with Germany, Poland, Venice, and Mulcovy
The Chriſtians, however, notwithſtanding their il
management, and diviſions, had, in this war, . th
ſuperiority. Soon after, happened the battle ol
Zanta (4), in which prince Eugene routed the grand
ſignor at the head of his army. This defeat, made
remarkable by the death of a grand vitier, ſeven
teen baſhaws, and twenty thouſand Turks, humbieq
the Ottoman inſolence, and brought on the peace ol

Carlowitz ; in which the Turks were obliged to ſub
mit to the terms of their conquerors (e). The Ve

netians were to have Morea, the Muſcovites Alopngy
the Poles Caminieck, and the emperor Tranſilvania
(4) 1697. (ec) 1699. |

cb. 16. LEWIS MV. 253
u Chriſtendom was bleſſed with perfect tranquil,

\frica, The world, in general, ſeemed to be in
ace during the laſt two years of the ſeventeenth
atury ; a remarkable period, but of a ſhort du-
nion.
The publie troubles ſoon began again. The
North was diſturbed, in the year 1700. by two
nen, the moſt extraordinary that ever appeared in
he world; the czar Peter Alexiovitz, emperor of
juſla, and young Charles XII. king of Sweden.
The czar Peter, though born almoſt a ſavage, ar-
ized to a pitch of true grandeur : by force of ge-
ius, and labour, he became the reformer, or rather
under, of his empire. Charles XII. more virtu-
ws than Peter, and yet leſs ſerviceable to his ſub-
a,, being formed to command a ſoldiery, but not
people, was the firſt hero of his age: he died,
nmerer, with the character of an imprudent prince.
bt war, which continued eighteen years, and
WT ought ſuch deſolation on the North, aroſe from
tt ambitious deſigns of the czar, and the kings of
and and Denmark, who intended to take advan-
WT: of the youth of Charles XII. in order to ſtrip
and of ſome part of his dominions. Charles, when
nus only ſixteen years old, conquered theſe three
en. dces, became the terror of the North, and was

col aibed their education. Nine years he was the moſt
vidable prince in the world, and nine more the
ve unfortunate. |

Tte freſh commotions in the South of Europe
g from another cauſe. A great diſpute aroſe
u dividing the ſpoils of the Spaniſh monarch,

ky, and war was not talked of either in Aſia r

wuted an hero at an age when others have not

ö

254 THE AGE OF d
whoſe death was approaching. The powers, who
already enjoyed in idea this vaſt ſucceſſion; acted
in the ſame manner as generally happens during the
ſickneſs of a rich old man without children: his
wife, his relations, the prieſts, and the lawyers, pla-
ced to receive the laſt commands of the dying per-
fon; beſet him on all ſides to wreſt from him a word
in their favour. Some agree to ſhare the ſpoils,
whilſt others prepare to diſpute them,

Lewis XIV. and the emperor Leopold, were in
the ſame degree of conſanguinity : both were grand
ſons of Philip III. for both had married daughter
of Philip IV. His royal highneſs the Dauphin, and
Joſeph king of the Romans, the emperor's ſon
had a double claim by the ſame proximity. The
. right of birth was in the houſe of Bourbon; for th

king, and his ſon the Dauphin, had the eldeſſſf
daughters for their mothers: but the emperor's fa
mily aſſerted for their rights, firſt and eſpecially
the ſolemn and ratified renunciations of Lewis XII ;
and XIV. to the crown of Spain; then the nan
of Auſtria; the blood of Maximilian, from whoni

Leopold and Charles II. were deſcended; the al
moſt conſtant union of the two Auſtrian brar
and the ſtill more conſtant hatred againſt the Bo
bons; the averſion which the Spaniards had thee
to the French nation ; and, as their laſt reſource, |
certain policy they had in their power to go
the Spaniſh councils.

Theſe two rivals were not only afraid of eac
other, but had likewiſe all Europe to fear. TM
other powers, but eſpecially thoſe of England an
Holland, whoſe intereſt it was to keep a balancY
would never ſuffer the crown of Spain, with

== FS $$ == »p => n=

>
— 9

ES

to |

>
Mal

ö
,
;
"

a .

of the Empire, or of France, to be placed upon the
ame head. William had formed a deſigu, even

of the Spaniſh monarchy; and to give the principal
rt to a prince neither of the Bourbon nor Auſtrian
family, This young prince, only eight years of
ge, was deſcended from a younger daughter of
Philip IV. wife to the emperor Leopold: theſe had
daughter, married to Maximilian elector of Ba-
ria; and the youth, whom the Engliſh and Dutch
had fixed upon, was the fruit of this marriage.
The French monarch conſented to this; he being
o have by the partition, Sicily, Naples, the pro-
ince of Guipuſcoa, and ſeveral towns. The arch-
luke Charles was to have Milan; and the remainder
of it was to be given up to this young prince of Ba-
ria, whom it would be a conſiderable time be-
bre they would have any occaſion to fear. Eng-
and, France, and Holland, projected and made

WF ts treaty . * France expected to gain an ad-
(ion to her territories; and the Engliſh and Dutch
Wy uttered themſelves they ſhould thereby effectually
: 88 eſabliſh quiet in one part of Europe. All this po-
ne icy, however, proved of no ſignification. The dying
li, being told how his monarchy was divided be-
Wl ire his death, was moved with the higheſt indigna-
son; and, in conſequence of it, everybody expected,
v he would declare the emperor, or the emperor's
in, for his ſucceſſor, as a recompence to Leopold
br not being concerned in the partition; and, in

(f) Ottober 11. 1698.

' Larrey and Limiers ſeem to have known nothing of this
partition-treaty,

Vor, I. 98

FFT

ils

3

1 N
5

4.16 LEWIS . 13

whilſt Charles IL was living, to make a partition

2 N 22

9
*

. BS

256 T HE. AGE OF Gi 76
ſhort, that his teſtament wotild be inurely dichtet
by the power of the Ruſtrian family, and whotly
| to its wiſhes. He made one, indeed;
but, in this, he declared the fame” young piinee of
Bavaria, whom we have mentioned, heir to all Wis
dominions. The Spaniſh. nation, who feared no-
thing ſo much as the their mon-
archy, highly applauded this diſpoſition; and they
hoped, a general peace would be the eſſect of it
Theſe hopes, however, were as vain as the parti
tion-treaty ; for the PET os the deſigned
king, died at Bruſſels (g).

The houſe of Auſtria was unjuſtly accuſed, 28
being the cauſe of this 3
upon the bare probability, that a crime is
likely to be committed by thoſe to whom ir ſee |
moſt advantageous. The intrigues and cabals were
renewed in the courts of Madrid, Vienna, Verſailles
London, Rome, and the Hague.

Lewis XIV. king William, and the ſtates gene
ral, made another imaginary diviſion of the 8p il
monarehy. They aſſigned to the archduke Charles
younger ſon of the emperor, what they had befor |
given to the deceaſed youth (5). —

They allotted Milan to the duke of Lorrain
and his duchy, which had been ſo often taken, ani
as often reſtored, by the French, was to be for eve
annexed to the crown of France. This tre:
which put in motion the politics of all the pri
either to oppole or defend it, proved to as ung
purpoſe as the former. Europe was 2

pointed in her expectation, as n
ways. -

TFS =.

Tr

te!

(g) Feb. 1699. 4) March 170%

cl. 16. LEWIS NV. 257
ion; becauſe he was in great hopes of having
the whole ſucceſſion. The French manarch, who
ud preſſed Han 7
— ſuſpenſe.
| The king of Spain, being ſenſidle of his declin-
ng ſtate though in the flower of his age, was in-
ned to ſettle his whole monarchy on the archduke
(harles, nephew to his queen, and ſecond ſon to the
emperor Leopold: for ſo much was he convinced of
he neceſſity of paying ſome regard to the balancing
yſtem, that he became afraid of naming the eldeſt
og his ſucceſſor; ſuch a ſtep be faw plainly would
im the reſt of Europe, and all the other powers
N88 Fould immediately have recourſe to arms, when
WE dey fav Spain, with the Indies, the Empire, Hun-
+ fry, Bohemia, and Lombardy, in the fame hands.
e therefore requeſted the Emperor Leopold to
an his ſecond fon, Charles, to Madrid, with ten
WT fouſind men; but this would not then have been
(red by France, England, Holland, nor Italy;
ral were ſollicitous to bring about the partition.
be emperor would not venture his fon alone to
de mercy of the Spaniſh council; and he knew he
lis intention was only to ſend a fufficient body of
troops into Italy, to ſecure himſelf in this part of
be Spaniſh- Auſtrian monarchy. It happened, in the
WY "portant affairs of theſe two grand princes, as we
aun fly ſee amongſt private perſons about their little
| uncerns; they diſputed, and then grew out of
aper: the German haugbtineſs raiſed the Caſtilian
nde. The counteſs de pa who —__ 50.
| Z 2 2b 8: bidu

SFS

OD r 5 "OY

verned here er cit ontributec
likewiſe to alienate the affections of at Ma
drid, whom ſhe ought rather to have gained; ine
the council of Vienna rendered things un more i
reconcileable by their haughty procedure.
The young archduke, afterwards the emperg
Charles VI. generally called the ali ſei |
reproachful names. But he learned from” thenes
how cautious a prince ought to be in his expreſſions
The biſhop of Lerida, embaſſador from Madrid";
Vienna, being diſguſted at the Germans,” repr
ſented” what Charles had ſaid in the „ |
in his diſpatches to Madrid; and he himſelf v
againſt the houfe of Auſtria, in terms more 47
proachful than any which the archduke had t
out againſt the Spaniards: « The minds of the tl N
© niſters of Leopold,“ faid he, “ are like the goa
« horns in my country, little, ſtubborn, and '&ool
« ed.” This letter became public: the biſhop” ol
Lerida was recalled ; and, at his return to Madrid
he not a little heightened the antipathy of * Spe
. againſt the Auſtriaas.
Many other little trifling incidents, which Y
nerally connected with affairs of importance, contri
buted likewiſe to bring about that great changewic]
Happened in Europe, and prepared the way for t
revolution, by which the houſe CO for er
loſt Spain and the Indies. Cardinal f
and the moſt conſiderable of the Spaniſh f
having formed themſelves into a party, to prevt
the diſmembering of their monarchy, "perſuade
Charles II. to prefer a pushen af
XIV. to a prince ſo remote from them, and-ſo'1
capable to defend them. This, they ſaid, would |

SFA. SFS CTAN STT Bm *

+

. 16. UEWIS NV. 259
10 violation of the ſolemn. renunciations of the mo-
her and queen of Lewis XIV. to the crown. of
Spain: ſince theſe had been made on purpoſe to
xevent the elder ſons from coming into poſſeſſion
of the two kingdoms; and, for that reaſon, they
had choſen a younger ſon. It would be likewiſe do-
ng juſtice to the right of blood, at the ſame time
that it would preſerve the Spaniſh monarchy from
partition. The ſcrupulous king conſulted divines
won this point; who were of the ſame opinion
dith his council. He then, notwithſtanding his ſick-
is, wrote with his own hand to the pope, deſiring
WT tis opinion in the affair. The pope Innocent XII.
o ſaw plainly, that the liberty of Italy depended
WT peatly on the houſe of Auſtria's being weakened,
note to Charles, « that the laws of Spain, and the
« welfare of all Chriſtendom, required him to give
the preference to the family of Bourbon.” This
kuer was dated the 16th of July 1700. His ho-
neſs, we ſee, of a caſe of conſcience made a ſtate-
far; whilſt his catholic majeſty converted an im-
portant affair of ſtate into a caſe of conſcience.
Lewis XIV. was informed of theſe proceedings;
ut his council had not the leaſt concern in this great
gent: at this juncture there was not even an em-
aſador at Madrid, Marſhal d'Harcourt had been
Realled ſix months before; the partition-treaty,
wich France was to ſupport by her arms, having
rendered her miniſter highly obnoxious at the Spa-
uh court, The French had now only at Madrid
me of the ſecretaries to Harcourt's embaſſy, who
on Panaged their affairs. This man has, indeed, been
bid envoy in all the gazettes, and hiſtories gene-
| 2.89

26 THE ACE OF Gig
rally copied from thence; but there is certainly a
wide oo RL TR
2 ; „ bite
All Europe magined; dat d W
had been intirely distitel by de cee W Wikia,
but the dying prince had wholly oonſulted the in-
tereſt of his kingdom, and the wiſhes," nay; even
fears, of his ſubjects; for the French monardi had
ordered a body of troops to march to the fon
tiers of Spain; and theſe were to be commande
by the marſhal d'Harcourt. Nothing, indeed, i
more true than this, that the reputation af Lewis,
tors which operated in this revolution.  Charkes c
Auſtria, after having ſigned the ruin of his on
houſe, and the grandeur. of that of Bourbon, tak
guiſhed about a month longer, and then ended bi
obſcure life, in the thirty-ninth year of his age
Perhaps, it may not be altogether uſeleſs, in order
to ſhew ſomewhat of human nature, to mention
that this monarch, a few months before his death
ordered the graves to be opened in che Eſeuril, off
his father, mother, and firſt queen, Maria-Louila c
Orleans, who was ſuſpected to have been poilonec
by his command; as may be ſeen in the *
Anecdotes; and he kiſſed the remains of their
dies. In this he either followed the pd s
ſome ancient kings of Spain; or he was defirous (
accuſtom himſelf to the horror of death; or had
perhaps, ſome ſecret ſuperſtitious notion, that tha
opening of theſe tombs would retard his fatal hour
The particulars of his will were kept ſo ſecret |

 *' RR E = mr ==> ww x

—

r

S ©-
S

1

that the count de Harrac, embaſſador from bis lm
1 (i) October 1. 1700. .

S
22

= FEA ESSE MES» ©

cb. 16.

LEWIS NV. 361

rial majeſty, Nill flattered bimſelf, that che arch-
uke was nominated ſucceſſor: he waited, for a con+
Werable time, the ifſue of the grand council held
mediately after the king's death; and the duke

{Abrantes at laſt approaching him with open arms, -

farrac made then no doubt, that the arehduke was
lng; when the duke, embracing him, faid, Yengo
ul expedir me. de la caſa de Auſtria ; © I come to
nuke my leave of the houſe of Auſtria.” ..

Thus, after two hundred years ſpent in wars, and
fuitleſs negotiations, for only a part of the 8Spaniſn
fontiers, the houſe of Bourbon, by a daſh of the
zen, at laſt got the whole Spaniſh monarchy, without

reaties, without cabals, and even without the leaſt

bye of ſuch a ſueceſſion. We thought ourſelves
WJ liged to bring to light a fact hitherto darkened

nd miſrepreſented by ſo many miniſters and hi-
ſorians, blinded by -prejudices, and outward. ap-

WT jearances, which generally lead into error. All that

ss been publiſhed in ſo many volumes, in relation

v money ſpent on the occaſion by marſhal d Har-

of court, and the Spaniſh miniſters. bribed to procurt
WT tis will, muſt be ranked amongſt political falſ-
2 foods, and popular errors. The marquis de Torci,

riniſter in France at that time for foreign affairs,

s given a convincing proof of this truth, by a
wer which I have under bis hand. The king of

ain, in chooſing for his ſucceſſor the grandſon of a

u who had been ſo long his enemy, had always his
tb dougbts upon the effects of a general balance. The
ike d Anjou, grandſon of Lewis XIV. was called
o the Spaniſh ſucceſſion, becauſe he could have no
apectation of inheriting the crown of France; and
de ſame teſtament, which, in failure af a younger

JL 7
"TTL

1

17

5
2
A

10

462 THE A0 E or VA. 6
fon of the Bourbon family, nominated the anche
Charles, afterwards emperor Chiles VI. exproy
mentioned, that the Empire and Spain imuſt dene
be united in the ſame ſovereign nm .
| Lewis XIV. might now either adhere to thetriaty
of partition, by which France would be a gainer or
accept of the will ſo advantageous to his family, It
is certain, the matter was under deliberation, But,
of all his privy-council, chancellor 'Ponchartrain
was the only one who adviſed him to keep'to' the
treaty.: he ſaw the dangers which would enſue in
having a new war to ſupport. Lewis ſaw-them alſo;
but he was accuſtomed not to fear danger: he
cepted therefore of the teſtament ; and, at his cor
ing out of the council, meeting the princeſſes de
Conti, and madame the-ducheſs; « Well” faid be
ſmiling, which courſe would you take, ladies?
Then without waiting their anſwer, « Which ſoeverlf
I follow, ” added he, *I know ſhall be blamed.

The actions of kings, though they 'themſelve
may be flattered, always undergo many ſevere cen
ſures; inſomuch that the king of England himſe
had ſeveral bitter reflections thrown out againſt hin
in parliament; and his miniſters were perfecuted fo
having made the treaty of partition. The Engliſh
who reaſon better than any people, but who ſon
times ſuffer their reaſon to be extinguiſhed by fu
and party-ſpirit, at once exclaimed againſt Wallian
who made the treaty, and againſt Lewis, whobroke it

Europe ſeemed at firſt to be ſtruck with amaze

ment, and unable to exert herſelf, when ſhe ſaw t
monarchy of Spain become ſubject to France, he
rival for three hundred years. Lewis MV. 3
peared to be the happieſt and moſt powerful mai

EFEFTEEFEEESSYSD2SS»> S STS A =

*
SO

F
FSF

n r

v

bs

:

uy

:

>

5

F

=
;

- 4 mu
= =
— CY * —

0. 16. LEWIS NV. 263
uch upon earth. He was now in his ſixty-ſecond
err, ſurrounded” with a numerous offspring; and
ane of his grandſons was going to take upon him
te ſovereignty of Spain, America, half of Italy, and
the Netherlands. The emperor as yet could do
pthing but complain.

King William, being become weak and infirm,
tough only in the fifty. ſecond year of his age, did

. tot now appear a dangerous enemy; beſides, he

muſt have the conſent of his parliament to declare
var. Lewis had ſent over into England fix millions
of livres, by the ſtrength of which he flattered
tinſelf he ſhould be able to gain a majority of votes
in his intereſt. William and the Dutch, not having
: ſufficient ſtrength to declare themſelves, wrote to
Philip V. as lawful king of Spain. Lewis XIV.
was ſecure of the elector of Bavaria, father to the
deceaſed young prince, who had been nominated
ling of Spain. This elector, governor of the Ne-
herlands in the name of the late King Charles IT.
t once ſecured to Philip V. the poſſeſſion of Flan-
lers, and opened a paſſage for the French troops
brough his electorate to Vienna, in caſe the em-
peror ſhould declare war. The elector of Cologn,
other to the elector of Bavaria, was as ſtrongly in
te intereſt of France as his brother; and both
emed to be right in their judgments; for the houſe
of Bourbon was then incomparably the ſtrongeſt.
The duke of Savoy had one daughter, who was
wcheſs of Burgundy, and another now going to
de queen of Spain : he himſelf was to command the
french armies in Italy; ſo that it was not imagi
lewould ever declare war againſt ſach near relations.

The duke of Mantua, who had been ſold by his

F E
,
:
7 -
- oe

| | , | "8 ,
6s T HE AGE OF | G
miniſtry to the French, now ſold hinaſclf;/an

 ceiyed. a: French gariſon. into hie dukpdom, 4
Mikoeſe acknowleged the grandes . Lew a,
out heſitating: even Portugal, the natural enemy of
Spain, at firſt joined with her. In ſhort, froc
Liſbon to Antwerp, and from the Danube to Napl
all was in the intereſt of the Bourbog'family, "ol
king became ſo haughty upon his proſperity, 4
in ſpeaking to the duke of Rochefaucault, aboy
Gune, propokcions made tn tins ty rGNINEN
uſed the following expreſſion: . You will fn
E S g
40 they were.“ 2 NY
| Sasse 8 andeur
of Lewis XIV. even to his grave, promiſed the an
peror te arm England and Holland in his cauſe: nc
| he likewiſe gained Denmark in his- intereſt, 1%
fine, eee
been, for ſome time, concerted againſt the Be
family (H: but the French mongrch was hue
moved with this; and, reckoning upon the d
which his money would make in the Englih- p;
ment, and ſtill more upon th united rg
France and Spain, he deſpiſed his enemies.

About this time, James died mx $4. Getnuidnpt
IS rg Lewis immediately acknowicge
the prince of Wales as lawful: king of E
Had he not taken this flew; i. lanes WHAM
parliament of England would not have intermedgie
betwixt the houſes of Bourbon and Auſtria; at le
ſeveral of the members of that parliament have |
aſſured me: but thus to acknowlege for their x
a prince who had been proſcribed by them, appears
| (i) September 1700, (1) September 46. 278%

& 16. EE WIS XIV. 2865
n inſult to the nation, and an aſſecting to be arbiv =
wy in Europe. This ſpirit of liberty, whith then
wgned in England, being heightened by their ntred
the power of Lewis XIV. diſpoſed the narivn to
jre William whatever ſubſidies he demanded;
a, in the ſpring of the year 1701. Italy has
ern generally the country which has felt moſt from
ambition of the emperors: here it was that his
ms could moſt eaſily penetrate by the way of Tirol
nd nd Venice; for this republic, though neutral in
108 mearance, was more inclined to the houſe of
WT uſtria than Bourbon: beſides, ſhe was obliged by
carry to give a paſſage to the German troops; and
1 & xccordingly performed ber n with
Wot the leaſt reluctancte. |
= The emperor waited till the Germanic body:
bald come over to his intereſt, before he would
tzc Lewis on the fide of Germany. He had a
rn in Spain, and a correſpondence there: but no
ng could be reaped from thence, unleſs
er of his ſons were there in-perſon. This could
ode effected without the aid of the Dutch and
im fleets. King William did all in his power
augen the preparations: and though his body was
JT"; and almoſt lifeleſs, yet his underſtanding, be-
pon; till lively and«a&tive, pur every thing in mo-
n; but all he did was not fo much to ſerve the
＋ We of Auſtria, as to humble Lewis XIV.
is He was to have headed the allied army in the be-
Nang of the year 1702. Death, however, pre-
Td bim in this deſign: he received a fall from
oc, which proved mortal to his decayed body;
= e on = fight fre, which carried him

N

* FY
F 4h | * if * 2
2 . a = +
N — — 2
— * *
da Yi. - = * —
9

THE ACE Or d

266

0

off. He died without giving the leaſt anſwer co
what the Engliſh prieſts, who were at his bei · ſde, i ©
ſaid to him on the ſubject of religion; and he ſhew. f.
ed no other önnen mj
the affairs of Europe. | fi
e He left the reputation of great poliican, though In
Pr ſa
ral; though he had loſt many battles. - His conduct
was always diſcreet and moderate; and his- Spa
han e eee eee thr
He never aimed at abſolute power in England r.
and to this it was owing that he reigned fo peace
ably. He was called ſtateholder of the Englin Gu:
and king of the Dutch. He was acquainted with «1
moſt of the European languages, yet could off be
ſpeak any one with elegance; for he was a mH «:!
of more judgment and reflection than imagination tet
He e e ee becauſe \ i!
perhaps, Lewis appeared too fond of them. | lim
glory was of a quite different kind from that « the x
the French monarch. Thoſe who are moſt pleaſed rei
with the character of a prince who acquired *
Kingdom without a natural right; who maintained _ Fi
it without being beloved; who governed deſpotic: Ti
ly, and yet did not enſlave Holland; who was I orc
ſoul and the chief of half of Europe; who had le er

genius of a general, and the valqur of a commogy
ſoldier; who never perſecuted any one for religion
who deſpiſed all human ſuperſtitionz and
manners were {imple and modeſt; ſuch, no co f
will give che name of Great to William rather t
Lewis. Thoſe, on the contrary, who are me
charmed with the pleaſures of a ſplendid cc
with magnificence ; with the protection gen

ee FORE, 4 F

16, LEWIS WV 267
its; with zeal for the public good; with a paſſion
for glory, and a talent for reigning; who are more
truck with the haughtineſs with which the French
niniſters and generals, in obedience. to their ſoves
xign's will, added provinces to France; - who are
nore affected with ſeeing a ſingle kingdom with
land ſo many powers, in ſhort, who admire more
z manarch of France, who gives the kingdom of
ain to his grandſon, than, a ſon-in-law who de-
HB froncs his father; ſuch will certainly ge the pre»

ference to Lewis XIV. |
William was ſucceeded by the princeſs Anne,
kughter of King James II. by a daughter of chan-
lor Hyde, one of the greateſt men in England.
he was married to the prince of Denmark, who was
only her greateſt ſubject. As ſoon, as ſhe aſcended
be throne, ſhe entered into all the meaſures of king
ol \iliam, though ſhe had had an open rupture with
in when living. Theſe meaſures were certainly
be moſt agreeable to her people; and though a ſo-
 "frcign in any other kingdom may make his people
indy conform to his inclinations, yet, in England,

WI: frince muſt comply with theirs.
= Thc diſpoſitions made by England and Holland,

WI" order, if poſſible, to put the archduke Charles
be emperor's ſon on the throne of Spain, or at leaſt
o oppoſe the Bourbons, deſerve, perhaps, the at-
Winton of all ages. Holland was to maintain one
WT undred and two thouſand troops, to be employed
WI the feld, or to be kept in gariſons. This was
ve than the vaſt monarchy of Spain could furniſh
Wi this juncture. A province of merchants, which
deen almoſt totally ſubdued in two months, about

vor. I. Aa

ns 4  Y ah *
, . o : TIF" I
C „ , * by -
: of wet . 2
vp e
* 4
-

a N N

268 THE AGE OF G
— thirty years before, could now do more than the
ſovereigns of Spain, Naples, Flanders, Peru, and
Mexico. England undertook to furniſh forty thou
ſand. In alliances it almoſt always happens, that!
the parties furniſh at length leſs than they prof
miſed; England, on the contrary, in the ſecond ven
of the war, ſent fifty inſtead of forty thouſand men:
and towards the end of the war, ſhe maintained; off
her own troops, and thoſe of her allies, upon thy
frontiers of France, in Spain, in Italy, in eka 5
in America, and in her fleets, two hundred at
twenty thouſand ſoldiers and ſallors: an im
which will appear incredible to one who conſic
that England, properly ſpeaking, is but equal to
third of France, and has not half ſo much money i
ſpecie : but it will not furpaſs the b&lief of tho
who know what commerce and eredit can do.
Englifh bore always the greateſt burden in this i
lance, The Dutch lightened theirs by degrees: foi
after all, the republic of the ſtates general are on
an illuſtrious company of merchants; but Englani
is a rich and fertile kingdom, abounding in ſtate
men, merchants and warriors. © *
The emperor was to furniſh ninety thouſs
men, excluſive of the aſſiſtance of the Empire, 2
thoſe allies whom he expected to detach from t
Bourbon family. Meanwhile the grandſon of Fran
reigned peaceably at Madrid; and in the beginni
of the century Lewis was at the height of his pov
and glory. But thoſe, who could penetrate into
ſecrets of the courts of Europe, eſpecially that W
France, began to apprehend a change. Spain, whi
had been greatly weakened under the late king'N

the blood of Charles V. became more ſo in the ©

* n 1 1 3 % . 422

9.16. LEW1S W. 2

jnning of the reign of a ſon of the Bourbon fa-
ny. The houſe of Auſtria had partiſans in ſeye-
al provinces of this monarchy. Catalonia ſeemed
dy to ſhake off the new yoke, and to declare
"oY fr the archduke Charles. It was impoſſible to
I oceive, that Portugal would not, fooner or later,
W couſe the cauſe of the Auſtrian family. It ap-
Wl eaced ber intereſt to blow up, amongſt the Spa-
beds, who were her natural enemies, a civil war,
y which Liſbon muſt be a conſiderable: gainer.
be dake of Savoy, though but juſt become father-
raus to the king of Spain, and allied to the Bour-
WT bon family both by blood and treaties, yet appear-
ll « already diffatisfied with his ſons-in-law. He had
WY it firſt a monthly penſion of fifty thouſand crowns,
lch was augmented to two hundred thouſand
ines; but this did not appear to him ſufficient to
lep him in the Bourbon intereſt. He wanted at
tilt to have Montferrat, and part of Milan, given
Wi to him. The haughty treatment he experi-
enced from the French generals, and the miniſtry
29 Verſailles, gave him reaſon to ſuſpect, that he
Would ſoon be diſregarded by his ſons-in-law, who
Wounded his dominions on all ſides. He had al-
Way ſuddenly quitted the Empire for France
ud it was now highly probable, that, being alſo
egieted by France, he would deſert her the firſt
pportunity.
in the court and kingdom of Lewis XIV. people
penetration already forefaw a revolution, which
at ee of leſs diſcernment cannot perceive till the
bi ent itſelf happens. The king, now above ſixty
gs of age, and being more retired, could
e bi. A 2 2 ; |

270 THE AGE OF G
now fo well diſtinguſh the characters of men He
faw things at too great a diſtance, with eyes leſs ve
piercing than before, and bewitched by a long
courſe of proſperity. Madam de Maintenon, with
all the great qualities ſhe poſſeſſed, had neither that
vigour, that reſolution, nor that greatneſs of ſoul,
requiſite to ſupport the glory of a ſtate,” It was if
by her intereſt chiefly, that her favourite Chamil-
lard was made ſuperintendant of the finances, in
I 698. and ſecretary at war, in 170 1. He was more Wl
of the honeſt man than the miniſter; the modeſty
of his conduct, when he was governor of St. Cyr,
had pleaſed the king: however, notwithſtanding bis
outward modeſty and diffidence, he was ſo unhappy er
as to think his ſtrength ſufficient to ſupport a weight,
which Colbert and Louvois both together had born
with difficulty. The king, relying upon his own
experience, believed he ſhould be able himſelf to
direct his miniſters ſucceſsfully. He had ſaid to king
James, upon the death of Louvois; * I have loſt a nis
« good miniſter; but this ſhall not affect either WW M.
« your affairs or mine.“ When he choſe Barbe - an
ſieux to ſucceed Louvois as ſecretary at war, 1M Lo
« made your father a miniſter, ſaid he; and I will or
ce make you one too.” He ſaid much the fame to cor
Chamillard. A king, indeed, who had laboured ſo ne.
long, and ſo ſucceſsfully, ſeemed to have a right toy "it
ſpeak in this manner, | Wi
In regard to the generals he employed, they «©:
were frequently too much confined by the ſtrict·
neſs of their orders; as were likewiſe his emballa-Y
dors, who were not to deviate in the leaſt from
their inſtructions. He uſed to ſettle the opera” i
tions of the campaign with Chamillard in madam

3 ITY ? 7
: Þ 4

ch. 16. LEWIS XIV.” 271

laintenon's apartment; and if a commander in-
ended any great enterprize, he muſt frequently
end a courier for permiĩſſion; and, before his return,
de opportunity was loſt, or the general defeated.
Honours and military rewards were laviſhed in
the molt inconſiderate manner, under the miniſtry
of Chamillard, Permiſũon was given to too many
young men to purchaſe regiments, and even to ſome
who had ſcarcely paſt their child-hood; whilſt,
mong the enemy, a regiment was the reward
of twenty years ſervice. This difference was
aſterwards very ſenſibly felt, on ſeveral occaſions,
where an experienced colonel might have pre-
rented a defeat. In the year 169 3. the king firſt
created knights of St. Lewis; an order which: he
inſtituted on purpoſe to raiſe an emulation in his
officers, and as an honourable reward for military
bravery ; but the croſſes of this order were fold as
ſoon as Chamillard began his miniſtry: and they
might be bought at the war- office for fifty crowns:
Military difcipline, which is the very ſout of an
amy, and which had been ſo ſtrictly preſerved by
Louvois, was now ſhamefully neglected. The
proper number of ſoldiers was not kept up in the
companies, nor that of the officers in the regi-
ments, The eaſineſs of having an underſtanding
with the commiſſaries, and the remiſſneſs of the
niniſter, produced this diſorder. The inconvenien-
tes of which, had other circumſtances concurred,
muſt have occaſioned the loſs of battles: for, in
oder to have a front of as great extent as that
of the enemy, they were obliged to oppoſe thin
battalions to thoſe that were numerous. The ma-
A a 3 |

BE

272 THE ACE OF @:x5.
gazines were now neither ſufficiently ſupplied „ nor
kept in readineſs; and the arms were not properly
tempered. Thoſe perfons, therefore, who faw theſe
defects in the government, and who knew what ge-
nerals France would have to encounter, were afraid
for her, even amidſt thoſe firſt advantages, which
ſeemed to promiſe her greater ſucceſs than ever.

CHAPTER XVII.

The war in 17501. the conduct of prince
Eugene, of marſhal de Villeroi, the duke
de Vendome, the duke of Marlborough,

and marſhal de Villars, to the year 1503.

S =S2> MF ER SMTT EE WW

HE firſt general who gave a check to the ſu-
periority of France, was a Frenchman; for
fo we muſt reckon prince Eugene, although a grand-
ſon of Charles-Emmanuel duke of Savoy. His father
the count de Soiſſons, who ſettled in France, was 4
lientenant-general, and governor of Champagne: be
married Olimpia-Mancini, one of cardinal Mazarin's
nieces, From this marriage, in other reſpects un-
fortunate, was born at Paris (a) this prince, ſo fa-
tal afterwards to Lewis XIV. and fo little known
to him in his youth. He was at firſt ſtiled in France
the chevalier de Carignan. He ſollicited the king for
2 ſingle troop of horſe; but he met with a refuſal, .
becauſe he happened to be ſo nearly related to the
princes of Conti, then in diſgrace at court. He then
WW ©!

. ©". >? os. R

entered into holy orders, and aſſumed the my of
abbot of Sayoy : he petitioned for an abbey, and
(a) October 1663.

. 17. LEWIS XV. 273

tis was alſo denied him. In ſhort, finding that
Lewis XIV. would neither promote him in the
church nor in the army, he went to ſerve the emperor
wzinſt the Turks in Hungary, in the year 1 684.
n company with the princes of Conti, who had al-
ready made a glorious campaign in- that ſervice.
The king ſent orders to the princes of Conti, and
thole who accompanied them in this expedition, that
they ſhould return. The abbot of Savoy was the
only perſon who did not obey : he continued his
wute, declaring that he renounced France for ever.
When the king was informed of this, he ſaid to his
courtiers, ſmiling, Do not you think I ſuffer a
« great loſs?” All the courtiers, indeed, looked
upon him as one of an unſettled mind, and who
world never be capable of any great undertaking.
But they framed their judgment on ſome ſallies of
youth, which ought never to fix our opinions of
men, This prince, though held in fuch contempt at
the French court, was born with the qualities requi-
ſte to make a great warrior, and an able ſtateſman.

WT ts underſtanding was clear and elevated, and his

reſolution ſuch as was neceſſary in the field, and the
cabinet, He has committed miſtakes, as all generals
tave done; but his overſights were effaced by the
number of his great actions. He humbled the
grandeur of Lewis XIV. and governed the Em-
pre: and, in the whole courſe of his victories, and
«miniſtration, he ſhewed an equal contempt of
pride and riches. He even cultivated letters, and
encouraged them as much as he could, at the court
of Vienna. He was now in the thirty-ſeventh year
of his age; having derived great experience from
ls victories over the Turks, and the miſtakes of the

if

e * | | | N , % 4 * * * *
274 THE AGE OH MN

Imperialiſts in the late wars, wherein he had ſerved
againſt France. He made a deſcent upon Italy by
the biſhopric of Trent, and the terrĩtories of Ve.

nice, at the head of thirty thouſand men; having

a full power to purſue what meaſures he thought
proper, The French court, at firſt, ordered marſhal
| Catinat not to oppoſe the paſſage of prince Eugene;
either not chooſing to offer the firſt act of hoſtility,
which was certainly bad policy, when they had an
army in readineſs; or to avoid giving offence to

the Venetians, who were, however, not ſo much to
be feared as the German army. This falſe ſtep of

the court made Catinat run into many others; fora
general ſeldom ſucceeds, when obliged to follow a
plan not his own. Beſides, it muſt be allowed ex-
tremely difficult, in ſuch a country, divided by fo
many rivers, and branches of rivers, to hinder the
paſſage of a ſkilful enemy, ſuch as prince Eugene
was; who, to a profound depth of deſign, joined like-

wiſe a ſurpriſing quickneſs and activity in execution,
The nature of the ground too, adjacent to the banks

of the Adige, was ſuch, that the imperialiſts were

confined, whilſt the French were ſcattered, and more

extended. Catinat was for paſſing over to the ene-
my; but his lieutenant- generals ſtarted difficulties,
and formed cabals againſt him: he had not reſolu-

tion enough to force them to a compliance with bis
orders; and this omiſſion, ariſing from the modera·
tion of his temper, proved a, fatal miſconduct.

Eugene firſt attacked the poſt of Carpi, near the

canal Blanc, defended by St. Fremont ;. who, not
conforming exactly to the orders of his general, was

defeated. After this ſucceſs, the Germans became
maſters of all the country betwixt the Adige and

4
8
3

*

b. 17. LEWIS NV. 275

44da; they even penetrated into the territory of
Breſciano, and Catinat retired behind the Oglio.
Voſt of the beſt officers approved of this retreat as
extremely prudent; nay, we muſt likewiſe add, that
the want of ammunition, which the government had
xromiſed but neglected to ſend, rendered it abſo-
utely neceſſary. The courtiers, eſpecially thoſe
who hoped to ſupplant Catinat in his command,
exclaimed againſt his conduct, as a reproach to the
French name. The marſhal de Villeroi undertook
to retrieve the honour of the nation. The confi-
lence with which he ſpoke, and the affection the
king had for him, accordingly procured this general
the command in Italy; and the marſhal de Catinat,
notwithſtanding his victories at Staffarda and Mar-
ſeilles, was obliged to ſerve under him.

The marſhal duke de Villeroi was ſon to the king's
preceptor; and, having been brought up with him,
ws always highly in his favour. He had been a
companion to him in all his campaigns, as well as
pleaſures, He was a man of an agreeable and
charming perſon, couragious, honourable, friendly,
ſociable, and magnificent in every thing: but his
enemies ſaid, that at the head of an army, he was
more taken up with the honour and pleaſure of
commanding, than buſied in the deſigns of a great
general. They likewiſe reproached him with fuch
in obiinate attachment to his own opinions, that he
tever followed the advice of any other perſon.

He came into Italy to give orders to marſhal de
Catinat, and to add to-the diſguſt of the duke of

Savoy. His behaviour ſhewed, that he thought a

kvourite of Lewis XIV. at the head of a powerful
amy greatly above a prince. He called him only

7

% THE AGE'OF d
Savoy; treating him as a general in the pay off
France, and not as a ſovereign who was lord of the
barriers which nature had fixed betwixt Franceand
Italy. The friendſhip of this prince was- certainly
not ſo regarded, as ſeemed neceſſary. The court
unagined, that fear alone would be a ſufficient tie
to keep him in her intereſt; and that a French
army, by which about fix or ſever thouſand Pie-
monteſe troops were continually ſurrounded; would
warrant his fidelity. Marſhal Villeroi behaved to
him as his ſuperior in command, and his equal in
other reſpects. The duke of Savoy had the empty
title of generaliſſimo, and the martha] had the ſole
authority. His firſt order was, that they ſhould
attack prince Eugene, poſted at Chiari near Ogio
The general officers were of opinion, that ſuch a
ſtep would be contrary to all the rules of war, for
very ſtrong reaſons: the poſt was in itſelf of no
conſequence, and the intrenchments inacceſſible;
ſo that they could gain nothing by carrying it, and,
if they failed, would loſe the reputation of the cam-
paign. Villeroi peremptorily told the duke of Sa-
voy, he muſt march; and he ſent an aid de- cn.
in his name, to order marſhal Catinat on the -
tack. Catinat made him repeat the order thrice;
and then turning to the officers under his command,
« Come then, gentlemen,” ſaid he, we mut
« obey.” They accordingly marched up- to theY
intrenchments (4). The duke of Savoy behaved, at
the head of his troops, not like a man diſſatisfied v.
with France; Catinat fought as if he ſought for |
death: he was wounded, and, in this condition,
when he ſazy the king's troops repulſed, and Ville

| (b) September 11. 17. |

T2 238S327ESTEPFS9ESEESS_FME SEES

wi not giving orders, he made a retreat. After

E
dut complaining of any perſon.

Prince Eugene always kept the a e
marſhal Villeroi. At laſt, in the midſt of winter, in the
ear 1702. one night, when the marſhal was aſleep,
n the utmoſt ſecurity, in Cremona, a town of great
frength, and defended by a numerous gariſon, he
gas ſuddenly awaked by the noiſe of ſeveral vollies

nounted his horſe, The firſt thing that preſents
elf to him, is a ſquadron of the enemy: he is
bſtantly taken priſoner, and conducted out of the
town not knowing what paſſed there, nor being
dle to imagine the cauſe of this ſurpriſmg event.
Prince Eugene was already in Cremona. A prieſt,
umed Bozzoli, provoſt of St. Maria Neuf, had
kt in the Germans by an aqueduct: four hun-
&cd ſoldiers, having by this means been conveyed
nto the prieſt's houſe, had killed the guards at the
two gates; and theſe being opened, prince Eugene
entered with four thouſand men. All this had been
Gone, before the governor, who was a Spaniard,
wuld have the leaſt ſuſpicion, and before Villeroi
mwaked. The preparations for this enterprize had
been carried on with the utmoſt ſecrecy, order, di-
lence, and precaution. The Spaniſh governor
firſt appeared in the ftreets, with ſome ſoldiers; but
"2s killed by a muſquet-ſhot; and all the general
officers ſhared the ſame fate, or were taken priſon-
rs, except count de Revel, the lieutenant-general,
ind the marquis de Pralin. Chance, however, de-

kacd all the prudence of prince Eugene.

—

tis he left the army, and came to Verſailles, to

of muſquet-ſhot: he roſe in the utmoſt hurry, and

1
1
1

278 THE AGE OF Ch. 17

The chevalier d'Entragues was that ſame day to
have a review, in the town, of a regiment of marines,
of which he was colonel: they had accordingly af.
ſembled by four of the clock in the morning, at one
end of the town, preciſely at the time when prince
Eugene entered at the other. D'Entragues hurried
into the ſtreets with his men, and furiouſly attacked
the Germans. By this means, the reſt of the gariſon
had ſome time to come together. The officers and

ſoldiers thronged into the ſtreets, and public places 7
in the utmoſt confuſion; ſome half -· armed, and others by
half naked, without a commander, and without order. ud
They fought in the greateſt diſtraction, running from var

ſtreet to ſtreet and from one ſquare to another, Two cs,
Iriſh regiments, part of the gariſon, at laſt put a ſtop 0
to the fury of the Imperialiſts. Never was any ton de
ſurpriſed with greater art and ſtratagem, nor any de-W port
fended with ſo much valour. The gariſon conſiſted had
of five thouſand men: prince Eugene had yet \
brought into the town but four thouſand ; a conſ ute
derable detachment of his army was to have come the
by a bridge over the Po. His meaſures had been yi,
concerted with great prudence ; but another wil-W dt
chance intirely defeated them. This bridge, guarded Ax:
only by about an hundred French ſoldiers, was to ban
have been firſt ſeized by the German cuiraſſiers, ¶ ww;
who, as ſoon as prince Eugene entered the town, doi
were accordingly ordered to go to make themſelves « 7
maſters of it. For this purpoſe, as they had come
in at the ſouth-gate, neareſt the aqueduct, they mull ty,
now go out by the north-ſide, through the Po- gate, tf.
to the field of Cremona, and run ſtraightway to the
bridge. They accordingly went thither; but the |
guide, who conducted them, bappening to be l

. 17. | LEWIS NV. 279

4 by a muſquet-ſhot from a window, the cuiraſ-
ſers miſtook one ſtreet for another; and thus the
wy was made longer. In this ſhort interval, the
lih, having ruſhed” to the Po-gate, furiouſly at-
ucked and repulſed the cuiraſſiers. The marquis de
Iralin ſeized this opportunity, and ordered the bridge
o be cut down. Thus the reinforcement, which
te enemy expected, could not advance, and the
town was ſaved. |
Prince Eugene, after having fought the whole
by, and having been always maſter of the gate he
hd entered, at laſt retreated ; carrying with him
narſhal Villerol, and ſeveral general officers, priſon-
es; but failed in carrying Cremona, which his own
tivity and prudence, joined to the negligence of
the governor, had put into his hands, and which
fortune, and the bravery of the French and Iriſh,
tad taken from him.

Marſhal Villeroi, who was extremely unfortu-
mate on this occaſion, was exclaimed againſt by
be courtiers at Verſailles with great bitterneſs;
wich is not to be wondered at, conſidering his
curacter, his high ſtation, and the ſhare he had
ways had of the royal favour. The king, who
damed, but did not reproach him, was highly pro-
wked that every one ſo much condemned his
woice; and on this occaſion, this ſaying eſcaped him,
" They are thus outrageous againſt him, becauſe
he is my favourite; an expreſſion he never uſed
wards any perſon, but this once, during his whole
iſe, The duke de Vendome was now named to
be command in Italy. |

The duke de Vendome, grandſon of Henry IV,
Voi. I. B b

—
—
*
2
„

” © C 1 9
* *
"> ; 7 Y
4 ** *
ny
- =

280. THE AGE OF. G

was, like him, bold and intrepid, affable in his
temper, benevolent in his diſpoſition, without pride,
harred, envy, or revenge, His behaviour / was
baughty only to princes, but eaſy and condeſcending
to every body elſe. He was the only general, under
whom the ſoldiers did not go to battle from a notion
of duty, or prompted by that animal inſtinct, and
mechanical enthuſiaſm, which leads them on to obey i
the commands of their officers : they fought for
the duke of Vendome, and would have facrificed
their lives to retrieve any falſe ſtep, which he was
ſometimes led into by the precipitancy of his tem-
per. He was thought not to concert his deſigns
with ſo much depth as prince Eugene; nor did he
ſo well underſtand the art of providing ſubſiſtence
for armies. He neglected all oeconomy, and allowed
the military diſcipline to relax. His table and bed en-
groſſed too much of his time; which was likewiſe the
caſe of his brother. His effeminacy often brought
tim into danger of being ſurpriſed ; but, on the
day of action, he retrieved all by a preſence of
mind, and quickneſs of parts, which ſeemed to riſe
in proportion to the danger. He always diſtin-
guilhed himſelf moſt in action; and this he always B
ſought for; being, as was ſaid, not ſo well qualified B
as prince Eugene for a defenſive war, but, in every i
reſpeR, as well formed for an offenſive one. |

His diſorder and negligence was not confined to
the army; for it prevailed to a ſurpriſing excels in
his houſe; nay, even in his perſon; and, from an
ayerſion to pride and oftentation, he ran into ſuch W
* cynical ſlovenlineſs as can hardly be paralleled. His
diſintereſtedneſs, one of the moſt noble virtues, be- W
came in him a fault; for he kept no account of jus

ow

SS SY SS EE EE ©@E v2 ©.

-

& 17, LEWIS XIV. 281

he had ever beſtowed on acts of liberality : nay, by
this means, he was often even pinched for common
neceſſaries. His brother, the grand prior, who ſerv-
ed under him in Italy, had all the ſame imperfections
even to a greater exceſs, and for which he made
mends by the ſame valour. It was certainly aſto-
nilbing to ſee two generals often abed at four of the
dock in the afternoon; and two princes grandſons
of Henry IV. ſunk into ſuch a neglect of their per-
ſons, as even the meaneſt Fug would have been
Wancd of.

but what is more ſurpriſing ſtill, is that mixture
activity and indolence, with which \ "endome car-
ned on a war againſt Eugene, fo full of ſtratagems,
ſur izes, marches, e of rivers, dangerous,
tough vnſcrviceable ſrirmihes, and bloody engage-
rents, where both ſides claimed the viftory : ſuch
ves that of Luzara (c); upon the account of which
e Deum was ſung at \ jenna as well as Paris. Ven-
come generally come off victorious when he had not
to do uh Eugene in perſon; but when Eugene bim-
elf commanded, then t rance had little reaſon to boaſt.
awidſt theſe battles, and ſieges of fo many caſtles,
and little towns (4), the court of V erſailles received
kcret intelligence, that the dulce of Savoy, grandſon
„0 a titer of Lewis XIII. and father-in-law to the
Wie of Burgundy, and Philip V. had quitted the
bourbon iFtereſt, and was gone over to that of the
tnperor, They were aſtonifhed, and enraged, at his
ts forſaking at once his two ſons-in-law, and, as
by imagined, his own intereſt. But the emperor

( Auguſt x5. 1703. (d) January 1703. .
B b 2

"gry "Iz Si "Mp St pap Er . 8

S 2B S ESS AS So & fl ©

rn

firs; and, by this want of order, loſt more than

%

1
*
1
7
*
1

7 - 4A
5 |
* Y

. all bis ſons · in · lau had refuſed him; Mom.
ferrat, Mantua, Alexandria, Valencia, che country
-betwixt the Po and Tenaro, and more money alſo thun
France had allowed bim. This money, however, was
to be furniſhed by the Engliſh; for the emperor
could not pay his own army but with great difficulty,
England, the richeſt of the allies, contributed more.
than all of them to the public cauſe. Whether the |
duke of Savoy, by this ſtep, violated the laws of na
tions, and thoſe of nature, is a queſtion in morality F
which has but little effect on the conduct of princes, |
'The event ſhewed, in the end, that, in this ng
he had at leaſt not failed in the laws of policy: bu
he failed in another eſſential point, in leaving hi
troops to the mercy of the French, while he was
in treaty with the emperor. The duke de Vendome
ordered them to be diſarmed (e): they were not.
indeed, above five thouſand men; but this was nol
inconſiderable number for the duke of Savoy. |
Scarce had the houſe of Bourbon loſt this ally
when ſhe was infarmed, that the king of Portugal
had likewiſe declared againſt her. Don Pedro, the
Portugueſe monarch, acknowleged the archduke
Charles king of Spain. The Imperial council in
the name of the archduke, who had not one towng
in Spain, divided this monarchy in favour of Pedra
II. giving up to him, by one of thoſe treaties whic
were never put into execution, Vigo, Bayonne, Al
cantara, Badajox, part of Eſtramadura, and all that!
country ſituated on the weſt of the Silver river
America: in a word, Charles gave away what ba
had not, in order that he might acquire what be
could in Spain. :
Ce. Auguſt 19. 1703.

e . e oy a

P

ch. 17. LEWIS XIV. 283
The king of Portugal, prince Darmſtadt miniſter

to the archduke, and the great admiral of Caſtille, his

partiſan, even ſollicited the aſſiſtance of the emperor
1 Morocco. They not only made treaties with
theſe barbarians for horſes and corn, but likewiſe
petitioned for troops. Muley Iſmael, emperor of
Morocco, the moſt warlike and politic potentate
then amongſt the Mahometan nations, would not
conſent to ſend troops, but upon terms that would
have been dangerous to Chriſtendom, and ſhameful
to the king of Portugal. He demanded this mon-
arch's ſon as an hoſtage, and certain towns alſo.
That treaty, therefore, did not take effect; and the
Chriſtians tore one another to pieces with their owfh
hands, without the help of thoſe barbarians, Such
ſuccours from Africa would have availed but little
to the houſe of Auſtria, in compariſon of that ſhe
received from England and Holland.

Churchill, earl, and afterwards duke, of Marlbo-
rough, who was declared general of the Dutch
and Englith forces in 1 702. proved the moſt fatal
man to the grandeur of France, that had appeared
for many ages. He was not as thoſe generals, who
receive from the miniſtry a plan of the campaign in
writing, and who, after having executed their or-
ders at the head of an army, return to ſolicit the
honour of being continued in their command. He,
a that time, governed the queen of England, by
lis being ſo neceſſary a perſon, and by the influence
vhich his wife had over her majeſty. He intirely
kd the parliament by his own power and intereſt,
fined to that of Godolphin, the lord treaſurer,
whole ſon was married to his daughter. Thus,

Bb 3

*

_ 4
NN
ve: |
3 4q%s, «
Nen

28 nne 9 1 "Y Rae A . — —
4 N 5 7 a" *.. * —
. * # - * = e C 2
* . a * =

_
* 4

284 THE AGE OF cb. ty.
maſter of the court, the parliament, and the ex.
chequer, more a king than William had been, 28
great a politician, and a much greater captain, he
did more than the allies could expect. He had,
to a degree above all the generals of his time,
that calm courage ip the midſt of tumult, that
ſerenity of ſoul in danger, which the Engliſh call
a cool head. And it was perhaps this quality, the
greateſt gift of nature for command, which for-
merly gave the Engliſh ſo many advantages over
the French in the plains of Poitiers, Creſſy, and
Agincourt. 4

Marlborough, who was an indefatigable warrior
during the campaign, in winter acted the part of an
able negotiator. He went to the Hague, and all
the courts in Germany. He perſuaded the Dutch W
to exert their utmoſt to humble France. He
rouſed the reſentment of the elector Palatine. He
went likewiſe to flatter the haughty elector of
Brandenbourg, when this prince wanted to be
king: he ſerved him at table, in order to procure I
of him a ſupply of ſeven or eight thouſand men.
Prince Eugene, on his part, no ſooner finiſhed one
campaign than he went direQly for Vienna, to make
preparations for another : and it cannot but appear W
evident, how much better an army muſt ſubſiſt,
when the general himſelf acts as the miniſter. B
Theſe two great men, who ſometimes jointly com- W
manded, and ſometimes ſeparately, lived always in
a good underſtanding: they had frequent confer- W
ences at the Hague with the grand penſionary
Heinſius, the miniſter who governed Holland in
eonjuntion with ſecretary Fagel, with as mueh ſo ;
gacity as the Barnevelts and de Witts, and with

ch. 17. reis e. 29 5
better fortune. Theſe three ſtateſmen ſo concerted
meaſures, that they put the ſprings of half Europe
in motion, againſt the houſe of Bourbon, The
French miniſtry was then too weak to reſiſt long
uch united force. They always kept the plan of
the operations of the campaign a profound ſecret.
They themſelves concerted their deſigns, and never
communicated them even to thoſe whoſe aſſiſtance
was neceſſary, till on the point of execution. Cha-
millard, on the contrary, being no politician, no
warrior, nor even well verſed in the public revenues,
vas greatly unequal to the part of a prime mini-
ſer. His own incapacity to concert meaſures,
made him therefore have recourſe to the aſliſtance
of many inferior perſons; ſo that, by this means,
his ſecrets often tranſpired even before he had fully
determined what particular courle to take,

As ſoon as Marlborough commanded the allied
army in Flanders, he made it appear, that he had
learned the art of war from Turenne, under whom
he had ſerved his firſt campaign as a volunteer.
He went, in the French army, by no other name
but that of the hand/eme Engliſhman but the viſ-
count de Turenne had judged, that the hand/ame
Eugliſhman would one day come forth a very great
man. He began his command with advancing
from obſcurity ſubaltern officers, in whom he diſ-
cerned merit, without confining himſelf to the order
of the military roll, which we call in France Pordre
ds tableau. He knew, that when ſteps of advance-
ment are only the conſequence of ſeniority, emula-
tion is extinguiſhed z and that the oldeſt is far from
being always the beſt officer. He formed men at
once, When he came into, the field, he gained.

* =
* "= 2
oy Is

6 — *

5 OR.
Ch. x7,

*

26 THE AE OFT

ground confiderably on the French, even without
fighting. The firſt month of the campaign, count
d Atlone, the Dutch general, diſputed the com-
mand; but, on the ſecond (/, was obliged to yield
to him in every reſpect. The French monarch had!
ſent againſt him his grandſon the duke of Bur-
gundy, a wile and juſt prince, born to make!
men happy. The marſhal de Bouflers, a brave
and indefatigable general, commanded under this
young prince. But the duke, after having in
vain attempted to take ſeveral places, and having
been forced to retreat by the excellent marches of
the Engliſh, returned to Verſailles in the middle
of the campaign. Bouflers now remained alone a
ſpectator of the ſucceſs of Marlborough, who took
Venlo, Ruremonde, and Liege, always advancing, W
and never for a moment quitting his ſuperiority. i
Marlborough, at his return to London after this
campaign, received all the honours that could be
conferred either by a monarchy or republic; he
was created a duke by the queen, and, which was
ſtill more grateful, received the thanks of both
houſes of parliament, who ſent a deputation of
their number to wait upon him at his houſe for
that purpoſe. :
Nevertheleſs there ſtill appeared a man who ſeemed W
deſigned to be a bulwark to the glory of France.
This was marſhal duke de Villars, then only a lieu -
tenant-general, but afterwards generaliſſimo of the
armies of France, Spain, and Sardinia, when in the
eighty-ſecond year of his age: he was reſolute and
bold, and raiſed himſelf by an obſtinacy-which he
always ſhewed in acting beyond his commiſion.
(1) 1703. | 8

e win . K N 9 Iv ©

ch. 17. LEWIS NV. 287
He ſometimes diſpleaſed Lewis, and, which was
more dangerous, Louvois; for he'ſpoke to them
with the ſame boldneſs as he ſerved. They reproach-
ed him, that he had not a modeſty becoming his
ralour. But, however, perceiving he had a genius
for war, and was formed for conducting a Freneh
army, after having neglected him a confiderable
number of years, they now promoted him in -a
ſhort time.

There was hardly any man whoſe fortune occa-
ſioned more jealouſy, and yet no one ever gave leſs
occaſion for it. He had, indeed, been created a
marſhal of France, a duke and peer of the realm,
and governor of Provence: but then he had ſaved
the ſtate; while others, who had almoſt ruined it,
or thoſe who had been only mere courtiers, had re-
ceived very near the ſame recompences. They even
reproached him with his riches, which he had ac-
quired by contributions levied in the enemy's coun-
try, the lawful, though inadequate reward of his
valour and good conduct; whilſt thoſe, who had
amaſſed fortunes ten times more conſiderable by the
moſt ſcandalous practices, poſſeſſed them with uni-
verſal approbation. He had not begun to enjoy
his reputation before his eightieth year ; and he was
forced to outlive the whole court, to taſte the full
ſweets of his glory.

It may not be unneceſſary to give the reaſon of
this injuſtice in the public. It was becauſe the
marihal de Villars bad no art: he knew not how to
gain friends with his good ſenſe and honeſty ; nor to
acquire eſteem by ſpeaking of himſelf ſo advanta-
geoully as he deſerved to be ſpoken of by others.
One day, when he went to pay his reſpects to the

4 \ |

288 THE AGE OF* . 5.
king, before he ſet out for his command, he told
him, before all the court: “ Sir, I am going to fight
« your majeſty's enemies; and I leave you ſurroung-
« ed with mine.” He ſaid to the courtiers, who, in
the regency of the duke of Orleans, had amaſſedifi
riches by that confuſion which was called the ſyſtem:
« As for me, I have never gained any thing but from.
© our enemies.” Theſe expreſſions, wherein he ſhew-]
ed the ſame courage as in his actions, caſt too great
a contempt on others, who were already ſufficiently
irritated by his good fortune. :
At the beginning of this war, he was one of thole
lieutenant-generals who commanded the detach-
ments in Alſace, The prince of Baden was at the
head of the Imperialits, ard had taken Landau, WW
after a defence of four months by Melac. This Wl
prince continned his progreſs, having the advantage
in numbers, in the ground, and in a ſucceſsful com-

mencement of the campaign. His army was among

thoſe mountains of Briſgau adjoining to the Black

Foreſt, which immenſe foreſt ſeparated the Bavarian

from the French troops. Catinat commanded then
in Straſbourg ; but he was too cautious to attack the
prince of Baden at ſuch great diſadvantage: for, had
he proved unſucceſsful, the French army would have
been irrecoverably loſt, and Alſace laid open. Vil-
lars, who had reſolved to be a marſhal of France,
or to die in the attempt, ventured what Catinat had
not dared to attempt. Having obtained permiſſion Bl
from court, he marched againſt the Imperialiſts,
with an army inferior to theirs, and engaged them
near Friedlingen, which gave name to the battle.
The cavalry engaged in the plain; and the French
infantry, after having clambered up to the ſummit

LEWIS XIV. 28%

0.17.

7.

4 of the mountains, attacked that of the Germans,
| N utrenched in the woods.

ght

[ have heard the marſhal de Villars ſay more than
once, that, after the battle was gained, as he was
narching at the head of his infantry, a voice called
aut, „We are undone.” Upon hearing this, all
tis regiments fled. He ran after them, calling
out, Come back, my friends; the victory is
Hours:“ Long live the king.” The ſoldiers an-
Wl fcred, © Long live the king,” trembling; and
WT {il continued to fly. The greateſt difficulty which
bee general had, was to rally the conquerors, Had
WT only two of the enemy's regiments appeared during

1 WT this panic, the French would have been defeated;
" WJ {© often does mere chance decide the fate of battles,
" The prince of Baden loſt three thouſand men,

ah all his artillery; and, after being driven from
he field, was purſued ſix miles acroſs the woods and
&files. As a farther proof of his defeat, the fort
W of Friedlingen capitulated ; yet, notwithſtanding all
this, he ſent word to Vienna, that he had gained a
ntory; and a Te Deum was ſung, more ſhameful

W to him than the defeat he had ſuffered.

h
* = The French ſoldiers, as ſoon as they had reco-
* ed from their panic, proclaimed Villars a mar-

hal of France in the field of battle; and, about a

» WM enight after, the king confirmed what had been
d [BB him by the voice of the ſoldiers,

Marſhal Villars, with his victorious troops, at
joined the elector of Bavaria ( g); whom he found
orous on his fide, having gained ground of the
taemy, and being maſter of the Imperial city of
(g April 1703

290 THE AGE OF G15
Ratiſbon, where, the- diet of the Empire had been
laying ſchemes for his deſtrufion.

Villars was rather formed to ſerve his country by
following his genius, than by acting in concert with
a prince. He led, or rather forced, the elector on
the other ſide of the Danube: but, after they had

_ paſſed the river, the elector repented it; perceiving,

that the leaſt misfortune would expoſe his dominions

to the emperor's mercy. The count de Styrum, at

the head of twenty thouſand men, was then going to
join the formidable army of the prince of Baden, near
Donawert. We muſt prevent this,” ſaid Villars

to the prince; © we muſt march inſtantly, and at-
c tack Styrum.“ The elector heſitated, and an -
ſwered, that he would confer with his generals and

miniſters. I am your miniſter and general,” re-
plied Villars: “do you want any other counſel than
“ mine, when the queſtion is about giving battle?”

The prince, being full of apprehenſions for his
dominions, was ſtill averſe to the French general's I
propoſal, and not a little diſpleaſed with bim.
« Well then,” ſaid Villars, “ if your electoral
« highneſs will not ſeize this opportunity with your

« Bavarians, I will engage with the French;” and
accordingly he immediately gave orders for the
attack. The elector, though he was moved with

indignation , and looked upon Villars as extremely

raſh, yet found himſelf under a kind of neceſſity to
1

* All theſe particulars are in the manuſeript "of Me-

moirs, written by marſhal Villars, which I have read. The firſt

printed volume of theſe Memoirs is certainly bis own; but the

two others are by ſome other hand; and are not like the fill,

”
/

EF 7

ST FT LIN LPT 7 Bo

ch. 17. "LEWIS NV. tov

feht againſt his inclination. They engaged in the
pains of Hochſtet, near Donawert (h.

After the firſt charge, there was à remarkable in-
ſance of the power of fortune in battles. The
French army, and that of the enemy, were both
ſized with a panic; both at once betook themſelves
to fight, and 'marſhal Villars was left almoſt alone
for ſome minutes in the field of battle: he, never-
theleſs, rallied his troops, led them again to the
charge, and gained the victory. Three thouſand of
the Imperialiſts were killed, four thouſand were
tken priſoners, and they loſt all their artillery
ud baggage. The elector got poſſeſſion of Au-
bourg; and the road of Vienna being now laid
open, it was debated in the emperor's council, whe-
ther he ſhould quit his capital.

The emperor's conſternation was excuſable; for
te was then every-where worſted. The duke of
Burgundy (i), with the marſhals Tallard and Vau-
tn under him, had made himſelf maſter of old
frac, Tallard had not only retaken Landau, but
tad likewiſe defeated the prince of Heſſe, (H after-
wards king of Sweden, near Spires, when he came
to relieve that city. If we may believe the marquis
& Feuquieres, that officer and judge ſo well {killed
n the military art, but ſo ſevere in his opinions,
marſhal Tallard gained this battle by a miſtake and
werſight. In his letter from the field of battle to
is majeſty, he had theſe words: & Sir, your army
* has taken more ſtandards and colours than it has
* loſt common ſoldiers.”

france having thus been ſucceſsful in Germany,

) Sept. 20. 1503. (i) Sept. 6. (5) Nov. 14. 1703.

Ve. II. gde

5
* b

292 THE AGE” OF 957 T%

it might be ſuppoſed Villars would pull the-ſneceh
much farther, conſidering the impetuaſity of his
temper, ſo formed to diſconcert the ſlowneſi of
the Germans: but that particular quality, which
made him fo formidable a general, rendered hin i
intolerable to the elector of Bavaria. The king de-
fired his generals ſhould: behave haughtily to none
but an enemy; and the elector of 'Bavaria-was {ſo
unfortunate as to demand another marſhal of France.
Thus, notwithſtanding Villars was ſo neceſſary
a man in Germany; where he had gained two
battles, and in all probability, would have over-
powered the emperor; yet be was ſent into the
Cevennes, to quell an inſurrettion amongſt the
eountry- people. We ſhall ſpeak of theſe fanatic
in the chapter upon religion. But Lewis XIV. hadi
other enemies more terrible, more ſucceſsful, and
more trreconcileable, than the Ages 1
Cevennes,

CHAPTER XVIII.
* defeat at Blenheim, or Hochſtet ; and
its conſequences.

HE duke of Marlborough returned to be
Netherlands in the beginning of the yeat

I 70 3. where his conduct and ſucceſs were equall
great. He had taken Bonne, the reſidence. of tha
elector of Cologne; thence he proceeded; to Huy
which he took, as alſo Limbourg; and made nf :
elf maſter of all the circle of the lower Rhige, Tha

a4

h 19. EWTS NV. 293
marſhal-de Villeroi; as ſoon as he was ſet atTibertyz
cmmanded- in Flanders; but he was not more
fortrnnate againſt Marlborough, than he had been
wiinſt prince Eugene. The marſhal de Bouflers
had, indeed, got a ſmall advantage, with a detach-
ment of the army, at the battle of Eckern, againſt
0bdam the Dutch general; but a victory attended
vith no advantage afterwards is of no value.
Mean while, if the Engliſh general had not marched
v the aſſiſtance of the emperor, it is probable the
WJ touſe of Auſtria would have been intirely ruined.
The elector of Bavaria was maſter of Paſſau : thirty
thouſand French under marſhal de Marſin, who had
JW ſucceeded Villars, covered the country on the other
de of the Danube; and parties made frequent in-
curſions into Auſtria. Vienna was, on one fide,
Wl threatened by the French and Bavarians, and, on the
WF other, by prince Ragotſki, at the head of the Hun-
eins, fighting for their liberty, and ſupported by
W the treaſure of France, as well as' Turkey. About
bs dme, prince Eugene now haſtened out of Italy
v command the arm in Germany; and he met the
ae of Marlborough at Heilbron. The Engliſh
general, being left intirely to his own judgment by
his queen, as well as the Dutch, marched with
WI ficcour into the heart of the Empire. He, at firſt,
carried with bim ten thouſand Engliſh infantry;
and twenty-three ſquadrons of horſe, He haſtened
lis march, and arrived upon the banks of the Da-
nube, near Donawert, oppoſite to the elector of
WY Þvaria's lines, wherein about eight thouſand French,
VE ad 25 many Bavarians, intrenched, guarded the
wountry they had conquered. After à conteſt of

Ce

= 4

$

SB ERESPTSCSSDRTESS2S STD

—
3

THE 40 or

294 ch. 10 il ©
two hours, Marlborough forced his way, at the Wl |:
bead of three Engliſh battalions, and defeated-the le
French and Bavarians. It is ſaid, that he killed fx n.
thouſand of the enemy, and loſt near that number .
himſelf (a): but the number of dee dend ts bat ef Tl 6:
little conſequence to a general, provided be gains il E
his point. Marlborough took Donawert, paſſed the .
Danube, and laid all Bavaria under contribution. WY ur
Marſhal de Villeroi, who attempted to follow the the
Engliſh general when he began his march, preſently WY #
Joſt ſight of him; and did not learn where he was, Wl tn:
will he heard of the wie en ena NANG J -:
Tallard, at the head of thirty thouſand men, march- Wl ©:
ed another way to oppoſe N and joined de
the elector. = cx;
About the ſame time, prince Eugene arrived, e
and joined Marlborough. The two armies at laſt 1 qui
met near Donawert, and almoſt in the ſame plains ö con
where marſhal Villars had gained a victory the year I
before. This general, who was then in the Cevennes, de
having received a letter from Tallard's army, dated een
the night before the battle, wherein the ſituation of cs
the two armies was deſcribed, and the manner in dis
which Tallard intended to engage; Villars wrote to 1 f
the preſident de Maiſons, his brother - in law, that f de
if marſhal Tallard gave battle in that poſition, be ard
would certainly be defeated. This letter nn ; my
to Lewis XIV, 44a 5 live]
The French army, code 3 — con- #4
ſiſted of eighty- two battalions, and an hundred and be
ſixty ſquadrons, which amounted to almoſt ſixty glor
thouſand men; for the companies were not com- a
u

plete. The enemy had ſixty-four battalions, and al
(4) July 3.1704.

hundred and fifty-two ſquadrons; but we may rec-
kon them only fifty-two thouſand ſtrong ;. for ar -
mies are generally given out to be more numerous
than they really are. This bloody and deciſiye
hattle merits a particular attention. The French
generals have been cenſured for many blunders;
the principal of which was, the bringing their army
under a neceſſity of fighting, inſtead of ſuffering
the enemy to be conſumed for want of forage, and
ging marſhal Villeroi time either to fall upon
the unguarded Low Countries, or march into Ger-
many, But, in anſwer to this reproach, we muſt
conſider, that the French being more numerous than
the confederate army, they had ſome reaſon to
WT expeft the victory; and, had they obtained this,
a the emperor muſt have been dethroned. The mar-
dis de Feuquieres reckons up twelve capital faults
committed before and after the battle, by Marſin,
Tl Tallard, and the eleftor : the moſt palpable was,
the not placing a ſtrong body of infantry in their
centre, and the ſeparating their forces into two bo»
bes. I have often heard marſhal Villars ſay, that
tis diſpoſition was inexcuſable.

Marſhal Tallard was with the right wing, and

EEE SE RATES SE FES FFF ©

n oor

to

nat WY the clector, with Marſin, commanded the left. Tal-
he brd, in his courage, had all the ardour aud viva-
wn BY ty fo peculiar to the French: his genius was

vely, penetrating, and abounding in expedients
and reſources. He was the perſon who had made
the partition-treaties: in ſhort, he had obtained
glory and fortune by his capacity and courage.
The battle of Spires had gained him immortal ho-
tour, notwithſtanding all the cenſures of Fey»

Cc 3

LS

ch. 18. LEWIS NV. " Sd

* ' _— F? - _ EM 8 a LY AV . -
2 £1 WV . -, 2 * . 7 » e * 7 4 5 *
* * — n *

296 T H E AGE OF Ch. 18.
quieres; for a victorious general is never g
any faults, in the publie opinion, in the fame
manner as one who has been defeated, is always J
ſuppoſed. to have acted ill, dee his coadutt has :
been never ſo diſcreet.
Tallard had one misfortune extremely dangerous
for a general: he was ſo ſhort-ſighted, that he could
not diſtinguiſh objects at the diſtance of twenty
paces. Thoſe, who have been well acquainted with
him, have likewiſe aſſured me, that his ardent cou-
rage, quite contrary to that of Mar „ was
apt to be inflamed, in the heat of action, to ſuch a
degree, as to deprive him of the perfect uſe of his
underſtanding. This defect proceeded from the
dry and hot temperature of his blood. It is ſuffi-
ciently known, that all the qualities of our fouls are
derived from the natural conſtitution of our bodies.
The marſhal de Marſin had never before com-
manded in chief; and, with a great deal of ſpirit W
and good underſtanding, he was ſaid to have rather
the experience of a good officer than a general.
As for the elector of Bavaria, he was not ſo much
eonſidered as a general, as a courageous prince ;
amiable in his behaviour, beloved by his ſubjects, and
ene who had more magnanimity than application.
The battle began betwixt twelve and one of the
dock. Marlborough, with his Engliſh, having paſſed
| rivulet, immediately charged Tallard's cavalry:
the marſhal, a little before had paſſed over to
the left wing, to obſerve its diſpoſition. To be
obliged to engage without their general, was, of
itſelf, a great diſadvantage to the marſhal's army. |

The army, commanded by the elector and Marſin
was not yet attacked by prince Eugene. Marlborough

, w_—_ wy

md, .Qq wy Fn ro wr &@ os a

| — =

4
1
Y
"of
by
4

8.
of
me
ys
has
us
ad
ity
-
yas

ch. 18. LEWIS NV. 297

had fallen upon the right wing almoſt an hour be-
fore Eagene could advance to the elector on the left.
When marſhal Tallard was told, that Marlbo-
rough had attacked his wing, he flew to it inſtantly,
and found them in the heat of action: the French
cavalry were thrice rallied, and as often repulſed.
He went to the village of Blenheim, where he had
poſted twenry-ſeven battalions, and twelve ſqua-
drons. This little ſeparate army made a continual
fre on that of Marlborough. From this village;
where he gave his orders, he flew again to the other
quarter, where Marlborough, with his horſe and his
foot between the ſquadrons, was driving before him
the French cavalry. |

M. de Feuquieres is certainly miſtaken in ſaying,
that marſhal Tallard was not there; and that he was
taken priſoner upon his return from Marſin's wing
to his own. All the accounts agree that he was
preſent ; and this he experienced to his coſt; for
there he was wounded, as was likewiſe his ſon mor-
tally by his ſide. All his cavalry was routed in his
preſence. The victorious Marlborough, on one fide,
advanced betwixt the two French armies ; as did his
general officers on the other ſide, betwixt Blenheim

and Tallard's army, ſtill ſeparated from the little

army in the village of Blenheim.

Marſhal Tallard, in this diſtreſſed ſituation, haſten-
ed to rally ſome ſquadrons. The weakneſs of his
light made him miſtake a ſquadron of the enemy
for a French one; and he was taken priſoner

by the Heſſian troops, then in the pay of Eng»-
land. At this very inſtant too, prince Eugene, after

having been thrice repulſed, at laſt gained the ad-
vantage, Tallard's army was already completely

by = £4 IA?
N Si * —
"Þ - bh

298 THE AGE OF d. 16.
routed; and put to flight. The confuſion and
diſtraction in this whole right wing was ſo great,
that the officers, as well as ſoldiers, threw them -
ſelves into the Danube, without conſidering what
they did. None of the general officers gave or-
ders for a retreat; nor did any one think of
ſaving, or bringing to action, thoſe twenty-ſeven
battalions and twelve ſquadrons of the beſt troops
of France, ſo unluckily cooped up in Blenheim,
The marſhal de Marſin now made a retreat, Count
de Bourg, afterwards a marſhal of France, ſaved
a ſmall part of the infantry, by retiring through
the marſhes of Hochſtet; but neither he, nor
Marſin, nor any other, thought of thoſe forces re-
maining in Blenheim, waiting for their orders: they.
amounted to eleven thouſand men, and were all
veteran troops. There are many inſtances of leſſer
armies, who have defeated others fifty thouſand F
ſtrong; or who have made glorious retreats: but
the ſituation of the place, where an army is poſted,
decides every thing. The French found it impoſ-
ſible to get out of the narrow ſtreets of a village,
to form themſelves in order of battle, before a
victorious enemy, which would inſtantly have over- W
powered them by a more extenſive front, by its
artillery, and even by the cannon of the vanquiſhed W
army, which they had in their poſſeſſion. Their
general officer, the marquis de Clerambaut, ſon of W
marſhal Clerambaut, haſtened to demand orders of
marſhal Tallard : but when he found this general N
was taken priſoner, and ſaw all flying, he alſo took I
to flight, and ran to drown himſelf in che Danube.
Brigadier Sivieres, who was poſted in the village
at this juncture, made a bold and deſperate effort:

—
OA

* . 2 5 @-

ck. 18. LEWIS NV. 299

he called aloud to the officers of the Artois and

provence regiments: to aceompany him: theſe, ac-
cordingly, with the officers of ſome other regi ·

ments, inſtantly followed him. They ruſhed upon
the enemy in the ſame manner as a ſally is made
from a beſieged town; but, after this-ſally, it was

neceſſary for them again to retire into the village:

and immediately after, an officer named Deſnon-
villes, entered the village on horſeback, with the
earl of Orkney: „Is this an Engliſh priſoner, you
« bring?” ſaid the reſt of the officers, crouding
about him. No, gentlemen,” he replied, « I
« am the priſoner ; and come to tell you, that you
have no other courſe to take, but to ſurrender
« yourſelves priſoners of war; and here is my lord
Orkney, who offers you terms of capitulation.“
All theſe veterans expreſſed the utmoſt aſtoniſh-
ment; the regiment- of Nayarre tore their colours,
and buried them under-ground : but, at laſt, being
obliged to yield to neceſſity, they ſurrendered with-
out fighting. My lord Orkney has himſelf aſſured

ne, that they could not do otherwiſe, in ſuch a Gitu-

ation. All Europe was aſtoniſhed, that the beſt
troops of France ſhould, in a body, ſubmit to ſuch an
ignominy. Their misfortune was imputed to cowar-
dice; but, ſome; years after, fourteen ; thouſand

} Swedes ſurrendering themſelves priſoners at diſcre-

tion to the Muſcovites in the open field, not a lit-
tle juſtified the French.

Such was that celebrated battle, known. in .
by tbe name of Hochſtet, of Plentheim in Ger-
many, and, in England, by that of Blenheim.
The conquerors loſt near five thouſand in the field,
ard had eight thouſand wounded; the greateſt! pars

4 —

300 THE AGE OFT d

ous, there remained not more than twenty thouſand.
About twelve thouſand of the French were killed;

and about fourteen thouſand made priſoners: all their
artillery, a vaſt number of their ſtandards and co-
lours, their tems and field-equipages, were likewiſe

taken by the enemy, together with the general

of the French army, and twelve hundred officers
Thoſe who had fled, were di:
ſperſed different ways: in leſs than a month, near
three hundred miles of territory were loſt. Ba:
varia, being now ſubjected to the emperur, felt at
once all the enraged rigour of the Auſtrian goveru·
ment, and the rapacious batbarity©of a' viftorious
ſoldiery. The eleftor, in his flight to Bruſſels, M
met with his brother the elector of Cologn,'who
was likewiſe driven from his dominions: they em-
braced each other, and ſhed rears Amarement
and conſternation now ſeized the court of Verſailles, Þ

of diſtinction.

hitherto accuſtomed to proſperity. The neus of Þ
the defeat came amidſt grand rejoĩcings for the birth

of a great grandſon of Lewis XIV. Nobody dared
to tell the king ſo cruel a truth. Madame Main

tenon was at laſt obliged to take upon her the office
to inform his majeſty, that he was no longer invin-

cible. It has been ſaid, and affirmed in moſt hiſto-
ries, that the emperor cauſed a monument of this
defeat to be raiſed in the plains of -Blenheim,/ with

1+ 1424

an inſcription extremely ſatirical upon Lewis. But

ſuch a monument never exiſted: nor was there |
one any-where but in England, which was erefted
in honour of the duke of Marlborough. The

— ROCHE TT MS SS TT Hl 9 3. 2 SO as *#?ÞaTRY

.'“ r © ©

. £5 0&© A. x-*

BLAST TA TASRIB PT EF REBT EE OUOEDPY FSASM2,R &

6. 13. LEWIS NV. 5 301

queen and parliament built a ſpacious palace in one
— fineſt parts of the kingdom, which has the
name of Blenbeim. This battle is there repre-
ſented in the pictures, and tapeſtry. The chanks
of boch houſes of parliament, with thoſe of the
cities and boroughs, and the acclamations of all
England, were the firſt rewards. of his vicbory.
The celebrated poem of Mr. Addiſon, a more laſt-
ing monument than the palace of Blenheim, is ac-
counted, by that learned and warlike nation,
amongſt the moſt honourable recompences beſtowed
on the duke of Marlborough. The emperor cre-
ed him a prince of the empire, and gave him the
principality of Mindelheim, which was afterwards
exchanged for another; but he has never been
known by this title, the name of Marlborough
taving become the moſt illuſtrious he could have.

The French army being intirely diſperſed, the
alles had now a free communication betwixt the
Danube and the Rhine, which they accordingly
paſſed, and entered Alſace. Prince Lewis of Ba-
cen, a general famous for encampments and marches,
inveſted Landau. Joſeph, king of the Romans,
eldeſt ſon of the emperor Leopold, was preſent at
tie ſiege. AN and likewiſe Traer-

bach (5).

Though three bnedred leagues of ground were
lot, yet the frontiers of France ftill remained un-
Gminiſhed, Lewis XIV. ſupported his grandſon in
Spain, and was victorious in Italy. Great efforts
were neceſſary to be made in Germany, to oppoſe
tte victorious : and the utmoſt vigour
vas accordingly exerted. The broken remains of

Y November 19. 23d 23-

-
—

*
* 9

302 THE AGE OP Ch. 18;

the army were reaſſembled,” the gariſons were
drained, and the militia ordered to take the field;
The miniſter borrowed money from all hands. An
army was at laſt muſtered up, and marſhal Villars
was recalled from the remoteſt part of the 'Cevey:
nes, to take upon him the command. Upon his
arrival, he found himſelf near Treves, with an in-
ferior force, oppoſite to the Engliſh general. Both
were equally deſirous to come to an engagement;
but the prince of Baden not coming up in proper
time to join the Engliſh troops, Villars had atleaſt
the honour to make the duke of Marlborough de-
camp (c); no inconſiderable thing at that time. The
duke of Marlborough, who eſteemed marſhal Vik
lars ſo much as to be deſirous of his eſteem, wrote
to him, at decamping, in theſe terms: „Do me
« the juſtice to believe, that my retreat is owing
« to the prince of Baden; and that my eſteem for
& you is greater than my anger againſt him. |
The French had till barriers in Germany. Flan-
ders, where marſhal de Villeroi commanded, after |
being delivered from his confinement, was yet un-
touched. In Spain, Philip V. and the archduke
Charles, equally expected to enjoy the crown: the
former built his hopes on the power of his grand- WY *
father, and the favour of moſt of the Spaniards;
the latter depended upon the aſſiſtance of the Eng-
fiſh, and the party he had in Catalonia and"Arra-
gon. This archduke, afterwards emperor, and
then ſecond ſon of the emperor Leopold, having
nothing but his'title, went to London, almoſt with-
out attendants, to d- ann ng
Anne.

© May 1705.

=6& an Tat enw P06 T 4 = = --

ch. 19. "LEWIS XIV. 30 3

Then it was that the power of England fully diſ-
played itſelf, This nation, ſo little intereſted in the
quarrel, furniſhed the Auſtrian prince with two hun-
tred tranſport-ſhips, thirty men of war, joined to
ten Dutch veſſels, nine thouſand troops, and mo-
ney, to conquer a kingdom. But, notwithſtanding
this ſuperiority, ariſing from power and good offices,

Jet the emperor, in his letter to queen Anne, pre-

ſented by the archduke, did not honour his bene-

of res with the title of majeſty : he only gave her
dat of ſerene highneſs, according to the ſtile of the
WJ court of Vienna, which cuſtom only can juſtify.

CHAPTER XIX.

me defeats in Spain; at Ramillies and Tu

rin; and their conſequences.

. 0 NE of the firſt exploits of thoſe Engliſh

troops, was the taking of Gibraltar; which,

ot without reaſon, had been accounted impreg-
WJ table. The place is rendered ſecure from any ap-
J proach, on the land- ſide, by a long chain of ſteep +
WF nacceilible rocks. The entrance by ſea is impracti-
ol cle to large ſhips. The bay being long, danger-
oss, and ſtormy, ſhips are expoſed to tempeſts, and
WT the cannon of the fortreſs and mole. The citizens
one, in this place, might defend it againſt a thou-

land ſhips, and an hundred thouſand men. But

en the flrength of Gibraltar proved the cauſe of

is being taken, The gariſon conſiſted only of

a hundred ſoldiers; and this number was ſuffi-
V.0L: i D d

RN 1

cient: but they neglected a duty which- they

thought needleſs. The prince of Heſſe had landed

eighteen hundred ſoldiers on the iſthmus, behind

the northern ſide of the town: the ſteepneſs of the
rock, however, made all attempts fruicleſs from
that quarter. The fleet made fiſteen thouſand dif.

charges of cannon; but all in vain. The ſailors, at

laſt, in one of their merry moods, rowed with their

long-boats under the mole; the artillery of which
might have blown them to pieces, but not a ſingle
gun was fired. They ſcaled the mole, and made

themſelves maſters, of it: the ſoldiers haſtened
after them; this impregnable place was obliged to
ſurrender (a); and, to this day, remains in the poſ-

ſeſſion of the Engliſh. Spain, become again a for-

midable power under the government of the prin-
ceſs of Parma, the fecond queen of Philip V. and
who has been ſo ſucceſsful in Africa, as well as Italy,
with an impotent indignation ſtill beholds Gibraltar
in the hands of a northern nation, whoſe ſaips, two Wl
hundred years before, durſt hardly venture into the

Mediterranean.

Immediately after the taking of Gibraltar, the
Engliſh, now maſters of that ſea, engaged count
Toulouſe, the French admiral, in fight of Ma-

laga (5). This fight, though not deciſive, was the

final period of the maritime power of Lewis XIV.

Count Toulouſe, his natural ſon, and lord: high

admiral of France, had in this engagement, com-
manded fifty ſhips of the line, and twenty-four

gallies. He retired with honour, and without
damage. Soon after, the king ſent thirteen ſhups
to attack Gibraltar, whilſt marſhal Teſſe beſieged

() Auguſt 4. 1704. (+) Auguſt 1 704.

—
-

70 Q- a q — 9 ” 1' & (Þ Fi. fr. =
$ * : * 3 : ; - | a 4 N »

r

ch. 19. LEWIS NV. 30 5

it by land (c); but this double raſhneſs proved at
once the ruin of the fleet and army. Part of the
ſhips were caſt away in a ſtorm; part were board-
ed and taken by the Engliſh, after a very brave
teſiſtance; and part were burnt on the Spaniſh
coaſt, From that day the French no longer made
figure with their numerous fleets on the ocean,
nor in the Mediterranean. The marine now almoſt
ſunk again to that condition whence Lewis had
raiſed it, in the fame manner, as many other grand
things, which had their riſe and fall during his reign.
The ſame Engliſh, who had taken' Gibraltar, in
ſx weeks conquered the kingdom of Valencia and

WJ Catalonia for the archduke Charles. They carried

Barcelona by a mere chance, which proceeded from
the raſhneſs of the beſiegers.

The Engliſh were at that time commanded dove
of the molt extraordinary men that country, ſo fruit-
ful in fierce, courageous, and whimſical geniuſes,
erer produced. This was the earl of Peterborough ;
a man in every reſpect reſembling thoſe imaginary

heroes, whom the Spaniards have repreſented in
WT their romances. At fifteen years of age, he left
London, to go to the wat againſt the Moors in

Africa, When he was twenty years old, he began

Le revolution in England, and became the firſt man
of diſtinction in Holland, next to the prince of

Orange : but, leſt the deſign of his voyage ſhould

Le ſuſpected, he embarked for America, and failed

from thence to the Hague, in a Dutch veſſel. He
more than once gave away all his fortune. He,
at that time, carried on the war in Spain almoſt at

(c) March 170g,
Dd 2

—

300 THE AGE OF «ug,

his own expence, and maintained the archduke,
with his whole family. He beſieged Barcelona,
with the prince de + Darmſtadt. He propoſed to
him, fword in hand ro force the intrenchments,
which covered fort Mont-joie and the town. This
enterprize was accordingly executed with ſucceſs;
but the prince of Darmſtadt periſhed in the at-
tempt. A bomb happening to burſt in the fort,
blew up the magazine of powder: the fort was
then taken, and the town offered to capitulate.
The governor came to a parley with Peterbo- W
rough, at the gates of the town. The articles
were not yet ſigned, when, on a ſudden, there was
heard a noiſe of ſhouts and hnzzas: © You betray
« us,” ſaid the governor to Peterborough, « whilſt
x we are capitulating with honour and ſincerity:
« behold, your Engliſh have entered the town by
& the ramparts; and are murdering, plundering, MW
« and committing all manner of outrages.” „No
ec are miſtaken” replied Peterborough ;” theſe mult
be the troops of the prince of Darmſtadt: there
« is only one expedient to ſave your town; allow W
« me to enter inſtantly with my Engliſh; I wil
cc make all quiet, and then return to the gate to
« finiſh the capitulation.” He ſpoke this with
an air of greatneſs and ſincerity, which, joined to
a ſenſe of the preſent danger, perſuaded the go- W
vernor; and Peterborough was accordingly ad-
mitted. He haſtened, with ſome of his officers,
into the ſtreets, where he found the Germans and :
Catalans ſacking the houſes of the principal inhabit-

+ In the hiſtory of Reboulet, this prince is called the head Wh

of the factious; as if he had been a Spaniard, who had revolt: |
ed againſt Philip V. ;

:
y
:

GR” oo uM, ce on = e

2

e e

Ch. 19. LEWIS XIV. 307
ants. He drove them away, and obliged them to
quit the booty they were carrying off. He luckily
reſcued the ducheſs of Popoli out of the hands of the
ſoldiers, by whom ſhe was on the point of being
dſhonoured; and reſtored her to her huſband. In
ſhort, after having quieted all diſturbances, he re-
turned to the gate, and finiſhed the terms of capi-
tulation. The Spaniards were amazed at ſeeing
fuch greatneſs of ſoul in the Engliſh, whom the
generality had always looked upon as mercileſs bar-
barians, becauſe they were heretics,

To the loſs of Barcelona there was likewiſe added
another mortification, by an attempt to retake it,
which miſcarried, Philip V. though he had the
majority of Spain in his intereſt, yet had neither ge-
nerals nor engineers, and but few ſoldiers. France
furniſhed him all. The count de Toulouſe re-
turned, to block up the harbour with twenty-five
ſhips, the remains of the French navy. Marſhal
Tele formed the ſiege with thirty-one ſquadrons,
and thirty- ſeven battalions. But as ſoon as the Eng-
lh fleet appeared, that of the French ſtood away,
nud marſhal Teſſe raiſed the ſiege in the utmoſt pre-
WJ cpitation. He left, in his camp, a vaſt quantity of
broviſions, beſides fifteen hundred wounded ſoldiers,
WJ to had nothing to truſt to, but the humanity of the
earl of Peterborough. Theſe loſſes were conſider-
able, It is doubtful whether it had before coſt
france more to conquer Spain, than it did now to
ſupport her. The grandſon of Lewis, however, always
maintained his right, by the affection of the Caſti-
lan nation, who perſiſted in their choice, and from
principle of pride, continued in their fidelity.

Dd 3

308 THE AGE OF Ch. 19.
Things went on ſucceſsfully enough in Italy, Lewis
had ſufficient revenge on the duke of Savoy. The
duke de Vendome had at firſt honourably repulſed
prince Eugene at the battle of Caſſano, near the
Adda: a bloody action, and one of thoſe undecifive
battles, for which Tr Dewms are ſung on both ſides;
but which only tend to the deſtruction of man-
kind, without adyancing the intereſt of any party.
After the battle of Caſſano, Vendome gained
a, complete victory at Caſſinato, in the abſence
of prince Eugene. The day after the battle, this
prince arrived, and had the mortification to ſee a de-
tachment of his troops intirely routed. The allies
were at laſt obliged to quit the whole country to
Vendome. There now only remained 'Furin to be
taken, which was inveſted; and there appeared not
the leaſt poſſibility of its being ſuccoured. To-
wards Germany, marſbal Villars drove before him
the prince of Baden, In Flanders, Villeroi com-
manded an army of eighty thouſand men: he
was deſirous to engage Marlborough, and highly
Battered himſelf he ſhould retrieve the honour he
had loſt in the battle with prince Eugene, His
too great confidence in himſelf, ndw proved more
fatal than ever to France. Marſhal Villeroi had
encamped his army near the Mehaigne, towards
the ſource of the Ghette. The centre was at Rami
lies; a village which became as famous as Hochſtet.

Villeroi had it in his power to avoid a battle;
and all his general officers adviſed him to it:
but he was hurried away by a paſſionate deſire of N
glory. The diſpoſition he made for the engage- I
ment is ſaid to have been ſuch, that every experi-
enced officer foreſaw the fatal conſequences. The

"

> A fe © =»

we

—
nM

TY mo PW DO TI WI TD TS OS WOW TIF

th. 19 L E WIS „ 09

ew-raiſed troops, undiſciplined and uncomplete,
were placed in the centre: he placed the baggage
betw ixt the lines of his army: and poſted his left
wing behind a- marſh, as if he intended to prevent
its advancing to the enemy.

Marlborough perceived theſe overſights, and ac-
cordingly diſpoſed: his army ſo as to make the
moſt advantage of them. He ſaw, that the left
wing of the French army could not attack his
right; he therefore immediately filed off a con-
ſderable part of it, in order to advance to Ramil -

les with a ſuperior number. Mr. de Gaſſion, the

leutenant- general, ſeeing this movement of the
enemy, called aloud to the marſhal: (Lou are
« undone, if you do not inſtantly alter your order
« of battle: draw off a detachment from your
left, that you may engage the enemy with an
« equal number: make your lines cloſer : if you
« delay one moment, all will be irretrievable.”
Many other officers joined in this ſalutary advice.
The marſhal, however, did not liſten to them. Marl-
borough began the attack, his enemies being ranged
in that very order of battle which he himſelf would
have choſen to ſecure his victory. This is the account
univerſally given in France of this affair; and hiſtory
is only a relation of the opinions of mankind. But
may we not likewiſe affirm, that the confederate
troops were better Eſciplined; and that the confi-
dence in their commanders, as well as their late
ſucceſſes, inſpired them with greater courage? Did
not ſeveral of the French regiments fail in their
duty? And are they not the firm and unmove-
able battalions, which determine the fate of king»
coms? The French army did not withſtand the

"= THE AGE or "Sy,

ſhock half an hour. They fought almoſt eight

hours at Hochſtet, and killed near eight thouſand
of the conquerors; but, at this battle of Ramillies,

they hardly deſtroyed two thouſand five hundred ef

the enemy. The allies gained a complete victory:

the French loſt twenty thouſand men, with the ;

glory of their nation, and all hopes of retrieving

it. The confederates had gained all Bavaria ang
Cologn by the battle of Hochſtet ; and by this of
Ramillies, they now got into their poſſeſſion all the

Spaniſh Flanders. The victorious Marlborough en-
tered Antwerp and Bruſſels: he took Oſtend, and
Menin ſurrendered to him.

Marſhal Villeroi was in the utmoſt deſpair: he
had not courage to write to the king an account of
the defeat; and remained five days without ſending We

any expreſs: at laſt, however, he wrote a confirma-

tion of that news, which had before alarmed the

court of France. Nevertheleſs, when Villeroi again

appeared before the klng, this monarch, inſtead of |

reproaching him, only faid, «© Monſieur le Marectal,
« one is not happy at our age,”

The king immediately recalled the duke de Ven-

dome from Italy, where he ſeemed no longer ne-
ceſſary, to ſend him into Flanders, in order, if
poſſible, to repair the late misfortune. He hoped,
at leaſt, and with an appearance of reaſon, that the
taking of Turin would afford fome conſolation for
ſo many loſſes. Prince Eugene was in ſuch a ſitua-
tion, that he could not advance to ſuccour that city.
He was on the other ſide of the Adige; and as the
river on this ſide is fortified by a long chain of in-
trenchments, the paſſage ſeemed therefore impracti-

cable. This great city was beſieged with forty-lix

Q

> or. ©, TD rl nd

BP WD RF” Go H- wy

8222 — 59 &5 222

— A, | tein tf — — 928293 — 22 2

© — 895 —

ch. 19. LEWIS NV. 311

ſquadrons, and an hundred battalions. The duke de
Feuillade, who commanded, was one of tke moſt
ſhining and amiable characters in France; and,
though a ſon-in-law of the miniſter, was greatly in
the public favour. He was ſon to that Marſhal Feuil-
ade, who erected a ſtatue of Lewis XIV. in the
Place de Viftoires, He inherited all the courage of
his father, with the ſame ambition, the ſame ſplen-
dour, and a better underſtanding. He flattered
himſelf he ſhould be able to take Turin ; and, as
a reward, he expected a marſhal's ſtaff. Chamillard,
his father-in-law, who loved him tenderly, had
ſpared nothing to make him ſucceed in the attempt.
The very imagination muſt be ſtartled at the detail
of the preparations for this ſiege. The readers, who
have not had an opportunity of being acquainted
with ſuch particulars, will, perhaps, not be dif-
pleaſed, if we here give ſome account of theſe vaſt
and uſeleſs preparations. *
There were an hundred and forty pieces of
cannon; each of which, with their carriages,
amounted to two thouſand crowns, They had alſo
one hundred and ten thouſand bullets, one hundred
and fix thouſand cartouches of one ſort, and three
hundred thouſand of another, twenty-one thouſand
bombs, twenty-ſeven thouſand ſeven hundred gre-
nades, fifteen thouſand bags of earth, thirty thou-
ſand inſtruments for pioneering, and twelve hun-
dred thouſand pounds of powder. There was, be-
lides, a vaſt quantity of lead, iron, tin, ropes, ſul-
phur, ſaltpetre, with every thing requiſite for miners,
and, in ſhort, all ſorts of implements neceſſary to
carry on a ſiege. It is certain, that the expence of
theſe preparations for deſtruction would dave been

312 THE AGE OF Ch. 10.
fufficient to ſettle one of the moſt numerous colo-
nies, and to have put it in a flouriſhing condition,
The duke de Fuillade puſhed this ſiege with the
utmoſt precipitation, and contrary to all rules. He
was a man of fire and activity, more capable than
any one for ſuch enterprizes as required only cou-
rage, but utterly incapable of thoſe where art, de-
liberation, and time, were neceſſary. The marſhal
de Vauban, the only general, perhaps, who loved
his country more than himſelf, had ' propoſed to
Feuillade, to come and direct the ſiege as an engj-
neer, and to ſerve in his army as a volunteer; but
the haughtineſs of Feuillade made him conſtrue this
offer of Vauban into pride under the diſguiſe of
modeſty; and he could not bear, that the beſt en-
gineer in Europe ſhould preſume to give him ad-
vice. He told him in a letter which I have ſeen,
that he expected to take Turin after the me-
& thod of Cohorn.“ This Cohorn was the Vau-
ban of the allies; an excellent engineer, a-good ge-
neral, and he had ſeveral times taken towns forti-

fied by the rules of Vauban, After the ſending of :

ſuch a letter, Feuillade looked upon himſelf as
obliged to take Turin. But having begun the at-
tack by the citadel, which was the ſtrongeſt fide,
and not having ſurrounded the whole town, the in-
habitants could ſend ſupplies both of men and-pro-
viſions. The duke of Savoy could alſo march out:
ſo that all the vehemence which Feuillade ſbewed in
many repeated and fruitleſs aſſaults, only protracted
the ſiege. | |

The duke of Savoy fallied out of the town with
ſome cavalry, in order to draw off the duke de

Feuillade. The French general accordingly quit

*

*
;
W.

1

:
:
:

1

ch. 19. LEWIS XIV. 313

ted the ſiege to purſue this prince; who, being bet -
ter acquainted with the country, eaſily eſcaped.
Thus Feuillade miſſed the duke of Savoy, and

the ſiege ſuffered greatly.

-y
*

proceedings of their general, that they believed he
had no intention to take Turin. It was faid, that
Feuillade, who was reported to have a paſſion for
the ducheſs of Burgundy, had fworn to that lady to
favour her father's capital. This vulgar error be-
came ſo prevalent, that I have hardly known one
officer, but believed it, even twenty years after:
nay, it was likewiſe given out, that the ducheſs of
Burgundy, in order to ſave Turin, had procured ma-

1 3 hs 4 . SI. 8 . "

TT 8 TT SEAERTT HTC Y

S ˙ CC FARE <1

meaſures, which proved the ſafety of the city.
Theſe abſurd reports gained credit; and many

n
* WJ writers, to their diſhonour, have inſerted them
-in their hiſtories +.

e- The duke de Vendome, in order to fayour the
operations of the ſiege, remained ſtationed on the
of borders of the Adige, from the thirteenth of May to
38 the twentieth of June. He had with him ſeventy

J battalions, and fixty ſquadrons; and, with this
length, he did not doubt he ſhould be able to
ock up all paſſes againſt prince Eugene.

= The general of the Imperialiſts was in great want

>

London lent him about fix millions of our livres;
nd he ar laſt got troops out of the circles of the
ire. Theſe reinforcements, however, arrived ſo
ae, that all Italy might have been loſt; but the
ge of Turin was much more tedious.

g + See Reboulet.

T 0 =» . „ T7 T

888 1 — cz ——— ů «³ͥ ͤ —
- —— —— — a -

All the inferior officers were fo aſtoniſhed at the

dame Maintenon, to bring about thoſe ill conducted

; both of men and money. The mercers company of

——
—

> pad Ir en 3
— — JS
— —

—
3 — —
EY

— —

—

„ P . ——— -
wat, 2 —

|

:

0

1

1

f ,
41]

Us l
ih

314 THE AGE OP Ch. 19.
Vendome was already named to go to retrieve
the loſſes in Flanders; but before his departure
from Italy, he had allowed prince Eugene to paſs
the Adige; he ſuffered him alſo to croſs the white
canal, and at laſt the Po, a larger river, and, in
ſome parts, more difficult to paſs than the Rhone,
Before the French general left the banks of the Po,
prince Eugene had it in his power to penetrate even
to Turin. Thus the affairs in Italy were in a cri-
tical ſituation, whilſt thoſe in Flanders, Germany,
and Spain, appeared quite deſperate. „
The duke de Vendome went towards Mons to t
collect the broken remains of Villeroi's army; and
the duke of Orleans, nephew to Lewis XIV. ſet YI
out to take upon him the command of the duke of b
Vendome's forces near the Po. Theſe troops were WM ni
in diſorder, as if they had been routed. Eugene had WY n
paſſed the Po, in ſight of Vendome: he croſſed the
Tenaro likewiſe in ſight of the duke of Orleans, and BY n:
took Carpi, Corregio, and Reggio; and, having ſtole of
a march upon the French, he at laſt joined the duke cb
of Savoy near Aſti. All that the duke of Orleans I pr.
could do wa to join the duke de Feuillade at the
camp before Turin. Prince Eugene followed him at
with all expedition. They had now one of two BY pci
courſes to follow, either to wait for prince Eugene »}
in their lines of circumvallation, or march out to di
meet him near Veillane, The duke of Orleans called BY fc
a council of war, which conſiſted of the marſhal de BY vt
Marſin, who had loſt the battle of Hochſtet, the BY tw:
duke de la Feuillade, Albergoti, Saint-Fremont, and WY ob.
other lieutenant-generals; . « Gentlemen,” ſaid the an
duke of Orleans, © if we remain in our lines, we
4 ſhall certainly be defeated; for our intrenchments

4
*
2
2
75

ch. 19. LEWIS XV. 315

« are five leagues in extent, and we are not able
« to line them. Our regiment of marines is only
« two men deep; and there are many places, you
« ſee, almoſt without defence. The Doria, which
runs through our camp, will hinder our troops
from bringing quick ſuccour to each other.
« Beſides, in waiting for an attack, the French loſe
« one of their greateſt advantages; that vehemence,
« and thoſe firſt moments of ardour, which ſo
often determine the fate of battles. Believe me
then, we ought to march againſt the enemy.” All
me lieutenant-generals, with one voice, replied,
Let us march :” but upon this, the marſhal de
Marſin pulled out of his pocket an order ſigned
by the king, commanding all to ſubmit to his opi-
nion, in regard to an action; and he was for re-
maining in the lines.

The duke of Orleans now perceived, with indig-
nation, that he was ſent to the army only as a prince
of the blood, and not as a general; and, being
obliged to acquieſce with the marſhal de Marſin, he
prepared to engage in this diſadvantageous ſituation.

The enemy made a feint to form ſeveral attacks
at once, Their motions threw the French into great
perplexity. The duke of Orleans was for one thing,
J whilſt Marſin and Feuillade were for another. They
diſputed, but came to no determination: but, in
bort, they fuffered the enemy to paſs the Doria:
Y which having done, they advanced in eight columns,
twenty-five men deep; and the French were now
obliged to oppoſe them inſtantly with battalions of
an equal depth.

Albergoti, who was ſtationed at a diſt: nee from

Vol. I. E e

316 THE AGE OF Chi ug;

the army, upon the Capuchin mountain, had; under
his command, twenty thouſand men; and he was

oppoſed only by militia, who dated not to attack
him, They ſent to him to demand twelve thouſand
men. He anſwered, that he could not leſſen his
numbers; and gave ſome plauſible reaſons, which
were taken. By this means the time was loſt in de-
lays. Prince Eugene attacked their intrenchments,
and in two hours forced them (4). The duke of Or-
leans, having received a wound, was obliged to retire
to have it dreſſed. Scarce was he in the hands of the
ſurgeons, when he heard that the enemy were ma-
ſters of the camp; that the rout was general. He
was immediately obliged to fly: the lines and trench-
es were abandoned, and the whole army was diſ-
perſed. All the baggage, proviſions, ammunition, and
the military cheſt, fell into the hands of the conquer-
ors. Marſhal de Marſin, being wonnded in the thigh,
was made priſoner: a ſurgeon, belonging to the duke
of Savoy, cut it off; but the marſhal ſurvived the
operation only a few minutes. Mr. Methuen, then
embaſſador from England to the duke of Savoy, one
of the moſt generous, brave, and moſt ſincere men
his country ever employed in an embaſſy, had al-
ways fought by the ſide of this prince. He had ſeen
marſhal de Marſin taken, and was preſent at his laſt
moments; and he has told me, that Marſin expreſſed
himſelf to him in theſe terms: “ Believe, at leaſt, Sir,
« that it was contrary to my advice, that we waited
« for you in ourintrenchments.” Theſe expreſſions
ſeem poſitively to contradict what had paſſed in the
council of war; yet they were certainly true: for
the marihal de Marſin, at his departure from Ver-

(4d) September 7. 1708.

. A A ea ded a o rr er

*

wm
>

RR eg T3535 >a 5 & >

= @® © BB. vt

*

4
8
2
0
5
|
1
|

o& & **+ A, it r ere AS

Ch. 20. LEWIS XIV.” 317
ſailles, had repreſented to the king, that it would
be abſolutely neceſſary to march agaĩinſt the enemy,
if they ſhould advance to relieve Turin; but Cha-
millard, intimidated by the former defeats, carried
it, that they ſhould not offer, but wait for battle;
and this order; given at Verſailles, cauſed the de;
feat of ſixty thouſand men. The French loſt only
two thouſand men in this battle; but we have al-
ready ſeen, that ſlaughter does leſs execution than
con fuſion. Want of ſubſiſtence, which will make
a victorious army retreat, obliged theſe vanquiſhed
troops to retire to Dauphiny. The late defeat oc-
calioned ſuch an univerſal diſorder, that though the
count de Medavy-grancey, then in Mantua with an
army, had defeated the Imperialiſts at Caſtiglione,
commanded by the landgrave of Heſſe, afterwards
king of Sweden, yet this victory, though a complete
one, availed nothing. In a ſhort time, they loſt the
duchies of Milan and Mantua, Piedmont, and at
laſt the whole kingdom of Naples.

CHAPTER XX.

The conſequences of the defeats received by
France and Spain. The humiliation, per-
ſeverance, and reſources of Lewis XIV.
The battle of Malplaquet,

HE battle of Hochſtet had coſt Lewis one of
the fineſt armies, with all the country betwixt
the Danube and the Rhine: and it had coſt the

Ee 2 Oba

318 THE AGE OF Ch. 20.
houſe of Bavaria all her dominions. By the defeat at

Ramillies, all Flanders was loſt, even to the gates of

Lifle ; and by that at Turin, the French were driven
out of Italy, as they always had been in all the wars
ſince Charlemagne. There remained ſome troops
in Milan, and that little army which had been victo-

rious under the count de Medavy. They till kept ;

ſome places; but theſe were offered to be given up
to the emperor, on condition he allowed a free re-
treat to thoſe troops, which amounted to fifteen
thouſand men. The emperor accepted of this pro-
poſal, and the duke of Savoy alſo came into it.
'Thus the emperor, by a ſtroke of the pen, was left
in the peaceable poſſeſſion of Italy; and the conqueſt
of Naples and Sicily was confirmed ro him. All thoſe
provinces in Italy, which had been conſidered before
as only feudatory, were now treated as intirely ſub-
jet. He taxed Tuſcany at an hundred and fifty
thouſand piſtoles, and Mantua at forty thouſand;
nor were Parma, Modena, Lucca, and Genoa, not-
withſtanding their being free ſtates, excepted from
theſe taxes. |

The emperor, who enjoyed all theſe advantages,
was not Leopold, the ancient rival of Lewis XIV,
who, under an appearance of moderation, had con-
cealed the nioſt profound ambition : it was his eldeſt
ſon, the lively, fierce, and paſſionate Joſeph; who,
nevertheleſs, was not a better warrior than his fa-
ther. If ever any emperor ſeemed formed to enſlave
Germany and Italy, It was certainly Joſeph. His
dominion now extended beyond the Alps. He laid
the pope under contribution; and, by his ſole au-
thority, in 1706. he put the electors of Bavaria
and Cologn under the ban of the empire: he ſtript

SS EY OG Fw. = i =.  cvov£x

—
2

„ ee

9e

Ch. 20. LEWIS XIV. 319

them of all their poſſeſſions, and kept in confine”
ment the children of the houſe of Bavaria, aboliſh-
ing their very name. Their father ſeemed now to
have no other reſource, but to linger out his diſ-
grace in France, or the Low Countries. Philip V.
afterwards gave up to him all the Spaniſh Flanders,
in 1712 . If he could have kept this province,
which was a better eſtabliſhment than Bavaria, it
would have delivered him from the ſlavery of the
houſe of Auſtria; but he could only poſſeſs the
towns of Luxembourg, Namur, and Charleroi; all
the reſt fell into the hands of the conquerors. Eve-
ry thing now ſeemed to threaten Lewis XIV. who
but a little before had ſtruck a terror into all Europe.
The duke of Savoy had it in his power to penetrate
into France. England and Scotland, having formed
an union, made now one kingdom; or, rather, Scot-
land, being now a province of England, was become
an acceſſion to the power of her ancient rival. To-
wards the end of the year 1706. and beginning of
1707. all the enemies of France ſeemed to have ac-
quired new ſtrength, whilſt ſhe appeared to be on the
brink of deſtruction ; being preſſed on all ſides both
by ſea and land. Of all thoſe formidable fleets which
Lewis had raiſed, there remained ſcarce thirty-five
ſnips. In Germany, Straſbourg was ſtill the frontier ;
but, Landau being loſt, Alſace was thereby left ex-
doſed. Provence was likewiſe threatened with an
invaſion by ſea and land; and what the French had
aready loſt in Flanders, made them more apprehen-

In Reboulet's hiſtory it is ſaid, that he had this ſovereignty
from the year 1700. ; but he had then only the government
of it.

Ee 3

320 THE AGE'OF d 2s,

ſive for what remained. Yet, notwithſtanding all
theſe misfortunes, France ſtill remained untouched;
and in this unſucceſsful war, ſhe had as anne
thing but her conqueſts.

Lewis XIV. ey bete refit ind though he
had received ſo many blows, yet he ſtill oppoſed,
protected, or attacked on all fides. His arms
proved as unſucceſsful in Spain, as they had been
in Italy, Germany, and Flanders. It is faid, that
the ſiege of Barcelona was even worſe mam
than that of Turin.

The count de Toulouſe only appeared with "
fleet, and was obliged to ſtand away for Toulon,

Barcelona being ſuccoured, the fiege was abandon-

ed; and the French army, after having loſt one

half of their number, retired, without any ammu- |
nition, into Navarre, a little kingdom which they
preſerved for the Spaniards, and which our kings
Join as a title to that of France, by an ancient cu-

ſtom, though it ſeems beneath their dignity.

To theſe misfortunes another was added, which
ſeemed to complete them. The Portugueſe, al-
ſiſted by ſome Engliſh, took all the places they
inveſted, and advanced into Eſtremadura. They
were commanded by a Frenchman, created a peer
of England: this was my lord Galloway, formerly ;
the count de Ruvigni; whilſt the troops of France
and Spain were headed by the duke of Berwick, B
an Engliſh nobleman ; but they could not ſtop be

progreſs of the conquerors.
Philip V. remained in PBL uncertain of

his deſtiny ; whilſt Charles his competitor, was in-

creaſing his party, and ſtrength in Catalonia.
He had made himſelf maſter of Arragon, the

A Tt ©@ TP ©

DD A £3... 0 © JLI4

- & 2 © a©-;

"ERS TCA S Tc a
* 3
* 8 57 * Ta: Be a i - p F

Ta< TA 7 - &

ch. 20. LEWIS MV. 321

province of Valencia, Carthagena, and part of Gra-
nada. The Engliſn kept Gibraltar in their own poſ-
ſeſhon ; and they took, for him, Minorca, Ivica, and
Alicant. The roads to Madrid being now all laid
open, Galloway entered that metropolis without
my oppoſition, and ordered the archduke Charles
to be proclaimed king: he ſent likewiſe a ſmall de-
tachment to perform the ſame ceremony at Toledo.
The affairs of Philip V. appeared ſo deſperate, that
marſhal Vauban, that prince of engineers, and ex-
cellent patriot, a man always buſied in projects,
ſome uſeful, and others impracticable, but all ex-
traordinary, adviſed the court of France to ſend
Philip V. to reign in America, and to embark with
him all the Spaniards attached to his intereſt; Spain
muſt then have been abandoned to civil factions;
and the commerce of Mexico and Peru would have
come wholly to the French: ſo that, by this change
of fortune in the family of Lewis, France might {till
have promoted her grandeur. The project was cer-
tainly deliberated upon at Verſailles; but the un-
ſhaken firmneſs of the Caſtilians, and the miſcon-
duct of the enemy, preſerved the crown to Philip
V. The people loved Philip as their own choice;
nor could they help having an affection for his
qucen, the duke of Savoy's daughter, conſidering
the care ſne took to pleaſe them, the intrepidity ſhe
diſplayed above one of her ſex, and the conſtancy
and vigour with which ſhe behaved in her misfor-
tunes. She went herſelf from town to town, ani-
mating the people, exciting their zeal, and receiving
many preſents which were brought to her. By this
means, ſhe furniſhed her huſband with more than
two hundred thouſand crowus, in the ſpace of three

322 THE AGE OF ch. 20.

weeks. Not one of all the grandees, who had taken
oaths of allegiance to Philip V. deſerted him; When
Galloway proclaimed the archduke at Madrid, many
called out, « Long live Philip;” and the populace
at Toledo were fo enraged, that they attacked thoſe
who proclaimed the archduke, 1 nn them to
retire.

The Spaniards cl then had ae but little in ſup-
port of their king; but when they ſaw him worſted,
then, indeed they exerted themſelves in an extra-
ordinary manner; ſhewing, on this occaſion, a cou-
rage quite different from that of other nations, who
generally. begin with great efforts, and- afterwards
flacken. It is difficult to impoſe a king upon a peo-
ple againſt their inclination. The Portugueſe, Eng-
liſh, and Auſtrians, in Spain, were haraſſed every-
where: they were in want of proviſions, and made
many falſe ſteps, ſuch as are almoſt unavoidable in a
ſtrange country; ſo that, by degrees they were in-
tirely defeated. At laſt, Philip V. after having been
three months an exile from Madrid (a), entered
again in triumph, and was received with as much
joyful acclamation, as his rival had oh a cold-
neſs and reluctance.

Lewis XIV. redoubled his efforts, when * ſaw
the Spaniards acting with ſo much ſpirit : and though
he was then obliged to guard all the coaſts upon the
ocean and Mediterranean, by placing the militia
there; though he had an army in Flanders, another
at Straſbourg, a third in Navarre, and a fourth in
Rouſillon; yet he ſent a reinforcement to marſhal
Berwick in Caſtille,

It was with theſe troops, aided by the Spaniards

(a) e 6p 22. 1706.

Ch. 20. "LEWIS NV. 323
that Berwick gained the famous and important
battle of Almanza over Galloway. Neither Philip
nor the archduke were preſent at this action:
and this made the famous earl of Peterborough,
2 man extraordinary in every thing, ſay aloud,
« Excellent, indeed! that we muſt fight for two
« princes, who will not fight for themſelves.” The
duke of Orleans, who intended to be there, being
to command in Spain, did not arrive till next day;
but he made all poſſible advantage from the victory:
he took ſeveral places; and, among the reſt, Le-
rida, the rock the great Conde had ſplit upon.

On the other ſide, marſhal Villars, who was again
inveſted with the command, there being an abſolute
neceſſity for a man of his abilities, retrieved the
honour loſt at the battle of Hochſtet, in Germany.
He had forced the lines of Stolhoffen, on the other
fide of the Rhine, and diſperſed all the enemy's
troops (b): he raiſed contributions on all the coun-
try fifty leagues round, and penetrated at laſt as
fir as the Danube, This rapid ſucceſs gave the
French ſome reſpite on the German frontiers; but
all was loſt in Italy. The kingdom of Naples, being
defenceleſs, and accuſtomed fo often to change its
maſters, was reduced by the conquerors, The pope
was not able to prevent the Germans paſling through
his territory; and he now ſaw, without daring to
complain, that the emperor was become his vaſſal,
greatly againſt his inclination. This is a remarkable
inſtance of the influence of received. opinions, and
the power of cuſtom, that Naples always can be
{ized upon without conſulting the pope; and yet

(5) May 22. 1707«

«.

324 THE AGE OF ch. 20.
that the maſters of the kingdom we eee
e e eee dee A
At the very time when che pad an 1 80h
XIV. tel Naples, his grandfather ww un thÞ pike |
of loſing Provence and Dauphiny. The duke of
Savoy, and prince Eugene, had already entered by
the narrow paſſage of Tenda. Lewis was greatly al
mortified to ſee, that the duke of Savoy, WhO A
year before, had been reduced almoſt to his capital, :
and prince Eugene, who had been educated in his

court, were now on the point of taking from him *
Toulon and Marſeilles. = 2
ch.

Toulon was beſieged with great vigour: an Eng-
liſh fleet, having the command of the ſea, lay be- BW
fore the port and bombarded the town. Had the MI
aſſailants uſed a little more diligence and precav i Br
tion, and been more unanimous in their meaſures, W
Toulon muſt have fallen into their hands. Mar- BY *
ſeilles, being without any defence, could not have I ©
held out; and it was likely, that France would now By 4
loſe two provinces: but what ſeems likely, happens hi
but ſeldom. There was time to ſend fuccour: ac- BY
cordingly, a detachment was diſpatched from mar-
ſhal Villarg's army to theſe provinces; for they chole Ih 0.
to relinquiſh their advantages in Germany, to pre-
ſerve a part of France. The country, through which
the enemy penetrated, is dry, barren, and moun- |

tainous; proviſions are ſcarce. and a retreat is ex- be
tremely difficult. The ſickneſs which prevailed in BY ©
the enemy's army, proved likewiſe greatly'in favour al
of Lewis. The ſiege of Toulon was raiſed (c): and

ſoon after, Provence was delivered, and Dauphiny th

freed from all danger; for an invaſion ſeldom ſuc- G
| ec

ce) Auguſt 23. 1707.

02
.

I
ä *,

5 FEET SY ASST vo.

HH 7 7

SAS TS F 7 HS

ch. 20. LEWIS XIV. 325
ceeds, unleſs the invaders have a perfect knowlege
in the country. Charles V. had miſcarried in an at-
tempt on the ſame provinces; and, in our time, the
queen of Hungary's troops have alſo proved un-
ſucceſsful in an effort of the like nature.
Nevertheleſs, this irruption ſo expenſive to the
allies, was no leſs fo to the French: a conſiderable
part of their 125 mn and their

I forces divided.

Europe didn not expett, at a time den- mer

5 vas reduced fo. low, and when ſhe accounted it

great good fortune to have eſcaped an invaſion,

chat Lewis would have the boldneſs or ſtrength to
JJ make a deſcent upon Great Britain, notwithſtanding
JJ the decay of his own navy, and the power of the
A britiſh fleets, which covered the ſeas. This pro-
ect was propoſed by thoſe of the Scots who were

attached to king James's fon, The ſucceſs was
doubtful ; but Lewis XIV. thought he ſhould ac-
quire certain glory only by the attempt; and he
himſelf ſaid, that this motive determined him as
much as any political intereſt.

To carry the war into Great Britain, though, at
the ſame time, the burden of it was ſupported with
great difficulties in ſo many other places; and to en-
deavour, at leaſt, to re-eſtabliſh James's: fon on the
throne of Scotland, whilſt Philip V. could hardly
be maintained on that of Spain, ſeemed to be a bold
and great undertaking; the ſucceſs of which, aſter
al, did not ſeem altogether improbable.

Amongſt the Scots, all thoſe who had not ſold
themſelves to the court of London, repined at being
in a ſtate of dependence on the Engliſh. Their
ſecret wiſhes were unanimoully for the deſcendant of

326 THE ACE or G2

their ancient kings, who, from his cradle, had been
driven into exile from the thrones of England, Scots
land, and Ireland, and even the legality of his birth
diſpated. They promiſed, that he ſhould find thirty
thouſand men in arms, ready to fight in his cauſe, if
he would only land near Edinburgh, with a ſmall
force from France. |
Lewis XIV. en ee had made f
many efforts for the father, now exerted himſelf as
' much for the ſon, even in his adverſe fortune. Eight
men of war, and ſeventy tranſports, were fitted out
at Dunkirk; in which ſix thouſand troops were em-
barked. The count de Gace, afterwards marſhal
de Matignon, had the command of theſe forces;
and the chevalier de Forbin Janſon, a moſt ex-
cellent ſea- officer, conducted the fleet. The juncture
appeared very favourable: in Scotland there were
not above three thouſand regular troops, and Eng-
land was almoſt without any; all her ſoldiers being
then employed in Flanders, under the duke of
Marlborough : but they were obliged to embark
for England; and the Engliſh had then at ſea a fleet
of fifty men of war. This enterprize was juſt like
that in 1744. in favour of the grandſon-of James II.
It was defeated by the activity of the Engliſh, and
many croſs accidents. The miniſtry at London had
ſufficient time to bring over twelve battalions from
Flanders; and the moſt ſuſpected perſons in Edin-
burgh were ſeized. The pretender, at laſt, appeared
on the coaſts of Scotland; but the ſignals agreed upon
not being given, all that the chevalier de Forbin could
now do was to carry him back to Dunkirk, He ſaved
the fleet; but no advantage was reaped from the ex-
pedition. Matignon was the only gainer by it; for,

0
-

EFSA Z 600 ERA

BARS RATE . KF 2 * 8.0 r 8

6

N,

-

ch. 20. LEWIS mv.” | 327 FA

having opened his orders at ſea, he found a pareit
for creating him a marſhal of France: a/reward for
what he would have done, but could not effect.

If there ever was a chimerical notion, that 1
certainly one, conceived by ſome hiſtorians, who
pretended that queen Anne had a ſecret corre-
ſpondence with her brother. It is abſurd, to the
higheſt degree, to ſuppoſe, that ſhe would invite
her competitor to come and dethrone her. They
confounded the time; and it was thought that ſhe
favoured him, becauſe ſhe afterwards ſecretly con-
ſidered him as her heir. But who would ever wiſh
to be dethroned by a ſucceſſor ?

The affairs of France now declining daily, the
king reſolved to ſend his grandſon, the duke of
Burgundy, to head the armies in Flanders; think-
ing, that the preſence of the apparent heir to the
crown would inſpire the ſoldiery with emulation,
which began to languiſh. This prince had a firm
and intrepid ſoul; he was pious, juſt, philoſophical,
and ſeemed formed to command men of wiſdom.
Having been educated by the archbiſhop of Cam-
bray he had a ſtrict regard to all the moral duties:
he loved mankind, and was deſirous to render them
happy. He had been inſtructed in the art of war,
but he looked upon it rather as the ſcourge of the
human race, and an unhappy neceſſity, than as a ſouree
of true glory. This philoſophical prince was ſent
againſt the duke of Marlborough, and the duke de
Vendome was given him as his aſſiſtant: and here
it happened, as it does but too often; the great
officer was not heard with proper regard, and the
prince's council often prevailed over all the argu-

Voi. I. „

326 THE AGE OF Cha,

their ancient kings, who, from his cradle, had been
driven into exile from the thrones of England, Scot
land, and Ireland, and even the legality of his birth
diſputed. They promiſed, that he ſhould find thi
thouſand men in arms, ready to fight in his cauſe, if
he would only land near * with a ſmall
force from France.
Lewis XIV. e in happen had made fo
many efforts for the father, now exerted himſelf as
much for the ſon, even in his adverſe fortune. Eight
men of war, and ſeventy tranſports, were fitted out
at Dunkirk; in which fix thouſand troops were em-
barked. The count de Gace, afterwards marſhal
de Matignon, had the command of theſe forces;
and the chevalier de' Forbin Janſon, a moſt ex-
cellent ſea-officer, conducted the fleet. The juncture
appeared very favourable: in Scotland there were
not above three thouſand regular troops, and Eng-
land was almoſt without any; all her ſoldiers being
then employed in Flanders, under the duke of
Marlborough : but they were obliged to embark
for England; and the Engliſh had then at ſea a fleet
of fifty men of war. This enterprize was jult like
that in 17 44. in favour of the grandſon of James II.
It was defeated by the activity of the Engliſh, and
many croſs accidents. The miniſtry at London had
ſufficient time to bring over twelve battalions from
Flanders; and the moſt ſuſpected perſons in Edin-
burgh were ſeized. The pretender, at laſt, appeared
on the coaſts of Scotland ; but the ſignals agreed upon
not being given, all that the chevalier de Forbin could
now do was to carry him back to Dunkirk, He ſaved
the fleet; but no advantage was reaped from the ex-
pedition. Matignon was the only gainer by it; for,

TS =

RAESA7TBRAPEaSRSSoaTaRaT CET SES ERA

1

* . .
* — * * 9 *
1 * "a N 5 p oy
. SE... U o
= 7 lk = -

for creating him a marſhal of France: a rewatd for
what he would have done, but could not effect.

If there ever was a chimerical notion, that wt
certainly one, conceived by ſome hiſtorians, who
pretended that queen Anne had a ſecret corre-
ſpondence with her brother. It is abſurd, to the
higheſt degree, to ſuppoſe, that ſhe would invite
her competitor to come and dethrone her. They
confounded the time; and it was thought that ſhe
favoured him, becauſe ſhe afterwards ſecretly con-
ſidered him as her heir. But who would ever wiſh
to be dethroned by a ſucceſſor ?

The affairs of France now declining daily, the

king reſolved to ſend his grandſon, the duke of
Burgundy, to head the armies in Flanders; think-
ing, that the preſence of the apparent heir to the
crown would inſpire the ſoldiery with emulation,
which began to languiſh. This prince had a firm
and intrepid foul ; he was pious, juſt, philoſophical,
and ſeemed formed to command men of wiſdom.
Having been educated by the archbiſhop of Cam-
bray he had a ſtrict regard to all the moral duties:
he loved mankind, and was deſirous to render them
happy. He had been inſtructed in the art of war,
but he looked upon it rather as the ſcourge of the

human race, and an unhappy neceſſity, than asa ſource

of true glory. This philoſophical prince was ſent

againſt the duke of Marlborough, and the duke de

Vendome was given him as his aſſiſtant: and here

it happened, as it does but too often; the great

officer was not heard with proper regard, and the

prince's council often prevailed over all the argu-
Vor. I. Led Bog

ch. 20: LEWIS AV. 2
having opened his orders at ſea, he found a patent

*

 & \F LY 4

328 THz AGE OF ' Cho,

ments of the general. In the French army there
were two parties; but that of the allies was unanji-

mous in the common cauſe. Prince Eugene wag
then upon the Rhine; but, when he was with
Marlborough, they were always unanimous in their
meaſures. ,.., -

The duke of Burgundy was ſuperior i in numbers}
France, though all Europe looked upon her as quite
exhauſted, had furniſhed him with an army of near
an hundred thouſand men, whilſt the allies had only
about ,cighty thouſand, He had likewiſe the advan-
tage of intelligence, in a country which had been
ſo long under the Spaniſh government, ſo tired of
the Dutch gariſons, and where many of the inha-
| bitants were attached to Philip V. By this means,
he eaſily got poſſeſſion of Ghent and Ypres. But
the miſconduct in the war rendered all theſe ad-

vantages fruitleſs. The diviſion. amongſt the French

which perplexed all their councils of war, was the
occaſio: a that they firſt marched towards the Dendre,

and, two hours after, they turned back towards the

Schelde for Oudenard; and, by this means, time
was loſt. Prince Eugene, and Marlborough, on
the contrary, improved every moment to their ad-
vantage, and always agreed in their meaſures. The
French were routed near Oudenard (d. It was not
a great action; but it proved a fatal retreat. Ma-
ny ov erſights were committed: the regiments, re.
cciving no orders, eſcaped the beſt they could. There
were above four thouſand men taken in the roads
by the enemy, a few miles only from the field of
battle. x
The diſpirited army retired in diſorder under.
(4d) July 11. 1708.

gh : WY hs

74 * * a ' x *
- 1 4 | Fi
Ch. 20. LEVIS

Ghent, Tournay, and Ypres; ia ſuffered Eu-
gene, at his return from the Rhine, without any

force.

To beſiege ſo large and ſo well fortified a town
s Liſle, without being maſter of Ghent, without
having any other way for a convoy of proviſions,
or ammunition, but by Oſtend, and theſe to be
brought upon a narrow cauſway, liable to be ſur-
priſed every moment, appeared to all Europe as a
raſh action; but the miſunderſtanding and per-
plexity, which prevailed in the French army, ren-

dered it excuſable; and the ſucceſs at laſt juſtified

the attempt. Their large convoys, ſo eaſy to be

ſeized, eſcaped ; and the troops, which eſcorted them,
ſo likely to be defeated by ſuperior numbers, came

off victorious. The duke of Burgundy's army,
which might ſo eaſily have attacked the enemy's
imperfect intrenchments, made not the leaſt at-
tempt upon them. In ſhort, Liſle was taken, to

the great aſtoniſhment of all Europe, who looked

upon the duke of Burgundy as more able to beſiege
Eugene and Marlborough, than theſe generals were
to inveſt Liſle. Marſhal de Boufters defended the
place for near four months.

The inhabitants were ſo accuſtomed to the noiſe

of cannon, and all the horrors of a ſiege, that

public entertainments were exhibired, and as much
frequented as in time of peace; and though, one
day, a bomb fell very near the theatre, yet the di-
verſion ſtill went on uninterrupted.
Marſhal Bouflers was indefatigable, and had pat
every thing in ſuch excellent order, that the inhabit-
43

- >» of 5 *

5 F o 2 T
U - - *
4 f
=

r
7
-

moleſtation, to beſiege Liſle with a leſs W

I The hiſtorians 4, or rather the Dutch writers, who

2 OX f ag
* K

_ . 1 | "RE 7 *
ö VG S 4 1 *

3 | ru. AGE OF & 20

. in his diligence, were intirely eaſy,
His Flis defence this place merited even the-eſteem of
his enemies, as well as the affections of thoſe he
defended, and the rewards of his royal maſter,

have affected to cenſure him, would have done
well to conſider, that, when they. contradict the
public voice, they ought to have been eye-witnelles,
or to have given the ſtrongeſt evidence for the truth t
of what they advance. |

Mean while, the army, which had beheld the ſiege Ml «
of Liſle, gradually decreaſed: they allowed Ghent MW rc
and Bruges to be taken, and all the other important h:
poſts one after another. Few campaigns had been of
more fatal. The officers, in the duke of Vendome's at
party, imputed their misfortunes to the duke of be
Burgundy's council; who, on their fide, charged 01
all upon the duke de Vendome. All, in ſhort, were Pe
<xceſlively chagrined by the late diſaſters, One W.

* J. 1. „ -© 9 ot * le
S a wu v! vurgunay's courtiers 1210 to v cu |

dome: © See the conſequences of your never going an
cc to mals; to this we muſt aſcribe all our misfor-
te tunes.” Do you imagine,” anſwered Ven-
dome, “ that Marlborough goes there oftener than
c T?” This rapid ſucceſs of the allies not a little
elated the heart of the emperor Joſeph. He was al-
-ready abſolute in the empire, and maſter of Lan-
dau; and he now ſaw the road to Paris almoſt in-
tirely laid open, by the taking of Liſle. A party of

*

PD . e 0 .o +

t Such is the hiſtory written by the Jeſuit la Motte, who fled
into Holland, under the name of la Hode: it was printed for
a bookſeller, named Vanduren ; and was continued by la Mar-
tiniere; the whole being founded upon the pretended memoirs
of a count de — ſecretary of ſtate,

ODE. BOP EEE Toms,

A 9
9 © 2 —
"os. .

the Dutch had the boldneſs even to force their wy:
to Verſailles from Courtray; and under the- very
window, of the caſtle, carried off the king's maſter
of the harſe, whom. they miſtoa for the dauphin,
the duke of Burgundy's, father. A general conſter-
nation now ſeized Paris. At this juncture, the em-
' peror had at leaſt as great hopes of eſtabliſhing his
brother Charles in Spain, as Lewis had of main-
taining his grandſon on that throne.

The Spaniſh, monarchy, which the deri e were
ſo zealous to prevent being diſmembered, was al-
ready divided amongſt three princes. The emperor
had taken, for himſelf, Lombardy and the kingdom
of Naples; his brother Charles ſtill kept Catalonia,
and part of Arragon. The emperor then forced
pope Clement XI. to acknowlege the archduke king
of Spain. This pope, who was ſaid to reſemble St.
Peter, becauſe he firſt affirmed, then denied, after-
wards repented, and wept, had always acknow-

leged Philip V. after the example of his predeceſſor,

and was attached to the Bourbon family. The em-
peror was now revenged on him by annexing to the
Empire ſeveral feudatory principalities, or duchies;
particularly thoſe of Parma and Placentia, which
before had held of the popes: he likewiſe ravaged
ſome of the eccleſiaſtical territories, and ſeized the
town of Commacchio, Formerly the pope would
have excommunicated an emperor that dared to dif-
pute any of his moſt triffling privileges; and this
cxcommunication would have dethroned him: but
the ſpiritual power of the holy ſee being now re-
duced to ſuch a degree as was reaſonable, Clement

XI. animated by France, had the courage, for a

Ff 3

. * 8 - ny
a>.
„

2 * 13 * 6 *

* - * * —
_ 2 2 1 *
o ENG -
his”
T *

. | * * y . * : wy
r *

| 1 * * ;

a — - as |

"= a 4 *

4 7

3 THE A0 f OT 26
moment, to have recourſe to the fword. He
armed; but preſently repented: he ſaw, that the
Italians, being under an eccleſiaſtical government,
were not formed to handle the ſword ; 'he"accord-
ingly diſarmed again, left chte W the em
peror*s poſſeſſion, and conſented thus to addreſs the
archduke: © To our very dear ſon, the catholic
« king in Spain.” The Engliſh fleet in the Medi-
terranean, and the German troops on his frontiers,
ſoon after obliged him to write thus; To our
* very dear ſon Charles king of the Spaniſh dom
« ntons.” This declaration of the pope, which
availed nothing in the Empire, might have an in-
fluence with the people of Spain, who had been
made to believe, that the archduke was unworthy
to reign, becauſe he was protected by thoſe .
who Had ſeized upon Gbbraltar.

There remained to the Spaniſh modify be»
fides the continent, the iſland of Sardinia, and that
of Sicily; the former was conquered by an Eng-
liſh fleet Ce), and given to the emperor; for the
Engliſh did not chooſe, that the-archduke ſhould
have any thing beſides Spain. Their arms, at this
time, made the treaties of partition. They deferred
the conqueſt of Sicily to another opportunity;
thinking it better to employ their ſhips in going
in queſt of the galleons from America, ſome df
which they took, than to procure more dominions
for the emperor.

France was now reduced as low as Rome, and in
a more dangerous ſituation ; all her reſources being
now exhanſted, and her credit intirely ſank: the

(e Avguſt 1 708.

W.
N

> 88S 8

Sas gr rr

9

- 2 $8.5 Wi AS. SED 87 - &s - TS WS RS. FU

„ 2 a 9

ym G7, on 8. FER Fo

2... Ae an it dd

—

1 ve

. 2%/% ö HE Ws av

229 nl

ment, Lewis would not have had wherewith- to

n *
> =

"OE 1 1 *
8
people, who had idolized Lewis in his |
now, in his misfortunes, murmured againſt bim.
The perſons, to whom the miniſtry, had fold
their country for ſome. ready money on the moſt
preſſing emergencies, enriched themſelves by the
public misfortunes, and infulted the national ca-
lamities by their riotous luxury: what had been
borrowed from them, was already conſumed; and
had it not been for the bold activity of ſome mer-
chants, particularly thoſe of St. Malo, who went
to Peru, and brought from thence thirty millions
of money, half of which they lent to the govern-

pay his troops. The war had ruined the ſtate, and
the merchants retrieved it. The affairs of Spain
were in the ſame ſituation. Thoſe galleons, which
eſcaped the Engliſh, contributed to maintain Philip;
but this fupply for a few months did not remove
the difficulty of raiſing recruits. Chamillard, who
had the management of the finances, as well as
the war, gave up the finances in 1708 4, which he
left in fuch diſorder, that they could not be repaired
during that reign; and, in 1709. he quitted the
management of the war, which was become no leſs
difficult than the other. A great many faults were
hid to his charge; and the public, whoſe cenſures
are the more ſevere the more it has ſuffered, did
not make an allowance for the misfortunes of the
times, when faults cannot be avoided; M. Voiſin,

+ The Jeſuit la Motte's hiſtory, continued by la Martiniere;
aſſerts, that Chamillard was turned out of the miniſtry in 1903.
and that marſhal d Harcourt was called to take upon him the
management of the finances by the unanimous voice of the
public, The miſtakes of this hiſtorian are numberleſs.

k 8 2 4 .
3 Mo 2 . th e ,
- 3 FAS
A :
o 2
Fr
Ty

uE ACE OTC

— * *
* 4 = 1 1 n
i” ;
by «

$34 Ct
en debe, wie: Gickgedes kim inthe te
management of military: affairs, and M. 10

who had the direction of the finances, were unable
. mam d

the public credit. be 1.69. mar H
be hard winter in 1709. a another aggrans ci
tion to the deſperate condition of France. The olives pr

which are the chief ſupport of the ſouthern — th
the kingdom, periſhed; almoſt all the other fruit- th
trees were likewiſe killed; and their hopes from har 6
veſt were intirely blaſted. » There were but few'tna- 40
gazines; and any ſupply they could have from the tl
ſea ports of the Levant, or Africa, muſt have been n
at the greateſt expence, and very likely to be taken h
by the enemy's fleets; againſt which they had no na+ a
val force to oppoſe. This ſevere winter prevailed ci
through all Europe; but the enemies had more re- d
ſources in this calamity. The Dutch eſpecially, it
who had been ſo long the factors of different nas 0
tions, had ſtorehouſes ſufficient to ſupply the flou- I
riſhing armies of the allies with plenty of all neceſ- *
ſaries; whilſt the broken and diſpirited troops of ,
France were ready to periſh with want and miſery, |
Lewis XIV. who had already made ſome ad- 8
vances towards a peace, being now in ſuch'diftreſſed f
circumſtances, reſolved to ſend to the Hague his ,
principal miniſter the marquis de Torci Colbert, k
together with the preſident. Rouille. This was
extremely mortifying. They had firſt a conſer- :
ence at Antwerp, with the two burgomaſters, Buis f
and Vanderduſſen, who ſpoke with the air of con- f
querors; treating the miniſters of one of the moſt :
haughty monarchs with all that loftineſs and cc.

2 4 * 1

\

RN »

mr ASS LE A ⅛ M dn dos wes Go. oo © AO As > * 7 1 „ To.

ch. 26, LEWIS Iv. 9

r with wich the puch ha been c
1072. ; d Of e703

The ſtates general had _ dadtholder lines the
death of king William; and the magiſtrates in
Holland, who already aſſumed the title of patrie

cian in their families, were now become ſo many

princes. The four Dutch commiſſaries, deputed to
the army, behaved in the moſt lordly manner to
the thirty German princes in their pay. Order
« Holſtein to come thither,” ſaid they: © Tell
« Heſſe to. come and ſpeak with us.” This was
the ſtile of thoſe merchants; who, in the plain-
neſs of their dreſs and diet, piqued themſelves on
humbling at once the German pride in their ſervice,
and the haughtineſs of a great monarchformerly their
conqueror. By ſuch proofs of their ſuperiority, they
did not mean to ſhew · that all grandeur conſiſts
in power: they defired to have the ſovereignty
of ten towns in Flanders; amongſt which were
Liſle, then in their polleilion, and Tournay, not vet
taken. Thus the Dutch deſigned to reap the fruit
of the war, not only at the expence of France, but
likewiſe of Auſtria, in whoſe intereſt they fought;
after the example of Venice, who had formerly
increaſed her territories' from thoſe of all her
neighbours, The republican ſpirit -is, - indeed, at
bottom, as ambitious as the monarchical.
This » evidently appeared -ſome- nb after

wards; for, when this viſionary negotiation was

dropt; when the arms of the confederates had ac-
quired greater advantages; the duke of Marlbo-
rough, more a ſovereign in England than his royal
miſtreſs, having been effectually gained over by the
Dutch concluded a treaty with them in 1709. By

*

=
_ * A
_ * _—_ %*
* * * EP OY
= .
* *
=
fs > a

336 THE AGE OF

. 28.
this they were to be miſters of all the frontier- MI ?
towns to be taken from France; they were to keep 7
gariſons in twenty different places in Flanders; at the 0

W

expence of the country in Huy, Liege, and Bonne;

and were to have upper Guelderland intirely under
their ſovereignty. They were in effect to become
lords of the ſeventeen provinces of the Low Coun-
tries, and to have ruled in Liege and Cologn. Thus
it was they intended to aggrandize themſelves even
on the ruins of their allies. They had already pro- NN
jected theſe grand ſchemes, when the principal mi-

niſter of France came to ſue for peace; ſo that it *
is not to be wondered at, he was received in fo 2
haughty a manner. |

After having heard theſe mortifying prelimina-
ries, the miniſter of Lewis XIV. proceeded to the f.
Hague ; where, in the name of his maſter, he was
treated with the higheſt indignity. He there found
prince Eugene, the duke of Marlborough, and the
penſionary Heinſius, who were unanimous for con-
tinuing the war. The prince, by this, purſued
bis glory and revenge; Marlborough ſought glory,
and an immenſe fortune, both which he equally co-
veted; Heinſius, being intirely ruled by the other
two, looked upon himſelf as a Spartan common-
wealthſman, who had humbled a Perſian monarch.
They did not propoſe a peace, but a truce; and,
during this ſuſpenſion, they demanded an ample fa-
tisfaction for all their allies, though none for the
allies of the king, and that too, on condition he join-
ed with them to drive his grandſon out of Spain,
within the ſpace of two months; and, as a ſurety
of this, that he ſhould deliver up, for ever, to the
Dutch ten towns in Flanders; that he ſhould give

9

r OO" 9" WY

Ch. 20. LEWIS XIV, 337

up Straſbourg, Briſac, and intirely renounce all pre-
tentions to Alſace (g). Lewis XIV, little expected,
when he refuſed prince Eugene a troop of dragoons,
when Churchill was not even a Colonel in England,
and the name of Heinſius hardly known to him,
that theſe three ſhould ever preſcribe him ſuch con-
ditions. The marquis de Torci departed without ſo
much as entering into negotiation, and reported to
the king the orders of his enemies. Lewis now ated
in a manner he had never before done with his ſub-
jects: he juſtified his conduct to them; and ſent
them a circular letter, wherein he ſet forth the ne-
ceſſity he lay under, of obliging them ſtill to ſupport
the burden of a war: wherein he alſo excited their
indignation, their ſenſe of honour, and even their
pity. The politicians ſaid, that Torci went, in a
ſuppliant manner, to the Hague, for no other
reaſon, but to ſhew the inſolence of the ene-
mies, to juſtify Lewis to all Europe, and to ani-
mate the French with a ſpirit of juſt reſentment ;
but the truth is, he went for no other end but to ſo-
licit peace; nay, the preſident Rouille was left-at
the Hague, to try if he could procure eaſier terms:
but, inſtead of giving any anſwer upon that head,
the ſlates commanded him d Gepart within (Would:
four hours.

Lewis XIV. when informed of this mortifying
behaviour, ſaid to Rouille, « Since I muſt make war,
I chooſe rather to carry it on againſt my enemies,
« than my children.” He accordingly made all
preparations for, another effort in Flanders. The
very famine, which depopulated the country,
proved a reſource in war; for thoſe who wanted

(g) Nay 23. 31094 1 3

2 F WWF. 3

738 THE AE OF d 26.
bread became ſoldiers. There were great quanti-
ties! of land left untilled; but, however an
was raiſed. Marſhal Villars, who had been ſent
the preceding yenr to command the army in Savoy,
where he raiſed the ſpirits of the troops, and had
gained ſome ſucceſs, was now recalled into Flin-
K
ing country. NN Go 341
5 Harborough had already taken Tour wil
Fugene covered the ſiege.” And theſe two geherals
now marched to inveſt Mons, Marſhal Villars ad:
vanced to oppoſe them: he had with him marſhal
Bouflers, who, though his ſenior, had ſolicited to
ferve under hin. Bouflers ſincerely loved his king
and country : he proved, on this occaſion, hotwith-

ſtandings the maxim of a great wit, that in a mo-
narchical ſtate, eſpecially under a good maſter, there

are virtues; and, doubtleſs, as many and as great,

as in republics, with leſs enthuſiaſm, perhaps, re

with more of what is termed honour. - ©

As ſoon as the French advanced to prevent as
ſiege of Mons, the allies marched to attack them near
the wood of Blangies, and the village of Malplaquet.

- The two armies conſiſted each of about eighty
dens men; but that of the allies was ſuperior
by forty-two battalions. The French brought with
them eighty pieces of cannon, and the allies an
hundred and forty. The duke of Marlborough
commanded the right wing, which conſiſted of the
Engliſh and German troops in the pay of England.
Prince Eugene was in the centre; and Till, with
count Naſſau, headed the left wing, dnn of the
Dutch troops.

Marſhal Villars took upon himſelf the 2

a. hs. als tht i, ho

LACS
-—w. -

„rer

S N. 8 b 5425

ch. 2 LEWIS Mv. 339

of the left wing, and appointed Bouflers to com-
mand the right (). He had intrenched his army in
a hurry; a precaution which ſeemed extremely ſuit-
able to an army, inferior in numbers, diſpirited with
misfortunes, and one half compoſed of young re-
cruits; and ſuitable to the circumſtances of France,
which a total defeat muſt-reduce to the utmoſt ex-
tremity. Some hiſtorians have blamed the general
for his diſpoſition: - He ought,” ſay they, © to
« have paſſed a large hollow, inſtead of having it
« in his front.” But do not thoſe, who, in their |
cloſets, pretend to paſs a judgment on what paſſes
in a field of battle, ſeem to be a little too confident
in their own abilities ?

All that I know is, that the marſhal himſelf ſaid
that the ſoldiers, who had gone without their bread
a whole day, after having received it, threw away
part of it, to advance to the engagement free of all
incumbrance. There have been few battles, for ſe.
veral ages, that continued longer, or were more
eagerly conteſted, and none more bloody. I ſhall ſay
nothing in regard to this action, but what was gene-
rally allowed. The left wing of the enemy, where
the Dutch fought, was almoſt intirely deſtroyed,
and even purſued with muſquet and - bayonet,
Marlborough, on the right, made, and withſtood,
the greateſt efforts. Marſhal Villars drew off ſome
part of his centre to oppoſe Marlborough; and, at
that very juncture, the centre was attacked; the
intrenchments, which covered it, were carried in-
ſtantly ; for the regiment of guards, left to defend
them, made no reſiſtance. The marſhal, haſten-

(b) Sept. 31; 1769,

*

30 THE AGE OF 28
ing from the left wing to his centre, was wound.
ed, and the battle loſt. The field was covered with
1 men, either dead or

There was nothing to be ſeen but one continued
Heap of carcaſes, eſpecially where the Dutch had
been ſtationed. The French, ſcarce loſt above eight
thouſand men in this battle, whilſt the enemy had
about twenty-one thouſand killed or wounded; for
the centre having been forced, and the two wings
broke through, pang — enen
eſt Naughter.

Marſhal Bouflers + made a retreat = Sed end;
being aſſiſted by the prince de Tingri-Montmo-
renci, afterwards marſhal Luxembourg; who in-
herited all the courage of his anceſtors. The army
retired between Quenoi and Valenciennes, carrying
with them ſeveral colours and ſtandards taken from
the enemy, Theſe ſpoils afforded ſome conſola-
tion to Lewis XIV. and the honour of having
fought ſo conſiderable a time, and having loſt only
the field of battle, was accounted equal to a vi-
Qory. Marſhal Villars, at his return to court, af
fured the king, that had he not been wounded, he
Mould have gained the victory. I have been in
company with the marſhal, who always ſeemed
perſuaded of this; but re CY
perſon of his opinion.

It may ſeem ſomewhat aſtoniſhing, that an army,
which had killed of the enemy two thirds more
than they had loſt, ſhould not endeavour to hinder
thoſe, who had no other advantage than that of Iy-

t In a book, intitled, Memoirs du morechel de Barwich, it
is aid, that marſhal Barwick made this retreat. Thus it 1
that mol} memoirs are written. |

BESS KST 88

£2

8 © 3 te a þ » ©

<< ka@ES oo TT PTa T7 How T T7 coco

7 „ &*

N

ch. 21. LEWIS v. 234%

ing amidft their dead, from going to beſiege Mons.
The Dutch: oewal} —ů—
enterprizez and not a little heſitated : but the name
of a battle loſt impoſes upon the conquered, and
diſpirits them. Men never do all they have in
their power; and the ſoldier, when told that he is
defeated, is afraid of meeting with the like fate
gain. Mons was therefore beſieged and taken (i):
and it alſo was given up to the Dutch; as were
likewiſe Tournay and Liſſe. |

CHAPTER XXT.

Lit XTV. continues to fae for peace, ind
to act on the defenſive. The duke de Ven-

dome ſecures dae een en

| throne.

HE enemy 80 2 — *
they not only took, on this ſide, all the bar-
riers of France, but they likewiſe intended, by the
aſſiſtance of the duke of Savoy, to invade Franche-
Comte, and, by the two extremities to penetrate
into the heart of the kingdom. In order to- facili»
tate this enterprize, general Merci was ordered: to
enter the higher Allace, by Bale; but he was luckily
obſtructed by count, afterwards marſhal, du Bourg,

near the iſle of Newbourg on the Rhine (2). Thoſe
of the name of Merci, by I know not what fatality,
have been always as remarkable for their misfortunes,

(i) October 11. 1705. (a) OY 7709.
| Gg 2 It

342 THE AGE OF Ch er,

as their reputation. This we have juſt mention-
ed, was intirely defeated. ' Nothing was attempt.
id on the fide of Savoy; but the French were
nevertheleſs in great apprehenſions from Flanders;

archduke as king of Spain; to give no aſſiſtance to
his grandſon, but to leave him intirely to his own for-
tune; to give four cautionary towns; to deliver up
Straſbourg and Briſac; to renounce the ſovereignty
of Alſace, and only to keep the government there-
of; to demoliſh all the forts betwixr Bale and Phi-
lipſbourg ; to fill up the harbour of Dunkirk, and
intirely eraſe the fortifications of that place, which
had been formidable for ſo conſiderable a time; to
give up to the ſtates general Liſle, Tournay, Ypres,
Menin, Furnes, Conde, and Maubeuge. Theſe
were, in part, the articles upon which it was pro-
poſed to conclude the peace which he implored.

The allies, by way of triumph, pretended they
wanted to examine more narrowly into the ſubmiſ-
fions of Lewis XIV. They allowed his plenipoten-
tiaries to come, the beginning of 1710. to the little
town of Gertrudenberg, with the petitions of that
monarch. For this purpoſe, he made choice of
marſhal d'Uxelles, a man of a cool and reſerved
temper, and though not of a bold and enterpriſing
turn, yet extremely diſcreet in his conduct; toge-
ther with the abbot, afterwards cardinal de Polignac,
a man of the fineſt genius, and one pf the greateſt
orators of his age: made at once to pleaſe by the
gracefulneſs of his perſon, and the force of his elo-
guence, Neither wiſd om, eloquence, nor it, hoe er,

and the inner parts of the kingdom were in ſuch a
declining ſtate, that Lewis ſtill ſued for peace in 2
ſuppliant manner. He offered to acknowlege the

C
a
ſr

eee 2. 6 8

on ww

—

a. ww wm. ty

we > 7

r i 4 4. _ A 4 A.

* f

ch. 21. LEWIS MV. 343

avail any thing in miniſters, when the prince is un-

ſucceſsful. ViRtories are the beſt peace-makers. The
embaſſadors of Lewis were rather confined at Get
trudenberg, than admitted to treaty. The depu-
ties came to hear their propoſals, which they carried
to the Hague to prince Eugene, the duke of Marl-
borough, and count Zinzendorf, embaſſador from
the emperor. Theſe offers were always received
with contempt. They were inſulted by ſcurrilous
libels; all of which were compoſed by French re-
fugees, who were become greater enemies to the
glory of Lewis XIV. than Marlborough or Eugene.

The French plenipotentiaries even ſubmitted fo
far as to promiſe, that the king ſhould contribute
money to dethrone Philip V. and yet they were not
liſtened to. The allies infiſted, as one of the preli-
minaries, that Lewis ſhould. engage, by himſelf, to
drive his grandſon out of Spain, by force of arms,
in two months. This abſurd inhumanity, much
more inſolent than a downright refuſal of peace,
aroſe from new ſucceſſes.

Whilſt the confederates treated in this haughty
manner in oppoſition. to the grandeur and pride of
Lewis XIV. they took the town: of Douay : ſoon af-
ter, they alſo: made themſelves maſters of Bethune,
Aire and Saint-Venant. The earl of Stair even pro-
poſed to ſend detachments to the gates of Paris.

Almoſt at the ſame time, the archduke's army
commanded by Gui de Staremberg, the German
general, who had the greateſt reputation after prince
Eugene, gained a complete victory, near Saragoſſa (0,

—

(5) Auguſt 20. 270.

Gg 3

444 THE AGE OF Ch 2x,
commanded by the marquis de Bay, an unfortunate
general. It was again remarked that neither of the
two princes, who diſputed the crown bf Spain, though
both within reach of the army, was preſent at the
battle. Of all the princes who were fought: for by
the other powers of Europe, the duke of Savoy was
the only one who ſerved in perſon. It was hard;
however, that he could not acquire this glory, but by
fighting againſt his two daughters; one of hom he
wanted to dethrone, in order to gain a ſmall part in
Lombardy, about which the emperor Joſeph had
already raiſed difficulties, and of which he would
certainly be deprived the firſt opportunity.
This emperor was every-where ſucceſsful, and
every-where ſhewed great want of moderation in his
proſperity. By his own authority alone, he dif-
membered Bavaria, and gave away the juriſdictions
thereof to his relations and creatures. He ſtript the
young duke of Mirandola of his dominions in Italy.
The princes of the empire furniſhed him with an
army on the Rhine; not conſidering, they contri-
buted to ſtrengthen a power they dreaded : fo much
did the ancient hatred againſt the name of Lewis
XIV. till prevail in their minds, that the humbling
of that monarch ſeemed their firſt care. Joſeph had
likewiſe the good fortune to overcame the malecon-
tents in Hungary. France had ſtirred up againſt him
the prince Ragotſki, who took arms in defence of
his own rights, and thoſe of his country. Ragotlki
| being defeated, his towns were taken, and all his
party ruined. Thus Lewis XIV. was equally un-
fortunate abroad as at home, by ſea as by land, and
u his public negoticons, as well as private b.
_ wigues.

ow. 4
4

—¶ GBC

1 ow te. + a

ch. 21. LEWIS XV. 345.

All Europe now imagined, that the \archduke
Charles, brother to the fortunate Joſeph; would
reign in Spain without any rival; but Europe was
threatened with a power more formidable than that
of Charles V. This was England, who had been, for
a conſiderable time jealous. of the Spaniſh-Auſtrian
branch, and Holland, its revolted flaye, who. had
almoſt exhauſted herſelf to eſtabliſh the Auſtrian
family. Philip V. who had returned to Madrid,
quitted it again, and retired to Valadolid, whilſt
the PLE qc. e eee
triumph.

The French king could no longer aſſiſt his ound
ſon; he had been obliged to do in part what his
enemies had demanded at Gertrudenberg; to aban-
don the cauſe of Philip, by ordering his troops
from Spain for his own defence: for he could not,
without the utmoſt difficulty, defend himſelf to-
wards Savoy, the Rhine, and eſpecially in Flanders,
where the war was carried on with the greateſt
vigour,

Spain was in a ſtill more diſtreſſed condition than
France: all her provinces had been ravaged by ene-
mies, or protectors. She had been invaded by Por-
tugal, and all her commerce was deſtroyed. There
was likewiſe a general ſcarcity throughout the king-
dom; but this proved more fatal to the conquer-
ors than the conquered, becauſe, in a confiderable
part of the country, the people refuſed every thing
to the Auſtrians, whilſt their affeftions prompted
them to do all in their power for Philip. This
monarch had now neither troops, nor a general,
from France. The duke of Orleans, by whom his

346 THE (AGE'OF \hinf

inſtead of continving to command his armies, /was
become his enemy. It is certain; indeed, that not-
withſtanding the affection of Madrid for Philip; and
the attachment of great part of the nobles,” and all
Caſtille, to his cauſe, yet he had ſtill a formidable
party in Spain againſt him. All the Catalans, a war-
like and obſtinate people, were ſtrongly attached to
his competitor ; and the half of Arragon was like-
wiſe gained over to the ſame intereſt. One party of
the people waited the event; another hated the arch-
duke more than they loved Philip. The duke of
Orleans, of the ſame name with Philip, diſſatisfied
with the Spaniſh miniſtry, and more ſo with the
princeſs des Urſins, who chiefly governed, began
now to entertain fome hopes, that he might be able
to procure for himſelf the kingdom he had been de-
fending : accordingly when Lewis had propoſed: to
abandon his grandſon, and an abdication was talked
of in Spain, the duke of Orleans thought himſelf
worthy to fill the throne, which Philip ſeemed about
to renounce. He had pretenſions to the crown of
Spain, which the teſtament of the deceaſed king had
neglected; but his father had kept up his rights by
entering a proteſt.

By his agents he made a private league with ſome
of the Spaniſh nobles, whereby they engaged to
place him on the throne, if Philip ſhould abdicate! In
this caſe he would certainly have found many of the
Spaniards ready to inliſt under the banners of ſo war-
like a prince. Had this project ſucceeded, it could
not have diſpleaſed the maritime powers, who would
then have had leſs occaſion to be afraid of ſeeing
France and Spain united under the fame prince;
and it would likewiſe have removed ſome obſtades .

4

A

» —

Ende Be SS ooo

*

ch. 21. LEWIS NV. 347
to the peace. The ſcheme was diſcovered at Madrid,
about the beginning of 1 709. when the duke of Or-
leans was at Verſailles, and his agents in Spain were

immediately impriſoned. Philip could not forgive his

relation for imagining that he would -abdicate, and
for having formed a deſign to ſucceed him. France
likewiſe exclaimed againſt him; and the dauphin,
father to Philip V. gave it as his opinion in council,
that he ought to be proceeded againſt as guilty of
high treaſon : but the king choſe rather to bury in
ſilence this unformed and excuſable project, than to
puniſh his nephew at a .
on the brink of deſtruction.
ä —
fought, the king of Spain's council, and moſt of

the nobles, being ſenſible they had no able com-

mander to oppoſe againſt Staremberg, who was re-
garded as another Eugene, they wrote in a body
to Lewis XIV. intreating he would ſend them the

duke of Vendome. This prince, who had retired to

Anet, accordingly departed. His preſence was equal
to an army. The great reputation he had acquired
in Italy, not impaired by his unfortunate campaign
at Liſle, ſtruck the Spaniards with admiration. His
popularity, his liberality, which even extended to
profuſion, his openneſs of temper, and his love for
the ſoldiery, gained him univerfal eſteem. As ſoon
as he ſet foot in Spain, it happened to him as for-
merly to Bertrand du Gueſclin; his name alone
drew numbers of volunteers. He wanted money;
and this he was ſupplied with by the boroughs, ci-
ties, and religious houſes. The whole nation was
ſeized with a ſpirit of enthuſiaſm. The broken re-
mains of the battle of Saragoſſa were again brought

246 THE AGE OF Ch. 21.
' together, and united under him at Valadolid; and
every part of Spain was eager to furniſh him with
recruits. The duke de Vendome, being reſolved
not to ſuffer this ardour to cool, purſued the con-
querors, brought back the king to Madrid; and
obliged the enemy to retire to Portugal. He' ſtill
followed them, forded the Tagus, took Stanhope pri-
ſoner at Brihuega, with five thouſand Englith, came
up with general Staremberg, and the very next day
gave him battle at Villavicioſa. Philip V. who had
never yet fought in perſon with his other generals,
being animated by the fpirit of Vendome, pur him-
ſelf at the head of the right wing, and the general
commanded the left. Here they gained fo com-
plete a victory, that, in the ſpace of four months,
this prince, who, at his arrival, found every thing
in the moſt deſperate ſituation, reſtored perfect
quiet, and ſettled for ever the crown of Spain on
- Whilſt this great revolution aſtoniſhed the al-
lies, another lefs diſtinguiſhed, though not lefs
deciſive, was forming in England. Sarah Jennings,
ducheſs of Marlborough, intirely ruled queen
Anne, and the duke governed the nation, He
had the treafury at his command, by means of
Godolphin the lord high treafurer, father-in-law to
one of his daughters: he wholly influenced the
council by means of Sunderland his ſon-in-law, ſe-
cretary of ſtate; and the queen's houſhold, where
his wife — was at his devotion. He was
abſolute maſter of the army, all the poſts in it being
in his diſpoſal. The Whigs and Tories were the two
parties which then divided England; the former, of
which Marlborough was the head, refuſed nothing

—

ch. 21 LEWIS XIV.” wy

to promote his grandeur; and the latter were forced
to admire him, and be ſilent. It may not be un-
worthy of hiſtory to take notice, that the duke and
ducheſs were the moſt graceful perſons of their time;
and that this outward advantage not a little attracts
the multitude, eſpecially when joined to honour and
lory. - | 199 e
: He had even more intereſt at the Hague than the
grand penſionary; and his influence in Germany was
conſiderable, being always as ſucceſsful a negotiator
as a general ; no private perſon had ever ſo extenſive
a power, or fo high a glory. He might alſo ſtreng-
then his power by that immenſe wealth which he ac-
quired in his command. I have heard it ſaid by his
widow, that, after four children. had their patrimo-
nies, there remained, excluſive of any court favour,
a yearly income of ſeventy thouſand pounds, equal
to about one million five hundred thouſand livres
of the preſent French money. Had not his parſi-
mony been equal to his grandeur, he might have
formed a party the queen would have been unable
to deſtroy: and if his ducheſs had had a little more
condeſcenſion, the queen would never have ſhaken
off her fetters. But the duke could not overcome
his paſſion for riches, nor the ducheſs give up her
humour. The queen had loved her to ſuch a degree,
as to be under a perfect ſubjection to her will. In
ſuch connexions, diſguſt generally proceeds from the
perſon who has the greateſt aſcendant. Caprice, haugh-
tineſs, and an abuſe of this ſuperiority, often ren-
der the yoke intolerable, and the ducheſs of Marl-
dorough carried them to the higheſt degree. The
queen began to look about for another favourite,
and turned her eyes upon Mrs. Maſham. The

ducheſs was now rouſed with jealouſy. Some gloves
of a particular make, which ſhe had refuſed the queen,
and a baſon of water, ſhe, with affected careleſſneſs,
in her majeſty's preſence, let fall on lady Maſham's
gown, gave a turn to the affairs of Europe. The
queen and ducheſs became now highly incenſed a.
gainſt each other. The new favourite's brother ſo-
licited the duke for a regiment: he refuſed this re-
queſt, and the queen granted it. The Tories ſcized
this opportunity to deliver the queen from her do-
meſtic ſlavery; to humble the power of Marlbo-
rough; to make a change in-the miniſtry; to con-
clude a peace; and, if poſſible, to reſtore the Stuart
family to the throne of England. Had the ducheſs
been a little more pliant in her diſpoſition, ſhe might
have regained her influence. Her majeſty, and ſhe,
had been accuſtomed to write to each other under
fiftitious names. This myſterious and familiar cor-
reſpondence left a channel always open for recon-
ciliation; but the ducheſs uſed this only to widen
the breach. She wrote in an imperious manner, ſay-
ing in her letter, « Do me juſtice, and give me no
« anſwer.” She afterwards repented, and, in tears,
came to aſk pardon. The queen made her no other
reply than this: « You have ordered me to give
« you no anſwer, and I will obey.” The rup-
ture being now irreparable, the ducheſs appeared
no more at court. Some time after, they began
with turning Sunderland out of the miniſtry, in or-
der next to diſplace Godolphin, and then the duke
himſelf. In other kingdoms, this is termed a dif-
grace; but, in England, it is a change of miniſtry.
This, however, was extremely difficult to bring
about. The Tories, though maſters of the queen,

n. GSG MI. CE CME *T TFT

-

e

m_ a 3 ap

Gf Af om o@ © ws wmMwi

hd ki. 4 AS — — „

Ch. 21. LEWIS Mv. 351
were not ſo of the kingdom. They were obliged
to have recourſe to religion; of which they have
no more at preſent in Great Britain than the little
which is wanted to diſtinguiſh parties. The Whigs
mclinedto preſbyterianiſm : this was the party which
had dethroned James II. perſecuted Charles II. and
beheaded his father. The Tories, were for epiſco-
pacy, which favoured the houſe of Stuart, and want-
ed to eſtabliſh the doftrine of paſſive obedience to-
wards kings, the biſhops expecting thereby to pro-
cure a greater ſubmiſſion to themſelves. They ſpi-
rited a preacher to enforce this doctrine in the ca-
thedral of Saint Paul's, to paint the adminiſtration
of Marlborough in the moſt odious colours, and to
blacken the whole party, which had fixed the crown
on king Wilham. But the queen, though ſhe favour-
ed this prieſt, had not a ſafficient power to hinder
his ſermon being publicly burnt, and himſelf filenced
for three years, by both houſes of parliament. The
queen was ftill more fenſible of her weakneſs, when
fe found, that notwithſtanding her ſeeret affection
for her own blood, ſhe durſt not open the paſſage
to the throne, ſhut againſt her brother by the Whigs.
Thoſe writers, who ſay that Marlborough, and his
party, fell as ſoon as the queen withdrew her favour,
ſeem not to be acquainted with the conſtitution of
England. The queen, though ſtrongly inclined to a
peace, dared not even to remove Marlborough from
me command; and, in the ſpring of 171 1. he ſtill
continued to haraſs France, notwithſtanding his diſ-
grace at court. Propoſals of peace from France
were fecretly offered at London; but the queen's
ne miniſtry durſt not yet accept of them. |

. Hh

WES.
* .

352 T HE AGE O F ch. 21.

A new event, as unexpected as many others,
effected this grand work. This was the death of
the emperor Joſeph (c), who leſt all the dominions ;
of the Auſtrian family, the empire of Germany,
and his pretenſions on Spain and America, to his
brother Charles, who was elected emperor of the
Romans a few months after.

As ſoon as the emperor's death was known, thoſe
prejudices, which had armed ſo many nations, began
now to be diſſipated in England, by means of the
new miniſtry. Great pains had been taken to hinder
Lewis XIV. from governing Spain, America, Lom-
bardy, the kingdom of Naples and Sicily, under' the
name of his grandſon; and why ſhould they now
wiſh to ſee ſo many dominions united in the houſe of
Charles, VI.? Why ſhould the Englith nation exhauſt
their treaſures? They contributed more than Holland
and Germany together ; and the expence of the pre- c
ſent year amounted to ſeven millions ſterling. Muſt |
Great Britain ruin herſelf in a cauſe in which ſhe was
ſo little intereſted, and to procure a part of Flanders
for the United Provinces, her rivals in commerce ?
Theſe conſiderations, which emboldened the queen, 7
opened the eyes of great part of the nation; and a
new parliament being called, ſhe was now at liberty (t
to make preparations for the peace of Europe. b
But though ſhe was ſecretly endeavouring to q
8
ri

te . „ Hwy 2 * — —_ ——

bring it about, ſhe could not yet publicly diſengage
herſelf from her allies; and whilſt private negotia-
tions for a peace were tranſacting in the cabinet,
Marlborough was carrying on hoſtilities in the field. d
He made con. inual advances in Flanders, and forced G
the lines which marſhal. Villars had drawn from

(c) April 17. 1712,

Chi 11 * LEWES XIV. _J 353

Mdatheall to Valenciennes: he took Bouchain, and
advanced as far as Queſnoi (d); from whence to Paris
there was hardly a ſingle fort to oppoſe him.

It was at this unfortunate time, that the famous
Gue-trouin, by his courage, and the aſſiſtance of
ſome merchants, having no rank in the navy, and
owing every thing to himſelf, equipt a fleet, and
took St. Sebaſtian de Rio Janeiro (e), one of the
principal towns in Braſil. He returned loaded with
riches; but the Portugueſe loſt more than he gained.
All this damage, however, done at Braſil, proved no
remedy to the misfortunes of France.

CHAPTER XXII.

The victory nice at Denis by marſhal
Villars. The affairs of France retrieved.
A general peace concluded.

HE negotiations for a peace were now public-

ly entered upon at London. The queen ſent

the earl of Strafford embaſſador to Holland, to lay

before the ſtates the propoſals of Lewis XIV. It

was not Marlborough they had now to ſolicit; for

Strafford obliged the Dutch to name plenipotentia-
ries, and to receive thoſe of France.

There were three eminent men who ſtill 2

this peace. Marlborough, prince Eugene, and Hein-

ſus, perſiſted in their reſolution to diſtreſs Lewis

(4d) Sept. 1711. (e) Sept. and Oct. 2711.
| + i

=_
— — — —— ——— . e 60e

354 THE AGE OF *

XIV. - But the Englich general, upon his return
to London, towards the end of 1711. was diveſt-
ed of all his employments. He found a new houſe
of commons; nor had he now a majority amongſt
the lords; for the queen, having created ſeveral
peers, had thereby weakened the duke's party, and

made an acceſſion to that of the crown. Like Sci-

pio, he was accuſed of miſdemeanours; but he ex-
tricated himſelf, like him, by his glory, and by

retiring, However, he was till powerful in his

diſgrace, Prince Eugene ſerupled not to come over
to London to afliſt his party. This prince met with

ſuch a reception as his rank and diſtinguiſhed merit

deſerved; and the refuſal due to his propoſitions.
The court prevailed : prince Eugene returned alone
to finiſh the war; and, having no companion to
ſhare the honour, this was a freſh incitement to
him, to hope for new victories.

Whilſt the conferences were carrying on at Ut-
recht, where the French miniſters, who had been ſo
haughtily treated at Gertrudenberg, came now to
negotiate on more equal terms; marſhal Villars,
having retired behind his lines, covered Arras and
Cambray. Prince Eugene took the town of Queſ-
noy, and extended in the country an army of about
an hundred thouſand men. The Dutch had made
an extraordinary effort; and though hitherto they
had not borne the expence they had agreed to in the
war, yet this year they even furniſhed beyond their
contingent. Queen Anne could not yet openly diſ-
engage herſelf. She had ſent the duke of Ormond,
with twelve thouſand Engliſh, to prince Eugene's
army, and ſtill retained in her pay a conſiderable
body of Germans. Prince Eugene, having burnt

Re rRMB: Sd lpCRMMWwU.. . r = MM FS

<y

GS. = £2. x

ch. 2 [LEWIS XIV. 385

the ſuburbs of Arras, marched againſt the French
army, and propoſed to the duke of Ormond to give
battle: but the Engliſh general had been ſent thither'
with orders not to fight. Mean while, the particular
negotiations of France and England advanced, and-
a ſuſpenſion of arms was proclaimed betwixt the
two crowns, Lewis XIV. put Dunkirk into the
hands of the Engliſh, as a ſurety that he would
perform his engagements. The duke of Ormond
retired towards Ghent : he carried with him all the
Engliſh troops, and wanted likewiſe to have drawn
off thoſe in his miſtreſs's pay; but he could only
procure twelve regiments of Holſtein, and a regi-
ment of Liege to follow him. The troops of
Brandenbourg, the Palatinate, Saxony, Heſſe, and
Denmark, ſtill remained under prince Eugene, and
were paid by the Dutch. Even the elector of Ha-
nover, who was to ſucceed queen Anne, left his
troops with the allies in ſpite of her ; ſhewing there-
by, that, though his family expected the crown of
England, they did not build their hopes on * ws
your from the queen.

Prince Eugene, though deprived of the Engliſh,
was ſtill ſuperior to the French army by twenty
thouſand men: he was ſo too by his ſituation, by
his having plenty of every thing, and by a e
of victories for nine years.

Marſhal Villars could not hinder bim from be-
ſieging Landrecy. France, being drained of men
and money, was in the utmoſt conſternation; nor
could the French depend greatly on the conferences
at Utrecht, ſince the ſuccefs of prince Eugene might
render them all ineffeftual. Conſiderable detach-

H h 3

—

356 THE AGE OF d. a8.
ments of the enemy had already ravaged part of
= and ivy gents I IO of
m n a.
There was now a el alarm 1 in Verſailles,
and throughout the whole kingdom. About a year
afterwards happened the death of the king's only
fon: the duke and ducheſs of Burgundy with their.
cldeſt fon, being taken off ſuddenly in a few months
after, were carried to their graves in the fame
hearſe; the youngeſt of their children was likewiſe
at the point of death. Theſe domeſtic misfortunes,
Joined to thofe abroad, and the public miſery, made
the end of Lewis's reign appear as a period deſtined
for calamity; and the French now expected more
misfortunes, than they had before ſeen glory and
grandeur.
About this very time, the duke de Vendbae died

in Spain. That ſpirit of dejection and deſpondency
which prevailed through alt France, and which I
mylelf remember, made every one apprehenſive,
that Spain, hitherto ſupported by Vendome, would
now be loſt by his death.
Landrecy could not hold out long. It was even
debated in council at Verſailles, whether the king
ſhould not retire to Chambord. Upon this occaſion,
his majeſty told marſhal d'Harcourt, that, in caſe
of any new misfortune, he would ſummon together
alt the nobility of his kingdom, and, notwithſtand-
ing he was in his ſeventy- fourth year, would lead
tdem on againſt the enemy, and die at the head od
ts army.
A miſtake of prince Eugene delivered the king,
and the whole kingdom from their perplexidies-
It is {aid that his lines were too much extended;

CY

>. 2.

** es ants 6 a6 a ac od SR RS

*
,
7
2
F
;
1
|

Ch. 22. LEW 18 XIV; 357:

that bis magazine of ſtores in Marchiennes was at
too great a diſtance; and that general Albemarle,
poſted at Denain, betwixt Marcbiennes and the
prince's camp, was not properly ſituated to be
ſpeedily ſuccoured, if attacked. I have been aſſured,
that a very beautiful Italian lady, whom I faw ſome
time after at the Hague, and who was then kept
by prince Eugene, reſided at the Marchiennes; and
that ſhe was the cauſe of the magazine being fixed
at this place. It ſeems not to be doing juſtice to
prince Eugene, to imagine that a woman. ſhould
influence his military diſpoſitions. Thoſe who know,
that a curate, together with a counſellor of Douay,
named le Fevre d'Oryal, walking towards theſe parts,
were the firſt who projected the attack on Denain
and Marchiennes, may better demonſtrate, from
this fact, by what ſecret and weak ſprings the great-
eſt affairs of this world are often directed. Le Fevre
gave his opinion to the governor of the province;
he communicated it to marſhal Monteſquieu, who
commanded under Villars. The general approved
of it, and put it in execution. This action proved,
in effect, the ſafety of France, more than the peace
with England. Marſhal Villars gave prince Eugene
the ſlip; he ordered a body of dragoons to advance
in ſight of the enemy's camp, as if they were about
to attack it; and whilſt theſe retired towards Guile,
the marſhal marched to Denain (a) with his army,
in five columns and forced the intrenchments of
general Albemarle, defended by ſeventeen battalions,
who were all killed or taken. The general ſurren -
dered himſelf a priſoner, together with two princes
of Naſſau, a prince of Holſtein, a prince of _

(a) July 24. 1712. ||

_
OO

358 THE AGE OF Ching:

and all the officers. Prince Eugene haſtened with
what troops he could get, but did not arrive till
the action was over: he went to attack a bri
leading to Denain, which the French guarded ; but
in this attempt he loſt moſt of his men, and was
obliged to return to his camp, after being a wit-
neſs of this defeat.

All the poſts towards Marchiennes, along the

Scarpe, were carried one after another, with great
rapidity. ' The French now advanced to Marchi-
ennes, defended by four thouſand men : they be-
ſieged the place with ſo much vigour, that, in
three days, the whole gariſon were made priſon-
ers (b), together with all the proviſions, and war-
like ſtores, which the enemy had amaſſed for the

campaign. -Marſhal Villars had now intirely the

faperiority. The enemy, being diſconcerted, raiſed
the ſiege of Landrecy, and ſuffered Douay, Queſ-
noy, and Bouchain, to be retaken (c), ſo that the
frontiers were now in ſecurity. The army of prince
Eugene retreated, after having loſt fifty battalions;
forty of which, from the battle of Denain to the
end of the campaign, had at different times been
taken priſoners. The moſt ſignal victory could
not have produced greater advantages.
If marſhal Villars had had the popularity of fome
other generals, he muſt now have been extolled as
the deliverer of his country; but his ſervices were
hardly acknowleged; and amidſt the public joy far
this unexpected ſucceſs, envy was ſtill predominant.
Every ſtep of Villars haſtened the peace of Ut-
recht. The miniſtry of queen Anne, accountable
to their own country, as well as Europe, neglected

(9) July 30. 1712. (e) Sept, and Oct. 1722.

-E0

J Gr GG GEES od a AMC ʃ¼w oa

ch. 22. LEWIS XV. 359

neither the intereſt of England, nor that of their
place, ĩuſiſted, that Philip V. eſtabliſhed in Spain,
ſhould renounce all bis pretenſions to the erown of
France, which he bad always maintained; and that
his brother the duke de Berri, heir apparent to the
crown of France, after Lewis's anly great grandſon,
who was almoſt at the'point of death; ſhould like-
wiſe renounce all claim to the crown of Spain, in
caſe he became king of France. The ſame renun-
ciation was alſo required of the duke of Orleans.
But the late war, of twelve years continuance, pro-
ved the weakneſs of ſuch ties upon mankind. There
is as yet no law acknowleged, which can oblige-the
deſcendants to- deprive themſelves of 'the right of
reigning, though their fathers may have renounced
it, Such renunciations are of no efficacy, but when
the common intereſt agrees with them. However,
for a little, they calmed a ſtorm which had continued
for twelve years; and it was very probable, that
the time would come when ſeveral nations would
endeavour to maintain theſe: renunciations, now
become the baſis of the balance and tranquillity of
Europe. |

— igine chi "kb of forage
and of Sicily, with the title of king; and, on the
continent, Feneſtrelles, Exilles, 'with the valley of
Pragilas; thus they aggrandized him at the exqunce
of the houſe of Bourbon.

They aſſigned the Dutch a conſiderable barrier,
which they had always deſired ;- and as they had ta-
ken ſome territories from the houſe of Bourbon in
favour of the duke of Savoy, ſo likewiſe they in-
croached a little on the rights of the Auſtrian fa-

| | | 2 be Ch.
Ch. 22.

360 THE AGE OF
mily, to ſatisfy the Dutch, who, at the expenet of b
this houſe, were now to become the governors and
maſters ofthe ſtrongeſt towns in Flanders. Tbe com- 4
mercial intereſt of Holland was taken care of; and "
articles were likewiſe flipulated in favour of portugal Sb.
To the emperor was allotted the ſovereignty of
the Ten provinces in Spaniſh Flanders, and the
important government of the barrier towns. He
had likewiſe confirmed to him the kingdom of ©
Naples and Sardinia, with all his poſſeſſions in Lom- hs
bardy, and the four ſea-ports on che coaſts of Tuf. MW fe
cany : but the council of Vienna, looking upon "
themſelves as aggrieved, would not agree to theſe

conditions. 0
In regard to Great Britain, her intereſt and glory —
were intirely ſecured. She procured, as one article, th
that the harbour of Dunkirk, which had been the
cauſe of ſo many jealouſies, ſhould be demoliſhed -
and filled up. Spain left her in the poſſeſſion of 5
Gibraltar and Minorca. * France gave up to her
Hudſon's-Bay, the iſland of Newfoundland, and ”
Acadia, As to her trade in America; ſhe even ob- *
tained privileges not granted to the French, who 1
placed Philip V. on the throne, We muſt likewiſe .
aſcribe to the Engliſh miniſtry, as a moſt glorious X

article, their obliging Lewis XIV. to ſet at liberty
thoſe of his ſubjects, who had been confined for
their religious principles. This was, indeed, to dictate
laws; but ſuch, however, as were perfectly equitable.

Queen Anne, at laſt, facrificing the rights of
blood, and the ſecret inclinations of her heart, to
the good of her country, uſed her intereſt to have
the ſucceſſion ſettled, and properly ſecured, upon
the houſe of Hanover.

LEWIS MV. 386.

ch. 22.

duke of Bavaria was to keep the duchy of Luxem-
bourg, and county of Namur, till he and the ew
ther were re-eſtabliſhed in their electorates; for
Spain had given up theſe two ſovereignties to the
Bivarian, as a recompence for his loſſes; and the
allies had neither taken Namur nor Luxembourg.
As to France, who agreed to demoliſh Dunkirk,
and to give up ſo many places in Flanders, formerly
conquered by her arms, and confirmed by the trea-
ties of Nimigen and Ryſwick, ſbe had given up to
| her Liſle, Aire, Bethune, and Saint-Venant. »
Thus it appeared, that the Engliſh miniſtry ren-
dered juſtice to all parties; but they themſelves did
not meet with the like candour from the Whigs.
One half of the Engliſh nation ſoon after inſulted
the memory of queen Anne, for having done one
of the greateſt and beſt actions that can ever be in
the power of a ſovereign, that of reſtoring peace to-
ſo many nations. She was reproached, in that ſhe-
might eaſily have ee n ws ur
neglected the opportunity.

All theſe treaties were Goned one ade 2 in
the year 1713. The emperor, either through the
obſtinacy of prince Eugene, or the bad policy of
his council, entered not into any of theſe negotia -
tions: he might certainly have had Landau, and
perhaps Straſbourg, had he at firſt come readily in-
to the meaſures of queen Anne; but he remained
obſtinate for war, and had nothing. Marſhal Vil-
lars, having ſecured what remained of the French
Flanders, marched towards the Rhine; and, after
having made bimſelf maſter of Spires, Worms, and
all the — country, took Landau, the ſame

As to the electors of Bavaria and Cologn; the

362 THE AGE OP Chi 22.
which the emperor might have preſerved by a
peace (d). He forced the intrenchments which
prince Eugene had drawn in the Brifgaw, and de-
feated murſtial Vaubonne within his lines (e, He
likewiſe | beſieged and took Privourg N Ae l.
tropolis of Upper Auſtria.
The councit of Vienna were, n
tremely urgent for the fuccours promiſed by the
circles of the Empire. Theſe reinforcements, how-
ever, did not arrive; and the emperor at laſt be-
came ſenſible, that without England and Holland,
8 and he reſolved, when
too late, to make peace.

Marſbal Villars, having thus concluded the war,
had likewiſe the honour of concluding/ a peace at
Raſtadt with prince Eugene. This was, perhaps,
the firſt inſtance of two generals meeting, at the
end of a campaign, to treat in the name of their
maſters. Upon this occaſion, they both behaved
with that eaſy freedom peculiar to- their characters.
E have heard marſhal Villars fay, that the following
was one of his firſt expreſſions to prince Eugene:
« Sir, we are not enemies to cach other; your-ene-
« mies are at Vienna, and mine at Verſailles.” Both,
indeed, had always factions to ſtruggle againſt at
their own courts.

In this treaty no mention was made of the rights
which the emperor pretended upon the monarchy of
Spain, nor the empty title of Catholic king, which
Charles VI. always aſſumed, whilſt Philip V. had
the kingdom. Lewis XIV. ſtill kept Straſbourg
and Landau, which he had before propoſed to reſign,
er and new Briſac, which

(ay Aug. 20. 1713. (e) Sept. 20. / Oct. 30. |

be had offered to demoliſh; e
ſovereignty of Alſace, which formerly he would

have renounced: and what was moſt honourable,

he got the electors of Bavaria and Cologn re-eſta-
bliſhed in their dominions and honours. _

It is very remarkable, that France, in all her
treaties with the emperors, always protected the
rights of the princes and ſtates of the empire. She
laid the foundation of the Germanic liberty at Mun-
ſter, and got an eighth electorate created for the

houſe of Bavaria. The treaty of Nimigen con-

firmed that of Weſtphalia. By the treaty of Ryſ-
wick, France procured the cardinal de Furſtem-
burg the reſtoration of all his poſſeſſions; and now,
by the peace of Utrecht, ſhe re-eſtabliſhed the two
electors. It muſt be owned, that in all this nego-
tiation, which terminated ſo long a diſpute, France
received the law from England, and, in her turn,
gave it to the Empire.

The hiſtorical memoirs of theſe times, from whence
moſt of the hiſtories of Lewis XIV. have been com-
piled, ſay, that prince Eugene, at the concluſion
of the conferences, begged the duke de Villars, in
his name, to embrace Lewis's knees, and to preſent

that monarch with the moſt profound and ſincere ,

reſpects © of a ſubje& to his ſovereign.” But, in
the firſt place, it cannot be ſaid, that a prince, the
grandſon of a prince, is the ſubject of another prince,
becauſe he was born in his dominions. Secondly, it
is ſtill leſs conſiſtent, that prince Eugene, the gene-
ralifimo of the empire, ſhould call himſelf a ſub-
jet of the French monareh.

Mean while, each power took pollefion of their

Vor. I. 11

363

364 THE AGE OF Ch. 22.
knowleged in Sicily, without conſulting the empe.
ror, who in vain complained. Lewis ſent his troops
to take poſſeſſion of Liſle. The Dutch ſeized upon
the barrier towns; and the ſtates of the country
gave them one million two hundred and fifty thou-
ſand florins annually, for being maſters of Flanders.
Lewis ordered the harbour of Dunkirk to be filled
up, the citadel to be raſed, and all the fortifications,
and the mole to be deſtroyed, in ſight of the Engliſh
commiſſary. The Dunkirkers, now ſeeing their
commerce intirely ruined, ſent a deputation of their
number to London to implore the clemency of queen
Anne. It was not a little mortifying to Lewis XIV.
that his ſubjects ſhould go to ſolicit the favour of
a queen of England; but it was ſtill more mortify-

ing to them, that the queen was obliged to refuſe
their requeeſt.

The king, ſome time after, cauſed the canal of
Mardyke to be inlarged; and, by means of the
fluices, an harbour was ſoon made, faid to be equal
to that of Dunkirk. The earl of Stair, embaſſador
from England, made warm remonſtrances to Lewis
on that account. It is ſaid, in one of the beſt books
- extant, that his majeſty made this reply to lord
Stair : © Mr. Embaſſador, I have always been maſter
„in my own kingdom, and ſometimes in others;
« do not remind me of this.” I am quite cer-
tain, that Lewis never made fo unſuitable an an-
ſwer. He had never been maſter of the Engliſh;
but was the fartheſt from it that could be. He
was always indeed maſter in his own dominions:
but the queſtion is, whether he was ſo far maſter,
as to be able to elude a treaty, to which he owed his

Ch. 22. LEWIS uV. 3656

preſent tranquillity, and, perhaps the greateſt part
of his kingdom. It is however certain, that he
immediately put a ſtop to the works at Mardyke ;
and thus yielded to the embaſſador's repreſenta-
tions, inſtead of treating them with diſregard; All
that had been done at Mardyke, was ſoon after de-
moliſhed, during the regency, and the treaty ful-
filled in every particular.

. Notwithſtanding this peace of Utrecht, and that
of Raſtadt, Philip V. did not enjoy all the Spaniſh
monarchy ; he had till Catalonia to ſubdue, as well
as the iſlands of Majorca: and Ivica.
Here I muſt take notice, that the emperor Charles
had left his wife at Barcelona and, not being able
to ſupport the war in Spain, nor willing to give up
his rights, and accept of the peace of Utrecht, had
agreed with queen Anne, that the empreſs and her
troops, being of no more ſervice in Catalonia,
ſhould be embarked in Engliſh veſſels. Catalonia
was accordingly evacuated ; and Staremberg, at
his departure, reſigned. the title of viceroy. But
he left all the ſeeds of a civil war; and the hopes
of a ſpeedy relief from the emperor, and even from
England. Thoſe who bad then the greateſt influ-
ence in that province, imagined they might now
form a republic under a foreign protection; and
that the Spaniſh monarch would not be able to re-
duce , them. They now diſplayed the fame cha-
raſter which Tacitus aſcribed to them ſo long
ago: „ An intrepid people, © ſays that hiſtorian,
« who look upon life as nothing, when not em-
« ployed in fighting.”

Had they exerted themſelves as much for Philip

| I12

V. their king, as they did againſt him, the archduke
would never have contended for Spain. 'They

. ſhewed' plainly, by their obſtinate reſiſtance, that

Philip V. though diſengaged of his competitor,
could not alone reduce them. Lewis XIV. who,
towards the clofe of the war, could neither furniſh

his grandſon with ſhips nor ſoldiers againſt Charles,

now ſupplied him with both to quell his revolted
ſubjects. The port of Barcelona was blocked up

with a French fleet, and marſhal Berwick beſieged

it by land.
The queen of Great Britain, faithful to her trea-
ties, did not ſuccour this town. The emperor pro-

miſed, but fent no ſuccour: the beſieged defended

themſelves with a courage ſupported by a kind of

fanatical madneſs. The prieſts and monks ran to
arms, and mounted the breaches, as if they fought
for religion. The phantom of- liberty rendered
them deaf to all the offers made by their maſter.
More than five hundred eccleſiaſtics loſt their lives
in arms at this ſiege; and we may eaſily judge from
thence, whether their diſcourſe and example had not
oreatly animated the people.

They hung out a black flag from the breach, and
bore ſeveral aſſaults in a ſurpriſing manner. The
aſſailants having at laſt forced their way, the be-
fieged fought from ſtreet to ſtreet : when the old
town was taken, they retired to the new ; and, in
capitulating, they ſtill demanded the oreſervation
of their rights (g). However, they only obtained
their lives and properties ; for moſt of their privi-
leges were taken away. Sixty monks were con-
demned to the galleys; and this was the only ven-

(g) September 12. 1714.

8 ＋ as mc AA

Hes, o$ mh

a XxXxXc «wy an mw $6

Ch. 23. LEWIS XIV. 367

geance taken. Philip V. had treated the little town
of Xativa more ſeverely in the courſe of this war:
he had raſed it to the very foundation, as an example
to'deter others. But though an inconfiderable place
might be thus deſtroyed, it would have been ex-
tremely unpolitic to demoliſh a large town, with fo
fine a port, and ſo beneficial to the whole kingdom.

This fury of the Catalans, which had not inſpired
them when Charles VI. was amongſt them, but
tranſported them to ſuch a degree, when deſtitute of
aſſiſtance, was the laſt flame of that fire which had
laid waſte the moſt beautiful part of Europe, for fo
conſiderable a time, occaſioned. by the will of
Charles II. king of Spain. |

CHAPTER XXII.

The ſlate of Europe, from the peace of
| Utrecht to the year 1750.

Shall continue to call this a civil war. The

duke of Savoy was in arms againſt his two daugh-
ters, The prince de Vaudemont, who eſpouſed the
cauſe of the archduke Charles, had like to have taken
priſoner his own father in Lombardy, who was in
the intereſt of Philip V. Spain had been divided into
factions; and whole regiments of French Calviniſts
had ferved againſt their native country. It was, in
ſhort, for a fucceſſion amongſt relations, that a ge-
neral war had been commenced ; and it muſt like-
wiſe be obſerved, that queen Anne excluded from

368 THE AGE OP Ch. 23.
the throne her own brother, whom Lewis protected,
and whom ſhe was obliged to profcribe.

Human prudence and expectations were defeated
in this war, as they generally are. in every thing,
Charles VI. though twice proclaimed at Madrid,
was driven out of Spain. Lewis XIV. when ready
to ſink, recovered by the unexpected broils in Eng-

land. The council of Spain who had called the duke

of Anjou to the throne, only to prevent their mon-
archy from being diſmembered, {aw it ſtill divided.
Lombardy, and part of Flanders, remained to the
houſe of Auſtria : the houſe of Pruſſia had likewiſe
a ſmall part of Flanders: the Dutch had the fove-
reignty of another; and a fourth part was left in
poſſeſſion of the French. Thus the inheritance of
the houſe of Burgundy 'was divided amongſt four
powers ; and the houſe which ſeemed to have moſt
right, did not preſerve one acre in the Spaniſh do-
minions. Sardinia, though of little importance to the
emperor, remained to him for ſome time. He allo
for ſome time poſſeſſed Naples, that grand fief
of Rome, which is ſo often, and fo eaſily ſeized.
"The duke of Savoy had Sicily for four years, keep-
ing it chiefly to maintain againſt the pope an e.
traordinary, but ancient right of being pope himſelf
in this iſland ; that is, of being almoſt in every point,
abfolute ſovereign in matters of religion.

The weakneſs of human policy appeared ſtill more
after the peace of Utrecht, than during the war. It
is certain, that the new miniſtry of queen Anne had
ſecretly formed a ſcheme for eſtabliſhing the ſon of
James II. on the throne. Queen Anne herſelf, in-
ſtuenced by her miniſters, began to liſten to the voice
of nature, and entered into the deſign of ſettling the

Ty Do & PT

" — —— r ＋—

c 12

ae en on. ber eee eee
againſt her inclination. Her death, however, pre-
vented this project being put in execution, The fa-
mily of Hanover, whom ſhe looked upon as aliens,
and diſliked, fucceeded. Her miniſters were perſe-
cated; and the pretender's party, having made an
attempt for him in 1715. were defeated. This re-
bellion, which if the queen had lived a little longer,
would have been termed a legal revolution, was pu-
_niſhed by the blood of thoſe who were concerned
in it,

The good underſtanding, and union, betwixt
France and Spain, which had raiſed ſuch apprehen-
ſions, and given the alarm to fo many nations, was
broken off as ſoon as Lewis XIV. died. The duke
of Orleans, regent of France, though irreproachable
as to his guardianſhip of the young prince, behaved
as if he himſelf had been to ſucceed. He fotmed a
ſtrict alliance with England, though reputed the na-
tural enemy of France, and made an open rupture
with that branch of the Bourbon family which reign-
ed at Madrid. Philip. V. who had renounced all
pretenſions to the crown of France by the late peace,
raiſed, or rather gave the authority of his name 10
raiſe, ſeditions in France; which ought to have
choſen him regent, as he could not reign in that
kingdom. Thus, after the death of Lewis XIV. all
the views, negotiations and political meaſures, took
a quite different turn in 1
moſt of the princes in Europe. .

The regent of France, in concert with the Eng-
liſt, attacked Spain; fo that the firſt war of Lewis
XV. was undertaken againſt bis unde, whom Lewis

LEWIS MV. q 369

370 THE AGE OF 0 23

XIV. had ſettled on his throne, at the expenie of
ſo much blood.

During the courſe of this ſhort war, the Spaniſh

miniſtry deſigned to take advantage of the duke of
Savoy; who had likewiſe formed a ſcheme of doing
ſomewhat of the ſame nature with regard to the

emperor. The reſult of this chaos of intrigues was,

that the Spaniards deprived the emperor of Sardinia,
and the duke of Savoy of Sicily, in 1718.: but
France having defeated them by land, and the Eng-
liſh by ſea, they were forced to give up Sicily to
the houſe of Auſtria; and Sardinia was aſſigned to
the dukes of Savoy, who ſtill poſſeſs it, and bear
the title of kings of that iſland.

To ſhew by what a blind fatality the affairs of
this world are often governed, we may obſerve,
that the Ottoman empire, . which might have at-
tacked Germany during the courſe of the long war

in 1701. deferred it till the concluſion of the

general peace, and then declared war againſt the
emperor, who had an army of veteran troops, com-
manded by prince Eugene; who conquered the
Turks in two memorable battles, and forced them
to accept of a diſhonourable peace: and, as a far-
ther addition to theſe contradiftions, in which all
affairs abound, this very emperor, victorious over
the Turks, could not procure Sicily, without the
aſſiſtance of the Engliſh, and the regent of France.

But what moſt aſtoniſhed all the courts of Europe,
was to ſee, ſome time after, in 1724. and 1725.
Philip V. and Charles VI. formerly ſo incenſed
againſt each other, now ſo cloſely united; and af-
fairs ſo turned from their natural courſe, that the
Spaniſh miniſtry, for a whole year, intirely governed

wo . ©&Q

-*i- 23-1 -

—

— - = my wy ©» 0

- A F*. =" + a.

eq ©, wo D

&4 we £4 &©&& — —

* N

ch. 23. LEWIS NV. 371
the court of Vienna. This court, which hitherto
always exerted herſelf to hinder the Spaniſh branch
of the French family from all acceſs into Italy, ſo
far quitted her natural ſentiments, as to admit a ſon
of Philip, and Elizabeth of Parma, his ſecond wife,
into Italy; from which it was deſigned to exclude
both French and Spaniards, The emperor gave
up to this younger ſon of his competitor, the poſ-
ſeſſion of Parma, Placentia, and the grand duchy
of Tuſcany: and though the ſucceſſion of theſe do-
minions was not open, Don Carlos was admitted
there, with fix thouſand Spaniards; and the ex-
pence of Spain was only two hundred thouſand
piſtoles, given to the court of Vienna. |

This error of the emperor's council was far from
being a lucky one; for it coft him dear in the con-
ſequences. The whole of this affair was unnatural:
two families who had been enemies, formed an
union, without having any confidence in each other,
The Engliſh, who had done all in their power to
dethrone Philip V. and had taken from him Minorca
and Gibraltar, were the mediators in this treaty ; and
it was ſigned by Ripperda, a Dutchman, who was
become a duke, and a man of great power in Spain:
he was ſoon after diſgraced, and went to end his
days at Morocco, where he endeavoured to eſta-
bliſh a new religion.

Mean while, in France, the regency of the duke
of Orleans, which ſeemed likely to be ſo full of
troubles, by means of his ſecret enemies, and the
general diſorder of the finances, proved the moſt
quiet and fortunate. The French had been inured to
perfect ſubmiſſion under Lewis XIV. And hence
aroſe the ſafety of the regent, and the public tran-

1 THE AGE OF Ch. 23.
illity. A conſpiracy, directed at a diſtance by car-

al Alberoni, and but ill conducted in France, was
diſcovered, and cruſhed in the bud. The parliament,
which, during the adminiſtration of the late queen

regent, had raiſed a civil war, for the places of
twelve maſters of requeſts; and had annulfed the

wills of Lewis XIII. and XIV. with leſs ceremony

than that of a private perſon, was ſcarce at liberty
to make remonſtrances, when the value of their ſpecie
was increaſed to three times more than the uſual
ſtandard; and their proceſſion afoot from the grand
chamber to the Louvre ſerved only. to draw upon
them the railleries of the people. The moſt upjuſt
edict that had ever been iſſued, the prohibiting the
whole inhabitants of a kingdom to keep by them
above five hundred livres in current coin, raiſed not
the leaſt commotion, A general want of ſpecie, the
people flocking in crouds to the office, to receive
a little money for the neceſſary expences of life, in
exchange for a diſcredited paper, which overſpread
the whole kingdom; ſeveral perſons ſqueezed. to
death in the croud, and their bodies carried by the
people to the royal palace; all theſe things pro-
duced no appearance of a (edition. In ſhort, this
famous projet of Law's, which had ſeemed to
threaten the regency and the kingdom with de-
ſtruction, contributed, in reality to the ſupport of
both, by conſequences which none had foreſeen.
The paſſion for riches, which now ſeized all ranks
of people, from the loweſt elaſs to the magiſtrates,
biſhops, and even princes of the blood, turned the
minds of every one from all attention to the public
intereſt, and all political or ambitious views; for the
thoughts of every one were now wholly engroſſed

n.
vi
bi
Cl
X d
c
n
ſl
v
c
1
F

— A

a —_—

Ch. 23. LEWIS XV. 373
with the fear of loſing, and the deſire of gaining.
It was, indeed, a new and ſurpriſing game, wherein
the whole nation betted againſt each other; and,
having the true ſpirit of eager gameſters, they did
not chooſe to quit their play, to diſturb the go-
vernment. It happened, however, which could not
be foreſeen but by perſons of the greateſt experi-
ence and penetration, that a chimerical project pro-
duced a teal commerce, and reſtored the India
company, which had been eſtabliſhed by the fa-
mous Colbert, but ruined by the late wars. In
ſhort, though the fortune of many private perſons
was ruined, yet the nation,' in a little time, be-
came richer, and more flouriſhing in commerce,
This project ſharpened the underſtanding of the
people, as civil wars generally excite their courage,
The diſtraction in the finances having ceaſed
with the regency, that in politics alſo ſubſided as
ſoon as cardinal Fleury came to the head of the
miniſtry. If there ever was an happy mortal upon
earth, the cardinal was ſurely ſo. He was looked
upon as a moſt amiable man, and perfectly agree-
able in converſation, even to his ſeventy-third year :
and at this age, when others retire from the world,
he took into his hands the helm of government, and
was always conſidered as a perſon of the higheſt
wiſdom. All his meaſures, from 1726. to 1742.
proved ſucceſsful; and he preſerved his intellectual
faculties ſound, clear, and capable of tranſacting af-
fairs, even to the ninetieth year of his age.
When we, conſider, that, of a thouſand of our
cotemporaries, there is very rarely one who arrives
at this age, we muſt allow, that Fleuri had a pecu-
liar deſtiny. . If his grandeur was extraordinary,

374 THE AGE OF 1 Ch. 23,

which having begun ſo late, ſhone ſuch a conſider-
able time, without any cloud to obſcure it, his mo.
deration, and ſweetneſs of manners, were no leſs
- conſpicuous. The riches and magnificence of car-
dinal d'Amboiſe, who aſpired at the papacy, are
well known; as well as the arrogant ſimplicity of
Ximenes, who raiſed armies at his own expence,
and who, in the dreſs of a monk, ſaid, that he led
the nobles of Spain with his cord. Every one is
likewiſe acquainted with the regal pomp of Riche-
lieu, and the immenſe riches amaſſed by Mazarin.
The characteriſtic of cardinal Fleury was modera-
tion. He was ſimple, and frugal, in every parti-
cular, and always uniform in his behaviour: he had
nothing high nor elevated in his character; which
was owing to his mildneſs, equanimity, and love of
order and peace. He proved, that perſons of a
mild, condeſcending, and benevolent temper, are
beſt formed to govern others.

He let the kingdom quietly repair its loſſes, and
grow rich by an extenſive commerce, without
making any innovation: thus treating the ſtate as
a ſtrong and robuſt conſtitution, which naturally
recovers of itſelf. _ | |

Political affairs inſenſibly returned into their na-
tural chanel. Happily for Europe, Sir Robert
Walpole, the prime miniſter of England, was of a
diſpoſition equally pacific. Theſe two men main-
tained almoſt all Europe in that tranquillity which
laſted from the peacc of Utrecht to the year 1733-3
and which was but once interrupted by the ſhort war
in 1718, This was an happy time for all nations,
who, cultivating commerce and arts with emulation,
forgot their paſt calamities. .

K *'L E WIS wv. 375
In theſe times two powers aroſe, which had been

hardly mentioned in Europe before this age. The

one was Ruſſia, which the czar Peter the Great had

raiſed out of a ſtate of barbarity. This monarchy,
before his time, conſiſted only in vaſt defarts, and a
people without laws, without diſcipline, and without
any uſeful knowlege ; ſuch as the Tartars have al-
ways been. This country was ſo little known in
France, that when Lewis, in 1668. received an ein-
baſſy from Muſcovy, a medal was ſtruck on the
occaſion, as had been done in memory of the Siameſe
embaſſy. This new empire, after having humbled
Sweden, began to have an influence | in all affairs,
and to give laws in the North,

The ſecond power eſtabliſhed by force of art;
and upon leſs extenſive foundations, was Pruſſia.
It was as yet, however, only in its infancy, and
had not diſtinguiſhed itſelf,

The houſe of Auſtria remained almoſt in the ſame
ſtate in which ſhe had been placed by the peace
of Utrecht. England till preſerved her power by
ſea, whilſt that of Holland gradually decayed. This
little commonwealth, become powerful through the
indolence of other nations, began to decline, be-
cauſe her neighbours now carried on the trade, which
the Dutch before had wholly to themſelves. Sweden
languiſhed, whilſt Denmark flouriiked. Spain and
Portugal were chiefly ſupported by America. Italy,
which was always.in a weak condition, remained
divided into as many ſtates as at the beginning of
the age, excepting Mantua, annexed to the Au-
ſtrian family. *

Savoy at this time ſurpriſed the world with an

Vor. I. K k

a ©
r CC od _— — — — -

”
4
* *
* *
bu .

376 THE AGE OF G

extraordinary occurrence, which may ſerve as a
grand leſſon to ſovereigns. The king of Sardinia,
duke of Savoy, that Victor Amedeus, who had
been ſometimes an enemy, and ſometimes an ally,
to France aud Auſtria, and whoſe inconſtancy had
palled, for policy, being at laſt tired of buſineſs, and
of himſelf, in the year 17 30. and the ſixty- fourth
year of his age, through caprice reſigned the
crown he had borne the firſt of his family; and a
year after, in another fit of caprice, repented of
this ſtep. Neither the company of his miſtreſs,
who was become his wife, devotion, nor tran-

quillity, were ſufficient employment to a ſoul like
his, which, for fifty years, had been buſied in the
affairs of Europe, He, gave a remarkable inſtance
of human frailty, and ſhewed how liable the mind
is to be diſſatisfied, either in a private ſtation, or on
a throne. In this age four ſovereigns renounced
their crowns: Chriſtina, Caſimir, Philip V. and
Victor Amedeus. Philip reſumed his againſt his
inclination; Caſimir never once thought of it;

-» Chriſtina had once thoughts of it, upon a diſguſt

ſhe received at Rome; Amedeus was the only
one who endeavoured by force to re-aſcend the
throne which he had quitted through an un-
eaſineſs of mind. The conſequence of this at-
tempt is well known, His ſon, Charles-Emanuel,
might have acquired a glory ſuperior to the poſſeſ-
ſion of any crown, in reſtoring his father what he
held from him, had his father alone, or the ,cir-
cuniſtances of time, exacted his compliance; but
an arabitious miſtreſs wanted to reign « and all the
council were under a neceſſity to prevent this, and
eva to confine their late ſovereign. , He *

Ch. 23. , Lewis mv. 377
ſoon after in priſon, It has been ſaid, though falſe-
ly, in the memoirs of theſe times, that the court
of France intended to ſend twenty thouſand men to
aſſiſt the father againſt his ſon: but neither the ab-
dication of that prince, nor his effort to regain the
crown, nor his confinement, nor death, cauſed the
leaſt motion amongſt any of the N Ae na-
tions.

All remained peaceable from, Ruſſia even to Spain,
till the death of Auguſtus II. plunged Europe again
into freſh troubles and commotions, from which ſhe
is ſo ſeldom exempted.

King Staniſlaus, father-in-law to Lewis XV. hav-
ing been already nominated to the ſucceſſion of Po-
land in 170 4. was elected king in 1733. in the moſt
ſolemn and legal manner. But the emperor Charles
VI. procured another election, which was ſupported
by his own arms, and thoſe of Ruſſia; and a fon
of the late king of Poland, elector of Saxony, who
had married a niece of Charles VI. carried it againſt
his competitor.” Thus' the houſe of Auſtria, whic!
had not been able to preſerve Spain and the Weſt⸗
Indies, and which could not even ſettle a trading
company at Oftend, yet had "ſufficient intereſt to
deprive the fatherin-law of Lewis XV. of the
crown. France beheld a ſecond example of what
had formerly happened to prince Armand de Conti;
who, having been folemnly elected, but having
neither money npr troops, and being rather re-
commended than ſt pported, loſt the crown to
which he had been elefted. ©

King Staniſlaus went to Dantzick, to ſupport his
ere but me great majority i in his favour ſoon
'K K 2 Kan

378 THE AGE OF Ch. 23,
yielded to the great majority againſt him. This eoun:
try, where the people are ſlaves, where the nobility
{ell their votes, where they never have 2 ſufficient
treaſury to maintain an army, where the laws are

without force, and where liberty i is only productive
of diviſions; this country, I ſay, boaſted in vain of

its warlike nobility, who could bring into the field -

an army of an hundred thouſand men on horſe-

back. Ten thouſand Ruſſians at once put to

ſlight all who were aſſerabled in favour of Stani-
flaus. The Poliſh nation, who, the preceding age,
looked upon the Ruſſians with · the utmoſt contempt,
now dreaded them, and followed the meaſures they
dilated. The empire of Ruſſia had become formiĩ ·
dable ever ſince the time of Peter the Great, Ten
thouſand diſciplined Ruſſian ſlaves diſperſed the
whole nobility, and gentry, of Poland ; and king

Staniſlaus, having taken ſhelter in Dantzick, was

very ſoon beſieged there by an army of thirty oy:
fand men. | 4
The emperor of Genmany, s in union with
Ruſſia, was almoſt ſure of ſucceſs. In order to keep
an equal balance, France ought to have ſent a nu»
merous army by ſea; but England, as ſoon as ſhe
had ſeen fuch vaſt preparations, would have declared
herſelf, Cardinal Fleury, who took particular care
to keep England quiet, was neither willing to. faf-
fer the ſhame of deſerting Staniſlaus, nor did. he

chooſe to venture too great a force to ſuccour him.

He ſent a fleet with. fifteen hundred men, under the

command of a brigadier. The officer imagined,

that nothing was in earneſt deſigned ; and when
he approached Dantzick, thinking he ſhould. fa-
crifice his men to no manner of purpoſe, he put

ea. ed A Aa. ̃ a a » ²ům co ct uo co fo@rc.oc w ˙ . a a TX

ww AI RN wewc: r W oo» A £% aw

Ch, 23. LEWIS IV... 3»
into Denmark to refreſh, The count de Plelo,
embaſſador from France at the Daniſh court, was
highly enraged at this retreat, and looked upon it
as diſhonourable. He was a youth, who, having
ſtudied the belles letters and philoſopby, had im ·
bibed the moſt heroic ſentiments, and ſuch as me-
rited a better fate than he met with. He reſolved”
to ſuccour Dantzick againſt ſo numerous an army
with this ſmall force, or to die in the attempt. Be-
fore his embarkation, he wrote a letter to one of
the ſecretaries of ſtate, which ended with theſe
words: „I am certain I ſhall not return: I there ·
« fore recommend my wife and children to your
« care.” He arrived in the road of Dantzick, and,
baving difembarked, he attacked the Ruſſian army;
and after having received many wounds, he periſhed,,
as he had foreſeen ; and all his party were either killed
or taken priſoners, His letter, and the news of his:
death, arrived at the ſame time. Dantzick was taken,
and the French embaſſador in Poland, who happen--
ed to be in this place, was made a priſoner of war,
in violation of the privileges due to his character.
Staniſlang was obliged to diſguiſe himſelf, and at laſt
eſcaped, after having run through many dangers,
and ſeen a. price ſet upon his head by the Muſco-
vite general, in a free country, the place of his na-
tivity, and amidſt a nation who had elected him
king, with all the formality of their laws. The
French miniſtry would have intirely loſt that: re--
putation neceſſary for the ſupport of its grandeur,,
if it had not revenged ſuch an infult; but a re-
venge, unleſs attended with ſome utility; would bat:
little avail, |

KK 3 * 24

%% THE £687 OF. ch 25
The great diſtance of the plates hindered them
from carrying their reſentment againſt the Muſco-
vites;. and policy directed their vengeance upon the
emperor. This they accordingly put in execution in
Germany, and in Italy. France formed a league
with Spain and Sardinia; and though theſe three
powers had each ' ſeparate intereſts, 2 they” alt
. at humbling Auſtria.

The dukes of Savoy, for a conſiderable time;
had: been gradually inereaſing their dominions, by.
ſometimes ſelling their aſſiſtance to the emperors,
and ſometimes by declaring againſt them. King
Charles-Emanuel had' great hopes of getting the Mi-
laneſe, and was promiſed it by the French and Spaniſh.
miniſtries.. Philip V. king of. Spain, or rather queen
Elizabeth of Parma, his conſort, expected greater
poſſeſſions than Parma and Placentia to be ſettled
on her children. France propoſed no other advan-
tage but her on glory, the welfare of her 2
and the humbling of her enemies.

Nobody chen expected, that Lorrain ſhould be
' the fruits of this war. Mankind are generally guided
by events, which they ſeldom have the direction of:
No negotiation was ever more ſpeedily terminated
than that which united theſe three monirchs,

England and Holland, who had been fo Tong ac-
cuſicined:bo join Auſtria againſt France, abandoned
her: at this juncture. This was the effect of that re-
putation for equity and moderation, which the
French court had lately acquired. The notion of
her being pacifically inclined, and void of all am-
dition, kept her natural enemies quiet even when
ſhe declared war; and nothing ſurely can redound
more to the honour of the miniſtry than their have

:
%

ch. 23. LEWIS iv; vo F6e

ing perſuaded ſuch powers, that France 1
on Wu IE the: emperor, without giving any
alarm to the liberty of Europe: all theſe powers
accordingly beheld the rapid ſucceſs of the French
arms, eaſy and. undiſturbed. | A French army had
gotten poſſeſſion of the country upon the Rhine x
and another party of their troops in/conjun@ion
with thoſe of Spain and Savoy, had rendered them-
felves maſters of Italy. Marſhal Villars finiſhed his
glorious career, in the eighty-ſecond year of his age,
after having taken Milan. Marſhal'de Cegni; his fac-
ceſſor, gained two battles; whilſt the duke de Mon-
temar, the Spaniſh general, obtained a victory in
the kingdom of Naples, at Bitonto, from whenee he
| was ſurnamed; this being an honour which the
Spaniards often beſtow, in imitation. of the ancient
Romans. Don Carlos, who had been acknowleged:
hereditary ſucceſſor of Tuſcany, became immedi--
ately king of Naples and Sicily. Thus the emperor
Charles VI. loſt almoſt all Italy, for having given
a king to Poland: and, in two campaigns, à fon
of the Spaniſh monarch got both the - Sicilies,
ſo often taken and retaken formerly; and : upon
which, for more than two ages, the houſe of Au-
ſtria had continually fixed her attention,
| This was dhe only war in-Italy which ended with
any ſolid advantage to the French, ſince the time
of Charlemagne. The reaſon of this: was, their
having the guardian of the Alps on their fide,
who. was become one of the moſt potent princes in
thoſe parts; their being likewiſe ſeconded by the
beſt troops of Spain; and their armies being con-
ſtantly ſupplied with all neceſſaries.

The emperor. then. thought. himſelf very happy

382 THE AGE OF h, 23
in receiving conditions of peace offered by the vittor
rious French, However, cardinal Fleury, who had
the ſagacity to prevent England and Holland from
intermeddling in this war, ſnewed likewiſe his great
n their

|

{

|

|

mediation,
By this treaty, Don Carlos was acknowleged -
{

|

|

king of Naples and Sicily. Europe had already

been often accuſtomed to ſuch alterations. They
- aſſigned to Franeis duke of Lorrain, deſtined to be
ſon-in-law to the emperor, the inheritance of the
Medicis family, which had been before granted
to Don Carlos: and this made the hte grand |
duke of Tuſcany, upon his death-bed, aſk, « If |
« they would not name a third heir, and what other |
« child the Empire and France would give him.”
We mult not imagine from this, that the grand |
dukedom of Tuſcany conſiders itſelf as a fief of
the Empire; but the emperor eſteemed it as ſuch,
as well as Parma and Placentia, which have been
always claimed by the holy ſee; and for which the
late duke of Parma did actually pay homage to the
pope: fo much do the rights of princes alter with
thecircumſtances of time. By this peace theſe duchies
of Parma and Placentia, which by right of blood,
belonged to Don Carlos, fon of Philip V. and a
princeſs of Parma, _
Charles VI. as his property.

The duke of Savoy, now king of Sardinia, who
expected the duchy of Milan, which his family, be-
come great by degrees, for a conſiderable time, claim--
edas their right, got only a ſmall part thereof; viz. the
Novareſe, Tortoneſe, and the fiefs of the Langhes.
He derived his pretenſions to. Milan from a daugh--

hs AM om Www tt oa mm S#q+ < vw. fe SS a #am- Doc

Ch. 23. LEWIS XIV. 383

ter of Philip II. king of Spain, from whom he was
deſcended, France like wiſe pretended thereto, by
right of Lewis XII. the natural heir of this duchy.
Philip V. urged alſo his right to Milan, as it had
been feudatory ſucceſlively:to.four kings of Spain,
his predeceſſors. But all the pretenſions yielded to
convenience, and the public intereſt. The emperor
kept the Milaneſe, notwithſtanding the general law
of the fiefs of the empire, which ſays, that the em -
peror (ball keep the ſovereignty, but give the poſ-
ſeſſion to ſome other power. It was intended as a
limitation on the emperors, who might otherwiſe
in time ſwallow up the whole dominions of the
Empire. But there are ſo many exceptions to this
law, and there are ſo many examples for and againſt
it, that, in any grand affair of ſtate, it muſt be con-
feſſed, that the preſent intereſt is the ruling law.
By this treaty, king Staniſlaus renounced a king-
dom, which though it had been twice given him,
he could never get poſſeſſion of; but he kept the
title of king, For this loſs; he was now to have a
recompence; but it proved more ſo to France than
him. Cardinal Fleury was contented at firſt with
Barrois, which the duke of Lorrain was to give up
to Staniſlaus, with the reverſion to the crown of
France, Lorrain was not to be given up. till its
duke ſhould be in full poſſeſſion of Tuſcany: fo
that the ceſſion depended on many chances. This
was reaping very little from ſuch great ſucceſs, and
fo many favourable circumſtances; of which the -
cardinal, being urged to make more advantages,
demanded Lorrain on the ſame conditions as Bar-

rois; and it was accordingly granted.
It coſt France only a ſmall ſum of money; and a

333 THE AGE OF Ch 25.

penſion of four million and five hundred thouſand
livres to the duke, till Tuſcany fell to him.
Thus Lorrain became for ever annexed to the
crown of France; a reunion which had been ſo often

unſucceſsfully attempted. By this means, a Poliſh.
king was tranſplanted to Lorrain; which was the

laſt time this province had a ſovereign to reſide

there; and he rendered it happy. The reigning
houſe of the princes of Lorrain got the ſovereignty
of Tuſcany. The ſecond ſon of the king of Spain
was transferred to Naples; fo that the medal of
Trajan might have been renewed ; regna a/ſignata,
“ kingdoms aſſigned.“

The houſe of Bourbon, at the end of this ſhort |

war, was advanced to ſuch a pitch of grandeur as ſhe
could not have expected even in the height of Lewis
XIV's proſperity. Almoſt all the inheritance of
Charles V. Spain, the two Sicilies, Mexico, and
Peru, were now in her poſſeſſion. The houſe of
Auſtria at laſt ended in the perſon of Charles VI. in
1740. What remained of his dominions was likely
to be taken from his daughter, and divided amongſt
ſeveral powers. France carried the election of an
emperor with the ſame facility as the emperors had
formerly choſen the electors of Cologn, and the bi-
ſhops of Liege. The famous pragmatic ſanction of
the late Auſtrian emperor, who had thereby ſettled
his whole dominions on his daughter; this ſanction,
guaranteed by the Empire, England, Holland, and
© France herſelf, was at firſt ſupported by no one
power. The elector of Bavaria, ſon of him who had
been put under the ban of the Empire, was crowned,
without oppoſition, duke of Auſtria at Lintz, king
of Bohemia at Prague, and emperor at Frankfort,

ws A amd wid wi oa©© as © an =. __

Fe 1 1 — 88 [ ry as

Ch, 23, LEWIS XIV, 385
by the arms of Lewis XV. They went even to.the
gates of Vienna. The daughter of ſo many empe-.
rors found herſelf, for a whole year, intirely-deſli-
tute of aſſiſtance, and' without any hope but what
aroſe from her own intrepidity. Scarce: were her
father's eyes cloſed, when ſhe loſt Sileſia by an
invaſion of the young king of Pruſſia, who will
be long talked of by poſterity. He, was the firſt
who took advantage of this conjuncture, to promote
his grandeur. For this purpoſe he made uſe of an
army as well diſciplined as that of the antient Ro-
mans, which bis father ſeemed to have formed only
for parade and empty ſhew, France, Pruſſia, Sax-
ony, and Bavaria, attacked the remains of the houſe
of Auſtria, Her allies beheld this in ſilence; and
the diviſion of her dominions ſeemed now unavoid-
able. But it ſoon appeared evident, how difficult
it is for ſuch a weak prince as the eleftor of Ba-
varia, emperor under the name of Charles VII.
but without power, and a general without national
troops, to conquer a kingdom by the power of
another, Never were ſuch great advantages ſuc-
ceeded by ſo many misfortunes, What ſeemed -
likely to promote his, grandeur, contributed to his
ruin; and that extremity to which the queen of Hun-
gary was reduced, ſerved to raiſe her ſtill higher, The
houſe of Auſtria ſprung up again out of her aſhes.
The queen of Hungary found a powerful ally in
George II. king of Great Britain. Her cauſe was
likewiſe ſoon after eſpouſed by the king of Sar-
dinia, Holland, and even by Ruſſia, who ſent the
laſt year of the war thirty-five thouſand men to her
aſſiſtance, She made ſeparate treaties with Pruſſia
and Saxony: but above all, her own intrepid ſpi-

386 THE AGE of Ch. 23,
nt ſupported ber as much as any of her allies,

Hungary, where her anceſtors had experienced a

continued ſcene of civil wars, rebellions, and ex-
ecutions, proved to her a kingdom united, affection-
ate, and filled with zealous friends. The war was

carried on in the heart of Germany, in Italy, Flan-
ders, and even upon the frontiers of France, and
on the Indian and American ſeas, almoſt in the

ſame manner as that in 170 1. Cardinal Fleury, now
too far advanced in years to ſupport ſo heavy a
burden, laviſhed away, with regret, the treaſures of
France in this war, entered into againſt his inclina-
tion, and died, after having been a ſpectator of no-
thing but misfortunes ariſing. from miſconduct.
He never thought to have had occaſion for a ma-

rine: what remained of their navy had been i intire-

ly deſtroyed by the Engliſh, and the provinces of
France lay altogether expoſed. The emperor, whom
France had made, was thrice driven from his do-
minions, and died one of the moſt unfortunate
princes upon earth, in having been exalted to the
higheſt pitch of human grandeur. The queen of
Hungary taſted at once the pleaſure and glory of
creating her Huſband emperor, and of reſtoring the
imperial dignity to her family, *

Lewis XV. after the death of cardinal Fleury in
1743. whom he greatly lamented, took the govern-
ment intirely upon himſelf; and repaired the miſ-

fortunes which aroſe in the laſt years of Fleury's
miniſtry. He was ſucceſsful every-where, except in

Italy, where he had to oppoſe the king of Sardinia,
whom the cardinal had alienated from France.

There was one remarkable thing in this war *

which was, that there had never been ſeen ſo many

”
——

"AO | ** p as FITS

r + mt hd 25 arr iT© Ac O4/D $$ .4a_ , 4 a£©«_ A . AS

Ch. 23. LEWIS xiv. 367

fovereigns at the head of their armies. Francis of
Lorrain, grand duke of Tuſcany, afterwards em-
peror, often headed the Auſtrian troops, Don Car-
los king of Naples, ſon of Philip V. commanded
his army at Veletri; and George II. king of Great
Britain in perſon gained a battle near the Maine.

The king of Sardinia appeared every-where with-
his troops, and always with ſucceſs. The king of
Pruſſia himſelf obtained five victories. Lewis XV.
procured glory and ſuperiority to his nation at the
battle of Fontenoy, and preſerved them in that
at Laufeld. In ſhort, after having in perſon ſub-
dued all Flanders, and taken Maeſtricht, by mar-
ſhal Saxe; after his enemies were driven out of Pro--
vence by marſhal Bellifle; after having ſaved Genoa.
by marſhal Richelieu; after having ſettled the king.
of Naples on his throne ; he made a peace as glo-
rious as any of his campaigns: for, at the treaty of
Aix-la Chapelle, he ſhewed a moſt unparalleled and.
unexpected moderation; not even reſerving any
thing to himſelf of what he had conquered by his
arms. He had, however, the glory of protecting his
allies; of reſtoring the Genaeſe to their rights; of
eſtabliſhing the duke of Modena in his dominions,
and of ſettling the infant Don Philip in Parma and
Placentia, the inheritance of his mother. This was,
indeed, a great acquiſition, thus to be the pro-
tector of all his allies. Reputation, amongſt power.
ful princes, is equal to conqueſts. After fuch an
happy peace, France was re-eſtabliſhed on the ſame
footing as at the peace of Utrecht, and became ſtill:
more flouriſhing.

The Chriſtian powers in Europe were now di-

Vou. I. LX

7
FS

| *

THE AGE; ttc.

upon each other, and who! both endeavoured te

maintain that balance, the pretext of ſo many wars

and which was eſteemed the true baſis of a laſting
peace. The ſtates of the empreſs queen of Hun-

gary, part of Germany, Ruſſia, Great Britain, Hol-

land, and Sardinia, compoſed the one; France,
Spain, the two Sicilies, Pruſſia, and Sweden, formed

| a. 2.
vided into two grand parties, who became a cheek 2

4 *. dy, ts Oo 1 * 7 «xz 9 -. \ "y
- o - — 0 _—
: * 17 + I * _—
— .- * — p 9 bs
A n N 7 * R > CRM
on * ** * . a =. 5
o =»

the other. All theſe powers kept np ſtanding ar-

mies; and a laſting peace was now hoped for, from

that dread which one half of Europe feemed to have

of the other.
Lewis XIV. was the firſt who maintained uch

numeroũs armies: and this obliged the other princes
to do the fame; ſo that after the peace of Aix- la-

Chapelle, the Chriſtian powers of Europe had about
2 million of men in arms: and it is to be hoped, *
that it will be long before there ſhall be any aggreſſor, ' |

as they have all armed to defend themſelves.

*
— 2

*
hs * - @<
=
