The Pauline Eschatology (Geerhardus Vos, 1930)
==========================================================
Vos's 1930 Pauline Eschatology — Princeton's biblical theologian on the already/not-yet structure of Paul's thought. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

ue 
nee 


Bu 


coer 


as 


27 


sea, 
eet 
eer 


pes 


chy 


dela 


ot 


as 


rrr 
is 


ene eee 


Testy. 
eee RSS 


y, 


chelsea) 


ee ee 


coe 


ee 


ceo 


‘ 
{ 
5 
: 
: 
fi 


et 


dite 


cate 


= 


3s 


were sce 


et etes 


= 


BIS 


Seer 


$n 


Pagstrs 2 


ee 
“ie 
shh 


Ar =. 
(ae 5, Se hoe = 
. Tee nd a 
ye atm ie gt tT ahaa | 7 ¥. 
> J ‘sis i ci 4 E « ie > —- 
? Ct > re bys Ss me 
‘ , ps ro ~ = agit “- Pag 
ae as , 
ee a 
tu ' 


Be ee nt a 


<€ 


ce 


4 SEP2 2] 1982 
Bey ON Ay 
| OL OgiGAL SEW 


BS 2655 ET ve. 1930) .Core 
Vos, Geerhardus, 1862-1949 
The Pauline eschatology 


‘ THE 
PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


BY 


GEERHARDUS VOS, Pu.D., D.D. 
Professor of Biblical Theology 


in Princeton Theological Seminary 


PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR 
1930 


4 ry y 
hive ae 
» be is a 
‘¢ , 
i 
4 
5 ¢ 


pews ¢ CREATOR REDEMPTOR CONSUMMATOR | he Sieg 
ug: 3 F : : oe a ‘. 
HIS TRIBUS RELIGIO NOSTRA UNIVERSA PENDET ; See 5 ? : 


PREFACE 


HRISTIAN faith has at various times put widely 
varying appraisals on biblical eschatology. The latter 


was first held in esteem because of the service it was 
able to render to early apologetics. The two at the outset 
were practically identical. The vindication of the new-born 
faith depended on the proof that the Messiah, that great 
Agent and Consummator of God’s world-purpose, had ap- 
peared upon the scene. Whosoever believed in this found 
himself drawn into the center of the eschatological move- 
ment, by prophets long foretold. It is true, this apologetic 
subserviency did not always work in even measure to the 
advantage of the Scriptural scheme of Eschatology. The Old 
Testament was the chief armory from which weapons had to 
be drawn. Even Virgil’s Fourth Eclogue could not quite 
replace this, whatever its ultimate provenience. And as to the 
Old Testament, who can deny that sometimes minor and 
isolated correspondences were subjected to a harder strain 
than they ought to have been asked to bear. 

At all times through the life of the Church the eschatologi- 
cal hope remained securely fixed upon her mind. It was an 
uncontroverted, accepted belief. Perhaps the retention of it 
may sometimes have been largely of a formal nature. But 
there is something about these expectations and visions of 
the last things, that will draw them into the hight and focus 
of the consciousness of believers, whenever storms of perse- 
cution arise and hard distresses invade. The mediaeval Roman 
Church seemed so unshakably fixed beyond every chance 
of transitoriness, and it moreover so clearly typified the true 
image of the ultimate city of God, that in it, one would 
suppose, only little soil could have been left for the cultiva- 
tion of super-terrestrial fields. And yet this appearance was 
to some extent deceptive. The finest products of the hymnody 
of that Church, with their unearthly aroma still clinging to 


vi PREFACE 


them after so many ages, are here to prove how rich a vein 
of piety ran through the hearts of their authors, derivable 
from the living waters of Paradise alone. Its:hills still stood 
and the birds were still delighting the saints of God with jubi- 
lance from their leafy trees. 

In the period of the Reformation the problem of the ob- 
taining of righteousness before God filled hearts and minds. 
For the time this forced the eschatological hope into the 


- background, although even then it would have been by no 


means paradoxical to say that the two strands of the justi- 
fying faith and the eschatological outlook remained closely 
intertwined. Paul knew the inevitableness of this and knew it 
better, perhaps, than the foremost heroes of the Reformation, 
not even Luther or Calvin excepted. While the Reformers 
were by no means unacquainted with the melodies of eschato- 
logical music, theirs was by preference martial music drawn 
from the storm and stress of the Psalter. But they received 
something better from Paul than either prophet or Psalmist 
had been able to give. Paul had been the first to grasp with his 
master-mind the single items of eschatological belief scat- 
tered through Scripture, and to weave them into a compact, 
well-rounded system, so coherent, that, speaking after the 
manner of man, it became next to impossible for any of the 
precious texture henceforth to be lost. He it was who made 
the single items of hope find themselves and group themselves 
into crystal formations with symmetrical shapes. Truly for 
this, not his smallest gift, he may justly be called the father 
of Christian eschatology. 

With the rise of Rationalism Eschatology was bound to 
drift into troubled waters. Eschatology is preeminently his- 
torical, and Rationalism is from its cradle devoid of historic 
sense. It despises tradition; the past it ignores and the future 
it barely tolerates with a supercilious conceit of self. More- 
over Rationalism is bent upon and enamored of the inward. 
To it the essence and value of all religion lie in purely-subjec- 
tive ethico-religious experiences. Now in the eschatological 
process from the nature of the case, the forces of propulsion 


PREFACE Vil 


must come from ab extra. No nature-force can possibly be 
conceived as producing them. All that remains of inter- 
est for Eschatology in such circles can spring from a “histori- 
cizing”’ curiosity only. Piety it is no longer capable of kindling. 
And yet, there was and may still further appear to be some- 
thing good from the Lord in this modernistic setback. Driven 
by such a storm of denial from the old pastures, not a few 
of the pious sought refuge out of this chill-grown world 
into anticipations of the world to come. We cannot help but 
recoil from much distorted thought and morbid emotion, that 
makes present-day eschatologizing propaganda unlovable. But 
let us be sure not to overlook even the smallest grain of golden 
piety that may linger in it. 

And meanwhile let us learn to reconcile ourselves to this 
outstanding sign of the times: Eschatology has become the 


large mountain of offense lying across the pathway of modern . 


unbelief. That part of it which we call Messiahship was already 
a piece broken from that rock in the days of Jesus. The double 
offense was one at bottom. Neither will be tolerated in modern 
religious thought. And the results will inevitably be the same. 
Paul divorced from his Eschatology becomes unfit for his 
Apostleship; Jesus divested of his Messiahship can no longer 
serve us as a Saviour. What boots it to strive for minor (al- 
though in themselves sufficiently important) things, when we 
see all these treasures the Church has gloried in and all this 
nourishment we have lived on, burned up before our eyes in one 
and the same fire? Here, certainly, is the test-limit of what 
shall warrant a claim to continuity with historic Christianity 
and the right to further retention of the name of “Christian.” 


GEERHARDUS VOS. 
Princeton, January 21, 1930. 


Ye, 


Chapter 
Chapter 
Chapter 
Chapter 


Chapter 
Chapter 


Chapter 


Chapter 
Chapter 
Chapter 
. Chapter 


Chapter 


ee 


I] 


Til 


IV 


V 


VI 


XII 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PAGE 
The Structure of The Pauline 
j ERT ar A Se) Foyer Camis De Weigle ee AD aes (ad h yO es I 
The Interaction between Eschatology 
ATIC CH ERECHOD Ver Ut (hicry Lom tk er tao wand fi 42 
The Religious and Ethical Motivation 
Oiaraulishmiscnatology ys Vice oat by ws, 62 
The Coming of the Lord and Its 
PTOCULSCITS! Bui pee eka tate Aint as Read 72 
BUT GHIVUATIOGL OUT My scare enh Sua engi 94 
TIRES TTOCEICI NS oor ak thc ny tins oe SN 136 
Alleged Development in Paul’s Teach- 
ANSTO the NeSurrection iii Wee acd yee oa 172 
ithe: Resurrection-Chanve® 00300) 206 
The Extent. of the Resurrection .:.)... 215 
The Question of Chiliasm, in Paul ..... 226’ 
aCe Ata C2 vi (oa 11 apport ee a TLR nna FR 261 
eet CRNA SLAs cis yet ameter trons | 288 


af 


iy 


CHAPTER I 


THE STRUCTURE OF THE PAULINE 
FSCHATOLOGY 


Eschatology is “the doctrine of the last things.” It deals 
with the teaching or belief, that the world-movement, reli- 
giously considered, tends towards a definite final goal, beyond 
which a new order of affairs will be established, frequently 
with the further implication, that this new order of affairs 
will not be subject to any further change, but will partake 
of the static character of the eternal. Eschatology is a term 
of Greek derivation, which leads us to look for its linguistic 
antecedents first of all to the Greek Old Testament. Here 
we find the two phrases évyataz separ (occurring Gen. xlix. 
feted ii, 2; Jer. xxxvil: 24;*> Ezek. xxxyiil. 16;\ Hos. iit. 
5; Mic. iv. 1; Dan. x. 14) and écyarov rav nwepov (occurring 
eamexxty. 14; Deut. iv. 30; xxxi. 29; Jer. xxill. 20; 
Seve La). | 

Back of these Greek phrases lies the Hebrew phrase o%°7 
neans.® It is important to determine the precise import of the 
term Any, both etymologically and conceptually. ““Acherith” 
is a derivation from “achar’”’ and the latter means “hind- 
most.” ““Acherith” is applied to space as well as to time in 
the sense of “‘the hindmost part.’’ An example of the applica- 
tion to space is Ps. cxxxix. 9: “the uttermost parts of the 
sea.’ Applied to time, as is the case in the phrase under re- 
view, it would proximately signify “the farthermost parts 
of the days.’ The question arises, however, whether this is 
a purely chronological designation, or whether there enters 


1In the arrangement of the Hebrew text this passage occurs xxx. 24. 

2 The last two in the Hebrew text, xlix. 39. Heb. Jer. xlviii. 47 has no 
corresponding Greek passage in Sept. Chap. xxxi. 

3 Besides “acherith hajjamim,’ the combinations “acherith hazza’am” 
“of the wrath” and “acherith hashshanim” “of the years” are also found, 
the former in Dan. viii. 19, the latter in Ezek. xxxviii. 8. 


2 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


se en i $4 


into it likewise the idea of ‘“eventuation,” “issue of a fore- 
going process.”’ In ordinary untechnical usage such a sense 
sometimes does attach to the word: Job viti. 7 draws a con- 
trast between the small beginnings of prosperity and its 
abundant issue; the former is “‘reshith,”’ the latter “‘ache- 
rith”; similarly xlii. 12; Prov. v. 4, 11 speak of the bitterness 
of the end of a man’s relation with “the strange woman,” 
implying that this bitter ‘‘acherith” is the inevitable outcome 
of the whole course of conduct involved. In the same way it 
is said of wine that “it goes down smoothly,” but that “at the 
last (“‘acherith’’) it bites like a serpent and stings like an 
adder,” xxill. 31, 32; the “reward” hoped for is an “ache- 
‘rith,” xxiii. 18; xxiv. 14. There can not, therefore, be drawn 
any objection a priori from the common usage of the word 
to its having carried a similar pregnant sense in technical ~ 
eschatological language. The sole question is whether the 
presence of this climacteric element can be pointed out in the 
eschatological passages. The “Blessing of Jacob,” Gen. xlix, 
contains an approach to this point of view in what it predicts 
concerning Judah, vs. 10. The “Shiloh,” that is “the One 
to whom Judah’s sceptre and ruler’s staff belong’ appears 
here as the ultimate embodiment and virtually as the eternal- 
izer of Judah’s preeminence among the tribes. In other words 
the One later called the Messiah is a Consummator in more 
than a purely chronological sense. This is still clearer if the 
Ezekielian reference to this prophecy is laid by the side of it, 
for here a succession of acts of overturning is held in pros- 
pect until shall come “He whose right it is,” and to whom 
Jehovah gives the final government, Ezek. xxi. 32;* both in 
Genesis and in the reproduction of the thought by Ezekiel the 
idea of progression towards a fixed end is marked by the 
word “until.” To be sure the term ‘“‘acherith” stands in Gen. 
xlix. I at the head of the prophecy with general reference to 
what is foretold concerning all the tribes, yet it is meant vir- 
tually so that in Judah’s destiny alone it is realized to the full 


4Vs. 27 in English text. 


ITS STRUCTURE 3 


extent of its import.° The same phenomenon meets us in Nu. 
xxiv. 14: Balaam says to Balak, “I will advertise thee what 
this people (Israel) shall do to thy people in the acherith haj- 
jamim.” Upon this follows the vision of the star out of Jacob 
and the sceptre out of Israel, projected into the dim future 
(“not now” and “not nigh’’). The introduction is abrupt; no 
intervening events nor preparatory stages are mentioned. In 
the last mashal, however, (vss. 20-24), there is a concatena- 
tion of successive overthrows befalling successive powers, in 
regard to which the idea of historico-causal connection sug- 
gests itself. The representation of one power overtaking and 
replacing another reminds strongly of the later prevision of 
political developments in Daniel, with this difference that 
Daniel places the kingdom of God at the close of the rise and 
rule of the profane kingdoms as something in which the entire 
movement comes to rest, whilst with Balaam, the Messianic 
culmination stands in the preceding mashal by itself, and be- 
fore the picture of the intervening destinies in vss. 20-24. The 
occurrence of the simple “acherith”’ without determination in 
the first of Balaam’s meshalim, xxiii. 10, ought not to be 
overlooked; it is here ostensibly applied to the individual, and 
used synonymously with ‘“‘death”: “Let me die the death of 
the righteous, and let my acherith be like his.”” In Deut. iv. 30 
the “‘acherith hajjamim’”’ denotes the time of the return of 
Israel to Jehovah after all the calamities described in the 
foregoing discourse shall have come upon them; among these 
is the captivity, so that the use is from the O.T. standpoint . 
truly eschatological. In Chap. xxx1. 29, on the other hand, it 
marks the period of the calamities themselves, and these are 
placed by Moses at the end of a process of corruption begin- 
ning immediately after his death; in this Deuteronomy antici- 
pates some of the prophetic representations. No mention is 
here made of return, so that only the negative side of the 
eschatological outcome is touched upon. Isa. 11. 2-4 and Mic. 

iv. I-3 are identical prophecies with this difference only that 


5 Gen. xlix. 1, “Gather yourselves together, that I may tell you that 
which shall befall you in the latter (acherith) days.” . 


4 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


the idyllic picture of the new paradise in vs. 4 is added by 
Micah. In both the reference is to the last issue of things. 
Isaiah makes no direct connection between the events of the 
“acherith”’ and the preceding developments; the prophecy is 
introduced abruptly. In Micah, however, through the attach- 
ment to the exceedingly ominous close of Chap. iii a contrast 
seems to be suggested between the depth and the height in 
Israel’s future; the translators of the English Bible (A.V., 
R.V., A.R.V.) express this view of it by giving the conjunc- 
tion ““waw’’ the sense of “‘but.”’® Of the Jeremiah-passages 
two (XxXlli. 20; xxxvil. 24, corresponding to Hebrew and 
English xxx. 24) link with the “‘acherith” (placed in or after 
the captivity) a new understanding of the divine judgment 
come upon the people. The two others (xxv. 18; found in 
Hebrew and English xlix. 39 and xlviit. 47, lacking in the 
Greek) speak of the return at the end of Elam and Moab. 
To these may be added the interesting statement in Hebrew 
and English xxxi. 17,’ to the effect that there is “hope” for 
the people’s “acherith,” thus associating the latter with a state 
of favor; this renders it probable that the “new understand- 
ing’ of the judgment, predicted for the “acherith” in the 
references given above, is meant to bear the same auspicious 
meaning. Ezek. xxxviil. 16 represents the last great attack 
made by Gog upon the people as taking place in the “acherith” ; 
this attack happens when the state of security has already 
become an established state for Israel (vs. 14).° Hos. 11. 5 
fixes the “‘acherith” as the point after the exile, when the 
children of Israel return and seek Jehovah their God and 


David their King, and come with fear to Jehovah and to 

6 The waw occurs also in Isaiah; to be certain of its force as “but,” 
we should have to know that the prophecy was taken from Micah by 
Isaiah, or that the connection of contrast found by the English Versions 
was intended in an assumed third source lying back of both Isaiah and 
Micah. 

7In Sep. xxxviii. 16, corresponding to the Hebrew above cited, the 
text is greatly different and the word “acherith” does not occur. 

8 Cp. Mic. iv. 1, 11, where the attack of the “many nations” is mentioned 
after the description of the ‘“acherith” as a state of blessedness. But the 
arrangement need not be strictly chronological; vs. 11 says “and now.” 


ITS STRUCTURE 5 


His goodness. Finally, according to Dan. x. 14, the inter- 
preter proceeds to make the prophet understand what shall 
befall the people in the “latter (post-Persian) days.” 

The above survey includes all the Greek Old Testament 
instances of occurrence of the phrase. Certain conclusions 
can be drawn from it, which here may be briefly set down: 
In the first place the phrase belongs strictly to the field 
of eschatology. It does not signify some indefinitely subse- 
quent point or period or complication of events. The note of 
epochal finality is never missing in it. This should, how- 
ever, not be confounded with the idea of chronological fixity. 
It is peculiar to the Old Testament that it makes this “acherith”’ 
a sort of movable complex, capable of being pushed forward 
along the line of prophetic vision. Here is not the place to 
treat of the principle of the philosophy of revelation under- 
lying this phenomenon; it may suffice to point to it as a fact 
borne out by exegetical induction.*® In the second place the 
conception relates to the<¢ollective,aspect of eschatology: it 
deals with the fortunes Dateihie of the people, not with 
the prospect and future of the individual.*® This, however, 
does not mean that the Old Testament, as sometimes alleged, 
is wholly lacking in individual eschatology, it only means that 
whatever approach to or teaching of such a doctrine there is 
has not found expression through the “acherith’’-concept. 
Thirdly the idea is elastic as to its extent, no less than mov- 
able as to its position. It covers, as has been shown, unfavor- 


® Cp. Delitzsch, Commentar tiber die Genesis,* 1872, pp. 498-501. 

10 A possible exception is Num. xxili. 10; here “the death of the 
righteous” (parallel to his“‘acherith”) is spoken of as something devoutly 
to be desired. Can this refer to Israel as the connection would seem to 
indicate? There is nothing strange in “the righteous” as a name for 
Israel; “Jeshurun” occurs as a name of the people in Deut. xxxii, 15; 
XXXiii. 5, 26; Isa. xliv. 2. For the idea of the death of Israel cp. Hos. 
xili. 13, but there the representation is ominous. Even when individualis- 
tically interpreted, Balaam’s words are eschatological; the blessedness is 
pronounced in view of the future after death (hence “the righteous’), 
not in view of things left behind (children or property). Individually 
interpreted the passage would yield an early instance of the eschato- 
logical conception of the state after death; Gen. v. 24 would furnish the 
only analogue. 


6 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


able and favorable happenings occurring in the farthest 
visible plane to which the prophetic vision extends, and there 
is no clear marking of the sequence of these in time. This is 
what might be expected, taking into consideration the whole 
tenor of Old Testament prophecy with regard to the future. 
Sometimes points are mentioned as falling within the “‘ache- 
rith,” sometimes a condensation of events occupying apparently 
a certain stretch of time. The principal question is whether 
the static outcome, the permanent state of blessedness pre- 
dicted, is actually included, sometimes at least, in the ‘‘ache- 
rith.” If so, then this would extend the latter indefinitely, in 
fact render it synonymous with what the New Testament 
considers the state of eternity, although, of course, the lan- 
guage of time would still be employed to describe it, the 
latter feature being inherent in the etymology of the phrase 
itself. Deut. iv. 30 has been quoted as an instance of this (on 
the usual construction) : “When thou art in tribulation and 
all these things are come upon thee, in the latter days thou 
shalt return to Jehovah thy God.” Thus construe R.V. and 
A.R.V., but A.V. has: “When all these things are come upon 
thee (1.e., the calamities spoken of) even in the latter days,” 
etc. This, as an alternative construction, is also offered by 
R.V. and A.R.V. in the margin. The Greek Text is not clear ; 
it reads: “and all these words (things) shall find thee in the 
“acherith of the days.’ The Hebrew represents the “acherith” 
as the period of adversity. But even if the construction of 
R.V. and A.R.V. be adopted, the passage still falls short of 
placing the blessed age in the “acherith” ; what it puts there ex- 
plicitly is only the act of conversion. And no more than this 
can be said for the passage in Hos. iii. 3: the people’s coming 
unto Jehovah and unto His “goodness” is put in the “ache- 
rith.” Here, however, it is possible, if “coming to his good- 
ness” be taken in the pregnant sense of enjoying God’s favor, 
to make the ‘“‘acherith”’ cover the resulting permanent escha- 
tological state. The only passage which unequivocally puts 
consummated eschatological things within the “acherith” is the 
duplicate prophecy, Isa. ii. 2; Mic. iv. 1. Here we read that in 
the ‘‘acherith” the mountain of Jehovah’s house shall be estab- 


ITS STRUCTURE 7 


lished (“‘nakhon jihjeh”) at the head (= on the top) of the 
mountains; the Niphal Participle must be understood of an 
enduring condition, and the same is implied in the representa- 
tion in vss. 3, 4 of Jehovah’s teaching function, of his judg- 
ing between many nations and of the state of peace and 
security prevailing, every man sitting under his vine and 
fig-tree, and none to make them afraid (the last in Micah 
only ).** 

Coming now to the N.T., and first to the extra-Pauline 
New Testament material, we notice the fact that in the Synop- 
tical Gospels the terminology of ésyatov does not appear with » 
eschatological reference. In John it occurs; here we meet with 
“eschate hemera,”’ vi. 39, 40, 44, 54; x1. 24. On account of 
both the noun and the adjective being in the singular, and 
through the specific reference to the act of the resurrection, 
the Old Testament phrase has here become contracted in 
meaning. Acts has but one instance of the use of the phrase, 
li. 17, and this in a quotation by Peter from Joel iii. 1, where 
the Hebrew does not contain it, but simply says “after that.” 
But this easy substitution proves that the formula was thor- 
oughly familiar in early-Christian circles. Apart from Paul 
the other N.T. references are Heb.1.2; Jas. v.3; 1 Pet.1.5, 20; 
2 Pet. ili. 3; 1 Jno. ii. 18 (bis); Jude 18. In these pas- 
sages the noun varies between “hemerai’”’ and “‘kairos,’”’*”’ or 
“chronos,’ “chronoi,” “time,” “‘times’’; 1 Jno. 11. 18 the 
phrase runs, as in the Gospel, “‘eschate hora,” with this dif- 
ference only that what figures in the saying of Jesus as a 
point of time (the point of the resurrection) becomes in the 
Epistle the last stretch of time. 

The characteristic feature of these New Testament ap- 


bee sy 


11Cp. Stark, “Der Gebrauch der Wendung Beacherith Hajjamim im 
alttestamentlichen Kanon, Z. f. A. W. 1891, pp. 247; Giesebrecht, 
Beitrige sur Jesajakritik, Anhang, pp. 187-220. 

12 The difference between “eschatai hemerai” and “kairos eschatos” 
can best be felt through 2 Tim. iii. 1, “in the last days grievous times 
(kairoi chalepoi) shall come”; the former is purely chronological, the 
latter carries the note of qualitatively complexioned and specifically ap- 
pointed seasons. This passage in 2 Tim. is the only case of technical use 
of “eschatai hemerai” with Paul. 


8 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


plications of the phrase consists in the idea accompanying 
them that the writers and readers are conscious of the last 
days being upon them, or at least close at-hand. Indeed, this 
has to such an extent become inseparable from the phrase, 
that no longer any particular pains are taken to separate by 
means of precision of statement present from future or semi- 
present from present. Herein lies a very marked difference 
from the Old Testament mode of representation. Sometimes 
belief in the imminence of final happenings and the per- 
vasive eschatological state of mind engendered by this, seem 
to lead to scrutiny of the contemporary state of things for 
possible symptoms of the approach of the end, 2 Tim. ii1. 1; 2 
Pet. iii. 3; Jud. 18. At other times the observation of the 
symptoms leads to the conclusion, or at least the strengthen- 
ing of the conclusion, that the last hour is there, 1 Jno. 11. 
18. Again at other times the thought has a thickly ominous 
coloring, Jas. v. 3. It also may appear in more theoretical 
form, though even then never wholly detached from the 
present practical situation, 1 Pet. i. 5, 20. An interesting ex- 
ample of combination of the two motifs appears in Heb. 1. 
2: “God has spoken in the last days in a Son” ; to this, which 
is so far a merely chronological construction of the history 
of revelation, the writer then as a sort of afterthought, by — 
means of the pronoun “these” loosely attached at the close, 
adds the reflection that these days are the present days of 
himself and his readers; were it not for the subsequent 
supervention of that thought, the sense would have nat- 
urally been expressed by “ep’ eschaton (plural) ton hem- 
ern.” By all this the phrase which previously hovered in the 
mist of more or less remote futurity, has obtained a fixed 
appurtenance to the present and closely impending future. It 
is due to the correct perception of this that in our English 
Bible the Old Testament and Septuagint phrases are rendered 
by “the latter days,’’ whereas the New Testament speaking 
of itself translates the identical phrases by “‘the last days.’’* 


13 Jn thus rendering from the Old Testament A.V., R.V. and A.R.V. 
agree with the two exceptions of Gen. xlix. 1 and Isa, ii. 2 (Mic. iv. 1). 


ITS STRUCTURE 9 


A feature which this extra-Pauline New Testament usage 


and that of the Greek Old Testament have in common is — 


what might be called the “non-comparative”’ character of 
both. There is no conscious reflection upon the qualitatively 
specific complexion of “early” or “earlier” days: the atten- 
tion is wholly fixed upon the future final segment of time, so 
as to make the contrast an almost entirely chronological one. 
In result of this the rendering by “latter days’ might easily 
create a misunderstanding, the comparative degree inviting 
the idea that two sorts of days, the earlier and the latter ones 
were, at least by implication, set over against each other. But 
this is not necessarily implied; yet neither is it allowable to 
draw the conclusion, that the static result of the crisis foreseen 
will again be made up of “days,” although that would suit the 
Old Testament perspective of a Messianic state in time quite 
well. The “eternal” as the negation of time is not envisaged 
here. What is envisaged is a point or stretch lying at the end 
of history; it forms part of what are called “days”; that 
thereafter there shall be no more days, but something of a 
different nature is not implied. The acherith, the eschaton 
have the stress, not the jamim or the hemerai. The phrase 
“last days’ does not as yet carry the implication, that the 
time-order is soon to be ended to make place for a non- 
diurnal state of existence. 

Now examining Paul with the technical phrases just dis- 
cussed in mind, it is immediately apparent that his termin- 
ology is differently oriented than that attaching itself to the 
eschaton-idea.** To be sure, Paul joins the adjective “eschatos”’ 


In these two passages A.V. has “the last days.” So far as Isaiah and 
Micah are concerned, this anticipation, as it were, of the New Testament 
usage may be due to the static character of what is located in the 
“acherith”; cp. above “the mountain of Jehovah’s house shall be (and 
remain) established”; as a permanent, non-transitory phenomenon this 
seemed better expressible by “last” than by “latter.”’ Num. xxiii. 10, 
where all three versions have “last end” is hardly an exception to the 
rule, for here the translators obviously found the death of the righteous 
person referred to; in xxiv. 14 where the point of view is nationally- 
collective, all three version have again “latter days.” 

14Tf anywhere, then the phrase “the last days” might have been ex- 


en 


IO THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


to a number of nouns and that with eschatological connota- 
tion. I Cor. iv. 9, the Apostles are represented as set forth 
eschatot to death, which certainly can not mean that they are 
the most recent examples of such a destination; it relates 
to their place in the final tribulation impending. 1 Cor. xv. 26, 
“last’’ (with reference to death): in the order of enemies to be 
abolished seems to be purely numerical, although, of course, 
the eschatological association could not be entirely kept out of 
the word. The latter is distinctly present in “the last trumpet,” 
vs. 52, for this does not refer to all the several trumpets 
blown in the course of the world’s history, but it either means 
the counterpart to the tremendous trumpet-blast that accom- 
panied the giving of the law, or it is named “‘last’’ because of a 
series of eschatological trumpets immediately preceding it, in 
which case there is no reflection upon ordinary, so to speak 
secular, trumpets.*® Most significant of all, however, is the 
designation of Christ as “the eschatos Adam,” vs. 45, where 
“‘last”’ is entirely steeped in eschatological meaning, for this 


~ “last Adam” is the fountain-head of the resurrection, vss. 22, 


39 66 


23, a “quickening Spirit,” “of heaven” and “heavenly,” vss. 
47-49, all this referring to the final celestial state and the 
conditions pertaining thereto, such as the peculiar kind of 
(bodily) image to be borne by believers after their resurrec- 
tion. In how far this use of “eschatos’” by Paul has its roots 
in the ancient idea of “‘the last days,’ can not here be 
determined. 

In distinction from the O.T. point of view the structure of. 
Paul’s eschatology appears antithetical. It places the end 


pected in the ‘“Man-of-Sin” prophecy, 2 Thess. ii; its absence from this 
piece seems significant. “The day of the Lord” is here the central con- 
ception; cp. also “in his own season” vs. 6. 

15 How thoroughly “eschatologized” the trumpet is appears from its 
occurrence without the term “last” 1 Thess. iv. 16, and the verb 1 Cor. 
Xv. 52; cp. Matt. xxiv. 31, “a great trumpet’; in Thess. “the trump of 
God”; in Rev. viii-xi. 15, the seven trumpets are numerically distin- 
guished, but, collectively speaking, they all belong to “the end.” Rev. 
xv. I and xxi, 9, the attribute eschatai belongs to the seven plagues be- 
cause “in them is finished the wrath of God.” 


ITS STRUCTURE II 


under the control of one principle with the sway of which an 
opposite principle of equally comprehensive rule and of pri- 
mordial origin is contrasted, so as to make the two, when taken 
together, yield a bisection of universal history. By giving the 
soteric movement this cosmical setting it claims for it the 
significance of a central world-process, around the core of 
which all happenings in the course of time group them- 
selves.*° By this one stroke order is brought into the dis- 
connected multitudinousness of events. The eschatology, 
without losing touch with history, nevertheless, owing to the 
large sweep of its historical reach, becomes philosophico- 
theological. It no longer forms one item in the sum-total of 
revealed teaching, but draws within its circle as correlated 
and eschatologically-complexioned parts practically all of the 
fundamental tenets of Pauline Christianity. Here this can 
only be briefly premised; it will have to be shown by de- 
tailed investigation at subsequent points. It will appear 
throughout that to unfold the Apostle’s eschatology means 
to set forth his theology as a whole. Through a conceptual 
retroversion the end will be seen to give birth to the beginning 
in the emergence of truth. What we are here concerned with 
more immediately is the specific terminology in which this 
mode of thought has come to express itself. In 1 Cor. xv. 
45-47, the presence of this antithetical orientation is clearly 
seen in the correspondence of the two names for Christ, “the 
eschatos Adam” and “the deuteros Man,” the opposite to 
the former no less than to the latter being “the protos Man.” 
“Eschatos” here bears technical meaning; it designates not 
so much the Adam that belongs to the order of the “eschata,” 
but pointedly the One who is the last in contrast with one 
other who is the first; it is antithetical no less than “deu- 
teros.” As backward of “the protos” there was no other, so 
beyond “the eschatos’’ there can be none further. Typologi- 


16 In the Epistle to the Hebrews there is a similar bisection of history 
with eschatological issue, but here this pertains to the sphere of re- 
demption; the first age is the Old Diatheke, the second the New Diatheke, 
cp. ii. 5; (oikoomene melloosa); vi. 5 (mellon aion) cp. “Hebrews, 
the Epistle of the Diatheke,” P.T.R., 1914, I915. 


ae 


IZ THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


cally the same principle finds expression Rom. v. 14: “who 
is a figure (type) of him that was to come.” 

More comprehensively the antithetical structure appears in 
the distinction between the two ages or worlds. The only pas- 
sage in Paul where this contrast is explicitly drawn is Eph. 
1. 21: “far above... every name that is named, not only 
in this world (or age), but also in that which is to come.” 
There are, however, quite a number of other passages where, 
although only “this age’ (6 aiwy odtos) appears the other 
member of the contrast is nevertheless present by implica- 
tion. Thus: Rom. xit.. 2351 Cor. 4) 2050115 G55 a 
2 Cor. iv. 4; Galii. 4; Eph, 1.2; 1°Tim. vist7; Pit 
Eph. i. 21 there is a special reason for naming both terms, be- 
cause the supremacy of the name of Christ above all other 
names was to be affirmed without restriction either as to time 
or sphere. The other passages deal with some feature or element 
within the pre-eschatological period, so that there was no need 
of naming the opposite. Still, apart from this, Paul might 
have in certain connections spoken of the “coming aeon” by 
itself, but the less formal, more expressive phrase “king- 
dom of God”’ was naturally preferred in such cases, just as 
we more easily speak of “heaven” or “eternity” than of “the 
future age”; cp. I Cor. vi. 9, 10; xv. 50; Gal. v.21; Eph.v.5; 
1 Thess. 11.12; 2 Thess. i. 5; 2 Tim. iv.18. The scarcity of ex- 
plicit reference to “the coming aeon” should not, therefore, be 
counted an instance against the familiarity of Paul with the 
correlated contrast nor against the importance of the part 
played by it in his eschatological scheme. There is no evi- 
dence that the term “aton” had per se an evil flavor, which 
would have rendered it unfit to the Apostle’s mind for asso- 
ciation with the perfect future life; Eph. i. 21 proves the 
contrary. And yet it cannot be denied that asa rule the phrases 
“this age,” “this world” were apt to call up evil associations. 
Such is plainly the case in I Cor. i. 20; ii. 6-8; in both these 
instances the evil implied or expressed has a peculiar noétic 
reference. Satan is in 2 Cor. iv. 4 called outright “the god 
of this aton.’”’ According to Gal. i. 4, Christ gave Himself 


ITS STRUCTURE Li 


for our sins that He might rescue us out of this present evil 
aion. 2 Tim. iv. 10, Demas is said to have forsaken Paul, 
because he loved this aion. The Apostle warns the readers, 
Rom. xii. 2, not to assume or bear “the schema’ of this aion, 
but to let themselves be transformed in the opposite direct- 
tion. The degradation of the concept of “‘aion” in these cases 
is probably a reflex of the evil meaning of “kosmos.” Other 
passages like 1 Tim. vi. 17; Tit. 11. 12 are more neutral from 
an ethical point of view.” 

There are two problems connected with this terminology, 
being to some extent interdependent. The first problem con- 
cerns the antiquity and origin of the contrast in general; the 
second concerns the relation of “aion’’ to “kosmos.”’ The 
Johannine writings do not employ “this aion” or “the coming 
aion” for the purpose of eschatological contrast. Wherever 
“aion’’ occurs in them either in the purely-temporal or*in the 
eternity-sense, the associations are thoroughly favorable; the 
pronoun “this” is not prefixed to it. The standing phrase is 
“eis ton aiona,” “until eternity.’”’ This receives sufficient ex- 
planation from the older Scriptural time-use of “‘olam”’ and 
the plural “‘olamim.” On the other hand, for the evil member 
of the antithesis the word “kosmos,” “ho kosmos hootos’’ 
finds characteristic employment with John.** Now this word 
“kosmos” with Paul also occasionally occurs synonymously 
with “ho aion hootos.” So we find it Rom. ili. 6; 1 Cor. 
eet 1. 12; 111. 19; xi. 32; 2 Cor: vii. 10; Phil. 11. 15. 
That the word “kosmos” had evil coloring, when used in 
ethico-religious connections appears most clearly from the 
fact of its never being transferred to the state to come; “ho 
kosmos ekeinos,” “that age,’ is neither Johannine nor 
Pauline. Jesus in his speech to the Jews shows conscious 
avoidance of it, Jno. viii. 23: “Ye are of this world; | am 
not of this world” instead of: “I am of that world.” This 


17 The wicked nature implied in the contrast to the other aion marks 
a further point of difference between the Pauline antithesis and that in 
Hebrews. 

18. Cp. Jno. xii. 31; xiv. 30; xvi. 11, “ho archon too kosmoo tootoo” ; 
ep. with “the god of this aeon,” 2 Cor. iv. 4. 


14 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


does not, of course, prevent either with John or Paul the 
ethically-neutral use of “world” as a comprehensive quanti- 
tative designation of the lower creation. For Paul, cp. Rom. 
1.83 Vv. 123'1 Gor. iv..9 (vil. 3L) 3 x1v. 10; Ephiis4 ; Cone 
1 Tim. v1.7; for John, cp.1..9,.10} 11. 195 vi. 14 jv 
ix; 5) xX. 365 Xii 273 Xi 13 XVI 215 XV 245 ee 
RASA UNO ao le AO sree] Te a 

The usage of both terms in Paul leaves the impression that 
the antithesis is not of the Apostle’s own coining. The evil 
aspect of “‘the present age’ he may have accentuated more 
than was done previously, but he certainly did not frame 
de novo either the phrase itself nor its close association with 
“ho kosmos.” In the Jewish writing 4 Ezr., scarcely a 
generation later than Paul, it is said “that God made two 
aions,’’ vii. 50; further, the present age and the future age are 
contrasted in a number of passages. The same appears in the 
Apocalypse of Baruch (of approximately the same period). 
Hillel speaks of “the life of the future aion.’”’ Jochanan ben 
- Zakkai (about 80 A.D.) states that God revealed to Abraham 
“this aion’ but not “the coming aion.’ To these may be 
joined, as a Jewish witness for the way of speaking, Eleazar 
from Modiim (somewhat later than Jochanan) who enumer- 
ates among the six good gifts bestowed upon Israel the com- 
ing aion and the new world. These Jewish authorities would 
certainly not have borrowed a phrase of this kind from Paul 
nor from the vocabulary of Christian eschatology in general. 
So that, even if earlier indubitable instances of occurrence 
could not be quoted, the ones just mentioned will suffice to 
prove the Pauline usage a derived one. Dalman, who is on 
the whole disinclined to carry the phrases farther back than 
is absolutely necessary, here also has critical suspicions, but 
is compelled to admit: “the existence of the phrases ‘this 
aion, ‘the future aion’ is at any rate established for the close 
of the first post-Christian century.’ 

Ascending backwards from Paul to the speech of Jesus in, 
the.Synoptical Gospels, we find the distinction between the two. 


18 Cp. Dalman, Die Worte Jesu, I, pp. 122, 123. 


ITS STRUCTURE I5 


‘ages both explicitly drawn and assumed by implication. The 
explicit contrast occurs Matt. xii. 32; Mk. x. 30; Lk. xx. 34 ff. 
Semi-explicit is Lk. xvi. 8, where as the contrast to “the 
children of this age (or world)” appears “the children of 
light.”’ Impliedly the antithesis seems to be present Matt. x1i1. 
22 (Mk. iv. 19) “the care (Mk. cares) of the age (or world)” 
and in Matt. xili. 39, 40, 49; xxiv. 3; xxviii. 20, “the end 
guvTéheta of the age (or world).2° Dalman concludes that 
from a comparison of these parallels the occurrence of the 
phrase in the speech of Jesus cannot with any degree of 
certainty be inferred, and that, moreover, even should Jesus 
have actually employed it, it must have been for his mode 
of speaking of no significance. The inference of later intru- 
sion of such a phrase from the mere fact of absence or 
variation in one or more parallel Gospel-texts seems pre- 
carious, because condensation no less than amplification on 
the writer’s part may possibly account for the facts. But, 
even if one, with Dalman, were to call in doubt the presence 
of the phrase in the eschatological vocabulary of Jesus, its 
employment by the Evangelists, or by the antecedent bearers 
of the Gospel-tradition, would none the less retain consider- 
able significance. For that the Evangelists or the tradition did 
not all borrow this phraseology from Paul seems certain. 
At their time of repeating or committing to writing, there- 
fore, the terminology must have lain, so to speak, in the air, 
and this time was not so very far removed from the time of 
Paul or even of Jesus. In regard to the coloring of the con- 
trast in the Gospel-passages we note that in certain instances 
it is chronological; so Matt. xii. 32: “it shall not be for- 
given him, neither in this aion, neither in that to come.” In 
Mk. x. 29, 30, “this aion” and “the aion to come”’ are the 
two time-instalments for restitution, the latter of which, to 
be sure, far surpasses the former. But in Lk. xx. 34ff., it is 
implied that the children of “this aion” are ethico-religiously 
inferior, because unworthy to obtain the other aion. From 


20 Besides here, the phrase “synteleia too aidnos” is found in Heb. ix. 
26 only. 


16 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


the point of view of inherent distinctiveness “‘the children of 
this aion in their generation” are in Lk. xvi. 8 set over 
against “‘the children of the light’; “light” here is certainly 
not a mere figurative characterization, but points to the 
element pervasive of the future aion (or world). “The care 
(cares) of this aion” in Matt. xiii. 22; Mk. iv. 19 seem to re- 
flect an unfavorable estimate of the influence and tendency 
of the aion (or world) with which some of the hearers of the 
gospel are preoccupied.”* On the other hand, the five passages 
in Matthew containing the phrase “sunteleia too aionos” ob- 
viously take aion in a strictly chronological sense without 
admixture of a depreciating judgment. 

Can this usage of the contrasting two ages (or worlds) be 
traced much farther back before the time of Jesus? In Sir. 
xvili. 10 the translated Syrian text distinguishes between 
“this aion” and “the aion of the pious,’ which yields both the 
formal opposition of the two and the different appraisal of 
each. But Dalman thinks that “in the day of the aion,” cor- 
responding to this in the Greek text, means no more than “in 
the life-time,’ and moreover considers the entire verse a later 
interpolation shedding no light upon the usage in the author’s 
own time (about 175 B.c.). The Apocalypse of Enoch like- 
wise speaks in Ixxi. 15 of “the future aion,” and in xlvili. 7 
of “the aion of unrighteousness,” but again these passages 
are regarded by Dalman subsequent additions to the text. The 
harvest thus gleaned from the pre-Christian sources is not 
plentiful; indeed after Dalman’s critical sifting it dwindles 


to practically nothing. We would thus seem to be forced 


down to the Jewish period about contemporary to Jesus and 
Paul for reliable attestation of the existence of the termin- 
ology, always keeping in mind that it must be somewhat 
older than this time in view of the easy way in which Paul 
handles it. | 
Before tracing the antiquity of “kosmos” as found with 
Paul, and in the Greek Gospels, partly as a comprehensive 


21 Some textual authorities read “too aionos tootoo” in this passage; 
cp. Dalman, p. 125. 


——_ 


mS en Be 


ITS STRUCTURE 17 


term for all that exists, partly as an evil-complexioned desig- 
nation of the system opposed to God, and therefore doomed 
to pass away, 1.e., more or less eschatologically colored, we 
shall have to put to ourselves the question what lies back of 
it in the Hebrew or the Aramaic vernacular. As is well 
known these languages originally possessed no word for 
“world,” but helped themselves, where the idea of “the all” 
was to be expressed by roundabout ways of speaking; e.g., 
Gen. 1. I says: “in the beginning God created the heaven and 
the earth.” In later times, through the contact with and influ- 
ence of other languages and modes of thought, it was found 
necessary to employ a single word for the concept of “the 
world.” The word that entered into this vacant place of 
speech was the word Ha-‘Olam. But this word was from its 
very etymology a time-designation; in being adopted for 
“world” it was put to an extraneous new use. And yet the 
choice of precisely this word for that particular use can not 
have been purely arbitrary; there must have been some rea- 
son in the time-meaning that invited the transition to the 


world-meaning. Probably the inducement lay in the consid-\ 


eration that the time-course of things unrolling itself suc- 


cessively up to an expected end could be comprehensively sur- | 
veyed so as to appear a coherent totality of specific char-|| 


acter: the age constituted, as it were, a world when regarded 
as to its complexion. It will be observed, however, that this 
could scarcely have happened, had not “the age” appeared as 
strictly terminating at the farther end. In other words belief 
in a fixed nature and a temporal duration of the present 
order of things is inherent in the word “ion,” where it 
inclines to pass over from the time- into the world-category.” 
From that point on an “age” and a “world” had become so 
closely cognate as to be well-nigh inseparable, both being 
expressible by the same word. In this chronological semi- 
qualitative condensation of the entire content of a temporal 
development from beginning to end seems to lie the seed out 


22Dalman, Die Worte Jesu, p. 134, thinks that no reflection upon the 


terminus ad quem was necessary to account for the new point of view: 


~~ 


18 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


of which the full-grown scheme of the two ages and the two 
worlds grew up. 

It is obvious that the twofold meaning of the one word 
olam”’ thus established was bound to produce a degree of 
uncertainty in the understanding and rendering of the word 
in not a few cases. And this uncertainty attached not only to 
the term in the Hebrew or Aramaic original; it likewise 
passed over to the Greek employment. The Greek had a sep- 
arate word for “world,” and therefore was quite able to dis- 
tinguish in each case. But this was not done in all instances. 
As ‘Olam “age” had received ‘Olam “world” for its twin- 


ccf 


' brother, so the Greek term aion for “age” was liable to 


be pressed into the same double service. Originally a pure 
time-concept, it now became an all-comprehensive space- 
concept as well. “Aion” may mean “age” in the New Testa- 
ment and it may mean “world.” In some cases the decision 
may be difficult, in other cases the sense “world” is from the 
context unmistakable. Matt. xiii. 22, “care of the aion”; Lk. 
xvi. 8, “the children of this aion” (as contrasted with “the 
children of the light”) are examples of the former; 2 Tim. iv. 
10, “having loved the present aion” and Heb. 1.2 and xi. 3 will 
illustrate the latter. The two last-named references from He- 
brews illustrate the inevitable grammatical incongruousness 
arising from carrying over “‘aion”’ “world” into the Greek. 
“Aion” in its time-sense stood in the Semitic idiom not sel- 
dom in the plural, naturally so, since there were many ages or 
sections of time, or because the concept was subject to plurali- 
zation for the sake of stressing endlessness or majesty. 
Where with “aion” in the sense of “world” this pluralization 
was retained, we find the mode of speech that God made the 
“atonas,’ “worlds.” 

The equivocalness of the word “Olam,” or its Aramaic 
equivalent, has something to do also with the difficulty of - 


the unsurveyableness of the course of things sufficed to suggest it. He 
admits, however, that “‘Olam” in such a case is distinguished from 
“world” by its temporal conception only; as to content, the two are 
equal. 


ITS STRUCTURE IQ 


ascertaining how old exactly the world-idea is in the religious 
‘sources, where it first with certainty emerges in them. In 
the Old Testament there is no assured instance; Daniel still 
says ‘‘the whole earth,” where to us the whole “world” would 
have seemed to be in place; obviously the writer did not have 
the latter at his disposal; cp. ii. 35, 39; iii. 31; iv. 8, 19. Sir. 
XXXvill. 4 is a doubtful instance; the Greek “ktisma aionos”’ 
would naturally suggest “creation of the world,” especially 
in view of the Syriac rendering with ‘“‘da-‘almah” for the 
second word. Still it is possible to maintain, as Dalman pre- 
fers doing, that “aionos’’ here goes back to the meaning of 
“eternity” for ‘‘‘Olam’’ which would yield “the eternal 
creation,” thus eliminating the idea of “world.” En. i-xxxvi 
contains several times the designation of God as “the God of 
the aion,” or “the King of the aiones,” “the Ruler of the 
aion.” Here again the first impulse would be to render “King 
of the world” or “‘God of the worlds.’ Dalman, however, ob- 
jects to this on the ground of the obvious dependence of such 
phrases on the O.T. “God of the age,” “Rock of the ages,” 
“King of the age,” “kingdom of all the ages,” Gen. xx1, 33; 
Deemer, 4) xl. 28; Jer: x. 10; Ps. cxlv. 13, all expressive 
of the eternity of God. To be sure, in none of these phrases 
does the article stand before the second word, whilst in the 
Greek combinations it is found regularly. The force of 
this, however, is somewhat lessened by the observation, that 
the article need not have been intended to render “aion”’ by 
itself determinate, but only for the determination of the com- 
pound name. Or again, the qualification “(ha-)‘olam’ might 
have meant no more than to describe God as God forever, 
“(ha-)‘olam” being used adverbially. But, while all this may 
be possible, it at the utmost allows bare possibility of 
not-yet-existence of the world-concept; for disproving its 
existence it is insufficient, and on the whole unconvincing.” 
In the Similitudes of Enoch several times “the creation of 
the world”’ occurs; here the idea of creation forbids to think 
of “age.” The passages are xlviii. 6, 7; lxix. 16, 17, 18; 


238 Die Worte Jesu, pp. 133-134. 


20 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


Ixxi. 15. Dalman regards them as later additions, without, 
however, giving his reasons except in the case of the first. 
Be this as it may, the mere suspicion thrown. upon them is 
bound to render them doubtful witnesses. In the Book of 
Visions (En. Ixxxiii-xc) occurs “God of the entire world,” 
Ixxxiv. 2; because it stands in “a very verbose doxology” 
belonging to the introduction of the Visions, Dalman speaks 
dubiously about this; he thinks it may be later than the other 
parts. Besides, of the Visions as a whole he remarks, that 
their date cannot be determined with certainty. And his con- 
clusion of the whole matter, to our mind somewhat rash, is 
that the use of the word ‘Olam for ‘“‘world” in the pre-Chris- 
tian period is subject to strong doubt.” 

The Synoptical passages containing ‘‘world” (kosmos) 
are the following: Matt. iv. 8; v. 14; xiii. 38; xvi. 26; (Mk. 
vill. 36; Lk. .ix.'25) $ xvill:. 7) xxiv 213 XXV. 3475 
50); xxv, 13; (Mk. xiv: 9); Mk. xvi. 157° cee 
Even these are attacked, so far as an underlying “Olam 
for kosmos is concerned. The reasons adduced do not carry 
weight. That the appropriateness of “kingdoms of the earth” 
in the temptation-narrative is as great as that of “kingdoms 
of the world” not many exegetes, coming to the phrase with- 
out particular linguistic preoccupation would affirm. Was 
Satan’s influence in its wide range, let us say at the time of 
the writing of this account, not more graphically depicted by 
“world” than by “aion’? Luke has for “kosmos” “oikoo- 
mene,” which admits of the same remark. Where Matthew, 
Mark and Luke agree in rendering their original with “gain- 
ing the whole world,” Matt. xvi. 26; Mk. viii. 36; Lk. ix. 25 
the argument from absence of kosmos in a parallel text 
is eliminated. Hence Dalman acknowledges that from the 
saying some plausibility may be obtained for the use of the 
Aramaic term “world,” but he thereupon straightway weak- 
ens the grudgingly granted concession by observing at the 
close “that the possibility exists to remove also this example 
of the use of ‘ ‘alam’ for ‘kosmos’ from the speech of Jesus, 


24 Die Worte Jesu, p. 135. 


ITS STRUCTURE 2I 


by either taking ‘ ‘alma’ in the sense of ‘Zeitlichkeit’ (time- 
expanse), or putting back of ‘the whole kosmos’ ‘all the 
earth’ (ar'a).” That in the combination “light of the kosmos” 
and “salt of the earth,” Matt. v. 14, the translator must have 
found two different words in his original, is self-evident. 
There is a presumption in favor of light having been asso- 
ciated with “world” and salt with “earth.” While as a matter 
of fact in both figures humanity is meant as that which is to 
be enlightened and to be salted, yet the diffusion of light as 
the more volatile element is more naturally joined to the idea 
of “world” and that of salt as a materially penetrating ele- 
ment joins itself most easily to “earth.’’ The “woe” that is 
proclaimed upon the kosmos, could not very well, without 
falling into extremely realistic apocalyptic, have been called 
down upon the earth. The phrases descriptive of the preach- 
ing of the gospel to the kosmos, Matt. xiii. 38; xxvi. 13; 
Mk. xiv. 9; xvi. 15 would allow equally well of the render- 
ing “to the (whole) earth,” and therefore do not help to a 
decision. Quite synonymously with these are used “in the 
whole oikoomene,”’ Matt. xxiv. 14, and “to all the ethne (na- 
tions),”’ Mk. xiii. 10; Matt. xxvili. 19; “to the whole ktisis”*® 
Lk. xvi. 15, cp. “ta ethne too kosmoo,” Lk. xii. 30; “from the 
foundation of the kosmos,” Matt. xxv. 34; Lk. xi. 50; “from 
the beginning of the kosmos,” Matt. xxiv. 41; “from the be- 
ginning of the ktisis,’” Mk. x. 6; xii. 19; these are certainly 
more natural expressions when understood of “the world” 
than of “the earth’’; the quotation in Matt. xiii. 35 from Ps. 
Ixxviii. 2 puts “foundation of the world” for the Sept. “from 
the beginning” which has no further specification as to the 
beginning of what is meant. Taking all the evidence together 
it seems hard to escape the conclusion, that the Aramaic origi- 
nal of the Evangelist was not unfamiliar with “Alma” as 
“world.” It would be highly precarious to assume that in all 
the instances quoted Jesus employed the word with a time- 


25 It ought to be remembered that “ktisis” can designate “the created 
yace of men”; Dalman, Die Worte Jesu, p. 144. 


22 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


meaning only, or did not speak the sayings in their present 
form at all.”° 

Before dismissing these Synoptical cases the question may 
be put, whether the kosmos-‘olam, if assumed to be present 
in them, carries with it any association of evil. Is “the world” 
in the parlance of Jesus a bad or a neutral name? The king- 
doms of the world offered by Satan are undoubtedly con- 
ceived as making up an evil world.*’ The kosmos upon which 
the “woe” is pronounced on account of the offenses bound to 
come in it, Matt. xviii. 7, is, at least in a potential sense, an 
object of condemnation, but to what extent this enters into 
the word “kosmos”’ itself is harder to determine.** the kos- 
mos that needs to derive its light from the disciples is a dark- 
ened world in a moral sense. The kosmos comparable to the 
field into which the seed is sown is likewise a sphere outside 
the pale of salvation. The nations of the kosmos seek after 
the things of this life in distinction from the disciples who 
seek after the kingdom of God, and the character of these 
nations which are thus described can scarcely avoid impress- 
ing itself upon the world they compose. Into the other cases 
no ethical or religious appraisal need enter.” 

About to return to Paul we may cast a look around in the 
earlier or contemporary Jewish (non-canonical) literature.*° 


26 To think of “‘Olam,” “‘Alam” as time-concepts exclusively is for- 
bidden by the nature of the reference, e.g., “foundation of the world,” 
where “foundation of the age” yields no sense. The choice lies among 
three things: “world,” “earth,” and the critical denial of the expressions 
to Jesus. 

27 Rey. xi. 15, “The kingdom of the world is become of our Lord and 
of his Christ,” furnishes a parallel, although “kingdom” is here in the 
singular and might mean “kingship.” 

28 The latter half of the verse individualizes the application “woe to 
that man,” showing the evil nature of the object affected. 

29 The above survey shows that the evil connotation of “ho kosmos,” 
so prominent in John, is not entirely absent from the Synoptics. It 
further indicates that Jesus’ use of the concept “world” contains the 
same elements as that of Paul; although the ethical coloring is neither 
so emphatic nor so systematic as with the Apostle. 

80 Hellenistic writings like 2 Macc., 4 Macc., Wisdom, need not be 
considered here; they use “kosmos” freely. What we are endeavoring to 
trace is the Semitic equivalent back of “kosmos.” 


ITS STRUCTURE 23 


The section Ixxii-lxxxii of the Book of Enoch (about 100 
B.c.) refers several times to the created “world,” Ixxi. 1; 
Ixxv. 3, 8; Ixxxi. I, 5, 7. In another division of the same 
book, xci-civ (about the same date), “the revelation of the 
judgment to the whole world’ is spoken of, xci. 14; the 
ideas of totality and of wickedness mingle here. The Assump- 
tio Mosis (preserved in Latin, about A.D. 50-100) speaks of 
the “orbis terrarum,” and also of “‘saeculum.’’** Both of these 
rest on the world-sense of the underlying original. The Apoca- 
lypse of Baruch (believed to contain sections of varying 
dates) has even in its older parts, not perhaps so very far re- 
moved from Paul, the Syriac term in the sense of “world” ; 
the Greek lying back of the Syriac must have read “kosmos,”’ 
liv. 1; lvi. 2, 3; Ixxiii. 1, 5. The Book of Jubilees (last cen- 
tury before Christ) speaks of the “generations of the saecu- 
lum,” and God is called “the God of the saeculum,” phrases 
in which the Latin “saeculum” plainly seems intended to ren- 
der the Greek “kosmos,” although the time-conception is not 
wholly excluded, x. 17; xxv. 23; also the possibility that 
“earth was meant in the original may have to be reck- 
oned with. Finally, 4 Ezra (Apoc. of Ezra), in the main 
dating at the latest from the close of the First or the begin- 
ing of the Second Century A.p., makes frequent mention of 
“the created saeculum” (in the Syriac text “ ‘alma’’), and 
while in some instances “aion”’ may be the word presupposed 


81 {n Christian Latin the noun “saeculum” signifies both “age” (from 
sequi “to follow”) and “world,” the latter with a sub-flavor of inferior- 
ity from the other-worldly point of view. Hence “secular,” from “saecu- 
laris,” “pertaining to the world.” The saeculum is the transitory in its 
nature—no less than in its time-aspect. This way of speaking is not in- 
digenously Latin; it seems to have been imported into the language from 
the Jewish or the Christian vocabulary. The phrase “in saecula saecu- 
lorum” of the liturgy means, quite after the Scriptural (both Hebrew and 
Greek) pattern “unto endless ages.” It acquires a strange sound only 
when for the version into English “world” is used: “world without end.” 
This seems at first to imply a confusion between the two meanings of 
“saeculum,” choosing “world” where “age” was indicated. But we are 
told by lexicographers, that in old English likewise the word “world” 
already had a time-meaning. Owing to this, “world without end” may not 
have sounded so strange to the first users as it does to us now. 


24 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


in the original Greek, even this would not bar out the sense 
of “world,” as Heb. i. 2; x1. 3 prove. The reason why Dal- 
man thinks that “aion’”’ must have stood everywhere in the 
Greek is not plain.” 

The later Jewish literature has no further bearing on the 
situation in the words of Jesus or the writings of Paul. After 
having looked around in the environment, nearer or more re- 
mote, of our Lord and his Apostle, we now proceed to take 
up certain points yet undetermined and on which perhaps the 
enquiry just concluded may cast some light. The question 
naturally arises, whether, if.in the surrounding literature 
(Jewish or Christian) “aion’ was made to render double 
service for “age’ and “world,” traces of the latter are dis- 
coverable with Paul. For Rom. xii. 2; 1 Cor. ii. 6, 8; iii. 18; 
2 Cor. iv. 4; Gal. i. 4; 1 Tim. vi. 17 the possibility of this 
must be admitted; on the other hand where not “‘this aion,”’ 
but the present age (“‘ho nun aion’’) appears, the strict time- 
reference has more plausibility. With “kosmos” this “nun” 
is not found, whilst “hootos” is, 1 Cor. iii. 19. That Paul, 
though closely associating “this age’ and “this world,” yet 

‘~~~ did not quite promiscuously employ them follows from their 
joint-occurrence in Eph. ii. 2; “wherein ye once walked ac- 
cording to the aion of this kosmos”’; here the supposition is 
that to the kosmos (conceived as evil) an evil time- or life-_ 
complexion belongs, the one affecting the other and being in- 
separable from the other, but none the less conceptually and 
linguistically distinguishable the one from the other. On the 
whole we shall have to say that the world-scheme follows the 
time-scheme, not the reverse; this is not without theological 
importance for the interpretation of the Apostle’s idea of the 
kosmos as evil.** 


82 Die Worte. Jesu, p. 140. 

83 It may be of some interest to note the attitude of the Versions 
of the English Bible towards the more or less equivocal “aion.” A.V. has 
rendered “aion” everywhere by “world,” except in Eph. ii. 2, where “‘aion” 
and “kosmos” occur together in the phrase “aion too kosmoo,” and con- 
sequently the former required some other term for which “course” was 
chosen; this would not badly render “aion” in its temporal sense, but 


ITS STRUCTURE 25 


We have already seen that the distinction between “this | \ 
age’ and “the age to come” lies in the line of successiveness.  — 
Where, and as soon as, the one ceases, the other begins, or at 
least is at the point of beginning. Even pre-millennarians can 
have no objection to this statement, inasmuch as under their 
scheme the millennium could in part be identified with the 
age to come as the beginning thereof. The very name “coming 
aion’”’ is not merely expressive of futurity, but also carries 
within itself the element of direct successiveness. Were this 
otherwise, then the entire closely-knit scheme intended to com- 
prehend all happenings in the universe from beginning to 
end would fall into pieces, because of the lacking link in the 


“course” inevitably awakens the erroneous impression as though “man- 
ner of conduct” were intended, which is not quite so large a concept as 
Paul wished to express. In Matt. xiii. 22 (Mk, iv. 19) “the cares of this 
world” A.V. has added the pronoun “this” which is not in the original; 
the adverb “nun” in 1 Tim. vi. 17 and 2 Tim. iv. Io, Tit. ii. 12, has not 
prevented the rendering “world”; nor has the pointed contrast between 
“this aion” and “the aion to come,” in Matt. xii. 33, induced abandon- 
ment of “world”; in “synteleia too aionos,” “world” is likewise retained ; 
in Heb, ix. 26, the plural “aiones” did not prevent the rendering “world” 
(singular), which to be sure was warranted in view of 1. 2 and xi. 3, 
where, however, the plural “worlds” is given; the case of ix. 26 and that 
of the two other passages is not alike, because in the latter the idea of 
“making” the “aiones” enters, which positively demands “world”; in the 
other passage (ix. 26) the matter is doubtful; R.V. has “ages” in the 
second half of the verse; this procedure of A.V. has the merit of uni- 
formity; in some cases it is undoubtedly correct, in others certainly 
incorrect; the worst is that it covers up a problem to the reader who 
is unfamiliar with the original. R.V. and A.R.V., so far as the text- 
reading is concerned, have, in, the main, conformed themselves to A.V., 
but by the marginal reading “age” in nearly all cases remind of the 
problem which linguistic investigation in modern times has more clearly 
brought to light. Still, they might have shown less conservatism in the 
matter; it would have been perfectly safe to place “age” in the text in 
more than one instance, where it now must put up with a place in the 
margin, e.g., Matt. xii. 32; Mk. x. 30; Eph. i. 21. Eph. ii. 2, on the other 
hand, “course of this age” would be scarcely an improvement on “course 
of this world’; here the marginal suggestion of “age” would have better 
been omitted. On the whole the Revisions are better guides, not so much 
because in their text-rendering they are more correct, but because in 
their margin they reflect the uncertainty of interpretation, which also 
may be an interpreter’s legitimate function. 


26 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


middle. To say that a sin will not be forgiven either in this 
age or in the age to come could never have served as a formula 
for absolute unforgivableness ad infinitum, -Matt. xii. 32, if 
there were conceivable a gap between the two aions. “The 
rulers of this age” are in process of being brought to nought 
(present participle), 1 Cor. ii. 6, which implies that after 
their conquest the aion in which they have ruled ceases. 
We should also remember that Paul, no less than our Lord, 
inherited this distinction from Jewish theology or Apocalyp- 
tic, where it undoubtedly had the meaning of successiveness. 
Even, were one to deny its pre-Pauline currency in Judaism, 
the successiveness plainly belonging to it soon afterwards 
would be decisive on this point. The close association be- 
tween aion and kosmos compels the same conclusion, for of 
the kosmos it is said, 1 Cor. vii. 31 that its schema passes 
away : it passes away to make room for another schema. “The 
ends of the aions” have come upon believers, 1 Cor. x. 11. As 
will be afterwards shown the “pleroma too chronoo,” “the 
fulness of time’ has nothing to do in the first place with the 
idea of “ripeness of the times’’; it designates the arrival of 
the present dispensation of time at its predetermined goal of 
fulfilment through the appearance of the Messiah, Gal. iv. 4; 
cp. Eph. i. 10. Thus understood it signifies the immediate 
transition from chronos to something else. 

This straight horizontal way of looking at the eschatolog- 
ical progress was not with Paul a purely-formal thing. There 
belong to it a grandiose sweep and impressive inclusiveness 
with regard to the whole of history. When filled with the con- 
tent of the latter it acquires the character of the most intense 
_ dramatic realism. It is drama, and, besides that, drama has- 
tening on with accelerated movement to the point of dénoue- 
ment and consummation. Hence it engages the Apostle’s most 
practical religious interest no less than that it moulds his 
theoretical view concerning the structure of the Christian 
faith. Some writers have held, to be sure, that nothing but 
purely-Jewish, or at best primitive-Christian, eschatology 


ITS STRUCTURE 27 


is with slight modifications reproduced in this teaching.** 
Even if this were correct, it would not necessarily prove the 
otioseness or perfunctoriness of such. an inheritance of 
thought and life. Jewish religion was not entirely barren 
of genuine enthusiasm. Especially in its Apocalyptic phase it 
reveals a heartfelt interest in the final issues to come, such 
as went far beyond pessimistic other-worldliness or morbid 
curiosity inciting to speculation.*® And, what is more than 
this, Paul’s relation to these matters could never be as distant 
and at bottom speculative as was that of Judaism.** For to 


84 Cp. Pfleiderer, Paulinism, I, 259; Brickner, Entstehung der Paul- 
inischen Christologie, pp. 173 ff.; Johannes Hoffmann, Das Abendmahl 
im Urchristenthum, p. 139; Deissmann, Th.L.Z., 1898, Sp. 14. 

85 Baldensperger, Das Selbstbewusstsein Jesu im Lichte der Messia- 
nischen Hoffnungen seiner Zeit, 3d ed. 1903, credits Apocalyptic with a 
considerable influence towards that transcendentalizing and spiritualizing 
of religion which in his opinion found its supreme expression in Chris- 
tianity. 

36 This may be the proper place to add a few remarks about the rela- 
tion of the Pauline to the Jewish eschatology. That the formal contrast 
between the present age and the coming age was derived by Paul (or by 
Jesus) from that source has already been shown. Nor is this contrast 
purely formal, for it implies a relative depreciation of the ethico-religious 
quality of the present age. But there are not a few other points of 
agreement between the Pauline and the Jewish teaching, although these 
relate rather to details than to comprehensive issues. We mention the 
following without laying claim to completeness of statement. The dyios, 
saints or angels, will accompany the Messiah at his coming, En. i. 9; 
4 Ezr. vii. 28; xiii. 52; xiv. 9. There will be the sound of a trumpet to 
wake the dead, Orac. Sib. iv. 173; 4 Ezr. vi. 23. Both God and the 
Messiah bring about the resurrection, Apoc. Bar. ixxxv. 15; Psa. Sol. 
xi. 96. A distinction is drawn between the dead to be raised and the 
gathering to the Messiah of those found alive at His appearance, Apoc. 
Bar. xiv. 2; 4 Ezr. vii. 28. A change will take place both in the raised 
and in the living, En. cviii. 11; 4 Macc. iv. 22, although the exact point 
in time of the change is not fixed with uniformity (on which cp. later) ; 
the impossibility of having part in the future world without such a 
change is recognized; the conception of being “absent” from the body 
in death appears, Test. Abr. lxxxiv. 21; xcv. 23; the representations that 
God will be the Judge, that the Messiah will be, that the saints will judge 
the world, are found En. c. 4; 4 Ezr. xii. 32; Sap. Sol. iii. 8. Fire is 
named as the means of testing man’s work, Apoc. Bar. xlili. 39. Of 
course, the Jewish eschatology has its basis in the Old Testament. This, 
however, can not wholly account for the agreement between it and Paul 


28 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


Paul the chief actor in this drama had come upon the scene; 
the Messiah had been made present, and could not but be 
looked upon as henceforth the dominating-figure in all fur- 
ther developments. And Christ was to Paul so close, so all- 
comprehensive and all-pervasive, that nothing could remain 
peripheral wherein He occupied the central place. We hope 
presently to show that, as a matter of fact, not only the 


as to data going beyond the O.T. There is no escape from the conclusion 
that a piece of Jewish theology has been here by Revelation incorporated 
into the Apostle’s teaching. Paul had none less than Jesus Himself as a 
predecessor in this. The main structure of the Jewish Apocalyptic is 
embodied in our Lord’s teaching as well as in Paul’s. And further, 
1 Thess. iv. 15 shows that in an important point of his eschatological 
program Paul was directly dependent on a word from the Lord. Cp. also 
the figure of the Lord’s coming as a thief in the night, 1 Thess. v. 2, 
which seems to have no parallel in Jewish literature, Matt. xxiv. 43. The 
exhortation to be watchful, 1 Thess. v. 6 ff.; 1 Cor. xvi. 13; Eph. vi. 18, 
may well be a reminiscence of similar words by Jesus. The term “epi- 
synagoge” “our gathering together,” 2 Thess. ii. 1 is perhaps reminiscent 
of Matt. xxiv. 31, érurvvagovor “they shall gather together.” The pro- 
phecy of great sufferings and persecution as preceding the end may have 
been derived, at least in some of its details from Matt. xxiv. 19 ff., cp. 
1 Thess. iii. 4; 1 Cor. vii. 26, 28. The thought that the saints shall judge 
the world offers a partial analogy to the promise of Jesus about the 
Apostles’ judging the tribes of Israel. The doctrine concerning the 
change in the body finds a point of contact in our Lord’s argument with 
the Sadducees. 

On the whole, however, it should not be overlooked that the Pauline 
eschatology differs from the Jewish Apocalypses in certain fundamental 
characteristics. For one thing it is non-political. As will afterwards be 
shown, there is no place in the Apostle’s scheme for an earthly, provi- 
sional kingdom of the Messiah. Paul’s polemic against heathenism is of a 
strictly religious nature, Rom. xiii. 1 ff. The great powers to be destroyed 
are “Sin” and “Death”; the victory to be won over them proceeds from 
“Grace” and “Life,” Rom. v. 17, 21; I Cor. iv. 8. The Pauline Eschatology 
(though by no means preponderatingly so) is yet more individualistic 
than the Jewish. It is also much more restrained and sober, less luxuriant 
than the latter in which the over-heated phantasy plays no small part. With 
Paul the specifically-religious interest rules supreme. In such matters the 
imagination always tends to multiply and elaborate; the religious inter- 
est tends in precisely the opposite direction: it simplifies and concen- 
trates. Hence the phenomenon, that the Jewish eschatology offers a 
multitude of unharmonized, and even unharmonizable, details, whilst 
with Paul we find a comparatively simple and consistent scheme; cp. 
Wernle, Die Anfange unserer Religion, p. 173. 


ITS STRUCTURE 29 


Christology but also the Soteriology of the Apostle’s teach- 
ing is so closely interwoven with the Eschatology, that, 
were the question put, which of the strands is more central, 
which more peripheral, the eschatology would have as good 
a claim to the central place as the others. In reality, however, 
there is no alternative here; there is backward and forward 
movement in the order of thought in both directions. 

That the Apostle’s religious mentality was of a forward- 
looking character appears first of all from the role played in 
his Epistles by the conception of “hope.” The role would un- 
doubtedly have been more prominent still, had it not been for 
the necessity of stressing the idea of faith on account of its 
controversial importance. In hope the believer must abound 
through the Holy Spirit, Rom. xv. 13. Together with faith 
and love it enters into the triad of abiding things, 1 Cor. 
xiii. 13.°’ The proximate fruit of the ripening Christian 
experience consists in such hope as does not put to shame, 
inasmuch as the foretaste of the life to come is shed abroad 
in the believer’s heart through the preliminary gift of the 
Holy Spirit, Rom. v. 4. The Christian 71s saved “upon the 
basis of hope” (ep’ elpidi), for hope and the things upon 
which it terminates constitute the supreme goal of salvation, 


87 That “now” in “now abideth” can not be restricted to the temporal 
state is clear from the contrast between the provisional and temporary 
charismata and the abiding three graces. That love, the greatest of the 
three, remains in the final state is easy to understand. With regard to 
faith the matter is more difficult, because Paul elsewhere (2 Cor. v.7) puts 
the present walk in faith (or: through the region of faith) over against 
the future walk through or in sight (or: through the region of sight) ; 
cp. also vs. 12 in the same context. The presupposition might be that, 
side by side with the promises fulfilled, and as such requiring no further 
functioning of faith, there will always be elements in the apprehension 
and possession of God which must remain inaccessible to the creature 
except through faith. God, as God, by his own Being, under all circum- 
stances, must to a large extent remain apprehensible by faith alone. But 
it is different with regard to hope. Hope ordinarily has its very terminus 
and object in the final state as such, and would accordingly with the 
arrival of the latter seem to supersede itself. Hence the word becomes 
suggestive of still ulterior vistas of realization within the final state. Nor 
is it sufficient to say that the abiding, assured retention of the attained 
things appears as an object of ceaseless hoping; this would introduce a 


30 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


Rom. viii. 24. The pre-Christian pagan state is characterized 
by the absence of God and of hope, and these two are not 
meant as two simply-codrdinated items of religious destitu- 
tion; the second arises from the first and the implication is 
that foremost among the benefits of religion (that is of 
“having God’’) is to have hope, Eph. 11. 12; 1 Thess. iv. 13. 
God is called the God of hope, Rom. xv. 13. Hence the double 
theme of the Apostle’s missionary preaching to the Thessa- 
lonians is to turn “unto God from idols, to serve a living and 
true God, and to wait for his Son from heaven, who delivers 
from the wrath to come,” 1 Thess. 1. 9, 10. Hope is one of 
the great telic categories of the divine vocation, Eph. 1. 18; 
iv. 4. In the Christian armor it constitutes the helmet, as 
connected with salvation, 1 Thess. v. 8. Still in the Pastoral 
Epistles it occurs as “the blessed hope and appearing of our 
great’ God and Saviour: Jesus. Christ,” Tit. 11. 1 3)eaoeme 
“the hope of eternal life,’ Tit. iii. 7. In Gal. v. 5 Christians 
“through the Spirit by faith wait for the hope of righteous- 
ness” (that is for the realization of the hoped for things per- 
taining to the state of righteousness conferred in justifica- 
tion). 

A mere survey of the above references places in very 
clear light the vividness and vitality pertaining to hope and 
the complex of future realities it calls up and keeps present 
to the Christian mind. So far from resembling a quiescent, 
non-productive capital, merely carried pro forma on the ledger 
of consciousness, it contains energy and actual no less than 
potential force. The etymological coloring of such words as 
“apokaradokia’ and “apekdechesthar’ in itself bears witness 
to the eager state of mind depicted, Rom. viii. 19, 23, 25; 
I Cor. 1.7; Gal. v. 5; Phil. 1. 20; 111. 20; cp. also the duplica- 
tion by synonymy in Phil.i.20.°° The quiet, but none the less 


discordant note into the Pauline idea of consunamation, and be moreover 
in direct contradiction to the statement of Rom. viii. 24: “Who hopes 
for that which he sees?” Cp. Bachmann in Zahn’s Kom. z. N.T., Vol. 
VII, p. 405. The same triad of faith, love and hope occurs also 1 Thess. 
i. 3, where hope occupies the third place, and 1 Thess. v. 8, with the same 
sequence. 


ITS STRUCTURE 31 


intense, energy of hoping appears most strikingly in this that 
it is equal to transforming the natural protest against pain 
and tribulation into that submission of patience which the 
word “hypomone” expresses.** The suffusion of the hoping 
state of mind with profound feeling and the strong concen- 
tration of interest upon it as a life-concern are well illustrated 
by 1 Cor. xv. 19, a statement which needs some paraphras- 
ing in order to bring out its full force and exact meaning. It 
might be paraphrased approximately as follows: If we have 
turned out to be no more than Christ-hopers and staked on 
that our whole present life, then we are of all men most 
pitiable. In this one sentence the Apostle has woven two 
thoughts together at some expense of syntactical perspicuity. 
The one thought is that hope without corresponding reality, 
or at least a principle of realization, is the most futile and 
ill-fated frustration of life-purpose; the other is that when 
this futile hope so engrosses a man as to monopolize him for 
an unreal world such a state of mind involves the forfeit of all 
palpable realities of life, a sacrifice at bottom of all this- 
worldliness for an other-worldliness that has no substance.* 


88 Cp. Hodge, Comm. on Rom. p. 423 (ad Rom. viii. 19) : “The earnest 
expectation, dmoxapadoxia from kxapadoxelv, erecto capite prospicere, to 
look forward with the head erect. The dz is intensive ; so that droxapadokia 
is earnest or persistent expectation.” The same idea is in the other word, 
although here the figures of the erect head and the stretching forward 
are not explicitly present. 

39 “Hypomone’ literally signifies “staying under” as the opposite of 
“withdrawing from underneath” some burden or hardship. This meta- 
phorical, and in particular N.T. spiritualized, meaning is not to be con- 
founded with the Stoic “apathy,” for the latter is an artificial indifference 
forced by the will, whilst the Christian patience is an inward submission 
inspired by other positive gains and satisfactions in view. Hence “hope” 
and “patience” in the Christian sequence of thought naturally go to- 
gether. Cp. Rom. v. 3, 4; vili. 25; xv. 4; 1 Thess. i. 3. 

40 The “monon” at the end of the hypothetical clause is intended to 
apply equally much to the words “in this life (only)” as to the phrase 
“having had hope (only).” The text which places 7Amikores éopev after 
év xpirr@ and directly before povov brings this out better than the ordi- 
nary sequence: #Amikdtes év Xpror@ povov. The force of the periphrastic 
perfect, “have been hopers,” will be noted; it describes such as have ac- 
quired hope and continued to live on that basis ever since; this looks 
backward to “in this life”; it suggests the idea of a whole life thrown 
away on mere hope. 


32 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


The pagan, who lives without God and without hope in the 
world, has at least the enjoyment of the earthly and transi- 
tory; the Christian whose hope puts him to shame has not 
even this: he has lost what he had and received nothing in 
return, cp. vs. 32. It is significant also in the present con- 
nection that Paul makes hope the source of that peculiar 
exaltation which he calls “kauchasthai.” If the distinction 
between the so-called ‘‘enthusiastic’ and the more stabilized 
elements in the Christian religiousness must needs be 
drawn, it will be necessary, on account of this association 
with kauchasthai to recognize in the experience of hoping a~ 
genuinely enthusiastic element; cp. for this combination Rom. 
v. 2, 3; 1 Thess. ii. 19.44 Whatever relative appraisal Paul 
might put upon the two categories named, the fact stated 
makes it at any rate certain, if further assurance were re- 
quired, that the believer’s hope is a most potent ferment and 
stimulant in the religious consciousness of the early Chris- 
tian, and not the least in the Pauline churches. After all, 
what is most convincing in this respect is the indubitable ex- 
pectation of the nearness of the parousia which pervaded the 
Christian mind, and can, both as an expectation and a wish, 
be traced in the consciousness of the Apostle himself. It is a 
pity that through the chronological problem in its bearing 
upon the infallibleness of the teaching, the far more important 
aspect of the fact as exponential of Paul’s attitude towards 
the futurity-side of Christianity has been too little consid- 
ered. A mere chronological datum the feature certainly is not. 
It would not be out of the way to suggest that the chronolog- 
ical element has been just as much affected by the eagerness of 


41 It is true kauchasthai is not descriptive of Christian states of mind 
exclusively. Paul reminds the Jew that it is his habit to practise this 
feeling with reference to God and the law, Rom. ii. 17, 20. With apparent 
allusion to the former he predicates the act of believers as exercised in 
God through Jesus Christ, Rom. v. 11; Phil. iti. 3. In the majority of 
cases it is used in a depreciating sense either of Jews or Christians, there- 
fore negatively and often metaphorically; cp. 1 Cor. i. 29, 313 iii. 21; 
iv. 7; 2 Cor. v. 12; but cp.also 2) Cor. x. 15-17; x. 16, and (herpacus 
doxical vs. 30; xii. 9. 


ITS STRUCTURE 33 


the intent upon eschatological consummation as the reverse. It 
is a not uncommon phenomenon till the present day that the 
acuteness or over-acuteness of the eschatological sensorium, 
brings with itself an inevitable foreshortening of the vista 
in time. To look contemptuously at the latter can never serve 
as an excuse for the practical neglect of the true principle of 
Christian hope as such. 

In still another way the predominance of the eschatological 
note evinces itself through the disparaging judgment passed 
upon the present age or world. This is by no means to be 
interpreted as a reflex effect of the eschatological state of 
mind, as though preoccupation with the future had produced 
first indifference to and next dissatisfaction with or con- 
demnation of the existing state of things. The attitude to- 
wards the world has its own reason, altogether apart from 
eschatological interest, although the latter may be nourished 
by the former. In this point eschatology is not so much the 
active as the passive factor. Nevertheless the intense revul- 
sion from the world and the age, such as they are, affords con- 
vincing proof that without a secure anchorage in the world 
beyond the spiritual poise which the Apostle everywhere 
maintains would have been impossible. It has become cus- 
‘tomary to speak of “‘pessimism” in this connection. The term 
is badly chosen, not because it is too strong in degree, but be- 
cause in philosophical nomenclature it denotes the assumption 
of an absolute, irremediable, metaphysically grounded de- 
spair of things. Such a belief was a priori impossible to Paul; 
in fact it forms a contradiction in terms with the concept of 
eschatology itself. As to the outcome of the eschatological 
process nothing but unqualified optimism could have existed 
in the Apostle’s mind, not to speak now of the optimistic, be- 
cause soteric, implications of the substance of his teaching 
as a whole. The idea of the creation of the world by God 
already is incompatible with even that qualified pessimism 
which is symptomatic of Gnostic speculation. Absolute pessi- 
mism would have had to attach itself within the scheme of 
Paul’s thinking to the conception of the eap&, and there is no 


34 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


evidence whatever either of the primordial origin of the odpt 
in creation or Gf its lasting persistence in the end. On the 
contrary, wherever Paul speaks of the two stages of existence 
he avoids the mention of the cdpé. The real source of this 
so-called pessimism lies in the Apostle’s acute and pervasive 
sense of sin. It is the burdensomeness and depressive power 
of sin that impels irresistibly towards the thought of hope 
with regard to the eschatological deliverance.** Nor should it 


42 Cp. 1 Cor. xv. 45-40, the one passage in which Paul goes back of the 
fact of sin to find the determining basis for the relatively inferior state 
of man, as compared with his eschatological destiny, in the mode of his 
creation. But the technical term for this is not here “sarkikos,” it is 
“psychikos”; the idea of sin does not enter. ) 

43 A parallel to this intensification of the eschatological hope through 
the acute sense of sin and evil is furnished among the Apocalyptic writ- 
ings by 4 Ezra and Apoc. Baruch, both written not too far apart 
from the date of Paul. In both there is a depreciating judgment on the 
present state of the world. True, there appears between these two writ- 
ings a difference in the severity of judgment expressed. 4 Ezra is more 
sweeping in his view than the writer of Baruch. This appears in the ex- 
planation of the origin of sin. In the former Apocalypse the nexus 
between Adam’s sin and that of humanity as a whole is much more 
direct: with Adam wascreated a principle of evil, the so-called “yezer-ra,” 
and it was by yielding to this that the “cor malignum” was developed ; 
hence Adam is the cause of spiritual death as well as of physical death 
in mankind, because all were made to share in this evil propensity. The 
scheme of justification through the law proved, and could not but prove, 
a total failure. All this, except the idea of concreated evil propensity, 
reminds of Paul. As a matter of fact the opinion is held that 4 Ezra stood 
under Christian, specifically Pauline, influence. Box (The Ezra-Apoca- 
lypse, Introd. p. 1xxi) reaches this conclusion all the more easily, be- 
cause he inclines to the opinion that Paul likewise in some way asso- 
ciated the first beginnings of evil with creation, on which more below. 
On the other hand, Bar. keeps in line with the Jewish-Rabbinical the- 
ology; every man is his own Adam; there are at least a few who have 
kept the law and been justified thereby. But notwithstanding these differ- 
ences as to the genesis of evil, the fact remains that the outlook upon the 
present world is a highly unfavorable one, in Bar. no less than in 
4 Ezra. The recognition of physical death alone as inseparable from this 
world was sufficient to effect this. To the righteous also, according to 
Bar. xv. 8, “this world is a trouble and a weariness with much labor”; it 
sounds like an echo of Paul’s statement of 1 Cor. xv. 19, when Baruch 
declares: “For if there were this life only, which here belongs to all 
men, nothing could be more bitter than it.” If this be not pessimism (in 
the specific sense of the word) it certainly is a most pessimistic kind 


ITS STRUCTURE 35 


be overlooked that the drift towards the future was promoted 
by what the Apostle, and for that matter the nascent Church 
as a whole, were given to taste of the hostility of the world 
in its bitterest form of persecution. Rom. viii. 35-39; 1 Cor. 
Xv. 19-34; 2 Cor. iv. 7-v. 10 clearly illustrate the force of this 
motive. Such passages are precisely the center of the great 
contexts in which, taking its departure from the fact of sin, 


of optimism, Bar. xxi. 13. It remains true, however, that this sentiment 
of hopeless involvement in evil is stronger in the other Apocalypse. It is 
stressed that few are saved, ix. 159; there is none not a sinner, viii. 35; 
this-age is full of sorrow and impotence, iv. 27; the ways of this world 
have become narrow and sorrowful and painful, vii. 12. Box truly says 
that the theology of such statements “is essentially other-worldly.” The 
point, however, here most interesting us is the obvious connection be- 
tween this despairing world-outlook and the liveliness of the eschato- 
logical hope, for it is in this respect that the two Apocalypses come near- 
est to the Pauline representation. We find in them likewise the eschatology 
_ per contrarium, that of the spring forcibly held down, but on that very 
account evincing a high degree of resiliency. Where the hope of renova- 
tion of the present world is given up, there precisely the gaze is fixed 
with intensity on the future world: “corruption is passed away, weariness 
is abolished, infidelity is cut off, while righteousness is grown, and faith- 
fulness is sprung up,” 4 Ezra vii. 114. In the future age (which is already 
prepared) “the evil root is sealed up from you, infirmity from your 
path extinguished; and Death is hidden, Hades fled away; corruption 
become forgotten, sorrow passed away; and in the end the treasures of 
immortality are made manifest, viii. 53, 54. Even the note of eager hope 
for imminence of the future in view of the intolerable situation of the 
present is not wanting: ‘““The underworld and the chambers of souls are 
like the womb; for just as she who is in travail makes haste to escape 
the anguish of the travail, even so do these places hasten to deliver what 
has been entrusted to them from the beginning,” iv. 41, 42. And: “If I 
have found favor in thy sight, and if it be possible, and if I be sufficieat, 
show me this also: whether there be more to come than is past, or 
whether the more part is already gone by us,” vss. 44, 45. Still at this 
point, speaking even without regard to revelation, the Apocalypses were 
bound to fall short of Paul and the New Testament in general; to the 
latter the appearance and eschatologizing of the post-resurrection state 
of the Messiah changes all this anxious, half-querulous questioning into 
an enthusiastic hope. Cp. for the Jewish teaching in the documents named: 
Baldensperger, Das Selbstbewusstsein Jesu im Lichte der Messianischen 
Hoffnungen seiner Zeit, 3d ed.; Charles, The Apocalypse of Baruch, 
1896; Box, The Ezra-Apocalypse, 1912; Charles, A Critical History of 
the Doctrine of a Future Life, 2d ed. 1913; Oesterley, The Books of the 
Apocrypha, 1914. 


+ Ra 


36 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


the discourse rises through the consciousness of redemption 
to the highest summits of eschatological eloquence. 


--— Thus far we have considered the structure of the Apostle’s 


eschatology as built on the plan of consecutiveness. The anti- 
thesis is between a world (age) that 7s and a world (age) 
that is to come. The point of view is dramatic, the new being 
the outcome and termination of the forces of supernatural 
history propelling towards it in the old. This ancient point of 
view, while quite in accord with the Old Testament (and the 
Jewish) perspective to which the arrival of the Messiah still 
lay in the future, ceased to be in perfect harmony with a state 
of fact and belief looking back upon the arrival of the Mes- 
siah, and which in consequence had to recognize the eschato- 
logical process as in principle already begun. That neverthe- 
less the scheme of successiveness was not straightway - 
discarded, nor the full consequences from its abeyance drawn 
was due to more than one reason. An ancient scheme like this 
that had become an age-long tradition to the eschatological 
consciousness is not abruptly changed by the mere turning 
of a hand; revelation here as elsewhere prefers the mode of 
gradual transition to that of violent supersedure. Still this 
does not wholly explain the retention and continuing vitality 
of a point of view, which might appear to have been in prin- 
ciple overcome through the stupendous event of the Messiah’s 
introduction into the process of history. The real and deeper 
reason lay doubtless in this that the Messianic appearance 
again had unfolded itself into two successive epochs, so that, 
even after the first appearance, and after making full allow- 
ance for its stupendous effect, the second epoch had, after the 
fashion of cell-separation, begun to form a new complex of 
hope moving forward into the future. In this way it will be 
seen that the scheme of successiveness had not been entirely 
abrogated but simply been reapplied to the latter half of the 
original scheme: the age to come was perceived to bear in its 
womb another age to come, so that with reference to the 
mother and the as yet unborn child, as it were, the category of 
what is and what is to be not only could, but had to be re- 


ITS STRUCTURE ay 


tained. In accordance with this we find the Apostle speaking 
of “the age to come,” not merely in his earlier Epistles but 
likewise in the later ones, cp. Eph. i. 21; ii. 2; 1 Tim. vi. 17; 
Beam, iv. 10: Tit. ii. 12. 

Side by side, however, with the continuation of this older 
scheme the emergence of a new one, involving a coéxistence 
of the two worlds or states, can be observed. From the nature 
of the case this principle did not allow of application to the 
age-concept, for the two sequences of time are mutually exclu- 
Sive. So long as one age lasts no other can supervene.** It is 
different with regard to worlds or states, for here the exist- 
ence of one does not exclude the contemporary existence of 
another, and there is nothing logically impossible either in 
the believer’s belonging to both or at least preeminently to 
one rather than to the other. And what was logically possible 
became practically unavoidable through the shifting of the cen- 
ter of gravity from the lower to the higher sphere, as brought 
about by the removal of the Messiah to the higher world and 
his abiding there in permanence. The bond between the be- 
liever and Christ is so close that, from Paul’s point of view, 
a detachment of the Christian’s interest not only, but even a 
severance of his actual life from the celestial Christ-centered 
sphere is unthinkable. The latter consideration counts for 
more than the mere fact that through the appearance or resur- 
rection of Christ the eschatological process has been set in 
motion. As soon as the direction of the actual spiritual life- 
contact becomes involved, the horizontal movement of 
thought on the time-plane must give way immediately to a 
vertical projection of the eschatological interest into the 
supernal region, because there, even more than in the histori- 
cal development below, the center of all religious values and 


44 This furnishes a certain test for determining whether in certain 
cases aiwv has the age-sense or the world-sense, where otherwise the 
choice might be dubious. For instance, in Gal. i. 4, the idea of lifting the 
believer from one age into an other would be hyper-paradoxical, and for 
that reason “world” is indicated: “Who gave himself ... that he might 
deliver us out of this present evil world.” To be sure, in the idea of a 
removal out of the present world enough of the paradox remains. 


38 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


forces has come to lie. The other, the higher world is in ex- 
‘istence there, and there is no escape for the Christian from 
‘its supreme dominion over his life. Thus the other world, 
hitherto future, has become present. Now, if the present 
world had at the same moment ceased to exist, then the 
straight line would have been carried through unbrokenly, 
and for a concurrent unrolling of two lines of existence there 
would have been no call. As it was, a duplication had to 
ensue. The two diagrams at the foot of this page will make 
the principle in question visually plain to the reader.” 
The point of view thus attained may be described as sem- 
~~ eschatological. It is characteristic of the Epistles of the First. 
Imprisonment, Ephesians, Colossians, Philippians. We can 
not expect that Paul should have used for it the formula of 
the Christian’s belonging in principle to a higher “kosmos,” 
for the word “kosmos’’ had through its evil associations be- 
come unfit for such usage. It is true “aion’”’ in its world-sense 
might have served the purpose, and is by implication actually 
so employed in passages as early as Rom. xii. 2 and Gal. 1. 4. 
But ‘‘aion” had to continue in use for the continued older 
simple distinction between “this age’”’ and “the age to come.” 
Consequently the idea of “heaven”? and such metaphorical 
locally-oriented phrases as “the things above” had to take the 
place of the older technical terms. “Heaven” offered more- 
over the advantage of expressing that the provisionally- 


45 I. THE ORIGINAL SCHEME 
| i Se Ves OR ga ee rr 
This age or world The age or world to come 


II. THe Moptriep SCHEME 
The world to come, 
realized in principle 


a [in Heaven] Cieaue 

6) = 
Ae o hoo ae 
haba ree B) 2) 
ook & oy ee rs 
Hl a s/°% 3.8 8 
a 2: 1.0. tee 
eget Hl oe > 
oo C34 8S rt ees 

~ jee Oo 

[ h] Rates. 

on eart im 2:5 


This age or world 


ITS STRUCTURE 39 


realized final state lies on a higher plane than the preceding 
world-development. Thus we find the Apostle declaring that 
the Christian is blessed in Christ with every spiritual blessing \ 
‘in the heavenly regions,” Eph. i. 3, a way of expression, | 
clearly indicating the Christological basis of the transfer 
of the believer’s domicile and possessions to heaven: it is 
“in Christ,” i.e., because of his being in heaven, that the 
affirmation can be made, cp. i. 20. Still stronger is the state- 
ment of ii. 6 to the effect that the believer is raised up with 
Christ, and made to sit with Him in the heavenly regions, 
and here the repetition of the phrase “in Christ Jesus’ at the 
end of the sentence emphasizes with additional stress how the 
lever of the whole upward movement lies in the removal of 
Christ to the supernal sphere consequent upon his resurrec- 
tion. In the Epistle to the Philippians the Christians’ “ zroné- 
Tevpa”’ “commonwealth” or “citizenship” is said to be in 
heaven for the reason of Christ’s being there, which, however, 
does not alter the other aspect of the believer’s attitude de- 
scribed in the words: “from whence also we wait for a 
Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ,” ili. 20. From the Epistle 
to the Colossians may be added to this the translation of the 
readers into the Kingdom of the Son of God’s love, because 
as a rule the phrase “Kingdom of God” bears for Paul eschat- 
ological significance, i. 13; 2 Tim. iv. 18; further the stress 
on the Christian’s duty to seek the things above, and that 
from the motive of Christ’s being there, and in consideration 
of the believers’ life being there hid with Christ in God, 
Col. iii. I, 2, is to be noted here. 

It has sometimes been asserted that this deflection from the 
straight prospective line of vision to the upward bent towards 
the heavenly world represents a toning down of the eschato- 
logical interest. Nothing could be farther from the truth. 
In reality this whole representation of the Christian state as 
centrally and potentially anchored in heaven isnot the abroga- 
tion, it is the most intense and the most practical assertion 
of the other-worldly tenor of the believer’s life. Precisely 
because it is to a large degree incipient realization, it bears 


4O THE PAULINE. ESCHATOLOGY 


the signature of eschatology written clear on its face. And 
because there is in it no going back upon, but a reaffirmation 
of the absolute ultimate hope, the other, more simple line of 
projection into the future continues to exist side by side with 
it in full validity. The idea of the future by no means recedes 
into the background; the coming of Christ is in continuance 
and without the slightest abatement of interest dwelt upon. 
The only thing that may be conceded to the view criticized 
is that the eager forward-stretching movement of the former 
period, characterized by a certain degree of restlessness, here 
gives place to a more quiet and serene attitude of contempla- 
tion of the other world and its content. But this is not the 
state of mind of one who has unlearned to hunger because 
of an often disappointed hope in the beginning of the feast. 
On the contrary it betokens the passing away of the acute, to 
some degree painful, sense of hunger as a result of the ample 
provisional satisfaction obtained. The partial enjoyment has 
rather whetted the appetite for the true food in its abundance. 
What gives rise to misunderstanding at this point is the 
confusion of eschatological two-sidedness with the philo- 
sophical bisection of the universe into a higher and lower 
sphere. While this cosmical distinction is presupposed by the 
view in question, it is in no wise identical with it. The heaven 
in which the Christian by anticipation dwells is not the cos- 


‘\/ mical heaven, it is a thoroughly redemptive heaven, a heaven 


become what it is through the progressive upbuilding and 
enrichment pertaining to the age-long work of God in the 
sphere of redemption. As such it not only in principle beatifies 
but also still beckons onward the believer to its final consum- 
mation. Heaven, so to speak, has received time and history 
into itself, no less than time has received unchangeableness 
and eternity into itself. Herein lies the inner significance of 
the repatriation of Christ into heaven, carrying thither with 
Himself all the historical time-matured fruit of his earthly 
stage of work, and now from there guiding with impartial 
solicitude the two lines of terrestrial and celestial develop- 
ment of his Church. Besides the Christ the Spirit holds the 
two aspects of the Christian’s double life-process together, for 


ITS STRUCTURE AI 


the Spirit in all his working and in all his present-state mani- 
festations here is, as we shall afterwards have occasion to 
show, at bottom naught but the earnest and first-fruits of _ 
the adequate final possession of the celestial state. That is 
his fundamental significance, the focus from which all the 
Spirit’s activities proceed and in which they consequently 
meet again. Notwithstanding a certain formal resemblance in | 
the two-sidedness of the Christian life, it stands at a far re- 
move from Greek philosophical dualism.*° Its very genesis 
forbids identification with this even to the slightest degree. 
Its mother-soil lies in eschatological revelation, not in meta- 
physical speculation. For this reason it is important to be 
able to show that the horizontal historical line of perspective 
is the older one, out of which only through an eminently- 
historical event the parallel structure of the two spheres was 
begotten. The historical was first, then the theological. And 
because the latter came from the former every possibility of 
conflict was from the outset excluded, neither of the two could 
interfere with the other. Nor could the rearrangement of the 
perspective result in abatement of the eschatological interest, 
as inherent in the Christian faith. For this to take place 
would have meant a primal apostasy from the origins of 
Christianity. What is usually charged against the age of 
Constantine and the rise of Protestantism would actually 
have its root in a Pauline Hellenizing speculation, which 
under the guise of directing to heaven would have in its 
actual effect meant a worldly recurrence from the future 
upon the present. There is nothing of this in the Apostle’s. 
intent : the Christian has only his members upon earth, which 
are to be mortified; himself, and as a whole, he belongs to 
the high mountain-land above, Col. iii. 5. . 

46 The same charge of infection with Hellenic (Alexandrian) dualism 
to the effect of softening down primitive Christian eschatologism has 
been brought against the Fourth Gospel and the Epistle to the Hebrews. 
In regard to both the answer to the charge will have to be the same as 
that given above with regard to Paul. In John, no less than in Hebrews, 
the chronological perspective is retained without impairment. It is true, 
however, that the spiritualizing tendency of Hebrews assumes in part 
the form of correcting a too externalized, and consequently impatient, 
form of eschatological preoccupation. 


CHAPTER II 


THE INTERACTION BETWEEN ESCHATOLOGY 
AND SOTERIOLOGY 


In Dogmatics the chapter devoted to Eschatology is or- 
dinarily given the last place. The sequence in the actual pro- 
cess predetermines the scientific arrangement. The develop- 
ments at the end are naturally viewed in the light of a 
consummation of the redemptive acts and experiences dealt 
with in Soteriology. The interest attaching to them, if not 
wholly, yet most frequently, arises from the desire to see 
“perfected” what has been begun, a desire fully justified 
both from a theoretical and a practical point of view. At 
bottom, of course, the desire springs and gathers momen- 
tum from the habitual consciousness of the Christian state as 
an unfinished state with which the protracted abode of the 
Church in this world, and our own life under preliminary 
conditions have familiarized but not satisfied us. This pro- 
visional state of affairs has been crystallized in a theological 
system with its own laws of perspective. We think and the- 
ologize out of the present into the future, because our base of 
existence is in the present. Whether this is as it ought to be 
need not be here considered; it certainly is a matter-of-fact 
state of mind. To the early Christians a different orientation 
had been given, and that not merely as a matter of practical 
religious outlook, but likewise through the teaching of Rev- 


_ elation. The ultimate things were brought forward in their 


le 


PRET NM r3.. 


consciousness, in order that in the light of these they might 


learn the better to understand the provisional and the pre- 


paratory. For the ultimate is in a very important sense the 


' normative, that to which every preceding stage will have to 


conform itself to prove the genuineness of its Christian char- 
acter. When we speak of the pervasive influence exerted by 
the hope of the world to come upon the earliest generation 


INTERACTION 43 


of believers, this ought not to be confined to the stimulating 
and uplifting effect of the other-worldly atmosphere of those 
days in general. There was an influence exerted upon the doc- 
trinal understanding of the Christian realities likewise. The 
light of the world to come cast its clarifying and glorifying 
radiance backward into the present through the medium of 
teaching and prophecy concerning the future. The picture 
drawn of what lay ahead was by no means exclusively pro- 
duced by a prolongation and enlargement and intensification 
of the vision already attained; the reverse method also was 
to no small degree put into practice, that of illumining the 
imperfect by the colors in which the perfect was steeped to 
the eye of faith. If the Christian hope had been of an imagi- 
native type, such as is apt to lose itself in concrete details of a 
future state, the danger of such a contemplation of the pres- 
ent life with the mind upon the transcendental world would 
have been only too obvious. But the Christian hope bore a 
different character. It was sufficiently spiritualized to fasten 
itself upon the inward potencies of what was in the womb of 
the life to come. This eternal treasure with which the true 
hope occupied itself was not different from but homogeneous 
with the treasures that had already been imparted to the 
present state. What Augustine so strikingly formulated con- 
cerning the relation of the two historic economies of the 
history of redemption: “Novum Testamentum in Vetere 
latet, Vetus in Novo patet’ permits of application to the 
subject in hand. Here also there was a “new” and an “old,” 
but the substance was the same, not different in principle, and 
thus it came about that the one could be used to interpret the 
other. Revelation could make use of the preéstablished har- 
mony which it had itself laid at the basis of its scheme. 

Living, then, in a world of semi-futurities there is every | 
reason to expect that the thought of the earliest Chris- 
tians should have moved backwards from the anticipated 
attainment in its fulness to the present partial experiences © 
and interpreted these in terms of the former. Just as natural 
as it appears to us to regard eschatology the crown of 


44 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


soteriology, it must have felt to them to scan the endow- 
ments and enjoyments already in their possession as veritable 
instalments of the inheritance outstanding. All the more was 
this natural, because theirs was a most vivid realization of 
the comparative importance of the two, such as would inevit- 
ably make the future entitled to the prime place in the scale 
of values. 

So far, however, all this, while creating a strong presump- 
tion in favor of our thesis, is of an a priori nature. It will 
be necessary to examine somewhat in detail after a compara- 
tive fashion the material and the vocabulary of the Apostle’s 
teaching both in the sphere of eschatalogy and in that 
of soterics. To this we now proceed. Before entering upon 
it, however, it may not be superfluous to remind ourselves, 
that what we endeavor to ascertain is not the chronology of 
the emergence of Pauline ideas. That would be a far easier 
process than the one we actually have in view. Our task con 
sists of ascertaining the perspective of thought in the re- 
vealed Gospel delivered by the Apostle. An eschatological 
and soteriological verity might have been disclosed to Paul 
in the same moment of time, and yet their mutual adjust- 
ment might have remained for that moment unclarified and 
unappreciated, being reserved as a subject for further revela- 
tion and apprehension. Nevertheless the correlation of things 
in their logical order could in no case have been indefinitely 
postponed in a mind like Paul’s. It is the subtle weaving of 
these threads of perspective into the doctrinal fabric of 
thought as a whole that we must endeavor, so far as possible, 
to unravel. 

There are in the Pauline teaching four important struc- 
tural lines and in connection with these it will prove easiest 
and most convincing to test our thesis. These consist of the 
idea of the resurrection, the thought of salvation, the doc- 
trine of the judgment and justification, the conception of the 
Spirit. It is natural to put the first of these first, because 
here the eschatological priority of origin and the actual influ- 
ence upon the seteric teaching are most palpable. That the 


INTERACTION 45 


resurrection is something specifically eschatological needs no 
pointing out. Nor is it necessary to show that Paul regards 
the resurrection of Jesus as the actual beginning of this gen- 
eral epochal event. Christ through his resurrection is the 
firstfruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor. xv. 20. When now we 
find that the soteric experience, whereby believers are intro- 
duced into a new state, is characterized by the Apostle as a 
“rising with Christ,” or “being raised with Christ’’ and find, 
moreover, that this is not an occasional, figurative descrip- 
tion of the experience, but obviously a piece of fixed doc- 
trinal terminology, then the retroactive formative influence 
exerted by eschatology upon a central part of the saving ore 
cess is placed beyond all question. A soteriological termin- 
ology of this kind was unknown before in Scripture. Pre-_ 
BAGH SHY to Paul no one ae nor would have defined © 
“regeneration” or “conversion” as a species of resurrection<> 
The explanation of this way of speaking froma general meta-~.. 
phorical usage is here excluded. Nothing remains but turning, 
things round and according eschatology the precedence in. - 
order. It might be urged that in some instances the affirma- 
tive 1s accompanied by the phrase “with Christ,” and that 
consequently there is a borrowing here from Christology 
rather than from eschatology, Col. iit. 1. This would, how- 
ever, be plausible only in case Christ’s resurrection appeared 
invested anywhere with other than eschatological associations. 
This not being the case, the phrases “‘to be raised in or with 
Christ” can bear only the one meaning: to have througha radi- 
cal change of life one of the two fundamental acts of escha- 
tology applied to one’s self. This becomes plainer still by ob- 
serving that Paul in this way of speaking does not mean to 
affirm merely a general analogy between the resurrection of 
Jesus and the religious reconstructive vitalism of the Chris- 
tian life, but most realistically derives from the risen Christ, 
that is from the resurrection-force stored up in Him the 
quickening in question. It is in the most literal sense of the 
word an anticipative effect produced by the eschatological 
world upon such who are still abiding in the present world. In 


46 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


other words the shaping of soteriology by eschatology is not 
so much in the terminology; ‘it proceeds from the actual re- 
alities themselves and the language simply is adjusted to that. 
Much that is customarily ascribed to the influence of the 

_mystical factor in the Apostle’s thought or experience is un- 
doubtedly, after a far more simple fashion, derived from this 
source. Eschatology was pregnant with mysticism, to a larger 
extent than is commonly appreciated. For, be it observed, the 
mystical element does not on this explanation disappear : it is 
only reduced, as to its origin, to the fundamental problem, 
how there can be from the heavenly, to all intents eschatologi- 
cal, world a projection into and a vital interaction with the 
life that is still lived in the world below.* 

We may here attach some other representations containing 
the same fundamental thought, although not explicitly nam- 
ing the concept of resurrection. One of these is the idea of 
the cai) xriows, another the idea of waduyyeveo(a, The for-- 
mer 1s met with in 2 Cor.v, viand Gal. vi. 15, the latter in Tit. 
iii. 5. The recognition of the eschatological provenience of the 
term “‘new ktisis”’ has been held back by its assumed individual 
use in 2 Cor. v. 17: “Wherefore if any man is in Christ, he is _ 
a new creature,’ and likewise by the exclusively subjective- 
soteriological reference the representation seemed to suggest. 
Both obstacles also make themselves felt in regard Tit. iii. 5. 
But in regard to neither of the two passages can these objec- 
tions obscure the quite perceptible eschatology texture. That 
Paul in Corinthians means something far more specific than 
the metaphorical statement about some one’s having been 
made “a new man” would ordinarily convey, the context 
clearly shows. For the one who has undergone this experi- 

' ence of having become “in Christ,” not merely individual 


1Cp. Rom. vi. 6, 11; vii. 4; viii. 10, 11; xiii. 11; 2 Cor. i. 9, 10;iv.12 
(here even of the resurrection-power of Jesus as manifesting itself in the 
miraculous support of Paul’s body in the midst of dangers and exhausting 
labors) ; v. 15; Eph. i. 19, 20; v. 14 (here more metaphorically, but even so 
plainly presupposing the literalistic terminology) ; Col. ii. 12, 13; pas- 
sages illustrating the causal influence of Jesus’ resurrection upon the 
future raising of the believer’s body are, of course, more numerous. 


INTERACTION 47 


subjective conditions have been changed, but “‘the old things 
are passed away, new things have come into being.’ There 
has been created a totally new environment, or, more accur- 
ately speaking, a totally new world, in which the person 
spoken of is an inhabitant and participator. It is not in the 
first place the interiority of the subject that has undergone 
the change, although that, of course, is not to be excluded. 
The whole surrounding world has assumed a new aspect and 
complexion. That the efficient cause for the thing described 
lies “in Christ’’ clearly indicates that such is the fact. Christ 
nowhere with the Apostle figures merely as a productive 
center of new individuals: He is everywhere, where the for- 
mula in question occurs, the central dominating factor of a 
new order of affairs, in fact nothing less than the originator 
and representative of a new world-order. A mere glance at 
the Pauline (and generally N.T.) usage of “ktisis” will 
further bear out the comprehensive and objective associations 
of the word; cp. Rom. viii. 19, 20; Col. 1. 15; Heb. ix. 11; 
Rev. 11. 14. Nor does the context permit any restriction to 
the renovated inner nature of the Christian subjectively con- 
sidered. The whole argument of the passage revolves around | 
the substitution of one objective status and environment for 
another. It belongs to the chapter on “justification” equally 
much as to that on inward renewal. Vs. 18 speaks of “all 
things” as “being of God,’ which again is not naturally 
understood of the subjective internal condition of the be- 
liever alone. Also the term “xatadAaoceobat,” “to reconcile,” 
peints to the objective sphere, and in its Greek import, as dis- 
tinct from the English-Bible rendering, is quite flexible and 
broad enough to allow of this widening out of the concept 
Ss to the idea of a “change”’ affecting the whole world. In view 
of all this there is ample reason for favoring the rendering 
“a new cteation,” which, when once substituted, directly 
points to the eschatological antecedents of the idea and opens 
up the perspective of its other-worldly far-reaching signifi- 
cance. Hence the Apostle speaks in vs. 18 of all things, indi- 
cating that not a single point but a comprehensive range of 


48 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


renewal stands before his mind. The whole antithesis spoken 
of is for him determined by the complexion of the Christ 
who stands in the center of it: to know of, that is to reckon 
with, a Christ cata capea means one constitution of things, to 
reckon with a differently complexioned Christ (the Christ 
KaTa TvevLa is meant, though not explicitly named) means a 
different, an opposite constitution of things, which in this 
case can only be the eschatological one. How the reference to 
justification, lying on the surface of the argument, can 
fit into this eschatologically-colored interpretation will ap- 
pear presently. 

Not so strongly reminiscent of eschatological origins is the 
phrase xawn xriows in the second instance of its occurrence, 
Gal. vi. 16: “For neither is circumcision anything nor un- 
circumcision, but a new creation.” Still even here the thought 
of the new final order of affairs with new values of endur- 
ing equalizing character is by no means absent. On the 
negative side it clearly finds expression in the immediately 
preceding avowal: “Far be it from me to glory, save in the 
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom (or which) 
the world has been crucified unto me and I unto the world.” 
The cross is here represented as effecting an absolute separa- 
tion between two worlds, so as to have cut loose the Apostle 
from the world to which he at first belonged, and having 
transplanted him into another. And this separation was so 
radical that the two parts between whom it took place were 
afterwards equally unable to have community of interests 
one with the other: the world was no less crucified to Paul 
than Paul was to the world. At first it naturally seems difficult 
to fit in this conception of the effect of the cross with the usual 
modes of teaching developed concerning the same in other 
contexts of the Epistles. The difficulty disappears if we call 
to mind the Christologico-eschatological background of the 
statement. It is first of all with reference to Christ and the 
kosmos that such a sharp divorce has taken place through the 
cross. T’he cross, that is to say his death under the peculiar 
circumstances in which it took place, cut through the bond 


INTERACTION 49 


which for a definite period of time had tied Him to the kos- 
mos; it threw Him out from the world, and He departed 
from it to enter another world, which was his real home. 
It needs no pointing out that in Christ’s case this exchange 
‘of one world for another possessed before aught else eschato- 
logical features and proportions. It made Him not so much a 
“new creature,” as the veritable beginner of a “new creation.” 
Now, if in conscious assimilation of his own experience to 
this train of thought, the Apostle affirms of himself that he 
is crucified to the world, as the world is to him, and further 
that henceforth in his new sphere of existence a new creation 
is the decisive, all-important factor, it will hardly do justice 
to Paul’s intent to confine it to the idea of endowment with 
a new and higher nature or personality; the conception is 
too weighty for that; the fundamental underlying idea must 
be that of an incorporation into a new system of reality, ax 
fact which renders it in principle eschatological. How the 
Apostle would have expressed himself without conscious 
side-reference to the objective eschatological situation can be 
seen from Gal. v. 6: “For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision 
avails anything nor wuncircumcision, but faith working 
through love.” Here, it will be observed, where the thought 
is subjectively turned, the opposite to circumcision and un- 
circumcision is not “a new creation,” but “faith working 
through love.” 

It is not different with the term “palingenesia’ occurring 
in Tit. ui. 5. To be sure, here the indigenous soteriological 
meaning seems to be so strongly attested through the com- 
bination with “loutron,” the washing of palingenesia and of 
anakoinosis (which are both) of the Holy Spirit.” Baptism 
to our consciousness certainly is something pertaining to the 
present Christian state. Nevertheless the very fact of its 
being joined to palingenesia proves that it must have in its 
conception a definite bearing on the future life. Within the 
New Testament this is indicated by 1 Pet. ii1. 21, where the 
world-overwhelming flood appearing as its type, it has 
ascribed to it a power saving from the antitypical judgment. 


50 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


In extra-biblical sources already the eschatological meaning 
appears in evidence, and that not as a derived metaphorical 
usage; on the contrary, the philosophico-mythological 
meaning is the prius, and an occasional figurative use is felt 
as having been derived from that. Of individual eschatology 
it is used in connection with the Dionysiac myth in referring 
to which Plutarch speaks of the ‘“‘awofwwoes’’ and the 
‘“oranuyyeves Oar.”? In the Pythagorean doctrine of the trans- 
migration of souls the term was used technically as the oppo- 
site of the “‘wpatn yéveois”’ or “viv yéveois,”” With Philo it 
signifies the life after death, individually conceived, but also 
is applied to the future world collectively. Subsequently, 
however, the metaphorical meaning developed, even in Philo. 
Cicero calls his return from banishment his palingenesia.° 
Eschatological likewise is the single occurrence in the Septua- 
gint: Job xiv. 14: “All the days of my warfare would I wait 
cos mahi yévopnar, Besides by pagan authorities, the 
eschatological sense is attested by the saying of our Lord in 
the New Testament itself, Matt. xix. 28: “Ye who have fol- 
lowed me shall in the regeneration, when the Son-of-Man 
shall sit on the throne of his glory, also sit upon twelve 
thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.’’* In this saying 
the word cannot be restricted to the more or less individualiz- 
ing application of the resurrection; it covers the resurrection 
as a whole and even the renewal of the universe as is shown 
from the parallels in Mark and Luke which have as its equiva- 
lent descriptions of the final state, Mk. x. 29, 30; Lk. xxii. 
29, 30. Thus also Josephus understands the term, making it 
interchangeable with apokatastasis.° Under these circum- 

2 De Delph. 9 (389 A); De Is. et Os. 35 (364). 

3 De Cherub. (ed Mangey), 150, 45; Leg. ad Caj. 503, 32; Cic. Ad 
Attic. 6, 6. . 

4 The construction above given is to be preferred to that in A.V. and 
R.V. “who have followed me in the regeneration.” This would refer to 
the following of Jesus by the disciples during his earthly ministry. Even 
this, however, would not necessarily take the eschatological reference out 
of it, inasmuch as Jesus’ labors on earth meant a veritable beginning of 


the eschatological kingdom. 
5 Ant. x1. 3-9. 


INTERACTION SI 


stances the eschatological reference in connection with bap- 
tism in Tit. iii. 5 can create no surprise. It made itself so 
naturally felt that Origen on Matt. xix. 28 declares baptism 
to be the prooimion (prelude) to that palingenesia (1.e., 
the great palingenesia of the resurrection). Even Clem. 
Rom. still says that Noah preached a palingenesia to the kos- 
mos.° The familiar soteriological sense appears first with 
Clem. Alex. 

The second idea in the handling of which the close nexus 
between present and future appears is that of salvation. 
Owing to the eminently practical concern attaching to this 
matter, it could hardly be expected otherwise than that here 
the soteriological present usage should more easily detach 
itself from the earlier eschatological meaning of the term. In 
the Pauline teaching, however, this was not accomplished by 
a clean-cut separation of the present experience from its orig- 
inal setting. What happened was the emergence of an idea in 
which without clear distinction present enjoyment and joyful 
anticipation of the final deliverance mingle. The sense of sal- 
vation was never entirely deeschatologized: Even the most 
practical religious consciousness found it impossible to think 
of the one aspect without more or less clearly remembering the 
other. The mind of the early Christian reveals a constant oscil- 
lation from the one pole to the other. Only the multitudinous- 
ness of concerns with the world that is, has somewhat deflected 
the religious interest from that beyond. The movement of 
thought and the movement of aspiration have both somewhat 
changed their original point of departure and their habitual di- 
rection. Believers followed the chronological order, which after 
all appears so largely the normal one to time-circumscribed 
minds. Paul and his converts by a sort of reversion thought 
themselves saved as in the future so in the present. Precisely: 
because the two states of consciousness, that of being destined 
to an impending salvation and that of having the prelibation 
of the same each day, so naturally coalesced, the necessity for 


6 Ad Cor. i. 9. 


vee 


52 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


sharp distinction was less strongly felt. Hence there are a 
number of passages, which it is easy to construe as referring 
to the simple sense of possession in the present, whilst in all 
probability the mixture of feeling just referred to is voiced 
in them, and in consequence half their shade of significance 
is obscured through an overlaying with our own color of piety. 


‘Fortunately statements are not lacking which embody the 
pure futuristic manner of conceiving the thing in its original 


force. According to Rom. v. 9, 10, after and because being 
justified by Christ’s blood, the readers shall be saved from the 
wrath of the judgment through Him, and that particularly 
through his (resurrection-) life. The Christian is saved “by 
hope,” viii. 24, 25; here the past tense (Aorist) joined to the 
idea of “hope” strikingly portrays the mixed mental attitude 
towards the idea of salvation; how strongly present and 
active the ingredient of hope is may be felt from the appended 
remark: “hope that is seen is not hope,’ a remark which 
might seem to deny, if not explicitly the pre-potency, at least 
the visual actuality of salvation. The strongest passage is 
Rom. xiil. 11: “for now is salvation nearer to us than when 
we first believed.’ The representation of 1 Cor. ili. 15 places 
both the destruction of the bad builder’s work, and his per- 
sonal salvation “as through fire” in “the day,” i.e., the day of 
judgment, cp. vs. 13. The much-mooted exhortation, Phil. ii. 
12: “Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling” 
is most easily relieved of its difficulty through allowing “‘sal- 
vation” its future reference. At any rate the verb “work 
out’ does not as a rule bear the sense, so frequently given it 
in the exposition of this text, of unfolding through strenuous 
effort the potentialities contained in something, but rather 
that of achieving, accomplishing a thing: the readers are 
exhorted to fit themselves through the diligent practice of 
obedience for and assure themselves of the salvation at the 
end with its varying degrees of glory; cp. 2 Cor. iv. 17; v. 5; 
vil. 10, 11. His own salvation Paul makes dependent on his 
own affliction and that of the readers on theirs, and in so far 
assigns it to the future, 1 Thess. v. 8, 9; in the believer’s 


INTERACTION 53 


armor “‘the hope of salvation”’ is figuratively described as the 
helmet. God has appointed believers unto the obtaining of 
salvation and that this is said with reference to the end ap- 
pears from the opposite “not unto wrath,” the latter term 
having eschatological meaning throughout with Paul. The 
foregoing quotations do not prove, of course, that the obtain- 
ing of salvation was placed by Paul entirely in the future. 


There are not a few instances where the application to the << 


present life lies plainly on the surface. The most unequivocal 
of these are Eph. 11. 5: “By grace are ye saved ones (Per- 
fect Tense)’; cp. vs. 8: “For by grace are ye saved ones 
through faith’; Tit. iii. 5: “According to his mercy He 
saved us (Aorist Tense); 2 Tim. 1. 9: “According to the 
power of Him who saved us” (Aorist Tense). The mere use 
of Present or Future does not have the same convincing 
force as that of Perfect, because the Present can be void 
of chronological significance, expressing only the fact that 
God performs or will perform the act and the Future can 
be a Future of logical sequence ; consequently in some passages 
the question cannot be answered with certainty to which of the 
tworubrics they belong: Rom. x.g:“Ifthou shalt confess .. . 
and shalt believe . . . thou shalt be saved.” In 2 Cor. ii. 15 
the idea seems to stand midway between the “having been 
saved,” and the “being destined to be saved,” for here the 
Apostle declares: “For we are a sweet savor of Christ unto 
God in them that are being saved (in process of salvation) 
and in them that are perishing (in process of being lost) ; to 
the one a savor of death unto death; to the other a savor of 
life unto life.” 

A survey of the facts registered leaves little doubt but that 
between the two aspects of the matter, the priority belongs 
in the Apostle’s mind to the eschatological aspect. If the 
starting-point had lain at the other end, we might surely 
expect some qualifying phrase to appear in the futurity-pas- 
sages to intimate that not salvation as such, but only its per- 
fection or consummation was associated with the end; the 
opposite is the case: salvation at the end is spoken of in an 


a Sg 


54 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


absolute way, as though it were the only conception custom- 
ary; it is ““” c@tnpia,”’ In fact, the phenomenon furnishes a 
strict analogy to the manner after which in our Lord’s teach- 
ing such things as “the Kingdom of God” and “the Parousia 
of the Son-of-Man” are referred to as future things in an ab- 
solute way, as though no other Kingdom, no other Parousia 
were reckoned with. There is a continuity in the writings of 
the New Testament of this way of speaking: the feeling 
expressed in the word of our Lord, “‘the hour comes and 1s 
now’ reéchoes everywhere. The lower air was so surcharged 
with the sense of what great things had already come to pass 
and what greater things were on the wings in the upper air 
ready to come down, that the precision in speaking of the sev- 
eral parts and phases of the whole was for the moment in 
abeyance. Keen hope had projected itself into the future, and 
there the habit of speech about salvation had been to no small 
extent acquired. Afterwards it required some effort to 
translate such language back into the more sober dialect of 
the life of protracted waiting on earth. How unfortunate 
that we, after waiting so long, seem to have forgotten the 
semi-celestial accents of Christianity’s childhood! 

In the matter of justification it requires closer scrutiny, 
perhaps, to discover the eschatological origins that have 
shaped it at the beginning and the interdependence with the 
outlook into the future life characterizing it in continuance. 
The controversial history through which the doctrine passed 
and the anti-Judaistic stamp as a result put upon it tended to 
make it more than aught else a truth of present generally- 

> religious importance. It became in the Pauline type of teach- 
ing the very foundation of all Christian belief and experience. 
And Protestantism, especially of the Lutheran kind, has cer- 
tainly not been wrong in making its true interpretation, over 
against Romanism, the comprehensive basis of Christian 
truth generically conceived. And yet, with the large place 
occupied in the early-Christian consciousness by the thought 
.. of the life to come, it is easy to see, that two such all-covering 
planes could not fail to intersect. There exists, however, suffi- 


INTERACTION 55 


cient evidence for the eschatological stamp borne by the idea 
of justification even at that controversial stage. It is some- 
times alleged that Paul was the first to frame the concept of 
a comprehensive adjustment of all sins in the accounting of 
God. In this form the thought is not correct, because Judaism 
had already worked out the doctrine of a daily balance struck 
by God taking into account the works performed up to the 
point of reckoning, both as to merit and demerit, and not 
omitting to introduce the element of imputed righteousness 
from the fathers, who had a surplus of merit. Only this 
formal similarity overlooks the specific difference ‘between 
the two schemes compared. Under the Judaistic scheme the 
balance struck is unstable, subject to constant modification, 
each new moment introducing new items to be reckoned with 
changing the momentary credit or debit from day to day. For 
this relativity and uncertainty Paul substituted absoluteness 


and certainty. And here lies precisely the point where escha- « - 


tology and justification intersect. By making both the negative \ 
element of the forgiveness of sin and the positive element of 
bestowal of the benefits of salvation unqualified, the Apostle 
made the act of justification to all intents, so far as the © 
believer is concerned, a last judgment anticipated. If the act 
dealt with present and past sins only, leaving the future 
product in uncertainty, it could not be regarded as possessing 
such absoluteness, and the comparison with the last judgment 
would break down at the decisive point. This interpretation 
of the Pauline doctrine as bearing a purely-retrospective sig- 
nificance has been actually advocated of late. It has been con- 
tended that in the Apostle’s view justification is in the main 
a missionary doctrine, enabling the convert to begin with a 
clean record, but with the clear understanding that the ques- 
tion of salvation in the end shall be by no means prejudiced 
by it, the final issue no longer made dependent on the 
forgiving grace of God, but on the holiness of the post- 
baptismal life. The Christian cannot be saved unless success- 
ful in his striving to stand blameless before God in the 
judgment-day. At bottom Paul’s teaching so interpreted 


56 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


would have as much, if not more, in common with the 
Romanist than with the common Protestant doctrine.’ The 
main proof for this is said to lie in the fact that the 
Apostle nowhere consoles the readers of his Epistles, when 
fallen into sin, with the free, abundant pardon of justi- 
fication, but requires instantaneous conversion, and in the 
opposite case insists upon their excommunication from the 
fellowship of believers. Both his personal practical experi- 
ence and his doctrinal conviction were that the Christian can 
and ought to be sinless. Hence his doctrine of the new 
creature under the control of the Spirit. There is a grain of 
truth in this representation, but taken as a whole it bristles 
with impossibilities. True, the pastoral practice of the 
Apostle does not seem to make as abundant use of the conso- 
latory aspect of justification for allaying the consciousness of 
sin as from the Protestant standpoint might have been 
a priort expected. In seeking to explain this, however, it 
should be remembered that the Pauline converts had been to 
no small extent in their pre-Christian state gross pagan 
sinners, with whom special caution had to be exercised, lest 
the doctrine of free grace should become an occasion for 
antinomianism. When Paul speaks of sin such as ipso 
facto excludes from tolerance and is inconsistent with the 
Christian state, consequently falling outside the pale of the 
church, he has in mind these gross types of sin. A scrutiny of 
the catalogues of sins in I Cor. v. 11; vi. 9, 10; Gal. v. 19-21 
immediately reveals the pertinence of this observation. But 
surely, Paul did not consider anything remaining below these 
terms of excessive and persistent and Christianity-excluding 
sins as negligible and exempt from the reach of justification. 
The Apostle not seldom does speak of the consciousness of 
justification as needful for those who, within the Christian 
sphere, are subject to a daily sense of sin. In Rom. v. 2 he 
affirms that believers through Christ have received and now 
are in actual possession of ( €ay7Kapev ) access to the grace 


7 Wernle, Der Christ und die Stinde bei Paulus, 1897. Cp. Gottschick, 
Paulinismus und die Reformation, Z. f. Th. u. K., 1897, pp. 308ff. 


INTERACTION 57 


wherein they stand, i.e., the grace of peace through justi- 
fication ; cp. also the Present Tense éyouev in Eph. i. 7; Col. 
i. 14. According to Gal. ii. 20 the life which the Apostle now 
lives in the flesh he lives through the faith of (in) the 
Son of God, who loved him and gave Himself for him. In 
Phil. iii. 7-9 he represents it as his constant striving to be 
found in Christ, not having a righteousness of his own . 

but that which is through faith in Christ. It is also extremely 
doubtful whether the forgiveness of trespasses spoken of in 
Eph. i. 7 and Col. i. 14 refers to sins of the pre-Christian state 
only. The argument, therefore, derived from scanty recourse 
to justification in pastoral practice does not prove that Paul 
excluded sins committed after conversion from the scope of 
the justifying pronouncement of God. To be sure, were Wern- 
le’s view correct and justification purely-retrospective, then 


the vital nexus between it and the final judgment would be ~ 


broken. But in favor of the intimate connection between the 


future and the present, and the backward movement in 


thought from the former to the latter much more may be 
said than is directly affected by this controversy. The lan- 
guage of Rom. vili. 33, 34: ““Who shall lay anything to the 
charge of God’s elect? It is God that justifies; who is he that 
condemns” could not be more absolute than the verdict 
rendered in the last judgment; in fact it is so absolute as to be 
indifferent to the categories of present, past or future. In this 
respect the fact of justification is only the reverse side of the 
facts of prognosis and predestination and it would be out of 
place in the catena salutis of vs. 29, if its scope were less 
unlimited and unconditional than that of the other concep- 
tions enumerated. Justification is a “Sucaiwous Cons” (justifi- 
cation of life), and the “life” thus declared to be its conse- 
quent is the endless life, that of which it is promised that 
the saints “shall reign’ in it, Rom. v. 18-21. In general the 
certainty of salvation so emphatically affirmed by the Apostle 
with regard to the Christian as such would not be possible, if 
the central act of the divine saving procedure bore with re- 
gard to the future an aspect of relativity. Instead of being, 


~~ 


} 


58 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY ° 


what it actually is, the backbone of the sureness of the 
religious consummation, it would become the one weak point 
exposing all the remainder to uncertainty, and in so far worse 
than void of value. Ultimately the absoluteness of the divine 
self-committal inhering in this one act of justifying the sin- 
ner is due to the feature of its being a ‘““God-interesting”’ act 
in the strongest sense of the word. It is the act in which reli- 
gion celebrates its triumph, and therefore the act in which 


the religious and the eschatological are inseparably united. 
But for this same reason it is in principle incapable of being 
-an eschatological act in the exclusive sense of the word, an 


‘act incapable of anticipation. An experience which was lack- 


ing in the foretaste of the ultimate enjoyment of God would 
be to that extent lacking the innermost core of religion 
itsel f.* , 

The fourth line along which an influence of the eschato- 
logical teaching upon the Apostle’s soteriological doctrine 
can be observed is that of the significance and function of the 
Spirit. As this subject will afterwards at various points in 
our investigation obtrude itself, we here content ourselves 
with a mere sketch of the argument. As is generally 
recognized, the specific character of Paul’s doctrine of the 
Spirit lies in the universal and equable distribution of his 
operation over the entire circle of believers, and within the 
life of every believer over the entire range, subconscious and 
conscious, religious and ethical, of this life. In this particular 
the Pauline pneumatology is clearly marked off from the 
phases of Revelation preceding it, not only in the Old Testa- 
ment, but also from earlier New Testament types of teach- 
ing, not even the Johannine type of our Lord’s teaching 
excluded, although in the last-mentioned a certain preforma- 
tion of Paul’s doctrine may be found. The problem is how 


* to account for this immense widening out of the subject. It 


might be answered, and not unjustly, that the extraordinary 
bestowal of the Spirit at Pentecost, or to use more strictly- 


8 Cp. Titius, Die neutestamentliche Lehre von der Seligkeit, Vol. I, 
Der Paulinismus unter dem Gesichtspunkt der Seligkeit, p. 162. 


INTERACTION 59 


Pauline language, the new phase of the Spirit’s influence con- 
nected with the resurrection of Christ, are sufficient to account 
for this, the practical enlargement being merely the inevitable 
result of the speeding up of the factual progress of events. 
Still this will not wholly account for the peculiarity in ques- 
tion, for the main peculiarity consists in the enveloping, 
circumambient, one might almost say atmospheric character 
of the Spirit’s working, a feature first clearly emerging with 
Paul, and that so strongly as to give at times almost the im- 
pression as though the personal character of the Spirit’s 
mode of existence were obscured by it. To recur upon what 
the Old Testament teaches about the Spirit’s universally 
distributed influence in the sphere of natural life does not 
help to a solution, because this idea of the quickening power 
of the Spirit in nature, while nowhere denied in the New 
Testament, and by no means entirely absent from Paul, has 
nevertheless to a large extent been eclipsed by the soteric 
pneumatology. And particularly, so far as Paul himself is 
concerned, this soteriologizing aspect of the Spirit’s work- 
ing has been carried to a point, where it can scarcely be 
understood as a simple prolongation of the line of his 
working in the sphere of nature. The “pneumatic” with Paul 
is practically equivalent to the “supernatural.” It is conse- 
quently rather the opposite to than the analogue of the nat- 
ural, after the manner of the antithesis expressed by Jesus in 
Jno. iii. 8. A natural solution offers itself by supposing that 
the ‘“Pneuma” was in the mind of the Apostle before all 
else the element of the eschatological or the celestial sphere, 
that which characterizes the mode of existence and life 


in the world to come and consequently of that anticipated 


<x. 


< 


form in which the world to come is even now realized in 


heaven. As pervading this sphere it would cease to exercise a 
spasmodic activity to be confined to certain groups of phe- 
nomena; its presence and operation would of necessity ap- 
pear constant and universal within the sphere of redemption. 
The detailed phenomena pointing to the actual existence of 
this point of view will be investigated later. If their presence 


60 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


may be taken for granted here, they prove that in a very large 
aspect, second to none in its importance for the Pauline system 
| of thought, the eschatological appears as predetermining 
“>= both the substance and form of the soteriological.® 

What has been found is important not merely by reason of 

the light it throws upon the genesis of Paul’s teaching on its 
intellectual side, it likewise helps to answer the charge of the 
absence of systematic coherence brought particularly against 

the eschatological teaching. It were far more accurate to say 
that the eschatological strand is the most systematic in the 
“entire fabric of the Pauline thought-world. For it now appears 
that the closely interwoven soteric tissue derives its pattern 
from the eschatological scheme, which bears all the marks of 
having had precedence in his mind. Among all the other fac- 
tors usually reckoned with as sources or determinants of the 
Apostle’s theological system, there is none that can lay equal 

=» claim to self-evidencing character with this. No doubt Paul’s 
mind had by nature a certain systematic bent, which made 
him pursue with great resoluteness the consequences of given 
premises. No doubt also some influence should be attributed 

to his Jewish scholastic training. As to the latter, however, 
the influence of the Rabbinical cast of mind has, if we may 
believe Jewish writers, been greatly overestimated. The Rab- 
binical teaching was not particularly systematic. Even where 

it tended towards logical correlation, it contented itself with 
more or less superficial attempts at harmonizing, and did 
not feel disturbed even by serious antinomies.*° It is safe to 

— > assume that far more than all this counted the eschatological 
mould into which the Apostle’s thought had been cast from 
the beginning. What gives dogmatic coloring to his teaching 

is largely derived from its antithetical structure, as exhibited 

in the comprehensive antitheses of the First Adam and the’ 
Last Adam, sin and righteousness, the flesh and the Spirit, 


®Cp. the author’s article entitled “The Eschatological Aspect of the 
Pauline Conception of the Spirit” in Princeton Theological Studies, 1912, 
PP. 200-259. 

10 Cp. C. G. Montefiore, Judaism and St Paul, 1914. 


INTERACTION 61 


law and faith, and these are precisely the historic reflections —. 
of the one great transcendental antithesis between this world 
and the world-to-come. It is no wonder that such energetic 
eschatological thinking tended towards consolidation in an 
orb of compact theological structure. For in it the world- 
process is viewed as a unit. The end is placed in the light of < 
the beginning, and all intermediate developments are con- 
strued with reference to the purpose a quo and the terminus: 
ad quem. Eschatology, in other words, even that of the most 
primitive kind, yields ipso facto a philosophy of history, be 
it of the most rudimentary sort. And every philosophy of his- 
tory bears in itself the seed of a theology. To this must be 
added that the Pauline outline of history possessed in the 
Messianic concept a centralizing factor of extraordinary 
potency, an element whereby the antitheses above named were 
dissolved into an exceptionally harmonious synthesis. Only 
one thing more, and that of supreme importance, needs to be 
remembered: all eschatological interpretation of history, 
when united to a strong religious mentality cannot but pro- 
duce the finest practical theological fruitage. To take God as _. 
source and end of all that exists and happens, and to hold 
such a view suffused with the warmth of genuine devotion, 
stands not only related to theology as the fruit stands to the 
tree: is is by reason of its essence a veritable theological tree 


of life. 


CHAPTER III 


THE RELIGIOUS AND ETHICAL MOTIVATIiG# 
OF PAUL'S HSCHATOLOGE™ 


The eschatological part of the Pauline teaching has not 
escaped the general opprobrium cast upon the teaching as a 
whole, that of being un-modernly theological, and hence par- 
taking of all the blemishes and inadequacies, which the flesh 
of all theology is heir to. There is a difference, however, be- 
tween the general dislike attaching to the whole fabricand the 
special attack made against this one piece in particular. The 
offensive carried on along the line as a whole is of a more 
formal, theological nature, and, as a rule, disavows an- 
tagonism on principle to the religious spirit pervading the 
teaching as such, provided only the substance be thoroughly 
divested of its antiquated form. The polemic against the 
eschatology is of a different kind. Here a positive ethico- 
religious blame is believed to attach to the animus and con- 
tent of the ideas considered in themselves. At the outset, in 
view of what we have found concerning the close interweav- 
ing of eschatology with the entire structure of the soteri- 
ology, it would seem preposterous to praise in one and the 
same breath the evangelically-religious and high-mindedly 
ethical Paul, and yet to make bitter charges against his doc- 
trine concerning the end of the world. It is a priori probable 
that in the circles where such dualistic appraisal appears, 
either the general trend of Paulinism has been profoundly 
misunderstood, or the motivation of the eschatology mis- 
apprehended, or both defects are present in equal degree. The 
charges against the eschatology find various forms of ex- 
pression. Foremost stands the revulsion from the super- | 
naturalism in the eschatology, for with Paul, as elsewhere in 
Scripture, eschatology is supernaturalism in the uth degree. 
Most uncompromising, further, is the fault found with the 


ETHICO-RELIGIOUS MOTIVATION 63 


other-worldliness of the Apostle’s eschatology. To be sure, 
this is a fault found not with Paul only, but with 
every type of New Testament eschatology at any point. Paul 
may have carried the matter to an extreme, but none of 
the other writers of the New Testament, not even the Evan- 
gelists or the Jesus speaking through them, is exempt from 
this criticism. At bottom the disagreement here is not one 
between two types of religion and theology; it concerns the 
health of religion over against its decline. It is inherent in 
religion to seek the highest and closest approach to God; 
where this has become a matter of indifference, to however 
small a degree, there the genuineness and vigor of the religious 
impulse have suffered impairment, and been replaced by in- 
terests of a lower nature, religiously considered; the change 
of outlook is symptomatic of a movement away from God, 
though this may not be always consciously realized. Where 
the extreme of the tendency in question has been reached it 
deserves to be qualified as in principle anti-religious. A so- 
called Christianity proving cold or hostile towards the inter- 
ests of the life to come has ceased to be Christianity in the 
_ historic sense of the word. 

A second factor working for the disparagement of Bibli- 
cal Eschatology, and of the Pauline type in particular, springs 
from the modern striving after autonomy in ethics and re- 
ligion. Here again the element criticized is not confined to 
Paul but covers the entire range of Biblical religion, and, in 
common with the tendency just discussed, points to a deep- 
rooted perverseness in the religious mind. There sometimes 
enters a “too proud to receive” in the relationship between 
God and man, after the same manner as it appears in social 
human intercourse. Only in the latter case the fault is more 
excusable than in the former, because in religion the giver 
and the receiver are so inevitably unequal in position, as to 
lift the whole question of what the proprieties allow and 
forbid above the sphere of reasonable consideration. In our 
Lord’s teaching the two great principles of the sovereignty 
of God, and of the fatherhood of God, at one stroke rule 


64 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


out the impious concept of human autonomy in deciding 
the terms on which man shall deal with God. The one 
who has given all is still at the close of the process (sub 
specie juris divini) an “unprofitable” (not a “useless’’) ser- 
vant, since the master has gotten out of him no more than 
he was at the outset entitled to or, to speak in terms of the 
slave-market, than had been paid for him at the beginning. 
Everyone feels that in a relationship thus construed the prob- 
lem of what is consistent or non-consistent with the dignity of 
human nature to offer, or to receive, loses all significance. 
The same regard for divine sovereignty appears likewise in 
the insistence upon the principle that God without injustice 
can give the same remuneration to those who labor less than 
to those who labor more. At best this could be a question of 
equity; the idea that “the pride of labor’ were justified in 
denying the more to the others, beyond what these have 
strictly earned, remains entirely out of the question. Apart 
from the element of the divine sovereignty, however, our 
Lord appeals likewise to the idea of the divine fatherhood, 
which as such is incompatible with the enforcement of in- 
herent rights. The child refusing to do for its parents aught 
else than a spirit of autonomous choice may allow it to, acts 
from the very opposite of filial piety, which amounts to say- 
ing that the action would be irreligious and unethical in prin- 
ciple. In this matter grace intertwines with justice, but the 
recurrence upon either one to the exclusion of the other im- 
plies that the autonomous desire of the creature is made the 
regenant principle in intercourse with God. 

The above said holds true in general. It is, however, in 
the province of eschatology that the two ideas of autonomy 
and heteronomy stand out in sharpest contrast. The web of 
biblical eschatology is shot through with the strand of re- 
ward.* In the teaching of Jesus, where one might least expect 
it, it 1s particularly in evidence, to such an extent indeed, 


11It ought to be observed that the Gospels not unfrequently introduce 
the idea of reward in connection with eschatological material: Matt. 
Viele eV dese 40 Meo ar ik oes 


ETHICO-RELIGIOUS MOTIVATION 65 


that its authenticity has been called in question, on the mere 
ground of the irreconcilableness of such ideas with the ideal 
ethics of the Great Teacher of Nazareth. Where the presence 
and authenticity of the element admit of no denial, the issue 
is glossed over through declaring all such utterances 
a lingering remnant of Judaism, which Jesus had not been 
able to throw off completely. Were the thought confined to 
isolated contexts, an attempt to this effect might perhaps be 
made with some approach to plausibleness, but even then 
the fact would remain that in certain recurrent figures, taken 
from the sphere of labor in the harvest field or elsewhere, the 
idea is irremovable. If one so choose, he may consider it 
tares of teaching, but to weed it out from the grain is im- 
possible. Sometimes it occurs in the most tender religious 
setting, as where a reward is promised for prayer in secret.’ 
Plainly this is not an outworn fringe of Judaism; it belongs 
to the innermost core of Jesus’ religious consciousness. 
With Paul particularly Jesus’ reward-concept shows strik- * 
ing, mostly eschatological, affinities. If there be any reward at 
all, then the great epoch of summing up and _ allotting 
destinies must be pregnant with it. Nevertheless the idea is 
by no means confined to eschatology, no more than it 1s with 
Jesus. How deep-seated an idea it is appears especially from 
the circumstance that it has succeeded in maintaining itself 
upon the background of the Apostle’s insistence upon the 
principle of absolute grace in redemption. In spite of the doc- 
trine of justification through faith alone, the factor of works 
does not cease to play a role in the teaching on the Last Judg- 
ment, not even so far as the Christian is concerned. How far 
these two apparently discordant notes are capable of being 
reduced to harmony we shall have to consider at a later point. 
Here we simply note that the conflict most stubbornly 
obtrudes itself at the high points of Paul’s eschatological 
teaching. That the idea of eschatological reward can be made 
to render service as a powerful incentive towards religious 
and, in particular missionary, zeal, the grand climax of the 


2 Matt. vi. 5. 


66 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


resurrection argument in_1 Cor. xv proves: ‘“‘Wherefore, my 
beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abound- 
ing in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your 
labor is not in vain in the Lord.”’* That a similar sequence 
exists between eschatological reward and the endurance of 
persecution and affliction in the present life, is shown by 
1 Thess. 1. 4-7: “For your patience and faith in all your perse- 
cutions and in the afflictions which ye endure (is) a manifest 
token (endcigma) of the righteous judgment of God, to the 
end that ye may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God 
for which ye also suffer; if so be that it is a righteous thing 
with God to recompense affliction to them that afflict you and 
to you that are afflicted rest (relief) with us at the revelation of 
the Lord Jesus from heaven,” etc. The same axiom underlies 
the argument of Rom. ii. 6, 7: “Who will render every man 
according to his deeds: to them who by patient continuance 
in well-doing seek for glory and honor and immortality, eter- 
nal life,’ etc. The reasoning here is not dialectic, nor a species 
of argumentum ad hominem, employed to drive the Jews into 
a theological corner ; it is a hypothetical argument, to be sure, 
but none the less, e mente Pauli, perfectly serious, and im- 
mutably valid from the standpoint of the divine procedure. 
Neither here nor elsewhere does the Apostle assert on prin- 
cipial grounds, that the bestowal of eternal life on the basis 
of fulfilment of the divine law would militate against the 
dignity of religion either from the side of God or from the 
side of man. It should be noticed that the terms in which the 
Apostle speaks to denote the reward are specifically-eschato- 
logical terms: glory, honor, immortality, eternal life. The | 
passage proves that the eschatological principle is so deeply — 
embedded in the structure of the biblical religion as to pre- | 
cede and underlie everything else. Even the procedure of 


3That the phrase “in vain” does not admit of restriction to the 
promise of spiritual success in the labors of the present, appears from 
the connection with the foregoing by means of “wherefore.” It is in 
and through the resurrection that the eternal fruition of the work will 
be obtained. 


a 


ETHICO-RELIGIOUS MOTIVATION 67 


“grace” and “faith” on which the entire Pauline Gospel is 
staked, does not, when correctly apprehended, so far as the 
objective divine procedure is concerned, abrogate it ; it only ex- 
empts man from its direct operation, and that for the twofold 
reason that when applied to sinful man it must prove futile, 
and moreover, that it must, when put into practice by the sin- 
ful subjectivity of man, inevitably carry with itself that mood 
of “boasting” and “self-glorying” which is not merely de- 
ficient in religious value, but pointedly anti-religious, the 
negation in principle of what is the core of religion itself.* 
The fact therefore remains, that Paul admits and retains 
the principle of reward within his eschatological scheme. As 
to the compatibility of this with the principle of a law-free 
gospel, the present connection is not the place for a thorough 
discussion of that problem. Our interest for the moment lies 
in the registering of the fact as such, not in the evaluation of 
it as something either to the discredit or the credit of the 
Pauline eschatology. 

Attacks of still a different kind have been made upon the 
eschatological teaching of the Apostle. The difference from 
the foregoing lies in this that here not the injection of escha- 
tology as such is on principle condemned, but the quality of 


4 Under the system of redemption the principle is simply transferred 
from man to Christ, in whom both the futility and temptation to 
“slorying” are unthinkable, cp. Phil. it. 8, 9. Though sounding para- 
doxical, it would be quite correct to say, that the motive underlying 
Paul’s championship of grace is at bottom not different from that 
binding him to the forensic principle of eschatological reward. The two 
are at one in this that they both aim at securing the revelation of the 
supreme glory of God, the one in the ethical sphere, the other in the 
soteric sphere. The eschatological reward-idea is simply one of the 
twin forms in which the Apostle gives expression to the absolute ascen- 
dancy of the divine glory in religion. The law of recompense for 
righteousness is intended to express that the ethical process (no less 
than the soteric process) exists for the sake of God. It is precisely in 
the recognition of this point that Calvinism proves itself the deepest 
interpretation of Paulinism, and in so far the purest expression of 
the spirit of Augustinianism and the Reformation. Cp. the author’s 
article on Alleged Legalism in Paul’s Doctrine of Justification, P. R., 
1903, pp. 161-80. 


68 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


the Apostle’s mental attitude in embracing its ideas and as- 
sociations is subjected to sharp censure. The content of 
Paul’s mode of thinking as to tone and coloring not merely 
but likewise as to moral and religious spirit is represented as 
an inferiority complex scarcely worth classifying under the 
head of religion at all. The charge is a charge against the 
man Paul; it is meant to cast a stigma upon his character. 
We are told that in his eschatology Paul was largely domin- 
ated by egotism to the serious injury of the altruistic element 
in his religious make-up. Seeing how prominent a place the 
eschatological strands of thought occupy in the teaching the 
seriousness of the charge lies on the surface. Altogether 
apart from the ethico-religious flaw, the abnormal proportion 
would interfere with the symmetry of the Apostle’s faith. 
This, however, is by no means as yet the worst. Stunted and 
deformed characters have sometimes accomplished . great 
things in the Kingdom of God. Nay even a sanctified egotism, 
provided it be intensely conscious of its vocation for the ser- 
vice of the truth, is not an uncommon phenomenon in the 
annals of religion. In the present case, however, the 
issue reaches out beyond such self-concentration of service. 
What is found fault with in Paul is egotism per se. It was 
something that sprang from a most intense desire for life, 
and that physical life. Nor was this purely negative, viz. the 
instinctive protest of human nature against death as a mon- 
strous thing; it had assumed the character of an unquench- 
able thirst for bliss and glory. From this point of view the 
Apostle’s entire eschatological “obsession” has been with great 
sharpness interpreted by Kabisch.’ The Paul of Kabisch might 
be properly called the gluttonous man and wine-bibber among 
the eschatologists of the New Testament. Under this author’s 
treatment almost all conceptions and processes are physicized. 
The fire by which the products ofa man’s work are destroyed, 
and from which he himself is narrowly saved at the last day 
(1 Cor. ili. 13-15), Paul is supposed to have understood as 


_  5The Eschatology of Paul, 1893; cp. the review of this book by Dr. 
Purves in The Presbyterian and Reformed Review, 1894, p. 143. 


ETHICO-RELIGIOUS MOTIVATION 69 


literal physical fire; the insistence upon the value of his body 
and the eager longing for its preservation and restoration, so 
as to avoid an intervening period of nakedness between the 
moments of death and resurrection, are but symptoms of a 
vulgar interest in such delights as the possession of a future 
body alone could render possible:/This would be the extreme 
form of the idea of reward viewed from its reprehensible 
subjective side. It goes without saying that such a type of be- 
lief did not, according to Kabisch, spring chiefly from the Old 
Testament but rather from the Rabbinical and Apocalyptic 
ideas of later Judaism. Notwithstanding the distorted and 
extravagant features of -Kabisch’s book, it may serve as a 
caution against certain hyper-“spiritualized” interpretations 
of New Testament religion, to which all occupation with the 
body as of religious interest has virtually become indifferent 
or even repellent. In the store set by the body Paul reveals 
himself, not in the first place, the pupil of Apocalyptic, but a 
true heir of the Old Testament tradition. That to the latter, 
so far as it had attained an outlook into the future life, the 
body could have in no wise appeared unimportant, hardly 
needs proof; the question would rather lie the other way, 
whether the idea of a purely spiritual, unembodied entity had, 
as concerns man, as yet entered within its purview. All that 
is related in the Messianic prophecies concerning the enjoy- 
ments of the future age is inseparable from the existence and 
functioning of the body. It is not otherwise with Jesus, who 
likewise associated with the resurrection the reendowment of 
the heirs of the age to come with a true body.® The correct 
interpretation of the passage Matt. xxii. 30; Mk. xii. 25; Lk. 
xx. 30 leads to the same conclusion, for, although in the 
abstract the idea of a resurrection without a body is not un- 
thinkable, and actually occurs in the Apocalyptic literature,’ 


6 Cp. The Bible Student, Vol. III, 1901, pp. 189-97. 

7 Charles, A Critical History of the Doctrine of a Future Life, 2nd 
ed., 1913, pp. 205ff. finds the belief in a resurrection without the body 
in the two following writings of the First Century B.c. En. xci-civ and 
Psalt. Sol. Prior to this it occurs only in En. vi.-xxxvi, dated by 
Charles from the preceding century. In the First Century after Christ, 


70 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


yet from the discourse of Jesus in the passages cited such an 
idea is plainly excluded. The being “like unto angels’ (Lk. 
Vv. 36 lodyyerol efor) does not express similarity to the angels 
in every respect, but only in regard to the absence of the 
faculty of procreation; for conveying the idea of bodiless 
existence not ¢cos but o“otes would have had to be employed. 
A comparison of the passage with other utterances of Jesus 
leads to the same result.° The two classical contexts I Cor. 
“xv and 2 Cor. v are explainable only from the standpoint 
of one to whom a bodiless existence in the world to come 
would have fallen short of the ideal of supreme blessedness. 
There must have been some powerful motive underlying such 
a state of mind. Mere emotional shrinking from a condition 
of nakedness, while to some extent involved, will not com- 
pletely account for it. But to say that the Apostle loved his 
body, and loved it for specific eschatological reasons, is by no 
means equivalent to saying that this love sprang from hedon- 
istic desire. Other things might very well have come under 
consideration. For one thing the wish for redemptive consum- 
mation should be taken into account. Paul was not a man 
easily satisfied with half-way attainment in the redemptive 
sphere. He was governed by the absolutistic impulse, which 
is in the same manner characteristic of the teaching of our 
Lord. Nor should we dismiss in such a connection the ideal 
of a fuller measure of glorification of God through the com- 
pletely restored organism of man than would be possible in a 
disembodied state.® Not the slightest evidence, however, can be 
produced of an anticipation of, far less of a legitimate escha- 
tological satisfaction cherished by Paul apart from God and 
the enjoyment of communion with Him. Had he been ani- 
mated by an irreligious interest in the things of the future 
life, then the inevitable accompaniment of this would have 
on the other hand, he finds it represented in the Book of Wisdom, the 
writings of Philo, and 4 Macc. 
8 Cp. Matt. viii. 11, and in general the realistic terms in which Jesus 
speaks of the life to come, a mode of speech inconceivable without belief 


in a body. 
Oot Gocivic13,°10> Phil aise tale nessa wires 


ETHICO-RELIGIOUS MOTIVATION 71 


been a pronounced individualism. In reality the eschatological 
interest attaches with Paul to the large collective happenings 
rather than to the destiny of the individual, although, of 
course, the latter can never be wholly kept separated from the 
former. In 1 Cor. xv the center of gravity does not lie invs. 58 » 
but in vs. 28. The intense Christ-ward bent of the Apostle’s 
piety also is irreconcilable with the type of hedonism laid to 
his charge. If hedonism be principially individualistic, then 
the inclusion of additional egos would be bound to break 
its force. The climacteric consolation extended to the Thes- 
salonians in connection with their ultimate deliverance is that 
they shall “be forever with the Lord,” 1. iv. 17. Where the 
note of joy and glory enters it is not seldom produced by the 
sense of pride arising from the presentation of believers in 
holiness and blamelessness at the parousia rather than from 
any hedonistic prospect opening up for the Apostle himself, 
Poriess, ii:19, 20.*° 

A thorough discussion of the alternative of self-interested- 
ness or altruism in the Apostle’s eschatological consciousness 
can not be given except in the closest dependence on the two 
fundamental realities which make up for him the content of 
the eternal state. These two realities are that of “life” and 
of “glory.” The investigation of these two, however, belongs 
to the concluding chapter of our treatise, that dealing with 
the future world. Before reaching that subject of “‘static’”’ 
eschatology, we shall have to deal with the preceding dra- 
matic developments. It is to the consideration of these that 
we now proceed. 


10 Of course, it is not intended to deny to Paul that transfigured 
spiritualized type of “hedonism,” if one prefers so to call it, as distinct 
from the specific attitude towards life that went in the later Greek phi- 
losophy by that technical name. Nothing, not even a most refined Chris- 
tian experience and cultivation of religion are possible without that. It is 
concreated with “the seed of religion” in man. Augustine speaks of this 
in his Confessions in these words: “For there exists a delight that is 
not given to the wicked, but to those honoring Thee, O God, without 
desiring recompense, the joy of whom Thou art Thyself! And this is the 
blessed life, to rejoice towards Thee, about Thee, for Thy sake.” Conf. 
X, 32. 


CHAPTER IV 


THE COMING OF THE LORD AND ITS 
PRECURSORS 


The two overtowering final events in the drama of escha- 
tology are the Resurrection and the Judgment. As we shall 
presently see they are the points where the rivers of history 
issue into the ocean. There are numerous subsidiary streams, 
but, regarded from the standpoint of the ultimate basin as a 
whole, these are but minor affluents whose waters do not 
reach the sea except by way of the two principal outlets. 
That of the latter there are two, and only two, is due to the 
inherently religious, and partly remedial, character of the 
process of which eschatology is the consummation. The 
Judgment is, of course, the inevitable summing up of a 
_ world-process that has fallen subject to the moral abnor- 
- mality of sin; the Resurrection, after a parallel manner, serves 
for restoring what has become the prey of decadence and 
death. Where both purposes have been accomplished, their 
accomplishment makes zpso facto provision for whatever else 
in detail is disordered in the present age. Only in regard to — 
the resurrection an additional factor must be taken into ac- 
count. What pertains to it can not be exhaustively deduced 
from the remedial necessity created by sin and death. For the 
eschatological process is intended not only to put man back 
at the point where he stood before the invasion of sin and 
death, but to carry him higher to a plane of life, not attained 
before the probation, nor, so far as we can see, attainable 
without it. 

This double-faced aspect of the final issues of history and 
redemption is in itself conceivable without a specifically- 
Messianic complexion. Many a time in the Old Testament 
the conclusion of things, both by way of judgment and 
of transformation, is connected with the epiphany of Jehovah 


THE “COMING” AND ITS PRECURSORS 73 


without Messianic assistance. In fact the characterization of 
the great double event as a “coming” of the Messianic figure 
is very rare in the Old Testament. Even at the first opening 
of New Testament revelation in the disclosures made to the 
family of John the Baptist, and subsequently through the 
latter himself, the other mode of representation, that of the 
Lord’s (God’s) coming still maintains itself. In the teaching 
of Jesusand particularly with Paul the terminology undergoes 
a deep change in this respect. While the description of the 
end-crisis as a signal interposition of God is never entirely in 
abeyance, we may say that on the whole it gives way to that 
of the coming of Christ. This is highly significant, because 
the term “coming” had in certain connections become prac- 
tically a technical term for eschatological eventuation, just as 
we are accustomed to speak of the “parousia’’ meaning with- 
out explanation that of Jesus. Now this whole complex was 
bodily shifted from Jehovah-God to the Messianic circle of - 
thought. The greatand uniformly expected “coming”’ is hence- 
forth a coming of the Messiah. Perhaps no more sweeping 
and in its effects more momentous transfer of a fundamental 
Old Testament concept and its reincarnation, as it were, in 
the New Testament frame of thought than this can be 
imagined. It should not be forgotten, of course, that the 

1JIn the O.T. “coming” of God in the eschatological sense: Ps. 1. 3; 
Ixxx. 2; lix. 20; Zech. xiv. 5; Mal. iii. 1; iv. 6; of the Messiah’s 
advent: Gen. xlix. 10; Num. xxiv. 17 (“shall rise’); Dan. vii. 13; 
tor the N.T. cp. Matt. xxiv. 3, 27, 37, 39; 1 ‘Cor. xv. 23; 1 Thess. ii. 19; 
ieetaives 153 ¥. 23; 2 Thess, ii. 1,.8' (vs. 9 af: “the Man of Sin”); 
eae vez. -o, t Pet. ii. 12 (of God); 2 Pet. i. 16; iii..4, 12 (of “the 
day of God’). To these must be added the references to “the day of 
the Lord,” so far as with certainty they mean by “Lord” Christ: Rom. 
eee 1 Aor, 1) 6; /tii.-135 “v.55 2 Cor..1, 14% *‘Phil,. 1, 6, 10; i. 16; 
emiess, Vv, 2 (4) > v¥.5,0; 2 Thess. 11. 2; 2) Tim.i. 18; iv, 8; 1: Pet. ii, 10, 
The term “ézidaveia” likewise ought to be taken into account, because of 
its O.T. frequency with regard to Jehovah; it occurs connected with 
Jesus’ future coming in 2 Thess. ii. 8 (joined to parousia) ; 1 Tim. vi. 14; 
2 Tim. i. 10; iv. 1, 8; Tit. ii. 13; finally “droxdAvfis” likewise comes 
under consideration as an example of transference from the O.T.: 1 Cor. 
Sen 2 Thess. 1. 7; 1 Pet. 1, 7, 133 iv. 13. 

Cp. for the pervasiveness of the idea of “coming” in biblical escha- 
tology, Sellin, Der alttestamentliche Prophetismus, p. 181. 


74 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


transference was facilitated by the attribution of the Kyrios- 
title to Jesus, which made it almost unavoidable to identify 
the “coming” of Jehovah-Kurios with the advent of the 
Messiah. Nevertheless the significance of the phenomenon 
remains. It lies not so much 1n the frequency of the associa- 
tion of Jesus with the eschatological crisis, but rather in the 
simultaneous disappearance of more or less similar escha- 
tological terms once connected with God. 

First we deal with the Pauline use of the term “parousia.” 
This occurs of Christ in the following passages: I Cor. xv. 
233.1 Thess. 11, 193111. °133°iv. 153 Vv. 233.2 7 bnesounaa 
8, (9). Being originally an appellative, in course of time 
the word tended to become a proper noun, the advent of Jesus 
at the end to such an extent monopolized its usage that other 
connections were lost sight of. This had for its further re- 
sult, that in the later stage no determinative Genitive was 
required any longer, “‘the parousia’ being in Christian par- 
lance referable to. one event only, and therefore not in 
need of closer specification. But such was not the original em- 
ployment of the word; the specific de-genitivized use lies be- 
yond the New Testament and the early Christian period. In 
the Pauline Epistles there are half a dozen passages where 
the Apostle speaks of his own parousia or of that of his own 
fellow-workers in the Gospel, in each case, of course, with 
the necessary personal determination: I Cor. xvi. 17 (of 
Stephanas); 2 Cor. vil. 6, 7 (of Titus); x. Io (of the 
body of Paul); Phil. 1. 26; 11. 12 (of Paul). It is true, even 
in such cases the word carries a certain stress of solemnity or 
importance, due to the consequences associated with the ar- 
rival of the person in question. Of the advent of the 


~~ Messiah “‘parousia” does not occur in the Jewish literature. 


With an approach to eschatological meaning it appears in 
“The Testaments of the XII Patriarchs,’ where Test. Jud. 
xxiii. 3 we read of “the parousia of the God of Righteous- 
ness,” which certainly sounds as if a degree of affinity be- 
tween it and the eschatological manner of speech had begun to 


THE “COMING” AND ITS PRECURSORS 75 


be felt.* In its secular as well as in its religious-eschatological 
use the word expresses the two closely connected ideas of 
arrival and presence. Parousia signifies “becoming present” 
and “being present” for a longer or shorter period. Some- 
what of an analogy to this is furnished by the double sense 
of the English word ‘“‘visit.” It has been surmised that in 
parousia the static significance was the original one, out of 
which the other developed. This, however, is not certain. In 
the New Testament the idea of occurrence, arrival, plainly 
stand in the foreground.’ Of chief importance to note is the 
absence of the notion “again” from the word considered by 
itself. The noun means “arrival,” not ‘return.’”’* It can not 
correctly be rendered by “second coming.’ When the Chris- 
tians spoke of the parousia of their Lord, they were, of 
course, aware and mindful that the event spoken of was in 
point of fact a second arrival, duplicating in a certain respect 
that of the incarnation. Still there did not develop out of this 
consciousness the phrase “second parousia.” That this did 
not happen is only explainable from the intensively prospec- 
tive outlook of the early Church. So many things and such 
absolutely-consummating things had become associated with 
the parousia of the Messiah, that only the catastrophe of the 


2 Occurrences in extra-biblical Greek: Soph. El. 1104; Eur. Alc. 209; 
in the later period: Pol. 23, 10, 14; Dion Hal. 1, 45, 4; Thuc. 1, 128, 2. 
In the Greek O.T. Neh. ii. 6 (variant reading wopeia); Jud. x. 18; 
2 Macc. Vili. 12; xv. 21; 3 Macc..iii. 17. 

8 How close the two lie together can be estimated from the fact that 
the coming is not for bringing other things, but has for its chief purpose 
the bringing by the Lord of Himself to his own; cp. 1 Thess. iv. 17, On 
the background of the “parousia” lies the “apousia’; this naturally 
tends towards making the static sense a subject of attention; in the 
passages where the parousia of others is spoken of, the comforting 
note of abiding presence, at least for a time, is distinctly co-audible; 
mer or, xvi. 17; 2: Cor.: viil.,6, 73 Phil. 1.26; 11. 12. 

4The English rendering is in regard to the point of time less explicit 
than the German “Zukunft” and the Dutch “toekomst,” both of which are 
compound nouns in which the element of futurity is coexpressed. The 
English lacks such a word and has to content itself with “coming,” 
which, to be sure, is a more correct rendering of “parousia.” The futur- 
ity of the event can be supplied through joining the auxiliary to the verb: 
1 Cor. xv. 23. 


76 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


last days seemed capable of attracting and retaining the word 
for itself. This undoubtedly differs from the gravitation of 
present-day Christianity towards the historical life of Jesus 
in the past. The New Testament believer felt that while the 
Messiah had entered the world and been present in it, never- 
theless the epochal coming, the one fully worthy of that 
name, the actual parousia of the Lord, belonged to the 
future. While the centering of Christian contemplation upon 
the nativity is both justified and understandable, yet it is 
more in the line of doctrinal perspective than in the line of 
instinctive, immediate apprehension of things.’ Paul in this 
respect occupies the same standpoint as Peter and James, 
whilst in the Synoptics, if not the term “‘parousia,”’ at least 
a past “coming” is predicated of Jesus, and that in words 
spoken by Jesus Himself. 

~ The parousia taken as an event is with Paul catastrophic. 
Of a development within the limits of the concept, or a du- 
plication or triplication of the event there is nowhere any 
trace. It is a point of éventuation, not a series of successive 
events. About the questioi; whether it ushers in the “millen- 
nium” or the eternal state, nothing can, of course, be de- 
cided by this in itself. Only, if it should be found to refer to 
an “interregnum,” then this by stress of usage would be apt 
so closely to bind it to the chiliastic complex of hope, as to 
dim the eternity-prospect beyond. It designates the momen- 
tous event, and consequently that which it opens up must 
needs carry a supreme, absolute weight to the religious 
consciousness. To conceive of Paul as focusing his mind on 
any phase of relative consummation, and as tying up to this 
the term “parousia,” inevitably would involve his relegating 
the eternal things to a rank of secondary importance. It 
would have meant a repetition, or perhaps a continuation, of 
the Judaistic scheme of thought.* Whether the evidence 


5 The fact stated should not be exploited to deny the Messianic com- 
plexion or consciousness of our Lord’s earthly life. The joint-occur- 
rence in Paul of the two ideas “has come” and “will come” proves that 
the one point of view need not exclude the other. 

6A difference is observable here between the terminology in regard 


THE “COMING” AND ITS PRECURSORS 77 


bears out the conclusion here anticipated (and in a certain 
sense “prejudiced” ) the subsequent discussion of the chili- 
asm-problem in Paul’s eschatology will have to determine. 
A chiliasm-parousia tends to make for a chiliasm-complexion 
of the final state as a whole. And this would be worse than 
the Judaism of 4 Ezra and the Ap. of Baruch. What 
appears there as a compromise between the temporal and 
transcendental strands would with Paul have become a 
principial appraisal of the former above the latter. The vista 
of the transcendental world of heaven would have become 
all but effaced by the concrete shapes moving in the temporal 
foreground. . 

A second term descriptive with Paul of the eschatological 
coming of Christ is the term “revelation,” @roxaduyis. This 
@ecurs 2 Thess.i.7; Cor. 1,7; iii. 13; (Rom. it. 5; vili718). 
The idea of a “revelation” of the Messiah is older than Chris- 
tianity. It did not first grow out of the belief of the present 
hidden life of Jesus in heaven which began with his with- 
drawal at the ascension and will come to an end through an 
open reappearance in the last day. The older eschatology had 
already learned to conceive of a twofold sense of this re- 
vealing. In some cases the conception moves entirely within 
the terrestrial sphere, both the hiding and the unveiling 
(revelation) taking place on earth, whatever place or time 
of existence might be further put back of that. The belief 
existed in certain circles that the Messiah, after his birth 
into this lower world, would for some time be kept hidden 
in some unknown place on earth, and that not until the ap- 
pointed moment He would leave this hiding-place, and show 
Himself in public to the people, to perform his specific task, 
to the parousia and the kingdom. The latter is duplicable; it comes in 
instalments; so in the Gospels, where the present and the eschatological 
kingdom are clearly distinguished. Nevertheless this has not led to any 
duplication of the “parousia” of the Christ. The latter is one and indi- 
visible. The nearest that (in terminology of the kingdom) comes to a 
twofold advent is such a saying as John xiv. 3, but the parousia-idea is 
foreign to the Johannine writings with the exceptions of 1 John ii. 28, 


where the word refers to the end and excludes a preliminary occurrence 
no less than in Paul. Cp. further Heb. ix. 27, 28. 


78 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


cp..I Ap. Bar, xxix!’ 3; xxx. 1; 4 Ezr. vii, 28; Dest, eyes 
An instance of his Jewish belief is recorded in Jno. 
vii. 27: “When the Christ comes, no one knows whence 
He is,’ although the idea thus suggested is in no wise 
countenanced by Jesus or the Evangelist. Apart from this 
the Scriptural passages are all framed on the principle of a 
direct translation from the heavenly into the earthly regions, 
so as to impart to “apocalypsis”’ a technical (theological) 
sense, applied frequently to the transfer, or coming down, of 
great things, from the supernal to the terrestrial sphere. In 
this sense we meet with it already in the vision of Dan. vii. 
which depicts one like unto a son of man (== man) as com- 
ing with the clouds of heaven, words which certainly assume 
a previous existence, although giving as yet no information, 
how far the preéxistence was understood to reach back in 
time or into eternity. This general background, however, of 
a revelation from heaven, could not but assume a quite dif- 
ferent complexion through becoming correlated with the 
visible disappearance of Jesus into heaven, and thus coupled 
with the promise of a likewise visible movement in the 
opposite direction, viz. his appearance in the future. That, 
rather than the incarnation, now become his “revelation” par 
excellence.* 

The flavor attaching to the term “apocalypsis” differs 
somewhat from that carried by the term” “parousia.” The 
latter concerns believers chiefly, the former the enemies of 


rr ene cA 


God’s people, though in neither case exclusively SO. "so. In 2 | 


7 The above statement does not, of course, exclude, that in the Apoca- 
lyptic writings (and sometimes in the same books), most transcendental 
representations of the Messianic introduction into the earthly world 
occur side by side with the other. Cp. the writings above cited. — 

8In the First Epistle of Peter, where the idea of the hidden invisible 
existence of Jesus and his salvation in heaven is stressed, the escha- 
tological usage of “revelation” is likewise in evidence; cp. i. 13; v. 4. 
In i. 20 the word is davepovy instead of dwoxadvrrev. This passage 
is a striking proof for the eternal actual preéxistence of Christ. “Fore- 
known before the ages” and “manifested in these last times” yields an 
impossible contrast, unless “foreknown” be given the pregnant sense 
of “eternally beloved as an existing being.” 


THE “COMING” AND ITS PRECURSORS 79 


Thess. i. 7, 8 the militant revelation is described in the 
following terms: “‘At the revelation of the Lord Jesus from 
heaven with the angels of his power, rendering vengeance 
to them that know not God, and to them that obey not the 
gospel of our Lord Jesus.” To believers the appearance of 
Christ will partake of the character of a “revelation,” inas- 
much as his glory has not been visibly disclosed to them 
before. The idea is in all passages plainly implied, that 


Jesus’ eschatological revelation will bear the features of a =~ 


strictly momentary, miraculous act. While things preceding 
and preparing for it do not, of course, lack all gradual and 
orderly unfolding, yet the event itself is catastrophic in the 
absolute sense, nay this very idea of suddenness and unex- 
pectedness seems to be intimately associated with the word. 
Hence of the “Anomos”’ of 2 Thess. ii. 3, 6, 8 an @moxaduis 
is predicted; many forces may after a hidden, mysterious 
manner work towards the ripeness of the time for his ac: 
tivity, none the less he is to be revealed “in his time.”’ 

A third term designating Christ’s advent is 1) 7mépa. 
1 Thess. v. 4; 2 Cor. ili. 13; (Heb. x. 25). This is found in 
various forms, according to the complements added to it. In 
Paul’s writings the following of these enlarged designations 
occur : 
n Hepa ToD Kupiov, 1 Thess. v. 2; 2 Thess. ii. 2; 1 Cor. v. 
5 (Acts ii. 20; iil. 10) ; 


SR 


n nwépa ToD Kupiov nue, t Cor. 1. 8; 


ers 


 nuépa TOV Kupiov *Incov, 2 Cor. i. 14; 

» nuépa “Inood Xpiorod, Phil. i. 6; 

n Huépa Xpictod, Phil. i. 10; ii, 16; 

The first of these forms is a rendering of the O. T. phrase 
“the day of Jehovah.’ Hence, in regard to some passages 
there is doubt, whether “the Lord” in it be meant as the 
Greek translation “Lord” = “Adonaj” = “Jehovah,” or sig- 
nifies the Lord Jesus. Where the name “Jesus” is found in 
apposition, or the pronoun “our” is appended, there can be, 
of course, no doubt but Christ is meant. Absolutely certain 


of this we can not be, when the title simply reads “the Lord.” 


SO THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


As to the import and bearing of the word “day,” various 
theories are being held,of none of which absolute certainty 
can be affirmed. Some think the origin lies in the conception 
of Jehovah as a victorious warrior, who has his day in which 
He will be the center of the entire scene of battle and victory, 
the day thus being monopolized by Him and filled with the 
revelation of his glory. There are certain contexts in Paul 
which favor this association. According to 1 Thess. v. 2; 
ii. 8 the day brings with it destruction for the enemies of 
God’s people. The O.T. usage is to a large extent in accord 
with this ::Am. v: 18; Hos. i::113 Isa, 112; x. 3 Xi Oyen 
Xxxiv..8; Jer. -xlvi. 10; Ez, vit! 195 xii. 55 xe 
4.15; 1.1, 11, 313 11. 14; Ob. 15; Zeph. 4.14, 15 
Mal. iv. 5.° 

Others think that the source of the idea must be sought in 
the terminology of judgment in the forensic sense. A judge 
or a court have their day on which they are in session. That 
such usage was not unfamiliar to Paul may be seen from 
I Cor. iv. 3: “But with me it is a very small thing that I 
should be judged of you, or of any man’s day.’”’*® The idea of 
a judgment-day is plainly associated with the phrase “day of 
the Lord,” wherever Paul by means of the idea urges the 
practice of holiness: Rom. 11. 16; 1 Cor. ii. 13; Phil. 1. 6, 10; 
11. 16. It should be remembered, however, that the punitive- 
realistic and the purely-forensic conceptions cannot in all 
cases be cleanly separated, as little as this can be done in the 
Old Testament.** 

In a couple of passages Paul seems to have colored the} 


®Tsa. ix. 4 has been quoted as furnishing an analogy through the 
phrase “the day of Midian”; cp. W. Robertson Smith, Prophets of 
Israel, p. 397. The comparison is not exact, because Midian, after whom 
the day is named, appears in it as the conquered, not as the victor, as 
Jesus does in the interpretation suggested in “the day of Jehovah.” 
Wellhausen calls attention to the Arabic phrase “the day of some tribe” 
for the day of its great victory. 

10 Cf, Acts xix. 38, ‘dyopatou’”’ (i.e. 7ugpar) are being held; it was easy 
for the adjective to drop out of the phrase. 

11 The “visitation” in Isa. x. 3 is a visitation for judgment; in the 
same ominous sense the word occurs in 1 Pet. ii. 12; Jude 6. 


THE “‘COMING’’ AND ITS PRECURSORS SI 


word “day” forming part of the phrase with the (not-purely 
chronological), but likewise physical-pictorial association of 
the element of “light.” “Light” belongs to the day as its char- 
acteristic, the opposite of the darkness that pertains to the 
night. Hence “the day of the Lord” can be visualized as a day 
of deliverance, joy and blessedness. There is perhaps no fig- 
ure more pregnant in its religious associations than the figure 
of “light.” In the sphere of the emotions (no less than in that 
of the intellect for knowledge) it is made to render service as 
a physical analogon for spiritual rejoicing. The two main pas- 
sages inviting to this, as at least a partial interpretation inter- 
woven with the preceding usage, are Rom. xiil. 11-14 and 
2 Thess. v. 1-8. According to the former the world-night is 
a time of wickedness, characterized, as the night-time in the 
pagan world usually is, by such things as revelling, drunken- 
ness, chambering, wantonness, strife, jealousy, because the 
publicity inseparable from daylight holds these and other 
things under restraint. vs. 13. Moreover, for the wicked as 
well as the good, the night is the period of sleep, vs. 11. Of this 
world-night the Apostle further affirms the nearness of the 
end: it is far spent; the emergency, therefore, demands 
watchfulness (“waking out of sleep’) and abstinence from 
all forms of pagan immorality, through the consciousness of 
the imminence of the crisis: it is high time; salvation, eschato- 
logical salvation, is relatively at hand.*” Believers must put on 
the “armor of light,” vs. 12. Besides the usual warning at- 
tached to the thought of the approaching moment of the judg- 
ment, there is here an allusion to the ushering in of the future 
state as a state of light, and salvation, a day in the literal (not 


12 Grossheide, De Verwachting der Toekomst van Jesus Christus, 
would apply vs. 29: “The time is short” to the nearness of death for 
individuals, and reveals in general a tendency to remove the strong 
sub-eschatological consciousness from the record through unrealistic 
exegesis. To confine ourselves to Paul, he interprets Phil. iv. 5 “The 
Lord is near,” of the Lord’s omnipresence. In Rom. xiii. 11 “now is 
salvation nearer” he puts upon “salvation” the otherwise quite permis- 
sible but here impossible sense of “the sum total of what the Christian 
obtains through faith, while of “nearer” he gives no satisfactory explan- 
ation. These and some other passages are grouped together under the 


82 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


merely chronological) sense; the day has become a qualitative 
conception, by reason of its association with light; the word 
has received ethico-religious import bono sensu, it is a day 
and not a night. And, through its contrast with “the night 
which is far spent,” it has also ceased to be the mere marking 
of a point in the eschatological process; this day so quickly 
to ensue is quantitatively stretched out toa period of extended 
duration. As the night had a course of which a “being far 
spent” could be predicated, so the day has its extension and 
means more, to speak in terms of the same figure, than the 
break of day, or the morning. 

In 1 Thess. v. 1-8 the contrast is in the first place one be- 
tween the ominous surprise which the arrival of the day 
of the Lord involves for the wicked when it arrives as a 
thief in the night, or as travail comes upon a woman with 
child. Up to the third verse, it will be observed, the contrast 
of light-darkness is still absent. In vss. 4-8, however, this 
element enters. On the whole it is utilized to stress the con- 
trast between the sobriety of the day and wantonness of the 
night; likewise between the heedlessness of the wicked and 
the watchful preparedness of believers. Still the statement in 
vs. 5: “Ye are all sons of the light and sons of the day” re- 
minds of the same allusion observable in Rom. xiii. Through- 
out the terminology of the two passages is strikingly the same. 
The occurrence of “light” as a soteric term in other connec- 
tions likewise adds force to the understanding here; cp. Eph. 
v. 8, 9, 13; Col. i. 12, Even in the O.T. there are points of 
contact, for the association of darkness, on the one hand, and 
light, on the other hand, with judgment and salvation. If one 
were to follow this lead, the proper paraphrase for “day of 


heading, “Scripture passages wrongly brought into connection with our 
subject” (the Parousia). For the other class (where the Parousia is 
actually involved) he quotes from Paul, 1 Cor. vii. 29; xv. 51; 1 Thess. 
iv. 15, 17; 2 Thess: ii. 1ff. The treatise is exceedingly valuable on 
account of the detailed lists inserted with each passage of previous, or 
contemporary, writers and their various views on the exegesis at issue. 
It deals, of course, not with Paul’s statements alone. 


THE “COMING” AND ITS PRECURSORS 83 


Jehovah” in the passages cited would be “the light-rpeign 
(day) of Jehovah” as well as “‘the dawn introducing it.”’"™ 

A remarkable feature about these several terms is their 
detachment from the precedents, attendants and subsequents 
of the crisis they describe. They mark the mere event to come; 
of further eschatological speculation they are void. The Apos- 
tle handles the theme in a large, one might almost say ab- 
stract, manner. Yet this is not due to the terms themselves, 
which are fully capable of a rich filling-up with solid concrete 
material. The cause will have to be sought in the constructive, 
history-building role eschatology had come to play in the mind 
of Paul. In view of the outstanding summit the detailed and 
scattered features on the slopes of the mountain have, while 
not entirely effaced, at least lost their sharpness of contour. 
While this may less satisfy the interest of eschatological 
curiosity, it for this very reason greatly contributes to the 
outstanding of the chief structural elevations. The trans- 
parency of the atmosphere secures for the latter a clear vision 
of their unique importance. 

It would be a mistake, however, to infer from this that for 
the Apostle the eschatological crisis bears no fixed organic 
relation to the preceding historical process. The very scheme 
of the two successive worlds renders it unthinkable that at any 
arbitrarily chosen point the world to come should supersede 
the world that is. The phrase TAnpapa Tod ypdvov, Gal. iv. 4, 
implies an orderly unrolling of the preceding stages of world- 
history towards a fixed end. It is true, this statement refers to 
what we call “the first coming” of Christ, but we must not 
forget that the whole drama enclosed between the two ‘“‘com- 
ings” is so much a unit for Paul, that orderly progression 
towards the close being characteristic of the former coming, 
a similar approach could not possibly be absent from the 


13Jn Am. v. 18 the prophet warns the wicked, that “the day of 
Jehovah” is darkness and not light. Evidently it had been considered 
by the people largely in the latter aspect, for they are said to “desire” it. 
Cp. on this passage and the O.T. usage of the phrase in general, 
Gressman, Der Ursprung der Israelitisch-jiidischen Eschatologie, pp. 


I4I-150. 


84 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


‘climacteric termination of the whole. But also in certain con- 
crete ways the Apostle has set definite limits to the continu- 
ance of the present aeon on its course, and thereby at the same 
time fixed the point of arrival for the world to come.” In 
Rom. viii. 19-23 the final stage appears as a painful birth- 
process: “The whole creation groans and travails in pain 
together until now.” A clear analogy to this is furnished by 
the Jewish theology, where it speaks of the “cheblet- 
hammashiah,’ “the birth-woes of the Messiah.’ While this 
explicitly refers only to the arrival of the Messiah himself, it 
undoubtedly carries with it the idea of great changes and new 
conditions to be ushered in by his momentous appearance. 
Still, a difference exists in this regard, that Paul has divested 
the idea of its limited form of expression, and made it ex- 
pressive of the entire foregoing world-process as character- 
ized by the universal prevalence of sin: “The creature was 
made subject to vanity”; it suffers from the bondage of cor- 
ruption in an all-inclusive sense; it waits in eager expectation 
for the liberating end. That the «riots “the creature” is meant 
here in distinction from man, the context clearly shows; par- 
ticularly the words “‘itself”’ and ‘‘ourselves also” (vss. 21, 23) 
preclude all doubt concerning this. How this grandiose con- 
ception was filled out in detail, and whether it involves the 
belief of a progressive, and in course of time accelerated, cor- 
ruption of nature cannot with certainty be determined, al- 

14 The word dives, technically “birth-throes,”’ does not occur in our 
passage; it is used by Paul figuratively of the destruction coming upon 
the wicked at the arrival of the day of the Lord, 1 Thess. v. 3. Being 

likewise found in our Lord’s eschatological discourse, Mark xiii. 8; 
Matt. xxiv. 8, it would seem to have acquired its specific association with 
the pains of childbirth previously. In itself it can denote any violent 
pain, Ps. xviii. 5ff., but the eschatological reference, both in the saying 
of Jesus and here is not subject to doubt. The ktisis here in Romans 
seems to be the lower ktisis, whereas according to the Gospel-prophecy 
also astral bodies are involved. The usage goes back in general, and 
here with Paul in particular, to the curse upon the soil pronounced in 
the account of the fall. That Paul looked upon his own time as exhibiting 
an extreme intensity of the curse, and a correspondingly strong aspiration 


of nature towards deliverance, is not capable of proof. The thing dates 
from the beginning; cp. “until now” in vs. 22. 


THE “‘COMING”’ AND ITS PRECURSORS 85 


though this idea would fit well into the general scheme of 
Paul’s thought. It should be noticed, however, that the rep- 
resentation reflects a genuinely sympathetic feeling towards 
the lot of subhuman nature. Paul is sometimes charged (in 
distinction from Jesus) with a lack of sensibility towards 
the natural, subhuman world, but here at least with a cer- 
tain tenderness he sympathizes with the pitiable lot of the 
lower creation. Whether there lies back of this mere per- 
sonification, or whether perhaps, as some would believe, it 
betrays the ascription of a degree of consciousness to the ani- 
mal and vegetable, or even the astral, world, is a question at 
least worth considering. The terms used certainly are strong: 
the creature manifests an doxapadox(a for the manifesta- 
tion of the sons of God. The contrast between willingness and 
unwillingness is introduced to describe the tenor of the crea- 
ture’s subjection. The creation follows in this not its own 
natural bent but finds itself implicated in the woeful destinies 
of mankind. In this fact lies, on the other hand, also the rea- 
son for its ultimate deliverance, which on account of such 
origin must coincide with the removal of the bondage of man 
to corruption and his endowment with the glorious liberty 
of the coming age. One almost gets the impression, as though 
this remarkable piece of the philosophy of nature were intro- 
duced as a foil to the wilfully wicked self-surrender of man 
to his enslavement by sin. It is scarcely subject to doubt that 
the participle iaordéas does refer to man, not to God. 
The strain of pessimism in Paul with regard to the world 
in its sub-redemptive state is plainly traceable here. It is, 
however, no more absolute pessimism than is the Apostle’s 
estimate of the ethico-religious condition of unredeemed 
mankind. The gloom of the one, no less than that of the 
other, is in anticipation dispersed by the assurance of the 
glorious deliverance at the end. The redemptive optimism lies 
deeper and by far outweighs the pessimism of the sense of 
sin and corruption, cp. Rom. vii. 18. 

More particularly relating to social conditions in the 
circle of believers is the évecréca avayxy spoken of in 1 Cor. 


86 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


vii. 26, in view of which the Apostle inclines towards dis- 
suading such as are single from entrance upon the state of 
marriage. The phrase in itself has no eschatological color ; 
nevertheless, in view of the context evidently requires to be 
understood in that light. The average troubles connected with 
married life as such can scarcely be referred to. Nor is justice 
done to the language by thinking of marital troubles made 
more complex and burdensome for Christians through im- 
pending persecution. A quite particular aggravation of the 
distress referred to must have stood before the Apostle’s 
mind according to the closing words of vs. 28: “Neverthe- 
less such shall have trouble in the flesh, and I would spare 
you.” In the decisiveness of these words “shall have trouble” 
the eschatological note clearly makes itself heard. A quite spe- 
cial tribulation is imminent. Explicitly this is affirmed by the 
opening clause of vs. 29: “The time is short.’”’ The manner 
in which this statement is introduced by: “This I say, 
brethren,” shows that the expectation of the nearness of the 
end carries the emphasis. But the words “the time is short” 
certainly cannot have the rather banal sense, that it is no 
longer worth while to marry. The shortness or rather “con- 
tractedness” of the time serves simply as a reminder of the 
belief that the parousia may not be far distant, and that from 
the parousia all sorts of worldly distress are inseparable. 
Thus understood the idea of the present “anangke” and the 
statement “the time is short’ fit perfectly into each other. 
But there appears in the context still a third motive pointing 
to the same conclusion. The counsel takes in view other rela- 
tionships and occupations, vss. 30, 31: they that weep should 
be as though they wept not, and they that rejoice as though 
they rejoiced not, and they that buy as though they possessed 
not, and they that use this world, as not abusing it. And the 
reason for all this is given in vs. 31: “the fashion of this 
world passes away.” But here again the readers are imme-. 
diately reminded of the fact that the relevancy of the advice, 
so far from resting on a purely chronological opinion as to 
the nearness of the event, derives its main force from the 


THE “COMING” AND ITS PRECURSORS 87 


state of mind in which the Christian ought to contemplate 
the end and make ready for it. The underlying idea is none, 
other than that the times preceding the parousia require a 
unique concentration of the minds of believers upon the. 
Lord and the manner in which they may best please Him. | 
The last days are to be days of undivided and most assidu- 
ous interest in the Lord and the unparalleled mode in which 
He may soon come to reveal Himself: “He that is un- 
married cares for the things that belong to the Lord, how 
he may please the Lord; but he that is married cares for the 
things that are of the world, how he may please his wife.” 
There is difference also in regard to this between a wife and 
a virgin. The unmarried woman cares for the things of the 
Lord, that she may be holy both in body and in spirit: but 
she that is married cares for the things of the world, how 
she may please her husband” vss. 32-34.*° 

A further datum making the time of the parousia depen- 
dent on certain future developments is furnished by Rom. ix. > 
T1-15; 25-32. Here Paul outlines in broad strokes the course 
determined for the extension of the Gospel to those to be 
saved through its effect. This outline has the peculiarity that 
it names not only the bare facts, but to some extent adds a 
psychological and soteric explanation, so that one might 
call it a philosophy of the history of the church in the widest 
sense. The close connection between it and eschatology lies in 
two statements: vs. 15, where the result of the ‘“ TpecAnuynis” 
i.e., the receiving back of the unbelieving majority of the Jews 
into favor brings with itself what is called “life from the 
dead.” The climacteric nature of the event to be expected as 
the issue of the unfolding ways of God forbids to tone 
down this phrase to the purely-metaphorical, making it fall 
within the terms of mere spiritual revival. “Life from the 


15The form of marriage in use among the Dutch Churches gen- 
eralizes the idea of affliction as connected with marriage, so as to detach 
it from the eschatological background it has in our passage: “Inasmuch 
as ordinarily those that are married are subject to manifold adversities 
and crosses on account of sin,” etc. 


88 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


dead”? must refer to the resurrection specifically so named, 
and so understood it presupposes the beginning of the closing 
act of the eschatological drama. The second statement, lead- 
ing to the same conclusion, is found in vss. 25 and 26: “blind- 
ness in part is happened to Israel, until the fulness (aAnpwpa) 
of the Gentiles be come in and so ( ofrws) all Israel shall be 
saved, as it is written, There shall come out of Sion the 
Deliverer, and shall turn ungodliness away from Jacob.” In 
this last statement, it is true, the immediate supervention of 
the eschatological crisis upon the preceding events is not 
directly affirmed, but it is clearly enough implied in this 
that the twofold great purpose of the Gospel-preaching will © 
have at that point been attained, the bringing in of the ful- 
ness of both Gentiles and Jews. The motive effecting this stu- 
pendous reversal in the attitude towards the Gospel on the 
part of the Jews is described by Paul as a “zapafydodv ,’ OF, 
in the passive, “apatyndoic0a.” In vs. 14 Paul applies the 
principle involved even to the scattering results of his own 
Apostolic missionary activity among the Jews. There the 
“parazeloon”’ includes the indirect aim: “if by any means | 
may provoke to jealousy my flesh (the Jews), and so save 
some of them.” This subsidiary purpose the Apostle pursues 
alongside of and through the opportunities offered him in his 
evangelizing of the Gentiles, vss. 13, 14: “For I speak to 
you Gentiles, inasmuch as I am (specifically) the Apostle of 
the Gentiles, I magnify mine office (even so far as primarily 
it extends to the Gentiles), if by any means I may save some 
of them (the Jews ).’’ Nevertheless such conversions remain for 
the present but sporadic examples, though at bottom expressive 
of a divine principle intended to work itself out on the largest 
of scales at the predetermined point in the future. And this 
is intimated in vs. 11: “Have they (the Jews) stumbled that 
they should fall? God forbid, but rather through their fall 
salvation is come unto the Gentiles, for to provoke them (the 
Jews) to jealousy.” The “parazeloun” of x. 19 in a quotation 
from Deut. xxxii. 21 is of a somewhat different nature, for 
its proximate effect is “aapopyifobv,” “to provoke to anger.” 


THE “COMING” AND ITS PRECURSORS 8&9 


Paul, however, may have looked upon the anger aroused in 
the hearts of the Jews through the marvellous success of the 
Gentile mission as a sort of negative preparation for the 
“parazelousthai”’ in the nobler sense. It can only lead to con- 
fusion not to distinguish between the single conversions 
spoken of in such statements and this comprehensive eschato- 
logical recovering of the unbelieving Jews. The “pleroma”’ 
held in prospect for them stands in contrast to the “#rrnwa” 
and “craparrepa” of vs. 12. Both words, taken together with 
the question of vs. 11, leave no doubt but the general, national 
apostasy of Israel is referred to, and consequently the recov- 
ery from this must bear the same collective interpretation. 
Just as the “riches of the world,” and the “riches of the 
Gentiles” take the pagan world in its organic, collective 
sense, so the other term in the antithesis requires the same 
understanding. It need scarcely be added, that “collective” 
is not identical with a “universalistically”’-conceived extension 
of the two effects to all single men on either side. If it were, 
then the curious question could not have been so simply 
passed by as to what in Paul’s view had become, or was to 
become, of the individuals who had died away or were to die 
away in the intervening time between the setting in of the 
hardening of Israel and the end.It is precisely characteristic 
of the passage that it abstains from the consideration, far 
more the solution, of such problems, and speaks in ethnic 
terms. Only with this in mind can we take the events as tend- 
ing more or less directly to the eschatological consumma- 
tion.*® The phrase “‘srapwars ard wépous,” “hardening in part,” 


16“Tlds ’IopayA” could, of course, when taken by itself, mean the 
joint-body of the people of God composed of Jews and Gentiles by race. 
Whether it can bear this meaning in the surrounding context is a 
different question. This we feel bound to deny. 

As to “otrws” in the clause at the beginning of vs. 26, “And ovrws 
all Israel shall be saved,’ this is sometimes rendered by “then” 
owing to the (involuntary) injection of chronological progression 
into the passage. When translated “thus,” it cannot signify aught else 
than “in the working out of the principle stated,” “after this manner” ; 
ep. Zahn, Komm. ¢ N.T., Romer, p. 523, note 66, who paraphrases, with 
appeal to Acts xvii. 33; xX. II; xxviii. 17, “not until after this has 


go THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


p. 25, bears strong witness to the necessity of the collective 
exegesis. On the other hand, a frank recognition of this state 
of facts ought not to be exploited, as it often is, in the inter- 
est of a total denial of the Pauline doctrine of sovereign 
election as an integral factor in the salvation of individuals. 
The evidence of Paul’s firm belief in that and the supreme 
importance it bears for the whole construction of his soteri- 
ology and eschatology is superabundant. Even 1f Rom. ix-xi 
were entirely left out of account this would still hold abso- 
lutely true. The trouble arises from too much mechanical 
exegesis expended on these particular chapters without pene- 
trating into the inner core of the doctrine and from over- 
hasty disregard of the numerous statements where this core 
comes into view. Nor should it be overlooked that even in the 
very opening up of the problem as regards Israel in the pres- 
ent in Ch. ix several times an individualistic turn is given to 
the idea of election. Apart from its national application the 
principial significance of the doctrine in soterics shines 
through everywhere in the argument. The Apostle was not 
led first from the ethnic employment of the idea to the intro- 
duction of it in individual cases. It is from certain theological 
standpoints convenient to assert this, but the opposite order 
of emergence as between the two is just as conceivable. 


happened”; this paraphrase of Zahn does introduce the time-element, 
through its “not until,’ but only retrospectively. As observed above, the 
close sequence between the conversion of Israel and the end is suspended 
on the words “life from the dead.” Whether this consummation is to be 
construed chiliastically, or otherwise, is not indicated by our passage. 
To the question of “Chiliasm” as present or not present in the Pauline 
Eschatology as a whole we shall have to revert afterwards. 

That the things foretold will happen in or to the then present gen- 
eration is not affirmed by the Apostle. Some have even thought that 
the possibility of this not being so is indicated by the (intended) 
omission of the pronoun “airéy” after the noun “apdcAnpiw” in xi. 
15. On this view the certainty of the national “receiving is the 
only thing affirmed. A whole generation, or more, might intervene, and 
still the statement would lose none of its literal fulfilment, when the 
epoch-making event took place. The causal significance of the latter for 
the coming of “life from the dead” would not be impaired by the chrono- 
logical interval. 


THE “‘COMING”’ AND ITS PRECURSORS QI 


Paul, we believe, came to the discussion of this problem, the 
unbelief of the greater part of Israel, as antecedently a pre- 
destinarian; he was not first made a predestinarian through 
his weighing of that problem. There is abundant evidence of 
his application of the principle of predestination or election 
before the writing of Romans. Cp. 1 Thess. 1. 4; 1 Cor. 1. To 
say that Paul revolved or further worked out the problem in 
his mind does not imply that for this reason it ceased to be for 
him an object of divine revelation, lost divine sanction. On 
the contrary, in Ch. ix. 2 he explicitly affirms that at least 
avowal of the one aspect of it there mentioned (the presence 
of great sorrow in his heart) was made “‘in Christ,” that is, 
with the concurrent witness-bearing of the Holy Ghost in 
his consciousness. | 

Still another statement implying a gradual and fixed ap- 
proach towards the goal of the Parousia is found in 1 Cor. 
xv. 24, 25. Here it is declared that before the arrival of “the 
end” (7d rédos ), Christ must have previously put down 
all “rule” (apy7) and “authority” (é€ovota) and “power” 
( 8%vamis ); that Christ’s reign of conquest must last until 
He shall have put all enemies under his feet; further that 
“the last enemy” to be destroyed is “‘death.”’ Plainly there is 
affirmed in these words a progressive subjugation of ene- — 
mies leading up to the consummation. The fact that death is 
named “‘the last” points to the resurrection. All this, however, 
moves in the super-terrestrial sphere of the world of spirits, 
so that it can scarcely be counted among the prognostics of 
the approaching crisis; it consists of happenings unobserv--——— 
able by men. There is further involved the somewhat com- 
plicated question, as to where the beginning of the conquests 
named should chronologically be placed: does it belong from 
beginning to end of the “millennium,” as postulated by 
some on the ground of this and other passages as a fixed 
element in Paul’s eschatology? Or does it form part of the 
present period, in which case it would date from Christ’s res- 
urrection and be conceived by the Apostle as going on at that 
very moment so as to cover the entire period between the 


Q2 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


resurrection and the final parousia of the Lord. So far as the 
plausibility or implausibility of such a “chiliastic” exegesis is 
concerned, we shall revert to that aspect of the question in its 
proper place, when the presence or non-presence of a millen- 
narian strand of thought in Paul’s teaching comes under re- 
view. 

Still another problem, although of less direct bearing on 
the questionin hand, concerns the exact nature of the enemies 
spoken of. Are the words used abstract designations for cer- 
tain types of movements hostile to God and Christ, or do they 
refer to concrete demonic powers? As concerns the other 
terms (“rules,’ “authorities,” “powers’’) the general de- 
monological statements in other passages of the Epistles put 
beyond doubt, that concrete beings, or groups of such, are 
meant. It is somewhat more difficult to assume this for 
“death,” although Jewish analogies for even that are not lack- 
ing. Certainly in Rom. v. 12-21 “death” is highly personalized, 
but so are “sin” and “life.” In the Apocalypse especially 
death appears in vivid concreteness, and the juxtaposition of 
death with the other powers speaks in favor of an analogous 
interpretation in all four cases. The phrase “all enemies” 
(vs. 25) opens still farther, but scarcely more definite, pros- 
pects.*‘ At any rate this much is sure, that the Apostle as- 
sumes an incessant, uninterrupted pressing on of the soteric 
movement towards its absolute conclusion determined 
in the divine plan. The end stands in fixed relation towards 
what precedes it. Be the compass of time within which. all 
things occur longer or shorter, the simple fact of the desig- 
nation of “death” as the “Jast” enemy proves that_a_well-_ 
ordered succession is contemplated. 

To the foregoing may be added a couple of passages from 
the Pastoral Epistles. As is well known, these Epistles lay 
strong stress upon the invasion of the churches by godless, 
depraved elements, and draw, on the whole, a dismal pic- 
ture of the condition of things, both morally and reli- 
giously, at their time of writing. In itself it would have been 


9:9) 166: 


17 Cp. O. Everling, Die Paulinische Angelologie und Daemonologie, 1888. 


THE “COMING” AND ITS PRECURSORS 93 


easy to bring these symptoms of decadence into connection 
with the near approach of the eschatological crisis. As a 
matter of fact we actually observe such a connection 
dwelt upon in John’s First Epistle. In the Pastorals, on the 
other hand, such an inference is drawn only twice: 1 Tim. iv. 
1 and 2 Tim. 111. 1. “In later times (év dtordpous Karpois ) 
some shall fall away from the faith, giving heed to seducing 
spirits and doctrines of demons.” This forecast is introduced 
by: “the Spirit says expressly” (én7és “in so many words’), 
a form of statement indicating that the low appraisal put 
upon the character of the times was by no means the opinion 
of single, pessimistically inclined, persons, but a piece of 
actual prophetic revelation once expressed with great em- 
phasis. The other statement (iii. 1 of the Second Epistle 
reads: “But know this that in the last days ( év éoyarais 
jmepas ) grievous times shall come. For men shall be lovers 
of self, lovers of money, boastful, haughty, railers, dis- 
obedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural 
affection, implacable, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, 
no lovers of good, traitors, headstrong, puffed up, lovers of 
pleasure rather than lovers of God, holding a form of godli- 
ness, but having denied the power thereof.’ The enumeration 
resembles to some extent the catalogues of forms of sin 
found in the earlier Pauline Epistles.** The vices and excesses 
of sin there rehearsed lack, however (with the exception of 
Col. ili. 5-8), the explicit reference to the semi-eschatological 
character of the times, and this is precisely what is present 
here in the Pastorals. It would be a mistake to assume that 
Paul in these later Epistles represents that sort of thing as 
still lying entirely in the future. The enumeration 1s fol- 
lowed in 2 Tim. ili. 5 by the injunction “From these turn 
away.’ It is a matter of present concern and eminent impor- 
tance. 


18 Cp. Rom. i. 20-32; iii. 10-18; 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10; Gal. v. 19-21. 


CHAPTER V 


THE MAN OF SIN 


“The Man of Sin,” also called “The Son of Perdition,” 
“The Lawless One,” is an eschatological person described 
by Paul in 2 Thess. i. 1-12. In ordinary eschatological 
parlance he bears the name Antichrist, and in the First and 
Second Epistles of John this name occurs. So far as we are 
able to ascertain, Antichrist is not a Pauline term, although 
the possibility must be reckoned with, that Paul may have 
been acquainted with it and simply not used it. Even the 
Johannine Apocalypse with all its abundance. of escha- 
tological imagery, does not employ it. What lies back of 
2 Thess. in early Christian tradition, whether written or 
unwritten, does not know “the Antichrist’ as a formal title. 
going back farther to the pre-Christian literature of the 
apocryphal or pseudepigraphical kind or to the Old Testa- 
ment, we still look in vain for the later so familiar technical 
term. | 

To say that the name Antichrist is scarce in or absent from 
early documents by no means implies that the real person or 
the real thing called by other names but resembling to a 
larger or smaller extent the conception, is equally non- 
existent in that period. Paul himself is a striking example for 
the fact that a reality-complex of great religious or historical 
moment can exist for considerable time prior to its finding 
significant, unifying designation in the theological and es- 
chatological vocabulary. The time-distance between Thessa- 
lonians and the Johannine Epistles is scarcely long enough 
to permit the working out of such an extra-important and 
far-reaching complex of ideas. Whatever may be true of the 
sudden emergence of names, whole blocks of religious 
thought with all their psychological associations are not so 
suddenly upheaved. John certainly deals with it as something 


THE MAN OF SIN 95 


not then first made known to his readers, but avowedly fami- 
iar, and the same manner of introducing it is seen in Thes- 
salonians. The attention called to it was for an eminently 
practical purpose, viz. to warn against the delusion, as though 
the day of the Lord had already arrived.* But for correcting 
that the simplest reference to a well-established eschatological 
program would have been sufficient. When instead of this the 
Apostle launches out into a somewhat detailed exposition 
of the entire subject, it becomes difficult to escape the 1m- 
pression that Paul took a certain personal delight in draw- 
ing the figure at full length. And what he says seems to be 
derived from a fixed fund of knowledge. In the pre-Pauline 
tradition of the N.T. there is but one thing that could throw 
light on this. We refer to the phrase of our Lord in the great 
eschatological discourse Bdéruypa ths épnuwcews, translated 
in the English text by “abomination of desolation”: ““When, 
therefore, ye see the abomination of desolation, spoken of 
through Daniel, the prophet, standing in the holy place (let 
him that reads understand). The Daniel-context refers 
proximately to a desecration of the sanctuary in Jerusalem 
expected, it seems, from the sacrilegious hand of Antiochus 
Epiphanes. That Jesus shaped the matter in his mind after 
the same fashion is plain; only he projects the horrible event 
from the past in which it had once taken place into a future 
beyond his own point of speaking. The monstrous concept is 
neither by Daniel nor by Jesus clothed directly in the form 
of a personal antagonist to God; in this respect the 
technical terms of the Antichrist-tradition do not yet ap- 
pear, but as ominous shades they hover already in the back- 
ground.” In our later treatment of the prophecy we shall 


1“Has already arrived,’ thus we shall have to understand the verb 
“enhesteke.” The rendering “is at hand” seems a compromise due to 
doctrinal motives ; “just at hand” (A.R.) is a half-compromise, betraying 
that the simple “at hand” did not quite satisfy. 

2 The participle “standing” has in Matt. the neuter form, in Mk. 
the masculine. The masculine makes the statement point beyond the 
-erime of Antiochus, who had only put an idolatrous altar, not an idol- 
atrous image, in the holy place. In the masculine appears a degree of 


96 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


endeavor to make clear that the same phenomenon observ- 
able in Paul and with Jesus already characterizes the repre- 
sentation in Daniel. Already there things are spoken of and 
not explained; there lies a world of not unknowable, and yet 
only half-known mystery beyond what is disclosed. Thus we 
are enabled to draw through the line from Paul to Jesus and 
from Jesus to Daniel and from Daniel to something already 
an object of knowledge, be it as yet only vague, to an older 
generation. This continuity is of great value to all Chris- 
tian scholars who seek to deal with the Antichrist-subject. At 
bottom it furnishes the main scriptural justification for deal- 
ing with the subject on a typical basis. The modern mind may 
scorn this as one more instance of the unscientific, “rab- 
binical” treatment of the Old Testament by the New. What- 
ever maltreatment may be charged, it is a comfort to know 
that the crime was committed before by both Jesus and Paul. 

Some have thought that evidence of an older Antichrist- 
tradition could be discovered in the name Beliar® occurring 
repeatedly in the O.T. There is in itself nothing objection- 
able in tracing such connections. Were Beliar actually con- 
nected with the Antichrist-genealogy, this would prove his 
origins to be exceedingly ancient. In the only passage where 
Paul introduces the name, 2 Cor. vi. 15, Beliar is naught else 
but a duplicate name for Satan. The whole meaning centers 
in the ethical exhortation that righteousness and iniquity and 
light and darkness can have no more communion with each 
other than Christ can have with Beliar. Examining the Old 
Testament we find that Beliar nowhere appears as a name di- 
rectly given to a person, but always in the company of pre- 
fixes for the purpose of attaching to the persons or things 
referred to an evil connotation. Thus we read of “sons,” 


39 


“children,” . “daughters,” “men,” even of “brooks ot 
approach to the personal. Still it is only the quasi-personality of the 
statue not the living one of the tyrant as yet. It is scarcely necessary 
to add that the warning “let him that reads understand” refers not to 
the reading of Matthew but of the Daniel-prophecy. 


8 The name itself occurs in various forms, such as: Beliar, Belial, 
Belian, Beliab, Belias, Belier, Belchor. 


THE MAN OF SIN Q7 


Mea Weut, xiii, 33 judg, xix, 223 xx.)13501 Sama 16; 
Sen, 27> XXV. 17; 255 Xxx, 2252) Samixvi' 75> xxii, 6; 
Past) Xxi. 10, 13; 2:Chron. xiii. 7. 

Surmises and speculations about this O.T. Beliar are 
somewhat precarious precisely because of his appearance in 
a composite indirect form. Undeniably there hides behind 
these phrases a real demonic name which largely must have 
gone out of use, being replaced by Satan or some such name. 
It had ceased to perform further service than that of a term 
of opprobrium, varying according to the intent with which it 
was hurled at somebody in mere desire to tease or with the 
more serious purpose of inflicting real harm through an as- 
sumed magical force inhering in it. It is plain that Beliar is 
not in canonical Scripture a precursor or duplication of 
Antichrist. 

But Beliar has not been allowed to rest in his O.T. oblivion. 
His name reemerges in the apocryphal and pseudepigraphical 
writings and through the methods applied by the religionsge- 
schichtliche school has from there been thrown back into the 
olden times and that with a much more pronounced Anti- 
christ-physiognomy than was his before. This school makes 
its great principle the substantial identity and continuity of all 
Oriental, especially Babylonian, religion. Much material con- 
cerning Beliar in the non-Canonical literature and in the 
earlier unwritten tradition is freely dated back into hoary 
antiquity, and thus a quite novel Antichrist-tradition is 
constructed. 

The modern writer who has done most in this line of 
throwing back the late post-Christian material into a large 
pre-Christian tradition-reservoir is Bousset.* Following the 
ideas of Gunkel a.o. Bousset assumes that the conception 
of a Great Adversary is very ancient.’ Its ultimate origins 

4 Bousset, Der Antichrist in der Uberlieferung des Judenthums, des 
Neuen Testamentes, und der alten Kirche, 1895. 

®°Gunkel, Schdpfung und Chaos, likewise published in 1895. It should 
be added that Bousset is somewhat more restrained and cautious in 


drawing upon the ancient Babylonian material than Gunkel. In regard 
to this point Julicher observes, Th. L., 1896, col. 397, that not much 


ee 


98 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


are traced back to the ur-Babylonian myth of the contest 
between Marduk and the Chaos-dragon. Through anthropo- 
morphisation of this primeval myth arose the figure of a 
human opponent of God, used by Satan as his instrument. 
Then this again was changed into the image of a Jewish 
pseudo-Messiah. At a still later point of development the 
pseudo-Messiah became a political oppressor arising from the 
sphere of paganism. This is an abnormally long development, 
but Bousset thinks this feature need not tell against the 
hypothesis, because tradition in the eschatological sphere, 
and particularly so in the Antichrist-sphere, has always borne 
a rigid character enduring like a once set block of con- 
crete. Therefore, in his opinion, the existence of the much 
earlier can be proven from even its sporadic emergence in cer- 
tain beliefs at later points. Another observation is supposed to 
lend help to the same effect. It is believed that the material 
was largely transmitted through secret oral tradition, not in 
written form such as would be accessible to a greater num- 
ber of readers. 

It does not lie within our plan to criticize these views in 
any large way. The Antichrist-complex, it is true, forms part 
of them, but they comprise much more that is not of our direct 
concern. As to the fixity of the tradition, a single glance at the 
series of transformations which Bousset believes it through 
the course of the ages to have undergone is certainly not 
adapted to impress us with its alleged rigidity. And, so far 
as the manipulation of the material by Bousset and his follow- 
ers is concerned this bears all the bad features of extreme 
arbitrariness. There is constant unwarranted combination and 
equation of names and features lying not only decades but 
ages apart, and a persistent effort to supply the lacking inter- 
mediate links from unevidenced hidden strands of popular 
belief. Furthermore, denying to the patristic writers the 
capacity of producing such things, even through an over- 
heated imagination, does injustice to their mentality, as 


has survived in Bousset’s work of Gunkel’s mythological mixture of 
the material. 


THE MAN OF SIN 99 


though they had been entirely sterile in the power of eschato- 
logical production. It hardly agrees with what we know of 
some of them. Papias certainly was not under-endowed with 
fecundity in this line. Nor should one overlook the stupen- 
dous proportions this hypothesis has assumed, covering with 
its wings almost the whole compass of what is called sacred 
history. Both Gunkel and Bousset are driven to assume that 
this sinister tradition of the Arch-enemy is older than the 
Messianic tradition. The Antichrist has here eaten the young 
Christ-child after some such fashion as the Christian Apoca- 
lypse depicts in one of its visions. 

We must not, however, let such observations turn us aside 
from our proximate purpose, which is to examine the alleged 
precedents of the Antichrist-concept in the Apocalyptic writ- 
ings and their backward projection from thence into the pre- 
Christian literature. The following may fairly illustrate the 
method by which the results are obtained. In the Ezra- 
Apocalypse (4 Ezr.), a work dating according to Schurer 
a.o. from about 81-96 A.D., a realistic description of a human 
monster is given, in connection with which, however, the 
name Beliar does not appear. It is different in the Testaments 
of the XII Patriarchs, usually dated from the first Chris- 
tian century. Here Beliar is actually introduced. The refer- 
ences are as follows: Test. Rub., 4: ““whoredom brings upon 
a man the derision of Beliar and of men”; Sim. 5: “whore- 
dom separates from God and drives to Belial’; Lev. 19: “the 
choice lies between the darkness and the light, the works of 
God and the works of Beliar’’; Dan. 4: “when the soul is con- 
tinually worried, the Lord departs from it, and Beliar obtains 
dominion”; Napht. 2: “the alternative rule of conduct for 
man is either a law of the Lord or a law of Beliar’’; Iss. 6: 
“his descendants will leave the commandments of the Lord 
and cleave to Beliar”’; Zeb. 9: “God will deliver all captive 
men from Beliar’’; Jos. 20: “after Joseph’s bones have been 
brought up to Canaan, God will be in light with the Israelites, 
and Beliar will be in darkness with the Egyptians”; Benj. 3: 


IOO THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


“the spirits of Beliar incite to every kind of wickedness and 
oppression.” 

It seems clear that there is nothing in the passages cited 
compelling to think of an Antichrist figure differentiated 
from Satan. All that is said admits of easy derivation from 
the influence of the latter. And negatively the absence of the 
eschatological element is difficult to account for, if Beliar 
in those former times passed as a technical name for Anti- 
christ. Still another writing bearing on the problem is the 
so-called Ascensio Isaiae, particularly in its later part, Chaps. 
vi-xi, apparently of Christian origin, whilst the preceding 
Chaps. i-v seem to be of Jewish provenience. The Jewish 
section is somewhat indefinitely dated after the destruction 
of Jerusalem by Titus. In iv. 2 occur these words: “And 
after the consummation has arrived, the Angel Berial, that 
great King of the world, over which he rules since it exists, 
will descend from his firmament, in the form of a wicked 
human matricidal king; he is the king of this world... ; 
this angel Berial, in the form of the said kingdom, will come 
and together with him will come all the powers of this world, 
and they will obey him in whatsoever things he shall desire.” 
This passage does not form part of the central section of the 
Jewish core of the book. As standing in the text, it contains 
clear references to the role played by Nero in the Antichrist- 
expectation, and consequently must be later than the time at 
which Nero could have been expected to return as a super- 
natural figure, either from the Orient, still alive, or from 
Hades through a resurrection. On the other hand, his being 
called a wicked angel, the ruler of this world, having his 
habitation in the air, and the chief of the powers of this world, 
all this closely identifies him in character with Satan. There 
are things here scarcely predicable of Nero. Bousset, recog- 
nizing this, suggests that the Nero-references are a later 
insertion. This, it must be admitted, makes the passage har- 
monious within itself, but at the same time dispenses of the 
necessity to think of an Antichrist-Beliar. What is said of 


THE MAN OF SIN IOI 


Beliar as to his being the king of this world is identical with 
what Paul affirms of Satan. 
In the Book of Jubilees we find ourselves according to 
the best critical judgment, in the first century of the Chris- 
tian era. Beliar appears in 1. 20 under the strangely deformed 
name ‘‘Belchor.”’ God is invoked, that He may create in his 
people a right mind, and that the spirit of Belchor may not 
dominate them, so as to enable him to accuse the people 
before God. The last-mentioned thought plainly reminds us 
of the O.T. conception of Satan as “the adversary,” the one 
who slanders and opposes man in the judgment. The second 
place where the figure appears (here in the ordinary form 
“Beliar”) is xv. 33; of the apostate, heretical, antinomian 
Israelites it is predicted that in the excess of their wickedness 
they will abandon the rite of circumcision, and leave their 
children such as they were born. It needs no pointing out that 
Beliar is here entirely void of eschatological associations. 
The statement would fit far better into the scheme of Fried- 
lander, to be considered presently, according to whom Beliar 
is the head of a Jewish-Gnostic, antinomian heresy. 
We now come to the one context in the Apocalyptic litera- 
ture, where the distinction between Satan and Behar seems 
to be clearly drawn, each being invested with his own attri- 
butes and functions. This is the prophecy in Orac. Sib. iii. 
46 ff. In this, according to Bousset one of the oldest ingre- 
dients of the document, the prophet (or quasi-prophetess ) 
declares: “But when Rome shall rule over Egypt also... 
then the greatest kingdom of the Immortal King will appear 
to mankind ... . thereupon from among the Sebasténoi will 
come Beliar and will cause high mountains to rise up, and 
will cause the sea to be silent, the fiery great sun and the shin- 
ing moon, and also will cause the dead to be raised, and per- 
form many signs among men. But no consummation will 
there be in him, only leading astray; and so he will cause 
many men to err, both believing and elect Hebrews and like- 
wise other lawless men, which never yet heard the speech of 
God. But when thereupon the threatenings of the great God 


102 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


approach and a power of fire comes to the land through the 
water wave and burns Beliar and all overbearing men, who 
have yielded faith to him, then the entire world will be ruled 
under the hand of one woman and obey her in all things. . . 
when the ether-inhabiting God rolls up the heavens, as the 
scroll of a book is rolled up . . . when no longer will exist 
the shining balls of the lights of heaven, neither night, nor 
morning, no longer many days of care, no longer spring nor 
winter, likewise neither summer nor autumn. And then the 
judgment of the great God will appear in that momentous 
time when all this has come to pass.” Not a few elements in 
this description remind of N.T. eschatological items, and the 
possibility cannot be a priori denied that these may be older 
than the N.T. both in their written form and in the tradition 
lying farther back. Absolutely complete and clear, to be sure, 
even here the distinction between Beliar and Satan is not: in 
fact Satan has no place in the whole prophecy: the conflict is 
purely between Beliar and the “great God.” We are not told 
in so many words that Beliar is or will be a man; the fact of 
his being burnt with his human followers does not compel 
that assumption. His coming “from the Sebasténoi’” speaks 
somewhat in favor of human nature on either interpretation 
usually given to this strange phrase, which according to some 
designates the Samaritans (from the name of their city “Se- 
baste’), according to others is connected with “sebastos,” a 
predicate of the Roman world-rulers. We must at this point 
agree with Bousset in his opinion that heterogeneous elements 
mingle in this strange composition. While the final stupen- 
dous world-upheaving events are ascribed to the intervention 
of the great ether-inhabiting God, yet certain preliminary 
things named in the line of nature-catastrophes scarcely fall 
within the power of a mere man however supernaturally en- 
dowed. The trait of the error-spreading activity of Beliar 
reminds vividly of the same element in the description of 
2 Thess., although with Paul it 1s more stressed and elabo-. 
rated. The idea of seduction in belief has some basis in the 
O.T. references to Belial. For the feature of the reign of the 


THE MAN OF SIN 103 


woman there is no point of contact in N.T. eschatology, for 
what the Apocalypse of John contains in this line is of a 
different nature. Here in the prophecy of the Sibyl an actual 
female ruler is meant. | 

This recurrence upon the Apocalyptic and Pseudepigraphi- 
cal literature to discover the antecedents of the Antichrist 
figure does not carry much convincing force. Of course, it 
cannot a priori be denied that an amount of superstitious 
folklore was current in Jewish circles before the Pauline 
Epistles were written. Only that these current beliefs of 
such gross and rudimentary form were the source from 
which the N.T. Antichrist doctrine was drawn and from 
which it can be satisfactorily explained is hard to believe.* A 
writer like Cheyne seems to have felt this, when by the appli- 
cation of a far more radical method he seeks to identify Belial 
with the Babylonian “Belili.” On the other hand Hommel 
asserts that the Babylonians borrowed their Belili from the 
Western Shemites. 

A second, and widely different attempt to supply the Anti- 
christ-concept with an extra-biblical origin is connected with 
the name of Friedlander. This scholar, a liberalizing Jew of 
wide learning, has worked out the hypothesis that there ex- 
isted from comparatively early (pre-N.T.) times a specifi- 
cally Jewish type of Gnosticism.’ The days are past in which 
Gnosticism was supposed to be of heretical-Christian origin. 
Students find many references in ancient Jewish lore to a 
sect or party called “Minim.” It was at one time customary 
to identify these Minim with Jewish-Christians. Friedlander 
gives the term a far wider and differently-oriented signifi- 
cance. He goes so far as to exclude the Jewish-Christians 
from its range altogether. The Minim are in Friedlander’s 


6 Expositor, 1805, on 2 Sam. xx. 5: “The land whence no return is 
possible, Hades.” Cp. Hepp, De Antichrist, Ist ed., 1919, note 34, p. 2601; 
Cp. Jilicher’s critique of Bousset’s Zur Entstehungsgeschichte des 
Christenthums, 1894; Der vorchristliche jiidische Gnostizismus, 1808; 
in Th. L. 18096, coll. 375-379. 

7 Friedlander, Der Antichrist in den vorchristlichen Jiidischen, 
Quellen, 1901. 


104 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


opinion a product of the Alexandrian-Jewish philosophy 
which had Philo for its chief exponent. Their tendency, re- 
ligiously considered, lay in the direction of antinomianism. 
What Friedlander quotes from his sources as bearing out the 
equation Belial-Antichrist is of a decidedly legalistic complex- 
ion. It is this uniformizing point of view that enables the writer 
to give the figure of his Antichrist such a large and compre- 
hensive range. But, and this is our chief criticism of 
the hypothesis,* into the figure of the Man-of-Sin drawn by 
Paul the construction will not fit. In Thessalonians the Anti- 
christ appears far different and far worse than merely “anti- 
nomian.” Even from an orthodox-Jewish point of view 
laxness in the legalistic mode of life or a degree of (con- 
scious or only unconscious) infidelity to the law, tending 
through allegorizing to apostasy, could scarcely ever have 
produced the features of the Apostle’s lurid description. It 
must be admitted, however, and in this respect Friedlander 
has called attention to a sometimes neglected element, that 
through the second half of Paul’s prophecy in Thessalonians 
in what is predicted of the great error-produced and error- 
producing activity of the Enemy there runs an “antinomian” 
strain. In the first half the aggressive formidable traits are 
more in evidence. But on the whole Paul’s relation to “anti- 
nomianism”’ as gatherable from his Epistles was of a far 
different, in certain respects even opposite, nature than that 
implied in Friedlander’s construction. To the Judaizers Paul 
appeared as himself the great “antinomian’’; had Paul had 
the sin of antinomianism specifically in mind when penning 
his great prophecy, he could hardly have been so entirely 
oblivious of the slanderous way in which it had been used by 
his enemies to defame himself as not to indicate by a single 
word his own interest in the matter. 

Since then no clearly traceable and safe road leads back into 
the past to discover the Man-of-Sin except that via the 

8 The Talmudic sources upon which Friedlander has drawn for his 


evidence are not in their peculiar idiom usable for us, so that as to their 
adequacy as witnesses we may not allow ourselves a judgment. 


THE MAN OF SIN 105 


prophecy of Daniel, we must now, in greater detail examine 
what are the points or features through which certain Dan- 
ielic characterizations have become incorporated into the 
Pauline prophecy without meaning to suggest by this that 
the scattered elements in Daniel furnish a complete account, 
either as to substance or form, of all the outstanding fea- 
tures in Thessalonians. ‘““The mouth speaking great things” 
Dan. vii. 8, 20, is a striking pre-analogy to all the blasphemy 
with which the Apostle in advance charges the Man-of-Sin. 
Thess. vs. 4 “he that opposes and exalts himself against all 
that is called God or is worshipped; so as to sit in the temple 
of God setting himself forth as God” reminds of vs. 24 in the 
same chapter of Daniel. The “doing according to his will” 
and “magnifying himself’ Dan. viii. 4 finds its echo in the 
trait of anti-divine overbearing, which has so vividly set 
its impress upon the Pauline description. The “little horn,” 
that came out of one of the four “notable horns,” into which 
the “great horn” of the goat was broken, likewise proceeds to 
blasphemous acts, so far even as to take away from the 


Prince of the Host the most sacred religious apparatus, and 


to cast down the place of the sanctuary (Dan. viii. 14); and 
bears a striking likeness to the Apostle’s description in Thes- 
salonians. “The abomination that makes desolate” above 
commented upon (Dan. xi. 31), is entirely in line with the 
features named. Closely corresponding to Thess. vs. 4 is Dan. 
xi. 36, “he shall do according to his will and he shall exalt 
himself, and magnify himself aboveevery god and speak mar- 
vellous things against the God of gods,” anticipating the realis- 
tic description of Thess. It must be acknowledged, that the 
Danielic vision and the Pauline apocalypse cannot be so laid 
one over the other as a transparent paper is laid over a map in 
clear colors, so as to be able to trace for every detail a clear 
corresponding double underneath. With much likeness there 
is much unlikeness, or rather much lacking in close resem- 
blance. There may be no exact resemblance in the behavior of 
the pagan tyrants to Antichrist’s setting himself in the temple 
of God as a self-deifier, but as between type and antitype the 


106 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


correspondence is close enough. The only aspect in regard to 
which a somewhat pervasive difference remains lies in this 
that the element of perversion of revealed truth, so striking in 
Paul, remains in Daniel more or less in abeyance. But this is 
what one might a priori expect from an Old Testament vision- 
ary delineation. 

In all these respects the latter part of Daniel is steeped in 
the colors not of the supernatural only, but the figures arising 
and walking across the scene of its visions are supernormal, 
gigantic, colossal shapes. The absolute, the unsurpassable, the 
excess of blasphemous behavior are written in large letters 
on the face of these exponents of unique wickedness to come. 
Nor need doubt be entertained as to the personal condensation 
which these bulks of evil receive in the process of forecasting 
the evil fortunes of the people of God. It is true, the com- 
plete unification imparted to the godless movement in Thes- 
salonians, wherein Antichrist is made to stand out as a living 
sculptured personality, is in Daniel not yet attained. The 
storm-clouds have not that far opened their gaps to let him 
step forth as the personal spirit of the tempest. It should be 
remembered, however, that the ideas of the massal and of the 
individual, of the power in the abstract and its wielder in the 
concrete are not always sharply distinguished in such types 
of apocalyptic representation. This does not mean that the 
personal equation is ignored or ever entirely left in the back- 
ground. That a wicked and oppressive and blasphemous 
world-power employs a king of the same characteristics is 
simply taken for granted. Let us notice, how, after the de- 
scription of the beasts in Dan. vii. 1-8, which is adapted to 
make us think of kingdoms merely, the interpreter says (vs. 
17): “These great beasts which are four, are four Kings.” 
Hence also one is quite warranted to think in the theophany of 
the “One like unto a man (son-of-man)”’ of an actual single 
being and not merely, as nowadays so many would like to have 
us do, of a mere symbol of the kingdom of God. This inter- 
change between power and head of the power regularly re- 
turns throughout the visions and their interpretations. In 


THE MAN OF SIN 107 


Vili. 10-12 things are predicated of “the little horn” con- 
ceivable of some individual only; the noun “horn” is femi- 
nine, and the feminine verbs of the sentences agree with 
this; in viil. 22-26 the first king of Greece is represented by 
the shaggy goat, and also by the great horn between his eyes ; 
here at first the forms are feminine, but in vs. 23 “a king”’ is 
said to stand up, because, in accordance with this, the wicked- 
ness is brought to a climax through a concrete person. So it 
is represented in vii. 8 ff., where the fourth beast resolves 
itself into ten horns. Of the little horn, coming up from 
among these, it is said, that it had eyes like the eyes of a man, 
and a mouth speaking great things. Because of the super- 
natural coloring of this description it has been assumed that 
a vision of the personal Antichrist must be contained in it, the 
more so since the description immediately precedes the epi- 
sode of the judgment, vss. 9-14. In the interpretation of the 
vision given by “‘one of them that stood by” the same close 
conjunction between the fierceness of the prosecution in- - 
flicted upon the saints and the judgment is noticeable; here 
likewise the picture given of the horn rising from the ten 
partakes of supernormal features: he speaks words against 
the Most High, vs. 25. To be sure, here this element is not so 
strongly stressed and by themselves the words might be 
understood of some human political force or its representa- 
tive king. He “changes times and the law.” But the vision of 
the judgment and the dominion of the saints following there- 
upon is again no less steeped in eschatological colors than the 
one standing at the close of the original revelation itself, 
vs. 14. 

In Chap. viii. 10 similar phenomena present themselves. In 
some respects even stronger terms are used in the description 
of the doings of the “little horn” (here growing out of the 
four horns of the ram) than in the preceding account: “‘it 
waxed great, even to the host of heaven, and some of the 
host and of the stars it cast down to the ground and trampled 
upon them.” Here, be it noted, we seem to be in the midst of 
the fortunes and afflictions of the Syrian war, and time- 


108 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


reckonings as to duration of the oppression are given; more- 
over, the account issues not into a scene of absolute con- 
summation; the goal set is rather the cleansing of the 
sanctuary, which is in accordance with the fact that the 
wickedness of the tyrant had culminated in the sacrilege done 
to the holy places and things. None the less in the subjoined 
interpretation a king of fierce countenance appears, understand- 
ing dark riddles, mighty, but not by his own power, causing 
craft to prosper in his hand, magnifying himself in his heart, 
broken in the end without hand. In x1. 36 ff. the king is de- 
scribed as doing according to his will, exalting himself and 
magnifying himself above every god, speaking marvellous 
things against the God of gods, not even regarding the god 
of his fathers, nor the desire of women, nor any god, magni- 
fying himself above all. In reading this we cannot help 
feeling strongly that such terms would not be naturally 
applied to any average human enemy, however much in the 
hysteria of excited religious patriotism the physiognomy 
of such a tyrant might tend to acquire a sort of supernatural 
monstrosity.” It has been assumed that where these phe-| 
nomena emerge the Apocalypse makes a sudden leap of 
vision out of its forecasts of politico-historical setting, into. 
the remoteness of the absolute end, so as to bring upon the 
scene the actual individual Antichrist. In order to make this 
to a certain extent intelligible we should have to fall back 
upon the law, not unfamiliar in the exposition of prophecy, of. 
the foreshortening towards the end of the prophetic perspec- — 
tive. Even in regard to the most striking passages in Chap. xi 
and Chap. xii, where the injection of the idea of the resurrec- 
tion proves that the seer deals with downright eschatological 
values there is no clean escape from this, because in xii. 1 the 
‘and at that time” mark, as it were, the hopping-off 


6 


words 


® Perhaps the memory of what happened in this field of unrestrain- 
able exaggeration during the World War may help somewhat towards 
making this psychologically intelligible. Only in the present case it was 
not impure human passion, but divine inspiration that enlarged the 
figures on the screen. 


THE MAN OF SIN 109 


point for this flight out of the nearer present into the rarer 
atmosphere of the end. The view referred to is in some ways 
attractive. It yields a direct, realistic picture in the O.T. 
Scriptures of the veritable Antichrist without need of re- 
curring: upon the intermediate process of typical prefigura- 
tion. What is taught in literal terms about the Antichrist in 
the N.T. thus acquires a direct continuity with the O.T. pre- 
dictions. This avoids abrupt, violent breaks in the development 
of the idea. True, it keeps the eschatological Antichrist 
closely entangled with personages or events of contemporary 
history. A suggestion has been offered to obviate at least part 
of this difficulty. Much has been theorized in the last decades 
concerning the ancient existence in several quarters of the 
ancient world of a fixed body of eschatological lore, in which, 
among other ingredients, also the figure of a personal su- 
preme wicked power held its place. Revelation transferred 
the features of monstrosity that had gathered around this 
“Antichrist’’-complex to any malign enemy of the nearer or 
more remote crisis, thus serving the double purpose of adding 
to what was previously known of this mysterious person and 
of rendering its central significance applicable to the practi- 
cal needs of the time being. 

But where are we to look within the Old Testament for 
a body of belief or revelation substantial enough to have 
created a fixed nomenclature of the character thus postulated ? 
Were it a matter of eschatology in general, it might be 
more feasible to trace back the later beliefs to earlier 
beginnings, to which the later elaborations could attach 
themselves. But it is quite a different thing to assume such a 
process with regard to the figure of an individual Antichrist, 
even if discounting the etymology, we were to confine our- 
selves to the general idea of a supreme impersonation of 
malignity and hostility. In that field the stream of folklore 
derived from ancient sources flows but scantily, or even 
trickles down to nothing, so that at last we are driven back 
upon the dire dragon contending with Marduk in the ancient 
Babylonian cosmogony. From Daniel to these ur-Shemitic 


I1O THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


myths there is a far cry, and in the territory spanned there 
would remain little enough of continuity from span to span 
to be of much importance. 

The “Gog (and Magog,” or “from Magog’’*®)-prophecy 
in Ezekiel might at first sight seem to afford some help here. 
Closely looked at, it presents rather a parallel of somewhat 
older date than, strictly speaking, a precedent of the Dan- 
ielic vision. The prophecy of Ezekiel differs from the de- 
scription in Daniel first through its warlike complexion and 
next through the absence of the directly Godward, blas- 
phemic element; it also, however, falls out of the frame of 
the ordinary prophetic threatenings against the enemies of 
Israel, present or future, through the stupendousness of its 
proportions. Still this is a matter of degree rather than of 
principial difference. It has one feature not common to ordi- 
nary threatening prophecy: the attack of Gog and of his 
hordes is distinctly described as occurring after a period of 
rest and felicity enjoyed by the people of God subsequently 
to a previous redemption and return to their land, Chap. 
XXXVlll. 7-12, 14. Even this also, however (the second at- 
tack on a world-wide scale and the gigantic victory over the 
assembled hordes), has its preformation in the earlier proph- 
ecy, notably so in Isaiah xxiv-xxvii and Micah iv. 2 and its 
context. In these earlier texts it proves more or less difficult 
to establish beyond doubt the particular point in question, 
viz. the time of succedence of the second all-comprehensive 
attack. Attention is called to such earlier utterances as Ezek. 
xxxvill. 17. The chronological definition of the great events 
as belonging to “the latter days,’ xxxviii. 16 is not of itself 
sufficient to mark the piece as consummatorily-eschatological, 
for, as observed in a previous connection, the phrase named 
has in the prophetic perspective a movable position. It is not 


10 Gen. x. 2, “Magog” as a “son” of Japhet; Ezek. xxx. 23; “Gog” of 
the land of “Magog,” the Prince of Rosh, Meshag and Tubal; vs. 14, 
“Gog”; vs. 16, “o Gog”: “Gog,” vs. 18, xxxix. 1; “Gog!” “ostgome 
vs. 6 “a fire on Magog,” as of a people or land; vss. 6, 11, “Gog,” a people; 
vss. II, 15, “the Valley of Hamoth,” Gog; Rev. xx. 8, “Gog and Magog,” 
as deceived by Satan with other nations to war against the holy city. 


THE MAN OF SIN ab 


so much something in the content of the Ezekiel-prophecy, 
that secures it its prominence in O.T. eschatology, but rather 
something added to and brought into it from the New Testa- 
ment, viz. the reproduction of it in Rev. xx. 7-10, where the 
context allows of no other than the reference to the absolute 
issue of events.” 

After all, what we are chiefly concerned with are the ante- 
cedents in the earlier Scriptures of the Pauline Antichrist 
pericope. So far as this is concerned, it is plain at a single 
glance, that Paul is not to any large extent dependent upon the 
Ezekielian source, for in the one feature in which the latter 
might seem to go beyond Daniel, through the mention of a 
specific name, and the summing up in it of the entire complex 
of the final enmity, Paul has not availed himself of this, but 
confined himself to qualitatively descriptive designations, a 
trait entirely in keeping with the un-military, un-political 
tenor of the Pauline prophecy. And, on the other hand, it is in 
Daniel that the general tone and atmosphere of the pictures 
and visions are more unearthly and transcendental, so that no 
one need wonder at finding precisely in these respects the 
O.T. and N.T. epochal prophecies intentionally and _ inti- 
mately connected. Though Ezekiel may furnish us with the 
interesting names of Gog and Magog, it is Daniel who un- 
rolls for us the scroll of the resurrection, something in the 
wake of which, with or without interval, the final consum- 
mation must ensue. 

That Paul in 2 Thess. 11 is dependent on Daniel hardly re- 
quires pointing out. The “falling away’ (apparently a tech- 
nical apocalyptic term) of vs. 3 reminds strongly of Dan. x1. 
32 ff.; xi. 39; the predestinarian strain in Dan. xi, xii finds 
its reflection in 2 Thess. ii. 11-13. Particularly the anti-reli- 


gious, blasphemous trait in the description of the enemy must. 


have been copied after Daniel: ““He opposes and exalts him- 


11 Particularly two concrete features have been in Ezekiel pointed 
out as marking an Antichrist connection: one is Chap. xxxviil. 4, 
“T will put hooks into thy jaws,” comparing Gog to a wild beast; the 
other is that which speaks of the previous preparation of Gog, xxxviil. 7. 


; 


II2 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


self above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that 
he sits in the temple of God setting himself forth as God” ; 
cp. Dan. v. 20-23; vii. 20, 21; vill. 11; xi. 31; 36-40 with 
2 Thess. 11. 4. 

But, however striking these prophetic antecedents and lit- 
erary dependencies may seem, the chief question remains 
how Paul for himself conceived of this mysterious power. 
First of all its personality, while not explicitly affirmed, is 
throughout assumed. It is true, the collective, abstract move- 
ment connected with his appearance, teaches that more than a 
single powerful person is involved. But most assuredly a per- 
sonal leader of the movement, and that a human personality 
is suggested. The easiest way to prove this might at first 
sight seem to point to the phrases “the man of sin,” “the son 
of perdition,” were it not for the commonness of the idiom to 
prefix “son” or “man” to a certain attribute or characteristic 
in order to mark the person meant as the supreme manifes- 
tation or exponent of the quality spoken of. In such a case 
“son” would not necessarily determine the species of the per- 
son referred to; a superhuman, demonic leader of the forces 
of sin and the issues of perdition could be properly called 
“man” or “son” of that with which he is identified, cp. Jno. 
xvii. 12 (of Judas) “the son of perdition.”’ This idiomatic way 
of speaking does not even exclude Satan from the field of 
possibilities. And there are not a few features in the descrip- 
tion reminding vividly of the nature and ways of Satan, that _ 
supreme antagonist of God. Nevertheless the whole tenor of | 
the passage implies that a visible historically conditioned 
episode, playing in the clear light of human history, is thought | 
of. Besides this, we are explicitly told in vs. 9 that his “coming 
is according to the working of Satan.’ What is according to 
Satan’s working cannot be identical with Satan himself. On 
the other hand, for an evil superhuman spirit under Satan, 
the stage set and the drama unrolled, if once placed in the 
historic sphere, would seem almost with necessity to re- 
quire the visible interposition of him who is chief in the 
kingdom of evil, in association with that of the intermediate, 


THE MAN OF SIN Il3 


be it superhuman, demonic agent. We may take for granted, 
then, that the Antichrist will be a human person. Into this - 
view also best fit the developments and events connected with 
his appearance and activity. That his whole figure is steeped, 
as it were, in the atmosphere of the supernatural, cannot alter 
anything in this respect. He certainly stands at a far remove 
from the purely-naturalistically human; wonders and signs 
are attributed to him, vs.9; the “/ying wonders,” are not char- 
acterized by the attribute “lying” as inherently false, spurious, 
of mere fictitious make-up; they are so called because 
they go with the propaganda of error as the revelation- 
miracles accompany the proclamation of the Gospel-truth. 
The supernatural environment is truly present; only it 
serves the sinister purpose of accrediting the Satanic 
instead of the Divine. This close conjunction between 
the supernatural and the Man-of-Sin has led certain 
writers to the extreme view, that the conjunction is of 
a hypostatic character, “Antichrist” appearing and acting as 
a veritable Messiah-Satan incarnate. Such a view is rendered 
impossible, not merely by its monstrous nature, but even 
antecedently through the inherent, subordinationistic function 
of the Messiahship as such. Who sets himself up as a Mes- 
siah, thereby, at least ostensibly, recognizes that there is One 
higher than himself. To the “Man-of-Sin”’ Paul ascribes 
the denial and abnegation of every other superior divine 
power. He deifies Himself in the most absolute sense; the 
Antichrist-idea and the Messianic idea are at this point mutu- 
ally exclusive. Antichrist might choose to operate by means 
of a Messiah under him, as his instrument, himself he cannot 
pretend to be the Messiah, because that would involve abdica- 
tion of his pretension to being God. When Jesus in the third 
temptation is offered a Satanically controlled Messiahship, 
through accepting which He would have to transfer his 
Messianic allegiance from God to the Tempter, the principle 
just stated is clearly brought out; the new relation proposed 
is instantly recognized as an idolatrous one, and for that, if 
for no other reason, repudiated. What Satan there suggested 


IIl4 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


was nothing less than that he himself should figure as God 
and Jesus as his Messiah. One who receives worship and dis- 


penses power over all the kingdoms of the world is, concept- _ 


ually, equal to God; he who accepts such power in feof can 
be nothing else than inferior to God in office. Had Jesus re- 
acted upon this truly blasphemous suggestion, He would have 
been an equally subordinated agent as He was in reality; only 
the relationship would have existed between Him and the false 
god, and thus partaken of illusoriness instead of reality from 
beginning to end. According to Paul’s description the Man- 


of-Sin stands at the extreme opposite to this: he is one for * 


whom to present himself as Messiah would have meant to 


that in Thessalonians are perforce to be compared, we shall 
have to say that they agree in the extreme unholy pretensions 
displayed in both (exclusive claim to deity), but differ in the 
roles postulated in each case for Jesus as Messiah-Apostate 
and the future Man-of-Sin. In both, Satan subject to the 
true God,aspires to deity; in the Gospel he endeavors to carry 
this out by means of the prostituted Messiahship (under him-. 
self) of Jesus; with this method, at least so far as the explicit 
statements of Paul lead us to infer, he will dispense in the 
future. His own claims will lie in the sphere of the divine, 
not of the Messianic. 

On the grounds thus generally formulated we feel bound to 
reject the one concrete form in which the Messianic construc- 
tion of the Antichrist-idea has been worked out. It has been 
suggested that the Apostle conceived of the coming Man-of- 
Sin as the pseudo-Messiah of the Jews, about to set himself 
up sooner or later as the abnegator and repudiator of Jesus, 
the Christian Messiah, and as on principle opposing the latter 
by his whole activity.** According to this view the Antichrist 
meant for Paul, at the date of 2 Thess., the person whom the 
Jews would recognize as their Messiah, and who would in 

12Cp. Schneckenburger, J. f.d. D. Th., 1859; Weiss, St. u Kr., 1860; 


also Bousset, who, however, regards this only as one phase in the long 
evolution of the concept. 


; 
; 


disavow himself. If the two cases, that of the temptation and , 


THE MAN OF SIN IIS 


reality be the supreme embodiment of the spirit of disobe- 
dience and unbelief with regard to the true Christian Gospel 
as centered in the Messiahship of Jesus. The figure would 
stand for the Satanic corruption and prostitution of the Jew- 
ish Messianic hope. From the circumstances under which the 
Epistle was written, it is believed, the entire situation is easily 
explainable. Direct opposition and persecution the Apostle 
had, up to that time, experienced from the Jews only. Where 
the Gentile population had molested him, it had done so at the 
instigation of the Jewish populace. Precisely at Thessalonica 
the latter had happened during Paul’s preaching in that city ; 
likewise in Corinth, whence our Epistle was written, the 
same enmity had confronted him. Both First and Second 
Thess. speak of the Jews in the terms of strongest maledic- 
tion. When “the mystery of iniquity” is said to be “already at 
work”’ (vs. 7), this, we are told, is most naturally understood 
of the enmity of the Jews even then plotting in secret for 
Paul’s destruction. At bottom this enmity, while ostensibly 
confined to Jesus and his Apostle, was disobedience to God, 
and would therefore issue into downright apostasy with such 
open manifestations of godlessness and blasphemy as are 
subsequently depicted. It is even believed, that the blasphe- 
mous claims of the “Lawless One,” opposing and exalting 
himself against all that is called God or that is worshipped, 
so as to sit in the temple of God, setting himself forth as God 
(vs. 4), can be explained on the principle of the Messiah’s 
being the absolute representative of God, whence falsely claim- 
ing Messiahship amounts to falsely laying claim to divine 
honor and worship. The very fact of the enthronization in the 
temple at Jerusalem proves, we are told, that none other than 
a pseudo-Messiah of the Jews can be thought of, because by re- 
sorting to that place he recognizes the sanctuary as the habita- 
tion of God. The pseudo-prophecy mentioned in vs. 9g is like- 
wise believed to favor this solution of the problem. The two 
features combined of usurped power and false prophecy are 
especially supposed to prove that the malign enemy must be 
a Jew, whilst elsewhere, when a pagan potentate impersonates 


116 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


the Antichrist (as in the Johannine Apocalypse) the false 
prophecy appears as a separate movement, working in connec- 
tion with, but not identical with, the antichristian principle 
in its highest potency. Still further, on the view under dis- 
cussion Paul anticipated that the Jewish pseudo-Messiah 
would attempt to overthrow the Roman Empire, and seek to 
establish a universal (not “universalistic’”) Jewish kingdom. 
Finally, on this interpretation the technical terms “the re- 
strainer” (0 catéywy masc.) and “the restraint” (To Katéyov 
neut.) are supposed naturally to refer to the Roman power 
and the Emperor. By the Roman authority Paul had been 
more than once protected from the machinations and persecu- 
tions of the Jews, so that he could easily think of it as re- 
straining for the present the fiercest and final flaring up of 
the Jews’ hostility against the cause of Christ represented 
by himself. | 

When the Jewish-pseudo-Messiah-Antichrist theory is 
thus concretely put before us, we immediately begin to feel 
how impossible its implications are. It is not necessary now to 
dwell upon the fact that, if actually ascribed to Paul after 
such a bald fashion, it would most certainly fall under the 
rubric of mistaken and therefore unfulfilled (perhaps one 
should say unfulfillable) prophecy. What has most given 
popular support to it is the name “Antichrist” itself, remind- 
ing as it does of “the Christ,” who is antagonized or opposed 
not only, but in very fact supplanted through usurpation of 
his office. But it ought to be remembered at the outset, that 
the word “Antichrist,” or the predicate “Antichristian” do 
not belong to the Pauline vocabulary. They are Johannine 
terms within the New Testament.*® And further, even where 
they occur in the Epistles of John, it is by no means certain 
that the preposition “anti’’ is meant to bear the pointed mean- 
ing of “in the place of.” In the passages in John’s Epistles 
the sense “Opponent of Christ’? appears perfectly plain and 
natural. Still it is far from impossible that in the popular 


13 7 John ii. 18, 22; iv. 3; 2 John 7. 


THE MAN OF SIN It 


mind the distinction between one who antagonizes Christ and 
one who seeks to supplant Christ was not always sharply felt. 
Of course, the supplanting involves the antagonizing, but the 
reverse does not hold true, because there are other modes of 
antagonizing than by ursurpation of the enemy’s office. All 
we may attempt to affirm here is the larger generic concep- 
tion, and then, proceeding from this, to seek to discover what 
elements, if any, and of what precise nature, enter of the 
more particularized conception, so as to ascertain whether the 
sense “in the place of”’ for “‘anti’”’ unmistakably appears. 

For the sake of precision a distinction should be drawn 
between the two concepts of a pseudo-Jewish Messiah, and 
that of an Arch-enemy of God, who, without meaning to ex- 
hibit himself as a Jewish Messiah, or professedly being recog- 
nized as such, none the less adopts or imitates certain methods 
put into practice by the genuine Christian Messiah, always, 
however, keeping his inner spiritual mentality and attitude, 
together with those of his followers, outside of the focus of 
the Messianic subordination to God. That the semblance of 
Messianic method and procedure will not be lacking may be 
safely affirmed a priori. After all, since we are here dealing 
with two supreme world-organizing forces, both operating 
on the same immense scale, there must needs be points and 
surfaces, where, formally considered, they will touch and in 
result of this to some extent resemble each other. The same 
wide folds of cosmical drapery are thrown over both; no 
wonder that, as they stride in gigantic shape over the field 
of prophecy and world-history, the impression is created 
that rivalry in the pursuit of the same supreme goal ani- 
mates the onward march of each. There is a largeness in 
the construction of programme, that inevitably puts them 
in parallelism. Thus an “apokalypsis’ is ascribed to the 
Man-of-Sin, vs. 6: “to the end that he may be revealed 
in his own season; vs. 8: “and then shall be revealed ‘‘the 
Lawless One’; in vs. 9 we read of his “parousia”’: “whose 
parousia is according to the working of Satan with all 
powers and signs and lying wonders.” His whole manner 


118 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


of working is described in terms that compel us to think 
of something parallel to the Gospel propaganda carried on 
by the servants of the true Christ. All these things, how- 
ever, though apparently confirming the theory of pseudo- 
Jewish-Messiahship, fall short in the one vital respect: they 
neither imply, nor, taken together with vs. 4, permit of the 
consciousness or recognition or pretense of Messianic subor- 
dination to the supreme God. The Man-of-Sin 1s bent upon, 
and driven by Satan into reproducing and exploiting for his 
wicked ends certain grandiose concomitants of the Christ- 
epiphany, but is unable to sum these up under the supreme 
category of Messiahship, for the simple reason that such 
would defeat his innermost, and public, aim of absolute 
emancipation from all that is divine or quasi-divine. If a term 
be wanted to mark off sharply the one frame of mind and 
method of working from the other, it may be defined as that 
of “plagiarizing’ certain exceedingly effective Messianic 
methods, and making the most of these, whilst all the time 
taking care lest they should be construed by his followers in 
such a way as would frustrate his un-Messianic, nay directly 
contra-Messianic intent. In reality no two things could be 
more opposite than this openly irreligious, antichristian state 
of mind, and the profoundly religious subordination, bor- 
dering upon self-effacement of Jesus to God. The plagiarisms 
adopted are in their very complexion but tools towards the 
setting up of an openly professed un-Messianic program, a 
program not only void objectively, but meant to be void of all 
Christian religious acknowledgments and aspirations. The 
Man-of-Sin is the irreligious and anti-religious and anti- 
Messianic subject par excellence. 

It must be admitted, that among the patristic writers, from 
Irenaeus onward, the Antichrist appears not unfrequently 
as a Jew. The tracing back of his genealogy to the tribe of 
Dan is an instance of this. To Bousset this furnishes suffi- 
cient reason for declaring it part of the alleged ancient pre- 
Christian doctrine concerning the Man-of-Sin in Jewish 
writings or traditions, lost to us but still accessible to the 


THE MAN OF SIN 119 


Church Fathers. The tribe of Dan came under consideration 
by reason of what is related concerning it in Gen. xlix. 16, 17: 
“Dan shall judge his people as one of the tribes of Israel; 
Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path, biting 
the horse’s heels so that his rider shall fall backward.” Ac- 
cording to Deut. xxxii. 22, “Dan is a lion’s whelp, leaping 
from Bashan,” viz., a rival or enemy of the Messianic tribe 
of Judah. Jer. viii. 16 depicts, how the snorting of the 
enemy’s horses shall be heard from Dan, and the whole land 
tremble at the sound of the neighing of his strong ones. 
Lev. xxiv. 10, I1 was likewise called into requisition, be- 
cause the man who blasphemed “‘the name’ is there said to 
have been the son of a Danite woman. There was still further 
the fact, that, according to Jud. xvili. 30, 31, the Danites had 
from early times practised idolatry, and that, later on, Dan 
had become one of the two centers of bull-worship introduced 
by Jeroboam. But probably the main motive for this patristic 
judification of the Man-of-Sin lay (apart from the Apoca- 
lypse), in what Paul prophesies concerning his setting up 
his throne in the temple, which many could not conceive on 
any other basis than that of his affiliation with the Jewish 
religion. There is no reason to believe that for all this there 
was any other ground than allegorizing exegesis. 

The above takes issue with the view that Paul, or as is as- 
serted the author of 2 Thess., ascribed to the Man-of-Sin a 
Jewish provenience and modelled him after the image of the 
false Jewish Messiah. Another illustration of “zeitgeschicht- 
liche” interpretation is afforded by the opposite view, that his 
is a pagan figure embodying in itself the wicked essence of 
paganism carried to its utmost intensity, and directed with 
intensest malignity against the true God and his people. Both 
Daniel and the Johannine Apocalypse contain much that, at 
least as a phase in the history of Antichristianism, seems to 
favor this. When, however, thus narrowed down to its “geit- 
geschichtliche” interpretation, the process from which Paul 
expected the end of the world becomes no more than a piece 
of the drama of Roman imperial persecution inflicted upon 


I20 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


Jew and Christian and in its far-reaching import long since 
discredited. In its most popular form it is believed to 
have attached itself to the at one time current belief, 
that Nero, the arch-persecutor would, notwithstanding his 
disappearance from the scene by flight or death, soon 
return, and then, with the help of Satan, through super- 
natural influences and activities, set up a new phase of his 
wicked reign, conducted with an unparalleled virulence of 
Antichristian persecution. This view has been ascribed to the 
writer of 2 Thess. and the Apocalypse, both of which on that 
view being denied to the canonical writers under whose 
names they stand. Considering only the question of dating, 
it is plain that the Apostle Paul could have had on such a 
theory nothing to do with the writing of 2 Thess. The piece 
thus interpreted presupposes the death of Nero, which hap- 
pened 68 a.p. And although the same charge of anachronism 
could not be brought against the (allegedly composite) Apoc- 
alypse, yet here the phantastic and in many respects conflict- 
ing scenes, derived, it is held, from the most various, to a 
large extent mythical, sources, would deprive the last book 
in our N.T. Canon, at least in its visionary part, of well-nigh 
all religious value. With the application of this hypothesis to 
the Book of Revelation we have here nothing to do, because 
we desire to keep strictly within the limits of the Pauline 
Eschatology. 2 Thess. particularly, as a unicum in the Pauline 
Epistles in its teaching on the last things, deserves to be 
treated by itself with undistracted attention. Only after the 
contents of it shall have been ascertained, so far as this is 
possible, does the law of the ‘“‘analogia fider”’ demand of the 
student that he shall endeavor to correlate and harmonize 
the one with the other. 

Modern criticism has not always kept sufficiently in mind 
this methodical principle. Starting with the Neronian form 
of the Antichrist theory, too rashly forced upon the Apoca- 
lypse of John, it has caused the little prophecy of Paul to be- 
come darkened and dwarfed by the huge shadows of its 
larger companion. Under the obsession that the Nero story 


THE MAN OF SIN I2I 


must be the chief source of ancient Christian occupation with 
and dread of the last things, it was regarded a self-under- 
stood maxim, that Paul’s ““Man-of-Sin” was cradled in the 
same circle of superstition. The Tubingen school lent to this 
Romanization (or rather Neronization) the aid of its 
prestige. Such champions of Hegelian N.T. Criticism as 
Kern, F. C. Baur, Hilgenfeld and many others strenuously 
advocated it from the first. The pictures of both Chaps. x11 
and xvii of the Apocalypse were explained on this basis of the 
Nero-return-belief. In the former context it is related that 
one of the seven heads of “‘the beast’? was smitten unto death, 
and his death-stroke healed, and that after this the beast re- 
ceived authority from the dragon, and acted and was wor- 
shipped after an Antichrist-fashion. The famous number of 
the beast is given as 666, and as lending support to the theory, 
the opinion arose that this number was the result of addi- 
tion of the number-values of the Hebrew characters compos- 
ing the name ““Neron Kesar.” In Chap. xvii it is related that the 
seven-headed and ten-horned beast upon which the woman 
sits : was, and 1s not, and is about to come up out of the abyss, 
and to go into perdition, and again, that he was and is not 
and shall come (7wapeora: ). Further, that the seven heads 
are seven kings, of which the five are fallen, the one is, the 
other is not yet come, that the seventh, when come, must 
continue a little while, and that thereupon the beast will 
appear as the eighth, it being added that the beast is also of 
the seven. The seven kings are on this theory identified with 
the seven first Roman Emperors, among which Nero holds 
the fifth place. This piece, then, it is believed, was written 
after Nero’s death, under the sixth Emperor, and it embodies 
the expectation that after a brief reign of his next two suc- 
cessors Nero will return from the dead in the role of 
Antichrist. 

We have given a brief survey of these several attempts in 
order to make plain how unfeasible it is to fit into the lock of 
2 Thess. ii the key of the Johannine Apocalypse. These are 
two, not one, prophecies, and each has the right to be exe- 


[22 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


geted on its own merits and within its own context. There 
is absolutely nothing in Paul’s description of the Man-of-Sin 
to remind of Nero. True, the Man-of-Sin has his parousia, 
and, combining with this the idea of a double parousia 
(“second coming’’) of Christ, an intimation might be found 
in the introduction of this term to the effect that the Man-of- 
Sin will likewise appear twice, first in his historical emer- 
gence, and afterwards, having withdrawn from the scene, be 
it through death or through flight to the Orient, in a highly 
demonic, supernaturalized form, to play out his complete 
anti-Christian role. Surely a weak support to hang the over- 
rash identification of the happenings in 2 Thess. and in Rev- 
elation on. This formal distinction between “first advent”’ and 
“second advent,’ so familiar to us, had not at that time been 
drawn, at least it had not acquired any such fixed meaning as 
to become of itself suggestive of a duplication of the Neronic 
appearance. If Jesus’ epiphany was one only, and that a 
future one, then the chronologically-innocent use of the term 
“parousia’”’ could never suggest the idea of a Nero revenant, 
far less of a Nero redivivus. Moreover Nero had been the 
great persecutor of the Christians, and precisely to this 
character of persecutor he owed his eschatological reputa- 
tion.'* In Thessalonians his activity lies fundamentally in the 


14 Zahn, Einleitung 1 pp. 251 ff. presents a forcible argument against the 
injection of the Nero legend even into the Apocalypse. He argues from the 
chronology. The belief in the return of Nero ran through two successive 
stages. During the early stage it was supposed he had not been actually 
slain, but escaped into the Orient (the Parthians), from where, without 
previous death, he would return to resume his former sway. Later, when 
the lapse of time precluded his still being believed alive, the original 
expectation was changed into the more mysterious belief that he had, 
indeed, died, but would presently return from Hades. Now Zahn argues 
that the date of the Apocalypse is too early for finding in it the passing 
over, or the having passed over, of the earlier belief into the later one. 
Nero at the time of his disappearance was only 31 years old (68 a.D.). 
Consequently at or about the year 80 he would not have been more 
than 43. Thinking of him as at that stage of life, there was nothing © 
implausible in the view that he would come back, or might come back 
at any time, as a living person. But the alleged Nero-figure of the 
Apocalypse is the figure of one previously dead up to the moment of his 


THE MAN OF SIN I23 


sphere of religious and moral seduction. He proceeds, not by 
applying violence, but through estranging and leading astray © 
his followers from the truth of the Gospel. Of political or- 
ganization and activity, though in reality the antecedents of 
the Antichrist tradition made it difficult to dissociate him 
wholly from this, nothing is said by the Apostle in so many 
words. The theme is, as it were, lifted above this plane by the 
general tenor of Paul’s teaching which was wont to seize upon 
large principles of religious development, either for good or 
for evil. 

This latter feature of Paul’s treatment of the great enemy 
is plainly reflected in the names “Man-of-Sin,” or, according 
to a much adopted variant reading, “Man-of-Unrighteous- 
ness” and the “Lawless One.” As has been observed above, 
these are Hebrew idioms; they designate one in whom sin and 
unrighteousness have become concentrated, yet not so as to 
make him entirely identical with Satan in Paul’s conception. 
The words had acquired peculiar associations ever since the 
time of the Syrian crisis foretold in the prophecy of Daniel. 
It has been suggested, that “‘a7ootacla,” vs. 3 ‘“‘the falling 
away is likewise meant as a proper name to be coordinated 
with the others, so as to represent the Enemy as “Apostasy 
Incarnate.’*® That later patristic writers have made this for- 


reappearance: he is healed from his death-wound and. comes up from 
the abyss. Such a picture could not have been fitted into the at that time 
still generally current expectation of his return as a living man. Of 
course, this argument is dependent on Zahn’s dating of the Apocalypse. 

As to 2 Thess., while fully reckoning with its nature as prophecy, 
we nevertheless think it highly improbable that, with Nero not yet on 
the throne and not yet having put into practice his malign and cruel 
designs, and not yet having disappeared, nor having been succeeded by 
another emperor, Paul should have simply taken for granted all these 
intermediate things, entirely unknown to his readers, and confronted the 
latter with an eschatological figure, for whose conception more or less 
familiarity with all these items of future happening was indispensable. 

15 Cp, Wohlenberg, J wu. IJ Thessalonicherbrief,? p. 145, who refers to 
Nestle’s article in The Expository Times, On II Thessalonians, Vol. XVI, 
Pp. 472, 473. The feminine gender of “apostasia,” and the use of the 
article, seem to us to tell against this view, especially since the other 
two names have prefixes indicating their reference to a person. 


I24 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


mal identification (so Chrys. and Thdt.) proves nothing for 
Paul’s intent here. The change of the word into a proper 
name was probably favored by the occasional rendering of 
Belial by ““Apostasis,’ and the consequent identification of 
Belial with Antichrist. While for Paul this usage cannot be 
substantiated, the immediate injection of the idea in the 
prophecy from the very outset proves the importance attached 
to it. The blasphemy against God constitutes to the Apostle the 
supreme wickedness. The self-deification, so elaborately set 
forth in vs. 4, is felt as the inmost sinfulness in the sin of the 
Man-of-Sin. The transition from vs. 3 to vs. 4, by means of 
the mere article strikingly brings out the nexus of thought: 
precisely because he goes to the non plus ultra of sin, he de- 
serves fully the name ‘“Man-of-Sin,”’ and the doom an- 
nounced by “Son-of-Perdition.”’ Among the terrible things 
reserved for the proximity of the end, the most terrible to 
Paul’s mind, is this negation of God in his very existence, this 
wilful insult to the divine majesty. In it the very foundations 
of religion are shaken: The “sitting in the temple of God” 
only sums up in one terse image that unholiest offense offered 
to the Holiest of Beings. Nor is this self-deification conceived 
as a purely passive attitude; it energetically asserts itself 
against all deity as such, pretended or true. The participle 
arodexvivta implies the thought of intensified, positive as- 
sault upon God: deeds, not mere assertions, are meant by 
it. In this, as in every other strand of his teaching, Paul 
shows himself thoroughly theocentric. 

In order still somewhat further to determine the character 
in which the Apostle represents this impersonation of wicked- 
ness, it will be conducive to raise the question, what inner con- 
nection there is between the “apostasy,” this moral and reli- 
gious debacle on the grandest of scales and the appearing and 
activity of the “Lawless One” up to its catastrophic finale at. 
the end. The “Man-of-Sin” is not without more identical with 
the apostasy, which rather like an ominous cloud of blackest 
darkness, enwraps his appearance. The “‘falling away” is one 
of the attending phenomena in the infernal outbreak, but not 


THE MAN OF SIN 125 


entirely identical with the latter’s explosion. It has, if only in 
a premonitory way, its sure connection with the arrival of 
the Enemy. The ‘‘Man-of-Sin” has his hand in fanning the 
flame to its fierceness as a world-conflagration. Such is the 
explicit affirmation of vss. 9-12. But the reverse relationship 
can be affirmed with equal warrant. In vs. 3, the sequence indi- 
cates that the apostasy comes first, and that on the waves of 
its tempest the Wicked One is lifted up and carried on to his 
ultimate destination. One might even infer, that not merely 
the falling in upon itself of the fabric of the world of evil, 
but likewise the first beginnings of its ominous origin, are due 
to him. The highly enigmatic words of vs. 7: “The mystery 
of lawlessness does already work,’ whatever in the concrete 
they refer to, certainly leave with us the impression of some 
preliminary, gradual, secret activity behind the scene, as 
it were, of what is impending. The “Lawless One” comes 
when the moment is ripe for placing himself at the head of a 
movement that has already gained impetus not without his 
initiative. Of course, such a movement stands from the out- 
set under the influence of that same superhuman power, that 
will also bring the Man-of-Sin into the open. The two not 
merely follow each other in time, but are also internally con- 
nected through the Satanic influences working back of each. 
On the other hand, according to vss. 9-12 the appearance of 
the “Anomos” becomes the occasion for a more widely ex- 
tended and systematically organized apostasy. He deceives 
those that are being lost (i.e. condemned to and on the way 
towards perdition). God through him sends them a working 
of error, so that they believe a lie. His deceptive and mislead- 
ing methods lead to a culmination of that doom, which 
through the interaction of unbelief at the beginning, and the 
punitive hardening of God has been made inevitable. The 
whole representation reminds vividly of what is narrated in 
Exodus concerning Jehovah’s dealing with Pharaoh. The 
phrase “not having received the love of the truth,” seems to in- 
dicate, that not merely through neglect of the truth in the ab- 
stract, but that with a pointed antagonism to God the apostates 


126 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


have disdained his manifestation of love which formed the 
central substance of “‘the truth’ revealed and offered to them 
in the Gospel, and which tended to their salvation. The excess- 
ive sinfulness of this attitude towards the gospel appears — 
from the extreme reaction it provokes on God’s part: “for this 
cause God sends them a working of error, that they should 
believe a lie.”’ Vss. 10-12 show that the self-deification of the 
“Lawless One’ is not something confined to his own convic- 
tion; through the spirit of error sent from God, they are made 
to believe “76 webdSos” “the lie,” that is the fundamental, all- 
comprehensive lie, that follows in its totality from the setting 
up of himself as God by the ‘““Man-of-Sin,” for as in God and 
his position of deity the entire world and system of truth are 
founded, even so from the self-deifying spurious God, the 
counterpart of this, a world of “lying,” is inseparable.” 
While thus sketching in broad strokes the immoral and 
irreligious character of this opponent of God and Christ, the 
Apostle has furnished neither the Thessalonians nor us with 
detailed, concrete information such as we, no less than they, 
might pardonably crave. Even the milieu from which all these 
terrible phenomena will in occurring detach themselves is not 
clearly designated. Besides this also stands unanswered the 
more concrete question, whence and how the personal head of 
this wickedness will enter upon the scene of his activities. 
Being a man, will he be born as a man, and at a point of ripe- 
ness assume his public role? Or are we perhaps to assume, 
that, like the whole manner of his activity, so the mode of his 
origin will be supernatural? If the latter, can we avoid the 
idea of a relative preexistence spent in some mysterious hid- 
den sphere, after some such manner as the Jews pictured to 


16 The passage is one of the most interesting statements in Paul binding 
the experience of true religion to a noétic complex of verities, received 
through the mind. Even the false religion can not escape this law of 
intellect and belief in the primacy of religion because such a preced- 
ence is indispensable to the proper exercise of all religious functions. 
How different from the modern phantasy that a genuine type of 
Christianity can exist and flourish apart from every embrace of a 
substantial content of truth. 


THE MAN OF SIN 127 


themselves the antecedent state of the Messiah previous to his 
public appearance? Will the termination of his career, de- 
scribed in words from Isaiah xi. 4, be after the manner of 
“slaying,” preserving the personal identity of the enemy 
slain, or after the manner of annihilation. The words avandio- 
Kew andKkatapyeto Gat do not necessarily carry the latter implica- 
tion, but, at any rate, they emphasize both the instantaneous- 
ness and the finality of the act: “whom the Lord Jesus shall 
slay with the breath of his mouth, and bring to nought by the 
manifestation of his parousia.’”’*’ The enquiry as to the proxi- 
mate environment of his arising, whether Jewish or Gen- 
tile, savors overmuch of the narrowly-geitgeschichtlich fram- 
ing of the problem. It is, of course, easy to argue: if not 
Jewish, then Pagan. But this does not necessarily follow. In 
the foregoing discussion we have not aimed at the exclusion 
of Jewish nationality per se, but only argued against the 
possibility of Jewish Messiahship; these two are different 
things. In the same way we have not sought either to affirm 
or to deny the pagan provenience of the Man-of-Sin. His 
person is so closely wrapped up with the idea of “the apos- 
tasy,’ and the latter is so generally associated in the New 
Testament with the Christian Church, that naturally in this 
connection also our first thought would be of a birth from the 
womb of an unfaithful Church, profoundly alienated from 
the rectitude of the true faith. The milieu seems to be one to 
which the distinction between Jew and Gentile has become 
indifferent, a milieu dereligionized in principle. Still more 
interesting and to popular inquisitiveness more attractive, ap- 
pears the enquiry as to how the Antichrist shall come into the 
world. It must be conceded that such an air of supernatural- 


17 Bengel finely defines the exact difference between the two terms 
“epiphaneia” and “parousia” in the following manner: “hic apparitio 
adventus ipso adventu prior est, vel certe prima ipsius adventus emi- 
catio, ut émipaveia tHS Huepas”’. The joining of the two words with 
érupaveca perceptibly adds to the effect. In Isaiah, from whom the 
words are taken, the suddenness, instantaneousness of the working of 
the divine omnipotence is one of the most characteristic traits in the 
description of judgment. 


128 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


ness, not to say superearthliness, envelopes the figure, that 
to think of a mysterious origin seems scarcely avoidable. Still 
his generic humanity remains beyond question, for, apart 
from the titles examined above, the very sharpness of the 
antithesis between him and God, the stress on the criminality 
of his pretense of being God, place him in the category of the 
creature beyond all shadow of doubt. It is not, however, 
plausible so to stress his historical emergence as to make 
him and his work a mere stage, by the side of other preceding 
stages, in the unfolding of the plan of God. As to a possible 
preéxistence, not merely as antedating the publicity of his ap- 
pearance on the scene of activity, but likewise in regard to 
his entrance into the world, there is in the manner of his 
portraiture not a little that leads to thinking of this. Finally 
on the problem of his ultimate disposal it were presumptuous 
to risk a decisive conclusion. The Apocalypse itself tells 
nothing more of the Arch-deceiver, the devil, than that he 
was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where are also 
the beast and the false prophet, and eternal torment is in- 
flicted upon them, the same lake of fire into which Death and 
Hades were cast, and which is called ‘‘the second death,” 
xx. 6, 14. According to some exegetes this “second death” 
is equivalent to annihilation.** 

But these problems, already sufficiently obscure i deter 
the exegete from framing any definite, positive answer, even 
do not yet constitute the most cryptic part of the prophecy. 
Strange to say, the latter is found in the practical momentary 
bearing of Paul’s words on the needs of his readers. In vss. 
5-7, to be sure, the main purport of the discourse is not quite 
so opaque as the significance of the single parts and their 
mutual relations to one another. Their obvious purpose is 
none other than still further to restrain the Thessalonians in 
their over-eagerness and excitability with regard to the immi- 
nent, or perhaps even in their opinion at that very moment 
transpiring, advent of the Lord, while yet at the same time 


18 Cp, Zahn’s Komm. zg. N.T. in loco. 


THE MAN OF SIN I29 


detracting nothing from the central value and high serious- 
ness attaching to the matter in itself. The words are intended 
to compose and lead back to patience the readers in envisaging 
the realities of the parousia, both in their terrifying and in 
their comforting aspect. There is still delay, before the su- 
preme event transpires; a certain process of hidden prepara- 
tion must run its course; this process is called the évepyeta@a. 
Together with the delay organically involved in this, there is 
also exercised a more positive xatéyev “restraint,” from 
which the person exercising it derives the semi-technical 
name o xatéyoy, “the restrainer,” or 70 catéyov, that which 
restrains, in the neuter gender, vs. 6. The reason given for this 
is that the Man-of-Sin may be revealed in his own (proper) 
season, and not before that. Consequently the “restrainer” or 
“restraint” must be removed, “é« péoov yiyvéo@ai,” where- 
upon straightway (rdre) the Lawless One shall be revealed, 
and whatever the prophecy has foretold concerning him go 
into fulfilment. Paul further ascribes to his readers a certain 
degree of knowledge formerly acquired concerning some of 
these things, partly derived from his previous presence with 
them, and a previous knowledge relating not to any peri- 
pheral matters, but to the very core of the Man-of- 
Sin’s behavior. Now, at the time of his writing the second 
letter, he declares them possessed of additional knowledge as 
touching the “mystery of lawlessness” and the restraint re- 
tarding it. This, briefly stated, and with abstaining as much 
as possible from prejudicial exegesis, is the gist of what the 
crucial verses in question contain. 

It will be observed that the several points named are not 
entirely independent from one another. That the “working” 
and the “restraining” mutually determine each other lies 
on the surface. But how is the mystery working? And where 
are we to look for the restraint that is being exercised? If the. 
” “now” in vs. 6 were to be construed, as is often done, 
with the increased knowledge of the readers, as differing 
from a previously relative ignorance, the inference would be 
plain, that at the time of writing the mystery was to a large 


“yoD, 


130 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


extent solved for the Thessalonians. If they “knew” (oiSare) 
about the restraining power, then a fortiori they must have 
been likewise informed as regards the mystery of lawlessness 
held back by it. On this construction, however, the question 
inevitably obtrudes itself in which way such additional infor- 
mation had reached the Thessalonians: Not through the first 
letter, for in that no trace of it is to be discovered. Nor in 
the intervening time after the sending of 1 Thess., for Paul 
himself warns the readers against lending credence to com- 
munications concerning the presence of the day of the Lord, 
that reached them under the pretense of coming from him. It 
will be necessary, therefore, to abandon this construction, 
although the sequence of the words does not forbid it, and 
a natural contrast found between the words “when I 
was still with you; coupled with the verb “I told you these 
things’ and the word vdp lend a degree of plausibility to it: 
“then I told” and “now ye know.” The other interpretation 
joins the “viv” to the participle xaréyov (in vs. 7 xatéyov) 
This would mean. that they were informed about the power 
that was “now” holding back the outbreak of the ultimate 
wickedness, and, according to the ydp at the opening of vs. 7, 
were informed likewise, through some initiation into secret 
happenings about the furtherance of the mystery of iniquity. 
The word “now,” thus interpreted links the present knowl- 
edge of the Apostle and the Thessalonians to the absolute end 
of things, so far as the appearance of the Man-of-Sin can 
be said to precede the latter without further intervening de- 
velopments at least on a large eschatological scale. Such a 
prospect overbridging ages is not an unknown thing in Bibli- 
cal prophecy; the “now”’ of the reader and the “then” of the 
consummation not seldom stretch out hands towards one an- 
other over vast intermediate spaces. What causes unusual 
trouble lies not in that but in the fact that the point of depart- 
ure for that long span is not for us determinable, although it 
was so for Paul and the readers of the Epistle. Still another 
difficulty should not be overlooked. The locating of the “‘re- 
strainer’ or “restraint,” and the locating of the Antichristian 


THE MAN OF SIN 131 


center of wickedness are usually held to determine one the 
other on the principle of oppositeness. Where the Man-of- 
Sin is sought in Judaism, there the restraint or restrainer are 
sought within the pagan, particularly Roman, sphere. And 
the contrary view also has not been without advocates, viz. 
that the Enemy was expected from the Roman side, and the 
power of restraint somehow placed in Judaism. As to the 
latter view, the disproportionateness of the two factors is too 
obvious to deserve serious consideration. As to the former, 
the obstacles besetting the theory of Jewish provenience have 
been sufficiently brought out in an earlier connection. Where 
Judaism is entirely eliminated from the construction, and yet 
‘the “zeitgeschichtliche’”’ principle upheld, as is the case with 
the Neronian hypothesis, it becomes necessary to place Anti- 
christ and Restrainer within the same circle, one being e.g. 
one Emperor, the other his predecessor on the throne. The 
objection to this lies in the sharp antithetical character Paul 
seems to ascribe to the two principles. They are so diverse and 
antagonistic, that whence the one proceeds it is unnatural to 
look for the other. How could a relatively better Emperor 
restrain, or hold back the supremely iniquitous future Enemy, 
or even seriously hold back the increasing work of the “mys- 
tery of iniquity,” when in the latter, as we are given to under- 
stand, the Satanic principles are making ready for their final 
assault upon the people of God? How could the temporary 
successor of Nero, with all the imperial might back of him, 
prevail for a moment against the onslaught of Nero return- 
ing, when the latter was being equipped and propelled by the 
Evil One himself? Truly, we move here among mysteries 
within mysteries ! 

A peculiar view worked out by Von Hofmann may lay claim 
to a brief notice. It is based on a representation in Daniel 
as to the successive powers contending against the people of 
Israel, and the relation of their activity one to the other. It 
need not be again pointed out, that in the vision of Daniel 
there is a higher super-terrestrial background to the contest 
the prophet is made to witness in the political devolutions of 


[32 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


power. In Chap. x the supernatural person appearing to Daniel 
affirms to have been withstood by another supernatural power, 
called the Prince of the kingdom of Persia. This lasted for a 
certain length of time, after the lapse of which Michael, one 
of the chief Princes (also called “your Prince,” i.e., the 
patron-Prince of Israel in vs. 21) came to help him, vs. 13, 
to confirm and strengthen him, xi. 1. According to this rep- 
resentation the world-power has its Prince, and Israel has its 
Prince in the world of superhuman Spirits, and between these 
fierce, protracted combats are going on for supremacy on an 
immense, though invisible, field of battle. Thus, besides the 
Prince of Israel, there is another, who declares, that, after 
having spoken to the prophet, he will return to the fight 
against the Prince of Persia. But, when abandoning this fur- 
ther encounter, he goes away, the Prince of Greece will appear 
on the scene to renew the attack. Von Hofmann thinks that 
here we have something resembling in general outlines the 
situation of 2 Thessalonians. The three features of a with- 
standing of the demonic head of the world-power, of a re- 
moval or departure of the one that withstands, and of the 
immediate appearance after this of a more godless Antagon- 
ist of Israel’s cause, here meet together. In view of this coinci- 
dence between the two prophecies one might, at least hypo- 
thetically, be tempted to assume that Paul likewise understood 
by the caréyov and xaréywv something supernatural and far 
superior to all the might of Rome. If this be tentatively ac- © 
cepted, it throws at least some light on one subject otherwise 
entirely veiled in darkness. None the less the fact remains, 
that it is impossible for us to form concrete conceptions of 
how the restraint of the mystery takes place, how its power 
is organized, whether there is a direct retarding influence 
brought to bear upon the ““Lawless One,” or perhaps he is only 
indirectly affected in his movements by means of the influ- 
ences brought to bear upon his victims. 

One of the objections raised against the genuineness ( Paul- 
ine origin) of 2 Thess., is that the Apostle, who expected ac- 
cording to Rom. xi. 25 the coming in of the fulness of the 


THE MAN OF SIN 133 


Gentiles and the salvation of all Israel, and regarded this 
momentous epoch as a precursor of the end, cannot, in direct 
contradiction to that, have made the end dependent on such 
an apostasy as is here predicted. The answer to this is that the 
coming in of the Gentiles does not preclude the falling away 
again from the Gentiles of considerable groups. The apostasy 
of the end had become too much a fixed factor in eschatology 
long before Paul, than that Paul could have simply ignored 
it or mapped out a program in which there was absolutely no 
room reserved for it. Even our Lord had distinctly predicted 
it. And in Rom. xi. 20 ff. it is hinted at as a possibility. In 
Daniel likewise it is an important ingredient closely inter- 
woven with the typical Antichristian vision of the prophet. 
Daniex1:32.°° | 

In what has been said in this concluding section of our en- 
quiry there has entered much that of necessity remains 
highly problematical, and will only cease to be so in the same 
degree that the vision hastens on to the end. 2 Thess. belongs 
among the many prophecies, whose best and final exegete 
will be the eschatological fulfilment, and in regard to which 
it behooves the saints to exercise a peculiar kind of eschato- 
logical patience.” 


19 The standing article before the noun 7 dwooracia bears witness to 
the technical meaning acquired by the term as a fixed element in the 
final unfolding of things. 

20In view of the apparently insuperable difficulties of the exegesis 
of vss. 5-7 it might seem wise to content ourselves with a non liquet. 
Even Wohlenberg, otherwise so skilful in the solution of intricate 
exegetical problems, concedes, in regard to the katechon problem: “here 
the expositor finds himself hemmed in by difficulties’; Komm, p. 153, 
note. Perhaps more attention ought to have been given by exegetes to 
the not uncommon alternate significance of katechein, viz. “to occupy,” 
“hold in possession.” It is not unthinkable that through its over-ready 
acceptance of the meaning “to keep back” or “to restrain” the exposi- 
tion may have been thrown upon a wrong track. Trying this other 
rendering we would obtain a reference to the world power, which at the 
time of writing enjoyed a wide international supremacy. This 
would lead back to the scheme of Daniel and Von Hoffmann’s 
application of it to the program of 2 Thessalonians would 
in this way gain some additional support. It might appear easier to 


134 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


The idea of the Antichrist in general and that of the apos- 
tasy in particular ought to warn us, although this may not 
have been the proximate purpose of Paul, not to take for 


understand that the readers of the Epistle knew, and particularly knew 
then, what or who the “katechon”’ was. Even Augustine felt a sort 
of dissatisfaction with the traditional exegesis. Paul, he observes, could 
say to the Thessalonians, “ye know,” whilst, as to ourselves, we do not 
know. Peculiar to the patristic writers is, that the rendering “to hold” 
carries with itself a rather favorable view of the Roman dominion. 
Whatever it might be in itself, it rendered the Church the good service 
of delaying, postponing something immeasurably worse. In a certain 
sense this is less an abandonment of the “restraint-idea,’ than a modifi- 
cation of the significance the word was usually supposed to express: 
it came now to mean “to hold the rule, and thereby to restrain the 
succession of the absolutely evil rule.” In this vein Tertullian does not 
hesitate to declare “Romanae diuturnitati favemus.’ What a distance in 
eschatological appraisal between the picture of the fourth beast given 
by Daniel, and the rather mild, semi-benevolent estimate put upon it by 
these Fathers! For the Roman Empire has not ceased being “the fourth 
beast.”’ Not until it is disposed of comes the acme of terror, with which 
for formidableness even Rome cannot be compared. The patristic 
writers, however, by no means are uniform and consistent in their 
translation and application of “katechein.” Both Tertullian and Augus- 
tine employ the two senses “tenere” and “detinere” in various passages, 
and, curiously enough, sometimes with an ascription of one meaning to 
the masculine, of the other to the neuter participle. Augustine takes the 
term “apostasia” as signifying a person, rendering it by “Refuga,” 
which is paraphrased by “Refuga de Domino.” It is likewise interesting 
to notice that Augustine resurrects the Nero-hypothesis, though 
cautiously stating that it is the view of some. 

In the opinion of the Fathers named the realism of the eschatological 
substance and imagery are fully preserved. It was different with Origen, 
with whom the desubstantivation and spiritualization of this whole world 
of things plainly begins to play havoc with our passage. While not con- 
sistently abandoning the idea of a personal Enemy of God, he elsewhere 
seems to give countenance to the view that Antichrist signifies an 
impersonal, purely-spiritual principle. Taking the two usages together 
one might almost be made to feel that they yield a replica of the Anti- 
christ teaching of the Epistles of John. 

Finally attention may be called to Jilicher’s words to the effect, that 
the disappearance of well-nigh all the apparatus of 2 Thess. is due to 
spiritualization arising from Rom. xi. Th. LZ. 1806 (Review of Bous- 
set’s book). For evidence to the contrary one need only consult Wohlen- 
berg’s instructive Excursus, at the close of the Commentary. The few 
facts culled from this Excursus, cited above, are sufficient to refute 
Bousset’s opinion. 


THE MAN OF SIN 135 


granted an uninterrupted progress of the cause of Christ, 
through all ages on toward the end. As the reign of the truth | 
will be gradually extended, so the power of evil will gather 


force towards the end. The making all things right and new | 


in the world depends not on gradual amelioration but on the 
final interposition of God. 


CHAPTER VI 
THE RESURRECTION 
The First Epistle to the Thessalonians, although less in- 


forming as to the nature of the resurrection itself, furnishes 
many details concerning the nature of the parousia. The 


"~ instantaneous conjunction between the parousia and the res- 


urrection is pointedly affirmed: “The Lord Himself shall de- 
scend from heaven . . . and the dead in Christ shall rise 
first,’ iv. 16. It is unwarranted, however, to appeal to the 
mention of “‘the clouds,” and “the air’ in vs. 18 for con- 
structing the process in this way, that the Lord’s descent will 
be provisionally suspended at some point on high before the 
earth’s surface is reached, then subsequently, after certain 
preliminary actions have been performed from that higher 
station, to be continued earthward. It is true that the descent 
is suspended, only it is not interrupted. The place “in the air” 
is the nearest the Descending One comes to the earth. There 
is nothing unnatural or suggestive of mystery in this whole 
representation. A position of some remoteness from the sur- 
face of the earth is after all the most natural to assume in this 
connection. The far reach and universal scope of the tre- 
mendous event here set in motion are in better accord with 
some central elevated place in the air than a standpoint occu- 
pied on the flat surface of the ground. Of course, for the 
raised and the saints found living at the parousia, who are at 
first on the earth, a subsequent movement in the air is 
required, to meet the Lord at the point where He has taken 
his station. An element of mystery is injected into the 
situation through a certain exegesis of the statement “to the 
end He may establish your hearts . . . at the coming of 
our Lord Jesus with all his saints,” ii, 13. When here “the 
saints” with whom Jesus comes are understood of hitherto 
unembodied believers making together with Him this unique 


) 


THE RESURRECTION 137 


journey from heaven to earth, the difficulties, not to say incon- 
ceivabilities, are much increased. Various questions arise : how 
can these saints, who have hitherto lived in heaven without 
a body be suitable companions of the Lord at his embodied 
visible appearance? It is everywhere stressed by Paul as well 
as elsewhere in the New Testament (not to go back now to Dan. 
vil), that the feature of glorious visibility is the most out- 
standing feature of this supreme event. A large part of the 
resurrection, viz. that pertaining to the saints arrived from 
heaven, would then have to be anticipated, in order to endow 
this group with the appropriate radiant apparel in which they 
are to follow the Lord in his assumed further movement earth- 
ward. At the completion of this final descent the resurrection 
of all the believing dead would follow, and such believers as 
are found living would (after a change corresponding to the 
resurrection-change) join themselves to those having already 
brought the substance of the resurrection with them from 
the air, and thereupon this entire company would join the 
Lord to the place (or a place) previously selected for that 
purpose. With the Chiliastic associations of this construction 
we do not here deal; it will subsequently come under con- 
sideration in the chapter devoted to the problem of Chiliasm 
in Paul. For the present it may suffice to call attention to the 
phantastic ensemble created by such understanding of the term 
“saints” of men come from heaven. All this difficulty arising 
from accumulation of strange features disappears im- 
mediately when “saints” is taken to designate angels come 
with Christ from heaven. It is true, Paul does not in any 
passage call the angels “‘saints,’ and on the other hand, in 
Matt. xxvii. 52 we do read of the bodies of the saints that 
were asleep appearing in the holy city at the crucifixion of 
Christ. Over against this, however, may be placed the words 
of Jesus Himself, Mk. viii. 38: “the Son-of-Man also shall 
be ashamed of him, when He comes in the glory of his Father 
with the holy angels.” From this saying it appears that the 
attribute “holy” could with a special fitness be given to the 
angels in eschatological connections. There is nothing what- 


128 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


ever to contraindicate the angel-reference in a passage so 
steeped in eschatological atmosphere as 1 Thess. iti. 13. From 
vs. 14, “‘those who are asleep . .. God shall bring ( 4&e ) with 
Him,” no argument can be drawn in favor of the joint-coming 
of Christ and the risen saints at the parousia. Here “to bring” 
( ayev ) refers to the introduction of the saints, jointly with 
Christ, into the Kingdom of God, not to God’s bringing 
them to earth in the movement of the parousia. The statement 
in iv. 17 can be interpreted in the same way, so as to make the 
meeting of believers with Christ in the air not preparatory 
to a further earthward descent for judgment, but intro- 
ductory to an abode with Him in the supernal regions. 

More explicit information as to the attending circumstances 
of the resurrection we obtain in iv. 16. Here we learn of the 
“shout,” the “voice of the archangel,” and the “trump of 
God” as accompanying the descent. The sounds thus described 
serve the purpose of summoning from afar, as it were, the 
dead to arise, in order to render them ready for their share in 
the event only a little later than Christ has begun his earth- 
ward movement. 

The preposition used with these three descriptive phrases 
is €v, It describes the attending circumstances of the act. The 
following queries arise: (1) Who is the subject issuing the 
“shout” (édkevopa), and who are the objects receiving it? 
(2) What is the relation of the two subjoined terms, the 
“voice of the archangel,’ and the “trump of God,” to the 
keleusma? The word keleusma is a forcible term used to 
describe the word of command given, for example, to soldiers, 
or to sailors rowing in a ship, or to dogs in the chase. Here, 
however, its meaning is not associated with any of these par- 
ticular uses. Bringing in the military idea would represent 
Jesus as by a shout summoning his forces to the conflict with 
and final victory over the power of evil. But the power of evil 
remains entirely in the background in the whole representa- 
tion. The shout is undoubtedly addressed to the dead as dead, 
that is, as in a state which would render them, figuratively 
speaking, deaf to every other impact of sound and require to 


THE RESURRECTION 139 


rouse them all the authority and omnipotence of God. Both 
the immediateness and the irresistibleness of the power trans- 
mitted by such a sound to a sphere where otherwise no sound 
is able to penetrate are most strikingly expressed. 

Now, who is the subject of the keleusma, the utterer of this 
tremendous command? Is it Christ or God? It has been urged 
that, since “the Lord”’ is the subject of the verb “shall come 
down,” He must likewise be the subject of the act which 
attends his descent. But the second phrase, “with the voice of 
the archangel,” shows that this argument has no force. If 
Christ can come down with the voice of the archangel, He 
can also descend with a keleusma proceeding from some one 
else, which would in this case be God. Still this, while possible, 
yields no more than a possibility, and falls short of convincing 
proof. The statement as a whole rather favors the other view, 
viz., that Christ is the One issuing the keleusma. Especially 
the emphasis thrown on the fact that Christ Himself will 
descend makes us expect the prominence of Christ in the whole 
transaction, and this would be secured through the issuing of 
the keleusma from Him. The direct ascription of this to 
Christ serves the further purpose of rendering the resurrec- 
tion of believers undeniably certain: being ‘dead in Christ” 
they can not fail of participating in the effect of an act or 
process in which He is the princeps or center. At any rate, 
whether Christ be the subject of the keleusma, or not, it 
would yield an incongruous thought to regard Him as the 
object of the commanding voice. Such a loud summons to 
Christ who dwells in the immediate presence of God would 
be wholly out of place; whereas, when conceived as addressed 
to the dead, it is in entire harmony with the situation." 

Assuming then that the keleusma is uttered by Christ, the 
question next arises, What is the relation to it of the two 
other terms named, the “voice of the archangel” and the 
“trump of God’’? Are these coordinated or subordinated con- 


1 Kabisch would have the keleusma addressed to Christ. 


I40 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


ceptions? Do they define what the keleusma consists in, or do 
they name two further and separate items? In the former case 
the construction would more likely have been that with the 
genitive (pevis apyayyédov), and similarly with the other 
member (cddmvyyos Geov), The repetition of €v favors the 
other interpretation. This, however, is not to be so under- 
stood as though the keleusma did not take effect until after 
the voice of the archangel and the trump of God had produced 
theirs, the latter two wakening the dead, the former sum- 
moning the dead already wakened. The three serve the same 
purpose and their force is cumulative. Who blows the trumpet 
is not stated; only the voice of the archangel should not be 
identified with the sound of the trumpet; against this the 
conjunction «ai speaks. It must be granted, however, that the 
sounding of the eschatological trumpets is elsewhere assigned 
to the angels, cp. Apoc. x. 7; xi. 15, where, the number being 
seven, the seven archangels must be meant. Michael, one of 
the archangels, appears already significantly connected with 
the resurrection in Dan. xii. 12. The conception of Michael 
as having a special task in connection with the last things is 
found also in the Apocalyptic writings ;* ancient Jewish tra- 
ditions make him particularly the blower of the last trumpet.® 
The figure of the trumpet, however, has its root not there but 
in the Old Testament. Its origin seems to lie in what the 
Pentateuch relates of a trumpet blown at the giving of the 
Law: “There were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud 
upon the mount, and a voice of a trumpet exceeding loud”’ 
(Ex. xix. 16). According to Isa. xxviil. 13, a great trumpet 
will be blown to gather the scattered people of God from 
Assyria and Egypt and summon them to the holy mountain 
of Jerusalem, where they will worship Jehovah. From the 
standpoint of the Old Testament this is already eschatologi- 
cal. Full New Testament eschatological significance is given 


2 Cor Ass Mos! x: 25 En, Xe TI eRXIvi GK Vaden xed 
8 Cp. 4 Esd. vi. 23; Or. Syb. iv. 173. 


THE RESURRECTION I4l 


the words from Exodus by the author of the Epistle to the He- 
brews, who reminds the readers that they are come “not to a 
mountain that might be touched* and that burned with fire, and 
unto blackness, and darkness and tempest, and the sound of 
a trumpet, and the voice of words . . . but unto the heavenly 
Jerusalem” (xii. 19). Here the principle of typology is ap- 
plied via oppositionis: the setting and the external apparatus 
are the same, but the significance and effects are opposite.° Our 
Lord, likewise, in eschatological discourse speaks of the great 
sound of a trumpet wherewith the angels shall gather the 
elect (Matt. xxiv. 31). Here also, it will be observed, the 
angels are the trumpet-blowers. Apart from the trumpets in 
the Apocalypse, the only other reference to the trumpet is 
found with Paul himself (1 Cor. xv. 52). Here it is called 
“the last trump” (€oxdtn cadmiyE): “We shall all be changed 
. at the last trump, for the trumpet shall sound, and the 
dead shall be raised incorruptible.” The adjective “last” in 
this phrase is usually misunderstood. The Apostle’s meaning 
is not that during the ages of the world’s history many trum- 
pets have in succession been blown, but that this one, as mark- 
ing the close of all history, will be the last one to sound. 
“Last” does not here signify “final” in a chronological 
sense. It is a technical eschatological term, which does not 
indicate plurality, but duality; there is one at the beginning, 
and there will be another, corresponding to it at the end; and 
between these two trumpets lies the whole content of historical 
eventuation. Finally the genitive (“‘of God”) added to 
“trump, does not mean that God blows it, but simply char- 
acterizes it as belonging to the eschatological order of things. 
4 “Might be touched” is the expression of the material, tangible charac- 
‘ter of the mountain; it has nothing to do with the prohibition of touching 
the mount in Ex. xix. 12. Its opposite is not the inaccessibleness, but the 
-spiritualness of the mountain of the New Jerusalem. 
5 Zech. ix. 14 is not meant eschatologically; here the trumpet is one of 
war: “And Jehovah shall be seen over them, and his arrow shall go forth 


as the lightning: and the Lord Jehovah will blow the trumpet, and will 
go with whirlwinds of the south.” 


142 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


By these colorful features Paul makes for us even more 
grandiose and impressive what under no circumstances could 
fail being a scene of intense realism. They furnish practi- 
cally the only material on which our imagination can draw for 
filling out the large frame of the canvas. It were wrong un- 
doubtedly to reduce all the things mentioned to the rubric of 
figurative language, in regard to which the author is aware 
of painting freely, rather than of copying the solid content 
of prophecy given him by the Spirit. On the other hand we 
should not overlook the equally.obvious fact, that in painting 
by words, even with the fullest intent of accuracy, the Apostle 
had to avail himself of a fixed medium of language, which 
left room for a margin of over-literalism, and whose interpre- 
tation by others, while seemingly in full accord with the words 
recorded, nevertheless may introduce an ingredient of inad- 
equacy when compared with the actual intent of Paul. We 
have here before us a striking example of the possibility of 
__over-stressing the literalness of the language and imagery 
_.used, and yet, while thus seeming to do justice to the writer’s 
speech, missing in reality the deeper and finer qualities and 
objectives of his true conception. The literalistic may appear 
to our human vision nearer the real, and yet, owing to our 
pardonable craving for the concrete, be more subjective than 
the spiritualized. 

In view of the original literal, physical association of the 
words forming the resurrection-terminology with the notions 
of “sleep” or “causing to rise, or stand up,” the question is 
asked whether Paul’s idea of the state between death and 
resurrection is that of sleep or unconsciousness? If God wakes 
the dead, or if they are roused and made to stand on their 
feet, what other implication can this have than that they pass 
out from a sleeping into a waking condition? And, what 
seems stronger still, the representation of the dead as those 
who have been put to rest (bed), and consequently now are 
in that condition, appears inseparable from the phenomena of 
physical sleep. None the less it would be rash to draw even 
such theological, eschatological inferences from this as might 


THE RESURRECTION 143 


seem to lie plainly on the surface. These are all words and 
modes of speech of most-ancient origin. Undoubtedly at 
the time of their first springing into usage they had 
clearly associated with themselves a feeling of their ety- 
mological significance, viz., that of a state dim conscious- 
ness or unconsciousness in the dead. But, like all words, 
especially like all words denoting universal common pro- 
cesses, they were subject to attrition. While, of course, 
continuing capable of describing the surface facts, they 
could not fail to lose part of the coloring and implica- 
tions of the facts, whose apprehension had once asserted 
itself in their coinage. Except when particular occasion arose 
to reflect on their original force, they were handled as so many 
word-signs, into whose primordial picturesqueness the aver- 
age language-user no longer enquired. Such was undoubtedly 
the case with words that had no specific revelation-function 
to perform, being common to the current speech of all. The 
words for “sleep” (Kolar, Koimac Oat, Kexotpaa Oar) are words 
of this sort. These may have passed through more than one 
stage of primitive association, but inevitably they suffered the 
fate of becoming blind words. It is, of course, different with 
the class of terms that had to serve the purposes of revelation. 
True, while originally subject to this same attrition-process, 
Christian thought and feeling could bring back some of the 
old coloring. But the possibility must likewise be reckoned 
with that ovwav and xotuwacGa had come to mean little more 
than to be placed in the recumbent position of the grave. At 
the same time it is likely that among believers a special sense 
cf tenderness accompanied the act, reminiscent of the ordi- 
nary act of putting a child to bed, with loving hands. 

Nor need we doubt that, as the correlate of physical sleep is 
awakening, so this latter idea, never existing or at least long 
since obliterated in pagan language, might, as it were, ac- 
quire a new significance. Here a negative pagan concept 
came to meet the different sentiment of the Christian 
mind. For the pagan «omudadoc@at is a sleep to which no 
waking is joined and in this quite important respect the two 


144 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


words were not by any means analogues. In the case of 
éyelpev it is not merely a single association that differentiates 
the Christian from the pagan; in the latter the entire idea of a 
supernatural, miraculous “bringing back from the dead” is 
lacking, because the supernaturalistic background as a whole 
is in paganism absent. Consequently Scriptural usage had to 
translate the term into a totally new circle of belief and under- 
standing: the ordinary, physical éyetpev, has received a new, 
redemptive, superlative sense. 

All this, and more, it is necessary to remember, before 
venturing to draw positive inferences from certain terms, 
and that sometimes even without assuring one’s self that in 
the later times of paganism a similar drawing of inferences 
was still a living process. When even pre-Christian paganism 
does not universally ascribe to the koimomenos or the kekot- 
memenos a sleep or rest, in the sense of unconsciousness, we 
may not assume that this ancient, imaginative corollary of the 
term was saved out of its semi-oblivion into a new literalness 
for the Christian faith. Though to the pagan poet there 
was nothing to look forward to but “nox una longa dormi- 
enda,” a sleep without end, such a prospect was certainly never 
present to the early Christian; and if the ideas of “una” and 
“longa” were wholly eliminated for him, why should the 
notion of sleeping in the sense of unconsciousness have per- 
sisted ? Moreover we have from Paul explicit statements con-, 
cerning this “intermediate state,’ which positively exclude its | 


- having been to his mind a state of unconsciousness, such as, | 


apart from dreams, physical sleep ordinarily induces. In 
2 Cor. v the whole train of Paul’s reasoning is based on the 
thought, that there will be a differentiation in feeling (that is, 
a perceptible difference in the self-reflexive consciousness) in 
the state after death. Whether he feels clothed with a body or 
feels naked will be an object of perception to him. To the 
unconscious dead there is not and can not be any distinction 
between the one state and the other: all things are alike to 
them. Even though only the minimum of what appears desir- 
able to Paul, 1.e., to die before the parousia, is in store for 


THE RESURRECTION 145 


him, still he expresses the assurance that to be in an “un- 
clothed” (naked) state at home with the Lord, will be a cause 
of contentment, and the looking forward to this provisional 
minimum becomes a reason for good courage, which it could 


not be without the expectation of consciousness in the post-. 


mortem state. Similarly, in Phil. 1. 23 the having departed and 
being with Christ is estimated as “very far better.” To be sure, 
the estimate is formed in his present mind, but the whole con- 
trast of “‘worse’’ or “better” loses its significance, if conscious- 
ness, the only organ of difference in appraisal, be denied. The 
Apostle, then, continues to make use of the common language 
of the day in teaching about these things, and there is hardly 
any perceptible effort on his part to correct or modify the 
latter. What he does is to fill with vital substance language 
that had so largely become voided of meaning. 

It has been alleged, it is true, that Paul abstained from the 
use of the word “death” with reference to departing believers, 
and employed “‘to sleep’ as a euphemism useful in enabling 
him to do this. This avoidance, it is held, was practised by 
him with reference to believers only, and not with reference 
to Christ, where the soteric necessities of the case almost com- 
pelled the use of “death.” But, even with that restriction, the 
theory is not borne out by the facts, for in 1 Thess. iv. 16 he 
speaks of “the dead (vexpot) in Christ’; and if he used 
“dead,” he certainly could have used “death,” which is no 
worse a term. Besides, it is one thing to prefer the use of one 
word to another on account of aesthetic reasons, and another 
thing to fill the form of a word with an entirely new content; 
the latter is what he would have done in forcing upon the then 
colorless term xouuac@a the significance of death-sleep liter- 
ally interpreted. The state of death is a state of consciousness, 
and, as already shown, capable of the sensation of comfort 
or discomfort, according to the presence or absence of the 
body, such as results from a garment one is accustomed to 
wear, and which one misses when it is not on him. It would, 
perhaps, be too much to assert, that, apart from this the 
death-state of believers is an undesirable experience. That 


a 


it falls short of the acme of blessedness must be acknowl- ~— 


146 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


edged, and it may be well to call attention to this fact as over 
against the error of death-sleep, for to the sleeper there is 
neither pain nor pleasure, a consideration which might incline 
minds, over-enamored with the idea of absolute quiescence, to- 
wards that erroneous theory and the erroneous exegesis on 
which it is based. The average terminology of burial customs 
is perhaps to some extent responsible for the error, though as 
a whole, no doubt, it is born out of a morbidly pessimistic 
appraisal of life, to which may be added the semi-poetic attrac- 
tion of the language employed. 

It has further been urged that 1 Cor. xi. 30 and 1 Thess. 
iv. 13 cast a reflection on the state of death even for believers. 
If this were correct it would furnish one more argument 
against the theory under criticism. It must remain doubtful, 
however, whether this is not putting too much into the words. 
To die is ordinarily a painful experience as such, irrespective 
of the state upon which it introduces. And possibly those who 
died in the Corinthian church died under special circumstances 
expressive of divine disapproval of their conduct, so that 
their departure was a chastisement in itself, leaving out of 
account altogether what their death might proximately lead 
them into. It should also be remembered, that, owing to the 
prevailing expectation of a speedy return of the Lord, Paul’s 
teaching had not dwelt upon the intermediate state to any 
large extent, so that his converts in Corinth could more 
readily regard premature death as a chastisement than we 
would. In 1 Thess. iv. 13 the cause for the “sorrowing” which 
Paul deprecates does not lie in their regarding the state of 
death as an evil in itself, but in their apprehension of it as an 
interminable state. The Thessalonians, it appears, had not yet 
fully assimilated the resurrection truth. Paul’s statements in 


this passage, with which we hope to deal more fully in another 


connection, confine themselves strictly to the one matter on 
which the Thessalonians were disquieted, viz., the presence 
at the parousia of their fellow-Christians who had died be- 
fore. On the intermediate state this throws no light whatever.® 


8It may be well at this point to subjoin a few linguistic remarks on 


he 


THE RESURRECTION 147 


Having now the immediate precedents and the general 
terminology before us, we next attempt to obtain an insight 
into the religious and doctrinal principles underlying the resur- 
rection. As a fact, and that a fact not lacking doctrinal expla- 
nation, it is, next to the cross, the outstanding event of re- 
demptive history. But Paul has first made it a focus of funda- 


the Pauline usage of speech concerning the resurrection. The largest 
place is occupied by éyecpeyv, and that in the active voice, God the 
Father being the acting subject. Of Jesus Himself it is said that He 
“was raised” (‘“‘waked’’) implying the same relationship of activity on God’s 
part. The creative aspect of the act standing in the foreground, this is 
what we should naturally expect. Nowhere is it said of Jesus that He 
contributed towards his own resurrection, far less that He raised Himself. 
His role is throughout that of the terminus upon whom God’s resurrective 
action works, in order that through Him it may work upon others; cp. 
Rom. iv. 24, 25; vi. 4, 9; vii. 43 viii. 11, 34; x. 9; 1 Cor. vi. 14; Xv. 12-17, 20; 
2 Cor. iv. 14; v. 15; in these passages partly the active, partly the passive 
occurs, the former of God, the latter of Jesus. The verb avioravai is much 
rarer in use than éyeipew (cp. Rom. xiv. 9). As the figure allows more 
of response in the one that is raised, we find here the representation that 
Christ avearn (1 Thess. iv. 14), involving somewhat of the participative 
element on the part of Jesus in the transaction. But, apart from this 
slightly different turn in the application to Jesus, it will be seen at a 
glance that the verb dyvuordvat is much less in evidence with Paul than 
the companion-term éye/pev. In the Pauline speech of Acts x both 
terms interchange (cp. Acts xvii. 18, 32; xxiil. 6; xxiv. I5, 21). 
In regard to the tenses employed the difference between the aorist 
and perfect in éyefpev should be noticed. The peculiar force of the per- 
fect can be most clearly felt in a passage like 2 Tim. ii. 8: “Remember 
Jesus Christ risen (éynyeppevov) from the dead.” The form “risen” here 
expresses that the experience of the resurrection constitutes Christ “a 
Risen One” in perpetuum, so that the act of remembering terminates 
not on his Person in general, but on that capacity of the Person that 
belongs to Him.as “a raised, living One” (cp. 1 Cor. xv. 16, 17, 20); 
passages with the aor. pass. are frequent. In the sphere of the noun 
avacrao.s has the monopoly, because a corresponding noun éyepous seems 
to have been in sporadic use only (cp. Matt. xxvii. 53, used of the resur- 
rection of Jesus). A unicum in the New Testament is é€avdoracts (Phil. 
ili. T1, used of the resurrection of Paul), of which term more later on. 
The word anastasis is sometimes active, i.e., the act of producing the 
resurrection, but it may also be an abstract term, describing the event as 
such in its generality (Rom. i. 4; 1 Cor. xv. 12). Much less richly repre- 
sented than the éye/pewy and dvordvac groups is the correlative term 
KouaoOar, descriptive of the pre-ressurrection state; this is in the 
main confined to the two contexts of 1 Thess, iv and 1 Cor. xv. Here 


148 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


Se 


mental Christian teaching and built around it the entire con- 
ception of the faith advocated and propagated by him. In 
order to gain an insight into how this came about, we must 
first call to mind, that in the Apostle’s construction of Chris- 
tian truth, two distinct strands show themselves. The first we 
may call the forensic one. It revolves around the abnormal 
status of man in the objective sphere of guilt, and deals with 
~~ all that is to be done outside of man, in order to its reversal, 
so that instead of an dduk0s he may become in legal standing a 
dixatos before God. The other, while variously denominated, 
may here for convenience’ sake be called the transforming 
one. It has to do with everything that pertains to the subjective 
condition of him to whom the grace of God is imparted. The 
former effects justification, the latter regeneration and 
sanctification. | sae 
The peculiarity of the Pauline system of truth consists in 
this, that these two complexes of doctrine do not exist side 
by side in such form as to yield by mere addition of the 
one to the other the complete body of Paulinism; the 
situation is rather this, that furnishing along each line a 
continuous conspect of the gospel, each after a fashion may 
lay claim to relative completeness. Hence the phenomenon 
that in the treatment of the Pauline teaching some writers 
from a sense of personal preference have chosen the one 
line, and tracing it out, have felt contented that they were 
offering the student a full-orbed compass of the Apostle’s 
religious thought. All the time they were forgetting, or per- 
vexpos, though in itself a word of coarser associations, has come to 
occupy the field. We can not make the distinction, however, as though 
ko.acOGar were reserved for believers and vexpoc promiscuously applied 
to believers and unbelievers in the state of death. The phrase  vexpoi 
éy xpust® (1 Thess. iv. 16) suffices to prove that the word, while 
reminding of the nekrosis which is the product of death, is not incapable 
of being joined to the most noble and intimate relationships of the 
Christian state. The corruptible is swallowed up by that mystical union 
with the Lord to which there is no suspension even in death. On the 
other hand, cp. for xotudoOae in a dishonorable connection, 1 Cor. xi. 30. 


There is no difference in the use of the terms surveyed between the 
resurrection of Jesus and that of believers. 


THE RESURRECTION I49 


haps with some intentional partiality ignoring, that along- 
side of it, there runs the other twin strand making up the 
other semi-cycle of the teaching. Nor was this unfortunate 
only because it resulted in incompleteness of rendition, the 
more serious fact was that even in what thus obtained re- 
production the proper balance was lacking. For it stands to 
reason that in a mind highly doctrinal and synthetic like Paul’s 
a loose juxtaposition of two tracks of thinking without at 
least an attempt at logical correlation is inconceivable. In 
such a matter Paul’s mind as a theological thinker was far 
more exacting than theirs who think that with their facile 
leaning over to one favored side they have done justice to the 
genius of the greatest constructive mind ever at work on the 
data of Christianity. | 

So far this is only looking at the question from the purely 
human standpoint of the religious thinker. But we dare not 
dismiss the point without reminding ourselves that the com- 
pleteness and logical coherence of the truth taught through 
its organs is a preeminent postulate of revelation. It is for 
these reasons a priori to be expected that the two strands 
discoverable shall not be entirely equal in rank within the 
system of doctrine, for that would yield a dualism hard to 
put up with. And so soon as the question is raised, through 
the principial superiority of which of the two spheres the 
necessary balance and symmetry are safeguarded, the solu- 
tion can be hardly other than that the forensic principle is--~ 
supreme and keeps in subordination to itself the transform- 
ing principle. Justification and sanctification are not the 
same, and an endless amount of harm has been done 
by the short-sighted attempt to identify them. But neither 
are these two independent one of the other; the one sets the 
goal and fixes the direction, the other follows. What has 
darkened the vision of some in this matter was the taking for 
granted that for superiority in leading position all that is 
needed is greater bulk and outstanding prominence on either 
side. It was unavoidable that in practical communications 
directed to the building up of disciples in the faith, such as 


I50 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


the Epistles, the viewpoint of sanctification could easily come 
to overshadow the more isolated and momentary problem of 
justification. This would undoubtedly have happened had not 
the latter principle found such emphatic and ineffacable tes- 
timony borne to it, as is the case, for example, in the Epistle 
to the Galatians and certain sections of Romans. 

Coming now specifically to the resurrection, this before 
aught else would seem to be exempt from displacement out of 
the transforming into the forensic sphere. It signifies in fact 
the most radical and all-inclusive transforming event within 
the entire range of the believer’s experience of salvation. It is 
equivalent to “becoming a new creation,’ and what could be 
excluded from such a sweep of renewal? The one in Christ 
is kalvn xtiows. In Him the old things have passed away, 
all things from that point on become new.’ And what is true 
of the earthly prototype of the eschatological change must 
ipso facto hold true of the resurrection part of the supreme 
crisis at the end. There likewise in an absolutely unprece- 
dented manner and to an unprecedented extent the idea of re- 
newal furnishes the light in which all things are placed. And 
yet it were, from the point of view of Paul’s teaching a mis- 


7It is usually taken for granted, not merely in homiletical usage, but 
likewise in commentary-exposition, that xawi «riots describes the reno- 
vation in the subjective condition of the believer, if not entirely so, at 
least chiefly. The rendering “new creature” has promoted this partial 
inisunderstanding. But ktisis signifies “creation” no less commonly than 
“creature.” The context in 2 Cor. v shows that Paul’s real point of view 
is better rendered by “‘a new creation.” Through the redemptive provision 
afforded by God in Christ, and specifically by one’s eivau év xpior@, the 
Christian has been transferred into a new world, a world which differs 
toto genere in all its characters, its whole environment, and (this could 
hardly remain unexpressed in such a sweeping statement) differs likewise 
principially as to the basis of objective righteousness on which the new 
man stands, from the present world. Nor is it necessary to reach this 
by inference; the context says it in so many words: “But all things are 
of God, who reconciled us through Christ to Himself ... to wit, that God 
was in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself.” And that this “recon- 
ciliation” is an objective process (atonement plus justification) appears 
plainly from the following words “not reckoning unto them their tres- 
passes.” For the sense of “creation” attaching to ktisis cp. Heb. ix. 11. 


THE RESURRECTION ISI 


take to confound prominence here with undivided supremacy. 
To his view the resurrection with all that clusters around it, 
has behind it a still more potential principle, a principle from 
which in fact it springs, and in whose depths it lies anchored. 
And this deeper principle is that of the acquisition of right- | 
eousness, a forensic principle through and through, and 
yet no less than the resurrection a transforming principle 
also. It is especially by considering the nexus between Christ 
and the believer that this can be most clearly perceived: in 
the justification of Christ lies the certainty and the root of 
the Christian’s resurrection. For the supreme fruit of Christ’s 
justification, on the basis of passive and active obedience, is 
nothing else but the Spirit, and in turn the Spirit bears in 
Himself the efficacious principle of all transformation to 
come, the resurrection with its entire compass included. Resur- 
rection thus comes out of justification, and justification comes, 
after a manner most carefully to be defined, out of the resur- 
rection; not, be it noted, out of the spiritual resurrection of 
the believer himself, but out of the resurrection of Christ. On 
the basis of merit this is so. Christ’s resurrection was the de 
facto declaration of God in regard to his being just. His 
quickening bears in itself the testimony of his justification. 
God, through suspending the forces of death operating on 
Him, declared that the ultimate, the supreme consequence of 
sin had reached its termination. In other words, resurrection 
had annulled the sentence of condemnation. 

This is the simple meaning of Rom. iv. 25: “who was de- 
livered up for our trespasses, and was raised for our justifi- 
cation.” The preposition 6@ occurring in each of the two 
clauses, must have, of course, in each the same constructional 
force; what this force is the first clause shows beyond 
all possibility of doubt: Christ was delivered up to death 
“on account of our trespasses.’’ Our trespasses were the 
ideally efficient cause of his death ( d&ac. acc.). If it is to 
correspond to this, the second clause must mean that He was 
raised “on account of our justification” (dd c. acc.). Be- 
cause in his completed death our justification was virtually 


[52 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


secured, it needed only the passing of death from off Him, 
and the consequent substitution of life for death to declare 
this. Not, therefore, to render our justification more easy to 
apply, nor even to release in Him forces working for its 
application, was He raised. There was in his coming to life 
something far more efficacious than a mere demonstration 
might have been.* 

A passage with a similar trend of thought is Rom. viii. 23. 
Here the technical term vio@ecia (“adoption”) is introduced 
in close connection with the “redemption of the body,” i.e., the 
eschatological resurrection. It is not merely in the grace of 
this present life that the believer is given to taste the fruition 
of his release from the forensic power of sin, the same prin- 
ciple works through to the very end, so long as there shall still 
remain something to be set right, some sequela of sin even 
in the sphere of the body to be removed. Here it can be plainly 
observed how the one thought passes over into the other: 
“adoption” is by parentage a forensic concept; yet it fulfills 
itself in the bodily transforming change of the resurrection. 

It has been not unplausibly held, that this forensic aspect 
of the resurrection as a declarative, vindicatory, justifying 
act, forms a very old, if not perhaps the oldest, element in 
Paul’s doctrine on the subject. To Judaism the belief largely 
bore this meaning. Paul could later truthfully say, that in 
preaching the resurrection he defended the Pharisaic position, 
not merely through insistence upon the fact, but also so far as 
this fact amounted to a vindication of the people of God (Acts 
xxill. 6). In 1 Cor. xv. 30-32 the resurrection is viewed as a 
reward for the incurring of danger and the daily dying under- 
gone. In vss. 55-57 of the same context it is pictured as the 
swallowing up of death in victory, and death is here pointedly 
named as the penalty for sin imposed by the Law, so that the 


8 The idea here found in the verse has nothing to do with the doctrine 
of eternal justification. What is referred to is not an eternal, i.e., supra- 
temporal act, but an act in history. It was simply the ideal side in the 
mind of God to the visible, temporal occurrence of the suspension of the 
death of Christ. 


THE RESURRECTION 153 


resurrection is the final removal of the condemnation of sin. 
In vs. 58 it appears even as a recompense for the labor accom- 
plished, hence as an incentive for the more intense prosecu- 
tion of this labor: “Wherefore, my beloved brethren, be ye 
steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the 
Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in 
the Lord.” After the long disquisition on the raising of the 
dead the “wherefore” can have no other meaning than that the 
motive of the exhortation lies in the sure prospect of the 
resurrection. The “forasmuch as ye know” relates in like 
manner to the unshakable assurance of this culminating event 
in which all rewards of the pious will be summed up. 

Of course, all this must be understood in harmony with the 
Apostle’s principle of salvation through grace, apart from 
works, as must his doctrine of reward in the judgment gen- 
erally. Side by side, therefore, with the resemblance between 
it and the Jewish doctrine, the vital difference between meri- 
torious and non-meritorious ground of bestowal should never 
be overlooked. Still it remains worth observing, that the 
Apostle has incorporated this idea of the resurrection in his 
forensic scheme. It seems a pity that in the more prominent 
associations of our Easter observance so little place has been 
left to it. The Pauline remembrance of the supreme fact, so 
significant for redemption from sin, and the modern-Chris- 
tian celebration of the feast have gradually become two quite 
different things. Who at the present time thinks of Easter as 
intended and adapted to fill the soul with a new jubilant assur- 
ance of the forgiveness of sin as the guarantee of the inheri- 
tance of eternal life?® 


® Much light falls on the forensic significance of the resurrection in 
believers from a comparison with the case of Christ’s resurrection. The 
Spirit is in Christ. the seal and fruit of his righteousness, and at the same 
time it is in Him through his exalted state, produced by the resurrection, 
the perpetual witness of the continuous status of righteousness in which 
He exists. In Him unintermittedly springs up that fountain of justifica- 
tion, from which all believers draw. To say that forgiveness of sin pro- 
cured through the imputation of Christ’s merit constitutes only the initial 
act in the Christian life, and that thereafter, the slate having been wiped 
clean, there is no further need for nor allowance of recourse toit, all being 


154 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


We hasten on, however, to outline the other, more familiar 
aspect of the event. That it bears such an aspect so far as the 
body is concerned lies on the surface. That this is a transfor- 
mation effected by Christ Himself is likewise plain; and still 
further that the transformation is analogous to that produced 
in the body of Christ Himself at his own resurrection. All 
this is implied in the classical passage Phil. 111. 21, where the 
expressive term MeTaoynmarifev is employed for describing 
it. The question, whether this transformation of the body 
takes place in the believing portion of the Church then 
living, or in all found alive at the parousia may be here left 
to one side. Nor can it make any difference for our present 
purpose, whether the change spoken of shall coincide with 
the raising of believers, or constitute a separate subsequent 
act. 

A far more complicated problem is whether at the parousia 
this transformation will concern the somatic condition of 
believers only, or will include a corresponding psychical 
change, affecting more particularly that side of human nature 
where the body is most closely interrelated with the soul. A 
priort it seems difficult to deny this. The opposite would 
involve a kind of physical construction of the resurrection- 
principle, such as we may well hesitate to ascribe to Paul. 
Bodily the resurrection certainly is, and every attempt to de- 
physicize it, so often inspired by a dislike of the supernatural 
on its material side, amounts to an exegetical tour de force, 
so desperate as to be not worth losing many words over. Now, 
if there be a somatic resurrection, we can not otherwise con- 
ceive of it than as a somatic transformation. There is not a 
simple return of what was lost in death; the organism re- 
turned is returned endowed and equipped with new powers; it 
thenceforth staked on sanctification, is, apart from all other criticism, 
wrong, because it ignores forensic righteousness as a vital factor in the 
exalted state of the Saviour. If this were not so, it would remain un- 
explainable why, in the matter of justification, Paul directs the gaze of 
faith not merely to the cross retrospectively, but likewise upward to the 


glorified existence of Christ in heaven, wherein all the merit of the cross 
is laid up and made available forever. 


THE RESURRECTION 155 


is richer, even apart from the removal of its sin-caused de- 
fects. The normal, to be sure, is restored, but to it there are 
added faculties and qualities which should be regarded super- 
normal from the standpoint of the present state of existence. 
To receive back a body, and to have a body at all is much 
(2 Cor. v. 1-9), but we may feel sure that it was not to Paul 
exhaustive of the grace of the resurrection, even considered 
from the somatic point of view. Nor do we lack information 
to that effect. According to 1 Cor. xv. 45-49 believers shall 
bear after Christ the image He Himself obtained in his 
own resurrection. And this is not a case of mere analogy as to 
radiancy of appearance through externally imposed glory, it 
is something deeper and farther-reaching, intensely real, al- 
though we may not be able to form a concrete conception of it 
any more perhaps than could Paul himself. With all the dif- 
ference inevitably existing between the two cases the opro@jvat 
év Ouvapet €€ avactdcews vexpov of Rom. i. 4 must have its 
counterpart in the resurrection of believers; in their case like- 
wise there must take place an investment with dvvapus ,*° 

The resurrection-idea has been too much concentrated upon 


19 The analogy, and its bearing upon our problem become most clear 
when the passage, Rom. i. 3-4, is somewhat closely analyzed. Here we 
read that Jesus was épicGels vids Geod ev duvaper KaTa TrEdpa dylwovvys e& 
dvactacews vexpOv. The clause stands in parallelism to the one in vs. 3: 
TOU yevomevov Ex oreppatos Aaveld kata odpxa. It will be noticed that the 
following members correspond to each other in the two clauses: yevduevos 
dpiobeis; KaTa capKa— KATO VEDA AYLWOVVYS; EK OTEP MATOS 

AaveiS———eE dvactacews vexp@v. The reference is not to two coexist- 
ing states in the make-up of the Saviour but to two successive stages in 
his life. There was first a yéveo@at kata cadpxa, then a dpicOjvor Kara 
mvevdpa. The two prepositional phrases have adverbial force, yet so as to 
throw emphasis on the result no less than on the initial act: He became, as 
to his sarkic existence, and He was “of the seed of David.” The dpc Ojvae 

Paul refers to is not an abstract determination, but an effectual installa- 

tion, with bestowal of the requisite energy pertaining to the new state. 

Paul seems to avoid the repetition of yevowevov, not so much for stylistic 

reasons, but because it might have suggested, even before the reading 

of the sentence to the end could correct this, that at the resurrection the 
sonship of Christ, as such, first originated, whereas his actual meaning is 
that the sonship xara dvvapwv there began to enter into operation. By the 
~ twofold xara the manner of each state of existence is contrasted, by the 


156 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


its somatic aspect per se; it has been taken too much for 
granted that the bare body is all that is needed for the sake 
of restoring the completeness of human nature. If we may 
judge of the resurrection of believers mutatis mutandis after 
the analogy of that of Christ, we shall have to believe that 
the event will mark the entrance upon a new world 
constructed upon a new superabundantly dynamic plane. 
It is for the body, no less than for the soul a new birth. The 
resurrection constitutes, as it were, the womb of the new 
aeon, out of which believers issue as, in a new, altogether 
unprecedented, sense, sons of God: “They are sons of God, 
being sons of the resurrection,” therefore they neither marry, 
nor are given in marriage (Lk. xx. 35-36). This whole idea 
of the &vdoracis as a genesis into a higher world opens up 
the largest conceivable perspective into a life of new structure 
and new potencies for the entire state of the Christian man. 
There exists a certain analogy at this point between the 
avdoraots and the cosmical Taduyyeveria of Matt. xix. 28. 
Thus far, however, our discussion has confined itself to 
the resurrection of the body. A continuity has been established 
between this as it took place in Jesus, and what will take place 
at the parousia in them that are Christ’s, and the securing of 
this continuity has been found to be due to no one else than 
to Christ Himself. When desiring to construct from Paul’s 
statements an organic bond between the entire Christian life 
here upon earth and the resurrection at the end, we feel per- 


twofold é« the sphere of origin of each. As to the one He was “from the 
seed of David,” as to the other He was “out of resurrection from the dead.” 
The resurrection (both of Jesus and of believers) is therefore according 
to Paul the entering upon a new phase of sonship characterized by the 
possession and exercise of unique supernatural power. That this should 
apply to Christ’s body alone, or to the exertion by Christ of somatic 
power on the bodies of believers alone, while not here expressly denied, 
is in itself highly implausible. 

The above interpretation does not, of course, imply that Paul denied 
the supernatural conception of Jesus by the Spirit. Precisely, because 
speaking of the pneuma-siate in the absolute eschatological sense, he 
could disregard here the previous Spirit-birth and the Spirit-endowment 
at the baptism. 


THE RESURRECTION 157 


haps that what has been said above renders us in a degree un- 
satisfied. The leap we had to make from Jesus’ resurrection 
to the believer’s leaves, as it were, the intermediate spaces 
unfilled, and thus threatens to destroy the true organic co- 
herence. What we desire is to be able to show, that the 
believer’s whole ethico-religious existence, the sum-total of 
his Christian experience and progress, all that is distinctive of 
his life and conduct demands being viewed as a preparation 
for the crowning grace of the resurrection. Only by showing 
this can the Apostle’s teaching be fully cleared of the charge 
of incoherency between his religion and his eschatology. We 
believe it is possible to show this. The passages in which the 
entrance upon the Christian state is represented as a being 
raised with Christ come here under consideration. As shown 
before, they are semi-eschatological in import; they take for 
granted that in principle the believer has been translated into 
the higher world of the new aeon. Still for this very reason 
they establish a real, a vital relationship between what is en- 
joyed already, and what will be received at the end, for it is 
characteristic of the principle to lead on unto the final fulfil- 
ment. Thus, according to Rom. vi. 5, the likeness (“the image 
made like”) of the Saviour’s resurrection is to be reproduced 
in the Christian. Even now believers are to reckon themselves 
alive unto God in Christ Jesus, the Lord (vs. 11). Those who 
have the vision of the glorified Christ are through it “trans- 
formed into the same image from glory to glory.” 2 Cor. i11. 
18. Whatever may be the exact meaning of these mysterious 
words it is at any rate plain, that a transforming influence 
proceeds from Christ, stich an influence as He could bring 
to bear upon us only in the capacity of the glorified, i.e., the 
risen Christ, and which has for its goal the acquisition of the 
same glory-image on the part of believers. 

In a different form the same principle of continuity between 
the present spiritual life and the resurrection shows itself, 
where believers are exhorted to strive after sanctification with 
the thought and desire in mind that at the day of the Lord’s 
coming they may be presented to Him in a sanctified condi- 


158 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


tion, which will at the same time cause rejoicing in those who 
have labored for them and make the event objectively produc- 
tive of greater grace and joy. On behalf of the Thessalonians 
Paul gives expression to the hope, that the Lord may make 
them to increase and abound to the end that He may establish 
their hearts unblamable in holiness at the coming of the Lord 
Jesus with all his saints (1 Thess. 111. 13; v. 23). Further, 
we shall have to add to these indications the complex of ideas 
gathering around the phrase “to be in Christ.”* It is not 
Pauline to conceive of believers who are in Christ as envel- 
oped by Him after a quietistic, unproductive fashion. The 
relation is one that has its intent determined by their destiny 
to share after their own degree in his glorified state. Even 
dead believers are in the intermediate period before the resur- 
rection “dead in Christ’ (1 Thess. iv. 16). The statement is 
made in order to assure those then living of their certitude 
of being themselves changed in due time. If Christ gathers to 
and envelopes in Himself all his own with such comprehen- 
siveness that even the “dead” are never separated from Him, 
nor He from them, then the conclusion is surely justified, that 
the entire activity He directs towards them aims at raising 
them unto likeness with Himself. Their life and lot are so 
inwrought with Christ’s that the general law of happening in 
the large phases of his experience must repeat itself in them: 
“Tf so be that we suffer with Him, that we may he also glori- 
fied with Him.” 

Finally, in a more un-Christological form the principle of 
continuity and causal nexus between the growth of the state 
in grace here and the inheritance of the resurrection has found 


11 It is not essential to assert that the two formulas év ypuoro and éy 
mvevpare are entirely synonymous and coextensive, nor that the formula 
“in Christ” is coined after the analogy of “in the Spirit,’ as Deismann 
thinks (Die neutestamentliche Formel in Christo-Jesu, 1892). To the 
contrary, Walter (Der religiése Gehalt des Galaterbriefs, 1c04, pp. 122- 
144) has shown that the usage of the former considerably overlaps the 
limits within which the latter would be applicable; it has a large forensic 
connotation. But where “in Christ” pertains to the mystical sphere, the 
two formulas are practically interchangeable. 


THE RESURRECTION 159 


striking expression in the figure of sowing and harvesting: 
“Whatsoever a man soweth, shall he also reap. For he that 
soweth unto his own flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption, 
but he that soweth unto the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap 
eternal life. And let us not be weary in well-doing: for in due 
season we shall reap, if we faint not’ (Gal. vi. 7-9). A con- 
nection and proportionateness between the future life of the 
Christian and his conduct here are affirmed in this no less 
than in the foregoing passages.” 

The same problem thus far considered in terms of Chris- 
tology admits of being studied likewise under the head of the 
doctrine and function of the Holy Spirit. In order to perceive 
this the reader should endeavor to make clear to himself how 
intimate a connection there exists between the Holy Spirit 
and Eschatology. The lack of recognition of this fact, so 
common among even doctrinally informed Christians is mostly 
due to the eclipse which the Spirit’s eschatological task has 
suffered on account of his soteric work in the present life. 
The ubiquitousness and monergism of the Spirit’s influence 
in the gracious processes we now experience have, as it were, 
unduly contracted our vision, so that after having emphasized 
the all-inclusiveness of this work, we forget that we have 
forgotten, or merely counted in pro forma the other hemi- 
sphere pertaining to the Spirit, that dealing with the introduc- 
tion into and the abode in the life to come. Paul has not left 
us in uncertainty or unclearness in regard to this part of the 
Spirit’s working. In 1 Cor. xv, and other classical contexts 
the subject is placed in such prominence and the light of 
revelation so superabundantly focussed upon it, that some 
have even felt, as though it outshone somewhat the Christ- 


12Tt might seem almost unpardonable here to pass by the words of 
Phil. iii. 10, 11: “Becoming conformed unto his death, if by any means 
I may attain unto the resurrection from the dead.” The thought here 
expressed, however, seems to go beyond the import of the above passage 
in so far as the obtaining of the resurrection as such would seem to be 
made dependent on Paul’s Christian striving. The passage will be dis- 
cussed in a subsequent connection. 


160 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


glory ordinarily so inseparable from the things soteric. 
But soteriology so long had the priority in the Church’s 
familiarizing herself with the Spirit, that the other part of the — 
subject had little chance left of obtruding itself and so gaining 
the attention it is by nature entitled to. What makes this 
relative neglect all the more unexplainable, and up to a certain 
point inexcusable, is the fact that after all the Spirit's eschato- 
logical functions are simply the prolongation of his work in 
the soteriological sphere. But be this as it may, now that in 
more recent times the attention of Scripture students has been 
attracted to the facts, the intensity of occupation with them 
has more than made up for the shortcomings of former times. 

The connection of the Spirit with Eschatology reaches back 
far into the Old Testament. The fundamental sense of AM 
is in the Hebrew, and other Semitic languages, that of air in 
motion, whilst with the Greek 7vevuathe notion of air at rest 
seems to have been chiefly associated. This rendered the 
Hebrew term fitted for describing the Spirit on his energiz- 
ing, active side, which further falls in with his ultimate eschat- 
ological function of producing supernatural effects on the 
highest plane. Thus, the Spirit comes to be linked together 
with eschatology. We can observe this along several lines of — 
thought. 

There is first the idea that the Spirit through certain extra- 
fordinary manifestations of the supernatural, in certain pro- 
phetic signs, heralds the near approach of the future world. 
Thus in Joel iii. 1 ff.° the outpouring of the Spirit on all 
flesh is described as taking place “before the great and terrible 
day of Jehovah comes.’’* It is not excluded by this, that the 


18 4j, 28 ff. in the English versions. 

14 Volz (Der Geist Gottes und die verwandten Erscheinungen im Alten 
Testament und im anschliessenden Judenthum, 1910, p. 93) while explain- 
ing Joel as above, thinks that Peter in Acts ii. 16-21 follows a different 
exegesis, because representing the disciples as permanently possesseed 
of the Spirit. The contrary is true: Peter distinctly quotes the entire 
Joel-passage, including the words which put the phenomena named before 
the coming of the day of Jehovah (vs. 20), and which assume a period 
of some length during which opportunity is afforded to call upon the 


THE RESURRECTION 161 


Spirit will also have his place within the new era itself, but 
this is not indicated here. The Spirit works these signs, not 
because He stands for the eschatological as such, for the latter 
idea has not yet been reached. 

Next, the Spirit is brought within the eschatological field 
itself as furnishing the official equipment of the Messiah. It 
_will be noted that in the passages where this occurs (Isa. xi. 2; 
XXvill. 6; xlii. 1; lix. 21 (?); 1xi. 1) the Messiah receives the 
Spirit as a permanent possession. In calling this equipment 
with the Spirit official we do not mean to imply that it is 
externally attached to the Messiah, not affecting his own sub- 
jective religious life, for He is not merely a Spirit of wisdom 
and understanding, of counsel and might, but also a “Spirit 
of knowledge and fear of Jehovah.” Still the prophet does 
not mean to describe what the Spirit is for the Messiah Him- 
self, but what through the Messiah He comes to be for the 
people. 

Thirdly, the Spirit appears as the source of the future new 
life of Israel, especially of the ethico-religious renewal, and 
thus first becomes suggestive of the eschatological state itself. 
To this head belong the following passages: Isa. xxx1l. 15-17; 
Seemed. (°0) >} 12, Xxxvi. 27; XxXXVli., 14; XXX1x: 29. 
It will be observed that in these prophecies the sending of the 
Spirit is expected not from the Messiah but directly from 
Jehovah Himself, although the statements occur in prophecies 
containing the figure of the Messiah. The emphasis rests on 
the initial act as productive of new conditions; at the same 
time the terms used show that the presence and working of the 
Spirit are not restricted to the first introduction of the eschato- 
logical state, but characterize the latter in continuance. The 
land and the nation become permanent receptacles of the 


name of Jehovah in order to ultimate salvation in the day of judgment 
(vs. 21). The Spirit’s working is here no less sub-eschatological than it 
is in Joel. Peter is even more explicit than Joel in regard to this point, 
for he modifies the quotation by introducing into it the phrase “‘in the last 
days,’ a phrase which in the New Testament is everywhere sub- 
eschatological. 


162 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


Spirit. The promise assumes in Ez. xxxvi. 26 an individualiz- 
ing form. 

Fourthly, we must take into account that in the Old Testa- 
ment the word “Spirit” appears as the comprehensive formula 
for the transcendental, the supernatural. In all the manifesta- 
tions of the Spirit a supernatural reality projects itself into 
the experience of man, and thus the sphere whence such mani- 
festations come can be named after the power to which they 
are proximately traced. This is in harmony with the two-fold 
aspect of the wind, which is at the same time a concrete force, 
and a supernal element seeming to come from above. But the 
Spirit stands for the supernatural not merely in so far as 
the latter connotes the miraculous, but likewise in so far as it 
is sovereign over against the creature: it “blows where it 
listeth.” In man the pneumatic awakes the awe pertaining to 
the supernatural, and exposes to the same danger. Even in 
his ordinary life the prophet is, on account of his pneumatic 
character, as it were concentrated upon a higher world, “he 
sits alone because of Jehovah’s hand” (Jer. xv. 17). 

The idea mentioned in the fourth place is the one which 
has undergone a somewhat further development in the Apoca- 
lyptic literature. Here at least the Spirit is explicitly described 
as a Spirit of eternal life (Ovac. Sib. ii. 771), a Spirit of 
holiness pertaining to paradise, named in connection with the 
tree of life (Test. Levi, xvii. 11). Still further ooesgee 
Rabbinical Theology when it brings the Spirit specifically into 
connection with the resurrection : ‘“Holiness leads to the Holy 
Spirit, the Holy Spirit leads to the resurrection.”*® The im- 
pression that the period of Judaism felt itself to be an un- 
pneumatic period is sometimes due to an unwarranted com- 
parison with the following Spirit-filled days of the early 
Christian Church. Both the wise men and the Apocalyptic 
writers of that period feel themselves men of a higher divine 

15.Cp. the author’s article on “The Eschatological Aspect of the 


Pauline Conception of the Spirit” in Princeton Biblical and Theological 
Studies (1912), pp. 211-259. 


THE RESURRECTION 163 


rank. Sometimes the pneumatic state vaunted of assumed the 
form of a translation into the heavenly sphere. 

Coming back to Paul we may adopt for guidance the two- 
fold aspect in which the eschatological function of the Spirit 
appears in his teaching. On the one hand the Spirit is the 
resurrection-source, on the other He appears as the sub-  / 
stratum of the resurrection-life, the element, as it were, in / 
which, as in its circumambient atmosphere the life of the 
coming aeon shall be lived. He produces the event and in con- 
tinuance underlies the state which is the result of it. He is 
Creator and Sustainer at once, the Creator Spiritus and the 
Sustainer of the supernatural state of the future life in one. 
As to the first, Rom. viii. 11 affirms that God 8a tod évo- 
KODVTOS avTod mvetmaTtos év tuly or Sia TO evoLKOdY TvEedLa 
shall give life to the mortal bodies of the readers. IIvedpa is 
here not the human spirit, psychologically conceived, as vs. 
To at first sight might make us assume. It is the divine Pueuma 
that is referred to, to be sure, in its intimate union and close 
association with the believer’s person. Hence in vs. 11 there 
is substituted for the simple pueuma the full definition “the 
Spirit of Him that raised Jesus from the dead.” In this desig- 
nation of God resides the force of the argument: what God 
did for Jesus He will do for the believer likewise.** It is pre- 
supposed by the Apostle, though not expressed in so many 
words, that God raised Jesus through the Spirit. Hence the 
argument from the analogy between Jesus and the believer is 
further strengthened by the observation, that the instrument 
through whom God effected this in Jesus is already present 
in the readers. The idea that the Spirit works instrumentally 
in the resurrection is plainly implied. This is altogether apart 
from the interesting divergence in the construction of 6va 


16 Tt should be noticed how significantly Paul varies in this connection 
the name of Christ. First he speaks of the raising of Jesus from the 
dead. Here the Saviour comes under consideration as to Himself, his 
own human nature. Then he speaks of the raising of Christ Jesus from 
the dead. Here the Saviour comes under consideration as the Messiah in 
’ his representative capacity, which furnishes a guarantee that his resur- 
rection must repeat itself in that of the others. 


1604 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


which occurs with the accusative in several important authori- 
ties. That would yield the paraphrase: If the Spirit of God 
who raised Jesus dwells in you, then God will create for that 
Spirit the same appropriate habitat as He created for Him 
in the resurrection-body of Jesus. This is a unique idea; 
it reverses the relation between Spirit and resurrection-body ; 
usually the Spirit is for the sake of the new body, here the 
new body would be for the sake of adorning the Spirit. But, 
interesting though the thought may be, the other reading 
(Sua cum genitivo) seems to have more textual weight in its 
favor. Adopting this, we paraphrase: If the Spirit of God 


who raised Jesus dwells in you, then God will make the in-_ 
dwelling Spirit accomplish for you what He accomplished — 
for Jesus in the latter’s resurrection. The idea of the “in-— 


dwelling” of the Spirit in believers, occurring as it does in 
a train of thought prospective to the resurrection, can hardly 


help suggesting a process of preparation carried on with a 


view to that supreme eventual crisis. The Spirit is there as 
indwelling certainly not for assuring the Christian of his 
ultimate attainment to the resurrection alone. The indwelling 
must attest itself by activity also. 

It might be said, however, that in statements of this kind 
the point of departure is the soteriological conception of the 
Spirit as a present factor in Christian life, and from there it 
moves forward to the future, so that the eschatological task 
of the Spirit would not be something peculiar, but only his 
. general task applied to one particular situation. We therefore 
turn to another train of thought, which clearlv starts from 
the eschatological end of the line, and from that looks back- 
wards into the present life. This is the case in 2 Cor. i. 22; 
v. 5; Eph. i. 14. Here Paul derives the proof for God’s 
having prepared him for the eternal state in a new heavenly 


body from the fact of God’s having given him the appa8wv tov © 


mvevpatos. ‘The “earnest” consists in the Spirit, the genitive 


being epexegetical, just as in Gal. 111. 14 the “promise of the 


Yee tenn erat 9 ret 


THE RESURRECTION 165 


Spirit means the promised thing consisting in the Spirit.’ 
Now the Spirit possesses this significance of “pledge” for no 
other reason than that He constitutes a provisional instalment 
_of what in its fulness will be received hereafter. The quite 
analogous conception of the a@rapx7 Tov mvevpatos (Rom. viii. 
23) proves this.’Appa8ev means money given in purchases - 
as a pledge that the full amount will be subsequently paid. 
In this instance, therefore, the Spirit is viewed as pertaining 
specifically to the future life, nay as constituting the substan- 
tial make-up of this life, and the present possession of the 
Spirit is regarded in the light of an anticipation. The spirit’s 
proper sphere is the future aeon; from thence He projects 
Himself into the present, and becomes a TNS) of Himself 
in his eschatological operations. 

As indicated above, the Spirit is not only the author of 
the resurrection-act, but likewise the permanent substratum 
of the resurrection-life, to which He supplies the inner, basic 
element and the outer atmosphere. It is this second aspect of 
his function we must now look into. A difficulty meeting us at 
the outset may be briefly referred to. It concerns the two-fold 
aspect in which the Scriptures present to us the character 
of the Holy Spirit. Owing to the task He performs in the 
work of individual salvation, together with the other two 
members of the Holy Trinity, it is most familiar to us to 
conceive of Him as a Person, and not only this: the task has 
become so thoroughly personalized, as to leave almost no 
room for aught else in our practical contemplation of the 
Spirit. When, alongside of this, operations and functions are 
ascribed to Him, for the expression of which we need figures 
clothed in impersonal terms, we must not over-rashly con- 
clude that in this matter, taken as a whole, two disjointed, 
differently oriented conceptions of the Spirit confront us, 
such as it would be absolutely impossible to reduce to common 
terms. We may not be able to make a construction that shall 


17 A third conception, that of the o@payis (“seal”) lacks the outstand- 
ing element in the dppaBwy and the dmapyxy, viz. the identity of the 
pledge and the thing pledged, cp. 2 Cor. i. 22; Eph. i. 13; iv. 30. 


166 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


reconcile what seems to our minds incombinable in the same 

subject, but this does not prove that actual coexistence be- 

tween these two aspects is in the Deity impossible. A Chris- 

tological parallel can easily disabuse us of the necessity of 

such a negative conclusion. Nothing can be more personal 

than the intimate relation which the Christ (particularly the 

Risen Christ) sustains to the believer. And yet the back- 

ground or underlying basis of this personal relationship is 

largely expressed in terms, that, did we not know better, 

might make us think of an elementally distributed Christ- 

atmosphere, in which, at least from the Saviour’s side the 

personal is submerged, and of which the imagination fails 

to supply us with an adequate idea of what it consists in, 

inwardly considered. If to be “in Christ,’ and at the same’ 
time to live in conscious intercourse and fellowship with Him | 
are not logically identical, and are yet to our common Chris- | 
tian faith joined in the same believing subject without en-— 
dangering the recognition of the one aspect by that of the 

other, then why should an analogous double relation of the 

Holy Spirit to our persons be deemed incongruous? This — 
parallel between the two cases, that of Christ and of the Holy 

Spirit is all the more convincing, since in the Pauline soteriol- 

ogy the two phrases €v mvevuat, and év ypioT®, at least so 

far as the latter is not meant forensically, are equivalent as 

to purport. The Holy Spirit is, comparatively speaking, even 

more elemental than the Risen Christ. Still less is there need 

for wondering that the Spirit plays in Eschatology this, as it 

were, semi-personal role. 

Let us now briefly survey the evidence found for this rep- 
resentation in the Epistles. 1 Cor. xv. 42-49 contrasts the 
two bodies that belong to the preéschatological and the eschat- 
ological states successively. The former is characterized as 
uxixov, the latter as wvevpatixdv, This adjective Pneuma- 
tikon expresses the quality of the body in the eschatological 
state. Every thought of immaterialness, or etherealness or 
absence of physical density ought to be kept carefully re- 
moved from the term. Whatever in regard to such qualifica- 


THE RESURRECTION 167 


tions may or may not be involved; it is certain that such 
traits, if existing, are not described here by the adjective in 
question. In order to keep far such misunderstandings the 
capitalizing of the word ought to be carefully guarded 
both in translation and otherwise: 7vevwatixov almost cer- 
tainly leads on the wrong track, whereas LHvevparixdr, not 
only sounds a note of warning, but in addition points in the 
right direction positively. Paul means to characterize the\ 
resurrection-state as the state in which the Pueuma rules. 


That it rules signifies more particularly, that it impresses — 


upon the body its three-fold characteristic of apOapala, dd£a 
and dtvayis (vss. 42, 43). Over against this stands the psy- 
chical body, which in order of time precedes the soma Pneu- 
matikon. The former for its part is characterized by $8opa, 
ariwia and acGeveia, The passage is unique even in the long 
register of the high mysteries of the faith with Paul, in that 
it contrasts not the body affected by sin, not the body as it 
came to exist as a result of the entrance of evil into the world, 
with the future body, but the primordial body of Adam (‘‘the 
First Adam’’) and the body of the consummation. The proxi- 
mate reference is to the contrast between the two bodies only; 
but in vs. 46 the representation widens out to a far more 
general, indeed a cosmical one. In the all-comprehensive anti- 
thesis there established by the principle: “that is not first 
which is 76 Ilvevwatixcv, but that is first which is76 yuyrxor, 
then that which is 70 Hvevpatixdv’’,this is expressed by the 
contrast €« y#s and é& odpavod. When it is affirmed that the 
Second Man is from heaven, this has nothing to do with the 
original provenience of Christ from heaven; the “from 
heaven” does not necessarily imply a “coming from heaven,” 
any mcre than the opposite “from earth’ implies a coming 
of Adam from the earth at the first creation.** To refer 


18 Cp. for this use of é€ odpavod 2 Cor. v. 2, “our habitation which is 
from heaven”; likewise Mk. viii. 11; xi. 30; Jno. iii. 27; vi. 31; Apoc. 
xxi. 2. The test of this interpretation of the phrase lies in the use of 
€ovpavios in vss. 48, 49; this adjective is applied to believers no less 
than to Christ, and in the case of believers it can not mean that they are 


i. ~ 


168 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


“from heaven” to the coming of Christ out of the state of 
preéxistence at his incarnation would make Paul contradict 
himself, for it would reverse the order insisted upon in vs. 
46; not the ‘‘Pneumatic” is first, but the “psychical.” Besides 
this it would make the Pneumatic the constituent principle 
of the human nature in Christ before the resurrection, of 
which there is no trace elsewhere with Paul. The phrase 
“from heaven” simply expresses that Christ after a super- 
natural fashion became the Second Man at the point marked 
by éreara. A “becoming” is affirmed of both Adams, the sec- 
ond as well as the first, for the verb éyévero in vs. 45 belongs 
to both clauses. How far in either case the subject of which 
this is affirmed existed before in a different condition is not 
reflected upon. The whole tenor of the argument (for such it 
actually is) compels us to think of the resurrection as the 
moment at which 70 IIvevpatixov entered. Christ appeared 
then and there in the form of a Ilvevpatixos and as such 
inaugurated the eschatological era. But, besides identifying 
the eschatological and the pneumatic, our passage is peculiar 
in that it most closely identifies the Spirit with Christ. Up to 
this point the Spirit, who works and sustains the future life 
was the Spirit of God. Here it begins to be, not so much the 
Spirit of Christ, but the Spirit which Christ became. And, 
being thus closely and subjectively identified with the Risen 
Christ, the Spirit imparts to Christ the life-giving power 
which is peculiarly the Spirit’s own: the Second Adam be- 


at the time of writing “from heaven” or “in heaven.” The absence of 
the word gapxixds from 1 Cor. xv. 45-49 affords in itself the strongest 
conceivable proof that the contrast is between the creation-body and the 
resurrection-body, not between the body invaded by sin and the body 
restored by redemption. The partial transformation is, of course, included 
in the larger one. It is like a transaction, if such a one there could be in 
the sphere of therapy, wherein the physician, while administering medi- 
cine for healing, should mix with it an elixir of eternal life. The patient 
at the end of the treatment would then find himself, not merely healed, 
but a new man, not figuratively as we sometimes say after a complete 
recovery, but in the literal sense of the phrase. This, apart from its 
philosophical background, is the element of truth in the @appaxdy dbava- 
atas of the Greek Fathers. 


THE RESURRECTION 169 


came not only Ilvedpa but rvedua Cworroovy, This is of great 
importance for determining the relation to eschatology of the 
Christ-worked life in believers.”” 

We have found that the Spirit is both the instrumental 
cause of the resurrection-act and the permanent substratum 
of the resurrection-life. The question here arises which of the 
two is the primary idea, either in order of thought or in point 
of chronological emergence. It might seem plausible to put 
the pneuma-provenience of the resurrection-act first, and to 
explain this feature from what the Old Testament teaches 
concerning the Spirit of God as the source of natural life in 
the world and in man, especially since in the allegory of 
Ezek. xxxvii this had already been applied to the national 
resurrection of Israel. If the Spirit worked physical life in 
its present form, what was more reasonable than to assume 
that He would likewise be the author of physical life restored 
in the resurrection. As a matter of fact, however, we find 


19 The question why Paul, after having up to vs. 43 (incl.) conducted 
his whole argument on the basis of a comparison between the body of sin 
and the body of the resurrection, substitutes from vs. 44 on for the body 
of sin the normal body of creation is an interesting one, though very 
difficult to answer. The answer should not be sought in the direction of 
ascribing to him the view that the creation-body and the body of sin 
are qualitatively identical, in other words that the evil predicates of 
pOopa, atiuia, doGeveia, enumerated in vs. 42 belong to the body in virtue 
of creation. Paul teaches too plainly elsewhere that these things came 
into the world through sin. The proper solution seems to be as follows: 
the Apostle was intent upon showing that in the plan of God from the 
outset provision was made for a higher kind of body (as pertaining to a 
higher state of existence generally). From the abnormal body of sin no 
inference could be drawn as to that effect. The abnormal and the eschato- 
logical are not so logically correlated that the one can be postulated 
from the other. But the world of creation and the world to come are 
thus correlated, the one pointing forward to the other; on the principle of 
typology the first Adam prefigures the last Adam, the psychical body the 
pneumatic body (cp. Rom. v. 14). The statement of vs. 44b is not meant 
as an apodictic assertion, but as an argument: if there exists one kind 
of body, there exists the other kind also. This explains why the quotation 
(Gen. ii. 7), which relates proximately to the psychical state only, is yet 
treated by Paul as proving both, and as therefore warranting the sub- 
joined proposition: “the last Adam became a life-giving Spirit.” The 
quotation proves this, because the “psychical” as such is typical of the 


170 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


that the operation of the Spirit in connection with the natural 
world recedes into the background already in the inter-canon- 
ical literature, and remains so even in the New Testament 
writings themselves. It is more plausible to assume that the 
thought of the resurrection-life was the first in order, and that, 
in partial dependence on this at least, the idea emerges of the 
Spirit as the Author of the miracle of the resurrection. For 
the pneumatic character of the age to come there existed a 
solid Old Testament basis in trains of thought, which had fully 
held their own and even found richer development in the 
early New Testament period. And, quite apart from eschato- 
logical contexts, the thought that the heavenly world is the 
pneumatic world meets us in Paul, 1 Cor. x. 3, 4; Eph. 
i. 3. From this the transition is not difficult to the idea that 
the eschatological state is preeminently a pneumatic state, 
since the highest form of life known, that of the world of 
heaven, must impart to it its special character. 

A second problem on which the eschatological evaluation 
of the Spirit may perhaps be expected to throw some light 
concerns the ubiquitousness of the Spirit in the entire Chris- 
tian life on earth, his equal distribution over all its spheres 
and activities. In Paul first from the subjective side Chris- 
tianity and the possession of and action through the Pneuma 
become interchangeable, and with strong emphasis the center 
of the Spirit’s operations is found in the ethico-religious 
pneumatic, the first creation of the second, the world that now is (if 
conceived without sin) of the aeon to come. This exegesis also disposes 
of the view that Paul meant to include vs. 45° in the quotation, the latter 
being taken from Gen. 1. 27 (man’s creation in the image of God). On 
such a supposition Paul’s manner of handling the record would have to 
rest on the Philonic (and o!der) speculation of a two-fold creation, first 
of the ideal, then of the empirical man. According to this speculation the 
ideal man is created first, the empirical man afterwards, since Gen. i 
comes before Gen. ii. But Paul affirms the very opposite: not the pneu- 
matic is first, the psychical is first. If there is reference at all in vs. 46 
to this Philonic philosophoumenon, it must be by way of pointed correc- 
tion. Paul would mean to substitute for the sequence of the idealistic 
philosophy the sequence of historic unfolding; the categories of his 


thought are Jewish, not Hellenic: he reasons in forms of time, not of 
space. 


THE RESURRECTION I7I 


sphere. With such thoroughness and emphasis this had not 
been done before Paul. Gunkel has no doubt exaggerated 
somewhat the originality of the Apostle in this respect and 
underrated the preparation made for this development by 
the Old ‘Testament prophetic and earlier New Testament 
teaching.*® Still a simple comparison between the Petrine 
speeches in Acts and the Pauline statements abundantly 
shows, that Paul was the first to ascribe to the Spirit that 
dominating place and that pervasive uniform activity, which 
secure to Him, alongside of the Father and the Son, a neces- 
sary divine relation to the Christian state at every point. 


20 Gunkel, Die Wirkungen des Heiligen Geistes nach der populiren 


Anschauung der apostolischen Zeit und nach der Lehre des Apostels 
Paulus, 1888. 


CHAPTER VII 


ALLEGED DEVELOPMENT IN PAUL’S TEACHING 
ON THE RESURRECTION 


The recent intense occupation with the significance of the 
Spirit for the structure of the Pauline eschatology has in 
many respects enriched our knowledge of the subject. At 
the same time, and offsetting as it were this benefit, it has 
given rise to certain efforts from the critical side to work out 
a scheme of development for the Apostle’s convictions and 
expectations as to the resurrection. The resulting views are so 
radical and deep-cutting, as to have modified in the mind of 
their supporters not only this one important point but the 
entire organism of the Pauline teaching. Into these theories 
and their supposed basis this chapter proceeds briefly to look. 

As just intimated, the idea of the Spirit is made the start- 
ing-point and the propelling power of this evolution both in 
its particular and in its general aspect. Once adopted it is then 
turned into a search-light throwing its luminous beams on 
all the high mountain tops of the Apostle’s world-view. It 
de-Judaizes and to not a small extent Hellenizes his Chris- 
tian thought. The development thus assumed is not, however, 
like the normal progress that might have been expected in one 
who once testified concerning himself: “When I was a child 
I spake as a child . . . now that I have become a man, I 
have put away childish things” (1 Cor. xiii. 11). It is rather 
welcomed as a development consisting in the elimination of 
error, each successive stage of belief contradicting the pre- 
ceding stage, and in turn being superseded by the following 
one. The stages in this evolutionary construction and the 
forces back of them are counted as follows: 

The first stage of the development is found by these critics 
in the First Epistle to the Thessalonians.* It contains an as yet 


12 Thess. is not taken account of in this theory owing to its assumed 
unauthenticity. 


ALLEGED DEVELOPMENT 173 


purely-Jewish form of eschatological belief, differing from 
the Jewish only in being centered around the Person of Jesus. 
Like Apoc. Bar. |. 2 it assumes that God will raise the dead, 
nihil immutans in figura eorum. Paul, we are told, at the time 
of writing this Epistle, and during his previous preaching, 
believed that the bodies would be brought up from the grave 
in the same condition as when laid therein. The main 
purpose of his preaching this doctrine to the Thessalonians 
was to reassure them that those who had recently died would 
be on the same footing with themselves at the moment of the 
parousia. Hence nothing is said about the change in those liv- 
ing at that point. The fact of the decomposition of the body 
in the grave did not trouble Paul, because he took for granted 
that the time until the parousia would be very short! 

The second form of the development is represented by the 
First Epistle to the Corinthians. If the Thessalonians-stage 
can be called pre-pneumatic, this next one is characterized by 
the influence exerted by the pneuma-idea. Here the pneumatic 
eschatology begins. Paul now expects the resurrection to bring 
about a vast change in the rising body, and expects its occur- 
rence at the very moment of rising. The pneumatic-trans- 
formation-idea virtually becomes a part of the resurrection- 
idea itself. Nor was this conception made possible only by the 
introduction of the Pnewma-factor; it became inevitable so 
soon as the Puewma, whose very function consists in trans- 
formation, was closely joined to the event of the resurrection. 
The Spirit would have denied his own nature, as in very es- 
sence a transforming agent, had He been contented with the 
purely objective task of bringing forth the dead, without ef- 
fecting a creative change in the somatic substance, which in 
the resurrection He operates upon. Further, the new man con- 
sisting as to his essence in spirit, and the sarx, the very 
opposite of spirit, having its seat in the body, the prime ne- 
cessity for such a fundamental act as the resurrection can 
from the nature of the case consist in nothing else than the 
elimination of the “sarkic” body. This, of course, means the 


174 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


cutting off in reality of all-connection between the present — 
body and the body of the resurrection, although it is admitted 
that this last consequence of the modified view is not in so 


many words drawn by Paul. Although on such a view the | — 


real continuity lies in the Pneuma, and no longer in the body, | 
the Apostle nevertheless continues to assign the resurrection © 
to the moment of the parousia. This, we are told, was an in- 
stance of inconsistency. It fitted only into the mechanical 
system of Judaism as exhibited in his own previous position 
of 1 Thessalonians. The inconsistency necessarily led on to 
the development of the third position. 

This third position is based on the observation on the part 
of Paul, that the Spirit being present in the believer from the 
beginning of his Christian life, there existed in reality no 
reason, why his crowning work should be postponed till the 
moment otf the parousia, which, no matter whether Paul 
thought it distant or near, involved an element of objection- 
able retardation. The moment of resurrection was now placed 
at the believer’s death. Be it noted, however, that the resurrec- 
tion placed at that moment savored in no respect of the di- 
luted modern spiritualization so largely favored in certain 
circles. It was not to his mind the mere entrance upon a super- 
ior incorporeal state, but the entrance upon a better embodied 
state, as refined and spiritualized as that expected during his 
second period, only no longer postponed till a later point, but 
immediately accorded in articulo mortis. There is, then, no 
discarding of the resurrection-idea here, but only the re- 
modelling of it on a new basis. This third conviction is found 
reflected in the remarkable passage, 2 Cor. v. 1-8. It also finds 
recognition in certain statements of Romans and Colossians. 
Apart from the logical motivation above stated, the impulse 
towards embracing it arose from the Apostle’s experience of 
the danger of death he had repeatedly incurred in his mission- 
ary labors. Hitherto he had believed in such a close nearness 
of the Lord’s coming as to cherish reasonable hope for a life 
prolonged to that point. Now reckoning seriously with a pre- 
vious death, he had to reconsider his resurrection-belief in 


ALLEGED DEVELOPMENT 175 


adjustment to it. And it was under the emotion aroused by the 
thought of a pre-parousia-death, and particularly the inevi- 
tably ensuing interval of “nakedness,” i.e., the existence of the 
soul without a covering body, that_he found refuge within 
this new construction of things. Nakedness could be prevented, 
if at the very moment wherein the old body slipped off a new 
somatic garment were produced and put on in order to 
take its place. It seemed even possible to add to this view 
a belief in the preéxistence of the new body, as held ready 
antecedently in heaven, and put to its predestined use at the 
very moment of the believer’s death. In accordance with this 
new construction he speaks, we are told, in Rom. viii. 19, not 
of the glorification of the sons of God, but of the revelation 
of the sons of God, an expression adapted to suggest that the 
glory of God’s children already exists and waits only to be 
manifested. Similarly in Col. iti. 4 the statement occurs that 
when Christ, who is our life, shall be manifested, the Colos- 
sians also shall be manifested in glory. 

Still a fourth standpoint is attributed to Paul, according to 
which in certain connections he implies the genesis and devel- 
opment of a somatic organism within the believer during the 
course of the present life, whilst the earthly body is still upon 
him. This, however, differs from the preceding stages enu- 
merated in that it does not follow them as something attained 
in chronological sequence replacing a belief held before. It 
occurs in Epistles which at the same time reflect one or the 
other of the previous standpoints. According to 2 Cor. iv. 17 
the “weight of glory” is wrought for the believer while he is 
still in the present state, and according to iii. 18, in the same 
context, the “transformation into the image of the Lord from 
glory to glory” takes place gradually here and now as the 
words themselves suggest. Consistently carried out this would, 
of course, have led to a considerable modification of what the 
new exegesis fiinds in 2 Cor. v. Iff., as above formulated. 
Not even at death would the draping with a new body have, 
on such a theory, been rendered necessary. The new body 
having been already formed within the old body previously 


176 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


to death, all that remained to happen was the slipping off of 
the old which had hitherto hid the new from view, so that it 
might be manifested from within. 

It will not be necessary to review this scheme of develop- 
ment in each of its steps. Only in so far as it involves a devia- 
tion from the traditionally accepted doctrine of the resurrec- 
tion, so largely received from Paul, need we enter into the 
questions involved. The alleged second stage, that found in 
I Cor. xv, agrees in its broad outlines with the common 
Christian faith. It is different with the remaining three 
phases. To these we therefore address some critical remarks. 

As regards the first stage the point in question is the ab- 
sence of the pneumatic factor. It is true that the Spirit is not 
here explicitly named either as the author of the resurrection- 
act or as the substratum of the resurrection-life. Does this 
reveal non-acquaintance on Paul’s part with such a circle of 
ideas? We must not overlook that the absent features did not 
bear directly upon the purpose of Paul’s exhortation. Not the 
nature, but the fact of the resurrection required stressing. 
The point that the living should not anticipate the previously 
dead on this joyful occasion was the point in need of emphatic 
affirmation. Such Paul affords explicitly. It were, however, 
foolish to infer from this, that he could not have told his 
readers much more about the nature of the event, had it been 
expedient. Indirectly the Epistle shows clearly enough that | 
the idea of the pneumatic character of the resurrection was 
not unknown to the author, whatever might be the case with 
his hearers. In iv. 14 the certainty of the readers’ resurrection 
is based on the fact that Jesus “died and rose again.” The 
ground of the certainty can not lie in this, that Christ is now 
alive, and therefore able to serve as the instrument of 
resurrection for the others. For in that case there would have 
been no reason to emphasize that Christ not only rose but 
“died and rose again.” The real nerve of the argument is that | 
because in his life their experience had been prefigured, the | 
phase in question must be likewise reproduced in them. Now | 
everywhere in the Pauline teaching the Spirit is the mediating — 


ALLEGED DEVELOPMENT aM 


‘factor, whereby the reproduction of the experience of Christ. 


in believers takes place, and there is no reason to assume that 
the idea has any other than this same pneumatic background 
here. We meet even with the phrase “dead in Christ.” This 
does not apply to any particular class of “dead,” e.g. to such 
alone as had died for Christ’s sake; the words do not suggest 
this, and there is no evidence of early cases of martyrdom in 
Thessalonica. The phrase “in Christ’? can have no other 
meaning than belongs to it elsewhere. It describes the funda- 
mental, mystical union between the dead and Christ. The 
phrase “in the Spirit” undoubtedly lies back of it. 


In regard to the second stage a few brief words may suf- . 


fice. The main point to take issue with here relates to the as- 
sertion that on the view developed by Paul, and taken over 
from him into the Church’s creed, the real continuity between 
the original body and the resurrection-body is broken off. To 
be sure, this is more in the nature of a dogmatic contention 
than of an exegetical finding ; it means that to Paul’s modified 
standpoint and for his unspiritual followers the trend of 
belief in this direction was leading to that. They were on the 
point of losing something that had always been precious to 
their imagination, to wit, the recovery of the identical body 
here possessed. Not now enquiring into the metaphysical or 
physical or biological elements of the issue but confining our- 
selves to the purely-exegetical question what Paul’s words 
about the subject may mean, the answer need not be over- 
difficult nor dubious. To be sure, the figure of “sowing”’ 
( ozetpetv ), which plays so large a role in the argument, does 
not suffice of itself to vouch for Paul’s belief in a real con- 
tinuity (which is still different from complete identity) be- 
tween what is deposited in the ground and what is raised. 
_ Nevertheless by way of implication this idea seems to underlie 
the word and figures used. Only a mistake has often been made 
through over-estimating the purport of the representation. 
Paul did not adopt or frame the figure for the sole or even 
main end of stressing the continuity between the two bodies. 
The argument, in which it lies enclosed, is an argument for 


rte 


178 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


the truth of the resurrection in general, and not for this one 
special point. The idea of “sowing”? forms, within the argu- 
ment as a whole, a means to an end; it is not the end in itself. 
Hence it gives no information as to the modus quo of the 
intermediate process between the figurative “sowing” and 
“harvesting.” Its meaning is confined to the twin poles of the 
mysterious process, its beginning and end. We are sure Paul 
could and would have felt like the man in the parable, who 
knew not how the growth was brought about. What the 
actual purpose of the use of the figure was we can only ascer- 
tain by carefully considering the course of Paul’s argument. 
It is necessary to go back to vs. 35. Here Paul formulates the 
two principal objections raised in Corinth, probably first by 
pagans, but later likewise by Christians, on whom the cavil- 
lings of the others had not failed to make some impression. 
The formulation is as follows: “But somebody will say: how 
are the dead raised, and with what kind of body do they 
come?’ This, be it observed, is not one question presented in 
two forms for the sake of emphasis or clearness. Two distinct 
grounds for scepticism are plainly distinguished. The first, 
“How are the dead raised,” ridicules the phantastic folly of 
believing in the return to life of a dead body. The whole thing 
was considered as lying beyond the sphere of arguable pos- 
sibilities. The second objection is contained in the second part 
of the verse: “With what kind of body do they come?” This 
second question relates to the indeterminableness or un- 
imaginableness of the form. The Apostle proceeds to deal 
with these two questions in due order of sequence.? The 
answer to the former is given in vs. 36; to think that what 
is “dead’’ ( vexpov ) cannot be raised is in flagrant contradic- 
tion to the facts of experience: ‘“‘what thou sowest is not made 
alive except it have died.” Death, so far from being an ob- 


2 The two questions, while logically distinct and recognized as such by 
Paul in the order of treatment, are not entirely independent, and there- 
fore merged somewhat in the double interrogative sentence: the un- 
imaginableness was in reality a part of the more largely conceived 
impossibility. 


ALLEGED DEVELOPMENT 179 


stacle to quickening, is its very prerequisite. Here the figure 
of “sowing” is already present ; it serves the purpose of point- 
ing to a common law of nature. Quite different is the use to 
which Paul turns it from vs. 37 onwards. Here the second (or 
secondary) objection, “With what kind of body do they 
come?” is met. The objectors found it impossible to frame a 
concrete conception of the nature of the resurrection-body, 
that is of its form and appearance. It is important to note 
that the question of substance does not seem to enter into 
either of the two stages of the argument. What the doubters 
felt perplexed about, concerned the quality of the new bodies, 
viz. their external quality. Perhaps it is not irrelevant here 
to remember the peculiar mentality of the average Greek (not 
now including the philosophers). The Greek would want 
above all in such things the convincing force of vision and 
imagination. To be unable to form a concrete image of some- 
thing was of itself an invitation to doubt. In accordance with 
this Paul speaks throughout the sequel of the discourse (up 
to vs. 50) of the present and future bodies in terms of quality 
and appearance. The way of introduction of the substance- 
question in vs. 50 indicates of itself, that there a new aspect 
of the mystery is for the first time touched upon.*® Previously 
to that point the figure of “sowing” served merely to answer 
the second objection raised, viz. that no concrete visualisation 
of the body to come could be formed. Paul meets this with an 
appeal to the richness of God’s resources in the bestowal of 
form, and to his sovereignty in choosing from the available 
forms in each individual case what seems fitting to Him: 
“And that which thou sowest thou sowest not the body that 
shall be, but a bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or some 
other kind; but God gives it a body even as it has pleased 
Him, and to every seed a body of its own.”* The form, the 


3 “Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood can not inherit the 
kingdom of God.” 

4The Past Tense in the Greek “as it pleased Him,” might seem to 
suggest a reference to the creative appointment of the “bodies” of things. 
But in connection with the Present Tense “gives” this is little likely. 


180 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


appearance, that characterizes what comes out of the ground, 
is not to be limited to a replica of what was put into the 
soil. The grain, the seed-kernel, is “naked,” that is unclothed 
with foliage or flowers. The dress, the envelope, are given by 
God. No observation of a seed-grain could have taught, with- 
out previous experience, what the appearance of the sprout 
or plant issuing would be like. What right then has a man to 
argue from the impossibility of pre-vision and pre-imagina- 
tion, to the presumptuous conclusion that the forthcoming of 
a new differently-shaped and differently-appareled body is 
a priort an absurdity? 

It is evident that this feature, the intent of bringing out the 
non-resemblance between seed and plant governs Paul’s en- 
tire treatment of the comparison. That in this explanation we 
have correctly diagnosed the Apostle’s intent, is borne out 
likewise by the subjoined argument of vss. 39-41. Here Paul 
elucidates the principle at stake from two other spheres, pass- 
ing over from vegetable to animal and astral existence. This, 
of course, excludes the possibility of every attempt at genetic 
explanation, which in the foregoing, where sowing and reap- 
ing came under review, might still have seemed to be possible. 
What here remains of the argument is solely the variety of 
somatic condition in the groups named as a static fact. Natur- 
ally the group of animal creatures as standing nearest to man 
is first drawn upon for illustration. After that the astral world 
comes under review. The point at issue, however, remains the 
identical one dwelt upon before. The variety, existing de facto 
as a constant phenomenon, though differentiated in its multi- 
plicity, removes the right of doubting the possibility of the 
resurrection on the sole ground of a differently complexioned 
body being inconceivable. Let us briefly follow the progress in 
the reasoning. Its structure is carefully and skilfully framed 
through the alternate employment of the two adjectives @\A0s 
and érepos, Unfortuntely the precise difference between these 
two, and, in consequence, the full force of the argumentation, 
are lost to the English reader. The clearness of contrast 
could have been retained only through a pedantic alternation 


ALLEGED DEVELOPMENT ISI 


between the philosophic phrases “generically different” and 
“specifically different.”’ Paul calls attention to the differences 
appearing both in the sub-human and in the superhuman 
realms between single species. He likewise calls attention to 
the generic, fundamental difference between the realms taken 
comprehensively. AAAos marks the difference among the spe- 
cies included in one and the same genus, whilst repos marks 
the difference between the genera. Between the flesh of man- 
kind and beasts and birds there is specific difference only; as 
to genus they belong in common to the same animal world; 
hence in vs. 39 @Ados_ is used: “there is one flesh of men, an- 
other of beasts” («tnvov), etc. When, however, all these are 
taken together, and the heavenly bodies placed over against 
them a heterogeneity results: “‘the glory of the celestial and the 
glory of the terrestrial are ¢vepat.”” But among the heavenly 
there is again a specific difference: “another ( 4A” ) is the 
glory of the sun and another is the glory of the moon, and 
another is the glory of the stars, for star differs from star in 
glory.” Here again it is at once seen that the reasoning re- 
volves not about the substantial make-up of these bodies, but 
about their kind, their quality, their appearance. This follows 
further from the fact that the close of vs. 38 links on closely 
to vss. 39-41, and there, as shown above, the reference to 
plant-clothing in foliage and flowerage is unmistakable. The 
same observation can be made by noting carefully the word 
here chosen by the Apostle to express the aspect in regard to 
which the variety exists. It is a variegation in “glory” ( 6e&a), 
and “glory” is primarily a term of outward manifestation. 
Again, the same conclusion may be drawn from the manner 
in which Paul, returning to the figure of sowing, immediately 
resumes the terminology of the qualitative. He contrasts the 
two bodies (“sown” and “rising’’) as possessed of corrup- 
tion (vs. incorruption), dishonor (vs. glory), weakness (vs. 
power ). In keeping with all this we shall have to understand 
the word sarv in vs. 39 not of “flesh” as so much animal 
matter, but of the ordinary somatic instrument for revealing 
certain traits or a complex of appearances. Sarx is simply in 


182 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


this connection a synecdochical designation of soma from this 
qualitative point of view (cp. vss. 38, 40). When Paul says: 
“another is the sarx of men, another is the sarx of beasts, 
another the sarx of birds, another the sarx of fishes,” he 
means nothing else than that a cognate somatic organization 
in each case defines the limits of the species. Earthly bodies 
can be thus differentiated by the term sarx, because sar is in 
them the most conspicuous feature, one of these elements 
after which the language is wont to give names to things. 
But, coming to “‘celestial things,” the difficulty arises that such 
celestial entities possess no sarx, after which they could be 
synecdochically denominated. Yet, although sarx was ex- 
cluded, the word soma in the sense of medium of appearance, 
above defined, continued to admit of use. It is somewhat diffi- 
cult to determine, when Paul speaks of c@pata érroupana, 
whether the word “‘body”’ is used in the sense of physics or of 
biology. That sun, moon and stars are named as instances of 
heavenly bodies would seem to favor the former. This is held 
by others to be non-decisive, because, following a prevailing 
belief, both Jewish and pagan, Paul might have looked upon 
these celestial balls as inhabited by angels. In that case their 
glorious outward appearances might have been considered as 
a radiance of angelic inhabitants. Whatever one’s exegetical 
choice between these two opinions may be, the conclusion to 
be drawn is, in this instance as before, that the resurrection- 
body will differ greatly from the kind of body we now possess 
in its eradiation of glory. It will be a case of heteros and not. 
merely of allos. What will be the attributes from which this 
difference in manifestation results is stated in vss. 42, 43. 
Four contrasts are distinguished. These four, however, are 
not simply coordinated. On either side the three first named — 
are thought of as the product of the last and fourth. That the 
earthly body consists in corruption, dishonor, weakness is in 
some way connected with its being a c@va Yuyixov, In the 
same manner the heavenly body is characterized by incorrupti- 
bleness, glory, power, all three of which result from its being a 
capa Ivevpatixov, The only difficulty thus remaining unsolved 


ALLEGED DEVELOPMENT 183 


is how Paul could connect as inevitable consequences with 
the psychical body, which is according to the following 
context the body of creation, the unfallen body, these three 
ugly predicates of corruption, dishonor, weakness. One might 
suggest that what he connects with creation is not the actual 
existence of these qualities, but the contingency of their emer- 
gence: the “psychical body” would then be a body, not in- 
fected by, but nevertheless not immune either from corrup- 
tion, dishonor, weakness, whereas the Pneumatic body is-—~ 
lifted above all invasion of these. It must be admitted, how- 
ever, that this is dogmatic construction, so far as our passage 
is concerned. Taking into account Paul’s teaching as a whole, 
we believe it to be a quite justifiable construction; only the 
principle is not here expressed in so many words. Still there 
is even here one phenomenon lending favor to the view sug- 
gested: Paul seems intentionally, in characterizing the body 
of the First Man, to avoid the adjective.sarkic and the noun 
sarx to which it belongs. From both words in the ordinary 
Pauline vocabulary the notion of sinfulness, moral corrup- 
tion, is inseparable. The introduction of such words as €« ys 
xoixes, yoixds, vss. 47-49, where on the ordinary terminology 
sarx, sarkic would have been indicated, proves to our minds 
that the avoidance was intentional, and not for the sake of 
stylistic variation only. In vs. 50, on the other hand, where 
the body of man’s sinful estate is indisputably spoken of, the 
term sarx immediately emerges.° 
We now have the facts with sufficient completeness before 
\us. The question is in order, whether in this context, so full 
of mysteries, there is actually present, as the evolutionary 
-pneumatology would have it, such a powerful influx of 
| the pneuma-principle as would overbear everything else, and 
even exclude the factor of the erstwhile earthly body from the 
process described. The answer must be in the negative. Let it ' 
be observed that so far as the act of raising is concerned, the 
Spirit does not receive the prominence we should expect Him 
on the new theory to acquire or possess.’ It is God, as else- 


5 “Flesh and blood can not inherit the kingdom of God.” 


Benet ew. 


184 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


where, who raises. No doubt He does it through the Spirit, 
but pointedly stressed this is not. Where it does come to ex- 
pression the form is Christological, that of the Lord having 
become a [vedpa Sworoitv (vs. 45). This concerns the act 
of the resurrection, strictly so taken. It does only through in- 
ference teach that in the subsequent resurrection-state we shall 
bear the Spirit-image, or live in the Spirit-atmosphere (vs. 
49). As to the presence and operation of the Spirit in the inter- 


mediate state, preparing the dead for the issue of the resurrec-_ 


tion, nothing whatever is stated; we are here thrown back on 
the scanty phrase “dead in Christ” from 1 Thessalonians. If 
the last-mentioned idea could be legitimately drawn from the 
passage, then, the importance of the Spirit would be greatly 
enhanced; but even then, with the mystery thus increased, it 
would contribute nothing to the problem of how the body 
buried can retain continuity with the body raised. The Spirit 
were in that case no more than the preparatory agent for bring- 


ing about gradually the event of the resurrection. On one view 


only could a measure of light seem to fall on this mystery of 


all mysteries, viz. if in any way the Spirit could be conceived, 
as so identified with the body sown as no longer to form the. 


Actor but the object acted upon, no longer the Sower, but in 
some sense the seed sown. For in that case the continuity and 
identity of what is sown and what rises at the end would be 


absolutely assured, since the Spirit is according to the judg- — 


gested solution brings us face to face with the unsolved, and 


perhaps unsolvable problem of the relation between the Holy 
Spirit ad extra and the Holy Spirit immanently considered as 


part in the make-up of the believer’s person. Whether solvable - 


or not, the problem, even if it promised elucidation in general, 
would from the terms employed in the context here be plainly 
eliminated as a true solvent. This will appear straightway, if 
once more the several elements entering into the figuratively 
formulated transaction be recalled. The term “naked grain” 
is assumed as the starting-point for this construction. This 


' “naked grain” is explained as carrying in itself a germ, a 


ALLEGED DEVELOPMENT 185 


nucleus of life, and on the same principle the body buried ~” 
would have within itself the Holy Spirit as the principle or 
potentiality of a requickened life. Unfortunately Paul in 
working out the figure makes no distinction between germ 
and seed in such a way that the presence of the former could 
serve aS a guarantee of the identity of the rising with the 
buried body. On the contrary he affirms that that which is 
sown is quickened, and precisely what is sown dies. The sub- 
ject is the same in both propositions. And moreover, in vs. 
37, instead of picturing the connection between seed and plant 
in terms suggested by the interpretation offered, he passes 
over to a totally-different train of thought. After stressing 
the necessity of dying previously to the possibility of quicken- 
ing, the argument turns to the variegated exhibition of ex- 
ternal clothing in the plant-world. On the theory advocated 
attention ought to have been immediately called to the fact 
that the dying is but a partial one in which the Spirit-kernel 
is not actually involved. Nothing of the kind is done. Neither 
do the terms subsequently employed fit into the theory under 
discussion. If the Spirit is sown as residing within the seed, 
then it can no longer be affirmed that what is sown is naked, 
for on such a view the Spirit-kernel is precisely clothed upon 
with the seed. Of what is sown it is emphatically affirmed that 
it undergoes this process in corruption, dishonor, weakness. 
All these and such-like things are utterly unpredicable of the 
Spirit, no matter, whether He be taken objectively as a divine 
entity, or subjectively as immanent in man. Thus, whichever 
way one turns, the proposed explanation proves impossible 
and futile. It is better to leave the matter where it is and to 
commit the working out of the mystery to God, who can bring 
about things unsearchable to the mind of man. The resurrec- 
tion belongs with many other objects of eschatological faith 
to the region “which eye saw not, and ear heard not, and which 
ascended not into the heart of man.” 

We proceed to the discussion of the alleged third stage in 
the evolution of Paul’s resurrection-belief. This is the stage 
in which the Apostle is supposed to have moved forward the 


186 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


endowment with a new body to the moment of death in case 
the death of his earthly body occurred before the parousia. 
This view is not ascribed to Paul as a firmly established con- 
viction, but as a more or less contingent eventuality, which 
none the less he seriously reckoned with. The passage on which 
it is chiefly based is 2 Cor. v. 1-8, a context extremely difficult 
of interpretation, partly as a result of some uncertainties in the 
text, which, however, may themselves have arisen from a 
desire through emendation to remove exegetical or doctrinal 

obstacles. The best method of dealing with the passage seems _ 
to be to give first a cursory exegesis of the successive clauses, 
paying particular heed to their syntactical coherence, and then 
to sum up the results obtained in a brief paraphrase. In order 
that the exegesis may be conducted with the greatest degree 
of discrimination, it will be desirable to place clearly before 
our minds the traditional understanding of the words, which 
was common up to the time when the modern exegesis took 
hold of them. This old view interpreted as follows :—Paul felt 
himself in uncertainty as to whether he was destined to sur- 
vive till the parousia or die previously to that point. If the 
former happened the eagerly desired heavenly body would 
become his immediately, and that without any strange, fear- 
some process of first stripping off the earthly body now 
clothing him. In both respects this mode of transformation 
appeared to him the more desirable. There would be no delay, 
and there would be nothing of the dread ordinarily associated 
with death. But in case the other alternative happened through 
his dying before the coming of the Lord, both of these advan- 
tages would not only be lost, there would in addition ensue 
the far more serious detriment of having to spend the interval 
between his death and the parousia in a disembodied state, a 
state of “nakedness” as he calls it. Confronted with these two 
possibilities and their differing implications, he gives voice 
to a strong desire for obtaining the former and escaping the 
latter. With the idea of a tertium quid, viz. that the new body 
could possibly become his immediately upon death, he did 
according to the old exegesis in no wise reckon. That which 


ALLEGED DEVELOPMENT 187 


on the modern exegesis formed the very pivot of the move- 
ment of his hope, did according to the ancient exegesis never 
enter his mind. He had before him a maximum and a mini- 
mum; the former he preferred, but with true Christian resig- 
nation expressed himself contented with the latter, should 
the Lord have that in store for his servant. He could be thus 
contented with fulfilment of the lesser hope, because after all 
it had in common with the higher desire the assurance of 
being with Christ immediately after death, even if the supreme 
satisfaction of entering upon that blessedness in the body 
were denied him. 

Proceeding now to our cursory exegesis of the complex of 
thought, we observe that the opening statement in vs. I, when 
read in the A.V. has perhaps more than aught else in the 
passage given rise and encouragement to the modern inter- 
pretation: “For we know that if our earthly house of this 
tabernacle were dissolved (xatadvOy), we have a building 
from God,” etc. This subjunctive “were” injects into the 
statement the thought of the improbability of its happening 
after the manner the sentence describes: Even if it were,—but 
it is not likely to happen. This rendering at the outset pre- 
judges the Apostle’s state of mind as to the outcome, and is 
in no wise required by the Greek text. The conjunction “if” 
(éav) with the Aorist Subjunctive not infrequently has the 
force of a Future Perfect. The correct rendering accordingly 
would be: “We know that im case our earthly tent-house shall 
have been dissolved, we have a building from God,” etc. The 
inaccuracy has been corrected by the R.V., which reads: “For 
we know that if the earthly house of our tabernacle be dis- 
solved” (“be’ instead of “were’’), etc. Through this correc- 
tion of the rendering the impression is made less obtrusive, as 
if Paul in these words reflected upon the availableness of anew 
body for himself in the very moment that the less desirable 
event of his pre-parousia death should occur. All that the 
words, strictly taken, mean is that the loss of the earthly body 
will be made up for (sooner or later) by the supervening of 
a wholly-differently complexioned body pertaining to another 


188 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


sphere, but of the time-point when this certainty shall enter 
into actuality, nothing is said. Nor do the words, taken 
by themselves, contain an intimation as to whether the “disso- 
lution” is near or not. But, it will be asked, does not the 
Present Tense ‘‘we have’ ( €youev), when joined to the fore- 
going, imply that the new body must be in possession of the 
Apostle, when he dies; how otherwise could he declare that 
at the extreme moment of his earthly life he has it? There is 
more than one way to meet this difficulty. The verb “we have’ 
can be given the sense of assured possession, carrying a title 
de jure to something that may or may not as yet be in exist- 
ence. Or “we have’ might be a case of imaginative projection 
into the world to come. The closing words of the verse ( €v 
ovpavois ) favor the latter, for they do not, of course, describe 
where the body now is or has been from the first. That would 
be a formal avowal of the preéxistence of souls, and could 
hardly in the Apostle’s view have been confined to souls, 
when once embraced with regard to them. What the phrase 
really means is that heaven is the place in which the body, 
when received, will be permanently possessed, in which it 
will exist and move and live; that such is the correct inter- 
pretation can be verified from the corresponding phrase 
“earthly” ( émiyetos ), applied by way of contrast to “tent- 
house” ( ot«/a tod oxjvous ). Further, that the term “house” 
(ol«/a ) which is the object of “we have” is used from the 
standpoint of the actual and permanent possession in the 
heavenly life, appears from the difference between it and 
the term “‘building’”’ (0¢«od0u7 ) used just before. In the latter 
the emphasis rests on the origin of the body: it is a building, 
something constructed, hence the added words €« cod; it isa 
building provided by God, of his own making. In the former 
the emphasis rests on the existence of the body as a finished 
product, a “house.” Vs. 1, therefore, leaves it undecided when 
this body will be received, and in no way implies its preéxist- 
ence. The characterization of the new body as “eternal’’ only 
intends to set it off against the frail and collapsible “tent- 
house,” serving as a figure for the earthly body. A contact for 


ALLEGED DEVELOPMENT I &9 


the idea of precexistence has further been sought in the closing 
words of vs. 2, ‘‘our habitation from heaven.” But this “from 
heaven” is simply another form of statement for what is 
called in vs. 1 “from God.” The resurrection-body is from 
heaven because it is in a special supernatural sense from God. 
Heaven is the seat and source of the Pneuma by which the 
resurrection-body is formed.* On the other hand the word 
érrevovoacGat in this second verse is distinctly unfavorable to 
the view that Paul looked forward to or weighed the possi- 
bility of receiving the new body at or immediately after death. 
‘Evdtcac@at means “‘to put on,” and érevdvoac Gat signifies “to 
put on one garment over another garment’ ; it is the preposi- 
tion €7/, that effects this plus in the meaning. The latter word 
expresses the same thing which in 1 Cor. xv. 53 Paul calls 
évdvoac@at, because there the subject of the act is the present 
earthly. body: “this corruptible must put on incorruption, 
and this mortal must put on immortality.” Here in 2 Cor. v, 
on the other hand, the subject is the self, the incorporeal part 
of the believer, conceived as already clothed upon with its 
present body-garment, and desiring to put on over this, as 
‘some over-garment, the eschatological body. Now, how did 
or could Paul conceive of the realization of this desire? The 
answer seems plain. He could hardly conceive of it as taking 
place at death, for death is precisely the putting off of the ~ 
first garment hitherto worn. On such a supposition room 
would remain for an €vd’cac@a only, no longer for an 
érevdvcac@a. It yields an utterly fantastic thought to as- 
sume that the Apostle expected at death to carry over, were it 
only for a moment, the earthly body, and then to slip on over 
it the new body. In such a case there would have been no real 
death, nothing would have remained for burial. The only 
way in which we can intelligibly construe for ourselves this 
erevdveacGai is that it takes place at the parousia, and then, 
in those to whom the parousia takes place before death. Under 


6 Cp. 1 Cor. xv. 47: “the Second man is (by virtue of the resurrection) 
from heaven.” Notice also the difference between e€ otpavod (singular) 
relating to origin and év rots ovpavois (plural) of locality in vs. 1. 


I90 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


these circumstances alone Paul would still be wearing the old 
body, and therefore able to put on over it the habitation from 
heaven. Vs. 2, therefore, is utterly irreconcilable with the 
modern exegesis of a reception of the new body at death. 

Vs. 3 we wish to pass by without comment for the moment, 
because it is exceedingly obscure, owing in part to the uncer- 
tain reading of two words, and thereby incapable of yielding 
any definite conclusions on the question before us. We shall 
revert to it presently, when endeavoring to paraphrase the 
passage as a whole. 

Coming to vs. 4, we notice several points entirely incon- 
sistent with the idea that Paul is thinking of something to 
happen at death. He declares: “We that are in the tent do 
groan being burdened, because we would not be unclothed, 
but be clothed upon, that what is mortal may be swallowed 
up of life.” Here an alternative is formulated by Paul and a 
preference expressed. The alternative is between the two 
experiences, first of being unclothed, and then being clothed 
anew, and second of being clothed upon immediately. And he 
prefers the latter. The preference is a strong one. Under the 
influence of the uncertainty of its decision Paul groans. Now 
the question arises: Does this situation fit the case of the 
bestowal of a new body at the moment of death or the case of 
the bestowal of it at the parousia? In answer let us make clear 
to ourselves that the groaning and the strong preference be- 
come entirely unintelligible, if we conceive Paul thinking of 
both members of this alternative as attached to the moment 
of death. For, how could the resolution of such an alternative 
m articulo mortis become to him a matter of burdensome un- 
certainty ? It would have certainly been regarded by him as per- 
taining to the formalities of getting into the proper apparel for 
a solemn occasion; in both cases the outcome would have been 
precisely the same. If once it were fixed that the new body 
comes immediately, it certainly, in comparison with that tre- 
mendous fact, must have appeared a matter of slight impor- 
tance, whether it immediately (with the smallest of intervals 
between) shall succeed the old body, or shall, casting a veil 


ALLEGED DEVELOPMENT IOI 


over all that goes on beneath, swallow up the old body, ab- 
sorbing it, as it were, into itself. For one who was assured 
that death without fail would bring with itself the new body, 
it would seem pusillanimous to groan on account of the trifling 
question whether the instantaneous occurrence should take 
place one way or the other. Paul was, with his entire pericu- 
lous and painful life-experience behind him, hardly the man 
to let his mind be distracted to the point of groaning fear 
over such matters. All this vexing uncertainty and painful 
weighing of a small issue must have lacked real importance 
for a man of his temperament. The fear of death per se, asa 
momentary experience we have no reason to ascribe to him. 
It follows, therefore, that the strong sense of uneasiness and 
the strong preference expressed must have revolved around 
another, far more serious and solemn question, viz. would 
there be or would there not be awaiting him in the near future 
a protracted state of being unclothed, that is ‘naked’ between 
his possible death and the arrival of the parousia? The un- 
certainty, therefore, arising from this can not stand in direct 
contradiction to the “we know” in vs. I; in other words “‘we 
know” can not, consistently with what follows, carry the 
meaning : we know that we receive a new body at the time of 
death. Such a conviction would from the outset have rendered 
all subsequent burdensomeness and groaning out of place. 
The simple sense of the verse is, as above intimated: in a 
general way Paul affirms that instead of the tent dissolved a 
new structure will be received, but he does not indicate here 
when or how it will be given. 

It is said that vs. 5 proves the “being clothed upon” to be in 
Paul’s view the common lot of all believers, because of the 
statement “He that wrought us for this very thing is God.” 
The plural “us” is on this view understood of all Christians. 
Likewise the further words “who gave us the earnest of the 
Spirit” are taken to bear out this exegesis, since all Christians 
are recipients of the Spirit and must consequently share in 
what this gift is the pledge of. He could not have affirmed 
these things, had he confined the “being clothed upon’ to 


’ 


192 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


those found alive at the parousia. To this our answer is that 
from the ‘“‘us” and the statement concerning the gift of the 
Spirit as an earnest, no such conclusion can be legitimately 
drawn. Even if Paul does not use “us” here as a rhetorical 
plural, but actually includes all believers, this simply shows 
how he lived in the expectation, that the parousia might still 
find the great majority of the Christians of his day alive, and 
looked upon the cases of those who died in the interval as 
exceptions. After all, he could just as well say of believers in 


general, that they had been prepared by God to be “clothed | 


upon,” at the last day, as he could on the hypothesis under 

review affirm of his readers collectively, using the word “us,” 

that they had been prepared of God for investment with a new 

body at death, for on every view he must have been aware 

that some would be found alive at the parousia, whom God 

could not have prepared for that peculiar experience, and to 

whom He could not have given the Spirit as an earnest for 

such experience. We have answered this argument on the 

assumption, that “this very thing” (av70 todto) in vs. 5 actu- 

ally refers to the “being clothed upon,” as excluding the “being 

clothed” of vs. 4. Of course, the affirmative answer brings us 

face to face with the difficult question, how Paul could so 

positively affirm that God had prepared the majority of the 
then living believers to survive till the parousia, then to be 

changed in the way indicated by “being clothed upon.” For 

this reason we feel inclined to give to “this very thing”’ 

another reference. For the present, however, it suffices to) 
have shown, that the usual ASD of vs. ies does mh 
_ compel us to place the “clothing upon” at death. 

Finally, vss. 6-8 are said to demand the modern exegesis. 
Here Paul declares himself of good courage, because imme- 
diately after death he will be with the Lord: to be at home in 
the body 1s to be absent from the Lord, whilst to be absent 
from the body is to be at home with the Lord. And this goal 
of his desire which he expects to reach at death is taken as 
identical with what is described in vss. 2 and 4 as the “being 
clothed upon,” because by means of “therefore” it is con- 


. 


ALLEGED DEVELOPMENT 193 


nected with the foregoing: “Being therefore always of good 
courage, etc. Hence the conclusion drawn runs as follows: 
the being at home with the Lord is effected through the “being 
clothed upon” at death. To this we reply as follows: Paul’s 
good courage in view of the fact that to die means to be at 
home with the Lord attaches itself to the preceding context in 
the general import of the latter, a general import that found 
‘clearest expression in iv. 17, 18 and v. 1. The general propo- 
sition, in regard to which Paul felt absolute assurance, was 
that after the present affliction, or in reward for it, there is 
eternal glory in store for the believer, and more specifically 
that, after this earthly tent-body shall have been dissolved, 
the believer will be put in possession of an eternal heavenly 
body. As to the secondary question, whether this consummate 
state of glory would be reached with or without an interven- 
ing period of nakedness of death, as to this Paul felt no con-~_ | 
viction, either one way or the other, but only a desire and a 
preference. Hence he contents himself with expressing this 
preferential desire as growing out of a strong dislike of the 
state of nakedness. Now, inasmuch as his assurance on the 
general question far outweighed the uncertainty on that one 
particular point, Paul could, notwithstanding the unresolved 
doubt of vss. 2, 4, proceed in vs. 6 with the declaration, that 
he was always of good courage. Of course, he had to put the 
ground of his good courage under the circumstances in the 
form of the minimum of what he felt sure about; he could 
not say: we are always of good courage, because to be absent 
from the earthly body means to be put immediately in 
possession of the heavenly body. His uncertainty as to whether 
he would survive till the parousia forbade him that. There- 
fore he says only as much as he could with full certainty 
profess: to be absent from the body is to be at home with the 
Lord. Even in case that happened which appeared to him the 
less desirable, he would still be contented, because in this 
being with the Lord everything else was potentially given. 
Looking at it closely, the words of vss. 6-8 even seem to dis- 
parage the idea of the new body being given at death. He 


194 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


speaks here of death as meaning absence from the body. Of 
course, he means the earthly body; yet he would scarcely have 
expressed himself precisely thus, had he meant that imme- 
diately another body would be substituted, for the state in 
such a new body would hardly be describable as the state of 
one absent from the body. And likewise the phrase “to be 
present with the Lord” is so general that Paul, had he had in 
mind the presence with Christ in the new glorified body, 
would in all probability have chosen a more definite mode of 
expression in contrast to that of “being absent from the 
body.” Our conclusion, therefore, is that vss. 6-8 do not 
favor the exegesis under review. 

We must now look for a moment at the passage as a whole, 
and in connection with this at the difficult vs. 3, in order to 
grasp the import of the entire section, and thus to gather in 
the fruit of our somewhat laborious exegesis. The passage 
connects with iv. 17,18 by means of “for” (yap): “For we 
know that in case our earthly tent-house shall have been dis- 
solved, we have a building from God,” etc. Chapter iv. 17, 18 
affirm that the “affliction” in the body works out an eternal 
weight of glory, likewise to be enjoyed in the body, since 
there, in the body, the “affliction” was borne. The future body 
thus appears from the outset as the bearer of an eternal weight 
of glory. The knowledge that such a new body shall be ours is 
basic for the hope of possessing and enjoying the certainty of 
this eternal glory. Without such a center the glory could not 
exist. Especially the description of this new body as a “house” 
admirably fits into this train of thought, because a house is 
not a mere place of shelter, but has attached to it the aesthetic 
conception of a center of manifestation for the glory of its 
inhabitant. The next verse joins to this, by means of “«at 
yap,” as a further basis of the conviction expressed in the 
“we know’’ of vs. I, the circumstance that “we groan desiring 
to be clothed upon with our habitation from heaven.’ Such 
an ardent, groaning longing affords a particularly strong 


7 Kal yap is stronger than the simple yap: “for verily.” 


ALLEGED DEVELOPMENT 195 


ground for the assurance that a heavenly body must be ap- 
pointed for us. This would not follow, of course, if the long- 
ing were of the nature of a purely-subjective sentiment or 
aspiration. In the present case it does follow, because, being 
worked in the believer by the Spirit, it becomes divinely 
prophetic of what is actually in store for him. The idea is that 
the Christian is so eagerly desirous of the succedence of the 
heavenly body, if possible, without the intervening of any 
period of bodiless existence, as to justify the conclusion that 
the Spirit's hand is discernible in this. The ardency and eager- 
ness of the desire are guarantees of its divine origination. 
Paul continues, “in this we groan.” Some render by “‘in this 
(tent )” referring back to vs. 1. This construction is some- 
what favored by vs. 4 where the same thought is expressed 
as follows: “for we that are in this tent do groan.” It is quite 
possible, however, to render: “in this respect we groan, that 
we long to be clothed upon.” 

The foregoing brings us to the difficult vs. 3. There are two 
points of uncertainty in the reading of this verse: (1) the 
conjunction introducing the sentence is in some MSS. ¢& ye 
(or & ye xai), in others ¢! wep; (2) the participle following 
this conjunction is read in some authorities évévedmevor, in 
others éxSuvadevor. The evidence seems to be in favor of & ye 
Kal évdvodmevol ov yuuvol evpeOnoducOu, But it is extremely 
difficult, on any view taken of the passage as a whole, to fit 
these words into the context with an intelligible result. The 
modern exegesis above criticized would take it as follows: 
the verse assigns the reason for the longing to be clothed 
upon at death: having put the (new) body on we shall not 
then be found naked. For in that case there will be no interval 
of disembodied existence. So far as thought is concerned, and 
taken by itself, this would yield appropriate sense. The fatal 
objection to it is that it takes ¢vdvcac@ar in the same sense 
as belongs specifically to émevd0cac@ar, Now the latter is used 
vss. 2 and 4 with pointed emphasis upon the €7é, so as to com- 
pel the express understanding that it is not identical with 
évdvoacOa, but rather its opposite, if not in result, yet surely 


196 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


in method of procedure. This being so, we may say that Paul, 
in order to express the thought attributed to him by this new 
exegesis, would in all likelihood have repeated the word 
érrevdvoac Gat in its participial form; he would have said “we 
long to be clothed upon, since having been clothed upon we 
shall not be found naked.” The verb which has but one prepo- 
sitional prefix is distinguished from the doubly compound 
one in this very vital respect, that it does not imply the guar- 
antee for the avoidance of “‘nakedness,”’ inasmuch as it does 
not fix the point for the “putting on” as coinciding with the 
moment of death. We are bound, therefore, to take ¢vduca- 
pevot as different from é7evdveduevor, But what the clause 
means, 1f the distinction be insisted upon, as we believe it must, 
appears difficult to tell. Under these circumstances we prefer, 
instead of wrestling with the text in order to extract from it 
some sort of meaning, such as will at best induce half-accept- 
ance, to try how far the difficulty admits of relief by adopt- 
ing the other reading with é«dvodpevor instead of évduca- 
pevot,® With this combined with either « ye xat or e& mTep 
(“although”), we can reach comparative clearness. The sole 
warrant always for changing the text, either by pure emenda- 
tion, or through adoption of some other, perhaps less-strongly 
attested, reading, is the discovery that the adopted modifica- 


8 Of course, it is not impossible for a skillful exegete, who finds him- 
self in an impasse of this kind, to extort from the text some tolerable 
sense, sacrificing all naturalness of expression to the one desire of making 
the words say anything at all. As an example of this sort of exegesis the 
following might be offered: We long to be clothed upon through reaching 
the parousia alive, thus avoiding the interval of nakedness, since also, 
after having “put on” at that point, we shall not henceforth be found 
naked at our entrance upon the eternal state. In other words, since such is 
our ultimate destiny in any event, even though we may have to attain 
unto it through death, and subsequent nakedness and ultimate putting on 
of the body, rather than by instantaneous putting on of the new over the 
old, nevertheless we can not help continue longing for the ante mortem 
parousia-investment, because that reaches the eventual goal in the shortest 
and easiest manner. This exegesis, it will be perceived, separates the xa/ 

from the ef ye and joins xaé closely to évdvodpevos. It certainly is inge- 
nious; but is it not too ingenious to invite confident acceptance? 


~ rr 


ALLEGED DEVELOPMENT LOY 


tion suddenly lets in light where before darkness prevailed. 
Such is the case here. “Eu ye kai exdvodpevor yields “if so be 
that also, having put off this body (1.e., having died), we shall 
‘not in the end be found naked, our “being clothed upon” 
taking place at the general resurrection. Taking the other 
conjunction ¢€¢ ep we obtain the following rendering: “al- 
though even having put off this body (died) we shall not 
ultimately be found naked.’’’ 

Vs. 4 takes up vs. 2 again, elaborating further the same 
thought there expressed, whence in the same manner the 
verse is introduced by «at yap. The groaning, though it be a 
groaning caused by uncertainty as to the how or when, 
_ nevertheless conveys assurance so far as the simple fact of 
ultimate attainment is concerned. The “being burdened” here 
by no means excludes the “we know” of vs. I, as it would do 
on the modern interpretation. 

In connection with vs. 5 we encountered a difficulty, left for 
the time to one side. Here is the place to consider it. It 
consisted in the problem, how “this very thing” could be 
referred to the immediately preceding “clothed upon’ ?*® How 
could Paul so objectively affirm that God had purposed and 
prepared him and his readers for “being clothed upon,” if at 
the same time he continued in uncertainty, as to whether he 
was to attain it or not? That for which God prepares believers 
can scarcely be considered a matter of doubt, and conversely, 
if the point was subject to doubt, Paul could scarcely affirm 
that God had prepared him and the others for it. We sug- 
gested at the previous point a removal of the difficulty by 
making “‘this very thing” refer back not to the immediately 
preceding “clothed upon,” but to the general thought domi- 
nating the whole preceding context, viz. that im one way or 


® The conjunctival combination ef wep has in older Greek (Homer) not 
infrequently the sense of “although.” Occasionally it retains this force 
in later Greek also. 

10 The difficulty here considered is, it will be observed, a difficulty 
which the old and the new exegesis equally encounter. Both must admit 
that in vs. 4 Paul expresses a doubt, and seek some reconciliation with 
the “we know” of vs. I. 


198 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


another the Christian is sure to obtain a new body. The ques- 
tion remains, however, whether “this very thing’ is not too 
pointed and emphatic for reference to this general idea. For 
this reason we now offer for consideration the reference of 
these words not to the “being clothed upon,’ but to “we 
groan.’ The “groaning” is on this view taken as the very 
thing for which God has prepared the believer, which He 
causes to issue from his heart, whence also it has a prophetic 
significance, becomes a confirmation of the assurance that he 
shall obtain the heavenly body. 

We have now at some length discussed the chief passage 
supposed to contain the proof that Paul had undergone a 
change in his eschatological outlook, and have found it in- 
adequate, nay implausible at many a point. The other passages 
to which appeal is made for the same purpose are less involved 
and consequently more easily disposed of. In Rom. vii. 19 
Paul declares: “the earnest expectation of the creation waiteth 
for the revealing (@7oxaduyis ) of the sons of God.’ What 
will happen at the end is here called a “revealing’’ of the sons 
of God, not because their somatic glory preéxisted, and hence 
needed no more than a momentary flashing forth into light. 
The reason is a quite different one. It is none other than that 
their status as sons of God with all privileges attached, such 
as freedom and heirship, existed before, but had not been 
openly demonstrated. Not their celestial body, but their 
supreme sonship was in hiding. It is this status that will be 
revealed, and this revelation will be accomplished, by laying 
upon them the glory, the medium for whose manifestation, 
to be sure, is the body of the resurrection. For doing this, 
however, the body needed no previous existence. Paul does 
not even say that the glorious body will be revealed, but that 
the sons of God will be revealed, or, what amounts to the same 
thing, that the glory will be revealed “‘to us” (vs. 18).** Because 
the resurrection is a revelation of sonship (not of a hitherto 
hidden body), it can be also called the “adoption of sons” 


11 Notice the preposition eis quads, not év Huiv. 


ALLEGED DEVELOPMENT 199 


(viofecia ). That not merely the bringing to light of an 
already existing body, but its real formation is referred to 
follows from the coincidence of the redemption of the body 
with the deliverance of the whole creation from the bondage 
of corruption. Still another passage appealed to (Col. 111. 
3, 4) speaks of the life hid with Christ in God, and of the 
manifestation of believers with Christ in glory at the time of 
Christ's own manifestation. ‘Life’ does not here necessarily 
imply somatic existence so that the hidden presence of a body 
for each believer in Christ would be affirmed. It is true the 
manifestation of believers together with the manifestation of 
Christ Himself in glory presupposes that they will, when 
manifested, possess a body to make them manifest as Christ 
will be manifest through his body. But it by no means follows 
from this that they possessed this body previously, simply be- 
cause Christ possessed his previously to the joint-manifesta- 
tion. The contrast between the hidden state and the manifested 
state has not the body for its subject, but the life of the be- 


liever. This life is first hid with Christ, because it is a dis-- 


embodied life; at the last day it will become manifest through 
union with the eschatological body. For in the world to come 
all things are manifest and provided with the proper organs 
for being so. 

In addition to the foregoing we note that the advocates of 
the modified resurrection-doctrine are compelled to admit an 
inconsistency on Paul’s part even during the stage of develop- 
ment assumed for this third period. In this very chapter the 
Apostle speaks of the fact that all believers must be made 
manifest before the judgment-seat of Christ. The manner in 
which this is referred to shows that it contemplates a collec- 
tive manifestation. We have already seen that in the preceding 
context the Apostle speaks of his conviction, that God, who 
raised up the Lord Jesus, will also raise him (Paul) up with 
Jesus, and present him together with the Corinthians. We 
may further compare Phil. 111. 20, 21: “For our common- 
wealth is in heaven; whence also we wait for a Saviour, the 
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall fashion anew the body of our 


200 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


humiliation, that it may be conformed to the body of his 
glory, according to the working whereby He is able even to 
subject all things to Himself.” This last passage also sug- 
gests an answer to the question, why, if the new body is a 
product of the Pneuma, the believer should have to wait for 
it until the parousia, whilst the Pneuma is his already during 
the present life. The Spirit’s work in the renewal of things 
proceeds according to a fixed, systematic method, in certain 
distinct stages. First it takes effect in the sphere of the inner 
man. Its laying hold on the outward man has to wait till the 
bodily appearance of Christ on earth. The “working whereby 
He is able to subject all things to Himself” will then draw 
within the sphere of its operation that whole visible external 
realm to which the body belongs. Consequently there is noth- 
ing arbitrary in the postponement of the transformation of 
the body till the parousia, nothing that could be called incon- 
sistent with the Pauline doctrine of the present possession by 
believers of the Spirit. 

There still remains to be looked into the fourth and most 
revolutionary extreme supposed to have been reached by Paul 
in his concept of the resurrection. This is the stage in which 
he is claimed to have reached the idea of an actual preforma- 
tion of the new body within the believer during the course of 
the latter’s earthly life. This lies so much on the line of the 
construction built on 2 Cor. v, that it must create wonder 
that the Apostle did not, once having reached this novel con- 
cept, consistently adhere to it, but fixed soon after upon the 
moment of death as the proper point for bringing the new 
body into existence. For it is chiefly in Chap. iii of the same 
Epistle that this extreme view is found. There is surely a 
hysteron-proteron here. The words which in Chap. iii are 
believed to speak of the mystical process in question are found 
in vss. 17-18: “Now the Lord is the Spirit: and where the 
Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty. But we all with unveiled 
face beholding as in a mirror (or reflecting as a mirror) the 
glory of the Lord, are transformed into the same image from 
glory to glory, even as from the Lord the Spirit,” with which 


ALLEGED DEVELOPMENT 201 


are to be compared the words in vs. 16 of the next chapter: 
“Wherefore we faint not; but, though our outward man is 
decaying, yet our inward man is. renewed day by day.” In 
judging of the exegesis imposed upon these statements, it 
should not be forgotten that the uniform testimony on the 
time-question runs squarely athwart such an opinion as is 
thus ascribed to Paul, for everywhere he excludes the earthly 
life-course from the resurrection-process, even there where 
according to some he places it at the moment of death. His 
tenses in speaking of the supreme event are throughout fu- 
ture; cp. Rom. viii. 11; Gal. vi. 8; 1 Cor. xv (passim) ; 2 Cor. 
vy. 1-10; Phil. iii. 20, 21. If now in the context of 2 Cor. iii 
and iv a different conception of such a radically reversional 
type actually confronted us, the utmost we could say would 
be that the Apostle in these isolated moments, in a fit of rap- 
ture, as it were, had been raised to such mystical heights, as 
in this case to be swept entirely out of the consistency of a 
uniform doctrine. But even to assume this involves consider- 
able difficulty. The assumption would lead us to expect that 
Paul would have from this point onwards at least made con- 
sistent progress along the line indicated. If between First. 
and Second Corinthians he advanced sufficiently to move the 
point of the resurrection backwards from the parousia to the 
death of individuals, and even at certain moments by a flash 
of pneumatic illumination was given to believe that the for- 
mation of a new body is now already imperceptibly going on 
within the Christian, then we would surely expect that be- 
tween that date and Philippians he would have made still 
further progress, and attained the last result of this develop- 
ment as an assured possession. As a matter of fact we find 
the very opposite. Philippians would suffice to disillusion us 
in this respect for it proves that the Apostle did ex hypothest 
not only halt in his development, but surrendered the newly- 
gained ground by most distinctly placing the transformation 
of the body at the parousia. For this reason it is unlikely that 
even as isolated extreme modes of statement the passages 
cited can bear the interpretation put upon them. 2 Cor, iil. 


202 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


18 speaks of the glory into which believers are changed by 
beholding as in a mirror (or, according to another render- 
ing, “reflecting as mirrors”) the glory of the Lord. This 
glory into which they are transfigured is meant to be set in 
contrast to the glory that shone upon the face of Moses, when 
descending from the mount of God. Now, inasmuch as with 
Moses this was a visible, bodily glory, it might be thought 
that with reference to believers it must be of the same nature, 
the more so, since “glory” (60§@) has in most cases eschato- 
logical associations relating to the body. None the less the 
context shows that in the present case Paul attached a differ- 
ent meaning to the word, viz. the idea of an inward glory of 
illumination by the Spirit of God. It was not the body of 
Moses as a whole that shone but his face, the organ of vision. 
Christians likewise receive this glory through beholding it; it 
is the face which is the organ of its absorption. This takes 
place ‘‘with uncovered face” ( avaxexaduppéevp trpocwmT@ ). To 
speak more literally, it is the Gospel by which this mysterious 
process is mediated, whence the Apostle calls it in iv. 4 “the 
gospel of the glory of Christ.’ The Gospel corresponds to 
the veiled countenance of Moses, so far as the perishing are 
concerned, in whom the god of this world (Satan) has blinded 
the minds of the unbelieving. At his conversion God shined 
into Paul’s heart” in order that the Apostle by his preaching 
might impart to others the illumination of the knowledge of 
the glory of God Tpos PwTicpmov THS yvooews THS SdENS TOD 
Geod in the face of Jesus Christ.” This beholding of the glory 
through a mirror is something that belongs, dispensationally 
speaking, to the present state, for in 1 Cor. xiii. 12, Paul 
pointedly distinguishes between the vision “in a riddle” (€v 
aiviypatt ) and the vision “face to face,” which latter is 
reserved for the end, with which further agrees 2 Cor. v. 7, 
according to which believers walk through the land of faith, 
not as yet through the land of sight. All this points to the 
conclusion, that in the context of the passage under exami- 
nation a peculiar turn is given to the concept of “glory,” a 
turn by which it is placed in the sphere of “knowledge” 


ALLEGED DEVELOPMENT 203 


(yv@ous ). This is confirmed by the fact that iii. 7 names as 
one of the concomitants of the state in which the transfigura- 
tion takes place “liberty,” which “liberty” also in Rom. viti. 21 
appears connected with the “glory.” If the above interpreta- 
tion be correct, we may conclude that the “glory” spoken of in 
our passage has nothing to do with the body, but is an inward 
state, specifically belonging to the sphere of supernatural 
knowledge. | 

Even less ground is there to find in the verses 2 Cor. iv. 
16-18 the idea of a present transformation of the body 
within, while the old earthly body still continues to drape the 
inner man. Here the resurrection is in the context explicitly 
placed at the end, vs. 14: “knowing that He who raised up 
the Lord Jesus shall raise up us also, and shall present us 
with you.’ What has misled many here is that in the preced- 
ing context Paul speaks of the manifestation of the life of 
Jesus in “his mortal flesh,” i.e. his body. But his speaking in 
terms of sarx suffices to show that he can not have meant 
thereby the transformation of the body, since that could come 
about only through the putting aside of the mortal flesh, and 
could never be called a “manifestation of life in the flesh.” 
What the Apostle hints at by these expressions is the preser- 
vation of his life in the midst of the deadly perils spoken of 
in vss. 8, 9. He describes these in vs. 10 as an “always bearing 
about in the body the dying ( véxpwous ) of Jesus. But, while 
it would be a mistake to identify this sustaining operation of 
divine power with the body-forming operation of the Spirit, 
there appears, nevertheless, and this is the element of truth 
in the fantastic view propounded, a real connection between 
the death-entailing experiences of the Apostle’s labors and 
the ultimate resurrection. In vs. 14, in the closest dependence 
on the register of persecution and affliction written in the 
foregoing, Paul declares: “Knowing that He that raised up 
the Lord Jesus shall raise up us also with Jesus.’ What is 
the mysterious connection here obviously implied? It must 
be sought on the negative, not on the positive side. The pro- 
cess of resurrection from its inherent nature has two sides, 


204 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


the stripping off of the flesh and the endowment of the 
believer with a pneumatic soma. From the negative point of 
view it could be truly affirmed that the resurrection-process 
was in operation: room was being made for the new body 
through the gradual removal of the old. But this is something 
far different from the assumption of the development of a 
new body within the old. On its negative side the disintegra- 
tion of the old structure could also be interpreted as a 
prophecy of the rearing of the new building appointed to take 
its place. From the actual erection of the latter, however, this 
remains different. In this negative sense only the Apostle 
could say to his readers: “So then death works in us but 
life in you.” The bodily life God sustained in Paul was the 
same life that enabled him to labor for the Corinthians. And 
he labored for them, certainly not by means of a mysterious 
invisible, embryonic corporeity built up within, but in no other 
way than by means of the present natural life of the body, in 
which he was undergoing hardships for their sake. Nor do 
the statements of vss. 16 and 17 compel us to think of a 
present bodily glory inwrought in Paul: the outward man, he 
declares, is decaying, the inward man is renewed day by day. 
For “the inward man” does not signify here a composite 
human person, consisting of the Pueuma plus a new body. 
It stands for the Spirit as distinguished from the present 
fleshly body. If the other view were correct, if © éo@ (or, 
éswbev) dvOpw7os meant spirit and body combined, then its 
opposite 6 €&m avOpwros ought likewise to signify the natural 
spirit and body combined, whereas the context shows that it 
does stand for the bodily life alone. In the other two passages 
where 6 €ow dyOpwros is spoken of (Rom. vii. 22; Eph. iii. 
16), there can be no doubt about Paul’s referring to the inner 
spiritual part of man by itself and not including a new body./ 
But this renewal of the inner man mentioned in vs. 16 is the 
beginning of the eschatological glory in its future sense. 
That here the future glory must be meant follows from the 
manner in which the light affliction is spoken of as lasting 
but for a moment; its momentariness is contrasted with the 
eternal character of the glory, and this contrast involves the 


ALLEGED DEVELOPMENT 205 


contrast between present and future. On the principle of gra- 
cious recompense the affliction here endured works out for 
the eternal world, a superabundant weight of “glory.” For 
the present, therefore, he speaks of the renewal of the inner 
man only. When speaking of the weight of glory compre- 
hensively it is in contrast with the present, as of something 
that does not exist at the moment of speaking, but which is 
being laid up (not actually in preparation), something which 
the present tribulation creates the title for.” 


12 Along another line of approach the present preparation of the resur- 
rection-body might be, and actually has been, postulated from what in 
two contexts the Apostle says concerning the “sowing” of the old body 
and the new body to be harvested from it (Gal. vi. 7, 8 and 1 Cor. xv. 
36ff). It is plain that in Galatians the figure has nothing to do with 
internal bodily metamorphosis, but with ethico-religious conduct deter- 
mining the eschatological issue on the principle of reward, not by physical 
nexus. As to I Cor. xv. 36ff., here the extreme end of earthly life (the 
burial) is spoken of, and for a previous extensive process of preparation 
there is no room. Only by making (like Calvin) the sowing cover the 
entire preceding life could the desired inference of an earlier fashioning 
of a new body within be drawn. The whole theory of present pre-eschato- 
logical formation of a body within a body savors of the fantastic. It 
reminds curiously of what was the primitive Greek conception of the 
soul, viz. not that of a spiritual entity within a material one, but that of a 
complete somatico-pneumatic interior entity within the exterior entity, 
a whole man within a whole man (cp. the description of primitive Greek 
psychology in Rhode’s Psyche). From that to Paul’s refined psychology, 
there is, of course, a far cry. It must be admitted, however, that, con- 
sidering the question from the standpoint of pure exegesis, ‘Calvin may 
claim support from the representation in 1 'Cor. xv. The sowing precedes 
the dying in the plant: vs. 36, “is not quickened except it die.” But it 
by no means follows from this that the inseparableness of the two 
involves in the corresponding spiritual process the same chronological 
sequence requiring a sowing on the part of man prior to his death. The 
correspondence, when put to such use, also halts in this point, that the 
requisite dying in the plant is not a momentary thing as the death of 
man is, but a gradual process of decomposition in the ground. Fixing 
the starting-point of before and after thus, it is no longer self-evident, 
that man must sow his resurrection-body before his death and burial. It 
must further be conceded that the qualities enumerated in vss. 42-44 
favor somewhat a “sowing” during life. At least “dishonor” and “weak- 
ness” do. “Corruption” is more neutral because it can be said no less of 
the dead body than of the living body. What most favors Calvin’s view 
is the phrase o@pa Wxixov which can hardly apply to the dead body, but 
can be quite properly said of the living body before death. 


CHAPTER VIII 
THE RESURRECTION-CHANGE 


So far as the Apostle’s recorded teaching is concerned this 
subject of the resurrection-change relates to_believers, both 
those whom the Lord’s parousia will find living, and those 
whom at His advent He will raise from the dead. The chang- 
ing is so intimately related to and connected with the agency 
of the Pneuma, that this of itself would exclude from its 
consideration the problem of what takes place in those raised 
not for an eternal Pneumatic state of blessedness, but for a 
subsequent state of punishment. It is true that the common 
earthly corporeity would as little fit in with a permanent de- 
structive environment and its forces of perdition, as the same 
kind of corporeity would be adapted to the surroundings and 
powers of the eternal life that awaits believers. Leaving this 
question to one side because of its speculative and purely- 
inferential character through lack of exegetical data, the 

-~ulterior question may be raised, whether the change, as it 
affects believers, is substantially distinct from the process of 
the resurrection itself. The right of the distinction rests on 
the difference between the two situations in which those sub- 
ject to the resurrection and those subject to the change find 
themselves. The former issue from a state of death, the latter, 
though already in possession of the Pneuma, nevertheless 
will exist as to their bodies in a condition of un-pneumatic 
life, and this postulates in their case the change as a distinct 

“> separate event. It is an event not mixed with any other pro- 
cess. On the other hand, the change in those raised does not 
partake of such separate, self-contained character: it is, as it 
were, swallowed up by the larger, more comprehensive event 

! of the resurrection itself. We nowhere get the impression as 
though the believing dead were first in a purely negative 
manner restored to an as yet unchanged form of bodily life, 


THE RESURRECTION-CHANGE 207 


and then through the superimposition of a second positive act 
made partakers of a transformed corporeal constitution. This 
would be a mechanical procedure. We may a priori expect that 
the Spirit will not in this respect deny his own nature, which 
loves organic procedure in all redemptive operations. 

There are four passages which deal with the destiny and 
experience of believers found living at the parousia; these 
are I Thess. iv. 15-17; I Cor. xv. 51-53; 2 Cor. v. 1-5; Phil. 
iii. 20, 21. The first of these does not speak of any change; it 
simply affirms, that the living, after the previous raising of 
the dead, shall together with the latter be caught up in the 
clouds, to meet the Lord in the air. Without due warrant it 
has been inferred from this that at the time of writing Paul 
had not as yet developed his doctrine of a change in the resur- 
rection-body, and consequently did not expect a corresponding 
change in the living either. But the question of change was 
altogether beside the point at issue in this connection, and the 
change for the dead is implied and guaranteed by the assump- 
tion of the presence of the Pneuma, which, as shown before, 
underlies their in-being in Christ even in the interval between 
death and resurrection. And, if the dead in being raised 
undergo a change, then we may count it certain that the same 
was believed by Paul as regards the living, who shared the 
same in-being and its cause, the activity of the Spirit. Of this 
change the other three passages speak explicitly. 2 Cor. v. 1-5 
has already been discussed in detail. It contains the figure of 
the “érevdtcacGar” by the believer of the heavenly body over 
the earthly body, in result of which what is mortal (1.e. the 
earthly body) will be swallowed up of life." The peculiarity 
of this representation is that it starts with the new body and 
makes the other body be absorbed by the former, but by the 
terms of the figure this particular mode of the process, is, of 
course, confined to such as are found living at the parousia; 
the others are only “clothed,” not “clothed upon.” That the 
several contrasts drawn in vss. I and 2 ascribe to the post- 
resurrection body a constitution wholly different from that 


1Karazo6y, literally; “Drunk down so as to disappear.” 


208 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


possessed by the former body is plain at a glance. The former 
is no longer “earthly,” has no longer the nature of a “‘taber- 
nacle,”’ but is a solid structure to be possessed and used in 
heaven forever, for this is what “eternal in the heavens” 
means. This radically altered condition, affirmed as a fact, 
involves that some change producing it must have taken 
place, and this applies to both classes here reckoned with by 
Paul, the living and the raised, since it is affirmed in its gen- 
erality. In the other two passages, I Cor. xv. 51-53 and Phil. 
iii. 20, 21 the representation starts from the old body and 
makes this to be changed into the new body. There is no con- 
tradiction in this. Both are figurative and in so far, when 
each is taken by itself, inadequate representations. How little 
the two are mutually exclusive appears from the fact that in 
2 Cor. v. 1-5 they appear side by side in “ésrevStcacOar’ and 
“KaTAvOn.” : 

Between 1 Cor. xv and Phil. iti. a disagreement has been 
discovered, and on the basis of this an argument constructed 
against the genuineness of Philippians.” It has been urged 
that according to Philippians the identical body of our humili- 
ation is changed, whilst according to 1 Corinthians we our- 
selves are changed, and the earthly body is done away with. 
This also, however, amounts to nothing more than a verbal 
difference inseparable from the limitations of figurative ex- 
pression. On the one hand the “weracynpatiopuds” of Phil. 
lii involves a doing away with the body of humiliation; on‘ 
the other hand the doing away with the body of flesh we 
blood may not be understood in such a sense as to destroy the 
continuity between the old body and the new. Granting the - 
point that Paul here says “we shall be changed,” he likewise 
uses the alternate representation that “the corruptible must 
put on incorruption.” Whether one says: the body of humilia- 
tion is transformed into a body of glory, or says, the corrup- 
tible puts on incorruption, the mortal immortality, makes no 
difference whatever as to the principle of continuity. In 
neither case is there any emphasis upon the perpetuation of 


2 Hoekstra in Theol. Tydsch. 1875, p. 443. 


THE RESURRECTION-CHANGE 209 


the substance which changes its *x“@ or of the old garment 
which puts on over itself the new. When the Apostle says in 
t Cor. vil. 31 rapaye 16 oyfpma Tov Kdocpou rovTov, he surely 
does not mean to affirm that the substance of the present 
world will abide. Even so in Philippians the point at issue is 
not the substance but the “oy#ua,’ the contrast lying be- 
tween “rare(vaois” and “8dEa.”” 

That a change will take place inherent in the resurrection- 
act for believers that are raised follows not only from explicit 
or more or less implicit statements, but rests besides on the 
stronger ground of the analogy between the resurrection of 
Jesus and that of believers which Paul throughout presup- 
poses. According to Rom. i. 1-4, while the identical Jesus 
who had been buried rose from the grave, yet it was by no 
means the same Jesus in the endowment and equipment of < 
his human nature. Not only a new status had been acquired 
through the resurrection: new qualities amounting to a re- 
constructed adjustment to the future heavenly environment 
had been wrought in Him by the omnipotent power of God: 
He had been determined (declared effectually) the Son of 
God with power according to the Spirit of Holiness, by the 
resurrection from the dead.* It is self-evident that these 
words do not refer to any religious or ethical transformation 
which Jesus in the resurrection had to undergo. Such a 
thought nowhere finds support in Paul’s Christology, nor in 
his general teaching. Only, in the quite justifiable eagerness 
for excluding this, there is too narrow an interpretation put 
_ upon the sentence, as though it meant to affirm a purely bod- 
ily transformation. The other, psychical, side of our Lord’sce 
human nature was obviously affected no less than the physical 
side.. This comprehensive change was inseparable from the 
resurrection itself; it was not an additional element, but an 

3Cp. on the other hand 2 Cor. xi. 13-15, where the emphasis rests on 
the real character of Satan remaining the same, when he changes his. 
oxnua into an angel of light. 

4(Cp. what is taught in 1 Cor. xv. 45-49 concerning the new consti- 


tution and image of the Second Adam, in terms which by no means 
are exhausted through a purely physical reference. 


Z1IO THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


integral part of the first and only act required. Had this been 
lacking, then not the resurrection, but the subsequent trans- 
formation ought to have furnished the pattern upon which the 
soteric renewal of believers was fashioned. As it is the Paul- 
ine formula reads “raised with Christ,’ and of this generic 
designation of the renewal of the Christian the particular 
form “changed with Christ’ could be only a specific variation. 
As to how the mysterious process of this “change,” where 
it appears by itself, apart from the resurrection, will take 
place we gain from the Apostle’s figurative statements no | 
more concrete information than we do on the corresponding 
problem of the mode of change in the resurrection. The ques- 
tion may, however, be put, as to whether Paul knows and uses 
a generic term descriptive of both, at any rate closely analo- 
gous, transactions. Does he designate both by the common 
term a\dAdrrecOar OF peracynpativecOar? The answer to this 
depends on the exegesis of I Cor. xv. 51-53 and Phil. iit. 
20,.21. In 2 Cor. v. I-5, as we have seen, the figure brings it 
about that both are formally distinguished, the one being 
named an évdtcac@at, the other an évrevdtcacGa. But in the 
other two passages it is not uniformly recognized that such a 
distinctive way of speaking is actually present. Some inter- 
preters understand the terminology used here comprehen- 
sively of all believers, those dead and those found living, 
others more narrowly apply it to the latter group only. The 
question is of some importance, because, if we adopt the 
former view, it would yield one more ground of assurance 
for the continuity of the new body with the old. For when) 
Paul says — dei 16 dOaptov todto évdtcacba adbapatav Kab 
70 Gynrov tovTo . . . a@avaciav, and we are warranted in 
applying this to the resurrection as well as to the change, | 
then it will follow that in the resurrection the cid bode 
will play its part, that it will be there as an évducdpevov, as 
something that “puts on for itself,” in other words that we | 
are not justified in thinking of it as simply the endowment | 
of the soul with a new body, altogether without coniaaeeel 
with the old body laid in the grave. The choice is, especially 


EY ere 


Pe 


THE RESURRECTION-CHANGE 2II 


with reference to 1 Cor. xv. 51-53, a difficult one. It turns on 
the interpretation of the words: sapvtes od KorpnOnoopeba, 
mavres 8€ ddXaynodpeba. If the more usual construction of od 
be followed, the statement will mean: it is true of all of us 
that we shall not sleep, but be changed. This could mean noth- 
ing else than that Paul expected all his readers to survive till 
the parousia. On this view, further, the words od corunOnao- 
peOa may still have a twofold sense. They may affirm: we 
shall not fall asleep (die) between now and the parousia, but 
be changed at the parousia; the alternative view makes the 
clause mean: we all of us shall not at the parousia first have 
to fall asleep (die), but we shall all be changed directly at 
that time without such an intermediate experience. The diffi- 
culty in the way of this first exegesis, in either of its forms, 
is that the forecast has not been fulfilled. Neither Paul, nor 
any of those living when he wrote has reached the parousia 
in the body. He said of all: od xoupnOnodpeOa ; in reality all 
éxotunOnoav. This difficulty is all the greater, since Paul does 
not seem to give expression here to a mere subjective hope or 
opinion, but explicitly characterizes the statement asa “uuo- 
mmpvov, something received by revelation: ($00 upvarhprov bpiv 
Xé€yo. In order to avoid this difficulty Meyer assumes Paul 
to have silently supplied with the subject mwavres the qualifi- 
cation “all who shall be left at the parousia,” and understands 
the statement in the second sense indicated above, i.e., as a 
declaration to the effect that those left at the parousia will 
not then have first to die. If we adopt this view, the form in 
which Meyer presents it seems a fairly plausible one. The 
“uvotnp.ov” does not then refer to the fact that all shall sur- 
vive, but only to the fact that those who do survive, more or 
less numerous or more or less soon, shall not have to die, but«— 
will be changed as living persons. And when Paul speaks in 
the first person plural, as though he himself and his readers 
were concerned in this, it is not necessary to ascribe this 
chiefly to individual curiosity, nor need the form of statement 
be considered a purely-rhetorical plural; it may be set down 
_ to the common hope of all Christians at that time of being 


212 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


perhaps permitted to survive till the parousia. The advantage 
of this view is that it enables us to take the verb a\Aaynao- 
wea in the same sense in both vs. 51 and vs. 52, in each case 
with restricted reference to those found living. The loss_in 
pregnancy of meaning lies in this that it ceases to throw 
light on the change of body involved in the resurrection from _ 
the dead. Plainly in vs. 53 the Apostle uses the word with 
this restricted application, for, distinguishing two groups, he 
SayS: ot vexpol éyepOnoovTrat . . . Kal nmets adraynoopeba. 
On the other hand it must be confessed, that the silent sup- 
plementing of such a qualification as Meyer assumes leaves 
behind the impression of a degree of arbitrariness. 

The other interpretation in its simplest form (for there 
are others) assumes a transposition of the negation ov. Tlap- 
Tes ov is rendered as identical with ov aves.’ This does not 
seem to bean impossible construction. While perhaps primarily 
inspired by dogmatic interest, it has not lacked advocates with 
whom this factor could scarcely count, but who felt linguis- 
tically justified in adopting it. The sense resulting is: it is” 
not true of all but only of some that we shall sleep; it is true* 
of all (both who sleep and who do not sleep) that we shall at 
the last day be changed. On this rendering Paul affirms the 
change for both groups. This suffers from the apparent 1m- 
plication that the resurrection of believers does not in itself 
as yet effect the necessary change, which takes place only a 
little later, in order that both raised and those found living 
may simultaneously partake of it as an identical experience; 
the real transforming aspect of the resurrection as such 1s lost 
sight of, a result which, as intimated before, ill agrees with the 
Pneumatic character of the act. It is likely that the Spirit, 
while performing his specific transforming task in the quick- 
ening of the dead, will as it were, refrain from carrying it to 
its logical completion through bringing the dead upon whom 
He operates to a state adapted to their henceforth eschato- 
logical, celestial life? The mere motive of guarding the simul- 


5 Cp., however, the phrase od py) POdcwuey 1 Thess. iv. 15 and the 
interpretation put upon this in the Chapter on Chiliasm, 


THE RESURRECTION-CHANGE 213 


taneous occurrence of this final stage of the act may seem to 
some insufficient. Nor is this merely a question of appropriate- 
ness in the sequence of the process meant to form one con- 
tinuous act. The adoption of a postponed change in those 
raised brings the idea into conflict with the explicit statement 
of vs. 52, where Paul does not simply affirm of vexpol éyep- 
Oncovra, but of vexpol éyepOnaovtar apOaprot. According to 
these words the change for the raised does not follow, it coin- 
cides, and that not merely chronologically but substantially<- 
with the resurrection. The resurrection is in their case such 
a thing as to result tpso facto in “incorruptibleness.” It is 
true, the verses from vs. 54 onwards speak of the victory over 
death in such general terms as render it difficult to believe that 
they attach themselves to but one particular aspect of this 
victory, viz. the change of the living. Still, perhaps even here 
the figure in «aremd$n May, on account of its resemblance to 
2 Cor. v. 4, seem to refer particularly to the change of the 
living. Overmuch weight, however, should not be attached 
to this, since the word in question forms part of a quotation 
here, being no more than a reminiscence from the passage in 
Hosea, whilst in 2 Cor. v it forms an independent figure. 

The advantages and disadvantages of both views so nearly 
balance each other, that we do not feel competent to make a 
choice. The one thing certain is that Paul conceived of the 
resurrection as involving a pneumatic transformation. To 
that vs. 52, with its éyepOjcovtar apOapto bears conclusive 
witness. But, whether he made the raised share in a still fur- 
ther change with the living, or, as a matter of language em- 
ployed the word “change” sometimes generically to include 
both phases of the transaction, as to this we venture no posi- 
tive decision.® 


8 How difficult the passage is, from the point of view of precise doc- 
trinal construction may be judged from the several attempts appear- 
ing already in early authorities to alter the text. Besides the two varia- 
tions above noted (awdvres ov and wavres pev ov) we find: zavres 
pev eyepOnoopeba, od mavres 8 ddAaynodpeBa, and: wavTes pev 
KoiunOnooueba, od mavtes dé dAAaynoducba, On these readings cf. 
Westcott and Hort in the Appendix. 


214 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


As to Phil. iii. 20, 21, here the representation that the Chris- 
tian “waits for a Saviour” seems to show that the Apostle 
speaks from the standpoint of such as look for the parousia 
during their lifetime, so that the petacynpatiopds is not 
made to include the change in the resurrection. On the other 
hand, there is nothing in the conception of a peTaoxnpatio Mes 3 
or in the phrase cdma ths ramevacews, that could have hin- 
dered Paul from applying these terms to the process of the 
resurrection itself.’ 


7 Cp. Klopper, Der Brief des Apostels Paulus an die Philipper, p. 224, 
note. Klopper even thinks that the “ éwrevdvcacbar” of 2 Cor. v. 3, 4 
permits of a reference to those who are raised at the parousia, where 
it would mean the putting on of the new body over the old body just 
raised. This, it seems to us, is positively excluded by od Oé\omev éx- 
dvoacGa. of 2 Cor. v. 4, with érevdvcacGai as its opposite. The two 
categories exclude each other. 


CHAPTER IX 


‘THE EXTENT OF THE RESURRECTION 


By the phrase “extent of the resurrection’ we posit the 
question whether, according to Paul’s teaching all dead men 
will be raised at the end, or only a limited section of those who 
shall have died previously to that time. The problem is, of 
course, to some extent bound up in part with that of Chiliasm, 
and in so far belongs to the following Chapter. The segment of 
the church set apart for an anticipated resurrection at the open- 
ing of the millennium, whether more or less narrowly counted, 
form part of the resurrection in any event, so that on the score 
of the chiliastic doctrine itself there is no objection to the 
comprehensive resurrection of all who have been, or are, or 
shall be believers, retrospectively, or at the moment, or prospec- 
tively during the interregnum to elapse before the absolute 
end. On the other hand, it stands to reason, that, when once 
the unitary and all-comprehensive scope of the transaction 
has at that point been broken in upon, the temptation may 
easily arise to affirm this partial aspect of the event likewise 
to the second and final act of the resurrection drama, confin- 
ing this to believers so as to exclude from it all but the rais- 
ing of Christians. The partialness of the idea is apt to fasten 
itself upon it, although originally proper to one application 
of it only. In logic, to be sure, this is by no means necessary: a 
partial resurrection at the opening of the millennium and 
an all-comprehensive raising of all the dead at the last day 
are by no means inherently contradictory. It is another ques- 
tion whether any limitation imposed upon the final resurrec- 
tion is in line with the general trend of the Apostle’s teaching, 
and if not, will not seem at the outset to be discredited, by 
the character of Paulinism as a whole. 

Leaving these more or less a priori considerations to one 
side, we proceed to consider the direct data of Paul’s deliv- 


Pf 


~, 
> 


216 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


erances on or allusions to the extent of the resurrection as 


such. The debate between limited and unlimited resurrection, 


distinguished by exclusion of non-believers or their inclusion, 
at first sight does not seem to leave the latter member of the 
alternative a fair chance for presenting the merits of its case. 
It has been plainly shown above that the resurrection of 
which Paul speaks in practically all the great contexts dealing 
with the subject, is viewed and treated by him as a Pneu- 
matic event. But, the question immediately arises: how could 
a Pneumatic occurrence, and that one in which the Spirit 
plays so prominent and intimate a part, fall within the sphere 
of the non-Christian? The same question, only presented 
from a different angle, arises where the close relation of the 
Spirit-Christ to the resurrection is considered. The raised 
are raised because of their being “of Christ” or “asleep im 
Christ,” conditions inapplicable to such as do not possess the 
Spirit or are not possessed by the Spirit, for in this matter, 
no less than in regard to the Christian state as a whole appur- 
tenance to Christ and appurtenance to the Spirit flow into one. 
Unbelievers having not the Spirit cannot undergo that part 
of his quickening activity that is productive of the resurrec- 
tion, or, if they could, how could they be fit subjects for living 
the subsequent Spirit-life for which to all intents the agency 
of the Spirit in the act of the resurrection is but the necessary 
preparation. With regard to non-Christians the resurrection 
would come to appear as internally disrupted, inasmuch as 
in its better and eternal half it could never be expected to 
take place. So far as the pervasive tenor of the Pauline teach- 
ing is concerned, it must be freely conceded that the compre- 
hensive interpretation is at a decided disadvantage. None the 
less too much weight may be easily attributed to this for the 
following reason: the Apostle is not e mente sua presenting 
in his letters a well-rounded, complete system of Christian 
truth, although more than any other New Testament complex 
of teaching it has come to be this for us. Paul writes to Chris- 
tians and that for practical purposes largely. This fact re- 
minds us that the phenomenon of his preoccupation with the 


THE EXTENT OF THE RESURRECTION 217 


resurrection of believers and his seeming neglect of the other 
side may easily be due to quite different causes than a logical 
disregard of systematic completeness.” As a matter of fact 
the Jocit from which we draw our information of the thing 
as it lay in Paul’s mind are in each case intra-redemptive in 
character; they are for comfort and, if for argument, than 
for such argument as the Christian readers stood in need of 
for comfort. It remains quite possible that in different situa- 
tions, but scantily recorded for us, there may have been 
motives working in Paul’s mind postulating a resurrection 
of non-believers, motives pertaining to a different than the 
strictly-soteric sphere. The pneumatic basis on which the 
resurrection is put only explains this one thing, viz. that 
Paul does not coordinate and mention together the two divi- 
sions of the resurrection, as otherwise would have seemed 
natural in an adherent of the doctrine of two-sided resurrec- 
tion. For such joint-mention or coordination the significance 
of the event in the two classes of men had become too widely 
different in result of the thorough development of Paul’s 
doctrine of the Pneuma. To the ordinary Jewish conscious- 
ness habituated to the belief that the resurrection would be 
the same thing in the case of all men, placing all in the same - 
condition of a restored earthly corporeity before the judg- 
ment-seat of God, it was quite easy to speak after the well- 
known manner of a resurrection of the good and the evil. To 
Paul this must have been exceedingly difficult, for the simple 
reason that the term “resurrection” had to such an extent 
attracted to itself and begun to monopolize the habitual soteric 
associations, as to become after a fashion inapplicable to 
something in which these soteric concomitants had _no place. 
Inevitably the term “resurrection” had lost somewhat of its 
neutral character, becoming graphically fit for use only in 
sensu bono. It is far from impossible in our opinion that 
Paul consciously refrained from speaking of the resurrection 
of the wicked. Still, and this requires strong emphasis, it 
would by no means follow from this, that such avoidance of 
the term could be justly construed as evidence of the princi- 


218 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


ple, that the Apostle had thrown overboard the residue of 
content that had at one time been undividedly included in the 
term for evil and good alike, after discounting the specifi- 
cally-Pneumatic elements. We must, therefore, proceed very 
cautiously here.* 

An argument in favor of partial resurrection as the gen- 
‘uinely Pauline doctrine has been drawn from what is believed 
to have been the Pharisaic conception of the subject. For our 
information about the belief of the Pharisees in this respect 
we depend on Josephus. He states that according to them 
only the souls of the righteous have the power (faculty) of 
coming to life again, whilst the wicked remain forever im- 

prisoned in the nether-world.’ In another passage he records 
as the Pharisaic view that only the soul of the righteous 
man, in distinction from that of the wicked, passes into a 
new body.* If such was the Pharisaic position, it is argued, 
and if, as we know from elsewhere, Paul declared himself in 
essential harmony with the Pharisees on this issue, then the 
Apostle cannot have thought differently of the question under 
review than his former co-religionists. This argument, how- 
ever, is not so conclusive as at first sight it might seem. We do 
not know to what extent one may rely on Josephus for exact- 
ness in formulating the Pharisaic doctrine on such a con- 
troversial, and somewhat esoteric point. That no complete 
reliance can be placed on his statements appears from the 
second passage above quoted, where he even credits the 
Pharisees with his own belief in the transmigration of souls, 
as expressed in the last-cited passage. Still it seems not im- 
probable that what on two occasions Josephus ascribes to the 
Pharisees must have been a doctrine held at least by some 
among them. The Pharisaic leaders were hardly such expert 
and precise theologians as instinctively to extrude whatever 


1 According to Schwally, Das Leben nach dem Tode, pp. 168, 172, 
Josephus avoids the term avacracts even with reference to the righteous, 
for reasons of political prudence because dvacracis can mean “revolt.” 

2 Antiquit. XVIII, 14. 

3 Bellum Jud. U1, 374. 


THE EXTENT OF THE RESURRECTION 219 


tan contrary to the principles of their system. Paul in such 
matters had a much keener sensorium. We may be sure, how- 
ever, that the view quoted by Josephus was not the only doc- 
trine held in Pharisaic circles. In all probability more than 
one view was current. What all agreed on was the reality of 
the resurrection as such, apart from the question to whom 
exactly it was to extend. And possibly those Pharisees who 
did not deny the resurrection of all theoretically, yet for 
practical reasons threw so much more emphasis on its main 
aspect as a resurrection of the righteous, could by this 
alone lead Josephus to the mistaken inference expressed in 
his statements. But even, if feeling bound to take Josephus’ 
account as substantially correct, this would not compel us to 
ascribe the same Pharisaic position, unmodified in any re- 
spect, to Paul after his conversion. Altogether apart now from 
the factor of revelation, Paul might through his contact with 
the earliest Christians have been led to alter his Pharisaic 
persuasion on the subject. The early Christians were, of 
course, not recruited from the Pharisees chiefly. Those con- 
verted from other circles may well have entertained varying 
opinions. 

Leaving this matter of the Pharisees and Josephus to one 
side, it must be conceded that the doctrine of an all-inclusive 
resurrection was not before or at the time of Paul the firmly 
established doctrine of Judaism. In various quarters, in 
various forms, the range of the resurrection was limited. The 
Old Testament itself had approached the doctrine from the 
point of view of the people of God or of the pious among 
the people of God. Thus in Isa. xxvi. 19: “Thy dead shall 
live; my dead bodies shall arise’’; the resurrection of the dead 
members of the holy nation is predicted, for assurance that 
they may share in the joys of the future. It is not clear how 
far back this promise is intended to apply, nor how compre- 
hensive its range is conceived. In Dan. xii. 2 the prophecy 
confines itself to many that shall awake, although it is not 
limited here to such as are righteous, some being destined to 
everlasting life, some to shame and everlasting contempt. 


220 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


Here probably the reference is not to all the righteous and 
wicked that have made up all generations of the people of 
Israel, but to those righteous and wicked who have played 
a prominent part in the crisis with which this prophecy deals. 
The idea that the martyrs of the people of God are sure of the 
resurrection, whilst nothing is said of the others, righteous 
or unrighteous, is found also elsewhere. For this Chap. xc of 
the Book of Enoch may be compared. In 2 Macc. it cannot be 
determined with certainty, whether the resurrection of the 
evil is denied or not. Of Antiochus Epiphanes it is explicitly 
denied, but this relates not to the resurrection as such; the 
reference is to the avdoraous eis Conv. It is said that Judas 
Maccabaeus made expiation for the slain in whose garments 
pagan idols had been found, imép avactacews diaroyCopmevos, 
“concerned about their resurrection.”’ This, however, might 
relate to the punishment they might otherwise have to suffer - 
in Sheol, previously to the resurrection, so that a resurrection 
with subsequent punishment is not necessarily implied.* Still 
another variation of the doctrine is that not only the martyrs 
of the last crisis, but all the righteous dead of Israel are to be 
raised. This is found in the Psalms of Solomon, iu. 10 ff. and 
in the section of the Enoch Apocalypse extending from xci to 
civ. A still somewhat wider extent the resurrection obtains in 
Enoch i-xxxvi. In this document besides the resurrection 
of the righteous from among Israel (in the body) a resurrec- 
tion of some impious Israelites as disembodied spirits seems to 
be taught, viz. of those who have not been adequately pun- 
ished in the present life; they are brought up from the 
nether-world, in order to be cast into Gehenna, the place of 
punishment, whilst the other wicked Israelites, already sufh- 
ciently punished in this life, appear to remain permanently in 
the more negative state of Sheol. Finally, the most inclusive 
view is that all the wicked as well as the righteous will be 
raised for judgment. Where this view is found two points are 
frequently left in obscurity, although the author in each case 
may have had a definite opinion on the subject: a) whether 


4Schwally, Das Leben nach dem Tode, p. 171. 


THE EXTENT OF THE RESURRECTION 22! 


all the wicked and all the righteous from among Israel, 
or all the wicked and righteous composing the human race are 
meant; b) whether the wicked are simply to be brought up as 
disembodied spirits in order to be judged, after which they go 
to their final punishment in the same disembodied state, or 
whether they are put in possession again of their erstwhile 
bodies in order to receive punishment in these. The writings in 
which this doctrine of a universal resurrection is found are 
the following: the Similitudes of the Book of Enoch, li. 1: 
(here the two points just specified are left doubtful) ; 4 Ezrav. 
45} Vil. 32; xiv. 35 (here the first two passages speak of a uni- 
versal resurrection of the race: Deus vivificabit creaturam, 
whereas the last-mentioned passage might be limited to 
Israel) ; Apoc. Bar. xlii. 8; 1. 2 (here the absolute universality 
is found by some writers, for instance Volz, but denied, 
among others, by Charles) ; the resurrection here is a resur- 
rection in the same body, which is afterwards changed in 
bonum or malum; Test. X/J Patr.: Benj. 10; Lev. 4; in the 
former passage it is said that after the fathers have been 
raised, all will be raised (whether this “all” relates to all 
Israelites or to all men is not plain) ; in the other passage the 
Greek text has that, when the Lord will hold judgment on all 
mankind, Hades will be depleted; the Armenian text con- 
tains the quite different words “the nether-world will make 
prisoners through the plagues of the Most High” ; the fourth 
book of the Sibylline Oracles, vss. 180 ff. (here there exists 
some uncertainty as to whether the wicked to be raised are 
the wicked of all generations of history, or only those wicked 
just perished in the great world-conflagration) ; the Life of 
Adam: Chap. x, “the sinners shall be there”; xli, “the whole 
seed of Adam.” 

Especially this last class of writings teaching a universal 
resurrection, is of interest for our present purpose. For, 
while here the universality is explicitly affirmed, we never- 
theless find certain other statements which’ speak of 
the resurrection of the righteous, and that in such a way as 
to make it appear as though no other aspect of the resurrec- 


222 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


tion were known to the authors. Such varying representations 
appear side by side not only in writings which criticism be- 
lieves to be composite, but likewise in documents or sections 
of documents whose unity is not subject to doubt. Thus e.g. 
in the Similitudes of the Book of Enoch, apart from the pas- 
sage cited above (li. 1), there are several other contexts in 
which only the resurrection of the just is reflected upon, cp. 
xl. 3; Ixi. 5; Ixii. 8. In 4 Ezra, side by side with the univer- 
salistic passages (v. 45; vil. 32; xiv. 35), we find the particu- 
laristic statements of iv. 35; vil. 28. In Apoc. Bar., side by side 
with the universal resurrection of xlii. 8 and 1. 2, the resurrec- 
tion of the righteous is mentioned, as though it were the only 
one, Xxvi1, (21), 24;xxx..1 ff. In Dest. AJ] Paty we havemer 
so much two classes of statements, but at least statements of 
more or less doubtful interpretation. In the Life of Adam 
occurs the most striking juxtaposition of both forms of state- 
ment: Chap. xli, as just stated, contains the doctrine of the 
resurrection of the whole human race which is of the seed 
of Adam; Chap. xiii contains the words: ‘“‘Then all flesh from 
Adam onward shall be raised, all those which are holy peo- 
ple.” The point which, in view of these facts, we desire to 
make is the following: if in the case of the writers of these 
Apocalyptic books the one-sided emphasis thrown upon the 
resurrection of the righteous did not exclude a conjoined be- 
lief, be it of a more theoretical nature, in a universal resur-— 
rection of good and evil alike, then there is ample reason. 
--for hesitating to say that Paul must have restricted the resur- 
rection to believers, on no other ground than that prevailingly . 
he speaks of it as a Pneumatic transaction. To introduce the 
same double-facedness in his various references must have 
been more easy for him than for the Apocalyptists, because the 
constant emphasis on the Pneuma led of itself to relegating 
the other side to a sort of semi-oblivion, a feature not equally 
present in Apocalyptic literature, although its relative absence 
even there did not prevent the one-sided focussing of the 
attention on the saving side of the transaction. It so happens 
that Apoc. Bar. and 4 Ezra, are the books in which the ap- 


THE EXTENT OF THE RESURRECTION 223 


parent contradiction 1s-most-conspicuous, and these are pre- 
cisely the writings standing nearest to Paul. 

The only explicit witness we have for Paul’s belief in a 
comprehensive resurrection of the wicked as well as of the 
righteous is found in his speech to Felix, Acts xxiv. 15. The 
Apostle here declares that he believes all things which are 
according to the law, and which are written in the prophets. 
Probably he makes this affirmation in order distinctly to 
align himself with the Pharisees over against the Saddu- 
caic unbelief, which was based on a one-sided adherence to 
the explicit testimony of the Thora, and on refusal to take 
into account the Scribal traditions. As the main content 
of this belief, based on both prophets and law, he names the 
hope he has towards God, which hope the (Pharisaic) Jews 
also themselves look for, that there shall be a resurrection 
both of the just and unjust. It will be observed that, though 
the two-sided character of the resurrection is here affirmed, 
nevertheless the main emphasis lies on its hopeful aspect, 
1.€., aS a resurrection of the righteous. The whole doctrine 
is a “hope held towards God.’’”? And this hope he declares to 
have in common with the (Pharisaic) Jews, which shows 
that in the Pharisaic doctrine likewise, while the resurrection 
of the wicked was not denied, yet the main interest attached to 
the hope which the doctrine afforded for the righteous. This 
may help to explain how Josephus came to believe that the 
Pharisees expected a resurrection of the righteous only. There 
is no ground for calling into question the accuracy of this 
speech of Paul to Felix, far less to deny its historicity alto- 
gether. The author of Acts proves himself in other points 
thoroughly acquainted with the differences in belief between 
Pharisees and Sadducees and with the prevailing Jewish be- 


5 It is perhaps not necessary to exclude altogether from the aspect of 
“hopefulness” the resurrection of the wicked from the Jewish stand- 
point. As shown before there attached to the Jewish expectation of the 
resurrection an element of triumph over the wicked opponents of the 
cause of Judaism: these had to see the vindication of the righteous for 
the satisfaction of the latter. In the background of the resurrection looms 
the coveted judgment. 


y 


224 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


liefs in general. Even if one were to assume that he had 
freely composed the speech, we might nevertheless expect it 
to be true in so much of its theological coloring as is of im- 
portance for the matter under review. The author could 
not have made the mistake of representing Paul as at one with 
the orthodox Jewish doctrine on this point, if neither the Jew- 
ish orthodoxy, nor the Apostle had actually entertained the 
belief imputed to them. 

This testimony from Acts would be corroborated by direct 
testimony from two of the Epistles, if we could adopt the in- 
terpretation given by some to I Cor. xv. 22-28 and to Phil. 
ili. 11. If in the former passage the words “‘then comes the 
end’ could be understood of the end of the resurrection, there 
would for this succeeding act of the resurrection be none 
others left than the wicked, at least supposing that those “‘of 
Christ,” raised in the preceding act, included all believers. In 
another chapter, however, we will endeavor to show that 
“the end” spoken of is not “the end of the resurrection” with 
which negative conclusion the argument presented falls to 
the ground. As to Phil. i11, inasmuch as the personal privilege 
of resurrection striven after, would on the new interpretation 
have to be considered the martyr’s privilege, it would leave 
open the field of any subsequent resurrection-stage for the 
non-martyr Christians, and the question of resurrection for 
the wicked would not be touched thereby. 

An indirect proof for the resurrection of the wicked 
has been found in Paul’s supposition of the presence of un- 
believers at the judgment by which the resurrection is suc- 
ceeded. The inconclusiveness of this argument is due to the 
circumstance that a judgment passed on disembodied souls 
is not an impossible conception, and actually occurs elsewhere 
in the Jewish sources, as has been shown above. Hence, so 
long as the question under debate is not entirely settled, one 
must reckon with the possibility that both the resurrection 
and the judgment will deal with the wicked in an uncorporeal 
state. To be sure, positively considered, there is nothing in 
Paul that would suggest such an idea. It amounts to no more 


THE EXTENT OF THE RESURRECTION 225 


than a mere abstract possibility. And there is, on the other 
hand, that which, while not amounting to absolute proof, at 
least tends towards tavoring the opposite view. This will ap- 
pear presently, when we shall have occasion to deal with the 
Apostle’s doctrine on the Judgment. Finally, attention may be 
called to 1 Tim. vi. 13: “I charge thee in the sight of 
God “rod Swoyovodvtos ta wdvta.” his, placed in comparison 
with 2 Tim. iv. 1: “I charge thee in the sight of God and of 
Christ Jesus who shall judge the quick and the dead, and by 
his appearing and his kingdom,” seems to require an eschato- 
logical interpretation for the word ‘‘quickeneth,”’ and the 
object of this being “all things” (or in view of the article pre- 
fixed ‘‘the universe’) the all-comprehensiveness of the resur- 
rection might seem to be affirmed. In classical Greek the 
word fwoyovetv actually has the sense of “‘to bring to life,” “to 
quicken.”’ In the two other N.T. passages, however, where 
this same verb occurs, Lk. xvii. 33 and Acts vii. 19, the sense 
is “‘to preserve alive,” which does not suit the interpretation 
of the resurrection. If the correct reading were ‘‘fworovodv- 
ros, instead of “fworyovobvros, this objection would fall 
away, since “footy is used elsewhere (by Paul and Peter 
and John) in the sense of “to quicken.” As it is, the uncer- 


tainty of reading and rendering do not permit_a sure conclu- 


sion. The issue of the discussion remains that for explicit 
proof of Paul’s belief in the universality of the resurrection 
we are dependent on the testimony of Acts xxiv. 15. 


F; 
f 
é 


} 


CHAPTER X 


THE QUESTION OF 'CHILIASM, IN fate 


“Chiliasm,” more commonly called “Pre-millennarianism,” 
occupies a peculiar place in the scheme of Biblical Eschat- 
ology. It is difficult to form a deliberate judgment upon it, 
either by way of decisive rejection or enthusiastic approval. 
The question is, of course, a question of evidence, to be 
considered and settled on the basis of Scriptural testimony 
and of calm, sober, dogmatically-unprejudiced exegesis. 
Were it confined to the elucidation of the Pauline eschatology 
alone, the settlement should not appear overdifficult. Unfor- 
tunately, where one undertakes to do this, he must expect 
to have the scheme outlined in Rev. xx. 4 ff. brought to his 
attention with the insistent demand, that a laborious effort 
at harmonizing shall be forthwith undertaken in which 
the large mould of the Pauline eschatological teaching shall 
be reduced to the narrower, pictorial measures of the Apoca- 
lyptic vision. With all due respect to the authoritativeness of 
biblical prophecy, it is difficult to escape the feeling that this 
is an unmethodical procedure. The minor deliverances ought 
in the harmonizing process be made to give way to the far- 
sweeping, age-dominating program of the theology of Paul. 
After the latter has been interpreted to a satisfactory degree 
of clearness and certainty, then, and not until then, will come 
the time to look the Apocalypse in the face, and to en- 
deavor to bring it into consonance with the Pauline deliver- 
ances. The law of proportion cannot be entirely waived in so 
far-reaching a matter as this. On the other hand, if we are 
urged to settle the problem not quite so objectively, but more 
on the basis of a theological imitation of philosophical be- 
haviorism, putting to ourselves the question, which of the 
two, pre-millennarianism or post-millennarianism, has done 
or bids to do more good to practical Christianity, or which 


THE QUESTION OF CHILIASM 227 


of the twain can be trusted to do less injury to the cause of 
religion, even then the answer is by no means so readily forth- 
coming. Chiliasm has to its credit the astounding readiness it 
evinces of taking the O.T. Scriptures in a realistic man- 
ner, with simple faith, not asking whether the fulfilment of 
these things is even logically conceivable, offering as its sole 
basis the conviction that to God all things are possible. This 
attitude is, of course, not attained except through a reckless 
abuse of the fundamental principles of O.T. exegesis, a per- 
version invading inevitably the precincts of N.T. exegesis 
likewise, heedless of the fact that already the O.T. itself 
points to the spiritualizing of most of the things in question. 
Apart from accidental features, and broadly speaking, 
Chiliasm is a daring literalizing and concretizing of the sub-— 
stance of ancient revelation. Due credit should be given for 
the naive type of faith such a mentality involves. It is a great 
pity that from this very point of view pre-millennarianism 
has not been psychologically studied, so as to ascertain, 
whence in its long, tortuous course through the ages it has ac- 
quired such characteristics. Although pre-millennarianism is 
by no means a local phenomenon, there are evidently certain 
milieus in which it has found a more fertile soil than else- 
where. In certain countries it comes to meet an eccentric in- 
terest in the superficial, visible, curiosity-attracting events in 
eschatological perspective. The evil is not so much an evil in 
itself : it is a malformation or over-rank outgrowth drawing 
to itself a surplusage of religious interest, at the expense of 
what is more essential and vital in the eschatological sphere. 
The resulting evil lies largely in the deficit thus caused in the 
appraisal of other eschatological processes far overshadowing 
in importance this one feature, at least to the normally- 
constituted Christian mind. Its tendency towards eclipsing 
views more important than itself has done much harm. It is 
not an uncommon experience at the present day for one who 
expresses dissent from Chiliasm to be met with the question, 
Are you then, an unbeliever in “the second coming?” In 
other words the subject of eschatology in its broad and tre- 


—— 


228 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


mendous significance has vanished from the field of vision, 
the delusion has been created that eschatology and Chiliasm 
are interchangeable, the species has usurped the place of the 
genus, which is to be regretted, altogether apart from the 
question whether acceptance of the species is in accordance 
with the biblical data or not. 

“Chiliasm” is so named from the numeral “y?dsos,” “a 
thousand.”’ The name is more or less unaptly chosen, because 
the duration of the interval which is placed between the two 


successive resurrections, or the point of the departure of © 


the two successive eras, is by various adherents of the scheme 
variously fixed. It might have been six hundred or four hun- 
dred, in neither case would this have affected the essence of 
the belief in the least. Since, however, in common usage the 
number “one thousand”’ is laid at the basis, the designation 
may be allowed to stand by reason of the preference of the 
vast majority of adherents. It is true another term, that of 
“pre-millennarianism,”’ would deserve the preference ifa more 
informing nomenclature be sought after. But this termin- 
ology is less perspicuous for the noun “pre-millennarianism”’ 
does not make it plain to what the preposition “pre” in it has 
reference, and the Latin “‘millennium”’ is no more free than 
the Greek name from prejudicially fixing the duration. The 
point of departure is in both cases the parousia; the number 
of years fixed upon begins with it; pre-millennarian is an 
adjective before the implied noun parousia, expressing the as- 


sumption that the return of Christ will take place before the - 


millennium. The substance of the matter is that Chiliasm 
divides the eschatological future following upon the parousia 
into two distinct stages, the one of a temporary provisional, 
the other of an eternal, absolute character. The old traditional 
view of orthodox theology, and the current interpretation of 
Paul know of no such dualism in the eschatological prospect ; 
they make the eternal state, strictly so called, begin with the 
return of the Lord. | 

This “‘chiliastic” division of the eschatological future into 
two distinct stages is probably of pre-Christian origin. It 


“ 
ee 


THE QUESTION OF CHILIASM 229 


seems to be first met with in the Book of Enoch, Chaps. xci 
and xcili, in the ‘““Vision of Weeks,” so called, because it di- 
vides the entire course of the world’s duration into ten weeks. 
The eighth of these stands for the Messianic period, the ninth 
and the tenth bring the final judgment, and it is not until the 
close of the tenth week that the new creation appears. In the 
third book of the Jewish Sibyl (vss. 652-660) the Messianic 
kingdom is represented as subject to attack and destruction 
by the assembled nations, and after in turn these are de- 
stroyed, the kingdom of God begins. The dating of these 
two apocalyptic documents is somewhat uncertain, but not 
a few authorities place them in the pre-Christian period.* The 
same distinction between a preliminary Messianic and a final 
kingdom has been found in the Psalms of Solomon. Here in 
Psalms xvii and xviii the Messianic reign seems to be de- 
scribed as something transitory, for the writer speaks not 
only of “his (1.e., the Messiah’s) days,” “those days” (xvil. 
32; xvill. 6), but also of his (the Messiah’s) lifetime (xvii. 
37). On the other hand, in Psalm iii. 12 we read of a resur- 
rection to eternal life. It is not absolutely certain, however, 
that all the Psalms in this collection are of one author. If we 
were sure of this unity in authorship, the succession of two 
differently-complexioned kingdoms would offer the only 
explanation of the two varying descriptions of the future. 
Were the authorship diverse such a conclusion would not be 
necessary, since the outlook of one author might be entirely 
confined to the Messianic era sub specie temporis, whilst an- 
other might contemplate the same era as of eternal duration.” 
Coming down into the Christian period, we meet the twofold 
kingdom in the Slavic Enoch and the two great Apocalypses 
of Ezra and Baruch, and here a definite number of years is 
fixed for the duration of the provisional Messianic reign. 


1So Bousset, Die Religion des Judenthums, p. 331, note I. 

2It does not, of course, follow that the author of Ps. iii made such a 
distinction. He might have conceived the Messianic reign as eternal, or 
his conception of “eternal life’ might have been un-Messianic, Only if 
we identify him with the author of Psalms xvii and xvili can we 
affirm that the eschatology of the latter was also his. 


230 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


According to 4 Ezra vii. 28 ff. the Christ reigns four hundred 
years, then He, together with all other earthly creatures, dies, 
after which the dead awake and the eterrial judgment occurs. 
Similarly in xii. 34, where the reign of the Messiah lasts till 
the end of the world and the day of judgment. In the Slavic 
Enoch and Apoc. Bar. the limited duration of the Messianic 
era is connected with the system of world-periods. In the 
latter apocalypse, after the description of the Messianic king- 
dom in Chap. xxix, the opening verse of the following chap- 
ter states that, when the period of the arrival of the Messiah 
has been completed, He will return in glory into heaven, which 
return will be the signal for the resurrection of those who 
are fallen asleep hoping for Him. While Chap. xli. 3 rep- 
resents the reign of the Messiah as “permanent forever,” this 
is immediately qualified by the subjoined clause “until the 
world devoted to destruction comes to a close, and the things 
named above fulfil themselves.” Finally, according to Chap. 
Ixxiv. 2 the Messianic age is that which is transitory, and 
the preceding that which is non-transitory. 

In regard to the motive underlying this conception of a 
provisional Messianic kingdom it has been suggested by recent 
writers that it should be looked upon as a compromise between 

two heterogeneous eschatological ideals, the ancient national- 
political, terrestrial scheme, revolving around the destiny of 
Israel, and the later transcendental-cosmical scheme, which 
has in view the transformation of the kosmos, and the 
introduction of altogether new conditions on a super-mundane 
plane. At first the ideas and expectations connected with these 
two schemes formed an orderless mass, a conglomerate with- 
out adjustment or correlation. The most diverse elements lay 
unreconciled and unreconcilable in close proximity to one 
another, as in the older parts of the Book of Enoch and in 
the Book of Jubilees. Or, the semblance of coherence was 
saved by bringing into the foreground only one of these two 
aspects of the eschatological hopes, leaving the other in 
eclipse, while not theoretically denying its right of existence. 
Thus in the Similitudes of the Book of Enoch and in the 


THE QUESTION OF CHILIASM 231 


Testaments of the XII Patriarchs the prevailing atmos- 
phere is of the transcendental, super-terrestrial kind, although 
not to the entire exclusion of earthly national prospects. 
On the other hand in such writings as the Psalms of Solomon 
and the Assumption of Moses the eschatological drama plays 
mainly on the stage of this world and under temporal condi- 
tions, the interest being centered on Israel. Rarely, as in the 
Slavic Book of Enoch, does the spirit of other-worldliness 
become so dominant as to expel all the heterogeneous elements 
belonging to the other and lower plane. In most cases the 
contradictions were not actually removed, but only covered 
up by the distribution of emphasis. And for this reason it was 
inevitable, it is thought, that a more systematic attempt 
should in course of time be made to bring not only apparent 
but real order into the confusion. This was done through the 
distribution of the various elements over two successive 
periods. The older national, political, earthly hopes, it was now 
believed, would first go into fulfilment, and thus have full 
justice done to them. But this would last for a time only. 
Then, after this tribute had been paid, the new order of 
things could assume its eternal, cosmical sway, no longer 
hindered in the unfolding of its transcendental character by 
the intrusion of motives of a lower type. 

Sometimes, as notably in the case of Bousset, the view 
sketched is coupled with the hypothesis that the entire 
higher eschatology of Judaism is not a native growth on 
the soil of the Old Testament, but an importation from 
Babylonian (ultimately Persian) sources. This _ peculiar 
assumption, however, so grave and far-reaching in its con- 
sequences, is by no means essential to the theory.* The cleav- 
age and heterogeneity which mark the Jewish eschatology 
would invite reduction to a system quite as much if the 

3The view carries with it the inference that the basis and back- 
ground of the entire Christian idea of salvation are of pagan origin. 
The question about the origin of the Apocalyptic eschatology resolves 
itself into a question of the antecedents of the specifically soteric ele- 


ment in Christianity. For the soteriology rests throughout on the 
eschatology. 


' 


“f 


232 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


disharmony were due to indigenous development, as if due 
to the intrusion of foreign influence. But apart from this, 
and considering the problem altogether by itself, we are not 
convinced that the solution, attractive though it may seem, is 
borne out by the facts. The origin of a scheme does not always 
coincide with the uses to which it may be subsequently put. 
When so far back as the period of canonical prophetism we 
find the twofold representation, on the one hand that the 
final order of things will be called into being by the appear- 
ance of a Messianic King, and on the other hand that it will 
come through the appearance and interposition of God Him- 
self, so that the two conceptions of a Messianic Kingdom 
and a Kingdom of God appear at this early stage side by side 
without any attempt at harmonizing, then it would seem, that 
in this ancient prophetic diversity, we have a fully adequate 
explanation of the origin of the two successive kingdoms, — 
without having to go to Babylonia and Persia, or deriving 
the whole from Apocalyptic dissatisfaction with the world. 
When once the problem inherent in this twofold perspective 
had made itself felt, it required no profound insight to per- 
ceive that the easiest way of solving it lay in making the two 
forms of the future state follow each other, in which case the 
first in order would naturally be the Kingdom of the Messiah, 
to be followed by the Kingdom of God as the absolute con- 
summation of all things. Chiliasts resenting the charge of 
the dependence of their favorite idea on the streaming in of 
pagan elements of thought into the Old Testament, can make 
a good case for themselves on the ground _ indicated. 
Whether the New Testament stamps with its approval the 
solution by which on the theory stated the early Jewish The- 
ology sought to solve the problem, or has a different solu- 
tion of its own, may for the present remain an open question. 
But a charge of being rooted in paganism, rather than in 


» statements of the Old Testament need not lie against 


Chiliasm. 
From this possible origin of the distinction we must, how- 
ever, keep separated the use to which in course of time it 


THE QUESTION OF CHILIASM 233 


came to be put.* In itself the distinction between a preliminary 
Messianic and a subsequent divine Kingdom is indifferent to 
eschatological tone or atmosphere. In the earlier sources the 
Messianic kingdom is not depicted in particularly glowing 
sensualistic colors, as though any conscious effort had been 
made to save in it realistic hopes and dreams for which, it 
was felt, the more modern outlook left no room. Nor, on the 
other hand, is the final state described in such super-sensual 
terms as to convey the impression that an order of things so 
constituted is utterly incommensurable with the substance of 
the old earth-bound expectations. It is not in Enoch, not in 
the well-known verses of the third book of the Jewish Sibyl, 
nor in the Psalms of Solomon that the picture of the provi- 
sional Messianic kingdom assumes the complexion usually 
called “‘chiliastic’ in the specific sense of the word. This 
happens first in the great Apocalypses of Ezra and Baruch. 
According to 4 Egra vii. 28, God’s son, the Christ, when re- 
vealed “will dispense joy for four hundred years to those that 
remain.’ The same prospect of “joy” for those left in the land 
recurs in xii. 24. The most typical passage is Apoc. Bar. xxix. 
1-8: “When the Messiah begins to reveal Himself, Behemoth 
and Leviathan likewise appear, and are given as food to the 
remnant; the earth produces ten-thousandfold; a vine will 
have one thousand branches, every branch one thousand clus- 
ters, every cluster one thousand grapes, and every grape will 
yield one kor of wine; winds will proceed from God and will 
carry to the people the fragrance of aromatic fruit, and at 
night clouds will distill healing dew; the heavenly supplies 
of manna will be let down and they will eat of them in those 
years, because they have reached the end of the ages.’ Charac- 
teristic also is Ixxiv. 1: “In these days the reapers will not 


4 This may be seen most clearly from the Slavic Enoch, in which, as 
Bousset observes, the atmosphere is pervasively transcendental, and 
which yet (for the first time) limits the Messianic kingdom to a 
thousand years. 

5 This is the passage from which Papias is believed to have borrowed 
his well-known description of the Chiliastic state, quoted by Irenaeus, 


V, 33, 3. 


234 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


have to exert themselves, and those that build will not have to 
toil, for of themselves all works will have progress together 
with those who labor thereon with much rest.”’ And it is pre- 
cisely in these latest Apocalypses that the final state appears 
at the farthest remove from the conditions of earthly exis- 
tence even in an idealized form. It is not a perfection of the 
present life, but a transposition of life into the supernatural 
key that is expected. There can be little doubt that some sense 
of the incompatibility of such glories with the Messianic joys, 
as ordinarily conceived, contributed to sharpen the distinc- 
tion between the two successive states, and to make it one not 
merely of chronology, but likewise of antithetical character. 
The Pauline eschatology in point of time lies between the 
older documents in which Chiliasm crops out and this later 
efflorescence of it in 4 Ezra and the Baruch-Apocalypse. It 
is not surprising, therefore, that attempts should have been 
made to bring the Apostle in line with the general apocalyptic 
development in this matter. Effort is exerted to make him 
teach the future coming of some such temporal kingdom as 
the Jewish sources assume.° It is alleged that Paul expects 
a twofold resurrection, one of a certain class of dead at the 
parousia, and one of the remaining dead at the end of all, and 
that he places a glorious provisional reign of Christ between 
these two resurrections. Now it will be observed that the idea 
of Chiliasm, when introduced in this concrete form, which 
is, aS a matter of fact, the only form for which any semblance 
of support can be found in the Pauline Epistles, does not 
particularly fit into the development of doctrine in Jewish 
Apocalyptic. It would represent a more advanced form of the 
idea than is met with in 4 Ezra and Apoc. Bar., inasmuch as 
6 Grimm, Q. f. W. Th., 1873, pp. 380-411; Schmiedel in Holtzmann’s 
Handkommentar? II, p. 196; Kabisch, Die Paulinischen Vorstellungen 
von Auferstehung und Gericht und ihre Beziehung sur Jiidischen 
Apocalypse, pp. 111-112; Bousset, Die Religion des Judenthums?, p. 331. 
Among more recent writers the presence of Chiliasm in Paul is denied 
by Titius, Die Neutestamentliche Lehre von der Seligkeit, Der Paulinis- 
mus, p. 47; Charles, A Critical History of the Doctrine of a Future Life 


in Israel, in Judaism, and in Christianity, p. 386; Kennedy, St. Paul’s 
Conceptions of the Last Things, pp. 322-324. 


THE QUESTION OF CHILIASM 235 


with Paul the differentiation between the two kingdoms 
would appear carried through to the point of a distinction 
between two resurrections. In the two above-named Apoca- 
lypses the resurrection is not yet divided, but remains fixed 
at its accustomed place immediately before the final judgment. 
The Pauline teaching then would in this respect be not in con- 
tinuity with the apocalyptic development of doctrine, but 
overtake it and pass on beyond. Still it might be urged that 
this phenomenon can be explained from the specifically Chris- 
tian feature, that the Messiah has already come, and that in 
Him, at a central point, the resurrection has already become 
an accomplished fact, so that naturally, when between this 
fundamental resurrection and the final resurrection the 
Chiliastic kingdom as a future stage is inserted, this inter- 
mediate stage must likewise have at its opening some kind of 
resurrection connected with itself. In this way at least some- 
what of the strangeness of a departure from the ordinary 
scheme could be toned down, and the hypothesis of a real 
connection in the main point upheld. 

It must be admitted, however, that the likelihood of finding 
Chiliasm in Paul is not favored by the trend of the Apostle’s 
teaching as. a whole. Not merely does his general concatena- 
tion of eschatological events, in which the parousia and the 
resurrection of believers are conjoined with the judgment 
exclude every intermediate stage of protracted duration, it is 
of even more importance that Paul conceives of the present 
Christian state, ideally considered, as lived on so high a 


plane that nothing less nor lower than the absolute state of the | 
eternal consummate Kingdom appears worthy to be its. 


sequel." To represent it as followed by some intermediate 


Smet hess. 1.10 j2ii, 17s: 111,. 12? v.10, 23 3:2 Thess. 1. ¥o$) 11:12, 13. 
In point of fact, the Chiliastic scheme runs so contrary to the Apostle’s 
teaching as a whole, that its assumed appearance in I Cor. xv. 4 and 
Phil. iii has been construed by some writers as prima facie evidence of 
the interpolation of the former passage (So Michelson, Th. T., 1872, 
pp. 215-221, and Bruins, ibid., pp. 381-415, and of the spuriousness of 
the Epistle to the Philippians as a whole (So Hoekstra, Th. T., 1815, 


442-450. 


236 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


condition falling short of the perfect heavenly life would be 
in the nature of an anti-climax. It is, as shown before, of the 
very essence of salvation that it correlates the Christian’s 
state with the great issues of the last day and the world to 
come. And in this connection it should be once more observed, 
that what the earthly Christian state anticipates is in each case 
something of an absolute nature, pertaining to the eternal life. 
No matter with what concrete elements or colors the assumed 
Chiliastic régime be filled out, nevertheless to a mind so 
nourished upon the very firstfruits of eternal life, it can for 
the very reason of its falling short of eternal life, have had 
little significance or attraction. 

Still such general considerations do not absolve us from 
testing the exegetical basis on which adherents of the theory 
believe it to rest. There are not lacking those who fully agree © 
with us as to the general structure of the Pauline eschatology, 
but who, on exegetical grounds, feel constrained to assume, 
that through lack of discrimination the Apostle let this hetero- 
geneous strain of teaching, as a remnant from his Judaistic 
past, continue in his thought and work harm to his proclama- 
tion of the Gospel. The passages in which Chiliasm has been 
' discovered are chiefly four: 1 Cor. xv.-23-28; 1 Thess. iv. 
} 13-18; 2 Thess. i. 5-12; Phil. iii. 10-14. We shall exam- 
ine these in succession. As to 1 Corinthians the argument 
for the Chiliastic interpretation may be briefly stated as 
follows. It is urged, first of all, that in the statement of vs. 22: 
“As in Adam all die, so also in Christ shall all men be made 
alive,” the “‘all’? must be taken without restriction. All men 
die, all are to be made alive. This necessitates, it is further 
said, since “of rod ypicrod” of vs. 23 does not exhaust the 
“ardvres,” the assumption that vs. 24 speaks of a subsequent 
stage in the resurrection. The words “‘eita +d réXos”’ are there- 
fore taken to mean: “Then comes the end,” i.e., the final stage 
of the resurrection. And it 1s believed that with reference to 
these two successive stages thus obtained the Apostle writes in 
vs. 23: “Each in his own order.” There are two orders, 
first the raising of those that are Christ’s at his parousia, 


THE QUESTION OF CHILIASM 237 


secondly the end of the resurrection (that is the raising of the 
remainder of men), when He delivers up the Kingdom to 
God, even the Father. And as in the first statement the phrase 
“at his parousia’’ is added to fix the time when this first act 
will occur, so in the second statement the words “when He de- 
livers up the kingdom” are added to define the point for the 
second act. 

The first resurrection, then, takes place at the parousia, the- 
second when Christ abdicates his kingdom. This, of course, » 
involves that the two do not coincide but are separated by an 
interval of shorter or longer duration. Just as between the 
“amapyn ypiotos” and the év tn wapovala adrod lies a period 
marked by “éevra,’ so between év 77 mapovala and 76 Tédos 
Paul places an interval and marks this by e?ra. That there are 
two successive acts to be distinguished in the resurrection, 
follows also, it is believed, from the use of the term “Taypa”’: 
“each in his own tagma.” This distributive way of speaking 
implies that there is more than one tagma, and, since Christ ” 
in his resurrection stands alone, and cannot form a tagma by 
Himself, it is plain that there must be two tagmata besides 
Him. The one of these two is the tagma of those that are 
Christ’s at his coming, the other is the tagma of those raised 
at the end. That the time elapsing between the resurrection 
of believers and the final resurrection must be a protracted 
period is said to be implied by the second grav in vs. 24. The 
first érav merely names in the Present Subjunctive the point 
of time, when the final resurrection takes place, étav rapadido 
tiv Bactrelav to Oe, “when He delivers up the kingdom to 
God”; the second gravy names in the Aorist Subjunctive the 
period after which the resurrection will occur, 6tav catnpynon 
racav apynv, when He shall have abolished all rule.” ‘Thus 
Paul not merely implies that there will be a period between the 
resurrection of believers and that of the others, but also con- 
ceives of this period as “the kingdom of Christ” specifically, 
in distinction from the kingdom of God, which is to follow 
after, and he moreover affirms that this specific inter-resur- 
rection kingdom of Christ will have for its concrete content 


238 THE, PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


the progressive subjugation of the enemies designated dpyat, 
éEovoiat, duvapmers. 

Having now the proposed exegesis before us, we perceive 
at a glance that it seems to commend itself by that most popu- 
lar of credentials, surface simplicity. But, as is frequently the 
case, the difficulties lie beneath the surface. Let us begin with 
the argument derived from gdyres in vs. 22. There is an in- 
surmountable obstacle to understanding this of ‘“‘all men” in 
the fact that the Cworroveic Pau is represented as taking place 
év Xpictm. How can this apply to the second resurrection at 
the end? Two answers are offered us, but they are both 
equally unacceptable on the basis of the general teaching of 
Paul. The first is that offered by Meyer and Godet. These 
propose to give to “év ypicTr@’’ a weakened sense, so weakened 
indeed as to make it equally applicable to the resurrection of 
the lost as to that of believers. Thus Meyer interprets the 
phrase in question to mean that “in Christ lies the ground and 
cause, why at the final historical completion of the redemptive 
work death . . . shall be removed again and all shall be made 
alive.”’ And Godet asks: ‘““May it not be said of those who shall 
rise to condemnation, that they also shall rise év ypiot@? 
. . . Uhe Saviour having once appeared, it is on their relation 
to Him that the lot of all depends for weal or woe; it is this 
relation consequently which determines their return to life, 
either to glory or to condemnation.” We submit that all this 
rests on an utterly un-Pauline interpretation of the phrase 
“év ypior@.” Wherever this occurs in Paul it is always meant 
in the full sense of a soteric (though not necessarily “pneu- 
matic’) in-being in Christ. Especially a fwomoetcbar taking 
place in Christ must needs be mediated by the Spirit; just as 
the atroOvyncke év7@’ Addp implies a real connection between 
Him and the all who die. This suggestion, therefore, is un- 
acceptable. The second way of relieving the difficulty, that, 
after those who are Christ’s have been raised, still others 
shall be raised év +$ ypuor@ is scarcely more plausible. It ven- 
tures to assume that the Apostle here rises to the height of 
belief in the so-called “ QmroKaTdoTacls TAaVTOV, that is of 


THE QUESTION OF CHILIASM 239 


absolute universalism. At the second resurrection those will 
be raised, who at the time of the first resurrection at the 
parousia were not yet “‘of Christ,’ but who in the meantime 
have been converted and thus become subjects of a saving 
resurrection.* Such an assumption, however, no less than the 
proposal of Meyer and Godet, is too palpably inconsistent ~ 
with the Apostle’s most explicit teaching elsewhere to deserve 
serious consideration. The eternal judgment of the wicked 
is taught not only in the earlier Epistles, but in this very same 
Epistle to the Corinthians, and in the later letters, so that 
the difference cannot be accounted for by any development in 
Paul’s mind in the direction of universalism. Neither do the 
words “fva } 6 Oeds mdvta év rao.’ in vs. 28 require an 
absolutely universalistic interpretation, so far as the ultimate 
salvation of all human and superhuman creatures is con- 
cerned. For these words refer to the bringing to nought of the 
enemies spoken of in vss. 24, 25 of whom the last is Death. 
These enemies are designated “apya/, éfovolat, Suvapers, 
Oavatos.’ They prevent until the end that God should become 
“Ta wavra év raow,’ that is they interfere with the complete 
victorious sway of God over the universe.’ Full justice is 
done to these words when they are interpreted of the breaking 
of the power of these enemies in the world. To be sure, it may 
be replied, that, so long as any wicked men remain, the power 
of superhuman enemies is not wholly broken, because the 
very existence of moral evil among part of the human race 
would imply its continuance, and that, therefore, although the 
év maowv be neuter, and does not directly affirm the conversion 
of all men, yet indirectly the unqualified subjection of the 
universe to God and the comprehensive xatapycia Oar of these 
powers warrant the same conclusion. In reply to this we 
would submit that if the phrase ra mdvta év r&ow is to be 
pressed to that extreme, then Paul must have meant to con- 
vey by it the idea of either the conversion or the annihi- 


8 This is the view of Grimm, Z. W. Th., 1873, pp. 380-411. Also of 
Schmiedel, Handkommeniar, II, p. 196. 
9 Probably maow is neuter: “in all things,” that is “in the universe.” 


240 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


lation of these spirit-forces likewise. If moral evil cannot 
continue to exist in man, no more can the theory of absolute 
universalism permit its continued existence outside of man. 
In the passage before us, however, the Apostle does not 
either speak of or hint at conversion or annihilation of these 
demonic powers, but simply affirms their future catapyeioOa 
This word does not, as a rule, mean to reduce to non-exist- 
ence, but to render inoperative, to strip of power “depyov 
totic Oar.”*° And in the case of 6 @avatds we have a concrete 
example of how it is meant. Death catapyetra when he is no 
longer permitted to slay men. This will happen no more after 
the resurrection. Assuming that 6 Qavards is not a mere per- 
sonification but a real demon-power, one of a genus divided 
into “rules” and ‘authorities’ and “powers,” and further 
assuming, that as such Death 1s assigned to eternal condemna- 
tion, there would be nothing inconsistent in all this with 
God’s being all in all in the universe. And, assuming once 
more thatt the wicked of mankind are likewise given up by 
God to eternal perdition, there is nothing inconsistent in their 
continuing evil either with the catapyeicoOa. of Death or 
with God’s being all in all. 

If these two proposals be unacceptable, the quite re- 
mains what is the true interpretation of “‘all shall be made 
alive’ in vs. 22? Again two possibilities offer themselves. The 
one is to assume that “all” is qualified by “in Adam” and “in 
Christ.” Charles believes that this construction is indicated 
by the position of the words. According to him the rendering 
should be: “As all who are in Adam die, so all who are in 
Christ shall be made alive.’ This is a possible view; for 
analogies 1 Cor. xv. 18 (“those who fell asleep in Christ are 
perished’), 1 Thess. iv. 16 (“the dead in Christ shall rise 
first’), Col. i. 4 (“your faith in Christ Jesus”), Rom. ix. 3 
(“accursed from Christ’), may be compared. On this 
view the whole succeeding context deals avowedly with 
the resurrection of believers only. It is, of course, quite 
possible to adopt this construction of vs. 22 and its 


10: Cp. 2 Thess. 11. 8; 1 Cots 1), 283 41°65 Hebei. 14 


THE QUESTION OF CHILIASM 241 


corollary that the passage confines itself to the resurrec- 
tion of believers, without endorsing Charles’ further in- 
ference that Paul taught a resurrection of believers only. 
There is, however, still a second way, in which the 
Same understanding of the passage may be had, and yet 
the more usual construction of “in Adam” and “in Christ” 
be retained. For even when construing these phrases with the 
verbs, we are quite at liberty to assume that Paul made the 
mental qualification: “all (who were in Adam)” and “all 
(who are in Christ).’’ We believe this to be the most plausi- 
ble interpretation of the verse. What the Apostle means to 
Say is not that there is no exception to the dying in Adam 
(although in point of fact this was actually his teaching), nor 
any exception to the being made alive in Christ, viz. so far as 
any making alive anywhere takes place. What he does mean to 
affirm is rather this that there is no variety of operation in the 
range of these two processes described as “in Adam,” “in 
Christ.” In other words not the universality of the law, but 
the universality of its modus operandi within the compass in 
which it works, this is what is affirmed. Vs. 22 serves to eluci- 
date vs. 21, and in the latter verse the point of the statement 
is that both death and resurrection are through a man. Conse- 
quently in vs. 23 not “saves” by itself, but “waves” jointly 


with “in Adam” and “in Christ’ has the emphasis; there is | 
no dying outside of Adam, there is no quickening apart from. 
Christ. With abstract, absolute universalism this has nothing |” 


to do whatsoever. : 

The next point raised was related to Paul’s use of “rdyya.” 
This, it is maintained, implies two stages in the resurrection 
separated by an interval. And it will have to be conceded that 
there is no escape from this, if the primary meaning of 
“tagma”’ be insisted upon. Primarily the word stands for 
“division,” “troup,” “group,” being used largely as a military 
term in tactics. “Each in his own tagma”’ would then imply, 
that there are two groups to be raised at least. Now, it is 
further urged, Christ could not possibly have been considered 
by the Apostle as forming a tagma by Himself; conse- 


99 66 99 66 


¢ 


242 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


quently the divisions (plural) referred to must exist. and 
form a pair apart from Christ being reckoned in; in other 
words there must be two resurrections subsequent to that 
of Christ with the two necessary intervals. On this view 
the word &caatos “each” in vs. 23 does not include Christ, but 
covers only the “all” of vs. 22, of whom it is said that they 
will be made alive “in Christ,’ which latter affirmation could 
not, of course, apply to Christ Himself. 

Against the validity of this argumentation we submit, that 
it is impossible to exclude Christ from the range covered by 
éxaoros. Christ is the darapy% and amapy7 stands connected 
with &ézera. No plausible reason can be assigned why Paul 
should have written the clause “‘Christ the firstfruits” at all, 
unless he meant to assign to Christ a clearly defined place in 


the order of the resurrection. On the other hand, by assuming 


that Christ forms atagma by Himself, the reason why his res- 
urrection is introduced here becomes immediately perspicu- 
ous. Probably the circumstance had been urged against the 
Apostle’s doctrine of the resurrection, that the resurrection of 
believers ought to take place immediately after their death, at 
least with no longer delay than intervened between Christ’s 
death and his resurrection. To this the Apostle may be con- 
ceived as replying: ‘“‘each in his own order.’’ Christ has a 
precedence, He is theavapy7,the source of the entire process, 
therefore his resurrection had to follow without delay, but it 
is only natural that that of the others should be postponed till 
His coming, precisely because He is the azrapyy. The Apostle, 
it seems to us, does not use tagma with any conscious empha- 
sis upon its primary military meaning; dmrapyy belongs to a 
totally different sphere of figurative representation, that of 
the firstfruits and the harvest. The only point of comparison 
in the use of tagma is that of order, sequence of occurrence. 
By so understanding it here we also meet the argument drawn 
from the difficulty that Christ cannot form a tagma by Him- 
self. To adhere to the primary sense of “division,” “troup,” 
and yet include Christ would be possible only by throwing 
strong emphasis on the military meaning of the word, as if to 


THE QUESTION OF CHILIASM 243 


suggest that He was, as it were, a host in Himself, an entire 
division by reason of His own strength. This might suit the 
role He plays in the eschatological process, and fit in with 
the representation of Him as the conqueror over all enemies in 
the sequel. But, as already observed, it is not favored by the 
characterization of Christ as ‘“‘aparche,” rather than as 
apxnyos or some such term. And it certainly does not fit the 
case of those who form the other tagma, for believers in their 
resurrection do not appear in any military capacity. 


9d 66 


If then tagma be given the sense of “order,” “rank,” and 


Christ comes in the first tagma, every necessity falls away for 
inferring from the mode of statement that there must be a fur- 
ther tagma beyond that of Christ and that of believers, and 
for finding here, in consequence of the other rendering, the 
doctrine of a twofold resurrection, one before and one after 
the millennium. 

Much is made of the argument that e?ra at the beginning 
of vs. 24 proves a substantial interval between the parousia 
and “the end.” It must be granted that, had the Apostle 
meant to express such a thought, efra would have been en- 
tirely appropriate for the purpose. But it is not true that ei7va 
is out of place on the other view, viz. if Paul means to affirm 
mere succession without any protracted interval.’ Kira can 
be used just as well as tore to express momentary sequence 
of events, as may be verified from a comparison with vss. 
5,0, 7 in this same chapter, and with Jno. xii. 4,5.Of course, 
a brief interval in logical conception at least, must be as- 
sumed: ‘‘7d rédos’’ comes, speaking in terms of strict chro- 
nology, after the rising of of rod ypiorod. But that by no means 
opens the door to the intercalation of a rounded-off chiliad 
of years. 

The absolute phrase “76 réXos” does not favor the view that 
“the end of the resurrection may, or even must, be meant by 

11 The contention of Titius, Der Paulinismus unter dem Gesichtspunkt 
der Seligkeit, p. 47, to the effect that Paul, if he wanted to mark a pro- 


tracted interval, was bound to repeat: é€retra is not borne out by gram- 
matical analogy. 


244 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


it. In its absoluteness the simple “76 téXos”’ is too weighty for 
this; it requires a more absolute force. To interpret it of the 
“end” of the present aeon is scarcely admissible, for that 
coincides with the parousia, and by means of eira “the 
end” is represented as a step subsequent to the parousia. We 
have the choice between taking it in its strictly teleological sig- 
nification as “‘the goal,” i.e. the goal to which the entire pro- 
cess of redemption has been tending, or, if the time-element 
be retained, taking it as the close of the great eschatological 
finale, which leads over from this aeon into the coming one. 
The latter seems favored by the time-sense of é7ay and the 
clauses which this conjunction introduces. That which forms, 
\ as it were, the concrete content of the “telos” is the giving 
up of the kingship to God, the Father. And this “giving up” is 
nothing else but the culminating result of the eschatological 
process of subduing the enemies, whence also the second érav 
describes it as taking place after all these enemies have been 
reduced to subjection. Taking telos in this sense as marking 
the consummation-point of Christ’s eschatological reign, we 
can no longer find in it the evidence for a millennium which 
it would contain, if taken to mean “the end of the resurrec- 
tion.” 

The question remains, however, where Paul makes this 
eschatological reign of Christ, which comes to a close after 
the resurrection of believers, begin. It is on the answer to 
this question that the understanding of e?ra, which in itself 
may mean sequence with or without chronological interval, in 
the present case depends. If Paul made this reign of Christ 
begin at the parousia, then there must lie a period between the 
parousia and the telos, because the beginning and the end of 
things cannot but be separated in time. If, on the other hand, 
the reign dates from a point back of the parousia, then the 
telos can follow closely united with the parousia. Here the 
second $rav-clause may help us to a decision. It affirms that 
the delivering up of the kingdom will happen after Christ 
has brought to nought the various powers enumerated. The 
question resolves itself into this: Is there anything in the 


THE QUESTION OF CHILIASM 245 


conception of these hostile powers and of their subjection that 
compels us to think of Christ's warfare against and victory 
over them as not antedating the parousia? Plainly the con- 
quest is of such a nature that it covers a period of some dura- 
tion; this is implied in the dypis of and in the word “last” of 
the phrase “‘the last enemy.” But the question is where we 
shall make the period begin: at the parousia or at some earlier 
point? “Oravis retrospective, but the point to which the retro- 
spect extends is uncertain. All we can say is that there is 
nothing in the words of the passage itself, nor in Paul’s 
general teaching, to hinder us in dating this period of eschato- 
logical conquest from the Saviour’s death and resurrection. "~~ 
Paul regards these last-named events in an eschatological 
light. In Col. 11. 15 he speaks of the conquest of the dpyai 
and é€ovala. as having in principle been accomplished in the 
cross of Christ. In Rom. viii. 38, 39 he assumes that even 
now Christ so reigns over and controls death and life and 
principalities and powers as to preclude every separation of 
the Christian from the love of God in Him. 

But, while the words of the second $7vav-clause will fit into 
either view, nevertheless, when this clause is taken in con- 
nection with the statement of vs. 26, it will be felt decidedly 
to favor an earlier beginning of the kingdom of Christ than 
at the parousia. The last enemy that is brought to nought is 
Death. The conquering of the other enemies, and conse- 
quently the reign of Christ consisting in this, precedes the 
conquest of Death. Now Paul makes the conquest of Death 
coincide with the parousia and the resurrection of believers. 
According to vss. 50-58, when the dead are raised incorrupti- 
ble, and the living are changed (1.e. according to vs. 23 at the 
parousia), Death is swallowed up in victory. And still fur- 
ther, apart from this specific argument, a more general argu- 
ment can be built on vss. 50-58, because it is there implied 
that the resurrection of the righteous and the very last ‘‘end” 
fall together. The Apostle here speaks throughout in terms 
of absolute consummation. When the righteous dead are 
raised this is the moment of their inheriting “the kingdom of 


morgen 


246 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


God,” vs. 50. Notice, the Apostle does not say “the kingdom 
of Christ,” as he ought to have said according to the chiliastic 
exegesis of vss. 24-28, for this exegesis makes him distin- 
guish between a kingdom of Christ and the kingdom of God 
in this way, that the former extends from the parousia till the 
“end,” whilst the latter does not begin until the “end.” Vs. 
50 proves that the kingdom of God begins with the parousia 
and the resurrection of the righteous, therefore the kingdom 


of Christ must, so far as it is chronologically distinguished 
_ from the kingdom of God, lie before the parousia. It begins, 


as already stated, with Christ’s own resurrection. This con- 
clusion also follows from the equivalence of the xupidrys 
of Christ and the Bacirela of Christ. The xupidrns begins 
with the resurrection of the Saviour, therefore his Bacwnela 
cannot begin at a later point. Phil. 11. 9-11 connects with 
Christ’s exaltation to the xupiérns the same things that 
I Cor. xv. 24-28 connects with his reign as King. The trump 
blown for the resurrection of Christians is “‘the last trump,”’ 
which excludes the prospect of any further crisis. Elsewhere 
also the Apostle joins together the resurrection of believers, 
the change of the living and the judgment of the world.* 
Finally, Paul expects that the renewal of the «rious will ac- 
company the resurrection of the saints.** When the creation 
is delivered from the bondage of corruption into the liberty of 
the glory of the children of God, this of itself must mark the 
consummation of all things, and excludes the further activity 
of enemies, such as would still have to be reduced to subjec- 
tion. 

Two other passages usually quoted as carrying chiliastic 
implications are 1 Thess. iv. 13-18 and 2 Thess. i. 5-12. The 
argument from the former passage is not so much an argu- 
ment from direct statements contained in it, but rather based 
on the observation that without the injection into the exegesis 
of the millennium-idea the passage yields no clear sense, whilst 
becoming lucid so soon as the factor of the millennium is 


12\(Cp,1 Thess. 11.1952 Thess.\1..7; 1 Cor. 1.7, 83 2) Timaiveos 
13Cp. Rom. viii. 18-22. 


THE QUESTION OF CHILIASM 247 


reckoned with. It is argued that the Thessalonians appear to 
have been dubious as to whether those who had died from 
among them after the formation of their church would be 
raised from the dead at the coming of the Lord. But, it is 
further argued, they cannot possibly have been ignorant of 
or non-believers in the final resurrection of the saints as 
such, since this latter doctrine holds a central, prominent place 
in Paul’s gospel, and he cannot but have preached it to them 
emphatically. They could not have been Christians without 
knowing and accepting it. The situation is supposed to become 
clear and conceivable only, if we understand the doubt or 
unbelief involved as relating not to the resurrection of be- 
lievers in general, but to the question whether the already 
departed saints would obtain for themselves a resurrection at 
the parousia which would enable them to share in the provi- 
sional kingdom of Christ, together with those whom the Lord 
would find alive at His coming, or whether they would have 
to wait for their resurrection and glory until the end of this 
kingdom. It was for them not a question of resurrection or 
no-resurrection, but a question of earlier or later, the former 
meaning participation, the latter non-participation in the 
blessedness of the millennial kingdom. And that such was the 
real situation, it is urged, follows not merely from the impos- 
sibility of conceiving it otherwise, but also from the manner 
in which Paul meets the difficulty. He does not affirm in gen- 
eral that there is a resurrection of the dead, as he does in 
1 Cor. xv, but says ‘‘those that are fallen asleep, God will 
through Jesus bring with Him.” And “we that are alive, that 
are left unto the coming of the Lord, shall in no wise precede 
them that are fallen asleep.’ The use of the verb @dveav, 
“precede” is taken as proof that the question was a mere 
question of precedence. Paul denies the precedence in the 
particular form in which the Thessalonians had imagined it. 
There will be no later or earlier as regards believers, no dis- 
crimination between living and dead as to sharing in the pro- 
visional Messianic kingdom. All will be brought by God to 
be with Jesus at his coming. But, while denying this, and in 


248 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


the very act of denying this, Paul implies that the general 
scheme of the resurrection left room for the possibility of 
doubt on this point. If there is room for precedence in the 
abstract, there must be successive stages; there must be a 
double resurrection, one at the parousia, another at the close 
of Christ’s millennial reign. The Apostle virtually assures the 
Thessalonians that their dead will be present at the first meet- 
ing of the saints with Christ, which distinctly presupposes 
that there will be a second meeting at a later point. 

Here, even more than in the case of 1 Cor. xv, it must. 
be conceded that the argument looks like a very plausible and 
convincing one. But, when we look more closely at the actual 
words of the passage, the matter becomes considerably more 
complicated and less certain. First of all, it should be observed 
that little can be built on the @ priori assumption of the im- 
possibility of the Thessalonians doubting the resurrection of 
the dead saints mm toto after the preaching of Paul. To the 
Church of Corinth Paul had also preached the resurrection, 
still some of the members of that Church were disbelievers of 
the doctrine. To be sure, the doubt of the Thessalonians, if 
it existed, must have been of a somewhat different com- 
plexion, more naive, less theoretical, that that of the Corin- 
thians, otherwise Paul would have met it systematically as he 
does in I Cor. xv. But, if theoretical considerations made 
the Corinthians sceptical, notwithstanding the explicit preach- 
ing of Paul, then some more primitive or instinctive form of 
the same pagan unbelief may have kept the Thessalomans — 
from assimilating this part of Paul’s gospel, in a more inno- 
cent way, of course, for the Apostle does not blame, he simply 
comforts and reassures them. It is not @ priort impossible, 
that there were those among the Thessalonians who believed 
the glory of the end to be restricted to those who would be 
found living at the parousia, and expected nothing for the 
dead, neither at the parousia nor thereafter, neither in the 
body nor as to the soul, in a word who judged of the dead 
after a pagan fashion, while taking a Christian view in regard 
to those whom Christ would find living in the body at his 
coming. 


THE QUESTION OF CHILIASM 249 


But the decisive question is: What does the passage itself 
imply? The very words in which the Apostle introduces the 
subject seem to make it plain that the Thessalonians did not 
take into account, as a reason for relative disappointment, or 
relative comfort, a resurrection of their dead later than the 
parousia at a point separated from the latter by an interven- 
ing reign of Christ. Vs. 13 indicates that the readers were 
given to sorrowing over their dead as the pagans do who have 
no hope. The question has been raised, whether this neces- 
sarily must mean their sorrowing for the same reason for 
which the pagans are wont to sorrow, or whether justice per- 
haps may be done to these words, by merely making them 
mean, that the Thessalonians sorrowed in the same excessive 
manner as the Gentiles do, only for a different reason, the 
Gentiles because they have no hope for the post-mortem 
state at all, the Thessalonians because they feared that their 
dead would not return to life until after the Messianic (pro- 
visional) reign of Christ with its possibilities for enjoyment 
was hopelessly past. It has been argued that Paul distin- 
euishes the case of the Thessalonians from that of the Aourroé; 
the Aourof are of wh éyovtes édXsrida ; they themselves, there- 
fore, must be éyovres édmida ; consequently Paul does not 
class them with unbelievers concerning the resurrection; the 
manner or excess of their sorrow only was the same as that 
of the pagans; not the reason was the same. This argumenta- 
tion, however, overlooks the fact that the édwida éyew, 
which certainly is implied with reference to the readers, is 
not an édrida éye in their subjective consciousness, but in 
the objective conviction of Paul. The Apostle does not mean 
to say: You need not have sorrowed, because you knew you 
had hope. What he means to say is: You need not sorrow, 
because J know there is hope for you. These words, therefore, 
do not help us in any way to determine the subjective state of 
mind of the Thessalonians, whether they doubted merely the 
raising of their dead at the parousia or the raising of their 
dead at any time whatsoever. Decisive, however, it seems to 
us are the following considerations: (1) The «ad before of 


250 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


Nowrot indicates that the Thessalonians in their own mind 
also belonged to the class of those who had no hope; had the 
mere manner or degree of sorrowing formed the point of 
comparison, Paul would have written caOas of Aourol; (2) 
The way in which Paul explains himself in vs. 14 shows how 
he conceived of the subjective state of mind of the Thessa- 
lonians. It will be noticed how in this verse he really gives a 
double assurance: (a) that the xowunOevres will be raised; (b) 
that they will be brought by God into the presence of Jesus at 
the parousia. This sounds as if both points had been in doubt. 
Had the latter only been in doubt, Paul would have said: the 
resurrection will take place not later than, but at the parousia. 
What he says is: there will be a resurrection of the dead, and 
the dead will be present at the parousia. Especially the protasis 
of vs. 14: “for if we believe that Jesus died and rose” makes 
this very clear, because logically it requires the apodosis: 
“then also those that are fallen asleep will rise in Christ.” 
That Jesus rose Paul would not have mentioned at all, had 
there not been doubt concerning the fact of the resurrection 
generally. The apodosis which Paul actually wrote does not 
show our point so clearly, because it contracts into a single 
clause two distinct propositions: 0 eds Tods KorunOevras éyepet 
dia ToD “Incod and 6 Oeds Tovs KoimnOevtas aber cuv avTa@; 
(3) Had the Thessalonians been merely concerned about a 
belated participation of their dead in the blessings of the 
future, and had Paul wished to call attention to the relative 
hopefulness of even this state of mind in contrast with the 
utter hopelessness of the pagan unbelief, then the Apostle 
would as a matter of fact have given the Thessalonians two 
distinct grounds of comfort: in the first place that even so 
their doubt did not call for such excessive sorrow, since they 
themselves continued to feel assured of an ultimate resurrec- 
tion embracing all Christians; in the second place that the 
actual situation was far better than they imagined, since they 
could count on an immediate resurrection coinciding with the 
parousia. But in reality there is no trace whatever that the 
Apostle had two such distinct thoughts in mind: vs. 14, by 


THE QUESTION OF CHILIASM 251 


9) 


means of “for’’ attaches itself to vs. 13, yet it makes no 
reflection upon the main thought which would according to 
the Chiliastic exegesis find expression in vs. 13, viz. that the 
Thessalonians had at any rate the final resurrection to fall 
back upon. 

On the ground of these three considerations it may be 
confidently affirmed that the sorrow of the Thessalonians had 
no Chiliastic background, but was caused by misconceptions 
of a more fundamental nature. It is true this yields no more 
than a negative result. It can not be proven from their 
state of mind, that they were Chiliasts, nor that Paul had 
taught them such doctrine. Notwithstanding this the possi- 
bility is not thereby precluded, that in the answer Paul gives 
in order to instruct or relieve them, there might have lain 
Chiliastic implications. The general doubt of the Thessa- 
lonians, as to whether their dead would be present at the 
parousia, Paul might have met in the more precise form of 
implying that they would not only participate in the resur- 
rection, but would obtain a first resurrection restricted 
to believers. In other words the writing of this very pas- 
sage might have been the first occasion on which Paul 
called the attention of the Thessalonian converts to the 
subject of the provisional kingdom. This brings us to the 
question how the ¢@dcwpev in vs. 15 is to be understood. The 
verb expresses the thought of arriving earlier at a goal than 
somebody else. How is this to be understood in the present 
situation? Did Paul, when using this figure, have in mind 
that there were two distinct arrivals at the presence of the 
Lord and at the resurrection-crisis, one earlier and one later, 
and does he assure the Thessalonians that those who remained 
alive would not have the advantage of the earlier arrival and 
that the dead in Christ would not have to put up with the 
later one of these two arrivals? In that case the background is 
that of Chiliasm with its twofold resurrection. Or, did Paul 
simply employ the figure to assure the readers that in gaining 
the presence of the Lord the dead would not be one moment 
behind the living? In that case the representation has nothing 


252 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


to do with Chiliasm. It seems to us that everything speaks in 
favor of the latter exegesis. The Chiliastic scheme distin- 
guishes between two resurrections, but not between two 
resurrections to glory, so that it fails to explain the mode 
of expression: those that are left will not anticipate the dead. 
Of an anticipation in glory the Chiliastic scheme knows only 
where the first resurrection is confined to the martyrs, and 
that could not be the case here, since Paul speaks of all the 
dead in Christ.** : 

In 2 Thess. 1. 5-12 two expressions occur which have given 
rise to a Chiliastic explanation. In vss. 5 ff. the Apostle says 
that the persecutions and afflictions endured by the members 
of the church are a manifest token of the righteous judgment 
of God, to the end that they may be counted worthy of the 
kingdom of God for which they also suffer, since it is a 
righteous thing with God to recompense affliction to them 
that afflict the readers and to those that are afflicted rest with 
Paul at the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven. In 
vs. [1 we have the more general idea, that God may count the 
Thessalonians worthy of their calling («Ajo here in the 
objective sense “that to which one is called,” as &Aé& else- 
where, ‘‘that which is hoped for’). There is, however, nothing 
in these statements that would go beyond the general thought 
that suffering and glory, sanctification and the inheritance of 
the kingdom of God are inseparably linked together. The 


14 Tt is a question in dispute, which will probably never be settled to 
satisfaction, how much of vss. 15-17 belongs to the Adyos Kvpiov 
which the Apostle quotes, and with what degree of literalness it is 
quoted by him. If we could feel sure that the words in vs. 15 of zeptAa- 
mopevor ov py POdcwpev Tos KournPevras (with a change, of course, 
from the first to the third person) were literally Jesus’ words, either 
orally transmitted or by revelation delivered to Paul, then it would 
be plain that to draw the inference of Chiliasm from@@dcwpev would 
involve not merely the ascription of this doctrine to Paul but likewise 
to Jesus. But it is scarcely worth while for our present purpose to 
pursue this any further, because we have no data to determine the 
precise extent nor the exact literalness of the quotation. The words of 
Jesus might merely have affirmed the resurrection of the believing dead 
at the parousia, and Paul might have made use of this declaration in 
an argument with or without Chiliastic implications. 


THE QUESTION OF CHILIASM 253 


persecutions and afflictions of which the former passage 
speaks are not specifically those of martyrdom, and to think 
of a separate resurrection for all those that were persecuted 
and afflicted, would be without analogy. Besides this, the 
kingdom to which Paul refers is “the kingdom of God” (vs. 
5), and this, according to 1 Cor. xv. 24, is the kingdom of the 
absolute end, not any intermediate kingdom preceding it.” 

The last passage we must examine as to its bearings on the 
question of Chiliasm is Phil. iii. 10-14. The Apostle, it is said, 
here expresses the desire to become conformed unto the death 
of Christ, i.e., to suffer martyrdom. The motive for this 
desire is expressed in the words: “If by any means I may attain 
unto the resurrection from the dead.” Paul, according to this 
interpretation, expected a preliminary resurrection in which 
those only would share who had died for Christ’s sake, 
whereas the others would have to be content with the general 
resurrection at a much later point. This, it will be observed, 
would yield a conception far more analogous to what chilias- 
tic exegetes find in the well-known passage of the Apoca- 
lypse, than to the chiliastically interpreted statements of 1 
Cor. xv. 22 ff. Here in Philippians we should actually have 
the idea that the martyrs receive as a special reward a resur- 
rection preceding that of the others, whereas, according to 
1 Cor. xv, all those that are of Christ would share at his 
coming in the resurrection.”® 


15 Cp. 1 Thess. ii. 12: “To the end that ye should walk worthily with 
God, who calleth you into His own kingdom and glory.” It will be 
observed, that if the passage from 1 Thess. iv discussed above and the 
expressions in 2 Thess. i both teach Chiliasm, they pointedly disagree 
as to the type of Chiliasm taught, since the First Epistle implies that 
all believers, who have died, share in the resurrection at the parousia, 
whereas the Second Epistle would restrict this privilege to those who 
have endured persecution. This might easily be construed as a reflection 
on the genuineness of the Second Epistle. 

16 The difference between the Chiliasm found in 1 Cor. xv. 22 ff. and 
that of the Apocalypse relates to several other points: the Apocalypse 
makes the reign of Christ last one thousand years; Paul in 1 Cor. xv 
would speak of an indefinitely portracted period. According to the 
Apocalypse at the close of the one thousand years during which Satan 
is bound he is let loose again previously to his final defeat by Christ; 


254 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


It so happens that in the Epistle to the Philippians it is 
more impossible than anywhere else to reconcile the alleged 
Chiliastic elements with the fundamental structure of the 
Pauline Eschatology. According to Chap. iil. 20, 21 Paul 
makes the parousia coincident with the change of body not 
merely for himself but for all: “for our commonwealth is in 
heaven, from whence also we wait for a Saviour, the Lord 
Jesus Christ, who shall fashion anew the body of our humili- 
ation, that it may be conformed to the body of his glory, 
according to the working whereby He is able to subject all 
things unto Himself.” If Paul expected any special privilege 
for himself and other martyrs as regards time and order of 
resurrection, it cannot have been in connection with the 
parousia. We should then have to assume that he looked for- 
ward to an earlier resurrection, perhaps immediately after 
death. On such a view it would perhaps be possible to explain 
the plural of vss. 20, 21 rhetorically so as not to include Paul 
himself, and confirmation might be found for that in the first 
chapter, where “to depart’ is equivalent to “being with 
Christ.’’ Thus at least a degree of consistency could be saved 
for the Epistle. But even such a modified form of the antici- 
pated-resurrection theory would not be plausible enough to 
entitle it to serious consideration. On the one hand it is un- 
natural to exclude Paul from the jets of ili. 20, 21; on the 
other hand there is nothing in 1. 20-24 to suggest the Apos- 
tle’s conceiving the “being with Christ” to which his death 
would immediately introduce him, as an embodied life in 
heaven. It is true the phrase ody Kupi eivac designates in 
1 Thess. iv. 17 the presence with Christ in the body after the 


in 1 Cor. xv the close of the millennial period would signify the con- 
quering of the last enemy. In the Apocalypse the conflict between 
Christ and the enemies is concentrated in the crisis at the end, whilst 
with Paul it would cover the whole period of Christ’s kingdom. The 
millennial reign, which according to the Apocalypse would be a reign 
of peace, Satan being bound, would be a reign of war according to the 
interpretation put on Paul’s words. It is usually assumed that the 
millennial. reign of which the Apocalypse is believed to speak, is a 
reign to be exercised by Christ on earth; the process of which Paul 
speaks plays in the transcendental heavenly sphere. 


THE QUESTION OF CHILIASM 255 


resurrection, but in that passage it receives its special mean- 
ing from the context, as is indicated by the word ofztas, 
“and thus we shall be forever with the Lord.” In our passage 
the “being with Christ’? does not have its meaning context- 
ually determined in this way. The phrase in itself decides 
nothing as to the form which the presence with Christ will 
assume. Nothing hinders and everything favors giving it the 
same meaning as the évdnufoat wpos tov Kvpiov of 2 Cor. v. 8. 

Another serious objection to the Chiliastic interpretation 
lies in the expressions of vs. 12. Here Paul speaks of that 
which would enable him to catavtav eis rHv éEavdorai tHv ex 
vexp@v as an “apprehending,” a “having been made per- 
fect,” and denies having attained to this: ‘““Not that I have 
already apprehended or am already made perfect, but I press 
on, if so be that I may apprehend that for which also I was 
apprehended by Christ Jesus.” It is plain from this that the 
condition on which the Apostle suspends his attaining unto 
the resurrection cannot be martyrdom, for it would have 
had no sense for him to assure the readers that, that he had 
not yet obtained this, nor was yet in that way made perfect. 
Some internal process of attainment and perfecting must be 
referred to’ So soon as we understand the words as speaking 
of attaining to the resurrection in that sense they appear to 
be identical in substance with other Pauline statements affirm- 
ing the causal nexus between suffering here on earth with 
Christ and glorification with Him hereafter, and in which it 
is universally recognized that no special privilege granted to 
a class of believers can be meant but only the general grace of 
the resurrection-glory in store for all believers.’ 

But the difficulty arises that on this exegesis Paul seems 
to make his participation in the resurrection, which elsewhere 
appears as an assured predetermined hope of every Christian, 
contingent upon the issue of a process he is undergoing here 

17 Cp. Rom. viii. 17: “If so be that we suffer with Him, that we may 


also be glorified with Him”; 2 Tim. ii. 12: “If we suffer, we shall also 
reign with Him,” 


256 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


on earth. How could he speak, one unavoidably asks, of his 
resurrection with the dubiousness implied in the words: “If 
by any means I might attain unto the resurrection from the 
dead?” In order to relieve this difficulty Van Hengel in his 
Commentary on the Epistle proposes the following: the word 
é£avdotacis does not mean here Paul’s own resurrection, but 
is a designation for the time when the parousia takes place, 
equivalent to “the hour of the resurrection.’ Paul then 
would, with a degree of dubiety, express the desire that, as a 
result of his striving after conformity to Christ, he might 
be permitted by God to attain unto, 1.e., to survive until the 
day of the resurrection. But this is an impossible exegesis 
for several reasons. Why should Paul call the day of the 
parousia by this name “‘the resurrection from the dead,” if 
he himself wishes or hopes to survive, so that to himself per- 
sonally it would not be a day of resurrection? Going outside 
of his usual terminology to employ a strange name, we should 
expect him to choose at least a name that had some applica- 
tion to his own personal case. And in the first chapter of the 
Epistle Paul shows very plainly that survival until the parou- 
sia did no longer at the time of writing appear to him so 
desirable a thing as to be the supreme goal of aspiration. He 
there declares to depart and be with Christ “very far better” 
than “to abide in the flesh.” 

We are thus compelled to face the fact that éfavaoraois 
designates Paul’s own resurrection at the parousia, and that 
the Apostle represents this as in some sense dependent on his 
whole Christian striving and living as this revolved around 
the apprehension of Christ and the conformation to his death. 
This may be an unusual representation, but we have no right 
to declare it impossible or rule it out a prior. If taking it at 
its full meaning should have to be done at the cost of embrac- 


18 Commentarius Perpetuus in Epistolam Pauli ad Philippenses, 1838, 
pp. 234 ff. 

19 Van Hengel thinks that the verb xaravrav demands the interpre- 
tation of “pervenire ad tempus hujus eventi.” But he overlooks the fact 
that the choice of the verb is determined by the figure of “striving,” as 
in the sequel is the verb duwxev. Both are obviously metaphorical. 


THE QUESTION OF CHILIASM 257 


ing the pre-millennarian scheme, we should not over-dogmati- 
cally shrink from the issue. Still, with all openness of mind, 
we cannot bring ourselves to the conclusion that such is the 
absolutely necessary exegesis. The protests raised by the 
Epistle as a whole seem to be too emphatic for this. From one 
point of view, of course, the resurrection belonged to the 
province of the Apostle’s absolute certitudes, viz. as viewed 
from the standpoint of the divine purpose reflected in the 
believer’s assurance of salvation. But, from another point of 
view, the resurrection could appear none the less as the ethi- 
cally and religiously conditioned acme of his progress in 
grace and conformity to Christ. The best way to make this 
believable is to place side by side Paul’s strong sense of ac- 
countability towards the judgment-day, and his absolute 
conviction about the all-comprehensiveness and certainty 
of the verdict of justification. The sanctification of the be- 
liever is to him in practical life the sine qua non of the divine 
approval in the last day. This may throw light upon the 
analogous representation of the resurrection as the goal of 
a process of ever-growing apprehension and reproduction of 
Christ. As no one can expect to stand in the last day who has 
not practised holiness in the fear of God, so no one can hope 
to attain unto the resurrection of life who has not learned to 
know Christ and the power of his resurrection and the fellow- 
ship of his sufferings, being conformed unto his death. Such 
a mode of viewing the resurrection need not do away with 
the other mode of viewing it as a gift of free grace bestowed 
for the sake of the merit of Christy The first relation in which 
Paul stands to Christ is expressed in vss. 8, 9: “That I may 
win Christ and be found in Him, not having my own right- 
eousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the 
faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith.” 
This is the forensic relation of justification and it is funda- 
mental. But this is followed by a second, that of the appre- 
hension of Christ subjectively in sanctification. And that it is 
not impossible for Paul to hold up the resurrection as a goal 
to be striven after, appears from the fact that he here plainly 


258 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


so represents the spiritual resurrection, which elsewhere he 
views quite as much as the bodily resurrection under the 
aspect of an absolute act or gift of God. The process 
of “knowing Christ,” more particularly of knowing “the 
power of his resurrection” is, in some sense, subject to a 
Sioxecv. It is at one and the same time a divine grace and a 
Christian attainment. It is a yvaous in which Paul takes an 
active part, in which there is place for a caradaBeiv, just as 
there is a catavrdy with reference to the eschatological resur- 
rection. It may not be easy to explain in the concrete how 
precisely the Apostle conceived of this. The only point we de- 
sire to make is that, if the terms of effort be appropriate 
terms to be used in connection with the spiritual resurrection, 
then we lack the right to say that catavray eis used with e ras 
involves an impossible representation from Paul’s point of 
view as regards the resurrection of the body at the last day. 
Possibly in vs. 14 “the prize of the high-calling of God in 
Christ Jesus” likewise designates the resurrection-experience 
or the resurrection-state as something to which God will call 
at the end, or as something lying ready in heaven as the 
goal to which the believer has been called. Now of this prize 
Paul declares that he presses on towards it as towards a goal, 
and he expects of all mature Christians (réXevo. ) that they 
will be “thus minded,” that is assume the same attitude of 
pursuit. 
’ We have completed our exegetical survey, and the conclu- 
sion is that in none of the passages where Chiliasm was sup- 
posed to have been discovered, the discovery is borne out by 
the facts, while in not a few contexts it is positively irrecon- 
cilable with the Apostle’s representation. It ought to be re- 
membered, however, that this result of our investigation 
concerns_only the idea of a provisional Messianic Kingdom 
as future, i.e., strictly eschatological from Paul’s own stand- 
point, beginning with the parousia of the Lord. The argument 
in no wise precludes Paul’s having regarded the present reign 
of Christ, with its semi-eschatological character in the light 
of a provisional kingdom to be succeeded by an absolute king- 


THE QUESTION OF CHILIASM 259 


\ 

~> dom at the parousia. In point of fact such a conception is 
found in the passage of 1 Cor. xv. Here we are told in so 
many words that at “‘the end” Christ will deliver up the king- 
dom to God, even the Father. This implies plainly a distinc- 
tion between the kingdom of Christ as a present and the 
kingdom of God as a future reality. In this place then Paul 
has plainly incorporated into his eschatology the idea of a two- 
fold kingdom, just as in the teaching of our Lord there 
appears the same distinction between the present king- 
dom and the eschatological kingdom. In this form, and 
in this form only, is the distinction exempt from the objec- 
tion that it must involve an anticlimax and interpose some- 
thing different where the whole tenor of the Pauline teaching 
requires unbroken continuity. On our interpretation the Mes- 
Sianic provisional kingdom and the present cwrnpia are 
identical and coextensive, so that what the Christian now 
possesses and enjoys is the firstfruits and pledge of the life 
eternal. Paul’s aspiration everywhere fastens, without any 
intermediate resting-point, on the eternal state. This is 1m- 
mediately explained, if the blessings and joys of the Mes- 
sianic reign have already arrived, so that the Christian hope 
can with undistracted intensity project itself into the world to 
come. 

It cannot be maintained, however, that Paul carries 
through this distinction between the kingdom of Christ and 
the kingdom of God with uniformity. Although to a larger 
extent an eschatological conception with Paul than with 
Jesus, the kingdom of God is not exclusively so in the 
Pauline teaching. The Apostle speaks of “inheriting the 
kingdom of God,” 1 Cor. vi. 9; xv. 50; Gal. v. 21; Eph. v. 5; 
believers are “called to God’s kingdom and glory,” 1 Thess. 
li. 12; they suffer “‘that they may be counted worthy of the 
kingdom of God,” 2 Thess. i. 5. But the kingdom of God 
also appears as a present reality. According to Rom. xiv. 17 
it consists not in eating and drinking, but in righteousness and 
peace and joy in the Holy Spirit, and acording to 1 Cor. 


on 


260 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


iv. 20 its essence is not in word but in power.” In these pas- 
sages the kingdom of God and the present reign of Christ. 
are identified. And if the present kingdom can be called the 
kingdom of God, it is also worthy of notice that the future 
kingdom can be called the kingdom of Christ. This occurs 
in Eph. v. 5, where Paul speaks of an “inheritance in the 
kingdom of Christ and of God.” In 2 Tim. iv. I we read of 
“the émudavefa and Baoirefa of the Lord Jesus Christ” 
as coinciding with the judgment. This has been brought into 
connection with the advanced doctrine of the later Epistles, 
where Christ is represented as the goal of the world-move- 
ment.” 

The above observations show that a hard and fast,distinc- 
tion between a Messianic kingdom and the ultimate kingdom 
of God cannot be carried through in Paul. Obviously what 
has invited the distinction in 1 Cor. xv is the fact, that there 
the reign of Christ appears in one specific aspect, viz. as a 
reign of conquest. The Baoirkeveev of Christ here virtually 
consists in subduing one enemy after the other. As such it 
naturally enters into contrast with the absolute eternal reign 
of God at the end, of which it is characteristic that from it all 
enemies and warfare shall have been banished. Confirmation 
to this may be found in Col. i. 13, the one passage besides 
I Cor. xv. 24, where the kingdom of Christ has a somewhat 
militant setting: “God has delivered us out of the power of 
darkness and translated us into the kingdom of the Son of 
his love.’”’ To be sure, here the conqueror, who rescues us 
from the enemy, is rather God than Christ. 


20. Op, alsod Oe, WIV. at OL iye. £ By 
21 Cp. Enc. Brbl. II, 1386. 


CHAPTER XI 


THE JUDGMENT 


Resurrection and Judgment are the two correlated acts of 
the final consummation of things. They are like twin-woes 
in the travail by which the age to come is brought to birth. 
But they are not cleanly separated even at their eschatologi- 
cal emergence. In the resurrection there is already wrapped 
up a judging-process, at least for believers: the raising act 


in their case, together with the attending change, plainly in-. 


volves a pronouncement of vindication. The resurrection 
does more than prepare its object for undergoing the judg- 
ment; it sets in motion and to a certain extent anticipates 
the issue of the judgment for the Christian. And it were not 
incorrect to offset this by saying that the judgment places 
the seal on what the believer has received in the resurrec- 
tion. Broadly speaking, and keeping the whole trend of reve- 
lation in mind, the two processes cover between themselves 
the entire religious destiny and status of man. The physis 
and the ethos appear here in their interdependence. Ethi- 
cally man must be set right, physically, or rather soterically, 
he must be healed and transfigured. To these two ideas noth- 
ing of equal fundamental importance could be added: they 
are in principle exhaustive of what takes place at the end. 

The eschatological judgment appears in two widely vary- 
ing forms of description, which, respectively, may be named 
the realistic and the forensic one. In regard to the former it 
is not necessary that the technical term “judgment” should 
be employed, or where this appears it is in a less formal 
half-metaphorical sense. The substance, however, is always 
there, viz. that God brings about an effectual termination to 
the preceding process and puts in the place of it something 
toto genere different of final significance. F'rom the nature of 
the setting given to this it relates chiefly to the judgment of 


IN 


262 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


God’s enemies. The setting is martial; the background that 
of a fierce battle and a decisive victory. In the Old Testa- 
ment this is for a long time the prevailing mode of repre- 
sentation, though from Daniel and the Psalms onward the 
formal forensic picture becomes increasingly in evidence, 
without, however, entirely superseding the other. In the mar- 
tial judgment there is no apparatus of records kept and ex- 
amined, and no verdict solemnly pronounced on the basis of _ 
these. The mode is theophanic, that is through an appearance 
of Jehovah, but the theophany assumes such dimensions and 
produces such absolute effects, that there can be no question 
as to its belonging to the sphere of eschatology proper. 
Through the subsumption of the apparently physical pro- 
cess under the category of judgment its basally-eschatologi- 
cal character is assured. What seems at first sight blind and 
unexplainable is placed in the light of supreme purpose. 

The two terms in which this survival of the one, and that 
the earlier, of the Old Testament representations finds ex- 
pression are opyn and dreOpos. It is chiefly the merit of 
Ritschl to have once more placed in its proper eschatologi- 
cal setting the idea of the divine “wrath.’’* The term is not, 
of course, exclusively eschatological in its use; cp. Mk. iii. 
5; Rom. x11. 19; xill. 4, 5. But the overgrowing of the gen- 
erally-ethical by the specifically-eschatological is clearly — 
traceable. The doy wéAXovoa Of John the Baptist, the “doy 
that abides” of Jno. iii. 36, the “coming dpy7’’ of 1 Thess. 
i. 10 clearly indicate its ancient eschatological affinities long 
after the period of the Old Testament. Then there is also 
the figure of its “being stored up,” which presupposes a final 


1The seemingly obvious reference of “wrath” to the present in 
Rom. i. 18 has had an obscuring effect on its more specific eschatalogical 
application. The Present tense “is revealed,” as well as the effects 
described in the immediate sequel, belonging to the perverseness of the 
Pagan ethico-religious life of the time, have rashly led to the conclusion 
that the context relates to the purely providential retribution of God. 
But the better version of the Present is “is being revealed.” These 
religious and moral monstrosities are characteristic of the end, as may 
be seen from the Pastorals. 


THE JUDGMENT 263 


epochal terminus to its outworking. This reference is plainly 
required where the “‘orge’’ appears as something from which 
even believers need yet to be saved through the life of Christ, 
Rom. v. 9; for the present it would be absolutely impossible 
to conceive of believers as subject to the divine wrath, so 
that on that account alone reference of the “wrath” to the 
eschatological crisis appears inevitable. The objects of rep- 
robation are designated as “oxetn dpyfs’ i.e. vessels in 
which wrath has been stored up for manifestation in the 
future, Rom. ix. 22. 

Less frequent is the term “8AeOpos,” perhaps a specifically- 
Pauline word in eschatological usage. It occurs four times: 
tewor.svi.5; 1 Lhess, v. 3; 2 Thess. 1.9; 1 Tim. vi..9. With 
“orge’ it has in common the unforensic setting. The root 
from which “‘olethros” is derived is the same as in “émdAXupw” 
and in the latter’s correlative noun “daworea.” All these 
forms are pointedly eschatological. The ‘““Man-of-Sin” in 2 
Thess. 11 bears the name “son of perdition” (“‘apoleia’’). 
1 Tim. vi. 9 “olethros” and “apoleia”’ occur together. Whether 
the verb “apollumi” means, eschatologically, “to annihilate,” 
and the noun “‘apdleia” “annihilation” is a question to be 
looked into presently. 

There is one peculiar feature about this execution of 
judgment in act, viz. the immediateness of its effect. This is 
best illustrated by the description of the disposal of the 
“Man-of-Sin” in Thessalonians; it is brought about by the 
breath of the mouth of the ‘Christ, by the mere manifestation 
of His coming. Plainly this feature was borrowed from Isa. 
xi. 5. In Isaiah it is simply one of the illustrations of the 
prophet’s conception of the instantaneousness of Jehovah’s 
supernatural working particularly in judgment. 

It were a mistake to understand these realistic descriptions 
of the judgment as, to the mind of Paul, depicting God in a 
passionate state of non-reflecting self-assertion. Even in the 
Old Testament this is not so. Back of the bursting forth of ' 
the ‘‘wrath” and of the surrender to “olethros,” there is always 
assumed to lie a decision taken deliberately and based on 


204 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


righteous grounds. What is so often alleged and so thought- 
lessly repeated concerning the unethical nature of the God 
of a large part of the Old Testament finds no support in 
such representations. The terminology does not favor it, for 
the process is of old called a ““Shaphat,” a “judgment, and a 
“judgment” as such has intelligent discrimination in it. Else 
the term and its derivatives could never have been drawn 
into the service of certain current delineations of Jehovah's 
O.T. character, either eschatologically or otherwise. The 
peculiar term ‘“‘zedakah”’ for “‘victory” in certain contexts of 
the Old Testament bears witness to the same principle.” 

It would be no less a mistake, however, to identify these 
unforensic forms of judgment-execution with purely physi- 
cal processes. Realistic they are, to be sure, but realistic is 
not to be equated to the sensual-physical. The breath of the 
mouth of the appearing Christ is not to be understood as a 
withering blast, although some of the Apocalyptic writers 
may have actually formed this conception of the Messiah’s 
mode of action. But neither is all this material to be diluted 
into the purely ethico-spiritual, as though it were a species of 
psychological procedure, only on a higher plane. The divine 
realism is more than thought- or will-tissue. But the greater of 
these two misconceptions is, perhaps, that of solidifying what 
happens into elements of physics. Kabisch, who out-apoca- 
lypses the Apocalyptics, has gone farthest in the direction of 
the latter extreme. He handles the conception of “fire,” not 
only after a realistic-substantial but after a materialistic 
fashion, particularly in connection with 1 Cor. i1, 13-15. To 
the physical nature of the fire here spoken of he attributes, 
first of all, the illuminating character of the judgment: 
“every man’s work shall be made manifest: for the day shall 
reveal it’’ (1.e. the day of Jehovah) as a complex of light- 
producing fire. But fire is also a destructive, consuming prin- 
ciple, so that, if the process be once physically conceived, the 

2Tt ought not to be overlooked that “forge” is objective; it designates 


the product, the issue in act of a state of mind; the corresponding state 
of mind giving vent to “orge” is “@uds.” 


THE JUDGMENT 205 


literal fire will furnish the unitary element in which these two 
effects are naturally combined. The fire spoken of is assumed 
to be, with the same literal understanding, the elemental fire 
of which the Spirit consists. This pneumatic fire, according 
to Kkabisch, preserves in Paul’s conception that which is 
similar to its nature, whilst destroying all the dissimilar, viz. 
the sarcical.*). 

All this rests on an over-literal interpretation of what 
wishes to be understood as figurative language, although it 
can not be denied that by an unusually felicitous interweav- 
ing of a figurative woof with a literal-realistic warp a 
remarkably-impressive texture has been obtained. The figures 
are undoubtedly suggested by belief in the phenomenon of an 
actual, eschatological fire having a real function in the judg- 
ment-day. But this by no means suffices to render the entire 
representation physico-eschatological. It may even be 
doubted, whether in the Apocalyptic passages quoted much 
more than figures are intended, because in other passages the 
figurative meaning lies on the surface. Thus Test. Abr. we 
read: “He tests the works of man by fire, and if any man’s 
work is consumed by the fire, straightway the angel of judg- 
ment takes him and carries him into the place of sinners 
. . . but if the fire shall test any man’s work and shall 

8 For the Apocalyptic source of this Kabisch refer to the following 
passages: 4 Ezra xiii. 9, 10, where the Messiah in combat with the 
enemies neither raises his hand, nor carries a sword nor any other 
weapon, but causes to proceed from his mouth a fiery stream and from 
his lips a flaming breath, and stormy sparks to fly from his tongue, all 
of which, mingling together, set the attacking host of the enemy on 
fire and annihilate them; then, in Chap. xxxviii, this fire is further,in the 
mind of the Apocalyptic writer (as interpreted by Kabisch) identified 
with the Law, alleged to have been understood by the Jewish Rabbis 
as a fiery substance, which would add one more element of possible 
literalness to the meaning of the representation; further, in 4 Ezra xiv. 
39 Ezra is made to drink the Law in the form of a chalice full of water 
with the color of fire; in Apoc. Bar. xlviil. 39 it is said that fire will eat 
the designs of the wicked and that in flames the cogitations of their 
reins will be tested. If all this in the Apocalypses is to be taken literally, 


then we shall have to say at the least that it goes far beyond the Old 
Testament realism. Cp. Isa. xi. 4; Mal. iv. 1. 


266 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


not touch it, he is justified.” The argument taken from 
the Jewish representation of the Law as a fiery substance, 
operating as such in the judgment-day, rests on a very 
slender basis, for in 4 Ezra xili. 38 it is only the Syriac 
Version that reads: “by his Law which resembles a flame’”’; 
the better reading seems to be: “by his word of command 
which resembles a flame.’* In Chap. xiv. 39 the water 
which Ezra is given to drink resembles fire not because the 
substance of the law is of fire, but to depict the seer’s in- 
spiration.® But if some, or even all of such statements bore | 
in the mind of these visionary writers a grossly-physical 
sense, it would by no means follow from this, that the 
images called up by the Apostle, simply because the same 
terms appear in them, require or allow the same interpre- 
tation. The fact alone that Paul in the passage of I Cor. i11 
turns the figure into three different directions suffices to 
prove that to him it is actually a figure.° Nor does Paul 
believe that any such fire will be needed to destroy that 
product of work which is compared to hay, wood, stubble. 
With as much right might one insist upon the literalness of 
these terms: wood, hay, stubble, in their application to the 
work- product as upon the literalness of the combustion-pro- 
cess when applied to the destruction of the things named. 
Were the destruction to be understood realistically as a de- 
struction through chemical fire, then it would be unavoidable 
to assume the presence of the work-product in some realistic 
sense in the day of judgment, a consideration which, to be sure, 
does not deter Kabisch, for he asserts that according to the 
Jewish, and therefore likewise Paul’s conception, the sub- 
stance of works done is bodily preserved and bodily brought 
forward to undergo judgment. Support has been sought for 
this in the representation, that, when Christians are made 
manifest before the judgment-seat of Christ, each will 

4Cp. Gunkel in loco in Kautzsch, Die Apokryphen und Pseudepi- 
graphen. 

5 Gunkel, ibid. 


6 The three directions are: (a) the day will reveal it by fire; (b) the 
day will test by fire; (c) the fire will consume. 


tJ) 


THE JUDGMENT 267 


receive the things done in the body, whether it be good or 
bad, 2 Cor. v. 10. Within this statement, however, the phrase 
“done in the body” serves no other purpose than to specify 
the state of life, that in the judgment will pass under review, 
viz. the period spent in the body. It is impossible to conceive 
that Paul meant to restrict the judgment to corporeal sins, 
excepting from it all non-somatic wrongdoings. Even, when 
enumerating the works of “the flesh,’ he subsumes under 
this category several forms of sin that lie outside the sphere 
of the body, Gal. v. 19. 

Passing over into the strictly-forensic field we find a tech- 
nical terminology employed. The verb xpivev, xpiver@au is 
the regular medium for describing the judging act of God or 
Christ. The noun for the passing of the judgment is «pious 
that for the resulting verdict xpiua ;cp. Rom. v. 16. These terms 
are not, of course, confined to eschatological use, although in 
the majority of cases such is their actual reference. In its ety- 
mological origins the term “‘krinein” is an entirely neutral 
term meaning “‘to place or keep apart.’’ The central idea is that 
of discrimination. In the basic natural, physical associations 
there is no technical judicial element present. “To judge” 
simply means to form an opinion, which, while it cannot help 
being to the credit or discredit of the one on whom the 
Opinion is passed, is not even reminiscent of either law or 
law-court. How purely-ideal the mental action is becomes 
specially clear from its forming the main element in the 
concept of “to answer,” droxpiOjvar. A certain opinion is 
placed before the mind of one spoken to; this evokes a cor- 
relative opinion, and the act of “answering”’ is strikingly 
conceived as the result of the reaction of one opinion upon 
another. We meet this, ethically or juridically as yet 
uncolored, use in such passages as Lk. vil. 43; xil. 57; Jas. 
ii. 12. In Pauline statements it occurs Act. xill. 46; xv. 19 
(“my opinion is’); xx. 1; (“had determined’) ; 1 Cor. x. 
15; 2 Cor. v. 14; Tit. ii. 12. Easily, however, there enters 
into this the formulation of a more or less _ official 
approval or disapproval. Thus the definitions brought from 


268 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


the council of Acts xv to the diaspora-Christians are called 
ddyuata Kkexptméva in xiv. 4. This is a court-terminology, 
although as a matter of fact it describes not an enforceable 
decision, but partakes of the nature of advice from the 
Apostles. 

Within the province of divine jurisdiction, on the other 
hand, we plainly are in such statements as the following: 
Rom. xii..25 111) 63) vi..23 1: Coriiy5%Vi 135 x32 
I1, 12; 2 Tim: iv. 1. In most instances of this forensic 
turn given to the word it contracts an unfavorable meaning 
implying divine disapprobation. The neutral “krinein” tends 
to change into an unfavorable “krinein,”’ although this latter 
signification, notwithstanding its unfavorable import, still 
remains distinguishable from the absolutely unfavorable 
verdict of the last judgment.’ 

There is still a third group of terms relating to the judg- 
ment-procedure of God with its result of final, absolute 
determination. This group attaches itself to the “‘Sécazos- 
Suxacovv-dixalmois’’-idea which plays so large a role in the 
Apostle’s soteriological, particularly his justification-vocab- 
ulary. It comes under consideration as to all three, adjective 
noun and verb, in a favorable sense only. The “dikaios” in 
result of justification cannot, of course, be condemned in 
the last judgment. Still of his positive final absolution and 
endowment with the supreme eschatological blessedness we 
read less than might be a priori expected in the judgment- 
contexts. And it is doubtless the relative absence of the 
element in question that reflects itself in the scarceness of 
the justification-terminology in such cases. The term “dikaios” 
(of God as Judge) occurs with undoubted reference to the 
final judgment .in.2 Tim, iv. 8 only.* In 2 Thess. i. 5, 6 the 

7’The neuter sense of krinein (in the divine procedure) still appears 
in Rom. ii. 2; in Rom. v. 16 and 1 Cor. xi. 33 a sharp distinction is 
drawn between “krinesthat” and “katakrinestha”’; the Corinthian be- 
lievers are “judged” on account of sinful conduct, but this is done through 
causing cases of sickness and deaths among them for the explicit 
purpose, that with the world in the last judgment they should not have 


to undergo the sharp verdict of xaraxpuots. 
8In regard to the precise implicatons of the verse interpreters differ; 


THE JUDGMENT 269 


enduring of persecution by believers is called an “‘endeigma’’ 
of the ‘“‘dikaia krisis’”” of God, to the end that the readers 
may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God; here both 
the entire context and particularly the term “kingdom” prove 
that the statement is meant eschatologically sensu stricto; 
there is no reflection here so much upon relative matters of 
degrees of blessedness; the inheritance of the kingdom. of 
God is involved. The verb “dikaioon” “‘to justify” is found in 
the argument of Rom. ii. 13; while this argument is hypo- 
thetical, as explained above, it is none the less fundamental ; 
it connects the principle enunciated with the final judg- 
ment, which is explicitly named in vs. 16: the day when 
“God shall judge the secrets of men . . . by Jesus Christ.’ 
The noun “dikaiOsis’’ occurs with probably eschatological 
reference once only, Rom. v. 18; “(the free gift) came 
unto all men to justification of life’; here the reference to 
“life” certainly includes the consummate life of the eternal 
state, although it is not necessarily restricted to that. The 
synonym “dikaiokrisia’” appears in Rom. ii. 5 with specific 
eschatological reference: “the day of wrath and of revela- 
tion of the righteous judgment of God.” On the future 
tenses in certain passages no absolute reliance can be placed, 
because the tense may be logical and not chronologically- 
prospective.° The fact remains that the justification-termin- 
ology is somewhat in abeyance in Paul’s references. to. the 
judgment. This in a measure confirms the conclusion reached 
before, viz..that in*ene important sense justification is to 
Paul virtually a judgment by way of anticipation. 

By no means, however, does this mean that Christians 
have no further interest in or concern about the judgment 
the reference to the last day is beyond doubt, and in connection with it 
God is called “the righteous Judge”; uncertain is the construction of the 
phrase “the crown of righteousness”; is the Genitive explicative or 
possessive? The former would yield “the crown consisting in righteous- 
ness” that is in the absolute eternal righteousness flowing from the final 
judgment. The latter yields: the consummation (crown) of that right- 
eousness, which is the believer’s possession already in this life; cp. the 


incorruptible crown of 1 Cor. ix. 25. 
Suge MOMs iL 14 20; 1V.i25° Vv. 17, 10. 


270 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


still to come. How little this would be correct may be seen 
from the fact that by far the majority of instances where 
the last-judgment-idea occurs speak of believers. Of course, 
the first and most obvious reason for this is, that the letters 
are addressed to Christians, and that in consequence the judg- 
ment idea is brought to bear upon such. As God alone judges 
those that are “without,” even so the Apostle might quite 
properly speak no more than was absolutely unavoidable of 


j 


the judgment to be passed upon the world of unbelievers. | 
The restraint in this respect could not help bringing about 
a certain abeyance of the sharp antithesis between believers 
acquitted and non-Christians condemned in the last day. *° 
It were quite unwarranted to infer from this that the sharp 
contrast named was not familiar to or even was indifferent 
to the Apostle. Proof for the opposite is by no means lack- 
ing. Instances in which the act of “krinein’” revolves around 
the salvation or non-salvation of persons are the following: 
Rom. -it..2,43,'8, 12). 165 111.6) 8; v.16} \‘Cormvaem ee 
2.Cor. 11.932 Thess,'1i..12 ) Pum. 111.6; 2 Taman 

Giving full weight to these passages and not drawing any © 
unwarranted generalizing conclusions from them, we still 
cannot help noticing that, broadly speaking, with Paul the 
judgment is an event that will make discrimination as to the 
future rank and enjoyment in the life to come between 
individual ‘Christians. The differences established may and 
will be great, but the range covered by them lies within 
the realm of salvation. The Corinthian transgressors are 
“judged,” that is disciplined by God through the infliction 
within their circle of sickness or death, but this happens 
not to the detriment of their final salvation, rather to the 
furtherance of it, 1 Cor. xi. 30-32. Particularly this principle 
is brought to bear upon those who are dispensers of the 
Gospel to others. All the work performed by one of this 


10Cp. the words of Jesus, Matt. xxv. 32, 33. To the instances of 
condemnation of the evil may be added the affirmation that “the world” 
(that is “the world” in its evil complexion) is and will be subject to 
condemnation: Rom. iii. 6 (purely quantitative?) ; 1 Cor. vi. 2; x1. 32. 


THE JUDGMENT 271 


class may in the last day be destroyed as by fire, neverthe- 
less the workman himself will issue from the judgment as 
a firebrand plucked out of the combustion that destroys his 
work, 1 Cor. iii. 14. At the same time the destruction of his 
work-product will be reckoned to him and by him as a real 
loss which he suffers. Paul, although only hypothetically, 
yet with real seriousness and a perceptible degree of fear, con- 
templates the contingency of becoming a castaway in his 
own person after all the labor expended by him towards the 
salvation of others.” 

It might easily seem as if through the partial shifting of 
the emphasis from the personal issue to the question of 
degrees in the allotment of eternal benefits somewhat of the 
solemnity of the judgment-prospect were apt to be lost. The 
actual tone and tenor of the Apostle’s deliverances on this 
subject do not verify such an impression. There remains 
hanging over the consciousness of approaching judgment a 
veil of disturbed apprehension, which even the most 
advanced in sanctification is unable to throw off. It forms in 
a certain sense the balancing counterpart to the pervasive 
and fundamental joyfulness of the first recipients of the 
new-born faith. And this tremor that runs as an under- 
current beneath and mingles even with the surface waves of 
the stream of primitive Christian experience is so real that 
it shows its presence in the mind of the Apostle himself to 
whom an ascent to the highest summits of Christian exulta- 
tion was not unfamiliar. The supreme joy engendered by this 
was not able to render him immune to the fear and depres- 
sion inseparable from the contemplation of the ultimate 
crisis with all it bears within itself of eternal issues. In the 
conscious presence of this thought he became acquainted 
with what he calls “the dread of the Lord,” 2 Cor. v. 11.” 


11 1 Cor. ix. 27. 

12[t is not quite certain that the statement, “Knowing therefore the 
terror of the Lord, we persuade men” should be understood of the par- 
ticular fear Paul feels towards the judgment in the capacity of a dis- 
penser of the Gospel, or of the fear he seeks to instil into his hearers 
through reminding them of their future exposure to the judgment. 
Vs. 10, urging that all must enter the judgment, favors the latter. 


272 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


And in the case of the common believer likewise this senti- 
ment is a constant ingredient. All the teaching on the father- 
hood and love of God as connected with the experience of 
justification did not eradicate it. It yields no satisfactory 
explanation to say that this element in Paul’s and the early 
Christians’ mind represents but a lingering remnant of 
Paul’s erstwhile religious way of thinking and feeling. It is 
far too deep-seated for that. Much more to the point would 
it be to recognize in it the thoroughly matured fruit of the 
age-long culture of the moral aspect of revealed religion 
among the Old Testament people of God fostered by the 
Law and the Prophets. In this respect also Paul was a gen- 
uine son of Israel, and through upholding the principle 
involved he took pains to make his converts spiritual heirs 
of what was finest and noblest in the Mosaic dispensation. 
Besides, nothing is more certain than that any depreciating 
judgment passed upon this strain in Paulinism affects with 
equal pertinence the teaching of Jesus. 

The clear recognition of this aspect of the judgment 
brings us face to face with the problem of the legitimate 
or non-legitimate role played in the Pauline teaching (and in 
Biblical teaching generally) with the conception of reward. 
The question has been touched upon in our third chapter, 
but a closer examination at this point need not prove super- 
fluous. The modern stress laid upon the autonomy and 
spontaneity of religion, even to the point of strict exclusion 
of every form of external authority, here plainly runs athwart 
what constitutes a main strand in the religion of the Scrip-. 
tures. To propose any rule at all and to introduce any 
motives whatsoever ab extra is held to vitiate the religious 
process at its very root. The general answer to this radical 
ne position is, of course, that it puts man on an equal plane 

l-with God in the matter of religious converse, and that this 
in itself is an irreligious attitude to assume. Such autonomy 
and spontaneity as are thus insisted upon belong to God 
and to Him alone. If the objection to forcing religion upon 
man were to be taken in a strictly-literal sense the position 


THE JUDGMENT 273 


taken might be readily allowed; there is no need of saying 
that with God no such gross violation of the nature of piety 
is conceivable. But the modern critique of the principle of 
authority in religion strikes far deeper than the view thus 
defined. It voices at bottom a protest against every non- 
volitional introduction of religious forces into the soul; 
the entire system of efficient, subconsciously communicated, 
grace is negated by it, so that to take one’s stand on that 
ground would by one fell stroke annihilate the entire redemp- 
tive substance of the Christianity of the New Testament, and 
charge Paul with the incongenial rdle of unconsciously 
playing the Pelagian. What here we are more immediately 
concerned with embodies the obnoxious criticism in a much 
subtler and apparently less subversive form. The contention 
is that making use of the reward-motif in religion injures 
the delicacy of a relationship that by its very nature should 
be conducted on the high plane of absolute altruism. In 
other words it is the commercial aspect of the notion of 
reward, the guid pro quo method that provokes protest. 
Hence the name attached to it is “legalism” and its parent- 
age is derived from the perverse system of Judaism, par- 
ticularly as this system existed in post-Old-Testament times. 
The psychological root of this opinion lies not very far 
removed from the root of the preceding error: it is again 
the self-sufficient man thinking too highly of himself to 
suffer the dignity of his human nature to be encroached upon 
by God. No more than the psychic spontaneity of his religion 
can he permit the delicate texture of its fine spiritual disin- 
terestedness to be interfered with from any quarter what- 
soever. 

Putting the question not now on the basis of the ethics or 
psychology of religion, but on the basis of the available 
evidence alone there can be no doubt as to the presence and 
vital significance of the reward-idea in the Pauline escha- 
tology. The classical statement is that of Rom. 11. 6-10, We 
have explained before why owing to the intrusion of sin, the 
rule here formulated never attains to realization in practice, 


—" 


274 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


and what are the particular obstacles to its successful opera- 
tion. The general cause lies in the refusal of the flesh (sin- 
ful human nature) to be subject to the will of God, Rom. 
Vil. 5, 18; vili. 7; Gal. v. 17. But, while this belongs to the 
subconscious disposition of man, Paul goes further and 
points out to us the conscious channel which this inner oppo- 
sition to God delves for itself to reach the open of surface 
manifestation. The general sinfulness of the heart might 
perhaps be mistaken for a negatively-disabling factor, some- 
thing dooming all human efforts towards eschatological | 
attainment to sheer futility. As a matter of fact Paul puts 
the failure of the law-method, if not on a more fundamental, 
yet religiously considered, on a more ugly basis. In its 
extreme form it assumes the character of enmity against 
God, such enmity to which the mere approach of and con- 
tact with God acts as a stimulus to hostile reaction. Still 
more specifically the Apostle teaches that the method for- 
mulated breaks down at one particular point, viz. its in- 
evitable lapse into the sin of “boasting’’ before God. We 
can clearly observe that in his hamartological appraisal of 
the degrees of sin this constituted for Paul an extreme 
point of the fatal course traversed by sin in the human 
consciousness. It occupies this place for the simple reason of 
its being a profoundly irreligious attitude towards God as 
the rightful possessor and sole legitimate recipient of relig- 
ious glory. The fact alone that the legalistic type of relig- 
ion solicits and fosters this type of sin is in the Apostle’s 
judgment sufficient to put it out of all consideration as a 
feasible method for arrival at the eschatological goal; cp. 
Rom. iii. 27. 

Still this principial exclusion of the compensation-idea is 
enforced only in the sub-redemptive stage. Redemption 


‘\ reconstructs the relation of man to God. It does so not only 


in general, but also in this very respect, that room is again 

created for the introduction of the reward-complex. First of 
all in its ancient, immutable form it is incorporated and 
remains firmly embedded in the objective vicarious task of 


THE JUDGMENT 275 


Christ on behalf of man. Christ, according to Paul, does pre- 
cisely what fallen man could no longer do in result of the 
insuperable obstacles thrown in his pathway by sin. For in 
Christ’s case these obstacles do not exist; subjectively He is 
exempt from the disabling influence of sin. His positive moral 
and religious perfection renders every invasion of the self- 
glorifying factor into his consciousness a priori impossible. 
Hence in Phil. ii. 9 the gracious bestowal of the name above 
every name upon the Saviour is placed by Paul without the 
slightest hesitation on the footing of work rendered and 
value received: “Wherefore also God highly exalted Him 
and gave unto Him the name which is above every name.’’*’ 
Further, through an extension of the same principle to 
believers, although in their case no “earning” in the strict 
sense is according to Paul’s general teaching conceivable, 
they are nevertheless admitted into a status within the 
régime of grace where with strict maintenance of the denial of 
merit, they are permitted to lay up a store of recompense for 
themselves towards the day in which all accounts are to be 
settled. As John spoke of receiving out of the fulness of 
Christ grace for grace, so after a somewhat similar fashion 
it might be said that in this Pauline construction there is 
deep calling unto deep, grace lying underneath grace 
throughout the successive divine dispensations at every point 
and on every plane. 

Apart from Rom. ii. 5-10 the passages that speak of the 
allotment to the individual believer of a degree of reward 
are the following: 1 Cor. i. 4-8; i11. 8; xv. 32, 58; 2 Cor. iv. 
Seer. 1x:.0-6; Gal. v1.5-10; Phil. 1. 10, 263 °11..163 Col: 
Gepeeii24. 1 Lhess, iii) 13,5-v. 23; 2 Thess..i. 73.0) Tim, 11. 
feeetvess V.255 V1. 18, 19053 2 Tim. 11. ‘1; iv. 4,-8, 14,.16. 
What strikes one most in these pages is not so much the 


18 The Greek original for “gave,” “éyapicaro,” should not be overlooked 
in this passage. The name which Jesus had rightfully earned yet was 
bestowed upon Him by manner of grace. Even when God enters into 
the recompense-relationship with man He does so in virtue of an 
unmerited act of favor, granting something that He was in no wise 
bound to give. 


Ne, 


276 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


enunciation of the compensatory principle but rather the 
matter-of-fact manner of its expression. It is evident that the 
Paul who had passed through the storm and stress of the 
Judaistic controversy, and come off triumphant in that crisis 
through the vindication of the doctrine of salvation by free 
grace, without the works of the law, could not possibly have 
felt any detraction from that in the incentive offered to the 
increase of the measure of reward. There was evidently to 
the Apostle’s mind no retreat from the former position in all 
this. The matter simply belonged to a different plane. 

It should not be overlooked that the prospect of reward 
just discussed reacts upon the envisagement of the judgment 
both by Paul and the common Christian. While the judg- 
ment as such can not be otherwise regarded than as a matter 
of solemnity and fear, yet to this has now been added the 
reverse side, that of a prospect of joy and hopefulness and 
there results a still more complex feeling such as might well 
baffle the most skilful attempt at psychological analysis. Even 
the factor of a prospective reward, can, owing to its uncer- 
tainty and its dependence on the progress in sanctification, 
not but add a constant element of anxiety to the Christian 
hope. The judgment is unlike the resurrection in that its 
canvas can never be entirely flooded with light and joy. But 
neither can it, in view of the subintroduction of the note of 


14 The charge of continued infection of Paul by Jewish legalism is 
according to the above comments unwarranted, as has been shown before 
in Chapter III. The differences between the Jewish and the Pauline 
standpoint may be briefly formulated as follows: according to the 
Jewish mind the matter rests on a commercial basis; consequently 
God has no choice but is bound to reward; Paul never loses out of sight 
the prerogative of the divine sovereignty. God is not under obligation to 
reward such as He is under to punish sin, except in so far as He has 
bound Himself by implicit or explicit promise. It further follows from 
this that the reward according to Paul is never meted out on the basis 
of strict equivalence ; in this respect also God retains His full sovereignty. 
Finally, the filial relationship of the Christian to God inevitably imparts 
to the procedure an altogether new physiognomy: henceforth it is not 
only a reward of grace, but specifically a reward bestowed by paternal 
love. 


THE JUDGMENT 27/7 


reward, be ever entirely overspread henceforth by the aspect... 
of gloom and trembling. The things to be received, it is true, 
are not things of small importance; they concern tremendous 
issues in the world of eternity, so that even a mere question 
of degree can never wholly become a matter of secondary 
importance, far less of indifference. The element of trepida- 
dation can not be fully eliminated, because it is inherent in 
the situation itself. But after all it can no longer reign 
supreme. With pride and rejoicing the Apostle looks for- 
ward to the day that shall exhibit in its clear light the accu- 
mulated fruit of a life full of service of the Lord. And out 
of this prospect of intense personal and official satisfaction 
there springs again in turn the intensified urge of exhorta- 
tion addressed to his converts not to disappoint either him 
or themselves in the attainment of this unique prize. Such, 
doubtless, is the meaning of passages like 1 Thess. ii. 19; 
Beret 5; 2 Cor, 1145 vii. 43.2 Cor. iv. 175,Gal. vi.9; 
Eph. vi. 9; 1 Thess. ii. 19. 

There are still two other aspects of the judgment on which.” 
reflection is made by Paul. The one is its publicity andthe 
other its character as a vindication of the ways of God. 
These two are not independent one oi the other. The vindi- 
cation requires the publicity, since it is not to limited groups 
of persons but to the world, entering into judgment without 
exception, that this final divine pronouncement must be 
made known. Only this is in keeping with the majesty of 
God and the solemnity of the transaction. Paul, however, 
has in mind, besides the interhuman publicity confront- 
ing God with man and man with man mutually, also that 
exploration of men from within which draws the hidden 
content of the hearts into the open of the light of day. For 
God, the Omniscient One, this might seem superfluous, but 
for men it is not so, and the judgment fulfills itself in no 
other way than through the participation of all concerned in 
its execution. To Paul it was not without form and void, no 
mere metaphorical tableau to shadow forth a supersensual 
occurrence. The mysteries with which it remained beset in 


278 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


every attempt at visualization, did not hinder his interest in 
nor insistence upon an essential feature like this, in spite of 
its sharing in the mysterious character of the whole in all its 
details. It is part of the evil that it seeks to hide itself in the 
heart, nay would fain hide itself from the inlooking of God. 
The bringing of it to the surface of observation on every 
hand is an instalment of the retribution visited upon it, the 
first step, as it were, of its conviction and condemnation. In 
this respect it is the opposite to the hidden man of the heart, 
whose natural home is in the mystic recesses where he dwells 
alone with God.** Of the necessity that the hidden sin must 
be exposed Paul speaks in Rom. ii. 16 and 1 Cor. iv. 5. In 
the former passage the readers are cautioned not to pass 
judgment on one another before the time, implying on the 
one hand that previously to that eventful time the necessary 
‘data for fair judgment are lacking, owing to the hidden 
nature of the evidence, and, on the other hand, that the time 
of judgment having arrived and the veil of secrecy having 
been drawn aside, the possibility and opportunity for due 
judgment will be afforded them by God. 

The thought of the vindication of the divine justice emerges 
only rarely in a direct way where Paul is speaking of the judg- 
ment. In his treatment of the process of justification, on the 
other hand, he touches upon it once and again.*® The judg- 
ment has frequently been represented as a theodicy. The 
thought of the necessity of a theodicy can not have appealed 
to the Apostle’s mind over-strongly: he was too deeply im- 
pressed with the divine sovereignty for that. Still the 
approach to this point of view is not entirely absent. In the 
O.T. one of the branches into which the idea of the divine 
Zedaquah divides itself is that of righteousness of vindica- 
tion. This is found especially in the latter part of the Book of 
Isaiah. It is, however, the vindication of the people in their 
controversy with the heathen that is referred to there and not 
the vindication of Jehovah in his judging procedure specifi- 


15 Cp. Rom. iii. 4, 19. 
16 Cp, Rom. ix. 14. 


THE JUDGMENT 279 


cally. At the same time Jehovah’s cause is so closely bound 
up with the cause of Israel that the vindication of Israel can 
not well be thought of, nor is it actually conceived, without 
that of God. The only passage which in Paul actually con- 
tains the thought of a forensic vindication of God occurs in 
Rom. iii. 4. It is a quotation, not however from those 
Isaianic contexts but from Ps. li. Here by a bold metaphor 
God is introduced as Himself a party at the bar. The Psalm- 
ist in his profound penitence thirsts, as it were, for some 
extraordinary recognition of the fact, that God is in the right 
and he himself in the wrong as regards his sins and for 
that purpose makes the pointedly personal confession 
“Against Thee only have I sinned,” as it were, desiring to 
see Jehovah put in the right through some formal action at 
law. Here, then, God is not, within the terms of the figure 
the Judge, but one upon whom judgment is passed; the pur- 
pose for which Paul reproduces the situation is, however, 
that in his own judicial procedure God may be found true, 
but every man a liar. 

There are a couple of points at which Paul’s eschatology 
comes in contact with his demonology. The larger and most 
important part of these concern the action proceeding from 
Christ against the great demonic powers, who, with Satan at 
their head, rule the present age, and still in a measure retain 
their influence after the enthronization of Christ through the 
resurrection. Satan is “the god of this aion.’’ As such he 
blinds the mind of the unbelieving in order to prevent the 
dawning upon them of the light of the gospel, 2 Cor. iv. 4. 
To the readers of Romans he holds in prospect that ‘“‘shortly 
God will bruise Satan under your feet.” This can refer only 
to the fulfilment of the curse pronounced upon the serpent 
according to Gen. iii. 15, and therefore is of strictly eschato- 
logical import. But Paul likewise speaks of a judgment upon 
the sub-Satanic powers of the demon world, such as are 
enumerated in Rom. viii. 38. The implication that these 
powers might attempt to separate believers from the love of 
God marks them as out of harmony with the divine purpose. 


280 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


The inclusion of “angels” is not at variance with this, for 
the Apostle distinguishes formally between “angels of light” 
and “angels of darkness,’ 2 Cor. xi. 14.1‘ That no more 
reference is made to Satan and his cohorts as the prime 
rulers and movers of the evil side of the universe is 
partly due to the supplanting of this antithesis (Satan vs. 
God) by the contrast between the “First” and the “Second” 
“Adam,” which has an even wider reach in its ultimate 
issues; partly perhaps also to the familiarity of at least 
Paul’s Jewish readers with this province of his theology.** — 
There is no doubt that according to the writer’s mind 
such powers, so far as they are evil, will enter into the judg- 
ment of the last day. They are perhaps included in the, 
apparently exhaustive, enumeration of those whose knees 
shall bow in the name of Jesus, since the three spheres of the 
universe are explicitly named as contributing the participants 
in this act, Phil. ii. 9-11. A more detailed description of the 
judgment in this realm of evil spirits is furnished by 1 Cor. 
xv. 24; here the “bringing to impotence’ of all rule, author- 
ity, power, comprehensively designated in vs. 25 as “all his 
enemies” is spoken of. This, however, as argued in a preced- 
ing chapter is not confined to the last crisis strictly so called; 
it belongs, with the exception of the abolishment of death, the 
last enemy, to the period intervening between the resurrection 
of Christ and the parousia. A different point of view, that of 
an anticipated, but more gradual judgment-disposal is 
observable in 1 Cor. i. 18; here those not saved by the cross 
are described in the present tense as “the perishing ones’ ; 


17 The “angel of light” into which Satan “transfashions” himself is 
not metaphorically so called; while explaining the deceptive, ingratiating 
form of Satan’s appearance to seduce, it rests on the fixed literal dis- 
tinction between “angels of light” and “angels of darkness.” Satan by 
nature belongs to the latter class, but can put on the “schema” of the 
former. 

18 Cp, Everling, Die Paulinische Angelologie und Déamonologie, 1888. 
This monograph opens up a large, and largely unknown, territory in 
the faith of Judaism and of Paul. In regard to Paul, however, it is 
over-inclined to assimilate the data to the fanciful Jewish beliefs 
recorded in the Apocalyptic literature. 


THE JUDGMENT 281 


whether this includes the evil spirits seeking to bring about 
such a failure of the gospel-preaching, must remain doubtful. 
Of a “coming to nought” or “being reduced to nought” of 
“the rulers of this world” we read in 1 Cor. ii. 6; here there 
can be no doubt but demonic spirits are referred to, because 
in vs. 8 ignorance is predicated of these same rulers in regard 
to the glory of Christ such as led them to crucify the Lord.” 
In so far as this act was a condemnable and self-condemna- 
tory act, and in so far, moreover, as it set in motion the _ 
eschatological winding up of affairs through the cross, it 
would not be rash to discern in this a form of anticipated 
judgment. In the various passages dealing with this subject 
one gains the impression that the Apostle was conscious of a 
mysterious drama being enacted behind the scenes of this 
visible world in the world of spirits, and that not a drama 
bearing its significance in itself; it is something pregnant 
with the supreme solution of the world-drama at the close of 
history. There is one passage, however, in which this fact, 
only divinable elsewhere, finds explicit statement. This is 
Col. ii. 15. Paul here declares that in the cross God was 
“amexduadpmevos” the principalities and the powers and made a 
show of them openly “‘eSeuywarecev, and (thus) triumphed 
“@piauBetoas” over them. The precise implications of the 
statement depend almost wholly on the figure involved in 
the participle “ amexSucduevos ..’ The English versions render 
this by “spoiled,” ‘“‘despoiled,’ but there is an alternative 
translation, viz. “put off from Himself.” Both renderings are 
unobjectionable linguistically considered; the main respect 
in which they differ is that the former accentuates the hostile 
relation between God and the principalities and powers, 
which is in accord with such terms as “making a show” and 
“triumphing”’ which can hardly be understood of any other 
class than evil angels. The other view involves the assump- 


19 The ignorance of the (evil) world-spirits in regard to the intent of 
God’s procedure seems to have been a not unfamiliar idea in Judaism; 
cp. Everling, op cit. p. 12 ff. The N.T. parallels are rare; Eph. iii. 10 and 
I Pet. i. 12 are of a different nature. 


282 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


tion that the powers named stood in some connection with 
the pagan gods; these had, as it were, veiled and obscured as by 
a mask the face of the true God to the view of heathendom, 
and God now openly declared his fundamental difference 
from them. Still even so the phrases “making a show” and 
‘“triumphing”’ with their ominous import remain. Besides, a 
difficulty arises from the connection into which Paul brings 
these demonological ideas with the soteric significance of the 
cross (to which “in it” in vs. 15 points back) and the putting 
off by God from Himself, or despoiling, the principalities and — 
powers; the act means not simply the removal of delusions on 
the part of paganism, but involved for Israel itself the forgive- 
ness of trespasses on the basis of the blotting out of the bond 
written in ordinances that was against those living under the 
law.*° But, whatever interpretation may be put upon the mys-\ 


20 Zahn, Einleitung in das Neue Testament, I, pp. 334, 335, adopts the 
second view outlined above, but does not succeed in making clear how 
the interdependence between the soteric abrogation of the law-debt and the 
triumph over the principalities and powers is to be conceived of. The 
problem of the passage comes near to touching that of the ororyéia Tod 
Kocpov, the “rudiments” or the “elements” of the world, which appear in 
Gal. iv. 8 and Col. iit. 8, 20. Here likewise Zahn maintains the tradi- 
tional conception of stoicheia as rudimentary elements of teaching 
(Heb. v. 12) over against the modern demonological view which would 
take them as spirits connected particularly with the astral bodies, and 
regulative as such of the physical, ceremonial apparatus of pagan 
religion. The peculiarity of the use to which Paul on the latter view 
puts the conception lies in this, that he charges the Galatians, originally 
pagans in their religion, with the folly of returning to a stoicheia- 
worship when they embrace the Judaistic form of religion. He assumes 
the presence of a common element in this respect between the cere- 
monialism of paganism and that of Judaism. What it consists in the 
sequel, Gal. iv. 9-11 explains: the observance of days, months, seasons, 
years, under the rule of astral movements. This does not necessarily 
involve, however, that the stoicheia in all religions in which they occur are 
of the same character. Paul may have thought that this class of religious 
observances was during the Old Testament subject to special regula- 
tion and supervision by God, whereas in the pagan world they were left 
to develop without restraint. The stoicheia would have acted as divine 
instruments until such time as the new régime abrogated them. So 
far as Galatians is concerned this represents a tenable view. Nothing 
in the line of condemnation is there said against them; the blame, and 
largely a blame of foolishness and futility, is placed upon those who, 


THE JUDGMENT 283 


terious words, it is plain on any view that the Apostle viewed . 
the crucifixion of Christ as a real judgment visited upon. 
superhuman spirits, something that, after a manner, might be 
put in parallelism with the anticipation of the final resurrec-. 
tion in that of Christ. 

There is still one other aspect in which the angels appear 
subject to judgment, not this time of God, but to judgment 
on the part of believers. This representation occurs in 1 Cor. 
vi. 3. Immediately before (vs. 2) it takes the form “Or know 
ye not that the saints shall judge the world?” It is not quite 
certain that Paul meant these two objects “angels” and “‘the 
world” to be understood interchangeably. In that case only 
evil angels could come under consideration, for ‘‘kosmos”’ with 
Paul has as a rule evil associations, although not uniformly so. 
Where the subject of the judging is God the term might be 
taken quantitatively in the sense of totum mundum, Rom. 111. 
6, still this is not probable, cp. the accumulation of evil aspects 
of the world in 1 Cor. 1-111. It will be noted that Paul speaks 
of this function of judging angels and judging the world as 
something familiar to the Corinthian readers, which indi- 
cates that it was a commonly accepted belief; otherwise the 
statement could not have been put in the form of a question: 
“Know ye not that, etc.” In the Pauline writings there is no 
after having passed from under their rule, seek to restore it; there is 
no reference to any divine judgment pronounced upon them, In 
Colossians it is different. While the stoicheia themselves are not char- 
acterized as hostile to God, yet contextually they seem to be identified 
with the principalities and powers whom God despoiled or shook off 
from Himself and triumphed over. The latter occur in vs. 15; immedi- 
ately before stands the statement of the blotting out of the bond 
written in ordinances that was against the people; the same powers 
appear invested with authority to hold a bond for God, and to be the 
objects of the punitive divine procedure; in vs. 8 they are outright 
called “stoicheia” and placed in an unfavorable light: “of the world and 
not after Christ”; in the sequel also (vs. 20) they are, with a close 
backward reference to vs. 15, characterized as beings or things to which 
the readers have died with Christ. Cp. “therefore” in vs. 16. The subject 
remains doctrinally beset with much obscurity. It belongs to the dis- 
cussion in hand only in so far as it involves a judgment passed by God 


on reprehensible spirits identified with the present age. For the modern 
literature on the stoicheia question cp. the Bibliography. 


284 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


further reference or allusion to this matter. Everling, who 
relies much on parallels from the Apocalyptic literature, has 
little light to shed on the question here. All he is able to quote 
for comparison is the Book of Enoch, Chap. x1i1. to the effect 
that Enoch was commissioned by God to deliver to the evil 
spirits who had intermarried with the daughters of men 
(Gen. vi.) the condemnatory sentence of God, passed by God 
after the accusation presented by the Archangels. This latter 
feature, viz. that precisely the accusers are found among the 
Archangels, whilst the “sons of God” are the small group of 
Azazel with his two hundred angels, does not fit well into 
the quite unrestricted statements of Paul that “the saints 
shall judge the world,” or that “we shall judge angels.” 
The only thing furnishing a parallel are the words of Jesus 
assuring the Apostles that they are to sit on twelve thrones 
judging the twelve tribes of Israel, Matt xix. 28; Lk. xxi. 
30. Judging is in the Orient a regal function, the king being 
lawgiver and law-executor in one. But, whilst the saying of 
our Lord could be placed under the general rubric of the 
saints reigning with Him, the statement of Paul is too 
specific to permit of such exegesis. What the Apostle finds 
fault with in his readers is not their domineering attitude 
towards fellow-Christians but their litigosity: they go to law 
before the unrighteous (pagans) and not before the saints. 
And they do this in regard to “the smallest matters,” things 
pertaining to this life. There are in this two points of dis- 
approbation on Paul’s part. First, it is beneath the dignity of 
believers, who formed, even in Corinth, an aristocracy of the 
Spirit, to submit their trivial bread-and-butter differences 
(biotika) to common pagans. Secondly, in seeking redress 
from pagans they contemptuously pass by fellow-believers as 
not wise or distinguished enough to settle points of differ- 
ence, where such arose.** In both respects the reminder of 


21 The more principial point, viz. that such differences admissible into 
court should occur among the Corinthians at all, Paul reserves till 
vs. 7: “Nay, already it is altogether a defect in you, that ye have 
lawsuits one with another.” 


THE JUDGMENT 285 


their destiny to judge angels is (not without a certain admix- 
ture of irony) made by Paul to serve as a corrective. From 
this we may gather that the future judging of angels was not 
to the Apostle’s mind a negligible function; it required 
respectful recognition from Christian to Christian; a slight 
in connection with it deserved rebuke. And further, the things 
which the judgment of the angels to be held related to were 
not small matters but matters of the life to come and con- 
sequently of supreme importance. Now, while this gives us a 
glimpse of what lay in the Apostle’s inner mind on this sub- 
ject, it by no means satisfies our not illegitimate curiosity, 
the less so since it is evident that the Corinthian Christians 
knew more, perhaps all, about it.” 

There remains still one question that needs briefly to be 
considered. It is the question of the Judge who, according to 
Paul, will preside at. this solemn function and render the 
supreme decision. It is God from whom all righteousness and 
judgment issue, and to whom all the, to men un-disentangible, 
threads of conduct, be it inward or outward, are clear, who 
as His divine right executes this conclusive judicial act and 
thus receives this part of the glory that must accrue to Him 
from all that has ever happened in the world. This indeed is 
the finest note in Paul’s manifold pursuit of the idea of the 
righteousness of God. It is not enough to be righteous 
objectively, nor sufficient to carry the approval of one’s con- 
science within one’s self, the crown in the process is not put 
upon it until God by formal judgment has declared a man 
absolved sub specie juris divini. As an undertone this may be 
overheard even in such an occasional utterance as of I Cor. 
iv. 3-4: “But with me it is a very small thing that I should be 
judged of you or of man’s day (i.e. in a human court) : yea, 
I judge not mine own self. For I know nothing against my- 
self; yet am I not hereby justified: he that judges me is the 
Lord.” But this isolated note is not in principle different 

22Cp. for the entire passage the instructive, finely discriminating 


exegesis of Bachmann, in Zahn’s Komm. z. N. T., Vol. VII, 2nd ed., 
pp. 224-238. 


286 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


from the music of the full chorus of the doctrine of justifi- 
cation: “That He might Himself be just, and (none the less) 
the justifier of him that has faith in Jesus,’ Rom. ili. 26; 
or: “let God be found true, but every man a liar; as it is 
written, That thou mightest be justified in thy words, and 
mightest prevail when thou comest into judgment,” vs. 4. At 
this high point the theocentric principle of God’s judgment- 
procedure and of his soteric justification-method are clearly 
seen to spring from the same root. 

vx Side by side with the judgment of God stands that of 
which Christ is the presiding figure, 2 Cor. v. 10. This, how- 
ever, is not to be interpreted as a later accretion to the dignity 
and office of Christ, and therefore particularly quotable as evi- 
dence for the Saviour’s deity. Evidence to that effect it no 
doubt is, but it is by no means a piece of the investiture of 
Jesus with divine attributes or functions on the part of the 
early Church. The roots lie much farther back, viz. in the 
Old Testament conception of the Messiah as the representa- 
tive of God, who on that account also is the executor of and 
the participator in the divine judgment. And even this rests 
ultimately on the inseparable union upon which the reigning 
and the judging function had entered in the Shemitic world 
from times immemorial. 

There is one instance in a Pauline discourse where the 
Apostle reflects upon the essentialness of the human nature 
~. of Christ as a qualification for his holding judgment. This 
occurs in the Areopagus discourse, Acts xvii. 31: “inasmuch 
as He has appointed a day in which He will judge the world 
in righteousness by a man whom He has ordained.””? A 
similar statement occurs in the Fourth Gospel, v. 27: “And 
he gave him authority to execute judgment, because he is a 
son of man.’’”* It is not clear in either passage what motive 


23 The English versions evade the point of difficulty by rendering, 
A. V. “by that man whom He has ordained, R. V. “by a man,” with 
“that man” in the margin, A. R. V. “by the man,” with “a man, in the 
margin.” 

24 Some have been tempted to find in John v. 27 a substitution of 
“man” for “son of man.” The latter would then be the formal title of 


THE JUDGMENT 287 


underlies this stressing of the participation of Jesus in 
human nature. The ability on his part to enter into the sub- 
jectivity of those whom He is to judge has been thought of ; 
this would approximate the thought to that so prominent in 
the Epistle to the Hebrews, only that there a specific turn is 
given to the idea: Jesus’ sympathy is chiefly concerned with 
the temptation that befalis believers through suffering; it is 
profoundly moral and not merely emotional sympathy with 
suffering as such. 


the Messiah, who as such holds the judgment. The intimate connection 
between the name “Son-of-Man” and the judgment is in evidence in the 
latter part of the Synoptics. If, however, there is a substitution here, 
it would have originated in the Greek original, for both the article 
before “son” and that before “man” are lacking in the text. 


CHAPTER XII 


THEE TE RNAS DA 


The main character of the state following the resurrection 
~<and the judgment is described by the adjective “aiwmos.’ As 
will be presently shown, the character so named does not 
exclusively express some relation to or severance from time; 
certain qualitative associations are bound up with it. Of the 
final issue of the eschatological succession of events it occurs 
in the Pauline Epistles fourteen times: Rom. ii. 7; v. 21; vi. 
22, 23;2 Cor. iv. 17, 183 v. 13 Gall vi. 8; 2 Thess: tage 
1 Tim. ii. 10; Tit. i. 2; ili. 7; Phi. 15; to these must be added 
Acts xiii. 46, 48. Of these passages the only one explicitly 
joining the term to the destiny of those condemned in the 
judgment is 2 Thess. i. 9: “dreOpov ai@uov.’ The Hebrew 
“"Olam” to which the noun “aédv” in “aiévios” must be 
traced back seems to be in its original significance what the 
philosophers call a “Grenzbegriff,’ but conceived after a 
rather concrete fashion; it denotes what is ‘unreachable to 
the time-sense of man.* This seems first and chiefly to have 
related to the past when lying beyond the reach of re- 
membrance; “the hills of eternity” are the immemorially 
existing hills, which, of course, does not imply that 
they had no beginning in fact, Gen. xlix. 26; Deut. 
xxxili. 15. Doubled phrases such as “le‘olam wa‘ed” 
came into use to intensify the idea by means of repeti- 
tion.* Duplication could also serve the purpose of dis- 
tinguishing between eternity “a parte post’ and “a parte 
ante’: “me-‘olam ‘ad ‘olam.’”” It has been held by some that 


1 Etymologists make the root ‘‘‘alam” signify “to be hidden”; the ideas 
of eternity (heaven) and being hidden appear in close association, cp. 
1 Cor. x. 7; Eph. iii. 9; Col. 1. 26; “mysterion” and “revelation” are 
correlative terms by opposition; hence in the last-quoted passage “hid- 
den from ages.” 

2Cp. Von Orelli, Die Hebraischen Synonyme der Zeit und Ewigkeit, 
1871. 


THE ETERNAL STATE 289 


‘“‘ai@vios”’ is derived not from the Old Testament concept 
of eternity but from the formal eschatological distinction 
between “‘this aion” and “the aion to come.” This is unlikely 
for more than one reason. The notion of perpetuity, unend- 
ingness, while perfectly applicable to the age to come, is 
obviously inherently opposed to the phrase “the present age.”’ 
Besides, the entirely uneschatological Hellenic “‘aion’ is 
doubtless related to the word “aiei,” “‘always,” so that every 
derivation from a technical eschatological system appears 
superfluous. The present age is precisely the opposite of © 
aionios, for it has a “ouvrédea,”’ As for Paul’s usage in par- 
ticular, the Apostle finds in the consummate state the anti- < 
thesis to “chronos,” “‘time,” Gal. iv. 4.° There is not a single 
instance in Paul which compels us to restrict the adjective 
aionios to a relative duration; of the instances above cited no 
less than eleven join the adjective to the noun “life,” “zoe 
aionios’ ; the inherent content of the phrase “‘eternal life” pre- 
cludes limitation. Both the Rabbinical theology and Greek 
philosophy already found the specific difference of the word 
in its negation of any recognizable time-extent beyond. By 
the Rabbins “the future aion” is characterized as “perfectly 
long,’ Kiddush xxxix. 2. Aristotle speaks of aionios as that 
which by nature has nothing beyond itself, De Coelo 1. 9, 
which, to be sure, relates to the lifetime of a person, but in 
the same sense can be applied to the cosmical span of 
time. But, when speaking of the philosophical ‘‘a7re:pia,”’ he 
admits that the transfer of the period-limitation to this is of 
the nature of an epinomy, that is metaphorical.* We see, 
therefore, that the word-forms, both Semitic and Hellenic, 
bear the seed of the concept non-cessation in themselves 
although in each of the two spheres it required a different 


3 As remarked before in another connection, “fulness” is not meant here 
in the first instance as “ripeness”; it signifies the completion of what was 
“time” and the succession of it by what is different from time through the 
mission of the Messiah into the world. For the Messiah is the introducer 
and beginner of the eschatological world. 

4Cp. Cremer Worterbuch der Neutestamentlichen Grdacitat, sub voce 
aionios. 


290 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


principle to mature the term to its predestined absoluteness.* 
When the eternal character of the final state is put over 
against the time-character of the present state the distinction 
proximately bears a popular meaning. While in no wise deny- 
ing the philosophico-theological conception of an existence 
outside of and above time attributed to the divine nature, for 
which, subjectively speaking, the categories of present, past 
and future do not exist, and to a certain degree even suggest- 
ing this, the suggestion, if such there be, could only apply to 
the divine nature, and transcends the state of the creature — 
under all circumstances, the consummate eschatological state 
not excepted. Paul nowhere affirms that to the life of man, 
after the close of this aeon, no more duration, no more divisi- 
bility in time-units shall exist. Life so conceived is plainly the 
prerogative by nature of the Creator: to eternalize the inhabi- 
tants of the coming aeon in this sense would be equivalent 
to deifying them, a thought whose place is in a pagan type of 
speculation but not within the range of biblical religion.* Paul 
clearly makes a difference to his own mind, not only between 
dying before the parousia and surviving till then, for these 
contingencies involve, of course, a prius and a post, both sub- 
ject to the law of time, but he likewise, in his conception of 
. a possible post-mortem state of nakedness, longer or briefer, 
“pro jects the idea of perceptible duration into the life be- 
yond. The declaration of the angel in the Apocalypse, 
x. 6; “ ypdvos ovkéts éotat, iS not meant to infringe upon 
the principle just laid down; it may be translated with 
5 The animus of the ever-repeated attempt to de-eternalize the word 
“aionios” is of a doctrinal-theological nature. It desires not so much to 
limit the state of blessedness, but rather to find a linguistic and exegetical 
basis for the attack on the idea of “eternal punishment.” There is no real 
relief to be obtained from this offense by diluting the term aionios. Relief 
could come only through weakening the sense of the word for destruction 


to which aionios is joined. Attempts to that effect we shall consider in the 
immediate sequel. 

6An instance of such pagan self-deification Reitzenstein finds in 
the Hermetic writings, and brings this to bear on I Cor. iii. 4, where “are 
ye not men” is taken to imply that as pneumatikoi men are divine. Cp. 
on this the author’s The Eschatological Aspect of the Pauline Conception 
of the Spirit in Princeton Theological Studies, pp. 248-250. 


THE ETERNAL STATE 291 


A.R.V. “that there shall be delay no longer.’’** Never- 
theless time in the present life is so inseparably connected 
with the great astral movements that, when the latter should 
cease to exist or to operate, it could be truly said that 
time in the old terrestrial form had with them ceased to 
be. Apart from such statements the descriptions in the 
Apocalypse of the dramatic developments in the supernal 
sphere are full of the movement of time.® 

If further inquiring into the characteristics of the aionion, 
still keeping its formal aspect rather than its substantial con- 
tent in view, the first feature obtruding itself is that of the 
imperishableness, including the unchangeableness, of the 
things pertaining to it. Paul declares, almost after the manner 
of an axiomatic truth: “the things which are seen are tem- 
poral; but the things which are not seen are eternal,’ 2 Cor. 
iv. 17. At first this reads like a differentiating appraisal of 
the visible and the invisible, something reminding of the 
antithesis between the two worlds of the ideal and the sense- 
things with Plato. A closer examination of the words in their 
context will soon convince that this exegesis would convey 
only part of the meaning, and for the other part produce a 
wrong perspective. The emphasis does not rest on the seen 
versus the unseen, but on the fact that the former, under the 
present circumstances happens to consist of perishable things, 
whereas the other under the same circumstances possesses the 
nature of the eternal, of what from its very nature cannot 
perish, because it carries the principle of eternity in itself. A 
permissible paraphrase would be: the things that in this 
lower, preliminary, state engage our interest are transitory 
and corruptible; the things which in the present dispensation 
the believer cannot yet lay hold of by vision are the eternal, 


7A.R.V. has the old rendering “time” in the margin. 

8 Cp. Rev. vii. 16; xxi. 23. 

®It is usually believed that even the Old Testament contains the repre- 
sentation of Jehovah as subjectively existing above all progression of 
time viz, in Isa. lvii, 15, “the Lofty One that inhabits eternity.” It is 
probable, however, that the clause should be rendered “who sits en- 
throned forever” which would retain the time-form expression. 


292 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


incorruptible realities. It goes without saying, that the distinc- 
tion thus interpreted partakes not of the nature of a cool, 
disinterested diagnosis of metaphysical difference; there is a 
degree of pathos in the declaration, occurring as it does in a 
highly emotional context. Paul is conscious of exo7retv “look- 
ing at,’ that is contemplating with interest the make-up of 
the invisible world. Only, this mode of contemplation is with 
the Apostle not induced by the invisibleness of the things in 
question; in the abstract he practises no cult of the invisible 
as partaking per se of a superior complexion: that would be 
a Hellenic thought, but he has. learned to recognize in the 
things unseen to the present aion the enduring things of the 
world to come, a world already in principle present, the con- 
templation of which can consequently render solace and sup- 
port in the affliction of the moment. That thus and thus only 
the stress is rightly divided will be perceived from the closely 
following word: “for we pilgrimage through a land of faith, 
not of sight,’ 2 Cor. v. 7. Here the unseen things of the 
other passage are precisely the things of future sight, deriving 
their supreme value from this prospective visibleness, whilst 
the walking through a region of faith is felt precisely as a 
matter of relative lack of importance. After essentially the 
same fashion Paul measures the superiority of the building 
from God above the present tent-abode by this one supreme 
characteristic that it is “aionion,’ to be possessed and 
inhabited in heaven, 2 Cor. v. 1. Here also the synonymity of 
the “ouranion” and the “‘aionion”’ is clearly observable. 

The emphasis placed on the atonion should not mislead us 
into assuming that Paul was most stirred by the mere end- 
lessness of the state hoped for. In any ordinary prospect of 
felicity mere endlessness as such could not fail to prove an 
attraction, almost a thought of compulsion. But it is 
necessary to remember that the object or the objects to the 
possession of which endlessness is ascribed are of an 
altogether unique kind, of such a nature in fact that the end- 
lessness became a part of their adequate apprehension. Com- 
mon things can be appropriated and assimilated in a finite 


THE ETERNAL STATE 293 


succession of single moments and part by part. The fugitive- 
ness of occupation or intercourse with them may cause that 
wistful regret that is inseparable from converse with the 
finite. With God it is different. He himself being aionios, 
there can be no thorough, no adequate reception of Him into 
our finite consciousness, unless there be some assurance of 
the unceasingness of our communion with Him. He is not a 
God of the dead but of the living. All temporal, partial experi- 
ence of God inevitably leaves a sense of dissatisfaction 
behind. God remains the Eternal One but we can never be 
lifted out of the sphere opposite to this. None the less prac- 
tically this problem can be met through God’s imparting a re- 
flection of his unique eternal existence to our life as creatures, 
through admitting us into the realm of the aionion. In 
this He not merely confers a boon upon man, but at the same 
time provides a true satisfaction for Himself. Although in 
the abstract being self-sufficient as God, He has freely chosen 
to carry his concern with us to the extreme of eternal mutual 
appurtenance of which the creature is capable. Paul affirms 
both, on the one hand that God is the only immortal Being 
1 Tim. vi. 16 and, on the other hand, that He has appointed 
as the eschatological goal of religious fellowship with Him- 
self, among other things, the prize of an incorruption, Rom. 
ii. 7 such as is equivalent to eternal life. And that this attri- 
bute, existing in Him alone in its highest potency, and in us 
in an ectypical form means in both cases more than mere end- 
less existence, but has a content commensurable with its eter- 
nity, should not be overlooked. The biblical terminology does 
not in respect to believers employ, after the philosophic 
fashion, the word “immortality,” but chooses as a larger, 
deeper receptacle the term “‘life.’’*® We find that the aionion- 
concept, thus understood, belongs to the acme of religion, 
serving to express its absoluteness. Eschatology ceases for 


10 Yet compare I Cor. xv. 53, 54: the mortal puts on immortality; still 
the very form in which this is expressed is such that it could never have 
been applied to God, who is the Only One who has immortality, 1 Tim. 
vi. 16. 


294 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


those who have learned, and in principle experienced this, to 
be an abstract speculation: it becomes the profoundest and 
most practical of all thought-complexes because they, like 
Paul, live and move and have their redemptively-religious 
treasures in God. 

To the opposite state awaiting the condemned after the 
judgment aionios is applied by Paul only once, 2 Thess. i. 9. 
This is the statement most frequently depended upon to tone 
down the principle of two-sided eternal retribution tradi- 
tionally ascribed to the Apostle. It not being feasible to 
modify the eschatologically-constant value of aionios, the 
attack has centered upon the noun or nouns to which the 
adjective is attached. ‘“Olethros” and “‘apoleia’’ have been 
given the sense of ‘“‘annihilation.”’ The absolute universal- 
ism thus forced upon the Apostle has a weak basis to rest 
upon. It can appeal to one passage only besides the one under 
review from 2 Thess. i. 5-9, viz. to the statement in 1 Cor. 
xv. 22 where the promise is found that in Christ all shall De 
made alive with the same universality as all die in Adam. The 
latter passage has been examined by us at an earlier point in 
the chapter on the Extent of the Resurrection. At any rate 
it does not speak of annihilation. As concerns the statement 
in 2 Thess. no one can deny that it posits a strong contrast 
between the destiny of believers and the end of their perse- 
cutors. Only, the question arises, whether the thought of 
annihilation is fitted to serve as the evil opposite pole in a 
contrast so sharply stressed by Paul. It will have to be 
remembered at the outset that “annihilation” is an extremely 
abstract idea, too philosophical, in fact, to find a natural place 
within the limits of the realistic biblical eschatology, least of 
all, it would seem, in this outburst of vehement indignation 
against the enemies of the Gospel. Closely looked at it is not 
a stronger but a weaker concept than that of protracted retri- 
bution to threaten with, so that, instead of contributing to 
the sharpness of the opposition intended, it would to a cer-| 
tain extent obliterate the latter. Nor is there any need ety- 
mologically of foisting this absolute meaning upon “olethros”’ 


THE ETERNAL STATE 295 


or “‘apoleia,’ a derivative of the same root. The idea of a 
“second death” occurring in Rev. xx. 6, 14; xxi. 8 has 
indeed suggested the thought of “annihilation” to commen- 
tators, but in the Pauline contexts no such idea appears. In 
point of etymological import “‘apoleia,’’ stands at a suffi- 
ciently far remove from even the milder sense of destruction, 
not to say from its extreme force found in annihilation. The 
verb originally means “to lose’ and out of this first develops 
the signification “to ruin,’ “to destroy.” In English 
idiom “‘to destroy” without difficulty passes over into the 
meaning “‘to annihilate,’ as when the philosophical physicists 
assert that matter cannot be destroyed, but this is deceptive, 
because it is a technical adaptation of a more general term to 
a specific usage for which, on account of the very strange- 
ness of the idea, it is hard to find a proper English equivalent, 
so that the Latin “annihilare’’ for precision of speech would 
have been preferable. In Greek “apollunai,’’ even when involv- 
ing violent death, does not go beyond the limit of ruining, 
destroying. The exclamation “olola,’ “I am ruined,” pre- 
supposes that the person using it has not ceased to exist. 
Interesting for the point in question is from the classical 
language Sophocles, Oedipus Coloneus, vs. 399: ““Now the 
gods are setting thee up, formerly they destroyed thee.’’ The 
upshot of the matter is that apollunai is but a stronger 
synonym for apokteinein, cp. Matt. x. 28, where the contrast 
lies between “killing the body” and “destroying both soul 
and body in Gehenna,” the verb in the former clause being 
apokteinein in the latter apollunai. Instances elsewhere in the 
New Testament, e.g. Jno. vi. 27; 1 Pet. i. 7 do not allow the 
rendering “‘annihilatio.”’ The same question that is here 
raised in regard to “‘apollunai” arises also in regard to the 
verb “katargeisthai’”’ as used by the apostle in 1 Cor. xv. 24, 
26; whether this signifies “to annihilate” or “to render 
inoperative” has been discussed in the chapter relating to 
the Question of “Chiliasm in Paul.” 


) 


11 Nearest approach to the idea of “reduction to non-existence” within 


296 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


The problem of the relation of “olethros” and “apoleia” 
to existence or non-existence could be solved without much 
difficulty, were writers willing to test the Pauline statements 
by reference to the words of Jesus, because the latter on 
the one hand uses “‘apoleia”’ of the state and Gehenna of the 
place of eternal destruction and on the other hand combines 
with these the strongest predicates of unceasing retribution ; 
cp. Matt. v. 29; vil. 13; Mk. v. 20, 303.1%) 43). Gee 
Lk. xi. 5. But the argument would mean little to those who 
are bent upon deéschatologizing the teaching of Jesus, to the 
extent of declaring unauthentic what is called the “small 
apocalypse’ in the closing part of the Synoptics. Even 
the Fourth Gospel in what it says about Jesus does not differ 
in this matter from the united testimony of the Synoptical 
Gospels Jno. xvii. 12. Could Paul in a matter like this have 
shown less severity than Jesus?” | 

The eschatological process, then, on its evil no less than 
on its favorable side, issues into a state that is literally eternal. 
The attribute “aionion,’ however does not remain entirely 
within the quantitative sphere. It attracts to itself certain 
associations of quality.) The circumstance that the word had 
become so intimately and consistently attached to. the realm 
of future blessedness has made it strongly suggestive of 
richness and nobility of content. In so far as this is the case 
it cannot be denied, that the reverse, sinister significance 
suffers a partial eclipse. The fact of its restricted occurrence, 
in that ominous sense, bears out this feature. It would never- 
theless be a mistake to infer that the Apostle’s conviction re- 
garding the tremendous reality of the punitive side of the sub- 
ject had received any impairment. The terms considered 
could never have been joined to the predicate of “aionios” at 


Scripture is, perhaps, found in Job xxviii. 22: “Destruction and death say, 
We have heard the fame thereof with our ears,” but this is a poetic 
hyperbole. It means to represent the most remote and non-accessible 
things as still unable to point out the dwelling-place of “wisdom.” 

12 The Pauline passages where azwAea occurs are: Rom. ix. 22; Phil. 
i. 28; iii. 19; 2 Thess. ii. 3. In none of these is there noticeable a lack of 
pathos, rather the opposite. 


THE ETERNAL STATE 297 


all, if the sharp edge of the Apostle’s eschatological “dualism” 
had been actually worn off to any degree. The relative 
scarcity of usage is naturally explained from the fact that 
Paul was before aught else a minister of the grace of eternal 
life, an Apostle rather than a doom-foretelling prophet. We 
have already met the same phenomenon of unequal division 
of stress in discussing the doctrines of the resurrection and 
the judgment. In that connection no one would be so foolish 
as to infer a tendency on Paul’s part towards detracting 
from the importance of these central topics of all biblical 
eschatology. 

Passing on now from the more formal to the material 
make-up of the future state, we must endeavor to analyze 
the elements entering into its content..The Apostle has not 
left us without guidance in this endeavor. The category of 
time is exchanged for that of space when the final state is 
located in or identified with heaven. The “aionion” and the 
“ouranion’ belong together and evince mutual attraction. 
It has already been noticed in a previous connection that the 
conjuncture was naturally brought about throughthe entrance 
of Christ into heaven in the course of historical development. 
There remains to be added, however, that the ultimate ground 
for this historical event lies far deeper. The primacy of the 
celestial sphere in the eschatological universe antedates as 
a constitutive principle every other reason. The structure of 
the two strata placed one above the other, with the higher 
stratum made regulative for the lower one in its laws and 
ideals, is, of course, older than Paul. It underlies the parabolic 
teaching of our Lord in the Synoptics, and more abstractly 
and principially reveals itself both in the setting and in the 
discourses of the Fourth Gospel. And this scheme, far from 
being a purely speculative construction, is of eminently prac- 
tical import. It is the basis of what in devotional language 
we call other-worldliness. Other-worldliness neither with 
Paul nor elsewhere in Scripture is a negative state; it does 
not involve any morbid or distorted religious habit of mind. 
Every tendency or attempt to replace it by an earthly-ortented 


rine 


298 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


type of religion is productive or symptomatic of a basic dis- 
turbance in the very groundwork of the Christian mind. 
The Christian religion was born under the auspices of 
this primordial and irreducible contrast of the two worlds 
involving the trend of the pious from below to on high and 
their destiny to arrive at the goal of their deepest aspiration. 
Nothing can so ill afford a disavowal of its native milieu 
as historic Christianity. How easily to the mind of Paul 
the eternal and the heavenly melt into one may be gathered 
from such passages as I Cor. xv. 47; 2 Cor. v. 5; Col. 1. 5. 


/ “Heaven” is to our feeling, possibly even more than to the 


Apostle’s, a definition of what locally surrounds and encloses 
the realities and delights of the eternal state rather than a 
description of the content of these. 

The actual elements into which the eternal and heavenly 


kingdom of God. The first of these four underlies and pro- 
duces the second and the third, so that the whole might be re- 
duced to the Spirit and the kingdom of God. The Spirit 
is the fundamental creative factor as regards life and glory 
in the saints. It is a pity that the word “spiritual” has 
through the devotional usage become so wedded to the 
ideas of fineness and supersensuousness of religious texture 
as to lose some of its power for conveying to us the 
deeper core of its significance. It is easier to regret than 
to correct this, all the more so, since the states called 
“spiritual” in popular parlance are actually, the product 
of the Spirit’s inworking. Another cause interfering with a 
clear solution of the problem of the Spirit’s eschatol- 
ogical operation lies in the fixed antithesis between the 
“gdp&’ and the “Ilvedua’ in the Pauline teaching. The flesh 
“lusteth” against the ““Pneuma” and vice versa, Gal. v. 17. 
If we knew for certain what is the background of the evil 
associations of the flesh which are so much in evidence as to 
render “sarx” with Paul practically the synonym of sin, we 
should likewise be able, on the principle of opposites, to dis- 
cover why the Spirit is the Antagonist and Conqueror of the 


THE ETERNAL STATE 299 


flesh, and that not in virtue of some function given to Him 
as a mere matter of fact, but so as to be able to tell what 
there is in the nature of the Spirit to make Him the execu- 
tive of the Godhead in this particular respect. The anthropo- 
logical or psychological theory scarcely helps us on with the 
problem as regards the history of revelation. For on the one 
hand there seems to be no Old Testament passage associat- 
ing the “flesh” with sin after the characteristic manner of 
Paul, nor, on the other hand does the Old Testament par- 
ticularly place the Spirit’s function in the ethico-religious 
sphere so as to make Him the Exterminator of sin par 
excellence as Paul does. The “flesh” is in the Hebrew 
Scriptures no less than in Paul a mystery. In the somatic 
constitution of man, as contrasted with his psychical make- 
up, no principle of sin is sought by the Old Testament. 
Nor can this have been the belief of Paul. The source 
of sin according to the Apostle does not lie in the flesh 
as a product of creation, but in the act of the First 
Adam imputed to all. Notwithstanding the present-day 
unpopularness of this exegesis of Rom. v, it is our conviction 
that a doctrinally unprejudiced scrutiny of the famous pas- 
sage will compel a return to it, whether it agree with the 
doctrine or not. No more than a glance at Gal. v. 13 ff. is 
needed to prove that Paul reckoned among the works of 
the sarx things that have from an ethical standpoint nothing 
whatever to do with the body. Now it is quite true that the 
same Paul means to characterize sinful human nature by the 
name sarx. Only the very point at issue is, whether this can 
be wholly due to the notorious fact that many sins actually 
take their point of departure from the body. That would be de- 
nominating a group of phenomena from one peculiar feature 
which would be inappropriate to the larger remainder of 
the group. To say, therefore, sarx is not human nature 
as such, but sinful human nature, does not bring one step 
nearer the solution of the problem. It amounts to a 
matter-of-fact observation where explanation is desired so 
far as possibly attainable. And the explanation should 


300 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


cover not merely the ordinary soteric operation of the 
Spirit in the Christian subject during this life, but like- 
wise cast light upon his eschatological presence and 
Operation in the world to come. To our mind there 1s 
but one, at least halfway satisfactory explanation of this. 
It amounts to this that the central significance in all mani- 
festations of the Spirit, both those that we are accustomed 
to call ordinary or those called extraordinary, consisted for 
Paul in the tremendous irresistible power with which the 
Spirit makes his impact and produces his results in every 
sphere of operation. This was something inherent in the 
nature of the Spirit. All the phenomena revealing his presence 
and working bore witness to this. The fundamental note in 
his activity was that of divine, unique forth-putting of 
energy. In the Old Testament this can be tested easily; one 
passage for many may suffice: “Now the Egyptians are men, 
and not God; and their horses flesh, and not Spirit,” Isa. 
xxxi. 3. But, according to this statement “flesh” is the direct 
opposite of “Spirit” for no other reason than that its charac- 
teristic is inertia, lack of power, such as can only be removed 
by the Spirit of God. The two terms are not only correlatives 
but are mutually exclusive: where the one is the other 
isnot. We can understand from this that in early times 
of the Christian faith the factor of the Pneuma was 
most easily associated with the manifold and variegated 
supernatural forms of miraculous expressions which 
marked the life of the Church. Paul did not put as high 
an estimate in point of edification upon this wonder- 
world of young Christian growth and the vigorous stirring 
of sap revealed in it. He knew full well and told his 
converts with great frankness that these were the things 
intended to pass away, and that there were other more dis- 
tinctively ethico-religious things characterized as “abiding.” 
Unfortunately in recognizing this state of facts a twofold 
mistake has but too often been made. The first is that the 
Apostle is represented as denying the provenience of these 


THE ETERNAL STATE 301 


extraordinary gifts and modes of expression from the Spirit. 
There is no evidence to that effect. The second mistake is so 
to represent it that to his mind the relatively quieter and more 
equable impulses and habits of life among his converts were 
somehow detached from the Spirit, or that perhaps a some- 
what modified and toned-down conception of the Spirit was 
substituted for the original one. For this there is no evidence 
either. We must, in order to understand the Apostle, first of 
all rectify the somewhat misapprehended antithesis in ques- 
tion. It is an antithesis expressive of a comparative judg- 
ment on the usefulness of these two different groups of 
phenomena for edification, not an antithesis between a non- 
Spirit-caused and a Spirit-caused group of things. The Spirit 
is in both. The, originally perhaps slight, shift in perspective 
might easily in the future course of thought give rise to the 
serious error, that Paul meant to desupernaturalize the quiet 
and in part unobservable processes, that, delighting more in 
the triad of faith, hope and love, he therefore conceived of 
these three as having no particular impulse or impact of the 
Spirit underlying them. Modern less enthusiastic and more 
self-restrained habits of religion easily favored this, even 
where there was no conscious intent to that effect. We 
must refamiliarize ourselves with connecting these quiet 
virtues and graces with the constant powerful urge 
and influence of the Spirit. The cultivation of faith and 
hope and love was perhaps not entirely confined for Paul 
to “the hidden man of the heart,” nor need it have been over- 
much governed by the desire to escape the charge of 
demonstrativeness. By remembering these things we shall 
better understand how the Spirit, in the center of whose opera- 
tion stands out the feature of impulsive superhuman energy, 
can form the connecting link between the mode of the 
believer’s life on earth and that in the age to come in heaven. 
Thus it may also become clearer to us how the firstfruits and 
the harvest can be identical in character. The Apostle’s teach- 
ing may at least negatively supply a caution not to empoverish 
our eschatological hope to the unruffled surface of the 


302 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


waters of Shiloah. There may enter into it more than we 
suspect of the mighty rushing of the Pentecostal wind.” 
The three other remaining conceptions conveying to us 
the contents of the eternal state are those of “‘life,” “glory” 
and “the Kingdom of God.” They sustain to the Spirit the 
relation of products to the Producer. Further they possess 
this in common that they set forth the eternal state in the 
most comprehensive manner conceivable. Herein also the 


Apostle shows himself as at one and the same time sensitively ° 


receptive to the influx of revelation and capable of the firm — 


grasp of the theological thinker. His utterances reflect less of 
the charm of the pictorial than of the luminosity radiating 
from the core of condensed ideas. Where with Paul the con- 
cretely-pictorial does appear, it seldom fails to bring with it 
the impression of a mysteriousness incapable of being trans- 
lated into terms of the reproductive imagination. It is what 
ear has not heard, what eye has not seen and what has not 
ascended into the heart of man, 1 Cor. il. 9, 10. Even where 
the transcendental is anticipated in the concreteness of a vis- 
ionary experience, and avails itself for expression of the 
forms of number and space combined, the inherent difficulty 
of speaking about such things, and the doubt about the “‘law- 
fulness’ of doing so, show how thoroughly the Apostle re- 
mained convinced of the strangeness to an earthly creature of 
the concrete forms having their habitation above. 

In view of this humble reticence, based in part on the con- 
sciousness of ignorance, we ought to be all the more grateful 
that, though not in detail, yet the Apostle has most posi- 
tively named the great outstanding categories of heavenly 


13 The above attempt at framing some doctrinal and historical substruc- 
ture to the predominance of the Spirit in the eternal state does not lay 
claim to have thrown light on all difficulties. If the common denominator 
of what is “Spiritual” is power, are we not compelled, since the sarx, its 
opposite, is the comprehensive term for sin, to assume that the ubiquity 
of sin in the world is somehow connected with the latter’s character as 
“inertia” springing from the lack of the Spirit in the things of God? Upon 
this we neither dare nor desire to enter further here. A few remarks 
about it will be found in Princeton Theological Studies, p. 255, note 61. 


. 


THE ETERNAL STATE 303 


experience as destined to fill the vast spaces above. The most 
intimate and highly spiritualized relation of the believer to 
Christ as the focus of heaven points the way in this respect. 
In regard to what further belongs to this as its proper accom- 
paniment and needful environment we may cherish the same 
conviction. And still further particular stress among this is 
laid upon the affectional attitude towards Christ which rounds 
off heaven in itself. Only we must not let the unavoid- 
able stress thrown on this obscure to us the reference of 
all beatitude to God. The deepest-sounding notes in Paul’s 
melodies of heaven find their point of unison in God the 
Father through His Son. Of a Jesu-latry such as 
would have forced the First Person of the Trinity into 
the unknown, uncultivated background Paul knows nothing. 
The deity of Christ surely needs not any repression of fact 
to prove its apostolic provenience. Paul’s religion was from 
the very outset of his Christian life “‘theocentric,”’ and it 
could never have become so “Christocentric” as it actually 
is, had not the rich, religious occupation with the Saviour 
secured for the latter the indisputable place wherein He 
appears in the closest unity with the Father. This was to Paul 
not so much a matter of doctrinal necessity as of devotional 
indispensableness. Though the ordinary prepositions are 
“éx” and “ es”’ with reference to the Father, and the corres- 
ponding preposition for the Son is ‘‘éd,” yet Paul does not 
fall short in his highest doctrinal flight from declaring that 
the universe was created ‘evs’? Christ.1* All this harmoni- 
ously existing inter-communion, as it existed before the 
aeons, could not possibly cease to exist in the transcendental 
aeons of the world to come. 

The second and most frequent mould into which the con- 
tent of the coming age is cast is that of “‘S@7” or “S@1 at@nos,” 
The mere fact of the frequency of the conjunction of “life” 
with ‘“‘aionios” shows how eminently eschatological the con- 
ception of life grew to be from the simplest beginnings. 


14Cp. Rom. xi. 36; 1 Cor. viii. 6; Col. i. 16. 


304 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


There are two distinct strands in Paul by means of which 
“life” attains, this eschatological completion. The first 
springs from the ancient antithesis in which life stands 
opposite to death since the very beginnings of the race. 
We may not let ourselves be drawn aside from the 
biblical emphasis thrown on this point by any findings or 
dogmas of evolutionary science; for here our sole purpose is 
to ascertain what was Paul’s view on the subject, and in 
which respect it has influenced his doctrine of life. Two things 
are certain: whatever the modernly conceived provenience of 
the venerable opening narratives in Genesis may be, to Paul 
they stand for real occurrences recorded as factsin an inspired 
record. But, one will ask, what have they to do with eschato- 
logy? “Much every way.’ For no matter whether the 
account involved is preéxilic or postexilic or harks back, 
as Gunkel and many others believe, to an ancient Baby- 
lonian soil, pregnant with eschatological mythology, the 
subject-matter after which we are enquiring is most cer- 
tainly there. The tree of life and the other tree and 
the primeval paradise and the fall and death and the 
expulsion from the garden on account of the sin committed, 
all these are present in the scriptural narrative, and a single 
glance at Rom. v is sufficient to convince of the fact, that in 
the most fundamental manner they support (qua history) 
the entire eschatology of Paul. And the Apostle’s eyes were 
centrally focussed on life and death in their forever inter- 
acting force. The only reasonable interpretation of the 
Genesis-account (e mente Pauli) is this, that provision 
was made and probation was instituted for a still higher 
state, both ethico-religiously and physically complexioned, 
than was at that time in the possession of man. In 
other words the eschatological complex and prospect were 
there in the purpose of God from the beginning. This, then, 
represents the first two of the eschatological strands spoken 
of above. Its eminent significance arises from connection 
with the individual’s part in eschatology. The collective 
interpretation of the genesis of Biblical eschatology, while 


THE ETERNAL STATE 3905 


not untrue or out of place, has yet, together with critical 
aspersions cast on Genesis, had the result of obscuring the 
supreme importance of this great primordial event for the 
unfolding of Paul’s doctrine. Probably it was not even neces- 
sary to contribute much de novo to this circle of ideas, for 
here, if anywhere, Jewish or Jewish Apocalyptic literature 
had, on the basis of the Old Testament, prepared the way for 
the Apostolic doctrine. The momentous sentence, “through one 
man death came into the world” itself is as to its substance 
derived from the Book of Wisdom ii. 24, although there 
“the devil’s envy” has the place of what Paul simply calls 
“one man,’’ evidently for the sake of a clearer parallelism 
between the First and Second Adam, vss. 12, 15. This orig- 
inal conception of life with its antithesis to death bore in 
itself, however, the seed of the collective conception, because 
the terms in which it is spoken of in the ancient narrative 
are not applying to our first parents alone, but mean to be 
taken generically; on Adam’s son and on his son and simi- 
larly on successive generations the same curse and punish- 
ment fell that overtook him. Death and Life having been in 
this manner become collective ideas, there was only one step 
further required to objectivize them, and in particular to 
make out of the many living ones to be restored in the sub- 
sequent course of redemption the inhabitants of a compre- 
hensive realm of life. Over against the nation that is subject 
to death revelation posits the nation that shall come to life 
again, and through the contact of this idea with the ultimate 
future hope and its projection on a large scale the appropri- 
ate issue of this development is reached; the future blessed- 
ness emerges as “the life’ par excellence. Still one more 
consideration must be taken into account: so soon, and in the 
proportion that the promise of the resurrection began to 
stand out clearly on the horizon of religious hope, nothing 
else could fill the content of a state thus projected but the 
pregnant conception of “life.” It is remarkable how deeply 
rooted in past religious experience, how compact and at the 
same time rich in content from an eschatological point of 


306 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


view this revelation-product has become. It is not possible 
here to trace the history in detail, but the point of departure 
and the point of arrival of its course lie clear before our eyes. 
It is needful in endeavoring to construe what lay between 
to distinguish carefully between “long life,” ie. a gift of 
divine favor for the single Israelite or the nation on earth, 
and the great prospective gift reserved for “‘the latter days,” 
and no longer confined to the earthen vessels in which it had 
so long through the ages been carried. In Deuteronomy and 
in the Psalter there are some data helpful for this, but unfor- 
tunately in the latter book uncertainty concerning the date 
in which the single Psalms were written renders it hard to 
draw definite conclusions. If the “tree of life’ spoken of in 
Prov. iti. 18 consciously and directly refers back to the orig- 
inal tree of paradise, the ultimate eschatological import admits 
of no doubt; there must have attached to this ancient concept 
some clear, more or less widespread, remembrance of an 
objective sphere of life once potentially realized, and beckon- 
ing again for the future. Deut. xxx. 15 represents Jehovah 
as setting before Israel “life and good” with, as opposites, 
‘death and evil’’; at first sight one is inclined to connect with 
such an absolute antithesis some outlook into the future 
world. Where, however, in vs. 19 the thought is repeated in 
slightly different form, the prospect draws back again into 
the present: “Therefore choose life that both thou and thy 
seed may live.”’ Nearly the identical phraseology in Jer. xxt. 
8 plainly speaks of the God-appointed and pre-determined 
issues of national destiny in the earthly sphere. The Psalter 
makes more frequent reference to the paradisical rivers of 
life than to the condensation of the idea in the one tree of 
life, and the former have fully retained their eschatological 
associations: Psa. xxxv. 9; xlvi. 4, 5. These waters must be 
intended to refer back to paradise, because they issue from 
(underneath) the throne of God, cp. Gen. ii. 10, and, as the 
counterpart of this, we learn in the vision of the Apocalypse 
of the same waters with undoubted eschatological perspec- — 
tive: il. 7; xxi. 6; xxii. 1-17. What lends confirmation to 


THE ETERNAL STATE 307 


thus joining the earliest and the later is the emphasis placed 
upon the divine favor as an indispensable concomitant of the 
eschatological life. The concept of life would never have 
obtained in the Old Testament its comprehensive and preg- 
nant significance, had it not from the outset been wedded to 
the profoundly-religious thought of prospering in the favor 
of God.** 

“Life bears the stamp of its eschatological nature upon 
itself through frequent combination with the attri- 
bute “aionios.’’ The Pauline instances where this is found 
Bee acts; xii. 46; Rom: ii. 73 v. 21; vi. 22; Gal. vi, 8; 1 
Tim. i. 16; vi. 12; Tit. i. 25; 111. 7; nine passages altogether. 
The phrase is, however, by no means original with Paul. Our 
Lord accepts it as a phrase in common use, when asked by the 
rich young ruler, regarding the condition of entering “eternal 
life,’ and suspends its attainment after the orthodox Jewish 
fashion on the fulfilment of the law: Mk. x. 17; Lk. x. 25; 
xviii. 18. When the disciples feel perplexed about the hard- 

ness of the task, Jesus gives an answer in which “eternal 
life” is equated to “the Kingdom-of Heaven.”’ The latter is 
meant in precisely the same sense in which the enquirer spoke 
of “entering eternal life.” The difference between “inherit- 
ing” and “entering” is in this connection of no further sig- 
nificance than its adjustment to the two terms. The mode of 
our Lord’s dealing with the terminology proves that it had 
been in use considerable time before Him. In fact He Himself 
makes use of it on other occasions: Matt. xix. 29; Mk. x. 
30; Lk. xviii. 30. We must go back as far as Dan. xii. 2 to 
find the antecedents of the phrase; it occurs in Ps. Solom. 
Semen, xxxvil. 4; 2, Macc. vii. 9; 26; 4. Macc. xv..3.** 
By way of antithesis it receives its full meaning from the con- 
trast with “death,” and it is in part through this contrast 
with a comprehensive sphere of life that “death” in its turn 


15 Cp. Job. x. 12: “Thou hast granted me life and favor and thy pres- 
ervation has preserved my spirit; Psa. xxxvi. 9: “For with thee is the 
fountain of life: in thy light shall we see light.” 

16 Cp. Dalman, Die Worte Jesu, pp. 127-128. 


308 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


likewise ceases to be an individual experience and becomes a 
realm with extension, as is clearly perceptible in 2 Cor. ii. 
16: “the savor of death unto death . . . the savor of life 
unto life.” There is, however, perceptible a difference here 
in that the conception of death, objectively taken, is more 
strongly personalized, whence some have inferred actual per- 
sonal existence, whereas life, being less the agent of aggres- 
sion than the passive object of enjoyment, tends more to 
remain a term of abstract comprehensiveness. 

Life not only is pointedly opposite to “death” it likewise 
forms a sharp contrast to such precursors and concomitants 
of death as are destructive of life. Thus the category of 
“divas, “power” obtains a place in the concept of life. 
It becomes a life not so much lived in quietness, but to a 
considerable extent a life asserting itself, a trait which again 
has its affinity with the attribute “aionios.” The intimate 
relation between “‘life’ and ““Pneuma”’ could not fail bring- 
ing this about. Likewise the opposition of life to “p@opa,” 
“corruption” Rom. viii. 21; 1 Cor. xv. 42,50; Gali 
proves it; corruption is a process that has in itself fatal power 
of increase and intensification. There is no reason to limit 
this, where the Spirit comes under consideration, to one 
only of the twin aspects of the latter’s vivifying task. The 
Spirit cannot deny Himself in whatever sphere His energy 
is introduced, least of all where He works in the consum- 
mate state, where all God’s works and ways run together to 
produce a.perfect issue. 

Of the soul-transformation at death Paul speaks com- 
paratively little in particulars. That sorrow, death, sin and 
all sin-born evils must make halt before entrance into 
the eternal state is self-evident. Such things as dishonor 
and weakness are incompatible with the life-state in 
heaven. But there also is joined to these a character of 
“humiliation” affecting even the body with its enveloping 
sphere, Phil. ii. 21. That the Spirit has again his part in 
effecting the necessary change requires no demonstration, 
it being included in the change wrought by the resurrection. 


THE ETERNAL STATE 309 


Such things should not be minimized in the interest of a 
hyper-spiritualizing of the content of the future life. Their 
incompatibility with the absolute perfection of God, with 
whom nothing of the frailness and corruption of the sin- 
ful can have fellowship is to be taken into account. It is 
noteworthy, however, that silence is observed on this aspect 
of the matter, so far as concerns the intermediate state. The 
great sin-extruding and evil-conquering processes are rele- 
gated, as it were, to the climacteric epoch at the end. It is 
there that Death and all that inevitably trails in his wake 
shall be swallowed up in victory, and the body of sin 
delivered from all that causes its bearer, or erstwhile bearer, 
to groan. 

One more point is to be considered before dismissing the 
idea of “‘life’’ in its eschatological import. As it is strongly 
bound to God in its preduction, so it has a telic character 


directing it to God as its solitary goal. This is true of its, 


earthly prototype, the life that believers live here below while 
still in the flesh. It is particularly at the height of his con- 
templation of it that the Apostle is reminded of this. No less 
than in the sphere of justification, the instinct of life tends to 
concentrate all its forces and aspirations upon God, and this 
law of existence is observable in the eschatological prolonga- 
tion and consummation of the life of the world to come. This 
convergence upon and final arrival of life at the center of 
satisfaction in God, while inextricably interwoven with the 
fundamental texture of religion, receives with Paul an addi- 
tional and intensified force from its connection with the life 
of the exalted Christ, and thus the deepest mystical verity 
in soteriology and Christology is found to join itself to the 
eschatological prospect. The reign in life promised to believ- 
ers for the coming age is a dominion fulfilling itself 
through Jesus Christ, Rom. v. 17. When Abraham waxed 
strong through faith he in doing so gave glory to God, v. 21. 
The life lived by Christ is defined as “lived unto God,” and 
this serves as a basis for the exhortation: “Present yourselves 
unto God, as alive from the dead,” Rom. vi. 13. The concep- 


< 


310 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


tion of “sanctification,” but too often restricted in practice to 
the soteric progress in assimilation to the ethical perfection 
of God, has for its irremovable core the idea of consecration 
to God and consequent appurtenance to Him. It cannot be too 
much emphasized that “holiness” is in the Pauline vocabu- 
lary never ethical perfection as such and without regard to 
its terminus in God. No construction of the idea losing this 
out of sight is from the Apostle’s viewpoint a thoroughly 
Christianized idea. Whatever fruit it may cultivate, it can 
never produce the highest, which is in this case the only truly 
religious fruitage, its subserviency to the glory of God who 
is the absolute end of all ethical striving. 

Among the constituent elements of the life-organism no 
mutilation of what properly is called “religion,” is counte- 
nanced by the Apostle. The modern deplorable neglect, or 
even disavowal, of large normal and indispensable religious 
territories is unknown to Paul. In particular the noetic, or to 
speak in more popular language, the intellectual element in 
religion is recognized, and recognized in such terms that the 
primacy of doctrinal knowledge in all normal religious experi- 
ence is on principle upheld. In Eph. iv. 17-20 the walk of the 
Gentiles in their pseudo-religion is from this point of view 
characterized as a walk in the vanity of their-minds (“nous”) ; 
they are darkened in their “understanding” (“dianoia’”’ ) ; sub- 
ject to “ignorance” (“agnoia’’), which exists on account of 
the “hardening of their hearts,” (‘“‘porosis tes kardias” ). The 
salient point in this enumeration is the clause in vs. 18, ob- 
viously intended to explain the several abnormalities and per- 
versions named as sprung from the basic religious ignorance 
in which paganism had become involved through sin. And it 
is in striking correspondence with this state of facts that the 
Apostle stresses the principle that, at their conversion 
they had “learned” (€“aere) Christ in a different way. It is 
true this peculiar noetic mode of approach to the Christ and 
the Christian world-view had probably something to do with 
the philosophic complexion of the problems it was by 
the Apostle intended to meet. Nevertheless it remains also 


é 


THE ETERNAL STATE 311 


true that Paul has, after a philosophico-religious manner con- 
tended with this untruth, and in doing so has diagnosed 
the entire complex of religious malformation, as it were, 
embryologically, from some ancient flaw in the thought-form 
of paganism. It was in its origin “alienation from the life of 
God” that gave birth to the ill-shapen product. Per- 
haps no more incisive criticism of the false modern slogan 
“religion is not doctrine but life’ than these few verses from 
Ephesians can be conceived. What Paul says is not that per- 
verted ideas concerning religion and Christ are unimportant 
and their correction negligible; what he maintains is that they 
are subversive of the true Christian religion, and ought to 
be resisted to the utmost. And the Apostle intimates by the 
phrase “life of God,” that in the internal constitution of the 
divine life itself there exists a typical antecedence of mind 
upon which every religious reflex of the nature of God in 
the human subject ought to model itself. There cannot remain 
any reasonable doubt that what Paul considered essential for 
the present (in Ephesians particularly emphasized) semi- 
eschatological life on earth he regarded as in the highest 
degree normative for the heavenly life in the fully-attained 
state of eternity. 

The question seems permissible, in view of what we have 
found, whether the Apostle regarded the state of life in the 
future aeon as in an absolute sense immune to further 
invasion of antagonistic forces from without. That he con- 


» sidered it unending has already been shown to sufficiency. It 


might be thought that therein lay irrefutable evidence in 
proof of its immunity to invasion from without. Still, 
strictly speaking, the two affirmations are by no means 
identical. Something might, as a matter of fact, continue 
indefinitely without termination, and yet the cause for this 
might not lie in any inherent essence of eternity. God Himself 
is “eternal” or “immortal” after this matter-of-fact fash- 
ion: metaphysically speaking He is immune to and incapable 
of death. The question can hardly be suppressed, how much of 
this essence of eternal life has been imparted as its inherent, 


Spies THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


inalienable character to the future aeon and everything that 
moves therein. And this leads us back once more to the 
deep unfathomable mysteries of the aionion-concept. The 
close assimilation and association between believers on the 
one hand and God and the divine Christ on the other hand 
seem to decide the question in favor of a principially and 
inherently uninvadable and unchangeable life-state. The su- 
preme ideal of religion likewise would seem to postulate it. 
It is another question whether Paul has anywhere explicitly 
expressed himself to that effect. Nevertheless, in so far as 
he speaks of God as “the King immortal, invisible, the only 
God,’ 1 Tim. i. 17, and as “the One who alone has immor- 
tality,” vi. 17, a distinction with regard to the presence of 
this attribute in God and in believers cannot be denied. God 
possesses this immunity to death per essentiam; to believers 
it comes per gratiam, yet so that an unceasing action on 
God’s part secures its permanence. Like God, possessing the 
fount of life in Himself, no creature even in the con- 
summate state is permitted to be. Yet there is in each 
some reality vouchsafing continuity in the possession 
of what he has. The Second Adam dwells in them as 
a Quickening Spirit as undisplaceable as He lives in the 
human nature of the Lord Himself. In the discourses of the 
Fourth Gospel the presence of eternal life and the promise 
of its permanence forever are most unequivocally affirmed, 
cp. Jno. iii. 36; v. 26; vi. 53; xi. 25. And Paul is persuaded 
that neither death nor life, nor any of the demonic princi- 
palities, nor any creature will be able to separate him from 
the love of God which is in Christ. He who is united to 
Christ and lives within the circle of his love, to him the 
eternal retention of the supreme eschatological life is ab- 
solutely secure. Mortality is in every one made partaker of 
the resurrection swallowed up of life, 2 Cor. v. 4. The life 
of the Colossians is hid with Christ in God, so as to 
partake of the same security, notwithstanding its present 
invisibility, that pertains to the inward things of God and 
Christ. And the whole intimate life-union existing between 


THE ETERNAL STATE 313 


the believer and Christ vouches for the certainty of the 
eternal persistence of this bond. Christ has abolished death 
and, brought life and immortality (‘“a¢@apota’’) to light 
through the Gospel, 2 Tim. i. 10." 

With the second chief ingredient of the eternal state 
we can deal more briefly. In regard to it likewise Rom. i. 7 
lays down the fundamental rule: to seek after incorruption 
is equivalent to seeking after glory. Rom. iii. 23 names as 
the result of universal sin that all ‘“‘totepobvrar tis  d0&ns 
Tod @eod .””** In Chap. v. 2 the glory of God is projected 
into the future and represented as an eschatological inheri- 
tance, the means of its apprehension being hope. The Aorist 
in Chap. viii. 30 “He has glorified” is anticipative: the act is 
as certain as if it had been already accomplished. Some ques- 
tioning has arisen concerning the precise force of the Gent- 
tive in the phrase “the glory of God.” Gramatically con- 
sidered this could mean “the glory possessed by God.” 
Parallel constructions are: “the life of God,” “the peace of 
God,” “the righteousness of God’; the peculiar feature of 
which is that they are pregnant constructions, in which the 
triple ideas of “original in God,” “reflected from God” and 
“communicated in an ectypical sense to man” meet. The 
underlying principle is in each case that the inherent excel- 


17 The strongest affirmation in regard io the “immortality” of Christ is 
made by the writer of Hebrews, who attributes to Christ a“fwn adxatraAvtos,” 
a life incapable of dissolution. The statement is made with specific refer- 
ence to the priestly work of Christ which could not be suspended by his 
death even for a moment, since its very execution consisted in his death. 
This was possible because all through death He remained in full posses- 
sion of this undissolvable life, Heb. vii. 16. 

18 Some exegetes take “the glory of God” in vs. 23 as referring to the 
Shekhinah upon the mercy-seat; the verb on this view will have to be 
translated “are shut out” from the glory of God, as it appeared in the 
Old Testament sanctuary. This fits in well with the rendering “mercy- 
seat” for “itaorypiov” in vs. 25. It is far from certain, however, that 
“hilasterion” has in that verse the meaning of “mercy-seat,” which it has 
in LXX and in Heb.ix.&. “Instrument of propitiation” has equal linguistic 
warrant, and suits the context fully as well. The verb “poe6ero” lends 
some support to the rendering ‘“‘mercy-seat,” since of a sacrifice, or any 
ritual act in general, it is less naturally affirmed that it is “set forth.” 


ne OPER ROR Ne 


giA. THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


lence of God is reproduced and brought to revelation in his 
beatified creatures. No stronger witness than this to the 
God-centered character of the eternal world can be conceived. 
‘““ Adéa ,” glory, must be distinguished from ‘‘7¢#7,” honor, 
as appears from their occurring together in Rom. 
ii. 10. “‘T¢#9”’ is good appraisal in the opinion of others; 
it is a judgment passed by others on somebody, something 
inward, therefore, not something substantially-outward. By 
right of etymology the two terms ought to exchange places, 
for it is precisely “doxa”’ that is derived from the verb 
“ doxeév,” “to bear a certain reputation.” But this rule was 
no longer of strict observance at the time of Paul’s writing.” 
Glory is as closely connected with the Spirit as life is. 
The distinction lies in this, that what_life is for the hidden 
side of the eschatological subject, that doxa is for the 
outward side in which the higher life comes to revelation. 
The doxa plays a large réle in the interrelation between the 
risen Christ and the believer. The union of what is the per- 
sonal possession in Christ ( é« rod éwod, Jno. xvi. 14) and 
the Spirit-endowment of the Christian is of the closest, so 
close in fact as to permit of the statement “the Lord is the 
Spirit,” an equation not, of course, meant trinitarianly, but 
soteriologically. Because doxa pertains to the sphere of mani- 
festation, Paul speaks of it as that “which shall be revealed 
to usward.” The application of the general concept to the 
believer’s state and condition works in two directions. There 
is a somatic and there is a doxa of the inner man. In both 
respects the Spirit is the Agent for its creation and bestowal. 
The body is raised “éy 80&y,” 1 Cor. xv. 43. Doxa belongs to 
“wn” Col. iii. 4. In not a few instances, however, the idea 
is deepened so as to stand for religious excellence as such. 


19 The physical root-concept in the Shemitic languages seems to be that 
of “being heavy.” Cp. von Gall, Die Herrlichkeit Gottes, 1900. This is easily 
associated with the metaphorically used idea of “weight,” and next- spring 
from this the ideas of “prestige” “renown.” The glory of a king lies in 
the splendor of his retinue, since that most naturally expresses his 
majesty and power. It is curious to observe that thus derived the Hebrew 
“Kabod” stands nearer to ry in the Greek than to dd€a. 


THE ETERNAL STATE 315 


How solidly the endowment with doxa is conceived appears 
from 2 Cor. iv. 17: “an eternal weight of glory.” The fun- 
damental conception is aesthetic; doxa constitutes the beauty 
of the children of God. The “liberty” that comes at the end 
to the creation, now bound to the bondage of sin through the 
sin-bondage of man, forms part of it, because it draws into the 
light whatever change has taken place: for groaning there 
is substituted joy. By no means is doxa to be limited to 
somatic radiancy, although this forms an essential part 
of it; it was precisely from this (aesthetic) point of view, 
and not from purely-sentimental motives that Paul desired 
to be clothed, 2 Cor. v. 3. But doxa undoubtedly dwells 
also in the things that eye cannot for the present see, nor ear ~— 
for the present hear, and that for the present do not come 
up in the hearts of men. For these things are not intrin- 
sically incapable of the vesture of glory; they only require 
the proper eye, the proper ear, the proper heart, the proper 
milieu. And, since they are the Spirit’s workmanship, the 
Spirit will impart to them that uniquely heightened intensity, 
which it is His nature and mode of working to produce. 
Whatever of anticipation there is of such things in this life 
is always viewed as a “Pneumatikon” par excellence, 2 Cor. 
ii. 18. 

We close this discussion of the aionion-character of the 
world to come with the briefest of references to a question 
which sometimes unduly engages men’s eschatological occu- 
pation with the future. It is the question concerning possible 
further progress for the inhabitants of the coming age 
beyond the point already attained by them when entering it. 
Strange to say, this question is not always predominantly 
concerned with inward ethico-religious growth, but not sel- 
dom relates to external increase in the visible embodiments 
of religion. Will there be worlds beyond this eschatologically- 
consummated world to conquer? It is not likely that from 
Paul we may expect information or encouragement in such 
a speculation. For, although Paul exhibited in all his labors 
for the Gospel the most intense zeal, and an outpouring 


316 THE PAULINE ESCHATOLOGY 


of apparently exhaustless energy, yet, when it comes to the 
point of eschatology, there is to all this a sort of counter- 
poise, owing to which the Apostle never loses: the desire 
of finding rest in the unnamable, unfathomable depths of a 
mystic satisfaction in God and Christ, such as craved ‘no 
further out-venturing into realms beyond. All Paul’s labor 
was a most strenuous endeavor to bring the restlessly-tem- 
poral to where it would lose itself in the forever-undisturbable 
aionion. There is no passage in the Epistles indicative of an 
opposite trend or desire. There may be heavens in the plural 
numerically or structurally, but there is no succession of ages 
or worlds to come. Eternity is not pregnant with other 
eternities.*° We do not hear of further sowings nor further 
reaping in the fields of the blessed. It is useless to carry the 
spirit of time into the heart of eternity. There clings an 
earth and time-savor to all this questioning what there will be 
to occupy one’s self withal when arrived above. As if the 
Lord God Himself would not be there with his inexhaustible 
fulness! In his presence there can be neither surfeit nor 
teadium. The noblest distinction of the eschatological Church 
consists in this that thenceforth she will be able to lay aside 
the armor of her militancy, because she has become the 
Ecclesia triumphans in aeternum.”* 


20 The phrase “ages to come,” Eph. ii. 7 is a plural of immensity; it 
expresses itself in terms of time, whereas eternity marks the pleroma of 
time. 

21 Precisely of pagan eschatologies it is characteristic to look for inces- 
santly recurring cycles after the world-year shall have been ended. The 
reason is that in paganism the concept of eschatology is a piece of nat- 
uralism, sprung from astral, zodiacal observation of circuits among the 
heavenly bodies. When the longest circuit has been completed and brought 
back to its point of departure, it inevitably proceeds to repeat itself along 
the immemorial selfsame courses. The “year of gold” has “come round” 
again. The future age of God, though made of the finest gold, does not 
“come round”; it simply comes and then abides. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Baldensperger, W. Das Selbstbewusstsein Jesu im Lichte der Mes- 
sianischen Hoffnungen seiner Zeit, 1903. 
Blom, A. H. Th. Tijdschr., 1863, pp. 4 ff. (Stoicheia). 
Bousset, W. Der Antichrist, 1895. 
Die Religion des Judenthums im neutestamentlichen Zeitalter, 1906. 
Die Judische Apokalyptik, 1903. 
Kyrios Christos, 1921. 
Nachtrage und Auseinandersetzungen, 1916. 
Box, G. M. The Ezra-Apocalypse, 1912. 
Brtickner, M. Die Entstehung der Paulinischen Christologie, 1903. 
Bruston, E. La Vie future d’aprés St. Paul, 1895. 
Burton, Ernest de Witt. Spirit, Soul and Flesh, A. J. Th., 1913-1916. 


Charles, R. H. A critical History of the Doctrine of a future Life in 
Israel, Judaism and in Christianity, 1899; 2d ed., 1913. 
The Apocalypse of Baruch, 1896. 
Cremer, H. Uber den Zustand nach dem Tode, 1802. 


Dalman, G. Die Worte Jesu, Band I, 1808. 

Deissman, A. Die neutestamentliche Formel “in Christo Jesu,” 1892. 
Paulus, IQII. 

Dickson, W. P. St. Paul’s use of the terms “flesh” and “Spirit,” 1883. 

Dieckmann, H. Die Parousie Christi, 1898. 

Diels, H. Elementum, 1899 (Stoicheia). 


Erbes, C. Der Antichrist nach den Schriften des Neuen Testaments, 
1897. 

Everling, O. Die Paulinische Angelologie und Damonologie, 1888. 

Ewald, H. Adam und Christus, J. Ch. W., 1849. 


Feine, P. Jesus Christus und Paulus, 1902. 
Friedlander, M. Der Antichrist in den vorchristlichen jiidischen Quel- 
len, 1897. 


Gall, Freiherr von. Die Herrlichkeit Gottes, 1900. 

Giesebrecht, F. Beitrage zur Jesajakritik, Anhang, pp. 187-220. 

Ginzburg, L. Jewish Encyclopaedia, Vol. I, Article, “Adam Kadmon.” 

Gloél, J. Der Heilige Geist in der Heilsverktindigung des Paulus, 1888. 

Grafe, E. Die Paulinische Lehre vom Gesetz, 1884. 

_ Gressmann, H. Die Entstehung der israelitisch-jiidischen Eschatologie, 
1905. 

Griethuyzen. N.J. f. W. Th. 1850, pp. 304-346. (On 2 Cor. v. 1-6.) 


318 BIBILOGRAPHY 


Grimm, W. Uber die Stelle 1 Cor. xv. 20-28; Z. W. Th. 1873, pp. 380- 


All. | 
Grossheide, F. W. De Verwachting der Toekomst van Jesus Christus, 
1907. 
Gunkel, H. Die Wirkungen des Heiligen Geistes nach der popularen 
Anschauung der apostolischen Zeit und der Lehre des Apostels 
Paulus, 1888. 


Hepp, V. De Antichrist, 1st ed., 1919. 
Holtzmann, H. J. Neutestamentliche Theologie (2nd ed. by Julicher 
and Bauer), 2 Vols., I9II. 


Kabisch, R. Die Eschatologie des Paulus in ihren Zusammenhangen mit 
dem Gesammtbegriff des Paulinismus, 1893. 

Kennedy, H. A. A. St. Paul’s Conceptions of the Last Things, 1904. 

Klopper, A. Die Bedeutung und der Zweck des Abschnittes Rom. v. 


T12))0 St. a Rin, 1860: 
Der Brief an die Colosser, 1882. 


Der Brief des Apostels Paulus an die Philippenser, 1893. 
Knopf, R. Paulus, 1909. 


Oesterley, W. O. E. The Books of the Apocrypha, 1914. “ 

Olschewsky, W. Die Wurzeln der Paulinischen Christologie, 1908. 

Orelli, C. von. Die Hebraischen Synonyma der Zeit und der Ewigkeit, 
1871. 


Pfleiderer, O. Der Paulinismus, 2nd ed., 1890. 
Philippi, F. Die biblisch-kirchliche Lehre vom Antichrist, 1877. 


Rohde, E. Psyche, 1903. 

Rinck, H. W. Vom Zustande nach dem Tode, 3rd ed., 1878. 

Rothe, R. Neuer Versuch einer Auslegung der Stelle Rom. vy. 12-21, 
1836. 


Salmond, C. H. The Christian Doctrine of Immortality, 1gor. 

Schlatter, A. Theologie des Neuen Testaments, 1910. 

Schmiedel, P. W. in Handkommentar zum Neuen Testament (ad 2 Cor. 
by Hah 3 gin 

Schneckenburger, M. Beitrage (Antichrist) : 
Theol. Jahrb. 1848. 
JD TH 7.3405. 

Schwally, J. Das Leben nach dem Tode, 18092. 

Schweitzer, A. Paul and his Interpreters (tr. from the German), 1912. 

Shoemaker, W. R. The use of “Ruach” in the O.T. and of “Pneuma” 
in the N.T., 1904. 7 

Siebeck, H. Die Entwickelungslehre vom Geiste in den Wissenschaften 
des Alterthums; Z. f. V6lker-psychologie und Sprachwissenschaft, 
1880. 

‘Simon, Th. De Psychologie des Apostels Paulus, 1897. 


BIBILOGRAPHY 319 


Slotemaker de Bruine, J. R. De eschatologische Voorstellingen in 1 and 
2 Cor., 1804. ; 

Sokolowski, E. Die Begriffe Geist und Leben bei Paulus in ihrer Bezie- 
hung zu einander, 1903. 

Stahelin, R. Zur Paulinischen Eschatologie; J. D. Th., 1874. 

Stark, W. Gebrauch der Wendung Beacherith Hajjamim im alttes- 
tamentlichen Kanon, Z. f. A. W., 1891. 

Stegmann, B. A. Christ the “Man from Heaven,” 1927. 


Teichmann, E. Die Paulinischen Vorstellungen von Auferstehung und 
Gericht und ihre Beziehungen zur jiidischen Apokalyptik, 1806. 
Thackeray, H. St. J. The Relations of St. Paul to Jewish Thought, 
1900. 

Tillman, F. Die Widerkunft Christi nach den Paulinischen Briefen, 
1909. 

Titius, A. Die neutestamentliche Lehre von der Seligkeit, II, Der 
Paulinismus unter dem Gesichtspunkt der Seligkeit, 1900. 


Volz, P. Die jiidische Eschatologie von Daniel bis Akiba, 1903. 
Vos, G. The Eschatological Aspect of the Pauline Conception of the 
Minit. fo...) .9:,, 1912. 


Wadstein, 'E. Die eschatologische Ideengruppe: Antichrist, Weltsabbat, 
Weltende und Gericht, Q. W. Th., 1896. 

Waitz, Th. Uber 2 Cor. v. 1-4: J. f. P. Th, 1882. 

Weber, F. Jtidische Theologie, 2nd ed., 1897. 

Weiss, B. Apokalyptische Studien, St. u. Kr. 1869 (Antichrist). 

Weiss, Johannes. “Himmlischer Mensch”; R.G.G., 1900. 

Wendt, H. H. Die Begriffe Fleisch und Geist im biblischen Sprach- 
gebrauch, 1878. 

Wernle, P. Der Christ und die Stinde bei Paulus, 1897. 

Windisch, H. Entstindigung des Christen nach Paulus, 1908. 

Winstanly, E. W. Spirit in the New Testament, 1908. 

Wrede, W. Paulus, 1904 (Religionsgeschichtliche Volksbiicher). 


i il ii | | 


1 1012 01094 3902 


DATE DUE 


j De Pee = eae re 
. 


GAYLORD PRINTEOINU.S.A. 


‘ad at ee < om 
_—— a we a a, 
: ora ad 


- 


vet. 


Para eae Sta 
Banh 


vigtets 
iterates 
ety aterets 


Mins 


ee 


act st 
eben tee let 2 se 
o> eeutet * : 43 
ila pe rar ed} “ Sot8Sise sbatayet 


a 


Parser ho oe si 
tH ik S 


The 
eee 


ue 
prerty 


= 
tatacere 
ipletshet siehe 


Late ni te tots 
te 


ee 


ise te # 


tyleteteiet 


i 
or z t ’ Bit » 
: i ae ; : tt tote 
om 


site Ha i cfs ‘ ‘ : : tied ‘. ; ‘ teitsereterietecstsis 


1 t 


Malye: 


ve 


gine’ ait 
Selesterne 
ate 


ure 


Fiteletate 


HR Ks SIO 
ue 
fetett 


ic 


Fi 
eS 


os ar 
44 Teletelelatelets: 

Fezy 
sf 


$ ais 
titel ; : : ititetetert? 
. : : 4.38 


teeta? 
pa) is ata! 


etal terete 
Sti 


ta) 


stele i 
‘ 
sey ; Y : : ‘ : Mesh iaipiss gies 


wap seca tt 
Sonat. ae eee 


Gri oe 

tet 1etete 
etstee 
+H} eR 


5 mT 


gine 


. 
Teiste 


feeds 
3; 


iyteletytare th 
sist + : i : yiet 


. 


BBe 
: sfrietstey bird tit cet 
4) : AR paieatt i 


>
