Operations Carried On at the Pyramids of Gizeh in 1837, Vol. 1 (Howard Vyse, 1840)
==================================================================================
Richard William Howard Vyse — Operations Carried On at the Pyramids of Gizeh in 1837, Vol. 1 (London, 1840), public domain. The first modern pyramid excavation narrative. Scan via Internet Archive (operationscarrie01howa). Raw OCR, not proofread.

^;j^;:^j5^5;j^^^>j^^^i^ 


*n.tm-  •  «**-■'  l^'!^. 


WtKilTX  ' 


UNIVERSITY  OF   PITTSBURGH 

Dar. 
qDT63 
H7 

V.  1 


JJarlington  M.emorial  Library 


THE  PYHAMIDS   OF  GIZEH. 


1 


^ 


>. 


'^ 


'^.  ^ 


V, 


I,    '■^■ 


)  0  ©  ©  ®  V  E  (J^^  oi  tV.e  ce  /?\§  D  li:i 

PuMiilicdfej-J^Tr'is.'ar.Bjigeitt  Street 


OPERATIONS 


CARRIED  Oi\   AT 


THE     PYRAMIDS     OF     GIZEH 


IN    1837: 


WITH  AN  ACCOUNT  OF 


A    VOYAGE     INTO     UPPER     EGYPT, 


an  ^ppcntiijf- 


By    colonel     HOWARD    VYSE. 


VOL.    I. 


LONDON: 
JAMES    FRASER,  REGEXT    STREET, 


LONDON": 

MOVES   AND   BAllCLAY,  CASTLF  STRIfcT,  I.FICFSTFB   SQrAIlE. 


-  HER  ROYAL  HIGHNESS 
THE   PRINCESS   AUGUSTA. 


MADAM, 

THE  PERMISSION  TO  DEDICATE  THE  FOLLOWING 
PAGES  TO  YOUR  ROYAL  HIGHNESS  GIVES  ME  THE  GREATEST 
SATISFACTION,  NOT  FROM  ANY  VAIN  IDEA  THAT  THEY 
ARE  PECULIARLY  WORTHY  OF  SUCH  EXALTED  PATRONAGE, 
BUT  FROM  THE  OPPORTUNITY,  WHICH  IT  AFFORDS,  OF  EX- 
PRESSING MY  MOST  GRATEFUL  SENSE  OF  THE  UNVARYING 
CONSIDERATION  AND  NOTICE,  WITH  WHICH  YOUR  ROYAL 
HIGHNESS  HAS  BEEN  PLEASED,  FOR  MANY  YEARS,  TO  HONOUR 
MY  FAMILY  AND  MYSELF,  AND  ALSO  THE  SINCERE  RESPECT 
AND    DUTIFUL    ATTACHMENT,   WITH  WHICH 

I  HAVE  THE  HONOUR  TO  BE, 

MADAM, 

YOUR   ROYAL  HIGHNESs's 
MOST  GRATEFUL  AND  OBEDIENT  SERVANT, 

THE  AUTHOR. 


CONTENTS 


THE    FIRST    VOLUME. 


First  arrival  at  Cairo    1 

State  of  the  Pyramids  of  Gizcli,  Sec 3 

Return  from  Syria  to  Alexandria    13 

Second  Arrival  at  Cairo 16 

M.  Caviglia's  arrival  at  Gizeli      18 

Voyage  into  Upper  Egypt    2-2 

Arrival  at  Thebes     30 

Es  Souan       Q-J 

Temple  of  Sabooa    38 

Temple  of  Araada 39 

Wady  Haifa 41 

Faras 4:> 

F'erradj 44 

Abou  Sinibel     45 

Tosko    50 

Ibrim     51 

Derr      50 

Dakke   53 

Gerf  Hossein    54 

Dandoor    55 

Kalabshee      53 

Wady  Taffa 57 

Gertassee 5y 

Debode     59 

I'liilfB    60 

Koum  Ondji.?    (35 


VIII  CON'lENTS. 

P.<CE 

Hadjar  Silsilis   G6 

Edfou     67 

Eilithias     68 

Esneh    70 

El  Hallani     1-2 

Gebelein    73 

Ermont      73 

Thebes      74 

Dendera    97 

Quasr-e-Syad    98 

How 98 

Abydos     99 

Eckmira    101 

Shendowee    102 

Gow-el-Kebeer 104 

E-Siout     105 

El  Karib   108 

Tel-el-Amarna      109 

Rerainoun     112 

Sheik  Abadeh 113 

Beni  Hassan     113 

Minyeh     119 

Dewadee   120 

Tehneh      121 

Deir-el-Adra    122 

Kom  Achmar 125 

Benisouef 126 

The  Faiyoum    126 

Gizeh    137 

Sarcophagus  discovered  by  M.  Caviglia  in  a  Mummy-pit 144 

A  Sarcophagus  discovered  in  the  Western  Grotto  in  Campbell's 

Tomb    149 

M.  Caviglia  gives  up  the  works  at  the  Pyramids    152 

Temple  near  the  Third  Pyramid 156 

Stoue  Quarries  near  Second  Pyramid 159 

Bridge  in  Southern  Dyke 167,  174 

Campbell's  Tomb 175 


CONTENTS.  IX 

PAGE 

Fourth  Pyramid    183 

Lower  Entrance  of  Second  Pyramid  discovered     185 

Passages  to  the  Eastward  of  Great  Pyramid 189 

Abou  Reche 193 

Shaft  in  Third  Pyramid    198 

Sarcophagus  in  Western  Grotto  in  Campbell's  Tomb    201 

Tombs  near  the  Southern  Dyke 201 

Wellington's  Chamber      205 

Pavement  at  the  Northern  Front  of  Great  Pyramid 208 

Well  of  Sweet  Water   210 

Entrance  into  the  Great  Pyramid  made  by  the  Caliphs     213 

Sarcophagi  in  Eastern  Grotto  in  Campbell's  Tomb    214 

Central  Building  in  Campbell's  Tomb    216 

Chasm  in  Pavement  near  Great  Pyramid    221 

Nelson's  Chamber     235 

Tombs  to  the  Westward  of  the  Great  Pyramid 238 

Present  State  of  Egypt     239 

Hieroglyphics  on  Ruins  near  Second  Pyramid 255 

Lady  Arbuthnot's  Chamber     256 

Casing-stones  of  the  Great  Pj-ramid    261 

Northern  Air  Channel  opened     263 

Foundations  to  the  Eastward  of  the  Great  Pyramid 273 

Shaft  Northward  of  the  Sphinx,  No.  3    274 

Fossil  found  in  the  Sphinx 275 

Shaft  Westward  of  the  Sphinx,  No.  2     275 

Piece  of  Iron  in  the  Great  Pyramid    275 

Campbell's  Chamber     277 

Quarry  Marks  in  Great  Pyramid — Mr.  Birch's  Notes 279 

Southern  Air  Channel  opened     285 


LIST  OF   PLATES 


THE   FIRST   VOLUME. 


PACE 


Casing-stones  at  the  Great  Pj'ramicl    (Frontispiece) 

Map   1 

Section  of  the  Great  Pyramid 3 

Section  of  the  Second  Pyramid 5 

Janissary  Selim     14 

Arab  Woman    23 

Ciiildren  of  Upper  Egypt     30 

Temple  of  Sabooa    38 

Temple  of  Amada   39 

Catchief  s  House  at  Derr     52 

Nubian  Women    57 

Ruin  at  Karnac     81 

Plan  of  Ruin  at  Karnac 81 

Brick  Arch  near  the  Memnonium    89 

Sheik's  Tomb  at  Eckniim 101 

Speos  Artemidos 116 

Figures  in  the  boat 138 

View  of  Third  Pyramid    154 

Quarries  near  the  Second  Pyramid 159 

Bridge  in  the  Southern  Dyke 167 

Second  Pyramid,  Upper  Entrance 169 


Xll  LIST  OF  PLATES. 

FAOE 

CampboU's  Tomb      175 

View  of  Pyramids  to  the  south  of  the  Third  183 

Second  Pyramid,  Lower  Entrance 185 

Section  of  Third  Pyramid    198 

Well  of  Sweet  Water   210 

View  of  the  Tents  at  Gizeh 2 14 

Building  in  Campbell's  Tomb      216 

Entrance  of  the  Great  Pyramid   236 

View  of  the  Plain  from  the  Tents    259 

Hieroglyphics  in  Chambers  of  Construction   279,  284 


PREFACE. 


The  chief  object  of  the  following  pages  is  to  give 
a  distinct  account  of  the  works  carried  on  at  the 
Pyramids  of  Gizeh,  under  a  firmaun  granted  by 
the  Pasha  in  the  winter  of  1836. 

The  form  of  a  Journal  has  been  adopted,  and 
the  daily  employments,  and  numbers  of  the  people, 
have  been  given,  that  the  extent  and  difficulties  of 
the  various  operations  may  be  more  fully  under- 
stood; —  difficulties  not  a  little  increased  by  the 
irregular  attendance  of  the  labourers. 

Abstracts  from  various  authors  antient  and 
modern,  who  have  treated  of  the  Pyramids,  are 
inserted  in  'the  Appendix :  for  those  taken  from 
Arabian  writers  I  am  indebted  to  the  labours  of 
Dr.  Sprenger.  A  few  other  subjects  are,  likewise, 
incidentally  alluded  to,  from    a   supposition    that 


XIV  PREFACE. 

they  might  interest,  and,  perhaps,  assist  future  tra- 
vellers in  Egypt,  but  without  any  idea  of  compe- 
tition with  Mr.  Lane's  accurate  account,  or  with 
Sir  J.  Gardner  Wilkinson's'  more  extensive  work, 
—  two  books,  with  which  every  traveller  in  that 
country  should   be    supplied. 

When,  in  consequence  of  Colonel  Campbell's 
letter,  M.  Caviglia  withdrew  from  the  Pyramids,  I 
was  engaged  in  assisting  Mr.  Perring  in  his  survey 
of  those  monuments,  and,  although  I  had  not,  at 
first,  the  slightest  intention  of  remaining  abroad,  I 
considered  it  my  duty  to  await  the  completion  of 
the  survey,  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  pursue  the 
objects,  for  which  the  firmaun  was  obtained.  The 
discovery  of  the  exterior  mouth  of  the  northern 
air-channel  in  the  Great  Pyramid,  and  the  hope  of 
arriving  at  the  apartments,  which  were  supposed 
to  exist  in  the  Third,  by  the  excavation  begun  in 
its  interior  induced  me  to  persevere;  and,  as  is 
often  the  case,  one  thing  led  on  to  another,  until, 
being  fairly  engaged  in  works  of  so  much  interest, 
I  was,  of  course,  determined  to  carry  them  on  to 

'  Sir    J.    Gardner    Wilkinson    has    received    tiie    honour   of 
knighthood  since  the  following  pages  were  written. 


PREFACE.  XV 

a  favourable   result,  whatever  sacrifices  of  money 
or  of  time  might  be  incurred. 

Many  of  our  researches  proved  failures,  they 
are,  however,  all  described,  together  with  the  rea- 
sons why  they  were  attempted.  It  will  also  be 
seen  that  some  of  the  discoveries  were  accident- 
ally made,  a  circumstance,  indeed,  to  be  expected 
from  the  little  analogy,  which  exists  in  the  internal 
construction  of  the  three  larger  Pyramids,  although 
their  general  purposes  appear  to  have  been  the 
same ;  and  the  following  pages  will  clearly  shew 
that,  whatever  ultimate  success  was  obtained,  it 
must  be  chiefly  attributed  to  the  zealous  and  able 
assistance  of  Mr.  Perring  and  of  Mr.  Mash,  and  to 
the  unwearied  perseverance  of  Mr.  Hill  and  of 
Mr.  Raven ;  nor  should  the  valuable  services  of 
tv,'o  other  Englishmen  (Goodman  and  Jack)  be 
forgotten,  the  latter  of  whom,  besides  being  con- 
stantly employed  during  the  day,  passed  every 
night  for  nearly  five  months,  in  superintending 
the  excavations  in  the  interior  of  the  Third  Pyra- 
mid. These  details,  however,  it  is  to  be  feared 
will  not  be  completely  understood,  excepting  by  a 
constant  reference  to  Mr.  Perring's  plans,  pub- 
lished in  two  numbers,  by  Mr.  Fraser,  of  Regent 
Street,   from  which   the    sections    and   admeasure- 


XVI  PKKl'ACli. 

meiits  inserted  in  these  volumes  liave  been  copied." 
Plans  of  Campbell's  Tomb,  and  of  most  of  the  other 
Pyramids,  as  far  south  as  the  Faiyoum,  including 
the  ruined  site  of  Abou-Reche,  have  also  been  re- 
ceived from  Mr.  Perring,  and  will  compose  a  third 
number.  The  whole,  it  is  presumed,  will  form  a 
work  of  considerable  interest ;  and  the  value  of  it 
will  be  greatly  increased  by  a  number  of  excellent 
drawings  taken  on  the  spot  by  Mr.  Andrews,  who 
remained  at  Gizeh  for  a  considerable  time,  and 
who  with  the  same  disinterested  kindness,  which 
distinguished  the  conduct  of  the  other  two  gentle- 
men, was  indefatigably  employed  in  my  behalf 
even  during  the  intense  heat  of  summer.  I  find 
it  difficult  to  express  my  acknowledgments  for  the 

^  The  plates  which  relate  to  Gizeh  have  been  executed 
from  Mr.  Andrews'  drawings  by  Mr.  Arundale,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  the  panoramic  view,  the  well,  and  the  tent,  which  together 
with  the  other  plates  that  gentleman  has  contrived  to  arrange 
from  rough  and  imperfect  sketches  attempted  by  myself.  1  take 
this  opportunity  of  remarking  that  the  table  of  levels  at  the 
bottom  of  the  plate  containing  the  section  of  the  rock  (see  page 
138,  Appendix,  Vol.  II.)  was  added  in  this  country  to  Mr. 
Perring's  drawing,  and  that  the  difference  of  13  feet  lOj  inches 
is  erroneously  inserted,  as  may  be  seen  by  reference  to  page  150. 
Another  mistake  in  the  level  of  high  Nile  of  1838,  instead  of 
1837,  has  been  corrected. 


PREFACE.  XVU 

cheerful  and  valuable  assistance  which  these  gen- 
tlemen invariably  afforded  me.  The  public  will 
be  enabled,  in  some  degree,  to  estimate  the  extent 
of  my  obligations  by  the  excellence  of  their  works  ; 
and  I  beg  to  assure  them,  that  I  shall  ever  remem- 
ber with  pleasure  the  time  spent  with  them  at 
the  Pyramids. 

It  is  with  regret  I  allude  to  the  unpleasant 
detail,  which  the  dishonourable  accusations  made 
in  the  name  of  M.  Caviglia  against  Colonel  Camp- 
bell and  myself  have  rendered  indispensable  ;  but 
in  doing  so  I  think  it  particularly  necessai'y  to 
mention,  in  reference  to  that  gentleman's  opinion, 
that  I  never  experienced  any  interruption,  or  even 
had  reason  to  suspect  the  slightest  hostility  on  the 
part  of  the  French,  or  of  any  other  persons,  whilst 
I  was  engaged  at  the  Pyramids, 

Could  I  have  obtained  a  direct  order  from  the 
Pasha  to  enforce  the  constant  attendance  of  a 
sufficient  number  of  people,  my  intention  was  to 
have  excavated  the  entire  area  round  the  Sphinx, 
which  appears,  at  least  on  the  western  and  south- 
ern sides,  to  have  been  enclosed  by  a  peribolus  of 
unburnt  bricks  ;  but  my  application  was  not  for- 
warded to  the  Pasha :  and,  from  the  immense 
quantity    and    the    looseness   of  the   sand    to   be 

VOL.  I.  b 


PREFACE. 


removed  in  order  to  make  the  operation  of  any 
real  utility,  without  the  constant  attendance  of  a 
considerable  number  of  people  the  undertaking 
would  have  been  almost  indefinite  as  to  time  and 
expense.  I  conceive  that  this  object,  and  the 
different  levels  of  the  water  in  the  tombs,  are 
peculiarly   worthy   of    further    investigation. 

It  was  understood  that  the  antiquities  disco- 
vered under  the  firmaun  were  to  belong  to  the 
Pasha,  and  that,  without  his  Highness's  permission, 
nothing  whatsoever  could  be  retained  by  either 
Colonel  Campbell  or  myself.  Separate  lists  are 
in  consequence  subjoined  of  the  different  articles 
found  at  Gizeh  since  the  13th  of  February,  dis- 
tinguishing those,  which  we  were  allowed  to  keep 
in  consequence  of  an  application  to  Boghos  Bey ; 
and  since  my  return  to  England  I  have  sent 
every  thing  of  value  to  the  British  Museum.  The 
Sarcophagus  of  Mycerinus  was  removed  with  con- 
siderable trouble  and  expense  out  of  the  Third 
Pyramid  for  the  same  purpose  ;  as  I  was  convinced 
that  owing  to  the  brittle  quality  of  the  stone,  of 
which  it  was  composed,  it  would  soon  have  been 
entirely  destroyed  had  it  been  left  in  an  open 
pyramid.  I  was  the  more  confirmed  in  this 
apprehension  by  having  found,  to  my  great  regret, 


that  the  magnificent  casing-stones  discovered  at 
the  base  of  the  Great  Pjramid  were  so  much 
defaced,  even  during  the  time  that  I  remained 
at  Gizeh,  that  I  tliought  it  my  duty,  upon  leaving 
the  place,  to  cover  them  again  with  a  considerable 
quantity  of  rubbish,  and  thereby  to  do  all  in  my 
power  to  protect  from  further  injury  one  of  the 
most  interesting  features  of  these  unrivalled  monu- 
ments. I  am  sorry  to  add,  that  my  precautions 
were  unsuccessful,  and  that  I  have  been  subse- 
quently informed  that  the  blocks  have  been 
again  uncovered  and  much  injured. 

The  following  narration  is  chiefly  composed 
from  a  regular  journal  of  the  daily  occurrences, 
as  they  severally  happened  ;  and  I  have  to  observe, 
that  it  was  written  in  1838,  notwithstanding  the 
great  delay,  which  has  taken  place  in  its  publica- 
tion, owing  to  the  number  of  plates,  to  my  own  in- 
experience, and  to  other  incidental  causes,  which 
have  also  unfortunately  made  a  list  of  errata  neces- 
sary; and  the  reader's  attention  is  particularly 
requested  to  these  inaccuracies,  and  likewise  to 
lists  of  corrections  made  by  hand,  which  are 
added  in  order  to  prevent  mistakes  although  every 
copy  has  been  carefully  examined. 

I  cannot  conclude  these  prefatory  observations 
without  returning  my   best  thanks  to  Mr.  Birch 


XX  PREFACE. 

for  his  valuable  notes  now  published,  and  likewise 
for  those  on  the  inscriptions  at  Tourah,  Abouseir, 
&c.,  already  prepared  for  a  third  volume,  which 
will  contain  Mr.  Perring's  recent  discoveries,  since 
my  return  from  Egypt,  and  one  or  two  other 
papers  relating  to  that  country.  I  have  also 
great  satisfaction  in  expressing  my  acknowledg- 
ments for  the  kind  assistance  and  attention,  which 
I  have  met  with  at  the  British  Museum ;  and  at 
Oxford  from  Dr.  Macbride,  and  Dr.  Bandinel  of  the 
Bodleian  Library ;  likewise  at  Eton  College,  pai'- 
ticularly  from  the  Rev.  Mr.  Coleridge,  an  ad- 
vantage, for  which  I  was  chiefly  indebted  to  the 
late  Rev.  Mr.  Wright ;  whose  lamented  death 
has  deprived  me  of  a  very  old  and  much-respected 
friend,  and  the  Church  and  the  College  of  a  most 
virtuous  and  distinguished  ornament;  a  man  pos- 
sessed of  the  soundest  judgment,  and  of  great 
literary  attainments;  dignified  by  the  highest  sense 
of  honour  and  of  moral  integrity;  andinspii-ed  with 
an  ardent  love  for  his  country,  and  with  undaunted 
resolution  to  secure  its  liberties,  and  to  promote 
its  prosperity,  by  maintaining  inviolate  its  antient 
laws  and  glorious  constitution  : 

"  Cui  pudor,  et  justitiae  soror 
Incorru])ta  fides,  nudaque  Veritas, 
Qiuiudo  ullum  invenient  parem  ?  " 


ERRATA   IN  Vol.  I. 


S")  from  ) 
bottom  j 


..      24, 

last  line, 

Sovadee 

Souadee 

..      41, 

line  19, 

Abousier 

Abouseir,  passi 

..      42, 

6, 

Darfour 

Darfoor,  passim 

..      47, 

4. 

form 

forms 

— 

..      11, 

pummels 

pommels 

..      48, 

..        3, 

Kabibsba 

Kalabshee 

. .      52, 

..      19, 

Cordofan 

Kordovan 

..      60, 

3, 

upon 

upon 

..      64, 

. .      10, 

niter 

desert 

itisert 

country 

..      67, 

..      18. 

Jor 

proiijla?a 

read 

propyl  a;on 

..      69, 

3, 

Kameses 

Remeses 

. .      — 

8, 

contains 

contain 

..      72, 

..      16, 

nor 

or 

..      82, 

3, 

Oisirtesen 

Obirtesen 

..      86, 

. .      22, 

hjire 

Government 

insert 

The  British 

••      — 

. .      27, 
( 2"''  fron 

for 
] 

this  country 

rend 

Great  Britain 

. .      89, 

j  bottom 

\" 

were 

are 

. .      — 

I'lSt  line, 

are 

were 

..      96. 

line  14. 

Assasseuf 

A  ssasseef 

..      97, 

•  ■      ^9, 

Deir 

Drah 

..    108, 

7, 

after 

is 

insert 

being- 

..    112, 

last  line. 

Jor 

three 

read 

these 

..    115, 

line  16, 

omit 

that 

..    126, 

..        6, 

/"'■ 

Faioum 

Faiyoum,  pn$iin 

•■      - 

jVl'  from 
(  bottom 

head,  cljief,  or 

head  or  chief 

..    ]30, 

..      13, 

Antinoe 

Arsinoe 

..    13.1, 

astbutone 

in 

on 

..    182, 

..      18, 

bejie 

be 

dele 

to 

..    219, 

. .      24, 

for 

Atrsus 

read 

Atreus 

..    220, 

..      19, 

sprung- 

Sjirang 

..    224, 

2, 

tliirty-"eight 

thirty-six 

..    243. 

C  6"' from  : 
(   bottom 

1835 

1836 

..    258, 

..      14, 

Abdallatif 

Ahd  Allalif,  pa 

..    27.7, 

last  line. 

Abon  Simbal 

Abou  Simbel 

..    279, 

4, 

relates 

rehite 

..    284, 

7, 

2,3 

23 

CORRECTIONS   MADE   BV  HAND. 


..      17,    line    21,        ..        1780  instead  of         178o 

. .    282,     inverted  commas  at  note  erased 


.  rouno 


,     V  CAUSEWAY  ■-     ■, 


PLAN      OF      THE 

PYRAMIDS    or  CHIZEH   and 

THEIR       VICINITY, 
BY 

J  .5.  PERRINC.C.E. 

1837. 


5*'    15; 


/  ''^e£j 


^' 


van    -  rs;»"S5  .  \ 

NCH  -TRCNCM  ^ 


*  V  CRELAT    PYRAMlClji;',jj    ^ 

■■J-  "'' 


1 1:3 


I '-  I^j^'  .j,_j  ■ 


TRUE        MLH1D1AN  V    y     —      •  /  I'-     ^TT    ~i 


20    _  IO-2I 


I 


-     "      Vic     JON' 


,ST  \si^        I 


totsg 


.y'  - 


J- 


/>  ^ 


EXCAVATEl^    TpMBS 


BY    JA?  FRASrR,  215.  RECENT   ST 


ME,  17   CATE    S'' 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH, 


Before  I  describe  the  Operations  carried  on  at  the  Pyra- 
mids in  the  spring  and  summer  of  1837,  it  is  necessary 
to  state  the  condition,  in  which  I  found  them  on  my 
first  arrival  in  Egypt,  and  some  other  particulars,  which 
may  tend  to  make  the  Operations  in  question  better 
understood. 

I  arrived  in  Alexandria  on  the  29th  of  December, 
1835,  with  the  intention  of  visiting  Upper  and  Lower 
Egypt ;  but  finding  that  an  opportunity  would  present 
itself,  towards  the  end  of  February,  of  visiting  Syria  with 
peculiar  advantage,  I  determined  to  postpone  till  my 
return  from  that  country  my  voyage  into  Upper  Egypt, 
and  to  spend  the  time,  that  remained  at  my  disposal, 
in  Cairo. 

Among  the  many  objects  of  interest,  which  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  that  curious  and  picturesque  city  afforded, 
the  Pyramids,  particularly  those  of  Gizeh,  attracted  my 
attention ;  from  the  grandeur  and  simple  majesty  of  their 
forms,  from  the  remote  antiquity  and  uncertainty  of  their 
origin,  and  also  fi-om  the  peculiarity  of  their  mysterious 
construction ;  since,  after  the  investigation  of  many  ages, 
doubts  were  still  entertained,  not  only  as  to  the  purpose 
for  which  the  passages  and  chambers  already  discovered 

VOL.   I.  1! 


L  A  1 


PLAN     OF     THE 

Pyramids  or  Chizeh  an 

J.S.  PERRINC.C.E 
1837. 

r 

f 


f/  ( 


1^. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH, 


Before  I  describe  the  Operations  carried  on  at  the  Pyra- 
mids in  the  spring  and  summer  of  1837,  it  is  necessary 
to  state  the  condition,  in  which  I  found  them  on  my 
first  arrival  in  Egypt,  and  some  other  particulars,  which 
may  tend  to  make  the  Operations  in  question  better 
understood. 

I  arrived  in  Alexandria  on  the  29th  of  December, 
1835,  with  the  intention  of  visiting  Upper  and  Lower 
Egypt ;  but  finding  that  an  opportunity  would  present 
itself,  towards  the  end  of  February,  of  visiting  Syria  with 
peculiar  advantage,  I  determined  to  postpone  till  my 
return  from  that  country  my  voyage  into  Upper  Egypt, 
and  to  spend  the  time,  that  remained  at  my  disposal, 
in  Cairo. 

Among  the  many  objects  of  interest,  which  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  that  curious  and  picturesque  city  afforded, 
the  Pyramids,  particularly  those  of  Gizeh,  attracted  my 
attention  ;  from  the  grandeur  and  simple  majesty  of  their 
forms,  from  the  remote  antiquity  and  uncertainty  of  their 
origin,  and  also  from  the  peculiarity  of  their  mysterious 
construction ;  since,  after  the  investigation  of  many  ages, 
doubts  were  still  entertained,  not  only  as  to  the  purpose 
for  which  the  passages  and  chambers  already  discovered 

VOL.  I.  B 


2  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

were  originally  intended,  but  in  a  much  greater  degree 
respecting  any  other  passages  or  apartments,  which 
might  reasonably  be  supposed  to  exist  in  these  enormous 
structures. 

An  additional  interest  arose  from  the  great  probability 
that  they  were  the  mighty  works  of  the  Shepherd  Kings, 
whose  descendants,  according  to  Manetho,  after  their 
expulsion  from  Egypt,  under  the  denomination  of  Philis- 
tines built  in  Syria  Jerusalem,  and  also  many  defensive 
towns,  which  had  the  same  names  as  those  they  had 
quitted  in  Egypt.''  This  extraordinary  people  appear  to 
have  been  of  the  same  race  with  the  Cyclopes  and 
heroic  adventurers,  whose  enormous  structures  and  archi- 
tectural skill,  and  whose  wanderings  and  misfortunes, 
have  been  celebrated  by  the  antient  poets. 

As  it  had  been  suggested,  that  the  inchned  passages 

^  See  Bryant's  "  Antient  History,"  p.  231.  And  here  let  me  pay 
a  tribute  to  departed  excellence  and  learning,  whicli  appear  from  various 
causes  to  have  been  much  undervalued,  notwithstanding  the  unacknow- 
ledged advantages  that  have  been  frequently  derived  from  them,  parti- 
cularly as  regards  the  Antient  Chronology  and  Dynasties  of  Egypt. 
Etymological  researches,  it  must  be  confessed,  are  uncertain,  and  may 
give  rise  to  many  fanciful  conjectures ;  but  no  person  can  examine  the 
works  of  the  author  to  whom  I  have  referred,  without  being  convinced  of 
the  great  extent  of  his  learning,  of  the  soundness  of  his  conclusions,  and, 
above  all,  of  his  profound  conviction  of  the  truth  of  Revelation,  and  of 
the  unerring  justice  of  the  Almighty.  The  candour  and  simplicity  of 
his  character,  and  the  benevolence  of  his  disposition,  arc  apparent  in  his 
writings  ;  and  it  may  with  justice  be  observed,  that  the  chief  object  of 
his  learned  inquiries,  through  a  long  and  laborious  life,  was  a  zealous 
and  Immble  endeavour  to  "  assert  eternal  Providence,  and  justify  the 
ways  of  God  to  men."  It  is,  therefore,  much  to  be  lamented  that  his 
posthumous  works  have  been  unaccountably  suppressed. 


^7 


fy' 


/' 


,-r.-^^-YA^- 


■  ^—-'S-^ 


rjff 


•^^^^^ 


xS 


VER 


THE  GREAT  PYRAMID.  3 

were  intended  for  astronomical  observations,  I  endea- 
voured to  ascertain,  whether  the  angles  of  inclination  were 
the  same  in  the  Great  and  Second  Pyramids  of  Gizeli 
and  in  that  of  Dashoor.  I  was  anxious,  likewise,  to 
examine  more  particularly  the  Channels  "^  proceeding 
from  the  King's  Chamber  in  the  Great  Pyramid,  which 
appeared  likely  to  conduct  to  other  apartments  :  for  this 
purpose  I  revisited  the  Pyramids  of  Gizeh  on  the  13th 
February,  1836,  and  took  with  me  Mr.  Hill,  a  very 
intelHgent  person,  who  now  keeps  the  hotel  at  Cairo, 
but  who  was  then  employed  in  the  Pacha's  service,  as 
superintendant  of  some  copper  mills  worked  by  steam 
in  the  citadel. 

The  following  is  an  account  of  the  condition  in  which 
we  then  found  the  Pyramids,  and,  I  may  add,  in  which 
they  remained  when  operations  were  commenced  upon 
them  in  the  followinof  November. 


STATE  OF  THE  GREAT  PYRAMID  AT  GIZEH. 

The  inclined  passage  from  the  entrance  to  the  sub- 
terraneous apartment,  that  apartment  itself,  and  the 
unfinished  passage  proceeding  to  the  southward  from  it, 
were  open,  although  much  encumbered  with  stones  and 
rubbish ;  as  were  the  forced  and  upper  passages  leading 
to    the   King's    and    Queen's    Chambers.^      These    two 


^  As  these  channels  were  subsequently  found  to  have  been  made 
for  the  ventilation  of  the  King's  Chamber,  they  are  called  Air  Channels. 

3  A  reference  to  Mr.  Perring's  Plans  (Eraser,  Regent  Street,  London) 
will  fully  explain  the  passages  and  chambers  here  alluded  to. 


i::i^,     .^ 


-«t-" 


^.^^-^^  ■^^'' 


GREAT       PYRAMID. 

VERTICAL,    SECTION     FRor»,     SOUTH     to    NORTH 
T„«o^o„    PASSAGES      «.,u  -CHAM  EER  S 


THE  GREAT  PVRAMID.  3 

were  intended  for  astronomical  observations,  I  endea- 
voured to  ascertain,  whetlier  the  angles  of  inclination  were 
the  same  in  the  Great  and  Second  Pyramids  of  Gizeh 
and  in  that  of  Dashoor.  I  was  anxious,  hkewise,  to 
examine  more  particularly  the  Channels  ^  proceeding 
from  the  King's  Chamber  in  the  Great  Pyramid,  which 
appeared  likely  to  conduct  to  other  apartments  :  for  this 
purpose  I  revisited  the  Pyramids  of  Gizeh  on  the  13th 
February,  1836,  and  took  with  me  Mr.  Hill,  a  very 
intelligent  person,  who  now  keeps  the  hotel  at  Cairo, 
but  who  was  then  employed  in  the  Pacha's  service,  as 
superintendant  of  some  copper  mills  worked  by  steam 
in  the  citadel. 

The  following  is  an  account  of  the  condition  in  which 
we  then  found  the  Pyramids,  and,  I  may  add,  in  whicli 
they  remained  when  operations  were  commenced  upon 
them  in  the  following  November. 


STATE  OF  THE  GREAT  PYRAMID  AT  GIZEH. 

The  inclined  passage  from  the  entrance  to  the  sub- 
terraneous apartment,  that  apartment  itself,  and  the 
unfinished  passage  proceeding  to  the  southward  from  it, 
were  open,  although  much  encumbered  with  stones  and 
rubbish ;  as  were  the  forced  and  upper  passages  leading 
to    the   King's    and    Queen's    Chambers.^      These    two 


•  As  these  channels  were  subsequently  found  to  have  been  made 
for  the  ventilation  of  the  King's  Chamber,  they  are  called  Air  Channels. 

^  A  reference  to  Mr.  Perring's  Plans  (Fraser,  Regent  Street,  London) 
will  fully  explain  the  passages  and  chambers  here  alluded  to. 


4  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

chambers,  together  with  Davison's,  and  the  communi- 
cation, or  well,  descending  from  the  great  vipper  passage 
to  that  of  the  subterraneous  apartment,  were  also  open. 
In  the  floor  of  the  subterraneous  apartment,  an  excava- 
tion had  been  made  to  the  depth  of  a  few  feet ;  some 
stones  had  also  been  removed  from  behind  the  wall  at 
the  south-eastern  corner  of  Davison's  Chamber :  one  of 
the  blocks  composing  the  pavement  had  been  taken  up 
near  the  north-western  corner  of  the  King's  Chamber, 
and  an  excavation  had  been  carried  on  beneath  the 
Sarcophagus  :  this  last,  however,  was  almost  entirely- 
filled  up  with  rubbish.  The  mouth  of  the  southern  Air 
Channel  had  been  partially  enlarged,  and  an  excavation  of 
a  few  feet  had  been  made  near  the  portcullis,  along  the 
course  of  the  northern  Air  Channel.  In  the  Queen's 
Chamber  a  considerable  passage  had  been  forced  into 
the  solid  masonry,  from  the  niche  on  the  eastern  side. 
There  was  also  a  large  hollow  near  the  granite  blocks 
at  the  commencement  of  the  ascending  passage,  which 
was  supposed  to  have  been  the  forced  entrance  made 
by  the  Caliphs.  These  were  the  only  excavations  of 
any  consequence.  On  the  exterior  of  the  Pyramid 
a  vast  heap  of  stones  and  rubbish,  50  feet  in  height, 
extended  from  the  base  to  the  entrance  of  the  inclined 
passage. 


STATE  OF  THE  SECOND  PYRAMID. 

The  upper  entrance,  conducting  to  Belzoni's  Chamber, 
and  the  chamber  itself,  with  the  descending  passage 
returning  to  the   north,  were   open  ;    as  were    also   the 


•¥ 


THE  THIRD  PYRAMID.  O 

horizontal  passage  to  the  forced  portculhs,  and  a  con- 
siderable part  of  the  re-ascending  passage  leading  to  the 
lower  entrance.  The  inclined  passage  from  the  hori- 
zontal part  of  this  communication,  together  with  the 
small  chamber  to  which  it  conducted,  were  likewise  acces- 
sible. Several  stones  had  been  removed  from  the  pave- 
ment near  the  Sarcophagus  in  Belzoni's  Chamber,  and  a 
large  excavation  had  been  carried  on  across  the  upper 
horizontal  passage  to  a  considerable  extent.  A  mound, 
similar  to  that  on  the  exterior  of  the  Great  Pyramid, 
extended  from  the  base  to  the  upper  entrance.  The 
chasm  in  the  centre  of  the  northern  front,  by  which  the 
Caliphs  are  supposed  to  have  entered,  and  in  which 
Belzoni  commenced  his  operations,  was  apparent ;  and 
there  is  no  doubt  that,  before  the  stones  had  col- 
lapsed, it  communicated  with  the  excavation,  already 
mentioned,  across  the  horizontal  passage. 


STATE  OF  THE  THIRD  PYRAMID,  AND  OF 
THE  OTHERS. 

In  the  northern  front  of  the  third  Pyramid  a  con- 
siderable chasm  had  been  made,*  said,  by  Denon,  to 
have  been  the  work  of  the  Mamelukes ;  while  below  it 
another  smaller  chasm  had  been  carried  on  upon  the 
level  of  the  upper  line  of  granite,  which  forms  the 
front  of  the  lower  part  of  the  Pyramid.  A  great  deal 
of  rubbish,  and   many  large  blocks  of  calcareous  stone 

*    The  eastern   side    of  this  excavation  was   in  the  centre  of  the 
northern  front. 


•S'ECTI  ON    FROM   S    TO    N    THROUGH  PASSAGES, 

SECOND      PYRAMID. 


ir^A-- 


iU/kc. 


THE  THIRD  PYRAMID.  O 

horizontal  passage  to  the  forced  portculhs,  and  a  con- 
siderable part  of  the  re-ascending  passage  leading  to  the 
lower  entrance.  The  inclined  passage  fi-om  the  hori- 
zontal part  of  this  communication,  together  with  the 
small  chamber  to  which  it  conducted,  were  likewise  acces- 
sible. Several  stones  had  been  removed  from  the  pave- 
ment near  the  Sarcophagus  in  Belzoni's  Chamber,  and  a 
large  excavation  had  been  carried  on  across  the  upper 
horizontal  passage  to  a  considerable  extent.  A  mound, 
similar  to  that  on  the  exterior  of  the  Great  Pyramid, 
extended  from  the  base  to  the  upper  entrance.  The 
chasm  in  the  centre  of  the  northern  front,  by  which  the 
Caliphs  are  supposed  to  have  entered,  and  in  which 
Belzoni  commenced  his  operations,  was  apparent ;  and 
there  is  no  doubt  that,  before  the  stones  had  col- 
lapsed, it  communicated  with  the  excavation,  already 
mentioned,  across  the  horizontal  passage. 


STATE  OF  THE  THIRD  PYRAMID,  AND  OF 
THE  OTHERS. 

In  the  northern  front  of  the  third  Pyramid  a  con- 
siderable chasm  had  been  made,*  said,  by  Denon,  to 
have  been  the  work  of  the  Mamelukes;  while  below  it 
another  smaller  chasm  had  been  carried  on  upon  the 
level  of  the  upper  line  of  granite,  which  forms  the 
front  of  the  lower  part  of  the  Pyramid.  A  great  deal 
of  rubbish,  and   many  large  blocks  of  calcareous  stone 

*    The  eastern   side   of  this  excavation  was   in   the  centre  of  the 
northern  front. 


6  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII. 

and  of  granite,  were  lying  around  it ;  particularly  on  the 
northern  side,  in  which  the  above-mentioned  excava- 
tions had  been  made.  Some  of  these  had  been  taken 
away  at  the  centre ;  but  the  difficulty  of  removing  the 
heavy  masses  without  the  assistance  of  machinery,  had 
put  a  stop  to  the  operation.  Opposite  the  centre,  and 
at  some  little  distance  from  the  base  of  the  Pyramid,  a 
pit  about  20  or  30  feet  square  had  been  excavated  in 
the  rubbish,  the  sides  of  which  had  been  supported  by 
a  revetment  of  large  stones.  Several  blocks  had  been 
forced  from  a  paveinent  at  the  bottom  of  this  pit,  it  would 
seem  in  search  of  an  entrance  into  the  Pyramid,  and  many 
others  yet  remained  there,  similar  to  those  afterwards 
uncovered  to  the  eastward ;  but  there  was  no  appearance 
that  the  Pyramid  had  ever  been  opened. 

The  three  smaller  Pyramids  south  of  the  third,  and 
the  three  east  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  were  more  or  less 
dilapidated,  but  were  closed  up. 

We  took  the  angles  of  the  entrance  of  the  Great,  and 
of  the  Second,  Pyramids ;  but,  having  no  other  instru- 
ments than  a  fine  edge  and  level,  and  the  surface  of  the 
stone  being  rough  and  vmeven,  notwithstanding  the 
exquisite  regularity  and  perfection  of  the  masonry,  our 
mensurations,  probably,  were  wrong,  as  we  afterwards 
found  that  they  did  not  accord  with  those  taken  subse- 
quently with  a  theodolite,  by  Mr.  Perring.  We  carefully 
examined  Davison's  Chamber  in  the  Great  Pyramid ;  and 
the  result  of  this  examination  was  a  conjecture,  that  it 
formed  a  sort  of  entresol  between  the  King's  Chamber 
and  some  large  sepulchral  apartment  over  it,  to  which 
the  inclined  ceiUng  of  the  Great  Passage  was,  probably, 
an  entrance.     I  also  thought  that  the  channels  proceed- 


THE  PYRAMID  OF  SACCARA.  7 

ing  from  the  King's  Chamber  communicated  with  other 
apartments. 

In  the  Second  Pyramid  it  was  evident  that  the  re- 
ascending  passage,  returning  to  the  north,  led  to  a  lower 
entrance. 

The  following  remarks  on  the  Pyramids  of  Saccara 
and  Dashoor,  and  on  those  of  Howara  and  Illahoon,  may 
not,  possibly,  be  altogether  devoid  of  interest,  although 
not  immediately  connected  with  the  subject  in  question. 
I  did  not  examine  the  two  latter  Pyramids  till  my  second 
visit  to  Egypt. 

THE    PYRAMID    OF    SACCARA. 

This  Pyramid  was  built  in  steps,  or  degrees,  and 
was  entered  from  a  sort  of  well,  or  shaft,  made  in  the 
sand,  on  the  northern  side.  The  passage,  which  was 
long  and  winding,  and  apparently  in  many  places  forced, 
led  to  a  lofty  chamber,  in  the  roof  of  which  wood  had 
been  employed.  Various  forced  passages  wound  around 
this  chamber,  and  conducted  to  openings,  or  windows, 
which  looked  down  into  it  from  a  considerable  height. 
These  passages  were  much  encumbered  with  rubbish, 
pieces  of  alabaster,  and  decayed  wood ;  and  in  one  place 
there  was  an  accumulation  of  large  blocks  of  polished 
granite,  raised  up  by  small  fragments  of  stone  sufficiently 
high  to  admit  of  a  man's  crawling  beneath  them.  For 
what  purpose  they  were  so  placed,  we  did  not  find  out. 
Mr.  Wilkinson  mentions  a  chamber  hned  with  blue  tiles, 
but  this  I  was  unable  to  discover.* 

*  These  buildings  as  well  as  most  of  the  others  have  been  recently 
examined  by  Mr.  Perring,  and  it  is  intended  to  publish  his  remarks  in 
a  third  volume. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 


NORTHERN    PYRAMID   OF   DASHOOR. 

The  entrance,  like  those  of  the  Pyramids  at  Gizeh,  is 
an  inclined  passage,  commencing  at  a  considerable  height 
in  the  northern  front,  and  leading  to  a  spacious  chamber, 
whence,  by  a  forced  passage  in  the  bottom  of  the  wall, 
another  apartment  is  entered.  At  the  height  of  about 
28  feet,  a  square  aperture,  something  like  the  entrance 
leading  to  Davison's  Chamber  in  the  Great  Pyramid, 
opens  into  a  passage  about  14  feet  long,  which  conducts 
to  an  inner  chamber  on  a  lower  level,  full  of  masses  of 
unwrought  stone,  some  of  which  are  apparently  intended 
for  sarcophagi.  These  chambers  have  roofs,  like  that 
in  the  Great  Passage  of  the  Pyramid  of  Gizeh.  We  took 
the  angle  of  the  inclined  passage  ;  but,  as  there  was 
reason  to  believe  that  the  measurements  taken  at  Gizeh 
were  not  correct,  the  result,  in  this  instance,  was  not 
to  be   trusted. 


THE  PYRAMID  OF  HOWARA. 

This  Pyramid  is  situated  upon  high  desert  land,  in 
an  obtuse  angle  formed  by  a  large  canal.  It  is  at  some 
little  distance  from  the  water ;  and  the  intermediate 
ground  appears  to  have  been  formerly  cultivated.  There 
is  a  village  on  the  opposite  bank.  The  Pyramid  stands 
due  north  and  south,  and  is  composed  of  large  unburnt 
bricks,  formed  of  the  earth  dug  out  of  the  canal, 
mixed  up  with  a  proportion  of  straw.  They  are  ex- 
tremely hard  and  well  made,  and  put  together  without 


THE  PYRAMID  OF  ILLAHOON-  9 

mortar.  I  examined  several  in  the  hope  of  finding  a 
cartouch,  by  which  the  date  and  origin  of  this  antient 
building,  and  probably,  by  inference,  that  of  the  canal, 
might  be  discovered.  But,  although  many,  no  doubt, 
exist  in  the  midst  of  such  a  quantity  of  materials,  I  could 
only  find  the  usual  marks  of  a  hand  having  been  drawn 
over  the  reverse  sides.  A  large  excavation  had  been 
made  on  the  northern  front ;  and  several  huts,  apparently 
never  inhabited,  had  been  built  with  the  bricks  taken  out 
of  it.  High  mounds,  which  seem  to  be  the  ruins  of  a 
Peribolus,  surround  it  on  all  sides ;  and  a  quantity  of 
blocks  of  granite,  and  of  other  sculptured  stone,  appears 
to  indicate  the  site  of  a  temple  at  the  southern  front. 
I  did  not  perceive  any  hieroglyphics ;  but  I  have  been 
subsequently  informed  that  some  had  been  formerly  dis- 
covered upon  blocks,  which  may  have  been  since 
removed. 

The  Pyramid  of  Illahoon  is  about  four  miles  distant 
towards  the  south-east.  I  could  not  perceive  any  relative 
connexion  between  the  situation  of  these  two  Pyramids 
with  that  of  the  stone  ruins  supposed  to  have  belonged  to 
a  similar  structure  in  the  direction  of  Lake  Moeris,  or  with 
that  of  the  antient  town  of  Arsinoe. 


THE  PYRAMID  OF  ILLAHOON. 

This  Pyramid  is  likewise  in  the  desert,  at  no  great 
distance  from  the  cultivated  land,  and  is  also  composed 
of  bricks ;  but  much  of  its  exterior  has  been  removed, 
and  the  form  is  too  irregular  to  admit  of  its  aspect 
being  correctly  taken  ;    the   stone  nucleus,  around  and 


10  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

over  which  it  was  constructed,  is  entirely  exposed  on 
every  side  of  the  base ;  as  are  also  large  spaces  of  stone, 
at  equal  distances  in  the  superstructure.  At  each  angle  a 
column  of  brick-work,  two  courses  in  width,  is  carried  up 
to  the  top. 

I  conceive  that  the  entrance  into  this  Pyramid  is  in 
the  sand  around  its  base,  and  that  the  whole  of  the  pas- 
sages and  chambers  are  in  the  rock ;  that  the  Pyramid 
at  Howara  is  similarly  arranged ;  and  that  there  are 
in  neither  of  them  any  chambers  in  the  superstructures 
of  brick. 

There  were  several  natural  grottoes  in  the  adjacent 
rocks ;  but  I  did  not  observe  the  remains  of  any  tombs, 
or  of  excavations,  although  many  may  lie  concealed 
under  the  vast  drift  of  desert  sand,  as  sepulchral  shafts 
are  visible  between  the  Pyramids  and  the  village. 

These  Pyramids  are  to  be  included  in  Mr.  Perring's 
Survey. 

After  a  careful  examination  of  the  Pyramids  of  Gizeh, 
I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  they  contained  many 
apartments  yet  unopened,  as  well  on  account  of  their  vast 
magnitude,  as  also  of  the  small  space  occupied  by  those 
already  discovered. 

The  manner  in  which  these  immense  buildings  were 
constructed,  and  the  means  by  which  the  vast  blocks 
of  almost  impenetrable  stone  were  worked  and  placed 
at  different  heights  with  critical  exactness,  are  even 
now  unknown.  For  instance,  the  blocks  of  granite, 
composing  the  floor  of  the  King's  Chamber  in  the  Great 
Pyramid  of  Gizeh,  are  laid  with  such  precision,  that  not 
only  are  the  joints  scarcely  perceptible,  but  the  under 
faces  and  edges  of  the  stones  are  so  sharp  and  polished. 


PYRAMIDS  OF  GIZEll.  11 

that  it  is  impossible  to  detect  how  they  were  lifted  and 
placed  in  contact  Avith  each  other,  as  no  marks  of  force 
or  of  any  purchase  having  been  applied  can  be  per- 
ceived ;  so  that  some  persons  imagine,  that  it  was  not 
until  after  they  had  been  fixed  in  their  respective  places 
that  the  outward  surfaces  of  the  stones  were  smoothed 
down  and  finished.  The  blocks  placed  perpendicularly 
to  the  incline  in  the  several  passages  have  also  the 
finest  joints,  and  scarcely  any  settlings  or  imperfections 
appear.  The  masonry  in  the  King's  Chambei",  the  casing- 
stones,  and  those  in  the  foundation  and  at  the  base,  are, 
perhaps,  unrivalled.  This  will  be  again  more  particularly 
alluded  to.^ 

It  appears  that  the  Pyramids  were  tom.bs ;  that 
the  inchned  passages  were  for  the  purpose  of  assist- 
ing the  conveyance  of  the  sarcophagi,  and  for  the 
better  arrangement  of  the  solid  blocks  with  which  part 
at  least,  if  not  the  whole,  of  the  long  entrances  were 
closed  up ;  and  also  to  increase  the  difficulty  of  disin- 
terment and  of  violation.  Having  been  closed  with 
solid  masonry,  they  could  not  have  been  used  for  astro- 
nomical observation,  nor  yet  for  initiation  or  mysterious 
purposes,  as  some  have  fancifully  supposed. 

It  would  indeed  seem,  from  the  great  care  and  pre- 
cautions taken  to  ensure  the  preservation  of  the  body 
at  an  expense  so  vast,  and  by  means  so  indestructible, 
that  in  these  early  ages  there  was  a  settled  conviction, 

*  Mr.  Perring  is  of  opinion  that  the  flat  surfaces  were  obtained  by 
working  the  stones  level,  and  by  afterwards  rubbing  a  surface-plate, 
covered  with  a  wet  composition,  over  it,  to  ascertain  the  projecting 
irregularities,  which  were  then  cut  awaj' ;  applying  the  plate  and  the 
cutting  alternatclj'  till  a  regular  surface  was  obtained. 


12  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII. 

not  only  of  an  after-existence  of  lengthened  duration, 
but  also  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  —  a  belief 
which,  however  obscured  and  mystified  by  imperfect 
tradition  and  by  superstitious  ceremonies,  could  only 
have  had  its  origin  in  direct  revelation. 

It  is  also  to  be  observed,  that  the  subsequent  dis- 
covery of  the  casing-stones  at  the  base  of  the  Great 
Pyramid,  proves  that  these  buildings  had  originally  one 
smooth  and  polished  exterior,  which  appears  likewise  to 
have  actually  existed  in  the  time  of  Pliny.  It  is  impossible, 
therefore,  to  imagine  that  their  summits  could  have  been 
easily  attained,  or  conveniently  occupied  for  astronomical 
observation  :  neither  would  their  height,  however  great 
when  compared  with  that  of  other  buildings,  have  tended 
much  to  the  advancement  of  scientific  purposes. 

Soon  after  these  examinations  (namely,  on  the  22d 
of  February,  1836)  I  returned  to  Alexandria ;  and  on 
the  23d  I  had  the  pleasure  of  being  introduced  to  Mr. 
Caviglia,  with  whom  I  had  a  long  conversation.  He 
informed  me  that  he  had  made  the  excavation  in  the 
Subterraneous  Chamber ;  that  to  the  south  of  Davison's 
Chamber,  and  the  one  also  along  the  Northern  Air 
Channel ;  and  that  he  had  attempted  to  force  the  mouth 
of  the  Southern  Air  Channel  in  the  King's  Chamber.*' 
He  stated  his  belief  that  these  channels  led  to  other 
apartments,  which,  by  excavating  in  their  direction, 
might    be    easily   discovered.      He    also    mentioned   the 

^  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  Greaves,  who  travelled  in  1638, 
describes  the  mouth  of  the  Southern  Air  Channel  to  have  been  then 
partially  forced,  and  blackened  with  smoke.  He  likewise  alludes  to 
excavations  near  the  sarcophagus ;  but  he  neither  mentions  the  Sub- 
terraneous Chamber,  Davison's  Chamber,  nor  the  passage  leading  to  it. 


VOYAGE  TO  CAIRO.  13 

vertical  direction  he  supposed  the  Southern  Air  Channel 
to  take.  He  was  so  good  as  to  allow  me  to  read  some 
papers  he  had  written  on  the  mystical  purposes  for  which 
he  believed  these  buildings  to  have  been  applied  ;  together 
with  a  printed  account  of  his  discoveries  some  years  since 
at  the  Sphinx.  I  proposed  that  he  should  go  to  the 
Pyramids,  and  carry  on  operations  at  the  Air  Channels 
at  my  expense,  but  he  declined  doing  so  ;  and  having 
afterwards  mentioned  the  subject  to  Mr.  Sloane  (the  vice- 
consul,  and  Mr.  Caviglia's  intimate  friend),  that  gentleman 
also  informed  me,  that  he  knew  Mr.  Caviglia  would  not 
at  that  time  engage  in  such  an  undertaking. 

Accordingly,  dismissing  the  subject  from  my  mind, 
I  left  Alexandria  for  Beyroot  on  the  26th  of  February. 

After  a  tour  in  Syria,  Asia  Minor,  Szc,  I  again  arrived 
at  Alexandria  on  the  25th  of  October,  with  the  intention 
of  going  to  Thebes  and  Wady  Haifa,  and,  if  an  oppor- 
tunity offered,  of  visiting  also  Mount  Sinai,  and  then 
of  returning  to  England  by  Italy  and  the  Rhine  ;  for, 
at  that  time,  I  had  not  the  remotest  idea  of  engaging  in 
any  operations  at  the  Pyramids. 

Soon  after  my  arrival,  however,  Mr.  Sloane  men- 
tioned that  it  was  proposed  to  procure  a  firmaun  for 
Colonel  Campbell,  himself,  and  me,  who  were  to  pay 
equal  shares ;  and  that  Mr.  Caviglia  was  to  superintend 
the  operations.  I  had  several  conversations  with  Colonel 
Campbell  and  Mr.  Sloane  about  this  business  ;  and  had 
subsequently  frequent  interviews  with  Mr.  Caviglia,  who 
was  extremely  sanguine,  particularly  about  the  apartments 
to  which  the  Air  Channels  in  the  Great  Pyramid  were 
supposed  to  lead. 

On  the  2d  of  November  I  paid  my  first  subscription 


14  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

(200  dollars)  to  Mr.  Caviglia :  Colonel  Campbell  paid 
the  same  sum ;  and,  I  conclude,  Mr.  Sloane  did  so 
likewise. 

The  following  day  I  left  Alexandria  for  Cairo,  Mr. 
Caviglia  remaining  behind  to  buy  various  articles,  such 
as  ropes,  &c.,  which  could  there  be  best  obtained." 

I  embarked  about  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  on 
the  Mahmoudie,  and  performed  my  voyage  with  great 
convenience,  as  Colonel  Campbell  was  so  good  as  to  send 
with  me  his  Janisary  Sehm,  whom  I  found  of  the  greatest 
service.  The  voyage  by  this  canal  to  Atfee  presents  no 
objects  of  interest  to  the  eye,  except  a  few  villas  erected 
on  its  banks,  and  the  sakias,  or  Persian  water-wheels, 
the  constant  motion  of  which  in  some  degree  enlivens  the 
scene,  and,  for  a  few  miles,  clothes  the  shores  with  ver- 
dure, soon,  however,  succeeded  by  utter  sterility,  which 

^  Excepting  the  Obelisks,  the  famous  Pillar,  the  Grecian  Catacombs 
called  Cleopatra's  Baths,  and,  possibly,  one  or  two  other  foundations, 
Alexandria  does  not  at  present  afford  many  objects  of  particular  interest ; 
but  by  the  gradual  removal  of  the  vast  mounds  surrounding  the  new 
town,  innumerable  fragments  of  large  columns,  and  other  remains  of 
antient  magnificence,  are  continually  brought  to  light,  these  mas- 
sive foundations  form  a  striking  contrast  to  the  slight  and  imperfect 
buildings  erected  over  them.  During  the  time  I  remained  there,  a 
quantity  of  marble  slabs,  broken  columns,  and  several  Corinthian 
capitals,  of  bad  workmanship,  had  been  dug  up  in  the  gardens  of 
Mahomet  El  Garbi  (the  consul  for  Morocco) ;  and  soon  afterwards  a 
range  of  large  columns  of  red  granite,  with  intercolumniations  of  about 
nine  feet,  and  likewise  another  row,  composed  of  gray  granite,  at  about 
seven  feet  distance,  were  discovered.  Behind  these  columns  were  two 
parallel  walls,  at  a  considerable  distance  from  each  other,  apparently 
Roman,  and  containing  several  arches ;  they  had  been  covered  with 
a  coating  of  stucco,  of  which  some  patches  remained,  with  the  traces 
of  figures   coarsely   painted.      The   whole    plain    beyond    the    Rosetta 


■mm^' 


VOYAGE  TO  CAIRO.  15 

continues,  with  scarcely  any  exceptions,  on  both  tlie 
banks.  The  lake  Marcotis  extends  along  the  distance 
to  the  southward  ;  and  on  the  opposite  side  a  view  is 
now  and  then  obtained  of  the  glorious  Bay  of  Abonkir, 
beyond  the  intervening  desert  plains,  interspersed  with 
large  ponds,  the  banks  and  surface  of  which  are  covered 
by  incrustations  of  white  salt. 

'November  Mi.  —  We  arrived  about  six  at  Atfee  ; 
and,  procuring  the  first  boat  we  could  find,  which  was, 
as  usual,  very  dirty,  and  infested  with  vermin  and  rats, 
we  set  out  about  ten.  The  wind  was  favourable,  but 
so  strong,  that  I  could  not  prevail  upon  the  Janisary  to 
keep  the  water  even  with  bare  poles  ;  and  we  accord- 
ingly put  into  Fouah,  a  large  Arab  town,  with  a  cotton 

Gate  is  one  undulating  surface  of  ruined  foundations,  heaps  of  broken 
materials,  pottery,  &-c.  Several  large  columns  of  excellent  work- 
manship had  been  dug  up  in  forming  the  Frank  Burial-grounds,  where 
excavations,  it  would  therefore  appear,  might  be  attempted  with  great 
success  ;  at  all  events,  many  valuable  materials,  and  possibly,  also, 
interesting  inscriptions,  might  be  discovered.  A  lofty  tumulus  on  the 
sea-shore,  not  far  from  the  modern  Lazaretto,  is  supposed  to  have  been 
the  tomb  of  Alexander  the  Great.  The  sarcophagus,  at  present  in  the 
British  Museum,  was  said  to  have  been  originally  found  there ;  and  also 
some  remarkable  alabaster  columns,  taken  by  Junot  to  Paris.  The 
place  had  afterwards  contained  a  Columbarium ;  and  since  that  has 
been  distinguished  by  the  tomb  of  a  Mahometan  Sheik,  —  memorials 
which,  although  they  may  have  confounded  the  original  foundation,  yet 
tend,  in  a  certain  degree,  to  establish  the  reputed  sanctity  of  the  spot. 
The  shore,  broken  in  upon  by  the  waves,  continually  discloses,  parti- 
cularly near  this  place,  fragments  of  columns,  foundations,  &c.  of  great 
extent.  It  is  itself  a  commanding  situation  upon  "  the  far-sounding 
shore,"  and  may  have  formerly  been,  from  its  relative  position,  a  fit 
station  for  the  monument  of  the  mighty  hero. 


16  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

manufactory,  on  the  eastern  shore.  This  place  was  once 
famous  for  its  dancing  girls,  till  the  Pacha  put  an  end  to 
their  trade,  by  sending  considerable  numbers  of  them 
to  the  army  in  Syria,  and  by  confining  the  rest  in  the 
towns  of  Upper  Egypt."*  Fouah  appears  to  have  been 
the  site  of  an  antient  town,  and,  like  most  other  places 
in  Egypt,  much  more  flourishing  some  years  since  than 
at  present.  Soon  after  leaving  this  place,  we  were  again 
obliged,  by  contrary  winds,  to  put  in  shore  ;  where  I  had 
an  opportunity  of  observing  the  slovenly  way  in  which 
husbandry  is  carried  on  in  this  once  fertile  country.  The 
ground  was  extremely  foul ;  and  the  seed,  scattered  by 
broad-cast  sowing,  was  afterwards  ploughed  in,  when 
a  sort  of  attempt  was  made  to  clean  the  ground,  and  to 
break  the  clods.  We  sailed  about  sunset,  and  had  some 
very  heavy  rain,  with  thunder  and  lightning.  The 
vermin,  gnats,  rats,  &c.  were  beyond  all  belief;  and,  to 
make  matters  worse,  my  English  servant  was  violently 
attacked  by  fever. 

In  attempting,  near  Cairo,  to  make  a  short  cut,  the 
boat  got  a-ground,  and  we  were  obliged  to  return  a  mile 
or  two,  and  then  to  go  round,  having  lost  the  channel  by 
the  faintness  of  the  starlight.  We  did  not,  therefore,  arrive 
at  Boulac  till  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning  (Nov.  9th), 
when  I  was  very  glad  to  convey  my  servant  to  Mr.  Hill's 
house,  where  he  could  have  medical  assistance.  I  called, 
without  delay,  on  the  consul,  Mr.  Piozan,  respecting  the 
firmaun  necessary  for  the  operations  at  Gizeh,  by  whom 


«  It  is  remarkable,  that  both  the  Crusaders  and  the  French,  in  their 
invasions  of  Egj'pt,  mistook  these  people  for  a  deputation  of  the  most 
considerable  of  the  inhabitants,  comins;  out  to  hail  their  arrival. 


CAIRO.  17 

I  was,  in  consequence,  introduced  to  Habbib  EfFendi  (the 
governor),  and  also,   in  the    course  of  the  morning,  to 
Achmet  Bey  (the  minister    of  war).     The  latter  invited 
me   to  accompany  him  on  the  Wednesday  following  to 
see  some   battalions  of  infentry  inspected  ;   and  also  on 
the  Friday,  when  the  cavalry  and  artillery   were  to   be 
under  arms  at  Tourah.^     In  the  course  of  the  morning, 
I  went  to  Ishmael  Pacha's  palace  at  Boolac,  at  present 
occupied  by   an  establishment  of  cadets.     The  boys  are 
taken    in  as    early   as    six    or   seven    years    of  age,  and 
are    instructed   in    mathematics,    drawing,   mapping,  &c. 
They  appear  healthy  ;  and  I  was  told  that   the  hospital 
did  not  at  that    time    contain    a   single    patient.     They 
sleep    in    regular    beds,    about    twenty    in    each    room. 
Several    of  their    performances    were    exhibited,    which 
did    them   great    credit.      They    have    casts    of  relievos 
and  of  antient  sculpture,  and  a  large  collection  of  prints, 
after  the  most   eminent  Italian  and  other  masters,  con- 
taining sacred  subjects,  portraits,  &c.,  amongst  which  was 
a  print  of  George  the  Third,  putting  an  end  to  the  riots 
in   1780.     There  were   also  "  The   Siege   of  Gibraltar;" 
Wilkie's  "  Village  Politician  ; "   "  Opening  the  Will,"  &c. 
There    appeared,    in    short,   to    be   no    restriction    as    to 
subjects,   or  to  the  representation  of  men  and  animals, 
which  was  formerly  the  case  in  Mahometan  countries. 

I2th.  —  Thermometer  about  72°  in  the  day;  and  66° 
at  night. 

\5th.  —  jNIr.  Caviglia  arrived.      I   accompanied   him 

9  See  Appendix. 


IS  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

immediately  to  Mr.  Piozan's,  and  we  afterwards  arranged 
matters    with    Mr.    Hill.      We    dined    together    in    the 


16///.  —  In  consequence  of  Achmet  Bey's  invitation,  I 
went  with  Mr.  Piozan  and  Mr.  GofF,  attended  by  one  of 
the  Bey's  aides-de-camp,  to  his  house ;  and,  after  coffee, 
pipes,  &c.,  we  proceeded  to  the  plain,  where  eight  bat- 
talions were  drawn  up  near  an  encampment  between  the 
town  and  Birket  El  Hadge.'  I  was  afterwards  occupied 
in  engaging  a  boat,  and  in  making  preparations  for  my 
voyage  into  Upper  Egypt.  In  the  evening,  Mr.  Cavigha 
dined  with  me. 

llth.  —  Mr.  Caviglia  set  out  for  the  Pyramids. 

l%th.  —  I  went  early  in  the  morning  with  Mr.  Piozan, 
and  the  aide-de-camp,  to  Tourah,  where  Achmet  Bey 
inspected  several  squadrons  of  cavalry,  and  some  ar- 
tillery. We  dined  at  that  place  with  Billel  Bey  (the 
commandant) ;  the  dinner  was  in  the  European  manner, 
and  most  abundant,  but  the  room  was  intensely  hot, 
and  swarmed  with  flies.  In  coming  back  to  Cairo 
we  passed  over  a  vast  plain,  covered  with  innumer- 
able and  beautiful  tombs  ;  whence  a  number  of  the 
Pacha's  hareem,  having  paid  their  devotions,  were  silently 
returning  in  the  still  hour  of  evening,  surrounded  by  their 
numerous  attendants.  The  picturesque  city,  with  its 
countless  minarets,  lay  beneath  the  shadow  of  the  citadel, 
placed   on   a   fine   promontory   of  the  Mookattam  ;  and 

'  See  Appendix. 


PYRAMIDS  OF  GIZEH.  19 

beyond  it,  to  the  westward,  was  the  ever-flowing  river, 
with  the  Pyramids  of  Gizeh,  Saccara,  and  Dashoor,  on 
the  distant  mountains  of  the  interminable  desert.  These 
various  objects,  grand  and  beautiful  in  themselves,  were 
greatly  enhanced  by  the  fine  climate  and  picturesque 
costume  of  the  East ;  and  many  of  them  were  of  the 
greatest  interest,  from  the  reflections  to  which  they 
gave  rise.  They  were  the  mysterious  records,  enduring 
for  countless  ages,  of  mighty  generations  long  since 
passed  away,  whose  names  and  histories  are  now  un- 
known, and  whose  very  existence,  excepting  for  the 
testimony  of  these  unrivalled  monuments,  would  have 
been  lost  and  forgotten  in  the  obscurity  of  the  remotest 
times. 

19//^' — I  signed  a  contract  for  the  boat  at  the  consul's 
ofl3ce,  and  concluded  my  arrangements  for  the  journey 
into  Upper  Egypt. 

2lst. — I  left  Cairo  at  eleven  o'clock,  with  Mr.  Hill, 
and  arrived  at  the  Pyramids  about  four,  by  a  very 
circuitous  road,  on  account  of  the  waters  yet  remain- 
ing from  the  inundation.  The  country  was  rich  beyond 
description  :  when  the  waters  subsided,  the  surface  merely 
required  hoeing  to  prepare  it  for  seed.  The  dykes 
were  of  considerable  extent;  and  the  Arabs  were  busily 
employed  in  taking  quantities  of  fish,  in  large  pools,  left 
by  the  inundation.  After  dinner  I  went  with  Mr.  Caviglia 
to  the  Great  Pyramid,  which,  as  well  as  the  Second, 
Third,  and  smaller  Pyramids,  were  in  the  condition  before 
described ;  excepting  that,  at  the  two  largest,  some  of  the 
rubbish  had  been  cleared  out  from  the  passages.     We 


20  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

examined  the  Air  Channels  in  the  King's  Chamber,  and 
inserted  a  pliable  rod  to  the  length  of  about  50  feet  into 
the  southern,  which  appeared  to  pass  horizontally  through 
the  wall  for  5  feet,  then  to  ascend  vertically  for  14,  and 
afterwards  to  take  an  unknown  direction. 

22d.  —  We  visited  the  subterraneous  chamber  in  the 
Great  Pyramid,  which  had  partially  been  cleared  out, 
and  in  which  Mr.  Caviglia  had  excavated,  when  engaged 
with  ]Mr.  Salt,  to  the  depth  of  a  few  feet.  He  did  not 
appear  to  think  that  there  was  any  apartment  beneath  it. 
We  then  examined  the  ruins,  supposed  to  have  been 
temples,  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  three  Pyramids,  and 
also  the  dykes.  We  awaited  with  great  impatience  the 
arrival  of  the  firmaun,  which  was  to  be  forwarded  to  us 
from  Alexandria. 

23d. — We  examined  the  Second  Pyramid,  particularly 
with  a  view  to  a  lower  entrance  ;  also  the  Third  Pyramid, 
and  the  other  I'uins. 

241/1.  —  Having  again  gone  round  the  several  monu- 
ments, it  was  agreed  that  Mr.  Caviglia  should  be  ready 
to  commence  as  soon  as  the  firmaun  arrived ;  and,  in 
the  meantime,  should  make  the  necessary  preparations 
for  extending  the  excavation  he  had  already  made  on  the 
southern  side  of  Davison's  Chamber,  in  order  to  intercept 
the  southern  Air  Channel ;  and  also  for  continuing  the 
excavation  he  had  commenced,  at  the  entrance  of  the 
King's  Chamber,  along  the  course  of  the  northern  Air 
Channel.  That  he  should  remove  the  rubbish  in  search 
of  the  lower  entrance  of  the  northern  front  of  the  Second 


PYRAMIDS  OF  GIZEH.  21 

Pyramid ;  and  carry  a  gallery  into  the  centre  of  the 
Third  Pyramid,  from  the  upper  chasm  in  its  northern 
front ;  and,  hkewise,  that  he  should  clear  out  the  pas- 
sages of  the  Great  and  Second  Pyramids,  by  which 
operation  alone  many  discoveries  had  been  made.  I 
also  mentioned  my  intention  of  mapping  the  ground, 
and  of  taking  a  survey  and  plan  of  the  Pyramids,  as  no 
plan,  by  which  work  could  be  carried  on  with  accuracy, 
was  to  be  procured.  Discretionary  power  was  also  given 
to  Mr.  Caviglia  to  pursue,  in  addition  to  these,  any  other 
project  that  circumstances  might  seem  to  recommend 
in  the  Pyramids  themselves,  and  in  the  temples  on  their 
eastern  fronts,  as  regular  entrances  into  the  Pyramids, 
of  a  larger  description  than  those  already  opened  in  their 
northern  fronts,  were  believed  to  have  been  constructed, 
and  to  lie  concealed  below  those  edifices.  Mr.  Cavigha 
had  a  carte  hlanclie  with  Mr.  Hill,  at  the  hotel,  and  in  all 
other  respects,  for  his  own  personal  accommodation  ;  and 
likewise  for  stores  of  every  description,  which  he  might 
think  proper  to  order,  for  the  carrying  on  of  the  work 
in  hand. 

I  was  extremely  sanguine  as  to  the  success  of  our 
intended  operations,  particularly  of  those  at  the  Great 
Pyramid ;  and  it  was  with  some  hesitation,  and  much 
reluctance,  that  I  set  out,  in  the  evening,  for  Upper 
Egypt.  Mr.  Caviglia,  however,  having  promised  that  he 
would  write  if  any  thing  important  should  occur,  I  left 
him  with  the  intention  of  instantly  returning  to  Gizeh, 
in  case  my  presence  should  be  required. 


22  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 


VOYAGE  INTO  UPPER  EGYPT. 

The  wonders  of  Upper  Egypt,  and  the  voyage  to 
Wady-Halfa,  have  been  too  often  described  to  make  a 
detailed  account  necessary.  I  shall,  therefore,  confine 
myself  to  a  few  remarks  on  those  objects  which  appear 
most  worthy  of  notice,  and  to  such  general  observations 
as  may  interest  future  travellers ;  and,  I  shall  at  the  same 
time,  keep  connected  the  form  of  a  journal,  which  appears 
best  calculated  to  give  a  distinct  account  of  the  Operations 
at  Gizeh,  the  principal  object  of  this  book. 

Having  commenced  my  voyage  rather  late  in  the 
season,  I  adopted  the  usual  course  of  taking  every  ad- 
vantage of  the  northerly  winds  that  yet  remained,  in 
order  to  get  to  Wady-Halfa  without  delay,  and  of  post- 
poning, till  my  return,  the  examination  of  the  various 
antiquities  which,  on  every  side,  presented  themselves  to 
my  view. 

Thermometer  in  cabin,  68°.  I  sailed  in  the  evening 
from  Gizeh  with  a  fair  wind,  which,  however,  soon  failed ; 
so  that  I  did  not  arrive  at  Benisouef  till  November  27. 
The  weather  was  like  an  Italian  summer,  and  the  sunsets 
particularly  beautiful. 

The  general  appearance  of  the  country  is  that  of  a 
fertile  plain,  bounded  by  the  desert,  on  a  much  higher 
level.  The  barren  mountains  are  at  a  considerable  dis- 
tance on  the  western  side,  but  approach  nearer  on  the 
eastern,  and  occasionally  come  down,  in  the  form  of 
rocky  cliffs,  to  the  edge  of  the  stream. 

The  villages  are  situated  amidst  open  groves  of  palm- 
trees,  upon  mounds  of  rubbish  which  frequently  conceal 


ARAK   WOMAIS  .. 
J\iil^t,A  i^  James Jnoser,  S/^J(^avliS/' 


VOYAGE  INTO  UPPER  EGYPT.  23 

the  foundations  of  antient  towns  ;  and,  being  sometimes 
embellished  with  lofty  minarets,  and  with  one  or  two 
considerable  buildings,  rendered  conspicuous  by  white- 
wash and  by  regular  windows,  they  produce,  at  a  distance, 
a  pleasing  and  characteristic  effect ;  but,  upon  a  nearer 
approach,  nothing  can  be  more  forlorn  than  the  flat- 
roofed  houses,  built  with  clay-brick  of  the  same  colour  as 
the  adjoining  land,  and  often  more  dilapidated  than  the 
antient  ruins  amongst  which  they  are  placed.  The  vacant 
unglazed  windows,  instead  of  affording  an  idea  of  light 
and  cheerfulness,  disclose  dark  and  dreary  apartments, 
to  which  comfort  and  cleanliness  are  alike  strangers. 

Nor  is  the  scenery  much  enlivened  by  the  listless 
groups  seated  under  the  walls,  to  bask  in  the  warmth  of 
the  noonday  sun ;  by  the  naked  children,  and  half-starved 
dogs,  dispersed  among  the  rubbish  ;  by  the  cattle  standing 
on  the  brink,  or  the  buffaloes  immersed  in  the  mud,  of 
the  river ;  or  even  by  the  graceful  forms  of  the  Arab 
women,  filling  their  jars  at  the  all-bounteous  stream. 

Excepting  occasional  exclamations,  the  perpetual 
groanings  of  the  unwearied  sakias,"  turned  by  cattle,  or 
the  splashings  of  the  water  raised  by  a  succession  of 
baskets  worked  by  manual  labour,  are  the  only  sounds  to 
be  heard.  Nor  are  many  objects  to  be  seen  moving  along 
the  banks.  Now  and  then  a  turbaned  Arab,  mounted  on 
an  ass,  with  two  or  three  attendant  wives  carrying  his 
baggage ;  or  a  few  camels,  sheep,  or  goats,  may  be  seen 
passing  from  village  to  village  ;  or,  at  times,  a  traveller 
from  the  adjacent  desert,  shrouded  in  the  many  folds  of 
his  thick  bernouze,  whose  meagre  dromedary  bears  ample 

-  Persian  water-wlieels. 


24  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

testimony  to  the  long  and  wearisome  journey  he  has  just 
performed. 

Cangias,  and  hoats  of  all  descriptions,  are  constantly 
plying  up  and  down  the  river ;  and  innumerable  flocks  of 
wild  fowl  swarm  on  its  sandy  islands. 

The  plains  teem  with  abundance ;  and  it  is  difficult 
to  suppose  that  any  circumstances  short  of  open  hos- 
tility could  reduce  the  inhabitants  to  the  state  of  poverty 
and  depression  under  which  they  labour.  It  may  be 
observed,  however,  that  in  a  warm  climate  the  wants  of 
life,  are  few,  habitations  are  scarcely  necessary,  and  clothes 
almost  an  encumbrance.  These  circumstances,  therefore, 
combined  with  many  years  of  injustice  and  of  oppression, 
will  sufficiently  account  for  the  squalid  penury  of  the 
inhabitants,  and  for  the  ruined  state  of  the  houses,  which 
form  as  strong  a  contrast  as  the  sterility  of  the  desert 
itself  to  the  surrounding  abundance,  and  to  the  never- 
ceasing  fertility  of  the  soil.  The  resources,  the  wealth, 
and,  consequently,  the  power  of  such  a  country,  when 
properly  administered,  antient  tradition  and  stupendous 
ruins  sufficiently  attest ;  but  at  present  scarcely  more 
than  one-third  of  the  land  is  under  cultivation ;  and  the 
population  is  yet  more  diminished. 

28///.  — We  passed  Abou-noor  and  Kom  Achmar,  near 
the  village  of  Medil,  Djebel  Sheik  Embarek  being  seen  in 
the  distance,  and,  on  the  following  day.  Sheik  Hassan 
and  the  Convent  Sittah  INIariam-El-Adra,  situated  on 
lofty  cliffs,  which  continue  for  some  distance,  and  are 
called  Djebel-Tayr,  and  afterwards  arrived  at  IMinyeh, 
and  the  village  of  Sovadee,  on  the  opposite  bank. 


VOYAGE  INTO  UPPER  EGVPT.  25 

30//?. — Thermometer  58°.  We  left  Beni-IIassan, 
Sheikh  Abadeh  (Antinoopolis),  and,  on  the  opposite  bank, 
Reramoun,  near  which,  at  Oshmounayn,  were  the  ruins  of 
Hermopohs  INIagna,  now  entirely  destroyed.  At  Djebel- 
Toona,  some  miles  to  the  westward,  are  several  mummy 
pits,  containing  sculptures  and  inscriptions  similar  to  those 
at  Tel-El-Amarna,  which  will  be  afterwards  mentioned. 
Melawee  is  supposed  to  be  the  site  of  Hermopolitana 
Philace,  of  which  no  traces  remain,  excepting  some 
mounds  of  rul)bish ;  and  opposite  are  the  remains 
of  Sbayda.  Beyond  Sheik  Said  is  the  site  of  other 
buildings ;  and  at  Tel-El-Amarna  may  be  seen  the  ruined 
mounds  of  Alabastron  ;  and  beyond  Tanoof,  in  the  plain 
on  the  opposite  bank,  is  the  entrance  of  the  Bahr 
Yousef;  at  Dharoot,  also,  are  the  mounds  of  another 
antient  town.  El  Karib  (Hieracon)  is  situated  on  Djebel 
Abou  Faydee.  The  cliffs  continue  to  Abou-Hadji-Ma- 
homet ;  and  on  the  western  plains  is  Cosseh  (Cusje). 

Dec.  1st. — Thermometer  61°.  I  arrived  at  Manfaloot, 
whence  there  is  a  track  to  the  Oasis  of  Daklah  ;  and,  on 
the  opposite  shore,  according  to  Mr.  Wilkinson,  an  old 
convent,  called  Deir-El-Bukkara.^  The  eastern  shores 
at  this,  and  many  other  parts  of  the  river,  are  peculiarly 
picturesque ;  and  several  mounds,  marking  the  site  of 
considerable  towns,  bear  testimony  to  the  extent  of  the 
former  population  of  the  country.  In  this  neighbourhood 
crocodiles  are  generally  first  observed. 

'  It  will  be  seen,  by  the  frequent  reference  I  make  to  Mr.  Wilkin- 
son's book,  how  extremely  useful  it  is  to  a  traveller  in  this  country. 


26  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

2nd.  —  Thermometer  70°.  We  arrived  at  E-Siout 
(Lycopolis),  the  present  capital  of  Upper  Egypt.  It  is 
a  flourishing  town,  well  situated  near  picturesque  moun- 
tains ;  and  caravans  set  out  from  it  for  Darfoor.  It  is 
to  be  observed,  that  the  force  of  the  stream,  whicli 
varies  considerably  in  different  parts  of  the  river,  is  here 
very  rapid. 

Sd. — According  to  Mr.  Wilkinson,  at  Shodb  are  the 
mounds  of  Hypsele  ;  at  El-Wasta,  those  of  Contra-Lyco- 
polis  ;  at  Sherg-selin,  of  Selinon  ;  and  at  Abou-teeg,  those 
of  Abutis.  The  mountains  at  Govv-el-Kebeer  (Antasopolis) 
are  very  fine ;  and  the  adjacent  plain  is  supposed  to  have 
been  the  scene  of  the  contest  between  Isis  and  Typhon. 
In  the  plains  on  the  western  bank,  is  situated  Tahta, 
probably  the  site  of  Hesopis.  Sheik  Hereedee  is  next 
passed,  near  which  Mr.  Wilkinson  supposes  Passalon, 
and  another  antient  town,  to  have  been  situated.  Itfou 
(Aphroditopolis)  is  on  the  western  plain,  near  which  are 
the  Red  and  White  Monasteries,  which  will  be  afterwards 
mentioned ;  and  in  the  neighbourhood  are  the  ruins  of 
Atribis,  now  called  Medeenet-ashaysh. 

We  passed  Souhaaj,  the  site  of  an  antient  town,  and 
afterwards  Echmim  (Chemmis,  Panopolis),  in  the  time  of 
the  Mamelukes,  the  capital  of  Upper  Egypt.  Beyond 
Echmim  is  said  to  be  the  site  of  Thomu.  We  then 
passed  Mensheeh  (Ptolemais  Hermii),  situated  on  a  high 
bank  ;  and,  on  the  4th,  we  arrived  at  Girjeh,  near  which 
is  Arabet-El-Matfoun  (Abydos),  containing  the  tomb  of 
Osiris. 

Near  Abou-haled   is   the  site  of  Chenoboscion ;  and 


VOYAGE  INTO  UPPER  EGYFr.  27 

further  on,  the  catacombs  of  Quasresyad,  and  at  Fow  the 
remains  of  Bopos  ;  also  at  How,  those  of  DiospoHs  Parva, 
finely  situated  amongst  groves  of  palm-trees.  In  this 
part  of  the  stream  rocks  are  first  observed  —  a  consider- 
ation of  some  importance  in  a  navigation  where  boats 
are  often  aground  eight  or  ten  times  a-day.  We  soon 
afterwards  arrived  at  Kenneh. 

5th.  —  Thermometer  80°.  The  mountains  to  the 
eastward  are  very  magnificent ;  and  the  appearance  of  the 
Nile  well  justifies  the  appellation  of  the  mighty  river  of 
Egypt,  being  navigable  for  above  1000  miles  by  boats  of 
forty  or  fifty  tons,  without  the  aid  of  a  single  tributary 
stream,  although  it  is  just  possible  that  it  may  be 
periodically  supplied  by  subterraneous  sources.  It  may, 
I  think,  well  be  questioned,  whether  the  Delta  be  al- 
luvial, as  the  water  becomes  clearer  the  higher  you 
ascend  the  river;  and  as  there  are  not  any  depositions  at 
the  Cataracts,  or  any  where  below  them,  whence  so  vast 
a  quantity  of  soil  could  have  been  derived.  It  seems  to 
be  diluvial,  and  its  surface  to  have  been  raised,  together 
with  the  bed  of  the  river,  by  gradual  deposits. 

The  fertility  of  the  land,  although  a  great  part  of  it  can 
scarcely  be  cultivated  during  half  the  year,  is  almost  equal 
to  that  of  volcanic  countries ;  whilst  it  is  wholly  exempt 
from  the  perilous  visitations  to  which  they  are  subject, 
and  might  be  irrigated  with  facility  in  those  parts  which 
are  not  renewed  by  the  annual  inundation  of  the  Nile. 

The  climate  may  be  considered  as  healthy  as  any  in 
the  world,  and,  by  the  periodical  rising  of  the  stream,  has 
the  peculiar  advantage  of  a  succession  of  the  seasons 
without  their  uncertainty. 


28  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

Besides  these  peculiar  advantages,  Egypt  possessed 
a  considerable  degree  of  civilisation  and  knowledge  at 
a  very  remote  period ;  and,  from  various  expressions 
in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  it  may  be  collected,  that  it 
was  a  country  peculiarly  favoured  by  the  Almighty.* 
It  seems,  also,  more  immediately  connected  with  the 
Bible  than  almost  any  other  country.  From  the  time 
of  Abraham  to  that  of  our  Saviour  the  connexion  is 
kept  up,  chiefly,  however,  as  a  prohibited  land,  in  contrast 
to  that  of  Judea ;  neither  is  the  extreme  state  of  cor- 
ruption and  of  idolatry,  into  which  it  afterwards  fell,  at 
all  inconsistent  with  the  supposition  that,  when  most 
other  nations  were  immersed  in  darkness,  and  living  in 
the  most  savage  ignorance,  Egypt,  and,  perhaps,  some 
portions  of  the  East,  preserved  distinct  and  accurate 
traditions  of  the  antediluvian  world,  originally  derived 
from  revelation ;  and  that  the  Egyptians,  for  especial 
purposes,  were  endowed  with  great  wisdom  and  science. 

A  vast  quantity  of  provision  was  collected  at  Kenneh, 
to  be  sent  by  Cosseir  to  the  Hedjas.  The  war  in  that 
country  appears  likely  to  destroy  the  wealth  and  popu- 
lation of  Egypt,  the  mortality,  by  the  enemy  and  by 
sickness,  being  very  great ;  and,  besides  these  losses,  the 
men,  to  avoid  the  conscription,  fly  to  the  mountains ; 
so  that  the  land  in  many  districts  is  out  of  cultivation 
for  want  of  hands,  and  it  has  already  become  necessary 
to  import  corn  for  home  consumption  into  a  land  which 
was  once  styled  the  granary  of  Rome.  The  supphes, 
also,  are  subject  to  great  waste,  besides  that  incident 
to  warfare,  as  they  are   first   collected   into   magazines 

*  Isaiah,  xix.  23. 


VOYAGE  INTO  UPPER   EGYPT.  29 

from  the  villages  by  means  of  boats ;  thence  reshipped 
to  be  conveyed  to  Kenneh ;  and,  lastly,  carried  upon 
camels  to  Cosseir,  there  to  be  embarked  for  Jidda  or 
Mocha. 

The  camels  are  pressed  from  the  villages  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Kenneh,  at  the  price  of  eighteen 
piastres  per  head,  and  are  paid  for  by  paper,  which 
is  supposed  to  be  deducted  afterwards  from  the  taxes. 

From  Kenneh  to  Cosseir  is  a  journey  of  three  or 
four  days.  After  the  first  day  there  is  no  water,  and 
many  camels  die  on  the  road. 

Opposite  to  Kenneh  are  seen  the  ruins  of  Dendera 
(Tentyra) ;  and  near  them  a  high  mountain  projects  into 
the  plain,  where  the  Necropolis  of  the  antient  city  is 
supposed  to  have  been  excavated.  Further  on  the  same 
bank  is  Ballas,  remarkable  for  the  manufacture  of  porous 
jars,  used  for  the  cooling  of  water.  In  their  construction, 
a  stone,  called  hamr,  is  an  ingredient ;  it  is  brought  by 
the  Ababde  Arabs  from  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Red 
Sea.^ 

This  evening,  the  mountains  of  Thebes  were  seen 
about  twenty  miles  off.  The  banks  of  the  stream,  which 
here  resembled  a  magnificent  lake,  were  covered  with 
luxuriant  crops  amidst  open  groves  of  sount  and  of 
palm-trees.  The  ranges  of  the  desert  hills  were  of  the 
finest  forms,  and  appeared  to  greater  advantage  from 
the  unrivalled  clearness  of  the  atmosphere.  Recollec- 
tions, also,  of  the  antient  glories   of  the   mighty  capital 

'  Coft  (Coptos)  is  on  the  eastern  bank,  and  afterwards  Coos 
(ApoUinopolis  Parva)  ;  Shenhoor,  also,  stands  on  the  site  of  an  antient 
town. 


30  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

added  greatly  to  the  interest  of  the  scene,  and  I'aised 
expectation  to  the  highest  pitch  on  approaching  its 
famous   plains. 

Qth.  —  In  the  morning,  Thebes  was  eight  or  nine  miles 
distant :  the  land  to  the  westward  was  at  a  considerable 
height  above  the  water,  and,  about  eight  years  before, 
had  been  the  scene  of  an  engagement  between  the  Pacha 
and  the  Mamelukes.  But  little  cultivation  appeared  : 
the  fields,  sown  with  barley,  were  formed  into  small 
beds,  round  which  the  water  raised  from  the  river  was 
conveyed  by  channels  on  a  higher  level. 

The  walls  of  some  of  the  larger  houses  inclined 
gradually,  in  a  pyramidal  form,  something  like  the  pro- 
pylsea  of  the  antient  temples,  and  had  a  border  of  red 
and  white  over  the  doors,  as  also  along  the  tops,  which 
gave  them,  at  a  distance,  a  turreted  appearance — an 
ornament  often  seen  in  this  part  of  the  country.  But 
most  of  the  habitations  were  merely  huts  ;  and  each, 
however  small,  was  inclosed  in  a  yard,  in  which  the 
poultry,  cattle,  &c.,  were  defended  by  a  wall,  and  guarded 
by  dogs ;  whilst  the  whole  village  was  surrounded  by 
heaps  of  rubbish  and  offal. 

The  scanty  population  appeared  extremely  poor,  and 
liad  a  bad  reputation,  which  they  seemed  to  deserve,  by 
the  precautions  that  had  been  taken  to  secure  the  little 
property  they  possessed  from  mutual  acts  of  depredation. 

Thermometer  57°.  As  we  advanced,  the  mountains 
between  the  plain  of  Thebes  and  the  valley  of  Biban- 
El-Moluc  appeared  on  the  western  shore  ;  and  on 
the  eastern,  Karnac  and  Luxor.  The  great  Temple  at 
the  latter  place  is  finely  situated  upon    a   sandy  bank, 


<:-.F 


u- 


•-jiijac  -C^ssiK--^ 


CHHILUFlEM    >0>1F    lUPriKIR,    lESGYIP'T., 


,  r  :'/■•{ -ful":^  '. 


VOYAGE  INTO  UPPER  EGYPT.  31 

above    which  the    river   is    wider,  and   forms   a    sort  of 
harbour. 

The  village  is,  as  usual,  iu  a  grove  of  palm-trees ; 
and  beyond  it  a  plain,  exhibiting  at  present  but  little 
cultivation,  extends  to  some  distance,  and  is  bounded  by 
desert  hills.  Above  the  village  is  a  large  and  fertile 
island,  and  on  the  western  bank  of  the  river  are  likewise 
extensive  levels  in  a  rough  and  neglected  state,  where 
the  well-known  Colossi  are  seated  in  mournful  solemnity 
amidst  groups  of  ruined  temples  —  the  isolated  but  magni- 
ficent monuments  of  antient  splendour.  This  plain  is 
also  bounded  by  lofty  mountains,  amongst  which  are  the 
valleys  of  Biban-El-lNIoluc,  and  other  recesses,  full  of 
sepulchral  excavations,  while  the  lower  parts  of  the  rocky 
heights  facing  the  east  are  occupied  by  the  village  of 
Gournou.  Further  on  towards  the  south,  the  mountains 
recede  to  the  westward,  and  the  flat  country  extends 
to  Erment,  being  partially  cultivated  along  the  banks 
of  the  river.'' 

^  Thebes  was  famous  for  chariots  of  iron  ;  and  both  sacred  and  pro- 
fane liistory  record  the  vast  power  of  the  whole  country  in  chariots  and 
Iiorsemen,  and  also  the  expeditions  performed  by  them,  and,  if  tiie 
accounts  we  have  of  the  siege  of  Troy  deserve  credit,  they  penetrated 
even  to  the  shores  of  the  Hellespont.  Yet  it  is  not  easy  to  imagine 
how  they  could  have  been  conducted,  even  through  Egypt,  from  the 
plains  of  Thebes,  either  over  the  cultivated  ground,  or  by  the  desert 
sands.  If  roads  were  established,  sufficiently  permanent  to  resist  the 
inundations,  and  to  allow  a  passage  for  so  many  wheeled  carriages, 
some  vestiges  would  liave  probably  remained.  Their  conveyance  across 
the  desert,  and  subsequent  movements  in  a  mountainous  country  like 
Syria,  and  where  few,  if  any,  appearances  of  antient  roads  exist,  seem 
to  be  attended  with  still  greater  difficulties. 


32  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

The  wind  being  fair,  I  passed  Erment  (Hermontis). 

Hh.  —  Left  Eilelithias  and  Kom  Achmah  on  tlie 
eastern  shore,  and  in  the  evening  was  opposite  to 
Edfou. 

Sth.  —  I  went  through  the  narrow  pass  of  Hadjar 
Silsilis,  where  the  water  must  be  exceedingly  deep,  as 
the  current  is  not  perceptibly  increased ;  and  leaving 
Koum  Ombos,  situated  on  a  promontory  on  the  eastern 
shore,  I  arrived  in  the  evening  at  Es  Souan.  The 
island  of  Elephantine  is  covered  with  rubbish  and  broken 
pottery :  but,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  foundations, 
a  wall  towards  the  south-eastern  end,  and  a  figure  in 
a  sitting  posture,  nothing  can  be  distinctly  made  out. 
Tablets  of  hieroglyphics  have  been  inscribed  in  many 
places  on  the  rocks  in  these  islands,  and  also  in  those 
near  the  town  of  Es  Souan.  The  neighbouring  quarries 
to  the  eastward  are  very  interesting,  on  account,  of  the 
vast  monuments  they  have  furnished  for  so  many  ages, 
and  of  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  stone  of  which  they 
are  composed.  They  appear  to  have  been  worked  prin- 
cipally with  a  chisel,  although  the  marks  of  wedges  are 
in  some  places  visible.^ 

The  column  containing  the  well-known  inscription 
has   been   removed ;    but    the   Obehsk   remains,   and    I 

^  It  is  to  be  remarked,  that  in  tlie  various  painted  representations 
of  tlie  sculpture  of  images  from  granite  anil  from  other  stone,  tlic 
instruments  emploj'cd  are  often  represented  of  a  yellow  colour,  like 
that  of  brass. 


VOYAGE  INTO  UPPER  EGYPT.  33 

observed  upon  it  several  curved  rows  of  small  square 
holes,  similar  to  those  on  the  great  stone  in  the  quarry 
at  Baalbec.  As  neither  of  these  blocks  had  been  finished, 
these  holes  were,  probably,  made  for  the  convenience 
of  moving  them,  and  not  for  the  purpose  of  fixing 
them  in  any  particular  building,  as  I  at  first  conceived 
to  be  the  case,  when  I  saw  similar  cuttings  on  the  three 
large  stones  built  into  the  wall  of  the  Temple  at 
Baalbec ;  and  naturally  concluded  that  they  must  have 
belonged  to  some  former  building,  as  the  holes  did 
not  appear  to  be  of  any  use  in  their  present  position. 
In  returning  to  the  town,  I  passed  through  an  exten- 
sive burial-ground,  where  there  are  many  curious 
inscriptions. 

10th.  —  Having  changed  my  boat,  and  made  the 
necessary  arrangements,  I  set  out  for  Wady  Haifa  at 
twelve  o'clock,  and  in  about  two  hours  I  perceived, 
by  a  considerable  noise  and  slight  ripplings  of  the  water, 
that  we  approached  the  Cataracts.  As  the  channel  was 
winding  and  full  of  isolated  rocks,  and  the  stream  ran 
with  great  violence,  a  fair  wind  was  absolutely  neces- 
sary. This,  unluckily,  we  had  not ;  and,  therefore,  were 
obliged  to  put  into  a  small  creek,  or  bend  of  the  river, 
under  some  high  rocks  of  granite,  on  the  eastern  shore, 
upon  which  various  tablets  of  antient  hieroglyphics  had 
been  inscribed,  and  several  figures  also  coarsely  drawn, 
probably  by  the  French  army,  who  were  stationed  in 
the  neighbourhood  for  some  time.  The  shores  on  both 
sides  of  the  river  were  entirely  barren.  The  weather 
was  cold  and  dreary ;  and,  when  it  was  almost  dark, 
a  Nubian   woman,  with  her  clothes  and  a  bundle  upon 

VOL.   I.  D 


34  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

her  head,  swam  through  the  foaming  waters  from  the 
western  shore,  and  dimbhig  up  the  rocky  chfFs,  dressed 
herself,  took  up  her  bundle,  and  pursued  her  solitary 
journey. 

llth.  —  We  were  enabled,  by  a  fair  wind,  to  proceed 
about  eleven  o'clock ;  and  were  hauled  by  a  rope  through 
the  first  cataract,  or,  rather,  rapid.  The  boat  was  full 
of  Nubians,  who  were  extremely  active,  and,  when  occa- 
sion required,  swam  from  rock  to  rock  with  great  dex- 
terity :  they  were  remarkably  well  made,  and,  from  their 
dark  glowing  colour,  had  the  appearance  of  bronzed 
statues.  We  had  ascended  two  strong  eddies,  or  rapids, 
without  encountering  any  fall  or  cataract,  and  seemed 
to  be  in  a  fair  way  of  getting  through  our  difficulties, 
when  the  wind  lulled,  and  the  people,  probably  for  the 
sake  of  another  day's  pay,  took  advantage  of  a  sudden 
turn  in  the  rivei-,  where  the  passage  was  rather  dif- 
ficult, and,  after  much  altercation  and  noise,  finally 
moored  the  boat  to  the  eastern  shore.  As  no  further 
progress  could  be  made,  I  set  out  for  Philee,  over  sandy 
hillocks  interspersed  with  patches  of  cultivation  wher- 
ever the  inundation  had  left  any  alluvial  deposit,  and 
passing  a  village  of  scattered  clay  huts  in  a  grove  of 
palm-trees,  and  afterwards  some  cultivated  ground,  I 
arrived  at  a  promontory,  composed  of  large  masses  of 
black  granite,  on  the  brink  of  the  river  opposite  the 
island  of  Bigge,  which  is  also  formed  of  enormous 
blocks  of  the  same  material,  of  the  most  extraordinary 
and  picturesque  shapes.  The  inhabitants  resembled 
Negroes  rather  than  Arabs,  and  appeared  tolerably 
well  off. 


VOYAGE  INTO  UPPER  EGYPT.  35 

Beyond  the  promontory  lay  a  desert  plain  of  con- 
siderable extent,  with  a  few  houses  collected  together 
under  the  lofty  rocks  where  the  road  branches  off  to 
Es  Souan/'  and  on  the  high  bank  near  the  stream  a 
number  of  Jaloups  were  hutted,  with  a  few  slaves  and 
a  quantity  of  dates,  and  other  goods,  upon  which  an 
import  duty  is  levied  at  Es  Souan.  The  river  sweeps 
in  a  majestic  curve  round  the  island  of  Phila?,  which 
is  separated  by  a  smaller  branch  of  the  stream  from 
Bigge,  and  is  adorned  with  most  beautiful  ruins,  seen 
to  great  effect  amongst  trees  and  verdure.  The  whole 
of  the  island  appears  to  have  been  covered  formerly 
with  temples,  and  surrounded  by  a  wall ;  and  even 
now  tiiere  are  but  few  spots  capable  of  cultivation : 
after  visiting  this  interesting  spot,  I  returned  to  the 
boat. 

12;'/?.  —  The  wind  being  fair,  we  passed  the  only  fall 
which  could  be  termed  a  cataract.  No  danger  can  occur 
with  good  cordage ;  but  if  the  tow-lines  gave  way,  the 
boat  would  probably  be  dashed  to  pieces,  by  the  rapidity 
and  force  of  the  stream,  against  the  numerous  rocks 
above  and  below  the  water.  We  were  nearly  twenty 
minutes  in  getting  through  this  place,  as  the  rudder 
broke  just  in  the  critical  moment.  Having  paid  the 
people  and  the  pilot,  we  again  proceeded,  passed  Philse, 
and  the  temple  of  Debode  and  arrived  at  Gertassee. 

The  Nubians  are  tributary  to  the  Pacha,  and  for- 
merly  paid   for   each  sakia  two  slaves ;    they  procured 

8  Tliis  place,  and  also  the  Cataracts,  are  callert  Sel'.ayl ;  a  name  by 
which  this  part  of  Nubia  is  also  sonictimes  distinguished. 


36  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

them  by  sending  parties  into  Dongola,  and  the  adjacent 
countries,  who,  concealing  themselves  near  the  river, 
seized  the  people  when  they  came  for  water  :  at  present, 
liowever,  two  hundred  and  twenty-five  piastres  (about 
forty-five  shillings)  are  paid  by  half-yearly  instalments 
for  each  machine.  In  addition  to  this  tax,  duties  of 
one  piastre  for  every  palm-tree,  of  ten  per  cent  upon 
dates,  and  of  sixty-five  piastres  on  every  slave  exported 
from  Es  Souan  to  Cairo,  are  also  demanded.  The 
Nubians  seem  proud  of  their  country.  They  are  a  hand- 
some people,  excepting  that  the  lower  parts  of  their  faces 
often  project  like  those  of  Negroes ;  they  have,  like  the 
Arabs,  very  fine  teeth  and  eyes ;  their  hair,  generally 
woolly,  is  cut  short,  excepting  one  tuft  on  the  top  of  the 
head,  according  to  the  Mahometan  custom.  Their  cloth- 
ing is  composed  of  white  cotton,  and  consists  of  a  shirt, 
short  trowsers,  and  a  long  folded  scarf  passing  over  the  left 
shoulder,  and  confined  round  the  waist  by  a  narrow  girdle 
with  long  ends.  They  wear  a  white  cotton  cap,  and  a 
knife  or  dagger,  fastened  in  a  case  to  the  inner  part  of 
the  left  arm  above  the  elbow.  They  have  generally  ear- 
rings, carry  spears  and  large  daggers,  long  straight  swords, 
and  invariably  nabouts  four  or  five  feet  long.°  The  women 
are  chiefly  clothed  in  coarse  brown  garments,  but  in 
some  places  in  gowns  of  blue  cotton,  with  a  quantity 
of  necklaces  and  bracelets  composed  of  courie  shells, 
armlets  above  the  elbow,  ear-rings,  and  also  nose-rings, 
which  are  likewise  frequently  used  by  the  Bedouins. 
Their  thick  hair  plaited  in  ringlets,  and  often  adorned 
with   fetichies    and   ornaments   composed   of  shells   and 

9  Nabouts  arc  thick  sticks,  of  a  very  hard  wood. 


VOYAGE  INTO  UPPER  EGYPT.  37 

of  beads,  is  arranged  in  a  straight  line  across  their  fore- 
heads and  round  their  heads,  something  in  the  style  of 
the  head-dress  of  the  Sphinx,  and  is  copiously  anointed 
with  castor  oil,  or  with  grease.  I  saw  in  one  of  the 
villages  a  little  child,  apparently  the  daughter  of  a  sheik, 
and  evidently  proud  of  her  appearance,  carrying  milk  in 
an  inlaid  basin,  and  adorned  with  a  profusion  of  bracelets, 
ear-rings,  necklaces,  &c.,  and  with  her  hair  dressed  with 
coloured  stones,  but  without  any  clothing  excepting  a 
leathern  girdle  round  her  waist,  ornamented  with  silver 
in  various  devices. 

13th.  —  Thermometer  81°.  I  arrived  at  Kalabshee, 
and  afterwards  at  Dendoor  (within  the  tropics).  We  then 
passed  Sabagoora,  a  large  ruined  village  on  the  eastern 
bank,  where  a  battle  had  been  fought  between  a  Nubian 
chief  and  Ishmael  Pacha  ;  and  on  a  chain  of  barren  hills, 
on  the  opposite  shore,  we  noticed  the  ruined  temple  of 
Gerf  Hossein,  formerly  Thosh,  the  abode  of  Pthah. 
Mr.  Wilkinson  observes,  that  the  Coptic  name,  Thosh, 
greatly  resembles  Ethaush,  signifying  Ethiopia ;  and  that 
Kush,  the  old  Egyptian  name  for  Ethiopia,  is  retained  in 
the  Nubian  name  of  this  antient  place,  which  is  now 
called  Kish.  The  cultivation  is  here  confined  to  the 
immediate  banks  of  the  river.  The  remains  of  two 
antient  watch-towers  are  to  be  seen  towards  the  nortli, 
and  the  ruins  of  the  temple  are  finely  situated  above  the 
modern  village.  I  sometimes  fancied  that  in  this  country 
the  evenings  were  accompanied  by  a  longer  twilight  than 
in  Italy. 

11//;.  —  I  came  to  Maharaka  and  Korosko,  and;  pro- 


3»  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

ceeding  up  the  stream  to  the  north-west,  landed  on  the 
western  bank  at  the  ruins  of  Sabooa.  A  few  huts,  and 
some  patches  of  cultivated  ground,  occupy  the  western 
bank  of  the  stream,  where  twenty  or  thirty  black  Arabs 
exist  in  the  greatest  misery  and  want.  Nothing  can 
exceed  the  utter  desolation  of  this  forlorn  place,  which 
may  formerly  have  been  thronged  with  unnumbered 
multitudes,  pressing  forward  with  prayers  and  offerings, 
in  all  the  pomp  of  idolatrous  worship.  According  to 
Mr.  Wilkinson,  this  Temple,  which  has  a  very  grand  and 
antient  appearance,  was  built  in  the  time  of  Remeses  the 
Second,  about  1355  B.C.  It  was  approached  from  the 
river  by  an  avenue  of  Sphinxes,  amongst  which  are  two 
colossal  figures.  Two  similar  statues  guard  each  side  of 
the  entrance  of  the  Propylseon,  which,  as  well  as  the 
Temple,  has  been  covered  with  sculpture  and  hieroglyphics. 
The  interior  is  hypsethral,  and  is  surrounded  by  columns 
cut  into  the  shape  of  Colossi,  similar  in  style  to  those  at 
Abou  Simbel.  The  immense  blocks  which  form  the  archi- 
traves, bring  to  the  recollection  of  the  English  traveller 
those  of  Stonehenge.  The  adytum  appears  to  have  been 
an  excavation  in  a  ledge  of  rock,  which  may  probably 
also  contain  many  antient  sepulchres ;  but  the  whole  is 
at  present  nearly  overwhelmed  by  desert  sand. 

15tli.  —  Thermometer  63°.  The  boat  was  tracked  up 
the  Wady-el-Kharib.  The  shore  was  hilly,  with  here  and 
there  a  little  cultivation  near  the  river,  and  a  few  sheep 
and  goats  grazing  among  the  bushes.  A  road  branches 
off  from  Korosko,  through  Wady-Halfa,  to  Dongola.  The 
■  journey  is  performed  in  eight  days,  and  is  the  usual  route 
for  the  slave  koffles,  although  it  affords  little  or  no  water 


I 

s 


—  ^nS 


VOYAGE  INTO  UPPER  EGYPT.  S9 

by  the  way.  These  desert  roads  are  called  Agaba  (pro- 
bably the  same  as  Akaba).  On  the  opposite  western 
bank  a  few  huts  are  occasionally  to  be  seen  amongst 
the  groves  of  palm-trees.' 

16th.  —  Thermometer  57°.  While  the  boat  passed 
slowly  along  against  the  stream,  I  took  an  opportunity 
of  examining  several  extensive  mounds  of  pottery,  nearly 
opposite  the  temple  of  Amada,  and  which  seem  to  mark 
the  situation  of  an  ancient  town.  I  observed  on  several  of 
the  squared  stones  the  remains  of  red  plaster,  and  also 
traces  of  foundations  that  had  been  cut  in  the  rock, 
with  cavities  for  the  fastening  of  stone  doors.  In  many 
places,  excavations  had  been  made ;  but  when,  and  by 
whom,  I  could  not  discover. 

The  temple  of  Amada,  situated  in  an  extensive  desert 
plain,  is  said  by  Mr.  Wilkinson  to  have  been  built  in  the 
time  of  Thothmes  the  Third,  1490  years  b.c.  Like  that 
at  Sabooa,  it  has  an  appearance  of  great  antiquity.  It 
is  composed  of  large  squared  stones  laid  in  mortar.  The 
apartments  are  small,  and,  as  far  as  can  be  seen  from 
the  sand,  not  above  ten  or  twelve  feet  in  height.  The 
roof  consists  of  immense  slabs,  and  is  surmounted  by  a 
cupola,  for  it  has  been  used  as  a  church,  or  a  mosque. 
The  chambers  and  the  rest  of  the  interior  have  been 
painted  with  hieroglyphics,  and  the  whole  is  a  most 
venerable  and  curious  specimen  of  antient  skill.  The 
colours  yet  remain  perfectly  fresh  and  brilliant,  and  the 


1  When  the  Nubians  marry,  a  separate  hut  is  made  of  mats  for  the 
happy  couple  at  a  little  distance  from  the  village,  where  they  remain  for 
three  days,  and  then  return  to  their  former  occupations. 


40  OPERATIONS  CARIUED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

cattle,  birds,  and  other  figures,  are  executed  in  a  mas- 
terly style.  Many  tombs  are  said  to  be  in  the  adjacent 
rocks. 

Derr  is  situated  advantageously  in  a  grove  of  palm- 
trees  on  the  eastern  bank,  which  is  cultivated  to  a  con- 
siderable extent :  it  is  supported  chiefly  by  the  slave- 
trade,  and  is  tolerably  populous. 

The  house  of  Hassan  Catchief,  the  Nubian  mutzel- 
lum,  looks  extremely  well  from  the  river.  The  people 
seem,  upon  the  whole,  in  a  better  condition  than  those 
in  Egypt ;  but  their  welfare  depends  entirely  upon  the 
conduct  of  the  Catchief,  who  has  almost  unlimited  power. 
The  contrast  of  extreme  fertility  with  the  yellow  sands 
of  the  desert  is  at  this  place  very  striking.  On  the  oppo- 
site shore  are  several  ruins,  apparently  Roman. 

nth. —  Thermometer  70°.  I  arrived  at  Ibrim,  a 
town  built  upon  some  high  cliffs,  that  extend  for  some 
distance  along  the  margin  of  the  road.  Not  far  to 
the  northward  is  an  extensive  burial-ground,  held  in 
great  estimation  by  the  natives,  probably  on  account 
of  some  antient  tradition.  It  contains,  amongst  other 
tombs,  those  of  the  Mamelukes  who  fell  some  years 
ago  in  a  great  battle  with  the  Pacha.  The  remains 
of  Roman  buildings  are  to  be  seen  in  the  citadel,  and 
some  remarkable  tombs  have  been  excavated  in  the  cliffs, 
which  will  be  afterwards  described.  This  part  of  the 
country  is  called  Wadi  Guanee.  The  eastern  bank  of  the 
river  is  fertile ;  but  on  the  western  there  are  no  signs  of 
cultivation.  Several  antient  tombs  have  been  discovered 
near  the  mountains  of  Tosco,  at  some  distance  inland. 
At  Aboufertig  I  saw  a  man   paddle   liimself  across  the 


VOYAGE  INTO  UPPER  EGYPT.  41 

river  on  a  bundle  of  rushes ;  and  I  was  informed,  that 
two  or  three  people  often  pass  over  together  in  this 
way. 

1 8///.  —Thermometer  68°.  We  left  Abou  Simbel  on 
the  western  bank,  and,  soon  after,  Faras,  containing 
several  antient  remains,  on  the  eastern,  which  is  well 
cultivated  ;  and,  having  passed  some  ruins  and  the  village 
of  Ougaguin  on  the  western  shore,  arrived  at  Wady  Haifa. 

I9th.  —  Thermometer  79°.  Early  in  the  morning, 
I  went  up  in  a  small  boat  for  three  or  four  miles ; 
and,  disembarking  on  the  western  bank,  walked  to 
Abouseir,  through  desert  plains  of  yellow  sand,  here 
and  there  varied  by  mountain  ranges  of  different  colours, 
composed  of  red,  white,  and  black  rocks.  We  passed 
two  small  brick  buildings,  intended  probably  for  khans ; 
and  near  them  killed  a  very  large  snake,  of  which  the 
people  were  much  afraid.  They  said,  that  it  was  ex- 
tremely venomous,  and  had  the  power  of  springing 
forward,  when  attacked,  to  a  great  distance.  Abousier 
is  a  rocky  promontory,  about  one  hundred  feet  high, 
immediately  over  the  rapids.  They  are  composed  of 
black  rocks,  with  patches  of  white  sand,  interspersed  with 
a  few  trees  and  bushes,  and  extend  to  some  distance  up 
the  river,  which  is  here  very  broad.  The  promontory  is 
inscribed  with  the  names  of  many  travellers  ;  and  affords 
a  very  extensive  view  to  the  southward  over  Batn  El 
Hadjar,  and  to  the  northward,  beyond  Wady  Haifa.  The 
country  is  entirely  desolate,  excepting  about  the  village 
of  Wady  Haifa,  which  is  situated  in  a  plain,  and  con- 
tains a  barrack  and  a  large  magazine  or  storehouse.     A 


42  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

cultivated  island,  called  Muogis,  upon  which  are  the  ruins 
of  a  church,  is  to  the  southward  of  it.  Very  little  at 
present  exists  of  the  ruins,  mentioned  by  Mr.  Wilkin- 
son, on  the  western  shore.  Wady  Haifa  is  eight  days' 
journey  from  Dongola,  thirty  from  Kordovan,  sixty  from 
Habesh  (Abyssinia),  and  forty-six  from  Darfour.  The 
western  shore  is  said  to  be  uninhabitable  for  want  of 
water;  but  a  few  Ababde  Arabs  are  enabled  to  inhabit 
the  Eastern  Desert  by  means  of  reservoirs,  which  are 
filled  with  a  considerable  quantity  of  rain  water  in  the 
winter  season.  An  Oasis,  or  Wah,  is  at  the  distance  of 
ten  or  twelve  days'  journey  to  the  westward ;  but  I  could 
not  obtain  any  particular  information  respecting  it. 

The  boat  was  now  prepared  for  our  return,  by  taking 
down  the  larger  mast  and  sail ;  and  it  was  with  some 
satisfaction  that  I  began  to  proceed  homewards. 

20th.  —  Thermometer  78°.  I  landed  at  Faras,  and 
went  up  a  sloping  bank  covered  with  palm-trees,  dou- 
rah,  and  lupines,  to  some  sandy  hillocks,  which  possibly 
conceal  the  remains  of  an  antient  town.  They  were 
partly  overgrown  with  bushes,  and  abounded  with  the 
recent  tracks  of  leopards,  lynxes,  wolves,  gazelles,  &c. 
I  then  crossed  a  sandy  plain,  containing  a  Turkish  burial- 
ground,  to  some  antient  tombs  :  they  had  been  excavated 
in  the  rocks,  furnished  with  stone  doors  turning  upon 
pivots,  and  contained  vestibules,  which,  in  general,  con- 
ducted to  a  large  apartment ;  whence  passages,  leading 
to  various  chambers,  branched  off  in  different  directions. 
They  appeared  of  great  antiquity,  and  had  probably  been 
used  for  concealment  in  the  early  ages  of  Christianity. 
I  did  not  see  the  inscriptions,  nor  the  Egyptian  cavern 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  43 

mentioned  by  Mr.  Wilkinson  ;  but  observed,  at  some 
little  distance,  two  large  buildings  of  unburnt  bricks  upon 
foundations  of  stone,  which  seemed  to  have  been  churches. 
There  were  Roman  arches  in  both  of  these  structures ; 
and  in  one  of  them,  two  pillars  of  coarse  red  stone, 
about  eight  or  nine  inches  in  diameter,  with  capitals, 
apparently  the  work  of  the  lower  ages. 

To  the  south  of  the  village,  there  were  remains  of 
unburnt  brick  walls,  and  several  fragments  of  small 
columns  of  granite ;  also,  some  figures  roughly  sculp- 
tured, and  others  painted  upon  plaster,  evidently  of 
Christian  workmanship,  and  placed  there  to  conceal 
the  decorations  of  an  antient  Egyptian  building.  The 
northern  side  of  the  village  did  not  afford  any  thing 
worthy  of  notice ;  but  on  the  adjacent  heights  were 
several  ruins,  apparently  of  churches  —  proofs  of  the 
former  prevalence  of  Christianity  in  this  country.  The 
rocks  and  the  tops  of  the  neighbouring  mountains  bore 
so  close  a  resemblance  to  pyramids,  that  I  should  have 
stopped  to  examine  them,  had  I  not  been  assured  by 
Ignowe  (an  intelligent  Arab,  who  had  accompanied  j\I. 
Champollion  in  this  country)  that  it  was  their  natural 
shape.  Between  Kosco  and  Adda,  on  the  eastern  shore, 
and  considerably  above  the  level  of  the  river,  which 
at  this  place  turns  to  the  westward,  are  a  number  of 
remarkable  hillocks  on  a  sandy  plain,  bounded  to  the 
eastward  and  northward  by  barren  mountains,  and  by 
isolated  conical  rocks,  and  through  which  the  road  from 
Kosco  to  Ferradj  passes.  These  hillocks,  of  various 
sizes,  are  about  thirty-seven  in  number  (besides  several 
apparently  destroyed),  and  are  nearly  in   straight   lines. 


44  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

Each  of  them  stands  in  an  hollow ;  from  which  it  would 
seem  that  the  sand  and  stones,  used  for  their  construction, 
had  been  taken.  They  have  precisely  the  appearance  of 
the  tumuli  in  northern  countries,  and  of  having  been 
raised  as  monuments  after  some  great  battle ;  for  which 
the  plain,  it  may  be  added,  would  have  afforded  a  proper 
arena.  The  adjacent  ground  is  strewed  with  a  quantity  of 
broken  pottery.  These  remarkable  mounds  are  inserted 
in  Colonel  Leake's  Map,  and  have  been  supposed  by  some 
people  to  be  volcanic  ;  at  all  events,  from  the  regularity  of 
their  positions,  they  can  scarcely  have  been  occasioned  by 
the  wind.  I  opened  one  of  them  across  the  centre  to 
the  foundation,  and  found  it  to  be  composed  of  sand 
and  stones,  without  any  indication  of  an  artificial 
construction. 

Ferradj  is  situated  on  a  high  rock,  and  must  have 
been  a  considerable  place.  It  contains  walls  of  unburnt 
bricks,  and  the  ruins  of  towers,  and  of  a  fort,  which 
seems  to  have  been  Roman,  or  of  the  lower  ages.  Vast 
quantities  of  pottery,  of  burnt  and  unburnt  bricks,  and 
a  few  fragments  of  small  granite  columns,  are  scattered 
about ;  likewise  part  of  an  Egyptian  cornice,  with  the 
protecting  bird,  &c.,  but  of  indifferent  workmanship.  A 
party  of  men  were  employed  in  taking  away  the  materials 
for  other  buildings.  There  is  a  Turkish  burial-ground 
below  the  mountains.  The  road  passes  through  this 
place  to  Korosko,  Dongola,  &c.  An  antient  excavation 
in  the  cliff,  supported  by  four  columns,  is  said,  by 
INIr.  Wilkinson,  to  be  of  the  time  of  Amenoph  the  Third ; 
it  contains  a  remarkable  hollow  and  several  groovings, 
the  object  of  which   it  is  difficult  to   understand.      Tiiis 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYFI.  45 

grotto  had  been  used  as  a  church ;  the  antient  sculp- 
ture and  hieroglyphics  had,  in  many  places,  been  effaced, 
and  the  legend  of  St.  George  and  the  Dragon,  and  other 
sacred  figures,  had  been  painted  on  the  ceiling  and  on 
the  walls.  The  apartments,  which  were  very  elegant, 
had  been  closed  by  stone  doors,  opening  inwards ;  the 
face  of  the  cliff  had  been  levelled  for  a  certain  distance 
near  the  entrance,  and  a  row  of  holes,  about  three 
inches  square,  had  been  cut  into  it.  The  high  land  at 
this  place  recedes  to  some  little  distance  from  the  river. 
The  western  bank  was  here  partially  cultivated,  and  Abou 
Simbel  lay  before  us.  I  arrived  there  in  the  after- 
noon ;  and,  having  passed  the  two  tablets  engraved  on 
the  rock  near  the  larger  temple,  moored  the  boat  before 
the  fa9ade  of  the  small  one,  which  faces  the  east,  whilst 
that  of  the  Great  Temple  is  not  opposite  any  of  the 
cardinal  points,  but  is  inchned  to  the  north-eastward. 
The  river  seems  to  have  gained  at  this  place  con- 
siderably upon  the  land,  which  formerly  was,  in  all 
probability,  cultivated,  and  a  station  of  commercial 
importance,  and  of  extensive  communication  with  the 
interior  of  the  country. 

Many  antient  remains  may  yet  be  concealed  under 
the  sand,  which  fills  up  the  valley  between  the  two 
temples,  and  which  would  soon  have  entirely  hidden 
the  larger  one,  had  it  not  been  for  the  perseverance 
and  exertions  of  Sig.  Belzoni,  and  of  Captains  Irby  and 
Mangles.  The  complete  removal  of  this  sand  would 
be  a  work  of  considerable  labour,  but  of  little  diflS- 
culty,  as  the  situation  is  favourable,  and  as  the  river 
is  at  hand  to  carry  off  any  quantity  which  might 
be    thrown    into    it.       The     operation    would     possibly 


46  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

lead  to  discoveries  of  great  interest,  and,  at  all  events, 
vv'ould  exhibit  the  Great  Temple  to  considerable  ad- 
van  tage." 

Both  of  the  temples  are  said  to  bear,  in  many  respects, 
a  striking  resemblance  to  the  excavations  in  India. 
They  are,  certainly,  wonderful  specimens  of  antient  in- 
dustry and  science ;  the  carving  being  very  fine,  and 
much  of  the  detail,  consisting  of  birds,  animals^  &c.,  is 
described  with  great  truth  and  spirit,  and  painted  with 
colours,  yet  preserving  their  freshness  and  brilliancy, 
after  a  probable  lapse  of  above  3000  years.  Their  pre- 
servation, however,  is  in  a  great  degree  owing  to  the 
dryness  of  the  atmosphere,  and,  also,  to  the  protec- 
tion afforded  by  the  accumulated  sands.  It  may  be 
observed,  that  although  great  labour  has  been  bestowed 
upon  the  colossi  and  portals,  the  surrounding  face  of  the 
rock  has  been  left  in  its  natural  state,  excepting  that  near 
the  entrance  of  the  Great  Temple  there  are  some  square 
holes,  like  those  at  Ferradj,  possibly  intended  as  guides 
to  the  work.  The  colossal  figures,  as  seen  at  present, 
lose  much  of  their  effect  from  their  oblique  position,  for 
they  are  inclined  backwards  hke  a  buttress ;  and,  although 
it  is  difficult  to  imagine  how  they  would  appear  when 
seen  from  a  proper  distance,  yet  their  features  and  pro- 
portions are  not  only  extremely  broad  for  their  height, 
but  coarse  and  ill-defined,  and  reminded  me,  in  a  great 
degree,  of  the  Metopes  at  Selinus.  These  statues  are  of 
an  enormous  size,  being  six  feet  from  the  ground  to  the 


2  In  the  following  cursory  remarks,  it  is  not  intended  to  enter  into 
any  detailed  account  of  these  monuments,  which  have  been  not  only 
repeatedly  described,  but  accurately  draMU. 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  47 

knee ;  the  countenances  are  placid,  the  featm-es  those  of 
Negroes,  the  mouths  prodigiously  wide,  and  altogether 
out  of  proportion.  Over  the  portal  of  the  Great  Temple, 
a  row  of  grotesque  Typhous  form  an  upper  cornice. 
Mr.  Wilkinson  has  justly  remarked,  that  the  doorways  of 
both  the  temples  gradually  diminish  towards  the  sanctum, 
in  order,  probably,  to  assist  the  general  effect  by  in- 
creasing the  perspective.  The  doors  themselves  must 
have  been  of  vast  size,  extremely  heavy,  and,  probably, 
made  of  metal ;  they  seem  to  have  been  folding,  and  to 
have  turned  on  pummels,  like  the  stone  doors  belonging 
to  tombs.  It  is  obviously  impossible,  in  their  present 
state,  and  by  the  light  of  a  wax  candle,  to  determine 
precisely  the  original  effect,  which  these  mighty  temples 
may  have  produced:  the  Colossi  do  not,  certainly,  at 
present,  appear  to  advantage;  but  I  am  inclined  to 
believe  that  the  Egyptians,  Hke  their  pupils  the  Greeks, 
well  understood  the  principles  of  effect  and  of  propor- 
tion, and  that  the  simplicity  and  immense  size  of  these 
gigantic  figures,  the  grandeur  of  the  door-ways,  with 
their  enormous  architraves  and  mouldings,  assisted  by 
the  beauty  and  variety  of  the  coloured  inscriptions,  which 
must  have  had  the  effect  of  tapestry,  together  with  the 
great  size  of  the  heroic  figures,  and  the  solemnity  of  the 
four  deities,  seated  in  the  obscurity  of  the  adytum,  must 
have  produced  an  effect  more  splendid  and  finished  than 
that  displayed  by  any  smaller  buildings  of  plain  unco- 
loured  stone,  however  beautiful  their  proportions  and 
exquisite  the  sculpture  might  have  been.^ 

'  It  cannot  escape  observation  that  a  great  similaritj'  exists  between 
the  coloured  stucco,  with  which  the    interiors   of  these  temples  have 


48  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

The  interiors  of  the  temples  have  been  plastered  and 
painted ;  and  as  the  same  battle  is  recorded  here  and 
at  Thebes,  Kalabsha,  Sabooa,  Derr,  and  in  several  other 
places,  it  must  have  been  an  event  of  paramount  im- 
portance ;  and,  from  the  resemblance  of  the  different 
representations,  it  is  evident  that  they  were  executed  by 
the  same  persons,  or,  at  least,  according  to  conventional 
forms.  There  appears  a  propriety  in  describing  the  wars 
and  exploits  of  the  king  in  the  lai-gest  apartments,  and 
the  sacred  offerings,  the  ark  and  the  symbolical  repre- 
sentations near  the  adytum,  where  the  hero  is  represented 

been  covered,  and  that  yet  adhering  to  the  pavement  of  the  cella 
and  to  many  other  parts  of  the  temple  at  Egina,  particularly  the  red, 
which  is  the  colour  of  porphyry :  and,  as  painted  stucco  may  yet  be 
seen  on  the  Parthenon,  it  is  to  be  concluded  that  the  whole  of  these 
beautiful  edifices  were  plastered  and  painted,  notwithstanding  the  fine 
material  and  exquisite  sculpture  with  which  they  were  adorned.  It 
cannot  be  supposed  that  a  people  of  so  refined  a  taste  as  the  Greeks 
undoubtedly  were,  would  have  adopted  this  practice,  had  they  not, 
together  with  other  arts,  originally  received  it  from  those  who  may  have 
used  it  on  account  of  the  inferior  materials  with  which  they  built,  for 
it  is  not  possible,  according  to  modern  opinion,  that  any  colouring, 
much  less  a  covering  of  stucco,  could  add  to  the  exquisite  beauty  of 
Grecian  sculpture.  It  would  seem  that  the  Greeks  followed  the 
example  of  the  Egyptians  in  this  instance,  as,  I  think,  it  will  after- 
wards be  proved  they  did  in  some  others,  especially  in  regard  to  the 
Doric  order ;  and  it  is,  therefore,  the  more  extraordinary,  that  the  arch 
(which  was  constructed  in  Egypt  800  years  before  Christ)  should  have 
been  unknown  to  them.  These  considerations  make  it  probable  that  the 
rough  surfaces  of  the  temples,  at  Passtum,  and  at  Selinus,  were  either 
covered  with  plaster,  or  intended  to  be  so  ;  for,  notwithstanding  the 
imposing  grandeur  of  these  noble  structures,  particularly  of  the  former, 
they  by  no  means  equal  the  magnificent  and  finished  appearance  of 
several  of  the  Egyptian  temples,  particularly  that  of  Karnac. 


RETURN  FRO.M  UPPER  EGYPT.  49 

making  his  offerings  to  the  gods,  with  a  sceptre,  which 
has,  it  is  to  be  remarked,  at  the  end  of  it  an  extended 
hand,  like  that  adopted  as  an  ensign  by  the  Roman 
armies,  and  afterwards  by  Napoleon,  as  king  of  Italy. 
The  figures  are  executed  with  great  spirit  and  observ- 
ation of  nature,  although  not  in  exact  proportion  or 
drawing;  and  there  is  evidently  a  national  distinction 
preserved  amongst  the  groups  of  prisoners,  some  of 
whom  appear  to  have  been  Negroes.  The  likenesses  of 
the  hero  and  heroine  are  well  preserved  throughout  the 
different  scenes,  and  they  are  also  like  each  other, 
whether  as  portraits,  or  as  family  or  national  likenesses, 
or  symbolical  of  marriage,  or  of  the  text,  "  male  and 
female  created  he  them,"  it  is  difficult  to  determine.  The 
hero  is  handsome,  and  has  certainly,  as  has  been  re- 
marked, a  likeness  to  Napoleon.  The  queen,  as  far  as 
the  formality  of  the  sculpture  will  allow  of  an  opinion, 
has  beautiful  features,  well-formed  hmbs,  and  a  fine 
figure,  her  complexion  seems  to  have  been  of  that  golden 
hue  so  often  to  be  seen  amongst  the  common  people, 
and  which,  with  care  and  cosmetics,  must  have  shone 
with  increased  lustre :  for  even  many  of  the  common 
boatmen  have  a  fine  tone  of  colour,  and  their  muscles 
are  well  developed  from  the  thinness  of  their  skins.  To 
judge  by  these  representations,  a  great  similarity  appears 
to  exist  between  the  antient  Egyptians  and  the  modern 
Nubians. 

One  of  the  smaller  chambers  in  the  Great  Temple 
is  furnished  with  a  stone  shelf,  or  dresser,  in  the  same 
way  as  an  apartment  in  the  tomb  opened  by  Mr.  Bel- 
zoni  at  Thebes ;  and  I  imagined  that  I  had  discovered  in 
it  the  remains  of  an  iron  fastening. 

VOL.  I.  ^ 


50  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

The  difference  of  the  proportions  of  the  smaller  temple 
to  those  of  the  larger  seemed  to  agree  with  its  supposed 
feminine  dedication  to  Isis,  or  Athor.  On  each  side  of 
the  entrance  are  colossal  Atlantides  in  the  usual  position 
of  advancing  with  the  left-leg  foremost,  accompanied  by 
two  smaller  figures,  the  one  also  advancing,  the  other  the 
reverse  :  these  gigantic  statues,  like  those  in  the  facade 
of  the  other  temple,  are  seen  to  disadvantage  from  their 
inclined  positions.  There  are  several  cartouches  in  this 
temple,  which  I  did  not  observe  in  Mr.  Wilkinson's  list, 
and  a  slight  difference  in  that  of  Remeses  the  Second.  It 
has  a  crypt,  or  subterraneous  apartment,  beneath  it  about 
five  feet  high.  To  the  northward  of  these  temples  there 
is  a  figure  of  Isis  remarkably  well  carved  in  the  rock ; 
and  at  some  little  distance  are  the  remains  of  a  wall, 
and  of  an  old  building  apparently  a  church.  On  the 
sloping  bank  of  sand  between  the  temples  a  stove  yet 
remains,  that  was  used  by  JNIr.  Hay  in  taking  casts  of 
plaster.  This  gentleman  seems  to  have  done  more  than 
any  other  person  to  preserve  from  oblivion  the  venerable 
antiquities  of  this  interesting  country  ;  therein  presenting 
a  striking  and  honourable  contrast  to  the  wanton  and 
barbarous  devastation,  which  has  marked  the  progress  of 
many  other  noted  antiquarians,  particularly  at  Thebes 
and  Karnac. 

I  left  Abou-Simbel  with  great  regret,  but  as  I  ex- 
pected great  discoveries  to  have  been  made  by  Mr. 
Caviglia  at  Gizeh  I  set  out  in  the  afternoon  of  the  21st, 
and  proceeded  to  Tosko,  a  picturesque  village  surrounded 
by  fields  in  a  tolerable  degree  of  cultivation ;  but  the 
people  were  apparently  extremely  poor.  The  antient 
tombs  are  excavations  in  isolated  rocks,  and  at  a  distance 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  51 

have  the  appearance  of  buildings ;  the  roofs  were  sup- 
ported by  square  pillars,  but  they  are  nearly  destroyed, 
and  the  hieroglyphics  almost  entirely  effaced.  Channels 
and  reservoirs  of  water  had  been  cut  in  the  rocks, 
and  there  were  also  the  remains  of  quarries.  The 
high-road,  or  communication  from  one  part  of  the 
country  to  another  runs  at  the  back  of  these  villages. 
The  people  manufacture  for  their  own  use  a  coarse 
sort  of  cotton-cloth,  and  cultivate  dates,  cotton,  Indian 
corn,  a  small  kind  of  doura,  lupins,  and  the  other  usual 
crops.  I  was  informed  there  were  ruins  at  Shebash,  as 
mentioned  in  Colonel  Leake's  map,  but  I  did  not  visit 
them.  I  arrived  at  Ibrim  at  ten  o'clock,  and  as  it  was  a 
moonlight  night  I  examined  by  means  of  a  rope  the 
tombs  excavated  at  various  heights  in  the  face  of  the 
cliff.  The  first  I  entered  had  three  sitting  figures  cut  out 
of  the  rock  in  a  kind  of  niche,  or  sanctum  at  the  further 
end  of  the  apartment ;  they  were  greatly  mutilated,  and 
the  hieroglyphics  nearly  destroyed.*  The  sides  of  the 
excavation  had  been  plastered  and  painted,  and  parts  of 
the  colouring  yet  remained,  particularly  on  the  wall  to 
the  right  of  the  door,  where  two  ostriches,  some  cattle  in 
pairs,  a  panther,  or  leopard,  and  a  few  other  figures,  might 
be  made  out.  The  apartment  was  ventilated  by  an  air- 
channel.  The  second  excavation  contained  four  figures, 
and  the  remains  of  painted  stucco  were  visible  upon  the 
ceiling.  The  third  had  three  sitting  figures  like  the  first, 
and  amongst  the  hieroglyphics  some  cartouches  had 
been  inscribed,  but  they  were  no  longer  legible :  this 
tomb  had  likewise  a  spiraculum,  or  air-channel.     In  a 

*  Some  of  these  hieroglyphics  are  published  in  M.  Champollion'e 
works. 


52  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

fourth  the  three  figures  were  repeated,  and  many  hiero- 
glyphics inscribed,  but  they  were  in  so  bad  a  state  of 
preservation,  that  I  could  only  make  out  one  cartouche. 

22d. — I  went  on  shore  at  Derr.  The  town  is  clean, 
and  tolerably  well  built,  and  surrounded  as  usual  by 
groves  of  date-trees  and  cultivated  grounds.  The  houses 
were  of  clay,  with  flat  roofs  ;  that  of  the  Catchief  was 
larger  than  the  rest,  and  had  rows  of  red  and  white 
bricks  round  the  doors  and  windows,  and  along  the  top. 
I  found  him  surrounded  by  a  number  of  his  attendants, 
sitting  on  an  earthen  divan  near  an  immense  sycamore- 
tree  in  the  middle  of  the  village.  He  was  very  tall,  of  a 
swarthy  complexion,  and  dressed  in  a  dark-blue  shirt,  red 
slippers,  and  turban,  with  a  number  of  strings  of  beads  and 
fetichies  around  his  neck.  He  received  me  very  civilly, 
and  made  me  several  presents  consisting  of  sheep  and 
dates,  of  a  nabout  from  Kostam,  an  iron  hatchet  from 
Sennaar,  and  of  a  small  stick  curved  at  the  end,  and  used 
in  riding  camels,  called  an  assar ;  it  comes  from  Cordofan, 
and  is  supposed  to  be  described  in  the  antient  hierogly- 
phics. I  bought  several  mats,  which  are  here  manufac- 
tured in  considerable  quantities.  They  cost  about  seven 
piastres  each,  are  well  made,  but  when  new  have  a  most 
disagreeable  smell.  I  went  to  the  house  of  a  slave-dealer 
to  buy  some  courbashes.  It  was  built  of  mud,  about  eight 
or  nine  feet  high,  and  stood  in  a  court-yard,  in  which 
were  a  few  hovels,  an  earthen  bed-place,  and  a  mill  for 
grinding  corn  by  means  of  a  stone  turned  by  a  handle, 
which  was  thrown  round  alternately  by  two  women  who 
sat  opposite  to  each  other  on  the  ground.  This  must 
be  the  kind  of  mill  alluded  to  in  the  New  Testament. 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  63 

In  the  yard  a  handsome  young  woman  was  employed  in 
making  a  mat ;  she  had  the  pecuhar  complexion  so  often 
described  in  the  paintings  at  Abou  Simbel,  and  was 
dressed  in  the  usual  manner,  but  wore  a  number  of  white 
and  red  necklaces,  fetichies,  and  other  ornaments  formed 
of  beads  and  shells.  The  temple  is  an  excavation  in  a 
low  rock  near  a  burial-ground  at  the  back  of  the  town ; 
it  is  completely  ruined,  and  half  full  of  stones ;  the 
foundations  of  eight  square  columns  might  be  traced  in 
the  vestibule,  and  the  interior  was  supported  by  others. 
The  usual  heroic  exploits  had  been  described  on  the 
walls,  and  a  few  of  the  hieroglyphics  might  still  be  made 
out ;  but  the  idols  in  the  adytum  had  been  destroyed. 
From  Derr  roads  branch  off  to  Korosko,  Dongola,  &c. ; 
and  on  the  western  shore,  Elvvah  may  be  reached  by  a 
journey  of  twenty  days. 

23(1. — Thermometer  71°.  I  arrived  at  a  temple  nearly 
opposite  to  Maharaka,  in  which  place  I  was  informed  that 
no  ruins  existed.  This  temple  is  in  tolerable  preserva- 
tion, and  does  not  appear  of  very  great  antiquity.  Ac- 
cording to  Mr.  Wilkinson,  it  was  dedicated  to  Isis  and 
Serapis.  That  it  has  since  been  used  as  a  church  appears 
from  the  remains  of  Christian  figures  still  to  be  seen 
upon  the  walls.  It  stands  in  a  court  surrounded  by  a 
colonnade,  with  a  staircase  leading  up  to  the  roof.  It 
contains  also  several  Greek  inscriptions,  which  have  no 
doubt  been  copied.  The  approach  from  the  river  has 
been  constructed  with  masonry,  and  is  now  covered  with 
a  collection  of  huts,  which  compose  the  modern  village. 
Thence   I  proceeded  to  the  temple  at  Dakke,  which  is 


54  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII. 

situated  in  a  plain,  and  fronts  the  north,  with  a  handsome 
propylason,  and  staircases,  by  whicli  the  top  may  be 
attained.  It  is  well  built,  but  the  stones  have  been  only 
finished  off  round  the  edges.  Beneath  it  is  a  subter- 
raneous apartment  roofed  with  slabs  of  stone  eighteen 
or  twenty  feet  long,  and  at  present  nearly  full  of  rubbish, 
but  the  figures  of  a  lion,  and  the  offering  of  a  sphinx  are 
well  cut  in  the  walls.  Many  excavations  have  been 
made  in  the  plain,  which  seems  to  have  been  formerly 
cultivated  ;  and  in  the  rocky  hills,  at  some  little  distance, 
there  are  said  to  be  antient  tombs.  This  temple  is  the 
most  southern  built  by  the  Ptolemies  between  Philje 
and  Wady  Haifa,  with  the  exception  of  that  of  Ibrim, 
which  with  those  at  Derr  and  at  Ferradj  are  the  only 
three  on  the  eastern  bank  of  the  Nile.  The  country  at 
Dakke  is  tolerably  well  cultivated,  but  the  village  itself 
consists  of  a  few  huts  covered  with  reeds.  On  the 
eastern  shore  there  is  a  large  ruin  of  unburnt  bricks, 
which  is  supposed  by  Mr.  Wilkinson  to  be  the  site  of 
Metacompso. 

I  next  visited  Gerf  Hossein  (the  antient  Tutzis). 
The  temple  is  an  excavation  in  a  ridge  of  rocky  hills, 
and  before  it  is  an  hypsethral  court  surrounded  with 
gigantic  figures  in  nearly  the  same  style  as  those  at 
Abou  Simbel,  but  composed  of  different  layers  of  stones, 
which  are  now  so  decayed,  that  the  continuity  of  the 
hieroglyphics  inscribed  upon  them  is  lost.  The  mas- 
sive architraves  placed  upon  the  top  of  these  figures 
reminded  me,  like  those  at  Sabooa,  of  Stonehenge ;  and 
it  is  not  improbable  that  together  with  religious  tradi- 
tions the  art  of  building  temples  may  have  even  reached 


EETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  55 

that  place  from  Egypt.  The  warlike  exploits  described 
at  Abou  Simbel  are  here  also  recorded  in  the  interior, 
which  has  been  painted. 

A  large  architrave  had  been  taken  away  from  one 
of  the  doorways,  but  the  Pacha  had,  I  was  informed, 
prevented  any  further  spoliation.  There  are  probably 
catacombs  in  the  adjacent  mountains;  and  in  the  plain, 
which  no  doubt  •  was  formerly  productive,  there  are 
vestiges  of  other  antient  foundations,  amongst  which  are 
those  of  a  church ;  there  has  also  been  an  extensive 
burial-ground,  and  a  considerable  village.  The  Reis 
had  pretended  for  some  reason  or  other  that  there 
was  a  shoal  near  Gerf  Hossein,  which  would  not  allow 
of  the  boat  being  brought  to  the  shore,  so  that  I  had 
a  considerable  distance  to  walk  ;  and  did  not  therefore 
arrive  at  Dandoor  till  the  evening.  This  small  temple 
faces  the  east,  and  is  handsomely  built  of  large  stones 
finished  round  the  edges,  but  it  cannot  be  compared 
with  the  massive  structures  of  more  antient  times,  and 
is  already  much  dilapidated  although  supposed  to  have 
been  built  during  the  reign  of  Augustus,  whilst  temples 
coeval  with  the  Exodus  are  comparatively  in  good  pre- 
servation. It  is  now  surrounded  by  heaps  of  squared 
stones,  but  was  originally  adorned  by  a  peribolus,  with  a 
propylason,  and  was  highly  ornamented  with  hieroglyphics. 
The  roof  is  destroyed  ;  behind  it  is  a  small  grotto  with 
an  Egyptian  portal,  and  near  it  are  some  quarries.  The 
pommels  of  the  doors  had  turned  in  sockets  let  into 
squared  stones,  which  does  not  appear  to  have  been  the 
case  in  more  antient  buildintrs. 


56  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

24:tli.  —  Between  this  place  and  Kalabshee,  there  are 
one  or  two  reefs  of  sunken  rocks  across  the  river,  which 
may  have  been  cataracts  in  former  times  when  the 
water  was  at  a  lower  level.  The  temple  at  Kalabshee, 
fronts  the  east,  has  been  of  a  considerable  size,  and 
has  had  an  extensive  peribolus,  but  is  at  present  much 
dilapidated,  and  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  the  village. 
The  approach  to  it  was  by  a  handsome  quay  and  raised 
road,  which  led  to  a  propyl^on.  The  interior  has  been 
covered  with  painted  hieroglyphics,  and  adorned  with 
gilding,  and  a  staircase  led  to  the  summit.  The  stones 
with  which  it  was  built,  were  only  finished  round  the 
edges,  and  the  doors  had  been  of  the  same  construc- 
tion as  those  of  Dandoor.  There  are  vestiges  of  tombs 
in  the  adjacent  hills  ;  and  at  some  little  distance  a  con- 
siderable accumulation  of  rubbish  and  pottery,  most 
probably  marks  the  site  of  a  Roman  town.  The  most 
interesting  object  however  is  an  excavated  temple  called 
Beit  El  Walid  ;  the  interior  as  well  as  the  vestibule  of 
which  had  been  inscribed  with  hieroglyphics  painted  on 
plaster,  and  adorned  with  sculptures  representing  the 
battles  before  mentioned.  Hieroglyphics  had  been  also 
inserted  on  the  inner  sides  of  the  columns,  which  are 
of  the  same  kind  as  those  at  Thebes,  Benihassen,  &c., 
so  greatly  resembhng  those  of  the  Doric  order.  The 
whole  had  been  executed  with  much  care,  and  as  at 
Gerf  Hossein  the  imperfections  in  the  rocks  had  been 
closed  up  with  masonry. 

The  plain  appeared  very  fertile,  and  well  cultivated, 
the  village  as  usual  dirty  and  ruinous,  but  the  inhabit- 
ants, comparatively  speaking,  were  well   off,  they  have 


-/H»i^t^  bifC  fffu  nuin  it 


r^  W  IH\  I  AW       W  O  JM  K  m  . 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  57 

the  character  of  being  turbulent,  and  gave  the  French 
a  good  deal  of  trouble.  The  Sheik  pays  a  duty  to  the 
Pacha,  but  has  hitherto  contrived  to  prevent  the  ad- 
mission of  any  troops,  and  to  avoid  the  conscription. 
Strangers  however  at  present  are  well  received.  Besides 
the  usual  crops  of  cotton  and  doura,  &c.,  henna  grows 
here  in  abundance;  it  is  a  shrub  about  four  feet  high, 
and  has  a  small  red  flower,  the  dye  is  produced  from 
the  leaves  when  dried  and  pulverised. 

The  women  were  dressed  in  the  usual  manner,  but 
their  heads  were  covered  with  an  extraordinary  quantity 
of  castor  oil,  they  wore  very  large  ear  and  nose  rings, 
and  a  long  leathern  strap  round  their  necks,  to  which 
were  attached  the  wooden  keys  of  their  houses,  amulets, 
and  a  small  bag  for  money,  and  other  valuables.  I 
bought  several  scarabasi,  and  other  trifling  antiquities, 
which  were  strung  on  their  necklaces.  The  children 
were  entirely  naked,  excepting  a  leathern  strap  round 
their  waists,  and  some  of  them  had  their  hair  tied  up 
in  small  bunches  with  strings  of  coloured  beads.  One 
of  the  men  was  picturesquely  dressed  in  a  long  robe, 
with  a  scarf  over  his  shoulder ;  a  round  shield,  made  of 
a  thick  hide  with  a  knob  in  the  centre  hung  round  his 
neck ;  and  he  carried  in  his  hand  a  straight  sword  similar 
to  those  used  by  the  Christian  knights  in  the  crusades. 

The  ruins  at  Wady  Taffa  are  situated  on  a  stony 
plain  elevated  about  twenty  feet  above  the  river,  to 
which  it  gradually  descends  in  sloping  banks  covered 
with  verdure.  The  plain  is  surrounded  by  barren  hills, 
and  on  an  eminence  to  the  southward  the  house  of  the 
Sheik  seems  to  occupy  the  site  of  an  antient  building. 


"58  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

A  raised  causeway  of  masonry  has  formed  the  approach 
from  the  river ;  and  amongst  accumulations  of  rubbish, 
of  ruined  walls  and  foundations,  upon  which  the  huts  of 
a  few  miserable  savages  are  erected,  the  remains  of  a 
temple  supposed  to  have  been  built  in  the  time  of  the 
Romans  may  be  traced,  as  also  those  of  another  edifice 
in  a  different  direction,  with  Egyptian  columns  in  the 
interior.  They  had  been  constructed  with  stones  finished 
round  the  edges,  and  with  the  usual  stone  doors ;  and 
holes  apparently  for  metallic  fastenings  may  still  be 
seen  at  the  angles  of  the  stones.  The  courses  in  some 
of  the  walls  are,  as  Mr.  Wilkinson  has  observed,  in  curved, 
and  not  in  horizontal  lines ;  and  a  doorway  has  been  con- 
structed in  one  place  many  feet  above  the  level  of  the 
ground. 

Not  far  from  the  village  of  Gertassee  is  a  large 
quadrangular  enclosure,  the  walls  of  which  are  about 
twenty  or  thirty  feet  high,  and  of  considerable  breadth, 
and  externally  composed  of  large  squared  stones,  but  the 
middle  is  filled  up  with  rubble-work.  The  masonry  is 
not  of  the  best  workmanship,  and  it  is  to  be  observed 
very  inferior  to  that  of  a  similar  building,  called  Ramah, 
near  Hebron,  in  Syria ;  which  appears,  like  this,  to  have 
been  intended  for  a  place  of  security  for  cattle,  goods, 
&c.  Several  of  the  courses  on  the  western  side  from 
settling  or  some  other  cause  are  curved  like  those  at 
Wady  Taffa.  I  did  not  observe  any  hieroglyphics,  but 
the  remains  of  sculpture  are  visible  over  a  lofty  gateway 
in  the  centre  of  one  of  the  faces  of  the  building  front- 
ing north-east  half  north.  The  adjoining  plain  had  but 
little   cultivation.      Towards    the   north    were   extensive 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  59 

stone-quan-ies,  which  contained  the  Greek  inscriptions 
mentioned  by  Mr.  Wilkinson,  also  a  Roman  bust,  and  a 
most  beautiful  doorway  decorated  with  the  winged  globe, 
sacred  serpents,  &c.,  in  the  finest  taste.^ 

An  hypjethral  building,  apparently  unfinished,  is  finely 
situated  on  an  adjacent  eminence,  with  its  front  towards 
the  river  facing  east-south-east.  It  is  ornamented  with 
many  hieroglyphics,  and  the  four  columns  towards  the 
northern  and  southern  sides  are  quadriform,  and  deco- 
rated witir  the  head  of  Isis  ;  while,  towards  the  eastern 
and  western,  they  have  Egyptian  capitals.  The  advan- 
tage of  a  slight  breeze  enabled  us  to  proceed,  we  passed 
several  buildings  of  burnt  brick,  and  arrived  at  the  Temple 
of  Debode  (the  antient  Parembole)  in  the  evening.  The 
river  is  here  a  noble  stream,  and  on  the  eastern  side  a 

5  The  Greeks,  and  also  the  Romans  appear  in  many  instances  to 
have  followed  the  example  of  the  antient  Egyptians  in  their  numerous 
inscriptions ;  and  it  is  extraordinary  with  what  care  and  expense  the 
latter  have  recorded  upon  stone,  and  even  upon  granite  occurrences 
apparently  of  small  importance  —  such  as  the  individual  circumstances 
of  private  funerals,  the  excavation  of  stones  from  a  quarry,  the  offerings 
of  private  individuals,  &c. ;  and  amongst  other  instances  the  successful 
petition  of  the  priests  at  Philoe  to  obtain  exemption  from  military  con- 
tributions was  even  thought  worthy  of  being  inscribed  upon  the  pedestal 
of  an  obelisk.  If  such  trifles  as  these  were  handed  down  to  posterity,  it 
does  not  seem  probable  that  the  important  events  of  history  would  have 
been  forgotten,  particularly  by  a  people,  who  boasted  of  their  accuracy 
in  these  matters.  This,  however,  can  only  be  ascertained  by  a  much 
more  extensive  and  accurate  knowledge  of  hieroglyphics  than  has  at 
present  been  acquired.  It  may  here  be  remarked,  that  several  of  the 
tombs,  temples,  and  other  monuments  appear  to  have  been  inscribed  by 
degrees,  and  at  different  times  after  their  erection,  probably  as  the  events 
recorded  successively  took  place. 


60  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

chain  of  picturesque  mountains  comes  down  nearly  to 
the  water.  On  the  western  the  hills  are  more  distant,  and 
up  on  the  intermediate  plain  the  temple  is  finely  situated 
with  the  remains  of  an  extensive  peribolus,  and  an  ap- 
proach by  a  raised  causeway  from  the  river,  through 
three  handsome  propyltea.  The  view  of  the  stream  with 
the  adjacent  mountains  through  these  lofty  gateways  is 
very  striking  from  the  building  itself,  which  must  have 
been  extremely  magnificent,  although  it  does  not  bear 
the  appearance  of  remote  antiquity,  indeed  it  is  ascribed 
by  Mr.  Wilkinson  to  the  time  of  Ptolemy  Philometor. 
It  has  been  built  of  the  same  materials  as  the  temples 
at  Wady  TafFa ;  and  the  sockets  for  the  stone  doors  have 
been  cut  in  squared  blocks.  The  apartments  have  been 
ceiled  with  flat  slabs,  and  covered  with  hieroglyphics,  but 
they  do  not  appear  to  have  been  plastered  or  painted, 
A  few  isolated  ruins,  probably  of  Roman  forts,  are  to  be 
seen  to  the  northward,  together  with  several  Nubian  huts 
amidst  patches  of  cultivated  ground ;  these  habitations 
are  six  or  seven  feet  high,  situated  in  small  yards  sur- 
rounded by  walls,  are  built  of  unburnt  bricks  or  clay, 
and  covered  with  reeds.  The  inhabitants  are  ex- 
tremely poor,  but  appear  very  healthy.  The  boys  are 
naked,  excepting  a  leathern  girdle,  but  have  a  noble  and 
independent  air,  and  are  extremely  well  set  up. 

I  soon  afterwards  amved  at  Philae,  which  was  seen 
to  great  advantage  in  the  clear  light  of  a  still  evening. 
The  boat  was  moored  under  a  high  bank  opposite  the 
northern  end  of  the  island,  along  which  the  river  sweeps 
finely  to  the  south-westward.  The  moon  shone  with 
uncommon  splendour,  and  gave  a  mysterious  and  solemn 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  61 

effect  to  the  ruined  temples  of  the  sacred  island,  which, 
surrounded  by  palm-trees  and  vegetation,  formed  a  sin- 
gular contrast  to  the  portentous  and  grotesque  masses 
of  granite  on  the  island  of  Bigge,  and  on  the  adjacent 
shores. 

The  river  here  presented  the  appearance  of  a  vast 
lake,  nor  was  it  possible  to  contemplate  unmoved  that 
mighty  and  wonderful  stream,  the  sources  of  whose 
periodical  visitations  are  veiled  in  the  same  obscurity 
which  still  involves  the  history  of  those  powerful  nations 
whose  industry  once  clothed  its  banks  with  fertility ;  and 
whose  science,  called  into  action  by  superstitious  enthu- 
siasm, ennobled  them  with  buildings  of  such  matchless 
grandeur  and  beauty,  that  the  very  ruins  have  for  suc- 
cessive ages  commanded  universal  admiration.  Nor  can 
it  be  recollected  without  increased  interest,  that  many 
of  those  noble  monuments,  evincing  in  their  construction 
so  much  power  and  skill,  and  decorated  with  so  many 
elaborate  devices,  were  raised  in  very  early  ages,  cer- 
tainly at  no  long  time  after  the  deluge;  and  that  they 
therefore  not  only  afford  convincing  proofs  of  the  refine- 
ment, to  which  mankind  had  attained  before  that  great 
event,  but  also  testify  that  Egypt  was  the  source  from 
which  Greece  first,  Rome  next,  and  subsequently  through 
them  the  rest  of  Europe  derived  tlie  chief  part  of  their 
civilisation,  and  knowledge. 

25?//.  —  I  sent  the  boat  to  Es  Souan,  and  went  early 
in  the  morning  to  Philte.  The  hypajthral  temple  near 
which  I  landed  is  extremely  lofty,  and,  if  intended  for 
effect,  must  have  been  constructed  upon  principles  totally 
different  from  those,  which  directed  the  works  at  Abou- 


62  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

Simbel,  and  at  other  places.  The  edifices  on  this  island 
were  however  the  productions  of  a  much  later  period ; 
they  are  exceedingly  beautiful,  are  decorated  in  every  part 
with  hieroglyphics,  and,  together  with  their  propylaea, 
colonnades,  obelisks,  and  ascents  from  the  water  have 
a  very  striking  effect  notwithstanding  their  ruined  con- 
dition, and  their  comparatively  new  appearance ;  indeed 
the  island  is  nearly  covered  with  them,  and  with  mounds 
of  rubbish.  These  noble  objects  have  been  so  fully  and 
minutely  described  by  preceding  travellers,  that  I  shall 
not  enter  into  any  detailed  account,  which  from  the 
short  visit  I  paid  them  I  am  by  no  means  quali- 
fied to  offer,  but  I  shall  conclude  with  a  few  cursory 
observations. 

The  Great  Temple  and  the  principal  propylaea^  front 
the  south-east ;  the  other  propylaea,  south-south-east. 
The  colonnade  and  steps  leading  from  the  water  are  also 
in  another  direction,  which  the  form  of  the  island  most 
probably  determined.  The  masonry  of  these  edifices  is 
very  fine,  and  in  many  places  holes  apparently  for 
metalhc  fastenings  may  be  observed  at  the  angles  of  the 
blocks.  The  hieroglyphics  in  the  interior  of  the  temple 
have  been  painted  upon  plaster.  In  the  chamber,  where 
the  apotheosis  of  Osiris  is  supposed  to  be  represented, 
the  left  leg  of  the  principal  figure,  laid  on  his  back  for 
the  purpose  of  embalmment,  is  stretched  out  in  the  same 
position,  as  that  in  which  the  Colossi  are  frequently 
sculptured ;    and    the    protecting   genius    appears    in    a 


"  The  lofty  portals  seem  to  have  been  intended  for  treasuries  or  for 
places  of  security,  as  their  internal  construction  is  well  adapted  for 
defence. 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT. 


63 


human  shape,  and  not  in  that  of  a  bird.  In  the  chamber, 
where  the  birth  of  Horus  is  dehneated,  there  is  a  curious 
representation  of  a  bird  encircled  by  the  flowers  of  the 
lotus,  having  on  the  one  side  a  serpent,  and  on  the  other 


two  priests  in  the  act  of  worshipping  a  serpent  suspended 
upon  a  cross,  which  has  a  great  resemblance  to  the 
usual  representation  of  the  Brazen  Serpent  in  the 
Wilderness. 

I  was  informed  that  Mr.  Hay  had  discovered  a  pass- 
age under  the  water,  composed  of  solid  masonry,  between 
this  island  and  that  of  Bigge,  and  that  the  entrance  was 
from  a  shaft  amongst  the  ruins  of  the  Great  Temple. 

The  island  of  Bigge  is  singularly  composed  of  high 
mountains  of  granite  interspersed  with  fields  of  doura, 
and  with  the  huts  of  a  few  inhabitants  built  amongst 
foundations,  mounds  of  rubbish,  and  ruined  walls,  in  such 
a  manner  that  no  building  of  any  consequence  can  be 
examined  without  previously  destroying  them.  I  saw  the 
remains  of  a  Roman  arch,  and  a  block  in  one  of  the  huts 
inscribed  with  hieroglyphics,  and  no  doubt  many  antient 
memorials  have  in  like  manner  been  consigned  to  tem- 
porary or  perpetual  oblivion.  It  was  a  romantic,  and  in 
many  respects  interesting  place,  from  the  strong  contrast 
of  the  fantastic  masses  of  barren  stone  with  the  luxuriant 


64  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

vegetation  around  them,  and  from  the  perfect  seclusion 
and  stilhiess  of  the  scene,  interrupted  only  by  the  in- 
distinct noise  of  the  water-wheels,  which  sounded,  par- 
ticularly as  it  happened  to  be  Sunday,  like  the  distant 
harmony  of  church-bells,  whilst  some  yellow  stones  on 
the  fertile  bank  reflected  in  the  water  had  the  appearance 
of  primroses  —  a  resemblance  not  a  little  heightened  by 
the  warmth  and  serenity  of  the  air ;  but  at  present 
neither  the  incense  of  praise,  nor  the  fragrance  of  Spring 
exist  in  this  desert. 

Being  obliged  to  proceed  to  Es  Souan  without  delay, 
I  returned  to  the  shore,  under  which  the  boat  had 
been  moored  during  the  previous  night,  in  order  to 
proceed  by  land  to  that  place.  The  bank  was  nearly 
semicircular,  and  about  twenty  or  thirty  feet  above  the 
water ;  a  sandy  plain  extended  towards  the  north  totally 
devoid  of  cultivation,  and  bounded  at  various  distances 
by  ranges  of  mountains.  In  the  most  inaccessible  parts 
of  the  masses  of  granite  opposite  to  Bigge  tablets  of 
hieroglyphics  had  been  inscribed,  and  a  few  huts  formed 
a  village  near  their  base,  but  not  a  vestige  of  cultiva- 
tion was  to  be  seen  excepting  on  the  islands,  whilst 
Philae,  with  its  magnificent  ruins  and  waving  palm- 
trees,  universal  emblems  of  victory,  appeared  above  the 
stream  with  a  dignity  and  pre-eminence  scarcely  inferior 
to  that  of  the  Parthenon  over  the  plain  of  Athens. 

On  proceeding  to  Es  Souan  I  passed  a  wall  of 
unburnt  brick,  apparently  intended  as  a  defence  to 
the  road  which  wound  through  a  narrow  valley 
amongst  lofty  mountains,  and  on  either  side  the  ruins 
of  buildings,  probably  Roman  guard-houses,  and  after- 
wards   several    Sheik's    tombs,     and     also    a     fountain 


RETURN  FRO^r  UPPRR  EGVPf.  65 

reported  to  have  been  formed  by  Abd-el-Catchief,  who 
died  of  the  plague  in  the  year  1836  ;  and  who  is  said 
to  have  built  a  tower  not  far  distant.  The  road  thence 
goes  tlirough  the  Turkish  burial-ground,  which  I  have 
already  mentioned,  and  shortly  after  enters  Es  Souan. 
The  baggage  having  been  replaced  in  the  boat  I  brought 
from  Cairo,  and  the  necessary  arrangements  made,  I  pro- 
ceeded immediately  to  Koum  Ombos,  where  I  remained 
for  the  night,  during  which  some  rain  fell. 

26ih. — Thermometer  76°.'  The  ruins  are  well  situ- 
ated on  a  high  bank  on  the  eastern  and  concave  side  or 
a  bend  in  the  river.  The  stream  has  already  swept  away 
great  part  of  these  interesting  monuments,  and  will 
eventually  destroy  the  remainder;  whilst  from  the  land 
the  sands  of  the  desert  have  drifted  over  them  in  im- 
mense qviantities.  The  peribolus  was  composed  of  a 
very  high  wall,  of  unburnt  bricks,  and  on  its  south- 
eastern side  a  doorway  seems  to  have  been  originally 
intended,  but  never  completed.  The  cartouche  of  Thoth- 
mes  the  Third  is  inscribed  upon  it,  but,  from  the  manner 
in  which  the  fastenings  for  the  door  have  been  formed, 
it  would  appear  to  have  been  of  a  later  date.  The 
temples  have  been  covered  with  hieroglyphics  painted 
upon  stucco.  Some  of  the  slabs  of  which  the  flat  ceil- 
ings were  composed,  are  twenty-seven  feet  long.  I 
searched  without  success  for  the  unfinished  figures  in- 
scribed in  squares,  mentioned  by  Mr.  Wilkinson.  The 
catacombs  appear  to  have  been  excavated  in  a  ridge  of 
hills  to  the  northward. 

''  The  theriuoraetiical  observations  were  always  taken  in  tlie  eahin, 
but  at  different  times  of  the  daj'. 

VOL.  I.  F 


66  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

At  Hadjar  Silsilis  the  rocks  are  higher,  and  the  quar- 
ries much  more  extensive  on  the  eastern,  than  on  the 
western  shore.  The  antient  town  was  also  on  the  former 
side  to  the  northward  of  the  quarries,  which  are  most 
wonderful  instances  of  industry  and  skill.  It  is  difficult 
to  determine  whether  the  excellence  of  the  workmanship, 
or  the  fine  and  continuous  texture  of  the  stone  of  which 
the  lofty  cliffs  are  composed,  is  most  to  be  admired.  In 
many  places  winding  roads  have  been  carried  into  the 
heart  of  the  mountain,  and  extensive  excavations  made 
with  the  utmost  exactness,  apparently  by  the  chisel, 
although  in  many  places  the  marks  of  wedges  are  visible. 
Several  ranges  of  squared  holes  may  likewise  be  observed, 
similar  to  those  on  the  great  stone  in  the  quarry  at  Baal- 
bec  ;  and  on  the  perpendicular  face  of  the  lofty  rocks  rows 
of  small  cavities  have  been  cut  in  slanting  directions, 
apparently  for  the  insertion  of  wooden  supports  to  serve 
as  staircases  or  means  of  ascent.  Horizontal  and  per- 
pendicular lines,  and  occasionally  hieroglyphics,  have  also 
been  draWn  on  the  face  of  the  stone,  and  the  projecting 
angles  in  the  perpendicular  sides  of  the  winding  roads 
have  been  perforated,  either  for  the  insertion  of  ropes  or 
pulleys,  or  to  afford  a  view  of  the  road  through  them. 

A  sreat  deal  of  work  has  also  been  carried  on  on 
the  western  side,  and  several  curious  tablets,  containing 
figures  and  hieroglyphics,  have  been  inscribed  on  the 
rocks ;  and  the  bright  colours  with  which  they  have  been 
painted  are,  in  many  instances,  distinct  and  fresh.  There 
are,  likewise,  niches  about  four  feet  deep,  with  a  variety 
of  figures  and  inscriptions ;  and  grottoes,  like  those  at 
Ibrim,  in  which  the  ceilings  have  been  chequered  with 
a  red  and  white  pattern.     The  most  remarkable  of  these 


'   RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  67 

excavations  is  towards  the  north  :  it  consists  of  an  apart- 
ment adorned  with  hieroglyphics,  and  of  a  painted  cor- 
ridor, in  which  four  large  columns,  or  piers  have  been 
left  to  support  the  roof.  Mr.  Wilkinson  states  that  it 
was  begun  by  the  successor  of  Amenoph  the  Third,  and 
that  it  contains  the  representation  of  a  battle ;  but  this 
I  could  not  discover,  and  conclude  therefore  that  it  has 
been  lately  destroyed." 

There  are  many  other  excavations  at  this  interesting 
place,  described  by  Mr.  Hamilton  and  other  travellers, 
which  for  want  of  time  I  did  not  examine. 

27///.  —  Thermometer  65°.  I  arrived  at  Edfou.  The 
temple,  surrounded  by  the  huts  of  the  modern  village,  is 
situated  on  an  extensive  plain,  naturally  fertile,  but  at 
present  only  partially  cultivated,  and  bounded  by  a  dis- 
tant range  of  mountains,  where  the  antient  Necropolis 
was  placed.  The  entrance  is  by  a  most  magnificent  pro- 
pylasa,  which  appears  to  be  a  more  recent  structure  than 
the  rest  of  the  edifice.  It  is  built  with  the  greatest 
solidity,  and  contains  many  apartments  that  have  been 
closed  with  stone  doors,  and  lighted  by  apertures  worked 
in  the  masonry.  They  are  connected  by  a  staircase  ex- 
tending to  the  top  of  the  building,  and  likewise  to  a 
variety  of  similar  chambers  in  the  foundation.  The  gates 
of  the  great  entrance,  probably  of  metal,  must  have  been 
of  an  enormous  height,  and  exceedingly  heavy.  They 
seem  however  to  have  been  hung  in  the  usual  manner, 
upon  pommels  which  turned  in  sockets. 

The  temple  itself,  one  of  the  most  imposing  in  Egypt, 

8  Mr.  Hay  is  said  to  have  taken   copies  of  these  inscriptions,  and 
many  of  tliem  have  been  published  by  ^M.  Chanapollion. 


68  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

affords  a  striking  contrast  to  the  miserable  hovels,  many 
of  which  are  built  upon  it,  and  others  on  vast  mounds 
of  rubbish,  with  which  it  is  surrounded.  The  interior 
covered  with  painted  hieroglyphics  has  been  divided  by 
earthen  walls,  to  form  a  magazine  for  corn ;  and  beneath 
it  are  enormous  substructions,  which  I  entered  by  a  hole 
from  an  Arab  house.  They  were  full  of  dirt  and  filth  of 
every  description,  but  had  been  built  in  the  most  solid 
manner,  and  had  been  adorned  with  highly  finished 
sculptures.  Several  of  the  blocks  had  had  fastenings 
let  into  hollows,  cut  in  the  shape  of  a  double  wedge, 
like  those  at  Karnac.  At  some  little  distance  were  the 
remains  of  a  smaller  temple  of  equally  fine  workmanship, 
but  even  more  dilapidated  than  the  larger  one.  The 
modern  village  is  tolerably  extensive,  and  contains  a 
small  Coptic  convent,  and  about  sixty  Christians. 

After  passing  the  island  of  Damanieh,  I  arrived  at 
El  Kab,  the  antient  Eilithias,  so  called  from  Eilitheia 
(Lucina);  and  also  named  Beni-Lail,  (Sons  of  the  Moon).^ 
A  large  space,  in  which  several  excavations  had  been 
made,  is  surrounded  by  a  high  and  thick  wall  of  un- 
burnt  bricks,  constructed  with  ramps,  by  which  it  might 
have  been  ascended ;  the  bricks  in  several  parts  of  it 
were,  as  is  frequently  the  case  in  Etruscan  architecture, 
placed  endways,  and  lengthways  in  alternate  courses.  It 
contained  a  quantity  of  rubbish  and  broken  pottery,  and 
also  mounds  of  brick  buildings ;  of  these  the  most  con- 
siderable was  towards  the  northward,  and  appeared  to 
have  been  the  citadel.  This  town  is  supposed  to  have 
been  of  great  mercantile  importance,  and  to  have  been 

9  Nesle  Lail,  the  site  of  Hierocompolis  according  to  Colonel  Leake's 
map  4s  on  the  western  shore  of  the  river. 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  69 

situated  at  the  termination  of  one  of  the  principal  roads 
from  the  Red  Sea.  I  could  not  find  the  ruins  men- 
tioned by  Mr.  Wilkinson,  nor  the  cartouche  of  Rameses 
the  Second ;  neither  did  I  observe  any  reservoir,  or  col- 
lection of  water,  excepting  a  pond  beyond  the  enclosure, 
encrusted  with  a  considerable  quantity  of  natron.  The 
adjacent  plain  is  surrounded  by  mountains,  which  ap- 
proach the  enclosure  on  the  northern  side,  and  contains 
the  antient  Necropolis,  which  must  have  been  very  ex- 
tensive. The  intervening  space  between  the  boundary 
wall  and  the  hills  is  covered  with  broken  pottery,  sar- 
cophagi, bones,  fragments  of  mummy  cloth,  and  other 
indications  of  antient  tombs.  But  the  objects  most  worthy 
of  notice  are  excavations  in  the  rocks,  containing  deep 
shafts,  and  mummy  pits,  and  on  their  walls  various  in- 
teresting details  and  hieroglyphics  painted  upon  stucco. 
Most  of  them  have  in  all  probability  been  opened  many 
centuries  ago,  and  are  every  day  losing  somewhat  of  their 
original  character,  it  is  therefore  fortunate  that  many  of 
these  interesting  inscriptions  have  been  preserved,  and 
some  of  them  already  published  by  M.  Champolhon. 

Beyond  these  tombs,  and  near  the  river  are  tlie 
remains  of  a  ruined  temple  mentioned  by  Mr.  Wilkin- 
son ;  who  has  also  described  three  others  to  the  east- 
ward, and  at  the  entrance  of  the  valley,  through  which 
the  communication  with  the  Red  Sea  most  probably  lay. 
They  are  three  or  four  miles  from  the  river.  The  small 
chapel  of  Ra  stands  in  the  middle  of  the  valley,  and 
fronts  the  east-north-east.  It  seems  to  have  had  neither 
a  peribolus  nor  portal,  but  is  decorated  with  painted  hie- 
roglyphics, and  with  several  cartouches,  one  of  which  is 
that  of  Thothmes  the  Fourth.     Near  it  at  the  foot   of 


70  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

the  mountains  is  a  temple,  supposed  to  have  been  dedi- 
cated to  Lucina,  and  built  in  the  reign  of  the  Ptolemies. 
It  is  partly  an  excavation,  and  is  approached  by  a  ramp 
with  a  handsome  balustrade.  The  stones  employed  in 
the  masonry  had  only  been  worked  round  the  edges. 
Further  on  upon  the  hills  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
valley  is  another  temple,  attributed  to  Amenoph  the 
Third,  and  which  contained  his  cartouche,  and  also  that 
of  Thothmes  the  Fourth.  This  building  fronting  west- 
south-west  had  doors  at  each  end,  a  small  court  enclosed 
by  a  peribolus,  and  was  painted  with  hieroglyphics. 
Higher  up  the  mountain  are  appearances  of  extensive 
quarries,  which  may  be  worth  examination ;  and  further 
to  the  southward  in  the  plain,  is  a  considerable  Arab 
village.  In  returning  through  the  cultivated  ground  to 
the  boat,  which  had  gone  down  the  stream,  I  found  that 
the  harvest  of  Doura  had  commenced.  The  ruins  at 
Kom  Achmah  were  said  to  have  been  entirely  destroyed. 
I  passed  the  remains  of  the  pyramid  El  Koofa,  which, 
according  to  Mr.  Wilkinson's  excellent  book,  was  built 
in  stages,  and  at  present  does  not  exceed  thirty-five  feet 
in  height,  and  arrived  in  the  evening  at  Esneh  (Lato- 
polis).  The  boat  was  moored  under  a  high  bank,  in 
which  are  to  be  traced  the  remains  of  an  antient  pier, 
and  on  its  summit  a  large  school  has  been  established 
for  boys.  Similar  institutions  are  to  be  met  with  in  all 
the  principal  towns,  and  sufficiently  pi'ove  the  Pacha's 
anxiety  to  ameliorate  by  education  the  condition  of  his 
people.  Little  however  can  be  effected,  unless  instruc- 
tion is  likewise  extended  to  the  females ;  which,  it  would 
appear,  can  only  be  accomplished  by  the  introduction  of 
Christianity. 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  71 

28///.— Thermometer  58°.  I  went  on  shore  early  in  the 
morning.  The  town  is  extensive  ;  it  contains  magazines, 
and  manufactories  of  cotton  and  of  indigo,  and  particu- 
larly of  the  caps  that  are  universally  worn  under  the 
red  tarbouses.  The  various  public  buildings,  the  fac- 
tories, barracks,  the  hareems  of  the  principal  officers, 
and  a  palace  belonging  to  the  Pacha  without  the  town, 
have  at  a  distance  a  clean  and  respectable  appearance, 
owing  to  the  constant  renewal  of  whitewash ;  but  it  is 
to  be  regretted  that  they  are  erected  with  the  mate- 
rials of  antient  temples,  and  that  any  attempt  at  im- 
provement in  the  different  towns  is  at  the  expense 
of  these  noble  monuments,  highly  interesting  on  ac- 
count of  their  architecture,  but  infinitely  more  so  from 
the  valuable  records  of  antiquity  contained  in  the  in- 
scriptions. The  population  is  Arab,  and  as  usual  in  a 
state  of  abject  misery.  I  observed  here,  and  at  other 
places,  that  the  children's  eyes  were  actually  devoured 
by  flies  without  any  care  being  taken  to  prevent  it;  in- 
deed, a  woman  to  whom  my  janissary  mentioned  the 
subject,  laughed  at  the  idea  of  precaution.  I  afterwards 
found  the  Arabs  at  Gizeh  unaccountably  indifferent  about 
loss  of  sight. 

The  temple  had  evidently  been  upon  a  very  grand 
scale,  but  the  vestibule  only  remains ;  for  the  ground  on 
the  inner  side  is  occupied  by  Arab  houses  on  a  level  with 
the  floor.  As  it  has  been  converted  into  a  magazine  for 
cotton,  it  may,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  for  a  time  at  least  escape 
further  spoliation.  The  roof  was  composed  of  enormous 
slabs,  and  supported  by  twenty-four  columns  in  four  rows, 
each  of  which  was  more  than  six  yards  in  circumference, 
within  twenty  feet  of  the  ceiling.  I  could  not  measure 
them  below  that  height,  as  the  place  was  full  of  rubbish. 


72  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

The  door,  that  formerly  opened  into  the  interior,  was 
entirely  stopped  up.' 

The  temple  of  Contra  Laton  seen  by  Mr.  Hamilton  in 
1801  has  been  removed  for  the  sake  of  the  materials. 
The  site  of  it  upon  the  eastern  bank,  whence  Esneh  is  seen 
to  great  advantage,  is  however  yet  distinguished  by  part 
of  a  brick  wall,  one  or  two  stones  inscribed  with  hierogly- 
phics, some  fragments  of  broken  pottery,  and  a  quantity 
of  rubbish  near  El  Hallam,  two  villages  on  an  exten- 
sive plain,  bounded  in  the  distance  by  desert  mountains, 
in  which  the  Necropolis  of  the  antient  city  may  possibly 
be  found.  It  may  here  be  remarked  that  scarcely  in  any 
country  do  the  tombs,  which  have  been  discovered,  bear 
any  proportion  to  the  immense  population  that  have  suc- 
cessively passed  away. 

I  did  not  visit  Asfoon,  Asphinis,  nor  Tofnees,  supposed 
by  Mr.  Wilkinson  to  be  the  site  of  Aphroditopolis,  as  the 
temple  at  that  place  was  entirely  destroyed ;  nor  did  I 
go  to  the  convent  Edeir,  where  according  to  Mr.  Hamilton 
a  small  temple  existed  upon  the  site  of  that  antient  town.^ 

1  I  was  informed  that  Mr.  Hay,  and  also  "M.  Champollion,  had 
examined  several  tombs  and  excavations  at  Isla,  a  place  in  the  mountains 
about  two  days'  journey  from  Edfou ;  and  that  the  latter  gentleman  had 
continued  his  researches  to  Erment,  and  had  found  several  grottoes,  con- 
taining hieroglyphics  and  inscriptions,  and  also  a  sarcophagus  formed  of 
alabaster ;  but  that  the  whole  of  these  sepulchres  had  been  previously 
opened. 

*  I  had  already  heard  a  tradition  that  a  considerable  treasure  near 
Koum  Ombos  was  guarded  by  a  dragon,  which  occasionally  came  down 
to  drink  at  the  river  ;  and  had  at  that  time  the  power  of  blinding  by  a 
glance  those  who  beheld  him.  A  report  existed  at  Esneh  that  a  cliff  had 
actually  fallen  down  in  that  neighbourhood,  and  that  a  quantity  of  money 
was  discovered,  of  which  a  party  of  soldiers  liad  been  sent  to  take  pos- 
session.    Traditions,  however  fabulous,  are  often  founded  upon  fact. 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  73 

The  tombs  in  the  mountains  of  Gebelein  had  been  en- 
tirely destroyed,  and  nothing  remained  to  mark  the  site 
of  the  antient  town  of  Crocodilopolis,  excepting  a  few 
mounds  of  rubbish,  and  the  ruins  of  some  brick  huts  on 
the  side  of  the  rocky  heights,  and  a  few  cottages  inhabited 
by  the  men,  who  work  for  the  Pacha  in  the  adjacent 
quarries.  It  is  surprising  that  the  sacred  Crocodiles  were 
not  interred  at  Crocodilopolis  instead  of  Erment,  as  the 
people  of  the  latter  place  are  represented  to  have  been 
hostile  to  them. 

Eight  columns  and  some  walling,  included  in  a  build- 
ing adjoining  the  Sheik's  house  are  all  the  remains  of  the 
Great  Temple  at  Ermont  (Hermontis),  which  is  said  to 
have  been  built  by  Cleopatra.  The  principal  part  has 
been  taken  down  for  the  sake  of  the  materials,  and  the 
rest  will  be  probably  soon  disposed  of  in  the  same  man- 
ner. The  hieroglyphics  had  been  well  executed  in  stucco, 
but  had  not  been  painted.  The  church,  which  appears 
to  have  been  an  extensive  building,  is  entirely  destroyed, 
a  few  stones,  and  some  broken  columns  of  granite  alone 
marking  its  former  site.  The  ruins  of  a  brick  building, 
apparently  those  of  a  church,  are  to  be  seen  on  an  adja- 
cent eminence  near  an  antient  tank.  The  surrounding 
plain  is  extremely  fertile,  and  the  village  was  formerly 
rich  and  populous,  and  the  inhabitants,  consequently, 
very  turbulent.  They  have  however,  within  a  few  years 
past,  been  reduced  by  conscriptions  and  other  causes  to 
extreme  poverty,  and  are  no  longer,  as  they  once  were, 
the  terror  of  unprotected  travellers.^  I  found  vast  quan- 
tities of  cattle  collected  for  the  Pacha  at  this  place,  and 

'  Selini,  the  janissary,  accompanied  Mr.  Leigh  when  the  Arab  was 
suffocated  in  the  mummy-pit  at  the  northern  end  of  the  island,  opposite 
to  Erment.     He  informed  me,  that  when  that  unfortunate  accident  hap- 


74  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII. 

considerable  manufactories  of  indigo  and  of  bricks.  In 
the  latter  it  was  curious  to  observe  that  the  apertures 
in  the  kilns  were  covered  over  by  horizontal  courses, 
exactly  as  they  were  in  antient  buildings  before  the  arch 
was  adopted.  I  had  an  opportunity  of  purchasing  several 
scarabsi,  and  other  small  antiques,  at  this  place. 

The  road  to  Elvvah  branches  off  from  Erment.  After 
crossing  the  plain,  it  ascends  the  mountains  to  a  stony 
desert  on  a  much  higher  level  than  the  valley  of  the 
Nile.  As  no  water  is  to  be  had,  and  the  heat  very 
oppressive,  the  journey  is  attended  with  considerable 
fatigue,  and  was  formerly  also  with  some  degree  of 
danger,  owing  to  the  savage  disposition  of  the  Arabs. 
Their  predatory  habits  however  are,  as  has  been  stated, 
at  present  controlled  by  the  authority  of  the  Pacha,  and 
the  journey  may  be  performed  now  with  comparative 
security.  It  is  probable  that  many  oases  exist  yet  un- 
discovered in  these  wild  scenes  of  desolation,  which 
appear  to  have  been  but  imperfectly  explored. 

I  proceeded  to  Luxor,  where  I  found  Dr.  Cummings, 
who  had  been  obliged  by  a  violent  illness  to  return  from 
Esneh,  and  Mr.  Baillie,  another  gentleman,  whom  I  had 
also  met  at  Cairo,  soon  after  arrived.  Thermometer  66°. 
The  Great  Temple  is  a  most  magnificent  structure,  and 
stands  in  a  very  advantageous  situation,  but  is  much  en- 
cumbered with  sand,  mounds  of  rubbish,  and  the  houses 
of  the  modern  village.*     The  obelisk  in  front  of  the  pro- 

pened,  the  Arabs  were  in  such  numbers,  and  in  such  a  state  of  excite- 
ment, that  a  retreat  was  attended  with  some  difficulty. 

*  It  is  surprising  that  the  French  did  not  clear  away  this  and  other 
antient  monuments,  when  they  had  possession  of  the  country  and  the 
command  of  the  inhabitants,  whose  employment  would  have  been  desir- 
able in  every  respect. 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  75 

pylasa  is  considered  the  finest  in  Egypt,  but  is,  in  my 
opinion,  inferior  to  that  in  the  Temple  of  Karnac ;  pos- 
sibly owing  to  its  being  seen  to  disadvantage,  as  the 
adjacent  mounds  hide  nearly  half  of  it,  and  as  its  com- 
panion has  been  sent  to  France. 

30^■/^  —  The  temples  at  Karnac  have  been  repeat- 
edly described,  and  much  accurate  information  respecting 
them  is  contained  in  Mr.  Wilkinson's  book,  to  which  I 
am  enabled  to  add  little  from  the  short  time  I  remained 
there  ;  I  shall  therefore  confine  myself  to  such  general 
observations  as  occurred  on  the  spot.  Having  obtained 
horses  from  the  Catchief  of  Karnac,  I  set  out  for  that 
place  along  the  causeway,  or  avenue  of  sphinxes,  by 
which  the  Great  Temple  was  formerly  connected  with 
Luxor,  and  afterwards  passed  through  several  magnificent 
propyleea  covered  with  innumerable  hieroglyphics.  To 
the  eastward  was  another  avenue  of  sphinxes,  and  near 
it  a  large  reservoir  of  water  surrounded  by  antient  found- 
ations, and  by  a  variety  of  mutilated  statues  chiefly  of 
basalt.  Besides  the  propylaja,  which  on  every  side  sur- 
round the  Great  Temple,  many  stupendous  ruins  con- 
structed of  enormous  blocks  present  themselves  in  all 
directions,  each  of  which  in  any  other  situation  would 
merit  particular  attention.  But  the  principal  approach 
to  the  Great  Temple  is  from  the  westward,  the  side 
towards  the  river ;  and  here  the  grandeur  of  the  pro- 
pylsea,  forming  probably  the  most  magnificent  entrance 
ever  constructed  by  human  science,  must  be  seen  to  be 
comprehended.  The  stones,  that  compose  its  exterior,  are 
laid  in  horizontal  courses,  and  like  the  casing-stones  of 
the  Pyramids  at  Gizeh,  have  been  cut  according  to  the 


76  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

required  obliquity  of  the  surface,  and  afterwards  smoothed 
down  from  the  top.  It  may  give  some  idea  of  the  vast- 
ness  of  these  buildings  to  observe  that  great  spaces,  par- 
ticularly in  the  inner  face,  have  not  yet  been  finished. 
The  doors,  of  proportionate  size,  appear  to  have  been 
suspended  in  the  same  manner  as  at  Edfou,  and  in  other 
temples.^  Immense  figures  of  granite  guard  each  side  of 
this  entrance,  which  opens  into  a  spacious  court  sur- 
rounded by  buildings  of  proportionate  grandeur,  and  on 
the  eastern  side  by  the  entrance  to  the  Great  Temple. 

This  gigantic  portal  was  decorated  with  the  finest 
sculpture,  and  hieroglyphics,  and  likewise  with  two  enor- 
mous Colossi ;  and,  although  surrounded  by  ruin  and 
desolation,  stands  without  a  rival  in  the  world.  What 
edifice,  antient,  or  modern,  can  vie  with  this  structure, 
in  grandeur  and  simplicity  ?  and  what,  in  comparison,  is 
the  boast  of  Michael  Angelo,  that  he  would  raise  in  the 
air  a  dome  similar  to  that  of  the  Pantheon  ?  The  mul- 
titude of  columns,  the  massive  architraves,  suspended 
above  100  feet  high  in  the  air,  the  vast  scale  of  the 
component  parts,  rendered  beautifully  attractive  by  the 
exquisite  finish  and  variety  of  the  painted  sculptures,  are 
of  a  magnitude  and  perfection  not  to  be  described ;  and 
the  whole  effect  is  far  superior  to  that  of  any  building 
of  uncoloured  stone,  and  of  smaller  proportions.  The 
cella  once  had  an  upper  range  of  columns,  like  that  of 
the  Temple  of  Neptune  at  Psestum;  although  few  of  them 

5  This  mode  of  construction  seems  to  have  been  universally  applied 
in  very  antient  times  to  all  doors  of  whatever  dimensions,  but  at  some 
few  places  —  at  Patara,  for  instance,  in  Asia  Minor  —  the  stone  doors 
of  antient  tombs  slide  in  grooves. 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  77 

now  remain.  It  is  also  filled  up  to  a  considerable  height 
by  enormous  masses  of  broken  columns  and  of  ruined 
architraves,  some  of  which  appear  to  have  been  destroyed 
by  fire,  notwithstanding  the  great  height  to  which  they 
have  been  raised  ;  and  the  surface  of  some  of  the  columns 
towards  the  eastern  end  of  the  hall  have  not  been  faced 
down,  but  merely  roughly  chiselled  into  the  proper 
shape  and  dimensions.^  What  it  must  have  been  when 
fresh  and  uninjured,  and  filled  with  multitudes  of  priests 
and  worshippers,  in  all  the  pomp  and  splendour  of 
Egyptian  idolatry,  can  scarcely  be  imagined ;  but  I  con- 
sider that  the  spectacle  it  affords,  even  in  its  present 
dilapidated  condition,  an  ample  compensation  for  the 
time  consumed,  and  the  trifling  inconveniences  neces- 
sarily incurred  in  a  voyage  from  England.  Beyond  this 
temple  other  sacred  buildings  extend  in  a  right  line, 
the  works  of  successive  monarchs  from  the  earliest  times  ; 
and  an  open  space  near  the  centre  had  been  adorned  with 

«  Having  been  informed  that  the  blocks  were  kept  together  by 
wooden  fastenings,  I  examined  several ;  but  instead  of  wood,  I  found  in 
the  joints  of  one,  which  had  partly  been  thrown  over,  cuttings  about 
an  inch  deep  in  the  shape  of  wedges,  with  the  smaller  ends  meeting  at 
the  centre  of  the  column,  full  of  an  exceedingly  fine  white  cement  of 
the  consistence  of  pounce,  which,  notwithstanding  an  exposure  of  pro- 
bably many  centuries  to  the  intense  heat  of  the  climate,  still  retained 
a  degree  of  moisture.  I  brought  away  some  of  it  with  the  intention 
of  having  it  analysed.  In  the  corresponding  stone,  that  had  been  placed 
upon  it,  were  similar  cuttings  filled  up  in  like  manner.  The  slabs 
forming  the  roof  of  another  part  of  the  Temple  had  been  cut  in  a  some- 
what similar  manner ;  but  I  did  not  find  any  thing  in  them,  nor  discover 
by  what  substance  they  had  been  fastened.  The  extreme  tenacity  of 
the  cement  used  in  antient  buildings  was  afterwards  evident,  when  the 
casing-stones  of  the  Great  Pyramid  of  Gizeh  were  discovered. 


78  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

four  obelisks  ;  one  at  present  remains,  a  monument  of  sur- 
passing beauty,  and  appears  to  great  advantage,  shooting 
up,  as  it  does,  into  the  azure  vault  of  an  almost 
cloudless  sky.  It  is  composed  of  the  finest  rose-coloured 
granite,  and  has  been  grooved  down  the  edges,  and 
worked  with  the  utmost  exactness.  The  few  hiero- 
glyphics inscribed  upon  it  are  also  of  the  finest  work- 
manship. Many  of  these  buildings  were  no  doubt 
hypaethral,  and  the  effects  of  light  and  shade  seem  to 
have  been  well  understood  by  those  who  planned  and 
executed  them.  Mr.  Wilkinson  remarks,  that  the  central 
temple  is  more  than  100  years  older  than  any  other 
building  at  Thebes,  and  that  the  cartouche  of  Osirtesen 
is  inscribed  in  it :  the  cartouche  however  of  Thothmes 
the  Third  is  also  to  be  found  towards  the  bottom  of  a 
doorway.^  The  ceiling  had  been  formed  of  large  slabs 
of  granite,  ornamented  with  gilt  stars  upon  a  blue  ground. 
The  figures  upon  the  walls  were  sculptured,  and  painted 
upon  the  stone  in  some  places  with  diffei'ent  and  appro- 
priate colours,  and  in  others  with  a  greenish  gray,  which 
formed  a  pleasing  contrast  with  the  warm  tints  of  the 
polished  granite.  The  cartouche  of  Osirtesen  was  also 
inscribed  upon  some  ruined  columns  in  an  adjoining 
building,  which  are  called  polygonal,  but  which  are 
essentially  Doric,  excepting  that  the  echinus,  annuli, 
and  hypotrachelion  are  wanting.  JNIr.  Wilkinson  has 
justly  observed,  that  they  prove  the  pure  taste  of  the 

7  The  doorway  is  much  decayed,  having  been  composed  of  basalt, 
which  seems  ill  adapted  to  withstand  the  corroding  effects  of  the  desert 
sands;  but  the  whole  apartment  has  been  materially  injured  by  anti- 
quarian researches,  carried  on,  as  it  is  said,  under  the  direction  of  Mr. 
Dronetti. 


RETURN    FROM  UIM'ER   EGYPT.  79 

most  antient  Egyptian  architecture^  and  were  the  pro- 
totype of  the  Greek  Doric  ;  nor  can  any  one,  I  think, 
see  these  pillars,  and  those  at  Benihassen,  without  being 
of  the  same  opinion,  and  without  being  convinced  that 
the  Greeks  took  with  them  from  Egypt  amongst  other 
sciences,  those  of  architecture  and  of  sculpture,  and,  as 
has  been  already  stated,  the  art  also  of  colouring  the 
interior  of  their  temples  upon  stucco.  It  should  hkewise 
be  remembered  that  the  Doric  was  the  oldest  order  in 
both  Egypt,  and  in  Greece.  Some  of  the  blocks  com- 
posing these  columns  are  three  feet  seven  inches  in 
diameter,  and  have  been  fitted  together  by  pommels  and 
corresponding  cavities,"  their  flutings  are  nine  inches 
wide.  In  an  adjoining  temple,  the  capitals  of  the  co- 
lumns have  the  appearance  of  being  inverted ;  and  at 
right  angles  to  this,  another  building  contains  many  of 
the  Doric  columns  nearly  in  a  perfect  state.  Beyond 
these  temples  are  magnificent  propyltca,^  through  which 
the  distant  mountains  and  bright  blue  sky  are  seen 
with  great  effect ;  and  on  all  sides  vast  mounds  of  ruined 
materials,  enormous  masses  of  solid  masonry,  fragments 
of  columns  and  of  architraves,  attest  the  former  splen- 
dour of  this  extraordinary  place,  and  at  the  same  time 
the  wonderful  efforts  that  have  been  made  to  destroy 
it.  On  tlie  exterior  of  the  northern  wall  of  the  Great 
Temple  are  the   femous   battle   scenes,    which    are  also 


8  Tlie  same  fastenings  are  to  be  observed  in  some  of  the  architraves 
at  Stonehenge. 

9  It  is  extremely  probable,  as  Mr.  Wilkinson  observes,  that  Homer's 
sjc«T0f«3-i;A«i  may  allude  to  these  portals  ;  and,  also,  that  from  them  tri- 
umphal arches  were  derived. 


80 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII. 


partially  recorded  at  Abou-Simbel,  and  at  other  places, 
and  which  are  supposed  to  relate  to  the  times  of 
Sesostris.  Was  the  knowledge  of  hieroglyphics  as  per- 
fect as  in  some  publications  it  is  supposed  to  be,  the 
doubts  that  exist  respecting  the  subjects  of  these  sculp- 
tures would  be  soon  removed,  as  tablets  of  hierogly- 
phics are  inserted  over  the  prisoners,  the  represent- 
ations of  cities,  and  in  other  parts  which  evidently 
relate  to  the  subjects  described,  and  would  probably 
throw  much  light  upon  antient  history  and  chronology, 
and  possibly  upon  Homer's  poems.  For  instance,  the 
hieroglyphics  in  the  margin 
Sp^^  are    placed    over  a  town    near 

/^^  J      ^_^  a    river,    supposed,    from    the 

'       -^       insertion   of  crocodiles,   to   be 

the  Nile.  There  are  several 
figures  on  horseback  intro- 
duced, the  horses  are  in  ge- 
neral executed  with  so  much 
spirit,  and  thrown  into  atti- 
tudes so  true  to  nature,  that 
such  imitations  could  only 
have  been  the  result  of  a 
very  accurate  observation  of  the  most  beautiful  ori- 
ginals. They  were  sometimes  out  of  proportion,  and  of 
ideal  forms ;  but  in  spirit  and  in  general  effect,  reminded 
me  of  Vernet's  drawings.  Many  of  the  figures  were 
well  imagined,  particularly  a  chief  killed  by  the  gigantic 
hero.  The  cars,  particularly  the  wheels,  appear  to  have 
been  made  of  metal;  and  the  reins  were  fastened 
round  the  body  of  the  driver,  as  they  are  represented 
in  Roman  sculpture.     I  did  not  perceive  any  cars  drawn 


/VSAAA/WVSA;: 


naaaKaaaa/' 


«*^  -* 


^ 

^N 


T, 

^ 

n 

-t^ 

i^ 

1 

^ 

3 

Fig. 


Plan  of  the  Ruin. 

Views  of  the  Pedestals,  each  Side  of  the  Entrance,  at  A  and 

-Ornaments  upon  the  Pedestals. 

Inscriptions. 


KETURX  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  81 

by  more  than  two  horses.  Great  attention  seems  to 
have  been  paid  in  these  designs  to  national  costume 
and  physiognomy ;  and  in  some  of  them  human  sacri- 
fices are  certainly  represented,  notwithstanding  the  sup- 
position that  the  figures  are  allegorical.  The  sculpture, 
that  records  the  wars  of  Shishak  in  Palestine,  is  remark- 
ably well  executed,  particularly  a  recumbent  figure  on 
the  lower  part  of  the  wall. 

I  went  back  by  a  ruined  tank  towards  the  reservoir 
of  water,  already  mentioned,  and  observed,  to  the  east- 
ward of  an  avenue  of  sphinxes,  the  foundation  of  a 
building,  which  had  been  adorned  with  small  Doric 
columns.  The  blocks  had  fifteen  flutings  of  seven  inches 
and  a  quarter  each,  and  had  been  fastened  together  in 
the  usual  manner  by  wedge-shaped  grooves  crossing  each 
other  at  right  angles  at  the  centre.  On  each  side  of 
the  entrance  were  the  pedestals,  and  lower  parts  of  two 
basaltic  statues,'  in  the  same  position   as  the  Colossi  in 

1  The  sculptures  on  the  sides  of  the  pedestal  are  the  common  orna- 
mental border  and  the  peculiar  representation  which  may  be  called  an 
anaglyph ;  it  represents  a  terebra  or  bore  placed  between  two  groups 
of  the  flowers  of  papyrus  and  lotus,  the  stem  or  cord  of  each  central 
flower  rises  to  the  height  of  the  stick  of  the  bore,  passes  to  the  top  of 
the  picture,  and  droops  pendent  over  the  exterior  flower.  This  anaglyph 
has  not  been  explained.  The  central  symbol  (the  bore)  is  used  in  the 
texts  for  the  letter  c  (s)  as  the  initial  of  a  group  reading  c  ee  r  "  to 
accuse,  reprobate,  command ;"  and  the  lotus  and  papyrus  respectively 
represent  "  the  upper  and  lower  hemisphere,"  the  "  north  and  south."' 
The  whole  apparently  indicates  "  commanding  the  upper  and  the  lower 
world."  The  inscriptions,  placed  parallel  to  the  legs  of  the  statue,  contain 
the  names  and  titles  of  Amenoph  the  Third,  or  ;\Iemnon.  To  the  left  is  the 
gracious  God,  Lord  of  dilating  the  heart  (the  Sun,  Lord  of  Truth),  beloved 
of  Pasht,  Neith  the  giver  of  life  eternal."  To  the  right  is  "the  son  of  the 
Sun  ofhis  race  loving  him  "  .  .  .  .  beloved  of  Pasht,  Neith. — Mr.  Birch. 
VOL.  I.  G 


82  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

the  plain  of  Thebes.  The  torso  of  one  of  them  was 
near  these  pedestals,  and  by  the  cartouche  on  the  girdle, 
proved  to  be  that  of  Oisirtesen  the  First.  I  obtained 
leave  to  take  it  to  England,  and  it  is  now  in  the  British 
Museum.  I  found  Mr.  Wilkinson's  book  particularly- 
useful  at  Karnac. 

In  returning  to  the  boat,  I  was  sorry  to  observe  a 
number  of  people  employed  in  constructing  magazines 
of  gunpowder  within  a  mile  of  the  antient  buildings.  The 
approach  to  Luxor  must  have  been  extremely  magni- 
ficent, but  is,  as  I  have  mentioned,  much  disfigured  by 
the  accumulations  of  sand  and  rubbish,  and  also  by  the 
loss  of  the  obelisk  taken  to  Paris,  which  has  destroyed 
the  effect  of  the  one  remaining.  There  are  ruins  of  other 
temples  in  a  distant  part  of  the  plain  near  the  moun- 
tains ;  but  I  had  not  an  opportunity  of  seeing  them  ;  nor, 
by  the  accounts  that  are  given  of  them,  do  they  appear 
to  be  of  much  importance. 

The  plains  of  Thebes  are  very  extensive  on  both 
sides  of  the  Nile,  and  well  calculated  for  the  site  of  a 
powerful  city ;  for,  as  water  can  probably  be  found  in 
most  places  at  the  level  of  the  river,  they  are  capable  of 
great  fertility.  At  present  however,  owing  to  a  scanty 
population,  and  to  other  causes,  they  are  very  imperfectly 
cultivated.  The  inhabitants  of  Luxor,  and  of  Karnac 
scarcely  amount  to  2000,  and  the  conscription  is  likely 
to  reduce  even  that  number.  The  summer  is  very  hot, 
and  lasts  ten  months  ;  and  during  the  extreme  heats 
the  people  of  Karnac  take  refuge  amongst  the  ruins. 
Bathing  is  dangerous,  owing  to  the  number  of  croco- 
diles, which  are  said  to  destroy  animals,  and  even  women 
who  approach  the  river;  and  to  strike  down  their  prey 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  83 

Avith  their  tails  into  the  water  before  they  devour  it. 
The  Catchief  sent  me  a  present,  and  came  himself  in 
the  evening,  when  I  procured  the  use  of  his  horses  for 
the  examination  of  the  plain  on  the  other  side  of  the 
river.     [^Thermometer  at  night,  57°.] 

31s/.  —  Thermometer  TS''.  I  again  went  to  Karnac, 
and  examined  the  ruins  where  the  torso  was  found ;  and 
afterwards  the  Great  Temple :  the  more  I  saw  of  it,  the 
greater  were  my  admiration  and  delight.  In  the  evening 
the  boat  was  removed  to  Gournon. 

Januanj  1st,  1837.  —  I  set  out  early  in  the  morning 
for  Biban  El  JNIoluc.  Beyond  a  strip  of  cultivated  land 
near  the  river,  and  the  ruins  of  a  temple,  apparently 
of  great  antiquity,  and  supposed  to  have  been  built 
by  Osirei,  father  of  Sesostris,"  the  plain  is  covered 
with  barren  sands,  which  towards  the  mountains  form 
mounds,  and  hillocks,  some  of  which  seem  to  have 
been  tumuli,  and  others  the  effects  of  repeated  exca- 
vations amongst  the  shafts,  and  mummy  pits.  Vast 
quantities  of  blanched  bones,  black  rags,  broken  mummy 
boards,  gums,  and  resinous  substances  present  a  scene 
of  extensive  and  of  wanton  spoliation,  altogether  pe- 
culiar to  this  extraordinary  place.'  The  mountains 
likewise  abound   with    ruined  tombs,    whence    thousands 

-  It  is  called  El  Ebek  by  iSIr.  Hamilton. 

^  It  may  with  great  probability  be  inferred,  from  the  authority  of 
Homer,  and  from  many  of  the  fables  and  traditions  of  antient  mythology, 
that,  together  with  longevity,  mankind  were  originally  endowed  with 
superior  intellectual  and  bodily  faculties.  It  would  also  appear  that 
castes  were  established,  that  brass  and  iron  manufactured  (without  which 


84  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

of  bodies  have  been  dug  out,  despoiled,  and  broken 
up,  and  afterwards  scattered  on  all  sides  in  surprising 
niimbers. 

neither  wood  nor  stone  could  have  been  worked),  and  that  the  arts 
had  arrived  at  great  perfection  before  the  deluge;  and  it  may  reason- 
ably be  inferred  that  many  of  them  survived  that  great  event.  The 
power  and  skill  displayed  in  the  different  magnificent  sepulchres,  in  the 
pyramids,  and  in  many  other  stupendous  remains  of  remote  antiquity, 
appear,  therefore,  less  surprising  than  the  powerful  motive  that  caused 
their  construction,  and  the  vain  contrivances,  by  embalment  and  other 
precautions,  to  preserve  inviolate  the  body  after  death. 

This  motive  seems  to  have  acted  with  equal  force  upon  all  classes  of 
the  Egyptians,  the  most  learned  people  of  antiquity,  and  also  upon  the 
shepherd  kings,  of  a  totally  different  religion  and  nation  ;  and  could  only 
have  arisen  from  a  profound  conviction  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body, 
and  of  a  future  existence,  connected  with  the  doctrine  of  expiation,  and 
of  sacrifice. 

It  is  evident  that  natural  religion  could  never  have  arrived  at  this 
great  and  important  truth,  but  tliat  it  must  have  been  originally  imparted 
by  direct  revelation,  although  afterwards  obscured,  and  in  the  end  en- 
tirely lost  sight  of  from  the  corrupt  and  base  superstitions  notoriously 
prevalent  among  this  wonderful  people,  from  whom  the  same  errors, 
together  with  civilisation  and  learning,  were  diffused  throughout  the 
rest  of  the  world.  And  it  is  also  probable  that  this  doctrine  was 
but  slightly  alluded  to  by  Moses,  and  that  his  tomb  was  expressly 
concealed  to  avoid  the  superstitious  veneration  that  has,  in  many  in- 
stances, even  under  a  more  perfect  dispensation,  been  paid  to  the 
dead ;  and  which  has  so  greatly  conduced  to  idolatrous  and  sensual 
practices,  and  to  such  absurd  notions,  that  without  the  most  positive 
testimony  could  not  have  been  supposed  to  have  existed  even  amongst 
the  most  ignorant  people. 

Many  arguments  might  here  be  adduced  of  the  inefRcacy  of  mere 
human  acquirements  with  respect  to  an  after  existence,  which  the  au- 
thority of  Cicero  himself  might  be  brought  to  support,  who  confessed 
the  doubt  and  gloom  in  which  it  was  involved.  And  it  is  also  to 
be   observed,  that  the  antients   seem  to  have  been   deeply  impressed 


RETURN  FROISI  UPPER  EGYPT.  85 

The  people  of  Gournon  live  in  huts,  or  in  sepul- 
chres on  the  sides  of  the  mountains,  and  make  use  of 
the  fragments  of  mummies  and  of  their  cases  for  fuel, 
and  for  other  purposes.  Mr.  Hay  had  formerly  a  house 
near  the  village ;  and  Signore  A\'erdie,  a  Greek,  has  resided 
there  for  the  last  ten  years. 

The  approach  to  Biban  El  JNIoluc  is  by  a  natural 
valley,  through  which  however  it  may  be  concluded 
that  a  sufficient  road  formerly  existed  for  the  processions 
which,  according  to  the  evidence  of  antient  sculpture, 
attended  funeral  ceremonies.  Were  it  not  for  these  re- 
presentations, it  might  be  supposed  that  interments  were 
performed  with  secrecy,  and  that  concealment  of  the 
tombs  was  the  main  object,  as  the  entrances  are  in  ob- 
scure and  hidden  situations,  and  as  the  surface  of  the 
mountains  has  been  left  entirely  in  a  natural  state.  These 
lonely  glens  are  however  highly  picturesque,  and  form 
a  strong  contrast  to  the  elaborate  decoration  of  the 
interior  of  those  sepulchres.  The  mountains  are  of 
an  imposing  grandeur,  but  in  many  places  of  a  loose 
friable  texture.  Shortly  after  you  enter  the  valley  it 
becomes  narrower,  and  winds  round  towards  the  south- 
east, where  it  is  connected  by  a  steep  path  with  the 
plain  of  Thebes. 

The  tombs  that  are  accessible  have  been  numbered, 
so  that  reference  can  easily  be  made  to  Mr.  Wilkinson's 
book.*     The    first   I    visited  was   No.  17,  discovered  by 

with  the  idea  of  a  superintending  Providence  ;  as  scarcely  a  heroic 
achievement  is  recorded  by  the  antient  poets  without  an  invocation  for 
supernatural  assistance,  or  a  hero  represented  in  Egyptian  sculpture 
without  a  tutelary  deity. 

*  This  book,  to  which  I  have  so  often  referred,  is  equally  useful 
on  the  eastern  side  of  the  mountain  ;  but  it  is  to  be  lamented,   that 


86  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII. 

Signore  Belzoni.  It  fully  equalled  my  expectations ;  but 
I  was  sorry  to  observe  bow  wantonly  it  bad  been  dis- 
figured, it  was  said,  but  I  trust  witbout  foundation,  by 
M.  ChampoUion.  One  square  pillar  bad  been  entirely 
destroyed,  and  several  of  tbe  apartments  were  strewn 
witb  large  fragments,  wbicb  bad  been  cut  from  the 
painted  walls,  and  columns.  Tbe  sepulcbre,  however, 
bad  been  violated  before  Belzoni's  discovery,  who  found 
tbe  sarcophagus  removed  from  its  original  position,  and 
a  descending  passage  of  considerable  length  opened  be- 
neath it,  which  could  not  have  been  effected  when  the 
sarcophagus  was  in  its  place.  In  most  of  these  tombs, 
as  also  in  the  Pyramids  of  Gizeh,  the  sarcophagi  have 
been  removed,  and  excavations  made  beneath,  and  around 
them,  in  search  either  of  treasure,  or  of  secret  commu- 
nication ;    but   this  is,   I    believe,  the    only  passage    that 

many  of  the  interesting  objects  described  have  been  since  destroyed. 
As  the  tombs,  however,  whicli  contained  them  are  pointed  out,  much 
needless  inquiry  is  saved.  According  to  all  accounts,  Mr.  Hay  has 
with  laudable  industrj'  caused  casts  and  copies  to  be  taken  of  these,  and 
of  other  antiquities  in  Upper  and  in  Lower  Egypt,  which  will  probably 
in  a  few  years  be  entirely  destroyed.  Government  should  publish  collec- 
tions of  this  sort,  and  save  from  oblivion  records  that  can  never  be  replaced. 
They  would  do  well  to  emulate  the  wise  and  liberal  manner  in  which 
M.  Champollion's  and  Signore  Rosellini's  works  have  been  published. 
The  fine  obelisk  at  Thebes  and  the  colossal  statue  at  Metrahery  are  at 
our  disposal ;  but  it  appears  that  this  country  is  now  too  much  impo- 
verished to  remove  any  of  those  masses  which  antient  Egypt  had  both 
the  power  and  the  skill  in  numberless  instances  to  fashion  and  to  erect, 
and  which,  it  may  be  remembered,  the  Romans  found  it  easy  to  convey 
not  only  to  Italy,  but  also  across  the  deserts  to  Palmj'ra.  It  is  to  be 
regretted  that  the  obelisk  from  Thebes  has  not  been  erected  in  this 
country  as  a  monument  to  Lord  Nelson  :  it  would  have  been  a  more  appro- 
priate and  glorious  record  of  his  fame  than  any  sculpture  w  hich  modern 
times  can  produce. 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  87 

has  yet  been  found  under  a  sarcophagus,  nor  is  any 
vacancy  or  hollow  to  be  observed  in  any  of  the  pyra- 
mids, where  treasure  could  have  been  lodged.  I  then 
entered  several  other  tombs  well  worthy  of  examination, 
although  greatly  injured,  as  might  be  expected,  from 
the  length  of  time  they  have  remained  open.  The  en- 
trances are  not  in  general  so  much  inclined  as  those 
in  the  pyramids,  nor  do  they  appear  to  have  been  filled 
up  with  solid  masonry,  but  are  generally  covered  with 
inscriptions.  In  the  entrance  of  No.  15  there  were  two 
large  medaUions  executed  in  white  stucco,  that  have 
precisely  the  appearance  of  ivory,  and  may  have  been 
intended  to  represent  that  substance,  in  which,  and  in 
gold  Phidias,  and  Praxiteles  are  said  to  have  chiefly 
carved ;  and  as  the  Hebrews,  as  well  as  the  Greeks, 
may  be  imagined  to  have  carried  arts,  and  sciences 
with  them  from  this  wonderful  country,  these  sculp- 
tures may  serve  to  explain,  not  only  the  works  of  the 
above-mentioned  artists,  but  also  the  ivory  palaces 
mentioned  in  Scripture.  Processions  of  prisoners,  or  of 
victims,  are  frequently  represented,  with  their  arms  fast- 
ened behind  them,  and  with  a  rope  round  their  necks, 
possibly  to  denote,  in  the  Grecian  manner,  slavery,  or 
Helotism.  Some  of  these  appear  to  be  Jews  ;  others 
have  scarfs  over  their  shoulders,  and  their  hair,  w'hich 
is  extremely  bushy,  cut  square  before,  and  behind, 
with  a  perpendicular  bald  stripe  behind  their  ears,  and 
a  large  tress  hanging  down  each  side  of  their  faces. 
Negroes,  and  different  nations,  are  also  portrayed,  some 
of  whom  are  dressed  in  flowered  garments.  In  other 
places  are  figures  without  their  heads,  which  are  sepa- 
rately represented  with  a  sacrificial  knife;  also  decapitated 


88  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

persons  in  a  kneeling  position,  with  their  arms  tied 
behind  them  to  a  stake  surmounted  by  a  jackall's  head. 
In  one  instance  I  observed  a  row  of  kneehng  figures, 
each  of  whom  was  held  down 
by  a  priestess,  whilst  the  blood 
spouted  out,  like  a  fountain,  from 
the  top  of  his  head  into  a  cup 
or  basin  placed  before  him.  One 
of  these  victims  appeared  to  be 
struggling  with  two  priestesses,  and 
endeavouring  to  escape.  There  is, 
therefore,  little  doubt  that  human 
sacrifices  are  represented  by  these  designs,  and  that  they 
formed  part  of  the  sepulchral  rites  of  persons  of  con- 
sequence ;  a  conclusion  to  which  Mr.  Hamilton  also 
appears  to  have  arrived.  The  several  divinities,  it  may 
be  added,  are  repi-esented  in  the  usual  forms,  but  gene- 
rally with  more  decorous  emblems  than  in  the  temples, 
and  other  buildings.  A  child  in  the  character  of  Harpo- 
crates  seated  on  a  winged  globe,  is  supposed  by  Mr.  Wil- 
kinson to  typify  regeneration  after  death,  and  another 
figure  seems  to  be  rising  out  of  a  tomb  at  the  command 
of  a  divinity ;  I  shall  not  however  attempt  even  a  general 
description  of  these  interesting  paintings,  as  it  would  not 
only  require  considerable  detail,  but  much  more  observa- 
tion than  I  had  time  to  bestow  upon  them. 

2f/.  —  Sig.  Werdie  was  so  good  as  to  shew  me  his 
collection,  which  contained  a  number  of  interesting  an- 
tiquities, amongst  which  were  some  very  handsome 
mummies,  and  several  buff  embroidered  scarfs  which 
were  considered  extremely  antient,  but  which  appeared 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT. 


89 


as  fresh  as  when  first  out  of  the  loom.  This  gentle- 
man's house  was  well  arranged,  considering  its  extra- 
ordinary situation.  I  then  proceeded  to  the  Memno- 
nium,  where  the  famous  Colossus  excites  almost  as 
much  astonishment  by  the  manner  in  which  it  has  been 
destroyed,  as  by  the  skill,  and  labour,  which  must  have 
been  employed  in  its  erection,  for  it  is  impossible  to  con- 
ceive by  what  engine  so  vast  a  mass  of  sohd  granite 
could  have  been  suddenly  broken  without  some  marks 
being  left  of  the  manner,  in 
which  the  force  was  applied. 
The  form  of  the  arches  near 
the  Memnonium,  and  the 
lining  of  bricks  placed  edge- 
ways to  retain  cement,  or 
mortar,  would  lead  to  the 
supposition  that  they  were 
Roman ;  but  had  they  been 
constructed  by  that  people 
with  materials  taken  from 
Egyptian  buildings,  several 
different  cartouches  would 
probably  have  been  found 
amongst    them,    particularly 

as  a  considerable  ruin,  composed  entirely  of  the  bricks  of 
Thothmes  the  Third  (or   Moeris),^  was  close  at  hand.® 


*  See  Rosellini,  Tav.  2.  torn.  1. 

6  It  is  also  to  be  observed,  that  these  bricks  are  of  the  same  size 
as  those  of  Remeses  the  Great,  one  foot  four  inches  long,  seven  inches 
broad,  and  five  inches  deep.  They  are  composed  of  mud  and  cut  straw, 
and  between  the  courses  layers  of  straw,  which  were  wonderfully  fresh, 
are  inserted  with  the  slime,  that  serves  for  mortar.     In  some  instances 


90 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 


This,  however,  is  not  the  case ;  the  only  cartouche  dis- 
covered at  these  arches  is  that  of  Amunmai  Remeses 
(called  in  Mr.  Wilkinson's  list  Remeses  the  Great,)  by 
which  it  would  appear  that  they  were  built  in  the  reign 


the  bricks  are  laid  in  alternate  courses,  endways,  and  lengthways. 
The  cartouche  of  the  king  is  not  impressed  upon  all  of  them,  but  the 
marks  of  a  man's  hand  having  been  drawn  over  were  visible  on  the 
reverse  sides. 

7  This  inscription,  which  consists  of  a  single  line  of  large  hiero- 
glyphics, contains  the  names  and  titles  of  the  person,  for  whose  tomb  the 
bricks  were  made.  "  The  Osirian  (deceased),  divine  father,  chief  pro- 
phet, priest  of  Anion,  Piran-nofre,  the  true."  It  bears  the  name  of 
Piran-nofre,  a  deceased  chief-prophet  of  the  god  Amon,  the  eponymous 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  91 

of  that  monarch.  They  seem  to  have  been  a  sub- 
structure of  some  other  edifice :  bodies  have  been  taken 
out  from  beneath  them.  I  did  not  hear  whether  they 
were  those  of  Egyptians ;  but  if  they  were,  and  coeval 
with  the  Memnonium,  it  would  go  far  to  prove  that  that 
building  was  a  tomb,  or  a  temple,  and  not  a  palace. 

On  the  following  day  I  had  an  opportunity  of  ex- 
amining the  arches  in  the  ruined  Pyramid  at  Drah  Abou 
Negger.  It  is  situated  at  a  considerable  height  on  the 
side  of  the  mountain,  and  consists  of  a  foundation  of 
unburnt  bricks  of  nearly  the  same  dimensions  as  those 
already  described,  and  impressed  with  the  cartouche  in 
the  preceding  page.  A  few  squared  stones  appeared  to 
have  been  used  in  the  superstructure ;  the  brick-work 
contained  an  apartment,  which  had  been  regularly  domed 
over  on  the  principle  of  an  arch,  and  had  been  lined  with 
bricks  placed  edgeways,  like  the  arches  near  the  Mem- 
nonium. Opposite  to  the  entrance  a  large  niche  had 
been  worked  in  the  same  manner;  and  on  the  left-hand 
a  smaller  one  had  been  constructed  by  horizontal  courses 
gradually  approaching  each  other  from  the  bottom.  This 
building  had  every  appearance  of  antiquity,  and  as  the 
arches  were  in  the  foundation,  they  proved,  in  my  opinion, 
that  the  Egyptians  were  acquainted  with  that  mode  of 
construction  ;  indeed,  if  a  large  space  was  to  be  built 
over  by  brickwork,  it  could  scarcely  be  effected  in 
any  other  manner.  In  the  caverns  and  sepulchral  ex- 
deity  of  Thebes :  this  evidently  refers  to  the  person,  for  whom  the  edifice 
was  erected,  and  not  to  any  mark  for  a  collection  of  revenue  from  bricks, 
the  term  Osiris,  or  Osirian,  which  is  placed  before  the  name,  ah\ays 
indicating  a  deceased  person.  —  Mr.  Birch. 

The  other  cartouclie  belongs  to  Amunmai  Remcses. 


92  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

cavations,  which  occupy  the  space  between  Medinet  Abou 
and  the  mountains,  brick  arches  are  every  where  visible. 
And  an  arch  has  also  been  constructed  with  bricks,  bear- 
ing the  cartouche  of  Thothmes  the  First,  to  support  the 
roof  of  a  cavern  in  the  adjacent  hills,  where  the  rock 
happens  to  be  of  a  very  loose  texture.  Mr.  Wilkinson 
may  have  alluded  to  this  tomb  when  he  observed,  that 
arches  were  known  in  Egypt  1540  years  before  Christ; 
and  it  must  have  been  of  importance,  as  the  French  are 
said  to  have  taken  away  a  very  fine  sarcophagus  from  the 
bottom  of  a  deep  shaft,  which  has  been  sunk  in  it. 

I  did  not,  however,  observe  any  remains  of  arches 
built  with  stone.  The  portal,  mentioned  by  Sig.  Belzoni, 
behind  Drah  Abou  Negger,  is  composed  of  stones  laid 
in  horizontal  courses,  and  cut  into  a  coved  shape  like 
the  roof  of  the  temple  at  Abydos,  and  those  of  the 
Mamertine   prisons    at    Rome. 

Tlie  sculpture  at  the  Memnonium  seems  to  relate 
to  the  same  great  event,  that  is  recorded  at  Karnac, 
Abou  Simbel,  and  at  other  places,  and  is  equally  worthy 
of  admiration  ;  indeed  in  some  respects  more  so,  being 
executed  with  greater  care,  and  more  highly  finished. 
The  horses  in  particular  must  have  been  designed  from 
very  beautiful  originals,  although  greatly  differing  from 
those  represented  in  Grecian  sculpture  ;  and  many  of 
them  are  described  in  spirited,  and  natural  attitudes, 
such  as  I  never  observed  in  any  other  place.  The 
whole  is  in  nearly  the  same  style,  and  has  the  same 
merits  and  defects,  as  those  at  Karnac.  The  adjacent 
ground  abounds  with  gigantic  fragments  of  fine  work- 
manship, and  no  doubt  many  still  lie  concealed  below 
the  surface. 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  93 

Scl.  —  In  continuing  my  examination  of  this  inter- 
esting place,  I  proceeded  to  the  two  famous  statues,  one 
of  which  is  said  to  he  that  of  Memnon.  They  have 
evidently  been  placed,  together  with  other  Colossi,  as 
ornaments  upon  a  causeway,  that  formed  the  approach 
to  a  considerable  building,  the  site  of  which  may  yet  be 
made  out,  and  which  is  said  by  ISIr.  Wilkinson  to  be  of 
the  time  of  Amenoph  the  Third.  No  apparent  superi- 
ority distinguishes  one  of  these  images  from  the  other; 
but  the  most  northern,  from  the  inscriptions,  with  which 
it  is  covered,  and  also  from  tradition,  is  supposed  to  have 
emitted  the  musical  sound,  and  to  be  the  monument  of 
the  mighty  hero.  IMr.  ^^'ilkinson  appears  to  consider  that 
the  sound  was  produced  by  artificial  means,  and  that  a 
sonorous  block,  which  he  found  in  the  lap  of  the  figure, 
was  struck  for  that  purpose.  It  would  seem  however 
more  probable,  that  it  was  occasioned  by  the  vibration  of 
the  stone,  of  which  the  figure  is  composed,  under  the 
powerful  action  of  the  morning  sun ;  a  phenomenon  not 
entirely  without  precedent. 

Medinet  Abou  is  situated  on  a  knoll,  and  is  sur- 
rounded by  Arab  huts.  This  building  is  evidently  com- 
posed of  two  distinct  parts  :  the  smaller  and  more  antient, 
said  to  have  been  built  in  the  time  of  Thothmes  the 
Third,  contains  Doric,  or  polygonal  columns,  hke  those 
at  Karnac.  The  larger  has  been  a  most  stupendous 
edifice ;  although  not  equal  to  the  temples  at  Karnac  in 
extent,  or  in  grandeur,  it  certainly  exceeds  them  in  excel- 
lence and  variety  of  decoration.  These,  besides  describing 
with  considerable  detail  the  usual  battle-scenes,  proces- 
sions, triumphs,  Szc,  are  rendered  peculiarly  interesting 
by  the  introduction  of  ships  and  of  the  sea-shore,  and  give 


94  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

an  extensive  idea  of  the  conquests  and  dominion  of  an- 
tient  Egypt.*^  In  one  of  these  curious  representations 
I  fancied  that  I  observed  a  hostile  chief  making  a  yet- 
tatura,  with  an  extended  hand,  and  arm,  to  avert  the 
evil  eye  of  the  conqueror,  who,  it  may  be  remarked,  is 
always  represented  in  the  flower  of  youth.  The  simi- 
larity of  some  of  the  costumes  with  those  discovered 
in  America,  and  many  other  interesting  particulars,  have 

8  An  explanation  of  the  sculpture  so  frequently  found  in  tombs 
and  in  other  places,  is  extremely  desirable ;  and  particularly  of  these 
writings,  which  are  of  the  greatest  possible  interest  as  far  as  profane 
history  is  concerned,  but  they  have  not  yet  been  deciphered,  even  with 
the  help  of  the  figures.  Whatever  progress  has  been  made  in  hierogly- 
phics seems  to  have  been  effected  by  a  careful  examination  of  the 
triple  inscription  on  the  Rosetta  stone,  which  was  brought  to  England 
in  1801.  Yet  in  1833,  Mr.  Wilkinson,  the  highest  authority  in  these 
matters,  thus  expressed  himself :  "  No  one  is  yet  sufficiently  advanced 
in  the  language  of  antient  Egypt  to  enable  him  literally  to  translate  an 
inscription  of  any  length,  or  moderately  complicated,  though  a  general 
meaning  may  frequently  be  obtained."  This  assertion  is  unfortu- 
nately found  to  be  true,  notwithstanding  the  pretensions  set  up  to  the 
contrary.  Nor  does  it  appear  that  even  Mr.  M^ilkinson  has  been  able 
to  establish  any  undoubted  chronology,  or  succession  of  the  antient 
kings,  even  with  the  aid  of  the  stone  found  at  Abydos,  and  of  the  Greek 
historians,  or  to  reconcile  in  any  way  the  differences  which  exist  between 
the  accounts  of  Manetbo,  and  those  of  Herodotus.  The  earliest  periods 
are  still  involved  in  complete  mystery,  and  the  most  important  events 
remain  as  yet  unexplained,  although  described  both  in  sculpture,  and  in 
written  characters.  Some  great  mistake  must  indeed  exist  in  those 
antient  accounts,  which  carry  back  the  dynasties  to  a  period  before  the 
creation,  and  record  four,  in  which  twenty-seven  kings  reigned  one  hun- 
dred and  forty-six  years ;  sixteen,  forty-three  ;  sixty,  one  hundred  and 
eighty-four ;  and  seventy  other  monarchs  seventy  days  ;  whilst  at  the 
same  time  to  Cheops  is  attributed  a  reign  of  fifty ;  and  to  his  successor, 
Chephren,  fifty-six  years. 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  95 

been  adverted  to  by  Mr.  "Wilkinson,  and  by  other  tra- 
vellers. The  interior  of  this  building  is  on  a  noble 
scale,  and  has  a  most  splendid  appearance,  notwith- 
standing the  remains  of  the  church,  with  which  it  is 
encumbered ;  and  its  walls  contain  representations  of 
processions,  and  other  remarkable  ceremonies,  which  give 
it  in  some  degree  the  appearance  of  a  palace,  although 
its  situation  in  the  midst  of  tombs  seems  to  constitute 
it  a  temple.  It  is  impossible  however  to  distinguish 
with  much  accuracy  the  respective  destinations  of 
Egyptian  buildings ;  as  the  appearance  of  the  several 
ruins  fully  warrants  the  observation  made  on  Petras, 
that  the  early  inhabitants  connected  almost  all  their 
works  of  art  with  the  idea  of  mortality,  and  of  a  state 
after  death. 

Not  far  distant  is  a  small  temple  of  no  great  antiquity, 
but  of  considerable  interest  from  the  sculptures  it  con- 
tains, which  are  said  to  elucidate  the  succession  of  the 
Ptolemies.  It  has  been  surrounded  by  a  peribolus  of 
unburnt  brick,  and  is  remarkable  on  account  of  the 
manner,  in  which  the  stones  have  been  fastened  by  pieces 
of  wood  inserted  between  the  different  courses.  The 
ground  between  these  buildings,  and  the  mountains  has,  as 
I  have  before  mentioned,  been  entirely  occupied  by  sub- 
terraneous tombs  constructed  with  brickwork,  and  the 
whole  range  of  mountains  is  covered  with  the  fragments 
of  embalmed  bodies  and  the  spoils  of  innumerable  sepul- 
chres, which  attest  by  their  numbers  the  immense  popu- 
lation, and  by  the  excellence  of  their  sculptures,  the 
wealth  and  prosperity  of  the  antient  city.  In  one  of 
the  interior  valleys  the  violated  tombs  of  the  queens, 
and  likewise    of  the    Pallades,  probably   the    first   mon- 


06  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

astic  order  of  either  sex,  that  ever  existed,  exhibit  on 
their  painted  walls  several  curious  memorials  of  antient 
worship. 

Still  further  in  the  mountains  are  the  remains  of  a 
large  convent,  built  upon  a  terrace,  in  a  most  romantic 
situation ;  and  behind  it  are  the  portals  of  an  Egyptian 
temple,  excavated  in  the  side  of  a  lofty  cliff,  over  which 
there  is  the  path  to  the  valley  of  Biban  El  Moluc.  In 
these  lonely  recesses  ruined  tombs  abound  in  every 
direction,  together  with  mounds  of  broken  pottery  and 
of  sepulchral  remains.  And  it  is  to  be  observed  with 
regret  that  the  work  of  destruction  is  still  going  on, 
for  in  one  of  the  most  beautifully  excavated  tombs  at 
Assasseuf  I  saw  ox-wains  busily  employed  in  carrying  away 
large  masses  of  stone,  torn  forcibly  from  highly  sculptured 
walls,  for  common  purposes,  and  which  could  have  been 
obtained  with  equal  facility  from  the  natural  rock.  In 
a  very  extensive  tomb  at  the  same  place,  which  had  a 
long  inclined  entrance,  there  were  fluted  pilasters  of 
smaller  proportions,  but  of  the  same  kind  of  architecture 
as  those  at  Medinet  Abou,  and  at  Karnac.  Innumer- 
able objects  of  great  interest  might  be  alluded  to,  but 
I  must  refer  to  Mr.  Wilkinson's  work  for  a  more  de- 
tailed account  of  the  unrivalled  remains  of  antiquity, 
which  yet  distinguish  this  remarkable  scene  of  ruin,  and 
of  desolation. 

In  the  evening  I  returned  to  Luxor,  where  Mr.  Lakin, 
Mr.  Rutherford,  and  Dr.  Wilson  had  arrived.  They  were 
on  their  way  to  Nubia. 

4:th.  —  Thermometer  65°.  I  spent  the  day  at  Karnac, 
and  took  an  opportunity  of  recommending  the  Catchief 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  97 

to  exert  his  authority  in  preventing  the  further  destruc- 
tion of  the  ruins  and  tombs.  He  promised  to  do  so  ;  but 
of  course  I  did  not  much  rely  upon  the  professions  of 
an  Arab.  A  fine  young  crocodile,  about  fourteen  inches 
long,  was  offered  for  sale,  which  had  been  caught  when 
asleep  upon  a  sand-bank ;  but  as  there  was  little  chance 
of  its  living,  I  did  not  buy  it. 

5th.  —  Thermometer  65°.  I  again  went  to  the  tem- 
ples of  Luxor,  and  of  Karnac,  and  returning  to  Gournou 
in  the  afternoon,  I  rode  to  the  Memnonium.  In  the 
evening  I  called  upon  Lord  Lindsay,  and  Mr.  Ramsay, 
who  had  arrived  from  Cairo,  and  we  agreed  to  visit  the 
ruins  on  the  following  day.  A  letter  from  that  place 
informed  me  that  M.  Caviglia  had  at  last  received  a 
firmaun,  but  that  on  account  of  some  informality  it 
had  been  returned,  and  that  another  was  expected. 

Gth.  —  Thermometer  53°.  I  set  out  by  myself  early 
in  the  morning,  and  afterwards  examined  the  sculptures  at 
Medinet-Abou,  Deir  Abou  Negger,  Biban-El-lNIoluc,  and 
various  other  tombs,  &c.  with  Lord  Lindsay  and  Mr.  Ram- 
say. I  sailed  in  the  evening,  with  much  regret  that  I  had 
not  leisure  to  see  more  of  this  wonderful  place. 

The  weather  was  at  times  comparatively  cold,  as  may 
be  seen  by  the  variations  of  the  thermometer. 

Sth.  —  I  did  not  land  at  Cous  (Apolhnopolis  Parva), 
nor  at  Coft  (Coptos),  four  miles  distant  from  the  river 
on  the  eastern  shore,  as  scarcely  any  remains  now  exist 
at  either  of  these  places;  but  proceeded  to  Kenneh,  and 
visited   the  well-known    temples   of  Tentyra  (Dendera). 

VOL.  I.  H 


98  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

I  was  sorry  to  observe  again  at  this  place,  that,  in  pro- 
portion as  what  is  called  the  civilisation  of  the  country 
extends,  these  noble  edifices  become  more  and  more  dila- 
pidated, and  that  neither  perfection  of  art,  nor  antiquity 
are  any  protection,  when  materials  are  wanted  either  for 
public  buildings,  or  for  private  palaces.  In  short,  the 
difficulty  of  removing  the  enormous  masses,  of  which  they 
are  composed,  forms  their  only  defence.  The  Great  Tem- 
ple even  has  been  assailed,  notwithstanding  the  quantity 
of  loose  materials,  with  which  it  is  surrounded.  The  Arab 
village  has  been  removed  towards  the  river. 

9th.  —  I  landed  near  Quasr-e-Syad,  and  the  site  of 
Chenoboscion,  in  search  of  the  tombs  mentioned  by 
Mr.  Wilkinson.  Having  crossed  a  plain  slightly  culti- 
vated to  the  desert  mountains  at  about  two  miles' distance 
from  the  river,  I  found  a  rough  cavern,  containing  a 
Greek  inscription,  but  without  any  vestiges  of  painting, 
or  of  sculpture,  or  of  a  regular  doorway  ;  neither  did 
it  appear  to  have  been  used  as  a  tomb.  The  floor  had 
not  even  been  levelled.  These  mountains  are  composed 
of  white  stone  interspersed  with  small  black  pebbles. 
Beyond  this  grotto  were  two  others  near  a  canal,  in 
which  doorways,  and  a  raised  bench  often  seen  in  se- 
pulchral excavations  had  been  roughly  hewn.  The 
villages  in  this  neighbourhood  were  nearly  deserted,  as 
the  inhabitants  had  fled  to  the  mountains,  and  wan- 
dered from  place  to  place  to  avoid  conscription,  and 
compulsory  labour  in  the  manufactories. 

How  (Diospolis  Parva)  is  a  straggUng  village  built  on 
mounds  of  rubbish,  and  of  broken  pottery.  It  contains 
manufactories  of  sugar,  and  of  indigo,  and  is  situated  in 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  99 

a  rich,  and  fertile  plain  abounding  with  crops  of  every 
description.  The  cotton  appeared  to  be  very  luxuriant, 
as  well  as  the  sugar  canes,  which  were  to  be  cut  in 
March.  There  were  the  remains  of  a  large  reservoir, 
but  the  temple  no  longer  existed.  In  my  way  to  the 
tomb  of  Dionysius  I  passed  two  handsome  mosques, 
that  had  been  built,  by  the  Mamelucs,  opposite  to  each 
other,  and  consequently  the  niche  in  one  of  them,  which 
should  have  indicated  the  position  of  Mecca,  pointed  in 
a  contrary  direction.  The  tomb,  supposed  to  have  been 
built  in  the  time  of  the  Ptolemies,  was  nearly  covered 
with  stones,  and  sand,  so  that  the  lower  apartment  was 
inaccessible.  Amongst  the  sculptures  which  were  visible, 
the  protecting  genius  was  represented  in  the  form  of  a 
female  as  at  Philte.  The  INIahometan  burial-grounds  on 
the  adjacent  plain  were  said  to  have  been  the  scene  of 
a  great  battle ;  and  a  considerable  number  of  mummies 
have  been  from  time  to  time  dug  out  of  the  distant  moun- 
tains —  the  necropolis  of  the  antient  city. 

Farshiout,  about  six  miles  inland  from  Girjeh,  is  the 
modern  capital  of  the  province,  and  Arabet-El-Matfoun 
is  not  very  distant  from  the  latter  place. 

10th.  —  I  set  out  from  Girjeh  with  some  officers, 
who  were  returning  to  England  from  India,  for  Arabet 
(the  antient  Abydos).  We  could  not  at  first  procure 
a  suflScient  number  of  horses,  but,  upon  meeting  the 
Sheik  on  the  outside  of  the  town,  he  readily  sup- 
plied the  whole  party.  Our  road  lay  over  cultivated 
plains,  and  in  about  an  hour  and  a  half  we  arrived  at 
Arabet,  near  a  large  pond,  the  banks  of  which  were 
encrusted  with  natron.     The  village  is  built  (apparently 


100  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

upon  the  mounds  of  the  antient  town),  at  the  verge  of 
the  cultivated  ground,  which  seems  formerly  to  have  ex- 
tended to  the  mountains,  but  the  space  is  now  covered  by 
the  sands,  which  have  overwhelmed  the  ruins  at  this  place, 
and  also  those  further  to  the  southward,  where  the  plain 
is  of  greater  extent.  It  cannot  be  supposed  that  these 
magnificent  structures  were  erected  in  a  desert,  and  as 
the  sands  from  the  neighbouring  mountains  were  pro- 
bably always  encroaching,  industry  must  have  been  as 
necessary  in  this  country,  as  in  others  less  productive, 
not  only  to  increase  fertility,  but  to  arrest  the  progress 
of  the  desert  by  canals,  and  by  other  means  of  irrigation. 
Besides  the  testimony  of  antient  history,  fragments  of 
obelisks,  pieces  of  alabaster,  and  other  costly  materials 
evmce  the  former  splendour  of  the  two  buildings,  which 
alone  are  at  present  visible,  and  even  they  are  so  deeply 
buried,  that  they  scarcely  merit  the  attention  of  a  cur- 
sory traveller.  The  masonry  is  good,  and  the  ceilings 
of  the  chambers  in  the  larger  one  are  composed  of  stones 
cut  into  a  coved  shape,  like  those  in  the  gateway  at 
Thebes.  They  are  adorned  with  the  finest  sculpture, 
and  are  surrounded  with  sepulchral  shafts,  and  the  re- 
mains of  tombs  that  have  been  despoiled  of  their  con- 
tents ;  but  as  the  famous  tablet  was  found  here  by  Mr. 
Bankes,  further  excavations  near  the  buildings  might 
possibly  lead  to  interesting  discoveries.  On  returning 
to  Girjeh  I  again  met  the  Sheik,  with  whom  I  took 
coffee,  and  in  the  evening  sailed  for  Eckmim.  The 
officers  proceeded  to  Cairo. 

El  Birbe,  near  Girjeh,  is  supposed  to  occupy  the  site 
of  the  antient  town  (This). 


'       S-    -  J- 


®     I 
3     I 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.         101 

11th.  —  Eckmim,  the  antient  Chemmis  (Panopolis), 
is  a  considerable  town,  well  situated  on  an  eminence,  in 
a  fertile  plain  bounded  by  desert  mountains,  in  which 
was  the  necropolis.  A  Sheik's  tomb,  held  in  high  vene- 
ration, has  been  built  upon  the  site,  and  partly  with  the 
materials  of  the  antient  Temple  of  Pan,  and  contains  a 
large  stone,  that,  from  a  cavity,  and  groovings  cut  in  it, 
seems  to  have  been  antiently  used  in  sacrificial  cere- 
monies. The  Arab  women,  who  are  childless,  and  de- 
sirous of  having  a  family,  are  in  the  habit  of  sitting  upon 
this  stone,  and  of  performing  ablutions  with  water  drawn 
from  an  adjacent  well,  over  which,  to  make  the  charm 
efficacious,  they  must  have  previously  stepped.  It  seems, 
therefore,  that  in  former  times  the  Mahometans  allowed 
their  converts  to  retain  local  superstitions,  provided  the 
name  of  the  tutelary  influence  was  changed,  under  which 
the  practices  were  observed  ;  as  the  Catholics  have 
done  in  Italy,  where  most  of  the  local  traditions,  that 
now  prevail,  may  be  traced  to  a  Pagan  origin.  Many 
squared  stones,  inscribed  with  hieroglyphics,  are  scattered 
about,  and  in  a  hollow  at  a  little  distance  is  an  architrave 
with  a  Greek  inscription,  which  has  been  copied  by  Dr. 
Pococke,  Mr.  Hamilton,  and  other  travellers.  Several 
remains,  such  as  fragments  of  columns,  &c.  may  likewise 
be  seen  in  the  town. 

On  the  opposite  bank  is  Souhaaj,  where  the  Mameluc 
chief — Morad  Bey  was  buried;  it  is  built  on  the  mounds 
of  an  antient  town,  by  some  considered  to  have  been 
Crocodilopolis.  I  then  passed  Sheik  Hereedee,  and  the 
supposed  site  of  Passalon,  and  proceeded  to  Shendowee. 
on  the  western  shore.  The  surrounding  plain  extends 
about  four  miles  to  the  desert  mountains,  and  is  irrigated 


102  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

by  a  canal,  that  probably  joins  the  Bahr  Yousef  near 
Benisouef.9  Having  applied  to  the  Nazir  of  Shendowee 
for  horses,  and  guides  to  the  Red,  and  White  Convents, 
(the  latter  of  which  is  also  called  Amba  Shnoodeh),  he 
sent  his  nephew,  some  armed  attendants,  and  a  Coptic 
secretary,  with  whom  I  immediately  proceeded.  Such 
was  the  fertility  of  the  plain  over  which  we  passed,  that 
the  crops  were  reaped  in  four  months  after  sowing.  They 
were  extremely  luxuriant,  and  quantities  of  cattle,  camels, 
sheep,  and  goats  tethered  in  rows  to  long  ropes,  were 
depastured  on  all  sides.  The  sheep,  as  in  other  parts  of 
the  country,  were  badly  shaped,  and  marked  with  brown, 
and  white  ;  but  the  cattle,  and  particularly  the  oxen,  were 
very  handsome,  and  fine  in  the  horn.  The  best  were  of 
a  dark  brown,  or  of  a  cream  colour. 

We  crossed  the  canal  at  a  ford,  and  arrived  in  about 
two  hours  at  the  Wliite  Convent,  which  is  a  lofty  quad- 
rangular building  situated  in  the  sands,  at  the  termi- 
nation of  the  cultivated  ground,  and  not  far  from  the 
mountains,  where  sevei-al  antient  tombs  have  been  found. 
The  walls  are  of  stone,  and  have  a  projecting  cornice. 
The  door  is  very  strong,  and  opens  into  a  square, 
cloistered  court.  The  church  is  in  the  form  of  a  Greek 
cross,  and  contains  four  arched  recesses,  surmounted  in 
the  middle  by  a  cupola.  The  arches  are  rounded.  The 
altar  is  of  common  stone,  but  appears  to  have  been  plated. 
The  coved  roof  above  it  had  been  originally  adorned 
with  mosaics,  and  a  wooden  screen  before  it  had  been 
painted  with  figures  of  the  Holy  Virgin,  of  St.  George 
and  the  Dragon,  and  of  other  saints.     The  whole  is  in 

9  An  oasis  is  distant  four  days' journey  from  this  place. 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.         103 

a  most  dilapidated,  and  dirty  state,  as  sheep  and  cattle 
are  brought  into  the  cloister  every  night  for  security.  It 
did  not  appear  that  much  service  was  performed,  although 
three  Coptic  priests  constantly  resided  there.  They  in- 
vited me  to  take  coffee,  and  complained  that  the  grounds 
belonging  to  the  convent  had  been  seized  upon  by  the 
government,  and  that  they  were  much  impoverished ;  but, 
as  they  had  sheep,  and  cattle,  they  must  have  had  land 
for  their  support.  They  are  however  in  a  great  measure 
maintained  by  the  Copts,  who  live  in  considerable  numbers 
together  with  the  Arabs  in  the  neighbouring  villages,  and 
who  visit  the  convents  on  holydays.  This  building,  as 
well  as  that,  which  I  afterwards  visited,  was  well  adapted 
for  defence,  and  also  protected  by  an  Arab  guard,  said 
to  be  necessary  on  account  of  the  bad  disposition  of  the 
population,  the  Coptic  part  of  which,  it  is  to  be  observed, 
was  exempted  from  conscription.  Several  large  mounds, 
broken  pottery,  and  a  few  squared  stones  indicate  the  site 
of  antient  buildings.  On  some  of  the  blocks  I  observed 
hieroglyphics,  and  on  one  the  remains  of  a  tryglyph. 

The  Red  Convent  was  similarly  situated,  and  built 
on  the  same  plan,  but  had  been  constructed  with  burnt 
bricks,  and  appeared  of  a  more  recent  date.  The  columns 
in  the  church  were  rather  larger,  and  had  something  like 
Corinthian  capitals,  and  in  several  of  the  architectural 
ornaments,  particularly  under  the  cupola,  shells  were 
introduced.  The  communion-table  was  composed  of 
granite.  The  church  was  locked  up  and  neglected,  and 
the  whole  building  in  a  worse  condition  than  the  other, 
and  merely  inhabited  by  a  few  Coptic  peasants,  with 
their  cattle.  Some  mounds  in  the  cultivated  ground  at 
a   short    distance   from   these    convents,  and    at   present 


104  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

occupied  by  an  Arab  village  are  the  only  remains  of  Itfou 
(Aphroditopolis.)  The  ruins  of  Athribis  are  said  to  be 
at  some  little  distance  to  the  southward,  but  I  did  not 
visit  them.  I  came  back  to  Shendowee  by  a  circuitous 
road,  in  order  to  pass  the  canal  at  an  easier  ford,  so  that 
it  was  night  before  I  arrived  at  the  Nazir's  house ;  whence 
I  returned  to  the  boat,  and  immediately  sailed.  During 
this  excursion,  I  witnessed  a  ceremony  which  was  new  to 
me  ;  one  of  the  attendants  happening  to  meet  an  acquaint- 
ance knelt  down  on  the  ground,  and  made  several  prostra- 
tions, as  if  at  prayer.  His  friend  did  the  same  ;  after  which 
they  got  up,  and  embraced  with  the  usual  salutations. 

12th.  —  The  temple  at  Gow-El-Kebeer  (Antaeopolis) 
has  been  entirely  removed,  for  the  sake  of  the  materials. 
It  was  situated  in  a  fertile  plain,  at  present  interspersed 
with  a  few  scattered  hamlets,  and  supposed  to  have  been 
the  scene  of  the  fabled  contest  of  Isis  with  Typhon, 
after  the  death  of  Osiris.  The  connexion  of  this  story 
with  the  name  of  Antaeus  is  remarkable.  The  desert 
mountains  which  encircle  the  place  to  the  eastward,  ap- 
proach the  river  at  the  southern  extremity,  and  also 
at  the  northern,  where  several  grottoes  and  antient  tombs 
have  been  excavated,  which,  having  procured  guides,  I 
proceeded  to  examine.  The  fastenings  of  stone  doors, 
and  the  remains  of  painted  stucco  were  in  many  places 
visible ;  and  also  a  brick  wall,  which  had  the  appear- 
ance of  great  antiquity.  There  was  likewise  an  inclined 
passage,  which  was  said  to  lead  to  other  apartments ;  and 
further  on  an  Egyptian  figure  in  a  sitting  position  had 
been  sculptured  near  a  grotto,  which  seemed  to  have 
been  a  temple,  as  it  contained  a  stone  altar.     At  some 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.         105 

little  distance,  in  front  of  a  large  excavation,  a  consider- 
able space  had  been  levelled,  whence  a  staircase  ascended 
to  a  chamber  at  right  angles  to  the  excavation,  which 
had  a  window  opening  into  the  court :  grapes,  and  other 
devices,  apparently  Roman,  had  been  painted  on  the 
walls  of  these  apartments.  The  inhabitants  of  the  place, 
with  what  justice  I  cannot  say,  had  a  bad  character,  and, 
indeed,  during  the  time  I  was  examining  these  grottoes, 
a  number  of  people,  many  of  them  armed  with  guns, 
assembled,  and  seemed  inclined  to  be  troublesome ;  and 
I  have  no  doubt  that  a  Frank,  unacquainted  with  their 
language,  and  unattended  by  a  janissary,  would  have 
met  with  inconvenience.  There  were  extensive  quarries 
higher  up  the  mountains  to  the  eastward,  which  con- 
tained Egyptian  figures,  hieroglyphics,  and  also  inscrip- 
tions of  a  later  period,  and  small  pieces  of  alabaster 
were  scattered  about.  It  was  difficult  to  imagine  how 
the  large  blocks  could  be  safely  conveyed  from  these 
lofty  situations,  as  the  mountains  were  precipitous,  and 
full  of  ravines.  I  saw  in  the  plain  below,  the  ruins  of 
a  church  built  with  arches,  and  likewise  those  of  another 
building  upon  an  adjoining  eminence. 

I  did  not  again  disembark  till  I  arrived  at  E-Siout. 

On  the  eastern  bank,  a  little  above  that  town,  a  Sheik's 
tomb  had  been  built  upon  a  mound  close  to  the  river, 
under  which  a  great  treasure  was  said  to  be  concealed. 
The  mound  seemed  to  have  been  a  tumulus,  and,  by 
excavation,  some  antient  memorial  might  possibly  be  dis- 
covered. 

13th. — E-Siout  is  a  place  of  importance,  and  is  situated 
on  the  site  of  Lycopolis,  but  does  not  present  any  object 
of  antiquity,  excepting  some  excavations  in  a  high  range 


106  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

of  hills  near  it.  One  of  them,  called  Stahl-Antar,  is 
very  extensive,  and  contains  many  apartments,  which 
seem  to  have  been  chiselled  out  of  natural  caverns,  and 
to  have  been  decorated  with  painted  hieroglyphics,  the 
figures  of  divinities,  processions,  &c.  The  ceiling  of  the 
principal  chamber  has  been  coved ;  a  descending  passage, 
which  probably  conducts  to  other  apartments,  was  closed 
up  with  rubbish,  and  fragments  of  human,  and  of  other 
mummies  were  scattered  about  in  considerable  quanti- 
ties. I  did  not  visit  the  alabaster  quarries,  nor  the 
convent  at  Dronka,  where  a  good  many  Copts  are  said 
to  reside. 

The  gardens,  with  which  the  town  is  surrounded, 
and  the  principal  roads,  are  upon  raised  banks,  as  the 
adjacent  plain  is  annually  inundated ;  and  in  conse- 
quence extremely  productive.  Indeed,  the  whole  place 
was  better  built,  and  more  flourishing  than  the  gene- 
rality of  Arab  towns,  and  contained  several  hareems, 
and  whitewashed  houses.  A  battalion  of  infantry  was 
encamped  near  it,  and  appeared  to  be  in  good  order; 
the  arms  were  remarkably  clean.  In  my  way  to  Stahl- 
Antar,  I  met  a  concourse  of  people  bringing  from 
a  neighbouring  village,  for  the  governor's  inspection, 
the  body  of  a  man  who  had  been  murdered.  The 
delinquent  had  fled,  but,  from  the  nature  of  the 
country,  escape  is  very  difficult.  Before  I  returned  to 
the  boat  I  called  upon  the  Governor,  Mohat  Bey,  to 
express  my  thanks  for  his  civility ;  he  had  been  in 
command  in  Nubia,  and  was  a  very  agreeable  person. 
In  going  thither  a  circumstance  occurred,  which  shews 
the  foolish  mistakes  that  may  arise  in  this  country 
between  persons,  who  cannot  understand  each  other. 
As    I    passed    through    the    bazar    with    the    governor's 


RETURN  PROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  307 

janissary,  and  attendants,  I  met  near  a  gateway  an 
Arab  officer,  who  called  out  with  much  earnestness,  and 
made  violent  gestures  for  me  to  stop,  and  to  get  out  of 
the  way.  His  horse  was  rather  troublesome,  and,  as  the 
one  I  rode  was  the  same,  I  concluded  that  he  was  afraid 
of  their  coming  into  collision,  I  knew  perfectly  well, 
however,  that  I  could  easily  prevent  any  accident,  and 
accordingly  passed  through  the  gate,  keeping  on  the  left 
hand,  and  making  signs  to  him  to  keep  on  the  other 
side,  at  the  same  time  giving  him  the  usual  salutation ; 
when,  to  my  surprise,  he  became  more  excited,  and  talked 
louder  than  ever.  I  was  afterwards  informed  that  what  I 
intended  as  a  civility  he  took  as  an  affront,  and  that  he 
had  been  insisting  that  I  should  wait,  in  order  that  he, 
being  a  Mahometan,  might  go  first  through  the  gate. 
My  attendants  appeared  much  offended,  and  wished  me 
to  represent  his  conduct  to  the  governor,  which  of  course 
I  would  not  do. 

I  wrote  to  Colonel  Campbell  from  this  town,  desiring 
to  hear,  by  a  letter  directed  to  Benisouef,  whether  any 
discovery  of  importance  had  taken  place  at  Gizeh,  as, 
in  that  case,  I  intended  to  return  immediately  to  Cairo, 
instead  of  visiting  the  Faioum. 

In  proceeding  down  the  stream  I  was  informed  that 
a  boat,  Avhich  was  moored  to  the  eastern  shore,  belonged 
to  an  Arab,  and  had  no  European  aboard,  although  it 
carried  an  English  flag.  I  therefore  went  over  with  the 
intention  of  taking  it  away,  when  a  Maltese  appeared, 
and  claimed  it.  Of  course  I  declined  any  further  in- 
terference, but  noted  down  the  particulars,  and  trans- 
mitted them  to  Colonel  Campbell,  who  took  measures 
to  prevent  the  repetition  of  a  similar  abuse.  European 
flags  are  often  obtained  in  this  manner  for  trading  specu- 


108 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 


lations  in  native  boats,  that  could  not  otherwise  be  carried 
on.  A  practice,  which,  besides  giving  just  cause  of  com- 
plaint to  the  government,  exposes  the  flag  to  disgrace, 
from  the  misconduct  of  the  Arabs  who  sail  under  it. 


14^th.  —  Thermometer  early  in  the  morning  49°, 
afterwards  56°.  I  arrived  at  Manfaloot,  situated  on  a 
high  bank  on  the  western  shore,  which  is  gradually 
undermined,  and  carried  away  by  the  stream.  The 
changes  that  take  place  in  the  channel  of  the  river, 
together  with  the  progress  of  the  desert  sands,  increase 
greatly  the  difficulties,  that  on  other  accounts  exist  in 
ascertaining  the  position  of  antient  cities.  As  I  could  not 
obtain  horses  to  examine  the  bank  opposite  to  the  town, 
I  proceeded  to  El  Karib,  the  supposed  site  of  Hieracon, 
situated  at  the  back  of  the  cliffs  of  Djebel  Abou  Faydee. 
The  ruins,  consisting  of  walls  and  of  foundations  built 
of  small  unburnt  bricks,  are  on  one  side  of  a  valley ; 
and  on  the  other  several  caverns  have  been  exca- 
vated, in  which  mummies  of  dogs,  and  cats  are  said 
to  have  been  found.      They  were,  however,  completely 

closed  up  with 
sand.  I  found 
in  the  adjoining 
quarries  a  tablet 
ofhieroglyphics, 
some  Egyptian 
sculpture,  and  a 
Greek  inscrip- 
tion, but  they 
were  much  effaced  ;  and  also  some  curious  diagrams  drawn 
in  red  lines,  and  apparently  intended  as  marks  for  hewing 
the  stone.     I  observed  likewise  some  antient  remains  near 


A 

/ 

// 

/ 

RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT. 


109 


a  small  Arab  village  at  some  little 
at  Deir-El-Cosseir  (on  nT- 
the  site  of  Pesla)  had 
been  destroyed,  and 
no  signs  of  sculpture 
remained  in  the  grot- 
toes. I  did  not  visit 
Djebel  Toona  on  the 
western  bank,  as  it 
was  at  a  considerable 
distance  from  the 
river,  and  as  the  only 
remains  consisted  of 
tombs  similar  to  those 
atTel-El-Amarna,  and 
accordingly  arrived  in 
the  evening  at  Hadji 
KandeishnearCoseah, 
the  antient  Cus^. 


distance.     The  convent 


15t/i.  —  The  ruins  at  Tel-El-Amarna  (formerly  Ala- 
bastron)  are  situated  in  a  plain  of  considerable  extent, 
and  surrounded  by  a  semicircular  chain  of  desert  hills, 
that  come  down  to  the  river  at  its  northern  and  southern 
extremities.  The  promontory  to  the  northward  is  called 
Sheik-Said.  A  large  island  is  opposite  to  the  plain,  and 
a  strip  of  cultivated  ground  in  an  open  grove  of  palm- 
trees  extends  along  the  bank  of  the  river,  near  which  the 
villages  are  situated.  The  rest  of  the  plain  is  neglected 
and  covered  with  sand;  but  the  ground  under  tillage 
is  very  productive,  and  sugar-canes,  cotton,  and  other 
crops,  are  raised  in  great  abundance.     The  remains  of  the 


110 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 


antient  town  consist  of  mounds  of  rubbish,  of  the  found- 
ations of  small  buildings,  and  of  two  large  masses  of 
brickwork  ;  there  are  also  vestiges  of  walls  under 
Sheik-Said.  In  several  parts  of  these  mountains  the 
surface  has  been  roughly  chiselled,  and  grottoes  formed, 
but,  as  far  as  I  observed,  without  sculpture,  or  re- 
gular portals ;  in  one,  however,  there  was  an  altar, 
and  some  remarkable  channels  had  been  cut  before 
it.  No  doubt  a  considerable  necropolis  exists,  as  the 
hills  abound  with  natural  caverns.  Most  of  the  tombs 
opened  by  Mr.  Hay  had  been  closed  up  with  sand, 
but  some  were  accessible,  and  were  interesting  from 
the  representations  on  their  walls;  and  near  one  of 
them  a  winding  staircase  of  some  length  descended 
to  an  excavation,  which  had  been  lined  with  painted 
stucco. 

Over  the  door  of  this  tomb,  a  solar  disc  was  inscribed, 
from  which  rays  with  hands  at 
their  extremities  extended  as  from 
a  common  centre ;  two  figures, 
one  of  them  apparently  that  of  a 
king,  were  represented  as  wor- 
shippers in  a  kneeling  position ; 
and  on  each  side  hieroglyphics, 
and  circles,  or  discs  were  intro- 
duced. The  interior  consisted  of 
three  small  apartments,  and  ap- 
peared to  have  been  covered  with 
paintings,  which  were  almost  entirely  defaced.  Proces- 
sions of  prisoners  of  a  red  complexion,  but  with  the 
features  of  Negroes,  were  amongst  the  figures,  that  could 
be  made  out ;    also   a   solar    disc   with   rays,   like    that 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT. 


Ill 


over  the  entrance, 
and  beneath  it  the 
figures  of  a  king,  and 
of  a  queen  dressed  in 
high  caps ;  the  whole 
being  surrounded  with 
various  hieroglyphic- 
al  inscriptions.  The 
principal  cartouches 
had  been  entirely  de- 
stroyed in  every  part 
of  the  tomb,  and,  as 
the  form  of  the  caps 
appeared  to  be  Per- 
sian, they  might  have  belonged  to  the  era  when  that 
people  possessed  the  country.     The  following  cartouches 


were  inscribed  on  the  walls,  and  the  same  are  also  said  to 
exist  at  Djebel  Toona.^ 

1  The  hieroglypliical  cartouches  at  Tel-El-Amarna  contain  the  ho- 
norific titles  of  the  sun,  in  reference  to  the  solar  disc,  whose  rays  of 
light  terminate  in  human  hands:  the  Deities,  on  account  of  their  mythic 
reign  over  Egypt,  had  all  cartouches  in  which  their  names  were  in- 
scribed.    The  cartouche  A,  which  maj'  be  considered  as  the  prenomen, 


112  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

In  another  excavation  sacrifices,  and  chariot  races 
had  been  described,  but  the  principal  cartouches  were 
in  that  also  obliterated.  There  had  been  two  rows  of 
columns,  the  outer  had  disappeared ;  but  of  the  inner, 
six,  and  two  pilasters  connected  by  a  low  wall,  yet 
remained.^  On  each  side  of  the  portico,  or  entrance, 
were  recesses,  with  the  remains  of  figures  seated  in 
the  usual,  formal  position.  Many  smaller  apartments 
branched  off  in  different  directions ;  and,  opposite  the 
doorway,  a  narrow  chamber  of  some  depth  contained  at 
the  furthest  end  a  mutilated  image,  to  which  the  floor 
ascended  by  steps  to  within  four  feet  and  a  half  of  the 
ceiling.  The  paintings  in  these  excavations  had  been 
well  executed,  but  were  much  effaced.  I  did  not  visit 
the  quarry  of  alabaster.  I  was  informed  that  the  ruins 
of  Sbayda  were  six  miles  above  Hadj  Kand. 

15tk.  —  The  French  superintendent  conducted  me 
with  much  civility  over  the  works  at  Reramoun,  where 
a  considerable  quantity  of  fine  sugar  is  produced,  chiefly 
for  the  use  of  the  Pacha's  hareem.  He  complained  of 
the  great  difficulties  he  met  with  in  obtaining  the  neces- 
sary supplies,  and  likewise  in  effecting  the  improvements 
which,  at  his  suggestion,  had  been  sanctioned  by  the 
Pacha,  in  consequence  of  the  idleness  of  the  Arabs,  and 
of  the  jealousy  of  those  under  him,  who  thwarted  him 
in  every  possible  way.  This  is  universally  the  case 
when  Franks  are  employed  as  overseers,  and  the  Pacha, 

reads :    "  The  living  Har  (Horus),  rejoicing  in  his  solar  abode."     The 
cartouche  B,  reads :    "  Who  superintends    the  splendour  of  his  disc." 
Similar  cartouches  appear  in  M.  Rosellini,  torn.  i. — Mr.  Birch. 
^  For  the  capitals  of  three  columns,  see  preceding  page. 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT. 


113 


naturally  becomes  dissatisfied,  and  is  easily  induced,  by 
the  artful  representations  of  those  about  him,  to  direct 
that  instead  of  Europeans,  natives  should  be  employed, 
who  are  incapable  of  conducting  a  large  establishment 
even  in  the  customary  manner,  much  less  of  adopting 
such  improvements  as  from  time  to  time  might  be  made 
in  the  different  operations. 

The  ruins  at  Medinet  Antholee  are  on  an  elevated 
plain,  and  are  separated  by  the  Wady  Garoos  from  Sheik 
Abadeh  (the  site  of  Antinoopohs).'  The  latter  town 
must  have  been  also  finely  situated,  and  very  extensive, 
but  most  of  the  materials  have  been  taken  away  by  the 
Defterdar  Bey  ;  and  a  few  columns,  a  mass  of  brick 
building,  which  seemed  to  have  been  a  bath,  and  some 
broken  materials,  and  mounds  of  rubbish  are  all  that 
remain  of  this  celebrated  place.  The  streets  appear  to 
have  been  spacious,  and  adorned  with  rows  of  columns 
in  the  same  manner  as  those  at  Djerash,  the  foundations 
of  which  in  many  places  remain.  I  did  not  visit  the 
catacombs  at  Sheik  Timay,  where  the  lofty  chfTs  come 
down  to  the  brink  of  the  river,  which  soon  afterwards 
expands  into  a  noble  sheet  of  water,  and  appeared,  when 
I  saw  it,  to  great  advantage  — glowing  with  the  peculiar 
beauty  imparted  by  a  setting  sun  in  this  fine  climate. 
[Thermometer  75°.] 

IGth.  —  The  tombs  at  Beni  Hassan  are  on  the  eastern 

3  The  Arab,  whom  we  procured  as  a  guide  at  this  place,  was  accom- 
panied by  his  son,  about  seven  or  eight  years  old.  I  happened  to  take 
notice  of  the  child,  and  to  give  him  a  piastre,  when  his  father  imme- 
diately took  him  away,  exclaiming  that  I  wanted  to  murder  him,  in 
order  to  find  hidden  treasures  by  means  of  his  blood. 
VOL.  I.  ^ 


1  14  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

shore,  and  at  a  considerable  height  above  the  level  of 
the  river ;  they  are  excavated  in  a  range  of  low  cliffs 
on  the  side  of  a  sloping  bank,  and  are  connected  by  a 
kind  of  terrace  or  path.  The  most  northern  has  been 
either  entirely  ruined,  or  never  finished.  Before  the 
portal  of  the  next  are  handsome  columns  of  the  same 
kind  as  those  already  described  at  Karnac,  and  which  are 
perfectly  Doric,  excepting  that,  as  in  other  instances,  the 
echinus,  annuli,  and  hypotrachelion  are  wanting.  The 
interior  of  this  excavation  is  singularly  beautiful ;  it  is 
divided  into  three  compartments  by  two  rows  of  columns, 
painted  of  the  colour  of  porphyry;*  and,  according  to 
Mr.  Wilkinson,  of  the  following  dimensions :  Sixteen  feet 
eight  inches  and  a  half  in  height,  of  five  diameters, 
slightly  diminishing  towards  the  top,  and  of  sixteen 
flutings  of  eight  inches  in  breadth,  and  of  half  an  inch 
in  depth.  The  inner  face  of  each  column  has  been  left 
flat  for  the  inscription  of  hieroglyphics.  The  whole  of 
the  interior  of  the  chamber  is  painted  upon  stucco. 
The  ceilings  of  the  three  divisions  are  coved,  and  are 
separated  by  bands,  or  flat  spaces  of  the  same  width  as 
the  abaci,  and  painted  in  alternate  squares  of  gold,  with 
red ;  and  of  white,  with  light  blue  ornaments ;  a  broad 
band  also  runs  down  the  middle  of  each  ceiling.  The 
whole  is  remarkably  elegant,  both  in  proportions  and 
also  in  decorations,  excepting  a  painted  cornice,  which 
has  not  a  pleasing  effect.  The  walls  are  covered 
with  various  figures  employed  in  leaping,  wrestling,  &c., 
many  of  which  are  in  excellent  drawing.  Gymnastic 
exercises,  the  breeding,  and  rearing  of  cattle,  and  different 

*  The  same  colour  is  to  be  seen  on  several  blocks  of  the  Temple  at 
^gina. 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.         115 

rural  occupations,  are  also  described,  and  explained  by 
appropriate  hieroglyphics.  The  third  tomb  from  the 
north  has  similar  columns  and  decorations;  and  in  one 
of  them  a  group  of  strangers  is  portrayed,  amongst  whom 
are  women,  and  children  carried  in  panniers  on  asses,  and 
an  ibis,  and  ostriches  are  presented  to  a  king.*  This 
drawing  has  been  supposed,  (but  it  appears 
without  much  probability,)  to  represent  the 
arrival  of  the  Israelites  in  the  time  of  Osir- 
tesen  I.;  whose  cartouche  is  inscribed  in 
various  parts  of  the  hieroglyphics,  together, 
however,  with  several  others,  which  belonged  '^^'^T'^^J 
to  later  monarchs.     The   same  columns  ap-  i  |\_       {( 

pear  in  the  two  adjoining  excavations,  which ^ 

have  not  been  finished  ;  and  it  is  remarkable,  that  although 
they  are  also  to  be  seen  in  the  most  southern,  that, 
in  the  intermediate  tombs,  the  pillars  peculiarly  called 
Egyptian,  with  capitals  composed  of  the  flowers  of  the 
lotus,  (and  in  this  instance  of  extremely  bad  proportions,) 
have  been  introduced.  Many  of  the  excavations  com- 
municate with  each  other,  and  in  most  of  them  are  shafts, 
and  niches  for  the  reception  of  mummies,  but,  in  general, 
they  do  not  appear  to  have  been  completed :  some  of 
them  have  been  furnished  with  stone  doors.  The  view 
from  the  terrace  in  front  of  these  sepulchres  is  very  ex- 
tensive, and  comprehends  the  river  studded  with  fertile 
islands,  a  plain  to  the  southward  interspersed  with  the 
ruins  of  several  Arab  villages,^  and  also  a  chain  of  hills, 

5  Some  of  the  strangers  are  clothed   in   party-coloured  garments, 
that  bring  to  recollection  Joseph's  coat  of  many  colours. 

6  These  villages  had  been  plundered  by  the  Mamelucs,  and  also  by 
the  French,  &c.,  in  1800;  and  several  had  been  abandoned  on  account 


116 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 


intersected   by  deep    gullies,    and    ravines,  —  the   effects, 
apparently,  of  torrents. 

In  exploring  the  valleys  in  search  of  the  Sj^eos  Arte- 
m'lclos,  several  portals,  and  sepulchral  excavations  were 
discovered ;  but  I  was  obliged  to  get  a  guide  from  the 
villages  to  find  out  the  place  in  question,  which  was  called 
Stahl-Antar,  and  proved  to  be  on  the  southern  side  of 
a  valley,  or  glen,  that  extended  eastwards  for  a  con- 
siderable distance.  The  entrance  was  by  a  portico,  com- 
posed of  a  double  row,  each  of  four  columns,  which 
may  possibly  have  been  hewn  into  the  shape  of  colossal 
figures :  the  inner  row  was  destroyed,  and  of  the  outer 
only  three  remained,  and  they  were  entirely  defaced. 
In  the  centre  of  this  portico,  or  colonnade,  a  square 
chamber  of  no  great  size  had  been  excavated,  which 
opposite  to  the  doorway  contained  a  niche  about  seven 
feet  from  the  floor.  The  remains  of  an  image  might 
be  distinguished ;  and  hieroglyphics  had  been  inscribed 
on  the  columns,  and  also  upon  the  walls  near  the  door- 

way,    and    near    the    niche, 

X    /^  X       f      ^^    \       where      the     cartouches     of 

Thothmes  III.  and  of  Osiri- 
Menephthah  I.  had  been  in- 
scribed ;  but  the  whole  was 
exceedingly  rough,  and  the 
marks  of  a  chisel  were  every 
where    visible.''      The    rocks 


of  the  plague,  wliich  was  very  destructive  in  1836 :  the  inhabitants  are 
at  present  few  in  number,  and  in  bad  repute. 

7  These  cartouches  are  the  prenomens  of  Thothmes  the  Third  (or 
Moeris),  and  of  Menephthah  the  First,  both  monarchs  of  the  18th 
dynasty. — Mr.  Birch. 


A.^ 


L 


^ 

2 

•=^ 

S 

^ 

> 

RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT. 


117 


I^aQDOnrOOOQ  Q/^ 


over  the  entrance  had  been  faced  down,  and  towards  the 
right,  or  western  side,  rows  of  hieroglyphics  had  been 
cut,  but  seemed  to  be  illegible.  One  or  two  small 
chambers,  and  the  remains  of  steps  leading  to  them,  had 
been  also  hewn  out  ;— — 
on  the  sides  of  the  ^ 
colonnade. 

There  did  not 
appear  to  be  any 
excavations  in  the 
higher  part  of  the 
valley,  but  there 
were  several,  on 
both  sides,  which 
contained  deep 
shafts,**  between 
the  Speos,  and  the 
plain.  One  of  them 
was  of  a  consider- 


8  The  cartouches  at  this  place,  which  are  numbered  from  the  left, 
are  apparently  the  prenomen,  and  name  of  Alexander,  the  son  of 
Alexander  the  Great.  The  prenomen  repeated  in  B,  2,  4,  7,  9,  reads 
Pe  2;i.i.  ijHT,  COJTn  ttiJUHt  "  The  sun  rejoicing  the  heart 
approved  of  Amon."  The  name  occurring  alternately  in  A,  1,  3,  5,  G, 
8,  10,  II^XKC^.n"TpC,  Alexander.  The  first  symbol,  a  bird  or 
eagle,  is  a  phonetic  variety  of  the  common  form.  See  Rosellini,  tom.  ii. 
tav.  xvii.  b.  1,  b.  2.  The  reason  given  by  M.  Rosellini  for  this  name 
not  appertaining  to  Alexander  the  Great  is,  that  Alexander  particularly 
assumed  the  title  of  the  "  son  of  Amon,"  which  would  have  appeared 
in  the  composition  of  his  name, — a  reason  hardly  adequate,  as  the  title 
of  the  "son  of  Amon,"  similar  to  the  "  Epiphanes  and  Theos  Philadel- 
phos,"  &c.,  in  the  Ptolemies,  woidd  probably  have  been  added  to  the 
name  out  of  the  cartouche,  and  consequently,  the  name  may  as  well  be 


118  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

able  size,  and  consisted  of  several  chambers  roughly 
chiselled;'  and  over  the  entrance  a  figure  was  inscribed 
in  the  act  of  worshipping,  and  five  cartouches  on  either 
side  facing  inwards,  of  which  1,  3,  5,  6,  8,  10,  were  like 
A,  and  2,  4,  7,  9,  like  B/  The  interior  of  another  tomb 
had  been  painted  with  the  white  flowers  and  stalks  of 
the  lotus,  in  compartments  upon  a  dark  blue  ground ; 
and  in  another  place  a  design  had  been  sketched  out, 
but  not  executed.  INIummies  of  cats  are  said  to  have 
been  found  near  the  Speos.  The  channel  between  the 
islands  and  the  plain  near  the  Speos  is  only  navigable 
during  the  inundation. 

There  are  large  mounds  and  a  quantity  of  broken 
pottery  at  Kom  Achmar,"  and  a  quarry  in  an  adjoining 
valley,  also  several  tombs  excavated  on  the  side  of  the 
mountain,  and  decorated  with  painted  figures,  proces- 
sions, &c.,  in  which  the  drapery  is  remarkably  well  re- 
presented. The  river  takes  a  fine  bend  under  these 
rocky  mountains,  and  afterwards  stretches  away  with 
great  effect  towards  Minyeh.     The   village   of  Souadee, 

that  of  Alexander  the  Great.  The  pienomen  is  assumed  from  the 
name  of  the  monarch  Hophra,  or  Apries,  of  the  26th  Saite  dynasty, 
with  the  addition  of  "The  approved  of  Amon." — Mr.  Birch. 

9  Notwithstanding  the  great  care  with  which  the  interiors  of  some 
of  the  tombs  have  been  finished,  in  many  others  no  attempt  at  decora- 
tion is  visible,  either  from  the  premature  death  of  the  persons  for  whom 
they  were  intended,  or  from  other  causes  at  present  inexplicable.  In 
Campbell's  tomb  at  Gizeh,  for  instance,  sarcophagi  of  the  most  ex- 
quisite workmanship  have  been  placed  in  rough  grottoes  cut  in  the  rock, 
without  the  least  attention  to  symmetry,  or  to  any  regular  shape. 

^  See  preceding  page. 

"  Several  places  arc  called  by  this  name,  which  signifies  a  red 
mound. 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  119 

where  a  number  of  boats  were  being  built,  amongst  open 
groves  of  beautiful  palm-trees,  luxuriant  plantations  of 
sugar-cane,  and  abundant  crops  watered  by  a  succession 
of  sakias,  was  highly  picturesque.  Some  antient  tombs, 
built  of  calcareous  stone,  have  here  been  destroyed,  in 
order  to  make  lime  for  the  Pacha's  service.  It  is  much 
to  be  regretted  that  they  were  not  composed  of  the  sand- 
stone from  the  neighbouring  mountains. 

Minyeh  appears  at  a  distance  to  be  a  considerable 
place,  as  many  of  the  houses  are  whitewashed.  I  arrived 
there  about  four  o'clock,  when  a  number  of  Bedouins 
were  crossing  the  stream  in  small  boats ;  the  women 
wore  the  usual  blue  dress,  but  the  coverings  of  their 
faces  were  red.  I  went  on  shore  to  see  a  cotton  manufac- 
tory, and  was  invited  by  the  commandant,  Hassan  Bey,  to 
his  barge,  which  was  moored  beneath  the  bank.  I  found 
him  surrounded  by  his  attendants,  and  received  great 
civility  from  him,  and  also  from  the  governor,  Churcliid 
Effendi,  who  soon  afterwards  arrived.  I  understood  that 
these  dignitaries  usually  spent  the  mornings  in  their  barge, 
on  account  of  the  heat.  The  cabin  was  very  narrow, 
extremely  low,  and  so  much  encumbered  with  cushions, 
that,  when  I  took  my  leave,  I  thought  that  I  should  have 
been  obliged  to  request  both  their  excellencies  to  move 
before  I  could  extricate  myself  from  my  embarrassment, 
which  was  not  a  little  increased  by  a  low  awning  before 
the  cabin,  under  which  a  secretary  was  seated,  surrounded 
witli  a  quantity  of  papers.  During  the  course  of  this  visit, 
I  expressed  strongly  my  regret  at  the  devastations,  to 
which  the  antient  monuments  were  constantly  subject, 
and  explained  how  much  it  was  the  Pacha's  interest  to 
prevent  future  spoliation,  particularly  where  sculpture  and 


120  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

hieroglyphics  were  in  question.  They  both  promised 
to  give  orders  accordingly,  but  most  probably  with  as 
little  intention  of  keeping  their  word  as  the  Catchief  of 
Karnac. 

The  Governor  sent  a  janissary  with  me  to  the  factory, 
which  was  a  large  establishment.  Some  of  the  rooms  con- 
tained two  hundred  looms,  but  many  of  them  were  not  at 
work.  The  labour  was  as  usual  forced ;  and  a  man  was 
confined  in  irons  in  the  court-yard  for  having  attempted 
to  escape.  I  passed  through  the  bazars,  which  were  very 
crowded,  and  also  well  supplied,  to  a  school,  that  con- 
tained about  one  hundred  boys  ;  they  looked  healthy,  and 
comparatively  clean  ;  and  were  seated  on  the  ground  in 
circles  of  ten  or  twelve  together  round  small  tables  pre- 
paratory to  supper,  which  consisted  of  abundance  of  good 
Arab  bread,  and  of  soup.  The  children  are  taken  by 
force  to  this  school,  (possibly  the  only  method  by  which 
education  can  be  at  present  carried  on),  and  are  not 
allowed  to  go  out  excepting  on  Fridays,  when  they  walk 
through  the  town.  They  are  taught  to  read,  and  to  write, 
and  are  ultimately  sent  to  the  academies  at  Tourah,  or  at 
Boulac.     The  plague  raged  violently  at  Minyeh  in  1837. 

nth.  —  I  went  on  shore  at  Dewadee,  a  village  on  the 
eastern  bank,  and  walked  across  the  cultivated  ground 
to  a  number  of  brick  walls,  and  foundations  at  the  foot 
of  the  hills,  which  might  have  been  supposed  to  have 
been  those  of  houses,  had  they  not  contained  sepulchral 
shafts,  and  an  immense  quantity  of  bones,  which  are  con- 
tinually dug  up  by  the  Arabs,  whenever  they  take  away 
the  earth  as  dressing  for  the  cultivated  land.  A  boundary 
wall  had  enclosed  these  remains,  and  at  the  entrance  of 


KETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.         121 

a  narrow  pass,  more  ruins  and  foundations  were  to  be 
perceived  of  the  same  kind,  and  further  up  in  the  moun- 
tains parts  of  the  Gisr  El  Agoos,  (the  wall,  that  is  said 
to  have  extended  from  the  sea  to  Es  Souan)  still  exist. 
This  wady,  or  pass,  soon  after  turns  to  the  right,  and 
continues  its  course  through  the  mountains  till  it  reaches 
the  Nile  near  Kom  Achmar.  To  the  northward,  near 
Djebel  Sheik  Embarek,  a  grotto,  which  contained  in  a 
niche  opposite  the  entrance  the  remains  of  two  figures, 
and  a  sepulchral  shaft,  had  been  excavated  in  the  rocks ; 
and  near  it  was  a  descent,  that  probably  led  to  other 
tombs.  These  excavations,  and  several  others  of  the  same 
kind  were  full  of  loose  stones,  and  rubbish.  Whilst  I  was 
examining  these  grottoes,  several  Arab  girls  arrived  from 
a  small  encampment  of  Bedouins,  who  had  come  down 
the  wady  from  the  desert ;  they  possessed  a  few  sheep, 
and  goats,  but  were  extremely  poor.  The  weather  was 
fine,  and,  together  with  the  fertility  of  the  crops,  and 
the  singing  of  the  birds,  reminded  me  of  an  English 
spring. 

Mounds  of  rubbish,  broken  pottery,  fragments  of  ar- 
chitraves, of  cornices,  and  of  squared  stones,  and  masses 
of  brick  work  apparently  Roman  mark  the  site  of  Acoris, 
near  the  Arab  village  of  Tehneh,  which  is  situated  at  the 
eastern  extremity  of  a  fertile,  but  neglected  plain,  about 
two  miles  from  the  river.  These  ruins  are  at  the  en- 
trance of  a  valley,  which  extends  still  further  to  the  east- 
ward in  several  directions,  and  also  to  the  south  behind 
a  range  of  cliffy  mountains,  which  in  every  part  contain 
excavations,  and  tombs,  and  are  ascended  by  means  of 
terraces  carried  along  from  one  grotto  to  another.  The 
river,  and  the  adjacent  country  are  seen  to  great  advan- 


122  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

tage  through  a  natural  arch  in  a  cavern  near  the  summit, 
whence  there  is  a  mountain  path  down  a  wild,  and  barren 
valley  to  the  eastward.  Several  quarries,  and  also  sepul- 
chral excavations  are  to  be  seen  on  the  adjacent  hills, 
but  the  latter  have  been  opened,  and  despoiled  of  their 
contents.  I  did  not  observe  any  hieroglyphics,  nor  did  I 
find  the  Roman  figures,  Greek  inscriptions,  and  reservoir 
mentioned  by  Mr.  Wilkinson.  Amongst  the  ruins,  I 
noticed  some  stones  that  had  been  cut  in  a  remarkable 
manner,  and  had  apparently  formed  part  of  an  altar ;  and 
before  an  altar  placed  in  the  entrance  of  the  adytum  in 
one  of  the  excavations,  a  deep  pit,  sufficiently  large  to 
receive  a  sarcophagus,  and  several  holes  connected  by 
groovings,  which  might  possibly  have  been  intended  to 
convey  the  blood  of  sacrifices  into  it.  Between  Tehneh, 
and  the  convent,  Deir  El  Adra,  the  Gisr  El  Agoos  is  to 
be  traced  in  many  places. 

As  soon  as  the  boat  appeared  in  sight  of  the  convent, 
two  of  the  monks  came  down,  at  first  by  a  ravine,  and 
afterwards  by  a  subterraneous  passage  to  the  river,  and 
plunging  into  the  stream  swam  off  to  it.  They  were 
very  stout  men,  and  I  can  well  imagine,  if  an  opportunity 
occurred,  would  be  again  as  troublesome  to  passengers, 
as  they  are  reputed  to  have  formerly  been.  They  are 
chiefly  maintained  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  adjacent 
Coptic  villages.  The  place  is  difficult  of  access  from 
the  river,  on  account  of  the  rapidity,  and  depth  of  the 
stream,  so  that  with  Arab  boatmen  a  large  vessel  cannot 
safely  approach  it.  The  cliffs,  however,  terminate  about 
two  miles  to  the  northward,  whence  it  can  be  easily  visited 
by  land.  The  lofty  minaret  of  Samaloud  is  seen  on  the 
opposite  shore. 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  123 

IStli.  —  There  seems  to  have  been  an  antient  town 
near  Sheroneah,  where  there  are  extensive  IVIahometan 
burial-grounds,  and  a  canal,  that  proceeds  from  the  river 
near  Darhabeah,  and  conveys  the  water  of  the  inundation 
across  the  adjacent  plain.  The  dog  mummy-pits  men- 
tioned by  Mr.  Wilkinson  are  probably  in  the  neighbouring 
mountains. 

Mr.  Waghorn,  who  was  employed  under  Colonel 
Campbell  to  convey  the  East  India  Company's  despatches 
to  Bombay,  overtook  me  near  this  place  on  his  return 
from  Cosseir,  and  soon  afterwards  proceeded  to  Cairo.' 
I  received  a  letter  by  this  gentleman  from  M.  Caviglia, 
dated  December  22d,  1S36,  which  had  been  accidentally 
detained  at  Kenneh.  I  was  informed  by  it  that  he 
was  still  of  opinion  that  the  southern  air-channel  in  the 
Great  Pyramid  at  Gizeh,  after  having  ascended  vertically 
fourteen  feet,  changed  its  direction  towards  the  centre  of 
the  pyramid,  above  Davison's  chamber ;  that  he  had  not 
hitherto  been  able  to  intercept  it,  but  was  continuing 
his  labours  for  that  purpose  ;  that  the  firmaun  had  not 
arrived ;  that  he  was  preparing  to  measure  the  pyramid ; 
that  he  had  received  several  strangers,  &c.  &c. 

Not  far  from  the  mounds  of  Kom  Achmar,  which  I 
intended  to  visit,  the  people  of  the  neighbouring  village 
of  Habyeah  had  assembled  on  a  rising  ground  with  flags, 
and  with  Arab  music,  which  the  women  loudly  accom- 
panied with  their  voices,  to  celebrate  the  arrival  of  two 

3  The  Sails  of  1836  for  India  left  Falmouth  May  3d,  and  arrived 
at  Bombay  July  5th ;  left  Falmouth  June  3d,  arrived  at  Suez  28th,  and 
at  Bombay  July  17th;  left  Falmouth  July  4th,  arrived  at  Mocha 
August  23d,  and  at  Bombay  September  3d. 


124  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

priests,  I  therefore  landed  with  the  janissary,  and,  join- 
ing the  crowd,  I  observed  three  or  four  men  entirely- 
naked,  excepting  a  cloth  round  their  waists,  dancing  upon 
some  mats,  and  amongst  them  a  man,  with  a  white  cotton 
cap,  and  a  short  apron,  exerting  himself  in  the  most 
furious  manner,  foaming  at  the  mouth,  and  brandishing 
a  scourge  of  small  cords  in  his  right  hand,  and  another 
instrument  in  his  left  with  the  most  violent  gesticula- 
tions, whilst  a  person  stood  behind  to  assist  in  case  he 
should  fall  from  excitement,  or  from  exhaustion.  This 
man,  I  found  to  my  surprise,  was  one  of  the  priests,  and 
that  the  ceremony,  which  I  then  witnessed,  lasted  three 
or  four  days,  and  nights.  A  respectable  looking  man  was 
seated  upon  the  ground  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  mats, 
dressed  in  a  green  robe,  and  turban,  whom,  I  concluded, 
from  the  colour  of  his  dress,  and  appearance,  to  have 
been  the  other  functionary.  I  was  told,  however,  that  he 
was  only  an  attendant,  and  that  the  priest  was  a  naked 
wretch  with  a  cloth  round  his  waist,  who  knelt  before  him 
in  a  state  of  the  greatest  possible  exhaustion,  and  excite- 
ment, and  who  made  the  most  horrible  contortions,  and 
noises,  whilst  the  man  in  green  in  vain  attempted  to 
pacify,  and  to  sooth  him.  Upon  our  approach,  the  priest 
jumped  up,  and  came  towards  us  with  a  large  palm  branch 
in  a  threatening  manner.  I  do  not  suppose  that  he  would 
have  struck  me  ;  but  Selim,  the  janissary,  probably  in 
order  to  enhance  his  own  consequence,  said,  that  he  cer- 
tainly would,  and  that  the  rest  of  the  people  would  have 
joined  him,  unless  he  had  interposed.  As  soon*^  he  had 
done  so,  the  priest  dropped  the  stick,  and,  standing 
upright,  raised  his  head,  and  muttered  a  prayer;  after 
which  he  embraced,  and  kissed  Selim  the  janissary,  and 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT. 


125 


wwv 


then  favoured  me  with  the  same  benediction,  no  doubt  in 
full  expectation  of  receiving  a  backshish.  With  such  in- 
structors, can  the  savage  state  of  the  population  be  any 
longer  a  subject  of  surprise  ?  I  was  informed  that  the 
priests  received  no  regular  pay,  but  that  their  privileges 
consisted  in  being  exempt  from  conscription,  and  in  being 
provided  with  a  house,  fuel,  and  a  servant. 

I  found  at  Kom  Achmar  mounds  of  rubbish,  and 
foundations  composed  of  burnt,  and  of  unburnt  bricks, 
amongst  which  the  walls  of  the  town  could  be  made 
out,  and  a  gateway,  or  entrance 
opposite  to  a  ravine  in  a  chain 
of  hills,  where  there  had  been 
quarries.  The  place  must  have 
been  of  importance,  but  the  mate- 
rials had  been  taken  away  to 
Benisouef.  I  examined  a  subter- 
raneous passage  of  considerable 
length,  but  did  not  find  any  thing 
worthy  of  notice.  Several  of  the 
unburnt  bricks  had  been  stamped 
■with  hieroglyphics,  some  of  them 
in  double  columns;  but  the  cha- 
racters were  so  much  effaced,  and 
the  surface  of  the  bricks  so  rough, 
that  I  could  but  imperfectly  make 
out  those  in  the  margin." 


O 

dJ 


— r 


*  The  hieroglyphics  given  in  the  first  section  are  exceedingly  dif- 
ficult to  recognise,  and  it  is  still  more  so  to  offer  any  connected  inter- 
pretation of  their  meaning.  The  line  on  the  left  seems  to  coincide  with 
the  line  on  the  right  hand  side  of  the  second,  of  which,  although  rather 


126  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

19th.  —  As  I  did  not  find  on  my  arrival  at  Benisouef 
any  answer  to  the  letter  which  I  had  sent  to  Colonel 
Campbell,  and  as  the  one  I  received  by  Mr.  Waghorn 
did  not  induce  me  to  suppose  that  any  discoveries  of 
consequence  had  been  made  at  Gizeh,  I  determined  to 
take  a  cursory  view  of  the  Faioum,  and,  accordingly, 
having  procured  horses  from  Phil  El  Effendi,  the  go- 
vernor, I  left  Benisouef  at  ten  o'clock. 

The  plain  was  covered  with  abundant  crops  of  cotton, 
of  beans,  and  of  other  produce,  amongst  which  were  herds 
of  cattle  of  all  descriptions,  and  the  horses  of  a  regiment 
of  cavalry.  I  passed,  soon  after,  two  villages,  the  one 
entirely,  and  the  other  nearly  deserted,  from  the  dread 
the  inhabitants  entertained  of  the  conscription,  or  of 
being  condemned  to  compulsory  labour  without  a  hope 
of  obtaining  more  than  a  scanty  subsistence  for  them- 
selves, and  for  their  families.  I  met  afterwards  several 
of  these  unfortunate  people  brought  back  as  prisoners 
with  their  cattle,  and,  like  them,  fastened  together  with 
cords.  Encampments  of  Bedouins  were  likewise  to  be 
seen  on  all  sides,  whose  cattle  were  turned  into  the  crops 


more  distinct,  only  a  conjectural  restoration  can  be  offered. 

"  Prophet,   Priest  of  the  abode  of  Amon,  Lord  of  the 

thrones  of  the  two  worlds  ;"  but  this  explanation  is  given 

with  considerable  diffidence.     It  is  possible,  especially  in 

the  upper  copy,  that  there  may  be  the  poniard,  which  in 

the  texts  replaces  the  human  head,  as  determinative  of 

head,  chief,  or,  and  in  that  case  it  would  be  the  "  Chief 

Prophet,  Priest,"  that  is,  the   high-priest.      Should  this  conjecture  be 

well  founded,  the  illegible  characters  in  the  second  line  are  the  name, 

and  the  whole  indicates  that  the  bricks  were  destined  for  the  hypogea 

of  a  deceased  sacerdotal  functionary. — Mr.  Birch. 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.         127 

belonging  to  the  inhabitants.  Beyond  El  Hadjar,  (one 
of  the  depopulated  places  already  mentioned,)  a  ridge  of 
barren  land  on  a  higher  level  intersects  the  cultivated 
plain,  which  continues  to  the  two  villages  of  Illahoon, 
where  the  pyramid,  which  forms  a  prominent  object  from 
Benisouef,  has  been  constructed  on  the  verge  of  the 
desert.  At  this  place  a  dam,  connected  with  a  bridge, 
regulates  the  water  of  the  Bahr  Yousef:  it  is  well  built; 
and  had  been,  I  heard,  lately  repaired ;  and  was,  no 
doubt,  erected  on  antient  foundations,  as  many  are  to  be 
seen  near  it,  together  with  shafts  and  ruined  tombs.  A 
palace  belonging  to  the  Pacha  is  pleasantly  situated  in  a 
grove  of  palm-trees,  on  the  grassy  banks  of  a  large  pool, 
and  the  scene  is  not  only  enlivened  by  the  picturesque 
figures,  that  repair  to  it  for  the  water,  and  by  the  persons 
belonging  to  a  magazine,  where  a  number  of  carts  are 
employed,  but  also  by  occasional  travellers,  as  a  consi- 
derable traffic  is  yet  kept  up  from  Medinet  El  Faioum, 
(the  present  capital  of  this  once  fertile  province,)  with 
Cairo,  and  with  the  other  towns  to  the  northward  of 
Benisouef.^  The  common  route  to  the  greater  oasis 
likewise  passes  through  it. 

From  Illahoon,  the  road  to  Medinet  passes  over  a 
tract  of  ill-cultivated  ground  at  the  verge  of  the  desert, 
leaving  the  pyramid  to  the  northwards ;  and,  on  the 
distant  barren   hills    to    the    southward,  the  remains    of 

5  There  is,  however,  a  much  shorter  communication  through  the 
desert,  from  the  northern  part  of  the  Faioum  by  Dashoor  to  Gizeh, 
which  requires  about  twenty-four  hours,  and  the  journey  thence  to 
Alexandria  occupies  about  six  days.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  two 
other  tracts  reach  the  banks  of  the  Nile  near  pyramids,  one  at  that  of 
Lysht,  and  the  other  at  the  false  pyramid. 


128  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

some  Coptic  monasteries.  Not  far  off  a  large  canal  is 
crossed  by  a  dyke  supported  on  arches,  (which  appear  to 
have  been  originally  of  Roman  construction),  and  after- 
wards the  beds  of  several  water-courses  that  have  been 
cut  round  the  brow  of  the  desert  plain,  upon  which  the 
pyramid  of  Howara  is  built.*'  The  village  itself  is  incon- 
siderable, and  stands  on  a  bank  between  the  road,  and  the 
water.  About  seven  miles  further  the  road  turns  to  the 
right,  on  the  western  bank  of  the  Bahr  Yousef,  and,  having 
passed  a  magazine,  and  an  unfinished  palace  belonging  to 
the  Pacha,  enters  Medinet  El  Faioum  by  a  bridge  built 
over  clear  and  sparkling  streams,  that  no  doubt  flow  from 
the  above-mentioned  canal.  The  journey  from  Benisouef 
occupied  about  seven  hours.  The  ruins  of  Antinoe,  the 
antient  capital,  are  situated  on  a  high  range  of  hills,  at 
some  distance  to  the  north  of  Medinet,  which,  in  con- 
sequence of  an  abundant  supply  of  water,  is  surrounded 
by  luxuriant  vegetation,  and  lofty  trees.  It  is  also 
adorned  with  handsome  minarets,  contains  several  good 
houses,  and  a  well-supplied  bazar,  and  is  better  built  than 
the  generahty  of  Arab  towns.  On  approaching  it  over  the 
bridge,  it  brought  to  my  recollection  Windsor,  and  Eton, 
without  possessing  any  exact  resemblance  to  either  of 
these  places.  After  passing  through  a  number  of  winding 
streets,  I  arrived  at  the  residence  of  Ali  Dud,  the  Madyr. 
He  was  not  in  his  house,  but  in  a  small  square  apartment 
on  a  level  with,  and  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  street. 
The  room,  which  appeared  to  be  his  hall  of  audience, 
was  crowded  with  Coptic  secretaries,  Turks,  and  Arabs  of 

6  The  pyramids  of  Howara  and  of  Illahoon  have  been  already  de- 
scribed.    See  pages  8  and  9. 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  129 

every  description.  He  gave  me  a  very  civil  reception, 
and,  after  the  usual  ceremony  of  coffee,  and  pipes,  I  pro- 
duced my  firmaun,  and  requested  bis  assistance  in  visiting 
the  interesting  province  over  which,  he  presided.  This 
he  readily  promised ;  but  how  the  important  affair  was 
to  be  performed  gave  rise  to  a  discussion  of  nearly  two 
hours,  in  which  every  person  present  participated.  At 
length,  however,  an  arrangement  was  made,  and  I  accom- 
panied the  Madyr  to  his  own  residence.  We  passed 
through  a  court,  in  which  there  were  several  horses, 
and  then  through  long  passages  and  a  dirty  staircase  to 
a  spacious,  but  cold  apartment,  as  the  large  windows  of 
lattice-work  were  but  partially  covered  with  oiled  paper. 
A  well-grated  window,  over  a  door  into  the  hareem, 
afforded  to  its  inhabitants  an  opportunity  of  observing 
what  took  place.  The  floor  was  paved  with  red  tiles, 
but  a  carpet  was  laid  before  a  low  sofa  covered  with 
cushions,  and  extending  round  two  thirds  of  the  room. 
These,  together  with  a  small  mirror,  and  a  basin  and  ewer, 
constituted  the  furniture  ;  and  the  whitewashed  walls 
were  adorned  with  a  solitary  group  of  three  small  prints 
of  Britannia,  cut  out  of  an  English  shop-bill.  The  room 
was  not  particularly  clean,  although  probably  the  best  in 
the  whole  province.  After  pipes,  and  coffee  had  been 
introduced,  a  plentiful  supper  was  served  in  the  usual 
manner;  and  as  the  Madyr,  myself,  and  the  janissary, 
who  served  as  interpreter,  sat  together  on  the  floor, 
round  a  circular  tray  in  front  of  the  latticed  window  of 
the  hareem,  we  must  have  presented  an  amusing  spectacle 
to  those  within,  whose  lights  from  time  to  time  appeared, 
although  their  persons  could  not  be  distinguished.  The 
Madyr  was  an   old  man,  and  had  been  a  considerable 

VOL.  I.  K 


1 30  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

merchant,  and,  probably  on  account  of  his  wealth,  had 
been  obliged  by  the  Pacha  to  accept  the  government  of 
the  province.  He  appeared  extremely  credulous,  but  was 
very  civil,  and  obliging,  and  contributed  all  he  could  to 
my  convenience.  He  remained  for  a  considerable  time 
after  supper,  and  a  long  conversation  was  carried  on  by 
means  of  the  janissary  Selim.  I  then  retired  to  the  sofa, 
but  not  to  sleep,  owing  to  the  quantity  of  gnats,  and  of 
vermin,  with  which  the  place  abounded. 

20^/j.  —  I  left  the  town  early  in  the  morning  with 
the  Sheifc  of  Shadowee,  by  the  way  I  had  arrived,  and 
leaving  at  «ome  distance  to  the  left  the  mounds  which 
occupy  the  site  of  Antinoe,  we  proceeded  through  cul- 
tiyaied  plaists,  and  groves  of  olive,  and  of  fig-trees,  to 
some  ruins,  which  are  supposed  to  have  belonged  to  an 
antient  pyramid.  The  inhabitants  of  the  different  vil- 
lages 'Were  employed  in  threshing  out  their  corn,  under 
the  superiRtendence  of  the  Sheiks,  and  of  the  Pacha's 
©ificers, -y/Ji®  take  away  two-thirds  for  their  master,  which 
sufficien'tly  ^accounts  for  the  reluctance,  with  which  the 
felWis  wcKrk,  particularly  as  they  are  at  the  same  time 
subject  to  the  oppression  of  the  Sheiks,  and  to  the  devast- 
ations ©f  the  Bedouins,  twenty  thousand  of  whom  were 
said  at  that  time  to  have  taken  up  their  quarters  in  the 
provide®'-.  The  ruins  in  question  may  have  formed  part 
of  one»  'ffc  of  two  monuments,  as  they  consist  of  two 
large  "masses  perfectly  unconnected,  and  at  some  distance 
linom  'each  other,  but  neither  the  form,  nor  foundations 
can  be  ascertained.  The  stones  are  large,  well  squared, 
and  firmly  set  in  mortar,  and  the  masonry  much  resem- 
Hes  that  of  the  pyramids  at  Gizeh.     After  having  ex- 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.         1  31 

amined  these  remains,  we  passed  through  an  undulating 
country,  where  my  companion  got  several  fair  shots  at 
cranes,  but  without  success,  although  he  dismounted, 
and  knelt  down  to  take  deliberate  aim.  This  instance, 
and  what  I  had  previously  seen  in  the  desert,  near  Pal- 
myra, gave  me  a  bad  idea  of  the  prowess  of  the  Arabs. 
In  a  few  miles  we  came  to  the  village  of  Shadowee, 
situated  on  lofty  mounds  near  a  deep  glen,  through  which 
a  large  stream  flows  towards  the  Lake  Moeris.'' 


'^  I  was  informed,  that  the  population  of  this  place  onlj'  amounted 
to  four,  or  five  hundred,  although  it  formerly  exceeded  six  thousand, 
and  that  many  of  the  Slieiks  had  been  killed,  or  forced  to  run  away  to 
the  desert.  The  Faioum  presents  a  striking  contrast  to  the  alluvial  plains 
of  the  rest  of  Egypt,  as  it  consists  of  high  undulating  ground,  and  of 
picturesque  valleys  well  watered  by  streams,  which  flow  from  the  Bahr 
Yousef,  and  from  the  other  canals.  A  variety  of  timber  and  of  fruit- 
trees,  gardens  of  roses,  and  vineyards,  amidst  groves  of  olive,  and  of  mul- 
berry-trees, vary  its  appearance.  The  Lake  Moeris  presents  a  fine  ex- 
panse of  water  to  the  westward,  and  beyond  it  is  the  interminable  desert. 
The  antient  canals,  and  watercourses  seem  to  have  been  constructed 
with  great  skill,  and  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  no  regular  survey  of 
them  exists,  as  it  would  probably  shew  the  former  level  of  the  Nile,  and 
aiFord  information  respecting  the  Bahr  Bela  Mar,  and  might  also  lead  to 
the  discovery  of  the  famous  labyrinth,  and  of  other  celebrated  remains. 
Yet,  notwithstanding  its  fertility,  in  no  part  of  the  country  is  distress 
more  apparent,  or  cultivation  less  attended  to :  indeed,  a  considerable 
part  of  the  land  is  entirely  neglected ;  for,  besides  the  oppression  which 
affects  the  whole  country,  the  Bedouins,  as  I  have  mentioned,  are  allowed 
to  encamp  in  great  numbers,  and  their  cattle  are  turned  out  amongst  the 
crops  in  perfect  security;  whilst  those  of  the  inhabitants  are  obliged  to  be 
driven  home  every  evening  to  the  villages ;  and  the  report  of  fire-arms, 
shouting  of  men,  and  the  continual  barking  of  dogs  during  the  night,  shew 
that,  even  there,  they  are  not  in  safety.  The  Sheiks  of  the  villages  connive 
at  depredation,  and  keep  on  good  terms  with  these  savage  intruders,  that, 


132  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

Upon  our  arrival  the  Sheik  conducted  me  to  his 
divan,  a  dirty  upper  room  with  mud  walls,  that  had  pro- 
hably  once  been  whitewashed ;  and  some  loose  bricks 
having  been  removed  from  a  small  aperture,  which  served 
for  a  window,  sufficient  light  was  admitted  to  shew  that 
no  rest  was  to  be  expected  either  on  the  dirty  cushions 
laid  against  the  walls,  or  upon  the  stained  carpets  spread 
over  the  mats  on  the  earthen  floor,  which,  to  judge  by 
the  state  of  several  small  recesses,  or  cupboards  in  the 
walls,  had  never  been  cleaned  since  it  was  built,  and 
must  therefore  swarm  with  vermin  of  all  descriptions. 
In  due  time  dinner  was  brought  in,  at  which  the  Sheik's 
brother,  and  eight  or  ten  persons  assisted,  and  amongst 
them  one  of  the  Bedouin  Sheiks,  a  stout,  handsome  man, 
dressed  in  a  clean  Arab  blanket,  and  red  tarboose,  and 
much  superior  in  appearance  to  the  Arabs  of  the  villages. 
He  seemed  to  be  an  intelligent  person,  made  many  in- 
quiries respecting  my  journey,  and  readily  answered  any 

ill  case  of  necessity,  they  may  find  a  secure  retreat  amongst  them.  They 
themselves  oppress,  and  plunder  the  people  to  the  last  degree,  not  only  to 
meet  the  demands  of  the  Pacha,  and  to  preserve  an  interest  by  bribing  his 
officers,  but  also  to  amass  treasure  for  their  own  purposes,  which  they  keep 
in  a  portable  and  available  shape,  and  ready  for  immediate  flight  whenever 
caprice,  or  other  circumstances  may  make  it  expedient.  The  dilapidated 
state  of  the  villages  may,  therefore,  be  easily  imagined,  but  the  habits 
of  rapacity  thus  produced  can  be  scarcely  conceived.  I  saw  an  astonish- 
ing instance  of  this  in  crossing  the  Lake  Mceris  on  the  following  morning. 
The  boatmen,  who  rented  the  fishery  from  the  Sheik,  brought  two  large 
fish  for  sale,  and  also  ajar  of  fresh  water  for  our  accommodation.  The 
Sheik  immediately  seized  upon  the  fish,  and  the  jar,  and,  unless  my 
janissary  had  interfered,  a  scuffle  would  have  ensued,  as  the  poor  people, 
to  whom  these  objects  were  of  value,  although  not  intrinsically  worth  a 
piastre,  were  determined  to  defend  their  property. 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.  133 

questions  about  the  oasis,  and  the  ruins  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  the  lake,  witliout  being  able,  however,  to 
afford  any  particular  information. 

Owing,  to  the  distance  of  the  village  from  the  lake, 
and  to  the  difficulty  of  procuring  a  boat,  I  could  not  cross 
the  water  till  the  following  day.  In  the  evening  supper 
was  brought  in,  and  afterwards  coffee,  and  pipes,  when 
the  fishermen,  who  owned  the  boat  upon  the  lake,  and 
many  other  persons,  came  up,  and  a  conversation  lasted 
for  some  hours. 

21s/.  —  I  set  out  with  the  Sheik,  and  a  number  of 
attendants,  at  six  in  the  morning  for  the  lake.  We 
passed  a  fine  plain,  abounding  with  crops  of  clover,  beans, 
and  different  sorts  of  grain,  and  affording  pasture  to  herds 
of  goats,  camels,  and  other  cattle,  which  were  guarded 
by  armed  Bedouins,  much  stouter,  and  better  clothed 
than  those  in  Syria.  They  wore  white  blankets,  red 
tarbooses,  and  sandals,  and  many  of  them  were  armed 
with  pistols,  suspended  under  the  left  arm  by  a  broad 
Moorish  belt,  that  passed  over  the  right  shoulder.  They 
appeared  in  perfect  security,  and  were  strolling  about  in 
various  directions  on  foot,  and  also  on  horseback,  but 
none  of  them  were  well  mounted.  Their  black  tents 
were  pitched  on  the  grounds,  that  had  been  eaten  down 
by  the  cattle,  and,  in  many  instances,  were  surrounded 
by  yards  enclosed  with  reeds."      Beyond   the  cultivated 


s  The  Faioura,  from  the  abundance  of  pasture,  is  better  adapted  to 
the  feeding  of  cattle  than  any  other  part  of  Egypt,  and,  from  its  isolated 
position,  is  peculiarly  fit  for  the  reception  of  strangers.  In  these  respects 
it  would  answer  the  description  of  the  land  of  Goshen ;  and  if  the  canal. 


134  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

land,  a  barren  plain  covered  with  stunted  bushes,  and 
which  appears  to  have  been  formerly  under  water,  ex- 
tends for  about  two  miles  to  the  lake,  where  some 
people  were  employed  in  building  a  boat.  The  water 
was  so  shallow  that  we  were  carried  to  the  vessel  which 
was  to  convey  us  to  the  other  side.  The  lake  abounds 
with  fish*  and  with  various  kinds  of  waterfowl,  and  great 
quantities  are  taken  by  hooks  attached  to  long  lines,  that 
are  stretched  at  intervals  over  the  surface.  I  saw  a  large 
black  fowl  with  a  sharp  serrated  bill  caught  in  this 
manner ;  and  two  fish  called  Shillbee  Beeri,  with  flat 
heads,  and  beards,  or  whiskers  six  or  seven  inches  long, 
which  were  said  to  be  very  fine,  and  were  nearly  a  yard 
in  length. 

We  arrived  on  the  western  shore  in  about  an  hour, 
and  landed  in  the  same  way,  in  which  we  embarked. 
Having  passed  a  narrow  strip  of  bushes,  where  the  slots 
of  leopards,  and  of  antelopes  were  visible,  we  ascended 
a  steep  ridge,  on  which  there  had  been  evidently  vine- 
yards, as  the  remains  were  to  be  perceived  struggling 
through  the  sand,  that  now  covers  the  extensive  ranges 
of  desert  mountains  to  such  a  depth,  that  their  rocky 
summits  are  the  only  objects  perceptible  in  the  undulating 
waste.     As  the  sand  is  deep  and  drifted,  it  is  impossible, 

Bahr  Yousef,  could  be  supposed  to  have  been  the  work  of  the  great 
patriarch,  it  might  be  an  additional  argument. 

9  Certain  varieties  of  fish  are  said  to  be  peculiar  to  the  Nile,  and 
to  the  Caspian  Sea.  I  do  not  believe  that  the  assertion  extends  to  those 
in  the  Lake  Mceris ;  but,  considering  the  antient  traditions  respecting 
this  lake,  it  would  be  interesting  to  discover  any  fish  in  it,  wliich  are 
peculiar  to  the  Caspian  Sea,  and  still  more  so  if  they  were  not  found 
in  the  Nile. 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT. 


135 


without  very  extensive  excavations,  to  determine  what 
was  the  former  surface  of  the  country,  but  it  is  evident 
that  the  part  next  the  water  had  been  cultivated,  and  that 
the  antient  town,  we  came  to  visit,  had  been  placed  to 
great  advantage;  and  that  before  the  plains  and  moun- 
tains, between  it  and  the  lake  had  been  overwhelmed 
with  the  vast  body  of  sand,  that  it  commanded  a  magni- 
ficent prospect  of  the  lake,  from  which  it  is  not  three 
miles  distant,  and  of  the  fertile  province  on  the  eastern 
shore. 

The  ruins,  (said  by  Mr.  Wilkinson  to  be  those  of 
Dimay,  or  Nerba,)  are  situated  on  an  eminence,  and 
are  approached  from  the  eastward  by  a  causeway,  com- 
posed of  black  stone,  which  may  be  traced  to  some  dis- 
tance amidst  brick  foundations,  mounds  of  broken  pottery, 
fragments  of  talc,  and  of  squared  stones,  as  may  be  also 
the  walls  of  the  town,  built  of  unburnt  bricks,  which  in 
many  places  are  nearly  white.  Layers  of  reeds  had  been 
inserted  between  the  courses;  and  to  the  right  hand  of 
the  entrance,  and  about  two  feet  above  the  ground,  a  re- 
markable cavity,  one  foot  in  height,  and  in  width,  and 
nine  feet  in  length,  had  been  worked  from  the  outside 
into  the  wall,  and  contained  three  pieces  of  flat,  and  as 
many  of  round  wood,  placed  across  the  bottom,  at  equal 
distances.  I  could  not  discover  a  cartouche,  or  any  in- 
scriptions upon  the  bricks.  I  fancied  with  the  assistance 
of  a  glass  that  I  could  discover  stone  quarries,  and  the 
remains  of  a  necropolis  in  some  cliffs  about  two  miles  to 
the  westward.  There  were  likewise  square  masses  of 
ruins  on  a  mountain  between  the  town,  and  the  lake. 

I  had  intended,  in  my  return  to  Medinet,  to  have 
examined  the  obelisk  at  Biggig ;  but  after  a  long  detour. 


136  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

I  found,  that,  on  account  of  the  number  of  water-courses, 
there  was  not  any  direct  load  from  Shadowee  to  that 
plaCe,  and  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  return  to 
witliin  a  mile  of  Medinet,  and  then  to  go  a  consider- 
able distance  in  order  to  arrive  there.  It  was  night,  and 
as  the  obelisk  was  broken,  and  thrown  down,  and  the  in- 
scription well  known,  I  did  not  think  that  the  mere 
inspection  of  it  was  worth  the  journey.  I  was  sorry 
that  I  could  not  remain  longer  in  this  beautiful  province, 
where  I  had  received  so  much  hospitality,  and  where 
so  many  interesting  antiquities  may  yet  be  concealed,  but 
my  anxiety  to  return  to  Gizeh  induced  me  to  set  out  on 
the  following  morning. 

22r/.  —  I  took  leave  of  the  Madyr,  and  proceeded  at 
eight  o'clock,  with  the  Sheik  of  Illahoon  as  a  guide,  to 
the  pyramids  at  that  place,  and  at  Howara ;  but  he  soon 
lost  his  way  among  the  ravines,  and  watercourses,  that 
intersect  the  country  in  every  direction,  and  I  was 
obliged  to  procure  other  assistance.  We  met  a  consider- 
able number  of  Bedouins,  and  of  country  people  on  their 
way  to  Medinet,  and  passed  over  a  tract  of  land  evidently 
capable  of  great  fertility.  We  then  crossed  a  stream  in  a 
part  of  the  large  ravine,  which  I  had  observed  at  Howara, 
and  which,  at  this  place,  appears  to  have  been  formed  in 
a  natural  gulley.  And  having  left  on  the  opposite  bank, 
a  considerable  Arab  village,  we  turned  to  the  right,  and 
pursued  our  way  over  a  desert  plain  to  the  pyramids, 
and  afterwards  proceeded  to  Benisouef.  I  received  on 
the  road  to  that  place  a  letter  from  M.  Cavigha,  enclosed 
by  M.  Piozan.  It  was  an  answer  to  that  which  I  had 
sent  to  Colonel  Campbell  from  E-Siout,  and  was  dated 


RETURN  FROM  UPPER  EGYPT.         137 

January  17th,  1837.  It  informed  me,  that  the  works  in 
the  Great  Pyramid  were  much  advanced ;  that  in  the 
Second'  he  had  discovered  a  passage,  communicating  by 
a  pit  with  the  lower  descending  passage ;  and  that  he  had 
proceeded  with  the  excavation  on  the  northern  front  in 
search  of  a  lower  entrance,  which  he  hoped  to  find  in  a 
few  days.  That  at  the  Third  Pyramid  he  was  already 
within  sixty  feet  of  the  centre.  And  that  he  had  been 
also  employed  on  some  mummy-pits.  He  likewise  added, 
that  his  discovery  in  the  Second  Pyramid  had  excited 
the  envy  of  the  French  to  such  a  degree,  that  Colonel 
Campbell  had  been  obliged  to  exert  himself  with  the 
government  to  secure  the  exclusive  privileges  granted  by 
the  firmaun." 

On  approaching  the  town,  I  met  a  number  of  mounted 
Bedouins,  their  horses,  and  several  that  I  saw  in  the 
town  were  very  bad,  and  many  of  them  only  two  years 
old.  Colts  of  the  same  age  are  used  in  Syria,  which 
might  be  adduced  as  an  instance  in  favour  of  early  train- 
ing ;  indeed,  in  that  country,  old  horses  do  not  appear 
to  stand  fatigue. 

23d.  —  Having  expressed  my  acknowledgments  to  the 
governor  for  the  assistance  I  had  received  from  him,  I 
left  Benisouef  at  six  o'clock,  and  arrived  at  Gizeh  on  the 
following  evening,  when  I  went  to  Cairo,  and  returned 


1  See  vertical  section  of  Second  Pyramid. 

2  It  will  subsequently  be  seen  what  progress  M.  Caviglia  had  made 
in  the  three  pyramids,  particularly  in  the  third,  where,  by  Mr.  Perring's 
admeasurement,  his  excavation  bad  only  arrived  at  the  length  of  six  feet 
on  the  13th  of  February. 


138  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

at    night    to   the   boat,   which   was   moored   under    the 
western  bank.^ 

24:tk.  —  Being  extremely  anxious  to  see  what  progress 
had  been  made,  I  set  out  early  in  the  morning,  and  went 
immediately  to  the  Great,  and  to  the  Second  Pyramids, 
where  I  expected  to  find  M.  Caviglia,  and  his  men,  but  I 
did  not  meet  with  a  single  person,  and  I  afterwards  dis- 
covered the  people  at  work  on  three  mummy-pits  between 
the  Sphinx,  and  the  Second  Pyramid.  M.  Caviglia,  how- 
ever, informed  me  that  parties  had  been  employed  by 
night,  and  by  day  at  the  southern  side  of  Davison's  chamber, 
in  search  of  the  southern  air-channel ;  and  in  continuing 
the  excavation,  near  the  entrance  to  the  king's  chamber, 
along  the  course  of  the  northern  air-channel  in  the  Great 
Pyramid ;  and  also  at  the  excavation  in  the  Third.  He 
then  shewed  me  his  discovery  in  the  Second  Pyramid.  It 
appeared  that,  in  clearing  the  horizontal  passage,  he 
found  that  a  part  of  the  floor  was  composed  of  masonry, 
near  the  chasm  formed  in  that  communication  by  the 
descending  passage,  which  returns  beneath  it  to  the  north- 
ward ;  and  that,  when  this  masonry  was  removed,  he  dis- 
covered another  descending  passage,  above,  and  parallel 
to  the  lower  one,  which  terminated  at  a  short  distance  in 


3  On  arriving  near  Tourah,  one  of  the  boatmen  was  dressed  in  a 
white  robe,  a  high  fur  cap,  and  a  white  beard,  and  came  round  the  boat 
for  a  backshish,  on  account  of  our  having  returned  from  Upper  Egj'pt. 
This  custom  is  something  like  that  observed  in  crossing  the  Line. 

The  boat  belonged  to  the  company  established  on  the  Nile,  and  was 
of  about  fifty  or  sixty  tons ;  it  was  therefore  very  roomy,  and,  as  it  was 
newly  painted,  perfectly  clean.  The  figures  in  the  annexed  sketch  are 
given  to  shew  the  costume,  and  appearance  of  the  people. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  139 

the  rock,  and  was  connected  by  an  hole  with  the  other 
passage.*  It  might  therefore  be  supposed  that  it  had 
been  made  for  the  sake  of  ventilation  in  forming  the 
subterraneous  passages  before  the  pyramid  was  built,  or 
that  an  alteration  had,  for  some  reason  or  other,  taken 
place  in  the  original  construction  of  the  pyramid. 

A  narrow  excavation  had  also  been  carried  by  INI.  Ca- 
viglia,  through  the  mound  of  rubbish  in  the  centre  of  the 
northern  front  of  this  pyramid,  to  within  about  thirty- 
eight  feet  of  the  base,  whereby  the  rock,  and  a  pavement 
in  the  form  of  a  step  had  been  uncovered,  which  he 
imagined  had  been  painted  of  a  red  colour  upon  stucco. 
I  was  myself  at  first  of  the  same  opinion,  till  further 
observation  proved  that  it  was  merely  a  partial  discolor- 
ation, produced  from  the  particles  of  red  cement."  This 
work  had  been  commenced  on  too  small  a  scale,  and 
only  at  the  bottom ;  and  the  materials  had  not  been  re- 
moved to  a  sufficient  distance ;  consequently,  as  the 
mound  was  composed  of  very  large  blocks,  and  upwards 
of  forty  feet  high,  the  removal  of  it  was  attended  with 
great  difficulty  on  approaching  the  building,  and  was  not 
completely  effected.  It  should  have  been  carried  on  at 
the  top,  and  on  both  sides,  as  well  as  at  the  bottom. 
M.  Caviglia  then  shewed  me  the  three  pits,  upon  which 
the  people  were  employed.  The  two,  nearest  the  Second 
Pyramid,  were  large  quadrangular  shafts  of  considerable 

*  The  reader  is  in  this  and  similar  instances  referred  to  the  plans  in 
this  book,  and  also  to  the  large  plates  of  the  "  Pyramids  of  Gizeh,"  pub- 
lished in  numbers  by  Mr.  Fraser  of  Regent  Street. 

^  Upon  what  foundation  the  other  opinions  respecting  this  pyramid, 
published,  (apparently  by  M.  Caviglia),  in  the  "  Malta  Gazette"  of 
March  22d,  1837,  were  founded,  it  is  impossible  to  say.     See  Appendix. 


140  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

depth;  but  the  third,  near  the  Sphinx,  (afterwards  called 
Campbell's  tomb,)  was  evidently  of  a  very  curious  con- 
struction, although  the  sand  had  only  been  partially  re- 
moved from  the  north-western  corner  of  the  fosse,  and 
from  the  shaft  near  the  south-western  angle,  as  it  was 
proposed  to  clear  out  the  fosse  first,  and  then  to  fill  it 
up  again  with  the  sand  from  the  interior  excavation  in 
order  to  save  expense.*^  A  cawass,  (or  janissary,)  from 
government,  and  the  Sheiks  of  the  neighbouring  villages 
were  in  attendance. 

In  conversation  with  M.  Caviglia,  I  expressed  my 
disappointment  that  greater  progress  had  not  been  made, 
particularly  at  the  Great  Pyramid ;  when  he  informed  me, 
that  more  men  could  not  be  obtained ;  and  that,  as  the 
French  had  a  party  amongst  the  Arabs,  it  was  necessary 
to  occupy  the  ground,  to  prevent  any  interruption  on 
their  part.  With  respect  to  thv.se  statements,  it  is  only 
necessary  to  observe,  that  a  greater  number  of  people 
subsequently  attended,  and  that  during  the  period  I  re- 
mained at  the  pyramids,  I  never  experienced  the  slightest 
interference.  It  was,  at  this  time,  settled,  that  whatever 
communications  might  subsequently  become  necessary,  in 
consequence  of  important  discoveries,  they  should  be 
made  from  time,  to  time  to  Mr.  Hamilton  ;  to  which 
arrangement  Colonel  Campbell  afterwards  readily  as- 
sented. 

Mr.   Hill  came   in   the   afternoon,   with  Sir  Edward 


^  The  portions  of  rock  left  as  buttresses  across  the  fosse  were 
extremely  curious ;  and  it  was  supposed  that  water  would  be  found  at 
the  bottom.  Plans,  and  sections  of  this  monument  are  expected  from 
Egypt,  and  will  probably  be  published. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  141 

Pearson,  and  Captain  Smith  ;  and,  in  the  evening,  I 
went  with  them  to  Cairo ;  at  which  place  a  number 
of  persons  had  arrived  from  India,  and,  amongst  them, 
Mr.  Turton,  to  whom  I  subsequently  gave  a  letter  of 
introduction  to  M.  Caviglia,  in  order  that  he  might  ex- 
amine the  pyramids. 

26iA.  —  I  sent  my  baggage  from  the  boat  to  the 
pyramids,  and,  returning  there  in  the  evening,  I  found 
Mr.  Maltas,  and  several  other  persons ;  as  also  Mr. 
Turton,  and  his  family,  who  soon  afterwards  set  out  for 
Cairo. 

21th.  —  I  began,  with  M.  Caviglia's  assistance,  to 
measure  the  interior  of  the  Great  Pyramid ;  and,  in  the 
course  of  the  day  I  copied  the  hieroglyphics  inscribed  on 
the  rocks  to  the  northward  of  the  Second  ;^  where  M. 
Caviglia  pointed  out  a  cutting,  (apparently  the  beginning 
of  a  doorway),  but  which  he  considered  an  Hebrew 
character,  and  informed  me  that  there  was  a  shaft 
beneath  it,  supposed  to  be  connected  by  an  under- 
ground passage  with  the  building  itself.  The  works  were 
continued  at  the  three  pits,  as  also  in  the  interior  of  the 
Great,  and  in  the  chasm  at  the  northern  front  of  the 
Third  Pyramid.  I  had  a  long  conversation  in  the  even- 
ing with  M.  Caviglia,  in  which  he  observed  that  I  hurt 
his  feelings  by  continually  urging  him  to  turn  his  atten- 
tion towards  the  pyramids,  instead  of  employing  the 
people  at  the  mummy-pits.  I  assured  him  that  I  had  no 
such  intention,  but  that  as  I  had  undertaken  the  opera- 

'^  Which  are  afterwards  inserted,  see  February  17th. 


142  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH, 

tions  solely  with  a  view  to  these  magnificient  structures, 
particularly  the  great  one,  I  naturally  wished  to  make 
some  discoveries  before  I  returned  to  England.  I  re- 
marked, that  the  pits  had  been  most  probably  already 
opened;  that,  if  not,  mummies  were  of  little,  or  no  value; 
and  that,  as  the  pyramids  were  the  great  object  for  which 
the  firmaun  had  been  obtained,  I  confessed  myself  sur- 
prised, and  disappointed  that  greater  efforts  had  not  been 
made  to  discover  their  interior  construction.  He  repeated 
what  he  before  said  respecting  French  interference,  and 
intrigue,  and  the  difficulty  of  procuring  more  men ;  ex- 
pressed his  opinion  that  the  mummy-pits  might  produce 
several  objects  interesting  to  the  scientific  world,  and,  in 
short,  that  having  begun  the  excavations,  it  was  necessary 
to  finish  them. 

28th.  —  I  continued  the  admeasurements.  Affairs 
went  on  as  usual.  Several  bones  were  found  in  some 
grottoes  in  the  sides  of  the  shaft  nearest  the  Second 
Pyramid.     Mr.  Hill  came. 

29th.  —  I  proceeded  with  my  examination  of  the  Gi-eat 
Pyramid ;  and  in  the  course  of  the  day  went  to  Cairo 
with  Mr.  Hill  to  get  sieves  to  sift  the  sand  taken  out  of 
the  mummy-pits,  in  which  small  particles  of  leaf-gold,  and 
other  trifles  are  often  found,  and  also  for  a  windlass  to 
assist  in  raising  the  sand,  that  these  operations  might  be 
finished  as  soon  as  possible.  I  likewise  determined  to 
procure  some  boring  rods,  which  I  imagined  would  have 
been  more  useful,  than  they  afterwards  proved.  Mr.  Hill 
had  assisted  me  in  measuring  the  Great  Pyramid,  and 
also  engaged  to   do  the  same  in  mapping  the  ground. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  143 

but  he  observed  that  a  Civil  Engineer  had  arrived  with 
Mr.  Galloway,  who  was  furnished  with  the  proper  in- 
struments, and  who,  he  had  no  doubt,  would  under- 
take the  survey  in  the  best  manner.  In  consequence 
of  what  he  said,  I  took  an  opportunity  of  mentioning 
the  subject  to  Mr.  Galloway,  who  in  the  handsomest 
manner  immediately  acceded  to  my  request,  and  pro- 
mised Mr.  Perring's  able  assistance,  which  that  gen- 
tleman afterwards  most  kindly,  and  disinterestedly  con- 
tinued, with  what  effect  the  masterly  plans,  and  drawings, 
together  with  the  map  formed  by  himself,  and  Mr.  Mash, 
will  best  testify.**  I  again  beg  leave  to  acknowledge  the 
great  assistance  which  I  received  from  those  gentlemen, 
and  to  express  my  satisfaction,  that  accurate  elevations, 
and  plans  of  these  most  antient,  and  noble  monuments 
will  at  last  be  published,  which,  besides  other  excellences, 
will  possess  that  paramount,  and  most  unusual  quality, 
truth. 

30//«._I  dined  with  Mr.  Galloway,  and  Mr.  Perring, 
and  had  a  good  deal  of  conversation  with  them  respecting 
the  measuring  of  the  pyramids,  and  the  mapping  of  the 
ground. 

Slst,  _  I  went  to  Mabietta  with  Mr.  Hill,  where  we 
succeeded  in  procuring  some  boring  rods,  and  in  the 
evening  I  again  met  Mr.  Galloway,  and  Mr.  Perring.'-* 


8  See  No.  I.  of  the  «  Pyramids  of  Gizeli,"  published  by  Mr.  Eraser. 

9  An  incident  occurred  at  Mabietta,  that  shews  the  incapacity,  and 
ignorance  of  the  Pacha's  superintendents.  The  one  in  question  was 
a  Levantine,  and,  I  was  told,  a  very  respectable  person,  and  had  the 


144  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

February  1st.  —  I  returned  to  the  pyramids,  and  found 
matters  going  on  as  usual.  A  sarcophagus  was  dis- 
covered in  a  rough  grotto  on  the  southern  side  of  the 
central  mummy-pit.  It  had  been  opened,  and,  as  I  was 
informed,  only  contained  the  following  articles ;  some 
pieces  of  bone,  and  of  linen  ;  a  few  small  green  ornaments, 
(apparently  of  a  necklace) ;  a  green  idol;  a  brown  scarabseus 
without  any  inscription ;  a  piece  of  red  cornelian ;  some 
narrow  strips  of  leaf-gold ;  thirty-two  gilt  balls  about  the 
size  of  a  pea ;  a  lump  of  resinous  substance  with  more  of 
these  balls  adhering  to  it ;  a  blue  scarabagus  without  any 
inscription ;  a  bull  with  his  legs  tied  together  for  sacrifice, 
composed  of  stone,  (about  an  inch  long  ;)  and  two  pieces 
of  polished  stone,  about  half  an  inch  long,  and  a  quarter 
broad,  stuck  together  with  gum.  The  grotto  was  about 
eighteen  feet  long,  and  thirteen  broad.  Sixty-three  green 
idols  were  found  amongst  the  sand  in,  and  about  it.  I 
was  also  told  that  some  pieces  of  bone  had  been  brought 
out  of  the  shaft  at  the  south-western  corner  of  Campbell's 
Tomb.i 

charge  of  several  extensive  establishments.  As  he  had  promised  Mr.  Hill 
to  furnish  me  with  the  boring-rods  at  a  fair  price,  provided  he  could  part 
with  them  consistently  with  the  Pacha's  interest,  I  thought  it  proper  to 
express  my  acknowledgments ;  when,  to  my  surprise,  he  asked,  what  sort 
of  a  machine  the  instrument  in  question  was,  and  whether  it  vvas  as  large 
as  the  great  steam-engine  belonging  to  the  copper  mill  in  the  citadel  ? 
and  seemed  much  astonished  when  I  told  him  that,  although  of  con- 
siderable length,  it  was  about  the  size  of  the  nabout,  which  I  held  in 
my  hand.  With  such  superintendence  it  is  not  wonderful  that  the 
establishments  fail. 

1  Every  thing  discovered  under  the  firmaun  was  to  belong  to  the 
Pacha.  The  articles  found  before  the  13th  of  February,  were  in  the 
charge  of  M.  Caviglia. 


OPERATIONS  CAREIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  145 

2d.  —  I  examined  the  above-mentioned  antiquities.  It 
is  remarkable  that  all  these  idols/  and  many  more  sub- 
sequently found,  differed  from  each  other,  either  in  phy- 
siognomy, or  in  inscription.  Some  of  them  appeared  to 
have  been  portraits,  those  made  of  toTa  cotta  seemed  to 
have  been  cast,  and  afterwards  inscribed.  Selim  arrived 
with  the  boring-rods,  several  of  which  were  missing,  and 
were  never  afterwards  recovered.  I  concluded  that  they 
were  taken  out  of  the  box  at  the  factory ;  as  I  had  no 
reason  to  suspect  the  janissary  of  dishonesty,  or  of  care- 
lessness. He  returned  in  the  evening  to  Cairo,  with  my 
English  servant,  who  had  been  suddenly  attacked  by 
fever. 

JNI.  Cavigha  informed  me  that  Colonel  Campbell  had 
authorised  M.  Piozan  to  advance  for  him  another  sub- 
scription during  his  intended  absence  in  Upper  Egypt. 

A  party  was  sent  to  remove  the  rubbish  from  the 
northern  front  of  the  Second  Pyramid. 

At  night  there  was  a  heavy  storm  of  wind  and  rain. 

Sd.  —  Instead  of  the  party  at  the  Second  Pyramid, 
thirteen  women  and  children  were  employed  there. 

A  few  additional  men  came  from  an  adjacent  village ; 
but  the  people  worked  very  badly,  and  nearly  one  half  of 
them  sat  still,  under  pretence  of  relieving  the  rest.     They 

*  They  represent  a  human  mummy  holding  a  hoe  and  pickaxe,  with 
a  basket  slung  over  the  left  shoulder,  and  are  supposed  by  M.  Cham- 
pollion,  and  by  other  authors,  to  personify  the  deceased,  equipped  for 
the  mj'stic  cultivation  of  Hades.  These  in  question  bear  the  name  of 
Psametik,  whose  surname  is  Aahmos,  or  Amasis,  born  of  Pasht  Ertais. 
He  appears  to  have  been  some  functionary  of  state — attached  to  the 
care  of  the  pure  abode.  —  Mr.  Birch. 

VOL.  I.  L 


146 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 


also  came  late  in  the  morning,  and  were  not  fairly  at 
work  before  seven,  or  eight  o'clock.  They  were  allowed 
an  hour  at  twelve  o'clock  for  dinner,  and  were  dismissed 
before  sunset.  A  Reis  received  two  piastres  per  day ; 
the  men,  and  larger  boys  one  piastre;  and  the  women, 
and  children  twenty,  or  thirty  paras,  according  to  their 
size.^  The  men  employed  in  the  interior  of  the  pyra- 
mids, and  those  subsequently  procured  from  Cairo,  and 
from  the  quarries  at  the  Mokattam,  had  of  course  higher 
wages ;  and  after  the  13th  of  February,  every  person 
received  double  pay  when  any  discovery  of  consequence 
occurred.  This,  however,  instead  of  being  an  additional 
stimulus  to  exertion,  proved  a  mere  waste  of  money. 
The  people  at  first  assembled  every  morning  and  even- 
ing, to  be  counted  off",  on  the  terrace,  where  the  tents 
were  pitched ;  but,  by  a  more  convenient  arrangement, 
they  afterwards  collected,  according  to  their  villages, 
upon  the  plain  beneath. 

In  the  course  of  the  day  a  large  stone,  which  seemed 
to  cover  the  aperture  of  a  pit,  was  found  near  the  grotto 
wliere  a  sarcophagus  had  been  discovered  in  the  middle 
shaft.  It  was  broken  with  some  difficulty,  but  nothing, 
excepting  sand,  was  beneath  it.  A  rough  wall  had  been 
built  from  east  to  west  across  the  lower  part  of  this 
shaft,  apparently  to  divide  it  for  separate  interments. 
More  bones  were  taken  out  of  the  grottoes,  which  seemed 
to  have  been  enlarged  from  natural  fissures. 

4:th.  —  I  completed  my  copy  of  the  hieroglyphics  on 


'  For   the  value  of  money  see  Appendix.      Forty   paras   make   a 
piastre,  and  five  piastres  are  worth  a  shilling. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  147 

the  rock  near  the  north-western  angle  of  the  Second 
Pyramid  ;  and  afterwards  examined  the  Third,  the  three 
smaller,  and  the  periboli,  and  boundaries  near  them.  In 
the  afternoon  Mr,  Hill  came  with  Paulo,  a  Maltese,  who 
was  engaged  to  superintend  the  boring ;  they  immediately 
went  with  M.  Caviglia  into  the  Great  Pyramid,  and  re- 
solved to  commence  operations  in  the  centre  of  the  king's 
chamber.  But  it  was  found  impossible  to  bore  through 
the  blocks  of  granite,  or  to  remove  them  on  account  of 
the  closeness  of  the  joints,  I  therefore  directed  Paulo  on 
the  following  morning  to  clear  out  an  old  excavation  at 
the  north-western  corner,  and  to  begin  boring  at  the 
depth  of  six  feet  four  inches  below  the  surface  of  the 
granite  blocks,  and  at  the  distance  of  three  feet  from 
the  northern,  and  ten  feet  nine  inches  from  the  western 
side  of  the  chamber,  A  party  was  employed  at  the 
Second  Pyramid,  ]Mr,  Hill  set  up  several  triangles,  to 
raise  the  sand  from  the  fosse  at  Campbell's  tomb,  which 
would  scarcely  ever  have  been  got  out  without  the  assist- 
ance of  machinery. 

In  returning  to  the  tents  in  the  afternoon,  I  asked 
M,  Caviglia  when  he  would  probably  have  finished  his 
excavations  at  the  mummy-pits,  and  be  able  to  take  the 
bulk  of  the  people  to  the  pyramids.  He  said  in  about 
a  fortnight,  but  that  he  then  intended  to  begin  upon 
another,*  I  remarked,  that  in  that  case  it  was  useless 
for  me  to  remain  any  longer,  as  no  discovery  could  be 
made  before  I  should  be  obliged  to  return  to  England, 

*  This  pit  was  on  the  hills  beyond  the  southern  dyke,  and  M.  Ca- 
viglia informed  me  that  the  French  had  failed  in  attempting  to  open  it. 
It  is  described  26th  March, 


148  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

He  observed  that  the  ground  would  be  surveyed,  and  that 
I  could  take  the  map  with  me ;  and  asked  what  I  would 
advise  him  to  do  with  the  pits  that  were  already  begun. 
I  recommended  him  to  give  up  the  two  higher  shafts, 
which  had  evidently  been  opened,  and  to  employ  the 
people  at  the  pyramids ;  but  to  continue  the  excavation 
at  Campbell's  toinb,  on  account  of  \he  peculiarity  of  its 
construction,  although  it  had  been,  no  doubt,  already 
plundered,  as  the  superstructure  was  destroyed.  To 
this  he  agreed,  and,  on  going  to  Cairo  in  the  evening, 
I  informed  Colonel  Campbell  accordingly.  Indeed  I  had 
often  expressed  to  him  my  regret,  that  so  much  time  and 
money  had  been  wasted  upon  these  works ;  but  he  seemed 
to  have  a  great  opinion  of  M.  Caviglia's  experience  and 
skill ;  and  a  disinclination  to  interfere  with  his  projects. 

5t/i.  —  I  remained  at  Cairo. 

6th.  —  M.  Caviglia  came  early  in  the  morning,  and 
informed  me  that  he  had  received  Colonel  Campbell's 
directions  to  proceed  with  the  mummy-pits  as  usual.  As 
soon,  therefore,  as  I  was  dressed,  I  went  in  search  of  the 
colonel.  I  found  him  at  the  house  of  M.  de  Laurin,  the 
Austrian  consul-general,  and  explained  to  him  how  un- 
satisfactorily the  works  had  been  carried  on  at  Gizeh ; 
when  he  promised  to  send  orders  to  M.  Caviglia  to 
employ  the  people  without  delay  at  the  pyramids.  He 
introduced  me  in  the  course  of  the  day  to  Mr.  Lakin, 
Mr.  Rutherford,  and  Dr.  Wilson,  who  were  proceeding 
to  Upper  Egypt. 

7fh.  —  I  went  to  Gizeh  in  the  afternoon  with  Mr.  Gal- 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  149 

loway,  and  JNIr.  Perring ;   and  we  began  to  measure  the 
interior  of  the  Great  Pyramid. 

8ih.  —  We  continued  the  admeasurements.  In  the 
evening,  Mr.  Perring  and  Mr.  Galloway  returned  to  Cairo 
with  Mr.  Hill,  who  had  arrived  in  the  morning. 

9t/i.  —  The  work  was  resumed  at  the  Second  Pyra- 
mid, probably  in  consequence  of  Colonel  Campbell's 
letter.  Two  German  and  two  English  travellers  paid 
us  a  visit.  Several  bones  were  found  in  the  fosse  of 
Campbell's  Tomb. 

10th.  —  M.  Caviglia  went  to  Cairo  to  make  arrange- 
ments respecting  the  Arabs,  who,  the  Sheiks  had  in- 
formed him,  would  be  required  to  work  at  a  canal. 

A  quantity  of  bones  were  found  upon  one  of  the  but- 
tresses, and  in  other  parts  of  the  fosse  at  Campbell's 
tomb.  Whilst  I  was  employed  in  the  Great  Pyramid,  I 
was  informed  that  a  sarcophagus  had  been  discovered  in 
a  grotto  proceeding  from  the  shaft,  near  the  south- 
western coi'ner  of  the  tomb.^  I  immediately  went  to  the 
spot,  and  finding  that  JM.  Caviglia's  servant  (Giachino) 
had  entered  it,  I  ordered  him  out,  and  forbade  any  person 
to  go  down  before  jNI.  Caviglia's  return.  The  sarcophagus 
was  empty. 

The  Sheiks  came  to  me  in  the  course  of  the  morning, 
and  offered  to  furnish  two  or  three  hundred  additional 
men,  if  I  could  obtain  a  protection  for  them  from  being 
sent  to  the  canal.      I  immediately  accepted  them,  and 

*  A  plan  of  the  tomb  will  be  given. 


150  -  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

promised  to  consult  with  M.  Caviglia  respecting  the  pro- 
tection. I  paid  the  people  in  the  evening,''  and,  upon 
his  return,  gave  an  account  of  them  to  M.  Caviglia,  and 
informed  him  of  the  discovery  of  the  sarcophagus,  and 
of  the  additional  men  offered  by  the  Sheiks.  He  ob- 
served, that  he  did  not  like  to  employ  more  men,  as  the 
weekly  bills  were  already  very  high.  I  told  him  that  I 
thought  he  was  right  about  the  weekly  bills,'  but  that, 
as  time  was  eveiy  thing  to  me,  I  would  pay  the  rest 
of  the  people,  whom  he  did  not  want,  and  employ  them 
in  distinct  operations.  He  then  alleged,  that  he  had 
not  leisure  to  attend  to  any  additional  works.  I  stated 
that  I  would  undertake  both  their  payment,  and  super- 
intendence, and  avoid  all  interference  with  his  excava- 
tions. In  the  evening  Mr.  Hill  and  Mr.  Perring  arrived. 
A  smith's  forge  was  established  in  an  adjoining  tomb. 
At  dinner,  M.  Caviglia  produced  a  programme  of  his  in- 
tended operations.  I  informed  him,  that  I  had  no  objec- 
tion to  it ;  and,  as  I  had  before  stated,  that  I  should 
employ  the  rest  of  the  people  according  to  my  own  judg- 
ment, and  at  my  own  expense. 

11///.  —  Mr.  Hill  went   away   early   in   the   morning. 

^  Their  numbers  were — men,  sixty-eight;  women  and  children, 
fifty-three ;  with  Paulo,  in  the  Great  Pyramid,  four ;  at  the  excava- 
tion in  the  Great  Pyramid,  six ;  at  the  excavation  in  the  third  pyra- 
mid, two. 

7  I  had  repeatedly  stated  my  apprehensions,  that  Colonel  Campbell 
would  give  up  the  affair  on  account  of  the  increasing  expense,  and,  as 
that  might  materially  embarrass  our  operations,  that  I  was  readj'  to 
advance  any  reasonable  sum,  besides  our  regular  contributions ;  and,  in 
fact,  M.  Caviglia  had  been  furnished  with  provisions,  and  stores  of  every 
description  by  Mr.  Hill  on  my  account. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH..  151 

Soon  afterwards  I  found  it  necessary  to  recall  Paulo,  and 
the  party,  who  were  boring  in  the  Great  Pyramid,  and  to 
withdraw  the  rods,  owing  to  circumstances,  which  it  is 
unnecessary  to  detail,  but  which  subsequently  induced 
Colonel  Campbell  to  give  up  his  share  in  the  under- 
taking, and  to  dismiss  U.  Caviglia  from  the  pyramids.'' 
I  wrote  to  Colonel  Campbell,  and  went  with  Mr.  Perring 
to  the  Great  Pyramid,  where  we  took  the  angles,  examined 
the  excavations,  and  likewise  the  stone  at  the  northern 
end  of  the  great  passage,  which  appeared  to  Mr.  Wilkin- 
son to  have  been  granite.  We  also  directed  our  atten- 
tion to  a  considerable  settling  on  the  western  side  of  this 
passage,  occasioned,  probably,  either  by  the  excavation 
made  by  the  Caliphs,  or  by  the  chasm  connected  with 
the  grotto  in  the  well.  Dr.  Wilson,  Mr.  Rutherford,  and 
Mr,  Lakin  arrived;  with  whom,  and  with  Mr.  Perring, 
I  went  in  the  evening  to  Cairo  ;  where  I  saw  Colonel 
Campbell,  and  explained  to  him  my  reasons  for  declining 
all  further  co-operation  with  M.  Caviglia. 

12/7/. — I  returned  with  Mr.  Galloway  and  Mr.  Perring 
to  the  pyramids,  where  the  Arab  Sheiks  had  been  some 
time  in  attendance.  I  desired  them  to  send,  on  the  fol- 
lowing morning,  the  additional  men,  whom  they  had  pro- 
mised ;  but  this  they  now  refused  to  do.  INIr.  Galloway, 
Mr.  Perring,  and  myself,  measured  the  exterior  of  the 
Great  Pyramid ;  and  Mr.  Perring,  in  passing  over  the 
centre  of  the  northern  front  for  that  purpose,  disco- 
vered the  mouth  of  the  northern  air-channel.^    On  returu- 

8  See  Appendix. 

9  As  there  had  been  an  excavation  to  the  length  of  thirty-seven  feet 
along  the  upper  end  of  the  channel,  and  a  great  many  stones  removed 


152  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

ing  to  the  tents  from  these  operations,  1  received  a  letter 
from  Colonel  Campbell,  informing  me,  that  he  gave  up 
the  works  carried  on  under  the  firmaun,  and  inclosing  a 
copy  of  one,  which  he  had  sent  to  M.  Caviglia,  to  recall 
him  from  the  pyramids.  Mr.  Galloway  returned  to  Cairo. 
Mr.  Perring  and  myself  passed  most  part  of  the  night  in 
examining  the  interior  of  the  Great  Pyramid  ;  particularly 
Davison's  chamber,  the  passage  leading  to  it,  and  the 
excavation  made  by  M.  Caviglia  on  its  southern  side. 

February  IStli. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  78.  Children,  37. 

Great  Pyramid.  —  Davison's  Chamber. 

Northern  Air-Channel. 

Passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 

King's  Chamber. 

Third  Pyramid.  —  Temple  to  the  Eastward. 

•  Excavation  between  the  Temple  and  Pyramid. 

The  numbers  of  people  employed  are  regularly  stated,  as  they  varied 
considerably  from  day  to  day ;  but,  to  avoid  unnecessary  repetition,  the 
day's  works  are  omitted,  when  they  are  the  same  as  the  preceding. 
With  one  or  two  exceptions,  no  work  was  done  on  Sundays.  The  people 
employed  at  piece-work,  and  the  quarry-men  from  Cairo,  are  not  included 
in  these  accounts. 

M.  Caviglia  having  sent  me  word,  (in  consequence, 
no  doubt,  of  the  letter  which  he  had  received  from 
Colonel  Campbell,)  that  he  did  not  intend  to  employ 
the  people,  I  counted  them  off,  and  sent  them  to  the 

from  the  face  of  the  pyramid  near  it,  it  is  surprising  that  it  had  not 
been  sooner  discovered ;  particularly  as,  according  to  M.  Caviglia, 
sulphur,  rope-ends,  and  pitch  had  been  burnt  in  the  lower  part  of  it, 
and  "  des  hommes  experimentes"  sent  in  various  directions  over  the 
exterior,  in  order  to  detect  its  direction  by  the  smell,  or  by  the  smoke. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  OX  AT  GIZEH.  153 

works  above  mentioned/  The  excavation,  begun  by 
INI.  Caviglia  behind  the  blocks  of  granite,  which  form  the 
southern  wall  of  Davison's  chamber,  with  a  view  of  in- 
tersecting the  soutliern  air-channel,  was  continued ;  and 
another  party  was  also  employed  at  the  same  place,  to 
carry  up  the  excavation  above  the  roof  of  the  chamber, 
where,  as  I  before  mentioned,  I  expected  to  find  a  sepul- 
chral apartment,  to  which,  I  thought  it  probable,  that  that 
chamber  was  an  entresol,  and  the  top  of  the  great  passage 
an  entrance.  Some  men  were  employed  in  clearing  out 
the  mouth  of  the  northern  air-channel,  which  had  been 
discovered  by  Mr.  Perring  on  the  exterior  of  the  pyramid; 
but  the  excavation  along  the  course  of  this  channel  near 
the  king's  chamber  was  discontinued  from  the  great  diffi- 
culty attending  it.  The  candles  would  scarcely  burn ; 
not  more  than  six  inches  were  cut  out  in  twenty-four 
hours ;  and  I  knew,  from  examination,  that  at  least  thuty- 
five  feet  remained  without  any  opening,  or  apartment. 
The  connexion  between  the  upper  and  lower  parts  of  this 
channel  was  not  then  ascertained ;  but,  even  if  it  had, 
a  communication  from  it  to  other  chambers,  was  highly 
probable.  The  men  sent  into  the  passage  leading  to  the 
queen's  chamber  were  ordered  to  clear  out  the  rubbish 
from  the  bottom  of  the  step,  as  far  as  the  apartment.  In 
the  king's  chamber,  the  boring  rods,  withdrawn  on  the 
11th  instant,  were  replaced ;  and  Paulo  resumed  his 
former  operations. 

The  greatest  part  of  the  people  were  sent  with  the 

1  In  order  to  understand  the  details  contained  in  this  journal,  a  refer- 
ence is  recommended  not  only  to  the  accompanying  plates,  but  also  to 
Mr.  Perring's  plans  and  sections,  published  by  Mr.  Fraser,  215  Regent 
Street. 


154  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

two  janissaries  to  clear  the  space  between  the  eastern 
front  of  the  Third  Pyramid  and  the  ruins  of  the  temple ; 
and  likewise  to  excavate  the  adytum  of  the  latter  build- 
ing, in  the  hope  of  finding  an  entrance  into  the  pyramid. 

Giachino,  whom  M.  Caviglia  had  discharged,  entered 
my  service,  and  had  the  general  direction,  and  superin- 
tendence of  these  works.  Having  made  these  arrange- 
ments, I  assisted  Mr.  Perring  in  taking  the  level  of  the 
entrance  from  the  base  of  the  Great  Pyramid. 

In  the  evening,  that  gentleman  returned  to  Cairo ; 
and  a  number  of  Arab  Sheiks  and  Turkish  officers  paid 
me  a  visit. 

When  the  people  w  .o  paid  off,  a  guard  was  placed 
upon  Campbell's  tomb,  which  was  continued  till  M.  Ca- 
viglia's  departure  for  Alexandria,  when  I  took  away  the 
windlass,  ropes,  &c.,  and  the  machinery  that  had  been 
erected. 

An  old  basket  having  been  dug  up  in  the  passage 
leading  to  the  queen's  chamber,  I  concluded  that  it  had 
been  already  examined,  and  ordered  the  rubbish  to  be 
replaced,  and  the  operation  to  be  given  up. 

February  lith. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  95.  Children,  73. 

Great  Pyramid. — Davison's  Cliamber. 

King's  Chamber. 

.  Northern  Air-channel. 

Subterranean  Passage  and  Chamber. 

Third  Pyramid. — Temple  to  the  Eastward. 

Excavation  between  the  Temple  and  Pyramid. 

Interior. 

Mr.  Perring  had  informed  me  on  the  preceding  even- 
ing, that  having  again  examined  the  works  near  Davison's 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT   GIZEH.  155 

chamber,  he  had  directed  Paulo,  to  take  away  tlie  men 
employed  over  the  granite  blocks  on  the  southern  side, 
and  to  set  them  to  work  in  the  end  of  the  passage  at  the 
north-eastern  corner  of  that  apartment,  where  we  had, 
on  the  evening  of  the  12th  instant,  observed  a  small 
crevice  in  a  joint,  by  the  side  of  the  corner-block  of 
granite,  which  allowed  of  the  insertion  of  a  reed  for  about 
two  feet  in  an  upward  direction ;  and  which  the  men  were 
to  follow  up.  I  expressed  my  thanks  to  Mr.  Perring,  and 
gave  directions  accordingly.  The  place  was  rather  less 
confined,  and  more  convenient  for  the  object  which  I 
had  so  anxiously  in  view,  namely,  to  penetrate  over  the 
chamber,  yet  it  was  still  a  most  difficult  operation,  as  the 
passage  was  not  much  more  than  three  feet  in  height, 
the  stones  extremely  large,  and  hard,  and  the  whole 
overhand  work.  The  Arabs  can  stand  heat,  but  are 
feeble  workmen,  and  have  neither  proper  tools,  nor  skill 
for  such  undertakings.  We  had  parties  employed  by 
night  and  day  for  many  weeks,  which  required  con- 
stant superintendence.  I  tried  piece-work,  without  suc- 
cess ;  and  but  little  progress  was  made,  until  quarry- 
men  arrived  from  the  Mokattam,  who  understood  their 
business,  and  could  use  gunpowder  ;  yet  even  then  the 
joints  were  obliged  to  be  cut  to  get  I'oom  for  the  blasting ; 
and  the  great  fragments,  immediately  above  the  work- 
men, were  afterwards  drawn  out  with  much  difficulty, 
and  in  many  instances  with  considerable  danger.  The 
other  party,  employed  on  the  southern  side  of  the  cham- 
ber, was  soon  withdrawn.  Owing  to  the  idleness  of  the 
Arabs,  the  boring  rods  in  the  King's  Chamber  were  not 
constantly  turned,  and  a  notch  was  made  at  the  bottom 
of  the  hole,  in  which  the  chisel  snapped  off  at  the  depth 


156  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

of  five  feet, — it  was  reported,  upon  granite.  Nothing, 
therefore,  remained  but  to  cut  through  the  stones  for 
the  chisel.  The  subterraneous  chamber,  and  the  passage 
proceeding  from  it  to  the  south,  were  strictly  examined, 
but  without  any  other  result,  than  the  conviction  that 
they  were  unfinished  excavations  ;  nor  could  the  purpose, 
for  which  the  passage  had  been  intended,  be  discovered. 

Some  bones,  and  a  skeleton,  probably  of  a  common 
Arab,  wrapped  up  in  coarse  linen,  were  found  amongst 
the  stones  near  the  Third  Pyramid  ;  and  people  were 
employed  in  carrying  on  the  gallery,  which  JNI.  Caviglia 
had  made  to  the  length  of  six  feet,  from  the  chasm  to 
the  northern  front.  Several  strangers  visited  the  works. 
Mr.  Hill  arrived  in  the  evening. 

February  \5th. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  96.  Children,  83. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

The  excavation  for  the  chisel  was  begun  in  the  King's 
Chamber.  About  fifteen  feet  of  the  northern  air-channel 
had  been  cleared. 

Litter  and  decayed  forage  were  taken  out  from  the 
place  where  the  bones  were  discovered,  at  the  Third 
Pyramid.  The  Adytum  of  the  temple  was  cleared  to  its 
rocky  foundation  ;  it  was  seventeen  feet  below  the  top  of 
the  present  wall,  and  was  stained  in  places  with  red 
cement  in  which  a  pavement  had  been  laid  :  no  pavement 
or  lining,  however,  remained,  nor  were  any  inscriptions  or 
sculpture  visible  upon  the  enormous  blocks,  with  which 
it  was  built ;  but  a  shallow  square  had  been  cut  in  the 
centre  of  the  western  side,  and  slight  indications  of 
pedestals  appeared  on  the  floor. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  OJST  AT  GIZEII.  157 

I  examined  the  several  pyramids  with  Mr.  Hill ;  and, 
on  arriving  at  the  portcullis  of  the  Second,  we  imagined 
that,  if  it  was  entirely  taken  out,  access  might  be  ob- 
tained through  the  vacancy  or  groove,  in  which  it  moved 
up,  to  other  passages,  and  chambers,  that  might  possibly 
exist  in  the  higher  part  of  the  building.  Had  we  ex- 
tended our  researches  a  few  paces  further,  the  great 
excavation  across  the  horizontal  passage  would  have 
shewn  our  mistake,  for  it  was  from  twelve  to  fifteen  feet 
high  at  the  distance  of  twenty-three  feet  eight  inches 
from  the  portcullis,  and  must,  therefore,  have  intersected 
any  passage  that  ascended  at  the  usual  angle.  Not  being 
aware  of  this  circumstance,  however,  we  lowered  the  port- 
cullis, in  order  to  break  it,  and,  in  doing  so,  endeavoured 
to  shut  in  two  of  the  Arabs,  that  they  might  work  the 
harder  to  effect  their  escape;  but  no  persuasion  could 
induce  them  to  remain,  although  Mr.  Hill  offered  to  stay 
with  them ;  and  the  granite,  owing  to  the  confined  situ- 
ation, resisted  all  our  efforts  from  without.  Some  men 
were  therefore  employed  to  cut  grooves  across  it. 

I  was  informed  that  INI.  Caviglia  had  arrived  with 
a  janissary  to  remove  his  baggage,  but  I  did  not  see 
him. 

February  16th. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  90.  Children,  82. 

Great    Pyramid. — King's  Chamber. 

Davison's  Chamber. 

Northern  Air  Channel. 

Second  Pyramid. — Portcullis. 

Lower  Entrance. 

Third     Pyramid. — Interior. 

Boring. 

Excavation  between  the  Temple  and  Pyramid. 


158  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

Mr.  Hill  went  to  Cairo.  Having  ordered  that  the 
tomb,  which  had  been  occupied  by  M.  Cavigha,  should 
be  cleaned  out,  and  made  fit  for  use  ;  I  was  told  that 
he  had  left  behind  him  a  quantity  of  clothes,  furniture, 
and  various  other  articles.  These  were  given  in  charge 
to  Giachino,  his  former  servant,  who  said,  that  he  had 
received  directions  to  keep  them  till  M.  Caviglia's  return, 
which  he  expected  would  be  in  about  two  months. 

A  large  party  was  employed  in  removing  the  mound 
from  the  northern  front  of  the  Second  Pyramid,  in  search 
of  a  lower  entrance. 

The  gallery  in  the  northern  front  of  the  Third  Py- 
ramid, was  extended  an  additional  six  feet,  and  a  tent 
was  put  up  in  the  chasm,  that  Giachino  might  superin- 
tend the  work  by  night.  As  there  were  no  accounts, 
antient  or  modern,  respecting  the  entrance  of  this  py- 
ramid, or  of  its  having  ever  been  opened,  notwithstanding 
the  attempts  that  from  time  to  time  had  been  made,^  it 
w^as  an  object  of  the  greatest  curiosity,  and  I  fully  ex- 
pected to  discover  the  interior  chambers  and  passages, 
by  carrying  on  the  gallery  to  the  centre,  and  by  after- 
wards sinking  a  large  shaft  to  the  foundation.  I  also 
ordered  Paulo  to  bore  for  a  passage  in  the  lower  chasm, 
behind  the  granite  blocks  that  form  the  base  of  this 
pyramid. 

February  \ltli. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  85.  Children,  63. 

Great    Pyramid. — King's  Chamber. 

Davison's  Chamber. 

Northern  Air  Channel. 

^  I  was  not  then  aware  of  the  extract  translated  by  Burckhardt  from 
Edrisi,  which  will  be  afterwards  alluded  to. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  159 

Second  Pyramid — Portcullis. 

Lower  Entrance. 

Quarries. 

Third    Pyramid. — Interior. 

Boring. 

Excavation  between  Temple  and  Pyramid. 

In  the  course  of  the  morning,  Giachino  reported  that 
the  men,  employed  at  the  northern  air-channel,  had  ar- 
rived at  a  portcullis ;  but  when  the  sand  had  been  com- 
pletely cleared  out,  the  supposed  portcullis  was  found  to 
be  the  termination  of  the  forced  passage,  (three  feet,  by 
two  feet  nine),  made  to  the  extent  of  thirty-seven  feet, 
upon  the  air-channel,  which  continued  nine,  by  nine  and  a 
half  inches,  (at  about  an  angle  of  twenty-six)  in  the  solid 
masonry.  It  was  full  of  sand  and  stones,  which,  owing 
to  the  smallness  of  the  aperture,  and  its  inclined  position, 
were  with  difficulty  taken  out,  though  various  instruments 
were  contrived  for  that  purpose.  For  many  days  scarcely 
a  bushel  of  sand  was  drawn  up ;  but,  by  Mr.  Hill's,  and 
afterwards  by  Mr.  Raven's  perseverance,  and  with  the 
assistance  of  the  boring  rods,  above  ninety  feet  of  this 
small  channel  were  entirely  cleared,  and  ventilation  re- 
stored to  the  pyramid. 

Another  groove  was  cut  in  the  portcullis  in  the 
Second  Pyramid.  The  sand  was  removed,  in  search  of 
a  shaft,  below  the  cutting  mentioned  by  M.  Caviglia  on 
27th  of  January.^      No   shaft  was   discovered,  but   the 

3  M.  Caviglia  appears  to  have  always  entertained  an  idea  that  He- 
brew characters  were  connected  with  the  pyramids ;  for,  in  a  letter  to 
Mr.  Hamilton,  dated  Sept.  21,  1818,  is  the  following  passage: — "La 
forme  du  premier  (pyramid)  exprime  ce  pentagramme,  nillTITj  qui  est, 
constate  par  les  cinq  lignes  perpendiculaires,  qui  sont  au  dessus  de  la 
chambre,  ou  il  y  a  le  sarcophage." 


160 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII, 


bottom  of  the  rock  bad  been  excavated  to  form  the  lower 
part  of  a  doorway,  and  the  cutting  beneath  the  hiero- 
glyphics marked  the  outline  of  the  top.  Similar  works 
had  been  begun  at  the  bottom  of  the  rock  under  the 

On  the  northern  side. 

.  ,    inscription    on    the   western    side,    and    Mr. 

[J  Birch's  explanation   of  the  characters  leaves 

no  doubt  that  entrances  were  intended.  Al- 
though the  operation  was  a  failure  as  far  as 
the  original  object  was  concerned,  yet  it  led 
to  the  discovery  of  lines  of  the  quarrying,  by  which  the 
rock  must  have  been  levelled  when  the  pyramid  was 
constructed.  They  formed  squares  of  about  nine  feet, 
and  had  been  preserved  under  a  depth  of  sand ;  but  in 
other  parts,  where  they  had  been  exposed  to  the  air, 
they  were  almost  entirely  effaced,  which  proved  their 
great  antiquity. 

On  the  western  side.* 


*  The  line  of  hieroglj'phics,  sculptured  above  the  quarries  levelled  for 
the  Second  Pj'ramid,  contains  the  names  and  titles  of  a  functionary  of  the 
age  of  one  of  the  Remeses,  (the  second,  or  third,)  or,  of  one  of  the  nine- 
teenth dynasty ;  he  is  named  Maei,  and  is  stated  to  be  superintendent 
of  a  certain  office*  under  Remeses  (beloved  of  Amun),  "in  the  abode 


*  The  "bearers"  of  the  . . .  peculiar  office  undiscovered.  The  heron, 
a  sieve,  occasionally  preceded  by  the  lituus,  form  the  phonetic  group 
O'V^^i.CU,  "  clear,"  "  splendid,"  and  are  accompanied  in  the  Egyptian 
ritual  by  the  determinative  of  a  disc  shedding  light,  and  elsewhere  by 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  OX  AT  GIZEII.  161 

At  the  Third  Pyramid  the  boring  had  got  down 
seven  feet  five  inches,  and  the  gallery  in  the  chasm  had 
advanced  about  two  feet.  I  gave  up  the  operation 
between  this  pyramid  and  the  temple  on  account  of  the 
great  difficulty  and  danger  attending  the  removal  of  the 
granite  blocks,  and  of  the  little  probability  that  existed 
of  finding  an  entrance,  at  all  events  from  the  temple.  In 
the  evening  INIr.  Hill  arrived  ^vith  the  unwelcome  intelli- 

of  Haroeri,  son  of  the  superintendent  of  the  carriers  Bokenamun,  justified 
in  Egypt."*  The  inscription  underneath  contains  the  name  of  his  son 
Piieri,  "vivifying  his  name."-]-  The  names  and  titles  of  the  same  Maei 
appear  in  the  hieroglyphics  on  the  western  side,  with  the  variation  of 
Chief  of  the  Bearers,  or  Builders,  in  the  abode  of  the  Sun.  Although, 
from  the  position  in  which  they  were  found,  it  might  be  supposed  that 
these  characters  were  of  the  era  of  the  pyramid,  the  whole  mass  of 
hieroglyphic  evidence  is  against  it.  Were  it  not  almost  certain  that 
the  stone  was  removed  in  preparing  for  the  base  of  the  pyramid,  the 
name  and  titles  of  the  functionary  might  justify  the  supposition  that  he 
superintended  the  quarryings  at  a  later  period  for  the  construction  of  a 
temple  in  honour  of  the  god  Re  or  Haroeri  in  the  time  of  the  eighteenth 
or  nineteenth  dynasties,  long  after  the  erection  of  the  pyramids ;  but 
this  does  not  appear  to  have  been  the  case,  and,  from  the  sepulchral 
tenor  of  the  inscription,  it  must  be  concluded  that  the  site  was  at  that 
epoch  considered  desirable  for  the  excavation  of  Hypoges,  or  tombs, 
and  that  the  name  inscribed  indicated  the  locality  marked  out  by  the 
beginning  of  a  doorway  for  the  vault  of  Maei.  It  is  impossible  to  con- 
nect the  comparatively  complex  name  of  Remeses  in  the  inscription 
with  those  of  the  early  dynasty,  under  which  the  pyramids  were  built. 
—  Mr.  Birch. 


a  symbolic  eye.  In  one  text  Horus  is  said  to  illuminate  the  world  with 
OT^^Lcy,  "  the  splendour  of  his  eyes."  (Vide  Champollion,  Mon.  de 
I'Egypte.)     It  frequently  formed  a  sacerdotal  title. 

*   The  pure  Land  of  Truth. 

-f-   A  common  sepulchral  appellation  of  the  relations  of  the  deceased. 


162  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

gence  that  Mr.  Galloway  and  himself  were  going  to 
Alexandria;  and  that  jNIr.  Perring,  owing  to  important 
business,  would  not  be  able  to  attend  for  some  days. 
At  night  ISIr.  Hill  went  round,  and  examined  the  works. 

February  IStli. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  128.  Children,  56. 

Great    Pyramid. — King's  Chamber. 

Davison's  Chamber. 

Northern  Air-channel. 

Second  Pyramid. —  Portcullis. 

Lower  Entrance. 

Quarries. 

Third    Pyramid.  —  Interior. 

Boring. 

The  morning  was  so  extremely  foggy,  that  the  pyra- 
mids were  quite  obscured.  My  time  was  occupied  as 
usual. 

19th.  —  I  went  to  Cairo  early  in  the  morning;  where 
I  saw  Mr.  Galloway,  who  was  on  the  point  of  setting  out 
for  Alexandria,  and  also  Mr.  Perring,  who  was  engaged 
in  laying  down  a  railroad  at  Tourah,  and  was  obliged, 
therefore,  to  suspend  for  the  present  the  survey,  which 
we  had  undertaken.  He  gave  me  several  useful  ad- 
measurements of  the  Great  Pyramid.  INIr.  Hill  having 
mentioned  that  a  person,  who  had  arrived  at  his  house 
from  India,  desired  to  go  with  me  to  the  pyramids,  I  took 
an  opportunity  of  calling  upon  him,  and  had  the  pleasure 
of  his  company  on  my  return  in  the  evening.  This  gen- 
tleman, I  was  afterwards  informed,  was  a  Mr.  Ashburner 
from  Bombay. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  163 

Fehniarij  20th. 

Reis,  6.  Men,  63.  Children,  36. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

The  gallery  at  the  Third  Pyramid  had  heen  carried 
on  about  three  feet,  the  boring  nearly  twelve.  A  Russian 
colonel,  and  four  other  strangers,  paid  me  a  visit. 

Fehniarij  2\st. 

Reis,  6.  Men,  90.  Children,  59. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

The  works  did  not  go  on  to  my  satisfaction  in  tlie 
King's  and  Davison's  Chambers,  notwithstanding  that 
Paulo  remained  during  the  night  in  the  Great  Pyramid. 
I  therefore  ordered  an  agreement  to  be  made  for  piece- 
work at  twenty-two  piastres  per  foot.  Seventeen  feet  of 
the  northern  air-channel  had  b^n  cleared.  The  centre 
of  the  southern  front  of  the  Great  Pyramid  was  marked 
on  the  same  level  with  the  doorway  on  the  northern, 
that  an  entrance  might  be  searched  for  as  far  to  the 
westward  of  the  centre  on  that  side,  as  the  present  door- 
way is  to  the  eastward  of  the  centre  on  the  other,  for  I 
conceived  it  possible  that  a  communication  might  proceed 
from  a  southern  entrance.  I  had  not  at  that  time  any 
idea  that  the  stupendous  masses  of  the  pyramids  were 
composed  of  solid  masonry,  and  that,  (with  the  exception 
of  the  King's,  and  Queen's  Chambers,  and  the  adjoining 
passages  and  chambers  of  construction  afterwards  disco- 
vered in  this  pyramid,)  the  apartments  were  invariably 
excavations  in  the  solid  rock.  Indeed,  after  having  ascer- 
tained the  foct  almost  beyond  the  possibility  of  a  doubt, 


164  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

it  was  difficult  to  believe  it,  or  to  comprehend  an  adequate 
motive  for  the  construction  of  these  magnificent  buildings 
merely  as  sepulcliral  monuments  over  a  tomb,  unless  it 
was  the  all-powerful  influence  of  superstitious  feelings. 

The  rubbish  had  been  nearly  removed  from  the  base 
of  the  Second  Pyramid.  The  two  grooves  in  the  port- 
cullis were  finished,  and  another  was  begun  across  them. 

I  measured  the  chasms  on  the  northern  front  of  the 
Third  Pyramid,  and  directed  that  the  excavations  should 
be  carried  on  by  piece-work ;  and  that,  instead  of  daily 
pay,  the  men  should  receive  a  thousand  piastres  on 
arriving  at  the  centre  of  the  pyramid.  There  was  a 
difficulty,  however,  in  making  this  arrangement,  because 
the  same  people  did  not  regularly  attend,  and  because 
those,  who  were  employed,  from  their  extreme  poverty, 
required  money  for  their  daily  subsistence.*  Mr.  Ash- 
burner  returned  to  Cairo. 

*  Whatever  may  have  been  the  result  of  these  operations,  the  villages 
of  Koum  el  Eswith  and  of  Cafr  el  Batran  have  been  greatly  benefited, 
not  only  by  the  daily  receipt  of  more  money  than  they  ever  before 
obtained,  but  by  their  exemption  from  public  labour  at  an  adjacent 
canal.  In  the  present  state  of  the  population  all  labour  must  be  com- 
pulsory, but  the  mode  in  which  it  is  exacted  is  often  extremely  cruel, 
and  the  cause  of  great  distress.  When  a  public  work  is  to  be  carried 
on,  the  people,  or  a  considerable  portion  of  them,  are  demanded  by  the 
Madyr  of  the  district  from  the  Sheiks  of  the  villages,  who  make  a 
selection  at  their  own  discretion,  and  are  also  obliged  to  attend  in 
person.  A  system  of  injustice,  bribery,  and  extortion  is  the  natural 
consequence  :  the  Mamoor  (the  officer  under  the  Madyr),  oppressing 
the  Sheiks;  and  the  Sheiks,  in  their  turn,  the  defenceless  people,  who 
are  reduced  to  the  lowest  state  of  misery.  In  many  instances  a  guard 
is  stationed  to  prevent  the  return  of  the  people  to  their  homes  before 
the  completion  of  the  work;  and  as  no  respect  is  paid  to  age,  sex, 
sickness,   or   poverty,    the    consequences   on  the   iniirm,  from   age   or 


OPERATIOXS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  165 

Februarij  22cL 
Reis,  7.  Men,  96.  Children,  43. 

Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  in  soutliern  front. 

King's  Chamber. 

Davison's  Chamber. 

Northern  Air-channel. 

Second  Pyramid.  —  Portcullis. 

infancy,  and  the  effects  upon  a  beautiful  and  intelligent  race  of  chil- 
dren, particularly  in  wet  and  cold  situations  and  seasons,  can  scarcely 
be  imagined.  Yet,  with  all  the  advantages  of  regular  wages,  and 
exemption  from  severe  labour  whilst  employed  at  the  pyramids,  of 
attention  to  their  comfort,  and  to  any  little  accidents  that  might  occur, 
and  of  medical  aid  and  of  food  to  the  sick,  and  likewise  of  a  positive 
prohibition  of  severe  measures,  and  of  corporal  punishment,  these  unhappy 
people  were  totally  insensible  to  the  kindness  shewn  to  them.  Indeed, 
on  the  contrary,  they  practised  every  possible  imposture  and  deceit 
to  obtain  money,  food,  medicine,  &c.  &c. :  and,  at  last,  their  insolence 
and  idleness  arrived  at  such  a  pitch,  that  the  only  alternative  was  to 
give  up  the  work,  or  to  have  recourse  to  the  usual  means  of  coercion. 
What  might  be  effected  by  a  long  and  continued  exercise  of  rewards 
and  punishments,  with  power,  at  the  same  time,  to  enforce  obedience, 
and  habits  of  industry,  I  know  not ;  but,  I  am  certain,  that  in  the  pre- 
sent state  of  things,  no  business  can  be  carried  on  without  the  dread  of 
corporal  punishment.  The  children  work  with  the  greatest  alacrity,  and 
appear  susceptible  of  great  improvement ;  but,  with  a  few  exceptions, 
the  men,  from  some  cause  or  other,  appear  incapable  of  exertion, 
and  incorrigibly  idle.  In  justice  to  the  Pacha,  it  must  be  confessed, 
that  he  has  established  schools  in  every  large  town,  and  appears  to  be 
extremely  anxious  to  civilise  his  people  ;  but  the  education  of  the  boys 
can  have  but  little  effect,  while  the  female  part  of  the  population  are 
plunged  in  the  grossest  ignorance.  It  has  been  well  observed,  that  the 
antient  system  of  Egyptian  superstition  survived  the  repeated  conquests 
to  which  the  country  was  subject,  and  at  last  yielded  only  to  the 
Christian  dispensation ;  and  it  may  be  doubted  whether  the  present 
degraded  and  miserable  condition  of  these  people  can  ever  be  effec- 
tually improved,  except  by  the  same  beneficial  influence. 


166  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

Second  Pyramid. — Lower  Entrance. 

Quarries. 

Excavation  for  base  at  north-western  angle. 

Tliird     Pyramid.  —  Interior. 

Boring. 

Bridge  in  soutliern  dyke. 

The  excavation  for  a  southern  entrance  in  the  Great 
Pyramid  was  begun  at  the  distance  of  twenty-four  feet 
westwards  from  the  centre,  and  carried  on  to  the  depth 
of  thirty  feet,  which  was  a  work  of  considerable  difficulty 
and  labour,  and  was  not  finished  till  the  29th  of  May.^ 
The  stones  were  very  large,  and  the  half  of  each  of  them 
was  keyed  in  under  the  upper  layer,  besides  which,  many 
of  them  were  in  slanting  directions,  although  in  horizontal 
courses ;  it  became  therefore  necessary  to  break,  almost 
every  block  before  it  could  be  removed.''  The  mortar 
was  nearly  as  hard  as  the  stone  itself,  so  that  with 
Arab  workmen,  and  common  tools,  it  was  a  most  tedious 
operation.  To  obviate  some  of  these  difficulties,  I  ordered 
the  people  to  get  up  twenty  or  thirty  feet,  and  to  cut 
perpendicularly  down  behind  the  stones ;  but  very  little 
advantage    was   gained    in    proportion    to    the    increased 

^  Tlie  principal  part  of  the  blocks  composing  the  pyramids  were 
quarried  from  the  rock  on  which  they  stand,  and  abound  with  fossil 
remains ;  but,  for  the  casing  of  the  exterior,  for  the  lining  of  the  pass- 
ages, and  for  many  other  particular  parts,  they  w-ere  brought  from  the 
Mokattam,  and  consisted  of  a  compact  limestone  which  contains  few 
fossils,  and  is  termed  by  geologists  swine-stone. 

7  Mr.  Perring  observed,  that  the  mortar  used  for  the  casing  and 
lining  of  the  passages  was  of  lime  only;  that  in  the  body  of  the  pyramid 
it  was  composed  of  red  brick,  gravel,  Nile  earth,  crushed  granite,  and 
calcareous  stone,  and  of  lime ;  and  that  for  fillings  in  desert  sand  was 
employed  in  a  grout  of  liquid  mortar. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  167 

number,  which  required  to  be  removed.  Towards  the 
end  of  this  work  gunpowder  was  used  with  great  effect. 

A  number  of  heavy  blocks  were  taken  away  from  the 
rubbish  at  the  Second  Pyramid  ;  and  an  excavation  for 
the  base,  on  the  western  side,  and  near  the  north-western 
angle  of  that  building,  was  carried  across  to  the  opposite 
cliff,  under  the  hieroglyphics  already  alluded  10.**  At 
the  Third  Pyramid,  the  boring  was  discontinued  at  the 
depth  of  twenty-eight  feet,  which  was  then  supposed  to 
be  below  the  foundation,  although  it  afterwards  proved 
to  be  seven  feet  above  it.  At  one  time  a  vacancy  of  two 
or  three  feet  was  perceived,  most  probably  occasioned  by 
a  joint  in  the  masonry.  The  stones  of  this  pyramid  are 
of  an  enormous  size,  particularly  near  the  foundation. 

When  I  was  paying  the  people  in  the  evening,  Prince 
Piickler  Muskau  arrived,  and  requested  to  encamp  in  my 
enclosure;  to  this  I  did  not  consent,  but  directed  a  person 
to  conduct  his  highness  to  the  Great  Tomb  in  the  plain 
generally  occupied  by  travellers ;  where  he  encamped. 
Captain  Rowland  and  Lieutenant  Campbell,  of  the  East 
India  Company's  ship,  Hugh  Lindsay,  then  at  Suez,  paid 
me  a  visit. 

The  sand  was  cleared  away  under  the  bridge  in 
the  southern  dyke,  in  order  that  it  might  be  surveyed. 
It  is  evidently  of  great  antiquity  ;  the  stones  are  remark- 
ably large,  and  without  carving  or  inscription  of  any  sort. 
Other  bridges  are  also  mentioned,  and  may  have  been 
constructed  in  that  part  of  the  dyke  which  formerly  ex- 
tended across  the  plain,  but  at  present  only  one  has  been 
discovered.     This  dyke  is  not  a  direct  continuation  of 

^  See  page  160. 


168  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

that  near  the  Third  Pyramid,  which  at  first  sight  it 
appears  to  be.  The  whole  plain  to  the  foot  of  the 
mountains,  from  Saccara  to  Abou  Reche,  seems  to  have 
been  formerly  under  cultivation,  but,  either  from  neglect 
of  the  antient  canals,  or  from  other  causes,  it  is  now 
covered  with  about  nine  feet  of  sand.  The  whole  desert 
has  evidently  encroached  upon  the  valley  of  Egypt,  par- 
ticularly from  the  westward ;  and  there  was  probably 
little  or  no  sand  on  the  mountains  at  Gizeh,  nor  upon 
the  plain  beneath,  when  the  pyramids  were  erected.  An 
abundant  supply  of  water  must  have  been  required  for 
their  construction,  and  also  for  the  use  of  the  workmen 
employed  upon  them  ;  and  as  it  can  now  be  found  in 
many  places  within  a  few  feet  of  the  surface,  the  land 
might  be  reclaimed  without  any  great  difficulty. 

February  ISd. 
Reis,  8.  Men,  106.  Children,  71. 

Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  in  southern  front. 

King's  Chamber. 

Davison's  Chamber. 

Northern  Air-channel. 

Second  Pyramid. — Portcullis. 

•= Lower  Entrance. 

Quarries. 

Excavation  for  base  at  north-western  angle. 

Third    Pyramid. — Interior. 

Bridge  near  southern  dyke. 
Sphinx.  Boring. 

In  going  round  the  works,  I  particularly  examined 
the  excavation  over  the  passage  in  the  Second  Pyramid. 
It  is  connected  with  the  opening  in  the  centre  of  the 
northern  front,  by  which  it  is  supposed  that  the  caliphs  en- 


■\i  0 


^4. 


^! 


h^  i' 


'r::r%^ 


^rV  .,  ,, 


IT 


U 


fiibliolu'd     by     .i;iMifK     Kivtscr,     Reg'tJit    f.l. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  169 

tered,  and  in  which  Signer  Belzoni  worked,  until  he  was 
obhged  to  desist  from  the  loose  and  irregular  construc- 
tion of  the  building.  In  many  parts  the  stones  have 
collapsed,  and  a  good  deal  of  rain-water  and  drifted  sand 
have  penetrated,  from  time  to  time,  from  the  north-west, 
through  the  loose  joints  of  the  masonry.  The  excavation 
must  have  been  made  with  great  difficulty,  and  Signor 
Belzoni's  statement  was  not  exaggerated,  for  when  I 
attempted,  on  the  10th  of  March,  to  work  in  this  place, 
the  men  hesitated  to  proceed ;  and,  as  there  was  no  great 
chance  of  success,  I  gave  it  up.  It  is  probable  that  most, 
if  not  all  of  these  magnificent  tombs,  have  been  violated 
soon  after  their  erection ;  but  it  will  be  afterwards  seen 
that  the  three  larger  pyramids,  and  many  of  the  smaller, 
were  subsequently  opened  by  Mussulmans,  and  apparently 
about  the  same  time.  Signor  Belzoni  found  the  regular 
entrance,  concealed  under  a  mound,  which  is  now  higher 
than  the  top  of  it,  and  obstructed  only  by  loose  stones 
and  sand,^  and  it  is  remarkable  how  well  the  forms  of 
the  pyramids  are  calculated  for  the  concealment  of  an 
entrance  near  the  centre  of  their  fronts,  as  the  loose 
stones  and  rubbish  produced  by  decay,  or  by  violence, 
chiefly  accumulate  over  these  parts.  I  also  observed 
that  the  lower  portcullis  in  this  pyramid,  which  had  been 
forced  out  of  its  socket,  moved  up  into  a  solid  groove ; 
and,  concluding  that  the  portcullis  in  the  upper  passage 
was  similarly  constructed,  I  gave  up  the  idea  of  its  re- 
moval, and  raised  it  to  a  sufficient  height,  so  that  a 
person  could  conveniently  enter.  Signor  Belzoni  had  only 
lifted  it  eight  inches,  which  I  ordered  to  be  marked. 

9  See  Athanasi's  statement  in  Appendix. 


170  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

I  began  to  bore  through  the  shoulder  of  the  Sphinx, 
in  order  to  ascertain  whether  or  not  it  was  hollow.  The 
head  seems  to  have  been  painted  red,  and  upon  the  top 
of  it  there  was  a  cleft  four  or  five  feet  deep. 

I  called  on  Prince  Piickler  Muskau,  who  was  en- 
camped in  the  plain,  with  a  considerable  suite  of  the 
Pacha's  people,  janissaries,  camels,  horses,  &c.  In  the 
evening  he  sent  a  message  by  his  physician  that  he  would 
pay  me  a  visit  on  the  following  day. 

Fehriiary  24^t/i. 
Rtis,  7.  Men,  99.  Children,  66. 

Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  on  southern  front. 

King's  Chamber. 

Davison's  Chamber. 

Northern  Air-channel. 

Second  Pyramid.  —  Lower  Entrance. 

Excavation  for  base  at  north-western  angle. 

Quarries. 

Third    Pyramid. — Interior. 

■ Excavation  for  base  at  north-eastern  angle. 

Bridge  in  the  southern  dyke. 
Sphinx.  Boring. 

I  discharged  Selim  at  his  own  I'equest,  and  sent  a 
letter  by  him  to  Colonel  Campbell. 

Some  desert  sand,  probably  fillings  in,  had  been  found 
in  the  excavation  made  for  the  chisel  in  the  King's 
Chamber.  The  Northern  Air-channel  was  given  up,  as 
the  men  were  unable  to  break,  or  to  draw  out  the  stones, 
with  which  it  was  filled.  The  depth  of  the  boring  at 
the  Sphinx  was  nine  feet  eight  inches. 

The  prince  paid  me  a  long  visit.  Mr.  Perring  and 
Mr.  Mash  (another  able  engineer)  arrived.     I  went  round 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  OX  AT  GIZEH.  171 

the  works  late  at  night,  and  met  the  prince  and  his 
retinue  returning  to  his  tents.^  The  excavation  for  the 
survey  at  the  north-eastern  angle  of  the  Third  Pyramid 
was  commenced. 

February  25th. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  107.  Children,  85. 

Great    Pj'ramid.  —  Excavation  in  southern  front. 

King's  Chamber. 

Davison's  Chamber. 

Second  Pyramid.  — Lower  entrance. 

Excavation  for  base  at  north-western  angle. 

Third    Pyramid. — Interior. 

Excavation  for  base  at  north-eastern  angle. 

Bridge  in  southern  dyke. 

Sphinx.  Boring. 

I  had  made  an  arrangement  with  a  Reis  from  Ker- 
dassee  to  remove  the  stones  and  rubbish  from  the  centre 
of  the  northern  front  of  the  Great  Pyramid  in  fifteen  or 
twenty-five  days,  as  the  work  might  turn  out,  for  two 
thousand  piastres,  the  Reis  to  find  all  the  tools  except- 

1  The  echoes  near  the  pyramids  are  very  surprising.  They  may  be 
attributed  to  the  number  of  subterraneous  passages,  and  to  the  magni- 
tude, forms,  and  relative  positions  of  the  buildings  themselves.  The 
vultures,  which  harbour  upon  them  at  night,  bark  like  watch-dogs. 
(^Latrator  anubis.)  Neither  the  Maltese,  Turks,  nor  the  Arabs,  would 
go  out  by  themselves  after  dark,  from  a  dread  (according  to  their  own 
account)  of  lions,  and  of  other  wild  beasts,  but,  in  fact,  from  supersti- 
tious apprehension  ;  so  that,  when  either  of  the  Maltese  went  at  night 
to  the  pyramids,  it  was  necessary  to  send  two  Arabs,  as  one  would  not 
come  back  alone.  The  contrast  was  striking,  when  an  Englishman, 
Jack,  who  afterwards  entered  my  service,  went  by  himself  every  evening, 
for  five  months  together,  with  his  stick  and  his  bottle,  to  spend  the  night 
in  the  Third  Pyramid. 


172  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON"  AT  GIZEII, 

ing  crowbars ;  but  I  afterwards  broke  off  this  agree- 
ment, as  I  thought  it  would  probably  interfere  with  the 
other  works,  and  lead  to  quarrels  and  disputes  between 
the  villages.  I  requested  the  Sheiks  of  Koum  el  Eswith 
and  of  Cafr  el  Batram  to  undertake  this  operation ;  they 
refused  to  do  so,  but  offered  to  superintend  the  work  at 
my  expense,  which,  of  course  I  declined.  I  had  great 
hopes  of  success  in  the  excavation  above  Davison's 
Chamber,  and,  upon  the  whole,  every  thing  went  on 
well.  In  going  round  to  the  several  works,  I  met  at  the 
Second  Pyramid  Prince  Piickler  Muskau,  who  called  to 
take  leave  before  he  set  out  for  Upper  Egypt.  Whilst 
he  was  there,  I  sent  my  Arab  (Dare)  into  the  pyramid, 
to  find  out,  if  possible,  the  entrance  by  listening  to  the 
blows  struck  with  a  large  hammer  upon  different  parts 
of  the  pavement ;  but  the  solid  masonry,  with  which  the 
upper  part  of  the  subterraneous  passage  was  closed,  pre- 
vented any  favourable  result.  In  a  short  time  we  arrived 
at  the  granite  blocks  in  the  lower  part  of  the  pyramid ; 
and  a  vacancy  betw'een  two  of  them  appeared  to  be  the 
entrance  closed  up  with  calcareous  masonry,  particularly 
as  the  adjoining  stones  to  the  eastward  shewed  exactly 
like  a  break,  and  gave  to  the  granite  blocks  the  appear- 
ance of  a  portal.  The  rubbish  covered  the  western  block, 
which,  I  imagined,  broke  back  in  the  same  manner.  As 
I  concluded  that  I  had  at  last  discovered  the  entrance, 
I  sent  after  the  prince,  who  had  gone  to  his  tents.  For- 
tunately he  had  not  leisure  to  return,  for  immediately 
afterwards  I  perceived  that  the  supposed  entrance  was 
filled  up  with  rock ;  and  that  the  granite  was  the  revet- 
ment mentioned  by  Herodotus.  It  has  been  already 
observed  that  this  work  had  not  been  properly  set  out 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  173 

at  the  commencement.  It  had  now  become  extremely 
encumbered,  the  removal  of  the  large  stones  from  the 
higher  part  of  the  mound  was  attended  with  some  risk ; 
and  continual  attention  was  necessary  to  prevent  acci- 
dents. Indeed,  after  all,  a  considerable  quantity  of  rubbish 
was  left  upon  the  face  of  the  pyramid. 

26th. — I  went  to  Cairo  in  the  morning,  and  returned 
with  Lieutenant  Campbell,  of  the  Hugh  Lindsay,  to 
dinner. 

February  21tli. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  122.  Children,  81. 

Great   Pj'ramid.  —  Excavation  in  southern  front. 

King's  Chamber. 

Davison's  Chamber. 

Second  Pyramid. — Lower  entrance. 

Excavation  for  base  at  north-western  angle. 

Third     Pyramid. — Interior. 

Excavation  for  base  at  north-eastern  angle. 

Bridge  in  the  southern  dyke. 

Sphinx.  Boring  near  the  shoulder,  and  neax  the  tail. 

Mr.  Campbell  informed  me,  that  in  the  preceding 
spring  he  went  to  the  top  of  the  Second  Pyramid  in  com- 
pany with  an  English  traveller,  Mr.  Faber;  and  that,  as 
the  Arabs  would  not  shew  him  the  way,  (although  they 
subsequently  followed  him,)  he  found  the  ascent  very 
difficult,  owing  to  a  great  quantity  of  loose  rubbish,  and 
also  to  the  projection,  and  slippery  surface  of  that  part 
of  the  casing,  which  yet  remained.  The  joints  of  the 
casing  were  horizontal ;  and  the  projecting  angles  of  the 
stones,  which  were  not  of  a  very  large  size,  had  been 


174  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

finished  down  from  the  top.'-  The  western  side  was 
the  highest ;  and  a  large  stone  on  the  apex  had  been 
displaced,  possibly  by  lightning,  but  more  probably 
by  human  violence :  the  platform  was  about  nine  feet 
square. 

The  boring  in  the  shoulder  of  the  Sphinx  had  pene- 
trated sixteen  feet.  I  gave  up  the  excavation  at  the 
bridge  in  the  Southern  Dyke,  until  Mr.  Perring  was  ready 
to  survey  it,  on  account  of  the  great  difficulty  of  keeping 
out  the  loose  sand.  It  was  composed  of  two  horizontal 
stones ;  the  northern  was  found  to  be  twenty-two  feet  in 
length,  and  six  feet  six  inches  in  depth.  The  length 
of  the  bridge  was  eight  feet  nine  inches  ;  its  breadth, 
twenty-seven  feet  eight  inches.  Three  tiers  of  very  large 
blocks  had  been  uncovered.  At  the  bottom  of  the  rub- 
bish at  the  northern  front  of  the  Second  Pyramid,  a 
stratum,  chiefly  consisting  of  desert  sand,  and  about  four 
feet  thick,  appeared  to  mark  the  first  attempt  to  open  the 
pyramid,  and  some  black  spots  upon  its  surface  seemed  to 
have  been  occasioned  by  fire.  No  other  distinct  stratum 
occurred ;  but  the  remainder  was  an  accumulation  of 
large  blocks  of  stone  and  of  rubbish.  The  lower  tier, 
revetted  with  granite,  had  been  forced  apparently  in 
search  of  an  entrance  ;  hut  the  pavement,  as  far  as  I 
could  observe,  had  remained  untouched.  Two  masons 
arrived  from  the  citadel  to  cut  through  the  blocks  of 
granite,  but  they  entirely  failed,  and  returned  on  the 
following  day  to  Cairo. 

I   sent  a  message  to  Colonel  Campbell  by  the  lieu- 

-  They  have  been  worked  in  the  same  way  in  the  propylsea  of  the 
Groat  Temple  of  Karnae. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  175 

tenant  of  the  Hugh  Lindsay,  to  express  my  regret  that 
the  tomb  near  the  Sphinx,  in  which  he  took  a  particular 
interest,  had  not  been  cleared  out,  and  to  offer  to  com- 
plete it.  He  gave  his  consent,  and  desired  to  share  in 
the  expense,  which  I  declined,  but  requested  him  to  in- 
form M.  Caviglia  of  the  circumstance,  as  I  did  not  choose 
to  interfere,  on  my  own  account,  with  any  of  the  excava- 
tions, which  that  gentleman  had  undertaken  in  his  search 
for  mummies. 

February  28tk. 
Reis,  7.  Men,  95.  Children,  51. 

Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  on  southern  front. 

Excavation  on  northern  front. 

King's  Chamber. 

Davison's  Chamber. 

Second  Pyramid. — Lower  Entrance. 

Excavation  for  base  at  north-western  angle. 

Third    Pj'ramid. — Interior. 

Excavation  for  base  at  north-eastern  angle. 

Sphinx.  Boring  near  the  shoulder,  and  near  the  tail. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

The  morning  was  cold  and  foggy,  and  at  first  every 
object,  even  the  gigantic  pyramids,  were  totally  obscured ; 
but  as  the  atmosphere  cleared  up,  the  scene  from  the 
Sphinx  became  singularly  beautiful.  The  picturesque 
forms  of  the  women  and  children  carrying  baskets  of 
sand  upon  their  heads  on  the  undulating  mounds  near 
Campbell's  Tomb,  the  finely  broken  foreground  extending 
to  the  rocks  at  the  Southern  Dyke,  and  the  enormous 
masses  of  the  ruined  temple  on  the  rising  ground  before 
the  Second  Pyramid  were  in  the  finest  breadth  of  light 


176  OPERATIOXS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

and  shade.  For  a  time  the  lofty  apex  of  the  Second 
Pyramid  shone  alone  in  the  clear  blue  sky,  (like  the  top- 
gallant sails  of  a  ship  of  war,)  far  above  the  clouds  that 
shrouded  its  mighty  bulk,  which  by  degrees  slowly  ap- 
peared in  all  its  grandeur ;  and  soon  afterwards  the 
southern  front  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  glittering  with  the 
morning  sunbeams,  was  displayed  in  full  majesty  as  the 
light  vapours  melted  away  from  its  enormous  space. 

Owing  to  the  oblateness  of  their  forms,  the  want  of 
proper  objects  of  comparison,  the  proportionate  small- 
ness  of  the  stones,  with  which  they  are  built,  and  many 
other  adventitious  circumstances,  the  exaggerated  and 
undefined  expectations  of  travellers  are  often  disappointed 
in  the  hasty  survey  generally  taken  of  these  monuments ; 
and  they  are  consequently  considered  rude  and  misshapen 
masses  of  coarse  masonry,  without  symmetry  or  beauty, 
and  alone  worthy  of  notice  from  their  extraordinary  size. 
A  more  deliberate  examination,  however,  never  fails  to 
alter  and  correct  these  opinions ;  and  it  was  universally 
acknowledged  by  those  who  remained  for  any  length  of 
time  at  Gizeh,  that  the  more  carefully  and  frequently 
they  were  inspected,  the  more  extraordinary  their  gran- 
deur appeared,  and  also  the  striking  effects  which  under 
the  varying  influence  of  the  atmosphere  they  continually 
presented.  Pre-eminent  in  dimensions  and  antiquity  over 
all  other  buildings  in  the  world,  they  are  alike  admirable 
for  the  excellence  of  their  masonry,  the  skill  and  science 
displayed  in  their  construction,  and  the  imposing  majesty 
of  their  simple  forms. 

As  the  lower  entrance  into  the  Second  Pyramid  could 
not  be  discovered,  fires  were  lighted  in  the  reascending 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  OX  AT  GIZEII.  177 

passage,  but  it  was  so  effectually  closed  up,  that  we  did 
not  derive  any  advantage  from  the  smoke. 

Several  Turkish  and  Egyptian  officers  came  to  the 
pyramids  in  the  morning ;  and  in  the  evening  a  number  of 
Arab  Sheiks  and  Wahabees  also  arrived.  They  remained 
some  time  at  the  tents,  and  in  the  course  of  conversation 
remarked,  that  I  did  not  make  the  men  work  hard  enough, 
and  dismissed  them  too  soon  at  night. 

March  1st. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  112.  Children,  89. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

Lord  Lindsey  and  Mr.  Ramsey  paid  me  a  visit,  in- 
spected the  several  works,  and  returned  to  Cairo  in  the 
evening. 

Some  stones  were  taken  up  from  the  pavement  at 
the  Second  Pyramid,  but  without  success.  The  base  at 
the  north-eastern  angle  of  the  Third  was  sufficiently 
cleared  for  the  survey.  The  excavation  at  the  northern 
front  of  the  Great  Pyramid  proceeded  rapidly,  but,  as 
the  regular  passage  led  to  the  subterraneous  chamber, 
I  did  not  expect  to  find  a  lower  entrance,  unless  it 
conducted  to  the  apartment  mentioned  by  Herodotus. 
The  ramp,  or  inclined  end  of  the  granite  block  at  the 
corner  of  Davison's  Chamber  was  discovered,  which 
confirmed  me  in  the  idea  that  there  was  a  large 
apartment  over  it,  and  that  the  height  of  Davison's 
Chamber  was  regulated  by  the  slope  of  the  roof  in  the 
great  gallery. 

We  were  disturbed  during  the  night  by  the  firing 
of  guns,  music,  &c.,  and  various  other   riotous  demon- 

VOL.  I,  N 


178  OPERATIOXS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII. 

strations   of  joy  in  the  villages  on  the  plain  below  our 
tents,  in  consequence  of  the  celebration  of  a  wedding. 

March  2d. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  110.  Children,  94. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

I  again  carefully  examined  the  excavation  across  the 
horizontal  passage  in  the  Second  Pyramid,  and  also  Bel- 
zoni's  Chamber.  In  the  latter,  square  holes  hke  the  be- 
ginning of  air-channels  had  been  cut  on  the  northern  and 
southern  sides ;'  and  others  below  them  marked  out  with 
red  lines.  If  a  northern  air-channel  had  likewise  been 
begun  on  the  exterior,  it  might  have  been  a  guide  for 
the  forced  passage.  As  I  conceived  that  it  was  possible 
to  find  out,  by  means  of  the  boring-rods,  the  lower  en- 
trance of  the  Second  Pyramid,  the  operations  carried  on 
at  the  Sphinx  were  suspended,  and  the  hole  made 
near  the  shoulder,  about  twenty- five  feet  and  a  half 
in  depth,  was  plugged  up.  The  excavation  for  the  base 
at  the  north-western  angle  of  the  Second  Pyramid  was 
finished.  The  chisel  in  the  King's  Chamber  was  found 
to  have  been  broken  upon  a  calcareous  stone,  and  not 
upon  granite  ;  all  hopes  therefore  of  an  apartment  in 
that  direction  were  at  an  end. 

Dr.  Cummins  came  to  the  pyramids.  The  Englishman 
mentioned  in  the  note  page  171,  arrived:  he  was  indefa- 
tigable in  his  exertions,  directed  most  successfully  several 
operations   during  the    day,  and  passed  every  night  for 

*  Mr.  Perring  imagined  that  they  might  have  been  used  in  the 
construction  of  the  roof. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  179 

five  months  in  superintending  the  Arabs  in  tlie  Third 
Pyramid.  A  number  of  Bedouins  came  to  tlie  works  in 
the  course  of  the  day :  this  was  often  the  case,  as  the 
pyramids  may  be  considered  close  to  the  high  road 
leading  from  the  Faioum  to  the  Delta,  and  to  Alexandria. 
There  are  shorter  routes,  but  this  track,  by  skirting  the 
cultivated  ground,  is  more  convenient  for  camels,  flocks, 
&c.  Nothing  could  exceed  the  surprise  of  these  savages 
at  hearing  the  ticking  of  a  watch,  and  particularly  at 
the  lucifer  matches.  After  a  time,  however,  the  Arab 
girls  found  out  the  use  of  the  latter,  and  were  very  eager 
to  have  them. 

March  3d. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  124.  Children,  106. 

Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  of  southern  front. 

Excavation  of  northern  front. 

Davison's  Chamber. 

Queen's  Chamber. 

Passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 

Second  Pyramid. — Boring  for  Lower  Entrance. 

Belzoni's  Chamber. 

. Passage. 

Tliird    Pyramid. — Interior. 
Campbell's  Tomb. 

The  janissary  Osman  had  a  dreadful  attack  of  oph- 
thalmia, which  obliged  me  to  send  him  into  Cairo  the 
next  day.  Another  operation  was  begun  in  the  passage 
leading  to  the  Queen's  Chamber.  The  upper  stone, 
which  formed  the  step,  was  let  in  on  one  side  under  the 
superstructure ;  but  the  stones  beneath  it  were  only 
keyed  in  so  that  a  small  reed  could  be  inserted  for 
several  feet  along  their  sides,  and  they  appeared,  there- 


ISO  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

fere,  to  conceal  the  entrance  into  another  passage.  We 
began  to  remove  the  great  block  under  the  recess  in  the 
Queen's  Chamber,  and  the  whole  of  that  apartment  was 
carefully  examined.  The  people  commenced  boring  for 
a  lower  entrance  at  the  Second  Pyramid,  and  a  party 
under  an  intelligent  reis,  carefully  sounded  Belzoni's 
Chamber,  and  the  passage  leading  to  it.  The  various 
chasms  and  imperfections  in  the  rock,  through  which  this 
passage  was  cut,  were  made  good  with  masonry,  and 
the  sides  had  been  stuccoed,  and  painted.  On  the  sides 
of  the  chamber  (cut  out  of  the  solid  rock)  a  sparry 
secretion  appeared,  similar  to  that  on  the  walls  of  the 
Queen's  Chamber  ;  although,  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  the 
latter  are  composed  of  masonry.  About  half  the  floor 
from  the  eastern  end  of  Belzoni's  Chamber  was  rock, 
the  remainder  was  a  pavement  of  two  tiers  of  calca- 
reous stone,  excepting  some  blocks  of  granite  at  the 
western  end,  in  which  the  sarcophagus  had  been  sunk. 

March  4th. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  152.  Children,  114. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

A  stone  in  the  southern  side,  and  exactly  opposite  the 
entrance  of  the  Queen's  Chamber,  was  broken  into ;  the 
joints  appeared  to  indicate  a  door,  but  nothing  was  dis- 
covered. The  gallery  had  arrived  within  thirty-seven  feet 
of  the  centre  of  the  Third  Pyramid,  when  strong  blasts 
of  air  were  distinctly  felt  in  it  from  the  south,  although 
the  excavation  was  on  the  northern  front.  This  was 
invariably  the  case  when  a  Kamseen  (southerly  wind) 
was    prevalent.      As    the    joints    were    too    close,    and 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  181 

the  bulk  of  the  masonry  too  great,  for  the  wind  to 
penetrate  through  the  building,  I  can  only  account  for 
these  currents  by  supposing,  that  they  arose  from  the 
lower  excavations  which  were  afterwards  discovered  in 
the  interior  of  the  pyramid,  and  which  had  a  communi- 
cation with  the  regular  entrance ;  but  then  these  exca- 
vations were  distant  from  the  gallery,  and  the  regular 
entrance  was  also  on  the  northern  side,  and  completely 
buried  under  blocks  of  granite,  rubbish,  and  sand.  Simi- 
lar gusts  of  wind  were  afterwards  very  perceptible  in  the 
gallery  made  from  the  northern  front  to  the  centre  of 
the  Fourth  Pyramid ;  but  the  joints  of  this  building 
were  more  open,  and  its  bulk  much  less.  I  again  ex- 
amined the  hieroglyphics  on  the  rocks  near  the  Second 
Pyramid. 

Jl/arcl/  otJi.  —  l  went  to  Cairo  and  got  another  janis- 
sary in  the  room  of  Osman.  I  saw  Mr.  Perring  and 
Mr.  Mash,  who  agreed  to  return  with  me  to  the  Pyramids 
on  the  following  day  ;  I  also  called  upon  Col.  Campbell, 
and  informed  him  how  matters  went  on  at  the  tomb. 

Alarcli  6tli. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  137.  Children,  112. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

I  left  Cairo  in  the  afternoon  with  INIr.  Perring  and 
Mr.  Mash,  in  a  most  violent  kamseen  wind,  by  which,  in 
crossing  the  Nile,  we  were  exposed  to  some  danger. 
The  sky  was  completely  obscured  with  sand,  and  the  sun 
appeared  as  if  eclipsed ;  the  blast  was  hot,  and  affected 


1  82  OPERATIOXS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

the  eyes  most  painfully.     Upon  our  arrival  we  examined 
the  works,  which  had  gone  on  well.* 

March  1th. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  99.  Children,  88. 

Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  on  southern  front. 

Excavation  on  northern  front. 

^-^  Davison's  Chamber. 

Queen's  Chamber. 

Passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 

Second  Pyramid. — Boring  for  Lower  Entrance. 

Belzoni's  Chamber. 

Passage. 

Third     Pjramid. — Interior. 
Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid. — Preparing  to  bore. 

It  rained  early  in  the  morning.  The  janissary  Ach- 
met  arrived.  The  Second  Pyramid  was  surveyed  ;  the 
Arabic  inscription  could  not  to  be  discovered  in  Belzoni's 
Chamber.  A  party  was  employed  in  clearing  out  the 
lower  passages.  The  sarcophagus  in  Belzoni's  Chamber 
was  minutely  examined ;  it  was  composed  of  granite, 
and  of  the  finest  workmanship ;  the  lid  was  made  to 
slide  on  into  a  dovetail,  which  it  exactly  fitted,  and  it 
had  been  fastened  by  two  pins,  which  went  up  into  holes 

*  As  several  of  the  Arabs  were  attacked  with  ophthalmia,  I  applied 
to  Naylor  Bey,  who  had  arrived  from  England  for  the  purpose  of  esta- 
blishing an  Ophthalmic  Hospital :  the  Pacha  immediately  gave  him  the 
rank  and  decorations  of  a  Bey,  and  a  house  called  Ater  El  Nebbi,  near 
Fostat,  for  an  establishment ;  he  also  sent  a  ship  of  war  to  bring  his 
family  from  Europe.  From  some  cause  or  other,  however,  the  establish- 
ment was  broken  up,  and,  I  believe,  that  Mr.  Naylor  returned  to  Europe. 


OPERATIOXS  CAERIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  183 

in  the  lid,  and  dropped  into  corresponding  lioles  in  the 
sarcophagus  when  the  Hd  was  in  its  place,  so  that  with- 
out having  been  broken  it  could  not  have  been  removed. 
Some  resinous  substance,  which  I  brought  away,  was 
found  at  the  bottom  of  these  holes. 

The  Fourth  Pyramid  ^  (the  middle  one  of  the  three 
south  of  the  third)  was  prepared  for  boring  by  removing 
the  stones  from  the  top  of  it,  as  I  expected  to  find  the 
sepulchral  chamber  by  penetrating  through  it.  It  was 
much  dilapidated  on  the  northern  front ;  but  the  masonry 
on  the  other  sides  was  very  fine,  and  the  stones  exceed- 
ingly large,  and  apparently  of  great  antiquity.  Like  the 
sixth  (the  one  to  the  westward),  it  had  been  built  in 
regular  stages.  The  other  works,  particularly  those  of 
the  Great  Pyramid,  were  also  attended  to  ;  and  a 
scaflfolding  was  put  up  in  the  great  passage,  that  the 
stone  at  the  northern  end  might  be  examined.  It 
proved  to  be  calcareous,  but  from  its  size,  and  situation, 
was  an  object  of  interest. 

March  StJi. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  122.  Children,  88. 

Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  of  southern  front. 

Excavation  of  northern  front. 

Davison's  Chamber. 

Queen's  Chamber. 

5  The  three  large  pyramids  are  sufficientlj-  distinguished.  The  other 
pyramids  mentioned  in  this  book  were  numbered  as  follows  :  The  Fourth, 
the  central  of  the  three  southward  of  the  Third;  the  Fifth,  that  to  the 
eastward  of  the  Fourth  ;  the  Sixth,  that  to  the  westward  of  the  Fourth  ; 
the  Seventh,  the  most  northern  of  the  three  to  the  eastward  of  the  Great 
Pyramid;  the  Eighth,  that  to  the  southward  of  the  Seventh;  the  Ninth, 
that  to  the  southward  of  the  Eighth. 


184  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

Great    Pyramid. — Passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 
Second  Pyramid. — Boring  for  Lower  Entrance. 

Passage. 

Third    Pyramid. — Interior. 
Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pj'ramid. — Preparing  to  bore. 

After  having  gone,  as  usual,  round  the  several  works, 
I  assisted  Mr.  Per  ring  and  Mr.  Mash  in  measuring  the 
Second  Pyramid. 

March  9ih. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  140.  Children,  112. 

Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Davison's  Chamber. 

Queen's  Chamber. 

Passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 

Large  Stone  in  Great  Passage. 

Second  Pyramid. — Boring  of  Lower  Entrance. 
Third    Pyramid. — Interior. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid. — Preparing  to  bore. 

We  again  inspected  the  pyramids,  and  also  the  ruins 
to  the  eastward  of  the  great  one,  particularly  two  in- 
tersecting passages,  which  were  afterwards  excavated. 
Having  entered  the  Great  Pyramid,  we  directed  our  at- 
tention to  the  Queen's  Chamber,  and  to  the  large  stone  in 
the  northern  end  of  the  great  passage.  It  had  a  sparry 
secretion,  like  that  on  the  walls  of  the  Queen's,  and  on 
the  sides  of  Belzoni's  Chamber,  and  was  different  from 
those  in  the  other  parts  of  the  passage.  Whilst  proceed- 
ing to  the  King's  Chamber,  Mr.  Perring  and  Mr.  JNIash 
were   sent  for   to   attend  a  comicil   in  Cairo.      At  the 


U    V  't  J, 


BajiiWl  >>s  J  Tr.\5« .  ■■.IS.TLe.^euL  St 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  185 

Second  Pyramid,  the  operations  in  the  horizontal  passage 
were  given  up,  and  the  lower  entrance  was  found  in  the 
pavement  about  forty  feet  from  the  base  of  the  pyramid. 
It  was  completely  filled  up  with  solid  masonry,  closely 
jointed  and  cemented :  the  first  stone  was  ten  feet  long, 
and  the  others  six,  or  seven.  I  ordered  parts  of  them 
to  be  removed  so  as  to  admit  of  a  passage  ;  but,  on 
account  of  their  hardness,  confined  situation,  the  bad- 
ness of  the  tools  (merely  picks),  and  the  unskilfulness 
of  the  Arabs,  very  little  was  effected  before  the  arrival 
of  the  men  from  the  IMokattam  quarries. 

Colonel  Rainsford  paid  me  a  visit. 

I  measured  the  excavation  in  the  Third  Pyramid,  and 
ordered  four  remarkable  stones  to  be  removed  from  the 
higher  part  of  the  western  front,  as  I  thought  that  they 
might  conceal  an  air-channel. 

March  lOth. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  136.  Children,  121. 

Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

— —  Davison's  Chamber. 

■  ■  Queen's  Chamber. 

Passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 

Large  Stone  in  Great  Passage. 

Second  Pyramid.— Lower  Entrance. 

Excavating  in  forced  Passage. 

Third    Pyramid. — Interior. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid. — Preparing  to  bore. 

Several  pieces  of  bone  and  of  decayed  mummy-board 
were  found  in  the  square  of  Campbell's  Tomb,  also  some 
fragments  of  stone   inscribed  with   hieroglyphics.      The 


186  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

hieroglyphics  were  in  several  places  covered  with  plaster ; 
the  stone,  therefore,  must  have  previously  belonged  to 
some  other  building  before  the  fragments  were  employed 
as  fillings  in,  in  this.  Some  men  were  set  to  work  in 
the  excavation  across  the  horizontal  passage  in  the  Se- 
cond Pyramid  ;  but  the  masonry  was  so  insecure  that 
they  were  afraid  to  proceed.  In  the  evening  I  went 
round  the  works  with  Jack. 

March  llth. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  152.  Children,  126. 

Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  of  southern  front. 

Excavation  of  northern  front. 

Davison's  Chamber. 

■  Queen's  Chamber. 

Passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 

Large  Stone  in  Great  Passage. 

Second  Pyramid. — Lower  Entrance. 

Third    Pyramid. — Interior. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid. — Preparing  to  bore. 

Bones,  earthenware,  and  small  pieces  of  leaf  gold, 
were  brought  out  of  Campbell's  Tomb.  One  of  the 
fragments  of  earthenware  was  handed  to  a  boy,  who, 
instead  of  placing  it  with  the  other  things  that  had 
been  discovered,  put  it  into  his  dress ;  I  immediately 
took  it  from  him,  and  directed  it  to  be  preserved.  In 
the  afternoon  I  went  back  to  look  for  this  fragment, 
when  it  was  missing.  The  sherd  was  positively  good  for 
nothing,  but  I  thought  it  my  duty  to  insist  on  its  being 
restored;  I  therefore  sent  off  all  the  people,  and,  in  about 
an  hour,  I  ascertained  that  the  boy,  from  whom  it  was 
taken,  had  destroyed  it  in  revenge.     I  directed  that  he 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  1S7 

should  be  sent  to  the  Sheik,  and  not  be  allowed  to  work 
again,  and  I  dismissed  the  reis  from  the  tomb,  who  ought 
to  have  protected  my  property,  or  rather  that  of  the 
Pacha,  as  every  thing  found  belonged  to  his  highness. 
At  this  time  the  gallery  went  on  but  slowly  in  the 
Third  Pyramid,  on  account  of  the  extreme  hardness  and 
solidity  of  part  of  its  construction.  It  is  built  apparently 
in  stages,  and  with  two  different  kinds  of  masonry,  which 
are  both  excellent ;  but  the  better  sort,  composed  of 
very  finely  jointed  stones,  has  been  covered  over  by 
work  of  a  looser  construction. 

M.  Fresnell,  attended  by  M.  Massara,  the  French 
dragoman,  came  and  entered  the  Second  Pyramid. 

12///.  —  I  again  carried  the  level  of  the  entrance  on 
the  northern  front  of  the  Great  Pyramid  round  to  the 
excavation  on  the  southern  side,  and  also  marked  out 
the  exact  centre  to  prevent  any  mistake  in  searching  for 
a  southern  entrance.*" 

Marcli  loth. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  154.  Children,  123. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

Osraan  the  janissary  returned  to  his  duty,  which  I 
reported  to   the  British   consul,  and   expressed   a  desire 

^  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Gallowaj',  containing  an  application 
from  M.  Caviglia  to  be  again  employed,  which  I  answered  on  the  fol- 
lowing morning,  expressing  my  regret  that  I  could  not  accede  to  his 
request.  My  letter  was  addressed  by  mistake  to  jNIr.  Sloane,  as  the 
one,  which  I  received,  was  either  endorsed  by  that  gentleman,  or 
forwarded  by  Mr.  Piozan  as  coming  from  him. 


188  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

to  keep  Achmet  also,  as  I  had  so  many  operations  in 
hand. 

I  measured  the  lower  entrance  of  the  Second  Pyramid, 
and  sent  the  details  to  Mr.  Perring. 

I  was  informed  by  Abd  El  Ardi  (the  most  intelligent 
and  active  of  the  reis),  that  there  was  a  shaft,  containing 
several  sarcophagi,  about  five  yards  from  the  northern 
side  of  Campbell's  tomb,  and  that  it  had  been  recently 
opened  by  some  men  from  Koum  el  Eswith.  I  deter- 
mined, therefore,  not  to  excavate  this  shaft,  unless  it 
communicated  with  the  fosse  surrounding  the  Tomb, 
which  was  afterwards  found  not  to  be  the  case.  Abd 
El  Ardi  also  told  me,  that  he  had  himself  pointed  out 
to  M.  Caviglia  Campbell's  Tomb,  having  found  it  too 
large  for  excavation  on  his  own  account. 

The  Arabs  had  made  so  little  progress  in  the  lower 
entrance  of  the  Second  Pyramid,  that  I  determined  to 
await  the  arrival  of  the  stone-masons.  The  boring  had 
been  begun  at  the  Fourth  Pyramid  ;  and  several  stones 
were  removed  at  the  Sixth  to  prepare  it  also  for  the 
same  operation.  Tlie  whole  of  the  top,  and  part  of  the 
northern  front  of  this  edifice,  had  been  taken  down  by 
the  Pacha,  that  the  materials  might  be  sent  to  Alex- 
andria. Several  stones  from  the  Third  Pyramid  had 
been  removed  for  the  same  purpose,  but,  owing  to  the 
want  of  machinery  and  of  skill,  and  to  the  depth  of  the 
sand,  the  Pacha  had  been  unable  to  take  them  away. 
Indeed,  their  removal  is  impossible,  unless  a  regular  road 
be  made  for  the  purpose. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  189 

March  lUh. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  134.  Children,  127. 

Great    Pyramid.  —  Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Davison's  Chamber. 

Queen's  Chamber. 

Passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 

Large  stone  in  Great  Passage. 

Third    Pyramid.  —  Interior. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid.  —  Boring. 

Sixth      Pyramid. — Preparing  to  bore. 

Passages  to  the  eastward  of  the  Great  Pyramid. 

In  the  morning,  several  officers,  who  had  come  from 
India,  and,  soon  afterwards,  Mr.  Perring,  Mr.  Hill,  and 
Mr.  Mash  arrived. 

We  examined  the  works,  particularly  those  in  the 
Great  Pyramid,  where  several  admeasurements  were 
taken.  I  began  to  clear  out  the  passages  to  the  east 
of  the  Great  Pyramid,  which  were  examined  on  the  9th 
instant.  Tliey  were  excavations  in  the  rock  almost  due 
north  and  south,  the  southern  entrance  not  being  very 
far  distant  from  an  extensive  pit,  or  quarry,  of  an  oblong 
form,  extending  north-east  and  south-west.  I  could  not 
perceive  any  foundations  near  them.  These  passages  had 
the  usual  angle,  and  nearly  the  same  dimensions,  as  those 
in  the  pyramids,'  and  were  exceedingly  well  cut,  with 
grooves  and  fittings  for  doorways.  The  one  from  the 
south  extended  about  thirty-eight  feet;  that  from  the 
north  passed   under  it  to   the   extent    of  sixty-five    feet. 

7  The  details  of  these  passages  will  be  given  in  the  Appendix. 


190  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

The  lower  end  of  the  latter  passage  had  not  been  finished, 
but  was  roughly  chiselled  in  the  rock,  in  which  it  abruptly 
ended,  without  any  shaft  or  exit.  A  shaft,  however, 
descended  from  the  surface  of  the  ground  to  the  inter- 
sections of  the  two  passages.  These  excavations  may 
have  been  intended  for  a  tomb,  and,  if  finished,  would 
probably  have  been  covered  by  a  pyramid.  The  oblong 
pit  or  quarry  may  have  been  the  cause  of  their  having 
been  abandoned.  The  passage,  however,  from  the  south 
is  not  easily  accounted  for. 

In  the  evening,  all  the  officers  went  away  except  Mr. 
Rogers,  who  remained  for  the  night. 

March  15th. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  126.  Children,  133. 

Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Davison's  Chamber. 

■  Queen's  Chamber. 

Passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 

Large  Stone  in  Great  Passage. 

Third   Pyramid. — Interior. 

Stones  on  the  western  front. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid. — Boring. 

Sixth     Pyramid.  —  Preparing  to  bore. 

Passages  eastward  of  Great  Pyramid. 

Mr.  Perring  and  Mr.  Mash  measured  the  base  of  the 
Second  Pyramid.  Mr.  Hill  removed  the  stones  on  the 
western  front  of  the  Third ;  they  were  very  large,  and 
in  all  probability  key-stones  for  the  revetment  of  the 
upper  part  of  the  pyramid ;  but  nothing  was  discovered. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  191 

The  excavation  for  the  lower  entrance  of  the  Second 
Pyramid  was  resumed. 

Mr.  Rogers,  Mr.  Perring,  and  iMr.  Hill  returned  to 
Cairo. 

It  was  this  morning  reported,  that  on  the  11th  instant 
(Saturday),  ten  men,  who  were  employed  on  the  southern 
front  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  upon  being  called  to  their 
work  at  the  customary  hour  in  the  afternoon,  sat  down, 
and  refused  to  proceed,  notwithstanding  the  authority  of 
the  reis,  and  of  Jack,  who  superintended  the  work,  and 
that  six  of  the  men  had  not  returned  since  that  day. 
I  directed  that  these  men  should  not  be  again  employed, 
and  accordingly  read  over  their  names  to  the  people  at 
pay-time,  in  the  evening,  and,  having  sent  for  the  Sheik 
of  their  village  (Koum  El  Eswith),  I  informed  him  of  the 
circumstance.  He  engaged  that  the  men  should  be 
punished.  I  then  told  him,  that,  notwithstanding  the 
repeated  representations  of  the  janissaries,  I  had  hitherto 
strictly  forbidden  any  harsh  measures ;  but,  since  the 
people  were  insensible  to  good  treatment,  the  only  alter- 
native left  was  either  to  give  up  the  undertaking,  or  to 
allow  them  to  be  dealt  with  in  the  usual  manner.  I 
added,  that  I  was  determined  to  carry  on  the  work,  and 
that  the  change  of  treatment  was  to  be  considered  as  the 
necessary  consequence  of  the  misconduct  of  the  people, 
and  directly  contrary  to  my  own  wishes  and  inclination. 
After  this  I  had  no  complaints,  and  the  works  went  on 
better.  Of  course  I  took  good  care  that  no  abuse  was 
made  of  this  most  unpleasant  expedient. 


192  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

March  16  fh. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  117.  Children,  111. 

Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  in  Southern  Front. 

Excavation  in  Northern  Front. 

Davison's  Chamber. 

I  Queen's  Chamber. 

■■  Passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 

~—  Two  Borings  in  Passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 

Large  Stone  in  Great  Passage. 

Third    Pyramid. — Interior. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid. — Boring. 

Sixth     Pyramid. —  Preparing  to  Bore. 

Passages  eastward  of  the  Great  Pyramid. 

I  assisted  Mr.  Mash  in  taking  the  dimensions  of  the 
Third  Pyramid.  The  boring  at  the  Fourth  was  given  up 
at  the  depth  of  eight  or  ten  feet,  as  the  stones  were  so 
loose  that  they  would  not  retain  water,  and  as  the  work 
was  attended  with  great  difficulty.  For  these  reasons  the 
removal  of  the  stones  from  the  top  of  the  Sixth  Pyramid 
was  relinquished.  The  excavation  at  the  passages  east- 
ward of  the  Great  Pyramid  was  finished. 

March  11  th. 

Reis,  3,  Men,  41.  Children,!. 

Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  in  Southern  Front. 

Excavation  in  Northern  Front. 

Davison's  Chamber. 

Two  Borings  in  Passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 

Third     Pyramid. —  Interior. 

Fourth  Pyramid.  —  Interior. 

This  day  being  the  commencement  of  Beiram,  very 
few  people  came,  although  I  offered  double  pay  as  an 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON^  AT  GIZEII.  193 

inducement ;  and  several  of  the  works  were,  in  conse- 
quence, suspended. 

As  the  boring  had  not  succeeded,  I  directed  Jack  to 
carry  a  gallery  to  the  centre  of  the  Fourth  Pyramid, 
commencing  ten  feet  eastward  from  the  middle  of  the 
northern  front,  and  at  about  three  feet  above  the  base. 

After  examining  the  works,  I  set  out  with  Mr.  Mash 
for  Abou  Reche.  These  ruins  are  mentioned  by  M.  Ca- 
viglia,  and  also  by  Mr.  Wilkinson,  and  are  situated  about 
six  miles  to  the  north  of  Gizeh,  on  a  high  range  of 
desert  mountains,  rendered  conspicuous  by  white  cliffs. 
We  passed  between  the  hills  and  the  cultivated  ground 
upon  a  plain,  which  must  have  been  formerly  under  till- 
age ;  for,  notwithstanding  the  depth  of  barren  sand,  a 
scanty  vegetation  might  be  here  and  there  observed,  par- 
ticularly near  a  mound  called  Kom  Achmar,  the  site  of 
an  antient  town  or  village. 

From  the  range,  upon  which  the  ruins  of  Abou  Reche 
are  situated,  a  rocky  promontory  extends  almost  across 
the  plain  to  a  grove  of  palm-trees  on  the  verge  of  the 
cultivated  ground,  and  is  covered  towards  the  north  with 
a  large  mass  of  brickwork ;  whilst  the  western  and 
southern  sides  continue  in  a  natural  state,  and  do  not 
exhibit  the  smallest  vestige  of  any  building,  or  founda- 
tion. The  remains  of  inclined  passages,  which  probably 
led  to  sepulchral  excavations,  are  visible ;  but  the  whole 
is  much  dilapidated.  A  considerable  part  of  the  mate- 
rials have  been  taken  away  for  modern  purposes,  and 
the  remainder  will,  no  doubt,  by  degrees  share  the  same 
fate.  The  bricks  are  unburnt,  and  of  large  dimensions 
like  those  at  lllahoon,  and  at  Howara,  and  are  well 
made,   but  do   not   contain   any  straw :    they  should  be 

VOL.  I.  o 


194  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII. 

examined,  as  some   of  them   may  have  been   impressed 
with  a  cartouche. 

On  a  sandy  plain  to  the  northward  of  the  promontory, 
a  small  village,  called  Abou  El  Wall  (Father  of  Bricks), 
is  surrounded  with  mounds  of  broken  pottery  and  rubbish, 
which  mark  the  situation  of  a  more  considerable  place. 
After  crossing  this  plain,  we  ascended  by  a  winding  path 
amongst  rocky  hills,  where  antient  tombs  had  been  exca- 
vated, and  proceeded  to  the  objects  of  our  research,  along 
a  broad  causeway,  which  extended  in  a  south-westerly 
direction. 

The  principal  ruin  consists  of  a  few  courses  of  ma- 
sonry, forming  a  square  of  three  hundred  and  forty-four 
feet.  An  entrance  on  the  northern  side,  has  the  appear- 
ance of  a  road  into  a  quarry,  and  descends  to  a  large 
quadrangular  space,  extending  east  and  west,  which,  as 
well  as  the  passage,  is  at  present  entirely  uncovered. 
This  excavation  appears  to  have  been  made  on  a  larger 
scale  than  was  afterwards  found  requisite,  and  to  have 
been  built  up  with  very  large  blocks.  They  appear  to  be 
very  antient,  and  to  have  been  quarried  upon  the  spot : 
many  of  them  are  scattered  about ;  and  others  remain 
suspended  as  it  were  against  the  sides,  particularly  towards 
the  eastern  and  western  ends  at  a  considerable  height, 
which  shews  that  the  apartment  must  have  been  lofty. 
Two  or  three  smaller  square  foundations  of  granite,  and 
those  of  a  larger  building  upon  an  eminence  are  also  to 
be  observed ;  and  the  ground  is  every  where  covered  with 
rubbish,  broken  pottery,  and  with  the  chippings  of  granite 
blocks,  that  have  been  cut  up  for  the  purposes  of  removal. 
From  the  decomposition  of  the  latter  material  it  has  been 
supposed   that  these   buildings  are   of  greater  antiquity 


OPERATIOXS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  195 

than  those  at  Gizeh ;  but  I  consider  that  the  comparative 
smallness  of  the  pieces,  and  their  pecuharly  exposed  situa- 
tion to  the  corroding  air  of  the  desert,  ^vill  sufficiently 
account  for  their  decay  :  besides,  it  is  to  be  observed, 
that  at  this  place  the  large  masses  of  granite  appear 
sound  and  entire,  although  the  surface  may  have  scaled 
off;  and,  also,  that  small  fragments  may  be  found  near 
the  Third  Pyramid  at  Gizeh  completely  perished.  Granite 
is  known  to  be  of  different  qualities,  and  one  species  is 
termed  disintegrating,  from  its  fragile  texture.  The  stone, 
however,  in  both  these  instances,  appears  to  be  of  the 
same  quality ;  but  it  is  evident  that  neither  granite  nor 
basalt  can  resist  the  action  of  the  desert  sand. 

The  valley  to  the  eastward,  and  immediately  below 
the  cliffy  side  of  the  mountain,  seems  to  contain  antient 
remains,  which  I  had  not  an  opportunity  of  examining; 
but  I  hope  to  receive  a  detailed  account  from  INIr.  Per- 
ring,  who  has  undertaken  to  survey  them,  in  time  for 
insertion  in  the  Appendix.  I  have  already  mentioned 
that  we  ascended  by  a  causeway  from  the  north-east ;  we 
returned  by  another  on  the  contrary  side  of  the  mountain, 
which  had  at  first  a  south-westerly  direction,  and  then 
turned  to  the  south-east.  We  arrived  at  Gizeh  in  a  heavy 
shower  of  rain.  In  going  round  the  works  we  were 
informed  by  the  Arabs  that  there  were  other  ruins  still 
further  to  the  northward,  but  we  could  not  obtain  any 
positive  information  about  them. 

March  18th. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  109.  Children,  98. 
(ireat    Pyramid. — Excavation  of  southern  front. 
Excavation  of  northern  front. 


196  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII. 

Great    Pyramid. — Davison's  Chamber. 

Queen's  Chamber. 

Passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 

Two  borings  in  passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 

Large  stone  in  Great  Passage. 

Second  Pj'ramid. — Floor  in  Belzoni's  Chamber. 
Third    Pyramid. — Interior. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid. — Interior. 

The  floor  in  Belzoni's  Chamber  was  examined,  and 
as  the  eastern  part  consisted  of  rock,  and  the  remainder 
of  a  pavement  of  two  courses  of  squared  stone,  it  was 
supposed  that  the  sarcophagus  might  conceal  a  secret 
passage  to  the  principal  tomb,  as  Herodotus  states  was 
sometimes  the  case ;  and  a  few  blocks  were  taken  up ; 
but  nothing  was  found  out  either  at  this  time  or  in 
August,  when  the  whole  of  the  pavement  was  removed 
by  Mr.  Perring,  in  consequence  of  the  discovery  of  the 
large  apartment  in  the  Third  Pyramid. 

We  returned  to  Cairo  during  a  strong  Kamseen  wind. 

19th.  —  I  gave  to  Mr.  Brettel  a  letter  of  admission  to 
the  tents,  as  he  set  out  in  the  evening  with  a  party  to 
visit  the  pyramids. 

March  20th. 

Reis,  6.  Men,  118.  Children,  108. 

Great    Pyramid.- — Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Davison's  Chamber. 

Queen's  Chamber. 

Passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 

Two  borings  in  passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 

Large  stone  in  Great  Passage. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  197 

Third     Pjramid. — Interior. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid. — luterior. 

I  was  detained  till  late  by  business  in  Cairo,  as  Mr. 
Piozan  (the  consul,  and  also  Messrs.  Briggs  and  Thur- 
burn's  agent)  had  gone  to  Alexandria.  On  arriving  at  the 
pyramids  with  Mr.  Mash,  I  found  Mr.  Brettel  and  three 
other  gentlemen  just  setting  out  on  their  return  to  Cairo. 

Two  parties  had,  on  the  16th  instant,  begun  to  bore 
in  the  passage  leading  to  the  Queen's  Chamber,  in  order 
to  ascertain  whether  the  communication  existed,  which 
appeared  to  be  concealed  by  the  stones  let  in  under  the 
step,  where  we  had  been  so  long  employed.  The  borings 
were  made  near  a  round  hole  in  the  pavement,  about  six 
inches  deep.  Similar  holes  had  been  found  in  the  Queen's 
Chamber,  at  the  exterior  of  the  north-western  angle  of  the 
Second  Pyramid,  and  in  other  places.'' 

March  2\st. 
Reis,  6.  Men,  99.  Children,  130. 

'J'he  same  works  vera  repeated. 

Fragments  of  earthenware  were  found  in  Campbell's 
Tomb.  The  gallery  had  arrived  within  fifteen  feet  of  the 
centre  of  the  Tliird  Pyramid,  and  was  continued  for  a 
short  distance    at  an   angle   of  forty-five   degrees,   when 

8  Mr.  Perring  says,  that  these  holes  may  be  observed  wherever  the 
upper  part  of  the  courses  of  stone  are  exposed,  and  that  they  were  in- 
tended to  support  the  wooden  machines  mentioned  by  Herodotus  for 
raising  the  stones,  which  he  thinks  were  like  the  polyspaston  of  Vitruvius, 
but  this  machine  is  supposed  to  have  consisted  of  an  apparatus  of  blocks, 
and  puUies,  which  were  probably  then  unknown. 


198  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII. 

a  perpendicular  shaft,  about  five  feet  in  diameter,  was 
begun.  This  was  carried  to  the  base,  and  the  operation 
was  attended  with  some  trouble,  as  the  workmen  were 
obliged  to  come  up  from  the  bottom,  every  time  the 
blasting  took  place,  by  means  of  a  rope  ladder ;  for  those 
made  of  wood  were  destroyed  by  the  pieces  of  stone,  and 
the  effects  of  the  powder.  Part  of  the  gallery  was  also 
inconveniently  narrow,  and  the  stone  was  obliged  to  be 
broken  up  before  it  could  be  removed. 

Mr.  Harris  (of  Alexandria)  and  Dr.  Walne,  who  was 
afterwards  consul,  encamped  near  the  palm-trees  on  the 
plain. 

In  the  course  of  the  morning  I  assisted  Mr.  Mash  in 
taking  several  admeasurements. 

March  22c?. 

Reis,  G.  Men,  104.  Children,  78. 

Great     Pyramid. — Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Davison's  Chamber. 

Queen's  Chamber. 

Passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 

Two  borings  in  passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 

Large  stone  in  Great  Passage. 

Second  Pyramid. — Lower  Entrance. 

Third     Pyramid. — Interior. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid. — Interior. 

We  examined  the  air-channels  in  the  King's  Chamber, 
and  put  up  rods  in  the  northern  to  the  length  of  one  hun- 
dred and  nineteen  feet ;  in  the  southern,  of  fifty-nine  feet. 
In  the  course  of  this  operation  we  were  surprised  to  find 
that  the  latter  was  not  in  the  vertical  direction  described 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  OX  AT  GIZEH.  199 

by  M.  Caviglia.  A  few  more  green  idols  were  found  in 
Campbell's  tomb.  Two  quarrymen  were  employed  in 
blasting  the  stones  in  the  lower  entrance  of  the  Second 
Pyramid.^ 

March  23d. 

Reis,  7.  xMen,  108.  Children,  115. 

Great    Pyramid.  —  Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Davison's  Chamber. 

Queen's  Chamber. 

Passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 

Northern  Air-cliannel. 

Large  Stone  in  Great  Passage. 

Second  Pyramid.  —  Lower  Entrance. 

Third     Pj'raniid.  —  Interior. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid.  —  Interior. 

As  a  cavity  had  not  been  discovered  in  the  passage  at 
the  depth  of  ten  feet,  the  boring  rods  were  taken  up  to 
force  the  northern  air-channel,  which  we  were  induced 
to  attempt,  from  having  found  so  great  a  length  of  the 

9  One  of  these  Arabs,  Daoud,  remained  with  me  during  the  whole 
time  I  was  at  Gizeh,  and  was  employed  after  I  left  Egypt  in  sinking  the 
shaft  in  the  subterraneous  chamber  in  the  Great  Pyramid  ;  he  was  an 
excellent  workman,  extremely  zealous  and  active,  and  possessed  of  great 
strength,  although  he  was  said  to  live  entirely  on  spirits,  and  Hhasheesh 
(an  intoxicating  preparation  of  hemp).  He  had  once  a  narrow  escape 
when  blasting  for  the  lower  entrance  at  the  Second  Pyramid.  He  had 
set  fire  to  two  shots,  and  only  one  of  them  going  off,  he  returned  to 
relight  the  other,  which  exploded  whilst  he  was  in  the  narrow  passage ; 
luckily  no  large  fragments  came  out,  and  he  escaped  with  a  few  trifling 
bruises  about  the  arms.  The  previous  explosion  had  thrown  out  many 
fragments  of  considerable  weight  to  a  great  distance. 


SECTS®?!!  TMR®WCM  CENTRE    ®r  TMO^E)    PYK/^KSia 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  199 

by  M.  Cavio;lia.  A  few  more  green  idols  were  found  in 
Campbell's  tomb.  Two  quarrymen  were  employed  in 
blasting  tbe  stones  in  tbe  lower  entrance  of  the  Second 
Pyramid.^ 

March  23d. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  108.  Children,  115. 

Great    Pyramid.  —  Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Davison's  Chamber. 

Queen's  Chamber. 

■ Passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 

Northern  Air-channel. 

• ■  Large  Stone  in  Great  Passage. 

Second  Pyramid.  —  Lower  Entrance. 
Third     Pyramid.  —  Interior. 
Campbell's  Tomb. 
Fourth  Pyramid.  —  Interior. 

As  a  cavity  had  not  been  discovered  in  the  passage  at 
the  depth  of  ten  feet,  the  boring  rods  were  taken  up  to 
force  the  northern  air-channel,  which  we  were  induced 
to  attempt,  from  having  found  so  great  a  length  of  the 

9  One  of  these  Arabs,  Daoud,  remained  with  me  during  the  whole 
time  I  was  at  Gizeh,  and  was  employed  after  I  left  Egypt  in  sinking  the 
shaft  in  the  subterraneous  cliamber  in  tiie  Great  Pyramid  ;  he  was  an 
excellent  workman,  extremely  zealous  and  active,  and  possessed  of  great 
strength,  although  he  was  said  to  live  entirely  on  spirits,  and  Hhasheesh 
(an  intoxicating  preparation  of  hemp).  He  had  once  a  narrow  escape 
when  blasting  for  the  lower  entrance  at  the  Second  Pyramid.  He  had 
set  fire  to  two  shots,  and  only  one  of  them  going  off,  he  returned  to 
relight  the  other,  which  exploded  whilst  he  was  in  the  narrow  passage ; 
luckily  no  large  fragments  came  out,  and  he  escaped  with  a  few  trifling 
bruises  about  the  arms.  The  previous  explosion  had  thrown  out  many 
fragments  of  considerable  weight  to  a  great  distance. 


200  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII. 

lower  part  of  it  entirely  empty.  In  consequence  of  a 
letter  from  Mr.  Piozan's  dragoman,  I  went  in  the  evening 
to  Cairo,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Hill  and  Mr.  Mash. 

March  2ith. 

Reis,  6.  Men,  108.  Children,  108. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

I  found  the  consul's  office  closed,  as  it  was  Good 
Friday,  of  which  I  was  not  aware.  I  therefore  returned 
without  delay  to  the  pyramids.  The  Kamseen  wind  was 
extremely  violent ;  and  the  sand  got  even  into  my  watch 
and  stopped  it,  which  was  a  great  inconvenience,  as  it 
could  not  be  repaired,  and  as  it  had  enabled  me  to  regu- 
late the  people's  work.  By  means  of  the  boring  rods  we 
cleared  five  feet  of  the  northern  air-channel.  The  large 
stone  in  the  Great  Passage  was  cut  through.  It  proved 
to  be  a  lining  over  a  shallow  cavity,  about  five  inches 
square,  which  was  formed  in  the  eastern  corner  by  the 
inclined  position  of  the  roof.  In  order  to  complete  the 
inquiry,  the  other  side  of  the  stone  was  begun  upon. 
Daoud  was  sent  to  blast  in  Davison's  Chamber ;  and  small 
charges  of  gunpowder  were  used  in  the  other  works 
wherever  they  could  be  applied.  The  shaft  had  been 
sunk  about  three  feet  in  the  Third  Pyramid. 

March  25th. 
Reis,  6.  Men,  119.  Children,  119. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

A  quantity  of  black  dust,  apparently  decayed  stone, 
was  discovered  under  the  first  stone  that  was  removed 
in  the  lower  entrance  of  the  Second  Pyramid. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  201 

The  sand  bad  now  been  cleared  out  in  Campbell's 
Tomb  to  a  level  vvitb  the  grotto  communicating  with  the 
shaft  at  the  south-western  corner,  in  which  a  sarcophagus 
was  found  on  the  11th  of  February.  This  was  now  well 
examined;  it  was  composed  of  red  granite,  and  inscribed 
with  rows  of  hieroglypliics.  It  lay  east  and  west  on  the 
southern  side  of  the  grotto,  and  the  lid,  which  was  also 
covered  with  hieroglyphics,  had  been  removed,  and  placed 
near  the  wall.  The  grotto  itself  was  roughly  chiselled, 
without  plaster  or  decoration ;  and  a  sort  of  groove  ran 
round  the  walls  close  to  the  floor,  in  which  small  pieces 
of  rough  stone  were  placed  at  nearly  equal  distances. 
There  were  niches  in  the  wall  at  the  head  and  foot  of 
the  sarcophagus,  and  two  apertures  had  been  roughly 
cut  through  the  sides  of  the  grotto,  one  into  the  central 
part  of  the  tomb,  and  the  other  into  the  shaft,  which 
went  down  to  a  considerable  depth.  The  sarcophagus 
was  empty,  but  sixty-five  green  idols,  in  a  perfect  state, 
and  several  broken  pieces  were  taken  out  from  the  sand, 
with  which  the  grotto  was  filled. 

2Qth.  —  I  examined  the  southern  dyke,  and  the  tombs 
on  the  hills  near  it,  which  appear  to  extend  to  Abouseir 
and  Saccara.  The  shafts  were  in  general  extremely 
deep.  They  had  been,  no  doubt,  pillaged  by  the  an- 
tients,  and  many  of  them  had  been  recently  opened  by 
Mr.  Massara,  and  by  other  persons.  One  of  the  most 
considerable  was  that  alluded  to  by  M.  Caviglia  on  the 
4th  of  February.  It  was  a  large  rectangular  pit,  forty- 
three  feet  in  depth  to  the  sand  at  the  bottom.  The 
edges  were  marked  with  hollows,  that  had  the  appearance 
of  gutters,  and  a  square  passage  like  the  inclined  entrances 


202  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

in  the  pyramids  had  been  cut  through  the  rock  on  the 
southern  side,  and  opened  into  the  excavation,  at  about 
fifteen  feet  from  the  top,  without  any  apparent  means  of 
descent,  or  any  communication  with  the  bottom :  it  is 
probable,  therefore,  that  some  building  formerly  existed 
in  the  centre,  (like  that  afterwards  discovered  in  Camp- 
bell's Tomb,)  with  which  the  passage  communicated. 
The  lower  part  of  the  perpencHcular  sides  were  hollow, 
and  several  large  grottoes  seemed  to  extend  to  a  consi- 
derable distance,  particularly  towards  the  south-west. 
The  bottom  was  covered  by  a  pavement,  which  was  said 
to  have  resisted  every  attempt  to  remove  it.  With  gun- 
powder, however,  this  might  be  easily  accomplished.  The 
desert  mountains  abound  with  tombs  in  every  direction. 
I  examined  three,  which  contained  regular  arches  with 
key-stones,  and  vestibules  with  domed  roofs.  They  were 
near  each  other,  and  there  were  probably  many  more 
constructed  in  the  same  manner.  They  had  been  closed 
with  stone  doors  fixed  on  pivots.  I  did  not  consider 
them  of  very  remote  antiquity ;  and  it  is  to  be  observed 
that,  in  the  adjacent  plain,  there  are  heaps  of  burnt 
bricks,  apparently  Roman.  Large  tumuli,  surrounded 
with  masonry,  and  ruined  sepulchres  covered  with  sand, 
occupy  the  highest  part  of  the  hills;  and  the  traces  of  a 
wall  extend  from  east  to  west,  upon  the  summit.  I 
afterwards  examined  the  periboli  near  the  Third  Pyramid, 
the  excavations  in  it,  and  the  other  works. 

March  21th. 

Rels,  5.  Men,  101.  Children,  109. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  203 

As  more  people  were  absolutely  necessary,  I  sent  to 
the  Shieks  of  Koum  el  Esvvith,  and  Cafr  el  Batran.  The 
former  came,  attended  with  ten  additional  men  ;  the 
latter,  however,  did  not  make  his  appearance  at  all,  not- 
withstanding I  sent  by  the  janissaries  in  the  evening,  and 
again  on  the  following  morning.  I  accordingly  reported 
him  to  the  British  consul.  Mr.  Perring  infoimed  me  by 
Mr.  Hill  that  neither  Mr.  Mash  nor  himself  could  attend 
for  some  days.  I  discharged  Paulo.  Hyaenas  and  other 
wild  animals  came  frequently  round  the  tents  during  the 
night ;  but  the  dogs  alarmed  them,  and  prevented  our 
getting  a  shot  at  them. 

March  28th. 

Reis,  6.  Men,  140.  Children,  120. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

The  work  went  on  very  slowly  at  the  northern  air- 
channel,  and  scarcely  a  bushel  of  sand  was  taken  out  dur- 
ing the  day.  In  fact,  this  operation  wanted  more  looking 
after  than  its  situation  (three  hundred  and  thirty-one  feet 
above  the  base  of  the  pyramid)  rendered  at  that  time 
practicable.  I  inserted  a  candle  at  the  end  of  a  rod, 
through  a  small  hole,  that  had  been  made  in  the  chamber 
above  Davison's  (subsequently  called  Wellington's),  and 
I  had  the  mortification  of  finding  that  it  was  a  chamber 
of  construction,  like  that  below  it.  More  green  idols 
were  found  in  Campbell's  Tomb. 

3Iarch  29th. 
Reis,  7.  Men,  95.  Children,  101. 
Great     Pyramid. — Excavation  in  southern  front. 
Excavation  in  northern  front. 


204  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII. 

Great     Pyramid. — Wellington's  Chamber. 

Queen's  Chamber. 

Passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 

Northern  Air-channel. 

Large  stone  in  Great  Passage. 

Second  Pj'ramid. — Lower  Entrance. 

Third    Pyramid. — Interior. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid. — Interior. 

Rock  in  centre  of  northern  front  of  Great  Pyramid. 

In  examining  the  ground  to  the  northward  of  the 
Great  Pyramid,  I  observed  a  hne  of  rock  projecting  above 
the  sand,  which  appeared  to  have  been  scalped  down,  and 
might,  therefore,  I  considered,  have  contained  an  en- 
trance to  the  subterraneous  passage  mentioned  by  Hero- 
dotus. It  was  parallel  to  the  building,  and  about  a  hun- 
dred yards  from  it.  But,  upon  removing  the  sand  to  the 
depth  of  six  or  seven  feet,  it  was  found  to  be  in  its 
natural  state,  and  the  work  was  given  up.*  I  at  first 
entertained  an  idea  that  a  grand  ascent  might  have  been 
formed  from  the  plain  below  to  the  brow  of  the  mountain 
upon  which  the  Great  Pyramid  is  placed ;  but  the  side 
of  the  rock  is  covered  with  vast  heaps  of  rubbish,  frag- 
ments of  stone,  great  quantities  of  coarse  gravel,  which 
have  been  brought  from  distant  parts  of  the  desert  (pro- 
bably from  Dashoor),  and  with  other  materials,  that  have 
been  used  for  fillings  in,  and  for  rubble  work  in  the 
interior  of  the  edifice.  Two  or  three  large  holes  of  an 
angular  shape  have  been  cut  in  the  platform  before  the 

1  A  trench  near  this  place,  which  does  not  exist,  is  inserted  in  the 
French  map,  probably  through  a  mistake  for  the  two  pits  further  to  the 
eastward. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII,  205 

pyramid,  and  a  number  of  round  ones  about  twelve  inclies 
in  diameter,  and  eight  or  ten  inches  deep.  The  latter 
are  in  rows  about  five  feet  asunder,  principally  before  the 
north-eastern  angle  of  the  building,  where  the  blocks  of 
stone  would  have  been  brought  by  the  northern  dyke. 
There  is  also  a  remarkable  groove,  or  trench,  which,  as 
well  as  the  holes,  seems  to  have  been  used  in  the  erection 
of  scaffolding,  or  of  machinery  when  the  pyramid  was  built. 
The  excavation  had  arrived  within  a  short  distance  of  the 
centre  of  the  Third  Pyramid ;  and  we  were  in  daily  ex- 
pectation of  meeting  with  the  granite  lining  of  an  apart- 
ment. But  as  it  was  necessary  to  enlarge  the  shaft,  little 
progress  was  made  for  some  days.  The  great  depth  at 
which  we  had  now  arrived  in  Campbell's  Tomb,  made  the 
clearing  of  the  sand  very  difficult,  and  laborious. 

Alarch  30t/i. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  133.  Children,  140. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

The  hole  into  Wellington's  Chamber  being  practicable, 
I  examined  it  with  Mr.  Hill.  The  floor  was  unequal,  as 
it  was  composed  of  the  reverse  of  the  blocks  of  granite, 
that  formed  the  ceiling  of  Davison's  Chamber.  It  was 
entirely  empty,  excepting  one  piece  of  stone  thrown  into 
it  by  blasting.  Not  an  insect  or  a  bat  appeared,  nor  the 
traces  of  any  hving  animal.  There  had  not  been,  indeed, 
any  doorway  or  entrance ;  and  although  some  of  the 
granite  blocks  in  the  southern  and  northern  walls  had 
lugs,  or  projections,  yet  the  stones  composing  the  roof 
rested  upon  them  —  so  that  it  was  impossible  that  they 
could    have    been    moved    up    as    a    portcuUis.       This 


206  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII. 

chamber,  in  fact,  like  Davison's  and  the  otliers  afterwards 
discovered,  was  merely  a  vacancy,  or  chamber  of  con- 
struction, to  take  off  the  weight  of  the  building  from  the 
King's  Cliamber.  Their  dimensions  are  as  follows  :  — 
King's  Chamber,  thirty-four  feet  three  inches,  by  seven- 
teen feet  one  inch ;  Davison's,  thirty-eight  feet  four 
inches,  by  seventeen  feet  one  inch  ;  Wellington's,  thirty- 
eight  feet  six  inches,  by  seventeen  feet.  In  the  ceilings 
alone  was  any  exactness  of  construction  preserved. 
These  were  beautifully  polished,  and  had  the  finest  joints, 
in  order  most  probably  to  prevent  the  slightest  accumu- 
lation of  dust  or  of  rubbish.  In  all  other  respects,  the 
masonry  in  these  apartments  became  less  perfect  as  they 
ascended.  The  northern  and  southern  walls  of  Welling- 
ton's, and  of  Davison's  Chambers  were  of  granite,  the 
eastern  and  western  of  calcareous  stone ;  the  ceiling  con- 
sisted of  nine  blocks  of  granite  laid  from  north  to  south, 
and  were,  like  those  in  Davison's  apartment,  of  a  sufficient 
length  to  extend  their  bearings  beyond  the  walls  of  the 
King's  Chamber.  The  average  height  of  the  chamber 
(which  varies,  owing  to  the  irregular  surface  of  the  floor) 
was  about  three  feet  eight  inches.  JNIr.  Perring,  in  the 
course  of  his  survey,  found  that  these  apartments  had 
been  finished  from  the  eastward,  and  that  consequently 
the  western  sides  were  last  built. 

For  a  day  or  two  after  the  chamber  had  been  opened, 
those  who  remained  in  it  became  blackened  as  if  by  a 
London  fog :  as  this  effect  gradually  disappeared,  I  con- 
ceive it  to  have  been  occasioned  by  blasting,  and  by  the 
sudden  admission  of  the  air.  Upon  first  entering  the 
apartment,  a  black  sediment  was  found,  of  the  consistence 
of  a  hoar-frost,  equally  distributed  over  the  floor,  so  that 


OPERATIONS  CAKRIED  OX  AT  GIZEII.  207 

footsteps  could  be  distinctly  seen  impressed  on  it,  and  it 
had  accumulated  to  some  depth  in  the  interstices  of  the 
blocks.  Some  of  this  sediment,  which  was  sent  to  the 
French  establishment  near  Cairo,  was  said  to  contain 
ligneous  particles.  When  analysed  in  England,  it  was 
supposed  to  consist  of  the  exuvije  of  insects ;  but  as  the 
deposition  was  equally  diffused  over  the  floor,  and  ex- 
tremely like  the  substance  found  on  the  25th  instant  at 
the  Second  Pyramid,  it  was  most  probably  composed  of 
particles  of  decayed  stone.  If  it  had  been  the  remains 
of  I'otten  wood,  or  of  a  quantity  of  insects  that  had  pene- 
trated through  the  masonry,  it  would  scarcely  have  been 
so  equally  distributed ;  and,  if  caused  by  the  latter,  it  is 
difficult  to  imagine  why  some  of  them  should  not  have 
been  found  alive  when  tlie  place  was  opened  evidently 
for  the  first  time  since  the  pyramid  was  built. 

Having  ordered  the  entrance  to  be  enlarged,  I  went 
round  the  other  works.  I  afterwards  wrote  to  Colonel 
Campbell,  and  sent  with  my  letter  the  idols  found  in  his 
tomb.  Mr.  Perring  and  Mr.  Mash  having  arrived,  we 
went  in  the  evening  into  Wellington's  Chamber,  and  took 
various  admeasurements,  and  in  doing  so  we  found  the 
quarry  marks. 

March  Slst. 

Reis,  8.  Men,  149.  Children,  187. 

Great     Pyramid. — Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

'  Wellington's  Chamber. 

— —  Queen's  Chamber. 

Passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 

— —  Northern  Air-channel. 

— •  Large  Stone  in  Great  Passage. 


208  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

Second  Pyramid. — Lower  Entrance. 

Third     Pyramid. — Interior. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth   Pyramid. — Interior. 

Rock  in  centre  of  northern  front  of  Great  Pyramid. 

Bridge  in  southern  Dyke. 

We  discovered  the  pavement  at  the  base  of  the  Great 
Pyramid.  I  still  entertained  great  hopes  of  finding  a 
sepulchral  apartment,  and  therefore  directed  that  every 
exertion  should  be  made  to  get  above  Wellington's 
Chamber,  for  which  purpose  Daoud  was  employed.  In 
addition  to  the  other  works,  the  bridge  was  again  cleared 
out  for  Mr,  Perring's  survey.  In  the  afternoon  I  went 
with  Mr.  Hill  to  Wellington's  Chamber,  and  the  Duke's 
glorious  name  was  inscribed  on  the  southern  wall. 

Mr.  Raven  came  to  see  the  works.  This  gentleman, 
who  was  afterwards  employed,  had  had  the  charge  of  a 
rice -mill  worked  by  steam  at  Rosetta.  He  not  only 
understood  the  habits  and  language  of  the  Arabs,  but  was 
also  a  most  zealous  and  active  man  of  business.  He  got 
every  thing  into  perfect  order,  collected  and  kept  in  good 
repair  the  various  tools,  boring-rods,  &c.,  and  was  inde- 
fatigable in  his  exertions  during  the  whole  time  he  re- 
mained at  the  pyramids.  He  was  a  friend  of  Mr.  Hill's, 
to  whom  I  am  indebted  for  his  assistance ;  and  I  take 
this  opportunity  of  acknowledging  my  obligations  to  Mr. 
Hill  himself,  who  was  always  ready  to  assist  me,  and  was 
of  the  greatest  possible  service. 

April  1st. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  173.  Children,  262. 

The  same  works  were  continued. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  209 

Mr.  Perring  and  Mr.  Mash  went  away,  and  in  the 
evening  I  returned  to  Cairo,  with  Mr.  Hill  and  Mr.  Raven. 

April  2d. — I  remained  at  Cairo. 
April  3d. 

Reis,  8.  Men,  151.  Children,  177. 

The  same  works  were  continued. 

I  went  with  Colonel  Campbell  to  see  Ibrahim  Pacha, 
but  we  were  not  admitted,  as  he  was  indisposed.  He 
had,  indeed,  returned  from  Syria  on  that  account.  We 
then  called  on  Mr.  Bonfort  (his  man  of  business),  with 
whom  we  sat  some  time.  He  wore  the  Nizam  dress,  but 
the  room  contained  books  and  pictures,  and  had  the  air 
of  a  European  apartment.  We  afterwards  visited  Shereef 
Pacha  (the  Governor  of  Syria),  to  whose  assistance  I 
had  been  so  much  indebted,  when  the  party,  which  I 
accompanied  to  Palmyra,  had  been  robbed  by  the  Arabs. 
In  alluding  to  this  circumstance,  the  Pacha  mentioned 
that  he  had  paid  the  full  amount  of  our  losses  on  that 
occasion,  according  to  an  account  sent  to  him  by  Mr. 
Farren ;  which,  he  added,  could  not  in  justice  have 
been  demanded,  as  he  had  offered  in  the  first  instance  a 
guard,  but  that  Mr.  Farren  had  refused  to  accept  it. 

I  returned  in  the  evening  to  the  pyramids  with 
Mr.  Hill. 

April  4:tli. 

Reis,  8.  Men,  139.  Children,  210. 

Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Wellington's  Chamber. 

Queen's  Chamber. 

VOL.  I.  P 


210  OPERATIONS  CAERIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

Great     Pyramid.— Passage  to  Queen's  Chamber. 

Northern  Air-channel. 

Second  Pyramid. — Lower  Entrance. 

Third    Pyramid. — Interior. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth    Pyramid. — Interior. 

Bridge  in  southern  Dyke. 

Well  near  the  Tents. 

The  rubbish  on  the  northern  front  of  the  Great  Py- 
ramid had  been  cleared  away  from  the  pavement,  and, 
as  it  was  in  the  form  of  a  step  hke  that  at  the  Second 
Pyramid,  it  was  considered  that  a  similar  entrance  might 
exist ;  and  that  it  might  possibly  conduct  to  the  famous 
tomb  mentioned  by  Herodotus.  The  pavement  was, 
therefore,  carefully  examined,  but  the  stones  were  found 
to  be  laid  upon  the  solid  rock.  They  had  the  finest 
joints,  but  were  perfectly  plain,  without  the  slightest 
indication  of  sculpture  or  of  painting,  or  appearance  of 
an  entrance. 

The  large  stone  in  the  great  passage,  and  also  the 
excavation  of  the  rock  in  front  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  were 
given  up  for  the  reasons  before-mentioned. 

Having  been  informed  that  there  was  a  well  of  good 
water  in  the  plain  below  the  tents,  which  had  been 
cleared  by  M.  Caviglia,  and  afterwards  by  Mr.  Wilkinson 
(and,  it  is  to  be  remarked,  regularly  filled  in  again  by 
the   Arabs),°   I   ordered   it  to   be   excavated,  and  walled 

«  The  female  figures  introduced  in  this  sketch  represent  the  Arab 
girls  employed  to  supply  the  workmen  with  water,  of  which,  as  it  may 
be  supposed,  the  heat  of  the  climate,  and  nature  of  the  work  carried  on 
occasioned  a  great  consumption.  The  usual  dress  consists  of  a  blue 
loose  gown,  and  a  large  black,  or  chequered  handkerchief  thrown  over 


-a 


_.£t:^S:S»il..-:£:iij£— ,..;J~-ii. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZF.H.  211 

round  sufficiently  higli  to  prevent  the  drifted  sand  from 
falling  into  it.  The  water  was  excellent,  and  at  about 
the  same  depth  as  that  in  the  well  near  the  palm-trees, 
but  the  latter,  from  some  cause  or  other,  was  brackish. 

the  head  with  which  they  occasionally  cover  their  faces,  as  they  do  not 
wear  the  black  veil  (called  boorcko).*  Their  hair,  plaited  with  black 
strings,  to  which  brass  rings  were  attached,  hangs  down  their  backs  ;  and 
their  heads  are  bound  round  bj'  a  smaller  black  handkerchief,  with  a 
coloured  border:  they  generally  wear  a  profusion  of  necklaces,  rings, 
and  ear-rings,  and  are  tattoed  on  the  chin  and  other  parts  of  the  face, 
and  also  on  their  arms,  and  hands,  which  are  often  stained  with  henna. 
The  water  jars  are  of  a  very  picturesque  form,  and  have  a  slight  conca- 
vity at  the  bottom  to  fit  the  shape  of  the  head,  which  is  protected  by  a 
piece  of  linen'  folded  in  the  form  of  a  wreath,  or  by  a  corner  of  the  large 
handkerchief  gathered  up  beneath  the  jar,  which  occasions  the  drapery 
to  fall  in  square  folds  over  the  shoulders  with  the  grace  of  antient  sculp- 
ture. Their  features  are  often  very  handsome,  their  teeth  extremely 
beautiful,  and  their  eyes  naturally  fine,  although,  in  many  instances,  dis- 
eased by  neglect,  and  by  a  constant  exposure  to  the  sand,  and  dust,  so 
that  one-eyed  persons  are  frequently  met  with. 

Their  figures,  when  young,  are  wonderfully  graceful,  and  well  formed, 
and  also  perfectly  erect,  although  perhaps  not  inspired  with  the  air  of 
liberty  and  independence  which  more  properly  belongs  to  their  wander- 
ing sisters  of  the  desert,  notwithstanding  that  they  also  pride  themselves 
on  being  Bedouins.f 

The  boys  are^  well  made,  active,  and  capable  of  great  exertion  ; 
several  of  them  are  very  intelligent,  and  work  extremely  well.  The 
children,  of  five  or  six  years  old,  are  also  good-looking,  and  animated, 
notwithstanding  the   hardships   and   squalid    misery   to    which   they  are 

*   See  Mr.  Lane's  work  on  modern  Egypt. 

t  Nothing  can  be  more  striking  than  the  majestic  figures  occasionally 
seen  near  the  wells  at  Alexandria.  Long  flowing  robes  of  dark  blue 
adorn  their  fine  limbs  with  the  most  classical  drapery,  and  large  silver 
bracelets  and  other  ornaments  call  to  remembrance  the  accounts  of 
patriarchal  times. 


212  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

They  both  appeared  to  stand  nearly  at  the  same  level 
as  that  in  the  wells  on  the  cultivated  grounds,  which 
seemed  to  be  regulated  l)y  the  Nile.  The  comparative 
levels  of  these  wells,  and  of  the  water  in  the  tombs,  were 
taken  by  Mr.  Perring  and  Mr.  Mash,  and  may  be  re- 
ferred to  in  the  Appendix. 

I  was  this  morning  informed,  that  a  cavity  had  been 
discovered  below  the  second  tier  of  stones  under  the  step 
in  the  passage  leading  to  the  Queen's  Chamber;  but, 
upon  examination,  it  was  found  to  be  accidental,  and 
full  of  sand,  rubble-work,  &c.  A  similar  vacancy  oc- 
curred at  about  the  same  depth  under  the  stone  near  the 
niche  in  the  Queen's  Chamber,  which  contained,  like  the 
other,  fillings  in  of  desert  sand,  and  a  quantity  of  the 
black  particles  of  decayed  stone ;  they  were  about  three 
or  four  feet  deep,  and  evidently  did  not  lead  to  any  con- 
cealed communication.  The  works,  therefore,  were  aban- 
doned. The  Arabs  recommended  that  a  stone  should 
be  removed  at  the  right  of  the  entrance  into  the  Queen's 
Chamber,  where  a  ledge  or  grooving  at  the  bottom  of  the 
wall  had  been  discontinued.  The  sparry  excrescence  on 
the  sides  of  this  chamber  gives  it  an  unfinished  appear- 
ance.    The  slight  projection  at  the  corner  of  the  entrance 

exposed,  and,  witli  proper  management,  would  become  a  fine  population. 
But  the  men,  with  a  few  exceptions,  are  sullen,  irrecoverably  idle,  deceit- 
ful, and  totally  insensible  to  good  treatment,  and  therefore  apparently 
incapable  of  amelioration.  Their  clothing,  like  that  of  the  Bedouins  of 
the  desert,  should  consist  of  a  red  tarbouse,  a  shirt,  a  pair  of  short 
trowsers,  and  a  white  blanket ;  but  most  of  these  people  have  seldom 
any  other  covering  than  rags,  and  are  generally  bare-footed  ;  and  it  is 
remarkable  with  what  perfect  indifference  and  ease  they  pass  over  the 
sharp  stones  and  thorns  of  the  desert. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  213 

has  been  made,  according  to  some  opinions,  to  prevent 
the  blocks,  with  which  the  passage  is  snpposed  to  have 
been  closed  up,  from  being  forced  into  the  Chamber  ;  the 
step  may  also  have  some  relation  to  these  blocks. 

I  discharged  Giachino  at  his  own  request — which  I 
intended  to  have  done  on  other  accounts,  for  his  conduct 
had  lately  been  far  from  satisfactory.  As  he  refused  to 
take  with  him  the  effects,  which  had  been  intrusted  to 
his  care  by  M.  Caviglia  when  he  left  the  pyramids,  they 
were  sent  to  Mr.  Hill's  hotel,  and  a  list  of  them  signed  by 
Giachino  to  the  British  Consulate. 

April  5th. 
Reis,  9.  Men,  227.  Children,  193. 

Great      Pj'ramid. — Excavation  on  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Wellington's  Chamber. 

Northern  Air-channel. 

Second  Pj-ramid.  — Lower  entrance. 
Third     Pyramid. — Interior. 
Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid. — Interior. 
Bridge  in  the  southern  Dyke. 
Well. 

Osman,  the  janissary,  was  obliged  to  go  again  into 
Cairo  on  accoimt  of  ophthalmia,  occasioned  probably  by 
the  Kamseen  wind,  which  was  extremely  violent. 

The  entrance  of  the  forced  passage  made  by  the 
Caliphs  on  the  exterior  of  the  northern  front  of  the 
Great  Pyramid,  was  uncovered.  It  was  in  the  centre,  of 
considerable  size,  and  appeared  to  have  been  effected  by 
fire ;  a  quantity  of  dried  forage  (Tibni),  and  of  decayed 
litter  were  also  found  near  it,  as  if  a  number  of  camels 


214  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

had  been  employed  there.  Mr.  Perring  and  Mr.  Mash, 
during  their  survey,  had  penetrated  from  the  interior 
through  this  passage  into  a  cavity,  that  had  been  made 
by  former  explorers  in  the  mound  of  rubbish,  with  which 
it  had  been  concealed.  Mr.  Raven,  who  came  to  remain, 
went  round  the  several  works  with  Mr.  Hill  in  the  evening. 

Api-il  6th. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  173.  Children,  174. 

The  same  works  were  continued. 

Under  Mr.  Raven's  superintendence,  the  terrace,  upon 
which  our  tents  were  pitched,  was  covered  over  with  a 
layer  of  earth,  and  the  sand  in  the  other  parts  was  kept 
firm  by  constant  watering,  which  was  a  great  advantage 
during  the  intense  heat  of  summer.  The  tombs,  in  which 
we  lived,  were  likewise  floored  with  earth,  repaired,  and 
whitewashed.  Two  Moors  were  hired,  who  kept  the 
place  in  good  order,  and  were  better  guards  than  the 
common  Arabs;  but  we  had  watchmen  from  the  villages 
at  night,  as  the  Sheiks  were  accountable  for  the  security 
of  the  place. 

The  lower  entrance  into  the  Second  Pyramid  was 
opened. 

The  sand  was  cleared  out  from  a  rough  grotto,  that 
was  at  the  bottom  of  a  shaft  at  the  south-eastern  corner 
of  Campbell's  Tomb,  and  that  also  opened  into  the  central 
excavation.  It  contained  three  sarcophagi — one  of  red, 
another  of  white  granite,  and  a  third  of  basalt,  crowded 
together  in  an  extraordinary  manner.'     They  appeared  to 

'  One  of  the  granite  sarcophagi  found  in  this  tomb  has  been  sent  to 
the  British  Museum  at  the  suggestion  of  Lord  Prudhoe,  on  account  of 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  215 

be  in  their  original  positions,  and  must  have  been  de- 
posited with  great  difficulty.  The  lids  had  been  removed. 
They  were  extremely  well -finished,  and  adorned  with 
rows  of  hieroglyphics.  The  one  made  of  basalt,  in  par- 
ticular, was  of  most  excellent  workmanship,  but  broken, 
and  entirely  ruined.  Three  hundred  and  ninety  green 
idols  were  found  near  them,  but  the  sarcophagi  had  been 
completely  ransacked,  and  nothing  was  left  excepting  a 
quantity  of  fine  gum,  attached  to  the  mummy-boards  in 
the  one  formed  of  white  granite. 

Mr.  Perring  and  Mr.  Mash  arrived,  and  went  round 
the  works. 

April  1th. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  189.  Children,  154. 

Great     Pyramid.  —  Excavation  in  southern  front. 
■ Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Wellington's  Chamber. 

Northern  Air-channel. 

Third     Pyramid.  —  Interior. 
Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid.  —  Interior. 
Bridge  in  southern  Dyke. 
Well. 

I  sent  the  idols  to  Colonel  Campbell,  and  M.  Ca- 
viglia's  goods  to  Mr.  Hill's.  Mr.  Perring  and  Mr.  Mash 
returned  to  Cairo.  The  sand  had  been  sufficiently  cleared 
out  from  the  bridge  in  the  southern  dyke.  Mr.  Hill  came 
respecting  gunpowder,  for  which  I  was  obliged  to  apply 

the  hieroglyphics  with  which  it  is  inscribed ;  and  a  fragment  of  the  one 
made  of  basalt  has  been  also  sent  with  it,  which  is  remarkable  for  the 
finish  and  beauty  of  the  workmanship. 


216  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

through  Colonel  Campbell  to  Government,  as  I  had 
bought  all  that  I  could  find  in  Cairo,  where  it  was  only 
allowed  to  be  sold  in  small  quantities. 

April  8th. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  182.  Children,  154. 

Great    Pj'ramid.  —  Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Wellington's  Chamber. 

Northern  Air-channel. 

Third     Pyramid. — Interior. 
Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid. — Interior. 
WeU. 

Mr.  Gates,  of  the  20th  regiment,  who  had  arrived  from 
India,  came  to  the  pyramids,  and  returned  in  the  evening 
to  Cairo  with  Mv.  Raven.  Mr.  Mushet  encamped  on  the 
plain  near  the  palm-trees. 

Two  quarry-men  were  sent  to  blast  over  Wellington's 
Chamber.  The  building  in  the  centre  of  Campbell's 
Tomb  was  this  day  discovered.  It  extended  east  and 
west,  and  was  covered  in  by  a  perfect  arch.  The  walls 
were  of  white  stones,  which,  although  not  remarkable  in 
point  of  size,  were  well  jointed  and  finished,  and,  except- 
ing the  arch,  the  masonry  had  the  appearance  of  Grecian 
architecture.  A  passage  had  been  forced  into  the  western 
end  of  the  upper  apartment,  and  in  the  centre  of  the  roof 
there  was  a  circular  opening,  into  which  a  stone  stopper 
had  been  fitted,  with  a  small  hole  in  the  middle  of  it 
lined  with  coarse  pottery,  for  the  circulation  of  air.  The 
floor  of  this  apartment  was  flat  down  the  middle,  but 
sloped  off"  on  each  side  to  the  springing  of  the  arch ;  and 


/'4K  *     1 


Ifr> 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII. 


217 


in  its  centre,  immediately  below  the  hole  in  the  roof  was 
a  similar  aperture,  which  had  been  filled  with  the  same 
kind  of  stopper.  These  stoppers  were  lying  near  the 
apertures ;  and  in  the  upper  apartment  fragments  of  coarse 
amphorae  were  found,  with  a  quantity  of  desert  sand. 
The  lower  apartment,  or  tomb,  had  a  regular  entrance  at 
the  western  end.  From  the  upper  apartment,  which  was 
about  seven  or  eight  feet  high,  I  entered  by  the  air-hole 
already  described  into  the  lower,  where  an  immense  stone, 
supported  on  each  side  by  masonry,  had  originally  formed 
a  complete  covering  to  a  most  magnificent  sarcophagus 
placed  benetith  it.  Several  rows  of  hieroglyphics  were 
engraven  upon  the  lower  part  of  this  stone,  also  upon  the 
sarcophagus,  and  upon  the  hd.  The  end  of  the  stone 
over  the  head  of  the  sarcophagus  had  been  broken  off", 
and  the  lid  was  lifted  up  about  fourteen  or  fifteen  inches. 
Some  broken  ampliorse  were  found  upon  the 
large  stone  on  each  side  of  the  apartment  under 
the  springing  of  the  arch.  The  place  was  nearly 
full  of  sand,  and  the  smoke  of  a  lamp  or  candle 
was  visible  in"  various  parts.  The  sarcophagus 
had  been  imbedded  in  very  small  pieces  of  white 
stone,  and  on  each  side,  near  its  shoulders,  were 
niches  or  hollows,  in  which  several  tiers  of  green 
idols  were  subsequently  found,  standing  in  double 
rows.  They  were  swathed,  after  the  fashion  of 
mummies,  with  narrow  tape,  which  had  imbibed 
the  colour  of  the  idols,  and  decomposed  on  the 
slightest  exposure  to  the  air.  At  the  foot  of  the 
sarcophagus  was  a  square  pit,  about  nine  feet 
deep,  and  lined  with  masonry ;  it  had  two  air- 
channels  near  the  bottom,  and  a  row  of  charac- 


-X 
-X 
-X 

nil 


218  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

ters,  many  of  which  were  not  hieroglyphics,  inscribed  on 
one  of  the  walls.  It  was  at  first  supposed  to  communicate 
with  a  lower  tomb,  but  this  was  not  the  case.  As  the  lid 
of  the  sarcophagus  had  only  been  raised  a  few  inches,  I 
thought  that  part  of  the  mummy  might  yet  remain.  I 
accordingly  wrote  to  Colonel  Campbell,  Mr.  Perring,  and 
Mr.  Hill,  and  having  ordered  the  two  janissaries,  and 
some  of  the  reis  to  watch  during  the  night,  I  postponed 
any  further  investigation  till  the  following  day. 

Apnl  9th. 
Reis,  7.  Men,  16. 

Mr.  Hill  arrived.  We  immediately  went  to  the  tomb. 
Having  cleared  out  a  quantity  of  sand,  we  found  the 
sarcophagus  entirely  empty,  excepting  a  few  trifling  orna- 
ments of  stone.  The  cartouche  of  Psammetichus  the 
Second  was  not  upon  the  sarcophagus,  although  it  ap- 
peared in  a  line  of  hieroglyphics  inscribed  in  a  hollow 
groove  round  the  inside  of  the  central  excavation,  in 
which  the  building  was  placed. 

Mr.  Wilkinson  has  remarked,  that  the  most  antient 
stone  arch  discovered  in  Egypt  is  in  a  tomb  on  the  north- 
eastern rocks  of  Saccara,  and  that  it  was  constructed 
during  the  reign  of  Psammetichus  the  Second  about  six 
hundred  years  before  Christ.  It  is  remarkable  that  this 
building  appears  to  be  of  the  same  date.  These  two  in- 
stances are  therefore  the  earliest  specimens  hitherto  dis- 
covered of  this  mode  of  construction  in  stone.  The 
Egyptians,  however,  formed  arches  with  bricks  in  very 
remote  times ;  and  it  is  surprising  that  the  Grecians  were 
unacquainted  with  them. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  219 

But  at  the  time  when  the  pyramids  were  built,  and 
for  many  subsequent  years,  they  do  not  seem  to  have 
been  invented,  and  ceihngs  appear  to  have  been  composed 
in  three  ways. 

The  most  simple  consisted  of  horizontal  blocks  with 
flat  surfaces,  like  those  in  the  King's,  and  in  tiie  four 
chambers  immediately  above  it  in  the  Great  Pyramid ; 
and  in  the  temples  and  porticoes  in  various  parts  of  the 
country.  It  is  to  be  remarked,  in  some  instances,  as  at 
Abydos,  that  the  lower  surface  of  the  horizontal  stones 
was  cut  into  a  coved  shape. 

When  additional  strength  was  required,  or  when  the 
space  was  of  great  width,  it  was  covered  in  by  the  succes- 
sive projection  of  the  horizontal  courses  from  the  bottom, 
towards  each  other ;  so  that  the  perpendicular  ends  of 
the  stones  formed  a  notched  line,  as  may  be  seen  in  the 
sections  of  the  Great  Gallery,  and  of  the  niche  in  the 
Queen's  Chamber  in  the  Great  Pyramid ;  and  likewise  in 
the  chambers  of  the  Northern  Pyramid  at  Dashoor.  In 
some  other  buildings  formed  in  this  manner,  the  ends  of 
the  projecting  blocks  were  cut  into  a  curved,  or  con- 
tinuous line,  which  had  the  appearance  of  an  arch ;  as 
may  be  seen  in  a  building  at  Thebes ;  in  the  Treasury  of 
Atrgeus,  at  Mycenae ;  in  the  Mamertine  prisons,  at  Rome  ; 
in  the  gateways  at  Tiryus,  and  at  Tusculum  ;  and  in 
other  Cyclopean  buildings. 

Anotlier  method  is  equally  antient,  and  has  been 
adopted  in  the  Queen's,  and  in  Campbell's  Chambers  in 
the  Great  Pyramid ;  in  Belzoni's,  in  the  Second ;  and  also 
in  the  sepulchral  apartment  in  the  Third.  In  these  in- 
stances the  blocks  are  inclined,  and,  meeting  at  the  top, 
form  an  angular  roof.     The  imperfection  of  this  arrange- 


220  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

ment,  when  the  superincumbent  weight  is  considerable, 
seems  to  have  been  fully  understood,  by  the  great  depth 
to  which  the  blocks  have  been  inserted  in  the  walls ;  and, 
in  Campbell's  Chamber,  where  the  weight  is  very  great, 
and  the  masonry  comes  down  upon  the  ceiling,  four 
apartments,  or  vacancies  have  been  contrived  as  an  addi- 
tional precaution.  The  roof  in  the  Queen's  Chamber  is 
protected  by  the  Great  Gallery ;  and  that  in  the  Third 
Pyramid  is  merely  set  up  in  an  excavation ;  but,  in  the 
Second  it  apparently  sustains  the  whole  perpendicular 
weight  of  the  building;  and,  as  it  is  ill  calculated  for 
such  a  purpose,  the  rock,  of  which  the  sides  of  the  apart- 
ment are  composed,  probably  rises  above  it,  and,  by  some 
contrivance,  assists  in  supporting  the  enormous  weight  of 
the  edifice. 

The  fosse,  which  surrounds  the  central  excavation, 
had  been  evidently  arched  over,  for  some  of  the  stones 
remained ;  but  as  the  surface  of  the  rock,  whence  these 
arches  sprung,  was  not  on  the  same  level,  there  must 
have  been  false  joints  at  every  angle.  The  remains  of 
stone  arches  are  also  to  be  seen  in  the  apertures  of  one 
or  two  of  the  adjacent  shafts,  so  that  there  can  be  no 
reason  for  supposing,  from  the  existence  of  an  arch,  that 
the  sepulchral  chamber  was  posterior  to  the  excavation. 

But  the  most  extraordinary  circumstance  is  that  the 
building  was  found  to  rest  upon  a  stratum  of  desert  sand, 
between  two  and  three  feet  thick,  beneath  which  sand 
was  the  solid  rock  without  aperture,  or  shaft  of  any  kind. 
People  have  passed  entirely  under  the  building,  and  rods 
and  poles  have  been  inserted  in  every  direction.  It  is, 
therefore,  to  be  concluded,  that  after  the  central  excava- 
tion had  been  made,  it  was  filled  up  to  the  top  with  sand. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  221 

that  the  tomb  was  built  upon  it,  and  the  sarcophagus  and 
the  large  stone  placed  over  it,  possibly  on  account  of  the 
difficulty  attending  these  operations  at  the  bottom  of  the 
pit,  into  which  it  was  afterwards  gradually  let  down  by 
taking  out  the  sand  in  the  same  way  as  the  lining  of  a 
well  is  lowered.  The  building,  in  its  present  state,  would 
be  soon  destroyed  by  the  crumbling  away  of  the  sub- 
stratum from  beneath  it,  did  not  the  sand  fall  in  from  the 
mounds  on  the  top,  and  continually  accumulate  around  it. 
Mr.  Maltas  and  Mr.  Mushet  called  at  the  tents.  In 
the  evening  Mr.  Perring  and  Mr.  Mash  arrived  from 
Cairo,  when  we  again  visited  Campbell's  Tomb. 

April  lOth. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  180.  Children,  169. 

Tlie  same  operations  were  repeated. 

Mr.  Perring,  Mr.  Mash,  and  Mr.  Hill  went  to  Cairo. 
There  was  a  strong  Kamseen  wind,  and  consequently 
blasts  of  air  were  felt  in  the  interior  of  the  Fourth  Py- 
ramid. In  the  course  of  the  excavation  at  the  northern 
front  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  it  was  found  that  not  only 
the  lower  part  of  it  had  been  forced  in  search  of  an 
entrance,  but  that  a  large  hole  had  been  made  through 
the  pavement  into  a  deep  hollow,  which  had  been  filled 
up  with  rubble  work,  pieces  of  granite,  and  of  other 
stones,  and  afterwards  closed  with  large  blocks,  and  effec- 
tually concealed  by  the  pavement.*     The  disclosure  of  it, 

*  It  will  be  seen  that  this  hollow  was  subsequently  cleared  out  to  the 
depth  of  forty-seven  feet,  when  it  became  so  narrow  that  the  people 
could  not  work.  A  low  grotto,  and  a  small  channel  branched  off  from 
it.  It  seemed  to  be  a  natural  fissure,  and  extended  along  the  centre  of 
the  northern  front,  within  ten  feet  of  the  building. 


222  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

therefore,  could  not  have  been  the  result  of  accident,  but 
of  an  examination  expressly  made  in  search  of  a  subter- 
raneous passage,  of  which  there  is  not  the  slightest  indi- 
cation in  the  interior  of  the  pyramid,  but  where,  on  the 
contrary,  an  inclined  passage  from  the  regular  entrance 
three  hundred  and  twenty  feet  in  length  leads  directly  to 
a  subterraneous  chamber  more  than  one  hundred  feet 
below  the  base.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  in  very 
remote  times  some  tradition  existed  of  a  subterraneous 
passage  peculiar  to  this  pyramid ;  for,  although  the  stones 
at  the  base  of  the  Second  Pyramid  had  been  forced,  yet 
the  pavement  at  that  place  did  not  appear  to  have  been 
attempted  notwithstanding  that  the  existence  of  a  lower 
entrance  must  have  been  manifest  to  all,  who  examined 
the  interior  of  that  building.  These  facts  coincide  with 
the  account  of  Herodotus,  that  the  tomb  of  Cheops  was 
at  so  great  a  depth,  that  it  was  surrounded  by  the  water 
of  the  Nile,  and  differed  from  any  thing  to  be  seen  in  the 
Second  Pyramid, —  a  description  the  more  remarkable,  as 
it  relates  to  the  only  pyramid  which  contains  chambers 
in  the  masonry,  and  cannot  apply  to  any  apartment  at 
present  discovei-ed  in  it.^ 


*  The  level  of  the  river  is  not  inconsistent  with  this  account.  The 
baise  of  the  pyramid  was,  in  the  month  of  May  1837,  one  hundred  and 
forty-six  feet  five  inches  above  the  level  of  the  Nile,  and,  allowing 
twenty  or  thirty  feet  for  the  increased  elevation  of  the  bed  of  the  river, 
the  whole  would  only  amount  to  about  one  hundred  and  seventy-six 
feet ;  and  a  passage  like  that  at  the  Second  Pyramid,  inclining  at  an 
angle  of  twenty-six  degrees,  at  the  distance  of  forty  feet  from  the  base, 
would  arrive  at  the  depth  of  two  hundred  and  twenty  feet  below  the 
centre  of  the  pyramid.  The  step  at  this  pyramid  is  thirty-three  feet  six 
inches  from  the  base,  and  one  foot  nine  inches  high.     The  floor  of  the 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  OX  AT  GIZEII.  223 

It  is  difficult  to  imagine  that  the  Great  Pyramid  was 
intended  to  be  the  tomb  of  more  than  one  individual. 
Indeed  the  whole  structure  seems  built  for  the  security 
of  the  King's  Chamber,  and  for  the  sarcophagus  within 
it ;  but  if  the  dread  of  violation  was  as  strongly  felt  as 
antient  authors  seem  to  describe,  it  is  possible  that  the 
apartments  and  passages  in  the  masonry  were  intended 
as  a  blind,  and  that  the  tomb  in  this,  as  in  all  the  other 
pyramids  at  Gizeh,  was  an  excavation  in  the  rock  at  a 
depth  sufficient  to  elude  discovery.  Or,  on  the  other 
hand,  if  the  testimony  of  Herodotus  is  to  be  refused  on 
this  point  (although  it  has  been  found  correct  in  many 
other  instances),  we  must  conclude  that  Cheops  was  ac- 
tually buried  in  the  King's  Chamber,  and  not,  according 
to  the  usual  manner,  in  an  excavation  ;  and  that  the 
unfinished  subterraneous  apartment  was  intended  to  de- 
ceive, and  to  support  the  fictions  of  the  priests,  which 
were  communicated  to  Herodotus.''  It  was  my  intention 
to  have  blasted  the  rock  to  a  considerable  depth,  in 
search  of  a  communication;  the  discovery  of  this  fissure, 
therefore,  saved  me  a  great  deal  of  trouble  and  expense ; 
and  as  much  interest  was  attached  to  this  inquiry,  I 
directed,  when  I  left  Egypt  in  1837,  that  a  shaft  should 
be  sunk  in  the  floor  of  the  subterraneous  chamber,  to  the 
depth   of  fifty  feet.       This  operation  was  attended  with 

subterraneous  chamber,  which  is  now  open,  is  above  one  hundred  feet 
below  the  base. 

^  As  Cheops  and  Chephrenes  are  stated  to  have  been  decidedly- 
hostile  to  the  religious  institutions  of  the  country,  it  is  not  probable 
that  the  priests  would  have  felt  any  great  interest  in  preventing  the 
violation  of  their  tombs. 


224  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

difficulty,  from  the  want  of  a  free  circulation  of  air ;  but, 
in  September  1838,  it  had  penetrated  thirty-eight  feet 
through  the  solid  rock,  without  any  appearance  of  a 
chamber.  An  excavation  of  this  kind  appeared  to  be 
the  easiest  way  of  ascertaining  the  truth,  as  it  is  nearly 
in  the  centre  of  the  pyramid,  and  as  there  is  no  clue,  by 
which  any  regular  entrance  can  be  found. 

As  it  is  evident,  in  many  parts  of  Egypt,  that  the 
desert  has  been  continually  encroaching,  particularly  from 
the  westward,  there  was  probably  little  or  no  sand  upon 
the  rocks  at  Gizeh  when  the  pyramids  were  erected.  It 
would  also  appear  that  they  were  broken  open  soon  after 
they  were  built,  and  at  about  the  same  time ;  for  at  the 
bottom  of  the  mounds,  at  the  northern  fronts  of  the  two 
largest,  the  strata  of  undisturbed  desert  sand  are  of  incon- 
siderable depth  below  the  lines  of  rubbish  produced  by 
the  first  aggressions  committed  upon  them ;  indeed  Dio- 
dorus  Siculus  states,  that  neither  the  bodies  of  Cheops 
nor  of  Chephrenes  were  deposited  in  the  pyramids,  from 
an  apprehension  of  the  violence  to  which  they  might  be 
exposed ;  and  we  know  that  they  were  open  in  the  time 
of  Herodotus,  four  hundred  and  forty-five  years  before 
Christ,  and  in  that  of  Pliny,  a.d.  79,  as  these  authors 
describe  their  interior  construction  ;  nor  is  it  likely  that 
when  once  the  solid  masonry  was  removed  from  the  inte- 
rior of  the  passages,  they  were  ever  again  closed  up, 
excepting  by  the  effects  of  decay  and  of  dilapidation.  A 
considerable  space  of  time  must  have  elapsed  before  the 
regular  entrances  were  so  effectually  concealed  by  the 
accumulation  of  stones  and  rubbish,  that  even  the  posi- 
tions of  them  were  forgotten,  which  appears  to  have  been 


OPERATIOXS  CARraED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  225 

the  case,  when  the  Cahphs  penetrated  into  the  interior 
through  the  sohd  masonry ;  although,  as  the  Arabian 
historians  relate,  they  seem  to  have  possessed  some  know- 
ledge respecting  their  construction,  for  in  botli  instances, 
the  excavations  have  been  carried  on  from  the  centres  of 
the  northern  fronts,  and  have  been  directed  eastwards,  at 
proper  levels,  so  as  to  intersect  the  passages  with  an 
exactness,  that  could  not  have  been  the  effect  of  chance. 

A  slanderous  paragraph,  intended  to  be  inserted  in  the 
English  newspapers,  was  this  day  shewn  to  me,  which 
accused  Colonel  Campbell  of  having  improperly  laid 
himself  under  obhgations  to  the  Pacha  by  obtaining  the 
firmaun ;  and  which  implied  that  the  Colonel  and  myself 
intended  to  make  our  fortunes  under  the  pretence  of 
scientific  researches.  This  absurd  accusation  is  only 
worthy  of  notice  as  affording  a  specimen  of  the  anony- 
mous attacks  to  which  the  Colonel  is  exposed,  from  the 
adventurers  who  infest  Egypt. 

April  lit//. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  195.  Children,  174. 

Great    Pjiamid. — Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Wellington's  Chamber. 

Northern  Air-channel. 

Second  Pyramid.  —  Roof  in  Belzoni's  Chamber. 
Third     Pyramid. —  Interior. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid.  —  Interior. 

Well. 

As  Mr.  Perring  was  desirous  of  ascertaining  how 
the  roof  in  Belzoni's  Chamber  was  constructed,  an  exca- 

VOL.  I.  Q 


226  OPERATIONS  CAKEIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

vation,  which  in  the  end  cost   a  good  deal   of  trouble, 
was  begun.      I   copied  the   quarry-mavks  found  at  the 


m 


southern  front  of  the  Great  Pyramid.     The   broken   am- 
phorse,  and  green  idols,  were  sent  to  Colonel  Campbell. 

April  12th. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  205.  Children,  2] 9. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

Lights  were  shewn  during  the  night  from  the  top  of 
the  Great  Pyramid,  probably  by  IMr.  JNIushet's  party. 
Tlie  thermometer  was  above  90  in  the  shade,  and  the 
Kamseen  winds  were  extremely  violent,  so  that  Mr. 
ISIushet's  tents  upon  the  plain  were  overwhelmed  with 
sand,  and  he  was  obliged  to  set  out  for  Cairo. 

Several  more  windlasses  and  triangles  were  put  up  to 
raise  the  sand  from  Campbell's  Tomb.  The  excavation 
had  arrived  within  nine  feet  of  the  centre  in  the  Fourth 
Pyramid. 

I  attended  in  the  afternoon  at  a  wedding  in  the 
village  of  Cafr  el  Batran,  but  nothing  occurred  worthy 
of  notice. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  2'27 

April  IStli. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  77.  Children,  130. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

The  Sheiks,  who  had  assembled  to  celebrate  the 
wedding,  paid  me  a  visit :  they  galloped,  two  at  a  time, 
brandishing  their  guns  with  loud  exclamations,  across  the 
sandy  plain  to  the  bottom  of  the  terrace,  and  firing, 
wheeled  suddenly  round  and  retired.  After  repeating  this 
ceremony  two  or  three  times,  they  dismounted,  and  came 
up  to  the  tents,  where  I  gave  them  coffee  and  gun- 
powder. They  were  armed  with  swords,  and  very  long 
guns  (chiefly  German,  or  French,  with  a  good  deal  of 
inlaid  work  upon  the  stocks),  and  wore  embroidered 
pouch-belts,  and  a  kind  of  red  boot,  manufactured  in  Bar- 
bary.  Their  horses  were  active,  but  not  particularly 
well-bred,  and  they  had  Turkish  saddles  and  bridles. 
I  went  down  with  them  into  the  plain,  when  they  repeated 
their  exercise  on  horseback.  They  then  dismounted  and 
advanced,  either  singly  or  two  at  a  time,  shouting,  dancing 
and  hopping,  with  a  view%  it  may  be  supposed,  of  alarming 
the  enemy,  and  of  exciting  their  own  courage  ;  when,  sud- 
denly stooping  down,  they  fired,  and  retired  in  the  same 
way  as  they  had  advanced.  It  was  a  ridiculous  affair, 
exactly  such  as  might  be  expected  from  savages.  The 
Arabs  by  whom  we  were  attacked  in  Syria,  came  on 
in  the  same  manner,  only  that  they  were  almost  naked, 
and  advanced  in  two  lines,  armed  with  large  clubs  and 
stones,  as  well  as  fire-arms,  followed  by  a  third  line,  armed 
with   spears  and  mounted  on  camels. 

A  number  of  idols,  &c.,  were  sent  to  Colonel  Camp- 
bell.    The  excavation  in  Belzoni's  Chamber  was  supposed 


228  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

to  have  been  sufficiently  deep  for  the  examination  of  the 
roof.  Thin  pieces  of  a  white  stone  hning,  and  some  frag- 
ments of  coarse  pottery  were  found  in  the  excavation 
at  the  northern  front  of  the  Great  Pyramid ;  and  also 
the  bottom  of  a  buff-coloured  vase,  or  jar,  of  a  coarse 
texture,  and  lined  with  a  fine  green  glaize. 

April  lith. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  107.  Children,  123. 

Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  in  southern  front. 
. Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Wellington's  Chamber. 

Northern  Air-channel. 

Third    Pyramid.  —  Interior. 
Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid. — Interior. 
The  Well. 

Colonel  Campbell  and  M.  De  Laurin  (the  Austrian 
Consul-General)  came  to  the  Pyramids.  They  examined 
the  Tomb,  Wellington's  Chamber,  and  the  different  works, 
and  returned  to  Cairo  in  the  evening.  I  sent  for  the 
Sheiks  of  Koum  el  Eswith  and  Cafr  el  Batran,  that 
Colonel  Campbell  might  give  them  directions  about  the 
attendance  and  conduct  of  their  people. 

April  15th. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  116.  Children,  129. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

More  of  the  buff  earthenware  was  found  near  the  base 
of  tlie  Great  Pyramid  ;  in  some  instances,  the  glaize  was 
of  an  extremely  brilliant  colour,  and  a  perfect  vitrifaction. 
In  the  evenino;  I  returned  to  Cairo  with  Mr.  Raven. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  229 

Colonel  Campbell  observed  yesterday,  that  many  of 
the  people  had  complaints  in  their  eyes,  and  desired  that 
they  should  be  sent  to  Cairo,  in  order  that  Nayler  Bey 
might  give  directions  respecting  them.  They  accordingly 
received  their  wages  for  the  day,  and  went  to  Colonel 
Campbell's  house,  who  gave  them  money,  and  a  good 
dinner.  Nayler  Bey  prescribed,  and  undertook  to  cure 
them,  but  they  would  neither  attend  to  his  advice,  nor 
adopt  his  remedies,  and  consequently  returned  without 
any  benefit.  It  is  surprising  how  indifferent  the  Arabs 
appear  to  blindness  ;  several  of  them  employed  about  the 
tents  were  assured,  that  they  would  inevitably  lose  their 
sight,  if  they  did  not  wash  and  foment  their  eyes  ;  but 
although  fomentations  were  prepared,  they  would  not 
make  use  of  them.'^  Most  of  the  children's  eyes  are 
diseased  from  dust  and  neglect,  and  from  the  irritation 
produced  by  swarms  of  flies  allowed  to  settle  upon  them  ; 
consequently  blind  and  one-eyed  persons  abound  in 
Egypt,  particularly  in  Cairo,  and,  I  may  also  add,  in 
Syria.  The  inflammation  appears  generally  to  commence 
in  the  eye-lids,  and  no  doubt  with  cleanliness,  and 
medical  assistance,  it  might  at  first  be  easily  cured ; 
but  when  the  eye  itself  is  attacked,  the  case  must  be 
extremely  critical.  The  periodical  visits  of  a  medical 
man  to  the  villages  might  be  of  great  benefit,  particularly 
if  these  indolent  people  could  be  prevailed  upon  to  keep 


T  One  of  the  people  from  the  villages  was  totally  blind,  but  he  was  a 
very  good  workman,  and  had  assisted  for  some  days  in  clearing  out  the 
Air-channel  on  the  exterior  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  before  his  infirmity 
was  discovered,  when,  of  course,  he  was  employed  in  a  safer  position. 


230  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

themselves  clean.  They  had  generally  deep  scars  near 
the  eyes,  which  they  had  lost ;  indeed,  scarification,  and 
the  application  of  a  fetish,  or  charm,  which  consists 
generally  of  a  passage  in  the  Koran  written  by  a  priest 
upon  a  piece  of  parchment,  and  folded  up  in  a  triangular 
shape,  appear  to  be  their  only  remedies.  The  ophthalmia, 
that  attacked  the  people  at  the  Pyramids,  was  extremely 
sudden  and  violent,  and  was  attended  with  great  inflam- 
mation, and  with  severe  pain  at  the  temples. 

April  IGfli.  —  Colonel  Campbell  embarked  for  Alex- 
andria. 

I  was  informed  by  Mr.  Perring,  that,  in  a  letter  he  had 
lately  received,  ]\Ir.  Galloway  complained  of  not  having 
had  an  answer  to  an  application,  which  he  had  some  time 
before  made  to  me,  respecting  Mr.  Caviglia,  who  was 
anxious  to  obtain  my  permission  to  return  to  the  Pyra- 
mids. I  immediately  wrote  to  Mr.  Galloway  to  apologize 
for  the  error  I  had  conmiitted  in  writing  to  Mr.  Sloane 
(the  vice-consul  at  Alexandria),  and  enclosed  a  copy  of 
my  letter  to  that  gentleman.  —  (See  March  I3t/i.) 

April  17  th. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  98.  Children,  119. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

Mr.  Raven,  as  usual,  returned  to  the  Pyramids  by 
daybreak.  I  settled  various  affairs  at  Cairo.  Mr.  Perring 
sent  his  drawings  of  the  quarry  marks  in  Wellington's 
Chamber.     I  returned  to  Gizeh  in  the  evening. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  231 

April  ISl/i. 
Reis,  8.  Men,  166.  Chiklron,  149. 

Great     Pyramid.  —  Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Wellington's  Chamber. 

Northern  Air-channel. 

Roof  in  Queen's  Chamber. 

Third     Pyramid.  —  Interior. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth    Pyramid.  —  Interior. 

There  had  been  a  very  heavy  storm  durhig  the  night, 
and  there  was  rain  in  the  morning.  I  wrote  to  Nayler 
Bey  about  some  people,  who  had  apphed  to  mo  on 
account  of  their  eyes,  but  they  were  not  admitted  into 
his  hospital.  An  officer  paid  me  a  visit,  and  returned  to 
Cairo. 

An  excavation  was  begun  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining 
the  manner  in  which  the  roof  in  the  Queen's  Chamber 
was  constructed.     Mr.  Perring  and  Mr.  Mash  arrived. 

April  I9th. 

Reis,  8.  Men,  128.  Children.  133. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

Mr.  Harris,  who  was  remaining  in  his  boat  at  Gizeh, 

paid  me  a  visit. 

April  '20th. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  114.  Children,  101. 

Great      Pyramid.  —  Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Wellington's  Chamber. 

Northern  Air-channel. 

Roof  in  Queen's  Chamber. 

Second   Pyramid.  —  Roof  in  Belzoni's  Chamber. 
Third      Pyramid.  —  Interior. 

Fourth    Pyramid.  —  Interior. 


232  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

The  works  at  Campbell's  Tomb  were   discontinued 

for  want  of  hands.     I  wrote  to  Mr.  Hamilton,  and  sent 

Mr.  Perring's  drawings  of  the  quarry-marks,  and  some  of 

the   black  dust  found  in  Wellington's  Chamber.     As  the 

result   of  the  excavation  in   Belzoni's  Chamber  was  not 

considered   satisfactory,  the  work  was  resumed  at  that 

place. 

April  21st. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  117.  Children,  146. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

The  jaw-bone  of  a  sheep  and  some  decayed  charcoal 
were  found  in  the  interior  of  the  Fourth  Pyramid.  These 
articles  were  probably  brought  in  by  the  Arabs  ;  ^  or  they 
would  otherwise  establish  the  great  antiquity  of  the 
charring  of  wood,  and  possibly,  by  inference,  of  the  smelt- 
ing of  metals  —  the  latter  process  must  indeed  have  been 
practised  before  the  Pyramids  could  have  been  built. 

Mr.  Perring  and  Mr.  Mash  continued  the  survey ;  and 
in  the  course  of  it,  copied  the  characters  in  the  pit  at  the 
foot  of  the  sarcophagus  in  Campbell's  Tomb.  They  were 
inscribed  with  red  paint  between  double  lines,  about  two 
inches  apart.  —  (See  page  217.) 

Captain  and  Mrs.  Mitchell  arrived  in  the  morning,  and 
returned  after  dinner  to  Cairo. 

A  quantity  of  broken  pottery  was  found  near  the 
forced  entrance  on  the  northern  front  of  the  Great 
Pyramid. 

8  When  I  was  employed,  in  1832,  in  an  excavation  at  Bosco  Tre 
Case,  near  Mount  Vesuvius,  the  same  piece  of  broken  pottery  was 
brought  up  from  a  shaft  five  successive  times,  by  way  of  an  inducement 
to  so  on  with  the  work. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  OTfi  AT  GIZEII.  233 

Ajml  22d. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  111.  Children,  90. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

April  23d.  —  A  party  came  to  breakfast,  including  the 
Count  and  Countess  Odescalchi/  and  Mr.  Piozan  —  they 
afterwards  went  into  the  Pyramids,  examined  the  different 
works,  and  returned  to  Cairo  in  the  evening.  The  Count 
had  a  house  at  Saccara,  and  was  desirous  that  I  should 
undertake  some  operations  at  that  place  ;  but  the  firmaun 
did  not  extend  beyond  Gizeh,  and  I  was  also  fully  occupied. 

April  2Mi. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  123.  Children,  118. 

Great    Pyramid.  —  Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

■ Wellington's  Chamber. 

Northern  Air-channel. 

Roof  in  Queen's  Chamber. 

Second  Pyramid.  —  Roof  in  Belzoni's  Chamber. 
Third    Pyramid.  —  Interior. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid.  —  Interior. 

The  work  at  Campbell's  Tomb  was  again  I'esumed. 
As  the  depth,  particularly  in  the  foss,  had  become  very 
great,  and  the  ropes  were  much  worn,  and  therefore  ill 
calculated  to  sustain  the  weight  of  the  casks,  which  were 
secured  with  iron  hooping,  I  entertained  great  apprehen- 
sions for  the  safety,  not  only  of  the  people  who  worked 

9  An    Italian    officer,   in    the  Pacha's   service,  and  nephew  to  the 
Cardinal  of  that  name. 


234  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

at  the  windlasses  above,  but  also  of  the  boys,  who  were 
employed  below  in  filling  the  casks.  The  greatest  care 
was  taken  to  keep  the  latter  out  of  the  way  when  the 
machine  was  at  work,  and  luckily  no  serious  accident 
happened  :  and  an  application  was  made  to  Mr.  Piozan, 
the  consul,  by  which  I  obtained  an  order  for  a  rope  to  be 
made  at  the  citadel ;  but,  notwithstanding  the  order  pro- 
ceeded from  Habeb  Effendi  (the  governor  of  Cairo),  the 
people  refused  to  make  it,  alleging  that  "  a  new  machine 
was  required  to  do  so,"  although  larger  ropes  had  been 
made  by  the  same  people  for  Mr.  Hill,  when  he  had  the 
care  of  the  steam-engine  at  the  copper  works  in  the  citadel. 
As  this  application  failed,  Mr.  Hill  found  in  the  Pacha's 
stores  some  rope,  that,  by  splicing,  would  have  answered 
the  purpose  tolerably  well.  Another  order  was  obtained, 
and  was  signed  by  the  governor  and  by  all  the  different  au- 
thorities, excepting  one  person,  who,  upon  being  informed 
that  the  rope  was  wanted  for  the  Pyramids,  refused  to  sign 
it.  I  was  therefore  obliged  to  send  to  Alexandria  (one 
hundred  and  forty  miles  distant),  and,  in  the  meantime, 
to  buy  up  any  old  cordage  of  sufficient  size  that  could  be 
met  with  at  Boulac. 

April  25th. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  111.  Children,  134. 

Great    Pj'ramid. — Excavation  in  soutbern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Wellington's  Cliamber. 

Northern  Air-chaunel. 

Third    Pyramid. — Interior. 

Fourth  Pyramid. — Interior. 

Harvest  having  commenced,  very  few  able-bodied  men 
came,  and  the  works  at  Campbell's  Tomb,  the  Queen's, 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  235 

and  Belzoni's  Chambers,  were  necessarily  discontinued. 
In  the  course  of  the  day  the  chamber,  subsequently  called 
Nelson's,  was  discovered.  It  was  entirely  empty,  had  no 
regular  entrance,  and  was  floored  with  the  reverse  of  the 
granite  blocks  of  Wellington's  Chamber,  which  it  much 
resembled,  as  it  had  these  dimensions,  thirty-eight  feet 
nine  inches,  by  sixteen  feet  eight  inches.  The  ceiling 
was  of  polished  granite,  and  resembled  those  in  the  other 
chambers  ;  but  the  northern  and  southern  sides  of  the 
room  were  not  entirely  of  that  material.  Several  quarry- 
marks  were  inscribed  in  red  upon  the  blocks,  particularly 
on  the  western  side.  This  apartment  was  evidently 
intended  for  the  same  purpose  as  those  below  it,  viz.  to 
carry  off  the  weight  of  the  building  from  the  King's 
Chamber. 

April  261/1. 
Reis,  9.  Men,  71.  Children,  72. 

Great    Pyramid.  —  Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Nelson's  Chamber. 

— —  Northern  Air-chaunel. 

Third    Pyramid. — Interior. 
Fourth  Pyramid. — Interior. 

All  hopes  of  an  important  discovery  were  not  yet 
given  up,  and  the  best  quarrymen  were  employed  to  get 
above  the  roof  of  Nelson's  Chamber.  I  was  sorry  to  have 
so  few  men,  but  the  excuse,  viz.  the  harvest,  would  not 
allow  of  a  complaint.  I  sent  an  account  of  our  disco- 
veries to  JNIr.  Hamilton. 

Jj^ril  27 til. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  50.  Cliikhen,  5-2. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 


236  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

The  quarry-marks  in  Nelson's  Chamber  were  copied. 
Several  Arab  Sheiks  called.  Every  evening  just  before 
sunset  there  were  strong  gusts  of  wind,  chiefly  from  the 
north  and  north-west. 

April  28th. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  76.  Children,  59. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

Mr.  Hill  inscribed  Nelson's  great  name  in  the  chamber 
lately  discovered. 

April  29tli. 

Reis,  9,  Men,  58.  Children,  53. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

We  had  been  employed  in  the  interior  of  the  Great 
Pyramid,  and  had  just  come  out  from  the  entrance,  when 
Dr.  and  Mrs.  Hardy,  and  Mr.  Andrews  came  up  the  side 
of  the  building  to  inspect  it.^  They  went  into  the 
pyramid,  and,  after  dinner,  returned  to  Cairo  with  Mr. 
Hill,  and  Mr.  Raven.     Three  Arabs  ran  away  during  the 

1  This  view  has  been  taken  from  a  point  rather  below  the  floor  of  the 
entrance,  or  the  surface  of  the  upper  tier  of  stones,  which  form  the  fore- 
ground, would  have  been  visible,  as  they  are  laid  at  the  same  angle  as  the 
passage  itself,  namely,  26-4] .  The  entrance  is  at  some  distance  from  the 
stones  in  the  foreground. 

The  large  blocks,  placed  $71  decharge  over  the  entrance,  have  given 
rise  to  many  conjectures.  Some  have  imagined  that  an  immense  portal 
existed,  in  contradiction  not  only  to  antient  testimony,  but  to  the  internal 
evidence  of  the  building  itself,  by  which  it  is  clear  that  the  entrance  was 
carefully  concealed.  Others  have  conceived  that  a  succession  of  these 
stones  was  placed  over  the  passage,  in  order  to  sustain  the  superincum- 
bent weight  of  the  structure ;  but  upon  examination,  square  masonry  is 
found   immediately   behind   them ;    and   it   may   also   be   remarked   that 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  237 

night  from  the  Third  Pyramid,  under  pretence  of  having 
been  ill  treated  by  Jack.  I  sent  the  men  to  their 
respective  villages.  Upon  inquiry,  it  appeared  that  they 
had  totally  neglected  their  work,  and  had  been  found 
fast  asleep. 

April  30th. — I  sent  for  the  Sheik  of  Koum  el  Eswith^ 
and  represented  to  him  the  ill  conduct  of  the  men  on  the 
preceding  night.  He  promised  to  send  a  better  party ; 
but,  in  the  evening,  the  same  men  appeared.  He  was, 
therefore,  again  summoned,  and  attended  at  last  with  a 
different  set. 

Ma//  1st. 

Reis,  8.  Men,  74.  Children,  79. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

Some  men  were  employed  during  the  night  at  the  ex- 
cavation near  Nelson's  Chamber ;  but  it  was  afterwards 
determined  that  a  party,  at  an  advanced  price  of  three 
piastres,  should  come  very  early  in  the  morning,  and  work 
through  the  day  under  the  superintendence  of  Daoud. 

I  wrote  again  to  Nayler  Bey  about  the  sick  people. 

3Icii/  2d. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  107.  Children,  106. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

Several  Arab  chiefs  came.     Red  quarry  marks  were 

owing  to  the  form  of  the  pyramid,  the  upper  end  of  the  passage,  near  the 
exterior,  has  no  great  weight  to  support. 

The  courses  are  inclined  near  the  entrance,  but  gradually  become 
horizontal,  like  the  rest  of  the  building.  The  blocks,  forming  the  sides 
of  the  passage,  are  laid  perpendicularly  to  it. 


238  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

continually  found  upon  the  stones,  that  were  removed  at 
the  southern  front  of  the  Great  Pyramid. 

May  3d. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  61.  Children,  46. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

I  examined  the  rocky  ground  to  the  westward  of  the 
Great  Pyramid,  and  the  tombs  and  buildings  to  the  north 
of  the  Second.  Foundations  might  every  where  be  traced 
under  the  sands ;  and  shafts  lined  with  unburnt  bricks, 
amongst  which  probably  a  cartouche  might  be  found,  which 
would  determine  the  date  of  the  constructions.*  Portals 
and  sepulchral  chambers  had  been  formed  in  the  northern 
ridge  of  the  mountain.  The  entrance  of  one  of  the  largest 
was  supported  by  square  pillars,  and  contained  a  mummy- 
pit.  The  interior  consisted  of  two  ruined  chambers,  which 
had  formerly  been  adorned  with  painted  stucco,  but  were 
filled  with  the  sands  of  the  desert.  A  staircase  descended 
from  these  apartments  to  a  lower  range  of  excavations 
and  shafts,  where  fragments  of  mummies,  and  of  embalmed 
animals  were  to  be  found  beneath  the  sand.  Part  of  a 
large  bird,  which  had  been  preserved  with  great  care,  was 
brought  out.  The  footsteps  of  wild  beasts,  the  sole 
tenants  of  these  deserted  sanctuaries,  were  every  where  to 
be  seen. 

Jack  imagined  that  a  stone  on  a  level  with  the  base  at 
the  southern  front  of  the  Fourth  Pyramid  concealed  an 
entrance.  I  thought  he  was  mistaken,  but  I  allowed  him 
to  remove  it,  as  the  excavation  might  be   of  service  in 


*  Much  information  might  possibly  be  obtained  from  the  cartouches 
on  the  bricks  in  the  various  ruins  in  Egypt. 


OPERATIONS  CARTxIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  239 

other  respects,  and  as  it  would,  at  all  events,  shew  the 
level  of  the  buildhig. 

Captain  Demay,  INIr.  Mash,  and  Mr.  Perring  came ; 
and  Sir  Robert  Arbuthnot  brought  me  a  letter  of  introduc- 
tion from  Colonel  Campbell. 

May  4fh. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  56.  Children,  52. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

Captain  Demay  and  Mr.  Hill  went  to  Cairo.  The 
stone  at  the  Fourth  Pyramid  was  blasted,  but  no  passage 
was  discovered.  I  directed  that  this  excavation  should  be 
carried  on  to  the  centre,  for  the  reasons  already  men- 
tioned. 

I  became  extremely  anxious  to  finish  my  operations 
before  the  inundation  of  the  Nile,  and  therefore  sent  again 
to  the  Sheiks  of  the  different  villages  for  more  men.  My 
applications  were  not,  however,  attended  with  much  suc- 
cess, unless  the  weather  was  extremely  hot,  when  the 
corn  could  not  be  safely  carried,  on  account  of  its  shed- 
ding. On  these  occasions  a  considerable  number  of 
people  came  to  work,  and  the  Sheiks  took  great  merit  to 
themselves,  and  boasted  of  their  exertions  in  my  service. 

I  did  not  observe  any  interference  on  the  part  of  the 
Pacha's  officers  at  either  of  these  villages  during  the 
harvest ;  but  there  was  no  reason  to  suppose  that  they 
were  exempt  from  the  usual  contributions  in  agricultural 
produce  and  in  cattle. 

The  Egyptians  have  remained  for  many  ages  in  the 
most  abject  condition  ;  but  it  may  be  doubted  whether 
their  situation  was  at  any  period  more  calamitous  than  it 
is  at  present,  although  they  enjoy  the  inestimable  benefit 


240  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

of  a  strong  and  efficient  government  —  without  which, 
neither  private  security,  nor  pubhc  prosperity,  can  long 
exist.  Unhappily,  however,  this  peculiar  advantage  is  in 
many  instances  perverted  to  their  ruin,  and  together  with 
their  own  idleness,  dishonesty,  and  ignorance,  has  plunged 
them  into  a  state  of  misery,  which  Christianity  and  its 
attendant  blessings  can  alone  effectually  relieve.  It  may, 
therefore,  be  worth  while  to  consider  how  far  the  Pacha 
deserves  the  commendations  so  lavishly  bestowed  upon 
him  in  this  country,  in  consequence  of  the  innovations, 
and  reforms  he  has  attempted  in  his  own  ;  and  whether  a 
power,  as  extensive  as  that  which  was  at  any  time  pos- 
sessed by  the  Romans  in  Egypt  and  in  Syria,  has  been 
exerted  for  the  welfare  of  those  countries,  or  for  the  grati- 
fication of  his  own  private  ambition. 

The  schools  and  manufactories  every  where  established, 
indicate,  as  I  have  already  mentioned,  the  Pacha's  anxiety 
to  civilize  the  people  ;  and  the  condition  of  the  army  and 
navy,  however  inferior  they  may  be  to  European  establish- 
ments—  his  success  in  war  —  the  whole  tenour  of  his 
memorable  life  —  and,  above  all,  the  unexampled  extent 
of  his  authority,  prove  the  resources  and  vigorous  energy 
of  his  mind,  and  also  the  rectitude  of  his  intentions,  when- 
ever his  own  personal  interests  do  not  interfere.  At  the 
same  time  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  notwithstanding  these 
merits,  influenced  probably  by  the  prejudices  of  early  life, 
he  appears  to  be  desirous  of  carrying  his  improvements 
into  effect  on  the  short-sighted  principles  of  eastern  des- 
potism ;  and  to  be  unable  to  understand,  that  the  perma- 
nent interests  of  every  government  are  essentially  involved 
in  the  prosperity  of  the  people  :  that,  for  instance,  the 
most   effectual   manner   of  increasing   his   own   revenue 


OPEEATIOXS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  241 

would  be  to  employ  his  despotic  authority  in  preventing 
fraud  and  oppression,  and  by  a  firm  administration  of  jus- 
tice to  establish  the  foundation  of  all  prosperity — namely, 
security  of  person  and  of  property.  But  the  idea  of  self- 
interest  seems  to  actuate  every  arrangement.  Instead 
of  holding  out  an  incitement  to  agriculture,  (in  which, 
after  all,  the  real  wealth  and  power  of  Egypt  consist),  the 
Pacha,  according  to  a  custom,  which  has  long  prevailed  in 
this  unfortunate  country,  has  taken  possession  of  the 
land,  and  carries  on  the  cultivation  by  forced  labour.  A 
great  proportion  of  produce  and  of  cattle  of  every  descrip- 
tion, is  periodically  taken  from  the  villages ;  and,  besides 
the  usual  duties,  taxes  are  levied  upon  the  palm  trees  and 
the  sakias  —  imposts,  which  inflict  great  privations  upon 
the  people,  and  directly  tend  to  limit  cultivation.  With  the 
same  interested  view  monopolies  of  every  kind  are  esta- 
blished ;  the  sale  even  of  the  necessaries  of  life  is  regu- 
lated by  the  Pacha,  and  the  prices  vary  from  time  to  time 
as  appears  most  likely  to  suit  his  immediate  speculations. 
When  to  these  measures  are  added  the  oppression  of  the 
Sheiks,  and  of  the  other  subordinate  officers  —  the  spolia- 
tion arising  from  the  farming  of  the  taxes  —  and  the  rapa- 
city that  any  appearance  of  wealth  excites  — together  with 
the  actual  poverty  occasioned  by  commercial  monopolies 
and  by  legal  enactments,  that  have  the  effect  of  sumptuary 
laws  —  it  is  not  surprising  that  provisions  have  risen  con- 
siderably in  price  ;  that  coi'u  is  imported  for  home  con- 
sumption ;  and  that  the  people  have  acquired  such  habits 
of  hopeless  and  dejected  indolence,  that  the  common  opera- 
tions of  life  can  scarcely  be  carried  on  without  coercion, 
and  the  dread  of  corporal  punishment.  In  addition  to 
these  evils  frequent  conscriptions  for  the  military  services, 

VOL.  I.  R 


242  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

and  for  the  manufactories,  have  reduced  the  popula- 
tion to  that  degree  that  vast  tracts  of  fertile  land  are 
left  uncultivated  ;  and  the  repeated  levies  are  so  repug- 
nant to  the  people,  that  they  frequently  put  out  an  eye, 
and  otherwise  mutilate  themselves  and  their  children, 
or  escape  to  the  mountains  to  secure  their  freedom.  It 
has  been  supposed,  that,  if  the  Pacha's  independence  and 
the  quiet  possession  of  the  territories  at  present  under  his 
authority  were  formally  guaranteed,  his  subjects  would 
experience  relief  by  a  considerable  diminution  of  his  army 
and  navy ;  but  even  this  result  is  not  probable,  for  like 
all  other  usurpations  his  power  can  only  be  supported  by 
extensive  military  establishments,  and  they  will  always  be 
kept  up  on  some  pretext  or  other  :  such  as  the  expedition 
of  10,000  men,  which  was  contemplated  in  1838,  to  take 
possession  of  the  gold  mines  in  Kordofan,  and  in  the 
adjoining  countries. 

The  war  in  the  Hedj-as  has  been  a  principal  cause 
of  these  oppressions,  and,  after  all,  is  likely  to  prove  an 
unsuccessful  contest.  It  occasions  (as  I  have  already 
observed),  not  only  a  vast  consumption,  but  also  an  im- 
mense waste  of  supplies  of  every  description  ;  and  so  great 
a  loss  of  men,  that  the  conscription  has  not  only  been 
extended  with  great  severity  into  the  upper  country, 
where  people  are  forcibly  carried  off  by  day  and  by 
night ;  but  coffles  of  slaves  have  been  sent  from  Suakim, 
to  repair  the  vast  numbers,  who  perish  by  disease,  by 
famine,  and  by  desultory  warfare  with  an  active  and 
indefatigable  enemy. 

As  the  habits  of  the  people  in  Syria  are  more  domestic 
and  refined  than  those  of  the  Arabs,  the  misery  and  de- 
spair occasioned  by  conscription  are  more  severely  felt  in 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  243 

that  country ;  and  there  also,  in  consequence  of  general 
insecurity,  and  of  the  want  of  hands,  cultivation  is  much 
diminished,  and  provisions  are  proportionably  dear.  But, 
as  it  was  said  of  the  Romans,  "  ubi  solitudinem  faciunt 
pacem  appellant,"  so  it  must  be  confessed,  that  by  dis- 
arming the  country,  and  by  drafting  such  considerable 
numbers  for  military  service,  before  the  late  disturbances 
broke  out  public  tranquiUity  was  preserved,  and  the  safety 
of  the  traveller  ensured  to  a  degree  never  before  experi- 
enced.' What  may  now  be  the  situation  of  that  interesting 
country,  and  to  what  an  extent  the  dreadful  evils,  which 
the  Syrians  experienced  from  their  brutal  oppressors,  may 
at  present  be  carried,  it  is  painful  to  consider.  No  situa- 
tion, not  even  that  of  the  Greeks,  which  excited  so  much 
sympathy  in  Europe,  can  be  more  desperate  ;   and  the 


'  During  a  toui'  in  Syria,  I  witnessed  many  distressing  scenes  at 
Jerusalem,  Hebron,  and  at  other  places.  The  dread  of  conscription 
indeed,  was  so  universal,  that  the  inliabitants  of  the  villages  immediately 
concealed  themselves  upon  the  appearance  of  a  traveller,  who  accident- 
ally approached  to  obtain  information  respecting  the  road,  or  for  any- 
other  purpose  :  and  the  waste  lands  about  Csesarea  Philippi,  and  in  other 
parts  of  the  country,  were  full  of  unfortunate  persons,  who,  having  fled 
from  their  homes  or  from  their  escorts,  found  shelter  in  the  woods  and 
thickets,  and  who  must  in  the  end  from  necessity  become  banditti.  The 
Emir  Bechir  was  compelled  to  take  his  subjects  by  force,  and  to  confine 
them  in  his  own  palace  for  the  inspection  of  the  Pacha's  ofiicers.  A  con- 
siderable number  were  imprisoned  in  the  buildings  that  surround  the 
great  court  at  Ebtedin.  Some  of  them  escaped;  but  in  March  1835 
about  fifty-six  were  inspected  by  Achmet  Bey,  and  on  the  morning  of  the 
13th  they  were  brought  down  into  the  great  court,  where  they  were  fas- 
tened in  parties  of  ten  or  twelve  by  a  long  rope,  with  their  hands  con- 
fined in  a  cleft  piece  of  wood.  Their  cries  and  lamentations  were  dread- 
ful.    If  they  went  aside,  and  knelt  down  to  pray,  they  were  driven  back 


244  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

Syrians  have  an  additional  misfortune,  in  the  conviction 
that  their  calamities  lead  to  no  permanent  result,  but  that 
they  are  themselves  sacrificed  and  their  country  ruined, 
for  the  transitory  interests  of  the  Pacha  and  of  his  son. 

Affairs,  however,  cannot  long  continue  in  their  present 
state,  either  in  Egypt  or  in  Syria ;  European  interference 
must  sooner  or  later  take  place,  and  unless  the  interests  of 
Great  Britain  be  in  future  better  attended  to  than  they  are 
at  present,  that  interference,  particularly  in  the  event  of 
the  death  of  the  Pacha  or  of  his  son  Ibrahim,  will  be  French. 
The  influence  which  that  people  already  possess  in  these 
countries  must  be  obvious  to  every  casual  observer. 
Their  language  is  taught  in  the  different  seminaries,  the 
European  instructors  in  the  military  and  civil  establish- 
ments, are  almost  entirely  French,  or  Italians  connected 
with  France ;  and  last,  although  not  least,  education  and 
accomplishments  are  diffused  in  the  different  hareems 
through  the  same  channels. 

This  nation  also,  whose  interests  have  always  been,  and 
must  necessarily  be  hostile  to  those  of  Great  Britain,  have 
established  a  complete  system  of  steam  navigation  in  the 
Mediterranean  precisely  at  the  moment  when  the  commu- 
nication with  India  is  opened  through  Egypt,  and  have 

into  the  crowd  by  the  sticks  of  the  Arab  soldiers ;  and  were  at  length 
marched  off  under  a  strong  escort,  never  to  return.  A  woman  dressed 
in  white,  with  a  child  in  her  arms,  and  with  her  naked  feet  swollen  and 
bleeding,  followed  the  party  in  mournful  silence  as  it  proceeded  over  the 
rocky  mountains.* 

*  Since  this  was  written,  Mr.  Farren's  "  Letter  to  Lord  Lindsey"  has 
been  published,  and  fully  corroborates  these  remai'ks,  as  far  as  they  relate 
to  Syria. 


OPERATIONS  CAUEIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  245 

also  formed  permanent  establishments  in  Africa,  which 
give  them,  besides  other  important  advantages,  the  com- 
mand of  both  shores  of  that  sea,  and  place  them  within  a 
few  hours'  sail  of  Sicily.  They  have  likewise,  a  consider- 
able army  in  the  field,  and  armaments  afloat,  much  superior 
in  numbers  to  our  fleet  at  Malta;  whilst  on  the  other 
hand,  the  garrisons  at  the  Ionian  Islands,  and  at  Malta 
are  very  weak.  The  system  likewise  by  which  the  latter 
place  has  hitherto  been  supplied  with  grain,  is  proposed 
to  be  given  up,  notwithstanding  that  Egypt  and  Sicily  im- 
port corn  for  home  consumption,  that  the  supply  from 
Barbary  may  at  any  time  be  prevented  by  the  plague,  or, 
in  the  present  state  of  affairs  by  French  interference,  and 
that  the  trade  with  Odessa  is  daily  becoming  more  and 
more  precarious.  To  complete  the  whole,  a  free  press 
is  to  be  established  at  Malta,  which  cannot  fail  of  exciting 
discontent  against  our  own  authority,  and  well-grounded 
apprehensions  in  the  neighbouring  states,  as  the  island 
will  naturally  become  a  receptacle  for  the  turbulent  and 
seditious,  whose  crimes  may  occasion  their  expulsion  from 
other  countries.*  These  matters  cannot  but  excite  the 
apprehension  and  wonder  of  those,  who  consider  the  im- 
portance of  Malta,  as  regards  our  eastern  possessions,  and 
who  call  to  mind  the  extreme  jealousy  naturally  felt  by  all 
former  governments  at  the  repeated  efforts  made  by  our 
national  enemy  from  time  to  time,  and  particulariy  during 
the  last  war,  to  secure  possession  of  it,  and  to  extend  her 
power  in  the  INIediterranean  as  a  means  of  promoting  an 
interest  in  India  similar  to  that,  which  it  formerly  cost  this 
country  so  much  blood  and  treasure  to  counteract. 

*  It  is  to  be  observed,  that  the  written  language  of  Malta  is  Italian. 


246  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

The  interests  of  different  nations  must  ever,  according 
to  their  relative  positions,  be  conflicting  and  opposite ; 
and  war  will  inevitably  ensue,  unless  aggression  be  met 
with  a  dignified  and  timely  assertion  of  right,  supported  by 
an  adequate  power  to  enforce  remonstrance.  But  what 
is  the  case  at  present  ?  The  military  establishments  of 
France,  and  of  the  whole  of  Europe  are  wisely  kept  up  in 
an  efficient  state,  while  those  of  Great  Britain  are  so  re- 
duced that  they  cannot  even  preserve  tranquillity  at  home, 
and  in  the  colonies,  much  less  can  they  meet  the  diffi- 
culties of  the  times  abroad  ;  and  this  at  a  moment  when 
the  East  Indies  are  menaced  by  the  power  of  Russia,  and 
by  the  defection  of  the  native  princes  on  the  one  hand, 
and  by  the  aggrandisement  of  the  French  on  the  other ; 
when,  owing  to  seditious  practices  both  within,  and  without 
the  walls  of  parliament,  Canada  is  probably  for  ever  lost, 
and  Ireland  scarcely  acknowledges  obedience  to  the  law. 
The  government  in  fact  under  the  influence,  if  not  the  dic- 
tation of  a  corrupt  press,  of  reformers  and  dissenters  of  all 
sorts  and  denominations  are  no  longer  free  agents,  but 
temporise,  and  fluctuate  in  order  to  meet  the  inflamed  and 
democratic  fancies  of  a  senseless,  and  deluded  mob,  rather 
than  to  promote  by  a  steady,  and  consistent  policy  the 
great  and  permanent  interests  of  the  State.  History  can 
scarcely  furnish  an  instance,  in  which  a  government  in 
little  more  than  twenty  years  has  so  rapidly  lost  stabifity 
at  home,  and  consideration  abroad. 

The  prosperity  and  power  of  Great  Britain  consisted 
in  institutions  and  principles  of  government  that  united  in 
one  common  interest  the  different  classes  of  a  well-regu- 
lated community  ;  and  a  foreign  policy  consonant  to  these 
monarchical  principles  maintained  the  country  in  security 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  247 

and  happiness  through  years  of  calamity  and  of  war,  and 
finally  advanced  her  to  a  summit  of  unexampled  glory. 
This  policy  is  now  entirely  discarded,  and  our  former  alli- 
ances are  postponed  in  favour  of  a  connexion  with  revolu- 
tionary France ;  who,  with  a  patriotic  steadiness  well 
worthy  of  imitation,  is  gradually  but  rapidly  advancing  her 
national  interests  over  those  of  this  country. 

These  matters  are  not  mere  assertions,  but  facts  evi- 
dent in  every  part  of  Europe  from  Russia  to  the  unfor- 
tunate Peninsula  to  any  person  who  will  take  the 
trouble  to  examine  them.  It  is  likewise  equally  manifest 
that  these  evils  will  not  only  continue,  but  must  rapidly 
increase  as  long  as  republican  principles  are  permitted  to 
infest  the  country,  and  to  array  the  different  classes  of 
society  against  each  other  —  as  long  as  corresponding 
unions  for  the  avowed  purpose  of  rebellion  are  allowed 
to  exist,  and  itinerant  demagogues  to  excite  the  people  to 
insurrection,  by  a  false  display  of  imagined  riglits,  in- 
compatible with  any  form  of  civilized  society,  and  utterly 
subversive  of  those  institutions  in  Church,  and  State,  upon 
which  the  real  liberty  and  welfare  of  every  individual  are 
founded. 

These  observations  may  appear  irrelevant  to  the  sub- 
ject of  this  book ;  but  to  what  part  of  the  world  can  an 
English  traveller  direct  his  steps  without  perceiving  with 
proud  exultation  the  high  position  which  his  country  has 
attained  among  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  without 
feeling  an  ardent  and  increased  desire  to  perpetuate  a 
constitution  and  form  of  government,  which,  under  Provi- 
dence, have  been  the  sources  of  such  great  advantage  ? 

To  return,  however,  to  the  object  more  immediately  in 
question  —  namely,  the  present  state  of  Egypt  —  it  will 


248  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

appear  upon  examination^  that  the  manufacturing  interests 
are  not  in  a  more  prosperous  condition  than  those  con- 
nected with  agriculture. 

In  consequence  of  the  communication  by  steam,  Egypt 
will  probably  again  become  a  great  emporium  of  Eastern 
commerce ;  and  if  encouragement  was  given  to  the 
valuable  productions  which  the  country  can  abundantly 
supply,  and  if  security  of  property  and  freedom  of  trade 
were  established,  an  extensive  intercourse  must  take 
place,  that  would  greatly  contribute  to  the  prosperity  of 
the  country,  and  to  the  civiUzation  of  its  inhabitants.  But, 
unfortunately,  the  Pacha,  either  from  an  idea  of  inde- 
pendence or  of  improving  the  habits  of  the  people,  endea- 
vours to  supply  the  wants  of  the  country  by  native 
industry.  The  home-market  is,  therefore,  stocked  with 
inferior  articles  ;  and  monopolies  are  necessary  to  prevent 
the  importation  of  those  of  a  better  description  at  a 
cheaper  rate,  and  at  once  put  a  stop  to  speculation 
and  improvement.  The  establishments  are  extensive,  and 
comprehend  various  branches  of  manufacture  —  such  as, 
silk  and  cotton,  cloths,  hardware,  paper,  glass,  sugar,  &c., 
the  arms  and  accoutrements  for  the  army,  and  the  stores 
for  the  naval  arsenals.  The  machinery  is  in  general 
excellent ;  and  some  of  the  superintendents  ai-e  Franks 
—  a  few  of  whom  possess  knowledge  and  abilities,  that 
could  not  fail  of  leading  to  a  favourable  result  in  the  course 
of  time ;  but  from  a  jealousy  of  European  interference, 
from  intrigue  and  party  motives,  or  from  a  mistaken  idea 
of  economy,  these  persons  seldom  keep  their  situations 
for  any  length  of  time.  Even  those  appointed  by  the  late 
Mr.  Galloway,  who  is  said  to  have  been  an  intelligent 
person  and  to  have  had  great  influence,  were  discharged 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  249 

ill  his  absence,  and  replaced  by  Turks  or  Arabs,  unqua- 
lified for  the  business. 

There  is  also  a  total  want  of  co-operation  between  the 
several  departments,  which  are  under  the  direction  of 
Boards,  chiefly  composed  of  worthless  adventurers  from 
all  nations,  who  abound  in  Egypt,  and  are  ready  to  under- 
take any  speculation  by  which  money  can  be  obtained. 
The  Pacha  appears  to  be  aw^are  of  their  characters,  and 
to  employ  them  merely  because  he  cannot  procure  better 
assistance,  without  being  fully  sensible  of  the  mischief 
that  results  from  their  mismanagement,  of  which,  amongst 
many  others,  the  following  instance  occurred  when  I  was 
in  Egypt :— An  instrument  belonging  to  one  factory  was 
essentially  necessary  for  the  repair  of  the  machinery  in 
another ;  but,  notwithstanding  repeated  applications,  and 
a  written  order  from  what  was  considered  the  proper 
authority,  it  was  never  obtained,  the  repair  could  not  be 
effected,  and  the  operation  of  the  establishment  was  con- 
sequently impeded.  From  the  same  insubordination,  and 
spirit  of  rivalry,  fictitious  prices  are  put  upon  the  manu- 
factures furnished  for  the  Pacha's  service,  in  order  to 
shew  the  prosperous  state  of  the  different  establishments, 
which  not  only  renders  it  impossible  to  form  an  estimate 
for  any  undertaking,  but  gives  rise  to  endless  disputes, 
and  altercations  between  the  persons  employed  and  the 
government.^  Amongst  other  causes  of  failure,  an  ap- 
parent want  of  steadiness  in  the  Pacha  himself  may  be 
mentioned,  for  one  project  is  no  sooner  begun  than  it  is 
abandoned  for  another ;  and  also  a  total  ignorance  of  the 
means  necessary  for  the  accomplishment  of  his  designs, 

5  Inferior  articles  of  wrought-iron  have,  in  tliis  manner,  been  valued 
at  four  times  the  price  at  which  the  best  might  have  been  obtained  from 
England. 


250  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

which  occasions  the  employment  of  people  in  situations 
for  which  they  are  totally  unfit ;  it  may  likewise  be 
remarked,  that  either  from  ignorance,  or  vmaccountable 
obstinacy,  inferior  machinery  is  in  many  instances  made 
use  of  when  that  of  a  superior  kind,  and  imported  at  a 
vast  expense,  is  spoihng  through  neglect,  and  is  often 
entirely  foi'gotten,  and  destroyed.  Besides  these  circum- 
stances, the  benefits  derived  from  the  division  of  labour 
are  entirely  overlooked,  and,  in  short,  so  many  difficulties 
arise  from  the  dirty  and  idle  habits  of  the  Arabs,  their 
want  of  skill  and  extreme  repugnance  to  labour,''  from 
the  heat  of  the  climate  and  the  dryness  of  the  air,  that 
it  is  surprising  that  the  articles  produced  under  such 
disadvantages  are  not  more  imperfect. 

6  The  occurrence  here  stated  will  shew  the  manner  in  whicli  com- 
pulsory labour  is  carried  on.  An  Arab  blacksmith,  employed  by  me 
at  Gizeh,  was  taken  up  in  Cairo,  on  account  of  a  debt  alleged  to  be  due 
from  him  to  the  Pacha,  but  he  was  immediately  released  as  being  under 
the  protection  of  the  British  flag.  Upon  inquiry,  it  appeared  that  the 
man  had  been  originally  taken  by  conscription,  and  employed,  although 
ignorant  of  the  trade,  to  convert  a  certain  weight  of  iron  in  a  given  time 
into  a  quantity  of  nails,  which  it  was  found  could  be  effected  by  a  skilful 
workman.  The  deficiency  that  necessarily  arose  from  his  inexperience 
was  deducted  from  his  wages,  and  he  was  also  to  be  kept  to  hard  labour 
and  imprisoned  till  the  whole  was  paid :  his  embarrassments,  therefore, 
could  terminate  only  with  his  existence,  as  every  stroke  with  his  hammer 
plunged  him  deeper  into  debt.  He  was  also  obliged  to  bribe  the  person 
employed  in  weighing  out  the  iron,  who  would  otherwise  have  given 
him  short  weight.  The  Pacha  is  entirely  ignorant  of  these  acts  of 
oppression  that  perpetually  occur.  He  cannot  with  justice  be  accused 
of  cruelty  ;  indeed,  many  instances  of  his  generosity  and  clemency  might 
be  cited ;  nor  did  I  witness  during  the  time  I  was  in  his  dominions,  any 
instance  of  capital  punishment,  excepting  of  a  woman  (for  the  same 
offence  as  that  mentioned  in  Mr.  Lane's  interesting  work,  namely,  the 
marrying  four  husbands  at  the  same  time),  an  execution  probably  pro- 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  251 

Egypt,  in  its  present  state,  is  ill-fitted  for  manufactur- 
ing speculations,  and  the  population  would  derive  infinitely- 
more  advantage,  and  also  be  more  effective  for  military 
purposes,  by  employment  in  agricultural  pursuits  and  in 
the  production  of  cotton,  indigo,  sugar,  grain,  &c.,  than  by 
forced  labour  in  unwholesome  factories. 

German  and  English  miners  and  engineers  have  ex- 
plored Mount  Lebanon,  the  neighbourhood  of  Tarsous, 
and  other  parts  of  the  Pacha's  dominions,  and  coal  and 
iron  ore  have  been  sent  to  a  blast  furnace,  lately  erected 
at  Cairo ;  the  metal  hitherto  used  has  been  brought 
from  foreign  countries.  Iron  ordnance  is  imported,  but 
brass  guns  are  cast  in  the  citadel.  They  are,  however, 
imperfectly  formed,  as  the  metal,  from  not  being  properly 
refined,  gives  out  a  quantity  of  scorias ;  and  as  the  mules 
have  not  sufficient  power  to  keep  the  turning  machine 

Deeding  from  Mahomcdan  laws  and  customs,  with  which  the  Pacha 
could  not  well  interfere.  The  gaols,  however,  are  iu  a  most  horrible 
condition;  the  people  are  fastened  by  the  neck  to  a  chain,  and  are 
crowded  together  in  a  most  disgusting  state,  with  scarcelj'  any  light,  air, 
or  food ;  so  that,  considering  the  intense  heat  of  the  climate,  it  is  sur- 
prising that  malignant  fevers  are  not  the  consequence.  The  suppression 
of  the  dancing  girls,  who  had  existed  from  the  earliest  periods,  as  antient 
sculpture  proves,  was  an  extraordinary  instance  of  the  Pacha's  despotic 
authority,  and  of  the  promptness  with  which  it  is  put  in  force.  They 
were  simultaneously  seized  upon  at  Fouah,  Nigeleh,  Cairo,  and  through- 
out the  whole  of  Egypt.  Many  of  them,  married  as  well  as  single,  were 
sent  to  the  army  in  Syria,  and  the  rest  confined  at  Esneh,  and  at  other 
towns  in  Upper  Egypt.  Their  performances  were  entirely  prohibited 
and  put  a  stop  to.  The  duty  (about  £4000)  which  they  paid  as  a 
license  in  Cairo,  was  levied  upon  the  rest  of  the  inhabitants ;  and  no 
disturbance  of  any  kind  ensued,  although  tlieir  exhibitions  formed  a 
considerable  part  of  the  amusements  of  all  classes.  With  a  power  so 
despotic,  how  much  good  might  be  effected  I 


252  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

steadily  in  motion.  The  muskets  are  most  injudiciously 
of  both  French  and  English  patterns,  but  together  with 
the  rest  of  the  arms  are  tolerably  made  according  to 
models.  The  cutlery  is  not  well  finished,  and  is  often 
decorated  after  the  French  fashion,  with  plated  orna- 
ments.    Files,  at  present  cannot  be  manufactured. 

The  construction  of  a  wet-dock  at  Alexandria  has  for 
many  years  engaged  the  Pacha's  attention,  and  people  of 
various  qualifications  have  from  time  to  time  been  em- 
ployed upon  it,  but  hitherto  with  little  success.  In  order 
to  procure  materials  for  this,  and  for  similar  u^ndertakings, 
a  railroad  has  been  laid  at  the  western  end  of  the  harbour 
for  the  conveyance  of  stone.  The  quarries,  which  are 
immediately  accessible  by  it,  have,  however,  been  nearly 
worked  out  in  forming  the  road,  and  a  quay  at  the  bottom 
of  a  small  cove ;  and  the  cove  itself  is  approached  with 
risk  owing  to  sunken  rocks.  Another  railway  has  been 
lately  established  near  Tourah,  between  the  antient  quar- 
ries on  the  Mokattam  and  the  Nile;  this  is  under  able 
direction,  and  may  be  of  use,  but  the  line  was  not  well 
chosen,  and  was  adopted  by  one  of  the  boards  contrary 
to  the  opinion  of  the  civil  engineer  employed  in  conduct- 
ing the  work. 

The  communication  with  India  by  means,  of  wheel 
carriages  across  the  desert  from  Cairo  to  Suez,  and  of 
steam  vessels  on  the  Nile,  and  on  the  Red  Sea,  must  have 
the  most  beneficial  effects  upon  Egypt ;  it  is,  therefore, 
the  Pacha's  interest  to  give  it  every  support,  and  at  pre- 
sent he  seems  inclined  to  do  so.  It  cannot,  however, 
be  considered  as  an  establishment  connected  with  the 
government. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  allude  to  the  various  canals  for 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  253 

the  irrigation  of  the  land,  and  to  other  improvements, 
particularly  about  Cairo  and  Alexandria,  which  have  in 
many  instances  been  attended  with  success^  Of  these, 
perhaps  the  canal  from  Alexandria  to  Atfee  is  the  most 
remarkable ;  but  the  Barrage  is  worthy  of  notice,  which 
has  for  its  object,  besides  the  addition  to  the  revenue 
which  its  name  implies,  a  considerable  increase  of  the 
productive  ground  ;  although  it  may  be  observed  that  at 
the  time  it  was  begun  vast  tracks  of  fertile  land  were 
lying  waste  for  want  of  hands  to  cultivate  them.  It  is 
said  to  have  originated  from  a  survey  taken  when  Napo- 
leon was  in  Egypt ;  but  it  can  hardly  be  supposed  that  he 
had  leisure  to  attend  to  such  matters,  and  still  less,  if  an 
opportunity  had  occurred,  that  he  would  have  attempted 
so  extraordinary  a  project. 

It  is  proposed  to  stop  up  the  Rosetta  and  Damietta 
branches,  and  to  cut  a  new  channel  for  the  river  from  the 
northern  end  of  the  Delta,  and  also  to  construct  at  that 
point  immense  flood-gates,  by  which  the  level  of  the 
water  is  to  be  raised  and  regulated.  The  difficulties  to 
be  surmounted  may  be  easily  imagined.  The  stream  is 
exceedingly  powerful,  and  varies  considerably  at  every 
season  of  the  year,  and  also  in  one  year  from  another. 
The  present  channels  are  wide  and  very  deep,  and,  con- 
sequently, the  formation  of  a  new  watercourse  of  a  suffi- 

7  Amongst  other  undertakings,  a  companj'  of  Greeks  were  employed 
in  1837  to  weigh  up  a  number  of  guns  in  the  Bay  of  Aboukir:  many 
of  them  are  English,  and  were  probably  lost  in  the  unfortunate  expedi- 
tion under  General  Fraser,  of  which  no  detailed  account  was  ever  pub- 
lished. It  was  probably  thought  by  the  ministry  then  in  power  that  the 
result  of  the  expedition  to  the  Dardanelles  was  sufficient  to  gratify  public 
curiosity. 


254  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

cient  capacity  will  be  attended  with  prodigious  labour 
and  expense ;  and  it  is  to  be  doubted  whether,  from  the 
nature  of  the  soil,  an  adequate  foundation  can  be  obtained 
for  buildings  intended  to  resist  the  full  force,  (even  during 
the  inundation,)  of  a  stream  at  all  seasons  navigable  for 
one  thousand  miles  by  boats  of  fifty  or  sixty  tons. 
Neither  the  expense  nor  the  consequences  of  such  a 
gigantic  undertaking  can  be  calculated ;  and  the  desired 
effect  might  be  obtained  by  partial  means  at  a  much  less 
expense,  and  without  the  risk  that  must  attend  any  great 
alteration  in  the  channel  of  such  a  body  of  water.  To 
form  an  opinion  of  the  abilities  of  the  Pacha's  advisers, 
and  of  their  resources  for  such  an  undertaking,  it  is  only 
necessary  to  mention  that  it  was  proposed  to  take  down 
the  Pyramids  of  Gizeh,  Saccara,  Dashoor,  &c.,  and  to  use 
the  materials  in  stopping  up  the  branches  of  the  river. 
Fortunately,  however,  both  projects  are  equally  imprac- 
ticable. 

In  1836  an  attempt  had  been  made  to  dig  out  the 
foundations,  and  a  few  tons  of  stone  had  been  collected ; 
a  range  of  mills  and  ovens  had  also  been  built  for  the 
supply  of  forty  or  fifty  thousand  men,  but  upon  so  bad  a 
plan,  that  a  much  fewer  number  would  have  answered 
the  purpose.  The  work  was  soon  afterwards  discon- 
tinued on  account,  as  it  was  alleged,  of  a  great  mortality 
amongst  the  labourers,  but,  in  fact,  because  both  money 
and  men  were  wanting,  and  also  because  the  projectors 
found  it  impossible  to  proceed. 

May  5th. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  56.  Children,  56. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII. 


255 


More  of  the  buff  earthenware  with  the  green  glaize 
was  found  near  the  northern  front  of  the  Great  Pyramid. 

May  6th. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  71.  Cbildren,  SO. 

The  same  ■«-orks  were  repeated. 

I  copied  some  hieroglyphics  which  jNIr.  Perring  had 
observed   on  the   ruins  of  the   temple   eastward    of  the 


Second  Pyramid.''  These  characters  appeared  to  be  upon 
the  inner  face  of  a  stone,  which  must  therefore  have  pre- 
viously belonged  to  some  other  building  of  extraorcHnary 
antiquity ;  and  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  blocks  have  been 
discovered  in  the  tombs  to  the  westward  of  the  Great 
Pyramid  inscribed  with  inverted  hieroglyphics  on  their 
inward  faces. 

Whilst  I  was  thus  employed,  jM.  Deval,  the  son  of  the 
French   consul   at  Aleppo,  introduced   himself.      I   sent 

8  This  inscription  had  been  observed  and  copied  by  Mr.  Salt,  and, 
through  the  kindness  of  the  Earl  of  Mountnorris,  I  am  enabled  to  insert 
it  as  it  appeared  when  that  gentleman  was  in  Egypt.  Since  that  time 
some  of  the  characters  have  been  effaced. 


256  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

some  people  with  lights  to  shew  him  the  interior  of  the 
pyramids.  Soon  afterwards  I  met  his  father,  with  M. 
Massara,  the  French  dragoman,  whom  I  invited  to  the 
tents.  I  then  joined  Mr.  Perring  and  Mr.  Mash,  who 
were  employed  in  sm-veying  the  ground  between  the 
Great  and  Second  Pyramids.  At  twelve  o'clock  M.  Deval 
and  his  son  came  to  my  tent,  and,  after  having  taken 
some  refreshment,  the  former  returned  to  Cairo,  and  the 
latter  with  the  dragoman  went  on  to  Saccara. 

The  chamber  above  Nelson's  (afterwards  called  Lady 
Arbuthnot's)  was  opened,  and  in  the  course  of  the  after- 
noon I  entered  it  with  Mr.  Raven.  We  found  this  apart- 
ment of  the  same  description,  and  nearly  of  the  same 
dimensions  as  the  others  below  it,  being  thirty-seven  feet 
four  inches  by  sixteen  feet  four  inches.  Like  the  rest  it 
was  quite  empty,  and  built  in  the  same  manner,  but  with 
less  care,  and  with  a  greater  proportion  of  calcareous 
stone  on  the  northern  and  southern  sides.  The  excava- 
tion was  continued,  in  order  to  get  above  it. 

In  the  evening  I  returned  to  Cairo  with  Mr.  Perring 
and  Mr.  Mash. 

Ma?/  7th. — I  called  on  Sir  Robert  and  Lady  Arbuthnot 
at  Colonel  Campbell's  house. 

Mai/  8th. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  61.  Cliildren,  91. 

Great    PjTamid. — Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Lady  Arbuthnot's  Chamber. 

Northern  Air-channel. 

Third    Pyramid. — Interior. 

Fourth  Pvramid. — Interior. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  257 

I  returned  in  the  afternoon  with  Mr.  Hill  to  the 
pyramids. 

In  crossing  the  Nile  I  saw  a  crowd  of  people  on  the 
eastern  bank,  who,  I  was  informed,  were  assembled  to 
witness  the  execution  of  a  woman  for  having  married  four 
husbands.^  The  criminal  soon  made  her  appearance, 
completely  wrapped  up,  and  concealed  in  an  Arab  shawl, 
and  was  conducted  down  the  bank  to  a  boat,  and  seated  in 
the  bottom.  She  was  tied  round,  and  probably  strangled, 
with  a  cord,  to  the  end  of  which  a  heavy  stone  was  affixed. 
The  boat  was  then  put  off  fi'om  the  shore,  and  the  woman, 
together  with  the  stone,  were  suddenly  thrown  into  the 
deep  channel  westward  of  the  IMekias,  on  the  Island  of 
Rhoda.  I  never  afterwards  passed  the  river  without  an 
unpleasant  recollection  of  this  event.  It  was,  however, 
the  only  execution  that  I  witnessed  during  the  two  years 
I  was  traveUing  in  the  East. 

An  immense  piece  of  rock  of  eight  or  nine  tons 
weight  fell  during  the  night  from  the  cliffs  above  the 
blacksmith's  shop  into  the  plain,  but  luckily  without  injury 
to  any  one. 

May  9tli. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  78.  Chilfiren,  80. 

Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

— J-  Lady  Arbuthnot's  Chamber. 

Nortliern  Air-channel. 

Roof  in  Queen's  Chamber. 

Third    Pyramid. — Interior. 

Fourth  Pyramid. — Interior. 

9  It  is  remarkable  that  Mr.  Lane,  in  his  account  of  Egypt,  mentions 
the  execution  of  a  woman  for  a  similar  offence. 


258  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

Several  pieces  of  broken  pottery,  a  quantity  of  red 
stucco,  or  mortar  composed  of  pounded  granite,  and  of 
a  red  stone  (some  of  which  was  found  near  it),  were  dug 
out  near  the  base  of  the  northern  front  of  the  Great  Py- 
ramid. This  red  stone  is  still  used  for  the  same  purpose 
in  Egypt. 

A  number  of  blocks  which  formed  part  of  the  casing 
were  likewise  discovered.  As  it  was  not  then  ascertained 
that  the  pyramid  had  been  cased,  these  stones  were  at 
first  supposed,  from  their  angular  shape,  to  have  been 
employed  in  filling  up,  and  in  concealing  the  cavity  near 
the  entrance.  They  were  extremely  hard,  and  remark- 
ably well  worked ;  but  contrary  to  the  testimony  of 
Abdallatif,  and  of  other  Arabian  authors,  they  did  not 
shew  the  slightest  trace  of  inscription,  or  of  sculpture. 
Nor,  indeed,  was  any  to  be  found  upon  any  stone  belong- 
ing to  the  pyramid,  or  near  it  (with  the  exception  of  the 
quarry-marks  already  described,  of  a  few  lines  drawn  in 
red  upon  a  flat  stone,  apparently  intended  for  a  lining), 
and  of  part  of  the  cartouche   of  Suphis,  engraved  on  a 


brown  stone,  six  inches  long  by  four  broad.  This  frag- 
ment was  dug  out  of  the  mound  at  the  northern  side 
on  June  2d  ;  but  it  did  not  appear  to  have  belonged  to 
the  pyramid.  Mr.  Perring  states,  that  he  has  not  observed 
inscriptions  upon  stones  quarried  upon  the  spot,  but  only 
upon  those  brought  from  the  Mokattam,  and  that  the 
same  red  colouring,  called  moghrah,  is  now  used  in  the 


OPEUATIOXS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  5259 

quarries.  The  excavation  under  the  roof  of  the  Queen's 
Chamber  was  resumed.  Lady  Arbuthnot's  Chamber  was 
minutely  examined,  and  found  to  contain  a  great  many 
quarry-marks.  Notwithstanding  that  the  characters  in 
these  chambers  were  surveyed  by  Mr.  Perring  upon  a 
reduced  scale,  I  considered  that  facsimiles  in  their  ori- 
ginal size  would  be  desirable,  as  they  were  of  great 
importance  from  their  situation,  and  probably  the  most 
antient  inscriptions  in  existence.  I  requested  therefore 
Mr.  Hill  to  copy  them.  His  drawings  were  compared 
with  the  originals  by  Sir  Robert  Arbuthnot,  Mr.  Brettel 
(a  civil  engineer),  Mr.  Raven,  and  myself,  and  are  deposited 
in  the  British  Museum. 

Sir  R,obert  and  Lady  Arbuthnot,  and  her  brother,  Mr. 
Fitzgerald  (an  officer  in  the  fourth  dragoons),  arrived. 

The  wcatlier  was  exceedingly  hot,  and  the  gnats  and 
other  insects,  particularly  the  small  sand-flies,  were  very 
troublesome.  A  number  of  Bedouins  were  continually 
passing  along  tlie  sandy  plain  below  the  tents,  as  the 
proximity  of  the  cultivated  land  afforded  water  and  other 
resources  for  their  flocks  of  sheep  and  goats,  and  herds 
of  camels.  They  had  few  horses,  and  those  very  bad. 
The  camels  travelled  at  the  rate  of  about  two  and  a  half 
miles  per  hour,  in  a  desultory  manner,  wandering  occa- 
sionally from  the  direct  path  to  crop  any  prickly  herbage 
that  the  desert  might  afford.  The  women  were  carried 
by  them  in  close  liowdahs,  or  tents,  made  of  blankets 
stretched  over  framework;  and  were  not  only  exposed,  in 
this  confined  situation,  to  the  rough  and  irregular  move- 
ments of  the  camels,  but  to  the  intense  heat  of  the  sun, 
and  of  the  burning  sands, — a  mode  of  conveyance  wliich 
constant  habit  could  alone  make  supportable.     They  feel. 


IP  6^  Kl  (0)  IS  /r\  Ikffl  II  ©     -^  II  IX  W     >o-,  !,.■   ■„■  mi  g  ,  [p  [L,  /A  D  R"! ,   IF  IS  (s:!  tiSi    T  Cil  E     T  E  W  Tr 


i 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  ^59 

quarries.  The  excavation  under  the  roof  of  the  Queen's 
Chamber  was  resumed.  Lady  Arbuthnot's  Chamber  was 
minutely  examined,  and  found  to  contain  a  great  many 
quarry-marks.  Notwithstanding  that  the  characters  in 
these  chambers  were  surveyed  by  JNIr.  Perring  upon  a 
reduced  scale,  I  considered  that  fiicsimiles  in  their  ori- 
ginal size  would  be  desirable,  as  they  were  of  great 
importance  from  their  situation,  and  probably  the  most 
antient  inscriptions  in  existence.  I  requested  theiefore 
Mr.  Hill  to  copy  tliem.  His  drawings  were  compared 
with  the  originals  by  Sir  Robert  Arbuthnot,  INIr.  Brettel 
(a  civil  engineer),  Mr.  Raven,  and  myself,  and  are  deposited 
in  the  British  Museum. 

Sir  Robert  and  Lady  Arbuthnot,  and  her  brother,  Mr. 
Fitzgerald  (an  officer  in  the  fourth  dragoons),  arrived. 

The  weather  was  exceedingly  hot,  and  the  gnats  and 
other  insects,  particularly  the  small  sand-flies,  were  very 
troublesome.  A  number  of  Bedouins  were  continually 
passing  along  the  sandy  plain  below  the  tents,  as  the 
proximity  of  the  cultivated  land  afforded  water  and  other 
resources  for  their  flocks  of  sheep  and  goats,  and  herds 
of  camels.  They  had  few  horses,  and  those  very  bad. 
The  camels  travelled  at  the  rate  of  about  two  and  a  half 
miles  per  hour,  in  a  desultory  manner,  wandering  occa- 
sionally from  the  direct  path  to  crop  any  prickly  herbage 
that  the  desert  might  afford.  The  women  were  carried 
by  them  in  close  howdahs,  or  tents,  made  of  blankets 
stretched  over  framework;  and  were  not  only  exposed,  in 
this  confined  situation,  to  the  rough  and  irregular  move- 
ments of  the  camels,  but  to  the  intense  heat  of  the  sun, 
and  of  the  burning  sands, — a  mode  of  conveyance  which 
constant  habit  could  alone  make  supportable.     They  feel. 


260  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

however,  a  pride  in  being  secluded,  and  thus  taken  care  of. 
The  men,  armed  with  long  guns,  and  shrouded  from  the 
rays  of  the  sun  by  thick  blankets,  brought  up  the  rear. 

Ilay  10  th. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  112.  Children,  85. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

Mr.  Perring,  with  the  assistance  of  Mr.  Hill,  surveyed 
Lady  Arbuthnot's  Chamber.  Sir  Robert  and  Lady  Ar- 
buthnot  examined  the  works,  as  far  as  the  intense  heat 
would  allow.  They  had  a  long  and  uncomfortable  voyage 
before  them,  at  a  very  unfavourable  season ;  as,  besides 
crossing  the  desert  to  Suez,  they  were  to  make  the  voyage 
to  Jidda,  or  to  Mocha,  in  Arab  boats,  which  are  kept 
close  to  the  shore,  and  are  anchored  every  night ;  and 
were  to  proceed  to  Bombay  in  whatever  vessel  might 
accidentally  be  found  at  either  of  these  ports. 

May  11th. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  115.  Children,  106. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

Ma?/  12th. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  80.  Children,  91. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

Sir  Robert  and  Lady  Arbuthnot,  and  Mr.  Fitzgerald, 
were  obliged,  much  to  my  regret,  to  return  to  Cairo,  on 
account  of  the  great  heat,  which  made  such  accommoda- 
tion as  I  could  give  them  very  inconvenient,  particularly 
for  a  lady.  The  thermometer  in  the  tent  in  which  we 
sat  exceeded,  during  the  day,  one  hundred  and  twenty 
degrees,  and  in  the  tombs,  during  the  night,  stood  above 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII. 


261 


4"  11'" 


ninety.     Mr.  Perring  and  Mr.  INIash  likewise  returned  to 
Cairo. 

After  having  gone  round  the  several  works,  I  was  sent 
for  about  two  o'clock  to  the  Great  Pyramid,  as  the  casing- 
stones  at  the  base  had  been  discovered.  The  size  and 
angle  of  the  building  could  *"  ^i" 
therefore  be  exactly  deter- 
mined, and  all  doubts  were 
removed  respecting  a  re- 
vetment. Two  of  the 
blocks  were  in  their  ori- 
ginal position,  nearly  in  the  centre  of  the  pyramid-/  and 
those  adjoining  them  to  the  eastward  must  have  been 
covered  by  the  mound  of  rubbish  for  a  considerable  time 
before  they  were  removed,  as  the  exact  space,  which 
they  had  occupied,  was  left  in  it,  like  a  perfect  model. 
Why  they  were  thus  taken  out  sideways,  and  by  what 
means,  without  disturbing  any  part  of  the  mass  above 
them,  it  is  difficult  to  say. 

They  were  quite  perfect,  had  been  hewn  into  the 
required  angle  before  they  were  built  in,  and  had  then 
been  polished  down  to  one  uniform  surface;'  the  joints 
were  scarcely  perceptible,  and  not  wider  than  the  thick- 
ness of  silver  paper;  and  such  is  the  tenacity  of  the 
cement  with  which  they  are  held  together,'  that  a  frag- 

1  Their  dimensions  ^^•e^e  taken  by  Mr.  Brettel,  and  the  angle  was 
51-50. 

2  This  was  proved  to  have  been  the  case  bj-  the  excavations  after- 
wards made  at  the  Eighth  Pyramid,  which,  it  is  remarkable,  was  sup- 
posed to  be  that  of  the  daughter  of  Cheops.     See  August  8th 

3  During  a  visit  to  Thebes,  I  endeavoured  to  find  out  the  means  by 
which  the  blocks  composing  the  columns  in  the  Great  Temple  at  Karnac 


262  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

ment  of  one,  that  has  been  destroyed,  remained  firmly  fixed 
in  its  original  alignement,  notwithstanding  the  lapse  of  time 
and  the  violence,  to  which  it  had  been  exposed.  The 
pavement  beyond  the  line  of  the  building  was  well  laid,  and 
beautifully  finished  ;  but  beneath  the  edifice  it  was  worked 
with  even  greater  exactness,  and  to  the  most  perfect  level, 
in  order,  probably,  to  obtain  a  lasting  foundation  for  the 
magnificent  structure  to  be  built  upon  it.  I  consider 
that  the  w'orkmanship  displayed  in  the  King's  Chamber, 
in  this  pavement,  and  in  the  casing-stones,  is  perfectly 
unrivalled  ;  and  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  whole 
exterior  of  this  vast  structure  was  covered  with  the  same 
excellent  masonry. 

May  13th. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  114.  Children,  106. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

The  Sheiks  of  Cafr  el  Batran,  and  of  Harranieh, 
reported  that  the  men  of  their  respective  villages  would 
be  sent  for  to  clear  out  a  canal  in  the  neighbourhood. 
I  went  accordingly  to  Cairo  in  the  evening,  with  Mr.  Hill 
and  JNIr.  Raven,  and  arranged,  with  Mr.  Piozan,  to  visit 

had  been  united.  It  was  said  that  wood  had  been  used  for  that  purpose 
in  the  same  manner  as  in  the  Grecian  temples,  but  I  could  not  discover  any 
of  that  substance,  nor  j'et  of  metallic  fastenings  ;  in  searching,  however, 
between  the  joints  of  one  of  the  larger  columns,  the  upper  part  of  which, 
■with  its  stupendous  architrave,  had  fallen  over  probably  many  centuries 
before,  I  discovered  in  a  cavity  formed  at  the  centre,  in  the  shape  of 
double  wedges  meeting  at  the  points,  a  quantity  of  white  cement,  which, 
notwithstanding  a  long  exposure  to  the  extreme  heat  of  the  climate,  had 
not  been  pulverised,  but  still  retained  a  degree  of  moisture,  and  could 
be  cut  with  a  knife. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII. 


263 


the  Madyr  of  the  district  at  Mabietta  on  the  following 
morning  at  eight  o'clock. 

Mmj  \^th.  —  \  went  with  INIr.  Perring  to  Mabietta,  but 
the  Madyr  had  not  arrived.  In  the  afternoon  I  w^as 
taken  ill,  and  did  not  return  to  Gizeh  till  the  evening  of 
the  18th. 

May  loth. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  81.  Children,  67. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

I  was  informed,  by  a  letter  from  IMr.  Raven,  that  the 
passage  through  the  northern  Air-channel  was  open,  but 
that  a  partial  obstruction  remained,  which  he  proposed  to 
remove  by  means  of  the  boring -rods.  This  was  soon 
effected,  and  the  rods,  and  also  water,  passed  freely  from 
the  top  to  the  bottom,  which  proved  that  the  Chan- 
nel did  not  communicate  with  any  apartment  excepting 
the  King's  Chamber.  Before  Mr.  Raven's  arrival  this 
difficult  operation  had  been  attended  to  by  Mr.  Hill ;  but, 
in  justice  to  the  former  gentleman,  it  is  to  be  remarked, 
that,  although  he  had  at  the  same  time  the  superintend- 
ence of  all  the  other  works,  he  succeeded  in  clearing 
ninety  feet  of  the  upper  part  of  an  inclined  channel,  only 
nine  inches,  by  nine  and  a  half  inches,  wide,  and  situated 
more  than  three  hundred  feet  above  the  base  upon  the 
exterior  of  the  pyramid,  from  the  sand  and  stones  with 
which  it  had  for  centuries  been  choked  up.  For  this  pur- 
pose his  Arab  servant  was  constantly  on  the  spot,  and  he 
was  himself  obliged  to  ascend  the  pyramid  two  or  three 
times  every  day  to  direct  the  Arabs  how  to  proceed. 


264  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

Mai/  leth. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  79.  Children,  78. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

Ma?/  17  th. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  91.  Children,  106. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

I  rode  in  the  evening,  with  Sir  Robert  and  Lady 
Arbuthnot,  to  see  the  ovens  for  hatching  chickens  at 
Gizeh.  The  process  has  been  sufficiently  described  by 
Mr.  Wilkinson,  and  also  by  Mr.  Lane.  The  ovens  were 
not  in  full  work,  as  they  can  only  be  employed  at  parti- 
cular seasons  ;  but  abundance  of  chickens  had  been  pro- 
duced. They  appeared  to  have  been  dwarfed  by  the 
process,  and,  as  M.  Denon  remarks,  are  sold  by  measure. 
The  building  was  extremely  dirty  and  full  of  vermin ;  and 
in  order  to  arrive  at  the  ovens,  we  were  obliged  to  creep 
through  several  low  doorways  and  narrow  passages. 

3Iai/  ISih. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  86.  Children,  99. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

Dr.  Walne  applied,  through  Mr.  Perring,  for  copies  of 
the  characters  found  in  the  Great  Pyramid,  in  order  to 
send  them  to  M.  Rosellini.  I  requested  Mr.  Perring  to 
express  my  regret  that  I  could  not  accede  to  his  request, 
and  received  from  that  gentleman  a  satisfactory  and 
obliging  answer. 

Mr.  Piozan  wrote  to  the  Madyr  respecting  the  men  of 
Cafr  el  Batran,  and  of  Harranieh. 


OPEKATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  265 

I  returned  to  the  pyramids  with  Mr.  Brettel  and  Sir 
Robert  Arbuthnot,  and  found  every  thing  in  good  order 
under  Mr.  Raven's  superintendence. 

The  Shereef  of  Mecca  had  encamped  on  the  ai'able 
land  near  the  northern  dyke. 

Ma//  10th. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  104.  CLildrcu,  90. 

Tlie  saliie  works  were  repeated. 

Mr.  Fitzgerald  arrived  before  breakfast.  The  Shereef 
of  Mecca  having  called  in  the  morning,  I  returned  his 
visit,  but  I  did  not  see  him,  as  he  was  at  prayers.  I 
received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Piozan,  to  say  that  the  ]Madyr 
would  dine  with  me  on  the  following  Sunday. 

We  examined  the  northern  Air-channel ;  and  Sir  Ro- 
bert Arbuthnot,  Mr.  Brettel,  Mr.  Raven,  and  myself,  com- 
pared Mr.  Hill's  drawings  with  the  quarry-marks  in  the 
Great  Pyramid ;  and  we  afterwards  signed  an  attestation 
of  their  accuracy.  The  two  former  gentlemen  and  Mr. 
Fitzgerald  returned  at  night  to  Cairo. 

In  the  evening,  the  people  belonging  to  the  Shereef  of 
IVIecca  exercised  their  horses  with  the  jereed,  in  the  sandy 
plain  below  the  tents  ;  several  of  them  were  well  bred, 
and  very  clever,  and  the  men  were  picturesquely  dressed 
with  Wahabee  handkerchiefs  on  their  heads,  &c.,  and 
together  with  their  horses,  made  a  capital  show.  Their 
exploits  with  the  jereed  were  not,  however,  very  excellent, 
and  the  deep  sand  took  away  from  the  speed  of  their 
horses. 


266  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII. 

Mai/  20th. 

Reis,  9.  Men,  126.  Children,  132. 

Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Lady  Arbutlinot's  Chamber. 

Second  Pyramid. —  Roof  in  Belzoni's  Chamber. 
Third     Pyramid. — Interior. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid.  —  Interior. 

Mr.  Brettel  arrived,  and  took  the  dimensions  of  the 
casing-stone. 

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Hamilton. 

The  excavation  at  Campbell's  tomb  was  again  resumed. 
Abd  el  Ardi  pointed  out  a  shaft  near  the  brick  peribolus, 
to  the  northward  of  the  Sphinx  ;  another  between  that 
monument  and  Campbell's  Tomb ;  and  a  tliird  between 
Campbell's  Tomb  and  the  Second  Pyramid,  which  con- 
tained water.*  The  latter,  he  said,  had  been  opened  about 
three  years  before  by  M.  Massara.  I  directed,  therefore, 
Mr.  Hill  to  get  a  pump  made,  and  a  hose  was  sent  for 
from  Alexandria,  in  order  to  examine  them. 

Jack  had  been  informed  by  an  old  Arab  (who  had  been 
employed  under  M.  Jemel  in  former  excavations),  that 
there  was  an  underground  communication  between  the 
southern  front  of  the  Third  Pyramid  and  the  most  east- 
ward of  the  three  smaller  to  the  south  of  it  (which  is 
called  the  Fifth).  Although  I  did  not  imagine  that  the 
information  could  be  depended  on,  a  party  was  set  to 
work  in  search  of  it.  The  Arab  likewise  stated,  that 
some  years  ago  four  or  five  Europeans  were  employed  in 

*  Marked  in  the  Map,  No.  3  ;  No.  2  ;  and  No.  1. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  267 

excavating  at  the  pyramids,  and  that  they  quarrelled  so 
disgracefully,  that  the  Pacha  was  obliged  to  interfere,  and 
to  divide  the  ground  between  them. 

The  wedding  of  a  Sheik's  son  took  place  in  an  adjoin- 
ing village,  and  in  the  morning  an  immense  concourse  of 
people  came  across  the  plain,  no  doubt  in  full  expectation 
of  a  backshish  ;  they  were  accompanied  by  a  band  of 
music  and  dancing ;  and  some  of  the  performers  were 
girls,  who,  in  addition  to  their  usual  dress,  were  covered 
with  a  loose  drapery  composed  of  shawls  and  scarfs,  which 
floated  in  the  air,  as  they  moved  about  with  swords  in 
their  hands,  which  they  brandished  with  violent  gestures.^ 
The  bride  and  her  attendants  were  mounted  upon  camels  ; 
and  horsemen  fired  and  skirmished  in  various  directions, 
and  formed  an  escort,  which  was,  probably,  in  other  times, 
necessary  as  a  defence.  I  gave  them  a  few  piastres, 
and  a  pound  of  English  gunpowder.  The  Shereef  of 
Mecca  returned  to  Cairo. 

May  2l5/.— Mr.  Piozan  arrived  to  meet  the  Madyr, 
and  soon  afterwards  his  dragoman  brought  us  word  that 
that  person  was  engaged,  and  could  not  come,  which  I 
considered,  on  his  own  account  a  very  happy  circum- 
stance, as  it  was  extremely  hot,  and  as  the  tent,  which 

5  I  saw  an  extraordinary  ceremony  of  this  liind  at  the  celebration  of 
a  wedding  in  the  Haouran,  in  which  each  of  the  women  in  turn  figured 
with  a  sword,  and  appeared  to  defend  herself  with  it  from  the  men,  who 
danced  hand  in  hand  in  a  circle  around  her,  and  pretended  to  approach 
her  with  the  same  violent  gesticulations  and  hoarse  guttural  noises  that 
they  use  in  their  religious  performances,  and,  as  in  those  exhibitions, 
they  did  not  leave  off  till  they  were  in  a  state  of  complete  exliaustion. 
This  dance  is  probably  a  very  antient  custom. 


258  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

was  all  the  accommodation  I  could  offer,  was  ill  calcu- 
lated for  a  large  party.  I  had  provided  cooks  from 
Cairo,  and  a  great  Turkish  dinner  was  prepared.  In  the 
course  of  the  day,  Mr.  Hill  drew  my  attention  to  an  Arab, 
who  was  employed  to  turn  a  spit,  upon  which  a  sheep 
was  roasting  whole  over  a  large  fire ;  it  had  been  lighted 
in  an  angle  made  by  two  walls,  with  the  noon-day  sun  in 
full  force  upon  it.  The  only  protection  which  the  man 
had  from  the  rays  of  the  sun  was  a  cotton  cap  and  a 
thick  blanket ;  and  although  he  appeared  to  be,  upon 
the  whole,  better  done  than  the  sheep,  he  was  perfectly 
unconcerned  and  at  his  ease.  The  wedding  luckily 
afforded  an  opportunity  for  getting  rid  of  the  sheep,  and 
of  a  variety  of  greasy  dishes,  for  which,  however,  I  never 
received  any  thanks  or  acknowledgment. 

The  exact  level  of  the  mouth  of  the  northern  Air- 
channel,  on  the  exterior  of  the  pyramid,  was  carried 
round  to  the  southern  front,  the  centre  of  which  was  also 
marked,  and  a  reward  of  one  hundred  piastres  offered  to 
Abd  el  Ardi  if  he  could  find  the  mouth  of  the  southern 
Channel.  It  was  soon  discovered  in  the  same  relative 
position  as  the  northern. 

Mr.  Brettel,  Mr.  Piozan,  and  the  dragoman,  in  the 
evening  returned  to  Cairo. 

Mmj  22d. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  129.  Children,  154. 

Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Lady  Arbuthnot's  Chamber. 

Second  Pyramid.  —  Roof  in  Belzoni's  Chamber. 
Third     Pyramid. — Interior. 

Fourth  Pyramid. — Interior. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  269 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Excavation  between  the  Third  and  Fifth  Pyramids. 

Boring  the  Sphinx. 

Shaft  westward  of  Sphinx. 

As  the  rods  were  no  longer  employed  at  the  Air- 
channel,  the  boring  at  the  shoulder  of  the  Sphinx  was 
again  resumed ;  and  a  party  was  sent  to  clear  out  the 
shaft  which  contained  the  water  between  the  Sphinx  and 
Campbell's  Tomb. 

I  went  to  Cairo,  and  sent  Mr.  Perring's  drawings,  and 
Mr.  Hill's  facsimiles  of  the  quarry-marks  to  Colonel 
Campbell  at  Alexandria,  to  be  forwarded  to  Mr.  Hamilton. 

May  23d. 

Reis,  7.  Men,  137.  Children,  133. 

The  same  works  were  repeated. 

On  returning  to  the  pyramids  with  Mr.  Hill,  I  called 
at  Gizeh,  on  the  Madyr  Mahmoud  EfFendi.  As  he  was 
taking  his  siesta,  and  was  not  visible  for  some  time,  I  was 
received  by  the  Mamoor.  I  was  at  length,  however, 
admitted,  and  found  him  in  a  large  airy  apartment,  fitted 
up  with  a  divan  in  the  Turkish  manner.  After  the  usual 
ceremony  of  coffee,  pipes,  &c.,  I  explained  the  object  of 
my  visit ;  namely,  that  he  would  assist  me  in  procuring 
more  men,  and  also  in  insuring  their  regular  attendance. 
I  likewise  mentioned,  that  the  Sheiks  had  informed  me  that 
their  people  would  be  sent  to  work  at  the  candl.  He 
replied,  that  he  had  heard  from  Colonel  Campbell  on  the 
subject,  and  had  written  already  to  the  Sheiks,  and  that 
he  would  again  send  orders  to  them.  I  then  expressed 
my  regret  that  I  had  not  the  honour  of  seeing  him  at  the 
pyramids  on  Sunday,  and  my  hope  that  he  would  name 


270  OPERATIONS  CAREIED  ON  AT  GIZEII. 

another  day  for  that  purpose  ;  he  said  that  he  was  then 
about  to  proceed  into  Upper  Egypt,  but  that  on  his 
return  he  would  pay  me  a  visit.® 

^  On  this  occasion,  as  on  many  others,  I  felt  the  want  of  a  proper 
dragoman  ;  and,  I  may  add,  that  many  of  the  difficulties  and  quarrels 
which  travellers  meet  with  are  owing  to  the  ignorance  or  dishonesty  of 
their  interpreters.  Nothing  can,  indeed,  completely  supplj'  the  place 
of  personal  communication  ;  j'et  a  professed  dragoman  is  always  more 
useful  than  a  common  man  like  the  Copt  employed  upon  the  present 
occasion,  who  could  neither  understand,  nor  express  any  complimentary 
language :  and  who,  in  all  probability,  made  ridiculous,  and  even  offen- 
sive, what  was  intended  to  be  obliging  and  respectful.  For  instance, 
when  I  told  the  INIadj'r  that  one  of  the  chief  objects  of  my  visit  was  to 
express  my  regret  at  not  having  had  the  honour  of  seeing  him  at  the 
pyramids,  and  my  hope  that  he  would  appoint  an  early  day  for  that  pur- 
pose, I  have  reason  to  believe  that  Ibraliim  told  him  that  I  came  to  know 
why  he  had  not  come  according  to  his  engagement,  and  when  I  might 
expect  him.  The  English  consulate  at  Cairo  is  badly  provided  in  this 
respect.  Other  nations,  by  giving  adequate  salaries,  are  served  by 
men,  who  can  be  depended  upon  ;  in  many  instances  by  Franks  properly 
educated  and  instructed  in  the  language  of  the  country.  The  miserable 
pittance  afforded  by  us  will  not  retain  a  respectable  person  ;  and  the 
hinderance  and  embarrassment  in  public  affairs,  and  the  difficulty  and 
injustice  in  private  transactions  where  these  interpreters  are  concerned, 
together  with  the  consequent  estrangement  and  disgust  generally  felt  for 
consular  authority,  may  be  readily  imagined.  The  dragoman  of  the 
British  consulate,  when  I  left  Cairo,  was  a  son  of  the  French  inter- 
preter— a  circumstance  not  likely  to  insure  secrecy  or  despatch,  where 
British  interests  were  concerned.  The  Turkish  and  Arab  authorities 
perceiv^heir  advantage,  and  in  private  matters  but  too  often  profit  by 
the  ignorance  or  corruption  of  these  inefficient  agents.  It  may  also  be 
observed,  that  the  consuls  themselves,  however  zealous  and  respectable, 
are  in  an  awkward  and  false  position  in  Mahommedan  countries,  where 
Europeans  are,  to  a  great  degree,  exempt  from  the  Turkish  and  Arab 
authorities,  and  only  amenable  to  that  of  their  own  consulate,  which,  in 
the  ease   of  the  British  consul,  is  exercised   on  personal  responsibility. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  271 

In  proceeding  to  the  pyramids,  the  Kamseen  wind 
was  extremely  violent.  Near  the  village  of  Cafr  el  Batran 
I  was  met  by  two  men,  who  stretched  out  a  red  ribbon 
before  my  donkey,  to  intimate  that  I  must  stop  and  give 
a  backshish  to  two  sons  of  a  Sheik,  who  had  just  been 
married.  I  found  that  it  was  a  usual  custom  in  this 
part  of  the  country,  and  I  therefore  complied  with  it. 
The  bridegrooms  were  fine-looking  lads  ;  their  red  caps, 
and  blankets,  were  new  and  clean,  and  their  hands  were 
stained  red  with  henna.' 

The  shaft  in  the  centre  of  the  Third  Pyramid  was 
fifty  feet  deep,  but  had  not  led  to  the  discovery  of  any 
apartment  or  passage.  Some  green  idols  were  found  in 
the  southern  part  of  the  fosse  at  Campbell's  Tomb. 

May  2ith. 
Reis,  8.  Men,  146.  Children,  168. 
Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  in  soiitliern  front. 
Excavation  in  northern  front. 

If  a  Consul  abuses  his  power,  he  should  be  deprived  of  his  situation  ; 
but  in  the  proper  exercise  of  his  authoritj',  he  should  be  supported,  and 
not  be  liable  to  such  penalties  as  Mr.  Barker  has  incurred,  or  with  which 
Mr.  Farren  had  been  threatened,  in  1836,  in  consequence  of  a  transaction 
at  Damascus.  At  all  events,  some  more  effectual  power  than  that  which 
now  exists  should  be  provided  to  control  the  rabble  of  Maltese,  lonians, 
and,  I  may  add,  of  British  adventurers,  of  every  class  and  description, 
who  seek  in  Egypt,  and  in  the  East,  for  employment,  which  their  crimes 
and  notoriety  prevent  their  attaining  in  their  own  countries. 

T  A  red  dye  (said  to  be  composed  of  minium),  was  used  by  the 
Romans,  on  joyfiil  and  triumphant  occasions.  Could  this  custom  have 
been  deduced  from  Egypt?  The  application  of  henna,  and  also  of 
indigo,  appears  to  have  been  of  great  antiquity,  and  to  have  prevailed 
formerly  amongst  the  savages  that  inhabited  Europe,  as  it  docs  at  pre- 
sent amongst  most  others  in  every  part  of  the  world. 


272  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII. 

Great    Pyramid. — Lady  Arbuthnot's  Chamber. 

Second  Pyramid. — Roof  in  Belzoni's  Chamber. 

Third    Pyramid. — Interior. 

Excavation  between  tlie  Third  and  Fifth  Pyramids. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid. — Interior. 

Boring  the  Sphinx. 

Shaft  westward  of  Sphinx. 

Shaft  between  Campbell's  Tomb  and  Second  Pj'ramid. 

After  much  labour,  the  excavation  at  the  southern 
front  of  the  Great  Pyramid  had  been  carried  to  the  level 
of  the  supposed  entrance,  but  without  the  shghtest  appear- 
ance of  a  passage.  The  difficulties  encountered  in  this 
operation  proved  how  much  expense  and  labour  would  be 
necessary  to  take  down  one  of  these  great  edifices.  The 
stones  must  be  carefully  lowered  from  the  top,  or  they 
would  be  broken,  and  unfit  for  any  useful  purpose  ;  and 
unless  extensive  causeways  were  formed,  the  surrounding 
ground  would  soon  be  encumbered  to  that  degree  as  to 
impede  all  further  operations.  So  wonderfully  have  these 
monuments  been  constructed  for  duration. 

In  part  of  the  fosse  at  Campbell's  Tomb  the  bottom 
had  been  found  at  the  depth  of  seventy-two  feet.  The 
shaft  westward  of  the  Sphinx  was  cleared,  and  a  party  had 
begun  upon  that  between  Campbell's  Tomb  and  the 
Second  Pyramid.  The  thermometer  was  115°  in  the 
shade. 
,  May  25th. 

Reis,  8.  Men,  ISO.  Children,  172. 

Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Lady  Arbuthnot's  Chamber. 

Southern  Air-channel. 


.    OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  273 

Second  Pyramid. — Roof  in  Belzoni's  Chamber. 

Third    Pyramid. — Interior. 

Temple  eastward  of  the  Great  Pyramid. 

Excavation  between  the  Third  and  Fifth  Pyramids. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid. — Interior. 

Boring  the  Sphinx. 

Shaft  westward  of  Sphinx. 

Shaft  between  Campbell's  Tomb  and  Second  Pyramid. 

Shaft  north  of  Sphinx. 

An  excavation  was  begun  at  the  foundation  (supposed 
to  be  that  of  a  temple)  to   the    eastward    of  the   Great 
Pyramid.     A  few  stones  remained  in  their  original  posi- 
tion ;  but  we  soon  found  that  nothing  was  to  be  disco- 
vered except  by  proceeding  on  a  larger  scale  than  at  that 
time  was  advisable.     The  building  appeared  to  have  been 
destroyed  by  fire,  as  the  basalt,  which  was  in  considerable 
quantities  near  this  and  the  other  foundations  beyond  it, 
seemed  to  have  been  burnt.     Several  of  the  blocks  had 
been  carried  down  the  side  of  the  mountain  into  the  plain 
below,   apparently  for   removal.      Some    men  were  em- 
ployed   at   the    shaft   north    of  the    Sphinx.       INIr.   Hill 
blasted  near  the  mouth  of  the  southern  Air-channel,  to 
get  sufficient  room  for  the  erection  of  a  scaffold  to  sup- 
port the  boring-rods,  as  we  imagined  that  this  operation 
would  be  attended  with  as  much  trouble  as  that  on  the 
northern  front. 

May  26th. 

Reis,  8.  Men,  153.  Children,  163. 

Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Lady  Arbuthnot's  Chamber. 

VOL.  I.  T 


274  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.j. 

Great    Pyramid. — Southern  Air-channel. 

Second  Pyramid. — Roof  in  Belzoni's  Chamber. 

Third     Pyramid. — Interior. 

Temple  eastward  of  the  Great  Pyramid. 

Excavation  between  the  Third  and  Fifth  Pyramids. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Boring  the  Sphinx. 

Shaft  westward  of  Sphinx. 

Shaft  between  Campbell's  Tomb  and  Second  Pyramid. 

Shaft  north  of  Sphinx. 

I  examined  the  shaft  to  the  north  of  the  Sphinx.  The 
tomb  was  an  excavation  in  the  rock,  and  was  entered  on 
the  southern  side.  An  outer  chamber  conducted  to  two 
others,  one  to  the  north,  and  the  other  to  the  west ;  both 
of  them  contained  shafts  ;  and  over  that  in  the  western 
chamber  a  figure,  in  a  sitting  posture,  had  been  sculptured 
in  a  niche.  As  our  object  was  to  ascertain  the  level  of 
the  water,  we  only  cleared  out  the  shaft  in  the  northern 
chamber,  which  was  found  to  contain,  at  a  certain  depth, 
a  sarcophagus,  in  a  grotto  or  recess.  The  level  of  the 
water  is  given  in  the  Appendix  ;  and  the  only  objects  of 
interest  which  we  met  with,  consisted  of  some  green  idols, 
a  piece  of  flat  stone  marked  with  one  or  two  straight 
lines,  and  the  fragment  of  a  Sphinx,  about  eighteen  inches 
long,  roughly  carved  in  coarse  stone,  without  inscription 
or  hieroglyphics. 

The  boring-rods  were  broken  owing  to  the  carelessness 
of  the  Arabs,  at  the  depth  of  twenty-seven  feet  in  the  back 
of  the  Sphinx.  Various  attempts  were  made  to  get  them 
out,  and  on  the  21st  of  July  gunpowder  was  used  for  that 
purpose  ;  but  being  unwilling  to  disfigure  this  venerable 
monument,  the  excavation  was  given  up,  and  several  feet 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  275 

of  boring-rods  were  left  in  it.  During  the  operation  a 
very  beautiful  fossil  of  a  reed  was  discovered,  which  is 
now  in  the  British  IMuseum. 

The  shaft  to  the  westward  of  the  Sphinx,  was  in  a 
tomb  formed  in  a  ledge  of  rock.  It  was  of  considerable 
depth ;  and  from  the  bottom  of  it,  apartments  had  been 
excavated  to  the  east  and  west  —  that  to  the  east  con- 
tained a  sarcophagus  of  granite  covered  with  hieroglyphics, 
the  lid  of  which  had  been  removed.  Out  of  this  apart- 
ment was  another  to  the  northward,  with  a  recess  on  the 
eastern  side,  and  two  passages  branched  off  towards  the 
south.  They  had  been  already  plundered,  and  contained 
only  a  small  quantity  of  sand,  a  few  large  stones,  and 
shallow  water,  which  stood  at  the  depth  of  four  inches 
within  the  sarcophagus,  and  must  have  been,  some  time 
or  other,  therefore,  as  high  as  the  top  of  it,  unless  it  had 
been  placed  there  by  modern  explorers.  Abd  el  Ardi  told 
me  that  the  doorway  into  this  tomb  had  been  filled  up  with 
masonry,  and  that  he  had  formerly  cleared  the  sand  out 
of  it  by  a  hole,  which  may  still  be  seen  near  the  entrance. 
Our  researches,  as  in  the  other  tomb,  were  confined  to 
the  examination  of  the  water. 

More  fragments  of  coarse  pottery  were  found  in  the 
excavation  at  the  northern  front  of  the  Great  Pyramid ; 
and  Mr.  Hill  discovered  a  piece  of  iron  in  an  inner  joint, 
near  the  moutli  of  the  southern  air-channel,  which  is  pro- 
bably the  oldest  piece  of  wrought  iron  known.'     It  has 


^  Lord  Prudhoe  is  said  to  have  brought  from  Egj'pt  an  antient  iron 
instrument ;  and  I  thought  that  I  had  perceived  the  remains  of  an  iron 
fastening  in  the  chamber  containing  the  sideboard  or  shelf  in  the  great 
temple  at  Abon  Simbal.     In  fact,  stone  could  not  have  been  quarried 


276  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

been  sent  to  the  British  Museum  with  the  following 
certificates : — 

"This  is  to  certify,  that  the  piece  of  iron  found  by  me  near  the 
mouth  of  the  Air-passage,  in  the  southern  side  of  the  Great  Pyramid  at 
Gizeh,  on  Friday,  May  26th,  was  taken  out  by  me  from  an  inner  joint, 
after  having  removed  by  blasting  the  two  outer  tiers  of  the  stones  of  the 
present  surface  of  the  Pyramid  ;  and  that  no  joint  or  opening  of  any  sort 
was  connected  with  the  above-mentioned  joint,  bj'  which  the  iron  could 
have  been  placed  in  it  after  the  original  building  of  the  Pyramid.  I  also 
shewed  the  exact  spot  to  jNIr.  Perring,  on  Saturday,  June  24th. 

"J.  R.  Hill. 

«  Cairo,  June  25th,  1837." 

"  To  the  above  certificate  of  Mr.  Hill,  I  can  add,  that  since  I  saw 

the  spot  at  the  commencement  of  the  blasting,  there  have  been  two  tiers 

of  stones  removed,  and  that,  if  the  piece  of  iron  was  found  in  the  joint, 

pointed  out  to  me  by  Mr.  Hill,  and  which  was  covered  by  a  larger  stone 

partly  remaining,  it  is  impossible  it  could  have  been  placed  there  since 

the  building  of  the  Pyramid. 

"  J.  S.  Peering,  C.  E. 
«  Cairo,  June  27th,  1837." 

"We  hereby  certify,  that  we  examined  the  place  whence  the  iron 
in  question  was  taken  by  Mr.  Hill,  and  we  are  of  opinion,  that  the  iron 
must  have  been  left  in  the  joint  during  the  building  of  the  Pyramid, 
and  that  it  could  not  have  been  inserted  afterwards. 

"  Ed.  S.  Andrews, 
"James  Mash,  C.  E." 

The  mouth  of  this  Air-channel  had  not  been  forced  — 
it  measured  8^  inches  wide  by  9|  inches  high  —  and  had 

without  metal,  which  must,  therefore,  have  been  in  use  in  the  earliest 
times.  The  smelting  of  metals  seems  to  have  been  an  antediluvian  art, 
as  artificers  in  iron  are  mentioned  in  the  Bible ;  but  it  is  impossible  to 
say  in  what  state  metals  then  were.  In  M.  Rosellini's  work,  people  are 
represented  cutting  granite  with  a  yellow  instrument. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  277 

been  effectually  screened  from  the  sands  of  the  desert  by 
a  projecting  stone  above  it.  The  northern  had  probably 
been  constructed  in  the  same  manner. 

May  11  th. 

Reis,  8.  Men,  143.  Children,  174. 

Great    Pyramid. —  Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Lady  Arbuthnot's  Chamber. 

Southern  Air-channel. 

Roof  in  Queen's  Chamber. 

Temple  eastward  of  Great  Pyramid. 

Second  Pyramid.  —  Roof  in  Belzoni's  Chamber. 

Third    Pyramid. — Interior. 

Excavation  between  the  Third  and  Fifth  Pyramids. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid. — Interior. 

Shaft  westward  of  Sphinx. 

Shaft  between  Campbell's  Tomb  and  Second  Pyramid. 

Shaft  north  of  Sphinx. 

The  excavation  near  the  roof  in  the  Queen's  apart- 
ment was  again  resumed.  The  chamber  over  Lady  Ar- 
buthnot's (subsequently  called  Campbell's)  was  opened 
and  minutely  examined.  The  people  employed  at  the 
mouth  of  the  southern  Air-channel  could  be  distinctly 
heard  from  it ;  its  length  was  thirty-seven  feet  ten  inches, 
and  its  width  twenty  feet  six  inches ;  it  was  entirely 
empty,  without  door  or  entrance,  and  seemed  to  have 
been  intended  for  the  same  purpose  as  the  chambers 
below  it ;  but  appeared  to  be  the  last  and  to  complete 
the  series,  as  it  had  an  inclined  roof,  like  the  Queen's 
and  Belzoni's  Chambers,  composed  of  eleven  slabs  of 
calcareous   stone,  twelve  feet  three  inches  long.     They 


278 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 


rested  upon  a  low  wall  about  three  feet  high,  which 
allowed  for  the  inequalities  of  the  floor,  composed,  as  in 
the  other  instances,  of  the  reverse  of  the  granite  slabs 
that  formed  the  ceihng  of  the  rooms  below  it ;  the  stone, 
by  the  side  of  which  the  entrance  was  worked  up,  was 
six  feet  six  inches  in  thickness.  Holes  had  been  cut  in 
the  floor,  apparently  for  the  purpose  of  sustaining  tem- 
porary supports  of  wood  for  the  erection  of  the  roof.  Ex- 
cepting the  floor,  the  whole  of  the  chamber  was  built  of 
calcareous  stone.  The  joints  were  open,  and  there  were 
considerable  settlements ;  some  of  the  stones  of  the  roof 
also  were  cracked,  which  was  not  surprising,  considering 
the  immense  weight  they  supported.  When  we  first 
entered  this  chamber,  the  floor  was  covered  with  the 
same  deposit  of  dust  which  we  had  observed  in  the  apart- 
ments below  it,  and,  in  addition,  the  calcareous  stones 
were  covered  with  an  exudation,  which  had  the  appear- 
ance of  white  feathers,  and  resembled  that  afterwards 
found  in  the  Third  Pyramid.  There  were  many  qiiarry- 
marks  similar  to  those  in  the  other  chambers,  and  also 
several  red  lines  crossing  each  other  at  riftht  angles,  with 


black  equilateral  triangles  described  near  the   intersec- 
tions, in  order  probably  to  obtain  a  right  angle. 


^  This  hieroglyphic  was  not  observed  by  Mr.  Hill. 


^ — ^ 


Ct  R  E  jV  T       P  V  r  a  M  I  d      . 

SJiowiivff  t'be  Hieroglyphic  euxd otkei Characters fcnmi mi tLo Stones. 


6<Zsf.)  <■*  fj.fu  £bl(?fu/  T/u>  cen^o  of  t/t^.  floor  e^/^^  ■st'^e-s  of 


|5i 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  279 

I  returned  in  the  evening  to  Cairo  in  company  with 
Mr.  Raven  and  Mr.  Hill. 

The  following  observations,  by  Mr.  S.  Birch  of  the 
British  Museum,  relates  generally  to  the  quarry-marks  in 
all  the  chambers  of  construction  that  have  been  cleared 
in  the  Great  Pyramid,  and  specimens  of  them  are  given  in 
the  annexed  plates :  — 

"  The  symbols  or  hieroglyphics,  traced  in  red  by  the 
sculptor,  or  mason,  upon  the  stones  in  the  chambers  of 
the  Great  Pyramid,  are  apparently  quarry-marks ;  a  sup- 
position strengthened  by  the  fact  of  their  appearance  upon 
the  blocks  which  have  been  transported  from  the  Mokat- 
tam,  and  of  their  absence  on  the  stones  quarried  upon  the 
spot. 

"Although  not  very  legible,  owing  to  their  having 
been  written  in  semi-hieratic  or  linear-hieroglyphic  cha- 
racters, they  possess  points  of  considerable  interest  from 
the  appearance  of  two  royal  names,  which  had  already 
been  found  in  the  tombs  of  functionaries  employed  by 
monarchs  of  that  dynasty  under  which  these  Pyramids 
were  erected. 

"  A  cartouche,  similar  to  that  which  first  occurs  in  Wel- 
lington's Chamber,  had  been  published  by  Mr.  Wilkinson, 
mater.  Hieroglyph.  Plate  of  unplaced  King's  E  ;  and  also 
by  M.  Rosellini,  tom.  i.  tav.  1,  3,  who  reads  the  phonetic 
elements  of  which  it  is  composed  "  Seneshufo,"  con- 
jecturing it  to  be  the  Sensaophis  of  Eratosthenes,  which 
name  is  supposed  by  Mr.  Wilkinson  to  mean  "  the 
Brother  of  Suphis."  Without  entering  into  any  discus- 
sion as  to  the  etymology  of  the  prefixed  sen,  or  as  to  the 
syllables  to  which  it  might  be  paralleled  in  Coptic,  or  in 
the  sacred  dialect,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  reading  of 


0  R  :     a 


lit         E  I    B      L     ar,-C      K      s 


Jr 


R  0  O 


iSji^zj. 


U^^ 


\Jfkk  ^^11 


-'\r 


t^ 


-i?  ^ 


X 


F  O    R    M   I    N  "■<j  ''' 


YDil 


'.     H     l',    A  T         1-  Y    I!    A    M     1    1> 

lllli  •^li'cs  „j„l  tVHcit  Ornii    ..  Crtiij..trlnitlnuif6  U'lumbiT.      r  ' 

!,.■  HlcrOiilvptiic...,.l..il»-rCliaractersl.i.m,lo„il„.  Stones.  JJ  ! 


A,.,,//  *»>A"V:i;i/. 


_2/'Hbjs'8»I^Mid 


•-i  r 


^t^i 


u 


EST      E  M  D 


b  0  U  T  H      SIDE 


40  R  TH      SIDE 


_      -    *.^ 


g\R!7^::d:^l^^li;^^ 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  279 

I  returned  in  the  evening  to  Cairo  in  company  with 
Mr.  Raven  and  Mr.  Hill. 

The  following  observations,  by  Mr.  S,  Birch  of  the 
British  Museum,  relates  generally  to  the  quarry-marks  in 
all  the  chambers  of  construction  that  have  been  cleared 
in  the  Great  Pyramid,  and  specimens  of  them  are  given  in 
the  annexed  plates  :  — 

"  The  symbols  or  hieroglyphics,  traced  in  red  by  the 
sculptor,  or  mason,  upon  the  stones  in  the  chambers  of 
the  Great  Pyramid,  are  apparently  quarry-marks ;  a  sup- 
position strengthened  by  the  fact  of  their  appearance  upon 
the  blocks  which  have  been  transported  from  the  Mokat- 
tam,  and  of  their  absence  on  the  stones  quarried  upon  the 
spot. 

"Although  not  very  legible,  owing  to  their  having 
been  written  in  semi-hieratic  or  linear-hieroglyphic  cha- 
racters, they  possess  points  of  considerable  interest  from 
the  appearance  of  two  royal  names,  which  had  already 
been  found  in  the  tombs  of  functionaries  employed  by 
monarchs  of  that  dynasty  under  which  these  Pyramids 
were  erected. 

"  A  cartouche,  similar  to  that  which  first  occurs  in  Wel- 
lington's Chamber,  had  been  published  by  Mr.  Wilkinson, 
mater.  Hieroglyph.  Plate  of  unplaced  King's  E  ;  and  also 
by  M.  Rosellini,  tom.  i.  tav.  1,  3,  who  reads  the  phonetic 
elements  of  which  it  is  composed  "  Seneshufo,"  con- 
jecturing it  to  be  the  Sensaophis  of  Eratosthenes,  which 
name  is  supposed  by  Mr.  Wilkinson  to  mean  "  the 
Brother  of  Suphis."  Without  entering  into  any  discus- 
sion as  to  the  etymology  of  the  prefixed  sen,  or  as  to  the 
syllables  to  which  it  might  be  paralleled  in  Coptic,  or  in 
the  sacred  dialect,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  reading  of 


280  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

Sensaophis  is  false,  owing  to  an  error  of  the  transcriber, 
which  has  been  adopted  by  subsequent  editors  through 
the  want  of  a  proper  analysis  of  the  passage.  After  men- 
tioning the  first  Saophis,  Eratosthenes  gives  in  his  cata- 
logue, Q'/jQumoi'  tg  iQacitXsuffiii  '2i'^(xau(ptg :  |3'  where  the  azv  of 
i^uaikzuaiv  is  affixed  to  '2au(pig.  /3' ;  there  being  no  other 
Sensaophis  in  his  list  (see  Ei'atosthenica,  Godfred.  Bern- 
hard.  8vo.  Berlin,  1822).  The  whole  value  of  M.  Rosel- 
lini's  reading  rests  on  the  supposition  that  the  vase  and 
the  animal  (the  ram)  placed  after  it  reads  sen,  and  signifies 
a  Brother ;  but  it  is  well  known  to  all  occupied  in  philolo- 
gical researches  upon  Hieroglyphics,  that  no  such  combin- 
ation has  hitherto  been  found :  which  fact  is  alone  suffi- 
cient to  destroy  the  felicity  of  M.  RoseUini's  theory,  and 
has  already  given  rise  to  considerable  doubts  as  to  the 
general  correctness  of  his  reading.  The  presence  of  this 
name,  as  a  quarry-mark,  in  the  Great  Pyramid,  is  an 
additional  embarrassment. 

"  The  other  name  discovered  with  it,  which  he  had 
already  observed  in  an  adjacent  tomb,  and  conjectured  to 
be  that  of  Cheops,  demonstrates  at  the  same  time  the 
value  of  the  phonetic  system,  and  the  ingenuity  of  the 
learned  Italian.  It  is  composed  of  elements  purely  pho- 
netic, and  is  decidedly  a  name.  It  has  also  been  published 
by  Mr.  Wilkinson,  mater.  Hieroglyph,  unplaced  King's ; 
and  M.  Rosellini,  torn.  i.  tav.  1,  2,  and  reads  Shoufou 
(Suphis)  or  Khoufou  (Cheops),  according  to  the  aspir- 
ation given  to  the  initial  —  a  sieve  QljJ,  which  appears  in 

Mr.  Wilkinson's  work  without  any  distinction  from  the 
solar  disc.  The  merit  of  assigning  it  to  Cheops  belongs 
to  M.  Rosellini. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  281 

"  There  is,  however,  no  difficulty  in  deahng  with  the 
two  names,  for  ascend  to  what  period  we  will,  the  ex- 
istence of  prenomens  is  unquestionable,  and  the  tombs  in 
the  vicinity  of  the  Pyramids  bear  ample  testimony  of  names 
at  a  very  early  epoch  composed  of  elements  equally  pho- 
netic with  those  of  the  Pharaohs  of  later  dynasties,  of  the 
Ptolemies,  or  of  the  Caesars.  Without,  therefore,  any  very 
positive  violation  of  analogy,  the  two  cartouches  may 
perhaps  thus  form  the  prenomen  and  name  of  one  monarch 
known  to  the  Greeks  under  the  appellations  of  Suphis, 
Saophis,  Cheops,  Chemmis,  and  Chembes.  Nor  is  it  the 
less  probable  on  account  of  the  absence  of  the  solar  disc, 
that  this  cartouche  containing  the  jug  and  ram  is  a  pre- 
nomen, as  several  cartouches  of  early  epoch  do  not  com- 
mence with  that  symbol ;  among  others  may  be  particu- 
larly specified  the  twentieth  of  the  upper  row  of  the  Tablet 
of  Abydos,  where  the  hawk  of  Hor,  or  Horus,  is  substituted 
for  the  solar  disc  in  the  prenomen  of  Merenre  or  Meren- 
hor,  and  two  other  prenomens,  in  which  the  disc  is  wanting, 
are  also  given  by  Messrs.  Burton,  Wilkinson,  and  Rosellini. 
It  is  at  all  events  very  probable,  notwithstanding  the  asser- 
tion of  M.  Rosellini,  that  the  jug  and  ram  (not  sheep) 
represent  the  name  of  the  god  Neph,  or  Nev,  the  Chnou- 
phis,  Chnebis,  Chnephis,  Knef,  Chnoumis,  or  Chnemis,  of 
the  Greek  writers  and  inscriptions,  one  of  the  types,  or 
avatars  of  the  god  Amoun-ra,  the  eponymous  deity  of 
Thebes,  and  the  Jupiter  of  Egyptian  mythology  ;  and  who, 
as  Chnouphis,  always  appeared  with  the  head  of  a  ram, 
and  presided  over  the  inundation  of  the  Nile. 

"Mr.  Wilkinson  supposes  the  IthyphaUic  form  of 
Amoun-ra,  the  Harsaphes  of  M.  Champollion,  to  indicate 


282  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

Khem,  Xsf/.,  and  Chemmo  to  mean  the  city  of  Pan,  or 
Panopolis  ;  but  it  is  within  the  circle  of  probabihties,  that 
Chnem  or  Chem  were  one  and  the  same  deity,  and  Chem- 
mis  is  known  to  have  been  a  large  city  of  the  Thebaid,  in 
which  district  both  types  of  Amoun  were  worshipped. 
Should  this  conjecture  be  right,  the  names  at  once  subside 
into  one ;  Saophis  and  Cheops  are  mere  dialectical  varia- 
tions of  the  same  differently  aspirated,  or  Grecianized, 
and  Chemmis  is  the  prenomen  transcribed  into  Diodorus 
(lib.  i.  c.  63),  from  the  name  of  Chnouphis,  or  Chnoumis, 
replacing  the  disc  of  the  sun.  This  position  is,  however, 
at  present  hypothetical,  inasmuch  as  the  mere  presence  of 
these  names  in  separate  parts  of  such  a  vast  edifice  as  the 
Pyramid  does  not  preclude  the  possibility  that  the  car- 
touches indicate  the  name  of  Suphis  I.  and  11.^ 

"  The  meaning  of  the  hieroglyphics  following  the  pre- 
nomen, and  written  in  the  same  linear  hand  as  the  car- 
touche, is  not  very  obvious.  A  reference  however  to  those 
on  other  monuments  gives  a  solution  of  most  of  the  forms 
represented. 

"  They  consist  of  a  gom  or  koucoupha  sceptre,  a 
pschent,  a  curved  line,  a  sword,  a  peculiar  instrument,  and 
a  level,  and  apparently  compose  the  titles  of  the  monarch, 
similar  to  "  Giver  of  Life,  like  the  Sun  for  ever,"  of  later 
rulers ;  and  the  sentence  may  mean  "  Mighty  in  Upper 
and  Lower  Egypt,  giver  of  power."  The  third,  fourth, 
and    fifth    symbols,  indicate   some   office,  the   particular 


9  The  chambers  wherein  they  were  found  were  altogether  in  one 
part  of  the  building,  and  connected  in  one  original  plan,  as  chambers 
of  construction. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  283 

function  of  which  is  at  present  unknown.  The  same 
title  appears  on  the  coffin  of  the  Queen  of  Amasis  in  the 

form  of   I    4j   r^\    "^  ^     .     These  inscriptions  are 

pecuhar  to  this  period,  and  to  the  era  of  the  Saite  dynasty, 
who  revived  many  of  the  earher  prenomens,  titles,  and 
offices. 

"  The  symbols  following  the  name  are  very  indistinct, 
but  apparently  titles  ;  other  symbols  written  in  characters 
more  nearly  the  Hieratic  also  appear,  but  possess  less 
interest  than  those  previously  described.  The  figure  of  a 
bird  resembling  a  swallow,  and  used  to  express  Ulep, 
"great,  chief,"  &c.,  is  of  common  occurrence,  as  is  also 
the  symbol  of  a  priest,  a  man  pouring  water  over  his  head, 
but  the  cartouche  of  Suphis  is  followed  by  a  hieroglyphic 
to  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  a  parallel.  The 
symbol  also  which  appears  in  Wellington's  Chamber,  and 
perhaps  the  fourth  to  the  left  in  the  west  end  of  the  same 
chamber  preceding  the  cartouche  (neb  Shoufou),  are 
equally  difficult  of  solution  ;  they  may  possibly  replace 
the  figure  of  the  priest ;  but  this  is  mere  conjecture,  and 
far  from  being  proved,  and  may  also  be  a  portion  of  the 
standard  of  Suphis  I.  and  II.,  which  is  about  to  be  pub- 
lished by  M.  Rosellini. 

"A  curious  sequence  of  symbols  occurs  upon  the 
blocks  of  the  northern  and  southern  sides  of  Campbell's 
Chamber.      The  mason  has  marked  upon  tliose  of  the 


south  the  symbol      I      Hoqpe,  "good,"  or  "excellent," 
perhaps  hkewise  used  in  these  instances  as  a  cipher,  for  it 


284  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

is  accompanied  by  numerals.  The  first  instance  presents 
=  =  T  '  NoFRE,  eight,'  where  the  recurved  line  indica- 
tive of  the  decimal  has  probably  been  rubbed  off,  since  the 
block  next  but  two  in  succession  has .  _^  ^  T    '  Nofre, 

inno 

21,'  which  would  make  the  number  of  the  preceding  block 
'  18.'     After  21,  a  single  unmarked  block  occurs,  then 

^  -^.T^  which  signifies  Nofre,  2,  3.    No  analogy  between 

Nofre  and  South  has  been  as  yet  discovered.  The  blocks 
on  the  opposite  quarter  are  marked  with  a  koucoupha 
sceptre,  called  gom,  or  torn,  apparently  with  reference  to 
strength,  power,  &c.,  the  Coptic  XoJU..  One  block  bears 
this  symbol  by  itself,  and  the  other  with  the  numerals  IV. 
gom  IV.  At  the  east  end  the  symbol  Nofre  again  occurs 
with  some  other  marks  apparently  numerals,  but  imperfect 
and  indistinct,  and  at  the  joint  is  a  gazelle  couchant  having 
before  it  a  sword,  or  glaive. 

"  Hieroglyphics  are  at  present  so  imperfectly  under- 
stood, that  it  is  difficult  to  give  an  explanation  of  the  whole 
of  these  signs,  many  of  which  may  after  all  have  been 
merely  appropriate  to  masonry ;  it  is  indeed  equally  so  to 
assign  for  what  reasons  the  South  should  have  been  con- 
sidered '  the  Happy  or  Gracious,'  and  the  North,  *  the 
Powerful'  quarter." 

May  28ih.  —  The  following  articles  were  sent  to  the 
Consulate  for  Colonel  Campbell  —  a  small  image  of  leaf 
gold,  found  in  the  fosse  of  Campbell's  Tomb,  and  a  few 
trifling  ornaments  of  ivory,  found  near  the  Sarcophagus ; 


•o  n,  *  N  i  T't  • 

s.tt»t   8  ugfaK. . 


"vH 


I.  /  .IxtAf  l.M.  ''■'U:lJcii^i> 


284  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII. 

is  accompanied  by  numerals.  The  first  instance  presents 
^~T  '  NoFRE,  eight,'  where  the  recurved  line  indica- 
tive of  the  decimal  has  probably  been  rubbed  off,  since  the 
block  next  but  two  in  succession  has .  -,  ^  T    *  Nofre, 

inno 

21/  which  would  make  the  number  of  the  preceding  block 
*  18.'     After  21,  a  single  unmarked  block  occurs,  then 

which  signifies  Nofre,  2,  3.    No  analogy  between 


pno 


Nofre  and  South  has  been  as  yet  discovered.  The  blocks 
on  the  opposite  quarter  are  marked  with  a  koucoupha 
sceptre,  called  gom,  or  torn,  apparently  with  reference  to 
strength,  power,  &c.,  the  Coptic  XoJU..  One  block  bears 
this  symbol  by  itself,  and  the  other  with  the  numerals  IV. 
gom  IV.  At  the  east  end  the  symbol  Nofre  again  occurs 
with  some  other  marks  apparently  numerals,  but  imperfect 
and  indistinct,  and  at  the  joint  is  a  gazelle  couchant  having 
before  it  a  sword,  or  glaive. 

"  Hieroglyphics  are  at  present  so  imperfectly  under- 
stood, that  it  is  difficult  to  give  an  explanation  of  the  whole 
of  these  signs,  many  of  which  may  after  all  have  been 
merely  appropriate  to  masonry ;  it  is  indeed  equally  so  to 
assign  for  what  reasons  the  South  should  have  been  con- 
sidered '  the  Happy  or  Gracious,'  and  the  North,  '  the 
Powerful'  quarter." 

May  28ih.  —  The  following  articles  were  sent  to  the 
Consulate  for  Colonel  Campbell  —  a  small  image  of  leaf 
gold,  found  in  the  fosse  of  Campbell's  Tomb,  and  a  few 
trifling  ornaments  of  ivory,  found  near  the  Sarcophagus ; 


]',  AST    K,NI>. 


\^ 


~-JS 


WKS'l'    ION  I) 


^i-"". 


OtftEAT    PVR 

AKI)  otHJlK  WKJTINO 


fS^ 


iUTH  NtOTS       <^HA.M«eR  . 


NORTH      SI  lil-i 


-V     \ 


CK|SN, 


I 


f 


3 


'ST. 


< 


5     ^ 

w  3 


^       I 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 


285 


three  or  four  green  idols,  and  a  fragment  of  the  small 
Sphinx  already  described. 

It  appeared  by  Mr.  Perring's  drawings,  that  the  mouth 
of  the  southern  Air-channel  was  forty-seven  feet  higher 
than  the  roof  of  Campbell's  Chamber. 

I  understood  that  M.  Caviglia  had  been  for  some  days 
at  Cairo,  and  that  he  returned  soon  afterwards  to  Alex- 
andria. I  had  no  intercourse  with  him  excepting  an 
application  through  Giachino  for  the  goods  which  he  had 
left  at  Gizeh :  these  were  delivered  to  him  by  Mr.  Hill, 
according  to  a  hst  which  I  had  sent  to  the  British 
Consulate. 

In  the  evening,  I  arrived  at  the  Pyramids  with  Mr. 
Mash  and  Mr.  Hill.     It  was  a  very  stormy  night. 

Mmj  29th. 

Reis,  10.  Men,  174.  Children,  189. 

Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  in  southern  front. 

Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Roof  in  Queen's  Chamber. 

Southern  Air-channel. 

Second  Pyramid.  —  Roof  in  Belzoni's  Chamber. 

Third     Pyramid. — Interior. 

Excavation  between  the  Third  and  Fifth  Pyramids. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Shaft  westward  of  Sphinx. 

Shaft  between  Campbell's  Tomb  and  Second  Pyramid. 

Shaft  north  of  Sphinx. 

Mr.  Hill  proceeded  with  his  operations  at  the  southern 
Air-channel,  and  about  seven  feet  from  the  surface  of  the 
Pyramid,  he  found  within  it  a  large  stone  which  he  was 
afraid  would  get  fixed  further  down.  He  therefore  re- 
moved  it  with  the  utmost  caution,  which  was  fortunate 


286  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

for  Mr.  Perring,  who  was  employed  in  the  King's 
Chamber,  and  having  contrived  to  force  his  head  and 
shoulders  at  that  very  moment  into  the  lower  part  of  the 
channel,  would  probably  have  been  killed  had  the  stone 
in  question  fallen  through  it.  Upon  the  removal  of 
this  block  the  channel  was  completely  open  ;  an  immediate 
rush  of  air  took  place,  and  we  had  the  satisfaction  of  find- 
ing that  the  ventilation  of  the  King's  Chamber  was  per- 
fectly restored,  and  that  the  air  within  it  was  cool  and 
fresh.  The  channel  above  the  stone  was  clean,  but  below 
it  was  much  blackened  with  fires  made  from  time  to  time 
in  the  lower  part  to  discover  its  direction.  It  was  nearly 
or  quite  horizontal  through  the  wall  of  the  King's  Cham- 
ber, and  afterwards  ascended  in  one  continued  line  to  the 
opening  on  the  outer  side  of  the  Pyramid ;  but  as  the 
King's  Chamber  is  to  the  southward  of  the  centre  of  the 
Pyramid,  and  as  the  openings  of  both  the  Air-channels  are 
at  the  same  height,  the  line  of  the  southern  is  considerably 
shorter,  and  more  inclined  than  that  of  the  northern  — 
the  length  of  the  southern  Air-channel  being  174  ft.  3  in., 
that  of  the  northern,  233  feet.  Had  not  the  upper  part 
of  the  latter  channel  been  forced,  and  that  of  the  southern 
filled  up  with  the  above-mentioned  stone,  both  of  them 
would  in  all  probability  have  remained  open,  and  the 
ventilation  of  this  wonderful  structure  would  have  con- 
tinued as  perfect  as  when  it  was  first  built.  It  is  to  be  re- 
marked, that,  as  the  apartment  is  to  the  eastward,  the 
ventilation  by  the  Air-channels,  which  are  in  the  centre,  is 
oblique. 

These  channels  had  probably  always  excited  parti- 
cular attention  ;  indeed,  we  are  informed  by  Greaves,  that 
the  lower  part  of  the  southern  had  been  forced,  and  was 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  287 

blackened  with  smoke  in  1638.  They  are  noticed  by 
various  travellers,  and  have  given  rise  to  many  fanciful 
conjectures  by  M.  Maillet  and  others ;  it  is  therefore  sur- 
prising that  their  direction  was  so  long  unknown.  It  is, 
however,  satisfactorily  proved  by  these  operations  that 
they  were  intended  to  ventilate  the  King's  Chamber,  and 
that  they  have  no  communication  with  any  other  apart- 
ments; and,  consequently,  it  might  be  inferred  that  no 
chambers,  or  passages,  exist  in  the  Pyramid  besides  those 
already  discovered. 

The  excavation  in  search  of  a  southern  entrance  was 
therefore  given  up,  which  had  been  carried  to  a  consider- 
able depth  without  finding  the  least  indication  of  a  pass- 
age, either  by  an  inclination  in  the  courses  of  the  stones, 
or  by  any  other  circumstance.  The  great  magnitude  of 
the  building,  compared  with  the  smallness  of  the  cham- 
bers and  passages ;  and  also  the  position  of  the  entrance 
to  the  eastward  in  the  northern  front,  induced  a  conjec- 
ture that  an  entrance  to  the  westward  in  the  southern 
front  might  conduct  to  passages  and  apartments  con- 
structed in  the  great  space  between  the  three  chambers 
entered  from  the  north.  But  this  does  not  appear  to  be 
the  case  ;  and  it  is  to  be  believed  that  the  King's  Chamber 
is  the  principal  apartment,  and  the  security  of  the  sarco- 
phagus within  it  the  great  object  for  which  the  Pyramid 
was  erected.  Many  arguments  might  be  adduced  in  sup- 
port of  this  opinion  ;  amongst  others,  it  may  be  observed, 
that  the  proportions  of  the  passages  correspond  with  the 
dimensions  of  the  sarcophagus,  and  that  their  arrange- 
ment seems  expressly  intended  to  facilitate  the  deposi- 
tion, and  to  prevent  the  removal  of  it.  The  Queen's 
Chamber   may  be  considered   as   an   appendage   to  the 


288  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

King's,  in  the  same  way  as  the  apartments  in  the  sepul- 
chres at  Thebes.  It  may  also,  like  those  in  David's  tomb, 
mentioned  by  Josephus,  have  contained  treasures ;  but, 
whatever  may  have  been  the  object,  it  has  evidently  been 
concealed  with  great  care.  It  is  also  to  be  observed  that 
the  King's  Chamber  has  been  secured  by  four  granite 
portcullises,'  and  by  the  solid  masonry  with  which  the 
whole  length  of  the  passages  have  been  closed ;  that  the 
well  has  been  formed  to  supply  with  air  the  people  em- 
ployed in  filling  from  the  interior  the  reascending  passage 
at  the  bottom  of  the  great  gallery,  with  blocks  laid  up  in 
the  gallery  for  that  purpose ;  and  that  it  also  afforded  to 
them  an  escape  by  the  lower  passage  when  the  work  was 
completed.  The  entrance  passage  was  probably  after- 
wards filled  up  from  the  exterior.  The  great  importance 
of  the  King's  Chamber  is  also  proved  by  the  air-channels 
expressly  made  for  its  ventilation,  and  also  by  the  precau- 
tions taken  to  secure  even  the  walls  from  any  superin- 
cumbent pressure  by  the  five  chambers  above  it,  which 
are  less  carefully  built,  and  of  worse  materials,  in  propor- 
tion to  their  distance  from  it ;  whilst,  at  the  same  time, 
the  exquisite  finish  of  the  ceilings  in  the  four  lower  apart- 

1  The  portcullis  consisted  of  slabs  of  granite  fixed  in  grooves,  which 
were  not,  in  the  first  instance,  brought  down  below  the  top  of  the 
passage,  till  it  was  necessary  to  lower  the  portcullis,  when  the  grooves 
were  cut  out  to  the  bottom.  One  of  the  portcullises  has  never  been 
lowered,  but  remains  suspended  over  the  entrance, — a  circumstance 
which  might  be  supposed  in  some  degree  to  corroborate  the  assertions  of 
Diodorus  Siculus,  that  the  body  of  the  king  was  not  laid  in  this  tomb,  had 
not  the  other  three  been  lowered,  the  passages  filled  up  with  masonry, 
and  an  excavation  been  carried  under  the  sarcophagus,  which  could 
scarcely  have  been  attempted  if  the  tomb  had  been  found  empty. 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH.  289 

ments  prevent  any  accumulation  of  rubbish,  and  it  would 
appear,  also,  the  deposition  of  the  sparry  excrescence, 
which  was  found  only  in  the  upper.  Nor  should  the 
masonry  of  the  chamber  be  forgotten,  which  is  probably 
the  finest  specimen  in  the  world.  It  consists  entirely 
of  enormous  masses  of  polished  granite  worked  down,  and 
laid  with  the  greatest  exactness,  and  has  retained  its 
original  perfection  for  unnumbered  centuries,  whilst 
other  mighty  fabrics,  composed  of  coarse  workmanship 
and  materials,  have  gradually  crumbled  away  into  shape- 
less masses  of  stones  and  of  rubbish.*  In  this  instance 
every  block  is  as  fresh  and  as  perfect  as  when  taken 
from  the  quarry ;  and  such  is  the  ponderous  solidity  and 
perfection  of  their  texture,  and  the  labour  and  science 
employed  in  their  arrangement,  that  they  seem  to  set  at 
defiance  the  effects  of  time,  and  the  efforts  of  human 
violence.  It  has  been  remarked  that  the  upper  chambers 
were  finished  from  the  east,  and  the  vast  blocks  of  this 
floor  appear  to  have  been  closed  in  by  a  smaller  oblong 
stone  at  the  north-western  corner.  This  had  been  removed, 
no  doubt,  in  very  early  times,  in  search  of  treasures  sup- 
posed to  have  been  concealed  beneath  the  sarcophagus. 
The  excavation  is  mentioned  by  Greaves ;  and,  when  it 
was  cleared  out  for  the  boring,  an  opportunity  was 
afforded  of  observing  the  great  care  with  which  the  sup- 
ports and  bedding  for  the  blocks  had  been  constructed, 

*  It  may  likewise  be  observed,  that  of  all  tlie  remarkable  objects 
which  were  formerly  considered  peculiarly  worthy  of  notice,  and  there- 
fore termed  the  "  Seven  Wonders, "  the  Pyramids  alone  at  present 
remain. 

VOL.  r.  u 


290  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

and  the  extraordinary  manner  in  which  they  were  worked 
and  put  together.  (See  page  11.)  The  custom  of  de* 
positing  treasures  in  mausolea  seems  to  have  prevailed 
universally  in  the  earliest  times,  and  to  have  been  at  once 
the  cause  of  the  solidity  of  their  construction,  and  of  the 
violation  to  which  they  have  been  in  all  countries  sub- 
ject; for  some  more  powerful  motive  than  mere  curiosity 
must  have  caused,  in  former  times,  the  great  labour  and 
expense  attending  these  researches,  particularly  at  the 
pyramids,  where  it  was  necessary  to  cut  through  and 
remove  the  blocks  of  granite  and  solid  masonry,  which 
closed  the  passages  and  chambers.  It  would  also  appear 
that,  besides  the  wealth  contained  in  the  chambers,  some 
object  of  peculiar  interest  was  supposed  to  be  concealed 
in  or  about  the  sarcophagi,  as  all  of  them  in  the  pyramids 
at  Gizeh,  and  many  at  Thebes,  have  been  broken  into, 
and  various  excavations  have  been  made  around  them ; 
and  it  is  singular  that  the  only  instance  in  which  success 
appears  to  have  attended  these  excavations,  is  the  secret 
passage  beneath  the  sarcophagus  in  Belzoni's  Tomb  at 
Thebes  :  in  none  of  the  others  do  any  cavities,  or  traces 
of  a  communication  appear. 

I  happened  to  be  employed  at  Campbell's  Tomb  when 
the  southern  Air-channel  was  opened,  and  I  heard  with 
great  satisfaction  Mr.  Hill's  three  English  cheers  on  the 
occasion,  as  I  fully  expected  that  we  should  have  had  as 
much  trouble  with  that,  as  we  had  with  the  northern. 
Some  green  idols,  broken  jugs,  coarse  red  paterae,  cups, 
and  other  pieces  of  earthenware,  together  with  a  small 
quantity  of  leaf-gold,  were  found  in  the  southern  fosse  of 
Campbell's   Tomb.     Similar  paterae  and  cups  had  been 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEII.  291 

also  found  near  the  Fifth  and  most  of  the  other  pyramids. 
Mr.  Perring  and  Mr.  Mash  surveyed  Colonel  Campbell's 
Chamber. 

May  SOtL 

Reis,  10.  Men,  196.  Children,  185. 

Great    Pyramid. — Excavation  in  northern  front. 

Roof  in  Queen's  Chamber. 

Clearing  the  Chambers  and  Passages. 

Second  Pyramid. — Roof  in  Belzoni's  Chamber. 

Third    Pyramid. — Interior. 

Excavation  between  the  Third  and  Fifth  Pyramids. 

Campbell's  Tomb. 

Fourth  Pyramid. — Interior. 

Shaft  westward  of  Sphinx. 

Shaft  between  Campbell's  Tomb  and  Second  Pyramid. 

Sliaft  north  of  Sphinx. 

Bridge  in  southern  Dyke.  '     - 

Several  Arab  Sheiks  came  to  the  tents. 

Mr.  Hill  copied  the  hieroglyphics  in  Campbell's  Cham- 
ber. The  survey  was  continued,  and  a  party  was  again 
sent  to  the  bridge  in  the  southern  Dyke.  The  lid  of  the 
sarcophagus  in  Campbell's  Tomb  was  moved  out  on 
wooden  rollers,  that  the  hieroglyphics  might  be  copied ; 
and  various  articles  were  sent  from  this  place  to  the 
consulate.  A  quantity  of  bones  and  pieces  of  earthen- 
ware were  found  on  the  buttress  at  the  south-western 
angle,  and  in  different  parts  of  the  fosse.  I  examined, 
with  Mr.  Hill,  the  chasm  at  the  northern  front  of  the 
Great  Pyramid;  it  had  been  cleared  to  a  great  depth, 
and  had  become  so  narrow  that  the  works  were  carried 
on  with  difficulty.  As  the  operations  were  nearly  finished 
in  the  interior  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  people  were  em- 


292  OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH. 

ployed  to  clear  away  the  stones  and  rubbish  from  the 
different  chambers  and  passages.  The  sand  had  been 
taken  out  of  the  shaft  between  Campbell's  Tomb  and  the 
Second  Pyramid,  and  a  grotto  was  discovered  at  the 
bottom  of  it. 


END  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME. 


