Operations Carried On at the Pyramids of Gizeh in 1837, Vol. 3: Appendix (Howard Vyse, 1842)
============================================================================================
Richard William Howard Vyse — Operations Carried On at the Pyramids of Gizeh in 1837, Vol. 3: Appendix to Operations (London, 1842), public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (operationscarri03vysegoog). Raw OCR, not proofread.



o 
3 


r 


302050252J 


THE   PYRAMIDS    OF    GIZEH. 


APPENDIX   TO    OPERATIONS 


CARRIED  ON  AT 


THE   PYRAMIDS    OF    GIZEH 


IN   1837. 


CONTAINING 


A   SURYEY   BY   J.    S.    PEERING,   ESQ. 

CIVIL   ENGINEER, 


or 


THE  PYRAMIDS  AT  ABOU  ROASH,  AND  TO  THE  SOUTHWARD, 

INCLUDING  THOSE  IN  THE  FAIYOUM. 


By    colonel    HOWARD   VYSE, 

C0RRB8P0NDINO  MIMBBR  OF  THE  ROYAL  ACADEMY  OF  FINE  ARTS  OF  FRANCE. 


VOL.  III. 


LONDON: 
JOHN  WEALE,  HIGH  HOLBORN ; 

AKD 

G.  W.  NICKISSON,  216  REGENT  STREET. 


MOCCCXLII. 


LOMDOM: 

PRIXTSD  BY  UOYES  AWD  BABCLAT,  CASTLE   8TBEET, 

LSICE8TEE  saUABE. 


CONTENTS 


OF 


THE  THIRD  VOLUME. 


Remarks  apon  the  Map     I 

Pyramid  of  Abou  Roash 8 

—  Zowyet  el  Arrian • 10 

—  Reegah 10 

—  —        Notes  by  Mr.  Birch    12 

Pyramids  of  Abouseir    • 12 

—  -^        Northern  Pyramid    • 15 

^              —        Middle  Pyramid    • 17 

—  —        Great  Pyramid 19 

—  —        Small  Pyramid 21 

—  —        Notes  by  Mr.  Birch 22 

Pyramids  of  Saccara 

—  —        The  Map 37 

—  —        No.  1  in  the  Map 89 

—  —        No.  2        —        89 

—  —        No.  8        —         41 

_              _        No.  4        —         61 

—  —        No.  5        —         61 

—  —        No.  6        —         51 

—  —        No.  7        —         62 

—  —        No.  8        —         62 

—  —        No.  9        —         62 

—  —        Mustabet  el  Faraoon    58 

—  —        Notes  by  Mr.  Birch 53 


VI  CONTENTS. 


PAOS 


Pyramids  of  Dashoor     66 

—  —         Northern  Brick  Pyramid 57 

—  —         Northern  Stone  Pyramid 68 

—  —         Southern  Stone  Pyramid 65 

—  —        SmaU  Pyramid 70 

—  —         Southern  Brick  Pyramid 70 

—  —         Notes  by  Mr.  Birch 72 

Pyramids  of  Lisht 77 

Pyramid  of  Meydoom    78 

Pyramid  of  Illahoon  80 

Pyramid  of  Howara 82 

Pyramids  of  Biahhmoo 84 

The  Birket  Kharoon 85 

Pyramid  of  El  Koofa 85 

The  Mummy  Pits  at  Saccara    86 

Discoveries  at  Tourah    90 

—  —         Notes  by  Mr.  Birch     93 

Remarks  on  the  Measures  by  which  the  Pyramids  were  built     • .  • .  104 

The  Sphinx    107 

—  Mr.  Birch's  Notes 114 

—  Notes  on  the  Greek  Inscriptions 118 

Remarks  on  the  Egyptian  Army 120 

Horses  in  Egypt  and  Syria   ISO 


LIST  OF  PLATES 


IN 


THE  THIRD  VOLUME. 


Portrait  of  Mr.  Perring,  (Frontispiece)  paom 

Map    1 

Ruined  Pyramid  and  Causeway  of  Abou  Roash  from  Kerdassy     • .  7 

Abou  Roash    8 

—         Plans      9 

• 

Pyramid  of  Reegah   • 10 

—  -*        Hieroglyphics 12 

Pyramids  of  Abouseir,  Map • Id 

—  —       Northern  Pyramid 14 

—  —       Entrances  to  Northern  and  Middle  Pyramids  15 

—  —       Middle  Pyramid    17 

—  —       View  of  Roof,  and  Entrance  to  the  Great 

Pyramid     18 

—  —       Great  Pyramid 20 

—  —       Small  Pyramid 21 

Pyramids  of  Abouseir  and  General  View  of  Saccara 22 

Pyramids  of  Saccara,  Map     37 

—  —        No.  2 39 

—  —        No.  3,  (Great  Pyramid)  N.E.  View 41 

_              _        No.  3,  PI.  A   42 

—  _        No.  3,  PI.  D   44 

—  —        No.  3,  PL  C    46 

—  —        No.  3,  PI.  B    47 


•  •• 


VUl  LIST  OF  PLATES. 

P^^;f}M.p  and  View     '56 

—  Views  of  Northern  Stone,  and  Southern  Brick  Pyramids    58 

—  Northern  Brick  Pyramid,  Section     60 

—  —  Hieroglyphics 63 

—  Northern  Stone  Pyramid,  Section  and  Plan     64 

—  —  Section  of  Passages 65 

—  Southern  Stone  Pyramid,  View    65 

—  —  Sections  through  W.  and  N. 

Entrance  Passages,  PI.  1 ..     66 

—  —  Section  of  Northern  Passage 

Entrance,  PI.  4    67 

—  —  Western  Entrance,  PL  3 ... .     68 

—  —  Portcullis  and  Hieroglyphics, 

PL  2     69 

Pyramids  of  Lisht      77 

View  of  Pyramid  of  Meydoon • 79 

Pyramid  of  Illahooa 81 

Views  of  Ruins  at  Biahhmoo  and  Pyramid  of  Howara 83 

Pyramids  of  Biahhmoo  and  Howara     85 

View  of  the  Tourah  Quarries    ••.•.....  90 

—  —  Interior • 91 

Tourah  Quarries,  View  from  Interior   92 

Plan  of  the  Quarries  at  Tourah  and  Massara 93 

Tourah  and  Massara  Quarries,  Tablets  Nos.  1  and  8 94 

Touarh  Quarries,  Tablet  No.  2     95 

_  _  No,3     96 

—  —  No.  4     97 

Tourah  and  Massara  Tablets,  Nos.  5  and  7     98 

Massara  Quarries,  Tablet  No.  6    99 

—  —  No.  9    100 

_  _  No.10      101 

—  —  No.  11      102 

Inscriptions  from  Massara  and  Tourah  Quarries,  Tablet  12 102 

View  of  Sphinx  during  Excavations 107 

Fragments  of  the  Beard  of  Sphinx    109 

Fragments  found  during  Excavation  of  Sphinx,  Plate  A     •  •  •  109 


LIST  OF  PLATES.  IX 


PAOB 


Ground  Plan  of  Temple  and  Steps  in  Front  of  Sphinx   110 

View  of  Temple  between  Fore  Legs  of  Sphinx    110 

Altar  and  Fragments  found  near  Sphinx,  Plate  D  110 

Building  on  Steps  of  Sphinx,  Plate  C 112 

Inscription  on  a  Building  on  Steps  leading  to  Sphinx,  T  in  Ground 

Plan    113 

View  of  Steps  leading  to  the  Sphinx 113 

Tablet  between  Fore  Legs  of  Sphinx,  Plate  B     115 

Smaller  Tablet 117 

Inscription  on  Paws  of  Sphinx,  Plate  £   118 

Inscription  found  near  Sphinx,  Plate  F    118 

Tablet  found  during  Excavations,  Plate  G 119 

Inscriptions  found  near  Sphinx,  Plate  H 119 


PREFACE. 


This  volume  is  an  Appendix  to  those  which  were 
published  in  1841. 

It  contains  the  results  of  Mr.  Perring's  opera- 
tions on  the  other  Pyramids,  after  I  had  left 
Egypt;  an  account  of  the  mummy-pits  at  Saccara; 
his  remarks  on  the  measures  according  to  which 
the  Pyramids  were  built ;  and  some  discoveries 
made  by  him  at  Tourah  and  at  Massara,  whilst 
he  was  employed  in  constructing  a  railroad  from 
the  quarries  to  the  river. 

It  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  advert  to  Mr. 
Perring  s  abilities  and  zeal  in  carrying  on  these 
inquiries,  as  they  are  fully  exemplified  by  the 
numerous  engravings  in  this  book,  and  also  by 
Part  III.  of  the  larger  work. 

Through  the  kindness  of  the  Earl  of  Mount- 
norris,  I  have  the  satisfaction  of  publishing,  to- 
gether with   Mr.   Salt's   plans,   that    gentleman's 


Xll  PREFACE. 

account  of  M.  Caviglia's  excavations  at  the  Sphinx 
in  1816. 

I  beg  leave  to  express  my  sincere  acknowledg- 
ments to  Samuel  Birch,  Esq.,  Assistant  in  the  An- 
tiquarian department  in  the  British  Museum,  and 
Assistant-Secretary  to  the  Archaeological  Institute 
at  Rome,  for  his  valuable  Notes  on  the  hieroglyphi- 
cal  inscriptions ;  and  also  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Coleridge 
of  Eton,  for  the  kind  assistance,  which  he  has  been 
pleased  to  afford,  respecting  the  Greek  inscriptions 
found  near  the  Sphinx. 

The  remarks  on  the  Egyptian  army,  and  also 
on  the  horses  of  Egypt  and  of  Syria,  are  inserted, 
because  they  are  referred  to  in  the  former  volumes. 

As  this  volume  completes  the  Work,  I  take  the 
opportunity  of  returning  my  best  thanks  to  Mr. 
Arundale,  for  the  care  and  attention  he  has  be- 
stowed on  the  execution  of  the  several  plates. 

Stoke,  October  20, 1842. 


l\ 


jTii.  -j'sta   ii3Drjii.>£ais!f:r     .s©"ff2;u'a 


APPENDIX 


TO 


OPERATIONS  CARRIED  ON  AT  GIZEH, 


REMARKS   UPON  THE  MAP. 

Egypt  is  naturally  divided  into  the  Delta,  and  the  valley  of 
the  Nile,  which  extends  from  the  Delta  to  Es  Souan  near  the 
First  Cataract,  and  which  was  subdivided  by  the  antients  into 
Middle  Egypt,  and  the  Thebaid.  The  former  of  these  districts  is 
now  distinguished  by  the  name  of  Bathree  (towards  the  sea); 
and  the  latter  is  divided  into  Wastanee  {the  Middled  and  Said 
{the  Upper). 

The  thirty-six  nomes,  or  provinces,  are  ascribed  to  Sesostris 
by  Diodorus  Siculus,  who  also  says  that  they  were  equal  in 
number  to  the  apartments  in  the  Labyrinth,  which  are  supposed 
to  have  been  twenty-seven  ;  the  nine  others  may,  therefore,  have 
included  the  different  oases. 

Middle  Egypt,  called  by  the  Greeks  Heptanomis,  was,  at  a 
later  period,  included  in  the  district,  named  by  the  Romans 
Arcadia  in  honour  of  the  Emperor  Arcadius ;  and,  according  to 
the  **  Notitia  Imperii "  (ascribed  to  the  fourth  century).  Middle 
Egypt  and  part  of  the  Delta  formed  the  Provinciss  Augustannicae. 

The  Pyramids  of  Middle  and  of  Lower  Egypt  are  thirty-nine 
in  number.  They  are  situated  on  the  western  side  of  the  river, 
and  chiefly  on  the  desert  hills,  which  form  the  western  boundary 
of  the  valley  of  the  Nile  :  — 

1  was  in  the  Nome  Latopolitis. 
33     -        -  »    -       Memphitis. 

2  -        -  Heracleopolitis. 

3  -        -        -      Crocodilopolitis. 

VOL.  III.  B 


2  APPENDIX. 

They  extend  from  29°  16'  56''  to  30°  2'  30"  north  latitude, 
and  occupy  a  space  measuring,  from  north  to  south,  fifty*three 
English  miles.  The  map  was  laid  down  from  a  trigonometrical 
survey,  carefully  taken  in  1839.  It  contains  the  sites  of  the 
Pyramids  and  the  adjacent  country,  including  part  of  the  Delta, 
for,  notwithstanding  the  supposed  origin  of  its  name,  that 
province  appears,  according  to  Ptolemy,  to  have  extended  as  far 
south  as  the  Pyramids  of  Gizeh.  Abou  Fedeh  also  places  the 
division  between  the  upper  and  lower  country  at  Fostat,  or  Old 
Cairo.  Parts  of  five  nomes,  and  the  whole  of  another,  are 
therefore  inserted  as  follows : — 

In  the  Delta,  part  of  the  nomes      -        -      s  „  ,.      ,.  .' 

[Heliopolitis. 

The  nome        ......     Memphitis. 

iAphroditopolitis. 
Heracleopolitis. 
Crocodilopolitis. 

The  situations  of  antient  towns,  as  far  as  they  can  be  ascer- 
tained, are  also  marked. 

The  account  that  Menes  had  diverted  the  river  into  its  present 
course  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  valley  has  been  disputed  by 
many  commentators ;  but  the  antient  channel  has  been  shewn 
by  Sir  John  Gardner  Wilkinson,  and  may  be  traced  in  the  low 
ground,  between  Kafr  el  Lyal  and  the  Bahr  Yousef,  to  the  north- 
ward of  Bamasht.  Indeed,  to  the  southward  of  this  place,  the 
Bahr  Yousef  evidently  flows  in  an  excavation ;  but  to  the  north- 
ward of  it,  between  the  site  of  Memphis  and  the  Libyan  Desert, 
it  apparently  occupies  the  antient  bed  of  the  river,  which,  accord- 
ing to  Herodotus,  was  used  by  vessels  in  their  passage  from 
Naucratis  to  Memphis.^ 

From  the  Bahr  Yousef  another  canal  of  the  same  name 
supplies  the  Faioum  with  water.  It  is  said  to  have  been  the 
work  of  one  of  the  earliest  kings,  and  is  the  source  of  the  fertility 
of  that  district. 

NOMOS  LATOPOLITIS. 

The  site  of  Latopolis  has  not  been  discovered.  According 
to  Ptolemy,  it  was  near  the  river,  and,  by  the  "  Itinerary  of 
Antoninus,"  was  twenty  miles  distant  from  Memphis;    it  may 

'  A  branch  from  this  canal  probably  passed  under  the  Pyramids  of  Gizeh 
into  the  Bahr  Bela  Mar. 


APPENDIX.  3 

therefore  be  supposed  to  have  been  situated  near  the  antient 
mounds  called  Kom  Achmar.  Cercasura  was  probably  at  £1 
Eksass.  The  ruins  near  the  Pyramid  of  Abou  Roash  are 
supposed  to  mark  the  position  of  Cochone,  Cochoma,  Cho,  or 
Choe,  because  Cho  signified  a  hill — and  the  elevation,  upon 
which  the  pyramid  was  built,  is  higher  than  the  surrounding 
country — and  because  the  decayed  state  of  the  materials  seems 
to  correspond  with  the  remote  era  of  Venephres,  the  fourth  king 
of  the  first  dynasty,  who,  according  to  Manetho,  erected  a 
pyramid  near  that  city. 

NOMOS  HELIOPOLITIS. 

An  obelisk  and  a  few  mounds  are  all  that  remain  of  Hslio- 
POLis,  famous  for  its  grandeur,  and  also  for  the  learning  of  its 
inhabitants.  At  this  city  Plato  and  Eudoxus  studied,  and 
Herodotus  obtained  materials  for  the  history  of  Antient  Egypt. 

Cairo  occupies  the  site  of  an  antient  city,  or  probably,  of  two 
small  towns  called  Liou  and  Tikes-chromi.  The  adjacent  rocks 
have  been  excavated,  and  contain  antient  quarries,  both  of  sand- 
stone and  of  limestone ;  and  Greek  and  Coptic  inscriptions  are 
found  in  some  grottoes  at  a  little  distance  to  the  south,  which 
seem  to  have  been  the  retreat  of  the  early  Christians. 

The  situation  of  the  modern  town  of  Cairo  (Misr  el  Kahirah, 
built  by  Moez  e  Deen,  359  a.h.)  was  probably  chosen  on  account 
of  its  strength. 

BouLAc,  the  port  of  Cairo  for  vessels  arriving  from  the  north- 
ward, seems,  from  its  name,  to  have  had  an  Egyptian  origin. 

The  Nilometer  on  the  Island  of  Rhoda  appears,  from  the 
length  of  the  cubit  employed,  and  from  other  circumstances,  to 
be  much  older  than  the  building,  in  which  it  is  placed.  The 
building,  according  to  El  Makim,  was  erected  by  the  Kalif 
Soliman  ebn  Abd  el  Melik,  a.h.  97,  and  was  afterwards  repaired 
under  Almamon  and  Mutawakel.  It  is  said  that  the  French 
intended  to  build  a  fortified  town  on  this  island,  and  to  have 
established  a  citadel  on  the  island  opposite  to  Boulac. 

According  to  Strabo,  Babylon  was  an  antient  military  post ; 
and,  according  to  Josephus,  it  was  built  by  Cambyses,  on  the 
deserted  site  of  Latopolis.'  It  was  afterwards  the  station  of  a 
legion,  and  the  present  remains  are  evidently  of  Roman  con- 
struction.    Coptic  authors  state  that  it  held  out  for  seven  months 

'  Mnny  towns  had  this  name. 


4  APPENDIX. 

against  the  Arabs,  who  built  near  it  the  first  mosque,  and  Fostat 
the  first  Arab  city,  which  were  erected  in  Egypt.  It  b  now  called 
Old  Cairo,  and  has  a  port,  chiefly  used  by  vessels  coming  down 
the  river. 

NOMOS  APHRODITOPOLITIS. 

This  district  commenced  immediately  above  Old  Cairo. 

Tab  A  NouB,  which  in  Coptic  signifies  ^^  the  place  of  goldy'* 
is  now  known  by  the  Arabic  name  of  Atar  el  Nebbi  (traces  of 
the  Prophet).  It  is  mentioned  by  the  early  Arab  authors,  and 
seems  to  be  connected  with  Venus  Aurea,  now  called  Gezeeret 
el  Dahab, —  a  place  in  the  Memphite  nome,  on  the  opposite  side 
of  the  river. 

Troja,  now  Tourah,  supposed  by  Strabo  to  have  been  built 
by  the  Trojan  captives  carried  off*  by  Menelaus,  is  situated  at  the 
foot  of  a  mountain,  called  by  Pliny  and  by  Ptolemy  Troici 
Lapidis  Mons,  and  mentioned  by  Herodotus  to  have  supplied  the 
stones  for  the  erection  of  the  Pyramids.  It  is  composed  of 
compact  limestone,  which  has  formed  the  casing  of  the  exterior, 
and  the  linings  of  the  passages  and  of  the  apartments  in  most 
of  these  buildings.  The  mountain  is  at  present  known  by  the 
name  of  Mokattam  (^the  hewn),  on  account  of  the  extensive 
quarries  which  were  worked  in  it  by  the  antient  Egyptians,  and 
which  seem  to  have  been  abandoned  since  the  time  of  the  Pto- 
lemies till  1838,  when  a  railroad  was  made,  by  the  direction  of 
Mahomet  Ali,  from  the  quarries  to  the  river .^ 

SoENAS  Mandras  was,  by  the  **  Itinerary,"  twelve  miles  from 
Babylon,  and,  according  to  the  ^*  Notitia,"  a  military  post. 
Under  the  Emperor  Leo  I.  it  was  the  see  of  a  bishop.  It  seems 
to  have  been  called  in  Coptic  Alban,  and  is  now  Hellowan.  The 
town  was  either  rebuilt,  or  restored,  by  Abd  el  Azeez  Ebn  Merwan 
(a  ruler  of  Egypt),  who  made  it  his  residence,  and  adorned  it 
with  gardens.     The  adjacent  land  is  very  fertile. 

Aphroditopolis  (by  the  Egyptians  called  Ipih,  or  Petfieh, 
and  now  Atfeh,  is  stated,  in  the  ''  Notitia,"  to  be  a  military  post, 
and  in  the  "  Itinerary,"  to  be  thirty-two  miles  distant  from 
Babylon) ;   according  to  Strabo,  and  to  other  authors,  it  was 

•  This  work  was  executed  by  Mr.  Perring,  who,  in  carrying  the  level 
to  the  river,  discovered  several  antient  tombs,  which  contained  bodies 
wrapiied  in  yellow  woollen  cloth,  similar  to  that  found  in  the  Third  Pyramid 
of  Gizeh.    See  further  account  of  these  quarries. 


APPENDIX.  O 

situated  near  the  Arabicus  Mons,  and  contained  a  temple,  in 
ivfaich  a  sacred  'white  bull  was  preserved. 

TiLOSj,  or  TisjOL,  or  Delass,  said  by  Coptic  authors  to  have 
been  near  Atfeh,  and  to  have  contained  a  convent,  appears  to 
have  been  at  Soal,  a  large  village  near  the  river. 

Ancyronpolis,  so  called  by  Stephanus  of  Byzantium,  and 
Angyron  by  Ptolemy,  was  in  this  nome,  and  in  the  same  latitude 
as  Ptolemais.  No  traces  of  it  are,  however,  to  be  found  in  that 
position ;  but  the  situation  of  Crumba  has  the  appearance  and 
the  reputation  of  being  an  antient  site. 

Thimonepsi  is  described,  in  the  "  Notitia,"  to  be  a  military 
post,  and,  in  the  "  Itinerary,"  to  be  twenty-four  Roman  miles 
distant  from  Aphroditopolis.  It  was  probably  at  Wady  Bayad, 
opposite  Beni  Souef. 

NOMOS  MEMPHITIS. 

Memphis,  the  capital  of  Lower  Egypt,  is  supposed  to  have 
been  built  by  Menes,  the  earliest  king  of  the  country*  Diodorus 
describes  it  to  have  been  nineteen  miles  in  circumference;  and 
his  account  is  in  some  degree  confirmed  by  the  remains  of  build- 
ings and  of  foundations.  This  great  extent  most  probably 
occasioned  the  contradictory  statements  given  by  antient  his- 
torians of  its  relative  distance  from  the  neighbouring  places.  Not- 
withstanding the  antient  grandeur  of  Memphb,  Edrisi,  who  wrote 
in  the  twelfth  century,  says  that  it  was  then  an  insignificant 
place,  and  indeed  it  may  be  supposed  to  have  supplied  materials 
for  the  building  of  Cairo.  Abou  el  Fedeh,  howeyer,  200  years 
afterwards,  mentions  extensive  ruins,  consisting  of  great  blocks 
inscribed  with  figures ;  and  at  the  village  of  Metrahenni  a  large 
tank  may  now  be  traced,  near  the  foundations  of  a  building, 
which  appears  to  have  been  the  temple  of  Ptah  or  Vulcan, 
mentioned  by  Herodotus,  and  by  other  antient  historians ;  and  a 
colossal  statue  near  it  was  probably  the  image  of  Rameses,  said 
to  have  been  erected  before  the  temple.^  The  city  appears  to 
have  extended  to  the  northward  of  the  temple ;  but,  as  it  was 
built  upon  low  ground,  the  foundations  have  probably  been 
covered  by  the  annual  deposit  of  the  river. 

MoKS  PsAMHius,  near  the  above-mentioned  city,  was  that  part 
of  the  Libyan  Mountains,  upon  which  the  Pyramids  of  Saccara' 

*  This  statne  was  excavated  by  Signore  Caviglia,  and  presented  by  the 
late  Mr.  Sloane,  Vice-consul  at  Alexandria,  to  the  British  Museum. 

*  The  name  of  the  deity  of  Memphis  was  Pihah  Sakarl. 


b  APPENDIX. 

are  built;  and  the  Serapium  was  placed,  according  to  Strabo, 
upon  the  plain  near  it ;  but  no  vestiges  of  it  have  been  discovered. 

Venus  Aurba.  Diodorus  speaks  of  a  field  called  ^'  Venus 
Aurea"  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Memphis;  and  an  old  site  near 
the  river,  as  has  been  already  mentioned,  is  now  called  Gezeeret 
el  Dahab  (the  golden  island  orfield)^  which  seems  to  be  a  trans* 
lation  of  the  antient  name. 

BousiRis.  This  name  was  applied  to  various  places  in  Egypt, 
where  Osiris  was  worshipped  in  the  form  of  an  ox.  The  Busiris 
mentioned  by  Pliny  has  been  generally  supposed  to  have  been 
at  Abouseir,  on  account  of  the  similarity  of  name ;  but,  as  the 
situation  of  that  place  appears  to  have  been  included  within 
the  city  of  Memphis,  the  name  may  be  supposed  to  have  marked 
the  site  of  a  temple  dedicated  to  Osiris  within  the  city ;  and 
if,  as  Pliny  describes,  Busiris  was  opposite  the  Great  Pyramid 
of  Gizeh,  it  may  with  more  propriety  be  supposed  to  have  been  at 
an  old  site  upon  the  adjacent  plain,  near  the  village  of  Kom  el 
Eswith  (the  blach  mound). 

Acanthus.  The  Egyptian  name  of  this  town  is  not  known, 
but  it  is  mentioned  by  Diodorus,  Strabo,  and  Ptolemy ;  and 
Strabo  assigns  to  it  a  temple  of  Osiris,  and  a  sacred  grove  of 
Egyptian  thorn  (the  acanthus  of  the  Greeks).  Groves  of  these 
trees  are  now  to  be  met  with  between  Saccara  and  Dashoor,  and 
the  town  was  most  probably,  therefore,  situated  on  the  edge  of 
the  desert  near  the  hamlet  of  Zowyet  el  Dashoor. 

Pemb,  or  Pbmbau,  is  stated,  in  the  *'  Itinerary,''  to  have  been 
twenty  miles  from  Memphis.  About  this  distance  a  place,  called 
Bemah,  has  been  constructed  upon  an  antient  site,  and  the 
Pyramids  and  a  cemetery  near  them  appear  to  establish  the 
antiquity  of  the  spot. 

NOMOS  HERACLEOPOLITIS. 

According  to  Ptolemy,  it  was  divided  from  the  Nomos  Mem- 
phitis  by  the  river,  which  probably  flowed  near  Kafoor  el  Gazaala, 
where  a  canal  from  the  Bahr  Yousef  intersects  the  cultivated 
land. 

IsiDis  Oppidum,  Issiu,  or  Iseum,  was,  by  the  ''  Itinerary," 
forty  miles  from  Memphis,  probably  at  the  site  now  occupied  by 
the  modern  village  of  Zowyet  el  Masloob. 

NiLOPOLis,  where  there  was  a  temple  dedicated  to  the  Nile, 
under  the  personification  of  Osiris,  and  under  the  title  of  Bousiris, 
seems  to  have  been  at  a  place  called  Abouseir  el  Melik.     Near  it 


APPENDIX.  7 

are  the  remains  of  an  antient  dyke  constructed  with  masonry, 
and  other  works  of  considerable  magnitude ;  and  in  the  adjacent 
rocks  are  excavated  tombs,  but  they  do  not  appear  to  contain 
inscriptions. 

Ptolemais,  called  Ptolemajdo  in  the  ^'  Theodosian  Table/'  is 
described  by  Ptolemy  to  have  been  near  the  entrance  to  the 
Arsinoite  Nome.  It  is  now  called  Illahoon,  and  is  at  the 
entrance  into  the  Faioum.  The  sluice  for  the  admission  of  the 
waters  into  the  canal  called  Bahr  Yousef  is  evidently  built  on 
an  antient  foundation,  and  the  shafts  near  the  Pyramids  seem 
to  have  formed  the  cemetery  of  the  antient  city. 

Veano.  In  the  '*  Theodosian  Table  *'  we  find  that  the 
distance  from  Veano  to  Ptolemaidon  Arsinoitum  was  six  miles. 
If  six  be  supposed  to  be  a  mistake  for  eleven,  the  distance  would 
coincide  with  that  of  some  antient  mounds,  upon  which  is  a 
village  called  Wennee. 

PousHiN,  or  BousHix  according  to  the  Coptic,  was  at  Boosh. 

Phannisjoit  appears  to  have  been  near  Pouchin,  and,  accord- 
ing to  Champollion,  it  was  at  the  modern  village  of  Zaytoon,  the 
word  Phannisjoit  signifying  in  the  Coptic,  as  Zaytoon  in  the 
Arabic,  a  place  of  olives. 

Ikbmen,  under  the  Emperor  Diocletian,  was  a  military  post 
near  the  above-mentioned  places. 

CiENE  was  at  Benisouef.  The  only  notice  of  it  is  in  the 
*'  Itinerary  of  Antoninus,"  which  states  that  it  was  about  twenty 
miles  firom  Isiu. 

Hbracleopolis  Magna.  The  capital  of  this  nome  was,  by 
the  **  Theodosian  Table,"  six  miles  south  of  Ptolemais ;  and 
antient  mounds  and  foundations  near  the  village  of  Ahnas  agree 
with  this  distance. 

NOMOS  CROCODILOPOLITIS. 

This  district  was  so  called  by  the  Greeks,  but  by  the  Egypt- 
ians Piom,  because  it  was  marshy  and  full  of  water.  Under  the 
Lagidae  the  province,  as  well  as  the  capital,  was  called  Arsinoe. 
It  is  now  known  by  the  name  of  Faioum,  which  seems  to  be  a 
corruption  of  its  Egyptian  name.  The  chief  town,  Medeenet  el 
Faioum,  is  to  the  southward  of  the  site  of  the  antient  Arsinoe. 


8  APPENDIX. 


PYRAMID  OF  ABOU  ROASH. 

This  Pyramid  is  situated  about  five  miles  to  the  north- 
westward of  those  at  Gizeh.  The  base  (320  feet  square)  alone 
remains.  The  defective  places  have  been  made  good  with 
masonry,  but  the  bulk  of  it  is  formed  of  the  mountain  (com- 
posed of  a  hard  chalk),  which  has  been  reduced  to  a  level  around 
it.  No  part  of  the  external  casing  is  to  be  found ;  indeed  the 
edifice  was  not  probably  ever  completed,  or  even  raised  to  a  con- 
siderable height,  for  scarcely  any  materials,  and  very  little  rubbish, 
are  to  be  seen,  although  the  situation  is  difficult  of  access. 

An  inclined  entrance-passage,  and  an  apartment,  lying  east 
and  west,  have  been  constructed  in  an  excavation,  and  have  been 
lined  with  fine  calcareous  stone  from  the  Tourah  quarries. 

The  passive  (about  160  feet  in  length)  is  in  the  centre  of  the 
northern  firont,  and  descends  at  an  angle  of  22^  35^  The 
dimensions  of  the  apartment  are  about  40  feet  by  1 5,  and  above 
it  smaller  chambers  appear  to  have  been  constructed,  similar 
to  those  over  the  King's  Chamber  in  the  Great  Pyramid  of 
Gizeh.  Hieroglyphics  have  been  inscribed  with  red  ochre  on 
some  of  the  blocks  at  the  western  end,  but  they  cannot  be 
distinctly  made  out. 

Upon  the  adjacent  ground  are  heaps  of  broken  granite, 
which  may  possibly  be  the  chippings  of  the  blocks,  originally 
intended  for  an  external  casing,  but  afterwards  broken  up,  and 
carried  away  for  other  purposes.  The  firagments  crumble  to 
pieces  upon  being  handled,  and  are  much  decomposed  and 
covered  with  moss,  either  from  great  antiquity,  or  from  an 
exposure,  not  only  to  the  corroding  air  of  the  desert,  but  also 
to  the  moist  winds  of  the  Delta. 

Some  other  foundations  are  upon  the  same  height,  which 
has  been  already  described  to  be  composed  of  chalk,  and  which 
appears  to  have  been  worked  in  very  early  times  (as  at  present) 
for  the  sake  of  the  flints  imbedded  in  it.  The  levelled  space 
around  the  Pyramid  is  about  510  feet  above  the  plain.  The 
ea^em  and  southern  sides  of  the  mountain  are  nearly  perpen- 
dicular, and  beneath  it  to  the  southward  are  antient  remains. 
The  northern  side  has  been  sloped  away,  and  an  inclined  cause- 
way has  been  constructed  from  the  plain  below  (as  is  shewn  in 
fig.  1).     It  is  4950  feet  in  length,  30  feet  in  breadth,  and  in 


APPENDIX.  9 

some  places  nearly  40  feet  high.    About  half  of  it  is  constructed 
with  masonry. 

Fig.  1  is  a  plan  of  the  Pyramid  and  of  the  hills  upon  which 
it  is  placed. 

Fig.  2,  Plan  of  excavation,  wherein  the  inclined  entrance* 
passage  and  the  apartment  have  been  formed. 

Fig.  3,  Section  through  the  apartment,  and  along  entrance* 
passage  looking  west. 

Fig.  4,  Section  through  apartment  looking  south. 

A  view  of  the  Pyramid  from  Kerdassy,  looking  across  the 
plain  of  sand,  is  also  given ;  and  also  a  view  taken  from  near 
the  south-western  angle. 

A  valley  to  the  northward  extends  to  the  Natron  Lakes,  and 
is  the  usual  road  of  the  western  pilgrims  from  the  Barbary 
coast.  Mummy-pits  and  tombs  were  found  in  this  valley,  but 
they  did  not  contain  any  inscriptions ;  the  inhabitants  of  the 
neighbouring  village,  however,  were  said  to  have  taken  from 
them  a  variety  of  small  articles,  similar  to  those  in  the  tombs 
at  Gizeh,  and  mummy-cases  inscribed  with  hieroglyphics.  At 
the  edge  of  the  hills,  on  the  northern  side  of  the  valley,  are 
traces  of  an  antient  square  building.  It  is  called  by  the  Arabs 
El  Deir  (flie  convent)^  a  name,  however,  which  is  often  indis- 
criminately applied  by  them  to  antient  ruins. 

Upon  a  projecting  knoll,  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  mountain, 
and  near  the  village  of  Abou  Roash,  are  also  the  remains  of  a 
building  of  considerable  magnitude  and  solidity.  It  is  composed 
of  crude  bricks,  made  of  Nile  earth,  without  any  intermixture 
of  straw.  Small  sepulchral  grottoes  at  the  bottom  of  inclined 
passages  have  been  roughly  hewn  in  the  side  of  the  mountain ; 
they  contain  sarcophagi,  which  are  without  any  ornament  or 
inscription. 

Upon  a  plain  now  covered  with  sand,  between  this  place  and 
the  village  of  Kerdassy,  the  site  of  a  considerable  town  may 
be  traced.  The  name  of  it  has  perished,  together  with  its  edi- 
fices ;  but,  from  the  apparent  antiquity  of  the  Pyramid  in  ques- 
tion, it  was  probably  Cochoma,  mentioned  by  Africanus  as  having 
existed  under  the  fourth  king  of  Manetho*s  first  dynasty,  Vene- 
phes  (Enephes,  or  Venephres),  son  of  Cencenes,  "for  that 
monarch  is  said  to  have  erected  a  pyramid  near  the  town  of 
Cochone  (Cochoma,  or  Choe)."^ 

*  See  Remarks  upon  the  Map. 


10  APPENDIX. 


PYRAMID  OF  ZOWYET  EL  ARRIAN. 

It  is  called  by  the  Arabs  El  Medowareh  {the  circular)  j  and 
is  situated  on  an  eminence  near  a  sheik's  tomb,  about  three 
quarters  of  a  mile  to  the  westward  of  the  village,  from  which  it 
takes  its  name. 

It  is  mentioned  in  the  **  Description  d*Egypte"  (vol.  v. 
p.  14),  in  connexion  with  two  other  buildings,  the  remains  of 
which,  after  some  trouble,  were  at  length  discovered ;  the  one 
about  half  a  mile,  and  the  other  about  a  mile,  to  the  northward 
of  the  Pyramid  in  question  ;  but  they  were  so  completely  dilapi- 
dated, that  their  original  construction  could  not  be  made  out; 
indeed  of  the  most  perfect  there  were  only  to  be  seen  a  few 
stones,  composing  a  parallelogram,  twice  as  long  as  it  was 
broad.  The  materials  of  the  Pyramid  of  Zowyet  el  Arrian 
have  been  quarried  from  the  adjoining  hills,  and  consist  of  hard 
limestone,  in  which  are  many  fossil  shells.  The  blocks  have 
not  been  squared,  nor  laid  in  regular  courses,  but  form  a  sort 
of  rubble  work,  in  which  clayey  loam  mixed  with  sand  has 
been  used  instead  of  mortar. 

Great  part  of  the  building  has  been  removed  for  the  use 
of  the  neighbouring  villages;  and  it  is  only  where  the  sand 
has  been  taken  away  in  search  of  materials,  particularly  at  the 
north-western  angle,  that  the  masonry  is  visible.  The  pyramidal 
form  is  entirely  destroyed,  and  the  general  appearance  of  the 
ruin  is  that  of  a  round  hill. 

No  remains  of  a  casing,  or  of  the  limestone  from  the  Mo- 
kattam,  were  discovered. 

Present  base,  about  300  feet 

Ditto  height     -    -    61  feet  above  the  rock. 

The  rock  before  the  northern  front  had  been  scarped  away, 
so  as  to  form  on  the  eastward  an  inclined  approach  from  the 
plain  beneath. 


PYRAMID  OF  REEGAH. 

It  is  situated  on  a  hill,  near  the  deserted  village  of  Reegah, 
about  three  quarters  of  a  mile  north-west  of  the  Pyramids  of 
Abouseir ;  is  called  by  the  Arabs,  Haram  el  Abou-Goorob,  and 


^ 


••t 


^•1.1^ 


j^ 


•vKV 


'f 


.»* 


-^^'. 


a" 


z 
< 

>• 

K 
S 

o 


5  .  uj 

<  : 
o 


0. 


^. 


I 


I 


t- 


.'-^ 


V 
1 


^* 


s 


4 


8 


ft 


APPENDIX.  1 1 

is  composed  of  masonry  superior  to  that  of  the  Pyramids  of 
Aboaseir. 

There  appears  to  have  been  a  temple  before  the  eastern  front, 
and  a  causeway  communicating  therefrom  to  another  building  on 
the  plain.    (See  Plan,  fig.  1.) 

The  Pyramid  had  been  carried  up  in  two  inclines,  like  the 
Southern  Pyramid  of  Dashoor.  The  casing  of  the  lower  part 
was  of  granite,  and  had  an  angle  of  75^  2(/ ;  that  of  the  upper 
part,  composed  of  calcareous  stone  from  the  Mokattam,  had  an 
angle  of  about  52^. 

The  base  was  123  feet  4  inches  square. 

Mr.  Perring  excavated  in  the  centre  of  the  northern  front, 
and  found  amongst  the  rubbish  fragments  of  stone  which  were 
rudely  sculptured  and  coloured,  and,  in  some  instances,  were 
marked  with  golden  stars  upon  a  dark -blue  ground,  as  if  they 
had  belonged  to  the  ceiling  of  an  apartment ;  he  also  met  with 
some  coarse  earthenware  pots,  and  a  mass  of  brickwork  erected 
close  to  the  Pyramid,  upon  the  broken  casing-stones ;  fragments 
of  which,  composed  of  granite,  were  found  near  the  north- 
eastern angle.  As  Mr.  Perring  did  not  discover  an  entrance 
on  the  northern  side,  he  extended  his  researches,  but  without 
effect,  to  the  eastward,  where  brick- 
work had  been  also  erected  over 
the  broken  casing,  and  where  more 
coarse  earthenware,  consisting  of 
pots  and  of  lamps  of  this  shape  were 
found,  and  likewise  some  round 
pieces  of  black  basalt,  from  3  to  7 
inches  in  diameter.  Mr.  Perring  doubted  the  antiquity  of  the 
lamps.  Several  sculptured  slabs  were  also  discovered,  upon  one 
of  which  was  the  cartouche  represented  in  the  Plate. 

The  hieroglyphics  were  found  upon  blocks  near  the  eastern 
front,  and  the  stone  marked  fig.  7,  and  several  others,  upon 
which  characters  were  rudely  sculptured,  had  been  apparently 
brought  out  from  the  interior  of  the  building.  Figs.  2  and  3 
were  well,  but  slightly  engraved,  upon  four  pieces  of  granite, 
which  seem  to  have  belonged  to  the  temple  already  alluded  to. 

Fig.  3  had  formed  part  of  a  doorway,  for  the  hole  A  was 
evidently  intended  to  receive  the  top  of  the  heel-post  of  a  door. 


12  APPENDIX. 


NOTE  BY  MR.  BIRCH. 

As  two  of  these  inscriptions  are  upon  blocks,  which  according  to 
Mr.  Perring's  account  had  been  taken  from  another  edifice  before  they 
were  used  in  the  construction  of  the  Pyramid,  they  cannot  be  considered 
to  be  exclusively  connected  with  the  existing  monument,  and  are  there- 
fore comparatively  of  less  value.  They  are  all  likewise  too  imperfect 
to  be  completely  understood.  Figs.  2  and  3,  at  present  separate,  were 
no  doubt  originally  connected  together.  Fig.  1  contains  the  name  of 
the  king  Ousrenre ;  and  on  a  line  to  the  left  the  seated  figure  of  the 
monarch  may  be  traced.  He  is  crowned  with  a  teshr,  or  with  the  lower 
part  of  a  pschent  surmounted  by  two  horns ;  and  he  holds  a  whip  in  his 
hand,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  figure  of  die  king  Maire,  or  Piops,  on  a 
tablet  at  Chenoboskion,  published  by  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson.  Before  the 
monarch  is  the  head  of  a  person  of  rank,  and  also  an  imperfect  inscrip- 
tion, in  which  can  be  distinguished  a  cord  and  an  owl,  phonetically 
expressing  CJUL,  and  part  of  the  word  C6AXCI,  **  minister ,  officer,  pre- 
ferred.*' (Champ.,  "  Gram.  Egypt"  p.  464.)  Fig.  2  contains  part 
of  two  vertical  lines,  which  probably  recount  the  address  of  a  deity 
to  the  monarch,  and  the  titles  of  the  monarch,  as, ''  all  stability"  "  all 
power  r  and  in  the  line  to  the  right  "  the  king  set  up**  may  be  readj 
Fig.  3  comprehends  a  long  horizontal   line  of  hieroglyphics,  in  which 

is  ''  of  him  the  sun  taking  the  heart '*      The   inscription 

resembles  those  which  have  been  discovered  near  the  Pyramids  at  Gizeh. 
The  lower  part  has  contained  one  of  the  usual  sacred  representations,  sur- 
mounted by  the  symbol  of  heaven,  supported  by  a  gom,  or  koucoupha 
sceptre. 


PYRAMIDS  OF  ABOUSEIR. 

Thbt  are  three  in  number  (besides  the  lower  part  of  another, 
which  has  sometimes  been  called  a  temple,  and  the  base  of  a  fifth 
mach  smaller),  and  are  situated  to  the  south-eastward  of  the  ruins 
of  Zowyet  el  Arrian,  and  of  Reegah,  about  seven  miles  S.S.E. 
of  those  at  Gizeh,  and  about  three  miles  N.N.E.  of  Saccara. 

»  Barton,  "  Excerpta  Hier.''  Plate  XXXVII.  20.  Rosellini,  "  Monum. 
Tav."  Cory  (I.  Preston),  "  Mythological  Inq."  8vo.  London,  1887.  Title- 
page,  D,  Plate,  where  the  deity  says, — <'  I  set  up  the  tosh  f'capj  on  thy  head 
Uke  thy  father  Amoun-ra.''  Plate  facing  p.  134,—"  Who  gives  all  life  and 
power  J  aU  stability,  aM force,  like  the  sun,**  are  the  titles  of  the  Guardian  of 
the  South,  the  Hophioue  of  M.  Champollion.  Burton,  "  Excerpta  Hier." 
Plate  XXV.  6. 


rie  I 


F.c  2 


[ 


%iT 


s: 


<ftA^A<%^ 


TVs.  C<».A.  ,   ^'»*>^  UrvC 


|v .  •;?  (>" 


IC 


A 


f-^.- 


(u 


^/-^^^-f^^^. 


1 '.    r 


\ 


tf:'n. 


i^^n 


,-1 

V  i 


/> 


/'A 


-^ 


/■ 


A  ! 


HIEROGLYPHICS. 

TO  A""*  scale: 


V 


J    I  < 
/    I 


A  .rt-' 


I 


s 


J'J  FtrriKf  <erf» 


IP  V  K^BB  Q  ©      (§)l? 


K  S  ©^  U 


iuigwii<rjjJv^o"i:t-:  I--  - 


:.v.    '■""■i^ 


i[- 


■■■&^^-'' 


J 


lEA-T     -I J  ms:i     if'X.ti&.iSUJ^Z     •!!     ^miJDUr  S3;Jt3 


APPENDIX;  13 

They  are  on  an  elevation,  which  is  about  eighty  feet  higher 
than  the  adjacent  plain,  and  is  composed  of  argillaceous  rock, 
unfit  for  extensive  excavation;  the  few  tombs  which  occur  are 
therefore  formed  of  masonry.  A  map  of  the  Pyramids,  and 
a  general  view  of  them,  taken  from  the  edge  of  the  cultivated 
ground,  are  given. 

Mr.  Perring  experienced  a  great  deal  of  trouble  in  the  ex- 
amination of  these  Pyramids,  and  was  unable  to  engage  many 
labourers,  on  account  of  the  people  being  employed  in  the 
Dhoorah  harvest.  He  began  with  the  Northern  Pyramid,  and 
removed  the  rubbish  in  the  centre  of  the  northern  front,  com- 
mencing at  the  peribolus  and  clearing  away  down  to  the  plat- 
form. In  doing  so  he  first  removed  fragments  of  broken  stones 
and  sand,  and  found  beneath  them  parts  of  the  casing, 
which  had  consisted  of  granite  and  of  the  stone  from  the 
quarries  at  Tourah,  one  of  which  appeared  to  have  been  cut 
for  the  reception  of  a  tablet  like  the  tablets  said  by  Herodotus 
to  have  contained  inscriptions  over  the  entrances  of  the  Pyra- 
mids. The  passage  was  full  of  stones  and  of  rubbish,  which 
continued  to  fall  down  from  an  opening  in  the  ceiling;  and 
while  these  were  being  removed,  the  side  of  the  Pyramid  gave  way, 
and  completely  buried  one  of  the  labourers ;  who  fortunately, 
however,  did  not  sustain  any  material  injury :  for  fear  of  a 
serious  accident,  Mr.  Perring  removed  all  the  people  except 
seven  or  eight  of  the  best  men,  and  these  he  had  some 
difliculty  in  keeping  to  their  work,  as  large  masses  of  masonry, 
together  with  rubbish,  from  time  to  time  fell  in.  On  this 
occasion,  as  on  many  others,  the  courage  and  exertions  of  a 
Reis,  named  Abd  el  Ardi,  were  peculiarly  conspicuous. 

Mr.  Perring  succeeded  in  removing  the  hieroglyphics  and  the 
cartouche  B  from  the  retaining  wall  to  the  westward  of  the 
entrance,  and  was  obliged  to  use  gunpowder  for  that  purpose. 
As  the  masonry,  in  which  he  was  working,  was  composed  of 
rubble  work,  and  as  the  lining  of  the  passage  had  been  destroyed, 
some  date-trees  were  procured  from  the  village  of  Metrahenni, 
and  he  endeavoured  to  shore  up  the  loose  blocks,  but,  owing 
to  the  bad  texture  of  the  masonry,  with  little  success.  After 
ten  days'  labour  he  arrived  at  the  apartment,  which  was  com- 
pletely ruined,  and  full  of  rubbish  and  of  broken  stones ;  his 
attempts  to  clear  it  were  attended  with  great  difliculty  and 
risk,  and  the  apartment  was  three  several  times  filled  up  with 
stones,  that  fell  through  the  broken  parts  of  the  roof*      He 


14  APPENDIX. 

continued  his  operations  for  above  three  weeks,  notwithstanding 
that  one  man  had  his  leg  broken,  and  that  several  others  were  se- 
verely hurt.  He  found  the  long  inscription  A,  and  also  part 
of  D,  inscribed  with  red  ochre  upon  blocks  of  Tourah  stone, 
near  the  entrance  of  the  Pyramid. 

The  Northern  Pyramid  has  been  surrounded  by  a  wall,  and 
has  also  been  connected  with  the  plain  on  the  eastern  side  by 
an  inclined  causeway,  formed  with  rude  blocks  of  limestone, 
quarried  on  the  spot ;  and  at  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  cause- 
way there  appears  to  have  been  a  building. 

Another  inclined  way  seems  to  have  formed  an  approach 
to  the  Middle  Pyramid,  although  not  in  a  direct  course,  owing, 
probably,  to  the  profile  of  the  ground.  Upon  the  sides  of  a 
considerable  part  of  it  fragments  of  black  basalt,  at  nearly  equal 
distances,  appear  either  to  have  belonged  to  an  avenue  of 
sphinxes,  or  to  have  formed  part  of  a  parapet  wall,  as  may 
be  seen  in  the  Plate.  These  inclined  roads  were,  no  doubt, 
originally  constructed  for  the  conveyance  of  the  stone,  and  of 
the  other  materials,  used  in  the  erection  of  the  Pyramids;  but 
they  seem  afterwards  to  have  constituted  the  regular  approaches. 
Herodotus  mentions,  that  they  were  adorned  with  the  figures 
of  animals,  which  were  probably  either  sculptured  hieroglyphics, 
or  an  avenue  of  sphinxes. 

The  interior  of  the  three  Pyramids  is  upon  the  same  plan. 
The  entrance-passages,  in  the  centre  of  the  northern  fronts,  are 
at  first  inclined,  and  afterwards  horizontal.  The  apartments 
in  the  centres  of  the  Pyramids  range  from  east  to  west,  and 
are  covered  by  inclined  roofs,  consisting  of  several  courses  of 
stone.  The  materials  and  the  workmanship  are  also  similar. 
The  bulk  of  the  building  has  been  in  the  first  instance  carried 
up  in  degrees,  and  has  been  afterwards  completed  into  a  pyra- 
midal form.  The  greatest  part  of  the  material  consists  of  stone 
found  upon  the  spot ;  but  the  exterior  casing,  the  linings  of  the 
passages,  and  of  the  apartments,  and  the  roof-blocks,  are  from 
the  Tourah  quarries,  to  which  these  Pyramids  are  exactly  opposite. 

The  masonry  is  in  general  very  rude,  and  consists  of  rough 
blocks  of  various  sizes,  put  together  like  rubble  work,  with 
Nile  earth  instead  of  mortar.  The  exterior  casing  of  all  tbe 
Pyramids  has  been  removed,  and  the  masonry,  when  exposed 
to  the  weather,  of  course  would  be  soon  destroyed;  but  it  is 
diflScult  to  account  for  the  disappearance  of  the  materials,  unless 
by  supposing  that  they  have  been  taken  for  other  buildings; 


I 


APPENDIX.  15 

and|  as  the  Pyramids  of  Oizeh  are  more  conveniently  situated 
for  that  purpose,  as  regards  Cairo,  it  may  be  inferred  that  these 
buildings  were  destroyed,  at  an  earlier  period,  for  the  erection  of 
a  more  antient  town  in  their  more  immediate  vicinity. 

Near  the  south-western  corner  of  the  Great  Pyramid  are 
the  foundations  of  another,  in  which  an  entrance  on  the  northern 
side,  and  an  excavation  for  a  passage  and  apartments  may  be 
traced. 

NORTHERN  PYRAMID. 


Base 

OriglnaL                                 Pmoit. 

267  ft.                    .         216  ft. 

Perpendicular  Height 
Angle  of  Casing 

162  ft.     9  in.         -         118  ft. 
5P  42'  36" 

After  the  entrance-passage  in  the  centre  of  the  northern 
front  was  discovered,  it  was  not  practicable  for  a  fortnight,  owing 
to  the  broken  stones  and  sand,  and  to  the  ruined  state  of  the 
building.  The  passage  descended  at  an  angle  of  27^  b'  for  14 
feet,  and  then  proceeded  in  a  horizontal  direction.  At  the  distance 
of  27  feet  from  the  incline,  it  has  been  closed  by  a  portcullis, 
formed  of  a  block  of  granite  1  foot  3  inches  in  thickness ;  and 
the  same  material  has  been  employed  in  the  passage,  as  far 
as  the  present  entrance,  11  feet  6  inches  beyond  the  portcullis. 
A  view  of  the  entrance  in  its  present  state  is  given. 


Passage  from  Entrance  to  Portcullis 

Ditto  ditto 

From  present  Entrance  to  Apartment 

Ditto  ditto 

Height  at  Entrance    -        -        -        - 
Height  near  Granite        •        -        . 
Height  at  Granite,  B  ... 

Height  beyond  Granite  at  Apartment    - 
Apartment  breadth  North  and  South 
Height  at  Sides         .... 
Height  in  Centre  -        -        -        . 


Fwt 

IfldiM. 

4 

2J  high. 

4 

0    wide« 

71 

4    long. 

4 

2    wide. 

6 

10 

6 

4 

4 

5 

4 

li 

11 

8 

9 

4 

12 

6 

The  apartment  was  in  the  centre  of  the  Pyramid,  and  ex- 
tended 9  feet  4  inches  to  the  eastward  of  the  entrance-passage, 
but  its  original  dimensions  are  uncertain,  and  so  indeed  are 
the  numbers  and  position  of  the  apartments.  Some  however 
appear  to  have  been  placed  under  the  eastern  part  of  the  edifice. 


16  APPENDIX. 

and  to  have  been  entered  by  the  low  passage  (C,  in  plan), 
but  the  place  was  full  of  rubbish,  and  towards  the  east  had 
been  completely  ruined. 

Most  of  the  pavement  had  been  destroyed,  as  well  as  a 
sarcophagus  formed  of  black  basalt^  the  fragments  of  which  were 
well  polished,  but  quite  plain.  Two  small  iron  wedges,  4  or 
6  ounces  in  weight,  which  might  possibly  have  been  used  in 
destroying  the  building,  were  also  found;  they  were  about  3 
inches  in  length,  and  l|inch  in  breadth  at  the  edge. 

The  granite  in  the  sides  and  in  the'  soof  of  the  passage  at 
B  (in  plan  and  section)  was  apparently  intended  to  give  strength 
to  the  masonry,  where  its  solidity  was  weakened;  and,  as  an 
additional  security,  there  had  been  three  tiers  of  roof- blocks, 
the  footings  of  the  upper  rows  of  which  had  been  carried  beyond 
those  of  the  lower,  in  order  to  distribute  the  pressure  over  as 
great  a  base  as  possible.  These  roof-blocks  were  of  immense 
size,  in  some  instances  they  were  35  feet  long,  9  feet  wide,  and 
12  feet  thick ;  yet  so  completely  had  they  been  destroyed,  that 
of  the  upper  tiers  only  two  perfect  blocks,  and  fragments  of  two 
others  remained. 

The  indefatigable  exertions  therefore  of  the  people,  who  broke 
in  and  destroyed  these  Pyramids,  cannot  but  excite  surprise,  and 
in  some  degree  admiration,  although  they  were  probably  occa- 
sioned by  no  better  motive,  than  a  desire  to  obtain  the  hidden 
treasures.  The  Earl  of  Mount  N  orris  appears  to  be  of  the  same 
opinion.' 

The  apartments  and  passages  had  been  constructed  with  large 
blocks  of  Tourah  stone,  beautifully  worked  and  well  put  together. 

A  recess  in  the  casing  above  the  entrance  appeared  to  have 
been  intended  to  receive  an  inscription,  like  that  which  we 
are  informed  by  Diodorus  was  placed  over  the  entrance  of 
the  Third  Pyramid  of  Gizeh,  and  this  circumstance  may  in  some 
degree  account  for  the  inscriptions  said  by  Herodotus  and  by 
other  authors  to  have  been  seen  upon  the  Pyramids. 

DD,  in  plan  and  section,  are  retaining  walls,  about  24  feet 
asunder.  They  are  composed  of  large  blocks  laid  in  more 
regular  courses,  and  built  with  more  care  than  the  rest  of  the 

•  See  Lord  Valencia's  "Travels,"  vol.  III.  page  433 : — "  I  cannot  but  sus- 
pect that  the  conquerors  of  this  country  found  treasures  concealed  in  some 
of  the  stones  of  the  antient  edifices,  and  that  the  expectation  of  finding  more 
led  to  the  laborious  destruction  of  these  massive  temples,  which  seem  to  have 
been  constructed  to  bid  defiance  to  time  itself." 


[el 


iUJ 

!     V 


t^ 


li  ^ 


e.- 


APPENDIX.  1 7 

Pyramid.  They  were  probably  run  up  in  order  tbat  the  bulk 
of  the  Pyramid  might  be  carried  on  before  the  passages  were 
finbhed,  which,  on  account  of  their  superior  masonry,  must 
have  required  considerable  time  and  attention.  Upon  these  walls 
the  hieroglyphics  A,  B,  C,  and  D,  were  written  in  red  ochre. 

A  pavement  two  feet  in  thicknessi  extended  around  the 
building  to  the  peribolus;  and  where  the  rock  was  low,  the 
pavement  was  placed  upon  a  layer  of  sand.^ 

MIDDLE  PYRAMID. 

Thb  appearance  of  this  Pyramid  is  that  of  a  square  mound; 
and  the  masonry  is  only  visible  where  the  rubbish  has  been 
removed  from  the  angles. 

Mr.  Perring  employed  all  the  people,  whom  he  could  spare 
from  the  Northern,  upon  the  Middle  Pyramid,  and  began  to 
remove  a  great  accumulation  of  rubbish  near  the  base :  after  six 
days*  labour  the  pit  or  hollow.  A,  was  discovered ;  it  was  com- 
posed of  small  stones  without  mortar,  and  was  apparently 
intended  to  prevent  the  eutrance  from  being  choked  up  by 
sand  and  rubbish ;  it  was  cleared  out  in  eight  days ;  a  few 
pieces  of  granite  were  found  in  it,  and  fragments  of  stone  in- 
scribed with  hieroglyphics.  It  then  became  necessary  to  clear 
away  the  front  of  the  Pyramid,  as  the  rubbish  fell  down  upon  the 
people  employed  in  the  pit.  In  ten  days'  time  the  entrance- 
passage,  6,  was  discovered,  and,  as  it  was  regularly  filled  up  with 
masonry,  it  was  evident  that  the  Pyramid  had  been  forced  from 
above.  After  six  days'  additional  labour  a  forced  entrance  was 
discovered  by  Abd  el  Ardi,  which  led  down  to  a  horizontal 
passage,  running  north  and  south  from  the  bottom  of  the  inclined 
entrance  (see  Plate).  This  forced  entrance  was  choked  up  with 
rubbish ;  it  was  very  narrow,  and,  in  attempting  to  widen  it,  blocks 
continually  fell  in  from  the  masonry  above,  which  could  only  be 
removed  by  ropes  and  pulleys,  so  that  it  was  eleven  days  before 
the  passage  was  practicable. 

SuppoMd  Original.  Preaent 

Base       .        -        -        -        274  ft      0  in.  213  ft. 

Perpendicular  Height  •         -    171  ft.      4  in.  107  ft. 

The  present  entrance  (see  Plate)  is  by  a  forced  excavation, 
cut  down  perpendicularly  through  the  masonry  for  about  40 
feet  into  the  regular  passage  near  a  portcullis,  which,  as  well 

*  The  Udofvi  wooden  cup,  containing  red  ochre,  which  was  found  at  this 
Pyramid,  had  an  iron  &8tening. 

VOL.  III.  C 


18  APPENDIX. 

as  the  inclined  entrance  leading  down  to  it,  remained  closed  up 
with  blocks  of  granite;^  the  passage  is  lined,  and  the  portcullis 
is  formed  of  the  same  material. 

The  horizontal  passage  from  the  portcullis  to  the  apartment  is 
63  feet  in  length,  5  feet  10  inches  in  height,  and  5  feet  1  inch 
in  width.  For  the  distance  of  24  feet  from  the  portcullis  it  had 
been  broken  up,  and  was  much  encumbered  with  rubbish. 

The  width  of  the  apartment  appeared  to  have  been  14  feet, 
but  it  could  not  be  correctly  ascertained,  as  the  place  was  filled 
up  above  the  side  walls  with  the  fragments  of  the  blocks,  which 
had  belonged  to  the  roof. 

The  roof  had  been  formed  by  three  tiers  of  blocks,  48  feet  6 
inches  in  length.  Many  of  them  had  been  destroyed,  but  upon 
the  whole  the  interior  was  in  a  better  state  than  that  of  the  other 
two  Pyramids  ;  it  was,  however,  completely  ruined.  The  marks 
of  wedges  were  every  where  visible ;  but  it  was  difficult  to 
imagine  that  any  power,  excepting  that  of  gunpowder,  could  have 
eifected  so  much  destruction ;  it  was  not  therefore  cleared  out. 
The  condition,  in  which  it  was  found,  is  represented  in  one  of 
the  plates  ;  and  in  the  section  it  may  be  observed  that  the  roof- 
blocks  had  been  laid  with  different  degrees  of  inclination,  in  order 
that  the  vacancy  between  the  tiers  might  relieve  the  ceiling  of 
the  apartment  from  the  superincumbent  weight.  The  skeleton 
of  a  starved  tiger-cat  was  found  in  the  apartment. 

The  position  of  the  granite  block  in  the  casing  of  the  passages 
beneath  the  roof  (D  in  the  section)  is  similar  to  that  already 
described  in  the  account  of  the  Northern  Pyramid,  and  was  no 
doubt  intended  for  the  same  purpose. 

Figs.  F,  G,  H,  I,  J,  K,  L,  shew  the  principal  hieroglyphics ; 
but  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  nearly  every  block  belonging  to  the 
exterior  contained  larger  or  smaller  inscriptions,  written  upon 
the  light-coloured  stones  with  red  ochre,  and  upon  the  darker 
with  white  paint. 

F  was  found  upon  two  sides  of  a  stone. 

6  the  same. 

J  occurred  several  times,  more  or  less  distinctly. 

All  the  characters  were  upon  blocks  found  on  the  exterior 
of  the  building,  excepting  T,  which  was  upon  a  roof-block,  and 
was  the  only  inscription  observed  at  these  Pyramids  upon  stone 
from  Tourah ;  whereas  the  inscriptions  found  at  Gizeh  were 
invariably  upon  the  blocks  from  the  Arabian  mountains. 

^  This  is  an  additional  proof  that  these  buildings  were  merely  tombs. 


^i^^&i 


V 


APPENDIX.  19 


GREAT  PYRAMID. 

Mr.  Perrinq  then  removed  the  stones  and  rubbish  from  the 
northern  Front  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  and  met  with  fragments  of 
a  casing  composed  of  granite,  which  had  been  cut  up  for  modern 
use^  like  the  blocks  belonging  to  the  Third  Pyramid  of  Gizeh ;  at 
the  end  of  sixteen  days  he  arrived  at  the  masonry  A,  which  had 
a  casing  in  the  form  of  steps,  but  he  did  not  discover  an  entrance. 
He  therefore  proceeded  to  clear  away  the  rubbish  from  the  side 
of  the  Pyramid  above  it,  when  he  found  a  space,  where  the 
masonry  had  fallen  in ;  and  in  doing  so  he  met  with  a  pointed 
piece  of  sycamore  wood,  part  of  a  head-rest,  and  a  mallet  about 
11  inches  long,  4j^  inches  wide  at  the  upper  end,  and  much  worn. 
It  was  similar  to  those  represented  by  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson, 
Vol.  II.  p.  181,  and  Vol.  III.  p.  336. 

The  building  was  in  steps  or  degrees,  covered  over  with 
flat  stones  (see  a,  b,  c,  in  section,  fig.  1),  and  the  space  between 
these  and  the  pyramidal  casing  was  filled  up  with  a  rubble  work 
of  smaller  stones ;  so  that  it  appears  to  have  been  the  original 
intention  to  have  left  it  in  steps  or  degrees,  like  the  present  form 
of  the  Pyramid  of  Saccara. 

The  lower  courses  of  the  casing,  and  part  of  the  entrance- 
passage,  had  been  composed  of  granite.  The  masonry  was  some- 
what better  than  that  of  the  two  other  Pyramids,  and  the  mortar, 
composed  of  Nile  earth,  had  been  mixed  up  with  a  small  quantity 
of  lime,  or  of  pounded  limestone. 

Suppoied  originftL  Picient. 

Base 359  ft.    9  in.         325  ft. 

Perpendicular  Height  -        -     227  ft.  10  in.         164  ft. 

From  present  Entrance  to  Apartment       -        -        -     104  ft. 

The  entrance-passage,  in  the  centre  of  the  northern  front,  had 
an  inclination  of  26^  3^.  The  horizontal  continuation  of  it  from 
D  to  D  in  section  was  constructed  with  large  blocks  of  Tourah 
stone,  in  the  singular  manner  (shewn  in  the  cross- section, 
%•  3),  and  a  roof  of  inclined  stones  between  two  walls  had 
relieved  the  passage  from  the  superincumbent  weight  of  the 
building. 

The  sides  were  however  destroyed,  and  the  roof  had  been 
broken  up,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  blocks,  which  had  been 


20  APPENDIX. 

left  at  intervals  to  support  the  superstructure.  A  long  piece  of 
wood  had  been  worked  into  the  masonry  at  E,  in  section,  fig.  1, 
which  though  rather  shaky,  was  completely  sound.*  Layers  of 
split  reeds  were  laid  in  many  places  upon  the  blocks  of  the  roof 
of  the  passage.  The  reeds  were  like  those  used  in  the  East  for 
pens,  and  had  been  striped  with  red  paint. 

After  ten  or  twelve  feet  of  this  passage  had  been  cleared  out, 
the  people  were  alarmed  by  a  loud  noise,  and  had  just  made 
their  escape,  when  a  large  mass  of  masonry  above  the  entrance 
fell,  and  disclosed  a  wall  composed  of  large  blocks,  C.  It  then 
became  necessary  to  remove  the  rubbish,  which  amounted  to 
several  hundred  tons.  The  lining  of  the  passage  was  found  com- 
pletely broken  up  ;  but  at  length  a  small  opening  was  discovered 
to  the  right  of  the  excavation,  by  which  Mr.  Perring  entered  the 
apartment  and  found  it  in  the  same  state  as  those  in  the  other 
Pyramids. 

This  apartment  had  also  been  covered  with  a  pointed  roof  of 
three  courses  of  blocks.  They  were  45  feet  in  length,  and  had 
extended  from  east  to  west,  but  had  been  destroyed  with  a  mis- 
chievous perseverance,  which  was  truly  wonderful. 

A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  contain  hieroglyphics. 

A,  reversed,  occurs  in  red  upon  a  block  in  the  passage. 

B,  C,  D,  are  inscribed  over  the  apartment  in   black,  .iV^ 
where  most  of  the  stones  are  marked  thus  in  red.  >X 

E  was  found  upon  a  loose  block  near  the  entrance. 

The  view  of  the  entrance  shews  the  casing  of  the  story  or 
degree,  C  in  the  section,  fig.  1 .  It  was  marked  with  horizontal 
and  with  perpendicular  lines,  drawn  in  red  ochre,  and  with  a 
hieroglyphic  at  the  rectangular  intersections.  A  small  figure  of 
a  female  deity  (Bubastes),  composed  of  green  glazed  pottery,  was 
found  near  this  Pyramid. 


'  Part  of  it  has  been  sent  to  the  British  Museam,  and  the  following  cer- 
tificate was  given  to  Mr.  Perring :  — 

"  Cairo,  April  27,  1839. 

"  The  piece  of  wood,  taken  by  Mr.  Perring  from  the  Great  Pyramid  at 
Abouseir,  must  have  been  built  in  the  masonry  of  the  building  at  the  time 
of  its  original  erection — a  considerable  portion  of  the  same  still  remaining 
inclosed  amongst  the  stones,  that  have  not  been  disturbed,  and  the  mortar 
adhering  to  its  surface,  which  could  only  have  taken  place  when  it  was 
first  laid  on. 

''  Signed,  Clauds  Hamilton." 


APPENDIX.  21 


SMALL  PYRAMID. 

Mr.  Perrinq  turned  his  attention  to  this  Pyramid,  when  the 
blasting  of  the  blocks,  which  had  fallen  from  the  Great  Pyramid, 
previous  to  their  removal,  or  any  other  circumstance,  set  a  few 
hands  at  liberty.  In  clearing  the  northern  front  several  of  the 
casing  blocks  were  found,  and  it  was  evident  that  the  Pyramid 
had  formerly  extended  considerably  beyond  the  present  base. 
A  range  of  mummy-pits  had  been  excavated  before  the  north- 
ern front,  the  entrances  of  which  had  been  surrounded  by  walls 
of  crude  bricks  three  or  four  feet  high.  As  Mr.  Perring  imagined 
that  the  entrance  to  the  Pyramid  might  be  found  in  these  pits  he 
examined  them  :  one  of  them  was  unfinished ;  in  another,  which 
extended  under  the  base  of  the  Pyramid,  plain  sarcophagi,  com- 
posed of  calcareous  stone,  had  been  deposited  in  small  recesses. 
But  the  pits  did  not  communicate  with  the  Pyramid.  Mr.  Per- 
ring, therefore  cleared  out  a  hollow  in  the  masonry,  which  seemed 
to  have  been  occasioned  by  the  roof  of  the  apartment  having  given 
way ;  and  by  these  means  he  entered  the  interior.  The  roof  of 
the  apartment  had  been  composed  of  blocks  laid  horizontally  from 
east  to  west,  and  supported  by  side  walls ;  they  had  all,  however, 
excepting  two,  as  well  as  those  of  the  passages,  been  removed. 

Feet.  Inches. 

Present  Base     -------  54  6 

Former  ditto           -        -        -        -        -         -  -75  5 

Apartment,  length.  East  and  West        -        -  -          12  2 

breadth,  North  and  South       -     ,    -  -     10  6 

height       ------  87 

Recess  at  South-eastern  corner,  breadth    -        -  -      5  1 

depth  -        -  -           3  5^ 

Horizontal  Passage  from  northern  side,  length   -  -     14  0 

breadth  -           2  5 

height    -  -       8  7 

Inclined  Passage,  leading  eastward,  length    -  -         27  0 

breadth       -  -      2  10 

Angle          -         -         -         -         22°  10' 


. . 


•  • 


A  shaft  ascended  from  the  upper  part  of  the  passage :  its 
direction  was  not  ascertained.  It  may  have  communicated  with 
an  inclined  passage  from  the  northern  side,  or  have  led  directly 
out  of  the  building. 

The  apartment  and  the  passages  had  been  formed  in  excava- 


22  APPENDIX. 

tions,  and  had  been  lined^  paved,  and  roofed,  with  blocks  from 
the  Mokattam. 

Neither  any  hieroglyphics  nor  the  remains  of  a 
sarcophagus  were  observed ;  but  a  piece  of  basalt 
of  the  following  shape  was  found.  Part  of  a  glass 
bead,  a  small  scarabseus,  a  common  earthenware 
figure  of  a  deity,  and  a  small  stone  scarabasus, 
were  found  in  the  interior  of  this  Pyramid. 


NOTES  BY  MR.  BIRCH. 

Althouou  these  Pyramids  are  of  less  interest  than  those  of  Gizeh, 
the  hieroglyphics  upon  them  are  of  considerable  importance,  because 
they  contain  the  dates,  prenomens,  and  royal  standards,  of  two  monarchs. 
They  are  evidently  quarry-marks ;  but,  instead  of  having  been  inscribed, 
like  those  in  the  Pyramids  of  Gizeh,  only  upon  stone  brought  from 
the  Mokattam,  they  were  found  on  the  blocks  quarried  upon  the  spoL 
This  is  remarkable.  In  the  former  instance,  they  may  have  been  in- 
tended to  distinguish  the  materials,  which  had  been  prepared  for  a 
royal  edifice;  but  in  the  present,  their  use  is  not  obvious,  and  they 
can  have  only  served  to  denote  the  founder  of  each  particular  Pyramid. 
It  appears  from  them,  however,  as  will  be  afterwards  shewn,  that  the 
Northern  Pyramid  is  the  most  antient,  and  the  Southern,  in  which,  how- 
ever, no  royal  name  was  found,  is  the  latest  built. 

In  proceeding  to  examine  the  inscriptions,  I  shall  therefore  begin 
with  those  which  were  discovered  at  the 

NORTHERN  PYRAMID. 

Figs.  A,  B,  were  found  on  the  retaining  walls.  They  contain  the 
prenomen  of  the  monarch,  by  whom,  probably,  the  Pyramid  was  built. 
It  has  been  already  published  by  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson,'  by  M.  Rosellini,^ 
and  by  Dr.  Leemans;^  although  the  last-mentioned  author  has  con- 
founded it  with  a  prenomen,  probably  that  of  Shefre,  or  Chrefren.  M. 
Lenormant  corrected  this  mistake,  and  discovered  the  prenomen  of 
Shore  and  of  Nepercheres.    The  phonetic  value  of  the  middle  character, 

^3^"^    is  uncertain ;    but  it  had  probably  the  sound  of  g|  or  I), 
from  its  resemblance  to     >^^^^^Hv      which  is  well  understood.    The 


3  Mat.  Hieroglyph.  Unpublished  Kings,  a. 
*  Men.  Stor.  Teste,  Tav.  I. 

^  Monumens  Egyptians  portants  des  L^gendes  Royauz,  &c.  8vo,  Leide, 
1838,  p.  20. 


APPENDIX.  23 

name,  therefore,  may  he  read  Re-shou,  or  rather,  Shou-re,  by  a  trans- 
position, which  is  proved  by  my  remarks  on  the  name  Menkare^  to 
be  often  necessary.  The  symbols  immediately  above  this  name  are 
clearly  part  of  the  designation  of  one  of  the  last  four  months  of  the 
Egyptian  year,  Pachon,  Pauni,  Epiphi,  or  Mesori ;  but  the  inscription 
is  imperfect,  for  it  evidently  began  with  a  date,  the  greatest  part  of 
which  is  wanting.     The  following  words  may,  however,  be  made  out : — 

**  In  the  year month day powerful  and  living 

Re-shou  (or  Shou-re) "    The  rest  of  the  inscription  is  not 

clear.^ 

Fig.  C,  merely  contains  the  final  titles  represented  by  the  gom 
and  symbol  of  life,  and  which  have  been  already  said  to  signify  **  power- 
ful;' "  living." 

Fig.  D,  was  taken  from  a  large  block  in  the  retaining  wall  on 
the  western  side  of  the  building,  and  had  been  originally  concealed 
by  the  masonry.  It  begins  with  **  Horus  of  the  two  worlds,  the 
hawk  of  golds"  and  then  contains  in  two  places  the  royal  standard, 
composed  of  characters,  in  which  "  TcgOT  or  Tj4>0T,"  Tosh  or 
Tokh,  can  alone  be  satisfactorily  read.  Beneath  the  standard  to  the 
right  is  a  date,  *'  the  eighth  day  of  Phamenoth;"  and  above  the  one  to 
the  left  is  XoJUL-OIt^,  "  the  mighty  and  living"  or  &K-on^, 
"  restrainer  of  the  living"  It  is  to  be  remarked  that  these  epithets 
likewise  precede,  and  follow  the  titles  found  on  the  eastern  side  of 
the  Pyramid.  The  name  of  the  king  Shou-re^  and  his  standard  appear, 
therefore,  to  be  ascertained,  and  also  fragments  of  two  dates ;  but,* 
whether  they  relate  to  the  beginning,  or  to  the  completion  of  the 
Pyramid,  cannot  be  positively  determined. 

The  only  other  document,  which  relates  to  the  reign  of  this  king,  is 
the  sculpture  on  the  rocks  at  Wady  Magara,  published  in  the  Travels  of 
M.  Laborde,^  where  the  king  Shou-re  appears  to  hold  in  his  left  hand 
the  hair  of  a  captive,  emblematic  of  some  nation,  which  he  has  conquered, 
and  to  strike  him  with  a  mace  held  in  his  right.  Behind  the  monarch  is 
the  peculiar  sceptre,  distinguished  by  a  jackal  and  two  deities,  who 

« 

•  Inecriptions  on  the  Mummy-board  of  the  Coffin  found  in  the  Third 
Pyramid  at  Gizeh,  fol.  London,  1838,  published  by  Mr.  Fraser,  Regent 
Street.  Lenormant,  ''  Eclaircissements  sur  le  Cercueil  da  Roi  Memphite 
Mycerinus,  traduit  de  1' Anglais,*'  4to.  Paris,  1839. 

^  It  consists  of  a  man  seated  and  a  fowl,  a  suspended  symbol,  a  moon,  a 
Bolar  disc,  and  a  bar,  meaning  a  month ,  a  parallelogram  and  three  horizontal 
bars,  terminated  by  a  lotus  flower,  and  may  signify,  perhaps,  one  of  the  last 
three  months  of  the  year.  There  is  also  the  koucoupha  sceptre,  the  symbol 
of  life.  These  are  said  to  have  occurred  on  one  block,  although  they  do  not 
appear  to  be  connected. 

•  Voyage  de  PArabie  Petree,  fol.  Paris,  1830.  Tableaux  Hierogly- 
phiques,  III. 


24  APPENDIX. 

carry  wands  and  maces,  and  are  crowned  with  the  teshr,  and  ouobsh,  or 
oueit.  The  representation  is  enclosed  at  the  sides  by  two  kpucoupha 
sceptres,  and  is  surmounted  by  the  starry  heaven.  The  inscription 
contains  "  Horus^  the  lord  of  diadems,  the  hing  Shou-re^  the  giver 
^f  ^{f^for  ever,  the  lord  (or  chief)  of  all  countries,  the  establisher  (?) 
of  all  countries.'*  At  the  same  place  also  are  records  of  Maire  (or 
M(Bris),  of  Cheops,  of  the  king  Senophris,  and  of  Ousrenre,  another 
monarch  of  the  same  line.  The  plates  in  M.  Laborde*s  works,  however, 
have  been  so  negligently  transcribed,  that  some  of  the  characters,  those 
particularly  in  a  group  below  the  hawk,  are  quite  unintelligible ;  but  at 
all  events  it  is  clear  that  they  do  not  describe  the  royal  standard  found 
at  Abouseir. 

MIDDLE  PYRAMID. 

Fig.  F.  These  hieroglyphics  apparently  contain  the  title  Souten  Rash 
or  Rokh,  "  Royal  tutor,  orator,  or  guardian,**  followed  by  the  symbols 
of  '*  abode  "  or  ^*  palace ;"  and  the  title  is  repeated  twice  upon  a  block 
on  the  exterior,  but  the  hieroglyphics  are  not  clear.  The  initial  signs 
are  possibly  the  same  as  the  title  following  those  of  Cheops.9 

Fig.  O,  was  found  upon  a  block  on  the  exterior.  It  cannot  be  com- 
pletely deciphered,  but  it  seems  to  signify  mahe  to  go.  (?) 

Fig.  H.  The  symbol  Noub,  **gold,"  is  on  a  large  block  from  the 
quarries  at  Tourah,  which  had  formed  part  of  the  roof  of  the  Great 
Chamber,  and  it  is  the  only  inscription  found  on  that  kind  of  stone. 

Fig.  J,  occurs  several  times,  and  appears  to  refer  to  the  abode  of  the 
living  moderator  {the  monarch). 

Fig.  K,  is  a  quarry-mark  on  a  casing-stone  somewhat  similar  to  that 
already  cited.  It  is  also  imperfect  The  dates  of  the  year  and  of  the 
month  (which  without  doubt  it  originally  contained)  at  present  do  not 

appear.    The  fragment  is  as  follows :  " the  ninth  dag  of  {the 

king)  Re-ousr  { Ousr-re) ever ......"     It  is  extraordinary  in  this 

inscription  that  the  cartouche  of  the  king  is  rectangular,  and  that  the 
characters  are  inscribed  in  the  figure,  which  usually  expresses  ''  abode, 
residence ;  **  but,  as  it  is  preceded  by  a  date,  it  may  be  concluded  that 
the  name  of  the  monarch  is  intended,  and  not  "  abode  **  or  "  edifice.** 

Fig.  L,  is  upon  a  block  on  the  exterior.  It  contains,  in  unusually 
large  characters,  two  phonetic  groups  —  CAJLC-OOCp,  *'  the  great 
minister.** 

These  characters  are  written  in  a  careless  linear  style.  The  sense  is 
not  distinct,  but  as  they  express  (like  the  inscription  fig.  O)  ''  made  to 

go  to *'  they  were  probably  directions  to  the  workmen  for  the 

position  of  the  blocks. 

°  Operations  carried  on  at  Giceh^  Vol.  I.  p,  283,  and  Middle  Pyramid. 


APPENDIX.  25 

It  may  here  be  remarked,  that  prenomens  occasionally  admit  of  slight 
variations  in  their  forms,  which  in  some  instances  are  only  complements 
of  shortened  or  abbreviated  expressions.  Thus  the  prenomen  of  Thoth- 
mes  the  Third  is  written  with  three  or  four  different  symbols :  with  a 
disk,  a  sort  of  basket,  and  a  beetle,  or  with  an  undulating  line  after  the 
basket.  The  prenomen  in  the  Middle  Pyramid  at  Abouseir  may  there- 
fore be  the  same  as  that  at  Wady  Magara,  which  contains  tlie  undulat- 
ing line  after  the  disk,  and  either  expresses,  Reenousr  **  the  sun  of 
vigilance,^'  according  to  M.  Rosellini,  or  Ousr-enre,  "  the  strength  of 
the  sun^**  according  to  my.  system.  The  same  name  was  found  at  the 
Pyramid  of  Reegah ;  and  it  will  therefore  appear  that  the  sculptures  at 
Wady  Magara,  the  inscriptions  at  Abouseir  and  at  Reegah,  and  those  in 
the  plate  headed  the  Pyramids,  in  Mr.  Burton's  ''  Excerpta  Hier."  refer 
to  the  same  monarch. 

At  Wady  Magara  the  king  is  represented  without  any  attendant 
deities,  in  a  similar  manner  to  the  king  Shore  before  described.  The 
inscription  at  Wady  Magara  gives  the  usual  Pharaonic  titles  and  epithets 
— *^Horus  the  strength  of  the  world,  the  giver  of  life  for  ever;  the 
gracious  god,  the  lord  of  the  world,  the  hing  of  the  upper  and  lower 
regions,  seated  in  all  lands ;  the  divine  resplendent  Hawk  of  gold, 
Ousrenre,  the  giver  of  life  for  ever  s  the  gracious  god  Ousrenre,  esta^ 
blished  in  all  lands.** ^  Before  the  standard  is  a  large  vase  of  libations, 
inscribed  with  the  name  and  titles  of  '*  the  king  Ousrenre,  giver  of  life, 
power,  of  dilated  heart  for  ever.** 

The  above-mentioned  name  likewise  appears  on  a  tomb  near  the 
Ninth  Pyramid  of  Gizeh,  and  it  is  therefore  connected  with  the  successors 
of  the  line  of  Cheops. 

These  documents  comprise  all  that  is  at  present  known  about  the 
reign  of  this  early  monarch,  for  a  similar  cartouche  in  the  Tablet  of 
Karnac  cannot  be  ascribed  to  him,  for  reasons  which  will  hereafter  be 
given. 

My  opinion  of  the  comparative  antiquity  of  the  Northern  Pyramid  of 
Abouseir  is  founded  upon  an  inscription.  No.  5  in  Plate  XXVII.  of 
Mr.  Burton's  ^'  Excepta  Hier.,"  which  was  discovered  near  the  Pyramids 
of  Gizeh,  and  has  been  apparently  copied  from  a  tablet  in  the  interior  of 
a  tomb.  It  represents  a  man  named  Otai,  seated  before  a  table  or  stand, 
with  a  peculiar  reed-shaped  top.  The  writing  upon  the  area  refers 
to  an  offering,  which  consists  of  a  quantity  of  wine,  bread,  Sec.  Before 
the  figure  of  Otai  is  the  following  inscription  in  three  horizontal  lines 
of  large  hieroglyphics: — "  An  offering  to  Anoup  {Anubis),  resident  in 

'  The  standard  of  Ousrenre  is  also  published  by  M.  Rosellini,  *'  Men. 
Stor."  T.  III.  Tav.  I.  p.  46.  It  is  analogous  to  that  of  Shore.  It  differs  from 
M.  Laborde,  "  Voyage  de  TArabie  Petree,"  fol.  Paris,  1830,  p.  71.  M.  Rosel- 
lini does  not  give  M.  Laborde's  copy,  but  recites  a  Dr.  Ricci*s. 


26  APPENDIX. 

the  divine  abode,  (may  he  give)^  a  good  and  great  embalmment  in  the 

Amenti  and  in  the  west,  to  the  all  true  and  devoted  to  his  lord 

an  abode  well  provided  for  him attached  to  the  bards,  delighting^ 

his  lord  with  his  strains,  excellent  in the  great  abode  of  the  god 

Ra,   of  Athor  the  pure  goddess, Nofrekare   the  pure  god,^ 

Shou-re  the  pure  god,  Ousrenre  the  pure  god,  Otai*^  In  No.  3  in 
the  above-mentioned  Plate,  the  same  title  follows  the  cartouche  as  in 
No.  5.  This  title  has  been  already  mentioned  in  the  *'  Operations  carried 
on  at  Gizeh/'  Vol.  H.  p.  9.  In  No.  5,  Otai  is  represented  to  have  been 
a  bard  under  the  kings  Nofrekare,  Shou-re,  and  Ousrenre:  the  pre- 
cedence of  these  monarchs  is  therefore  ascertained.  Their  names,  how- 
ever do  not  appear  in  the  only  copy  of  the  Hieratic  Canon  of  Turin ,^  to 
which  I  have  had  access,  neither  is  their  relative  position  with  the  dynasty 
of  Cheops  determined.  It  is,  however,  necessary  to  mention  that  in  the 
restoration  of  Renofre,  the  two  arms  signifying  Ka,  are  wanting,  and  that 
Nofre-ka-re,  therefore,  and  Nepercheres,  although  highly  probable,  are 
not  positively  established  ;  that  the  phonetic  value  of  the  central  sign  in 
the  cartouche  of  Shou-re,  and  of  the  initial  signs  of  Ousrenre,  is  not 
exactly  determined,  although  the  latter  has  been  supposed  to  be  '^  ou ;" 
besides  that  the  list  of  £ratosthenes  consists  chiefly  of  names,  and  that 
the  prenomen  Ousrenre  is  apparently  connected  with  prenomens  totally 
distinct  from  that  of  Nepercheres,  so  that  it  may  be  supposed  that 
different  monarchs  had  the  same  prenomen.  But  the  most  probable 
solution  of  these  difficulties  seems  to  be  afforded  by  the  lists  of  Manetho, 
where,  in  the  fifth  Elephantine  dynasty,  immediately  succeeding  to  that 
of  Cheops,  the  first  three  names  are  Usercheres,  Sephres,  and  Neper- 
cheres,^ which,  if  inverted,  would  greatly  resemble  the  three  in  ques- 
tion ;  and  their  era,  immediately  afler  the  Memphite  dynasty,  would 
coincide  with  the  probable  date  of  these  buildings.  It  may  be  also 
remarked,  that  there  is  no  evidence  to  shew  that  any  of  the  Pyramids 

'The  parts  between  brackets  are  restored  from  contemporaneous  mo- 
numents. 

'  The  phonetic  group  expressing  this  has  been  translated  by  M.  Cham- 
poUion,  to  be  "  morose,"  CoDCOJJUL  or  Ulcoau.  of  the  Coptic;  but  the 
correction  is  evident  from  the  context. 

*The  term  "ka"  (offering)  is  wanting  in  the  inscription;  there  can, 
however,  be  scarcely  a  doubt  with  regard  to  it.  Wilkinson^s  "  Manners  and 
Customs  of  the  Egyptians,"  Vol.  III.  p.  280,  gives  the  cartouche  in  its  full  form. 

*  By  M.  Dulaurier,  of  Thoulouse.  The  liberality  of  the  Sardinian  govern- 
ment has  allowed  Dr.  Lepsius  a  copy  for  his  own  use, 

•  Rosellini,  "  Mon.  Stor."  Tom.  I.  PL  I.  p.  28.  According  to  this  analogy, 
Usercheres  would  be  Ousr-ka-re,  not  Ousrenre.  That  the  name  of  Chnumis, 
or  Chnouphis,  the  tutelary  deity  of  Elephantine,  appears  in  the  cartouche  of 
Cheops  at  the  Great  Pyramid,  would  induce  a  belief  that  the  then  reigning 
dynasty  received  its  title  from  that  island. 


APPENDIX.  27 

were  constructed  later  than  the  eighteenth  dynasty,  but  that  they  appear, 
on  the  contrary,  to  have  been  erected  before  the  invasion  of  the  Shepherd 
Kings.  At  the  same  time  it  must  be  confessed,  that,  from  their  situation, 
these  tombs  cannot,  without  some  hesitation,  be  ascribed  to  an  Elephan- 
tine dynasty,  because  the  sepulchres  belonging  to  the  Memphite,  the 
Theban,  and  the  Saite  dynasties,  have  been  generally  found  near  the 
respective  capitals,  whence  the  monarchs  derived  their  names,  and  con- 
sequently, that  the  island  of  that  name  might  be  supposed  to  have 
contained  the  tombs  of  the  Elephantine  Kings.  But  the  similarity  of  the 
names  is  at  all  events  remarkable ;  and  it  is  possible  that  the  succeeding 
monarchs  may  have  occasionally  retained  the  name  of  the  town,  whence 
the  founder  of  the  dynasty  derived  his  origin,  without  reference  to  their 
own  actual  residence,  or  capital  city.  By  adopting  a  correction  proposed 
by  the  ingenious  criticism  of  the  Chevalier  Bunsen,  and  by  striking  out 
the  name  of  Soris  as  an  interpolation,  Suphis  L  (Cheops  or  Chemmis) 
will  be  the  founder  of  the  fourth  Memphite  dynasty ;  and  he  is  expressly 
mentioned  by  Diodorus  to  have  been  an  inhabitant  of  Memphis,  and  by 
Eratosthenes,  to  have  extended  his  authority  over  Thebes,  in  Upper 
Egypt  Memphis  was,  most  probably,  at  that  epoch,  the  metropolis  of 
Egypt,  and  continued  to  be  so  till  the  invasion  of  the  Shepherd  Kings ; 
after  which,  on  account  of  political  circumstances,  it  was  supplanted  by 
Abydos  and  by  Thebes,  when  the  latter  city,  embellished  by  Remeses  the 
Great  (styled  the  King  of  Kings),  surpassed  probably  the  antient  capital, 
and  continued  to  be  the  seat  of  empire  till  the  epoch  of  the  Ptolemies, 
and  was  even  then  inferior  only  to  Alexandria.  On  these  grounds  it 
may  be  presumed  that  the  Elephantine  Kings  constructed  their  tombs  of 
a  similar  shape  and  grandeur  to  those  of  their  predecessors,  and 
established  them  upon  the  rocky  eminences,  already  consecrated  for  that 
purpose  by  former  dynasties,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  their  actual 
residence. 

The  succession  of  these  monarchs  has  indeed  been  stated  in  a  dif- 
ferent manner  by  M.  Rosellini  from  memory,  and  also  by  Sir  J.  G.  Wil- 
kinson,7  but,  as  in  their  lists  the  names  are  unconnected,  and  given  upon 
inadequate  authority,  they  cannot  without  further  evidence  be  admitted. 
Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson,  indeed,  seems  to  have  been  aware  of  these  dif- 
ficulties, for  in  p.  507  of  his  work  on  Thebes,  and  General  View  of 
Egypt,  he  says, — '*  But  I  offer  this  table  with  great  deference,  and  shall 
willingly  yield  to  any  opinion,  that  may  be  established  on  more  positive 
and  authentic  grounds."  It  is  indeed  obvious  that  the  regular  succession 
of  these  antient  monarchs  cannot  be  established  solely  upon  the  authority 
of  monuments,  in  different  parts  of  which  isolated  names  may  have  been 

^  Manners  and  Customs,  Vol.  III.  p.  280.  This  ingenious  and  highly 
talented  author,  who  has  done  so  much  for  Egyptian  archceology,  says  they 
are  placed  in  chronological  order.  This  succession  would  give  Nouv-Shouf 
(Cheops),  Shore  (Sephres),  Nofre-er-kare  (Nepercheres). 


28  APPENDIX. 

occasionally  inserted.  This  indeed  ^I  have  already  alluded  to  (see 
"  Operations  carried  on  at  Gizeh,"  Vol.  II.  pp.  7  and  8),  where  it  will 
appear  that  the  most  antient  monarch  is  last  mentioned.  And  in  support 
of  tlie  assertion  that  the  names  of  individuals  were  frequently  composed 
of  those  of  kings,  I  refer  to  a  paper  forwarded  by  me  to  the  Society  of 
Antiquaries,^  in  which  the  names  of  the  children  of  an  official  character 
are  composed,  amongst  other  symbols,  of  the  prenomen  of  the  reigning 
monarch.  This  custom  seems  to  have  been  universally  prevalent,  and 
the  traces  of  it,  if  carefully  investigated,  may  occasionally  throw  con* 
siderable  light  upon  the  individuals  of  the  antient  dynasties.  I  do  not, 
however,  positively  insist,  from  the  slight  analogy  of  their  names,  that 
these  monarchs  belonged  to  the  fifth  Elephantine  dynasty;  but  at  the 
same  time  I  must  observe,  that  the  tables  hiUierto  published  are  not  only 
at  variance  with  the  inscription  in  the  tomb  (called  of  Trades)  at  Gizeh, 
but  likewise  with  those  contained  in  Mr.  Burton's  "  Excerpta  Hier.," 
both  of  which  are  corroborated  by  the  context,  by  certain  connecting 
links  between  the  several  kings  founded  upon  an  analogy  of  the  names 
and  title9  of  various  functionaries,  and  upon  the  tenor  of  several  inscrip- 
tions relating  to  the  monarchs  in  question  at  Wady  Magara,  and  also 
near  the  Pyramids  of  Gizeh.  I  must  likewise  add,  that  the  appearance 
of  the  same  names  at  Wady  Magara  seems  to  shew,  that  these  monarchs 
preceded  the  conquest  of  Egypt  by  the  Shepherd  Kings,  because  none  of 
the  persons  belonging  to  the  subsequent  dynasties,  who  were  driven  by 
these  invaders  into  Upper  Egypt,  are  there  recorded. 

Another  reference  to  a  king  Ousrenre,  but  which  cannot  possibly 
apply  to  the  monarch  mentioned  at  Abouseir,  is  contained  in  two  inscrip- 
tions, which  were  published  by  Dr.  Lepsius,  and  afterwards  by  M.  Rosel- 
lini,9  and  were  found  upon  a  statue  sent  by  the  former  gentleman  to  the 
Museum  at  Berlin.  They  contain  a  dedication  by  a  Pharaoh,  supposed 
to  be  Osortasen  the  First,  to  his  father,  Ousrenre,  or  Eian ;  and  it  is  to 
be  remarked,  that  the  word  ''  father,'*  a  general  expression,  is  not 
followed  by  the  pronoun  <*  him,**  or  "  his,**  but  by  the  seated  image  of  a 
king,  and  that  the  name,  as  well  as  the  prenomen,  is  preceded  by  a 
branch  and  by  a  bee,  which  have  hitherto  been  supposed  only  to  precede 
prenomens.  It  can  be  satisfactorily  proved,  however,  that  prenomens 
were  made  use  of  before  the  sixteenth  dynasty,  and  the  one  in  question 
is  similar  to  that  found  at  Abouseir,  except  in  the  substitution  of  an 
eye  for  a  mouth  in  expressing  the  letter  R,  and  in  the  insertion  at  the 
bottom  of  the  cartouche  of  an  undulating  line  (phonetically  signifying  N). 
By  comparing  the  inscription  on  the  statue  with  the  Tablet  at  Karnac,  in 
which  a  king  named  Re-en-ous,^  Ousenre  (probably  an  abbreviated  form 

•  ArchiDologia,  Vol.  XXIX.  p.  113,  pi.  XIV.  fig.  B,  C. 

•  Rosellini,  "  Men.  Stor."  Tom.  III.  PI.  I.  p.  46. 

'  Burton,  "  Excerpta  Hier."  PL  I.*  Tablet  of  Kamac. 


APPENDIX.  29 

of  Ousrenre),  is  placed  before  two  kings,  whose  prenomens  are  almost 
similar  in  construction  and  in  meaning  to  his  own.  It  is  to  be  con- 
cluded that  the  next  king  in  succession,  namely  Osortasen  the  First,  had 
been  preceded  upon  the  throne  by  two  relations  or  brothers ;  although 
the  succession^  of  Kamac  does  not  coincide  with  the  list  copied  in 
Mr.  Burton's  '<  Excerpta  Hier."  from  the  tombs  at  Gizeh. 

The  Tablet  at  Kamac  has  not  been  satisfactorily  explained.  The 
Ousrenre  recorded  in  it,  although  the  same  as  that  on  the  Berlin  Statue, 
is  evidently  distinct  from  the  Ousrenre  of  the  Pyramids.  The  standard 
of  the  older  king  seems  to  have  been  more  correctly  given  by  M.  Laborde, 
than  by  M.  Rosellini.  In  both  instances  it  commences,  like  that  of 
Shou-re,with  the  word  "Tosh,"  or  "Tokh;"  and  the  copyofM.  La- 
borde <  contains  the  epithet      |  I    _ CVCp-XOXO,  "regulating 

the  upper  and  lower  countries,'^  instead  of  the     III      of  M.  Rosellini.' 


The  dynasty  of  Cheops  probably  preceded  that  of  the  Osortasens  by  a 
much  less  space  of  time  than  the  lists  of  Manetho  hint  The  analogy  of 
this  title  with  the  names  of  the  Osortasens  is  remarkable ;  but  nothing 
has  been  satisfactorily  made  out  before  the  time  of  Amasis :  indeed,  the 
arrangement  of  the  seventeenth  dynasty  seems  to  be  entirely  conjectural. 
It  is,  in  short,  impossible  to  establish  a  distinct  and  satisfactory  account 
of  the  succession  and  names  of  the  early  dynasties  without  more  com- 
plete and  connected  information,  than  has  yet  been  attained,  and  also 
without  a  more  intimate  knowledge  of  the  language  and  method  of  com- 
munication, than  has  been  at  present  acquired.  For,  although  it  may  be 
reasonably  expected  that  the  hieroglyphical  documents  already  procured 
—some  of  which  are  bilingual,  and  others  Gnostic  rituals,  apparently 
containing  the  elements  of  more  antient  writings — may  eventually  afford 
the  means  of  arriving  at  the  most  satisfactory  results,  yet,  in  the  mean 
time,  it  is  evident  that  perplexity  and  doubt  are  inevitably  increased  by 
premature  and  rash  conclusions,  unsupported  by  facts,  and  incapable  of 
proof.  To  arrive  at  any  certainty  respecting  these  successive  dynasties, 
it  is  necessary  to  compare  the  various  inscriptions  respecting  them,  and 
fully  to  comprehend  their  expressions  and  meaning.  In  this  way  alone 
can  any  positive  knowledge  of  these  curious  and  interesting  particulars 
be  obtained.  All  other  statements,  however  ingeniously  imagined,  must 
be  entirely  hypothetical ;  and  in  adverting  to  the  difficulties  attending 

'  Laborde,  "  Voyage,"  &c.  loc.  cit. 

'  Rosellini,  "  Men.  Stor."  Tom.  III.  loc.  cit.  It  apparently  means  the 
*' strength  of  the  two  worlds,"  or  "  having  power  over  the  two  worlds,"  the 
ambiguity  being  in  the  word  CVCp,  which  may  be  taken  either  as  a  verb  or 
substantive. 


30  APPENDIX. 

this  inquiry,  it  may  also  be  observed,  that  the  whole  of  the  characters 
contained  in  a  cartouche  are  not  always  to  be  considered  as  phonetic,  but 
that,  probably  by  a  license  incidental  to  a  mixed  mode  of  writing,  they 
are  partly  syllabic,  and  partly  phonetic ;  and  likewise,  that  the  charac- 
ters are  usually  inserted  in  the  cartouches,  so  as  to  please  the  eye 
rather  than  to  follow  the  connexion  of  the  pronunciation.  The  necessity 
for  inversion  in  order  to  make  out  the  prenomens  of  the  more  antient 
monarchs  seems  to  be  clearly  proved  by  a  reference  to  the  lists  of  Ma- 
netho,  by  the  texts  themselves,  and  also  by  the  explanation  of  the  name 
of  Menka-re,  as  well  as  of  those  of  the  monarchs  found  at  the  Pyramids 
of  Abouseir.  These  instances  must  therefore  be  held  in  remembrance  by 
those  persons,  who  undertake  the  explanation  of  hieroglyphical  inscrip- 
tions. In  alphabetical  languages  a  metathesis  of  the  syllables  of  a  word 
cannot  take  place ;  but  in  symbolical  languages  it  is  frequently  used. 
Thus,  in  the  Chinese,  the  radicals,  or  elementary  characters,  which 
answer  to  the  class  known  in  hieroglyphics  by  the  name  of  determina- 
tives, occasionally  appear  above,  below,  or  at  the  side  of  the  specific 
elements,  without  making  any  alteration  in  the  character,  because  their 
ideographic  meaning  is  not  affected  by  position.  In  the  same  manner, 
in  that  language,  the  relative  locations  of  the  words  are  frequently  over- 
looked. Thus,  what  expresses  "  man-hand^**  or  "  hand-man^^^  equally 
means  ''  mans  hand"  or  "  hand  of  man,**  The  same  principles  apply 
to  Egyptian  hieroglyphics,  and  probably  for  the  same  reason  —  that  the 
whole  system  is  throughout  ideophonetic,  or  of  ideal  sound.  The  car- 
touche, for  example,  of  Re-nofre-ka,  or  Nofre-ka-re,  contains  three 
elements,  every  one  of  which  is  the  image  of  an  idea  intended  to  be 
described.  The  circular  disc  indicates  a  sun,  pronounced  Ra  in  the 
Memphite,  and  Re  in  the  Saidic  dialect;  the  guitar,  taken  phonetically, 
stands  for  the  letter  N  only  when  the  idea  ** good"  is  to  be  expressed. 
The  two  uplifted  hands,  signifying  Ka,  or  an  offering,  were  exclusively 
used  during  the  best  epoch  of  Egyptian  art,  to  express  "  bearing f**  or 
'* offering r  as  Ka,  ''to  offer;'*  Kot,  ''to  bear"  or  "build/'  &c. 
Each  symbol  in  the  above  name  is,  consequently,  emblematic  as  well  as 
phonetic,  its  relation  to  sound  not  being  greater  than  to  idea ;  and  the 
whole  group  may  be  supposed  to  signify,  either  "  the  good  offering  of 
the  sun"  "good  in  offering  to  the  sun"  or  "  the  sun  good  in  offer- 
ing ;"  and  may,  with  great  probability,  be  assumed  to  form  Nofre-ka-re, 
which  resembles  the  name  of  the  monarch  Nepercheres  in  the  lists  of 
Manetho. 

M.  Lenormant^  has  not  only  translated  my  account  of  the  coffin  of 
Mycerinus,  as  1  have  already  remarked,  but  he  has  entered  into  consi- 

^Lenormant  (Ch.),  "  Eclairc.  snr  le  Cercueil  de  Mycerinus/'  4to.  Paris, 
1899,  pp.  87-4^9  has  been  the  first  to  publicly  recognise  Shore  and  Nofre- 
ka-re. 


APPENDIX.  31 

derable  detail  respecting  the  transposition  of  the  symbols,  which  had 
been  also  adopted  by  two  Egyptian  scholars — M.  Rosellini  and  Dr. 
Leemans,  although  by  these  gentlemen  it  has  been  limited  to  two  names ; 
by  the  one  to  Shou-re,  and  by  the  other  to  Merenre.  M.  Champollion 
does  not  seem  to  have  entertained  this  opinion,  excepting  in  the  cartouche 
of  the  god  Chnouphra ;  but  the  placing  the  dominant  disc  of  the  sun  last 
is  justified  by  a  reference  to  the  lists  of  Manetho,  and  by  the  inscriptions 
themseWes.  The  analogy  of  the  names .  obtained  by  this  transposition 
has  been  amply  and  accurately  detailed  by  M.  Lenormant;  it  is  there- 
fore unnecessary  to  say  more  upon  the  subject,  except  by  pressing  it 
most  strongly  upon  the  attention  of  those  who  are  engaged  in  the  inves* 
tigation  of  these  antient  characters. 

The  prenomens  assumed  by  the  Egyptian  monarchs  upon  their  acces- 
sion, which  were  generally  inscribed  in  ovals,  preceded  by  the  bee  and 
branch,  had  most  frequently  a  reference  to  the  sun,  generally  in  an 
active,  but  occasionally  in  a  passive  sense.  The  Tablet  at  Abydos  con- 
sists almost  entirely  of  prenomens ;  but  that  from  Kamac  comprehends 
likewise,  several  of  the  names  of  the  monarchs,  together  with  their  pre- 
nomens, as  may  be  seen  in  those  of  the  Enentefs.  The  Hieratical  Canon 
of  Turin  contains  indiscriminately  names  and  prenomens ;  and  the  Greek 
compilers,  who  no  doubt  derived  their  information  from  similar  monu- 
ments, have  also  inserted  in  their  lists  both  prenomens  and  names.  In 
the  same  manner  several  of  the  kings  of  China  are  as  frequently  distin- 
guished in  the  annals  of  that  country  by  the  ''neen  haou,"  or  honorific 
name  assumed  during  their  lives,  as  by  the  *'  meaou  haou,"  or  appellation 
of  honour  after  death.  Such  ambiguities  will  naturally  take  place  where 
different  titles  are  used  ;  and  the  insertion,  in  antient  inscriptions,  of  one 
name  in  preference  to  the  other,  most  probably  arose  from  temporary 
circumstances,  which  cannot  now  be  ascertained. 

It  must,  however,  be  confessed,  that  the  propriety  of  this  transposi- 
tion of  the  disc  must  depend  upon  the  construction  of  the  sentence,  and 
upon  the  meaning  of  the  accompanying  symbols,  as  may  be  seen  by  an 
analysis  of  the  following  royal  names,  particularly  by  that  in  a  cartouche 
attributed  to  Amenemses  by  M.  Rosellini,^  the  eight  characters  of  which, 
if  read  as  they  are  inscribed,  will  give — **  Tke  sun  established  like^  the 
sun  approved  of;"  but,  as  the  three  final  symbols  in  the  latter  part  are, 
by  transposition,  well  known  to  mean  "  approved  of  the  sun^*  by  a  simi- 
lar process  the  first  five  characters  will  likewise  express  "  established  like 
I  the  sun ;"  and  the  transposition  is  in  this  case  evidently  necessary,  for  a 

,  king  cannot  be  consistently  styled  *'  the  sun,**  and  at  the  same  time  *'  the 

approved  of  the  sun"^    The  meaning,  therefore,  of  the  first  part  of  the  . 
I 

*  Rosellini,  "  Men.  Stor."  Vol.  II.  No.  126. 

*  In  ^'Ammian.  Marcellin."  lib.  xvii.  the  Pharaoh  is  never  called  the 
iun,  and  the  son  of  the  sun^  but  Apollo,  and  the  son  of  the  sun,    The  parts 


82  APPENDIX. 

sentence,  evidently  requires  that  the  symbol  expressing  the  sun  should  be 
read  last.  The  first  part  of  a  sentence  can  admit  of  inversion  with  as 
much  propriety  as  the  last ;  and  it  is  well  known  that  the  Pharaohs  were 
frequently  termed  "  Givers  of  life,  like  the  sun,  for  ever ;"  <*  Lords 
of  the  panegyrics  (or  festivals),  like  their  father  PhiahJ"^  In  this  car- 
touche then  at  least,  every  symbol  can  be  satisfactorily  made  out,  and 
it  is  certain  that  the  dominant  disc  of  the  sun  must  be  put  last. 

In  another  cartouche,  published  by  M.  Rosellini,  as  belonging  to 
Remeses  the  Eighth,  the  characters,  as  they  are  placed,  read — ^'  The 
sun,  the  guardian  of  truth  i*  ^*  Amoun,  the  light  of ^^  or  ^^illuminated 
by,"  Here  again  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  text  must  mean  "  The 
sun,  the  guardian  of  truth,  the  light  of  Amoun.**  An  important  tablet 
in  the  British  Museum  gives  the  entire  solution  of  this  passage,  **  The 
disc  of  the  sun  at  Thebes  Amon.**  The  cartouche,  containing  a  preno- 
men  wherein  the  monarch  is  personified  as  "  The  king  of  the  upper  and 
lower  world,  the  sun,'*  &c,  must  be  considered  to  be  his  sacred  name ; 
and  the  second,  in  which  he  is  styled  ''  The  son  of  the  sun,"  was  proba- 
bly his  common  appellation,  in  reference  to  his  deification,  as  ''  The 
gracious  god,  the  good  god,  the  living  gracious  god,  the  living  Hor," 
&c, :  epithets  frequently  inscribed  upon  the  monuments  of  the  Pharaohs. 
It  may  also  be  observed,  that  an  examination  of  the  hieroglyphics 
upon  the  coffin  of  Amyrteeus  (?)  in  the  British  Museum,  No.  10,  will 
prove  that  the  object  of  the  sculpture  was  to  declare  that  the  deities 
would  make  the  same  adorations,  and  perform  the  same  offices  to  the 
deceased  monarch,  which  they  did  to  the  sun  in  its  course.  This 
mode  of  expression  is,  however,  only  found  upon  the  monuments  of 
actual  monarchs. 

The  prenomen  in  the  cartouche  (No.  69  of  M.  Roselltni's  **  Monu- 
menti  Storici'*)^  also  contains  "  the  disc  the  light  of"  The  prenomen 
(No.  108)  is  preceded  by  the  titles  **  The  son  of  the  sun,  living  in 
truth"  and  contains  **  the  sun  the  light  of,  the  sun  approved  of ;"  which 
of  course  means  "  the  light  of  the  sun,  the  approved  of  the  sun"  Two 
other  cartouches,  which  are  inserted  between  those  of  Ousenr-re  and 
Osortasen  I.  in  the  Tablet  of  Kamac,  contain  ''  the  sun  render  victorious 
rf"  or  "  by,"  and  **  the  sun  render  powerful  of"  or  **by,"  which  should 
no  doubt  be  read  "  the  rendered  victorious  by  the  sun  ;"  **  the  rendered 
powerful  by  the  sun"    In  No.  14  also  of  M.  Rosellini,  ''  the  sun, 

in  cartouches  appear  to  be  Iv  "HXi«f  itfttn^suf  auJ  ''A^f  Hxjuuh  llw^rm**,  &c. ;  but 
this  transcript  is  partly  corrupt.  The  name  of  Sesostris  has  originated  from 
some  such  adjunct.  Sesoosis,  a  variation  of  it,  approaches  Shaa  en  shaou, 
similar  to  the  Saa  en  saa  of  the  Persian  rulers.  Mr.  Osbume  has  suggested 
that  Sapt-en-re  are  the  final  symbols  of  his  name. 
^  Rosetta  stone,  Greek  text.    Monuments /MiMim. 

. '  Dr.  Leemans's  '*  Monumens  Egypt.''  8vo.  Leide^  1838,  reads  this  name 
**  ItenbashUi  Apaclman.(?)''    The  transposition  gives  Oubasheniten, 


APPENDIX.  33 

attached  o/,"  or  "  beloved  of**  or  •*  6y,*'  signifies,  in  like  manner,  "  the 
attached  (or  beloved)  of  the  sun,**  These  characters,  considered  pho- 
netically, produce  "  Snashtenre^*  "  Merenre,**  which  are  of  the  same 
construction  with  some  names  in  the  lists  of  Manetho. 

In  all  these  instances  the  proper  position  of  the  characters  is  indi- 
cated by  the  closing  pronoun,  and  by  the  evident  meaning  of  the  sen- 
tences. In  the  name  of  Thothmes  I.  there  is  an  adjunct ^  similar  to  those 
which  frequently  accompany  royal  names  upon  scarabeei,  and  small 
amulets.  The  characters  Shaa,  **  crowned  f**  or  ^^  elevated;*  Re,  "  Mc 
sun  ;*'  She,  '*  like^*  should  be  read  Shaa  she  re,  '^  crowned  like  the  sun^** 
according  to  the  transposition  adopted  in  Honshere,^  one  of  the  most 
familiar  names  in  Egyptian  archaeology.  The  other  names,  Nepercheres 
and  Shore,  are  not  so  completely  determined,  because  in  these  words  the 
characters  admit  of  different  readings.  In  the  same  manner  Re-metaou-en 
may  be  Metaouenre,^  like  the  Ousr-Ra,  or  Rauosis,'  Princeps  Robusto- 
rum  of  Eratosthenes.  Re-mei-ophth  (No.  56)  may  be  Meiophthres,  or 
Miophris;  and  in  the  various  lists,  "  Re-mour-ka,"  Mourcheres;  '<  Re- 
ka-mei,"  Moicheres.  But  these  names  cannot  be  depended  upon,  as  they 
have  been  assumed  upon  no  other  authority  than  by  a  reference  to  Mane- 
tho. In  many  of  the  royal  names  the  dominant  disc  of  the  sun  seems 
to  designate  the  celestial  functions  of  semi-deified  monarchs;  yet  in 
many  others  it  may  serve  to  represent,  in  the  person  of  the  king,  some 
faculty,  or  power  of  that  great  luminary. 

The  transposition  of  syllables  should  be  carefully  applied  to  doubtful 
names,  by  which  alone  its  value  can  be  ascertained.  Many  other 
instances,  besides  those  already  mentioned,  might  be  adduced ;  but  an 
effectual  examination  of  them  would  require  a  greater  space  than  can  be 
afforded  in  these  observations,  which  are  intended  more  especially  to 
illustrate  the  quarry-marks  of  the  Pyramids  at  Abouseir. 

From  a  consideration  of  royal  names  I  proceed  to  those  of  inferior 
persons,  which  have  been  found  near  the  Great  Pyramid  at  Abouseir, 
and  which,  it  is  to  be  remarked,  in  some  instances  have  been  written  in 
black,  and  not  in  the  usual  red  colour.  Three  of  these  inscriptions 
contain  dates,  which  from  analogy  might  be  supposed  to  have  been 
followed  by  royal  names ;  but  this  has  not  been  the  case. 

*  Rosellini,  "  Men.  Stor."  Tom.  I.  Part  I.  tav.  V.  100  n.  pp.  212,  218, 
and  n.  2. 

1  Ibid.  Tom.  I.  Part  I.  p.  271.  Vide  Dissertation,  by  Dr.  Lepsius,  on 
the  same  statue,  in  the  Proc.  of  the  Arch.  Inst,  of  Rome. 

*  Rauosis  may  be  an  inversion  of  Ousra,  from  reading  the  cartouche 
directly.  Leemans's  reading  is  incorrect,  and  Segato's  scarcely  worth  criti- 
cising.—  ^'Mon.  Egypt,  port,  des  L^gendes  Royales,**  p.  20.  Of.  Lenor- 
mant,  ''  Eclairciss.  de  I'lnscr.  sur  le  Cere,  du  Roi  Memphite  Mycerinus.** 

*  Where  a  cartouche  is  composed  of  the  disc  of  the  sun  and  an  adjective 
only,  it  may  be  read  directly. 

D 


34  APPENDIX. 

In  the  formula  of  dates  the  royal  titles,  or  those  inserted  in  the  stand- 
ard, generally  follow  the  cypher,  as  "  the  living  Horns**  &c.  The  first 
of  the  symbols  is  an  iSf,  the  second  possibly  a  reed,  but  the  third  and 
fourth  are  differently  represented;  as  in  one  instance  the  third  is  appa- 
rently the  upper  part  of  a  sieve,  and  the  fourth  a  mouth,  signifying  S  H 
and  R ;  while  in  the  other  they  are  decidedly  an  N  and  K :  the  last,  in 
both  cases,  is  the  symbol  of  life. 

A  similar  group  from  the  Middle  Pyramid  contains  three  symbols, 
then  an  indistinct  character,  afterwards  a  block  (phonetically,  P),  a 
basket,  a  diadem,  a  belt  upon  two  human  legs,  and  the  symbol  of  life. 
These  characters  I  cannot  satisfactorily  explain;  but  I  conceive  it 
just  possible  that  they  may  describe  the  title  of  some  great  official 
personage,  similar  to  those  conferred  upon  high  functionaries  under  the 
dynasty  of  the  Osortasens,  and  to  those  which  I  have  already  noticed  in 
my  observations  upon  the  quarry-marks  found  in  the  Great  Pyramid  of 
Gizeh.  And  this  supposition  is  rendered  more  probable  by  the  appear- 
ance of  a  group  beginning  with  a  jackal,  which  apparently  describes  a 
name.  I  only  know,  however,  one  name,  Eimothph,  beginning  with  a 
jackal,  and  that,  although  of  frequent  occurrence  at  the  time  of  the 
Ptolemies,  does  not  occur  at  an  earlier  period.  The  name,  however, 
cannot  be  made  out  in  the  present  instance. 

THE  GREAT  PYRAMID. 

Fig.  A,  contains  in  the  first  part  of  the  upper  line  a  date  in  the 
month  of  Mesore,  but  the  day  cannot  be  distinguished. 

According  to  the  usual  mode  in  which  dates  are  inserted,  these 
symbols  delineate  either  the  standard,  or  the  titles  of  the  king,  and  pho- 
netically signify  Ccyp  ;  but  they  are  too  imperfect  to  be  exactly 
explained,  although  it  may  be  conjectured,  that  the  lower  line  contains 
the  name  of  a  woman,  or  of  a  female  deity,  which  seems  to  be  represented 
in  B.  The  jackal  has  various  significations ;  sometimes  that  of  a  guard- 
ian (generally  sacerdotal),  at  others  of  a  son,  and  frequently,  when  com- 
bined with  other  characters,  of  the  name  of  the  god  Eimothph,  or 
Imouth ;  and  in  sepulchral  monuments  during  the  Ptolemaic  era,  and 
in  a  few  more  antient  a  jackal  precedes  in  the  name  of  the  above-men- 
tioned deity. 

B.  This  inscription  contains  a  date,  in  which  the  year,  the  month, 
and  the  day,  are  expressed ;  but  it  is  imperfect,  and  the  fourth  day  can 
only  be  distinguished.    The  other  characters  resemble  those  in  A,  C,  D. 

C.  These  characters  are  like  those  in  B.  They  are  inserted  in 
black,  and  with  bars  which  are  vertical,  and  therefore  unlike  those  in  A 
and  D,  which  are  horizontal.  A  fourth  month  is  recorded,  but,  as  the 
season  is  not  mentioned,  it  cannot  be  ascertained  whether  it  signifies 
Choiak,  Pharmuthi,  or  Mesore. 


APPENDIX.  35 

D.  The  upper  line  contains  a  portion  of  a  date,  viz.  ''  the  eighth  of 
Epiphi/'  the  third  month  of  the  last  Egyptian  season.  The  lower  line 
somewhat  resembles  A.  The  determinative  image  of  a  man  seated  upon 
a  chair  seems  to  indicate  that  these  two  lines  express  a  name.  The 
characters  are  not  perfectly  defined,  but  the  upper  line  contains  an 
inscription  similar  to  the  cartouche  of  a  king,  and  ends  with  three  pairs 
of  uplifted  hands,  preceded,  either  by  a  branch  (see  Champol.  "  Gram. 
Egypt.'*  p.  43,  n.  165),  or  else  by  the  symbol  {ibid,  p.  40,  n.  94) ;  and 
immediately  before  it  is  a  horizontal  line  and  a  parallelogram.  The 
lower  line  contains  the  expression  '*  Penti,"  and  the  symbol,  a  T,  initial 
of  Tot,  inserted  in  Champol.  '*  Gram.  Egypt.'*  p.  43,  n.  158.  It  is  also 
to  be  remarked,  that  a  name,  resembling  in  its  composition  the  one  in 
the  upper  line,  occurs  in  an  inscription  upon  a  tomb  found  at  Gizeh.  See 
Nos.  61  and  64,  Egyptian  Saloon,  in  the  British  Museum. 


The  following  is  the  substance  of  a  letter  from  Mr.  Harris  of 
Alexandria  to  Mr.  Perring,*  dated  April  18,  1839:  — 

I  promised  to  send  to  you  the  observations  that  had  occurred  to  me 
upon  examining  the  quarry-marks  which  you  found  upon  the  stones  of 
the  Pyramids  of  Abouseir.  The  interest  which  they  excite,  arises  from 
the  supposition,  that  these  writings,  being  directions  to  guide  those,  who 
embarked  the  stone  at  the  quarries,  who  conveyed  it  to  its  destination, 
and  who  built  with  it  when  there,  will  contain  a  more  matter-of-fact 
meaning  than  the  more  recondite  inscriptions  that  adorned  the  fabric 
after  it  was  ''  completed." 

Some  of  the  characters  evidently  indicate  the  building,  for  which  the 
stones  were  destined,  and  others  the  position,  in  which  they  were  to  be 
placed ;  this  last  direction  could  not  be  necessary  in  regard  to  all  the 
stones  of  a  building,  but  would  be  requisite  for  all,  or  most  of  those  com- 
posing the  linings  of  the  chambers,  passages,  &c.  the  angles,  and  other 
particular  positions. 

NORTHERN  PYRAMID. 

A.  Here  we  have  the  name  of  the  king,  for  whom  the  Pyramid  was 
probably  erected  as  a  tomb. 

The  position,  in  which  the  stone  was  to  be  placed,  seems  to  be  indi- 

^  fj^       75 

cated  by  the  marks    =  \***\  ^        B    the  meaning  of  which  it  would 

^» 

^  Mr.  Ferring  states  that  Mr.  Harris  has  lately  discovered  at  Alexandria, 
a  statue  of  Jupiter  Serapis,  which  has  been  broken  exactly  in  the  manner  de- 
scribed by  Mr.  Gibbon,  in  his  account  of  the  destruction  of  the  Temple,  a.  d. 
889.    See  Vol.  III.  p.  86,  chap.  28. 


36  APPENDIX. 

not  be  difficult  to  find  out  by  obserying  the  stones  in  their  respective 
places,  and  by  comparing  the  situation  of  others,  that  are  written  upon. 
B  has  the  name  only. 

C.  The  name  may  possibly  have  been  efiaced  or  cut  off,  if  the  stone 
required  any  fitting  on  the  spot. 

D.  Here  we  have  the  name  of  the  king  again,  but  in  another  form, 

whereby  we  learn  the  value  of  the  unknown  character  ^  ;  for 

is  the  splendid  Ra,  or  O  Ra,     ©   T    ^X^,  ^^         ^  equivalent 

to     a>    ,  tsh  or  thsh.  r-    COOT  or  T >^  Q   making 

Rathsho. 

This  group  looks  amazingly  as  if  two  brothers  or  two  sisters  were 
spoken  of.    There  are  two  hawks,  as  if  it  meant  two  kings ;  and  what 

follows  appears  like    -5^  X ^  I  ^    •  ^ *      ^^^    jf  ^^ 

signify  **  Brother-lovivg  T  and  by  the  same  rule  ^^^  would  be 
*«  Sister-lovingr  ^^""^^ 

The  fifth  king  of  the  fourth  dynasty  RhatoiseSj  and  Rau-osis,  and 
the  eleventh  king  of  the  eighteenth  dynasty,  is  called  Rathos^  Athoris, 
or  RathosiSy  all  of  which  names  bear  a  great  resemblance  to  the  one 
we  have  deciphered ;  but  I  am  of  opinion,  that  it  is  premature  to  begin 
to  class  these  names  before  a  sufficient  number  of  them  is  collected 
from  the  tombs,  and  their  relation  to  each  other  noticed.  To  pursue  the 
inquiry,  the  sand  ought  to  be  cleared  out  of  all  the  tombs  about  the 
Pyramids  of  Gizeh. 

What  follows  the  name,  I  do  not  pretend  to  understand,  but  the 
characters  in  the  lower  line  indicate  the  position,  as  in  A. 

MIDDLE  PYRAMID. 
F,  G,  1,  and  K,  I  must  pass  over. 
In  J  f)  jQ^    signifies  ''  to  make  live" 

-<^    is  a  verb  of  action,  "  to  do/*  or  "  to  execute.'*^ 
n  I  signifies  **  a  dwelling" 
The  whole  may  mean  **  an  eternal  habitation,**  or  **a  Tomb." 

L.   *rr  ^*y  may  have  the  same  signification  as  the  above. 

*  Champollion. 


'"""V^-^^-v 

^              V 

?*■■".      -f        r- 

<■-    ^-v*^ 

.         '*"'"' 

■  '..w     ^ 

r-  ,  ■;■ 

'  ■    ..    '  , 

r       - 

^^*iwi-:,V 

;   C^   ■■■     - 

c          ,■ 

■~"'        ..1 

'.    "■■ ,  "  —J' 

■  .    V'o-. 

■  '".V .«. ' 

-  "  ■-^■■■•^.. 

[           o     '                    ' 

,h# 

"„^    ......  -,.-„ 

■''°' """,.•-= 

\t'    '  ':'.: 

--"  J-'naaKy  **  •-*■ "" 

--ftr?^': 

^''    . 

.'it* 

'RUL     ««.TH 

J               / 

■;-4.^. 

.    .      ,     -        a 

•,^' 

x'  i 

■,-'         '"' 

■;  '  ^ 

"-"■°-  >-,  :  . 

_,  ,  ■ 

"■*  ,  ■-"yf':  '  .r-x 

'—  ■■■•r    '. 

■•-    ;     ■- 

■■,  »*i* 

■      7f  *-.  ;f    / 

' 

■^z.    '^*-' 

'r-'-,'-  :■■ 

;pyi=|.^ 

.■    ""■       .'?     • 

,  * ' 

r  ,^,j; 

."■^'a 

^^  J /■•-■'' 

"    '-.^ 

.h/§p 

\'iw 

'--!">-  ■■ 

j  v™i* 

'"     0     , 

P     L    "^ 

'''Ate 

3                G     R    0 

J    N     D  -  - 

APPENDIX.  37 

H.  The  character  here  given   |v^-^  is  a  symbol  of  gold,  and  being 

on  the  roof- block  of  the  apartment,  it  seems  to  indicate  that  the  stone 
was  intended  for  the  [?3b?\|  ^vhich,  according  to  Champollion,  expresses 
**  an  halntation^  the  sepulchral  chamber  of  a  tomb" 

GREAT  PYRAMID. 

D  resembles  the  foregoing,  and  so  does  the  initial  character  of  B. 
It  appears  that  these  characters  were  found  in  the  sepulchral  chamber, 
and  that  A  was  in  the  passage  leading  to  the  apartment,  which,  with  the 
addition  of  O-^  implying  "  to  move,**  **  to  enter,**  or  **to  go  out,**  has 
also  the  same  initial  character. 


E    seems  to  be  a  name.  Q        is  for     pTkn    *i  the  tomb,** 

tU  U  L/  jf  '^  of  the  king,**  named,  for  example,  "  Koncharts.** 

PYRAMID  OF  REEGAH. 

Taking  the  value  of  the  characters,  as  expressed  in  Coptic  letters^ 

they  shew  COnrTlt  CJtXtX  -fv  (1"IOX,  TA^pHO-rx)  Clt^i ;  or 

if  the   perpendicular   line    in    P     J     be  inclined  thus  .^u    marking 

I*  ,  it  may  be  COnrXItCUUt  •f'VCirf",  which  appears  to  be  of  the 
king,  monument  of  the  king  to  lay  the  solid  foundation.  CtXIt  signifies 
to  place,**  ''to  dispose,*'  '*  to  prepare  ;**  Cirf,  ''foundations;**  and 


« 


OULIt     crte    means   "  to  found,**    "  to   lay   a  foundation  ;**    CI1&, 

ncrtfi.,  is  translated  by  M.  Champollion  "  la  force  ;**  but  it  is  not 
in  the  dictionary. 

appears  to  be  the  sign  of  the  plural  number,  &c.  &c.  Sicfi 


PYRAMIDS  OF  SACCARA. 

THE  MAP. 

Mr.  Pbrring  considers  that  the  range  of  mountains  from 
Dashoor  to  Abouroash  contained  four  cemeteries ;  the  most  North- 
ern belonging  to  Latopolis,  that  near  Glzeh  to  Heliopolis,  the  one 
at  Saccara  to  Memphis,  and  that  at  Dashoor  to  Acanthas.     In 

'  It  will  be  evident  to  the  hieroglyphical  scholar,  that  these  conjectures  by 
no  means  coincide  with  Mr.  Birch's  explanations. 


38  APPENDIX. 

order,  therefore,  to  comprehend  the  whole  of  the  cemetery  of 
antient  Memphis,  this  Map  extends  as  far  northward  as  the 
village  of  Abouseir. 

The  Pyramids  of  Saccara  are  eleven  in  number,^  exclusive  of 
the  large  building,  called  "  The  Throne  of  Pharaoh  "  They  are 
built  with  stone,  and  were  approached  by  inclined  roads  or 
causeways  from  the  plain  below.  They  are  all  much  decayed, 
excepting  the  large  one  built  in  degrees,  which,  together  with 
another  towards  the  north-east  (No.  2  in  the  Map),  are  the  only 
two  at  present  open. 

A  space  around  the  large  Pyramid  (about  8200  feet  in  length), 
abounds  with  mummy-pits,  and  also  with  tombs,  although  of  the 
latter  but  few  remain,  as  they  have  been  subject  to  continual 
devastation  for  the  sake  of  materials  for  building.  The  most 
interesting  at  present  are  those  marked  G  and  K  on  the  Map. 

In  G  are  the  cartouches  of  several  kings  of  the  early  dynasties. 
K  is  an  excavation  and  contains  the  name  of  Psammetichus  II. ; 
and,  although  the  roof  is  not  a  regular  arch,  yet  the  way,  in  which 
it  is  built,  evidently  shews  that  the  principles  of  an  arch  were 
known  when  it  was  formed.  The  space  (F  in  the  Map)  to  the 
northward  of  the  Great  Pyramid  is  supposed  to  have  been  used 
for  the  interment  of  criminals,  because  the  bodies  were  placed, 
without  coffins,  in  small  recesses  lined  with  crude  bricks,  and  had 
been  mutilated  by  the  loss  of  the  hands,  or  of  the  feet,  which  had 
been  separated  at  the  joints. 

The  Serapeum  is  said  by  Strabo  to  have  been  built  on  a 
sandy  spot,  and  traces  of  it  have  been  looked  for  (but  without 
success)  amongst  the  mounds  and  antient  substructions  near 
this  place. 

A  sketch  of  the  Pyramids  of  Saccara,  as  seen  from  the  north- 
em  brick  Pyramid  of  Dashoor,  is  given  in  Plate  IX.  Fig.  6; 
and  Bruce  probably  alluded  to  this  view,  when  he  observed,  that 
*^  the  traveller  is  lost  in  the  immense  expanse  of  desert,  which 
he  sees  full  of  Pyramids  before  him ;  is  struck  with  terror  at  the 
unusual  scene  of  vastness,  and  shrinks  from  attempting  any  dis- 
covery amidst  the  moving  sands  of  Saccara."  Bruce's  '^  Travels," 
Vol.  I.  p.  66. 

'  Nine  of  them  are  numbered  from  north  to  south  in  the  Map. 


t:.L^, 


si 


IE'  \ 


APPENDIX.  39 


PYRAMID  No.  1  IN  THE  MAP. 

This  pyramid  seems  to  have  been  of  a  later  date  than  the  two 
following,  because  the  road  for  the  conveyance  of  materials  to 
it  has  been  constructed  with  crude  bricks  from  a  causeway, 
which  had  been  previously  formed  in  the  rock  to  Nos.  2  and  3. 
The  bricks  are  large,  and  are  made  of  alluvial  soil,  with  but 
little  straw,  excepting  on  the  outside ;  and  almost  all  of  them  are 
marked,  apparently  by  the  fingers  having  been  brought 
close  together,  and  thrust  in  thus 

The  pyramid  is  much  decayed,  and  presents  the  appearance 
of  a  mass  of  rubbish.  The  masonry  is  only  visible  at  one  place 
on  the  southern  side.  It  appears  to  have  been  built  in  steps 
or  degrees. 

Attempts  had  been  made,  both  on  the  northern  and  on  the 
southern  sides,  to  open  it,  but  without  success;  and  an  excavation, 
about  8  feet  deep,  had  been  begun  at  the  top. 

Present  Base,  about  -        -        -         210  feet. 

Ditto  Height 59  feet. 

Platform  at  top,  about       ...  50  feet 

PYRAMID  No.  2  IN  THE  MAP. 

Mr.  Perring  proceeded  to  Saccara  during  the  inundation  on 
the  24th  July,  1839 ;  and,  notwithstanding  the  great  heat  of  the 
climate,  the  thermometer  in  his  tent  being  114^  at  2  p.m.,  and 
1 12^  at  5  A.M.,  he  began  his  operations  upon  this  pyramid.  It  is 
called  by  the  Arabs,  *^  Haram  el  Mekurbash,'*  the  Broken  or 
Serrated  Pyramid,  and  was  opened  by  a  Signor  Maruchi,  in 
1831  or  1832;  but  was  again  closed  up  by  the  falling  in  of  the 
masonry. 

It  is  built  with  large,  unsquared  stones,  rudely  put  together. 
There  are  no  remains  of  a  casing,  and  the  whole  is  much  decayed. 

The  regular  inclined  passage  in  the  centre  of  the  northern 
front  remains  closed  up  with  masonry ;  and  at  the  opening,  C, 
Figs.  1  and  2,  it  was  found  to  be  lined,  and  also  to  be  stopped  up 
with  blocks  of  granite.  To  avoid  these  obstructions,  therefore, 
when  the  Pyramid  was  broken  open,  the  present  entrance  was 
probably  forced  into  the  lower  end  of  the  inclined  passage,  which 
thence  proceeds  in  a  horizontal  direction,  and  has  been  closed 
near  the  middle  by  a  portcullis,  consisting  of  a  slab  of  granite. 


40  APPENDIX. 

about  half  of  which  remains.  Above  this  portcullis,  a  perpen- 
dicular excavation  is  apparently  connected  with  the  horizontal 
passage,  D,  Fig.  1,  which  had  been  forced  from  the  entrance. 

A  little  beyond  the  portcullis  on  the  eastern  side,  a  passage 
communicates  with  two  side-rooms  excavated  in  the  rock,  and 
originally  lined  with  fine  masonry,  the  fragments  of  which  at 
present  nearly  fill  them. 

The  two  principal  apartments  have  pointed  roofs,  and  are 
lined  with  calcareous  stone  from  the  quarries  of  the  Mokattam. 
The  blocks  which  form  the  sides  are  not  laid  on  horizontal  beds, 
but  slope  away  with  an  incline,  like  the  beds  of  those  in  the 
Queen's  Chamber  in  the  Great  Pyramid  of  Gizeh.^ 

Nearly  the  whole  of  the  pavement  has  been  removed,  and  the 
stones  are  scattered  about  the  floor,  and  in  the  passages. 

In  the  inner  of  the  two  principal  apartments  the  remains  of  a 
small  sarcophagus,  made  of  plain  basalt,  and  without  any  orna- 
ment, were  found.  The  sarcophagus  had  been  removed  from  its 
original  position. 

In  the  northern  and  southern  walls  (at  BB,  Fig.  2)  are 
cavities,  apparently  intended  to  receive  the  ends  of  beams,  used 
for  lowering  the  sarcophagus  into  its  place. 

The  whole  of  the  passages  and  apartments  are  excavated  in 
the  rock,  and  are  below  the  base  of  the  Pyramid. 

OriginaL  Prcaent 

Base' 231  ft.  3  in.     210  ft.  0  in. 

Height 146  ft  6  in.      108  ft  0  in. 

Length  of  Inclined  Entrance-passage,! 
closed  up  with  masonry,  about    J 
Angle  of  ditto        -        -        26°  35' 

Feet  Inches 

Horizontal  Passage,  length  to  Portcullis      -     31     3 
Thickness  of  Portcullis  -         -         -  2     3 

Portcullis  to  Apartments    -         -         -         -     26     9 

Total  length 60    3 

Feet  Indiei. 

Width  of  Passage 4    2 

Height  to  Granite  Heading,  A         -----61 

•  "  Pyramids  of  Gizeh,"  Plate  VIII.  No.  1. 

'  The  base  appeared  to  be  longer  from  north  to  south  than  from  east  to 
west ;  but  it  is  supposed  that  it  was  a  square,  and  that  the  apparent  irregularity 
was  owing  to  the  rubbish,  and  to  the  ruined  state  of  the  building.  The  rock, 
and  the  diiicrciit  sorts  of  masonry,  are  distinguished  in  the  plans. 


\, 


u^ 


0 


2 

8 

4 

2 

18 

0 

8 

0 

34 

0 

7 

3 

APPENDIX.  41 

Feet  Inches 

Height  beyond  ditto 42 

Outer  Principal  Apartment,  length,  East  and  West  -        -     13     7 

breadth,  North  and  South  1 0     3 

height  at  Sides      -        -        -     10    5 

height  in  Centre         -         -  14     2 

Passage  between  Apartments,  length        -  -        -      5    6 

width    -         -         -         -  3  11 

height        -         -         -         -       3  11 

Inner  Apartment,  length,  East  and  West      -        -        -         25    71^ 

breadth.  North  and  South     -        -        -     10     3 
The  height  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  Outer  Apartments. 
Passage  leading  from  the  principal  Entrance-passage  to  thel 
Side-rooms,  length     -        -        -        -        ..M^ 

width  ------ 

height      ------ 

First  Room,  running  East  and  West,  length     -        -        . 

width 
Second  Room,  running  North  and  South,  length 

.    width    - 


THE  GREAT  PYRAMID,  No.  3  IN  THE  MAP, 

Mr.  Perring  then  examined  the  pyramid  called  by  the  Arabs, 
**  Haram  el  Modarrggeh,"  the  Pyramid  of  Degrees.  It  is  situated 
on  an  elevation  of  about  91  feet  above  the  plain,  whence,  by 
scarping  the  rock  into  a  regular  incline  to  the  base  of  this  Pyra- 
mid, and  also  to  that  of  the  one  marked  No.  2  in  the  Map,  roads 
have  been  made  for  the  conveyance  of  the  stone  used  in  the 
buildings,  which  was  principally  taken  from  the  eastern  face  of 
the  mountain,  where  tombs  were  afterwards  formed  in  the  quarry- 
ings,  and  likewise  for  that  of  the  finer  blocks,  which  were  brought 
across  the  river  from  the  Mokattam.  It  was  opened  by  the 
Baron  von  Minutoli  in  1821,  and  is  the  only  Pyramid  in  Egypt, 
the  sides  of  which  do  not  exactly  face  the  cardinal  points,  the 
northern  front  being  4^  35'  east  of  the  true  north.  It  also  differs 
from  the  rest  in  many  other  particulars,  namely,  in  the  form  and 
mode  of  building,  in  the  number  and  complexity  of  the  passages, 
in  having  four  entrances  (one  of  them  in  the  southern  front),  and 
also  a  variety  of  small  excavated  chambers,  upon  the  walls  of  two 
of  which  hieroglyphics  and  peculiar  ornaments  are  to  be  seen; 
in  containing  a  large  apartment  covered  in  with  timber,  and  fur- 
nished with  a  hidden  chamber,  and  not  apparently  intended  for 


42  APPENDIX. 

sepulchral  purposes,  and  likewise  a  great  quantity  of  fragments  of 
marble,  and  of  alabaster  vases,  and  of  sarcophagi,  which  give  to 
the  building  the  character  of  an  extensive  catacomb,  rather  than 
that  of  the  tomb  of  a  single  individual. 

It  is  evident  that  the  exterior  of  the  edifice  originally  con- 
sisted of  six  degrees  or  stories,  each  of  which  had  the  shape  of  a 
truncated  Pyramid,  and  was  successively  smaller  than  that  below 
it ;  but,  by  the  effects  of  time  and  of  violence,  the  whole  of 
the  eastern,  and  nearly  the  whole  of  the  northern  and  of  the 
southern  sides  of  the  lowest  tier  have  been  removed.  Two 
attempts  have  also  been  made  to  force  an  entrance  on  the  south- 
ern side,  and  the  French  are  said  to  have  employed  artillery  for 
that  purpose. 

The  bulk  of  the  masonry  (see  fig.  1,  Plate  A)  consists  of 
loose  rubble-work,  and  is  inclosed  by  the  walls,  CC,  which  are 
about  9  feet  in  thickness,  and  are  composed  of  rudely  squared 
stones  set  to  the  angle  of  the  face ;  and  the  breadth  of  the  build- 
ing from  north  to  south  has  apparently  been  increased  by  an 
additional  wall  on  each  of  those  sides.  The  walls  of  the  lowest 
tier  are  10  feet  thick.  The  stones  have  been  quarried  on  the 
spot,  and  a  great  deal  of  mortar  has  been  used ;  in  some  places  on 
the  southern  side  the  masonry  is  of  a  better  quality.  The 
mortar  is  of  various  kinds,  but  it  is  principally  composed  of  the 
gravel  of  the  desert  and  of  lime,  or  of  Nile  earth  and  of  small 
pieces  of  calcareous  stone. 

Feet     ladMii 

Original  Base,^  North  and  South       ...         351       2 

East  and  West     -        -        -        -    393     1 1 

It  seems  to  have  covered  an  area  of  15,372  square  yards ;  but 
the  present  base  is  irregular,  in  consequence  of  the  partial  re- 
moval of  the  lowest  tier. 


OrlgmaL 

Platform  at  top,  North  and  South     -     42  ft.  10  in.         24  ft. 

East  and  West        -     85  ft.     8  in.         55  ft. 

The  degrees  or  stories  vary  in  height,  and  gradually  diminish 
towards  the  top. 


'  The  base  of  this  pynunid  from  north  to  south  appears  to  have  been 
originally  331  feet  2  inches,  and  to  have  been  afterwards  increased  by  the 
additions  of  a  wall,  10  feet  thick  at  each  end,  to  351  feet  2  inches. 


APPENDIX*  43 

FeeL  Inchei. 

Ist 37     8 

2d 35  11 

3d 34     3 

4th 32     7 

5th 30  10 

6th 29     2 


200    5 
Present  height  above  Base     -       1 96    6 

above  Sand      -       190     0  (in  places  less). 

The  fkce  of  each  story  or  degree  has  an  angle  of  73^  3(y  with 
the  horizon. 

The  entrance,  which  is  in  a  pit,  at  the  distance  of  52  feet 
from  the  building,  and  11  feet  to  the  westward  of  the  centre 
of  the  northern  front  (see  a,  Figs.  1  and  2,  Plate  A),  is  generally 
closed  up  by  the  sands  of  the  desert,  and  often,  indeed,  by  the 
Arabs,  in  order  to  gain  money  from  strangers  who  wish  to 
visit  it. 

The  pit  opens  into  a  passage,  which  is  nearly  horizontal  for 
about  120  feet,  and  afterwards  descends,  in  the  circuitous  and 
irregular  manner  shewn  in  the  drawings,  to  the  lower  part  of  the 
large  apartment.  It  is  an  excavation,  and  appears  to  have  been 
intended  for  a  secret  communication  with  the  large  apartment, 
and  also  with  the  small  chambers  and  lower  passages. 

Near  the  entrance  of  the  passage  is  a  hole  for  the  pivot  of 
a  door. 

The  centre  of  the  principal  entrance  is  36  feet  to  the  eastward 
of  the  centre  of  the  northern  front.  The  passage  is  stopped 
up  with  masonry ;  it  has  been  irregularly  cut  out,  but  the 
general  inclination  is  23^  20' ;  it  is  3  feet  5  inches  wide  in  the 
centre,  and  has  a  ramp  on  each  side.  It  is  176  feet  5  inches 
long,  and  it  enters  the  apartment  7  feet  6  inches  above  the 
floor.  The  excavation  made  for  it  was  originally  more  than  10 
feet  in  width,  and  for  76  feet  it  was  an  open  cutting,  beyond 
which  it  has  been  tunnelled  in  the  rock.  The  roof  of  it  is  there- 
fore horizontal,  and  is  20  feet  9  inches  below  the  base  of  the 
superstructure.  The  reason  for  the  great  size  of  the  excavation 
appears  to  have  been  to  facilitate  the  removal  of  the  stone,  and 
of  the  chippings,  &c.  from  the  large  apartment,  after  it  had  been 
covered  in  by  the  erection  of  the  Pyramid. 

The  passage  was  formed  with  masonry  in  the  bottom  of  the 
excavation,  and  the  vacant  part  was  filled  up  with  rubble-work. 


44  APPENDIX. 

which  has  been  partially  removed.  The  passage  is  still  closed  up 
with  large  blocks. 

Another  passage,  179  feet  6  inches  in  length,  aboat  4  feet 

2  inches  in  height  and  in  breadth,  irregularly  excavated  in  the 
rock,  commences  6  feet  without  the  building,  and  6  feet  to  the 
eastward  of  the  centre  of  the  northern  front  (see  Plate  A,  Figs. 
1  and  2).  A  track  had  been  worn  down  the  middle  of  it,  and  a 
few  stones  had  been  piled  up  on  the  western  side.  It  communi- 
cates in  a  horizontal,  but  not  quite  straight  direction,  with  n 
recess  in  the  upper  part  of  the  western  side  of  the  lai*ge  apart- 
ment, where  a  groove  had  been  cut  across  the  floor,  apparently 
for  the  insertion  of  a  beam,  whence  a  rope  had  probably  been 
suspended.  This  passage  was  discovered  by  Mr.  Perring,  in 
August  1839,  whilst  he  was  in  search  of  a  chamber  under  the 
western  part  of  the  Pyramid,  as  those,  which  he  had  entered, 
were  under  the  eastern  part  of  the  building. 

A  fourth  entrance,  proceeding  from  a  pit  {d)  14  feet  square, 
and  about  7  feet  to  the  eastward  of  the  centre  of  the  southern 
front,  had  been  previously  found,  and  was  supposed  by  Mr. 
Perring  to  be  the  only  passage  then  discovered  from  the  southern 
side  of  a  Pyramid. 

This  entrance  communicates  by  a  horizontal  gallery,  166  feet 

3  inches  long,  6  feet  4  inches  high,  and  10  feet  wide,  with  a 
recess  at  the  south-western  comer  of  the  large  apartment.  The 
recess  was  70  feet  above  the  floor,  the  texture  of  the  rock  could 
not  be  depended  upon,  and  poles,  above  6  feet  in  length,  could 
not  be  introduced :  the  examination  of  the  recess  was,  therefore, 
attended  with  some  difficulty.  The  gallery  is  an  excavation,  but, 
as  the  rock  above  it  has  not  been  left  of  sufficient  thickness  to 
sustain  the  weight  of  the  superincumbent  masonry,  the  ceiling  is 
supported  by  a  row  of  twenty-two  short  columns,  formed  with 
blocks  of  compact  limestone.  They  are  roughly  worked  except- 
ing the  one  x,  Plate  A,  which  has  been  inscribed  with  four  rows 
of  hieroglyphics  (see  Plate  D,  Fig.  6).  Tlie  characters  are  badly 
engraven,  and  the  stone  seems  to  have  belonged  to  some  other 
building,  as  part  of  the  inscription  has  been  cut  away,  in  order  to 
fit  the  block  for  its  present  position.  These  columns  have  been 
brought  to  their  bearings  by  wedges  of  wood,  inserted  both  above 
and  below  them ;  and  most  of  them  are  cracked  by  the  superin- 
cumbent weight.  The  southern  end  of  the  gallery  was  stopped 
up  with  sand,  but  for  the  length  of  160  feet  from  the  interior  it 
was  open,  and  did  not  seem  to  have  been  previously  visited,  as 
nearly  thirty  mummies  were  found  in  it,  apparently  undisturbed. 


SECTION 


APPENDIX.  45 

They  had  neither  coffins  nor  sarcophagi,  nor,  with  the  exception 
of  three  or  four,  any  painted  decorations.  They  crumbled  to 
pieces  upon  being  touched,  and  could  not  be  removed.  Mr. 
Perring  therefore  proceeded  to  examine  them.  He  found  them 
inclosed  in  wrappers,  with  pitch  and  bitumen,  but  he  did  not 
meet  with  any  of  the  objects  usually  deposited  with  mummies, 
excepting  some  of  the  common  stone  idols  upon  the  body  of  a 
female ;  he  therefore  concluded  that  they  were  the  bodies  of  per- 
sons employed  in  the  building.  A  few  pieces  of  decayed  wood^ 
apparently  belonging  to  date-trees,  were  also  found. 

The  large  apartment  is  likewise  an  excavation ;  the  western 
side  of  it  is  25  feet  6  inches  to  the  eastward  of  the  centre  of  the 
Pyramid  from  north  to  south,  but  it  is  immediately  under  it  from 
east  to  west.  It  measures  24  feet  by  23,  and  is  77  feet  high  from 
the  floor  to  the  original  ceiling,  which  he  examined  by  the  help 
of  torches  made  of  greased  rags,  and  ascertained  it  to  have  been 
formed  with  planks,  supported  by  a  platform  of  timber,  consisting 
of  cross-bearers  and  of  two  principal  beams.  One  beam  remained 
in  its  place,  but  was  broken  in  the  middle ;  the  other,  together 
with  the  platform,  and  about  9  feet  of  the  masonry,  had  fallen 
down,  and  the  room  was  therefore  covered  in  by  the  rubble-work, 
which  composed  the  interior  of  the  Pyramid,  and  which  was 
retained  in  its  place  merely  by  the  adhesion  of  the  mortar,  and 
of  the  materials.  The  apartment  was  filled  with  rubbish  to  the 
height  of  25  feet,  and  the  sides  of  it  were  blackened  by  the  smoke 
of  torches.  They  are  roughly  hewn,  and  have  probably  been 
cased  with  masonry. 

The  Arabs  informed  Mr.  Perring  that,  when  Baron  von  Minu- 
toli  first  opened  the  Pyramid,  a  broken  sarcophagus  was  found 
in  the  large  apartment. 

In  the  floor  (which  consists  of  blocks  of  granite)  a  remarkable 
chamber,  10  feet  long,  5  feet  4}  inches  wide,  and  5  feet  4}  inches 
high,  had  been  formed,  the  entrance  to  which  had  been  closed  by 
a  conical  block  of  granite,  shaped  like  the  stopper  of  a  bottle;  it 
was  above  four  tons  in  weight,  and  was  grooved  round  the  top,  as 
shewn  in  the  perspective  representation,  see  Plate  D,  Fig.  6.  A 
few  hieroglyphics  were  slightly  engraven  near  the  south-western 
corner  of  the  chamber,  but  had  been  partially  concealed  by  a 
joint. 

The  Baron  von  Minutoli^  says,  that  this  chamber  is  **  a  small 

•  See  "  Recollections,"  p.  83. 


46  APPENDIX. 

sanctuary,  formed  of  several  blocks  of  stone  placed  one  upon 
another,  into  which  a  man  could  easily  enter,  and  from  which 
the  voice  of  an  oracle  was  probably  made  to  issue."  Mr.  Perring 
does  not,  however,  coincide  with  the  Baron's  opinion,  but  is 
inclined  to  believe,  that  the  place  was  intended  for  a  treasury, 
because  there  did  not  appear  any  secret  entrance,  by  which  a  man 
could  easily  have  got  into  it,  and  because  the  ponderous  block,  by 
which  it  was  closed,  did  not  seem  fitted  for  mysterious  purposes, 
as  a  number  of  men,  and  machinery  also,  would  be  required  to 
raise  it ;  because,  likewise,  no  acoustic  efi^ect  was  perceived,  which 
would  peculiarly  qualify  the  place  for  an  oracle ;  and  because  it 
was  well  adapted  for  a  secure  and  secret  treasury.  At  all  events, 
it  did  not  appear  to  have  been  used  as  a  tomb,  for,  had  a  body 
been  placed  within  it,  some  remains  would  probably  have  been 
found,  as  it  could  not  have  been  conveyed  away  through  the 
present  forced  entrance,  unless  it  had  been  broken  into  small 
pieces. 

The  granite  blocks,  belonging  to  the  floor  of  the  large  apart- 
ment, are  from  3  feet  6  inches  to  4  feet  6  inches  in  thickness; 
and  a  reference  to  the  sections  (see  Plates  A  and  D)  will  shew 
that  they  are  supported  by  short  pillars  of  loose  stones,  placed 
together  without  mortar,  and  wedged  up  with  wood  to  an  uniform 
height. 

In  many  places  broken  pieces  of  wood,  crooked  branches,  &c. 
have  been  inserted  between  the  pillars  to  tie  them  together.  It 
has  been  already  remarked,  that  the  employment  of  wood  is 
peculiar  to  this  Pyramid. 

Mr.  Perring  observed  upon  many  of  the  stones  characters, 
which  had  been  indistinctly  written  in  red  ochre. 

From  the  south-eastern  angle  of  the  large  apartment,  a  passage 
below  the  level  of  the  floor  communicates  with  the  smaller  rooms. 
The  doorway  in  one  of  them  is  bordered  with  hieroglyphics  in 
relief,  and  that  in  another  has  a  similar  inscription  traced  in 
black.  The  characters  had  been  much  defaced  since  Mr.  Burton 
copied  them :  they  contain  the  title,  but  not  the  name,  of  a  very 
early  king.  See  Plate  C.  The  headings  of  these  doorways  are 
covered  with  small  stars,  sculptured  in  relief. 

The  first  apartment  (see  Plate  B,  Fig.  3)  is  20  feet  6  inches 
in  length,  north  and  south,  5  feet  IJ  inch  in  width,  and  6  feet 
5  inches  in  height;  the  other  is  18  feet  8  inches  in  length,  east 
and  west,  and  of  the  same  width,  and  height  as  the  former.  From 
the  south-eastern  angle  a  small  doorway  opens  into  an  excavation, 


m 


TUlU  C. 


H  i  I  i  1 1 1 1  TrrriTrfTN^s^ 


r^.^rj^^ff;^:^&i-/^TO 


c 


•  III 


I- 


/WW\ 


SetiU 


® 


1 


1 


HlKRO«'«>    OHARACTCRS  on     POf^CCLAIN 


^  *  • 


=£ 


zZmS 


DOORWAY    Of     SMALL      APARTMENT 


F 


I 


H^--:;' 


» 


f 1 

I    .    I 


I 


B 


az-  z  ju 


^ 


SKCTION    FROM     C   TO  O 


'^r^x^f  y/x^'/:;^  ^v/a;  -^^:_i^ 


tLtVATlON    or    PAPT   or  WALL.        SECTION     THHOUO'HA.B 


J.FtrrxK^  djtl* 


972Il^SISa>      (5)3      S^(5(3i&.3Ik^.  STf  ft. 


I  ' 


Hi  1 


<> 


APPENDIX.  47 

in  which  another  room  of  the  same  kind  may  formerly  have  been 
constnicted. 

The  sides  of  these  apartments  had  been  lined  with  calcareous 
stone,  and  ornamented  with  rows  of  convex  pieces  of  bluish-green 
porcelain,  inscribed  on  the  back  with  a  hieroglyphic,  the  impres- 
sion of  which  remained  on  the  cement.  See  Plate  C.  The 
porcelain  had  been  removed,  but  from  the  fragments  found  in 
the  upper  passage,  Mr.  Perring  was  enabled  to  ascertain  the  form 
of  the  several  pieces.  The  rock,  made  good  and  level  with 
plaster,  formed  the  floors,  and  the  ceilings. 

From  the  northern  side  of  the  second  apartment  an  excavated 
passage  inclines  to  the  westward,  and  communicates  with  the 
present  entrance-passage.^  Mr.  Perring  is  of  opinion  that  the 
communication,  leading  from  the  entrance-passage  below  the 
level  of  the  great  apartment,  was  not  only  intended  to  facilitate 
the  construction,  and  to  open  into  the  lower  excavation,  but  that 
it  has  also  served  for  a  catacomb,  because  the  recesses  in  the  sides 
of  it  (which  are  as  large  as  the  nature  of  the  rock  will  allow)  are 
sufficient  to  contain  sarcophagi ;  and  because  the  sanctity  attached 
to  the  Pyramids  may  have  authorised  the  interment  within  them, 
of  the  people  employed  in  their  construction,  and  likewise  that 
of  the  attendants  of  the  deceased  king. 

The  lower  passages  (about  5  feet  in  width)  were  nearly  filled 
with  broken  vases  composed  of  marble  and  of  alabaster,  with 
fragments  of  sarcophagi,  and  with  broken  stones,  upon  which 
stars,  a  common  ornament  of  Egyptian  ceilings,  were  observed. 
These  passages  were  very  intricate,  in  some  instances  leading  to 
the  excavations  for  the  floor  of  the  large  apartment ;  in  others,  to 
small  recesses,  which  might  also  have  been  supposed  to  have 
been  intended  for  the  bodies  of  the  workmen  employed  in  the 
building,  had  they  not  contained  the  fragments  of  valuable  sar- 
cophagi. 

A  small  passage  near  the  doorway  appeared  to  communicate 
with  the  recess  at  the  upper  part  of  the  western  end  of  the  apart- 
ment; but  upon  examination  it  was  ascertained  to  end  in  the 
rock.  The  lowest  passage  to  the  westward,  which  Mr.  Perring 
had  imagined  to  be  connected  with  one  on  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  entrance,  was  also  found  to  be  similarly  constructed. 


'  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson  conjectures  that  these  apartments  and  passages  are 
of  a  later  date  than  the  rest  of  the  Pyramid.  See  '' General  View  of  Egypt 
and  Thebes,''  p.  337. 


48  APPENDIX. 

Mr.  Perring  endeavoured  to  ascertain  whether  any  apartment 
existed  to  the  westward  of  the  large  one,  which  has  been  described 
to  be  to  the  eastward  of  the  centre  of  the  Pyramid,  although 
directly  in  it  in  the  other  direction. 

He  also  cut  a  communication  along  the  face  of  the  excavation 
from  the  top  of  the  main  entrance,  to  find  whether  any  passage 
existed  from  the  recess  in  the  western  side  of  the  apartment ;  and 
in  six  days  he  had  contrived  to  penetrate  to  the  apartment,  and 
to  form  a  ledge  along  the  northern  and  western  sides  to  the  recess, 
which  has  been  described  to  communicate  with  a  passage  179  feet 
6  inches  in  length,  towards  the  northern  end. 

Plate  A,  Fig.  1,  is  a  vertical  section  of  the  Pyramid  through 
the  centre  of  the  principal  apartment,  along  the  line  O,  H,  in 
Fig.  2,  which  is  37  feet  eastward  of  the  centre  of  the  Pyramid. 

Plate  A,  Fig.  2,  is  a  sectional  plan  through  A,  B,  in  Fig.  1, 
at  the  level  of  the  gallery  discovered  August  15th,  1839.  The 
passage  leading  to  the  northward  from  the  recess  at  the  upper 
part  of  the  western  side  of  the  large  apartment  (drawn  in  small 
dotted  lines)  is  above  the  plane  of  the  supposed  section. 

Plate  B,  Fig.  1,  is  a  sectional  plan  through  C,  D,  in  Fig.  I, 
Plate  A,  on  a  level  with  the  roof  of  the  excavation  for  the  princi- 
pal entrance-passage. 

Plate  B,  Fig.  2,  is  a  plan,  following  the  passage,  by  which 
the  Pyramid  is  usually  entered,  and  shewing  the  side  excavations, 
which  are  6  feet  6  inches  above  the  floor  of  the  large  apartment, 
and  which  constitute  small  chambers. 

Plate  B,  Fig.  3,  is  a  sectional  plan,  E,  F,  in  Fig.  1 ,  Plate  A, 
through  the  lower  passages  and  small  apartments.  ^ 

Plate  D,  Fig.  1,  is  a  sectional  plan,  shewing  the  chamber  in 
the  floor,  and  the  small  apartments. 

Fig.  2.  A  vertical  section,  looking  northward,  through  the 
large  apartment,  the  chamber  in  the  floor,  and  the  small  apart- 
ments. 

Fig.  3.  A  vertical  section,  looking  westward,  through  the 
large  apartment,  the  chamber  in  the  floor,  and  the  inclined 
entrance. 

Fig.  4.     Ditto,  ditto,  looking  eastward. 

Fig.  6.  A  representation  of  the  granite  stopper,  which  closed 
the  opening  of  the  chamber  in  the  floor. 

Plate  C.    The  doorway  of  the  small  apartment,  with  the 

^  The  chamber,  in  the  Plate  D,  is  called  "  a  sanctuary.'' 


APPENDIX.  49 

hieroglyphics  in  bas-relief  (with  the  broken  parts  restored),  and 
with  the  convex  pieces  of  porcelain  inserted  upon  the  walls. 

Plate  C.  Details  of  the  pieces  of  porcelain,  and  of  the  man- 
ner in  which  they  were  fastened  to  the  walls.  A  is  the  masonry ; 
B,  the  piece  of  porcelain  attached  to  the  masonry  by  stucco, 
which  was  chiefly  composed  of  plaster  of  Paris.  At  the  back  of 
each  piece  of  porcelain  was  a  projection  pierced  through  with 
a  hole,  into  which  the  moist  stucco  upon  the  wall  entered ;  and 
in  some  instances,  to  increase  the  adhesion,  the  wall  was  also 
perforated  in  the  same  manner. 

Plate  C  contains  the  hieroglyphical  characters  on  the  porce- 
lain which  were  impressed  upon  the  plaster.  The  marks,  such 
as  E,  which  denote  various  numbers,  from  1  to  8y  frequently 
occurred. 

Plate  D,  Fig.  5.  The  surface  of  the  column  x,  in  the  gallery, 
and  the  inscriptions  upon  it. 

The  following  Letters  of  Reference  are  common  to 

Plates  A,  B,  and  D. 

a  The  usual  entrance  by  the  pit  opened  by  Baron  Von  Minu- 
toli,  in  1821. 

h  A  pit  unopened.  It  communicates  with  the  passage  disco- 
vered August  26th,  1839. 

c  The  commencement  of  the  inclined  entrance-passage  (un- 
opened). 

d  A  pit  communicating  with  the  gallery,  discovered  August 
16th,  1839.  It  had  been  partially  opened^  but  was  after- 
wards closed  up  with  sand,  &c. 

e    The  opening  of  the  passage  into  the  apartments. 

/    The  opening  of  the  gallery  into  the  apartments. 

g  Loose  stones  sticking  in  the  angle,  and  shewing  the  height, 
to  which  the  apartment  had  been  filled  up  by  the  stones 
and  rubbish  brought  down  from  the  roof.  The  rubbish 
was  cleared  out  into  the  passages. 
hh  Holes,  abqut  two  feet  deep,  apparently  intended  to  receive 
the  ends  of  beams. 

t    A  shaft,  which  had  been  forced  upwards  into  the  masonry, 
and  by  which  the  interior  construction  of  the  edifice  was 
discovered. 
jjj    Small  chambers  excavated  from  the  large  apartment.    They 
are  shewn  more  distinctly  in  Plate  B,  Fig.  2. 

h    A  small  passage. 

VOL.  III.  s 


50  APPENDIX. 

/    A  small  passage,  which  connects  the  large  apartment  with 

the  lower  passages. 
m    A  small  passage,  leading  from  one  of  the  small  chambers,  y, 

to  the  main  passage,  and  to  the  lower  passages. 
n    A  shaft  formed  in  the  masonry,  with  which  part  of  the  exca- 
vation is  filled  up.     It  connects  the  upper  part  of  the 
excavation,  which  contains  the  principal  passage,  with 
the  present  entrance-passage. 
o    A  passage,  excavated  in  the  rock,  from  the  upper  part  of  the 

shaft,  to  the  present  entrance-passage. 
p    An  excavated  communication  from  the  above  passage,  o,  to 
another,   which  connects  the   present  entrance-passage 
with  the  excavation  made  for  the  principal  passage, 
r    A  passage,  from  the  connecting  passage,  leading  to  a  chamber 

to  the  eastward. 
s    A  small  chamber  near  the  doorway. 

t    A  small  chamber  or  recess,  wherein  a  body  was  probably 
deposited. 
1/,  Vf  Wj  Ditto,  ditto. 

X    A  column,  inscribed  with  the  characters  drawn  in  Plate  D, 

Fig.  5.     It  is  in  the  gallery  discovered  in  August  1839. 
y    A  beam  across  the  large  apartment,  composed  of  oak,  and 
measuring  about  18  inches  by  12.     It  had  been  strutted 
fi'om  each  side  by  angle-pieces,  but  was  broken  in  the 
middle.     A  similar  one  had  also  been  broken  down  by 
the  weight  of  the  masonry,  and  had  been  removed. 
z    The  remaining  cross-bearers  of  the  wooden  platform,  which 
carried  the  weight  of  the  superincumbent  masonry,  and 
formed  the  ceiling  of  the  apartment.    Small  portions  of 
it  were  found ;  they  appeared  to  be  oak,  larch,  and  cedar, 
and  the  larch  was  in  the  soundest  state. 
The  Pyramid  had  been  surrounded  by  an  enclosure,  within, 
and  near  the  north-eastern  angle  of  which,  were  two  heaps  of 
ruined  masonry,  about  120  feet  in  diameter,  and  28  feet  in  height, 
apparently  the  remains  of  small  pyramids  (see  Map).    The  rock 
within  the  enclosure  to  the  southward  had  been  cut  down  to  a 
level  with  the  base  of  the  Pyramid. 

On  the  western  side  beyond  the  enclosure,  several  tombs  were 
placed,  in  lines  parallel  to  the  Pyramid,  like  those  near  the 
Pyramids  of  Gizeh. 


APPENDIX.  51 

PYRAMID  No.  4  IN  THE  MAP. 

It  is  situated  a  little  to  the  southward  of  the  last-mentioned 
Pyramid,  and  is  surrounded  with  heaps  of  broken  stone  and  of 
rubbishy  formed  by  repeated  attempts  to  open  it^  and  also  by  the 
removal  of  the  casing,  which  had  consisted  of  compact  limestone 
from  the  quarries  at  Tourah. 

The  base  was  so  completely  ruinedi  and  encumbered  with 
stones  and  with  sand,  that  the  extent  could  not  be  accurately 
measured,  but  it  appeared  to  have  been  about  220  feet,  and  in 
height  62  feet. 

The  platform  at  the  top  was  about  30  feet. 

PYRAMID  No.  6  IN  THE  MAP. 

This  is  the  only  Pyramid  built  entirely  with  stone  from  the 
Arabian  quarries.  In  all  the  others,  that  material  was  only  used 
for  an  exterior  casing,  and  for  a  lining  to  the  rooms  and  to  the 
passages.  The  good  quality  and  convenient  size  of  the  stones 
employed  in  the  building,  have  of  course  led  to  its  destruction, 
and  the  inhabitants  of  the  adjoining  villages  have  removed  most 
of  them  for  their  own  purposes. 

Present  Base,  about  -        -        -        -        250  feet. 
Height 40  feet. 

A  causeway  to  the  eastward  may  be  traced,  but  it  is  nearly 
covered  over  by  the  sands  of  the  desert. 

PYRAMID  No.  6  IN  THE  MAP. 

This  building  is  near  the  village,  and  is  called  *'  Haram  6 
Showwaf,"  the  Pyramid  of  the  Watchman,  because  it  was  one  of 
the  stations  where  a  look-out  was  formerly  kept,  to  apprize  the 
inhabitants  of  the  approach  of  the  Bedouins.  It  was  built  with 
unsquared  stones,  and  had  a  casing  of  blocks  from  the  Mokattam, 
which  is,  however,  almost  entirely  removed.  The  remains  of  a 
causeway,  about  36  feet  wide,  may  yet  be  traced  in  the  direction 
of  the  village ;  near  the  Pyramid  it  was  formed  by  an  inclined 
cutting  in  the  rock,  and  afterwards  by  a  masonry  composed  of 
large  blocks.  On  each  side  of  it,  and  at  about  220  feet  from  the 
eastern  face  of  the  Pyramid,  are  the  traces  of  two  small  buildings, 
which  may  have  been  appendages,  like  the  buildings  or  temples 
opposite  the  eastern  fronts  of  the  three  larger  Pyramids  of  Gizeh. 


52  APPENDIX. 

Present  Base,  about  ...        -        270  feet. 
Height 80  feet. 

PYRAMID  No.  7  IN  THE  MAP, 

Is  a  small  Pyramid,  about  100  feet  from  the  north-eastern 
angle  of  No.  6.  It  is  entirely  ruined,  and  the  greatest  part  of 
the  materials  have  been  taken  away. 

Present  Base,  about  -        •        -        -         140  feet. 

Height 27  feet. 

Top 70  feet 

PYRAMID  No.  8  IN  THE  MAP. 

It  is  named  by  the  Arabs,  **  Haram  6  Syadeen,"  the  Pyramid 
of  the  Hunters,  for  which  its  situation  may  be  supposed  to 
account. 

This  Pyramid,  and  No.  6,  are  on  the  northern  edge  of  a 
valley  leading  to  the  Faioum,  on  the  southern  side  of  which 
No.  9,  and  the  Mustabet  el  Faraoon,  are  placed.^ 

The  present  appearance  of  this  Pyramid  is  that  of  a  square 
heap  of  rubbish. 

Near  it  are  the  fragments  of  a  former  casing  of  stone  from 
the  Arabian  mountains,  and  also  broken  pieces  of  granite. 

A  causeway  runs  obliquely  into  the  valley  to  the  southward  of 
No.  6,  and  near  a  square  enclosure,  formed  with  walls  of  crude 
brick. 

Present  Base,  about  -        -        -        •        240  feet 
Height 87  feet. 

PYRAMID  No.  9  IN  THE  MAP. 

It  is  called  '^  Haram  el  Mustabet/'  from  being  placed  near  the 
building  known  by  the  name  of  Mustabet  el  Faraoon. 

It  is  built  in  degrees,  and  with  small  stones,  and  both  in  the 
materia],  and  its  present  condition,  resembles  No.  8,  on  the  oppo- 
site side  of  the  valley. 

*  The  roads  leading  from  the  Faioum  are  often  distinguished  by  Pyramids. 
Mr.  Perring,  however,  does  not  consider  that  any  connexion  existed  between 
the  Pyramids  and  the  roads,  but  that  they  were  so  placed  merely  because  the 
entrances  to  the  valley  of  the  Nile  afforded  appropriate  situations  for  their 
erection. 


APPENDIX.  53 

On  the  eastern  side  are  several  foundations,  and  beyond  them, 
and  towards  the  village,  is  a  long  caaseway^  constructed  with 
stone. 

Present  Base,  above  ...        -        245  feet. 
Height 75  feet. 

MUSTABET  EL  FARAOON. 

The  Throne  of  Pharaoh,  so  called  from  an  Arabian  tradition, 
that  an  antient  king  of  Egypt  erected  it  for  his  seat. 

It  is  a  pyramidal  building,  composed  of  very  large  stones,  and 
constructed  in  two  degrees,  or  stories,  the  lower  of  which  has 
consisted  of  five  courses  of  masonry,  each  about  6  feet  high ;  the 
upper  story  has  also  had  five  courses,  each  6  feet  3  inches  in 
height.  On  the  northern  and  southern  faces  another  course  of 
blocks,  about  4  feet  in  height,  has  been  carried  up,  which  forms 
at  these  fronts  a  sort  of  parapet,  23  feet  in  breadth. 

The  materials  consist  of  coarse  calcareous  stone,  in  which  are 
semi-petrified  oyster-shells.  The  building  has  no  doubt  been  a 
tomb.  Attempts  had  been  made  to  open  the  northern  and  south- 
era  fronts,  but  apparently  without  success. 

y  Feet*    fnfhWi 

Original  Base,  North  and  South           -        -        -  309  0 

East  and  West          -        -        -        -  217  0 

Original  Top,  North  and  South            -        -        -  263  0 

East  and  West           -        -        -        -  181  0 

Original  Height  in  Centre            ....  56  3 

at  Ends 60  3 


•  • 


Near  the  eastern  front  are  foundations,  composed  of  compact 
limestone,  and  of  granite,  whence  a  causeway,  made  with  crude 
bricks,  extends  due  east  for  about  390  feet,  and  then  inclines 
northwards  towards  the  village  of  Saccara. 

NOTES  BY  MR.  BIRCH. 

No.  8  IN  THE  MAP.    PLATE  C. 
Some  account  of  this  Pyramid  is  to  be  found  in  a  work  of  Signore 
O.  Segato,^  and  in  General  Minutoli's  "  Reise  zum  Tempel  des  Jupiter 
Ammon/'T    The  inscription  over  the  architrave,  and  on  the  lintels  of  the 

*  Saggi  Pittorici,  kc.  da  Q.  Segato  e  Lorenzo  Masi.     Fas.  Seoondo. 
Fiorenze,  1827. 

»  Fol.  Berlin,  1824,  pp.  406-7,  Tab.  XXVin.  Fig.  4,  a. 


54  APPENDIX. 

inner  door,  have  been  also  published,®  and  have  been  found  to  contain 
the  titles  and  the  standard  of  a  monarch.  The  standard  ^  is  of  the  usual 
shape,  and  is  surmounted  by  the  hawk  of  Harsiesi  crowned  with  a 
pschent.  The  two  symbols  in  the  standard  beneath  it  express  the  words 
noinre,  ''divine,*'  and  pOOT",  ''race*'  or  "germ,"  &c.  The  whole 
implies  " Horus  the  divine  germ*'  and  is  represented  four  times  upon 
each  lintel.  The  inscription  on  the  architrave  must  be  read,  from  the 
emblem  of  stability  in  the  centre,  to  the  right  and  to  the  left,  and  expresses 
—  *'  The  king  ruling  over  the  upper  and  lower  world,  the  divine  germ^ 
the  sun,  golden  (resplendent),  strong,  and  living."  The  sentence  is 
closed  by  the  abridged  form  of  the  determinative  symbol  of  Ran  ^  (name). 
As  a  cartouche  containing  symbols  has  not  been  found  in  this  Pyramid, 
it  is  at  present  uncertain  whether  or  not  the  symbols  expressing  the  sun, 
resplendent,  &c.  (Renoubgom),  form  the  prenoroeu  of  a  king.  The 
standard  may  belong  to  the  founder  of  the  Pyramid.  It  resembles  that 
of  the  king  Nepercheres,^  and  indeed  those  of  all  the  monarchs  in  the 
Memphite  dynasty  ;  and,  I  have  already  observed,  that  a  similar  group  of 
characters  was  found  at  Reegah,  and  also  upon  a  tomb  in  the  vicinity  of 
the  Pyramids  of  Gizeh.^ 

Fig.  10  shews  the  detached  hieroglyphics  inscribed  upon  the  tiles.^ 
The  subject  of  them  is  no  doubt  sepulchral,  because  a  meaning  may  be 
deduced  from  them,  which  resembles  that  of  other  inscriptions  copied 
from  tombs  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Pyramids  of  Gizeh,   as  fol- 

lows: —   ^        "offering"  "that  he  may  give**     o 

r\N    I  I    A      " ^'^  ''^^  speaking  and  devoted  to  the  great  god" 

which  was  at  that  time  frequently  added  to  the  names  of  deceased  per- 
sons, instead  of  the  expression  afterwards  used — "  Justified  (truth-speak- 
ing, veridique)  to  Ra,  to  Osiris,"  or  "  to  the  great  god,"    It  is  of  course 

•  Burton,  « Excerpta  Hier."  PI.  XXVII.  No.  6.  Segato  et  Minutoli, 
loc.  cit. 

'  This  standard  has  also  been  alluded  to  by  Rosellini,  ^'Mon.  Stor.** 
Tom.  II.  PI.  I. 

■  It  has  also  been  supposed  to  represent  a  signet ;  and  in  some  instances  it 
replaces  the  solar  disc :  thus  both  Isis  and  Nephthys  kneel  upon  the  symbol, 
Noub,  and  place  their  hands  on  this  object,  or  on  the  solar  disc.  The  vulture 
and  hawk,  when  intended  to  represent  Victory,  hold  it  in  their  claws. 

«  RoseUini,  "Mon.  Stor."  Tom.  11.  Part  I.  PI.  I.  p.  16.  Tav.  Agg.  L 
No.  9. 

»  Burton,  "  Excerpta  Hier."  PI.  XXVII.  No.  6. 

*  Some  of  these  tiles  were  brought  over  by  Mr.  Burton,  and  are  now  in 
the  British  Museum.  Hieratic  numerals  are  inscribed  upon  their  reverse 
sides,  intended,  most  probably,  as  directions  for  their  positions  in  the  building. 


APPENDIX.  55 

impossible  to  determine  to  which  deity  the  indefinite  term  ''  the  great 
god**  alludes.  It  has  been  applied  to  Anubis,  who,  as  well  as  Phtah, 
was  especially  worshipped  at  that  time.^ 

Fig.  1 1  was  on  a  column  in  the  gallery.  It  represents,  in  two  places, 
a  deceased  person  standing  up,  and  presenting  offerings  to  a  deity  seated 

upon  a  throne.    Th^  line  of  hieroglyphics  to  the  left  expresses — " 

Phtah  Sochar^  Osiris^  resident  in  the  centre  of  the  tomby  may  he  give 
an  abode f  Sfc.  to  the  royal  scribe^  attached  to  the  silver  abode  of  the 

lord  of  the  worlds  and  attached  to  the  charge  of  the  silver  abode 

mas"  &c.  In  the  next  line  may  be  read — "  For  the  sake  of  the  mili- 
tary chief ;*•  and  in  the  line  to  the  right, — *' For  the  sake  of 

the  bard  of  the  gracious  god,**  or  "  of  the  person  praising  the  gracious 
god,  superintendent  of  the  white  {or  silver  abode)  of  the  lord  of  the 
world,  of  the  upper  and  lower  hemisphere  (?) mas,** 

These  inscriptions  are  also  sepulchral,  and  appear  to  have  been  exe- 
cuted some  time  after  the  erection  of  the  Pyramids,  which  were  probably 
appropriated  to  persons  of  the  royal  family.  They  seem  to  belong  to  the 
eighteenth  dynasty,  because  the  title  **  military  chief"  or  **  youthful 
chief*  (P^^  &^)»  Although  it  occurs  under  the  monarchs  of  the  six- 
teenth and  seventeenth  dynasties,  was  not  used  during  the  reign  of  their 
Memphite  predecessors.^    Nor  was  the  formula,  ^* royal  scribe"  then 

known,  but     |bjn  ||l   "scribe  of  the  white"  or  "silver  abode 

employed.  The  expression  in  the  dedication, — "for  the  offering  of" 
was  seldom  used  towards  the  conclusion  of  the  seventeenth  dynasty,  and 
was  unknown  at  the  time  of  the  Memphite  kings.  The  expression 
"  ....  mas**  does  not  occur  as  a  termination  to  any  name  till  the  close 
of  the  seventeenth  dynasty.^  For  these  reasons  the  inscription  upon  the 
column  does  not  seem  to  have  been  earlier  than  the  eighteenth  dynasty, 
and  must  therefore  have  been  made  long  after  the  decease  of  the  antient 

*  Burton,  '^Ezcerpta  Hier."  PI.  XXVII.  No.  35.  Respecting  Anubis, 
many  sepulchral  inscriptions  from  Memphis  in  the  British  Museum  allude  to 
the  worriiip  of  this  deity,  and  end  with  "to  the  great  god."  On  some  vases 
also  in  the  Museum,  which  belong  to  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  dynasties, 
and  were  brought  from  Abydos,  the  name  of  Anubis  replaces  the  expression 
"  the  great  god"  as  "  devout  to  the  great  god"  "  devout  to  Anubis" 

*  Cf.  Tombs  at  Benihassan.  Burton,  "  Excerpta  Hier."  PI.  XXXIII. 
The  expression  or  title  "royal  tutor"  was,  however,  often  used  at  this  epoch. 

^  Portion  of  the  tomb  of  Onkhif,  British  Museum.  Leemans  supposes  it 
to  be  a  "palace"  (or  portion  of  some  such  edifice),  ^' salon  blanche;"  but  it 
is  difierently  inscribed,  with  the  group  for  sUver,  upon  the  statue  of  Pnahsi, 
British  Museum,  No.  43,  and  means  "  the  silver  house" 

'  Aahmas,  Oohmas,  or  Amasis,  is  the  earliest. 


"T  was 


56  APPENDIX. 

monarch  for  whom  the  Pyramid  was  erected.J^  The  latter  part  of  the 
inscription  is  obscure.  It  resembles  a  royal  standard,  in  which  the  hawk 
is  put  for  the  ureeus ;  but  it  is  not  easy  to  decide  by  the  copy,  whether  in 
the  original  the  **  world,"  ^  or  the  expression  ** justified ,**  vrsa  inserted. 
It  is  hardly  possible  to  suppose  that  this  fragment,  which  is  stated  to  have 
been  built  in,  can  be  qlder  than  the  inscription  of  the  inlaid  door. 

We  know  that  the  tombs  of  inferior  persons  frequently  became  the 
sepulchres  of  other  individuals  ;  and  history  informs  us  that  the  memory 
of  the  monarchs,  who  erected  some  of  the  Pyramids,  was  not  held  in 
much  veneration.  But  the  desecration  of  these  magnificent  mausolea  by 
the  entombment  of  subjects,  however  high  their  rank,  is  a  surprising  fact, 
which  cannot  be  now  accounted  for. 

According  to  the  following  extract  from  the  work  of  Sig^ore  G. 
Segato,  characters  were  traced  in  black  in  the  interior  of  the  edifice :  — 
'*  Nella  parte  interna  posteriore  all'  architrave  si  scorgono  traccie  di 
alcuni  geroglifici  lineati  in  nero,  che  non  si  puo  rilevare,  ma  che  sembrano 
ben  posteriori  all*  edificazione  della  Piramide/'^ 

This  author's  philological  researches  were  not  successful ;  indeed, 
hieroglyphics  were  ill  understood  when  he  wrote.  The  date  of  the 
monarch,  upon  whose  standard  *'  divine  germ**  is  inscribed,  has  not  yet 
been  determined  by  any  inscription,  nor  has  it  been  ascertained  whether 
he  preceded,  or  was  posterior  to  Cheops. 


PYRAMIDS  OF  DASHOOR. 

A  MAP  is  given,  and  a  general  view,  which  was  taken  during 
the  inundation  from  the  neighbourhood  of  the  village  of  Shinbab. 
The  Pyramids  are  situated  near  the  village  of  Meusheeh,  and  are 
about  three  miles  from  Dashoor,  which  is,  however,  the  principal 
place  in  the  neighbourhood.  They  consist  of  two  large  buildings 
of  stone,  of  a  smaller  one  of  the  same  material,  and  of  two  of 
crude  brick,  and  they  are  placed  on  a  high  undulating  desert 
plain,  covered  with  stones,  with  small  pebbles,  and  with  petrified 

'  Mr.  Perring  has  already  observed  that,  as  this  stone  is  a  fragment,  the 
hieroglyphics  must  have  belonged  to  a  building  more  antient  than  the  Pyra- 
mid ;  but  Mr.  Birch's  opinion  of  them  would  seem  to  induce  a  belief  that  the 
passage  in  question,  had  been  inserted  upon  the  fragment  long  after  the  erec- 
tion of  the  building. 

*  In  some  of  the  standards,  belonging  to  the  seventeenth  dynasty,  is  the 
expression  '^  world.'* 

*  Saggi  Pittorid  da  Segato  e  Lorenzo  Masi.  Fas.  Secondo.  Fiorenze^  1827. 


<•■■  5 


St  f 


•v. 


V- 


f 


£ 
I. 
W 
I 
Ifl 
Z 


> 

o- 

Q 


<   . 


^•b^ 


^A 


.■^^.^..Mt- 


Q 

< 
(0 


o 

o 


7 


CO 

O  -^ 


a  ' 


■  t 

a 


'4 

K 

o 

s 
c 


•<  z 

u 

z 
o 


vji?!^* 


ff^  « 


'ii«?^ 


^ 


•.5.-— - 


-***; 


k"«'  ■»•■  tq> 


.V 


•so^ 


.".**.>. 


fer 


z 
< 
a 

y 

-J 
a 

CD 


■r. 


5 


o 
<D 


C8 


u 

o 


\ 
\ 

I 

I', 


r3 


iX 


o. 

4.. 


2^ 


54 

V— S 


A 

? 


J 


APPENDIX.  67 

wood.  But  Mr.  Perring  observes  that  the  place  does  not  contain 
many  shafts  or  tombs,  although  it  formed  part  of  the  cemetery  of 
Acanthus,  the  site  of  which  is  marked  by  considerable  mounds, 
near  the  mountains  to  the  north-westward  of  Zowyet  el  Dashoor. 

THE  NORTHERN  BRICK  PYRAMID. 

On  the  8th  of  September,  1839,  Mr.  Perring  began  to  remove 
the  rubbish  and  sand  accumulated  at  the  northern  front  of  this 
Pyramid,  which  is  called  by  the  Arabs,  *'  Haram  Mekubbub/' 
the  Round  or  Flat  Pyramid,  as,  from  the  effects  of  time  and  of 
the  seasons,  it  has  the  appearance  of  a  mound  ;  but  the  materials 
had  not  been  taken  away,  as  they  had  been  from  the  Southern 
Pyramid. 

It  is  composed  of  crude  bricks,  and  has  been  cased  with  stone 
from  the  Mokattam  quarries,  pieces  of  which  were  found  near  the 
base.  The  northern  front  has  had  the  addition  of  a  temple  or 
portico,  adorned  with  sculpture  and  hieroglyphics,  like  those  said 
to  be  attached  to  the  Pyramids  in  Ethiopia.'  The  casing  and  the 
portico  had,  however,  been  entirely  removed,  and  their  former 
existence  was  only  ascertained  by  the  operations  carried  on  by 
Mr.  Perring,  in  September  and  October  1839,  in  order  to  discover 
the  entrance  of  the  Pyramid ;  and  in  continuing  the  excavation 
to  the  eastward  a  hollow,  about  6  feet  deep,  was  found  in  the 
ground  under  the  Pyramid,  which  was  supposed  to  have  been 
occasioned  by  the  sinking  in  of  a  passage  below  it.  It  was 
therefore  cleared  out  to  the  depth  of  8  feet,  but  nothing  was 
discovered. 

The  dilapidation  of  the  Pyramid  seems  to  have  been  begun  at 
a  very  early  time  by  the  Egyptians  themselves,  as  mummies  were 
found  in  the  ruins ;  and  as  many  of  the  broken  stones  were  in- 
scribed with  hieratic  characters  of  a  comparatively  late  period,  by 
which  it  would  appear  that  the  persons  who  destroyed  the  edifice, 
probably  for  the  sake  of  the  materials,  not  only  retained  the 
customs,  and  the  language  of  antient  Egypt,  but  also  used  the 
spot  as  a  place  of  interment ;  and  the  destruction  of  the  masonry 
was  no  doubt  accelerated  by  the  facility,  with  which  the  stones 
could  be  removed  to  the  neighbouring  city,  at  one  time  the 
capital  of  the  lower  country.  Indeed,  the  Arab  historians  have 
attributed  the  dilapidation  of  the  Pyramids,  and  of  the  Tombs 
at  Gizeh,  to  the  establishment  of  Cairo  in  the  vicinity  of  those 
monuments. 

'  See  CaiUaud,  Waddington,  and  Hoskins. 


58  APPENDIX. 

According  to  Herodotus,  Asychis,  the  successor  of  Mycerinns, 
added  lofty  propyleea  to  the  eastern  front  of  the  Temple  of  Vulcan, 
and  also,  from  a  desire  to  surpass  in  magnificence  his  predeces- 
sors, constructed  a  Pyramid  with  bricks,  upon  which  was  this 
inscription:  —  ^* Do  not  degrade  me^  by  comparing  me  with  the 
Pyramids  built  with  stone,  which  I  excels  as  much  as  Jupiter  excels 
the  other  gods  ;  for  those ^  who  built  me,  thrust  poles  into  the  lakes ^ 
andy  collecting  together  the  mud^  which  adhered  to  them^  they  made 
bricks,  and  thus  they  constructed  me."  The  Pyramid  in  question 
has  been  supposed  by  Mr.  Hamilton,  and  by  other  good  authori- 
ties, to  have  been  built  by  Asychis ;  and,  in  support  of  that  opinion 
it  may  be  observed,  that  it  is  the  most  considerable  Pyramid  built 
with  bricks,  and  that  it  is  near  the  other  Pyramids  formed  of 
stone,  with  which  it  might  have  been  compared ;  and  also  that  it 
is  within  a  short  distance  of  the  Temple  of  Vulcan,  which  Asychis 
had  so  considerably  embellished.  The  solidity  of  its  construction 
is  likewise  remarkable.  Not  a  single  brick  appears  to  have 
settled  from  its  place;  and,  although  the  boasting  terms  of  the 
inscription  have  excited  much  surprise,  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  a 
mass  more  solid,  and  also  more  durable,  as  long  as  it  was  pro- 
tected, by  an  external  casing  of  stone,  from  the  effects  of  the 
atmosphere.  It  is  certainly,  therefore,  as  superior  to  those  built 
with  common  stone  rubble,  as  Jupiter  may  be  supposed  to  have 
been  to  the  other  gods.  The  pre-eminence  attributed  to  it  may 
also  have  been  enhanced  by  the  grandeur  of  the  portico  or  temple, 
by  which  it  was  distinguished,  and  which  was  probably  adorned 
with  sculpture  and  with  hieroglyphics,  executed  with  the  greatest 
care  and  skill.  As  the  whole  of  the  bricks  are  not  composed  of 
alluvial  soil,  the  latter  part  of  the  inscription  can  only  refer  to 
those  formed  of  the  mud  or  clay  drawn  out  of  one  of  the  sacred 
lakes ;  and  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  the  Acherusia  of  Diodorus 
was  at  no  great  distance  in  the  direction  of  Memphis,  and  that 
the  boundaries  of  another  lake  are  to  be  traced  to  the  northward 
of  the  ruins,  supposed  to  be  those  of  the  Temple  of  Vulcan,  near 
that  city.  If  it  be  urged  that  this  Pyramid  could  not  have  been 
built  by  Asychis,  because,  from  having  been  cased,  it  must  have 
had  the  appearance  of  stone,  it  may  be  remarked  that  all  the 
brick  Pyramids  at  present  existing  in  Egypt  (which  are  four, 
exclusive  of  some  small  buildings  at  Thebes)  appear  to  have  been 
covered  with  stone;  and  likewise,  that  the  above-mentioned 
inscription  would  have  been  unnecessary,  bad  the  material,  of 
which  the  Pyramid  was  formed,  been  apparent.     After  a  few  days' 


APPENDIX.  59 

labour  a  considerable  quantity  of  tbe  casing  was  found,  which 
had  been  sawn  up  for  removal.  Most  of  the  blocks  were  inscribed 
with  red  ochre,  but  the  characters  were  generally  illegible.  In 
removing  the  rubbish,  which  was  chiefly  composed  of  the  soil  of 
the  bricks  washed  down  by  the  rain,  and  mixed  with  fragments  of 
stone  and  with  sand,  a  small  part  of  a  cartouche  was  discovered 
(see  Fig.  8);  also  several  pieces  of  cloth,  a  skull,  an  ornament 
composed  of  green  earthenware,  part  of  a  cross-banded  moulding, 
and  blocks  containing  hieratic  inscriptions,  and  hieroglyphics 
sculptured  in  relief.  Two  fragments  adorned  with  stars  on  a 
blue  ground,  had  apparently  formed  part  of  a  coved  ceiling.  As 
the  edges  were  imperfect,  it  could  not  be  ascertained  whether 
these  stones  had  been  inserted  on  the  principles  of  an  arch,  but, 
as  the  grain  was  oblique  to  the  curve,  it  was  not  probable.  Part 
of  a  jar  of  brown  pottery,  with  a  remarkably  handsome  black 
border,  was  also  dug  up. 

As  stone  had  been  used  in  the  casing  of  the  building,  it  might 
have  been  also  employed  in  the  construction  of  the  apartments. 
But  it  was  supposed  that  the  interior  of  this  Pyramid  might  pos- 
sibly afford  an  additional  proof  of  the  antiquity  of  the  arch,  because 
ceilings  of  any  extent  could  not  well  have  been  formed  with  bricks 
in  any  other  manner.  Mr.  Perring,  therefore,  proceeded  to  exa- 
mine it  in  September  1839,  and  for  that  purpose  he  first  cut  into 
the  building,  which  he  did  with  considerable  difficulty,  because 
the  bricks  continually  fell  in,  as  the  sand,  in  which  they  were 
laid,  was  removed.  He  then  laid  open  upwards  of  90  feet  of  the 
northern  front,  and  likewise  the  platform  before  it  to  the  same 
extent :  but  he  could  not  discover  any  entrance ;  and  he  therefore 
concluded  that  the  apartments  were  excavations  in  the  rock,  and 
that  the  entrance  was  by  a  shaft,  or  by  an  inclined  passage,  at 
some  distance  from  the  Pyramid,  and  entirely  unconnected  with 
it.  This  he  endeavoured  to  intersect,  by  sinking  a  trench  30  feet 
wide  from  the  centre  of  the  northern  front ;  but,  although  he 
carried  it  in  to  the  length  of  160  feet,  his  attempts  were  unsuc- 
cessful. By  these  operations,  however,  he  discovered  that  the 
building  had  been  attempted  to  the  eastward,  and,  as  has  been 
already  mentioned,  that  there  had  been  a  portico,  apparently 
connected  by  a  stone  platform  with  the  casing  of  the  Pyramid, 
and  covered  in  by  a  roof,  formed  by  the  successive  projections  of 
the  courses  of  the  blocks.  These  courses  had  met  at  the  summit 
in  the  centre,  and  their  angles  had  been  cut  away,  so  as  to  con- 
stitute a  curved  line ;  a  mode  of  construction  by  no  means  uncom- 
mon, and  which  would  seem  to  imply  an  ignorance  of  the  arch  at 


60  APPENDIX. 

the  time  when  the  roof  was  built,  although  it  may  have  gradually 
led  to  the  invention  of  it.     Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson  considers  that  the 
oldest  stone  arch,  which  had  been  discovered  when  he  wrote  his 
book  containing  Observations  on  Thebes,  and  a  General  View  of 
Egypt  (see  p.  337),  had  been  built  in  the  time  of  Psammeticus  II. 
(about  600  years  before  Christ),  and  the  arch  in  Campbeirs  Tomb 
at  Gizeh  was  of  about  the  same  date.     There  is  said,  however, 
to  be  an  arch  in  the  portico  of  a  Pyramid  at  Meroe,  inscribed 
with  the  cartouche  of  Tirhaka,  about  700  years  before  Christ. 
The  different  methods,  by  which  ceilings  were  formed,  before 
the  invention  of  the  arch,  have  been  already  described,  Vol.  I. 
p.  219.     Porticoes  are  said  by  MM.  Caillaud  and  Waddington, 
to   have  been  attached  to  the  Pyramids  in  Ethiopia ;   but  this 
is  the  only  one  hitherto  discovered  in  Lower  Egypt.     Near  this 
place,  and  at  the  depth  of  about  4  feet  6  inches,  above  fifty 
bodies  were  found,   ten    of  which  were   mummies,   embalmed 
and  deposited  in  the  usual  manner.     The  others  were  much 
decayed,  and  had  been  buried   in  their  clothes,  and   in  some 
instances  were  bound  round  with  common  cord,   and  laid  in 
wooden  coffins,  or  amongst  a  few  branches  of  date-trees.     Some 
of  the  clothes  were  woollen,  others  coarse  linen,  with  a  fringed 
border  of  bright  scarlet  worsted.    The  heads  were  covered  with 
bright  red  net-work.     Mr.  Perring  imagined  that  these  bodies 
bad  belonged  to  a  pastoral  people,  probably  to  Bedouins,  and  that 
they  had  been  interred,  together  with  the  mummies,  at  a  very 
early  period,  before  the  introduction  of  Christianity.     One  of  the 
embalmed  bodies  was  in  a  decayed  wooden  coffin,  and  near  it  a 
reed  flute  was  found.     About  a  foot  lower,  a  piece  of  cross-band 
moulding,  slabs  containing  coloured  and  well-executed  sculptures, 
which  recorded  the  dedication  of  an  offering,  and  part  of  a  car- 
touche, were  also  dug  up.    Five  or  six  bodies  had  been  placed  over 
these  fragments,  and  one,  enclosed  in  a  coffin,  was  found  in  a 
small  tomb  constructed  with  the  bricks  of  the  Pyramid,  in  which 
had  been  placed  a  piece  of  glass  like  the  bottom  of  a  wine-glass, 
and  a  pair  of  brass  armlets.    Two  mummies,  handsomely  deco- 
rated, and  wrapped  up,  were  laid  in  sarcophagi  made  of  coarse 
earthenware,  the  ends  of  which  were  circular ;  and  upon  the  lids, 
which  were  composed  of  two  pieces,  faces  had  been  rudely  painted. 
The  mummies,  upon  exposure,  crumbled  into  dust.    They  did  not 
appear  to  contain  the  idols,  and  small  figures  usually  found  in 
Egyptians*  tombs ;  but  Mr.  Perring  collected  some  bronze  nails, 
the  bracelets  and  the  earrings  of  a  child,  and,  from  the  body  of  a 
female  some  beads,  buttons,  and  bronze  pins. 


»- 
If) 

uJ 

$ 

O 

z 
o 


APPENDIX. 


61 


The  building  was  carried  down  much  lower  than  Mr.  Perring 
expected ;  he  accordingly  enlarged  the  excavation,  and  he  found 
a  wall  of  rubble- work,  which  appeared  to  be  a  protection  to  an 
entrance.  On  the  24th  he  arrived  at  the  base  of  the  building,  30 
feet  below  the  surface  of  the  ground.  He  found  a  pavement 
composed  of  large  stones,  and  towards  the  north  a  hollow  about 
2  feet  8  inches  wide,  which  had  been  stopped  up  by  a  block,  and 
had  in  some  degree  the  appearance  of  an  entrance  to  an  inclined 
passage.  The  foundation  was  remarkable.  The  stony  surface  of 
the  desert  had  been  made  level  by  a  layer  of  fine  sand,  confined 
on  all  sides  by  a  stone  platform,  14  feet  6  inches  wide,  and  2  feet 
9  inches  thick,  which  supported  the  external  casing;  and  the 
Pyramid  was  built  upon  the  sand,  which  was  firm  and  solid. 
Mr.  Perring  has  met  with  other  instances  in  Egypt  where  sand 
has  been  thus  used;^  and,  provided  it  be  retained  in  its  place,  it 
apparently  may  be  depended  upon.  The  blocks  composing  the 
platform  were  laid  upon  four  courses  of  bricks. 

Many  of  the  stones,  which  belonged  to  the  casing,  are  large. 
The  dimensions  of  one  are  as  follows : — 
Base,  8  feet  3  inches ;  vertical  height, 
1  foot  1 1  inches ;  and  the  face  of  it  is 
above  6  feet  in  length.  The  blocks 
were  not  laid  in  regular  courses  of  an  / 
equal  thickness,  but  each  stone  had  been  fitted  to  those  adjoining, 
as  in  the  masonry  termed  polygonal.  Putlock  holes  had  been 
cut  into  many  of  the  blocks  to  receive  the  ends  of  the  poles,  upon 
which  a  scaffold  had  been  placed,  that  the  workmen  might  be 
enabled  to  finish,  and  trim  off  the  casing  to  an  even  surface.^  And 
these  holes  had  been  in  every  instance  filled  up  with  small  pieces 
of  the  same  stone,  laid  in  cement  or  in  gypsum,  and  so  exactly 
worked,  that  many  of  them  were  not  discovered  until  the  stones 
had  been  broken.  Several  of  the  blocks, 
particularly  in  the  lower  part,  were  held 
together  by  stone  cramps,  thus.  The  base 
of  the  single  stone,  which  formed  the  apex 
of  the  Pyramid,  was  about  6  feet  8  inches 
square.     It  had  been  fixed  upon  the  course 

*  Namely,  Campbell's  Tomb  at  Gizeh,  the  Temple  near  the  Pyramid  of 
Reegah,  the  Platform  of  the  Northern  Pyramid  of  Abouseir,  and  some  smaller 
tombs. 

'  These  holes  were  probably  intended  for  the  above-mentioned  purpose ; 
at  the  same  time  a  reference  is  made  to  Vol.  I.  p.  33. 


62  APPENDIX. 

below  it  (composed  only  of  two  blocks)  by  two  of  the  above-men - 
tioned  cramps  on  each  of  the  four  sides.  These  cramps  had  been 
laid  in  cement  composed  of  plaster  of  Paris.  They  were  probably 
formed  of  wood  or  of  stone,  but  none  were  discovered.^ 

The  bricks^  of  which  the  body  of  the  Pyramid  was  built,  were 
16  inches  long»  8  inches  wide,  and  from  4^  to  6|  inches  thick. 
They  did  not  afford  any  inscription,  but  had  been  marked  on  the 
upper  surface,  by  means  of  the  fingers,  with  different  signs,  appa- 
rently according  to  their  quality  ;  but  varying  according  to  their 
position,  as  the  marks  at  the  north-western  differed  from  those 
at  the  north-eastern  angle,  and  at  the  south-eastern  angle  only 

Mr.  Perring  observed  i7\  =  .  The  greatest  number  were  com- 
posed of  alluvial  soil,  and  were  marked  thus  ^.  Those  formed 
of  sandy  loam,  or  of  sand  mixed  up  with  Nile  earth,  and  a  little 

straw,  had  this  mark    \l   •     Others,  with  not  quite  so  much  sand 

in  their  composition,  had  merely  been  marked  by  a  thumb  thrust 
into  the  centre ;  a  few,  which  contained  a  good  deal  of  straw, 

had  this    ^^^^^^.     The  most  usual  mark,  particularly  on 

those  near  the  base,  had  been  made  by  two  fingers,  about  an  inch 
apart,  having  been  drawn  down  the  middle ;  and  the  bricks  so 
distinguished  were  formed  of  a  very  dark  tenacious  earth,  and 
without  any  intermixture  of  straw.  They  were  all  remarkably 
solid,  and  they  had  been  laid  principally  in  courses  from  north  to 
south,  occasionally  intersected  by  courses  running  from  east  to 
west.  The  bricks  were  bedded  in,  and  the  interstices  between 
them  were  filled  up,  with  fine  dry  sand.  In  the  operations  already 
described,  Mr.  Perring  had  examined  more  than  90  feet  of  the 
northern  front,  and  the  platform,  which  supported  the  casing  and 
the  portico.  He  had  also  ascertained  by  two  shafts,  that  the  rock 
was  16  feet  below  the  base  of  the  building,  and  therefore,  as 
the  sand  and  rubbish  had  accumulated  to  a  great  height,  that 
excavations  in  search  of  the  entrance  (in  which  he  had  already 
employed  above  sixty  people  more   than  a  month),  would  be 


*  Similar  spaces,  in  the  blocks  of  the  Great  Temple  at  Kamac,  ^ere  found 
to  have  been  completely  filled  with  cement,  which,  notwithstanding  the  great 
heat  of  the  climate,  still  retained  a  degree  of  moisture.    See  Vol.  I.  p.  77. 


is!k 


<: 


^ 


JTOKTMV  SSIGKPTKjbltXB  OF  S&.S XE OQIK. . 


APPENDIX.  63 

attended  with  great  labour  and  expense,  and  with  more  time,  than 
he  had  at  his  disposal.  He  therefore  sent  for  the  sheik  of  the 
village,  and  the  reis,  whom  he  had  employed,  and  he  offered 
them  two  purses  (about  10/.)  if  they  would  discover  the  entrance 
by  the  time  of  his  return  from  the  Faioum ;  but  they  would  not 
undertake  the  discovery  at  that  price,  notwithstanding  the  people 
of  the  village  were  unemployed. 

The  shafts  A  and  B  were  sunk  to  ascertain  the  depth  of  the 
rock  below  the  base  of  the  Pyramid ;  it  has  been  described  to 
be  15  feet,  and  the  intermediate  space  was  filled  up  with  com- 
pact gravel. 

Figs.  1  and  2  were  written  with  red  ochre  upon  the  blocks, 
which  had  belonged  to  the  casing.  Figs.  3  to  10  represent  sculp* 
tured  inscriptions  found  upon  other  blocks.  Mr.  Perring  imagines 
that  Fig.  3  formed  part  of  the  inscription  mentioned  by  He- 
rodotus. 

Feet.  Indiei. 

Original  Base 350    0 

Height 215    6 

Angle  of  Casing        -        51°    20'    25" 
Present  Height  above  the  Base,  about  -        -        -        -        90  ft. 

above  the  surface  of  the  sand  of  the  Desert,  about  82  ft. 

THE  NORTHERN  STONE  PYRAMID. 

It  is  built  with  stone  taken  from  the  adjacent  mountains^  and 
principally  from  quarries  to  the  westward  and  south-westward  of 
the  edifice,  which,  like  that  in  the  Mustabet  el  Faraoon,  is  of  a 
reddish  colour,  calcareous,  and  interspersed  with  semi-petrified 
shells,  chiefly  those  of  oysters.  The  exterior  casing,  and  the  lin- 
ings of  the  passages,  and  of  the  chambers,  are  of  white  compact 
limestone  from  the  Arabian  mountains;  and,  were  it  not  for  a 
quantity  of  broken  granite  near  an  inclined  road,  which  proceeds 
from  the  eastern  side  of  the  Southern  Brick  Pyramid,  it  might  be 
supposed  that  these  buildings  were  erected  by  kings,  who  pos- 
sessed the  lower  country  only,  and  who  consequently  had  not 
access  to  the  quarries  at  Es  Souan ;  for  that  material  does  not 
appear  to  have  been  used  in  either  of  the  stone  Pyramids  at  this 
place. 

Two  causeways  had  been  constructed  from  this  Pyramid  to 
the  quarries  to  the  westward,  and  two  others  also  towards  the 
valley  of  the  Nile,  for  the  conveyance  of  the  stone,  which  was 
brought  from  the  opposite  side  of  the  water. 


64  APPENDIX. 

In  some  places,  particularly  on  the  western  side,  the  casing 
still  remains.  The  top  of  the  Pyramid  was  built  entirely  with 
Arabian  stone.  The  apex  had  been  formed  of  one  block,  and  the 
course  below  it  of  four  others,  4  feet  9  inches  thick;  but  in 
general  the  courses  towards  the  top  were  about  2  feet,  and  those 
near  the  base^  about  3  feet  in  thickness.  The  stones  are  laid  in 
horizontal  courses,  and  the  whole  of  the  masonry  is  good,  and 
resembles  that  of  the  Great  Pyramid  of  Gizeh.  The  angle  at  the 
apex  is  nearly  a  right  angle,  and  the  building  has  on  that  account 
a  handsome  and  solid  appearance,  and  from  retaining  more  of 
its  original  form  than  the  others,  it  is  called  by  the  Arabs, 
"  Haram  Mesinee,"  the  Pointed  or  Sharp  Pyramid.  It  is  also 
called  '*  Haram  el  Wataweet,"  from  the  number  of  bats  within  it; 
and  sometimes  **  Haram  6  Silsili,*'  on  account  of  a  chain  said  to 
have  been  suspended  from  the  entrance  of  the  passage  between 
the  second  and  third  chambers. 

The  centre  of  the  entrance  is  12  feet  6  inches  to  the  eastward  of 
the  centre  of  the  northern  front,  and  the  bottom  of  it  is  94  feet 
perpendicularly  higher  than  the  base  of  the  building.  The  pass- 
age  is  3  feet  5 J  inches  in  width,  3  feet  11 J  inches  in  height,  and 
has  an  inclination  of  27^  56^.  Its  original  length  was  205  feet 
6  inches,  of  which  4  feet  6  inches  have  been  destroyed  by  the 
removal  of  the  external  casing.  The  lower  part,  and  a  horizontal 
passage,  24  feet  4  inches  long,  3  feet  5J  inches  wide,  and  4  feet 
5i  inches  high,  leading  from  the  bottom  of  it  to  the  first  chamber, 
were  much  encumbered  with  rubbish. 

The  first  chamber  is  27  feet  5j|  inches  in  length,  north  and 
south,  and  11  feet  11  inches  east  and  west.  The  floor  b  on  a 
level  with  the  base  of  the  Pyramid.  The  four  lower  courses  of 
the  walls,  to  the  height  of  11  feet  8}  inches,  are  perpendicular; 
but  each  of  the  eleven  courses  above  them  sets  oyer  nearly 
6  inches,  so  that  the  ceiling  is  only  1  foot  2  inches  in  width.  The 
two  lower  projecting  courses  are  3  feet  in  thickness ;  the  others 
rather  more  than  2  feet  6  inches ;  and  the  height  of  the  chamber 
is  about  40  feet  4}  inches. 

A  passage,  10  feet  4  inches  long,  3  feet  6^  inches  wide,  and 
4  feet  6^  inches  in  height,  leads  from  the  south-western  corner  of 
this  chamber  to  another  apartment,  exactly  similar,  excepting 
that  it  is  about  two  inches  shorter  from  north  to  south.  The 
pavement  of  this  second  chamber  has  been  removed,  and  the  room 
is  full  of  rubbish.     At  the  end  of  it,  and  at  the  height  of  25  feet 


BTTtKKIE      IP'Srm^JCItlB)      «ir      ]E£ 


6! 


APPENDIX.  65 

d}  inches  from  the  original  floor,  a  passage,  3  feet  5}  inches  in 
width,  runs  southward,  for  23  feet  1 1  inches,  to  a  third  chamber, 
the  floor  of  which  had  been  taken  up  to  the  depth  of  14  feet. 
The  floor  of  the  above-mentioned  passage  (which  was  originally 
3  feet  5J  inches  high)  had  also  been  taken  up,  in  order,  probably, 
to  facilitate  the  removal  of  the  large  blocks  from  the  inner 
chamber. 

The  third  chamber  is  27  feet  3  J  inches  long  from  east  to 
west,  and  13  feet  7}  inches  wide  from  north  to  south.  The  sides 
are  perpendicular  for  12  feet  1  inch,  after  which  fourteen  courses 
project  inwards,  as  in  the  other  apartment ;  and  the  total  height 
from  the  original  floor  to  the  ceiling  is  48  feet  1  inch. 

Origtnal.  Pment 

Base  -        -        -        719  ft.     5  in.  700  ft.     0  in. 

Perpendicular  Height  342  ft.     7  in.  326  fL     6  in. 

Angle  of  external  Casing         -        43°     36^     11" 

Fig.  1  is  a  section  of  the  Pyramid,  through  the  entrance- 
passage  and  the  first  chamber,  looking  west,  a  a  a,  on  the 
sides  of  the  Pyramid,  are  parts  of  the  casing. 

Fig.  2  is  a  plan,  through  A  B,  Fig.  1,  upon  a  level  with  the 
third  chamber,  and  with  the  horizontal  passage  leading  to  it  from 
the  second  chamber. 

In  another  plate,  Fig.  1,  is  part  of  the  section  on  an  en- 
larged scale. 

Fig.  2  is  a  plan  through  E  F  in  Fig.  1 . 

Fig.  3  is  a  section  of  the  second  and  third  chambers. 

Fig.  4.  A  transverse  section  of  the  second  chamber,  looking 
south.  It  shews  the  entrance  of  the  passage  leading  to  the  third 
chamber. 

Fig.  5.  Plan  of  the  entrance-passage,  and  of  the  first  and 
second  chambers. 

THE  SOUTHERN  STONE  PYRAMID. 

It  is  built  in  two  inclinations,  so  that  the  lower  part  has  the 
form  of  a  truncated,  and  the  upper  that  of  a  perfect  Pyramid ; 
which  mode  of  construction,  according  to  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson, 
was  probably  occasioned  by  a  desire  to  complete  the  building 
more  quickly  than  it  was  at  first  intended :  and  it  may  be  added, 
that  this  conjecture  was  in  some  degree  confirmed  by  Mr.  Per- 
ring's  researches,  by  which  it  appeared  that  the  upper  part  had 

VOL.  III.  p 


66  APPENDIX, 

been  carried  up  with  less  care  than  the  lower,  and  was  also  com- 
posed of  smaller  stones  ;  but,  whatever  may  have  been  the  cause, 
the  effect  is  unpleasant,  particularly  when  compared  with  the  fine 
proportions  of  the  Northern  Pyramid. 

The  beds  of  the  casing-stones  are  not  horizontal,  but  incline 
downwards  towards  the  interior  of  the  edifice,  in  order,  probably, 
to  obtain  greater  solidity,  and  likewise  to  save  the  materials,  as 
less  of  the  external  faces  of  the  stones  thus  laid,  would  require  to 
be  planed  away  to  complete  the  exterior  of  the  building.  This 
incline,  however,  is  not  uniform,  nor  at  right  angles  to  the  exte- 
rior, but  it  seems  to  be  regulated  by  the  shapes  of  the  blocks ;  in 
the  upper  part  it  is  generally  at  an  angle  of  3^  30',  and  in  the 
lower  part  it  varies  from  6*^  3(y  to  9°.  The  casing-stones  of  the 
lower  part  are  very  large,  some  of  the  courses  being  4  feet  8  inches 
in  height;  but  they  are  often  divided  into  two  layers,  and  the 
joints  at  the  sides,  instead  of  being  vertical,  are  cut  to  fit  the 
adjacent  stones.  The  courses  in  the  upper  part  are  seldom  more 
than  2  feet  in  height.  Although  a  good  deal  of  the  casing 
remains,  the  building  towards  the  top  is  much  injured  by  the 
weather,  and  most  probably  has  never  been  completed.  The 
masonry  in  the  lower  part  has  also  been  destroyed,  principally,  it 
is  said,  by  the  late  Deflardar  Mahommed  Bey,  to  get  materials 
for  his  palace  near  Cairo.  Upon  the  exterior  were  several  holes, 
in  every  respect  like  those  observed  in  the  casing  of  the  North- 
ern Brick  Pyramid,  and  they  had  been  concealed  in  the  same 
manner. 

The  body  of  the  Pyramid  is  built  with  stone  from  the  imme- 
diate vicinity,  and  much  of  it  seems  to  have  been  quarried  near 
the  northern  and  eastern  faces ;  but  the  casing-blocks,  and  those 
immediately  behind  them,  together  with  the  linings  of  the  pas- 
sages and  chambers,  consist  of  stone  from  the  Mokattam,  which 
has  induced  a  belief  that  the  whole  edifice  is  composed  of  that 
material. 

The  building  has  been  surrounded  by  a  stone  wall;  and  a 
causeway,  composed  of  blocks  from  the  Mokattam,  has  led  from 
the  north-eastern  angle  of  the  enclosure  to  a  small  valley  extend- 
ing to  the  plain  below.     (See  Map.) 

FeeL  iDchM. 

Base 616  8 

Perpendicular  height  of  lower  part       -        -        -  147  4 

upper  part          -        -        -  172  2 

ToUl  height  at  present 319  6 


a.  cnnDKiE   ip^XAjfcauD  ■»  no^fticdiKiim. 


i^»PENDIX.  67 

The  original  perpendicular  height,  if  the  casing  had  been  com- 
pleted, would  have  been  335  feet  9  inches. 

Angle  of  the  casing  of  the  lower  portion         -     54^     14'    46" 

upper  portion    -        42°    59'    26" 
The  platform  at  top  is  about  40  feet  square. 

Mr.  Perring  began  to  clear  the  passages  on  September  20th. 
There  are  two,  and  both  of  them  are  inclined.  The  one,  which 
is  open,  is  in  the  centre  of  the  northern  front,  twelve  courses 
above  the  present  level  of  the  ground,  and  34  feet  10  inches  per- 
pendicularly higher  than  the  base:  it  is  difficult  of  access.  The 
other  is  44  feet  4  inches  to  the  southward  of  the  centre  of  the 
western  front,  and  at  a  perpendicular  height  of  97  feet  8  inches 
above  the  base.  It  was  discovered  by  Mr.  Perring  in  October 
1839,  but  it  has  not  been  opened.  The  first  part  of  the  northern 
passage,  in  length  41  feet  2  inches,  at  present  descends  at  an 
angle  of  28^  38'  on  account  of  a  settlement  (shewn  at  A  in  the 
Section) ;  but  the  original  inclination  was  that  of  the  remainder 
of  the  passage  (26^  10^).  Immediately  at  the  entrance,  the 
removal  of  the  floor  has  increased  the  height  of  it  to  5  feet 
10  inches,  but  it  is  afterwards  only  3  feet  5^  inches ;  the  width 
is  the  same,  and  the  total  length  is  256  feet  1 1  inches. 

The  Pyramid  was  entered  in  1660,  by  Mr.  Melton,  an  English 
traveller;  and  in  1680  by  M.  Le  Brun,  when  a  small  apartment 
was  discovered.  It  had  also  been  visited  by  Mr.  Pocock.  It 
was  examined  by  Mr.  Davison,  in  1763,  by  whom  the  passage 
was  found  to  be  blocked  up.  When  Mr.  Perring  commenced  his 
operations,  it  was  only  accessible  to  the  length  of  140  feet,  and 
it  had  evidently  been  closed  up  intentionally,  because  stones 
detached  from  the  upper  part  would  have  rolled  over  the  mouth 
of  the  entrance ;  and  because  it  was  full  of  large  stones,  like 
those  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  adjacent  desert.  The  removal 
of  these  obstructions  has  been  said  to  have  commenced  on  Sep- 
tember 20th ;  but  it  could  only  be  continued  at  intervals  in  conse- 
quence of  the  want  of  air,  which  on  the  15th  of  October  had 
nearly  occasioned  the  work  to  be  abandoned,  when  a  rush  of 
fresh  air  down  the  passage,  consequent  upon  an  opening  being 
effected  into  the  interior  apartments,  enabled  the  men  to  proceed, 
and  in  a  few  minutes  to  complete  the  operation.^    The  lower  end 

^  Mr.  Perring  states  that  this  current  of  air  continued  for  two  days,  so 
that  the  lights  could  with  difficulty  he  kept  in.  It  would  therefore  appear 
that  the  apartments  must  have  had  some  other  communication  with  the  out- 
ward air. 


68  APPENDIX. 

of  the  passage  is  horizontal  for  2  feet  8  inches ;  after  which,  for 
16  feet  2  inches,  it  is  40  feet  9  inches  in  height,  and  is  con- 
structed like  the  ascending  gallery  in  the  Great  Pyramid  of  Gizeh. 
An  apartment  is  then  entered  about  20  feet  6  inches  in  length, 
north  and  south,  16  feet  I  inch  in  width,  and  80  feet  in  height. 
The  walls  are  closed  in  on  all  sides,  by  the  gradual  projections  of 
the  fifteen  upper  courses,  till  the  ceiling  is  about  a  foot  wide. 
This  is,  probably,  the  apartment  mentioned  by  Mr.  Melton.  It 
had  been  filled  up  with  a  masonry  of  small  squared  stones  (see 
B  B),  to  a  level  with  the  top  of  the  passage,  which  had  also  been 
in  like  manner  built  up.  This  masonry  had  been  partially 
removed,  but  it  probably  now  conceals  a  sarcophagus,  or  the 
entrance  to  a  secret  apartment.  The  Pyramid,  however,  appeared 
to  have  been  exposed  to  great  violence,  and  many  of  the  stones 
were  broken ;  but  the  walls  had  not  been  blackened  by  smoke. 

From  another  passage,  10  feet  long,  in  the  southern  side  of 
the  room,  and  opposite  to  the  entrance,  is  a  shaft  42  feet  6  inches 
in  height,  which  again  communicates,  by  the  opening  C,  with  the 
apartment,  at  about  half  its  height ;  but  the  shaft  does  not  appear 
to  be  connected  with  any  other  place,  unless  it  be  continued  down- 
wards. Many  of  the  stones  in  this  apartment  have  given  way 
under  the  superincumbent  pressure,  and  the  settlement  must 
have  taken  place  whilst  the  building  was  going  on,  because  most 
of  the  fciulty  places  have  been  covered  over  with  plaster.  After 
a  great  deal  of  trouble  wood  and  ladders  were  introduced ;  and  by 
means  of  a  scaffolding  the  aperture  on  the  southern  side  of  the 
apartment  was  examined,  from  which  a  decayed  cord  formed  of 
papyrus  was  suspended.  The  masonry  was  found  to  have  been 
cut  through,  in  order  to  connect  the  apartment  with  a  horizontal 
passage,  which  communicated  with  the  western  entrance.  (See 
Plate.)  This  cutting,  61  feet  8  inches  in  length,  was  not  straight, 
nor  regularly  formed,  but  was  slightly  inclined  upwards.  The 
right-hand  corner  of  the  upper  end  (marked  x)  had  been  rounded, 
and  a  small  recess  had  been  cut  out  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
horizontal  passage,  apparently  for  the  conveyance  of  a  long  solid 
body  into  the  lower  apartment. 

The  entrance  from  the  western  front  of  the  Pyramid  was  by  a 
passage  222  feet  8  inches  long,  3  feet  4  inches  wide,  and  3  feet 
4  inches  high,  and  laid  at  an  angle  of  26^  36^.  The  greater  part 
of  it  was  closed  up  with  large  blocks,  which  had  only  been 
removed  for  about  60  feet  at  the  lower  end.  The  entrance  on 
the  outside  of  the  Pyramid  was  so  well  concealed  as  to  have 
escaped  the  closest  examination,  and  the  blocks  within  it  appeared 


Sfflmrm?  STTOUE  H'7!tAHl!B>fflZ  ©ASIE'^.iIi'lt 


APPENDIX.  69 

to  have  been  fitted  with  the  greatest  accuracy.     In  one  place,  E, 
on  the  southern  side  of  the  passage,  two  upright  pieces  of  wood 
had  been  let  into  a  recess  in  the  stone-work.     The  horizontal 
passage  at  the  end  of  the  incline  was  on  a  level  with  the  base  of 
the   Pyramid.     It  was   remarkably  well  constructed,  and   was 
3  feet  4  inches  wide,  6  feet  4  inches  high,  and  65  feet  6  inches  in 
length.     It  contained  two  portcullises  of  a  peculiar  construction, 
see  Plate,  Figs.  1,2,  and  3.     Fig.  1  shews  the  position  of  the 
slab,  which,  during  the  building  of  the  Pyramid,  had  probably 
been  propped  up,  and,  upon  the  removal  •f  the  support  had  slid 
down  the  incline,  and  had  closed  the  passage^  as  shewn  in  the 
other  figures.    This  portcullis  was  found  in  its  place,  but  the 
upper  part  had  been  broken  away  to  allow  of  an  entrance.    The 
portcullis  must  have  been  let  down  when  both  of  the  entrance- 
passages  were  open,  as  it  had  been  plastered  on  both  sides.    The 
eastern  end  of  the  horizontal  passage  communicated  with  an 
apartment  21  feet  6  inches  long,   13  feet  6  inches  wide,  and 
62  feet  6  inches  high.     It  had  been  constructed  like  the  other, 
and  had  been  built  up  to  a  great  height  with  small  stones.     An 
excavation  had  been  carried  on,  to  the  length  of  about  12  feet, 
into  this  masonry  near  the  floor,  and  the  apartment  had  been 
entirely  ruined.    This  is  the  only  inclined  entrance  hitherto  dis- 
covered in  a  Pyramid  from  any  other  quarter  than  from  the 
north,  for  the  passage  from  the  southern  front  of  the  Pyramid 
of  Saccara  is  horizontal;   and  it  seemed  to   be   the  principal 
entrance,  for  the  northern  was  constructed  with  inferior  masonry, 
and  had  not  the  defence  of  a  portcullis. 

Fig.  4  represents  some  rude  characters  near  the  mouth  of  the 
northern  entrance.  In  Sir  J.  6.  Wilkinson's  opinion,  they  were 
inscribed  at  a  comparatively  late  period,  in  which  case  the 
passage  must  have  been  accessible  when  hieroglyphics  were  still 
in  use ;  and  according  to  Zoega,  *^  De  Obeliscis,''  that  mode 
of  writing,  together  with  idolatry,  gradually  disappeared,  when 
the  Christian  religion  was  introduced,  about  the  third  century. 
Cordage,  and  antient  baskets  formed  of  the  papyrus,  were  found 
in  the  passages  of  this  Pyramid;  and  the  operations  carried  on 
at  the  Northern  Brick  Pyramid  seem  to  prove,  that  in  some 
instances,  the  Egyptians  themselves  broke  open  and  destroyed 
these  antient  tombs. 

Plate  I.  Fig.  1,  is  a  vertical  section  of  the  Pyramid  along 
the  western  entrance-passage,  looking  north. 


70  APPENDIX. 

Fig.  2.  Ditto,  along  the  northern  entrance-passage,  looking 
east. 

Plate  II.  Figs.  1,  2,  and  3.  Details  of  portcullis,  in  the 
upper  passage. 

Fig.  4.     Hieroglyphics  in  the  northern  entrance-passage. 

Plate  III.  Fig.  1.  Section  along  the  western  entrance-pass- 
age, and  the  upper  apartment,  discovered  October  20th,  1838, 
looking  south. 

Fig.  2.     Plan  of  ditto. 

Plate  IV.  Fig.  1.     Section  of  lower  apartment. 

Fig.  2.  Section  along  the  northern  entrance-passage,  looking 
east. 

THE  SMALL  PYRAMID. 

It  is  situated  at  the  distance  of  180  feet,  and  immediately 
opposite  the  centre  of  the  southern  face  of  the  preceding  one ; 
and  it  is  inclosed  by  the  same  peribolus. 

It  is  built  with  roughly  hewn  blocks,  and  has  had  a  casing  of 
stone  from  the  Mokattam,  which  i?,  however,  destroyed. 

OriglnaL  Pnwnt. 

Base 181  ft    0 10. 

Height 106  ft.     9  in.  68  ft. 

Angle  of  Casing,  50°  IT  41" 
Platform  at  top,  about  40  feet  by  30  feet. 

THE  SOUTHERN  BRICK  PYRAMID. 

It  is  called  by  the  Arabs,  **  Haram  &  Sodah,"  the  Black 
Pyramid,  and  is  now  much  destroyed,  as  it  has  afforded  materials 
for  the  houses  and  tombs  of  the  neighbouring  village  of  Men- 
sheeh.  Mr.  Perring  did  not  discover  any  traces  of  the  chamber, 
the  roof  of  which  is  stated  by  Dr.  Richardson,  and  by  others,  to 
have  fallen  in ;  nor  did  he  perceive  any  considerable  settlement. 
It  is  built  in  the  same  manner,  but  not  so  carefully,  as  the  other 
Brick  Pyramid.  The  bricks  contain  a  greater  quantity  of  straw, 
and  are  of  unequal  sizes;  from  16^  x  7|  x  6}  to  13}  x  6}  x  4} 
each.  Most  of  them  have  been  made  of  rubbish,  containing 
broken  pottery  and  pieces  of  stones,  like  that  which  at  present 
forms  the  mounds  near  the  modem  villages  in  the  country.  It 
might  be  supposed  that  this  Pyramid  was  the  one  built  by 
Asychis,  as  shells  may  be  observed  in  some  of  the  bricks,  the 


APPENDIX.  71 

upper  surfaces  of  which  are  distinguished  by  various  marks  made 
with  the  fingers,  of  which  the  principal  are 


Mr.  Perring  was  very  anxious  to  discover  the  interior  of  one 
of  the  Brick  Pyramids,  but,  on  account  of  the  vast  quantity  of 
sand  and  rubbish,  which  encumbered  the  base  of  this  Pyramid, 
he  did  not  venture  to  undertake  the  operation. 

The  ruin  is  at  present  about  400  feet  square ;  but  the  original 
base  did  not,  probably,  exceed  350  feet. 

Like  the  other  Pyramids,  it  had  been  cased  with  stone  from 
the  Mokattam.  One  of  the  blocks  had  been  worked  to  an  angle 
of  67°  20^,  which,  although  steep,  in  some  degree  corresponds 
with  the  present  shape  of  the  ruin ;  and  Mr.  Perring  observes 
that  the  angle  would  depend  on  the  position  of  the  blocks,  as  one 
block  gave  an  angle  of  67°  26^,  and  therefore,  that  the  beds  of 
the  blocks  were  no  doubt  differently  inclined  according  to  the 
shape  of  the  building. 

The  remains  of  considerable  buildings,  composed  of  stone 
from  the  Djebel  Achmah,  near  Cairo,  and  also  a  good  deal 
of  broken  granite,  are  to  be  found  near  an  inclined  road,  which 
proceeds  from  the  eastern  side  of  the  Pyramid,  towards  the 
village. 

Feet.  iDchei. 

Original  Base 342  6 

Height,  perpendicularly     -        .         -  -    267  4 

Present  Height 156  0 

Angle  of  Casing,  57°  20'  2" 

The  defeat  of  the  Pasha's  army  in  Syria  rendered  the  country 
between  Gizeh  and  the  Faioum  unsafe  for  travellers,  and  during 
his  residence  at  Dashoor  Mr.  Perring's  tents  were  attacked 
by  a  party  of  Bedouins.  He  was,  however,  well  armed  and 
prepared  for  their  reception,  and  the  Bedouins  at  length  with- 
drew, without  any  other  ill  consequences,  excepting  the  loss  of 
a  red  cap,  which  they  stole  from  an  Arab,  whom  they  rode  over 
in  their  retreat. 


rl  APPENDIX. 

NOTES  BY  MR.  BIRCH. 
THE  NORTHERN  BRICK  PYRAMID. 

Th£8E  inscriptions  were  found  upon  blocks  of  calcareous  stone, 
which  had  belonged  to  the  propyloeon  erected  before  the  northern  front 
of  the  Pyramid.  From  the  specimens  sent  by  Mr.  Perring  to  the  British 
Museum,  the  hieroglyphics  appear  to  have  been  executed  with  a  purity 
of  style,  which  distinguished  the  intervening  period  between  the  Mera- 
phite  dynasty,  and  the  expulsion  of  their  successors  to  Abydos;  and 
may  on  that  account,  without  impropriety,  be  assigned  to  the  era  of 
Asychis,  by  whom  the  Pyramid  has  been  by  some  persons  supposed  to 
have  been  built;  but  the  fragments  of  a  royal  prenomen,  discovered 
amongst  the  ruins,  are  too  imperfect  to  admit  of  identification :  and  the 
other  inscriptions  are  similar  to  those  often  found  upon  coeval  sepulchral 
monuments,  and  do  not  possess  any  distinct  peculiarity.  It  is,  therefore, 
a  point  yet  undetermined,  which  of  the  brick  Pyramids  at  present  existing 
is  the  work  of  Asychis.  Considerable  illustration  of  the  general  design 
of  this  propyleeon  is  afforded  by  the  sculptures  on  the  propyleeon  of  the 
Pyramid  at  Mount  Birkel.^ 

The  inscriptions  are  at  all  events  sepulchral.  They  represent  tables 
of  provisions  deposited  as  offerings  to  the  dead ;  sacerdotal  and  other 
functionaries  performing  acts  of  adoration  and  of  consecration  ;  and  offi- 
cers of  state  presenting  funeral  gifts.  Similar  tables  have  been  almost 
exclusively  found  upon  monuments  executed  before,  or  during  the  seven- 
teenth dynasty.  Several  have  been  discovered ;  those,  upon  the  entrance 
of  a  tomb,  in  the  possession  of  Signore  Athanasi;  upon  the  stele  Anas- 
tasi,  No.  36,  in  the  British  Museum ;  upon  a  rectangular  sarcophagus, 
purchased  of  Mr.  Sams,  and  now  placed  in  the  British  Museum ;  and 
upon  the  sarcophagus  of  a  person  named  Savaknaa,  or  Souchinaa, 
belonging  to  Signore  Athanasi,  may  be  cited  as  instances.  No  doubt 
can  exist  respecting  the  character  of  these  offerings,  because,  in  the 
beginning  of  the  inscriptions  over  the  tables  upon  Signore  Athanasi*s 
sarcophagus,  the  title  **  Osirian  (jdeceased)^**  is  inserted.  It  is  to  be 
remarked  that,  besides  these  tables  of  provisions,  other  articles,  such  as 
mirrors,  collars,  and  their  counterpoises,^  bracelets,  armlets,  crowns, 
pillows,  shentis,  daggers,  bows,  arrows,  and  various  kinds  of  sceptres, 
are  sometimes  inscribed,  which  do  not  appear  upon  the  fragments  from 
Dashoor. 

The  provisions  are  usually  placed  in  baskets,  by  which  they  are 
counted,  and  the  greatest  number  here  appears  to  have  been  four. 

•  CaUlaud  (Fred.),  "  Voyage  k  Meroe,"  fol.  Paris,  1823,  PI.  LIH.  LIV. 

'  By  counterpoises  are  meant  the  objects  shaped  like  this    Tj    or  ff 

worn  behind^  to  counterbalance  the  collars  or  tippets  of  the  Egyptian  kings. 


APPENDIX.  73 

These  tables  are  not  seen  upon  tombs  or  stelce  coeval  with  the  Pyra- 
mids of  Gizeh,  al though  the  same  articles  of  food  are  found  in  inscrip- 
tions of  a  later  date. 

The  inscriptions  at  Dashoor  appear,  therefore,  to  shew  that  the  Pyra- 
mid was  constructed  at  a  period  intermediate  between  the  dynasty, 
which  built  the  Gizeh  Pyramids,  and  their  successors  at  Abydos,  and  at 
Thebes. 

On  a  fragment.  Fig.  6,  chamberlains,  and  other  ofiBcers  in  the  service 
of  the  court,  perform  adoration,  consecrate  royal  offerings,  and  carry 
various  provisions ;  other  processions,  see  Figs.  3,  4,  5,  are  composed  of 
members  of  the  family  of  the  deceased,  and  of  persons  connected  with 
his  household,  who  bear  articles  of  furniture  and  of  food.^ 

Quarry-marks,  in  linear  or  hieratic  characters.  Figs.  I  and  2,  have 
also  been  discovered ;  but,  as  they  do  not  contain  a  royal  name,  they 
cannot  establish  the  date  of  the  building. 

From  Mr.  Perring's  account  of  the  stone  casing  of  these  Pyramids, 
they  may  be  supposed  to  have  been  constructed  in  imitation  of  the  mag- 
nificent Tombs  at  Gizeh,  and  to  have  been  formed  with  bricks  on  account 
of  their  comparative  cheapness.  This  conjecture  is  more  probable,  be- 
cause great  political  difficulties  are  said  to  have  occurred  in  the  time  of 
Asychis.  The  manner  in  which  the  sculptures  are  executed,  and  the 
style  of  the  hieroglyphics,  although  they  do  not  afford  a  positive  proof, 
yet  seem  to  indicate  that  they  belonged  to  a  time  prior  to  the  sixteenth 
dynasty,  and  consequently,  to  the  invasion  of  the  Shepherd  kings. 
Indeed,  it  may  be  remarked,  that,  immediately  after  that  event,  the 
Egyptian  monarchs  could  not  have  possessed  either  resources,  or  leisure 
for  the  erection  of  such  colossal  structures ;  but  that,  on  the  contrary, 
affected  either  by  want  of  power,  or  by  change  of  taste,  or  of  habit, 
instead  of  engaging  in  such  gigantic  undertakings,  they  were  evidently 
contented  with  the  elaborate  detail,  and  finished  embellishments,  which 
decorate  the  interior  of  the  excavated  tombs  in  the  Biban  el  Molook. 

Fig.  3.  The  hieroglyphics,  before  the  figure  walking,  signify  his 
titles — n^^  CJULOIt^,  **  the  great  house,  the  fabricator,'*  Dur- 
ing the  reigns  of  the  early  dynasties,  deceased  persons  were  styled 
^^functionaries  attached  to  the  great  house  or  palace  ;*'  and  this  title 
occurs  over  a  male  figure  in  the  Tomb  of  Trades,  and  is  also  seen  on 
sculptures  taken  from  another  tomb  at  Gizeh,  and  now  in  the  British 
Museum. 

Fig.  5.  The  lines  immediately  above  the  figures  express  the  numbers 
of  the  several  objects  in  the  baskets.  The  eatables  presented  upon  the 
tables  have  been  already  mentioned.     Other  objects,  although  not  clearly 

■  The  female  relations,  including  the  iULOOnCy  or  nurse,  are  also  fre- 
quently represented  in  sculptures  executed  uuder  the  sixteenth  and  seven- 
teenth dynasties. 


74  APPENDIX. 

designed,  are  articles  of  food,  such  as  a  cake,  the  ribs  and  the  shoulder 
of  an  animal,  grapes,  &c.  represented  in  baskets ;  and  the  hieroglyphics, 
before  the  man  dressed  in  the  skin  of  a  panther,  signify  ^*  a  royal  offer- 
ing,'*^ Behind  him,  and  above  another  figure,  holding  in  both  his  hands 
the  roll  of  a  manuscript,  are  the  words  ^^l^I,  **  priest"  and  ceilCI, 
"  approved  minister,  officer ;"  and  behind  these  figures  a  person  is  repre- 
sented in  a  kneeling  position,  with  one  arm  lifted  up,  and  with  the  other 
placed  upon  his  breast,  as  if  in  the  act  of  adoration.'  There  is  also  an 
imperfect  inscription,  which  has  consisted  of  two  lines. 

Fig.  6  resembles  No.  5.  The  inscription  above  the  figures  enume- 
rates the  number  of  the  different  offerings,  and  the  termination  of  the 
table,  in  which  the  objects  have  been  phonetically  inserted. 

Part  of  the  same  table  occurs  in  the  second  division,  with  characters 
signifying  **  water,*'  or  "  libations/*  and  with  another  tropically  employed 
to  denote  *^ plants  ;*'  which  represents  a  young  plant  shooting  from  a  clod 
of  earth,  and,  as  the  symbol  for  "a//*'  is  beneath  it,  **  a  basket  Jilled  with 
every  young  vegetable**  may  be  signified.  In  the  next  division  a  kneel- 
ing figure  is  apparently  employed  in  grinding,  and  in  the  area  are 
various  articles  of  food,  with  their  names ;  and  amongst  them  are  ^IK, 
"  cordials  or  refreshments ;"  €Xh\  "  grapes ;"  and  a  material  called 

ofT  or  lyr. 

Behind  is  the  arm  of  a  figure  in  the  act  of  making  a  royal  offering. 

In  the  third  division  the  flowers  and  buds  of  the  lotus  are  placed 
upon  an  altar  or  stand,  with  a  figure,  like  that  in  the  second  division. 
And  in  the  area  is  an  inscription  in  hieroglyphics : — ItOITe  (OIIXOT, 
*'  the  divine  bread,**  together  with  cakes  of  bread,  the  shoulders  of  vic- 
tims, &c.  In  the  next  compartment  an  inscription  expresses  "  attached 
to  the  hall  of  audience"  *•  charged  with  the  care  of  the  great  house,* 
or  *<  palace  ;'*  and  below  it  a  figure  pours  a  libation  from  a  vase  into  a 
cup  held  by  another  person,  and  in  the  area  are  inserted  "  the  gift  of  a 
libation"  and  two  tables  covered  with  offerings,  consisting  of  water- 
fowls, vases,  cakes  of  bread,  onions,  together  with  joints  of  meat. 

The  traces  of  two  figures  may  also  be  made  out,  bearing,  upon  small 
trays  or  stands,  different  offerings ;  and  before  one  is  inscribed  **  the 
architect  ;'*  and  before  the  other,  two  symbols,  frequently  found  in  family 
registers,  apparently  expressive  of  some  relationship. 

Fig.  7,  A,  is  part  of  a  cornice,  taken  from  the  upper  part  of  the 
propyleeon.     It  contains  hieroglyphics,  and  also  the  insignia,  which  are 


*  A  figure  in  a  similar  attitude  occurs  upon  a  stela  of  the  seventeenth 
dynasty,  in  the  British  Museum ;  and  upon  it  is  inscribed—'^  He  makes  a 
royal  offering,"  or  ^^  He  perfinrms  an  act  of  adoration"  Champ.  "Gram. 
Egypt."  p.  66.  And  below  is  a  star,  which,  besides  other  significations, 
as  glory,  adoration,  &c.  expresses  the  name  of  the  god  Siou^  or  Seb^  Chronos. 

'  A  similar  figure  is  inscribed  in  the  quarries  at  Tourah. 


APPENDIX.  75 

often  inserted  above  the  representations  of  deities.  Below  them  is  part 
of  the  starry  heavens,  and  an  inscription,  containing  <*  the  royal  chief,**  a 
title  conferred  upon  the  highest  officers,  and,  in  this  instance,  written  in 
a  more  ample  form  than  usual,  and  most  probably  accompanied  by  the 
figure  of  the  person  to  whom  it  belonged.  According  to  M.  Rosellini, 
the  phonetic  group  piIG  is  analogous  to  pOftHI^  and  indicates  that  the 
individual  was  young,  and  probably,  also,  that  he  belonged  to  the  mili- 
tary caste.  The  same  title  was,  however,  frequently  attributed  to  queens 
and  princesses,  and,  when  applied  to  men,  was  often  accompanied,  as  in 
the  present  instance,  with  feminine  attributes.  Its  exact  meaning,  how- 
ever, is  not  ascertained. 

Fig.  4  contains  fragments  of  two  compartments.  In  the  upper,  a 
man  clothed  with  a  shenti  round  his  loins,  inclines  forward ;  and  another 
holds  in  his  right  hand  a  club  or  scimitar,  and  in  his  left  a  bow.  In  the 
lower  compartment,  the  sides  of  which  have  been  ornamented  with  a 
border  in  a  rectangular  pattern,  are  traces  of  the  starry  heavens,  and  also 
of  an  inscription  in  hieroglyphics,  of  which,  however,  only  one  (the  back 
of  a  chair)  can  be  made  out. 

Fig.  8.  Part  of  a  royal  prenomen  appears  in  a  horizontal  line  of  hiero- 
glyphics, but,  unfortunately,  the  fragment  contains  little  more  than  a 
quarter  of  the  cartouche.  Like  that  of  Mencheres,  it  has  evidently  been 
composed  of  three  groups  of  uplifted  arms,  of  another  symbol  apparently 
rectangular,  and  of  the  disc  of  the  sun,  or  of  the  hawk.  From  such  im- 
perfect remains,  it'  is  impossible  to  tell  to  what  monarch  the  cartouche 
belongs,  for  it  can  scarcely  be  assigned  to  Mycerinus;  and  the  only 
other  cartouche,  with  which  it  can  be  compared,  is  a  disputed  reading.* 
It  may  also  be  remarked,  that,  from  the  position  of  the  characters  in  the 
lower  part  of  the  cartouche,  there  was  probably  another  symbol,  besides 
the  disc  of  the  sun,  and  those,  which  are  contained  in  this  fragment ;  and 
in  that  case,  it  would  be  unlike  any  cartouche  hitherto  discovered.  It 
may,  however,  from  its  general  resemblance,  be  referred  to  the  sixteenth 
or  seventeenth  dynasties. 

Fig.  9.  This  fragment  consists  of  the  remains  of  two  horizontal  lines 
of  hieroglyphics.  In  the  upper,  a  bundle  of  papyrus,  of  an  unusual 
shape;  and  in  the  lower,  the  phonetic  symbols  CXX  may  be  traced, 
and  also  the  figure  of  a  child,  with  his  hand  to  his  mouth,  and  a  peculiar 


branch,  which  forms  the  initial  to  the  word  TT*,  or  COITIt.* 

Fig.  10.    In  this  are  represented  the  eatables  commonly  used  in 

*  The  one  engraved  in  Rosellini,  "  Mon.  Stor.**  Parte  Prima,  Tom.  II. 
Tav.  XV.  11;  and  Laborde,  "Arabic  Petr6e,"  Tab.  Hier.  It  reads  Pe 
or  ^^p  cy  •  •  •  •  K^.    The  name  accompanying  it  has  been  read  Osterot. 

Rosellini,  loc.  cit. 

«  These  two  pieces  are  in  the  British  Museum. 


76  APPENDIX. 

sepulchral  offerings  placed  upon  a  table  or  stand  in  the  presence  of 
individuals  of  high  rank.  In  the  centre  of  the  table  are  two  yases, 
which,  as  they  end  in  a  point,  like  the  antient  amphorce,  are  placed  in 
small  cylindrical  stands.  They  are  painted  in  different  colours,  to 
denote  the  materials  of  which  they  were  formed ;  red  for  earthenware, 
green  for  bronze,  and  yellow  for  gold.  These  vessels  may  be  supposed 
to  have  contained  wines  and  other  liquors.  To  the  right  of  them  are  the 
haunch  of  a  deer,  coloured  red ;  a  goose,  coloured  yellow ;  a  cake  of 
bread,  two  bunches  of  grapes,  and  a  basket  of  yellow  figs. 

THE  SOUTHERN  STONE  PYRAMID. 

Plate  XV.  Figs.  7  and  8,  are  hieroglyphics  traced  upon  the  sides  of 
the  northern  entrance  of  the  Southern  Stone  Pyramid  at  Dashoor ;  but 
they  do  not  appear  to  have  a  reference  to  the  original  design  of  the 
building. 

The  inscription  on  the  eastern  wall,  Fig.  7,  seems  to  have  been  as 
follows :  — 


!?^ 


"  The  bearer  of  the  feather  standard  of  the  god  Phtah,  Periphtah 
justified y  son  of  Penamoun  justified"  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the 
feather  sometimes  represents  the  feather  standard,  and  that  the  above- 
mentioned  title  does  not  seem  to  have  been  used  before  the  eighteenth 
dynasty,  and  then  to  have  belonged  to  the  officers  of  various  kings,  and 
also  to  the  priests  of  Phtah,  and  of  other  gods.^  The  pat  sceptre  is 
usually  put  before  the  sceptre  in  the  form  of  a  feather,  or  of  a  fan  ;  and, 
although  it  sometimes  phonetically  replaces  the  bird,  as  i  or  II9  yet, 
it  is  also  frequently  used  as  the  determinative  of  the  word  gjopn, 
and  apparently  signifies  "  to  lead,^  or  "  to  precede.**'^ 

The  meaning  of  the  inscription  upon  the  western  wall.  Fig.  8,  is  not 
so  easily  determined,  on  account  of  its  imperfect  state,  and  of  its  laconic 
style.  It  may,  however,  be  remarked,  that,  if  the  first  four  characters 
are  correctly  copied,  they  express  ''ti»  all  her  tribunals ;"  but  that,  if 
the  third  character,  instead  of  representing  the  basket,  neb,  or  nibi, 
"  all"  be  the  symbol  which  may  be  found  in  Champ.  '* Gram.  Egypt" 
p.  45,  No.  219,  it  will,  in  conjunction  with  the  fourth  and  fifth,  represent 
the  word  I)€JtA.Clf  '*  to  sit"  The  next  symbol  is  a  stream  of  water 
poured  out  from  a  vase  upon  a  man's  leg,  and  expresses  Ot^^, 


'  Pedestal,  British  Museum,  No.  42. 

^  Pap.  Salller,  No.  2,  passim.    Peyron.  Lex.  Ling.  Copt.  voce. 


.  /' 

'{■: 

■I,  ■,;:.; 

&    h 

■.    ;  ■  .-  f. 

li              ^ 

'• '  ;■:    1 

[f  r 

;•': 

i  *         < 

'/J'l             ,              ] 

:■     1     ^    / 

■     •   C  !    \            % 

^    \    \. 

'  J  ^*^  I 

:  \  \ 

• 

r 

v.-  :\ 

\ 

4 

i'\ 

'■r 

'% 

\ 

,.> 

s 

\ 

APPENDIX.  77 

*'pure,**  It  18  followed  by  three  undulating  lines,  a  scarabeeus,  and 
the  figure  of  a  man  sitting.  Although  the  two  lines  are  not  connected, 
they  seem  to  have  been  executed  at  the  same  time,  and,  from  analogy, 
not  to  be  more  antient  than  the  twenty-sixth  dynasty ;  and  if  the  line 
contains  the  unexplained  titles  used  during  the  era  of  the  Psammetichi 
and  Ptolemies,  it  should  precede  Fig  7." 

The  Pyramids  in  Ethiopia  appear  to  be  less  antient  than  those  of 
Gizeh,  and  many  of  the  smaller  were,  probably,  of  a  comparatively 
recent  date,  and  were  erected  in  imitation  of  the  original  buildings. 
These  imperfect  inscriptions  cannot,  however,  be  considered  as  a  posi- 
tive proof  of  the  age  of  the  edifice. 


PYRAMIDS   OF   LISHT. 

Mr.  Perhing  went  to  Mensheeh  on  the  21  st  of  October,  to 
await  the  arrival  of  a  guard  from  Cairo,  which  the  disturbed  state 
of  the  country  made  essentially  necessary.  On  the  25th  four 
soldiers  arrived  from  Ali  Bey,  the  sub-governor  of  Cairo,  to  say 
that  Mr.  Perring  could  not  with  any  degree  of  safety  proceed  by 
land,  even  with  a  guard.  He  accordingly  procured  a  boat,  and 
leaving  Mensheeh  on  the  27th,  went  across  the  inundation  to 
Dashoor,  round  the  northern  and  eastern  sides  of  which  place, 
the  canal,  known  by  the  names  £1  Bainhee,  El  Menhee,  and 
Bahr  YousefF,  runs  in  a  circuitous  course,  so  as  to  avoid  the 
site  of  the  antient  town.  Beyond  Barnasht  the  canal  is  evidently 
artificial,  and  marks  the  limits  of  the  cultivated  ground.  Mr. 
Perring  passed  the  night  at  Tahm6,  whence  the  principal  road 
crosses  the  Desert  to  the  Faioum,  a  little  to  the  northward  of 
the  Pyramids  of  Lisht,  where  Mr.  Perring  arrived  about  twelve 
o'clock  on  the  28th. 

They  are  usually  distinguished  by  this  name  by  the  Arabs, 
but  they  are  also  called  the  Pyramids  of  Metanyeh,  or  of  Bemha. 
Metanveh  is  about  two  miles  and  a  half  to  the  eastward ;  but 
Bemha,^  although  still  farther  off  to  the  north-eastward,  occupies 
an  antient  site,  probably  that  of  Peme,  or  Pemeau,  and  has, 
therefore,  of  the  two,  perhaps  a  better  claim  to  the  Pyramids. 

*  A  figure  dancing  is  also  seen  in  titles  upon  St^le,  in  the  United  Service 
Museum. 

'  This  does  not  appear  on  the  Map. 


78  APPENDIX. 

Both  these  monuments  are  entirely  ruined.  The  space  between 
them  (rather  more  than  a  mile)  contains  excavated  tombs  and 
mummy-pits,  most  probably  belonging  to  the  antient  cemetery ; 
but  neither  sculpture  nor  hieroglyphics  are  to  be  observed  near 
them. 

In  the  Plate  is  a  section  of  the  Northern  Pyramid.  It  is 
situated  near  a  canal,  and  is  placed  upon  an  elevation  of  about  60 
feet  above  the  plain.  Many  of  the  blocks  have  been  taken  away 
to  build  a  bridge  at  Tahme,  and  their  removal  has  disclosed  its 
construction,  which  is  very  irregular,  and  consists  of  differently 
sized  stones,  put  together  with  Nile  earth  instead  of  mortar,  and 
arranged  in  walls  of  unequal  thickness,  so  as  to  form  steps  or 
degrees  (as  in  the  Great  Pyramid  of  Saccara) ;  and  over  the 
whole  a  Pyramid  appears  to  have  been  formed  with  bricks,  and 
then  covered  with  a  stone  casing. 


• 

Feec.  Xochfli. 

Present  Base,  about 

360     0 

Height  - 

-      89     8 

A  section  of  the  Southern  Pyramid  is  also  given.  From  having 
been  built  with  a  soft  limestone,  it  has  crumbled  away  until  it  has 
the  appearance  of  a  round  hillock ;  and,  in  fact,  many  of  the 
adjacent  desert  hills  are  much  more  pyramidal.  It  is,  however, 
more  advantageously  placed,  is  larger,  and  has  been  constructed 
with  greater  masses  of  stone,  and  apparently  with  more  care,  than 
the  Northern  Pyramid. 

Feet.   Inches. 

Present  Base  ...        450    0 

Height  -        -        -        -     68     6 

The  view  of  these  Pyramids  was  taken  from  the  Bahr  Youseff. 


PYRAMID   OF   MEYDOOM. 

Oh  the  29th  of  October  Mr.  Perring  sailed  to  the  Pyramid  of 
Meydoom,  having  been  delayed  by  his  boat  getting  aground  on 
the  ruins  of  a  bridge,  where  the  water  ran  with  great  force.  The 
boat  could  not  be  got  afloat  without  taking  every  thing  out  of  it. 
Luckily  a  number  of  Arabs  were  upon  the  spot,  but  their  assist- 


APPENDIX.  79 

ance  could  not  be  procured  till  a  remuneration  had  been  regu- 
larly settled.  He  could  not,  therefore,  examine  the  Pyramid  till 
the  following  day. 

This  monument  is  near  the  limits  of  the  cultivated  ground, 
and  about  two  miles  to  the  north-westward  of  the  village,  from 
which  it  takes  its  name. 

The  Plate  shews  its  present  appearance^  which  is  peculiarly 
striking  when  seen  from  the  river. 

It  is  called  the  ''  False  Pyramid,''  because  the  base  is  supposed 
to  have  been  formed  out  of  a  knoll  of  rock,  and  it  certainly  has 
that  appearance.  To  ascertain  the  fact  two  excavations  were 
made,  one  at  the  north-eastern  angle,  and  the  other  on  the  west- 
ern side,  but  the  rock  was  not  discovered.  Owing,  however,  to 
the  want  of  assistance  and  of  leisure,  the  operations  were  not  satis- 
factorily concluded.  The  supposition,  therefore,  may  be  well 
founded,  and  the  exterior  only  may  consist  of  masonry,  as  a  large 
tomb,  near  the  north-eastern  angle,  is  evidently  constructed  in 
that  manner. 

The  base,  about  630  feet  square,  is  much  encumbered  with 
rubbish,  and  is  at  present  of  an  irregular  form.  The  superstruc- 
ture is  in  three  degrees,  each  having  the  form  of  a  truncated 
Pyramid,  with  an  angle  of  74^  1(/.  The  lower  degree  has  a  base 
of  199  feet,  and  is  69  feet  6  inches  in  height;  the  second,  a  base 
of  about  127  feet,  and  is  32  feet  6  inches  in  height;  the  third,  or 
upper  degree,  is  entirely  ruined,  and  is  at  present  only  about 
22  feet  6  inches  high.  The  actual  height  of  the  Pyramid  is, 
therefore,  about  124  feet  6  inches.^ 

The  blocks  consist  of  compact  limestone,  are  about  2  feet 
thick,  and  must  have  been  brought  from  a  considerable  distance. 
They  are  laid  at  right  angles  to  the  external  face,  and  have  been 
worked,  and  put  together  with  great  skill ;  indeed,  the  excavation 
made  by  the  removal  of  the  stone  for  the  bridge  at  Tahm6,  shews 
that  the  masonry  is  of  a  superior  description,  and  that  it  has  been 
continued  into  the  mound,  upon  which  the  edifice  is  built.  The 
whole  has  probably  been  covered  with  large  unsquared  blocks,  so 
as  to  complete  the  shape  of  a  regular  Pyramid. 

On  many  of  the  stones,  writing  in  red  ochre  may  be  traced, 
but  it  is  in  general  scarcely  legible.  The  characters  here  given, 
however,  were  observed  in  two  places.    The  entrance  was  not 

'  Accidentally  inserted  in  the  Plate,  224  feet  6  inches. 


80  APPENDIX. 

discovered,  but  previous  attempts  in  search  of  it  were  evident, 
as  the  rubbish  had  been  removed  from  the  centre  of  the  base  of 
the  northern  front,  into  heaps  on  either  side.  The  smooth  surface, 
and  steepness  of  the  building  rendered  an  ascent  to  the  summit 
impracticable  without  artificial  assistance. 

There  had  been  a  peribolus  of  stone  masonry,  and  near  the 
north-eastern  angle  a  large  tomb  had  been  constructed  on  a  knoll 
of  rock. 

About  a  mile  to  the  northward  were  other  ruins,  appiarently 
of  tombs,  which  had  been  supposed  by  the  French «  to  be  the 
remains  of  Pyramids ;  but  their  oblong  shape,  and  the  nature  of 
the  materials  (small  crude  bricks)  of  which  they  were  composed, 
did  not  support  the  supposition. 


PYRAMID   OF   ILLAHOON. 

Hating  finished  the  Pyramid  at  Meydoom,  Mr.  Perring  pro- 
ceeded to  the  southward,  and  in  doing  so  his  boat  again  grounded, 
and  was  obliged  to  be  unladen  before  it  could  be  hauled  over 
a  bank.  On  the  31st  of  October  he  met  with  the  Gebalee,  a 
powerful  tribe  of  the  Bedouins.  The  sheik  was  absent,  but  his 
son  received  him  hospitably,  offered  a  house,  and  sent  down  large 
trays,  containing  a  roasted  lamb,  wheaten  bread,  stewed  dates, 
and  abundance  of  other  provisions.  Mr.  Perring  was  informed 
that  the  Bedouins  had  agreed  with  the  Pasha  to  remain  tranquil, 
and  to  furnish  a  body  of  cavalry,  upon  consideration  of  an  annual 
payment,  and  of  permission  to  occupy  productive  ground  at  a 
very  small  yearly  rent. 

The  tribe  appeared  to  have  availed  itself  largely  of  this  pri- 
vilege, and  to  have  taken  possession  of  a  considerable  quantity 
of  ground,  which  afforded  a  refuge  to  the  Fellahs,  or  station- 
ary Arabs,  who  had  escaped  from  the  adjacent  country,  for  fear 
of  conscription,  or  on  other  accounts.  These  Fellahs,  however, 
appeared  to  be  better  satisfied  under  the  authority  of  the  Be- 
dooina,  than  under  that  of  their  native  sheiks, — possibly  from 
the  efiect  of  change.     From  twenty  to  thirty  of  them  were  em- 


>    €< 


Description  of  Egypt,**  Vol.  IV.  Chap.  xvi.  Sect.  8. 


*-.*JK*,_L 

E_t_-'' 

r 

\m  -^     ~ 

^ 

l^ 

[zy 

V 

^■'  ' 

r^- 

v'A 

f^ 

\^ 

PLAN      T^ftoiiOH    A  B 
^-'•' I-                   T'' 

ffTlEAiaaiE)    ®ir    HaHLtlSClOH. 


APPENDIX.  81 

ployed  in  cultivating  the  ground,  with  wooden  hoes,  under  the 
direction  of  a  single  Bedouin,  like  blacks  under  a  slave-driver. 

The  boat  was  drawn  over  a  bank  into  a  canal,  and  arrived 
opposite  the  Pyramid  of  Illahoon  on  Nov.  1st.  This  building  is 
situated  about  two  miles  to  the  northward  of  the  village,  and 
at  no  great  distance  from  the  cultivated  plains,  which  extend  to 
the  banks  of  the  river.  It  is  also  near  the  commencement  of 
a  strip  of  land,  along  which  the  principal  road  passes  to  the 
Faioum,  and  which  is  rendered  productive  by  the  admission  of 
water  through  a  lock,  erected  about  five  or  six  years  since, 
apparently  upon  antient  foundations.  The  arrangements  of  the 
water  at  this  place,  and  particularly  those  at  the  Lake  Mceris, 
are  important,  because  they  regulate  the  inundation  of  the  whole 
country.  The  water  is  brought  down  by  the  Bahr  Youseff;  and 
by  means  of  a  sluice,  the  remains  of  which  are  visible  near  the 
entrance  of  the  canal,  the  current  was  originally  turned  through 
a  lock,  and  through  several  smal  sluices  to  the  westward  of  it, 
into  the  Faioum.  A  bank  or  dyke,  composed  of  antient  masonry, 
and  now  called  Gisr  e  Sultanee,  confined  the  inundation  between 
the  river  and  the  mountain,  and  was  furnished  with  various 
small  sluices,  for  the  occasional  passage  of  the  water,  necessary 
for  the  cultivation  of  the  country  below  it ;  by  which  means,  the 
water  could  be  regulated  with  the  greatest  accuracy,  and  the 
dangers,  which  might  have  resulted  from  an  accidental  failure 
in  a  larger  work,  were  avoided. 

The  Pyramid  is  built  round  a  knoll  of  rock,  which  is  nearly 
40  feet  higher  than  the  base.  The  rock  towards  the  base  has 
been  faced  with  crude  bricks,  and  a  superstructure  has  been 
erected  above  it,  composed  of  the  same  material,  and  supported 
by  walls  of  stone,  which  proceed  from  the  centre  of  the  edifice, 
and  which,  until  they  are  minutely  examined,  have  the  appear- 
ance of  masses  of  rock.     (See  Plate.) 

The  Plate  also  shews  the  mode  of  construction.  The  bricks  are 
laid  in  a  mortar  formed  of  Nile  earth,  as  high  as  the  walls  extend, 
and  above  them  in  dry  gravel.  They  measure  16g  by  8g,  and 
about  5}  inches  in  thickness;  are  well  worked,  and  are  formed 
of  Nile  earth,  mixed  up  with  various  proportions  of  chopped 
straw.  They  have  also  been  marked  with  the  fingers  on  the 
upper  surface,  in  the  same  manner  as  those  in  the  ruins  at 
Dashoor. 

The  Pyramid  has  had  an  external  casing  of  stone,  and  ali^o 

VOL.  III.  G 


82  APPENDIX. 

a  peribolus  of  the  same  material.  There  are  mummy-pits  in  the 
adjacent  ground,  and  grottoes  amongst  the  desert  hills,'  which, 
in  Mr.  Perring's  opinion^  formed  part  of  the  cemetery  of  Ptole- 
mais.  The  Pyramid  of  Howara  is  visible,  but  does  not  appear 
to  have  had  any  relative  connection  with  this  building. 

Present  Base,  about    -         -         -         360  feet. 
Height        -         -         -         -    1 30  feet. 

The  view  in  the  accompanying  Plate  is  taken  from  the  Bahr 
Youseff. 


PYRAMID  OF  HOWARA. 

On  the  following  day  Mr.  Perring  proceeded  to  Mede^net  el 
Faioum  by  the  Bahr  Youseff,  which  is  also  called  Bahr  el 
Faioum.  It  is  from  80  to  120  feet  in  breadth  ;  but  near  the  village 
of  Howara  el  Gusab  it  flows  in  a  narrow  channel,  which  has  been 
cut  through  the  rock,  and  at  one  place  is  of  small  dimensions, 
adapted  for  the  application  of  a  bridge,  or  else  of  a  sluice,  by 
which  the  waters  may  have  been  directed  into  an  adjacent  ravine, 
which  Mr.  Perring  supposes  to  be  the  canal,  called  by  Pliny  "Fossa 
Grandis,'*  and  said  by  Strabo  to  have  been  connected  with  the  lake. 
A  large  village  occupies  the  northern  bank  of  the  ravine,  which 
near  Howara  el  Gusab  is  crossed  by  a  bridge  of  ten  Roman 
arches;  the  arches  are,  however,  built  up  with  masonry.  The 
bottom  of  the  ravine  contains  a  small  stream,  and  is  also  covered 
with  a  grove  of  palm-trees,  which  proves  that  for  many  years 
past  no  great  body  of  water  can  have  flowed  through  it. 

The  actual  distance  from  the  village  of  El  Gusab  to  the 
Pyramid  of  Howara,  is  a  mile  and  half;  but,  owing  to  the  inun- 
dation, Mr.  Perring  found  the  road  extremely  intricate,  and 
nearly  four  miles  in  length ;  and  he  had  great  diflSculty  in  obtain- 
ing a  guide. 

The  Pyramid  is  situated  on  a  desert  plain  (bounded  by  the 
above-mentioned  ravine,  which  connects  the  Bahr  Youseff  with 

'  These  grottoes,  when  partially  examined  in  1837,  appeared  to  be  natu- 
ral, and  not  to  have  been  worked,  or  used  as  places  of  sepulture.  (See 
"  Operations  carried  on  at  Gizeh,"  Vol.  I.  p.  10.) 


APPENDIX.  83 

the  lake),  near  the  spot  where  the  Faioum  may  be  said  to  begin, 
and  at  the  termination  of  the  strip  of  land,  near  the  other  end  of 
which  the  Pyramid  of  Illahoon  is  built. 

The  Pyramid  of  Howara  is  constructed  with  crude  bricks, 
which  contain  much  straw,  measure  17^  x  8|  x  5^,  and  are  laid 
in  fine  gravel.  The  remains  of  a  stone  casing  are  to  be  seen 
near  the  base,  but  it  has  been  entirely  removed.  On  the  northern 
front  is  a  large  chasm,  supposed  to  have  been  made  about  the 
year  1815  by  a  M.  Jaques  Riffaud,  in  search  of  an  entrance; 
and  several  small  buildings  have  been  constructed  with  the  bricks, 
which  have  been  taken  down. 

In  the  great  French  work  an  account  is  given  of  the  discovery 
of  an  interior  apartment,  but  it  appears  to  want  confirmation. 

The  state  of  the  country,  and  other  causes,  prevented  a  more 
exact  examination  of  this  monument. 

Present  Base,  about    .        .        -        300  feet. 
Height     -  -        -        -    106  feet. 

The  ruins  of  extensive  buildings  (by  some  people  supposed  to 
have  been  the  famous  Labyrinth)  are  to  be  seen  to  the  southward 
of  this  Pyramid.  They  occupy  a  space  of  about  800  x  500  feet ; 
but  they  were,  perhaps,  originally  of  greater  extent,  as  they  seem 
to  have  been  intersected  by  the  above-mentioned  canal.  This 
space  is  covered  with  large  fragments  of  compact  limestone, 
which  bear  a  high  polish,  and  also  with  broken  columns  and 
capitals  of  granite,  executed  in  the  best  style  of  Egyptian  art. 
See  "  Thebes,  and  General  View  of  Egypt,"  p.  365. 

In  the  Plate  is  a  plan  of  the  ruins,  and  a  vertical  section  of 
the  Pyramid. 

The  Governor  of  Medeenet  ofiered  to  receive  Mr,  Perring  in 
his  house,  but  he  preferred  the  accommodation  of  a  tent.  It  was 
pitched  near  the  house,  and  owing  to  the  unsettled  state  of  the 
country,  a  guard  was  constantly  necessary. 


84  APPENDIX. 


PYRAMIDS  OF  BIAHHMOO. 

These  remains  are  about  five  miles  from  Medeenet  el  Faioam, 
and  about  half  a  mile  from  the  village  of  Biahhmoo.  They  con- 
sist of  two  masses  about  30  feet  in  height,  and  in  length  and 
breadth  about  30  feet  by  22,  and  likewise  of  a  few  smaller  heaps, 
of  well-constructed  masonry  composed  of  large  blocks  of  compact 
limestone. 

A  plan  is  given  in  the  Plate.  The  original  bases  appear  to 
have  been  squares  of  about  120  feet,  with  a  space  of  the  same 
dimensions  between  them;  and,  at  the  height  of  about  4  feet  6 
inches,  Pyramids,  114  feet  square,  seem  to  have  been  erected 
upon  them. 

The  inclination  of  the  sides  was  63^  30^,  and  the  appear- 
ance of  the  building  when  complete,  is  shewn  in  the  section. 
(See  Plate.) 

According  to  Pocock,  and  to  other  writers,  these  ruins  were 
formerly  called  by  the  people  of  the  country,  "  Rigl  Faraoon" 
(the  Legs  of  Pharaoh) ;  but  that  name  is  not  at  present  known, 
and  the  ruins  are  styled  "  El  Seneui "  (the  Statue),  or  "  Mus- 
tahmel"  (the  Bathed) ;  and  Mr.  Perring  imagines,  that,  as  antient 
names  and  traditions  were  probably  preserved  in  the  secluded 
province  of  the  Faioum,  long  after  the  occupation  of  the  rest  of 
the  country  by  the  Mahometans,  these  names  indicate  that  the 
ruins  mark  the  site  of  the  Pyramids  described  by  Herodotus 
(B.  II.  c.  149)  to  have  been  surmounted  by  colossal  statues,  and 
that  the  Pyramids  were  not  built  in  the  Lake,  but  in  the  waters 
of  the  inundation ;  for  he  saw  near  Senhoris  the  artificial  dyke, 
which  M.  Linaut  had  observed,  and  which  was  evidently  intended 
to  retain  the  waters,  notwithstanding  the  elevation  of  the  ground 
above  the  level  of  the  lake ;  and  indeed  he  considers  that  the 
exaggerated  accounts  of  Herodotus  respecting  the  lake  itself,  may 
in  this  manner  be  accounted  for.  He  also  remarks,  that  Sir  J.  G. 
Wilkinson  appears  to  be  of  the  same  opinion  ("Thebes,  and 
General  View  of  Egypt,*'  p.  354) ;  and  at  all  events,  that  these 
are  the  only  remains,  which  in  any  degree  answer  the  description 
of  the  antient  author. 


r 


SECTION     LOOKING      N 


.^>- 


T^' 


$ 


v*_ 


\^ 


^^_- 


"^\. 


\iL. 


\ 


\. 


A 


V 


% 


.\ 


■^. 


t        < 

I      k 


IMMMtlMki 


St 


4; 

I 

V-       P  VRAM  10     .    '^ 


w  « 


PYRAMID      OF     HOWARA 


PLAN    or   RUINS. 


«    SECTION      or     PrRAMiD 


h 


r] 


\t^''- 


pft  cacwTjj 


/      "A 


o 

c  . 
z 


e 
o 


u 
r 
w 

M 

o 

M 
S 

■ 

e 
« 


o 


I 

•   D 


rr:j- 


/00 

__i 


a»« 


Plan    of    the 
PYRAMIDS     or      BIAHMOO 


—V 


JUNFACE 


APPENDIX.  85 


THE  BIRKET  KHAROON. 

Mr.  Perrino  proceeded  to  the  Birket  Kharoon,  which  he 
believes  to  have  been  the  Lake  Mceris,  and  he  employed  the  four 
following  days  in  visiting  the  lake ;  and  the  other  parts  of  the 
Faioum.  Wretched  as  he  had  found  the  general  condition  of 
the  people  of  Egypt,  he  was  surprised  at  the  miserable  state  of 
this  once  most  fertile  province.  Out  of  sixty-six  villages,  twenty 
had  been  entirely  deserted  within  the  last  two  years.  Cultivation 
was  carried  on  by  forced  labour,  and  the  distress  naturally  increased 
in  proportion  as  the  population  diminished.  The  repairs  of  the 
dykes  and  canals,  essentially  necessary  for  the  cultivation  of  the 
country,  depended  on  the  same  means,  and  were  consequently  so 
much  neglected,  that  in  less  than  twenty  years  the  province 
would  probably  be  either  a  desert  or  a  marsh.  The  soil,  an 
extremely  fertile  loom,  is  capable  of  constant  irrigation,  and,  by 
its  position,  is  completely  sheltered ;  but,  notwithstanding  these 
great  advantages,  and  the  fineness  of  the  climate,  the  cultivation 
is  carried  on,  as  has  already  been  observed,  by  compulsion,  and 
the  inhabitants  are  not  only  exposed  to  the  conscriptions  and 
levies  of  the  government,  and  to  the  tyranny  and  extortion  of 
each  individual  sheik,  but  also  to  the  depredations  of  the  wan- 
dering Bedouins,  who  turn  their  cattle  into  the  crops,  live  at  free 
quarters  amongst  the  villages  without  distinction,  and  who  were 
prevented  from  laying  waste  the  country  only  by  the  authority  of 
the  Pasha.     (See  Vol.  I.  p.  131.) 


PYRAMID  OF  EL  KOOFA. 

In  lat.  25°  10',  near  the  village  of  Bisaleh,  between  Esneh 
and  Edfoo,  is  a  Pyramid  called  "  El  Koofa."  It  stands  upon 
a  mountain,  at  the  verge  of  the  cultivated  land,  and  about  two 
miles  from  the  river.  The  present  base  is  69  feet  6  inches  square, 
and  it  does  not  appear  to  have  been  much  larger.  Twenty-seven 
courses  of  blocks,  built  in  three  stories  or  degrees,  remain,  and 
are  38  feet  6  inches  in  height  above  the  rock  which  forms  the 
base.  The  stones  composing  it  have  been  taken  from  the  ad- 
joining mountain,  and  consist  principally  of  petrifactions :  they 
are  small,  and  have  been  roughly  hewn  into  a  quadrangular  form. 

Several  pyramidal  structures  have  also  been  found  amongst  the 
tombs  in  the  western  mountains  of  Thebes.     (See  Vol.  I.  p.  91.) 


86  APPENDIX. 

THE  MUMMY-PITS  AT  SACCARA. 

Many  of  these  pits  are  entered  by  shafts  in  sepulchral  apart- 
mentSy  excavated  in  the  eastern  side  of  the  rock,  upon  which  the 
Pyramids  are  placed,  and  which  has  supplied  the  greater  part  of 
the  building  materials ;  the  apartments  are  frequently  connected 
by  doorways,  and  have  been  adorned  with  painted  hieroglyphics, 
and  with  sculpture,  now,  however,  much  defaced,  but  still  retain*^ 

ing  this  cartouche*  [YYSO) 

In  other  instances  the  shafts,  from  20  to  80  or  100  feet 
in  depth,  are  sunk  in  the  ground,  which  is  covered  with  bones, 
broken  pottery^  i^&gSy  &nd  the  remains  of  mummies,  and  of  their 
cases.  The  shafts  communicate,  at  various  depths,  with  sepuU 
chral  chambers,  in  the  largest  of  which,  and  frequently  in  a 
recess^  a  sarcophagus  is  generally  found,  which,  from  its  posi* 
tion,  size,  and  peculiar  decorations,  may  be  supposed  to  have 
contained  the  body  of  the  individual,  for  whom  the  pit  was  exca-* 
vated ;  the  different  members  of  his  family  having  been  also 
deposited  in  sarcophagi,  whilst  the  other  chambers  are  filled 
with  the  remains  of  persons  apparently  of  less  consequence,  but 
evidently  of  various  ranks,  because  some  of  them  are  only  wrapped 
in  linen  bandages,  and  piled  up  in  heaps ;  and  otliers  are  care- 
fully placed  in  wooden  coffins,  or  in  cases  formed  of  layers  of 
linen  cloth  stuck  together  with  glue. 

It  would  appear,  by  Mr.  Grey's  papyrus  now  in  the  British 
Museum,  that  tombs  were  sold,  and  that  money  was  paid  for 
interment,  and  for  the  performance  of  funereal  rites. 

Notwithstanding  the  prohibition  of  the  Pacha,  many  of  the 

^  Mr.  Perring  is  of  opinion  that  considerable  information  respecting  the 
antient  dynasties  might  be  obtained  by  a  careful  examination  of  the  hierogly- 
phics in  the  tombs  at  this  place,  and  at  Gizeh.  He  conceives  that  the  superior 
antiquity  of  the  Pyramids  of  Gizeh  is  proved  by  the  total  absence  of  the  hier- 
atic character,  and  in  the  use  alone  of  hieroglyphics  in  the  quarry-marks. 

He  was  anxious  to  discover  whether  pyramids  were  restricted  to  the  tombs 
of  monarchs,  or  whether  they  were  sometimes  appropriated  to  those  of  their 
subjects,  and  observes  that  he  found  in  two  tombs  to  the  southward  of  the 
seventh,  eighth,  and  ninth  Pyramids  at  Gizeh,  a  representation  of  the  end 
of  a  sarcophagus  closed  with  a  lid,  which  resembled  the  sarcophagus  found  in 
the  Third  Pyramid.    The  hieroglyphics  were  indistinct,  but  he  discovered  this 

cartouche  iflT^v^Ij*  which  has  been  given  by  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson.  *  ("  Man^ 
ners  and  Customs  of  the  Antient  Egyptians,'^  Vol.  III.  p.  280.) 


APPENDIX.  87 

inhabitants  of  the  villages  near  Saccara  are  frequently  employed 
in  collecting  the  various  antiquities  deposited  in  these  pits.  Small 
articles  of  gold  are  sometimes  found  on  bodies  enclosed  in  sarco- 
phagi ;  but  on  those  in  wooden  coffins  the  ornaments  are  com- 
posed of  stone,  or  of  earthenware ;  and,  indeed,  from  mummies 
less  carefully  prepared  two  or  three  scarabeei  are  only  obtained. 
According  to  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson,  the  idols  of  Phtah  Sakari^ 
(stated  by  Herodotus  to  have  been  the  peculiar  deity  of  Mem- 
phis) are  exclusively  found  in  the  tombs  at  this  place,  and  at 
Gizeh.  The  other  articles  consist  of  small  figures,  of  vases,  of 
scarabeei,  and  of  amulets  composed  of  various  materials,  and 
workmanship  according  to  the  rank  of  the  deceased.  Models  of 
furniture,  arms,  and  papyri,  which  are  frequently  found  in  the 
tombs  at  Thebes,  are  sometimes  discovered  at  Saccara;  and,  as 
these  objects  are  inclosed  within  the  linen  wrappers,  frequently 
about  the  chest  of  the  mummies,  the  bodies  are  always  broken  up 
in  search  of  them,  and  of  the  gums,  and  resinous  substances  used 
in  the  process  of  embalmment,  which  are  now  sometimes  esteemed 
to  be  medicines,  and  which  were  formerly  in  great  repute. 

The  catacombs  containing  the  birds  are  entered  by  the  shafts, 
A,  B,  and  C,  in  the  Map,  of  which  A  and  B  were  open,  but  the 
most  considerable,  C,  was  closed  up.  The  mummies  are  depo- 
sited in  galleries  irregularly  excavated  in  the  rock,  if  that  term 
can  be  applied  to  a  soil  composed  of  indurated  clay  and  of  shale ; 
and  the  material,  which  was  removed,  was  no  doubt  ground  up, 
and  employed  in  the  manufacture  of  the  coarse  vases,  which 
contain  the  birds.  They  are  of  a  conical  shape,  rounded  at  the 
ends,  and  usually  contain  the  mummy  of  an  ibis,^  wrapped  up  in 


*  From  which  Mr.  Salt  derives  the  name  of  Saccara. 

•  Mr.  Perring  observes,  that  in  Egypt  the  Ibis  was  a  sacred  emblem  of 
the  god  Thoth,  who,  as  the  regulator  and  dispenser  of  time,  had  a  reference 
to  the  influences  and  phases  of  the  moon;  that,  according  to  Plutarch,  the 
Ibis  was  adored  on  account  of  a  fancied  relation  between  the  blended  tints  of 
its  plumage  and  the  appearance  of  the  moon.  He  adds,  that  Diodorus  Sicu- 
lus  described  Thoth  to  have  been  the  inventor  of  calculation,  of  numbers,  and 
of  letters ;  and  that,  upon  the  authority  of  ^lian,  the  Ibis  was  sacred  to  Thoth 
because  its  steps  were  exactly  a  cubit  in  length.  He  also  remarks  that  Thoth 
is  denoted  in  hieroglyphics  by  an  Ibis ;  and  that  Hermes,  likewise  supposed 
to  have  been  the  inventor  of  letters  and  of  figures,  and  the  teacher  of  wisdom, 
is  styled  Ibiform.  Mr.  Perring  considers  that  Herodotus  is  mistaken  when 
he  asserts  that  all  the  mummies  of  the  Ibis  were  preserved  at  Hermopolis, 
although  it  is  probable  that  some  may  have  been  collected  in  that  nouie,  as 
in  the  '^  Itin.  Anton.**  an  Ibium  is  stated  to  have  been  situated  thirty  mQes 
dbtant  from  Oxyrynchus,  and  twenty-four  from  Hermopolis, 


88  APPENDIX. 

various  ways ;  some  being  merely  tied  up  in  a  linen  rag,  whilst 
others  are  carefully  bandaged,  as  is  well  described  in  the  plates  of 
the  great  French  work  J 

Jars  of  earthenware,  containing  eggs,  beetles,  and,  in  a  few  in- 
stances embalmed  snakes  are  concealed  under  heaps  of  sand  near 
the  shafts.    The  snakes  had  not  been  very  carefully  preserved. 
They  appeared  to  Mr.  Perring  to  be  either  the  cerastes,  said  by 
Herodotus  (B.  II.  c.  74)  to  have  been  consecrated  to  Ammon,  or 
the  species  sacred  to  Knef,  and  emblematic  of  royalty.     Most  of 
the  beetles  were  about  1 J  inch  long  (scarabaeus  sacer),  considered 
to  be  the  mysterious  emblem  of  Phtah,  or  Vulcan :  the  species 
is  not  at  present  generally  found  in  Egypt,  although  it  is  com- 
mon in  the  more  southern  countries.     Upon  some  of  the  jars, 
which   contained   eggs,  Mr.   Perring  observed  hieratic  inscrip- 
tions in   black  characters.    The  jars  varied  in  shape,  and  also 
considerably  in   size,  as   they  were   calculated  to  contain   from 
one  to  six  hundred  eggs.     They  had  been  closed  up  with  a  linen 
cloth,  fastened  by  a  string,  or  with  a  covering  of  clay ;  the  impres- 
sion of  a  seal,  however,  was  not  observed.     The  eggs  belonged 
principally  to  geese,  and  in  almost  every  instance  they  contained 
birds  just  ready  to  break  the  shell.     They  appeared  to  have  been 
preserved  by  means  of  bitumen  :  some  had  been  separately  wrap- 
ped up  in  a  piece  of  linen,  and  others  were  placed  in  ashes.     Mr. 
Perring  conceived  that  they  were  offerings  to  the  deities  in  order 

'  These  pits  were  examined  on  the  15th  of  January,  1836,  by  climbing 
over  the  layers  of  vases,  with  which  the  galleries  were  filled  nearly  to  the  top. 
The  extent  of  the  excavations  was  surprising,  as  was  also  the  immense  num- 
ber of  the  vases,  which  were  laid  in  rows,  with  the  large  and  small  ends  in 
alternate  directions,  so  as  to  form  a  solid  mass  of  unknown  extent,  and  to  all 
appearance  of  the  same  antiquity.  The  means,  by  which  this  extraordinary 
collection  could  have  been  made,  is  therefore  as  surprising  as  the  motive 
which  induced  it.  It  has  been  already  said  that,  with  few  exceptions,  each 
vase  contains  an  Ibis.  The  bird  is  not  at  present  to  be  found  in  Egypt, 
although  it  is  to  be  met  with  higher  up  the  river ;  but  such  astonishing  num- 
bers, even  if  the  bird  had  been  common,  the  whole  country  could  hardly 
have  afforded,  unless  the  breed  was  particularly  attended  to,  and  preserved. 
For  although  the  pits  were  probably  open  in  the  time  of  the  Romans,  and  even 
in  that  of  Cambyses,  and  have  been  exposed  to  continual  and  unlimited  de- 
predation, yet  the  vases  seem  comparatively  undiminished,  and  inexhaustible. 
It  is  also  remarkable,  that,  from  the  various  ways,  in  which  the  birds  are 
inserted  in  the  vases,  they  appear  to  have  been  held  in  veneration  by  all 
ranks  of  people.  In  examining  the  contents  of  a  number  of  these  vases, 
which  were  brought  up  from  the  shafts,  in  one  near  a  sarcophagus  a  hawk 
was  found,  of  which  the  beak  and  legs,  and  also  the  feathers  upon  the  thick 
part  of  the  ^vings  were  perfect. 


APPENDIX.  89 

to  insure  the  increase  of  tlie  flocks,  and  that  they  had  been  depo- 
sited in  these  places  on  account  of  the  sanctity  of  the  tombs. 

Under  other  heaps  of  sand,  at  no  great  distance  from  the 
former,  together  with  jars  containing  eggs,  a  quantity  of  sea  sand, 
and  of  ashes  had  been  placed,  and  also  small  parcels  of  natron 
tied  up  in  linen:  natron  is  also  found  in  the  tombs. 

At  D  is  the  entrance  to  other  catacombs.  They  also  consist 
of  galleries,  on  each  side  of  which  the  bones  of  oxen  are  placed 
in  wrappers,  with  the  heads  upon  them :  the  remains,  probably, 
of  sacrifices,  which  seems  to  correspond  with  the  account  given 
by  Herodotus.^ 

The  entrance  to  the  catacombs,  where  the  mummies  of  dogs 
were  deposited,  is  marked  by  E,  but  most  of  them  had  been 
destroyed  apparently  by  fire,  which,  upon  the  authority  of  Plu- 
tarch, Mr.  Perring  supposes  to  have  taken  place  in  consequence 
of  the  sacrilegious  attack  made  by  the  dogs  on  the  entrails  of  the 
bull  Apis,  after  he  was  slain  by  Cambyses. 

The  catacomb  containing  the  mummies  of  cats  is  at  H  in  the 
Map,  and  many  fragments  of  them  were  scattered  about  the 
entrance.  The  cats  were  sacred  to  Bubastes  (the  Diana  of  Mem- 
phis), and  their  remains  were  consequently  preserved  with  great 
care.  These  mummies  are  covered  with  fur,  well  preserved, 
and  of  a  red  colour — the  eiFect,  probably,  of  the  embalmment. 
Bronze  images  of  cats  were  found  in  the  bandages,  which  had 
been  very  carefully  applied.  This  Mr.  Perring  considers  to  agree 
with  the  antient  account  of  the  high  estimation,  in  which  these 
animals  were  held.  He  adds,  that,  as  their  mummies  are  to  be 
found  at  this  place,  at  Thebes,  and  at  Beni  Hassan,  the  account 
of  Herodotus,  which  states  that  they  were  only  entombed  at 
Bubastes,  is  not  to  be  trusted. 

'  Mr.  Perring  observes,  that  in  the  sands  at  this  place  the  bones  of  sheep 
were  found  intermixed  with  those  belonging  to  oxen,  but  that  the  remains  of 
those  animals  were  not  found  in  the  catacombs ;  and  he  conceives  that  this 
agrees  with  the  tradition  that  sheep  were  not  held  in  peculiar  adoration  at 
Memphis.  He  adds,  that  the  heads  of  sheep  are  found  in  almost  every 
mummy-pit,  and  he  supposes  that  the  heads  of  the  animals  killed  for  food 
were  so  disposed  of,  because  Herodotus  says  that  the  inhabitants  did  not  eat 
them,  and  because  it  was  not  likely  that  the  Egyptians  would  defile  the 
sacred  waters  of  the  Nile  (the  only  fresh  water  in  the  country)  by  throwing 
into  them  the  heads  of  slaughtered  animals,  professedly  held  to  be  unclean. 
The  imprecations  stated  by  Herodotus  to  have  been  pronounced  upon  the 
heads  of  animals,  in  Mr.  Perring's  opinion,  applied  only  to  those,  which  had 
been  sacrificed. 


90  APPENDIX. 


DISCOVERIES  AT  TOURAH. 

The  following  account  is  drawn  up  from  a  letter  received 
from  Mr.  Perring,  and  dated  September  14th,  1838. 

The  sarcophagi,  and  other  antiquities  were  chiefly  excavated 
from  a  range  of  sand-hills,  or,  rather,  from  a  bank  of  sand,  which 
begins  near  the  village  of  Massara,  and  extends  about  half  a  mile 
beyond  Tourah.  It  skirts  a  narrow  slip  of  cultivated  land  at 
the  ed^e  of  the  desert,  and,  as  it  corresponds  in  length  with  the 
antient  quarries,  it  was  no  doubt  the  cemetery  of  the  people  em- 
ployed in  them.  The  length  of  it  was  about  two  miles,  and  it 
was  only  interrupted  by  the  village  of  Tourah,  and  in  one  or  two 
other  places  by  roads  leading  from  the  quarries  to  the  river,  till 
it  was  cut  into  by  Mr.  Perring  in  carrying  on  the  level,  and 
in  searching  for  materials  for  the  construction  of  a  railroad, 
which  was  made  by  the  orders  of  the  Pasha,  for  the  conveyance 
of  stone  to  the  river. 

When  the  antiquities  in  question  were  first  discovered,  Mr. 
Perring  imagined  that  they  might  lead  to  important  results 
respecting  the  history  of  the  Shepherd  Kings,  because  the  car- 
touche of  Amenophis,  who,  acccording  to  Manetho,  reigned  soon 
after  the  expulsion  of  the  shepherds  from  Egypt,  is  inscribed  in 
one  of  the  quarries.^ 

Mr.  Perring  was  not  at  the  time  resident  at  Tourah,  he 
therefore  requested  his  friend,  Mr.  Holroyd,  who  was  living  upon 
the  spot,  to  attend  to  the  discoveries ;  and  the  following  details 
are  the  substance  of  a  communication  from  Mr.  Holroyd,  dated 
Dec.  23d,  1837:  — 

One  hundred  and  fifty  sarcophagi  were  found :  they  were 
composed  of  compact  limestone.  Most  of  them  were  perfect, 
and  were  closed  with  lids.^  They  did  not  afibrd  any  inscrip- 
tions,  and   were   evidently   in   their   original  positions,   but  in 


*  See  Josephus  against  Apion. 

1  The  lids  were  not  fastened,  but  were  let  into  a  recess,  as  is 
shewn  in  the  annexed  figure : — 


V 


■'^^.■i^* 


-^^  ■— -/.s^ 


APPENDIX.  01 

various  directions^  chiefly  north  and  south.    The  cavities  of  four- 
teen of  the  sarcophagi  vfere  rectangular, 
one  was  in  this  shape,        I  ^        and   live  in  this, 


Several  of  them  contained  perfect  skele- 
tons ;  but  the  bones  were  brittle,  and  crumbled,  when  they  were 
handled.  The  fourteen  rectangular  sarcophagi  were  of  different 
sizes,  as  if  for  children,  as  well  as  for  other  persons ;  but  the 
others,  from  their  dimensions,  were  evidently  intended  for  adults. 
Some  of  them  were  furnished  at  the  corners  with  projections, 
which  were  probably  used  as  handles.  A  sarcophagus  made  of 
one  piece  of  earthenware,  with  a  lid,  was  also  found ;  likewise 
another,  composed  of  four  pieces  of  that  material  fastened  toge- 
ther with  strings  and  pegs.  It  was,  unfortunately,  broken 
in  taking  it  out ;  but  upon  the  upper  part  the  form  of  a  female 
face  could  be  traced,  intended,  no  doubt,  to  be  a  portrait  of 
the  deceased.  It  had  been  painted,  and  the  eyes  were  shewn 
to  have  been  ornamented  with  khol,  and  it  contained  a  few 
rude  hieroglyphics.  Within  the  sarcophagus  were  some  bones, 
a  round  plate  of  earthenware,  and,  across  the  feet,  a  small  jar 
of  the  same  substance  containing  the  bones  of  a  foetus — the 
offspring,  most  probably,  of  the  woman,  who  may  have  died 
during  parturition.  The  feet  of  the  woman  were  towards  the 
west,  those  of  the  foetus  towards  the  north :  these  skeletons 
had  not  been  embalmed.  At  the  distance  of  about  two  feet  from 
this  sarcophagus,  a  small  figure  cut  out  of  limestone,  and 
inscribed  with  a  row  of  hieroglyphics  down  the  centre;  and  id 
other  places  a  number  of  jars,'  of  various  forms  and  sizes,  con- 
taining, in  many  instances,  black  pulverised  earth,  were  dug  up; 
remains  of  walls,  and  of  bricks  composed  of  the  mud  of  the  river 
mixed  with  small  pebbles,  likewise  pieces  of  copper  greatly  cor- 
roded, and  the  fragments  of  a  small  jar  or  bottle,  were  also 
found  near  the  sarcophagi.     Other  skeletons  had  been  inclosed 

*  The  jars,  and  part  of  this  sarcophagus,  were  in  the  possession 
of  Mr.  Holroyd.  Many  of  the  former  resembled  the  crockery  at  pre- 
sent used  in  Egypt.  The  most  common  shape  was  this,  in  which  the 
mummies  of  cats  are  frequently  inclosed. 


92  APPENDIX. 

in  wooden  coflSns,  with  wrappers  of  coarse  woollen  stuff.  None 
of  these  bodies  had  been  embalmed,  or  prepared  with  bitumen,  but 
they  appeared  to  have  been  salted,  as  a  quantity  of  salt  was  found 
on  the  skeletons,  and  in  the  sarcophagi,  and  was  collected  by  the 
Arabs  for  culinary  purposes.  Many  skeletons  without  sarcophagi 
or  coffins  were  also  discovered,  generally  near  the  above-mentioned 
walls.'  These  bodies  appeared  to  have  been  buried  in  their 
clothes;  one  in  particular,  which  had  four  or  five  dresses,  and  an 
outer  garment  of  bright  red,  seemed  by  the  hair  to  have  belonged 
to  a  female.  The  skulls  and  bones  were  less  decayed  than  those 
in  the  sarcophagi ;  the  hair  in  one  instance  was  finely  curled, 
and  was  of  a  red  colour,  which  was  supposed  to  have  been  held 
in  abomination  by  the  Egyptians.^  AH  the  wrappers  were  com- 
posed of  coarse  woollen  cloth,  similar  to  that  found  in  the  Third 
Pyramid  of  Gizeh.  A  very  large  sarcophagus  was  also  discovered. 
It  was  7  feet  10  inches  in  length,  was  rectangular,  and  had  a 
heavy  lid.  Several  indistinct  characters  had  been  scrawled  in 
red  on  the  inside — 


j> — 1/  >/'' 


A  number  of  heads  of  oxen,  with  the  horns  pointing  upwards, 
and  slightly  covered  with  sand,  recalled  to  Mr.  Holroyd's  recol- 
lection the  account  given  by  Herodotus;  and  every  circumstance 
connected  with  these  antiquities  impressed  him  with  the  idea  that 
they  belonged  to  the  sepulchres  of  the  poorest  of  the  Egyptians, 
excepting  the  woollen  cloth,^  and  that,  he  supposes,  was  only 
considered  impure  in  reference  to  the  priests,  and  to  those  per- 
sons^  who  were  connected  with  the  service  of  the  Temple. 

Several  hundred  additional  bodies  were  soon  afterwards  dug 
up.  Most  of  them  were  inclosed  in  sarcophagi,  but  a  few  were 
in  wooden  coffins.  Three  or  four  tombs^  constructed  with  large 
slabs  of  calcareous  stone,  were  likewise  opened.     In  these  the 

'  Mr.  Holroyd  quotes  a  passage  from  Diodorus  Siculus,  B.  I.  02 :  — "  If 
any  one  has  a  tomb  for  his  sepulture,  his  body  is  placed  in  it ;  if  not,  a  cham- 
ber is  constructed  in  liis  house,  and  his  bier  is  placed  close  against  the  most 
solid  part  of  the  wall.** 

*  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  bodies  of  Jacob  and  of  Joseph  were  em- 
balmed, and  that  the  Hebrews  appear  in  many  instances  to  have  adopted  the 
customs  of  the  Egyptians. 

*  Scarcely  any  of  this  cloth  could  be  preserved,  but  some  of  it,  and  a  skull, 
have  been  deposited  in  the  British  Museum. 


\ 


^ 


\ 


\ 


\ 


r 


\\ 


<:*■ 


/:*ii 


i| 


9 


o 


CO 

u 

en 


u 

z 


GC 
< 
CO 
(A 

< 


c 


I 
< 

D 

o 


/r. 


CO 


v/) 


4 

a 


1  .    I 


^o. 


^^ 


-    --  A., 

1° 


1^ 


5i 


3 


u     ^ 


A»M1»»' 


vM  n  O  A. 


.'^' 


1 

JJ 


bodies  were  preserved  with  bitumen,  and  with  linen  wrappers 
painted  in  the  usual  manner;  but  bad  not  the  protection  of  coF* 
fins:  they  were  laid  parallel  to  each  other  upon  the  floor,  with 
the  heads  towards  the  north.  Eight  bodies,  of  various  ages, 
placed  in  this  manner,  were  found  in  the  largest  tomb,  which  bad 


94  APPENDIX. 

that  the  person,  under  whose  superintendence,  and  the  object,  for 
which  the  works  were  carried  on,  are  stated  in  both  the  inscriptions; 
that  the  name  of  the  monarch  forms  the  first  part  of  the  hieroglyphical, 
and  the  second  of  the  Latin  record ;  and  that  the  tutelary  deities  are 
placed  in  compartments  abo?e  the  hieroglyphical  text  Considering, 
therefore,  the  difference  of  idiom,  and  the  time,  which  had  elapsed 
between  the  respective  dates,  the  inscription  upon  the  cippus  represents 
the  devotional  formularies,  which  had  been  adopted  in  the  earliest 
times. 

The  relative  positions  of  these  tablets,  and  the  progressive  enlarge- 
ment of  the  quarries,  are  shewn  in  the  ground  plan.  No.  1 ,  the  most 
antient,  and  executed  towards  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Amonemhe  IV. 
is  at  the  entrance  of  the  excavation,  which  appears  to  have  been  worked 
under  Amenophis  II.  and  III.,  by  an  imperfect  tablet,  to  have  been 
continued  to  the  time  of  Necho,  and  according  to  a  demotic  inscription, 
traced  in  black,  even  to  a  later  period.  The  tablet  of  Necho,  indeed, 
warrants  a  conjecture  that  the  works  were  carried  back  again  towards 
the  entrance  of  the  quarry. 

The  Latin  inscription  on  the  cippus  is  as  follows : — 

"To  Jupiter,  the  highest  and  most  excellent  Cbnubis;  to  Juno,  the 
queen ;  the  tutelary  deities  of  this  mountain ;  under  the  dominion  of 
the  Roman  people,  and  in  the  propitious  era  of  our  lords  and  empe- 
rors, Severus  and  Antoninus,  the  most  pious  Augusti ;  of  Geta,  the 
most  pious  C8esar(?)  ;  and  of  Julia  Domna  Augusta,  the  mother  of  the 
camp;  new  quarries  were  first  discovered  near  Pbilee;  and  many 
large  rectangular  columns  and  pillars  were  taken  from  them  under 
Subatianus^  Aquila,  the  prefect  of  Egypt;  the  care  of  the  imperial 
works  being  under  the  superintendence  of  Aurelius  Heraclides, 
decurio  of  the  Moorish  division  (ala)  of  the  army." 

TOURAH  QUARRIES. 

No.  1.  —  This  tablet,  although  imperfect,  is  of  considerable  import- 
ance, because  it  contains  on  the  cornice  a  date,  "  the  43d  year.''  It  does 
not  exhibit  the  figure  of  any  deity,  excepting  that  of  Hat,  "  the  good 
demon,"  and  the  words  "celestial  sun,''  together  with  the  names, 
and  titles  of  the  monarch,  are  written  in  large  characters  under  the  archi- 
trave. The  prenomen,  which  would  have  determined  the  name  of  the 
individual  king,  is  wanting,  but  the  name  proves  that  he  belonged  to 
either  the  sixteenth,  or  seventeenth  dynasty.  The  titles  are  "  the  son 
of  the  sufif  Amonemhefi  beloved  of  Phtah,  the  rampart  of  the  souths 

■  M.  Dubois  supposes  that  it  is  "  Atianus,"  and  that  "  Sub."  is  a  repeti- 
tion. 

'  The  earliest  date  connected  with  this  name  in  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson's 
"Mat.  Hier."  agrees  with  the  forty-first  year  of  Amonemhe  IV,  according 


:;.i;;ii«Vii>]1i 


^ 


< ; 


K    eg 
<    < 


J 


(0 

u 
a: 

a 

X 

< 
a: 

o 


w 


uJ 
O 

r 
< 


X 

h 
< 

I- 


APPENDIX.  95 

and  ofAnuhis:*  The  titles  of  '*  Athor,  mistress  (of  the  fields  of  the 
sun  ?)"  also  appear ;  and  "  giver  of  life,  of  stability,  and  of  power,  like 
the  sun  for  ever  J*  At  the  upper  corner  is  the  name  "  Hat"  The  three 
horizontal  lines  express  ''  the  opening  of  the  (quarries)  to  cut  the  good 
and  white  stone  (calcareous  stone)  of  the  precincts,  for  the  temples  of 
the  pure  god  of  the  lands  of  the  south,  under  the  arm  of  the  military 
chief,  attached  to  the  charge  of  the  signet  (?)...  ."  The  lower  part 
of  the  tablet  is  erased,  but  the  inscription  is  amply  illustrated  by  other 
tablets,  containing  similar  formulas.  They  usually  terminate  with  the 
name  of  the  officer,  under  whose  charge  the  excavation  took  place,  and 
who  probably  cut  the  inscription  as  a  record  of  himself,  as  well  as  of 
his  sovereign,  and  of  the  quantity  of  stone  taken  away.  Parts  of  the 
inscription  are  obscure,  especially  the  end  of  the  second,  and  the  com- 
mencement of  the  third  line ;  but  it  is  possible  to  read  **  the  priest  of 
the  lands  of  the  south.**  (?)  I  have  already  observed,  however,  that  the 
term,  which  at  an  earlier  period  signified  a  *^  god,**  was  afterwards  used 
to  express  ** priest,"  ** prophet-priest "  Several  of  the  symbols,  espe- 
cially the  larger,  do  not  appear  to  have  been  correctly  copied,  and 
their  forms  are  unusual,  and  cannot  be  made  out ;  but,  by  a  reference 
to  other  tablets,  in  the  upper  line,  the  ^*  caves  {quarries)  of  the  rock  " 
"  in  order  to  draw  forth,**  ^  may  be  deciphered. 

No.  2. — This  tablet  is  in  the  shape  of  a  propyleeon^  and  a  long  in- 
scription round  the  lintels,  although  partially  effaced,  records  on  the  left 
side,  that  Amenophis  II.  under  the  titles  of  '*  the  mighty  Horus,  the 
greatly  vigilant,  the  king,  the  sun,  the  chief  of  the  worlds,  has  paid 
devotions  to  the  gods  and  goddesses,  and  has  opened  the  quarries  to 
take  away  the  good  and  white  stone,  for  the  temples  ,  ..•;*'  and  on 
the  right  side,  '*  make  him  a  giver  of  life  like  the  sun"  In  the  upper 
compartment  the  monarch  is  represented  offering  water  and  incense  to  a 
train  of  deities,  Amoun,  Harsiesi,  Souchis,  Anubis,  Athor,  and  Pasht. 
In  the  second  he  adores  Phtah,  Osiris,  Penterotei,^  Ashtaroth,  Pasht, 
Athor,  and  Sate.  The  five  lines  beneath  are,  ''  In  the  fourth  year  of  the 
sanctity  of  the  king,  he  the  king,  the  sun,  the  ruler  of  the  world,  the 
son  of  the  sun,  Amonophth,  the  giver  of  life,  commanded  the  opening 

to  the  arrangement  of  M.  Rosellini ;  but  this  author  also  ascribes  a  reign  of 
forty-four  years  to  Amonemhe  V.,  which  at  all  events  is  not  impossible.  The 
absence  of  a  prenomen  makes  it  uncertain  to  which  of  the  above-mentioned 
monarchs  this  tablet  belonged ;  but  it  was  probably  to  the  immediate  prede- 
cessor of  Amasis.  Cf.  Wilkinson  (J.  G.),  "Mat.  Hier,"  Dynasty  L  Pi.  I. 
Rosellini,  "  Mon.  Stor."  Tav.  IV.  96,  p.  198. 

*  If  the  "  great  god  of  the  land  of  the  south  "  means  Osiris,  or  Amon,  the 
stone  was  probably  required  for  the  repairs  of  the  temples  at  Thebes,  or  at 
Abydos. 

'  A  form  of  Horns. 


96 


APPENDIX. 


of  the  abodes  (supposed  of  the  gods),  to  draw  the  good  and  white  stone 
for  the  repairs  of  the  temples  for  a  period  of  years.  Before  the 
king  opened  the  abodes  by  these  excavations,  the  appointed  adorations 
were  made  in  the  quarries,  in  the  presence  of  his  majesty,  who  was 
entitled  the  giver  of  life,  and  of  power  like  the  sun :  done  under  the 
arm  (by  the  authority)  of  the  military  chief,  who  was  attached  to  the 
heart  of  the  king  by  the  fabrication  of  his  constructions  (on  account  of 
his  skill  in  architecture),  who  adorned  the  head  of  the  temples,  who 
erected  tablets  in  the  lands  of  Naharaina  (Mesopotamia),  and  ofKaroei 
(a  province  in  Lybia),  who  was  attached  to  the  bearers  (a  title  analo- 
gous to  our  bricklayers)  of  Egypt,  of  all  the  gods  of  the  north  and  of 
the  south  the  royal  scribe,  Saph.*' 

This  tablet  is,  therefore,  an  historical  document,  and  commemo- 
rates a  public  act,  performed  in  the  fourth  year  of  the  reign  of  Amenoph 
II.,  connected  with  the  repairs  of  the  edifices  erected  by  that  monarch. 
The  beginning  of  the  third  line  is  not  clear,  but  the  meaning  of  the 
first  two,  and  of  the  last  two  lines  is  evident ;  and  the  important  func- 
tions held  by  Saph  are  similar  to  those  recorded  in  the  tombs  at  Beni- 
hassan,  and  have  a  reference  to  the  progressive  conquests  of  an  Egyp- 
tian king.  Saph  appears  to  have  been  a  royal  scribe,  an  architect,  or 
surveyor,  engaged  in  the  erection  of  the  temples,  and  likewise  of  the 
stelee,  and  tablets,  which  are  phonetically,  and  ideographically  described 
in  the  fourth  line  by  the  onion  and  pullet,  the  initials  of  the  Coptic  words 
OJeiX,  "  white;'  and  OTerr,  •*  stele  or  column^  According  to  M. 
Champollion  he  must  have  been  employed  in  Lybia  and  Mesopotamia, 
which  countries  had  been  conquered  by  Amenoph  II.  or  by  his  prede- 
cessors.^ 

No.  3. — The  upper  part  of  this  tablet  is  erased,  but  Amenoph  III.  or 
Memnon,  appears  to  stand  before  three  deities ;  Amoun-ra,  whose  form 
can  be  with  difficulty  made  out ;  Harsiesi,  ''  the  lord  of  Sshatem," 
crowned  with  a  pschent;  and  Chnoumis,  or  Chnouphis-ra,  the  ''great 
terrifier,  lord  of  Sou  ten  rot"  The  monarch  is  in  the  act  of  presenting  a 
symbolic  eye  on  a  basket,  which  he  holds  in  both  hands.  Behind  the 
monarch,  and  on  the  right,  is  an  imperfect  vertical  line  of  hieroglyphics, 
in  which  the  titles  of  Chnouphis  only  remain.    The  end  of  the  inscription 

is  as  follows : — '' astonisher  of  the  gods.^     That  they  will  give 

thee  all  life,  all  force,  all  power,  for  ever."  The  four  horizontal  lines 
beneath  contain — **the  year  of  the  sanctity  of  Horus,  the  bull,  the 
mighty  (victorious),  ruling  with  truth  ;  the  lord  of  the  upper  and  lower 
worlds,  the  establisher  of  the  houses  of  stone,  the  tranquilliser  of  the 


'  These  tablets  probably  recorded  important  conquests^  like  that  supposed 
to  have  been  left  by  Sesostris^  at  the  Nahr  el  Kelb. 
*  A  title  of  Noum. 


nl^^^^/^U?  Ji  rr  EEE-l^ir<r^;  li£  t'f^ 


fzfirTL--1TffM:^-^>^i^M1^I.?.!^/ 


TOUR^H   QUARRIES 


TABLET     N»    3. 


if 


(0 

UJ 

< 


Z 
h 

u 

-J 

CO 

< 


O 


APPENDIX.  97 

world,  Ike  hintf,  the  lord  of  the    two  worlds,  the  sun,  the    lord  of 


98  APPENDIX. 

abodes  of  stone,  the  tranquillizer  (according  to  ChampoUion)  of  the 
worlds  the  hawk  of  gold,  the  lord  of  strength,  the  conqueror  ofeastern^l)  • 
foreigners ;  the  gracious  god,  the  lord  of  dilated  heart,  the  lord  of 
diadems,  ....  gracious,  in  the  oeit,  (the  crown  of  Upper  Egypt), 
bearing  (?)  the  pschent  with  life,  and  with  power;  the  king,  the  lord 
of  the  world,  the  lord  giving  light, ^  the  sun,  the  lord  of  truth,  the  son 
of  the  sun,  the  belcved  son  of  his  race,  f  beloved  of  the  gods  ....  (in) 
his  tribunal,  the  lord  of  diadems,  Amenoph,  the  king  of  Egypt,  the 
giver  of  life,  of  stability,  of  power,  and  of  victory  ;  of  dilated  hearty 
with  his  offering  (?)»  .  .  .  .  like  the  sun  for  ever.  The  commands 
of  his  majesty  were  to  open  the  rock,  and  to  excavate  the  good  and  white 
stone,  in  order  to  repair  the  temples  for  a  period  of  years,  when  his 
majesty,*'  &c. 

No.  5. — This  tablet  is  also  in  the  shape  of  a  propylceon,  and  had 
probably  a  frieze  and  a  cornice,  with  the  representation  of  Hat,  "  the 
good  demon."  The  sculpture  is  almost  effaced ;  but,  it  appears  by  the 
name  in  the  compartment,  above  the  monarch,  and  below  the  emblem  of 
heaven,  that  Pharaoh  Nech6,  who  is  styled  **  the  lord  of  the  world,  the 
sun  strengthening  the  heart,  the  giver  of  life  like  the  sun,"  is  represented 
in  the  act  of  making  an  offering  of  wine  (for  the  word  **  wine"  can  be 
made  out,  where  the  offering  is  usually  mentioned)  to  two  divinities.  The 
deity  (in  a  shrine  to  the  right)  is  Phtah,  or  Khons,  and  he  holds  in  his 
hands  a  sceptre,  often  assigned  to  the  Egyptian  Hephaistos,  and  com- 
posed of  the  gom,  the  symbol  of  life  and  of  stability.  The  other  deity, 
Atm6,  or  Athom,  is  crowned  with  a  pschent,  and  also  bears  the  gom.^ 
The  word  ''  etemaV*  is  legible  in  the  centre ;  and  lower  down  were 
evidently  several  horizontal  lines  of  hieroglyphics  ;  they  are  effaced,  but, 
doubtless,  referred  to  works  carried  on  in  the  quarries  during  the  reign 
of  Nechd. 

*  This  expression  has  been  translated  by  M .  Rosellini,  "  lord  over  the  rest*' 
It  is  here  apparently  in  an  abbreviated  form,  but  it  is  written  with  its  full  com- 
plement of  characters  upon  one  of  the  obelisks  at  Luxor,  rtC&-  Ipl-  Of.&A.Cyy 
''  the  lord  making  light,''  (?)  which  would  coincide  with  the  solar  epithets  of 
the  monarch.    Cf.  Rosellini. 

'  There  is  an  ellipse  here  of  ''makes,'*  "gives,"  or  ''places,**  The  term 
"gods'*  may  be  put  adjectively  for  "divine," — "his  divine  constructions" 

'  Two  arms  upon  an  ensign )  which  often  appear  borne  behind  the  mon- 
arch. 

9  This  deity  has  been  called  Tom,  Thorn,  Tmou,  Atmou,  &c.  The  final 
vowel  is  paregoric,  and  the  reed,  often  prefixed,  is  probably  an  ^,    But  the 

term  UXocOiUL,  '' Atuom,"  is  the  proper  name  of  a  man.  Cf.  Quatremere, 
"Recberches  sur  la  Langue  de  TEgypte."  8vo.  Paris,  p.  123.  Tattam, 
"  Lexicon  Linguae  CopticaB,"  voce  Athom.  MS.  Vaticanus,  Tablet  of  Wood 
in  the  British  Museum,  Case  LL.  No.  2. 


■"!< 


*.U.-^ 


i-:- 


TOUR  A  H    QUARRIES 


;tL 


a  m 


Si' 


Pf/ 


MAS3ARA     QUARRIES     N"/, 


\ 


n 


? 


MAASARA    QUARRIES 


TABLET     N«>   6. 


APPENDIX.  99 


MASSARA    QUARRIES. 

These  quarries  appear  also  to  have  been  worked  from  north  to 
south.  The  earliest  tablets,  Nos.  6  and  7,  are  of  Amasis,  but  his  im- 
mediate successors  are  not  noticed ;  although  the  names  of  Psam- 
metichus  IL,  and  of  Hakoris,  are  inscribed  on  the  cartouches  to  the 
southward.    The  remainder  of  the  tablets  belong  to  the  Ptolemies. 

No.  6. — The  upper  part  contains  the  names  and  the  titles  of  Amasis,^ 
and  those  of  his  wife,  Amasis  Nofreareh.  The  royal  prenomen,  with 
the  usual  titles,  is  in  the  centre.  On  the  left  is  expressed  —  *^  beloved 
of  Atk6m,  lord  of  Pont;*'  on  the  right  — "  beloved  of  Phtah,  who 
is  the  southern  rampart,**  Further  to  the  left  are  the  titles,  &c.  of 
Nofreareh,  the  queen  of  Amasis,  **  the  royal  daughter^  Aahmes  No- 
freareh,  the  giver  of  eternal  life^  the  royal  sister^  the  chief;"  and 
to  the  right  is  written  — "  the  royal  wife,  the  great  royal  mother, 
the  mistress  of  the  world"  Below  these  titles  are  eight  horizontal 
lines  of  hieroglyphics.  It  will  be  seen  by  the  Plate,  that  they  are 
imperfect,  but  that  they  refer  to  excavations  in  the  quarries.  **  In 
the  twenty-second  year  of  the  sanctity  of  the  king^  the  son  of  the 

sun,  Aahmos,  the  giver  of  life,  the  caves filled  with  good  and 

white  stone  of  the  precinct  (^.)  were  opened  for  the  abodes  belonging 
to  ,  ,  ,  .  abode,  the  abode  of  Phtah,  the  gracious  god  of  Amon  in 

Thebes his  sanctity  made the  stone  by  oxen  (?).... 

Done  under  the  arm  (the  authority)  of  the  chief  ,  '  ,  .  the  chief  of  the 
lord  of  the  world  constructing  .  .  ,  .  of  the  gracious  god  the  guardian 

of  the  signet "    Beneath  this  inscription,  a  block  of  stone,  drawn 

on  a  sledge  by  six  oxen,  and  attended  by  three  drivers,  is  represented.  The 
tablet  records  the  fact,  that  the  quarries,  which  had  been  begun  in  the 
forty-third  year  of  Amonemhe,  probably  the  fourth,  were  worked  in  the 
twenty-second  of  Amasis,  apparently  for  the  same  purpose,  viz.  the  build- 
ing of  the  temples  of  Phtah,  and  of  Amon  in  Thebes  ;  which  probably  were 
begun  by  Amonemhe,  because  the  inscription  mentions  that  the  stone  was 
intended  for  the  temples  of  the  gods  of  the  south,  and  for  the  temple  of 
Amon  in  Thebes.  It  therefore  appears  that  the  monarchs  of  the  six- 
teenth and  seventeenth  dynasties  (whose  capital  seems  to  have  been 
Abydos,  from  the  recurrence  of  their  names  upon  monuments  brought 
from  that  place)  had  regained  complete  authority  over  the  whole  country, 
especially  towards  the  close  of  the  seventeenth  dynasty.     These  tablets 


'  A  tablet  of  the  same  import,  and  referring  to  the  same  monarch,  has 
lM»cn  published  by  M.  Hoscllini,  **Mon.  Stor."  Teste.  Tav.  last  of  Vol.  1. 


100  APPENDIX, 

seem  to  be  the  earliest  records  at  present  known  respecting  Thebes, 
which  city  acquired  importance  in  proportion  to  the  conquests  of  the 
Egyptian  kings ;  and  superseded  Memphis,  as  the  capital  of  the  whole 
country,  on  account  of  the  comparative  superiority,  and  security  of  its 
situation.  The  deficiencies  of  this  tablet  may  be  in  some  degree  supplied 
by  a  reference  to  No.  8. 

No.  7. — ^The  figure  to  the  left  represents  the  deity  Sebek,^  Savak,  or 
Souchi-ra ;  which  appear  to  be  varieties  of  the  same  name.  He  has  the 
head  of  a  crocodile,  wears  the  crown  called  otf,  and  holds  in  his  left 
hand  a  gom,  or  koucoupha  sceptre,  and  in  his  right  hand  the  symbol  of 
life.     The  inscription,  which  is  in  three  vertical  lines  of  hieroglyphics,  is 

— **  the  invocation  of  Savak,  lord  ofRogalQ.)  [^^JcL  »-'*^  1  beloved, 

the  giver  of  life  in  his  tribunal,  like  the  sun,  for  ever  ;**  and  the  final 
line  is — "  an  invocation  to  Isis,  mistress  of  the  abode  of  the  sycamoreJ* 
These  inscriptions  are  evidently  imperfect,  and  are  also  in  an  unusual 
form.  If  the  expression  **  beloved,"  at  the  end  of  the  first  line  to  the 
right  be  correctly  copied,  which  from  the  accompanying  royal  titles  ap- 
pears to  be  the  case,  it  means  that  the  invocation  or  address  is  that  of  the 
Pharaoh,  or  monarch,  "  the  beloved  of  Souchi-ra,  of  the  lord,*  &c.  In 
other  respects  the  inscription  is  complete.  The  characters  are  red,  the 
colour  usually  employed  by  surveyors,  and  by  the  persons,  who  were 
engaged  in  executing  the  sacred  inscriptions. 

No.  8. — This  tablet  contains  in  the  cornice,  Hat,  **  the  good  demon," 
and,  with  some  slight  variations,  and  with  the  omission  of  the  represent- 
ation of  the  blocks  drawn  by  oxen,  resembles  No.  6.  The  rank  of  the 
officer  seems  to  be  exactly  the  same  as  that  in  No.  6 :  his  name,  in  the 
left-hand  corner,  is  Nofreheri,  and  a  second  excavation,  made  in  the 
twenty-second  year  of  Amasis,  is  probably  recorded. 

No.  9. — This  magnificent  tablet  is  unfortunately  much  defaced.  It 
is  in  the  shape  of  a  doorway  with  a  double  cornice,  on  both  of  which  is 
the  winged  symbol  of  the  good  demon,  and  at  each  end  of  the  lower  cornice 
are  the  titles  of  Hat,  '^  the  great  gody  the  lord  of  the  heaven,*'  On  the 
sides  are  plants  of  the  papyrus  and  of  the  lotus,^ — emblems  of  the  upper, 
and  of  the  lower  hemispheres ;  and  above  the  one  to  the  right,  which  is 
perfect,  is  an  ureeus,  crowned  with  the  white  crown,  the  ouobsh  or  oeit, 
the  emblem  of  dominion  over  the  upper  regions,  of  Soaven,  or  Suen,  the 
Egyptian  Eilethyia,^  and  likewise  of  Maut,  or  Mouth,  the  Hera  or  Juno  of 

«  Cf.  Wilkinson,  "  Mat.  Hier."  PI.  XXXV.  Champollion,  "  Panth. 
Egypt."  Sabak,  Peyron.  "Lexicon  Linguae  CopticaB,"  p.  219,  by  the  inha- 
bitants of  Arsinoe  crocodiles  were  C()l!ei  Souchis, 

•  Cf.  Rosetta  Stone,  1.  6,  Hier.  Part,    Champol.  "  Gram.  Egypt."  p.  9. 

*  Champol.  "  Pan.  Egypt."  Soaven.  Wilkineon,  "  Mat.  Hier.  Pan."  same 
deity.    Ser.  X.  PI.  XXXVIII.  p.  47,  who  hypothetically  allies  her  with  Sate. 


I» 


•  ftf 


I,  'JI'J  I. 


MAASARA  QUARRIES 


TABLET    N?    10 


APPENDIX.  101 

the  Thcban  system.  On  the  lower  part  of  the  tablet  are  alternate  rows 
of  the  flowers,  end  of  the  buds  of  the  papyrus.  Tlie  upper  part  of  a 
standing  figure,  crowned  with  an  olf,  fepreseiits  Ptolemy  Pliiladelphuii, 
adoring  a  train  of  deities;  slight  Indicatious  of  the  heads,  only  remain: 

but  they  appear  to  have  been  "fla,  or  i?e,  (Ae  iorJq/'(Ae region, 

_fixed/or  ever  {^.);  theitreat  god,  the  father  (or  the  statue);  .  .  .  .  Moui, 


102  APPENDIX. 

— *•  Oerlheky^  Pasht,  and  Athor,  the  guardian  of ,  .  ,  .  the  daughter  of 
the  sun,"     Behind  her  is  "  Thoth,  the  lord  of  the  divine  writings,  resi- 
dent in  the  abode  of  Monkh"  he  holds  in  his  hands  the  symbol  of  life, 
and  the  gom,  and  wears  upon  his  head  the  olf.     As  there  are  not  any 
traces  of  an  inscription,  the  tablet  was  probably  unfinished. 

Near  No.  10  are  the  prenomen,  and  the  name  of  Psammetichus.     The 
cartouches  are  surmounted  by  a  disc,  and  by  two  feathers. 

No.  11. — This  represents  an  act   of  adoration   (G00O'¥)7   to  the 
Theban  triad,  Amounra ;  Maut  (Mouth) ;  and  Khons.    The  monarch's 
name  is  erased,  and  also  his  figure,  excepting  the  hands,  which  appa- 
rently hold  the  symbol  of  fields,^  which,  in  this  instance,  signifies  that 
a  portion  of  the  produce  of  the  soil,  upon  some  particular  occasion,  was 
dedicated  to  the  local  deities.     Before  the  king's  cartouche  are  the  titles 
— "  the  good  god,  the  lord  of  the  world.**    The  two  perpendicular  lines 
before  the  first  deity  express  — "  the  speech  of(A)moun  ....  the  great 
god,  the  lord  of  the  two  abodes  of  the  sun,  of  the  upper,  and  lower  hemi" 
spheres,  and  of  the  region  of  Ouabsh,  or  Oeit-sbe,"  the  **  white  wall,** 
(AfviMv  rux»ffi  the  Memphite  Acropolis.)    Before  Maut  (who  bears  upon 
her  head  the  upper  and  lower  part  of  the  pschent,  the  oeit,  and  tcshr,  the 
red  and  white  crowns  of  Egypt,  and  the  vulture-shaped  head-dress)  is — 
"  the  invocation  of  the  great  mother,  the  mistress  of  the  land  of  Eshor, 
and  of  the  region  of  the  white  wall"    To  Maut  succeeds  the  hawk- 
headed  type  of  Khons,  with  an  inscription  containing  '*  the  invocation  of 
Khons  the  son  of  Hor,  (or  of  Ra),  the  great  god,  the  lord  of  the  region 
of  the  white  wall,*'    The  characters  on  the  architrave,  and  in  the  centre 
of  the  cornice,  refer  to  Hat,  **  the  good  demon."    The  fact  that  the  Theban 
triad  presided  over  quarries  excavated  Ih  the  neighbourhood  of  Memphis 
proves  that  the  monarch,  whose  name  is  erased,  must  have  belonged  to 
the  Diospolitan  line,  for  the  tutelary  deities  of  Memphis  were  Phtah,  Me- 
rephtah  or  Pasht,  and  Nofre-Athom.     The  region  mentioned  in  the  text 
was  either  in  Upper,  or  in  Lower  Egypt.     In  a  ritual  in  the  British 
Museum,  this  group,  together  with  a  star^  suspended  from  heaven,  ex- 
presses "  lli^A^••— the  Gixoopg,  of  the  Memphite,  and  the  (ToopA.^  of 
the  Theban  dialect.     On  the  cofllin  of  Soter,  in  the  British  Museum,  the 

*  It  is  to  be  observed  that,  at  a  late  epoch,  deities  frequently  bore  all  the 
names,  of  which  they  were  personifications.  Oerihek,  the  great  avenger,  and 
Pasht,  Diana,  or  Artemis,  and  also  Athor,  or  Aphrodite,  were  types  of  the 
same  deity.  On  a  ritual  in  the  possession  of  the  University  of  Dublin,  a 
hippopotamus  erect,  with  female  breasts  (7>-iier),  was  identified  witli  Athor, 
and  was  placed  before  the  goddess,  when  she  came  out  of  the  Syenite  moun- 
tains ',  but  the  prayers  of  the  deceased  were  addressed  to  Athor  only. 

»  Champol.  "Gram.  Egypt."  p.  387.  *  Ibid.  p.  39,  n.  64. 

*  Salvolini,  "  Analyse  Gram."  p.  96. 

*  Ritual  in  British  Museum,  pp.  79,  97.  Champ.  **  Gram.  Egypt."  G4S, 
n.  186. 


rrnTrrrn 


MAASARA   QUARRIES 


TABLET    N«»    II 


Jiuite<fL  4yn  c:>ie/!l.{ycn\ 


<:::  JwV.t<^->Uo^^'  ^  ^•'^^--' 


tr. 


^  >  y  ^  ^ 


Hf?gl 


'"-W.Wc^^X-  v4Vh|<.;  5 


\\V1 


■/<^. 


VH: 


jj  y.::^ 


.^^  tl^^^  {X?^^ 


^•^ 


It 


( 


k_ 


r3/ 


N^ 


O 


6 


0 


^^ 


CARTOUCHE  OF  P5AMMETICU5.2*" 


A/rv/.fo^ia^  OcA^. 


L(S  '  S  •  O  »7> 


'*' '       Ml 


cartouche:    N9I2 


J>4^kB^Latr*b  Ifu0c«eii 


INSCRIPTIONS  PROM  MAASARA  andTOORAH  QUARRIES 


APPENDIX.  103 

hieroglyphical  >  symbol  for  X  is  substituted  for  the  pool  used  for  g)  ; 
indeed,  cg'  and  X  are  indifferently  used,  as  Jtft^CIJI  for  MJ^U  <*  an 
axe ;"  OJUq  and  XKq,  "  to  lay  waste,"  &c.  The  name  of  the  region 
may  consequently  be  read  Eshor,  or  Ejor.  In  many  instances,  particu- 
larly in  the  isacred  dialect,  a  vowel  is  affixed  to  words  in  Coptic,  the 
radical  elements  of  which  are  contained  in  the  consecutive  consonants. 
Thus,  ClJCy^  OJ,  and  CajOje,  are  equally  used  in  both  dialects  to 
express  ** powerful"  "  able.**  A-OCOJUL,  and  eOOJtIL,*  are  names  of 
the  god  hitherto  called  Thmou,  Atmou,  or  Atmoo.  Now,  as  the  deter- 
minative is  expressed  by  three  waving  lines,  which  also  signify  water, 
the  word  may  be  ClJ^pi,^  which  was  applied  by  the  Egyptians  to  the 

Red  Sea,  in  the  form  of  <t>IOJUL  HOJ^pi,  "  the  sea  of  Skori,  or  of 
Skari;*'  a  term  which  has  excited  much  controversy.  ^  In  the  sacred 
dialect  of  Egypt  it  would  be  "  Eshormoou**  or  "  Eshoriom^  the  dark 
waters  or  sea ;"  a  term  not  applied  to  the  Nile,  which  is  styled  l4LpO, 
*•  the  river,**  By  a  reference  to  the  stele  of  Tiberius,  in  the  British  Mu- 
seum, it  may  mean  **  darkness**  or  ^^  extinction.'*  These  conjectures, 
however,  are  by  no  means  conclusive.  The  lines  in  the  lower  part,  if  any 
were  inserted,  are  entirely  erased ;  but,  from  the  tenor  of  the  other  in- 
scriptions, the  tablet  was  no  doubt  executed  in  honour  of  the  gods  when 
a  fresh  excavation  was  undertaken  for  sacred  purposes. ^ 

No.  12 — "  The  lord  of  diadems,  Hakr  {Acoris).**  The  name  of 
the  monarch  Acoris,  or  Akoris,  of  the  twenty-ninth  dynasty  of  Men- 
desians.^ 


*  Champ.  "Gram.  Egypt."    Salvolini,  "Analyse  Gram." 

*  Peyron,  "  Lex.  Ling.  Copt."  4to.  Turin,  1836,  p.  279. 

*  Peyron,  loc,  cit. 

*  Journal,  "  Tourah  Quarries,"  No.  7,  n.  2. 

*  Peyron,  "  Lex.  Ling.  Copt."  &c.  p.  304. 

^  Peyron,  loc.  cit.  According  to  Akerblad  it  means  "  the  sea  of  the 
faUen,"  in  allusion  to  the  miraculous  defeat  recorded  in  the  Exodus ;  but  this 
opinion  appears  to  be  erroneous,  for,  even  if  the  etymology  be  right,  the  ex- 
pression does  not  seem  to  have  been  used  till  after  the  introduction  of  Christ- 
ianity into  Egypt.  2S«^i  is  '*areed; "  and  Cf.  Tattam  (H.)  "  Lex.  iSgyptiaco- 
Latinum,"  contends  at  some  length  that  it  signified  "  the  reedy  sea,** 

*  The  monarch  was  probably  one  of  the  Ptolemies.  The  term  "  wliite 
wall*'  seems  indeed  to  have  been  as  old  as  Barneses  III.  (Cf.  Burton,  "Ex- 
cerpt. Hier.'*  PI.  LVI.  1.  8),  but  it  was  not  commonly  used  before  the  time 
of  the  Ptolemies.    Cf.  Monuments,  Stelae,  &c.  passim. 

»  Cf.  Champ.  "Precis  du  Syst.  Hier."  2d  edition,  1828,  p.  243  PI. 
Tabl.  Gen.  124.  Rosellini  (Hipp.),  "  Mon.  Stor."  Teste,  Tom.  II.  Tav.  XIII. 
p.  153,  n.    Wilkinson  (Sir  J.  G.),  "  Top.  Thebes,"  and  " Mat.  Hier."  Kings. 


104  APPENDIX. 


REMARKS  ON  THE  MEASURES,  BY  WHICH  THE 

PYRAMIDS  WERE  BUILT, 

TAKEN  FROM  MR.  PERRING'S  OBSERVATIONS. 

It  appears,  that  there  were  various  sorts  of  cubits,  but  that 
the  length  of  the  ordinary  cubit  (as  the  name  implies)  was  the 
distance  from  the  elbow  to  the  end  of  the  middle  finger,  and  was 
supposed  to  contain  six  hands'  breadths,  each  of  which  was 
subdivided  into  four  fingers'  breadths.  The  uncertainty  of  the 
measure,  unless  reduced  to  some  positive  standard,  is  evident, 
and  may  have  given  rise  to  the  above-mentioned  varieties.*  But, 
as  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson  very  properly  observes,*  the  Egyptians 
adhered  strictly  to  their  autient  customs,  and  preserved  most 
accurately  their  accustomed  measures,  particularly  those,  which 
were  used  for  the  regulation  of  the  waters  of  the  Nile,  as  any 
uncertainty  would  in  that  instance  have  produced  the  greatest 
confusion. 

Mr.  Perring  found  that  the  dimensions  of  the  Pyramids  agreed 
with  a  cubit,  described  by  Ezekiel,  chap.  xl.  ver.  6,  to  have  been  a 
cubit  and  a  hand's  breadth,  and  therefore  to  have  contained  seven 
hands'  breadths.^  He  assumed  for  the  antient  measure  a  mean 
taken  between  a  cubit  in  the  Royal  Museum  at  Paris,  one  from 

*  The  modern  Egyptian  ^'drah  belladee,"  although  rather  longer,  proba- 
bly represents  one  of  these  measures.    The  cubit  was  expressed  in  hierogly- 


phics by    /^;  /  ^  equivalent  to  the  Coptic  word  JUtAg|€,  or 

JtiL^^I,  '' mahe,'' ox '' mahV' 

'  '' Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Antient  Egyptians,"  second  series, 
Vol.  I.  p.  28. 

•  This  cubit,  therefore,  appears  to  have  been  used  by  the  Hebrews ;  and, 
notwithstanding  the  cities,  which  had  been  built,  and  the  civilisation,  which 
had  taken  place  in  Syria,  it  is,  indeed,  probable,  that,  before  their  arrival  in 
Egypt,  the  sons  of  Jacob,  owing  to  their  pastoral  habits,  and  to  the  little 
intercourse,  which  existed  between  them  and  the  Philistines,  had  few,  if  any, 
opi>ortunities  of  acquiring  scientific  knowledge,  which  had  then  attained  a 
great  perfection  in  Egypt ;  whence,  like  the  Greeks,  the  Hebrews  subsequently 
derived  a  knowledge  of  architecture,  and  of  the  other  sciences,  by  which  man- 
kind was  civilised  and  refined. 


APPENDIX.  105 

the  Nilometer  in  the  Island  of  Elephantine,  and  another  found  in 
a  propylaeon  at  Karnac ;  and  the  following  figures  will  shew  how 
nearly  it  coincides  with  a  cubit  stated,  in  Sir  Isaac  Newton's  "Trea- 
tise on  Antient  Weights  and  Measures,"  to  have  been  calculated 
from  the  proportions  of  the  King's  Chamber  in  the  Great  Pyramid 
of  Gizeh : — 

English  Feet. 

Cubit  in  the  Museum  -  -  1*707 
from  the  Nilometer  -  -  1-712 
from  Karnac  -        -         1'720 


3)5-139 


Mean  Cubit    -         -       1-713 
Sir  Isaac  Newton's  -         -  1'719 

According  to  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson,  the  cubit  in  the  Nilometer 
contains  20-6250 ;  that  at  Karnac  20*6500  inches ;  and  the  Hebrew 
cubit  1  foot  8-24  inches,  or  1  foot  9-888  inches.* 

This  measure  does  not  exactly  agree  with  the  buildings  in  their 
present  state;  but  Mr.  Perring  considers,  that  the  difference 
may  be  attributed  to  dilapidation,  and  to  other  accidental 
causes,  and  that  a  general  agreement  is  obvious.  He  also  ob- 
serves, that  the  cubit  calculated  from  the  King's  Chamber  proves, 
that  that  apartment  was  constructed  with  the  greatest  accuracy  ; 
and  he  conceives,  that  the  dimensions  of  the  different  chambers  and 
passages  were  originally  exact,  but  that  they  were  in  some  degree 
enlarged  by  the  blocks  having  been  afterwards  trimmed  down  to  a 
polished  surface.  He  adds,  that  Pliny  appears  to  have  been  the 
only  antient  author,  who  actually  measured  the  Pyramids,  and  that 
the  contradictory  statements  respecting  the  dimensions  of  these 
monuments  were  owing  to  the  rubbish  and  sand,  with  which 
they  had  been  encumbered,  probably,  from  very  early  times. 
The  late  surveys  were,  therefore,  taken  with  considerable  advan- 
tage, because  the  pavement  at  the  base  of  the  Great  Pyramid  was 
uncovered  in  three  places  on  the  northern  front,  and  because  the 
interiors  were  in  general  well  examined. 

As  the  assumed  cubit  is  reduced  to  English  measure,  it  can 
be  easily  applied  to  the  plans  in  Mr.  Perring's  large  work.  The 
several  details  are,  therefore,  omitted ;  and  the  following  obser- 


*  See  '*  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Antient  Egyptians/'  second  series, 
Vol.  I.  pp.  30,  32,  and  27. 


106  APPENDIX. 

vations  by  Mr.  Perring  are  only  inserted.  He  remarks,  that 
the  perpendicular  height  of  the  Great  Pyramid  was  to  the  base» 
as  6  to  8,  and  that  the  inclined  height  was  to  the  base,  as 
4  to  5 ;  ^  that  the  eight  plethra,  stated  by  Herodotus  to  be  the 
square  of  the  base,  were  measures  of  fifty-six  cubits,  eight  of 
which  formed  an  Egyptian  juger ;  that,  according  to  Pliny,  the 
whole  building  occupied  eight  jugera,  which  measures  must 
therefore  have  been  nearly  three  times  larger  than  the  Roman 
acres ;  that  the  height  from  the  base  of  the  Great  Pyramid  to  the 
floor  of  the  Queen's  Chamber,  the  height  from  the  floor  of  the 
Queen's  to  that  of  the  King's,  and  thence  to  the  top  of  Campbell's 
Chamber,  were  equal  (about  40  cubits);  also,  that  the  space 
from  the  ceiling  of  Campbell's  Chamber  to  the  top  of  the  Pyramid 
nl^as  160  cubits,  and  therefore  exceeded  the  three  above-men- 
tioned distances  by  40  cubits ;  and  likewise,  that  the  space  from 
the  roof  of  the  King's  to  that  of  Wellington's  Chamber,  and 
thence  to  the  roof  of  Lady  Arbuthnot's  Chamber,  were  the  same, 
and  that  each  of  them  was  equal  to  the  height  of  the  King's 
Chamber. 

Mr.  Perring  found  that  the  incline  of  the  roof-blocks  In  the 
Queen's  Chamber,  and  of  those  in  Belzoni's  Chamber  in  the  Second 
Pyramid,  was  one-third  of  the  width  of  the  respective  apartments; 
and  that  the  incline  of  the  roof,  in  the  lower  chamber  in  the 
Second  Pyramid,  was  one-fourth  part  of  the  width  of  that  room. 

He  also  endeavoured  to  ascertain  whether  any  relative  propor- 
tions were  observed  between  the  angles  of  the  exteriors  of  the  Py- 
ramids, and  those  of  the  entrance-passages,  but  they  appeared  to 
have  been  merely  determined  by  the  proportionate  extent  of  the 
base  and  of  the  perpendicular  height  of  the  building.  He  observes 
that  the  entrance  in  the  Great  Pyramid  inclines  about  one  foot  in 
two,  but  that  the  ascending  passage  seems  to  have  been  regu- 
lated by  the  height  of  the  King's  Chamber  above  the  base,  which 
was  80  cubits.  Mr.  Perring  also  remarks,  that,  as  the  build- 
ings were  not  intended  for  astronomical  purposes,  but  for  tombs, 
their  exterior  forms  were  no  doubt  adapted  for  duration  and  for 
grandeur,  and  their  internal  arrangements  for  strength  and  for 
security,  according  to  the  facilities,  which  the  rocks,  over  which 
they  were  erected,  and  their  positions,  afforded. 

*  A  reference  to  the  dimensions  will  shew  the  general  accuracy  of  these 
observations. 


•APPENDIX.  107 

THE  SPHINX. 

AN  ACCOUNT  OF  M.  CAVIGLIA'S  EXCAVATIONS  IN  1818, 
TAKEN  FROM  THE  PAPERS  OF  THE  LATE  MR.  SALT.' 

*'  This  monument,  so  imposing  in  its  aspect,  even  in  the  muti- 
lated state,  to  which  it  has  been  reduced,  has  always  excited  the 
admiration  of  those  who  possessed  sufficient  knowledge  of  art  to 
appreciate  its  merits  at  a  first  glance ;  for,  though  to  an  untu- 
tored eye  there  remains  so  little  of  the  features  as  scarcely  to 
give  more  than  a  general  idea  of  the  human  head,  yet,  by 
repeated  and  accurate  observation,  the  several  parts  may  be 
sufficiently  traced  to  afford  a  tolerably  complete  idea  of  its 
original  perfection. 

"The  contemplative  turn  of  the  eye,  the  mild  expression  of 
the  mouth,  and  the  beautiful  disposition  of  the  drapery  at  the 
angle  of  the  forehead,  sufficiently  attest  the  admirable  skill  of  the 
artist,  by  whom  it  was  executed.^  It  is  true,  that  no  great  atten- 
tion has  been  paid  to  those  proportions,  which  we  are  accustomed 
to  admire,  nor  does  the  pleasing  impression,  which  it  produces, 
result  from  any  known  rule  adopted  in  its  execution ;  but  it  may 
rather  be  attributed  to  the  unstudied  simplicity  of  the  conception, 
to  the  breadth,  yet  high  finish,  of  the  several  parts,  and  to  the 
stupendous  magnitude  of  the  whole. 

''Such  are  the  sentiments,  which  a  repeated  view  of  this 
extraordinary  work  has  inspired.  At  first,  I  confess,  that,  like 
many  other  travellers,  I  felt  that  the  praises  lavished  upon  it  by 
Norden,  Denon,  and  by  others,  were  exaggerated  ;  but,  the  more 
I  studied  it  at  different  hours  of  the  day,  and  under  different 
effects  of  light,  and  of  shade,  the  more  I  became  convinced  of 
their  having  barely  done  justice  to  its  merits:  it  must  indeed  be 
allowed,  that  the  drawings  by  both  these  gentlemen  but  faintly 
accord  with  their  encomiums,  but,  after  having  repeated  the  same 
task  myself  with  little  success,  I  must  admit,  that  the  difficulties, 
which  attend  the  undertaking,  are  sufficient  to  baffle  the  efforts  of 
any  one  not  professionally  dedicated  to  the  arts. 

*  Part  of  this  paper  has  heen  printed  in  HalPs  ''  Life  of  Salt,"  and  in 
one  or  two  other  publications,  but  the  plates,  taken  from  Mr.  Salt's  drawings, 
have  never,  I  believe,  been  published.  I  have  great  pleasure  in  making 
known  the  successful  results  of  M.  Caviglia*s  labours,  which  I  am  enabled 
to  do  by  the  kindness  of  the  Earl  of  Mountnorris,  and  I  beg  leave  publicly  to 
express  my  acknowledgments  to  his  lordsliip. 

'  The  monument  has  probably  been  much  defaced  since  1818,  for  these 
beauties  arc  no  longer  visible. 


108  APPENDIX. 

"Before  I  proceed,  I  must  premise,  tl)at  the  general  impres- 
sion, made  upon  me  by  this  monument,  has  been  produced  by  a 
deliberate  contemplation  of  it,  when  laid  open  to  its  base,  with 
the  fragments  of  a  beard  resting  beneath  the  chin,  with  its  paws 
stretched  fifty  feet  in  advance,  and  with  the  temple,  the  granite 
tablet,  and  the  altar,  represented  in  the  accompanying  sketches, 
spread  out  on  a  regular  platform  in  its  front.  These  interesting 
objects,  which  no  one  for  ages  had  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing, 
have  undoubtedly  tended  to  exalt  it  in  my  estimation ;  and,  in 
order  that  I  may  endeavour  to  convey  something  of  the  same 
feeling  to  others,  I  shall  proceed  to  a  detailed  account  of  what 
was'discovered  by  Capt.  Caviglia ;  which,  together  with  the  several 
sketches  taken  on  the  spot  during  the  progress  of  his  operations, 
may  remain  as  a  record  of  his  labours,  when  the  objects  themselves 
arje  destroyed,  or  again  entombed  in  the  moving  sands. 

"  From  various  reports  in  circulation  in  Egypt  I  was  given  to 
understand,  that  the  French  engineers  had  made  a  considerable 
excavation  in  front  of  the  Sphinx,  and  that  they  had  just  disco- 
vered a  door  at  the  time,  when  they  were  compelled  to  suspend 
their  operations.  This  account  was  confirmed  by  the  repeated 
assertions  of  the  Arabs,  several  of  whom  declared,  that  they  had 
been  present  at  the  discovery;  and  said,  that  the  door  led  into 
the  body  of  the  Sphinx;  while  others  affirmed,  that  it  conducted 
up  to  the  Second  Pyramid.  Though  little  stress  could  be  laid 
upon  such  statements,  yet  they  rendered  Capt.  Caviglia  very 
unwilling  to  give  up  his  researches  without  at  least  doing  all  in 
his  power  to  ascertain  the  fact. 

"  To  this  end  he  first  began  to  open  a  deep  trench  on  the  left, 
or  northern,  side,  opposite  the  shoulder  of  tlie  statue ;  and, 
though  the  sand  was  so  loose,  that  the  wind  drove  back  fre- 
quently during  the  night  more  than  half  of  what  had  been  removed 
n  the  day,  yet  he  managed,  by  the  aid  of  planks  arranged  so  as 
to  support  the  sides,  to  dig  down  in  a  few  days  to  the  base.  (See 
view  of  Sphinx.)  As  the  trench,  however,  was  not  more  than 
20  feet  across  at  the  top,  and  not  above  3  feet  wide  at  the  bottom, 
the  situation  of  the  workmen  evidently  became  dangerous ;  for, 
if  any  large  body  of  sand  had  fallen  in  (and  the  planks  were  very 
weak),  it  must  have  irrecoverably  smothered  those,  who  were 
employed  below;  it  was  therefore  found  necessary  to  abandon 
this  part  of  the  attempt.  By  what  had  been  done,  however,  the 
height  of  the  statue  from  the  top  of  the  head  to  the  base,  was 
ascertained ;  and  it  was  also  found  that  tlie  external  surface  of  the 
body  was  composed  of  stones,  of  various  sizes,  but  put  together 


\   ■ 

•y 

<:^^\ 

•v 

s 

■■■.x 

•■^  N 

-^ 

■  / 

.'X    '^        i  .J 

■RAOMENTSOF  THE  BEARD  OF  THE  5PMIN 


)""'■'   ..      ■  --i--— -^ 

V 

/ 

i 

RAGMtNIS   rouND    DURING    THE   EXCAVATION    OF   THE    SPHINX 


APPENDIX.  109 

with  much  care,®  and  covered  with  red  paint.  The  form  of  the 
masonry  was  not  very  regular,  but  it  consisted  of  three  successive 
ledges,  sufficiently  broad  for  a  man  to  stand  upon,  and  intended, 
probably,  to  represent  the  folds  of  a  mantle  or  dress.  It  seemed 
to  have  been  added  by  the  Romans. 

"  As  the  result  of  the  first  operation  did  not  prove  satisfactory, 
Capt.  Caviglia  determined  to  undertake  a  larger  excavation 
towards  the  front,  in  which  he  employed,  from  the  beginning  of 
March  to  the  end  of  June,  from  sixty  to  a  hundred  labourers. 
The  first  discovery  of  any  interest  was  that  of  several  fragments 
of  stone,  upon  which  was  represented  plaited  hair,  and  on  the 
sides  of  which  were  inscribed  kneeling  figures,  and  hieroglyphics. 
(See  Plate.)  Upon  the  first  sight  of  these  fragments  I  was  led  to 
imagine  that  they  were  parts  of  a  beard,  or  at  least  of  that  singu- 
lar appendage  usually  denominated  a  beard,  and  frequently  at- 
tached to  the  chins  of  male  personages  in  Egyptian  sculpture;^ 
this  idea  was  confirmed  by  the  size,  and  by  the  position  of  the 
fragments,  as  the  largest,  which  must  have  been  nearest  the  chin, 
was  first  found,  and  the  opinion  received,  indeed,  afterwards  ad- 
ditional confirmation  by  the  discovery  of  three  tablets,  on  which 
sphinxes  were[sculptured  in  bas-relief,  with  beards  plaited  precisely 
in  the  same  way  as  that  on  the  fragments.  (See  Plate  of  the 
smaller  tablet,  and  Plate  B.)  The  rest  of  the  beard  was  found  in 
the  sand,  together  with  a  stone  inscribed  with  a  double  row  of  hiero- 
glyphics (Fig.  6,  Plate  A.),  that  appeared  to  have  belonged  to  a 
wall  or  pillar,  upon  which  the  beard  was  supported,  and  some  of 
which  yet  remained.  Part  of  the  head  of  a  serpent,  about  2  feet  long 
and  1 J  broad,  which  had  ornamented  the  head  of  the  statue,  was 
also  discovered;  (See  Fig.  1,  Plate  A.)  Most  of  these  fragments 
were  found  in  a  small  temple,  10  feet  long  and  5  feet  broad, 
which  was  immediately  below  the  chin  of  the  statue,  which,  ac- 
cording to  Pliny,  contained  the  body  of  Amasis,  the  first  king  of 
the  eighteenth  dynasty.^  Soon  after  this  discovery  a  large  block  of 
granite  {aa  in  ground-plan),  on  the  eastern  side  of  which  figures 
and  hieroglyphics  were  beautifully  inscribed  (see  Plate  B),  was 

*  Mr.  Salt,  no  doubt,  meant  the  lower  part  of  the  statue. 

'  A  female  sphinx,  (probably  an  emblem  of  the  Nile),  with  this  appendage, 
is  to  be  seen  on  the  statue  of  Memnon,  and  in  many  of  the  temples ;  but  these 
images  were  usually  andro-sphinxes,  and  were  so  described  by  Herodotus, 
and  by  Strabo. 

^  Another  king  of  the  same  name  reigned  670  B.C.,  towards  the  end  of  the 
twenty-sixth  dynasty.  Sir  J.  G.  AVilkinson's  "Thebes  and  General  View  of 
Egypt,"  p.  510. 


110  APPENDIX, 

found  in  the  small  temple  (see  d  in  ground-plan),  together  with 
two  other  tablets,  composed  of  calcareous  stone  (see  hb  in  ground- 
plan).  One  of  these  was  in  its  original  position ;  the  other  had 
fallen  down,  and  was  afterwards  sent  to  the  British  Museum.'  (See 
Plate,  view  of  temple.)  Between  the  front  walls  of  this  temple  a 
small  lion  of  good  workmanship  was  found,  with  the  head  towards 
the  image  (see  view  of  Temple);  and,  as  small  statues  of  the  bull 
Mahdes  are  similarly  placed  in  Indian  temples,  I  conceive  that 
this  statue  was  in  its  original  position.  Fragments  of  other  lions, 
rudely  carved,  and  the  head  and  shoulders  of  a  sphinx,  were  like- 
M'ise  discovered.  All  these  remains,  together  with  the  tablets, 
wnlls,  and  platform  of  the  temple,  had  been  ornamented  with  red 
paint ;  which  colour,  according  to  Pausanias,  was  appropriated  in 
Egypt,  as  in  India,  to  sacred  purposes.^ 

''  A  large  part  of  the  left  paw  was  uncovered,  and  the  platform 
of  masonry  was  found  to  extend  beyond  it ;  and,  in  the  course  of 
a  fortnight,  Capt.  Caviglia  had  removed  the  sand  from  the  paw, 
and  from  the  outer  walls  of  the  temple  (see  hh  in  ground-plan), 
in  front  of  which  was  an  altar  formed  of  granite  (see  h  in  ground- 
plan).  It  is  now  in  the  British  Museum,  and  has  had  at  the 
angles  projecting  stones,  which  may  be  supposed  to  have  been 
called  the  horns  of  the  altar.  (See  Fig.  1 ,  Plate  D.)  The  altar  yet 
retains  the  marks  of  fire — the  effects,  probably,  of  burnt-offerings. 

*'  The  opening  {j)  between  the  two  walls  {Jih  in  ground-plan) 
was  raised  2  feet  above  the  pavement,  and  formed  a  sort  of 
window,  by  which,  it  may  be  supposed,  that  the  priests  only  were 
admitted  into  the  temple ;  and  near  it  another  lion  (Fig.  3,  Plate 
A),  rudely  carved,  and  apparently  intended  to  have  been  placed 
upon  one  of  the  walls  (hh  in  ground-plan),  was  dug  up.  It  is  now 
in  the  British  Museum.  The  figure  of  an  owl  and  three  small 
stones,  which  had  belonged  to  an  altar,  were  also  discovered. 
(See  Fig.  2  in  Plate  A,  and  Figs.  4  and  5  in  Plate  D.)  Fig.  4, 
Plate  A,  seems  to  have  been  a  votive  offering.  The  interior 
walls  {cc  in  ground-plan)  had  probably  been  surmounted  with 
small  sphinxes,  like  that  already  described,  e  e  mark  the 
pavement. 

'  Mr.  Birch,  Assistant  to  the  Antiquarian  Department  at  the  British 
Museum,  and  Assistant-Secretary  to  the  Archteological  Institute  of  Rome,  has 
kindly  enabled  me  to  give  an  explanation  of  these  inscriptions. 

'  Diodorus  says  that  the  kite  was  esteemed  sacred,  because  it  brought  to 
the  priests  of  Memphis  a  book  inscribed  with  red  characters ;  and  he  also 
observes  that  those,  w  ho  wrote  the  sacred  characters,  wor€»,  when  so  employed, 
a  red  head-dress. 


as 


0 
(4 


9 


'X, 


.  -I  IBIS  TCMini.t  mn-visKH  tup:  mtx  m^;-  "s  irn 


!J 


t    ^^i^AfiXNiCvor:?;-  J 


'/-  -^  fs    i 


aCMENTS     rcJL.rHD    NEAR    THE    ; 


APPENDIX.  Ill 

"  Short  Greek  inscriptions  were  indistir  ctly  cut  on  the  paws 
of  the  statue  (see  Plate  E ;  Figs.  2,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  in  Plate  F,  and 
Figs.  3,  4,  6,  6,  7,  8,  in  Plate  H).  They  prove  that  the  image 
was  held  in  high  veneration ;  confirm  the  expression  of  Pliny, 
*  quasi  silvestre  nemus  accolentium ; '  and  contain  various  phrases, 
which  elucidate  many  doubtful  points  in  the  sculptures  in  the  ad- 
jacent tombs.* 

**Capt.  Caviglia  succeeded  in  laying  open  the  base  of  the 
Sphinx,  and  in  clearing  away  the  sand  in  front  of  it,  to  the  extent 
of  more  than  a  hundred  feet. 

"  It  is  scarcely  possible,"  continues  Mr.  Salt,  **for  any  person, 
unused  to  operations  of  this  kind,  to  form  an  idea  of  the  difficul- 
ties, which  Capt.  Caviglia  had  to  surmount,  when  working  at  the 
depth  of  the  base;  for,  in  spite  of  all  his  precautions,  the  slightest 
breath  of  wind,  or  concussion  set  the  surrounding  particles  of 
the  sand  in  motion,  so  that  the  sloping  sides  crumbled  away,  and 
mass  after  mass  tumbled  in,  till  the  whole  moving  surface  bore  no 
unapt  resemblance  to  a  cascade  of  water.  Even  when  the  sides 
appeared  most  firm,  if  the  labourers  suspended  their  work  only 
for  an  hour,  they  found  that  the  greater  part  of  their  labour  had 
to  be  renewed.^  This  was  particularly  the  case  on  the  southern 
side  of  the  right  paw,  where  the  people  were  employed  for  seven 
days  without  making  any  sensible  advance,  because  the  sand 
rolled  down  in  one  continued  and  regular  torrent  as  fast  as  it  was 
removed.  He  therefore  only  examined  the  end  of  the  paw, 
where  an  imperfect  inscription  (see  Fig.  2,  Plate  F)  was  disco- 
vered on  the  second  digit,  and  a  few  dedicatory  phrases,  addressed 
to  Harpocrates,  to  Mars,  and  to  Hermes  (see  Figs.  4, 6,  7, 8,  Plate 
H).^  At  the  distance  of  about  two  feet  to  the  southward  of  the 
right  paw,  the  platform  (kk  in  ground-plan)  abruptly  terminated, 

*  These  Greek  characters  will  be  afterwards  adverted  to.  Mr.  Salt  obserres, 
in  reference  to  one  of  these  inscriptions  (Plate  £),  that  Dr.  Young,  probably 
misled  by  a  bad  copy,  erroneously  supposed  that  the  eighth  line  alluded  to 
one  of  the  Roman  emperors.  The  words  are  —  iWx«»  o^tt^n,  and  they,  in  some 
degree,  confirm  the  account  that  the  Sphinx  was  considered  to  be  the  guardian 
of  the  tomb  of  Osiris.  Mr.  Salt,  therefore,  conjectures  that  the  tomb  may  be 
either  in  the  body  of  the  Sphinx,  or  in  the  Second  Pyramid.  It  is  to  be  ob- 
served, that  Fig.  2,  Plate  H,  is  on  a  pier  above  Esne,  and  has  been  inserted 
by  mistake. 

*  M.  Caviglia  should  have  begun  his  operations  on  a  larger  scale,  and 
have  removed  the  sand  from  the  monument,  instead  of  excavating  near  it. 
He  made  the  same  mistake  in  searching  for  the  entrance  of  the  Second  Pyra- 
mid.   (See  p.  161,  Vol.  IL) 

^  Mr.  Salt  appears  to  have  mistaken  these  names. 


112  APPENDIX. 

It  was  tlierefore  supposed  that  the  Sphinx  was  placed  upon  a 
pedestal ;  but,  by  extending  the  operations  in  front  of  the  statue, 
the  platform  was  found  to  be  continued,  and  the  steps  {II)  were 
discovered.  They  were  bounded  on  each  side  by  walls  formed  of 
unburnt  brick  (MM  in  ground-plan),  like  those,  which  enclosed 
the  antient  cities,  and  temples  of  Egypt.  The  inner  sides  of  the 
walls,  nearest  the  steps,  were  lined  with  stone,  and  were  coated 
with  plaster;  the  stonework,  however,  appeared  comparatively 
modern,  for  upon  several  of  the  blocks  were  the  remains  of 
Greek  inscriptions,  which  alluded  to  other  buildings.  (See  Fig.  3, 
Plate  F;)  and  another  of  the  inscriptions,  recorded  repairs, 
which  were  performed  by  tbe  orders  of  Antoninus,  and  of  Verus. 
The  walls  appeared  to  branch  off  towards  the  north,  and  also  to- 
wards the  south,  and  to  form  a  large  enclosure  around  the  Sphinx ; 
but  tbeir  direction  was  not  ascertained.''^  The  steps,  about  a  foot  in 
breadth,  and  eight  inches  in  height,  were  thirty  in  number.  They 
ended  abruptly  on  the  northern  side,  so  as  to  leave  a  passage 
between  them  and  the  wall.  (See  NN  in  ground-plan.)  This 
passage  was  not  examined. 

'*  On  a  stone  platform,  at  the  top  of  the  steps,  was  a  small 
building  (O  in  ground-plan),  which,  from  its  construction,  and 
from  various  inscriptions  found  near  it,  seemed  to  have  been 
a  station  (see  Fig.  1,  Plate  C),®  whence  the  emperors,  and  other 
persons  of  distinction,  who  visited  the  Pyramids,  could  witness 
the  religious  ceremonies  performed  at  the  altar  below.  An  in- 
scription on  the  front  of  it  was  much  worn.     (See  Fig.  1,  Plate  F.) 

**  Another  inscription  on  a  stele  (see  Plate  G)  was  found  at  p 
in  ground-plan.  It  was  erected  in  the  time  of  the  Emperor 
Nero,  and  bestows  on  him  the  epithet  aya^og  datfiuty  which  is  also 
found  on  his  coins,  with  the  figure  of  a  crowned  serpent,  the  true 
symbol  of  that  title.  Dr.  Young  has  indeed  stated  that  a/a^o^ 
Bat/iuv  was  often  represented  in  Egyptian  mythology  by  a 
winged  globe;  but  wings  were  the  emblems  of  Ptha,  and  a 
globe  of  Phre,  and  together  with  the  crowned  snake,  they 
formed  the  symbol  of  the  great  god. 

*'  The  platform  above  the  steps  was  of  narrower  dimensions,  and 
the  abutments  (RR  in  ground -plan)  had  a  theatrical  appearance. 
In  a  few  days  another  flight  of  thirteen  steps  was  discovered, 
and  another  small  building  (at  T  in  ground-plan,  see   Plate) 

'  Part  of  a  wall  has  been  found  in  a  direction  from  north  to  south,  near 
the  Shaft  No.  2,  in  the  map  in  the  first  volume. 

"  Fig.  2,  Plate  C,  is  a  restoration  of  this  building  by  Mr.  Salt. 


RESTORED.  FROI*  FHACiMEl 


V 


i 

i 


V 


■;.  V' 


> 

;  -]    r-   »'•■!>  M-.  VI  .-A  •7)4..'    , 

-•  ^  •   .  •',  I        r    •.  •  ^-  ■ 

I-                                            •        ' 

.»   ,      ...  ,r^i 'f^  •  f  ..'1 1* -r'l  r^ 

f 

/I  c  "»•  l  "-'  'A  fi*.  1-    ■'V 

ll^.«)ir»iT*i    <^ V'- ''-»;•■  .".••^■ 

^                    ^^    <--*«' 

f                      , 

J               ^    #    >o1"'"V  ^  •••'.       f*      »'».«-|.« 

1 

r,  .    •/>-»•'  'irtf 

• 

9 

y     •  •  r'      -.v**. 

1 

,.      r  -          • 

f 

]            .      i               '          r       •          , 

1                i 

-■.'.'■ 

^        '               •                    •    .--. 

/•*^ 


y' 


T 


tunkypiunaytokpatopcjN 


IC 


3 


ctnTIMIOYC(OYHpOY(YUb^Y<. 
n(PTINAKOCAPA6lKOYAAlABHNIKolr^^PalK°X 

Mtricror-KAmAYPHAIOYANT<-JNtlNuYUBAtT«-.N 


^    V>    ..V*  i.    '       V    •  V'^V   x.^ 


"N\    .  V**  s\ 


<^N^ 


■»■       _  N- 


^'    0\n 


-KMIOY>M>\C° 


AOMNlKCtBACTriC  nHTP-CCTPAToFTt AujNTOCTPoMA 

s^:,':..- W^\^*-^^N^\^^^"^^\'-^'**<'NUAi  Alt>eA  P^N  AnoKATUTAti  H 
v\.sv.\,s.  N^  -xNS  s>N-v\^*«I^OYtnApXUYAirynT«YtniCTFATHr"YNT'C 
vN     \\^sn4(/\PPIOYOYIKT»FoC  cTpATHToYNToC 
TOYCH  "^  ^^     •     -    - 


"».    X-  • 


^5  If.  :5^';^.^:'^'5  ^w.  ';?2  m^-^  iLd/ftr?)^'::!'^  to  mKiis  g?!KiLR2C, 


APPENDIX.  113 

which  resembled  that  at  o ;  it  appeared,  by  the  inscription,  to  have 
been  erected  under  the  Emperor  Septimius  Severus ;  and  the  name 
of  Geta  is  erased  from  the  inscription,  in  the  same  manner,  as  it  has 
been  taken  from  the  inscription  upon  the  triumphal  arch  at 
Rome.  At  this  place  another  inscription  on  a  stele,  erected  in 
the  reigns  of  Marcus  Antoninus,  and  of  Lucius  Verus,  was  found ; 
it  was  sent  to  the  British  Museum,  and  it  recorded  that  the  walls 
were  restored  on  the  15th  of  Pachon  (the  10th  of  May),  in  the 
sixth  year  of  the  reign  of  the  Emperors  Antoninus,  and  Verus.  At 
the  top  of  the  second  flight  of  steps  a  platform  is  carried  on  with 
a  gradual  ascent  to  the  length  of  135  feet,  bounded  by  a  wall 
on  the  southern  side  till  it  arrives  nearly  at  the  level  of  the 
ground,  when  the  rock  rapidly  descends  towards  the  Nile,  whether, 
or  not,  in  the  form  of  steps  was  not  discovered.  It  is  difficult  to 
convey,  even  by  drawings,  a  distinct  idea  of  this  approach  to  the 
Sphinx.  It  was  impossible,  however,  to  conceive  any  thing  more 
imposing  than  the  general  effect ;  or  better  calculated  to  set  off  to 
advantage  the  grandeur  of  the  enormous  monument,  particularly 
in  the  evening,  when  the  sun  was  setting  behind  it.  Mr.  Salt 
observes,  "  That  the  spectator  advanced  on  a  level  with  the  breast, 
and  thereby  witnessed  the  full  effect  of  that  admirable  expression 
of  countenance,  which  characterises  the  features,  whilst,  as  he  de- 
scended the  successive  flights  of  stairs,  the  stupendous  image  rose 
before  him,  whilst  his  view  was  confined,  by  the  walls  on  either 
side,  to  the  interesting  object,  for  the  contemplation  of  which,  even 
when  he  had  reached  the  bottom  of  the  steps,  a  sufficient  space 
was  allowed  for  him  to  comprehend  the  whole  at  a  single  glance. 
Mr.  Salt  concludes  in  the  following  words:  '^Such  was  the  result 
of  Captain  Caviglia's  exertions  in  June,  when,  in  consequence  of 
exposing  himself  too  much  to  the  sun,  he  was  unfortunately 
seized  by  an  attack  of  ophthalmia,  that  compelled  him  to  suspend 
his  operations,  and  shortly  afterwards  to  return  to  take  charge 
of  his  ship  at  Alexandria.  It  is,  perhaps,  a  circumstance,  unex- 
ampled in  Mahommedan  countries,  that  these  operations  should 
have  been  carried  on  by  a  single  individual,  attended  occasionally 
only  by  one  soldier,  without  the  slightest  molestation  having  been 
offered,  or  unpleasant  circumstance  having  occurred,  notwith- 
standing that  numerous  parties  of  idle  soldiers  went  every  day  to 
inspect  the  excavation,  and  that  thousands  of  Arabs,  during  part 
of  the  time,  were  encamped  in  the  neighbourhood;  and  this  cir- 
cumstance indeed,  strange  as  it  may  appear  in  Europe,  presents 
the  most  unequivocal  proof  of  the  tranquillity  reigning  in  Egypt, 

VOL.  III.  I 


]  14  APPENDIX. 

and  does  honour  to  the  government  of  Mohammed  Ali  Pasha, 
who,  on  this  occasion,  as  well  as  on  many  others,  I  have  reason  to 
testify,  has  shewn  a  remarkable  liberality  in  facilitating  the  re- 
searches carried  on  by  Europeans  in  any  way  connected  with 
science."  ^ 

*'  The  whole  expense  of  these  operations  amounted  to  about 
18,000  piastres  (450/.) ;  and  I  have  to  add,  that  Captain  Caviglia, 
to  whom  by  our  engagement  was  left  the  disposal  of  every  thing 
that  might  be  discovered,  very  handsomely  requested  me  to  for- 
ward  the  whole,  of  what  I  might  think  interesting,  to  the  British 
Museum,  as  a  testimony  of  his  attachment  to  our  country,  under 
the  flag  of  which  he  had  for  some  years  sailed/' 


MR.  BIRCH'S  NOTE  ON  THE  LARGE  TABLET. 

SEE  PLATE. 

This  tablet  represents  a  proscynema,  or  act  of  adoration,  offered  to 
the  Sphinx  by  Thothmes  IV.  or  V.,  supposed  to  have  reigned  1446  b.c.9 

The  upper  part  is  divided  by  a  perpendicular  line  of  hieroglyphics, 
ivhich  expresses  the  following  declaration  of  the  Sphinx,  '*  We  decree, 
that  the  sun,  the  establisher  of  the  world  ( Re-men -tor),^  shall  be 
crowned  on  the  throne  ofSeh;  that  Thothmes,  the  crown  of  crowns, 
shall  be  adorned  with  the  glory  of  A  thorn  J' 

In  each  of  the  two  upper  compartments,  a  sphinx  is  seated  on  a 

'  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson  is  of  opinion,  that  Pliny's  assertion  that  the  Sphinx 
is  the  tomb  of  Amasis  is  owing  to  a  mistake  in  the  names  AmoHis  and 
Tuthmosis ;  because  Herodotus  distinctly  says  that  the  tomb  of  Amasis  was 
near  the  Temple  of  Minerva  at  Sais. — **  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Antient 
Egyptians,"  Vol.  I.  p.  192.  And  in  Vol.  III.  p.  23,  he  remarks  that  sphinxes 
were  emblems  of  the  Egyptian  kings,  and  that,  when  composed  of  the  head 
of  a  man,  and  of  the  body  of  a  lion,  signified  the  union  of  intellect  with 
physical  force.  There  were  two  kings  of  the  name  of  Amasis,  one  the  last  of 
the  XVIIth  dynasty,  and  the  other  of  the  XX  Vlth  or  Saite  dynasty.  Hence 
the  assertions  of  Pliny  and  Herodotus  may  be  reconciled. 

'  It  has  been  usual  to  read  the  beetle  in  the  cartouches  the  word  TO^ 
the  world,  because,  with  particular  determinatives,  it  is  thus  found.  Cf.  Champ. 

Gr.  p.  08,  but  it  is  the  first  of  a  phonetic  group,  *Tp  Tar.  or  Tor,  signifying 
to  plant,  pledge,  &c.  Cf.  Champ.  Gr.  Eg.  p.  363,  Salv.  i.  An.  Gr.  41, 75.  The 
expression  Re-men-to  is,  therefore,  more  properly  Re-men-tor.  The  scarabsus 
at  the  Roman  period  was  employed  phonetically  for  T  in  proper  names. 
The  repetition  of  this  phrase  seems  to  infer  that  the  adoration  had  been 
made  about  the  period  of  the  coronation. 


ft 

ea 

ft 


ft 


APPENDIX.  lis 

pedestal,  which  resembles  a  doorway ;  and  the  image  on  the  left  receives 
a  libation  offered  by  the  monarch,  and  is  accompanied  with  an  inscription 
expressing  '*  the  sun — in  his  solar  mountain,  or  the  lord  of  the  two  solar 
abodes  ;"*  and  with  the  following  declaration,  "  We  grant  life  and  power 
to  Thothmes,  the  lord  of  the  world,  the  crown  of  crowns,** 

In  the  other  compartment  the  same  monarch  pours  a  libation  on  an 
altar,  and  offers  burning  incense  to  the  Sphinx,  which  is  here  styled, 
''  Ra  or  Hor  in  the  solar  mountain;**  and  is  said  "  to  grant  power  and 
victory  to  the  lord  of  the  world;  to  Thothmes,  the  crown  of  crowns" 

The  remaining  thirteen  lines  can  scarcely  be  made  out,  but  they 
begin  as  follows,  •*  In  the  first  year,  on  the  I9th  day  of  Athyr, 
under  the  purity  of  Horus,  the  mighty  hull;  the  establisher  of 
diadems ;  the  lord  of  the  upper,  and  lower  hemispheres ;  established 
with  dominion,  like  At  horn;  the  golden  hawk;  the  director  of  the 
years  ;  the  conqueror  of  the  {Libyans)  ;  the  King ;  the  Sun ;  the  pre^ 
server  of  worlds ;  the  son  of  the  sun ;  Thothmes  ;  the  diadem  of  diadems ; 
the  giver  of  life,  of  stability,  and  of  power  ;  like  the  sun  for  ever,**  &c. 
Any  attempt  to  explain  the  rest  of  the  inscription  would  require  a  restor- 
ation of  the  text,  which  would  be  attended  with  great  uncertainty ;  but 
it  appears  to  record  an  act  of  adoration  performed  by  the  monarch  to  the 
Sphinx ;  to  enumerate  the  benefits  supposed  to  have  been  conferred  by 
the  idol ;  and  also  the  following  address  of  the  Sphinx  to  the  king  ;  "  / 
am  thy  father;  the  god  in  the  solar  mountain;  Tor,  and  Athom,**^ 
The  inscription  also  declares,  *'  That  the  king  shall  wear  the  two  crowns, 
which  compose  the  royal  pschent ;  and  that  he  shall  sit  on  the  throne 
of  Seb,  the  youngest  of  the  gods,** 

In  the  thirteenth  line  part  of  a  cartouche  occurs,  which  is  apparently 
the  prenomen  of  the  king  Ra-shaa^f,  or  jSAo/re,  supposed  to  be  Chefren  ; 
but  the  fracture  in  the  inscription  makes  it  impossible  to  determine  in 
what  manner  the  name  is  mentioned.  It  is,  however,  to  be  remarked,  that 
the  Sphinx  is  situated  before  the  eastern  front  of  the  ruins,  supposed  to 
have  been  a  temple  connected  with  the  second  Pyramid,  which  is  said  to 
have  been  built  by  Chefren ;  and  also,  that  it  is  proved  by  this  tablet, 
which  seems  to  have  been  executed  in  the  first  year  of  the  reign  of  Thoth- 
mes IV.,  that  the  construction  of  the  image  had  then  been  achieved,  which, 
from  its  enormous  size,  could  scarcely  have  been  effected  in  one  year. 

'  A  sphinx^  resembling  in  many  respects  the  one  here  represented,  has 
been  published  by  ChampoIIion,  Pantheon  Egyptien,  24  (F),  holding  in  its 
fore  paws  a  figure  of  Truth,  and  called  ^'the  Sun,  the  lord  of  the  two  worlds, 
the  great  god,  the  lord  of  heaven  J"  This  image  is  also  seated  on  a  gateway. 
Salt's  copy  is  incorrect  and  should  apparently  read  ^^the  sun,  the  lord  of  the  two 
worlds  and  of  the  solar  abode,"  A  sphinx,  wearing  on  its  head  two  plumes, 
appears  in  the  boat  of  the  sun  at  the  sixth  hour.    Cf.  Rosel.  M.  d  C.  xli. 

'  Solar  types. 


1 16  APPENDIX. 

The  oldest  representation  of  a  sphinx,  which  Mr.  Birch  had  met  with, 
is  on  amulets  belonging  to  the  times  of  Thothmes  IV.,  who  is  represented 
on  the  erect  obelisk  at  Karnak  under  this  form  offering  to  Re,  and  of 
his  successors.^ 

According  to  Pliny,  the  Sphinx  at  Gizeh  was  the  tomb  of  Amasis,  the 
founder  probably  of  the  eighteenth  dynasty,  and  the  form  of  the  head- 
dress, and  the  remains  of  the  features  of  the  image,  seem  to  indicate, 
that  it  was  constructed  under  the  eighteenth,  or  Diospolitan  dynasty; 
and  the  inscriptions  in  question  appear  to  assign  to  it  as  high  an 
antiquity. 

In  this  tablet  the  Sphinx  is  identified  with  the  sun  under  the  appel- 
lation of  Horus,  or  the  god  of  the  solar  abode.  In  royal  cartouches  a 
sphinx  signifies,  "a  lord"  or  *'mast€r"^  and  it  is  called  in  hieroglyphics 
*'  okr."'^  The  Greeks  imagined  that  it  represented  intellect^  or  strength^ 
but  they  seem  to  have  alluded  to  the  sphinx  of  Thebes  in  BGeotia,^  and 
not  to  those  in  Egypt,  which  usually  personified  distinguished  monarchs, 
as  has  been  proved  by  two  inscriptions,  connected  with  Amenoph  III.* 
(or  Memnon),  which  have  been  already  published. 

The  figure  of  a  lion  appears  to  have  been  connected  with  the  sun, 
because  his  name  "JIfotci"  signified  splendour,  wisdom,  intellect,  &c., 
and  one  of  these  animals,  indeed,  appears  to  have  accompanied  dis- 
tinguished Egyptian  kings  in  their  conquests:  who,  from  their  heroic 
exploits,  were  often  mentioned,  as  a  lion  among  inferior  animals.  Amu- 
lets, and  scarabsei  have  been  often  inscribed  with  the  names  of  Egyptian 
kings,  who  are  in  the  form  of  a  sphinx,  and  in  the  act  of  treading 
under  foot  Asiatic,  or  Negro  prisoners.  The  Sphinx,  at  Gizeh  therefore 
probably  represented,  under  the  character  of  the  sun,  the  monarch 
by  whose  orders  the  image  was  constructed;  and  it  was  afterwards 
worshipped  in  consequence  of  the  superstitious  observances,  which  gave 
rise  to  the  deification  of  departed  kings,  to  whose  service .  priests  of 
difierent  orders  were  dedicated,  and  whose  glory  was  compared  to  the 
noonday  effulgence  of  the  sun. 

*  Amulet,  British  Museum,  case  BBB.,  2.  On  a  fragment  of  a  coffin 
Amenopbis  I.  is  personified  as  a  sphinx,  the  Queen  Mauthem  occurs  at 
Turin.  Ch.  Lett.  a.  M.  le  Due  de  Blacas.  PI.  I.  Alexander  is  found  under 
this  type.     Roeel.  M.  da  C.  166,  and  one  of  the  Ptolemies.    Ibid.  M.  R. 

*  It  is  used  for  the  syllable  Neb  in  the  name  Nashtn^M  or  Nakhtne^f 
Memphitic^.  Cf.  Rosel.  Mon.  Hor.  T.  11.  Tav.  XIV.  166  b.,  166  c.  Necta- 
nebo  also  offers  the  emblem,  Rosel.  M.  R.  cliv. 

•  Ch.  Gr.  Eg.  463.  This  perhaps  meant  victory,  as  Neith-okr,  the  vic- 
torious Neith. 

•  D'Athanasi,  Giov.  Researches  and  Discoveries  in  Upper  Egypt  8vo. 
London,  1836.    Frontispiece.    Burton,  Jas.  Exc.  Hier.  PL  LXI. 


I 


ft 


s 


« 


APPENDIX.  117 


NOTE  BY  MR.  BIRCH  ON  THE  SMALLER  TABLET  BETWEEN 

THE  FORE  LEGS  OF  THE  SPHINX. 

SEE  PLATE. 

Rameses  the  great,  Sesostris,  supposed  to  have  reigned  1355  b.c., 
dressed  in  his  robes,  holds  in  his  hand  an  amshoir  (or  censor)  and  a  conical 
piece  of  bread,  which  he  offers  to  a  sphinx  placed  on  a  pedestal,  which, 
like  that  in  the  tablet  plate  B,  has  the  form  of  a  doorway .«  The  Sphinx 
has  the  body  of  a  lion,  the  head-dress  of  a  god,  or  of  a  monarch,  and  the 
features  in  Mr.  Salt's  drawing  resemble  those  of  Raroeses. 

Before  the  Sphinx  is  an  altar  adorned  with  flowers ;  and  behind  the 
king  is  a  royal  standard,  supported  by  a  human  head,  and  by  four  arms, 
two  of  which  elevate  the  standard,  and  the  others  hold  a  koucoupha 
sceptre,  and  the  feather  of  truth ;  below  the  standard  are  the  emblem  of 
heaven,  and  the  staff,  which  ends  in  a  signet  representing  the  orbit  of  the 
sun.  Above  the  head  of  the  king  is  Har  of  Hat^  the  Horus  of  Edfou,  the 
celestial  sun  encircled  by  uresi,  which  sustain  the  symbols  of  life,  and  the 
crowns  of  the  upper,  and  lower  hemispheres,  over  which  the  sun  presided. 

The  inscriptions  on  the  upper  part  contain  the  names  and  the  titles 
of  the  monar(fh  in  question,  and  also  those  of  the  Sphinx.    The  monarch 

is  styled  **  The  gracious  god  directed^ the  lord  of  the  upper, 

and  of  the  lower  world;  the  sun;  the  director  of  truth;  approved  of 
the  sun;  the  lord  of  diadems;  Rameses,  beloved  of  Amoun  ;  the  giver 
of  life;  like  the  sun  for  ever;  Har-Hat,  the  giver  of  life,  of  stability, 
and  of  power,  A  gift  of  incense  and  of  libations.  Har — of  the  two 
solar  abodes  "  (which  refer  to  the  Sphinx  in  the  character  of  Har.  ph  re, 
or  of  Horus  the  sun),  •*  of  life,  of  stability,  and  of  power,*'  with  the 
following  epithets,  '*  the  giver  of  victory,  and  of  magnanimity ;  like  the 
sun  continually.** 

The  inscriptions  on  the  sides  of  the  tablet  are  nearly  alike,  but  that 
on  the  right  is  most  perfect,  lliey  express  "  Har,  the  sun,  the  ruler  of 
the  upper,  and  of  the  lower  world;  (Aroeris)  the  victorious  bull;  the 
beloved  of  truth ;  the  lord  of  the  upper,  and  of  the  lower  worlds ;  the 
regulator  of  Egypt ;  the  chastiser  of  nations ;  the  hawk  (of  gold)," 
&c.  &c.  The  tablet  is  imperfect  and  the  inscriptions  were  doubtless  much 
longer. 

'  The  form  of  these  pedestals  has  been  supposed  to  allude  to  a  communi- 
cation through  the  Sphinx  to  the  Second  Pyramid,  or  to  a  temple  within  the 
body  of  the  image.  Excavations  may  possibly  exist  in  the  rock  beneath  the 
Sphinx ;  but  for  many  reasons  a  communication  with  the  pyramid  is  not 
probable. 

»  ChampoUion  reads  this  group  ftlU.  "  to  direct,"  but  I  suppose  it  to  mean 
tlOtJJL  or  notJtX  '^  vjater  "  and  ''  to  sujffUse  "  taken  in  an  active  sense. 


118  APPENDIX. 


NOTES  ON  THE  GREEK  INSCRIPTIONS. 

The  characters  do  not  appear  to  have  been  accurately  copied ;  it  is, 
therefore,  extremely  difficult  to  explain  them ;  and  in  many  instances 
they  are  merely  fragments. 

PLATE  E. 

This  is  an  inscription  on  one  of  the  paws  of  the  Sphinx,  a  trans- 
lation of  it  was  given  in  the  *'  Quarterly  Review,"  Vol.  XIX.  p.  412. 

The  ever-living  gods  built  thy form. 

Sparing  the  gix>und  producing  com. 

Having  raised  thee  in  the  midst  of  the  level  arable  land. 

Having  driven  back  the  sand  from  the  rocky  island ; 

A  neighbour  of  the  Pyramids  they  placed  thee  ; 

(A  line  seems  wanting)  ....  such  to  behold, 

Not  the  slayer  of  (Edipus,  as  at  Thebes, 

But  the  goddess  Latona,  a  most  pure  attendant, 

•  •  •  •  •  protecting  the  regretted  good  Osiris 

the  revered  governor  of  Egypt, 

....  heavenly,  great, 

.  .  .  like  to  Vulcan, 

.  •  the  earth. 
The  Salutation  of  Arrian. 

PLATE  F. 

Fig.  1  is  an  inscription  on  the  front  of  the  building  at  O  in  ground* 
plan  (see  plan),  and  it  appears  to  have  been  a  description  of  the  Sphinx, 
but  it  is  very  obscure. 

Figs.  2,  4,  5,  7,  8,  were  found  on  one  of  the  paws  of  the  Sphinx ; 
and  figs.  3  and  6  were  on  the  wall,  but  they  are  too  imperfect  to  admit 
of  explanatioD. 

PLATE  G. 

Plate  G.  was  on  a  stele,  and  is  also  to  be  found  in  the.  **  Quarterly 
Review,"  p.  414. 

To  Good  Fortune." 

Whereas  the  Emperor  (Nero)  Claudius  Ceesar  Augustus  Germanicus, 
the  good  genius  of  the  world,  in  addition  to  all  the  benefits,  he  has  con- 
ferred on  Egypt,  has  shewn  the  most  especial  care  of  its  interests,  by 
sending  to  us  Tiberius  Claudius  Balbillus  as  governor,  through  whose 
favours  and  acts  of  kindness,  abounding  in  all  good  things,  Egypt,  be- 
holding the  gifts  of  the  Nile  yearly  increasing,  is  now  more  (than  ever) 

'  These  inscriptions  have  been  translated  by  M.  Letronne,  and  are  also 
inserted  in  the  "Library  of  Entertaining  Knowledge." 


2g 


Ufa 


fc3 


1^ 


a. 


PLATE      F 


rr  o .  1 


HA€KYP€l7TANTO^NCCp|(~|(^jCA(etlONopAMX 
\L<^AAJXf  KsPN o€t  Kul^^O  C  c  J  rrt  PCTT  At  To TH^e 

tACA'VATDCJtiepOIONOHC  e  \CK.OC  AXON  ATI  ANTA 

)€  poN  vi>  c>€*|>YTr€  p  i^'^n'foccoTTO  NexevToecurruYN 

e  I  N  Ors  l^vt  N TO etAAAANf  t-H^t  C.;it-| TIC  rC NOTK<:  I 

TA;CJ>^(ITe'H0T0eTjU)NA.MoNHCACIONAe 
eceAHCA\TX\*tT^iec-ACA7Tlc-JNtXApMA 


no.  2 


\ 


i4iZ0IIv^\AI2III/»P 


\\\X 


V^   N  .      \ 


AEIANApCJAir 

2YNPU|CAIT(KN0;ICT6 

AClix' 
(TJApVBU 

/ksrrzpfi>?^     cr  JJte  paw    of  fhe  oP-^ukt^ 


ri  c.  6 


HPAK^ATO( 


FIC.  7. 


^oAAoveitJN/oc 


f  TENflAOr 
EAUVr/NElNA 
2Y^A^OA0NTE 


no   3 


FIO.  « 


no.  S. 


ToTlpooKYNHMA 


FIG     4 


INSCRIPTIONS  FOUND  NEIAR  THE  SPHINX. 


PLATC     0 


\     V 


ArAOHTYXHI 

ere:!^     ••  ■     K/.AYz:.(octcAiCAfrEBAi:TO[: 

rEPMANJKecAYTOKPATajpoArAOocAAinuNrrHC 

OIKOYMENHCCYNAnAClNOICEYEnETHLENArA'  ' 
eoiCTHNAirYnTONTHNEMAPrECTATHNnpONOI^;  i 

<>ANnolECAf*lEN0£&PL|WNHMEINTIBEPIONKAAY<V' 
ONBAABlAAONHCEMONAiStAAEXACTOYTOYX^    ; 

P ITAEK  A 1 E  YEPPE  E I  AEnAHMYPOYCATTKItWAfAOma 
AirYriToCTACTOYNEIAOYAUPEACEnAY^iiM  Fr  ;  ' 

NAC^CATETOCeEojroYCANYNMAAAONAnEAAY^' 
CETHCAIKAIACANAfSACEUiCTOYBEOYEAOZE 
TOlCAnOKUX-IHEBOYEEIPEUE  TOYAHTOFo,' 
TOYnAPOIICOrCITAICnYPAMICIKAITOlCE'AYT 
KATACEINOMENOfCTonorpAnMATElLlKAlKOCi 

MOrPAMMATEIC  '       "ACOAI  K-i  wv  AC)  E  I  N  Al/    .  ' 
CTHAHMAIBlNHNriAl  fU-<    , 

PMAXEIEKTUN'^ICEXA-^-   >'\(  '     \, 

^-^OYTH^      .  OCAYTOY 
£=U)NEi      .-       ~~^~ — ~^-^-"^. 
AIPYmONKAAOlQ^x         --- 
ZEIFAPTACILCeEOYCAYTO 


ETHAEW 
AW  n  EN  CTO I  LI  EPOl  trr  AM  AElNAiUN'IM.NHMO"! 
NEYEC6AI0     .-;-    ilAPArLNOMEMOrrAPHMUNi" 
ElETONNOMONKAinpOElCYNHLACTONiHAION: 

APMA  JNEnonTHUIKAICUTHPATHITtTu  r.HYPA 

'^t\^V'^\NME  r  -^  vEI«>Tj-iTl<A!Y'''  EP^    ATtPfwEEC^,^ 

:OYA!/.T(hiHK{)C 
TIATAllPC.'TOC^'' 
"  '  ^   ABHISAI 
/\CTHN 
■^  rTlOY. 

I  THN 

'n--    •A  EL 


El     "MAM 

>C(3AHNTliN 


(' 


t^E\v-^  CAM  E  KG  C  !  1 1 A  E  I  C  T  H  D 
TO.Y  '->-^  .Kf o  L  n  &     ^  ^  ■  E  .0  N  - 

(0  Y ' 

(EM, 

r 

'.KA/^rA 

^    •  MP 


\\\  V 


vK\ 


-'A  Cxw  r\ 


TABLET  FOUND  DURING  THE  EXCAVATIONS  ATThE  SPHINX, 
'     AND  NOW  IN  THE  BRITISH  MUSEUM. 


< 

— i 

CL 


t 


2 

X  3 

>  « 

3 

< 


o 


VJ/ 


a. 
0 

■>^ 
I 

3 
< 

a. 
a. 

o 

h 


>- 


<< 

<o 

2< 


22 


< 

o 

X 

c:  >tf  < 

^  h< 
O  0  -? 

*'  X  -^ 

2  <  # 

O  H^ 
>  <  cp 


ol  ^  Z 


^iJ 


o 


O  V 

o 


li. 


K 

o 


lO 


F- 

L 


O 


1^ 


2 

>- 

o 


|2 


L 


o 
kl 


o 

< 

C:  h 

<  ^ 

U 

UJ 

o 

U 

z 

3: 

3K 

W 

u 

® 

UJ 

> 

h 

O 

< 

I 

^ 

3- 

<  3 

Ui 


^x 


% 


APPENDIX.  119 

enjoying  the  proper  rising  of  the  deity,  it  has  seemed  good  to  the  in- 
habitants of  the  village  Busiris,  in  the  Latopolitan  Nome,  who  live  near 
the  Pyramids,  and  to  the  local  and  village  clerks  therein  to  vote  and 

dedicate  a  stone  column • It  preserves  his 

godlike column in  sacred   characters  to  be 

remembered  for  ever for  having  come  to  our  noroe,  and 

for  having  worshipped  the  sun,  Armachis,  the  overseer,  and  Saviour,  and 

for  having  been  delighted  with  the  magnificence  and of  the 

Pyramids. 

PLATE  H. 

Fig.  1  was  inscribed  on  a  stele  near  the  building  at  N.  in  ground- 
plan,  and  is  noticed  in  p.  414  of  the  *'  Quarterly  Review." 

To  Good  Fortune. 
In  the  sixth  year  of  Antoninus  and  of  Verus,  the  sovereign  Emperors, 
in  the  prefecture  of  Flavins  Titianus,  Lucianus  Ophellianus  being  Com- 
mander in  chief,  and  Theon  being  the  general  of  the  Nome,  he  rebuilt 
the  walls  under  happy  auspices. 

Pachon  XV. 

Fig.  2  was  found  on  a  pier  above  Esne,  and  is  inserted  by  mistake, 
on  account  of  its  having  been  written  in  the  same  page  of  the  MS.  with 
the  other  inscriptions. 

Figs.  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  were  on  the  paws  of  the  Sphinx.  Fig.  3  is 
obscure.  Fig.  4  is  the  Adorations  of  Harpocratius  and  of  Punan.  Fig  5. 
The  Adoration  of  Arius.     Fig.  6.  The  Adoration  of  Hermius  Alexander 

Fig.  7.  The  Adoration  of  Hermius.     Fig.  8.  The  Adoration  of 

Arius. 


INSCRIPTION  ON  A  BUILDING  AT  T  IN  GROUND-PLAN. 

For  the  eternal  victory,  and of  the  sovereign  lords. 

Septimius  Severus,  Pius,  Pertinax,  Arabicus,  Adiabenicus,  Parthicus, 
Maximus,  and  Marcus  Aurelius  Antoninus  being  emperors.' 

and  Julia 
Domna  Empress  mother,  of  the  camps,  the  pavement 
.....  having  been  destroyed,  was  restored 
....  nus ;  prefect  of  Egypt,  being  commander-in-chief, 
Arrius  Victor  commanding 

'  Caracalla  had  the  titles  of  M.  Au.  Antoninus,  and  is  here  alluded  to. 
This  inscription  is  also  mentioned  in  the  *^  Quarterly  Review." 


120 


APPENDIX. 


REMARKS  ON  THE  EGYPTIAN  ARMY. 

Thb  following  remarks  on  the  Egyptian  army  were  written  in 
the  summer  of  1840,  and  were  published  in  the  '*  United  Seryice 
Journal"  of  November  in  that  year;  the  account  of  the  horses 
was  also  published  in  the  "  Sporting  Review "  of  Nov.  and 
Dec.  1840.  These  papers  are  now  reprinted,  because  they  are 
referred  to  in  the  two  former  volumes  of  this  work. 

It  is  a  most  satisfactory  reflection  that,  since  the  remarks  were 
written,  the  direction  of  the  public  affairs  of  this  country  has 
been  intrusted  to  an  administration  strictly  Conservative,  and  in- 
timately acquainted  with  the  circumstances  of  the  times,  and  with 
the  resources  of  the  country.  It  is  therefore  to  be  expected,  that 
those  great  principles,  by  which  the  nation  has  so  long,  and  so 
signally  prospered,  will,  as  far  as  circumstances  permit,  be  again 
adopted ;  and  that  the  interests  of  the  country  will  be  better 
attended  to  than  they  were  under  the  late  government. 

The  observations  more  immediately  relating  to  Syria  are  not 
inserted,  because  the  operations,  to  which  they  alluded,  are  con- 
cluded, and  although  the  result  greatly  exceeded  my  expectations, 
yet  I  consider  that  my  opinions  were  well  founded  ;  for,  notwith- 
standing the  established  and  well-merited  reputation  of  the  British 
navy,  it  was  difficult  to  imagine  that  the  trifling  detachment  landed 
from  the  fleet  (which,  I  believe,  did  not  at  any  time  exceed  2000 
Europeans)  would  be  able  to  defeat  an  organised  army,  in  com- 
plete possession  of  the  country,  and  supposed  to  amount  to  70  or 
80,000  men,  at  all  events  of  sufficient  strength  to  threaten  Con- 
stantinople. The  event,  no  doubt,  is  chiefly  to  be  attributed  to 
the  mismanagement  of  Ibrahim  Pasha,  and  of  Suleiman  Bey,  who 
ought  at  once  to  have  removed  their  artillery  and  stores  from  the 
coast,  when  they  could  no  longer  command  it;  and,  instead  of 
advancing  on  certain  destruction  by  attacking  our  people  in  com- 
munication with  the  fleet,  should  have  retired  upon  Damascus, 
and  upon  the  interior ;  whence  nothing  but  an  European  army, 
sufficiently  strong  to  keep  up  a  communication  with  the  fleet, 
could  have  dislodged  them.  The  noble  services  of  the  British 
navy,  and  the  efficiency  of  the  equipment,  made  up,  however,  for 
the  want  of  numbers,  and  amply  sustained  the  matchless  glory  of 
their  former  achievements. 


APPENDIX.  121 

At  the  same  time  it  must  be  confessed,  that,  if  the  reduction  of 
the  Pasha's  power  was  the  object  in  view,  his  army  should  not 
have  been  allowed  to  have  returned  to  Egypt,  particularly  that 
large  part  of  it,  which  was  composed  of  Syrian  conscripts;  and, 
it  may  be  added,  that  the  hostile  disposition,  which,  according  to 
Mr.  Perring's  account,  was  manifested  by  the  Arabs  on  the  con- 
fines of  Egypt,  and  more  especially  the  dreadful  state  of  Syria 
even  at  the  present  time,  may  well  call  in  question  the  policy,  as 
well  as  the  humanity,  of  destroying  a  government  (which,  however 
oppressive,  effectually  provided  for  the  tranquillity  of  the  country) 
without  establishing  an  adequate  authority  in  its  room  ;  and  also 
of  arming  a  population,  irreconcilably  divided  into  hostile  sects 
by  religious  opinions,  and  by  local  circumstances ;  and  of  then 
turning  them  loose  on  each  other,  with  no  other  control,  or  re- 
source from  anarchy  and  confusion,  than  the  ferocious  atrocities 
of  Albanian  banditti,  and  of  a  half-disciplined  Turkish  soldiery. 
The  mischief,  however,  is  done,  and,  unless  the  jealousies  and  dis- 
cordant interests  of  the  allies  can  sufficiently  subside  to  allow  of 
the  occupation  of  the  country  by  a  European  force, — a  circum- 
stance, which  would  be  highly  satisfactory  to  the  unfortunate 
inhabitants,  it  will  probably  be  found  necessary  to  call  in  the 
assistance  of  Mahomet  Ali,  whose  military  arrangements,  and 
vigorous  determination,  are  well  calculated  to  disarm  the  people, 
and  to  enforce  obedience ;  and  whose  authority,  however  de- 
structive and  severe,  is  at  all  events  preferable  to  license,  and  to 
insecurity. 

Having  briefly  stated  the  opinions,  which  my  visit  to  the  East 
induces  me  to  entertain,  I  proceed  to  mention,  that  the  formation 
of  a  regular  Egyptian  army  was  first  attempted  in  1822,  when  a 
corps,  consisting  of  5000  Mamelucs,  under  Mohammed  Bey,  and 
of  20,000  Negroes,  was  assembled  at  Es  Souan,  in  order  that  it 
might  be  disciplined  by  Colonel  Sevres,  who  was  said  to  have 
been  an  aide-de-camp  to  Marshal  Ney,  and  who  afterwards  as- 
sumed the  title  of  Suleiman  Bey. 

It  is  stated  that  the  instruction  of  the  Mamelucs  was  attended 
with  considerable  difficulty  and  danger ;  but  that  the  negroes  were 
more  tractable ;  and  were  also  strong  and  efficient,  until,  from  some 
cause  or  other,  which  has  not  been  explained,  they  suddenly 
became  sickly,  and  were  reduced  to  3000  men. 

As  this  scheme  had  failed,  the  Pasha  was  advised,  it  would 
appear,  by  the  French  consul,  through  whom  he  obtained  French 
and  Italian  instructors,  to  establish  a  conscription,  similar  to  thai 


122  APPENDIX. 

in  France.  30,000  men  were  in  consequence  indiscriminatelj 
seized,  and  sent  into  Upper  Egypt ;  and,  from  these  people,  the 
3000  Negroes,  and  some  Nubians,  with  the  Mamelucs  as  officers, 
an  army  was  formed,  which  in  1824  consisted  of  six  regiments, 
each  of  five  battalions  nominally  800  strong ;  but  the  whole  force 
did  not  actually  exceed  23,000  men.  Another  conscription  of 
15,000  men  soon  afterwards  took  place,  with  the  intention  of 
eventually  increasing  the  force  to  40,000. 

A  corps  of  artillery  was  formed  ;  and  the  army  attained  some 
proficiency  under  French  and  Italian  officers,  amongst  whom, 
a  Neapolitan  engineer,  named  Chiandi,  is  said  to  have  had  con- 
siderable merit;  but  Colonel  Sevres  appears  to  have  been  in- 
finitely superior  in  all  respects  to  the  other  Franks.  With  an 
idea,  probably,  of  increasing  his  authority,  he  turned  Turk,  and  is 
said  to  have  received  his  pelisse,  and  investiture  as  a  Bey  on 
Christmas-day. 

The  medical  department  was  at  that  time  extremely  defective, 
and  a  college  was  established  under  French  superintendence. 

Ibrahim  Pasha  is  reported  to  have  acquired  great  popularity 
with  the  new  levees,  notwithstanding  that  they  were  drilled  under 
his  direction  for  four  hours  in  the  morning,  and  as  many  in  the 
evening,  till  the  hospitals  were  crowded  with  sick.  Mahomet  Ali 
resided  also  for  some  time  in  the  camp  near  Cairo.  It  is  said  that 
he  enforced  with  great  strictness  the  observance  of  the  hours  of 
prayer,  but  that  he  sanctioned  at  the  same  time  the  open  sale  of 
wine  in  the  bazaar.^ 

In  1836,  there  were  fourteen  regiments  of  cavalry,  and  twenty- 
three  of  infantry,  besides  Albanians,  irregular  troops,  and  a 
considerable  corps  of  artillery.  Of  these,  four  regiments  of 
cavalry,  four  of  infantry,  and  a  troop  of  light  artillery,  formed 
the  guard.  The  greatest  part  of  the  men  had  been  raised  by 
conscription  in  Egypt,  but  several  regiments  of  cavalry,  and  a 
few  battalions,  came  from  Syria.  With  the  exception  of  some 
muskets  made  after  the  English  pattern,  they  were  armed,  ap- 

*  When  the  Pasha  was  employed  in  the  organisation  of  his  army,  a 
circumstance  occurred,  which  shews  his  despotic  authority,  and  the  absurd 
mistakes,  which  an  inconsiderate  exercise  of  it  often  occasioned.  His  High- 
ness happened  to  observe  at  Alexandria  a  pair  of  European  shoes,  which  ap- 
peared well  adapted  for  the  use  of  his  army.  Having  obtained  them  for  a 
pattern,  he  directed  that  twelve  pairs  should  be  made,  and  sent  to  Cairo,  with 
an  order  for  the  instant  manufacture  of  40,000.  The  order  was  obeyed,  and 
the  troops  were  furnished  with  40,000  pain  of  shoes  exactly  of  one  size  1 


APPENDIX.  123 

pointed,  and  exercised,  like  the  French  army.  The  French 
language  is  taught  in  the  schools,  and  the  Frank  instructors 
are  chiefly  of  that  nation,  which  has  consequently  great  influ- 
ence. The  whole  of  the  native  oflScers  were  formerly,  and  many 
now  are  taken  from  the  ranks,  and  are  therefore  entirely  un- 
educated ;  a  few  have  been  recently  furnished  by  the  different 
schools,  which  the  Pasha  has  established. 
The  monthly  pay  is  as  follows  :  — 

Plaftret. 


^  Cavalry. 

lufantry. 

Artillery.  ^ 

General  of  Division 

18,000 

18,000 

18,000 

General  of  Brigade 

10,500 

10,500 

10,500 

Mirely  Bey 

-    Colonel 

8,000 

8,000 

8,000 

Caimacan 

Lieutenant-Colonel 

3,000 

3,000 

3,000 

Bimbaschi 

-     Commandant 

2,500 

2,500 

2,500 

Sarcologassi  - 

Major 

1,250 

1,250 

1,250 

Umbaschi 

_  fist  Captain  - 
2d  Captain 

550 

600 

450 

500 

500 

Metagim  Awal 

Ist  Lieutenant 

300 

300 

360 

Metagim  Saim 

-    2d  Lieutenant  - 

250 

250 

300 

Sawuss 

Sergeants     - 

25 

25 

25 

Mobassi   - 

-     Corporals 

20 

20 

20 

Privates 

15 

15 

15 

In  1824,  the  pay  of  a  Mirely  (colonel)  amounted  to  8383— 
6  paras,  and  a  fraction.^  The  guards  have  double  pay,  3  per  cent 
is  deducted  for  military  stock.  The  troops  are  supposed  to  be 
paid  annually,  but  were  said,  in  1836,  to  be  a  year  and  a  half 
in  arrear. 

A  Christian  can  attain  to  the  rank  of  General  of  Division. 
Surgeons,  and  veterinary  surgeons  take  rank  as  officers.  Cavalry 
officers  are  furnished  by  Government  with  swords. 

A  colonel  it  allowed  forage  for  3  horses. 
A  lieutenant-colonel       . .         3     •  • 
A  commandant  •  •         2     .  • 

An  adjutant  .  •         2     .. 

Rank  is  distinguished  by  the  following  decorations  worn  on 
the  breast:  — 

Colonel       -        •    Crescent,  and  star  in  diamonds. 
Lieutenant-colonel    Crescent  in  gold,  star  in  diamonds. 
Commandant       -    Star,  and  crescent  in  gold. 

'  In  1886,  40  paras  made  1  piastre,  6  piastres  1  shilling. 


124  APPENDIX. 

Major     -  -         Crescent  in  gold,  star  in  silver. 

I  St  Captain  -     Star  in  silver,  with  small  diamond  in  centre. 

2d  Captain  -         Star  in  silver. 

Lieutenants  -     Small  star  in  silver,  with  one  quarter  of  crescent. 

Sergeant  Major         3  Marks. 

Sergeants    -         -     2  Marks. 

Corporals  -  1  Mark. 

Bars  on  the  arm  were  to  be  introduced  into  the  artillery 
service. 

The  men  are  retained  as  long  as  they  are  serviceable,  and,  if 
disabled,  or  wounded,  they  are  entitled  to  half  pay.  They  receive 
every  year  a  white  linen,  and  also  a  woollen  uniform,  either  red, 
blue,  or  brown,  according  to  the  colour  of  their  regiments.  The 
price  of  the  linen  dress  is  fifteen ;  of  the  cloth  sixty  piastres. 
Their  necessaries  are  soap,  one  or  two  shirts,  and  a  knapsack 
supplied  by  government.  A  company  is  divided  into  ten  messes, 
each  of  which  have  a  separate  bowl.  Their  food  consists  of 
lentels,  and  bread ;  and  meat  is  supposed  to  be  served  out  every 
fourth  day ;  married  men  may  take  their  rations  to  their  families. 

Tents  are  provided  by  government;  baggage  is  carried  by 
camels,  boats,  &c.  &c.  belonging  to  the  country ;  as  there  are  not 
any  baggage  animals  attached  to  the  regiments.  Courts- martial 
are  composed  of  one  of  each  rank. 

A  regiment  of  cavalry  consists  of  six  squadrons,  each  squadron 
of  four  pelotons,  each  peloton  of  two  companies,  each  company  of 
two  escouardes,  each  escouarde  of  six  men.  The  officers  are  a 
colonel,  a  lieutenant-colonel,  two  chefs  d*escadrons,  one  adjutant, 
one  standard-bearer  (or  comet),  six  1  st  captains,  six  2d  captains, 
six  1st  lieutenants,  six  2d  lieutenants,  six  quarter-masters,  seventy- 
two  non-commissioned  officers,  with  the  usual  number  of  surgeons, 
veterinary  surgeons,  and  farriers.  The  regiments  are  numbered, 
and  in  1836  three  of  them  were  to  be  equipped  as  cuirassiers  with 
appointments  after  the  French  fashion. 

A  regiment  of  infantry  is  composed  of  four  battalions,  each 
consisting  of  1000  men,  divided  into  eight  companies,  of  which 
one  is  composed  of  grenadiers,  and  another  of  light  infantry. 
The  officers  are  nearly  on  the  same  footing  with  those  of  the 
cavalry.  The  drums,  fifes,  and  music,  are  like  those  in  the  French 
establishments.  Four  guns  are  attached  to  each  regiment.  As 
some  of  the  muskets  are  made  after  the  English,  and  some  after 
the  French  pattern,  two  sorts  of  ammunition  are  necessary.     Each 


APPENDIX.  125 

man  carries  twenty-four  rounds ;  and  the  remainder  is  conveyed 
in  tumbrels. 

The  best  troops  were  probably  with  Ibrahim  Pasha  in  Syria ; 
therefore,  a  fair  opinion  of  the  army  could  not  be  formed  from 
those  in  Egypt ;  neither  should  the  great  difficulties,  which  the 
Pasha  had  to  encounter  in  its  formation  be  foi^otten,  arising 
from  the  idle  and  depressed  habits  of  the  population,  their 
extreme  dislike  to  regularity,  and  to  exertion,  and  particularly 
to  the  military  service,  a  dislike,  that  the  manner,  in  which  the 
conscription  was  carried  on  (however  necessary),  could  not  but  have 
greatly  increased ;  and,  if  to  these  considerations  be  added  the 
prejudices  and  peculiar  tenets  of  the  Mahometan  religion,  the 
energy  and  perseverance  which  have  brought  the  army  to  its  actual 
state,  will  be  clearly  manifest ;  and,  whatever  imperfections  may 
exist,  they  will  not  be  attributed  to  any  want  of  vigour  on  the 
part  of  the  Pasha,  or  of  his  son  Ibrahim.  But,  on  the  contrary,  it 
will  be  a  matter  of  surprise,  how  such  a  population  could  be 
rendered  at  all  effective,  and  yet  the  Arab  troops,  particularly  the 
infantry,  are  considered  the  best. 

I  cannot  give  a  decided  opinion  respecting  the  troops  in  Syria, 
as  I  never  saw  any  considerable  number  under  arms^  but  I  have 
occasionally  met  regiments  of  cavalry  on  their  march  in  that 
country ;  and  they  were  well  mounted,  and  armed ;  their  horses 
were  in  good  condition ;  their  baggage  small ;  and  they  had  few, 
if  any,  stragglers.  The  men  were  stout  and  serviceable,  and  ap- 
parently healthy  and  in  good  spirits,  and  had  not  that  sullen  and 
dejected  look,  so  universally  to  be  seen  amongst  the  troops  in 
Egypt.  One  regiment  in  particular,  which  I  met  near  Jaffa,  had 
the  finest  collection  of  high-bred  horses  I  almost  ever  saw,  which 
might  well  be  the  case,  as  they  had  taken  possession  of  the  best 
horses,  they  could  find  in  the  country. 

I  attended  several  drills  near  Cairo,  they  were  entirely  on  the 
French  plan,  and  chiefly  under  French  instructors ;  from  whom, 
as  well  as  from  the  other  officers,  I  received  every  civility.  The 
stables,  considering  the  habits  of  the  people,  were  clean,  and  in 
good  order ;  and  their  appointments  were  in  a  serviceable  state, 
which  was  all  that  could  be  expected.  They  were,  however,  bad 
horsemen,  their  bridle  hands  were  stiff,  and  ill  placed,  and  their 
horses  ill  bitted ;  the  whole  was,  in  fact,  a  bad  imitation  of 
European  equitations.  They  had  lost  the  firmness  and  dexterity, 
so  often  to  be  remarked  in  Eastern  horsemanship,  and  moved 
loosely  and  ill  when  in  squadron. 


126  APPENDIX. 

I  saw  twenty-four  squadrons  of  Arabs,  and  Syrians  inspected 
atTourah.  They  were  armed  with  swords,  and  carbines,  and  the 
flank  squadrons  of  each  regiment  had  lances,  with  red  and  white 
flags.  They  were  tolerably  well  mounted,  and  their  horses, 
although  rough,  were  in  fair  condition.  They  were  drawn  up  in 
good  allignment,  but  their  files  were  open.  Their  officers  were 
badly  mounted,  and  no  sort  of  uniformity  was  observed  in  their 
horse  appointments.  They  performed  several  manceuyres,  chiefly 
by  pelotons,  and  often  in  regimental  columns.  They  advanced  in 
line,  and  charged  very  slowly  ;  and  finished  by  trotting  past  with 
no  great  exactness,  or  regularity.  The  old  Turkish  saddle  is 
extremely  heavy,  and  the  large  stirrups  cannot  be  used  in 
squadron  ;  but  the  saddles  in  use  among  the  common  Arabs, 
although  of  the  same  form,  are  much  lighter,  and  with  smaller 
stirrups  would  be  preferable  to  the  Hussar  saddles,  which  these 
people  have  adopted.  The  Mameluke  bit  would  also  be  better 
than  the  one,  which  they  have  at  present.  Instead  of  blankets,  the 
saddles  are  placed  upon  loose  pannels,  so  awkwardly  stufied,  that 
with  a  little  use  they  would  probably  become  perfectly  unser- 
viceable. 

In  an  excursion  to  Palmyra,  I  had  an  opportunity  of  observing 
a  small  detachment  of  irregular  cavalry,  sent  as  an  escort  by 
Sheriff  Pasha.  The  officer  was  scarcely  in  any  respect  superior 
to  the  common  men,  who  were  mounted  on  their  own  horses, 
without  any  uniformity  of  dress,  or  of  appointments ;  were  armed 
with  long  guns,  swords,  pistols,  &c.,  and  rode  on  Turkish  saddles. 
How  they  would  have  behaved,  if  an  enemy  had  appeared,  I 
know  not ;  but  they  were  exceedingly  active  and  alert,  and 
appeared  to  be  well  aware  of  their  duty,  lliey  galloped 
forward,  and  occupied  the  rising  grounds  on  the  firont,  and 
flanks,  till  the  party  had  passed  by ;  and  pursued  every  horse- 
man, or  camel  they  saw  in  the  distance ;  in  marching  at 
night  they  kept  as  close  together  as  possible ;  but,  when  they 
halted  in  the  evening,  they  did  not  appear  to  have  any  idea  of 
precaution  (possibly  because  no  danger  was  apprehended),  for 
they  took  off  their  bridles,  and  turned  their  horses  loose  to  graze 
on  the  scanty  herbage  of  the  desert,  without  any  vidette,  or 
sentry ;  and  then  lighted  large  fires,  so  that  their  numbers,  and 
position  could  be  distinctly  seen,  whilst  the  advance  of  an  enemy 
was  completely  concealed.  They  were  probably  a  fair  sample  of 
this  species  of  force,  as  they  belonged  to  the  guard  of  Sheriff 
Pasha,  the  Governor-General  of  Syria,  stationed  at  Damascus. 


APPENDIX.  127 

I  saw  considerable  numbers  of  tbe  same  sort  of  people  encamped 
in  the  Forest  of  Basan,  and  near  Djerash,  and  also  in  the 
Haouran,  and  I  should  imagine  that  as  irregular  troops  they 
would  be  extremely  serviceable. 

The  infantry  stationed  in  Egypt  had  certainly  a  better  appear- 
ance,  than  those,  which  came  under  my  observation  at  Constanti- 
nople; and  were  better  appointed,  particularly  with  respect  to 
their  red  caps,  or  tarbouciies,  which  fitted  the  head,  instead  of 
coming  down  over  the  face  according  to  the  Turkish  fashion, 
apparently  with  an  intention  of  protecting  the  eyes  from  the  sun. 
Tbe  Arab  peasantry  are  in  general  straight,  and  well  made,  but 
most  of  them  have  short  necks,  and  extremely  high  shoulders, 
which  may  be  occasioned  by  the  constant  habit  of  sitting  upon 
their  heels.  Besides,  however,  this  defect,  when  drawn  up  in 
line,  many  of  them  seem  to  be  deformed  about  the  chest,  and 
shoulders ;  probably  from  the  looseness  of  their  clothing,  which, 
on  account  of  the  heat  of  the  climate,  is  not  made  to  fit  the  shape.^ 
Their  line  appears  also  to  considerable  disadvantage  from  a  want 
of  attention  in  sizing  the  men,  so  essential,  not  only  for  appear- 
ance, but  for  exactness  in  that  most  important  operation,  ad- 
vancing in  line. 

The  oflicers  wore  a  red  tarbouch  with  a  blue  tassel,  a  white 
nizam  dress,  consisting  of  a  waistcoat,  and  jacket,  of  loose  breeches 
hanging  over  the  knee,  and  of  white  leggins,  and  red  slippers. 
Their  swords,  or  rather  sabres,  were  hung  by  waist-belts  in  the 
European  fashion.  Besides  this  common  white  uniform,  they 
had  another,  made  in  the  same  manner,  but  of  blue,  grey,  or 
brown  cloth,  according  to  tbe  colours  of  their  regiments. 

For  full  dress  the  officers  wore  loose  crimson  jackets  covered 
with  golden  embroidery,  and  striped  silken  shawls  instead  of 
sashes  round  their  waists.  As  most  of  them  were  common  people, 
although  lately,  in  some  few  instances,  improved  by  instruction, 
they  could  not  be  expected  to  carry  much  authority,  to  be  dis- 
tinguished by  a  martial  appearance,  or  by  any  refinement  of 
manners.  The  greater  number,  in  fact,  particularly  in  tbe  in- 
ferior ranks,  were  little,  if  at  all,  better  than  the  common  Fellahs ; 
and  I  have  seen  one  of  them,  when  on  guard,  in  full  uniform, 
and  with  his  sword  by  his  side,  gutting  and  scaling  fish  in  the 
public  streets  of  Cairo. 

*  Owing  to  the  same  cause,  the  handsome  golden  embroidery  on  theoffioert' 
jackets  had  a  tinsel  and  tawdry  appearance. 


128  APPENDIX. 

I  have  already  observed,  that  the  dress  and  appointments  of 
the  men  consisted  of  a  red  tarbouch,  a  white,  dingy  red,  brown, 
or  blue  loose  jacket,  btittoned  up  to  the  chin,  loose  breeches,  and 
leggins  to  match,  red  slippers,  white  leather  belts,  which  were 
never  cleaned,  a  pouch  of  bad  black  leather,  a  waist-belt,  a 
sword,  and  a  socket  for  a  bayonet  without  a  scabbard ;  their  arms 
were  clean,  and  in  good  order,  and  their  bayonets  were  generally 
fixed.  They  had  a  sullen  and  dejected  look,  a  most  anmilitary 
appearance,  and  irregular  habits.  I  have  repeatedly  seen  sentries 
squatted  on  the  ground,  engaged  in  talking  to  other  people,  or  in 
spinning,  with  their  firelocks  resting  against  a  wall.  Their  arms 
were  regularly  lodged,  in  arm  racks,  at  the  several  guards,  but  they 
turned  out  in  a  very  slovenly  manner ;  and,  by  the  altercations,  and 
quarrelling,  that  took  place  between  the  non-commissioned  oflScers 
and  the  men  in  relieving  the  sentrie^^,  it  appeared  that  the  reliefs 
were  not  regularly  told  ofi*. 

The  Syrian  battalions  were  very  young,  and  of  low  stature ; 
and,  as  their  oflicers,  and  sergeants  were  full-grown  Arabs,  they  did 
not  appear  to  advantage.  It  was  said  that  many  of  them  died 
from  the  effects  of  the  climate,  when  stationed  in  Egypt. 

I  never  examined  an  infantry  barrack,  but  several  battalions 
were  encamped  without  the  walls  of  Cairo  in  a  very  regular 
manner,  and  the  whole  had  a  better  appearance  than  could  have 
been  expected  ;  the  tents  were  white,  and  clean,  and  the  guards, 
and  sentries  were  regularly  posted.  Their  wives  and  families  were 
hutted  at  some  distance  in  the  rear,  where  there  was  a  sort  of 
bazaar. 

I  saw  eight  battalions,  each  consisting  of  eight  companies, 
in  all  about  4600  men,  inspected  by  the  minister  of  war,  on  an 
extensive  desert  plain  near  the  encampment ;  they  were  drawn 
up  in  close  order,  their  line  was  good,  but  their  files  were  very 
loose.  The  drums  were  in  their  rear ;  and  the  music  on  the  right 
flank ;  the  pioneers  were  well  equipped. 

One  field-officer  in  each  battalion  was  mounted.  Some  of  the 
officers  were  in  full  dress,  but  the  whole  of  the  men  were  in 
white.  The  Egyptian  battalions  were  composed  of  stout  Arabs, 
and  were  said  to  have  served,  when  Acre  was  taken  from  the  Tnrks,^ 

^  Acre  is  remarkable  on  many  accounts,  and  will  be  for  ever  connected  with 
the  name  of  a  most  distinguished  character,  whose  glory  is  identified  with  that 
of  his  country,  which  he  served  with  such  heroic  enterprise,  and  with  such  pre- 
eminent success.  The  exploits  of  Sir  Sidney  Smith  are  still  remembered  with 
admiration,  and  with  respect  in  Syria ;  they  appear,  indeed,  from  the  little  re- 


APPENDIX.  129 

and  to  have  made  several  extraordinary  marches  to  Kerek,  and 
to  the  eastward  of  the  Dead  Sea ;  the  Syrian  battalions  consisted 
of  young  undersized  boys,  extremely  wan  and  pale.  They  changed 
position  by  an  echellon  movement  upon  a  central  company ; 
changed  front  by  wheeling  into  column,  and  by  countermarching ; 
formed  square ;  and  performed  several  other  manoeuvres  with 
tolerable  exactness,  but  very  slowly.  They  did  not  advance  in 
line.  They  fired  several  volleys  with  much  precision,  but  their  file 
firing  was  extremely  faint.  In  conclusion  they  wheeled  to  the 
right  by  companies,  and  marched  home  in  quick  time,  the  whole 
going  over  the  same  ground,  instead  of  breaking  ofi*by  regiments : 
they  marched  well,  and  with  good  intervals.  Their  music  was 
weak  and  out  of  time. 

I  afterwards  saw  two  divisions,  each  composed  of  four  bat- 
talions of  eight  companies :  one  division  consisted  almost  en-, 
tirely  of  Syrian  boys,  several  in  the  front  rank  were  not  above  five 
feet  high,  and  could  scarcely  load,  or  return  their  ramrods.  They 
presented  into  the  air  without  taking  the  slightest  aim,  and  many 
of  them  put  quantities  of  gunpowder  into  the  pockets  of  their 
loose  breeches,  in  order,  probably,  to  sell  it  at  Cairo  ;  for  which 
they  were  welLthrashed  by  their  officers  with  the  flat  of  their 
swords.  When  a  battalion  commenced  firing,  the  colour  and  two 
files  on  each  side  of  it  fell  out  to  the  rear.  They  performed 
several  evolutions  in  the  manner,  which  I  have  before  described ;  and 
one  of  the  divisions  advanced  a  considerable  distance  in  echellon 
from  the  right,  which  was  the  only  advance  directly  to  the  front, 
which  I  had  ever  seen  them  attempt,  and  it  did  not  by  any 
means  succeed. 

On  the  18th  of  November  I  was  present  when  some  artillery 
were  inspected  at  Tourah  ;  forty-eight  pieces  of  cannon,  (four  guns 
and  two  howitzers  to  a  battalion,)  were  drawn  up  in  line ;  the  gun- 
carriages  were  short,  and  were  fixed  by  a  vertical  pin  to  the 
limbern,  which  were  painted  of  a  dark  olive  green,  picked  out 
with  black.  An  ammunition  wagon  was  in  line  behind  each 
gun  ;  six  horses  or  mules  were  harnessed  to  each  gun,  and  four 
to  each  tumbril ;  these  animals  were  serviceable,  and  in  good  con- 
dition. The  saddles  and  harness  were  made  after  European 
patterns,  with  winkers  for  the  horses  in  hand,  with  rope  traces, 

gard  that  has  been  paid,  till  lately,  to  his  memory,  to  be  less  esteemed  by  his 
own  countrymen,  for  whom  in  perilous  times  he  fought  and  conquered,  than 
by  strangers  and  enemies.  Neglect  and  ingratitude  cannot  however  obscure 
his  well-earned  and  glorious  reputation. 

K 


130  APPENDIX. 

and  with  swing  bars  for  the  centre  pairs :  long  ropes  were  also 
provided  to  assist  in  working  the  guns  when  in  battery.  Ten  or 
twelve  dismounted  Arabs  in  brown  uniforms,  and  with  yellow 
belts,  apd  armed  with  swords,  bayonets,  and  with  muskets,  (which 
latter  were  slung),  were  attached  to  each  gun;  they  were  in 
marching  order^  but  their  knapsacks  appeared  almost  empty. 
The  men  were  clean,  well  appointed,  and  soldierlike.  The 
officers  wore  dark  blue  uniforms,  with  red  collars  and  cuffs,  and 
golden  embroidery.® 

They  took  up  various  positions,  and  fired  several  rounds,  at 
intervals  of  about  forty-three  seconds,  and  afterwards  marched  past 
(the  tumbrils  being  abreast,  on  the  outward  flank  of  their  respect- 
ive guns).  Some  practice  afterwards  took  place  at  a  long  wooden 
target,  with  a  distance  of  160  toises,  during  which  time  the  guns 
were  placed  in  some  works,  that  had  been  thrown  up  on  the  plain 
for  that  purpose. 

I  afterwards  observed  at  the  barracks  that  many  of  the  limbers 
were  fitted  with  seats,  but  those,  which  were  inspected,  carried 
only  small  ammunition  boxes. 

The  barracks  and  their  whole  establishment  appeared  in  good 
order,  and  the  men  were  stouter,  better  fed,  and  cleaner  than 
those  in  the  other  services.  Much  of  this  efficiency  was  owing  to 
the  talents  and  exertions  of  Colonel  Seguerra,  a  Spanish  officer 
of  great  respectability  and  merit,  who,  from  some  cabal  or  in* 
trigue,  was  soon  afterwards  compelled  to  leave  the  Pacha's  service. 


HORSES  IN   EGYPT  AND  SYRIA. 

During  my  first  visit  to  Cairo,  in  the  spring  of  1836,  I  had 
frequent  opportunities  of  seeing  the  Pacha's  stud  at  Shoubrah ;  it 
consisted  of  three  or  four  hundred  mares,  and  of  about  forty 
stallions,  and  was  in  very  bad  order.  But  the  best  of  the  horses 
and  mares  were  afterwards  sent  to  a  new  building,  about  two 
miles  off*,  and  were  much  improved  in  condition  under  the  care 
of  M.  Amand,  a  Frenchman.  The  stallions,  before  their  re* 
moval,  were  picketed  with  heel-ropes  under  open  sheds,  had 

*  Thofle  in  the  light  artillery  belonging  to  the  guard  had  light  bine  uni- 
forms. 


APPENDIX.  131 

very  little  grooming  or  exercise,  and,  as  the  weather  was  chilly, 
were  extremely  rough ;  added  to  which,  their  feet,  from  the 
Turkish  way  of  shoeing,  were  in  a  very  bad  state. 

The  shoes  in  Egypt,  like  those  in  Syria,  are  usually  circular 
plates,  with  a  small  hole  in  the  middle ;  but,  in  the  latter  country, 
they  have  sometimes  the  usual  form,  and  the  ends  of  the  shoe 
are  turned  up  across  the  heels,  as  a  protection  against  the  sharp 
edges  of  the  rock  ;  for  the  roads  in  the  mountainous  parts  of  that 
country  are  for  many  miles  a  series  of  broken  steps,  and  of  steep 
declivities,  and  a  horse  could  scarcely  travel  without  some  such 
defence.  It  is  true  that  the  form  of  the  hinder  shoes,  to  a  great 
degree,  prevents  overreaching ;  but  this  mode  of  shoeing  can,  in 
general,  only  be  applicable  to  travelling  at  a  slow  pace  and  in  a 
dry  country ;  for  a  horse  shod  in  this  manner  cannot  move  with 
security  on  moist  or  on  slippery  ground ;  nor  be  ridden  at  any 
pace  for  a  considerable  distance  on  a  hard  road,  without  injury. 
Upon  removing  the  shoe,  the  foot  is  found  so  much  compressed 
that  the  several  parts  of  it  cannot  be  distinguished,  and,  it  ap- 
pears, are  never  considered ;  for,  preparatory  to  being  shod,  the 
leg  is  held  up  by  one  man,  whilst  another  cuts  away  from  him 
with  a  buttress,  and  reduces  the  whole  foot,  by  removing  large 
slices  of  the  frog,  bars,  sole,  and  crust,  altogether,  and  the  plate 
of  iron  is  then  nailed  down  as  it  would  be  to  the  bottom  of  a 
post.  The  shoes  are  not  fullered,  and  are  fastened  in  each  quarter 
by  three  large  nails,  which  resemble  those  used  in  France,  and 
have  good  hold ;  for,  except  by  being  broken  against  the  rocks, 
or  worn  out,  the  shoes  are  seldom  lost.  The  clenches  are  twisted 
round  in  circles,  and  hammered  into  the  hoof.  My  horses  were 
scarcely  ever  lamed  by  these  shoes,  and  went  in  them  over  the 
most  difficult  roads  with  confidence  and  security.  Of  course,  it 
is  impossible  to  clean  the  foot. 

To  return  to  the  stud.  Amongst  the  stallions  were  several 
of  a  peculiar  white  breed  :9  they  were  said  to  have  been  sent  as> 

'  By  a  white  breed  I  mean  to  infer  that  the  horses  had  been  foaled  per- 
fectly white,  and  that  their  colour  was  not  the  efiect  of  age.  A  breed  of  this 
kind  was  once  famous  at  Girgenti,  in  Sicily,  and  I  believe  still  exists  iu 
Hungary ;  and  it  is  to  be  remarked,  that  many  of  these  Arab  stallions  had 
grey  eyes  like  the  Hanoverian  horses.  As  far  as  I  could  discover,  it  was 
equally  necessary  in  the  East,  as  it  is  in  England,  that  either  the  horse  or  the 
mare  should  be  grey,  in  order  to  breed  a  grey  colt,  and  that  in  those  countries, 
as  in  Europe,  colts  of  all  other  colours  may  be  indiscriminately  produced ;  but 
the  rule  does  not  seem  to  hold  good  in  the  white  breeds ;  indeed,  I  have  seen 
in  England  an  instance  to  the  contrary. 


132  APPENDIX. 

a  present  from  Mecca,  or  to  have  been  taken  during  the  war,  and 
seemed  to  be  thoroughbred :  they  had  in  general  more  power 
than  the  other  horses,  were  from  14*3  to  16*2  in  height,  extremely 
handsome,  of  great  substance,  and  had  capital  legs  and  feet. 
The  greys  and  bays  were,  in  general,  smaller.  Many  of  the  latter 
were  colts  three  and  four  years  old,  had  been  purchased  at  great 
prices,  and  were  supposed  to  be  high-bred,  but  they  were,  of 
course,  much  oat  of  condition  from  being  exposed  to  heat  and 
to  cold,  and  from  being  constantly  tied  up.  The  manes  and 
tails  of  the  colts  were  closely  shorn,  which  did  not  add  to  their 
appearance. 

The  finest  horses  were  the  following :  —  Mufti,  a  grey  horse,  six 
years  old,  brought  by  an  oflScer  in  the  Pacha's  service  from  Mecca. 
He  was  very  lengthy,  had  great  substance,  and  remarkably  large 
bone,  and  was  about  15*2-^  in  height,  and  able  to  carry  fourteen  or 
fifteen  stone.  He  had  the  finest  action,  the  highest  possible  show 
of  blood,  and  was  said  to  be  of  the  purest  breed.  When  I  after- 
wards saw  this  fine  horse  at  the  new  stables,  he  was  still  rough 
from  neglect,  and  from  want  of  exercise,  and  his  eyes  appeared 
weak  and  dull;  excepting  on  that  account  he  would  have  been 
worth  bringing  to  England.  A  dark  chestnut  horse,  with  two 
white  legs,  and  a  white  face,  was  of  equal  power,  but  was  rather 
heavier  in  his  forehand ;  he  was  also  considered  to  be  of  a  valuable 
breed.  Two  or  three  of  the  white  horses  were  particularly  fine, 
but  were  not  quite  so  lengthy,  and  had  rather  coarser  points. 
The  highest  bred,  however,  was  a  bay,  about  15*1^,  and  fourteen 
or  fifteen  years  old.  Nothing  could  exceed  the  strength  of  his 
limbs,  or  the  perfection  of  his  make,  excepting  that  he  was  rather 
upright  in  his  shoulders ;  his  head  and  neck  were  extremely  hand- 
some, and  his  display  of  high  breed,  and  of  action  was  equally 
striking.  He  was  very  muscular,  and  able  to  carry  twelve  or 
thirteen  stone.  There  were  several  stories  of  his  having  been 
taken  in  battle,  and  of  the  reluctance,  with  which  the  Arabs 
parted  with  him,  on  account  of  his  blood,  superior  excellence, 
and  great  value. 

There  was,  likewise,  a  bay  English  horse,  of  good  size  and 
shape  :  he  appeared  to  great  advantage,  as  he  was  in  a  box,  and, 
consequently,  in  better  condition  than  those  in  the  sheds.  He 
was  very  like  Gulliver  (by  Orville,  out  of  Canidia),  and  his  stock 
were  better  than  those  got  by  the  other  horses. 

Considering  the  value  of  these  fine  stallions,  I  was  a  good 
deal  surprised  at  seeing  a  sick  horse  loose  amongst  them,  which. 


APPENDIX.  133 

according  to  M.  Amand's  account,  was  infected  with  la  morve  (the 
glanders) :  the  disease  appeared  to  me  to  be  only  the  strangles  ; 
but,  even  in  that  case,  it  was  highly  improper  that  he  should  be 
loose  in  the  same  yard,^  and  have  access  to  the  water  and  the 
forage,  from  which  the  rest  were  fed: 

The  mares  were  fastened  by  heel-ropes  in  large  barns,  and  it 
may  be  easily  imagined  that  their  foals  were  in  the  worst  con- 
dition. Some  of  the  mares  shewed  blood,  particularly  a  grey 
from  Thebes ;  but  many  were  of  the  common  breed  of  Egypt, 
crossed  with  Arab,  or  with  Dongalese  blood.  A  few  had  been 
imported  from  the  latter  country,  and  had  the  distinctive  marks 
of  their  race,  namely,  long  heads,  extremely  round  in  the  nose, 
a  good  deal  of  white  on  their  faces,  and  legs,^  large  limbs, 
and  lengthy  narrow  frames.  They  shewed  blood,  and  had  a 
great  resemblance  to  our  horses  got  by  Blacklock.  The  slope 
of  their  shoulders  was  most  extraordinary ;  their  action,  as  it 
might  be  expected,  was  loose  and  disunited ;  but  they  had  great 
liberty,  easy  paces,  and  probably  excellent  wind.  They  were 
not,  however,  in  high  repute,  nor  had  the  Mamelukes  for- 
merly much  opinion  of  them,  notwithstanding  the  statement  of 
M.  Burckhardt. 

A  considerable  number  of  mules,  and  of  asses  were  also  bred 
at  Shoubrah. 

When  I  revisited  the  stud  on  the  12th  of  November,  1836, 
the  finest  mares  and  stallions  had  been  removed  to  the  new 
establishment,  which  was  situated  in  a  fertile  plain,  abounding  in 


>  One  of  the  white  stallions  had  a  disorder,  which  I  had  never  seen,  but 
which  I  was  informed  was  not  uncommon  in  the  East,  and  was  generally  fatal. 
I  only  saw  two  instances  of  it.  The  dock  was  swollen  to  a  large  size,  and  be- 
came knotty,  and  callous,  and  the  hair  stuck  out  and  was  rough.  It  did  not 
seem  to  be  attended  with  pain,  or  with  inflammation,  and,  therefore,  did  not 
appear  to  have  any  resemblance,  to  the  Plica  Polonica.  I  was  told  that  it  had 
a  connexion  with  the  blood-vessels  in  the  interior  of  the  horse's  body. 

'  White  marks  are  not,  at  present,  more  esteemed  in  the  East  than  they 
are  in  Europe ;  nor  have  the  stallions,  lately  imported  into  England,  been 
usually  distinguished  by  them,  excepting  the  Cole  Arabian,  who  was  said  to 
have  been  very  speedy.  There  is,  however,  an  account  in  Evelyn's  ^^  Memoirs" 
of  three  horses  which  were  taken  at  the  relief  of  Vienna,  and  brought  over 
for  Charles  IE.,  in  December  1684 ;  the  best  is  described  as  a  bay  with  two 
white  feet,  and  a  blaize.  The  Derby  Arabian  (the  sire  of  Childers)  had  four 
white  feet  and  a  blaize;  Childers  had  the  same;  it  may  be  added,  that 
Eclipse,  Selim,  Velocipede,  and  many  of  our  fastest  horses,  have  been  marked 
with  white. 


134  APPENDIX. 

luxuriant  crops  of  com,  cotton,  &c.  Two  large  enclosures  in 
front  of  the  stables,  fenced  in  with  reeds  about  seven  feet  high, 
contained  one  hundred  and  ten  yearlings,^  many  of  them  were 
promising — the  best  were  two  colts,  got  by  the  English  horse. 
The  produce  of  Mufti  were  strong,  but  coarse,  which  is  often  the 
case  with  young  Arab  stock  :  those  from  the  fine  bay  horse  were 
small.  These  horses  were  in  tolerable  condition,  and  had  the  great 
advantage  of  being  at  liberty.  Seventeen  later  yearlings  were 
turned  loose  in  a  large  barn ;  one  or  two  of  these^  particularly 
a  small  bay  colt,  were  very  handsome;  but  they  were  in  bad 
condition. 

The  buildings  were  very  extensive,  and,  being  new,  were 
perfectly  clean  :  they  surrounded  large  courts,  into  which  the 
brood  mares  ought  to  have  been  turned,  in  lots  of  twenty  or 
thirty,  with  sheds  to  shelter  them  from  the  sun.  There  were 
forty-eight  barren  mares  tied  up  in  a  large  stable,  some  of  which 
were  handsome  and  apparently  well-bred.  In  another  stable 
were  sixty-one  mares  in  foal ;  they  shewed  much  blood,  and  five 
of  them  (two  white  Nedgid,  and  three  greys  from  Syria,  Nubia, 
and  Thebes,)  were  remarkably  fine.  I  did  not  observe  at  these 
stables  any  mares  that  had  foaled,  they  were  probably  in  separate 
buildings.  Twenty-two  stallions  were  in  another  stable ;  the  grey 
horse  Mufti,  the  fine  bay,  the  chestnut  already  alluded  to,  and 
five  other  bay  horses — one  of  which  was  a  capital  horse  from 
the  Hedjas,  and  two  of  inferior  value,  which  had  been  selected 
from  the  army.  Eight  extremely  handsome  grey  Nedgid,  and  six 
white  horses, — of  which  five  were  Nedgid,  and  one  an  Egyptian 
stallion. 

These  horses  and  mares  were  in  large  boarded  stalls,  and  were 
not  fastened  by  heel-ropes,  but  by  halters  attached  to  posts  let  into 
the  bottom  of  the  stone  mangers.  The  stalls  were  not  paved ;  the 
mangers  were  high  ;  and,  by  a  singular  arrangement,  the  horses 
stood  in  two  rows  facing  each  other.  A  narrow  path  had  been 
made  along  the  walls  behind,  and  a  broad  high  walk  extended  m 
front  of  the  stalls  down  the  middle  of  the  building.  The  horses 
had  nothing  therefore  before  them  but  the  manger;  and  were 
consequently  kept  in  a  continual  state  of  alarm  and  uneasiness, 
by  people  coming  unexpectedly  before  them :  many  of  them,  in- 
deed, which  were  easily  excited,  hung  back,  with  the  imminent 

'  The  mares  generfilly  foal  about  October  and  November,  and  in  the  en- 
suing months,  on  account  of  the  green  crops,  that  come  in  at  that  time. 


APPENDIX.  135 

risk  of  pulling  up  the  post,  to  which  they  were  fastenedi  and  the 
whole  place  to  pieces,  and  it  did  not  appear  to  be  very  substan- 
tially built.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  why  this  absurd  plan  was 
adopted ;  which,  beside  other  inconveniences,  precluded  the  pos- 
sibility of  examining  the  horses,  without  passing  close  behind  them 
by  the  dirty  path  near  the  walls.  The  stalls,  however,  will  not 
last  long;  and,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  that  these  fine  horses  will  even- 
tually be  kept  in  loose  boxes,  and  the  mares  in  sheds,  which  will 
not  only  save  much  expense,  but  contribute  vastly  to  their  health, 
and  enable  them,  by  moving  about,  in  some  degree,  to  make  up 
for  the  neglect,  and  the  want  of  exercise,  to  which  they  are  ex- 
posed. The  stud,  however,  is,  upon  the  whole,  much  improved 
since  it  has  been  removed  to  this  place ;  and  the  French  super- 
intendent has  been  of  service.  Even  the  two-year-old  colts  sent 
to  the  stables  at  Cairo  are  in  better  condition ;  but  nothing  can 
compensate  for  want  of  air,  liberty,  proper  exercise,  and  good 
keep,  particularly  to  young  horses ;  and  the  colts  at  Shoubrah,  it 
is  to  be  observed,  are  principally  fed  with  chopped  straw,  and 
have  little  or  no  exercise. 

In  Syria,  horses  are  generally  fed  with  green  forage  during 
the  day,  are  watered  at  sunset,  and  their  allowance  of  grain  is 
afterwards  given  to  them  in  a  nose-bag.  It  is  to  be  observed, 
that  these  horses  are  generally  ridden  at  a  slow  pace,  and  are 
seldom  overheated. 

In  Egypt,  the  cattle,  and  in  many  instances  the  sheep  and 
goats,  when  turned  out  to  graze,  are  necessarily  tethered  in  rows, 
as  the  plains  contain  a  variety  of  valuable  crops,  and  are  entirely 
unenclosed,  on  account  of  the  annual  inundation.  Under  such 
circumstances,  heel-ropes  are  not  only  the  sole  expedient,  but  the 
most  secure  manner  of  picketing  a  horse,  either  with  regard  to  his 
own  safety,  or  to  that  of  other  horses  with  him.  About  February, 
most  of  the  horses  in  Cairo  are  turned  into  the  bersin  (a  fine  sort 
of  clover),  and  are  fastened  in  a  line ;  the  sizes,  (or  grooms,)  being 
encamped  behind  them.  And  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of 
the  city,  they  are  often  picketed  under  trees  on  the  banks  of  the 
Nile,  and  are  regularly  attended  to,  and  clothed. 

But,  notwithstanding  the  fine  climate,  they  are  generally,  both 
in  the  stable,  and  in  the  field,  in  the  condition  of  grass- horses. 
They  are  rough  from  want  of  exercise,  and  are  never  sufficiently 
cleaned,  although  a  sort  of  currycomb,  a  brush  made  of  twisted 
rope,  and  a  coarse  hair-cloth,  are  used  for  that  purpose.     It  is 


136  APPENDIX. 

scarcely  necessary  to  add,  that  their  manes  and  tails  are  seldom 
touched ;  and  it  appears  odd  to  an  European  eye,  to  see  a  horse, 
dirty  and  rough,  as  if  from  a  strawyard,  brought  out  with  a  velvet 
saddle,  and  with  a  bridle  covered  with  golden  embroidery  and 
fringes,  and  with  tassels  of  the  same  material/ 

Instead  of  the  large  Turkish  saddle  with  Eastern  stirrups,  a 
stuffed  pad  with  a  low  round  cantle^  covered  with  black  or  with 
red  cloth^  is  generally  used.  It  is  furnished  with  smaller  stirrups 
shaped  like  those  belonging  to  a  hussar  saddle,  and  with  short 
spurs  on  the  inward  sides.  The  bridles  are  of  different  patterns, 
and  are  generally  made  of  webbing.  Over  them  headstalls  are 
put  on,  composed  of  a  number  of  silver  chains,  and  adorned  with 
small  flat  ornaments,  particularly  on  the  nosebands. 

The  Mamelukes  were  formerly  no  doubt  well  mounted,  and 
armed,  and  could  ride  well ;  but  I  never  saw  a  fine  horseman  in 
these  countries.  Abou  Gosh,  (an  Arab  chief  near  Jerusalem), 
and  an  old  Mameluke  at  Cairo  were  the  best.  Some  of  them, 
indeed,  were  well  placed  on  the  old  Turkish  saddle,  (which  is  still 
used  by  the  Arabs,  and  is  by  no  means  an  inconvenient  equip- 
ment), yet  they  had  bad  hands,  turned  entirely  on  the  outside 
rein,  and  the  hand  and  the  heel  seldom,  if  ever,  accorded.  Skir- 
mishing, and  the  exercise  of  thejereed,  were  not  usually  performed 
with  much  address,  although  with  considerable  violence :  and  few 
of  their  horses  were  really  fast,  although  many  of  them  were  quick 
in  getting  into  their  speed.  When  the  colts  belonging  to  the 
Pacha's  stable  were  occasionally  exercised,  they  were  suddenly 
galloped  for  a  short  distance,  and  then  stopped  in  the  most  vio- 
lent, and  awkward  manner,  without  any  regard  to  the  action  of 
the  horse,  or  to  the  momentary  position  of  his  legs,  and  there- 
fore, with  great  danger  to  his  joints.  By  application  through 
the  consuls  strangers  can  procure  horses  from  these  stables,  and 
the  Pacha  himself,  and  many  of  his  officers  were  mounted  from 
them. 

There  were  a  number  of  remarkably  fine  mules  at  the  same 
place,  which  were  employed  in  conveying  provisions  for  the 
troops. 

The  stud  at  Shoubrah  was  intended  in  some  degree  to  supply 

*  The  Arabs  are  very  particular  in  walking  the  horses  about  till  they  are 
quite  cool ;  they  water  generally  once  a-day,  and  feed  in  the  mornings  and 
evenings,  and  indeed,  from  the  intense  heat  of  Eastern  climates,  the  morning 
and  evening  are  the  proper  times  for  eating,  for  both  man  and  beast. 


APPENDIX.  137 

the  caralry;  bat  in  tbis,  as  in  other  instances,  the  best  supply 
would  be  procured  from  the  people,  by  securing  to  them  the 
peaceable  enjoyment  of  their  possessions,  and  by  paying  a  fair 
remunerating  price. 

Opposite  to  the  stables  at  Cairo  was  the  establishment  for  the 
Pacha's  carriages.  I  heard  that  he  had  procured  through  Mr. 
Galloway  a  tolerable  coach  and  harness ;  but  the  carriages,  which 
I  saw,  were  worse  than  common  hackney-coaches ;  and  the  horses, 
harness,  and  particularly  the  coachmanship,  were  bad  beyond  all 
description  :  the  whole,  indeed,  was  conducted  in  such  an  awkward 
manner,  and  was  attended  with  so  much  difficulty  and  embarrass- 
ment, that  it  wa^  no  longer  a  matter  of  surprise  that  carriages 
appeared  to  the  Turks  most  extraordinary  inyentions.  Those, 
although  belonging  to  the  Pacha,  were  neyer  cleaned,  excepting 
that  the  linings  were  occasionally  brushed  out.  I  forget  the 
colours  of  all  of  them,  but  the  one  most  constantly  used  was  a 
dark  blue  chariot,  with  a  red  hammer-cloth;  the  yamish  had 
long  since  disappeared,  and  the  paint  scarcely  remained.  The 
harness  was  of  a  common  sort,  like  that  used  for  breaks,  it  had 
breast-collars,  and  did  not  appear  to  haye  been  either  cleaned  or 
repaired ;  there  were  no  bearing  reins,  and  the  cruppers  were 
seldom  put  on ;  the  reins  of  the  leaders  were  only  passed  through 
the  head-terrets  of  the  wheel-horses  ;  and  their  traces  were 
fastened  to  a  large  swing-bar  at  the  end  of  the  pole ;  the  horses 
were  driyen  with  bridoons,  or  with  bits  without  curbs.  There 
were  several  sets  of  horses,  white,  bay,  and  chestnut,  apparently 
yery  old,  underbred,  and  out  of  condition.  Their  thick  manes 
and  tails  were  never  combed,  and,  when  they  were  fastened  to  the 
carriage  (for  '*  put  together"  they  never  were),  the  pole-pieces 
were  put  on  first,  and  then  the  traces. 

The  coachman,  (and  the  best  performer  was  a  black),  was 
dressed  in  a  white  Nizam  suit,  with  a  red  tarbouse  and  slippers, 
and  drove  with  a  pig-whip.  He  leant  forward  on  his  box,  with 
his  legs  stretched  out  on  each  side  of  the  foot-board,  and,  having 
taken  the  ofi^-side  reins  in  his  right,  and  the  other  reins  in  his 
left  hand,  he  ascertained  their  purchase  by  two  or  three  violent 
pulls,  that  brought  the  horses'  heads  alternately  round  in  opposite 
directions ;  and  then  setting  to  work  with  his  whip,  started  his 
straggling  team  through  foot-passengers,  camels,  asses,  &c.  in  a 
most  surprising  manner.  On  his  return,  however,  the  horses 
bad  got  quite  steady,  and  by  taking  a  long  circuit  (if  nothing 


138  APPENDIX. 

accidentally  interfered),  the  equipage  was  safely  deposited  through 
a  large  gateway,  into  the  remise. 

The  women  of  the  harem  seemed,  however,  to  enjoy  this 
mode  of  conveyance,  and  often  took  long  drives,  and  returned  in 
the  evening  by  torch-light.  I  once  saw,  in  an  exceedingly  hot  day, 
four  fat  women  veiled  up  in  a  coach,  with  a  black  slave  sitting,  as 
a  guard,  on  the  floor  between  them.  Abbas  Pacha  had  also  a 
close  carriag,  eand  a  phaeton ;  and  one  or  two  of  the  Franks  had 
gigs,  and  four-wheeled  chairs  ;  there  were  also  one  or  two 
carriages  at  Alexandria. 

The  stud  of  Ibrahim  Pacha  was  in  much  worse  condition  than 
that  at  Shoubrah ;  but  several  of  the  mares,  of  which  there 
were  between  two  and  three  hundred,  appeared  to  be  superior, 
shewed  a  great  deal  of  blood,  and,  although  rather  slight, 
had  fine  racing  shape.  They  were  tied  up  by  heel-ropes  in 
large  stables.  Some  of  the  foals  and  yearlings  were  handsome 
and  high-bred,  but  were  starved  and  weak,  for  they  were  prin- 
cipally fed  upon  chopped  straw,  and  had  not  any  exercise.  The 
stallions  were  also  confined  by  heel -ropes.  Most  of  them  were 
coarse,  particularly  a  German  horse ;  but  there  were  some  good 
Turkish  stallions,   a  fine  white  horse   from  Shoubrah,   and  a 

food  shaped  ambler,  a  pace  which  is   much  esteemed  by  the 
urks. 

Ibrahim  Pacha  generally  rode  mules ;  and  he  had  some  very 
good  ones,  and  in  tolerable  order.  There  were  also  some  re- 
markably fine  stallion  asses  from  Syria,  and  from  Arabia,  by  which 
mules  were  bred  from  Arab  mares. 

The  horses,  taken  at  Acre,  had  three  round  spots  burnt  in 
their  hind-quarters  (which  was  not  an  unusual  mark) ;  although 
it  did  not  appear  to  denote  any  particular  breed. 

I  requested  permission  to  examine  the  shed  belonging  to  the 
Shereef  of  Mecca,  as  the  best  horses  came  from  that  place ;  and 
as,  I  concluded,  that  his  would  have  been  of  the  purest  breed.  I 
had,  indeed,  observed,  during  the  time  the  Shereef  was  encamped 
at  Gizeh,  that  his  attendants  were  well  mounted,  when  they 
practised  with  the  jereed  on  the  sandy  plain  below  the  Pyramids. 
Amongst  those,  however,  which  were  afterwards  shewn  to  me 
at  Cairo,  I  did  not  recognise  any  that  I  had  seen  before. 
They  must,  therefore,  have  belonged  to  some  of  the  other 
chieftains  from  Mecca,  or  to  the  stables  at  Shoubrah.  The 
Shereefs  stud   did  not  appear  to  be  numerous.     The  stables 


APPENDIX.  139 

were,  as  is  often  the  case,  undergroand,  and  upon  entering 
them,  my  attention  was  particularly  directed  to  a  grey  mare  in 
foal  by  a  white  horse,  then  in  the  possession  of  Abbas  Pacha ; 
both  the  mare  and  the  horse  were  of  the  purest  breed  from 
Mecca,  and  were  esteemed  of  great  yalue,  and  the  best,  which 
the  Shereef  possessed.  The  mare  shewed  much  blood,  had  a 
very  handsome  head,  and  good  lengthy  but  was  slight.  The 
horse,  which  I  afterwards  saw  at  the  stables  of  Abbas  Pacha,  was 
about  fourteen  hands  three  inches  high,  had  good  substance,  and 
also  shape,  but  not  that  of  a  race-horse ;  I  could  not  judge  of  his 
action,  as  he  was  led  out  in  heel- ropes,  and  with  a  heavy 
bit  fastened  into  his  mouth  by  a  cord.  There  was  also  in  the 
Shereefs  stable  a  bay  yearling,  got  by  the  white  horse  out  of  the 
grey  mare,  which  I  subsequently  brought  to  England  on  account 
of  his  blood.  I  procured  this  colt  with  great  difficulty,  most 
probably  because  the  Shereef  perceived  that  I  wished  to  have 
him.  He  said  that  he  belonged  to  his  son,  and  offered  me  any 
other  of  his  horses,  but  I  was  determined  to  have  the  colt,  because 
1  had  previously  heard  that  his  sire  was  the  highest-bred  horse  in 
the  stud,  and  because  his  dam  had  the  appearance,  and  also  the 
reputation,  of  being  of  the  purest  breed ;  and  because  a  yearling 
was  more  easily  conveyed  by  water  than  a  larger  horse.  I  em- 
ployed on  the  occasion  a  Frenchman  named  M.  Riga,  and  I  was 
so  fortunate  as  to  obtain  likewise  the  assistance  of  Mr.  Bretel, 
who  was  an  English  engineer  in  the  Pacha's  service,  and  had 
had  the  superintendance  of  the  mines  of  Mount  Lebanon.  As  the 
horse  is  stated  in  the  pedigree  to  have  been  given  to  me,  I  sub- 
join the  following  extracts,  which  will  shew  the  way,  in  which 
affairs  are  transacted  in  the  East,  and  will  prove  that  it  was 
expressly  stipulated  by  the  Shereef  that  I  was  to  send  to  him, 
in  exchange  for  his  horse,  a  golden  watch,  and  an  English 
carriage  with  harness  for  four  horses.  The  letters  I  received  at 
Alexandria,  at  Malta,  and  on  my  return  to  England,  and  the 
watch  and  carriage  were  sent  out  immediately  afterwards. 

Extract  from  Mr.  Bretel,  dated  Cairo,  August  9,  1837. 

**  It  affords  me  much  pleasure  to  be  able  to  announce  to  you 
that  the  Shereef  of  Mecca  has  this  morning  presented  for  your 
acceptance  the  horse,  which  you  admired ;  he  requests  that  you 
will  send  him,  as  an  acknowledgment,  a  small  watch,  not  larger 
than  the  circle  below,  also  an  English  carriage,  a  description  of 
which  he  has  not,  however,  given.  Mr.  Hill  has  sent  thirty 
dollars  as  presents  to  the  servants  of  the  Shereef,  he  has  also  sent 


140  APPENDIX. 

to  Mr.  Walne  for  a  tesheree  to  forward  the  horse  to  Alexandria 
without  delay,"  &c. 

Extract  from  M.  Riga,  dated  Cairo,  August  13,  1837. 

"  You  will  see  from  the  enclosed  document^  that  the  Shereefs 
views  in  giving  you  the  colt  are  not  quite  disinterested,  or  rather 
his  son's,  who  has  been  the  chief  party  in  the  business:  this 
document  stipulates  for  a  carriage,  with  harness  for  four  horses, 
and  for  a  small  gold  watch.  I  was  required  to  get  the  Consul's 
guarantee  that  these  would  be  sent,  but,  without  orders,  that 
gentleman  would  not  do  it ;  however,  you  told  me  to  make 
them  any  offer,  I  thought  proper,  and  to  carry  my  point  at 
and  I  took  it  upon  myself  to  guarantee  that  you  would  do  what 
all  hazards,  they  required,  and  I  hope  that  you  will  approve 
of  it." 

The  stipulations  with  Mr.  Bretel,  and  with  M.  Riga,  and 
the  formal  demand  attempted  to  be  made  through  the  Consul  of 
a  carriage,  and  a  watch,  form  a  curious  contrast  with  the  following 
account  of  a  communication  received  by  Mr.  Bretel  from  the 
Shereef. 

Extract  from  Mr.  Bretel,  dated  Cairo,  August  17,  1837. 

**  I  have  the  pleasure  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your 
letter  dated  the  12  inst.  On  the  following  morning  I  waited  on 
the  Shef  eef  of  Mecca,  and  stated  to  him  the  contents  of  it.  He 
appeared,  and  expressed  himself,  to  be  much  pleased,  when  I  told 
him  that  you  felt  highly  gratified  by  his  present.  He  then  said 
that,  as  his  son  was  anxious  to  have  a  small  gold  watch,  he  would 

'  The  official  translation  of  the  document  into  Italian  is  as  follows,  a 
literal  English  version  can  scarcely  be  given,  but  it  evidently  contains  a 
formal  demand,  through  the  English  Consul,  for  a  watch  and  a  carriage. 

"  Non  e  nascosto  nel  nostro  amore  che  voi  serivercte  una  lettera  dalla  parte 
del  Console  alia  Signoria  del  Nostro  Signore  Nobile  Abdallah,  in  questa  guisa, 
e  di  dirlo  per  sigillarla  col  suo  sigillo,  questo  vi  avvisamo." 

''  La  forma  deUa  lettera. 

*'  Discendenza  dei  Re  Nobili,  nostro  Signore  nobile  Abdallah,  iddio  allunghi 
la  sua  vita. 

'*  Non  e  nascosto  da  voi  che  Mohamed  Effendi  Bekkati  Capo  del  Divano 
del  consiglio  aveva  avvis&to  che  voi  dimandate  dalla  Signoria  del  Bey 
una  Carozza,  ed  un  piccolo  orologio.  Con  ajuto  di  dio  altissimo  awisamo 
quello  alia  sua  Excellenza  U  Bey,  e  lo  riceverete,  e  vi  ringraziamo  molto,  ed 
iddio  vi  doni  la  saluta. 

(Signed)        ''  Mohammbd  Effbndi  Bekxati  Zaada. 

"  Scrivauo  del  Consiglio  Nobile  di  Mocha.'' 


APPENDIX.  141 

accept  it  as  a  present,  and  in  remembrance  of  you,  bat  the 
carriage  he  positively  declined  receiving.  In  order  to  have  a 
specific  answer  I  wrote  to  him,  translating  that  part  of  your 
letter  relating  to  him,  for  which  purpose  he  gave  me  in  writing 
his  address,  *The  noble  Mohamed  Ebn  Aioon,  the  exalted 
Prince  of  Mecca.'  I  enclose  his  reply,  addressed  to  me,  and 
sealed  with  his  seal  (Mohamed  Ebn  Aioon).  After  the  usual 
compliments,  and  recapitulations  of  my  letter,  he  says,  'The 
name  of  the  horse  is  Abeiaau,  that  of  his  mother  £1  Baeah,  of  the 
Arab  Nedgid  breed,  and  the  name  of  his  father  is  Hadbaan,  our 
horse^  from  him,  which  is  called  Gerboa. 

'^ '  You  tell  us  that  the  English  bey.  Colonel  Vyse,  requests  us 
to  receive  a  gold  watch,  which  he  will  send  from  England  for  our 
son  for  his  acceptance,  and  a  carriage ;  we  told  you  that  he  must 
not  send  any  thing  for  having  received  the  horse,  but,  because  he 
has  prayed  that  our  son  will  receive  from  him  this  present,  it 
imports  not ;  let  him  then  send  the  carriage,  one  for  four  horses, 
and  let  the  colour  be  green.  When  we  shall  have  received  the 
carriage,  we  will  give  him  another  of  our  Arab  horses,^  and  we 
pray  that  he  will  accept  of  it.  We  beg  of  you  to  write  to  him  our 
regards.     Ginmad  el  Ewwel  15,  1253.' 

''The  above  date  corresponds  with  August  16th,  1837. 

"  I  have  sent  you  as  nearly  as  possible  a  literal  translation  of  a 
part  of  his  letter,  as  you  may,  in  fact,  perceive  by  the  singular 
style,  in  which  it  was  written." 

In  another  letter,  dated  November  21st,  1837,  I  received  from 
Mr.  Bretel  the  original  pedigree,  and  the  translation  here  given, 
and,  in  reference  to  the  former  account  given  by  the  Shereef  of 
the  breed  of  the  colt,  Mr.  Bretel  adds,  *'  I  could  not  exactly 
understand  what  the  two  names,  '  Hadbaan,'  and  '  Gerboa,' 
had  to  do  with  the  pedigree  of  the  colt.  It  has  been  satisfactorily 
explained  by  the  Shereef.  When  a  Nedgid  horse  is  very  cele- 
brated, his  descendants  take  his  name  as  a  peculiar  breed ; 
Hadbaan  was  a  celebrated  Nedgid  horse,  and  '  Gerboa,'  the 
father  of  the  colt,  being  of  his  blood,  is  called  a  Hadbaan. 
Whilst  the  Shereef  was  explaining  this  to  me,  a  person  of  some 
consequence  from  Mecca,  who  was  present,  asked,  'Was  the  colt 
a  Hadbaan?'  'E'  wuUah,'  answered  the  Shereef;  the  stranger 
appeared  to  be  rather  surprised  that  the  Shereef  should  have 

'  This,  as  well  as  other  parts  of  the  translation,  are  obscure. 
'  It  is  scarcely  to  add  that  no  other  horse  was  sent. 


142  APPENDIX. 

parted  with  a  Hadbaan  colt.    So,  also,  with  the  other  names,  the 
Hendees,  and  the  Nedgid." 

The  translation  of  the  pedigree  was  as  follows  :  — 

'*  All  which  is  attributed  herein  is  correct ;  the 
(Sbal)  Shereef  Muhammed  Ben  Aioon,  Shereef  of  Mecca, 

the  honoured,  has  written  it.  The  pardon  of  God 
be  for  him. 
'*  This  history  is  the  truth  of  the  bay  colt,  which  we  presented 
to  his  Excellency  the  Colonel  Howard  Vyse,  the  English  Bey  at 
Cairo,  the  protected.  His  name  is  Abeian;  his  breed  is  pure 
Nedgdt ;  he  was  born  at  Cairo,  in  our  habitation,  on  the  21st  of 
Oiumal  el  Aker,  1252,®  and  his  father  and  his  mother  are  of  the 
best  Arab  horses.  His  mother's  name  is  El  Abeieh,  daughter  of 
£1  Abeieh,  her  colour  is  white,  and  the  colour  of  her  mother  was 
bay ;  and  her  father's  name  was  Abeian  the  Hendees,  his  colour 
was  white,  and  he  pure  Nedgdi.  The  father  of  the  beforementioned 
colt  is  a  Hadbaan,  by  name  Gerboa ;  his  colour  is  white,  and  his 
mother  is  Hadba,  the  Nedgdi,  her  colour  is  white,  and  her  father's 
name  is  Gelwan,  the  son  of  Hadba,  and  the  colour  of  his  mother 
is  white.  The  whole  are  from  the  Nedgdi  horses,  celebrated 
amongst  the  Arabs. 

**  The  Shereef  Abdallah, 
(Seal)        Son  of  the  Shereef  Muhammed  Ben  Aioon. 

"  Shabaan,  6t.  1263."J> 

As  &r  as  breed,  soundness  of  constitution,  and  good  limbs,  are 
desirable,  a  cross  of  Arab  blood  may  be  of  service;  but,  with  some 
few  exceptions,  such  as  those  mentioned  in  the  Pacha's  stud  at 
Shoubrah,  Arabs  have  not  in  general  the  form  or  length  neces* 
sary  for  race-horses  -,  in  fact,  the  use,  to  which  they  are  applied, 
does  not  require  them,  nor  are  they  bred  with  a  view  only  to  swift- 
ness. The  colt  in  question  is  very  low,  barely  fourteen  hands, 
and  has  small  bone,  but  is  muscular,  and  so  much  furnished, 
that  his  age  has  been  doubted,  till  repeated  examinations  of  his 
mouth  proved  that  his  pedigree  was  correct.  He  shews  blood, 
has  fine  action,  is  remarkably  healthy,  and  has  great  courage, 
as  he  some  time  since  proved  by  leaping  a  gate  three  feet  nine 
inches  high,  and  a  boarded  door  seven  feet  from  the  gate,  and  five 
feet  six  inches  in  height ;  which  he  cleared  with  his  forehand  and 

>  October  1, 1S86.  *  November  5, 18d7. 


APPENDIX.  .  143 

body,  and  broke  through  with  his  hinder  legs,  without  any  other 
injury  than  a  scratch  below  his  stifle.  The  whole  leap  was  about 
eighteen  feet  in  breadth.  The  horse  has  also  good  length  for  his 
size,  but  he  has  not  the  shape  of  a  race-horse ;  what  his  progeny 
might  eventually  turn  out  is  another  question. 

Several  of  the  other  horses  shewed  blood,  and  were  of  good 
substance  and  height.  The  Shereef  himself,  when  at  the  Pyra- 
mids, rode  a  five-year-old  bay  horse,  which  had  the  appearance 
and  action  of  an  English  hunter ;  and  one  of  his  attendants  was 
mounted  on  an  animal  of  unrivalled  beauty  and  animation. 
Although  of  low  stature,  he  was  the  strongest  and  most  magni- 
ficent war-horse  I  ever  saw ;  but  he  was  old,  and  had  been  in  the 
stud  at  Shoubrah.  I  saw  also  in  the  Shereef's  stables  a  bay 
and  a  fine  five-year-old  grey  mare,  belonging  to  one  of  his  sous, 
and  one  or  two  other  clever  horses,  any  of  which  I  could  have 
obtained  with  much  less  trouble,  and  with  less  expense,  than  the 
yearling.  They  were  in  better  condition  than  the  horses  belong- 
ing to  the  Pacha,  but  in  point  of  value  could  not  be  compared 
with  the  best  of  his  stud,  which  I  have  already  described  to  have 
been  brought  from  Mecca;  indeed,  I  believe  that  some  of  them 
were  taken  from  the  Shereef  s  stables. 

It  is  to  be  observed,  that  most  of  the  best,  and  highest  bred 
horses  fi*om  Mecca,  and  from  the  Hedjas,  had  great  bone,  and 
were  of  good  size,  (like  the  grey,  and  the  chestnut  Wellesley 
Arabians),  they  had  also  the  finest  muscular  shape,  and  indica- 
tions of  high  blood;  but,  with  a  few  exceptions,  particularly 
amongst  the  mares,  they  have  not  the  length  and  character 
esteemed  in  England. 

The  horses  in  the  mountainous  parts  of  Syria  are  of  a  difi^erent 
breed  and  form  from  the  Arab,  with  which,  however,  they  are 
often  crossed,  they  are  taller  and  larger,  but  not  so  muscular.^ 

The  Druses  of  Mount  Lebanon,  (although,  from  the  extreme 
diflSculty  of  the  roads,  mules  might  have  been  supposed  preferable 
to  horses,)  were  finely  mounted,  chiefly  on  mares,  and  have 
a  highly  picturesque  costume,  composed  of  shawls  of  rich  and 
various  colours. 

I  tried  a  great  many  horses  at  Beyrout,  and  bought  two 
grey  mares,  that  answered  for  the  journey,  but  neither  of  them 
were  of  any  real  value.    One  of  them,  a  slight  white  mare,  shewed 

'  It  IB  probable  that  the  mountain  Arabs  mentioned  in  our  old  stad-books 
were  of  this  race. 


144  APPENDIX. 

much  blood,  and  had  very  fine  action,  and  was  remarkably  ser- 
viceable till  she  became  thin  and  weak,  probably  on  account  of 
her  age,  for,  I  had  been  informed,  that  old  horses  would  not 
stand  work  in  the  East,  and  I  was  recommended  to  buy  two  or 
three  year  olds.  The  pay  of  the  seis,  or  groom,  was  fifty  piastres 
per  month,  his  keep,  or  two  piastres  per  day  board  wages,  and 
a  pair  of  shoes  every  three  months,  as  he  always  attended  his 
master  on  foot  in  towns.  A  person  of  consequence  is  gene* 
rally  accompanied  by  two  of  these  people,  who  support  him  in 
difficult  places,  and  in  going  up  or  down  hill.  They  require  to  be 
well  looked  after,  and  endeavour  to  cheat  in  every  possible  way. 
The  stud  of  the  Emir  Bechir  was  supposed  to  be  excellent  ; 
I,  therefore,  expected  to  meet  with  some  mares  at  Ebtedin, 
that,  after  having  carried  me  through  the  country,  might  have 
been  worth  sending  to  England.  The  best,  which  I  saw  at 
that  place,  was  a  large  white  mare,  about  fifteen  hands  two 
inches,  she  shewed  much  blood,  and  had  the  most  perfect 
shape,  excepting  that,  from  the  height  of  her  forehand,  and  the 
fineness  of  her  loins  and  quarters,  she  appeared  rather  low  in  her 
saddle-place.  Her  tail  was  dyed  red  with  henna  ;  and  I  under- 
stood that  Ibrahim  Pacha  always  rode  her  when  at  Ebtedin. 
Her  price  was  200/.,  which,  as  she  was  eleven  or  twelve  years 
old,  and  barren,  was  more  than  her  value.  She  was  also  too  tall 
for  the  mountain -roads.  I  ofiered  100/.  for  her,  which  was  as 
much  as  she  was  worth,  particularly  as  she  was  shy,  and  easily 
alarmed,  which  induced  me  to  believe  that  her  eyes  were  bad. 
This  mare  came  from  Akkar,  between  Homs  and  Tripoli,  where 
a  number  of  very  fine  horses  are  bred.  They  are  not,  however, 
of  so  high  a  caste  as  the  Nedgid,  but  more  like  the  Turcoman, 
Circassian,  and  Persian  horses.^  I  could  have  purchased  at 
Ebtedin,  for  about  80/.  each,  two  fine  Arab  mares  of  the  Koghlani 
breed,  but  they  were  heavy  in  foal ;  they  were  a  grey  and  a  bay, 
very  handsome,  and  said  to  be  high-bred.  Many  inferior  horses, 
belonging  to  other  persons,  were  to  be  sold  at  this  place;  and 

*  In  the  autumn  of  1886 1  saw  at  Kalisch  in  Poland  a  corps  of  cavalry  from 
Karabah  (near  Teflis) ;  their  horses  were  low,  bat  very  strong,  and  appeared 
to  be  well-bred.  They  were  remarkably  fresh  after  a  long  and  difficult  march 
from  their  own  country.  The  men  were  the  most  picturesque  people  ima- 
ginable, but,  as  soldiers,  of  much  less  value  than  the  Caucasus  Cossacks,  who, 
from  constant  warfare  as  frontier  troops,  have  succeeded  to,  and  eclipsed  the 
famous  Don  Cossacks,  although  the  latter  appeared  to  me  to  be  much 
superior. 


APPENDIX.  145 

a  gentleman,  who  travelled  with  me,  bought  for  17/.,  a  very 
active  mare,  said  to  be  Annery  ;  but  she  was  coarse,  and  evi- 
dently not  thorough-bred.  It  should  be  remembered  that,  al- 
though the  climate  has  great  influence,  there  are  nearly  as  many 
low-bred  horses  in  the  East  as  in  Europe. 

In  my  way  to  Sidon  I  saw  the  Emir*s  stud  at  Djoun.  There 
were  two  stallions,  a  grey  of  good  size,  and  substance,  but  heavy 
and  calf-kneed,  said  to  be  Seglovvee,  and  a  chestnut  with  white 
legs,  of  much  power,  but  apparently  ill-bred ;  both  these  horses 
appeared  much  neglected ;  they  had  swelled  legs,  and  were  rough 
for  want  of  exercise.  There  were  four  mares  with  foals  (two 
Annecy,  two  Seglowee),  picketed  in  clover ;  they  were  in  very 
bad  order,  and  their  foals  were  weak  and  sickly.  The  mares 
themselves  shewed  much  blood,  but  were  completely  ill  from 
neglect,  and  from  want  of  food,  and  of  care.  There  were  likewise, 
seven  barren  mares.  Five  of  them  white ;  one,  which  was  a  fine 
specimen  of  the  mountain  breed ;  and  another  from  Akkar,  which 
was  remarkably  large  and  handsome ;  the  latter  was  marked 
across  her  arms,  and  thighs  with  a  firing-iron ;  the  two  others 
were  a  fine  bay  three-year-old  filly,  bought'of  the  Annecy  Arabs, 
and  a  starved  yearling.  Djoun  is  sheltered  by  surrounding 
hills,  and  there  is  abundance  of  water  and  tolerable  pasture,  the 
wretched  state  of  these  horses  must  be  therefore  owing  to  igno- 
rance, and  to  neglect.  The  Emir  had  informed  me,  when  I  was  at 
Ebtedin,  that  he  had  very  few  horses,  and  wished  to  increase 
his  stud,  by  which  I  concluded  that  he  was  afraid  that  the 
government  would  take  away  those,  which  he  had,  if  they  were 
seen. 

^rhe  foals  both  in  Egypt,  and  in  Syria  are  frequently  docked  ; 
and  the  points  of  their  ears,  and  those  also  of  the  young  asses,  are 
often  sewed  together.  Their  manes  and  tails  are  shorn  till  they 
are  four  years  old,  when  the  tails  are  cut  square,  with  a  lock  left 
in  the  middle  from  the  end  of  the  dock,  afler  which  they  are 
allowed  to  grow  down. 

The  breeds  of  Seglowee,  Kohlani,  and  Annecy,  are  in  much 
esteem  in  Syria,  particularly  the  former.  The  horses  from  Akkar 
are  Annecy.  There  is  also  a  breed  called  Abeian,  which  is  the 
name  of  the  Arab  colt,  that  I  bought  at  Cairo.  Good  horses 
were  chiefly  to  be  found  at  Jaffa,  Nablous,  and  Nazareth,  and 
also  from  the  eastward  of  the  Jordan  ;  but,  when  1  was  in  Syria, 
the  Arabs  were  afraid  to  shew  their  horses,  for  fear  of  their  being 
taken  away  by  the  government ;  otherwise,  1  have  no  doubt  that 

VOL.  III.  L 


\ 


146  APPENDIX. 

Arab  mares  and  horses  might  be  always  bought  (although,  per- 
haps, those  of  a  particular  breed,  or  excellence,  would  be  dear),  for 
an  Arab  will  never  refuse  to  sell  any  thing  in  his  possession,  if 
a  sufficient  price  be  offered. 

With  respect  to  the  care,  which  these  people  are  supposed  to 
take  of  their  horses,  I  have  to  state  that,  although  many  of  the 
horses  belonging  to  the  escort,  which  attended  us  to  Palmyra,  were 
foundered  and  infirm,  they  were  ridden  about  in  the  most  violent 
manner ;  and  also  that  one,  upon  which  a  soldier,  who  attended 
me  as  a  guide  from  Hebron,  was  mounted,  was  dreadfully  lame, 
(owing,  it  was  said,  to  his  having  fallen  into  a  well)  his  off 
thigh  and  hock  being,  not  only  bruised  and  swollen,  but  also  cut 
through  with  a  lacerated  wound  nearly  two  feet  in  length,  yet  he 
was  galloped  about  without  the  least  consideration.  I  may  like- 
wise add,  that,  having  lost  my  own  horse  in  going  from  Damascus 
to  Palmyra,  I  rode  the  mare  of  an  Arab  Sheik,  and  that,  during 
the  journey,  I  was  obliged  to  keep  watch  when  she  was  feeding, 
to  prevent  the  Sheik  taking  away  the  com  from  his  own  mare, 
which,  after  all,  I  believed  he  frequently  did,  and  he  finished 
by  stealing  the  nosebag.  On  our  arrival  at  Palmyra,  he  took 
away  the  mare,  under  pretence  of  taking  care  of  her;  and,  when 
I  returned  to  Kariathain,  I  found  that  he  had  cut  out,  and  stolen 
the  pannel  of  my  saddle,  and  that  the  mare's  back  was  injured 
to  such  a  degree,  that  she  could  not  continue  her  journey  to 
Damascus. 

There  are  six  or  seven  breeds  of  Nedgid  horses.  The  best 
blood  is  supposed  to  exist  between  Bassora  and  Mecca.  The 
horses  sent  to  England,  many  years  since,  by  Mr.  Manesty, 
then  consul  at  Bassora,  were  probably  from  that  part  of  the 
country. 

I  saw  several  well-bred  mares  belonging  to  the  Arabs  in  the 
Haouran,  and  many  fine  horses  among  the  irregular  cavalry 
encamped  in  the  forests  near  Djerash ;  but  those  of  high  caste 
were  generally  old  and  worn  out.  I  tried  a  great  many  horses 
and  mares  at  Damascus,  and  also  at  Jerusalem :  several  of  them 
belonged  to  the  Hadji ;  one,  a  small  bay  mare,  had  a  long  pedi- 
gree, and  came  from  Bagdad  ;  but  none  of  them  were  particularly 
worthy  of  notice.  When  I  called  on  Abou  Gosh,  at  Jerusalem,  I 
tried  a  grey  three-years  old  colt,  which  he  strongly  recommended, 
and  said  was  a  Koghlani:  the  colt  was  kept  constantly  saddled, 
and  was  picketed  with  heel  ropes  in  an  underground  vault,  or 
stable.    He  was  about  fourteen  hands  three  inches,  had  a  tolerably 


J 


APPENDIX.  147 

good  heady  but  was  rather  coarse  about  the  jaws;  had  a  short, 
low  necky  pretty  good  shoulders,  good  ribs,  and  carcase;  high, 
narrow  loms,  short  quarters,  good  legs  and  feet,  but  was  coarse, 
and  had  the  appearance  of  a  Welsh'  galloway :  he  had  broken 
knees,  and  had  been  fired  for  thorough-pins;  his  tail  was  cut 
square,  with  a  lock  left  in  the  middle ;   he  moved  well  and 
firmly,  and,  when  six  or  seven  years  old,  would  be  probably  very 
close  and  muscular.     I  was  told  by  the  superior  of  the  Latin  con- 
vent that  the  governor  had  seized  the  horse  for  the  Pacha's  ser- 
vice soon  after  I  tried  him ;  which  appeared  to  me  extraordinary, 
as  Abou  Gosh  was  on  good  terms  with  the  governor,  and  &s  he 
immediately  sent  into  the  country  for  another  horse,  which  I  by 
no  means  wished  him  to  do,  for  fear  that  he  would  be  taken  by 
the  governor  also.    This  horse  I  afterwards  bought,  and  sent  to 
Malta ;  he  carried  one  remarkably  well,  and  was  extremely  active, 
and  serviceable,  particularly  in  rocky  mountains.     I  gave  2520 
piastres  (about  26/.)  for  him.      When  animated,  he  was  very 
handsome,  but  had  not  a  very  high  show  of  blood.     I  got,  how- 
ever, the  following  attested  pedigree ;  the  original  was  given  to 
the  English  oflScer,  who  bought  the  horse,  and  who  was  after- 
wards, I  believe,  drowned  in  the  Nile.     *'  The  red  (bay)  horse  is 
Koghlani,  son  of  a  red  (bay)  mare,  which  I  bought  from  the 
Arabs  near  Gaza.     I  declare  that  he  is  Koghlani,  and  that  his 
mother  and  his  father  are  Koghlani,  and  that  all  his  ancestors 
were  Koghlani  for  fifty 'years,  being  known  as  to  their  sires  and 
g^andsires  till  now,  when  I  sold  the  horse  to  Colonel  Howard 
Vyse,  an  Englishman;  and  this  is  the  horse,  which  is  above 
described,  and  he  is  pure  Koghlani.    25  Gilfi,  1261  a.h."    Signed 
by  Abou  Gosh,  and  certified  by  the  authorities  in  Jerusalem. 
This  horse  had  good  substance,  was  about  fifteen  hands  and  one 
inch  high,  good  head  and  neck,  very  strong  shoulders,  short,  but 
strong  quarters,  thin  thighs,  capital  legs  and  feet,  and  good  loins ; 
he  was  rather  flat-sided,  but  was  deep  and  good  in  his  girthing- 
place.     He  had  been  roughly  fired  above  and  below  his  ofi^  hock ; 
his  tail  was  cut  square,  with  a  lock  in  the  middle,  and  his  mane 
was  tufted  and  thick ;  he  did  not  appear  very  high- winded,  and 
went  rather  round  in  his  gallop ;  he  improved,  however,  in  these 
respects,  and  became  an  admirable  fencer. 

The  Governor  of  Jerusalem  had  some  tolerably  good  horses ; 
and  Mr.  Farren  (the  consul  at  Damascus)  had  a  remarkably  fine 
bay  horse,  apparently  of  the  best  blood ;  but  he  was  old,  and  out 
of  condition.    That  gentleman  had  also  a'  bay  filly,  which  had 


148  APPENDIX. 

been  purchased  from  the  Arabs  ;.8he  shewed  much  blood,  but  was 
underlimbed  and  heavy.  The  horses  belonging  to  the  Persian 
princes,  who  had  at  that  time  gone  to  England,  were  also  at  Mr. 
Farren's.  They  were  well  clothed,  and  taken  care  of,  but  did  not 
appear  to  be  well  bred.  I  heard  of  a  mare  at  Damascus  for 
which  500/.  had  been  refused,  but  I  did  not  see  her.  Eight  or 
ten  horses  had  also  been  bought  for^the  Emperor  of  Austria;  but, 
with  the  exception  of  two  bay  stallions,  they  did  not  appear  to  be 
of  any  value. 


THE  END. 


LONDON  t 

I  RINIED  BY  MUYES  AND  BARCLAY,  CASTLK  SI  KELT, 
LKlCESTikR  SQUABS. 


X 


