OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT THE PYRAMIDS OF GIZEH IN 1837
Vol. II
by Colonel Howard Vyse
London: James Fraser, 1840

[Transcribed from the Internet Archive scan (operationscarrie02howa). Raw OCR, not proofread. Public domain: published 1840; author d. 1853.]

i^i i ^IfYs « xifti 155 1^

so

#

^^^t•LlbitAkIYy/•


^<!/0JnV3JO-

o

<rii30NVSOi^'^ %a3AiNn]WV^

^^tliBRAKYQ^

^Qmyi^"^

j^OFCAllFOft^

^OFCAIIFO/;

or

AWE UNIVERi//)

<rii]ONVso

vvlOSANGELfj>

%K\:^


/iaaAiNivaVkV

^OFCAIIFO/?^

>• s

33 -T-

4s>

\WEUNIVERS'//i

o

^lOSANCElfj

.^/sa]AiNn3WV

^>StLIBRARYa^ ^^^ILIBRARYQr.

'^<!/0JllV3JO'^

^tfOJnVJJO^

^WE UNIVERJ/A

o

^WE•UNIVERS•//^

^VlOSANCElfj-;^

o


'^Aa3AINn3Wv

^OFCALIFO/?;)!^

^OFCALIF0/?4^

^^Aavaan-^'^ ^^Aavaani^

^WEUNIVERV/v.

<rii30NVS01^

vaiibRARYQ^

^ ^tllBRARYQ^

^iilOJnVDJO^^ '^^OJIIVD-JO'^


\WEUNIVERi-//>.

o
<ril3DNVS01^^

^lOSANCElfx^

o 1——

%a3AINa-3WV

'^<!/0311V3JO'f^

^OFCALIF0/?4^ ^0FCAIIF0%

.^WEUNIVERy/A.


^vWSANCElfj^

"^AasAiNaswv

^>;,OFCA1IFOI?^ .«;,0f

^<?Aavaan# -^o}

\ME UNIVERSE

.vWSANCELfj>
o

^^IIIBRARYQ^

^^IIIBRARYQ/^


\WEUNIVERS/A

<r?13DNVS01^

aWEUNIVERS/a
5v c^o

.>;lOSANCElfj>

<rn30Nvsoi^'

^/$a3AINfl-3\

^OF CALIFO/?;)^

?7

^OFCALIFOftj^

'^OAavsaiiii'^

AWE UNIVERS//^

<ril30NVSO^^

^tolJiiVDJO'^ ^^OdnVDJO"^

l^c.^M icnp

;/</>•

o
<ril3DNVS0^^>

aWE l'NIVER5/A

'%a3AiNn3W^

.vlOSANCflf.r.>

.^OfCAllF0/?.</,

miVJf^

i ti=^t Hfei iiryj iTf

l.MVHfllT'W'^

^yO{)\\'M

^5 §fo(C

LIBRARY^?/- v>NHIBRARY6)/^

•5 -^ ST

•CAIIFO/?^:,

OF

o

v^

tv^

'^«!/ojiiv: ^ ^«!/ojnv3jo>^

^.OFCAI!

%

^lOSANCL

^10SANGEI%

MNfllWV

-n tJ

<rii]ONVsor^

OFCAII ^.;,^

-n «->

^'^:?lDfiYS01^

13AI

(^

'^^OJIIVDJO'^

^0-mH

LUiA^L.

•AllrOff^

>-

>&Aavaan# ^<?Aavaan-^^

•IIBRARYQ^

^ ^^UIBRARYC)/^

inv3jo>^

fCALIFO/?^ CA11F0%

cc

t-LJ

vvlOSANCEl^f^

o

<rii]ONvsm^^

AWE UNIVERSyA

o

iwm-}'^'

vvlOSANCElfj>

o

■^AaiMNH 1V\V

\lllBRARY6>/r. -s^Um

1*^

^Of CAllFOftj^

"^om^

m

o

"^/JMAINa iVA>

^Wti^l\tRy^

<f5l33NVS01^ %a3Ali

THE PYRAMIDS OF GIZEH.

ti e

I ^

^-i*-

OPERATIONS

CARRIED ON AT

THE PYRAMIDS OF GIZEH

IN 1837:

WITH AN ACCOUNT OF

A VOYAGE INTO UPPER EGYPT,

AND

^n ^[ppentiir-

By colonel HOWARD VYSE.

VOL. II.

LONDON:
JAMES FRASER, REGENT STREET.

y

LONDON :

PRINTED MY MOVES AND BARCLAY, CASTLE STREET, LEICESTER SQUARE.

>'

DT

CONTENTS

THE SECOND VOLUME.

PAGE

Shaft between Campbell's Tomb and Second Pyramid, No. 1 .... 4

Hieroglyphics in Tomb of Trades — Mr. Birch's Note 6

Pit before the Northern Front of Third Pyramid 15

Festa of the Dervishes in Cairo 18

Af Rock at the Base of the Second Pyramid 31

Excavation between Third and Fifth Pyramids 35

Roof in Queen's Chamber 37

Entrance of the Fifth Pyramid 37

Interior of the Fifth Pyramid 39

Shereef of Mecca 42

Roof of Belzoni's Chamber 44

Entrance of the Fourth Pyramid 45

Interior of the Fourth Pyramid 46

X New Palace in Cairo 52

Entrance of the Sixth Pyramid 63

Interior of the Sixth Pyramid 66

Interior of the Seventh Pyramid 68

Entrance of the Ninth Pyramid 69

Interior of the Ninth Pyramid 69

/^Entrance of the Third Pyramid 71

Edrisi's Account of Third Pyramid, translated by M. Burckhardt . . 71

Subterraneous Passage near Second Pyramid 76

Xinterior of Third Pyramid 77

Sarcophagus in Third Pyramid 83

Mummy-board of Mycerinus 86

Parallel Ridges near the Second Pyramid 88

Entrance of Eighth Pyramid 88

Interior of Eighth Pyramid - 89

Encampment of the Shereef of Mecca 91

Mummy-board of Mycerinus — Mr. Birch's Note 94

Arrival at Alexandria 97

Correspondence with Mr. Perring and Mr. Raven 97

VI CONTENTS.

APPENDIX.

PAGB

;)K Admeasurements and other Particulars relating to the Pyramids,

&c. at Gizeh 103

Sir John Herschel's Observations on the Entrance-Passages in

the Pyramids at Gizeh 107

Dimensions of Great Pyramid ] 09

Second Pyramid 114

• Dimensions of Second Pyramid 117

Third Pyramid 119

' Dimensions of Third Pyramid 120

Dimensions of Fourth Pyramid 124

Dimensions of Fifth Pyramid 125

Dimensions of Sixth Pyramid 126

Dimensions of Seventh Pyramid 127

Dimensions of Eighth Pyramid 128

Dimensions of Ninth Pyramid 129

Dimensions of Inclined Passages 130

Campbell's Tomb • * 131

Hieroglyphics in Campbell's Tomb — Mr. Birch's Notes 133

Inscriptions 1 45

/ List of Articles discovered at Gizeh, &c 146

Section of Rock and Levels of Water 148

Signore Caviglia 152

Prices paid in Egypt 177

Translations and Abstracts from various Authors 179

Herodotus 181

Diodorus Siculus 184

Strabo 187

Pomponius Mela 188

Pliny 188

Syncellus 190

Cyriacus 191

Breydenbach ■ 191

Bartholomeus de Salignace 191

Bellonius 191

Authors of various Antiquities 192

Johannes Helfricus 193

Mr. Lawrence Aldersey 193

M. Jean Palerme 194

Prosper Alpinus 196

Baumgarten 198

Sandys 199

Vincentzio Fava 202

Pietro della Valle 202

CONTENTS. Vll

PACE

M. de Villamont 203

Rabbi Benjamin 204

Professor Greaves 205

M. De Monconys 214

M. Thevenot 215

Mr. Melton 217

M. Vausleb 220

Kircher 221

M. Lebrun 222

M. MaiUet 224

De Careri 229

Lucas 230

Account of divers choice Remarks, &c 232

Quatremere .... 233

Egraont 234

Perizonius 236

Pere Sicard 236

Shaw 237

M. Norden 241

Kostar 243

Pococke 243

Dr. Perry 248

Mr. Hasselquist 25 1

M. Fourmont 251

M. Niebuhr 254

Mr. Davison 255

D'Anville 258

Bruce 258

M. I'Abbe de Binos 259

M. Savary 260

Sonnini 262

M. Volney 262

Monumens Egyptians, par Bouchart et Gravier 263

Mr. Browne 264

M. Denon 264

Colonel Coutelle 269

M. Jomard 274

Dr. Clarke 280

Mr. Hamilton 284

Dr. Whitman 286

Dr. Wilson 287

M. Caviglia 288

M. Belzoni 294

Signore Athanasi 299

Vlll CONTENTS.

PAGE

Dr. Richardson 300

The Author of " Recollections of the Peninsula" 305

Mr. Webster 305

Sir John Gardiner Wilkinson 306

Mr. St. John 310

Manuel, " Encyclopedique " 313

Captain Scott 315

Mr. Agnew 316

Abou Ma'sher Ja'fer Ben Mohammed Balkhi .• 319

Ebn Khordadbeh 320

Sir William Ouseley 320

Abou Rihan Mohammed Ben Ahmed Al Khawarezmi 321

Masoudi 321

Papyrus found in the Monastery of Abou Hormeis 330

Ebn Haukal 333

Abou Abdullah Mohammed Ben Selamah Abou Al Kodhai .... 333

Abou Abd Allah Mohammed Ben Abdurakim Alkaisi 333

Edrisi 334

Zaraakshari 337

Abd AUatif 337

Yakut 346

Abou MothafFer Youssef Ben Kazali 346

Al Makin 348

Jemal Ed Din Mohammed Al Watwati Al Kanini Al Watwati . . 348

Shehab Eddin Ahmed Ben Yahya 349

Ibn Batuta 350

" Kitab Succardan," by Ebn Abou Hajalah Ahmed Ben Yahya

Altelemsani 350

From the Camoos (Dictionary) of Firazabadi 351

Ebn Abd Al Hokm 351

Makrisi 352

Abou Mohammed Al Hassan Ben Ahmed Ben Yakub Al Hama-

dani Al Yemani 358

Soyuti 358

Abou Mohammed Mustafa 359

Abul Hassan 360

Mohammed Ben Abdullah Ben Mohammed 360

Al Akbari 360

Kitab Albuldan 361

Abdullah Ben Touloun 362

Tohfat Alajaib 362

Hi^^tory of the Marvellous Things in Egypt 362

LIST OF PLATES

IN

THE SECOND VOLUME.

Pyramids of Gizeh (Frontispiece)

Pavement and Pit before the Northern Front of the Third Pyramid 15

Vases found in Campbell's Tomb 23

Entrances of the Fourth and Fifth Pyramids 37

Pyramids to the South of the Third — Plans and Sections 41

A Lady of Cairo 53

Entrances of the Sixth and Seventh Pyramids 63

Pyramids to the East of the Great Pyramid — Plans and Sections 67

Entrances of the Eighth and Ninth Pyramids 69

Entrance of the Third Pyramid 71

^ Plans and Sections of Passages in the Third Pyramid 72

Small Ante-room and Portcullis in the Third Pyramid 78

Plans and Sections of Apartments in the Third Pyramid 81

Sepulchral Chamber in the Third Pyramid 83

Sarcophagus in the Third Pyramid 84

Large Apartment in the Third Pyramid 8G

Mummy-board 94

Woman of Alexandria 96

Inclined Passages to the East of the Great Pyramid 130

Campbell's Tomb — Plan and Section 131

VOL. II. b

X LIST OF PLATES.

FACE

Campbell's Tomb — Sections and Sarcophagus 132

Hieroglyphics in Campbell's Tomb 134

A Sarcophagus from Campbell's Tomb, with the Hieroglyphics at

the head and foot 136

Hieroglyphics on the Left Side of the Sarcophagus 140

Hieroglyphics on the Right Side of the Sarcophagus 142

Hieroglyphics on the Lid of the Sarcophagus 144

Section shewing the Levels of the Pyramids 148

Section of Chambers of Construction in the Great Pyramid 158

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH,

6fc. Sfc.

Mmj ^Ist.

Reis, 9. Men, 217. Children, 191.

Great Pyramid. — Excavation in northern front.

.—. Excavation eastward in northern front.

Excavation westward in northern front.

■ Excavation for round holes in northern front.

— — Roof in Queen's Chamber.

■ Clearing Chambers and Passages.

Second Pyramid. — Roof in Belzoni's Chamber.
Third Pyramid. — Interior.
Excavation between Third and Fifth Pyramids.
Campbell's Tomb.
Fourth Pyramid. — Interior.

Shaft between Campbell's Tomb and Second Pyramid.
Shaft north of Sphinx.

Mr. Mash and Mr. Perring went on with the survey.
Excavations were begun to the westward and eastward
of the centre on the northern front of the Great Pyramid,
in order to discover whether the step and pavement were
continued, and also to ascertain the base. In both places
pieces of the casing stones, and of the blocks, were

VOL. II. B

2 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

found, which had formed a pavement, and the rock had
been levelled, but not to so great a width as at the centre.
The ground was also cleared in front of the north-eastern
angle, that the round holes and grooving already mentioned
might be surveyed. Several green idols were found at
the depth of fifty-five feet in the southern foss of Camp-
bell's Tomb, also a round knob of yellow stone, apparently
the stopper of a vase, and a rectangular oblong piece of
the same material, two inches by one inch and a half,
and half an inch thick. It was highly polished, but was
perfectly plain, without carving or inscription. These
articles were afterwards sent to the consulate. I again
examined the ruins to the eastward of the Great Pyra-
mid, and went round the works with Mr. Raven.

An Englishman (Goodman), whom I had sent to Alex-
andria with the packet for Mr. Hamilton, returned with
a letter from Colonel Campbell, and entered my service.
He informed me that the weather had been unusually
stormy at Alexandria. We had also experienced at the
pyramids heavy showers and strong gusts of wind chiefly
about sunset. The ground at Gizeh, and also at Thebes,
is in many places broken up by ravines, or channels, which
are supposed to have been caused by heavy rains. Mr.
Wilkinson and also Mr. Hamilton mention periodical
showers ; and pits have been formed near the entrances
of some of the tombs at Thebes, apparently to secure them
from damp. Yet, although heavy showers do occasionally
occur, continued rain is exceedingly rare, and it can
hardly be supposed to have fallen in sufficient quantities
to have made these deep channels, which are probably,
therefore, the repeated effects of violent winds.

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 3

June \st.

Reis, 10. Men, 198. Children, 157.

The same works were repeated.

The Sheik of Harronieh again informed me that the
people from his village, and from Cafr el Batran, would be
sent to the canal. I therefore requested Mr. Piozan to
apply to the Madyr. Mr. Mash copied the hieroglyphics
in Campbell's Tomb. A flat piece of black stone, about
half an inch thick, square at one end, and round at the
other, but without any hole, carving, or inscription, was
found in the southern foss. Particles of leaf gold,
broken pieces of coarse earthenware, and a small orna-
ment like a cross, were likewise taken out. This tomb,
which, before it was plundered, must have been amazingly
rich, was a sort of Columbarium. Quantities of bones,
and five sarcophagi, were found in it ; and probably
many others have been deposited in the adjacent pits.
The whole ground, indeed, is one vast cemetery, and
abounds with shafts and sepulchral grottoes formed in the
quarries, which have supplied materials for the pyramids
and for other buildings.

June 2d.

Reis, 10. Men, 201. Children, 163.

Great Pyramid. — Excavation in northern front.

Excavation eastward in northern front.

Excavation westward in northern front.

Roof in Queen's Chamber.

Clearing the Chambers and Passages,

Second Pyramid. — Roof in Belzoni's Chamber.

Third Pyramid. — Interior.

4 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

Excavation between Third and Fifth Pyramids.

Campbell's Tomb.

Fourth Pyramid. — Interior.

Well north of Sphinx.

The shafts between Campbell's Tomb and the Second
Pyramid was examined. From the grotto at the bottom
of the first shaft a second descended to a lower chamber,
in which square pillars had been left to support the roof;
a third shaft in this apartment was full of water, which
was perfectly fresh, and covered the floor to the depth
of four or five inches. The level of the water was one
hundred and thirteen feet seven inches below the top of
the upper shaft. The Arabs said that an horizontal pas-
sage proceeded to the northward from these chambers
through the side of the rock, but, owing to the drifting
of the desert sand, and to the effects of repeated ex-
cavations, it is at present impossible to form an idea
of the original surface of the ground. It was highly
probable that water had been collected in artificial reser-
voirs for religious purposes ; but we did not suppose that
it proceeded from a spring, or fountain, as nothing of the
kind was to be met with in the whole country of Egypt ;
although, had it been proved to be an original source,
it would have sufficiently accounted for the reputed
sanctity of the ground. It may proceed from rain, but
does not appear to flow from the river ; as it does not rise
and fall with it.^ In whatever way it may be produced,
the sarcophagi could not have been intentionally im-
mersed, and the inundations of the tombs must have

1 No. 1, in map.

2 See Appendix ; where the different levels are stated.

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 5

accidentally arisen from the artificial channels having
been stopped up, and from the water having penetrated
between the strata of the rock.

In answer to the letter, which Mr. Piozan had sent by
an express into Upper Egypt, the Madyr informed him
that the people from Koum el Eswith, Cafr el Batran,
and Harronieh, were ordered to come to the pyramids,
but that the population of the other villages would be
wanted at the canal. This arrangement appeared suffi-
ciently explicit, but it was extremely difficult to find out
to what villages the people belonged. The Sheiks could
not be depended upon ; and, from the fear of conscription,
for the army, or for compulsory labour at the factories,
many of the people had no settled habitations, but wan-
dered from place to place as opportunity offered. From
the fineness of the climate their wants were few, and no
ideas of comfort or of home interfered with their wander-
ing inclinations.

A small piece of brown stone, inscribed with part of
the cartouche, or legend of Suphis, was dug out of the
rubbish at the centre of the northern front of the Great
Pyramid. At first I imagined it was supposititious ; upon
examination, however, it seemed to be genuine, but it did
not appear to have been used in the construction of the
building.^

This cartouche, together with another, is introduced
amongst the hieroglyphics, with which the interior of a
building to the westward of the Great Pyramid is covered.
It has been called the tomb of Trades ; and that part of
the inscription, which relates to the cartouche, has been

' The stone has been already described in vol. i., page 258.

6 OPERATIONS CAimiED ON AT GIZEH.

sent to me by Mr. Perring, and is contained in the follow-
ing note, with Mr. Birch's remarks.* It had been copied
by Signor Rosellini, before the discovery of it in the

4 The hieroglyphics, found in the tomb of Trades, over a male and
female figure, contain, as may be naturally expected, their names. That
over the male has the name and titles of the son of the person to whom
the sculptures in the tomb relate, and for Avhom it was probably ex-
cavated. It refers to Eimai, " his beloved eldest son, royal orator, royal
priest of the king Shoufo (Suphis or Cheops), superintendent of the
palace, scribe of truth." The one over the figure called a female (most
probably a person of very high rank), bears the name of " Skafas-
onkh, royal orator, prophet, royal priest, superintendent of the palaces
of Shoufo (Cheops), of the ro^^al race, devoted to his lord, loving his
lord," &c. In this latter instance, the name of a king forms part of the
name of a private individual,* an occurrence not uncommon at this period,
and often adopted during the era of the Psammetici, who revived both the
prenomina, titles, customs, &c., of the early dynasties. By the help of
these inscriptions, the individual successions of the several dynasties may
be sometimes made out, because the names of course generally occur
either during, or posterior to, that of the monarch assumed. In the pre-
sent instance, for example, it shews that the monarch Skafas was one
of the immediate predecessors of Cheops, if not the personage termed, in
the lists of Eratosthenes and Manetho, Biuris, Aiuris, or Soris.

M. Rosellini indeed makes this monarch a successor of Suphis II.
(see tom. i. tav. 1, 6), but the additional light thrown upon the sub-
ject by the inscription of the tomb in question proves that he must have
been a predecessor, unless we suppose, contrary to all analogy, that
names were assumed in advanced life and after infancy.f M. Rosellini

* In an inscription upon a tomb brought from Gizeh (B. M.) a per-
son is named "(Re-Shef) Nofre. Shefre-Nofre ;— The good Chefren."
Many examples may be found of names thus compounded of the Saite
dynasty.

f We know from the Bible, that Joseph's name was changed in Egypt,
and those of Daniel and his companions during their captivity ; but this
was probably on account of their being foreigners.

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 7

Great Pyramid, and was ascribed by him to Suphis, the
Cheops of Herodotus. As that monarch is said to have

(torn. i. p. 131) does not propose any reading for the name, but the
anterior part, of the Phonetic value of which he was not aware, replaces
in the ritual a group reading ^C, perhaps the obsolete word for statue,
and still retaining in Coptic the sense of " antient," " ancestor," &c. He
justly regards this as the ultimate portion of the name, of which the other
part reads CK^CJ, <«he who offers," or "is devoted to." The whole then
reads CK^CJ^C, Skafas — a name very analogous to those of the dynasty.
Some difference exists between the reading of the group p^ or pcy,
which M. Rosellini, in his account of this tomb (Monumenti Civili, parte
seconda, torn. i. p. 35), supposes to signify " purificator." M. Salvolini, on
the contrary, regards the expression as that of "to speak, address, orator"
— pcy of the Coptic, probably from its occurring with the determinative
image of a seated man holding his hand to his mouth
—the determinative symbol of verbs of speaking, calling, ^ — ~
&c. It is remarkable that both these royal names are /;T\
unaccompanied by regal titles ; and the formula, " loving
his lord," is of common occurrence in the inscriptions unattended by
the title of the monarch — the office held indicating "the lord" re-
ferred to. The accompanying transcription and interlinear interpreta-
tion, reads from left to right, in accordance with the European manner,
in order to make the translation plainer:

OVER A MALE FIGURE.

Ci-q cuep n^.iq conrxeit p^ coxTert ofA.£i

His son eldest loving him royal orator ? royal priest of

(®hr\ii

UJoTqoT 2^ort juip hi ^^.^.-HI c£,^i Gijuuli

Suphii I? or^Cheopi. '"^°P'^et j|^f^^'j"jj the house palace scribe of truth? Eimai.

8 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

been held in such detestation that his name was not even
pronounced, and that neither his body nor that of Che-
phren were buried in the pyramids, it is surprising that his

OVER A MALE AND FEMALE FIGURE.

}

(g) j.wvi>'

coTTeit p^ connren ot^.JSl up hi n^^.-Hi ^oTqoT

Royal orator, royal priest, super- the palace Shoufou,

intend- house (of) Suphis L or Cheops,

ent of

^on np connrert poone 2^^-^;-HI ^.u cyajonr ^p

prophet super- royal race ? !i0uses with devotion to

intendent

ne^-q JUipp neK-q CK^.q-^.c-on^

his lord, loving his lord. Skafas-onkh.

My attention has been especially directed to two parts of the preced-
ing inscription: — I. The term " souten-ouab, or royal priest" — a title
only found at this particular epoch, from its occurring before the name of
Shoufou — and since Suphis or Cheops is mentioned as belonging to the
sacerdotal order, M. Eosellini considers the expression to refer to the
monarch, not the individual ; but in the second part of the inscription
from the inner room, over both figures, it occurs immediately after
" souten-rokh," and forms part of the title of the individual beyond a
doubt, as the monarch would be scarcely called attache to, or chamberlain
of, his own palace ; and it refers to the person equally with the term

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 9

cartouche was recorded in any place by the priests, or,
at all events, that it was not effaced after his death.

The quarry-marks in the chambers of construction in
the Great Pyramid, and upon the stones belonging to the
Second and Third, prove that hieroglyphics were made use
of before these buildings were erected ; and the inscriptions
in the tomb of Trades shew that they had been employed at

immediately preceding it. At a later period, both terms were abandoned,
and the terra " royal scribe," the basilico-grammateus of the Greek in-
scriptions, appeared. II. — The term immediately following the cartouche
is rather ambiguous. It appears, in Burton's " Excerpta," to follow or
precede each of a small series of cartouches, according to the mode we
are willing to read them — the inscription being, unfortunately, imperfect.
M. ChampoUion, Gr. Eg. explains this as ^Oll, or "prophet priest,"
but affords no information as to the reason of such hypothesis. As the
title in the tombs and texts uniformly accompanies persons of the sacer-
dotal order, it is evidently some functionary of that class, as we have
prophets of Amoun, Phtah, Monthra, and almost every principal deity of
the Pantheon. But as the term is seldom placed absolutely by itself, and
is always 'prefixed to the name of the deity, of which the individual was
the priest, sometimes with the sign of the
genitive case interposed, it possibly refers to the
monarch ; and priests, or prophet-priests of the
monarch Remeses the Great, appear on some
steles. At this early epoch, however, the title
appears to have had some original signification
analogous to "great God," "gracious God," &c.,
of a later time, as on the entrance of a Memphian
tomb of this era. B. M., Egyptian Saloon, behind
No. 64, the goddesses Athor and Neith are termed C.^ ^
— " Athor the goddess, mistress of the abode of the
sycaomore. Neith, the goddess resident in the abode of the king He-shaf"
or Shaf-re {Cejjhren), where the symbols cannot signify ^^ priest,'' and it
is impossible that they indicate " prophet of the goddess Athor."

10 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

that time for sepulchral purposes : they abound, in fact,
upon ahnost every Egyptian tomb and sarcophagus, from
the earhest ages down to the time of the Romans ; and the
exception formed by the pyramids, appears to corroborate
the antient tradition that those buildings were the mau-
solea of the Shepherd Kings, who conquered Egypt, and
who were entirely of a different race, and hostile to the
religious institutions of the country.

The insertion of the cartouche of Mycerinus in the
Fourth Pyramid may have been accidental,^ but the man-
ner in which it is inscribed upon the mummy-board found
in the Third, agrees with the assertions of the priests, that
that king was held in a more favourable light than his pre-
decessors, and it is probable that, on account of his toler-
ation of their religious observances, he may have been con-
sidered worthy of funereal rites, and also of having his name
recorded over the entrance into the pyramid. It is to be
observed, however, that although his sarcophagus was dif-
ferent from those of his predecessors, and was highly orna-
mented with sculpture, yet that it did not bear a single
hieroglyphic, and that his body was not enveloped, accord-
ing to universal custom, in linen or cotton, but in woollen
cloth. This mummy-cloth was the first that had been dis-
covered made of that material,^ which is stated to have
been considered impure by the antient Egyptians, and
therefore unfit for sepulchral ceremonies ; but more of it
has been subsequently taken by Mr. Perring from some
antient tombs at Tourah, which do not appear to have

* See July 5.

^ An account of this' discovery is given in the Appendix. A skull
and some of the cloth have been deposited in the British Museum by
Dr. Bowring.

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 11

belonged to Egyptians, although some of their funereal cus-
toms seem to have been observed. The vicinity of Tourah
to the quarries, where the Hebrews are supposed to have
worked, and whence they commenced the Exodus, makes
the similarity of these cerements the more remarkable ;
and although the national vanity of Josephus has in vain
endeavoured to shew that the shepherd kings were the
sons of Jacob, yet we know that the latter were also shep-
herds, and that before their arrival every shepherd was an
abomination to the Egyptians ; an hostility which it is
difficult to account for, excepting by the antient traditions
respecting these mighty strangers ; who are also said by
Manetho to have laid the foundation of Jerusalem after
they were expelled from Egypt.

June 3c?.

Reis, 10. Men, 210. Children, 172.

The same works were repeated.

Much to my satisfaction, a new rope, which Mr. Hill
had procured from Boulac, was rove to the great windlass
at Campbell's Tomb. As the excavations from the
northern and southern sides of the Fourth Pyramid met
in the centre, without the discovery of any apartment, it
was supposed that a shaft was concealed beneath the
building.^ Additional excavations were therefore begun
from the centre in various directions on a level with the
base ; and if these operations proved ineffectual, I in-
tended to quarry under each of the blocks which had been
left to support the superstructure. I returned to Cairo
with Mr. Mash.

' See Appendix.

12 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

June Uh. — The Sheik of Harronieh came to Cairo
about his men. Mr. Piozan had the kindness to write to
the Mamoor ; but owing to the negligence of my Coptic
servant, the letter was not sent till the following day, but
as it was probably a mere complimentary effusion, and
was written by a dragoman upon whom no great reliance
could be placed, the delay was of less consequence. Mr,
Piozan offered to apply to Habib Effendi, but I would not
give him the trouble, as I considered that the interference
of the governor could not with propriety be requested, or
usefully exercised in affairs under the Madyr's immediate
jurisdiction.

June 5th.

Reis, 10. Men, 173. Children, 169.

Great Pyramid. — Excavation in southern front.

Excavation westward in northern front.

Roof in Queen's Chamber.

Clearing Chambers and Passages.

Second Pyramid. — Roof in Belzoni's Chamber.
Third Pyramid. — Interior.

Excavations between Third and Fifth Pyramids.

Campbell's Tomb.

Fourth Pyramid. — Interior.

Shaft north of Sphinx.

I returned to the Pyramids with Mr. Perring, Mr.
Mash, and Mr. Hill, in a Kamseen wind.

The men employed in the two excavations at the
northern front of the Great Pyramid were occasionally
taken to Campbell's Tomb, as, on account of the great
depth, much strength and many hands were required to
work the windlasses by which the sand was raised.

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII. 13

June Qth.

Reis, 10. Men, 169. Children, 142.

The same works were repeated.

The Sheik of Cafr el Batran came with a request that
my blacksmith might be allowed to make for him an in-
strument to cut grass, or grain. I readily consented, as I
understood from his description that it was a trifling affair,
which would be soon completed. It proved, however, to
be an immense machine, composed of nearly a ton of iron.
The metal, in fact, was his chief object. I kept my
promise, but carefully avoided such engagements in
future. It is indeed impossible to place the smallest
reliance on these people, who scarcely know the differ-
ence between truth and falsehood, and say what will suit
best for the moment — a practice, it is to be observed,
that is not unfrequently to be met with in other countries.
Mr. Perring and Mr. Mash took levels, and again
carefully examined and measured the works in the Third
Pyramid. The operations at the shaft north of the
Sphinx were finished.^

A Sheik's son, who was to be circumcised, came in a
grand procession across the plain in the hope of receiving
a backshish. He was about eight years old, wore a red
robe and a large turban, and rode a white mare. He was
accompanied by skirmishers on horseback, by music, and
dancing. The girls, who were employed in these perform-
ances, had sticks in their hands instead of swords, and
were dressed in long trowsers. Their black veils were
confined by a quantity of coloured fillets ; and pieces of

8 No. III.

<

14 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

silk hung loose from their arms, and had a singular
appearance. After exhibiting for some time, they re-
ceived a few piastres and some gunpowder, and went
away.

As the heat of the weather increased, the flies became
extremely troublesome, but we derived great benefit from
nets at the doors and windows. The gnats and sandflies
also made a mosquito curtain indispensable to those, who
could not adopt the custom ot entirely covering the head
and face at night. This is universally practised by the
Arabs, and is an excellent precaution, not only against
mosquitoes, but also damp exhalations, cold dews, malaria,
&c. ; and it may be remarked, that in Eastern countries
the head is always well covered, as a protection against
the heat by day, and the cold by night.

June 1th,

Reis, 10. Men, 201. Children, 172.

Great Pyramid. — Excavation in northern front.

Excavation eastward in northern front.

Excavation westward in northern front.

Roof in Queen's Chamber.

Clearing the Chambers and Passages.

Second Pyramid. — Roof in Belzoni's Chamber.

Third Pyramid — Interior.

Excavation between Third and Fifth Pyramids.

Campbell's Tomb. .

Fourth Pyramid. — Interior.

June 8 th.

Reis, 10. Men, 176. Children, 177.

The same works were repeated.

In many parts of the foss in Campbell's Tomb, the

\^

iT

^f -'*,^ ■'f^'.''

i^'-

^ "3

^

«v

■ S^r

3

^K

■^
^

#■,

y

N

.^^^:\

:mx.

j^mm.-,.

^ - > -^ ..jr..-JC^

z-?^.:.

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 15

sand had been cleared out to the depth of sixty-five feet,
and at the north-western corner we had at length arrived
at the bottom at seventy-three feet. Abd el Ardi told me,
that at Saccara several of the shafts were above two hun-
dred feet deep, and that images of iron and of silver, some
of which (according to his description) represented Har-
pocrates, were found in the grottoes. Mr. Raven was
employed in the Third Pyramid ; Mr. Perring and Mr.
Mash in continuing the survey.

June 9th.

Reis, 10. Men, 167. Children, 190.

The same works were repeated.

A Turkish Effendi, from Syria, accompanied by some
Arabs, came to the tents.

Fragments of an alabaster vase, and several small
bottles, were found in the southern part of the foss of
Campbell's Tomb — one or two of the latter contained
the remains of a dark substance, which upon being wetted
gave a brownish stain.

June 10th.

Reis, 10. Men, 199. Children, 169.

The same works were repeated.

There is a considerable hollow before the northern
front of the Third Pyramid, and the ground falls from
it on the eastern and southern sides. In consequence
of some remarks, that Mr. Perring and Mr. Mash had
made during their survey, I examined very particularly
a square pit at the northern front of this building. It
appeared to have been made in search of an entrance,
and was reveted on the western side, and on that next
the pyramid, to keep up the surrounding rubbish, that

16 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

extended along the front of the building, and contained
enormous masses of calcareous stone and of granite, and
other fragments chiefly produced by two large chasms,
which had been made one above the other in the face of
the pyramid, and were said by M. Denon to have been the
works of the Mamelucs. The eastern side of the upper
chasm is exactly in the centre of the northern front, and
the gallery, which I carried to the middle of the building,
proceeded from the end of it. At first, the bottom of the
pit appeared to be rock, but upon closer examination it was
found to consist of large stones, the upper tier of which had
been removed. It was, in fact, a continuation of the pave-
ment subsequently discovered to the eastward, which was
formed of two ranges of enormous blocks of such magni-
tude and weight, that it was difficult to imagine how they
could have been conveyed to their present position. As the
joints were open, they had probably been covered with a
coating of finer work. Several red lines and triangles,
like those found in the chambers of the Great Pyramid,
had been inscribed upon them. The pavement did not
extend to the westward, as the rock was considerably
higher in that direction; but it was necessary in front of the
north-eastern angle, to make good the declivity of the
ground, and was probably connected with the southern
dyke. It suggested to some people an idea that a larger
pyramid had been originally intended ; but I was not
myself of that opinion, because the substruction extended
to a considerable distance in the centre, and also because
the rock to the westward had not been cut down or pre-
pared, but was on a higher level, and abounded with holes
filled up with sand and rubbish. Gunpowder appeared to
have been made use of in the removal of the stones at the
bottom of the pit, and a hole had been drilled in one of them

OPERATIOXS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 17

under the side of it. It was difficult, therefore, to imagine
why a wall had been built precisely over the part which
required to be searched. It had the appearance of con-
siderable antiquity, but it had evidently been built against
the mound of sand and stone. Like the works in the
Fourth, the shaft in the interior of this pyramid had
not been attended with any success ; it was concluded,
therefore, that the Chambers were excavations in the
rock, and that the entrance was concealed by the pave-
ment without the pyramid ; for it was naturally supposed
that the lower part of the building had been carefully
examined before the chasms had been begun by the
Mamelucs. I therefore determined, not only to take up
the pavement at the bottom of the pit, but also to ascer-
tain whether it was continued on each side of it, and
towards the pyramid; — operations that were attended
with great labour and difficulty, on account of the vast
accumulations of sand, and of the number of blocks that
were to be removed — several of them of granite, and
four or five tons in weight.

Some more broken bottles, similar to those already
described, a large copper nail, pieces of coarse pottery,
a few idols, and one or two beads, were found in the
south-eastern corner of the foss in Campbell's Tomb.

On my return to Cairo with Mr. Mash, I received a
letter from Colonel Campbell by Baron Gunzerode and
Captain Gibser, two German officers, with whom I had
the pleasure of becoming acquainted.

June 11th. — A number of articles were sent to the
consulate for Colonel Campbell.

VOL. II. c

18 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

June 12 th.
Reis, 10. Men, 251. Children, 201.

Great Pyramid. — Excavation in northern front.

Excavation westward in northern front.

Roof in Queen's Chamber.

Clearing the Chambers and Passages.

Second Pyramid. — Roof in Belzoni's Chamber.

Third Pyramid. — Interior.

Excavation between Third and Fifth Pyramids.

Campbell's Tomb.

Fourth Pyramid. — Interior.

I did not go to Gizeh ; but Mr. Ptaven set out at day-
break, according to his usual custom.

Jtme 13th.

Reis, 10. Men, 191. Children, 171.

The same works were repeated.

I remained at Cairo on account of a festa, at which the
Dervishes were to perform some extraordinary ceremonies ;
but as the customs and rites of the Mahommedan religion
have been fully detailed by Mr. Lane, I shall refer the
reader to his interesting book, and merely describe what
happened to fall under my own observation.

I went in the evening with Mr. Piozan, the two
German officers, Mr. Brettel, Mr. Perring, Mr. Andrews,
and Mr. Mash, to the house of the Sheik of the Der-
vishes, on the Esbequier.^ He was a little old man, and

^ The Esbequier is a large space in the town surrounded with houses.
The middle of it was formerly converted by the inundation of the Nile
into a lake, upon which fireworks used annually to be exhibited, and
festivities to take place, when the Khalidge was cut. The water became
stagnant and offensive as the river gradually fell, and it was considered
advisable to fill up the ground, and to plant it. It is at present adorned

OPERATIOXS CARRIED OX AT GIZEII. 19

wore a light-blue robe ; and we found him in company
with a number of other persons seated upon a handsome
divan, in a spacious apartment, in the lower end of which
there was, as usual, a marble fountain. He received us
with great civility, and being informed of the motive of
our visit he directed his brother-in-law, and a personage
lately arrived from Morocco, to conduct us into an adjoin-
ing apartment, which afforded a prospect of the prepara-
tions for the festa. After the usual refreshments, of
coffee, pipes, and sweetmeats, as the ceremonies had
commenced, we went out to see them. I did not observe
any persons in Frank dresses, excepting those of our
party ; but, although a vast concourse of people had
assembled, we wandered about in every direction without
receiving the slightest molestation or insult. Triumphal
arches ornamented with coloured lamps, and with in-
scriptions taken most probably from the Koran, had been
erected near a high wall on the Esbequier, and also a
variety of tents and booths, where refreshments were
sold consisting of hot dishes prepared with oil, coffee,
sherbet, strong waters, pipes, &c. ; but the principal per-
formances took place in a number of pavilions formed
with carpets suspended upon lines, and capable of con-
taining two or three hundred people ; they were illumi-

with a few old sycamores, which have a venerable and picturesque ap-
pearance. A broad road, separated by a wide ditch from the ground
in the centre, is left in front of the houses, excepting on the southern
side, where they have the advantage of large gardens, which would be
extremely delightful if they were irrigated, and kept in good order ; but
the glowing ideas of oriental gardens exist only in the imagination,
although those at Shoubrah and at Rhoda are in some degree excep-
tions.

Kleber was assassinated in a garden belonging to an house in the
Esbequier.

20 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

nated with lamps and paper lanterns, and crowded with
spectators, who thronged round a boarded floor, which
had been prepared for the dervishes, or priests, who
directed the ceremonies, and for the performers, who
stood in circles, rocking their bodies backwards and
forwards, and at times moving round performed the
dance described by Mr. Lane. Their movements were
accompanied by Turkish music, and loud recitations in
unison with the priests, who regulated their motions in a
very striking and effective manner. The noise and uproar
may be imagined ; as the people became more excited,
their voices were hoarse and discordant, till several of
them, entirely exhausted from fatigue, heat, and enthu-
siasm, fell down, apparently in fits. When a vacancy
occurred it was immediately filled up, and the perform-
ances continued without intermission. All ranks and
conditions of the common people were engaged in them,
and several of them appeared to be as enthusiastic as the
dervishes themselves.^

We returned home late at night, and found the streets

^ This remarkable exhibition reminded me of a scene, which I had
witnessed some years before on the night of Christmas eve in the church
of Ara Coeli at Rome, which, on account of its reputed sanctity, was
crowded with peasantry in the picturesque costume of the neighbouring
mountains. As the night wore away, most of the lamps in the body
of the church burnt out, and the few that remained, combined with the
gleams of the morning, not only gave a singular and mysterious appear-
ance to the grotesque architecture of the building, and to the fantastic
ornaments, with which it had been for the occasion decorated, but lighted
up with an extraordinary effect the sparkling eyes and wild countenances
of the worshippers, who, excited like these poor Arabs by superstitious
enthusiasm, repeated with hoarse and exhausted voices continued re-
sponses to the service of the monks, which, waxing louder and louder,
pealed forth from the blaze of light that filled the choir.

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII. 21

illuminated, and full of people, and the shops open for the
sale of refreshments, but not a woman was to be seen
even at the wmdows. The principal mosques were also
lighted up ; and various processions with flambeaux, iron
cases filled with lighted wood, banners, and Turkish
music, paraded during the whole night from mosque to
mosque, reciting portions of the Koran, and paying com-
plimentory visits to the chief officers of the different
religious establishments, who sat for that purpose without
the buildings, attended by lights and music. A large
mosque adjoined Mr. Hill's hotel, and the officers be-
longing to it were stationed immediately beneath the
windows of my room'^ to receive the successive deputa-
tions ; which advanced in a noisy and tumultuous manner,
till they were within twenty or thirty paces of those
whom they intended to visit, when they halted, and four
or five individuals advanced and delivered a sort of ad-
dress, which ended in a salutation. They then returned
to their party, the bawling and clamour were resumed,
and the cavalcade moved off amidst the shouts and ex-
clamations of those whom it had come to compHment ;
and in this manner one procession after another arrived
during the whole night, so that the town was not quiet
till three o'clock in the morning.

'' These officers were old men of the most wretched description, and
lived in an underground apartment below the mosque. They did not
appear to have much employment, but were seated during the greater
part of the day upon mats in a shady corner of the street, and were
employed in selling small quantities of tobacco to the passengers. The
degraded condition of the inhabitants of these countries is therefore
easily accounted for ; and the same observations will unhappily apply to
the state of the common people of Ireland, and of most Roman Catholic
countries.

22 OPERATIONS CARRIED OX AT GIZEH.

k

June 14^/i.

Reis, 10. Men, 137. Children, 183.

Great Pyramid. — Excavation in northern front.

Excavation west in northern front.

Roof in Queen's Chamber.

Clearing the chambers and passages.

Second Pyramid. — Roof in Belzoni's Chamber.

Third Pyramid. — Interior.

Excavation between the Third and Fifth Pyramids.

Fourth Pyramid. — Interior.

We set out again this morning about eleven o'clock
for the Sheik's house ; and as we were accidentally too
late for the regular dinner, we were served in an adjoin-
ing room. Upon returning to the large apartment, we
found many of the principal persons in Cairo assembled,
and, amongst others, IVIuchtar Bey, the Minister of In-
struction, and at that time a great favourite with the
Pacha. He spoke French, and addressed himself with
much fluency to all our party. Like the rest of the
people of rank, he wore a white Nizam dress, and was
decorated with a large diamond order ; the decorations of
some of the other people had the addition of an anchor,
which shewed that they belonged to the navy.

After remaining here for some time, we went to a
kiosk in the gardens belonging to the house to witness
the ceremonies. A Sheik of the dervishes, dressed in
a large turban, and in a yellow robe, attended by a
numerous suite, and a grand display of horses' tails,
banners, and music, and followed by a vast multitude of
people, arrived from a mosque in a distant part of the
city by a raised road, that had lately been constructed
across the Esbequier. Upon his approach towards the

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII. 23

house of his superior a number of men laid themselves
down with their faces upon the ground close to each
other across the road, and the Sheik and all his attend-
ants passed over them. As the dust and the mob pre-
vented our having a distinct view of this spectacle, we
went through a stable into the Esbequier to see it re-
peated, when thirty or forty men laid down before us,
and were arranged close to each other by some attend-
ants; when the Sheik advanced in the same manner as
before, and rode over the whole of them. One or two of
them appeared to be uneasy and apprehensive as the
Sheik approached ; and several either pretended, or had
in reality received slight injuries. After the Sheik had
dismounted I examined his horse ; he was about fifteen
hands two inches, of good substance, and shod in the
common Turkish manner. There was not therefore any
deception, neither is the same horse always used. This
ceremony is repeated twice every year, and is minutely
described by Mr. Lane. We then returned to the house,
accompanied by the Sheik who had dismounted, and re-
sumed our seats on the divan. The lower end of the
apartment was filled by a number of people, many of
whom advanced, and kissed the Sheik's hands in the most
reverential manner. After some time a man naked down
to his waist came forward, and requested Muchtar Bey's
sabre, w'hich he presented to the Sheik, who took it in
his hand, and muttering a prayer passed his mouth over
it from hilt to point, and then returned it. The man
kissed the back and front of the Sheik's hands, and,
having said a prayer, held the sword with both hands by
the hilt and by the point, and pretended to strike vio-
lently with the edge across his naked stomach. He after-
wards knelt down, and put the edge of the centre of the

24 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

blade into his mouth still holding the ends with his
hands, and pretended to support one of the priest's attend-
ants, who stood upon it. He then exhibited other feats
of a similar description ; but the whole of these perform-
ances were evidently nothing more than mere tricks of
the most awkward jugglery. The next exhibition was
made by a party of dervishes, who came out from the
crowd, and performed some of the ceremonies, which we
had witnessed the preceding evening. Three or four of
them beat time with straps upon small brazen drums,
and moved their bodies from side to side, their gesticu-
lations and movements becoming by degrees inconceiv-
ably violent, and their voices louder, and scarcely articu-
late. Some of them actually went into fits ; others
foamed at the mouth ; and all of them were completely
exhausted, which might well be the case, as they had
been engaged in these exercises during the whole of the
preceding night. We were then informed that live ser-
pents would be devoured, and the Sheik pretended to
send out to procure them, but received an answer that
none could be found ; in fact, this disgusting ceremony
had been forbidden by the Pacha ; and were similar
prohibitions extended in many other instances, it would
greatly tend to amehorate and civilise the people. We
then took our leave, much pleased with the civility and
attention which had been shewn us ; and I went imme-
diately to the Pyramids.

June 15th,

Reis, 10. Men, 202. Children, 194.

Great Pyramid.— Excavation in northern front.

Excavation eastward in northern front.

Roof in Queen's Chamber.

Clearing the chambers and passages.

llZ,

\\'\

ivnnwaSBowMMfi^^-^''" '

>'3,,,r'»^'«91'

;H^vghel,il>.«loliepac-

■¥A\.§3Sg found- in (SO^LjOMaiL (Si^.Wyr'Df>ISyC4)L\5 T@BjlI)8 „

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII. 25

Second Pyramid. — Roof in Belzoni's Chamber.
Third Pyramid. — Interior.

Blasting the stones in the pit.

Clearing the pavement.

Excavation between the Third and Fifth Pyramids.
Campbell's Tomb.

During my absence the interior of the Great Pyramid
had been nearly cleared out. The eastern excavation at
the northern front had been completed to the base, where
the remains of a pavement were discovered. A consider-
able progress had been made in the Third Pyramid, and
several pieces of granite had been found in the bottom of
the shaft ; but they appeared to be only fiUings in. The
removal of the stones in the pit, and of the rubbish from
the pavement at the northern front, had been begun. It
is to be remarked that although many fragments, both
of granite and of calcareous casing, are scattered about
the base of this monument, key-stones of granite are
only to be found in the lower part, which corroborates
the account of Herodotus, that the revetment of that
material did not extend to the summit. Considerable
progress had been made at Campbell's Tomb, where two
large jars of red earthenware had been taken out of the
south-eastern angle of the foss ; the height of the one
was one foot eight and a half inches ; of the other, one
foot six inches. They were without ornament or inscrip-
tion of any kind, and were afterwards drawn by Mr.
Andrews.

June 16th.
Reis, 10. Men, 206. Children, 189.

Great Pyramid. — Excavation in northern front.

Excavation westward in northern front.

Roof in Queen's Chamber.

Clearing the chambers and passages.

26

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

Second Pyramid. — Roof in Belzoni's Chamber.
Third Pyramid. — Interior.

Blasting stones in the pit.

Clearing the pavement.

Excavation between Third and Fifth Pyramids.
Campbell's Tomb.

Fourth Pyramid. — Interior.

Nothing particular occurred.

June 17 th.
Reis, 11. Men, 215. Children, 214.

Great Pyramid. — Excavation in northern front.

Excavation westward in northern front.

Excavation for base at the north-eastern angle.

Roof in Queen's Chamber.

Clearing chambers and passages.

Second Pyramid. — Roof in Belzoni's Chamber.
Third Pyramid. — Interior.

Blasting stones in the pit.

Clearing the pavement.

Excavation between Third and Fifth Pyramids.
Campbell's Tomb.

Fourth Pyramid. — Interior.

I copied the cartouches in the tomb of Trades, which

r

Ua^K

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 27

have been alluded to on the 2d instant. The excavation
westward in the northern front of the Great Pyramid was
finished, and a small piece of iron was found in it com-
pletely decayed ; but, as it was taken out of the rubbish,
its antiquity could not be ascertained. A party was em-
ployed in clearing away the sand near the north-eastern
angle at the base of the Great Pyramid, to assist the
survey.

I returned with Mr. Ptaven in the evening to Cairo.
The night was exceedingly clear, and the general appear-
ance of the city extremely picturesque.

I gave the German officers an order for their reception
at our tents on the following morning.

June 18th. — I endeavoured to obtain some intelligence
from the old Arab, who had told Jack of the communica-
tion between the Third and Fifth Pyramids, as I imagined
that he must have acquired some information when he
was employed by ]\Ir. Jemel ; but I found that he knew
nothing. He offered, indeed, to shew me ninety cham-
bers full of gold near the Sphinx ; but I had already re-
ceived similar proposals from the high-priest, or head of
the Mahommedan religion, whom I accidentally met in
Cairo as I was returning from the Pyramids some weeks
before ; and who also mentioned that he possessed some
curious Arabic books respecting the Pyramids, which may
possibly be worth the attention of Arabic scholars.

June 19th.

Reis, 11. Men, 220. Children, 188.

Great Pyramid. — Excavation in northern front.

Excavation for base at north-eastern angle.

Roof in Queen's Chamber.

28 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

Great Pyramid. — Clearing chambers and passages.
Second Pyramid. — Roof in Belzoni's Chamber.
Third Pyramid. — Interior.

Blasting stones in the pit.

Clearing the pavement.

Excavation for pavement westwards of centre.

Excavation between Third and Fifth Pyramids.

Campbell's Tomb.

Fourth Pyramid. — Interior.

In addition to the works carried on at the northern
front of the Third Pyramid, I began an excavation in
search of a pavement to the westv^^ard of the pit, and
determined to remove the granite blocks and other stones
which had accumulated near the centre, although, as I
have already observed, it was to be presumed that the
front of the pyramid had been diligently searched before
the great chasm had been attempted with so much labour
and expense.

I wrote to Mr. Hamilton, and enclosed drawings of
the characters in Campbell's Chamber ; I also sent speci-
mens of them, together with the cartouche of Psamme-
ticus the Second'* to the Colonel himself; and was occu-
pied at Cairo during the rest of the day. Some coarse
red jugs marked with black rings were found in Camp-
bell's Tomb, but without any characters or inscription.

° It is to be observed, that as the cartouche in Campbell's Tomb is
unattended with any regal title, it is difficult, excepting by implication,
to ascertain whether it belongs to Psammeticus the Second, of which
monarch it is the prenomen, or to Hofphre, of whom it is the name.
The former lived, according to Mr. Wilkinson and M. Rosellini, about
603 B.C., and the latter 588. This cartouche, however, is not assigned
by Mr. Wilkinson to Hofphre.

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 29

These were the only painted specimens of pottery that
were discovered.

Ju?ie 20th.
Reis, 11. Men, 21]. Children, 208.

Great Pyramid. — Excavation in northern front.

Roof in Queen's Chamber.

Clearing the chambers and passages.

Second Pyramid. — Roof in Belzoni's Chamber.

Excavation for pavement at north-western angle.

Third Pyramid. — Interior.

Blasting stones in the pit.

Clearing pavement.

Excavation of pavement westward of centre.

Excavation between Third and Fifth Pyramids.

Campbell's Tomb.

Fourth Pyramid. — Interior.

I returned with Mr. Perring and Mr. Mash to Gizeh.

The party in the interior of the Great Pyramid had
finished their labours. Some people were sent to remove
the sand, which had fallen in upon the former excavation
at the north-western corner of the Second.

June 21 St.

Reis, 11. Men, 210. Children, 197.

Great Pyramid. — Excavation in northern front.

Roof in Queen's Chamber.

Second Pyramid. — Roof in Belzoni's Chamber.

Excavation for pavement at north-western angle.

Third Pyramid. — Interior.

Blasting stones in the pit.

Clearing the pavement.

Excavation of pavement westward of centre.

Excavation between Third and Fifth Pyramids.

Campbell's Tomb.

Fourth Pyramid. — Interior.

so OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII.

Several more fragments of coarse
earthenware were found in Campbell's
Tomb. The shaft in the interior of the
Third Pyramid was again examined, and
a quantity of unburnt brick and clay
were found in the joints near the founda-
tion, and also quarry-marks, which had L.JS
been drawn in red upon the blocks.

In the evening I was surprised by the
arrival of a corps of Lancers, which caused
great alarm to the Arabs, who were
loitering about the plain after being paid, 9

and who disappeared in an instant. The troops were at
first supposed to be on their march to the Faioum ; but
as they had no baggage, that did not appear to be pro-
bable. It was then concluded, from their movements,
that they were posted to intercept some Bedouins, but
the country was known to be perfectly quiet. At last it
appeared that they were the cadets from the establish-
ment at Gizeh, and had arrived for a field-day (or rather
a field-night), on account of the heat of the weather.
They were tolerably well on horseback, much cleaner
than the troops in general, and well mounted. They
behaved very regularly, and only requested water from
the well, for which purpose a man was stationed there
during the night. They probably found the ground be-
tween the Sphinx and the Pyramids too much broken up
by shafts and hollows to be safely occupied during the
night, as the videts, who had been placed there, were in

9 The symbol ideophonetic of the consonant n, and the word no/re,
or good. — Mr. Birch.

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZETI. 31

a short time withdrawn ; and at day-break, on the follow-
ing morning, they were posted across the plain in line
facing the north, with their left flank to the palm-trees,
and with detached parties and a chain of videts to their
front and rear. They soon afterwards moved off.

June 22rif.

Reis, 10. Men, 193. Children, 155.

Great Pyramid. — Excavation in northern front,

Roof in Queen's Chamber.

Second Pyramid. — Roof in Belzoni's Chamber.

Excavation for Pavement at south-western angle.

Third Pyramid. — Interior.

Blasting stones in the Pit.

Clearing the Pavement.

Excavation of Pavement westward of centre.

Excavation between Third and Fifth Pyramids.

Campbell's Tomb.

Fourth Pyramid. — Interior,

The Sheik of Cafr el Batram applied for stones, under
the pretence of constructing a tomb for his brother. He
was of course informed that they belonged to the Pacha,
and referred to the Madyr. This man had behaved
extremely ill ; and I have reason to believe that the appli-
cation w^as made in the hope that I should make an
improper use of the firmaun by acceding to his request.

The sand was sufficiently cleared at the north-western
angle of the Second Pyramid : a similar excavation was
begun at the south-western. In both places the rock was
found to have been levelled and prepared for a pavement,
and for a certain distance from the Pyramid it inclined
towards it. It had likewise been worked across to the
opposite cliffs, in which apartments had been excavated ;

32 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

and in one of them, containing a shaft, the ceiling had
been cut to resemble the trunks of palm trees. This
imitation of wooden buildings is very remarkable, parti-
cularly in excavations so antient and so peculiarly situated.
At Amphipolis, in Asia Minor, and in other places on that
coast, the tombs are hewn in exact imitation of wood,
but they are of small dimensions, and of inferior work-
manship, and also of a much more recent date.

Having been furnished some weeks before with a tes-
keree for the removal of a quantity of baggage from Cairo
to the Pyramids, I had since repeatedly inquired for it, but
it was not produced till this morning, and was then given
up with great reluctance by the Reis, to whom it had been
entrusted. It had been set in a glass case with a cord
attached to it to be worn over the shoulder, and had no
doubt been let out for hire, and used for all purposes. The
abuse of teskerees, and of firmauns granted to travellers,
should be prevented, as it gives just cause of complaint
to the government, and may eventually lead to bad conse-
quences. European flags are likewise often improperly
sold to the Arabs and Copts, as I have already remarked.

June 23d.
Reis, 11. Men, 198. Children, 182.

Great Pyramid. — Excavation in northern front.

Roof in Queen's Chamber.

Second Pyramid. — Roof in Belzoni's Chamber.

Excavation for Pavement at south-western angle.

Third Pyramid. — Interior.

Blasting Stones in Pit.

Clearing the Pavement.

Excavation between Third and Fifth Pyramids.
Campbell's Tomb.

Fourth Pyramid. — Interior.

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII. S3

As the shaft had got down to the foundation in
the Third Pyramid, it was determined to commence
in it from the bottom a series of horizontal galleries
at stated intervals in every direction : a number of
people were also employed in removing the blocks, and
clearing the pavement at the northern front, and in taking
down the wall round the pit. If these operations proved
unsuccessful, I was resolved to examine every part of the
pavement, and even to take down the face of the build-
ing ; in short, to leave no expedient untried, with what-
ever expense of money or time it might be attended, to
find the mysterious entrance. Little did I then imagine
that this was to be effected simply by removing the loose
stones that encumbered its front.^ I considered that this
Pyramid, like the others, must at all events have a
regular entrance ; and. that, as the shaft had not disclosed
a sepulchral apartment, the tomb was most probably in
the rock, and that the entrance was concealed by the
pavement, particularly as the chamber in the Second Py-
ramid is an excavation, and as the Tomb of Cheops is
described by Herodotus to have been a subterraneous
apartment.

Mr. Perring and I\Ir. JNlash continued their survey.

June 24ith.
Reis, 11. Men, 201. Children, 180.

Great Pyramid. — Excavation in northern front.

Roof in Queen's Chamber.

Second Pyramid. — Belzoni's Chamber.

Excavation for Pavement in south-western angle.

1 M. Belzoni, I afterwards found, had formed a correct opinion as
to the entrance.

VOL. II. D

34 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

Third Pyramid. — Interior.

Clearing the Pavement.

Excavation between Third and Fifth Pyramids.
Campbell's Tomb.

Fourth Pyramid. — Interior.

To-day I was principally occupied at the Third Pyra-'
mid, and found that the joints in the pavement had been
forced in different places. The masses of calcareous
stone, that had accumulated upon it, were first carefully
examined in search of sculpture and hieroglyphics, and
then blasted. The removal of the blocks of granite was
exceedingly difficult and laborious, but although they may
have withstood the unassisted efforts of Arab labourers,
they ought not to have proved impediments to Franks.

I returned to Cairo with Mr. Perring, Mr. Mash, and
Mr. Hill; Mr. Raven followed us. We found that Mr.
Piozan was out of office, that Dr. Walne was appointed
vice-consul, and ]VIr. Maltass, chancellario.

June ^5t]i. — Achmet, the Janissary, was sent to Cairo
on account of ophthalmia, and my best workman. Jack,
was laid up with the same complaint, and with fever — a
circumstance not to be wondered at, considering the dust
and heat to which he had been constantly exposed by
night as well as by day in the bottom of the shaft of the
Third Pyramid. He had been ill for some time, but could
not be prevailed upon to give up his work.

June 2Qth,

Reis, 11. Men, 191. Children, 159.

Great Pyramid. — Excavation in northern front.

Roof in Queen's Chamber.

Second Pyramid. — Roof in Belzoni's Chamber.

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII. 35

Third Pyramid. T^ Interior.

Excavation between Third and Fifth Pyramids.

Campbell's Tomb.

Fourth Pyramid. — Interior.

I remained at Cairo.

June 21th.

Reis, 10. Men, 184. Children, 161.

The same works were repeated.

The air was remarkably hot, and water in my room
at Cairo was 96°. I returned with Mr. Hill to the
Pyramids.

June 2%tJi,

Reis, 11. Men, 187. Children, 182.

The same works were repeated.

In order to finish Campbell's Tomb, the people were
chiefly employed at that place. Mr. Hill and Mr. Raven
spent the greatest part of the morning in measuring, and
examining the bottom of the shaft in the Third Pyramid,
where a large stone, at first supposed to be granite, had
been discovered.

In going round the works, I visited the excavation,
which had been so long carried on in search of a passage
between the Third and Fifth Pyramids. A considerable
space had been cleared down to the rock, and the men
were continuing their operations to the westward without
a chance of success. As they informed me that they did
so by Mr. Raven's directions, I allowed them to go on for
the present, intending to order Mr. Raven to give up the
work. Dare (an Arab, who attended me as a sort of in-
terpreter, from being able to speak Italian) observed, that

S6 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

if the excavation was continued four or five yards
southwards to the base of the Fifth Pyramid, an entrance
would probably be found, which might be a guide for that
of the Fourth, upon which we had been so long and un-
successfully employed. I approved of the idea, and gave
directions to that effect ; and to shew how accidentally
these boasted discoveries are often made, the remark of
my poor Arab led to the discovery of the entrances of the
six smaller pyramids f they were entirely concealed, and
no information existed at that time respecting them, but
they were subsequently opened without difficulty.

Some glass bottles, small pieces of leaf gold, bones,
small illegible coins, apparently bronze, coarse earthen-
ware, and one or two fragments of brass, or of bronze,
were found in the foss at Campbell's Tomb.

The air was extremely sultry and hot, but, as usual,
about four o'clock, there were strong gusts of wind from
the north and north-west. In the evening, the cavalry
came again to exercise.

June 29th.

Reis, 11. Men, 182. Children, 179.

The same works were repeated.

2 The French could not find out the entrances of these Pyramids,
and therefore proceeded to take one of them down, to ascertain its in-
terior construction, supposing that it had never been opened. Colonel
Coutelle describes the difficulties attending the operation, which was
interrupted by the evacuation of Gizeli. It appears, however, by Mr.
Salt's papers, that M. Caviglia succeeded in penetrating into one of the
Pyramids near the Third, and that he found at the end of a passage two
empty chambers, which communicated with each other. As there are
sarcophagi in the Fourth and Fifth, and as the Sixth has never been
completed, this description does not apply to either of the three.

,, ..,s,.t£«fc-»i,..- ^

fLW^^'

Tig.l

k^5

f.

Tx< Z .

J ArajMLaJj "mJlft

T-nlilisKe^ liytTTi aser, "R,t?'^«Ji-f St

D-CT LEx^'kieLiii^'-aj ui£ ^^»t^£«

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII. 37

Mr. Mash and Mr. Andrews came. 1 examined with
Mr. Raven and Mr. Hill the chasm on the northern front
of the Great Pyramid. It had been excavated for the
space of twenty feet to the westward, and fifty-four feet to
the eastward of the centre to the depth of forty-seven
feet, when it became so narrow, that nothing further
could be done without blasting. As it was found to
be a natural fissure, and did not contain a passage, the
work w^as given up. A piece of stone with some plaster
adhering to it was dug up near the Fifth Pyramid, which
led me to believe that the entrance was not very distant,
and also that it had been opened. Some more pottery was
found in Campbell's Tomb, which was at last effectually
cleared out. The excavation in the Queen's Chamber
was also satisfactorily concluded : the stones of the roof
had been carried to a great distance into the masonry, in
order to secure the walls of the chamber from any super-
incumbent weight, and the ends of them were cut so as to
give them a perpendicular bearing.

June SOth,

Reis, 11. Men, 177. Children, 158.

Second Pyramid. — Roof in Belzoni's Chamber.
Third Pyramid. — Interior.

Clearing the Pavement.

Excavation between Third and Fifth Pyramids.
Fourth Pyramid. — Interior.

In the afternoon, whilst I was examining the ruins
near the Second Pyramid, I was informed by an Arab
Sheik, that the entrance into one of the others had been
found. I immediately hastened to the Third, but upon
arriving I found that it was the entrance of the Fifth, which

S8 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

was thus discovered in two days.^ The passage was
in the masonry and in the centre of the northern front.
It had been completely built up with large blocks of stone,
laid in cement, and part of them had been cut through so
as to allow of a narrow entrance on the western side,
which, when discovered, was full of sand ; we there-
fore blocked up the mouth with loose stones, marked
with a pencil, and left Goodman in charge of it for the
night. A piece of buff earthenware with a green glaize
similar to that found in the northern front of the Great
Pyramid, and a small copper coin, were dug out of the
rubbish near this entrance.

The great stone, supposed to be granite, in the
bottom of the shaft in the Third Pyramid, was blasted ;
the shaft was four feet northward, and thirteen feet east-
ward of the centre, so that had there been any chamber
or passage near that place, it must have been discovered.
]Mr. Mash copied the hieroglyphics on the great stone
that covered the sarcophagus in Campbell's Tomb.* He
then, in company with Mr. Andrews, examined the joint
at the mouth of the southern Air-channel, whence the iron
was taken by Mr. Hill.

July \st.
Reis, 11. Men, 220. Children, 183.

Second Pyramid. — Belzoni's Chamber.

3 The centre of this pyramid is rather to the east of that of the Third.
It is built of small stones in irregular courses, none of which are more
than two and a half feet in height. Most of the material had been quar-
ried on the spot ; but a few blocks from the Mokattam mark the former
extent of the building, and shew that it had been at one time cased over
with hard stones.

■* See Appendix.

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 39

Third Pyramid. — Interior.

Clearing the Pavement.

Fourth Pyramid. — Entrance.
Fifth Pyramid. — Entrance.

A small brass or bronze head of an arrow, apparently-
votive, was found upon the pavement, near the centre of
the northern front of the Third Pyramid. The excavation
in the Fourth Pyramid was giv^n up, and the people were
employed in removing the sand and stones on the exterior
of the northern front in search of an entrance, which was
supposed to be similar to that of the Fifth. Some of the
sand having been taken out of the passage in the latter
Pyramid, we tried, but without success, to enter it. In
the afternoon, we repeated the attempt. I was followed
by Mr. Hill, Mr. Andrews, Mr. Mash, Jack, and Goodman.
The passage inclined at about an angle of 27°; and the
sand yet remained within two feet of the top ; where the
part, that had been forced, was so extremely narrow,
that we were obliged to enter sideways. The stones ap-
peared to have been cut away by a chisel, which, consider-
ing their hardness and the length of the passage, must have
been a tedious operation. After shding down about
thirty feet, the space between the stones and the v/all would
not admit of our proceeding. It was of course intensely
hot, and we were obliged to be drawn up by a rope. In the
evening, when more of the sand had been taken out, we suc-
ceeded better, and found at the bottom of the inclined
passage a portcullis of granite, a good deal corroded by
moisture, and by the effects of the sand. It must have
been conveyed down the entrance obliquely. A hole had
been made in it towards the top, and two others at the
corners of the ceiling, apparently for the purpose of hfting

40 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII.

it. When the passage had been enth'ely cleared, this
portcullis was lifted up so as to allow of an entrance under
it ; but when first discovered, we entered by an aperture,
which had been made through the rock above it, into a
short horizontal passage, which opened into the northern
side of the sepulchral chamber. The apartment was
quadrangular, and extended in length from east to west.
It was about three parts full of stones and sand,^ which
were heaped up nearly to the ceiling at the eastern end,
as the rubbish had been partially removed from the
western, where a granite sarcophagus was embedded in
the pavement, in the same manner as that in the Second
Pyramid, to which it was in every respect similar, ex-
cepting that it was rather smaller, and that the pinholes
for securing the lid were deeper. The lid had been forced
off with great violence, and the pavement around it had
been taken up. Excepting the immediate entrance, the
whole of the passages and chamber were excavations in the
rock. Several narrow fissures were visible in the chamber,
but the sides had been plastered, and brown horizontal
lines, one foot ten inches from the floor, had the appear-
ance of a painted border. No vestiges of sculpture or of
hieroglyphics were discovered on any part of the tomb ;

^ The forms and dimensions of the sarcophagi found in the Pyramids
at Gizeh will scarcely admit of the wooden cases or coffins adorned with
hieroglyphics, which are generally found in Egyptian tombs ; indeed, by
the fragment found in the Third Pyramid, tliat wooden case seems to have
been of a smaller size and of a different construction. The dimensions
of the sarcophagi in the Fourth and Fifth Pyramids corroborate the
antient accounts, that they were the tombs of the kings' wives.*

* For dimensions see Appendix.

-^

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

41

but upon the southern wall opposite to the entrance,
some Arabic characters were scrawled upon a fragment of

plaster with something like charcoal, which proved to be
the 112th chapter of the Koran/ and which, together with
the other inscriptions, seemed to indicate that all these
Pyramids had been entered about the same time by the
Cahphs. We found in the sarcophagus some pieces of
burnt reed and of charcoal, some of the buff earthenware
with a green glaize, and a few broken pieces of red pot-
tery. The interior of it appeared to me to have been

6 See " Sale's Koran," vol. ii. p. 517.

/

42 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

stained and blackened by fire, but Mr. Perring was not
of that opinion. It is to be observed, that the fire might
have been made by travellers for the purpose of ventilation.
This chamber was surveyed and measured by Mr. Mash,
and Mr. Andrews, and subsequently examined by Mr.
Perring.

After inspecting the other works, and paying off the
people, I went in the evening to Cairo with Mr. Mash,
Mr. Andrews, and Mr. Hill.

Juli/ 2d. — As several of the horses belonging to the
Shereef of Mecca, which I saw at the Pyramids, were
clever, and as I naturally concluded that he would have
some of the highest breed, I sent a message by Ibrahim,
my Coptic servant, who occasionally acted as dragoman,
with a request to see them. The Shereef returned a very
civil invitation, and I accordingly paid him a visit at a
handsome palace belonging to Hassan Bey, which had
been appointed by the Pacha for his residence. It was
pleasantly situated in a garden, in which was the Hareem ;
and during the inundation, it had the advantage of an
extensive lake or pond.

The Shereef was about fifty years of age, had a dark
complexion, and a pleasing countenance. He wore a yel-
low robe, and, like the rest of the people from the Hedjas,
a very flat turban. Two of his sons were seated with him
on a divan ; they were good-looking young men, had very
large eyes, and greatly resembled the pictures of East
Indian princes in Asiatic designs. They were dressed in
the Turkish fashion, but with white embroidered skull-
caps, and flat turbans, which were extremely becoming;
and they had upon the whole a mild and dignified appear-

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 43

ance. The Cadi of Mecca was also present ; he had the
reputation of being learned, and well-informed, was an
intelligent-looking person, and was likewise dressed in
yellow. Two other people, who seemed to be dragomen,
spoke Italian ; and the lower end of the room was filled
with attendants.

These Arabs were nearly as black as negroes, and had
a more vigorous and independent air than those either of
Egypt, or of Syria : one of them I particularly remarked ;
he wore a red robe, a crooked dagger, in a broad silver
scabbard, was stuck in his girdle, and a wahabee hand-
kerchief was thrown over his head ; his light frame was
replete with vigour ; and his thin and handsome features
were marked with fierce expression ; nothing escaped the
vigilance of his sparkling eyes, which glanced from object
to object with an eager ferocity peculiar to these wild
people.

The Shereef had got Major Felix's book on hierogly-
phics, talked much about the Pyramids, and said that he
had himself entered the great one. I offered to shew him
Mr. Perring's drawings, and the few things of interest
that had been found at Gizeh, and he appointed three
o'clock for that purpose. AVhen I took my leave, he
sent his sons and the Cadi to conduct me to the stables.
(See Appendix.) I do not think that they shewed me
all the horses, and certainly not any that I had seen be-
fore. Those at the Pyramids might indeed have been
furnished from the Pacha's stables, or have belonged to
some of the other chieftains from Mecca ; who, as well as
the Shereef, were detained as hostages in Cairo.

I returned at three o'clock with the drawings, &c.
The Shereef was more intelligent than any Arab I had

44 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

ever met with ; he examined the different articles with
much attention, and surprised me by observing that he
thought the glass bottles taken from Campbell's Tomb
had been tinged with iron. I shewed the Arabic writing
found in the Fifth Pyramid to the Cadi, who transcribed
those parts, that were legible, into modern Arabic charac-
ters, and said that it was a passage from the Koran, which
afterwards proved to be the case. I gave the Shereef a
copy of the cartouche of Suphis, and of some of the hiero-
glyphics found in the chambers of the Great Pyramid.
He seemed to take a great interest in the discoveries, and
promised to pay me a visit at Gizeh.

July Sd.
Reis, 11. Men, 169. Children, 139.

Second Pyramid. — Roof in Belzoni's Chamber.
Third Pyramid. — Interior.

Cleaning the pavement.

Fourth Pyramid. — Entrance.

Fifth Pyramid. — Clearing out chamber and passage.

I was detained at Cairo.

July 4:th.

Reis, 11. Men, 131. Children, 182.

The same works were repeated.

I returned to the Pyramids with Mr. Perring, Mr.
Mash, Mr. Andrews, and Mr. Hill.

The roof of Belzoni's Chamber was at length ex-
amined. The stones extended, like those in the Queen's
Chamber, a long way into the solid rock, on account,
probably, of the great weight which they had to sustain.
Mr. Raven had been actively employed before the Third

\

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 45

Pyramid, and had found upon the pavement a quantity of
unburnt bricks and of earth. Considerable progress had
been made in taking out the sand from the interior of the
Fifth ; but, when a sufficient number of people were em-
ployed in it, the air became so exceedingly foul owing
to the smallness of the forced entrance, that the candles
would not burn, and the heat became insupportable. For
these reasons, together with the improbability of making
any further discoveries, the chamber was not completely
cleared out. For some days, indeed, after the work had
been given up, the state of the air from the want of cir-
culation was such, that it immediately extinguished a
lighted candle, — a circumstance which the Arabs super-
stitiously ascribed to the bones, which remained in it.
In the course of the day the entrance into the Fourth
Pyramid was discovered in the rocky ground, about
thirteen feet without the base, and twelve feet westward
of the centre. It descended at an angle of twenty-seven,
had been originally filled up with masonry, which had been
removed, and, as well as the chambers, had been cut in
the rock. Nothing was found in the passage excepting
rubbish and sand ; but some coarse paterae, a piece of
stick, and a broken idol, were dug up near it. Besides
the excavations which we had lately made in the interior,
a chasm on a level with the base had been previously car-
ried to the depth of twenty-three feet into the masonry
at the centre of the northern front. This pyramid and
the Sixth (to the westward of it) are built of large squared
blocks put together in the manner of Cyclopian walling,
and are at present in steps or degrees : whether or not
their exteriors have ever been completed into pyramidal
forms, it is difficult to determine.

46 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

July 5th.
Reis, 6. Men, 160. Children, 85.

Third Pyramid. — Interior.

• Clearing the pavement.

Fourth Pyramid. — Clearing the chambers and passage.
Fifth Pyramid. — Clearing the chambers and passage.

The interior of the Fourth Pyramid was practicable,
and it was carefully examined.^ The passage conducted
to an anteroom, which was coated with white stucco ; it
contained a quantity of sand and of broken stones ; and
as the southern side had been forced in search of another
apartment, it appears that the first explorers were en-
tirely ignorant of its interior construction. Immediately
beneath the roof, a cavity about two feet deep ran along
the western side, and extended over the sepulchral cham-
ber, which was ceiled with large blocks of well-wrought
calcareous stone, laid horizontally from east to west, and
supported on ledges cut in the solid rock, and not on the
hnings of the chamber ; so that, except for the cavity, the
roof could not have been formed. This cavity had been

closed up with masonry, which was

t,0^ A entirely removed, and nothing was

/ \ / \ found in it, excepting a fragment of

grey stone, inscribed with two hiero-

^ glyphics. A short inclined passage

from the western side of the anteroom, near the north-
western angle, communicated with the sepulchral cham-
ber. It had been closed with a door of granite, which

^ The dimensions are given in the Appendix.

^ "Giver of life" generally concludes the titles and names of
Phamohs. — Mr. Birch.

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII. 47

had been sufficiently forced out of its place to allow of an
entrance ; it was afterwards entirely removed, that the
sand might be cleared out, and the sepulchral chamber
closely examined. This apartment extended from north
to south, and had been lined with square slabs laid in
cement. The pavement had been taken up in many
places. A space of some width had been cut out of the
plaster near the ceiling, and another near the floor, round
all the sides of the chamber except the southern, appar-
ently for a border ; but none of it remained ; although in
many places the remains of a stripe of brown paint were
visible. The sarcophagus appeared to me to have been
originally placed upon the pavement, along the southern
side, where the hd had been left, together with a consi-
derable quantity of decayed wood, probably the remains
of a mummy-board completely reduced to dust ; but Mr.
Perring was of opinion that it had been placed, north and
south, in the centre : we found it near the western side.
It was composed of granite, was quite plain, and resembled
that in the Fifth Pyramid, but was of smaller dimensions.
The dovetail for the lid was rounded (like that in the
Third Pyramid); and the holes for the pins were deep.
It contained a few bones, a small jaw-bone with remark-
ably good teeth, apparently that of a young woman, some
dust, and a few pieces of decayed wood, in the same state
as that near the hd.^ No hieroglyphics or sculptures of
any kind were found on the sarcophagus or on its lid, or
upon any stone in either chamber, with the exception of
the two characters above mentioned. The walls also of

9 Mr. Perring mentions that some mummy cloth made of linen was
also found, but I did not myself observe any.

48 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GlZEH.

both the chambers were perfectly plain ; but, upon one
of the slabs composing the roof, some hieroglyphics had
been described with red paint, and, amongst them, the
cartouche of Mycerinus.

^S o

VLJLJLJ

I

Illl^

From the appearance of the bones, and the small size
of the sarcophagus, they seem to have belonged to a
female ; and from the form of it, and the decomposed
state of the wood, and particularly from the general
appearance of the masonry, the superstructure may be
considered as coeval with the three large Pyramids, — a
supposition in accordance with the antient tradition, that
these three smaller buildings were the sepulchres of the
wives of Cheops, Chephrenes, and Mycerinus. It would
be very desirable to find out what has become of the
border cut out of the sepulchral chamber, as it doubt-
less contains an inscription, and it might yet possibly
be discovered in some museum or collection of antiqui-
ties/ The manner of fastening on the lids of the sarco-

1 The mode of burial in a plain sarcophagus deposited in a pyramid
without inscription, or sculpture, is so directly contrary to that usually
practised by the Egyptians, in which not only the sarcophagus, but also
the whole of the building were covered with hieroglyphics, that both of
them can hardly be supposed to have been used by the same people. It
seems probable, therefore, that the former was adopted by those mighty-
strangers, who, according to the most authentic accounts, had possession

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 49

phagi with pins appears to have been generally adopted,
even when a dovetail — an equally antient contrivance —
was not used.

As the entrance of this pyramid was so far to the
westward, and the tomb almost under the corner of the
superstructure, we concluded that another entrance to
the eastward, leading to another tomb, might exist. The
excavation was accordingly continued along the outside
in that direction in search of a passage ; and as the eastern
side of the anteroom was within four feet of the centre
of the pyramid, it was cut into in the hope of finding
another apartment.

Mr. Raven went to Cairo, for engines, chains, &c.,' to
enable us to remove the blocks of granite with more
facility.

An illegible coin, a wooden fastening for the load of a
camel, and some tihni (dried forage), were found near the
Third Pyramid, and also a quantity of unburnt bricks,
about twenty inches in length, and a heap of earth.

July 6th.
Reis, 11. Men, 141. Children, 94.

Third Pyramid. — Interior.

Clearing the pavement.

Fourth Pyramid. — Clearing the chambers and passages.

Blasting the eastern wall of the anteroom.

Blasting for another entrance.

Fifth Pyramid. — Clearing the chambers and passages.
Sixth Pyramid. — Removing the stones on the northern front.

of Egypt at a very remote period, but not before hieroglyphics had been
invented, and the arts had arrived at great excellence, which might well
be the case, as we know, from sacred history, that science flourished
before the deluge.

VOL. ir. E

50 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

Mr. Hill superintended the works during Mr. Raven's
absence.

A small piece of bronze, and some coarse paterae,
were found near the Fourth Pyramid, and a defaced coin
and paterae also near the Sixth. These two Pyramids
are similar in their dimensions and external construction.
Having discovered that the tombs in the Fourth and Fifth
Pyramids were in the rock, we concluded that they were
the same in all the rest, and began therefore to search for
the entrance of the Sixth, near the centre of the northern
front ; but, before the sand could be cleared away, it was
necessary to remove a quantity of large blocks which had
been thrown down from the top, by order of the Pacha,
and also, it is said, by the cannon of the French.

I mention the following circumstance to shew the
deceit and base habits of the people whom we employed,
and the difficulty of maintaining justice and order amongst
them. When the people had been paid in the evening,
the janissaries brought forward four boys, who had been
absent from their work the whole of the day, and had
only returned in time to receive their money. As the
boys were extremely alarmed, and confessed their fault, I
would not allow them to be punished, but sent them away
unpaid. It was then reported that six men had also
absconded, for which I reprimanded the janissaries, as it
was their duty to keep the men at work, and to report
any delinquency immediately to me. It was with some
difficulty that I could obtain from them the names of
the men (which, after all, were incorrect) ; nor could I
satisfactorily make out whether or not any men, in this
instance, had been absent ; although I knew that it was
often the case, and had taken every precaution to pre-

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII. 51

vent it. It was evident, however, that the janissaries had
quarrelled with the Reis, for they endeavoured to throw
the blame upon them for allowing the men to run away.
I gave orders that the delinquents should attend with the
Sheik of their village on the following day.

July 1th.
Reis, 11. Men, 139. Children, 152.

Third Pyramid. — Interior.

• Clearing the pavement.

Fourth Pyramid. — Blasting the eastern wall of anteroom.

Blasting for another entrance.

Sixth Pyramid. — Removing the stones on the northern front.

The Sheik of Cafr el Batran attended with the men,
but it appeared that they had not been employed at
all during the preceding day, and were accordingly dis-
missed. Upon this the Sheik accused the janissaries of
taking money and grain from the people, but could only
mention one instance, in which corn to the value of ten
piastres had been taken by Osman from a Reis belonging
to Haroneah. I thanked the Sheik for the information,
and I immediately interrogated the Reis with Mr. Hill, in
a manner the most likely to induce him to tell the truth,
when he repeatedly said that Osman had paid for the
grain, and that it had not been taken by force. I at first
thought of stating the circumstance to the people when
they were assembled in the evening, and of demanding if
any person had a complaint to make against the janis-
saries ; but, considering that much ill-will might be created,
without a possibility of arriving at the truth, I determined
to let the matter rest till I again saw the Slieik, which, as
it happened, was not for some days.

62 OPERATIONS CAHRIED ON AT GIZEH.

The works went on well, considering the limited
number of men employed, and we had now arrived at a
point nearly opposite the centre of the Third Pyramid,
where several round holes, similar to those near the Great
Pyramid, were found in the pavement. Mr. Raven had
sent a small crab, which proved very useful ; but we had
great difficulty in removing the granite, and, in doing so,
constant precaution was necessary to prevent accidents.

Mr. Wright and Mr. Wade came from Cairo. I sent
Dare with them into the Pyramids.

July 8th.

Reis, 11. Men, 139. Children, 180.

The same works were repeated.

In the evening, I accompanied Mr. Perring, Mr. Mash,
and Mr. Andrews, to Cairo, with Mr. Wade, Mr. Wright,
and Mr. Hill.

July 9th. — I went to see a new palace belonging to
Shereef Pacha, which was held in such estimation, that
Mahomet Ali was said to have expressed a wish to possess
it. It was of great extent, and was built round a court-
yard. The entrance hall and staircase were flagged with
very fine marble slabs, but they were badly put together.
The balustrades of the staircase were of wood, painted
dark blue ; and the landing-place was supported by two
common blue posts inserted in coarse stone capitals,
which were reversed, and daubed with patches of mortar
and plaster, left about the joints. Passages and back stair-
cases led to innumerable apartments; but the principal
rooms were entered from a circular landing-place, paved

A JLABY OIK €Alir--in>,

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 53

with marble. The wainscot was painted of a dark blue,
and was ornamented with festoons of flowers, trophies,
and medalHons over the door, representing gardens,
kiosks, flower-beds, pyramidal trees, and forts receiving
and returning the salutes of ships-of-war, that were sailing
in irriguous canals — the wretched performances, I was
informed, of Greek artists. The carpenters' work, door
handles, &c., were miserably executed ; and the painted
decorations were splashed over with mortar and white-
wash. Yet this was considered a well-finished building ;
in fact, in this country, seclusion in the Hareem, and
space and air in the other apartments, are all that is
required.*

July 10th.

Reis, 11. Men, 164. Children, 198.

Third Pyramid. — Interior.

Clearing the Pavement.

Fourth Pyramid. — Blasting for another Entrance.
Sixth Pyramid. — Removing Stones at northern front.

I was occupied with Mr. Perring, and with other mat-
ters, this day, at Cairo.

July 11th.

Reis, 11. Men, 102. Children, 19.

Third Pyramid. — Interior.

Clearing the Pavement.

In the afternoon, I went to the Pyramids with Mr.
Mash ; and near Cafr el Batran, we observed Mr. Raven's

2 The plate, which represents a lady of Cairo, will give some idea of
the exterior of the principal houses. The manner in which the women
of rank are carried, and the peculiar sort of saddle (which is said to have

54; OPERATIONS CARPvIED ON AT GIZEH.

servant on horseback, galloping towards Cairo, from
which I concluded, that some bad accident had happened;
and upon our arrival, I found that Mr. Raven had received
a very severe blow from a crow-bar, which had splintered
his jaw and knocked out five of his teeth, and that Abd el
Ardie had also been stunned, and much injured. It ap-
peared, that in order to remove a very heavy mass of
granite, Mr. Raven and Abd el Ardie had been heaving at
a crow-bar, whilst some Arabs were working with another,
which, owing to their negligence and idleness, sprung, and
occasioned this mischief. It was impossible, without con-
stant exertion, to make these people keep to their work,
or hold on, either when lifting or when hauling at a rope ;
and it is satisfactory to reflect, that during our operations,
no fatal accident occurred. Mr. Hill and Mr. Raven went
to Cairo.

The excavation in the wall of the anteroom at the
Fourth Pyramid had not led to any discoveries, and it was
for the time given up, as well as most of the other opera-
tions, that the work might be more effectually performed
at the Third Pyramid, where great strength was required.

July 12th,

Reis, 11. Men, 103. Children, 121.

The same works were repeated.

Mr. Hill arrived by break of day. I examined, with
Mr. Mash, the Fourth and Fifth Pyramids.

been first adopted during the time of the Mamelucs), is fully described in
Mr. Lane's book. The extreme of fashion seems to consist in the height
of the saddle, and in the size of the black satin cloaks.

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII. 55

In the evening, the Sheik of Cafr el Batran came. I
sent for the Reis of Harranich, and again questioned him
before the Sheik, respecting the corn which was said to
have been taken from him by the janissary without pay-
ment, when he said, in direct contradiction to his former
assertions, that the janissary had so taken it. I immedi-
ately ordered the janissary to take the Reis before the
Madyr on the following Friday, that the matter might be
cleared up, and that his character might be vindicated,
which it was out of my power to do. I told him that the
Reis accused him of a theft, and that unless he established
his character, he should not work under the British flag.

The cavalry again came, and returned home, as
before, on the following morning.

July ISth.

Reis, 11. Men, 124. Children, 148.

The same works were repeated.

Having been informed by Mr. Hill that Mr. Bagwell
and three other Irish gentlemen had arrived, I sent to
invite them to my tents, and had the pleasure of their
company till the next day.

July 14:th.
Reis, 11. Men, 102. Children, 149.

Third Pyramid. — Interior.

Clearing the Pavement.

Sixth Pyramid. — Removing Stones in northern front.

Mr. Bagwell and his companions went away.
I was employed at the Third and Sixth Pyramids the
whole day. As the inundation would soon take place, I

56 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII.

was anxious to enter the Third Pyramid. I had re-
peatedly sent the janissaries to collect people from the
different villages; and I now despatched Ibrahim (the
Copt) to inform the Sheiks once for all, that unless they
sent more men, they would not receive any bakshish.

Juli/ 15th.

Reis, 11. Men, 158. Children, 195.

The same works were repeated.

The Sheik of Koum el Eswith came to arrange about
additional people.

A small piece of painted wood and an English patent
screw were found amongst the rubbish at the Third
Pyramid ; but as it appeared from its shape that the
latter must have been made within the last eight years,
they were probably placed there by the Arabs.

I had sent my servant to Cairo, with the intention of
going there myself in the evening; but whilst I was
paying the men, a lad was brought in on a man's
shoulders, apparently half dead ; his white cap and fore-
head were matted with blood and sand ; and he was said
to have fallen down the whole depth of the shaft in the
Third Pyramid. I ordered them to carry him up to the
tents, and requested Mr. Hill to attend to him till I had
paid off the people. Mr. Hill came directly to inform me
that he was most severely hurt, and must be sent into
Cairo without loss of time. As soon as the people were
gone, I went up myself, and found the boy lying on an
earthen bank, to all appearance, senseless, and an Arab
(who called himself his uncle) sitting near him to keep off
the flies. His pulse and breathing were regular, and his

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII. 57

limbs warm ; but I concluded, that having fallen from
such a height, he must necessarily have received some
dreadful injury in his head, and I would not, therefore,
allow it to be touched. I directed Mr. Hill to set off
with Mr. Mash for Cairo, without a moment's delay, and
to return as soon as possible with the best medical advice
that could be procured. Not long after they were gone,
I happened to turn round and saw the boy open his eyes,
and close them again as soon as he observed that I per-
ceived it ; and upon turning suddenly round a second
time, he was looking at, and talking to, the man seated
near him ; but upon finding himself watched, he resumed
his former listless position. I immediately sent after Mr.
Hill, to say that medical aid was not required; and I
ordered the man to be told that he might attend upon the
boy if he chose, but that he would not be paid for doing
so. He said, that in that case he should go and take with
him the boy ; who also expressed a desire to return to
his village. I accordingly consented, and the Arab made
preparations to carry the boy down the hill, which I
would not allow, when the boy immediately got up and
walked down without the smallest difficulty. The Arab
then carried him across the plain ; and having laid him
down on the ground, went on to the village, and returned
with a crowd of people, who took the boy home with
shouts and lamentations. Both the man and the boy
returned on the 17th (Monday) in perfect health, and
apphed for a bakshish, — I need not add, without success.
It was afterwards ascertained that the boy had been
seated on a ledge of rock at the bottom of the upper shaft,
where he was employed to haul on a pulley, and that the
tackle having broken, he had fallen down about two feet.

58 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

and had grazed his forehead against the side of the shaft.
Such was the conduct of these wretched people ; and
instances of similar behaviour were continually occurring.
Osman (the janissary) had, according to my orders, set
out the preceding morning to take the Reis of Haroneah
before the Madyr ; instead of which, I found they had
only gone to Gizeh, where they dined together, and
returned in the evening. I accordingly sent for them,
and inquired why my orders had not been obeyed. The
Reis seemed at first amazingly frightened; but I clearly
saw that there was an understanding between them. I
therefore told the janissary that he had been accused of
being a thief, and of abusing my authority, by oppressing
the people ; that he had not thought fit to clear his cha-
racter; and therefore, although he had served me most
effectively and zealously since the 13th of February, and
although I was extremely sorry to part with him, that I
should not keep him any longer. I instantly discharged
him, but not without considerable reluctance, as he was
by far the best of the janissaries, and extremely useful.

July 16th. — In consequence of the affair of the Arab
boy, I remained at the Pyramids. Mr. Piggott, who was
staying with a party at the Great Tomb in the plain, paid
me a visit. In the evening, my best workman. Jack, got
extremely drunk ; and although repeatedly sent for, would
not attend as usual to take his party of Arabs to work
during the night in the Third Pyramid ; I was, therefore,
obliged to send the Arabs home again, and, much to my
regret, to discharge Jack the next morning. Mr. Hill
came.

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII. 59

July nth.

Reis, 11. Men, 127. Children, 117.

The same works were repeated.

A good many stones were removed at the Third and
Sixth Pyramids, and the pavement near the former was
found to have been broken up. The place was filled with
rubbish, but could not be examined, as it was necessary
to keep the surface level and hard, for the removal of the
blocks of granite.

Mr. Warden, a lieutenant of one of the Company's
ships, arrived from Suez.

July 18th.

Reis, 11. Men, 122. Children, 135.

Third Pyramid. — Interioi-.

■ Clearing the pavement.

Fourth Pyramid. — Blasting for another entrance.
Sixth Pyramid. — Removing stones on northern front.

As the passages and chambers, in the Fourth and
Fifth Pyramids, had been found beneath the masonry, I
was not very sanguine about the operations which had
been so long and so unsuccessfully carried on in the
interior of the Third. They were, however, still con-
tinued at night, but the men were taken off during the
day, and were employed in blasting stones at the northern
fronts of the Third and Sixth Pyramids. Notwithstand-
ing that there still remained a number of heavy blocks on
the front of the latter pyramid, we began to remove the
sand in search of the entrance.

60 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

July I9th.

Reis, 11. Men, 140. Children, 151.

The same works were repeated.

The Sheik of Haroiieah came in the morning, and
engaged to send a number of men — a promise he had
often made before, apparently without the smallest in-
tention of fulfilling it. As these people must have been
sensible that they were never believed, and could not,
therefore, have derived any advantage from falsehood,
their conduct could only proceed from " a natural, though
corrupt, love of the lie itself" (as Lord Bacon expresses
it) ; perhaps not uncommon in any part of the world, but
extremely prevalent in the East.

Mr. Hill brought me a letter from Colonel Campbell,
containing the melancholy account of the late King's
death.

July 20th.

Reis, 11. Men, 130. Children, 136.

Third Pyramid. — Interior.

Clearing the Pavement.

Fourth Pyramid. — Blasting for another entrance.
Sixth Pyramid. — Blasting stones in the northern front.

Lieutenant Warden, and two gentlemen who were on
their way to India, came in the morning to see the Pyra-
mids, and returned to Cairo at night. Mr. Waghorn was
so good as to send a collection of newspapers, and an
offer of Selim's services, if I intended to return soon to
Alexandria. I wrote to express my acknowledgments,
and to request that the janissary might be allowed to

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII. 61

inquire when the IMadyr would be at Mabietta, and also
to attend as dragoman, when I called upon him, as it was
necessary for me to make an application respecting the
people employed at the Pyramids.

July 2lst.

Reis, 11. Men, 136. Children, 109.

The san[ie works were repeated.

In consequence of Selim's inquiries, I went to Mabietta
at four o'clock in the afternoon. The IMadyr was enter-
taining several Turks of distinction, who had arrived in
the morning with the intention (as it was their Sunday, or
Festa) of remaining till the next day. They wore white
nizam dresses, and were seated on a divan. A band of
Turkish musicians were performing ; and I was told, that
dancers, male or female, were to be afterwards introduced.
Water and fruits were laid out upon a table, and coffee,
and small glasses of a very strong spirit, flavoured with
aniseed, cinnamon, and other stimulants and spices, were
frequently handed round, and appeared already to have
had a due effect upon some of the party — they were
all, indeed, in great good humour, and seemed determined
to enjoy themselves. I was also told, that when they
were disposed to sleep, they were partially undressed, and
passed the night on the divan in this room, or on that in
another apartment, wrapped up in coverlids — a plan
which does not exactly coincide with our ideas of com-
fort. The Madyr attended to me with much civility,
and desired that I would put down my wishes in writing.
I here again felt the want of a proper dragoman, and
could not venture upon any compliments, but confined

62 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

myself entirely to common expressions and to business ;
and I have every reason to believe, that Selim, notwith-
standing repeated injunctions, did not say what I told
him, but what he thought would best answer the purpose.
The Madyr repeated many aphorisms in favour of jollity
and mirth, and pressed me to remain for the night, which
I would gladly have done out of curiosity, but as I had
been employed all the morning at the Pyramids, and
had ridden to Mabietta in a high wind, my dress was
by no means fit for so much good company. After
having therefore taken coffee, and two or three glasses
of spirits, I reluctantly withdrew. I was, however, ex-
tremely glad to get to Cairo, and to take a Turkish
bath — the greatest possible luxury after heat and fatigue.
I had the satisfaction of finding that Mr. Raven was going
on well ; and arranged with Mr. Waghorn that my letter
to the Madyr should be translated into Arabic on the fol-
lowing morning.

Juhj 22d.

Reis, 11. Men, 149. Children, 136.

The same works were repeated.

Mr. Hill generally remained at the Pyramids during
Mr. Raven's illness, and nothing could exceed his zeal
and attention.

I wrote a letter to the Madyr, w^hich was translated
at the British Consulate. The Arabic version, however,
differed so much from what I wished to express, that I
enclosed with it the heads of the letter in English, that if
any of his people accidentally understood that language,
the Madyr might have a chance of being better informed
of the nature of my request. When I arrived at the Con-

Tag-,

^f^

.•* '"'^-^,^^. . -3.4^ '-X^^. X". >■

'-;2*

,jiS*^

4 ' <-

.'Jj

Tis

IF. Anoa/AAJ e , ii.ti_

'^xxk Sa^'ii^Lilii?' -t

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 63

sulate I found that a letter respecting this business had
been previously written at the dictation of Selim, the
janissary, and signed by the vice-consul, and that it was
on the point of being sent off. I immediately got posses-
sion of this document, which, as may be supposed, was
not much to the purpose. Affairs of real importance are,
no doubt, often transacted in a similar manner, and blame
thrown upon the Arab authorities which they do not
exactly deserve ; at the same time, in many instances,
particularly where money is concerned, they are too ready
to take advantage of the casual or intentional mistakes of
an interpreter, even when they are perfectly aware, from
other circumstances, of the real state of the question.

July 23d. — Jack, and Osman the janissary, who had
been discharged, were paid off.

Juhj 2Uh.
Reis, 11. Men, 111. Children, 78.

Third Pyramid. — Interior.

Clearing the pavement.

Sixth Pyramid. — Blasting stones in northern front.

I returned to the Pyramids with Mr. Andrews and
Mr. Hill.

Nothing further had been discovered at the Fourth
Pyramid. It is possible that an apartment to the east-
ward of the centre might have been originally intended,
but not executed. The entrance to the Sixth Pyramid
is in the rock, at some little distance from the base, and
six feet to the westward of the centre of the northern
front. It descended at an angle of thirty, and was full of
sand and stones.

64 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

Jult/ 25th.

Reis, 11. Men, 100. Children, 89.

Third Pyramid. — Interior.

Clearing the pavement.

Sixth Pyramid. — Clearing the passage.

Some charcoal was found under the stones in the
passage of the Sixth Pyramid ; and, soon after the en-
trance had been cleared, it was again covered over by a
number of blocks, which fell from the top of the pyramid,
and were not removed without much labour and difficulty.
Fortunately no accident happened.

July 26th.

Reis, 11. Men, 110. Children, 98=

Third Pyramid. — Clearing the pavement.
Sixth Pyramid. — Blasting stones in northern front.

Clearing the passage.

The excavation in the interior of the Third Pyramid
was at length entirely given up, and the men were em-
ployed to blast the stones that had fallen over the en-
trance of the Sixth. They were good workmen, and had
attended very regularly for many weeks.

I rode with Mr. Hill a little way into the desert.
Nothing was to be seen but a dreary prospect of black
craggy rocks, and of extensive hollows filled up with
yellow sand. It has never, probably, been explored ; and
as, in the lapse of centuries, great changes may have
taken place, the examination of it for a few miles might
afford some curious discoveries.

The remains of mounds, and tombs, and lines (appa-
rently periboli), are to be traced on the high ground to the
westward of the Second and Third Pyramids, where the

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII. 65

view of these monuments is very fine ; as the ground fiills
from them towards the Nile, and as the atmosphere over
the river, and the alluvial soil, produces the finest aerial
effect. The ridge also of the Mokattam is seen in the
distance to great advantage.

Heaps of pulverised granite, burnt clay, unburnt bricks,
and charcoal were found near the base of the Third Pyra-
mid, which led me to suppose that the entrance had been
opened, and that it was not far distant. Some people
were employed during the night in removing the stones,
that had fallen over the entrance of the Sixth Pyramid.

Mr. Raven returned, contrary to my entreaties, before
he was sufificiently recovered, and was therefore obliged
by illness, in a few days, to go back again to Cairo.

Juhj 27th.
Reis, 11. Men, 163. Children, 140.

Third Pyramid. — Clearing the pavement.
Fourth Pyramid. — Blasting eastern side of anteroom.
Sixth Pyramid. — Blasting stones in northern front.

Clearing the passage.

Seventh Pyramid. — Excavating for entrance.
Eighth Pyramid. — Excavating for entrance.
Ninth Pyramid. — Excavating for entrance.

The Sheik of Cafr el Batran came, and boasted of his
zeal in having collected a few more men, who, no doubt,
were sent in consequence of orders, which he had received
from the Madyr.

We had arrived at the granite blocks which formed
the lower part of the Third Pyramid, and every exertion
was used to clear away down to the base. Parties were
sent to increase the excavation in the eastern side of the

VOL. II. F

66 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII.

anteroom in the Fourth Pyramid, and to work at the
northern fronts of the Seventh, Eighth, and Ninth, which
are situated, as I have observed, to the eastward of the
Great Pyramid ; the Seventh being the northern, and the
Eighth the central. The entrance into the Seventh was
evidently beneath a large stone, that appeared, as far as
an opinion could be formed in the ruined state of the
building, to be in the centre of the northern front, where
the sand and rubbish had been thrown up in a ridge by
former explorers, so that very little labour was required
to arrive at the passage. The superstructure had been
nearly destroyed ; and there was a large cavity in the
centre, which had been covered over with sand.

A tent was set up for Mr. Andrews, who was employed
in drawing at the Great Pyramid.

I examined the Sixth. At the bottom of the passage
we found an anteroom partially filled with sand and stones,
that had fallen in by accident ; for it had not been closed
up with solid masonry, as the interior had never been
finished. The chambers had been cut in the rocks, and
the marks of a chisel were every where visible. The walls
had not been plastered, nor did we perceive any hiero-
glyphics or sculpture. The sepulchral chamber had been
begun from the eastern and southern sides, and had been
finished from the top, which was completed ; but a consi-
derable part yet remained to be cut out at the northern
end, and it had been left in the same state as the western
side of the subterraneous chamber^ in the Great Pyramid.
Intersecting lines had been marked with red on the ceiling ;

' It is evident, therefore, that the latter chamber had never been
completed.

\^

SECTION LOOKIN&W.

"\ ;-

CASING STONES
REMAINING

•;-^-

BASE OF PYRAMID
SECTION LOOKING W .

■M.JK3ic^lri-'^

SEVENTH - NORTHERN PYRAMID.

CENTRE OF PVf^AK

EIGHTH -CENTRAL PYRAMID.

CENTRE OF PVRAMT

N I NTH ■ SOUTHERN PYRAMID

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII. 67

another also perpendicularly over the entrance, on the
eastern side, and two horizontal lines along the sides of the
short inclined passage. The chamber appeared as if the
workmen had just left it ; it contained chippings and frag-
ments of stone, a small quantity of decomposed wood, and
several round stones, that seemed to have been used as
hammers, or mallets, two or three of which I brought
away. A few black quarry-marks were observed upon
some of the blocks near this pyramid.

July 28th.
Reis, 10. Men, 172. Children, 158.

Third Pyramid. — Clearing the pavement.
Fourth Pyramid. — Blasting eastern side of antechamber.
Seventh Pyramid. — Excavation for entrance.
Eighth Pyramid. — Excavation for entrance.
Ninth Pyramid. — Excavation for entrance.

In going round the works I met several strangers,
apparently Franks, near the Seventh Pyramid : and I
observed afterwards, with great regret, that the casing-
stones at the base of the Great Pyramid, which had been
discovered in a perfect state, were injured and broken.
Vegetable earth and charcoal were found near the Ninth
Pyramid, and a few quarry-marks were observed, which I
copied, as I afterwards did some Arabic characters, roughly

* Apparently represents the hieroglyphic bolt used for the letter s. —
Mr. Birch.

68 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

inscribed in a sort of diagram on the large stone over the
entrance of the Seventh Pyramid.''

As the interior of this monument was accessible, I
proceeded to examine it. The whole was an excavation,
and encumbered with stones and rubbish. The passage
in the centre of the northern front descended at an angle
of 33-35 to a vestibule, in which a cutting near the ceil-
ing, and another on the southern side, had been probably
intended, either for the fixing of a granite slab at the
entrance of the short inclined passage, that led to a sepul-
chral chamber to the westward, or to facilitate the intro-
duction of a sarcophagus into that apartment. The
northern side of this passage was lined with masonry. A
quantity of rain-water and drifted sand had also run down
from the entrance into a flaw, or chasm, on the eastern side
of the vestibule. The sepulchral chamber had been lined
with well-finished masonry, consisting of small squared
slabs of white stone, which had been entirely removed,
with the exception of a few courses near the north-western
corner. A shallow recess on the western side might have
been intended for the reception of a sarcophagus, which,
from some fragments that remained, appeared to have
been composed of polished basalt, and to have been quite
plain. There were some indications of an air-channel on
the northern side, and near it a quantity of the black dust
(consisting probably of decayed stone), so often to be
seen in these buildings ; a few small pieces of bone and
of rusty metal were likewise observed amongst the sand,
that had drifted with the rain-water, at the entrance.

* Mr. Perring states that he found the same inscription over the
entrance of the Eighth.

Tig.l.

J-

^4.

-« .^ '"S

t?

mg.z.

"^

^

.,*

TAi-iuii.k liUi

jJiCyiUiit^uif-uiAh .■' r^ Uve V"*^

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 69

As this pyramid was sufficiently opened for the pur-
poses of the survey, and as it had been evidently ran-
sacked, and examined in every part, nothing further was
done to it. It is, however, possible that some informa-
tion might be obtained, respecting the origin of this, and
also of the Eighth and Ninth Pyramids, if they were
entirely cleared out, which might easily be done at a
trifling expense.

The entrance into the Ninth Pyramid was concealed
under a heap of sand and of loose stones. It was about
two feet six inches above the base, and five feet eastward
of the centre in the northern front of the building, and
descended at an angle of twenty-eight.

As the work proceeded at the Third Pyramid, we
found that the rough and unequal surfaces of one or two
of the blocks near the centre, in the lower part of the
building, had been worked down to a flat surface, which
seemed to denote an entrance ; and the workmen were
accordingly employed at that place.

Jiilij 29th.
Reis, 11. Men, 189. Children, 87.

Third Pyramid. — Clearing the pavement.
Fourth Pyramid. — Blasting the eastern side of anteroom.
Eighth Pyramid. — Excavation for entrance.
Ninth Pyramid. — Excavation for entrance.

Mr. Raven was taken ill, and returned to Cairo.

I endeavoured to examine the interior of the Ninth
Pyramid ; but it was so full of sand and of rubbish that the
candles would not burn. It was afterwards found, like the
others, to contain an anteroom, connected by an inner
passage with a sepulchral chamber, which had been lined
and roofed with slabs one foot thick. The walling had been

70 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

destroyed, and the place was full of rubbish, but no traces
of a sarcophagus were discovered. Some paterae, pearl
oyster shells, earth, &c. were found near the Eighth Pyramid,
which shewed that the entrance was not far off; and at
one time we imagined that it had been discovered between
two inchned blocks at the base ; but they proved to be
parts of the casing, and the passage was afterwards found
in a higher part of the building. Several of the casing-
stones remained; they had been roughly chiselled into
the proper angle, and then worked down to a polished
surface after they had been built, and in many places the
latter operation had not been entirely performed; they
were as firmly laid as the blocks in the Great Pyramid,
and the masonry of the two buildings had a great resem-
blance ; and it is to be remembered that tradition assigns
this tomb to Cheops' daughter.

I carefully examined the Third Pyramid whilst the
people were at their dinners, and the result confirmed my
opinion as to the position of the entrance. I therefore
ordered Goodman (who superintended the work) to leave
the heap of rubbish and of accumulated sand behind him,
and to employ all the people in clearing away the large
blocks under the eastern side of the chasm made by the
Mamelucs, which I knew to be in the centre of the py-
ramid, and which also appeared to be the centre of the
levelled part of the masonry already mentioned ; where
the inscription, containing the name of Mycerinus, and
described by antient historians, may have been placed.
At all events, the entrance into this monument does
not appear to have been concealed, although the utmost
care has been taken to secure the interior from viola-
tion. When the people had come to this work, I

J^M-^

/■-f

-c

■-'••

- ; ^■

> ;:

"♦ ■

%^4 ^i

'}

^x

^P

i

-^zh ...

;-^ ^ "^

^-^s^l-

■r':-^*'^^

- ,* ,

iTft:!^!

/^

r I-

:^-

-^ •

f y
^ *• -

^

^' ^kv

.-#■" ' .-^i

«

^

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII. 71

went there, and sent for Mr. Andrews, The stones were
removed with great difficulty, particularly a large mass
exactly on the spot where I supposed the entrance to be.
Its removal proved my conjecture to be right ; and I con-
rT' sidered that my operations at the Pyramids were at length
successfully concluded. I immediately entered the pass-
age, which was completely open, and, notwithstanding
several large stones, appeared to be accessible for a con-
siderable distance. I then put a guard on the entrance,
and went to the tents to pay off the people."

As soon as they were dismissed, Mr. Andrews and
myself returned full of expectation to the mysterious en-
trance, impatient to examine what had excited the curi-
osity, and had hitherto been supposed to have eluded the
researches of all explorers, and of which no tradition or
account, antient or modern, was known to exist."

^ In returning to the Third Pyramid, Abd-El-Ardi informed me of
a subterraneous passage near the Second, which I afterwards cleared out.
This man, probably, was acquainted with many other objects of interest,
both here and at Saccara ; but he did not seem to know of the ruins
represented as being to the northward of Abou Reche ; the existence of
which should be ascertained.

7 Since this was wTitten I have been enabled, through the kindness
of the Earl of Mountnorris, to examine the papers of the late Mr. Salt ;
and amongst them I found the following extract from a translation liy M.
Burckhardt, of a passage in Edrisi, who wrote in 623, a.h. ; which
certainly, as far as it goes, is a contradiction to what I had, before I had
seen it, believed to be the case: — "A few years ago the Red Pyramid,
which is the Third, or smaller one, was opened on its lower skirt, on the
north side ; but it is not known who opened it. An alley was found
leading down about twenty draas or more, and on its extremity a narrow
place, that affords room for one person only ; after which a road is
entered of difficult and fatiguing passage, where one creeps along upon
the stomach for above twenty draas more, until an oblong square room

72 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

The entrance, as I observed, was situated thirteen feet
above the base, in the masses of granite of which it was
composed, and which immediately around the aperture had
been levelled to the angle of the upper part of the building,
but it did not present any traces of an inscription, or of
sculpture.^ The entrance had been forced, as well as the
inclined passage, the sides and floor of which had been car-
ried through the granite blocks for twenty-eight feet two
inches, and the roof for twenty-nine feet eight inches,
when a large block (B, PI. I. Fig. 2), was inserted, pro-
bably on account of a flaw in the rock. The remainder
of the passages, and all the other chambers and commu-
nications were entirely excavations. The interior of the
passage was rough and uneven, particularly near the en-
trance, where the joints of the masonry were open and
defective, and the ceiling was cut in coves of unequal
height. Much of this irregularity was no doubt occasioned

is reached, in which several pits are seen that were dug by those who
went in quest of treasures. From thence another room is entered, the
four walls of which are formed by six or seven chambers with arched
doors, as are the doors over the small private chambers in the baths. In
the midst of the space on the side, and round which these chambers ex-
tend, is a blue long vessel, quite empty. The Shereef, Abou El Hosseyn,
of the family of Mymoon Ibn Hambe, has told me that lie was pre-
sent when the opening into this pyramid was effected by people who
were in search after treasures ; they worked at it with axes for six
months, and they were in great numbers. They found in this basin,
after they had broken the covering of it, the decayed rotten remains of a
man, but no treasures on his side, excepting some golden tablets in-
scribed with characters of a language nobody could understand. Each
man's share of these tablets amounted to one hundred dinars."

^ A polished revetment of granite appears, by the key-stones of that
material, to have extended to C. (See section of the Pyramid.)

f^LATf:. /.

Ti O N S OF PAS 5

I

;a\\\\w

toL H yVsfe

m : — -

^

i

THIRD PYR ..MID

PLANS AND SECTIONS of PASS AG ES &c

v<-^^<N:^o<.^^;;c

»''«'<tme[<T.[^V_

0—0 PASSAGE

\\-\'>',',>\\\'VV,V

ENTRANCE PASSAGE

.^MiM.yJMmi

m

c

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 73

by the violence that had been used in removing the blocks
with which the passage, as far as the anteroom, had ori-
ginally been closed up.^ It formed, however, in its pre-
sent state, a strong contrast to the fine workmanship dis-
played in the passages of the other large pyramids, and
also on its own exterior. At the junction of the masonry
with the rock, the roof of the passage had been forced,
possibly on account of the stone B, which might have
been supposed to have concealed an entrance, and an
excavation (E, PI. I. Fig. 2) had been carried up into the
solid building, on the outside of one of the steps or stages,
of which the interior of this pyramid is built. ^ Beyond
the excavation the passage was much encumbered with
stones and rubbish, but continued practicable for some
distance, as the larger fragments had been piled up along
the western, side to make room for a man to pass : further
down it was entirely filled up with sand and stones.
Conceiving that the obstruction extended only for a few
feet, I sent Abd-El-Ardi to force his way ; but he was
unable to proceed, and we were obliged to postpone all
further investigation till the rubbish had been removed.
Some fragments of common pottery, a small piece of stick.

9 Mr. Perring is of opinion that, to facilitate the insertion of these
stones, a composition of Nile earth and small pebbles was spread on the
floor of the passage, down which they slided.

1 It consists of two sorts of masonry, one infinitely better than the
other as to the size of the stones, and as to the workmanship in general ;
and although the exterior is in one continued line, the bulk of it is
constructed in stages, diminishing as they ascend, which were probably
the altars, or steps, mentioned by Herodotus at the Great Pyramid, upon
which were placed the machines employed in raising the materials ; for
the courses of stone were not of sufficient width for that purpose.

74 OPERATIONS CAURIED ON AT GIZEH.

upon which the bark was tolerably fresh, some twigs, that
would almost bend, Tibni (or dried forage), part of an
old basket, and a rag of coarse linen, were found in the
passage.

From what we had seen, it appeared that the passage
had been forced ; that an excavation had been carried up
from it into the superstructure at the end of the masonry ;
that it had been reopened at no very remote period ; and
that, notwithstanding the unaccountable mystery which
prevailed about it, the upper part of the passage had
subsequently been visited as far as the stones had been
piled up. The Arabic characters afterwards found in the
interior of this pyramid were similar to those in the Fifth,
and most probably to the inscription discovered by Mr.
Belzoni in the Second, and they seem, together with the
diacrrams inscribed over the entrances of the Seventh and
Eighth, to prove that all these monuments were visited
nearly about the same time by Mahometans. It is sur-
prising, therefore, that any uncertainty should have existed
respecting the entrance of the Third Pyramid, and much
more so, that the two chasms should have been under-
taken with so much labour and expense by the Mame-
lucs before the lower part of the pyramid had been
examined ; for the entrance was chiefly concealed by the
masses of stone and rubbish occasioned by these works.^
These considerations influenced my researches, and they
seem, also, to have misled many other explorers, who,
instead of examining the lower part of the building,
sought for the entrance in the pit, and in the exterior

~ A few of these blocks were removed by Mr. Belzoni, who appears
to have guessed with great exactness the position of the entrance.

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 75

pavement. It may also be remarked that the height at
which the chasms were made, the excavation at E, and
those which will be subsequently mentioned in the interior
of the pyramid, shew that, even after the large apartment
had been entered, although probably before the tomb
itself was discovered, a strong idea prevailed that cham-
bers existed in the upper part of the edifice, — an opinion,
however, which these excavations, and the gallery and
shafts lately carried down to the foundation, prove to be
unfounded.

I returned with Mr. Andrews to the tents.

July 80fh. — Mr. Hill, Dr. Walne (the vice-consul),
and Mr. Trail (Ibrahim Pasha's gardener), dined with me
and returned in the evening. The doctor's visit was most
fortunate, as my carpenter had a sudden attack of fever,
for which he kindly prescribed.

July Slsf.
Reis, 11. Men, 87. Children, 85.

Third Pyramid. — Clearing out entrance.
Eighth Pyramid. — Excavation for entrance.
Ninth Pyramid. — Clearing out the chamber.
Sphinx. Blasting for the boring-rods.

Excavation for shaft at the south-western angle of Campbell's Tomb.
Pumping in shaft between Campbell's Tomb and Second Pyramid.
Subterannean passage near the Second Pyramid.

A party was sent to take up the pavement at the
south-western angle of Campbell's Tomb, which was
thought to conceal a shaft like that at the south-eastern
angle. None, however, was found. Some people were
also employed to get out the boring- rods left in the

76 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

Sphinx, which, for reasons already stated, they did not
effect.^ The pump was lowered to the bottom of the
shaft between Campbell's Tomb and the Second Pyramid,
but it could not be worked owing to the badness of the
hose. All that could be done, therefore, was to observe
whether the water kept the varying level of the river
during the inundation. Mr. Perring's observations are
given in the Appendix ; but the subject is well worthy
of the attention of future explorers, and may be carried
on with great advantage if a proper hose is obtained, as
the pump was left with Mr. Hill, and as the sand has
been taken out of the shafts. A considerable quantity of
water, no doubt, exists, and may have been collected for
religious purposes.

The general direction of the souterrain, near the
Second Pyramid, was east 1^ point north, and west Ij
point south. It appeared to have contained a communi-
cation, made out of a natural fissure, and was roofed over
with slabs to form a level surface ; indeed a passage may
even now exist, for we did not thoroughly examine it, but
only removed a sufficient quantity of sand, to ascertain its
direction and length. We entered it by a pit, made either
by former explorers, or by the accidental failure of the
roofing-stones, which have here fallen in for the space
of twenty-two feet. This pit was about fifty feet from
the south-western angle of the temple, and about two
hundred from the pyramid. The channel was covered
over with slabs for thirteen feet to the westward, beyond
which it became a narrow fissure. It extended to the

3 The fossil found at this place, as mentioned vol. i. p. 275, has every
appearance of being that of a reed : but I understand that it is considered
at the British Museum to be the spine of a large echinus.

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 77

eastward sixty -five feet, it was about four feet wide,
and was completely full of sand. One or two trifling
fissures branched off from it, but the sides were very
regular, and the working of a chisel might in many places
be observed ; the eastern end, indeed, to the length of
six feet is entirely artificial, and ends abruptly in the
rock. It may possibly communicate with sepulchral
shafts, or be connected with the water, and deserves a
stricter investigation than I had time to bestow upon it.
I have mentioned, that the ground in many places
sounds as if it were hollow ; and I have no doubt, that it
contains a number of curious excavations ; but the vast
body of sand which has accumulated from various causes,
makes it impossible, without much time and labour, to
ascertain the different levels and foundations, much more
to form a general idea of the whole. It is probable,
however, that advantage was taken of the quarries from
which the stones were cut for the Pyramids ; and as that
operation would naturally be guided by the quality of the
material, that no regular plan was followed as to the
position or size of the tombs.

August 1st.
Reis, 11. Men, 138. Children, 84.

Third Pyramid. — Clearing out the passages.
Eighth Pyramid. — Excavation for entrance.
Ninth Pyramid. — Clearing out the Chamber.

Mr. Perring, Mr. Mash, Mr. Raven, and Mr. Hill
arrived. The passages of the Third Pyramid were at
length practicable, although a quantity of sand and
rubbish yet remained in them. Indeed, the anteroom,
the chamber with the portcullis, and a considerable part

78 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII.

of the long passage proceeding from them, were filled up
with sand to within two feet of the ceiling ; but the large
apartment, and the rest of the pyramid, were only en-
cumbered with stones and rubbish, produced by former
excavations and by decay. The inclined entrance has
been already described. It was of considerable length,
and terminated in a short horizontal passage (see Plates I.
and II.) that lead to the anteroom, the walls of which were
covered with white plaster, worked in compartments.
(See Plate II. Fig. 7 and 8.) Directly opposite the
entrance into this room, a door-way of the same size
opened into a narrow chamber (Plate II.), which had been
filled up with three portcullises, placed across it from
east to west.* The middle of the anteroom had also been
blocked up by large stones laid across it from north to
south, which had completely closed both door-ways. Two
of them remained in their original position. The rest of
the anteroom had not been filled up;^ and the southern
side of it to the eastward of the door-way into the cham-

* The dimensions are given in the Appendix ; but reference is neces-
sary, in this and in many other instances, to Mr. Perring's "Plans of
the Pyramids," published by Mr. Fraser, of Regent Street, which will
give a clearer idea of them than can be conveyed in this work.

5 The slabs of granite forming the portcullis, were, according to Mr.
Perring's observations, conveyed down the passage angle-ways, and intro-
duced from the anteroom, by the openings A A, on each side of the door-
way, into the upper part of the chamber of the portcullis B, and there
inserted into grooves prepared for them. The openings A A were after-
wards filled up with masonry. The holes a b c were probably for the
insertion of beams to sustain or move the portcullis : there are corre-
sponding holes on the opposite side. The slabs were destroyed in forcing
the Pyramid, but part of the granite heading was found in the anteroom.
— (See Plate II., south end of room restored, D.)

Pass

L

Fic 2

Section looking west.

Fic 3 Fio 4

South End of Room Nohth End of Room

r»WCK. I

W^^vx^^^i\;\^,.\\;-,.

Fio I,
PLAN

^^^^VAV•: 'v:;^^- \ : ^Ks

F,c 6.

South End of Room, rf

F:c 5.

Section .ht„ Portc

( PORtT^C

lACE TO LaRCE APARTME*^^

V-^M^$5vJ^S$S^'V

Third Pyramid.
Small Ante Room and portcullis.

_1

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 79

ber, containing the portcullis, had been cut into, in order,
as it would appear, to avoid the necessity of breaking
down the slabs of granite forming the portcullis, which
might reasonably have been supposed to have concealed
a tomb ; but, as this did not prove to be the case, the
excavation had been turned to the right, so as to enter
the eastern side of the chamber containing the portcuUis,
as shewn by the dotted line D (Plate II. Fig. 1). A
passage, almost horizontal (as it had only four degrees of
declination), proceeded from the portcullis to the south,
and entered the northern side of the large apartment.
Immediately above it, another passage, at first horizontal,
and afterwards inclining upwards (see Plates I. and III.),
returned towards the north, and ended where the masonry
of the pyramid commenced. This passage had been
worked by the chisel from the exterior or north, the
other passages from the interior or south. It must,
therefore, have been formed before the other passages
and chambers, as the large apartment probably was also.
At the end of it, in the masonry, at C (Plate I. Fig. 2),
various excavations had been made in different directions
into the superstructure in search of a chamber, to which
it might have been imagined to conduct, for it had been
filled up with solid masonry — fragments of which yet
remain, and also part of the plaster upon the sides of it.
The mouth of this passage in the large apartment^ (see
Plates I. and III.) was worn into grooves, apparently by

^ This passage, like that discovered by M. Caviglia in the Second
Pyramid, was probably formed for the sake of supplying air to the people
employed in the subterraneous chambers ; or it may have been originally
intended for the regular entrance, and the plan may, for some reason
or other, have been altered.

80 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

chains or ropes, which may have been employed to con-
vey the workmen and their tools into it, or the stones and
rubbish made by these excavations out of it/ of which a
considerable quantity was found in the apartment, par-
ticularly at the eastern end. This room had a flat ceiling,
and was divided at some little distance from the western
side by pilasters, e e (Plate III., Figs. 1 and 2), and by an
architectural ornament on the roof,/ (Plate III., Fig. 2).

At the western end, and near the north-western
corner, a short passage, G (Plate III., Fig. 2), led to a
hollow of inconsiderable height, H (Plate III., Fig. 2),
floored by the reverse of the blocks of granite that form
the coved roof of the sepulchral chambers immediately
beneath it. The blocks extended from east to west, and
met in a ridge in the centre. Their reverse ends were
lodged in deep groovings cut into the rock, and they were
kept down in their places by pieces of stone laid upon
them.

The rock was partially covered with a sparry ex-
crescence, which had the appearance of white feathers,
and was of the same nature as that discovered in the
chambers of the Great Pyramid. The entrance to
the short passage G (Plate III., Fig. 2) had been closed
up with sohd masonry, and concealed by a coating of
plaster. It had probably been forced in search of ::he
tomb, and seemed to have been much frequented, for
the large masses of stone left within it were worn and
glazed over by the constant passing and repassing of a

7 These excavations, in some degree, account for the facility with
which the workmen in the shaft had been heard on the outside of the
pyramid over this spot.

I

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII. 81

concourse of people. The large apartment was forty-
six feet three inches in length ; and when the rubbish was
entirely removed, the floor for thirty-one feet from the
eastern end, was found to be rock, and the rest to have
consisted of a pavement, in which a place for a sarcopha-
gus had been sunk (Plate III., Figs. 1 and 2).^ We are
informed by Herodotus, that the body of an inferior person
was sometimes placed in the ostensible sepulchre to pre-
vent any further inquiry after the principal tomb, as is
mentioned respecting that of Amasis — an expedient which
seemed to have been contemplated, but not actually put in
practice in this instance ; for not a vestige of a sarcophagus
was to be discovered, which must have been the case if one
had been introduced, as the communications, particularly
through the anteroom, had not been sufficiently cleared
for its removal. The pavement had been entirely de-
stroyed.

The circular holes in the sides and floor of the
apartment were probably intended to receive beams for
the support of a scaffolding used in trimming and finishing
the walls, or to assist in the deposition of the sarcophagus
in the sepulchral chamber.

At the distance of seventeen feet from the eastern end
of this apartment, an inclined passage, which had been
no doubt originally concealed by the pavement, de-
scended to the sepulchral chamber nearly in the same

s Mr. Perring mentions indeed that a number of small pieces of red
granite were found among the rubbish in the large apartment; but
granite was used in the portcullis, and in the sepulchral chamber ; and
some undoubted fragment of the sarcophagus must have been found if
one had really been placed there.

VOL. II. G

83 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

manner as those in the tombs at Thebes. It contained a
quantity of rubbish, and also of black dust/ apparently
the exuviae of insects and of bats, likewise several large
stones, which had the same appearance of having been
rubbed and worn, as those already described. When this
passage was cleared out, it was found to have been built
up with ramps, and with blocks laid upon them after the
sarcophagus had been placed in the tomb, and to have
been closed at the lower end with a portcullis of granite
(Plate III., Fig. 2,m)The passage entered the eastern side
of a sepulchral chamber, which extended north and south,
and was entirely composed of granite. I have already
said that the blocks, which composed the roof, met in
a ridge in the middle, and were cut into the shape of
a pointed arch. The floor had been formed of large
masses well put together, several of which had been
taken up, and were lying in the apartment. The linings
of the walls had also been searched ; they consisted
of slabs, two feet six inches thick, and were in many
places stained by secretions from the rock, and by a
quantity of white fungus. Two cramps were found in
the western wall (see Plate III., Fig. 6, 7, 8, 9). The
stones ABC were kept in their places by the dovetail
cramp G, and the wedge -formed piece D, resting against
the side of the excavated rock behind, served to keep the
whole together. No sculpture, or inscription of any kind.

* A good deal of this deposition was also found in the large apart-
ment ; and the dung of large birds, probably of vultures, appeared in
many places, particularly on the sarcophagus, and seemed to have been
there for many years.

4

£ ■

-^■^

1^,^

SISS'WILiSMmiUL (52a^MIBE3S. TlSHm® 2^^IE.iv.SSIDE).

SOalisliBd iijr J Ixas. er, 2I5,^^,seut St

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII. 83

was discovered, excepting some rude and unconnected
Arabic words and characters'^ scrawled witli somethinc: like
chalk on various parts of the walls, and on the inside of
the sarcophagus.^ The only words that could be made
out were Mahomet Rasoul over the entrance. The sarco-

phagus is supposed to have been originally placed in the
centre of the chamber, to which its proportions were
very similar, but it had been moved, and was found

2 As soon as these writings were discovered, I sent to the Shereef of
Mecca to request permission for the Cadi to examine them, who, on the
2d of Jul}^ had explained those found in the Fifth Pyramid. The Cadi was
at Alexandria, but the Shereef was so good as to send two other persons
on the 3d inst., as will subsequently be seen, but they could only make out
the above words ; and, I was afterwards informed, thought proper to say,
that I had myself written them. I then endeavoured, but without success,
to procure persons from Cairo who understood antient Arabic characters.
From the desultory manner in which these writings are scrawled OA'cr
the walls and ceilings, I do not however believe that they have any con-
nected meaning. They are probably the names of visitors or of workmen,
or, perhaps, a few phrases from the Koran. I tried in vain to copy them ;
they were extremely faint, and could not be made out.

3 As the sarcophagus would have been destroj'ed, had it remained in
the pj'ramid, I resolved to send it to the British Museum. The diffi-
culties with which Mr. Raven had to contend in this operation, were not
trifling. One of the ramps in the inclined passage was to be removed in
order to get it into the large apartment, where it was placed upon
trucks, and the blocks in the anteroom having been got rid of, it arrived
at the bottom of the entrance passage. By means of a number of men,
and of a crab at the mouth of the pyramid, it had been conveyed halfway
up, when, owing to the roughness of the bottom, the trucks on one side

84 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

in the position represented. (See Plate III., Figs. 2 and
5.) It was entirely empty, and composed of basalt,
which bore a fine polish of a shaded brown colour,
but was blue where it had been chipped off, or broken.^
Some sharp substance, such as emery powder, had been
used in its construction, and it appeared to have been
sawn, which is remarkable, as the art of sawing marble
was not known at Rome till a late period.^ It was
finely carved in compartments, and the ornaments upon it
resembled in some degree the architectural decorations in
the tomb of Numbers, and those carved upon two blocks
of stone now exhibited in the British Museum, and which
formerly belonged to the collection of the late Mr. Salt.

gave way. As they could not be repaired for want of space, the sarco-
phagus was slowly lifted by levers, and got out by degrees ; which, con-
sidering that its weight was nearly three tons, was an arduous undertak-
ing. It was, however, at last safely hauled out, and placed on a proper
carriage, in which, with the assistance of planks, it was drawn over the
rocks and sands to the tents, and afterwards cased with strong timbers, to
be sent to the British Museum. It was embarked at Alexandria in the
autumn of 1838, on board a merchant-ship, which was supposed to have
been lost oif Carthagena, as she never was heard of after her departure
from Leghorn on the 12th of October in that year, and as some parts of
the wreck were picked up near the former port.

* A piece of it has been sent to the British Museum.
5 Mr. Perring has since discovered, in two tombs to the south of the
Seventh, Eighth, and Ninth Pyramids, a complete representation of

the end of this sarcophagus, with the
lid upon it. The hieroglyphics in
these grottoes are greatly defaced,
but they contain this cartouche,
which is also given by Signor Rosellini (Tom. I., tav. ii., 32), by Mr.
Burton in his " Excerpta," and has been since discovered in the pyra-
mids at Abouseir.

END ELEVATION

SIDE ELEVATION

TRANSVERSE SECTION

LONGITUDINAL SECTION

PLfvN WITH LID
R EMOVED

rScaie of iz 6 (/

1 1 I V i L

jL

^n.

THIRD PYRAMID.
SARCOPHAGUS WITH LID RESTORED

(.^.J^^rrrr/f iW

Jta iSfjkeXSi.'-Tr i*--- ■

Ttaaishedij'JTraaec, 235,Ee^ejir St .

;%#

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GlZKTI. 85

The sarcophagus did not bear any inscription or hierogly-
phics. The lid had been fixed by two pins in the usual
manner, and also by a dovetail, which was rounded ; and
a plate of metal seemed to have been applied so carefully
underneath it, that in order to insert a lever for its
removal, it had been found necessary to cut a groove
across the rim of the sarcophagus. The hd was not found
in the sepulchral chamber, but pieces of it were afterwards
discovered.

At the bottom of the southern side of the passage,
leading to the sepulchral chamber, a recess had been
formed (something like that in the lower horizontal
passage in the Second Pyramid), and on the opposite side
a flight of seven steps opened into the southern end of a
room, which were three feet below the level of the passage.
(See Plate III., Fig. 4.) This room was rectangular, but
not square with the sepulchral chamber, as it lay 25°
east of north ; a position evidently intended, together
with the above-mentioned recess, to facilitate the removal
of the sarcophagus between this and the sepulchral
chamber. It contained four niches or compartments on
the eastern side, and two on the northern ; one of the
latter, it is to be observed, had an inchned direction,
apparently for the purpose of receiving some solid sub-
stance of considerable lens[th. This room was half full of
rubbish, and several Arabic characters had been scrawled
on the ceiling. It was probably intended for funereal
ceremonies like those at Abou Simbel, Thebes, &c.

When the large apartment was finally cleared out,
the greater part of the lid of the sarcophagus was found
(as I have already stated) near the entrance of the passage
descending to the sepulchral chamber ; and close to it

•t

86 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

(see F, Plate III., Fig. 1), fragments of the top of a
mummy-case (inscribed with hieroglyphics, and amongst
them, with the cartouche of Menkahre) were discovered
upon a block of stone, together with part of a skeleton,
consisting of ribs and vertebrae, and the bones of the legs
and feet^ enveloped in coarse woollen cloth of a yellow
colour, to which a small quantity of resinous substance
and gum was attached. More of the board and cloth were
afterwards taken out of the rubbish. It would therefore

^ These relics are in the British Museum. Not being present when
they were found, I requested ^Ir. Raven, when that gentleman was in
England, to write an account of the discovery, in order that it might be
published: —

" Sir, " London, llth July, 1838.

" By your request, I send you the particulars of the find-
ing of the bones, mummy-cloth, and parts of the coffin, in the Third
Pyramid. In clearing the rubbish out of the large entrance-room, after
the men had been employed there several days, and had advanced some
distance towards the south-eastern corner, some bones were first disco-
vered at the bottom of the rubbish ; and the remaining bones and parts
of the coffin were immediately discovered altogether : no other parts
of the coffin or bones could be found in the room ; I therefore had
the rubbish, which had been previously turned out of the same room,
carefully re-examined, when several pieces of the coffin and of the
mummy-cloth were found ; but in no other part of the pyramid were
any parts of it to be discovered, although every place was most minutely
examined to make the coffin as complete as possible. There was about
three feet of rubbish on the top of the same ; and from the circumstance
of the bones and part of the coffin being all found together, it appeared
as if the coffin had been brought to that spot, and there unpacked.

" I am. Sir,

" Your most obedient servant,
" To Col. Howard Vyse." " H. Raven.

';-.vrKhy;;B-»iaKr

r- :. '^-

"^M

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII. 87

seem that, as the sarcophagus could not be removed,
the wooden case containing the body had been brought
into the large apartment for examination.

Whoever may have been the first explorers, it is
clear that at one period this pyramid remained open for
a considerable time, and was then much frequented by
Mussulmen, and that it was afterwards closed up for
many years, otherwise some accounts respecting it, more
circumstantial than that in Edrisi, must have existed,
and recent traces of bats and of reptiles would have
been found in it.

The great efforts, which had been made to get into the
higher parts of the building, were very extraordinary, and
the precautions, which had been taken to secure the tomb
from violation, were no less remarkable ; the ponderous
masses of granite, and of calcareous stone, with which the
whole of the entrance was filled up as far as the anteroom,
the blocks, which secured that apartment, the three port-
cullises in the smaller chamber, the squared stones, with
which the upper returning passage was built up, the con-
cealment of the immediate entrance to the tomb by the
pavement of the large apartment, and the manner in which
that passage was closed up with a portcullis of great
thickness, with ramps, and finally with solid masonry,
indicate the veneration in which the sepulchre was held,
and therefore the importance of the personage, to whom
it belonged.

August 2d.
Reis, 11. Men, 137. Children, 83.

Third Pyramid. — Clearing the Chambers and Passages.

Eighth Pyramid. — Excavation for Entrance.

Ninth Pyramid. — Clearing out the Chamber.

Excavating the lines westward of the Second Pyramid.

88 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

As I had at length discovered the entrance of the
Third Pyramid, I was anxious to finish my operations as
soon as possible, and employed parties by day and by
night at the Third and Eighth Pyramids. A number of
parallel ridges, to the westward of the Second Pyramid,
however, excited my attention, and I conceived that they
might have been the burial-places of the common people,
like those at Tarquinia, in Italy. Some of them were in
consequence cut through, but they were found to be com-
posed of stones and sand, and their origin was not
discovered.

I sent Ibrahim, the Copt, to inform the Shereef of
Mecca, that the Third Pyramid was opened, and, as I
have already mentioned, to request the assistance of the
Cadi to read the inscription. The Shereef returned for
answer, that the Cadi was at Alexandria, but that he
himself would come on the following day to the Pyramids.
I also sent to Cairo for people who understood antient
Arabic characters, but I could not prevail upon them to
attend.

Mr. Brettel arrived. We examined the interior of the
Third Pyramid, and also measured the subterraneous
passage near the temple of the Second. — (See July 31.)

In the course of the day, the entrance into the Eighth
Pyramid was found eight feet nine inches above the base,
in the centre of the northern front. It had an incline of
34*5 ; but was choked up with sand, so that the candles
would not burn, and the examination of it was necessarily
postponed. I then entered the Ninth, which has been
already described. — (See July 29.)

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 89

August 3d.
Reis, 8. Men, 119. Children, 55.

Third Pyramid. — Clearing chambers and passages.
Eighth Pyramid. — Clearing chamber and passage.

I called on the Shereef of Mecca, who was encamped
at the edge of the arable ground near the northern dyke ;
and, when I took my leave, he sent a Coptic secretary
and an Armenian, to read the inscription in the Tliird
Pyramid. They began by copying the diagram on the
great stone over the entrance of the Seventh. The Copt
then entered the Fifth, and looked at the writings, which
the Cadi had already partly deciphered. Both of them
afterwards examined the characters in the Third, as I
have already mentioned.

Having dismissed these persons, I entered the Eighth
Pyramid, and found in the anteroom twelve or thirteen
skulls, and a bronze armlet, with a piece of brown stone
shaped like part of a female hand, which was remarkable,
as the building was supposed to have been the tomb of
the daughter of Cheops. The entrance-passage and se-
pulchral chamber were on the same plan as those in the
Seventh and Ninth Pyramids ; the masonry had been
pulled down in search of other apartments ; and a quantity
of bones and broken mummy-cases were found in it, by
which it would appear that it had been subsequently used
as a general place of sepulture ; but there were not any
remains of a sarcophagus. I did not think it worth
while to be at further trouble or expense about these
tombs, as they had been completely ransacked.

The Shereef of Mecca dined with me. He came with
a large suite, and was accompanied by his two sons, and

90 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

by another Shereef Sheabyeah, an old man, to whom great
respect was paid, the whole party rising up on his ap-
proach. The tent was too small for so large a party ;
and a Tmkish dinner, consisting of a sheep roasted whole,
and a variety of hot dishes, under such circumstances,
together with the extreme beat of the weather, was a
most disagreeable affair. Mr. Andrews excited much
curiosity by his Oriental costume, and knowledge of Arabic
manners ; my guests, indeed, would scarcely believe that
he was a Frank. We afterwards rode round the Pyra-
mids, and the Shereef returned to his tents.

August itii. — The people were paid by Mr. Raven.

The Shereef called upon me early in the morning on
his way to the Pyramids, before I was ready to receive
him. I joined him at the Second, where I found him
seated upon the ground, to observe some Arabs, who had
been sent over the casing-stones up to the summit for his
amusement. Upon arriving at the Third Pyramid he
dismounted, and, much to my surprise, took off his tur-
ban and robe, and accompanied me into the interior.
He examined every part of it with attention, and seemed
much interested with such information as I was enabled
to offer. One of his sons, and two or three of his suite,
followed his example. When we returned I introduced
Mr. Raven, who explained the use of the crab in the
removal of the stones, and set it to work, that he might
witness its effects. He then went back to his tents.

The cavalcade was extremely picturesque ; and the
bright colours of the dresses, and beauty of the horses,
particularly when the jereed was used, had a fine effect.
The Shereef wore an orange-coloured robe ; and his flat

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 91

turban was becoming, and much more appropriate for a
horseman than the cumbrous head-dress used by the
Turks. He was remarkably well mounted ; his saddle
was padded, and had small stirrups like those described
in the Appendix, it was covered with purple velvet, and
embroidered with gold ; his bridle was black, it was also
ornamented with gold, and had a crimson rein of silken
cord. Besides a number of attendants carrying his gun,
pipe, &c., two janissaries bore before him long staves, sur-
mounted with bars of silver, from which balls were sus-
pended by chains of the same metal; — models of an
instrument made use of to confine a man's legs when he
is bastinadoed.

As soon as I got to the tents, I set out again for the
Great Pyramid, where I saw a quantity of rubbish thrown
over the casing-stones, in the hope of preserving them
from further injury ;''^ and at eleven o'clock I went with
Mr. Andrews to dine with the Shereef.

His encampment, with a number of horses and camels
picketed near it, was highly characteristic ; and the glow-
ing costume of his mounted attendants, who armed with
lances traversed the plain in different directions, appeared
to great advantage in the clear light of an Oriental climate.
The tents were pitched near the northern dyke beneath
the mountain, upon which the Great Pyramid is placed ;
and the transitory nature of these patriarchal and simple
habitations formed a strikins: contrast with the vastness

'o

7 I have had the mortification of hearing, since my return to England,
that these precautions were unavailing, and that the stones have been
uncovered, and broken to pieces. I was extremely anxious that the
British Museum should send for one of these blocks, as the fragments
which I have given to that establishment are rough, and imperfect.

92 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

and comparative duration of the surrounding objects, the
world of moving sand, the vast masses of the ruined
causeway, the desert mountains, and the enduring pyra-
mids established upon them — the silent witnesses of suc-
cessive and countless generations long since passed away,
and forgotten — and the most antient and wonderful mo-
numents of human skill, that seem to set at defiance the
effects of time, and almost to rival in extent and solidity
the productions of nature. The spectacle had also to me
an additional interest, from the conviction that I was on
the point of leaving for ever this wonderful place.

The Shereef received us in an open tent, in which
several people were assembled. In the course of conver-
sation he expressed a desire to see JNIr. Andrews's draw-
ings. They were accordingly sent for. He understood
them much better than I expected, and even pointed out
the portraits of several persons whom he had casually
seen.

After some time had elapsed, preparations were made
for dinner, by laying down two horses' hides upon the
ground before us, and by placing upon them a quantity of
Arab bread, which served for plates as well as for food.°
The guests, having washed their hands, seated themselves,
and begun their repast without further ceremony. I
observed upon this, and upon other occasions, that the
left hand was concealed, and that only the right was in
general employed. Wooden spoons were provided for
each person. Dishes composed of meat, vegetables, and
sweatmeats, in all sorts of basins, cups, and plates, were

^ The antiquity of this custom is proved by the interpretation given
to the denunciations of the Harpy, in the seventh book of the iEueid.

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 93

heaped upon the skins; but the principal feature was a
sheep roasted whole, which two men held up by the
hinder legs opposite to the Shereef, who slashed at it
with a large knife, and managed to cut it into pieces :
water was the only liquor, that I observed : when required,
it was served out in a silver basin. Each individual rose,
when he had finished his meal, washed his hands, and
retired from the tent. I took the opportunity of examin-
ing the horses, that were picketed near it ; and when T
came in for coffee, I got all the information I could,
respecting them. The Shereef informed me that his best
and highest bred horse had been taken to the stables of
Abbas Pasha, and that it was by far more valuable than
the others. I saw this horse in the evening at Cairo. It
was white, and is described in the Appendix as the sire
of the colt, which I brought to England.

Soon afterwards, I took my leave, and returned for
the last time to my tents, where I had been so long
employed, and left Gizeh for Cairo, in company with Mr.
Andrews, and Mr. Hill.

August 5th. — Mr. Mash and Mr. Raven came in the
evening from the Pyramids. The people had been occu-
pied in clearing out the interior of the Third Pyramid.

August 6th. — I received a board from
the Third Pyramid inscribed with hierogly-
phics. It formed the lower part of the
mummy-case belonging to Mycerinus, and
was left with Mr. Perring, in order that it
might be compared with any other pieces
that might afterwards be discovered, which

94 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

soon took place in the manner I have ah'eady described.^ ^
In the evening I had the pleasure of dining witli my
friends, with whom I had been so long engaged at the
Pyramids, to whose assistance I was so much indebted,

9 Mr. Perring was of opinion that some of the boards had been
charred.

^ The coffin found in the Third Pyramid, bears the prenomen of
the monarch, by whom it was erected, and gives the only name satis-
factorily fixed previous to the Sixteenth Dynasty. Although some dif-
ference exists as to the name of the monarch in the different Greek
authorities, by whom he is mentioned, yet they sufficiently agree in the
chief elements of the name, and period ; and the cartouche itself affords
an easy solution on the modern principle of analysing hierogly^phic texts.
Herodotus II. 129, calls the builder of the Third Pyramid Mucherinos,
the successor of Chephren, the son or brother of Cheops, who erected
the first or Great Pyramid. These monarchs appear in the list of Era-
tosthenes, as Moscheris, Sensaophis, and Saophis. Jablonski corrected
the name of Moscheris into Moicheris, as more analogous to its import.
Opuscula I. 752. Diodorus Siculus gives his name as Mukerinos,
or, according to others, Mecherinos, and one reading of Stephanus
Rhodius has the variation of Mencherinos. The same monarch
appears as fourth King of the Fourth Memphite Dynasty of Africanus,
under the title of Mencheres. It is evident, from a comparison of
these variations, that the integral elements of the name are identical,
and that the changes are those of dialect and termination. The car-
touche itself is unpublished, but one of the names of the Fifteenth
Dynasty bears considerable analogy to it (vide Ros. tom. I. tav. iv. 84),
and another given in the same author (Tom. I. tav. ii. 49) phonetically
approaches it in its elements, but the ideographic exactitude, with which
the prenomens of monarchs are composed, renders it doubtful, if not
improbable, that either can possibly refer to the same monarch. The
name read phonetically is Re-men-ka, and is composed of the disc of
the sun, determinative of the re or ra, the central symbol used in the
texts as the letter M, and especially appropriated to express the idea
M'"i I ^ I f..l Mn, Men, or Moun, " construction, monument," &c.,
Wvvv vww '^I'^ch idea, in the cartouche, is rendered by the

Yy;::

•n-lP Teili CtQ-FFIN OIF MlfCKMIlJ^lUS.

iii^/t^w ai- ■ i*/!'

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH. 95

and to ^vhose skill and industry are chiefly due whatever
discoveries may have been made.

August 1th. — The establishment at the Pyramids was

initial symbol, similarly to the contractions common to all monuments.
An inspection of the lists of early monarchs seems to justify the theory,
that the disc of the sun, universally dominant in prenomens, was occa-
sionally suffixed in the spoken dialect. By this metathesis, Men-kah-re
is obtained, comprising all the elements of the names in question ; and
the translation implies, "the dedicated offering to the sun" — sufficiently
near to the paraphrase 'Ha/o^oto? of Eratosthenes.

The whole passage of this author, who derived his information from
Egyptian sources, states O/iQcciav i'oxin'xtve-iv MoV;^J£g«5, 'HXt'o^oTOi' 'ir/i A«f toZ
Js KOB-fiov iiv iToa- y to. In this passage is an ellipsis of <i^ between the first
and second words, and of ovroi Ig^fx-nnl/ncci between 'Moc-p^i^ii and 'Ha/«^ot«5.
" The Seventeenth King of Thebes was Moscheris (Moicheris Jabl.),
whose name means, 'Given to the Sun:' he reigned thirtj^-one years.
It was the three hundred and seventy-third year of the world."

The cartouche is not in any respect similar to those of liis predeces-
sors, Suphis I. and Suphis II., as far as they can be ascertained : it
resembles rather those of the Sixteenth Dynasty, but there is no ti-a-
ditional or internal evidence to determine that Mukerinos was either the
founder or monarch of another line; and the list of Africanus fixes him to
the immediate succession and lineage of Suphis.

Enough has been eliminated of the meaning and application of the
hieroglyphics to enable the whole of the text of the coffin to be made
out; and although the allusion in itself would appear ambiguous, yet
sufficient light is shed upon it by monuments of an approximate and
later era to justify the interpretation. It consists of an address to the
deceased monarch, as identified with Osiris, whose name every embalmed
individual bore. Isis and Nephthys, the sister deities and campanioiis of
Osiris, direct a like invocation to the monarch Enantc f, whose inner
wooden coffin is in the collection of the British Museum. In the hiero-
glyphics of the coffin of Mukerinos, the unity of the king, under his
character of Osiris, is kept up throughout, that deity biing the son of
Netpe and Seb, the Egyptian Rhea, and Saturn. Osiris is called, on the

96 OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

now broken up excepting what was necessary for the
accommodation of Mr. Andrews and of Mr. Ptaven, who
intended to remain ; the former, in order to complete the
drawings he has so kindly undertaken; and the latter

coffin of Onkh-ape, a sacred bard (Brit. Mus.), the " revealed son of

Netpe." The literal meaning of the two lines appears to be as follows : —

Line I. — Osirian, King Men-kah-re of eternal life, engendered of

the Heaven, child of Netpe who extends thy mother ?

Line II. — Netpe over thee, may she watch thy abode of rest in
Heaven, revealing thee to the God (chastiser?) of thy im-
pure enemies, King Men-ka-re living for ever.
The expression "child," in Line I., is indicated by the calf and mouth,
phonetically s h r, derived from the root shaa, oriri, nasci, represented
by the calf and two human arms, with its determinative of the limb of a
victim. (Vide Salvolini, Analyse Grammaticale Raisonnee, PL F, 196.)
The word "rest" is of common occurrence in inscriptions, and is fre-
quently accompanied by the section of a sarcophagus, indicating the
abode of rest, or tomb, over which Socharis particularly presides. The
symbol before the hatchet has been almost all destroyed, but the angular
corner of the head, and the shape of the tail of the bird, is that of the
owl, — a purely phonetic symbol, and not found in a tropical sense. The
deity here referred to is Har, or Horus, identified with Ra, the Sun, the
support and avenger of his father Osiris, and chastiser of the impure (the
mystic enemies of that deity, associates of Typhon, the giants of Greek
mythoi). A personification of the goddess Netpe, kneeling on one knee,
with wings attached to her hands and arms, is commonly found depicted
on the chest of mummy-coffins. On that of Kotb-ti, a female attached to
the worship of Amon (Brit. Mus.), the prayer of the deceased com-
mences, " Oh, Netpe, ' Mother,* extend thy wings over me ;" and
amongst the prayers of the deceased Onkh-ape, the same invocation
occurs : " Extend thy mother, Netpe, over thee, that she may watch
over the abode of rest." The allusion in all these instances is to Osiris,
or the Osirian type of the dead, equally used in embalming the deceased
of either sex. The text of the inscription abounds with the use of
phonetic symbols, proving that at this early period the language had
been definitely formed.

ft.

^■rtj'^ta, 0v c ^ituatum.M^ei'

WiOMA^ & CHI1L.II) C)rA]LEXA:N"IDlRILA..

«

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII. 97

until the Third Pyramid had been effectually cleared
out.

I left Cairo with Mr. Hill, accompanied by Mr.
Brettell, Mr. Perring, and Mr. Andrews, of whom I took
leave near Shoubrah. It was my intention to have gone
by the desert to Alexandria from Rosetta ; but, being
unable to obtain asses at Rosetta owing to a large fair in
the neighbourhood, I returned to Atfee, and arrived by
water at Alexandria, on the 9th August, 1837.

I heard at that place, from Mr. Raven, that he had
cleared the Third Pyramid, and had been at work upon
the pavement of Belzoni's Chamber in the Second. I also
received from Mr. Perring a drawing of the hieroglyphics
inscribed on the mummy-boards, and soon afterwards the
boards themselves together with the bones found in the
Third Pyramid, which are now in the British Museum.
He likewise informed me, that in consequence of a place
for a sarcophagus having been found in the floor of the
Great Chamber in the Third Pyramid, and of the simi-
larity of its pavement with that of Belzoni's Chamber in the
Second, that the latter had been explored in the hope of
finding a concealed passage beneath it, but that nothing
had been discovered excepting the solid rock. As I con-
sidered it an object of great interest, I left directions before
I embarked for Malta, that the whole of the pavement and
the sarcophagus should be examined, which was accord-
ingly done, but without any successful result. I also desired
Mr. Raven to remove the sarcophagus out of the Third
Pyramid, and to sink a shaft in the Great Pyramid,
which has been already alluded to. Mr. Perring likewise
mentioned that the ornaments upon the sarcophagus in the
Third Pyramid resembled those in the tomb of Numbers,

VOL. II. H

98

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEH.

in which is this cartouche. It is also inscribed
upon the blocks sent over by the late Mr.
Salt, which are now in the British Museum.

As it had been arranged that the antiqui-
ties found at the Pyramids were to belong to
the Pacha, every thing, that had been disco-
vered since the 13th of February, was de-
1 livered to Colonel Campbell, who made ap-

plication to Boghos Bey for those articles, which I desired
tb take to England. A list of them is given in the
Appendix, and a few articles are added, which I collected
at Thebes, in Upper Egypt. A hst is likewise given of
those left with Colonel Campbell at Alexandria.

On the 27th of August I took leave of my friends at
that place, and sailed for Malta.

Since my return to this country I have received many
interesting letters from Mr. Perring, containing remarks,
most of which are embodied in this Journal. He entertained
an opinion that a secret passage existed in the Second
Pyramid ; and it may be observed that the same idea
seems always to have prevailed respecting the other
pyramids, and also the tombs at Thebes ; but, although
universally searched for, no such communication has
been found in any of the Pyramids at Gizeh, with the
exception of the concealed entrance in the Third. There

1 This name reads pe-Ojq or pe-^q by a metathesis gives cyqpG,
or ^Cjpe, Shefre or Khefre, Shefrenes or Kefrenes, Ki(p^yiv/i?, the v»?
being a mere Greek terminal; another instance that the solar disc at
the commencement of the prenomen was often suffixed in the spoken
language. The same monarch is called Suphis II. : his name is not
that supposed to be so by M. Rosellini in the cartouche found in the
First Pyramid, and in the Tomb of Trades. — Mr. Birch.

OPERATIONS CARRIED ON AT GIZEII. 99

is, however, a secret passage below the sarcophagus in
the tomb discovered by Signor Belzoni at Thebes.

Mr. Perring sent me several quarry-marks found upon

No. 1.

S)

the stones taken up in Belzoni's Chamber ; and said that
there were also many others, but that they were quite
illegible, and even these do not admit of any interpreta-
tion. No. 1. was found on all the four sides of a block.

The whole of the pavement in Belzoni's Chamber was
examined, and the sarcophagus removed from its place ;
it was bedded in a fine cement, upon a large block of
granite, and great hopes were at first entertained that a
secret entrance was concealed beneath it; but, upon
further examination, the granite proved to be merely a slab
from twelve to eighteen inches in thickness ; and as the
lower face of it was rough and irregular, it was bedded,
like the sarcophagus, in fine cement, or gypsum ; the rock
appeared solid in every other part ; without the slightest
indication of a passage. Mr. Perring is still, however,
of opinion that the principal chamber in this pyramid
is concealed.

APPENDIX.

APPENDIX.

ADMEASUREMENTS AND OTHER PARTICULARS RELATING TO THE
PYRAMIDS, ETC., AT GIZEH.

The three larger Pyramids seem to have been always pre-
eminent for antiquity and for size ; but as the mountains near
Gizeh have been used as a cemetery froui the time of Suphis to
a late period, there were probably many more of these monu-
ments besides those which now exist. We are indeed informed
that several were destroyed by the Vizier Karakousch for the
sake of their materials: at present the remains of nine only are
apparent.

Their dimensions are here inserted, and a few other parti-
culars that have been omitted in the course of this Journal. The
former refer to the large plans published in numbers ; but they
may, in some degree, be applied to the sections given in this
work, and may be also of use to future travellers in Egypt.

The entrances of all these buildings are from the north ; those
of the Great Pyramid, of the Second and Ninth, to the eastward
of the centre; of the Third, Fifth, Seventh, and Eighth, in the
centre; and of the Fourth and Sixth, to the westward.

The sepulchral chambers in the Great Pyramid, in the Second
and Fifth, extend east and west, and are entered from the north
in a straight line with the inclined passages. Those of the other
pyramids are entered by short passages from other apartments on
their eastern sides; and in the Third, Fourth, and Sixth, extend
north and south ; in the Seventh, Eighth, and Ninth, east and
west.

The ceilings in these chambers are flat, with the exception of
those in the Second and Third ; and the walls have been lined
with masonry, excepting those in the chambers of the Second and
Fifth. The Sixth has not been finished.

The sarcophagi, which have been discovered, have been placed
north and south, to the westward of the entrances, and not exactly
in the centre of that side of the chamber, near which they have

104) APPENDIX.

been deposited. Some doubts may exist, bowever, as to tbe
original position of tbose in the Third and Fourth Pyramids.^

I have already mentioned that these buildings appear to have
been begun from the' east, and likewise that all the sepulchral
chambers are formed in the rock, and that, notwithstanding their
enormous extent, the superstructures are almost entirely solid
masses, excepting in the Great Pyramid, where the tomb is in
the masonry, although it has been distinctly stated by Herodotus
to have been a subterraneous chamber of a peculiar description.
I have however sufficiently alluded to this subject, and to our
unsuccessful attempts in search of it. The historian is correct in
many other instances, and it is certain that great precautions
were taken to conceal the position of the sarcophagi. Doubts
may therefore be entertained whether the real tombs have been
discovered in the two larger pyramids, and the truth might be
known respecting the one in question by the removal of the sand,
and of the ground beneath it, to a level with the Nile, along the
foot of the mountain upon which the pyramid is placed; by which
operation any canal for the conveyance of water would inevitably
be discovered. •'

Upon the whole, it appears that, although the same plan
was not followed in their interior arrangements, particularly
in the three larger pyramids, all of them were intended for
the same purpose, and that their construction was carried on
upon the same princijjles ; that the chief masses were formed
with the materials quarried from the spot, and the parts,
which required more exactness, with a finer stone from the
Mokattam, or with granite. The Third Pyramid seems to have
been built in stages, like the Fourth and Sixth Pyramids, and to
have been afterwards completed into one continuous surface.*^

' It is to be remembered tliat tlie sarcophagi in Campbell's Tomb were laid
east and west.

" As part of the casing of the Eighth Pyramid was unfinished, Mr. Perring was
enabled to make the following observations: — lie observes, tiiat the beds and sides
of the blocks were worked to a perfect surface, so that, when put together, the
joints were scarcely visible, but that the faces were roughly hewn and projected, so
as to preserve the edges from being injured in raising the stones required for the
higher parts of the edifice above them, and that, when the whole was completed,
the levelling commenced from the apex downwards by one set of workmen, who
trimmed off" the projecting parts, and by another, who planed them down to a per-
fect and beautiful surface. In the quarries a regular system was carried to a still
greater extent. Tlie rocks were first cleared from rubbish, and levelled ; the blocks
were then marked out; holes for wedges were cut; the stones were split off by

APPENDIX. 105

It is probable that tliey were all carried up in the same manner,
and that these steps were alluded to by Herodotus ; as the courses
of the stones could not have afforded space for machinery of any
extent of power. Mr. Perring, however, has formed a different
opinion as to the interior construction of the Second Pyramid.

The hieroglyphics in the chambers of construction in the
Great Pyramid, and those in the Fourth, are evidently quarry-
marks ; and the total absence of these inscriptions forms a strikino-
contrast to the rest of the Egyptian tombs. The hieroglyphics
and decorations in the Third Pyramid have been in some degree
accounted for.

As it had been supposed that the inclined passages were
intended for astronomical purposes, I mentioned the circumstance
to Sir John Herschel, who, with the utmost kindness, examined
the annexed Table, and entered into various calculations to ascer-
tain the fact. I also informed Sir John of the allusion in the
" Quarterly Review" to M. Caviglia's remarks respecting the
polar star,^ and likewise of its having been seen by Captains Irby
and Mangles from the inclined passage in the Great Pyramid at
the period of its culminating, on the night of 21st March, 1817.*

M. Caviglia's lemarks, contained in a letter to Mr. Hamilton,
dated September 21 st, 1818, are as follow : —

"Tons les chemins qu'il y a dans I'interieur de ce monument
(la Grande Pyramide), ceux qui sont en pente, forment un angle
de 27° avec ceux qui sont en ligne horizontale. Mais ce qui a
merite mon attention est que Ton cesse de voir I'Etoile Polaire
on avant qu'on eut bouche le chemin Ton cessoit de descendre
pour monter."

M. Caviglia, no doubt, could have seen the star from this
passage, but the manner in which he observed it is not clearly
described ; nor can, after all, any conclusion be drawn from the
present length of the passage, either from the entrance to the
beginning of the ascending communication, or in any other parts
of it, because, owing to the dilapidated state of the exterior of

wedges, and they were afterwards removed ; so that these operations appeared to
have been performed simultaneously by successive gangs of workmen. It was
therefore evident that the advantages of a division of labour were duly appreciated
by the antient Egyptians.

' I beg leave to assure Sir John Herschel that I fully appreciate the honour he
has done me by having considered the question, and by having allowed me to pub-
lish the highest possible authority on this interesting subject.

* See M. Caviglia's "Discoveries in 1817;" "Translations and Abstracts of
various Authors."

106

APPENDIX.

the pyramid, the top of the passage has lost twenty-one feet six
inches of its original length, and, of course, the hottom propor-
tionahly more.

It would appear, that the direction of the passage was deter-
mined by the star, which was polar at the time when the pyramid
was constructed, and that the exact aspect of the buikling was
regulated by it ; but for the reasons already stated, it could not
have been used for celestial observation. The coincidence of the
relative position of a Draconis with the supposed date of the
pyramid, is at all events very remarkable.

A Table shelving the exterior angles of the buildings, the inclina-
tions, and proportions of the inclined passages, and also the
dimensions of the sarcophagi, that have been found in the nine
existing Pyramids at Gizeh.^

PASSAGES.

SARCOPHAGI.

Pyramids.

Ang

e.

Length.

Height.

Breadth.

Height
above base.

Angle of
Building.

Height.

Width.

0

,

Ft.

In.

Ft. In.

Ft.

In.

Ft. In.

0 /

Ft. In.

Ft. In.

Great

26

41

320

10

3 11

3

54

49 0

51 50

3 5

3 3

Second

25

55

104

10

3 11

3

5i

37 8

52 20

3 0

3 6i

Tliird

26

2

104

0

3 114

3

H

13 0

51 0

2 11

3 1

Fourth

27

0

27

0

3 6

3

3

without the
building.

In steps.

2 7

2 7

Fifth

27

12

56

9

3 111

3

54

2 6

52 15

3 14

3 3

Sixth

30

0

47

9

3 11

3

2

without the
building.

In steps.

No Sarcophagus.

Seventh

33

35

55

3

4 0

3

6

At the base.

52 10

Not found.

Eighth

34

5

37

0

4 0

3

6

8 9

52 10

Not found.

Nintli

28

0

53

0

3 11

3

5

2 6

52 10

Not found.

The base of the Great Pyramid was above high Nile, in 1837,
138 ft. 9 in.

The base of the Second is above the base of the Great Pyramid
33 ft. 2 in.

The base of the Third is above the base of the Great Pyramid
41 ft. 7 in.

* The tliree Pyramids of Abouseir are situated about seven miles to the south-
eastward from Gizeh, on a ridge about eighty feet above the plain. The angle of
building of the northern is 51° 35'; that of the descending passage in the northern
front 27° 5'. The angle of building of the Middle Pyramid, and that of the
entrance, could not be ascertained, on account of its dilapidated stute. The angle
of building of the Southern Pyramid was not discovered, but that of the entrance
was 26°.

APPENDIX. 107

The base of the three Pyramids, south of the Third, are lower
than the base of the Tliird, 16 ft. 8 in.

The bases of the three Pyramids east of the Great Pyramid,
appear to be on a level with it.

The Second Pyramid is about 400 ft. to the south of the Great
Pyramid.

The Tiiird Pyramid is about 750 ft. to the south of the Second.

Sir John HerscheVs Obsennitions on the Entrance Passages in the
Pyramids of Gizeh.

Four thousand years ago, the present polar star, a Ursae
Minoris, could by no possibility have been seen at any time in the
twenty-four hours through the gallery in the Great Pyramid, on
account of the precession of the equinoxes ; which, at that time,
would have displaced every star in the heavens, from its then ap-
parent position on the sphere by no less a quantity than 55° 45'
of longitude, and would have changed all the relations of the con-
stellations to the diurnal sphere.

The supposed date of the pyramid, 2123 years B.C., added to
our present date, 1839, form 3iJ62 years (say 4000), and the effect
of the precession on the longitudes of the stars in that interval
having been to increase them all by the above-named quantity, it
will follow that the pole of the heavens at the erection of the
pyramid must have stood very near to the star a Draconis, that
is 2° 51' 15" from it to the westward, as we should now call it ;
a Draconis was therefore at that time the polar star ; and as it is
comparatively insignificant, and only of the third magnitude, if
so much,^ it can scarcely be supposed that it could have been seen
in the daytime even in the climate of Gizeh, or even from so
dark a recess as the inclined entrance of the Great Pyramid. A
latitude, however, of 30°, and a polar distance of the star in ques-
tion of 2° 51' 15" would bring it at its lower culmination to an
altitude of 27° 9 1 ', and therefore it would have been directly in
view of an observer stationed in the descending passage — the
opening of which, as seen from a point sixty-three feet within,
would, by calculation, subtend an angle of 7° 7' ; and even from
the bottom near the sepulchral chamber would still appear of at
least 2° in breadth. In short, speaking as in ordinary par/awce, the

' In the catalogue of the Astronomical Society, the magnitude of « Draconis is
stated as intermediate between the third and fourth. It is certainly inferior to the
third; and it is to be observed, that there is not any larger star near it, which could
at that epoch have been preferred as a pole star.

108

APPENDIX.

passage may be said to have been directly pointed at a Draconis
at its inferior culmination, at which moment its altitude above the
horizon of Gizeh (lat. 30) would have been 27° 9' — refraction
being neglected as too trifling (about 2) to affect the question.
The present polar star a Ursae Minoris was, at that epoch, 23°
more or less in arc from the then pole of the heavens, and, of
course, at its lower culmination, it was only 7° above the horizon
of Gizeh.

No other astronomical relation can be drawn from the
table containing the angles and dimensions of the passages, for
although they all point within five degrees of the pole of the
heavens, they differ too much and too irregularly to admit of any
conclusions.

The exterior angles of the buildings are remarkably uniform,
but the angle 52° is not connected with any astronomical fact, and
was probably adopted for architectural reasons.

CALCULATIONS.

Por. of a. Draconis for 1839.

R.A., 1830 =13" 59'" 46"6 Due 1830 =65° 11' 26" (See Ast. See. Cat.)

Preces.sioii + 9 years= + 14*-6 Pre. + 9 years = — 2 36

14 0 1-2
Reduced to Arc 210° 0' 18"= a

Go 8 50 =SA)r 1839.

Precession in Longitude for + 1 year, epocli 1800 + 50" "22350

Variation for 2000 years backwards, to obtain a mean ) ^^^ 0" 04886

rate of precession for 4000 ... j + 50- 17464

jMultiply by years ... ... ... — 4000

Precession in Long. = — 200C97"-56 = — 55° 44' 57 ''56
or correctly enough for the purpose

- 200697-36000
55° 44' 58 '

P the present place of the north pole.

P' its place 4000 years ago.

a the star a. Draconis.

/S its projection on the equinoctial.

nr :i!= /; = 210° o' 18 " = «.

T =2= = 180
:0: /3 = 30 0 18 = angle ^ P «

In Spherical Triangle P n P'.
Given angle P n P = 55° 44' 58 ".
P n = P' n = obliquity of ecliptic at a
mean epoch, 2000 years back.

APPENDIX. 109

Obliquity in00y = 23°27'55" Required l.st side P P'.

Var. lor -20007 = + 1 31 2d angle P' P n.

23 29 26 = obliquity to be, and = P n = P' n.

Solution of Triangle n P P'.

Sin. 4 P n P'=Si!i. 27° 52' 29". . 9-6G98186 Tan. 27° 52' 29" ... 97233852

Sin. obliquity 96005.350 Cos. obliquity ...9 9624319

Sin. 4 P P' = 10° 44' 25" 9-2703536 Cotan. 64° T 22" ... 9 6858171

Angle P' P n = 64° T 22"
PP'= 21° 28' 50".

:Q= P n = 90° In Triangle P' P a given P P' = 21° 28' 50"

^ P a = 30° 0' 18" P a = 24 51 10 = 90 - 8

« P n = 59 59 42 ^"g^« P 1 P « = 4 7 40

P' P n = 64 7 22

Required « P .

P'Pa = 4 7 40 Cos. 21 28 50 99687359

Cos. 4° 7' 40" 9-9988720 Cos. 2 25 22 9 9996116

Tan. 21 28 50 9-5949652 9-9683475

Tan. a' 21 25 48 9-5938372 Cos. 21 25 48 9 9688865

24 51 10 Cos. P' a = 2 51 15 9-9994610

2 25 22

Note. — These calculations, which take in all the influence of the secular
variations of precession, &c., may be considered quite equal, in point
of precision, to any direct observation, that an Egyptian astronomer
of that date could have made.

TABLE OF DIMENSIONS OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.

The particulars of this pyramid, and the discoveries lately
made, have been already described. The hieroglyphics in the
Chambers of Construction are inserted at page 279, Vol. I.

Former base _ _ _

Present base . - - -

Present height, perpendicular

Former height, inclined » - -

Present height, inclined

Perpendicular height, by casing-stones

Angle of casing-stones 51° 50'.

Perpendicular height from base to bottom of entrance 49 0

Distance of the centre of this entrance eastward from the

centre of the pyramid - - - 24 6

Feet.

Inches.

764

0

746

0

450

9

611

0

568

3

480

9

110

APPENDIX.

Breadth of passage - - - -

Height perpendicular, to incline

Angle of entrance-passage 26° 41'.

Length from beginning of roof to the junction at the

bottom of upper passage^ _ - -

Thence to the forced passage
From the forced passage to the well
From the well to the horizontal passage
s^ Total length of inclined passage - - -

Horizontal passage.

Breadth . _ _ ,

Height _ _ - .

Length _ _ _ .

Subterraneous chamber.

East and west . - - -

North and south . . _

Height ....

Northern side, distant from the centre of the pyramid
northwards . - - _

Eastern side is distant from the centre of the pyra-
mid eastwards . . _

Depth from the base of the pyramid to the roof
Passage to the southward.

Length _ . . .

Breadth _ - . .

Height ....

Upper passage.

From the end of the granite blocks to the great
passage, including the space of 14 feet 9 inches
at present occupied by the granite blocks

Height - - . .

Breadth ....

Angle 26° 18'.
Great passage.

Vertical height ...

Length to the step leading to the king's chamber -

From the step to the passage leading to the king's
chamber _ _ _

Feet.

Inche

3

5i

3

11

63

2

17

10

215

2

24

8

320

10

2

9

3

0

27

0

46

0

27

1

11

6

8

0

25

11

90

8

52

9

2

7

2

5

124

4

3

11

3

51

28

0

150

10

^ This passage has lost more than twenty-three feet of its original length, owing
to the dilapidated state of the exterior of the building.

The block immediately over the entrance is 12 feet 6 inches wide, and 8 feet
6 inches in height, vertically to the incline. The two lower of the four blocks,
placed en dkharge above it, are 7 feet in width, and the two upper, 6 feet 8 inches.

Feet.

Inches

156

0

3

5h

1

H

2

0

22

1

3

8

3

5h

12

5

17

1

34

3

19

1

138

9

16

3

26

3

APPENDIX. Ill

Total length of great passage

Breadth between ramps

Breadth of each ramp - . _

Height of ramp _ . .

Length of passage to the king's chamber, including

the portcullis _ _ -

Height . - - -

Breadth _ . . -

Height of portcullis _ _ -

King's chamber.

North and south _ _ _

East and west _ . _

Height _ . _ -

From base of pyramid to floor

Northern side is distant from the centre of the pyra-
mid, southwards _ _ _
Eastern side is distant, eastwards

There is supposed to be a difference of a quarter
of an inch in one of the sides of the chamber,
which is probably an inflection in the stone.

Northern and southern air-channels.

Inclined height from the base of pyramid
Distance from eastern side of king's chamber
Height from floor _ - -

Height . . - -

Breadth . _ - -

Length from king's chamber to the outward part of

the northern air-channel - - -

Height _ _ . -

Breadth _ _ - -

Length from king's chamber to the outward part of

the southern air-channel
Height . . - -

Breadth _ _ - -

The mouth of the southern air-channel in the
king's chamber has been forced, but it was
probably of the same size as the other.

Sarcophagus in the king's chamber.
Outside.

Length - - - - 7 6J

Breadth - - - - 3 3

Height - - - - 3 5

331

0

8

1

3

0

0

6

0

8

233

0

0

9^

0

9

174

3

0

n

0

Bi

112 APPENDIX.

Feet. Inches.
Inside.

Length - - - - 6 6

Breadth - - - - 2 2J

Depth - - - - 2 10|

Passage leading to Davison's chamber.

Length - - - - 24 9

Davison's chamber, discovered by Mr. Davison, 1764.

East and west - - - - 38 4

North and south - - - 17 1

Height varies from 2 feet 6 inches to 3 feet 6 inches.

Wellington's chamber, discovered by Col. Howard Vyse,
March 30, 1837.
East and west - - - - 38 6

North and south - - - 17 0

Height varies from 2 feet 2 inches to 3 feet 8 inches.

Nelson's chamber, discovered by Col. Howard Vyse,
April 25, 1837.
East and west - - - 38 9

North and south - - - 16 8

Height varies from 2 feet to 4 feet 10 inches.

Lady Arbuthnot's chamber, discovered by Col. Howard
Vyse, May 6, 1837.
* East and west - - - - 37 4

North and south - - - 16 4

Height varies from 1 foot 4 inches to 4 feet 5 inches.

Col. Campbell's chamber, discovered by Col. Howard
Vyse, May 27, 1837.
East and west - - - - 37 1 0

North and south - - - 20 6

Height in the centre varies from 5 feet 10 inches to

8 feet 7 inches.
Perpendicular height from floor of the king's to roof

of Col. Campbell's chamber - - 69 3

Passage leading to queen's chamber.

From northern end of great passage to the beginning

of the low passage - - -

The low passage to the step
From the step to the queen's chamber
Total length of passage

Breadth of passage - _ -

Height before step
Height beyond step - . .

Queen's chamber.

North and south - - - 17 0

16

7

92

0

17

11

109

11

3

5h

3

10

5

8

APPENDIX.

113

East and west , - .

Height to commencement of roof
Extreme height of roof
Recess in eastern side.
Width at the bottom

Height . _ - .

Depth to the forced passage
From the western side of the chamber to the centre

of the Pyramid - . -

From the southern side of the chamber to the centre

of the Pyramid _ _ _

From the base of the Pyramid to the floor of the
chamber _ _ . _

Feet.

Inches.

18

9

14

9

20

3

5

1

15

3

3

5

2 10

67

Well.

26

1

32

5

133

0

191

6

2

4

22

0

Depth of perpendicular shaft

Thence to grotto . _ .

From grotto to the bottom -

Total depth

Square . _ _

Height of top of the rock from base of Pyramid

Note. — As the mouth of the well has been forced
through the masonry, Mr. Perring supposes
that it was not part of the original design, but,
if the upper inclined passage was filled with
solid masonry, it was the only way by which
the workmen could go out after they had closed
up the passage from the upper end of it.

The platform on the top of the Pyramid is about
thirty-three feet square ; above this are four
or five stones belonging to the upper layers.

Acres. Roods. Poles.
Former extent of base - 13 1 22

Present extent of base - 12 3 3

Supposing the rock to average eight feet over the
extent of base, and deducting the space occu-
pied by chambers and passages, the original
quantity of masonry would be - 89,028,000 cubic feet.
The present quantity of masonry would

be - - - 82,111,000 do.

Or, - - - - 6,848,000 tons.

6,316,000 do.
The space occupied by chambers and passages
being only 56,000 cubic feet, or X3W °^ ^^®
whole mass.
VOL. II. I

y

Feet.

Inches,

33

6

1

9

114 APPENDIX.

Pavement at the centre of the northern front.
Width from the original base
Thickness of stones

Note. — The chasm discovered in the pavement

was about 47 feet 6 inches deep.
The courses of stone in the Pyramid vary from
^^"^ 2 feet 2 inches, to 4 feet 10 inches in height.

Mr. Perring's Account of the Shaft sunk in the Subterraneous
Chamber, during the Summer of 1838.

Base of the Great Pyramid was above the Nile in 1838 137
The rise, that has gradually taken in the bed of the river,

is (according to Mr. Wilkinson) about - 10

147
From the base of the pyramid to the ceiling Feet. Inches.

of the subterraneous apartment - 90 8

Height of apartment - - 116

Probable height of any undiscovered chamber 10

112 2

35 1

The shaft has been sunk to the depth of 36 feet.

THE SECOND PYRAMID.

As the rock upon which the Pyramids are placed rises con-
siderably to the westward, in preparing a base for the Second, it
has been levelled so as to form an area round the building,
bounded on the western and northern sides by a low cliff, in
ji which grottoes containing shafts have been excavated ; but imme-
diately under the pyramid, the rock has been merely stepped up
in horizontal layers, and it appears at the south-western corner
eleven feet ten inches, and at the north-western fourteen feet
three inches above the base.^ The stone that has been removed

^^^ was no doubt used in the building. Sepulchral shafts have been
sunk before the northern front; and the rock sounds hollow in

jP^ several places between the two larger pyramids; and probably

• See page 160, Vol. I.

APPENDIX. 115

contains many subterraneous chambers and passages : but, as I
have before observed, owing to the echoes, occasioned by the
immense size and relative positions of these vast buildings, the
ear is not entirely to be trusted.

The structure appears to have been surrounded by a pavement,
although its extent has not been ascertained, excepting at the
centre of the northern front; and a substruction of large stones has
been laid at some distance from the north-eastern and south-
eastern angles of the building, in order, probably, to secure the
base.

The two lower tiers, about seven or eight feet in height, have
been facings of granite, as Herodotus has truly described ; but,
with the exception of the entrance-passage (likewise composed of
that material), the masonry is by no means equal to that of the
Great Pyramid.

Mr. Perring is of opinion that the interior is divided by
massive walls of wrought stone into square compartments, which
have been filled up with a sort of gigantic rubble-work, composed
of large blocks and of mortar ; however that may be, it is so irre-
gularly built, that since the removal of the casing, the desert sand
and rain have penetrated in several places to a considerable dis-
tance. It was this looseness of construction that impeded jNI.
Belzoni's operations, and occasioned the stones to collapse in the
excavation made by the Caliphs.

The stones on the summit of the building have been thrown
down ; the top of it is, at present, about nine feet square ; the
casing has also been removed to within 130 to 150 feet of the present
summit. It was made of a hard stone from the Mokattam, of the
same quality as the blocks at the base of the Great Pyramid, and
the part, which now remains, was probably left on account of the
difficulty of removing it.9

The ruined building near the eastern front, and those similarly
placed near the Great and Third Pyramids' have been probably
hypaethral temples. The remains of another construction, built
with enormous blocks, are likewise to be seen opposite the southern
front.

The inscription found by M. Belzoni in this pyramid is given in
his book, page 272, from a translation by M. Salame, as follows :
*' The master, Mohammed Ahmed Lapicide, has opened them ;

® The casing appears to have been perfect in 1638 (see extracts from Sandy's,
Villamout's, and Greaves's travels) — it is said to have been dilapidated by Careri, in
1695.

116 APPENDIX.

and the master, Otlimau, attended this (opening) ; and the king,
Alij Mohammed, at first (from the beginning) to the closing up."
The following note is added : " The Arabic to which 1 gave the
meaning of these last words ('to the closing up') is not spelt
correctly in the paper I saw, — a fault which I attribute to the
transcriber from the stone. It ought to be o^UXjj instead of
4^^^ the latter word not being to be found in the Arabic lan-
guage. The words between the parentheses in the translation are
not in the original. A. S."

Professor Lee, of Queen's College, Cambridge, in a letter to
Lord Aberdeen, dated October 2Ath. 1819, gives the following
version of this inscription: — "The master, Mohammed, son of
Ahmed, the stone-cutter, first opened them ; and upon this occa-
sion were present El Melee Othman, and the master, Othman,
and Mohammed Lugleik." The learned professor adds in a note
that by "them" it is intended to express the chambers in this
pyramid. He also remarks that the event appears to have been
recorded by Abd Allatif, and to have related to the project of
taking down the pyramids, entertained by Melic Alaziz, Othman
Ben TosouflF, and to his unsuccessful attempt upon the Third in
1 196-7, when part of that pyramid was removed ; and that
although no account exists of it that the Second might have been
opened at that time. He observes that Makrisi's book, entitled
' An Introduction to a Knowledge of the Royal Dynasties,' and
dated a year before the attempt upon the Third Pyramid, contains
the following passage, in which the opening of the two larger
pyramids appears to be described before any attack had been
made upon the Third. " In the month Dhi thijjat, Alaziz Othman
conceiA^ed a design of destroying the Pyramids, and of carrying
the stones to the walls of Damietta ; but, upon being informed
that the expense of demolishing them would be great, and the
gain, as regarded the stones, but small, he turned his attention
from the larger pyramids to the smaller one, which was built with
granite, and began to destroy it."^ Professor Lee remarks that the
Great Pyramid has remained open since the time of El Mamoon ;
and that it was therefore probable that he would attack the Second
in preference to the Third ; and also that the author states that
Abd Allah Ebn Ali Othman Ebn Youssef El Makhrumi died in

' It does not appear from this passage that any design existed to examine or
open the Pyramids, but to take them down for the sake of their materials; and, in
tliat case, the one which could be most easily destroyed would be preferred.

Feet.

Indies,

707

9

690

9

454

3

447

6

572

6

563

6

APPENDIX. 117

that year. He then quotes from Soyuti the following passages : —
" When Ahmed Ebu Tuloon dug down*^ to the doors of the
Pyramids they found a vessel of pearl ; but he gave up the iiope
of opening them." " In the time of Ahmed Ebn Tuloon a number
of people entered the Great Pyramid, and found in one of the
chambers a cup of glass with wonderful colours. When Ahmed
Tuloon was informed of this he gave orders that none should
enter it." By which it would seem that both El Mamoon, and
also Ebn Tuloon visited these buildings.

TABLE OF DIMENSIONS.

Former base _ _ _

Present base _ _ _ -

Former height, perpendicular

Present height, perpendicular

Former height, inclined

Present height, inclined - _ _

Angle 52° 20'.

Square of platform on the top about - - 9 0

From present top to bottom of casing from 130 to 150 ft.

Upper entrance-passage.

Note. — This passage has lost much of its original
length owing to the dilapidated state of the
exterior of the building.

Height of the bottom above the base of the pyramid 37 8
Centre of passage eastward from the centre of py-
ramid - - - - 43 10
Angle 25° 55'.

* The expression " dug down to the doors" would seem to intimate merely the
removal of the rubbish; and if the doors were found, and not afterwards opened,
it may be inferred that they were closed up v\illi solid masonry of a stronger con-
struction than the rest of the building, and, in that case, the forced entrances in the
two larger pyramids may be accounted tor : still, however, I am of opinion that all
of them have been visited in very early times. It has been supposed that the Great
Pyramid was opened by El Mamoon in 829, a.h. ; but it has also been believed from
the following observations of Dionysius Telmaghre, that it had been previously
entered : — " Nous avons regarde par une ouerture, qui etoit faile dans I'un de ces
edifices, et qui est profonde de cinquante coudees," Sec. Professor White conceives
that the passage refers to the opening made by El Mamoon; but that would not
affect a former violation of the tomb by the regular entrance.

118

APPENDIX.

Length from first covering-stone to horizontal pass-
age . - . -

Horizontal passage to portculHs
Thickness of portcullis . _ -

From portcullis to the end of granite -

Breadth _ _ _ -

Height - _ _ _

From end of granite to first descent
Height of passage _ - _

Breadth - _ - _ _

Perpendicular descent to the bottom of M. Caviglia's

passage - _ _ .

M. Caviglia's inclined passage.

Length - _ _ _

Angle 21° 40'.

Depth from floor to lower inclined passage -
Length of passage from first descent to second

— from second descent to lower inclined passage
From lower inclined passage to Belzoni's Chamber

Breadth _ - _ -

Height - _ _ _

Belzoni's Chamber, length east and west

breadth north and south

Height to commencement of roof

Extreme height - - _ -

Distance from east side to the passage
Centre of pyramid west of chamber
Centre of pyramid south of chamber
Extent of floor of rock from the eastern end
Pavement of limestone
Sarcophagus.

Exterior length - _ _ -

— breadth - - -

— height - - - _
Interior length - _ _

— breadth _ - _

— depth _ _ _
Distance from southern side of chamber
From western side - - _

Lower inclined passage.

Length to horizontal passage

Breadth _ _ - >

Height _ _ _ _

Angle 21° 40'.

Feet.

Inches.

104

10

3

3g

1

^

3

b\

3

5|

3

11

14

2

5

10

3

5i

6 9

4

4

8

7

29

9

128

4

3

51

5

10

46

2

16

2

19

3

22

5

8

7

8

0

3

10

16

0

30

0

8

7

3

6i

3

0

7

0

2

2i

2

5

4

4

3

7

96

4

3

5i

3

11

APPENDIX.

119

Lower horizontal passage.

Length to inchned entrance to lower chamber
From entrance to lower chamber to portcullis
Breadth _ _ _ -

Height - - . .

Thickness of portcullis
From portcullis to mouth of lower entrance on the

exterior of the pyramid
Breadth . - - -

Height _ _ . .

Angle 22° 15'.

Inclined entrance to lower chamber.

Length _ _ _ -

Breadth _ _ _ _

Height . - _

Angle 20° 50'.

Lower chamber.

Length east and west _ - _

Breadth north and south

Height at sides . - - -

Height in centre _ _ _

Pavement.

Width from the base in centre of northern front -

Supposing the rock to average eight feet over

the extent of base, the original quantity of

Feet.

Inches,

23

11

26

5

3

H

5

11

1

1

100

0

3

51

3

11

22

0

3

5

3

s

34

1

10

2

6

0

8

5

36 0

masonry would be - -

71,670,000 cubic feet,

Or, . . . . .

5,309,000 tons.

Present quantity of masonry

65,928,000 cubic feet.

Or,

4,883,000 tons.

Acres.

Roods. Poles.

Former extent of base - 1 1

1 38

Present extent of base - 10

3 30

THE THIRD PYRAiMID.

[For a description of the Interior, see p. 72, Sec. Vol. II.]

In order to obtain a level for the site of this Pyramid, instead
of lowering the rock towards the westward, a substruction, more
than ten feet in depth, has been laid in the opposite direction,
and particularly towards the north-eastwards, where the rock falls
considerably. This foundation is composed of two tiers of im-
mense blocks, and extends to a considerable distance beyond the

120 APPENDIX.

north-eastern angle, where it forms a sort of pavement, and has,
no doubt, been covered over with finer masonry.

The bulk of the pyramid has been more carefully and com-
pactly built than the two larger, and the stones have been better
finished, and are of a greater size. It has been carried up in
steps or stages, diminishing towards the top like those in the
Fourth and Sixth Pyramids ; and the angular spaces have been
afterwards filled up, so as to complete the pyramidal form.

The casing has been taken away at various times : some of
it was removed a few years ago to assist in the construction of
the arsenal at Alexandria ; and it was afterwards intended to
remove the whole structure, as material for the projected barrage.

The lower part of the casing consisted of polished granite, as
the antient historians have described ; ^ but the eleven or twelve
courses- towards the bottom are not worked smooth, but form a
sort of rusticated base, inclining like the rest of the pyramid.

It is most probable that both the chasms in the northern
front were made by the Mamelucs : but Mr. Perring was in-
formed, that the lower was the work of M. Jeniel, and that that
gentleman had made several unsuccessful attempts to discover an
entrance on the southern and eastern fronts, and also in the pit
before the centre of the northern.

The entrance into this pyramid does not appear to have been
concealed ; indeed it is said that the name of the monarch, for
whom it was intended, was inscribed over it.^

TABLE OF DIMENSIONS.

Base _ _ _ _

Present height, perpendicular

inclined

Former height, perpendicular

inclined

Angle of casing, 51°.

Square of platform at top, about - - 16 0

Present height of granite, perpendicular from the base.

On the western side - - - 36 9

On the northern side - - - 25 10

Upper excavation made by the Mamelucs.

Height from the base - - - 713

' As far as C in vertical section. ' The antient liistorians say fifteen.

' Diodorus Siculus, lib. i. p. 164.

Feet.

Inches.

354

6

203

0

261

4

218

278

2

APPENDIX.

121

Average breadth - _ _

Depth from the face of pyramid -
Lower excavation.

Height from the base - - _

Average breadth - _ _

Depth from tlie face of pyramid -
Height from the base to the gallery, began by M. Ca-
viglia at the southern end of excavation made by
the Mamelucs _ - - .

Extent of excavation made by M. Caviglia from No-
vember 1836 to 13th February, 1837
Extent to which that excavation was carried from thence
by Colonel Howard Vyse, to centre of the first shaft
Depth of the first shaft . - .

Horizontal passage to centre of second shaft
Depth of second shaft to the rock at the bottom of the
pyramid _ _ _ _

Extent of gallery between first and second shafts

towards the centre of the pyramid
Extent of gallery at the bottom of second shaft towards
the centre of the pyramid . _ _

Note. — Both these latter excavations intersect
the centre of the pyramid.

Excavation eastward at the bottom, of the second shaft
Depth of pit sunk at bottom of second shaft into the

rock - _ _ _

Entrance-passage in centre of northern front.
Perpendicular height from bottom of passage to base
Angle of passage 26° 2'.
Length of granite sides and floor
Length of granite roof _ _ -

Total length from entrance to bottom of incline
Breadth _ - _ _

Height perpendicular to incline
From bottom of incline to anteroom
Anteroom, length north and south
Breadth east and west . _ _

Height - _ - . -

From anteroom to end of the three portcullises
Passage from portcullis to large apartment.

Length _ _ . _

Breadth - _ _ _

Height . _ - -

Angle of passage 4°.

Feet.

Inches,

12

0

38

0

35

3

11

0

31

0

77

6

6

0

52

0

29

0

11

6

49

6

18

6

22

0

13 0

4 6

13 0

28

2

29

8

104

0

3

5 J

3

Hi

4

3

12

0

10

5

7

0

13

5

41

3

3

51

5

10

122

APPENDIX.

Feet. IncLes.

Large apartment.

Total length east and west

Breadth north and south _ - -

Length from east end to pilasters

Height of apartment from east end to pilasters

Height at west end - _ -

Former height of apartment westward of the

pilasters, where the floor was paved on a level

with eastern end . _ -

Present height varies on account of the irregularity

of the rock composing the floor from 12 ft. 11

in. to 13 ft. 4 in.
Place for a sarcophagus.

Distance from the western side of the apartment
Distance from the northern side of the apartment
Length north and south

Breadth east and west - . -

Depth in the rock - - _

Depth from the level of the former pavement, now

removed - _ - -

Breadth of pilasters - - -

Projection of pilasters _ _ _

Descending passage into the sepulchral chamber.*

Distance of its entrance from the eastern end of

the large apartment
Length to portcullis _ - _

Total height of passage
Height of ramp on each side
Breadth between ramps

Breadth of ramps - - -

Thickness of portcullis removed
From portcullis to bottom of incline
Length of horizontal passage to the apartment of

the sarcophagus . - _

Breadth - - - _

Height - - - >

Sepulchral chamber.

Length north and south - _ _

Breadth east and west

Height at the sides - _ _

Height at the centre - - _

46

3

12

7

34

6

15

10

13

4

12 0

2

10

2

0

8

7

3

4

1

3

2

7

3

0

1

0|

17

0

30

0

4

9

2

4

2

IH

0

11

0

10

2

5

10

0

4

6

6

9

21

8

8

7

8

9

11

3

* The passage was built up to the height of the ramp, for the length of sixteen
feet nine inches; in order, it would appear, to prevent the removal of the sar-
cophagus.

APPENDIX. 123

Feet. Inches.

0

6

3

8

2

6

8

0

3

1

2

11

6

5

2

Oi

2

Oh

Average length of stones meeting in the middle,

and composing the roof, is about
Thickness out of which the coving is cut
Thickness of granite lining, about
Sarcophagus.

Outside, length. - _ _

— breadth _ - _

— height _ _ _
Inside, length . - _

— breadth _ - _

— depth - - _
Difference of the level of the room containing the

niches below that of the passage leading to the
sepulchral chamber, from whence the commu-
nication is by seven steps
Length of the seven steps

Width of steps _ _ _

Room containing niches.

Length, north and south

Breadth, east and west

Height ....

Four niches on the eastern side.

Width . . . .

Height - - .

Depth ....

Two niches on the northern side.
Width

Height ...

Depth ... -

Note. — This room is not parallel to that of the
sarcophagus, but lays 25' east of north.

Upper passage from the large apartment.^

* This passage leads from the large apartment through the rock to the masonry,
and at the upper end of it are several forced passages, that appear to have been made
many years before. One of them extends 5 feet to the west, from the end of the
passage, and ascends about 11 feet, and then slopes upwards to the south-east to the
distance of 12 feet 6 inches, then continues horizontally to the southward, 35 feet
6 inches; afterwards inclines westward 6 feet 10 inches, and returns to the south
for 5 feet, and terminates in the masonry. Another excavation, 4 feet eastward of
the passage, ascends perpendicularly for 7 feet, runs southward horizontally 8 feet,
and then to the eastward 9 feet, where it terminates in the masonry. The highest
point of rock at the upper end of this passage, is 9 feet 2 inches above the external
base of the pyramid.

3

3

6

0

3

3

17

6

6

3

6

7

2

10

4

10

8

3

2

2

4

10

8

5

124 APPENDIX.

Feet. Inches.
Distance from the ceiling to the top of the entrance 1 7
Horizontal part

Length - - - 16 9

Height - - - 4 7

Breadth - - - 3 5i

Inclined part.

Length - - - - 63 7

Height - - - 3 lU

Breadth - - - - 3 5|

Angle 27° 34".
Perpendicular depth from the base of the pyramid to

the floor of the large apartment - - 34 8

Perpendicular depth from the base to the floor of apart-
ment of the sarcophagus - - - 51 0
Distance from the centre of the pyramid southwards, to

the northern side of the large apartment - 3 3

Distance from the centre of the pyramid westward,

from the eastern end of the large apartment - 10 4

Square of platform on the summit - - 16 0

Original quantity of masonry - 9,132,000 cubic feet,

Or, - - - 702,460 tons

Present quantity of masonry - 8,220,900 cubic feet.

Or, - - - 632,370 tons.

Acres. Roods. Poles.
Extent of base - - 2 3 21

TABLE OF DIMENSIONS OF THE FOURTH PYRAMID,

THE CENTRAL SOUTH OF THE THIRD.

[For the description of this Pyramid, see page 45, &c. Vol. II.]

Square of base . _ _ _

Height of first step . _ _

second step _ _ .

third step - _ _

fourth step - - -

Total height - _ _ _

Square of the summit, about - _ _
Horizontal distance of entrance from the northern front

Distance of the entrance westward from centre of

pyramid - - - - 12 0

102

6

17

3

19

6

19

6

13

3

69

6

23

4

13

0

APPKNDIX. 125

Inclined entrance-passage.

Length . _ -

Height

Width
Angle 27°.
Anteroom.

Length, east and west

Breadth, north and south

Height _ - -

Inclined passage leading to sepulchral chamber.

Length _ _ _

Width

Height . _ -

Angle, 21° 14'.
Sepulchral chamber.

Length, north and south

Breadth, east and west

Height . - .

Depth of the roof below base
Sarcophagus.

Exterior, length

breadth

height

Interior, length

• breadth

depth

Thickness of the lid

Extent of base 1156 square yards.

eet.

Inches,

27

0

3

6

3

3

13

9

10

3

8

7

11

8

3

0

3

6

19

2

8

9

10

4

11

4

6

8

2

7

2

7

5

10

1

6

1

lU

0

10*

TABLE OF DIMENSIONS OF THE FIFTH PYRAMID,

THE EASTERN SOUTH OF THE THIRD.

[For descriptions, see page 38, &c. Vol. II.]

Former square of base

Present square of base _ _ -

Former perpendicular height

Present perpendicular height

Central line down the present front

Angle 52° 15'.
Square of the summit, about
Entrance above the base

145

9

138

0

93

3

83

4

102

0

14

0

2

6

126 APPENDIX.

Inclined passage.

Length

Breadth - _ -

Height
Angle 27° 12'.
Horizontal passage.

Length to portcullis

Thickness of portcullis

From portcullis to apartment

Breadth

Height
Apartment.

Length, east and west, north side
south side

Width

Height . - -

Depth of the roof below base
Sarcophagus.

Exterior, length

breadth

depth

Interior, length

' breadth

depth

Former extent of base, 2361 square yards.
Present extent of base, 2116 —

Feet.

Inches,

56

9

3

5|

3

lU

4

0

0

101

8

9

3

5h

4

1

25

6

25

2

10

5

8

9

14

9

8

0|

3

3

3

]h

6

2'

1

9^

2

1

TABLE OF DIMENSIONS OF THE SIXTH PYRAMID/

THE WESTERN SOUTH OF THE THIRD.

[For description, see page 66, Vol. II.]

Square of base - - - - 102 6

Height of first step - - - 17 3

second step - - - - 19 6

third step - - - 19 6

fourth step - - - - 13 3

® Mr. Perring remarks, that this Pyramid is in ruins, and that it is the one into
which the French, during their occupation of Egypt, attempted to enter by means
of artillery; a mode of inquiry, he observes, worthy of military savaiis: this cir-
cumstance is alluded to by Colonel Coutelle.— See " Abstracts" from various authors.

APPENDIX. 127

Total height - - . .

Square of the summit, about

Entrance passage, westward of the centre

Length . . _

Breadth - _ _ .

Height - . _

Angle 30°.
Anteroom, length, north and south

Breadth, east and west

Height . . . -

Passage to inner apartment.

Length - - _

Height - - . -

Width
Sepulchral chamber.

Length, north and south

Breadth, east and west

Height varies from 7 feet to 9 feet 6 inches.

Roof of apartment below base - - 24 0

eet.

Inches,

69

6

23

4

6

0

47

9

3

2

3

11

13

8

8

7

7

6

7

0

4

1

3

5

26

0

11

4

172

6

111

0

140

0

TABLE OF DIMENSIONS OF THE SEVENTH PYRAMID,

THE NORTHERN EAST OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.
[For description, see page 68, Vol. IL]

Original base, supposed to be a square of

perpendicular height, supposed to be

inclined height, supposed to be -

Angle of casing, supposed to be 52° 10'.

Former extent of base, supposed to be 3295 square

yards.
Present base above ground, about

height above ground

Entrance-passage^ in centre of northern front, length
Height . - - -

7 These supposed dimensions are matter of opinion, as the exterior of the
structure is entirely ruins.

* The entrance-passage is composed of masonry to the distance of 16 feet;
and the northern side of the inclined passage leading to the sepulchral chamber is
also revetted in the same manner.

125

0

45

0

55

3

4

0

128 APPENDIX.

Width . . - .

Angle 33° 35'.
Horizontal passage, length
Anteroom, length, north and south

Width, east and west

Height at southern end

northern end

Length of inclined floor

Inclined passage leading to sepulchral chamber.

Length _ _ _

Height - -

Width
Angle 34°.
Sepulchral chamber — length, east and west

Width, north and south
Lining from 2 ft. 2| in, to 2 ft. 8 in. in thickness.

Feet.

Inches,

3

6

9

0

13

10

5

10

9

9

4

0

10

9

13

4

4

1

3

1

11

8

9

9

TABLE OF DIMENSIONS OF THE EIGHTH PYRAMID,

THE CENTRAL EAST OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.
[For description, see page 1, Vol. II.]

Original base, square of - -

perpendicular height

inclined height

Angle 52° 10'.

Original extent of base, 3295 square yards.

Present base above ground square of about

perpendicular height

Entrance-passage above the centre of the base

Length _ _ _

Height _ . - .

Width
Angle 34° 5'.

Horizontal passage, length
Anteroom, length, east and west

Breadth, north and south, west end
east end

Height - - - _

172

6

111

0

140

0

125

6

55

0

8

9

37

0

4

0

3

6

9

6

10

0

9

2

6

0

8

11

APPENDIX. 121)

Passage leading to sepulchral chamber.

Length

Height _ . _

Width
Angle, 26° 35'.
Sepulchral Channber — Length, cast and west

Breadth, north and south
Lining from 1 ft. 10 in. to 3 ft. 2 in.

Foet.

IncLes,

12

0

3

10

3

6

12

9

10

3

TABLE OF DIMENSIONS OF THE NINTH PYRAMID.

THE SOUTHERN EAST OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.

Original base, square of - -

perpendicular height
inclined height
Angle, 52° 10'.

Original extent of base, 2844 square yards.
Present base above ground, square of
Perpendicular height

Inclined height _ _ .

Entrance passage — height above base, about
Centre eastward of the centre of pyramid, about

Length

Height

Width
Angle, 28°.

Anteroom — Length, north and south
Breadth, east and west
Height
Passage to sepulchral chamber.

Length _ _ _

Height - . -

Width
Angle, 28° 50'.
Sepulchral chamber.

Length, east and west

Breadth, north and south

Height
VOL. II.

Feet.

Inches,

160

0

101

9

130

6

120

0

80

0

97

0

2

6

5

0

53

0

3

11

3

5

11

1

8

8

7

3

8

2

3

10

3

3

12

3

9

6

8

6

^

Feet.

Inches,

65

9

3

11

3

5

130 APPENDIX.

TABLE OF DIMENSIONS OF INCLINED PASSAGES,^

EXCAVATED IN THE ROCK TO THE EASTWARD OF THE
GREAT PYRAMID.

[For description, see page 189, Vol. I.]

Inclined passage from the north.

Length . _ _

Height - . - .

Width

Angle, 27° 20'.

Length from entrance to ascending passage - 40 6

Angle of ascending passage 27°.

Square of perpendicular shaft - - 2 4

From intersection of passages to horizontal part at the

commencement of ramps - - - 38 4

Height - - - - 3 11

Width (beyond this it is open) - -35

Horizontal part - - - 7 8

Continuation of incline to the surface of the ground.

Length - - - - 11 9

Ramp on each side.

Breadth - - - - 1 7

Height - - - - 2 0

Width between - - - 3 5|

Note. — A considerable part of the lower end of
the passage from the north, is only roughly
chiselled in the rock.

^ Mr. Perring remarks, that these passages are nearly in a line with those of the
Seventh, Eighth, and Ninth Pyramids, and that as the flaws in the sides of them
have been made good, and as the rock has been levelled for the foundation of a
building, it was probably intended to erect a pyramid over them ; but that it is to be
doubted whether the intentions have been realised, as the bedding for the stones is
not to be seen, and, likewise, as only three pyramids to the eastward of the Great
one are mentioned by Herodotus. He adds, however, that one of the passages
has been trimmed and plastered ; and remarks, that the ramps in the ascending
passage have, in some degree, a resemblance to those in the Great and Third
Pyramids.

^'

<
>

h
<

UJ

01
O

h.
O

UJ

<o

UJ

o
<

CO
CO

"■

1

%

uJ

-J

<-
o

in

a.
a:

-

(^

^_

yi<i.i

..o^

Jl-

,'.•■, t.Hajli,- i..th "'It- U„- /Vv

FIC

CAMPBELLS TOMB.

l.CENER^L PLKN _ FlC. II. SECTION OF E.SIDE OF TRENCH .

rBnKhiii©cLl;^JlTaj5er,2iT6.Tie.§e2iE St.

F I G 4

w^^^«^*^i^^^^^*

sV^N^^

^^■■.

T.-S^erritT^, del ?

CMVIPBELL'S TOMB.

FIG. 3. SECTION LOOKING WEST_FIG 4. PLAN

IviliiV.£xLir7-.J.Suis«l;215,l?_f<(«v,;: <;

APPENDIX. 131

CAMPBELL'S TOMB.

This Tomb has been already described, (see page 216, Vol. I.)
Mr. Perring, however, observes, that the arch which it con-
tains, proves that the principles of that mode of building must
have been well understood at the time of its construction, and
therefore that many arches had, no doubt, been previously formed ;
and he remarks, that Mr. Wilkinson (page 116, Vol. II. of his last
work on the antient Egyptians) is of the same opinion, and
that he imagines from the drawings at Beni Hassan, that the
invention was known at the time of the first Osirteseu, the con-
temporary of Joseph.

Fig. I. General plan. A A, is the central excavation, 30 feet
6 inches from east to west, 26 feet 3 inches from north to south,
and 53 feet 6 inches in depth.

B is the arched tomb. C C C C, shew a surrounding trench,
about 5 feet 4 inches in width, and about 57 feet 3 inches square,
measuring on the inner side. It is not equidistant from the
central excavation, on account, probably, of the sepulchral grottoe
proceeding from the shafts on the southern side.

Fig. II. is a section of the eastern side of the trench, and
shews the parts of the rock which have been left to support the
sides of the excavation — (Nos. 1,2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 ; see also the same
numbers in Fig. I. Plan) — the rest of which is supported in like
manner. The upper surface of the ground is not level, but the
trench is about 73 feet deep, being 15 feet 6| inches lower
than the surface of the inundation in 1838. It seems, there-
fore, to have been made for the purpose of insulating the
tomb, but not to have been carried to the proposed depth,
as it appears unfinished ; and we are given to understand by
Herodotus, that it was not an unusual custom for the Egyptians
to excavate until they met with a fissure in the rock by which a
supply of water might be obtained, without the trouble of cutting
a canal. The excavations or grottoes, to, x, y, z, in the different
shafts, appear to have been first made. The sarcophagus in the
British Museum was taken from y; another, made of basalt, was
found near, or rather under it ; a third, apparently of white
granite, was discovered at z ; and at x, a fourth, of basalt, decor-
ated with a few rows of hieroglyphics down the front : they had
all been opened, and the bodies removed.

Figures 3, 4, 5, shew the form and construction of the tomb

132 APPENDIX.

in the central excavation, placed upon a bed of sand, about two
feet six inches in thickness, on which slabs about five feet long,
composing the bed course, were laid flat, and upon them the
superstructure of small stones has been raised. In the centre
an immense block, A, has been placed, having a- recess scooped
out of it to receive the sarcophagus, and another large block, B,
was placed upon it, as a cover. The lower surface of this last
block has been roughly inscribed with a row of hieroglyphics,
which are partly given at Fig. 6 ; but the inscription is imperfect,
owinff to the stone having been broken. Thei'e are also a few
hieroglyphics (given at No. 8,) at the end of the lower block at E,
in a place which had the appearance of a pit.

The sarcophagus is of black basalt ; the hieroglyphics on the
lid are given at Fig. 7 ; at the corners of the apartment are
holes, c c c c, Fig. 3, intended, probably, to contain small vases.
There are also recesses, dd, on the northern and southern sides,
filled with small green idols ; and Mr. Perring remarks that the
tape with which they were swathed consisted of muslin, of such
an extreme fineness, that modern looms would find some difficulty
in rivalling it. The entrance of the apartment was by the pit, k.
Fig. 5 ; and near the opening of it, at m, was a row of hiero-
glyphics. The roof of the apartment has been already described
to be flat down the middle, and to slope off to each side ; and Mr.
Perring says that it is formed of four stones, the two outer being
set edgeways, and rather inclined inwards, and tlie two centre
placed upon them ; and immediately above it the arch com-
menced, which formed the roof of the upper chamber. The in-
trados of which are the segment of a circle, six feet two inches in
radius, and having a span of eleven feet. It is three feet ten inches
thick, and is composed of four separate courses, overlapping each
other, as shewn in Figs. 4 and 5, so as to maintain a good break-
joint. The stones composing it are four feet long, and fifteen
inches broad; it has not been built upon a centering, but the
stones of the inner course were previously cut to the exact curves
of the joints radiating from the centre. "With this course great
care has been taken, but less with the other three, many of the
stones of which are rectangular, and packed at the back with
chips. Each course, however, was separately grouted with fluid
mortar. A tube of earthenware in a stone stopper, h, had formed
an opening between the two apartments ; and immediately above
it was another opening, with a similar stopper at the top of the
arch, probably intended for ventilation.

Fl C.J.

M> OC f'( .

Fl G

A

Fl C. 6

rr'r

N9 8 .

**-*■

-|71.,ff»,:^;

(Sccde of"

j.J--f.

C AM PB ELL'S TOIVI B .

FiG.5SECTI0N LOOKING NORTH FIG. 6. HIEROOLVPHICS ON

STONE OVER SARCOPHAGUS FiC.7.LlD OF SARCOPHAGUS.

FIG 3.HlER>-',s AT END OF SARC^.*

APPENDIX. 133

At jj, Fig. 4, were two rows of ampliorte. The whole of ihe
masonry of the building is very beautifully worked and put toge-
ther, and where the walls, particularly in the interior, are trimmed
off, the joints are scarcely perceptible : the under sides of the arched
stones of the inner course have had the aris taken off, and are
tooled round so as to resemble rusticated work. A row of hiero-
glyphics is inserted in a shallow groove lined with plaster, that
runs round the sides of the central excavation a.t g g, Fig. 4: they
are given in Figs. 9, 10, 11, 12. Mr. Perring states that, at the
north-western corner of the central excavation, a stone has been
built in on the upper surface, which shews that it had formerly
been covered with an arch ; and that the trench exhibits the
same appearance. Mr. Perring conjectured that the whole
monument may have been covered by a pyramid.

TABLE OF DIMENSIONS.

Central excavation, east and west

north and south

depth about

Tomb — length _ _ . _

— breadth _ _ _ -

— height to springing of arch

— from springing to top of arch
Span of arch - -

Stratum of sand beneath the building from 2 feet to 3 feet,
Mean width of external excavation
Square of inner side of exterior excavation
Depth of exterior excavation about

Feet.

Inches,

30

6

26

3

53

6

14

9

10

5

19

4

7

8

11

0

5

4

57

3

73

0

Note I.

Inscriptions on the Sides of Camphell's Tomb.

The inscription on the sides of Campbell's Tomb refers to the
party for whom this construction was probably undertaken. He
appears to have been an attache to the scribes of the southern
quarter — probably one of the great divisions of Memphis— and
to have been named Phaikop or Phaishop : and in the line on the
south side, called Phaishop-entrat, in order to express more
clearly the phonetic force : the inscription here commences with
an invocation of the goddess Isis— " I am thy sister, Isis; rejoice

134 APPENDIX.

then to thy beloved, &c. :" ending with the titles of the deceased

" great in the south and north, chief scribe of the

south. Ra-haahethemoubsh." The intermediate parts in this
inscription are not distinct, being partially erased ; and the titles at
the other end are such as have not yet been entirely deciphered :
the latter name is compounded of that of the monarch with an
adjunct, implying in his glory (?) which has naturally been sup-
posed to indicate the period when the tomb was excavated. This
name appears to have been a surname of Phaishop, from the
tenor of the inscription upon the sarcophagus itself, which contains
the end of the name of Ra-haa-hethemoubsh (?) whose ' great name
is Phaishop,' whose ' good name is Nofrethmouemshnin.'i The
prenomen, which occurs in the composition of the name of the
individual, belongs to two monarchs — Psammetichus II., or
Apries. In Rosellini, torn. ii. tav. 1, a slight difference exists in
the manner of making the central symbol, which has been con-
jectured, not proved, to have the phonetic value of ^ — (see Sal-
volini, 'Analyse Grammatical,' PI. 6. 205, and Rosellini, Monu-
menti Storici.) On a monument, B. M., Egyptian Saloon, where
that name occurs, no such distinction exists ; and at all events,
whether or not the name is the prenomen of Psametik II., whicli
is far the most probable, because in almost all these compositions
of royal names to make private ones, prenomens seem to have
been taken by preference, although occasionally names appear
to have been used ; the tomb must have been constructed
anterior to 604 a.c, supposing it to have been made after
Psametik II. ; because it was likely to have been assumed by an
individual born during the reign of this monarch, and deceased
during that of his successor ; but if the supposition be adopted
from Apries, it must be posterior to 570 a.c. The other in-
scriptions in this tomb have all reference to the same functionary,
and consist of different prayers and formulas — an analysis of the
whole of which cannot at the present be given. Another, marked
Fig. 10, north side, contains an invocation to Netpe — " Osirian,
attache, to the scribes of the south — Rahaahethemoubsh — extend
thy mother Netpe over thee ; may she attend to thy abode of rest

in heaven, giving thee to appear to the god in the with

thy name to the god ; may she provide thee with all other things.
Netpe, the daughter of the Sun, above the attache of the

* 'NoFRETHMOu in the lily,' referring to the chapter in the Ritual — (see " Rit.
Ddsc. de I'Egypte") — where the head oftliat deity appears placed in a lily. He
also ordinarily wears a lily above his head for his distinctive emblem.

f^C^^A Kt' >^^ f f^ -^-y -=^k.

^1

i

^

'J ^

n

fl^

■AViJlMiftJ-Jii '^-'Icr^ri^J-'v

. :^%r^s^i'^^I^^^^^Uv*.>Cfl^^/^:^'':i:lf^p3:*^:.^-^t:^

:^/^^Pt::^-^P.i^r^<^^^— ^U— --i»^(l.jL.^-r >^^fp^->y->t

LINE ON THE SOUTH SIDE,

j'J-PlU

(lIilV^-/^/-C(^^*- ^ ^-p::rr^A1^5S \1T* V^ T.1 t'k-H'-VV^- -^ i

;„V^-f-

-tV.:i^o^Ty |^^.::i<._-^^^..^.^^^IIPVPl11.7^<^t:^^li ts^x;tll |

LINE ON THE NORTH SIDE

/ 1^^^^ ^ T^ m ^^ ^ <=.T^TT

LI NEON THE WEST SIDE

r~

^•<--- Vn<-V~^^^1"^'f<SV"^^^^1^^^^-:^i^'"-l ^^

n II j-i_ V n I. ■=* '^^^ ^^ — — n I-' • .......^ L — ,-,;.-. -1

LINE ON THE. EAST SIDE.

CAMP BELL'S TOMB.

___________

Juilctf , J f 1 ; ; ., ..- err,.

APPENDIX. 135

scribes of the south, Phaishop," &c. The latter part being com-
pletely confused and illegible, and of which even a general
meaning can scarcely be at present offered — a circumstance not
uncommon with regard to texts running upon unusual formulas,
especially those with which the sides of the coffins of the Psam-
metic era are adorned, and which consist of short prayers, &c.,
having reference to expressions, &c., in the ritual. The personage
to whom the inscriptions at the sides of the tomb refer, is not
the same as the one whose embalmed body was deposited in the
sarcophagus, from that locality, presented to the Museum by
Colonel Howard Vyse, nor of that of the basalt fragment from the
same locality. These, especially the granite one, having been
apparently placed there at a later epoch.

The other inscriptions with which the sides of this tomb are
covered, refer to similar prayers uttered by the priests, or having
relation to different deities, but are chiefly addresses. It would
be difficult at present to offer more than a conjectural explanation
of the meaning of these various formulae, which present difficult
forms ; not having yet been sufficiently collated to enable a
definite interpretation to be given. — Mr. Birch.

Note II.

Sarcophagus in CampheWs Tomb.

The lid of the Sarcophagus (Fig. 7) exhibits nothing beyond the
usual form of similar monuments — the face of the deceased in the
klaft, the beard, the oskli or collar, and the mummied form. On
it is a short inscription, containing an invocation to the deceased
attache of the basilicogrammateis of the viands — Phaishop* (?)
surnamed RA-HAAHETH-(Hophra)-EMOUBSH, &c., being the same
functionary for whom the tomb was excavated, as appears from
the tenor of the hieroglyphics upon the sides. This was, in
fact, the chief sarcophagus of the tomb ; and the other similar
functionaries, though not relatives, were subsequently deposited in
the same locality. The hieroglyphics on the stone over the
Sarcophagus (Fig. 6) refer to the same as those on the stone at
the end of the Sarcophagus, and contain a short religious sen-
tence, reading inversely from right to left (Fig. 8).

2 This I imagine to be the confused part at the base of tlie first 1. on tiie right :
compare the other inscriptions, from 1 to 7.

136 APPENDIX.

Note III.

Sarcophagus, now in the British Museum, which loas tahen from
the Shaft at the south-eastern corner of Cam-pheUs Tomb.

The sarcophagus, or coffin of red granite, found in a tomb in the
neighbourhood of Gizeh, discovered by Colonel Howard Vyse, in
1837, and named by him Campbell's Tomb, in honour of the present
British consul in Egypt, was presented to the British Museum
by the discoverer, and arrived there on the 11th of April, 1839.
The tomb, as will be perceived from the hieroglyphics copied
from its sides, was constructed, during the rule of the XXVI. or
Saite dynasty, for functionaries of high rank at Mempliis ; and the
two sarcophagi from that locality bearing internal evidence of
having been constructed during the same period, receive additional
illustration from two contemporaneous monuments, viz., the large
sarcophagus (note A) of Hapimen, Egyptian Saloon, No. 23, re-
moved from Cairo by the French, called there the " Lover's
Fountain," by the Turks, and the fragment, Egyptian Saloon,
No. QQ (note B), of which a counterpart exists in the Ashmolean
Museum at Oxford. The scenes on these three monuments
mutually illustrate, and are necessary evidences to, one another.

At the period of this dynasty, Memphis appears to have
resumed some of the antient splendour which it enjoyed under
the constructors of the eternal pyramids ; and an affectation for the
archaic names, titles, (mstoms, and, to a certain extent, an imita-
tion of the works of art of that remote epoch, seems to have
arisen under the rule of the Psammetici, and to have been con-
tinued till the Ptolemaic era. The reaso..s of this fashion are neces-
sarily hidden in much obscurity, as to whether caprice dictated
the change — a fancied descent from the older monarchs — or the
desire to throw over a throne, acquired by unusual means, an
appearance of that legitimate antiquity which it could not boast,
were the latent and moving springs of this peculiar archaism
during their reign. But the arts Avere in decay, a florid and
a frittered style was usurping the bold simplicity of the more
antient monuments; and the attempt at imitation only produced
a species of art which pointed out that the elements of its anni-
hilation were making fast inroads upon its powers : for the me-
retricious and ephemeral productions were wanting in that grace

s^.

-^^-'V*;

J-'-

.-r '7>

4. f

EW OF THE SftRCOPHACUS

FOUMO IN COL.CAMPBELl's to "I 6.

I EROOLVP H IC A L CHARACTERS AT THE

L li^, it; IL it/ Wi \k

DEITIES &c. ftT THE FOOT

APPENDIX. 137

and dignity which characterised the nobler productions of tlic
epochs of Rameses the Great, Thothmes the Third, or tlie Osir-
tasens ; neither did they possess the rude grandeur of the era of
the family of Cheops. It is to the period of the rule of the
Psammotici, and to the floating interval between them and tlie
commencement of the Lagidaj, that the fabrication of this colossal
monolith of Syenite is to be attributed. It is of inferior execution
• — the hieroglyphics and figures being cut in a slighter intaglio
than ordinary, and possessing none of the sharp squareness of
execution which characterises the monuments of the Ptolemies.
As a work of art, it is worse than the coffin of Hapimen, while
the titles of the deceased, who is mentioned as belonging to the
" temples of the quarter of the white wall," or Acropolis of the
southern Metropolis, indicate an approximation to the era of the
Ptolemies, under whom the Memphian functionaries seem espe-
cially to have flourished. As all the sarcophagi appear fabricated
upon one general model, varied slightly according to the taste of
the relatives of the deceased or dictation of the priests, who had
the especial charge of the embalming, it will be as well to notice
the type, more or less followed out, upon which they were con-
structed. The body of the deceased, embalmed and swathed after
the model of Osiris, was generally taken as the form for the sar-
cophagus, which was thus made to resemble a mummy of broad
jiroportions ; and on the sides, or at the head and foot, were
always sculptured, either in compartments or else diffused over
the whole, the various deities under whose care the body of the
Osirian was supposed especially to be. Throughout the text,
an analogy, not always quite complete, was kept up between
Osiris and the deceased ; and the various rituals and prayers
which the deities or the defunct uttered had universally reference
to a similar object. Thus Netpe. the wife of Seb, the Egyptian
Saturn, was often depicted upon the lower part of the chest of the
body, addressing the dead as her son, over whom she spread her
wings, Isis and NepTithys were represented kneeling and de-
ploring, as at the bier of Osii'is, while the inferior genii of the
Amenti appeared around the sides of their embalmed father, and
a host of principal deities uttered consolatory exhortations to the
deceased, or announced, as in the sarcophagus of Hapimen, the
particular members of the body which were under their especial
charge.^

^ See the interior, w litre llie deities are repvesenled round the whole of llie body.

138 APPENDIX.

The present sarcophagus is made upon a similar type, rudely
representing a mummy of truncated proportions, squared at the
feet and rounded at the upper end, having the lid or cover also
rounded above, and with the mask or portrait of the deceased
carved at the lid about the head ; below the head, which is en-
veloped in the peculiar long attire called the klaft, is an oskh, or
kind of semicircular collar or tippet, formed of parallel concentric
rows of lotus-flowers and other ornaments, not terminating, as
they usually do, in two hawks' heads. Beneath the oskh is the
goddess Netpe, profile to the right, kneeling upon both legs,
having on her head a disc, extending both arms, to which are
appended wings ; in each hand she holds an ostrich feather. At
the sides of Netpe are Isis and Nephthys, kneeling to the right
and left upon symbols of noub or ' gold,' facing Netpe, and
holding both hands over signets, which, in other scenes, are
replaced by solar discs. Beneath these deities, and in two com-
partments to the left and right, are the two first genii of the
Amenti — Amset or Amseth, and Hape or Ape — a form of the
deity Apis ; their names are written immediately before them.

The four perpendicular lines of hieroglyphics immediately
before each of these deities, which are not continued down the
whole length of the upper part of the lid, contain "The address
of Amseth. I am thy son— Osirian, priest of the Divine abodes
(temples) of the district of the white wall ; superintendent of abode
of the'* inundation (?) Saotou^ justified. I have come to manifest
myself beside thee." A perfectly similar address of the genius
Hape occurs in four corresponding lines. In two similar compart-
ments beneath are two other genii of the Amenti — Eagumautf,^
jackal-headed, and Kebhsnauf, hawk-headed. Each of these
deities utters a similar address, with the addition of the genealogy
of the deceased, " Born of the lady of the house Taisaenonkh."

* Very uncertain ; represented by a lion — possibly Ra, tlie abode of Ra.

* Saotou (?) Tliis name is peculiar to the Ptolemaic era. It occurs in the forms

, ^ I &c. The three bars in the present

J /'>\ ^h rv\ n \ i Gk instance, indicate a plural desinence,

J \\ \ lynX I \llll wli'ls its equivalent is a well-known

phonetic symbol for a vowel. Part of
his titles are, at present, undecipherable.

' The genius has been hitherto called Sioumautf — interpreted by Rosellini
"Star of his mother;" but variants of his name, as
clearly indicate that his appellation is Eaoumautf— JU
" He who adores his mother." Champollion, "Gr. G.,"
p. 282, calls him Soutefmau— evidently erroneously.

APPENDIX. 139

The three central lines interposed between these divisions, the text
of which is continued to the foot of the lid, contain three prayers
— the central line one, to Netpe : " Osirian ! &;c., extend the

mother Netpe over thee as she is attached to the

firmament : do not for ever and ever." The line to the

left contains another invocation to the same deity: "Go, thou
Osirian, &:c., to Netpe ; may she unite thee to the chief of her
race ; may she anoint thee with water like the east eye (?) in the

solar abode in the darkness with thy "

To the right and left, in two vertical lines of hieroglyphics,
continued down the whole length, are two similar prayers. The
one to the right contains a trilogistic prayer : " The invocation
Osirian, &c.; life for thee, thou who residest among the living,
illuminate thou Osiris pethempamentes, Osirian, Sec, who residest

among the light " The prayer to the left : "... .The

invocation .... Osirian, &;c.; appear thou, elevate thou, sit thou

in the abode of Haroeri, the guardian of Poni ; hail,

Osirian, &:c.; receive thou life, do not place thy feet in the heaven,
do not .... thou in the world." The two lines at the side of the
cover also contain two prayers of similar nature to those at the
top of the sides, " Osirian, &c., may the four deities, children
of Horus, making road to his father Osiris ; may they shew,
or appear, before thee ; may they lead to thee, &c., Osirian,
Sec, chastising thy enemies in the sepulchre, leading thee," &:c.
The other line to the right contains " Hail, Osirian, &c

support thou the other great gods ; may

they give thee thy enemies under thee for ever and ever."

The four first lines to the left of this contain "the prayer of
the Osirian military chief, superintendent of the signet, chief
purifier? scribe of the divine books of Amoun-ra sonther. . . .scribe
of the viands of ... . prefect of the abode of the inundation
(Nilometor). Saotou, justified son of . . . . prophet of Sate (?) mis-
tress of Eianho, Oohmos, or lohmos (Amos, or Amasis), justified
child of the lady of the house, Taisaenonkh justified, I come to
thee Nephthys, thy sister, guardian of the land of Hosk, enshroud-
ing to thee thy limbs, and arranging for thee thy arms, giving
passage to thy breath — thy life ; may they raise to thee thy arms
do not lament thy fault for ever and ever.

The prayer to the right contains "the speech of the Osirian
military chief, superintendent of the signet, priest of the temples
of the white wall, attached to the at the abode of silver

140 APPENDIX.

(treasury), and of the inundation. (?) Saotou, justified son of . . . .
of the priest of Sate, mistress of Eianho Tohmos or Am osis justified,
child of the lady of the house Taisaenonkh, approach to thee thy
sister Isis, rejoice thou to tliy beloved, &c. : may she give passage

to thy breath, may she may she regulate thee, probing for

thee thy faults, Osirian, &c., do not grieve for ever and ever."

At the end of the lid the goddess Isis is represented seated
on her legs, having on her head a throne, stretching out her
hands and arms, to which are attached wings, holding in one hand
a symbol of life, in the other a small mast and sail — emblem of
passage, or transmigration.

The left side, corresponding in arrangement to the right, repre-
sents the deceased standing, holding the small statue of truth, in
offering to a train of deities ; the hieroglyphics„before contain
the titles, name, and genealogy of the deceased ; and in the field,
it is stated, that ' he gives ti'uth.' The first deity of the train is the
god Re, Ra, or Pure, hawk-headed, having on his head theurseated
disc of the sun, holding in his left hand the gom, and in the other
the symbol of life. The hieroglyphics belonging to this division,
are " The address of Ra, lord of the two worlds, the great
God, lord of the heaven. I illuminate the body of the Osirian,
Saotou, like the soul of the sun, in the abode of glory (stars); I
grant illumination in the orbit, let him be not troubled, for ever
and ever." 2. The god To, or Tore, having on his head the scara-
bseus, one of the solar types : tlie text liere contains " The address
of Tore: I give adoration (?) to the Osirian, &c., together with the

guardian of my arms, I him with the servants of the

sun. Oh, Osirian ! " &:c. 3. Anubis, jackal-headed, " The
address of Anubis, the diiector of the embalming. I have
come to thee, Osirian, &;c. : I suspend for thee thy arms :
I subdue for thee thy limbs." (?) 4. Taut, Thout, or Thoth,
ibis-headed; the hieroglyphics in this division contain "The
address of Taut, the lord of Shmoun, the pure god, Osirian!
&:c. : I accord that thy name be established in the divine writings
for ever : thou shalt be before (?) the Tot gods, abiding with
and accompanying Osiris." 5. Neith, having upon her head the
lower part of the pshent called the toshr, or red cap: "The

address of Neith, the greater mother goddess. I

the south and north be not afflicted for ever !"

6. The goddess Selk, having upon her head a scorpion, her
distinctive emblem. "The address of Selk, I give good offering
to the Osirian, &:c. ; I shew him to the other gods, guardians of

/

//'d

0 D

n ^

^

i> r

atyot

-f-^r!zruiay.e._, dec.

m

"lX

/Ci /f^ AA/»A»\

\lir^&'\im\hl

^ r — •" .KJ^M^^S/^ < ft

i'--^

en

I'PoT

H?2^i^r/^=i?sf^k^

<>^ "^ /;- k:^^ n

riki^

^vv* <»vvwv\

^ite^^l^''^

>-S Z^ l^ cc- (0) (p !";{] ^ € y ^ tF®[y^RjE.. 6ua (g (£) L -. <& i\ [-ylJ L-' bj ^ IL ik' ^^ T<S' lal il'^i, (p

h itR O CLY PH 1 C A L CHARACTERS AND DEITIES ON THE I

Pui'lialied Vy Jauirs Tr Aji tT Jtt^cTii 3' JIM; -

APPENDIX. 141

Tosor, they shall assemble beside thy head Osirian," &c. 7. Sate,
having upon her head a uraeus. " The address of Sate, mistress
ofTapp, we grant thee to live in the land of Tosor, we submit
thy limbs like the sun in the Amenti, establishing thy name in
the mouth of the living." 8. Meui, having upon his head an
ostrich-feather. *' The address of Meui, the son of the Sun, set

up thy face, Osirian," &:c

9. Tafne, without any distinctive emblem. " The address of

Tafne, the daughter of the Sun, I give to the Osirian, &c. ;

of the wine (or milk) of the divine race. I grant that thy soul
may seek thee, and that he may see like the sun, like his splen-
dour." 10. Hape, cynocephalus-headed. The address of Hape.
" I give justification to the Osirian, &;c. ; in Noutehir like the lords
of the abode of glory : go thou to the heaven like the soul of the
sun. I make nothing of thy enemies for ever and ever." 11.
Kebhsnauf, hawk-headed. " The address of Kebhsnauf. I
have come to thee, Osirian, kc. ; I submit for thee thy limbs ; I
bind thy flesh, submit for thee thy arms; I give thee youth for
ever, Osirian," &c.

The large horizontal line of hieroglyphics contains part of a
prayer. From the unusual tenour and abbreviated manner in
which it is written, it is almost impossible for a complete analysis
of the whole. It commences the speech, " Hail, Osirian, suj)erin-
tendent of the abode of the river (?) Saotou justified set out with
ofiering to the sun ; go thou to the parhedals of the great god :
manifest thyself in going to the solar abode of the two truths,
enshrining thy soul," &:c.

The series upon the right side are perfectly analogous to those
on the left ; the deceased is represented standing as before, with
a garment from the loins to the ankles, called basoui, tied by a
girdle round the waist, and holding in his hands a figure of Truth
to a train of deities in compartments, formed by perpendicular
lines of hieroglyphics, containing a series of hortatory addresses
similar to those upon the other side. 1. Thmou or Thom, having
upon his head the pschent. The hieroglyphics record " the speech
of Thom. I lead to my orbit the Osirian, &c. Saotou in the

Amenti ; I enshrine his body ; I his adoration (?)

in the abode of glory." 2. Osiris pethempamentes, having upon
his head the otf. " The address of Osiris pethempamentes. I give
life to the Osirian, &c.; I lead him to the gods; I accord that he
may go and abide in the abode of glory, like the stars (or gods) of
the race of the earth and heaven." 3. Anubis, jackal-headed.

142 APPENDIX.

" The address of Anubis, the director of the embalming. I have
come to thee, Osirian, &c.; I fill thee with bitumen (?) ; I mani-
fest thee to the eye of Horus illuminating thee with thy

liffht." 4. Harsiesi, hawk-headed. " The address of Har-si-esi.
I have come to thee, Osirian, &c. ; set thyself up to the gods ;
live thou, and establish thyself for ever, avenging thee of thy
enemies." 5. Isis, having upon her head a throne. " The address
of Isis, the great mother-goddess. I have come to thee, Osirian,
&;c. ; I appear beside thee ; I will manifest thee to the gods, anni-
hilating thy enemies, and directing thee to the other gods." 6.
Nephtuys, having upon her head a basket and house, her name.
•'The address of Nephthys. I have come to thee, Osirian, &:c.;
I appear beside thee ; thou shalt be a god ; I am a giver of life
like pethempamentes ; grieve not for ever and ever." 7. Soaven,
having on her head a vulture klaft. " The address of Soaven,
the white region (?) mistress of Phos (?) I give water (?) to the
Osirian, &c.; at the good Ement. I lead him to the divine ....

.... to the grain (?) "

8. Seb. " The address of Seb, the youngest

of the gods. I have come to see the Osirian, &c.; my eldest son,
the regulator of his brethren, I tell thee, you are of my race for
ever and ever." 9. Netpe, having upon her head a vase. " The
address of Netpe, the great mother of the gods. I give water to
the Osirian, &c. ; I serve in the bark of the sun ; I appear above
thy head, placing it under me like the sun in his bark." 10.
Amset. " The address of Amset. I establish (set up) my father,
the Osirian, &c. ; I enwrap his flesh ; I put down his arms; I lay out
his limbs to the gods like pethempamentes." 11. Eaoumautf,
jackal-headed. "The address of Eaoumautf. I have come to
thee, Osirian, &c. ; I suffuse the essence (soul) of the sun over thy
body ; I support thee, mayest thou not fall, but be established
on thy legs."

The large horizontal line above contains a prayer similar
in tenour to that upon the other side, and rather plainer in
its general purport. It is the prayer, " Hail, Osirian, &c.

Saotou incline thy head thy limbs, place down thy arms,

bend thy legs (?) guard thy flesh, establish thy mouth at the gates
of the pure souls, manifest thyself to him who is attached the
construction, that he may fashion thy arm, and accomj)any thee

to the heaven, to thy father Seb, may he in stretching (?)

to thee his arm to direct thee."

The scene at the head of the sarcophagus represents a series of

APPENDIX. 143

figures, the individual meaning of which it is difficult to trace ; two
gigantic and elongated arms rising from the bottom hold in each
hand a shorn male figure of diminished proportions, who pours a
stream of liquid from a vase over a mummied figure, having upon
its head a disc ; between them four vertical lines of hierogly-
phics, reading from right to left, affirm " that the god in these
delineations accompanies (?) the disc as it goes and proceeds, illu-
minating the darkness under his sandals, viz. under his feet. His

soul proceeds, and is elevated to the sun their spirits stalk

like giants to the sun, their bodies remain in their abodes." The
subject traced between these two arms represents a mummied
figure, standing profile to the right, having on his head a disc,
above which is another disc, from whence drops a star by two
links : at each side is a uraus facing. The text here, although
not quite perfect and intelligible, is still sufficiently explanatory.
" The god in this picture (represents) the hours of the sun as he
goes with placing down his arms and .... his limbs ; he guards
the hours, as he goes with the darkness under his sandals : his
uraei will guard him .... the hours."

"The Tot gods in these pictures will the Sun, will

magnify and elevate that god in his orbit of Amoun the Tot

gods .... their spirits will elevate and magnify the Sun, their

bodies will remain in their abodes " The other texts

contain similar explanations of this scene, which bears some
analogy with the closing scenes of certain rituals, with regard to
the ultimate manifestation to light.

The scene at the feet of the chest represents a scene in which
the Bari of the Sun, or Tori, having the prow and stern ter-
minating in a lotus flower, is represented passing over the symbol
of the hills ; in the centre of the disc is represented the ascending
scarabseus, emblem of the god To, or Tore (Tor) : around the disc
is entwined the gigantic serpent called Apoph, holding its tail in
its mouth. In the bark are two male figures without any attri-
butes, both facing the prow ; and at the stern are a pair of paddles
and high oarlock. Underneath is the usual symbol of the hills;
and in it are represented seven male deities, seated, with their
knees raised profile to the right : above, is the goat's head and
neck, entitled 'the god'^ — emblem of Chneph, or Chnouphis :
on each side is the deceased kneeling, in the act of oflfering.

Qj n

7 This deity is also frequently called A^"^^&^ Ho — 'limb, himself,
he who is,' and here 'the god:' all referring to the creative power of this type.
(See ' Ch. Gr. Eg.' p. 91 . Wilkinson. ' Mat. Hier.')

144 APPENDIX.

In presenting this detailed account of tlie scenes represented,
and the texts, the ellipses have been indicated by dots ; and it
will be perceived, that, partly owing to the erasure of several
symbols, and partly owing to the new nature of a portion of the
texts, the whole will not at present admit of a solution. Many
portions, however, contain important notions connected with the
psychology and the mythology of the Egyptians.

The deities, although not precisely the same there as have
charge of the various portions of the body, consist of the principal
forms of the Pantheon ; and, as will readily be perceived, utter a
number of addresses relative to the functions which ihey perform,
or are supposed to perform in the Hades. The prayers around
the sides in the larger bands of hieroglyphics must be sacerdotal
addresses to the deceased, if not invocations of deities — they are
necessarily more obscure in their tenour, partly from referring to
subjects hinted at rather than definitely expressed. The analysis
of them is far from complete ; and it would, at present, be rash to
offer a particular solution of their contents. — Mr. Birch.

Note A.

The coffin of Hapimen, an officer of the very highest rank, which con-
sists of the chest or lower part of the Sarcophagus, was presented to the
British Government, by the Ottoman Porte, on the evacuation of Egypt
by the French, consequent upon the capitulation of Alexandria, in 1807,
by General Menou. It is of large dark granite, and of the era of the
Psammetici, having probably had a cover of the shape of the sarcopha-
gus of Saotou. On the exterior, are Isis and Nephthys kneeling upon
symbols of resplendence over discs, the four genii of the Amenti ; the
two Anubides, or Anubis ; and Hop Hioue Ch., the two symbolic eyes,
&c.; with appropriate invocations, very similar in their tenour to those on
the sarcophagus presented by Colonel Howard Vyse. The interior con-
tains around the various deities, to whom the different parts of the body
are dedicated, with inscriptions before them to that effect, and on the
bottom is a full length, full-face figure, of the goddess Netpe. The
hierologist will perceive, by an inspection, how much the texts of this
important monument illustrate, and are illustrated, by the present of
Colonel Howard Vyse.

'i^;^]|)^:

\m'H4W'

OOOC

0

OOOd

o

.^

d

o

11 €51

0

r4imfii>

Sis

T

u-

0

af*i^l!

V

-^ D

n

n ©

■A

0

i ^ y il

^

3

a_'

^"-^^:?i^\\i(-^ok^'"

>- Cr^tO"

1/ 1)0

^1-^^ o 0

/

1 u

^

1^

u •=»

-H

^ o^^^l I^^I^G

^

^\3^m\%t

(5 A lis ® i£> IP M #i 'S 32) a wmiytiis ).•!! C ® !L. «i^»aB»lBI£iL 'i. S 'iT '■£> VSi &

MIEROCLVPMICAI. CHftRACTtKS Of. THE LiP

APPENDIX.

145

Note B.

The fragment of the basalt Sarcophagus (B. M. 66) which has belonged
to PiPHEiRGOT, an attache of the scribes, prefect of the body-guard,
pastophorus priest, resident in the palace, &c., son of Nasiitiiariibai
and Herineitii, of which a counterpart exists in the Ashmolean Col-
lection of Oxford, illustrates the scene at the head of the Sarcophagus of
Colonel Vyse, which is of a nature rather difficult to explain. The text,
which is sufficiently explicit, refers to the procession of the sun through
the firmament, accompanied by the hours, and the deities called in the
Ritual the ToTON EN or Tot gods, the " established deities," as " the Sun
who goes with his body, and his limbs, who guards the hours, going in
the darkness," &c. The analogy of this fragment, with the scenes cited
at the head, will be readily perceived. — Mr. Birch.

INSCRIPTIONS.

Great Pyramid.

Basement stones
North-eastern excavation
North-western excavation
Northern air-channel
Southern air-channel
Wellington's chamber
Nelson's chamber
Lady Arbuthnot's chamber

Col. Campbell's chamber

Excavated 1837.

Opened May 22d, 1837.
— May 29th, 1837.
Wellington's chamber, March 30, 1837.
Nelson's chamber, April 25, 1837.
Lady Arbuthnot's chamber. May 6, 1837.
Col. Campbell's chamber, May 27, 1 837
H. Raven and Hill.

Second Pyramid.

Lower entrance
Stone quarries
North-western angle
South-western ang;le

Opened April, 1837.
Excavated 1837.

Third Pyramid.

Shaft in interior
Entrance

VOL. II.

Excavated 1837.
Re-opened July 29, 1837.

146

APPENDIX.

Fourth Pyramid.-

— Re-opened July 4,

Fifth

—

— July 1,

Sixth

—

— July 27,

Seventh

—

— July 28,

Eighth

—

— July 29,

Ninth

—

— —

Campbell's

Tomh.-

-Excavated 1827.

4, 1837.

LIST OF ARTICLES RETAINED.

Three broken earthenware pots

Earthenware lamp

Two fragments of earthenware

Two paterae

Two cups

Two round stones

Piece of stone

Small bronze hoop

Fossil

Fragment of a stone

Five small glass bottles

Nine broken pieces

Small figure, leaf gold

Thirty green idols

Piece of iron

Three pieces of stone

Three wooden birds

Earthenware jug

Torso of a king in basalt

Some bronze rings

Piece of stone

Where found.
Great Pyramid.
Campbell's Tomb
Great Pyramid.

Sixth andEighthPyramids.

Great Pyramid.

Eighth Pyramid.

Sphinx.

Eighth Pyramid.

Campbell's Tomb.

Great Pyramid.
Thebes.

Upper Egypt.

Exclusive of the above, the Bones and Pieces of Mummy-Board
found in the Third Pyramid, of which a separate list was given
to Colonel Campbell, viz. :

Where found.
'Patella - - Third Pyramid.

Fibula - - —

Right leg ( Femur - - —

Tibia - - —

\ Sacrum - - —

APPENDIX.

147

Left leg

Calcis

Fibula

Femur

Tibia

Sacrum

Patella^

Where found.
Third Pyramid.

Two floating ribs _ _ _ —

Coxigis . _ _ _ —

Some dorsal and servial vertebrae - —

Fourteen short pieces of mummy-board - —

Four long pieces with hieroglyphics - —

Four other pieces _ _ _ —

List of other Articles delivered to Col. Campbell.

Where found.
Near Third Pyramid.

Votive arrow-head of bronze

Bronze nail

Broken stone

Four green cups in a group

Green cup _ - _

Piece of brass or bronze

Two green beads

A bone eye

Three large coins

Three smaller coins

Small bone sistrum

Small bone cross

Five broken pieces of bronze

Stone with hieroglyphics

Earthenware fragment

Piece of black stone

Broken vase of alabaster

Round piece of alabaster

Collection of bone ornaments

Some leaf gold and a bead

Some leaf gold and bone ornaments

Seventy-three green idols

Three hundred and ninety-seven green idols

Coarse sphinx in two pieces

Fragment of a stone

Two large earthenware jugs

Fifty-nine broken pieces of earthenware

Fifty-nine paterae

Eight cups - - - -

Third Pyramid.
Campbell's Tomb.

Fourth Pyramid.
Great Pyramid.
Campbell's Tomb.

Chiefly Campbell's Tomb.
Shaft northward of Sphinx.

Campbell's Tomb.
Chiefly Campbell's Tomb.

[Near some of the Pyramids.

'' The left foot appears to have been deformed, and llie knee to have been stiff.

148 APPENDIX.

Section of Rock from north to south along the eastern front of
the Pyramids of Gizeh.

The plane of tlie section is north and south ; but it follows the
dotted line A A A in tlie accompanying plan.

It shews the elevations and positions of the buildings, and the
levels of the High and Low Niles, in 1837 and in 1838 ; and also
the levels of the water in the well of sweet water (near the tents),
of that in the well near the palm-trees, and in the shafts, Nos. 1,
2, and 3. The depth of the foss in Campbell's Tomb, and of the
shaft sunk in the subterraneous apartment of the Great Pyramid,
are likewise marked.

A table of the levels taken in the summer of 1837 is also
added, and the following remarks received from Mr. Perring : —

Shaft, No. 1, between CamphelVs Tomb and the Second Pyramid.

On the 7tli of June, 1837, the level of the river (it being Low
Nile) was 158 feet below the base of the Great Pyramid.

The level of the water in the shaft was 154 feet below the
base of the Great Pyramid ; and it was therefore four feet higher
than the river.

On the 23rd of October, 1838, the level of the river (it being
High Nile) was 137 feet 3 inches below the base of the Great
Pyramid .^

The level of the water in the shaft was 155 feet 4 inches below
the base of the Great Pyramid ;9 and it was therefore 18 feet 1
inch lower than the river, as the w'ater in the shafts had decreased
1 foot 4 inches.

Shaft, No. 2, west of the Sphinx.

On the 7th of June, 1837, the level of the water in the shaft
was 149 feet \ inch below the base of the Great Pyramid; and it
was therefore 8 feet 1 1 1 inches higher than the river.

On the 23d of October, 1838, the level of the water in the

* The inundation of 1837 was insufficient, and a scarcity was the consequence;
that of 1838 was considered rather above average. The rise in the former year was
19 feet 3 inches ; in the latter, 24 feet 10 inches.

' This shaft was frequently examined between June 1837 and October 1838,
and the decrease of the water was found to be gradual. It was supposed to be
occasioned by evaporation ; as in other places, where the water was less exposed
to that effect, the decrease was less.

TTeU-al'BtZnf^Tr^s

■J7S.T''aTrn-<j, iei.

PYRAMIDS S-OFTHIRD

THIRD PYRAMID

^a^c erf G-^gaii lyraniiii'

JFrmi'^M-e nf SretU I^rttmuii Jo rS/i^trff JY^l :/0,, J

APPENDIX. 149

shaft was 149 feet 4^ inches below the base of the Great Pyramid ;
and it was therefore 12 feet 1?; inch lower than the river, as the
water in the shaft had decreased 4 inches.

JFoss in Campbell's Tomb.

■ The upper surface of Campbell's Tomb is 79 feet 9^ inches
below the base of the Great Pyramid. The depth of the foss is
73 feet : it was therefore 5 feet 2\ inches higher than the river
on the 7th June, 1837, and 15 feet 6| inches lower than the river
on the 23d October, 1838.

Shaft, No. 3, north of Sphinx.

On the 7th of June, 1837, the level of the water in the shaft
was 149 feet Q\ inches below the base of the Great Pyramid ; and
it was therefore 8 feet 5^ inches higher than the river.

On the 23d of October, 1838, the level of the water in the
shaft was 151 feet GJ inches below the base of the Great Pyramid ;
and it was therefore 14 feet 3| inches lower than the river, as the
water in the shaft had decreased 2 feet.

Well near the Palm-trees.

On the 7th of June, 1837, the level of the water in tlie well
was 147 feet 10| inches below the base of the Great Pyramid ;
and it was therefore 10 feet 1:| inch higher than the river: and
on the 23d of October, 1838, if the water had not decreased, it
would have been 10 feet 7| lower than the river. ^

Well of Sweet Water near the Tents.

On the 7th of June, 1837, the level of the water in the well
was 146 feet 3| inches below the base of the Great Pyramid ; and
it was therefore 11 feet 8| inches higher than the river; and on
the 23d of October, 1838, if the water had not decreased, it would
have been 9 feet h inch lower than the river.

It will appear from these details, that, contrary to the received
opinion, these Avaters do not proceed from the river. The Arabs
consider that they are occasioned by rain ; but very little rain fell
during the winters of 1837 and of 1838; and, as will be seen in
the Table of Levels, the water in the well near the tents only lost a
foot in the course of the day. This well, although it was in con-
stant use, and was sometimes so exhausted that water was procured

' Mr. Perring lias not sent any additional information respecting tliese wells.
Tlie water at the palm-trees is brackish.

150 APPENDIX.

from other sources, was soon replenished, and never remained dry,
notwithstanding it was at that time 11 feet 8| inches above the
river. The water would therefore appear to proceed from a spring,
and, if so, it is the only spring that has been discovered in Egypt ;
which may account for the sanctity of the spot, and also for the
history of the Shepherd Philition having fed his flocks in the
neighbourhood, &;c. These remarks are, however, merely con-
jectures, as nothing certain can be known till the site of the place
is cleared from sand, and the subterraneous passages well ex-
amined. I have already remarked, that a sarcophagus at the
bottom of the shaft north of the Sphinx, No. 2, contained, in the
summer of 1 837, 3 or 4 inches of water ; by which it would
appear, that the water must have at one time covered the top
of it, unless it be supposed to have been purposely placed within
it. It is to be observed, also, that the foss in Campbell's Tomb
was dry, although it was 15 feet 6^ inches below the High Nile of
1838.

LEVELS ON THE SEVENTH OF JUNE, 1837.

Feet. Inches.

From the brink of the well of sweet water to that of the

well at the palm-trees - - - 0 8|

From the brink of the well at the palm-trees to the

top of the shaft north of the sphinx, No. 3 - 23 8A

From the top of the shaft north of the sphinx, No. 3, to

the top of the shaft west of the sphinx, No. 2 - 8 5|

From the top of the shaft west of the sphinx, No. 2, to

the south-eastern angle of Campbell's Tomb - 13 10|

From the south-eastern to the south-western angle of

Campbell's Tomb - - - 2 7|

From the south-western to the north-western angle of

Campbell's Tomb - - - 3 4|

From the north-eastern angle of Campbell's Tomb to

the top of the shaft, No. 1, between Campbell's

Tomb and Second Pyramid - - 35 11 1

Ascending 88 10
From the north-western to north-eastern angle of Camp-
bell's Tomb, descending - - - 2 7|

Total ascent from the brink of the well of sweet water
to the brink of the shaft between Campbell's Tomb
and the Second Pyramid, No, 1, ascending - 86 2i

APPENDIX. 151

Feet. Inches.

Brought forward - - - - 86 2|
From the top of the shaft between Campbell's Tomb
and the Second Pyramid, No. 1, to north-eastern

angle of Great Pyramid, ascending - - 40 5

126 7^
Depth from the brink to the water in the well of sweet

water - - - - -198

It will therefore appear that the base of the Great Py-
ramid was higher than the water in the well in that
month - - - - 146 3^

The depth to the water was taken early in the morning.
In the evening, after the well had been exhausted,
the depth was 20 feet 8 inches.

Depth from the brink to the water in the well of sweet

water, on the 7th June, 1837 - - 19 8

In the well at palm-trees, depth to the water on the 7th

June, 1837 - - - - 22 0

In the shaft north of sphinx. No. 3, depth to the water

on the 7th June, 1837 - - - 47 4

In the shaft west of sphinx. No. 2 - - 55 4

In the shaft between Campbell's Tomb and Second

Pyramid, No. 1 - - - - 113 7

From the water in the well at the palm-trees to the
under side of the great stone at the bridge in the
southern mound _ - - -

The water in the well at the palm-trees was lower than
that in the well of sweet water, when the water in
the latter had not been used

And, in the evening, when the water has been used

The water in the shaft to the north of the sphinx,
No. 3, was lower than that in the well at the palm-
trees _ - - - -

The water in the shaft west of the sphinx. No. 2, was
higher than that in the shaft north of the sphinx,
No. 3 - - - - - 0 5A

The water in the shaft between Campbell's Tomb and
the Second Pyramid, No. 1, was lower than that
in the shaft west of the sphinx. No. 2 - - 4 1 14

The water in the shaft, therefore, between Campbell's
Tomb and the Second Pyramid, No. 1, was lower
than the water in the well of sweet water - 7 8|

5

3i

1

n

0

n

1

n

152 APPENDIX.

SIGNORE CAVIGLIA.

It was not my intention to have taken up the time of the
public with any differences of opinion that might have arisen
between M. Caviglia and myself, nor with any unnecessary detail
respecting that gentleman's conduct ; but since the preceding
pages were written, a statement has appeared in an Edinburgh
journal,! containing a direct attack upon Colonel Campbell
and myself, in what are called translations of two letters, sent
by M. Caviglia for publication, through a correspondent at
Manchester.

As for the correspondent himself, and his prefatory remarks
and assertions, it is only necessary to observe, that the assumed
impartiality with which he introduces the subject, by stating,
that "The facts alleged in these letters rest for proof entirely
upon the authority and veracity of the writer," is a mere pre-
tence ; for, without any previous inquiry into the truth of the
statements, he decides the question at once in M. Caviglia's
favour, whom he describes as '^ an amiable and enthusiastic
devotee at the shrine of antiquarian learning, who has sacrificed
country, home, friends, and fortune, for the indulgence of the
refined, though eccentric, taste of exploring the hidden mysteries
of the Pyramids and Tombs of Egypt." How far this modest
description applies to the object of it, those acquainted with M.
Caviglia's history can best judge. And how far the anonymous
writer, in his frequent conversations, in the month of January,
1837, was enabled to ascertain the extent of that gentleman's
knowledge of the interior of the Pyramids, and of the mysterious
secrets which he had confidentially imparted to me, by the
" prudent reserve " maintained towards himself (a person, of
whose perfect integrity there could have been no reason to doubt),
it is not for me to determine ; a reserve, however, which, it is to
be remarked, that M. Caviglia could have had little difficulty in
maintaining, because he was most entirely ignorant of the interior
of the Pyramids, and likewise completely mistaken in all the con-
jectures he had formed about them, as will afterwards be shewn.

With respect to the tirade against the Duke of Wellington
and Colonel Campbell, his grace's fame and character require no

' Tail's Magazine. See page 1G8, &c.

APPENDIX. 153

Other defence against such aspersions, than their own intrinsic
excellence and lustre ; and whatever enemies Colonel Campbell
may have necessarily made amongst the obscure and unprincipled
adventurers with which Egypt abounds, by a faithful and diligent
discharge of his official duties, attacks, such as the one in question,
and that alluded to in my Journal of the lOtli of April, can never,
in the opinion of any respectable person, bring for one moment
into question his unblemished honour, and integrity of purpose.
As to the name of Wellington's Chamber, I am unwilling to alter
it for that of O'Connell, because I am neither reformer nor
republican ; or for that of Caviglia, because that gentleman had
no more to do with its discovery than his anonymous advocate
at Manchester.

With regard, however, to the object in view — namely, the two
letters to which INI. Caviglia's name is affixed — it is to be observed,
that the one dated the 2nd of April, 1837, is for the most part a
translation of an account published in Italian, apparently by M.
Caviglia himself, in the " Maltese Gazette," of the 22d of March,-
with the exception of the introduction of the name of Mr. Agnew (a
gentleman connected with the house of Thurburne and Brio-grs at
Alexandria, and not a traveller, as he is there described) ; of the
omission of the height of forty- three feet, to which M. Caviglia has
most unaccountably imagined a coating of red paint to have ex-
tended upon the surface of the Second Pyramid ; of the suppression
of several complimental expressions ; and of certain alterations
and additions necessary for the epistolary shape of the English
translation. As M. Caviglia cannot write in English, the letters
in question may be considered as the production of the anonymous
correspondent at Manchester. It is, however, of little importance
to whom they are ascribed ; nor should I have thought them
worthy of notice, especially the first, (which may be considered, in
its Italian version, as a mere newspaper puff,) had it not been for
the grave charges contained in them against Colonel Campbell
and myself. It is asserted that M. Caviglia had, after years of
labour and study, made discoveries, which he confidentially men-
tioned to me, and that a determination existed between Colonel
Campbell and myself " to dispense with his services, and to
profit in concert by the results of his previous studies and
researches in these monuments, which he had so freely im-
parted," and liy which, after he had been dismissed from the

' See page 166.

154 APPENDIX.

Pyramids, I subsequently directed my operations to a favourable
conclusion ; tliat, because the firmaun obtained for Colonel
Campbell, Mr. Sloane, and myself, was accidentally in M.
Caviglia's name, as he was to be employed under it, it had
been unjustly taken from him " at the very moment when, after
years of labour and study, he was about to realize his discoveries."
And it is also a subject of complaint that Colonel Campbell
refused to apply for another firmaun, in opposition to that actu-
ally in operation. The falsehood of the first scandalous assertion
will be manifest from the facts themselves ; and those who take
any interest in the matter, can form their own conclusions respect-
ing the characters of people who could invent, or who could after^
wards publish*, such base calumnies, without having previously
ascertained their probability or truth. With respect to the
firmaun being in M. Caviglia's name, I requested Colonel Camp-
bell to state in writing why it happened to be so ; and I subjoin a
copy of his letter, with an official translation of the document
itself, received at the same time.^ As to M. Caviglia's request for
another firmaun, in direct hostility and opposition to that above
mentioned, all comment or remark are unnecessary. It is like-
wise stated, that Colonel Campbell and myself went to the Pyra-
mids, and expressed great satisfaction at M. Caviglia's proceed-
ings, &c. This is a mistake, for I never saw Colonel Campbell
at the Pyramids till after M. Caviglia's departure from them ;
when, on the 14tli of April, he came there with M. De Laurin,
the Austrian consul-general. It is also said, that on the 10th of
February, 1837, I proposed to M. Caviglia " to employ three
hundred additional men, when he was superintending the labour
of one hundred and fifty workpeople." Now the number of
people employed on that day, including children, and the parties
in the Great and Third Pyramids, was one hundred and thirty-
three. M. Caviglia being absent the whole of that day at Cairo,
I paid the people myself, and gave him the account on his return
in the evening. These errors in numbers and facts I should treat
as of little or no consequence, were it not for the deductions
attempted to be drawn from them. With regard to the assumed
partnership, it is manifest that M. Caviglia always considered
himself as conducting the affair under Colonel Campbell and
myself; and that, in fact, from the many calls on Colonel Camp-
bell's time and attention, the arrangements were in a great mea-

' See page 164.

APPENDIX. 155

sure left to me. M. Caviglia cannot but recollect the different con-
versations we had on this subject, particularly those mentioned in
this Journal on the 24th and 27th of January, and on the 4th of
February ; and although 1 did not put an entire stop to his pro-
ceedings, he may likewise remember, that after he had engaged
on the 4th of February, in consequence of my observations to
leave off for a time his excavations at the two mummy-pits, he
thought it necessary to apply to Colonel Campbell for authority
to alter that engagement ; and that he came to my room at the
hotel in Cairo, early in the morning of the 6th, to inform me of
his having so done ; and he must remember that he likewise
received on that day a letter from Colonel Campbell, directing
him to adhere to his engagement with me, ^vhicli letter Colonel
Campbell immediately wrote, when he was informed by me of
the real circumstances of the case. As an additional proof, I beg
also to call to his recollection the programme of his intended
operations, which he offered for my approval on the evening of
the 10th of February, 1837.

The firmaun, in fact, entirely originated in a proposal made
by me to M. Caviglia, and afterwards communicated to his inti-
mate friend Mr. Sloane, on the 23d of February, 1836, to under-
take operations at my expense at the Pyramids;* for, upon my
return to Alexandria, on the 25th of October, in the same year, I
found that the arrangement, which afterwards took place, had
been already concluded by Mr. Sloane with Colonel Campbell
before 1 was aware of the circumstance, and that, in consequence
of my former proposal, my name was included in it. Respecting
any recompense which M. Caviglia was to receive, I was not
informed of it ; but I have living testimonies to prove the civility
and attention paid to him by me in every instance during the
time he was employed at the Pyramids ; and also my own ac-
counts to shew that, both during my presence at that place, and
my absence in Upper Egypt, independently of the joint subscrip-
tion, he was under no restriction, as far as expense was concerned,
either for his own personal convenience or for the works under
his superintendence ; and that whatever articles or stores might
have been judged necessary, they were to be obtained by applica-
tion to Mr. Hill.

M. Caviglia arrived at Cairo on the 15th of November, 1836,^
and, after various arrangements, went to the Pyramids on the

* Sec Vol. I. page 13. ' See Vol. I.

156 APPENDIX.

17th of that month, I joined him on the 21st, and, having
agreed upon the works to be carried on, I left the Pyramids for
Upper Egypt on the 24th of the same month, and returned to
them on the 24tli January, 1837, full of expectation in conse-
quence of the forwardness at which M. Caviglia, in two letters
(dated the 22d of December, and the 17th of January), men-
tioned the works at the Pyramids to have arrived. I could not,
therefore, but express my disappointment at finding, on my re-
turn, that little or no prospect of any discovery existed in the
First and Third Pyramids, and that not a man was at work at
the Second, but that the bulk of the people were employed in
searching for mummies, — an operation mentioned in his letters
as merely a secondary object. His excuses, in answer to my
obsei'vations on this subject, were the scarcity of men, the neces-
sity of occupying the ground from a fear of interruption from a
French faction, &c.

Notwithstanding all this, however, matters went on, as detailed
in my Journal, till the 10th of February, when, in M. Caviglia's
absence, I had an offer of two hundred or three hundred additional
men,^ which I gladly accepted, being extremely desirous, after all
the expense incurred, and inconvenience experienced, to endea-
vour at least to make some discoveries in the Pyramids before I
returned to England, which I wished to do without further delay.
I accordingly mentioned the circumstance to M. Caviglia on his
return from Cairo (as stated in my Journal), who, to my surprise,
made one objection after another, and, on the following morning,
came to me when I was at breakfast in the tent, and, without the
smallest provocation, behaved in so extraordinary and offensive a
manner, that the least I could do was instantly to order off the
people, whom 1 had brought from Cairo to work with the boring-
rods, &c. and to break off all communication with him. This
" amiable and enthusiastic devotee," who complains that I was
allowed " to trample under foot those courtesies of society which
are reciprocally due from one individual to another," was so good
as to tell me (in the presence of Mr. Perring), respecting the
additional men whom I intended to employ, that he was master,
and that no person dared to work there without his orders, with
many other complimentary expressions ;7 and, upon my desiring

6 The Shieks of the villages were anxious to prevent tlie employment of their
people at a neighbouring canal.

' As fur as I recollect, the words he useJ were, " Je suis maitre, et personne que
fnoi u'ose travailler ici ; si vous avez I'aigent, moi j'ai la Icle," &c.

APPENDIX. 157

him to return a second subscription of 40/., which I had just
advanced, he had the civility to throw it down most indignantly
on the breakfast-table, tied up in an old stocking, which I care-
fully returned with my best compliments, as soon as I had taken
out the money. Now, considering that M. Caviglia had been em-
ployed at my expense, excepting 40/. subscribed by Colonel Camp-
bell, and a similar sum said by him to have been paid by Mr.
Sloane ; that, instead of going effectually to work upon the Pyra-
mids (the original object of the undertaking), he had employed a
considerable part of the money on a totally distinct object, so that,
on the 24th of January, 1837, little or no progress had been made
in these buildings ; that also, notwithstanding my remonstrances,
he still persisted in searching for mummies, and not only refused
himself to employ additional men, but assumed in so extraordinary
a manner the right of objecting to their employment by myself;
— it cannot, I think, be a subject of wonder to any one that I in-
stantly gave up all communication with him, that Colonel Camp-
bell directed him to withdraw, or that I afterwards refused his
application to be again employed.

With respect to the information he boasts of having obtained
by a life of labour and study, and of the breach of confidence with
which I am charged in having taken advantage of his secrets
after his dismissal, I shall state the operations he carried on at
the three Pyramids, and their results ; and also advert to those
which have been subsequently attempted, in consequence of any
casual observations or remarks he may have made ; and thus at
once shew the extent of the information he possessed, and of the
obligations he so confidently asserts I was under to him in my
future operations.

At the Great Pyramid, misled by an erroneous opinion of the
vertical direction of part of the southern air-channel, which he
stated that he himself had ascertained by actual experiment, M.
Caviglia expended much time and labour in enlarging an excava-
tion, begun by him some years before, on the southern side of
Davison's Chamber. The height of the King's Chamber is nine-
teen feet one inch ; the average thickness of the granite blocks
forming the roof of the King's, and floor of Davison's Chambers,
is at least three or four feet, which, together, amount to about
twenty-two or twenty-three feet; the height of the mouth of the
channel from the floor of the King's Chamber is three feet.^

* See plan.

158 APPENDIX.

Now, M. Caviglia stated that, after passing horizontally through
the wall of the King's Chamber for five feet, the southern air-
channel ascended vertically for fourteen (making the total height
from the floor of the King's Chamber seventeen feet), and that it
afterwards turned off in an unknown direction, probably towards
the centre of the pyramid. He accordingly deepened the above-
mentioned excavation, in order to cut down upon the channel ;
and, having failed in that object, he continued the operation
towards the centre of the pyramid. This excavation is to be seen
in nearly the same state as it was at M. Caviglia's departure,
scarcely any additional labour having been expended upon it, and
that, not so much with a view of intercepting the air-channel, as
with the intention of getting above the ceiling of Davison's
Chamber, upon which undertaking Mr. Perring and myself deter-
mined after our examination on the night of the 12th of February .9
On the 13th, Mr. Perring reported that, having been again in
Davison's Chamber, he had taken the men from the southern
side of that apartment, and set them to work for the sake of
greater convenience at the end of the passage to the north of it,
where a small stick had been inserted on the preceding evening
for about the length of two feet up a crevice in an open joint on
the eastern side of the corner granite block, that formed part of
the ceiling of the chamber.^ M. Caviglia states that he had dis-
covered an unexplored passage, in which we were still prosecuting
our labours when he left the Pyramids, and in which, he would
lead the public to infer, that he had commenced an opening into
Wellington's Chamber. Now, there is positively no passage in
this part of the building but that leading into Davison's Chamber
and the air-channel. The former had been open, at all events,
since 1764 ; and the latter was, at the time, entirely unexplored,
and remained so till the 29th of May, 1837," when it was ascer-
tained that no part of it was in a vertical direction as M. Caviglia
bad confidently asserted, but that it continued in one inclination
from the wall of the King's Chamber to the exterior of the pyra-
mid, at a considerable distance, and perfectly inaccessible from
the excavation at the south of Davison's Chamber, in which so
much time and expense had been, in consequence of M. Caviglia's
unaccountable mistake, so long and so inconsiderately wasted.
Had M. Caviglia ever entertained an idea of getting above Davi-
son's Chamber, by any other means excepting by that of the

^ See Journal. * See plan. . ' See Journal.

SECTION LOOK mo EL

GREAT PYRAM I D .
king's chaiviberandchaivibers of construction.

■Sca/e

s/r

I \ u

Ai-Fci^

fnWia"V\p^ "V^TTra.SPT'Rftgmt St ■ 184;0

APPENDIX. 159

southern air-channel, it is manifest that instead of excavating
downwards and towards the centre of the pyramid, he would
have worked upwards in the calcareous stone on either the eastern
or western side of that apartment.^ The exact spot was of no
consequence, excepting as it afforded greater facility for cutting
through the stone, which was the sole reason why the one at the
end of the passage was fixed upon ; but if any great merit is to
be attached to its selection, Mr. Perring should be immortalised ;
and it should be named, according to the ideas of the anonymous
correspondent, " Perring's Hole, or Passage."

With regard to the northern air-channel, it appears, by M. Ca-
viglia's Italian expose, that in 1820 he tried to ascertain its direc-
tion (as many other people have done), by the insertion of long
sticks, which led him to the conclusion that " there were other

3 Since this statement was written, Lord Lindsay's book has been published,
and the following passage will remove all further doubt on the subject. His lord-
ship visited the Pyramids in December 1836, and, after describing the King's
Chamber, and M. Caviglia's excavation along the course of the northern air-channel,
he says : " * Now,' says Caviglia, ' I will shew you how I hope to find out
where the southern passage leads to.' Returning to the landing-place at the top of
the grand staircase, we mounted a ricketty ladder to the narrow passage that leads to
Davison's Chamber (so named after the English consul at Algiers, who discovered
it seventy years ago) ; it is directly above the King's Chamber, the ceiling of the
one forming the floor of the other. The ceiling of Davison's Chamber consists of
eight stones, beautifully worked ; and this ceiling, which is so low that you can only
sit cross-legged under it, Caviglia believes to be the floor of another large room
above it, which he is now trying to discover. To this room he concludes the little
passage leads that branches from the south side of the King's Chamber. He has
accordingly dug down into the calcareous stone at the further end of Davison's
Chamber, in the hopes of meeting it; once found, it will probably lead him to the
place he is in quest of. And now, I am sure, if I have been happy enough to in-
spire you with a tithe of the interest with which I followed every winding of the
pyramid, and of our cicerone's mind (itself a most extraordinary labyrinth), you will
be glad to hear that there seems every probability of his soon reaching the little
passage. Leaving a servant in the excavation, descending to the King's Chamber,
and shouting at the hole, the man answered by striking on the stone distinct strokes,
— as satisfactory a reply as could be wished for." With respect to the latter part
of this quotation, I can only say that, believing upon M. Caviglia's authority that
the air-channel was vertical, and that the excavation was consequently near it, I
have repeatedly endeavoured to ascertain its direction, by listening in Davison's
Chamber to noises made high up in the passage, but always without success ; and
the accompanying plan laid down by Mr. Perring will shew that it is impossible
I could have done so. The sounds, therefore, mentioned by Lord Lindsay, must
have been conveyed through the passage by which his lordship had ascended to
Davison's Chamber.

160 APPENDIX.

apartments in the interior of this monument,"* and that, having
failed, as might have been reasonably expected, in cutting through
the blocks of granite, " assistito da quella costanza che gli h
tutta propria, immagino di aprire un nuovo sentiero nella pietra
calcarea aderente al granito."^ This excavation he followed up
in his last operations to the extent altogether of thirty-six feet
without any beneficial result, and the work was accordingly dis-
continued on the 13tli of February. When this channel was
ultimately opened from above, it appeared that, like that to the
south, it had no communication with any other chambers, — a fact
directly at variance with M. Caviglia's conjectures, formed " after
years of labour and study ;" which intense application might have
been spared, if he had taken an excursion over the exterior of the
pyramid, where the forced mouth of the northern air-channel,
and the aperture of the southern, were plainly to have been seen.
I have already mentioned that the one was discovered accidentally
by Mr. Perring, and the other in one day by Abd El Ardi. In-
deed, whoever has examined these extraordinary buildings must
be aware how idle it is to talk of secrets and of study, about what
there is little or no analogy, or data, to go by. Proofs are not
wanting, that most of the discoveries at the Pyramids (excepting
those of the Caliphs, who appear to have possessed some know-
ledge of their interior formation), have been the result of conjec-
ture, and many of mere accident. It is only necessary to instance
M. Caviglia's interesting discovery in 1817, of the communication
between the upper and lower passages by means of the well. It
is 191 feet 6 inches in depth, and it had been examined in 1764
by Mr. Davison for 155 feet, so that the space of 36 feet 6 inches
was all that remained unexplored at that time ; and a good deal
of sand was removed by the French in 1800. The difficulty of
respiration, however, of course remained the same till the lower
passage had also been cleared out.^ And it seems, by Mr. Salt's
account, that, notwithstanding his perseverance and industry,
M. Caviglia failed entirely in his attempt to penetrate through
the well, and was obliged to give up the operation as hopeless ;

* It is scarcely possible to enter the King's Chamber without observing tlie two
air-channels. Greaves, who travelled in 1638, describes the opening of that to the
south to have been forced, and also to have been blackened with smoke.

^ See page 166.

* It is surprising that the French did not attempt this; but they appear to have
been most unaccountably ignorant that the entrance-passage went on beyond the
forced communication with the ascending passage to the chambers above.

APPENDIX. 161

but tliat, in clearing out the lower passage leading to the subter-
raneous apartment, (which, however, had also been entered by
Mr. Davison, to the extent of 131 feet.) he unexpectedly effected
his former purpose,''^ as the rubbish in tlie well naturally fell down
as fast as it was taken out at the bottom, and thus M. Caviglia,
whilst directing his attention to another object, unintentionally
made a most important discovery, and put an end to the doubts
and speculations, that bad existed respecting the well for above
2000 years.

At the commencement of our operations, I certainly imagined
that M. Caviglia was better acquainted than any other person
with the interior of the Great Pyramid ; but my confidence in his
judgment and skill was considerably lessened when he proposed
that the boring-rods should be used on the granite floor of the
King's Chamber, and also that they should be worked downwards
from the exterior of the pyramid upon the northern end of the
great passage, for the sake of ventilation; a distance, in his opinion,
of about 40 feet, but which afterwards proved nearly 200 feet.*'
After this latter exposition of the knowledge he had so laboriously
acquired of the relative distances of the several parts of this edi-
fice, and after other similar instances, that could be advanced, I
had not much reliance upon him.

The existence of a lower entrance at the Second Pyramid was
obvious to any person, who examined the reascending passage
from the forced portcullis in the interior. It was therefore deter-
mined, when I set out for Upper Egypt, on November 24th, 1836,
that the rubbish on the outside should be removed in search of it.
The confined and awkward manner, in which that work was first
set out, is apparent, and has prevented the proper completion of
it ; and the desultory and unsatisfactory way, in which it was
carried on, sufficiently accounts for the little progress that had
been made by the 13th of February .^

The disclosure of the short inclined passage, by the clearing
out of the interior of this pyramid, has been already described.'
It is certainly a curious discovery, but leads to no other conclu-
sion than that it was made either for the purpose of ventilation
during the formation of the excavated parts of the monument, or

' See Hall's " Life of Salt," vol. ii. p. 70.

* See vertical section of the Great Pyramid.

' See Journal, Vol. I.

' Seep. 1 38, Vol. I.
VOL. II. M

1 62 APPENDIX.

that the original plan had been altered, probably on account of
the nature of the rock, or of a different level having been taken
for the base of the edifice. The length of this passage is 18 feet
6 inches ; the depth from its floor to the ceiling of the lower in-
clined passage (with which M. Caviglia says it communicates by
a well) is 4 feet 4 inches. Whatever, however, may be the
amount of the discovery, I beg to assure M. Caviglia that due
honour has been done to it by the insertion of his name in Mr.
Perring's plans and admeasurements.

I have already mentioned the supposed Hebrew character be-
neath which M. Caviglia informed me, on the 27th January, 1837,
that a shaft was to be found. Excavations have since proved that
the cutting is the beginning of a doorway, and that, instead of a
shaft, there are the remains of stone quarries.

At the Third Pyramid, M. Caviglia had begun a narrow pas-
sage from the southern end of the upper excavation made by the
Mamelukes, " in the hope," as he says, "of being able to pene-
trate more easily the interior than by searching for an entrance at
the base;" which proves that, " after years of labour and study,"
he knew no more of the interior of that pyramid than of the
others, as the entrance is considerably below the lower excava-
tion, and as the whole of the apartments are entirely subterraneous.
On the 13th of February, M. Caviglia's passage had only arrived
at the length of six feet,^ notwithstanding the apparent satisfac-
tion with which he mentioned, in his letter of the 17th of January,
the progress he had made, and that he was within sixty feet of the
centre of the pyramid. As I afterwards carried on this work to
the centre, and sunk shafts to the foundation, without finding
any passage or apartment, it is clear that I received from M.
Caviglia no more assistance in the discoveries made at this
pyramid, than in other instances.^

As I did not inquire, I cannot state by whom M. Caviglia was
informed of the two upper shafts, where he was so long and so
unsuccessfully employed in searching for mummies. He most
probably heard of them from the Arabs, who, before the Pasha's
prohibition, were constantly employed in excavating either for

' See Mr. Perring's admeasurements.

3 Mr. Belzoni appears to have made a better guess than any other person as to
the position of the entrance into the Third Pyramid, by supposing that it was con-
cealed by the blocks of granite that formed the base; the removal of which, he says,
would evidently have brought him to the entrance of the pyramid, but that it re-
quired more money and time than he could spare.

APPENDIX. 163

themselves or for other people. But Abd El Ardi assured me,
that he pointed out Campbell's Tomb to M. Caviglia, having for-
merly found it too large to work on his own account. In fact, it
is evident to any person acquainted with the place, that the dis-
covery of these and of similar constructions can only be effected
by partially removing the sand, and can never be the result of
study and reflection.

So much for M. Caviglia's discoveries. And as for his
operations at Campbell's Tomb, it is only necessary to say that
he intended to open the several parts successively, in order to
save expense — a process by which it would have been impossible
to have surveyed and taken plans of this extraordinary edifice ;
and which could have led to no other beneficial result, than the
paltry acquisition of a few common antiquities : nor is it easy to
imagine the time in which even this imperfect operation would
have been effected, and the sand taken out from so great a depth
by the common Arab baskets, which were the only means he
employed ; since, even with the help of machinery and of ad-
ditional numbers (allowing for the few days' intermission men-
tioned in my Journal), the place was not finally cleared until the
29th of June.

Having now clearly shewn that I never received from M.
Caviglia the slightest useful information, or assistance (which
indeed was not in his power to afford), but that on the contrary I
had much reason to complain of the ill-judged and feeble manner,
in which he attempted, most unsuccessfully, to carry on the inten-
tions of the firmaun, and particularly also of the time and labour
which he wasted on other trifling objects, I have now most dis-
tinctly and indignantly to deny, that any determination existed
between Colonel Campbell and myself " to dispense with his
services, and to profit in concert by the results of his previous
studies and researches," which, it is falsely stated, he "so freely
imparted ;" — an imputation which can only affect the character of
the persons who have so vainly endeavoured to cast it on Colonel
Campbell and myself. M. Caviglia's dismissal on the 12th of
February, was the consequence of his own unwarrantable
conduct.

The details, which I have thought it necessary to draw up
respecting the recent discoveries at the Pyramids, will sufficiently
prove that I entertain no silly vanity respecting them, but that
on the other hand I have endeavoured to give full credit to those
gentlemen, by whose skill and perseverance I have been so mate-
rially assisted ; and I here beg to assure M. Caviglia how much I

164 APPENDIX.

I'egret that it is not in my power to make similar acknowledg-
ments to him. The tenour of my answer to his application, made
through Mr. Galloway, on the 7th of March, to be allowed to
return to the Pyramids, will shew that I never entertained the
slightest hostility towards him, although it was evidently impos-
sible to accede to his request. I could also, were it necessary,
appeal to Mr. Wilkinson's testimony, that I sedulously avoided
any allusions to these unpleasant transactions, beyond what were
necessary to make intelligible the operations afterwards so success-
fully carried on at Gizeh : nor should I have now entered into so
long and disagreeable a detail, had it not been for the groundless
and foul accusations publicly preferred, in M. Caviglia's name,
against Colonel Campbell and myself.

(traduzione.)

GiACCHE il nostro caro uffiziale stimatissimo Colonello Camp-
bell, Console-Generale del Re d' Inghilterra, ci fece sapere die h
la sua volonta di scavare una delle Piramide ; che si trova nel
Ghize con tutti i suoi appartenenti, e scoprire le antichita che ne
sbno nascoste ; le quale sono attorno nelle sue vicinanze, questo
fu colla conoscenza del Signore Caviglia ; ed anche la spese sai-a
pagata dal medesimo ; chiedendo da noi un firmano, per adjutarlo
in cio': e secondo la sua dimanda scrivemmo questo ordine a tutti
i direttori e comandanti, e Governatori in Generale, che sono
in quella direzzione ; di non impedire il Signore Caviglia sopra-
detto di quello, che e soprascritto, ansi d'ajutarlo in tutto cio,
che ne avra bisogno, e d' essere ubbidienti a questo nostro
comando, e di guardarsi bene di non trasgredirlo.

(SigiUato) MEHEMED ALL

Cairo, di {Moharem) Aprile 1252.

Alexandria, August IQth, 18o7.

My dear Colonel Vyse, — I inclose to you, at your request,
the copy and translation of the firmaun granted by Mahomet Ali
for excavating in the Pyramids of Gizeli and in their neigh-
j^ourhood.

APPENDIX. 165

You will perceive that the firman is in the name of Mr.
Caviglia, and it is therefore incumbent on me to explain the
reason of its being so.

When I first applied to the Pacha for the firman, I requested
that it should be made out in your name and in my own jointly.

The firman was accordingly made out in our names, and
addressed to the Moudir, Governor of the district of Ghize,

I sent my dragoman with the firman to the Moudir, in order
that he (the Moudir) should give the necessary instructions to the
Sheiks of the villages in the neighbourhood of the Pyramids, to
afford all the aid of workmen, &c. requisite to carry on the
excavations and operations which you contemplated.

On the receipt of the firman by the Moudir, that person gave
the necessary orders to the Sheiks in writing, but added that
they were to keep strict watch that nothing found there should
be carried off by you or rae. I was, as you may suppose, much
annoyed by this improper remark of the Moudir, and went at
eight o'clock on the same night to complain to the Pacha of this
circumstance.

The Pacha appeared to feel the circumstance even more than
I did myself, and in my presence gave orders to deprive the
Moudir of his employment ; and then asked me if it would not
facilitate the object in view if the firman should be made out in
the name of the person employed by us to carry on the exca-
vations, and then that person could give his orders direct to the
Sheiks, without any interference on the part of the Moudir, or any
reference to him.

I agreed with the Pacha in this view, and the firman was
accordingly made out in the name of M. Caviglia, the person
employed by us ; but had you or I desired it, it would equally
have been made out in the name of any other person you might
have designated. You will perceive, by this plain statement, the
reasons and the object of the firman being issued in the name of
M. Caviglia.

I have only now to felicitate you, &c.*

Believe me to be, with great regard,
My dear Colonel Vyse,

Yours most truly,
PATRICK CAMPBELL.

* The pari of lliis leltev lieie oniiUeil is merely complimentary.

166 APPENDIX.

Scoperte Fatte in Egitto, dal Capitan Caviglia,
nel 1820 e 1836.

Il Capitan Caviglia e bastantemente conosciuto per le scoperte
che fece nel 1817, nell' interno della Gran Pyramide di Giseh, per
quella di un tempio fra le zampe del' Andro-Sfinge, e per altre in
diversi Monument! Egiziani.

Persuaso egli che nell' interno della Gran Piramide potessero
existere altri appartamenti, oltre quelli gia conosciuti rinnovo i
suoi tentativi nel 1820, e comincio dalU introdurre una quantita
di bastoni fino a circa 120 piedi, entro le due aperture nord, e
sud della Camera del Re : mancando pero d' istrumenti atti a
travagliare sul granito, di cui e formata la camera, non potette
riuscire ad ingrandire dette due aperture ; ma assistito da quella
costanza che gli e tutta propria, immagino di aprire un nuovo
sentiero nella pietra calcarea aderente al granito, che e alia diritta
deir entrata della camera, ad oggetto di scuoprire il piccolo buco
d' alia parte del nord : aperto cosi il passagio per 15 piedi, rin-
venne il buco con la direzione nella massa calcarea verso 1' owest,
in un angolo ascendente di 27°.

Felice di questa scoperta voile tentare 1' apertura del lato sud,
della Camera del Sarcofago ; ma ogni sforzo, quantunque conti-
nuato in direzioni diverse, sopra uno spazio di 20 piedi fra la
pietra calcarea all' angolo sud-est della Camera di Davison,
rimase inefficace, ed infruttuoso.

Nel 1817 Caviglia aveva scoperto le parti nord ed est dell'
Andro-Sfinge, nel 1820 ebbe la sodisfazione di scuoprirne il lato
deir owest, e trovo che questo monument© siede sopra piede-
stallo circondato da un fosso scavato nella rocca, fosso che molto
probabilmente aveva servito a far circolare dell' acqua proveniente
dal canale indicate per il ponte che e situato in mezzo del cam-
mino situato al sud-est degli Alberi della Vallata.

In un vallone, 5 miglia distante nord-est dalla Gran Piramide,
scuopri diverse abitazioni, delle tombe, ed una gran cisterna, il
tutto scavato nella rocca, e senza la minima traccia di geroglifici ;
dal che formo opinione che tal luogo dovesse essere stato-abitato
da popolo assai antico, di cui ignoravasi il nome.

Nel medesimo vallone osservo pure un cammino che con-
duceva ad una collina ; sulla quale riconobbe gli avanzi di una

APPENDIX. 167

piramide, di circa 300 piedi di base, circondata da altra piccole
Piraniidi di Granito, che il tempo aveva quasi interamente pol-
verizzato, e fu indotto a supporrc clie tali ediiizi fossero di gran
lunga piu vecchi di quelli di Gizeh, ove il granito, come la piccola
piramide sono ancora in buonissimo stato.

Neir anno 1821, dovette sospendere il lavoro intorno a questi
monumenti, per occuparsi delle rovine di Memplii, che fruttar-
ongli la scoperta del Colosso del Gran Sesostri, la di cui bellezza
h nota in Europa.

Nel 1836, avendo riassunto nuove iudagini nell' interno della
Gran Piramide, e sempre all' intento di scoprire delle nuove
camere ; e la di lui attenzione essendosi estesa anco agli altri
monumenti, riconobbe nella Seconda Piramide, ove si riuniscon i
due passaggi per andare alia camera scoperta da Belzoni, un terzo
passaggio die comunicando col mezzo di un piccolo Pozzo coi
due altri, divieue molto interessante per la scienza.

Esaminata la natura dei travagli che oc3orrevano, il Cap.
Cavio'lia si determine ad aprire una strada esterna alia base, ed
alia distanza di 43 piedi da essa rinvenne die tanto il suolo della
rocca, quanto uno scalino scoperto a 11 piedi piu vicino all'
entrata, erano sinaltati di rosso. E, siccome sulle pietre cadute
dalla facciata del monumento questo smalto e della stessa natura,
di quelle che fu da lui rinvenuto, concepi 1' idea die tutta la
Piramide fosse stata smaltata di rosso a 43 piedi dalla base.

Molti avevano tentato di aprire la Terza Piramide, egli si e
accinto pure a tale impresa, ed ha cominciato ad aprire ad una
certa altezza un passaggio dal lato nord, non senza speranza di
penetrare piu facilmente in qualche appartamento, che tentandolo
dalla base.

Egli annunzia la difficolta, e la lentezza dei lavori nella Gran
Piramide ; cio non ostante e riuscito di fare una apertura al di
sopra della apertura della Camera di Davison, e crede in breve di
penetrare superiormente al soffito della medesima.

II Cap. Caviglia inline ha scoperto all' owest-nord-owest, e
a 300 piedi dall' Andro-Sfinge, una gran toniba, circondata da un
fosso lungo piedi 68, largo piedi 6, e profondo gia piedi 60.

La costruzione del medesimo e tanto particolarmente scavata
nella rocca, che da luogo di pervenire ai piu grandi resultati.

In questo momento il Cap. Caviglia ha sospeso ogni lavoro;
e pero sul punto di riprenderli, e di continuare senza interruzione,
per poi essere in grado di communicare al pubblico il frutto delle
sue onorevoli fatiche.

108 APPENDIX.

A Brief Account of the Discoveries made in Egypt, between the
years 1820 and 1836, hy T. B. Caviglia.

TO THE EDITOR OF TAIt's MAGAZINE.

The following, being translations of letters which have been sent
to me for publication, by M. Caviglia, you will probably think
worthy of an early insertion in your magazine. The facts alleged
in these letters, rest for proof entirely upon the authority and
veracity of the writer; and you will, therefore, probably deera it
due to justice, and to the characters of Colonel Vyse and Colonel
Campbell, to proffer the use of your pages to those gentlemen,
for an explanation of the part they have taken in the interesting
transactions referred to. For your justification, and the satisfac-
tion of your readers, however, I can state, in corroboration of the
principal incidents alluded to, that, having myself visited Egypt
in the course of a tour in the East, during portions of the last
and present year, and having paid several visits to the Pyramids,
I there made the acquaintance of M. Caviglia, who was, at the
time, engaged in superintending the labours of a party of work-
men, who were paid by Colonel Campbell, Colonel Vyse, Mr.
Sloane, and himself, jointly, as described in the following letters.
I spent the month of January in Cairo and the neighbourhood,
and frequently met and conversed with M. Caviglia upon the
subject of his views and projects; but I found that, both towards
myself and otbers, who took an interest in his scientific labours,
he maintained a prudent reserve respecting the discoveries he
expected to make, and the operations by which he hoped to effect
them. I mention this to shew that, if he imparted his secrets to
Colonel Vyse, it must have been in a spirit of confidence, spring-
ing from the intimate alliance they had entered into. How far
that confidence has been abused, must be determined by other
testimony than mine, as I have no means of judging of the circum-
stances of the case, excepting such as are given in M. Caviglia's
own letters below.

One word as to the names with which the chamber discovered
by Caviglia is to be christened ; for it seems that rival godfathers
are disputing over the subject. It appears, that whilst the dis-
coverer of the chamber in question would give it the title of

APPENDIX. 169

O'Connell, Colonel Vyse, with an esprit de corps, not a little
natural, assigns to it the name of Wellington. Neither name is,
in my opinion, well chosen ; for the Liberator of Ireland, a fame
more imperishable than even the Pyramids themselves, has
already heen secured at the hands of the historian ; whilst the
hero of Waterloo, if he be not remembered in the bridges, streets,
and boots, which are named after him, will for ever be preserved
in our memory by those annual instalments, which, in the form
of taxation, are levied in payment for his glory. In my opinion,
the apartment should be named after its discoverer, Caviglia, as
both the most proper and most euphonious title. Colonel Camp-
bell, whose name has been given to one of these discoveries, has
no right to identify himself in any way with the triumph of anti-
quarian science; not having, since his residence in Egypt, as
British consul, until the present questionable instance, lent the
slightest assistance to the cause of such researches. I would
recommend to his notice and imitation the very opposite conduct
of his worthy predecessor, Mr. Salt, who, whilst he patronized
the exertions of such enterprising individuals as Belzoni and
others, left them in the undisputed possession of all the honour
which justly accrued from their meritorious labours. I venture,
then, to give to the lately-discovered apartment the name of the
"Caviglia Chamber," in justice to the fame of an amiable and
enthusiastic devotee at the shrine of antiquarian learning — in
justice to one who has sacrificed country, home, friends, and
fortune, for the indulgence of the refined though eccentric taste
of exploring the hidden mysteries of the Pyramids and Tombs of
Egypt.

R. C.

Manchester, 20th Aug. 1837.

Captain Caviglia, already known by the discoveries which he
made in 1817, in the interior of the Great Pyramid, by the dis-
covery of the temple situated betwixt the fore-feet of the Andro-
Spliinx, as well as by other labours crowned with similar success,
begs to submit to the notice of the scientific M'orld the results of
his subsequent exertions in the same great field of antiquarian
.^arning.

In 1820, upon revisiting the Great Pyramid, he was induced
tu try an experiment, by pushing into the two small apertures,

170 APPENDIX.

which are on the north and south side of the " King's Chamber,"
a great number of pahn branches, tied together, to the length of
about 120 feet ; and which led him to the opinion that there were
other apartments in the interior of this monument. But, having
failed in the attempt to enlarge these small openings, owing to
the want of proper implements for working the granite with
Avhich the chamber is lined, he determined to pierce another
passage in the calcareous stone, of which the body of the pyramid
is formed, beginning at the right-hand side of the entrance to the
chamber, in the hope of striking upon the above small passage in
the calcareous mass to the north.

Having excavated to the distance of about fifteen feet, the
above-named small aperture — the course of which tended at an
angle of about 271° to the westward — was encountered: and
afterwards the labours of the workmen were diligently continued
in the same direction.

But, with a view to come upon the track of the other hole,
which opens into the south side of the King's Chamber, Captain
Caviglia caused another passage to be opened in the calcareous
stone to the south of the "Davison Chamber;" and having
penetrated about twenty feet, without finding the object of his
search, he gave orders to the workmen to continue their labours
in another direction.

After much labour, in 1817, Caviglia exposed to view the
north and east sides of the Andro-Sphinx, which, together with
the base, he discovered, to be so delicately coated with a reddish
coloured composition, that it left him in doubt whether the cover-
ing had originally been of plaster, or paint. In 1820, he, more-
over, discovered the west side of this monument, which he now
found to be placed upon a pedestal, likewise plastered or painted,
and surrounded by a ditch cut in the rock, intended probably for
the circulation of water, which was supplied from a canal in the
neighbourhood, as indicated by a bridge in the embankment, to
the south-east of the trees in the valley.

Whilst engaged in superintending the above works, Captain
Caviglia discovered, in a valley five miles to the north-west of the
Great Pyramid, several houses and tombs, together with a large
cistern, the whole cut from the solid rock, and presenting no
traces of hieroglyphics ; which latter circumstance has given rise
to the opinion, that this valley was peopled by an ancient race, of
whose name and history we are totally ignorant. In the same
valley, Caviglia having observed the traces of a road, which con-

APPENDIX. 171

ducted him to the summit of a small hill, he there laid open to
view the base of a pyramid, of about 300 feet square, surrounded
by small pyramids of granite, which had nearly crumbled to dust
beneath the hand of time. There is little doubt but these monu-
ments had a much earlier origin than the Pyramids of Gizeh —
the granite that covers the smallest of which is still in a tolerable
state of preservation. Having suspended his labours in the
neighbourhood of the Great Pyramids, he went, in 1821, to the
vicinity of Memphis, where his labours were that year rewarded
by the discovery of the colossal statue of the great Sesostris,
the magnitude and beauty of which are known throughout the
scientific world.

In 1836, Captain Gaviglia resumed his labours at the Great
Pyramids, with the hope of finding some additional chambers.
He discovered in the second of these monuments, at the point
where the passages of the two entries unite to conduct to the
chamber discovered by Belzoni in the centre, a third passage,
Avhich, in the circumstance of its communicating with the other
entries of Belzoni, by means of a small well, presents a feature of
interest to the scientific student of the principles of Egyptian
architecture. After considering as to the best mode of jDrosecut-
ing further investigations in the interior of the above pyramid, it
M'as determined to open its exterior entry, situated at the base;
when it was found, at the distance of forty-three feet from this
entrance, that the rocky foundation had been plastered or painted
red, in the same manner as the Andro-Sphinx ; and a similar
circumstance was observed with reference to a step, situated at
eleven feet nearer the sought-for entrance. As this red plaster
or paint is of the same kind as that which is found upon the
stones which have crumbled from the faces of the pyramids, there
is reason to conclude that the whole of the exterior surface of
those monuments, as well as the principal part of their founda-
tions, was painted or plastered red. Another incident tends to
confirm this supposition : having picked up, at the eastern base
of the Great Pyramid, a stone covered with a coat of red paint,
which he accidentally shewed to an English traveller, Mr. H. B.
Agnew ; that gentleman produced a stone of the same kind,
covered also with a red paint or plaster, which he had found on
the west side of the same monument. From that time there was
no longer reason to doubt that the two Great Pyramids, as well as
the Andro-Sphinx, had been originally covered witii a surface of

172 APPENDIX.

plaster — in colour, very much resembling the red granite with
which the Third Pyramid only was cased.

The unsuccessful attempts which have been made by a variety
of persons to open the smallest of the three great Pyramids,
induced Caviglia to make an experiment, by piercing another
passage at a certain height on the north side, in the hope of being
able to penetrate more easily the interior, than by searching for
an entrance at the base. As the works before referred to in the
interior of the Great Pyramid proceeded necessarily very slowly,
it was determined, without interrupting them, to commence an
opening above that of the entrance to Davison's Chamber; and
it is hoped, that, in a short time, it will be found practicable to
penetrate above the ceiling of that chamber.

Besides the above labours, Caviglia has discovered, at a dis-
tance of 300 feet to the west-north-west of the Andro-Sphinx, a
large tomb, surrounded with a ditch sixty-eight feet long and six
wide, and already excavated to the depth of about fifty feet, cut
out of the solid rock, and altogether of a style of construction so
peculiar as to warrant the hope that it may lead to still more
interesting results.

Captain Caviglia has found it necessary to suspend his
labours ; but he hopes soon to be able to resume them, and to
continue his operations without further interruption ; and he will
deem it his duty to announce his further progress to the scientific
world, of which he has the honour to regard himself as the
devoted and obliged servant.

T. B. CAVIGLIA.

Alexandria, 2d April, 1837.

Letter from T. B. Caviglia, addressed to Colonel Campbell,
Consul- General and Agent of his Britannic Majesty in Egypt
and its Dependencies.

Sir, — In the brief account which I have published to the
scientific world, of my discoveries in the Pyramids of Gizeh and
their environs, I stated — 1. "That I had commenced an opening
above that of the entrance to Davison's Chamber, and that I

APPENDIX. • 173

hoped soon to be able to penetrate above the ceiling of that
chamber. 2. That I had discovered, at a distance of 300 feet to
the west-north-west of the Andro-Sphinx, a large tomb, sur-
rounded with a ditch sixty-eight feet long and six wide, and
already excavated to the depth of about fifty feet, cut out of the
solid rock, and of a construction so peculiar as to lead to the hope
of still more important results."

At the moment when these hopes have been realised, and these
results obtained by Colonel Vyse, it becomes my duty to make
known to the public why I have been compelled to suspend my
labours, and how I have been superseded as director by that gen-
tleman. Justice requires that we should render unto every one
according to his works.

When, in the month of November last, in conjunction with
Colonel Vyse, and Mr. Charles Sloane, your vice-consul at Alex-
andria, you made me an offer, that, if I would again take upon
myself to direct the works at the Pyramids of Gizeh and the
neighbourhood, you would furnish me with the funds and the
firmaun necessary to the undertaking ; and that, as a recompense
for my services, I should receive a fourth part of such antiquities
as I might discover ; I accepted the proposal, begging you at the
same time to be good enough to offer to the disposal of the British
Museum my share of our future discoveries. It was thus that I
disposed of the antiquities which I found in the year 1817.

In fulfilment of the above arrangement, having received 40^.
from each of my three associates, and being provided with a
firmaun from the Pasha in my own name, I forthwith commenced
my labours. A short time afterwards you paid me a visit,
accompanied by Colonel V^yse, when you were so fully satisfied
with an inspection of the works, that you gave orders to your
vice-consul at Cairo to furnish me with additional funds for the
further prosecution of the undertaking. Soon afterwards, how-
ever, Colonel Vyse came and took up his residence at the Pyra-
mids with me. Regarding him in the relation of a partner, I felt
no hesitation in confiding to him my views and ideas as to the
direction of our works ; and I explained to him in all the security
of the most perfect confidence, the minutest details of my plans.
Of course, I did not allow the unworthy suspicion to enter my
mind, that he would profit by my frankness, in a manner so un-
becoming his rank, as to supplant me in the capacity of director
of the works.

On the 10th of February last, I was superintending the labour

174 APPENDIX.

of one hundred and fifty workpeople at different points, when
Colonel Vyse, without assigning any other reason than his own
humour, proposed to employ at his expense, and on his own
account, three hundred additional labourers. It became my duty
to sustain the rights of the partnership, and I explained to him
that one individual had not the right to embark in such an under-
taking on his own account, without the previous consent of all the
members of the association ; and besides, that, being the holder
of the government firmaun in my own name, and having been the
first to discover the unexplored passage in which we were still
prosecuting our labours, I could not consent that he should take
upon himself to act thus despotically, to the injury of the rights
of the partnership, and to the detriment of my own individual
reputation. Having, in consequence of that which had passed
between Colonel Vyse and myself^ paid you a visit at Cairo, to
apprise you of the proceedings of that gentleman, I was a good
deal hurt at finding a character of indecision in your observations
on the subject ; but the letter you did me the honour to transmit
me two days afterwards, a copy of which is given below, cleared
up ray doubts as to your intentions ; and 1 now perceive, that it
was determined by Colonel Vyse and yourself to dispense with
my services, and to profit in concert by the results of my previous
studies and researches in these monuments, which I had so freely
imparted to you. Nevertheless, I obeyed your orders, and
returned to you the firmaun which had been granted to me by
the Egyptian government. But let it not be imagined that, in
doing so, I acted from ignorance of my own rights or duties ; I
was influenced entirely by a prudent sense of the deference and
respect which are due to power, especially in a foreign land.

But, further, when Colonel Vyse affected to solicit your per-
mission to continue the works in the large tomb which I had
discovered, I stated, in reply to the letter which you did me the
favour to send me on the subject, that not only were the parties
interested at liberty to proceed with the works in that tomb, but
also to pursue further discoveries in all those other monuments
which I had brought to light in the years 1817, 1820, 1821, 1836,
and 1837 ; thus preferring the progress of scientific discovery to
my own private resentment. This correspondence, however, which
took place after my return to Alexandria, offers no palliation for
the injustice previously exercised towards me.

Subsequently, in a conversation with you at Cairo, I requested
your consent to be allowed to form another association, for the

APPENDIX. 175

purpose of continuing my labours, but which you formally re-
fused : intimating, as a reason, that not having, like Colonel
Vyse, the command of great pecuniary resources, I was not in a
condition, like him, to prosecute such expensive undertakings.
Thus, then, because Colonel Vyse is a richer man than myself, he
has been allowed to commit an act of injustice — to despoil me,
probably, of the fruits of a life of study and labour, and to trample
under foot those courtesies of society which are reciprocally due
from one individual to another. I addressed a similar request to
you in writing, to which you replied, verbally, through your vice-
consul at Alexandria, that the firmaun, though made out in my
name, was specially intended for you and Colonel Vyse ; which
leaves no room to doubt the deplorable fact of a special under-
standing having been entered into to my prejudice.

I am then forced to conclude, that, to favour Colonel Vyse, a
great abuse of authority has been committed against myself; and
I am bound to add, that a just sense of what is due to my cha-
racter, will compel me to submit to the tribunals of public opinion
the above statement of facts ; and to demand, at the hands of the
scientific world, an award of the fame due for the discoveries
which have just been made, and which were only seized upon by
others at the very moment when, after years of labour and study,
I was about to realize them, in the capacity of proprietor of these
discoveries, seeing that the author has alone the right to name his
own works. I have, moreover, to announce to you, that I have
given to the chamber in the Great Pyramid, situated above that
of Davison, the name of the O'Connell Chamber, which will serve
as a memorial of the toils he has endured for the cause of the
people, — as, in fact, this monument itself does of the sufierings of
the oppressed people whose hands erected it.

I have the honour to be, &c.

(Signed) T. B. CAVIGLIA.

Alexandria, list April, 1837.

N.B. Since forwarding the above letter to Colonel Campbell,
I have learned that Colonel Vyse has given the names of Wel-
lington and Campbell to the two discoveries above referred to ;
and I understand that he is following up successfully other works,
according to the plan traced out in my account, published in the
journal of Malta of the 22d March.

1 76 APPENDIX.

(Copy.)

Cairo, lQ,th February, 1837.

My dear Mr. Caviglia, — As I find that the affah' of the
Pyramids gives me nothing but trouble and annoyance, I have
determined, though with much regret, to withdraw altogether
from the undertaking.

It therefore becomes necessary that you should consider our
labours as finished, and you will be pleased to send me the firman,
and the translation, as it at present belongs by right to Colonel
Vyse, with whom the sheiks of the villages will henceforth con-
cert their operations. You will also be pleased to pay the
government cavass, and dismiss him.

It now only remains for me to assure you how sensible I feel
of the zeal you have manifested in our undertaking ; and that it
is with the utmost regret that I find myself comj)elled by circum-
stances to decline your co-operation, as well as the pleasure which
I had promised myself, from the prosecution of the works at the
Pyramids.

I beg you to believe that I remain, &c.
(Signed) PAT. CAMPBELL.

APPENDIX. 177

PRICES PAID IN EGYPT.

The following prices were paid in Egypt in 1836 and 1837. It
may he seen, by comparing them with those published by Mr.
Wilkinson, in 1835, that articles of consuraption have greatly
risen in value since that account was drawn up. l^pon many
of them, furnished by Mr. Hill, it may, however, be naturally
concluded that a profit was charged.

Piastres. Piastr. Paras. Piastr. Paras.

Bread, per oka - - .

Flour, per oka (Mr. Hill) 4

Beef, per oka, from
A calf, from

A sheep, from - _ _

Mutton, per oka

A lamb, from _ - _

A pig

A turkey, from
A goose, from

A duck, from _ _ -

Fowls and chickens, from
Pigeons - _ _

Butter, per rotolo
Butter per oka, from
Cheese, per oka
A Dutch cheese (Mr. Hill)
Eggs, 40 about
Potatoes, per oka (Mr. Hill)
Beans, per ardep (Mr. Hill)
Macaroni, per oka
Rice, per oka (Mr. Hill)
Bottle of pickles
Bottle of vinegar
Salt, a basket of -

Black tea, lib.
Green tea, 1 lb.
Coffee, per rotolo, from
Sugar, per oka (Mr. Hill)
Oranges, per dozen (Mr. Hill)
Lemons, per dozen (Mr. Hill)
Figs, per oka _ _ -

VOL. II.

3

0

3

10

2

4

to 3

20

72

0

.. 171

0

20

0

.. 40

0

2

0

18

0

.. 30

0

4

0

12

0

.. 18

0

4

0

6

20

1

20

2

10

0

30

3

20

0

30

1

5

2

10

3

10

6

0

15

0

1

0

2

0

1

10

68

0

3

30

3

0

5

0

5

0

5

0

30

0

45

0

5

0

6

0

7

0

I

0

0

21

3

0

78 APPENDIX.

Piastres.

Piastr.

Paras.

Piastr.

, Paras,

Raisins, per oka, from

5

0 to

6

0

Almonds, per oka

7

0

Apricots, per rotolo

2

0

Wine, common, per oka (Mr. Hill)

5

0

— French, per oka

15

0

— Marsala, per bottle (Mr. Hill)

16

0

Rum, per bottle (Mr. Hill)

10

0

Brandy, per bottle (Mr. Hill)

14

0

Wine, sherry, per bottle (Mr. Hill)

25

0

— port, per bottle (Mr. Hill)

25

0

Porter, per bottle (Mr. Hill)

7

0

Ale (Mr. Hill)

7

0

Tobacco, per oka (Mr. Hill)

16

0

Coals, per cantar

25

10|

Charcoal, a mat, from

12

0 ..

21

0

Wax candles, per oka (Mr. Hill) 30 and 42

28

0 ..

38

10

Lamp oil, per rotolo (Mr. Hill) 8

7

20

Soap, a rotolo (Mr. Hill) 4

an

oka . .

7

0

English gunpowder, 1 lb. -

20

0

Egyptian, 100 lbs.

387

0

A pair of saddle-bags

10

0

Abed

2

30

Stone jar - _ _

2

20

A pair of cafFas for a camel

40

20

White Arab dress, for a woman

12

0

Black Arab dress, for a woman

33

0

Pair of bracelets

2

0

MONEY.

The value of money was, in 1837, as follows: — 40 paras,
1 piastre ; 5 piastres, 1 shilling. A dollar was worth about
21 piastres and 20 paras.

The coins chiefly consisted of 3, 4, 9, 10, and 20 piastre
pieces.

WEIGHTS.

According to Mr. Wilkinson, there are 2| rotoli in an oka,
110 rotoli in a cantar, which measures differ in some degree when
applied to different commodities.

There appear to be 5 okas in a roob, and 24 roobs in an
ardep.

TRANSLATIONS AND ABSTRACTS

FROJr

VARIOUS AUTHORS.

When I undertook the piihlication of tliesc volumes, and of the
explanations and remarks which were necessary for the larger
work, I was naturally desirous of knowing the opinions which
had been previously entertained resiiecting the Pyramids, and of
making myself acquainted with the examinations and discoveries
which had already taken place. The results of my incpiiries were
the following translations and abstracts. For the accuracy of the
former, so far at least as regai-ds the antient authors, I need only
mention, that they have been examined by the Reverend Edward
Colerido^e, of Eton College. The Arabic authorities have been
translated by Dr. Sprenger, and I have endeavoured to arrange
them chronologically ; a task which has been attended with some
difficulty, as many of them are only known by quotations in the
works of posterior writers. In all the other passages I have endea-
voured to give the exact meaning of the authors, and whatever
mistakes may be found in them, they are, at all events, not
intentional misrepresentations.^

The extreme antiquity of these remarkable monuments is evi-
dent from the uncertainty that attends their origin, and, also, from
the fabulous accounts given of them by Eastern writers; in which
ignorance and superstition have so completely disguised tradition
and facts, that it is scarcely possible to ascertain the foundations
upon which they rest. The grandeur, peculiar situation, and
mysterious construction of the Pyramids, seem likewise, in many
instances, to have had considerable effect upon the imaginations
of later travellers. By whom they were first violated will never,
probably, be ascertained ; but the caliph, El Mamoon, seems to

' Many other authors who have written about Egypt have been consulted, but
they contain no information on the subject in question.

180 APPENDIX.

have explored the most of them. Few travellers have had either
leisure or opportunity to examine them minutely, for the hostility
of the Arabs appears to have been always formidable, and
considerable labour and time were necessary to obtain any satis-
factory results. Mr. Davison, in 1763, examined the chamber
which bears his name, of the existence of which he seems to
have been informed by M. Maynard, a French merchant. He
also examined the passage leading to the subterraneous apartment,
to the extent of 131 feet. The French do not appear to have made
any discoveries commensurate in importance with the advantages
which they enjoyed. The power of Mahomet Ali gave complete
security from the Arabs, and afforded opportunities, likewise, of
obtaining labourers ; and in consequence, a most important dis-
covery was effected by M. Caviglia in 1817, when, by clearing out
the inclined passage, he solved the mystery respecting the well in
the Great Pyramid, which had given rise to so many conjectures.
It is to be remarked also, that, at the same time, M. Belzoni dis-
covered the entrance of the Second Pyramid ; and it appears he
would also have entered the third, had he continued his operations.

It is surprising that these buildings seem not to have attracted
the attention of Alexander the Great ; nor, as it has been often
remarked, does Homer mention them : but the poet is equally
silent respecting Mount Etna. It is probable that he never heard
of either of these stupendous productions of art and of nature,
and that he never visited the interior of Egypt, or the countries to
the westward of Italy ; and, as it is supposed that he derived his
knowledge of Egyptian matters from the priesthood, his silence
respecting the Pyramids supports, in some degree, the tradition,
mentioned by Herodotus, and by other antient authors, that they
were the works of a powerful race, whose memory was accursed
and hated.

The progress that has been made in the study of hieroglyphics
has greatly confirmed the historical events mentioned in the Scrip-
tures. I have already alluded to the remarkable connexion of the
name of Philition with the Philistines of Palestine, who, according
to Manetho, after their expulsion from Egypt, laid the foundation
of Jerusalem (as has been conjectured by Whiston), thirty-seven
years before the calling of Abraham from Haran. It has also
been assumed (in my opinion, satisfactorily), by Bryant,- that these
mighty shepherds were the descendants of Ham, expelled, on

» See Biyant's " Ancient History, and Ancient Mythology."

APPENDIX. 181

account of apostasy and rebellion, from Babel, from Egypt, and
from Palestine ; and who afterwards, under the name of Cyclopes,
Pelasgi, Phoenices, &c., were pursued by Divine vengeance, and
successively driven from every settled habitation — from Greece,^
from Tyre, and from Carthage, even to the distant regions of
America, where traces of their buildings, aud, it has been
supposed, of their costume, as represented in Egyptian sculpture,
have been discovered. These tribes seem formerly to have been
living instances of Divine retribution, as tlie dispersed Jews are at
present. They appear to have been at last entirely destroyed ; but
their wanderings and misfortunes have l)een recorded by the ever-
living genius of the two greatest poets in the Greek and Latin
languages; and the Pyramids remain enduring yet silent monu-
ments of the matchless grandeur of this extraordinary people, of
the certainty of Divine justice, and of the truth of revelation.

HERODOTUS. — 445 B.C.

BOOK II.

Sect. 124. — Now they (the priests) told me, that Egypt had
enjoyed an excellent constitution and government, and a great
state of prosperity, up to the time of King Rhampsinitus. His
successor was Cheops, who reduced them to utter misery ; for
he closed all the temples, and debarred them from sacrifice. He
next enjoined all the Egyptians to labour for him : on some he
imposed the task of drawing stones, from the quariies in the
Arabian mountains, to the Nile ; others were charged to receive the
stones when transported over the river, and to draw them to the
so-called Libyan mountains. They worked in bodies of a hundred
thousand men, relieved every three months. The period of the
oppression of the people was ten years for the construction of the
causeway, along which they drew the stones — a work in my
opinion not much inferior to the Pyramid ; for it is three thousand
feet long, sixty feet wide, and in its loftiest part forty-eight feet
high. It is of polished stones, with intaglios of animals. Ten years

^ See Sir W. Cell's " Rome and its Vicinity," vol. ii. p. 148, wliere he mentions
their expulsion from Athens, and also that by Euripides they were styled, " Sons of
yEgyptus."

182 APPENDIX.

llien were sjient on this, and on the subterraneous chambers in the
liill on which the Pyramid stands, which he constructed for his
own vaults in an island made by introducing a canal from the
Nile. But twenty years were expended on the construction of the
Pyramid itself, which is square, each side being of eight hundred
feet, and of equal altitude. It is of polished and most accurately
jointed stones, no single stone being less than thirty feet. This
Pyramid was constructed in the manner of steps, by some called
])arapets (krossai) ; by others, little altars ;^ such being its original
construction, they raised the remaining stones with machines, made .
of short pieces of wood, from the ground to the first layer of steps,
and when the stone was let down on this, it rested on a second
machine standing on the first layer ; from this it was drawn to the
."■econd layer, where another machine lay to receive it — for there
Averejust so many machines as layers of steps ; or perhaps, they
transferred the same single portable machine to each layer on
removing the stone. We choose to mention both accounts as they
were related to us. Thus, the upper part of the Pyramid was first
finished off,^ then the next part, and last of all the lower ground
part. Now, the sum that was spent on radishes, onions, and
garlic, for the workmen, is marked in Egyptian characters on the
Pyramid ; and, as I well remember what the interpreter, as he
read over the writing, said to me, it made up a sum of sixteen
hundred silver talents. If these things be so, how much besides
may we calculate was spent on the iron with which they worked,
and on bread and clothes for the workmen, as they were occupied
the above-mentioned time in constructing these works, and no
little time besides, as I conceive, in cutting and carrying the
stones, and making the subterraneous excavation ? Cheops, they
continued, descended so low, that for want of money he placed his
own daughter in a cliamber, and charged her to get a certain sum
of money, which they did not specify. She not only obtained the
sum appointed by her father, but on her own account was minded
to leave a memorial behind her, and asked each of her visitors to
give her one stone for the works. Of these stones, they said, the

■• These steps have been already alluded to: they were probably progressive
stages, diminishing towards the top like those in the Fourth and Sixth Pyramids, as
the several tiers of stones could not have been of sufficient width to support madiines
oi any power. The Third Pyramid appears to have been built in tliis manner, and
the superficies to have been afterwards filled up into one continuous line.

This finishing fiom tlie top applies solely to the trimniing off and smoothing
the sv.rfaee of the casing-sloncs, which hud been roughly cut to the proper angle.

APPENDIX.

183

Pyramid was built which stands in the middle of the three before
the Great Pyramid ;^ each side of which is a hundred and fifty-feet J
The Egyptians said, that this Cheops reigned fifty years, and was
succeeded at his death by his brother, Cephren, who pursued in
all respects the same course as he had done, and built a Pyramid,
which, however, does not reach the measure of that of Cheops (for
these measures we ourselves took), since it wants subterraneous
chambers ; nor is there any canal flowing into it from the Nile as
there is into the other, which passes through an artificial tunnel
in the interior of the Pyramid, round an island, in which, they say,
Cheops himself lies.^ Cephren made the substructure of his
building of variegated Ethiopian stone,^ and built it adjoining the
great one, leaving it forty feet inferior in size. They both stand
on the same eminence, which is about one hundred feet high.
They say Cephren reigned fifty-six years. These make up one
hundred and six years, in which, according to their account, the
Egyptians were reduced to extreme misery, and during all this
time the temples were closed up. The Egyptians hated these
(kings) so much, that they are very unwilling to name them, but
call the Pyramids, the Pyramids of the shepherd Philition ; he
having fed his flocks in this spot about that time.^

Sect. 134. — He too (Mycerinus) left a pyramid, much less
than that of his father — it is a square of two hundred and eighty
feet, and, half-way up, of Ethiopian stone. 2 This indeed, other
Grecians attribute, but incorrectly, to the courtesan Rhodopis.
In saying this, they appear to me not even to know who Rhodopis
was, or they would not have ascribed to her the making of so

^ It is remarkable, that the casing-stones of this Pyramid resemljle tliose of the
Great in tlieir workmanship, and in having been apparently finished down from the
top.

^ See mensurations by JMr. Perring, for all the admeasurements in tiiese
abstracts.

* I have already referred to this remarkable account, which is so distinct that,
although nothing has been discovered by the shaft which has been lately made in the
subterraneous chamber down to the level of the Nile, it would appear, that a secret
apartment exists; and the last chance of finding it would be to remove the sand
and earth along the foot of the rocks, from the northern dyke to the Sphinx, as low
as the level of the river, which must disclose any canal that might iiave been made.

'■> The lower tiers have been faced with granite.

' The shepherds are said, by Manetho, to have been driven out of Egypt inio
Palestine, and there to have built Jerusalem : they appear to have retained this name,
Philistines.

- Kcy-slones of granite now rem.iin in tlic lower jinit of the Pyramid.

184 APPENDIX.

great a pyramid ; on which, to speak summarily, more thousands
of talents than can be numbered were spent. Besides, Rhodopis
flourished not in the time of this man, but of King Amasis. She
lived a vast number of years after the kings who left these
pyramids.

Sect. 149. — Adjoining to the corner where the Labyrinth ends,
is a pyramid of forty fathoms (square), on which are large animals
in intaglio. The way to it is under grouiid. Yet great as is this
Labyrinth, the lake called Moeris,3by the side of which it is built,
presents a yet greater wonder. The circumference of this lake
amounts to three thousand six hundred stadia, or sixty schoeni —
equal to the extent of sea coast in Egypt. The lake lies in length
towards the north and south, bei)ig fifty fathoms deep in its dec])est
part. It offers internal evidence of being artificial. For, as near as
may be, in the middle are two pyramids, each rising fifty fathoms
above the water, ajid built to as great a depth under the water."*
On each of them there is a stone colossal statue, sitting on a
throne. Thus the Pyramids are of one hundred fathoms; and
the one hundred fathoms make up a stade of six hundred feet
— the fathom containing six feet and four cubits ;^ the foot con-
taining four palms, and the cubit six.

DIODORUS SICULUS.

BOOK I.

CuAP. G3. — Upon his death the crown was held, during seven
generations, by kings devoted to idleness and luxury ; which is
the reason why the sacred records have handed down no magni-
ficent work or remarkable action of tlieirs, save of ]N ileus, ojie
of the number ; from whom the river, before called Egyptus, took
its name ; for Nileus made many useful canals, and was greatly
interested in rendering the Nile servicealde ; whence it took this
appellation. The eighth who became king was Chembes the

' This relates to the Lake Mceris.

* This passage respecting the buildings in the Lake Mceris, has been inserted,
because they were of the same form, and, it is to be presumed therefore, of the same
nature, as those at Ghizeh.

* The reader is referred to Bernard's work upon antiont weights and measures ;
where it will be seen that there were several sorts of cubits— the black, llie royal, Sic.

APPENDIX. 185

Meraphite, wlio reigned fifty years, and erected the greatest of
the three Pyramids, which are reckoned amongst the Seven
Wonders. Tliesc lie on the side of Lihya — a hundred and twenty
stadia from Memphis, and forty-five from the Nile : their magni-
tude, and the skill shewn in their execution, afford to sjjcctators
matter of the greatest astonishment. The largest is ({uadrangular;
each side at its base is seven hundred feet long, and more than
six hundred high ; it gradually contracts to the top, where each
side is six cubits ; it is built entirely of solid stone, of a difi^icult
workmanship, but eternal duration ; for in the thousand years
said to have elapsed since their construction, which some make
more than three thousand four hundred, the stones have not
moved from tlieir original position, but the whole remains unin-
jured. The stone is said to have been brought from a great dis-
tance in Arabia, and raised on mounds ; for machines, in those
days, had not been discovered. ]3ut the most wonderful thing in
tlie construction of a work of such magnitude is this — the whole
tract around is sand, yet no trace either of the mound or of the
working of the stone is left,^ so that the whole fabric appears to
have been placed on the surrounding sand, not gradually, by the
workmanship of man, but by the instantaneous agency of a Deity.
Some Egyptians affect to tell wondrous tales about this, and
pretend that the mounds were made of salt and nitre ; the river
was then let out upon them, melted them, and caused them
entirely to disappear without manual labour. This is not the
truth; but the same number of hands which raised the mounds,
restored the whole work again to its previous state. For three
hundred and sixty thousand men are said to have been occupied
on the work, which was scarcely terminated in twenty years.
This king on his death was succeeded by his brother Kephren,
who reigned fifty-six years : some say it was not his brother, but
his son Chabryis. But all agree, that, whoever succeeded, in
emulation of the purpose of his predecessor, constructed the
Second Pyramid, which resembles the First in its workmanship,
but is much smaller— each side being at its base six hundred feet.
An inscription on the greater one states, that the quantity of
money spent on herbs and radishes for the workmen amounted
to more than sixteen hundred talents. The smaller one is with-

" Vast mounds of the chippings of the stone, and of the materials which were
mixed in tlie mortar, yet remain on the brow of the hill to the north of the Great
Pyramid.

1 86 APPENDIX.

out inscription, but has an ascent cut into it through one of the
sides. It happened that neither of the kings, who constructed
them for their sepulchres, was buried in them ; for the multitude
enraged at the sufferings endured in the building them, and at
the many cruel and violent actions of these kings, threatened to
pull their bodies to pieces, and tear them insultingly from the
tombsJ Thus, both at their deaths charged their relations to
inter them secretly in some obscure place. Mikerinus, by some
called Mecherinus, succeeded — he was son of the builder of the
First Pyramid. He began to construct a third, but died before
the work was completed. He made each side at the base three
hundred feet, and built the walls, to the height of fifteen layers,
of black stone, like that of Thebes, but finished the rest with
stones like those of the other Pyramids. This work, inferior to
the others in size, surpasses them far in the art of its construc-
tion, and the expensiveness of its material. The name of its
builder, Mikerinus, is inscribed on its northern side. They say,
that he hated the cruelty of the kings, his predecessors, and
zealously pursued a life of kindness and beneficence toward his
subjects. Besides other actions, by which he was constantly
endeavouring to call forth the affection of the multitude towards
him, he spent much money upon the oracles,** and gave presents
to such respectable men as appeared not to get very agreeable
answers. There are also three other Pyramids — each side of
which is two hundred feet. Their size is inferior; but in con-
struction they resemble the rest. They say the three above-
mentioned kings built these for their own wives.9 These works
are acknowledged to far exceed the rest in Egypt, not only in
their magnitude, and in the expense of their construction, but
in the skill of their workmen ; and they say, the architects are
more worthy of admiration than the kings who supplied the
expense— for the former effected the execution of the design by
their own intellect and zealous exertion ; the latter contributed
but the wealth they had inherited, and the miseries of their fellow-
creatures. But there is absolutely no agreement amongst the

' If Cheops reigned fifty years, and had sufficient power to construct the Great
Pyramid, it can scarcely be supposed that his body was not deposited in it; parti-
cularly as his successor is said to have reigned fifty-six years, and to have erected a
similar tomb for himself, which he would scarcely have done, had his predecessor's
tomb been violated, or any doubt have existed of the security of his own.

" This may allude to the Spliinx.

" These three appear to be south of tiie Third.

APPENDIX. 187

natives, or amongst writers on the subject of the Pyramids. They
are ascribed both to the above-mentioned kings, and to others : *
for instance, Armaeus is said to have built the greatest ; Amasis,
the Second ; Inaron, the Third. Some say this latter is the se-
pulchre of the courtesan Rhodopis : she was beloved by certain
of the Prefects of Districts, whose affection induced them to
construct this at their common expense.

S T R A B O.

BOOK XVII.

Page 808. — Forty stadia from the city (Memphis) is the brow
of a hill, on which are many Pyramids, sepulchres of the kings.
Thi-ee of these are worthy of mention, but two are reckoned
amongst the Seven Wonders : for they are a stadium, 600 feet, in
height, quadrangular, the breadth of each side a little less than
the height, and the one is slightly larger than the other, and has,
about half-way up its sides, a removable stone. On taking this
away, there is a winding gallery to the vault." They are near
each other on the same plain ; but further off, on a higher part
of the elevated platform, is the Third, which, though smaller than
these two, was constructed at a much greater expense, being of
black stone from the foundations to near about the middle. Out
of this stone, which they bring from a distance, from the moun-
tains of Ethiopia, they also make mortar ; and being hard, and
worked with difficulty, it made the construction expensive. It
is called the Sepulchre of the Courtesan, which was erected by
her lovers. Sappho, the poetess, calls her Doiicha (the mistress
of her brother Charaxus), who carried Lestian wine for sale to
Nancratis. Others call her Rhodope *****•*. One of the
extraordinary things seen by us about the Pyramids should not be
omitted. Some heaps of broken stone lie before the Pyramids,
among which are found raspings in shape and size like a lentil,
and from some there is a protrusion like hulled corn half-shelled.
The story goes that frajrments of the workmen's food have been

o'

' This proves tlieir extreme antiquity.

- This account of the subterraneous apartment in the Great Pyramid, appears in
sjme deu,rLC to cunlrudict the dcitriplioa of Herodotus.

188 APPENDIX.

turned to stone, which is not improbable, since, in our own
country, there is an oblong eminence on a plain, which is full of
lentil-shaped pebbles of a calcareous stone. The sea and river
pebbles, too, present nearly the same difficulty ; but these by their
movement in the water offer some mode of accounting for it,
whereas here the process is more difficult to discover.

Page 81 1 .3 — At the end of this building (the Labyrinth) which
extends more than a stadium, there is a square Pyramid, a sepul-
chre, each side of which is about 400 feet, and the height the
same. The person buried there is Timandes.

POMPONIUS MELA.

BOOK I.

Section 9. — Pyramids constructed with stones of thirty feet, the
largest of which (for there are three) occupies about four acres
(jugera), and rises to an equal height.

PLINY.

NAT. HIST., BOOK XXXVI.

Sect. 16. — We will mention also cursorily the Pyramids, which
are in the same country of Egypt, — that idle and foolish exhibition
of royal wealth. For the cause by most assigned for their con-
struction is an intention on the part of those kings to exhaust their
treasures, rather than leave them to successors or plotting rivals,
or to keep the people from idleness. Great was the vanity of
those individuals on this point. There are traces of a great
number of Pyramids begun and left unfinished. One is in the
district Arsinois, two in that of Memphis, not far from the Laby-
rinth, of which also we shall have to speak. Two more exist
where the Lake Moeris, the great excavation, was ; but Egypt

Tliis latter paragraph is inserted fur tlie same reason as the similar extract
from lierudotus.

APPENDIX. 189

records among its wonderful and remarkable things the extreme
points of these, which are said to rise (above the water). The
remaining three, whicli have filled the earth with their renown,
and are conspicuous on all sides to those who sail by, are situated
on the African side on a barren stony mountain, between the city
of Memphis and what we have said is called the Delta, less than
four miles from the Nile, and seven from ^Memphis, near a village
called Busiris, where are persons accustomed to mount them.
Before these is the Sphinx,'* an object still more worthy of being
recorded, as it seems to give evidence of their venerating some-
thing of a mixed nature, like our rural deities. They suppose
King Amasis to be buried therein, and assert that it appears to
have been brought thither. It is smooth, and made out of the
natural stone. The circumference of the head of the monster,
across the forehead, is 102 feet ; the length is 14.3 feet ; the
height, from the stomach to the crown of the head, 62 feet.^ The
material of the largest Pyramid came from the Arabian quarries.
Three hundred and sixty-six thousand men are said to have been
twenty years building it. The construction of the three cost
seventy-eiglit years and four months.^ The authors who have
written upon them are Herodotus, Euhemerus, Duris Samius,
Aristagoras, Dionysius, Artemidorus, Alexander Polyhistor, Bu-
torides, Antisthenes, Demetrius, Demoteles, and Apion. All
these authors do not make it clear who built them. It has most
justly happened that oblivion has concealed the authors of such
vanity ; some of these have stated that 1600 talents were spent
on radishes, garlics, and onions. The largest occupies eight
acres (jugera) ; the four angles are equidistant; each side ex-
tends 88.3 feet : the height from the top fifteen feet.^ (?) The
length of each side of the second, between the four equal angles, is

* Notwithstanding the similarity of the name Abouseir to Busiris, this de-
scription of the relative position of the Sphinx proves that the author alluded to the
Pyramids at Ghizeh.

* It does not appear by this description that Pliny saw the lower part of this
figure.

^ According to Herodotus, Cheops reigned fifty years, and Chephren fifty-six
years.

7 In the text this is, "Altitudo a cacumine, pedes 15," which is stated in a note
to be so in the manuscript; and it is added, " Hoc est quindecera raillia pedum
cum semisse. Prius legebatur 'latitudo, .... pedes 25.'" The passage is very
obscure.

190 APPENDIX.

737 feet. The third, which is smaller than the others, but much
more beautiful, is of Ethiopian stone, and rises with a base of 363
feet between the angles; of the building there are no traces.^ For
a great space around the sand is clear, and resembles a lentil, as
in the greater part of Africa. The most curious question is, how
the stones were raised to so great a height. Some say they
heaped up mounds of nitre and salt, as the work increased, and
when it was completed, dissolved them by letting in the river ;
others say the scaffolding consisted of bricks, which were distri-
buted into private houses. They hold that the bed of the Nile
being much lower, the river could not have washed them away.
Within the largest Pyramid there is a well, eighty-six cubits deep.
The river is supposed to have been let in by it. Thales of Miletus
discovered the way to take the altitude of these, and all such
buildings, by measuring the shadow at the hour it was wont to
equal the size of the body. These are the marvels of the Pyra-
mids ; and, to tempt no one to admire this work of kings, it
remains to state that the smallest, but most beautiful of them, was
made by Rhodope, a courtesan. She was the fellow-slave and
companion of Esop, who illustrated his philosophy in fables ; and
it forms a yet greater wonder than the Pyramids, that a courtesan
could have acquired such prodigious wealth.

SYNCELLUS,

A MONK, CALLED ALSO GEORGIUS, IN THE 8x11 CENTURY A.D.

This author is stated to have affirmed, that the Great Pyramid,
said by Herodotus to have been built by Cheops, was constructed
by Suphis, whom he represents to have been of an impious cha-
racter, but to have afterwards repented, and to have written a
valuable treatise on sacred subjects, which was in great repute, and
the only memorable circumstance attending his reign .^

* Although at present there are no traces of machinery, or of other materials, by
which the mode of erecting this Pyramid is shewn, yet the space around it is by no
means clear, but much encumbered with stones and rubbish.

^ M. Jomard says, that the author in his chronology, pp. 54, 55, states from
Manetho, that Venephis built the Pyramids.

APPENDIX. 191

(Cyriaci Anconitoni liinerarum, Florent. 1742.)

CYRIACUS (1440)

Was greatly astonished at the size of the Pyamids, and havino-
ascended to the summit of the Great Pyramid, he saw an inscrip-
tion in Phoenician characters, — " Phoenicibus characteribus
epigramma." ^

BREYDENBACH, MAYENCE (1486).

HE RETURNED FROM HIS TRAVELS 1484.

Breydenbach visited Egypt, but he merely observes that he saw,
near the Nile, a number of Pyamids, which had been erected over
the tombs of the antient monarchs of the country ; that they had
been erroneously considered as granaries built by Joseph, in order
to provide against the seven years of famine mentioned in the
Scriptures : an account which could not be true, as they were
composed of solid masonry .^

BARTHOLOMEUS DE SALIGINACE (1550)

Mentions that the Pyramids were about five leagues from
Babylon, of great height, and that they were supposed to have
been granaries built by Joseph.

BELLONIUS (1553),

After quoting Herodotus, says, that the height of the Great
Pyramid was a thousand feet, the ranges of stone two hundred

' The author made plans or drawings of the Pyramids. See Vossius, lib. viii.
' This observation is very remarkable, as the Great Pyramid appears to be the
only one which contains any chambers in the superstructure.

192 APPENDIX.

and fifty, and the base about three hundred and twenty-five paces;
that he entered it by a square aperture in the northern side,
which was more dilapidated than the others ; and that, having
descended by the inclined passage for a considerable distance, he
arrived at the well, said by Pliny to have contained, at the depth
of eighty-six cubits, the waters of the Nile, but that when he saw it,
it was almost entirely filled up with stones and rubbish. He then
ascended, by a passage on the left hand, to a chamber in the centre
of the Pyramid, six paces long, and four broad. It was lined with
polished stone, and contained a large tomb twelve feet long and
six wide, formed of black marble, in which he was told that an
antient king had been buried. He mentions, that the passages
were much encumbered with rubbish, and infested with great
quantities of bats which had long tails.

The Second Pyramid, although actually smaller, appeared at a
distance, from having been built on a higher situation, of larger
dimensions ; — the summit ended in a point, but was inaccessible ;
it was solid, had no opening, and was said to have been covered
with marble, and to have been intended for a tomb. He adds,
that both these buildings were composed of Arabian stone.

The Third Pyraniid seemed at first sight, from being placed
upon still liigher ground, to be of equal height with the other
two, although it is in fact considerably less. It was said to have
been erected by Rhodope, and was extremely handsome, as it
was constructed of Ethiopian stone ; which, he adds, was of so
hard and close a texture, that it could not be worked with iron
tools.^

There was also a number of smaller pyramids, of different sizes,
near these three.

AUTHORS OF VARIOUS ANTIQUITIES (1560).

The Pyramids are towers in Egypt, of such an height that no
human power could have constructed them ; they exceed all
mensuration that could be taken by their shadows : — in fact, they
have no shadows.*

^ A distinction seems to be drawn between tools made of iron and those of
other metals.

* Professor Greaves alludes to the absurd tradition that the Pyramids had no
shadows. This passage is, however, so obscure, that the Latin words are inserted ;

APPENDIX. 193

JOHANNES IIELFRICUS (1565)

Travelled in Egypt, and says that the base of the Great Pyra-
mid was five hundred and sixty feet ; that the courses of the
stones were very high ; and that it was accessible only on one
part, on account of the ruined state of the exterior. He
mentions that he ascended at the south-western angle by two
hundred and thirty steps or ranges ; but, as he took notice of
a resting-place about half-way up, he probably ascended at tlie
north-eastern corner. He says that the platform on the top
was capable of holding fifty people, and was about twelve
fathoms in circuit. In the interior, he describes the descend-
ing passage — a small hole that led into an excavation, wlience
an ascending passage, about one hundred feet long, commenced.
He mentions the Queen's Chamber, and the well, which was
many hundreds of fathoms deep ; he also examined the King's
Chamber, where he found an empty tomb — supposed to have
been the sepulchre of the Pharaoh who was drowned in the Red
Sea.

MR. LAWRENCE ALDERSEY (1586)

Appears to have entered the Great Pyramid ; but he does not go
into any particular detail respecting it.

and their meaning may possibly be expressed by the slang phrase, that the Fyramids
were a shade too large.

" Pyramides Turres sunt in /Egypto, fastigatse ultra celsitudinem omnem, quae
fieri manu possit. Itaque mensuram egressa; nullashabent umbras."

M. Jomard ascribes this passage to Solinus, and quotes from Ammianus
Marcellinus, lib. xxii., that the Pyramids are towers of most astonishing height,
gradually diminishing towards the top ; and that, on account of their form, their
shadows do not extend beyond their circumference. As the passage is peculiar,
the original words are added : " Pyramides ultra omnera omnino altitudinem quae
manu confici possit erectae sunt turres, quarum magnitudo quoniam incelsitudinem
nimium scandens gracilescit paulatim umbras quoque mechanic^ ratione consumit."
He then cites from Cassiodorus, that the shadows are confined to the spaces occupied
by these buildings as follows: — " Pyramides in iEgypto quarum in suo statu se
umbra consumens ultra constructionis spacia nulla parte respicitur."

He likewise mentions, from Aristides, that the priests affirmed that the Pyramids
extended as far below the ground as they were high above it ; from Dion Cassius,
that Cornelius Gallus, the first governor sent to Egypt by Augustus, inscribed his
deeds upon Pyramids.

VOL. II. O

194) APPENDIX.

M. JEAN PALERME (1581),

Secretary to the DuTie of Anjou and of Alencon, who was brother
to Henry III. of France, gives the following account of the
Pyramids of Gizeh, which he visited in 1581.

He says, that, upon a close inspection, they greatly exceeded his
expectations ; and he considers, tliat they were justly esteemed one
of the seven wonders of the world, observing that all the others
had long since disappeared. He says, that the Great Pyramid had
been built above three thousand years, and that it was constructed
by one of the Pharaohs — the same who perished in the Red Sea.
According to some people, the square of the base was one
thousand six hundred and eighty feet ; and the summit, when
complete, one thousand four hundred and forty feet in height :
according to other accounts, there were two hundred and fifty
rano;es of stones, each from three feet nine inches to four feet two
inches high, which, he remarks, would give a height of about eight
hundred feet* — but he adds, that he only counted two hundred and
thirteen ranges ; and as they were of different dimensions, some
being so high that he required assistance to climb over them, and
others not more than two feet, it was difficult to calculate by them
the height of the building. It had, however, been taken by an
English traveller with an astrolabe, and was found to be one hun-
dred toises by perpendicular admeasurement ; and the base was a
square of one hundred and ten toises, each of six feet, and each
foot consisting of twelve inches.^ It was, therefore, three times
higher than the church of Notre Dame ; but easier of ascent,
on account of the extent of the base: indeed, otherwise, it would
have been scarcely practicable : he heard, indeed, as it was, that
one traveller had accidentally fallen from the top, and had been
dashed to pieces. He found the summit to be a square of about
four paces, and capable of holding about forty persons ; and he
caught upon the top of it one of the white birds called Pharaoh's
hens. He was much surpiised at the wonderful state of preser-
vation in which the Pyramids had existed for so long a time ;
and observed, that they were built with blocks of Arabian stone.

* It appears, according to this statement, that the lieight would be nine hundred
and eiglity-seven feet six inches, or one thousand and forty-one feet eight inches.
® He adds, that un pas dc rai consisted of three feet.

APPENDIX. 195

from fifteen to twenty foct long, and half as broad ; and with
joints so fine, that a knife could scarcely be inserted into them.
He found that several stones had been removed from the northern
side ; and mentions the antient traditions respecting their con-
struction ; and says that three hundred and sixty thousand men
were supposed to have been employed upon the Great Pyramid
for twenty years, and that they were thought to have been the
Israelites. The entrance, he says, was about the seventh and
eighth range of stone, and was small and square. He slid down
the inclined passage, and found that the bottom was built up
with a wall. He then crept through a small hole, and climbed
up, but not to so great an height as that from which he had
descended ; and he then came to a large space, where he found,
on the right hand, a long gallery, which he entered with the help
of torches, which were with difficulty kept alight, on account of
the multitude of bats : the examination was, therefore, attended
with some danger, for if the torches had gone out, he might have
missed the way, or have fallen into hollows, or down the dif-
ferent descents. He mentions an echo at this place, and also the
well ; and describes the Queen's Chamber to have been empty, to
have had a pointed roof {voutee en dos cVane), and to have been
five or six paces long, and as many wide ; he also says, that there
was a cavity {un pertuis) in this chamber, to the left of the
entrance, and that it communicated with another long entrance,
which he did not enter, on account of the inconvenience and difii-
culty attending the operation. The account is rather confused,
but it is evident that he ascended to the King's Chamber;
which he states to have been a handsome apartment, about
eighteen paces long, nine wide, and five or six toises in height.
The ceiling, he says, was composed of four flat blocks : he saw
the sarcophagus, which, he observes, had not any cover, and was
composed of the same stone as that of which the obelisks are
formed : he brought away a piece of it, out of curiosity. He
says, that the sarcophagus was eleven palms long and six wide ;
and that when struck, it sounded like a bell ; and that it was no
doubt intended to be the tomb of the king. This was all that he
observed about this Pyramid — which, he adds, surpasses the
others in magnificence, and is superior to the antiquities of antient
Rome. The Second Pyramid he describes as a solid mass, and says
that no entrance or chambers had been discovered in it ; and that,
as the surface was smooth, and without steps, it was impossible
to arrive at the top, which ended in a point. It appeared, he

196 APPENDIX.

says, at a distance, as large as the other ; but upon a closer
examination, the difference was evident. The Third Pyramid he
found to be much smaller. It was reported to have been built
by a courtesan, who, although originally a slave, contrived by her
beauty and elegance to amass sufficient riches for such an under-
taking. He adds, that there were a great number of smaller
pyramids, and also other tombs, but that they were ruined.

PROSPER ALPINUS (1591)

Gives the following account of the Pyramids of Gizeh. The
three most famous are built upon a sandy rock, five Italian
miles eastward^ of Cairo — the Third being about a mile distant
from the other two. The largest, which is first approached, is
composed of squared stones, of such an enormous size that,^ in
the opinion of many persons, all the mountains in Europe could
scarcely supply materials for its construction. He observed, in
ascending to the summit,^ which is a platform often paces, that
the ranges of stone, one hundred and twenty-five in number,
diminished a little in size towards the top ; he therefore con-
cluded, that the Pyramid was one hundred and twenty-five paces
high. He says, that each side of the base is one hundred and
fifty paces long, and that the whole circumference is five hundred
paces ;^ and he remarks that the southern face is much dilapidated.
He then proceeds to describe the interior, of which, in his time,
no correct account existed. He says that there was only one
entrance till the year 1584, when Ibi-aham Pacha, the viceroy of
Egypt, led by curiosity, and by the advice of an African magi-
cian, who told him that the Pyramid contained great treasures,
enlarged the confined entrance, so that a man could stand upright
in it. He also intended to blow up the Pyramid, by filling the
well with powder, and was dissuaded from the attempt by Signore

' "Ad Orientem essent :" — it should be "westward."

* *' Ut ad earn coinpaiaridam lapides monlium totius fere Europe vix sufficere
potuisse non paiici existimaiit."

® Prosper Alpinus is said, by M. Savary, to have ascended at the S.E. or S.W.
angle.

• This is evidently a mistake, and the whole account is so full of errors, and so
confused, that it is scarcely intelligible.

APPENDIX. 197

Emo, the Venetian consul, who told him that it would endanger
the town of Cairo.

He then says that the first part of it was formed like a square
tunnel,- that it became round, and gradually decreased till a man
could scarcely penetrate when lying flat upon his stomach. At
the end of this passage the space became larger, and contained on
the right hand the well mentioned by Pliny, nearly filled up with
sand and stones. From this place a broad passage ascended to a
great opening, which had a high-coved roof of polished stones, so
well put together, that the joinings could scarcely be seen ; and
the floor was so slippery that the ascent was effected by means
of small holes cut for that purpose. This passage was quite
straight, and longer, he observes, than those in Venetian palaces.
At the upper end of it, a square low entrance, fifteen or twenty
paces in length, conducted to another large ascending passage
precisely like the former, whence a second low passage, also about
fifteen or twenty paces long, opened into a square chamber, the
roof of which was formed by five polished stones; in which he found
a long chest of black marble, without a lid, twelve feet long, five
feet high, and as many broad. The sides of the chest were so thin,
that it was doubted whether it was made of marble or of some
composition.' Upon being struck, it sounded like a bell. He
adds that there was a channel to admit light into the chamber,
but that he made use of torches. He then mentions an accident
which happened to one of his party, who, in going down the last
ascending passage, lost his hold and fell to the bottom, " non
absque multo timore, et sui corporis damno" (as might be easily
imagined by those who know the place). The author further
observes, that he found the well did not contain any water for
seventy feet, as he went down in company with a friar, Paulo
Bigi, who had lately arrived from IVIount Lebanon ; and he adds
that, upon consideration, he does not believe that it was intended
for that purpose, but to serve as a communication with the lower
parts of the Pyramid, which (he believed) extended to as great a
depth underground as it was high above the base. The well was
easily explored to the depth of seventy feet, when a vacant space
occurred whence two passages proceeded, corresponding with those
found in the upper part of tiie Pyramid ; the one conducting to the
Sphinx,^ and the other to the Second Pyramid, which building was

* " Trumbaj."

' ♦' Seu materia qua marmorii lapides nobilissimi adulterari solent."

■• A mistake, probably, for tlie grotto.

198 APPENDIX.

called the Tomb of the Queen, and had no external entrance.
These passages he would have entered, had they not been full of
rubbish.

He then mentions, on the authority of Jacobus Marcus, a
physician, that, in 1577, a number of Italians went to Gizeh, and
having cleared away some of the sand, that they entered the Great
Pyramid ; but that, having gratified their curiosity, they found, on
their return, the passage so much encumbered with sand, that two
of them, a Venetian and a Sicilian, were obliged to remain there
during the night, as the rest of the party were afraid to wait and
assist them on account of the Bedouins. They returned for their
companions, however, the following morning, when they were
both got out without injury, but much alarmed ; as, besides other
disagreeable circumstances, they had been obliged to defend
themselves throughout the night, not only from the bats, but
from owls and other birds of prey.

He describes the Second as being situated about a stone's
throw, or rather less, from the Great Pyramid ; that its sides were
smooth,^ and without any steps by which it might be ascended;
and also that it had not any entrance excepting the subterraneous
passage, which was supposed to exist from the bottom of the well
in the Great Pyramid.

The Third Pyramid, he remarks, was much smaller, was also
closed up, and without steps. He observed many other pyramids
intended for sepulchres, but these he could not describe, as he did
not examine them. He then adverts to the Sphinx, and says that
it was wonderfully carved,^ that its entrance was probably from
the Great Pyramid, and that it had been intended for au oracle.

BAUMGARTEN (1594)

States that the Pyramids formed one of the Seven Wonders of
the world ; that the largest was built by Chemmi, and was of such

* " Quinimmo latera singula marmorea plana, perpolitaque in ea observari."
This is very remarkable.

^ " Namque ipsius mentum, os, nasus, oculi, frons, auresque ex artis sculptura
magno judicio ex sculpta viilentur." It would appear, therefore, to have at that time
been more perfect than at present, particularly as to tlie beard, which was found in
1817, beneath the sand.

APPENDIX. 199

extent, that a man from the top of it could not shoot an arrow
more than the half of its circumference. He says tiiat the base
contained seven acres, and that each of its sides would have con-
tained six acres ; but that as they gradually diminished towards the
top, they only occupied five cubits J He also mentions that it was
built with very hard stones brought from Arabia, and, as the
adjacent plains were sandy, that the difficulty of conveying the
materials, and of carrying on the work, seemed to him to have
been almost above human power. He repeats the traditions that
360,000 men were employed on the Great Pyramid for twenty
years ; but, notwithstanding their grandeur, that the kings who
built them were not buried in them, for fear of the resentment of
the people, and that they were interred in obscure places. He
says that the other two Pyramids were much dilapidated, but that
each of their sides formerly contained two acres.

SANDYS (1610).

Sandys says, the Pyramids stand on a rocky level ; and that,
as they are built of stone, they could not have been (as Jose-
phus imagined) the work of the Jews, whose labours were in
brick : neither does he agree with Nazianzenus, that they were
granaries built by Joseph before the seven years of famine ; and
he adopts the general tradition, that they were sepulchres of the
Egyptian kings. The greatest of the three was one of the seven
wonders of the world, and was supposed to stand on a square of
eight acres, each side being three hundred paces in length. The
summit, consisting of three stones only, was large enough for
three score of men to stand upon, and the ascent was by two hun-
dred and fifty-five steps, each step about three feet high, and of
a proportionable breadth. He observes, ** that the stones were
too large to have been borne by our carriages; and that they
were cut, afar off in Arabia, from quarries in the Trojan Moun-
tains, so called from the captive Trojans brought by Menclaus
into Egypt, and there afterAvards planted." The author proceeds
to quote from Herodotus the number of men and the length of
time emj)loyed in its construction. He ascended at the north-

' Tliis is very obscure.

200 APPENDIX.

eastern angle, and observed that the northern side was most
worn, by reason of the humidity of the wind from that quarter.
The entrance, he says, was equally distant from each corner
of the northern front ; and he concludes that it had been origin-
ally closed up. After the Janissaries had fired off their guns into
the entrance, he entered with an Arab guide, whom he terms a
Moor, by " a most dreadful passage, and no less cumbersome,
not above a yard in breadth and four feet in height, each stone
containing that measure ; so that always stooping, and sometimes
creeping, by reason of the rubbish, we descended (not by stairs,
but as down the steep of a hill,) one hundred feet, where the
place, for a little circuit, enlarged, and the fearful descent con-
tinued, which, they say, none ever durst attempt any further,
save that a Basha of Cairo, curious to search into the secrets
thereof, caused divers condemned persons to undertake the per-
formance, well stored with lights and other provision ; and that
some of tlieni ascended again well nigh thirty miles off in the
deserts — a fable devised only to beget wonder; but others have
written that, at the bottom, there is a spacious pit eighty-six
cubits deep, filled, at the overflow, by concealed conduits in the
midst of a little island, and on that a tomb, containing the body
of Cheops, a king of Egypt, and the builder of this Pyramid,
which with the truth hath a greater affinity ; for, since, I have
been told by one, out of his own experience, that in the utter-
most depths there is a large square place, though without water,
into which he was led by another entry, opening to the south,®
known but unto few, that now open being shut by some order,
and entered at this place where we feared to descend. A turning
on the right hand leads into a little room, which, by reason of
the noisome vapour and uneasy passage, we refused to enter.
Clambering over the mouth of the aforesaid dungeon, we
ascended as upon the bow of an arch, the way no larger than
the former, about one hundred and twenty feet. Here we passed
through a long entry, which led directly forward, so low that it took
even from us that uneasy benefit of stooping, and which brought
us into a little room with a compact roof, more long than broad,
of polished marble, whose grave-like smell, half- full of rubbish,
forced our quick return. Climbing also over this entrance, we

* The continuation of the entrance-passage appears to be confounded with the
well ; and the unfinished passage from the subterraneous chamber to have given rise
to tlie idea of a southern entrance.

APPENDIX. 201

ascended, as before, about a hundred and twenty feet higher.
This entry was of an exceeding height, yet no broader from side
to side than a man may fathom — benclied on each side, and
closed above with admirable architecture — the marble so great
and cunningly joined, as if it had been hewn through the living
rock. At the top, we entered into a goodly chamber twenty feet
wide and forty in length, the roof of a marvellous height, and the
stones so great, that eight floors it, eight roofs it, eight flags
the ends, and sixteen the sides, all of well-wrought Theban
marble. Athwart the room, at the upper end, there standeth a
tomb, uncovered, empty, and all of one stone; breast-high, seven
feet in length, not four in breadth, and sounding like a bell. In
this, no doubt, lay the body of the builder. They erecting such
costly monuments, not only out of a vain ostentation, but being
of opinion that, after the dissolution of the flesh, the soul should
survive, and when thirty-six thousand years were expired, again be
joined into the selfsame body, restored unto his former condition;
gathered in their conceits from astronomical demonstrations.
Against one end of the tomb, and close to the wall, there
openeth a pit with a long and narrow mouth, which leadeth into
an under chamber. In the walls, on each side of the upper room,
there are two holes, one opposite to another, their ends not dis-
cernible, nor big enough to be crept into — sooty within, and
made, as they say, by a flame of fire which darted through it.
This is all that this huge mass containeth wathin its darksome
entrails, at least, to be discovered. "9

Sandys then goes on to state, from Herodotus, that the
daughter of Cheops erected the Second Pyramid, which was less
than the former, " smooth without, and not to be entered." The
third, he observes, stands upon higher ground, and is much
smaller than the others ; and, according to Herodotus, was
*' greater in beauty, and of no less cost, being all built of touch-
stone, difficult to be wrought, and brought from the furthest
Ethiopian mountains ; but surely not so, yet intended they to
have covered it with Theban marble, whereof a great quantity
lieth by it." He adds, that it was said by some to have been

* From this description, and from the rude prints which accompany the narra-
tive, the entrance into the Great Pyramid appears to have been in the same state as
it is at present, excepting a large stone in the upper part of the entrance, and some
small masonry above llie angular blocks over the passage. The Second Pyramid
seems to have been in tlie condition in which Belzoni found it.

202 APPENDIX.

built by Miserinus, tbe son of Cheops ; by others, by Dahika, or
by Rhodope, whose slipper being brought by an eagle to the
king, Amasis, he ordered search to be made for her, married
her, and afterwards erected for her this monument.

VINCENTZIO FAVA (1615).

ViNCENTZio Fava visitcd the Pyramids in company with
Signore Gorgie, but he does not describe them.

PIETRO DELLA VALLE (1616)

Says, that the Pyramids of Gizeh are situated in a sandy plain,
at the distance of twelve miles from the Nile; but that, according
to Diodorus Siculus, they were fifteen miles from Memphis, and
not more than five miles and a half from the river. He adds,
that there were three large ones, and a great number of smaller.
He conceives that the height of the Great Pyramid was not much
greater than that of St. Peter's at Rome. He did not measure it
himself, as he believed that the dimensions taken by Bellonius
were correct. He found that its base was about three hundred or
three hundred and fifty paces, and that there were from two
hundred and ten to two hundred and fifty ranges of stone, from
two to four palms high. The masonry was very good, particu-
larly about the entrance, which he conceives was originally con-
cealed. He was greatly astonished at the passages which led to
the centre of the Pyramid, where the body was entombed. He
found that the first passage was square, and that it descended
rapidly for two hundred paces in a direct line. It was so
small, that a man could not proceed in it upright ; and he con-
ceived that it had been so formed to make the entrance more
difficult. The stones of which it was composed were from twenty
to thirty palms in length. At the end of this passage he came to
an open space, whence he entered, on the left hand, an ascending
passage with a pointed roof, which was also well built, and was
ascended with difficulty, on account of the smoothness of the floor.
The King's Chamber was twenty-one feet broad and forty feet

APPENDIX. 203

long, and its roof was composed of seven stones placed across it.
The tomb at the end of this chamber was made of so hard a stone,
that he tried in vain to break it with a hatchet. It sounded like
a bell, and had not any cover. It must have been placed in the
chamber when the Pyramid was built. The Arabs informed him
that the king for whom it was intended was not buried in it.
This Pyramid was the only one open. He went to the top of the
building, from whence the sea was visible. Several arrows were
shot by the Turks, none of which went beyond the base.

He then examined the smaller Pyramids, but was not able to
ascend them ; and also the Sphinx.

M. DE VILLAMONT (1618)

Assigns to the base of the Great Pyramid four hundred paces, of
two feet and a half to each pace. He found that it had about
two hundred and fifteen ranges of stone, and was more than
nine hundred and ninety-two feet high ; that the platform on the
top, which, fi'om below, seemed to end in a point, was composed
of one stone fifteen feet square. The Janissary who attended
him could not shoot an arrow beyond the base. He descended
by the same way he went up, as the rest of the Pyramid was
much ruined. He then says, that he went into the interior by a
well-constructed doorway ; and that, having descended twenty
feet, he entered, by a low and narrow passage, a large chamber
full of rubbish.^ Having returned from this apartment, he
ascended, on the left hand, by a long passage, which had no steps
but " des reluis" on each side, without which it would have been
difiicult to have proceeded,- and entered into a second chamber,
thirteen or fourteen paces long, eight broad, and sixteen high,
where he found a tomb of black marble, eight feet and a half
long; and five high, which he conceives must have been built into
the apartment. In returning from this chamber he saw the well,
into which, he was informed, that the last Pacha of Cairo had
caused a man, condemned to capital punishment, to be lowered
down in search of treasure. When at a considerable depth, the

' This appears to be tlie Queen's Chiunber.
* Tlie rumps appear to be alluded to.

204 APPENDIX.

cord broke, and the man fell to the bottom ; where, his light
having been extinguished, he wandered about in the dark for a
considerable time till he found a path, in which he proceeded till
the following morning, when he perceived daylight, and at last
came out in the desert : he then returned to Cairo, and received
the Pacha's pardon.

The Second Pyramid appeared at a distance, from its elevated
situation, to have been higher than the Great one ; but, upon a
nearer view, this was found not to be the case. The top of it
was inaccessible. M. de Villamont says that it was well built,
but did not contain any thing remarkable.^ A third Pyramid,
lower than the two former, and constructed of marble, was near
the second. It was entire, but had no entrance, nor steps by
which it could be ascended. There were many other smaller
Pyramids near these three.

{Itinerarium D. Benjandnisy cum Versione et Notis Constantini
Lempriere. Liidy. Bat. 1633.)

RABBI BENJAMEN (16.33)

Was born at Tudela in Spain, and travelled from 1160 to 1173.
He wrote an account of his adventures in Hebrew, in which he
observes, that there was a Pyramid (Anuid) near Mesr (Cairo),
constructed with great skill, the most extraordinary building in
the world.* He adds, that the Granaries of Joseph were com-
posed of the finest masonry, and were distant two parasangs from
the antient city, which had been entirely destroyed, but that the
ruins of walls and of houses remained. The Pyramid was near
the Granaries, and was built with matchless skill.^

^ As the Pyramid was not opened, this could not have been ascertained.

^ Anuid may mean column or obelisk, as well as pyramid.

* It seems that the Pyramids destroyed by Karacoush were called the Gran-
aries of Joseph. (See De Sacy.)

As one Pyramid is only mentioned, the author was probably anxious to attribute
the erection of these buildings to the Hebrews.

The tradition that the Pyramids were the Granaries of Joseph, is also mentioned
by Marinus Sametus Toxellus, in his work, " Secreta Fidelium Crucis," which he
presented to the pope in 1321. He observes, — about fifteen miles from Babylon in
Ej'ypt are some extremely lofty triangular Pyramids, which are said to have been
the Granaries of Joseph, and near them are the ruins of the antient city Thebes.

APPENDIX. 205

PROFESSOR GREAVES (1638-9),

In the two first chapters of his work upon the Pyramids,
examines at considerable length several of the antient authors,
whom we have already quoted, respecting their construction, and
comes to the conclusion that the Great Pyramid was built by
Cheops (the same as Chemmis ; or Cham with a Greek termina-
tion), whose reign commenced CIOCCLXVI years before Christ,
and lasted fifty years ; that the Second was built by Cephren or
Chabryis, who reigned fifty six years ; that the Third Pyramid'^
was built by Mycerinus, who reigned seven ; and also that a
Fourth Pyramid was built by Asychis, the duration of whose
reign is uncertain. He then alludes to the various accounts,
given by Oriental writers, and to that contained in a book called
" Morat-Alzeman," that they were built by Joseph, by Nimrod,
by Queen Dalukah, or by kings of Egypt, to guard against the
consequences of the flood; that they were the sepulchres of King
Saurid, of King Hougib, and of Fazfarinoun, son of Hougib ; or
that, according to the Sabeans, the Great Pyramid was the
sepulchre of Seth .

In the third chapter, he considers more immediately for what
purpose the Pyramids had been constructed, and states his be-
lief that they were tombs ; and he mentions, in support of this
opinion, the testimonies of several antient and Arabian authorities,
and cites, more particularly, the existence of a Sarcophagus in
the Great Pyramid. The enormous magnitude of these buildings
he conceives to have been intended for the security of the bodies
entombed, whose preservation was supposed to have been con-
nected with the existence of the soul : and in further support of
this idea, he refers to the custom of embalming; and, amongst
other quotations and references, to the assertion of Plato, that
this connexion between the soul and the body, and the wonderful
preservation of the latter by artificial means, prove how firmly a
belief in the immortality of the former existed in the earliest ages.
He then alludes to the different modes of embalming, and to the
funeral rites performed by the Egyptians ; and observes that em-
balming was evidently in use in the time of Joseph, and remarks
that the Hebrews are said, by Tacitus, to have, in many respects,

' The Tliiid Pyramid could scarcely bave been finished in seven years.

206 APPENDIX.

imitated the Egyptians in these matters. He considers that, in
a passage of that author, '' condere" was inserted by mistake,
instead of " condire ;"^ and that embalming and preparation were
signified, and not concealment or interment. He observes, that
something of the same kind is mentioned by Homer in his
description of the funeral of Patroclus ; and by Virgil, in relation
to those of Misenus and Tarquinius ; also, that the great burnings
at the funeral of Asa, king of Judah, was another instance; and
that Jacob and Joseph were likewise embalmed after the manner
of the Egyptians. He says, that of the two arks, which, according
to tradition, were carried by the Israelites in the Desert, one
contained the covenant, and the other the embalmed body of
Joseph — probably in a wooden mummy-case; although in the
accounts of the Arabs and Persians, that patriarch was buried in
the Nile in a case of glass. After referring to the doctrine of
transmigration, with which Pythagoras became acquainted in
Egypt, he mentions, on the authority of Diodorus and Strabo, the
pains taken by the antient kings of Egypt to build lasting and
durable sepulchres, and also the probability that, when Memphis
had succeeded to Thebes, the same anxiety for the preservation of
the dead incited the building of the Pyramids ; since it was a
prevailing opinion amongst the antient Egyptians that this life
is of short duration in comparison with that after death, and that
the sepulchres were therefore termed eternal mansions, and decor-
ated with exquisite adornments.^ The peculiar form of the Pyra-
mids, he conceives, was adopted as being the most durable,
and also as being symbolical of the Creator; and he quotes from
Pausanias, that in Corinth, Jupiter Melichius, and Diana (surnamed
Patroa,) were represented by pyramids or columns : and from
Clemens Alexandrinus, that an idolatrous observance of obelisks
and pyramids was the most antient mode of worship, and was prac-
tised before the invention of sculptured images. He observes, also,
that, according to Servius, men of renown were formerly buried
under, or in a mountain, whence the custom was derived of erecting
over their tombs pyramids or vast monuments ; and he cites as
instances the King's Pillar (of Absalom) ; the custom, described by
Pausanias, as having been practised by the Sicyonians ; and also the

^ "Judaeos ab iEgyptiis didicisse condere cadavera potius quam ciemare." —
Tacit. His^t. L. S. Spond, lib. i. c. 5.

^ " For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle was dissolved, we
have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens."
— 2 Cor. chap. v. 1.

APPENDIX. 207

pyramidal sepulchre of Porsenna, of which he gives the following
description : — " He was buried without the city (Clusium),' under
a monument of squared stones ; each side of it was three hundred
feet broad, and fifty feet high. Witliin the square basis, an
inextricable labyrinth had been constructed ; whither whosoever
adventured, without a clue, could not find a passage out. Upon
this square were placed five Pyramids — four in the angles, and
one in the centre — seventy-five feet broad at the bottom, and
one hundred and fifty in height ; they were pointed in such a
manner, that at the top there was one brass circle, and cover-
ings for them all, from which bells suspended by chains, when
moved by the wind, give a sound afar off, like the building at
Dodona. Upon this circle four other Pyramids, each of them
one hundred feet high, had been contrived ; above which, upon
one plain, were five other Pyramids — the altitude of which Varro
hesitated to mention ; as, according to the ' Etruscan Fables,' ' it
was as much as that of the whole work : with so vain a madness
he sought glory by an expense useful to no man, wasting besides
the wealth of his kingdom, and after all the commendation of the
artificers should be the greatest.' "'^

The learned professor then proceeds to describe the dimen-
sions, and construction of the Great Pyramid, which, he says, is
placed on a rocky eminence, situated on the border of the Libyan
desert, and about one hundred feet higher than the adjacent
plain. The mensurations, taken by Thales Milesius, were not
extant; and, in his opinion, the account of Diodorus Siculus was
more correct than those of the other antient authoj's. Professor
Greaves ascertained that the perpendicular height was four hun-
dred and ninety-nine feet ; the inclined, six hundred and ninety-
three feet ; and that the base was rather less, although it com-
prised 480,249 square feet ; that the summit terminated in a
small flat or square of ,13 and -f^^^ English feet, consisting of

1 Clusium, now Clnusi, in the Val Cliiana, was formerly denominated Camers.
Not a vestige remains of tliis tomb; but at Albano is an antient monument,
adorned with pyramids, vulgarly called that of the Horatii and Curiatii, but sup-
posed, with more probability, to be the monument of Aruns, son of Porsenna, who
was killed at the storming of Aricia. These buildings, and the Egyptian forms,
seen in the portals of the Etruscan monuments at Caslel d'Asso, and also at Tar-
quinia — and, it may be added, at the excavations in the valley of Cava Dessica,
between Noto and Modica, in Sicily — evidently determine the origin of the Etrus-
cans from Egypt, or from one common source.

* Pliny, L. 3G. 13.

208 APPENDIX.

nine stones, and that two were wanting at the corners. He remarks
also, that this space, according to Henricus Stephanus, in his
" Commentary on Herodotus," was said to be eight orgyiae (or
six feet) ; according to Diodorus Siculus, nine ; and to Pliny,
twenty- five.

This platform had been supposed to have been used for
astronomical observations, as was related by Proclus ; but he
conceives, that the additional height could not, in this situation,
have been of any consequence, and that the Pyramid was simply
a tomb.

It was most easily accessible at the north-eastern angle.

The ranges of stone towards the bottom were about four feet
in height and three in breadth, and diminished towards the top
to the height of about two feet — the antient account, that the
smallest block in the edifice measured thirty feet, applied, in his
opinion, to cubic measure — they were supposed to have been
quarried in the Arabian mountains. Notwithstanding the dila-
pidated state of the building, the courses of stone were counted
by himself and his companion, Titus Livius Barretinus, a Vene-
tian, and were found to be two hundred and seven or two hun-
dred and eight. He observes, that the number of them had not
been given by the antients, and that the modern accounts of
them varied ; that they were, according to Bellonius, two hun-
dred and fifty; to Albertus Lewinstein, two hundred and sixty;
to Johannes Helfricus, two hundred and thirty ; and to Grimano,
two hundred and sixteen. He ridicules the antient assertion that
the Pyramids had not shadows, although at noon-day they are
not always to be observed ; and in proceeding to describe the
interior, he attributes the want of accuracy in the antient his-
torians to a religious awe, and to a reluctance to disclose their
mysterious construction, and also to their credulity in trusting to
the assertions of the priests, who, for instance, had informed
Aristides that the foundations were as deep below the base as the
Pyramid was high above it.

Before, however, he enters into any further detail, the author
inserts the account of Ibn Abd Alhokin ; observing at the same
time, that the Arabian traditions respecting these buildings were
apparently mere fables.^

Professor Greaves then describes his ascent over a mound of
rubbish thirty-eight feet high, to the entrance in the centre of the

^ See Arabian authors.

APPENDIX. 209

northern front, which declined at an angle of twenty-six degrees.
The incline began at the exterior of the Pyramid, and at about
the distance of ten palms a straight passage commenced at the
same angle, 92| feet in length, and 3*463 feet in breadth, but
which diminished considerably in height as it proceeded. The
forced passage, which was probably made by Al Mamoon, caliph
of Babylon, extended eighty-nine feet, was of various heights,
and much encumbered with rubbish. The Professor got over a
large block, eight or nine feet high, into the ascending passage,
the pavement of which was of marble, although the roof and sides
appeared to be of a different stone; The length of it was one
hundred and ten feet. He then entered the large gallery, by a
narrow horizontal passage, at the end of which, on the right-
hand side, he came to the well, and found that it was circular,
and not square as the Arabian writers describe ; it was three feet
wide, and was made of white marble, and places for the hands
and feet of persons descending had been excavated in it. It had
been, according to Pliny, eighty-six cubits in depth, but, as it was
partly filled up with rubbish, he could only measure with a line to
the depth of twenty-feet ; he supposed that it conducted to the
vaults mentioned, but not described, by Herodotus. Having pro-
ceeded, on a level with the mouth of the well, for about fifteen
feet, he entered, by a low passage, a hundred and ten feet in
length, an arched vault or chamber, which was half full of
rubbish, and had an offensive smell. The length of it, east and
west, was nearly twenty feet, the breadth about seventeen, and the
height nearly fifteen. The roof met in a ridge in the middle, the
wall was plastered with lime, and had a glistening appearance.

He then mentions the niche on the eastern side of the room,
and the vague traditions that it communicated by a passage with
the Sphinx, or was a place for an idol. Having returned towards
the well at the end of the passage, he went up at the distance of
fifteen feet into the higher level of the great gallery, which like-
wise ascended at an angle of twenty-six degrees for the length
of a hundred and fifty -four feet. It was built of white and
polished marble ; was twenty-six feet in height, and in breadth
^tVo^V ; the passage in the middle was 3-^^^ feet ; the ramps on
each side were 1-^'oV ^^ot wide, and as much in depth. He
observed the holes in the ramps, and that the courses, seven in
number, of which the walls were formed, gradually contracted
towards the roof. At the upper end of the great gallery he
entered into two antechambers, formed of Thebaic marble. The

VOL. II. P

210 APPENDIX.

second was seven feet long, three feet and a half wide, and ten
feet high. Three grooves had been cut on the eastern and
western sides, within two feet and a half of the top, which he
says was wider than the bottom. These two apartments were
separated by a stone of red speckled marble, which was fixed
within three feet of the pavement, and two feet below the roof.
He mentions the lines that are cut perpendicularly over the
entrance into the King's Chamber, and, as he did not find any
other engravings or sculptures in the whole Pyramid, he was
much surprised at the statements of the Arabic authors, about the
various inscriptions said to have been engraved upon it, and was
at a loss to imagine upon what authority Dio, or his epitomiser
Xiphilinus, asserted that Cornelius Gallus, whomStrabo (lib. xvii.)
more truly names ^Elius Gallus, and with whom he travelled into
Egypt, had engraved in the Pyramids his victories, unless he
alluded to some other pyramids that had been destroyed.

From the antechamber he entered an apartment by a square
passage about the same size as the others, nine feet in length, and
formed of Thebaic marble. This chamber was twenty-four feet
distant from the great gallery, exactly in the centre of the Pyra-
mid, and nearly as far from the base as from the apex. It was
most beautifully formed of six ranges of blocks of Thebaic marble,
very highly polished ; and its roof consisted of nine stones of the
finest workmanship, and of equal widths, although the halves of
the two at the eastern and western ends were concealed by the
masonry.

Upon a minute examination, he found that the length of the
chamber was 34-38 English feet, the breadth 17-19 feet, and the
height 19-5 feet ; and observes, as the apartment had remained
entire for so many ages, that it would probably serve for a con
siderable time as a standard of mensuration.

He adds the following scale of admeasurements : —

English feet _ _ _ IQOO

Roman pes Colotianus _ _ _ 967

Paris _ _ _ _ 1068

Spanish . _ _ _ 920

Venetian _ - _ . 1062

Rhinland _ _ . . 1033

Braccio of Florence - - - 1913

Braccio of Naples - - - 2100

Derah of Cairo - - - 1824

Pike of Constantinople - - - 2200

APPENDIX. 211

He observes, that the Sarcophagus emitted a sound when struck,
in the same manner as an antient monument did which stood in
Woolwich Park, and wliich had been brought, by Mr. Rolt, from
Smyrna; that as for the body, it was supposed by some persons
to have been removed ; but that, according to Diodorus, neither
Chemmis nor Cephren were buried in the tombs built for them,
but in obscure places, from a dread of violation in consequence of
the hatred of the people.

The Sarcophagus and the Chambers were composed of the same
material, called Thebaic marble, Avhich he considered to be the
porphyry called, by Pliny, lucostictos ; whilst his companion, the
Venetian, thought that it had been quarried from the rocks of
Mount Sinai. Whatever, however, might have been the material,
it was without engraving or sculpture, and was, on the outside,
seven feet 3"5 inches in length, three feet 3*3 inches in depth,
and the same in breadth. The interior was 6*48 feet in length,
2-21 in breadth, and 2*86 in depth, and he says that its dimen-
sions shewed that the human stature had for many centuries
been the same.

The sarcophagus stood in the middle of the chamber, north
and south, and was twice as far from the eastern as from the
western side. He perceived an excavation beneath it, and that
a large stone had been removed from the pavement at the north-
western angle, which Sandys considered to be the mouth of a
passage leading into other apartments, but which in his opinion
had been taken up in search of the treasures which were formerly
placed in antient tombs ; as was the case, according to Josephus,
w^hen David was buried in Jerusalem, when, besides the usual
solemnities, riches were deposited in his sepulchre, to so great
an amount that, thirteen hundred years afterwards, when the city
was besieged by Antiochus the son of Demetrius, Hyrcanus, the
high priest, opened one of the vaults and took out three thousand
talents, with part of which he bought oflF Antiochus ; and some
years afterwards, king Herod took from another vault large sums
of money. It is likeAvise stated, that notwithstanding these re-
peated violations, the actual tomb of the king was not forced ; as
it had been, according to custom, concealed with the greatest
care, for fear that the monument should at any time be forced
open.

The author then describes the two air-channels ; the aperture
of the northern was -^^^^ of a foot by -^^^'^^, and its length into

212 ^ APPENDIX.

the building about six feet. The southern was larger and somewhat
round, but not so deep as the former, and appeared, from the
blackness within it, to have been intended as a receptacle for an
eternal lamp, like that which had been found in Tulliola's tomb
in Italy, and in other sepulchres mentioned by Camden to have
been found in England. No traces of the air-channels could be
perceived on the exterior of the Pyramid.

He further adds, that Dr. Harvey, the king's physician, was
surprised that any person could exist for any length of time in the
interior of the Pyramid, and that he had remained there for three
hours.

The professor then adverts to the foundations of a building
near the Great Pyramid, that seemed to have been constructed of
basalt.

With respect to the Second Pyramid, built by Cephren, not-
withstanding the observations of Herodotus, and of Diodorus
Siculus, the latter of whom observes that the base was one
hundred feet less than that of the Great Pyramid, Professor
Gi'eaves considers that they are of equal magnitude ; as it had been
proved by the mensurations that had been taken by a Venetian
doctor, and in some degree corroborated by the assertions of
Strabo, that they were nearly of the same size. He adds, that he
found the stones were not so large, nor so regularly laid, as those
in the Great Pyramid, but that the surface was smooth and even,
and the whole fabric, excepting where it was opposed to the south,
very entire and free from inequalities and breaches.* There did
not appear to be any entrance into the interior.

He then mentions the Hieroglyphics upon the face of the rock
to the northward of the Second Pyramid, and also the Chambers
excavated in the low cliffs on the northern and western sides. He
says that these apartments were much encumbered with sand, and
that they were entered by low portals of no larger dimensions than
the entrance into the Great Pyramid.^

He remarks that the Third Pyramid, from its advantageous

* This account is very extraordinary, as the surface of this Pyramid at present is
infinitely more rough, both from dilapidation, and also from a less perfect construc-
tion, than that of the larger one ; and as some record, or tradition, must have existed,
if the casing had been removed since 1639, it would almost appear that the professor
had not personally examined the Second or Third Pyramids.

* These entrances are of a considerable height, and must therefore at that period
have been filled up with sand.

APPENDIX. 213

position, appears at a distance equal to the other two, although it
is in reality much less. He refers to the accounts of Herodotus,
Diodorus, Strabo, and Pliny; and is of opinion, that most of the
antient authors relied upon the accounts of Diodorus, and did not
personally examine this Pyramid. He observes that Herodotus is
also very inaccurate respecting it ; and he adverts to the statements
of Bellonius and P. Gillius, that it was one-third greater than
the one near the Mons Testaceus at Rome, and that they found
it as perfect as when it was built — being composed of a stone
called basaltis, or Ethiopian marble, harder than iron itself. He
himself considers that it was neither composed of nor covered
with Ethiopian marble,^ notwithstanding these statements ; and
had ascertained that it was constructed with a light-coloured
stone ; but the ruins of the temple on the eastern side of it con-
sisted of blocks of stones of a dark colour,^ which he supposes
might have occasioned the mistake.

He then briefly notices the other smaller Pyramids, and pro-
ceeds to those of Saccara ; and afterwards quotes from Herodotus
and other antient authors, the different methods in which the
Pyramids were supposed to have been erected ; and mentions
also the petrifactions found in the stones ; but his remarks do not
throw any additional light on either subject.

Professor Greaves refers to, and mentions, the following
authors : —

Mentions — Euhemerus ; Duris Samius ; Aristagoras ; Dionysiiis ;
Artemidorus ; Alexander Polyhistor ; Butorides ; Antisthenes ; Deme-
trius ; Demoteles ; Apion ; Ammianus Marcellinus ; Solinus.

Quotes from — Herodotus ; Diodorus Siculus ; Strabo ; Pliny ;
Pomponius Mela ; Avistides ; Thales Milesius ; les Voyages de Seigneur
Villamont ; Bellonius ; Albert Lewenstein ; Johannes Helfricus ; Sebas-
tianus Serlius ; Cardinal Grimano ; Cassiodorus ; Xiphilinus in Caes. ;
^lius Gallus ; Henricus Spondanus, de Coemeteriis Sacris ; Brodaeus,
Epig. ; Josephus ; Morat Alzeman ; Ibn Abd Alhokni ; Leo Africanus ;
Plutarch, in Antonio ; Scaliger, in Eusebii Chronic. ; Manetho ; Euse-
bius ; Syncellus ; Tatianus, Justin Martyr ; Clemens Alexandrinus ; the

* Between the time of Gillius, 1553, and that of Greaves, the casing of the
lower part, which, it has been remarked in the course of this work, had no doubt
been reveUed with granite, may be easily supposed to have been taken away.

' The ruins of the temple, on the eastern side of this Pyramid, are of the same
colouted stone as the surrounding buildings. It would seem that the professor was
satisfied with a distant and cursory view of these monuments, as is frequently the
case with other travellers.

214' APPENDIX.

Bible, passim ; Lysimachus ; Tacitus ; Emir Cond ; Pausanias ; Tatiani
Orationes ; Diogenes Laertius; Italicus; Abd el AtifF; Abulfeda;
Berosus ; Machrisi ; Masondi ; Pythagoras ; Virgil ; Homer ; Pierius ;
Henricus Stephanus ; Proclus ; Plato.

M. DE MONCONYS (1647)

Says, that out of a number of Pyramids, two were much larger
than the rest, and that a third, of less size, was about one hun-
dred paces distant from those two, but was so dilapidated that it
could not be ascended ; neither had the entrances to the others
been discovered, so that the Great Pyramid was the chief object of
interest. He found this building five hundred and twenty feet high,
with a base of six hundred and eighty-two feet. It faced the four
cardinal points. The ranges of stones (like steps) were two hundred
and eight, of the average height of two feet and a half. The
summit was a platform, sixteen feet square, composed of twelve
very large stones. The entrance was on the sixteenth step,
nearly in the middle of the northern face. It was three feet six
inches high, three feet three inches wide, and continued at an
angle of sixty degrees, to the distance of seventy-six feet and a
half. At the end of it was a space full of rubbish, from whence
several passages led to various chambers. All the passages were
filled with sand and stones, excepting one in a line with, and
about the size of, that by which he had entered. It ascended, at
an angle of sixty degrees, to the length of one hundred and eleven
feet, where another lofty communication, six feet four inches
wide, continued, in the same direction, one hundred and sixty-two
feet three inches further ; and conducted to the door of a cham-
ber, which contained a tomb, three feet one inch in width, three
feet four inches in height, and seven feet two inches in length.
It had no cover, and was supposed to have been the tomb of
Pharaoh. The chamber was thirty-one feet long, nineteen high,
sixteen wide, and nine stones composed the roof; and the sides,
and floor, and also the passages, were formed with very large
blocks. Another chamber, below this, was entered by an horizon-
tal passage, which began from a square pit or well, and was one
hundred and sixty-two feet long. The well was very deep, but
inaccessible on account of bats and venemous animals, with which,

APPENDIX. 215

indeed, the whole Pyramid abounded. This well had no other
aperture than the entrance at the top, and was said to communi-
cate with the Sphinx, which he then describes, and supposes to
have been intended for an oracle.

In an accompanying print, which gives a view of the Pyra-
mids, the trees near the Sphinx are represented.

M. THEVENOT (1655)

States that three were considerably larger than all the rest of
the Pyramids ; that of these three, one was comparatively small ;
that the largest was the only one that could be ascended, or
that was open ; and that the entrance had been concealed by
masonry, until a Pacha of Egypt discovered and forced the pas-
sage. M. Thevenot took the admeasurements of the Great
Pyramid, and having compared them with those taken by Elzear
(a Capuchin friar), he had reason to believe they were correct.
He ascended the building at the north-eastern angle ; and found
that it had two hundred and eight ranges of stone, from two feet
and a half to three feet and a half high ; and that the height of
the whole was five hundred and twenty feet — the base was six
hundred aud eighty-two feet. He observed the chasm about
half-way up, which he calls a small chamber. The summit,
composed of twelve large stones, was a square of sixteen feet
eight inches. The entrance was on the sixteenth course, on the
northern side, and was approached over a mound of rubbish. It
was three hundred and ten feet distant from the north-eastern
angle, and three hundred and seventy-two feet from the north-
western. The stone over it was eleven feet long, and eight feet
wide. The entrance was a square of three feet three inches, and
descended at an angle of 60° for seventy-six feet five inches and
six lines ; from thence another passage, one hundred and eleven
feet in length, ascended at the same angle. The forced entrance
between these two passages was encumbered with rubbish. INI.
Thevenot then appears to allude to the excavation made by the
caliphs, which he conceives to have been occasioned by time.
He takes notice of the well at the end of the ascending passage,
and says that two other passages commenced from it, of which
the lower was horizontal, three feet three inches square, and con-

216 APPENDIX.

ducted to a chamber which had an inclined roof. Having heard
that it contained an opening or window, which communicated
with , other apartments, he searched for it several times with a
ladder, but could not find it, and therefore does not believe that
any such opening existed .^ He then climbed up to the great
gallery, and ascended to the King's Chamber. This gallery was
one hundred and sixty-two feet long, six feet four inches wide, and
had on each side a ramp two feet and a half high. The chamber
was thirty-two feet long, sixteen wide, and nineteen high, and had
a flat roof composed of nine blocks, sixteen feet in length ; seven
of them were four feet wide, but those at each end only two feet
in width, as the half of each of them was built into the wall. At
the further end of this chamber he examined a sarcophagus, cut
out of one block, seven feet two inches long, three feet four inches
broad, three feet four inches high, and above five inches thick.
It was entirely empty, and when struck, gave a remarkable
sound. It was composed of a very hard kind of porphyry, finely
polished, and had been broken in several places with hammers,
in order to obtain fragments to make seals with.9 The chamber
was lined with the same sort of stone. It was usually supposed to
have been intended for the tomb of the Pharaoh who was drowned
in the Red Sea; and he conceives it must have been placed
in the chamber before it was finished. He then mentions the
examination of the well by Elzear, the Capuchin, in September
1652, and states that the operation was attended with so much
risk, that he (M. Thevenot), although he had cords, did not
choose to venture, particularly as, from the relation of the
Capuchin, there was not much to be seen ; but he says that a Scotch
gentleman was let down with some other persons, which was the
second time it had been entered, but nothing was discovered
more than had been seen by Elzear. The well was not entirely
perpendicular ; it went down about sixty-seven feet to a grotto,
whence it again descended to the depth of one hundred and
twenty-three feet, when it was filled up with sand. It contained
an immense quantity of bats, so that the Scotchman was afraid
of being eaten up by them, and was obliged to guard the candle
with his hands. This well, he conceives, was made for the con-
veyance of mummies into the cavern under the Pyramid. He

8 This may possibly have been a mistake for the opening leading to Davison's
Chamber.

" " Pour en faiie des cachets."' — See Dr. Claike's account of this sarcophagus.

APPENDIX.

217

then went to the Second Pyramid, wliich was closed. Its base
was six hundred and thirty-one feet. The Third was much
smaller and of less importance, and appeared to have been cased
with the same sort of stone as that with which the chamber of the
Great Pyramid is lined, as a number of blocks were lying around
it. He quotes from Pliny, that three hundred and seventy thousand
men were employed on the Great Pyramid for twenty years, and
that one thousand eight hundred talents were expended upon
vegetables alone for their food. He took notice of the three
temples near the Pyramids, and says that near that of the Second
there was a subterraneous passage, reported to communicate
with the Sphinx, which was supposed to have been the tomb of
Amasis ; or, according to other accounts, to have been raised by
Amasis in honour of Rhodope, and to have contained an oracle.
The Bedoweens attacked the people he had left to guard his pro-
visions and baggage at the entrance of the Great Pyramid, during
the time he was employed in the interior of it.

MR. MELTON (1661),

An Englishman, travelled from 1660 to 1677; and his notes
were published in the Dutch language, owing, probably, to the
unsettled state of England at that time.

He visited the Pyramids, called, by the Arabs, the Mountains
of Pharaoh, on the 27th of April, and says, that three were much
more considerable than the rest, and could be seen at a great
distance ; that some of the others were hke those of the Mummies,
which he would afterwards describe ;i and that the rest, although
numerous, were of no great size. He adds, that one of the three
largest was much smaller than the other two, which were nearly
of equal bulk ; that the Great Pyramid was the only one which
could be ascended or entered ; and that the passage was said
to have been effectually concealed by a stone, until a pacha
opened it. He ascended at the north-eastern angle, and observed
the chasm half way up, which he calls a chamber. He found
that the ranges of stones were two hundred and six in number, and
of an average height of two feet six inches, but that some were
more than three feet high. He says, in another place, that some

' He appears to allude to llie Pyramids of Succara.

218 APPENDIX.

of the stones in the lower part of this Pyramid were four feet in
height ; others, three feet six inches, and five feet in length —
that, in the middle, they were about three feet square; and,
towards the summit, about two feet high, and three feet six
inches in length. The height of the Pyramid was five hundred
and twenty feet ; the sides of the Pyramid about six hundred and
eighty-two feet ; but he found that none of the three buildings
were squares, and that the northern and southern sides were the
largest.

Although, when seen from the ground, the summit appeared
to end in a point, it was a platform sixteen feet eight inches
square, originally composed of twelve large stones, some of which
were wanting. He was informed that a statue had been placed
upon it ; and thought that it had been the case, as the Pyramid
did not end in a point like the others, and as the holes, in which
the Colossus had been fixed, were apparent. However, when he
saw it, nothing was to be discovered but the names of various
travellers.

He supposed that a stone could not be thrown, but that an
arrow might be shot, from the summit beyond the base.

After the usual ceremony of discharging fire-arms into the
entrance to drive away the serpents, which he rightly considered
a useless precaution, he then visited the interior. He ascended,
over the mound of rubbish, to the entrance, which was on the six-
teenth range of stones, and about thirty feet from the centre, on
the northern front. The stone over it was eleven feet long, and
eight feet broad. The passage was much encumbered with an
accumulation of sand, and likewise with a multitude of bats, so
that the torches could scarcely be kept alight.

The passage extended to the middle of the Pyramid, and
inclined so sharply that it could scarcely be traversed : and it had
been so contrived, in his opinion, as a protection for the sarco-
phagus. It was straight, and lined on each side by blocks twenty
or thirty palms in length, and was so low, that it could only
be entered stooping. At the bottom of it he found a square
hole, where he reposed. He then went up an ascending passage, «
which had a roof formed of projecting stones, that narrowed
towards the top. It was without steps, and could only be
ascended with great difficulty, by laying hold of certain stones

^ The ascending Passage, the Well, the Queen's Chamber, &c., are entirely
omitted, either by the autiior or the translator.

APPENDIX. 219

which projected, and by taking advantage of holes cut in tlie
smooth floor at six palms' interval.

Having arrived at the top, he entered the sepulchral chamber,
which had no door : it was about forty feet long and twenty-one
feet wide, and was roofed with seven blocks laid across it, which
were supported by the walls.

The tomb was built aslant at the end of the chamber, and was
separated from the whole body.^

He found also a large column made of Egyptian stone, and
tried to break it with a hammer, which he took for that purpose,
but could make no impression. It emitted, when struck, a sound
like a bell, which could be heard at a great distance.

The tomb had no lid; and it was said, that the king for whom
it was intended had not been buried in it.

The author then repeats the antient traditions, that three
hundred and sixty thousand men were employed for twenty years
in building the Great Pyramid ; and that the construction of the
three was completed in seventy-eight years and four months. He
remarks, however, that nothing certain is known about them.

Mr. Melton appears to have revisited the Pyramids in com-
pany with many other persons on the 28th of the following
December; when, it is to be remarked, that, on account of the
water remaining from the previous inundation, he was carried by
the Arabs across a canal, precisely in the same way as he would
have been at the present moment.

From his observations on this and his former visit, he imagines
that the hills adjacent to the Pyramids were converted into one
large cemetery, probably for Memphis;^ that all the Pyramids
had entrances, and inclined passages of considerable length,
leading to sepulchral chambers, which were concealed by the
accumulation of the desert sands ; that they also contained deep
square wells, excavated in the rock, as he iiad found to be the
case in ten which he had examined f that these monuments were
regularly placed ; that each of the three larger were at the head
of ten smaller, many of which had been destroyed. He concluded,
that there had been originally above one hundred.

3 Tliis is very obscure, and is probably an error of tlie translator — " Is van 's
gehaele, licliaam afgesclieiden." "Lichaam" is said to mean a dead body; but
the autlior probably meant to express lliat the sarcophagus was movable, and
not fixed into the body of the masonry, as the pillar also evidently referred to it.
■• This the Dutch translator terms a churchyard, " Kerkhof."
* It is evident that he confounds the Pyramids with the adjacent tombs, which
contain shafts and also hieroglyphics.

220 APPENDIX.

He adds, that they were not huilt with blocks brought from
a distance, but with those quarried on the spot, which consisted
of a very hard white sandstone, and not of marble; and says, that
they were situated upon a ridge of rocks covered with desert sand,
as appeared by various excavations, particularly those at the
north-eastern angle of the Third Pyramid.

The author further says, that he discovered on some of them
hieroglyphics, which, he concludes, were the titles of thie persons
to whom these monuments belonged.

M. VAUSLEB (1664)

Visited the Pyramids during an inundation of the Nile, and dis-
embarked at the edge of the Desert. He says, that there are
three large Pyramids near each other, and that the biggest was
the only one that could be entered or ascended. He does not
appear to have counted the ranges of stones, but came to a con-
clusion that there were two hundred and fifty-five; and adds, that
the Dutch consul had found the height to be six hundred and
sixty-two feet ; but by allowing three feet for each of the ranges
of stone, he conceives that it was originally one hundred and three
feet higher, and that the total height had therefore been seven
hundred and sixty-five feet. Its base, accordmg to the Dutch
consul, was seven hundred and twenty feet, which would give
2880 square feet. The summit was a square of nineteen feet.
The entrance was on the northern side, and much encumbered
with sand. The height of it was about four feet; and its
width would allow two people to pass. As there were no
steps, holes had been cut in the floor to facilitate the descent.
The length of the first passage was nearly one hundred feet,
and, at the end of it, he found a very difficult hole, which
opened into a large space. After proceeding a few yards to
the left hand, he entered into a lofty and well-built gallery,^
which, he remarked, was so dark, " che causa horrore," and also
exceedingly offensive, from the dirt of bats and from the want
of ventilation. At the end of this gallery, he passed through
a horizontal passage, in which it was necesary to stoop, to a
chamber of great height, said, by Sandys, to be twenty feet broad

® He seems to have entirely overlooked the second ascending passage of above
a hundred feet, and also the Well and the Queen's Chamber.

APPENDIX. 221

and forty feet long. Opposite the entrance was a tomb, about
the length of a man, and rather more than three feet high,
formed out of one stone, which, upon being struck, sounded like a
bell. The Moors told him," that this was the tomb of Pliaraoh.
In one of the walls of this apartment, he saw a hole so small that
it could not be entered, the use of which he could not understand.
He was of opinion that, according to antient tradition, a trench,
of the depth of eighty-six braccia, might exist in this Pyramid,
which, by means of a subterraneous channel, might be filled with
the waters of the Nile, and might surround a hill, on which was
the tomb of Cheops, who built the Pyramid. He supposes, also,
that the Pyramid contained many other passages concealed by the
rubbish and stones. He adds, that, besides the passages and
vacancies he has described, there were a few smaller which he did
not explore, as some of them were entered with great difficulty,
and others were so ruined that they were not worthy of notice.

To the south, in the same mountain on which the Pyramids
are placed, he found various chambers and grottoes, many of them
inscribed with hieroglyphics. He could not form a decided
opinion respecting them, but concluded that they might have
been tombs, or the habitations of the priests who were connected
with the oracle of the Sphinx, or that they were the remains of
the antient city of Memphis. He remarks, that there are five or
six other large Pyramids about six miles to the south, which had
been described by Pietro della Valle, Sandys, and other people ;
and that, two days' journey above Cairo, another of considerable
size was to be seen : these are all that he observed between Cairo
and Girgeh. He could not arrive at any positive conclusion why
they were built, but he conceives that they were tombs of antient
kings, who, for political reasons, expended their riches, and
employed their subjects in their construction.

KIRCHER (1666),

In his " Treatise on Egyptian Obelisks, Hieroglyphics, and Pyra-
mids," is of opinion, that obelisks aud pyramids have mystical and
hidden significations, but he does not enter into any description or
give any admeasurement of them.

^ Vausleb, like many of the old writers, calls the Arabs, Moors.

222 APPENDIX.

M. LEBRUN (1674)

Says, that the Second and Third Pyramids were closed, and that
two of the three larger were nearly equal in size. He ascended,
by the mound of rubbish, to the entrance of the Great Pyramid,
which was on the sixteenth tier of stones from the bottom, and
about sixty feet eastward of the centre on the northern front. He
was informed, that the entrance had been formerly so exactly
closed up by a large stone, that it remained a long time undis-
covered, till a pacha at length succeeded in opening it.

The entrance he found to be square, and of the same size from
one end to the other, it being three feet and a half high, and of
nearly the same breadth ; the large stone over it was about twelve
feet long, and more than eight feet broad. The inclined passage
continued to the length of seventy-six or seventy-seven feet, when
a short and inconvenient excavation opened into an ascending
passage, of about the same width, and of more than one hundred
feet in lensth, which had a coved roof formed of stones, from
twenty-five to thirty palms long. M. Lebrun states, that being
a good deal overcome with fatigue and dust, he trusted, in many
instances, to the observations of others : and proceeds to remark,
that a large hollow, which appeared to be the effect of time and
of dilapidation, was found at the bottom of the ascending pas-
sage f and that at the upper end of that communication, two others
commenced, the lower one in a horizontal, and the upper in an
ascending direction. He then mentions the well, and repeats M.
Thevenot's account of it, and also that gentleman's description of
the other passages and apartments, referring the reader to a
print in which it is to be observed that the sides of the great
gallery incline inwards and meet at the top. He says, that the
sarcophagus was six feet two inches long, three feet one inch
broad, and three feet four inches high, and remarks, that most
probably it never had a cover, as it was reported that the body of
the king for whom it was intended had not been deposited in it.
Having; been informed that there was a communication from this
chamber to other passages and apartments, he examined an exca-
vation which he found in it to the right of the entrance.^ It was

^ This is no doubt the forced entrance made by the caliphs, the mouth of which
was stopped up by the rubbish on the outside of the Pyramid.
* Tlie excavation in the floor near the north-western corner.

APPENDIX. 223

not however above five or six feet deep, and had no outlet, but
was full of bats. In returning from this chamber, M. Lebrun
searched carefully for other passages, and discovered one of a con-
siderable size ; it was, however, full of rubbish and stones, and the
smell was so peculiarly offensive that he could not examine it.^

He then ascended the Pyramid at the north-eastern angle, and
mentions a small square apartment, or chasm, about halfway up.
The space on the top of the building was composed of ten or
twelve large stones, and was sixteen or seventeen feet square.
Tiie ranges of stone were two hundred and ten, and they mea-
sured from four to six palms in height. The square of the base
he states to be seven hundred and four feet; the height of the
Pyramid, six hundred and seventy-six feet.

He could neither enter nor ascend the Second Pyramid, which
appeared at a distance, from the elevation of its situation, higher
than the great one. He did not measure the base, but he was
informed that it was six hundi-ed and thirty-one feet. The apex
appeared to be so pointed, that there was scarcely room for a man
to stand. The Third Pyramid was small and of little importance.
He supposed that it had been cased with porphyry, because he saw
many fragments of that stone near it.

He then inserts some remarks from an account of INIelton, an
English traveller, who was of opinion that all the Pyramids had
entrances, by deep and long passages, into sepulchral chambers,
although the apertures were concealed by the sand ; and who states
that he had seen, upon some of these buildings, hieroglyphics,
which he supposed to express the names of those interred. M.
Lebrun observes, that he himself had never seen any of these
characters. Mr. Melton also supposed, that the three Great
Pyramids were each at the head often smaller ones, and, although
the positions of all these could scarcely be made out, that there
had been one hundred of them of different sizes; and he says that
they were built with stones quarried from the rock, which had
been afterwards partially covered with sand. M. Lebrun thinks
that the interiors of all these buildings are concealed by the sands,

' From an expression made use of by the author, " son plancher etoit tr^s haut,"
this may allude to the passage into Davison's or to the niche in the Queen's Chamber:
it was most probably the latter, as he does not mention any peculiarity of situation,
or of having used any ladder or extraordinary means in entering it, and as the Queen's
Chamber is mentioned by several travellers to have been very offensive from dirt and
rubbish.

224 APPENDIX.

for he saw in the Great Pyramid, although he did not examine
them, descending passages choked up with rubbish, which were
said to be of great length, and to lead to sepulchral chambers.^
He agrees with Mr. Melton, that these monuments are not built
with marble but with sandstone ; and he then quotes Pliny as to
the number of men employed, and the sums expended in erecting
them. He expresses his surprise at the magnitude of the enormous
blocks which have been placed at so great a height, and his regret
that historians have not recorded the means employed in moving
them.

M. MAILLET (1692),

(Consul- General in Egypt from 1692 to 1708,)

Has given a detailed account of the Pyramids, and his authority
has been in many respects much relied upon. Amongst other
circumstances, he incidentally mentions the northern dyke, or
causeway, by which the stones were brought to the Pyramids ;
and he remarks that the whole of its antient course might easily be
discovered, as the foundations probably remain under the soil.

He first adverts to the Third Pyramid, and observes that it
had been cased with blocks of a prodigious size, some of which
had been taken away, and many of the rest split by means of
wedges for other purposes.

He then remarks that the Second Pyramid was surrounded,
on the western and northern sides, by a foss^ cut in the rock ;
that it had been also cased with hard stones, which yet remained
towards the top, possibly because they could not conveniently be
removed ; that its ascent was tolerably easy, as far as the casing,
and that the Arabs had repeatedly climbed up to the summit ;
that neither this Pyramid nor the Third had been opened ; and
that the discovery of entrances would be very difficult undertakings,
although, he observes, as the entrances into the Great, and into
some of the smaller Pyramids, were on the northern side, probably

2 It would seem that he had observed the continuation of the inclined entrance
passage beyond the junction of it with the ascending communication.

' It is difficult to imagine how the levelling of the rock, on the western and
northern sides of this Pyramid, can be considered a foss.

APPENDIX. 225

the entrances into these were similarly situated. The Arabs in-
formed M. Maillet, that a statue of gold, forty cubits in height,
and representing the king, who was entombed in it, had been
placed upon the top of the Second Pyramid, the features of which
were distinctly visible from the Mokattam mountains, nine miles
off; and he thinks it probable that a large statue of granite may
have been placed there, and have been afterwards destroyed by
the Mahometans.

With respect to the Great Pyramid, notwithstanding the
assertions of many writers that it had never been cased nor yet
closed up, and that it was intended for the tomb of the Pharaoh
who was drowned in the Red Sea, he conceives that it certainly
had been closed, and also cased, like the rest, with white marble ;
and he considers the assertion of Pliny, that there were men
sufficiently active to ascend it, a proof of the original smoothness
of the surface. The entrance, which had evidently been forced,
he says, was one hundred feet above the base, and was approached
over a mound of rubbish ; the passage, three feet three inches
square, descended at a sharp angle for one hundred feet, and
had been, in the first instance, closed up with large stones, of the
same marble with which it was built, put together with cement.
He conceives that these blocks had been loosened by means of
hot water, and says that they had, at all events, been taken out
without injury to the walls of the passage, where notches had
been cut in the floor to assist the descent. It was evident that, at
the end of this passage, attempts had been also made to remove
the stones with which another, ascending at nearly the same
angle and in a direct line with the former, had been closed up ; ^
and he describes the difficulty attending the supposed search for
this communication, and the labours and risks incurred in exca-
vating the stones that concealed it. He conceives, that when the
granite blocks, that filled up the ascending passage, were dis-
covered, an excavation had been made to the right to get round
them, and to re-enter it at a higher point, and that, as the granite
blocks, at present to be seen at the bottom of this passage, do not
exactly fit, that those originally placed there had been broken up
and removed, and that the rest had slid down from the upper
part; and he concludes that, with the exception of these three, all

* Unless from previous information, it does not appear why any ascending
passage should have been expected. It has, therefore, been supposed that the
calcareous stone which concealed the granite blocks in it, must have accidentally
fallen out of the ceiling of the descending passage, and have led to the discovery.

VOL. II. Q

226 APPENDIX.

the blocks with which this passage had been filled, were succes-
sively broken up and carried away. He adds that it was evident,
from the ruined appearance of the passage, that great violence had
been employed on the occasion. He then describes the large
passage, or gallery, to be 6h feet wide including the two ramps,
which were 2^ feet high, and one foot and a half wide. The length
of it he found to be one hundred and twenty-four feet, although
he remarks that others had made it one hundred and forty feet.
He states, that above the ramps, at the distance of 2| feet, niches
have been cut one foot in length, six inches wide, and eight inches
deep ; and that the sides of the gallery were twenty-five feet high,
and narrowed towards the top by the gradual approximation of the
ranges of stone composing them, which, he says, were four in
number. He then adverts to the Well, the Horizontal Passage, and
the Queen's Chamber. The passage was one hundred and eighteen
feet in length, and three feet three inches square. The chamber
itself had an inclined roof, was 17| feet long, fifteen feet ten
inches wide ; and in the niche on the eastern side, three feet deep,
edghf feetJii^h, and three feet wide, he supposes the mummy of
the queen to have been placed upright. He mentions excavations
made in it to the depth of twenty or twenty-five feet ; and is of
opinion that the slight projection, on the right side of the entrance
into this chamber, was intended to prevent the stones, with which
the horizontal passage had been filled, from being forced beyond
the entrance into the room, and that the stone originally placed
there was made to fit it exactly. He carefully examined the great
gallery by means of candles, at the end of long poles, and found
that it had been injured in several places, and that, on the right,
a fragment had been broken ofi" from the edge of one of the
ranges. The settling, on the western side, he considers to have
been occasioned by an earthquake. He then describes the space
at the upper end of the great gallery, and the manner in which
he conceives the portcullis was constructed in the passage leading
to the King's Chamber, and is of opinion that the grooves, over
the entrance, had been intended to facilitate the insertion of the
stone that closed it. The chamber itself he found to be thirty-two
feet long, sixteen broad, and nineteen high, with a flat roof com-
posed of nine stones, sixteen feet in length, seven of which were
four feet wide, but those at the sides appeared only half that
width, because parts of them were built into the walls. Whatever
might have been originally deposited in this chamber, M. Maillet
only saw a tomb of granite, seven or eight feet long, four feet

APPENDIX. 227

wide, and as many high, which must have been placed there
when the Pyramid was built. The cover had been taken away.
He conceives that the king was buried in it, and that many of his
attendants were also enclosed alive in the chamber, who were
successively buried by each other in separate coffins, excepting
the last, who, M. Maillet remarks, could not have received any
assistance, and must therefore have buried himself. He was led
to this conclusion by observing the air-holes, which he states to
have been exactly in the middle of the opposite walls, and at the
height of 3^ feet from the pavement. That on the northern side
was one foot wide, eight inches high, and had penetrated, in a
horizontal direction, to the outside of the Pyramid. M. Maillet,
however, found it stopped up with rubbish to within five or six
feet of the chamber. The mouth of the other channel, which he
says was on the eastern side, he describes as being perfectly
j'ound, and big enough to admit two fists. He says that it was
a foot in diameter, and descended towards the bottom of the
Pyramid.^ He conceives that these communications were made
for the use of those persons who were buried alive with the dead
king; that by the former they received air and also nourishment,
by means of a wooden box drawn in and out with cords, and that
by the latter all impurities were removed. He says that he was
unwilling to search for the opening of the northern channel, for
fear of exciting the jealousy of the Arabs, but that he had no doubt
upon the subject. He then states that the large gallery was
necessarily spacious to contain, on several scaffoldings, the stones
with which the lower part of it, the horizontal passage and tlie
ascending passage, were eventually filled up; that the space was
exactly calculated to receive the whole of the materials, and
that they must have been placed there when the Pyramid was
built. He conceives that there were other passages still undis-
covered, situated, most probably, between the two chambers
already mentioned.

"He then gives nearly the same account of the well as M.
Thevenot, and conjectures that, w^hen tlie funeral had taken place,
the workmen closed up the passages with the stones contained in
the Great Gallery, and descended by the shaft, the upper part
of which was afterwards, by some contrivance, closed with ma-

^ After reading this description, stated to have been liie result of careful and
repeated examinations, no person would suppose that both these channels incline
upwards.

228 APPENDIX.

sonry.^ He remarks that this communication had never been satis-
factorily explored, and that the Pyramid had always been entered by
the regular passage. He conceives that the interior construction
of it was a profound secret, and that none of these tombs were
violated until the time of the Mahometans. He says, that the
one in question appeared to have been entered by the Caliph Mah-
moud, who died in the 205th year of the Hegira ; and who em-
ployed three years, and considerable sums, in the undertaking ; and
that he found little or no treasure, but saw an inscription, in letters
of gold, on the side of the chamber, declaring that the impious
violator of the tomb should experience, as his sole reward, the
regret of having committed a sacrilegious action without any
successful result. M. Maillet justly remarks, that this part of
the Arabian history brings the whole account into question, as the
language of the times when the Pyramids were built, and the
hieroglyphics in which the inscription was expressed, must have
been unintelligible to the Mahometans. He further adds, that
some of the Arab historians say that the Caliph Mahmoud had
an exact plan of the interior of the Pyramid, whilst other
accounts ascribe the opening to the Caliph Haroun-el-Raschid ;
but that, at all events, it seemed that the entrance was known to
be on the northern front.

He then states that the ranges of stone, besides two or three
which might have been wanting at the top, were two hundred and
eight, and that the Pyramid, when complete, was six hundred
feet high. He says, that the names of the kings who built the
Pyramids were unknown, and that history, in this respect, was
not to be trusted ; for that some of the Arabian traditions ascribe
their construction to giants who lived before Adam ; while other
authorities give a fabulous account of a monarch called Gian,
and of his mighty exploits. He also observes, that innumerable
tombs, and also a number of pyramids of various dimensions,9 had
been found on the neighbouring rocks, which shewed the high
degree of science at which the Egyptians had arrived in the earliest
times : but he adds, that it did not appear that any of them,
excepting the Great Pyramid, had been opened.

8 It is remarkable that he was not led by these considerations to form any idea
that the entrance-passage continued in a regular descent, and communicated with
the well or shaft.

' It seems that, at the time when M. Maillet visited the Pyramids, great incon-
venience was experienced from the accumulation of sand and rubbish in the interior;
and likewise that considerable danger was to be apprehended from the Arabs.

APPENDIX. 229

DE CARERI (1693)

Received from Fulgentius de Tovas, a Capuchin, a plan, ■with the
dimensions, of the Great Pyramid; and also a plan of the well,
from an account of Lazarus, a Capuchin, who had explored it
about the year 1670. He went to the top of the building, and he
says that there were two hundred and eight ranges of stone, and
that the whole had been cased with marble — that the perpen-
dicular height was five hundred and twenty feet, and the base six
hundred and eighty-two feet. The summit, composed of twelve
stones, was sixteen feet eight inches square. The entrance was on
the eighteenth range from the bottom. The inclined passage was
seventy-eight feet long, three feet and a half high, and three feet
and a quarter broad. It led to a space ten feet wide, which opened
to another ascending passage, seventy-six feet long, at the end of
which there were two ways, — the one, an horizontal passage,
twelve paces in length, with a room at the end ; and the other, six
feet four inches in width, ascended for the length of one hundred
and sixty-two feet, to a gallery, which conducted to a room thirty-
two feet long, sixteen feet wide, and nineteen feet high, with a
flat roof of nine stones. The apartment contained an empty
marble tomb seven feet two inches long, three feet one inch broad,
three feet three inches high. At the junction of the ascending
with the horizontal passage, there was a well on the right hand,
from which, at the depth of seventy-seven feet, a small cavern
branched to the westward, whence an oblique-descending passage,
two feet four inches broad, and two feet and a half high, had
been cut in the rock. At the depth of one hundred and twenty-
three feet, the well was entirely filled up with sand and stones.
The Arabs said, that a passage at the bottom of it conducted to
the Sphinx.

Entrance into the Pyramid.

Height - - _

Width - - - -

Length - - -

Space at the end of the descent
First ascent.

Lenjrth - - - - 76 0

Feet.

Inches,

3

6

3

3

76

0

10

0

230

1

APPENDIX.

Second ascent.

Feet.

Inches.

Length -

-

161

0

Width

-

6

4

Horizontal passage.

Length -

-

10

0

Gallery leading to upper apartment, eight or

ten paces.

The upper apartment.

Length

-

- 32

0

Width -

-

16

0

Height

-

- 19

0

Tomb.

Length

-

7

2

Breadth

-

3

1

Height

-

3

3

Square of space on the

top of the Pyramid

16

8

Perpendicular height

-

- 520

0

The base

-

682

0

First descent of well

-

- 77

0

Second descent of well

-

123

0

He found that the height of the Second was equal to that of
the Great Pyramid, but that the base was somewhat less. This
Pyramid was difficult of ascent, as it was much dilapidated, and
as the courses of the stones were not regular like those of the
Great Pyramid. The Third Pyramid was one-fourth less. Its
base twenty feet less, and its height in proportion. It was built
of white stone. De Careri then recites the accounts given by
Greaves, upon Arabian authority, particularly that of the opening
of the Pyramid by the Caliph Al Mamoon. He observes, that
they were undoubtedly tombs, and quotes Strabo, Diodorus,
Heredotus, and Aristotle in support of that opinion ; but he adds,
that they had also been constructed for astronomical purposes.

LUCAS (1699)

Says, that the two larger Pyramids of Gizeh were about two
hundred paces distant from each other, and that the Great
Pyramid was the only one opened. The entrance was about three
feet square, and the path to it was over a heap of sand and rubbish.
The inclined passage had a coved roof; and, at the length of

APPENDIX. 231

sixty paces, ended in a very difficult communication, ten paces
long, and about the size of a man. On the right he found an
excavation, and, towards the south, a large opening with a pit,
which appeared very deep, as far as he could ascertain by throw-
ing into it stones and pieces of lighted paper. From this place
he climbed up a stone, twenty-eight feet high, to a space twelve
or thirteen feet long, and entered, by a small opening, an ascend-
ing passage about seventy paces in length. He observed several
niches in the walls, made, apparently, for tlie reception of idols.
A short horizontal passage then conducted to a chamber twelve
paces long, and six paces large, and about twenty feet in height.
The ceiling was composed of nine stones, each four feet broad;
and its walls were finely polished. It contained, at the further
end, an empty tomb, seven feet long, three feet wide, three feet
and a half high, and five inches thick. It was composed of a very
hard and sonorous stone, which, excepting for its dark colour,
resembled porphyry. He then mentions another small chamber.
He also states, that there was only one entrance into the Pyramid,
and that, consequently, the air was exceedingly impure, and the
bats very troublesome. He returned, with some difficulty, by the
way he had entered ; and afterwards ascended the exterior, it would
appear, at the north-eastern angle, as he mentions the chasm at
that place. He remarks, that the ranges of stone were not of an
equal height; that the least was three feet high, and scarcely one
foot wide. He arrived, with some difficulty, at the top, which
was about twenty feet square, and formed by five stones, one of
which appeared to be wanting. He describes the descent as still
more difficult, and says, that there were two hundred and forty-
three ranges of stone ; that the Pyramid was more than seven
hundred and twenty-nine feet in perpendicular height ; and that,
allowing for the depth of the inclined passage in the interior,
the whole height must have been seven hundred and sixty-nine
feet. He then examined the two other Pyramids, which were not
open. They were built in the same manner, but were smaller
than the great one. They could not be ascended, because some
of the cement, with which they had been cased, still remained.
He remarked, that many people had supposed that this covering
was of stone, but he found it to be composed of cement.* He saw
many other smaller pyramids of ditferent sizes, on one of which
the Sphinx was placed.

' It is scarcely necessary to remark upon the inaccuracy of tliis description.

232 APPENDIX.

An Account of Divers Choice Remarks, taken in, a Journey, 8fc.
By Veryard, M.D. London, 1701. Page 297.

"Our next digression was to the famous Pyramids of Egypt,
■which stand about six or seven miles from Cairo, at the border of
the deserts of Africa, and are usually counted amongst the Seven
Wonders of the world, and this is the only one of the seven that
remains. Not to mention different smaller pyramids that are dis-
persed up and down in the deserts, we shall only describe the
three most remarkable; they are prodigious masses of wrought
stone upon a square base, lessening by degrees to the summit.
The square of the base of the largest was about three hundred
and twenty-two of my paces, so that the whole compass would be
one thousand two hundred and ninety-two paces, but owing to
the accumulation of sand, it is impossible to ascertain the exact
dimensions. Two of the opposite sides appear to the eye longer
than the others, by which it would appear that the base was an
oblong. The height seems to be equal to one side of the base.
The exterior was in the form of steps, by which we ascended, but
not without some difficulty and danger, from the irregularity and
decayed state of the stones. At about half of the ascent, we found
a place, which seemed expressly made for a resting-place for tra-
vellers, capable of holding nine or ten persons. After remaining
here some time, we proceeded to the top ; which, although when
viewed from below, it appears to end in a point, can nevertheless
contain forty persons with great ease. From thence, we had a
prospect on one side of the barren sandy deserts of Africa; and,
on the other, of Cairo, the Nile, and the adjoining country, with
all the towns and villages. The other two Pyramids terminate
in a point ; and hence it is conjectured that colossal figures may
have been placed on the summits ; and we observed, on the top of
the Great Pyramid, an hollow place, which appears to be formed
for that purpose, but nothing else is to be seen there excepting
the names of various travellers, which have been cut into the
stone. The number of steps, or ranges of stone, are two hundred
and six. The lower are ascended with difficulty, but they gra-
dually decrease towards the summit. We entered the Pyramid,
and were forced to creep on our hands and knees to the middle
of the building, where we found an hollow passage, like a large

APPENDIX. 233

chimney, running from the bottom almost to the top, with holes cut
cut on both sides to put in one's feet as we ascend. Having got
to a considerable height, we found a pretty little chamber adorned
with marble, with a tomb at the farther end, said to be for Pha-
raoh, where he designed to be buried, had he not left his carcass
in the Red Sea, pursuing the children of Israel. Near this was
another very similar to it ; but finding nothing more worthy of
notice, we returned by the way we came. The other two Pyra-
mids are much less, have no opening, and are of no great note."

QUATREMERE (1701),

In his translation of Makrisi, mentions an English traveller,
Veryard, who had been in Egypt, and in other parts of the East,
towards the close of the seventeenth century, who, speaking of
his residence at Suez, says: — "From hence (Suez) we made
an excursion of about five leagues into the isthmus to see a
Pyramid, which may contend with the greatest of those near
Cairo in all its dimensions. It has likewise steps on one side, by
which we ascended to the top, where we found an obelisk of about
four feet square at the base, eighteen feet high, and inscribed
with hieroglyphics. It seems to be one entire stone; but how
they could get any thing of that kind to such a prodigious height,
I cannot easily conceive ; for I am apt to think that it passes the
skill of our modern architects to do the like. From the bottom
of the Pyramid, we passed, through a narrow entry, into a large
vaulted room, in which we saw three tombs, rising about four feet
from the ground, two of which were covered with hieroglyphics.
From hence we ascended, by twenty-three steps, into another room,
arched like the former, but somewhat less, in which we observed
six niches in the walls, and a stone in the middle, which is
thought to have contained a statue, the fragments of which lie
still scattered up and down the room. This is a considerable
piece of antiquity, and was probably the sepulchre of some great
man, though all antient and modern history is silent on the
matter." 2

' M. Quatremeie remarks, that this narrative is very extraordinary — that it is
difficult to imagine that an autlior who, in other respects, has given a true and
rational account, would invent a story which could be so easily detected, and from

234 APPENDIX.

EGMONT (1709)

Says, that the Pyramids were called Djehel Pharoun : that the
largest was built upon a rock, about sixty feet high, which had been
hewn into the form of a camel's back. He states, that the base
of the Great Pyramid was found, by Greaves, to be six hundred
and ninety-three English feet : that the sides of the building faced
the cardinal points ; and that the entrance was on the northern
side. He appears to have gone up to the top at the north-eastern
corner, as he remarks the chasm, which he calls an inn, about
half way up. He found that the summit was covered with six
stones about six feet long, but that the intervals between them
would require six other stones of equal size. He concludes, there-
fore, that it was either not finished, or that several of the stones
had been taken down. The blocks had been put together wkh
mortar, which contained small pebbles. He says that the ranges
of stone were two hundred and six, the inclined height six hundred
and seventy feel, and the perpendicular five hundred feet ; and he
adds, that twenty-three feet were wanting to complete the apex.
With regard to the interior, he describes the entrance to be an
arched passage, three feet six inches wide, cut in the rock, and faced
with marble ; that the passage itself was eighty-four feet long, and
inclined at an angle of thirty-five degrees. It was nearly full of sand
and rubbish, and at the end of it he passed through a narrow space
into another passage, also cut in the rock, and ninety-six feet in
length, which ascended to a square landing-place twelve feet long,
and three feet four inches broad, from whence an ascending gallery,
a hundred and thirty-six feet long, and six feet six inches broad
between the walls, led to an upper chamber. This communication
had a stone bench on each side, one foot six inches broad, and one
foot six high ; and the height of the roof, which contracted at the
top, was twenty-two feet six inches above the pavement. The walls
consisted of nine tiers of marble blocks, seven of which projected

which he could not derive any possible advantage; whilst, on the other hand, so
interesting a monument could scarcely have existed in the neighbourhood of Suez
without attracting the observation of some of the numerous travellers that have for
so many years explored that part of the country. It is only necessary to add, that
the wiiole story appears to be a fiction.

APPENDIX. 235

two and a half inches. The chamber to which it conducted was
thirty-six feet long, eighteen broad, and as many high. The
walls were composed of five ranges of stone, the roof of nine
large blocks of Thebaic marble, and the floor was of the same
material, as was also an empty sarcophagus, which he found
about four feet from the farthest wall ; and which was seven feet
long, three feet six inches high, and six inches thick, and near it
was an excavation about three paces long, and twelve feet deep.
He observed two apertures, one on each side of the chamber,^ but
could not discover for what purpose they had been made. At the
entrance into this chamber he saw another opening, nearly closed
■with sand, into which he fired a pistol. After stating Mr.
Greaves' opinion respecting the cause of the extraordinary echoes
which are heard in this building, he adverts to the well, which
he says was divided into four parts, two inclined and two perpen-
dicular ; and which, as he was told, formed a communication
with the other Pyramids, but he could not examine it on account
of the sand. He refers the reader to M. Thevenot for a more
particular account of it. He then entered the horizontal
fissure, which was three feet square, and one hundred and thir-
teen feet long, and arrived at an arched chamber which was
covered with marble, was eighteen feet long, sixteen broad, and
eleven feet three inches high, and had a sloping roof. He
observes, that nothing was to be seen in this chamber, and that
it was very ofiensive, from the smell of bats and other vermin ;
and it was necessary to fire pistols in it from time to time, in
order to purify the air. He took the dimensions of this Pyramid
on the authority of Pere Sicard, a missionary.

The Second Pyramid appeared to have been covered with
marble, as a quantity of that material was to be found near it;
the entrance had not been discovered. Excepting on the southern
side, the surface had been well preserved, and had neither
chasms nor fissures ; and it was every where so smooth and even,
that it could not be ascended. Near these two buildings he
observed a third smaller Pyramid ; and others farther off in the
desert. He then quotes Diodorus and Strabo, as to the kings by
whom the Pyramids were built ; and narrates, from the Moral
Alzeman various traditions that they were built by Joseph, by
Nimrod, by Queen Dalukah, or by the Israelites ; and from Ebn
Abd Al Hokm, that they were considered to be antediluvian

' The air-cliannels.

236 APPENDIX.

structures, because there was no certain account of their erection :
and in conclusion, he mentions the intention entertained by a
pacha, in 1580, to destroy the Great Pyramid with gunpowder.

PERIZONIUS (1711).

In the " History of Egypt," by Perizonius, it is remarked that,
according to Josephus, the Hebrews were compelled to build the
Pyramids; but that this had been denied by others, and that
much uncertainty prevailed amongst antient authors as to the
date and purpose of their construction ; — that Manetho says, that
they were built by Venephes, the fourth king of the first, and in
another place by Suphis, the second king of the fourth dynasty ;
and that Marsham asserts, that Venephes reigned in the time of
Peleg, and of his son Reu, and Suphis in the time of Terah, before
the birth of Abraham. The author, however, does not believe
that these buildings are so extremely antient ; neither, on the
other hand, does he credit the account of Herodotus, that the
three Pyramids were built by Cheops, by his brother, and by his
son Mycerinus, after the Trojan war : for if they had been con-
structed at so comparatively late a period, more certain accounts
of them would have remained. Upon the whole, he is opinion
they were constructed by the Hebrews.*

PtRE SICARD*(1715).

This author observes, that there were twenty large Pyramids
and many smaller, that three of them were situated near the
site of antient Memphis, about nine miles from Cairo ; that the
largest of them was five hundred feet in perpendicular, and six
hundred and seventy feet in inclined height ; that it was ascended
by two hundred and twenty steps, about three feet in height ; and
that twenty-four or twenty-five feet w ere wanting at the summit,

" It is remarkable that the largest building in Rome, the Colosseum, is also said
to have been built by the captive Jews.
* This author is quoted by Egmont.

APPENDIX. 237

which was a square of ten or twelve feet. He says, the entrance
was on the northern side, and forty-five feet above the base ; and
that the inclined passag-e was eighty-five feet in length, and three
feet six inches square. At the end of it, another passage, ninety-
six feet in length, and three feet four inches square, ascended to a
well on the right hand, which was choked up with sand. From this
place an horizontal passage, three feet square, and one hundred
and thirteen feet long, conducted to a chamber eighteen feet long,
sixteen feet wide, and twenty-one feet high — the roof of which
inclined to a ridge in the middle. This chamber did not contain
any traces of a tomb. Returning to the well, he ascended a
gallery, which was one hundred and thirty-six feet in length, six
feet in width, and twenty-four in height, and had a roof which
contracted towards the top ; it had also a ramp on each side. At
the end of the gallery he passed through an horizontal passage,
formed of granite, twenty-one feet long, three feet eight inches
wide, and three feet four inches high, to a sepulchral apartment,
which was thirty- two feet long, sixteen feet wide, and sixteen feet
high ; it was entirely composed of granite ; and, at the distance of
four feet four inches from the end of it, he found a sarcophiigus,
seven feet long, three feet in height, and three feet and a half
wide. It was formed out of a single block of granite, had no
cover, and when struck, sounded like a bell. The author con-
ceives that the history of the Pyramids, and the particulars of
their construction, could be found out; likewise by whom they
were opened : but he does not mention how this knowledge could
be obtained.

SHAW (1721)

Notices the difference that exists in the various admeasure^
ments of the Pyramids, which arose, probably, from their being
taken on different levels. He quotes the following: —

The base, by Herodotus - - 800 feet.
• Diodorus - 700 —

Strabo - . 600 —

Sandys - - 300 paces.

Bellonius - - 324 —

Greaves - - 693 English feet.

Le Bruu - - 704 French feet.

238 APPENDIX.

He supposes, that neitlier of the three greater Pj'vamids were
ever finished, because the stones immediately over the entrance
of the greatest are placed en decharge, and are of a greater height
than seems necessary for so small a portal ; and because, for a
large space on each side of it, several of the parallel ranges are
discontinued. These circumstances indicate, in his opinion, some
further design ; probably that of a large and magnificent portico.
He considers that the ranges, or steps of stone, were intended to
be cased over, although this operation did not appear to have been
eifected at the Gieat or at the Third Pyramids ; while, at the
Second, scarcely a quarter of the building had been finished from
the top. The stones, of which the Pyramids are composed, are
from five to thirty feet long, and from three to four feet high,
and have been laid in mortar similar to that which is now used in
Barbary ; they contain fossil shells, resembling those which are
observed in the rocks on which the Pyramids stand, and have
evidently been quarried from them ; and, indeed, Dr. Shaw is of
opinion that natural eminences of rock constitute a considerable
part of the interior of these buildings. He quotes, from Pliny, the
antient authors who have written about these wonderful monu-
ments, and says, that Cheops, Chefrenes, and Micerinus, are sup-
posed to have built them ; but that, according to some authors,
Suphis built the First, the daughter of Cheops the Second, and
Nitocris the Third ; whilst others affirm that the two larger were
built by the shepherd Philition, and the smaller by Rhodope.
This difierence of opinion he considers extraordinary; and observes
that, as the Egyptians were the most learned people of antiquity, and
as they were supposed to have kept a chronological account of the
transactions of their kings, and of all great events, it is therefore
surprising that the authors of such great undertakings should be
disputed, and the account of them so uncertain, that even the pur-
poses for which the Pyramids weie erected have not been ascer-
tained. It was generally believed that they were tombs of the
antient kings : but he considers the internal construction of the
Great Pyramid ill adapted for a sepulchre, and thinks that it was
a temple. He remarks, that as the Second and Third had no open-
ings, they could not certainly have been sepulchral monuments,
unless each was built by the successor over the tomb of his ances-
tor. Taking this view of the subject, he conceives that the granite
sarcophagus, in the Great Pyramid, was intended for the celebi'a-
tion of the mystical worship of Osiris, and he supposes it to have
contained images, sacred vestments, and utensils, or water for lus-

APPENDIX. 239

tration. For, although its length is appropriate as a toinl), he thinks
that the height and breadth are too great ; besides, the Egyptian
sarcophagi were of a different sliape, and were adorned with hiero-
glyphics, and, in his opinion, always placed in an n})right position ;
whereas the one in question is placed upon the floor, north and
south, in the same direction as the entrance into the Pyramid.
He further remarks, that " this chest," upon being struck, emitted
the musical note (Etami), which corresponds with the chamber,
and might thereby be supposed to have similar proportions, had
not Professor Greaves found, by mensuration, that they were dif-
ferent. He further says, that, according to Herodotus, the tomb
of Cheops was in the vaults below ; and that it is therefore to be
presumed, that the Pyramid itself did not take the name of a
sepulchre from it : and, he adds, that even if the king had been
buried in it, that it still might have been a temple. Strabo appears
to Dr. Shaw to have been the only person among the antients who
was accpiainted with the entrance. The ascent to it, he observes,
at present, is not considerable ; but, in the time of Strabo, it might
have been nearly half-way up the Pyramid, as the accumulation
of sand and of rubbish must have been very great since that
period. If it was open in the time of that author, the Doctor is
of opinion that the descending passage was the only one then
known, and that it conducted to subterraneous apartments below;
or accounts would certainly have existed of the chambers of the
king and of the queen, and also of the chest, or sarcophagus, con-
tained in the former. He considers that the forced communica-
tion between the descending and ascending passages, corroborates
this idea. He conjectures, that the Great Pyramid may have a
communication with the Sphinx, and that underground passages
may, by possibility, exist, connecting it with secret chambers
in the other Pyramids.

He also adds the following mensurations, and other particulars,
of the Great Pyramid: —

It faces the four cardinal points. The entrance is on the
northern side, and about thirty feet to the eastward of the centre,
and forty-five feet from the ground.

Perpendicular height of the Pyramid

Base - _ _ -

The descending passage.

Length - _ _

Square - - - -

Angle of descent, 35°.

Feet.

Inches,

500

0

670

0

84

0

o

6

240 APPENDIX.

Feet. Inches.

12

0

3

4

113

0

3

0

18

0

16

0

11

3

This passage is filled up with sand, and the forced
passage from it communicates with the passage
above, which continues, in an ascending direc-
tion, in the same line, towards the southward, as
the passage of entrance.
Ascending passage.

Length - - - 96 0

Breadth and height - - - 3 6

At the end of this passage is a well, cut, partly in
the rock, to the depth of twenty-seven toises ;
near the well is a platform.
Length _ _ - -

Breadth _ _ -

Whence, to the southward, in the same lineal direc-
tion, is a horizontal passage.
Length _ _ _ _

Height and breadth
Which conducts to a chamber.

Length _ _ _ -

Breadth _ - _

Height of the angular roof
There is a niche, of ten or twelve paces in depth, on
the left hand of the chamber on entering it,
in which an excavation has been made, and
the stones and rubbish have been left in the
chamber. Returning from this chamber, and,
from the horizontal passage to the well, tlie
passage continues-—
Ascending - -

Breadth between the walls
Breadth between the ramps on each side
Breadth and height of the ramps on each side
Holes in the ramps.

Length _ _ _ -

Breadth _ _ -

Depth, about - - .

Distance from one hole to another, about
Fifty-six holes in both the ramps, twenty-eight

inches each.
Height of the roof of this passage - 22

At the end of this passage is a horizontal passage.

Length - - - - 21

Breadth ... - 3

136

0

6

6

3

6

1

6

1

8

0

6

0

6

3

4

32

0

16

0

16

0

APPENDIX. 241

Feet. Inches.
Its height is unequal ; in the middle of it are

groovings, and it is lined with granite. It

conducts to a chamber constructed with granite

in every part.

Length _ _ _ .

Breadth . _ .

Height (of five equal stones)

The celling is formed of nine large stones of equal size ; but
half of the width of those at the sides are built into the walls. At
the right hand of this apartment, and at the distance of four feet
four inches from the wall, is a monolythic tomb of granite, without
any top. Its height is three feet and a half, length seven feet,
breadth three feet, thickness six inches. To the right of the
tomb, in the corner of the floor, is a hole about three paces long,
and about two toises deep. There are two holes near the door,
the one to the right and the other to the left, each about two
feet square ; but their length is unknown ; they appear to have
been part of the original construction.

M. NORDEN (1737)

Says, that the Pyramids were tombs, and erected before hiero-
glyphics were invented, which were unintelligible at the time of
the Persian invasion under Carabyses. He also remarks, that
there are four principal Pyramids at Gizeh, besides several others
less worthy of notice ; that all of them had been built upon the
rock without any substructions ; that the height of each of the two
larger was five hundred feet; and that the Great Pyramid was
the only one that had been opened. He observes, that they were
constructed of unequal ranges of blocks, cut in the shape of
prisms, and taken partly from the spot and partly from the
mountains on the other side of the Nile; and he adds, that mortar
had been used only in the interior. He does not believe that
these buildings had been cased, although the upper part of the
second Pyramid was covered with granite. He ascended, to the
entrance of the Great Pyramid, by a mound of rubbish on the
northern side;— it was a little to the eastward of the centre, and
had been forced. An architrave over it shewed that it had had

VOL. II. R

242 APPENDIX.

a portal, and several stones Imd been removed in search of it, but
common square work, like that of the rest of the building, was
found behind the great stones which composed it. From this
entrance five different passages led, successively, to two chambers,
one below the other, in the middle of the Pyramid; and most of
these communications were about three and a half feet square, and
formed of white marble. He does not believe that the whole of
them were filled up with masonry, although the lower end of the
ascending passage had evidently been so. The Queen's Chamber,
he says, is coated with granite, and not with plaster, as Mr.
Greaves had asserted ; and he adds, that it was half full of stones,
taken from the excavation under the niche. He remarks, that
the well was also encumbered with rubbish. He examined the
groovings for the Portcullis, and the King's Chamber, together
with the granite Sarcophagus, and the excavation in the floor,
which, he supposed, was occasioned by the pavement having acci-
dentally fallen into some cavity beneath it. He says, that the
channels on the northern and southern sides were blackened by
the smoke of torches, inserted from time to time by travellers,
and were so full of stones and rubbish that they could not be
examined : but he concludes that they were intended to ventilate
the chamber. He also remarks, that the building, in general, did
not correspond with the account of Herodotus.

The Second Pyramid, although of the same size, appeared, from
the elevation of its site, higher than the great one, which it much
resembled; excepting that it had no entrance, that the upper
part was coated with granite, and that it was inaccessible. He
concludes, that Mr. Greaves must have been deceived by the
reports of others, and that he could not himself have examined
this Pyramid, because he states that its sides were smooth and
even ; and also that Herodotus must, in like manner, have derived
his information of the interior from other people, because he does
not appear to have entered it. He takes notice of the rock having
been cut away on the western side of the Second Pyramid,
and of the temples near it and the Third ; and observes, that
they were constructed with the same kind of stone as that used
in the Pyramids.

The Third Pyramid seemed to be constructed like the other
two, but was not so high by one hundred feet, nor had it any en-
trance. The Fourth Pyramid was one hundred feet less than the
Third, without coating or temple, and was likewise closed up. The
summit of it was terminated by a single great stone, like a pedestal,

APPENDIX. 243

and near it were several others of less consequence.^ Mr. Norden
then again adverts to Mr, Greaves's " Pyramidographia,"and states
his opinion that the Pyramids of Gizeh, although not so ancient
as those of Saccara, are much older than is usually supposed,
because, as no inscriptions or hieroglyphics are to be found either
upon them or upon the adjacent temples, they must have been
erected before that mode of writing was invented ; and because the
Sarcophagus, the lining of the chambers in the Great Pyramid,
and also the coping of the Second, were composed of granite,
which was so extremely antient that it had lost all polish. He
takes notice of the two dykes or causeways, and says, that the
summits of the Pyramids could not have been observatories, as
they were either actually covered with granite or intended to
be so. He conceives, that it was not the halfvf the Third, but
of the Fourth Pyramid, that was cased with the dark-coloured
stone mentioned by ancient authors, and blames Greaves for not
having personally inspected the Fourth.'^ He adds, that if the
inscription, stated to have been affixed to the Third Pyramid,
had really existed, some parts of it would have remained, as it
would have been engraven upon granite or basalt, and as it
was probably of considerable length, like those found on other
buildings, where the walls are almost entirely covered with
them.

KOSTAR (1738)
Visited the Pyramids, but does not describe them.

POCOCKE (1743),

Who travelled in 1743, has given a detailed account of the
Pyramids and Tombs of Gizeh, with a plan of what he con-
jectured might have been the regular design of the various
Tombs.^ He observes, that the Pyramids were supposed to have

" This Pyramid must be that called by us the Fifth, namely, the most eastern of
the three south of the Third.

^ It is to be observed, that Mr Norden has entirely overlooked the two Pyramids
which are close to the one which he blames Mr. Greaves for not having noticed.

* The plan is of no value. The sepulchral grottoes and monuments do not
appear to have been formed with any regularity, but to have followed the course of
the quarries which supplied materials for the buildings.

244 APPENDIX.

been cased with a hard stone or marble, brought from the moun-
tains of Arabia, and says, that there were considerable quarries
near the Red Sea. He quotes, from Herodotus, the descrip-
tion of the causeway by which they were conveyed, although he
thinks that the description was exaggerated. He remarks, that
in his time the causeway was twenty feet in width, and about
one thousand yards in length, that it had been built of hewn
stone, and strengthened on each side by sixty-one circular but-
tresses, about fourteen feet diameter, and thirty feet apart ;
that it afterwards turned to the westward, and passed over two
bridges, each of twelve arches, built on piers ten feet wide ;
and, subsequently, continued about one hundred yards further
to the south, and ended where the ground was higher. As the
country, over which the causeway was built, is low, and as
the Avater consequently covers it, frequently for a considerable
time, the work had been found useful, and had been kept in
repair.^ The author appears to have imagined that the stones
were brought to the Great Pyramid by a circuitous road, consi-
derably to the westward, on account of the steepness of the
mountain opposite its northern front.

He then states, from Herodotus, that this Pyramid was
built by Cheops, and that the base was a square of eight hundred
feet ; from Diodorus, that it was built by Chemmis or Chembis,
and that the base was seven hundred Greek feet ; from Strabo,
that it was less than six hundred ; from Greaves, that it was six
hundred and ninety-three English feet; and also, that the area
was a little more than eleven acres, the perpendicular height four
hundred and ninety-nine feet ; and that each side was an equilateral
triangle. He also considers that, as Diodorus stated the area at
the top to be nine feet, and Greaves thirteen feet square, some
stones must have been taken away since the time of Diodorus.
He himself found, that the top of the Pyramid was formed
of nine stones, two of which were wanting at the angles ; and
that the two upper tiers were not perfect. He counted two
hundred and twelve ranges of stones, from two and a half feet
to four feet high, and broad in proportion. They were rather
smaller towards the top. He ascended at the north-eastern
angle. He believed that the Pyramids had been cased with a
finer stone, and adduces in support of that opinion the authority of

'This description alludes to the Saracenic bridge built upon the foundations of
the antient causeway.

APPENDIX. 245

Herodotus and of Pliny ; and he says also, that they were ultimately
finished from the top.^ He then states, from Herodotus, the ac-
count of the subterraneous apartment, with which he supposes the
well to communicate ; and he believes that the Caliph jNIahamet,
who opened the Pyramid in the 827th year of the Christian era,
must have had some information respecting the interior. He
then concludes his account of the Great Pyramid with some
remarks on the descriptions of Greaves, and on those of M.
Maillet, respecting the Passages, King's Chamber, &c.

Dr. Pococke subjoins the following measurements, stating,
that those taken from Greaves are marked G. ; from his own
observations, P. ; from M. Maillet, M.; from Sicard, S. ; and
that the two last are in French feet.

Step to the entrance

Height lo it

Width and height

Length - - - -

Broken passage.

Length _ _ - -

Breadth . _ -

Height to upper passage
Upper passage.

Width and height

Length _ - - -

Landing place.

Length - - - - 15 0 G.

Passage to Queen's Chamber.

Width and height _ - -

Length _ _ _

Chamber.

Length - -

Breadth _ . _

Height of walls to roof

Length of slope of roof -

Diameter of well _ - -

' It is evident, from the casing-stones which have been lately discovered on tlie
north front of the Eighth Pyramid, said to be the tomb of Cheops's daughter, and
which are precisely of the same nature as those on the northern front of the Great
Pyramid, that the casing-stones were hewn or chiselled to the required angle before
they were put up, and that their surfaces afterwards were smoothed and polished.
The PropylcEum and great pillars at Karnac seem to have been worked m the same
manner.

Feet.
16

Inches.
0

G. P,

38

0

G.

3
92

463

6

G.
G.

89

0

G.

20

0

G.

9

0

G.

5

0

G.

110

0

G.

3

3

INI

110

0

G.

17

6

M,

15

10

M

11

3

S.

10

0

S.

3

0

G.

246

APPENDIX.

Feet,
12

3

1

1

6

Ascent into the upper gallery

Breadth of passage - - -

Height of ramps

Width - - - -

Whole breadth of gallery

Holes in the ramp.

Length - - - - 1

Breadth _ - - - 0

Depth - - - - 0

Distance from one another - - 3

Twenty-eight of these holes on each side.
Height of gallery - - - 26

Height of two tiers of stone, to the stone that sets in 5
Each stone sets out - - - 0

The seven tiers that set out, each in depth about 2

Landing-place of the same width.
Length - - - - 5

Height . - - - 10

Passage.

Length - - - - 8

Width - - - - 4

Height - - - - 4

Second passage.

Width - - - 4

Length - _ - - 6

Next passage.

Width - - - - 4

Length _ _ - - 8

Great room.

Length - - - --34

Width - - - - 17

Height - - - - 19

Nine stones cover the room, the two next the walls.
Width - - - - 2

The rest, wide _ . _ 4

Six tiers of stones, of equal breadth, compose
the sides.

The tomb.

Length - - _ _ 7

Width - - - - 3

Depth - - - -3

Inside. — Length - - _ 6

Width - - - - 2'

Depth - - - - 2

Inches.
0 M.

7 1 7
TOOTT

71 7
Toocy

87 0

3J-
3|

43B
l(JOff

860
TOffTT

G.

1 P.

7 P.

6 S.

9 P.

G.
P.
P.
P.

P.
G.

P.
P.
P.

P.
P.

P.
P.

G.
G.
G.

M.
M.

G.
G.
G.
G.
G.
G.

APPENDIX. 247

He then describes the levelled area, near the Second Pyramid,
as a fosse, ninety feet wide and thirty feet deep, on the northern
and western sides ; and also the chambers cut in the rock. He
considers that a range of holes, about ten feet high, near the
doors of these apartments, were for the purpose of inserting the
ends of slabs, in order to form a portico ;" and that a row, about
ten feet higher, above these, may have been for a similar portico
to a higher range of excavated apartments. He then quotes
various authorities, antient and modern, as to the size and
formation of the Second Pyramid ; and he conceives that there
is a mistake in the text, where Strabo is supposed to say that
the heights of the two Pyramids were a little more than the
lengths of their bases, that fisi^uv is inscribed for /xeiuv, and that the
reading should be " a little less." Notwithstanding its dilapi-
dated appearance, he thinks that the whole of this Pyramid had
been cased. He mentions the excavations in the Northern Front ;
and says, that Herodotus stated that the lower ranges of stone
were of granite ; and Diodorus, that there were steps in the side
of the Pyramid, which he conceives might be in the middle of
one of its faces. He observed that, on the northern and eastern
sides, the casing was entire for forty or fifty feet from the top ;
and that, for nearly one hundred feet lower, the stones seemed to
be set further out. He mentions some grottoes, with hierogly-
phics, towards the south-eastern angle of this Pyramid,-^ and the
ruins of the temples to the eastward of the Second and Third.
He then adverts to the Sphinx, and to a Pyramid W. N. W.
of the Sphinx,* which he supposes to be that of the daughter
of Cheops. He then describes the mound, or raised ascent to the
magnificent ruins of the temple, near the Third Pyramid, which,
he says, has been one hundred and sixty feet deep, and one
hundred and eighty in width, and the stones were sixteen or
seventeen feet long, and six in breadth and in height. In the
course of his remarks upon the Third Pyramid (said to have been
built by Mycerinus), he quotes from Herodotus, that its square
was three hundred feet, and that it was cased halfway up with

* These holes are generally supposed to be either natural fissures, or the termin-
ations of the tiers of the stones which had been quarried. Tliere are not any vestijjes
of a higher range of apartments at present visible.

^ This appears to be a mistake for S.W.

* This appears to be the building mentioned in Mr. Williams's map as tiie
Temple of Osiris.

248 APPENDIX.

Ethiopian stone; and from Diodorus Siculus, that It was so cased
for fifteen tiers, each of them five feet deep ; and he found by
admeasurement that these accounts were tolerably correct. He
then adverts to the assertion of Strabo, that on account of the
revetement, this Pyramid cost as much as the others. He adds
that a considerable part of these granite blocks are yet to be seen
scattered near the building, some of them above five feet in
height. The three smaller Pyramids, to the south of the Third,
he concludes to be those mentioned by Diodorus as the tombs of
the Queens. The two to the westward were eighty-seven feet
square, and built of three degrees, ten feet broad — each degree
consisting of three tiers of stones, four or five feet deep, that set
out about one foot. The eastern of these three Pyramids was
called the Fourth, and was one hundred feet square. The origin
of all these buildings was, in his opinion, the practice of covering
small eminences with masonry, as funeral monuments ; and he
supposes that all the Pyramids have been built round masses of
rock ; that the Great Pyramid was built over two rocky eminences
— the present entrance having been placed on the top of one, and
the room containing the Tomb (the King's Chamber) on the top
of another; and that the passages and lower chambers " might
have been cut in the side of the hill, though at some distance from
the outside of it."

DR. PERRY (1743)

Says that the Pyramids are very numerous ; that there are above
twenty large ones, and that the two biggest at Gizeh were those
generally visited ; that they were situated about six miles west-
ward fiom the river, and were called the Pyramids of Memphis,
bat that it was not known by whom, or when, they were built, or
for what purpose, which appeared to him extraordinary, con-
sidering their enormous magnitude, and the regular chronological
account of every great occurrence supposed to have been kept by
the antient Egyptians. He conceives, however, that even now
some account of them may yet be discovered in the hieroglyphic
character. He remarks that an equal uncertainty exists as to the
height an-d base of the Great Pyramid,^ that according to the

* Tliis may be owing to the dilapidated state of tlie building, and to the base
havinor been covered with sand and rubbish. The building was, no doubt, equi-
lateral and rectangular.

APPENDIX. 249

opinion of most persons, the different sides are of different dimen-
sions, and ascend at different angles ; that one side has an angle
of 40 degrees, another of 37|, a third of 35, and a fourth of
42 1 ; that if this be true, the apex could not be vertical to the
centre of the base : but, after all, he is of opinion that the great
object of inquiry is to find out at what time, by whom, and for
what purpose, these vast structures were erected. He inclines to
Dr. Shaw's opinion, and cannot suppose that they were built
from mere ostentation, or for the employment of the people, or
that they were designed only for sepulchral monuments ; he is of
opinion, from an attentive consideration of the interior con-
struction of the Great Pyramid (the only one then open), and also
from what might, by analogy, be supposed to be concealed in the
other Pyramids, that they were likewise intended for the per-
formance of religious rites and mysteries, by which their sanctity
as tombs would be greatly enhanced. He conceives, therefore,
that Dr. Shaw's account is the best, and refers generally to that
author, subjoining, at the same time, a view and also a section
of the Great Pyramid. He also imagines that none of these
buildings were ever entirely finished ; for the great one, instead of
terminating in an apex, ends in a space of fifteen feet square.
The Second, he thinks, is higher than the others ; and the Third,
he says, is a good deal less ; and he adds, that the superior height
of the Second is owing to its situatiou, and to the preservation of
the upper part of it. He measured the base of the Great Pyramid
on the southern and western sides, and found the southern to
be seven hundred and eighty-nine and a quarter feet, and the
western seven hundred and eighty ; that its perpendicular height
was about six hundred and eighty-seven feet ; and the exterior
angle of thirty degrees : he is aware that this account does not
agree with that of Mr. Greaves, but conceives that that gentleman
was mistaken in his admeasui-ements, and goes into a calculation
to prove it. He observes that the antient accounts of these
monuments are by no means satisfactory ; that the founders of
the three Pyramids are generally supposed to have been Cheops,
Cephrenes, and Mycerinus ; but that, according to Dr. Shaw, the
Great Pyramid was built by Seuphis, the Second by Cheops'
daughter, and the Third by Nitocris ; and that others say, that the
two largest were built by the Shepherd Philition, and the Third
byRhodope ; and he adds, that Ibn Abd el Hokm (an Arabian his-
torian) asserted that the Great Pyramid was opened by Almamon,
Caliph of Babylon, in the ninth century. Dr. Perry then quotes,

250 APPENDIX.

from this author, the account, so often repeated, of the body and
jewels found in a tomb, and the assertion that the Pyramids were
built by Saurid Eben Salhook, King of Egypt, three hundred
years before the Deluge. He was certain, however, that the
Great Pyramid was not first opened by Almamon, since it must
have been open in the time of Pliny ,^ who describes the well,
and who, therefore, must have seen it himself, or have received
his information from some person who had. He adds that it
was probably opened at a very early period.

He then gives the following dimensions, and a plan of the
Great Pyramid : —

Square of base - - -

Perpendicular height - - _

Additional building required to form the apex
Entrance, width of -

Height _ _ -

Length - - - _

Second passage, length
Horizontal passage, length

Width

Height - - . -

Lower Chamber, length

Width - - . .

Height - . .

Great Passage, length - - -

Width

Height - . . .

Passage to the Upper Chamber, length -
Antechamber, width _ _ _

Height - - _

Upper Chamber, length

Width
Height - _ _ _

Length of Sarcophagus

Height - _ - _

Width

The Sarcophagus and the whole of the Chamber is of granite;
the roof is composed of nine stones ; the Pyramid fronts the four
cardinal points, and is about twelve miles south-west of Cairo.

Tliis observation would equally apply to Herodotus.

Feet.
780

Inches.
0

690

0

15

0

3

6

4

0

90

0

107

0

140

0

■ 3

6

4

0

18

0

16

0

18

0

150

0

6

0

24

0

22

0

6

0

11

0

24

0

17

0

19

0

7

0

3

0

2

6

APPENDIX. 251

MR. HASSELGUIST (1750)

Visited Gizeh, and attempted to ascend the Great Pyramid, on
the western side, near the north-western angle, on the 13th of
July, but was prevented attaining the summit, as he says, by the
heat ; he also entered it, and visited the other Pyramids, but does
not offer any detail respecting them.

M. FOURMONT (1755),

In his work on the " Plains of Memphis," enters into considerable
detail respecting the Pyramids of Gizeh. He derives, as many
others have done, the word " pyramid" from w^, fire, on account
of the pointed form, in the shape of a flame.^ He says that there
are above twenty of different sizes at Gizeh, Saccara, and
Dashoor, but that the three largest are to the north. Two in the
Faiyoum are also of considerable dimensions, and others are to
be found in the Lybian desert.^ He quotes various authors as to
their reputed builders and dimensions ; and he observes that Lord
Charlemont ascertained that the perpendicular height of the Great
Pyramid did not exceed four hundred and forty-four feet. He
says that the two hundred and seven, or two hundred and eight,
ranges of stones, by which it is ascended, are from three to four
feet high, and that they recede gradually towards the top, at the
rate of about three feet in each range.^ The Pyramid was most
accessible on the southern side, or at the north-eastern angle, as
the other parts were much dilapidated. After referring to antient
authorities respecting the interior, he says, that the entrance, about
three feet square, was on the 16th range, and nearly in the middle

' It is to be observed that wv^ is considered to be Pelasgian, and not purely
Greek.

* Neitlier M. Fourmoiit, nor any other author, excepting Mr. Wilkinson, has
mentioned Abou Reche.

9 I think that " pierres " sliould be inserted for " pieds," — "qui devoit ^tre
compose de nenf pieds, mais il y en a deux qui manquent aux coins." There must
be a mistake in the printing "pieds" for "pierres." There appears, also, to be
several errors in the whole description; so that in some instances I have given the
author's words.

252 APPENDIX.

of the northern side ; and that he went to it over a mound of
rubbish. At the end of the inclined passage, about one hundred
feet in length, a narrow excavation opened into a sort of vestibule,
containing a mass of rock about four feet high, on the top of which
an ascending passage was entered. It was five feet long, and
about five feet square ; the pavement was of white marble, but
the top and sides of a softer stone. At the end of it two other
passages branched off, that to the right went to the pit mentioned
by Pliny, which was filled up with rubbish to within twenty feet
of the top. M. Fourmont went down, and found at the bottom a
passage, into which he could only penetrate seven or eight feet, for
want of air. Upon leaving the well he proceeded by the passage
to the left, which was horizontal, and of the same dimensions as
the former, and one hundred and ten feet in length, to a chamber
half full of rubbish, and extremely offensive from a smell of dead
bodies. It was about twenty feet long, seventeen wide, and not
quite fifteen high; the walls were covered with chalk, the roof
angular, and formed of large stones. Having returned from this
passage, he mounted another above it, " et on entre dans I'autre
galerie a la gauche, separee de la premiere galerie par la muraille
dans laquelle est I'entree qui mene au passage, dont nous venons
de faire mention." This gallery was very magnificent both in
workmanship and in materials, and ascended, at an angle of
twenty-six degrees, to the distance of one hundred and fifty-four
feet from the pit. There were ramps on each side, and quadran-
gular holes over them, and it was constructed with slabs of marble
so finely put together, that the joints could scarcely be perceived ;
and the walls became gradually narrower towards the top by the
overlapping of the courses of masonry. He says that the entrance
into the King's Chamber was formed of Thebaic marble ; and ob-
serves that the groovings for the portcullis were the only sculp-
ture or carving to be seen in the whole building. A square
passage, of the same size as the others, and nine feet in length,
entered the northern side of a handsome chamber, situated at the
distance of twenty-four feet from the end of the Great Gallery,
and exactly in the centre of the Pyramid. The walls were com-
posed of six equal ranges, and the roof of nine stones ; the whole
of Thebaic marble. The length of the southern side, at the top
of the lowest range of stone, was thirty- four English feet, of the
western side, seventeen feet ; and the height was nineteen feet six
inches. The sarcophagus was of one block of Thebaic marble, in
the form of an altai- ; upon being struck it was sonorous, and had

APPENDIX. 253

not any inscription. Its exterior length was seven feet three
inches and a half, and its depth three feet three inches and three
quarters. On the northern and southern sides of the chamber he
observed two openings opposite to each other, and he says that
the echo was very extraordinary.

After several remarks and quotations relative to the construc-
tion of the pyramids and causeways, he alludes particularly to
the Second Pyramid, which had no entrance, was built with
smaller stones, and not in regular steps or courses, like the Great
one, " et par-tout unis ; cet ouvrage, hormis le cote qui est oppose
au midi, paroit fort entier, et sans aucune breche.^ Au nord et
a I'occident de cette Deuxieme Pyramide se voyent deux pieces
d'architecture tres-magnifiques, et tres-bien travaillees d'environ
trente pieds de profondeur, et de plus de 1400 en longueur,
taillees perpendiculairement dans le roc. Ces batimens sont paral-
leles aux deux cotes de la Pyramide, que nous venons d'indiquer,
a une distance convenable, et forment un angle droit en se
joignant, ce qui fait un tres-bel effet. On y entre par des ouver-
tures quarrees faites dans le roc, dont plusieurs sont de la meme
grandeur que les passages etroits de la meme Pyramide, et dont
chacun conduit dans une chambre quarree, a laquelle le rocher
naturel sert de voute. Dans la plupart de ces chambres il y a un
passage, par ou Ton entre dans quelqu'autre appartement, mais ces
passages sont obscurs, et pleins des ruines. Au cote septentrional
par dehors on voit une ligne gravee en caracteres sacres."-

M. Fourmont then observes, that the Third Pyramid is
situated on elevated ground at a little distance from the Second,
but is much smaller than the other two, and of a lighter colour,
which he considers the effect of contrast. He then notices the
temples near the Second and Third Pyramids, and observes that
the one near the Third was most perfect, and says that in it, " on
trouve quatre piliers qui, sans doute, soutenoient une voute, dont
I'idole etoit couverte, et on tournoit autour de ces piliers comme
par une espece de collaterale."^ The blocks, with which this

' It is remarkable that the surface of this Pyramid, which at present is more
dilapidated than those of the others, should be represented by several travellers
to have been almost perfect.

* This passage is inserted on account of the singular description it contains of
the excavations in the low cliff on the western side of the Second Pyramid, where
there is not the slightest appearance of a building.

3 When this temple was cleared out in 1837, two square places, apparently for
pedestals, were found in the floor of the adytum.

254 APPENDIX.

temple is built, lie justly remarks, are very fine, being twenty-
seven feet long, eighteen broad, and four thick ; and he concludes
that the Pyramid was covered with granite, as several fragments,
to which cement adhered, were to be observed near it. He after-
wards adverts to the other ruins near the Pyramids, and then
proceeds to describe those at Saccara.

M. NIEBUHR (1761)

Appears to have been greatly annoyed by the Bedouins in both
his visits to Gizeh ; in the second he was accompanied by several
persons, and, amongst others, by M. Meynard, but the party was
then under great alarm on account of the Arabs. As far as he
could judge, the Pyramids fronted the cardinal points. The rock,
upon which they were built, was visible at the angles. He says
that he found the height of the Great Pyramid much less than it
was generally supposed to be ; at the same time, he observes
that, according to M. Fourmont's account, it was stated by Lord
Charlemont to be four hundred and forty-four feet. He does not
agree with Lucas that the Pyramids had been faced over with
cement, as the casing on the Second Pyramid was of stone ; and
upon examination he found that it had been finished from the top,
by smoothing off the projecting angles of the blocks. He remarks,
that the Pyramids are likely to last for many years, and that as
stones are more easily obtained from the quarries in the Mokattam,
there is less inducement to destroy them on account of their ma-
terials. He agrees with the antient historians, that the Third
Pyramid was partially covered with granite. He never heard
that inscriptions had been found upon the stones that lie scattered
around, nor did he find any upon the buildings, which indeed was
not likely, as the surfaces had been nearly destroyed He searched
in vain for the chamber above the King's, in the Great Pyramid ;
and he remarks that M. Mallet was equally unsuccessful,
although, by his own account, he had visited that edifice more
than forty times.* According to the information which he re-
ceived from M. Meynard, the chamber is over that in which

* It is extraordinary that the entrance into Davison's Chamber was not seen, as
it is of considerable size, and not more' than twenty-six feet above the entrance into
the King's Chamber. M. Meynard, although of the party, did not, probably, enter
the Pyramid, but he must have known it, as he gave a description of its size.

APPENDIX. 255

the Sarcophagus is placed, and of the same size, but lower; and
the entrance to it is about thirty feet above the floor of the passage
leading to the King's Chamber. He observed the petrefactions
in the masonry of the Pyramids, and also in the adjacent rock.

Dimensions hy M. Niehuhr.

Feet.

Elevation of the base of the Great Pyramid above the Nile 200
Distance between the nearest angles of the Great and of

the Second Pyramids _ _ _ 555
Elevation of base of the Second Pyramid above that of the

Great - - - - - 34

Base of Second Pyramid . _ _ 705

Base of western side of Great Pyramid - - 710

Inclined height of south-western angle of the Great Pyramid 500

Height of Great Pyramid _ _ _ 440

MR. DAVISON (1763).

An account of this gentleman's operations is contained in the
memoirs of the Rev. Robert Walpole, and has been alluded to
at some length in the nineteenth volume of the " Quarterly
Revievr." It appears that Mr. Davison took the height of the
Great Pyramid of Gizeh first, by measuring the ranges of stone,
and, subsequently, with a theodolite, and that both accounts
agreed. He found the number of ranges to be two hundred and
six ; the perpendicular height of the Pyramid four hundred and
sixty feet eleven inches; the base seven hundred and forty-six
feet; and that the platform at the top was composed of six stones.
The entrance, in the northern front, was upon the sixteenth
range from the base, and three hundred and fifty feet from the
north-eastern, and three hundred and ninety-six feet from the
north-western angle ; and the base was, on the 22d of October,
one hundred and sixty-three feet above the level of the IVile.
He afterwards measured the interior of the Pyramid. He then
examined the two oblong excavations to the eastward of it ; the
second, the third, and two ruined pyramids eastward of them ;
another built upon a square rock, and those to the southward of
the third.^

* The two ruined Pyramids eastward of the Second and Third, and the one on a
square rock, are no longer to be distinguished ; it is just possible, that by tlie two
former, Mr. Davison alluded to the ruins of tlie temples.

256 APPENDIX.

Mr. Davison's account of the examination of the well is con-
tained in a letter, dated 23d November, 1764, of which the follovr-
ing is the substance. A lantern having been lowered, he went
down, by the help of a rope, to the bottom of the first shaft, twenty-
two feet deep ; after which, he descended, perpendicularly, to the
depth of five feet, when he came to the second shaft, the mouth
of which was stopped up by a large stone, so as barely to allow of
a passage. Upon letting down the lantern still further, he per-
ceived that the shaft was oblique, and at the depth of twenty-nine
feet he came to a grotto fifteen feet long, four or five feet wide,
and about six feet in height. Thence he proceeded ninety-nine
feet in a shaft, which at first w^as inclined, but became, towards the
bottom, almost perpendicular. When at the total depth of one
hundred and fifty-five feet, the passage was blocked up with sand
and rubbish ; and he found the remains of a ladder that had
belonged to Mr. Wood,^ who had, sixteen years before, got down
as far as the grotto. The lower part of the shaft was so full of
bats, that it was extremely diflftcult to preserve a h'ght.

On the 8th of July, 1765, Mr. Davison went with M.
Cousigny (consul at Rosetta), M. Meynard (a French merchant),
and other persons, to the Great Pyramid, to exploie an opening
in the great gallery, which he had seen on a former visit, and
which led to the chamber eventually called by his name.'^ In
proceeding there for this purpose, he incidentally observed, upon
arriving at the forced junction between the descending and
ascending passages, that the entrance passage did not terminate
at this point, but went on in a right line into the Pyramid. The
rains that had fallen during the winter had washed away jDart of
the sand, and made this circumstance more apparent. He post-
poned, however, the immediate investigation of this subject, and
proceeded to the original object of inquiry in the great gallery.
He ascended, by the help of ladders, to the entrance, which was

* The same person who went to Palmyra. I cannot meet with any account of
his travels in Egypt.

^ The " Quarterly Review'' remarks, that this chamber had only been adverted
to by Niebuhr and Bruce. Thevenot mentions an aperture, said to have been in
the Queen's Chamber, which he could not find, and which required a ladder, and
may have been a mistake for this — the description would, indeed, also apply to the
Pyramid at Dashour. Niebuhr was informed of the passage by M. Meynard,
wlio accompanied him to Gixeli, in 1761, and described the chamber to him,
and had possibly, therefore, been in it, and probably gave an account of it to
Mr. Davison.

J^

APPENDIX. 257

a square of two feet four inches. On the eastern side of the gal-
lery, the passage turned to the south, and was so full of dirt and
hats' dung, that it was with great difficulty he arrived at the
chamber. INI. Meynard came into the passage near the door,
but being a good deal troubled with the dirt and want of air, did
not proceed further. Mr. Davison perceived that the chamber
was directly above the King's, and was floored wnth the reverse
of the granite blocks that formed the ceiling of that apartment.
It was four feet longer than the chamber below, which was covered
in by seven entire blocks, and only by the half of those next
the sides, whilst the floor of this chamber was composed of
the whole of the nine. The breadth of it was the same as
that of the King's. The ceiling consisted of eight slabs of
polished granite.^

Mr. Davison then examined the excavation of the niche in the
Queen's Chamber, but without making any discovery.

He afterwards returned to the supposed end of the entrance
passage, which has been already mentioned, and found that it
proceeded into the building.'-^ He entered it for the length of
one hundred and thirty-one feet, and says, " the descent, except
the first four feet and a half, is cut in the rock ; at the end of one
hundred and thirty-one feet, I found it so filled up with earth,
that there was no possibility of proceeding."

Mr. Davison then copied the hieroglyphics in the cliffs oppo-
site the north-western angle of the Second Pyi-amid. In one of his
letters to Professor White, he states that the Great Pyramid was
the only one open at Gizeh ; and in answer to a letter from that
l^erson, he writes from Lisboii, 10th October, 1779, that he had
not perceived any liiei'oglyphics upon any of the stones belonging
to the Pyramids, but that he had not ascended to the top of the
Second. He adds, that although almost all the casing of the two
larger Pyramids at Gizeh had been removed, yet that, from what
remained upon the Second, he had no doubt that both had been

covered over with stones of this shape / so as to form

a smooth surface from top to bottom. With respect to the Third,

* It does not appear that any thing was found in it, nor are any quarry- marks
mentioned.

® This passage was afterwards cleared out to the bottom by M. Caviglia, who,
in doing so, unexpectedly opened the well, and also discovered the subterraneous
apartment.

VOL. II, S

258 APPENDIX.

he had observed some of the granite key-stones remaining upon
it ; but he had not found any inscription upon the casing that
remained upon the Pyramids at Dashoor, or at Saccara ; and
the only hieroglyphics he had seen at Gizeh, excepting on the
tombs, were those inscribed on the rocks, facing the northern
front of the Second Pyramid. He adds, that some Latin verses
are said to have been observed upon them by Bolderstein, who
had many years before visited Egypt, and gives the following as
a specimen : —

" Vidi Pyramides sine te, dulcissime frater,
Et tibi quod potiii lacrymas hie nioesta profudi,
Et nostri memoiein luctus hie sculpo querelam."

D'ANVILLE (1766)

Mentions only tlie distance they are from Cairo, and quotes
many authors in that respect.

BRUCE (1768)

Visited the Pyramids of Gizeh, and observes that plans of them
had been published two years previously, from drawings by Mr.
Davison, who had discovered the small chamber in the Great
Pyramid, wiiich is called by his name : a discovery in which,
Mr. Bruce observes, there is nothing extraordinary, excepting its
having escaped observation for so many ages. He also considers
it surprising that there should have "been a constant belief that
the stones composing these Pyramids had been brought from the
Lybian^ mountains ; though any one who will take the pains to
remove the sand will find the solid rock there hewn into steps ;

' Tlie author probably meant *' Arabian."

APPENDIX. 259

and in the roof of the large chamber, where the Sarcophagus
stands, as also in the top of the roof of the gallery, as you go up
into that chamber, you see large fragments of the rock, affording
unanswerable proof that the Pyramids were once huge rocks,
standing where they now are ; that some of them, the most
proper from their form, were chosen for the body of the Pyra-
mid, and the others hewn into steps, and to serve for the super-
structure and the exterior parts of them."

MONSIEUR L'ABBE BE BINOS (1777),

In his letters, addressed to Madame Elizabeth of France, men-
tions that the Pyramids of Egypt are supposed by some to be
the tombs of the antient kings ; that they are called by others
the mountains of Pharaoh; that the poets have described them,
as rocks heaped one upon the other by the Titans, in order to
scale Olympus; that the Great Pyramid was the only one that
had been opened ; that those who have measured them, asserted
that the base of the Third was three hundred feet; of the
Second, five hundred feet ; and of the larger, six hundred feet ;
that he ascended to the top of the Great Pyramid, by one of the
angles, and found that those buildings were distant from one
another about twenty paces ; and that the Sphinx was behind
them, and not more than twenty feet above- the surface of the
sand. He states that the entraiK-e into the Great Pyramid was
about fifteen feet high above the rubbish, and probably three
times that height above the base. The entrance was a square of
four palms. The descending passage, about eighty feet long, v/as
full of rubbish ; and, at about o,ne-third from the bottom, he found,
on the right hand, a large opening, in which a mass of rock was
to be surmounted in order to arrive at an ascending passage,
about ninety-six feet in length and three feet four inches square.
At the upper end of this communication he saw, on the right
hand, a very deep pit, which formerly contained a secret chamber ;
and on a level with the mouth of the pit, a passage, one hundred
and thirteen feet long, and three feet square, conducted to a
chamber, eighteen feet long, sixteen wide, and twenty high.
" Having reached this chamber, he returned to the end of the
ascending gallery, near the well, where he perceived a perpen-
dicular ascent to another ascending passage, one hundred and

260 APPENDIX.

thirty-six feet long, six feet wide, and twenty-four feet high,
with ramps on each side ; and at the upper end a platform,
whence a corridor composed of blocks of granite, twenty-one
feet long, three feet eight inches wide, and three feet four inches
high, led to the sepulchral apartment. This chamber was thirty-
three feet long, sixteen feet wide, and sixteen feet high ; had a
flat ceiling, composed of six large stones ; and contained a tomb of
granite, very like that which the Abbe had seen in the church of
St. Athanasius, at Alexandria. It was hewn out of a single stone,
and was seven feet long, three feet wide, and three feet high,
and he found it entirely empty. In returning from this chamber,
a passage was visible, which led to a small apartment, apparently
the highest in the Pyramid.' The Abbe then ascended the Pyra-
mid, and found the top of it about twelve feet square ; and upon
it he observed six large stones, arranged in the form of an L,
which he was told signified a hieroglyphic.

MONSIEUR SAVARY (1777),

Who travelled in 1 777, visited the interior of the Great Pyramid,
and afterwards ascended to the top, by the usual path at the
north-eastern angle. He gives the dimensions of the Great Pyra-
mid from the following authors : —

Height. Base.

Herodotus - - 800 feet. 800 feet.

Strabo - - 625 — 600 —

Diodorus - - 600 — 700 —

Pliny - - — 708 —

Le Brun - - . 616 — 704 —

Prosper Alpinus - - 625 — 750 —

Thevenot - - - 520 — 682 —

Niebuhr - - 440 — 710 —

Greaves . - - 444 — 648 —

Number of Ranges of Stone.

Greaves _ _ _ _ 207

Maillet _ _ _ _ 2O8

Albert Lewinstein - - _ _ 260

Pococke - - - _ 212

Belon . . - . _ 250

Thevenot _ _ _ _ 2O8

^ This must have been Davison's Chamber.

APPENDIX. 261

He conceives that Greaves and Niebuhr are mistaken in the
height of the Pyramid. He says, that the ranges of stone are from
two feet to four feet high, the larger at the bottom; and that
Greaves's account should be five hundred and seventeen feet. He
observes, that Greaves, Maillet, Thevenot, and Pococke, appear
all to have ascended and made their observations at the north-
eastern angle ; that Albert Lewinstein, Belon, and Prosper Al-
pinus, ascended at the south-eastern or south-western angles; and,
as these travellers give a greater number of ranges of stone, he con-
cludes that that part of the Pyramid was not so much covered by
the desert sands ;* and says, that their accounts agree better with
Diodorus and with Strabo. He considers that the Pyramid is at
least six hundred feet high ; and that, as Pliny has stated that the
entrance was in the exact centre of its northern side, and as it is
now only one hundred feet high, the rubbish and sand must have
formed a hill of two hundred feet above the base.^ He remarks also
that, according to Pliny, the building covers a space of eight acres ;
and quotes from that author, Herodotus, and Diodorus Siculus,
that the Pyramid was cased with one uniform surface ; and from
Strabo, that it had been closed up. He agrees entirely with the
opinions of jNI. Maillet, which he inserts at great length ; and he
mentions that, according to some Arabian authors, the Pyramid
was opened by the Caliph Mahmoud at the beginning of the
eighth century ; according to others, that it was opened by the
Caliph Haroun-el-Raschid (who, he observes, sent a water- clock
to Charlemagne, the first that was ever seen in France). He
believes that the Pyramid was a tomb, notwithstanding the
opinions of M. Pauw.

The Second Pyramid, built by Chephren, brother to Chemmis,
appeared almost as high as the first, which coincided with the
accounts of Strabo and of Diodorus Siculus ; but its base was
smaller. He observes, that the revetment of this Pyramid was
entirely destroyed to within sixty feet of the top, and he concludes
that that part was left merely on account of the difficulty of its
removal. M. Savary does not conceive that this Pyramid had
ever been entered. To the east of these two he saw another,
similar in structure, but of much less dimensions. The base of it,
however, was about three hundred feet square. It was built by

*The accumulations of rubbish and sand are at present higher on the southern
side.

^ Pliny does not appear to have mentioned the entrance.

262 APPENDIX.

Mycerinus, who died before it was half finished, and was com-
posed of granite from Assouan . A considerable part of the revet-
ment was scattered around it. The king's name, according to
Diodorus Siculus, was inscribed on the northern side; but that
inscription, as well as the writings mentioned by Herodotus on
the revetment of the Great Pyramid, had been destroyed, and
taken away with the casing- stones. He then mentions the tradi-
tion, that the Third Pyramid was built by Rhodope ; and says,
that the Arabs call it Heroun-el-Bent (the Monument of the Girl).
He saw near it the ruins of three other small Pyramids, which,
according to Diodorus, were the tombs of the queens of the kings
buried in the three larger Pyramids.

SONNINI (1780)

Observes, that the Great Pyramid was about five hundred feet
in perpendicular, and seven hundred in inclined height ; that
the entrance was open, but that he had not sufficient time to exa-
mine it with accuracy ; that the original purpose of these vast
buildings had not been satisfactorily ascertained, but he hoped
that the invasion of the French army Avould lead to more exact
conclusions.^

M. VOLNEY (1783)

Expresses his surprise that the dimensions of the Pyramids
have not been accurately measured. He states, that they were

® As these travels were not published till some years after the French Revolu-
tion, this passage was most probably an interpolation. With these details, two
plans are published, which were intrusted to M. Sonnini by the Duke de Cbaulnes,
with certain manuscripts, in order that several parts in the interior of the Great
Pyramid might be particularly examined. Not having been able to effect these
inquiries, he returned the drawings, together with the manuscripts, to which the
capital letters in them refer; but he published the drawings, he says, because he
had copied them, although he did not think himself at liberty to publish the manu-
script. The plans, therefore, are unexplained. They relate to the antechambers and
portcullis belonging to the King's Chamber in the Great Pyramid, and are said to
have been drawn by Mr. Davison, and have been particularly mentioned in the
nineteenth volume of the " Quarterly Review."

APPENDIX. 263

erected upon a ledge of rocks, not more than fifty feet above the
adjacent plain, which had furnished the materials of which tliey
are built, consisting of a white calcareous stone, known in
France by tlie name of " Rairie." He observes, that if the
Pyramids had been intended for observatories, they would most
probably have been built upon the higher range of the Mokattam.
He also remarks, that an elevated observatory is useless in a flat
country, and that the ascents of many of these monuments were
impracticable ; and he does not think it likely that so many similar
buildings would have been constructed so near each other for the
same purpose. From the size of the sarcophagus in the Great
Pyramid, and from the rocks and adjoining grounds having been
evidently used as a cemetery, he is of opinion that they are
tombs, and adduces the etymology of the word Pyramid as an
additional argument. He found that the King's Chamber was
thirteen paces long, eleven wide, and the same in height. He
says, besides the Great Pyramid at Gizeh, one at Saccara had
been opened, and that an unsuccessful attempt had been also
made by one of the Beys on the northern front of the Third
Pyramid at the former place.'

Monumens Egyptiens, par Bouchard et Gravier (1791).

In this collection, which, as far as the monuments of Gizeh are
concerned, is of no sort of value, there is a curious representation
of a Pyramid (in Plate XXII.) called "Monument Sepulcral,"
with various entrances and temples. Where or to whom it was
erected does not appear. It seems to have been restored. Plate
XXIII., No. 1, is a Pyramid of five stages, said to be situated
northward of Saccara. No. 2 is a Pyramid of four stages, but its
situation is not mentioned. Plate XXIV. represents the Pyramids
of Moeris and of his Queen, said to have been built in the lake,
with a temple between them, and staircases, entrances, &c.
Plate XXV. is a Pyramid of Ptolemy Euergetes, the ruins of
which are stated to be near Thebes. It has the addition of a
pedestal, sphinxes, &c. Plate XXVI., the Great Pyramid of
Gizeh, the base of which is said to be about eight hundred feet.

^ He adds also, that, about 1780, one hundred manuscripts, in unknown cha-
racters, were dug up near Damietta, and burnt by order of the Pacha of Cairo.

264 APPENDIX.

Plate XXVII., the interior of the Great Pyramid. The King's
Chamber is placed in the middle of the structure, and the
Queen's under it, with a flat roof. The King's Chamber is said
to be composed of granite, and the roof of seven stones, the
Sarcophagus to have been made of marble ; and it is added that
frao-ments of terra cotta were found near it. Plate XXVIII. is
a general view of the three Pyramids — that of Chemmis, of
Chephren, and of Rhodope or of Mycerinus.

As I before stated, Nos. 26, 27, and 28, are not worthy of
notice.

MR. BROWNE (1792-1798)

Gives the following account of the dimensions of the King's
Chamber : —

Length _ _ _ _

Breadth - _ _

Sarcophagus, Length

Breadth - - -

Depth within - - _

Thickness
The Galleries and Great Chamber are situated due north and south,
allowing for the variation of the needle.
The first passage descending
Small chamber, Length

Breadth _ - _

Antechamber, length - - -

Main gallery, upper part - - _

lower part
Passage to inferior chamber

He adds, that the King's Chamber and Sarcophagus are
formed of granite, but that the Pyramids are built of a soft white
freestone, replete with shells, like the rock on which they are
placed.

Feet.

Inches.

34

5

17

2

7

8

3

2

2

10^

0

6

h and

south,

105

2|

18

9

17

1

7

5

150

0

148

0

109

0

M. DENON (1799),

Who was a member of the Institute in Egypt in 1779, states, that
Cheops was the fourth king in succession after Sesostris, and that
he built the Great Pyramid in emulation of the mausolea of his

APPENDIX. 265

predecessors, particularly of that of Rhampsinitus. He conjectures
that Cheops assumed the surname of Chemmis, given to him hy
Diodorus, from the city of Chemmis, now Eckmim. He takes
notice of the excavations to the eastward of the Great Pyramid,
and also of the three small Pyramids near them, in which he could
not discover any cavity or entrance. He then mentions the ruined
buildings on the southern side, and conceives that one of them was
the tomb of Cheops's daughter. The Second Pyramid, he says, was
built by Chephren (brother to Cheops), who he concludes, had not
sufficient money to complete the revetment in marble. The base
appeared to be smaller than that of the Great one, although the
height was nearly the same, and it was built upon a more elevated
situation. He conceives from the account of the subterranean
excavation mentioned by Herodotus, that the Great Pyramid was
surrounded by a canal, and that the excavations on the western
side formed part of it.^ He states, that the Second and the other
Pyramids were much dilapidated ; that, although the ascent of
the Second is extremely difficult, some of his party succeeded with
the assistance of the Arabs, in climbing up to the bottom of the
casing on the western side, which he considers to be forty feet from
the top, in order to ascertain of what it was composed? The lower
part of this Pyramid he imagines to have been built upon a square
base or pedestal. He also states, upon the authority of Diodorus
Siculus, that, after all, neither Cheops nor Chephren were actually
buried in these tombs. He objects to the account of M. Maillet,
particularly as to the air-channels, as he could not find any ti'aces
of them on the exterior of the Great Pyramid. Respecting the
Third Pyramid, he remarks, it was built by Mycerinus, and that,
like the Second, it had the addition of a temple on the eastern
side, and that the blocks of granite with which it had been cased
were scattered around it ; that the rock had been levelled on the
western side, in the same manner as it had been near the Second
Pyramid, and that chambers had been excavated in it.^ He
then takes notice of the three Pyramids to the south of it, the
Sphinx, the Dykes, and the other remains of antiquity, and

* They are oblong pits of no great depth, and are supposed to have contained
the mortar for building the Pyramids.

' " On a tire des fragmens de 'ce revfetement ; il ne reste plus de doute sur la
niatifere dont il est forme." He afterwards says, that this material was plaster.

' No chambers are to be seen at present, nor any place in which they could have
been formed.

2G6 APPENDIX.

descants at some length on the chronology of Egypt ; and in doing
so, he adverts to the tradition that the Third Pyramid was huilt
by Rhodope.

M. Denon then gives a table of the height of the several
ranges of stone of which the Great Pyramid is composed, by
■which it appears that they are two hundred and eight in number,
and that the height of the edifice is four hundred and forty-eight
feet two inches. He observes, that the stone abounds with petri-
factions, and that pieces of mother of pearl, and of shells, are
frequently found near the bases of the different Pyramids.^ The
base of the Great Pyramid is stated to be seven hundred and
twenty-eight feet ; the length of the inclined passage one hundred
and twelve feet, and the width three feet four inches. He found
that a forced entrance had been made into the ascending passage,
in order to avoid the granite blocks with which the lower part
of it was closed ; this communication was seventy-seven feet
in length, and appeared, from the ruined state of its sides, to
have been filled up with masonry ; the horizontal passage
leading to the Queen's Chamber was one hundred and eighteen
feet long, and was of the same width as the others ; the length of
the Queen's Chamber was eighteen feet, its width sixteen, and its
roof was inclined like that of the great gallery.' The chamber
contained a quantity of stones and rubbish, taken out of an exca-
vation that had been made in it before ; but, as the quantity
of rubbish is not equal to the excavation, M. Denon conjectures,
that a cavity had been discovered in the masonry. Returning
from the horizontal passage he ascended the great gallery, which
was one hundred and twenty-three feet eleven inches in length,
about twenty-five feet high, six feet six inches wide, and had a
ramp on each side twenty-eight inches high. He then describes
the projections of the corners in the walls and the construction of
the roof. From this gallery he entered the King's Chamber by
an anteroom, ten feet in height, which appeared to have been
closed up with blocks of stone. The length of the chamber was
thirty-two feet, the breadth sixteen, and the height eighteen feet
ten inches; the roof was flat, and composed of nine stones of

^ These appear to bave been brought there with earth, and the other materials with
which the cement was composed.

^ The roof of the Great Gallery is not inclined, but narrows towards the top
by the approximation of the courses that form the sides, which are all of them
perpendicular.

APPENDIX. 267

equal width, excepting that parts of tlic two next the walls were
hidden by the masonry. He could not discover of what material
the Sarcojahagus was composed ; it was seven feet long, four
broad, and three feet two inches high, and had not any lid.
Several observations, taken with the compass, are then added,
but be supposes that it does not traverse freely in the interior
of the Pyramid. He says, that the mouth of the northern air-
channel is one foot by eight inches, and that, at the depth of
five feet, it ends in the solid masonry. He supposes, therefore^
that it is a forced passage, as the stones within it are regularly
and firmly built, and could not have fallen in by accident, and
as there are no traces of any aperture on the exterior of the Pyra-
mid, which he had carefully examined. He also describes another
opening, about six inches wide, on the eastern side of the Chamber,*
which gradually became larger, and appeared to have been in-
tended to contain relics, manuscripts, or other articles usually placed
in tombs. He again condemns the conjectures of M. Maillet, and
observes how easily hypotheses are made, and how quickly they
vanish before an unprejudiced observer, who is determined to be
guided by facts, and who will not conceal the truth. He says,
that the mouth of the well is from thirty to forty inches wide, and
inserts M. Maillet's description, which he had himself verified.
He then remarks, that the King's Chamber is not in the middle
of the Pyramid ; but, as he did not take the angles of the descend-
ing and ascending passages, he could not exactly fix its position.^
The position of the entrance into the Pyramid, to the eastward of
the centre in the northern front, he supposes, was intended to
conceal it in case a vertical excavation should have been attempted
from its apex ; and he considei's that this precaution was the most
ingenious contrivance in these buildings,which, it is to be remarked,
he does not appear to hold in much estimation. He is of opinion,
that sepulchral apartments, with entrances from the other sides of
the Pyramids, may exist, not only on account of the immensity of
the building, but as affording an additional chance of security
for the principal tomb, which could not have been easily distin-
guished from the rest. He does not coincide with the opinion of
M. Maillet, that the well had been closed up, nor that the great

■* This must be the soulliern air-channel.

* It is to the north of it in his jihui, which by his own confession cannot be very
accurate.

268 APPENDIX.

gallery, or any part of the horizontal passage leading to the
Queen's Chamber, excepting its entrance, had been filled up with
solid masonry, but only the ascending passage ; and he is of
opinion, that the stones necessary for these operations were de-
posited between the ramps, which were raised for the purpose of
affording a spacious and level entry for the funeral of the king.

He then quotes Herodotus and Pliny, as to the construction of
the Pyramids, and estimates its solid contents at 79,144,277 cubic
feet, and thinks that it might be built by European workmen for
158,288,554 francs. The causeway seemed to M. Denon to have
been made for the conveyance of the building materials, and he
says that its construction shewed a great want of skill in those
who built it, and their ignorance of the arch, or that it would have
been used in this instance, and also in the Pyramid itself. The
mortar appeared to be like that used in Europe, and the stones
had been squared. He assigns a base of six hundred and fifty-
five feet, and a height of three hundred and ninety-eight feet, to
the Second Pyramid, which was built with blocks quarried from
the spot. The casing that yet remained shewed the angle of the
upper part of it, but he concludes from Herodotus, that the lower
part was built in steps or degrees. The stones of the exterior had
not been regularly squared, and it had, on this account, been
covered with plaster composed of " gypse," of a little sand, and
small flints. It was very white and conspicuous at a great distance,
and when the sun shone brightly upon it, it reflected the light,
so that it appeared to many persons to have been composed of
fine granite.*^ Having examined the temple on the eastern side,
he does not think that much of the Third Pyramid is concealed by
the sand ; its base was a square of two hundred and eighty feet,
and its height was two hundred and sixty-two feet. He could not
measure the ranges of stone on the northern front on account of
the excavations said to have been made by Mourat Bey, or by his
predecessor, Mahomed Bey, in consequence of having been pre-
sented with a ring, upon which was engraved a prediction of good
fortune, and of having dreamt of a treasure concealed in this
monument. From the vast quantity of black marble (probably
basalt), as well as granite, which he observed near this building,
its construction seemed to have been truly described by antient

'' The casing is of calcaieous stones in horizontal courses, like tliat of tlie
propjisea at Karnac.

APPENDIX. 269

authors, and he thinks that it had been built of different kinds of
stone : the casing appeared to have been lately removed.

Note.

The English translation by Aikin differs in some respects from the
French edition, as M. Denon is represented in it to have determined that
the height of the entrance to the Great Pyramid, which was the only one
open, was sixty feet above the base ; to have considered the King's Cham-
ber as the principal or sole object for which the building had been
erected ; and also to have observed, that so great was the antiquity of
the Sphinx and of the adjoining ruins, that the time and circumstances
of their demolition were equally unknown with those of their construction ;
and that these wonderful monuments proved the extent to which science
had arrived in the remotest times. M. Denon quotes the admeasurements
of antient authors, of Greaves, and of Lebrun, and inserts the following
observation taken by M. Caraboeuf, 1799 : —

" N. S. face of the Great Pyramid, 19' 58" of declination, N.O."

COLONEL COUTELLE (1801)

Was officially employed with M. Le Pere at the Pyramids of
Gizeh, and had a hundred men for a guard. Their exertions
appear to have been chiefly directed to take the admeasurements
of the Great Pyramid, and to examine the well in the interior of
that edifice ; to take down one of the smaller Pyramids ; and to
examine the Sphinx and the tombs. The following is the sub-
stance^of his remarks : — The entrance of the Great Pyramid is
situated on the fifteenth course in the north-eastern front, 14'"*489
above the base, and two ranges of stone are placed over it, to sup-
port the superincumbent weight of the building. The passages
are I'^-llO square, and are formed of blocks of calcareous stone
from the quarries near Tourah. The first passage is 22"^-363
in length ; the entrance appears to have been closed up and
concealed by masonry. Upon the removal of the blocks, which
formed the casing, the adjacent courses were found to be inclined,
like the passage itself, at an angle of 26°. The second passage
ascends at an angle of 27°, and is 33'"*134 long; the lower part
of it is still closed up with large blocks of granite, and to avoid
these impediments a communication had been forced beyond them.

270 APPENDIX.

This ascending communication ends in a sort of landing-place
near the well, whence a horizontal passage, SS^VQl in length,
conducts to the Queen's Chamber ; this apartment has a pointed
roof, and is S^TQS by 5'"022, and in height G^SO?, and is com-
posed of the same sort of stone as that employed in the passages.
The hollow, to the left of the entrance into this chamber, is not part
of the original construction, but is merely an excavation made by
the Arabs in search of treasure.' From the landing-place, before
mentioned, another communication continues to ascend, at the same
angle as the preceding, in the form of a large gallery, in length
40"''508, in height 8'""121, inbreadth 2"'091 ; on each side are ramps
live hundred and seventy-one millimetres high, and five hundred
and one millimetres in breadth. The floor between them has the
same width as the other passages. There are, on each of the
ramps, twenty-eight holes at equal distances, which are three
hundred and twenty-five millimetres long, one hundred and sixty-
two millimetres broad, and from one hundred and sixty-two to two
hundred and sixteen millimetres vertically deep. Colonel Coutelle
describes the construction of the walls and roof, and then proceeds
as follows. The gallery ends in a broad step l^'SS? in depth, and
of the same height and width as the great gallery ; a passage
is then entered l^Sll in length, 1™110 in height, and 1"'049 in
breadth ; and a vestibule succeeds 3'"803 in height, 1"" 214 in
breadth, and 2'"955 in length, which has contained several port-
cullises, and afterwards a passage l'"047 in width, 1"110 in
height, and 2"'563 in length, forms an entrance into the King's
Chamber, for which the whole Pyramid seems to have been built;
it is composed of granite, and has the following dimensions: —

Height - - - - 5"-858

Length of northern side - - . 10"'467

Length of southern side - - 10 472

Length of western side - _ _ 5'"235^

Length of eastern side - - S^^OO

The southern side inclines inward eighteen millimetres, which

■^ This can scarcely apply to the niche, which is regularly built in the apartment;
yet no other excavations appear to have been then made, excepting that at the bottom
of the niche.

• In M. Jomard's account, 5'"'-235 is the length of the eastern side. The cham-
ber is essentially rectangular, the irregularities here slated are merely the imper-
fections necessarily attending any human undertaking; such attempts at precision
are absurd, and form a contrast with the several inaccuracies which may be observed
ill the French statements.

APPENDIX. 271

reduces in some degree the width of the roof. The Sarcophagus
of granite is on the western side.

Length .... 2"'-301

Breadth .... l">-002

Height - - - - I^IS?

Thickness - - - - 6 inches.

There are no remains of the Hd.

An opening was seen, at the top of the great gallery, to the left
of the entrance into the King's Chamber; but no information
could be obtained respecting it, and on account of its great height
it could not be examined without a ladder. — " Nos mesures
etant prises pour aller faire cette decouverte, nous etions a peine
entres dans un canal, haut de 731 millimetres, et large de 650 mil-
limetres, qu'une nuee de chauve-souris se precipita sur nous pour
sortir ; nous fumes forces de rester long-temps couches sur un lit
de poussiere et d'excremens de ces animaux, oh nous etions etour-
dis par le sifflement de leurs pattes-ailes et suffoques par I'odeur
piquant qu'ils laissent dans les lieux qu'ils habitent ; nous fumes
obliges de nous couvrir le visage })our n'etre pas exposes aux
atteintes de leurs griffes, et de cacher nos lumieres dont une
cependant fut bientot eteinte. Entin, nous parcourumes en ram-
pant un espace S^SSS, et nous arrivames dans une vide ou aucune
lumiere n'avoit peut-etre penetre depuis bien des siecles."

This Chamber was exactly over that of the King's, and of the
same size, but in height only l'"002. The roof and the four walls
were of polished granite, but the floor was uneven, being formed
by the reverse of the slabs that composed the ceiling of the room
below. It was covered, with the dung of bats, to the depth of
fourteen centimetres on the higher parts, and of twenty-eight
centimetres on the lower ; so that it was encumbered, as well as
the passage, with rubbish to the depth of twenty-one centimetres.
The Chamber was evidently intended for the security of the
King's. ''Cette precaution n'etoit pas tout-a-fait inutile;
plusieurs pierres de ce second plafond sont fendues a une petite
distance de leur portee, et les blocs de granit qui les supportent
sont eclates sur les bords, par le poids des pierres posees en
decharge sur I'extremite de ce plafond, et par celui de la masse
superieure."^ A roof of this kind is said to have been found over

^ There is no wei-Iit upon lliis roof, as there are four chambers of construction
above it. It is surprising that the Frencli did not know that this apartment liad been

272 APPENDIX.

the sanctuary at Karnac, and many of the stones of which it was
formed were covered with inverted hieroglyphics, and must there-
fore have belonged to a former building.^

Colonel Coutelle examined the well in company with M.
Alihert. He observes, that it was so encumbered with large stones
that the space was narrowed, in one place, to the width of
two hundred and seventy-one millimetres.- Having arrived at
the end of the cord by which he was lowered down, he descended
without it, to the stones and rubbish at the bottom. He brought
some of them up, and they were found to be similar to those
in the walls and roof of the Grotto. He, therefore, concluded
that they had been thrown down from that place ; and that,
in the construction of the well, a vein of loose gravel had made
it necessary to build up the sides of the shaft, and that the
walling had afterwards been broken into, and the Grotto hollowed
out in search of treasures supposed to have been concealed behind
it ; but that the well was made when the Pyramid was built.
He states that the thermometer was at 25° at the bottom of
the shaft. He does not seem to have had any idea that the first
inclined passage was continued beyond its junction with the
ascending one, and communicated with the well. The well was
afterwards cleared out to the depth of sixteen or seventeen
metres. The Arabs worked about four hours in the morning
and three in the evening, with an intermission of four or five
hours, that the air might be renovated ; and the operation
was continued till military occurrences removed the French from
Gizeh.

The bed, upon which the corner-stone at the north-eastern
angle of the Pyramid had been placed, was discovered at the
distance of 2"" | from the apparent base, and the rock had been
well levelled and hollowed out to the depth of two hundred and
seven millimetres for the space of 3™9 by 3™4. The original
base was also traced at the north-western angle, at the same
level, and at the same distance from the building ; and the whole,

entered. And it may also be added, that they did not perceive that the entrance
passage went on beyond its forced junction with the ascending passage, in a straight
line towards the centre of the Pyramid, or suspect that it communicated with the
well; but it is clear that they did not.

' Mr. Wilkinson considers that this part of the Temple of Karnac is above 100
years older than any other building at Thebes, and is also of opinion that it had
succeeded a more antient edifice.

" These stones were subsequently removed by M. Caviglia.

APPENDIX. 273

when exactly measured, gave a distance of •232'"'747. This
was taken, across the heap of rubbish, from the north-eastern
to the north-western angle. The vertical height was taken by
measuring each step ; and, including the two ruined tiers at the
top, it was found to be 139'"-117 (428. 3. 2^); and, excluding
the upper tiers, which made 1"'117, exactly 138"" (424. 9. 11.)
There were also two hundred and three tiers, which, including
the part formed out of the rock, were 138'"-598. (42G. 8. OX.)
To the place where two angular stones had been imbedded was
0""519. (1. 7. 2.) The height, therefore, from this bed to the
two ruined tiers at the top was 139'"'117; and, including those
which the Pyramid may originally have had, would be HG*"
(449-1- feet,) — more than twice the height of the towers of Notre
Dame. He concludes, that the Pyramid was built upon a plat-
form 32"" (100 feet) above the level of high Nile, that it contains
2,662,628 cubic metres, 8,669,305 cubic feet, and that it had been
originally covered with a smooth casing. Colonel Coutelle does
not mention any quarry-marks.

In a large tomb, westward of the Great Pyramid, a shaft
was discovered, whence, at the depth of 19'30 millimetres, 58*7
inches, a rough grotto proceeded, which extended east and west,
and contained a sarcophagus of granite, l'"-068 in height,
2™-675 in length, and 1"'-133 in width. It was placed north and
south, and had the same dimensions as that in the Great Pyramid ;
it was well polished, but without hieroglyphics. The lid was
fitted on by pommels, with corresponding hollows and grooves.
The mummy had been taken away. As the tombs, which had
been excavated, were found to have been plundered, Colonel
Coutelle and his companions determined to secure the possession
of a sepulchre, which had never been opened or violated, by taking
down one of the smaller pyramids. They accordingly fixed upon
one of the three to the southward of the Third, the base of which
was 43"^, and they concluded that a shaft would be discovered in
the centre of the building. The stones were from l"" to l-^"' in
thickness, and weighed about six thousand kilogrammes, and they
had been removed from the top to more than half of its height
when the French evacuated Gizeh.

It appears, by the Colonel's account, that the back of the
Sphinx was the only part uncovered.

VOL. II.

274 APPENDIX.

M. JOMARD (1801).

This gentleman, besides various quotations from antient and
modern authors, enters into considerable detail respecting the
Pyramids, and says that the Great Pyramid is four hundred and
eighty-three metres N.E. of the Second, nine hundred and twenty-
six metres N.E. ^ N. of the Third, and five hundred and forty-
nine metres N.W. ^ N. of the Sphinx. The northern base deviates
from direct east and west 0". 19*58 southward, so that the northern
face is 20 south of east. The base was measured on December
8th, 1799 ; and again afterwards by M. Le Pere, an architect,
and by Colonel Coutelle, Chef de Bataillon, who made excavations
at the northern angles for that purpose. The entrance was in the
northern front, about forty-three feet above the base, and a mound
of rubbish afibrded a path to it. The remains of a foss, eighteen
metres six broad, was excavated in the rock, and extended along
its northern front, the depth of which was unknown, but it was
supposed to be in some respects like that near the Second
Pyramid. 2

He then observes, that the Great Pyramid had been covered
with a casing, but that it had been totally removed, and that the

^ No traces of a foss exist, nor is there any near the Second Pyramid, where a
space on the western and northern sides of the building has been cleared and levelled,
by removing a part of the rock, by which a low cliff is formed, about twenty or thirty
feet high, around, that part of the area. It is remarkable, that this foss is inserted
in the plans, which are very inaccurate in many respects, considering the time and
opportunities that the French had for surveying the ground. In Plate VI. this
foss is inserted, whilst the excavations to the eastward of the Great Pyramid are
omitted, as well as the foundations of buildings near them. The smaller Pyramids,
and other ruins near the large one, are also incorrectly placed. Many errors may
likewise be perceived in the other plates. In the XlVth, for instance, the King's
Chamber is represented in the centre of the Pyramid. It is to be observed, that
the descending passage in the Great Pyramid is made, in the sections, to end at its
junction with the ascending communication; which proves that, notwithstanding
Mr. Davison had examined the lower part of the passage in 1763 for a considerable
distance, the French, although they were employed from 1799 to 1801, had no
idea tiiat it was continued into the Pyramid. This, however, is also clear from the
account of Colonel Coutelle himself. The plans likewise shew, that the back of the
Sphinx was the only part, from which the sand had been removed.

APPENDIX. 275

whole building, particularly near the 'central parts of the faces
was much dilapidated. The ascent to the summit was usually
made at the N.E. angle. In 1801, Colonel Coutelle and M. Le
Pere found that there were two hundred and three ranges of
stones, which diminished towards the top, and that the original
height of the Pyramid had been four hundred and twenty-five feet
nine inches ; that the height of it, in its actual state, was four
hundred and twenty-two feet five inches ; the trigonometrical sur-
vey gave four hundred and twenty-three feet. In proceeding to
describe the interior, M. Jomard repeats the mistake, which was
made by Colonel Coutelle, in supposing that the large stones
placed "en decharge' over the entrance supported a great weight
of masonry ; which, owing to the oblate form of the building,
cannot be the case. He then says, " L'entree, ou le bord actuel du
canal descendant, est aujourd'hui a la treizieme assise, ou a
12"''64 ; c'est-a-dire, au treizieme de la hauteur de la Pyramide,
tronquee actuelle ou depuis du roc. Le plan vertical, nord et
sud, passant par le bord est de cette entree, est a 120 metres de
Tangle nord-ouest; par consequent, 6"''34 est de I'apotheme, 120
metres moins la moitie de 227"" 32 ; or la largeur du canal est de
1"11 ; il suit de la que le plan vertical passant par cette galerie
est bien perpendiculaire a la face verticale du socle, dirigee est et
ouest. En effet 1° le chambre dite du Roi, qui a la meme axe
que celui de la Pyramide, et dont les murs sont diriges est et
ouest, et nord et sud, a 10'"'472 de longeur, dont la moitie fait
5"'"236. 2° la distance a I'apotheme, 6"''34 doit etre diminuee
de la demi-largeur du canal, O^oSS ; reste, 5'"790 ; la difference,
a 5"'-236 est seulement de 0'"-549."

He describes the forced passage ; and, in a note, makes the
following remarks respecting the persons who made it : "Croyant
que le premier canal continuoit a descendre, ils ont creuse dans
la meme direction ; mais s'etant aper§us de leur erreur, ils se sont
^cartes a droite, et ont fait une tentative inutile, il reste en ce
point un grand trou ; ensuite ils se sont portes a gauche, et apres
avoir parcouru en demi-cercle autour de la vraie direction, ils ont
decouvert le second canal." ^ He gives the dimensions of the
interior ; and remarks, that there are twenty-eight holes, above
the ramps in the great gallery on the eastern side, but only

' Tliis makes it clear, tliat no suspicion existed that the entrance-passage
continued.

276 APPENDIX.

twenty-six on the western, on account of the entrance of the
well. He does not comprehend the use of the air-channels
in the King's Chamber, which he found to be blackened
with smoke. The sarcophagus, he observes, was quite plain,
without sculpture, and also without a cover ; and that an exca-
vation, about eight feet long and two in width, had been made
under it towards the western side of the room. He adds, that
Davison's Chamber was almost unknown before the French expe-
dition ;* that it has the same dimensions, excepting as to height,
as the King's, which is directly beneath it ; and which it was in-
tended to protect from the weight of the building. He adverts to
the echoes produced by the report of fire-arms, which were often
discharged into the air-channels. He describes the horizontal
passage to be of the same size as that from the entrance, and
the Queen's Chamber to be composed of granite, upon which he
observed a considerable quantity of saline incrustation, and says
that it had a pointed roof. He states, that this apartment was
extremely offensive, and much encumbered with the rubbish
produced by a large excavation. As for the well, he did not
examine it himself, but received his information from Colonel
Coutelle, who said, that at the bottom of it an apartment had
been cut in the rock, cither for the accommodation of those who
descended, or to catch the debris which might fall from above ;
and that it was so extremely hot, that the thermometer stood
at twenty-five degrees, whilst, in other parts of the Pyramid, it
was at twenty-two. The depth of the shaft was said to be 63™'34,
and the top of it GS""?! above the level of the Nile ; but that
M. Le Pere was of opinion, if it were entirely cleared out, that
it would go down even to the antient level of the river, which
was formerly lower than it then was. He observes, that the
Second Pyramid was built by Chephren ; that the eastern and
southern sides of the foss, by which it was surrounded, are de-
stroyed, while the northern and western yet remain. He says, that
this foss is a wonderful work, and cut in the rock to the depth
of 8™ or Q'" (twenty-five or twenty-eight feet) ; that its width
on the northern side is 59"°'5, (about one hundred and eighty-
three feet six inches) : and that part of it is hidden under the
sand. Its width on the western side is '31'" 4, or ninety-six feet nine

* It had been mentioned by Niebuhr, discovered by Davison, and known pre-
viously to M.Meynard (a French merchant).

APPENDIX. 277

inches and six lines, and that the Pyramid is built in the bottom
of it. This Pyramid, he states, has had a revetment of calcareous
stone, a portion of which remains on the upper part, which ter-
minates in a point, and that the lower part had probably a casing
of granite, as he observed several blocks of that material scattered
around it.^

He then mentions that the Third Pyramid, which is called
that of Mycerinus or of Rhodope, has the same aspect as the two
others, and has also been cased with granite. The chasm on the
northern side veas made by Murad Bey. This building was for-
merly separated from the Second Pyramid by a court, parts of which
yet remain, as well as of another on the southern side, enclosing
three smaller Pyramids ; whilst two other walls, on the western
side, formed a protection from the sands of the desert. The ruins
to the eastward of this Pyramid were composed of very large
stones, and had a spacious court, in which an entrance was formed
by two immense walls thirteen feet thick. The whole of it was
built with enormous blocks, as was also the southern dyke, which
was probably intended for the transport of stones from the village
Koum el Ecoued^ (the Black Building), where they had been
brought by a canal ; and he conceives that the name of the village
might be derived from the dark colour of the stones.

A fourth Pyramid, about thirty metres to the south of the
Third, has the same aspect. M. Le Pere and Colonel Coutelle
began to pull it down, but they had only time to remove one-half
of its height. They found many quarry-marks on the stones.
Two other Pyramids are to the west of this building. They are
built in four stages, each of which is divided "en marches tres
hautes et tres etroites, largeur de 0"'25, a 0""4 ; le parement
en est incline ; le sommet est une plateforme ; la base de I'une a
31'" 6 ; de I'autre, Sl^S ; le premier corps a 4"4, de haut; le
deuxieme, 5"-6 ; le troisieme, S'"^ ; le quatrieme, 3"-2. La
retraite du deuxieme sur le premier est egal a 3'"'2 ; celle du
troisieme sur le second, a 3'"2 ; celle du quatrieme sur le troi-

* It is to be remarked that no foss exists. The Pyramid has been erected upon
a rock that slopes down towards the east, and, in some degree, towards the south ;
and the higher part, towards the west and the north, has been perpendicularly cut
down, and levelled for a considerable space, so that a low cliff has, on that side,
been formed, in which grottoes have been excavated.

* Koum el Eswith. The villages upon the plain are not correctly laid down in
the French maps.

278

APPENDIX.

sieme, a S^'S ; la hauteur, 18" 6; Tangle d'inclination, 46 degres.
Les trois marches inferieures ont l^S, et l'""4 d'elevation ; les
suivantes sont un peu plus basses, mais la derniere a encore

o-'-s."

M. Jomard gives the following dimensions : —

Height of entrance from base'^

Number of courses of stones, 203

Height, deducting the two ruined tiers at the top

Small courses of the platform

Height by trigonometrical survey

Arete de la Pyramide, line from the summit to the

base at the angles - -

Inclined height _ _ -

Diagonal of the base _ _ _

Triangle of the fronts of the Pyramid —

Angle de I'arete avec la base - 57 59 40

Angle of the top - - 64 0 40

Angle des deux aretes opposees —

Diagonal angle at the summit - 97 6 0
Angle de I'arete avec la diagonale de la

base — angle formed by a diagonal

of the base with one of the lines at

the angles - - 41 27 0

Angle of two opposite fronts - 77 21 50

Angle of one of the fronts with the base 51 19 4
Le perimetre de la base — the circumference of the

base - - - _

Le perimetre du socle — the circumference of the

pedestal 7 - _ _

Width and height of entrance-passage
Angle of descent, 26° 30'

Length of passage _ _ _

Distance from the entrance of passage to exterior

of Pyramid - _ _

Height from end of descending to commencement

of ascending passage - - _

Angle of ascending passage, 25° 55' 30"

FRENCH MEASURES.

Mtrs. &c.

Pds.

43

Pes.

0

Lns.

0

425

9

0

422

5

0

423

0

0

923-6

930-99

3

^ 0

67

2 0

^

6

0 0

2

217-83

184-722
326-54

' These mensurations do not exactly agree with those of M. Coutelle. The
Pyramid has no pedestal, but the faces and also the lines of the angles (les aretes)
are in one continued line from the top to the bottom.

APPENDIX.

279

FnENCII MEASUHES.
Pds. Pes. Lns. Mtrs. &c.

Width and height of ascending passage

3 4| C

Ml

Length of ascending passage

102 0 C

Angle of great gallery, rather more than 26°.

Height of the floor at its commencement

7 2 0

Breadth of ramps - - _

1 Ci 0

Width of great gallery . . -

6 5 5

Height of great gallery, about

25 6 0

Length of upper passage - - -

124 2 11

Height of upper step

2 9 4

Length of landing-place _ - _

4 9 6

Breadth of passage to King's Chamber

1-049

Height of ditto _ _ _

Ml

Length of ditto in all

8-385

Width of vestibule . _ _

1-215

Height of ditto . - _

3-8

Length of ditto _ _ _

2-956

Height under the granite stone -

Ml

Thickness of ditto _ _ .

0 15 0

Height of ditto - - _

1-45

Breadth of ditto . _ .

1-05

Length of passage to King's Chamber

1-110

Length of King's Chamber.

Southern side - - _

10-472

Northern side - _ „

10-467

Eastern side , . _

5-235

Western side . - _

5-200

Height of King's Chamber

5-858

Height of air-channels from floor

5 0 0

Entrance of air-channels

0 7 0

by -

0 8 0

Depth of air-channels, from 3 to 4 feet.

Length of nine slabs composing the roof

181 0 0

6

Sarcophagus.

Exterior length - - _

2-301

— breadth

1-002

— height . _ _

1-137

Depth ...

0-948

Thickness of the sides

0-162

— bottom

0-189

Height of Davison's Chamber

3 1 0

1-002

Length of horizontal passage to Queen's Chamber

119 5 0

38-791

Breadth and height . - -

3 4i 0

Ml

Length of Queen's Chamber

5-793

Breadth of ditto ...

5-224

280

APPENDIX.

FRENCH MEASURES.

Pils. Pes. Lns.

Mtrs. &c.

Height to the springing of the roof

-

4-114

Extreme height of roof

-

6-308

Length of entrance

-

1-4

Width

-

0-6

Well.

Lower part of it — length

-

0-65

— width

-

0-6

Depth of first part

-

47-102

— second part

-

16-242

Total depth

-

63-344

Height of grotto

-

3

Breadth of ditto

-■

3

Height of top of well from the level of the Nile

68-71

SECOND PYRAMID.

Distance between Great and Second

Pyramid

555 0 0

180

Base on the northern side

-

207-9

western side

-

210-0

Height

-

138-0

THIRD PYRAMID.
Base on the northern side
Height, about - - -

Angle of inclination less than 45°.

100-7
53

TEMPLE TO EASTWARD OF THIRD PYRAMID.

Length . _ _

Breadth . . _

Vestibule to the eastward

Width of vestibule - - _

Length of dyke from the entrance

Breadth of dyke - _ _

173

0

0

56-2

166

0

0

53-8

95

0

0

31

44

0

0

14-2

801

0

0

260

44

0

0

14-2

DR. CLARKE (1801)

Was at Gizeh on 2.3r(l of August, and bears ample testimony to
the luagnificence of tlie Pyramids.^ He found that the platform,

Mr. Hamilton was of the party.

APPENDIX. 281

on the top of the great one was thirty-two feet square, and that it
consisted of nine stones, each of which was nearly a ton in weight,
altliough they were much inferior in size to some of the blocks
used in other parts of the buildings. They were of a grey lime-
stone, rather more compact than that which the English masons
call '^ chmch ;" and, in common with other kinds oftlie same
stone, exhaled a foetid odour upon being struck with a hammer.
They appeared to have been quarried upon the spot, but several
blocks of a more compact variety were found scattered about the
base; and, though he did not himself observe any, were to be
seen, as he was informed, in the corners of the building, which
were put together with mortar, containing fragments of terra
cotta. He remarks, that the French had been very assiduous in
their researches ; that they had attempted to open the smallest
of the three Pyramids, and had left a considerable chasm^ in one
of its sides, as an everlasting testimony of their curiosity and
zeal ; and that, bad not a stop been put to their labour by the
landing of our army, " the interior of this mysterious monument
would have probably been now submitted to the inquiry which
had long been an object among literary men." The doctor and
his party measured the Pyramid ; but as he was not satisfied
with the result, he did not publish it, and contents himself with
stating, that the French found the height of the Great Pyramid to
be four hundred and forty-eight French feet. He then went up by
the mound of rubbish to the entrance, and after having examined
it, was of opinion that whoever opened the Pyramid must have
been previously informed of its construction, because its position
seemed to be " almost in the centre of one of its planes, instead of
being at the base ; " and, because no traces appeared of any other
excavations in search of it.^ He does not believe the Arabian
tradition, that the Pyramid was opened by Al Mamoon, a caliph
of Babylon, in the ninth century ; for Strabo must have known
of the entrance above eight centuries before the existence of
the caliph, as he has exactly described it, as well as the passage

^Tliis chasm was made by the Mameluc Beys, and not by the French; and if it
had been carried through the Pyramid, it would not, as has been proved, have led to
any discovery, for the passages and chambers are entirely excavations in the rock.
It is remarkable that no author has mentioned the excavation in the walled enclosure
at the northern front of this Pyramid.

• Dr. Clarke could not, of course, have been aware of the forced entrance formed
by the caliphs, nor of the excavations at the base, as they were concealed under the
mound of rubbibli-

282 APPENDIX.

leading to the sepulchral chamber ; and he remarks also, that
it must have been open even in the time of Herodotus, as he
speaks of subterraneous chambers, which must have been seen to
have been described. He conceives, therefore, that the interior
was accessible in the earliest ages, and that perhaps it had never
been completely closed up.^ He refers the reader to Greaves's
admeasurement, but observes, that the entrance inclined at an
angle of 26°, and that the bottom of the ascending passage was
closed up with blocks of granite, and that a forced communication
had been carried round them, which he entered. At the end of
this ascending passage (one hundred and ten feet in length) he
came to the well, which was, accoi'ding to Pliny, one hundred and
twenty-nine feet deep, and, according to Greaves, only twenty feet;
and he conjectures, that the difference between these statements
was occasioned by the indirect course of the shaft, as a large
stone, which was thrown into it, was for some time delayed by
the sinuosities of the channel, but at length fell to the bottom
with a loud and " splashing sound, as if it had been broken into
pieces," and had fallen into a reservoir of water of considerable
depth, which agrees with Pliny's assertion, that there was water
at the bottom of this well.^ He also states, that two or three
small ducts or channels, branching off to the east and west
from this passage, were observed when the well was examined ;
and as they are not described by Sandys, Greaves, Vansleb,
Pococke, Shaw, Niebuhr, JMaillet, Lucas, Norden, Savary, or any
author that he had consulted, he supposes they were made by the
French. Dr. Clarke and his party entered several of them, but
could not make any progress. They found in one a small square
apartment, about three feet in height, into which a quantity of
loose stones had been thrown, apparently in clearing out the
passage leading to it. These hollows appeared to be accidental,
and of little or no consequence.* He then proceeded by the hori-
zontal passage to the Queen's apartment, and mentions its in-
clined roof; and having returned towards the well, he ascended to
the King's Chamber. He did not perceive the white and polished

» He had not observed that llie passages have been stopped up with solid
masonry, and vviih a portcullis.

3 It is remarkable that Dr. Clarke did not know that the well had been repeat-
edly examined, and tliat the French had excavated in it,

* No such excavations exist at present, unless the grotto in the well, or part of the
forced passage made by the caliphs, are alludtd to; but neither of tliein answers
this description.

APPENDIX. 283

marble mentioned by Greaves in the great passage or gallery, nor
the pilasters^ mentioned by Pococke in the antechamber. lie
observes, that pilasters were a comparatively modern invention,
and that marble was not used by architects before the fifteenth
olympiad, seven hundred and twenty years before Christ.^ He
then entered the King's Chamber, and admired the wonderful
skill with which it was constructed. Six ranges of stone formed
the sides, which were twenty feet high ; its length was about
thirty-six feet, its width eighteen ; the ceiling was composed of
nine slabs. Near the western side was a sarcophagus of the
same granite^ as that of which the chamber was composed; its
external length was seven feet three inches and a half, its depth
three feet three inches and three quarters, and its breadth the
same. He then took a cursory view of the other Pyramids, but
has nothing to communicate respecting them but what would be
a repetition of what has been already related by other writers.
But he observed, when on the summit of the Great Pyramid,
that the Second had, near its vertex, the remains of a covering as
of a plating of stone, which had once invested all its four sides;
and he says, that by some this revetment was erroneously sup-
posed to have been marble. And he observed, also, that it was
surrounded by a paved court, with walls on the outside, in which
were places for doors or portals, and that it had likewise an ad-
vanced work or portico.^

* The pilasters were the grooves of the portcullis.

^ Under the term " marble," the antients appear to have included any hard
stone that would take a good polish.

^ Dr. Clarke states, that " this beautiful relic was entire when our troops were
landed in Egypt," and mentions, that it had been reverenced and left untouched by
all people and nations, till it was broken by the English soldiers and sailors. Now,
it is stated by M. Palerme, who travelled in 1581, that he brought away a piece of
it as a relic ; — "de la pierre de laquelle nous emportames un morceau par curiosite."
M. Thevenot, who travelled in 1655, also mentions that pieces had been broken off
with hammers to be made into seals; — "pour en faire des cachets." And
Mr. Melton, who travelled in 1661, mentions, that he took with him a hammer for
the express purpose of breaking off a piece of it, but that he did not succeed
in doing so, owing to the hardness of the stone. It is very probable that our people
may have injured this monument, as fools of all nations have, in other instances,
mutilated and destroyed the remains of antiquity ; but Dr. Clarke should have been
certain of the fact, before he preferred an exaggerated accusation against the British
army, and drawn an invidious and unjust comparison between them and the French
soldiery.

* The walls are rocks. The portico must be the Temple on the eastern side.

284 APPENDIX.

Dr. Clarke, in a subsequent chapter, in which he enters into
considerable detail, respecting the origin and purposes for which
the Pyramids were constructed, seems inclined to discard the
authority of the Greek historians, particularly as their origin was
unknown when the first Greek philosopher visited Egypt. He
adverts to the accounts of the Arabs, and to that of Manetho, as
preserved by Josephus ; and also to sacred history. He observes,
that the Jews were remarkably connected with Egypt in general,
and especially with the Pyramids, although their labours were
chiefly employed upon brick constructions ; and seems disposed
to conclude that the Great Pyramid was the tomb of Joseph, and
that it was opened at the exodus that his bones might be carried
up to Judea, according to the oath he had required from his
brothers. He remarks the general resemblance which exists
between the Pyramids, as sepulchral monuments, and tumuli,
and conceives that the Soros and Stela are included in their form.
He afterwards alludes at some length to the Pyramids discovered
in Mexico and in South America.

MR. HAMILTON (1801)

Travelled in Egypt in 1801. He does not profess to enter into
a detailed account respecting the Pyramids, but refers to the
accounts of Pococke, of Denon, and of former travellers. He
gives the following admeasurements from M. INouet's report to
the Institute, and also from his own observation. Base about
seven hundred and fifty feet each way.

Length of the Pyramid - - _

Diagonal of the base

Length of the edge in its present" state

Length of do. when entire

Length of the platform at the top

Height of the Pyramid in its present state

Height of do. when entire

Length of the inchned side

Angle which the edge forms with the diagonal, 41° 42' 20".

Angle which the edge forms with the base, 58° 2' 20''.

Inclination of the sides towards the plane of the horizon, 51° 23' 46".

]ch feet.

Inches.

716

3

1013

0

636

1

676

8

42

8

421

8

448

6

574

1

English feet.

Inches,

34

9

17

4

22

0

20

0

17

0

15

0

' 7

6

3

6

3

6

0

6

APPENDIX. 285

The following measures were taken from his own obser-
vations ;

Length of the Chamber where is the Sarcophagus

Breadth of do. - _ _

Height - - - -

Length of the Lower Chamber

Breadth of do. . - -

Height of do. _ _ .

Length of the Sarcophagus

Breadth of do.

Height of do. - _ -

Thickness of sides _ . _

Mr. Hamilton considers that the Pyramids were tombs, and
that the granite chest was a sarcophagus ; but that, whatever
might have been its destination, it is evident that the build-
ing was constructed for the express purpose of containing it,
from its peculiar situation within the building, and also from the
exact correspondence of its dimensions with those of the several
passages and doorways. He can scarcely believe that any of
these vast buildings, particularly the large one, could have been
begun and finished in one reign.

He remarks, that the Second Pyramid is smaller than the great
one ; and that the differences of forty feet in its height, mentioned
by Herodotus, and of seventy-five feet in its base, stated by Dio-
dorus Siculus, appear to be near the truth. He then adverts to
the difficulty which exists, in the present state of these monu-
ments, to account for the canal by which the waters of the Nile
were said to have been introduced ; and expresses his belief, that
the whole of the revetment of the Second Pyramid was not
entirely completed.

He found that the base of the Third Pyramid was three hundred
feet, and that it was one hundred and fifty-six feet in height ; and
observed, that it retained several blocks of the Ethiopian stone,
with which, according to Diodorus and Herodotus, it was reveted
half way up to the summit. He remarks, that it had never been
satisfactorily ascertained whether the Pyramids in general were
entirely built upon the rock, or round one or more detached
hills ; and observes, that the account given by Mr. Bruce of
fragments of rock existing in the roof of the large gallery, in the
Great Pyramid, is a mistake, and that the whole of the roof is
composed of masonry. He then takes notice of the three smaller

286 APPENDIX.

Pyramids to the south of the Third, in which, according to Dio-
dorus, were deposited the bodies of the wives of Chemmis, Che-
phren, and Mycerinus ; and afterwards of the ruins on the eastern
fronts of the Second and Third Pyramids, which, he observes,
did not resemble the temples in Upper Egypt. He concludes
with several observations respecting the Sphinx.

DR. WHITMAN (1801)

Observes, that the Pyramids of Gizeh are situated about ten miles
to the south-west of Cairo, upon elevated and rocky ground,
which is covered with white sand, and forms the boundary of
the Lybian mountains ; and that their sides are opposite the four
cardinal points. He remarks, that the base of the Great Pyramid
had had different lengths assigned to it — from six hundred to
eight hundred English feet; — but that the French had ascer-
tained that the length of it was seven hundred feet, and the
height of the building six hundred feet. He found that the
First and Second Pyramids were nearly of the same size ; and that
the Third, although comparatively small, was also an enormous
structure, and it appeared to have been cased with red granite and
porphyry, as immense blocks of those stones were scattered around
the base. From the deep grooves which he had observed on
several of these blocks, he was led to believe " that they had
been originally connected together by metallic hoops or fastenings,
which having been corroded by time, by the occasional moisture
of the atmosphere, and by other causes, the blocks had been set
at liberty, and had successively fallen to the ground."^ The other
Pyramids were built of calcareous blocks, of different qualities
and textures. He did not personally examine the interior of the
Great Pyramid, but collected the following particulars from his
companions ; who informed him, that above the great chamber,
in which the sarcophagus or coffin is deposited, there is a
smaller apartment, about eighteen feet in length ; and that the
passage from the entrance is more than one hundred feet in
length, the ascending nearly of the same extent, and the great

" These groovings have apparently been caused by vvedgei in splitting the blocks
in order to prepare them for removiil.

Feet.

Inches,

34

4

17

0^

6

6

3

^2

0

6

2

n

2

8

APPENDIX. 287

gallery one hundred and fifty feet long. The following admea-
surements were taken by a British officer of engineers : —

Great Chamber.

Length - - _

Breadth - - >

Sarcophagus.

Length _ _ .

Height - _ _

Thickness of stone

Width within side

Depth, ditto

He does not believe that any of the Pyramids have been
" finished according to the original design ;" and he adds, " that
the lower parts or foundations interiorly seem to have been formed
of the incrustations of the rocky surface, which is perceptible in
several places in the interior." He then states, " that the Sphinx
had been hewn out of the solid rock," and that " it was supported
by several large blocks of stone, which formed the lower part of
the bust, and which had been somewhat decayed by time ; " that
" it was formerly conjectured that the head of the Sphinx was con-
nected with a body of proportionate dimensions, but the French,
by digging away the sand round its foundations, had demonstrated
the erroneousness of this opinion. "i He takes notice of the various
ruins, and of the enormous masses with which they have been
constructed ; and says, that in one of them a capacious and deep
well had been found, which was entirely dry. Several of his party
ascended the summit of the Great Pyramid at the eastern angle,
and conjectured that the ranges of stones were about two hun-
dred, varying from two feet and a half to three feet in length.

DR. WILSON (1805),
In his " History of Egypt," adverts to the Pyramids of Gizeli,

• The French are not supposed to have made any considerable excavations or
discoveries about the Sphinx, which was opened by Mr. Salt and M. Cavigiia in
1817; but it appears that when Ur. VVliitmaii saw it, some of tlie sand liad been re-
moved, as he describes the substructure, aUhough he did not perceive the body of
the image.

288 APPENDIX.

and gives the following dimensions of the Great Pyramid, which
were taken by Mr. Browne : —

Great Chamber.

Length _ - _

Breadth _ _ -

Sarcophagus.

Length _ _ _

Breadth _ _ .

Depth within - - -

Thickness - _ _

First Passage (descending).

Length - - - 105 1

Small Chamber.

Length - - - 18 9

Breadth - - - 17 1

Antechamber.

Length - - - 7 5

Main Gallery.

Upper part _ . _

Lower part
Passage to Inferior Chamber

Feet.

Inches.

34

1

17

2

7

8

3

2

2

101

0

6

150

0

148

0

109

I

M. CAVIGLIA (1817).

The following account of M. Caviglia's operations is taken from
Mr. Salt's letters, and from some remarks upon them in the nine-
teenth volume of the " Quarterly Review." M. Caviglia, having
made an arrangement with MM. Kabitziet and Fuentes, pro-
ceeded to Gizeh, in January 1817, and began with the examin-
ation of the well in the Great Pyramid. ^ He descended by means
of a rope to the bottom of the first shaft, twenty feet deep, when
the passage, which inclined towards the south, was nearly filled

° The editor of Mr. Salt's papers here remarks, that Mr. Salt did not appear to
have been aware that, in the year 1763, Mr. Davison had descended into the well,
and had given an accnrate description of it. And I may add, that it had been pre-
viously explored by a Capuchin Monk, Elzear, in 1652; by a Scotch gentleman; by
others who travelled with Thevenot, in 1655 ; and also by Mr. Wood, as well as
by the French in 1800, wlio contrived at that time to clear a considerable part of the
shaft.

APPENDIX. 289

up by some large stones, which he had great difficulty in rcmov-
iug. Kabitziet having gone down to his assistance, the blocks
were at length cleared out, and he was lowered down about four-
teen feet, when the passage was found to be lined with masonry,
and to open into a grotto, seventeen feet in diameter and four feet
in height. M. Kabitziet, being replaced by M. Fucntes, came
down to the grotto, and M. Caviglia continued his descent with the
help of the rope. He found that the masonry continued to the
same distance below the grotto as it did above ; that the channel
descended with a sharp incline to the south ; and that a succession
of holes had been cut in the sides to facilitate the passage. He
states, that having gone down above a hundred feet further, the
lamj) which he carried with him would scarcely burn; and that,
at the depth of one hundred and twenty-five feet, he found tlie
shaft entirely stopped up witli stones and rubbish, and conse-
quently returned. Soon after this affair, M. Fuentes gave up the
undertaking ; but M. Kabitziet, although unable to afford per-
sonal assistance, agreed to pay half of the expenses of any future
operations which M. Caviglia should attempt. That gentleman,
therefore, again went to the Pyramid, and proceeded with the
assistance of some Arabs to draw up the sand and rubbish from
the bottom of the well. In consequence, however, of its confined
situation and of the depth of the shaft, the Arabs would not work,
and he was obliged to apply for a firman to enforce their at-
tendance. But, notwithstanding all his exertions, the undertaking
was at last found impracticable, from want of a proper circulation
IX of air, and was abandoned.

Having, therefore, given up the well, he began to clear out the
entrance-passage, from the place where it was generally su))posed
to terminate, namely, where it is connected by the forced com-
munication wnth the ascending passage;^ and in doing so unex-
pectedly effected his former purpose respecting the well : for, after
having advanced one hundred and fifty feet, a doorway was dis-
covered, and the smell of the sidphur perceived which had been
burnt in the well to purify the air ; a bat flew out, and the cords
and baskets left in it during his former operations were found ; and
thus a free circulation of air was restored by means of the well,
which communicated with the upper and lower passages. Mr.
Salt and Mr. Briggs then joined in the undertaking. On clearing

' This bad been partially done by Mr. Davison, to ibe lenjlh of one hundred
and thirty-one feet.

VOL. II. • U

290 APPENDIX.

more of the passage, a wide fissure was discovered, which appeared
to be a continuation of one that had been seen in the well. The
passage is then said to have become narrower, and to have con-
tinued in a horizontal direction for twenty-eight feet, containing,
on its western side, a recess five feet long and three feet deep, which,
in Mr. Salt's opinion, corresponded with that near the King's
Chamber. The passage soon after entered, at the north-eastern
angle, a chamber, with a flat ceiling, forty-six feet long, and twenty-
seven broad. The room was nearly filled with stones and rubbish,
and rain-water had occasionally flowed into itfrom the entrance, and
upon examination, when cleared out, it was found to be unfinished.
Opposite the entrance a low horizontal passage^ continued, in a
direct line, to the distance of fifty-four feet, when it abruptly ended
in the rock. Some rough characters had been formed with the
smoke of a candle upon the roof, but were nearly illegible ; they
prove, however, that this chamber was open in the time of the

Romans. Mr. Salt considered that the
chamber had been originally finished,
and that its imperfect condition was
the effect of violence ; he was also in
hopes that it would have led to the dis-
covery of the tomb, described by Hero-
dotus to have been surrounded by the
waters of the Nile, but by examination,
and by referring to the admeasure-
ments taken by the French, he found
that the Nile, at its height, was thirty
feet lower than the floor of the cham-
ber. An excavation was discovered near the middle of the apart-
ment, which seemed to be the beginning of a shaft. Mr. Salt was
of opinion, that in the time of Strabo this chamber was the only
one open,"* and that the upper ascending passage had not then
been discovered ; and he was confirmed in this idea by Pliny's
account of an excavation in this Pyramid, eighty-six cubits below
the base, which very nearly agreed with the depth of the chamber.
He remarks, that the discovery of the upper passages, and of
the tomb, appeared to have been made by Almamoum, son of
Haroun el Raschid, and that the state of the Pyramids coincided
with the account given by Arabian historians of that discovery.
M. Caviglia then cleared out the Queen's Chamber, in the hope

* This opinion was stated by Dr. Shaw in 1721.

APPENDIX. 291

of finding a sarcophagus, and, also, of successfully continuing an
excavation which had been made to the distance of forty feet under
the niche in that apartment. Nothing, however, was discovered
excepting the names of " Paisley" and " Munro " inscribed at
the end of it. Mr. Davison's Chamber was next explored, and it
was supposed to be of larger dimensions, in length and breadth,
th{;n the King's Chamber below it, although its height was not
more than four feet. The singular dimensions of this apartment,
and the circumstance of its having been highly adorned with
polished granite, led Mr. Salt to expect some further discovery,
hnt a most rigid examination ended in disappointment.^

Mr. Salt then describes M. Caviglia's labours at the tombs
adjacent to the ^Pyramids, many of which appear to have been
cleared out, and very extensive excavations to have been made
in every direction. He adverts to the chambers excavated in tlie
rock to the westward of the Second Pyramid, and takes notice of
the one in which the roof is carved in imitation of the trunks of
date-trees, and also of the remarkable hieroglyphics on the face
of the rock to the north of that Pyramid. He then mentions the
works carried on at the Sphinx, and says, that after meeting with
considerable success, M. Caviglia, having experienced a severe
attack of ophthalmia, returned to Alexandria, as, according to
Mr. Salt, he was master of a merchant vessel that traded in the
Mediterranean under the British flag.

In addition to the above details it may be added that the " Quar-
terly Review," in the nineteenth volume, in alluding to the proba-
bility that the inclined passages in the Pyramids were intended
for astronomical observation, from the uniformity in their angles,
and from their northern positions,^ quotes a memorandum of

* "■ It is evident from the above passage, that Mr. Salt, at the time of his writing-
it, must have known of Mr. Walpole's recent publication; and yet it is equally-
certain, that in the early part of his memoir he attributed the discovery of the well to
M. Caviglia instead of Mr. Davison, who had explored it fifty-four years before,
which seems to have been a mistake that he afterwards omitted to correct." — Bi/ the
Editor of" Hall's Life of Salt."

6 The passage in the " Quarterly" is as follows:—" In all the Pyramids that have
been opened, which at Gizeh and Saccara amount at least to six, the entrance has
been found at or near the centre in the northern face, and the passage thence to pro-
ceed invariably in a slanting direction downwards ; the angle of inclination being
always the same. Greaves, in his ' Pyramidographia,' makes that of Cheops 26°,
and Caviglia, 27°; which, he says, is common to all the sloping passages within the
Pyramid of Cheops. He found the same angle on opening one of the small Pyramids
to the south of that of Mycerinus, at the end of the passage of which were two

292 APPENDIX.

M. Caviglia in support of this opinion'' — " One ceases to see the
polar star at the spot whence the main passage ceases to continue
in the same inclination, and where one begins to mount ;" and
observes, that from this expression it might be supposed that M.
Caviglia had actually seen the polar star when at the bottom of the
main passage, and that, in that case, its true angle had not been
ascertained. The polar star has been seen from this passage, but
the fact that these passages were filled up with solid masonry, their
number, and various other circumstances, appear inconsistent with
many of the conclusions arrived at upon this subject.

M. Caviglia is also said to have, to a certain degree, determined
the long-disputed point, bow far the living rock had been made an
auxiliary in the construction of these buildings ; and he states that
it appears externally at the north-eastern angle, also in the main
passage, and again close to the mouth of the well about eighty
feet above the base. An account is then given of M. Caviglia's
operations at the Sphinx, to which are added several interesting
remarks and quotations from various authors, which I do not
think it necessary to insert.

In a letter of the 21st September, 1818, addressed to Mr.
Hamilton, he encloses the folloNving admeasurements of the Great
Pyramid, together with these observations. He considers that the
external form of the building expresses the pentagramme nViTni,
which, he is also of opinion, is expressed by the five perpendi-
cular grooves,*^ which are cut over the entrance into the King's

Chamber.

Eug. ft. In.

Square of the base _ _ - _ 756 0

The height of two sides - - - 678 0

Angle of the sides with the base, 58°

Angle of the summit, 64°

chambers leading one out of the other, both empty. Belzoni estimates the sloping
passages of the Pyramid of Cephrenes at 26°."

It is to be remarked, that tiie angle of the entrance passage in the Great Pyramid
is 26°-41, and that of the upper passage, 26°1 8; that the entrance into the Second
Pyramid is25°-55,and that in the three to the south of the Third, the entrances incline
27 ,27°12,and30°. M. Caviglia's description doesnotdistinguish to which he alludes.

^ This passage is in a letter addressed by M. Caviglia to Mr. Hamilton, in
which lie states the entrance angle of the inclined entries to be 27°, and adds," que
1 on cesse de voir I'etoile poiaire oij, avant qu'on eusse bouche le chemin, Ton cessoit
de descendre pour monter."

^ These grooves are four in number, and appear to have been made for the
purpose of lowering the stone with which the passages to the King's Chamber were
closed up.

APPENDIX. 293

Height of the entrance from the base

Width of entrance-passage

Height of entrance-passage _ _ _

Length from the entrance to the granite blocks in the

ascending passage _ _ _

From the granite blocks to the beginning of the gallery
Height of the gallery . . _

Breadth of the lower part of it
Breadth of the higher part of it
The length of it is the same as that of the passage to

the King's Chamber . . _

Height of the passage leading to the King's Chamber
Width of it

Height of the Sarcophagus
Width

Length - - - -

Thickness _ . _ _

Length of the Chamber - - -

Width

Height ... -

Length of passage to the Queen's Chamber
Height of the Queen's Chamber

Width _ . - .

Length _ _ . _

Depth of the well to a block of granite that had fallen

into it _ _ . -

Size of the entrance of the well

Depth of the well _ _ . -

Its width, from 1 foot 6 inches to 2 feet 6 inches.
Height of the rock, in which the well is formed, 80

feet above the base of the Pyramid.
The length of the descending passage in a right line

with that of the entrance - - -

From the beginning, to the beginning of the rock
From the beginning of the rock to the well
From the well to the horizontal passage
Length of the horizontal passage
Length of the subterraneous chamber
Breadth of it
Height from 12 feet to 5 feet 6 inches.
Length of passage to the southward - - 52 0

He says, that in the subterraneous chamber there is a cistern,
with excavations like niches, and in them pedestals. He remarks,

Eng. ft.

In

51

0

3

6

4

1

73

0

118

0

30

0

7

0

4

0

152

0

3

7

3

5

3

6

3

3

7

6

0

6

35

6

17

3

18

9

126

0

15

9

17

2

19

0

38

0

2

5

192

0

230

0

27

6

178

0

22

0

28

0

44

9

26

6

294 APPENDIX.

that Davison's Chamber is about the same size as the King's,
but that the height is irregular, and does not exceed three feet
six inches ; and that it is entered by a small hole at the upper end
of the gallery. He adds, "Si la construction exterieure de ce
monument explique la valeur de ce pentagramme m^ni, I'in-
terieur fait connaitre les precautions que prenoient les pretres
Egyptians pour concentrer le domaine de la verite, en moduler
la propagation, et en arreter la trop dangereuse dispersion.
Comme ce qu'il y a de decouvert dans ce monument un auteur
I'appelle terra sepulcri, e'est-a-ceux qui connaissent le veritable
prix des choses, a en decouvrir I'autre partie, que le meme auteur
appelle terra viventium."

M. BELZONI (1817).

M. Belzoni and Mr. Beechey visited the Pyramids in company
with Mr. Salt and Mr. Briggs, when M. Caviglia was employed
under those gentlemen, and had previously, with the assistance of
M. Kabitziet (a young man in the employment of Mr. Boghos),
examined the interior of the well.

M. Belzoni states that, during that operation, M. Caviglia found,
at the depth of thirty-eight feet, the shaft stopped up by four large
stones, and that three of them being removed, the passage became
practicable ; that at the depth of twenty-one feet below these stones,
a grotto, seventeen feet long and four feet high, was discovered ;
that from a platform, seven feet below it, the shaft descended two
hundred feet, when it was stopped up with stones and sand ; and
that some Arabs were then employed to clear it out, but from
want of air were obliged to leave off. M. Caviglia, he states, then
turned his attention to another quarter, and began to clear out
the first passage of the Pyramid ; and, finding that it continued
at the same angle in a right line, he went on with the excavation
of it, till he arrived at the entrance into the bottom of the well,
and afterwards cleared the rest of the inclined passage, till he
discovered the subterraneous chamber.

M. Belzoni then mentioned M. Caviglia's excavations in the
different tombs, and those at the Sphinx, where a small temple
was discovered, between the paws of the image, and a large tablet
of granite, adorned with hieroglyphics, figures of sphinxes, &c.,
on its breast.

APPENDIX. 295

Tlie image of a lion was also found before the temple ; a stair-
case of thirty-two steps, and at the bottom an altar witli a Greek
inscription, of the time of the Ptolemies ; on each side of the altar
a broken figure of a sphinx ; likewise, at the distance of forty-five
feet, another altar, with an inscription to Septimius Severus, and
near it a Greek inscription to Antoninus.

He states, that from the base of the temple to the top of the
head was sixty-five feet ; from the breast to the extremity of the
paws in front, fifty-seven feet ; and that the height of the paws
was eight feet.

He adds, that M. Caviglia opened several tombs and mummy-
pits, and also some of the smaller pyramids ; and that, at the
suggestion of Mr. Briggs to follow a certain direction, he suc-
ceeded in finding the entrance into one of them, but it appears
that it was so decayed in the interior, that he could advance only
a few feet in it."^

M. Belzoni was invited by Mr. Salt to join M. Caviglia in
these operations, but he did not choose to interfere with that
gentleman's researches.

Before his journey into Upper Egypt, however, he visited the
Pyramids, in company with two other persons from Europe, and,
whilst his companions went into the Great Pyramid, he examined
the Second ; and, notwithstanding the various attempts made by
numerous travellers, particularly by the great body of French
savajis, to penetrate into the interior, and, notwithstanding, also,
the late researches made by Mr. Salt and M. Caviglia, he enter-
tained hopes of success. Upon his return, therefore, from Thebes,
he again examined the Pyramid minutely on every side, and
found, upon the northern, three marks, which encouraged him to
search for an entrance.^ He was also greatly encouraged in the
attempt, by observing that the accumulation of rubbish at the
northern front was higher than the position of the entrance in the
Great Pyramid ; and he therefore concluded that a passage was
concealed beneath it.

He examined it again the next day, and having obtained a
firmaun, immediately commenced operations. One party was em-
ployed in excavating between the Temple and the eastern side of
the Pyramid ; and another in the centre of the northern front,
where he observed the heap of rubbish was not so solid as in the

^ This description does not apply to any of the smaller pyramids that were
opened in 1837.

' See Athanasi's account of this operation.

296 APPENDIX. '

Other parts. He went on for several days without much apparent
success. On the eastern side he cleared down to the solid rock,
and traced a pavement from the Pyramid to the Temple, which, in
his opinion, surrounded it ; and he is of opinion that the Sphinx,
the Temple, and the Pyramid, were all erected at the same time,
since they are all in one line, and appear of equal antiquity. On
the northern side (after a great deal of labour in clearing away
the rubbish, by which it was concealed), he came to the forced
passage in the centre of that face of the Pyramid. Although he
perceived that it was evidently a forced, and not the real entrance
into the Pyramid, he worked in it for a few days, but Avas obliged
to desist from the looseness of its construction. Being foiled in
this instance, he again examined the entrance into the Great
Pyramid, and observed that it was to the eastward of the centre ;
he therefore renewed his attempts at the Second, at about thirty
feet to the eastward of his former excavation; and, after removing
a vast quantity of stone, he uncovered the three large masses of
granite that form the entrance. The passage was four feet high,
three feet six inches wide, and descended at an angle of 26° to
the len2;th of one hundred and four feet five inches. It was almost
full of large stones and rubbish ; and at the bottom there was a
portcullis, which, after much trouble, he raised sufficiently high
to allow him to pass. He entered with the Chevalier Frediani
into a horizontal passage, twenty-two feet seven inches long, in-
cluding a space of six feet eleven inches near the portcullis. He
then arrived at a chasm, made by a descending shaft, running
northward, immediately beneath the other, and having passed it,
proceeded in a continuation of.the horizontal passage, five feet
eleven inches high, and three feet six inches wide, running in a
rio-ht line from the original entrance towards the centre of the
Pyramid. The passage was an excavation, and the walls were
covered with arborizations of nitre ; and the flaws in the rocks
were closed with masonry. It led to a chamber which had a
painted ceiling, and contained at the western end a sarcophagus
sunk in the pavement. The apartment was forty-six feet three
inches long, sixteen feet three inches wide, and twenty-three feet
six inches high, and had been formed out of the rock, excepting
the roof, which was composed of large blocks of calcareous stone
that met in the centre, and had the same slope as the Pyramid
itself. The sarcophagus was of granite and without any inscription,
and was eight feet long, three feet six inches wide, and two feet three
inches deep in the inside. "The lid had been broken off at the

APPENDIX. 297

side, so that the sarcophagus was half open ; within were some
earth and stones ; hut he did not observe the bones among the rub-
bish till the next day, as his attention was principally bent in search
of some inscription that would throw light on the subject of the
Pyramid." Many scrawls, executed with charcoal, were to be
perceived ; and on the west side of the chamber was an inscrip-
tion in Arabic,- of which the following is a translation by M.
Salame : — " The master Mohammed Achmed Lapicide, has
opened them, and the Master Othman attended this (opening),
and the King Alij Mohamed at first (from the beginning) to the
closing up,"

He found under one of the blocks that had been removed
"something like the thick part of a hatchet, but so rusty that it
had lost its shape." He observed " on the northern and southern
sides (of the chamber) two holes, ^ which are in a horizontal
direction, like those that are seen in the First Pyramid, but
higher up."

He then examined the inclined passage, returning to the
northward, beneath the one by which he entered. It descended
for forty-eight feet six inches, and afterwards continued in a hori-
zontal direction fifty-five feet. About half-way in the horizontal
passage, there was a recess, in the eastern side, eleven feet long
and six feet deep ; and on the western side, opposite to it, another
passage twenty-two feet long, branched off at right angles, with a
descent of 26°, to a chamber thirty-two feet long, nine feet nine
inches wide, and eight feet six inches high ; in which were many
small blocks of stone, some not more than two feet in length.
This room had a roof of the same form as that of the upper
chamber, although it was entirely an excavation. He perceived,
upon the walls and roof, some imperfect inscriptions, which he
supposed were Coptic. Returning from tliis apartment into the
horizontal passage, he proceeded towards the north, till he came
to a portcullis of granite, which had been taken down, whence
the passage ascended for the length of forty-seven feet six inches.
It had been partially cleared of the masonry with which it had
been entirely filled, and evidently shewed that the Pyramid had
had two entrances. The following day M. Pieri, of the house of

^ This inscription is no longer visible, but the following remains in the chamber
— « Scoperta da G. Belzoni, 2 Mar., 1818."

^ The holes go in for a very small distance, and two others appear to iiave been
marked out in red lines below them.

298 APPENDIX.

Brings and Walnias, found a piece of bone in the f3arcophagus ; and
upon further investigation, other pieces were found, which having
been carried to London, proved to be those of a bull ; and it was
therefore supposed that the sarcophagus was intended to contain
the bones of that animal, although it was not larger than was
necessary for the reception of the wooden cases in which em-
balmed human bodies were antiently placed.

As the base of this Pyramid had been levelled by cutting
away the rock on the northern and western sides, and as there
are many extensive quarries in the neighbourhood, he concludes
that the Pyramids were built with stones cut upon the spot, and
also that they were tombs. The causeways, he sujiposes, were
for the accommodation of visitors, particularly at High Nile.
He gives the following dimensions of the Second Pyramid: —

Feet.
Base - - - - - 684

Inclined height _ - _ 568

Perpendicular _ _ _ - 456

Coating from the apex to the place where it ends - 140

He does not believe that any inference can be drawn respect-
ing the age of the Pyramids, from the circumstance that hiero-
glyphics have not been found in or upon them, or that the First
Pyramid had been cased, or that the exterior of the Second was
completely finished, because stones applicable to that purpose have
not been found near them.

With respect to the Third Pyramid, he observes, that an
attempt had been made to penetrate the eastern side, but that
he commenced his labours on the northern, " and after moving
a great quantity of materials," he " found a considerable accumu-
lation of enormous blocks of granite, which had evidently formed
the coating : proceeding yet lower," as he " cleared away the rub-
bish," he " found that part of the coating still remained in its
place, down to the base. The removal of these blocks would
evidently have brought" him " to the entrance into the Pyra-
mid, but it required more money and time than" he " could
spare."*

He also adds as follows : — "The consul, Mr. Salt, would have
been kind enough to have paid all the expenses I had incurred in

•* M. Belzoni was right in his conjecture, as subsequent examination has shewn.

APPENDIX. 299

opening the Pyramids, but this I positively refused, as I thought
it not fair and right that he should pay for what he had nothing
to do with."*

SIGNORE ATHANASI (1817)

Appears to have been employed by Mr. Salt as interpreter, and
afterwards to have been engaged with M. Belzoni at the Second
Pyramid. The operations, he says, were first begun at all the
four sides of the building, but during M. Belzoni's occasional
absence at Cairo, he (Signore Athanasi) employed the whole of
the people on the northern side, because he had observed that the
entrance was on the northern front of the Great Pyramid ; and,
he adds, that M. Belzoni, on his return, approved of the arrange-
ment. He then describes the great difficulties he had to contend
with in removing: the largje blocks and the vast accumulation of
materials with which the front of the Pyramid was encumbered ;
and states, that on the fifteenth day of their operations, when M.
Belzoni was again absent (who, he says, remained at Cairo for six
days at a time), one of the granite blocks forming the entrance
•was discovered,^ of which he gave immediate information to M.
Belzoni, who returned in consequence to Gizeh. He then says,
that the passage was so full of earth and sand, that it was three
days before they arrived at the portcullis : that the space beneath
it was too small to admit M. Belzoni, and that an Arab (named
Argian) first entered, and his accounts not being sufficiently explicit,
that he (Sig. Athanasi) then contrived to get in, examined the
chamber, and the sarcophagus, and saw the Arabic characters, of
which he informed M. Belzoni. The portcullis was at length raised
by levers to a sufficient height to admit M. Belzoni, who entered
and took a plan of the apartment. M. Athanasi further states,
that Mr. Salt returned in a few days after this discovery had been
efiected, from Upper Egypt, when M. Belzoni informed him that
the work had been executed under a firman obtained in his own
name. Signore Athanasi, however, states that he obtained the
firman from the Kiayah Bey, in his capacity of dragoman to
Mr. Salt,^ and that these operations were made with money

* See Sig. Athaiiasi's statement.

® See M. Belzoni's account.

' He gives a curious account of the manner in which the firman was obtained.

300 APPENDIX.

advanced by Mr. Salt's treasurer, which, after the Pyramid was
opened, M. Belzoni pretended to repay, saying that he had
received it only as a loan. Signore Athanasi adds, " I, on the
contrary, maintain that M. Belzoni would never have been able
to have struck a single axe into the ground about the Pyramid,
without the name of Mr. Salt ; and that without the express order
from the latter to his treasurer to supply us with money for the
expenses, we could never have thought of attempting such an
undertaking."

DR. RICHARDSON (1817),

In an account of his visit to the Great Pyramid, in company with
the Earl and Countess of Belmore, Mr. Salt, &c. &c., says, that
the base was about seven hundred feet; that the entrance-
passage, three and a half feet square, descended at an angle
of about 27° ; that it was lined with polished blocks of red gra-
nite ; and that cavities had been cut in the floor in order to afford
a firm footing to a person descending, but that this appeared
to have been a comparatively modern operation, as the cavities
were not equally polished with the rest of the surface. After
having descended about ninety-two feet, he entered a forced pass-
age to the right, and came to a perpendicular block, eight or
nine feet in height, which he surmounted, and ascended, by a
passage about five feet high, for the length of one hundred feet,
when he passed the well, on the right hand, in a recess about three
feet wide, and afterwards proceeded, by a narrow passage about
one hundred feet long, to the Queen's Chamber. This apartment
contained a niche at the north-eastern corner,^ and was seventeen
feet long, fourteen feet wide, and twelve in height to the lower
part of the ceiling, which was formed in a ridge. He then
ascended to the King's Chamber, and says, that on each side of
the gallery leading to it there was an abutment of a triangular
shape, with the broad side buttressing against a breast-wall in
front, and falling down to the floor in the form of an inclined

^ This appears to be a mistake. The niche is on the eastern side, but towards
the south-western corner of the room.

APPENDIX. 301

plane, and tliat tlie edge of this inclined plane was fourteen
inches broad. He supposed that the perpendicular height of this
gallery was about tvvcnty-six feet, and its length about one hun-
dred and twenty. Proceeding onwards from the top of this
ascent, he entered, by a passage about twenty-four feet long, the
King's Chamber, which was thirty-seven feet three inches long,
seventeen feet two inches wide, and about twenty high. It was
composed of highly polished masses of red granite, that reached
from the floor to the ceiling,9 which was formed of nine large
flat blocks of the same material, extending from wall to wall.
Towards the western end of this apartment, a sarcophagus of red
granite had been sunk in the pavement, which had been par-
tially removed in order to examine a small apartment beneath
it. The length of the sarcophagus was seven feet six inches, the
depth three feet three inches and a half, the breadth three feet
three ; and its interior dimensions proved that mankind were
formerly of the same stature as they are at present. It was
highly polished, but without hieroglyphics, sculpture, or orna-
ment of any description ; nor did he observe any in the chamber
or in the Pyramid. The sarcophagus had not any lid, and con-
tained merely a small quantity of dust, and a few pieces of broken
stone. He was of opinion that it had been introduced into the
chamber before the building was finished, although he perceived
that its dimensions exactly corresponded with those of the pass-
ages. He observed a small tunnel at the south-western corner
of the chamber, which sloped upwards as if to communicate with
the external air ; and he says, that round the sides of the chamber,
at the bottom of the granite flags with which the walls are lined,
a small groove, about ten inches wide, had been left, apparently for
the insertion of the stones, and had not afterwards been filled up.
He concluded that, as this chamber did not extend beyond the
centre of the Pyramid, a passage might be concealed by one of
the stones that formed the walls, and that it might lead to other
apartments. He did not enter Davison's Chamber, but con-
cluded, from what he had heard, that it had been formed to
relieve the ceiling of the King's from the superincumbent weight
of the building ; and that, as it had a regular entrance, it was
probably also intended to answer some other purpose. In de-
scending to the subterraneous chamber, he passed the bottom of

" Tliis account shews the excellence of the masonry. The blocks are in hori-
zontal courses.

302 APPENDIX.

the well, and afterwards arrived at the end of the Inclined pass-
age, where he could perceive the open air at the entrance ; and
he observed, that at night the polar star might be distinctly seen
from this point. The passage then became horizontal for twenty-
eight feet, and entered a cliamber, sixty-six feet long, twenty-seven
feet wide, and between twelve and fourteen feet high, which was
supposed to be exactly under the centre of the Pyramid, and con-
siderably lower tha,n its base. It appeared to be unfinished. He
then mentions the passage to the southwards ; and another, forty
feet long, which proceeded from a species of arch in the eastern
side of the Queen's Chamber. ^ He did not examine these pass-
ages himself; but, without the most positive and undoubted
authority to the contrary, he is inclined to believe that they con-
tinued on, and ultimately communicated with the open air, and
were intended for secret communications. The chamber, although
recently opened by M. Caviglia, appeared to have been frequently
visited in former times, as it was covered with smoke, and as
some Roman characters had been written on the ceiling with the
smoke of a candle. It appeared to the author to have been
alluded to by antient historians, but it did not answer the descrip-
tion of Herodotus. Dr. Richardson considered that this apart-
ment must have been of importance, from its great dimensions and
from its form, and also from the care that had been taken in con-
structing the passage, which he observed was lined with finely
polished slabs of syenite, behind which, he conceives, other
communications may exist. He concludes, as all the chambers
already known (with the exception of the subterraneous apart-
ment) are on the west of the entrance-passage, that the other
three spaces have their chambers also ; and he is surprised that
no attempt has been made to discover a passage entering from
the southern, eastern, or western sides of the edifice, particularly
on the southern, where a door might be concealed under the rub-
bish, which a careful examination would discover. He conceives
also, that the small tunnel from the King's Chamber may com-
municate with other chambers, or with the open air. He does
not believe that the Pyramids were intended for astronomical
purposes, because the passages were closed up with masonry, and

* There are many inaccuracies in this narrative. The passage said to pass under
an arch is a mistake. No such communication exists. In Mr. Salt's manuscript,
the excavation under the niche in the Queen's Chamber is said to have been cleared
out by M. Caviglia, and part of this account must have been copied from it.

APPENDIX. 303

could not therefore have been used for that purpose ; and because
in all of them the passages are from the north, although there
are objects equally worthy of observation in other jjarts of the
heavens. He says, that the well was one hundred and fifty feet
deep, and about three feet wide ; and that it was furnished with
holes on the sides to enable people to pass through it.

After having examined the interior, he ascended the outside
of the Pyramid (at the north-eastern angle), and in doing so,
observed on the eastern side a perpendicular part about four feet
wide and six feet high, which appeared to conceal a door. The
summit was a square of twenty-five or thirty feet. He is of
opinion that the Great Pyramid had been cased, although he did
not discover any remains of the casing stones ; and remarks, that
Herodotus said that none of the stones were less than thirty feet,
and that it was finished from the top, &c., — an account which
does not at all accord with the present state of the Great Pyra-
mid, nor with that of any other at Gizeh. He conceives it
would be worth while to compare this description with the Pyra-
mids of Abooseer, as they are coated, and as one of them may
certainly be called central, which, at Gizeh, can only be said of
the Second Pyramid.

He quotes from Abdallatif, that Melicalaziz Othman Ben
Yousouf, in the year 1196, attempted to pull down the Third
Pyramid ; but that, after eight months of inefiectual labour, he
failed in the undertaking -, and he remarks, that the Arab historians
record several other similar attempts ; and that they relate, that
the Great Pyramid was opened by Caliph Abdallah Mamoon, son
of Haroun el Raschid, who employed for that purpose fire and
vinegar ; but he thinks it more probable that the Caliph Mohdi
(Mohammed), whose name was found in the Second, opened both.
He supposes that the excavations, near the eastern front of the Great
Pyramid, were in some way connected with the tomb of Cheops, as
described by Herodotus ; and he is surprised that they had not
been examined." The account given by Abdallatif of the hiero-
glyphics inscribed upon the Pyramids, applied, in his opinion,
to the inscriptions in the neighbouring tombs : and he doubts
whether any were inscribed on the casing stones, because none
had been found in the interior, nor upon any of the fragments
or blocks connected with them, nor uj^on the coating that yet
remains on the Second and on the Third Pyramids. Neither are

'They have been examined by Mr. Salt.

304 APPENDIX.

there any inscriptions upon those of Abouseer, Saceara, and
Dashoor ; nor upon a sarcophagus, of the same shape and mate-
rial as that in the Great Pyramid, which was in a tomb where
he slept at Gizeh ; nor has any, he remarks, been found upon the
Sphinx, except those of a comparatively modern date, namely, of
the time of the Romans : and he concludes, that the absence of
these sculptures on the Pyramids was owing to the hostility of
the kings who built them to the religion of the country.

After several observations, he states, that Cheops reigned
1032 years b.c, and that after Chephren, his brother, and
Cherinus or Mycerinus, his son, a chasm of 151 years ensued
in Egyptian chronology, to the time of Asychis, the first king
of the sixth dynasty, after which the accounts continue down to
the Persian Conquest; and he is inclined to attribute this chasm,
the absence of hieroglyphics on the Pyramids, and the silence
observed in the Bible, and also in Homer's poems, respecting
these buildings, to the detestation in which the memory of their
founders, who were not buried in them, was held on account
of their impiety ; and he supposes, that the buildings were con-
sidered as unhallowed and accursed.

He remarks the skill with which they are constructed, and
how wonderfully they have endured the ravages of time, and
the violence of successive generations. He observes, that the
materials of the Great Pyramid were taken partly from the
rock upon which it stands, and partly from the quarries in the
Mokattam.

The Second Pyramid appeared to be built of the same materials,
but to stand upon higher ground ; it was forty feet lower than
the Great Pyramid, which is, in its present state, four hundred
and eighty feet high, which, with the addition of sixteen feet
for the completion of the summit, coincides with the statement
of Herodotus. The height of the Second Pyramid he conceives
to be four hundred and fifty-six feet. He observes, that the
rock had been cut down and levelled on the western, and in
some degree also on the northern and southern sides of it, and
that several blocks of granite were lying around it, but that the
casing which remained was of fine lime-stone.

The Third Pyramid he found greatly dilapidated, and sur-
rounded with masses of granite. He adds, that he observed
many ruined foundations, and the remains of other Pyramids,
some of which had been entirely destroyed, and the materials
carried away ; and that the whole of the adjoining ground was

APPENlilX. 305

filled with excavations, mausolea, and antient structures of
the most interesting nature. In fact, that the whole country, to
Dashoor, was one vast cemetery, but that most of the tombs had
been opened and plundered, and at present were overwhelmed
by an accumulation of the desert sand, and inhabited by wild
animals, reptiles, and bats.

THE AUTHOR OF "RECOLLECTIONS OF THE
PENINSULA," &c. (182.3),

Visited the Pyramids, in his return by Egypt from India.
He examined the King's, Queen's, and Davison's Chambers, and
went down the well, (which he says is one hundred and fifty-five
feet in depth). He also ascended the Great Pyramid, an oper-
ation, which, he remarks, may be performed without the least
risk. He then went into the Second Pyramid, and beheld with
admiration and surprise, the beauty of the polished granite, and
the .fine masonry of the descending passage ; and he considered
that great praise was due to Signore Caviglia, and to Signore
Belzoni for the discoveries, they had made in these buildings.
He likewise mentions the adjacent tombs, and the hieroglyphics,
with which they are adorned ; and remarks, that the costume of
the several figures, and the peculiar manner, in which the cloth is
disposed around their waists, are completely Indian. He after-
wards adverts to the various accounts, which have been given of
these mighty structures, that they were the Tombs of Cheops, and
of Chephren, or of Seth and of Enoch ; and also to Dr. Clarke's
supposition, that the Great Pyramid was the Tomb of Joseph.

MR. WEBSTER (1827)

Does not enter into much detail. He ascended the Great
Pyramid at the north-eastern angle, and observed that the
summit was about thirty-three feet square. He considers that
both the Great and the Second Pyramids were originally cased.
The entrance-passage of the former, he describes to be a square of

VOL. II. X

306 APPENDIX.

three or four feet, and to be lined with granite ; he states that the
King's Apartment containing the sarcophagus is in the centre
of the Pyramid ; and that the Chamber of the Queen below it
contains a niche, in which a mummy is supposed to have been
placed. He adds, that the Second and Third Pyramids were not
open ; ^ and that the summit of the former was inaccessible from
sand and rubbish.

MR. WILKINSON (1831),

In his book on Thebes and on Egypt remarks, that the Great
Pyramid of Cheops, or rather of Suphis, covered originally an
area of 570,000 square feet. The square of the base in its j^resent
state is about seven hundred and thirty-two feet, and its height
four hundred and seventy-four feet ; if entire the total height would
be four hundred and ninety-four, and with the casing, five hundred
and two feet. The coating of the Third Pyramid was of granite,
that of the others of limestone ; the entrance of the Great Pyra-
mid is nearly in the centre of the northern front, and the pas-
sage, descending at an angle of 27°, terminates in an unfinished
chamber below the level of the ground. About one hundred feet
from the entrance, the descending passage is joined by an upper
one ascending at the same angle to the Great Gallery, when it
runs horizontally into the Queen's Chamber. The Gallery itself
continues, also at an angle of 27°, to the King's Chamber, which
is lined with granite, and defended by four portcullises from
one foot four to one foot ten inches thick. The Sarcophagus is of
red granite, seven feet four inches by three feet, and only three
inches less than the width of the door, through which it must
have been introduced by a screw, unless it was built in when the
edifice was constructed. At the bottom of the Great Gallery
is the well, by which the workmen descended in order to go out
of the Pyramid by the lower passage, after they had closed the
upper with blocks of granite ; the lower end of which was

' The Second Pyramid was open, but the Arabs are in the habit of filling the
entrance with stones and rubbish, that they may be paid for removing them by
strangers, who are desirous of examining the interior of the Pyramids.

APPENDIX. 307

probably concealed from observation by a triangular piece of
limestone, fitted into the ceiling at its junction with the descend-
ing passage. He conceives, that those who opened the Pyramid
did so by the regular entrance, and, upon discovering the granite
blocks at the junction of the two passages, made, in order to
avoid them, the forced passage, by which the entrance into the
Great Gallery is at present effected. His opinions respecting any
other hidden chambers or passages, that might have been then
undiscovered, were as follows: — " Several other chambers and
passages, that may be hitherto undiscovered, no doubt exist in the
upper part of the Pyramid, and one* seems to me to be connected
with the summit of the Great Gallery. I suppose it first to run
upwards in a contrary direction to the north from that end, which
is above the well, where a block, apparently of granite, projects
at the complement of the usual angle of these passages. It
probably turns afterwards, and extends in a southerly direc-
tion over the Great Gallery. Above what is called the
King's Chamber, is a low room,^ I may say entresol, which
should support another similar chamber, and the stone at the
south-west corner of it has probably been let in after the
workmen had closed the above-mentioned passage, so that this
room served also as an outlet from the upper apartments, as the
well from those about the Great Gallery." He states, that the
Pyramid was said to have been opened by the Caliph Mamoon
about the year 820; and that the long forced passage to the
east,^ and below the level of the present entrance, is supposed to
have been made at that time.

He further states with respect to the hieroglyphics : — " It has
always been a matter of surprise, that no hieroglyphics are met
with either in the interior or on the exterior of the Pyramids,
and that, above all, the sarcophagus should be destitute of those
sacred characters so generally found on Egyptian monuments.
Herodotus says, he saw an inscription on the front,^ and by
his account it seems to have been in the Enchorial or in the

♦ The tubes xa the Great Chamber may possibly communicate with this passage
over the Great Gallery.

* " Called Davison's Chamber, in honour of its first discoverer."
® East, erratum for " west."

^ Abd-El-Azees also mentions hieroglyphics on the Great Pyramid ; he is
generally very accurate, but the authority of Arab writers can seldom be relied
upon.

308 APPENDIX.

Hieratic characters ; but the Enchorial did not exist at the time of
its erection, and the Hieratic from not being monumental would
scarcely have been used for such a purpose. His figures of
animals on the causeway appear to allude more particularly
to hieroglyphics ; but, as the exteriors both of the causeways
and the Pyramids are lost, we cannot now decide this question.
At all events we may be certain, that the stones, mentioned by
some writers in the walls of the adjacent tombs, were not taken
from the Pyramids, nor any one of them anterior in date to
the Great Pyramid,^ since their position is evidently regulated by
the direction of that monument. In the hieroglyphic inscriptions
of the tombs the names of the kings are of very great antiquity, —
long before the accession of the Sixteenth Dynasty, and we may
trace, in one instance, a name very much resembling that of
Suphis, the supposed founder of the Great Pyramid ; some
of the royal ovals are preceded by the title of priest instead
of king, which occurs again in some of the oldest tombs in
Upper Eg}^pt ; and this fact alone would suffice to prove their
great antiquity, and consequently a fortiori, that of the Pyramids
themselves.9 I do not pretend to explain or decide the real object
for which these stupendous monuments were constructed, but

8 " Contrary to the opinion of some who suppose, from the Pyramids not being
mentioned in the Bible, or in Homer, that they did not exist before the exodus, or
in the time of that poet, the presence of the name of Remeses the Great (who pre-
ceded the Trojan war), in a very secondary position, sufficiently answers the latter
objection ''

®"The Second was opened by Belzoni, in 1818, but he found from an inscription
in the chamber, that it had been entered before, and reclosed by the Sultan Alee-
Mahommed. Strabo says, the Great Pyramid was closed by a stone fitted into the
mouth of the passage : and a further proof of its having been opened before the time
of Caliph Mamoon is dravm from Pliny, who speaks of a well of eighty-six cubits in
depth, by which it was supposed that the Nile water was admitted. Eighty-six cubits,
or one hundred and twenty-nine feet, do not, however, agree with the depth of what
is now called the v?ell, which is nearly two hundred feet; and it is possible that he is
speaking of the lower passage, which in his time may have been cleared only to that
distance : at all events we must conclude, that the Pyramid had been purposely or
accidentally closed before the time of the Caliph. With regard to the admission of
the water of the Nile mentioned by Herodotus, the much lower level of the river at
once prevents the possibility of its being introduced into the Pyramid, the base of
which is even now upwards of a hundred feet above the surface of the water during
the inundation, and must have been more in the time of Herodotus, and still more
again at the period of its erection. Pliny, who was not led away by credulity and
want of judgment, justly questions the story, and observes that the Nile is much
lower."

APPENDIX. 309

feel persuaded that they may have served for tombs ; and also have
been intended for astronomical purposes, for though it is in vain
to look for the pole star at the bottom of a passage descending at
an angle of 27°, or to imagine that a close passage, or a pyramid
covered with a smooth and inaccessible casing was intended for
an observatory, yet the form of the exterior might lead to useful
calculations. They stand exactly due north and south, and,
while the direction of the faces east and west might serve to fix the
return of a certain period of the year, the shadow cast by the sun,
or the time of its coinciding with their slope, might be observed for
a similar purpose. The style of building in the Second Pyramid
is inferior to that of the First ; and the stones used in its construc-
tion were less carefully selected, though united with nearly the
same kind of cement: nor were all the stones of either Pyramid
brought from the quarries in the Arabian mountains ; but the
outer tier or casing was composed of blocks hevvn from their com-
pact strata. This casing, part of which still remains on the
Second Pyramid of Chephren, or Sensuphis, is in fact merely
formed by levelling or plaining down the upper angle of the
projecting steps, ^ and was consequently, as Herodotus very
justly observes, commenced from the summit. The passages
in the Second Pyramid are very similar to those of the First,
but there is no gallery, and they lead only to one main chamber,
in which is a Sarcophagus sunk in the floor ; it is remarkable
that this Pyramid appears to have had two entrances, an upper
one by which you now enter, and another about sixty feet below
it, which is still unopened. One hundred and thirty feet from the
mouth of the upper one was a granite portcullis, and the other
was closed in the same manner about one hundred feet from
its entrance. A little beyond the latter portcullis is a long narrow
chamber, and the passage is afterwards united with the upper
one by an ascending talus. The actual height of the Second
Pyramid is about four hundred and thirty-nine feet, and the
length of its base six hundred and ninety ; but if entire, its
height would be increased to about four hundred and sixty-six
feet. The Third Pyramid of Mycerinus, Moscheris, or Meche-

' " Being misled by the usual notion of an actual casing finished from the summit,
I ascended the Second Pyramid in the vain iiope of discovering some clue to the
position of the stones which might decide this point; but the subsequent examination
of other Egyptian buildings witliout a similar risk fully explained its fallacy, in the
manner, I have already noticed."

310 APPENDIX.

tinus,- has not yet been opened ; it differs from the other two
being built in almost perpendicular degrees, to which a sloping face
has been afterwards added ; the outer layers are of red granite,
and many of them still remain ; nor can we doubt the justness of
Pliny's remark, when he says, the Third, though much smaller
than the other two, was much more elegant from the Ethiopian
stone (granite of Es Souan) that clothed it ; the exterior of the
lowest row of the Second was also of the same stone, which is
testified by the blocks and fragments, that lie scattered about its
base, and by the evidence of Herodotus." He afterwards states,
that there is an Arabic inscription on the top of the Second
Pyramid ; and that the Pyramid said to have been built by the
daughter of Cheops stands, ^ as Herodotus observed, in the centre
of the three to the eastward of the great one. He adds, that,
besides the three Great Pyramids, there are six of smaller
dimensions, and the vestiges of a seventh.

He alludes, also, to the antient authorities respecting the
fossils and petrifactions found in the stone, and other particulars.

MR. ST. JOHN

Visited Gizeh in the year 1832, in his way to Upper Egypt.
He appears to have been wonderfully struck with the majestic
appearance of the Pyramids, which, he says, Cheops and his
successors erected as temples to Venus, on a rocky eminence
about one hundred feet above the level of the Egyptian plain.
He ascended by the usual path (namely, the north-eastern
angle) to the top of the Great Pyramid, and considered, that
the operation was attended with some danger, and that the

^ " Diodorus says, the name of this king was written on its northern face."
^ " The date of the Pyramids given by Herodotus is evidently very erroneous,
since he places Cheops after Mceris and Sesostris. Suphisis also said to have been
the founder of the First Pyramid ; as Sensuphis, his brother, of the Second ; i<nd Mos-
cheris or Mencheres of the Third ; and the era of these monarchs, about 2090 years
before Christ, is much more to be trusted to than that of Herodotus. Diodorus
says they were erected 1000 years before his time. Perhaps this Sesostris is the one
I have mentioned in a note on Remeses the Second in my ' Chronological List of
Kings.' "

APPENDIX. 311

death of Mr. Mayo was not to be wondered at.* He then
examined the interior, and describes the passage as being " cased
with slabs of Oriental porphyry, finely polished, and so exquisitely
fitted to each other as to seem but one piece. Having reached,"
he observes, " a certain depth, we climbed over a high slippery
rock overhanging the mouth of the well, and entered the adit
leading to the King's Chamber. This narrow smooth corridor,
which mounts with a steep ascent, is cased like the former with
porphyry ; we passed over the mouth of the entrance to the
Queen's Chamber, which lies directly under that of the King's;
notches cut in the pavement enabled us to fix our footsteps, and,
after groping along for a considerable time through dust and heat,
we arrived at a level passage of no great length, which led directly
into the Royal Chamber."

Mr. St. John does not seem to consider that the cofler of granite
had been a sarcophagus. He remarked, in the southern wall of
the King's Chamber, a small niche, which he considered was for
mysterious purposes. The ceiling was formed of blocks of stone
three feet broad, " and, being alternately of a lighter and darker
grain, gave the roof the appearance of being painted in broad stripes
of different colours. We found the length of the apartment to be
about thirty-nine feet, the breadth about eighteen, and the height
about twenty-two, in the north-west corner there were two small
square cavities sunk in the floor, and probably of great depth ;
they were now nearly filled with dust ; their use we could not
conjecture." He conceived, from the echoes produced ^by the
firing of a pistol, that many undiscovered chambers and passages
still existed.

He then descended to the Queen's Apartment, and found that
it was considerably smaller than the other, and that its ceiling
was inclined. As he was not furnished with a ladder, he could
not examine Davison's Chamber ; neither did he, at that time,
enter the Second Pyramid : but, from a cursory examination of
its exterior, it appeared to him probable that many subterraneous
passages existed between the Great and Second Pyramids.

On his return from Upper Egypt, he again went to Gizeh, and
entered the Second Pyramid. He observes, that the passages were
beautifully cased with Oriental porphyry, and that in the floor
of the large Chamber there was a sarcophagus, in which bones were
found, said to have been those of an ox, but which, he imagines,

* This unfortunate accident is the only one on record.

312 APPENDIX.

were those of a cow, and therefore a strong proof, that, contrary
to the received opinion, the Pyramids were not tombs. He found
that tlie Arabic inscription, mentioned by Befeoni, was no longer
legible ; and that a lower descending passage, which, he supposed,
led to many other excavated chambers, was filled up with large
stones and rubbish. He adds, that, although attended with some
danger, the ascent to the top of this Pyramid had several times been
effected. He then discusses, with considerable detail, the various
opinions, that had been entertained, respecting the purpose for
which the Pyramids were intended, — for observatories, for tombs,
for treasuries, or granaries ; and he conceives, that they could not
have been intended for observatories, on account of the number
of them, and from their having been covered with a smooth casing ;
neither for granaries, on account of their construction, and also of
their exposed situation in the desert. He thinks the suggestion that
they were tombs more probable, although he does not coincide
with that opinion, as he considers that they were temples erected
to the worship of Athor, Aphrodite, or Venus, which was intro-
duced by Cheops, who, out of respect for that deity, closed up the
temples, and interdicted the national worship already established,
and thereby incurred the hatred of the priests, as mentioned by
Herodotus; which, he conceives, w^ould not have been the case if
he had merely built himself a tomb. He considers the tradition
respecting Cheops's daughter, another proof that the worship
of Athor was thus observed, and that the Pyramids were temples.
He says, that although Herodotus stated, upon the authority of
the priests, that the body of Cheops was entombed in the Great
Pyramid, he could not have been informed by them that the
Second Pyramid was a sepulchre, because he expressly said that
it was not furnished with subterraneous apartments like the great
one. He also remarks, that Diodorus was informed by the priests,
that although these buildings were intended for tombs,' yet, from
apprehension of the hatred of the people, the bodies of the kings
were not actually deposited within them ; a statement, which,
although not entirely true, yet sufficiently establishes the fact
that no person has ever been entombed in them. The Arab
account, cited by Greaves, he wholly discards, and imagines that
the sarcophagus in the King's Chamber was intended to receive
the embalmed body of a cow, the symbol of Athor, or Venus.
He then remarks, that although Mycerinus permitted the temples
to be opened, and the priests to resume their functions, yet that he
also erected a pyramid to Athor, and that, when his only daughter

APPENDIX. 313

died, instead of being buried in a pyramid, she was entombed,
according to Herodotus, in the image of a heifer, which was
brought out once a-year, with religious rites and ceremonies,
which have a direct allusion to the above-mentioned worship.
He then enters into a detail respecting the forms, under which
Nature, or the creative power, has been worshipped in the East,
and also respecting the Pyramids at Benares ; and asserts, that the
narrow and difficult passages in the Great Pyramid of Gizeh were
intended to impress the votaries, who resorted there, with additional
awe ; and says, that similar narrow passages have been found at
Delphi, at the Oracle of Trophonius, and elsewhere. He likewise
remarks, that on his describing the Great Pyramid to some
learned Brahmins, they immediately said that it was a temple,
and asked if there was not a communication underground with
the river Kali (the Nile) ; for that, in this case, it must have been
intended for the worship of Pad Madevi, and that the sarcophagus
was a sacred trough, filled by the priests, on certain festivals, with
sacramental water, and with lotus-flowers.^

MANUEL, Encyclopedique et Pittoresque des Sciences et 'des Arts.

Paris, 1835.

In this work, notice is taken of the Pyramids, and the following
dimensions are given of the Great Pyramid (no doubt in French
measure) : —

Great Pyramid, — visible base on the northern side
Height -----
Height of stones, from 1 foot 8 inches to 4 feet 4

inches.
The entrance, on the northern side, is above the base
Height and breadth of entrance
Length of four great stones over tlie entrance
Length of passage . - .

* A similar opinion was given by the Indians who uni\ed in F-gypt ^villi Sir
David Baird's corps from Bombay.

Feet.

Inches,

660

0

460

0

43

0

3

4

12

2

67

2

314 APPENDIX.

Feet.

Inches,

Great stone over the entrance, and under the four

already mentioned.

Length _ > - _

25

0

Breadth . . - -

.5

0

Thickness - . -

4i

0

The forced passage to the right leads up to the ascend-

ing passage to the height of -

6

0

Of the same angle and dimensions as the former, and

in length _ - - _

102

0

A space then occurs (in which is the mouth of the

well) of -

14

0

The passage, leading to the King's Chamber

7

2

On each side is a ramp, in height

1

9

The gallery.

Length - -

124

0

Height of step at the top of it -

2

9

Landing-place, in length - - -

4

9

Passage of portcullis.

Width - - - -

4

0

Length _ _ _ _

9

0

Height - - - -

13

0

The portcullises are then described ; and the height

under the great stone of granite is -

3

4

Passage leading to the King's Chamber

4

0

King's Chamber, north side, in length

30

9

— southern side, in length

31

0

— eastern side, in length

15

6

— western side, in length

15

5

Height - - - _ -

17

8

Sarcophagus.

Length - - - -

7

0

Width . _ _ .

3

1

Height

3

5

Depth . - _ .

2

11

Thickness of the sides

0

6

Davison's Chamber of the same dimensions as the

King's ; but its height is only

3

1

Length of horizontal passage, leading to the Queen's

Chamber _ _ _ .

119

5

Queen's Chamber.

Length - _ - _

15

9

Height - . _ -

19

0

It is said to be full of rubbish.

Well ; width of opening - _ _

3

2

APPENDIX. Si5

Well; first shaft

— second shaft - _ _

— total depth . _ _

— depth to grotto from the top

— breadth of it - - ♦
It is said to be cased with calcareous stone.

The Second Pyramid is nearly of the same size as the
Great, and retains some of its casing.

Northern base _ _ _

Height - - - _

The Third Pyramid has been cased with granite.
Number of ranges of stone, seventy-eight.
Height . - . .

Northern base . - _ _

Feet.
85

Inches.
0

48

10

190

0

28

0

14

0

625

0

412

0

160

0

308

0

CAPTAIN SCOTT (1837),

In an account of Egypt, amongst various remarks and conjectures,
says, that Belzoni's admeasurements of the Great Pyramid are
the most correct ; that, when he visited that building, fourteen
stones alone remained on the top of it, and that the walls of the pas-
sages and chambers were not composed of cement, but of granite.
He considers that the Second Pyramid is the one said by Herodotus
to have been built by Cheops, and to have been surrounded by
the waters of the Nile ; because the Great Pyramid has never been
covered over, and because the Second has been entirely cased, and
is the highest, although it appeared to him to stand on lower
ground. He conceives that the Pyramids were built by Sesostris
and his successors, and not by Cheops and Chephren. He again
expresses his belief that the Second Pyramid was the one said to
have been completed from the top, and that the Great one was
built afterwards, and was never completed. He then describes
the chamber and passages in the Second Pyramid, and likewise
the excavated grottoes in the rock to the westward of it, and he
considers the area to have been a foss for the waters of the Nile.
He likewise gives the different admeasurements, which various
authors, antient and modern have taken, and which have been
already inserted.

316 APPENDIX.

MR. AGNEW

Published, in 1838, a treatise on the application of the quad-
rature of the circle to the configuration of the Great Pyramids
of Gizeh, which, together with the causeway, he considers to be
" component parts of one immense system ;" and says, " that the
whole of the immense scheme of the three Pyramids proceeded
from a chief circle of origin, the properties of which were more
especially to be represented." He also observes in another place,
that " the Pyramids of Egypt appear in general to have been
emblems of the sacred sphere, and of its great circle, exhibited in
the most convenient architectural form ; " and adds, that " the chief
object of these buildings being to serve for sepulchral monuments,
the Egyptians sought, in the appropriate figure of the Pyramid,
to perpetuate, at the same time, a portion of their geometrical
science." He imagines, that the three in question were built in
succession during the course of sixty years, and that each was
begun before the preceding was finished ; that the third mo-
narch, under whom the whole design was completed, dismissed
the people from their labours, and again opened the temples for
the national worship. He then goes into a variety of calculations
demonstrated by geometrical figures to support these opinions,
and to prove that the quadrature of the circle was known, " with
all practicable approach to exactness," by the antient Egyptians ;
and that in the bases, proportions, and relative positions of these
three Pyramids, and also in the size and course of the northern
causeway, and in those of the adjoining pits, certain geometrical
rules were attended to. For the causeway belonging to the Third
Pyramid he attributes other reasons.

He assigns to the interior of the Pyramids also mysterious
properties; but observes, that in their construction " the propor-
tion of five to four is very dominant ; " and he endeavours to
prove that it might have referred to astronomical calculations,
which may shew the sera when these buildings were erected.
He likewise supposes, that the labyrinth near lake Moeris was
constructed on " some curious combination of geometrical figures,
relating to a sphere and circle, the radius of which was the
perpendicular of the forty-fathom Pyramid, which stood at one
end;" and that all the great buildings of Egypt, besides their
primary and special use, elucidated in their construction geome-
trical science. To understand clearly, however, the author's

APPENDIX. 317

ideas, a reference to the book is absolutely necessary. The
following remarks on the Three Pyramids are, therefore, only
added.

THE GREAT PYRAMID.

The author having quoted from Pliny, '* est autem saxo na-
tural! elaborata et lubricata," in support of his opinion that the
exterior of the Pyramid had been originally saturated with some
fluid, such as oil or varnish,^ observes, that the liquid, whatever
it may have been, appears to have been transparent, and nearly
colourless ; and that the brownish tinge upon the stones, which
formed the casing, has been acquired by time. He does not
conceive that any part of the Pyramids had been painted red,
or it would have been mentioned by Herodotus, and by other
antient authors, although the pavements and steps around them
may have been stained with some dark colour. He is of opinion,
that the Great Pyramid had been revetted in the same manner
as the Second, because he has seen fragments of stones pre-
cisely similar to those, which covered that building, the external
faces of which had been " lubricated." With respect to the
interior of this Pyramid, he found the angle of entrance to be
26° 34' ; and, referring to a diagram, proceeds with many con-
jectures and calculations, which it is not necessary to detail. He
is of opinion, that many other apartments, besides those already
known, exist ; and that more than one person was interred in the
edifice ; that several pits and deep channels, with places on their
sides for the reception of mummies, have been excavated in con-
centric squares, the area of each diminishing by one-half succes-
sively ; and that, by the extent of these works, the length of
time taken up in their construction might be ascertained. He
imagines that there must be a second entrance at the base, either
at the northern, or eastern side ; and mentions the grotto in the
well, and several other points, where apartments and passages
might probably be found.

THE SECOND PYRAMID.

He considers, that the exterior is steeper by one degree than
that of the Great one; and that its summit is higher above the

8 The word " lubricata" simply means a surface polished, or made slippery, and
does not infer that oil or liquid of any kind had been applied to produce the cflTect.

318 APPENDIX.

horizon, although the Great Pyramid is the more lofty, owing to
a base upon which the Second is built, as it is situated upon a
high perpendicular platform beyond the pavement, and is sur-
rounded with three squares or steps, which bear certain pro-
portions to the sphere or circle ; and this, he imagines, to have
been likewise the case with the steps around the other two
Pyramids. The step of the Second Pyramid is five feet high,
and seven feet from the perpendicular of the edge of the base,
and the platform of rock is about ten or eleven feet above the
inner surface.''' This he considers was the 'jt^utov do/^ov of granite
described by Herodotus. He conceives that there were two ranges
of granite, and that the inner step was also of that material. After
other observations, he says, that the dark colour of the casing
has led many people to believe that it was painted.

THE THIRD PYRAMID.

He is of opinion that the granite casing, mentioned by antient
authors as extending half-way, was ninety-two feet high ; and
that it had some mysterious signification : that the size of the
building was regulated by that of the other two ; and that, from
an examination of the granite blocks, which formerly composed its
revetment, he found that the angle of its elevation indicated a per-
fection of form superior to that of each of the other Pyramids, and
that it was nearly a medium between them : that its perpendicular
height was the radius of a circle, the circumference of which
-was equal to the square of the base ; and that this Pyramid
was an emanation, or spirit, and essence from the first great
principle of the system, namely, the circle of origin ; and also that
its relative position was determined by some fixed law, and not
by mere convenience.

The exterior of the upper part did not appear to have been
covered with painted stucco, but to have been saturated with
some fluid like those of the other Pyramids ; and the contrast of
the two colours must, in his opinion, have had a good effect.

' It has been already observed, that the calculations contained in Mr. Agnew's
book should be examined in order to comprehend the full meaning of its author.

APPENDIX. 319

ABOU MA'SHER JA'FER BEN MOHAMMED BALKHI,

AN ASTROLOGER. DIED, 272 A.H.

{Bod. Lib. MS. 392.)

The wise men, previous to the flood, foreseeing an impenfling
judgment from heaven either by submersion or by fire, which
would destroy every created being, built upon the tops of the
mountains and in Upper Egypt many pyramids of stone, in order
to have some refuge against the approaching calamity. Two of
these buildings exceeded the rest in height, being four hundred
cubits high, and as many broad, and as many long. They were
built witli large blocks of marble. The length and breadth of
each stone was from eight to ten cubits square ; and they were so
well put together that the joints were scarcely perceptible. Upon
the exterior of the building, every charm and wonder of physic
was inscribed in the Mosannad character ;'' and likewise this de-
claration— " I have built them, and whoever considers himself
powerful, may try to destroy them ; let him however reflect, that
to destroy is easier than to build."

8 Tlie original is t\wU U<- The Camoos (Arabic Dictionary) says, that
SJsm*^ fourth conjugation — which means literally "propped," "supported" — is
the name of the Himyaritic character, perhaps so called in opposition to the Ta'lik,
i.e. "hanging," or "Persian character," to designate that it is more fixed and fitter
for inscription upon stone; but as we find here the word in the second conjugation,
which often answers to our " ize," in Germanize, and the Greek ,Zu>, in £XX»H?<y, it
may be derived from JsJLw " Sind," the Arabic name for Western India. This is
the more probable, as this word is used in the Mirat-ezxeman as an adjective, with
the word Himyaritic. Tiie Manahij Alfikr likewise terms a sort of writing " Sind,"
jXLwJLj De Sacy, in " Abd Allatif," p. 222, reads it in Makrizi, (where he quotes
Ebn Khordadbeh,) "Masnud:" but I cannot discover this expression, either in
the copy of Makrisi, or in that of Ebn Khordadbeh, which are preserved in the
Bodleian Library.* — Dr. Sprenger.

* The references occasionally introduced in the notes are generally taken from
the Arabic MSS. of the Bodleian Library, which are inserted in Uri's and Nicol's
catalogues ; it is therefore unnecessary to give more than the name or number
of the MS. There are few quotations from the printed books, which relate to
Arabic historians, as no additional information was to be expected from them.—
Dr. Sprcngcr.

320 APPENDIX.

The author^ further narrates that one of the caliphs intended
to take them down, in order to ascertain what they contained,
but that it was calculated that the riches of all the world would
not be suflScient to defray the expense ; and he also mentions the
tradition, that Joseph used those buildings as granaries.

EBN KHORDADBEH,

DIED ABOUT 300 A.H.

{Uri's Cat. 993, MS. Arab.)

Gives the same account as Abou Ma'sher, excepting the destruc-
tion of the Pyramids by the caliph.

SIR WILLIAM OUSELEY,

(^Oriental Geography.^ London, 1800).

About the distance of two farsangs from Fostat, there are some
antient structures, called Ahouan^ — two of them are of a great
height, namely, four hundred cubits, and are called Haraman —
and on the walls the following inscription is written in Greek :
— ''The building of Haraman and Sertaier (was) in the sign
of Cancer." ^ These buildings are quadrangular and gradually

^ This author is quoted by Kazwini, and also by Ebn Abou Osaiba (MSS. in
British Museum), but they do not mention the intention of the caliph to destroy
the Pyramids, which is probably, therefore, an interpolation in the MS. at Oxford.
— Dr. Sprenger.

' This is a translation of an antient author, who lived, according to De Sacy
(the translator of "Abd AUatif," and of other Eastern writers,) about 309' a. h. —
Dr. Sprenger.

^ It should be Ahram. — Dr. Sprenger.

3 This is evidently a very incorrect reading. I presume it ought to be "the two
Pyramids" — were built as the Eagle — was in Cancer. It is to be regretted that
Sir William Ouseley had never seen a fine copy of the work he has translated, (No.
615, in the library at the India House,) as it is very well written, and contains the
maps referred to in the MSS. from which he translated.— Dr. Sprenger.

APPENDIX. 321

diminish towards their summits, which are large enough for a
camel to stand upon. Within them are passages, which are diffi-
cult of access; and subterraneous chambers, supposed, with great
probability, to have been the sepulchres of antient kings.

ABOU RIHAN MOHAMMED BEN AHMED AL
KHAWAREZMI,

DIED AFTER THE YEAR 430, A.H.

This author is quoted by various Arabian authorities : he is
stated in the MS, of Yakut to have affirmed, that "the Persians
and Magians in general denied that the deluge had taken place ;"
but he does not afford any particular information.

MAS0UDI,5

DIED 345 A.H.

The manuscript of the Akbar Ezzeman, at Oxford, was so much
decayed, that recourse has been had to the works of other authors,
who have given the same account in nearly the same words —
namely, to Makrizi, who quotes from Usted Ibrahim Ben

* M. Jomard concludes from this author, that the Pyramids were covered with
continuous inscriptions, written by nations long since perished ; and he appears to
consider that this accovmt is correct, particularly as it is corroborated by Ebn Haukal,
and likewise by William De Baldensel,* who lived in the fourteenth century, and
said, that he saw inscriptions in various characters upon the two larger Pyramids.
It is to be remarked, however, that this only proves that some part of them had been
written upon ; and other authors have mentioned Latin verses, &c., that had been
inscribed in the same manner as the names of travellers, which are now to be seen
upon the top of the Great Pyramid. M. Jomard then states, upon the authority of
Dionysius Telmahre, that the Pyramids were solid buildings, erected over the tombs
of antient kings; and from the same author, that the height of the Pyramids
was two hundred and fifty cubits, and that their bases were squares of five hundred
cubits ; and also that he had examined an excavation fifty cubits deep, which had
been made in one of them, and found that it had been built of iiewn stones, from
five to ten cubits in length.

* M. Jomard seems to have taken tliis account from M. De Sacy.
VOL. II. Y

322 APPENDIX.

Wasyff Shah; to Soyuti ; to a MS. (No. 7503) in the British
Museum, entitled " The Odour of Flowers," or " the Wonders of
Different Countries, by Mohammed Ben Ayas ; " to a Turkish
"History of Egypt, " MS. (7861) in British Museum, written
1089, A.H. ; and to Yakut, MS. in the Bodleian Library.

Masoudi's account professes to relate the Coptic tradition, I
■which says, " That Surid, Ben Shaluk, Ben Sermuni, BenTermi-
dun, Ben Tedresan, Ben Sal, one of the kings of Egypt before
the flood, built the two great Pyramids; and, notwithstanding
they were subsequently named after a person called Sheddad Ben
Ad, that they were not built by the Adites, who could not conquer
Egypt, on account of the powers, which the Egyptians possessed
by means of enchantment ; that the reason for building the Pyra-
mids was the following dream, which happened to Surid three
hundred years previous to the flood. It appeared to him, that
the earth was overthrown, and that the inhabitants were laid
prostrate upon it ; that the stars wandered confusedly from their
courses, and clashed together with a tremendous noise. The king,
although greatly afiected by this vision, did not disclose it to any
person, but was conscious that some great event was about to
take place. Soon afterwards in another vision, he saw the fixed
stars descend upon the earth in the form of white birds, and
seizing the people, enclose them in a cleft between two great
mountains, which shut upon them. The stars were dark, and
veiled with smoke. The king awoke in great consternation, and
repaired to the temple of the sun, where, with great lament-
ations, he prostrated himself in the dust. Early in the morning
he assembled the chief priests from all the nomes of Egypt, a
hundred and thirty in number ; no other persons were admitted
to this assembly, when he related his first and second vision. The
interpretation was declared to announce, " that some great event
would take place."

The high priest, whose name was Philimon or Iklimon, spoke
as follows : — "Grand and mysterious are thy dreams : The visions
of the king will not prove deceptive, for sacred is his majesty.^ I

^ These words and the designation of the high-priests, and the general tenour of
the story are not Arabic. The king is represented as being of a superior order, and
the sacred organ of the priests ; but the caliphs, and even Mahomet, however greatly
reverenced by Mahometans, are always considered mere human beings; and
although the caliphs were invested with supreme authority, their viziers and
councils confined their deliberations to politics, and did not interfere with religious
affairs. — D?-. Sprenger.

APPENDIX. 323

will now declare unto the king a dream, which I also had a year
ago, but which I have not imparted to any human being." The
king said, " Relate it, O Philimon."^ The high-priest accoi'dingly
began : — "I was sitting with the king upon the tower of Amasis.
The firmament descended from above till it overshadowed us
like a vault. The king raised his hands in supplication to the
heavenly bodies, whose brightness was obscured in a mysterious
and threatening manner. The people ran to the palace to implore
the king's protection ; who in great alarm again raised his hands
towards the heavens, and ordered me to do the same ; and be-
hold, a bright opening appeared over the king, and the sun shone
forth above ; these circumstances allayed our apprehensions, and
indicated, that the sky would resume its former altitude ; and
fear together with the dream vanished away."°

The king then directed the astrologers to ascertain by taking
the altitude whether the stars foretold any great catastrophe, and
the result announced an approaching deluge. 9 The king ordered
them to inquire whether or not this calamity would befal Egypt ;
and they answered, yes, the flood will overwhelm the land, and
destroy a large portion of it for some years. ^

^ Some histories say that Philimon was with Noah in the ark. — Dr. Sprenger.

* The above-mentioned MS. 7503, on the authority of Usted Ibrahim Ben
Wasyff Shah, relates another vision of the high-priest, as follows: — " I saw the
town of Amasis, together with its inhabitants, overthrown. The images of the gods
(idols) cast down from their places, and personages coming down from Heaven,
and smiting with iron maces the inhabitants of the earth. I asked them why they
did so? They answered, Because these people did not believe in their gods. I
asked if there were means of security? They answered, Yes, whoever seeks will
find it from the Master of the Ark (Noah). I was overcome with alarm." It is
remarkable, that Makrizi in this passage, " They do not believe on their gods,"
writes their gods, and not their idols, which latter words he uses in all other in-
stances, in accordance with the Mahometan custom of mentioning with contempt
heathen deities. Soyuti renders this passage, " they do not believe on Bramah,
who created them." The word Kafar is accompanied with a substantive in an
accusative case, when it signifies " to disbelieve in." The B, therefore, in the
word Barahm, is not to be considered a preposition, but part of the word, which
is Barahm Brahma, and not Rahm, or Rama. — Dr. Sprenger.

" According to Makrizi, fire was to proceed from tlie sign Leo, and to consume
the world. A further continuation of this story is also given, on the authority
of Ustad Ibrahim, whose detail was derived from a papyrus found in the mo-
nastery of Abou Hormeis, a document, which will be afterwards alluded to. —
Dr. Sprenger.

• Besides the general deluge mentioned in holy writ, Dr. Sprenger is of opinion,
that a partial inundation took place in Egypt, and on the shores of the Mediter-

3^4 APPENDIX.

He ordered tliem to inquire if the earth would again become
fruitful, or if it would continue to be covered with water. They
answered that its former fertility would return. The king de-
manded what would then happen. He was informed that a
stranger would invade the country, kill the inhabitants, and seize
upon their property ; and that afterwards a deformed people,
coming from beyond the Nile, would take possession of the
kingdom ; " upon which the king ordered the Pyramids to be
built, and the predictions of the priests to be Inscribed upon
columns, and upon the large stones belonging to them; and he
placed within them his treasures, and all his valuable property,
together with the bodies of his ancestors. He also ordered the
priests to deposit within them, written accounts of their wisdom
and acquirements in the different arts and sciences.^ Subter-

ranean Sea, described by Masoudi, and alluded to by Abul Feda; whether the
supposition be true or not, it is extremely probable, that after the great and
miraculous event, large bodies of water were left on the higher levels, which from
time to time may have been increased by the melting of snow and by other natural
causes, till, bursting through their respective barriers they produced, without the
special intervention of Almighty power, at different times, partial inundations, and
other alterations in the surface of the earth, which, under Divine Providence, may
have had the salutary effect of keeping in human remembrance the former tremendous
judgment. Tlie destruction of the earth by fire and water, (both which agents may be
supposed to have been co-existent, since without water no volcanic effects can be
produced), and the idea of a resuscitation of the world after a certain period, appear
to have been alluded to by the Hindoos in their mythology, and also by the Parsees ;
and Herodotus states, that this was also the belief of the antient Egyptians, and terms it
i/i-rv^uffis. It would be perhaps difficult to ascertain whether these ideas proceeded
from traditions of the universal deluge, or of the final consummation of the globe.
The learned doctor then repeats his opinion, that the fable of Surid having built'
the Pyramids before the deluge, is not of Arabic origin, but that it is possible that
they were erected with the vain idea of providing against the recurrence of a similar
event; and that the tower of Babel, built for somewhat the like purpose, may have
been a Pyramid. He concludes, with great probability, that these monuments were
constructed by people of the same nation, wlio, he conjectures, established the reli-
gious institutions at Babylon, came to Egypt from Iran, and were termed by the
Arabs, Edris (teachers) ; by the Egyptians, Taulh ; and by the Greeks and Persians,
Hermes ; and, as a term of hostility, Cushites.

* These deformed people appear to be the men of ignoble birth, out of the
eastern parts, mentioned by Manetho.

3 Masoudi says that all these marvellous tilings were placed within the Pyramids,
whilst Makrizi, on the authority of Usted Ibrahim, particularises the subterraneous
passages as the depositories. On the margin of one of Makrizi's MSS., we read
that the inscriptions of the priests were on the ceilings, roofs,&c., of the subterraneous
passages.— D?'. Sproiger.

APPENDIX. 325

raneous channels were also constructed to convey to tlicm the
waters of the Nile.'* He filled the passages^ with talismans, with
wonderful things, and idols; and with the writings of the priests,
containing all manner of wisdom, the names and properties of
medical plants, and the sciences of arithmetic and of geometry ;
that they might remain as records, for the benefit of those, who
could afterwards comprehend them.

He ordered pillars to be cut, and an extensive pavement to bo
formed. The lead employed in the work was procured from the
West. The stone came from the neighbourhood of Es Souan.
In this way were built the Three Pyramids at Dashoor,^ the eastern,
western, and the coloured one. In carrying on the work, leaves
of papyrus, or paper, inscribed with certain characters, were placed
under the stones prepared in the quarries ; and upon being struck,
the blocks were moved at each time the distance of a bowshot (about
one hundred and fifty cubits), and so by degrees arrived at the Pyra-
mids.'^ Rods of iron were inserted into the centres of the stones,
that formed the pavement, and, passing through the blocks placed
upon them, were fixed by melted lead. Entrances, with porticoes
composed of stones fastened together with lead, were made
forty cubits under the earth : the length of every portico being
one hundred and fifty cubits. The door of the eastern Pyramid
was one hundred cubits eastward from the centre of the face,
in which it was placed, and was in the building itself. The
door of the western Pyramid was one hundred cubits westwaixl,
and was also in the building. And the doo'' of the coloured

'to

Pyramid was one hundred cubits southward of the centre, and

* ^(^aXj (jji^^ fj^ y*^^ ^f^ 3^*^*. These are the words of tlie
original ; they are not clear, and may mean the channel for tlie whole stream, which
was, according to Makrizi andSoyuti (l)iit not to Masoudi), constructed for the con-
veyance of the water into Upper Egypt, and to the westward, in which case, it is
to be observed, the water must liave Howed up hill. — Dr. Spraiger.

* It is stated, apparently on the authority of Usted Ibrahim, that these passages
are forty cubits under the earth ; and that the foundations of tiie Pyramids were after-
wards laid at four hundred royal cubits, or, according to some, five hundred, eacii
of which is equal to two common cubits ; and that the base was a space of one
hundred cubits. — Dr. Sprengcr.

® Makrizi and Soyuti do not mention Dashoor, so tiiat the autiior probably
alluded to the Pyramids of Gizeii, as Dashoor is only inserted in a MS. in the
Bodleian. — Dr. Sprenger.

'' This may be a symbolical manner of expressing that they moved the large
stones by mechanical powers which were described upon books or le.tvcs, or it
may allude to the quariy-niarks.

326 APPENDIX.

was likewise in the building. The height of each Pyramid was one
hundred royal cubits, equal to five hundred common cubits. The
squares of the bases were the same. They were began at the east-
ern side. When the buildings were finished, the people assembled
with rejoicing around the king, who covered the Pyramids with
coloured brocade, from the top to the bottom, and gave a great
feast, at which all the inhabitants of the country were present.

He constructed, likewise, with coloured granite, in the western
Pyramid, thirty repositories for sacred symbols, and talismans
formed of sapphires, for instruments of war composed of iron,
which could not become rusty, and for glass, which could be
bent without being broken ; and also for many sorts of medicines,
simple and compound, and for deadly poisons.

In the eastern Pyramid were inscribed the heavenly spheres,
and figures representing the stars and planets in the forms, in
which they were worshipped.^

The king, also, deposited the instruments, and the thuribula,
with which his forefathers had sacrificed to the stars, and also their
writings ; likewise, the positions of the stars, and their circles ;
together with the history and chronicles of time past, of that,
which is to come, and of every future event, which would take
place in Egypt. He placed there, also, coloured basins (for lus-
tration and sacrificial purposes), with pure water, and other
matters.^

Within the coloured Pyramid were laid the bodies of the
deceased priests, in sarcophagi of black granite ; and with
each was a book, in which the mysteries of his profession,
and the acts of his life were related. There were different
degrees among the priests, who were employed in metaphy-
sical speculations, and who served the seven planets. Every
planet had two sects of worshippers ; each subdivided into
seven classes. The first comprehended the priests, who wor-
shipped, or served seven planets ; the second, those who served
six planets ; the third, those who served five planets ; the fourth,
those who served four planets; the fifth, those who served three
planets ; the sixth, those who served two planets ; the seventh,

* The stars are at this time represented in the East in their constellations, as
may be seen in a fine MS. by Kazwini, in the library at the India House. —
I)}'. Sprevger.

^ Tiie account of the contents of the Pyramids is somewhat different in the
extract of Makrizi. Every writer, indeed, seems to iiave enumerated as many mar-
vellous things as his imagination could suggest. — Dr. Sprcnger.

APPENDIX. 327

those who served one planet. Tlie names^ of these classes
were inscribed on the sides of the sarcophagi ; and within them
were lodged books with golden leaves, upon which each priest had
written a history of the past and a prophecy of the future. Upon
the sarcophagi were, also, represented the manner, in which arts
and sciences were performed, with a description of each process,
and the object of it. The king assigned to every Pyramid a
guardian : the guardian of the eastern Pyramid was an idol of
speckled granite, standing upright, with a weapon like a spear
in his hand; a serpent was wreathed round his head, which
seized upon and strangled whoever approached, by twisting
round his neck, when it again returned to its former position
upon the idol. The guardian of the western Pyramid was an
image made of black and white onyx, with fierce and sparkling
eyes, seated on a throne, and armed with a spear ; upon the
approach of a stranger, a sudden noise was heard, and the image
destroyed him. To the coloured (that is, the Third Pyramid)
he assigned a statue, placed upon a pedestal, which was
endowed with the power of entrancing every beholder till he
perished. When every thing was finished, he caused the Pyramids
to be haunted with living spirits ; and offered up sacrifices to
prevent the intrusion of strangers, and of all persons, excepting
those, who by their conduct were worthy of admission. The
author then says, that, according to the Coptic account, the
following passage was inscribed, in Arabic, upon the Pyramids.
*' I, Surid, the king, have built these Pyramids, and have
finished them in sixty-one years.- Let him, who comes after me,
and imagines himself a king like me, attempt to destroy them in
six hundred. To destroy is easier than to build. I have clothed
them with silk; let him try to cover them with mats."

It is added, that the spirit of the northern Pyramid had been
observed to pass around it in the shape of a beardless boy, with
large teeth, and a sallow countenance; that the spirit of the
western Pyramid was a naked woman, with large teeth, who
seduced people into her power, and then made them insane, she
was to be seen at mid-day and at sunset : and that the guardian
of the coloured Pyramid, in the form of an old man, used to

' The n;\mes are given in the MS. of Masoudi, but they cannot be made or.t.
— Dr. Sprenger.

* Makrizi says " in sixty years;" and slates, that he had endeavoured to tind this
inscription, but in vain. — Dr. Sprenger.

328 APPENDIX.

scatter incense round the building with a llmribulum, like that
used in Christian churches.^

The following story is related by Masoudi, in the " Akbar-
Ezzeman."

Twenty men of the Faioum wished to examine the Pyramid.
One of them was accordingly lowered down the well by means of a
rope, which broke at the depth of one hundred cubits, and the man
fell to the bottom ; he was three hours falling. His companions
heard horrible cries ; and, in the evening, they went out of
the Pyramid, and sat down before it to talk the matter over.
The man, who was lost in the well, coming out of the earth,
suddenly appeared before them, and uttered the exclamations —
" Sak, Sak, Saka, Saka, " which they did not understand ; he
then fell down dead, and was carried away by his friends. The
above-mentioned words were translated by a man from Syad
(Said,) as follows: " He, who meddles with, and covets what does
not belong to him, is unjust."^ Masoudi proceeds to relate, that,
in a square chamber, some other explorers discovered in the lowest
part of the Pyramid, a vase containing a quantity of fluid of an
unknown quality. The walls of the chamber were composed of
small square stones of beautiful colours; and a person, having put
one of these stones in his mouth, was suddenly seized with a pain
in his ears, which continued until he had replaced it. They also

^ The Coptic account ends here. It appears from M. Quatremere's disserta-
tion, that the traditions of the antient Egyptians were preserved by their descend-
ants, the Copts, who were held in great respect by the Arabs. It is also said, that,
in the reign of Ahmed Ben Touloun, who conquered Egypt about 260 a.h., a
learned man, above one hundred years old, and of either Coptic or Nabathaean
extraction, lived in Upper Egypt. This person had visited many countries, and
was well informed of tlie antient iiistory of Egypt, and was, by order of Ahmed
Ben Touloun, examined before an assembly of learned Maliometans ; and Ma-
soudi's account of the Pyramids is said to have been given upon the authority
of this learned man. Masoudi also mentions certain persons who were, by pro-
fession, guides to the Pyramids. It may be remarked, that the Arabian authors
have given the same accounts of the Pyramids, with little or no variation, for above
a thousand years; and that they appear to have repeated the traditions of tlic
antient Egyptians, mixed up with fabulous stories and incidents, certainly not of
Mahometan invention. The history, however, although evidently incorrect, yet
seems as well worthy of credit, as the fables of Greek myliiology, or as Homer's
account of the heroes engaged in the Trojan war. — J}r. Sprenger.

* Makrizi has alluded to this story; and it is given at some length in MS. 9973,
in the British Museum. This account has been taken from the latter document, on
account of the bad condition of Masoudi's manuscrijit, but it has been carefully
foliated and cumpartd vvilii it. — Dr. Sproigei .

APPENDIX. 329

discovered, in a large hall, a quantity of golden coins put
up in columns, every piece of which was of the weight of one
thousand dinars. They tried to take the money, but were not
able to move it. In another place they found the image of a
sheik, made of green stone, sitting upon a sofa, and wrapped up
in a garment. Before him were statues of little boys, whom
he was occupied in instructing: they tried to take up one of
these figures, but they were not able to move it. Having pro-
ceeded further to a quadrangular space, similar to that, which
they had previously entered, they met with the image of a cock,
made of precious stones, and placed upon a green column.
Its eyes enlightened all the place ; and, upon their arrival,
it crowed, and flapped its wings. Continuing their researches,
they came to a female idol of white stone, with a covering on her
head, and lions of stone on each side, attempting to devour her,
upon which they took to flight. This took place in the time of
Yerid Ben Abdullah.^

In the " Golden Meadows," (9576 British jMu&eum), the author,
Masoudi, after adverting to the great size of the Pyramids, says, that
they were inscribed with the unknown and unintelligible writings of
people and of nations, whose names and existence have been long
since forgotten. He then mentions, that the vertical height of the
Great Pyramid was about four hundred cubits, and that its breadth
was the same ; and repeats the well-known tradition, that upon
them were recorded the arts and sciences, various secrets, and
knowledge, and also the sentence, " 1 have built them," &c. ; he
likewise narrates the story of the Mahometan king, who would
have destroyed them, had he not found that the wealth of the
whole kino-dom would not have afforded him the means of doin^r so.
The author says, that the Pyramids were built of squared stones of
unequal size, and that they were the tombs of kings ; that when one
of these monarchs died, his body was placed in a sarcophagus of
stone, called in Egypt and Syria, " Al Harm ;" and that a Pyramid
was built over it, with a subterraneous entrance, and a passage
above one hundred cubits long; that the Pyramid was constructed
in steps, which were built up and completed from the top to the
bottom, and effaced when the whole was finished.

Masoudi, in his " Akbar-Ezzeman," also states, that when the
Caliph Ilaroun Al Raschid was in Egypt, he wished to take down
one of the Pyramids to see what it contained. He was told that

^ Who was suppose J to have bceu a king of Egypt.

330 APPENDIX.

it was impossible. He answered, that he was determined at least
to open it ; and accordingly made the chasm, (which was in
the author's time visible), by means of fire and of vinegar, and
of iron instruments, and of battering engines. He was at a great
expense : and, having penetrated twenty cubits, he found a vessel
filled with a thousand coins of the finest gold, each of which
was a dinar in weight. When Haroun Al Raschid saw the gold,
he ordered that the expenses, he had incurred, should be calcu-
lated, and the amount was found exactly equal to the treasure,
which was discovered. He was at a loss to imagine how the
cost of his operations could have been foretold, and how the
money could have been placed exactly at the end of his excavation.

PAPYRUS FOUND IN THE MONASTERY OF ABOU

HORMEIS.

TRANSLATED INTO ARABIC, 225 A.H.

It is said, that in a tomb at the monastery of Abou Hormeis, a
body was found wrapped round with a cloth, and bearing upon
the breast a papyrus, inscribed with antient Coptic characters,
which could not be deciphered until, a monk, from the monastery
of Al Kalmun in the Faioum, explained it as follows:^ " In
the first year of King Diocletian, an account was taken from
a book, copied in the first year of King Philippus'^ — from an

^ The story is related by Masoudi, but this relation of it by Al Kodhai is given,
because he was a cadi in Egypt; and mentions the persons by whom the tradition
had been handed down from former times. — Dr. Sprenger.

^ Moses, of Chorene, seems to allude to this account when he mentions that Va-
larsaces sent to his brother Arsaces (the governor of Armenia), a learned man called
Mariba to inquire into the antient history of Armenia. This person is supposed to
have found, amongst the archives of Nineveh, a book, translated from Chaldaic into
Greek by order of Alexander the Great, which contained historical records of the
most remote antiquity. Valarsaces ordered them to be inscribed upon a column ;
and the author derived from this monument a considerable part of his history.
Cedrenus also says, upon the authority of an apocryphal work ascribed by the
Egyptians to Hermes, that Enoch, foreseeing the destruction of the earth, had
inscribed the science of astronomy upon two pillars ; the one composed of stone
to resist the operation of water, and tl'.e other of brick to withstand that of fire.
Cedrenus was a monk, and lived about 1050. — Dr. Sprenger.

APPENDIX. 331

inscription of great antiquity written upon a tablet of gold, which
tablet** was translated by two brothers — llwa, and Yercha — at the
request of Philippus, who asked them, how it happened that they
could understand an inscription, which was unintelligible to the
learned men in his capital? They answered, because they were
descended from one of the antient inhabitants of Egypt, who was
preserved with Noah in the ark, and who, after the flood had
subsided, went into Egypt with the sons of Ham, and dying in
that country left to his descendants, (from whom the two brothers
received them), the books of the antient Egyptians, which had been
written one thousand seven hundred and eighty-five years before
the time of Philippus, nine hundred and forty-six years before
the arrival of the sons of Ham in Egypt, and contained the
history of two thousand three hundred and seventy-two years ;
and that it was from these books that the tablet was formed. The
contents of the book were : ' We^ have seen what the stars fore-
told ; we saw the calamity descending from the heavens, and
going out from the earth, and we were convinced that the waters
would destroy the earth, M'ith the inhabitants and plants. We
told this to the King Surid Ben Shaluk : he built the Pyramids
for the safety of us,^ and also as tombs for himself and for his

^ A French author remarks, that it is possible that in the two hundred and twenty-
fifth year of the Ilegra an Arabic version was found of a Greek translation from
an antient MS., which may have related to celestial observations, and to the con-
struction of the Pyramids; and also that tlie two larger Pyramids may, from their
relative positions, have been called "eastern" and "western," and the Third, from the
dark colour of the granite, termed "painted." He conceives that treasures,statues, and
mummies, may have been found within them. He remarks, that the founder of
the Great Pyramid is called Surid, son of Shaluk ; of the Second, Herdjib ; and of
the Third, Kemses, son or nephew of Surid : an account which agrees with the Greek
historians. He observes, that the entrances, which have been discovered, are on the
northern sides, and about twelve metres above the bases of the Pyramids ; but that
in the time of the Caliph Al Mamoon, as the accumulation of rubbish must have
been less, the subterraneous passages, mentioned by the Arabian historians, may
have been more apparent; and he conceives that their accounts are, to a certain de-
gree, founded on facts.

" Masoudi begins his narration of Surid (whose liistory he has taken from this
document) by saying, tliat that monarch, son of Shaluk, king of Egypt, had a dream,
which he imparled to the chief of the priests, and directed him to examine what the
stars foretold, kc.— Vr. Sprenger.

' As there are two readings at this place, it does not appear that the meaning
of the original was clearly known.— Dr. Sprenger.

332 APPENDIX.

household. When Surid died, he was buried in the eastern
Pyramid ; his brother Haukith, in the western; and his nephew
Karwars, in the smaller — the lower part of which is built
with granite, but the upper with a stone called Kedan.' The
Pyramids are described to have had doors with subterraneous por-
ticoes or passages one hundred and fifty cubits in length. The
entrance into the eastern Pyramid is said to be on the side
next the sea, and that of the strong Pyramid towards the
Kiblah ; and vast treasures and innumerable precious things are
mentioned to have been enclosed in these buildings. Then
the two brothers calculated what time had elapsed from the
flood to the day when the translation was made by them for
King Philip ; and it appeared to be one thousand seven hundred
and forty-one years, fifty -nine days, and twenty -three -£jf^
hours."

" In this manner were the Pyramids built. Upon the walls
were written the mysteries of science, astronomy, geometry,
physic, and much useful knowledge, which any person, who
understands our writing, can read. The deluge was to take
place when the heart of the Lion entered into the first minute
of the head of Cancer, at the declining of the star. The other
indications were, the Sun and Moon entering into the first minute
of the head of Aries and Saturn, in the first degree and twenty-
eight minutes of Aries; and Jupiter, in the twenty-ninth degree
twenty-eight minutes of Pisces; and Hermes, i.e. Mercury, in
the twenty-seventh minute of Pisces ; the rising Moon, in the
fifth degree and three minutes of the Lion."^

'^ Masoudi affirms, in ihe Akbav-Ezzeman, that he wrote his account of Surid
from a Coptic modern history, entitled

3 This statement was translated from the Coptic into Arabic 225 a.h., supposed
to be four thousand three hundred and twenty-one years after the construction of the
Pyramids. The astronomical observations are not inserted from an idea of their
accuracy, but as they are expressed in the originals, altliough there is some difference
between the MS. of Masoudi and that of Kodhai. Masoudi states, that Rawis
Jupiter was in twenty-five minutes of Aries and Aphrodite ; Venus in the twenty-
ninth degree and three minutes of Pisces; that Saturn was in the Balance; and the
rising Moon in the fifth day and five minutes of the Lion. An account of liie
appearance of the heavens when the waters subsided, is also included. — Vr.
Sprenger.

APPENDIX. 333

EBN IIAUKAL

WROTE ABOUT THE MIDDLE OF THE 4t1I CENTURY A.H.

(963 Uris Catalogue.)

He describes the two larger Pyramids as the most extraordinary
buildings in the world. He also says, that a Prince of the Abas-
sides, either Al Mamoon or Al Motassem, reading upon one of
them the inscription, ** I have built them," determined to take
them down, but found that all the tribute of Egypt would not pay
the expense, although it amounted to 4,279,000 dinars.*

ABOU ABDULLAH MOHAMMED BEN SELAMAH
ABOU AL KODHAI,

DIED 454 A. II.

He gives the account of the papyrus (see page 330) upon the
authority of Abou Ebn Ali Hassan Ben Caliph Ben Hadid, Avho
got his information from Yahya Ben Othman, who received the
account from JNlohammed Ben Soka el Temimi.^

ABOU ABD ALLAH MOHAMMED BEN ABDURAKIM

ALKAISI,

DIED ABOUT 565 A.H.,

In his work "Tohfat Alalbab" (MS.) says, that Al Mamoon opened
the Great Pyramid, which is opposite to Fostat. The author en-
tered it, and found a square chamber with a coved roof, and in it a
well, ten cubits deep, large enough for a person to enter ; from
whence, at each angle, doors opened into large apartments, in
which bodies had been deposited, enveloped with many wrappers,
that had become black through length of time : they were entire

♦ The author 3^>^^ who is quoted by Makrizi, and wlio gives the same
account, is probably the same person.

" This is from the account of Makrizi; it is also mentioned by Yakut. —
Dr. Sprenger.

334 APPENDIX.

and retained their hair, and as none of it was grey, they appeared to
have belonged to young persons ; they were stiffened so that their
joints could not be moved, and they had become as light as air :
he likewise says, that there were four circles filled with human
bodies in the well, and that the whole place was infested with
bats. He also observes that various other animals were buried
there. And he says, that he found a bundle above a cubit long,
in the form of a turban composed of very white cotton inter-
woven with red silk ; and that, upon opening it, he found a dead
lapwing completely covered with feathers as if it had just died.
From the vaulted chamber above-mentioned the higher part of
the Pyramid was accessible by a passage, about five paces wide,
but without any stairs or steps.^ He was informed that those,
who went up there in the time of Al Mamoon, came to a small
passage, containing the image of a man in green stone, which
was taken out for examination before the caliph ; and that when
it was opened a human body was discovered in golden armour,
decorated with precious stones, in his hand was a sword of inesti-
mable value, and above his head a ruby of the size of an egg,
which shone like fire, and of which Al Mamoon took possession.
The author further states, that he himself saw the case, from which
the body had been taken, and that it stood at the door of the
king's palace at Cairo, in the year 511.

EDRISL
Note by J. L. Burkhardt.

Extract from Shereef JDjemal eddyn Aboo Djafar Mohamed
Edrysys " History of the Pyramids" written in 623 a.h.^

Referring to what Aboo Zeyd Al Balkhi, the author of a geo-
graphical treatise, Aboo e' Szalt, and others relate of the passages

' According to M. Jomard's account, tlie author says, that from a cliamber a
passage conducted to the top of the Pyramid; but he seems, by his description of
the size and form of the ascending passage, to mean not the summit of the building,
but the King's Chamber.

' There appears to be a mistake in this date. See Edrisi's preface to his own
work, translated by Jaubert. 4to. Paris, 1836, p. 22.

APPENDIX. 335

by which one ascends in the interior of the Pyramid towards the
top, and of the passages that descend down to its lowest recesses,
we shall relate here tliat we ourselves entered into the Great
Pyramid, and entered into the cubic chamber, in which the
decayed and rotten stuff was found. The way to this chamber
from the aperture, that was opened by Mamoon, is as follows : —
"He, that enters the Pyramid, continues in it for about twenty
draas ; in some places in an upright, in others in a bent posture.
Daylight shines upon him until he turns walking upright to his
left hand, where he finds a sloping alley, which he ascends to the
distance of a man's length, without meeting with any level step.
Below this alley is a pit, said to be a well formed here, the
opening of which admits a feeble light. A slender person only
can enter into it. The learned Noor Eddyn-Al-Tabary has in-
formed me that he crept into it upon his stomach to the distance of
less than a man's length, and then walked in it upright upon his
legs about twenty draas, after which he reached the exterior of
the Pyramid, at a place elevated above the breach practised on
the north side, right in front of him who enters. To return now
to the description of the alley. It is ascended until a door is
reached near a block of stone, by which one ascends towards
another sloping alley. To the right of him, who ascends, is a
well situated between the two alleys and the just -mentioned
door, but below the second alley. By this door (or opening),
a square room is entered with an empty vessel in it. On
the roof of the room are writings in the most antient cha-
racters of the heathen priests. Returning from hence to the
place, through which one enters, the second alley is ascended.^
On both sides of it are blocks of stone, in which cavities
haive been cut out Avith axes to facilitate the ascent. They
are about one draa distant from each other. Another square
room is then finally reached, in which is a hole, which appears
to have been excavated there. An empty vessel is seen here
similar to the former. Youssef Al Baba e' Sherr Abou Derr
has told me, that, in company with Kalyan the Persian, he
entered into some of the descending passages of the Pyramid,
which led them to a place, from whence they found no way to
proceed."

336 APPENDIX.

" A few years ago, the red Pyramid, which is the Third or
smaller one, was opened on its lower skirt on the north side ;
hut it is not known who ojjened it. An alley was found leading
down about twenty draas, or more ; and on its extremity a
narrow place that affords room for one person only. After
which, a road is entered, of difficult and fatiguing passage,
where one creeps along upon the stomach for above twenty
draas more, until an oblong square room is reached, in which
several pits are seen, that were dug by those who went in quest
of treasures. From thence another room is entered, the four
walls of which are formed by six or seven chambers with arched
doors, as are the doors over the small private chambers in the
baths. In the middle of the space on the side, and round which
these chambers extend, is a long blue vessel quite empty. The
Shereef Abou Al Hosseyn, of the family of Mymoon Ibn Hambe,
has told me that he was present when the opening into this
Pyramid was effected by people who were in search after trea-
sures. They worked at it with axes for six months, and they
were in great numbers. They found in this vessel, after they had
broken the covering of it, the decayed, rotten remains of a man,
but no treasures on his side, except some golden tablets inscribed
with characters of a language nobody could understand. Each
man's share of these tablets amounted to one hundred dinars."^

The following extract was translated by M. Jomard : "The
Pyramids are six miles from Cairo. The height of them is four
hundred cubits, and the square of the bases the same. The
blocks, with which they were built are five cubits high, and
ten or fifteen cubits long. They diminish at the top to a space
scarcely sufficient for a camel to lie down. The way to them
is by a bridge, and by a town, called Dashoor, where Joseph
was imprisoned, a distance of three miles ;9 and to the Pyramids
is five miles ; and they are the same distance from the river.
These buildings were covered with inscriptions, which are nearly
effaced ; and in the interior of each of them there is a passage,
barely allowing of an entrance. The two Great Pyramids have
a subterraneous communication ; and they are said to have been
tombs, and previously granaries.

" This account is copied exactly fiom the MS.

^ This was probably intended for a description of the road which passes near
Saccara during the inundation.

APPENDIX. 3.37

ZAMAKSHARI.

(died 538 A.H.)

His book, entitled ^|;>j^? ^j "The Spring of the Righteous,"
contains the same account as that given by Balkhi.

ABD ALLATIF.

(born 557 A.H.)

Extracts from a " Description of the Ancient Monuments of
Egypt," by Abd Allatif, an Arabian physician of Bagdad, born in
657; translated by M. Silvester de Sacy, 1810,

" Of all the countries, that I ever visited myself, or ever
acquired any knowledge of from the researches of others, there
are none that can compare with Egypt, in regard to the immense
number of antient monuments, that it contains. Amons tlie
wonders of that country are the Pyramids, which have attracted
the attention of many authors, whose works are filled with de-
scriptions and dimensions of these buildings. There are many
of them ; and they are all situated upon the same side of the river as
Gizeh, upon the same line with the antient capital of Egypt, and
at the distance of about two days' journey from it. There are also
others at Bousir. They vary much in size. Some are constructed
with earth and bricks, but the greater number of them are built
of stone, in a form exactly pyramidal, and with a smooth and
even surface ; others are constructed in steps or degrees. There
were formerly at Gizeh a considerable number of small pyramids,
which were destroyed, in the time of Salah-eddin Youssef (the son
of Ayyoub), by Karakousch, an emir in that prince's army. He
had the superintendence of all the buildings in the capital, and
constructed the stone wall, which surrounds Fostat, Cairo, and
all the ground between those two places, and the citadel upon
the Mokattam. He also built the citadel itself, and tlie two
wells, which exist to this day, and are considered among the
wonders of Egypt ; a staircase of nearly three hundred steps
leads to the bottom of them. Karakousch built the arches, that
are still to be seen at Gizeh, with the stones of the small pyra-

VOL. II. z

338 APPENDIX.

mids, which he destroyed. There were nearly forty of these arclies ;
but In the present year, (597 of the Hegra,) they were filled
up by a rash and ignoi'ant person, to whom the care of them
was intrusted ; as he imagined that, by confining the waters,
as it were, by a dike, they would spread themselves over the
territory of Gizeh, which vvould in this manner participate
in the benefits of the inundation ; but it had exactly the
contrary effect, for the force of the waters caused three of
them to burst, without any advantage arising to the country
from the inundation. The remains of the buildings, that were
destroyed by Karakousch, are still to be seen ; I mean the small
stones and rubbish not worth taking away,

" In proceeding to describe the Three Pyramids, which are
distinguished above all the others by their immense and wonder-
ful size, it is to be remarked, that they are situated in a line at
Gizeh, in front of Fostat, and at short distances from each other,
facing the east. Two of the three are of enormous magnitude,
and are built of white stone. These are nearer together than
the Third ; which is one quarter less than the others, and is
constructed of red speckled granite so extremely hard that it
is worked with great difficulty. This monument appears small
when compared with the others ; but when viewed by itself, and
at a little distance, it is truly magnificent. The form of the
Pyramids, and their extreme solidity, are indeed well worthy of
admiration ; and have enabled them to resist the effects of time
for so many ages, that it might almost be considered that it is
Time, that experiences the eternal duration of these extraordinary
edifices;^ and the more they are considered, the more convincing
is the proof, that the most consummate genius and skill were
employed in their construction. It is also to be observed, 'Que
chacun de leurs angles, fait face a I'une des quatre vents car-
dinaux, or la violence du vent se trouve rompu, quand elle
est regu par une angle, ce qui ne serait pas si elle rencontroit
une plane.' From their pyramidal form, founded upon a square

' " Another writer, according to Makrizi, has expressed the same idea, saying,
'AH things dread the effect of Time; but that over tiie Pyramids Time lias no
power.' If these expressions, a little exaggerated, had need of any apology, their
justification would be found in that fine line, which will exist as long as the Pyra-
mids, and which is so applicable to them, 'Leur masse indestructible a fatigue le
Temps.' Was it possible that Frenchmen could neglect the opportunity of engrav-
ing it upon the Pyramids? " — M. De Sact/.

APPENDIX. 339

base, and completed to a point, the different parts rest upon and
support each other, and gravitate towards the centre.

" But to return to the two Great Pyramids. Those, who have
taken their dimensions, assert that the base of each is four
hundred black cubits in length, as many in breadth, and also in
perpendicular height. Their pyramidal form is broken at the
top, where there is a plane ten cubits square. The following
remarks are the results of mine own observations. One of our
party shot an arrow in the direction of the perpendicular height
of one of these Pyramids, and of that of its thickness towards the
base, and it fell nearly upon the half of that space.* Being
told that, in a neighbouring village, there were people who
were accustomed to ascend to the summits, we sent for one of
them, and, upon giving him a trifle, he immediately began to climb
up in the same manner, and even more expeditiously than any one
could mount a staircase,^ without even taking off his slippers, or
his clothes, which were very full.^ I desired him, when he arrived
upon the top of the Pyramid, to measure it with his turban ; and
when he came down again, we found it to be eleven cubits,
{coudee naturelle). A man, who was well versed in the art
of taking admeasurements, made the perpendicular height of
the Pyramid to be nearly three hundred and seventeen cubits ;
and to each of the sides of the four triangular planes, which in-
cline upon that perpendicular, he gave four hundred and sixty
cubits. I believe these admeasurements to be wrong,^ and that

* This sentence is very obscure.

* It is to be observed, that Abd Aliatif says, "Comme nous aurions mont^ un
escalier," &c., which would imply steps ; however, if he really saw inscriptions, the
revetment must have remained.

6 " Mr. White very justly observes in his Notes, that the passage in Pliny, where
lie says, speaking of the Pyramids, ' Pyramides sitae sunt in parte Africse, monte
saxeo sterilique, inter INIemphim oppidum et quod appellari diximus Delta, a Nilo
minus quatuor miliia passuum, a Memphi septem ; vico apposito quam vacant
Busirin, in quo sunt assueti scandere illas,' supposes that, in the time of that writer,
the Pyramids still had their revetment; for, says Mr. White, 'res erat baud san^
memorabiHs, si non perfectissima operis laevitudo, contra quam nunc est, lubricum
et difficilem ascensum prsebuerit.' The same observation has not escaped M.
Qiiatrembre de Quincy. The argument applies to the expression of Abd Aliatif,
and authorises the inference that the Pyramids retained the greatest part, at least, of
their revetment, in the thirteenth century." — M. De Saci/.

^ These admeasurements are the same as those given by Mohalh, an Arabian
writer, and quoted by Ed. Bernard; except that Mohalii only gives nine cubits
as the square on the top of the Pyramid. According to the testimony of Kircher,

340 APPENDIX.

he ought to have given four hundred cubits to the perpendicular.
If it please God that I am able to execute all my plans, I mean to
take the dimensions myself. One of the two Pyramids is open.
The opening into the interior leads to narrow passages, to deep
wells, and to pits and precipices, as I am assured by those, who
have had the courage to explore them in search of treasures. No
way through the building has been discovered ; the most fre-
quented passage ascends to a square chamber in the higher
part of the Pyramid, containing a stone sarcophagus. The open-
ing, by which the Pyramid is novv entered, is not the original
entrance, but a forced passage made, it is said, by the Caliph
Mamoon.^ Many of my companions entered this opening, and

Joseph Ben -Altiphasi, that is to say, i^'^'-*^^^ (jJ *-'***'>:* in his 'History
of Egypt,' and Ebn-Salamas in his worii styled ' Le Jardin des Merveilles du
Monde,' make the height of tlie Pyramid to be three hundred and seventeen cubits,
and give four hundred and sixty cubits to each of the sides of the equilateral tri-
angles which form the inclined planes. (See Ebn-Salamas, M.Sim, Assemani, and
M. Schnurrer.) Abd Allatif observes, that these admeasurements appear to be
incorrect, and that four hundred cubits ought to have been given as the height of the
Pyramids. There certainly is an error in the dimensions here given, considering
the present condition of the Pyramid ; but Abd Allatif's supposition is still more
incorrect, because, supposing a regular quadrangular pyramid, complete in all its
parts, of which the base is four hundred and sixty cubits, and all the triangles equi-
lateral, their sides, being all of equal dimensions, would be four hundred and sixty
cubits, and consequently the height of the Pyramid would be 325-26; and supposing
tiie same Pyramid to be broken, and terminated by a section of ten cubits, the
height would be reduced to 3 1 8- 19, which is not far from the given number, three
hundred and seventeen ; only, it must be observed that, in saying that the equi-
lateral triangles, which form the four inclined planes of the Pyramid, have for their
common dimensions four hundred and sixty cubits, the triangles have been sup-
posed to be perfect, and no regard has been paid to the dilapidation of the build-
ing, which changes the triangles into ' trapezium isosceles,' of which the two
parallel sides have the inferior side four hundred and sixty cubits, and the superior
side ten cubits, and of which the two equal sides have each four hundred and
fifty cubits. When Abd Allatif says, that four hundred cubits ought to have been
given as the height of the Pyramid, perhaps he had heard of the apotheme; because,
according to the dimensions given, if no regard was paid to the Pyramid having
been broken off, the dimensions of its apotheme would be 398-37 cubits, which is
not far from four hundred. As to the rest, in order to know the exact dimensions of
the three Great Pyramids, the * Description of the Pyramids of Gizeh,' by M.
Grobert, should be consulted.''— M. Be Scicy.

^ " It appears to me very doubtful that the first opening of the Great Pyramid was
made by tiie Caliph Mamoon. My doubts arise from the manner in which Denys
de Telmahre, a Jacobite patriarch of Antioch, who accompanied Mamoon into
Egypt, speaks of the Pyramid, which, when he visited it, was already open. What
I have said upon this subject may be found in my ' Observations sur le Nom des

APPENDIX. 341

went up into the chamber constructed in the top of the Pyra-
mid. Upon their return, they related the wonderful things they
had seen, and told us that the passage was nearly stopped up with
bats and dirt ; that the bats were as large as pigeons, and that
in the upper part were openings and windows, which appeared
to have been made to admit air and light. When I again visited
the Pyramids, I entered this passage with several people, but
having penetrated about two-thirds into the interior, and having
through fear completely lost my senses, I returned half dead.

" These Pyramids are built of great stones, from ten to twenty
cubits in length, and from two to three cubits in thickness and
breadth. The extreme exactness with which they have been
worked and laid is worthy of the utmost admiration. The joints
are so perfect, that it would be impossible to pass a needle or
even a hair between them. They are cemented together by a

Pyramides.' M. Wahl observes, that some Eastern historians attribute the first
opening of the Pyramid to the Caliph Mahmoud ; and others, to Haroun Al Raschid :
but he does not mention the Works from which he forms this opinion. lie must,
at all events, have made some mistake, because none of the caliphs before Mamoon
bore the name of Mahmoud. Or did M. Wahl mean to speak of the Caliph Mahdi,
whose name was Mahommed? The common tradition, however, which attributes
to Mamoon the opening of the Pyramid, is founded upon the testimony of Masoudi,
who wrote about a century after the time of this caliph. According to Makrizi,
Masoudi reports this fact in a work entitled ' Histoire des Temps Passees et des
Choses, que la Fortune a detruites,' and he there says, 'That Abd-Allah Mamoon
son of Haroun Al Raschid, having come into Egypt, and having visited the Pyra-
mids, wanted to demolish one of them to see what tliey contained ; and that, upon its
being represented to him as an undertaking, in whicii he would not succeed, he an-
swered, 'An opening must be made ;' upon which his orders were obeyed ; and the
chasm was made, by the help of fire, vinegar,' &:c., which is to be seen at this day,
I examined this passage, as quoted by Makrizi, and it is said, that 'Raschid having
arrived in Egypt, and having seen the Pyriunids,' &c., but I have no doubt
that this is an error in the manuscript, for i do not recollect that any other
Arabian writer has mentioned any voyage of Haroun Al Raschid into Egypt.
Ebn Haukal, a contemporary of Masoudi, contents himself with saying, that
one of the Caliphs, Abbasis, who he believed to be Mamoon or Motasem, had an
idea of destroying the Pyramids, but that he gave up the project, after having
ascertained that the whole of the revenue of Egypt would not be sufficient to defray
the expenses of the enterprise. I have quoted this passage from Ebn Haukal
after Makrizi, in my ' Notice de la Geographie Orientale, d'Ebn Haukal,' where
it may be seen, and I have since found it in the manuscript of Ebn Haukal, in the
library of the University of Leyden. May it not be supposed, that the Pyramid
had been opened before Mamoon, and that the orders, given by that prince to
prosecute still further the researches into the interior of the Pyramid, gave rise to
the idea that he made the first opening? " — M. De Sacy.

342 APPENDIX.

layer of mortar not thicker than a sheet of paper ; with the com-
position of which I am totally unacquainted. The stones were
inscribed with antient characters, now unintelligible. I never met
with a person in all Egypt, who had even heard of any one who
understood them. The inscriptions are so numerous, that copies
of those alone, which may be seen upon the surface of the two
Pyramids, would occupy above ten thousand pages.^ I have read
in some of the books of the antient Sabaans, that one of these
two Pyramids is the tomb of Agathodaemon, and the other of
Hermes, who are said to have been two great proj^hets, of whom
Agathodsemon was the most famous and the most antient. It
is also said, that people used to come from all parts of the world
on a pilgrimage to these tombs.

9 "I translate *Aa:^\>!5 'pages,' and not like Pococke, 'books:' ' Confecerit
numerum decies miliium librorum.' It is c^t.:s\Aa^, and not ^tXx:s\AS, which
means 'a volume.'

" Here, assuredly, is a positive proof, and I cannot resist again repeating what I
have said in my remarks on Mr. White's edition. When one considers the
style of Abd Allatif, and the character constantly maintained by him, of an
impartial observer and an authentic historian, it is impossible to reject his evidence
upon a subject of so much importance, and upon which he expresses himself
in so decided a manner. His authority is strengthened, also, by that of many
other still more antient Arabian writers ; and even when his expressions appear a
little exaggerated, I do not think that the negative proof that is endeavoured to be
drawn from the silence of some of the most respectable historians, can weaken the
statement of an eye-witness so deserving of implicit faith. The weight of this
testimony is also increased by the words of Abd Allatif in some lines further on,
wherein, speaking of the traditions which existed relative to the destination and origin
of the Pyramids, he says, ' I have written at length upon that subject in my great
work, and I have related what others have said of these buildings : I refer those of
my readers to that work, therefore, who are desirous of further details. I confine
myself here to give an account of what I myself have seen.'

" I have said that many other Arabian writers before Abd Allatif agreed with
him respecting hieroglyphical inscriptions on the Pyramids, I will now quote some
of them. Masoudi, an author who flourished in the beginning of the fourth
century of the Hegra, and who wrote in Egypt, says, 'The Pyramids are buildings
of immense height, and of wonderful construction; the surfaces are covered with
inscriptions, written in the characters of antient nations and kingdoms which no
lono-er exist. What this writing is, and what it signifies, are not known.'

"Ebn-Khordadbeh, a traveller, and author of a 'Geographical Description of
the Mahometan Countries,' written in the third century of the Hegra, in a passage
quoted by Makrizi, thus expresses himself, ' All the mysteries of magic, and
all the recipes of the medical art, are written upon these Pyramids in Musnad
characters.'

" Makrizi also quotes from another writer, — ' We have seen the surfaces
of the two Great Pyramids covered with writings from the top to the bottom.

APPENDIX. 3 13

" I refer those, who wish for a more detailed account, to my
great work upon the Pyramids, in which I have inserted tlie
opinion of otliers respecting them ; in tliis, I confine myself to
the relation of what I myself saw of them. When Malec-alaziz
Othman Ben Youssef succeeded his father, he was prevailed
upon hy some persons of his court, — people totally devoid of sense
and judgment, — to attempt the demolition of the Pyramids. He
accordingly sent miners, and quarrymen, under the superin-
tendence of some of the principal officers and emirs of his court,
with orders to destroy the red Pyramid, which is the least of
the three. They encamped near it, collected labourers from all
parts of the country at a vast expense, and endeavoured with
great assiduity for eight months to execute the commission, with

The lines were close, and well inscribed opposite each other. They were written
in the characters that were in use among those, who constructed the buildings, the
letters are now unknown, and the sense cannot be discovered."

" Ebn Haukal, a traveller and writer of the fourth century of the Hegra, states
also, that the exterior faces of the Great Pyramids were covered with writing,
in characters, which he calls Greek-Syriac (if there is no mistake in the manuscript
of his work, belonging to the Library at Leghorn, and which I have now before me).
But, according to the passage quoted by Makrizi from Ebn Haukal, the characters
were Greek.

" William de Baldefisel, who travelled in the Holy Land and in Egypt in the
beginning of the fourteenth century, asserts, that he saw, upon the two Great
Pyramids, inscriptions in various characters. ' In quihus,' says he, ' inveni
scripturas diversorum idiomatuni ; ' and he gives an inscription in six Latin verses.

" The learned Greaves, in his ' Pyramidographia,' seems to doubt what the
Arabs say of these inscriptions; but the authorities, that he had before him, were not
so precise as those which I have quoted. Herodotus speaks of a single in-
scription upon the Pyramid of Cheops, which does not seem to agree with the
multitude of inscriptions mentioned by the Arabs, but he may only, perhaps, speak
of it on account of the singularity of its contents. From what the historian snys
of this inscription in Egyptian characters, I do not know whether one can abso-
lutely conclude, with his learned translator, that this inscription was in common
characteis, and not in hieroglyphics, although it may have been so, and the others
in hieroglyphics. Mr. White, to account for the silence of Greek and Latin writers
in regard to the writings asserted by Arabian authors to have been inscribed upon
the Pyramids, makes a very judicious observation, which I shall give in his own
words : — ' Tanta scilicet hieroglyphicorum characterum erat copia passim in
iEgypto, ut sine admiralione in oculos spectantium incurrerent, neque digni visi
fuerint qui in historiam referrentur. Ob eandem causam factum est, ut in descrip-
tionibus obeliscorum, qui a solo ad summum cacumen ca;lati sunt notis hierouly-
phicis, talium notarum memoria a plurimis veterum sit negiecla.'

"Itmnstbeatthe same time confessed, that, according to the accounts of various
travellers the highest part of the revetment of the Second Pyramid, \Nhich is still
to be seen, is witiiout any hieroglyphical writings. This, however, only proves

344 APPENDIX.

which they were intrusted, removing each day, with great diffi-
culty, one or tvco stones, which were forced out of their places
by levers and wedges, and afterwards drawn down with cords.
When at last one of these enormous blocks fell, the tremendous
noise was heard at an immense distance, and the concussion
shook the ground, and made the mountains tremble. On its
fall it became so deeply imbedded in the sand, that it was
moved with the greatest difficulty, when it was broken up by
means of wedges, and the fragments were conveyed to the foot of
the adjoining mountain. At length, having exhausted all their
pecuniary resources, their resolution grew proportionably weaker
as their labour and difficulties increased, and they were at last
obliged to give up the undertaking as hopeless. This took place
in the year of the Hegra 593. Considering the vast masses
that have been taken away, it might be supposed that the build-
ing would have been completely destroyed ; but so immense is
the pile, that the stones are scarcely missed ; and it is only on
one of its sides that any trace of the impression, which was at-
tempted to be made, can be discovered, and on which the revet-
ment is imperfect.! Observing one day the extreme labour it

that the whole of the entire surfaces were not covered with them. It is also said,
that no remains of hieroglyphics whatever are to be found, either upon the numerous
fragments which are scattered about the base of the Pyramids, or upon any
of the pieces of granite or marble which formerly made part of their revetment,
and which are at this day to be found at Gizeh and elsewiiere, where they serve for
lintels, thresholds, and door-posts ; but it may be doubted whether this fact has ever
been satisfactorily ascertained, which after all affords only a negative argument." —
M. De Sacy.

' " It appears that at the time when Abd Allatif wrote, the three Great Pyramids
had still their revetment entire, whicli induced him to believe that the Third had
been built entirely of red granite. In the " Description of the Pyramids of Gizeh,"
by M. Grobert, this species of granite is described very correctly ; but there are
several faults in the printing.

" 'The revetment of this Pyramid has been removed in modern times. The
fine pieces of Elephantine granite, which are heaped up near its base, still retain
their rectangular form (I'appareil des deux pavemens taille a I'equerre), which in-
contestably proves that the surface had been constructed in ascending steps.'

" Norden says, that the summit of the Second Pyramid is covered with granite on
the four sides; but this assertion, entirely contrary to the accounts of Arabian
authors, is completely refuted by M. Grobert.

"Many Arabia nauthors name the Third Pyramid (^ )y^' which must be trans-
lated 'coloured, or of colour,' not 'painted.'

" M. Wahl has substituted 'basalt' for 'granite,' in his account of Abd
Allatif; but the reasons which he gives for doing so do not justify that translation."
~-M. De Sacy.

APPENDIX. 345

required to remove one of the blocks, I asked an overseer, who
was superintending the operations, whether, if a thousand pieces
of gold were offered to hiui, he would undertake to replace it
in its original position ; he answered, that if he were to be given
many times that sum, he could not do so."

Booh IV. Chap. 3 and 4.

In the " Prolegomenes Historiques" of Ebn Khaldoun, in M.
De Sacy's "Abd Allatif," it is mentioned that Mamoon could only
destroy a small portion of one of the Pyramids ; that the work-
men penetrated into an open space between the exterior and
the internal masonry ; that the chasm might be seen in the
author's time ; and that, according to some people, a treasure
had been found, but that that was uncertain.

Booh V. Chap. 4.

It is also stated, that when the Persians conquered Egypt,
they forced open the tombs in search of treasure, and took away
great riches from the Pyramids, which were the sepulchres of the
kins:s : and that the Greeks afterwards did the same.

The patriarch (Denys Telmahre) also says, "We have seen in
Egypt those buildings, (of which they pretend St. Gregoire de
Nazianze spoke in his discourse.) They are not, as has been
supposed, the granaries of Joseph, but wonderful mausolea
erected over the tombs of their antient kings. They are oblique
(that is to say, inclined planes) and solid, and are not hollow or
empty .^ I have looked through an opening, fifty cubits deep, made
in one of those buildings, and I found that it was constructed
of wrought stones, disposed in regular layers. The bases of the
buildings are squares of five hundred cubits measured in cubits

^ It might almost be inferred that the author intended to express that tliey were
solid masses, without chambers or apartments, particularly, as in common with
many other writers, he describes them as monuments erected over the tombs of
kings. This certainly appears to be the case, in every instance, excepting in the
Great Pyramid — the one to which he alludes; he therefore could only have judged
of the interior of it from the excavations, and must have received his information
from tradition, or from other sources.

346 APPENDIX.

of ,' and their elevation is two hundred and fifty cubits.

The stones, with which they are built, are from five to ten cubits
in size, and are all wrouglit. At a distance, these buildings
appear like immense mountains." Denys further says, "That
he saw a house built upon the Nile, where the river is only one
stream, before it divides into four branches. This house is like
a square reservoir, in the middle of which is a stone column
marked with degrees and admeasurements. When the river
rises in the month of Elul, the waters rise in the interior of this
house, and inspectors come every day to ascertain by the column
how much they have increased. If they are below 14°, it proves
that only a small portion of the land of Egypt is watered,
no seeds are sown, and no taxes are raised; if the waters rise to
15° or 16°, there is a middling harvest, and the taxes are laid in
proportion; but when they attain to 17° or 18°, it indicates that
the whole of Egypt is inundated, and the harvest and taxes are
then complete ; if the waters rise to 20°, the country is com-
pletely desolated, and there is no harvest that year."

YAKUT.

DIED 626 A.H., ACCORDING TO HADGI KHALFA.

His "Geographical and Historical Dictionary" contains. most of
the quotations and authorities, which are cited by Soyuti, Makrizi,
and other authors, respecting the Pyramids.

ABOU MOTHAFFER YOUSSEF BEN KAZALI,

{Generally called Sibt Al Jauzi,)
died 654 A.H.

MSS. Bodleian Library, Oxford.
He says, in his Mirat-ezzeman, that among the wonders of Egypt
are the two Pyramids : the height of each of them is five hundred
cubits, and the squares of the bases are the same. They diminish
towards the top. Upon them there are seven sorts of writing:

^ " The word was eflTuced in ilie manuscript."— ill Be Smy.

APPENDIX. 347

I.Greek; 2. Arabic ;* 3. Syriac ; 4. Masnadlc; 5. Himyaritic ;^
6. Roomisli ; 7. Persian.

He adds, that the Caliph Mamoon Ben Ilaroun Al Raschid
came to Egypt,^ and wished to take down one of the Pyra-
mids to see what it contained. He was told that it was impos-
sible; he answered, that at least it must be opened. He made
a chasm, which the author says was to be seen in the Great
Pyramid. Having penetrated twenty cubits, a vessel was found
full of coined gold, each piece of which was a dinar in weight,
one thousand dinars in all, and two hundred dinars besides.
There was also a tablet, according to some accounts, of gold, to
others, of coloured marble, with an inscription in antient charac-
ters, as follows:^ "King , son of King , in the year

, will open this Pyramid, and will expend in doing so a

certain sum. We here repay him what he has laid out : if he
continues his researches, he will be at a great expense, and will
obtain nothing more." The caliph was greatly astonished : he
admired the beauty and excellence of the money, and ordered an
account to be drawn up of the expenses of the excavation, which,
to his surprise, exactly amounted to the money he had discovered ;
he therefore observed that the antient people were very wise, and
had a knowledge of future events, to which no other persons
could ever attain.^ It was said that the vessel was made out
of an emerald, and that it was taken by order of the caliph to

* There are two manuscripts at Oxford — tlie one numbered 660 mentions, in-
stead of Arabic, Hebrew. — Dr. Sprevger.

^ A difference is made between Himyaritic and Musnad — see the note on Abou
Ma'sher. The MS. 660, bears Hirilic, instead of Himyaritic. Eichhorn has given
some account of the once powerful empire of Hira : a more detailed notice is con-
tained in Masondi's " Golden Meadows." — Dr. Sprcnger.

« Makrizi, Soyuti, and the " Mirat-Ezzeman," by Ben Yugi, state that the
Pyramid was opened by one of the Abbasides. A MS. in the Bodleian Library
affirms that the Pyramid was opened by Al Raschid ; but Makrizi quotes from
Masoudi that it was forced by Al Mamoon. — Dr. Sprenger.

7 This is copied with some alterations and additions from Masoudi.— Dr.
Sprenger.

« Masoudi, and those who copy from him, do not mention an inscription, but
merely relate that Al Raschid, or Al Mamoon, being surprised at finding the money,
ordered it to be counted, when it was found equal to the expenditure. From Ma-
soudi's account, it would appear that the caliph was not himself present when the
treasure was discovered, but that the workmen sent him some of the money, when
he admired the coinage and beauty of the metal, and ordered an account of the
expenses incurred to be drawn up. — Dr. Sprenger.

348 APPENDIX.

Basfdad, and was there considered one of the wonders of
Egypt. Several people also examined the chasm, of whom
some perished, and others returned in safety.

AL MAKIN.
(died 672 A.H.)

In the first part of his history (MS. Arab. Christiana, No. 47 in
Nicol's Cat.,) states that Hermes built the Pyramids; and that the
antient kings, together with their treasures, were buried in them,
as it was believed that they would return again to the world. It
was also reported, that they were the granaries of Joseph.

JEMAL ED DIN MOHAMMED AL WATWATI
AL KANINI AL WATWATI.^

(died 718 A.H.)

He narrates the story of Surid, and also the tradition that Hermes
built the Pyramids. He likewise mentions that the Sabaeans
performed pilgrimages to them.

" The height of the Pyramid," he says, " is three hundred and
seventeen cubits, and the length of each angle is four hundred and
sixty cubits ; the top is a square of six cubits ; the length of every
stone is five cubits ; the height of the stones, fifty-two cubits." He
states that there are seven entrances ; each composed of one stone,
and closed by one lock, with such exactness that they cannot be
forced open ; that there are seven chambers, dedicated to the seven
planets ; and in every chamber an idol of gold, with one hand
Tipon the mouth, and with an inscription in Sind upon the fore-
head ; that upon reading the inscription the idol opens its
mouth, and discloses a key, which admits to various apartments.

' This author is quoted by Soyuti. — Dr. Sprenger.

APPENDIX. 349

SHEHAB EDDIN AHMED BEN YAHYA.

DIED (between 741 AND 749 A.H.)

His Writings are in Twenty Volumes, and contain a great deal of
Information. {Only the First Volume is in the Bodleian
Library. Uris Cat. 900.)^

The most celebrated of the Pyramids of Egypt are the two at Gizeh.
There are many traditions as to the time and purport of their con-
struction. It has been asserted that they were temples sacred to
the stars, that they were tombs, or that they were built to con-
tain books and treasures, and for places of refuge during the
deluge; they appeared, however, to the author to have been
tombs.

" The Great Pyramid was opened by Al Mamoon, but nothing
was discovered as to the motive, or time of its construction.*
The gold found in it was weighed, and it was exactly the
same sum which had been expended, and which had not been
previously calculated.^

" Each of the Pyramids was consecrated to a star.

"1. The Sabaeans performed regular pilgrimages to the great
one, and also visited the others, which were less perfect.

" 2. Every pyramid presents the form of a lantern. It begins
at its base as an equilateral triangle, which diminishes as it rises,
so that it is surrounded by equilateral sides. This form indicates
that it was sacred to a star."

The author says, that he " often went to Gizeh, and examined
the Pyramids to ascertain how much had been destroyed. They
were smoothly built, so that one stone covered another, and the
joints were close.

*' As some of the Pyramids are composed of bricks, it is evident
that they are posterior to the flood."

' See "Mem. de I'Acad. des Inscriptions." Vol. i. p. 354.

* A chasm here appears in the MS. — Dr. Sprenger.

' This story is mentioned by many authors, and also in the "True Chronicles;"
but it is probable that Al Mamoon did not find any thing witliin the Pyramid : he
certainly does not appear to have made any essential discoveries. — Dr. Sprenger.

350 APPENDIX.

THE FAMOUS TRAVELLER, IBN BATUTA.
(about 730 A.H.)

He says that the Pyramids were constructed by Hermes, the same
person as Enoch and Edris, to preserve the arts and sciences, and
other scientific acquirements, during the flood.

He details the history of the dream which occurred to Surid,
and his consequent deliberations with the priests, who foretold
that the Pyramid would be opened on the northern side ; and he,
therefore, ordered a sum of money, equal to the expenses of the
excavation, to be placed there. He also records the inscription
" I have built them," &c., and adds, that Al Mamoon effected the
entrance by means of fire, vinegar, and battering engines.'*

" KITAB SUCCARDAN," by EBN ABOU HAJALAH
AHMED BEN YAHYA ALTELEMSANI.

(died 776 A.H.)

British Museum MSS. Add. 5927 and 7319. — (Bodleian Library,
Oxford, in NicoVs Catalogue, No. 140.)

It is mentioned, that there is a subterraneous passage by which
the Nile enters into the Great Pyramid, and besides quotations
from various authors, the following accounts are given : —

In the days of Ahmed Ben Touloun a party entered the Great
Pyramid. They found in one of the chambers a goblet of glass of
rare colour and texture. When they came back they missed one of
the party and upon returning to seek him, he came out to them
naked, and laughing said, "do not follow or seek for me," and
then rushed back into the Pyramid. They perceived that he was
enchanted, and told the circumstance to Ahmed Ben Touloun,
who forbad that any should enter the Pyramid, and took posses-
sion of the goblet of glass, which was afterwards weighed, and
found to be of the same weight when empty, and when full of
water.

■• This account is from a MS. belonging to M. de Gogangos. — Dr. Sprenger.

APPENDIX. 351

When Al Mamoon opened the fissure, which exists at present
in the Great Pyramid, and had advanced about twenty cubits, he
found a green crypt containing coined gold. Tlie weight of every
dinar was an ounce.^ He was surprised at the excellence and
redness of the money, and found upon calculation, that it exactly
amounted to the sum, which he had expended in making the
excavation. It was also said that golden statues adorned with
jewels were discovered by a party in several chambers in the
Pyramid, who having brought away as many as they could carry,
found upon their coming out that one of their companions
was wanting ; who, whilst they were considering what was to be
done, came out to them naked, and laughing wildly, exclaimed,
" Sal Salabre, Sal Salabre," and then returned within the building.

From the Camoos (Dictionary) of FIRAZABADI.

(he died 816 A.H.)

The Haraman are supposed to be either two antient buildings
erected in Egypt by Edris, to preserve the arts and sciences,
and other knowledge, during the deluge ; or the buildings of
Sinan Ben el Moshalshal; (or the buildings of the antient ante-
diluvians), erected in consequence of the stars foretelling the
deluge. They contained every sort of charm and talisman.
There were also many smaller Pyramids.

EBN ABD AL HOKM,

GIVEN BY PROFESSOR GREAVES,

Repeats the account of Surid given by Masoudi, and of the open-
ing of the Pyramid by Al Mamoon, which has been already in-
serted, when several embalmed bodies are said to have been
found in ditferent apartments, and also one in golden armour, in-
closed with a ruby and sword in a case in the form of a human
figure ; he adds, that the Pyramid remained open, and was visited
for many years.

* " Oukiyali " may possibly be the same as the Latin uncia.

352 APPENDIX.

MAKRIZI.

(died 845 A.H.)

His work on Egypt is No. 671 in Uri's Catalogue; and, in page
96, he observes, that besides many others there are eighteen Pyra-
mids between Busir and Gizeh ; that some of them are small and
constructed with unburnt bricks, but that they are in general built
with stone. A few are in steps or stages, but most of them have
an inclined continuous form, and a smooth surface. A con-
siderable number are situated at Gizeh opposite to Old Cairo
Fostat ; most of the smaller have been destroyed by Karakousch,
(the vizier of Salah-eddin Youssef Ben Ayoub), who built with the
materials Kela Gebel (the citadel), the walls of Cairo (Mesr), and
the causeway with arches near Gizeh. He says, that there were
various traditions respecting the three larger Pyramids at Gizeh,
but that it was not known by whom, or for what purpose, they had
been constructed. The author appears to have taken his remarks
principally from " Abd Allatif," and then proceeds on the authority
of listed Ibrahim Ebn Wasyff Shah to give the account of Surid
Ben Shaluk, related by Masoudi. He afterwards says, that the
square of the base, and the height of the Great Pyramid, are five
hundred cubits, each consisting of twenty-four inches ;^ that the
four sides are equilateral, and that a line from the summit of the
building down the centre of either of them would measure, if the
Pyramid were perfect, five hundred cubits, but in its present state
only four hundred and seventy. He states, that in a perfect state,
the perpendicular height would be above four hundred cubits; that
the base contains 500,000 square cubits. He considers that it is
the most beautiful and extraordinary monument that was ever
contrived, and that nothing can be compared with it. The exca-
vation he attributes to the Caliph Al Mamoon, who, he says,
ascended by a passage into a square chamber, where he found
the sarcophagus which yet remains in it. The author then
quotes from the fihrist (index) of Ibrahim Alwatwati al Warrak,'''

* The MS. at Oxford is much defaced, but in a copy in the British Museum,
7317, these dimensions are said to be taken from Ali Ben Risvvan, an Arab
physician: Makrizi's whole account is indeed taken from other authorities. — Dr.
Sprenger.

^ According to M. Jomard's translation in the " INIemoirs of the Institute," this
author says, that a square chamber in the centre of the Great Pyramid, contains

APPENDIX. 353

that there was a great uncertainty about the history of Hermes
of Babel ; that according to some accounts he was one of the
seven keepers in the temples,'' whose business it was to guard the
seven houses ; and that he belonged to the temple of the planet
Mercury, and acquired his name from his office, for Mercury,
signifies in the Teradamian language, Hermes. He is also said
to have reigned in Egypt, and to have had several children,*
Taut, Aishm, Atrid, Koft. It is added, that he was renowned
for his wisdom ; and that he was buried in a building called Abou
Hermes; and that his wife, or, according to other accounts, his
son and successor, was buried in another ; and that these two
monuments were the Pyramids, and were called Haraman ;
that the height and breadth of the Great Pyramid were four
hundred and eighty Hasheme cubits, and that the summit was a
square of forty cubits, upon which an image had originally been
placed.

He then cites from other authors, as follows : —

Mohammed Ben el Arabi, called also Mohiy Ed Din, —
that the Pyramids were built by a people who believed in the
metempsychosis, and that they were made use of in computing
time.

Abul Sorur, — that the Pyramids were built by Hermes, or
by kings, who were ambitious of the same distinction after their
death, which they had possessed when alive.

Ben Matuy, — the discoveries are attributed to the Caliph
Mamoon, and an account is given of the Pyramid of Meidoun.

Mohammed Ebn Abd Al Hokm, — that the Pyramids were
constructed by Sheddad Ben Ad before the deluge ; for that,
if they had been built after that event had taken place, some
positive and certain accounts of them would have remained.

Ibrahim Ben Ebn Wasyff Shah, — that the Pyramids were
built by Surid, an antediluvian king, that they are defended by
three guardians, and communicate with the Nile by means of a

a tomb made of polislied stone, which had been painted ; and also two statues, tlie
one of a man holding a tablet of hieroglyphics, the other of a woman bearing a golden
mirror; that between them was a vase containing a golden box full of liquid blood,
closed up with bitumen ; and that mummies of a man and of a woman, with idols
and religious instruments, bad been placed in the tomb.

3 See Hammer ; Purgstall, " Sur I'lnfluence Mahommedisme dans les Trois
Premiers Siecles de I'Hegra" in the " Fundgriiben des Orients."— J>. Spreiiger.

* The names of the children of Hermes are written in the margin of the MS.—
Dr. Sprengcr.

VOL. II. A A

354 APPENDIX.

canal. Historical events, and astronomical and medical treatises,
were engraved upon them. The First was especially dedicated to
history and astronomy ; the Second to medical knowledge, and
contained, in thirty chambers of granite, talismans, malleable
glass, and other treasures ; the priests were buried in sarcophagi
made of granite, in the Third, and their annals were deposited
with them. The stones of which the Pyramids are composed
were fastened by iron rods through their centres, and by melted
lead, and had been worked down from the top. These buildings
were one hundred royal (five hundred common) cubits in height.
They had all of them entrances forty cubits high ; that of the
eastern looked towards the east, of the Second to the west, and
that of the Third to the south ; that the entrances were one
hundred cubits from the centre of their respective fronts, where
the passages commenced.^

Abou Abd Allah Mohammed Ben Abdurakim Alkaisi, —
that the Pyramids had quadrangular bases, and triangular sides ;
that they were eighteen in number ; that the three largest were
opposite to Fostat, and had bases five hundred cubits square,
and were of the same height. That the largest (Haroun Youssef)
was five hundred cubits in height, and had a circumference
of two thousand. It was constructed with stones fifty cubits square.
He also says, that the highest Pyramid was at the town of
Haroun Misr ; that it was like a mountain, and was built in five
terraces, and was called " Meidoun."

Abou Yazid al Balkhi, — that an inscription was found upon
a stone in the eastern Pyramid, which declared that, at the time
when the two Pyramids were built, tlie Eagle was in conjunction
with Gemini, 72,000 solar years before the Hegra.^

Abou Mohammed al Hassan Ben Ahmed Ben Yakub al
Hamadani, — that the Pyi'amids were antediluvian, and that they
resisted the force of the flood.

From another author, that the construction of the two

* M. Jomard imagines that the entrances are intended to be described as being
forty cubits within the buildings, and that the passages were filled up with masonry
for the distance of one hundred cubits.

® According to M. Jomard's translation of this author, Leo was in conjunction
with Cancer. He remarks, that this account is very obscure; and says, that the
traditions that the Pyramids were antediluvian buildings only prove their great
antiquity, and that nothing certain was known about them; for that they have been
attributed to Venephes, the fourth king of the first dynasty, and to Sensupliis, the
second king of the fourth Memphite race.

APPENDIX. 355

Pyramids, to the westward of Fostat, was considered one of
the wonders of the world ; that they were squares of four
hundred cubits, and faced the cardinal points. One was sup-
posed to have been the tomb of Agathodeemon, the other that of
Hermes, who reigned in Egypt for one thousand years ; both of
them were said to have been inspired persons, and to have been
endowed with prophetic powers. That according to other ac-
counts, these monuments were the tombs of Sheddad Ben Ad,
and of other monarchs who conquered Egypt.

Ebn Ofeir, that it was reported that Sheddad Ben Ad built
the Pyramids.

In the " Manahiy al Fikr," by Talal Uldin Mohammed Ben
Ibrahim Alwatvvati al Warrak, the same tradition is mentioned,
but the names have the terminations of Hebrew plurals ; Shed-
dak (Sheddad) Ben Adim, Ben Nerdesliir, Ben Cophtim, Ben
Mizraim; and Sheddad is said to be an Egyptian. According to
the testimony of the same author, (907 in Uri's Catalogue), and
to that of Abou Mohammed Mustafa (785 Uri's Catalogue),
the Adites worshipped the moon.

In an account written about 800 a.h., it is said, that Sheddad
Ben Ad reigned over the whole world; that the Adites were
very powerful, and peculiarly favoured by the Almighty ; that
they were giants, and endowed with supernatural strength, and
exclaimed, "Who is stronger than we?" It is stated, that the
Deity replied, " Do you not know that God, who created
you, is stronger?" But that, notwithstanding repeated expos-
tulations and the warnings of the Prophet Hud, sent for their
admonition, they continued rebellious, and were destroyed by the
Almighty.^

Abou Szalt^ of Spain, says, in his " Risaleh" (Memoirs),
that it is evident, from their works, that the antient Egyptians
possessed great knowledge and science, particularly in geometry
and astronomy ; and mentions, in support of this opinion, the
Pyramids and Barabi,^ which had excited the admiration and
astonishment of all beholders : " For what," he asks, "can be more
surprising than these immense buildings, consisting of enormous
blocks, with equilateral triangular sides, four hundred and sixty
cubits in height, and which, besides the beauty of their proportions,

^ This is mentioned in the 89th chapter of the Koran. — Dr. Sprer.ger.

^ This author is mentioned by Edrisi. — Vr, Sprcnger.

' This appears to be an Egyptian word adopted liy the Arabs.

356 APPENDIX.

possess a solidity, that neither tempests nor time can destroy?"
The author then quotes the verses of Motanebbi, mentioned by
Ebn Al Werdi;2 and also says, that the Pyramids were supposed
to have been the tombs of antient kings, who were as desirous of
posthumous glory as they had been of renown during their exist-
ence, and who intended, by these buildings, to transmit their
names to remote posterity.

He mentions, that when the Caliph Al Mamoon arrived in
Egypt, he ordered the Pyramids to be opened, and that an exca-
vation was accordingly made in one of them with great labour and
expense, which, at length, disclosed an ascending narrow pas-
sage, dreadful to look at, and difficult to pass. At the end of it
was a quadrangular chamber, about eight cubits square, and
within it a sarcophagus. The lid was forced open, but nothing
was discovered excepting some bones completely decayed by
time ; upon which the caliph declined any further examina-
tion, as the expenses had been very great, particularly in provi-
sions for the workmen. The author then observes, that it has
been mentioned, that Hermes, called Trismegistus, and, in
Hebrew, Enoch, having ascertained, from the appearances of
the stars, that the deluge would take place, built the Pyramids to
contain his treasures, and books of science and knowledge, and
other matters, worth preserving from oblivion and ruin ; but that
it has also been said, that the founder of the Pyramids was
either Surid Ben Shaluk, or Sheddad Ben Ad ; that the Copts
did not believe that the Amalekites came to Egypt, but that
the Pyramids were built by Surid in consequence of a dream, in
which he saw appearances in the heavens, which portended the
flood ; that he built them in six months, and covered them with
coloured silk, and placed upon them the inscription already
mentioned, — "I have built," &c. He likewise says, that the sur-
faces of the two Pyramids were covered with inscriptions from the
top to the bottom, and that the lines were close to one another,
but almost erased ; but that it was not positively known who built
them, nor what was the meaning of the inscriptions ; in short, that
every thing connected with them was mysterious, and the traditions
respecting them various and contradictory ; at the same time,
that they commanded such admiration and astonishment, that they
were actually worshipped. He adds, that the caliph ordered his
people to ascend the Great Pyramid, which they accomplished in

' Ebn Al Werdi's writings have been translated by Frehn.— Dr. Sprenger.

APPENDIX. 357

three hours, and found at the summit a space sufficient for eight
camels to lie down, and upon it a hody, wrapped up in cloths, so
much decomposed by time, that scarcely any part of them remained,
except an embroidery of gold. A hall was likewise mentioned in
this Pyramid, whence three doors led to as many chambers ; that
the doors were ten cubits long and five broad, and were composed
of marble slabs, beautifully put together, and inscribed with
unknown characters. They are said to have resisted their
efforts for three days; but being at length forced open, three
marble columns were discovered at the distance of ten cubits, sup-
porting the images of three birds in flames of fire. Upon the
first, was that of a dove, formed of green stone ; upon the second,
that of a hawk, of yellow stone ; and upon the third, the image
of a cock, of red stone. Upon moving tlie hawk, the door which
was opposite moved, and upon lifting it up, the door was raised;
and the same connexion existed between the other images and
doors. In one of the chambers they found three couches, formed
of a shining stone, and upon them three bodies ; each body was
shrouded in three garments, and over their heads were tablets
inscribed with unknown characters. The other chamber con-
tained arches of stone, and upon them chests of the same material,
full of arms and of other instruments. The length of one of the
swords was seven spans ; and the coats of mail measured twelve
spans. All these things were brought out, and the doors were
closed, as at first, by order of the caliph. The number of the
Pyramids are said to have been eighteen ; the three greatest
were opposite to Fostat ; and the base of the largest was a square
of five hundred cubits. A sarcophagus is also said to have been
found in the Pyramid, covered with a lid of stone, and filled with
gold ; and upon the cover was written, in Arabic characters,
" Abou Amad built this Pyramid in 1000 days."

The caliph is likewise said to have found a hollow image of
a man made of green stone, and covered with a stone like an
emerald, which contained a body in golden armour, a sword
of inestimable value, and a ruby as large as an egg;. According
to some accounts, the hollow case of green stone was to be seen
at the palace at Cairo in 511 a.h.*

* The author also gives an account, that the same person who built the Pharos
at Alexandria, built the Pyramids ; and mentions, with several other fabulous cir-
cumstances, tliat it was Jammai, the son of Sheddad, and that liis name was
recorded upon a high column. — Dr. Spicngcr.

358 APPENDIX.

ABOU MOHAMMED AL HASSAN BEN AHMED BEN
YAKUB AL HAMADANI AL YEMANL^

(died 334 A.H.)

He says that the Pyramids were built before the deluge, and
remained uninjured by it.

SOYUTL

(died 911 A.H.)

From tivo MSS. in the Bodleian Library, 660 and 780 in Uris

Catalogue.

He states, that the two larger Pyramids are the highest and the
most wonderful buildings in the world ; that they appear like
natural mountains ; and that, although time has ruined all other
edifices, yet these remain comparatively uninjured.

He further states, that the idol of the Pyramids, the Sphinx,
called Balhouyah Balhit, and by the common people, Abou
Chawl, " the Father of Terror," keeps back the approach of the
desert sand by a talisman.

Soyuti then relates the story of Surid Ben Shaluk, as given
by Masoudi, which he says was the common tradition ; and also
the account by Altelemsani. He adds, that the treasures concealed
in the Pyramid were guarded by spirits, who have been frequently
seen going round the buildings at daybreak and at noonday.
One of these guardians was in the form of a naked woman with
long hair ; another, in that of a boy with a green or sallow com-
plexion ; and a third, in the form of an old man. The author
then quotes from Ebn Abd Al Hokm, that the Pyramids were built
by Sheddad Ben Ad, and conceives that they were erected before
the deluge, or more accurate accounts would have existed about
them. He also states from the Mesalik of Ebn Fadhl Blah, that
they were either haikels of the stars, or tombs, or intended to
preserve treasures and records during the deluge ; and that they
were held in great veneration by the Sabseans, who performed
pilgrimages to them, and had opened one of them.

Soyuti mentions from Al Watwati al Warrak, that the Sabseans,

* Ilamadan is a town in Yemen. — Dr. Sprenger.

APPENDIX. 359

in performing pilgrimages to the Pyramids, sacrificed hens and
black calves, and burnt incense.

He then states, from Menardi, that many of the Pyramids
were destroyed by Karakousch ; that those that remained were
tombs, and contained dangerous passages, some of which
communicated with the Faioum, that they were sepulchres of
antient nionarchs, and were inscribed with their names, and
with the secrets of astrology and of incantation ; that it was
not known by whom they were constructed, whether by Youssef,
Nimrod, Queen Doluka, or by the Copts before the deluge,
in order ta preserve their treasures and records. Soyuti then
says, that Seth took possession of Egypt ; and that one of his
sons, Kinan,^was Hermes. That he was endowed with great wis-
dom and travelled through the world, being under the especial pro-
tection of Providence. That he was likewise a great warrior, and
conquered all the east, and introduced Sabaism,''^ which incul-
cated a belief in one god — the observance of prayer seven times in
each day — sacrifices, fasts, and a pilgrimage to the Pyramids.
It is also said, that he built one hundred and forty towns in
the east, the least of which was Raha ; and that, upon his
return to Egypt, the king of that country did him homage, and
believed in his predictions. He is supposed to have written the
first treatise on astronomy ; to have brought the people of Egypt
from the mountains, where they had retired for fear of the
waters, and to have taught them to cultivate the plains, and
also to regulate the inundations of the Nile. He afterwards
travelled into Upper Egypt, Nubia, and Abyssinia.^ The author
adds that, according to some accounts, one of the Pyramids is
the tomb of Seth.

ABOU MOHAMMED MUSTAFA.

(died 999 A.H.)
(Jlris Cat. BIS. 785.., Bodleian Library, Oxford.)
He copies entirely from Masoudi.

^ It may be Canaan, son of Ham.

'' The MS. 666, in Uri's Catalogue, contains an account of the Sabaean observ-
ances.— Dr. Sprenger,

® This account is repeated by Ahmed Youssef Tifaslii. It is also well known
from Bar IIebreus,and other Eastern authors, that three personages are known under

360 APPENDIX.

ABUL HASSAN.

{Library, East India House, No. 617.)

He says that the tablet upon which was the inscription, was
found in the mouth of a golden serpent. The rest of his account
is an imperfect repetition of former authors.

MOHAMMED BEN ABDULLAH BEN MOHAMMED,

OF BAGDAD.

This book was written (in Turkish) 1089 a.h. (Addit. MSS. of
Brit. Mus. 7861.) It contains an extract of the story of Surid,
and an imperfect translation of Makrizi's work .

AL AKBARI,

^^Wandeinng Stars," or the History of Misr and Cairo. By Shams
Uldin Mahommed Ben Alshaihh Abou 'Ishurur Ben Alshaikh
Mohammed Albakri. {Add. MSS. 9973, Brit. Mus.)

It contains the Sabsean tradition (already given) as to Surid.
The inscription, according to this account, was, " I have built
the Pyramids to provide against the dreadful consequences of the
deluge, which is about to overwhelm the earth."

He says that amongst the twenty-two remarkable objects in
Egypt are the two large Pyramids. It is said, by the "Com-
mentary upon Hariri" by Alsharisi,^ that they are situated seven
miles from Gizeh, and that they are built of enormous stones.
One of them is the tomb of Hermes (Edris, to whom be praise !)
the other that of Anamanimum .^ The Sabeeans perform pilgrimages

the name Hermes; that one of them was the Enoch of Scripture, and the Edris of
profane liislory. — Dr. Sprcnger.

' This Commentary is inserted in De Sacy's " Avertissemcnt aux Seances
de Hariri," Paris, 1822.

■ Probably meant for Agathodsemon.

APPENDIX. 361

to them, and say, " Abou Chawl, we have finished our visit to
thee."2

The Pyramids are said to have been covered with silk, and
to have had the before-mentioned inscription — "We have covered
them with silk, let others cover them with mats," &c.

The author then quotes Zamakhshari, and says that the stones
were brought from a place four hundred farsangs from Gizeh.^

KITAB ALBULDAN

MS. 7496, in the British Museum ( The Book of Cities,")

Contains the following account. There are three Pyramids, two
of which are four hundred cubits high, and as many square.
They are built with blocks of marble and of granite, ten cubits
square; and the joints between the stones can scarcely be seen.
Every block is engraved with Musnad-Hamaryaritic-characters,
describing charms and talismans, and various branches of science.
It was reported, that one of the caliphs, having read the inscrip-
tion, "I have built," &c., determined to take them down, but
was obliged to desist on account of the expense.

' Colonel Chesney discovered many Pyramids in Syria, to whicli pilgrimages
were performed. Unkowski also mentions in Miiller's " Sammlung llussicher
Geschichte erstes Stiick," p. 1 44, that he witnessed the celebration of the new year by
the Lamas of the Calmucs in the following manner. A tent of Chinese cloth was
pitched in an open space, marked out with red lines, to which the priest came in
procession from the westward, with his attendants, amongst whom six manyis (young
priests) carried sacred standards, each of them being supported by persons in red
garments bearing a model of a pyramid and two large trumpets; three men followed
with smaller trumpets ; and then fifty others in yellow dresses preceded with drums
and cymbals the rest of the priests, who were guarded by armed Calmucs. The
procession moved round the tent, and then assembled in the space before it, where
the models of the Pyramids weVe placed, which the priest worshipped by pro-
strating himself three times on the ground. — Dr. Sprenger.

2 This MS. has been alluded to in p. 328.

362 APPENDIX.

ABDULLAH BEN TOULOUN

Calls the Pyramids and the Nile two of the wonders of the
world, and says, that a serpent of gold was found in the Great
Pyramid, bearing in his mouth a silver tablet, with an inscription;
and that another inscription expressed, " I have built it, and
covered it with dressed leather, and with striped cloth of Yemen,
and afterwards with brocade : let those who think they have the
power, cover it with mats." In consequence of this inscription,
the Caliph Mamoon is said to have intended to cover it with
mats, but found that the revenues of Egypt would not pay the
expense.

TOHFAT ALAJAIB,

By Ehn Athir Aljazari, MS. 7497, and Tohfat AMnd,
MS. 7034, British Museum.

The Pyramids of Gizeh are described to be of enormous size,
and to have been constructed with large blocks of granite, kept
together by bars of iron, fastened with melted lead. They were
one hundred cubits high, and as many square.

The western Pyramid is said to contain in thirty chambers,
arms and treasures of various kinds ; the eastern, plans of the
stars, and historical and prophetic records ; and the Third to be
the cemetery of the priests, and to have been inscribed with
figures, carrying on the different trades and sciences. The
guardian spirits are also mentioned ; and the tradition of the
operations performed by the Caliph Al Mamoon.

THE HISTORY OF THE MARVELLOUS THINGS
IN EGYPT,

By Murtedi, an Arabian Author, translated into French by M.
Vathir, Arabian Professor to the King of France. The date
of the original MS. is not mentioned.

The author repeats the well-known tradition, that the Pyramids
Avere built by Surid before the flood ; and also the account of the

APPENDIX. 363

opening of the Great Pyramid by the Caliph Al Mamoon : and
states that, to effect this purpose, he poured vinegar upon the
stones after they had been heated by fire, and likewise employed
battering engines.

He then details, with many curious exaggerations, the fabulous
stories already given by other authors of a party, who visited
the Pyramids, and who, he states, went down the first and second
descents, and passed along the base of the Pyramid, until they
came to a narrow passage,* whence a cold wind proceeded, and
multitudes of bats, as big as black eagles ; that one of their party
was sent forward to explore it, with a cord fastened to his waist
by which, in case of necessity, he might be withdrawn. That, after
he had gone a short distance, the passage closed, and crushed him
to death, and that a dreadful sound scared the rest of the party
out of the Pyramid, of whom several died; and that as the rest
were consulting upon what had happened, their lost companion
suddenly appeared, and spoke to them in an unknown tongue.
The author adds that, according to another account, a basin was
found constantly overflowing with pure water, and in a chamber,
adorned with precious stones of various colours, a quantity of
treasure ; and that those who took up any part of it were
obliged to replace it, for until they had done so, they could not
stir frorn the spot. After which he mentions the image instructing
the children, the cock, &:c., and the figure of a woman, standing
upon her head, accompanied by roaring lions formed of white
stone, and that the explorers arrived at statues of black stone,
placed in a sandy desert, near the eastern side of the Pyra-
mid. He adds, that when these adventures were known, people
were sent in search of the sandy desert, but, (as it may be supposed,)
without much success. He then describes, in the usual manner,
the guardian spirits of the Pyramids, and subsequently mentions,
with many fabulous particulars, that Horgib embalmed and buried
his father, Surid, son of Shaluk, in the Great Pyramid, and after-
wards built the Pyramid of Dahasonon.^ He likewise gives a long
account of Edris, Noah, &c. in the same fabulous manner.

'' This appears to refer to the subterraneous chamber, and to the passage leading
from it to the southward.
* Probably Dashoor.

364 APPENDIX.

In Abul Feda's '' Historia Anteislamitica," edited by Fleisher,
p. 16, it is stated, that Syria was one of the earliest inhabited
countries, and that the Syriac language was the first that was
spoken; that the Sabaean language was established by Seth and
Edris, Enoch ; that there was a town called Haran, to which
jDilgrims resorted, as they did to the two large Pyramids of Gizeh,
one of which was said to be the tomb of Edris, and the other of
his son, Syabi ; where they celebrated, as a festival, the day on
which the sun entered the sign of Aries. In the " Melelwa Nahil,"
MS. 47, in Nic. Cat., Hermes is represented as the pupil of Agatho-
daemon. In another account, MS. 785, Uri's Cat. Agathodaemon
is mentioned as a king of Egypt. The Sabseans consider the
Great Pyramid of Gizeh as the Tomb of Seth ; the Second, that of
Hermes ; and the Third, that of Izabi ; while the Copts state, that
the Great Pyramid is the Tomb of Surid ; the Second, that of
Herjeb, or Haukith, his brother; the Third, that of his son. —
Dr. Sprenger.

In the Syrian chronicle of Bar Hebraeus, (translated into Latin
by Professor Bruns), Enoch is said to have invented letters and
architecture, under the title ofTrismigistus or of Hermes,^ to have
built many cities and established laws, to have taught the worship
of God, and astronomy, to give alms and tithes, to offer up first-
fruits, libations, &c., to abstain from unlawful foods, and drunken-
ness, and to keep feasts at the rising of the sun, on new-moons,
and at the ascent of the planets. His pupil was Agathodamon,
(Seth); according to other accounts, Asclepiades, a king, renowned
for wisdom, who, when Enoch was translated, set up an image
in honour of him, and thereby introduced idolatry. The Egypt-
ians are supposed to have been descended from these persons.
According to Hadgi Walfah, they derived their knowledge from
the Chaldeans, who are said to have been the same as the Per-
sian magi, and to have originally come from Babylon. The
statues of the Grecian Hermes, which seem to agree in name with
the Pyramids (Haram), were not images, but symbols of the Deity,

« With respect to the idle fables that tlie Pyramids were antediluvian, and built
by Hermes, &c., it is scarcely worth while to observe, that the stones, of which they
are constructed contain fossils.

APPENDIX. 365

and of the generative principle of nature in the form of obelisks J
Statues of this kind sacred to Hermes were erected by the Greeks in
honour of distinguished heroes ; and the same allegorical allusion
might have been kept in view when the Pyramids were constructed
as tombs. The Egyptian account, however, of Hermes, is very
obscure ; that person is mentioned in the " Burham i Kati" as the
son of Rahman, son of Isfendiar, and to have arrived from the East.
One of the sons of Aunshirwan has also that title. Hormig is
the name of the first day of the month, which is considered propi-
tious for the commencement of any undertaking ; and it is a name
of the planet Mercury ; and Wednesday (dies Mercurii) was
sacred to him: for to most of the planets days were attributed,
in which their influence was supposed to govern human affairs ;
and even Mahommedan superstition assigned to children born on
these days various qualities, characteristic of the heathen personi-
fications of the different planets.^ Hermes is mentioned in many
astrological treatises as presiding over the sixth climate. An idea,
a period of time, or any remarkable occurrence, were frequently
connected with ideal persons in mythology, and when any simil-
arity existed, received the same appellation. In this manner
there were five Hermes ; and the fifth was the Oriental Hermes
who was worshipped by the Phineatae ; and is said to have fled
after the death of Argus into Egypt, and to have civilised that
country under the name of Thoth. This coincides with the
account of Tifashi, which is evidently taken from an Egyptian
tradition; reference may also be made to Plato, Philel. 21, 24,
Phaedro, p. 340. Hermes was likewise distinguished by his
wisdom; and was reported to have been buried in a great building-
called Abou Hermes, which, together with another, the tomb of
his wife, or of his son, was afterwards named Haraman. These
were the two large Pyramids, and the form of their construction
was called Makhrut. — Dr. Sprenger.

'' See Winkel man, book i. cap. 1, 1011.

^ See an old copy of Abou Ma'sher's astrology in the Bodleian Library, and a
MS. of Lazioni at tiie India House. Abou Ma'slier,and many eminent astrologers,
resided at Balk, about the first or second centuries of the Hegra. — Dr. Sprenger.

366 . APPENDIX.

It was supposed that some information would be obtained from
Persian literature respecting the discoveries that were made, and
the state in which the Pyramids and other monuments were
found, when Cambyses invaded Egypt ; but this does not appear
to be the case ; and indeed the only fact which seems to be esta-
blished by the Eastern authors, to whom we have now referred, is
the opening of the Great Pyramid by Al Mamoon ; and even of
that, no distinct or rational account exists. The Arabian tradi-
tion, which attributes the origin of the Pyramids to an antediluvian
king, Sheddad Ben Ad,^ is as absurd as the Coptic account of
Surid, and as the Sabsean story of Hermes (or Enoch). ^ These
traditions prove indeed the great antiquity of the buildings,
and also the ignorance of those who supposed that any building
raised by human means could resist the effects of the deluge.
It appears likewise impossible to reconcile the righteous cha-
racters of Seth, and of Enoch, and of their descendants through
Shem, with the accounts of the Shepherd kings, given by
Herodotus and by Manetho. The former writer states, that
they were tyrants who cruelly oppressed the people, and putting
a stop to their religious ordinances, reduced them to slavery;
and he adds, that their memories were held in such detestation,
that even in his time, the people were unwilling to pronounce
their names, and therefore, called the Pyramids by a compre-
hensive term, the buildings of the Shepherd Philition, because
that person fed his flocks on the spot where they were erected.
Manetho, in a more detailed account, says, that these strangers
were of ignoble birth, and invaded Egypt in vast numbers
from the eastward, under the title of Shepherd Kings -," that
they built a strong place called Avaris, and kept possession of
the country for 511 years; and that upon their expulsion they

® Ad is said to have been the father of Amalek. — Bryant's "Antient History,"
p. 215.

' Enos the son of Seth, particularly mentioned in Gen. chap, iv., v. 26, seems to
have been confounded with Enoch, whose miraculous history may have given rise
to many fables; but whose connexion with Seth, who died 612 years before the
flood, is not apparent, as five generations, and 492 years intervened between their
respective births.

2 Gen. chap. ix. The worship to which the form of the Pyramids has been sup-
posed to have an allusion, appears to be adverted to in this chapter, and v. 25, 26,
coincide with the name of captives, by which, Manetho says, these people were
called in their sacred books.

APPENDIX. 367

migrated (In number, 240,000) to Syria, and built in that country
Jerusalem and many other fenced cities, as a protection against the
Assyrians, who at that time were masters of Asia. I have already
mentioned Bryant's conjecture, that these shepherds were the
descendants of Ham ; and in support of that suggestion, I refer to
his "Antient History," and to his "Observations on the Dis-
persion of Mankind," wherein he endeavours to prove that the
first part of the 11th chapter of Genesis relates exclusively to the
race of Ham, who appear to have founded large cities, and to have
established a great empire on the plains of Shinar, from which,
in defiance of Divine authority, they had dispossessed the descend-
ants of Shem. Having been driven thence by the rightful owners,
it seems that part of them invaded Egypt, and afterwards Syria ; and
that they were subsequently, under the titles of Philistines, Amalek-
ites,^ and other denominations, objects of Divine justice, and suc-
cessively driven from every city and colony, which, for especial
purposes, they were for a time permitted to occupy. These circum-
stances will account for the apprehensions which they are said by
Manetho to have entertained of the Assyrians, and also for the
abomination* in which every shepherd was held in Egypt ; and
which is the more remarkable, as the Egyptians had flocks and
herds, and were of course, therefore, accustomed to attend to
them. Their prowess and skill are recounted in the Bible ;^ and
I have already alluded to the concurrent testimony of profane
history, in which, notwithstanding various fables and exaggerations,
(the effects of poetical license, of national prejudice, or of perverted
tradition), their power and wisdom, and also their incessant wan-
derings and misfortunes, are forcibly described. In adverting to
the early records of antient history, it is likewise remarkable that
the author and precise object of those most sublime productions of
human genius, the "Iliad" and " Odyssey," are involved in the
same doubt and mystery, which attend the origin of the stu-
pendous monuments assumed to be erected by a people of the
same race as those to whom the poems in question are supposed
to allude. The whole, however, in fact, at present, only admits
of conjecture; but it is to be hoped will appear in a clearer
light, when a more intimate knowledge is attained of the numerous

' Exodus, cliap. xvii. v. 14-lG. Numbers, cliap. xxiv. v. 20.

* Genesis, chap. xlvi. v. 34.

* Numbers, chap. xiii. v. 28, &c. Deuteronomy, chap. i. v. 28.

368 APPENDIX.

hieroglyphical inscriptions, whicli seem, as well as the Pyramids,
to have been, under Providence, wonderfully preserved, in order
that their testimony may be added to that of the mighty poet, to
prove the existence of nations, which although long since passed
away and extinct, once occupied a most prominent and important
position in the first ages of the world, and are particularly adverted
to and distinguished in Holy Writ.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME,

LONDON:
rniNTEn by moves and EARCI ay, CASTI.E STnEET, tEICESTEn SQUARE.

ERRATA IN Vol. II.

Pac

re 21, line 8, for

30, last of text,

31, line 4,
54, first of note,

70, line 11, after

— last line, for
85, line 15,

105, .. '27,

110, .. 25,

— ..26,

115, last of note,

116. .. 20,
118, .. 30,
122, ..21,
122, first of note,

127, 2'>of note,

128, line 19,

133, SJ from bottom, . .
IST', line 14,
141, .. 11,

153, .. 4,

— ..25,

163, . . 24, before

180, .. 1,

183, 8"' from bottom, /or

191, line 10,

192, 6"' from bottom, . .
194, 2<i from bottom, ..

197, line 3,

198, 3'' from bottom, ..

204, j"T f^'^""^! ..
' ( 2'' of note, J

207, 3'' from bottom, . .

208, line 36,
212. .. 10,
214, .. 1,

— ..3,
217, ..15.
228, line 7.
238, ..21,
241, ..10,
247, last but one,
2.50, line 3,
251, .. 1,

264, . . 26,

265, ..15,

266, . . 16, after
280, let Well be the third lir,
287. line 29, for
289, ..24,

— ..33,

299,
300,
326,

last line.

complimontory

read

complimentary

videts

videttes

videts

videttes

is

are

built

insert

in

this

read

their

were

was

on avant

ea avant

7

5

5

, ,

7

1695

1693

Tosouff

Youssef, passim

30 0

30 2

3 0

3 5

ramp

ramps

ruins

ruined

page 1

page 89

ENTRAT

ENRAT

southern

northern

he

it

which

whom

complimenfal

complimentary

was

insert

it

most

omit

the

last

read

best

Pyaraids

Pyramids

could

can

eighty. seven

thirty-seven

it

the passage

ex sculpta

exsculpta

Aniud

Amud

Dessica

, ,

Despica

Alhokin

Al Hokm, passim

and

but

Cond

Coud

Machrisi

Makrisi

Bedoweens

Bedouins

Hegira

Hegra

Micerinus

Mycerinus

of

in

Williams's

Wilkinson's

Eben

Ebn

Hasselguist

Hasselquist

109 0

109 1

western

eastern

feet

insei-t

six inches

e instead of the fifth

length

read

height

firman

firmaun, passim

one hundred and )

fifty feet

!••

two hundred feet

Pyramids

Pyramid

south-western

south-eastern

bfgan

begun

CORRECTIONS MADE BY HAND.

7.

last line.

prophet

instead

of

rophet

. . 80,

reference

to note altered

to third fine

. . 82,

line 10,

ra

inserted

after

Fig. 2

. . 119,

.. 15,

3 8

instead

"f

3 0

. . 123,

7,

3 1

3

. . 124,

.. 28,

102 6

102 0

.. 126.

.. 30,

102 6

102 0

.. 187.

4,

Inaron

Iliaron

. . 187.

. . 23,

mortar

mortars

. . 251,

.. 13,

Faiyoum

Faivoum

. . 265,

reference

to note 9 altered to 21*'

line

.. 353,

4"' from bottom, Trois

instead

of

i'roi

.. 365,

21

from bottom, M.S.

S

'^Jr

IQNVSOl^

'Or

f

lONVSOl^"^

^^

University of California Library
Los Angeles

This book is DUE on rh. I... ^^^^^nmH below.

KEt

IfRC

MA

I'iorie K€^r»3w;v!s

MAY 0 1 im.

o

o

>s^

Vr

JUL 0 " ?HNM

DUE 3 NiQy:rHS FRO
DA-

FEB 2 6

:j uj

"ary

B.

r

0 ?

31993

^

UlJ
>

o

'O-

O

Fc

%83/MNn3\\V

y<

.v<r5

^'OAHvaan-^^ ^'^^AiiviiaiH^

, , ^ o

o

or

<

vvlOSANCElfj>

'%0JI1V3 JO"^ <rji33NVS01^^ %a3AINa]V\V^ ^.{/OdnVDJO^

^;OFCAIIFO/?^

^^AHvaani^'^

,^WEUNIVER5-/A

^VWSANCElfX^

<ril3DNVS01^

%a3AiNn3\\v^

^OFCALIFO/?^

'^ ^

'Or

o

.VWSANCElfXy
o

^IIIBRARYQ^ ^HIBRARYQr «5ME UNIVERi/^

■^/5a3AINfl 3WV^ ^<!/0JIW3JO^ ^<i/0JnV3J0^

o

,s>clOSA,M

o

^ :$

'^Jr

O

^VWSANCEI%

^OFCALIFO^, .^;OFCAllF0/?i^

^WEUNIVERSVa

vKlOSAN

o

^ 1 ir^ ^

so

■^ ^ — ■ \-^

AMLUNlVtKVA

^.OFCALIF0% AV^EUN'r

o

,^

„,v"^

, .jiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii

3 1158 00110 2804

C3

Gr\

'OaJAlMIJlA'

S;

/OJIIVOJO^

lOSANCtlfj

\tllBRARYQ<^ ^UIBRARY^

-<: S

*c cs

^(!/0JnV3JO>*'

%13:j

irrti

^

^OFCAllFOff^ ^OFCAllFOff^

^Abvaaii^^ ^<?Aav}ian-^\

^WEUNIVERS//i

t^l tnid

<^^

v-Uf

^t/i

It

^'10!

■'^/sai

^io|

.V^^

^

P i^H

^OFCAIIFO/?^

^ER% vvlOSANCEl%

f

'sm^^^

VERJ/^

?i

^1

'^

s$^

■^OJIWDJO

v.^F CAIIFO/?^
