The Buddhism of Tibet, or Lamaism
L. Austine Waddell (1895)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The 1895 first edition (London: W. H. Allen) of L. Austine Waddell's The Buddhism of Tibet, or Lamaism. Public domain.

========================================================================

BUDDHISM OF TIBET


LAMAISM


WITH ITS MYSTIC CULTS, SYMBOLISM AND MYTHOLOGY,
AND IN ITS RELATION TO INDIAN BUDDHISM.


L.  AUSTINE  WADDELL,  M.B.,

F.L.S.,  r.E.s.s.,

MEMBBB  OF  THE  ROYAL  ASIATIC  SOCIETY,  ANTHROPOLOSIOAL INSTITUTE, ETC.,
SUBGBOIT-MAJOK  H.Jt. BKNeAI. ARMY.


LONDON :

W. H. ALLEN & CO., LIMITED,

13,  WATERLOO  PLACE,  S.W.

1895.

[All  rights  reserved.)


k)  II .


WYMAN AND SONS, LIMITED,

PEINTEES,

LONDON AND BEDHILL.


WILLIAM  TENNANT  GAIRDNER,  M.D.,  LL.D.,  F.E.S.,

IN  ADMIRATION  OF  HIS  NOBLE  CHABACTEE,
PHILOSOPHIC TEACHINO, WIDE CULTURE, AND Z'
MANY LABOURS DEVOTED WITH EXEMPLARY  FIDELITY TO
THE INTERPRETATION OF NATURE AND THE SERVICE OF MAN,

THIS  BOOK
IS RESPECTFULLY  DEDICATED

BY  The  Author.


PEBFACE.


NO  apology  is  needed  for  the  production  at  the  pre-
sent time  of  a  work  on  the  Buddhism  of  Tibet,
or  "  Lamaism "  as  it  has  been  called,  after  its  priests.
Notwithstanding  the  increased  attention  which  in  recent
years  has  been  directed  to  Buddhism  by  the  speculations
of  Schopenhauer  and  Hartmann,  and  the  widely  felt
desire  for  fuller  information  as  to  the  conditions  and
sources  of  Eastern  religion,  there  exists  no  European
book  giving  much  insight'  into  the  jealously  guarded
religion  of  Tibet,  where  Buddhism  wreathed  in  romance
has  now  its  chief  stronghold.

The  only  treatise  on  the  subject  in  English,  is  Emil
Schlagintweit's  Buddhism  in  Tibet  ^  published  over  thirty
years  ago,  and  now  out  of  print.  A  work  which,  however
admirable  with  respect  to  the  time  of  its  appearance,  was
admittedly  fragmentary,  as  its  author  had  never  been  in
contact  with  Tibetans.  And  the  only  other  European
book  on  Lamaism,  excepting  Giorgi's  curious  compilation
of  last  century,  is  Koppen's Die  Lamaische  Hierarchie

'  Leipzig  and  London,  1863.  That  there  is  no  lack  of  miscellaneous  litera-
ture on  Tibet  and  Lamaism  may  be  seen  froih  the  bibliographical  list  in  the
appendix  ;  but  it  is  air  of  a  fragmentary  and  often  conflicting  character.


PREFACE.


und  Kirche  '  published  thirty -five  years  ago,  and  also  a  com
pilation  and  out  of  print.  Since  the  publication  of  thes(
two  works  much  new  information  has  been  gained,  thougl
scattered  through  more  or  less  inaccessible  Russian
German,  French,  and  Asiatic  journals.  And  this,  com-
bined with  the  existing  opportunities  for  a  closer  study  oj
Tibet  and  its  customs,  renders  a  fuller  and  more  syste-
matic work  now  possible.

Some  reference  seems  needed  to  my  special  facilities  foi
undertaking  this  task.  In  addition  to  having  personally
studied  "-southern  Buddhism"  in  Burma  and  Ceylon;  and
"  northern  Buddhism  "  in  Sikhim,  Bhotan  and  Japan ;
and  exploring  Indian  Buddhism  in  its  remains  in  "the
Buddhist  Holy  Land,"  and  the  ethnology  of  Tibet  and  its
border  tribes  in  Sikhim,  Asam,  and  upper  Burma ;  and
being  one  of  the  few  Europeans  who  have  entered  the
territory  of  the  Grand  Lama,  I  have  spent  several  years  in
studying  the  actualities  of  Lamaism  as  explained  by  its
priests,  at  points  much  nearer  Lhasa  than  any  utilized  for
such  a  purpose,  and  where  I  could  feel  the  pulse  of  the
sacred  city  itself  beating  in  the  large  communities  of  its
natives,  many  of  whom  had  left  Lhasa  only  ten  or  twelve
days  previously.

On  commencing  my  enquiry  I  found  it  necessary  to
learn  the  language,  which  is  peculiarly  difficult,  and  known
to  very  few  Europeans.  And  afterwards,  realizing  the
rigid  secrecy  maintained  by  the  Lamas  in  regard  to  their
seemingly  chaotic  rites  and  symbolism,  I  felt  compelled  to
purchase  a  Lamaist  temple  with  its  fittings  ;  and  prevailed
on  the  officiating  priests  to  explain  to  me  in  full  detail
the  symbolism  and  the  rites  as  they  proceeded.  Perceiv-
ing how  much  I  was  interested,  the  Lamas  were  so  oblig-


Berlin,  1859.


PREFACE.


ing  as  to  interpret  in  my  favour  a  prophetic  account
which  exists  in  their  scriptures  regarding  a  Buddhist  in-
carnation in  the  West.  They  convinced  themselves  that
I  was  a  reflex  of  the  "Western  Buddha,  Amitabha,  and
thus  they  overcame  their  conscientious  scruples,  and  im-
parted information  freely.  With  the  knowledge  thus
gained,  I  visited  other  temples  and  monasteries  critically,
amplifying  my  information,  and  engaging  a  small  staff  of
Lamas  in  the  work  of  copying  manuscripts,  and  searching
for  texts  bearing  upon  my  researches.  Enjoying  in  these
ways  special  facilities  for  penetrating  the  reserve  of
Tibetan  ritual,  and  obtaining  direct  from  Lhasa  and
Tashi-lhunpo  most  of  the  objects  and  explanatory
material  needed,  I  have  elicited  much  information  on
Lamaist  theory  and  practice  which  is  altogether  new.

The  present  work,  while  embodying  much  original
research,  brings  to  a  focus  most  of  the  information  on
Lamaism  scattered  through  former  publications.  And
bearing  in  mind  the  increasing  number  of  general  readers
interested  in  old  world  ethics,  custom  and  myth,  and  in  the
ceaseless  effort  of  the  human  heart  in  its  insatiable  craving
for  absolute  truth  ;  as  well  as  the  more  serious  students  of
Lamaism  amongst  orientalists,  travellers,  missionaries  and
others,  I  have  endeavoured  to  give  a  clear  insight  into
the  structure,  prominent  features  and  cults  of  this  system,
and haverelegated  to  smaller  type  and  footnotes  the  more
technical' details  and  references  required  by  specialists.

The  special  characteristics  of  the  book  are  its  detailed
accounts  of  the  external  facts  and  curious  symbolism  of
Buddhism,  and  its  analyses  of  the  internal  movements
leading  to  Lamaism  and  its  sects  and  cults.  It  provides
material  culled  from  hoary  Tibetan  tradition  and  explained
to  me  by  Lamas  for  elucidating  many  obscure  points  in
primitive  Indian  Buddhism  and  its  later  symbolism. Thus


PREFACE.


a  clue  is  supplied  to  several  disputed  doctrinal  points  oi
fundamental  importance,  as  for  example  the  formula  oi
the  Causal  Nexus.  And  it  interprets  much  of  the  inter-
esting Mahayana  and  Tantrik  developments  in  the  late]
Indian  Buddhism  of  Magadha.

It  attempts  to  disentangle  the  early  history  of  Lamaism
from  the  chaotic  growth  of  fable  which  has  invested  it,
With  this  view  the  nebulous  Tibetan  "  history  "  so-called
of  the  earlier  periods  has  been  somewhat  criticallj
examined  in  the  light  afforded  by  some  scholarly  Lamas
and  contemporary  history ;  and  all  fictitious  chronicles,
such  as  the  Mani-kah-'bum,  hitherto  treated  usually  as
historical,  are  rejected  as  authoritative  for  events  which
happened  a  thousand  years  before  they  were  written  and
for  a  time  when  writing  was  admittedly  unknown  in
Tibet.  If,  after  rejecting  these  manifestly  fictitious
"  histories "  and  whatever  is  supernatural,  the  residue
cannot  be  accepted  as  altogether  trustworthy  history,  i1
at  least  affords  a  fairly  probable  historical  basis,  which
seems  consistent  and  in  harmony  with  known  facts  and
unwritten  tradition.

It  will  be  seen  that  I  consider  the  founder  of  Lama-
ism  to  he  Padma-sambhava — a  person  to  whom  previous
writeri.  are  wont  to  refer  in  too  incidental  a  manner.
Indeed,  some  careful  writers '  omit  all  mention  of  his
name,  although  he  is  considered  by  the  Lamas  of  all  sects
to  be  the  founder  of  their  order,  and  by  the  nfajority  oi
them  to  be  greater  and  more  deserving  of  worship  than
Buddha  himself.

Most  of  the  chief  internal  movements  of  Lamaism  are
now  for  the  first  time  presented  in  an  intelligible  and
systematic  form. Thus,  for  example,  my  account  of  its


1  E.g,  W.  E.  S.  Ralston  in  his  Tibetan.  Tales.


PREFACE.  xi


sects  may  be  compared  with  that  given  by  Schlagintweit,^
to  which  nothing  practically  had  been  added.^

As  Lamaism  lives  mainly  hy  thp  spnspg  and  spends  its
strength  in  sacerdotal  functipns.  it  is  particularly  ricli  in
ritua;l.  Special  prominence,  therefore,  has  been  given  to
its  ceremonial,  all  the  more  so  as  ritual  preserves  many
interesting  vestiges  of  archaic  times.  My  special  facilities
for  acquiring  such  information  has  enabled  me  to  supply
details  of  the  principal  rites,  mystic  and  other,  most  of
which were previously undescribed. Many of these

exhibit in  combination ajTnjppf: Tnrlian  anH  prp-Ttiiflflhist

Tibetan  cults.  The  higher  ritual,  as  already  known,
invites  comparison  with  much  in  the  Eoman  Church  ;
and  the  fuller  details  now  aiforded  facilitate  this  com-
parison and  contrast.

But  the  bulk  of  the  Lamaist  cults  comprise  much
deep-rooted  devil-worship  and  sorcery,  which  I  describe
with  some  fulness.  For  Lamaism  is  only  -thinly  and  im-
perfectly varnished  over  with  Buddhist  symbolism,  beneath
which  the  sinister  growth  of  poly-demonist  superstition
darkly  appears.  ^

The  religious  plays  and  festivals  are  also  described.
And  a  chapter  is  added  on  popular  and  domestic  Lama-
ism to  show  the  actual  working  of  the  religion  in  every-
day life  as  a  system  of  ethical  belief  and  practice.

The  advantages  of  the  very  numerous  illustrations —
about  two  hundred  in  number,  mostly  from  originals
brought  from  Lhasa,  and  from  photographs  by  the  author
—must  be  obvious.^  Mr.  Rockhill  and  Mr.  Knight  have
kindly  permitted  the  use  of  a  few  of  their  illustrations.


1  Op.  cit. ,  72.  ^  But  see  note  on  p.  69.

'  A  few  of  the  drawings  are  by  Mr.  A.  D.  McCormick  from  photographs,  or
original  objects ;  and  some  have  been  taken  from  Giorgi,  Hue,  Pander,  and  others.


PREFACE.


A  full  index  has  been  provided,  also  a  chronological
table  and  bibliography.

I  have  to  acknowledge  the  special  aid  afforded  me  by
the  learned  Tibetan  Lama,  Padma  Chho  Phel ;  by  that
venerable  scholar  the  Mongolian  Lama  She-rab  Gya-tso ;
by  the  Nin-ma  Lama,  Ur-gyan,  Gya-ts'6,  head  of  the
Yang-gang  monastery  of  Sikhim  and  a  noted  explorer  of
Tibet ;  by  Tun-yig  Wang-dan  and  Mr.  Dor-je  Ts'e-ring ;
by  S'ad-sgra  S'ab-pe,  one  of  the  Tibetan  governors  of
Lhasa,  who  supplied  some  useful  information,  and  a  few
manascripts;  and  by  Mr.  A.W.  Paul,  C.I.E.,  when  pursuing
my  researches  in  Sikhim.

And  I  am  deeply  indebted  to  the  kind  courtesy  of
Professor  C.  Bendall  for  much  special  assistance  and
advice  ;  and  also  generally  to  my  friend  Dr.  Islay
Muirhead.

Of  previous  writers  to  whose  books  I  am  specially
under  obligation,  foremost  must  be  mentioned  Csoma
Korosi,  the  enthusiastic  Hungarian  scholar  and  pioneer
of  Tibetan  studies,  who  first  rendered  the  Lamaist  stores
of  information  accessible  to  Europeans. ^  Though  to
Brian  Houghton  Hodgson,  the  father  of  modern  critical
study  of  Buddltist  doctrine,  belongs  the  credit  of  dis-
covering^ the  Indian  nature  of  the  bulk  of  the  Lamaist
literature  and  of  procuring  the  material  for  the  detailed
analyses  by  Csoma  and  Burnouf.  My  indebtedness  to
Koppen  and  Schlagintweit  has  already  been  mentioned.

1  Alexander  Csoma  of  Koios,  in  the  Transylvanian  circle  of  Hungary,  like
most  of  the  subsequent  writers  on  Lamaism,  studied  that  system  in  Ladak.
After  publishing  his  Dictionary,  €hrammar,  and  Analysis,  he  proceeded  tc
Darjiling  in  the  liope  of  penetrating  thence  to  Tibet,  but  died  at  Darjiling  or
the  11th  April,  1842,  a  few  days  after  arrival  there,  where  his  tomb  now  bears
a  suitable  monument,  erected  by  the  Government  of  India.  For  details  of  his
life  and  labours,  see  his  biography  by  Dr.  Duka.

*  Asiatic  Researches,  xvi,,  1828.


PREFACE.


Jaeschke's  great  dictionary  is  a  mine  of  information  on
technical  and  doctrinal  definitions.  The  works  of  Giorgi,
Vasiliev,  Schiefner,  Foucaux,  Eockhill,  Eitel,  and  Pander,
have  also  proved  most  helpful.  The  Narrative  of  Travels
m  Tibet  by  Babu  Saratcandra  Das,  and  his  translations
from  the  vernacular  literature,  have  afforded  some  use-
ful details.  The  Indian  Survey  reports  and  Markham's
Tibet  have  been  of  service  ;  and  the  systematic  treatises
of  Professors  B,hys  Davids,  Oldenberg  and  Beal  have
supplied  several  useful  indications.

The  vastness  of  this  many-sided  subject,  far  beyond  the
scope  of  individual  experience,  the  backvi^ard  state  of
our  knovpledge  on  many  points,  the  peculiar  difficulties
that  beset  the  research,  and  the  conditions  under  vs^hich
the  greater  part  of  the  book  vi^as  vpritten — in  the  scant
leisure  of  a  busy  official  life — these  considerations  may,  I
trust,  excuse  the  frequent  crudeness  of  treatment,  as  well
as  any  errors  which  may  be  present,  for  I  cannot  fail  to
have  missed  the  meaning  occasionally,  though  sparing
no  pains  to  ensure  accuracy.  But,  if  my  book,  not-
withstanding its  shortcomings,  proves  of  real  use  to
those  seeking  information  on  the  Buddhism  of  Tibet,
as  well  as  on  the  later  Indian  developments  of  Buddhism,
and  to  future  v?orkers  in  these  fields,  I  shall  feel  amply
rewarded  for  all  my  labours.

L.  AusTiNE  Waddell.

London,

dlst  October,  1894.


CONTENTS.


PAGE

Preface ... ... ... ... ... ...  ...  vii

Note  on  Pronunciation ... ... ... ...  ...  xvii

List  of  Abbreviations  ... ... ... ... ...  ...  xix

I. iNTEODUCTORr DIVISION OF SUBJECT ...  ...  1-4

A.  HISTOBICAL.

II. Changes in Primitive Buddhism leading  to

Lamaism  ... ... ... ... ...  ...  5-17

III.  Rise,  Development,  and  Spread  op  Lsmaism  ...  18-53

IV.  The  Sects  op  Lamaism ... ... ...  ...  54-75

B.  DOGTBINAL.

V. Metaphysical  Sources  of  the  Doctrine  ...  76-131

VI. The  Doctrine  and  its  Morality ...  ...  132-154

VII, Scriptures  and  Litbratdrb ... ...  ...  155-168

C. MONASTIC.

VIII. The  Order  of  Lamas 169-211

IX. Daily  Life  and  Routine  ... ... ...  ...  212-225

X. HlEBARCHY  AND  Re-incarnate  Lamas ...  ...  226-254

D. BUILDINGS.


XI. Monasteries


255-286


CONTENTS.


PASE

XII. Temples  and  Cathedrals  ...  ...  . .  ...  287-304

XIII.  Shrines  and  Eelics  (and  Pilgrims) ...  ...  305-323

E.  MYTHOLOGY  AND  GOBS.

XIV.  Pantheon  and  Images ...  ...  ...  ...  324-386

XV. Sacred  Symbols  and  Charms ...  ...  ...  387-419

F.  RITUAL  AND  SORCERY.

XVI. Worship  and  Ritual 420-449

XVII. Astrology  and  Divination  ...  ...  ...  450-474

XVIII. Sorcery  and  Necromancy...  ...  ...  ...  475-500

G.  FESTIVALS  AND  PLAYS.

XIX. Festivals  and  Holidays ...  ...  ...  ...  501-514

XX. Sacred  Dramas,  Mystic  Plays  and  Masquerades  515-565

H. POPULAR  LAMAISM.

XXI. Domestic  and  Popular  Lamaism  ...  ...  ...  566-573

APPENDICES.

I. Chronological  Table  ...  575-578

II. Bibliography  578-583'

Index  585-598


EEONUNOIATION.


The  general  reader  should  remember  as  a  rough  rule  that  in  the
oriental  names  the  vowels  are  pronounced  as  in  German,  and  the  con-
sonants as  in  English,  except  c  which  is  pronounced  as  "  ch,"  n  as  "  ng  "
and  m  as  "  ny."  In  particular,  words  like  Buddha  are  pronounced  as  if
spelt  LQ  English  "  Bood-dha,"  Sahya  Muni  as  "  Sha-kya  Moo-nee,"  and
Karma  as  "  Kur-ma."

The  spelling  of  Tibetan  names  is  peculiarly  uncouth  and  startling  to
the  English  reader.  Indeed,  many  M  the  names  as  transcribed  from
the  vernacular  seem  unpronounceable,  and  the  difficulty  is  not  diminished
by  the  spoken  form  often  differing  widely  from  the  written,  owing  chiefly
to  consonants  having  changed  their  sound  or  dropped  out  of  speech
altogether,  the  so-called  "  silent  consonants."  '  Thus  the  Tibetan  word
for  the  border-country  which  we,  following  the  Nepalese,  call  Sikhim  is
spelt  'hras'ljons,  and  pronounced  "  Den-jong,''  and  hhra-s'is  is  "  Ta-shi."
When,  however,  I  have  found  it  necessary  to  give  the  full  form  of  these
names,  especially  the  more  important  words  translated  from  the  Sans-
krit, in  order  to  recover  their  original  Indian  form  and  meaning,  I  have
referred  them  as  far  as  possible  to  footnotes.

The  transcription  of  the  Tibetan  letters  follows  the  system  adopted  by
Jaeschke  in  his  Dictionary,  with  the  exceptions  noted  below,^  and  cor-
responds closely  with  the  analogous  system  for  Sanskritic  words  given
over  the  page.  The  Tibetan  pronunciation  is  spelt  phonetically  in  the
dialect  of  Lhasa.


1  Somewhat  analogous  to  the  French  Usparhnt.

2  The  exceptions  mainly  are  those  requiring  very  specialized  diacritical
marks,  the  letters  which  are  there  ( Jaeschke's -Dirf. ,  p.  viii.),  pronounced  ^a
as  a  prefix,  cha,  nya,  the  ha  in  several  forms  as  the  basis  for  vowels  ;  these  I
have  rendered  by  g,  ch',  n  and  '  respectively.  In  several  cases  I  have  spelt  words
according  to  Csoma's  system,  by  which  the  silent  consonants  are  italicized.


PKONUNGIATION.


For  the  use  of  readers  who  are  conversant  with  the  Indian  alphabets,
and  the  system  popularly  known  in  India  as  "  the  Hunterian,"  the
following  table,  in  the  order  in  which  the  sounds  are  physiologically
produced — an  order  also  followed  by  the  Tibetans — wUl  show  the
system  of  spelling  Sanskritic  words,  which  is  here  adopted,  and  which
it  will  be  observed,  is  almost  identical  with  that  of  the  widely  used
dictionaries  of  Monier-Williams  and  ChUders.  The  different  forms
used  in  the  Tibetan  for  aspirates  and  palato-sibilants  are  placed  within
brackets : —


{gutturals')

k

kh(k')

g

gh

n

(palatals)

c(c')

ch(ch')

j

jh

ft

(cerebrals)

t

th

d

dh

1?

(dentats)

t

th(t')

d

dh

n

(labials)

p

ph(p')

b

bh

m

(palato-sibil.)

(ts)

(ts')

(z&

ds)

(-')

J

V

r

1

sibilants)

s
h

sh(s')

s

am

ABBREVIATIONS.


B.  Ac.  Ptsbg.  =  Bulletin  de  la  Clagse  Hist.  Philol.  de  I'Academie  de  St.  Peters-

bourg.
BnEN.  I.  =  Burnoufs  Iwlrod.  mi,  Bv.dd.  indien.
Burn.  II,  = „ Lotus  de  bonne  Loi.
cf.  =  confer,  compare.

CsoMA  An.  =  Csoma  Korosi  Analysis  in  Asiatic  Researcftes,  Vol.  xx.
CsOMA  Gfr.  = „  „ Tibetan  Grammar.

Davids  =  Rhys  Davids'  Buddhism.
Desg.  =  Desgodins'  Le  Tibet,  etc.
EiTEL  =  Eitel's  Mandbooh  of  Ohitiese  Buddhism.
Jaesch.  D.  =  Jaesohte's  Tibetan  Dictionary.
J.A.S.B.  =  Jour,  of  the  Asiatic  Soc.  of  Bengal.
J.R.A.S.  =  Journal  of  the  Koyal  Asiatic  Soc,  London.
HoDGS.  =  Hodgson's  Essays  on  Lang.,  Lit,  etc.
Hue  =  Travels  in  Tartary,  Tibet,  etc.,  Hazlitt's  trans.
KopptN  =  Koppen's  Lamaische  Bier.
Markham  =  Markham's  Tibet.  ^

Marco  P.  =  Marco  Polo,  Yule's  edition.

O.M.  =  Original  Mitt.  Ethnolog.  Kouigl.  Museum  fur  Volkerkunde  Berlin.
Pander  =  Pander's  Das  Pantheon,  etc.
pr.  =  pronounced.

KocK.  L.  =  Rockhill's  Land  of  the  Lamas.
Rocs.  B.  = „ Life  of  the  Buddha,  etc.
Sabat  =  Saratcandra  Das.
S.B.E.  =  Sacred  Books  of  the  East.
ScHLAG.  =  E.  Schlagiutweit's  Buddhism  in  Tibet.
Skt.  =  Sanskrit.
S.R.  =  Survey  of  India  Report.
T.  =  Tibetan.

Tara.  =  Tdrandtha's  GescMchte,  etc.,  Sohiefner's  trans.
Vasil.  =  Vasiliev's  or  Wassiljew's  Den-  Buddhismus.


INTRODUCTORY.


TIBET,  the  mystic
Land  of  the  Grand
Lama,  joint God
and  King  of  many  mil-
lions, is still  the most
impenetrable  country  in
the world. Behind its
icy  barriers,  reared  round  it  by
Nature  herself,  and  almost  un-
surmountable,  its  priests  guard
its passes jealously against
foreigners.

Few Europeans have ever
entered  Tibet ;  and  none  for  half  a  century  have  reached  the


Below  Tang-kak  Pass.  ,


INTBODtJCTOBT.


sacred  city. Of  the  travellers  of  later  times  who  have  dared  to
enter this dark  land, after scaling its frontiers  and piercing


View  into  S.W.  Tibet
■  (from  Tang-kar  La  Pass,  16,600  ft.).


its  passes',  and  thrusting  themselves  into  its  snow-swept  deserts,
even  the  most  intrepid,  have  failed  to  penetrate  farther  than  the
outskirts  of  its  central  province.^  And  the  information,  thus
perilously  gained,  has,  with  the  exception  of  Mr.  Eockhill's,  been


- 1  The  few  Europeans  who  have  penetrated  Central  Tibet  have  mostly  been  Boman
missionaries.  The  first  European  to  reach  Lhasa  seems  to  have  been  Friar  Odoric,  of
Pordenne,  about  1330  a.d.  on  his  return  from  Cathay  (Col.  Yule's  Catluiy  and  the  Road
Thither,  i.,  H9,  and  C.  Markham's  Tibet,  xlvi.).  The  capital  city  of  Tibet  referred  to
by  him  with  its  "Ahassl "  or  Pope  is  believed  to  have -been  Lhasa.  In  1661  the  Jesuits
Albert  Dorville  and  Johann  Gruher  visited  Lhasa  on  their  way  from  China  to  India.
In  1706  the  Capuohine  fathers  Josepho  de  Asculi  and  Francisco  Marie  de  Toun  pene-
trated to  Lhasa  from  Bengal.  In  1716  the  Jesuit  Desideri  reached  i't  from  Kashmir  and
Ladak.  In  17il  a  Capuchine  mission  under  Horacio  de  la  Penna  also  succeeded  in
getting  there,  and  the  large  amount  of  information  collected  by  them  supplied  Father
A,  Giorgi  with  the  material  for  his  Alpliabetmn  Tihetanum,  published  at  Rome  in  1762f
The  friendly  reception  accorded  this  party  created  hopes  of  Lhasa  becoming  a  centre
for  Roman  missionaries ;  and  a  Vicar  apostolicus  for  Lhasa  is  still  nominated  and
appears  in  the  "  Annuario  jyontificio,"  though  of  course  he  cannot  reside  within  Tibet.
In  1811  Lhasa  was  reached  by  Manning,  a  friend  of  Charles'  Lamb,  and  the  only  Ehglish-  \
man  who  seems  ever  to  have  got  there  ;  for  most  authorities  are  agreed  that  Moor-
croft,  despite  the  story  told  to  M.  Hue,  never  reached  it.  But  Manning  unfortunately
left  only  a  whimsical  diary,  scarcely  even  descriptive  of  his  fascinating  adventures.
The  subsequent,  and  the  last,  Europeans  to  reach  Lhasa  were  the  Lazarist  mission-
aries, Hue  and  Gabet,  in  1846.  Hue's  entertaining  account  of  his  journey  is  well
known.  He  was  soon  expelled,  and  since  then  China  has  aided  Tibet  in  opposing
foreign  ingress  by  strengthening  its  political  and  military  barriers,  as  recent  ex-
plorers :  Prejivalsky,  Rookhill,  Bonvalot,  Bower,  Miss  Taylor,  etc.,  have  found  to  their
cost ;  though  some  are  sanguine  that  the  Sikhim  Trade  Convention  of  this  year  (1894)
is  probably  the, thin  edge  of  the  wedge  to  open  up  the  country,  and  that  at  no  distant
date  'Tibet  will  be  prevailed  on  to  relax  its  jealous  exclusiveness,  so  that,  'ere  1900,
even  Cook's  tourists  may  visit  the  Lamaist  Vaticani


LAND OF  THE  SUPERNATURAL.


3


almost  entirely  geographical,  leaving  the  customs  of  this  forbidden
land  still  a  field  for  fiction  and  romance.

Thus  we  are  told  that,  amidst  the  solitudes  of  this  "  Land  of  the
Supernatural "  repose  the  spirits  of  "  The  Masters,"  the  MahdtTnas,


Captain  of  Gdard  of  Don(>3:ya  Pass.

(S.-Western  Tibet.)  - .  '

whose  astral  bodies  slumber  in  unbroken  peace,  save  when  they
condescend  to  work  some  petty  miracle  in  the  world  below.

In  presenting  here  the  actualities  of  the  cults  and  customs  of
Tibet;  and  lifting  higher  than  before  the  veil  which  still  hides  its

B  2


mTBODUGTORT.


mysteries  from  European  eyes,  the  subject  may  be  viewed  under
the  following  sections: —

a.  Historical.  The  changes  in  primitive  Buddhism  leading  to
Lamaism,  and  the  origins  of  Lamaisin  and  its  sects.

h.  Doctrinal.  The  metaphysical  sources  of  the  doctrine.  The
doctrine  and  its  morality  and  literature.

c.  Monastic.  The  Lamaist  order.  Its  curriculum,  daily  life,
dress,  etc.,  discipline,  hierarchy  and  incarnate-deities  and  re-
embodied  saints.  ^

d.  Buildings. Monasteries,  temples,  monuments,  and  shrines.

e.  Pantheon  and  Mythology,  including  saints,  images,
fetishes,  and  other  sacred  objects  and  symbols.

/.  Kitual  and  Sorcery,  comprising  sacerdotal  services  for  the,
laity,  astrology,  oracles  and  divination,  charms  and  necromancy.

g.  Festivals  and  Sacred  Plays,  with  the  mystic  plays  and
masquerades.

/(,.  Popular  and  Domestic  Lamaism  in  every-day  life,  customs,
and  folk-lore.

Such  an  exposition  will  afford  us  a  fairly  full  and  complete
survey  of  one  of  the  most  active,  and  least  known,  forms  of  exist-
ing Buddhism ;  and  will  present  incidentally  numerous  other
topics  of  wide  and  varied  human  interest.

For  Lamaism  is,  indeed,  a  microcosm  of  the  growth  of  religion
and  myth  among  primitive  people ;  and  in  large  degree  an  object-
lesson  of  their  advance  from  barbarism  towards  civilization.  And
it  preserves  for  us  much  of  the  old-world  lore  and  petrified  beliefs
of  our  Aryan  ancestors.


ir.

CHANGES IN PRIMITIVE BUDDHISM LEADING  TO
LAMAISM.

"  Ah  !  Coni3tanfcine,  of  how  much  ill  was  cause,
Not  thy  conversion,  but  those  rich  domains
That  the  first  wealthy  Pope  received  of  thee."i

jo  understand  the  origin  of  Lamaism  and  its  place  in  the
Buddhist  system,  we  must  recall  the  leading  features
of  primitive  Buddhism,  and
glance  at  its  growth,  to  see

the  points  at  which  the  strange  creeds

and cults crept in, and the gradual

crystallization'  of  these  into  a  religion

differing  widely  from  the  parent  system,

and  opposed  in  so  many  ways  to  the

teaching  of  Buddha.

No one now doubts the historic

character of Siddharta Gautama, or

Sakya  Muni,  the  founder  of  Buddhism ;

though it is clear the canonical ac-
counts regarding  him  are  overlaid  with

legend,  the  fabulous  addition  of  after

days.^ Divested  of  its  embellishment,

the  simple  narrative  of  the Buddha's

life  is  strikingly  noble  and  human.

Some  time  before  the  epoch  of  Alex-
ander the  Great,  between  the  fourth  and

fifth centuries  before Christ,^ Prince

Siddharta  appeared  in  India  as  an  original  thinker  and  teacher,

deeply  conscious  of  the  degrading  thraldom  of  caste  and  the

1  Dante,  Pa/radiso,  xx.  (Milton's  trans.)

2  See  Chapter  v.  for  details  of  the  gradual  growth  of  the  legends.

3  See  Chronological  Table,  App^dix  i.


Sakya  Muni.


CHANGES  IN  PRIMITIVE  BUDDHISM.


priestly  tyranny  of  the  Brahmans,i  and  profoundly  impressed  with
the  pathos  and  struggle  of  Life,  and  earnest  in  the  search  of
some  method  of  escaping  from  existence  which  was  clearly  in-
volved with  sorrow.

His  touching  renunciation  of  his  high  estate,^  of  his  beloved
wife,  and  child,  and  home,  to  become  an  ascetic,  in  order  to  master
the  secrets  of  deliverance  from  sorrow;  his  unsatisfying  search  for
truth  amongst  the  teachers  of  his  time ;  his  subsequent  austerities
and  severe  penance,  a  much-vaunted  means  of  gaining  spiritual  in-
sight ;  his  retirement  into  solitude  and  self-communion ;  his  last
struggle  and  final  triumph — latterly  represented  as  a  real  material
combat,  the  so-called  "  Temptation  of  Buddha  "  :—


Temptation  of  Sakya  Muni
(from  a  sixth  century  Ajanta  fresco,  after  Eaj.  Mitra).

'  Infernal  ghosts  and  hellish  furies  round
Environ'd  thee  ;  some  howl'd,  some  yell'd,  somte  shriek'd,
Some  bent  at  thee  their  fiery  darts,  while  thou
Sat'st  unappall'd  in  calm  and  sinless  peace  "  ;  '


1  The  treatises  on  Vedic  ritual,  called  the  Brahmanas,  had  existed  for  about  three
centuries  previous  to  Buddha's  epoch,  according  to  Max  MiiUer's  Chronology  {mbial,
Lectures,  1891,  p.  58)— the  initial  dates  there  given  are  Rig  Veda,  tenth  century  b  c  ■
Brahmanas,  eighth  century  B.C. ;  Sutra  sixth,  and  Buddhism  fifth  century  b  c

2  The  researches  of  Vasiliev,  etc.,  render  it  probable  that  Siddharta's  father  was
only  a  petty  lord  or  chief  (cf.  also  Oldenbeeg's  Life,  Appendix),  and  that  Sakya's
pessimistic  view  of  life  may  have  been  forced  upon  him  by  the  loss  of  his  territories
through  conquest  by  a  neighbouring  king.

5  Milton's  Paradise  Regained,  Book  iv


BUDDHA'S  LIFE  AND  DEATH,


tis  reappearance,  confident  that  he  had  discovered  the  secrets  of
deliverance ;  his  carrying  the  good  tidings  of  the  truth  from  town
to  town ;  his  effective  protest  against  the  cruel  sacrifices  of  the
Brahmans,  and  his  relief  of  much  of  the  suffering  inflicted  upon
helpless  animals  and  often  human  beings,  in  the  name  of  religion ;
his death, full of years and honours, and the subsequent


k

A^

^

&.

,^^g

V

/T^j^^^^wps

^s

^^^8

M

^^s

^^^w

k  ISH

^^^

^S

^^nr^ril

i

E

V  =^^^1^=^

wSSmil  l1lii^!ll

1^1

-A^

4  .^tM3W

1

Wr^MV^

w

|f.;^-r<.^V

Buddha's  Death
(from  a  Tibetan  picture,  after  Griinwedel).


burial  of  his  relies, — all  these  episodes  in  Buddha's  life  are  familiar
to  EngUsh  readers  in  the  pages  of  Sir  Edwin  Arnold's  Light  of
Asia,  and  other  works.

His  system,  which  arose  as  a  revolt  against  the  one-sided  de-
velopment of  contemporary  religion  and  ethics,  the  caste-debase-
ment of  man  and  the  materializing  of  Grod,  took  the  form,  as
we  shall  see,  of  an  agnostic  idealism,  which  threw  away  ritual
and  sacerdotalism  altogether.

Its  tolerant  creed  of  universal  benevolence,  quickened  by  the
bright  example  of  a  pure  and  noble  life,  appealed  to  the  feelings


8  CHANGES  IN  PRIMITIVE  BUDDHISM.

of  the  people  with  irresistible  force  and  directness,  and  soon
gained  for  the  new  religion  many  converts  in  the  Granges  Valley.

And  it  gradually  gathered  a  brotherhood  of  monks,  which  after
Buddha's  death  became  subject  to  a  succession  of  "Patriarchs,"'
who,  however,  possessed  little  or  no  centralized  hierarchal  power,
nor,  had  at  least  the  earlier  of  them,  any  fixed  abode.

About  250  B.C.  it  was  vigorously  propagated  by  the  great
Emperor  Asoka,  the  Constantine  of  Buddhism,  who,  adopting  it
as  his  State-religion,  zealously  spread  it  throughout  his  own  vast
empire,  and  sent  many  missionaries  into  the  adjoining  lands  to
diffuse  the  faith.  Thus  was  it  transported  to  Burma,^  Siam,
Ceylon,  and  other  islands  on  the  south,  to  NepaP  and  the  countries
to  the  north  of  India,  Kashrnir,  Bactria,  Afghanistan,  etc.

In  61  A.D.  it  spread  to  China,*  and  through  China,  to  Corea,  and.


'  The  greatest  of  all  Buddha's  disciples,  Sariputra  and  Maudgalyayana,  who  from
their  prominence  in  the  system  seem  to  have  contributed  materially  to  its  success,
having  died  before  their  master,  the  first  of  the  patriarchs  was  the  senior  surviving
disciple,  Mahakasyapa.  As  several  of  these  Patriarchs  are  intimately  associated
with  the  Laraaist  developments,  I  subjoin  a  list  of  their  names,  taien  from  the
Tibetan  canon  and  Taranatha's  history,  supplemented  by  some  dates  from  modern
sources.  After  Nagarjuna,  the  thirteenth  (or  according  to  some  the  fourteenth)
patriarch,  the  succession  is  uncertain.


List  of  the  Pateiaechs.


1.  Mahakasyapa, Buddha's senior

disciple.

2.  Ananda, Buddha's cousin and

favourite  attendant.

3.  Sanavasu.

4.  Upagupta,  the spiritual adviser

of  Asoka,  250  B.C.

5.  Dhritaka.

6.  Micohaka  or  Bibhakala.

7.  Buddhananda.

8.  Buddhamltra (=  ?Vasumitra,  re-

ferred to  as  president  of  Kan-
ishka's  Council).

9.  Parsva,  contemporary  of  Kanishka,

circa  78  a.  u.

10.  Sunasata  (?or  Punyayasas).

11.  Asvaghosha,  also  contemporary  of

Kanishka,  dna  100  a.d.


12.  Masipala  (Kapimala).

13.  Nagarjuna,  circa  150  A.D.

14.  Deva  or  Kanadeva.

15.  Eahulata  (?).

16.  Sanghanandi.

17.  Sankhayaseta  (?)

18.  Kumarada.

19.  Jayata.

20.  Vasubandhu,  circa  400  a.d.

21.  Manura.

22.  Haklenayasas.

23.  Sinhalaputra.

24.  Vasasuta.

25.  Punyamitra.

26.  Prajriatara.

27.  Bodhidharma,  who  visited  China

by  sea  in  526  a.d.


2  By  SoNA  and  Uttaeo  {Maliavanso,  p.  71).

=  BnoHANAN-HAMiLTON  (Acct.  of  Nepal,  p.  190)  gives  date  of  introduction  as  a.d.  33  ■

probably  this  was  its  re-introduction.  '

4  During  the  reign  of  the  Emperor  Ming  Ti. Beal  {Budd.  in  China,  p.  53)  gives

71  A.D.


BUDDHA'S  RELIGION  AND  ITS  SPREAD.  9

in  the  sixth  century  A.D.,to  Japan,  taking  strong  hold  on  all  of  the
people  of  these  countries,  though  they  were  ver;^  different  from
those  among  whom  it  arose,  and  exerting  on  all  the  wilder  tribes
among  them  a  very  sensible  civilizing  influence.  It  is  believed  to
have  established  itself  at  Alexandria.^  And  it  penetrated  to
Europe,  where  the  early  Christians  had  to  pay  tribute  to  the
Tartar  Buddhist  Lords  of  the  Grolden  Horde ;  and  to  the  present
day  it  still  survives  in  European  Russia  among  the  Kalmaks  on
the  Volga,  who  are  professed  Buddhists  of  the  Lamaist  order.

Tibet,  at  the  beginning  of  the  seventh  century,  though  now
surrounded  by  Buddhist  countries,  knew  nothing  of  that  religion,
and  was  still  buried  in  barbaric  darkness.  Not  until  about  the
year  640  A.D.  did  it  first  receive  its  Buddhism,  and  through  it
some  beginnings  of  civilization  among  its  people.

But  here  it  is  necessary  to  refer  to  the  changes  in  Form  which
Buddhism  meanwhile  had  undergone  in  India.

Buddha,  as  the  central  figure  of  the  system,  soon  became  invested
with  supernatural  and  legendary  attributes.  And  as  the  religion
extended  its  range  and  influence,  and  enjoyed  princely  patronage
and  ease,  it  became  more  metaphysical  and  ritualistic,  so  that
heresies  and  discords  constantly  cropped  up,  tending  to  schisms,
for  the  suppression  of  which  it  was  found  necessary  to  hold  great
councils.

Of  these  councils  the  one  held  at  Jalandhar,  in  Northern  India,
towards  the  end  of  the  first  century  A.D.,  under  the  auspices  of  the
Scythian  King  Kanishka,  of  Northern  India,  was  epoch-making,
for  it  established  a  permanent  schism  into  what  European  writers
have  termed  the  "  Northern "  and  "  Southern "  Schools  :  the
Southern  being  now  represented  by  Ceylon,  Burma,  and  Siam  ;
and  the  Northern  by  Tibet,  Sikhim,  Bhotan,  Nepal,  Ladak,
China,  Mongolia,  Tartary,  and  Japan.  This  division,  however,
it  must  be  remembered,  is  unknown  to  the  Buddhists  them-
selves, and  is  only  useful  to  denote  in  a  rough  sort  of  way  the
relatively  primitive  as  distinguished  from  the  developed  or  mixed
forms  of  the  faith,  with  especial  reference  to  their  present-day
distribution.


1  The  MaUmnso  (Tornoue's  ed.,  p.  171)  notes  that  30,000  Bhikshus,  or  Buddhist
monks,  came  from  "  Alasadda,"  considered  to  be  Alexandria.


10  CHANGES  IN  PRIMITIVE  BUDDHISM.

The  point  of  divergence  of  these  so-called  "Northern"  and
"  Southern  "  Schools  was  the  theistic  Makdydna  doctrine,  which
substituted  for  the  agnostic  idealism  and  simple  morality  of
Buddha,  a  speculative  theistic  system  with  a  mysticism  of  sophis-
tic nihilism  in  the  background.  Primitive  Buddhism  practically,
confined  its  salvation  to  a  select  few ;  but  the  Mahayana  extended
salvation  to  the  entire  universe.  Thus,  from  its  large  capacity  as
a  "  Vehicle  "  for  easy,  speedy,  and  certain  attainment  of  the  state
of  a  Bodhisat  or  potential  Buddha,  and  conveyance  across  the  sea
of  life  -{samsdra)  to  Nirvana,  the  haven  of  the  Buddhists,  its
adherents  called  it  "  The  Great  Vehicle  "  or  Mahdydna ;  ^  while
they  contemptuously  called  the  system  of  the  others — the  Primi-
tive Buddhists,  who  did  not  join  this  innovation — "  The  Little,
or  Imperfect  Vehicle, "  the  Hinaydna,^  which  could  carry  so
few  to  Nirvana,  and  which  they  alleged  was  only  fit  for  low
intellects.

This  doctrinal  division  into  the  Mahayana  and  Hinayana,  how-
ever, does  not  quite  coincide  with  the  distinction  into  the  so-called
Northern  and  Southern  Schools ;  for  the  Southern  School  shows
a  considerable  leavening  with  Mahayana  principles,^  and  Indian
Buddhism  during  its  most  popular  period  was  very  largely  of  the
Mahayana  type.

"Who  the  real  author  of  the  Mahayana  was  is  not  yet  known.
The  doctrine  seems  to  have  developed  within  the  Maha-sanghika
or  "  Great  Congregation " — a  heretical  sect  which  arose  among
the  monks  of  Vaisali,  one  hundred  years  after  Buddha's  death,
and  at  the  council  named  after  that  place.*  Asvaghosha,  who
appears  to  have  lived  about  the  latter  end  of  the  first  century  A.D.,
is  credited  with  the  authorship  of  a  work  entitled  On  raisviig
Faith  in  the  Mahdydna.^  But  its  chief  expounder  and  developer
was  Nagarjuna,  who  was  probably  a  pupil  of  Asvaghosha,  as  he

1  The  word  Ydna  (Tib.,  T'eg-pa  cWen-po)  or  "Vehicle"  is  parallel  to  the  Platonic
SXM"'  *^  noted  by  Beal  in  Oatena,  p.  124.

2  Tib.,  Teg-i[ia  dvmn-pa.

3  Cf .  HiuEN  Tsiang's  Si-yu-Ei  (Seal's),  ii.,  p.  133 ;  Eitel,  p.  90 ;  Dharmafat.a  in
Mahabodki  Jour.,  1892;  Taw  Sein  Ko,  Ind.  Antiquary,  June,  1892.

4  The  orthodox  members  of  this  council  formed  the  sect  called  Sthaviras  or  "elders."

5  He  also  wrote  a  biography  of  Buddha,  entitled  Bnddha-Oariia  Kdm/a,  translated
by  CowELi.,  in  S.B.E.  It  closely  resembles  the  Lalita  Vistara,  and  a  •similar  epic
was  brought  to  China  as  early  as  70  a.d.  (Beal's  Chinese  Buddhism,  p.  90).  He  is  also
credited  with  the  authorship  of  a  clever  confutation  of  Brahmanism,  which  was  latterly
entitled  Vajra  Suci  (cf.  Hodgs.,  III.,  127);


THE  MAHATANA  AND  NAGARJUNA.


11


followed  the  successor  of  the  latter  in /the  patriarchate.  He  could
not,  however,  have  taken  any  active  part  in  Kanishka'sGouucil,
as  the  Lamas  believe.  Indeed,  it  is  doubtful  even  whether  he  had
then  been  born.'^

•  Nagarjuna  claimed  and  secured  orthodoxy  for  the  Mahayana
doctrine  by  producing  an  apocalyptic  treatise  which  he  attributed
to  Sakya  Muni,  entitled  the
Prajnd-pdramitd,  or  "  the
means  of  arriving  at  the  other
side  of  wisdom,"  a  treatise
which  he  alleged  the  Buddha
had  himself  composed,  and
had  hid  away  in  the  custody
of  the  Naga  demigods  until
men  were  sufficiently  enlight-
ened to  comprehend  so  ab-
struse a  system.  And,  as  his
method  claims  to  be  a  com-
promise between  the  extreme
views  then  held  on  the  nature
of  Nirvana,  it  was  named  the
Mddhyamika,  or  the  system  "  of  the  Middle  Path."  ^

This  Mahayana  doctrine  was  essentially  a  sophistic  nihilism;
and  under  it  the  goal  Nirvana,  or  rather  Pari-Nirvana,  while
ceasing  to  be  extinction  of  Life,  was  considered  a  mystical  state
which  admitted  of  no  definition.  By  developing  the  supernatural
side  of  Buddhism  and  its  objective  symbolism,  by  rendering  its


2,^oj-9*s)^m-^a


Nagaejuna.


1  Nagarjuna  (T.,  kLu-grub. )  appears  to  belong  to  the  second  century  a.d.  He  was  a
native  of  Vidarbha  (Berar)  and  a  monk  of  Nalanda,  the  headquarters  of  several  of
the  later  patriarchs.  He  is  credited  by  the  Lamas  (J.A.S.B.,  1882, 115)  with  having
erected  the  stone  railing  round  the  great  Gandhola  Temple  of  "  Budh  Gaya,"  though
the  style  of  the  lithic  inscriptions  on  these  rails  would  place  their  date  earlier.
For  a  biographical  note  from  the  Tibetan  by  H.  Wenzel,  see  /.  Pali  Text  Soc,
1886,  p.  1,  also  by  Saeat,  J.A.S.B.,  51,  pp.  1  and  115.  The  vernacular  history  of
Kashmir  (Eajatarangini)  makes  him  a  contemporary  and  chief  monk  of  Kanishka's
successor,  King  Abhimanyu  (cf.  also  Eitel,  p.  103 ;  Sohl.,  21,  301-3  ;  Kopp.,  ii.,  14 ;
O.M.,  107,  2;  CSOMA,  Gr.,  xii.,  182).

2  It  seems  to  have  been  a  common  practice  for  sectaries  to  call  their  own  system
by  this  title,  implying  that  it  only  was  the  true  or  reasonable  beUef.  Sakya  Muni
also  called  his  system  "the  Middle  Path"  (Davids,  p.  47),  claiming  in  his  defence  of
truth  to  avoid  the  two  extremes  of  superstition  on  the  one  side,  and  worldliness  or
infidelity  on  the  other. Comp.  the  Via  media  of  the  Anghcan  Oxford  movement.


12


CHANGES  IN  PRIMITIVE  BUDDHISM.


salvation  more  accessible  and  universal,  and  by  substituting  good
words  for  the  good  deeds  of  the  earlier  Buddhists,  the  Mahayana
appealed  more  powerfully  to  the  multitude  and  secured  ready
popularity.

About  the  end  of  the  first  century  of  our  era,  then,  Kanishka's-
Council  affirmed  the  superiority  of  the  Mahayana  system,  and
published  in  the  Sanskrit  language  inflated  versions  of  the  Bud-
dhist Canon,  from  sources  for  the  most  part  independent  of  the
Pali  versions  of  the  southern  Buddhists,  though  exhibiting  a  re-
markable agreement  with  them.^

And  this  new  doctrine  supported  by  Kaaishka,  who  almost
rivalled  Asoka  in  his  Buddhist  zeal  and  munificence,  became
a  dominant  form  of  Buddhism  throughout  the  greater  part  of
India ;  and  it  was  the  form  which  first  penetrated,  it  would  seem,
to  China  and  Northern  Asia.

Its  idealization  of  Buddha  and  his  attributes  led  to  the  creation
of  metaphysical  Buddhas  and  celestial  Bodhisats,  actively  willing
and  able  to  save,  and  to  the  introduction  of  innumerable  demons
and  deities  as  objects  of  worship,  with  their  attendant  idolatry  and

sacerdotalism, both of


Manjusei

(the  Bodhisat-God,  holding  the  Book  of  Wisdom

and  wielding  the  Sword  of  Knowledge).


which  departures  Buddha
had  expressly  condemned.
The  gradual  growth  of
myth  and  legend,  and  of
the  various  theistic  de-
velopments which  now
set  in,  are  sketched  in
detail  in  another  chapter.

As  early  as  about  the
first  century  A.D.,  Buddha
is  made  to  be  existent
from  all  eternity  and
without  beginning

And  one  of  the  earliest
forms  given  to  the  great-
est of  these  metaphysical
Buddhas — Amitabha,  the
Buddhaof  Boundless  Light


1  Several  of  the  Chinese  and  Japanese  Scriptures  are  translated from  the  Pali
Bbal's  Budd.  ill  Ghina,  p.  5)  and  also  a  few  Tibetan  (cf.  Chap.  vii.).


THEISM  AND IMAGE-W0E8HIP.


13


— evidently  incorporated  a  Sun-myth,  as  was  indeed  to  be  ex-
pected where  the  chief  patrons  of  this  early  Mahayana  Buddhism,
the  Scythians  and  Indo-Persians,  were  a  race  of  Sun-worshippers.

The  worship  of  Buddha's  own  image  seems  to  date  from  this
period,  the  first  century  of  our  era,  and  about  four  or  five
centuries  after  Buddha's  death  ;  ^  and  it  was  followed  by  a  variety
of  polytheistic  forms,  the  creation  of  which  was  probably  facili-
tated by  the  Grrecian  Art  influences  then  prevalent  in  Northern
India.2 Different forms

of  Buddha's  image,  origin-  /VyJ^^J \^

ally  intended  to  represent  Lk\^ ^r~i y /a

different  epochs  in  his  life,
were  afterwards  idealized
into  various  Celestial  Bud-
dhas,  from  whom  the  hu-
man Buddhas  were  held
to  be  derived  as  material
reflexes.

About  500  A.D.^  arose
the  next  great  develop-
ment in  Indian  Buddhism
with  the  importation  into
it  of  the  pantheistic  cult
of  Yoga,  or  the  ecstatic
union  of  the  individual
with  the  Universal  Spirit,
a  cult  which  had  been  in-
troduced into  Hinduism
by  Patanjali  about  150  B.C.
Baddha  himself  had  attached  much  importance  to  the  practice  of


Vajba-passi
(the  Wielder  of  the  Thundei-bolt).


1  Cf.  statue  of  Buddha  found  at  Sravasti,  Cdnninqham's  Stupa  of  Barkut,  p.  vii.  So
also  in  Christianity.  Archdeacon  Farrar,  in  his  recent  lecture  on  "  The  Development  of
Christian  Art,"  states  that  for  three  centuries  there  were  no  pictures  of  Christ,  but
only  symbols,  such  as  the  fish,  the  lamb,  the  dove.  The  catacombs  of  St.  CalUstus
contained  the  first  picture  of  Christ,  the  date  being  313.  Not  even  a  cross  existed
in  the  early  catacombs,  and  still  less  a  crucifix.  The  eighth  century  saw  the  first  picture
of  the  dead  Christ. Rabulas  in  586  first  depicted  the  crucifixion  in  a  Syriac  Gospel.

2  Smith's  Grmco-Roman  vnfl.on  QivilizationofAncientTiidia,J.A,S.B.,58  etseq.,  1889,
and  Gbonwedel's  Bvddh.  Kunst,

3  The  date  of  the  author  of  this  innovation,  Asauga,  the  brother  of  Vasubandhu,


14


CHANGES  LEADING TO  LlMAJSM.


abstract  meditation  amongst  his  followers;  and  such  practices
under  the  mystical  and  later  theistie  developments  of  his  system,
readily  led  to  the  adoption  of  the  Brahmanical  cult  of  Yoga,
which  was  grafted  on  to  the  theistie  Mahayana  by  Asanga,  a
Buddhist  monk  of  Grandhara  (Peshawar),  in  Northern  India.
Those  who  mastered  this  system  were  called  Yogdcdrya  Bud-
dhists.

The  Yogacarya  mysticism  seems  to  have  leavened  the  mass  of
the  Mahayana  followers,  and  even  some  also  of  the  Hinayana ;  for

distinct  traces  of  Yoga  are  to  be
found  in  modern  Burmese  and
Geylonese  Buddhism.  And  this
Yoga  parasite,  containing  within
itself  the  germs  of  Tantrism,
seized  strong  hold  of  its  host
and  soon  developed  its  monster
outgrowths,  which  crushed  and
cankered  most  of  the  little  life
of  purely  Buddhist  stock  yet
left  in  the  Mahayana.

About  the  end  of  the  sixth
century  A.D.,  Tantrism  or  Sivaic
mysticism,  with  i^s  worship  of
female  energies,  spouses  of  the
Hindu  god  Siva,  began  to  tinge
both  Buddhism  and  Hindiiism.
Consorts  were  allotted  to  the
several  Celestial  Bodhisats  and
most  of  the  other  gods  and  de-
mons, and  most  of  them  were
given  forms  wild  and  terrible,
and  often  monstrous,  according
to  the  supposed  moods  of  each
divinity  at  different  times.  And
as  these  goddesses  and  fiendesses


.  Samanta-bhadea
(a  Celeatial  BodhisafcJ.


the  twentieth  patriarch,  has  not  yet  been  fixed  with  any  precision.  It  seems  to  be
somewhere  between  400  a.b.  and  500  a.d.— Cf.  Vasil.,  B.,  p.  78  ;  Schiefnee's  Tdra.,
p.  126  ;  JoiiEN's  Hidoire  de  la  vie  de  Hmen  Tslumg,  83,  93,  97, 106,  114.


TANTRIK  BUDDHISM.


15


were  bestowers  of  supernatural  power,  and  were  especially  ma-
lignant, they  were  especially  worshipped.

By  the  middle  of  the  seventh  century  a.d.,  India  contained
many  images  of  Divine  Buddhas  and  Bodhisats  with  their  female
energies  and  other  Buddhist  gods  and  demons,  as  we  know
from  Hiuen  Tsiang's  narrative  and  the  lithic  remains  in  India ;  ^
and  the  growth  of  myth  and  ceremony  had  invested  the
dominant  form  of  Indian  Buddhism  with  organised  litanies  and
full  ritual.

Such  was  the  distorted  form  of  Buddhism  introduced  into  Tibet
about  640  a.d.  ;  and  during  the  three  or  four  succeeding  centuries
Indian  Buddhism  became  still  more  debased.  Its  mysticism
became  a  silly  mummery  of  unmeaning  jargon  and  "magic
circles,"  dignified  by  the  title  of  Mantraydna  or  "The  Spell-
Vehicle";  and  this  so-called
"  esoteric,"  but  properly  "  exoteric,"
cult  was  given  a  respectable  an-
tiquity by  alleging,  that  its  real
founder  was  Nagarjuna,  who  had
received  it  from  the  Celestial  Buddha
Vairocana  through  the  divine  Bod-
hisat  Vajrasattva  at  "  the  iron  tower  "
in  Southern  India.

In  the  tenth  century  a.d. ,2  the
Tantrik  phase  developed  in  Northern
India,  Kashmir,  and  Nepal,  into  the
monstrous  and  polydemonist  doc-
trine, the  Kalacakra,^  with  its  de-
moniacal Buddhas,  which  incor-
porated the  Mantrayana  practices,
and  called  itself the Vajra-ydna,

or  "  The  Thunderbolt -Vehicle,"  and

„  ,,  , T7- ■ -  Eleven-headed  Avalokita.

its followers were named vajra-

cdrya,  or  "  Followers  of  the  Thunderbolt."


i  See  my  article  on  Uren,  J.A,S,B.,  1891,  and  on  Indian  Buddhist  Cult,  etc.,  in
J.R.A.S.,  1894,  p.  51  et  seq,

2  About  965  A.D.  (CsoMA,  Gr.,  p.  192).

3  Tib.,  'Dv.s-Kyi-'lCor-h,  or  GinU  of  Time,  see  Chap.  vi.  It  is  ascribed  to  the  fabu-
lous country  of  Sambhala  (T.,  De-juii)  to  the  North  of  India,  a  mythical  country  prob-
ably founded  upon  the  Northern  land  of  St.  Padma-«am6Aam,  to  wit  Ddyana.


16  CHANGES  LEADING TO  LAMAISM.

In  these  declining  days  of  Indian  Buddhism,  when  its  spiritual
and  regenerating  influences  were  almost  dead,  the  Muhammadan
invasion  swept  over  India,  in  the  latter  end  of  the  twelfth  century
A.D.,  and  effectually  stamped  Buddhism  out  of  the  country.  The
fanatical  idol-hating  Afghan  soldiery  ^  especially  attacked  the
Buddhist  monasteries,  with  their  teeming  idols,  and  they  mas-


Nako
Can  Indian  Euddhist  Yajracarya  Monk  of  the  Eleventh  Century  A.D.).

sacred  the  monks  wholesale ; "  and  as  the  Buddhist  religion,  un-
like the  more  domestic  Brahmanism,  is  dependent  on  its  priests
and  monks  for  its  vitality,  it  soon  disappeared  in  the  absence  of
tbese  latter.  It  lingered  only  for  a  short  time  longer  in  the  more
remote  parts  of  the  peninsula,  to  which  the  fiercely  fanatical
Muhammadans  could  not  readily  penetrate.^

But  it  has  now  been  extinct  in  India  for  several  centuries,
leaving,  however,  all  over  that  country,  a  legacy  of  gorgeous
architectural  remains  and  monuments  of  decorative  art,  and  its

1  See  article  by  me  in  J.A.S.B.,  Ixvi.,  1892,  p.  20  et  seq.,  illustrating  this  fanaticism
and  massacre  with  reference  to  Magadha  and  Asam.

2  Tabaqat-i-Nihirl,  Elliot's  trans.,  ii,,  306,  etc.

3  Taranatha  says  it  still  existed  in  Bengal  till  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century  a.d.,
under  the  "  Chagala  "  Raja,  whose  kingdom  extended  to  Delhi  and  who  was  converted
to  Buddhism  by  his  wife.  He  died  in  1448  a.d.,  and  Prof.  Bendall  finds  {Cat.  Buddh.  Ski.
MSS.  intr.  p.  iv)  that  Buddhist  MSS.  were  copied  in  Bengal  up  to  the  middle  of  the
fifteenth  century,  namely,  to  1446.  Cf.  also  his  note  in  J.B.A.S.,  New  Ser.,  xx.,  652,  and
mine  in  J.A.S.B.  (Proc),  February,  1893.


ITS  FORM  IN TIBET.


17


living  effect  upon  its  apparent  offshoot  Jainism,  and  upon  Brah-
naanism,  which  it  profoundly  influenced  for  good.

Although  the  form  of  Buddhism  prevalent  in  Tibet,  and  which
has  been  called  after  its  priests  "  Lamaism,"  is  mainly  that  of
the  mystical  type,  the  Vajra-yana,  curiously  incorporated  with
Tibetan  mythology  and  spirit-worship,  still  it  preserves  there,
as  we  shall  see,  much  of  the  loftier  philosophy  and  ethics  of  the
system  taught  by  Buddha  himself.  And  the  Lamas  have  the  keys
to  unlock  the  meaning  of  much  of  Buddha's  doctrine,  which  has
been  almost  inacessible  to  Europeans.


Lama-Wobship.


Some  LAma-peiests.


III.


RISE, DEVELOPMENT, AND SPREAD OP LAMAISM.


au


IBET  emerges  from  barbaric  darkness  only  with  the
dawn  of  its  Buddhism,  in  the  seventh  century  of  our
era.
Tibetan  history,  such  as  there  i§ — and  there  is
none  at  all  before  its  Buddhist  era,  nor  little  worthy  of  the
name  till  about  the  eleventh  century  a.d. — is  fairly  clear  on  the


1  From  a  pliotograiih  by  Mr.  Hoffmann.


PBE-LAMAIST TIBET.  19

point  that  previous  to  King  Sron  Tsan  Grampo's  marriage  in
638-641  A.D.,  Buddhism  was  quite  unknown  in  Tibet.^  And  it
is  also  fairly  dear  on  the  point  that  Lamaism  did  not  arise  till
a  century  later  than  this  epoch.

Up  till  the  seventh  century  Tibet  was  inaccessible  even  to  the
Chinese.  The  Tibetans  of  this  prehistoric  period  are  seen,  from
the  few  glimpses  that  we  have  of  them  in  Chinese  history  about
the  end  of  the  sixth  century ,2  to  have  been  rapacious  savages
and  reputed  cannibals,  without  a  written  language,^  and  followers
of  an  animistic  and  devil-dancing  or  Shamanist  religion,  the  Bon,
resembling  in  many  ways  the  Taoism  of  China.

Early  in  the  seventh  century,  when  Muhammad  ("  Mahomet  ")


1  The  historians  so-called  of  Tibet  wrote  mostly  inflated  bombast,  almost  valueless
for  historical  purposes.  As  the  current  accounts  of  the  rise  of  Buddhism  in  Tibet  are
so  overloaded  with  legend,  and  often  inconsistent,  I  have  endeavoured  to  sift  out  the
more  positive  data  from  the  mass  of  less  trustworthy  materials.  I  have  looked  into
the  more  disputed  historical  points  in  the  Tibetan  originals,  and,  assisted  by  the
living  traditions  of  the  Lamas,  and  the  translations  provided  by  Rockhill  and  Buslicll
especially,  but  also  by  Schlagintweit,  Sarat,  and  others,  I  feel  tolerably  confident  that
as  regards  the  questions  of  the  mode  and  date  of  the  introduction  of  Buddhism  into
Tibet,  and  the  founding  of  Lamaism,  the  opinions  now  expressed  are  in  the  main
correct.

The  accounts  of  the  alleged  Buddhist  events  in  prehistoric  Tibet  given  in  the
Mani-Kdh-'bum,  Gyal-rahs,  and  other  legendary  books,  are  clearly  clumsy  fictions.
Following  the  example  of  Burma  and  other  Buddhist  nations  (cf.  Hiuen  Tsiang,
Julien's  trans.,  i.,  179  ;  ii.,  107,  etc.)  who  claim  for  their  King  an  ancestry  from  the
Sakya  stock,  we  find  the  Lamas  foisting  upon  their  King  a  similar  descent.  A
mythical  exiled  prince,  named  gNah-K'ri-hTsan-po,  alleged  to  be  the  son  of  King
Prasenjit,  Buddha's  first  royal  patron,  and  a  member  of  the  Licchavi  branch  of
the  Sakya  tribe,  is  made  to  enter  Tibet  in  the  fifth  century  B.C.  as  the  progenitor
of  -  mOlennium  of  Sroh  Tsan  Gampo's  ancestors ;  and  an  absurd  story  is  invented
to  account  for  the  etymology  of  his  name,  which  means  "  the  back  chair " ;  while
the  Tibetan  people  are  given  as  progenitors  a  monkey  ("  Hilumandju,"  evidently  in-
tended for  Hanumanji,  the  Hindu  monkey  god,  cf.  Rock.,  LL.,  355)  sent  by  Avalo-
kiteswara  and  a  rakshasi  fiendess.  Again,  in  the  year  331  a.d.,  there  fell  from  heaven
several  sacred  objects  (conf.  Rock.,  B.,  p.  210),  including  the  Om  mani  formula,
which  in  reality  was  not  invented  till  many  hundred  (probably  a  thousand)  years
later.  And  similarly  the  subsequent  appearance  of  five  foreigners  before  a  King,  said
to  have  been  named  T'o-t'ori  Nyan-tsan,  in  order  to  declare  the  sacred  nature  of  the
above  symbols,  without,  however,  explaining  them,  so  that  the  people  continued  in
ignorance  of  their  meaning.  And  it  only  tends  still  further  to  obscure  the  points
at  issue  to  import  into  the  question,  as  Lassen  does  {Ind.  Alt.,  ii.,  1072),  the  alleged
erection  on  Mt.  Kailas,  in  137  B.C.,  of  a  temporary  Buddhist  monastery,  for  such  a
monastery  must  have  belonged  to  Kashmir  Buddhism,  and  could  have  nothing  to  do
with  Tibet.
2  BuSHELL,  loe.  cit.,  p.  435.
They  used  knotched  wood  and  knotted  cords  (Remusat's  Besearohes,  p.  384).

c2


20  RISE  OF  LAMAISM.

was  fouDding  his  religion  in  Arabia,  there  arose  in  Tibet  a  warlike
king,  who  established  his  authority  over  the  other  wild  clans  of
central  Tibet,  and  latterly  his  son,  SronTsan  G-ampo,^  harassed  the
western  borders  of  China;  so  that  the  Chinese  Emperor  T'aitsung,
of  the  T'ang  Dynasty,  was  glad  to  come  to  terms  with  this  young
prince,  known  to  the  Chinese  as  Ch'itsung-luntsan,  and  gave  him
in  641  A.D.2  the  Princess  ^  Wench'eng,  of  the  imperial  house,  in
marriage.*

Two  years  previously  Sroh  Tsan  Grampo  had  married  Bhrikuti,
a  daughter  of  the  Nepal  King,  Amsuvarman  ;  ^  and  both  of
these  wives  being  bigoted  Buddhists,  they  speedily  effected
the  conversion  of  their  young  husband,  who  was  then,  according


1  Called  also,  prior  to  his  accession  (says  Eockhill,  Life,  p.  211)  Khri-ldan  Sron-
btsan  (in  Chinese,  Ki-tsung  lun-tsan).  His  father,  g'Nam-ri  Srofi-tsan,  and  his  an-
cestors had  their  headquarters  at  Yar-lun,  or  "  the  Dpper  Valley,"  below  the  Yar-
Iha  sam-po,  a  mountain  on  the  southern  confines  of  Tibet,  near  the  Bhotan  frontier.
The  Yar-lun  river  flows  northwards  into  the  Tsang-po,  below  Lhasa  and  near  Samye.
This  Yar-lun  is  to  be  distinguished  from  that  of  the  same  name  in  the  Kham  pro-
vince, east  of  Bathang,  and  a  tributary  of  the  Yangtse  Kiang,  The  chronology  by
Bu-ton  (t'am-c'ad  K'an-po)  is  considered  the  most  reliable,  and  Sum-pa  K'an-po
accepted  it  in  preference  to  the  Baidyur  Kar-po,  composed  by  the  Dalai  Lama's  orders,
by  De-Srid  San-gyas  Gya-mts'o,  in  1686.  According  to  Bu-ton,  the  date  of  Sron  Tsan
Gampo's  birth  was  617  a.d.  (which  agrees  with  that  given  by  the  Mongol  historian,
Sasnang  Setzen),  and  he  built  the  palace  Pho-dah-Marpo  on  the  Lhasa  hill  when
aged  nineteen,  and  the  Lhasa  Temple  when  aged  twenty-three.  He  married  the
Chinese  princess  when  he  was  aged  nineteen,  and  he  died  aged  eighty-two.  The
Chinese  records,  translated  by  Bushell,  make  him  die  early.  Csoma's  date  of  627
{Grammar,  p.  183)  ^or  his  birth  appears  to  be  a  clerical  error  for  617.  His  fii-st
mission  to  China  was  in  634  (Bushell,  J.B.A.S.,  New  Ser.,  xii.,  p.  440).

-  According  to  Chinese  annals  (Bushell,  435),  the  Tibetan  date  for  the  marriage  is
639  (C,  O.,  p.  183),  that  is,  two  years  after  his  marriage  with  the  Nepalese  princess.

3  Kong-jo  =  "  princess  "  in  Chinese.

*  The  Tibetan  tradition  has  it  that  there  were  three  other  suitors  for  this  princess's
hand,  namely,  the  three  greatest  kings  they  knew  of  outside  China,  the  Kings  of  Mag-
adha,of  Persia  (sTag-ziff),  and  of  the  Hor  (Turii)  tribes.  See  also  Hodgson's  Bss.  and
RocKHiLL's  B.,  213 ;  Csoma's  Or.,  196  ;  Bodhimur,  338.

=  Amsuvarman,  or  "  Glowing  Armour,"  is  mentioned  by  Hiueu  Tsiang  (Beal's  Ed.
Si-yu-ki,  ii.,  p.  81)  as  reigning  about  637,  and  he  appears  as  a  grantee  in  Fleet's  Corpus
Inscrn.  Ind.  (iii.,  p.  190)  in  several  inscriptions  ranging  from  635  to  650  A.D.,  from
which  it  appears  that  he  was  of  the  fhakuri  dynasty  and  a  feudatory  of  King  of
Harshavardhana  of  Kanauj,  and  on  the  death  of  the  latter  seems  to  have  become
independent.  The  inscriptions  show  that  devi  was  a  title  of  his  royal  ladies,  and  his
635  A.D.  inscription  recording  a  gift  to  his  nephew,  a  srumin  (an  oificer),  renders  it  prob-
able that  he  had  then  an  adult  daughter.  One  of  his  inscriptions  relates  to  Sivaist
lingas,  but  none  are  expressedly  Buddhist.  The  inscription  of  685  was  discovered  by
C.  Bendall,  and  published  in  Ind.  Ani.  for  1885,  and  in  his  Jmirney,  pp.  13  and  73.  Cf
also  Ind.  Ant.,  ix.,  170,  and  his  description  of  coins  in  Zeitchr.  der  Dmtach.


INTRODUCTION  OF  BUDDHISM.  21

to  Tibetan  annals,  only  about  sixteen  years  of  age,i  and  who,
under  tbeir  advice,  sent  to  India,  Nepal,  and  China  for  Buddhist
books  and  teachers.^

It  seems  a  perversion  of  the  real  order  of  events  to  state,  as  is
usually  done  in  European  books,  that  Sron  Tsan  Grampo  first  adopted
Buddhism,  and  then  married  two  Buddhist  wives.  Even  the
vernacular  chronicle,*  which  presents  the  subject  in  its  most
flattering  form,  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Sron  Tsan  Grampo,  when
he  sues  for  the  hand  of  his  first  wife,  the  Nepalese  princess,  the
following  words  :  "  I,  the  King  of  barbarous*  Tibet,  do  not  practise
the  ten  virtues,  but  should  you  be  pleased  to  bestow  on  me  your
daughter,  and  wish  me  to  have  the  Law,^  I  shall  practise  the  ten
virtues  with  a  five-thousand-fold  body  .  .  ,  though  I  have
not  the  arts  ...  if  you  so  desire  ...  I  shall  build  5,000
temples."  Again,  the  more  reliable  Chinese  history  records  that
the  princess  said  "  there  is  no  religion  in  Tibet " ;  and  the
glimpse  got  of  Sron  Tsan  in  Chinese  history  shows  him  actively
engaged  throughout  his  life  in  the  very  un-Buddhist  pursuit  of
bloody  wars  with  neighbouring  states.

. .  The  messenger  sent by  this Tibetan king to  India, at  the

instance  of  his  wives,  to  bring  Buddhist  books  was  called  Thon-
mi  Sam-bhota.^  The  exact  date  of  his  departure  and  return  are  un-
certain,^ and  although  his  Indian  visit  seems  to  have  been  within
the  period  covered  by  Hiuen  Tsiang's  account,  this  history  makes
no  mention  even  of  the  country  of  Tibet.  After  a  stay  in  India '
of several  years,  during  which Sam-bhota studied  under  the


1  The  Gyal-rdbs  Sd-wai  Meloii  states  that  S.  was  aged  sixteen  on  his  marriage
with  the  Nepalese  princess,  wlio  was  then  aged  eighteen,  and  three  years  later  he
built  his  Pho-dah-Marpo  Palace  on  the  Ked  Hill  at  Lhasa.

2  The  monks  who  came  to  Tibet  during  Sron  Tsan  Gampo's  reign  were  Kusara
(?  Kumara)  and  Sankara  Brahmana,  from  India ;  Sila  Mariju,  from  Nepal ;  Hwa-
shang  Maha-ts'e,  from  Cliina,  and  (E.  Schlagt.,  Gyal-rahs,  p.  49)  Tabuta  and  Ganuta,
from  Kashmir.

3  Mirror  of  Eoyal  pedigree,  Gyal-rahs  Sd-wai  Melon.

4  mT'ah-'k'ob.

5  K'rims.

°  Sambhota  is  the  Sanskrit  title  for  "  The  good  Ehotiya  or  Tibetan."  His  proper  name
is  Thon-mi,  son  of  Anu.

'  632  A.D.  is  sometimes  stated  as  date  of  departure,  and  650  as  the  return ;  but  on  this
latter  date  Sron  Tsan  Gampo  died  according  to  the  Chinese  accounts,  although  he
should  survive  for  many  (48)  years  longer,  according  to  the  conflicting  Tibetan  records.

»  "8<yuihern  India"  (Bodhimur,  p.  327).


22  RISE OF  LAMAISM.

Brahman  Livikara  or  Lipidatta^  and  the  pandit  Devavid  Sinha  (or
Sinha  Ghosha),  he  returned  to  Tibet,  bringing  several  Buddhist
books  and  the  so-called  "Tibetan"  alphabet,  by  means  of  which  he
now  reduced  the  Tibetan  language  to  writing  and  composed  for
this  purpose  a  grammar.^

This  so-called  "Tibetan"  character,  however,  was  merely  a
somewhat  fantastic  reproduction  of  the  north  Indian  alphabet
current  in  India  at  the  time  of  Sam-bhota's  visit.  It  exaggerates
the  flourishing  curves  of  the  "  Kutila,"  which  was  then  coming
into  vogue  in  India,  and  it  very  slightly  modified  a  few  letters  to
adapt  them  to  the  peculiarities  of  Tibetan  phonetics.'  Thonmi
translated  into  this  new  character  several  small  Buddhist  texts,*
but  he  does  not  appear  to  have  become  a  monk  or  to  have
attempted  any  religious  teaching.

Sroh  Tsan  Grampo,  being  one  of  the  greatest  kings  of  Tibet  and
the  first  patron  of  learning  and  civilization  in  that  country,  and
having  with  the  aid  of  his  wives  first  planted  the  germs  of  Buddh-
ism in  Tibetan  soil,  he  is  justly  the  most  famous  and  popular
king  of  the  country,  and  latterly  he  was  canonized  as  an  incarna-
tion of  the  most  popular  of  the  celestial  Bodhisats,  Avalokita  ;  and
in  keeping  with  this  legend  he  is  figured  with  his  hair  dressed
up  into  a  high  conical  chignon  after  the  fashion  of  the  Indian
i  mages  of  this  Buddhist  god,  "  The  Looking-down-Lord."

His  two  wives  were  canonized  as  incarnations  of  Avalokita's
consort,  Tara,  "  the  Saviouress,"  or  Groddess  of  Mercy ;  and  the
fact  that  they  bore  him  no  children  is  pointed  to  as  evidence  of
their  divine  nature.^ The  Chinese  princess  Wench'eng  was  deified


1  Li-byin  =  Li  +  "  to  give."

2  sG-rdhi  hitmi  hch^os  sum  chSi-pa.

3  The  cerebrals  and  aspirates  not  being  needed  for  Tibetan  sounds  were  rejected.
And  when  afterwards  the  full  expression  of  Sanskrit  names  in  Tibetan  demanded
these  letters,  the  five  cerebrals  were  formed  by  reversing  the  dentals  and  the  aspirates
obtained  by  suffixing  an  h,  while  the  palato-sibilants  is,  ish,  and  ds  were  formed  by
adding  a  surmounting  crest  to  the  palatals  ch,  chh,  and  j.  It  is  customary  to  say  that
the  cursive  style,  the  "  headless  "  or  U-med  (as  distinguished  from  the  full  form  with
the  head  the  U-ch'en)  was  adapted  from  the  so-called  "  Wartu "  form  of  Devanagrl—
Hodgson,  As.  Res.,  xvi.,  420 ;  Schmidt,  Mem.  de  I' Ac.  de  Pet.,  i.,  41 ;  Csoma,  (?)■.,  204  j
SiLBAT,  J.A.S.B.,18SS,i2.

i  The  first  book  translated  seems  to  have  been  the  Kamnda-vyuha  sutra,  a  favourite
in  Nepal ;  and  a  few  other  translations  still  extant  in  the  Tan-gyur  are  ascribed  to
him  (Csoma,  A.,  and  Rook.,  B.,  212.

=  His  issue  proceeded  fi-om  two  or  four  Tibetan  wives.


ROYAL PATRONS OF BUDDHISM.


23


as  "  The  white  Tara,"'  as  in  the  annexed  figure ;  while  the  Nepa
lese  princess  "Bri-
bsun,"  said  to  be  a  cor-
ruption of  Bhri-kuti,
was  apotheosised  as  the
green  Bhri-kuti  Tara,^
as  figured  in  the  chap-
ter on  the  pantheon.

But  he  was  not  the
saintlyperson  the  grate-
ful Lamas  picture,  for
he  is  seen  from  re-
liable Chinese  history
to  have  been  engaged
all  his  life  in  bloody
wars,  and  more  at  home
in  the  battlefield  than
the  temple.  Andhecer-  ^
tainly  did  little  in  the
way  of  Buddhist  propa-
ganda, beyond  perhaps
translating  a  few  tracts
into  Tibetan,  and  build-
ing a  few  temples  to
shrine  the  images  re-
ceived by  him  in  dower,^
and  others  which  he  constructed. He  built  no  monasteries.


Taea,  the  White.
The  Deified  Chinese  Princess  Wench'eng.''


^  E.  Schlagintweit  (p.  66)  transposes  the  forms  of  tlie  two  princesses,  and  most  sub-
sequent writers  repeat  liis  confusion.

^  She  is  represented  to  have  been  of  a  iiery  temper,  and  the  cause  of  frequent
brawls  on  account  of  the  precedence  given  to  the  Chinese  princess.

3  He  received  as  dower  with  the  Nepalese  princess,  according  to  the  Gyal-rahs,
the  images  of  Akshobhya  Buddha,  Maitreya  and  a  sandal-wood  ima,ge  of  Tara ;  and
from  his  Chinese  wife  a  iigure  of  Saliya  Muni  as  a  young  prince.  To  shrine  the
images  of  Aishobhya  and  the  Chinese  Sakya  he  built  respectively  the  temples  of
Ramoch'e  and  another  at  Rasa,  now  occupied  by  the  Jo-wo  K'an  at  Lhasa(see  Chaps,  xii.
and  xiii.) .  The  latter  temple  was  called  Basa-'p'rul  snaA  gi  gtsug-lha-K  'an,  and  was  built
in  his  twenty-third  year,  and  four  years  after  the  arrival  of  the  Chinese  princess
(in  644  A.D.,  BusHELii).  The  name  of  its  site.  Rasa,  is  said  to  have  suggested  the
name  by  which  it  latterly  became  more  widely  known,  namely,  as  Lha-sa,  or  "  God's
place."  The  one  hundred  and  eight  temples  accredited  to  him  in  the  Mani-Kah-bum
are  of  course  legendary,  and  not  even  their  sites  are  known  to  the  Lamas  themselves.

*  After  Pander,


24  RISE  OF  LAMAISM.

After  Sron  Tsan  Grampo's  death,  about  650  a.d.,  ^  Buddhism
made  little  headway  against  the  prevailing  Shamanist  superstitions,
and  seems  to  have  been  resisted  by  the  people  until  about  a
century  later  in  the  reign  of  his  powerful  descendant  Thi-Sron
Detsan,^  who  extended  his  rule  over  the
greater  part  of  Yunnan  and  Si-Chuen,  and
even  took  Changan,  the  then  capital  of
China.

This  king  was  the  son  of  a  Chinese
princess,^  and  inherited  through  his  mother
a  strong  prejudice  in  favour  of  Buddhism.

He  succeeded  to  the  throne  when  only
thirteen  years  old,  and  a  few  years  later  *  he
sent  to  India  for  a  celebrated  Buddhist  priest
KING  THi-SRoiJ  DETSAN.  ^^  establish  an  order  in  Tibet;  and  he  was
advised,  it  is  said,  by  his  family  priest,  the  Indian  monk  Santa-
rakshita,  to  secure  if  possible  the  services  of  his  brother-in-
law,^  Gruru  Padma-sambhava,  a  clever  member  of  the  then
popular  Tantrik  Yogacarya  school,  and  at  that  time,  it  is  said,
a  resident  of  the  great  college  of  Nalanda,  the  Oxford  of  Buddhist
India.

This  Buddhist  wizard,  Guru  Padma-sambhava,  promptly  re-
sponded to  the  invitation  of  the  Tibetan  king,  and  accompanied
thejnessengers  back  to  Tibet  in  747  a.d,''

As  Guru  Padma-sambhava  was  the  founder  of  Lamaism,  and  is
now  deified  and  as  celebrated  in  Lamaism  as  Buddha  himself,
than  whom,  indeed,  he  receives  among  several  sects  more  worship,
he  demands  detailed  notice.

The  founder  of  Lamaism,  Saint  Padma-sambhava  or  "the  Lotus-


1  He  was  succeeded  in  650  by  his  grandson  Mang-Sron-Mang-tsan  under  the
regency  of  Sron  Tsan's  Buddhist  minister,  Gar  (miW),  known  to  the  Chinese  as
Chiishih  (Bushell,  loc.  cii.,  446).

2  K'ri-Sral),  Ideu-Usan.  (Of.  Kopp.,  ii.,  67-72;  Schlag.,  67;  J.A.S.B.,  1881,  p.  224.)
Rook.,  B.,  quotes  p.  221  contemporary  record  inlsTan-gynr  (xciv.,  f. 387-391), proving
that  in  Thi-Sron  Detsau's  reign  in  the  middle  of  the  eighth  century,  Tibet  was  hardly
recognized  as  a  Buddhist  country.

3  Named  Chin  cheng  (Tib.,  Kyim  Shan),  adopted  daughter  of  the  Emperor  Jchang
tsong  (BusHELL,  456).

4  In  747  (CsoMA,  Gh.,  183) ;  but  the  Chinese  date  would  give  755  (Bushell).

=  The  legendary  life  of  the  Guru  states  that  he  married  the  Princess  Mandarava,  a
sister  of  Santa-rakshita.
«  Another  account  makes  the  Guru  arrive  in  Tibet  in  anticipation  of  the  king's  wishes.


The  Founder  of  Lamaism,  St.  Padma-sambhava,
in  his  Eight  Forms.


26


BISE OF  LAMAISM.


born  one,"i  is  usually  called  by  the  Tibetans  Guru  Rin-po-ch'e,  or
"  the  precious  Guru  " ;  or  simply  Lo-poii,''  the  Tibetan  equivalent
of  the  Sanskrit "  Guru  "  or  "  teacher."  He  is  also  called  "  Ugyan"
or  "  Urgyan,"  as  he  was  a  native  of  Udyana  or  Urgyan,  correspond-
ing to  the  country  about  Grhazni^  to  the  north-west  of  Kashmir.

Udyana,  his  native  land,  was  famed  for  the  proficiency  of  its
priests  in  sorcery,  exorcism,  and  magic.  Hiuen  Tsiang,  writing  a
century  previously,  says  regarding  Udyana  :  "  The  people  are  in
disposition  somewhat  sly  and  crafty.  They  practise  the  art  of  using
charms.  The  employment  of  magical  sentences  is  with  them  an
art  and  a  study."*  And  in  regard  to  the  adjoining  country  of  Kash-
mir also  intimately  related  to  Lamaism,  Marco  Polo  a  few  centuries
later  says  : "  Keshimur  is  a  province  inhabited  by  people  who  are

idolaters  (■i.e., Buddhists).  .  .  .
They  have  an  astonishing  ac-
quaintance with  the  devilries  of
enchantment,  insomuch  as  they
can  make  their  idols  speak.  They
can  also  by  their  sorceries  bring  on
changes  of  weather,  and  produce
darkness,  and  do  a  number  of
things  so  extraordinary  that  no  one
without  seeing  them  would  believe
them.  Indeed,  this  country  is  the
very  original  source  from  which
idolatry  has  spread  abroad."  ^

The  Tibetans,  steeped  in  super-
stition which  beset  them  on  every
side  by  malignant  devils,  warmly
welcomed  the  Guru  as  he  brought
them  deliverance  from  their  terrible  tormentors. Arriving  in  Tibet

1  For  legend  of  his  birth  from  a  lotus  see  p.  380.  2  sLob-dpon.

s  The  Tibetans  state  that  it  is  now  named  Ghazni,  but  Sir  H.  Yule,  the  great
geographer,  writes  (Maeco  P.,  i.,155) ;  "  Udyana  lay  to  the  north  of  Peshawar,  on  the
Swat  river,  but  from  the  extent  assigned  to  it  by  Hwen  Thsang,  the  name  probably
covered  a  large  part  of  the  whole  hill  region  south  of  the  Hindu  Kush,  from  Chitral
to  the  Indus,  as  indeed  it  is  represented  in  the  Map  of  Vivien  de  St.  Martin
(Pelerins  Bouddhistes,  ii.)."  It  is  regarded  by  FaHian  as  the  most  northerly  Province  ,
of  India,  and  in  his  time  the  food  and  clothing  of  the  people  were  similar  to  those  of
Gangetic  India.

<  Seal's  Si-Yu-Ki,  i.,  120.  5  Maeco  P.,  i.,  155.


DoR-JE  Legs.

A  fiend  (-priest)  subjected  by  St,  Padma-

sambhava.


ITS FOUNDER AND HIS SORCERY.


27


in  747  A.D.,  he  vanquished  all  the  chief  devils  of  the  land,
sparing  most  of  them  on  their  consenting  to  become  defenders  of "
his  religion,  while  he  on  his  part  guaranteed  that  in  return  for  such
services  they  would  be  duly  worshipped  and  fed.  Thus,  just  as  the
Buddhists  in  India,  in  order  to  secure  the  support  of  the  semi-
aborigines  of  Bengal  admitted  into  their  system  the  bloody  Durga
and  other  aboriginal  demons,  so  on  extending  their  doctrines
throughout  Asia  they  pandered  to  the  popular  taste  by  admitting
within  the  pale  of  Buddhism  the  pantheon  of  those  new  nations

they  sought  to

convert. And

similarly in

Japan,  where

Buddhism  was

introduced  in

the  sixth  cen-
tury A.D.,  it

made  little

progress till

the  ninth  cen-

tury , when

Kobo  Daishi

incorporated  it

with  the  local

Shintoism, by

alleging  that

the  Shinto  dei-
ties were  em-
bodiments of

the  Buddhist.
The  G-uru's

most powerful

weapons in

warring with

the demons

were  the  Vajra

(Tibetan,  dor-je),  symboKc  of  the  thunderbolt  of  Indra  (Jupiter),

and  spells  extracted  from  the  Mahayana  gospels,  by  which  he

shattered  his  supernatural  adversaries.


The  Twelve  Tan-ma  She-de-vils.
Subjected  by  St.  Padma.


28


RISE  OF  LAMAISM.


As  the  leading  events  of  his  march  through  Tibet  and  his
subjugation  of  the  local  devils  are  of  some  interest,  as  indicating
the  original  habitats  of  several  of  the  pre-Lamaist  demons,  I
have  given  a  condensed  account  of  these  in  the  chapter  on  the
pantheon  at  page  382.

Under  the  zealous  patronage  of  King  Thi-Sron  Detsan  he  built
at  Sam-yas  in  749  a.d.  the  first  Tibetan  monastery.  The  ortho-
dox account  of  the  miraculous  creation  of  that  building  is  referred
to  in  our  description  of  that  monastery.

^  On  the  building  of  Sam-yas,^  said  to  be  modelled  after  the  Indian
Odantapura  of  Magadha,  the  Gruru,  assisted  by  the  Indian  monk

Santa -rakshita,  instituted
there  the  order  of  the  Lamas.
Santa-rakshita  was  made  the
first  abbot  and  laboured  there
for  thirteen  years.  He  now  is
entitled  Acarya  Bodhisat.^

La-ma  ^  is  a  Tibetan  word
meaning  the  "  Superior  One,''
and  corresponds  to  the San-
skrit JJttara.  It  was  restricted
to  the  head  of  the  monastery,
and  still  is  strictly  applicable
only  to  abbots  and  the  highest
monks ;  though  out  of  courtesy
the title is now given  to
almost  all  Lamaist  monks  and
priests. The  Lamas  have  no
special  term  for  their  form  of
Buddhism. They  simply  call  it  "  The  religion  "  or  "  Buddha's
religion";  and  its  professors  are  "Insiders," or  "within  the  fold"
(nail-pa),  in  contradistinction  to  the non-Buddhists  or  "  Out-


Santa-eakshita.

Indian  Buddhist  monk  of  the  Eighth
Century  a.d.


1  The  title  of  the  temple  is  Zan-yad  Mi-gyur  Lhun-gyi  dub-pahi  tsug-lha-Ksan,
or  the  "  Self-sprung  immovable  shrine,"  and  it  is  believed  to  be  based  on  immovable
foundations  of  adamantine  laid  by  the  Guru.

2  And  is  said  to  have  been  of  the  Svatantra  school,  fuUowing  Sariputra,  Ananda,
Nagarjuna,  Subhankara,  Sri  Gupta,  and  Jnana-garbha  (of.  Sohl.,  67;  Kopp.,  ii.,  68;
J.A.8.B.,  1881,  p.  226;  Pand.,  No.  25.

3  bLa-ma.  The  Uighurs  (?  Hor)  call  their  Lamas  "tuin"  (Yule's,  Ca^Aay,  p.  241,
note).


ST.  PADMA'S  SOBGEEY.  29

siders  "  (chi-pa  or  pyi-'lin),  the  so-called  "  pe-ling  "  or  foreigners
of  English  writers.  And  the  European  term  "  Lamaism  "  finds  no
counterpart  in  Tibetan.

C^The  first  Lama  may  be  said  to  be  Pal- bans,  who  succeeded  the

Indian  abbot  Santa-rakshita ;  though  the  first  ordained  member

of  this  Tibetan  order  of  monks  was  Bya-Khri-gzigs.^ The  most

learned  of  these  young  Lamas  was  Vairocana,  who  translated  many

Sanskrit  works  into  Tibetan,  though  his  usefulness  was  interrupted

for  a  while  by  the  Tibetan  wife  of  Thi-Sroh  Detsan  ;  who  in  her

bitter  opposition  to  the  King's  reforms,  and  instigated  by  the  Bon-

'pa,  priests,  secured  the  banishment  of  Vairocana  to  the  eastern

province  of  Kham  by  a  scheme  similar  to  that  practised  by  Poti-

phar's  wife. But,  on  her  being  forthwith  afflicted  with  leprosy, she*

relented,  and  the  young  "  Bairo-tsana  "  was  recalled  and  effected

her  cure. She  is  still,  however,  handed  down  to  history  as  the  "  Eed

Eahula  she-devil,"^ while  yairocana  is  made  an  incarnation  of

Buddha's  faithful  attendant  and  cousin  Ananda ;  and  on  account

of  his  having  translated  many  orthodox,  scriptures,  he  is  credited

with  the  composition  of  translation  and  hiding  away  of  many  of

the  fictitious  scriptures  of  the  unreformed Lamas, which were

afterwards  "  discovered"  as  revelations.

It  is  not  easy  now  to  ascertain  the  exact  details  of  the  creed —
the  primitive  Lamaism — taught  by  the  Guru,  for  all  the  extant
works  attributed  to  him  were  composed  several  centuries  later
by  followers  of  his  twenty-five  Tibetan  disciples.  But  judging
from  the  intimate  association  of  his  name  with  the  essentials
of  Lamaist  sorceries,  and  the  special  creeds  of  the  old  unreformed
section  of  the  Lamas — the  Ifin-ma-pa — who  profess  and  are  ac-
knowledged to  be  his  immediate  followers,  and  whose  older  scrip-
tures date  back  to  within  two  centuries  of  the  Guru's  time,  it  is
evident  that  his  teaching  was  of  that'  extremely  Tantrik  and
magical  type  of  Mahayana  Buddhism  which  was  then  prevalent
'  in  his  native  country  of  Udyan  and  Kashmir.  And  to  this  highly
impure  form  of  Buddhism,  already  covered  by  so  many  foreign
accretions  and  saturated  with  so  much  demonolatry,  was  added  a


1  The  first  seven  novices  (Sad-mi  mi)  who  formed  the  nucleus  of  the  order  were
dBah  dpal  Abans,  rfeaw-devendra  and  Branka  Mutik,  'K'on  Nagendra,  Sagor  Vairo-
cana, rMa  TUarya  rin-ch'en  mch'og,  gLan-Ka  Tanana,  of  whom  the  first  three  were
elderly.

2  gZa-mar  gyal. The  legend  is  given  in  the  T'an-yik  Ser-t'en.


30


RISE OF LAMAISM.


portion  of  the  ritual  and  most  of  ^he  demons  of  the  indigenous
Bon-pa  reUgion,  and  each  of  the  demons  was  assigned  its  proper
place  in  the  Lamaist  pantheon.

Primitive  Lamaism  may  therefore  be  defined  as  a  priestly  mix-
ture of  Sivaite  mysticism,  magic,  and  Indo-Tibetan  demonolatry,
overlaid  by  a  thin  varnish  of  Mahayana  Buddhism.  And  to
the  present  day  Lamaism  still  retains  this  character.

In  this  form,  as  shaped  by
the  Guru,  Buddhism  proved  more
attractive  to  the  people,  and  soon
became  popular.  Its  doctrine
of  Karma,  or  ethical  retribution,
appealed  to  the  fatalism  which
the  Tibetans  share  with  most
eastern  races.  And  the  zealous
King,  Thi-Sron  Detsan,  founded
other  monasteries  freely  and
initiated  a  period  of  great  liter-
ary activity  by  procuring  many
talented  Indian  and  Kashmiri
scholars  for  the  work  of  translat-
ing the  Indian  canonical  works
and  commentaries  into  Tibetan.^
he  new  religion  was  actively


A BoN-PA PEIEST.2

opposed by the  priests  of  the  native  religion,  called  Bon,^  and
these  were  supported  by  one  of  the most  powerful  ministers.*

1  The  chief  translators  employed  at  this  time  were  the  ludian  monks,  Vimala  Mitra,
Buddha  Guhya,  Santigarbha,  Visuddhi  Sinha,  the  Tantrik  Acharya  Dharma-kirti  (who
translated  the  Vajradhdtu  Yoga  works).  The  Kashmiri  monks,  Jina-Mitra,  Dana-Sila
and  Anauda,  assisted  by  the  Tibetan  novices,  chief  of  whom  was  Vairocana.  No
translations  or  works  ascribed. to  Padma-sambhava  himself  occur  in  the  Tibetan
Tripitaka  canon.

2  After  Giorgi.

:i  Tlie  word  is  derived  by  Gen.  Cunningham  (Marco  P.,  i, ,  287)  from  Piini/a,  one  of
the  names  of  the  Seastitas,  or  worshippers  of  the  mystic  fly-foot  cross,  called  in  Tibetan
yyuh  drun,  though  Pumja  is  simply  "  a  holy  man,"  and  seems  original  of  the  Burmese
title  for  monk,  Pow/yl.  The  Bon  religion  resembles  the  Taoism  of  China  (see  Ydle,
loc.  cit.;  EoCK.,  B,,  p.  206  et  seq.,  and  his  L.L.,  p.  217  n.,  and  J.R.  Geoff.  Soc,  May,
1894).  It  is  especially  associated  with  the  worship  of  dragons,  or  ndgds,  and  its
reputed  founder  is  gS'en-rabs  Mi-bo.  As  now  practised,  it  is  deeply  impregnated  by
Buddhism.  For  a  list  of  some  of  its  deities  soc  Saeat,  Joitr.  Indian.  Buddhist  Text
Soc,  Vol.  i.

*  Named  NamMa-Shanrom-pa-skyes.  The  ministers  who  aided  the  King  were  Go
Shan-Ski,  and  Da-ffyah-ts\in.


OPPOSED BY INDIGENOUS PRIESTS.  31


Some  of  the  so-called  devils  which  are  traditionally  alleged  to
have  been  overcome  by  the  Gruru  were  probably  such  human  ad-
versaries. It  is  also  stated  that  the  Bon-pa  were  now  prohibited
making  human  and  other  bloody  sacrifice  as  was  their  wont ;  and
hence  is  said  to  have  arisen  the  practice  of  oifering  images  of
men  and  animals  made  of  dough.

Lamaism  was  also  opposed  by  some  Chinese  Buddhists,  one  of
whom,  entitled  the  Mahayana  Hwa-shang,^  protested  .against  the
kind  of  Buddhism  which  Santa-rakshita  and  Padma-sambhava
were  teaching.'  But  he  is  reported  to  have  been  defeated  in  argu-
ment and  expelled  from  the  country  by  the  Indian  monk  Kamala-
sila,^  who,  like  Santa-rakshita,  is  alleged  to  be  of  the  Sva-tantra
Madhyamika  school,  and  the  author  of  many  treatises  still  extant
in  the  great  commentary  (Tan-gyur).  The  excellent  Sanskrit-
Tibetan  dictionaries  (Vyutpatti)  date  from  this  literary  epoch.

Padma-sambhava  had  twenty-five  disciples,  each  of  whom  is
credited  with  magical  power,  mostly  of  a  grotesque  character.*

1  A  Chinese  term  for  a  Buddhist  monk  corresponding  to  Skt.  Oj)ddliydya  or
"master." (See  Edkin's  Diet,  and  Mayer's  HdWc.)

2  Two  works  by  Hwa-shang  zah-mo  are  found  in  tlie  Tan-gyur  (mDo,  xxx.,  xxxiii.
(Rockhill's  B.,  p.  220).

3  Kamala-sili  was  author  of  an  Indian  work  (Tarka)  expounding  the  various  pliilo-
sophic  systems  of  India.  (Prof.  G.  Buehler,  J.  BiuldkUt  Text  Soc.  of  India,  i.,  pt.  ii.,
p.  X.)

*  1.  Nam-k'a  fiih-po  mounted  tlie  sunbeams.

2.  San-gye-ye-se  drove  iron  bolts  into  rocks.

3.  Gyal-wa-ch'og-yan  changed  his  liead  into  a  liorse  s,  and  neighed  tlirice.

4.  K'ar-ch'en  Ch'o-gyal  revived  the  slain.

5.  Pal-ki-ye-se  overcame  three  fiendesses.

6.  Pal-ki-Sen-ge  enslaved  demons,  nymphs,  and  genii.

7.  Vairocana  obtained  the  five  heavenly  eyes  of  knowledge.

8.  Nah-dag-gyalpo  attained  Samadhi.

9.  Yu-driin-Nin-po  acquired  divine  knowledge.

10.  Jiiana-kumara  worked  miracles.

11.  Dorje-Dun  Jem  travelled  invisibly  as  the  wind.

12.  Ye-se-Naii  visited  the  fairy  world.

13.  Sog-pu-Lha-pal  (a  Mongol)  ensnared  ferocious  beasts.

14.  Na-nam-yese  soared  in  the  sky.

15.  Pal-ki-Wan-p'yug  killed  his  enemies  by  signs.

16.  Den-ma-tse-Wan  had  perfect  memory.

17.  Ka-Wa-pal-tseg  perceived  the  thoughts  of  others.

18.  Shu-bu-pal-sen  made  water  run  upwards.

19.  Khe-hu-c'ug-lo  caught  flying  birds.

20.  Gyal-Wai-Lodoi  raised  ghosts  and  converted  the  corpse  into  gold.

21.  Ten-pai-nam-k'a  tamed  wild  yaks  of  the  northern  desert.

22.  'Odan-Wan-p'yug  dived  into  water  like  a  fish.


32  RISE  OF  LAMAI8M.


And  these  disciples  he  instructed  in  the  way  of  making  magic
circles  for  coercing  the  demons  and  for  exorcism.

The  Guru's  departure  from  Tibet  was  as  miraculous  in  char-
acter as  his  life,  and  in  keeping  with  the  divine  attributes  with
which  he  has  been  invested  as  "  Saviour  of  a  sufifering  world."  ^

23.  Ma-t'og  rin-ch'en  crushed  adamant  to  powder  and  ate  it  like  meal,

24.  Pal-kyi  Dor-je  passed  through  rocks  and  mountains.

25.  Lan-dod  Kon-ch'og  wielded  and  repelled  thunderbolts.

And  a  twenty-sixth  is  added  :  Gyal-wai-Ch'aii  c'ub  sat  cross-legged  in  the  air.

1  After  residing  in  Tibet  for  about  fifty  years  (say  the  chronicles,  though  it  is
probable  he  only  remained  a  few  years),  and  founding  Lamaism  securely,  the  Guru,
in  802  A.D.,  much  to  the  grief  of  the  Tibetans,  announced  his  approaching  departure
for  fresh  religious  triumphs  in  other  lands.  Addressing  the  King,  he  said:  "In
Jambudvip  are  five  Eaksha  countries  with  500  towns  apiece.  The  Central  Eaksha
country  is  named  San-do-pal-ri  (zans-mdog-dpal-ri),  the  king  of  which  is  named
Langka  of  the  ten  necks  (?  the  ten-headed  Eavan).  To  its  east  lies  Lankapuri,  to  its
south  dGa-bu-c'an,  or  "  The  happy  "  (Skt.,  Sukhavati  or  Nandavati),  to  its  west  Ko-sha
t'ang-dmar-gling,  to  its  north  is  Byan-lag  fort,  to  its  south-east  is  Bam-ril-t'od-pa-
mk'ar,  to  its  north-west  is  Ma-la-gnam-lchags-rtse,  to  its  north-east  is  Nal-byih
cemetery,'  and  in  the  sbuth-east  is  the  lake  of  Phuri.  These  Eaksha  countries  are
crowded  with  men-eating  devils,  Who  if  not  conquered  will  depopulate  the  whole
world  of  Jambudvip,  and  except  me  none  other  can  subdue  them.  I  therefore
must  go  to  the  stronghold  of  the  Eaksha  at  San-do-pal-ri  in  the  country  of  rSa-
yab-glin  or  '  The  Yak-tail  continent,'  which  lies  to  the  south-west  of  Tibet.  Thither
must  I  now  go."

Then,  accompanied  by  the  King  and  nobles  and  his  two  fairy  wives  (the  Tibetan
one  of  which,  named  Yes'e-ts'o-gyal  w£is  t6  be  left  beliind),  he  went  to  the  Gung-
thang  La  in  Mang-yul  on  the  northern  confines  of  Tibet,  and  there,  after  giving-
farewell  advice  to  the  king,  priests,  and  the  assembled  multitude  to  keep  the  doctrine
he  had  taught  them,  and  the  revelations  he  had  hidden  in  caves  throughout  the  land,
he  was  enveloped  in  a  glorious  rainbow-halo,  within  which  appeared  the  four  great
heroes  (dPa-ho)  of  the  world,  who  assisted  him  in  mounting  the  celestial  horse-car
(named  "  ialaha "  or  Chang-sal)  in  which  he  was  now  borne  away  through  the  sky  in
a  south-westerly  direction,  attended  by  the  four  heroes  and  a  host  of  fairies  amid
heavenly  music  and  showers  of  flowers.  On  his  departure  the  assembled  multitude
were  distracted  with  grief  and  remained  transfixed  as  if  dead.  Ultimately  they
retired  below  the  pass  to  Srang-Adah-sho-^tsang-dor  and  the  plain  Thang-(Zpal-mo-
rfpal-thang,  where  they  remained  for  twenty-five  days  and  nights,  and  were  able  to
see  the  Guru's  celestial  party,  like.a  shooting  star,  sailing  away  through  the  sky
towards  the  horizon  till  lost  to  sight.  After  much  prayer  and  worship  they  sadly
departed  on  King  Thi-Sron  Detsan  telling  them  of  the  Guru's  safe  arrival  at  San-
do-pal-ri,  which  event  he  (the  king)  was  able  to  see  through  the  magical  insight
he  had  acquired  from  the  Guru.  It  appeared  that  the  Guru  reached  Singala  after
about  two  days'  journey,  and  penetrating  the  iron  palace,  he  entered  the  body  of  the
Eaksha  king  named  "He  of  the  Skull  rosary,"  and  preached  the  doctrine  to  the
thousand  daughters  of  the  Eaksha  and  the  folk  of  that  country.  A  few  days  after-
wards he  departed  for  Na-yab-glin,,  and  reached  the  capital  San-do-pal-ri,  where
instantly  abstracting  the  life  of  the  demon-king  named  Yaksha  Me-wal,  and  entering
his  body,  the  Guru  reigns  there  supreme  over  the  Rakshas,  even  up  till  the  present
day,  and  in  perpetual  youth  is  preaching  there  the  doctrine  of  Lamaism  in  a  para-
dise which  rivals  that  of  Amitabha's  western  heaven  of  Sukhavati.


ITS  DEVELOPMENT  AND  SPREAD.  33


__And  notwithstanding  his  grotesque  charlatanism  and  uncelibate
hfe,  he  is  deified  and  worshipped  as  the  "  second  Buddha,"  and
his  image  under  "The  eight  worshipful  Forms"  1  is  found  in
every  Tibetan  temple  of  the  old  sect,  as figured  at  page  25.

Thus  established,  and  lavishly  endowed,  Lamaism  made  steady
progress,  and  was  actively  patronized  by  Thi-Sroh  Detsan's  succes-
sors for  two  generations.^

The  eras  of  Lamaism  may  be  divided  into  (1)  primitive  or
"Augustine"  (from  King  Thi-Sron  Detsan's  reign  to  the  per-
secution), (2)  mediaeval,  including  the  reformation,  (3)  modern
Lamaism,  from  the  priest-kingship  of  the  Dalai  Lama  in  the
seventeenth  century.

An  interesting  glimpse  into  the  professed  religion  of  the  earlier
period  is  given  in  the  bilingual  edict  pillars  "  do-ring,"  erected  at
Lhasa  in  822  a.d.,^  in  treaty  with  the  Chinese.  In  the  text  of
these  edicts,  which  has  been  translated  by  Dr.  Bushell,*  occurs  the
following  sentence  :  "  They  [?  the  Fan  (Tibetan)  and  the  Han
(Chinese)]  have  looked  up  to  the  three  precious  ones,  to  all  the
holy  saints,  to  the  sun,  moon,  stars,  and  planets,  and  begged  them
to  be  their  witnesses."

In  the  latter  half  of  the  ninth  century  ^  under  king  Kalpachan,
the  grandson  of  Thi-Sron  Detsan,  the  work  of  the  translation  of
scriptures  and  the  commentaries  of  Nagarjuna,  Aryadeva,  Vasu-
bandhu,  etc.,  was  actively  prosecuted.  Among  the  Indian  trans-
lators employed  by  him  were  Jina  Mitra,  Silendrabodhi,"  Suren-
drabodhi,  Prajna-varman,  Dana-sila,  and  Bodhimitra,  assisted  by
the  Tibetans  Pal-brtsegs,  Ye-s'e-sde,  Ch'os-kyi-Gryal-ts'an,  and
at  least  half  of  the  two  collections  as  we  know  them  is  the  work


1  Guru  ts'an  gye. For  description  of  these  see  p.  379.

2  Tlii-Sron  Detsan  died  in  786  (Csoma,  Or.,  183),  and  was  succeeded  by  his  son,
Mu-thi  tsan-po,  who,  on  being  poisoned  by  his  mother  soon  after  his  accession,  was
succeeded  by  his  brother  (Sad-na-legs)  under  the  same  name  (Rookhill,  Life,  222),  and
he  induced  Kamalasila  to  return  to  Tibet  and  permanently  reside  in  that  country.
This  latter  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Ealpachan.

3  These  monoliths  are  assigned  by  Tibetan  tradition  (as  translated  by  Saeat.  ,  J. A  .S.B.,
1881,  p.  228)  to  Thi-Sron  Detsan's  grandson,  Ealpachan.

1  Op.  cit.,  521.

5  According  to  Tibetan  chronology ;  but  the  Chinese  make  Ralpachan's  accession
816  A.  D.  (Rockhill's  B.,  223).

6  These  two  were  pupils  of  Sthiramati  (  Vasiliev,  Turanatha,  320)

D


34


SPREAD OF  L2MAISM.


of  their  hands.^  And  he  endowed  most  of  the  monasteries  with
state-lands  and  the  right  to  collect  tithes  and  taxes.  He  seems
to  have  been  the  first  Tibetan  sovereign  who  started  a  regular
record  of  the  annals  of  his  country,  for  which  purpose  he  adopted
the  Chinese  system  of  chronology.

His  devotion  to  Buddhism  appears  to  have  led  to  his  murder
about  899,^  at  the  instigation  of  his  younger  brother  Lan  Darma,
— the  so-called  Julian  of  Lamaism — who  then  ascended  the  throne,
and  at  once  commenced  to  persecute  the  Lamas  and  did  his
I  tmost^  to  uproot  the  religion;  He  desecrated  the  temples  and
several  monasteries,  burned  many  of  their  books,  and  treated
the  Lamas  with  the  grossest  indignity,  forcing  many  to  become
butchers.

But  Lan  Darma's  persecution  was  very  mild  for  a  religious
one,  and  very  short-lived. He  was  assassinated  in  the  third  year

of  his  reign  by  a  Lama  of  Lha-
luh  named  Pal-dorje,  who  has
since  been  canonized  by  his  grate-
ful church,  and  this  murderous
incident  forms  a  part  of  the  modern
Lamaist  masquerade.*  This  Lama,
to  effect  his  purpose,  assumed  the
guise  of  a  strolling  black-hat  devil-
dancer,  and  hid  in  his  ample  sleeves
a  bow  and  arrow.  His  dancing
below  the  king's  palace,  which
stood  near  the  north  end  of  the
present  cathedral  of  Lhasa,^  at-
tracted the  attention  of  the  king,
who  summoned  the  dancer  to  his
presence, where the disguised

Lama  seized  an  opportunity  while
Black-hat  Devil-Dancee.  ,i i  • . i j. i.-  -i.!.

near  the  kmg  to  shoot  him  with

the  arrow,  which  proved  almost  immediately  fatal. In  the  re-


1  EOCK.,  B.,  225.

2  The  date  is  variously  given,  ranging  from  838  (Bushell,  439  and  522)  to  I
(CsoMA,  Or.,  183) ;  902  (Sanang  Setsen,  49) ;  914  (Koppen,  ii.,  72).

3  Actively  aided  by_his  minister,  sBas-stay-sjias.

*  See  Chap.  xx.

*  And  not  on  the  Red  Hill  latterly  named  "  Potala."


ITS  PERSECUTION  AND  liEVIVAL.  35


suiting  tumult  the  Lama  sped  away  on  a  black  horse,  which
was  tethered  near  at  hand,  and  riding  on,  plunged  through  the
Kyi  river  on  the  outskirts  of  Lhasa,  whence  his  horse  emerged
in  its  natural  white  colour,  as  it  had  been  merely  blackened  by
soot,  and  he  himself  turned  outside  the  white  lining  of  his  coat,
ani  by  this  stratagem  escaped  his  pursuers.^  The  dying  words
of  the  king  were :  "  Oh,  why  was  I  not  killed  three  years  ago
to  save  me  committing  so  much  sin,  or  three  years  henee,  that  I
might  have  rooted  Buddhism  out  of  the  land  ?  "

On  the  assassination  of  Lan  Darma  the  Lamas  were  not  long
in  regaining  their  lost  ground.^  Their  party  assumed  the  regency
during  the  minority  of  Lan  Darma's  sons,  and  although  Tibet
now  became  divided  into  petty  principalities,  the  persecution
seems  to  have  imparted  fresh  vigour  to  the  movement,  for
from  this  time  forth  the  Lamaist  church  steadily  grew  in  size
and  influence  until  it  reached  its  present  vast  dimensions,  culminat-
ing in  the  priest-kings  at  Lhasa.

By  the  beginning  of  the  eleventh  century  A.D.,  numerous  Indian
and  Kashmiri  monks  were  again  frequenting  Tibet.'  And  in
1038  A.D.  arrived  Atisa,  the  great  reformer  of  Lamaism,*  whose
biography  is  sketched  in  outline  below,  as  he  figures  con-
spicuously in  Lamaism,  and  especially  in  its  sects.


1  He  hid  in  a  cave  near  the  monastery  of  Brag-Yal-pa,  about  one  day's  journey  east
otLhasa.

2  Sanang  Setsen  says  (p.  51)  that  Lan  Darma's  son  reigned  without  the  Law.

3  AmoBg  whom  were  Smriti,  who  wrote  a  Tibetan  vocabulary  named  "  The  Weapon
of  Speech " ;  Dharmapala,  who  arrived  in  1013  a.d.,  accompanied  by  Siddhapala,
Gunapala,  and  Prajna-pala  from  Eastern  India ;  and  Subhuti  Sri  Santi,  who  translated
some  of  the  Prajna-paramita.

*  His  legendary  biography,  attributed  to  his  pupil  Brom-ton,  but  apparently  of
later  date  (and  probably  written  by  the  Dalai  in  the  sixteenth  centmy,  as  it  credits
Brom-ton  with  being  Avalokita's  incarnation),  has  been  translated  by  Sabat  in
Jour.  Ind.  BnM.  Text  Soc,  1893.  I  have  also  consulted  the  original.  (Of.  also  TiBA.
241,243;  Kopp.,ii.,  78,  79,117,127,  295;  Schl.,  69,  136;  Pand.,No.  29.)  Atlsa's  proper
Indian  name  is  Dipankara  Sri-jnana,  but  he  is  usually  called  by  the  Lamas  Jo-vo-
rje-Apal-ldan  Atisa,  or  "The  Illustrious  Noble  LordAtisha."  And  he  is  held  to  be
an  incarnation  of  Maiijusri,  the  Celestial  Bodhisat  of  Wisdom ;  though  this  seems
merely  a  pious  way  of  stating  that  Atisa  was  the  Maiijusri  of  Tibet,  or  the  most
learned  in  scholastic  and  astrological  lore  of  all  the  monks  who  had  previously
visited  Tibet ;  as  India,  Nepal,  and  China  already  possessed  their  especial  apotheosized
wise  man  as  a  Manjusri  incarnation.  He  was  born  in  980  a.d.  (according  to  his
Tibetan  chronicles),  of  the  royal  family  of  Gaur  at  Vikramanipur  (?),  in  Bengal,  his
father  being  named  Kalyana-sri,  and  his  mother  Prabhavati,  and  was  ordained  at

D 2


36


SPREAD OF  LAMAISM


Atisa.


Alisa  was  nearly sixty  years  of  age  when  he  visited  Tibet. '^
He  at  once  started  a  movement  which  may  be  called  the  Lamaist

Keformation,  and  he  wrote  many
treatises.^

His  chief  disciple  was  Dom-
ton,  ^  the  first  hierarch  of
the  new  reformed  sect,  the
Kadam-pa,  which,  three-and-a-
half  centuries  later,  became  the
Gre-lug-pa,  now  the  dominant
sect  of  Tibet,  and  the  estab-
lished church  of  the  country.

Atisa's reformation resulted

not only in the new sect,

Kadam-pa,  with  which  he  most

intimately identified himself,

but it also initiated, more  or

less  directly,  the  semi-reformed

sects  of  Kar-gyu-pa  and  Sakya-pa,  as  detailed  in  the  chapter  on

Sects.

The  latter  end  of  the  eleventh  century  saw  Lamaism  firmly

the  Odantapuri  Vihara.  He  underwent  training  under  botli  Maliayana  teachers
and  the  Maha  Siddhi  (grub-ch'en)  or  wizard-priests,  his  most  notable  masters  being
Chandi-akirti,  the  Abbot  of  Suvarnadvip,  or  Sudliarmanagar,  the  "Chryse"  of  the
ancients,  near  "  Thaton  "  in,  Pegu,  Mativitara  of  the  Mahabodhi  Vihara,  and  the  Maha-
siddlii  Naro,  who  is  especially  related  to  the  Kar-gyu-pa  Sect.  On  starting  for  Tibet,
he  was  a  professor  of  the  Vikramasila  monastery  in  Magadha,  and  a  contemporary
of  Nayapala,  son  of  King  Mahipala.

1  He  visited  Tibet  by  way  of  Sari  K'or-sum  in  1038  a.d.  in  the  company  of  the  Lama
Nag-tsho,  and  after  starting  what  may  be  called  the  Reformed  Lamaism,  died  in
the  sJfe-t'an  monastery,  near  Lhasa,  in  1052.  It  is  stated  that  he  came  from
Vikramasila  at  the  invitation  of  the  Tibetan  King,  named  Llia  Lama  Ye-shes-'od,  but
his  route  vid  Sari  renders  this  unlikely,  and  this  Lha  Lama  seems  to  have  been  a  petty
chief  of  N.W.  Tibet,  who  was  captured  about  that  time  by  the  Nepalese.

=  The  following  works  by  Atisa  occur  in  mDo  «f  bsTan  'gyur :  1,  Bodhipatha  pradipa ;
2,  Gary  a  sangraha  pradipa ;  3,  Satya  dvayavatara ;  4,  Madhyamopadesa ;  5,  Sangraha
garbha;  6,  Hridaya  nischita;  7,  Bodhisattva  manyavali;  8,  Bodhisattva  karmadi-
margavatara;  9,  Saranagatadesa ;  10,  Mahayanapatha  sadhana  varna  sangraha;
11,  Mahayanapatha  sadhana  ^.sangraha ;  12,  Siltrartha  samuchhayopadesa ;  13,  Dasaku-
sala  karmopadesa ;  14,  Karma  Vibhanga ;  15,  Samadhi  sambhara  parivarta ;  16,  Lokot-
tarasaptaka  vidhi ;  17,  Guru  Kriyakrama  ;  18,  Chittotpada  samvara  vidhi  krama  ;  19,
S'ikshd  samucchaya  abhi  samaya,  delivered  by  S'ri  Dharmapala,  King  of  Suvarnad-
vipa  to  DIpankara  and  Kamala ;  20,  Vimala  ratna  lekhana,  an  epistle  by  Dipaukara
to  Naya  Pala,  King  of  Magadha  by  Atisa  on  his  departure  for  Tibet.

3  Brtym-^tod.


UNDER  SASKYA  HIERABGHY.  37

rooted,  and  its  rival  sects,  favoured  by  their  growing  popularity  and
the  isolation  of  Tibet,  were  beginning  to  form  at  Sakya  and
elsewhere  strong  hierarchies,  which  took  much  of  the  power  out
of  the  hands  of  the  petty  chiefs  amongst  whom  Tibet  was  now
parcelled  out,  and  tended  to  still  further  open  the  country  to
Chinese  and  Mongol  invasion.

There  seems  no  evidence  to  support  the  assertion  that  this
Lamaist  revival  was  determined  by  any  great  influx  of  Indian
monks  fleeing  from  persecution  in  India,  as  there  is  no  record  of
any  such  influx  about  the  time  of  the  Muhammadan  invasion  of
India.
^  In  the  second  half  of  the  thirteenth  century,  Lamaism  received
a  mighty  accession  of  strength  at  the  hands  of  the  great  Chinese
emperor,  Khubilai  Khan.  Tibet  had  been  conquered  by  his
ancestor,  Jenghiz  Khan,i  about  1206  A.D.,  and  Khubilai  was  thus
brought  into  contact  with  Lamaism.  This  emperor  we  know,
from  the  accounts  of  Marco  Polo  and  others,  was  a  most  en-
lighten ftd  riLl!^r ;  and  in  searching^_about  for  a  religion  to  weld
together  the  more  unfcivilized  portions  of  his  mighty  empire  he
called  to  his  court  the  most  powerful  of  the  Lamaist  hierarchs,
namely,  the  Saskya  Grrand  Lama,  as  well  as  representatives  of  the
Christian"  aiTd  several  other  faiths,  and  he  ultimately  fixed  upon
Lamaism,  as  having  more  in  common  with  the  Shamanist  faiths
already  prevalent  in  China  and  Mongolia  than  had  Confucianism,
Muhammadanism,  or  Christianity.

His  conversion  to  Buddhism  is  made  miraculous.  He  is  said  to
have  demanded  from  the  Christian  missionaries,  who  had  been
sent  to  him  by  the  pope,  the  performance  of  a  miracle  as  a
proof  to  him  of  the  superiority  of  the  Christian  religion,  while
if  they  failed  and  the  Lamas  succeeded  in  showing  him  a  miracle,
then  he  would  adopt  Buddhism.  In  the  presence  of  the  mission-
aries, who  were  unable  to  comply  with  Khubilai's  demands,  the
Lamas  caused  the  emperor's  wine-cup  to  rise  miraculously  to  his
lips,  whereat  the  emperor  adopted  Buddhism  ;  and  the  dis-
comfited missionaries  declared  that  the  cup  had  been  lifted  by
the  devil  himself,  into  whose  clutches  the  king  now  had  fallen.

Just  as  Charlemagne  created  the  first  Christian  pope,  so  the

1  The  Tibetan  accounts  state  that  he  was  born  in  1182  a.d.,  and  was  the  son  of  the
Mongol  God  (?  deified  ancestor)  "The  White  Giiain-t'e."


38  SPREAD OF  LAMAISM

emperor  Khubilai  recognized  ^  the  Lama  of  Saskya,  or  the  Sakya
Pandita,  as  head  of  the  Lamaist  church,  and  conferred  upon  himi^
"temporary  power  as  the  tributary  ruler  9f  Tibet,  in  return  for
which  favour  he  was  required  to  consecrate  or  crown  the  Chinese
emperors.  And  the  succession  in  this  hereditary  primacy  was
secured  to  the  Pandit's  nephew,  Lodpi  Gryal-ts'an  (or  Mati-
dhvaja),  a  young  and  able  Lama,  who  was  given  the  title  of
Highness  or  Sublimity  (p'ags-pa).  Khubilai  actively  promoted
Lamaism  and  built  many  monasteries  in  Mongolia,  and  a  large
one  at  Pekin.  Chinese  history  ^  attributes  to  him  the  organisa-
tion of  civil  administration  in  Tibet,  though  it  would  appear
that.^he  exerted  his  authority  only  by  diplomacy  through  these
spiritual  potentates  without  any  actual  conquest  by  arms.
C'^'The  Sakya  pope,  assisted  by  a  staff  of  scholars,  achieved  the
great  work  of  translating  the  bulky  Lamaist  canon  (Kah-gyur)
into  Mongolian  after  its  revision  and  collation  with  the  Chinese
textSj^  Indeed,  the  Lamaist  accounts  claim  for  the  Sakya  Pope
the  invention  of  the  Mongolian  character,  though  it  is  clearly
modelled  upon  the  Syrian ;  and  Syriac  and  nestorian  missionaries
are  known  to  have  worked  in  Mongolia  long  prior  to  this  epoch.
Y  Under  the  succeeding  Mongol  emperors,  the  Sakya  primacy
seeins  to  have  maintained  much  of  its  political  supremacy,  and  to
have  used  its  power  as  a  church-militant  to  oppress  its  rival  sects.
Thus  it  bur^^^the  great  Kar-gyu-pa  monastery  of  Dikung  about
1320  A.DTjJ^^^'on  the  accession  of  the  Ming  dynasty  in  1368  A.D.
the  CWnese  emperors  deemed  it  politic,  while  conciliating  the
Lamas,  as  a  body,  by  gifts  and  titles,  to  strike  at  the  Sakya

^ power  by  raising  the  heads  of  two  other  monasteries  *  to  equal
rant  with  it,  and  encouraged  strife  amongst  thena.,,,"

^^,At  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century  a  Lama  named
Tson-K'a-pa  re-organized  Atisa's  reformed  sect,  and  altered  its
title  to  "  The  virtuous  order,"  or  Ge-lug-pa.  This  sect  soon
eclipsed  all  the  others ;  and  in  five  generations  it  obtained  the
priest -kingship  of  Tibet,  which  it  still  retains  to  this  day.  Its  '
first  Grand  Lama  was  Tson-K'a-pa's  nephew,  Greden-dub,  with
his succession based on the idea  of re-incarnation,  a theory

1  In  1270  A.D.

2  Maeco  p.,  ii.,  38.

-*  The  Ka-gyupa,  Dikung,  and  the  Ka-dam-pa  Ts'al.


UNDER GE-LUQ-PA.


39


which  was  afterwards,  apparently  in  the  reign  of  the  fifth
Grrand  Lama,  developed  into  the  fiction  of  re-incarnated  reflexes
of  the  divine  Bodhisat  Avalokita,  as  detailed  in  the  chapter  on  the
Hierarchy.

In  1640,  the  Ge-lug-pa  leapt  into  temporal  power  under  the
fifth  Grrand  Lama,  the  crafty  Nag-wan  L6-zang.  At  the  request
of  this  ambitious  man,  a  Mon-
gol prince,  Gusri  Khan,  con-
quered Tibet,  and  made  a  pre-
sent of  it  to  this  Grand  Lama,
who  in  1650  was  confirmed  in
his  sovereignty  by  the  Chinese
emperor,  and  given  the  Mon-
gol title  of  JDalai,  or  "(vast
as)  the  Ocean."  And  on  ac-
count of  this  title  he  and  his
successors  are  called  by  some
Europeans  "the  Dalai  (or
Tale)  Lama,"  though  this
title  is  almost  unknown  to
Tibetans,  who  call  these  Grand
Lamas  "  the  great  gem  of
majesty "  (Gyal-wa  Ein-po-
ch'e).i

This  daring  Dalai  Lama,  high-handed  and  resourceful,  lost  no
time  in  consolidating  his  rule  as  priest-king  and  the  extension  of
his  sect  by  the  forcible  appropriation  of  many  monasteries  of  the
other  sects,  and  by  inventing  legends  magnifying  the  powers  of
the  Bodhisat  Avalokita  and  posing  himself  as  the  incarnation  of
this  divinity,  the  presiding  Bodhisat  of  each  world  of  re-birth,
whom  he  also  identified  with  the  controller  of  metempsychosis,  the
dread  Judge  of  the  Dead  before  whose  tribunal  all  mortals  must
appear.

Posing  in  this  way  as  God-incarnate,  he  built  ^  himself  the
huge  palace-temple  on  the  hill  near  Lhasa,  which  he  called
Potala,  after  the  mythic  Indian  residence  of  his  divine  prototype


7^^

r^\

^

^ ^

^^^

^m>^

M

M/W

>^y^^\/K^va\

fe

Mi-^

z^^)r

/^

la^^

^t==;:5'^~~^

^

■"C^-

The  Fiest  Dalai  Lama.
L6-zan  G-ya-ts'o  or  G-yal-wa  iia-pa.2


1  Cf.  CsoMA,  dr.,  192  and

2  After  Pander.


J;  Kopp.,  ii.,  168,  235;  J.A.S.B.,  1882,  p.  27.
3  In  1643,  CsoMA,  G,:,  p.  190


40  SPREAD OF  LAMAISM.

Avalokita,  "  The  Lord  who  looks  down  from  on  high,"  whose  sym-
bols he  now  invested  himself  with. He  also  tampered  unscrupu-


POTALA, THE PaLACE OF THE DaLAI LaMA.

(From  a  native  drawing.)

ously  with  Tibetan  history  in  order  to  lend  colour  to  his  divine
pretensions,  and  he  succeeded  perfectly.  All  the  other  sects  of
Lamas  acknowledged  him  and  his  successors  to  be  of  divine
descent,  the  veritable  Avalokita-in-the-flesh.  And  they  also
adopted  the  plan  of  succession  by  re-incarnate  Lamas  and  by
divine  reflexes.  As  for  the  credulous  populace,  they  recognized
the  Dalai  Lama  to  be  the  rightful  ruler  and  the  existing  govern-
ment as  a  theocracy,  for  it  flattered  their  vanity  to  have  a  deity
incarnate  as  their  king.

The  declining  years  of  this  great  Grand  Lama,  Nag-wan,  were
tro  jbled  by  the  cares  and  obligations  of  the  temporal  rule,  and  his
ambitious  schemes,  and  by  the  intrigues  of  the  Manchus,  who
sought  the  temporal  sovereignty.  On  account  of  these  political
troubles  his  death  was  concealed  for  twelve  years  by  the  minister
De-Si,i  who  is  beHeved  to  have  been  his  natural  son.  And  the
succeeding  G-rand  Lama,  the  sixth,  proving  hopelessly  dissolute,
he  was  executed  at  the  instigation  of  the  Chinese  government


1  sDe-srid. Csoma's  Oram.,  191 ;  GiOEGi's  A  Ipli.


ITS  PRESENT-DAY  DISTRIBUTION.  41

which  then  assumed  the  suzerainty,  and  which  has  since  con-
tinued to  control  in  a  general  way  the  temporal  affairs,  especially
its  foreign  policy ,i  and  also  to  regulate  more  or  less  the  hierarchal
succession,^  as  will  be  referred  to  presently.

But  the  Ge-lug-pa  sect,  or  the  established  church,  going  on
th'e  Unes  laid  down  for  it  by  the  fifth  Grand  Lama,  continued  to
prosper,  and  his  successors,  despite  the  presence  of  a  few  Chinese
officials,  are  now,  each  in  turn,  the  de  facto  ruler  of  Tibet,  and
recognized  by  the  Lamas  of  all  denominations  as  the  supreme
head  of  the  Lamaist  church-' -'


In  its  spread  beyoni9~Ti"Eet,  Lamaism  almost  everywhere  exhibits
the  same  tendency  to  dominate  both  king  and  people  and  to  repress
the  national  life.  It  seems  now  to  have  ceased  extending,  but
shows  no  sign  of  losing  hold  upon  its  votaries  in  Tibet.

The  present  day  distribution  of  Lamaism  extends  through  states
stretching  more  or  less  continuously  from  the  European  Caucasus
to  near  Kamschatka;  and  from  Buriat  Siberia  down  to  Sikhim
and  Yun-nan.  But  although  the  area  of  its  prevalence  is  so  vast,
the  population  is  extremely  sparse,  and  so  little  is  known  of  their
numbers  over  the  greater  part  of  the  area  that  no  trustworthy  figures
can  be  given  in  regard  to  the  total  number  of  professing  Lamais|s.

The  population  of  Tibet  itself  is  probably  not  more  than
4,000,000,^  but  almost  all  of  these  may  be  classed  as  Lamaists,  for
although  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  people  in  eastern  Tibet
are  adherents  of  the  Bon,  many  of  these  are  said  to  patronize  the
Lamas  as  well,  and  the  Bon  religion  has  become  assimilated  in
great  part  to  un-reformed  Lamaism.*


1  Thus  it  procured  for  Tibet  satisfaction  from  tlie  Gorkhas  under  Prithivi-narayan
for  their  invasion  of  Western  Tibet  and  sack  of  Tashi-lhunpo  in  1768  (Kiekpatkiok's
Acct.  of  Nepal,  p.  268  ;  Buchanan-Hamilton,  Nepal,  p.  2i4),  and  the  present  seclusion
of  Tibet  against  Europeans  is  mainly  due  to  Chinese  policy.

2  An  interesting  glimpse  into  the  country  of  that  period  is  got  in  the  contemporary
record  of  the  friar  Horace  della  Penna,  translated  into  English  by  Markham  {op.  cit.,
p.  320  et  seq.)

3  RocKHiLL,  i.,  p.  296,  estimates  it  at  3,500,000.

*  Though  it  must  be  remembered  that  Mr.  Rockhill  found  a  large  tract  of  X.E.  Tibet
exclusively  occupied  by  B6n-pa.  In  the  north-eastern  province  of  Gya-de,  with  about
50,000  people,  between  the  Dang  River  and  Chamdo,  Mr.  Rocklull  found  that  the
B6n-pa  religion  reigns  supreme,  and  in  order  to  save  these  people  from  persecution  at
the  hands  of  the  Lamaist  Government  at  Lhasa,  China  itself  supervises  the  adminis-
tration of  this  province. And  "  all  along  the  eastern  borderland  of  Tibet  from  the


42  SPREAD OF  LAMAISM.

The  European  outpost  of  the  Lamaist  Church,  situated  amid  the
Kahnuk  Tartars  on  the  banks  of  the  Volga,  has  been  described  in
some  detail  by  Koppen.^

After  the  flight  of  the  Torgots,  about  12,000  cottages  of  the
Kalmuk  Tartars  still  remained  in  Eussian  territory,  between  the
Don  and  the  Yaik.  Now  they  number  at  least  20,000,  and  con-
tain more  than  100,000  souls,  of  which  by  far  the  great  majority
retain  the  Lamaist  faith.  Of  course,  since  the  flight,  all  inter-
course with  the  priest-god  at  Lhasa  is  strictly  forbidden,  nor
are  they  allowed  to  accept  from  him  any  orders  or  patents,  nor  to
send  him  any  ambassadors  or  presents.  Nevertheless,  he  gives
them  secret  advice  by  oracle  and  otherwise,  and  maintains  their
religious  enthusiasm.  Thus,  even  now,  he  exercises  an  important
influence  on  his  pious  flock  on  the  Volga,  so  that  they  can  be
considered  of  the  Lamaist  church,  although  the  head  Lama  (for
the  Kalmuks  still  call  their  head  priest  "  Lama  ")  is  sanctioned  at
present  by  the  Eussian  government,  and  no  longer  by  the  Dalai
Lama.

Altogether,  evidently  for  a  reason  not  far  to  seek,  the  number
of  priests  has  greatly  increased  since  their  connection  with  Lhasa
has  been  cut  off.  Formerly  the  Dalai  Lama  had  also  on  the  Volga
a  quite  disproportionate  number  of  bondsmen  or  Schabinaren,
whose  contributions  (taxes)  went  to  Lhasa ;  but  since  the  flight  of
the  Torgots  the  money  remains  there,  and  the  Schabinars  of  the
remaining  Ulusse  have  been  divided  amongst  the  several  Churulls.
These  clergy  also  would  appear  to  have  developed  extraordinary
zeal,  for  in  the  year  1803  it  was  reported  that  the  Kalmuk  priests
formed  a  tenth  part  of  the  whole  population,  that  they  perpetually
enriched  themselves  at  the  expense  of  the  people,  that  they
meddled  in  everything,  and  received  all  the  young  men  who  were
averse  to  labour  at  their  proper  calling,  etc.,  etc.

Since  1838  the  Russian  government  has  succeeded,  through
the  head  Lama  Jambo  Namka,  in  preventing  in  some  measure
these  abuses,  and  severer  laws  were  issued,  especially  against  the

Kokonor  to  Yun-nan,  it  (the  Biin-pa  religion)  flourislies  side  by  side  with  tlie  Lamaist
faith  ....  and  in  all  the  southern  portions  of  Tibet,  not  under  the  direct  rule
of  Lhasa,  its  Lamaseries  may  be  found.  So  it  seems  that  this  faith  obtains  in  over
two-thirds  of  Tibet,  and  that  it  is  popular  with  at  least  a  fifth  of  the  Tibetan-speaking
tribes." — (reoyraphical  Jom:,  May,  1894.
1  Op.  cit. ,  ii.,  385  et  seq.


ITS  PRESENT-DAY  DISTRIBUTION.  43

priests  interfering  in  civil  affairs ;  also  several  hundred  worthless
priests  were  expelled.

A  more  precise  census  of  the  Kussian  empire  gives  the  number
of  Lamaist  people  at  82,000  Kirghis,  and  1 19,162  Kalmuks  ;  while
the  Buriats  in  Siberia,  near  the  Baikal  lake,  are  estimated  at
about  190,000.1

Pallas  ^  calculated  when  he  visited  the  Kalmuk  country  last  cen-
tury that  there  was  one  Lama  to  every  one  hundred  and  fifty  or
two  hundred  tents.

In  China,  except  for  a  few  monasteries  at  Pekin,  etc.,  and  these
mostly  of  Mongol  monks,  the  Lamaist  section  of  Chinese  Budd-
hists seems  confined  to  the  extreme  western  frontier,  especially
the  former  Tibetan  province  of  Amdo. Probably  the  Lamaists  '
in  China  number  no  more  than  about  1,000,000.

Mongolia  may  be  considered  almost  wholly  Lamaist,  and  its  popu-
lation is  about  2,000,000.  Its  Buddhism  became  extinct  on  the  ex-
pulsion of  the  race  from  China  in  1368 ;  and  its  reconversion  to
Lamaism  did  not  occur  till  1577,  as  detailed  in  the  Mongol  history
by  Sanang  Setzen,^  who  was  a  great  grandson  of  one  of  the  chief
agents  in  this  movement.  Some  details  of  its  history  are  cited  in
connection  with  the  Taranatha  Grand  Lama  in  the  chapter  on
hierarchy.  The  number  of  Lamas  are  estimated*  at  10,000  in
Urgya  in  north  Mongolia,  2,000  in  Tchaitschi  in  south  Mongolia,
2,000  in  Altan  Ziima,  and  2,000  in  Kukukhotum.

Manchuria  is  largely  Lamaist,  with  a  population  of  about
3,000,000.

Ladak,  to  which  Asoka  missionaries  are  believed  to  have  pene-  \
trated,  is  now  entirely  Lamaist  in  its  form  of  Buddhism,  and  this
is  the  popular  religion. Its  history  is  given  by  Cunningham^  ard
Marx.^ The  population  was  estimated  by  Cunningham ''  at  158,000
and the Lamas  at 12,000, giving one Lama  to thirty laity.


1  KOPPEN,  Bulletin  Hist.  Phil,  de  VAcad-  de  St.  Petersbarg,  ix.,  p.  335  ;  Keith  John-
ston's Atlas,  p.  34.  Schlagintweit  says,  op.  dt.,  p.  12,  that  among  the  Buriats  Buddhism
is  still  extending.

2  Seism,  i.,  557  (French  ed.).

3  Op.  cit.

■"  KoppEN,  i.,  p.  381,  chiefly  based  on  Hue's  data.
=  Laddk,  p.  357,  et.  seq.
«  J.A.S.B.,  loc.  cit.
Op.  cit.,  p.  287.


44  SPREAD OF  LAMAISM


Eecent  estimates  place  the  population  at  about  178,000.  Spiti
in  1845  had  a  population  of  1,414,  and  the  Lamas  were  one
hundred  and  ninety-three,  or  about  one  to  seven.^

I  The  vernacular  history  of  its  introduction  into  eastern  Tur-
kestan or  Khoten  (Tib.,  Li-yul)  has  been  translated  by  Eockhill.^
'  In  Nepal,  the  number  of  Buddhists  grows  every  year  less  under
the  active  proselytizing  Hindu  influences  of  the  Grhorka  Grovern-

/  ment,  which  places  disabilities  upon  professing  Buddhists. But
the  majority  of  the  Nepalese  Buddhists  are  now  Lamaist.
i Bhotan  ^  is  wholly  Lamaist,  both  in  its  religion  and  temporal

/government.  Its  population  has  been  given  at  about  40,000  to
50,000  families,  or  a  total  of  145,200."  But  although  it  is  believed
to  be  almost  as  priest-ridden  as  Sikhim,  the  number  of  its  priests
is  estimated'  only  at  about  5,000,  distributed  in  the  six  districts
as  follows  :  In  Tassisudon  500,  in  Punakha  also  500,  in  Paro"  300,
in  Tongso  also  300,  in  Tagna  250,  and  in  Andipur  (or  Wandipur)
250,  in  round  sum  2,000.  Then  come  3,000  Lamas  who  do  not
reside  in  cloisters,  but  are  employed  as  officers,  making  a  totA^L,
5,000,  besides  which  there  are  a  lot  of  hermits  and  nuns.  ;,;

fin  regard  to  Sikhim,  where  Lamaism  is  the  state  religion,  I
have  elicited  from  original  documents  and  local  Lamas  full  detaifs
of  the  mode  in  which  Lamaism  was  introduced  into  that  country.
Some  of  these  are  worth  recording  as  showing  in  a  credible  manner
the  mode  in  which  Lamaism  was  propagated  there,  and  it  was
probably  introduced  in  a  similar  manner  into  several  of  the  other
areas  in  which  it  is  now  prevalent.

The  Lamas  and  laity  of  Sikhim"  and  Tibet  implicitly  beheve  that
St.  Padma-sambhava  (Guru  Eim-bo-ch'e),  the  founder  of  Lamaism,
visited  Sikhim  during  his  journeyings  in  Tibet  and  its  western
borderlands ;  and  although  he  left  no  converts  and  erected  no
buildings,  he  is  said  to  have  hid  away  in  caves  many  holy  books  for
the  use  of  posterity,  and  to  have  personally  consecrated  every
sacred  spot  in  Sikhim.

1  Major  Hay,  J.A.S.B.,  xix,,  437.

2  Life,  etc.,  p.  230,  et.  seq.  See  also  Dr.  Huth's  German  translation  of  the  Eor
history.

^  The  word  is  Sanskritic,  and  its  full  form  is  "  Bhotanta,^'  or  "  the  end  of  Bhot  or
Tibet"  (of.  HoDQS.,  L.,  i.,  p.  30).
*  Pembehton's  Mission,  p.  161.
■'  KopPEN,  ii.,  p.  363.
^  The  annexed  illustration  is  from  a  photograph  by  Mr.  Hoffmann.


IN  SIKHIM.


45


The  authorities  for  such  beliefs  are,  however,  merely  the  ac-
counts given  in  the  works  of  tlie  patron  saint  of  Sikhim,  Lha-tsiin
Ch'em-bo,  and  the  fictitious  "  hidden  revelations  ''  of  the  Tertons,
all  of  which  are  unreliable.  And  Lha-tsiin  rather  overdoes  it  by
asserting  that  the  Gruru  visited  SikHm  a  hundred  times.

Sikhim  seems  to  have  been  unknown  to  Tibetans  previous  to  the
latter  half  of  the  sixteenth  century  a.d.,  and  Lha-tsiin  Ch'em-bo's
own  account  of  his  attempts  to  enter  Sikhim  testify  to  the  pre-
vailing ignorance  in  regard  to  it,  owing  to  its  almost  impenetrable


Some  Sikhim  Lamas.
Mongol  Lama  She-rab.  A  Kar-gyu  Lama,

Lama  Ugyen  Gya-ts'o.


A  Xarma  Lama.


mountain  and  icy  barriers.  And  the  Tan-yik  Ser-t'en,  which  gives
the  fullest  account  of  St.  Padma's  wanderings,  and  considered  the
most  reliable  authority,  seems  to  make  no  mention  of  Sikhim..  It
is  extremely  improbable  that  the  Guru  ever  entered  Sikhim,
especially  as,  as  we  have  seen,  he  certainly  did  not  pass  through
that  country  either  when  going  to  or  returning  from  Tibet.

In  keeping,  however,  with  the  legendary  accounts  of  his  visit,  it
is  alleged  by  Sikhimite  Lamas  that  their  Lord  St.  Padma  entered
the  country  by  the  "  Lordly  pass  "  Jo-la  (Aug.,  Cho-la)  and  on  the


46  SPREAB OF  LAMAISM


east  side  of  the  pass  is  pointed  out  a  rock  on  which  he  sat  down,
called  Z'u-ti,  or  throne,^  and  near  the  pass  a  spot  named  Sinmoi
gyip-tsu,^  where  he  surprised  a  party  of  female  devils  preparing  to
cook  their  food  :  here  are  pointed  out  two  masses  of  columnar  rock
alleged  to  be  two  of  the  stones  of  the  tripod  used  to  support  the
cooking-pot  of  these  demons.  And  he  is  said  to  have  returned  to
Tibet  by  way  of  the  Je-lep  pass,  resting  en  route  on  the  Ku-phu
and  creating  the  Tuko  La  by  "  tearing  "  up  the  rock  to  crush  an
obnoxious  demon.

The  introduction  of  Lamaism  into  Sikhim  certainly  dates  from
the  time  of  Lha-tsiin's  arrival  there  about  the  middle  of  the
seventeenth  century  a.d.  By  this  time  Lamaism  had  become  a
most  powerful  hierarchy  in  Tibet,  and  was  actively  extending  its
creed  among  the  Himalayan  and  central  Asian  tribes.

Three  generations  of  Tibetan  colonists  from  the  adjoining
Chumbi  valley  had  settled  on  the  eastern  border  of  Sikhim,  near
G-ana--tok.  And  it  is  highly  probable  that  these  Tibetan  settlers
were  privy  to  the  entry  of  the  Lamas;  as  it  is  traditionally  reported
that  the  ancestor  of  that  Sikhimite-Tibetan,  who  was  promptly
elected  king  of  Sikhim,  by  Lha-tsiin,  was  a  proUge  and  kinsman  of
the  Sakya  Grand  Lama.  And  Lha-tsiin  Ch'em-bo  seems  to  have
approached  Sikhim  via  Sakya,  and  his  incarnations  subsequently
appeared  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Sakya,  and  even  now  his  spirit
is  believed  to  be  incarnate  in  the  body  of  the  present  Sakya  Lama.

Lha-tsiin  was  a  native  of  Kongbu,  in  the  lower  valley  of  the
Tsang-po  (Brahmaputra),  which  has  a  climate  and  physical  appear-
ance very  similar  to  Sikhim,  and  teems  with  traces  of  St.  Padma-
sambhava,  "discovered"  by  celebrated  Lamas,  and  it  had  been  a
happy  hunting  ground  for  the  Tertons,  or  discoverers  of  the
fictitious  treatises  called  "hidden  revelations."  Arriving,  then,
in  a  country  so  like  his  own,  and  having  the  virgin  soil  of  Sikhim
to  work  upon,  Lha-tsiin  seems  to  have  selected  the  most  romantic
spots  and  clothed  them  in  suitable  legendary  dress  in  keeping
with  his  ingenious  discovery  of  St.  Padma's  previous  visits.  And
to  support  his  statements  he  also  discovered  that  his  own  advent
as  the  apostle  of  Sikhim  had  been  foretold  in  detail,  nine  hundred
years  before,  by  the Gruru  himself, in  the  revelation entitled


1  bz'ugs  kliri.  a  Srin-mohi  rgyib  gcsug.


IN  SIKHIM.  47


"  The  prophetic  mirror  of  Sikhim."  i  He  seems  to  have  been  a
man  of  considerable  genius,  with  a  lively  sense  of  the  picturesque ;
and  he  certainly  left  his  mark  on  his  adopted  country  of  Sikhim,
where  his  name  is  now  a  household  \^ord.

The  traditional  account  of  his  entry  to  Sikhim  associates  with
him  two  other  Lamas,  to  wit,  a  Kar-tok-pa  and  a  Na-dak-pa ;  but
they  play  an  inconspicuous  part  in  the  work  of  introducing
Lamaism,  and  it  is  extremely  doubtful  whether  any  representative
of  these  JiTin-ma  sub-sects  arrived  in  Sikhim  at  so  early  a
period.

As  Lha-tsiin  is  so  intimately  identified  with  Sikhim  Lamaism,
being  its  de  facto  founder,  it  is  desirable  here  to  give  a  summary
of  his  life  as  extracted  from  the  local  histories.

lilFB OF ST. IHA-ISUN, THE PATEOy SAINT OF SIKHIM.

Lha-tsiin  Ch'em-ho'  is  a  title  meaning  "The  great  Reverend  God."
His  ordinary  religious  name  is  Kun-zan  naum-gye^  or  "  The  entirely
victorious  Essence  of  Goodness."  He  is  also  known  by  the  title  of
Lha-tsiin  nwm-Tcha  Jig-med,^  or  "  The  Reverend  God  who  fears  not  the
sky,"  with  reference  to  his  alleged  power  of  flying.  And  he  is  some-
tunes  called  Kusho  Dsog-ch'en  Ch'emho,  or  "  The  great  Honourable
Dsog-e'en  " — Dsog-ch'en,  literally  "  The  Great  End,"  being  the  techni-
cal name  for  the  system  of  mystical  insight  of  the  Nin-mapa,  and
Kusho  means  "  the  honourable."

He  was  born  in  the  fire-bird  year  of  the  tenth  of  the  sixty-year  cycles,
corresponding  to  1595  a.d.,  in  the  district  of  Kongbu,  in  south-
eastern Tibet.  Having  spent  many  years  in  various  monasteries  and
in  travelling  throughout  Tibet  and  Sikhim,  he  ultimately,  in  the  year
1648,  arrived  in  Lhasa,  and  obtained  such  great  repute  by  his  learning
that  he  attracted  the  favourable  notice  of  S"ag-wan,  the  greatest  of  the
Grand  Lamas,  who  shortly  afterwards  became  the  first  Dalai  Lama.
Indeed,  it  is  alleged  that  it  was  mainly  through  the  special  instruction
given  by  Lha-tsiin  to  the  Grand  Lama  that  the  latter  was  so  favourably
treated  by  the  Chinese  emperor  and  confirmed  in  the  temporal  rule  of
Tibet.

The  detailed  account  of  the  saint's  meeting  with  the  Grand  Lama  is
worth  citing  in  illustration  of  the  curious  mixture  of  the  crude  and  the
marvellous  which  make  up  the  bulk  of  these  indigenous  narratives. In


1  Den-jofi  I/ungten  Sel-wai  Meloh.

2  Ohhem-ho  is  the  Sikhimite  mode  of  pronouncing  "  Ch'en-po."

3  Kun-bzan-inam-iffyal.

*  l!ia-bisun  nam  mk'ah  'jigs-med.


48


SPREAD OF  LAM  ATS  M


the  year  prBvious  to  that  on  which  the  fifth  Grand  Lama  went  to
China,  which  Csoma  gives  ^  as  1649  a.d.,  the  Grand  Lama,  while  in
his  palace  at  Potala  told  his  attendants,  by  inspiration,  that  a  sage
would  that  day  visit  him,  and  should  be  admitted  to  his  presence.
Lha-tsiin,  arriving  at  the  site  now  named  Pargo-K'aliii,  immediately
below  Potala — the  Lamaist  Vatican — blew  loudly  a  k'dliii,  or  trumpet
of  human  thigh-bone;*  but  the  castle  guard,  in  ignorance  of  who  the


Mendicant  Lama  blowing  Thigh-boxe  Teumpet.


man  really  was,  seized  him  and  tied  him  to  the  Do-ring  monolith
in  the  neighbourhood,  as  a  punishment  for  daring  to  trumpet  so
close  to  the  castle.  The  saint,  bound  in  this  way,  shook  the  whole  hill
of  Potala,  and  so  his  arrival  was  brought  to  the  notice  of  the  Grand


1  Or.,  p.  190.

3  The  illustration  is  from  a  photo  by  Mr.  Hoffmann.


IN  SIKHIM.  49


Lama,  who  ordered  his  instant  release  and  admission.  On  coming  into
the  presence  of  the  Grand  Lama  he  walked  boldly  up  and  struck  the
latter  with  his  fist  and  then  vomited  before  him,  much  to  the  astonish-
ment of  the  courtier  Lamas.  The  Saint  then  explained  :  "  You  are
shortly  going  to  China ;  on  the  way  a  great  danger  besets  you,  but  my
striking  you  has  rid  you  of  that  danger.  In  China  you  will  find  your-
self iu  great  peril  some  day ;  then  consult  this  paper  I  now  give  you,
and  you  will  be  relieved.  My  vomiting  in  your  presence  means  that
you  will  ultimately  be  invested  with  great  power  and  riches  through
me."  The  dilemma  here  prophesied  was  a  query  by  the  Chinese
emperor  regarding  the  "  essence  of  the  rainbow  colour,"  '  which  quite
confounded  the  Grand  Lama,  till  he,  remembering  the  episode  with  the
Saint,  consulted  the  paper  and  found  full  information  noted  therein,
and  having  completely  satisfied  the  emperor,  he  received  great  honour
and  riches.  The  Grand  Lama,  on  his  return  from  China,  in  gratitude
for  services  rendered,  ofiered  Lha-tsiin  much  treasure,  which  the  Saint,
however,  refused.

Previous  to  his  visit  to  Lhasa,  it  is  said  that  the  Saint,  accompanied
by  a  few  dLsciples,  journeyed  to  the  south-west  of  Tibet,  saying :  "  Ac-
cording to  the  prophecy  of  Guru  Rim-bo-ch'e,  I  must  go  and  open  the
northern  gate  of  the  hidden  country  of  the  rice-valleys — De-mo-jong,^
i.e.,  Sikhim,  and  I  must  develop  that  country  religiously."  He  then
proceeded  by  way  of  Tashi-lhunpo  and  Sakya  to  Zar,  a  short  distance
to  the  north  of  Tashi-rabkha  near  the  Nepal  frontier,  where  he  then,  or
afterwards,  founded  a  monastery.

He  then  attempted  to  enter  Sikhim  by  way  of  Dsong-ri  (Jongri),
but  could  find  no  path,  and  remained  many  days  in  a  cave  named  Nam-
gah  ts'al,^  "  the  very  pleasant  grove,"  near  Kan-la  nan-ma.  There  "  the
everlasting  summit  of  the  five  repositories  (of  snow),"  the  mountain
god,  Kah-oh'en  dso-ha  *  transformed  himself  into  a  wild  goose  and  con-
versed with  the  sage ;  and  here,  "  according  to  the  prophecy  of  Guru
Rim-boch'e,"  he  composed °  the  book  named  "the  complete  Book  of
Worship  and  offerings  for  Kah  ch'en  dso-ha.°

At  this  time  another  Lama  of  the  Kar-tok-pa  sub-sect  came  by  Kangla
Nangma  searching  for  a  path  into  Sikhim,  and  also  tried  without
success  the  sPreu-gyab-tak  {i.e.,  "  Monkey-back  rook,"  with  reference
to  its  semblance  to  a  monkey  sitting  with  hands  behind  back),  and
Dsong-ri,  and  the  western  shoulder  of  sKam-pa  Khab-rag — a  ridge  of
"  Kabru,"  which  runs  down  to  the  Rathong  river.  He  then  arrived  at
the  cave  of  "  the  very  pleasant  grove,"  and  met  the  Saint,  who  told  him
that  as  he  was  not  destined  to  open  the  northern  gate,  he  should  go
round  and  try  the  western.

Then  Lha-tsiin,  traversing  the  Kangla  Nangma  and  finding  no  road
beyond  the  cave  of  Skam-pa  Kha-bf  uk,  flew  miraculously  to  the  upper


1  'Dsah  Of  on  sKin  po.  *  mdsod-liia  rtag-rtse.

2  bras-bmo-ljofis.  ■'  "  Ttsom  "  is  the  word  used.

3  mftam  dgah'ts^al,  ^  gans-cli^en  mdsod-yta  vack'od  sprvi  las  gnas-yoii  dsog.

E


50  SPREAD OF  LAMAISM

part  of  "  Kabru  "  (24,000  feet),  and  there  blew  his  kang-ling,  and
after  an  absence  of  two  weeks  flew  down  to  where  his  servants  were
collected  and  guided  them  by  a  road  via  Dsongri  to  JSTorbu-gang,  in
Sikhim.

Here  soon  after  arrived  two  other  Mn-ma  Lamas.  By  "  the  western
gate"  of  Single  La  came  the  Kar-tok-pa  Lama  above  mentioned,
named  "The  Great  Soul,'"  and  a  Lama  of  the  S"a-dak-pa  sub-sect,
named  The  Great  Sage,=  who  had  opened  "  the  southern  gate"  by  way
of  Darjiling  and  Namchi  respectively.  The  place  where  these  three
Lamas  met  was  then  called  by  the  Lepchas  Yok-sam,  which  means  "  the
three  superior  ones  or  noblemen,"  a  literal  translation  of  "  the  three
Lamas."

The  three  Lamas  held  here  a  council  at  which  Lha-tsun  said  :  "  "We
three  Lamas  are  in  a  new  and  irreligious  country.  We  must  have  a
'  dispenser  of  gifts '  ^  {i.e.,  a  king)  to  rule  the  country  on  our  behalf."
Then  the  lS[a-dak-pa  Lama  said :  "  I  am  descended  from  the  celebrated
Tertbn  S"a-dak  Nan-rel,  who  was  a  king;  I  should  therefore  be  the
king."  While  the  Kar-tok-pa  Lama  declared  :  "  As  I  too  am  of  royal
lineage  I  have  the  right  to  rule."  Then  Lha-tsun  said  :  "  In  the
prophecy  of  Guru  B.im-bo-ch'e  it  is  written  that  four  noble  brothers
shall  meet  in  Sikhim  and  arrange  for  its  government.  We  are  three  of
these  come  from  the  north,  west,  and  south.  Towards  the  east,  it  is
written,  there  is  at  this  epoch  a  man  named  P'iin-ts'ok,  a  descendant
of  brave  ancestors  of  Kham  in  Eastern  Tibet.  According,  therefore,  to
the  prophecy  of  the  Guru  we  should  invite  him."  Two  messengers  were
then  dispatched  to  search  for  this  P'iin-ts'ok.  Going  towards  the
extreme  east  near  Gangtok  they  met  a  man  churning  milk  and  asked
him  his  name.  He,  without  replying,  invited  them  to  sit  down,  and
gave  them  milk  to  drink.  After  they  were  refreshed,  he  said  his  name
was  P'iin-ts'ok.  He  was  then  conducted  to  the  Lamas,  who  coronated
him  by  placing  the  holy  water-vase  on  his  head  and  anointed  him  with
the  water  ;  and  exhorting  him  to  rule  the  country  religiously,  they  gave
him  Lha-tsiin's  own  surname  of  Nam-gye  *  and  the  title  of  "  religious
king."  P'Un-ts'ok  Nam-gye  was  at  this  time  aged  thirty-eight  years,
and  he  became  a  Lama  in  the  same  year,  which  is  said  to  have  been

1641  A.D.

Lha-tsiin  then  spent  the  greater  part  of  the  rest  of  his  life  in
Sikhim,  exploring  its  caves  and  mountain  recesses,  composing  its
Lamaist  legends,  and  fixing  sites  for  temples  and  monasteries.  He
first  of  all  built  a  hut  at  Dub-de,  which  afterwards  became  the
monastery  of  that  name.  And  he  is  believed  to  have  built  rude
shrines  at  Tashiding,  Pemiongchi,  and  Sang-iia-ch'o-ling ;  though
others  assert  that  Tashiding  was  first  occupied  by  the  original
S^a-dak-pa  Lama.

In  appearance  Lha-tsiin  is  usually  represented  as  seated  on  a  leo-

1  S&ms  dpah  ch^en-po.  ^  ^hyin~dag.

'  Hig-'dsin  ch'en-po.  *  nnam-ryyal.


IN  SIKHIM.  51


pard-skin  mat  with  the  right  leg  hanging  down  and  his  body  almost
bare — one  of  his  titles  is  He-ru-ka-pa,  which  means  "unclad."  His
complexion  is  of  a  dark  blue  hue.  Otherwise  he  is  somewhat  like
his  prototype  G-uru  Rim-bo-ch'e.  A  chaplet  of  skulls  encircles  his
brow.  In  his  left  hand  is  a  skull  cup  filled  with  blood,  and  a  trident
topped  with  human  heads  rests  in  front  of  the  left  shoulder.  The
right  hand  is  in  a  teaching  attitude.

He  is  believed  to  be  the  incarnation  of  the  great  Indian  teacher
Bhlma  Mitra.  And  he  himself  is  held  to  have  been  subsequently  in-
carnated twice  as  a  Sikhim  Lama,  the  last  re-incarnation  being  Jih
•mi  Pa-wo,  born  at  Ok-jarling  near  Sakya,  who  built  the  present  monas-
tery of  Pemiongchi.

I  cannot  ascertain  the  place  of  his  death  or  what  became  of  his  body,
but  he  is  currently  reported  to  have  died  in  Sikhim  of  fever  contracted
during  a  visit  to  India.  The  dark  livid  hue  of  his  skin  is  said  to  refer
to  his  death  from  malignant  fever.  His  chief  object  in  visiting  India
was,  according  to  a  popular  saying,  to  obtain  a  rare  variety  of  ruddy
leopard-.skin  (the  sala  leopard)  which  is  highly  prized  by  ascetics  as  a
mat.^

All  his  clothing  and  personal  effects  are  carefully  treasured  in
Sikhim  and  worshipped  as  most  sacred  relics.  They  were  all  stored
at  Pemiongchi  monastery  until  the  Gorkha  invasion  of  last  century,
when,  for  greater  safety,  most  of  them  were  taken  to  the  remote  To-
lung  monastery.  At  Pemiongchi  are  kept  one  set  of  his  full  dress
robes  after  the  style  of  Guru  Rim-bo-ch'e,  including  hat  and  boots,  his
hand-drum,  bell,  and  dorje,  and  a  miraculous  p'urhu  dagger  for  stab-
bing the  demons.  These  objects  are  only  shown  at  Pemiongchi  on
special  occasions  to  wealthy  worshippers,  and  they  are  highly  celebrated
as  a  certain  cure  for  barrenness.  Couples  afflicted  in  this  way,  and  who
can  afford  the  necessary  expense,  have  a  preliminary  worship  conducted
in  the  Pemiongchi  chapel,  lasting  one  or  two  days.  Then  the  box  con-
taining the  holy  relics  is  brought  forth  and  ceremoniously  opened,  and
each  article  is  placed  on  the  heads  of  the  suppliant  pair,  the  officiating
priest  repeating  meanwhile  the  charm  of  his  own  tutelary  deity.  Of  the
marvellous  efficacy  of  this  procedure  numerous  stories  are  told.  And
should  two  sons  result,  one  of  them  is  certainly  dedicated  to  the
Church.

Subsequent  to  Lha-tsiin  Ch'em-bo's  death  in  the  latter  end  of  the
seventeenth  century,  Lamaism  steadily  progressed  in  Sikhim  till
latterly  monks  and  monasteries  filled  the  country.  The  list  and
detailed  descripiton  of  these  are  given  in  the  next  chapter  under
the  heading  of  Monasteries.  What  civilization  and  literature  the
Sikhimites  now  possess  they  owe  to  Lamaism,  and  the  Lepcha
alphabet  too  was  derived  from  the  Tibetan.

1  Sa  gyorgar-tu  p'yin  la,  dm-gsah  lai  pags-pa.

E 2


52  SPREAD OF  LAMAISM

The  religions  displaced  by  Lamaism  were  the  Pon  (Boa),  which
is  usually  identified  with  Taouism,  and  the  earlier  animistic  and
fairy  worship  of  the  Lepchas,  which  can  scarcely  be  called  a  re-
ligion. Numerous  traces  of  both  of  these  primitive  faiths  are  to
be  found  incorporated  in  Sikhim  Lamaism,  which  owes  any  special
features  that  it  possesses  to  the  preponderance  of  these  two
elements.

Only  two  sects  of  Lamas  are  established  in  Sikhim,  namely,
the  Jfin-ma-pa  and  the  Kar-gyu-pa  as  represented  by  the  Kar-
ma-pa. There  are  no  Duk-pa  monasteries  in  Sikhim,  nor  does  there
seem  ever  to  have  been  any.

The  Lamas  number  nearly  one  thousand,  and  are  very  numer-
ous in  proportion  to  the  Buddhist  population  of  the  country.  In
1840 '  the  Lepchas  and  Bhotiyas  of  Sikhim  were  estimated  at
3,000  and  2,000  respectively,  but  Mr.  White,  in  his  census  of
Sikhim  in  March,  1891,  gives  the  population  roughly  as : —

Lepchas  ...  ... • ... 5,800

Bhotiyas  ...  ...  ... 4,700

Nepalese,  etc. ...  ...  ... 19,500


30,000


As  the  Nepalese,  who  are  of  very  recent  immigration,  are  all
professing  Hindus,  the  Lamas  are  now  dependent  on  the  Bhotiyas
and  Lepchas  for  support ;  and  we  thus  get  a  proportion  of  one
Lamaist  priest  to  every  ten  or  eleven  of  the  indigenous  population.
But  this  does  not  represent  the  full  priest-force  of  those  two  races,
as  it  takes  no  count  of  the  numerous  devil-dancers  and  Lepcha
priests  patronized  both  by  Bhotiyas  and  Lepchas.

In  British  Sikhim  and  the  Kalim-pong  section  of  British
Bhotan,  the  Lamaists  numbered  in  the  census  of  1891  40,520,
of  which  3,657  were  resident  in  the  town  of  Darjiling.^
'  There  is  no  sign  of  any  decrease  of  Lamaism  in  Sikhim,
although  large  numbers  of  Hinduized  Nepalese  have  lately  been
introduced  into  the  country,  and  the  government  is  no  longer  in


1  Dr.  Campbell  in  The  Oriental,  p.  13.
\ 2  "  Census  of  1891  Kept.,"  p.  47. -The  total  Buddhists  in  Bengal,  including  a  few
Ithousands  of  Burmese  convicts  in  Bengal  jails,  numbered  189,122.


IN-  SIKHIM.


53


-  the  hands  of  Lamas.  Its  Lamaism  is  so  deeply  rooted  that,  in  the
absence  of  any  actively  anti-Buddhist  policy  such  as  has  operated
in  Nepal,  it  is  unlikely  to  be  much  affected  by  the  recent  political
changes,  at  least  for  many  years  to  come.


Tashiding  Monastery
(in  Silihim).


54


IV.

THE SECTS OF  LAMAISM.

I  HE  light  shed  by  the  lamp  of  Lamaism,  like  that  of
most  other  religions,  has  been  broken  into  variegated
fragments  by  the  prisms  of  later  priests.

No  sects  appear  to  have  existed  prior  to  Lan-Darma's
persecution,  nor  till  more  than  a  century  and  a  half  later.  The
sectarial  movement  seems  to  date  from  the  Eeformation  started
by  the  Indian  Buddhist  monk  Atisa,  who,  as  we  have  seen,  visited
Tibet  in  1038  a.d.i

Atisa,  while  clinging  to  Yoga  and  Tantrism,  at  once  began  a
reformation  on  the  lines  of  the  purer  Mahayana  system,  by  en-
forcing celibacy  and  high  morality,  and  by  deprecating  the  general
practice  of  the  diabolic  arts.  Perhaps  the  time  was  now  ripe  for
the  reform,  as  the  Lamas  had  become  a  large  and  influential  body,
and  possessed  a  fairly  full  and  scholarly  translation  of  the  bulky
Mahayana  Canon  and  its  Commentaries,  which  taught  a  doctrine
very  different  from  that  then  practised  in  Tibet.

A  glance  at  the  annexed  "  Genealogical  Tree  of  Lamaist
Sects  "  will  show  that  Atisa  was  the  only  profound  reformer  of
Lamaism.

■The  first  of  the  reformed  sects  and  the  one  with  which  Atisa
most  intimately  identified  himself  was  called  the  Kah-dam-pa,^  or
"  those  bound  by  the  orders  (commandments)";  and  it  ultimately,
three  and  a  half  centuries  later,  in  Tson  K'apa's  hands,  became
less  ascetic  and  more  highly  ritualistic  under  the  title  of  "  The
Virtuous  Style,"  Ge-lug-pa,  now  the  dominant  sect  in  Tibet,  and
the  Established  Church  of  Lamaism.

1  Part  of  this  chapter  appeared  in  the  Asiatic  Quarterly  for  January,  1894.

2  JKah-^dams-pa.


ORIGIN  OP  SECTS.


55


GENEALOGICAL TREE OF  LAMAIST SECTS.


Old

op-Unrfformed

School


S«rn!-re  formed
School.


latrived  747  A;0.

^BUDDHISM


56  THE  SECTS  OF  LAMAISM.

Atisa's  chief  Tibetan  disciple  was  I)om-ton,i  or  "  Pom  Bakshi,"  ^
to  whom  he  taught  the  mystic  Mahayana  and  Tantrik  doctrines
which  he  himself  had  learned  in  India  and  Pegu.  Two
other  noted  pupils  were  K'u  and  Nak;  but  Dom-ton  was  the
recognized  head  of  the  Kah-dam-pa,  and  he  built,  in  1058,  the
Ea-Deng  *  monastery  to  the  north-east  of  Lhasa,  which  was  the
first  lamasery  of  the  new  sect,  though  the  monastery  of  T'6-diii,*  in
Pu-rang,  built  in  1025,  is  considered  to  have  become  a  Kah-dam-
pa  institution  by  Atisa's  residence  therein.  Dom-ton's  successor
was  Pgtova.

The  rise  of  the  Kah-dam-pa  (Ge-lug-pa^  sect  was  soon  followed
by  the  semi-reformed  movements  of  Kar-gyu-pa  and  Sakya-pa,
which  were  directly  based  in  great  measure  on  Atisa's  teaching.
The  founders  of  those  two  sects  had  been  his  pupils,  and  their
new  sects  may  be  regarded  as  semi-reformations  adapted  for  those
individuals  who  found  his  high  standard  too  irksome,  and  too  free
from  their  familiar  demonolatry.

The  residue  who  remained  wholly  unreformed  and  weakened  by
the  loss  of  their  best  members,  were  now  called  the  Nwt-ma-pa
or  "  the  old  ones,"  as  they  adhered  to  the  old  practices.  And  now,
to  legitimize  many  of  their  unorthodox  practices  which  had  crept
into  use,  and  to  admit  of  further  laxity,  the  S'in-ma-pa  resorted
to  the  fiction  of  -Ter-ma  or  hidden  revelations.

Just  as  the  Indian  monk  Nagarjuna  in  order  to  secure  an  orthodox
reception  for  his  new  creed  had  alleged  that  the  Mahayana  doctrine
was  entirely  the  composition  of  Sakya  Muni,  who  had  written  it
during  his  hfetime  and  entrusted  the  volumes  to  the  Naga  demi-
gods for  preservation  until  men  were  sufiiciently  enlightened  to
comprehend  so  abstruse  a  system,  so  in  the  same  way  several
Nin-ma  Lamas  now  began  to  discover  new  gospels,  in  caves  and

1  'Brom-ston  rGyal-wahi  'Byun-(;ruas.

2  PMhhi  is  a  general  term  in  Central  Asia  for  those  monks  called  in  Tibetan  Lob-pon,
or  Teacher ;  and  it  is  used  by  Marco  Polo  ( Yule,  i.,  305).  Pallas  says  it  is  Mongolian  for
sTon,  which  means  "Guide,"  and  is  applied  only  to  the  oldest  and  most  learned  priest
of  a  community.  But  the  title  sTon  (-pa)  is  usually  reserved  for  Buddha.  Yule  and
others  believe  it  to  be  probably  a  corruption  of  "  Bhikhshii,"  a  Buddhist  mendicant
monk,  and  Yule  shows  it  to  be  used  as  an  eouivalent  for  Lama  by  Kashiduddin,  and
in  the  Ain-i-Akbari.  Possibly  it  is  also  related  to  the  "  Abassi "  of  Friar  Odoric  (Mabk-
HAM,  p.  xlvi.). Oonf.  also  Koppen,  ii.,  105.

4  mT'o-\diii.


SECTARIAN  REVELATIONS.


57


elsewhere,  which  they  alleged  were  hidden  gospels  of  the  Gruru,
Saint  Padma.  And  these  so-called  "  revealers,"  but  really  the
composers  of  these.  Ter-Tna  treatises,  also  alleged  as  a  reason  for
their  ability  to  discover  these  hidden  gospels,  that  each  of  them
had  been,  in  a  former  birth,  one  or  other  of  the  twenty-five  disciples
of  St,  Padma.

Table  Showing

Descent akd InteRcRelations

or

THE CREEDS OF THE REFORMED LAMAIST SECTS.


Ultimate  luspirer.
Adi-Buddha  Vajradhara.


Proximate  Inspirer.
Maitreya.

Human  Teaches,

Asanga

(about  500  A.D.)

through

series

of

Disciples

to


Human  Teachers.

Tilo.
(about  975  a.d.)


1
(Naro.

Died  1039  a.d.)

2'antra — mnam-

len-bjin-rtabs.


Atisa'

Jantra. — rO-ya-ch'en  spyod.

Meditative  Doctrine. —
Lam-rim.  (=?Kramamarga).


Proximate  Inspirer.
Manjusri.

Human  Teachers.

Nagarjuna

(about  100  A.D.)

through

series

of

Disciples


Vasuputra.


Lama  *Brom-stou.


Mixed  Tantra. — gsum-
Ear-bsdus  na.  '

Meditative  Doctrine. — Maha-
mudra  or  P'yagch'en.


Tantra.— Gambhira,  darsana,  or  the
)  theory  or  doctrine.  T.',  zab-mo  blta.

Meditative  Doctrine. — Lam-'bras.
(=  PPhalamarga).


through
series

of
Disciples

to


Lama  Tson-E'apa

founder  of
GE-LUG-PA  Sect.


Lama  Mar-  pa.


Mila-ras-pa


Lama  Dwag-po  Iha-rje

founder  of

KAR-GYU-PA  Sect.


Lama  K'ug-po-lha-btsas
K'on-dKon-mch'og-rgyal-po.


founder  of
SASKYA-PA  Sect.


These  "  Eevelations  "  treat  mainly  of  Shamanist  Bon-pa  and
other  demoniacal  rites  which  are  permissible  in  Lamaist  practice ;
and  they  prescribed  the  forms  for  such  worship. About  thirty  of


58  THE  SECTS OF  LAMAISM.


these  revelations  have  been  discovered;  but  as  the  number  has
been  oracularly  fixed  at  one  hundred  and  eight,  future  contin-
gencies are  well  provided  for.  These  "  Eevelations,"  relaxing  still
further  the  Lamaist  obligations,  were  eagerly  accepted  by  most
Lamas,  and  they  play  an  important  part  in  the  schisms  which
subsequently  occurred  in  both  old  and  reformed  sects.  .  Indeed,
many  of  the  sub-sects  differ  from  their  parent  sects  merely  in
having  adopted  a  different  Ter-ma  work  as  an  ordinary  code  of
demoniacal  worship.

The  sectarian  distinctions  are  of  a  creedal  character,  entailing
different  ritualistic  and  other  practices,  and  expressed  by  a  dif-
ference in  dress  and  symbols.  The  creedal  differences  may  be
categorically  classed  under  the  heads  of —

1.  The  personality  of  the  primordial  deity  or  Adi-Buddha ;

2.  Special  source  of  divine  inspiration ;

8.  The  saintly  transmitters  of  this  inspiration ;

4.  Meditative  doctrine  or  system  of  mystical  insight ;  i

5.  Special  Tantra-revelation.

6.  Personal Tutelary — a Tantrik demoniacal Buddha of Sivaist

type;

7.  Religious  "  Guardian  ''-demon,  usually  of  Tibetan  type.

In  considering  the  sects  individually,  let  us  look  first  at  the
sect  forming  the  Established  Church — the  Gre-lug-pa — as  it  repre-
sents the  oldest  of  the  sects,  the  Kah-dam-pa,  and  is  the  purest
and  most  powerful  of  all,  having  now  the  temporal  government
of  Tibet  in  its  hands.


The  Gte-lug-pa  Sect,  or  Established  Chukch.
The  G-e-lug-pa  arose  at  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century
A.D.  as  a  regeneration  of  the  Kah-dam-pa  by  Tsoh-K'a-pa  or  L6-
zah-tak-pa''  or  Je-Eim-po-ch'e,  though  he  is  better  known  to  Euro-
peans by  his  territorial  title  of  Tsoh-K'a-pa,  that  is,  "  Native  of
the  Onion  Country,"  the  district  of  his  birth,  in  the  province  of
Amdo,  now  within  the  border  of  China.^

1  ZTa-wa. Skt.,  Darsana.

2  bio-bma  tak-po  (Cf.  Koppbn,  ii.,  18). O.M.,  115  ; J.A.S.B.,  1882,  p.  53-57 ; Pand.,
No.  41 ;  HowOBTH,  op.  cit.

'■'  He  was  born  in  1355-57  at  Kum-bum  (see  its  photograpli  at  page  280).


ESTABLISHED CHURCH  OR GE-LUG-PA.


59


He  was  probably,  as  Hue  notes/  influenced  by  the  Eoman
Catholic  priests,  who  seem  to  have  been  settled  near  the  place  of
his  birth.  Hue's  tradition  runs  that  Tson  K'a-pa  had  inter-
course with  a  stranger  from  the  West  with  a  long  nose  and
piercing  eyes,  who  is
believed  to  have
been  a  Christian
missionary.  He
studied  at  Zhar-
Ch'un,  in  Amdo,  and
thereafter  at  Saskya,
DiEung,  and  Lhasa.
He  wrote  many
books,^  and  most  of
the  extant  sacerdotal
manuals  of  the  Gle-
lug-pa  sect  are  at-
tributed to  him.  He
died  (or,  as  is  popu-
larly believed,  as-
cended to  Heaven  ^)
in  1417,  and  was
canonized  as  an  in-
carnation of  Maii-
jusri  (or,  as  some
say,  Amitabha,  or  Vajrapani).  And  by  the  Ge-lug-pa  he  is  con-
sidered superior  even  to  St.  Padma  and  Atisa,  and  is  given
the  chief  place  in  most  of  their  temples.  His  image  is  placed
above,  and  usually  between,  those  of  the  dual  Grand  Lamas — the
Dalai  and  Pan-ch'en — and,  like  these,  he  is  given  the  title  of
Gyal-wa,  or  The  Jina  or  Victor.  His  image  is  also  worn  as
a  charm  in  amulet  boxes.

Tsoh-K'a-pa  received  the  traditions  of  the  Kah-dam-pa  sect
from  the  Lama  Ch'os  skyabs-&zan-po,  the  seventy-eighth  abbot
in  succession  from  Dom-ton.

Unlike  AtTsa,  Tson-K'a-pa  was an ardent proselytizer, and

1  Travels  in  Tartar!/,  etc.,  Hazlett's  trans.,  ii.,  48.

2  Chief  of  which  was  The  Gi-adual  Way  (Lmn-rim),

-■'  His  ascension  is  celebrated  during  the  Lamaist  festival  of  Lamps.


TsoSf-K'A-PA.
i-Ggyal-ts'ab-rje  (disciple). mK'as-grub-rje  (disciple).


Vajra-bhairava  (tutelary).


A  votary.


60


THE  SECTS  OF  LAMAISM.


spent  most  of  his  strength  in  organization.  He  collected  the
scattered  members  of  the  Kah-dam-pa  from  their  retreats,  and
housed  them  in  monasteries,  together  with  his  new  followers,
under  rigid  discipline,  setting  them  to  keep  the  two  hundred  and
thirty-five  Vinaya  rules,i  and  hence  obtaining  for  them  the  title


Ue-lug-pa  Monk  and  Attendant.


of  Vinaya-kee-peis  or  "  Dul-iva  Lamas."  He  also  made  them
carry  a  begging-bowl,  anardha-chuna,^  pray ei -carpet,^  and  wear
patched  robes  *  of  a  yellow  colour,  after  the  fashion  of  the  Indian
mendicant  monks. And  he  attracted  followers  by  instituting  a


1  Including  retirement  during  Lent  for  meditation,  etc.

2  The  zla-gam  or  crescentic  cope  or  cape.
'  (/ding-wa.

■*  dras-drubs. See  detailed  description  at  p.  200.


ESTABLISHED OHURCH  OR OE-LUG-PA.


61


highly  ritualistic  service,  in  part  apparently  borrowed  from  the
Christian  missionaries,  who  undoubtedly  were  settled  at  that  time
in  Tsoii-K'a,  the  province  of  his  early  boyhood  in  Western  China.
He  gave  the  hat  named  pdn-ssa-sne-rih,  or  the  "Pandit's  long-
tailed  cap  " ;  and  as  it  was  of  a  yellow  colour  like  their  dress,  and
the  old  Lamaist  body  adhered  to  their  red  hat,  the  new  sect  came
to  be  popularly  called  the  S'a-ser  or  "  Yellow-cap,"  in  contradis-
tinction to  the  8'a-mar  or  "  Red-cap  "  and  their  more  aboriginal
Bon-pa  co-religionists  the  S'a-nak  or  "  Black-caps."  ^

This  seems  to  be  the  origin  of  the  sect-titles  depending  on  the
colour ,  of  the  cap.  The  Kah-dam-pa  are  said  to  have  worn  red
caps,  and  certainly  the  extant  pictures  of  Atlsa  and  other  Kah-
dam-pa  Lamas  give  them  red  caps.

Tson-K'a-pa  named  his  own  monastery,  which  he  built  in  1409
about  thirty  miles  east  of  Lhasa,  Gah-dan^  or  Paradise,  and  it  is
said  that  his  followers  at  first
went  by  the  name  of  Gah-lng-
pa  or  "  Followers  of  the  Gah-
dan  fashion";  but  as  this  name
was  ill-sounding  it  was  changed
to  the  more  euphonic  (re-lug-
pa  or  "  Followers  of  the  Virtu-
ous order."

The  special  sectarian  dis-
tinctions of  the  Ge-lug-pa,
which  represent  the  earlier
Kah-dam-pa  sect,  are  that  this
sect  has  the  mythical  Vajra-
dhara.  as  its  Adi-Buddha ;  and
derives  its  divine  inspiration
from  Maitreya — "the  coming
Buddha,"  through  the  Indian  Saints  ranging  from  Asafiga  down
to  AtTsa,  and  through  the  Tibetan  Saints  from  his  disciple
Brom-ton  to  Tson-K'a-pa  (Je-Eim-po-ch'e).  The  Ge-lug-pa  mys-
tical insight  (Ta-wa)  is  termed  the  Lam-rim  or  "the  Graded
Path,"  and  their  Tantra  is  the  "  Vast  Doer  "  (rgya-ch'en  spyod).


Vajea-dhaha.


1  See  page  196  for  pictures  of  the  caps.

2  Skt.,  "Tushita"  or  the  Happy  place.


62


THE  SECTS OF  LAMAISM.


Its  tutelary  demoniacal  Buddha  is  Vajra-bhairava  (Dorje-'jig-je),
supported  by  Sam  vara  (Dem-ch'og)  and  Gubya-kala  (Sang-dii).
And  its  Guardian  demons  are  "  The  Six-armed  Gon-po  or  Lord  "


The  Tutelary  Tam-bin's  Chaem.

and the Great horse-necked  Hayagriva  (Tam-din),  or  the  Eed'
Tiger-Devil.

But,  through  Atisa,  the  Ge-lug-pa  sect,  as  is  graphically  shown
in  the  foregoing  table,  claims  also  to  have  received  the  essence  of
Maiijusri's  doctrine,  which  is  the  leading  light  of  the  Sakya-pa
sect.  For  Atisa  is  held  to  be  an  incarnation  of  MaEijusri,  the
Bodhisat  of  Wisdom  :  which  is  merely  a  way  of  stating  that
he  was  the  greatest  embodiment  of  Buddhist  Wisdom  that,
ever  visited  Tibet.  An  din  the  person  of  Atisa  were  also  united
the  essentials  of  the  Kar-gyu-pa  sect  by  his  pupilage  to  the  Indiaa
sage  Naro.


KAR-GTU-PA  SECT.  63

Thus  the  Gre-lug-pa  sect  claims  that  through  AtTsa  it  has
received  the  special  inspiration  of  Maitreya,  and  in  addition  all
that  is  best  in  the  special  systems  professed  by  the  other  two  re-
formed sects.

The  purer  morality  practised  by  the  Gre-lug  monks  gained
them  general  respect.  So,  despite  their  internecine  feuds  with
the  Sakya-pa  and  other  rival  sects,  its  Church  grew  in  size  and
influence,  and  became  a  powerful  hierarchy  with  the  succession
of  its  chief  abbot  based  upon  the  theory  of  Ee-incarnation,
namely,  that  the  spirit  of  the  dead  chief  after  his  death  is  re-born
in  a  child,  who  was  forthwith  found  by  oracular  presage,  and  in-
stalled in  the  vacant  chair.

Tson-K'a-pa's  nephew,  Ge-dun-dub,  was  installed  in  1439  as
the  first  G-rand  Lama  of  the  Gre-lug-pa  Church,  and  he  built
the  monastery  of  Tashi-lhunpo,  in  1445,  while  his  fellow  workers
Je-She-rabSen-age  Gryal-Ts'ab-je  and  Khas-grub-je  had  built  re-
spectively De-p'ung  (in  1414),  and  Se-ra  (in  1417),  the  other
great  monasteries  of  this  sect.

Under  the  fourth  of  these  Grand  Lamas,  the  Ge-lug-pa  Church
was  vigorously  struggling  for  supreme  power  and  was  patronized  by
the  Mongol  minister  of  the  Chinese  Government  named  Chong-
Kar,  who,  coming  to  Lhasa  as  an  ambassador,  usurped  most  of  the
power  of  the  then  king  of  Tibet,  and  forced  several  of  the  Kar-gyu
and  Ifin-ma  monasteries  to  join  the  Ge-lug-pa  sect,  and  to  wear
the  yellow  caps.

And,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  previous  chapter,  the  Ge-lug-pa
sect  in  1640,  under  its  fifth  Grand  Lama,  leapt  into  temporal
power  as  the  dominant  sect  in  Tibet,  and  has  ever  since  remained
the  Established  Church  of  the  country.

Since  then,  however,  the  Ge-lug-pa  sect  has  gradually  retro-
graded in  its  tenets  and  practice,  till  now,  with  the  exception  of
its  distinctive  dress  and  symbols,  celibacy  and  greater  abstinence,
and  a  slightly  more  restricted  devil-worship,  it  differs  little  from
the  other  Lamaist  sects,  which  in  the  pride  of  political  power  it
so  openly  despises.

The  Kar-gyu-pa  Sect,
The  Kar-gyu-pa,  the  next  great  reformed  sect  after  the  Ge-lug-
pa,  was  founded  in  the  latter  half  of  the  eleventh  century  a.d.  by


64


THE  SECTS  OF  LAMAI8M.


Lama  Marpa^  of  Lha-brag,  who  had  visited  India  and  obtained
special  instructions  from  the  Indian  Pandit  Atisa  and  his
teacher  P'am-thin  and  Naro,  the  janitor  of  Nalanda  University,
who  never  visited  Tibet. But  as  Marpa  and  his  successor  Mila-

ra-pa,  while  nominally  having
a  monastery  at  Gro-bu-lun  and
sGrrub  -  p'ug  -  matogs,  respect-
ively, led  hermit  lives,  the
real  organizer  of  this  sect  was
the  Kah-dam-pa  Lama,  Dvag-
po  Iha-rje,  2  who  founded  the
monastery  of  Ts'ur-lha  about
1150.

The  name  Kar-gyu-pa'
means  a  "  follower  of  the  suc-
cessive orders,"  expressive  of
the  fact  that  the  sect  believes
that  the  rulings  of  its  later
sages  are  inspired.  Naro's
teacher,  the  monk  Tilo  or  Telo
(about  950  A.d.)  *  is  held  to  have  been  directly  inspired  by  the
metaphysical  Buddha  Vajra-dhara.

Its  distinctive  features  are  its  hermit  practices,  meditation  in
caves  and  other  retired  places,  and  the  following  speciali-
ties : —

Its  inspiration  was  attributed  by  their  saint  Tilo  directly  to
the  Adi-Buddha  Vajra-dhara.  Its  mode  of  mystic  insight  [Ta-wa)
is  named  Mahdmud/ra  ^  or  "  the  Great  Attitude,"  also  called
U-mahi  Lam  or  "  the  Middle  Path,"  and  its  Tantra  is  "  Sum-


K^^^^-


<^


Marpa.


•1  Marpa,  according  to  Sum-pa  K'an-po's  Ch'os-'byun,  was  born  at  Gro-bu-Iun
po  gsax,  as  the  second  son  of  dbAn-p'yug-'od,  his  mother  being  sKal-ldan  sKyd
_(/iiis.  His  son  when  riding  to  Talung  monastery  to  witness  a  Lama's  dance  was
tlirown  down  the  cliii  and  fearfully  mangled  owing  to  his  horse  in  a  rocky  defile
taking  fright  at  the  flight  of  some  rock  pigeons.  This  scene  is  pictured  often  in
Ear-gyu-pa  temples. (Cf .  also  Pand.,  No.  32. )

5  Also  called  iJe  sGam-po-Va  with  title  mii«»;-»i.e(Z.  He  was  a  native  of  E.  Tibet
beyond  Kongbu;  died  1152. (Cf.  Pand.,  No.  33.)

s  hXah-hTffi/iid-pa.

*  Cf.  TAEA.i  226,  Pand.,  No.  17.

'  P'yag-rgya-ch'en  usually  contracted  to  "  ch'ag-ch'cn."


St.  Mila-ra-pa,


KAR-OYU  SECT.  G5


kar-6suds-sum.i  Its  tutelary  demon  is  Samvara.  Its  guardian
deity  "  The  Lord  of  the  Black  Cloak. ^  Its  hat  is  "  the  medita-
tion hat  with  the  cross-knees,"  bearing  on  its  front  this  emblem  as
a  badge  like  a  St.  Andrew's  cross  (X),  and  a  conical  centre-piece
representing  a  cave  elsewhere.  And  with  these  technicalities  was
associated  a  stricter  observance  of  the  monastic  rules  and  discipline.

The  most  popular  Kar-gyu-pa  saint,  and  one  who,  while  found-
ing no  monastery,  did  more  even  than  Marpa,  to  establish  the  sect,
was  Marpa's  pupil,  Mila-ra-pa.^  He  never  visited  India,  but  led  a
wandering  ascetic  life  among  the  mountains  of  Tibet,  and  his
100,000  songs*  containing  much  Tibetan  colouring  are  popular
amongst  all  the  sects  of  Lamas,  and  his  name  is  now  a  household
word  throughout  Tibet.

He  is  pictured,  as  seen  in  the  annexed  illustration,  as  a  thinly-
clad  ascetic  almost  on  the  Indian  model,  enduring  great  hardships
of  climate  and  exposure,  and  a  great  magician  conquering  many
demons.  His  picture  is  surrounded  by  scenes  illustrative  of  the
leading  events  of  his  life.

His  biography  is  sketched  here  in  a  footnote,^  as  he  is  a  person
of  importance  in  Lamaism. It is  contained  in  a  bulky  volume


1  Marpa's  scripture  was  based  upon  the  "  mnam-len  byin  rlabs,"  which  lie  diluted  and
mixed  with  more  mystic  Tantras ;  hence  his  Tantra  is  called  "  the  mixed  "  (zun-'jug).
The  so-called  esoteric  is  the  "  mdo  lugs-stong-pa-nyid,"  and  the  esoteric  "  sh«^s  lugs  ide
stoh  dbyer  med,  which  are  referred  to  in  the  chapter  on  Doctrine.  *or  some  technical
details  regarding  several  sects,  see  transl.  by  Saeat,  J.A.S.B.,^Si^i ;  also  Eamsay's  Did.

2  »iGon-po  bar-nag.

3  Mi-la-ras-pa  or  "the  Cotton-clad."  (Cf.  Csoma,  Gr.,  181 ;  Tara.,  328  ;  Pane.,  No.  31.)
*  glu-'bum.

=  He  was  born  at  Kya-nan-tsa  in  the  year  1038  a.d.,  on  the  28th  day  of  the  month,
under  the  planet  phur-bu,  and  named  Thos-pa-dgal.  His  father,  Mila-shes-rab-rgyal-
mts'an,  was  a  wealthy  merchant  of  the  K'uii-po  clan  of  Uru-chan-ch'og,  and  his
mother  was  Gyan-tsa  dkar-rgyan.  The  father  died  when  Thos-pa-dgal  (the  young
Mila)  was  only  seven  years  old,  leaving  his  property  in  his  brother's  charge  till  his
son  reached  his  majority  at  fifteen.  This  uncle,  however,  appropriated  everything  to
himself,  and  left  young  Mila  and  his  mother  destitute,  and  even  persecuted  them.
Young  Mila's  mother,  therefore,  sent  her  son  to  become  a  Lama  in  order  to  learn  the
m<'«-art  of  destroying  people  by  sorcery.  So  he  started  off  for  Lhun-grub  grong
K'an  in  Gun-t'on-stod,  and  there  joined  a  party  of  monks  on  their  way  from
Upper  Srari  to  U  (or  Central  Tibet).  Passing  Yag-sde,  and  crossing  Mar-tsan,  he
reached  T'on-lun-raga  in  U,  and  found  at  Yar-lun  skyo-mo-Kruh  a  learned
"mt'u"  teacher  named  Yun  sTon-p'ro-rgyal,  who  taught  him  sorcery  for  several
years,  until  he  obtained  the  power  to  destroy  his  cruel  uncle's  house  and  gear.  After
being  instructed  in  the  mode  of  compelling  hailstorms,  he  went  to  Magon  (or  gTsan-
ron-gi-nar),  and  then  to  Ch'os-la  sgang,  where  he  became  a  pupil  of  Lama  Marpa,  who
had  visited  India. Here  he  was  set  many  tiresome  tasks  by  Marpa,  such  as  buildmg


66


THE  SECTS  OF  LlMAISM.


ascribed  to  his  disciple  Ras-ch'un,  and  dated  from  the  hermitage
of  the  latter.


AFFILtATION  OF  SUB-SECTS  OP  THE KAB-GYCT-PA.


FOUNDER:
MAEPA,
u  Tibetan  and  Pupil  of  Naropa.
b.  1010. ' ■


.-RA-PA.


MILA-JRA-]
b.  103S  d.  1122


Ras-cli'uu  Doiie  Grags-pa.
b,  1083.  d.


ITam  med  Dvag--po-Lharje
b.  I d.  1152.


Nin  ma  rev  ,

Lns-pWod-

lin  found

in  Konybu.


Nin -ma  rev.,
Padina-Lin,


Rincli'en-p'un-

is'og  or  Bkris-

p'lia-ts'oRS

•  prev.  to  1166.

DI-KUNG-PA

Sub-sect.


Nagr-cO]  an-ch'o5
g-yalpo  founded
sTag-glung-  Mon.
' Iq  1179.
TA-LUNG-PA
Sub-sect.


' '  Karma  Baksbi  "

(Ran-'byun-
Dorje  or  Dus-gsum

HiKhyen-pa)
b.ll09 I d.  1192
KAR-.\rA-PA
Sub- sect.


i^rul-sku-

rfbaar-Ssam-

vangpo,  founded

Ralung  monastery

prev.  to  1150

Upper  DUK-PA

Sub-sect.

Z'abs-drun  Nag-

dban-rnam-rgj^al ,

iMiddle  aad

Soutliern

(BhotaneseJ

DUU-PA

Sub-sect.


Niti-marev.,
Padma-lin.


Nin-marev.,

Sangt/'ds-

lin.


forts  and  pulling  them  to  pieces  again,  and  the  pictures  of  these  tasks  are  favourite
subjects  for  frescoes  in  Kar-gyu-pa  monasteries.  As  the  tasks  seemed  endless  and
Marpa  still  withheld  instruction,  the  young  Mila  fled,  taking  with  him  the  Indian
saint  Naropa's  "six-bone  ornaments  and  ^^oc^ma-j-a^a-rosary,  which  had  been  in
Marpa's  keeping  as  relics  ;  and  which  young  Mila  obtained  possession  of  by  the  con-
nivance of  Marpa's  wife,  bDag-med-ma.  These  relics  he  offered  to  Lama  rl^fog-pa,  who
in  return  gave  him  instruction  and  the  meditation  of  Gron-ldan  p'ug-pa..  Then
Marpa  recalled  him  and  initiated  him  into  the  mysteries  of  the  magic  circles,  and
gave  him  the  esoteric  name  of  dPal-s'es-pa  and  the  common  name  of  Mila-rdo-rje
rgyal  mts'an,  and  set  him  severe  ascetic  exercises.  Meanwhile  Marpa  went  to  India,
and  met  the  monk  Naropa  at  the  monastery  of  Bula-hari,  and  was  taught  'p'o-wa-
ston-'jug,  and  returned  to  Tibet  by  Ch'os-la  gan.  When  Mila  returned  home,  he
found  his  mother  dead,  so  he  dwelt  in  a  cave  near  by  named  Kan-mdsod  phug.
Then  his  uncle  and  aunt  assaulted  him  on  his  begging  excursions,  but  though  possess-
ing the  power  of  destroying  them,  he  preferred  to  flee  from  them  to  Brag  Kar-rta-so,
near  Kyi-roh,  where  he  remained  in  meditation  for  eighteen  years,  living  solely  on


THE  KAR-MA-PA.  67


Mila-ra-pa's  chief  pupils  were  Dvag-po-lha-rje/  who  continued
the  succession  of  the  orthodox  Kar-gyu-pa  doctrinej  and  Ra-
ch'uh  Dor-je  Tag-pa,^  who  did  not  interest  himself  in  organization.

The  hermit-feature  of  this  sect  rendered  it  so  unattractive,
that  several  sub-sects  soon  arose  which  dispensed  with  the  neces-
sity for  hermitage.  Thus  appeared  the  sub-sects  Kar-ma-pa,
Di-kung-pa,  Ta-lung-pa,  and  Duk-pa  (the  form  dominant  in  Bho-
tan),  which  differ  from  each  other  merely  in  having  each  adopted  a
different  revelation  from  the  STih-ma  sect  as  a  code  of  demoniacal
worship,  and  so  relaxing  the  purity  of  the  former  Kar-gyu-pa
practice.

These  differences  are  shown  in  the  foregoing  table.

And  the  image  of  the  particular  founder  of  the  sub-sect  shares
with  that  of  their  Adi-Buddha,  Vajradhara,  the  chief  place  in  their
temples.

The  Kar-m,a/-'pa  sub-sect  was  founded  in  the  middle  of  the  twelfth
century  by  Kar-ma-pa  Ean-ch'uh  Dor-je,  also  named  Dii-sum
K'yen-po,^  a  pupil  of  the  aforesaid  Dvag-po-lha-rje.  His  monas-
tery of  S'u-Ts'ur  Lha-luh,*  built  in  1154,  at  Ts'ur-p'u,  about
one  day's  journey  to  the  north  of  Lhasa  beyond  Sera,  is  still  the
headquarters  of  this,  the  most  powerful  of  all  the  Kar-gyu-pa  sub-
sects. °  This  Kar-ma  Lama  does  not  appear  to  be  identical  with
the  famous  "Kar-ma-Bakshi,"^  whose  image  is  the  central  one  in
all  Kar-ma-pa  temples,  for  his  birth  is  placed  by  Csoma  laterj  The
ninth  head  Kar-ma-pa  Lama  was  named  dGru-pa-bar  Phyug  Dor-je,
and  was  alive  in  1725  A.D.,  when  the  then  raja  of  Sikhim  visited
him  in  Tibet  and  was  prevailed  on  by  him  to  establish  some
Kar-ma-pa  monasteries  in  Sikhim.

The  so-called  monastery,  though  it  is  only  a  temple,  in  the
"  Bhotiya-basti '"  at  Darjiling  belongs  to  this  sect.

vegetables,  and  performing  many  miracles.  Tiien  he  went  to  Dig-ri  plain,  where  he
met  Pari,  the  translator,  and  his  pupils.  Thereafter  he  went  to  'Brin-yul,  and  after-
wards to  a  cave  in  Lab-ci-6u-gar  (?  Mount  Everest),  where  he  died.  His  favourite
god  was  Kuvera,  the  King  of  the  Yaksha  genii.

1  Also  called  rJe-Tsun  sGam-po. See  Pandee,  No.  33.

2  Ras-ch'un  rdo-rje  grags-pa,  born  1083,  founded  Ras-ch'un  p'ug  monastery.

3  Ran-'byun-rdo-rje  dus-gsura-mk'yen-po,  born  1109,  ordained  1124,  died  1192.
*  Ts'u-mts'ur.

^  It  was  zealously  patronized  by  De-si  Zan-po,  a  King  of  Western  Tibet,  with  his
capital  at  Shigatse.

6  Cf.  Csoma,  Gr.,  136  ;  J.A.S.B.,  51,  p.  63  ;  Pand.  No.  39.
'  In  Oram.,  185,  Kar-ma-Bakshi's  birth  is  given  as  1177  a.d.

F 2


68  THE  SECTS OF  LAMAISM.

It  differs  from  its  parent  sect  in  having  retrograded  towards  the
Nih-ma-pa  practices  by  adopting  the  Sin-ma  revelation  found
in  Kong-bo  and  entitled  Le-to  Lin-pa,^  or  "  the  locally  revealed
merit,"  and  some  also  have  'Jah-ts'on-pa.  Few  of  the  Kar-ma
Lamas  are  celibate,  and  Marpa,  the  founder  of  the  parent  sect
(Kar-gyu-pa),  was  married.

The  next  great  sub-sect  is  the  Dug-pa,^  which  also  arose  with  a
pupil  of  Mila-ra-pa's  disciple,  Dvag-po.  Its  founder  was  Pag-Sam-
Wang-pD,8  and  it  originated  in  the  gfNam  province  of  Tibet  about
the  middle  of  the  twelfth  century,  at  the  Ealung  monastery,  near
Gryan-tse,  in  Tod  or  Upper  Tibet.  To  emphasize  the  change  the
monastery  was  called  I)i(.gf-Ealung,  and  a  legend  of  the  thunder-
dragon  or  Dug  is  related  in  connection  therewith,  and  gives  the
sectarian  title.  It  adopted  the  same  revelation  as  the  Di-kung-
pa,  but  there  seems  some  other  distinctive  tenet  which  I  have  not
yet  elicited.

Much  confusion  has  been  caused  in  European  books  by  mis-
using the  name  -Dug-pa,  employing  it  as  a  synonym  for  the
"  red-hat "  sect,  which  properly  is  the  ]?<rin-ma.

The  Middle  Dug-pa  and  the  Lower  Dug-pa  arose  soon  after-
wards. The  Middle  Dug-pa  adopted  the  revelation  of  San-gyas-
lin-pa.  This  is  the  form  of  Kar-gyu-pa  which  now  prevails  in
Bhotan  under  the  name  of  Lhd  Dug-pa  or  "  Southern  "  Dug-pa.
Its  chief  Lama  is  Z'ab-drun  Nag-ban-nam-gyal,"  a  pupil  of  Padma
c?kar-po  "  or  "The  omniscient  white  lotus,"  who  leaving  Southern
Tibet  in  the  seventeenth  century  a.d.,^  settled  at  "  IChags-ri  rta
mgo  "  in  Bhotan,  and  soon  displaced  the  Karthok-pa  and  other
forms  of  STin-ma  Lamaism  then  existing  in  that  country,  and
which  are  reputed  to  have  been  founded  there  directly  by  St.
Padma  himself,  who  entered  Bhotan  via  gZ'as-ma  gan  and  left
it  by  mDun  tsan,  and  at  cZGron-ts'al  p'u  are  still  shown  his  foot-
prints on  a  rock,  and  at  the  sPa-te  tak-ts'an  or  tiger's  den.''

1  Las-'prod-lin-pa.

2  'brug-pa.  It  is  Sansbritised  in  the  Chronicle  of  Sag-wan  Nam-gyal  as  Meglm
Smra  or  "  Cloud-voice,"  thunder  being  regarded  as  the  dragon's  roar.

3  riPag-Jsam  ciban-po,  who  seems  to  be  identical  with,  or  patronized  by,  'Gro-
mgon  )-tsan-pa  rgyal  ra,!,  "  The  Victory-clad  Patron  of  Animals  "  (?  born  1160  a.d.).

*  His  title  is  idud-'jom-rdorje,  or  "the  Vajra  which  Softened  the  Devils."
=  OsoMA,  J.A.S.B.,  1832, 126.

8  According  to  the  Than-yig  sde-Zna,  some  historic  notes  on  the  history  of  Lamaism
in  Bhotan  are  to  be  found  in  the  book  Lho-Ch'os  'byun.


THE  DUG-PA AND SA-KYA-PA.  69

In  Bhotan  tbe  Dug-pa  sect  possesses  the  temporal  as  well  as  the
spiritual  power,  and  has  suppressed  all  other  sects  there.  Some
details  of  its  chief  monasteries  and  hierarchs  are  given  in  the
special  chapters  on  these  two  subjects.

The  Di-knng-pa,^  another  large  sub-sect,  also  originated  with  a
.  pupil  of  Dvag-po.  It  takes  its  title  from  the  DT-kung  monastery
founded  by  Einch'en-p'iin-ts'og  and  Je-spyan-sna-wa,  in  1177  a.d.^
Its  revelation  is  JTin-ma  the  Padma-lih-pa.

The  Ta-lunrf-pa^  issued  from  the  Dl-kang-pa  and  takes  its  title
from  the  Ta-lung  monastery  founded  by  Nag-dbah-ch'os-gyalpo
in  1178.  They  differ  frorii  their  parent  Di-kung-pa  in  admitting
also  the  revelation  work  adopted  by  the  Kar-ma-pa,  namely,  the
Le-to  liii-pa.

The  Sa-kya-pa  Sect.

The  last  great  reformed  sect  is  the  Sa-skya-pa  *  or  Sakya,  taking
its  name  from  the  yellow  colour  of  the  scanty  soil  at  the  site  of
its  first  monastery  in  western  Tibet,  founded  in  1071  a.d.  It
grew  into  a  niost  powerful  hierarchy,  and  attained  for  a  time  the
temporal  sovereignty  over  the  greater  part  of  Tibet  before  it  was
eclipsed  by  its  Ge-lug-pa  rival.

Its  founder  was  K'on-dkon-mch'og  rgyal-po,^  a  pupil  of  K'ug-
pa  Iha-btsas,  who  claimed  inspiration  from  the  celestial  Bodhisat
of  wisdom,  MaiijusrT,  through  the  Indian  sages  ranging  from
Nagarjuna^  to  Vasuputra,^  and  he  mixed  together  the  "  old  "  and
the  "new"  Tantras,  calling  his  doctrine  the  "new-old  occult
mystery"^  of  "The  deep  sight."  ^  Its  mystic  insight  is  called
"  The  fruitful  path."  i"  Its  special  gospels  are  Nagarjuna's  Ava-
tansaka,  Vasubandhu's  Paramartha. Its  tutelary  demon  is  Vajra


1  'Bri-gun.

-  CsoMA,  Gram.,  185.

=  sTag-lun.

*  Sa-skya-pa,  from  fiSa-ski/<t  =  "tawny  earth."

5  Born  1033. Details  of  the  sect  are  found  in  its  records,  The  Sa-skya  Yiff-ts'an.

0  These  are  given  as  Candra-Kirti,  Eig-pahi-K'u-p'yug,  Buddha  "  tigohs  "-pala.

'  Yab-sras.— Vasuputra  seems  a  title  of  the  great  Indian  monk  Vasubandhu,  the
brother  of  Asahga,  and  the  special  transmitter  of  Nagarjuna's  purer  Sautrantika
doctrines,  inspired  by  Manjusri.

'  gsar-iiih.

'  zab-mo-blta — Gambhira  darsaiia.

^  »jgon-po  gur.


70


THE  SECTS OF  LAMAISM.


phurpa,  for  whose  and  other  demonist  worship  it  borrowed  the
Nin-ma  books,  Dorje  phurpach'i  ch'oga ;  and  from  the  newer
school  were  taken  Dem-ch'ok,  Dorje-kando,  Den-z'i,  Maha-maha-

ma-yab,  Sangya  t'opa,  and  Dorje-
dutsi.  Its  demoniacal  Guardians
are  "  the  Guardian  of  the  Tent,"i
and  "  The  Face-Lord."  ^  Its  Hat
is  sa-z'u.  But  now  except  in  a
few  externals  it  is  practically  un-
distinguishable  from  the  Nin-
ma-pa.

The  Sa-kya-pa  has  two  re-
formed sub-sects,  namely,  the
Nor-pa  and  the  Jonan-pa.
These  differ  from  one  another
only  in  founders.

The  J6-nan-po  issued  from  the
Sa-kya-pa  in  the  person  of  Je-
Kun-gah-dol-ch'og  ^  in  the  be-
ginning of  the  fourteenth  century.  To  this  sect  belonged  the
illustrious  historiographer,  Lama-Taranatha.

Taranatha,  son  of  Nam-gyal  P'iin-ts'ogs,  was  born  in  Tsang  on
the  8th  day  of  the  pig-male-tree  year,  corresponding  to  1673
A.D.,  and  was  called  Kun-dgah  s5lyin-po,*  or  "  The  essence  of
happiness."  He  studied  in  the  Jqnang  monastery,  north  of  Sakya
under  the  religious  name  of  Taranatha,  and  in  his  forty-first  year
built  himself  a  monastery  in  the  neighbourhood,  which  he  named
rTag-6rten,  and  filled  it  with  many  images,  books,  and  caityas.
He  latterly  proceeded  to  Mongolia  at  the  invitation  of  the  people
of  that  country,  and  founded  there  several  monasteries  under  the
auspices  of  the  Chinese  Emperor.  He  died  in  Mongolia,  and  was
canonized  under  the  title  of  "The  Eeverend  Holiness," Je-feum  dam-
pa.^  And  his  "  re-incarnate "  successors  are  now  installed  with
great magnificence  as  Grand  Lamas  at  Urgya in  the  Kalkha


The  Loed  (-fiend)  Gub.


1  mGon-po  gur.

2  mGon-zhal.

3  Who  seems  also  to  be  called  Dol-bu  sher-rgyan.  Born  1290,  and  died  1353.
1  SB,,  Anandagarbha.  Another  account  gives  the  name  as  Sri-gcod  j-dorjo.
^  j-Je-Jtsun  dam-pa.


THE  SA-KYA  AND TARANATHA.


71


province  of  Mongolia,  to  the  east  of  Lob-Nor. Shortly  after  his
death,  both  Urgya  and  his  old  monastery — which  was  renamed —


Zi*M:"

/

: '."^

i

i&L^

f

'

J

i/^  lW#'^-':/-' '■"

ml^'

fl

^■^  1^

#

>
'*

^I^Kl

tJ-m^y '5  ^1(^4:':'.^^^

"  '^'''^^Wff^^^'"'

■^

A  Sa-skya  Lama.

"  P'un-ts'o-lin,"  were  forcibly  converted  into  Ge-lug-pa  institu-
tions, by  the  aggressive  Dalai  Lama  on  his  becoming  priest-king.
The  Nor-pa,  founded  by  Kun-gah  Zan-po  in  1427,  issued  from
the  Sa-kya-pa  at  the  time  of  Tson-K'apa.  Its  founder  discarded
the  JJin-ma  element  in  its  Tantrik  system,  retaining  only  the
"  new." It  has  many  monasteries  in  eastern  Tibet.


72


THE  SECTS OF  LAMAISM.


The  Nin-ma-pa  Sects.

The  wholly  unreformed  section  of  the  Lamas  was,  as  we  have

seen,  named  SsTih-ma-pa,  or  "the  old  school. It  is  more  freely

than  any  other  tinged  with the native Bon or pre-Buddhist

practices  ;  and  celibacy  and  abstinence  are  rarely  practised. This


I

!.■-

/•i' ;-:i,^i>%»tiS!*«-j««w.;i'«.Wl!«iE^

%  „,
^

^or

■P^

^^A

^^&

mr' ''

lOliftnlllilhi

j^^mgjk

UmL i

IB

^--'t^^p

HP

^' wBB

Hf  ^

BflK

^^BbI^^^H^^^b^^

m^^-J^.Y  2

jHK

'^^^H

^Jpl

^^^^i

'Vh^^HI

1

^BB^^Hbh^^'^:^  '  "^^^^^^^^Hl

NiN-MA  Lamas.


is  the  real  "  red-hat "  sect  of  Lamas,  and  not  the  Dug-pa  as  is
stated  in  European  books.

It  regards  the  metaphysical  Buddha  Samanta-bhadra  as  its
primordial  deity  or  Adi-Buddha.  Its  mystic  insight  is  Maha-
utpanna  (Dsog-ch'en)  or  "  the  great  ultimate  perfection."  Its
tutelaries  are  "  The  fearful  Vajra"  (Vajra-"phurba")  and  Dub-pa-
kah-gye.i Its  guardian  demon  is  "  The  Lord  Gur."  ^ It  worships


1  sGrub-pa  6kah-brgyad— the  tutelary  of  the  Guru  St.  Padma,

"  Gur-gon,  a  two-handed  demon,  the  highest  of  the  five  "  Pal-gon."


THE  mH-MA.  73


the  Gruru  Padma-sambhava,  the  founder  of  Lamaism,  in  a  variety
of  forms,  both  divine  and  demoniacal,  expressive  of  his  different
moods  at  different  times,  and  also  his  favourite  Kashmiri  teacher,
Sri  Sinba,  and  the  Indian  teacher  of  the  latter,  Grah-rab  Dorje,
who  derived  his  inspiration  from  the  celestial  Buddha,  Vajra-
satwa,  who  in  turn  was  inspired  by  the  primordial  deity,  Saman-
ta-bhadra  Buddha.

Its  peculiar  red  cap  is  named  after  the  Gruru  "  Urgyen-pan-
z'u,"  and  with  these  characteristics  it  exhibits  a  greater  laxity
in  living  than  any  other  sect  of  Lamas.

But  even  the  Rih-ma-pa,  too,  has  its  sub-sects,  based  on  the
adoption  of  different  revelations.  Its  chief  sub-sects  are  the
Dorje-tak-pa,  Mindol-lin,  Kar-tok-pa,  and  Na-dak-pa,  named  after
their  respective  founders  or  parent  monastery.  But  their  differ-
ences are  very  trifling.

The  Dorje-tak-pa  ^  is  named  after  the  greatest  of  the  existent
Rih-ma  monasteries,  to  wit,  Dorje-tak,  near  Sam-yas.  It  follows
the  revelation  "  found "  by  rGrod-ldem  in  Zan-Zah  Lha  brag,
and  its  chief  branches  seem  to  be  at  Hug-pa-glin,  Tsa-ngi  Lha-
ri  zim-p'ug,  and  T'eg-mc'og  glih.

An  offshoot  of  it  is  the  Nah-dag-pa,^  taking  its  name  from  its
founder,  Nah-dag,  "  the  owner  of  dominion,"  and  of  royal  lineage,
and  represented  in  several  Sikhim  monasteries.

Scarcely  inferior  in  extent  and  repute  to  the  Dorje-tak-pa  is
the  Min-dol-lih-pa,^  also  named  after  its  chief  monastery,  Min-
dol-lin. Its  revelation  was  found  by  bDag-ling-pa,  and  its  chief
branches  are  at  sLe-lun,  P'uh-po  ri-wo-ch'e.  And  in  Sikhim
it  is  represented  by  the  large  Pemiongchi  monastery,  which  until
a  few  years  ago  was  in  the  habit  of  sending  to  Min-dol-lih  batches
of  its  young  monks  for  instruction  in  the  higher  discipline  and
ritual.

The  Kar-tok-pa,"  named  after  Lama  Kar-tok,  "  The  under-
stander  of  the  precepts,''  adopt  the  revelation  of  kLoii-ch'en
Eab-^'byun  found  in  the  lake  of  sGrra-mdah.  Its  chief  monas-
teries are  at  Byah-ch'ub-glih  and  sDe-dge  ("  Der-ge ")  in  the
extreme  east  of  Tibet,  and  the  seat  of  a  large  printing  establish-
ment and  township  famous  for  its  inlaid  metal  work.

1  rdo-rje-brag-pa.  '  mNah-idag-pa. ^  sMin-^rol  Glin. *  JiKah-rtog-pa.


74  THE  SECTS OF  LlMAISM.

Lho-brag-lha-lun-pa  follow  the  revelation  of  Padma-lin-pa  like
the  Di-kung-pa  sub-sect  of  the  Kar-gyu-pa.

The  Lha-tsun-pa,  named  after  the  founder  of  Sikhim  Lamaism,
adopt  the  revelation  of  'Jah-ts'on-pa,  found  in  Kong-bu,  named
the  La-t'6-lin-pa.

The  Z'i-jed-pa.

The  Z'i-jed-pa  ("  the  mild  doer"),  or  passionless  Ascetic,  is  a
homeless  mendicant  of  the  Yogi  class,  and  belonging  to  no  sect
in  particular,  though  having  most  affinity  with  the  Kar-gyu-pa.
They  are  now  almost  extinct,  and  all  are  regarded  as  saints,  who  in
their  next  birth  must  certainly  attain  Nirvana.  They  carry  thigh-
bone trumpets,  skull-drums,  etc,  and  in  the  preparation  of  these
instruments  from  human  bones,  they  are  required  to  eat  a  morsel
of  the  bone  or  a  shred  of  the  corpse's  skin.  The  founder  of  the  order
was  P'a-dam-pa  Sans-rgyas  (  ?  Jnanaka-  or  Pita-Buddha),  born  at
Jara  Sin(d)ha,  in  India,  his  father  being  named  brTson-'grus^go-
ch'a  and  his  mother  Easha.  He  visited  Tibet,  via  Kashmir  and
Na-ri,  about  the  beginning  of  the  twelfth  century  A.D.,  his  final
visit  being  in  1112  A.D.  As  this  order  is  highly  esteemed  in
Tibet,  I  subjoin  some  details  of  its  chief  saints.^

Summary  of  Sects.

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  Lamaist  sects  seem  to  have  arisen
in  Tibet,  for  the  first  time,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  eleventh
century  a.d.,  in  what  may  be  called  the  Lamaist  Eeformation,
about  three  centuries  after  the  foundation  of  Lamaism  itself.

They  arose  in  revolt  against  the  depraved  Lamaism  then  pre-
valent, which  was  little  else  than  a  priestly  mixture  of  demonolatry


1  In  Tibet  P'a-dam-pa  taught  his  doctrines  to  Zhan-zkun-glin-h'awa  and  bSn  po  k'ra-
ch'vH-'iruh  Meeting  rMan  gra-Serpo,  of  Yar-Hims.,  he  accorapanied  him  to  Tsang,
where  he  gave  instruction  to  Lama  sKyo-bsSd-nam,  who  succeeded  him.

The  second  successor  was  tlie  hermit  rMa-sgom,  born  at  Yar-stod-skyer-snai",  in
1054  A.D.,  and  forming  tlie  rMa  order. His  pupil  was  So-cli'un-pa,  a  dwarf.

The  Yogini  Ma-gci'g-lab-sgron,  born  at  the  southern  Pli'a-druk,  in  1054  a.d.,  was
the  devoted  pupil  of  rMa.

s/f am-,  another  great  z'i-jed-pa,  was  a  pupil  of  dge-s'es-gra-pa,  and  suffering  injury
from  a  sa-^don  demon,  he  bui-ned  its  effigy.  The  demon  afflicted  him  with  dropsy
and  leprosy  ;  but  by  his  zhi-cjed  rites  he  recovered. He  died  1119  a.d.

Z'an-dgah-ldan,  also  a  pupil  of  rMa,  was  born  at  Yar-stod-gtsan-z'al,  in  the  tribe
of  jitTshims  zan.  His  pupils  were  gjjal-ston-dyah  ch'un-'bor,  sKyog-sgom  bsam-tan,
K'u-sgom  jo-dgah,  rGya-dar-sen,  and  Ch'us-pa-dar  brtson.


GENERAL  SUMMARY.


75


and  witchcraft.  Abandoning  the  grosser  charlatanism,  the  new
sects  returned  to  celibacy  and  many  of  the  purer  Mahayana  rules.

In  the  four  centuries  succeeding  the  Keformation,  various
sub-sects  formed,  mostly  as  relapses  towards  the  old  familiar
demonolatry.

And  since  the  fifteenth  century  A.D.,  the  several  sects  and  sub-
sects,  while  rigidly  preserving  their  identity  and  exclusiveness,
have  drifted  down  towards  a  common  level  where  the  sectarian
distinctions  tend  to  become  almost  nominal.

But  neither  in  the  essentials  of  Lamaism  itself,  nor  in  its  sec-
tarian aspects  do  the  truly  Buddhist  doctrines,  as  taught  by  Sakya
Muni,  play  a  leading  part.


Sash  of  Cabved  Huilan  Bones
worn  by  Lamas  in  Necromancy.
(Eeduced  |,  see  also  figure,  p,  18.)


76


m


THE METAPHYSICAL SOUKCES OF THE DOCTRINE.

S  Buddhism  is  a  highly  philosophical  religion,  and
Lamaism,  though  deeply  tinged  with  non-Buddhist
beliefs,  still  retains  much  of  the  loftier  philosophy
and  doctrines  of  Primitive  Buddhism  and  its  earlier
developments,  we  must,  in  considering  the  metaphysical  basis  of
the  Lamaist  doctrine,  glance  at  the  metaphysics  of  Buddha  him-
self, as  well  as  that  of  the  Mahayana  and  the  later  "develop-
ments." And  as  Buddha's  philosophy  is  based  upon  his  working
theory  of  the  Universe,  our  subject  will  fall  conveniently  under
the  heads  of  (a)  Buddha's  Theory  of  the  Universe,^  (b)  his  Meta-
physics, and  (c)  the  Metaphysics  of  the  Lamas.

However  inconsistent  materialism  and  theistic  theories  may
appear,  with  a  system  avowedly  idealistic  and  practically  atheistic,
it  certainly  seems  that  Buddha,  himself  a  Hindu  and  a  teacher
of  Hindfis,  did  adopt  the  Hindii  mythology  and  cosmic  notions
current  in  his  day,  with  slight  modifications,  which  were  directed
merely  towards  depriving  the  gods  of  their  creative  functions
and  rendering  them  finite  and  subject  to  death  and  the  general
law  of  metempsychosis.^

His  sutras,  or  sermons,  contain  numerous  references  to  these
divinities,  and  the  earliest  of  all  authentic  Buddhist  records
extant,  namely,  the  Asoka  edict  pillars  of  the  third  century  B.C.,
show  a  model  Buddhist  delighting  in  calling  himself  "  the  beloved
of  the  Gods";  and  in  the  Barhut  Stupa  of  the  second  century  B.C.

1  General  mythology  forms  a  special  chapter  (xv.),  but  it  is  necessary  at  this  stage
to  sketch  the  mythology  which  bears  directly  upon  the  doctrinal  developments.

2  Even  in  Brahmanic  mythology  the  hosts  of  the  gods,  including  Indra,  the  greatest
god  in  ^'edic  times,  are  subject  to  the  universal  law  of  dissolution  at  the  end  of  a
Kalpa,  or  cycle  of  time,  when  tlie  Triad  god-hoad  A.U.M. becomes  simple  soul


THE  BUDDHIST UNIVERSE.  77

the  gods  and  genii  are  represented  with  functions  identical  with
those  now  allotted  to  them  in  the  latter-day  Buddhism  of  both
Burma  and  Tibet,  where,  as  in  the  orthodox  scriptures  of  both
schools,  the  gods  receive  more  or  less  worship  on  account  of  the
power  which  they  are  believed  to  possess  of  bestowing  temporal
blessings.  And  the  coming  Buddha  is  believed  by  all  Buddhists
to  be  even  now  resident  in  the  Tushita  heavens  of  the  gods.

So  intimately  have  these  mythological  figures  been  woven  into
the  texture  of  Buddism,  and  especially  of  Lamaism,  which  peoples
the  world  with  gorgons  and  hydras  and  other  dire  chimeras,  that
without  having  gained  a  general  idea  of  their  nature  and  position,
it  is  impossible  to  understand  the  allusions  to  them  which  con-
stantly crop  out  in  Buddhist  rites  and  dogma.  And,  indeed,  many
of  these  fantastic  beliefs  with  their  deified  heroes  and  Nature-
worship  are  in  reality  petrified  survivals  of  the  Archaic  beliefs  of
our  Indo-Grermanic  ancestors.


Buddhist  Theory  of  the  Universe.

In  sketching  the  Buddhist  world-system,  with  its  "  antres  vast
and  deserts  idle,"  existing  mostly  on  the  map  of  the  imagination,
it  is  deemed  advisable,  in  order  to  avoid  needless  repetition,  to  give
at  once  the  Lamaist  version,  even  though  this  is  slightly  more
"  developed  "  than  the  cosmogony  of  Buddha's  day ;  although  it
cannot  be  very  different  after  all,  for  the  Lamaist  accounts  of  it
are  in  close  keeping  with  the  Barhut  lithic  remains,  and  almost
identicar  with  the  versions  found  among  the  Ceylonese  and  other
Buddhists  of  the  south,  and  the  Chinese  and  Japanese  Buddhists.^

This,  our  human,  world  is  only  one  of  a  series  (the  others  being
fabulous)  which  together  form  a  universe  or  chiliocosm,^  of  which
there  are  many.

Each  universe,  set  in  unfathomable  space,  rests  upon  a  warp  and
woof  of  "  blue  air  "  or  wind,  liked  crossed  thunderbolts  (yajra),
hard  and  imperishable  as  diamonds  (vajra),  upon  which  is  set
"  the  body  of  the  waters,"  upon  which  is  a  foundation  of  gold,  on
which  is  set  the  earth,  from  the  axis  of  which  towers  up  the  great


1  Cf.  also  GiOEGi,  whose  figure  is  attached  ;  and  summary  by  BuKNOur,  ii.,  599.

2  Skt.,  Sarva-loka-dhatu.


78  THE  UNIVERSE  OF  THE  BUDDHISTS.

Olympus— Mt.Merui  (Su-meru,  Tib.,  Ei-rab)  84,000  miles'  high,
surmounted  by  the  heavens,  and  overlying  the  hills.

In  the  ocean  around  this  central  mountain,  the  axis  of  the  uni-
verse, are  set  (see  figures)  the  four  great  continental  worlds  with
their  satellites,  all  with  bases  of  solid  gold  in  the  form  of  a  tortoise
— as  this  is  a  familiar  instance  to  the  Hindii  mind  of  a  solid  floating
on  the  waters.  And  the  continents  are  separated  from  Mt.  Meru
by  seven  concentric  rings  of  golden  mountains,  the  inmost  being
40,000  miles  high,^  and  named  "  The  Yoke  "  (Yugandara),*  alter-
nating with  seven  oceans,  of  fragrant  milk,'  curds,  butter,  blood  or
sugar-cane  juice,  poison  or  wine,  fresh  water  and  salt  water.  These
oceans  diminish  in  width  and  depth  from  within  outwards  from
20,000  to  625  miles,  and  in  the  outer  ocean  lie  the  so-called  con-
tinental worlds.  And  the  whole  system  is  girdled  externally  by  a
double  iron-wall  (Gakravdla)  Z\2^  miles  high  and  3,602,625
miles  in  circumference, — for  the  oriental  mythologist  is  nothing  if
not  precise.  This  wall  shuts  out  the  light  of  the  sun-and  moon,
whose  orbit  is  the  summit  of  the  inmost  ring  of  mountains,  along
which  the  sun,  composed  of  "  glazed  fire  "  enshrined  in  a  crystal
palace,  is  driven  in  a  chariot  with  ten  (seven)  horses ;  and  the  moon,
of  "  glazed  water,"  in  a  silver  shrine  drawn  by  seven  horses,  and
between  these  two  hang  the  jewelled  umbrella  of  royalty  and  the
banner  of  victory,  as  shown  in  the  figure.  And  inhabiting  the  air,
on  a  level  with  these,  are  the  eight  angelic  or  fairy  mothers.
Outside  the  investing  wall  of  the  universe  all  is  void  and  in  per-
petual darkness  until  another  universe  is  reached.


1  Its  prototype,  as  with  the  Greek  Olympus,  is  terrestrial,  namely,  Mt.  Kailas,
22,000ft.,  directly  north  of  Lake  Manasarovara  in  the  Himalayas  (of.  Mabkham,  xxiv.).

2  The  84,000  is  a  mathematical  figure  expressing  multitude.  The  Tibetan  measure
is  a  "  (Zpag-tshad,"  which,  according  to  Csoma  (Diet.),  equals  4,000  fathoms,  and  hence
a  geographical  mile,  but  it  is  used  as  the  equivalent  of  the  Indian  unit  of  measure
which  is  translated  in  the  Ceylonese  scriptures  as  a  Yojana,  i.e.,  a  unit  of  about  4  kos,
about  five  or  six  geographical  miles.

3  These  mountains  are  severally  named  the  Ox  Yoke-holder,  Plough-holder,  Sandal-
holder,  Pleasing  Mount,  Horse-ear  Hill,  Demon  or  Assembly  Mount,  and  Circle  or
Edge-holder.

*  The  names  of  the  others  are  Isadara,  Karaylka,  Sudarsana,  Asvakarna,  Vinayaka,
and  Nemiiidliara.

=  This  ocean  of  milk  was  churned  by  the  Brahmanical  gods  for  the  recovery  of  their
elixir  vitse  and  the  thirteen  precious  objects.  And  the  churning  produced  the  beauti-
ful goddess  Lakshmi.— Compare  with  Aphrodite  from  the  froth  of  the  ocean,  and  the
proverbial  beauty  of  the  Naga  water  nymphs— the  Hindu  mermaids.


'^f^^rf^  m-  ^  ^^^^^b^^^MMnw


The  Univebse  of  the  Lamas


80


THE UNIVERSE  OF  TEE  BUDDHISTS.


Of the four "  continents " all except "  Jambudvipa  " ' are
fabulous. They are placed exactly one in each of  the four

directions,  and  each  has  a
smaller  satellite  on  either  side,
thus  bringing  the  total  up  to
twelve.  And  the  shapes  given
to  these  continents,  namely,
crescentic,  triangular,  round,
and  square,  are  evidently  sym-
bolic of  the  four  elements.

These  continents,  shown  in
the  annexed  figure,  are  thus
described: —

On  the  East  is  Videha,^  or  "  vast
body"  (P).  This  is  shaped  like
the  crescent  moon,  and  is  white
in  colour.  It  is  9,000  miles  in
diameter,  and  the  inhabitants  are
described  as  tranquil  and  mild,  and  of  excellent  conduct,  and  with
faces  of  same  shape  as  this  continent,  i.e.,  crescentic  like  the  moon.

On  the  South  is  Jamudvlp''  (F),  or  our  own  world,  and  its  centre  is  the
Bodhi-tree  at  Budh  Gaya.  It  is  shaped  like  the  shoulder-blade  of  a
sheep,  this  idea  being  evidently  suggested  by  the  shape  of  the  Indian
peninsula  which  was  the  prototype  of  Jambudvipa,  as  Mt.  Kailas  in
the  Himalayas  and  N.E.  of  India  was  that  of  Mt.  Meru.  It  is  blue
in  colour  ;  ana  it  is  the  smallest  of  all,  being  only  7,000  miles  in
diameter.  Here  abound  riches  and  sin  as  well  as  virtue.  The  in-
habitants have  faces  of  similar  shape  to  that  of  their  continent,  i.e.,
somewhat  triangular.

On  the  West  is  Oodhanya,^  or  "  wealth  of  oxen  "  (I),  which  in  shape  is
like  the  sun  and  red  in  colour.  It  is  8,000  miles  in  diameter.  Its
inhabitants  are  extremely  powerful,  and  (as  the  name  literally  means,
cow  -1-  ox  -\-  action)  they  are  believed  to  be  specially  addicted  to  eating
cattle,  and  their  faces  are  round  like  the  sun.

On  the  North  is  Uttara-Kuru,"  or  "  northern  Kuru  "-tribe  (M),  of
square  shape  and  green  in  colour,  and  the  Inrgest  of  all  the  continents.


A  Faiey.3


1  T.,  Jambu-lin.

^  After  Pander.

4  Some  Lamas  state  that  this  name  is  derived  from  the  Jamb«  tree  (JSugmia
Jamiolans),  while  others  believe  that  the  name  is;  oaomatopoetic  for  the  sound
"  Jamb,"  emitted  vrhen  the  world  was  thrown,  by  the  gods  into  the  outer  ocean.

5  ba-glan  spyod.
^  sgra-mi-snan.


THE  O0DL1NG8  AND TITANS.  81

being  10,000  miles  in  diameter.  Its  inhabitants  are  extremely  fierce
and  noisy.  They  have  square  faces  like  horses ;  and  live  on  trees,
which  supply  all  their  wants.  They  become  tree-spirits  on  their  death  ;
and  these  trees  afterwards  emit  "  bad  sounds "  (this  is  evidently,  like
many  of  the  other  legends,  due  to  a  puerile  and  false  interpretation  of
the  etymology  of  the  word).

The  satellite  continents  resemble  their  parent  one  in  shape,  and  each
is  half  its  size.  The  left  satellite  of  Jambudvip,  namely,  "The  ox-
tail-whisk continent,"  is  the  fabulous  country  of  the  Eakshas,  to  which
Padma-sambhava  is  believed  to  have  gone  and  to  be  still  reigning  there.
And  each  of  the  latter  presents  towards  Mount  Meru  one  of  the  follow-
ing divine  objects  respectively,^  viz.,  on  the  east  (?  south)  the  mountain
of  jewels,  named  Amo-likha,  shaped  like  an  elephant's  head,^  and  on
the  south,  the  wish-granting  tree,"  on  the  west  the  wish-granting
cow,*  and  on  the  north  the  self-sprung  crops.^

In  the  very  centre  of  this  cosmic  system  stands  "  The  king  of
mountains,''  Mount  Meru,  towering  erect  "  like  the  handle  of  a
mill-stone,"  while  half-way  up  its  side  is  the  great  wishing  tree,"
the  prototype  of  our  "  Christmas  tree,"  and  the  object  of  conten-
tion between  the  gods  and  the  Titans.  Meru  has  square  sides  of
gold  and  jewels.  Its  eastern  face  is  crystal  (or  silver),  the  south
is  sapphire  or  lapis  lazuli  (vaidiirya)  stone,  the  west  is  ruby
(padmaraga),  and  the  north  is  gold,  and  it  is  clothed  with
fragrant  flowers  and  shrubs.  It  has  four  lower  compartments
before  the  heavens  are  reached.  The  lowest  of  these  is  inhabited
by  the  Yaksha  genii — holding  wooden  plates.  Above  this  is  "  the
region  of  the  wreath-holders "  (Skt.,  Srag-dhard),  which  seems
to  be  a  title  of  the  bird-like,  or  angelic  winged  Grarudas.  Above
this  dwell  the  "eternally  exalted  ones,"'  above  whom  are  the
Titans.

The  Titans.

The  Titans  (Asura^)  or  "ungodly  spirits."

These  are  pictured  in  the  "  Wheel  of  Life  "  (at  page  108),  in  the  upper
right  section. Their  leading  trait  is  pride,  and  this  is  the  world  of  re-


1  These,  according  to  other  accounts,  are  situate  on  the  flanks  of  Meru  itself.

2  The  Yama  rocks  are  on  the  south.  =  Tib.,  Yond-'dus-sa-gtol.
»  'dod-'zo-i-ba.

5  ma-smos-pi  lo-t'og.

c  The  Ri-wo  ria-s'in.

7  )-tag  myos,  here  the  ria  may  represent  "  horse  "—the  horse-headed  musicians.

B  T,,  Lha-ma-yin.


82  THE  UNIVERSE  OF  THE  BUDDHISTS.

birth  for  those  who,  during  their  human  career,  have  boasted  of  being
more  pious  than  their  neighbours.  The  Titans  were  originally  gods ;
but,  through  their  pride,  they  were,  like  Satan,  expelled  from  heaven ;
hence  their  name,  which  means  "  not  a  god."  '  And  their  position  at
the  base  of  the  Mount  Meru  is  intermediate  between  heaven  and
earth.

The  duration  of  their  life  is  infinitely  greater  than  the  human,  and
they  have  great  luxury  and  enjoyment;  but  in  pride  they  envy  the
greater  bliss  of  the  gods,  and  die  prematurely,  fighting  vainly  against
the  gods  for  the  fruits  of  the  heavenly  tree  and  the  divine  nectar.

Their  region  is  represented  in  the  picture,  of  an  almost  colourless
atmosphere.  They  live  in  fortified  houses.  The  ground,  both  inside
and  outside  the  fort,  is  carpeted  with  flowers  of  which  the  inhabitants,
male  and  female,  make  the  wreaths  and  garlands  which  they  wear.
They  are  dressed  in  silk;  and  when  the  heroes  are  not  engaged  in
fighting  they  spend  their  time  in  all  sorts  of  gaiety  with  their  wives.
In  the  right-hand  corner  is  shown  their  birth  from  a  lotus-flower
and  their  obtaining  a  wish-granting  tree  and  cow.  The  rest  of  the
picture  is  devoted  to  their  misery,  which  consists  in  their  hopeless
struggle  and  fatal  conflict  with  the  gods.  The  commander  of  the  forces
is  seen  in  conclave  with  his  leaders,^  horses  are  being  saddled  and  the
"  heroes "  are  arming  themselves  with  coats  of  mail  and  weapons.
Another  scene  shows  the  battle  raging  along  the  border  separating
their  country  from  heaven,  and  the  general  mounted  with  his  staff"  as
spectators  in  the  background.  The  warriors  of  the  first  line  are  all
killed  or  horribly  mangled  by  the  thunderbolts  and  adamantine  weapons
hurled  at  them  by  the  gods.  One  of  the  weapons  possessed  alike  by
gods  and  Titans  is  a  spiked  disc.

The  ultimate  fate  of  every  Titan  is  to  die  painfully  warring  against
the  gods  with  whom  they  are  in  constant  conflict,  and  they  have  no  ac-
cess to  the  ambrosia  with  which  a  wounded  god  obtains  instant  recovery.
Another  scene  (see  picture  on  page  102)  depicts  the  womenfolk  gathered
round  "  The  Eefleoting  Lake  of  Perfect  Clearness  "  after  the  departure
of  their  lords  to  the  battle.  In  this  lake  are  mirrored  forth  all  the
doings  and  ultimate  fate  of  their  absent  spouses,  and  there  is  also  shown
the  region  of  re-birth  of  themselves,  which  is  nearly  always  hell,  owing
to  the  passionate  life  which  they  lead  in  the  Asura  world.  And  while
their  lovers  die  painful  and  passionate  deaths,  the  misery  of  the  woman-
folk  of  this  world  is  to  look  into  this  fascinating  lake  and  experience
the  horror  of  such  hideous  spectacles.  In  the  picture  some  women  are
shown  peering  into  the  lake,  and  others  on  the  banks  are  giving  vent
to  their  grief.


1  Analogous  to  this  is  the  common  colloquial  term  mi-ma-yin  or  "not  a  man"
applied  to  those  who  lead  vicious  and  dissolute  lives.

2  Note  that  greatness  of  rank  is  shown  in  pictures  by  enlarged  bodily  dimensions.


THE  HEAVENS OF  THE  GODS.


83


The  Heavens  and  the  Gods.

Above  the  region  of  the  Titans,  at  a  distance  of  168,000  miles,
are  the  bright  realms  of  the  gods. In  the  lowest  compartment


Guardian  King  of  the  East,
y  ul-k'or-si-un .


of the heavens  are the four "  great guardian kings of the
quarters"  (Tib.,rgyal-c'en  de-z'i ;  Skt.,  Odtur-Mahdrdja),  namely: —

G  2


84  THE  UNIVERSE  OF  THE  BUDDHISTS.

1.  .Dhritardshtra  (Yul-k'or-srun '),  the  white  guardian  of  the
east,  and  king  of  the  Grandharvas  ^  (see  figure  over  page).

2.  Virudhaka  (P'ag-kye-p6  ^),  the  green*  guardian  of  the  south,
and  king  of  the  K'umbhandas  ^  (see  figure  page  330).

3.  Virupdksha  (Ja-mi-zan"),  the  red  guardian  of  the  west  and
king  of  the  Nagas  ^  (see  figure  page  289).

4.  Vaisravana  (Nam-t'6-sra  ^),  the  yellow  guardian  of  the  north
and  king  of  the  Yakshas.^  He  is  an  especial  favourite,  as  he  is  also,
in  another  aspect,  the  god  of  Riches  (see  figure  on  page  370).
Indeed,  it  would  seem  that  all  of  the  gods,  even  Indra  (Jupiter)
himself,  were  originally  considered  to  be  Yaksha  genii.

The  subjects  of  these  kings  are  members  of  the  eight  great
classes  of  supernatural  beings."

These  great  celestial  kings  guard  the  heavens  from,  the  attacks
of  the  outer  demons;  and  have  to  be  distinguished  from  a  more
extended  category  of  guardian  gods,  the  ten  Lokpals  who  guard
the  world  from  its  ten  directions  ;  namely,  Indra  on  the  east,  Agni
(the  fire-god)  on  the  south-east,  Yama  (the  death-god)  on  the  south,
Rakshas  (?  Sura)  on  the  south-west,  Varuna  (the  water-god)  on
the  west,  Vayu  (the  wind-god)  on  the  north-west,  Yakshas  on
the  north,  Soma  (the  moon)  on  the  north-east,  Brahma,  above;
Bhiipati,  below.

The  Buddhists  divide  every  universe  into  three  regions,  in  imita-
tion, apparently,  of  the  Brahmanic  Bhavanatraya,  substituting
for  the  physical  categories  (Bhu  earth,  Bhuva  heaven,  and  Svar
space)  of  the  Brahmans,  the  ethical  categories  of  Desire  (Kama),
Form  Riipa  and  Formlessness  (ArUpa),  which  collectively  are
known  as  "  The  Three  Regions  "  {Trailokya  ^i),  and  mostly  placed
in  heaven. They  are : —

I.  The  region  of  Desire,  Kdmadhdtu  (Tib.,  Dod-pahi  K'ams),
is  the  lowest  of  the  three,  and  comprises  the  six  Deva-
lokas  (Tib.,  Lha-Yul)  or  heavens  of  the  gods,  as  well  as
the  earth.

1  yul-'k'or  bsrun.  g  spyan  mig-bzan.

2  Di'i-za  "  the  Small-eaters."  v  iLu.

3  'p'ags  styes-pa.  s  rnamt  'os  sras.

i  Sometimes  the  colours  of  the  North  and  ^  .yNod-sbyin  or  "  the  injurers."

South  Guardians  are  transposed.  i"  See  chapter  on  Mythology.

=  Grul-bum.  "  "K'ams  gsum."


THE  HEAVENS OF  BRAHMA.  85


II.  The  region  of  Form,  Rdpadhdtu  (Tib.,  gZugs  kyi  k  ams)
is  in  the  purer  heavens  of  Brahma  where  form  is  free
from  sensuality. It  comprises  the  sixteen  Brahmalokas ;
which  are  divided  into  four  regions  of  contemplation
(dhyana).
III.  The  region of  Fokmlessness,  Ardpadhdtu  (Tib.,  ^Zugs
med-pahi k'ams) comprises the four  highest of the
Brahma  heavens  and  near  to  Nirvana.
The  heavens  are  thus  diagrammatically  shown  in  the  form  of  the
funereal monument  or caitya ; though  in  other  pictures,  as  in
the foregoing chart  of the universe, they form an inverted
pyramid,  increasing  in  size  from  below  upwards.

The  celestial  Buddhas  therein  shown  are,  it  is  needless  to  say,
additions  of  later  days.^

Diagram  of
The  Heavens  op  the  Buddhists.


The  iSix  Devalokas  are  in  series  from  below  upwards :  —

1.  Catur-mahardjalcayikas. — The  abode  of  the  four  guardian  kings
of  the  quarters,  already  mentioned.

2.  Trayastriiisas  (Tib.,  Sum-cu  tsa  sum)  or  "  The  33  "  Vedic  gods  with
Indra or Sakra  (Jupiter)  or  the Yaksha spirit  Vajrapani  as  chief.


1  Compare  with  Mr.  Hodgson's  account  {Lamj.  and  Lit.,  p.  43)  of  the  heavens
according  to  the  Nepalese  Buddhists.


86  THE UNIVERSE OF  THE  BUDDHISTS.


This  heaven  is  the  svarga  of  Brahmanism,  and  is  shown  in  the  upper
compai'tment  of  the  Wheel  of  Life.

3.  Yama,  the  Hindu  Pluto,  the  king  and  judge  of  the  dead.

4.  Tushita.  (Tib.,  dGah  Man)  or  "Joyful  place" — the  paradise  of  the
Bodhisats  prior  to  their  final  descent  to  the  human  world  as  Buddhas.
Maitreya,  the  coming  Buddha,  dwells  at  present  in  this  heaven.

5.  Nirmanarati  (Tib.,  'p'rul  t^gah).

6.  Paranirmita  Vasavartin  (Tib.,  t/z'an  'p'rul  dh&ii  byed) — tlie
highest  of  the  heavens  of  the  gods  and  the  abode  of  Mara.

The  Brahnialoka  worlds  are  subject  to  the  God  Brahma,  and  exist-
ence ranges  from  intellectual  tranquillity  to  unconsciousness.  These
worlds  of  meditation  {dhyana)  are  accounted  eighteen  in  number,  and
arranged  in  five  groups  (3,  3,  3,  2,  and  5)  corresponding  to  the  five-fold
division  of  Brahma's  world,  and  are  usually  named  from  below  upwards
as  follows :  (1)  Brahma  parsadya,  (2)  Brahma  purohita,  (3)  Maha
Brahmana,  (4)  Paritabha,  (5)  Apramana,  (6)  Abhasvara,  (7)  Parita-
subha,  (8)  Apramanasubha,  (9)  Subhakrishna,  (10)  Utpala,  (11)  Asa-
iiasatya,  (12)  Avriha  or  Vrihatpala,  (13)  Atapa,  (14)  Sudasa,  (15)
Sudasi,  (16)  Punyaprasava,  (17)  Anabhraka,  (18)  Akanishtha  (Tib.,
Og-min)  or  "  The  Highest " — the  abode  of  the  Primordial  Buddha-God,
the  Adi-Buddha  of  the  Lamas,  viz.,  Samantabhadra  (T.,  Kuntu-zaiipo).
This  last,  together  with  the  next  subjacent  Brahmaloka,  are  according
to  the  Lamaists  eternal,  and  are  placed  above  the  Arupa  Brahmalokas.

The  Four  Arupa  Brahmalokas  are  1.  Akasanantayatana,  2.  Vijnanan-
tayatana,  3.  Akincaiiayatana,  4.  Naivasaiijiiana  Saiijiiayatana.

The  duration  of  existence  in  each  of  those  states  is  for  vastly
increasing  periods  from  below  upwards,  till  beyond  the  sixteenth
immortality  itself  is  reached ;  and  according  to  some  of  the  later
Buddhists,  each  Bodhisat  must  traverse  each  of  these  stages  (Bhum)
before  he  attains  Buddhahood.

The  typical  heaven  of  the  gods — Indra's  paradise — is  pictured
in  the  Wheel  of  Life  at  page  108.  Its  atmosphere  is  yelloT*^,
and  in  it  are  portrayed  the  four  states  of  godly  birth,  bliss,  pas-
sion and  misery  and  death.

Godly  Birth.  The  god  is  born  at  once  fiilly  developed  within  a  halo
of  glory  from  a  lotus-flower, — the  oriental  symbol  of  immaterial  birth
and  is  provided  with  the  special  attributes  of  a  god, — viz.,  (1)  a  lotus-
footstool,  (2)  splendid  dress  and  ornaments,  (3)  goddess-companions,'
(4)  a  wish-granting  tree,  or  pag-sam-shin  (Sikt.,  Kalpadaru)^  which  in-
stantly yields  any  fruit  or  food  wished  for,  and  bends  to  the  hand  of
the  gatherer,  its  leaves  yielding  luscious  food,  its  juice  nectar,  and  its

1  Apsaras,  celestial  nymphs — the  "  houris  "  awarded  to  heroes.

2  The  wish-granting  tree  of  Indra's  heaven  is  described  in  the  45th  Section  of  the
Silpa  S'dstra.


THE  HEAVENS  OF  INBRA  (JUPITER).


87


fruit  jewels,  (5)  a  wish-granting  cow  {Kdma-dhenu  or  Surabha ')  which
yields  any  drink  wished  for,  (6)  self-sprung  crops  (usually  painted  as
Indian  corn  or  maize),  (7)  in  a  golden  stall  a  jewelled  horse-of-fore-
knowledge  which  Pegasus-like  carries  his  rider  wherever  wished,  through-
out the  worlds  of  the  past,  present,  and  future,  (8)  a  lake  of  perfumed
nectar  or  ambrosia  (Skt. ,  Amrita)  which  is  the  elixir  vitce  and  the  source
of  the  divine  lustre.^ Shining  is  a  peculiarly  divine  attribute,  and  the


Heavenly  Bikth.


etymology  of  the  word  "divuxitj,"  is  the  root  Biv,  "to  shine,"  the  parent
of  the  Skt.  Beva  and  Latin  Deus.

Godly  Bliss.  The  bliss  of  the  gods  is  depicted  by  an  assembly  of  be-
jewelled gods  and  goddesses  basking  in  sensuous  enjoyment  in  splendid
palaces  in  the  midst  of  a  charming  garden  enamelled  with  flowers,  of
which  they  make  their  wreaths.  Gay  birds  warble  in  the  foliage,  and
noble  animals  peacefully  roam  together  there.  Amongst  the  quadrupeds
are  deer,  lions,  and  elephants  with  jewelled  heads.  Amongst  the  birds
are  the  peacock,  parrot,  cuckoo,  and  the  "  Eala-pinka,"  which  repeats  the
mystic  '  Om  mani  padme,  Hum  !  "  for  the  language  of  the  gods  is  the


1  Images  of  these  are  sold  in  the  Indian  bazaars  as  toys  for  children.  Compare  this
myth  of  the  wishing-cow  with  the  parallels  related  by  Professor  Weber  m  SUiungsU'
ricUe  der  Kaenig  Preass.,  Acad,  zu  Berlin.,  xxvii.,  1890.

*  The  oup-bearer  is  Dhanwantari,  the  Indian  Ganymede.


88  THE  UNIVERSE  OF  THE  BUDDHISTS.

Deva-nagari  or  sacred  language  of  India.  One  of  the  blissful  conditions
of  godly  life  especially  dwelt  upon,  is  that  the  most  dainty  morsels  may
be  eaten  without  sense  of  repletion,  the  last  morsel  being  as  much
Telished  as  the  first.

In  the  centre  of  this  paradise  is  the  great  city  of  Belle-vue
(Sadarsana),  within  which  is  the  celestial  palace  of  Vaijayanta
(Amaravati)  the  residence  of  Indra  (Jupiter),  the  king  of  the
gods.  It  is  invested  by  a  wall  and  pierced  by  four  gates,  which
are  guarded  by  the  four  divine  kings  of  the  quarters.  It  is  a
three-storied  building ;  Indra  occupying  the  basement,  Brahma
the  middle,  and  the  indigenous  Tibetan  war-god — the  dGra-lha
— as  a  gross  form  of  Mara,  the  god  of  Desire,  the  uppermost
story.  This  curious  perversion  of  the  old  Buddhist  order  of  the
heavens  is  typical  of  the  more  sordid  devil-worship  of  the  Lamas
who,  as  victory  was  the  chief  object  of  the  Tibetans,  elevated
the  war-god  to  the  highest  rank  in  their  pantheon,  as  did  the
Vikings  with  Odin  where  Thor,  the  thunder-god,  had  reigned
supreme.  The  passionate  war-god  of  the  Tibetans  is  held  to  be
superior  even  to  the  divinely  meditative  state  of  the  Brahma.

War  with  tJte  Titans.  The  gods  wage  war  with  the  Titans,
who,  as  we  have  seen,  are  constantly  trying  to  seize  some  of
the  precious  fruit  of  the  great  Yoii-dn  sa-tol  (Skt.,  Fdrijdta^)
tree,  or  "  tree  of  the  concentrated  essence  of  earth's  products,"
whose  branches  are  in  heaven,  but  whose  roots  are  in  their
country.  The  climber  which  encircles  this  tree  is  called  the
Jambuti  tree,  and  is  the  medium  by  which  the  quintessence
of  the  most  rare  delicacies  of  Jambudvip  are  instilled  into  the
larger  tree. And  the  war-god  directs  the  divine  army.

To  account  for  the  high  position  thus  given  to  the  war-god,  it  is
related  that  he  owes  it  to  the  signal  assistance  rendered  by  him
to  the  gods  in  opposing  the  Asuras.^

The  misery  of  the  gods.  The  god  enjoys  bliss  for  almost  incal-
culable time ;  but  when  his  merit  is  exhausted  then  his  lake  of

1  Identified  witli  the  beautiful  Indian  Coral  Tree  {Jin/t/irhmliidiea).

'  It  is  related  that  in  former  times  the  gods  were  defeated  by  the  Asuras  in  fighting
for  the  fruits  of  the  great  wishing-ti-ee  of.  Paradise ;  and  the  defeated  gods  under
Indra  besought  ffSau-bahi-Sdag-po  for  council.  This  divinity  advised  the  gods  to
call  to  their  aid  the  war-god  dGra-lha,  and  also  to  obtain  from  the  depths  of  the
central  ocean  the  invisible  armour  and  the  nine  self -created  weapons,  viz.  :—(l;
rMog-lya  hhymg-keng-rils,  a  helmet  of  the  skeleton  bones  of  the  Garuda  bird;  (2;.
Khrab-ni-shar-lto-rgyab,  the  coat  of  mail  shining  like  the  sun ;  (3)  Lba-Wiehs-rdm-je-


THE  HELLS.  89


nectar  dries  up ;  his  wish-graiiting  tree,  cow  and  horse  die ;  his
splendid  dress  and  ornaments  grow  dim  and  disappear ;  his  palace
gets  dilapidated ;  his  flowers  and  garden  fade ;  his  body,  no  longer
bathed  by  nectar,  loses  its  lustre  and  sweats  like  mortals,  so  that
his  person  becomes  loathsome  to  his  goddess-companions  and  the
other  gods,  who  shun  himi,  and  so  the  poor  god  dies  miserably. ^  If
he  has  led  a  virtuous  life  during  his  existence  as  a  god  then  he  may
be  re-born  in  heaven,  otherwise  he  goes  to  a  lower  region  and  may
even  be  sent  to  hell.  Buddha  was  born  twenty  times  as  the
god  Sakra  or  Indra  (Jupiter)  and  four  times  as  Brahma.^

The  Buddhist  Hell.

The  antithesis  to  heaven  is  hell,  which  with  its  awful  lessons
looms  large  on  the  horizon  of  the  Buddhists.  For  according  to
their  ethical  doctrine  of  retribution,  and  in  the  case  of  the  more
theistic  developments,  their  conception  of  God  as  the  supreme
type  of  right-doing,  they  picture  him  like  a  human  judge  trying
and  punishing  the  evil-doers;'  although,  with  truly  Buddhist
idealism,  these  tortures  are  believed  by  the  more  philosophical
Lamas  to  be  morbid  creations  of  the  individual's  own  ideas,  a  sort
of  hellish  nightmare. The  majority  of  the  Lamas,  however,  and


qo-c'a,  necklet ;  (4)  Lalc-hag-mCsSn-c'd-lam-loJc,  a  weapon  resisting  and  returning
glove;  (5)  sStin-hhets-mdah-mts'Sn-kun  thub,  a  breast-plate  entirely  able  to  with-
stand arrows  and  other  weapons;  (6)  Pils-khehs-fies-pa-shjohs-c'ed,  a  knee-cap  which
defends  against  destruction;  (7)  Pkuhm-sha-dmar-gUng-druq,  a  six-embossed  shield.
The  nine  sorts  of  weapons  are:— (1)  a  'K'orlo  or  spiked-disc  which  completely
routes  the  enemy;  (2)  a  dCfra-sIa  or  an  axe  which  chops  the  enemy;  (3)  a  ral-gri
or  sword  which  slices  the  enemy ;  (4)  a  c/Zhu  or  bow  wliich  scatters  the  brains  of
the  enemy;  (5)  a  "mDah"  or  arrow  that  pierces  the  vitals;  (6)  a  Zhagsjoa  or
noose  which  ensnares  the  enemy;  (7)  a  mDimg  or  spear  which  pierces  the  hearts
of  the  foe  ;  ( 8 )  a  Ur-rdo,  a  whirring  sling-stone  that  produces  the  "  ur-r-r "
sound  of  a  thunder-dragon;  and  (9)  a  Sorje  or  thunder-bolt  which  demolishes
the  enemy.  The  story  seems  founded  on  the  Brahmanical  legend  of  Indra
(Jupiter)  obtaining  from  the  sea  the  talismanic  banner  which  conferred  victory
over  his  enemies ;  cf.  Srihat  SaiiUta,  translated  by  Dr.  Keen,  J.R.A.S.,  vi.,  p.  44.

The  gods  having  obtained  these  weapons  and  armour,  invited  the  war-god,  who
came  enveloped  in  thunder-clouds  and  attended  by  his  nine  sons,  and  receiving
worship  from  Indra  and  the  other  gods  as  the  price  of  his  assistance,  they  assailed
and  utterly  routed  the  Titans.

1  Compare  HAunY,  Man,  143.

2  R.D.  Buddhist  Birth  Stories  Gi.

3  Cf.  Maine's  works  on  Early  Law.


90  THE UNIVERSE  OF  THE  BUDDHISTS.

the  laity,  believe  in  the  real  material  character  of  these  hells  and
their  torture.

The  Buddhist  hell  (Naraka  ^ )  is  a  true  inferno  situated  in  the
bowels  of  the  human  earth  like  Hades,  and  presided  over  by  the
Indian  Pluto,  Yama,  the  king  and  judge  of  the  dead,  who
however  is  himself  finite  and  periodically  tortured.  Every  day
he  is  forced  to  swallow  molten  metal.  So,  as  the  shade  of  Achilles
says,  "  it  is  better  to  live  on  earth  as  the  poorest  peasant  than  to
rule  as  a  prince  of  the  dead."  ^

The  Great  Judgment  is  determined  solely  by  the  person's  own
deeds,  and  it  is  concretely  pictured  by  the  ordeal  of  scales,  where
the  good  deeds,  as  white  pebbles,  are  weighed  against  the  sins,  as
black  counters,  in  balances,  and  the  judge  holds  a  mirror  which
reveals  the  soul  in  all  its  nakedness.  "  Not  in  the  heavens,  not  in
the  midst  of  the  sea,  not  if  thou  hidest  thyself  in  the  clefts  of  the
mountains  wilt  thou  find  a  place  where  thou  canst  escape  the  force
resulting  from  thy  evil  actions."^  "  Through  the  six  states  of
transmigration  does  the  power  of  our  actions  lead  us.  A  life  in
heaven  awaits  the  good.  The  warders  of  hell  drag  the  wicked
before  the  king  of  hell,  Yama,  who  says  to  them : —

"  '  Did  you  not  when  on  earth  see  the  five  divine  messengers  sent  to
warn  you — the  child,  the  old  man,  the  sick,  the  criminal  suffering
punishment,  and  the  dead  corpse  ? '  And  the  wicked  man  answers —
'  I  did  see  them.'

"  '  And  didst  thou  not  think  within  thyself :  "  I  also  am  subject  to
birth,  old  age,  and  death.  Let  me  be  careful  to  do  good  works  "  ? '  And
the  wicked  man  answers  :  '  1  did  not,  sire ;  I  neglected  in  my  folly  to
think  of  these  things.'

"  Then  the  king,  Yama,  pronounces  his  doom  ;  '  These  thy  evil  deeds
are  not  the  work  of  thy  mother,  father,  relatives,  friends,  advisers.
Thou  alone  hast  done  them  all ;  thou  alone  must  gather  the  fruit.'
And  the  warders  of  hell  drag  him  to  the  place  of  torment,  rivet  him  to
red-hot  iron,  plunge  him  in  glowing  seas  of  blood,  torture  him  on
burning  coals,  and  he  dies  not  till  the  last  residue  of  his  guilt  has  been
expiated.'"*

Nor  is  hell  a  complete  expiation  of  offences,  for  Buddha  is
credited  with  saying,  "  A  harsh  word  uttered  in  past  times  is
not  lost,  but  returns  again,"  and  the  Jataka  tales  are  full  of
incidents  in  illustration.


1  dmyal-k'ams,  or  "the  region  of  torment." Compare  With  Chinese  version  in
Beal's  Galena,  p.  56,  seq.  a  Odyssey,  xi.,  481.

3  Dhamma-pada,  127.  »  Deva-duUa-sutIa,  transl.  by  H.  OLDENBEiiG.


HELLS  OF  BUDDHISM.


92


THE UNIVERSE  OF  TEE  BUDDHISTS.


Hell  is  divided  into  numerous  compartments,  each  with  a
special  sort  of  torture  devised  to  suit  the  sins  to  be  expiated.
Only  eight  hells  are  mentioned  in  the  older  Buddhist  books,  but
the  Lamas  and  other  "  northern  "  Buddhists  describe  and  figure
eight  hot  and  eight  cold  hells  and  also  an  outer  hell  (Pratyeha
naraka),  through  which  all  those  escaping  from  hell  must  pass
without  a  guide.  The  Brahmanical  hells  are  multiples  of  seven
instead  of  eight;  some  of  them  bear  the  same  names  as  the
Buddhists,  but  thej'  are  not  systematically  arranged,  and  as  the
extant  lists  date  no  earlier  than  Manu,  about  400  A.D.,  they
are  probably  in  great  part  borrowed  from  the  Buddhists.^

The  foregoing  figure  ^  shows  the
Lamaist  hells,  but  they  are  seen
in  greater  detail  in  "  The  \N'heel  of
Life,''  at  page  109.

At  the  entrance  to  the  great  hell
on  the  bank  of  the  Hindii  Styx — the
Baitarani^  or  "three  path"  river — ■
sits,  according  to  one  version,  an  old
hag,  a  sort  of  Prosperine,  who  strips
off  the  clothes  from  the  new  arrivals,
and  hangs  them  on  a  tree  behind
her.''  She  is  W)0  feet  in  stature,  with
eyes  like  burning  wheels,  and  she
despatches  the  condemned  souls  along
their  respective  roads  in  accordance
with  the  judgment,  but  sometimes
she  delays  them  with  endless  tasks
of  heaping  up  stones  on  the  banks  of
Styx,  and  so  prolongs  their  agony.
The  hot  hells  stand  in  tiers,  one  upon  another,  beginning  at  a
depth  of  11,900  miles  below  the  surface  of  the  earth,  and  reach
to  a  depth  of  40,000  miles ;  each  hell  has  four  gates,  outside
each  of  which  are  four  a-nfe-hells,  thus  making  altogether  136  hot
hells.


The  Buddhist  Pbospekine.


1  See  an  article  by  M.  Leon  Fecr,  "  L'Enf er  indien,"  in  the  Journal  Asiatiqve^
XX.  (1892),  and  i.  (New  Series  1893),  for  lists  and  description  of  the  Brahmanist  hells.

2  For  the  tracing  of  which  I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  J.  C.  White.

3  ="  The  sedent  queen."

■*  Her  picture  is  given  from  the  Japanese.


THE  HOT  HELLS.


93


The  atmosphere  of  the  hells  is  of  the  deepest  black : —

"  Light  was  absent  all. Bellowing  there  groan'd
A  noise,  as  of  a  sea  in  tempest  torn
By  warring  winds,  the  stormy  blast  of  hell."

Dante,  Canto  v.,  29.

Each  hell  is  enveloped  by  a  wall  of  fire,  and  the  horrible  tor-
ments are  St  to  illustrate  Dante's  Inferno. Indeed,  it  has  been

suggested  that  Dante
must have seen a
Buddhist picture of
these hells before
writing his famous
classic,  so  remark-
able is  the  agree-
ment between
them. The  lictors
(s'in-je) are sav-
age flame-en-
veloped monsters
with heads of
various animals,
and all  their  pin-


HoT  Heij,  Xo. 1.


cers,  and  other  instruments  of  torture,  are  red-hot.
The  following  are  the  eight  great  hot  hells.

1.  Sanjlva  '  =  "  again  revived."  Here  the  wretches  are  cut  and  torn
to  pieces  and  then  re-united  and  revived  only  to  suffer  the  same  process
repeated  ad  infinitum  throughout  the  period  spent  in  this  hell.

' '  Because  our  wounds  heal  ever  and  anon
Ere  we  appear  before  the  fiend  again."

Dante,  Canto  xxviii.,  36.

This  restoration  of  the  body,  in  order  to  subject  it  to  fresh  torture,
is  an  essential  part  of  the  process  in  all  the  hells.  The  body  when
thoroughly  mangled  is  restored  and  the  racking  torture  applied  afresh,
so  that  the  agony  never  ceases.  This  is  the  special  hell  for  suicides,
murderers,  ignorant  physicians  who  killed  their  patients,  fraudulent
trustees,  and  tyrants.

2.  ^atoMira^=  "black  lines."  Here  the  victims  are  nailed  down  and
eight  or  sixteen  black  lines  drawn  by  the  lictors  along  the  body,  which
is  then  sawn  asunder  along  these  lines  by  a  burning  hot  saw. Another


1  Yan-sos.


-  t'ig-nag.


94


THE UNIVERSE  OF  THE  BUDDHISTS.


punisliment  here  is  the  especial  one  of  the  slanderer,  or  busy-body,  who
has  his  or  her  tongue  enlarged  and  pegged  out  and  constantly  harrowed
by  spikes  ploughing  through  it.  To  this  hell  are  assigned  those  who
during  life  were  disrespectful  to  their  parents,  or  to  Buddha,  or  the
priests.

3.  SamgTidta, '  =  "  concentrated oppression." Here  the  guilty  are


t^HOTi^HELL  No.  3.

squeezed  and  crushed  between  animal-headed  mountains,  or  monster
iron  books.  This  last  is  an  especial  punishment  for  monks,  laymen  and
infidels  who  have  disregarded  or  profaned  the  scriptures,  and  also  for
priests  who  have  taken  money  for  masses  which  they  have  not  performed.
Others  here  are  pounded  in  iron  mortars  and  beaten  on  anvils.  Here
are  tortured  thieves,  those  who  indulged  in  hatred,  envy,  passion,  the
users  of  light  weights  and  measures,  and  those  who  cast  refuse  or  dead
animals  on  the  public  roads.

4.  Raurava^  =  ''  weeping  and  screaming."  The  torture  here  is  to  have
molten  iron  poured  down  the  throat.  Those  who  were  prisoners,  obstructed
watercourses,  or  grumbled  against  the  weather  (?  clearly  the  English
hell ! ),  or  wasted  food,  are  here  tortured.


1  bsdus  'joms.


^  nu-'bod.


THE  COLD HELLS.  95

5.  Maharaurava^  =  "  greater  weeping  and  screaming.''  Here  they  are
cooked  in  seething  cauldrons  of  molten  iron.  This  is  the  hell  for
heretics.

6.  Tdpana,"  =  "  heat."  The  condemned  is  enclosed  in  a  red-hot  fiery
chamber.  In  this  hell  are  punished  those  who  roasted  or  baked  animals
for  their  food.

7.  Pratdpana,^  =  "  highest  heat."  A  three-spiked  burning  spear  is
thrust  into  the  wretch's  body,  which  is  then  rolled  up  within  red-hot
iron  plates.  It  is  the  special  torture  for  apostates  and  those  who  reject
the  truth.

8.  jlmcAi,''  =  "  endless  torture."  This  is  the  most  severe  and  longest  of
all  the  infernal  torments.  The  guilty  is  perpetually  kept  in  flames,
though  never  consumed.  This  is  the  hell  for  those  who  have  reviled
Buddha,  and  others  who  have  harmed  or  attempted  to  harm  Lamaism
or  shed  the  blood  of  a  Lama  or  holy-man.

The  Cold  Hells,  apparently  an  invention  of  the  northern  Buddhists,
as  cold  was  an  idea  rather  foreign  to  the  Indian  mind,  are  situated  on
the  edge  of  the  universe  below  its  encircling  wall  (Cakravala).
They  are  encircled  by  icy  mountains  (see  plate,  page  109),  and  have
attendants  of  appalling  aspect,  as  in  the  hot  hells.  They  are  thus
described : — -

1.  Arbuda,' =  "  hlisteved  or  chapped."  The  torture  here  is  constant
immersion  of  the  naked  person  in  ice  and  glacier  water,  under  which
the  body  becomes  covered  with  chilblains  (which  torture  may  be  com-
pared with  the  curse  invented  by  a  scribe  in  the  reign  of  Athelstan  for
anyone  who  should  break  the  terms  of  his  charters  :  "  May  he  be
tortured  by  the  bitter  blasts  of  glaciers  and  the  Pennine  army  of  evil
spirits." ")

2.  NirarhudaJ  The  chilblains  are  rudely  scarified,  producing  raw
sores.

3.  Atata^  "  Ach'u  "  or  "  A-fa-ta,"  an  exclamation  of  anguish  beyond
articulate  expression — which  resounds  through  this  hell.

4.  Hahava!'  A  worse  degree  of  cold  in  which  the  tongue  is  p.iralyzed
and  the  exclamation  Kyi-'il  or  Ha-ha  alone  possible.

5.  A]iaha.^°  Here  both  jaws  and  teeth  are  spasmodically  clenched
through  cold.

6.  LHpala}'  Livid  sores  which  become  everted  like  blue  TJt-pal
flowers.

1  Su-bod  Ch'en-po.

2  Ts'a-ba.

3  Eab-tu  t'sa-wa.
'  mnar-med.

5  Ch'u-bur  ch'en. Arlm  sounds  suspiciously  like  Mount  Abu  (B

0  Quoted  by  Mr.  D.  W.  Freshfield  in  J.  R.  Geog.  S.,  1894.

1  Ch'u-bur-brol-wa.
s  A-ch'u.

"  Kyi-'ud.

10  So-t'am-pa.

11  Ut-pal-ltar  gas-pa.


96  THE UNIVERSE  OF  THE  BUDDHISTS.

7.  Padma.^ The  raw  sores  become  like  red  Lotus-flowers.

8.  Pundarika."  Raw  sores  where  the  flesh  falls  away  from  the  bones
like  the  petals  of  the  great  Lotus  ;  and  which  are  continually  pecked
and  gnawed  by  birds  and  insects  with  iron  beaks.

The  frontier  or  anterior  hells  at  the  exit  from  the  great  hell  are
called  "The  near  (to  re-birth)  cycle,"  ^  and  are  divided  into  four
sections.*  The  first  bordering  hell  consists  of  hot  suffocating
ashes  with  foul  dead  bodies  and  all  kinds  of  offal.  Then  is
reached  a  vast  quagmire,  beyond  which  is  a  forest  of  spears  and
spikes,  which  must  be  traversed  like  the  razor-bridge  in  Muhamma-
danism  and  in  Bunyan's  Pilgrim's  Progress.  Then  succeeds  a
great  river  of  freezing  water ;  on  the  further  shore  of  which  the
ground  is  thickly  set  with  short  squat  tree-trunks,  each  sur-
mounted by  three  spiked  leaves  which  impale  the  unwary  grop-
ing fugitives.  Eeference  to  these  last  two  ■  localities  occurs  in
the  ordinary  litany  for  the  dead,  which  says  "may  his  c'hu-wo-
rab-med  ocean  become  a  small  rivulet,  and  the  ts'al-ma-ri  tree  a
divine  wish-granting  tree."

In  addition  to  the  hot  and  cold  hells  are  eighty-four  thousand
external  hells  (!Re-ts'e-wa,  Skt.  ?  Lokantarika)  situated  mostly  on
the  earth,  in  mountains,  deserts,  hot  springs,  and  lakes.

Another  state  of  existence,  little  better  than  that  of  hell,  is
the  Preta  (Tib.,  Yi-dag)  or  Manes,  a  sort  of  tantalized  ghoul  or
ghost.  This  world  is  placed  above  hell  and  below  the  Sitavan
forest,  near  Eajgriba,  in  the  modern  district  of  Patna  in  Bengal.

These  wretched  starvelings  are  in  constant  distress  through  the
pangs  of  hunger  and  thirst.* This  is  pictured  in  the  Wheel  of


1  Padma-ltar-gas-pa.

2  Padma  ch'en-po-!tar-gas  pa.

3  fie-'k'or  (=?  Skt.,  Prateyha  narahi)  meaning  near  to  re-birth.

■•  Named  Agni-klwdu  (me-ma-mur  gyi  'obs)  or  the  fiery  pit,  Kunapanka  (Ro-myagB
Kyi  'dams)  or  quagmire  of  carcases,  Khuradhdrmana  (spu-gri  gtams  ts'al)  or  forest  of
spikes,  and  Asidlidravana  (ral-gri  loma  nays-ts'al)  or  forest  of  sword-leaves.

'  Thirty-six  species  are  described  in  five  groups,  namely  :  (1)  p'yii  sgnb-pa  cJian  or
"the  foreign  or  gentile  horrid  beings,"  (2)  Nang-gi  sgrib-pa  chan  or  the  Buddhist  horrid
beings,  (3)  Zas-skom-gyi  sgrib-pa  chan,  or  the  eating  and  drinking  horrid  beings  —these
are  they  who  on  eating  and  drinking  have  the  ingested  material  converted  into  lacerat-
ing weapons,  (4)  and  (5)  i/i(i-<Ao)- or  free  Yi-dags.  The  latter  are  not  confined

in  the  Prefa-prison,  but  are  free  to  roam  about  in  the  human  world— in  graveyards,
etc.,— and  injure  man.  These  are  (Beal's  Catena,  67)  1,  Flat-bodied;  2,  Needle-mouthed;
3,  Vomit-eaters ;  4,  Filth-eaters  ;  5,  Mist-eaters ;  6,  Water-feeders ;  7,  Scarcely  seen  ;
8,  Spittle-feeders ;  9,  Hair-eaters ;  10,  Blood-suckers ;  11,  Notion-feeders ;  12,  Flesh-


THE  MANES  OR  PBETA.


97


Life,  also  in  the  annexed  figure.  This  is  the  special  torment
for  those  who,  in  their  earthly  career,  were  miserly,  covetous,
uncharitable,  or  gluttonous.  Jewels,  food,  and  drink  are  found
in  plenty,  but  the  Pretas  have  mouths  no  bigger  than  the  eye
of  a  needle,  and  gullets  no  thicker  in  diameter  than  a  hair,
through which they can  never ingest a satisfying amount  of


Tantalized  Spirits.


food  for  their  huge  bodies.  And  when  any  food  is  taken  it
becomes  burning  hot,  and  changes  in  the  stomach  into  sharp
knives,  saws,  and  other  weapons,  which  lacerate  their  way  out
from  the  bowels  to  the  surface,  making  large  painful  wounds.
They  are  constantly  crying  "water,  water,  give  water!"  And  the
thirst  is  expressed  in  the  picture  by  a  flame  which  is  seen  to  issue
from  their  parched  mouths,  and  whenever  they  attempt  to  touch


eaters  ;  13,  luoeuse-feeders  ;  14,  Fever-makers ;  15,  Secret  pryers  ;  16,  Earth  lurkers ;

17,  Spirit-rappers ;  18,  Flame-burners  ;  19,  Baby-snatchers ;  20,  Sea-dwellers ;  21 ;

22,  King  Yama's  club-holders ;  23,  Starvelings ;  24,  Baby-eaters ;  25,  Vital-eaters ;  26,
Eakshas;  27,  Smoke-eaters;  28,  Marsh-dwellers;  29,  Wind-eaters;  30,  Ash-feeders;
31,  Poison-eaters ;  32,  Desert-livers;  33,  Spark-feeders;  34,  Tree-dwellers;  35,  Road-
dwellers;  36,  Body-killers.

H


98  THE UNIVERSE  OF  THE  BUDDHISTS.

water  it  changes  to  liquid  fire.  Avalokita  is  frequently  figured
in  the  act  of  giving  water  to  these  Pretas  to  relieve  their  misery,!
And  a  famous  story  of  Buddha  credits  the  great  Maudgalya-
yana,  the  right-hand  disciple  of  "  the  Blessed  One,"  with  having
descended  into  the  Preta-world  to  relieve  his  mother.  As  this
story,  the  Avalambana  Sutra,  dating  to  before  the  third  century
A.D.,  gives  a  very  vivid  picture  of  this  tantalizing  purgatory,  and
also  illustrates  the  rites  for  extricating  the  starveling  ghosts,^  it
is  here  appended.

MIUDGAlYAy ana's DESCENT INTO THE PRETA PURGATORY.

Thus  have  I  heard.  Buddha  at  one  time  was  residing  in  the  Country
of  Sravasti,  in  the  garden  of  Jeta,  the  friend  of  the  orphans.  At  this
time  Mugalan,  having  begun  to  acquire  the  six  supernatural  powers
(j.rrdhi),  desiring  above  all  things,  from  a  motive  of  piety,  to  -deliver
his  father  and  mother,  forthwith  called  into  use  his  power  of  super-
natural sight,  and  looking  throughout  the  world  he  beheld  his  unhappy
mother  existing  without  food  or  drink  in  the  world  of  Pretas  (hungry
ghosts),  nothing  but  skin  and  bone.  Mugalan,  moved  with  filial  pity,
immediately  presented  to  her  his  alms-bowl  filled  with  rice.  His  mother
then  taking  the  bowl  in  her  left  hand,  endeavoured  with  her  right  to
convey  the  rice  to  her  mouth,  but  before  it  came  near  to  her  lips,  lo  !
the  rice  was  converted  into  fiery  ashes,  so  that  she  could  not  eat  thereof.
At  the  sight  of  this  Mugalan  uttered  a  piteous  cry,  and  wept  many
tears  as  he  bent  his  way  to  the  place  whefS*  Buddha  was  located.
Arrived  there,  he  explained  what  had  happened,  and  awaited  Buddha's
instruction.  On  this  the  Master  opened  his  mouth,  and  said,  "  The  sin
which  binds  your  mother  to  this  unhappy  fate  is  a  very  grievous  one ;
from  it  you  can  never  by  your  own  strength  rescue  her,  no  !  nor  yet
all  the  powers  of  earth  or  heaven,  men  or  divine  beings  :  not  ^U  these
are  equal  to  the  task  of  dehverance.  But  by  assembling  the  priests  of
the  ten  quarters,  through  their  spiritual  energy,  deliverance  may  be
had,  I  will  now  recount  to  you  the  method  of  rescue  from  this  and
all  similar  calamities."  Then  Buddha  continued:  "  On  the  15fch  day
of  the  seventh  month,  the  priests  of  the  ten  quarters  being  gathered
together  ought  to  present  an  offering  for  the  rescue  of  ancestors
during  seven  generations  past,  as  well  as  those  of  the  present  genera-
tion, every  kind  of  choice  food  and  drink,  as  well  as  sleeping  materials
and  beds.  These  should  be  ofiered  up  by  the  assembled  priesthood  as
though  the  ancestors  themselves  were  present,  by  which  they  shall
obtain  deliverance  from  the  pains,  and  be  born  at  once  in  a  condition
of  happiness  in  heaven." And,  moreover,  the  World-honoured  One

1  See  my  "  Indian  Cult  of  Avalokita,"  /.  R.A.S.,  p.  1,  and  plates  ii.  and  iii.,  1894.

2  Translated  by  S.  Beai,  in  The  Oriental,  November  6th,  1875. A  dramatized  version ,
is  common  in  China. — Cf.  Las  Fkes  annuellement  ciUhrh  d  Emoin,  J.  J.  M.  de  Gkoot.


HARITI,  THE  GANNIBAL  SHE-DEVIL.  99


taught  his  followers  certain  words  to  be  repeated  at  the  offering  of e
sacrifices,  by  which  the  virtue  thereof  would  be  certainly  secured.

On  this  Mugalan  with  joy  accepted  the  instruction,  and  by  means  of
this  institution  rescued  his  mother  from  her  sufferings.

And  so  for  all  future  time  this  means  of  deliverance  shall  be  effectual
for  the  purpose  designed,  as  year  by  year  the  offerings  are  presented
according  to  the  form  delivered  by  Buddha.

Having  heard  these  words,  Mugalan  and  the  rest  departed  to  their
several  places,  with  joyous  hearts  and  glad  thoughts.

Eelated  apparently  to  this  story  is  the  Lamaist  account  of  "  The
queen  of  the  Pretas  with  the  fiery  mouth,"  whom  the  Lamas
identify  with  the  celebrated  Yakshini  fiendess  Hariti,  for  whom
and  her  five  hundred  sons  they  daily  reserve  some  of  their  food,
relating  in  support  of  this  practice  the  following  story,  evidently
borrowed  from  the  story  of  Hariti  in  the  Eatnakuta  Sutra ; —

HaEIII, the child-eating YAKSHOTI, and "  QUBBN OF PRETAS.''

Hariti,  queen  of  the  hungry  ghouls  with  the  burning  mouths,  had
five  hundred  children,  whom  she  fed  on  living  children.  The  great
Buddha,  "  Mohugalaputra,"  coming  to  her  dwelling,  hid  away  Pingala,
the  youngest  and  most  beloved  of  her  sons,  in  his  begging-bowl,  un-
known to  the  gods  or  demons.  The  mother,  on  her  return,  was  drowned
in  sorrow  at  the  loss  of  her  favourite  son,  and  in  her  distress  appealed
to  the  omniscient  Mohugalaputra  for  aid  to  recover  him.  The  Buddha
then  showed  her  Pingala  within  his  bowl,  yet  all  the  efforts  of  Hariti
and  her  demons  f aUed  to  release  him.  So  she  besought  Buddha  for  aid,
who  replied,  "  You,  with  five  hundred  children,  mercilessly  devour  the
children  of  men  who  have  only  two  or  three,  yet  you  grieve  at  the  loss
of  only  one  !  "  The  Preta-queen  declared  that  this  one  was  the  most
precious  of  all,  and  she  vowed  that  were  he  released  she  never  again
would  devour  human  children.  The  Buddha,  consenting,  restored  her
child,  and  gave  her  the  three  Refuges  and  the  five  Precepts,  and  (say
the  Lamas)  he  promised  that  in  future  all  Buddhist  monks  would  give
her  a  handful  of  their  daily  food.^

This  practice  is  probably  derived  from  the  Hindu  offering  of
food  and  drink  to  the  manes  of  departed  relatives,  the  Sraddha
ceremonial.

Flying visits  of  mortals to  Hades,  having  their  parallels  in


1  The  Japanese  version  of  this  legend  and  its  pictorial  illustration  are  published
by  Sir.  A.  W.  Franks,  F.R.S.,  in  Jour.  Soc.  Antiqiim-ies,  Vol.  liii.,  1892.  Buddha  further
informed  her  that  "You  were  the  ninth  daughter  of  King  Chia-ye  at  the  time  of
Buddha  Kasyapa,  and  performed  many  great  and  meritorious  actions.  But  because
you  did  not  keep  the  precepts  you  received  the  form  of  a  demon."

H  2


100  METAPHYSICS.


Odysseu's  and  Dante's  visits  to  purgatory,  are  found  in  Lamaism,
where  they  are  known  as  JDe-lok,  or  "the  ghostly  returning,"
and  are  used  for  stirring  the  people  to  good  behaviour.

Buddhist  Metaphysics.

Buddha,  being  a  Hindu,  accepted  the  Hindu  theory  of  the
universe  and  its  fantastic  world-system,  with  the  modifications
above  indicated,  and  he  started  also  with  the  current  notions  of
metempsychosis  and  Karma  as  part  of  his  mental  furniture.

According  to  the  theory  of  metempsychosis,  or  more  properly
palingenesis,  which  was  not  unknown  to  the  ancient  Hellenic
and  even  Jewish  literature,  and  western  fairy-tales,

,"  The  soul  that  rises  with  us,  our  life's  star

Hath  had  elsewhere  its  setting."— WoRDSWOETH.

Death  merely  alters  the  form,  but  does  not  break  the  continuity  of
the  life,  which  proceeds  from  death  to  re-birth,  and  fresh  deaths
to  fresh  re-births  in  constant  succession  of  changing  states,  dis-
solving and  evolving  until  the  breaking  up  of  the  universe  after
a  kalpa,  or  almost  an  eternity  of  ages.  How  Buddha  modified
this  doctrine  will  be  referred  to  presently.

'  Karma^  or  the  ethical  doctrine  of  retribution,  is  accepted  as
regards  its  general  principle,  even  by  such  modern  men  of  science
as  Huxley.^ It  explains  all  the  acts  and  events  of  one's  Ufe  as

1  Tibetan,  las  and  p'rin-las.

2  Professor  Huxley  in  his  lecture  on  Evolution  and  Ethics  says  : —

"  Everyday  experience  familiarizes  us  with  the  facts  which  are  grouped  under  the
name  of  heredity.  Every  one  of  us  bears  upon  him  obvious  marks  of  his  parentage,
perhaps  of  remoter  relationships.  More  particularly  the  sum  of  tendencies  to  act  in  a
certain  way,  which  we  call '  character '  is  often,  to  be  traced  through  a  long  series  of
progenitors  and  collaterals.  So  we  may  justly  say  that  this  'character,'  this  moral
and  intellectual  essence  of  a  man  does  veritably  pass  over  from  one  fleshy  tabernacle
to  another  and  does  really  transmigrate  from  generation  to  generation.  In  the  new-
born infant  the  character  of  the  stock  lies  latent,  and  the  Ego  is  little  more  than  a
bundle  of  potentialities,  but,  very  early,  these  become  actualities  :  from  childhood  to
age  they  manifest  themselves  in  dulness  or  brightness,  weakness  or  strength,  vicious-
ness  or  uprightness :  and  with  each  feature  modified  by  confluence  with  another
character,  if  by  nothing  else,  the  character  passes  on  to  its  incarnation  in  new
bodies.

"  The  Indian  philosophers  called  character,  as  thus  defined,  '  Karma.'  It  is  this
Karma  which  passed  from  life  to  life  and  linked  them  in  the  chain  of  transmigrations ;
and  they  held  that  it  is  modified  in  each  life,  not  merely  by  confluence  of  parentage
but  by  its  own  acts *  *  »  «  •  «

"  In  the  theory  of  evolution,  the  tendency  of  a  germ  to  develop  according  tp  a


KABMA  AND  PALINGENESIS.  101

the  results  of  deeds  done  in  previous  existences,  and  it  creates  a
system  of  rewards  and  punishments,  sinking  the  wicked  through
the  lower  stages  of  human  and  animal  existence,  and  even  to  hell,
and  lifting  the  good  to  the  level  of  mighty  kings,  and  even  to  the
gods.

In  this  way  Buddha  explained  all  the  acts  and  events  of  his  life,  his
joys  and  sorrows,  his  success  and  failures,  his  virtues  and  weak-
nesses, as  results  of  things  done  by  him  in  previous  states  of  life,
which  he  recalled  to  mind  as  occasion  arose  for  teaching  purposes.
And  thus  those  anecdotes  of  the  antecedent  lives  of  the  Buddha,
— the  so-called  "  Jdtaka  tales '' — ^with  the  moral  lessons  derived
from  them,  came  to  be  among  the  most  cherished  items  of
Buddhist  belief.'

The  various  regions  of  re-birth  or  "  ways  "  of  life,  the  so-caUed
Gati,^  are  pictorially  represented  in  the  accompanying  drawing
called  "  The  Wheel  of  Life."  They  are  given  as  six  (or  five,  as  with
the  primitive  Buddhists  when  the  Titcms  were  not  separately
represented),  and  are  thus  enumerated  in  the  order  of  their  su-
periority : —

1st. The  Grods  (Sura  or  Deva,  Tibetan,  Lha).

2nd.  Titans  {Asura,  T.,  Lha-ma-yin).

3rd.  Man  (Nwra,  T.,  Mi).

4th.  Beasts  (Tiryak,  T.,  Du-do^).

5th.  Tantalized  Ghosts  (Preta,  T.,  Yi-dvag).

6th.  Hell  (Naraka,  T.,  JTal-k'am).

Bournouf  *  writing  from  Chinese  and  Ceylonese  sources,  classes
man  above  the  Titans,  but  the  order  now  given  is  that  adopted  by


certain  specific  type,  e.i/.,  of  the  kidney-bean  seed  to  grow  into  a  plant  having  all  the
characters  of  Fhaseolus  vulgaHs,  is  its  'Karma.'  It  is  the  'last  inheritor  and  the  last
result  of  all  the  conditions  that  have  effected  a  Une  of  ancestry  which  goes  back  for
many  miUions  of  years  to  the  time  when  life  first  appeared  on  earth.'  As  Professor
Rhys  Davids  aiptly  says,  the  snowdrop  '  is  a  snowdrop  and  not  an  oak,  and  just  that
kindof  a  snowdrop,  because  it  is  the  outcome  of  the  Karma  of  an  endless  series  of

past  existences.' "

1  Buddha's  births  are  usually  numbered  at  550,  of  which  the  latter  and  more  im-
^  portant  are  called  "  the  Great  Births."  For  list  of  different  forms  of  existence  ascribed

to  Buddha  in  his  previous  births  see  Ehys  Davids'  Jdtaha  Tales.  Cf.  also  Cowell's
edition  of  the  Jatakas  translated  from  the Pali,  and Ralston's Tales  from  the

Tibetan.  ^  ^ ._ „ „  ^, , .

2  "  Skt.,  Gati :  Tib.,  gro-bahi  rigs."  =  Literally the  bent  goers.

*  Lotus  de  la  lonne  Loi,  p.  377.


102


METAPHYSICS.


the  Lamas.i Existence  in  the  first  three  worlds  is  considered
superior  or  good,  and  in  the  last  three  inferior  or  bad. And  these


•^


Tht'SnnajL  nujruraJa  uUlt.ta;ixr  ^Jie  Jiidiiiiiu, TIti  trf;tvt,er  GtmfKv^menA

Key  to  Wheel  of  Life.
(See  p.  109.)

worlds  are  shown  in  this  relation  in  the  picture,  the  highest  being
heaven,  and  the  lowest  hell.

The  six  regions  of re-birth  are  shown  in  the  middle  whorl.

>  Conf.,  Haedt's  Man.  of  Buddhism,  p.  37.  The  Lamaist  account  is  contained  in  the
"  mnon-pa-i  mdsod,"  translated  by  Lotsawa  Bande-iipal  j-tsegs  from  the  work  of  the
Indian  Pandit  Vasubandhu,  etc.


REQIQiNS  OF  RE-BIRTH.  103

They  are  demarcated  from  each  other  by  rainbow-coloured  cordons
representing  the  atmospheric  zones  that  separate  the  different
worlds.  No  place  is  allotted  to  the  other  phases  of  existence  be-
lieved in  by  the  Lamas,  namely,  the  everlasting  existence  in  the
western  paradise  of  Sukhdvati  and  of  the  celestial  Buddhas  and
demoniacal  protectors  of  Lamaism,  and  the  expressed  absence  of
such  expressions  of  the  current  modern  beliefs  favours  the  claim  of
this  picture  to  considerable  antiquity.

Of  these  six  states  all  have  already  been  described  except  the
third  and  fourth,  namely,  the  state  of  being  a  man  or  a  beast,  a
reference  to  the  Buddhist  conception  of  which  is  necessary  to
understand  the  picture  of  The  Wheel  of  Life.

The  most  pessimistic  view  is  of  course  taken  of  human  life.
It  is  made  to  be  almost  unalloyed  misery,  its  striving,  it  perenni-
ally unsatisfied  desire,  its  sensations  of  heat  and  cold,  thirst  and
hunger,  depression  even  by  surfeiting  with  food,  anxiety  of  the
poor  for  their  daily  bread,  of  the  farmer  for  his  crops  and  cattle,
unfulfilled  desires,  separation  from  relatives,  subjection  to  temporal
laws,  infirmities  of  old  age  and  disease,  and  accidents  are  amongst
the  chief  miseries  referred  to.  The  miseries  of  human  existence
are  classed  into  eight  sections,  viz.:  The  miseries  of  "(1)  birth;
(2)  old  age ;  (3)  sickness ;  (4)  death ;  (5)  ungratified  wishes  and
struggle  for  existence ;  (6)  misfortunes  and  punishments  for  law-
breaking  ;  (7)  separation  from  relatives  and  cherished  objects ;  (8)
offensive  objects  and  sensations.

In  the  picture  the  following  phases  of  life  are  depicted  amongst
others : —

1st.  Birth  in  a  cottage.

2nd.  Children  at  play.

3rd.  Manhood,  village  scenes,  people  drinking  wine  under  shade

of  a  tree,  a  man  playing  a  flute,  women  spinning  and

weaving,  a  borrower,  two  traders,  a  drunken  man.
4th.  Labour  by  sweat  of  brow,  men  tilling  a  field,  gathering  fuel

in  a  forest,  carrying  a  heavy  load.
5th.  Accident,  a  man  and  horse  falling  into  a  river.
6th.  Crime,  two  men  fighting,  one  under  trial  before  the  judge,

and  one  undergoing  corporal  punishment.
7th.  Temporal  government :  the  king  and  his  ministers.


104  METAPHTSIG^.


8th.  Old  age — decrepit  old  people.
9th.  Disease,  a  physician  feeling  the  pulse  of  a  patient.
10th.  Death,  a  corpse  with  a  Lama  feeling  whether  breath  be
extinct,  and  a  Lama  at  the  head  doing  worship,  and  a
woman  and  other  relatives  weeping.
11th.  Funeral  ceremonies. A  corpse  being carried  ofif  to  the
funeral  pyre  on  the  top  of  a  hill,  preceded  by  a  Lama
blowing  a thigh-bone  trumpet  and  rattling  a  hand
drum  :  he  also  has  hold  of  the  end  of  a  white  scarf  which
is  affixed  to  the  corpse. The  object  of  this  scarf  is  to
guide  the  soul  by  the  white  path  to  the  pyre  so  that  it
may  be  disposed  of  in  the  orthodox  manner,  and  have
the  best  chance  of  a  good  re-birth,  and  may  not  stray
and  get  caught  by  outside  demons. Behind  the  corpse-
bearer  is  a  porter  with  food  and  drink  offerings,  and  last
of  all  a  mourning  relative.
12th.  Religion  is  represented  by  a  temple  placed  above  all  other
habitations  with  a  Lama  and  monk  performing  worship ;
and  a  hermit  in  his  cell  with  bell,  'uayVa-sceptre,  and
thigh-bone  trumpet ; and  a  stupa  or  caitya  (ch'orten)
circumambulated  by  a  devotee.
The  state  of  the  beasts  is  one  of  greater  misery  even  than  the
human. In  the  picture  are  shown  land  and  aquatic  animals  of
various  kinds  devouring  one  another,  the  larger  preying  on  the
small ;  and  also  small  ones  combining  to  catch  and  kill  the  larger
ones. Human  hunters  also  are  setting  nets  for,  and  others  are
shooting  game. Domestic  animals  are  shown  laden  with  burdens,
or  ploughing  and  being  goaded  ;  some  are  being  milked  and  shorn
of  their  wool,  others  are  being  branded  or  castrated  or  having  their
nostrils  bored,  others  killed  for  their  flesh  or  skin,  etc. All  are
suffering  great  misery  through  the  anxiety  and  pains  of  preying
or  being  preyed  upon. In  the  water  is  shown  a  Ndga  or  merman's
house,  with  its  inmates  in  grief  at  being  preyed  upon  by  the
Garuda,  a  monster  bird,  like  the  fabled  roc,  which  by  the  rush  of
air  from  its  wings  cleaves  the  sea  to  its  depths  in  its  search  for
Wdgas.

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  consider  Buddha's  conception  of
Human  Life —


BUDDHA! S THEORY  OF  THE UNIVEBSE.  105

Buddha's  Conception  of  the  Cause  of  I.ife

AND OF  MiSEKY.l

Apart  from  its  importance  as  an  illustration  of  the  earlier  intel-
lectual life  of  humanity,  the  Buddhist  ontology,  the  most  won-
derful, perhaps,  the  world  has  seen,  possesses  a  paramount  interest
for  all  who  would  arrive  at  a  right  understanding  of  the  religion
and  ethics  with  which  it  is  associated.

Buddha  formulated  his  view  of  life  into  a  twelve-linked  closed
chain  called  "the  Wheel  of  Life  or  of 'Becoming'"  (Bhavacakra),
or  the  Causal  Nexus  (Pratitya  SaTnutpdda) ;  which  he  is  repre-
sented, in  the  Vinaya  scripture  itself,  to  have  thought  out  under
the  Tree  of  Wisdom.^  The  way  in  which  the  narrative  is  couched,
leads,  indeed,  to  the  impression  that  it  was  precisely  the  insight
into  this  "  Wheel  of  Life  "  which  constituted  his  Buddhahood,  and
distinguished  him  from  the  other  Arhats.  However  this  may
be,  he  gave  it  a  very  leading  place  in  his  philosophy,  so  that  the
stanza  recounting  its  utterance,  Ye  dharmd  hetu,^  etc.,  termed
by  English  writers  "  The  Buddhist  Creed,"  is  the  most  frequent  of
all  Buddhist  inscriptions,  and  was  certainly  in  olden  days  familiar
to  every  lay  Buddhist ;  and  it  is  practically  identical  with  "  The
four  noble  Truths,"  omitting  only  the  initial  expression  of
"  suffering."  *

1  The  bulk  of  this  article  appeared  in  the  J.R.A.S.  (1894),  pp.  367,  etc.

2  ViiMija  Texts,  Vol.  i.,  pp.  74-84.

3  "  Of  all  objects  which  proceed  from  a  Cause

The  Tathagatha  has  explained  the  cause.

And  he  has  explained  their  cessation  also  ;

This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  great  Samaiia."

ViTiaya  Texts,  i.,  146.
»  This  famous  stanza,  says  Professor  Rhys  Davids  ( Viimya  Texts,  i.,  146),  doubtless
alludes  to  the  formula  of  the  twelve  Nidanas.  "  The  Chain  of  Causation,  or  the  doc-
trine of  the  twelve  Nidanas  (causes  of  existence)  contains,  as  has  often  been  observed
in  a  more  developed  form,  an  answer  to  the  same  problem  to  which  the  second  and
third  of  the  four  Noble  Truths  (Ariya  Saoca)  also  try  to  give  a  solution,  viz.,  the  prob-
lem of  the  origin  and  destruction  of  suffering.  The  Noble  Truths  simply  reduce  the
origin  of  suffering  to  thirst  or  desire  (Tanha)  in  its  threefold  form,  thirst  for  pleasure,
thirst  for  existence,  thirst  for  prosperity  (see  i.,  6,  20).  In  the  system  of  the  twelve
nidanas  Thirst  also  has  found  its  place  among  the  causes  of  suffering,  but  it  is  not
considered  as  the  immediate  cause.  A  concatenation  of  other  categories  is  inserted
between  taraha  and  its  ultimate  effect ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  investigation  of  causes
is  carried  on  further  beyond  tawha.  The  question  is  here  asked,  what  does  tajiha  come
from  ?  and  thus  the  series  of  causes  and  effects  is  led  back  to  Avigga  (Ignorance)  as
its  deepest  root.  We  may  add  that  the  redactors  of  the  Pitakas  who,  of  course,  could
not  but  observe  this  parallelity  between  the  second  and  third  Ariya  Saccas  and  the


106  METAPHYSICS.


Yet  though  this  chain  forms  the  chief  corner-stone  of  Bud-
dhism, it  is  remarkable  that  scarcely  any  two  European  scholars
are  agreed  upon  the  exact  nature  and  signification  of  some  of  its
chief  links,  while  the  sequence  of  several  links  is  deemed  self-
contradictory' and  impossible;  and  even  the  alleged  continuity  of
the  whole  is  doubted.  The  best  western  authorities  who  have
attempted  its  interpretation,  Childers^  and  Prof.  H.  Oldenberg,
have  practically  given  up  the  problem  in  despair ;  the  latter  ex-
claiming, "  it  is  utterly  impossible  for  anyone  who  seeks  to  find
out  its  meaning,  to  trace  from  beginning  to  end  a  connected
meaning  in  this  formula."  ^

Such  conflict  of  opinion  in  regard  to  this  "  chain "  is  mainly
due  to  the  circumstance  that  no  commentary  on  its  subtle  formula
has  ever  been  published  ;  and  that  the  only  means  hitherto  avail-
able for  its  interpretation  have  been  the  ambiguous  Pali  and  San-
skrit terminology  for  the  links  themselves.  Thus,  for  one  only
of  these  links,  namely,  Sanskdra,  the  following  are  some  of  the
many  renderings  which  have  been  attempted  : —

"  Constructing,  preparing,  perfecting,  embellishing,  aggregation ;
matter ;  Karma,  the  Skandhas. — ('As  a  technical  term,  Sankdro  has
several  decided  shades  of  meaning  ...  in  fact,  Sankharo  includes
everything  of  which  impermanence  may  be  predicated,  or,  what  is
the  same  thing,  everything  which  springs  from  a  cause ' — Childers.) '
Les  Concepts. — (Burnouf )  * ;  Composition  notion  (Csoma) ;  Willen
(Schmidt) ;  Discrimination  (Hardy) ;  Les  id6es  (Foucaux) ' ;  Ten-
dencies, potentialities,  confections  (Rhys  Davids)  ;  "  Gestaltungen :
shapes  and  forms  (H.  Oldenberg) ;  Conformations  (W.  Hoey).

This  bewildering  obscurity  of  its  terminology  has somewhat


system  of  the  twelve  Nidanas  go  so  far  in  one  instance  (Ahguttara  Nikaya,  Tika
Nipata,  fol.  he  of  the  Phayre  MS.)  as  to  directly  replace  in  giving  the  text  of  the  four
Ariya  Saccas  the  second  and  third  of  these  by  the  twelve  Nidanas  in  direct  and  reverse
order  respectively."^ rimai/a  Texts,  i.,76.

1  Colebeooke's  Mis.  JSssmjs  2nd  ed.,  ii.,  453  sej.

2  Buddha,  etc.,  Eng.  trans,  by  Dr.  W.  Hoey,  p.  226.  Eecently  Mr.  H.  C.  Warren,  of
Cambridge,  Mass.  (Froc.  Amencan  Oriental  Society,  Ap.  6-8,  1893,  p.  xxvii),  has  ad-
vocated a  looser  meaning  for  the  word  paccaya,  usually  translated  "  cause,"  without,
however,  getting  rid  of  the  more  serious  difficulties, which  beset  the  interpretation  of,
the  chain.

3  Pali  Diet.,  p.  453.
*  P.  503.

^  These  last  four  authors  are  quoted  through  Koppen,  i.,  604.
"  B^iddhism,  p.  91,  where  the  fifty-two  divisions  are  enumerated.


BUDDHA'S  SUBTLE  CONCEPTION  OF  LIFE.  107


displaced  the  chain  from  its  due  prominence  in  the  European
books  on  the  system,  notwithstanding  the  importance  claimed  for
it  by  Buddhists.

Now  I  have  lately  discovered  among  the  frescoes  of  the  ancient
Buddhist  caves  of  Ajanta,  in  central  India,  a  picture,  over  thirteen
centuries  old,  which  supplies  a  valuable  commentary  on  this  sub-
ject. It  portrays  in  concrete  form  those  metaphysical  conceptions
— the  so-called  Niddna — which,  in  their  Pali  and  Sanskrit  termi-
nology, have  proved  so  puzzling  to  European  scholars.  And,  as
this  picture,  supplemented  by  its  Tibetan  versions  and  its  detailed
explanation  as  given  me  by  learned  Lamas,  who  are  thoroughly
familiar  with  it,  and  possess  its  traditional  interpretation,^  affords
a  clue  to  much  that  is  imperfectly  understood,  and  helps  to  settle
disputed  points  of  fundamental  importance,  these  advantages  seem
to  justify  my  bringing  it  to  notice,  and  may  also,  I  hope,  justify
my  attempt,  however  crude,  at  exhibiting  its  continuity  as  a  com-
plete authentic  account  of  human  life  from  the  absolute  stand-
point of  the  earliest  Buddhist  philosophy.

One  important  result  of  this  new  interpretation  of  the  ancient
formula  will  be  to  show  that  it  seems  to  possess  more  in  common
with  modern  philosophic  methods  and  speculations  than  is  usually
suspected.  Indeed,  it  would  scarcely  be  going  too  far  to  say  that
at  a  period  before  the  epoch  of  Alexander  the  Grreat,  in  the  valley
of  the  Ganges,  and  at  a  time  when  writing  was  still  unknown  in
India,  an  Indian  anchorite  evolved  in  the  main  by  private  study
and  meditation  an  ontological  system  which,  while  having  much  in
common  with  the  philosophy  of  Plato  and  of  Kant,^  and  the  most
profound  and  celebrated  speculations  of  modern  times  (such  as
those  of  Bishop  Berkeley,  and  Schopenhauer,  and  Hartmann),  yet
far  surpassed  these  in  elaborateness.  And  as  this  bold  system
formed  the  basis  of  Buddhist  ethics,  its  formulas  came  to  be  re-
presented for  teaching  purposes  in  concrete  pictorial  form  in  the
vestibules  of  the  Indian  monasteries  and  temples,  as  they  still  are
in  Tibet  and  China ; and  although  the  impermanence of  the


1  As  current  in  mediseval  Indian  Buddhism.

2  Buddha  seems  to  have  propounded  the  same  truth  which  Plato  and  latterly  Kant
were  never  tired  of  repeating,  that  "  this  world  which  appears  to  the  senses  has  no
true  Being,  but  only  ceaseless  Becoming ;  it  is  and  it  is  not,  and  its  comprehension  is
not  so  much  knowledge  as  illusion."


108  METAPHTSIC8.


materials  of  the  painter's  art  has  unfortunately  deprived  us  of
most  of  its  traces  in  India,  where  Buddhism  has  been  extinct  for
centuries,  yet  I  have  found  it  as  a  relic  in  the  deserted  cave-
temples  of  Ajanta.^

Buddha  himself  may,  as  the  Lamas  relate,  have  originated  the
picture  of  "  The  Wheel  of  Life,"  by  drawing  it  in  diagrammatic
fashion  with  grains  of  rice,  from  a  stalk  which  he  had  plucked
while  teaching  his  disciples  in  a  rice-field.  The  introduction  of
the  pictorial  details  is  ascribed  to  the  great  Indian  monk  Nagar-
juna,  who  lived  in  the  second  century  A.D.,  under  the  patronage  of
the  successors  of  the  Scythian  king  Kanishka,  who  we  know  from
Hiuen  Tsiang  employed  artists  in  great  numbers  in  the  decoration
of  Buddhist  buildings.  These  pictorial  details,  however,  are  alleged
to  be  objective  representations  of  the  self-same  similes  used  by
Buddha  himself,  who,  as  is  clear  from  his  Sutras  or  sermons,  con-
stantly used  homely  similes  and  allegories  to  illustrate  his
doctrines.  And  a  general  account  of  the  construction  of  the
picture  occurs  in  the  Bivydvaddna.^

The  particular  Indian  painting  from  Ajanta  on  which  the  pre-
sent article  is  based,  is  attributed  to  the  sixth  century  of  our  era,^
while  the  Tibetan  picture  which  supplements  it,  is  alleged,  and
with  reason,  to  be  a  copy  of  one  brought  to  Tibet  by  the  Indian
monk  "  Bande  Yeshe,"  in  the  eighth  century  A.D.*


1  See  its  photograph  accompanying  my  article  in  J.R.A.S.,  1894,  p.  370.

2  As  noted  by  Prof.  Cowell  (Maine's  Dissertations  on  Early  Law  and  Ouslom,  p.  50),  for
which  reference  I  am  indebted  to  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids.  In  the  Divyavadana,  pp.  299-300,
it  is  related  how  Buddha,  while  at  the  Squirrel's  Feeding-ground  (Kolaudaka)  in  the
Veuuvana  forest  near  Eajagriha,  instructed  Ananda  to  make  a  wheel  (cakram  kaiayl-
tavyam)  for  the  purpose  of  illustrating  what  another  disciple,  Maudgalyayana,  saw
when  he  visited  other  spheres,  which  it  seems  he  was  in  the  habit  of  doing.  The
wheel  was  to  have  five  spokes  (paiioagandakam),  between  which  were  to  be  depicted
the  hells,  animals,  pretas,  gods,  and  men.  In  the  middle  a  dove  (paravata),  a  ser-
pent, and  a  hog  were  to  symbolize  lust,  hatred,  and  ignorance.  All  round  the  tire  was
to  go  the  twelve-fold  circle  of  causation  in  the  regular  and  inverse  order.  Beings
were  to  be  represented  "  as  being  born  in  a  supernatural  way  (aupapadukah)  as  by  the
machinery  of  a  water-wheel  falling  from  one  state  and  being  produced  in  another."
Buddha  himself  is  to  be  outside  the  wheel.  The  wheel  was  made  and  placed  in  the
"  Grand  entrance  gateway  "  (dvarakoshthake),  and  a  bhikshu  aippointed  to  interpret  it.

'  BoEGESS,  in  Roch  Temples,  309.

*  And  now  at  Sam-yas  monastery.  For  a  technical  description  of  it  by  me  see
J.A.S.B.,  Ixi.,  p.  133  seq.  A  confused  copy  of  the  picture  was  figured  by  GioEOi
{^Iplmb.  Tibet),  and  partly  reproduced  by  FouoAux,  Annates  du  Musie  Gvimet,  Tome
sixieme,  1884,  p.  290,  but  in  neither  case  with  any  explanatory  description  of  its  details.


The  Buddhism  ot  iiDet.


The Wheel or Life,
Picturing  the  Buddhist  Theory  of  the  Universe.


[To  face  <p.


THE  PICTORIAL WHEEL OF'  LIFE.  109

The  Tibetan  form  of  the  picture  ^  here  given  should  be  studied
with  its  Key  (p.  102).  It  is  a  disc  or  wheel,  symbolizing  the  end-
less cycle  of  Life  {samsdra),  of  which  each  re-birth  is  a  revolution.
The  wheel  is  held  in  the  clutches  of  a  monster,  who  represents  the
hideousness  of  the  Clinging  to  Life.  The  broad  tire  is  occupied
by  the  Causal  Nexus,  and  the  nave  by  the  three  vices  or  delu-
sions, "  The  Daughters  of  Desire,"  the  three  vices — Rdga,  Bvesa,
Moha.  Lust,  ill-will,  stupidity,  which  lie  at  the  core  of  re-birth,
and  are  figured  here,  as  in  the  other  Indian  picture  on  page  6,  as
a  dove,  serpent,  and  pig,  appropriately  coloured  red,  green,  and
black ;  while  the  body  of  the  wheel,  which  is  considered  to  be  in
continuous  revolution,  is  filled  with  pictorial  details  of  Life  in  its
several  forms,  or  "  The  Whirling  on  the  Wheel "  of  Life.  And
outside  the  wheel  is  a  figure  of  Buddha,  showing  that  he  has  es-
caped from  the  cycle,  to  which  he  is  represented  as  pointing  the
way  of  escape.

The  ancient  conception  of  Life  under  the  fi.gure  of  a  wheel  of
which  each  re-birth  is  a  revolution  is  not  confined  to  Buddhism
and  Brahmanism.  This  fancy  finds  an  echo  more  than  once  in
Hellenic  literature.^


1  Skt., Bhavacakramudra ;  T.,  Srid-pahi  'K'or-lohi  p'yag-rgya,  or  shortly  "Si-pa K'or-
IS."  The  Tibetaaform  of  the  picture  is  of  two  styles,  the  "old"  and  "new."  The
latter  is  given  in  the  attached  plate,  and  it  differs  from  the  "  old  "  only  in  the  intro-
duction of  a  figure  of  Avalokita  or  the  God  of  Mercy,  in  the  form  of  a  fSage  or  Muni,
into  each  of  the  six  worlds  of  re-birth,  and  in  one  or  two  different  pictorial  symbols
for  the  causes  of  re-birth.

2  Cf.  note  by  Prof.  C.  Bendall  on  "Platonic  Teaching.in  Ancient  India." — Aihenimim,
10th  January,  1891.  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids,  commenting  on  my  article  (J  R.A.S.,  1894,
p.  388),  writes:  "  In  the  Orphic  theogony  we  come  across  the  notion  of  re-birth  considered
as  a  weary  unending  cycle  of  fate  or  necessity— kukAos  t^j  jev^asus,  S  Trjs  iJ.otpa5
Tpox6s,  etc. — from  which  the  soul  longs  to  escape,  and  entreats  the  gods,  especially
Dionysos  {Ai6vv(Tos  Awcrioi  flcSl  \iaiov),  for  release, — xiKXov  re  Krj^ai  Kal  waTn/cia-at
KaK6riiTos.  In  the  verses  inscribed  on  one  of  three  golden  funereal  tablets  dug  up  near
the  site  of  Sybaris  the  line  occurs :  'And  thus  I  escaped  from  the  cycle,  the  painful,
misery-laden'  {Inscr.gr.  Sicil.  et  Ital.  641).  These  allusions  may  be  referred  to  at
second-hand  in  Herr  Erwin  Rohde's  study  of  Hellenic  ideas  respecting  the  soul  and
immortality,  entitled  Psyche  (4to.  Hiilfte,  pp.  416  et  aej.;  509),  recently  completed.
Pindar,  Empedocles,  and  Plato,  as  is  well  known,  all  entertained  the  notion  of  repeated
re-birth  in  this  world  at  intervals  ranging  from  nine  to  one  thousand  years,  repeated
twice,  thrice,  or  an  indefinite  number  of  times,  and,  according  to  the  two  latter  writers,
often  mcluding  in  its  phases  incarnation  as  an  animal,  or  even  as  a  vegetable.  And
throughout  there  runs  the  Orphic  ideas  of  each  re-birth  being  a  stage  in  a  course  of
moral  evolution  and  effort  after  purification.  But  I  do  not  know  whether  the  actual
image  of  the  wheel  occurs  in  other  instances  besides  those  I  have  quoted. Empedocles,


no


METAPHYSICS.


la  the  pictorial  diagram  of  human  life,  as  conceived  by
Buddhist  philosophy,  the  causal  nexus  begins  at  the  left-hand
side  of  the  top  partition.  The  twelve  links  round  the  rim  follow
in  the  usual  order  and  in  evolutionary  fashion  as  follows  : —


Causal  Category.

EvOiUTIONARY  STAGE.

^  SANSKRIT.

I.

Unconscious  Will

Avidya

Stage  of  passing  from  Death  to

Re-birth.
Shaping  <of formless physical

II.

Conformations

Sanslcara

and  mental  materials  (in  the

Gata).

III.

Consciousness

Vijnana

Rise  of  Conscious  Experience.

IV.

Self -consciousness

Nama-rupa

Rise  of  Individuality — distinc-
tion hetween  self  and  not-self.

V.

Sense  -  surfaces  and

Understanding-

Chada.yatana

Realizes  possession  of  Sense-
Surfaces  and  Understanding
with  reference  to  outside
world.

VI.

Contact

Spmsa

Exercise  of  Sense-organs  on
outer  world.

VII.

Feeling

Vedana

Mental  and  physical  sensations.

VIII.

Desire

Trishna

Desire,  as  experience  of  pain  or
delusive  pleasure.

IX.

Indulgence

Upadana

Grasping  greed,  as  satisfying
Desire,  inducing  clinging  to
Worldly  Wealth  and  desire  of

heir  to  it.

X.

Fuller  Life

Bhava

Life  in  fuller  form,  as  enriched
by  satisfying  desire  of  married
life  and  as  means  of  obtaining
heir.

XI.

Birth  (of  heir)

Jati

Maturity  by  birth  of  heir  (which
affords  re-birth  to  another
spirit).

XII.

Decay  and  Death.

Jaramarana

Maturity  leads  to  Decay  and  to

Death.
Passing  from  Death  toEe-hirth.

I.

Unconscious  Will.

Avidya

The  key-note  to  Buddha's  system  is  that  Life  in  any  form  must
necessarily,  and  not  merely  accidentally,  be  accompanied  by  suffer-


for  instance,  sees  rather  a  toilsome  road  or  roads  of  life— itp^aAeas  j8i<(toio  KeAeiiflous.
With  Plato,  again,  we  more  readily  associate  his  simile  of  a  re-birth  as  a  fall  of  the
soul  from  heaven  to  earth,  as  it  drives  its  chariot  after  the  procession  of  the  gods,
through  the  steed  of  Epithumia  being  dragged  down  by  its  craving  for  carnal  things
—or,  as  the  Buddhist  might  say,  the  steed  of  Chandarago  overcome  by  Upadana  for
the  skandhas.

"  The  question  of  a  genetic  connection  between  oriental  and  Hellenic  notions  as  to
re-birth  is  of  the  greatest  interest.  Prof.  Leopold  von  Schrceder's  opinion  that  such  a
connection  exists  (PytlMgoras  ttnd  die  InAer,  especially  pp.  25-31)  seems  on  the  whole
to  be  well  founded."


THE WHEEL OF  LIFE.  Hi


ing  as  others  had  taught. Anityam  Duhkham  Andtmakam  /i All
is  transitory,  painful,  and  unreal !

Buddha,  therefore,  set  himself  the  task  of  solving  the  mystery
of  Life  in  order  to  find  the  way  of  escape  from  continual  Be-
comings, which  was  clearly  involved  in  misery.  Being  a  Hindii,
he  adopted  the  then,  as  now,  current  Hindu  notion  of  metem-
psychosis or  palingenesis,  the  doctrine,  namely,  that  death  merely
alters  the  form,  but  does  not  break  the  continuity  of  life  2  which
proceeds  from  Death  to  Re-birth,  and  fresh  Deaths  to  fresh  Ee-
births  in  constant  succession  of  changing  states  dissolving  and
evolving  until  the  breaking  up  of  the  universe  after  a  Kalpa,
or  almost  an  eternity  of  countless  ages ;  though  it  would  appear
probable  that  Buddha  and  the  primitive  Buddhists  denied  the
real  existence  of  the  material  and  physical  world  as  well  as  the
vital.

In  his  ontological  scheme,  while  adopting  an  agnostic  attitude
towards  the  Hindii  gods  and  their  creative  functions,  Buddha  does
not  begin  by  attempting  to  account  for  the  first  life.  He  accepts
the  world  as  a  working  system  on  metempsychological  lines,  and  he
evades  the  necessity  for  a  supernatural  creator  by  interpreting  the
Universe,  as  Will  and  Idea,  and  by  placing  the  Karma  or  ethical
doctrine  of  retribution  in  the  position  of  the  Supernatural  Con-
trolling InteUigenee  or  Creator.  Perceiving  the  relativity  of
knowledge  and  that  nature  furnishes  presumptive  evidence  that
some  evolution  has  taken  place  in  her  methods,  he  throws  his
theory  of  the  vital  process  into  a  synthetical  or  developmental
form,  showing  a  gradual  transition  from  the  simple  to  the  com-
plex, and  proceeding  from  the  homogeneous  to  the  heterogeneous
by  an  ever-changing  cosmic  order  in  which  everything  is  dominated
by  causality.

The  starting  point  in  Buddha's  theory  of  Life  is  the  connecting
link  between  the  old  life  and  the  new.  Unfortunately,  however,
even  on  so  elementary  a  point  as  this,  there  exists  no  consensus  of
opinion  as  to  what  Buddha's  view  of  this  link  precisely  was,  for
he  concerned  himself  less  with  the  metaphysical  aspects  of  his
philosophy  than  with  the practical  alleviation  and  removal of

1  Pali,  Anicmm  Duhham  Anattam ; in  Tibetan,  Mi-rtag-pa  sdug-bsnal-ba,  bdag-
med-ba.

2  But  see  hereafter.


112  METAPHTSIGS.


sorrow.  He  expressly  avoided  the  use  of  the  term  "  Soul "
(^AtDian),  as  this  word  was  already  in  use  in  Brahmanism  with  the
implication  of  supernatural  and  theistic  creation.  Some  say  that
he  taught  there  is  no  continuity  between  the  old  life  and  the  new,
that  the  Karma  attaches  itself  to  any  spirit  which  may  chance  to
be  re-born  at  the  time  of  the  person's  death.  But  if  this  be  so,
where  is  the  justice  of  the  Karma  doctrine  ?  It  is  said  by  some
that  the  sole-surviving  thing  is  Karma,  yet  this  term  is  used  so
elastically  as  to  include  products  which  belong  rather  to  the
category  of  the  Will-to-live.  Others  say  that  Vijiidna,  or  con-
sciousness alone,  survives ;  and  so  on.^

The  view  adopted  in  this  paper  is  based  upon  that  held  by  one
of  the  Lamas  who  explained  to  me  the  pictorial  Niddnas;  and  it
has  the  advantages  of  being  not  only  intelligible,  but  consistent,
and  seems  as  reasonable  as  any  ontological  theory  well  can  be
which  postulates  a  metaphysical  absolute.

Our  view  holds  that  there  is  actual  continuity  of  the  Individual
life  (or  Sattva)  between  death  and  re-birth.  And  this  identity  of
being  is  supported  by  the  doctrine  of  Elcotibhdva,  which  word,
according  to  its  Tibetan  etymology,  means  "  to  become  one  un-
interruptedly."^

The  Surviving  Thing,  which  is  carried  on  into  the  new  career  of
the  individual,  would  indeed  seem  to  be  identical  with  what  is  now
generally  known  to occidentals as Hartmann's absolute,  "  the

1  See  J.R.A.S.,  1892,  p.  1  seq.,  for  a  tabular  abstract  by  Prof.  Ehys  Davids  on  the
authorities  for  sucli  conflicting  views.

~  Ekotibhava  is  another  crux  of  Buddhism.  Childers,  in  quoting  Thero  Subhuti's
etymology  from  eho  udeii,  writes :  "  Ekodibhavo,  the  second  Jhana,  is  said  to  be  eetaso
ekodibhavo,  which  Burnouf  renders  '  Unity  of  the  mind ' ;  but  that  this  is  its  true
meaning  is  very  doubtful,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  full  extract  sent  me.  ...  In
accordance  with  tiiis  gloss  I  would  be  inclined  to  render  ekodibhavo  by  '  predomin-
ance,' rather  than  by  unity,  but  I  do  not  feel  competent  to  give  a  decided  opinion  as
to  its  meaning." — Diet,  p.  IZi.  Dr.  Morris  (in  the  Academy,  27th  March,  1886,  p.  222)
has  a  note  on  the  subject,  followed  by  Prof.  Max  Miiller  (Academy,  3rd  April,  1886,  p.
241),  who  would  derive  it  from  eka-|-kodi;  and  Professor  Eggeling  has  a  supple-
mentary note  in  the  Pali  Text  Soc.  Jour.  (p.  32,  1885),  in  which  it  is  considered  a
mental  state,  and  rendered  by  Prof.  Rhys  Davids  as  "  exaltation."  Prof.  Kern
(Introd.  to  his  translation  of  the  Saddharma  Pundanka,  xvii.)  In  noting  the  oocuirence
of  the  word  ekotibhava  in  the  Lalita  Vistara  (p.  147,  8,  and  439,  6),  rejects  Subhuti's
etymology  of  the  word,  without  assigning  any  reasons.  Tlie  Tibetan  -etymology,  how-
ever, entirely  supports  Subhuti.  It  is  translated  rG-yud-goh'ig-tu-gyur-pa,  which
means  "  to  become'or  to  be  transformed -|-one-|-a  thread,  continuous,  uninterrupted  " ;
and  my  Manuscript  Tibeto-Sanskrit  Dictionary  restores  the  word  to  Eka-|-urthanan-|-
bhava.


UNGONSGIOUa WILL.  113

Unconscious  Will";  and  to  this  is  attached  the  Karma  or  retribu-
tion of  deeds  done  in  former  lives.

This,  the  first  link  of  the  Ontological  Chain,  begins  at  the  instant
when  the  mortal  envelope  is  thrown  off  or  changed,  that  is  at
"  death,"  and  was  termed  by  Buddha  the  stage  of  Avidyd,  which
literally  means  "Want  of  Knowledge"  and  usually  rendered  into
Enghsh  as  "Ignorance"  or  "  Nescience."  But  the  word  Avidya  is
used  in  different  senses.  Its  ordinary  sense  is  thus  defined  in  the
Vinaya  Texts,  i.,  76 :  "  Not  to  know  Suffering,  not  to  know  the
Cause  of  suffering,  not  to  know  the  Cessation  of  suffering,  not  to
know  the  Path  which  leads  to  the  cessation  of  suffering,  this  is
called  Ignorance."  But  Avidyd,  as  the  initial  Unk  of  the  Causal
Nexus,  is,  according  to  our  information,  what  may  be  termed  the
Ignorant  Unconscious-Will-to-Live.

The  pictorial  representation  of  this  link  is  a  blind  she-camel
("  Ignorant  "  Productive  Unconscious  Will)  led  by  a  driver  (the
Karma). 1

The  camel  vividly  suggests  the  long  and  trying  journey  of  the
Unconscious  Will  across  the  desert  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,
past  death  itself  to  the  dawn  of  the  new  Ufe  beyond.  The  sex  of
the  camel  seems  to  indicate  the  potential  productiveness  of  the
Unconscious  Will.  The  blindness  of  the  beast  represents  the  dark-
ness of  the  passage  and  the  blind  ignorance  of  the  Unconscious
Will,  which  through  spiritual  ignorance  or  stupidity  (Moha)  be-
lieves in  the  reality  of  external  objects.  And  the  ignorant  animal
is  led  blindly  onwards  by  its  Karma.

In  the  body  of  the  picture  are  given  the  details  of  the  progress
across  this  initial  stage  to  the  next  link  in  the  chain  of  casuality.
The  manner  in  which  the  Karma  determines  the  kind  of  new  life
is  concretely  represented  as  a  "judgment  scene."  Here  the  sins
are  figured  as  black  pebbles,  and  the  good  deeds  as  white,  which
are  weighed  against  each  other  in  scales.  And  according  to  which-
ever preponderates  so  is  the  place  of  re-birth  in  one  or  other  of  the
six  states.  Thus  the  kind  of  new  life  is  entirely  determined  by
the  individual's  own  deeds  or  Karma,  which  cre&,tes  a  system  of

1  The  Tibetan  picture  usually  depicts  "  a  blind  old  woman  "  led  by  a  man.  This  per-
version of  the  Indian  picture  seems  to  me  to  be  due  to  a  mistranslation  on  the  part  of
the  Lamas,  who  appear  to  have  constructed  their  picture  from  a,  written  description
in  which  the  little  known  word  nc/a-mo,  a  she-camel,  is  interpreted  as  ga-mo,  an  old
woman.

I


lU  METAPHYSICS.


rewards  and  punishments,  sinking  the  wicked  through  the  lower
stages  of  human  and  animal  existence  and  even  to  heU ;  and  lifting  •
the  good  to  the  level  of  mighty  kings  and  sages,  and  even  to  the
gods.  Here  it  may  be  noted  that  hell  is  an  idealistic  state,  a  sort
of  hellish  nightmare,  the  product  of  the  morbid  sinful  imagina-
tion.

The  ignorant  Unconscious  Will,  as  a  homogeneous  aggregate
under  the  influence  of  the  three  fires  of  illusion  {Trividagni,  lust,
ill-will,  and  stupidity),  is  thus  led  by  its  Karma  to  one  or  other
of  the  six  gati  or  forms  of  existence  with  which  begins  link  num-
ber II.,  namely,  Confoemations  {Sanskdra).

Here  our  picture  and  its  Lamaist  tradition  have  come  to  our
aid,  and  rendered  it  certain  that  out  of  the  manifold  renderings  of
Sanskdra  attempted  by  European  scholars,  as  detailed  on  a  pre-
vious page,  "Conformations  "  was  the  one  intended  by  the  primitive
Buddhists ;  and  the  Tibetan  translation  of  the  Sanskrit  word  gives
"  impression  "  or  "  formation  "  +  "  action."  The  picture  is  a  potter
modelling  clay  on  his  wheel,  and  is  identical  with  the  Egyptian
image  of  the  creator.  It  represents  the  shaping  of  the  crude  and
formless  physical  and  mental  aggregates  of  the  Unconscious  Will
by  the  Karma,  in  accordance  with  "  The  Judgment."

"  Our  mind  is  but  a  lump  of  clay,
Which  Fate,  grim  Potter,  holds
On  sorrow's  wheel  that  rolls  alway
And,  as  he  pleases,  moulds."

C.  H.  Tawnet's  trans.  Vairagya  ^akam.

These  so-called  aggregates  or  Skandha  (Pali,  Khandha)  require
some  notice.  The  Buddhists,  in  their  theory  of  the  nature  of
sentient  beings,  pre-suppose  the  existence  of  ideal  atoms,  external
and  internal,  which,  by  aggregation,  constitute  man  and  the  rest
of  the  universe.  These  aggregates  or  Skandha  are  grouped  into
five  classes,  which  are  rendered  by  Professor  Rhys  Davids  as  (1)
the  Material  Properties  and  Attributes  (Rupa) ;  (2)  the  Sensations
(Vedand) ;  (3)  Abstract  Ideas  (Sanna) ;  (4)  Tendencies  or  Potenti-
alities (Sankhdra)  ;  and  (5)  Eeason  (^VinndTia).''-  Only  the  first
of  these  sets,  or  the  Rupa  Skandha,  appear  to  be  operated  on  in
link  number  II.  or  Conformations.

Now  the  Unconscious  Will,  no  longer  amorphous,  reaches  its

^  Buddhism,  p,  90.


RISE  OF  CONSCIOUSNESS, ETC.  115


next  stage  of  development  with  the  rise  of  Consciousness,  or  Con-
scious Experience  {Vijndna),&s  the  third  link  in  the  evolutionary
process.  This  is  figured  by  a  monkey,  which  some  learned  Lamas
explained  to  me  as  showing  that  the  rudimentary  man  is  becoming
anthropoid,  but  still  is  an  unreasoning  automaton.  From  this  it
will  be  seen  that  however  abstract  its  basis  of  metaphysical  con-
ceptions, or  transcendental  the  causal  machinery  by  which  it  is
set  in  motion,  Buddha's  evolutionary  scheme,  in  its  practical
aspects,  must  necessarily  depend  on  a  tolerably  comprehensive  and
subtle  interpretation  of  human  nature.

The  rise  of  Self-Consciousness  {Ndma-rupa,  literally  "  Name  "
+  "  Form  "),  as  a  result  of  conscious  experience,  forms  the  fourth
link  or  stage,  and  is  represented  by  a  physician  feeling  the  pulse
of  a  sick  man.  Here  the  pulse  denotes  the  individuality  or  dis-
tinction between  "  Self  "  and  "  Not  Self."  And  its  Sanskrit  title  of
"  Name  and  Form  "  expresses  the  commonest  features  of  Individu-
ality, "  comes  Ndmaru'pa,  local  form,  and  name  and  bodiment,
bringing  the  man  with  senses  naked  to  the  sensible,  a  helpless
mirror  of  all  shows  which  pass  across  his  heart."  ^  A  variant  of
this  picture  in  some  Lamaist  temples  is  a  man  in  the  act  of  being
ferried  across  an  ocean.  It  is  the  Individual  crossing  the  Ocean
of  Life.

As  a  result  of  Self-Consciousness,  the  individual  now  realises  his
possession  of  The  Sense-Sueface  and  Understanding  (Ghaddya-
tana).  And  here  again  the  relatively  low  place  given  to  the
understanding  is  quite  in  keeping  with  modern  philosophy.  The
picture  represents  this  link  by  a  mask  of  a  human  face,  "  The
empty  house  of  the  Senses";^  and  the  understanding  is  indicated
by  a  pair  of  extra  eyes  gleaming  through  the  brow  of  the  mask.
At  this  stage  seems  to  be  effected  the  fuU  union  of  the  hitherto
passive  will  with  the  active  co-efficients  of  a  human  nature  as
expressed  by  "  The  Three  Fires,  the  Buddhist  variant  of  our  Devil,
the  World  and  the  Flesh  "  {Rdga,Dvesa,  J/oAa),  though  these  have
been  present  concurrently  from  the  initial  stage  of  "  Ignorance."  ^

^  Arnold's  I/igkt  of  Asia.

2  The  Tibetan  picture  represents  this  literally  as  "  an  empty  house."

3  These  Three  Fires  (Skt.,  Trimdhagni)  seem  to  have  been  substituted  by  Buddha
for  the  Brahmanical  "Three  China"  or  moral  qualities  of  animated  beings — the  "bind-
ing qualities  of  matter  "  (Mon.  Williams's  Hind.,  p.  88) — namely,  mttva  (Goodness  or
Virtue),  rajas  (Activity),  and  tamos  (Darkness  or  Stupidity),  which  in  a  mystical  sense

I  2


1 1 6  MET  APR  rSIOS.


The  exercise  of  the  sense  organs  and  the  understanding  is  Con-
tact (Sparsa)  forming  the  sixth  link  or  stage,  bringing  the  indi-
vidual into  relation  with  the  outside  world.  It  is  pictured  by
kissing,  and  in  some  Tibetan  frescoes  by  a  man  grasping  a  plough.
It  illustrates  the  exercise  of  one  of  the  senses.

From  Contact  comes  Feeling  (Vedana),hoth  physical  and  men-
tal, including  delusive  pleasure,  pain,  and  indifference.  It  is
pictured  by  an  arrow  entering  a  man's  eye,^  evidently  a  symbolic
of  "  Perception,"  but  explained  by  the  Lamas  in  such  a  way  as  to
render  it  translatable  by  "  Feeling.'"

From  the  operation  of  FeeUng  comes  Desire  or  thirst  (Trishvd).
This  stage,  dealing  with  the  origin  of  Desire,  perhaps  the  most
psychologically  interesting  in  Buddhism,  is  pictured  by  a  man
drinking  wine,  and  the  same  metaphor,  namely,  thirst,  which  is
the  literal  meming  of  the  word  for  thi^  link,  and  is  adopted  by  Sir
Edwin  Arnold  in  his  graceful  lines —

"  Trishnd,  that  thirst  which  makes  the  living  drink
Deeper  and  deeper  of  the  false  salt  waves
Whereon  they  float,  pleasures,  ambitions,  wealth,
Praise,  fame,  or  domination  Conquest,  love,
Elch  meats  and  robes  and  fair  abodes  and  pride
Of  ancient  lines,  and  lust  of  days,  and  strife
To  live,  and  sins  that  flow  from  strife,  some  sweet,
Some  bitter. Thus  Life's  thirst  quenches  itself
With  draughts  which  double  thirst. "  2

Thus  the  conquest  of  Desire  is  the  greatest  step  towards  Budd-
hist salvation.

The  Satisfying  of  Geeed,  or  Indulgence  of  Desire  {Upaddna)
forms  the  next  stage.  It  is  pictured  by  a  man  grasping  fruit  and
storing  it  up  in  big  baskets.  It  appears  to  be,  and  is  so  explained
by  the  Lamas,  as  a  clinging  or  attachment  to  worldly  objects,
rather  than  to  worldly  "  existence  "  as  Oldenberg  has  interpreted
it.

With the next stage— the tenth link — namely, Becoming


are  interpreted  as  A,  U,  M  (or  OM),  the  Creator,  Preserver,  and  Destroyer.  These  three
fires  which,  according  to  the  Buddhists,  lie  at  the  core  of  re-birth,  are  Lust  (T.,  'dod-
c'ags,  cf.  Jaesch.,  p.  281),  Anger  or  lU-will  (T.,  z'e-sdan),  and  Stupidity  (T.,  gti-mug  or
p'rag-sdog,  cf.  Jaesch.,  207 ;  Kopp.,  i.,  33).

1  In  this  particular  Tibetan  picture  the  sixth  and  seventh  links  have  been  trans-
posed.

2  The  Light  of  Asia,  p.  165.


UPABANA—BHAVA—JATI.  117

(Bhava),  we  reach  one  of  the  alleged  obstacles  in  the  chain,
an  irreconcilable  link  which  puzzles  Oldenberg,  and  which,  to-
gether with  the  next  link,  is  deemed  inexplicable  and  altogether
out  of  place.  Up  to  the  preceding  link,  the  ninth,  the  evolution
has  clearly  been  that  of  the  life  history  of  a  man.  The  tenth
link  is  rendered  by  Oldenberg  thus :  "  From  '  Clinging  to  Ex-
istence '  comes  Ee-birth  and  the  Continuance  of  Being  for  yet
another  existence."  Very  naturally  he  goes  on  to  say  that  it  is
strange  to  find  a  man  who  has  long  ago  "  entered  on  real  life  "
suddenly  becoming  a  child  again.  And  adds,  "  How  can  a  man
be  born  again  when  he  is  old,"  and  before  he  dies  ?  for  death  only
happens  in  the  twelfth  stage.

But  here  it  would  seem  as  if  Oldenberg  has  misled  himself
by  introducing  the  term  "  Existence"  into  the  previous  link  and
by  interpreting  Bhava  as  "  Ee-birth."

For  we  find  that  Bhava  is  pictured  by  a  married  woman  ;  and
the  Lamas  explain  the  picture  by  saying  that  she  is  the  wife  of
the  individual  whose  life-history  is  being  traced.  The  word  is
thus  given  somewhat  the  sense  of  Bhavanah  (Childers'  Did. :
"  a  house-dwelling ")  ;  or,  as  it  might  be  rendered,  "  husband-
ship  " ;  it  is  the  result  of  the  previous  link,  namely.  Greed  or
Indulgence  in  Worldliness.  It  is  literally  fuller  "  Becoming "
{Bhava) — Life  as  enriched  by  satisfying  the  worldly  desire  of
home,  and  as  a  means  of  obtaining  an  heir  to  the  wealth  amassed
by  Grreed.

The  eleventh  stage  or  link  is  another  of  the  alleged  stumbling-
blocks,  which,  however,  ceased  to  present  any  difficulty  in  the
light  of  the  picture  and  the  Lamas'  explanation  of  it.  The  picture
shows  a  parent  and  child.  It  is  the  Maturing  of  the  man's  life
by  the  Birth  (Jdti)  of  an  heir,  and  as  a  result  of  the  married
existence  of  the  tenth  stage.  It  must  be  remembered  that
according  to  Buddhist  belief  there  is  no  propagation  of  species.
Life  is  held  to  be  indivisible  ;  hence  the  child  is  no  relation  to  his
parents,  as  the  wandering  individual  finds  its  family  through  its
own  inherent  Karma.  This  dogma  so  opposed  to  experience  and
science  carried  with  it  its  own  refutation;  but  it  forms  no
essential  part  of  the  evolutionary  chain.

Maturity  of  Life  then  leads  to  Decay  and  Death  {Jardmarana),
the  twelfth  and  final  stage,  which  in  turn  leads  on  to  link  No.  I —


118  METAPHYSICS.


Ee-birth — and  so  on  as  before. This  stage  is  pictured  as  a  corpse
being  carried  off  to  cremation  or  burial.

Let  us  now  look  at  tbe  Chain  as  a  whole.  Here  we  are  met  by
the  difficulty  of  finding  a  suitable  expression  for  the  word  which
connects  the  several  links,  the  Pali  foccaya,  usually  translated
"  cause  "  or  "  concurrent  occasion."  Prof.  Ehys  Davids  writes
{Vinaya  Texts,  i.,  146)  :  "  Hetu  and  paccaya  (the  word  so
frequently  used  in  the  formula  of  the  Nidanas)  are  nearly
synonymous.  Colebrooke  {Life  and  Essays,  Vol.  ii.,  p.  419)  says
that  the  Bauddhas  distinguish  between  hetu  '  proximate  cause,'
and  pacoaya  (pratyaya)  '  concurrent  occasion ' ;  but  in  practical
use  this  slight  difference  of  meaning,  if  it  really  existed,  has  but ,
little  weight  attached  to  it."  ^  Mr.  Warren  believes '  that  the
term  "  cause  "  should  be  used  in  a  very  loose  and  flexible  way,  and
in  different  senses,  in  discussing  different  members  of  the  series  of

links. But  as  Prof.  Oldenberg's  rendering — "  From

comes " — seems  sufficient  for  our  purpose,  while  it

preserves uniformity  and  continuity,  it  is  here  adopted. The
Chain  then  runs  as  follows  :

3  This  same  diHerence  is  observed  by  Tibetan  writers.  Pratitya  is  rendered  by
rkyen,  defined  by  Jaeschke  (Lid.,  p.  17)  as  "  a  co-operating  cause "  of  an  event
as  distinguished  from  its  proximate  (or,  rather,  primary  original)  cause  rgyu
(Skt.,  hetu).

"  Loe.  dt.  He  writes:  "Now  a  great-  deal  of  the  difficulty  experienced  by
scholars  on  this  subject  appears  to  me  to  arise  from  the  too  strict  way  in  which
they  use  the  word '  cause,'  and  from  the  idea  which  they  labour  under  that
Time  plays  an  important  part  here,  whereas  it  would  appear  to  have  but  a
secondary  role.

"  The  term  '  cause '  should  be  used  in  a  very  loos'e  and  flexible  way,  and  in  different
senses,  in  discussing  different  members  of  this  series.  The  native  phrase,  of  which
Chain  of  Causation  is  supposed  to  be  a  translation,  is  paticca-samuppdda.  Paticea  is  a
gerund,  equivalent  to  the  Sanskrit  pratUya,  from  the  verbal  root  i  'go,'  with  the  pre-
fix p-afe',  '  back ' ;  and  samwppada  stands  for  the  Sanskrit  samutpdda,  meaning  a '  spring-
ing up.'  Therefore  the  whole  phrase  means  a  '  springing  up '  [into  existence]  with
reference  to  something  else,  or,  as  I  would  render  it,  'origination  by  dependence.'
The  word  'chain'  is  a  gratuitous  addition,  the  Buddhist  calling  it  a  wheel,  and
making  Ignorance  depend  on  Old  Age,  etc.  Now  it  is  to  be  noted  that  if  a  thing
springs  up — ^that  is  to  say,  comes  into  being — with  reference  to  something  else,  or  in
dependence  on  something  else,  that  dependence  by  no  means  needs  to  be  a  causal  one.
In  the  Pali,  each  of  these  members  of  the  so-called  Chain  of  Causation  is  said  to  be
the  paccaya  of  the  one  next  following,  and  paccaya  is  rendered  '  cause.'  But  Buddha-
ghosa,  in  the  Visuddhi-Magga,  enumerates  twenty-four  different  kinds  of  paccaya,  and
in  discussing  each  member  of  the  paticcorsamuppada,  states  in  which  of  these  senses  it
is  a  paccaya  of  the  succeeding  one.

"  The  Pali  texts  very  well  express  the  general  relation  meant  to  be  conveyed  by  the
word  paccaya  when  they  say  '  If  this  one  [member  of  the  series]  is  not,  then  this
[next  following]  one  is  not.' "


THE  TWELVE-LINKED CHAIN. .  119

"  From  the  Ignorance  (of  the  Unconscious  Will)  come  Con-
formations. From  Conformations  comes  Consciousness.  From
Consciousness  comes  Self-Consciousness.  Froia  Self-Consciousness
come  The  Senses  and  Understanding.  From  the  Senses  and
Understanding  comes  Contact.  From  Contact  comej  Feeling.
From  Feeling  comes  Desire.  From  Desire  come^  Indulgence,
Greed,  or  Clinging  (to  Worldly  Objects).  From  Clinging  (to
Worldly  Objects)  comes  (Married  or  Domestic)  Life.  From
(married)  Life  comes  Birth  (of  an  heir  and  Maturity  of  Life).
From  Birth  (of  an  heir  and  Maturity  of  Life)  come  Decay  and
Death.  From  Decay  and  Death  comes  Re-birth  with  its  attend-
ant Sufferings.  Thus  all  existence  and  suffering  spring  from  the
Ignorance  (of  the  Unconscious  Will)."

The  varying  nature  and  relationship  of  these  formulae  is  note-
worthy, some  are  resultants  and  some  merely  sequences;  char-
acteristic of  Eastern  thought,  its  mingling  of  science  and  poetry ;
its  predominance  of  imagination  and  feeHng  over  intellect ;  its
curiously  easy  and  naive  transition  from  Infinite  to  Finite,  from
absolute  to  relative  point  of  view.

But  it  would  almost  seem  as  if  Buddha  personally  observed
much  of  the  order  of  this  chain  in  his  ethical  habit  of  cutting  the
links  which  bound  him  to  existence.  Thus,  starting  from  the
link  short  of  Decay  and  Death,  he  cut  off  his  son  (link  11),  he  cut
off  his  wife  (link  10),  he  cut  off  his  worldly  wealth  and  kingdom
(link  9),  then  he  cut  off  all  Desire  (link  8),  with  its  "three  fires."
On  this  he  attained  Buddhahood,  the  Bodhi  or  "  Perfect  Know-
ledge "  dispelling  the  Ignorance  (Avidya),  which  lay  at  the  root
of  Desire  and  its  Existence.  Nirvana,  or  "  going  out,"  ^  thus  seems
to  be  the  "  going  out "  of  the  three  Fires  of  Desire,  which  are  still
figured  above  him  even  at  so  late  a  stage  as  his  "  great  tempta-
tion ";2  and  this  sinless  calm,  as  believed  by  Professor  Ehys
Davids,^  is  reachable  in  this  life.  On  the  extinction  of  these
three  fires  there  result  the  sinless  perfect  peace  of  Purity,  Good-
will, and  Wisdom,  as  the  antitypes  to  the  Three  Fires,  Lust,  Ill-
will,  and  Stupidity  ; while  Parinirvdna or Extinction  of  Life

1  In  Tibetan  it  is  translated  "  The  Sorrowless  State " (mya-nan-med). Cf.  also
B0ENOTJF,  i.,  19 ;  Seal's  GateTia,  174, 183,  etc.

2  See  Ajanta  picture,  p.  6.

3  Buddhism,,  p.  14 ;  also  O.  Fkankfuktee,  Ph.D.  (in  J.R.A.S.,  1880,  p.  549),  who  shows
that  the  three  "iires"  are  also  called  the  three  "obstacles"  {Kincaim).


120  .  METAPHYSICS.


(or  Becoming)  was  reached  only  with  the  severing  of  the  last
fetter  or  physical  "  Death,"  and  is  the  "  going  out "  of  every
particle  of  the  elements  of  "  becoming." '

Amongst  the  many  curious  perversions  of  the  latter  Buddhism
of  India  was  the  belief  that  by  mystical  means,  the  Sattva  or
personal  entity  may,  short  of  death,  and  whilst  yet  retaining  a
body,  be  Hberated  from  the  influence  of  Avidyd,  and  thus  form
the  operation  of  the  causal  nexus,  and  so  secure  immortality.
Upagupta  and  many  other  noted  Buddhist  sages  are  believed  to
be  yet  living  through  this  happy  exemption.^

Buddha's  metaphysics  appears  in  the  light  afforded  by  the  chain,
to  borrow — like  so  many  other  world  principles  professing  to  solve
the  problem  of  existence — from  the  distinctions  of  psychology,
and  to  be  based  on  Will.  Schopenhauer  indeed  admits  the  affinity
of  his  theory  with  Buddhism.  He  writes  :  "  If  I  were  to  take  the
results  of  my  philosophy  as  the  standard  of  truth  I  would  be
obliged  to  concede  to  Buddhism  the  pre-eminence  over  the  rest.
In  any  case  it  must  be  a  satisfaction  to  me  to  see  my  teaching  in
such  close  agreement  with  a  religion  which  the  majority  of  men
upon  the  earth  hold  as  their  own."  ^ Hartmann's  absolute  or  his

'  These  are  the  so-called  Skandhas.

2  Although  it  is  a  common  belief  amongst  the  Burmese  that  Upagupta  still
survives  in  this  way,  and,  in  consequence,  is  an  object  with  them  almost  of
worship,  the  monks  cannot  point  to  any  ancient  scripture  in  support  of  this
popular  belief.

3  The  World  as  Will  and  Idea,  by  A.  Sohopenhauee,  Eng.  trans,  by  Haldane  and
Kemp,  1883,  ii.,  p.  371.  Schopenhauer  indeed  claims  to  have  arrived  at  such  agree-
ment independently  of  Buddha's  teaching.  He  writes :  "  This  agreement,  however,
must  be  the  more  satisfactory  to  me  because,  in  my  philosophising,  I  have  certainly
not  been  under  its  influence;  for  up  till  1818,  when  my  work  appeared,  there  were
very  few  exceedingly  incomplete  and  scanty  accounts  of  Buddhism  to  be  found  in
Europe,  which  were  almost  entirely  limited  to  a  few  essays  in  the  earUer  volumes  of
'Asiatic  Researches,'  and  were  principally  concerned  with  the  Buddhism  of  the
Burmese"  {loc.  cit.,  371).  It  is,  however,  probable  that  Schopenhauer,  such  an  omni-
vorous reader,  and  withal  so  egotistic,  minimizes  his  indebtedness  to  Buddha.  For
the  Vedanta  philosophy,  to  which  Schopenhauer  admits  Ms  indebtedness,  is  very
deeply  tinged  by  Buddhist  beliefs,  and  Schopenhauer  in  his  system  generally
follows  the  lines  of  Buddhism ;  and  in  his  later  writings  he  frequently  uses  Buddhist
works  to  illustrate  his  speculations.  Thus:  "We  find  the  doctrine  of  metempsy-
chosis ....  in  its  most  subtle  form,  however,  and  coming  nearest  to  the  truth
.  .  .  .  in  Buddhism"  (ioc.CT(.,iii.,  302).  And  illustrating  his  theme  "of  Denial
of  the  Will  to  Live,"  he  refers  {loc.  cit.,  iii,,  445)  to  Fauseoll's  Dhammapadam  and
Btienouf's  Introduction;  and  (p.  303)  Spence  Haedy's  Manual,  Obey's  Du  Nirmna
Indien  (p.  308) ;  Colebrooke,  Sangermano,  Transactions  St.  Petersburg  Academy  of
Science ;  and  frequently  to  the  Asiatic  Researches.


BUDDHISM  AS  A PHILOSOPHY.  121

Unconscious  includes  Unconscious  intelligence  as  well  as  Uncon-
scious Will.  In  Buddhism  intelligence  is  not  denied  to  Will  and
accorded  a  secondary  and  derivate  place  as  in  Grerman  pessimism,
and  we  may  even  infer,  from  what  is  set  forth  as  to  the  directing
function  of  the  Karma,  as  well  as  from  its  pictorial  representation,
that  Buddhism  in  some  sense  felt  the  necessity  of  attributing  an
intelligent  quality  to  the  unconscious  principle  in  order  that  it
might  pass  from  the  state  of  migratory  abstractiveness  to  that  of
determinate  being.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  not  here  as
an  essential  feature  of  the  system  a  deliberate  ascription  of  intelli-
gence to  the  unconscious  as  with  Hartmann.  The  Unconscious
Will-to-live  maintains  the  changes  of  phenomena.  "  The  world  is
the  World's  process."  All  "is  becoming,"  nothing  "is."  It  is
indeed,  as  has  been  suggested  to  me,  the  Flux  of  Heraclitus,  who
also  used  the  same  simile  of  Fire  and  Burning.  "The  constant
new-births  (palingenesis)  constitute,"  as  Schopenhauer,  a  Neo-
Buddhist  says,  "  the  succession  of  the  life-dreams  of  a  will,  which
in  itself  is  indestructible  until  instructed  and  improved,  by  so
much  and  such  various  successive  knowledge  in  a  constantly  new
form,  it  abolishes  or  abrogates  itself."  ^

As  a  philosophy.  Buddhism  thus  seems  to  be  an  Idealistic
Nihilism;  an  Idealism  which,  like  that  of  Berkeley,  holds  that
"  the  fruitful  source  of  all  error  was  the  unfounded  belief  in  the
reality"" and  existence  of  the  external  world";  and  that  man  can
perceive  nothing  but  his  feelings,  and  is  the  cause  to  himself
of  these.  That  all  known  or  knowable  objects  are  relative  to  a
conscious  subject,  and  merely  a  product  of  the  ego,  existing
through  the  ego,  for  the  ego,  and  in  the  ego, — though  it  must  be
remembered  that  Buddha,  by  a  swinging  kind  of  positive  and
negative  mysticism,  at  times  denies  a  place  to  the  ego  altogether.
But,  unlike  Berkeley's  Idealism,  this  recognition  of  the  relativity
and  limitations  of  knowledge,  and  the  consequent  disappearance
of  the  world  as  a  reality,  led  directly  to  Nihilism,  by  seeming  to
exclude  the  knowledge,  and  by  implication  the  existence,  not  only
of  a  Creator,  but  of  an  absolute  being.

As  a  Eeligion,  Buddhism  is  often  alleged  to  be  theistic.  But
although  Buddha  gives  no  place  to  a  First  Cause  in  his  system.


1  Schopenhaueb's  Will  and  Idea,  Eng.  trans.,  iii.,  300.


122  METAPHYSICS.


yet,  as  is  well  known,  he  nowhere  expressly  denies  an  infinite
first  cause  or  an  unconditioned  Being  beyond  the  finite ;  an'd  he
is  even  represented  as  refusing  to  answer  such  questions  on  the
ground  that  their  discussion  was  unprofitable.  In  view  of  this
apparent  hesitancy  and  indecision  he  may  be  called  an  agnostic.

In  the  later  developments,  the  agnostic  idealism!  of  primitive
Buddhism  swung  round  into  a  materialistic  theism  which  verges
on  pantheism,  and  where  the  second  link  of  the  Causal  Chain,
namely,  Sanskdra,  comes  closely  to  resemble  the  modi  of
Spinoza  ;^  and  Nirvana,  or  rather  Pari-Nirvana,  is  not  difierent
practically  from  the  Vedantic  goal :  assimilation  with  the  great
universal  soul :

"  The  dew-drop  slips  into  the  shining  sea."

And  the  latter  developments  generally  have  been  directed
towards  minimizing  the  inveterate  pessimism  of  Buddha's  ethics
which  tends  to  bring  the  world  to  a  standstill,  by  disparaging  that
optimistic  bias  which  is  commonly  supposed  to  be  an  essential
element  in  the  due  direction  of  all  life-processes.

Lamaist  Metaphysics.
After  Buddha's  death  his  personality  soon  became  invested  with
supernatural  attributes ;  and  as  his  church  grew  in  power  and  wealth
his  simple  system  underwent  academic  development,  at  the  hands
of  votaries  now  enjoying  luxurious  leisure,  and  who  thickly  over-
laid it  with  rules  and  subtle  metaphysical  refinements  and  specu-
lations.

^^  Buddha  ceases  even  to  be  the  founder  of  Buddhism,  and  is
made  to  appear  as  only  one  of  a  series  of  (four  or  seven)  equally
perfect  Buddhas  who  had  "  similarly  gone "  before,  and  hence
called  Tathdgata,^  and  implying  the  necessity  for  another  "  com-

^^ing  Buddha,"  who  was  called  Maitreya,  or  "  The  Loving  One."


I  "All  Sentient  beings  exist  in  the  essence  (garbha)  of  the  Tathagata." — Angulimaliyo,
SiUra  (Kah-gyur ;  Do,  xvi.  f.  208,  transl.  by  Rock.,  B.,  p.  196).

3  This  theory  of  multiple  Buddhas  and  the  introduction  of  the  name  Tathdgaia,
seems  to  have  been  introduced  by  the  Sautrantika  School  (Wass.,  B.,  314).  This
doctrine  is  held  by  the  southern  Buddhists.  Rhys  Datids  {B.,  p.  179)  writes :  "  It  is
not  so  necessarily  implied  in  or  closely  connected  with  the  most  important  parts  of
his  scheme  as  to  exclude  the  possibility  of  its  having  arisen  after  his  death "  (cf .
also  Davids,  p.  13,  Buddhist  Birth  Stories ;  Senaet's  La  Legends  du  Buddha).


THEISTIO  DEVELOPMENTS.  123


Then  these  (four  or  seven)  Buddhas  or  Tathagatas  are  extended
into  series  of  24,  35  and  1,000 ;  in  addition  to  which  there  are  also
Pratyeka  or  solitary  non-teaching  Buddhas.

In  the  second  century  after  the  Nirvana^  arose  the  Mahasanghika
sect  (latterly  grouped  under  Vaibhashika)  which  asserted  that  the
Buddhas  are  illusory  and  metaphysical;  that  the  traditions  re-
specting the  Buddha  having  been  born  into  the  world  as  men
are  incorrect,  that  the  law  is  Tathagata,^  that  the  "Buddhas
have  passed  beyond  all  worlds  (=Lokottaravadina);  ^  that  "Tatha-
gata  is  infinitely  extended  immeasurably  glorious,  eternal  in
duration,  that  to  his  power  of  recollection  (ni-smriti),  his
power  of  faith  (sradhabala),  his  experience  of  joy,  and  his  life
there  is  no  end ;  he  sleeps  not,  he  speaks,  asks,  reflects  not,  they
say  that  his  existence  is  ever  one,  and  uniform  (one  heart),  that
all  things  born  may  obtain  deliverance  by  having  his  instruction."*

This  theistic  phase  of  Buddhism  seems  foreshadowed  even  in
orthodox  Hinayana  scriptures.  Thus  in  the  Mahavagga  (i.,  6,  8)
Sakya  Muni  is  made  to  say  of  himself,  "  I  am  the  all-subduer ;
the  all-wise ;  I  have  no  stains,  through  myself  I  possess  know-
ledge; I  have  no  rival;  I  am  the  Chief  Arhat — the  highest
teacher,  I  alone  am  the  absolutely  wise,  I  am  the  Conqueror
(Jina),  "  And  the  Mahasanghika  sect  of  the  Hinayana  discussed
the  eternity  and  omnipotence  of  the  Buddha.  While  the  Sau-
trantika  section  asserted  the  plurality  of  the  Buddhas.

Indeed,  even  in  southern  Buddhism,  the  expressed  deification  of
Buddha  can  scarcely  be  said  to  be  altogether  absent.  For  Ceylon
monks,  following  an  ancient  ritual,  chant : —

"  I  worship  continually
The  Buddhas  of  the  ages  that  are  past,
I  worship  the  Buddhas,  the  all-pitiful,
I  worship  with  bowed  head.


"  I  bow  my  head  to  the  ground  and  worship

1  Mahdwanso, 20-21.  116yearsafterNirTana,BEALini»irf.^«.fo'5.,p.  301.  TheTibetan
gives  the  date  110  years  and  also  {Rookhill,  B.  ,  p.  182)  160,  which  is  probably  a  mis-
take for  the  116  of  the  Chinese.

2  Beal,  loc.  dt.

3  RocKHiLL,  B.,  183,  where  is  given  a  detailed  translation  of  the  features  of  the
eighteen  Hinayana  sects.

*  Beal,  loc.  dt.


124  METAPHYSICS.


The  sacred  dust  of  his  holy  feet,

If  in  aught  I  have  sinned  against  Buddha,

May  Buddha  forgive  nie  my  sin." '

Here  Buddha  seems  prayed  to  as  an  existing  and  active  divinity."

About  four  centuries  after  Buddha's  death  the  Mahayana  doc-
trine had  evolved  specialized  celestial  Buddhas  and  Bodhisatvas
residing  in  worlds  as  fabulous  as  themselves;  and  the  human
Buddhas  are  made  mere  manifestations,  and  reflexes  from  celestial
counterparts.

The  Mahayana  development  seems  an  offshoot  of  the  Maha-
sanghika  sect  of  primitive  Buddhism.  It  assumed  a  concrete  form
about  the  end  of  the  first  century  A.D.  under  Asvaghosha,  who
wrote  the  Mahayana  Sraddhotanda  Sastra;  but  its  chief  ex-
pounder was,  as  we  have  already  seen,  Nagarjuna.

Buddha,  it  will  be  remembered,  appears  to  have  denied  existence
altogether.  In  the  metaphysical  developments  after  his  death,
however,  schools  soon  arose  asserting  that  everything  exists  (Sar-
vastivada  ^),  that  nothing  exists,  or  that  nothing  exists  except  the
One  great  reality,  a  universally  diffused  essence  of  a  pantheistic
nature.  The  denial  of  the  existence  of  the  "  Ego  "  thus  forced  the
confession  of  the  necessary  existence  of  the  Non-ego.  And  the
author  of  the  southern  Pali  text,  the  Milinda  Panha,  writing  about
150  A.D.,  puts  into  the  mouth  of  the  sage  Nagasena  the  following
words  in  reply  to  the  King  of  Sagala's  query,  "  Does  the  all-wise
(Buddha)  exist  ?  "  *  "  He  who  is  the  most  meritorious  does  exist,"
and  again  "  Great  King !  Nirwana  is."  °

Thus,  previous  to  Nagarjuna's  school,  Buddhist  doctors  were
divided  into  two  extremes :  into  a  belief  in  a  real  existence  and
in  an  illusory  existence ;  a  perpetual  duration  of  the  Sattva  and
total  annihilation.  Nagarjuna  chose  a  "  middle  way  "  {Ma-
dhydmika). He denied the possibility  of our knowing  that


1  Patimokklw,,  Dickson,  p.  5.

''  Though  somei-hold  this  to  be  merely  a  chant  for  luck  and  not  real  prayer.

3  In  the  middle  of  the  third  century  after  the  Nirvana  (Beal,  loc.  eit.)  arose  the
realistic  Sarvastivada  as  a  branch  of  the  Sthaviras,  "  those  who  say  all  exists,  the
past,  futui-e  and  the  present,"  and  are  called  in  consequence  "  they  who  say  that
all  exists,"  or  Sarvdstivddina  (Roc-kkill,  B.,18i).

4  BasUrn  Won.,  p.  300,  and  Rhys  Davids'  Questions  of  Miliitda.
^  Mast.  Mon.,  p.  295.


S0PHI8TIO  NIHILISM.  125

anything  either  exists  or  did  not  exist.  By  a  sophistic  nihilism
he  "dissolved  every  problem  into  thesis  and  antithesis  and
denied  both."  There  is  nothing  either  existent  or  non-existent,
and  the  state  of  Being  admits  of  no  definition  or  formula.

The  Prajnd  'pdramitd^  on  which  Nagarjuna  based  his  teaching
consist  of  mythical  discourses  attributed  to  Buddha  and  addressed
mostly  to  supernatural  hearers  on  the  Vulture  Peak,  etc.  It
recognizes  several  grades  of  metaphysical  Buddhas  and  numerous
divine  Bodhisats,  who  must  be  worshipped  and  to  whom  prayers
should  be  addressed.  And  it  consists  of  extravagant  speculations
and  metaphysical  subtleties,  with  a  profusion  of  abstract  termin-
ology.

His  chief  apocalyptic  treatises^  are  the  Buddhavatansaka,
Samadhiraja  and  Eatnakuta  Sutras.  The  gist  of  the  Avatan-
saka  Sutra  may  be  summarized^  ag  "The  one  true  essence
is  like  a  bright  mirror,  which  is  the  basis  of  all  phenomena,  the
basis  itself  is  permanent  and  true,  the  phenomena  are  evanescent
and  unreal ;  as  the  mirror,  however,  is  capable  of  reflecting  images,
so  the  true  essence  embraces  all  phenomena  and  all  things  exist
in  and  by  it."

An  essential  theory  of  the  Mahayana  is  the  Voidness  or  Nothing-
ness of  things,  Sunyatd,*  evidently  an  enlargement  of  the  last
term  of  the  Trividyd  formula,  ATidtma.  Sakya  Muni  is  said  to
have  declared  that  "  no  existing  object  has  a  nature,^  whence  it
follows  that  there  is  neither  beginning  nor  end — that  from  time
immemorial  all  has  been  perfect  quietude*  and  is  entirely  im-
mersed in  Nirvana."  But  Siinyata,  or,  as  it  is  usually  translated,
"nothingness"  cannot  be  absolute  nihilism,  for  there  are,  as
Mr.  Hodgson  tells  us,  "  a  Sunyata  and  a  Maha-Siinyata.  We  are
dead.  You  are  a  Uttle  Nothing ;  but  I  am  a  big  Nothing.  Also
there  are  eighteen  degrees  of  SGnyata.'' You  are  annihilated,


1  FrajM  begins  with  chaos.  She  produced  all  the  Tathagatas,  and  is  the  mother
of  all  Bodhisattvas  Pratyeka-Buddhas  and  Disciples  (Conf .  Cowell  and  Eggeling's
Catal,  Skt.  MS.,  J.R.A.S.,  N.S.  viii.,  3).

2  For  some  details  of  these  see  Csoma's  An.,  p.  400.

3  Beal's  Gaiena,  125.
*  Tib.,  Tong-pa  iiid.
5  ifo-vo-nid.

s  Zod-manas  Zi-ba—"  nothing  has  manifested  itself  in  any  form  "  (Sohl.,  343).

'  Hodgson's  Esmys,  etc.,  59.


126  METAPHYSICS.


but  I  am  eighteen  times  as  much  annihilated  as  you."  ' And  the
Lamas  extended  the  degrees  of  "  Nothingness  "  to  seventy.

This  nihilistic  doctrine  is  demonstrated  by  The  Three  Marks  and
the  Two  Truths  and  has  been  summarized  by  Schlagintweit.  The
Three  Marks  are :

1.  Parikalpita  (Tih.,  Kun-tag)  the  supposition  or  error;  unfounded
belief  in  the  reality  of  existence ;  two-fold  error  in  believing  a  thing
to  exist  which  does  not  exist,  and  asserting  real  existence  when  it  is
only  ideal.

2.  Paratantra  (T.,  Z'%n-van)  or  whatever  exists  by  a  dependent  or
causal  connexion,  viz.,  the  soul,  sense,  comprehension,  and  imperfect
philosophical  meditation.

3.  Parinishpanna  (T.,  Yoh-grub)  "completely  perfect''  is  the  un-
changeable and  unassignable  true  existence  which  is  also  the  scope  of
the  path,  the  summum  bonum,  the  absolute.

The  two  Truths  are  Samvritisatya  (T.,  Kun-dsa-bch'i-den-pa)  The
relative  truth ;  the  efficiency  of  a  name  or  characteristic  sign.  And
Paramarthasatya  (Don-dam-pahi  den-pa)  the  absolute  truth  obtained  by
the  self-consciousness  of  the  saint  in  self-meditations.

The  world  (or  Samsara),  therefore,  is  to  be  renounced  not  for  its
sorrow  and  pain  as  the  Hinayana  say,  but  on  account  of  its  un-
satisfying unreality.

The  idealization  of  Buddha's  personality  led,  as  we  have  just
seen,  to  his  deification  as  an  omniscient  and  everlasting  god ;  and
traces  of  this  development  are  to  be  found  even  in  southern
Buddhism.  And  he  soon  came  to  be  regarded  as  the  omnipotent
primordial  god,  and  Universal  Essence  of  a  pantheistic  nature.

About  the  first  century  a.d.  Buddha  is  made  to  be  existent  from
all  eternity  (Anada).  Professor  Kern,  in  his  translation  of  The
Lotus  of  the  True  Law,  which  dates  from  this  time,^  points  out
that  although  the  theistic  term  Adi-Buddha  or  Primordial  Buddha
does  not  occur  in  that  work,  Sakya  Muni  is  identified  with  Adi-
Buddha  in  the  words,  "  From  the  very  beginning  {ddita  eva)
have  I  roused,  brought  to  maturity,  fully  developed  them  (the
innumerable  Bodhisats)  to  be  fit  for  their  Bodhisattva  position."  ^

And  with  respect  to  the  modes  of  manifestations  of  the  universal
essence,  "  As  there  is  no  limit  to  the  immensity  of  reason  and
measurement  to  the  universe,  so  all  the  Bnddhas  are  possessed  of


1  A.  LiLLiE,  J.R.A.S.,  xiv.,  9.  3  Loc.  cit.,  xxv.

Saddharma  Pundarika,  xxii.


PANTHEISTIC UNIVERSAL  ESSENCE.  127

infinite  wisdom  and  infinite  mercy.  There  is  no  place  throughout
the  universe  where  the  essential  body  of  Vairocana(or  other  supreme
Buddha,  varying  with  different  sects)  is  not  present.  Far  and  wide
through  the  fields  of  space  he  is  present,  and  perpetually  mani-
fested.^

The  modes  in  which  this  universal  essence  manifests  itself  are  the
three  bodies  (Tri-kaya),  namely — (1)  Dharma-kdya^  or  Law-body,
Essential  Bodhi,*  formless  and  self-existent,  the  Dhyani  Buddha,
usually  named  Vairocana  Buddha  or  the  "  Perfect  Justification,"
or  Adi-Buddha.  (2)  Sarnhhoga-kdya'^  or  Compensation-body,
Reflected  Bodhi,  the  Dhyani  Bodhisats,  usually  named  Lochana  or
"glorious"^;  and  (3)  Nirmdim-kdya^  or  Transform ed-body,
Practical  Bodhi,  the  human  Buddhas,  as  Sakya  Muni.^

Now  these  three  bodies  of  the  Buddhas,  human  and  super-
human, are  all  included  in  one  substantial  essence.  The  three
are  the  same  as  one — not  one,  yet  not  different.  When  regarded
as  one  the  three  persons  are  spoken  of  as  Tathagata.  But  there
is  no  real  difference,  these  manifestations  are  only  different
views  of  the  same  unchanging  substance.*

One  of  the  earliest  of  these  celestial  Buddhas  was  given  the
title  of  "  The  Infinite  Light "  (Amitdbha),  and  his  personality
soon  crystallized  into  a  concrete  theistic  Buddha  of  that  name,
residing  in  a  glorious  paradise  (Sukhavati)  in  the  West,  where
the  daily  suns  hasten  and  disappear  in  all  their  glory,  and  hence
supposed  by  some  to  include  a  sun  myth  or  to  be  related  to  sun-
worship,  probably  due  to  Persian  influence;  for  the  chief  patrons
of  the  early  Mahayana,  about  the  time  of  the  invention  of  this
myth,  were  Indo-Scyths,  a  race  of  sun-worshippers.

After  Nagarjuna, the  chief  expounder  of  the  Mahayana  philosophy


1  Beal's  Catena,  123.

2  T.,  ch'os-sku.

3  EiT.,  p.  180.
« longf-sku.

5  It  is  singular  to  find  these  Buddhist  speculations  bearing  so  close  a  resemblance
to  the  later  Greek  theories  on  the  same  subject,  especially  in  the  plain  resemblance  of
the  o-SjUO  myoeiih  or  luciform  body,  to  the  Lochana  (Rajana)  or  "  Glorious  Body  "  of
the  Buddhists.  Vide  the  whole  subject  of  these  "  bodies  "  treated  by  Cudwoeth,
Intellec.  System,  it,  788 ;  Seal's  Cat.,  123.

6  sprul-sku.

'  On  these  bodies  see  also  Vasiliev,  B.  (French  ed.),  p.  127,  and  Eitei.,  179  seq.
8  Bbal's  Catena,  123.


128  METAPHYSICS.


was  Vasubandhu,  who  was  less  wildly  speculative  than  many  of  his
predecessors  and  composed  many  commentaries.^  Previous  to  his
day,  the  nihilism  of  the  Mahayana  had  become  almost  mystic  in
its  sophistry.

This  intense  mysticism  of  the  Mahayana  led  about  the  fifth
century  to  the  importation  into  Buddhism  of  the  pantheistic  idea
of  the  soul  (atman)  and  Yoga,  or  the  ecstatic  union  of  the  in-
dividual with  the  Universal  Spirit,  a  doctrine  which  had  been
introduced  into  Hindiiism  about  150  B.C.  by  Patanjali.  This  inno-
vation originated  with  Asahga,^  a  monk  of  Gandhara  (Peshawar),
■syhose  system  is  known  as  the  Yogacarya,  or  "  contemplative "
Mahayana.  Asahga  is  credited  with  having  been  inspired  directly
by  the  celestial  Bodhisat  Maitreya,  the  coming  Buddha,  and  it
is  believed  that  he  was  miraculously  transferred  to  the  Tushita
heavens  and  there  received  from  Maitreya's  hands  the  gospels
called  "The  Five  Books  of  Maitreya,"  the  leading  scripture  of
this  party.

His  school,  the  Yogacarya,  and  especially  its  later  develop-
ment (into  which  magic  circles  with  mantras  or  speUs  were  in-
troduced about  700  A.D.),  was  entitled  "  Mantraydna  "  or  "  the
Tnantra-v ehicle."  And  Yoga  seems  indeed  to  have  influenced  also
the  Ceylonese  and  other  forms  of  southern  Buddhism,  among
whom  flying  through  the  air  and  other  supernatural  powers  (Irdhi)
are  obtainable  by  ecstatic  meditation  (though  not  expreSsedly
pantheistic),  and  the  recitation  of  dhdranis^;  and  the  ten  "  iddhis '"
or  miraculous  supernatural  powers,  are  indeed  regarded  as  the
attribute  of  every  perfected  saint  or  Arhat.*  "  EahatS  (Arhats)
flying  "  is  a  frequent  expression  in  the  southern  scriptures,  and  is
illustrated  by  numerous  paintings  in  the  early  caves  of  Ajanta,  in
central  India.

It  is  with  this  essentially  un-Buddhistic  school  of  pantheistic
mysticism — which,  with  its  charlatanism,  contributed  to  the  decline
of  Buddhism  in  India — that  the  Theosophists  claim  kinship. Its

1  Amitayus  Butropedesa,  Buddhagotra.Sastra,  on  the  Saddharma  Punijarika,  Vajra
Ch'edika,  Dasabhumika,  etc. ;  and  also  "  the  Treasury  of  Metaphysics  "  (Abidharma
Kos-sa  sastra),  containing  many  Sautrantiba  principles.

2  For  his  date  conf.  Vasil.,  225,  230  and  previous  note.  The  works  of  his  younger
brother  Vasubandhu,  were  translated  into  Chinese  557  a.d.

3  Conf.  Hardy's  B.M.,  p.,  252,  and  Geimblot,  Sept.  Suttaspali,  p.  323.
*  Childeks'  Fdli  Diet.


PANTHEISTIC  MYSTICISM  AND THEOSOPHY. 129

so-called  "  esoteric  Buddhism "  would  better  be  termed  exoteric,
as  Professor  C.  Bendall  has  suggested  to  me,  for  it  is  foreign
to  the  principles  of  Buddha.  Nor  do  the  Lamas  know  anything
about  those  spiritual  mediums — the  Mahatmas  ("  Koot  Hoomi  ")
— which  the  Theosophists  place  in  Tibet,  and  give  an  important
place  in  Lamaist  mysticism.  As  we  shall  presently  see,  the  mysti-
cism of  the  Lamas  is  a  charlatanism  of  a  mean  necromantic  order,
and  does  not  even  comprise  clever  jugglery  or  such  an  interesting
psychic  phenomenon  as  mesmerism,  and  certainly  nothing  worthy
of  being  dignified  by  the  name  of  "  natural  secrets  and  forces."

But  with  its  adoption  of  Tantrism,^  so-called.  Buddhism  entered
on  its  most  degenerate  phase.  Here  the  idolatrous  cult  of  female
energies  was  grafted  upon  the  theistic  Mahayana  and  the  pan-
theistic mysticism  of  Yoga.  And  this  parasite  seized  strong  hold
of  its  host  and  soon  developed  its  monstrous  growths,  which
crushed  and  strangled  most  of  the  little  life  yet  remaining  of
purely  Buddhist  stock.

Tantrism,  which  began  about  the  seventh  century  a.d.  to
tinge  Buddhism,  is  based  on  the  worship  of  the  Active  Pro-
ducing Principle  (Prakriti)  as  manifested  in  the  goddess  Kali
or  Durga,  the  female  energy  {^akti)  of  the  primordial  male
(Purusha  or  Siva),  who  is  a  gross  presentation  of  The  Supreme
Soul  of  the  universe.  In  this  cult  the  various  forces  of  nature
— physical,  physiological,  moral  and  intellectual — were  deified
under  separate  personalities,  and  these  presiding  deities  were
grouped  into  Mdtri  (divine  mothers),  Ddklcini  and  Yogini
(goddesses  with  magical  powers),  etc.  And  all  were  made  to
be  merely  different  manifestations  of  the  one  great  central  god-
dess. Kali,  Siva's  spouse.  Wives  were  thus  allotted  to  the
several  celestial  Bodhisats,  as  well  as  to  most  of  the  other
gods  and  demons;  and  most  of  them  were  given  a  variety  of
forms,  mild  and  terrible,  according  to  the  supposed  moods  of
each divinity at different times. And as goddesses and


1  Vasiliev  designates  this  stage  as  "Mysticism";  but  surely  the  developed
Mahayana  and  Yogacarya  doctrines  were  already  mystic  in  a  high  degree  ;
while  the  name  Taniril:  expresses  the  kind  of  mysticism  and  also  conveys  a  sense
of  Sivaist  idolatry,  although  the  word  "  Tdntra,"  according  to  its  Tibetan  etymology
(i-gyud),  literally  means  "  a  treatise,"  it  is  restricted  both  in  Buddhism  and  Hinduism
to  the  necromantic  books  on  Sakta  mysticism.

K


130  METAPHYSICS.


she-devils  were  the  bestowers  of  natural  and  supernatural
powers  and  were  especially  malignant,  they  were  especially
worshipped.

About  this  time  the  theory  of  Adi-Buddha,^  which,  it  has
been  seen,  existed  about  the  first  century  A.D.,  underwent  more
concrete  theistic  development.  He  becomes  the  primordial  god
and  creator,  and  evolves,  by  meditation,  five  celestial  Jinas  or
Buddhas  of  Meditation  (Dhydni  Buddhas),  almost  impassive,
each  of  whom,  through  meditation,  evolves  an  active  celestial
Bodhisat-son,  who  possesses  creative  functions,^  and  each  human
Buddha,  though  especially  related  to  a  particular  one  of  the  five
celestial  Buddhas  of  Meditation,  is  produced  by  a  union  of  re-
flexes from  each  of  these  latter.  For  pictures  of  these  deities,  see
the  chapter  on  the  pantheon,  where  also  I  give  a  table  present-
ing the  inter-relations  of  these  various  celestial  Buddhas,  Bodhi-
sats,  and  human  Buddhas,  and  also  incorporate  their  mystic
symbolism,  although  this  was  probably  added  in  the  later  Mantra-
yana  stage.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  five  celestial  Jinas  are  so  distributed
as  to  allot  one  to  each  of  the  four  directions,^  and  the  fifth  is
placed  in  the  centre.  And  the  central  position  thus  given  him,
namely,  Vairocana,  is  doubtless  associated  with  his  promotion  to
the  Adi-Buddhaship  amongst  certain  northern  Buddhists;  though
the  reformed  and  unreformed  sects  of  Lamas,  differ  as  regards
the  specific  name  which  they  give  the  Adi-Buddha,  the  former
calling  him  Vajradhara,  doubtless selected as bearing  the  title

1  Tib.,  mCh'og-hi  dan-pohi  Sans-rgyas.

5  "According  to  this  system,"  says  Mr.  Hodgson,  J.A.S.B.,  xii.,  400,  "from  an
eternal,  infinite  and  immaterial  Adi-Buddha  proceeded  divinely,  and  not  genera-
tively,  five  lesser  Buddhas,  who  are  considered  the  immediate  sources  (Adi-Buddha
being  the  ultimate  source)  of  the  five  elements  of  matter,  and  of  the  five  organs
and  five  faculties  of  sensation.  The  moulding  of  these  materials  into  the  shape
of  an  actual  world  is  not,  however,  the  business  of  the  five  Buddhas,  but  it  is  de-
volved by  them  upon  lesser  emanations  from  themselves  denominated  Bodhisattvas,
who  are  thus  the  tertiary  and  active  agents  of  the  creation  and  government  of
the  world,  by  virtue  of  powers  derived  immediately  from  the  five  Buddhas,
ultimately  from  the  one  supreme  Buddha.  This  system  of  five  Buddhas  provides
for  the  origin  of  the  material  world  and  for  that  of  immaterial  existences.  A
sixth  Buddha  is  declared  to  have  emanated  divinely  from  Adi-Buddha,  and  this
sixth  Buddha,  Vajrasattva  by  name,  is  assigned  the  immediate  organization  of
mind  and  its  powers  of  thought  and  feeling. "

3  The  five  "  wisdoms  "  which  the  human  Buddha  embodies  are :  Ch'o-ki  byifi  ki
ye-s'es.  Melon  ta-bahi,  Nambar-ned-ki,  Sosor  tog-pahi, Gya-wa  du-pahi  ye-s'es.


POLYTHEISTIG  DEVELOPMENTS.  131

of  "  Vajra  "  so  dear  to  Tantrik  Buddhists,  while  the  unreformed
sects  consider  him  to  be  Samantabhadra,  that  is,  the  celestial  son  of
Vairocana.  And  the  Adi-Buddha  is  not  considered  wholly  inactive
or  impassive,  for  he  is  frequently  addressed  in  prayers  and  hymns.

Sakya  Muni  is  the  fourth  of  the  Manushi  or  human  Buddhas  of
this  age,  and  his  Dhyani  Buddha  is  Amitabha,  and  his  corres-
ponding celestial  Bodhisat  is  Avalokitesvara,  the  patron-god  of
Lamaism,  who  is  held  to  be  incarnate  in  the  Grand  Lama.

The  extreme  development  of  the  Tantrik  phase  was  reached  with
the  Kala-cakra,  which,  although  unworthy  of  being  considered
a  philosophy,  must  be  referred  to  here  as  a  doctrinal  basis.
It  is  merely  a  coarse  Tantrik  development  of  the  Adi-Buddha
theory  combined  with  the  puerile  mysticisms  of  the  Mantra-
yana,  and  it  attempts  to  explain  creation  and  the  secret  powers  of
nature,  by  the  union  of  the  terrible  Kali,  not  only  with  the
Dhyani  Buddhas,  but  even  with  Adi-Buddha  himself.  In  this  way
Adi-Buddha,  by  meditation,  evolves  a  procreative  energy  by  which
the  awful  Samvhara  and  other  dreadful  Dakkini-fiendesses,  all
of  the  Kali-type,  obtain  spouses  as  fearful  as  themselves,  yet
spouses  who  are  regarded  as  reflexes  of  Adi-Buddha  and  the
Dhyani  Buddhas.  And  these  demoniacal  "Buddhas,''  under  the
names  of  Kala-cakra,  Heruka,  Achala,  Vajra-vairabha,i  etc.,  are
credited  with  powers  not  inferior  to  those  of  the  celestial  Buddhas
themselves,  and  withal,  ferocious  and  bloodthirsty;  and  only  to
be  conciliated  by  constant  worship  of  themselves  and  their  female
energies,  with  offerings  and  sacrifices,  magic-circles,  special
■maTO^ro-charms,  etc.

These  hideous  creations  of  Tantrism  were  eagerly  accepted  by
the  Lamas  in  the  tenth  century,  and  since  then  have  formed  a
most  essential  part  of  Lamaism;  and  their  terrible  images  fill
the country  and figure  prominently  in the sectarian  divisions.

Afterwards  was  added  the  fiction  of  re-incarnate  Lamas  to
ensure  the  political  stability  of  the  hierarchy.

Yet,  while  such  silly  and  debased  beliefs,  common  to  the  Lamas
of  all  sects,  determine  the  character  of  the  Tibetan  form  of  the
doctrine,  the  superior  Lamas,  on  the  other  hand,  retain  much  of
the  higher  philosophy  of  the  purer  Buddhism.

1  Compare  with  the  Pancha  RaksM,  and  see  chapter  on  pantheon,  pp.  353  and  363.

K 2


Lamas  sending  Papee-hoeses  to  Teavellees.i


VI.


THE DOCTRINE AND ITS ETHICS.

I  HE  simple  creed  and  rule  of  conduct  which  won  its
way  over  myriads  of  Buddha's  hearers  is  still  to  be
found  in  Lamaism,  though  often  obscured  by  the
mystic  and  polydemonist  accretions  of  later  days.  All
the  Lamas  and  most  of  the  laity  are  familiar  with  the  doctrinal
elements  taught  by  Sakya  Muni  and  give  them  a  high-  place  in
their  religious  and  ethical  code.

A  keen  sense  of  human  misery  forms  the  starting-point  of
Buddha's  Law  or  Dharma,^  the  leading  dogma  of  which  is  pro-
pounded in  "  The  Four  noble  Truths,"^  which  may  be  thus  sum-
marized : —

1.  Existence  in  any  form  involves  Suffering  or  Sorrow.^


1  After  Hue.

2  Dharma  is  best  rendered,  says  Ehys  Davids  {Biiddii.,  p.  45),  by  "truth"  or
righteousness,  and  not  by  "Law,"  which  suggests  ceremonial  observances  and  out-
ward rules,  which  it  was  precisely  the  object  of  Buddha's  teaching  to  do  away  with.

3  Arya  Balyaiu. T. ,  'p'ags-pa  6den-pa  hi'i.

i  The  word  for  Misery (SIi;t.,^sraOT;  T. 'zag-pa) means  "drops,"  so-called becauee it
oozes  or  drops  (zag)  from  out  the  different  regions  of  the  six  ayatanas  (or  sense-sur-


THE  TRUTHS  OP  THE  PATH.  133

2.  The  Cause  of  Suffering  is  Desire  and  Lust  of  Life.

3.  The  Cessation  of  Suffering  is  effected  by  the  complete  con-
quest over  and  destruction  of  Desire  and  Lust  of  Life.

4.  The  Path  leading  to the  Cessation of  Suffering  is  "  The
noble  Eight-fold  Path,"  the  parts  ^  of  which  are : — ■

1.  Right  Belief  5.  Right  Means  of  Livelihood

2.  „ Aims  6. „ Endeavour

3.  „ Speech  7. „ Mindfulness

4.  „ Actions  8. „ Meditation.

Thus  Ignorance  (of  the  illusive  idealism  of  Life)  is  made  the
source  of  all  misery,  and  the  right  Knowledge  of  the  nature  of
Life  is  the  only  true  path  to  emancipation  from  re-birth  or  Arhat-
ship ;  and  practically  the  same  dogma  is  formulated  in  the  well-
known  stanza  called  by  Europeans  "the  Buddhist  Creed." ^ And


faces)  as  drops  water  through  holes  (Eockhill*s  Uddnavarga,  10). It  seems  to  convey
the  idea  of  tears  as  expressive  of  misery.

1  A-nga.

2  "  The  Buddhist  Creed,"  found  so  frequently  on  votive  images,  is : —

Ye  dliarmd  hetuprabkavd
Heiun  teshdn  iatlMgaid
Syavadata  teshdk  ca  yo  nirodlia
Evamvcidl  malidsrama'tjah.
It  has  been  translated  by  Rhys  Davids  (•  Vin.  Texts.,  i.,  p.  146)  as  follows  :—
Of  all  objects  which  proceed  from  a  Cause
The  Tathagata  has  explained  the  cause,
And  he  has,  explained  their  Cessation  also  ;
This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  great  Samana.
The  Second  Stanza,  also  found  frequently  on  Buddhist  votive  images  in  India  (see
Btjbnouf's  Lotus,  p.  623,  and  Chnninqham's  Arch.  Surv.  Hep.  Ind.,  i.,  pi.  xxxiv.,  fig.
1,  First  Stanza),  is  according  to  its  Tibetan  form  : —
Sarvapdpasyd  karanam
Kusalasyopasapradam
Svacitiairi  paridama7iu
Etad  BuddhdmisdiaTiam.

Which  has  been  translated  by  Csoma  thus  :—

"  No  vice  is  to  be  committed  ;
Every  virtue  must  be  perfectly  practised  ;
The  mind  must  be  brought  under  entire  subjection.
This  is  the  commandment  of  Buddha."
In  Tibetan  the  first  stanza  of  "  the  Creed  "  is  widely  known,  and  is  :—
Ch'os-nam  t'am-c'ad  rgyu-las  byun
De-rgyu  de-z'in-gs'egs-pas  gsuns
rGyu-la  'gog-pa  gan-yin-pa
'Di-skad  gsuh-ba  dge-spyoh-ch'i.


134


THE  DOCTRINE  AND  ITS  MORALITY.


the  bulk  of  the  Buddhist  scriptures  is  devoted  to  the  proofs  and
illustrations  of  the  above  dogma.

The  Moral  Code,  as  expressed  in  its  most  elementary  form  of
rules  for  the  external  conduct,  forms  the  well-known  decalogue
(dasa-sila)  which  enunciates  its  precepts  in  a  negative  and  pro-
hibitive form,  namely  : —


1.

Kill  not.

7.

Use  no  Wreaths,  Ornaments

2.

Steal  not.

or  Perfumes.

3.

Commit  not  Adultery.

8.

UsenoHighMats  orThrones.

4.

Lie  not.

9.

Abstain  from  Dancing,  Sing-

5.

Drink  not  Strong  Drink.

ing,  Music,  and  Worldly

6.

Eat  no  Food  except  at  the

Spectacles.

stated  times.

10.

Own  no  Gold  or  Silver  and
accept  none.

Buddha  peeaching  the  Law
(in  the  Deer-park  [Mriga-dawaJ  at  Benares).


The  first  five  (the  panca-sila)  are  binding  upon  the  laity ;  the
whole  ten  are  binding  only  on  the  monks;  but  the  layman  on  cer-
tain fast-days,  in  accordance  with  a  pious  vow,  observes  also  one  or
more  of  the  next  four  (Nos.  6  to  9).  The  more  austere  rules  for
monastic  discipline  are  indicated  in  the  chapter  on  the  monkhood.


BUDDHA'S  SERMONS.  135

Sakya  Muni's  sermons,  as  presented  in  the  earlier  and  more
authentic  scriptures,  hav^  all  the  simple  directness  and  force
which  belong  to  sayings  of  "  the  inspired."  As  an  illustration  of
his  moral  teaching,  his  popular  sermon  on  "  What  is  the  Greatest
Blessing  ?  "  (the  Mangala  Siitra)i  is  here  appended  : —

Buddha's  Sbemon  on  What  is  the  Gkeatbst  Blessikg  ?

Praise  be  to  the  Blessed  One,  the  Holy  One,  the  Author  of  all
Truth  !

1 .  Thus  I  have  heard.  On  a  certain  day  dwelt  the  Blessed  One  ^  at
Srivasta,  at  the  Jetavana  monastery,  in  the  Garden  of  Anathapindaka.
And  when  the  night  was  far  advanced,  a  certain  radiant  celestial
being,  illuminating  the  whole  of  Jetavana,  approached  the  Blessed  One
and  saluted  him,  and  stood  aside,  and  standing  aside  addressed  him
with  this  verse:  —

Many  gods  and  men  yearning  after  good  have  held  divers  things  to
be  blessings ;  say  thou  what  is  the  greatest  blessing  ?

1.  To  serve  wise  men  and  not  serve  fools,  to  give  honour  to  whom
honour  is  due,  this  is  the  greatest  blessing.

2.  To  dwell  in  a  pleasant  land,  to  have  done  good  deeds  in  a  former
existence,  to  have  a  soul  filled  with  right  desires,  this  is  the  greatest
blessing.

3.  Much  knowledge  and  much  science,  the  discipline  of  a  well-
trained  mind,  and  a  word  well  spoken,  this  is  the  greatest  blessing.

4.  To  succour  father  and  mother,  to  cherish  wife  and  child,  to  follow
a  peaceful  calling,  this  is  the  greatest  blessing.

5.  To  give  alms,  to  live  religiously,  to  give  help  to  relatives,  to  do
blameless  deeds,  this  is  the  greatest  blessing.

6.  To  cease  and  abstain  from  sin,  to  eschew  strong  drink,  to  be
diligent  in  good  deeds,  this  is  the  greatest  blessing.

7.  Reverence  and  lowliness  and  contentment  and  gratitude,  to  receive
religious  teaching  at  due  seasons,  this  is  the  greatest  blessing.

8.  To  be  long-suffering  and  meek,  to  associate  with  the  priests  of
Buddha,  to  hold  religious  discourse  at  due  seasons,  this  is  the  greatest
blessing.

9.  Temperance  and  chastity,  discernment  of  the  four  great  truths,
the  prospect  of  Nirvana,  this  is  the  greatest  blessing.

10.  The  soul  of  one  unshaken  by  the  changes  of  this  hfe,  a  soul
inaccessible  to  sorrow,  passionless,  secure,  this  is  the  greatest  blessing.

11.  They  that  do  these  things  are  invincible  on  every  side,  on  every
side  they  walk  in  safety,  yea,  theirs  is  the  greatest  blessing.

Indeed,  Buddha's  teaching  is  not  nearly  so  pessimistic  as  it  is


'  From  Professor  Childers'  translation.  ^  Bhagava.


136  THE  DOCTRINE  AND  ITS  MOBALITT.

usually  made  to  appear  by  its  hostile  critics.  His  sermon  on
Love  (Mitra  Sutra)  shows  that  Buddhism  has  its  glad  tidings  of
great  joy,  and  had  it  been  wholly  devoid  of  these,  it  could  never
have  become  popular  amongst  bright,  joyous  people  like  the  Bur-
mese and  Japanese.

The  stages  towards  Arhatship  ^  or  emancipation  from  re-birth
are  graduated  into  a  consecutive  series  of  four  (cattaro-margd)
paths,  a  fourfold  arrangement  of  "  the  eightfold  paths  "  above  men-
tioned ;  and  these  depend  upon  the  doctrinal  comprehension  of  the
devotee,  and  his  renunciation  or  not  of  the  world,  for  the  higher
stages  were  only  reachable  by  celibate  monks  (aramana)  or  nuns
(srwrnm^era),  and  not  by  the  ordinary  laity  or  hearers  {sravaka).  ■
Those  who  have  not  yet  entered  any  of  these  stages  or  paths  are
"the  ignorant  and  unwise  ones."  And  Meditation  {dhydna)  is  the
chief  means  of  entry.  The  first  and  lowest  stage  or  step  towards
Arhatship  is  the  Srottdpatti,  or  the  entering  the  stream — the
state  of  the  new  convert  to  Buddhism.  He  is  called  Sotapanno,
"  One  who  has  entered  the  stream,"  inevitably  carrying  hita  on-
ward— though  not  necessarily  in  the  same  body — to  the  calm  ocean
of  Nirvana.^  He,  now,  can  only  be  re-born  ^  as  a  god  or  man,  and
not  in  any  lower  births,  though  his  metempsychoses  may  yet  last
countless  ages.*

In  the  second  stage  the  graduate  is  called  Sakrid-agamin,  or
"  he  who  receives  .birth  once  more  "  on  earth.  He  has  freed  him-
self from  the  first  five  fetters.

In  the  third  stage  he  is  called  An-agami,  or  "  one  who  will  not
come  back "  to  earth.  Such  a  person  can  only  be  re-born  in  a
Brahma  heaven,  whence  he  reaches  Nirvana.

The  fourth  and  highest  stage  is  the  attainment  of  Arhatship
in  this  life.  Such  a  graduate  will  at  death  experience  no  re-
birth.

After  Buddha's  death seems  to have  arisen the division of

1  Arhant  (Pali,  Araha,  Rahan,  Rahat)  as  its  Tibetan  equivalent,  dgra-bdom-pa,  shows,
is  derived  from  Ari,  an  enemy,  and  han,  to  extirpate,  i.e.,  "  he  who  has  extu'pated  his
passions."  It  seems  to  have  been  applied  in  primitive  Buddhism  to  those  who  com-
prehended the  four  Truths,  and  including  Buddha  himself,  but  lately  it  was  restricted
to  the  perfected  Buddhist  saint  (Laidlat's  FaHian  Ki,  94 ;  Buen.,  i.,  295 ;  ii.,  29V ;
Kopp.,  i.,  400;  Jaesoh.,  88).

2  HAEDsr's  Hastn.  Mon.,  Chap.  xxii.

"  Only  seven  more  births  yet  remain  for  him.

'  According  to  northern  Buddhism  for  80,000  kalpas,  or  cycles  of  time.


ARHATSHIP  AND  BODHISATSHIP.  137


Arhats  into  the  three  grades  of  Simple  Arhat,  Pratyeka-Buddha,
and  Supreme  Buddha,  which  is  now  part  of  the  creed  of  the
southern  school.

Firstly,  "the  Simple  Arhat  who  has  attained  perfection
through  his  own  efforts  and  the  doctrine  and  example  of  a  Supreme
Buddha,  tut  is  not  himself  such  a  Buddha  and  cannot  teach  others
how  to  attain  Arhatship.

"Secondly,  and  second  in  rank,  but  far  above  the  Simple
Arhat,  the  Pratyeka-Buddha  or  Solitary  Saint,  who  has  attained
perfection  himself  and  by  himself  alone  and  not  .  .  .  through
the  teaching  of  any  Supreme  Buddha.

"Thirdly,  the  Supreme  Buddha,  or  Buddha  ^Jar  excellence  (pnae
a  Bodhisattva),  who,  having  by  his  own  self- enlightening  insight
attained  perfect  knowledge  (sambodhi)  .  .  .  has  yet  delayed
this  consummation  (parinirvana)  that  He  may  become  the  saviour
of  a  suffering  world  ...  by  teaching  men  how  to  save
themselves.^

The  leading  religious  feature. of  the  Mahayana  doctrine  was  its
more  universal  spirit.  Its  ideal  was  less  monastic  than  the
Hinayana,  which  confined  its  advantages  practically  to  its
coeobitical  monks.  The  Mahayana  endeavoured  to  save  all  beings
by  rendering  Bodhisatship  accessible  to  all,  and  thus  saving  all
beings  in  the  ages  to  come.  It  also  called  itself  the  "  Vehicle  of
Bodisats,"  thus  constituting  three  vehicles  (Triyana)  which  it
described  as — (1)  Of  the  hearers  or  disciples  (Sravaka),  whose
vehicle  was  likened  to  a  sheep  crossing  the  surface  of  a  river ;  (2)
of  the  Pratyeka-Buddhas,  or  solitary  non-teaching  Buddhas,  whose
vehicle  was  likened  to  a  deer  crossing  a  river;  and  (3)  of  the
Bodhisats,  whose  vehicle  is  likened  to  a  mighty  elephant  which
in  crossing  a  river  grandly  fathoms  it  to  the  bottom.  These
vehicles  "  are,  in  plain  language,  piety,  philosophy,  or  rather
Yogism,  and  striving  for  the  enlightenment  and  weal  of  our  fellow-
creatures.  .  .  .  Higher  than  piety  is  true  and  self-acquired
knowledge  of  eternal  laws ;  higher  than  knowledge  is  devoting
oneself  to  the  spiritual  weal  of  others."^  It  thus  gave  itself  the
highest  place.

Its  theory  of  Bodhisatship  is,  to  use  the  words  of  Professor

^  Summary  by  Mon.  Williams's  Buddhism,  p.  134. '  Keen,  op.  cit.,  p.  xxxiv.


138  THE  DOCTRINE  AND ITS  MORALITY.

Rhys  Davids,  "the  keynote  of  the  later  school  just  as  Arhatship
is  the  keynote  of  early  Buddhism.^  The  Arhats  being  dead  cannot
be  active,  the  Bodhisattvas  as  living  beings  can :  "  the  Bodhi-
sattvas  represent  the  ideal  of  spiritual  activity ;  the  Arhats  of
inactivity."

But,  as  Professor  Kern  shows,  one  of  the  earliest  of  the  Mahayana
scriptures,  the  Saddharma  pun^anka,  dating  at  least  about  the
second  century  A.D.,  goes  further  than  this.  It  teaches  that  every-
one should  try  to  become  a  Buddha.  "It  admits  that  from  a  prac-
tical point  of  view  one  may  distinguish  three  means,  so-called
Vehicles  (^ydncis),  to  attain  summum  bonum,  Nirvana,  although
in  a  higher  sense  there  is  only  one  Vehicle — the  Buddha  Vehicle."  *

To  obtain  the  intelligence  (Bodhi)  of  a  Buddha,  and  as  a  Bodhi-
sat  to  assist  in  the  salvation  of  all  living  beings,  the  six  Pdra-
mitd  or  transcendental  virtues  must  be  assiduously  practised.
These  cardinal  virtues  are  : —

1.  Charity  (Skt.,  cZawa^)  4.  Industry  (wri/a^)

2.  Morality  (sila^)  5.  Meditation  (dhydna'')

3.  Fatience  (Jcshdnti  ^)  6.  Wisdom,  (prajnd^)
To  which  four  others  sometimes  are  added,  to  wit : —

7.  Method  (ujodya^)  9.  Fortitude  (feaia  ")

8.  Vrajer  (pranidhdna'^'^)  10.  Foreknowledge  (?  cZ%a7ia  i^)

Sakya  Muni,  in  his  last  earthly  life  but  one,  is  held  to  have  satis-
fied the  PdraTnitd  of  Giving  (No.  1  of  the  list)  as  prince  Visvantara
("  Vessantara ")  as  detailed  in  the  Jataka  of  the  same  name.
Asoka,  in  his  gift  of  Jambudvipa ;  and  Siladitya,  in  his  gifts  at
Prayag  (Allahabad),  as  described  by  Hiuen  Tsiang,  are  cited  as
illustrations  of  this  Pdramitd.

Meditation,  the  fifth  Paramita,  was  early  given  an  important
place  in  the  doctrine,  and  it  is  insisted  upon  in  the  Vinaya.^^
Through  it  one  arrives  at  perfect  tranquillity  (samddhi),  which  is
believed  to  be  the  highest  condition  of  mind. And  in  the  later


1  Origin,  p.  254.  ^  Sacr.  Bks.  Bast,  xxi.,  p.  xxxiv.

3  sbyin-pa,  CsomA,  Atialy.,  399  ;  Burnouf,  Lotus,  p.  544.

•  ts'ul-k'rims.  s  bzod-pa.  6  botson-'gruj.

'  bsam-gtan.  *  s'es-rab.  '  t'abs.

'"  smon-lam.  "  stobs.  12  ye-s'es.

"  For  stages  of  meditation  see  Bigandet's  Legends,  etc.,  446.  Bodhidliarma  in  tiie  fif  tin
century  a.d.  exalted  meditation  as  the  means  of  self-reformation.


PARAMITAS— PARADISE  OF  AMITABHA  139

days  of  mysticism  this  led  to  the  ecstatic  meditation  of  Yoga,
by  which  the  individual  becomes  united  with  and  rapt  in  the
deity.

The  ten  stages  through  which  a  Bodhisat  must  pass  in  order
to  attain  perfection.  These  stages  are  called  "  The  Ten^  Heavens  "
(dasa  bhumi^vara^),  and  are  objectively  represented  by  the
ten  "umbrellas"  surmounting  the  spire  of  a  cccitya,  and  one
of  the  treatises  of  the  "nine  canons"  is  devoted  to  their  de-
scription.^

In  the  natural  craving  after  something  real  and  positive,  "  When
the  theory  of  a  universal  void  became  the  leading  feature  of  the
Buddhist  scholastic  development,  the  question  pressed  upon  the
mind  was  this  :  If  all  things  around  us  are  unreal  and  unsub-
stantial, is  there  anything  in  the  universe  real  or  any  true  ex-
istence ?  The  answer  to  this  question  was  that  "  on  the  other
shore,"  that  is,  in  that  condition  which  admits  of  no  birth  or
death,  no  change  or  suffering,  there  is  absolute  and  imperish-
able existence."  *

The  chief  of  these  regions  is  the  western  paradise  of  Amitabha,
named  Sukhavati,  or  "  the  Happy  Land," '  a  figure  of  which  is  here
given,  as  it  is  the  goal  sought  by  the  great  body  of  the  Buddhists
of  Tibet,  as  well  as  those  of  China  and  Japan.  Its  invention  dates
at  least  to  100  A.D.,*  and  an  entry  to  it  is  gained  by  worshipping
Amitabha's  son,  Avalokita,  which  is  a  chief  reason  for  the  spell
of  the  latter,  the  Otti  Tnai^i  jpadine  Hum,  being  so  popular.

In  the  seventh  century  a.d.,  under  Buddha-palita,  and  in  the
eighth  or  ninth,  under  Candrakirti,  a  popular  development  arose
named  the  Prasanga  Madhyamika  (Tib.,T'al  gyur-va^),  which  by  a
hair-spUtting  speculation  deduces  the  absurdity  and  erroneousness
of  every  esoteric  opinion,  and  maintained  that  Buddha's  doctrines
establish  two  paths,  one  leading  to  the  highest  heaven  of  the
universe,  Sukhavati,  where  man  enjoys  perfect  happiness,  but  con-

1  They  are  sometimes  accounted  thirteen  in  Nepal  (Hodgson,  Lang.,  16)  and  also  by
the  Sfin-ma  Lamas.

2  See  also Laidlat's  FaSian,-p.  93;  J.R.A.S.,ii.i.,  1, 21.  Sometimes  they  are  extended
to  thirteen.

HoDQS.,  stipra  cit.  «  Beal's  Catena,  275.

5  For  its  description  see  Beal's  Catena,  p.  117  seg.;  Max  Mullee's  trans,  ofSuhMvaii-
vyulia,  S.B.B.,  xlix. ;  and  Saeat,  J.A.S.B.,  1891.
"  Max  MiJLLBR,  op.  cit.,  supra  ii.,  xxiii. Avalokita's  name  also  occurs  here.
'  Vasiliev,  B.,  327, 357 ;  Csoma,  J.A.S.B.,  vii.,  144.


MAGICAL  POWERS— SIDDHI.


141


nected  with  personal  existence,  the other  conducting  to  entire

emancipation  from  the  world,  namely.  Nirvana.^  -^

The  Yoga  doctrine  of  ecstatic  union  of  the  individual  with  the

Universal  Spirit  had  been  introduced  into  Hindiiism  about  150

B.C.  by  Patanjali,  and  is  not  unknown  to  western  systems.^ It

taught spiritual advancement  by means of a self-hypnotizing

to  be  learned  by  rules. By  moral  consecration  of  the  individual

to Isvara or the Supreme Soul, and mental concentration

upon  one  point  with  a  view  to  annihilate  thought,  there  resulted

the eight  great Siddhi  or  magical powers, namely (1) "  the

ability  to  make  one's  body  hghter,  or  (2)  heavier,  or  (3)  smaller,

(4) or larger than anything in the world, and (5) to reach

any  place,  or  (6)  to  assume  any  shape,  and  (7)  control  all  natural

laws,  to

'  Hang  like  Mahomet  in  the  air,
Or  St.  Ignatius  al.  his  prayer,'^

and  (8)  to  make  everything  depend  upon  oneself,  all  at  pleasure
of  will — Iddhi  or  Riddi."  On  this  basis  Asanga,  importing
Patanjali's  doctrine  into  Buddhism  and  abusing  it,  taught*  that
by  means  of  mystic
formulas — dhdranis
(extracts  from  Maha-
yana  sutras  and  other
scriptures)  and  mantra
(short  prayers  to
deities) — as  spells,
"  the  reciting  of  which
should  be  accompanied
by  music  and  certain
distortion  of  the  fingers
(mudrd),  a  state  of
mental  fixity  {samddhi)
might  be  reached  char-
acterized bj  neither
thought  nor  annihilation  of  thoughts,  and  consisting  of  sixfold

1  SCHLAGT.,  41-42.

2  Compare  the  remark  of  Beal, "  the  end  to  which  Plotinus  directed  his  thoughts  was
to  unite  himself  to  the  Great  God ;  he  attained  it  by  the  nnitim  method  of  the  Quietists."
—Critical  Diet.,  art.  Plotinus,  quoted  through  Seal's  Catena,  150.

3  HuniBEAS,  Gesta  Roman,  326.

4  His  doctrine  is  contained  in  the  treatise  entitled  YogicaryorlMmi  Sdstra.


Mystic  Attitudes  of  Fingers.


142  THE  DOCTRINE  AND  ITS  MORALITY.

bodily  and  mental  happiness  {Yogi),  whence  would  result  endow-
ment with,  supernatural  miracle-working  power."  These  miracu-
lous powers  were  alleged  to  be  far  more  efficacious  than  mere  moral
virtue,  and  may  be  used  for  exorcism  and  sorcery,  and  for  purely
secular  and  selfish  objects.  Those  who  mastered  these  practices
were^Jled  Yogacarya.

But  even  in  early  Buddhism  mantras  seem  to  have  been  used
as  charms,'^  and  southern  Buddhism  still  so  uses  them  in  Paritta
service  for  the  sick,^  and  also  resorts  to  mechanical  contrivances  for
attaining  Samadlii,  somewhat  similar  to  those  of  the  Yogacarya.'
And  many  mystic  spells  for  the  supernatural  power  of  exorcism
are  given  in  that  first  or  second  century  a.d.  work,  Saddharma
Pwndarika.^

In  the  mystic  nihilist  sense,  as  the  name  of  a  thing  was  as
real  as  the  thing  itself,  the  written  spell  was  equally  potent  with
the  spoken,  and  for  sacerdotal  purposes  even  more  so  on  account  of
the  sacred  character  of  letters,  as  expressing  speech  and  so  exciting
the  intense  veneration  of  barbarians.  No  Tibetan  will  wantonly
destroy  any  paper  or  other  object  bearing  written  characters.

The  general  use  of  the  mystic  OM,  symbolic  of  the  Hindu
Triad  AUM,  The  Creator,  Preserver,  and  Destroyer,  probably  dates
from  this  era ;  though  in  the  Amaravati  tope  is  figured  a  pillar  of
glory  surmounted  by  OM  proceeding  from  the  throne  s  apposed  to
be  occupied  by  Buddha.^  It  is  doubtful  whether  its  occurrence  in
some  copies  of  the  Lalita  Vistara  and  other  early  Mahayana  works,
as  the  first  syllable  of  the  Opening  Salutation,  may  not  have  been
an  after  addition  of  later  scribes.  The  monogram  figured  on
page  386  is  entitled  "  The  All-powerful  ten,"«  and  is  in  a  form
of  the  Indian  character  called  Ranja  or  "Lantsa."

fEe^  Tantrik  cults  ^  brought  with  them  organized  worship,
litanies,  and  pompous  ritual,  offerings  and  sacrifice  to  the  bizarre


1  Kullavagc/a,  v.,  6.  2  JSast.  Mon. Ehys  DA.Yms''MiKnda,  213.

3  Haedy's  M.M.,  chap.  "Ascetic  Rites."  See  also  the  mandala  diagrams,  p.  252 ;  and
"  The  Contemplation  Stone,"  J.R.A.S.,  1894, p.  664.

*  See  also  Beal's  Catena,  p.  284,  etc.

'  Fekgusson's  Tree  and  Serp.  Worship,  pi.  Ixxi,,  figs.  1  and  2.

1=  Nam-bc'u-dban-ldan ;  cf .  also  Chinese  name  for  the  ,'<rast!l:a.  The  letters  are  0,
U,  H,  K,  S,  M,  L,  V,  R,  Y.

'  Cf.  my  Indian- Buddhist  Oult  of  Avaloiita,  etc.,  J.R.A.S.,  1894  ;  Buhnodf's  Intro.,
465.


SPELLS— MANTRAS  AND  BHABANIS.


143


or  terrible  gods  and  goddesses  for  favours,  temporal  and  spiritual.
A  supreme  primordial  Buddha-god  and  superhuman  Buddhas  and
BodMsats,  together  with  their  female  energies,  mostly  demoniacal,


Magic"  CiECLE."!


demand  propitiation  by  frequent  worship  and  sacrificial  offerings.
This  Tantrik  ritual  is  illustrated  in  the  chapters  on  worship.

The  excessive  use  of  these  mystic  Mantras,  consisting  mostly  of
unmeaning  gibberish,  resulted  in  a  new  vehicle  named  ^.
Mantra-ydna,  which  ie  a  Tantrik  development  of  the  Yoga  phase


1  From  Japan.


144


THE  DOOTBINE  AND  ITS  MORALITY.


of  Buddhism.


Charmed  sentences  (dhdrani)  supposed  to  have

been  composed  by  these
several  divinities  them-
selves,  are  used  as
incantations  for  pro-
curing their  assistance
in  peril  as  well  as  in
ordinary  temporal
affairs.  And  by  means
of  these  spells  and
mummerythe  so-called
"  magic  circles "  are
formed  by  which  the
divinities  are  coerced
into  assisting  the  vot-
ary to  reach  "the other
shore."  And  the
authors  of  this  so-
called  "esoteric"
system  gave  it  -a.  re-
spectable antiquity  by
alleging  that  its
founder  was  really
Nagarjuna,  who  had
received  it  in  two
sections  of  vajra  and
garbha-dhatu  from
the  celestial  Buddha
Vajra-sattva,  within
"  the  iron  tower  "  in
southern  India.  Its
authorship  is,  as  even
Taranatha  himself  ad-
mits, most  obscure.^

The  Mantra-ydna
asserts  that  the  state
of the "  Great en-


YaStra  of  Miffjusiii.
(From  Japanese.)


1  Taean.,  113.


Magic-Ciecle  of  Avalokita.


MAOIG-CIROLES.  145


lighted  or  perfected  "1  that  is,  Buddhaship,  may  be  attained  in
the  present  body  (composed  of  the  six  elements)  by  following  the
three  great  secret  laws  regarding  the  body,  speech,  and  thought,^
as  revealed  by  the  fictitious  Buddha,  Vajrasattva.

Its  silly  secrets  so-called  comprise  the  spells  of  the  several
divinities,  and  the  mode  of  making  the  magic-circles  {man4ala)
of  the  two  sorts — the  outer  and  ipner  (yajradhdtu  and  garbha-
dhdtu)  ;  though  something  very  like,  or  analogous  to,  magic-circles
are  also  used  in  southern  Buddhism.^

Some  idea  of  its  contemptible  mummery  and  posturing  and
other  physical  means  for  spiritual  advancement  is  to  be  gained
from  the  following  three  exercises  which  every  Lama  should  daily
perform : —

The  "  meditative  posture  of  the  seven  attitudes  "  is  dail}'  assumed  by
the  Lama  with  bis  associates,  in  order  to  subjtigate  the  five  senses.
These  attitudes  are — (1)  sitting  with  legs  flexed  in  the  well-known
attitude  of  Buddha ;  (2)  the  hands  resting  one  above  the  other  in  the
lap;  (3)  head  slightly  bent  forward;  (4)  eyes  fixed  on  the  tip  of  the
nose ;  (5)  shoulders  "  expanded  like  the  wings  of  a  vulture  ;  "  (6)  spine
erect  and  "  straight  like  an  arrow " ;  (7)  tongue  arching  up  to  the
palate  like  the  curving  petals  of  the  eight-leaved  lotus.  While  in  this
posture  he  must  think  that  he  is  alone  in  a  wilderness.  And  he  now,
by  physical  means,  gets  rid  of  Eaga,  Moha,  Dvesa — the  three  "  original
sins  "  of  the  body — and  these  are  got  rid  of  according  to  the  humoral
physiology  of  the  ancients  in  the  three  series  of  dbnma,,  roma,  and
?-kyan-ma.  After  taking  a  deep  inspiration,  the  air  of  the  roma  veins
is  expelled  three  times,  and  thus  "  the  white  wind  "  is  let  out  from  the
right  nostrU  three  times  in  short  and  forcible  expiratory  gusts.  This
expels  all  anger.  Then  from  the  left  nostril  is  thrice  expelled  in  a
similar  way  "  the  red  air "  which  rids  from  lust.  The  colotirless
central  air  is  thrice  expelled',  which  frees  from  ignorance.  On  con-
cluding these  processes,  the  monk  must  mentally  conceive  that  all


'  Maha-utpanna  or  "  Atiyoga,  Tib.,  dsog-ch'en.

2  sKu,  Sun,  T'ug.  Tliis  doctrine  seems  almost  identical  with  that  of  the  Shin-
gon-shu  sect  of  Japan  described  by  B.  Nanjio  in  his  Jap.  Buddh.  Sects,  p.  78.
Taranatha  also  mentions  Nagarjuna's  name  in  connection  with  its  origin,  which  he
admits  is  most  obscure.  It  probably  arose  at  the  end  of  the  seventh  century  a.d.,  as
in  720  A.D.  Vajrabodhi  brought  it  with  its  magic-circles  to  China.

'  These  elaborate  circles  of  coloured  clay,  etc.,  are  described  in  detail  by  Habdt,  E.
M.,  252,  etc.,  and  I  have  seen  diagrams  of  an  apparently  similar  character  in  Burmese
Buddhism.  Compare  also  with  the  mechanical  contrivance  "the  Octagon"  (Tib.,
Ddb-(^ad)  used  in  the  rite  sGrub-byed,  to  concentrate  the  thoughts  and  coerce  the  she-
devils  (Ddkkini)  who  confer  miraculous  powers  described.  Sohlau.,  p.  247.  Cf.  also
"  Meditation-stone."


146


THE  DOCTRINE  AND  ITS  MORALITY.


ignorance,  lust  and  anger — the  three  original  sins — have  "disappeared
like  frost  before  a  scorching  sun."

He  then  says  the  "  a-lia-ki,"  keeping  his  tongue  curved  like  a  lotus
petal.  This  is  followed  by  his  chanting  "  the  Yoga  of  the  Lama,"
during  which  he  must  mentally  couceive  his  Lama-guide  as  sitting  over-
head upon  a  lotus-flower.

The  mere  recital  of  mystic  words  and  sentences  (mantra  or


Mystic  Attitudes.
(Lamas  of  Established  Church.)

dhdrani  [T.,  Z'uri]),  and  their  essential  syllable  (the  germs  or
seed,  so-called  vija)  is  held  to  be  equivalent  to  the  practice  of  the
Paramitas,  and  subdues  and  coerces  the  gods  and  genii,  and  pro-
cures long  life  and  other  temporal  blessings,  and  obtains  the
assistance of the Buddhas and Bodhisats. Although these


MY8TIG  ATTITUDES.


147


East


Dhdrai^is''-  were  likely  iatroduced  to  supply  the  need  for  incanta-
tions their  use  is  alleged  to  be  based  upon  the  doctrine  of  un-
reality of  things.  As  existence  is  ideal,  the  name  of  a  thing  is
equivalent  to  the  thing  itself,  and  of  a  like  efficacy  are  the
attitudes  (mudra)  of  the  fingers,  symbolic  of  the  attributes  of
the  gods.  Thus  Om  is  an  acceptable  offering  to  the  Buddhas,
Hei  dispels  sorrow,  and  by  uttering  Ho,  samddhi  is  entered.  Of
such  an  ideal  nature  also  were
the  paper  horses  of  Hue's
amusing  story,  which  the
Lamas  with  easy  charity  be-
stowed on  belated  and  helpless
travellers,  as  figured  at  the  top
of  this  chapter.

These  postures  and  parrot-
like exercises,  as  practised  by
the  unreformed  and  semi-re-
formed sects,  according  to
the  book  entitled  The  com-
plete esoteric  Tdntra^  and  the
reputed  work  of  Padma-sam-
bhava,  are  as  follows.  The  cor-
responding G-e-lug-pa  rites  are
not  very  much  different : —

Is*. — The  mode  of  placing  the  three  mystic  words,  body,  speech
and  thought  {hu,  sun  and  t'uJc).

2nd. — The  nectar-commanding  rosary.

Srd. — The  jewelled  rosary-guide  for  ascending,

4<A. — Secret  counsels  of  the  four  Yogas.

5th. — The  great  root  of  the  heart.

6th. — The  lamp  of  the  three  dwellings.

7th. — The  bright  loosener  of  the  illusion.

8th. — ^The  water-drawing  "  dorje."

9  th. — The  secret  guide  to  the  fierce  Dakkuii.
lOth. — The  drawing  of  the  essence  of  the  stony  nectar.
llth. — Counsel  on  the  Dakkini's  habits.
I2th. — Fathoming  the  mystery  of  the  Dakkinis
ISth. — Counsel  for  the  Dakkini's  heart-root.
lAth. — The  four  words  for  the  path  of  Pardo  (hmbo).
15th. — The  Pardo  of  the  angry  demons.


Lotus-petals  of  Heaet.

On  meditating  upon  Celestial  Buddhas.^

(A  Stage  in  the  Magic-Circle.— After  ITanjlb,)


1  Conf.  BuBNOUF,  i.,  522-74  ;  Vasiliev,  153, 193.


"  ffsah-shga^s  ?pyi  rffjud
h  2


148  THE  DOCTRINE  AND ITS  MORALITY.

16<A. — To  recognize  theGyalwa  Rig-na  or  the  five  celestial  Buddhas.
Then  "Happiness"  is  reached — this  goal  is  the  sensuous
happiness  of  the  Jina's  Paradise  or  of  Sukhavati,  that  of
Amitabha,  the  Buddha  of  Infinite  Light.

The  transcendental  efficacy  attributed  to  these  spells  fully  ac-
counts for  their  frequent  repetition  on  rosaries  and  by  mechanical
means  in  the  "  prayer-wheel,"  flags,  etc.

Thus,  the  commonest  mystic  formula  in  Lamaism,  the  "  Om-
ma-ni  pad-me  Hiim," — which  literally  means  "  Om!  The  Jewel  in
the  Lotus  !  Hum  ! " — is  addressed to the Bodhisat Padmapani


The  Peayee-Wheel  Fokmula.
Om-ma-^ii  -pad-me  Hxim.

who  is  represented  like  Buddha  as  seated  or  standing  within  a
lotus-flower.  He  is  the  patron-god  of  Tibet  and  the  controller  of
metempsychosis.  And  no  wonder  this  formula  is  so  popular  and
constantly  repeated  by  both  Lamas  and  laity,  for  its  mere  utter-
ance is  believed  to  stop  the  cycle  of  re-births  and  to  convey  the
reciter  directly  to  paradise.  Thus  it  is  stated  in  the  Mani-kah-
bum  with  extravagant  rhapsody  that  this  formula  "  is  the  essence
of  all  happiness,  prosperity,  and  knowledge,  and  the  great  means
of  deliverance " ;  for  the  Otn  closes  re-birth  amongst  the  gods,
ma,  among  the  Titans  ni,  as  a  man,  pacZ  as  a  beast,  me  as  a
Tantalus,  and  Sum  as  an  inhabitant  of  hell.  And  in  keeping  with
this  view  each  of  these  six  syllables  is  given  the  distinctive  colour
of  these  six  states  of  rebirth,  namely  Om,,  the  godly  white,;  ma,


PBAYER-WHEELS  AND OM-MANI  FORMULA.  149


The  OM  MAjyi  Fobmula
(in  Indian  "Banja"  characters  of  about  the


the  Titanic  blue ;  ni,  the  human  yellow ;  'pad,  the  animal  green ;
me, the  "Tantalic" red; and
Hum,  the  hellish  hlach.

But  the  actual  articulation
is  not  even  needed.  The  mere
inspection  of  this  formula  is
equally  effective,  and  so  also  is
the  passing  of  this inscription  _

before  the  individual. And  to  seventh  century),

be  effective  it  does  not  require  to  be  actually  visible,  it  is  therefore
printed  thousands  and  rnillions^  of  times  on  long  ribbons  and
coiled  into  cylinders  and  inserted  into  the  "  prayer-wheels  "  so-
called,  which  are  revolved  everywhere  in  Tibet,  in  the  hand  (see
pages  45,  218,  etc.),  and  as  great  barrels  turned  by  hand  or  water
or  wind,''  and  also  printed  on  stones  and  on  cloth-flags  which  flutter
from  every  house,  so  as  to  ensure  the  cessation  of  metempsychosis
by  re-birth  in  the  western  paradise.

The  origin  of  this  formula  is  obscure. The  earliest  date  for  it  1
yet  found  is  the  thirteenth  century  A.D.^

What  seems  to  be  a  more  expanded  version  of  this  spell  is
known  to  a  few  Lamas  and  is  met  with  in  Japanese  Buddhism
namely,  "  OM!  AmoghaVairocana  Mahdmud/ra  MANI PADMA
Jvala-pravarthtaya  HUM!"  But  this  is  addressed  to  the  first
of  the  Dhyani*  Buddhas,  namely,  Vairocana,  to  whom  also  the
Japanese  Mantrayana  sect  ascribe  their  esoteric  doctrine,  but  the
ordinary  Lamaist  formula  is  unknown  in  Japan,  where  its  place
is  taken  by  "  Ndm,o  0-7ni-to  Fo,"  or  "  Hail  to  Amitabha,  the
Buddha  of  Boundless  Light."

1  In  some  of  the  larger  prayer-wheels  it  is  printed  100,000,000  times  (Baron  Schilling,
Cf.  SCHLAG.,  121.

2  For  wind-prayer  vanes,  cf.  Eock.,  i.,p.  147  cf. ;  also  Gioe(3i,  508.

3  EocKHiLL,  in  The  Land  of  the  Lamas,  London,  1891,  page  326,  notes  that  Wilhelm  de
Rubruk,  writing  in  the  second  half  of  the  thirteenth  century  a.d.  {Soc.  de  Geog.  de
Paris,  iv.,  page  283)  states  regarding  the  Buddhist  monks  of  Karakorum :  "  Habeut
etiam  quocumque  vadunt  semper  in  manibus  quandam  testem  centum  vel  duoent-
orum  nucleorum  sicut  nos  portamus  paternoster  et  dicunt  semper  hec  verba  on  man,
laccam,  hoc  est  Deus,  tu  nosti,  secundum  quod  quidam  corum  interpretatus  est  michi,
et  totiens  exspectat,  remuneratiouem  a  Deo  quotiens  hoc  dicendo  memoratur."  Mr.
Rockhill  also,  I  find,  independently  arrives  at  a  similar  conclusion  to  myself  as  regards
the  relatively  modern  composition  of  the  Mani-6kah-sbum.  Cf.  also  Hue,  ii. ;  Kopp.,  ii.,
59-61.

*  W.  Anderson,  Gatal.  Jap.  Paintings  Brit.  Mus.


150


THE  BOGTRINE  AND  ITS  MORALITY.


From  its  mystic  nature  the  Om  Mani  formula  is  interpreted
in  a  great  variety  of  ways,  including  amongst  others  the
phallic,^  though  this  latter  sense  is  seldom  accorded  it.  The
heterodox  Bon-pa  followers  repeat  it  in  reverse  fashion,  thus
making  it  mere  gibberish.^

THE  MYSTIC  FORMULAS  FOE  THB  EOSAEIES.

The  repetition  of  the  mystic  formulas  for  the  beads  follows  the
prayer,  properly  so-called,  and  is  believed  to  contain  the  essence
of  a  formal  prayer,  as  well  as  to  act  as  a  powerful  spell.  The
formulas  are  of  a  Sanskritic  nature,  usually  containing  the  name
of  the  deity  addressed,  but  are  more  or  less  wholly  unintelligible
to  the  worshipper.

Different  mantras  are  needed  for  different  deities ;  but  the  one
most  frequently  used  by  the  individual  Lama  is  that  of  his  own
tutelary  deity,  which  varies  according  to  the  sect  to  which  the
Lama  belongs.

The  formulas  most  frequently  used  are  shown  in  the  following
table : —


Name  of  Deity.

The  Speli.

Special  kind  of
Rosary  used.

1.

Dor-je  jik-je.^

Om  !  Ya-man-ta-taka  hiim

Human skull or

Skt.,  Vajra-

phat !

"  stomach -stone."

bhairava

2.

Cha-na  dorje.*

Om  !  Vajrapani  hum  phat !

Raksha.

Skt.,  Vajrapdni.

Om  !  Vajva  dsan-da  maha
ro-khana  hum  !

Ditto.

Tam-din.°

Om  !  pad-ma  ta  ki-id  hum

Red  sandal  or  coral.

Skt.,  Hayagrwa.

phat  !

4.

Cha-ra-si  or  T'ug-je-
ch'enbo."
Skt.,  Avalokita.

Om  !  mani  pad-me  hum  !

Conch-shell  or  crystal.

5.

Dol-ma  jan-k'u.''

Om  ! Ta-re  tut-ta-re  ture

Bo-dhi-tse  or  tur-

Skt., Tara.

sva-ha  !

quoise.
Bodhitse.

6.

Do-kav.«

Om  !  Ta-re  tut-ta-re  mama

Skt. ,  Sitatara.

a  -  yur  punye-dsanyana
pusph-pi-ta  ku-ru  sva-ha  !

7.

Dor-je  p'ag-mo.'

Om  !  sar-ba  Bud-dha  dakkin-

Ditto.

Skt., Vajra-

ni  hum  phat  !

varahi.

8.

'O^zer-can-ma."

Om ! Ma-ri-cye mam  sva-

Ditto.

Skt.,  Marlci.

ha  !

1  As  noted  by  Hodgson.

2  The  characteristic  B6n-pa  mantra  is  however :
Jaesch.,  D.,  408 ;  Desgodins,  242.

3  rdo-rje-'jigs-byed.  *  p'yag-nardo-rje.
"  T'ugs-rje-c'en-po.  '  sgrol-ma  jan-k'u.
'  do-rje  p'ag-mo. lo  'od-zer-c'an-ma.


'  Ma-tri-mu-tri  sa-la  dzu." Cf.

=  rta-mgrin.
'  sgrol-dkar.


SPELLS  FOB  ROSARIES— VAJBAYANA.


151


Name  of  Deitt.

The  Spell.

Special  kinds  of
eosaby  used.

9.

Gon-po  nag-po.^

Om  !  Sri  Ma-ha-ka-la  hum

Raksha.

Skt.,  Kalanatha.

phat  sva-ha  !

10.

Nam-se."

Om  !  Vai-sra-va-na  ye  sva-

Nanga-pani.

Skt. ,  Ktivera.

ha  !

11.

Dsam-b'a-la.'

Om ! Jam-bha-la dsalen-

Ditto.

Skt.,  Jamhhala.

dra  ye  sva-ha  !

12.

Sen-ge-da.*

Om  ! a-hrih Sin-ha-nada

Conch-shell  or  crystal.

Skt.,  Sinhanada.

hum  phat !

13.

Jara-yang.°

Skli.  Manjughosha.

Om !  a-ra-pa-ca-nadhi !

Yellow  rosary.

a4.

Dem.-ch'ok."

Om  !  hrih  ha-ha  hum  hum

Bodhitse.

Skt.,  Samvara.

phat !

15

Pad-ma  jun-na.'

Om ! Vajra Gu-ru  Padma

Coral  or  bodhitse.

Skt.,  Padmasam-

sid-dhi  hum  !

bhava.

The  concluding  word  phat  which  follows  the  mystic  hum  in
many  of  these  spells  is  cognate  with  the  current  Hindiistani  word
phat,  and  means  "  may  the  enemy  be  destroyed  utterly ! "

The  laity  through  want  of  knowledge  seldom  use  with  their
rosaries  any  other  than  the  well-known  "  Jewel-Lotus  "  formula.

Such  mechanical  means  of  spiritual  advancement  by  promising
immediate  temporal  benefits,  have  secured  universal  popularity ;
and  possess  stronger  attractions  for  gross  and  ignorant  intellects
over  the  moral  methods  of  early  Buddhism.  The  Chinese
literati  ridicule  the  repetition  of  these  mantras  by  saying/
"  Suppose  that  you  had  committed  some  violation  of  the  law,  and
that  you  were  being  led  into  the  judgment-hall  to  receive  sen-
tence; if  you  were  to  take  to  crying  out  with  all  your  might
'  Your  Worship '  some  thousands  of  times,  do  you  imagine  that
the  magistrate  would  let  you  off  for  that  ?  "  -^ ^

On  the  evolution,  in  the  tenth  century,  of  the  demoniacal  Bud-
dhas  of  the  Kalacakra,  the  "  Mantra  "-vehicle  was  developed  into
"The  Thunderbolt-vehicle"  or  Vajraydna,  the  proficient  in
which  is  called  Vajrdcdrya.  According  to  this,  the  most  depraved
form  of  Buddhist  doctrine,  the  devotee  endeavours  with  the  aid  of
the  demoniacal  Buddhas  and  of  fiendesses  (JOdkJdni)  and  their


1  mgon-po  nag-po.
*  seii-ge-sgra.


2  rnam-sras.  ^  dsam  b'a-la.

5  'jam-dbyangs.  "  bde-mch'og.

'  pad-ma  byun-gnas.

9  Ebmusat,  As.  Misc. Most  conspicuous  amongst  the  authors  of  diatribes  against
Buddhist  worship  was  Han  Yft  in  the  eighth  or  ninth  centuries  a.d. Cf.  Mayers.


152  THE  DOCTRINE  AND  ITS  MORALITY.

magic-eircles  to  obtain  the  spiritual  powers  of  Siddhi  ^  or  "  The
accomplishment  of  perfection  or  of  one's  wishes."  Although  the
attainment  of  Siddhi  is  below  the  stage  of  Arhatship,  the  Lamas
value  it  more  highly  than  the  latter  on  account  of  its  power  of
witchcraft.  Its  mystic  insight  is  classed  as  the  external  (Gk'ir-
dub),  internal  (Nan-duh),  and  esoteric  or  hidden  (Sail-dub),
and  correspond  to  the  body,  speech,  and  thought.  Its  followers
are  called  Vajracarya  and  its  rules  are  detailed  by  Tson  K'hapa.
Its  recognized  divisions^  are: —

V-AJBATANA.

Lower  Tantra  Upper  Tantra


Kriya  Tantra  Carya  Tantra  Yoga  Tantra  Anuttara  Tantra

iya-rgyud  spyod  rnal-lyor  ila-'iia  med-pahi-gyud

In  only  the  last,  or  Anuttara  Tantra,  have  the  tutelary  demons
spouses.^

The  rampant  demonolatry  of  the  Tibetans  seems  to  have
developed  the  doctrine  of  tutelary  deities  far  beyond  what  is
found  even  in  the  latest  phase  of  Indian  Buddhism,  although
I  find  at  many  of  the  mediaeval  Buddhist  sites  in  Magadha,
images  of  several  of  the  devils  which  are  so  well-known  in  Tibet
as  tutelaries.

Each  Lamaist  sect  has  its  own  special  tutelary  fiend,  which  may
or  may  not  be  the  personal  tutelary  of  all  the  individual  Lamas  of
that  particular  sect;  for  each  Lama  has  a  tutelary  of  his  own
selection,  somewhat  after  the  manner  of  the  ishtd  devoid  of  the
Hindiis,  who  accompanies  him  wherever  he  goes  and  guards  his
footsteps  from  the  minor  fiends.  Even  the  purest-  of  all  the
Lamaist  sects — the  Gre-lug-pa — are  thorough-paced  devil-wor-
shippers, and  value  Buddhism  chiefly  because  it  gives  them  the
whip-hand  over  the  devils  which  everywhere  vex  humanity  with
disease  and  disaster,  and  whose  ferocity  weighs  heavily  upon
all. The purest Gre-lug-pa  Lama on awaking  every  morning.


1  Siddhi,  which  seems  (according  to  Sir  MoN.  Williams,  Budd.,  636),  to  correspond  to
the  stage  below  Arhatship.  Eighty  Siddhas  (saints)  are  sometimes  mentioned.  And
amongst  their  supernatural  Irdhi  powers  they  obtain  «  the  Rainbow  Body "  ('jah-
lus),  which  vanishes  like  the  rainbow,  leaving  no  trace  behind.

2Cf.  Jaesch.,  Z).,  112.

3  The  directions  for  these  cults  are  found  chiefly  in  the  Nin-ma  "revelations"  or
t&'Tiia  books.


COERCING THE  TUTELARY-FIENBS.  153

and  before  venturing  outside  his  room,  fortifies  himself  against
assault  by  the  demons  by  first  of  all  assuming  the  spiritual  guise
of  his  fearful  tutelary,  the  king  of  the  demons,  named  Vajrabhairava
or  Samvara,  as  figured  in  the  chapter  on  the  pantheon.  The
Lama,  by  uttering  certain  Tnantras  culled  from  the  legendary
sayings  of  Baddha  in  the  Mahayana  Tantras,  coerces  this  demon-
king  into  investing  the  Lama's  person  with  his  own  awful  aspect.^
Thus  when  the  Lama  emerges  from  his  room  in  the  morning,  and
wherever  he  travels  during  the  day,  he  presents  spiritually  the  ap-
pearance of  the  demon-king,  and  the  smaller  mahgnant  demons,
his  would-be  assailants,  ever  on  the  outlook  to  harm  humanity,
being  deluded  into  the  belief  that  the  Lama  is  indeed  their  own
vindictive  king,  they  flee  from  his  presence,  leaving  the  Lama
unharmed.

A  notable  feature  of  Lamaism  throughout  all  its  sects,  and
decidedly  un-Buddhistie,  is  that  the  Lama  is  a  priest  rather  than  a
monk.  He  assigns  himself  an  indispensable  .place  in  the  rehgion
and  has  coined  the  current  saying  "  Without  a  Lama  in  front  there
is  no  (approach  to)  Grod."  He  performs  sacerdotal  functions  on
every  possible  occasion;  and  a  large  proportion  of  the  order  is
almost  entirely  engaged  in  this  work.  And  such  services  are  in
much  demand ;  for  the  people  are  in  hopeless  bondage  to  the
demons,  and  not  altogether  unwilling  slaves  to  their  exacting
worship.

The  Chinese  contempt  for  such  rites  is  thus  expressed  in  a
sacred  edict  of  the  emperor  Yung-Ching.^  «  If  you  neglect  to
burn  paper  in  honour  of  Buddha,  or  to  lay  offerings  on  his  altars,
he  will  be  displeased  with  you,  and  will  let  his  judgments  fall  upon
your  heads.  Your  god  Buddha,  then,  is  a  mean  fellow.  Take  for
a  pattern  the  magistrate  of  your  district.  Even  if  you  never  go
near  him  to  compHment  him  or  pay  court  to  him,  so  long  as  you


1  This  process,  called  Iha-sgrub-pa,  implies  (says  Jaeschee,  S.,  52)  not  so  much  the
making  a  deity  propititious  to  man  (Csoma's  definition  in  his  Dia.)  as  rendering  a  god
subject  to  human  power,  forcing  him  to  perform  the  will  of  man.  This  coercion  of
the  god  is  aifected  by  saints  continuing  their  profound  meditation  (sgom-pa)  for  months
and  years  until  the  deity,  finally,  overcome,  stands  before  them  visible  and  tangible  ;
nay,  until  they  have  been  personally  united  with  and,  as  it  were,  incorporated  into
the'invoked  and  subjected  god.  The  method  of  effecting  this  coercion,  of  obliging
a  god  to  make  his  appearance,  is  also  called  sgrub-tabs.

2  K:fiMtFSAT,  As.  Miscell.


154  THE  DOCTRINE  AND ITS  MORALITY.

are  honest  folk  and  attentive  to  your  duty,  he  will  be  none  the  less
ready  to  attend  to  you  ;  but  if  you  transgress  the  law,  if  you
commit  violence,  or  trespass  on  the  rights  of  others,  it  would  be
useless  for  you  to  try  a  thousand  ways  of  flattering  him ;  you  will
always  be  subject  to  his  displeasure."

■^^  Thus  had  these  various  influences  warped  the  Buddhist  doctrine
in  India,  ere  it  reached  Tibet,  and  there  the  deep-rooted  demon-
worship  made  Lamaism  what  it  is :  a  priestly  mixture  of  Shamanist
cults  and  poly-demonist  superstitions,  overlaid  by  quasi-Buddhist
symbolism,  relieved  by  universal  charity  and  other  truly  Buddhist
principles,  and  touched  here  and  there  by  the  brighter  lights  of
the  teaching  of  Buddha.

But  notwithstanding  its  glaring  defects,  Lamaism  has  exerted  a
considerable  civilizing  influence  over  the  Tibetans.  The  people
are  profoundly  affected  by  its  benign  ethics,  and  its  maxim,  "  as  a
man  sows  he  shall  reap,"  has  undoubtedly  enforced  the  personal
duty  of  mastery  over  self  in  spite  of  the  easier  physical  aids  to
piety  which  are  prevalent.

And  it  is  somewhat  satisfactory  to  find  that  many  of  the
superior  Lamas  breathe  much  of  the  spirit  of  the  original
system.  They  admit  the  essentially  un-Buddhist  nature  of
much  of  the  prevalent  demonolatry,  and  the  impropriety  of  its
being  fostered  by  the  church.  They  regard  this  unholy  alliance
with  the  devils  as  a  pandering  to  popular  prejudice.  Indeed,
there  are  many  Lamas  who,  following  the  teaching  of  the
earlier  Buddhism,  are  inclined  to  contemn  sacerdotalism  al-
together, although  forced  by  custom  to  take  part  in  it.


Novice-Lama  beading  Sokiptuees.


VII.


THE SCRIPTURES AND LITERATURE.

I  HE  sacred  books  embodying  the  "  Word  "  of  Buddha
are  regarded  by  the  Lamas,  in  common  with  all  other
Buddhists,  as forming  the second member of  the
Trinity — "The  Three  precious  Ones" — in  whom  the
pious  Buddhist  daily  takes  his  "  refuge."

The  books  themselves  receive  divine  honours. They  are  held


3


156  THE  SOIUPTURES  AND  LITERATURE.

materially  sacred,  placed  in  high  places,  and  worshipped  with
incense,  lamps,  etc.  \}  and  even  fragments  of  books  or  manu-
scripts bearing  holy  words  are  treasured  with  the  utmost  rever-
ence. It  is  deemed  the  grossest  profanity  for  anyone  to  throw
even  a  fragment  of  holy  writ  upon  the  ground  or  to  tread
upon  it,  and  in  this  way  the  Tibetans,  like  the  Chinese,  not  in-
frequently express  their  contempt  for  Christianity  by  utilizing,
as  soles  for  their  shoes,  the  bundles  of  tracts  which  our  mission-
aries supply  to  them.

But  Buddha,  like  "the  Light  of  the  World,"  and  unlike
Moses  and  Muhammad,  wrote  nothing  himself;  nor  does  it
appear  that  his  words  were  even  reduced  to  writing  until
about  400  years  or  more  after  his  death,^  so  it  is  unlikely
that  most  of  his  sayings  have  preserved  their  original  form,
wholly  unaltered,  in  the  process  of  handing  them  down  orally
during  several  centuries.

The  Lamaist  scriptures  are  faithful  translations^  from  the
Sanskrit  texts,*  and  a  few  also  from  the  Chinese,  made  mostly  in
the  eighth  and  ninth,  and  the  eleventh  to  the  thirteenth  centuries

1  The  scriptures  are  actively  worshipped  even  by  southern  Buddhists.  "  The  books
are  usually  wrapped  in  cloth,  and  when  their  names  are  mentioned  an  honorific  is
added  equivalent  to  reverend  or  illustrious.  Upon  some  occasions  they  are  placed
upon  a  kind  of  rude  altar  near  the  roadside,  as  I  have  seen  the  images  of  saints  in
Roman  Catholic  countries,  that  those  who  pass  by  may  put  money  upon  it  in  order  to
obtain  merit "  (Habdy's  East  Mon.,  192).  Compare  also  with  Hindus  paying  respect  to
their  ^stras  with  garlands  and  perfumes  and  grains  of  rice,  and  the  Sildis  to  their  Granth.

2  The  words  were  at  first  transmitted  down  orally ;  their  recital  (bhana  =  to  speak)
is  one  of  the  duties  of  a  monk  even  now.  The  southern  (Pali)  scriptures  are  stated
to  have  been  first  reduced  to  writing  in  Ceylon  in  88-76  B.C.,  in  the  reign  of  King
Vartagamani  (Tcenoue,  Mahavanso,  207),  and  the  northern  by  king  Kanishka  in
the  second  half  of  the  first  century  a.d.  But  as  writing  was  certainly  in  use  in  Asoka's
day — 250  B.C. — it  is  probable  that  some  scriptures  were  committed  to  writing  at  an
earlier  period  than  here  assigned  to  the  complete  collect.  Cf .  Oldenbeeg,  Vinaya  Trip.
xxxviii.

3  The  verbal  accuracy  of  these  translations  has  been  testified  by  Max  Miiller,  Rhys
Davids,  Cowell,  Foucaux,  Feer,  Vasiliev,  Rockhill,  etc.

4  Indian,  Kashmiri  and  Nepalese  scriptui-es.  A  few  of  the  Tibetan  translations  were
made  from  the  Pali,  e.g.,  vol.  30  of  Sutras  (RocKHirx's  Udvanavarffa,  x).  Some  very  old
Indian  MSS.  still  exist  in  Tibet.  His  Excellency  Shad-«gra  Shab-pe,  one  of  the  Tibetan
governors  (bKah-blon)  of  Lhasa,  while  at  Darjiling  about  a  year  ago,  on  political
business,  informed  me  that  many  ancient  Buddhist  manuscripts,  which  had.  been
brought  from  India  by  mediaeval  Indian  and  Tibetan  monks,  are  still  presented  in
Tibet,  especially  at  the  old  monasteries  of  Sam-yiis,  Sakya,  Nar-thang  and  Phiin-tsho-
ling.  These  manuscripts,  however,  being  worshipped  as  precious  relics,  and  written
in  a  character  more  or  less  unknown  to  the  Lamas,  are  kept  sealed  up  and  rarely
seen  by  the  Lamas  themselves.


THE  BOOKS—'THE  CANON.  157


A.D. ;  and  a  very  few  small  volumes,  those  first  translated  into
Tibetan,  date  to  the  epoch  of  Thon-mi  Sambhota,  about  645  a.d.

None  of  these  Tibetan  translations,  however,  seem  to  have  been
printed  until  comparatively  recent  times,  though  the  exact  date
of  the  introduction  of  printing  into  Tibet  is  as  yet  unknown.

The  Tibetan  so-called  "books"  are,  strictly  speaking,  only  xylo-
graphs, being  printed  from  rudely  carved  wooden  blocks.  Mov-
able type  is  unknown,  and  a  large  proportion  of  the  books  are  still
written  in  manuscript.  The  great  canon,  the  Kah-gyur,  was,  it
seems,  only  printed  for  the  first  time,  at  least  in  its  collected
form,  about  two  hundred  years  ago.

The  paper,  which  is  remarkably  tough,  is  made  from  the  inner
bark  of  a  shrub,i  and  comes  mostly  from  Nepal  and  other  parts  of
the  sub-Himalayas,  and  the  Chinese  border-lands.  The  smaller
abstracts  from  the  scriptures,  used  by  the  more  wealthy  devotees,
are  sometimes  written  on  ornate  cardboard,  consisting  of  several
sheets  of  paper  pasted  together j  and  varnished  over  with  a  black
pigment,  upon  which  the  letters  are  written  in  silver  or  gold;
and  occasionally  they  are  illuminated  like  missals.

Books  now  abound  in  Tibet,  and  nearly  all  are  religious.  The
literature,  however,  is  for  the  most  part  a  dreary  wilderness  of
words  and  antiquated  rubbish,  but  the  Lamas  conceitedly  be-
lieve that  all  knowledge  is  locked  up  in  their  musty  classics,  out-
side which  nothing  is  worthy  of  serious  notice.

The  Lamaist  scriptures  consist  of  two  great  collections,  the
canon  and  the  commentaries,  commonly  called  the  "  Kang-gyur,
or  properly  the  Kah-gyur,^  and  Tan-gyur."  ^

The  great  code,  the  Kah-gyur,  or  "  The  Translated  Command-
ment," is  so  called  on  account  of  its  text  having  been  translated
from  the  ancient  Indian  language,*  and  in  a  few  cases  from  the
Chinese.  The  translators  were  learned  Indian  and  Kashimri  Pan-
dits and  a  few  Chinese  monks,  assisted  by  Tibetan  scholars."

The  code  extends  to  one  hundred  or  one  hundred  and  eight
volumes  of  about  one  thousand  pages  each,  comprising  one  thou-

1  The  Dafhne  Cannabina. See  Hodgson  in  J.A.S.B.,  1832,  i.,  p.  8,  for  an  account  of
its  manufacture.

2  bkah-'gyur.

3  bstan-'gyur.

»  rgya-gar-skad,  or  "  Indian  language,"  and  usually  employed  as  synonymous  with
"  Sanskrit."
'  Lo-tsa-wa.


158  THE  SCRIPTURES  AND  LITERATURE.


sand  and  eighty-three  distinct  works.  The  bulk  of  this  colossal
bible  may  be  imagined  from  the  fact  that  each  of  its  hundred  or
more  volumes  weighs  about  ten  pounds,  and  forms  a  package
measuring  about  twenty-six  inches  long  by  eight  inches  broad  and
about  eight  inches  deep.  Thus  the  code  requires  about  a  dozen
yaks  for  its  transport;  and  the  carved  wooden  blocks  from  which
this  bible  is  printed  require,  for  their  storage,  rows  of  houses  like
a  good-sized  village.

The  Kah-gyur  is  printed,  I  am  informed,  only  at  two  places  in
Tibet :  the  older  edition  at  Narthang,i  about  six  miles  from
Tashi-lhunpo,  the  capital  of  western  Tibet  and  headquarters  of  the
Grrand  Panch 'en-Lama.  It  fills  one  hundred  volumes  of  about  one
thousand  pages  each.  The  later  edition  is  printed  at  Der-ge  ^  in
eastern  Tibet  (Kham)  and  contains  the  same  matter  distributed  in
volumes  to  reach  the  mystic  number  of  one  hundred  and  eight.
In  Bhotan  an  edition  is  printed  at  Punakha ;  ^  and  I  have  heard
of  a  Kumbum  (Mongolian)  edition,  and  of  one  printed  at  Pekin.
The  ordinary  price  at  Narthang  is  about  eight  rupees  per  volume
without  the  wooden  boards.  Most  of  the  large  monasteries  even
in  Sikhim  possess  a  fuU  set  of  this  code.  The  Pekin  edition  pub-
lished by  command  of  the  emperor  Khian-Lung,  says  Koppen,  sold
for  £600 ;  and  a  copy  was  bartered  for  7,000  oxen  by  the  Buriats,
and  the  same  tribe  paid  1,200  silver  roubles  for  a  complete
copy  of  this  bible  and  its  commentaries.*  The  Kah-gyur  was
translated  into  MongoHan  about  1310  a.d.  by-  Saskya  Lama
Ch'os-Kyi  'Od-zer  under  the  Saskya  Pandita,  who,  assisted  by  a
staff  of  twenty-nine  learned  Tibetan,  Ugrian,  Chinese  and  Sans-
krit scholars,  had  previously  revised  the  Tibetan  canon  by  col-
lating it  with  Chinese  and  Sanskrit  texts,  under  the  patronage  of
the  emperor  Kublai  Khan.

The  contents  of  the  Kah-gyur  and  Tah-gyur  were  briefly
analyzed by Csoma,^  whose  valuable summary,  translated  and


1  sN'ar-tan.  2  sDe-dge.

^  So  I  have  been  told.

*  And  a  copy  also  of  this  edition  seems  to  be  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Academy  of
Sciences,  obtained  about  1830  by  Baron  Schilling  de  Canstadt,  together  with  about
2,000  Mongolian  and  Tibetan  treatises. — Bulletin  Ilistorico-philologigue  del  'Acad^mie  de
Si.  PHerhowg,  torn,  iv.,  1848,  pp.  321-329.

'  Vol.  XX.,  As.  Researclies,


THE  CANON.  159


indexed  by  Feer,^  and  supplemented  in  part  by  Schiefner  and
Rockhill, forms  the  basis  of  the  following  sketch.  Hodgson's  copy
of  the  Kah-gyur,  on  which  Csoma  worked  at  Calcutta,  contained
one  hundred  volumes,  and  appears  to  have  been  printed  from  the
wooden  types  prepared  in  1731,  and  which  seem  to  be  still  in
use  at  Narthang.

The  Kah-gyur  is  divisible  into  three  ^  great  sections,  the  Tripi-
taka^  or  three  vessels  or  repositories,  corresponding  generally  to
the  less  inflated  Pali  version  of  the  Tripitaka  of  the  southern
Buddhists,  which  has,  however,  no  counterpart  of  the  mystical
Sivaist  treatises,  the  Tantras. The  three  sections  are  : —

I.  The  Dul-va  (Skt.,  Vinaya),  or  Discipline,  the  compilation  of
which  is  attributed  to  Upali,*  in  thirteen  volumes.

II.  The  Dd  (Skt.,  Sutra),  or  Sermons  (of  the  Buddhas),  compiled
by  Ananda^  in  sixty-six  volumes  inclusive  of  Tantras.  As  these  dis-
courses profess  to  be  the  narrative  of  the  disciple  Ananda,^  who  is
believed  to  have  been  present  at  the  originals  as  uttered  by  Bud-
dha, most  of  these  Siitras  commence  with  the  formula :  Evam
mayd  srutam,  "  Thus  was  it  heard  by  me  ; "  but  this  formula  now
is  almost  regarded  by  many  European  scholars  as  indicating  a
fictitious  siitra,  so  frequently  is  it  prefixed  to  spurious  sutras,  e.g.,
the  Amitabha,  which  could  not  have  been  spoken  by  Buddha  or
recited  by  Ananda.  The  Lamas,  hke  the  southern  Buddhists,
naively  believe  that  when  Buddha  spoke,  each  individual  of  the
assembled  hosts  of  gods,  demons,  and  men,  as  well  as  the  various
kinds  of  lower  animals,^  heard  himself  addressed  in  his  own
vernacular.

III.  Tbe Gh' OS-non-pa  (Skt. Ahidharma), or Metaphysics,


1  M.  Lfon  Feer  published  in  1881  a  translation  of  Csoma's  Analysis  under  the
title  Analyse  du  Kandjour  et  du  Tandjmir  in  the  second  volume  of  the  "  Annales  du
Musee  Guimet,"  and  appended  a  vocabulary  giving  all  the  names  which  occur  in
Csoma's  Analysis,  with  an  Index  and  Table  Alphabetigue  de  Ouvrages  dus  Kandjour.
And  he  gave  further  extracts  in  Vol.  v.  of  the  same  serial.

2  Another  classification  of  the  canonical  scriptures,  especially  amongst  the  Nepalese,
is  given  by  Hodgson  {Lang.  13,  49)  as  "  The  nine  scriptures  (Dharmas),"  namely :
1.  Prajna  paramita.  2.  Gandha-vyuha.  3.  Dasa-bhiimisvara.  4.  Samadhi-raja.  5.
Lanka vatara.  6.  Saddharma  Pundarika.  7.  Tathagatha  guhyaka  (containing  the
secret  Tantrik  doctrines). 8.  Lalita  Vistara. 9.  Suvarna-prabhasa.

3  sde-snod  ^sum.  "  %e-var-'K'or.  =  'Kun-dgah-wo.
«  At  the  first  great  council  when  Buddha's  word  was  collated

'  Cf.  also  Seal's  Romcmtic  Legend,  244-254,  Gya  Tscher  Rol-jpa,  ch.  26.


160  THE  SCRIPTURES  AND  LITERATURE.

including  Transcendental  Wisdom  {8'er-p'''yin,  Skt.,  Prajnd  Pd-
ramitd),  attributed  to  Maha  Kasyapa,  in  twenty-one  volumes.

These  three  sections  are  mystically  considered  to  be  the  anti-
dotes for  the  three  original  sins ;  thus  the  discipline  cleanses
from  lust  (Rdga),  the  sermons  from  ill-will  (Bvesa),  and  the
wisdom  from  stupidity  (Moha).

By  subdividing  the  Do  or  Sutra  section  into  five  portions,  the
following  sevenfold  division  of  the  canon  results : —

"  I.  Discipline  or  Dul-va  (Skt.,  Vinaya),  in  thirteen  volumes,  deals
with  the  religious  discipline  and  education  of  those  adopting  the
religious  life,  and  also  contains  Jatakas,  avadanas,  vyakaranas,  sutras,
and  ridanas."  (It  is  the  Vinaya  of  the  Sarvastivadains,  and  its  greater
portion  has  been  abstracted  by  Rockhill.^)  It  is  sub-divided  into  seven
parts :

1.  "The  Basis  of  Discipline  or  Education  (dul-va-gz'i,  Skt.,  Vinaya
Vastu),  in  four  volumes  (K,  K',  G,  and  S^),  translated  from  the  Sanskrit
in  the  ninth  century  by  the  Pandits  Sarvajnyadeva  and  Dharmakara
of  Kashmir  and  Vidyakara-prabha  of  India,  assisted  by  the  Tibetan
Bindes  dPal-gyi  Ihunpo  and  dPal-brtsegs.  (The  chief  Jataka  and  other
tales  interspersed  through  these  volumes  form  the  bulk  of  Schiefner's
collection  of  Tibetan  tales,  translated  into  English  by  Ralston.)

2.  "  Sutra  on  Emancipation  (So-vor-t'ar-pai-mdo,  Skt.,  Pratimol'sha
Sutra),'  in  30  leaves.

3.  "  Explanation  of  Education  (Dul-va  nam-par-'byed-pa,  Skt.,
Vinaya  vibhdga)  in  four  volumes.  Enumerates  the  several  rules
(K'rims)  of  conduct,  253  in  number,  with  examples  of  the  particular
transgression  which  led  to  the  formation  of  these  laws.  Directions
for  dress  and  etiquette.

4.  "Emancipation  for  Nuns  {dGe-ahn  mahi  so-sor  thar pai  mod,  Skt.,
Bhikshuni  pratimohsha  Sutra),  36  leaves  in  the  ninth  volume  (T).

5.  "Explanation  of  the  Discipline  of  the  Nuns  (Skt. ,  jBAtfc,  Vinaya
vibhdga)  in  preceding  volume  (T).

6.  "  Miscellaneous  Minutiae  concerning  Religious  Discipline  (Dul-va
p'ran-ts'egs-kyi  gz'i,  Skt.,  Vinaya  Eshudraka  Vastu),  in  two  volumes.

7.  "The  highest  text  book  on  Education"  (Dul-va  gzun  blarma
Vinaya  Uttara  Qrantha),  in  two  volumes  (N  and  P),  and  when  spoken
of  as  "  the  four  classes  of  precepts  "  (lin-de-zhi)  the  division  comprises
1,  2  and  3,  6  and  7.

II.  Transcendental  Wisdom  ("  Ses-rab  kyi  p'a-rol-tu  p'yin-pa,"  or
curtly,  "Ser-ch'in" (Skt.,  Prajna-pdramitd),  in  twenty-one  volumes.


1  The  Life  of  the  Buddha,  etc.  Also  in  part,  but  not  directly  for  the  Dulva,  by
Sohiefner  in  his  Tiietische  Liebeiibescriehung  Sakra,  impl.,  St.  Petersburg,  1849.

2  Cf.  translation  from  the  Tibetan  by  Rockhiix,  and  from  the  Pali  by  Ehys  Davids
and  Oldenbebg,  Vinaya  Texts.


THE  CANON.  161

They  contain,  in  addition  to  the  metaphysical  terminology,  those
extravagantly  speculative  doctrines  entitled  Prajnorparamita,  which
the  Mahayana  school  attributes  to  Buddha's  latest  revelations  in  his
mythical  discourses  mostly  to  supernatural  hearers  at  the  Vultures'
Peak  at  Rajgriha.'  There  is  no  historical  matter,  all  is  speculation,
and  a  profusion  of  abstraction.

The  first  twelve  volumes,  called  'Bum  (Skt.,  Sata  Sahasrika)  or
"the  100,000  (slokas  of  Transcendental  Wisdom'),"  treat  fully  of
the  Prajna-paramita  at  large,  and  the  remaining  volumes  are  merely
various  abridgments  of  these  twelve.  Thus  the  three  volumes  called
Ni-k'ri  (pron.  Nyi-thi)  or  "  the  20,000  (slokas)"  is  intended  for  those
monasteries  or  individuals  who  cannot  purchase  or  peruse  the  full  text ;
while  the  single  volume,  entitled  the  brgyad-stoh-pan  (ashta  sahasrika)
or  8,000  (slokas),  contains  in  one  volume  the  gist  of  the  Prajiia-para-
mita,  and  is  intended  for  the  average  and  junior  monks.  This  is  the
volume  which  is  figured  on  the  lotus  which  Maiijusri,  the  Bodhisat
of  wisdom,  holds  in  his  left  hand.  And  for  the  use  of  the  schoolboys
and  the  laity  there  is  a  recension  of  three  or  four  leaves,  entitled
"Transcendental  Wisdom  in  a  few  letters"  or  Yige-nuh-du  (Skt.,
Alpa  akshara).^  And  mystically  the  whole  is  further  condensed  into
"  the  letter  A,  which  is  considered  "  the  mother  of  all  wisdom,"  and
therefore  of  all  men  of  genius ;  all  Bodhisatvas  and  Buddhas  are  said
to  have  been  produced  by  "A"  since  this  is  the  first  element  for
forming  syllables,  words,  sentences,  and  a  whole  discourse.

One  of  the  most  favourite  Sutras  and  a  common  booklet  in  the
hands  of  the  laity,  is  "the  Diamond-cutter"  (rDo-rje  gc'od-pa,  Skt.,
Vajrach'ediJca).  In  it  Bhagavati  (Sakya)  instructs  Subhuti,  one  of  his
disciples,  in  the  true  meaning  of  the  Prajna-paramita.^

The  full  text  ('Bum)  was  translated  from  the  Sanskrit  in  the  ninth
century  by  the  Indian  pandits  Jina  Mitra  and  Surendra  Bodhi,  and
the  Tibetan  interpreter  Ye-s'es-sde.

III.  "  Association  of  Buddhas "  (P'al-c'ar,  Skt.,  Buddhavatansaha),
in  six  volumes.  Description  of  several  Tathagatas  or  Buddhas,  their
provinces,  etc.  Enumeration  of  several  Bodhisats,  the  several  degrees
of  their  perfections,  etc.

This  great  Vaipulya  (or  developed  Sutra)  is  alleged  to  have  been
preached  by  Buddha  in  the  second  week  of  his  Buddhahood  and  before
he  turned  the  "  Wheel  of  the  Law  "  at  Benares.  And  it  is  asserted  to
have  been  delivered  in  nine  assemblies  at  seven  different  places,  and  is
thus  given  pre-eminence  over  the  first  historic  discourse  at  Sarnath.

IV.  "The Jewel-peak" (dkon-brtsegs, Skt., Jiatna-kuta). Enu-

1  They  are  alleged  to  have  been  delivered  in  sixteen  assemblies  at  the  following
sites :  Gridhrakuta,  SravastI,  Venuvana,  and  the  abode  of  the  Paranirmita-vasa-
vartins. cf.  Bun.  Nanjio's  Jap.  JBudd.  Sects,  p.  xvii.

2  This  probably  corresponds  to  the  Mahaprajiia  paramita  hridaya  Sutra,  translated
by  Beat,  (Catena,  282),  and  perhaps  the  original  of  the  more  expanded  treatises.

3  It  has  been  translated  from  the  Sanskrit  by  Cowbll,  Mahmjdoia  Texts,  ii.,  xii.

M


162  THE  SCRIPTURES  AND LITERATURE.

meration  of  several  qualities  and  perfections  of  Buddha  and  his
doctrine.

v.  The  Aphorisms  (Tib.,  mDo  or  mDo-sde  Sutra  or  Sutranfa).
Ihe  amplified  or  developed  Sutras  are  called  Vaipulya.  In  a  general
sense,  when  the  whole  Kha-gyur  is  divided  into  two  parts,  mDo  and
rGyud,  all  the  other  divisions  except  the  rGyud  are  comprehended  in
the  mDo  class.  But  in  a  particular  sense  there  are  some  treatises
which  have  been  arranged  under  this  title.  They  amount  to  about
270,  and  are  contained  in  thirty  volumes.  The  subject  of  the  works
is  various.  The  greatest  part  of  them  consist  of  moral  and  meta-
physical doctrine  of  the  Buddhistic  system,  the  legendary  accounts  of
several  individuals,  with  allusions  to  the  sixty  or  sixty-four  arts,  to
medicine,  astronomy,  and  astrology.  There  are  many  stories  to  ex-
emplify the  consequences  of  actions  in  former  transmigrations,  descrip-
tions of  orthodox  and  heterodox  theories,  mural  and  civil  laws,  the  six
kinds  of  animal  beings,  the  places  of  their  habitations,  and  the  causes
of  their  being  born  there,  cosmogony  and  cosmography  according  to
Buddhistic  notions,  the  provinces  of  several  Buddhas,  exemplary
conduct  of  life  of  any  Bodhisat  or  saint,  and  in  general  all  the  twelve
kinds  of  Buddhistic  Scriptures  '  are  to  be  found  here.

The  second  volume  (K')  contains  the  romantic  biography  of
Buddha — the  Lalita  Vistara,  translated  by  M.  Foucaux.^  The  seventh
volume  (J)  contains  the  Saddliarma  Pundartlca,^  or  White  Lotus  of  ihe
Holy  Law,  translated  from  the  Sanskrit  into  French  by  Burnouf,  and
into  English  by  Prof.  H.  Kern,*  and  the  most  popular  treatise  with
Japanese  Buddhists.  The  eighth  volume  (N)  contains  "  the  Great
Decease  "  (Mahdparinirvana).  The  ninth  volume  has,  amongst  others,
the  Surangama  Samadhi  Sutra  referred  to  by  FaHian.  The  twenty-
sixth  volume  (L),  folios  329-400,  or  chapters  of  "joyous  utterance"
(Udanas),  contains  the  Uddnavarga,^  which  Schiefner  showed  to  be  the
Tibetan  version  of  the  Dhammapada  ;  and  which  has  been  translated  into

1  This  twelve-fold  dmsion  (ysun  rab  yan-lay  bc'u-gnis)  I  here  extract  from  the
Vj-utpatti  in  the  Tan-gyur:  ].  Sittran.  (Dido-sdelii-sde)  discourses.  2.  geyam  (dbyicas
kyis  isiiad),  mixed  prose  and  verse.  3.  VyakaraftaH  (lun  du-5stan),  exposition,  i.
ffuthfi  (Tshigs-su-bc'ad),  verse.  5.  Uddnan  (C'ed-du-5rjod).  6.  Niddnan  (glin-gzhi).
7.  ^l'V'A?/irt!j  (rtogs-pa-brjod).  8.  Itirrittahan  (de-lta  bw  byun).  9.  /atete  (skyes-pa-
rabs).  10.  Vaipuhjan  (shin-tu-rgyas),  very  expanded.  11.  Aibhutdlmrmmah  (rmad-
du  bj-un),  mj'steries.  12.  Upadesah  (gtun-la-dbab).  This  division,  says  Buenoup
{Iidrod.,  p.  45-60),  wi-iting  of  Nepalese  Buddhism,  is  made  up  of  the  older  nine  angaa
mentioned  by  Buddhagosha,  a,d.  450,  to  which  were  added  at  a  later  period  Nidana,
Avadana,  and  Upadesa.  Conf.  also  Childees'  Did.,  Buenguf's  Lotus,  355,  356;
Haedy's  Man.;  Hodgson's  Ess.,  15;  Rhys  Davids'  Budd.,  214.

2  Also  summarised  by  CsoMA(^ljjaZ.,  413)  andVASiL.,  B.,  3,4, 176;  Feee's  Intro.,p.  72.
Also  abstracted  by  Eockhill,  B.,  ii. ;  and  in  part  from  the  Sanskrit  by  Eaj.  Mitra. ,

2  Dam-pahi  ch'os  padma  dkar-po.

*  Vol.  xxi.,  Sacred  Boohs  of  the  East.

'  Ch'ed-du  brjod  pai  ts'oms ;  see  also  Csoma's  Ah.,  p.  477.  Its  commentary  by'Praj-
navarman  (a  native  of  Bengal  who  lived  in  Kashmir  in  the  ninth  century — Tdrandtha,
p.  204,  EOCKHII.L,  xii.)  is  in  Vol.  Ixxi.  of  Tan-:/i/in:


THE CANON.  163


English  with  copious  notes  by  Mr.  Rockhill.  It  contains  three  hundred
verses,  which  "  are  nearly  identical  with  verses  of  the  Dliammapada  ;
one  hundred  and  fifty  more  resemble  verses  of  that  work."  The  varia-
tions show  that  the  northern  translation  was  made  from  a  dififerent
version  than  the  Pali,'  and  from,  as  Mr.  Rockhill  believes,^  a  "Sanskrit
version  in  the  dialect  prevalent  in  Kashmir  in  the  fii'st  century  b.o.,  at
which  period  and  in  which  place  the  compiler,  Dharmatrata,"  prob-
ably lived."

From  this  (Do)  division  of  the  Kah-gyur  are  culled  out  the  Indian
mystic  formulas,  mostly  in  unintelligible  gibberish,  which  are
deemed  most  potent  as  charms,  and  these  form  the  volume  named
mDo-man  g^zuri*  6sdus,  or  curtly,  D6-ma!i  or  "assorted  aphor-
isms " — literally  "  many  Sutras."  These  formulas  are  not  used  in
the  worship  of  the  Buddhas  and  superior  gods,  but  only  as  priestly
incantations  in  the  treatment  of  disease  and  ill-fortune.  And  as
these  spells  enter  into  the  worship  of  which  the  laity  have  most
experience,  small  pocket  editions  of  one  or  other  of  these  mystic
Sutras  are  to  be  found  in  the  possession  of  all  literate  laymen,  as
the  mere  act  of  reading  these  charms  suffices  to  ward  off  the  demon-
bred  disease  and  misfortune.

The  remaining  divisions  of  the  canons  are  : —

VI.  Nirvana  (Mya-naii-las-'das-pa),  in  two  volumes.  An  extended
version,  part  of  the  eighth  volume  of  the  mDo  on  "  The  Great  Decease,
or  Entire  deliverance  from  Pain."  "Great  lamentation  of  all  sorts  of
animal  beings  on  the  approaching  death  or  Shakya ;  their  offerings  or
sacrifices  presented  to  him ;  his  lessons,  especially  with  regard  to  the
soul.  His  last  moments;  his  funeral;  how  his  relics  were  divided  and
where  deposited." "

VII.  Tantra  (rgyud),  in  twenty-two  volumes.  "  These  volumes  in
general  contain  mystical  theology.  There  are  descriptions  of  several
gods  and  goddesses.  Instruction  for  preparing  mandalas  or  circles
for  the  reception  of  those  divinities.  Offerings  or  sacrifices  presented
to  them  for  obtaining  their  favour.  Prayers,  hymns,  charms,  etc.,
addressed  to  them.  There  are  also  some  works  on  astronom)-,  as-
trology, chronology,  medicine,  and  natural  philosophy.""

In  the  first  volume  (K)  are  found  the  Kalacakra  doctrine  ^  and
Sambara. In  the  third  the  history  of  the  divine  mothers  Varahi,  etc.

1  Rockhill's  Uddnatarga,  ix.

2  Loc  cit. ,  X.

3  Tdrandtha,  p.  54,  lig.  8.

*  gz'uns  =  Skt.  dharani,  which  is  a  mystic  spell  like  the  Hindu  Mantra.

5  CsoMA,  An.,  p.  487.

8  CsoMA,  An.,  p.  487.

'  CsoMA,  Gh-am.,  p.  172;  Diet,  488.

M 2


164  THE  SORIPTUBES  AND  LITERATURE.


In  the  seventeenth  volume  (M)  the  expelling  of  devils  and  Naga-
■worship.  The  Tathagata-guhyaka  contains  a  summary  of  the  Sivaic
esoteric  doctrine.

The  word  "  Tantra,"  according  to  its  Tibetan  etymology,  literally
means '  "  treatise  or  dissertation,"  but  in  Buddhism  as  in  Hinduism,  it
is  restricted  to  the  necromantic  books  of  the  later  Sivaic  or  Sakti
mysticism.

The  Tantras  are  arranged  into  "  The  four  classes  "  (gyud  sde  bzhi) :

1.  Kriya  Tantra  (bya-bai-rgyud).

2.  Gary  a  T.  (spyod-pai  rgyud).

3.  Yoga  T.  (rual-'byor  rgyud).

4.  Anuttara  Toga  T.  (rnal-'byor  bla-na  med-pai  rgyud)  or  "The

peerless  Yoga."

The  first  two  form  together  the  lower  division  ('og-ma),  and  the
latter  two  the  higher  division  (gon-ma).  It  is  only  in  the  Anuttara
Yogatantras,  including  the  Atiyoga  (Ds  og-ch'en),  that  the  tutelary
fiends  and  their  Jinas  have  female  energies  or  Matris.

Those  translated  from  the  eighth  to  the  eleventh  centuries  a.d.  are
called  "  the  Old,"  while  the  latter  are  "  the  New."  Amongst  those
composed  in  Tibet  are  the  Hayagriva,  Vajraphurba  and  sKu-gsun-t'ugs
yon-tan  'p'rin  las.

THE COMMENTARIES (TAX'-ffTUR).

The  BuddHist  commentators,  like  those  of  the  Talmud,  overlay
a  line  or  two  with  an  enormous  excrescence  of  exegesis.

The  Tibetan  commentary  or  Tdn-gyur  is  a  great  cyclopedic
compilation  of  all  sorts  of  literary  works,  written  mostly  by
ancient  Indian  scholars  and  some  learned  Tibetans  in  the  first
few  centuries  after  tbe  introduction  of  Buddhism  into  Tibet,
commencing  with  the  seventh  century  of  our  era.  The  whole
makes  two  hundred  and  twenty-five  volumes.  It  is  divided  into
the  classes — the  vGyud  and  mDo  (Tantra  and  Sutra  classes  in
Sanskrit).  The  iGyud,  mostly  on  tantrika  rituals  and  ceremonies,
make  eighty-seven  volumes.  The  mZ)o  on  science  and  literature
one  hundred  and  thirty-six  volumes.  One  separate  volume  con-
tains hymns  or  praises  on  several  deities  and  saints.  And  one
volume  is  the  index  for  the  whole.^  The  first  sixteen  volumes
of  the  vaDo  class  are  all  commentaries  on  the  Prajnd-pdramitd.
Afterwards  follow  several  volumes  explanatory  of  the  Madhyamika
philosophy  (of  Nagarjuna)  which  is  founded  on  the  Prajna-paramita.^

1  Jaesohke,  p.  112.  2  CsoMA,  An.,  553.

3  A  few  of  the  individual  treatises  have  been  translated,  either  in  full  or  aisiract,
by  Schiefner,  Eockhill,  etc.  Nagarjuna's  Friendly  Epistle  (bches-pahi  p'rin  yig),  by
Wenzel  in  J.  Pali  Text  Soc,  1886


COMMENTARIES  AND VERNACULAR.  165


One  volume  contains  the  Tibeto-Sanskrit  dictionary  of  Buddhist
terminology,  the  "  bye-brag-tu  rtogs  byad  (pron.  je-tak-tu  tog-je)
— the  Mahavyutpati.i  Under  this  heading  would  also  come  the
later  commentaries,  such  as  the  Bodhi-patha(in  Mongolian — Bodhi
Mur).  Its  contents  include  rhetoric,  grammar,  prosody,  mediaeval
mechanics,  and  alchemy.  But  its  contents  have  not  yet  been
fully  examined.^

THE INDIGENOUS TIBETAN LITERATURE.

The  indigenous  works  composed  in  Tibet  are  for  the  most  part
devoted  to  sacred  subjects.  The  secular  books  exist,  as  a  rule,
in  manuscript,  as  the  printing  is  in  the  hands  of  the  monks.'

The  sacred  books  may  be  divided  into  (a)  apocryphal  and
(b)  authentic  or  quasi-authentic.

The  apocryphal  works  are  the  most  numerous  and  most  popular.
Chief  amongst  these  are  the  fictitious  "revelations"  or  Terma
books,  already  referred  to  in  describing  the  part  which  they  played
in  the  origin  of  the  sects  of  Lamaism.  These  Terma  books  may
be  recognized  by  their  style  of  caligraphy.  For  instead  of  the
opening  sentences  and  chapters  commencing  with  the  hook-like
symbol  for  Oth,  duplicated  or  triplicated,  as  on  the  cover  of  this
book,  and  the  punctuation  periods  being  vertical  lines,  as  in
ordinary  orthodox  books,  the  Terma  books  commence  with  the
ordinary  anusvdra  (am),  or  a  vertical  stroke  enshrined  in  a
trefoil-like  curve,  and  their  periods  are  marked  by  two  small
circles  one  over  the  other,  like  the  Devanagari  visarga,  but  with
a  curved  line  with  its  concavity  upwards,  intervening.  These
"  revelations,"  it  will  be  remembered,  pretend  to  be  the  composi-
tion of  St.  Padma,  the  founder  of  Lamaism.*


1  The  Sanskrit  text  of  which  has  been  published  by  Maiyaneff ;  and  much  of  it  is
abstracted  in  the  Biuldhistisclie  Triglotte,  printed  by  Schiefner,  St.  Petersburg,  1859.

2  The  2nd  vol.  of  the  Annales  du  Musie  Cruimet  contains  some  additional  notes  on
the  Tan-gyur  by  M.  L^ou  Feer.

3  Most  of  the  printing-monastic  establishments  issue  lists  of  the  books  which  they
sell.

*  Amongst  the  better  known  are :  The  Golden  Rosary  of  Displayed  Letters  (T'ug-
yig  gser-'p'ren),  found  by  Sang-gyas  gling-pa ;  The  Displayed  Lotus  Orders  (Padma
bkah-t'an),  found  by  0-rgyan  gling-pa ;  Ka-t'ang  Zang-gling  ma ;  The  Lamp  En-
lightener  of  Prophecy  (Lung-brtan  gsal-bal  sgron-me).  Also  of  this  nature  are :
The  Directions  for  the  Departed  Soul  to  find  its  way  to  bliss  (Pa-cha-to's-sgrol).


166  THE  SGBIPTURES  AND LITEBATVBE.

To  this  revelation  class  belong  also  the  fictitious  works  attri-
buted to  King  Sroh  Tsan  Gampo.^

Of  the  other  most  common  apocryphal  works  found  in  Sikhim
are  the  Nd-yik,  or  "  Story  of  the  Sacred  Sites  of  Sikhim,"  and  Lha-
tsun's  inspired  manual  of  worship  for  the  great  mountain  god
Kahch'en-dso-na  (English,  Kinchinjv/nga) .  Each  monastery  pos-
sesses in  manuscript  a  more  or  less  legendary  account  of  its  own
history  (deb-t'er),  although  this  is  kept  out  of  sight.  In  the
Lepcha  monasteries  and  in  the  possession  of  a  few  Lepcha  laymen
are  found  the  following,  mostly  translations  from  the  Tibetan :
(1)  Tdshi  Suit,  a  fabulous  history  of  St.  Padma-sambhava;  (2)  Guru
Gh'o  Wan;  (3)  Sdkun  de-lok,  the  narrative  of  a  visit  to  Hades  by
a  resuscitated  man  named  Sakun;  ^  (4)  Ek-doshi  man-lom — forms
of  worship.

■The  large  work  on  the  Naga  demigods — the  Lu-'bum  dkar-po —
is  regarded  as  a  heterodox  B6n-po  book.^

As  authentic  works  may  be  instanced,  the  religious  chronologies
((]h'os-'byun)  and  records  (Deb-t'er)  by  Bu-ton,  and  Padma-kar-
po ;  the  histories  (Sun-'bum)  of  Zhva-lu  L6-tsa,  and  Taranatha's
well-known  history  of  Buddhism  in  India,  and  a  useful  cyclo-
pedia by  an  Amdo  Lama  entitled  T'ub-dban  bstan-pahi  STima ;
and  as  quasi-authentic  the  fifth  Grand  Lama's  "  royal  pedigree."  *
All  begin  with  pious  dedicatory  sentences  and  usually  end  with
the  Buddhist  wish-  that  the  writer  may  acquire  merit  through
his  literary  work.

But  most  of  the  autobiographies  so-called  (rNam-t'ar)  and  re-
cords (Yig-tsan  or  deb-t'er)  are  legendary,  especially  of  the  earlier
Lamas  and  Indian  monks  are  transparently  fictitious,  not  only  on
account  of  their  prophetic  tone,  though  always  "  discovered  "  after
the  occurrence  of  the  events  prophesied,  but  their  almost  total
absence  of  any  personal  or  historic  details. Some  of  the  later  ones

1  (1)  Mani  bKah-bum  (already  referred  to),  the  legendary  history  of  Avalokita  and
a  maze  of  silly  fables.  (2)  S'alch'em  or  Sron  Tsan  Gampo's  HonouraUe  Will  or
Testament,  and  (3)  an  exoteric  volume  entitled  "  The  Sealed  Commands,"  bka-rgga-
ma,  which  is  kept  carefully  secreted  in  some  of  the  larger  monasteries.  It  belongs  to
the  silly  esoteric  class  of  books  called  San-nak.

2  Cf.  also  the  play  of  Nansa,  The  Brilliant  Light,  Chap.  xx.

3  A  German  translation  by  Schiefner  of  the  smaller  version  has  been  published  by
the  St.  Petersburg  Acad.  {Das  ^Yeisse  Naga  Hnnderk  iaiisettd.)  Cf.  also  Kockhill,  L.,
p.  217,  n.

■*  gyal-rabs  [Skt.,  Rajvansa].


INDIGENOUS  BOOKS.  167

dealing  with  modern  personages  are  of  a  somewhat  more  historical
character,  but  are  so  overloaded  by  legends  as  to  repel  even  en-
thusiastic enquirers.

The  leading  ritualistic  manuals  of  the  various  sects  are  of  a
more  or  less  authentic  character,  and  small  pocket  editions  of  these
prayer  books  (smon-lam)  and  hymns  (bstod-tsogs)  are  very
numerous.^  Individual  Lamas  possess  special  books  according  to
their  private  means  and  inclinations,  such  as  the  100,000  songs'  of
the  famous  mendicant  sage  Mila-rd-pa  on  the  worship  of  Tara
and  other  favourite  or  tutelary  deities,  and  the  mode  of  making
their  magic-circles.  Mongol  Lamas  have  the  Dsang-lun.  The
specialist  in  medicine  has  one  or  more  fantastic  medical  works,
such  as  Mannag-rgyud,  S'ad-gyud;  and  the  Td-pa  or  astrologer
has  the  Baidyur  karpo  and  other  books  on  astrological  calculations
and  sorcery,  many  of  which  are  translated  from  the  Chinese.

Some  further  details  of  ritualistic  books  are  found  in  the
chapters  on  the  monkhood .  and  on  ritual,  where  several  abstracts
are  given.

The  secular  works,  through  most  of  which  runs  a  more  or  less
Buddhistic  current,  are  mainly  annals  or  chronicles  (16-rgyu).

Good  and  clever  sayings  and  reflections  (Hogs-brjod),  as  "  The
precious  rosary"  (rin-ch'en-p'reii-wa),  a  collection  of  proverbs,  and
drinking  songs.

Tales  more  or  less  fabulous  (sgruiis).  The  best  known  of  these  is
that  of  Ge-sar  (=  ?  Czar  or  Cesar),  who  is  described  as  a  mighty  war-like
king  of  northern  Asia,  and  who  is  made  to  figure  as  a  suitor  for  the
hand  of  the  Chinese  princess  before  her  marriage  with  Sron  Tsan  Gam-
po,  although  it  is  evident  the  legendary  accounts  of  him  must  be  more
ancient. Baber'  refers  to  the  story-book  named  Djriung-yi*  songs.'


1  The  Ge-lug-pa  monk's  manual  is  "  The  Bhikshu's  Timely  Memoranda  (dGe-slon-
gi-du-dran),  and  his  other  special  books  are  the  two  volumes  by  Tson  K'apa  entitled  :
The  Gradual  Path  (Lam  rim  c'en-ho),  a  doctrinal  commentary  based  on  Atisa's  version
of  the  Bodi  Patha  Pradip,  and  'The  Gradual  Path  of  Vajrad/mra  (i-Dor-c'an  Lam-
rim),  a  highly  Tantrik  book.  (Of.  Csoma,  Gr.,  197.)  For  Bodhi-mur  (Bodhi-patha),  see
Schmidt's  Ssanang  Ssetsen.

2  gLu-b'um.

3  Op.  cit.,  p.  88.

4 Rook.,  B.,  p.  288,  suggests  this  maybe  rGyus-yi-dpe.

5  Amongst  indigenous  geographical  works  is  "  A  Geography  of  the  World"  {Dsam-Hii
aye-she).  The  references  to  eountries  outside  Tibet  are  mainly  coniined  to  India,  and  are
even  then  very  inexact.  Its  most  useful  section  is  that  descriptive  of  Tibet,  translated
by  Sabat,  J.A.S.B.,  1887,  pp.  1  et  seq.  See  also  Wei-tshang  thu  .■!hl,  abstracted  by
Klaproth  from  the  Chinese.  Cf .  also  Csoma's  enumeration  of  Tibetan  works,  J.A  .S.B.,
vii.,  147  ;  ix.,  905.


168  THE  SCRIPTURES  AND  LITERATURE.

THE  LAMAIST  LIBRARY.

The  Lamaist  library  is  usually  situated  within  the  temple.
The  large  books  are  deposited  in  an  open  pigeon-holed  rackwork.
The  sheets  forming  the  volume  are  wrapped  in  a  napkin;  and
the  bundle  is  then  placed  between  two  heavy  wooden  blocks,  as
covers,  which  bear  on  their  front  end  the  name  of  the  book  in
letters  graved  in  relief  and  gilt.  The  whole  parcel  is  firmly  bound
by  a  broad  tape  and  buckle  tied  across  its  middle.  These  ponderous
tomes  are  most  unwieldy  and  not  easy  of  reference.  When  the
book  is  read  away  from  tables  as  is  usually  the  case,  it  is  held
across  the  knees,  and  the  upper  board  and  the  leaves  as  they  are
read  are  lifted  towards  the  reader  and  replied  in  order  in  his  lap.
Before  opening  its  fastenings,  and  also  on  retying  the  parcel,  the
monk  places  the  book  reverently  on  his  head,  saying,  "May  I
obtain  the  blessing  of  thy  holy  word."

Copyists  of  manuscript,  as  well  as  composers  and  translators,
usually  conclude  their  work  with  a  short  stanza  expressing  then-
pious  hope  that  "  this  work  here  finished  may  benefit  the  (unsaved)
animals."

An  enormous  mass  of  Lamaist  literature  is  now  available  in
Europe  in  the  collections  at  St.  Petersburg,  mainly  obtained  from
Pekin,  Siberia,  and  Mongolia ;  at  Paris,  and  at  the  India  OflSce,  and
Eoyal  Asiatic  Society  ^  in  London,  and  at  Oxford,  mostly  gifted  by
Mr.  Hodgson.'-

The  St.  Petersburg  collection  is  the  largest,  and  extends  to
over  2,000  volumes.'

1  Catalogue  of  these,  by  Dr.  H.  Wenzel,  in  J.R.A.S.,  1891.

'  The  India  Oiflce  copy  of  the  canon  was  presented  to  Mr.  Hodgson  by  the  Dalai
Lama.

Notices  of  these  occur  in  various  volumes  of  the  Mdana.  Asicd.  de  St.  Petersh.


A  Lamaist  Peocession.i


VIII.


THE LAMAIST ORDER AND PRIESTHOOD.


"  Without  the  Lama  in  front,
God  is  not  (approachable)."— KJaiow  Proveri.

is  in  primitive  Buddhism,  the  .monastic  order  or  con-
gregation of  the  Virtuous  Ones  ^  forms  the  third
member  of  the  Trinity,  "The  Three  most  Precious
Ones"  of  Lamaism.  But  owing  to  the  rampant
sacerdotalism  of  Tibet,  the  order  is  in  a  much  higher  position
there  than  it  ever  attained  in  Indian  Mahayana  Buddhism,  accord-
ing to  the  current  Tibetan  saying  above  cited.

The  order  is  composed  of  Bodhisats  both  human  and  celestial.
The  latter  occupy,  of  course,  the  highest  rank,  while  the  so-called
incarnate  Lamas,'  who  are  believed  to  be  incarnated  reflexes  from


1  After  GioTgi.  ^  Skt.,  Saiyha  ;  Tib.,  AOe-dmi.  ^  sprul-sku,  or  ku-s'o.


170  THE  ORDER OF  LAMAS.

a  superhuman  Buddha  or  Bodhisat  or  a  reborn  saint,  are  given  an
intermediate  position,  as  is  detailed  in  the  chapter  on  the  hier-
archy.

i?he  Lamas  are  "  the  Bodhisats  who  have  renounced  the  world," '
and  thus  are  held  to  correspond  to  the  Sangha  of  primitive
Buddhism  consisting  of  the  Bhikshus  (mendicants),  ^rdmciTieras
(ascetic)  and  Arhats.  The  nuns,  excepting  the  so-called  incar-
nations of  celestial  Bodhisats  (e.g.,  Dorje-p'agmo),  are  given  an  in-
ferior position  scarcely  higher  than  lay  devotees.

While  the  laity,  corresponding  to  "  the  pious  householders  and
hearers  "  ^  of  the  primitive  Buddhists,  who  under  the  Mahayana
system  should  be  "  the  Bodhisats  who  reside  in  their  houses,"  are
practically  excluded  from  the  title  to  Bodhisatship  or  early  Buddha-
hood  like  the  Lamas,  and  are  contemptuously  called  the  "  Owners  of
Alms,"  ^  those  "  bound  by  fear,"  *  and  the  "  benighted  people  ;  "  ^
although  the  lay  devotees  are  allowed  the  title  of  Updsaka  and
Updsikd  ^  if  keeping  the  five  precepts,  and  those  who  are  uncelibate
are  called  "  the  pure  doer '' ; ''  while  the  Neiv-t'o  or  Nen-na  ^
keep  four  of  the  precepts.

The  supreme  position  which  the  Lamas  occupy  in  Tibetan  society,
both  as  temporal  and  spiritual  rulers,  and  the  privileges  which  they
enjoy,  as  well  as  the  deep  religious  habit  of  the  people,  all  combine
to  attract  to  the  priestly  ranks  enormous  numbers  of  recruits.  At
the  same  time  it  would  appear  that  compulsion  is  also  exercised
by  the  despotic  priestly  government  in  the  shape  of  a  recognized
tax  of  children  to  be  made  Lamas,  named  bTsun-gral  Every
family  thus  affords  at  least  one  of  its  sons  to  the  church.  The
first-born  or  favourite  son  is  usually  so  dedicated  in  Tibet.''  The
other  son  marries  in  order  to  continue  the  family  name  and  in-
heritance and  to  be  the  bread-winner ;  and  many  families  contribute
more  than  one,  as  the  youths  are  eager  to  join  it.

'  Fravmjya.

-  HoDGS.,  niits.,  p.  98 ;  Hardy,  S.  .1/.,  p.  12.

•*  shyin-hdaffs

^  mi~7iarj-pa.

^  Ab'e-bsneii.  This  title  is  also  applied  to  a  novice,  probationer,  or  candidate.  Cf.
Kopp.,  ii.,  252;  Schlag.,  162;  Jaesohk.,  D.,  85.

^  mU\jn-spyod,

"  gsiien-gnas.

»  Conf .  also  Pandit,  A.  K.  In  Sikhim  it  is  the  second  son  ;  and  also  in  Ladak  (Mabx,
lot:  cit.).


GRADES OF  MONKS.  171


Thus  in  Tibet,  where  children  are  relatively  few,  it  is  believed
that  one  out  of  every  six  or  eight  of  the  population  is  a  priest.  In
Sikhim  the  proportion  is  one  to  ten.'  In  Ladak  one-sixth.^  In
Bhotan  one  to  about  ten.

GRADES.

In  every  monachism  there  are  naturally  three  hierarchical
seniorities  or  ranks,  namely :  the  scholars  or  novices,  the  ordained,
and  the  reverend  fathers  or  the  priests,  just  as  in  the  common
guilds  or  arts  are  the  grades  of  the  apprentice,  the  journeyman,
and  the  master.  Indian  Buddhism  had  its  grades  of  the  Srama-
nera  (or  the  novice),  of  the  expert  Sramana  or  Bhikshu  (the  mode-
rate one  or  beggar),  and  of  the  Sthavira  or  Vpdydhya  (master  or
teacher).

Lamaism  has  naturally  these  necessary  degrees  of  clerical
maturity  and  subordination,  and  by  dividing  the  noviciate  into
two  sections  it  counts  four,  thus  : —

1.  The  clerical  apprentice  or  scholar.  The  customary  title  of
this  first  beginner  in  holy  orders  is  Ge-nen,  which  means  "  to
live  upon  virtue,"  and  is  a  translation  of  the  Sanskrit  word
Updsaka  or  lay-brother.  This  word  has  a  double  meaning;  it
shows  firstly  the  simple  lay  believer,  who  has  promised  to  avoid  the
five  great  sins ;  and  secondly  the  monastic  devotee  or  scholar,  who
keeps  the  ten  pirecepts  and  is  preparing  for  the  holy  orders  to
which  he  partly  belongs  through  the  clothes  he  wears  and  the  official
acknowledgment  which  he  has  received.  He  is  also  called  Eab-
byun  or  "  excellent  born."  The  Mongols  call  these  "  Schabi,"
and  Bandi,  Banda,  or  "  Bante," '  which  latter  word  seems  to  be
of  Indian  origin. The  Kalmaks  call  them  Manji.*

2.  The  Ge-ts'vl,  the  commencing,  but  not  quite  fully  ordained
monk,  an  under  priest,  or  deacon,  who  keeps  the  thirty-six
rules.

3.  Ge-long  or  "  virtuous  or  clerical  beggar,"  the  real  monk,  the
priest,  over  twenty-five  years  of  age,  and  who  has  been  fully
ordained,  and  keeps  the  two  hundred  and  fifty-three  rules.

^  See  my  Ldmaism  in  Sikkim.

2  Knight,  op.  cit.,  p.  130.

3  Cf.  Jaeschke,  D.,  364.

*  The  Santals  of  Bengal,  who  are  believed  to  be  of  the  so-called  Turanian  descent,
call  their  chiefs  Manji.


172


THE  ORDER OF  LAMAS.


4.  The  ICan-'po,  which means the  master  or Abbot (Skt.,
Upddkydya). He  is  the  end,  the  true  extremity  of  the  Lamaist


A  Tibetan  Doctor  of  Divinity.
An  Abbot.


monachism,  because  he  has  under  him  all  the  scholars,  novices,
and  common  monks. And  although  the  regenerated  or  re-incar-


CURRICULUM.  173


nated  monks,  the  Chutuktus,  and  sovereign  priest-gods  are  above
him,^  their  originals  were  essentially  nothing  else  than  abbots.
He  it  is,  who  in  the  early  time  was  probably  the  only  one  to  be
honoured  by  the  title  Lama  {Guru  or  master),  and  to  whom  is
given  this  title  even  to  the  present  time;  although  he  may  be
called  a  Grand  Lama  to  distinguish  him  from  the  other  cloister
inhabitants.  Only  the  larger  cloisters  have  a  K'an-po,  who  has
the  right  to  supervise  several  smaller  Lamaseries  and  temples,
and  whose  position  seems  to  be  such  that  he  is  compared  as  a  rule
with  the  catholic  bishop.^

THE CURRICULUM.

In  sketching  the  details  of  the  curriculum  of  the  Lama,  I  give
the  outlines  of  the  course  followed  in  the  greatest  of  the  monastic
colleges  of  the  established  church  of  Tibet — the  Gre-lug-pa — as
related  to  me  by  Lama-graduates  of  these  institutions,  namely,
of  De-pung,  Sera,  Gah-ldan,  and  Tashi-lhunpo,  as  these  set  the
high  standard  which  other  monasteries  of  all  sects  try  to  follow,
and  marked  departures  from  this  standard  are  indicated  in  a
subsequent  note.

■  The  child  who  is  the  Lama-elect  (btsan-ch'un)  stays  at  home
till  about  his  eighth  year  (from  six  to  twelve),  wearing  the  red  or
yellow  cap  when  he  is  sent  to  a  monastery,  and  educated  as  in  a
sort  of  boarding-school  or  resident  college,  passing  through  the
stages  of  pupil-probationer  (da-pa),  novice  (ge-ts'ul),  to  fully-
ordained  monk  (ge-lon),  and,  it  may  be,  taking  one  or  other  of
the  degrees  in  divinity,  or  a  special  quaUfication  in  some  particular
academic  department.

As,  however,  the  applicants  for  admission  into  these  monastic
colleges  have  usually  passed  the  elementary  stage  ajid  have  already
reached,  or  nearly  reached,  the  stage  of  noviciate  at  some  smaller
monastery,  I  preface  the  account  of  the  course  in  great  mon-
astic colleges  by  the  preliminary  stage  as  seen  at  the  leading
monastery  in  Sikhim,  the  Pemiongchi,  which  is  modelled  on  that
of  the  great  Hin-ma  monastery  of  Mindolling.

Prdiminary  Exarflination — Physical. — When  the  boy-candi-

^  Those  K'an-pos  who  have  gone  through  the  Tantra  or rgyud-pa  course  have  a
higher  repute  than  the  others.
2  KoppEN,  ii.,  254.


174  THE  ORDER  OF  LAMAS.

date  for  admission  is  brought  to  the  monastery  his  parentage  is
enquired  into,  as  many  monasteries  admit  only  the  more  respect-
able and  wealthier  class.i  The  boy  is  then  physically  examined
to  ascertain  that  he  is  free  from  deformity  or  defect  in  his  limbs
and  faculties.  If  he  stammers,  or  is  a  cripple  in  any  way,  or  bent
in  body,  he  is  rejected.  When  he  has  passed  this  physical  exam-
ination he  is  made  over  by  his  father  or  guardian  to  any  senior
relative  he  may  have  amongst  the  monks.  Should  he  have  no
relative  in  the  monastery,  then,  by  consulting  his  horoscope,  one
of  the  elder  monks  is  fixed  upon  as  a  tutor,  who  receives  from  the
lad's  father  a  present  of  money ,2  tea,  eatables,  and  beer.^  The
tutor  or  elder  (Grer-gan)*  then  takes  the  boy  inside  the  great  hall
where  the  monks  are  assembled,  and  publicly  stating  the  parentage
of  the  boy  and  the  other  details,  and  offering  presents  of  beer,  he
■  asks  the  permission  of  the  elder  monks  (d6U-ch'os)  to  take  the
boy  as  a  pupil.  On  this  being  accorded  the  boy  becomes  a  pro-
bationer.

As  a  probationer  he  is  little  more  than  a  private  schoolboy  under
the  care  of  his  tutor,  and  doing  various  menial  services.  His  hair
is  cropped  without  any  ceremony,  and  he  may  even  wear  his
ordinary  lay  dress.  He  is  taught  by  his  tutor  the  alphabet  (the
"  Ka,  K'a,  Gra,"  as  it  is  called),^  andjafterwards  to  read  and  recite
by  heart  the  smaller  of  the  sacred  books,^  such  as  : —

Leu  bdun  ma,  or  "  The  Seven  Chapters  " — A  prayer-book  of  St.
Padma.

Bar-cW  lam  gsel  or  "  Charms  to  clear  the  way  from  Danger  and
Injury  " — A  prayer  to  St.  Padma  in  twelve  stanzas.

Sher-phyin — An  abstract  of  transcendental  wisdom  in  six  leaves.

sKu-rim — A  sacrificial  service  for  averting  a  calamity.

Mon-lam — Prayers  for  general  welfare.

sDig  sags,  or  "The  Confession  of  Sins."  ' The  mere  act  of  reading


1  At  Pemiongchi  5nly  those  candidates  who  are  of  relatively  pure  Tibetan  descent
by  the  father's  side  are  ordinarily  admitted.

2  In  Sikhim  definite  fees  are  payable  at  the  different  ceremonies  for  admission  to
the  order,  as  detailed  in  my  Lamaism  in  Sikhim,  amounting  to  about  150  Es.,  in  the
case  of  the  highest  monastery — Pemiongchi.  In  Bhotap  it  is  stated  (Pembeetom's
RepoH,  p.  118 ;  Tokner's  Embassy,  170)  that  the  fee  is  100  Bhotanese  rupees.

3  This,  of  course,  would  not  be  oifered  in  a  Ge-lug-pa  monastery.
*  dge-rgan,  or  "  the  Virtuous  Elder."  '  See  p.  xviii.

"  Such  small  manuals  are  about  eight  or  ten  inches  long  by  two  to  three  inches
broad,  and  usually  have  the  leaves  stitched  together.


TEXT-BOOKS  AND  LESSONS.


175


this  holy  booklet  even  as  a  school  exercise  cleanses  from  sin. Most  of
the  monasteries  possess  their  own  blocks  for  printing  this  pamphlet.
Both  the  text  and  its  translation  are  given  by  Schlagintweit."
r/>or  gchod — A  Sutra  from  the  book  of  transcendental  wisdom.


P'yogs-bc'ui-p'yogs-dral,  or  description  of  the  ten  direc
tions

Namo  Guru — "  Salutation  to  the  Guru  "

mO'oti-'bul — To  give  offerings

gTorma — Sacred  cake

bSans  bsur — Incense  and  butter-incense

ITo-mc'od — Rice  offering ...

E,ig-'dsin  snon-'gro — The  iir.st  essay  of  the  sage

Drag-dmar  snbn-'gro — The  primer  of  red  fierce  deity

bKa  brgyed — "  The  eight  commands  "  or  precepts

bPe  gs'egs  kun  'dus — The  collection  of  the  Tathagatas

Yes'es  sku  mc'og — The  best  foreknowledge

rTsa-gduii bs'ag-gsal — The root-pillar of clear confes-
sion


pages.


The  young  probationer  is  also  instructed  in  certain  golden
maxims  of  a  moral  kind,  of  which  the  following  are  examples  : —

Buddhist  Proverbs : —

Whatever  is  unpleasing  to  yourself  do  not  to  another.

Whatever  happiness  is  in  the  ■\forld  has  all  arisen  from  a  wish  for
the  welfare  of  others.  Whatever  misery  there  is  has  arisen  from
indulging  selfishness.

There  is  no  eye  like  the  understanding,  no  blindness  like  ignorance,
no  enemy  like  sickness,  nothing  so  dreaded  as  death.

A  king  is  honoured  in  his  own  dominions,  but  a  talented  man  every-
where.

"  The  four  Precipices  in  Speech. — If  speech  be  too  long,  it  is  te-
dious ;  if  too  short,  its  meaning  is  not  appreciated ;  if  rough,  it  ruffles
the  temper  of  the  hearers ;  if  soft,  it  is  unsatisfying.

,  "  The  Requirements  of  Speech. — Speech  should  be  vigorous  or  it  will
not  interest ;  it  must  be  bright  or  it  will  not  enlighten ;  it  must  be
suitably  ended,  otherwise  its  effect  is  lost.

"  The  Qualities  of  Speech. — Speech  must  be  bold  as  a  lion,  gentle  and
soft  as  a  hare,  impressive  as  a  serpent,  pointed  as  an  arrow,  and  evenly
balanced  as  a  dorje  held  by  its  middle  (literally  "  waist  ").

"  The  Four  Relations  of  Speech. — The  question  should  first  be  stated.
The  arguments  should  be  duly  connected,  the  later  with  the  earlier.
Essential  points  should  be  repeated.  The  meanings  should  be  illus-
trated by  examples.


1  The  word  for  sin  is  "  scorpion,"  tlius  conveying  tlie  idea  of  a  vile,  venomous,  claw-
ing, acrid  thing.

2  Op.  dt.,  pages  122  to  142.


176  THE  ORDER OF  LAMAS.

"  The  religious  king  Sron-Tsan  Gampo  has  said  (in  the  Mani-kah-
'bum) :  "  Speech  should  float  freely  forth  like  a  bird  into  the  sky,  and
be  clothed  in  charming  dress  like  a  goddess.  At  the  outset  the  object
of  the  speech  should  be  made  clear  like  an  unclouded  sky.  The  speech
should  proceed  like  the  excavation  of  treasure.  The  arguments  should
shoot  forth  nimbly  like  a  deer  chased  by  fresh  hounds,  without  hesitar
tion  or  pause."

"  Assemblies. — People  assemble  for  three  purposes,  namely,  for,  (a)
happiness,  (6)  sorrow,  and  (c)  worldly  gossip.  The  assembHes  for  happi-
ness are  three,namely,(l )  for  virtuous  acts,  (2)  for  worship  in  the  temples,
and  (3)  for  erecting  houses  and  for  feasts.  The  assemblies  for  virtuous
acts  are  four,  viz.,  the  gathering  of  the  monks,  the  gathering  of  the  laity
for  worship,  writing  and  copying  holy  books,  and  giving  away  wealth
in  charity.  There  are  six  kinds  of  assemblies  for  worship,  namely,  the
gathering  of  the  rich,  the  gathering  in  a  separate  place  of  the  common
men,  the  gathering  for  thanksgiving  of  those  who  have  escaped  from
their  enemy's  grasp,  traders  returned  safely  and  successfully,  sick  men
who  have  escaped  from  the  devouring  jaws  of  death,  and  youths  on
gaining  a  victory.

"  The  eight  acts  of  Low-born  persons. — Using  coarse  language,  im-
politeness, talking  with  pride,  want  of  foresight,  harsh  manners,  star-
ing, immoral  conduct,  and  stealing.

27ie  ten  Faults. — Unbelief  in  books,  disrespect  for  teachei's,  render-
ing one's  self  unpleasant,  covetousness,  speaking  too  much,  ridicul-
ing another's  misfortune,  using  allusive  language,  being  angry  with
old  men  or  with  women,  borrowing  what  cannot  be  repaid,  and
stealing.

Invoking  "  The  Messing  of  Eloquence  "  (iiag-byin-rlabs).  This  is  a
Mantrayana  rite  instituted  by  the  "  great  saint "  K'yuii-po  (Skt.,
Garuda  or  Puna,  or  Brika.)'

"  I  go  for  refuge  to  the  Three  Holy  Ones  !  May  I  attain  perfection
and  benefit  the  animal  beings.  The  one  who  brought  me  to  the  light
is  at  the  tip  of  my  tongue  and  the  white  Om  made  up  of  the  words  is
above  the  moon  :  the  white  Ali  (vowels)  go  by  the  right  circle,  the  red
Ka-li  (consonants)  go  by  the  left  and  the  blue  Ktan-snin  by  the  right."
I  repeat  them  secretly  after  deep  contemplation  :

"  Om  !  a,  a,  i,  i,  u,  u,  ri,  ri,  li,  li,  e,  ai,  o,  ou,  angah  !  swaha !  (This
is  to  be  repeated  thrice.)  Om  !  Ka,  Kha,  Ga,  Gha,  l!fa  (and  here  follow
all  the  letters  of  the  alphabet).  (Three  times).  Om !  ye  dh6rma
(here  follows  'The  Buddhist  Creed'  thrice.)  Through  the  rays  of  the
seed  of  the  mantra-rosary  and  the  power  of  the  blessings  of  speech,  I
summon  the  accomplishments  of  the  seven  precious  rgyal-srid  and
'  The  eight  glorious  signs.'"  By  repeating  the  above  one  attains  accom-
plishment in  speech.

During  this  training  the  boy's  relatives  call  about  once  a  month

1  Cf.  also  the  "  Garuda  Charm,"  figured  at  p.  387.


NOVICIATE.  177


to  enquire  after  his  progress  and  health,  and  to  pay  the  tutor  his
fees  for  the  lad's  board  and  education.

After  two  or  three  years  of  such  rudimentary  teaching,  when
the  boy  has  committed  to  memory  the  necessary  texts  (amounting
to  about  one  hundred  and  twenty-five  leaves),  his  tutor  sends  in
an  application  for  his  admission  as  a  novice.

The  mode  of  admission  to  the  noviciateship  in  the  great  De-
pung  monastery  is  as  follows  : — ■

THE NOVICIATE.

The  tutor-Lama  of  the  appHcant  for  the  noviciateship  addresses
the  head  monk  (spyi-rgan)  of  his  section  for  permission  to  admit
the  applicant,  and  at  the  same  time  offers  a  ceremonial  scarfs  and
the  fee  of  ten  rupees.  Then,  if  the  appUcant  be  found  free  from
bodily  defects  and  otherwise  eligible,  a  written  agreem'ent  is
made  out  in  the  presence  of  the  head  monk  and  sealed  by  the
thumb.

To  get  his  name  registered  in  the  books  of  that  particular  school
of  the  monastery  to  which  he  is  to  be  attached,  the  pupil  and  his
tutor  go  to  the  abbot  ^  or  principal  of  that  school  and  proffer  their
request  through  the  butler  or  cup-bearer,^  who  conducts  them  to
the  abbot,  before  whom  they  offer  a  scarf  and  a  silver  coin  (preferably
an  Indian  rupee),  and  bowing  thrice  before  him,  pray  for  admis-
sion.

Amongst  the  questions  now  put  are :  Does  this  boy  come  of
his  free  will  ?  Is  he  a  slave,  debtor,  or  soldier  ?  Does  anyone
oppose  his  entry  ?  Is  he  free  from  deformity,  contagious  disease,
or  fits  ?  Has  he  neglected  the  first  three  commandments  ?  Has
he  committed  theft,  or  thrown  poison  into  water,  or  stones  from  a
hillside  so  as  to  destroy  animal  life,  etc.  ?  What  is  his  family  ?
and  what  their  occupation  ?  and  where  their  residence  ?  On  giving
satisfactory  replies,  he  is  then  required  to  recite  by  heart  the  texts
he  has  learned ;  and  if  approved,  then  the  names  of  the  pupil  and
his  tutor  are  written  down  and  duly  sealed  by  the  thumbs,  and  a
scarf  is  thrown  around  their  necks,  and  the  boy,  who  has  been
dressed  in  princely  finery,  has  his  dress  exchanged  for  the  yellow
or  red  robe  in  imitation  of  Sakya  Muni's  renunciation  of  the
world ;  while,  if  he  is  rejected,  he  is  ejected  from  the  monastery,

1  Iha-rdsas.  '  mi:'an-^o.  ^  gsol.


178  THE  ORDER OF  LAMAS.

and  his  tutor  receives  a  few  strokes  from  a  cane,  and  is  fined
several  pounds  of  butter  for  the  temple  lamps.

The  approved  pupil  and  his  tutor  then  proceed  to  the  head
Iiama  (z'al-no)  of  the  great  cathedral  (common  to  the  colleges  of
the  university),  and,  offering  a  scarf  and  a  rupee,  repeat  their  ■
requests  to  him,  and  the  names  of  the  pupil  and  tutor  and  his
sectional  college  or  residentiary  club  are  registered,  so  that  should
the  pupil  misconduct  himself  in  the  cathedral,  his  teachers,  as  well
as  himself,  shall  be  fined.

The  neophyte  is  now  a  registered  student  (da-pa),^  and  on
returning  to  his  club,  he  is,  if  rich,  expected  to  entertain  all  the
residents  of  the  club  to  three  cups  of  tea.  If  he  has  no  relatives
to  cook  for  him,  he  is  supplied  from  the  club  stores ;  and  any
allowance^  he  gets  from  his  people  is  divided  into  three  parts,
one-third  being  appropriated  by  his  club  for  messing  expenses.
Then  he  gets  the  following  monkish  robes  and  utensils,  viz.,  a
sTod-'gag,  bs'am-t'abs,  gzan,  zla-gam,  z'wa-ser,  sgro-lugs,  a  cup,  a
bag  for  wheaten  flour,  and  a  rosary.

Until  his  formal  initiation  as  an  ascetic,  "  the  going  forth  from
home"  (pravrajyd-vrata),  by  which  he  becomes  a  novice  (Ge-ts'ul,
Skt.,  Sramana),  the  candidate  is  not  allowed  to  join  in  the  religious
services  in  the  monastery.  So  he  now  addresses  a  request  to  the
presiding  Grand  Lama^  to  become  a  novice,  accompanying  his
request  with  a  scarf  and  as  much  money  as  he  can  offer.

The  ceremony  of  initiation  is  generally  similar  to  that  of  the
southern  Buddhists.''

On  the  appointed  day — usually  on  one  of  the  fast  days  (Upo
satha),  the  candidate  has  his  head  shaven  all  but  a  small  tuft  on
the  crown ';  and  he  is  conducted  by  his  spiritual  tutor  (upadhyaya)
before  a  chapter  in  the  assembly  hall,  clad  in  the  mendicant's
robes,  on  putting  on  which  he  has  muttered  a  formula  to  the
effect  that  he  wears  them  only  for  modesty  and  as  a  protection


1  grva-pa,

2  'gyed.

'  dGe-lden-K'ri-rin-po-c'he,  or  s'Kyabs-mgon-rin-poch'e.

4  Cf.  Mahavanso,  i.,  12.  UpaSamimdd-Kamniavdka,  translated  by  F.  Spiegel,  op.  at.
Enys  Davids,  B.,  p.  RQ.

s  My  friend,  Mr.  A.  von  Rosthorn,  informs  me  that  the  Lamas  of  eastern  Tibet
usually  pass  through  an  ordeal  of  initiation  in  which  six  marlts  are  seared  in  their
crown  with  an  iron  lamp,  and  called  Dipamkara,  or  "the  burning  lamp."


INITIATION.  179


against  heat,  cold,  etc.  The  officiating  head  Lama,  sometimes
the  Grrand  Lama,  addressing  the  student  by  his  secular  name,
asks,  "  Do  you  subject  yourself  to  the  tonsure  cheerfully  ?  "  On
receiving  a  reply  in  the  affirmative,  the  presiding  Lama  cuts  off
the  remaining  top  tuft  of  hair  from  the  head  of  the  novice,  who
is  like  Chaucer's  monk,

"His  hed  was  balled,  and  shone  like  any  glas."

The  Lama  also  gives  the  kneeling  novice  a  religious  name,  by
which  he  is  henceforth  known,i  and  exhorting  him  to  keep  the
thirty-six  precepts  and  the  thirty-six  rules,  and  to  look  upon  the
Grand  Lama  as  a  living  Buddha,  he  administers  the  vows  to  the
novice,  who  repeats  clearly  three  times  the  formula,  "  I  take  refuge
in  Buddha,  in  the  Law,  and  in  the  Assembly."

The  ceremony  concludes  with  the  presentation  of  a  scarf  and
ten  silver  coins. ^

At  the  next  mass,  the  boy  is  brought  into  the  great  assembly
hall,  carrying  a  bundle  of  incense  sticks ;  and  is  chaperoned  by  a
monk  named  the  "  bride-companion  "  (ba-grags),  as  this  ceremony
is  regarded  as  a  marriage  with  the  church.  He  sits  down  on
an  appointed  seat  by  the  side  of  the  "  bride-companion,"  who
instructs  him  in  the  rules  and  etiquette  (sGris)  of  the  monkish
manner  of  sitting,  walking,  etc.

The  initiation  into  the  Tantrik  Buddhist  priesthood  of  the
Vajracaryas  is  detailed  below  in  a  foot-note.^

1  Extra  titles  are  also  bestowed,  says  Sarat,  on  the  descendants  of  the  old
nobility.  Thus,  Sag-tshang  families  are  given  title  of  Shab-dung ;  the  sons  of  high
officials  and  landowners  Je-dun ;  and  the  gentry  and  Sha-ngo  family  Choi-je.

2  Tanhas.

3  The  following  account  of  the  initiation  of  the  Vajracarya  priests,  as  given  by
Mr.  Hodgson  for  Nepal  (III.,  p.  139)  :—

"  Early  in  the  morning  the  following  things,  viz.,  the  image  of  a  Chaitya,  those  of
the  Tri  Eatna  or  Triad,  the  PrajnA  PiramitA  scripture,  and  other  sacred  scriptures,  a
kalas,  or  water-pot,  iilled  with  a  few  sacred  articles,  a  platter  of  curds,  four  other
water-pots  filled  with  water  only,  a  chivara,  mendicants'  upper  and  lower  garments,  a
Pi-nda  p&tra  (alms-bowl)  and  a  religious  staff,  a  pair  of  wooden  sandals,  a  small  mixed
metal  plate  spread  over  with  pounded  sandal-wood,  in  which  the  image  of  the  moon  is
inscribed,  a  golden  razor  and  a  silver  one,  and  lastly,  a  plate  of  dressed  rice,  are  col-
lected, and  the  aspirant  is  seated  in  the  svastiMsana  and  made  to  perform  worship  to
the  Guru  Mandala,  and  the  Chaitya,  and  the  Tri  Ratna  and  the  Prajnd,  PAramitA
Sistra.  Then  the  aspirant,  kneeling  with  one  knee  on  the  ground  with  joined  hands,
entreats  the  Guru  to  make  him  a  Bandya,  and  to  teach  him  whatsoever  it  is  needful
'for  him  to  know.  The  Guru  answers,  0  !  disciple,  if  you  desire  to  perform  the  Prav-
rajya  Vrata,  first  of  all  devote  yourself  to  the  worship  of  the  Chaitya  and  of  the  Tri

N  2


180  THE  ORDER OF  LAMAS.

The  novice  is  now  admitted  to  most  of  the  privileges  of  a  monk,
and  after  a  period  of  three  years  he  passes  out  of  the  preliminary
stage  (rig-ch'un),  and  is  then  entitled  to  have  a  small  chamber  or
cell  to  himself,  though  he  is  still  called  a  student  (da-pa),  and,  in-


Katna ;  you  must  observe  the  Ave  precepts  or  Pancha  Siksha,  the  fastings  and  the
vows  prescribed ;  nor  speak  or  think  evilly ;  nor  touch  any  intoxicating  liquors  or
drugs  ;  nor  be  proud  of  heart  in  consequence  of  your  observance  of  your  religious  and
moral  duties."

"  Then  the  aspirant  pledges  himself  thrice  to  observe  the  whole  of  the  above  pre-
cepts ;  upon  which  the  Guru  tells  him,  '  If  while  you  live  yon  will  keep  the  above
rules,  then  will  I  make  you  a  Bandya.'  He  assents,  when  the  Guru,  having  again
given  the  three  RaJcshds  above-mentioned  to  the  Chela,  delivers  a  cloth  for  the  loins  to
him  to  put  on.  Then  the  Guru  brings  the  aspirant  out  into  the  court-yard,  and  having
seated  him,  touches  his  hair  with  rice  and  oil,  and  gives  those  articles  to  a  barber.
The  Guru  next  puts  on  the  ground  a  little  pulse  and  desires  a  Ohela  to  apply  it  to  his
own  feet.  Then  the  Guru  gives  the  Chela  a  cloth  of  four  fingers'  breadth  and  one
cubit  in  length,  woven  with  threads  of  five  colours,  and  which  is  especially  manufac-
tured for  this  purpose,  to  bind  round  his  head.  Then  he  causes  the  aspirant  to  per-
form his  ablutions,  after  which  he  makes  pUjd  to  the  hands  of  the  barber  in  the  name
of  Visvakarma,  and  then  causes  the  barber  to  shave  all  the  hair,  save  the  forelock,  off
the  aspirant's  head.  Then  the  paternal  or  maternal  aunt  of  the  aspirant  takes  the
vessel  of  mixed  metal  above  noted  and  collects  the  hair  into  it.  The  aspirant  is  now
bathed  again  and  his  nails  pared,  when  the  above  party  puts  the  parings  into  the  pot
with  the  hair.  Another  ablution  of  the  aspirant  follows,  after  which  the  aspirant  is
taken  again  within,  and  seated.  Then  the  Guru  causes  him  to  eat,  and  also  sprinkles
upon  him  the  Pancha  Garbha,  and  says  to  him,  '  Heretofore  you  have  lived  a  house-
holder, have  you  a  real  desire  to  abandon  that  state  and  assume  the  state  of  a  monk  ?  '
The  aspirant  answers  in  the  affirmative,  when  the  Guru,  or  maternal  uncle,  cuts  off
with  his  own  hand  the  aspirant's  forelock.  Then  the  Guru  puts  a  tiara  adorned  with
the  images  of  the  five  Buddhas  on  his  own  head,  and  taking  the  Jealas  or  water-
pot,  sprinkles  the  aspirant  with  holy  water,  repeating  prayers  at  the  same  time  over
him.

"  The  neophyte  is  then  again  brought  below,  when  four  Ndyakas  or  superiors  of
proximate  VihAras  and  the  aspirant's  Guru  perform  the  Pancha  Abhisheka,  i.e.,  the
Guru  takes  water  from  the.  lalsa  and  pours  it  into  a  conch  ;  and  then  ringing  a  bell
and  repeating  prayers,  sprinkles  the  water  from  the  conch  on  the  aspirant's  head ;
whilst  the  four  Ndyakas  taking  water  from  the  other  four  water-pots  named  above,
severally  baptize  the  aspirant.  The  musicians  present  then  strike  up,  when  the
Ndyakas  and  Guru  invoke  the  following  blessing  on  the  neophyte :  '  May  you  be
happy  as  he  who  dwells  in  the  hearts  of  all,  who  is  the  universal  Atman,  the  lord  of
all,  the  Buddha  called  Ratnasambhava.'  The  aspirant  is  next  led  by  the  Ndyakas  and
Guru  above  stairs,  and  seated  as  before.  He  is  then  made  to  perform  pu}&  to  the
Guru  Mandal  and  to  sprinkle  rice  on  the  images  of  the  deities.  The  Guru  next  gives
him  the  Chivara  and  Nivasa  and  golden  earrings,  when  the  aspirant  thrice  says  to
the  Guru, '  O  Guru,  I,  who  am  such  an  one,  have  abandoned  the  state  of  a  householder
for  this  whole  birth,  and  have  become  a  monk.'  Upon  which  the  aspirant's  former
name  is  relinquished  and  a  new  one  given  him,  such  as  Ananda,  Shari,  Putra,  Kasyapa,
Dharma,  Sri  Mitra,  Paramita  Sagar.  Then  the  Guru  causes  him  to  perform  puj&  to  the
Tri  Eatna,  after  having  given  him  a  golden  tiara,  and  repeated  some  prayers  over
him. The  Guru  then  repeats  the  following  praises  of  the  Tri  Ratna :  '  I  salute  that


INITIATION.  181


deed,  all  the  monks,  from  the  novice  to  the  more  senior  (par-pa),
and  even  the  full  monk  (ge-lon)  retain  the  same  title  in  the
chief  monasteries  of  Tibet — the  term  "Lama"  being  reserved  to
the  heads  of  the  monastery.

The  novice  now  undergoes  a  severe  course  of  instruction,  during
which  corporal  punishment  is  still,  as  heretofore,  freely  inflicted.
The  instruction  is  mainly  in  ritual  and  dogma,  but  crafts  and
some  arts,  such  as  painting,  are  also  taught  to  those  showing
special  aptitude.  The  spiritual  adviser  of  the  young  monk  is
called  "  the  radical  Lama,"^  and  as  he  initiates  the  novice  into  the

Buddha  who  is  the  lord  of  the  three  worlds,  whom  gods  and  men  alike  worship,  who
is  apart  from  the  world,  long-suffering,  profound  as  the  ocean,  the  quintessence  of  all
good,  the  Dharma  Eaja  and  Munindra,  the  destroyer  of  desire  and  affection,  and  vice
and  darkness ;  who  is  void  of  avarice  and  lust,  who  is  the  icon  of  wisdom.  I  ever  in-
voke him,  placing  my  head  on  his  feet.

" '  I  salute  that  Dharma,  who  is  the  Prajnd  ?4ramit4,  pointing  out  the  way  of  perfect
tranquilUty  to  mortals,  leading  them  into  the  paths  of  perfect  wisdom  ;  who,  by  the
testimony  of  all  the  sages,  produced  or  created  all  things ;  who  is  the  mother  of  all
Bodhisatwas  and  Sravakas.  I  salute  that  Sangha,  who  is  Avalokitesvara  and  Mai-
treya,  and  Gagan  Ganja,  and  Samanta  Bhadra,  and  Vajra  Pani,  and  Manju  Ghosha,
and  Sarvanivarana  Vishkambhin,  and  Kshiti  Garbha  and  Kha  Garbha.'  The  aspirant
then  says  to  the  Guru,  '  I  will  devote  my  whole  life  to  the  Tri  Ratna,  nor  ever  desert
them.'  Then  the  Guru  gives  him  the  Dasa  S'ikshd  or  ten  precepts  observed  by  all  the
Buddhas  and  Bhikshukas,  and  commands  his  observance  of  them.  They  are :  1 .  Thou
shalt  not  destroy  life.  2.  Thou  shalt  not  steal.  3.  Thou  shalt  not  follow  strange
faiths.  4.  Thou  shalt  not  lie.  5.  Thou  shalt  not  touch  intoxicating  liquors  or  drugs.
6.  Thou  shalt  not  be  proud  of  heart.  7.  Thou  shalt  avoid  music,  dancing,  and  all  such
idle  toys.  8.  Thou  shalt  not  dress  in  fine  clothes  nor  use  perfumes  or  ornaments.  9.
Thou  shalt  sit  and  sleep  in  lowly  places.  10.  Thou  shalt  not  eat  out  of  the  prescribed
hours.

"  The  Guru  then  says, '  All  these  things  the  Buddhas  avoided.  You  are  now  become
a  Bhikshu  and  you  must  avoid  them  too ; '  which  said,  the  Guru  obliterates  the  Tri
Eatua  Mandala.  Next,  the  aspirant  asks  from  the  Guru  the  Chivara  and  Nivasa,  the
Pinda  Piitra  and  Khikshari  and  Gandhar,  equipments  of  a  Buddha,  a  short  staff  sur-
mounted by  a  Chaitya  and  a  water-pot.  Add  thereto  an  umbrella  and  sandals  to  com-
plete it.  The  aspirant  proceeds  to  make  a  Mandal,  and  places  in  it  five  flowers  and
five  Drubakund,  and  some  Khil,  and  some  rice ;  and  assuming  the  Utkutak  Asan,  and
joining  his  hands,  he  repeats  the  praises  of  the  Tri  Ratna  above  cited,  and  then  again
requests  his  Guru  to  give  him  suits  of  the  Chivara  and  the  like  number  of  the  Nivasa,
one  for  occasions  of  ceremony  as  attending  the  palace,  anotJier  for  wearing  at
meals,  and  the  third  for  ordinary  wear.  He  also  requests  from  his  Guru  the  like
number  of  Gandhdr  or  drinking  cups  of  Pinda  Pdtra,  and  of  Eldkshari.  One  entire
suit  of  these  the  aspirant  then  assumes,  receiving  them  from  the  hands  of  the  Guru,
who,  previously  to  giving  them,  consecrates  them  by  prayers.  The  aspirant  then
says,  'Now  I  have  received  the  Pravrajya  Vrata,  I  will  religiously  observe  the
Sitla-Skandba  and  Samddhi-Skandha,  the  Prajna-Skandha  and  the  Vimukti-Skand-
ha.' "

1  rTsa  wai  hlama.  This  is  not,  as  Schlagintweit  states  (op.  dt,  139),  in  any  way
restricted  to  particular  "  priests  who  originated  a  specific  system  of  Buddhism."


182  THE  ORDER OP  LAMAS.

mysterious  rites  he  is  held  by  the  latter  in  especial  reverence  all
through  life.

Frequent  examinations  are  held  and  also  wrangling  or  public
disputations.

In  every  cloister  is  a  teacher  of  the  law,  who,  as  a  rule,  takes
the  highest  rank  after  the  chief.  But  in  the  larger  ones  are
regular  schools  or  universities,  in  which  the  holy  books  are  syste-
matically explained,  and  theology,  etc.,  is  taught.  The  most
celebrated  ones  of  these  are  of  course  those  near  Lhasa  and
Tashi-lhunpo,  which  are  visited  by  students  from  all  provinces  of
the  Lamaist  church.  In  the  countries  of  southern  Buddhism  the
cloister  schools  are  divided  after  th3  three  branches  of  the  codes,
into  three  sections,  the  Sutras,  Vinayas  and  Abhidharmas.  In
Tibet  the  division  practically  is  the  same,  though  sometimes  is
added  a  medical  one,  and  also  a  mystic  faculty  for  magic  and  con-
juration, which,  however,  seems  to  be  united  as  a  rule  with  the
section  for  philosophy  and  metaphysics  (Abhidharma),  for  which
in  some  Lamaseries  special  schools  are  established.

Every  Lama  belongs  to  one  or  other  of  these  faculties,  and  the
position  which  he  occupies  inside  the  brotherhood  depends  on  the
number  and  class  of  holy  books  which  he  has  gone  through  and
understands  thoroughly.

As  soon  as  the  bell  sounds  he  has  to  go  to  his  respective  room  or
class,  to  start  with  his  lection,  to  receive  new  ones,  to  listen  to  the
explanations  of  the  professor,  etc.,  etc.,  and  to  prepare  for  examina-
tions and  disputations.

Examinations. — Within  a  year  after  his  admission  to  the  order
he  must  attempt  to  pass  the  first  professional  examination,  and  in
the  following  year  or  two  the  second  examination  for  promotion.
And  until  he  passes  these  examinations  he  must  perform  for  the
first  three  years  the  menial  offices  of  serving  out  tea,  etc.,  to  the
elder  monks  in  the  assembly  hall.

The  examinations  are  conducted  in  the  presence  of  the  heads  of
the  monastery  and  the  assembled  monks,  who  observe  a  solemn
silence,  and  the  test  is  for  the  candidate  to  stand  up  in  the  assem-
bly and  recite  by  heart  all  the  prescribed  books.^ The  ordeal  is  a

1  An  idea  of  the  nature  of  this  is  got  from  the  following  list  of  text  boobs  for  the
first  examination  at  Pemiongchi,  which  comprise  the  worship  necessary  for  three  ■
"  magic-circles,"  viz. : The  first  is  the  magic-circle  of  dKon-c'og  spyi  'dus  Eig-'dsin


EXAMINATIONS  FOR ORDINATION.  183

very  trying  one,  so  that  the  candidate  is  given  a  companion  to
prompt  and  encourage  him.  The  first  examination  lasts  for  three
days  ;  and  nine  intervals  are  allowed  daily  during  the  examination,


'dsah  ms'an  ning-pol  c'os  'k'or  (or  "  Banquet  to  the  whole  assembly  of  the  Gods  and
Demons  ") .  This  book  contains  about  sixty  pages,  and  its  recitation  takes  nearly  one
whole  day. It  comprises  the  chapters : —

(1)  Ts'e-sgrub  or  The  obtaining  of  long  life.

(2)  Z'i-k'ro — The  mild  and  angry  deities.

(3)  Guru-drag — The  fierce  form  of  Padma-sambhava.

(4)  Seii-gdonma — The  lion-faced  demoness.

(5)  Ch'osskyon  Mahakala  Yes'es  mgonpo.

(6)  T'an-lha  (Mt.  Thang-lha  with  its  spirit  "  Kiting  "  is  a  northern  guardian  of

Sikhim),  mDsod-lna,  Lha-ch'en  and  sMan-bstiin — Local  and  mountain  deities.

(7)  bsKan  bs'ags,  ts'ogs  and  Tas'i-smon-lam.-

The  second  comprises  the  Jnagic-circle  of  the  collection  of  the  Tathagathas  and  "  the
powerful  great  pitying  one"  (Avalokita)— bDe-gs'eg.s-kiin  'dus-gar-dbah,  T'ugs-rje
chen-po,  of  about  49  pages.

Then  follow  the  magic  circles  of  the  fierce  and  demoniacal  deities  Guru-drag-dmar,
K'rowo-rol  wai  gtor-zlog  and  Drag  poi  las  Gurui-gsol-'debs  len-bdun-ma,  K'a  'don  ch'os
spyod.

The  books  for  the  second  examination,  requiring  to  be  recited  by  heart,  are  the
■following : —

(1)  The  worship  of  "The  lake-born  Vajra"  (mTs'o-skyes-rdorje)— i.e.,  St.  Padma-

sambhava— and  "the  sage  Guru  who  has  .obtained  understanding"  (Rig
'dsin  rtog  sgrub-guru).

(2)  The  three  roots  of  sagedom  (Rig  'dsin  rtsa-gsum)—

(a)  Rig  'dsin  Ihamai-las.

(Jb)  Ts'e-sgrub  k'og  dbugs.

(c)  gSang  sgrub  donyi  snin-po.

(3)  The  deeds  of  Dorje  P'agmo  (rDorje  p'ag-moi-las),  the  great  happiness  of  zag-

med  (zag-med  Jde-ch'en),  and  the  four  classes  of  the  fierce  guardians— c'os
srufi  drag-po  sde  Szhi.  The  names  of  these  demons  are — on  the  east,  kLu-
bdud  Munpa  nagpo  ;  on  the  south,  Srinpo  Lanka-mgrim-bchu  ;  on  the  west,
Mamo  S'a-za  p'ra-gral  nag-po  ;  on  the  north,  gS'enpa  sPu-gri-dmarpo.

(4)  The  subjugation  of  the  host  of  demons— The  offering  to  the  Dhyani  Buddhas

bdud  dpuii  zil  non,  Kun-bzan,  mc'od-sprin.

(5)  The  sacrificial  ceremony  bskang  bshags,  viz.,  Rig  'dsin  bskang-bshags,  Phagmai

bskang  bshags.

(6)  The  prayer  of  the  glorious  "  Tashi  "—the  Lepcha  name  for  Padma-sambhava

— Tashi  sraon-lam.
The  above  books  reach  to  about  fifty-five  pages.

(7)  The  circle  of  the  eight  commanders  of  the  collected  Buddhas. bKah-bgyad

Me  gsegs  'duspai  dkyil-'khor  kyi  las  and  Khrowo-rol  wai  gtor-zlog  gyi
skori  bkah  brgyad. This  has  about  forty  pages. [The  names  of  the  eight
commanders,  bKah-bgyads,  are— (1)  C'e-mch'og,  (2)  Yah-dag,  (3)  gS'in-rje,
(4)  rTa-mgrin,  (5)  Phurpa,  (6)  Mamo,  (7)  'Gad  stoh,  (8)  Rig-'dsin.]
When  the  young  monk  recites  by  heart  all  these  books  satisfactorily,  and  so  passes

this  examination,  he  is  not  subject  to  any  further  ordeal  of  examination :  this  being

the  final  one.


184  THE  ORDER OF  LAMAS.


and  these  intervals  are  utilized  by  the  candidates  in  revising  the
next  exercise,  in  company  with  their  teacher.

Those  who  disgracefully  fail  to  pass  this  examination  are  taken
outside  and  chastized  by  the  provost.i  And  repeated  failure  up  to  a
limit  of  three  years  necessitates  the  rejection  of  the  candidate  from
the  order.  Should,  however,  the  boy  be  rich  and  wish  re-entry,
he  may  be  re-admitted  on  paying  presents  and  money  on  a  higher
scale  than  formerly,  without  which  no  re-admission  is  possible.  If
the  rejected  candidate  be  poor  and  he  wishes  to  continue  a  religious
life,  he  can  only  do  so  as  a  lay-devotee,  doing  drudgery  about  the
monastery  buildings.  Or  he  may  set  up  in  some  village  as  an  un-
orthodox Lama-priest.

The  majority  fail  to  pass  at  the  first  attempt.  And  failure  on
the  part  of  the  candidate  attaches  a  stigma  to  his  teacher,  while
in  the  event  of  the  boy  chanting  the  exercises  correctly  and  with
pleasing  voice  in  the  orthodox  oratorical  manner,  his  teacher  is
highly  complimented.

PUBLIC DISPUTATIONS.

The  public  disputations  are  much  more  attractive  and  favourite
exercises  for  the  students  than  the  examinations.  Indeed,  the
academic  feature  of  the  monastic  universities  of  Tibet  is  perhaps
seen  at  its  best  in  the  prominence  given  to  dialectics  and  dispu-
tations, thus  following  the  speculative  traditions  of  the  earlier
Indian  Buddhists.  In  the  great  monastic  universities  of  De-pung,
Tashi-lhunpo,  Serra  and  Grah-ldan,  each  with  a  teeming  population
of  monks,  ranging  from  about  4,000  to  8,000,  public  disputations
are  regularly  held,  and  form  a  recognized  institution,  in  which
every  divinity  student  or  embryo  Lama  must  take  part.  This
exercise  is  called  expressing  "  the  true  and  innermost  essence  (of
the  doctrine) "  (mTs'aTi-nid) ,  in  which  an  endeavour  is  made  to
ascertain  both  the  literal  sense  and  the  spirit  of  the  doctrine,^
and  it  is  held  within  a  barred  court.  Some  details  of  the
manner  in  which  these  disputations  are  held  are  given  below.^

1  Ch'os-k'rims-pa.

2  Conf.  also  Jaeschke,  Diet.,  p.  454,  who  is  inclined  to  identify  this  "  school "  with
the  Vaiseshkas  (or  Atomists)  Kopp,  i.,  691.

3  Within  the  court-ch'os-ra  where  the  disputations  are  held  are  seven  gi'ades
('dsiii-ra),  namely  i  (I),  Kha-dog-dkar-dmar ;  (2),  Tckedma  ;  (3),  P'ar-p'ijin  ;  (4),  mDM ;
(5),  'Didwa  ;  (6),  di  Uma  ;  (7),  bsLab-btnh.

At  these  disputations  there  are  tree-trunks,  called  the  Sal-tree  trunk  (Shugs-sdon),


OBBINATION  AND  DEGREES.  185

ORDINATION AND DEGREES.

After  a  course  of  such  training  for  twelve  years,  each  student  is
eligible  for  full  ordination,  the  minimum  age  for  which  is  twenty,
and  the  ceremony  is  generally  similar  to  that  of  the  initiation.
Those  who  prove  their  high  capabilities  by  passing  with  excep-
tional distinction  through  the  disputations  and  examinations
conducted  by  the  assembled  Lamaist  literati  and  the  heads  of
one  or  more  cloisters,  receive  academic  and  theological  degrees

Ichan-ma-sdonpo,  and  yubu ;  and  bounded  by  a  wall,  and  inside  the  court  is  covered
by  pebbles  (rdehu).  In  the  middle  there  is  a  great  liigh  stone  seat  for  the  lord
protector  (sKyabs-mgon),  and  a  smaller  seat  for  the  abbot  (mk'anpo)  of  the  school,
and  one  still  smaller  for  the  chief  celebrant.

On  reaching  the  enclosure,  the  auditors  take  their  respective  seats  in  the  seven
grades,  in  each  of  which  discussions  are  held.  One  of  the  most  learned  candidates
volunteers  for  examination,  or  as  it  is  called,  to  be  vow-keeper  (Dam-ichali) .  He
takes  his  seat  in  the  middle,  and  the  others  sit  round  him.  Then  the  students  stand
up  one  by  one,  and  dispute  with  him.

The  scholar  who  stands  up  wears  the  yellow  hat,  and,  clapping  his  hands  together
says,  Ka-ye  I  and  then  puts  his  questions  to  the  vow-keeper,  who  is  questioned  by
every  student  who  so  desires ;  and  if  he  succeeds  in  answering  all  without  excep-
tion, then  he  is  promoted  to  a  higher  grade.  In  any  case,  one  is  transferred  to
another  grade  after  every  three  years.

After  twenty-one  years  of  age  the  rank  of  dGe-'ses  is  obtained,  though  some  clever
students  may  get  it  even  at  eleven.  The  abbot  of  the  college  comes  into  the  en-
closure seven  days  every  month,  and  supervises  the  disputations  of  the  seven  grades.
When  a  candidate  has  reached  the  bslab-btub  grade,  he  is  certain  soon  to  become
a  dGe-s'es.

The  great  disputation,  however,  is  held  four  times  a  year,  in  spring,  in  summer,  in
autumn,  and  in  winter,  in  a  great  paved  courtyard,  and  lasts  five  or  seven  days.  On
these  occasions,  all  the  scholars  and  abbots  of  the  four  schools  of  the  colleges  of
De-pung  congregate  there.  And  all  the  learned  students  of  the  four  schools  who
belong  to  the  grade  of  bslab-btub  volunteer  for  examination,  and  each  is  questioned
by  the  students  who  ply  their  questions,  says  my  Lama,  "  just  like  flies  on  meat."
VVhen  the  voluntary  examinee  has  successfully  replied  to  all  the  questions  he  goes  to
the  abbot  of  his  own  school,  and,  presenting  a  silver  coin  and  a  scarf,  he  requests
permission  to  be  examined  on  the  Lhasa  mass-day.  If  the  abbot  receives  the  coin
and  scarf,  then  the  application  is  approved,  and  if  not,  the  student  is  referred  to
his  studies.  In  the  great  Lhasa  mass  all  the  monks  of  Serra,  De-pung,  and  Gah-ldan
congregate,  and  examinations  are  held  every  seventh  day,  and  the  dGe-s'es  of  the
three  monasteries  of  Serra,  De-pung,  and  Gah-ldan  act  as  examiners.  If  the  volun-
teer can  answer  them  all,  then  the  Lord  Protector  throws  a  scarf  round  his  neck,
and  he  thus  receives  the  title  of  dCfe-^es— somewhat  equivalent  to  our  Bachelor  of
Divinity.

The  newly-fledged  dGe-s'es  is  now  known  as  a  sKija-ser-med-pa-dGe-is'es  or  "The
yellowless-pale  Ge-s'e"  (pale -h  yellow  =  "  laymen  and  priests,"  says  Jaeschke,  D.,
p.  25).  Then  he  must  give  soup  (called  dGe-bs'es  T'ugpa)  to  all  the  students  of
his  school  and  club,  each  student  getting  a  cupful.  The  soup  is  made  of  rice,  mixed
with  meat  and  butter,  and  different  kinds  of  fruits.  Then  the  abbot  of  the  school
and  the  Spyi-so  of  his  club,  and  all  his  friends  and  relatives,  each  gives  him  a  Kha-
dag  scarf  and  a  money  present.


186  THE ORDER OF  LAMAS.

and  honours,  by  which  they  become  eligible  for  the  highest  and
most  privileged  appointments.

The  chief  degrees  are  Ge-s'e,  corresponding  to  our  Bachelor  of
Divinity;  and  Rab-jam-pa,  or  Doctor  of  Divinity.

The  degree  of  Ge-s'e,'^  or  "  the  learned  virtuosi,"  may  be
called  B.D.  It  is  obtained,  in  the  manner  above  detailed,  by
giving  proof  in  open  meeting  of  the  Lamas  ^  of  his  ability  to  trans-
late and  interpret  perfectly  at  least  ten  of  the  chief  books  of  his
religion.  The  Gre-s'e  is  eligible  to  go  in  for  the  higher  special
departments,  to  which  a  non-graduate,  even  though  he  may  be
a  ge-long,  and  as  such  senior  to  the  young  Gre-s'e,  is  not
admitted.^  Many  of  them  become  the  head  Lamas  or  lord
protectors  (skyabs-mgon)  of  the  government  monasteries  of  the
established  church,  not  only  in  Tibet,  but  in  Mongolia,  Amdo,
and  China.  Others  return  to  their  own  fatherland,  while  some
pursue  their  studies  in  the  higher  Tantras,  to  qualify  for  the
much  coveted  post  of  the  Khri-pa  of  Grah-ldan.

The  degree  of  Rab-jam-pa,'*'  "  verbally  overflowing,  endlessly,"
a  doctor  universalis,  corresponds  with  our  Doctor  of  Theology,  or
D.D.,  and  is,  it  seems,  the  highest  academical  title  of  honour
which  can  be  earned  in  the  Lamatst  universities,  and  after  a
disputation  over  the  whole  doctrine  of  the  church  and  faith.  The
diploma  which  he  receives  entitles  him  to  teach  the  law  publicly,
and  authorizes  him  to  the  highest  church  offices  not  specially
reserved  for  the  incarnate  Lamas.  And  he  is  given  a  distinctive
hat,  as  seen  in  the  foregoing  figure,  at  the  head  of  this  chapter.
It  is  said  that  in  Tibet  there  are  only  twelve  cloisters  who  have
the  right  to  bestow  this  degree,  and  it  is  even  more,  honourable
than  the  titles  bestowed  by  the  Dalai  Lama  himself.  But  this
is,  as  a  matter  of  course,  a  very  expensive  affair.

The  titles  of  Gh'o-je '  or  "  noble  of  the  law,"  and  Pandita  or

^  dGe-s'es.  It  seems  to  be  the  same  as  the  Tung-ram-pa  of  Tashi-lhunpo  and  the
Kabs-bchu,  Koppen,  ii. ;  it  also  seems  to  be  "p'al-ch'en-pa."

2  Apparently  a  joint  board  of  representatives  of  the  three  great  monasteries  afore-
said, De-pung,  etc. Conf .  also  Pandit  A.  K.  on"  Oisi."

^  The  Ge-s'e  of  the  three  great  Ge-lug-pa  monasteries  may  be  admitted  to  one  or
other  of  the  four  Lings  or  royal  monasteries :  Tse-nam-gyal,  sTan-gyal-ling,  Kun-de-
ling,  and  Gyud-sTod-smad,  and  he  may  become  a  i-Tse-drung  of  the  Grand  Dalai
Lama's  royal  monastery  at  Potala.

*  Eabs-'byams-pa,  and  seems  to  be  the  same  as  the  Kah-c'an  of  Tashi-lhunpo.

■'  Ch'oi-rje.


OFFICIALS  AND  DISCIPLINE.  187


"  learned,"  are  bestowed  by  the  sovereign  Grand  Lamas  on  those
doctors  who  have  distinguished  themselves  through  blameless
holiness  and  excellent  wisdom.  And  between  these  two  seems
to  lie  the  title  of  L6-tsa-wa  or  "  translator."  The  relative  ranks
of  Eab-jam-pa  and  Ch'o-je  may  be  seen  from  the  fact  that  after
the  second  installation  of  Buddhism  in  Mongolia,  the  former  were
put  by  law  on  the  same  footing  as  the  Tai-jis  or  barons  or
counts;  and  the  latter  as  Chungtaijis  or  marquesses  or  dukes.
Did  the  dignity  of  the  Paniita  allow  a  more  exalted  rank,  the
consequence  would  be  that  only  the  holy  princes  from  K'an-po
upwards,  that  is  to  say,  the  K'an-po,  the  Chubilghan,  and  the
Chutukten,  only  could  have  it;  but  of  this  nothing  certain  is
known.

Thus  the  K'an-po,  the  Ch'o-je,  and  the  Eab-jam-pa  form  the
three  principal  classes  of  the  higher  non-incarnate  clergy,  and
they  follow  each  other  in  the  order  described.  The  K'an-pos  take
amongst  them  the  first  place,  and  are,  as  a  rule,  elected  out  of  the
two  other  classes.  As  the  K'an-po  has  been  compared  with  a
bishop,  so  could  the  C'ho-je  perhaps  be  called  "  vicar-general  "
or  "  coadjutor."  And  often  in  the  same  cloister  by  the  side  of,  or
rather  under,  the  K'an-po,  are  found  a  Ch'o-je  as  vice-abbot  (a
mitred  abbot).  In  the  smaller  cloisters  the  chief  Lama  as  a
rule  has  only  the  grade  of  Ch'o-je  or  Eab-jam-pa.

Special  schools,  expressly  for  the  study  of  magic,  are  erected  in
the  cloisters  of  Eamo-ch'e  and  Mo-ru.  Those  who  receive  here
the  doctor's  diploma,  and  thereby  acquire  the  right  to  carry  on
the  mystery  of  science  practically,  especially  conjuring,  weather
prophecy,  sympathetical  pharmacy,  etc.,  etc.,  are  called  Nag-
ram-pa,  which  means  "  master  of  conjuration."  Their  uniform  is
Sivaite,  and  they  probably  spring  from  the  red  religion,  but  their
science  follows  strictly  the  prescribed  formulas  in  the  Kah-gyur,
and  is  therefore  quite  orthodox.^  Their  practices  as  augurs  are
detailed  under  the  head  of  sorcery,  along  with  those  of  the
ordinary  illiterate  Nag-pa  fortune-teller.

OFFICIALS AND DISCIPLINE.

The  huge  cloisters,  with  several  hundreds  and  occasionally
several  thousands  of  monks,  necessarily  possess  an  organized  body

1  KoPPEN,  ii.,  290.


188  THE  OBDER OF  LAMAS.

of  officials  for  tlie  administration  of  affairs  clerical  and  temporal,
and  for  the  enforcement  of  discipline.

At  the  head  of  a  monastery  stands  either  a  re-generated  or  re-
incarnate Lama  (Kits' o,  Tul-ku,  or  in  Mongolian  "KhuUlighan")
or  an  installed  abbot  (K'an^o,  Skt.,  Upadhdhaya),  the  latter
being  as  a  rule  elected  from  the  capital,  and  sanctioned  by  the
Dalai  Lama  or  the  provincial  head  of  the  re-incarnate  Lamas ;  and
he  holds  office  only  for  seven  years.

He  has  under  him  the  following  administrative  and  executive
officers,  all  of  whom  except  the  first  are  usually  not  ordained,  and
they  are  elected  by  and  from  among  the  brotherhood  for  a  longer
or  shorter  term  of  office  : —

1.  The  professor  or  master  (Lob-pon^),  who  proclaims  the  law
and  conducts  the  lessons  of  the  brethren.

2.  The  treasurer  and  cashier  t|C'ag-dso  ^).

3.  The  steward  (JTer-pa^  or  Spyi-iier).

4.  Provost  marshal  (Ge-Ko  *),  usually  two  who  maintain  order
like  police,  hence  also  called  vergers  or  censors,  and  they  are
assisted  by  two  orderlies  (hag-ner).

5.  The  chief  celebrant  or  leader  of  the  choir  or  precentor
(Um-dse).

6.  Sacristan  (Ku-ner).

7.  Water-giver  (Ch'ab-dren).

8.  Tea  waiters  (Ja-ma).

To  these  are  to  be  added  the  secretaries,^  cooks,"  chamber-
lain,'' warden  or  entertainer  of  guests,^  accountant,*  bearer  of
benedictory  emblem,"  tax-collectors,  medical  monks,  painters,
merchant  monks,  exorcist,  etc.

The  general  rules  of  conduct  and  discipline  are  best  illustrated
at  the  great  monastic  universities.

The  De-pung  monastery,  with  its  7,700  monks,  is  divided  into  four
great  colleges  (grwa-ts'an),  namely  :  (1)  bLo-gsal-glih  ;  (2)  sGto-mah ;
(3) bDe-yaiis  ; and (4)  sSTags-pa,  and  each of  these schools  of  the


1  sLob-dpon.  2  p'yag  mdsods.  3  gner-pa.

*  dge-bskos,  also  called  Ch'o-k'rlras-pa  or  "  religious  judge,"  and  the  provost  of  the
cathedral  seems  to  be  called  Zhal-no.
=  spyi-k'yab.  ^  gsol-dpon.  7  gam-dpon;

»  mgrou-gner  ch'en.  '  Tsi-dpon,  w  p'yag-ts'ang  or  sku-b'c'ar-mkhan-po.


DISCIPLINE  IN  MONASTIC  COLLEGES.  189

monastery  has  its  own  abbot.  The  monks  are  accommodated  accord-
ing to  their  different  nationalities  and  provinces,  each  having  separate
resident  and  messing  sections,  named  K'ams  ts'an  or  provincial  messing
clubs.  The  cathedral  or  great  hall  of  the  congregation,  named  T'sogs-
ch'en  Iha-k'an,  is  common  to  the  whole  monastery.

Sera  monastery,  with  its  5,500  monks,  divided  into  three  collegiate
schools  named  :  (1)  Bye-wa,  (2)  si?ags-pa,  and  (3)  sMad-pa,  and  each
has  its  sectional  club.

Gah-ldan  with  its  3,300  monks  is  divided  into  two  schools,  namely,
(1)  Byan-rtse,  and  (2)  S'ar-tse,  each  with  its  club.

Tashi-lhunpo  has  three  collegiate  schools.^

Each  club  has  at  least  two  Lama-officers,  the  elder  of  whom  takes
charge  of  the  temple  attached  to  the  club,  and  teaches  his  pupils  the
mode  of  making  offerings  in  the  temple.^  The  younger  officer  is  a
steward  in  charge  of  the  storehouse  (gNer-ts'ang),  and  the  tea  pre-
sented by  the  public  (Man-ja),  or  "  tea-general,"  and  the  kitchen  (Ruh-
k'an).  These  two  Lamas  are  responsible  for  the  conduct  of  the
monks  of  their  section,  and  in  case  their  pupils  do  wrong,  they —
the  masters — are  fined. These  two  officers  are  changed  every  year.

Entry  of  Pupil. — The  applicant  for  admission  goes  to  the  great
paved  court  (the  rdo-chal)  of  the  monastic  club,  the  masters  are  called
and  ask  him  whence  he  has  come,  and  whether  he  has  any  relatives  or


1  The  grand  monastery  of  Tashi-lhunpo  is  divided,  says  Saeat  {Jour.  Bud.  Text
Socy.  Ind.,  iv.,  1893,  p.  14),  into  forty  Kham-Uhan  or  wards,  which  are  placed  under
the  jurisdiction  of  the  three  great  Ta-tshang  or  theological  colleges,  viz. ; — (a)  Thoi-
samliug  college  exercises  control  over  the  following  Kltam-tshan : —

1.  Gya  Ehavi-tshan,  10. Ser-ling  Kham-tshan.

2.  TIso „ „  11. Je-pa,  also  called  Sha-pa  Ta-shany.

3.  Hamdong  Kham-tshaii.  12. Chang-pa  Kham-tshan.

4.  Chawa  „ „  13. Leg-thug „ „

5.  Tanag  „ „  14. Norpugandan, the  first house built

6.  Tang-moc'he  ^/ia»i-(sAa/4.  when  the  monastery  was  established.

7.  Tinke  „ „  15. /Srepa  (Hrepa)  Kham-tshan.

8.  Chunee  „ „  16. Pa-so  Eham-tslmn.

9.  Lhum-bu-tse „ „  17. Dong-tse  Kham-tshan
(J)  The  following  belong  to  Shar-tse  Ta-tshang : —

1.  Thon-pa  Kham-tshan.  7. Potog-pa  Kham-tshan.

2.  Gyal-tse-tse  Kham-tshan  8. N^nin  „ „

3.  Shin^  „ „  9. Tom-khaling

4.  Lhopa  „ „  10. D4yang-pa.

5.  Latoi  (Ladak)  „ „  11. Samlo  Kham-tshan.

6.  Chang-pa „ „  12. N^ninnag-po  Shara.
(c)  The  following  are  under  KyiZ-khang  :—

1.  Khogye  Kham-iskm.  6. Yi\mg  KJumi-tshan.

2.  Tangmo „ „  7. KliaZka „ „

3.  Bog-tsho  „ „  8. Darpa „ „

4.  Lakha „ „  9. Lhundub-tse  Kham-tshan.

5.  Dodan „ „  10. Tsa-oo  Kham-tshan,  also  called  Tsa-oo

para.


190  THE ORDER OF  L^MAS.

acquaintances  in  the  monastery.  If  any  such  there  be  he  is  called,  and
takes  the  applicant  to  his  own  private  chamber.  But  if  the  applicant
has  no  friend  or  relative  there,  tea  and  wheaten  flour  are  given  to  him,
and  he  is  kept  in  the  Ruh-khah  for  three  days.  After  which  period,
should  no  one  have  come  to  claim  him  or  search  for  him,  one  or  other
of  the  two  masters  of  the  section  take  him  under  their  charge,  the
head  master  having  the  preference,  and  the  proper  application  for
his  admission  is  then  duly  made.

For  the  general  assembly  hall  or  cathedral  there  is  a  special  staff  of
officials.  The  great  celebrant  {Tsogs-eh'en  dhu-mdsad)  who  leads  the
chant  ;  the  two  Z'al-no  are  the  provosts  ;  the  two  Naii-ma  are
subordinate  orderlies  who  look  after  the  conduct  of  the  students  ;  the
two  Oh'ab-rils  go  round  the  benches  giving  water  to  the  monks  to
rinse  out  their  mouths  after  reciting  the  mantras  (as  in  Hindu  rites  of
ceremonial  purity),  and  at  other  times  they  help  the  orderlies  to  look
after  the  pupils.  The  Lama  dMig-rtse-ma '  fixes  the  time  for  con-
gregation and  the  "  tea-general "  of  the  same.  The  two  orderlies
must  watch  whether  the  pupils  throw  away  tea  or  flour,  and  they
also  take  general  care  of  the  temples.

Early  in  the  morning,  about  four  o'clock,  a  junior  pupil  chants
chhbs-shad  from  the  top  of  the  temple  of  the  cathedral.  Then  each  of
the  clubs  beat  their  stone  bells  (rdo-Hing)  to  awake  the  occupants,  who
arise  and  wash  and  dress.  They  put  on  the  cope  (zla-gam),  and  carry
the  yellow  hat  over  their  shoulders,  and  take  a  cup  and  a  bag  for
wheaten  flour.  Some  bow  down  in  the  court,  others  circumambulate
the  temple,  and  others  the  temple  of  ManjusrI,  which  is  behind  the
cathedral,  repeating  his  mantra  {Omah-ra-pa-tea-na-dM).

About  one  o'clock  the  Mig-rtse-ma  Lama  chants  the  "  dmig-rtse-ma  "  in
a  loud  voice,  and  at  once  the  pupils  assemble  near  the  two  doors,  and
having  put  on  their  yellow  hats,  join  in  the  chant.  Then  after  an
interval  the  eJi'abril  opens  the  door,  and  all  enter  in  proper  order
and  take  their  seats  according  to  their  rank  in  their  club.^ The  yellow


1  Or  "  The  highest  idea  or  imagining"  (Skt.,  Avalambana).

2  At  Tashi-lhunpo,  says  Saeat  {Jour.  Budd.  Text  Socy.  Ind.,  iv.),  the  monks  sit  in
nine  rows  one  facing  anotlier.

fist  row  is  called  LobUg  or  Lob-zang  bug  tal.
2nd  Champa  tal  (tlie  row  opposite  the  gigantic  image  of

Maitreya).
3. Goikd  tal  (the  row  opposite  the  satin  tapestry).

J 4. Shiithi  tal  (the  row  opposite  the  huge  lamp  of  the

(.  hall).

Is  common  to  all  | ^'  '^°"S  <«^ (the front row opposite the sacerdotal

l  throne  of  the  Grand  Lama).

f  6.  Ne-chu  tal (the  row  opposite  the  painted  images  of  the

Kvil-khang \  sixteen  Sthaviras  (sages)  on  the  wall).

^ ■■■ I 7.  Ne-nmg  tal (the  row  opposite  the  old  images  of  the

I  sixteen  Sthaviras).

f  8.  Do/-ma  tal (the  row  opposite  the  image  of  the  god-

Shar-tse ...  -<  dess  Do?ma,  Tara).

(.  9.  Go-gyab  tal (the  row  opposite  the  door  of  the  hall).

Opposite  Dong  tal  is  the  chapel  or  Tsang-khang  containing  the  image  of  Buddha,


^ISGIPLIiVE.  191


hat  is  thrown  over  the  left  shoulder,  and  the  cup  and  the  bag  are
placed  under  the  knees,  and  all  sit  facing  to  their  front.

After  the  repetition  of  the  refuge  formula,  headed  by  the  chief
celebrant,  the  younger  provost  arises  and  dons  his  yellow  hat,  "  sGro-
rtsem-ma,"  and  with  an  iron  rod  strikes  a  pillar  with  it  once,  on  which
all  the  students  will  go  into  the  refectory,  where  tea  is  distributed  to
each  in  series,  each  getting  three  cupfuls.  On  drinking  it  they  return
and  resume  their  respective  seats,  and  continue  the  celebration.

When  drinking  the  tea  presented  by  the  populace  (many-ja)  all  the
pupils  sit  silent,  and  the  two  c'ab-rils  spread  a  carpet  and  make  a  seat  in
the  middle  for  the  elder  provost,  who  then  steps  forward  and  sits
down,  and,  after  having  thrice  bowed  down,  then  he  repeats  the
shyabs-'jug,  in  which  the  name  of  the  Dispenser  of  the  gifts,  who  has
offered  the  tea,  is  called  out,  and  blessings  prayed  for  to  extend  the
doctrines  of  Buddha,  to  secure  long  life  to  the  two  Grand  Lamas,  and
absence  of  strife  amongst  the  members  of  the  monkhood,  and  that  the
rains  may  descend  in  due  season,  and  the  crops  and  cattle  prosper,  and
disease,  human  and  of  animals,  decrease,  and  that  life  be  long  with
good  luck.

After  this  service  in  the  cathedral,  a  lecture  is  given  called  Ts'ogs-
gtam,  in  which  the  rules  of  etiquette  for  pupils  are  laid  down,  and  the
manner  of  walking  and  conduct  at  meetings  explained,  after  which
should  there  be  any  pupil  who  has  infringed  the  rules  of  discipline,  he
is  dealt  with  in  an  exemplary  way,  as  will  be  described  presently.

The  Refectory,  or  rather  tea-kitchen,  attached  to  the  cathedrals  and
temples,  has  five  regular  officials :  Two  tea-masters  (Ja-dpon),  who  look
after  the  distribution  of  the  government  tea,  and  the  other  after  the
tea  ordered  by  the  provost  of  the  cathedral ;  also  two  menial  Ja-ma,
and  the  superintendent  T'ab-gyog-gi  dpon-po,  who  has  twenty-five
subordinates  on  fatigue  duty.

The  service  of  general-tea  (Maii-ja)  is  given  three  times  daily  from
the  stock  supplied  by  the  Chinese  emperor  as  a  subsidy  amounting  to
about  half-a-million  bricks.  On  the  15th,  25th,  and  the  last  day  of  the
month,  general-tea  is  given  three  times' and  soup  once  by  the  governor
of  Gah-ldan  palace.  There  are  many  dispensers  of  gifts  who  oifer  tea
and  a  donation  ('gyed)  amounting'  to  three,  fifteen,  seventeen  silver
srangs  J)ieces  ;  and  it  is  the  custom  that  if  one  Tam-ga  (about  j^g  of  a
rupee)  be  offered  to  the  cathedral,  then  two  Tam-gas  must  be  offered
to  the  college-school,  and  four  to  the  club. Offerings  may  be  made


which  has  accommodation  for  eigiity  monks.  It  is  in  charge  of  the  KyiUthang
Ta-tshMng.

The  chapel  of  Maitreya  (ChamkliaTig;  which  is  three  storeys  liigh,  and  is  spacious
enough  to  contain  eighty  monies. It  is  under  the  charge  of  Thoisamling  College.

Opposite  to.Dotaa  tal  is  Dotoa  Lhakhang  (the  chapel  of  the  goddess  Tara).  It
can  hold  forty  monks,  and  is  in  the  charge  of  Shar-tse  Ta-tshanrj.

Opposite  Lobug  is  the  chapel  of  Paldan  Lhamo.  It  is  said  that  the  image  of
Paldan  Lhamo  contained  in  it  stands  in  space,  /  e.,  without  any  support  on  any  side.


192  THE ORDER OF  LAM  AS.

solely  to  the  school  without  the  cathedral,  and  may  be  made  to  the
club  independently  of  either.  In  any  case,  when  offerings  are  made
to  the  cathedral,  then  something  must  be  offered  both  to  the  school
and  to  the  club.  This  custom  has  existed  at  De-pung  at  least  from  the
time  of  the  great  Dalai  Lama  Sag-wan.

The  size  of  the  tea-boilers  of  the  larger  monastery  and  at  the  Lhasa
temple  is  said  to  be  enormous,  as  can  be  well  imagined  when  it  is
remembered  that  several  thousands  have  to  be  catered  for.  The
cauldron  at  the  great  Lhasa  cathedral  is  said  to  hold  about  1,200
gallons.

A  very  vigorous  discipline  is  enforced.  It  is  incumbent  on
every  member  of  the  monastery  to  report  misdemeanours  which
come  under  his  notice,  and  these  are  punished  according  to  the
Pratimoksha  rules.  Minor  offences  are  met  at  first  by  simple
remonstrance,  but  if  persisted  in  are  severely  punished  with
sentences  up  to  actual  banishment.

If  anyone  infringes  the  rules  of  discipline  short  of  murder,  or  oath,
or  wine-drinking,  or  theft,  within  the  club,  the  two  club-masters
punish  him ;  but  if  within  the  college  or  debating-hall,  then  he  is
amenable  to  the  provost  of  the  college.

A  member  of  De-pung  who  commits  any  of  the  ten  kinds  of  "  indul-
gence "  cannot  be  tried  except  in  the  cathedral.  The  elder  provost  calls
on  the  breaker  of  the  rules  to  stand  up  in  the  presence  of  the  assembled
students,  and  the  transgressor  rises  with  bent  head  and  is  censured  by
the  younger  provost  and  sentenced  to  a  particular  number  of  strokes.
Then  the  two  water-men  bring  in  the  dGe-rgan  of  the  club  and  the  tutor
of  the  offending  student.  The  dGe-rgan  rises  up  to  receive  his  censure,
and  so  also  the  tutors.  Then  the  offending  pupil  is  seized  by  the  head
and  feet,  and  soundly  beaten  by  the  lictors  (T'ab-gyog).

The  punishment  by  cane  or  rod  is  fifty  strokes  for  a  small  offence,
one  hundred  for  a  middling,  and  one  hundred  and  fifty  for  a  grave
offence.  In  the  cathedral  no  more  than  one  hundred  and  fifty  strokes
can  be  given,  and  no  further  punishment  follows.

For  breach  of  etiquette  in  sitting,  walking,  eating,  or  drinking,  the
penalty  is  to  bow  down  and  apologize,  or  suffer  ten  strokes.

The  most  severe  punishment,  called  "  Good  or  Bad  Luck  "  (sKyid-
sdug),  so  called  it  is  said  from  its  chance  of  proving  fatal  according  to
the  luck  of  the  sufferer,  is  inflicted  in  cases  of  murder  and  in  expulsion
from  the  order  for  persistent  intemperance,  or  theft.  After  the  con-
gregation is  over  the  teacher  and  club-master  of  the  accused  are  called  to
the  court,  and  the  provost  of  the  cathedral  censures  them.  Then  the
accused  is  taken  outside  the  temple  and  his  feet  are  fastened  by  ropes,
and  two  men,  standing  on  his  right  and  left,  beat  him  to  the  number
of  about  a  thousand  times,  after  which  he  is  drawn,  by  a  rope,  outside
the  boundary  wall  (Zchags-ri)  and  there  abandoned ;  while  his  teacher
and  club-master  are  each  fined  one  scarf  and  three  silver  Srangs.


DISCIPLINE.  193


The  rule  whicli  is  most  broken  is  celibacy.  The  established
church  alone  adheres  strictly  to  this  rule ;  so  that,  on  this  account,
many  of  its  monks  leave  the  order,  as  they  are  always  free  to  do,
though  suffering  social  disgrace,  as  they  are  called  han-lok,  or
"turncoats."  In  the  other  sects  many  celibate  monks  are  also
found,  especially  in  the  larger  monasteries  of  Tibet ;  but  the  great
majority  of  the  members  of  the  unreformed  sects,  for  instance,
the  Hin-ma-pa,  also  the  Sa-kya-pa,  Duk-pa,  etc.,  are  married
openly  or  clandestinely.

The  Lamas  also  extend  their  exercise  of  discipline  outside
the  walls  of  the  monastery.  Mr.  Rockhill  witnessed  at  Kumbum
the  following  fracas  :  "  Suddenly  the  crowd  scattered  to  right  and
left,  the  Lamas  running  for  places  of  hiding,  with  cries  of  Oekor
Ldma,  Gekor  Lama  I  and  we  saw,  striding  towards  us,  six  or  eight
Lamas,  with  a  black  stripe  painted  across  their  foreheads,  and
another  around  their  right  arms — black  Lamas  (hei-ho-sang)  the
people  call  them — armed  with  heavy  whips,  with  which  they
belaboured  anyone  who  came  within  their  reach.  Behind  them
walked  a  stately  Lama  in  robes  of  finest  cloth,  with  head  clean-
shaved.  He  was  a  Grekor,  a  Lama-censor,  or  provost,  whose  duty
it  is  to  see  that  the  rules  of  the  Lamasery  are  strictly  obeyed,  and
who,  in  conjunction  with  two  colleagues,  appointed  like  him  by
the  abbot  for  a  term  of  three  years,  tries  all  Lamas  for  whatever
breach  of  the  rules  or  crime  they  may  have  committed.  This
one  had  heard  of  the  peep-shows,  Punch  and  Judy  shows,  gambUug
tables,  and  other  prohibited  amusements  on  the  fair-grounds,  and
was  on  his  way  with  his  lictors  to  put  an  end  to  the  scandal.  I
followed  in  his  wake,  and  saw  the  peep-show  knocked  down,  Punch
and  Judy  laid  mangled  beside  it,  the  owners  whipped  and  put  to
flight,  and  the  majesty  of  ecclesiastical  law  and  morality  duly
vindicated."  ^

As  the  Lama  is  comfortably  clothed  and  housed,  and  fed  on  the
best  of  food,  he  cannot  be  called  a  mendicant  monk  like  the  Budd-
hist monks  of  old,  nor  is  the  vow  of  poverty  strictly  interpreted  ;
yet  this  character  is  not  quite  absent.  For  the  order,  as  a  body,
is  entirely  dependent  on  the  lay  population  for  its  support ;  and
the  enormous  proportion  which  the  Lamas  bear  to  the  laity  ren-


r.OOKHILL,  L.,  65.


194  THE  ORDER OF  LAMAS.

ders  the  tax  for  the  support  of  the  clergy  a  heavy  burden  on  the
people.

Most  of  the  monasteries,  even  those  of  the  sects  other  than  the
dominant  Ge-lug-pa,  are  richly  endowed  with  landed  property  and
villages,  from  which  they  derive  much  revenue.  All,  however,
rely  mainly  on  the  voluntary  contributions  of  the  worshippers
amongst  villagers  and  pilgrims.  And  to  secure  ample  aid,  large
numbers  of  Lamas  are  deputed  at  the  harvest-time  to  beg  and
collect  grain  and  other  donations  for  their  monasteries.  Most  of
the  contributions,  even  for  sacerdotal  services,  are  in  kind, — grain,
bricks  of  tea,  butter,  salt,  meat,  and  live  stock, — for  money  is  not
much  used  in  Tibet.  Other  sources  of  revenue  are  the  charms,
pictures,  images,  which  the  Lamas  manufacture,  and  which  are  in
great  demand;  as  well  as  the  numerous  horoscopes,  supplied  by  the
Lamas  for  births,  marriages,  sickness,  death,  accident,  etc.,  and  in
which  most  extensive  devil-worship  is  prescribed,  entailing  the
employment  of  many  Lamas.  Of  the  less  intellectually  gifted
Lamas,  some  are  employed  in  menial  duties,  and  others  are  en-
gaged in  mercantile  traffic  for  the  general  benefit  of  their  mother
monastery.  Most  of  the  monasteries  of  the  established  church
grow  rich  by  trading  and  usury.  Indeed,  Lamas  are  the  chief
traders  and  capitalists  of  the  country.

DREJjS.

The  original  dress  of  Buddha's  order  was  adapted  for  the  warm
Indian  climate.  Later,  when  his  religion  extended  to  colder
climes,  he  himself  is  said  to  have  permitted  warmer  clothing,
stockings,  shoes,  etc.  The  avowed  object  of  the  monk's  dress
was  to  cover  the  body  decently  and  protect  from  cold,  mosqui-
toes,i  and  other  sources  of  mental  disturbance.

The  dress  of  a  Tibetan  monk^  consists  of  a  hat  covering  his
closely-shaven  crown,  a  gown  and  girdle,  inner  vest,  cloak,  plaid,
trousers,  and  boots,  rosary,  and  other  minor  equipments.

LAMAIST HATS AND COWLS.

No  hat  is  mentioned  in  the  Buddhist  scriptures  as  part  of  the
outfit  of  a  monk,  nor  does  it  seem  to  have  been  introduced  into


'  Hardy,  East.  Mon.,  122.  2  gee  figures  on  pages  46,  60, 172,  etc.


BRESS—HATS  AND  COWLS.  195

Indian  Buddhism  even  in  the  later  period,  judging  from  its  ap-
parent absence  in  the  Ajanta  cave  paintings.  It  is,  however,  a
necessity  for  tonsured  heads  in  a  cold  climate,^  and  it  is  usually
made  in  Tibet  of  thick  felt,  flannel,  or  blanket.

The  conspicuousness  of  the  cap  lent  itself  readily  to  its  hat
being  converted  into  a  sectarial  badge.  We  have  seen  how  the
colowr  of  the  cap  afforded  a  rough  distinction  into  yellow,  red,
and  black  hats.  But  the  shape  is  also  an  important  element
in  differentiating  hats,  both  for  sectarian  and  ceremonial  pur-
poses.

The  majority  of  the  hats  are  of  an  Indian  type,  a  few  only
being  Chinese  or  Mongolian.

The  two  most  typical  hats  are  believed  by  the  Lamas  to  have
been  brought  from  India  by  St.  Padma-sambhava,  the  founder  of
Lamaism,  and  his  coadjutor,  Santa-rakshita,  in  the  eighth  cen-
tury. And  both  of  these  hats  are  essentially  Indian  in  pattern.

To  begin  with,  the  hat,  numbered  j  in  the  figure,  named
"  The  red  hat,  of  the  great  Pandits "  (pan-ch'en-z'wa-dmar).
It  is  alleged  to  have  been  brought  from  India  on  the  foundation  of
Lamaism  by  the  abbot  Santa-rakshita,  and  it  is  common  to  all
sects  in  Tibet  except  the  G-e-lug-pa.  Its  shape  is  essentially  that
of  the  ordinary  cap  used  in  the  colder  parts  of  India  during  the
winter  (see  iig.  n),  with  lappets  coming  over  the  ears  and  the
nape  of  the  neck,  which  lappets  are  folded  up  as  an  outer  brim
to  the  cap  in  the  hotter  part  of  the  day.  Such  a  cap  is  often
worn  by  Indian  ascetics  when  travelling  in  India  in  the  winter
time ;  and  it  is  quite  probable  that  Atisa,  as  the  Lamas
allege,  did  arrive  in  Tibet  in  such  a  hat,  and  possibly  of  a  red
colour.  The  chief  difference  in  the  Lamaist  form  is  that  the
crown  has  been  raised  into  a  peak,  which  gives  it  a  more  dis-
tinguished look,  and  the  lappets  have  been  lengthened.

Tson-K'apa  altered  the  colour  of  this  hat  from  red  to  yellow,
and  hence  arose  the  title  of  "  Yellow-hat "  (S'a-ser),  a  synonym
for  his  new  sect,  "the  Ge-lug-pa,"  in  contradistinction  to  the
"Eed-hat"  (S'a-mar)  of  the  Unreformed  Lamas.  He  raised  its
peak  still  higher  (see  figures  b  and  c  in  annexed  illustration),


1  In  India  the  only  need  for  a  head-covering  is  as  an  occasional  protection  against
the  sun,  but  the  Indian  monk  defends  his  shaven  crown  from  the  scorching  sun  by

his  palm-leaf  fan.

O 2


196


THE  OBDEE OF  LAMAS.


and lengthened its  lappets  in  proportion to the rank of  the
wearer. Thus  he  gave  himself  the  longest  lappets,  forming  tails


a.  rTse-z'va  sgro

b.  Pan-oh,'en  sne-rih.

c.  Ditto,  in  profile.

d.  rTse-z'va  sgro-rtse.

e.  dGon-'duB  dbu.
/.  Ditlo,  in  profile.

g.  T'an-zVa,  for  abbots  and  re-
incarnations.


Lamas'  Hats.

A.  alNfags  z'va-nag.
i.  rTaz'va,  for  nTse-drung
J,  Pan-ch'en  z'va-dmar.
k.  Dag  z'va-ri-'gra.
I,  dG-un-z'va.
m.  Z'va-dkar  skyed  k'ra.
71.  Jo-z'va  gliii  gsum.
u.  Jo-z'va  rgyun.


p.  Saks-z'u  of  Sakya.
g.  G-ra-z'a  of  Taranatha  (red).
r.  Sakya  k'ri  z'va.
s.  sGom-z'va  dbUus  'gyud.
t.  mKah-'groM  dbu-skra.
u.  Ear-ma  snags  z'va.
i\  sKar-ma  za-z'va.


HATS  AND  COWLS.  197


down  to  the  waist.  The  abbots  were  given  shorter  tails,  and  the
ordinary  monk  shorter  still,  while  the  novices  were  deprived
altogether  of  the  tails. It  can  be  used  when  walking  and  riding.

Padma-sambhava's  mitre-Uke  hat  is  the  "  U-gyan-Pandit,"  the
typical  hat  of  the  unreformed  Nih-ma  sect.  It  is  on  the
same  Indian  model,  with  the  lappets  turned  up,  and  divided  so
as  to  suggest  the  idea  of  a  red  lotus,  with  reference  to  the  ety-
mology of  St.  Padma-sambhava's  name,  to  wit,  "  The  Lotus-
born,"  and  his  legendary  birth  from  a  red  lotus-flower.  His  native
country  was  Udyana,  between  Afghanistan  and  Kashmir  ;  and  the
tall  conical  crown  is  still  a  feature  of  the  caps  of  those  regions.
It  is  also  called  the  Sahor  (Lahore  ?)  Pandit's  cap.  It  is  worn  by
the  Kin-ma  sect  in  empowering  (abisheka),  and  in  offering
oblations,  and  in  sacred  dances.  The  largest  form  of  this  hat,
surmounted  by  a  golden  vajra,  is  called  the  "  Devil  subduer  "
(dreg-pa  zil-non  gyi  cha  lugs),  and  is  figured  in  the  foregoing
picture  of  St.  Padma.  It  is  only  worn  by  the  head  Lamas  when
giving  the  king  holy  water,  and  at  the  highest  festivals.

Many  of  the  hats  are  full  of  symbolism,  as,  for  example.  Figs,  a
and  d,  as  described  in  the  footnote.^

^  rTse-zwa  sgro-lugs  (Fig.  a).  This  helmet-like  hat  is  common  to  all
G-e-lug-pa  Lamas.  It  was  invented  by  g^Z'i-bdag  ne-ser,  and  adopted  by
the  first  Grand  Lama  GedenDab.  It  is  used  along  with  the  cope  (zla-
gam)  when  going  to  mass,  and  is  taken  off  on  entering  the  temple  and
thrown  over  the  left  shoulder,  with  the  tails  hanging  down  in  front ;
on  emerging  from  the  temple  it  is  worn  or  not  according  to  the  monk's
own  wishes.  Its  long  tails  are  stitched  to  imitate  the  beaded  covers
of  a  book,  so  that  when  the  monk  grasps  the  tails,  he  is  to  conceive
that  he  has  a  grasp  of  the  scriptures ;  and  again  that  he  is  draw-
ing to  salvation  thousands  of  animals  represented  by  the  pile  on
the  cap.  The  three  lateral  stitches  in  the  tails  typify  the  three
classes  of  scriptures — the  Tripitaha,  as  well  as  the  three  original  sins
or  "  fires "  and  the  sin  of  body,  speech  and  mind,  for  which  the
Tripitaka  are  the  antidotes.  The  long  tails  also  have  to  suggest  to
him  that  the  doctrines  may  be  extended  and  long  remain.  The
marginal  stitches  represent "  the  twelve  best  commands."  The  inside  is
often  white  to  suggest  that  the  monk  should  keep  his  heart  clean  and
pure.  The  crest  represents  the  doctrinal  insight  (Zta-wa,  Skt.,  darsana)  of
the  wearer.  As  he  rises  by  taking  a  degree  in  divinity  his  crest  is
elevated  by  an  extra  stitch.

rTse-zwa  sked-bts'em  differs  from  the  foregoing  in  having  an
extra  stitch  in  its  crest  (see  p.  172).  It  is  confined  to  the  re-embodied
mfe'an-nid  Lamas  and  those  who  haye  taken  the  degree  of  dge-s'e,  or  B.D.


198  THE  ORDER OF  LlMAS.

Nuns  wear  a  skull-cap  of  woollen  cloth  or  fur,  coloured  yellow  or
red,  according  to  their  sect.

rTse-Bwa  sgro  rts'e  has  the  highest  crest.  It  is  confined  to  the  dGe-
6skul  of  De-pung  monastic  university  and  the  degree  of  D.D.

rTse-zwa  sgro-rtse-ma  (Fig.  d)  is  confined  to  the  Dalai  Lama's  chapel-
royal  of  rTse-j'Nam-gyal,  and  to  the  four  Lings.  It  is  worn  during
the  jrtor-rgyab  sacrifices  and  dances  at  these  temples  only.

dGongs  'dus  zwa  zur-zur  (Figs,  e  and/).  Designed  by  Pan-ch'en  6Lo-
5zan  ch'os-kyi  rgyal  «j.fcs'an  after  the  shape  of  dBen-igon  hill.  It  is
worn  by  the  Grand  Pan-ch'en  Lama  and  the  four  abbots  of  Tashi-lhunpo
on  going  to  preside  at  the  wrangling  disputations.

Pan-zwa  sne-rid'  ser-po  (Figs,  h  and  o).  This  is  a  yellow  variety  of  the
red  one  of  the  same  name,  with  the  tails  much  lengthened  by  Tson  K'apa.
It  is  only  worn  with  these  long  tails  by  the  Dalai  Lama,  the  Pan-ch'en
(Tashi)  Lama,  the  Gah-ldan  Khri-rinpo-ch'e,  and  the  Tibetan  Lama-
king  or  regent,  during  the  assembly  (nal-k'u)  mass  and  empowering.
It  is  worn  with  the  gos-ber  robes.

sNe-rin  zur  zwa  is  worn  by  the  abbots  of  the  colleges  and  the  head
Lamas  of  smaller  monasteries.

T'an-zwa  rf6yar-zwa  (Fig.  g)  is  the  summer  hat  when  riding  on  horse-
back, and  is  confined  to  the  Dalai  and  Pan-ch'en  Grand  Lamas,  the
regent,  or  king,  and  the  re-embodied  Lamas,  and  those  abbots  who,
having  obtained  highest  honours  in  divinity,  have  received  from  the
Grand  Lama  the  diploma  of  bdag-rkyen.

rTa-zwa  zur  Itas  dgun-zwa.  This  is  the  winter  riding  hat,  and  is
confined  to  the  above  privileged  persons.

Se-teb-rgyun  zwa  (Fig.  o).  The  summer  riding  hat  for  the  Tse-drung
grade  of  Lamas,  who  are  selected  on  account  of  their  learning  and  good
looks  as  personal  attendants  of  the  Grand  Lama  (sKyabs-mgon  ch'en).

rTa  zwa  i-gyun-zwa  (Fig.  i). The  winter  riding  hat  of  the  Tse-drung.

rTse-drung  sga-p'ug  is  used  only  by  the  skyabs-myou  ch'en-mo  in
ascending  and  descending  (?  Potala  hill).

Zwa-dkar  skyid-ka  (Fig.  m).  Worn  by  the  Tse-drung  attendants  in
summer  when  accompanying  the  Grand  Lama  wearing  preceding  hat.

Jo-fwa-gliii-gsum  (Fig.  n),  "  the  lord's  hat  of  the  three  continents."
It  is  formed  after  the  fashion  of  the  Asura  cave,  and  was  worn  by  the
Indian  Jo-ivo  (Atlsa),  the  reformer  of  Lamaism,  while  on  his  way  to  Tibet,
at  the  Nepalese  shrine  Svayambhunath  (T.,  Eang-'byuh)  Chaitya;
afterwards  it  was  the  hat  of  his  sect,  the  Kah-dam-pa.  In  hot  weather
its  flaps  are  folded  up,  and  in  the  cold  let  down.  It  was  originally  red,
but  changed  to  yellow  by  the  Ge-lug-pa.  Now  it  is  worn  only  by  the
hermits  (ri-k'rod-pa)  of  the  Ge-lug-pa  or  established  church,  and  is
never  worn  within  the  monastery  or  in  quarters.

Sa-skya  K'ri-zwa  (Fig.  r).  This  hat  of  the  Sa-kya  sect  is  of  later  intro-
duction. Originally  all  the  Sa-kya  Lamas  wore  the  Urgyen-pen-iwa  of
the  unreformed  party. "When  they  attained  the  temporal  lordship  over


HATS  AND  COWLS.  199

In  the  outer  rainy  districts  of  the  Himalayas,  in  Bhotan  and
Sikhim,  many  Lamas  wear  straw  hats  during  the  summer,  or
go  bare-headed.

the  thirteen  provinces  of  Tibet,  the  Chinese  king  "  Se-ch'en"  presented
this  hat  to  the  chief  of  the  sect,  his  highness  'Phag-pa  E.in-po-ch'e,
and  its  central  vajra  upon  the  "unchangeable"  crown  is  after  the  Chinese
style.  It  is  restricted  to  those  of  noble  descent  (gidung-pa),  and  is  only
worn  when  the  gduii-brgynd  Lama  ascends  the  throne,  or  in  empower-
ing devotees,  or  in  the  gTov  rgyab  sacrificial  offering. Cf.  also  p.  57.

Sa-zumt'on  grol  (Fig.p).  This  is  a  hat  of  the  Sa-kya-pa.  It  is  believed
to  confer  spiritual  insight,  and  to  have  been  invented  by  the  God  of
Wisdom  (Manjusri).  It  is  used  when  empowering  the  Khri-pa,  and  for
mass.

Sa-skya  grwa-zwa  (Fig.  q.)  This  is  the  hat  of  the  Jonah-pa  sub-sect,  to
which  Taranatha  belonged.  It  is  worn  by  the  junior  Sa-kya  monks
during  certain  masses,  at  the  beginning  and  the  end,  also  in  religious
dances  and  in  the  Tor-gya  sacrifice.

Karma-pai  zwa  nag(Fig.  t).  "  The  black  (fairy)  hat  of  the  Kar-ma-pa."
This  hat  was  conferred  upon  the  reverend  Rang-'byuii  rDorje  (Vajra
Svayambhu)  by  the  five  classes  of  witches  (DakkinI)  when  he  coerced
them  into  granting  him  the  Siddhi — power  of  flying  in  the  air.  Each
of  the  Dakkinis  contributed  a  hair  from  their  tresses,  and  plaited  these
to  form  this  hat.  "Whoever  wears  it  can  fly  through  the  air.  It  is
kept  as  a  relic  at  Sa-kya  monastery,  and  only  worn  in  state,  or  when  a
wealthy  votary  comes  to  the  shrine.  On  such  occasions  a  monk  on
either  side  holds  the  hat  to  prevent  it  from  carrying  off  the  wearer.

Karma  snags-zwa  (Fig.  u).  "  The  enchanter's  hat "  of  the  K-arma-
pa  sect.  It  is  shaped  after  the  cake-oft'ering  for  the  angry  demons,  and
is  worn  during  the  dances  and  the  jrtor-rgyab  sacrifice.

Dwag-zwa  ri-'gra  (Fig.  k).  A  hat  of  the  Kar-gyu-pa  sect,  worn  when
empowering  or  preaching.  It  is  shaped  after  the  hill  of  Dwag-lha
sgam-pa,  and  was  invented  by  mNam-med-diwag-po  Iha  rjes-ts'erin-ma.

sS^ags  pai  zwa  nag  (Fig.  h).  The  black  necromancer's  hat.  Worn  by
the  sLob-cZpan  Lama  of  the  unreformed  sect  in  their  g'Tor-rgyab  sacri-
fice, and  in  the  mystic  play  in  all  the  sects.

gZah-zwa  (Fig.  v).  "  The  planet  hat."  This  raven-crowned  hat  was
designed  by  Lama  Gyun-ston-k'ro-rgyal  on  seeing  the  planet  Mercury.
It  is  worn  by  the  Di-kung-pa,  Kar-ma-pa,  and  Nin-pia-pa  sects  during
the  ceremony  of  "  circling  the  planets "  (gzai-hakor)  and  the  striking
and  injuring  one's  enemy  {mt'u).

The  hat  of  the  Grand  Lama  of  Bhotan  (head  of  the  southern  Dug-pa
church),  and  figured  at  page  226,  is  called  pad-ma-mt'ong  or  "the
lotus-vision."  It  has  a  t/o/ra-spikelet  which  cannot  be  worn  by  any
but.  the  supreme  Lama.  And  the  hat  is  finely  embroidered  with  the
cross-thunderbolts,  lotus-flower,  and  thunder  dragons  (Dug).


200  THE  ORDER OF  LlMAS.

The  Tibetans  follow  the  Chinese  in  the  practice  of  saluting  by
taking  off  their  hat,  so  in  their  temples  no  hats  are  worn  except
during  certain  ceremonies,  and  then  only  a  special  kind.

THE ROBES.

The  robes,  which  the  monks  of  the  established  church  and  the
more  celibate  monks  of  the  other  sects  wear  during  certain
celebrations,  are  the  three  vestments  of  the  shape  prescribed  in
the  primitive  code  of  ritual,  the  Vinaya,  with  the  addition  of  a
brocaded  collared  under-vest  ^  and  trousers,  as  seen  in  the  figures.
The  material  of  these  robes  is  usually  woollen  cloth;  but  silk,
though  against  the  precepts,^  is  sometimes  worn  by  those  who
can  afford  the  expense.

The  colour  of  these  robes  is  yellow  or  red,  according  to  the  sect.
Yellow  or  saffron  ^  colour  in  Tibet  is  sacred  to  the  clergy  of  the
established  church,  the  G-e-lug-pa ;  and  its  use  by  others  is  penal.
The  only  instance  in  which  it  is  permitted  is  when  a  layman  is
bringing  a  present  to  the  Ge-lug-pa  priests.  He  then  is  permitted
to  wear  during  his  visit  a  flat  yellow  hat  like  a  Tam-o'-Shanter
bonnet.

These  three  orthodox  Buddhist  raiments  are  : —

1.  The  Lower  patched  robe,  named  "?z'dn"  *  (  =  Sanfighdti).  The
cloth  is  in  several  largish  patches  (about  twenty-three)  and  sewn
into  seven  divisions,  and  fastened  by  a  girdle  at  the  waist.^

1  stod  'jag.

2  In  common  with  most  ascetics,  Buddha  decreed  the  monastic  dress  of  his  order
to  be  of  as  mean  a  material  and  cost  as  possible,  and  the  colour  selected  was  sad
saHron,  which,  while  affording  a  useful  wearable  colour  not  readily  soiled,  gave
uniformity  to  the  wearer  and  afforded  no  scope  for  worldly  vanity  in  fine  dress.  Yet
nothing  can  be  more  dignified  and  becoming  than  the  thin  loose  robe  of  the  Buddhist
monk,  falling  in  graceful  drapery,  endlessly  altering  its  elegant  folds  with  every
movement  of  the  figure.  And  the  ease  with  wliich  it  lends  itself  to  artistic  arrange-
ment is  seen  not  only  in  the  Grecian  and  Indian  sculptures  of  Buddha  in  a  standing
posture,  but  is  even  retained  somewhat  in  the  thicker  and  relatively  unelegajit  robes
of  the  Lamaist  monk,  seen  in  the  several  figures.

3  Literally  nur-smrig  or  "  Brahmani  goose  "  (coloured).  This  sad-coloured  bird,  the
ruddy  shell-drake,  has  from  its  solitary  habits  and  conjugal  fidelity  been  long  in
India  symboUc  of  recluseship  and  devotion,  and  figures  in  such  capacity  on  the  capitals
of  the  Asoka  pillars.

*  gz'an  or  ?  dras-drubs.

5  The  patched  robe,  which  gives  the  idea  of  the  tattered  garments  of  poverty,  is
stated  to  have  originated  with  Ananda  dividing  into  thirty  pieces  the  rich  robe  given
to  Buddha  by  the  wealthy  physician  Jivaka,  and  that  robe  was  sewn  by  Ananda
into  five  divisions  like  this  one. .


ROBES.


201


2.  The  Outer  patched  robe,  named  Nam-jar  {P.,  ?  Antarvd-
saka).  The  cloth  is  cut  into  very  numerous  pieces,  about  one
hundred  and  twenty-five,  which  are  sewn  together  in  twenty-five
divisions.

3.  The  Upper  shawl,  named  bhd-gds  (Uttardsanghdti).  Long
and  narrow,  ten  to  twenty  feet  long  and  two  to  three  feet  broad.
It  is  thrown  over  the  left  shoulder  and  passed  under  right  arm,
leaving  the  right  shoulder  bare,  as  in  the  Indian  style,  but  the
shoulders  and  chest  are  covered  by  an  inner  vest.  It  is  adjusted
all  round  the  body,  covering  both  shoulders,  on  entering  the  houses
of  laymen.  And  over  all  is  thrown  a  plaited  cloak  or  cope,  cres-
centic  in  shape.^

But  the  ordinary  lower  robe  of  Lamas  of  all  sects  is  an  ample
plaited  petticoat,  named  "  S'am  t'abs,"^  of  a  deep  garnet-red  colour,
which  encircles  the  figure  from  the  waist  to  the  ankles,  and  is
fastened  at  the  waist  by  a  girdle,  and  with  this  is  worn  an  un-
sleeved  vest,  open  in  front  like  a  deacon's  dalmatia.  On  less
ceremonial  occasions  a  sleeved  waistcoat  is  used ;  and  when  travel-
ling or  visiting,  is  worn  the  ordinary  Tibetan
wide-sleeved  red  gown,  gathered  at  the  waist
by  a  girdle  ;  and  always  trousers.  The
sleeves  of  this  mantle  are  broad  and  long,
and  in  hot  weather,  or  on  other  occasions
where  greater  freedom  is  wanted  or  the  priest
has  to  administer  with  bare  arms,  the  arms
are  withdrawn  from  the  sleeves,  which  latter
then  hang  loose.

A  sash  is  also  usually  worn,  several  yards
long  and  about  three  inches  broad,  thrown
over  the  left  shoulder,  across  breast,  and  tied
in  a  bow  over  the  right  hip,  and  the  re-
mainder swung  round  the  body.^

Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  Lamas  of  every
sect,  the  established  church  included,  ordi-
narily wear  red  robes,  and  it  is  the  colour  of
the  girdles  (sKe-rag)  and  the  shape  and
colour  of  the  hats  which  are  the  chief  distinctive  badges  of  the


Wateb-bottle  Wallet.


1  zla-gam.


2  or  mt'an-gos.


3  KOPPBN,  ii.,  268.


202


THE ORDER OF  LAMAS.


sect.  The  holy-water  bottle  (Ch'ab-lug),  figured  on  page  201,
which  hangs  from  the  left  side  of  the  girdle,  is  also  fringed  by  a
flap  of  cloth  coloured  red  or  yellow  according  to  the  sect.

The  boots  are  of  stiff  red  and  particoloured  felt,  with  soles  of

hide  or  Yak-hair.

From  the  girdle  hangs,  in  addition
to  the  holy- water  bottle,  a  pen-case,
purse,  with  condiments,  dice,  etc.,
sometimes  the  rosary,  when  it  is
not  in  use  or  worn  on  the  neck  or
wrist,  and  the  amulet  box.  And  in
the  upper  flap  of  the  coat,  forming  a
breast  pocket,  are  thrust  his  prayer-
wheel,  drinking-cup,  booklets,
charms,  etc.

The  dress  of  the  nuns  generally
resembles  that  of  the  monks.  The
head  is  shaved,  and  no  ornaments
are  worn.i


THE EOSAEIES.

The  rosary  is  an  essential  part  of
a  Lama's  dress ;  and  taking,  as  it
does,  such  a  prominent  part  in  the
Lamaist  ritual,  it  is  remarkable  that
the  Tibetan  rosary  does  not  appear
to  have  attracted  particular  notice.

As  a  Buddhist  article  the  rosary
appears  only  in  the  latest  ritualistic
stage  when  a  belief  had  arisen  in  the
potency  of  muttering  mystic  spells
and  other  strange  formulas.  In
the  very  complicated  rosaries  of
Japan  ^  it  has  attained  its  highest
development.
Amongst  southern  Buddhists  ^  the  rosary  is  not  very  conspicu-

1  Cf.  BoTLB,  Mark.,  p.  109.

'•-  "Note  on  Buddhist  Rosaries  in  Japan."  By  J.  M.  James,  7rans.  Jap.  As.  Soc,  p.
173,  1881.

3  1  have  described  Burmese  Buddhist  rosaries,  as  well  as  some  of  the  Lamaist,  in
J.A.S.B.,l%n.


Pen-case,  Ink-bottle  and  Seal.

(The  pen-case  ig  silver-inlaid  iron  from

Der-ge.)


ROSARIES.


203


ous,  but  amongst  Tibetans  it  is  everywhere  visible. It  is  also

held  in  the  hand  of  the  image  of  the  patron  god  of  Tibet — Cha-

ra-si  (Skt.,  Avalokitesvara). And  its  use  is  not  confined  to  the

Lamas. Nearly  every  lay  man  and  woman  is  possessed  of  a  rosary,

on  which  at  every  opportunity  they  zealously  store  up  merit ;  and

they  also  use  it  for  secular  purposes,^  like  the  sliding  balls  of  the

Chinese  to  assist  in  ordinary  calculations :  the  beads  to  the  right

of  the  centre-bead  being

called  ta-than  and  regis- _d^M^'(:-£h cP-'^4j-

tering  iinits,  while  those

to  the  left  are  called  c'u-

d6  and  record  tens,  which

numbers  suffice  for  their

ordinary  wants.

The  Tibetan  name  for
the  rosary  is  "  'pren-ba,"
pronounced  t'en-wa,  or
vulgarly  t'en-na,  and
literally  means  "  a  string
of  beads."

The  rosary  contains
108  beads  of  uniform
size.  The  reason  for  this
special  number  is  alleged
to  be  merely  a  provision
to  ensure  the  repetition
of  the  sacred  spell  a  full
hundred  times,  and  the
extra  beads  are  added
to  make  up  for  any
omission  of  beads
through  absent-mindedness  during  the  telling  process  or  for  actual
loss  of  beads  by  breakage. Che-re-si  and  D6-ma  have  each  108

I  The  rosary  has  proved  a  useful  instrument  in  the  liands  of  our  Lama  surveying
spies.  Thus  we  find  it  reported  witli  reference  to  Gyantse  town,  that  a  stone  wall
nearly  two-and-a-half  miles  goes  round  the  town,  and  the  Lama  estimated  its  length
by  means  of  his  rosary  at  4^500  paces.  At  each  pace  he  dropped  a  bead  and  uttered
the  mystic  "  Om  mam  padm  hm,"  while  the  good  people  who  accompanied  him  in  his
Lin-Kor  or  religious  perambulations  little  suspected  the  nature  of  the  work  he  was
really  doing.


A  KOSAEY.


204  THE  ORDER OF  LAMAS.

names,  but  it  is  not  usual  to  tell  these  on  the  rosary.  And  in
the  later  Kham  edition  s  of  the  Lamaic  scriptures — the  "  bka-
'gyur," — the  volumes  have  been  extended  from  100  to  108.  And
the  Burmese  foot-prints  of  Buddha  sometimes  contain  108  sub-
divisions. This  number  is  perhaps  borrowed,  like  so  many  other
Lamaist  fashions,  from  the  Hindiis,  of  whom  the  Vaishnabs  possess
a  rosary  with  108  beads.

The  two  ends  of  the  string  of  beads,  before  being  knotted,  are
passed  through  three  extra  beads,  the  centre  one  of  which  is  the
largest.  These  are  collectively  called  "  retaining  or  seizing  beads,"
rdog-'dsin.  The  word  is  sometimes  spelt  mdo-'dsin,  which  means
"the  union  holder."  In  either  case  the  meaning  is  much  the
same.  These  beads  keep  the  proper  rosary  beads  in  position  and
indicate  to  the  teller  the  completion  of  a  cycle  of  beads.

This  triad  of  beads  symbolizes  "  the  Three  Holy  Ones  "  of  the
Buddhist  trinity,  viz.,  Buddha,  Dharma  (the  Word),  and  Sangha
(the  church,  excluding  the  laity).  The  large  central  bead  repre-
sents Buddha,  while  the  smaller  one  intervening  between  it  and
the  rosary  beads  proper  represents  the  church  and  is  called  "  Our
radical  Lama  "  (or  spiritual  adviser),^  the  personal  Lama-guide  and
confessor  of  the  Tibetan  Buddhist ;  and  his  symbolic  presence  on
the  rosary  immediately  at  the  end  of  the  bead-cycle  is  to  ensure
becoming  gravity  and  care  in  the  act  of  telling  the  beads,  as  if  he
were  actually  present.

The  Grelug-pa,  or  established  church,  usually  has  only  two
beads  as  dok-dsin,  in  which  case  the  terminal  one  is  of  much
smaller  size,  and  the  pair  are  considered  emblematic  of  a  vase  from
which  the  beads  spring.  In  such  cases  the  extra  bead  is  sometimes
strung  with  the  other  beads  of  the  rosary,  which  latter  then  con-
tains 109  beads;  thus  showing  that  the  beads  really  number  111.

Counters.

Attached  to  the  rosary  is  a  pair  of  strings  of  ten  small  pendant
metallic  rings  as  counters.  One  of  these  strings  is  terminated  by
a  miniature  dorje  (the  thunderbolt  of  Indra)  and  the  other  by  a
small  bell — in  Tantric  Buddhist  figures  the  dorje  is  ususlly  asso-
ciated with  a  bell. The  counters  on  the  dor/e-string  register  units

'  tsa-wai  bla-ma.


ROSARIES.  205


of  bead-cycles,  while  those  on  the  bell-string  mark  tens  of  cycles.
The  counters  and  the  ornaments  of  the  strings  are  usually  of  silver,
and  inlaid  with  turquoise.  These  two  strings  of  counters,  called
"  count-keepers,"  ^  may  be  attached  at  any  part  of  the  rosary
string,  but  are  usually  attached  at  the  eighth  and  twenty-first
bead  on  either  side  of  the  central  bead.

They  are  used  in  the  following  manner  :  When  about  to  tell
the  beads,  the  counters  on  each  string  are  slid  up  the  string.  On
completing  a  circle  of  the  beads,  the  lowest  counter  on  the  dorje-
string  is  slid  down  into  contact  with  the  dorje.  And  on  each  fur-
ther cycle  of  beads  being  told,  a  further  counter  is  slid  down.
When  the  ten  have  been  exhausted,  they  are  then  slid  up  again,
and  one  counter  is  slipped  down  from  the  bell-string.  The
counters  thus  serve  to  register  the  utterance  of  108  x  10  x  10=
10,800  prayers  or  mystic  formulas.  The  number  of  these  formulas
daily  repeated  in  this  way  is  enormous.  The  average  daily  number
of  repetitions  may,  in  the  earlier  stages  of  a  Lama's  career,  amount
to  5,000,  but  it  depends  somewhat  on  the  zeal  and  leisure  of  the
individual.  A  layman  may  repeat  daily  about  five  to  twenty
bead-cycles,  but  usually  less.  Old  women  are  especially  pious  in
this  way,  many  telling  over  twenty  bead-cycles  daily.  A  middle-
aged  Lama  friend  of  mine  has  repeated  the  spell  of  his  tutelary
deity  alone  over  2,000,000  times.  It  is  not  uncommon  to  find
rosaries  so  worn  away  by  the  friction  of  so  much  handling  that
originally  globular  beads  have  become  cylindrical.

Affixed  to  the  rosary  are  small  odds  and  ends,  such  as  a  metal
toothpick,  tweezer,  small  keys,  etc.

Material  of  the  Beads.
The  materials  of  which  the  Lamaist  rosaries  are  composed
may  to  a  certain  extent  vary  in  costliness  according  to  the  wealth
of  the  wearer.  The  abbot  of  a  large  and  wealthy  monastery  may
have  rosaries  of  pearl  and  other  precious  stones,  and  even  of  gold.
Turner  relates  2  that  the  Grrand  Tashi  Lama  possessed  rosaries  of
pearls,  emeralds,  rubies,  sapphires,  coral,  amber,  crystal  and  lapis-
lazuli.


1  grang-'dsin,  but  vulgarly  they  are  known  as cimb-she (c'u-bs'ad) or "the  ten
makers."

2  Embassy  to  Tibet,  p.  '261, 1800.


206


THE ORDER OF  LAMAS.


But  the  material  of  the  rosary  can  only  vary  within  rather
narrow  limits,  its  nature  being  determined  by  the  particular  sect
to  which  the  Lama  belongs  and  the  particular  deity  to  whom  wor-
ship is  to  be  paid.


Kinds  of  Kosaries.

Fig.  1.  The  yellow  wooden  rosary  of  G-e-lug-pa  sect.

,,  2.  The  red  sandal-wood  rosary  for  Tarn-din's  worship.

,,  3.  The  white  conch  shell  rosary  for  Cba-rasi's  worship.

,,  4,  The  Raksha  rosary  for  the  faries'  worship,

,,  6.  A  layman's  rosary  (beads  of  unequal  size).

,,  6.  The  human  skull  (discs)  rosary.

,.  7.  The  isnake-spine  rosary.

a = dO'dsin.  rf= rfor^e-pendant.

6=counter3.  e=a  tweezer  and  tooth-pick.

c= bell -pendant.


ROSARIES.  207


Kioids  of  Rosaries.
The  yellow  rosary  or  Ser-t'en,  Fig.  1,  is  the  special  rosary  of  the
Gre-lug-pa  or  "  reformed  school,"  also  called  "  the  yellow  hat  sect "
(S'd-ser).  The  beads  are  formed  from  the  ochrey  yellow  wood
of  the  G'an-ch'wb  tree,  literally  "the  Bodhi  tree"  or  tree  of
supreme  wisdom,  which  is  said  to  grow  in  central  China.  The
wood  is  so  deeply  yellow  that  it  is  doubtful  whether  it  be  really
that  of  the  Pipal  (Ficus  religiosa),  of  which  was  the  Bodhi  tree
under  which  Grautama  attained  his  Buddhahood.  These  beads
are  manufactured  wholesale  by  machinery  at  the  temple  called  by
Tibetans  Ri-wo  tse-na  and  by  the  Chinese  V-tha  Shan,  or  "  The
Five  Peaks,"  about  200  miles  south-west  of  Pekin.  Hue  gives  a
sketch  1  of  this  romantic  place,  but  makes  no  hiention  of  its
rosaries.  This  rosary  is  of  two  kinds,  viz.,  the  usual  form  of
spherical  beads  about  the  size  of  a  pea,  and  a  less  common  form
of  lozenge-shaped  perforated  discs  about  the  size  of  a  sixpence.
This  rosary  may  be  used  for  all  kinds  of  worship,  including  that  of
the  furies.

The  Bo-dhi-tse  rosary  is  the  one  chiefly  in  use  among  the
Kih-ma-pa,  or  "  old  (i.e.,  unreformed)  school "  of  Lamas,  also
called  the  S'a-mar  or  "  red-hat  sect."  It  is  remarkable  that  its
name  also  seeks  to  associate  it  with  the  Bodhi  tree,  but  its  beads
are  certainly  not  derived  from  the  Ficus  family.  Its  beads  are
the  rough  brown  seeds  of  a  tree  which  grows  in  the  outer  Hima-
layas. This  rosary  can  be  used  for  all  kinds  of  worship,  and
may  also  be  used  by  the  G-e-luk-pa  in  the  worship  of  the  fiercer
deities.

The  white  conch-shell  rosary  Tun-fenj'  Fig.  3,  consists  of
cylindrical  perforated  discs  of  the  conch  shell,  and  is  specially  used
in  the  worship  of  Avalokita — the  usual  form  of  whose  image  holds
a  white  rosary  ih  the  upper  right  hand.  This  is  the  special  rosary
of  nuns.

The  rosary  of  plain  crystal  or  uncoloured  glass  beads  is  also
peculiar  to  Avalokita.

The  red  sandal-wood  rosary  Tsdn-ddn-mar,  Fig.  2,  consists  of
perforated  discs  of  red  sandal-wood  [Adenanthera  pavonina)  or

1  Travels  in  Twrtary,  Tibet,  and  China.  By  M.  Hue  (Hazlitt's  trans.),  i.,  p.  79,  and
ilgured  under  Shrines.

2  DruA-p'refi.


208  THE  ORDER OF  LAMAS.

other  wood  of  a  similar  appearance.  It  is  used  only  in  the  worship
of  the  fierce  deity  Tam-din  (Skt.,  Hayagriva),  a  special  protector
of  Lamaism.

The  coral  rosary — Oh'i-rv^t'en — is  also  used  for  the  tutelary
fiend,  Tam-din,  and  by  the  unreformed  sects  for  their  wizard-saint
Padma-sambhava.  Coral  being  so  expensive,  red  beads  of  glass
or  composition  are  in  general  use  instead.  With  this  rosary  it  is
usual  to  have  the  counters  of  turquoise  or  blue  beads.

The  rosary  formed  of  discs  of  the  human  skull — the  t'od-fen,
Fig.  6 — is  especially  used  for  the  worship  of  the  fearful  tutelary
fiend  Vajra-bhairava  as  the  slayer  of  the  king  of  the  Dead.  It  is
usually  inserted  within  the  Bo-dhi-tse  or  other  ordinary  rosary;
and  it  frequently  has  its  discs  symmetrically  divided  by  four  large
Raksha  beads  into  four  series,  one  of  these  beads  forming  the
central  bead.  There  is  no  rosary  formed  of  finger-bones,  as  has
been  sometimes  stated.

The  "  elephant^stone  "  rosary — Lan-ch'en-grod-pa — is  prepared
from  a  porous  bony-like  concretion,  which  is  sometimes  found  in
the  stomach  (or  brain)  of  the  elephant.  As  it  is  suggestive  of
bone,  it  is  used  in  worship  of  Yama.  The  real  material  being  ex-
tremely scarce  and  expensive,  a  substitute  is  usually  found  in
beads  made  from  the  fibrous  root  of  the  bow-bambu  {Z'v^shin),
which  shows  on  section  a  structure  very  like  the  stomach-stone,
and  its  name  also  means  "  stomach  or  digestion "  as  well  as
"  bow."

The  Raksha  rosary.  Fig.  4,  formed  of  the  large  brown  warty  seeds
of  the  ElcBocarpus  Janitrus,  is  specially  used  by  the  JSfin-ma
Lamas  in  the  worship  of  the  fierce  deities  and  demons.  The  seeds  of
this  tree  are  normally  five-lobed  and  ridged,  and  it  is  interesting
from  a  botanical  point  of  view  to  find  how  relatively  frequent  is  the
occurrence  of  six  lobes.  Such  abnormal  seeds  are  highly  prized  by
the  Tibetans,  who  believe  them  to  be  the  offspring  of  some  seeds
of  Padma-sambhava's  rosary,  which,  the  legend  states,  broke
at  his  Halashi  hermitage  in  Nepal,  and  several  of  the  detached
beads  remaining  unpicked  up,  these  were  the  parents  of  the
six-lobed  seeds.  The  demand  for  such  uncommon  seeds  being
great,  it  is  astonishing  how  many  of  them  are  forthcoming
to  diligent  search.  This  rosary  is  also  commonly  used  by  the
indigenous Bon-po priests,  and  it is  identical  with  the  rosary


BOSABIES.  209


of  the  Hindus — the  rudrdksha  (Eudra's  or  the  fierce  god  Siva's
eyes,  with  reference  to  their  red  colour),  from  which  the  Tibetan
name  of  Raksha  is  apparently  derived.

The  Nan-ga  pd-ni  rosary  is  -used  only  for  the  worship  of
Namsra,  or  Vaisravana,  the  god  of  wealth  ;  and  by  the  wizards  in
their  mystical  incantations.  It  consists  of  glossy  jet-black  nuts
about  the  size  of  a  hazel,  but  of  the  shape  of  small  horse  chest-
nuts. These  are  the  seeds  of  the  Lwh-faii  tree  which  grows  in
the  sub-tropical  forests  of  the  S.E.  Himalayas.  They  are  emble-
matic of  the  eyes  of  the  Garuda  bird,  a  henchman  of  Vajra-pani  (a
form  of  Jupiter)  and  the  great  enemy  of  snakes,  and  hence  is
supposed  to  be  derived  the  Sanskritic  name  of  the  beads,  from
ndga,  a  serpent.  Its  use  in  the  worship  of  the  god  of  wealth  is
interesting  in  associating  snakes,  as  the  mythological  guardians
of  treasure,  with  the  idea  of  wealth.'

The  rosary  of  snake-spines  (vertebrae).  Fig.  7,  is  only  used  by
the  sorcerers  in  necromancy  and  divination.  The  string  contains
about  fifty  vertebrae.

The  complexion  of  the  god  or  goddess  to  be  worshipped  also  de-
termines sometimes  the  colour  of  the  rosary-beads.  Thus  a  tur-
quoise rosary  is  occasionally  used  in  the  worship  of  the  popular
goddess  Tara,  who  is  of  a  bluish-green  complexion.  A  red  rosary
with  red  Tam-din,  a  yellow  with  yellow  Manjusri ;  and  Vaisravan,
who  is  of  a  golden-yellow  colour,  is  worshipped  with  an  amber-
rosary.

The  rosaries  of  the  laity  are  composed  of  any  sort  of  bead  accord-
ing to  the  taste  and  wealth  of  the  owner.  They  are  mostly
glass  beads  of  various  colours,  and  the  same  rosary  contains  beads
of  a  variety  of  sizes  and  colours  interspersed  with  coral,  amber,
turquoise,  etc.  The  number  of  beads  is  the  same  as  with  the
Lamas,  but  each  of  the  counter-strings  is  usually  terminated  by
a  vajra:  both  strings  record  only  units  of  cycles,  which  suffice
for  the  smaller  amount  of  bead-telling  done  by  the  laity.
Mode  of  telling  the  Beads.

When  not  in  use  the  rosary  is  wound  round  the  right  wrist  like
a  bracelet,  as  in  figure  on  page  172,  or  worn  around  the  neck  with
the  knotted  end  uppermost.


1  See  p.


210  THE  ORDER OF  LAMAS.

The  act  of  telling  the  beads  is  called  taii-c'e,  which  literally
means  "  to  purr  "  like  a  cat,  and  the  muttering  of  the  prayers  is
rather  suggestive  of  this  sound.

In  telling  the  beads  the  right  hand  is  passed  through  the
rosary,  which  is  allowed  to  hang  freely  down  with  the  knotted
end  upwards.  The  hand,  with  the  thumb  upwards,  is  then
usually  carried  to  the  breast  and  held  there  stationary  during
the  recital.  On  pronouncing  the  initial  word  "Om"  the  first
bead  resting  on  the  knuckle  is  grasped  by  raising  the  thumb
and  quickly  depressing  its  tip  to  seize  the  bead  against  the
outer  part  of  the  second  joint  of  the  index  finger.  During
the  rest  of  the  sentence  the  bead,  still  grasped  between  the
thumb  and  index  finger,  is  gently  revolved  to  the  right,
and  on  conclusion  of  the  sentence  is  dropped  down  the  palm-
side  of  the  string.  Then  with  another  "Om"  the  next  bead
is  seized  and  treated  in  like  manner,  and  so  on  throughout  the
circle.

On  concluding  each  cycle  of  the  beads,  it  is  usual  to  finger  each
of  the  three  "keeper-beads,"  saying  respectively,  "Om  !"  "Ah!"
"Hiiin!;'

The  mystic  formulas  for  the  beads  have  already  been  illustrated.
They  follow  the  prayer,  properly  so-called,  and  are  believed  to  con-
tain the  essence  of  the  formal  prayer,  and  to  act  as  powerful
spells.  They  are  of  a  Sanskritic  nature,  usually  containing  the
name  of  the  deity  addressed,  and  even  when  not  gibberish,  as
they  generally  are,  they  are  more  or  less  unintelligible  to  the
worshipper.

The  formula  used  at  any  particular  time  varies  according  to  the
particular  deity  being  worshipped.  But  the  one  most  frequently
used  by  the  individual  Lama  is  that  of  his  own  tutelary  deity,
which  varies  according  to  the  sect  to  which  the  Lama  be-
longs.

The  other  articles  of  equipment  comprise,  amongst  other
things,  a  prayer-wheel,  -yo^Va-sceptre  and  bell,  skull-drum  and
smaller  tambour,  amulet,  booklets.  Some  even  of  the  higher
Lamas  wear  ornaments  and  jewellery.^


1  The  Grand  Lama  of  Tashi-lhunpo  wore  a  jewelled  necklace,  which  he  presented^to
Mr.  Bogle  (Markh.,  cxl.)


MENDICANT'S  STAFF.


211


A  few  possess  a  begging-bowl  and  the  mendicant's  staff,'  but
these  are  mostly  for  ritualistic  displays,  as  the  Lama  is  no  longer
a  mendicant  monk  living  on  alms  like  the  Indian  Bhikshu  of
old.

1  Khar-sit ;  Skt.,  the  onomatopoetic  hi-hi-le  or  kha-khcirvean,  the  alarm-staff  with
jingling  rings  carried  by  the  mendicant  monk  to  drown  out  by  its  jingling  worldly
sounds  from  the  ears  of  the  monk  and  to  warn  oil  small  animals  lest  they  be  trod
upon  and  killed.  Its  use  is  explained  in  Kah-gyur  Do,  Vol.  xxvi.,  Csoma,  Am.,  p.  479.
The  Tibetan  form  is  usually  tipped  by  a  trident  in  place  of  the  leaf-like  loop.


Alaem-Staff
of  a  mendicant  monk.


f  2


212


IX.


DAILY LIFE AND ROUTINE.


"  He  who  eats  Lamas'  food

Wants  iron  jaws."— K6eto»  Proverb.^

IlTHOUGtH  the  Lamas  are  enslaved  in  the  bonds  of  ritual
they  are  not  all  gloomy  ascetics,  wrapped  up  in  con-
templation, but  most  can  be  as  blithe  as  their  lay
brothers.  Their  heavy  round  of  observances,  however,
often  lies  wearily  upon  them,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  frequent
interruptions  in  the  ordinary  Lama's  saintly  flow  of  rhetoric  to
yawn,  or  take  part  in  some  passing  conversation  on  mundane
matters.

The  daily  routine  of  a  Lama  differs  somewhat  according  to
whether  he  is  living  in  a  monastery,  or
as  a  village  priest  apart  from  his  clois-
ter, or  as  a  hermit.  As  with  occidental
friars,  a  considerable  proportion  of  Lamas
have  trades  and  handicrafts,  labouring
diligently  in  the  field,  farm,  and  in  the
lower  valleys  in  the  forest.  But  scarcely
ever  is  he  a  mendicant  monk,  like  his
prototype  the  Indian  Bhikshu  of  old.

The routine  in  the  convents  of  the
established  church is seen  at its best
in  the  Grand  Lama's  private  monastery
or  chapel-royal  of  Nam-gyal,  on  mount
Potala,  near Lhasa,  and  I  am  indebted to one of  the  monks


Mendicant  Lama.^


1  ikiyr  zas  sa-la  Icliay-c/i  gram-pa  di/os.


2  After  Giorgi.


DAILY  ROUTINE.  213


of  that  monastery  for  the  following  detailed  account  of  the  prac-
tice followed  there.

EouTiNE  IN  A  Monastery  of  the  Established  Church.

Immediately  on  waking,  the  monk  ^  must  rise  from  his  couch,
even  though  it  be  midnight,  and  bow  thrice  before  the  altar  in
his  cell,  saying,  with  full  and  distinct  enunciation:  "0  Guide
of  great  pity !  hear  me !  0  merciful  Gruide !  Enable  me  to  keep
the  two  hundred  and  fifty-three  rules,  including  abstinence  from
singing,  dancing,  and  music,  and  thoughts  of  worldly  wealth,
eating  luxuriously,  or  taking  that  which  has  not  been  given,"
etc.,  etc.

Then  follows  this  prayer  ^ :  "0  Buddhas  and  Bodhisats  of
the  ten  directions,  hear  my  humble  prayer.  I  am  a  pure-
minded  monk,  and  my  earnest  desire  is  to  devote  myself  towards
benefiting  the  animals;  and  having  consecrated  my  body  and
wealth  to  virtue,  I  vow  that  my  chief  aim  will  be  to  benefit  all
living  things."

Then  is  repeated  seven  times  the  following  mantra  from  the  Sutra  on
"the  wheel-blessing  for  the  animal  universe"':  "Om!  Sambhara,  Sam-
mahd  jdba  hum ! "  Eollowed  also  seven  times  by  this  extract  from
hharahi  m,anaskar  m,aha  jaba  hum  !  Om  !  Smara  Smarabi  manaskara
Norbu-rgyas-pahi-gzhal-med-k'ah  :  "Om!  rtiei  ramini pravartya  hum.'"

This  is  followed  by  "  Oim  !  Khrecara  gairiaya  hri  hri  svaha  I "
— a  spell  which  if  the  monk  thrice  repeats  and  spits  on  the
sole  of  his  foot,  all  the  animals  which  die  under  his  feet  during
that  day  will  be  born  as  gods  in  the  paradise  of  Indra  (Jupiter).

Having  done  this  worship,  the  monk  may  retire  again  to  sleep
if  the  night  is  not  far  advanced.  If,  however,  the  dawn  is  near
he  must  not  sleep  but  employ  the  interval  in  repeating  several
mantras  or  forms  of  prayer  (smon-lam)  until  the  bell  rings  for
the  first  assembly.

The  first  assembly,  or  matin,  called  "  the  early  gathering  "  (sna-
tsogs),  is  held  before  sunrise.  The  great  bell  goes  and  awakens
everyone  hitherto  slumbering,  and  it  is  soon  followed  by  the  great
conch-shell  trumpei>call,  on  which  signal  the  monks  adjust  their

1  I  have  translated  by  "  monk  "  the  word  rfge-slon,  which  is  literally  "  the  virtuous
beggar,"  corresponding  to  the  Indian  Buddhist  word  Bhikshu,  or  mendicant.
^  Composed  by  m'as-grub-nag-dban-rdoi-je.
•"  'gro-wa-yongs-su-bsngo-wai-'khor-loi-mdo.


214  DAILY  LIFE  AND ROUTINE.

dress  and  go  outside  their  cell  or  dormitory  to  the  lavatory  stone-
flag  or  pavement  (rdo-6chal)  for  ablution.

Standing  on  these  stones,  and  before  washing,  each  monk  chants
the  following  Tnantra,  and  mentally  conceives  that  all  his  sins,  as
well  as  the  impurities  of  his  body,  are  being  washed  away  :  "  Omf
argham  tsargham  bimanase!  utsusma  mahd  krodh  humphat!"

Then  with  water  brought  in  copper  vessels,  and  with  a  pinch  of
saline  earth  as  soap,^  they  perform  ablutions  usually  of  a  very
partial  kind.

After  ablution  each  monk  repeats,  rosary  in  hand,  the  mantra
of  his  favourite  deity  (usually  ManjusrT  or  Tara),  or  his  tutelary
fiend,  as  many  times  as  possible.

On  the  second  blast  of  the  conch-shell,  about  fifteen  minutes
after  the  first,  all  the  fully-ordained  monks  bow  down  before  the
door  of  the  temple,  while  the  novices  bow  upon  the  outer  paved
court.  All  then  enter  the  temple  and  take  their  places  according
to  their  grade,  the  most  junior  being  nearest  the  door;  and  during
the  ingress  the  provost-marshal  stands  rod  in  hand  beside  the
door.

The  monks  seat  themselves  in  rows,  each  on  his  own  mat,  cross-
legged  in  Buddha-fashion,  and  taking  care  not  to  allow  his  feet  to
project,  or  his  upper  vestments  to  touch  the  mat.  They  sit  in
solemn  silence,  facing  straight  to  the  front.  The  slightest  breach
of  these  rules  is  promptly  punished  by  the  rod  of  the  provost-
marshal,  or  in  the  case  of  the  novices  by  the  clerical  sacristan.

At  the  third  blast  of  the  conch-trumpet  the  following  services
are  chanted  : —

Invoking  the  blessing  of  eloquence;  the  refuge-formula;  Tson-
K'apa's  ritual  of  Iha-brgya-ma.

After  which  tea  is  served,  but  before  it  is  drunk  the  presiding
Lama  says  a  grace  in  which  all  join.

LAMAIST GRACES BEFORE MEAT.

The  Lamas  always  say  grace  before  food  or  drink.  Most  of  these
graces  are  curiously  blended  with  demonolatry,  though  they  always  are
pervaded  by  univei'sal  charity  and other  truly Buddhist  principles.

1  This  earth  is  called  sug-pa,  but  the  higher  Laraas  use  soap  :  "  The  Lama  minister
of  the  Grand  Lama,"  says  Sarat's  narrative,  "  formerly  used  to  wash  his  holiness's  head
with  water  and  sty-jja  powder,  but  now  he  uses  a  cake  of  P 's  transparent  soap."


LAMAIST GRACES.


215


And  they  throw  some  light  on  the  later  Mahayana  ritual  of  Indian
Buddhism,  from  which  they  are  alleged  to  have  been  borrowed.

Before  drinking,  the  Lamas,  like  the  Romans,  pour  out  some  of  the
beverage  as  a  libation  to  their  Lares,  and  other  gods. A  common


Tea  Service.


grace  before  drinking  tea  (which  is  served  out  eight  or  ten  times  daily
at  the  temples  and  cathedrals— the  service  being  interrupted  for  this
temporal  refreshment)  is  : —
"  We  humbly  beseech  thee  !  that  we  and  our  relatives  throughout  all

our  life-cycles,  may  never  be  separated  from  the  three  holy  ones  !

May  the  blessing  of  the  trinity  enter  into  this  drink  ! " [Then,


•216  DAILY  LIFE  AND  ROUTINE.


here  sprinkling  a  few  drops on  the  ground  with  the  tips  of  the

fore  and  middle  fingers,  the  grace  is  continued  : — ]
"  To  all  the  dread  locality,  demons  of  this  country,  we  offer  this  good

Chinese  tea ! Let  us  obtain  our  wishes  !  And  may  the  doctrines  of

Buddha  be  extended  !  "
The  grace  before  food  of  the  established  church,  the  purest  of  all
the  Lamaist  sects,  is  as  follows  : —

' '  This  luscious  food  ^  of  a  hundred  tempting  tastes,  is  here  reverently  offered  by

us — the  animal  beings — to  the  Jinas  {the  Dhyani  Buddhas)  and  their

princely  sons  (celestial  Bodhisattvas). May  rich  blessings  overspread  this

food  !  Om-Ah  Hunti!
"It  is  offered  to  the  Lama— Oot  Guru  vmra  naividya-ah  Hum!
"  It  is  offered  to  all  the  Buddhas  and  Bodhisattvas— Om  sarva  Buddha  Bod-

hisattva  vajra  naividya-ah  Hum !
"It  is  offered to the tutelaries,  witches, and  defensores  fidei^—Om  Deva

Dakini  Sri  dhai-mapala  saparivara  vajra  naividya-ah  Hum  !
"One  piece  (is  offered)  to the  powerful demon-lord  (rfban-bahi-'byun-po  ;

Skt.,  BhUtesvara) — Om-Agra-Pinda-ashi  bhya  svahd!
"  One  piece  to  Aprog-ma — Om-Harite^-svaha !
"  One  piece  to  '  the  five  hundred  brothers  or  sisters '  * — Om  Harite  maha-vajra-

yakshini  hara-hara  sarva  papi-mokshi  svaha  !  '

"  This  food,  of  little  virtue,  is  offered  compassionately  and  without  anger  or

pride,  or  as  a  return  for  past  favours  ;  but  solely  in  the  hope  that  we — all

the  animal  beings — may  become  holy  and  attain  the  rank  of  the  most

perfect  Buddhahood."

When  any  flesh-meat  is  in  the  diet,  then  the  following  grace  is
repeated  seven  times  in  order  to  cleanse  from  the  sin  of  slaughter  and
of  eating  flesh :  "  Om  abira  khe-ca-ra  Hum  !  "  And  by  the  efficacy  of
this  spell,  the  animal,  whose  flesh  is  eaten,  will  be  reborn  in  heaven.

The  following  grace  is  for  the  special  benefit  of  the  donors  of  pro-
visions, tea,  etc.,  to  the  monastery,  and  it  is  repeated  before  the  rijpnks
partake  of  food  so  gifted  : —

"  Salutation  to  the  all-victorious  Tathagata  Arhat.  The  most  perfect  Buddha.
The  fiery  and  most  illuminating  king  of  precious  light  !  Namo  !  Sainanta-
prahha-ragaya  Tathagataya  Arhatesamayak-Buddhaya  Namo  Manjusri-
ye. Kumdra-Bhutaya  Bodhisattvaya  mcuia-sattvaya ! Tadyatha! Om


1  Z'al-sas.

°  Yidam  mK'ah-gro  ch'os-skyon.

^  This  is  the  celebrated  man-eating  Yaksldni  flendess,  with  the  600  children,  whose
youngest  and  most  beloved  son,  Pingala,  was  hid  away  by  Buddha  (or,  as  some  Lamas
say,  by  his  chief  disciple,  Maudgalyayana)  in  his  begging-bowl  until  she  promised  to
cease  cannibalism,  and  accept  the  Buddhist  doctrine  as  detailed  in  the  Batnakvia,
Sutra.  See  also  the  Japanese  version  of  this  legend,  footnote  p.  99.  The  Lamas  assert
that  Buddha  also  promised  Hariti  that  the  monks  of  his  order  would  hereafter  feed
Tjoth  herself  and  her  sons  :  hence  their  introduction  into  this  grace ;  and  each  Lama
daily  leaves  on  his  plate  a  handful  of  his  food  expressly  for  these  demons,  and  these
leavings  are  ceremoniously  gathered  and  thrown  down  outside  the  monastery  gate  to
these  prelas  and  other  starveling  demons.

*  The  children  of  the  above  Hariti.


MASSES  FOE-  SIGK.  217

ralambhe-nira-bhase  jaye-jayelabdhe  maha-materalcshinamme  parisodhayd
svahd.  (The  efficacy  of  reciting  this  mantra  is  thus  described,  says
the  Ge-lug-pa  manual  of  daily  worship,  in  the  Vinaj/a- Sutra :  "When
this  is  repeated  once  all  sins  will  be  cleansed,  and  the  dispensers  of  the
gifts  will  nave  their  desires  fulfilled. " Then  here  follow  with  :— )

"  May  I  attain  bliss  by  virtue  of  this  gift !

"  May  I  attain  bliss  by  deep  meditation,  the  ceremonial  rites,  reverence  and
the  offerings  !

"May  I  attain  perfect  bliss  and  the  supreme  perfection  of  the  real  end
(Nirvana)  !

"  May  I  obtain  the  food  of  meditation  of  the  hundred  tastes,  power,  and  bright-
ness of  countenance  by  virtue  of  this  food-offering  !

"  May  I  obtain  rebirths  of  wisdom,  void  of  thirst,  hunger,  and  disease,  by
virtue  of  this  repentance-offering  !

"  May  I  obtain  unalloyed  happiness,  free  from  worldly  birth,  old  age,  disease,
and  death  !

"  May  the  dispenser  of  these  gifts  attain  perfection  by  virtue  of  these,  his
liberal  gifts  !

"May  the  human  beings  and  all  the  other  animals,  obtain  deliverance  by
virtue  of  this  vast  offering  !

' '  May  all  the  Buddhists,  Nanda,  Upananda.  etc. ,  the  gods  of  the  natural  dwell-
ing, the  king,  this  dispenser  of  gifts,  and  the  populace  generally,  obtain
everlasting  happiness,  long  life,  and  freedom  from  disease.

"  May  all  the  human  beings,  by  virtue  of  this  (gift),  obtain  luck  in  body  and
fore-knowledge.

"  May  the  hopes  of  animals  be  realized  as  by  the  wish-granting  gem  {Cinta-
mani)  and  the  wish-granting  tree  (Kalpataru),  and  may  glory  come  on  all  !
mdngalam, !  "

After  the  tea-refreshment,  the  following  services  are  performed:
Ttoe  G-reat  Compassionators  liturgy,  the  praise  of  the  disciples  or
Sthaviras,  the  offering  of  the  magic-circle  or  man^ala,  though
the  great  circle  is  not  offered  every  day,  Yon-ten-zhi-gyurma,
and  the  worship  of  the  awful  Bhairava,  or  other  tutelary,  such
as  Sandus,  Dem-ch'og,  or-  Tara.  But  as  these  latter  liturgies  are
very  long,  they  are  interrupted  for  further  tea-refreshment.  And
at  this  stage,  that  is,  in  the  interval  between  the  first  and  second
portions  of  the  tutelary's  worship,  is  done  any  sacerdotal  service
needed  on  account  of  the  laity,  such  as  masses  for  the  sick,
or  for  the  soul  of  a  deceased  person.  In  the  latter  case  it  is
publicly  announced  that  a  person,  named  so-and-so,  died  on  such
a  date,  and  his  relatives  have  given  tea  and  such-and-such  present,
in  kind  or  money,  to  the  Lamas  for  masses.  Then  the  Lamas  do
the  service  for  sending  the  soul  to  the  western  paradise.^  Or,  if
the  service  is  for  a  sick  person,  they  will  do  the  Ku-rim'  ceremony.

The  tutelary's  service  is  then  resumed,  and  on  its  conclusion
tea  and soup  are  served. Then  is  chanted  the  S'es-rab  snin-


See  chapter  on  worship.  "  Not  phonetic  for  "  cure  him.'


218


DAILY  LIFE  AND  ROUTINE.


po,  after  which  the  assembly  closes,  and  the  monks  file  out  singly,
first  from  the  extreme  right  bench,  then  from  the  extreme  left,
the  youngest  going  first,  and  the  most  senior  of  the  re-incarnated
saintly  Lamas  last  of  all.

The  monks  now  retire  to  their  cells,  where  they  do  their
private devotions, and offer food to their tutelary deities ;

often  marking  the  time  to  be  oc-
cupied by  particular  devotional  exer-
cises by  twirling  with  the  finger  and
thumb  their  table-prayer-wheel,  and
while  it  spins,  the  exercise  lasts.

The  orisons  are  chanted  to  the
clamour  of  noisy  instruments  when-
ever the  sun's  disc  is  first  seen  in
the  morning.  Then  the  hat  is
doffed,  and  the  monk,  facing  the
sun,  and  uplifting  his  right  hand  to
a  saluting  posture,  chants  "  It  has
arisen !  It  has  arisen !  The  glorious
one  has  arisen  !  The  sun  of  happi-
ness has  arisen  !  The  goddess  Masici
has  arisen  !  Om-MarTcTnam  sva-
ha  !  "  On  repeating  this  mantra  of
Marici  seven  times,  he  continues
with:  "  Whenever  I  recall  your  name
I  am  protected  from  all  fear.  I  pray
for  the  attainment  of  the  great  stainless  bliss.  I  salute  you,
0  goddess  Marici!  Bless  me,  and  fulfil  my  desires.  Protect
me,  0  Goddess,  from  all  the  eight  fears  of  foes,  robbers,  -wild
beasts,  snakes,  and  poisons,  weapons,  firewater,  and  high  preci-
pices."

The  second  assembly,  called  "  the  After-heat"  (t'sa-gtin)  is
held  about  ^  9  a.m.,  when  the  sun's  heat  is  felt.  On  the  first  blast
of  the  conch  all  retire  to  the  latrine.  At  the  second  blast  all
gather  on  the  pavement,  or,  if  raining,  retire  to  a  covered  court
to  read,  etc. At  the  third  blast — about  fifteen  minutes  after  the


Peayee-cylindbk  fob  Table.


1  Time  is  only  known  approximately j'as  it  is  usually,  as  the  name  for  hour  (ch'u-
ts'al)  implies,  kept  by  water-clocks  (See  "C'u-ts'al,"  Ramsay's  Dirt., -p.  63),  and  also  by
the  burning  of  tapers.


OBISONS— VESPERS.  219

second — all  re-assemble  in  the  temple  and  perform  the  service  of
"  Inviting  the  religious  guardian  (-fiend)."  During  this  worship
tea  is  thrice  served,  and  on  its  conclusion  the  monks  all  leave  the
temple.  The  younger  monks  now  pore  over  their  lessons,  and
receive  instructions  from  their  teachers.

The  third  assembly,  called  "  Noon-tide,"  is  held  at  noon.  On
the  first  blast  of  the  conch  all  prepare  for  the  sitting.  At  the
second  they  assemble  on  the  pavement,  and  at  the  third  they  enter
the  temple  and  perform  the  worship  of  "  bS'ags-pa  "  and  "  bSkan-
wa,"  during  which  tea  is  served  thrice,  and  the  meeting  dis-
solves.

Each  monk  now  retires  to  his  cell  or  room,  and  discarding  his
boots,  offers  sacrifice  to  his  favourite  deities,  arranging  the  first
part  of  the  rice-offering  with  scrupulous  cleanliness,  impressing  it
with  the  four  marks,  and  surrounding  it  with  four  pieces  bearing
the  impress  of  the  four  fingers.  After  this  he  recites  the  "  Praise
of  the  three  holy  ones."  ^

Then  lay  servants  bring  to  the  cells  a  meal  consisting  of  tea,
meat,  and  pak  (a  cake  of  wheat  or  tsam-pa).  Of  this  food,  some
must  be  left  as  a  gift  to  the  hungry  manes,  Hariti  and  her
sons.  The  fragments  for  this  purpose  are  carefully  collected  by
the  servants  and  thrown  outside  the  temple  buildings,  where  they
are  consumed  by  dogs  and  birds.  The  monks  are  now  free  to
perform  any  personal  business  which  they  have  to  do.

The  fourth  assembly,  called  "  First  (after-)  noon  tea"  (dguh-
ja-dan-po)  is  held  about  3  p.m.  The  monks,  summoned  by
three  blasts  of  the  conch  as  before,  perform  a  service  somewhat
similar  to  that  at  the  third  assembly,  and  offer  cakes  and  praise
to  the  gods  and  divine  defenders,  during  which  tea  is  thrice  served,
and  the  assembly  dissolves.

Then  the  junior  monks  revise  their  lessons,  and  the  jadr-pa  or
middle-grade  monks  are  instructed  in  rhetoric  and  in  sounding
the  cymbals  and  horns.  And  occasionally  public  wranglings  as
a' ready  described  are  held  on  set  themes  to  stimulate  theological
proficiency.

The  fifth  assembly  or  vesper,  called  "  The  Second  (after-)  noon
tea  "  is  held  about  7  p.m. The  conch,  as  formerly,  calls  thrice  to


See  chapter  on  worship.


220  DAILY  LIFE  AND  ROUTINE

the  temple,  where  is  chanted  the  worship  of  Tan-rak  and  the
prayers  of  glory  (6kra-shis),  during  which  tea  is -given  thrice,
and  the  assembly  dissolves.  After  this  the  monks  return  to  their
rooms  till  the  second  night  bell  sounds,  when  the  junior  monks
repeat  from  memory  before  their  teachers  certain  scriptures  and
other  texts;  and  at  the  third  bell  all  retire  to  their  cells  to
sleep.

ROUTINE IN AN UNEEFOKMED MONASTERY.

The  routine  in  the  monasteries  of  the  unreformed  or  JSTin-
ma  sects  departs  considerably  from  the  high  standard  above
described,  and  introduces  more  demonolatry  and  the  worship  of
the  deiiied  wizard  Guru  Padma-sambhava.

The  practice  followed  at  Pemiongchi  monastry  is  here
described : —

In  the  morning,  after  offering  the  sacred  food,  incense,  and
butter-incense,  a  conch-shell  is  blown,  on  which  all  the  monks
must  come  out  of  their  chambers.  On  the  second  blast  all  collect
in  the  great  assembly  hall,  and  during  this  entry  into  the  hall
the  provost-marshal  stands  beside  the  door  with  his  rod  in  hand.
All  the  monks  seat  themselves  in  Buddha-fashion,  as  before
described.

The  slightest  breach  of  the  rules  of  etiquette  and  discipline  is
promptly  punished  by  the  rod  of  the  provost-marshal,  or,  in  the
case  of  the  younger  novices,  by  the  sacristan.

When  all  have  been  properly  seated,  then  two  or  three  of  the
most  inferior  novices  who  have  not  passed  their  examination,  and
who  occupy  back  seats,  rise  up  and  serve  out  tea  to  the  assembly,
as  already  described,  each  monk  producing  from  his  breast  pocket
his  own  cup,  and  having  it  filled  up  by  these  novices.

The  service  of  tea  is  succeeded  by  soup,  named  gSol-jam  t'ugpa,
and  served  by  a  new  set  of  the  novice  underlings.  When  the  cups
are  filled,  the  precentor,  joined  by  all  the  monks,  chants  "the
Sacrificial  Offering  of  the  Soup."  Three  or  four  cups  of  soup  are
supplied  to  each  monk. The  hall  is  then  swept  by  junior  monks.

The  precentor  then  inspects  the  magic  circle  ^  to  see  that  it  is
correct,  and,  this  ascertained,  he  commences  the  celebration,  con-

'  No  layman  is  allowed  to  serve  out  the  monks'  food  in  the  temple.  The  lay  ser-
vants bring  it  to  the  outside  door  of  the  building,  and  there  deposit  it.


IW UNREFOBMED  SECTS.  221

sisting  of  the  sNon-gro  and  the  refuge-formula,  and  Las-sbyan,
on  the  conclusion  of  which  the  assembly  disperses.

About  8  A.M.  the  conch-shell  blast  again  summons  the  monks  to
the  assembly  hall,  where,  after  partaking  of  refreshments  of  tea
and  parched  grain  in  the  manner  already  described,  a  full  celebra-
tion is  done. And  on  its  conclusion  the  monks  disperse.

About  10  A.M.  a  Chinese  drum  is  beaten  to  muster  the  monks
in  the  assembly  hall.  At  this  meeting  rice  and  meat  and  vege-
tables are  served  out  as  before,  and  with  this  is  also  served  beer
called  gSos-rgyab,  the  "  food-sacrifice  "  (ITo-mch'od)  being  done  as
formerly.  A  full  celebration  is  then  performed,  and  the  meeting
dissolves.

In  the  afternoon  a  conch-shell  is  blown  for  tea,  and  a  Chinese
gong  calls  for  beer,  the  monks  assembling  as  before,  and  doing
a  full  celebration  of  the  worship  of  the  lord  (demon)  Mahakala  and
the  guardians  of  religion  respectively.

When  sacerdotal  celebrations  on  behalf  of  laymen  have  to  be
done,  such  are  introduced  within  the  latter  celebration,  which  is
interrupted  for  this  purpose.  And  after  each  of  these  extra  cele-
brations the  monks  remain  outside  the  assembly  hall  "for  a  very
short  time  and  then  re-assemble.  On  finishing  the  extra  services,
the  worship  of  the  religious  guardians  is  then  resumed  and  con-
cluded.

In  the  evening  another  assembly,  preceded  by  tea  as  refresh-
ment, conducts  the  celebration  of  sKan-shags  with  one  hundred
and  eight  lamps.

Another  and  final  assembly  for  the  day  is  made  by  beat  of  drum,
and  rice  and  flesh-meat  is  served  out.

The  refreshments  and  meals  usually  number  nine  daily.

LIFE AS A VILLAGE PRIEST.

The  monk,  immediately  on  waking,  must  rise  from  his  couch,
even  though  it  be  midnight,  and  commence  to  chant  the  Mi-rtak-
rgyvd-bskul,  taking  care  to  pronounce  all  the  words  fuUy  and  dis-
tinctly. This  contains  the  instructions  of  his  special  Lama-pre-
ceptor, and  in  its  recital  the  monk  must  recall  vividly  to  mind  his
spiritual  guide.  This  is  followed  by  a  prayer  consisting  of
numerous  requests  for  benefits  of  a  temporal  nature  desired  by
the  petitioner.


222  DAILY  LIFE  AND  ROUTINE

Then  he  assumes  the  meditative  postm-e  of  the  seven  attitudes,^
and  gets  rid  by  physical  means  of  the  "  three  original  sins."

Then,  coercing  his  tutelary  demon  into  conferring  on  him  his
fiendish  guise,  he  chants  "  the  four  preliminary  services  "  : —

The  sJVon-gro  hzi-'byor.  These  are  the  refuge  formula,  which  cleanses
the  darkness  of  the  body ;  the  hundred  letters,  which  cleanse  all  ob-
scurity in  speech,  and  the  magic-circle  of  rice,  the  Mandala,  which
cleanses  the  mind  ;  and  the  prayer  enumerating  the  Lamas  up  to  the
most  perfect  one,  which  confers  perfection  on  the  monk  himself.

This  is  followed  by  the  chanting  of  hLa-gruh,  ^the  obtaining  of  the
Lama,"  and  "  the  obtaining  of  the  ornaments,  sNen-grub."

The  mild  deity  in  this  worship  is  called  "  The  Placid  One,"  ^
and  the  demon  •  "  The  Eepulsive."  ^  The  demoniacal  form  must
be  recited  the  full  number  of  times  which  the  Lama  bound  him-
self to  do  by  vow  before  his  spiritual  tutor,  namely,  one  hundred,
one  thousand,  or  ten  thousand  times  daily.  Those  not  bound  in
this  way  by  vows  repeat  the  charm  as  many  times  as  they  con-
veniently can.

Having  done  this,  he  may  retire  again  to  sleep,  if  the  night  be
not  very  far  advanced.  But  if  the  dawn  is  near,  he  must  not
go  to  sleep,  but  should  employ  the  interval  in  several  sorts  of
prayer.

As  soon  as  day  dawns,  he  must  wash  his  face  and  rinse  his
mouth  and  do  the  worship  above  noted,  should  he  not  have
already  done  so  ;  also  the  following  rites  : —

1st.  Prepare  sacred  food  for  the  six  sorts  of  beings  (Migs-strug-gi-
gtorma)  and  send  it  to  tantalized  ghosts.

2nd.  Offer  incense,  butter-incense,  and  wine-oblation  (gSer-sKj/em).
The  incense  is  offered  to  the  good  spirits — firstly,  to  the  chief  god  and
the  Lama;  secondly,  to  the  class  of  "  king  "  gods  ;  and  thirdly  to  the
mountain  god  "  Kanchinjinga."  Then  offerings  are  made  to  the  spirits
of  caves  (who  guarded  and  still  guard  the  hidden  revelations  therein
deposited),  the  "  enemy-god  of  battle,"  the  country  gods,  the  local
demigods,  and  "  the  eight  classes  of  deities."  The  butter-incense  is
only  given  to  the  most  malignant  class  of  the  demons  and  evil  spirits.

Some  breakfast  is  now  taken,  consisting  of  weak  soup,  followed
by  tea  with  parched  grain.  Any  especial  work  which  has  to  be
done  will  now  be  attended  to,  failing  which  some  tantrik  or  other

1  See  p.  145.  2  rnt'iin.  3  bzle-pa.


A(^ VILLAGE  PRIEST  AND HERMIT.  223


service  will  be  chanted.  And  if  any  temple  or  Caitya  be  at  hand,
these  will  be  circumambulated  with  "  prayer-wheel  "  revolving  in
hand,  and  chanting  mantras.  Then  is  done  any  priestly  service
required  by  the  villagers.

About  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  a  meal  of  rice  is  taken
followed  by  beer  by  those  who  like  it,  or  by  tea  for  non-beer
drinkers.

About  six  o'clock  p.m.  is  done  the  gtor-bsnos  service,  in  which,
after  assuming  his  tutelary  dignity,  he  chants  the  snon-gro  and
refuge  formula.  Then  is  done  a  sacrificial  worship  ^  with  bell
and  small  drum,  followed  by  an  invocation  to  the  hosts  of  Lamas,
tutelaries,  and  the  supernatural  defensores  fidei.

About  9  or  10  P.M.  he  retires  to  sleep.

IN HERMITAGE.

Buddhism  in  common  with  most  religions  had  its  hermits
who  retired  like  .Xohn  the  Baptist  into  the  wilderness. And  such.


Hekmit-Lama.:

periodical  retirement  for  a  time,  corresponding  to  the  Buddhist
Lent  (the  rainy  season  of  India,  or  Varsha,  colloq.  "  barsat "),  when
travelling  was  difficult  and  unhealthy,  was  an  essential  part  of  the
routine  of  the  Indian  Buddhist. Tson  K'apa  enforced  the  obser-

1  mCh'oga.  =  After  Hue.


224  DAILY  LIFE  AND  ROUTINE.

vance  of  this  practice,  but  it  has  now  fallen  much  into  abeyance.
Probably  the  booths  which  are  erected  for  the  head  Lamas  in
Sikbim  during  their  visits  to  villages  in  the  autumn,  are  vestiges
of  this  ancient  practice  of  retirement  to  the  forest.

Theoretically  it  is  part  of  the  training  of  every  _young  Lama  to
spend  in  hermitage  a  period  of  three  years,  three  months,  and
three  days,  in  order  to  acctistom  himself  to  ascetic  rites.  But  this
practice  is  very  rarely  observed  for  any  period,  and  when  it  is
observed,  a  period  of  three  months  and  three  days  is  considered
sufficient.  During  this  seclusion  he  repeats  the  spell  of  his  tutelary
deity  an  incredible  number  of  times.  The  Mvla-yoga  sngon-gro,
complete  in  all  its  four  sections,  must  be  repeated  100,000
times.  In  chanting  the  refuge-formula  portion,  he  must  prostrate
himself  to  the  ground  100,000  times.  The  repetition  of  the  Yige-
hrgya-^a  itself  takes  about  two  months  ;  and  in  addition  must
be  chanted  the  following  voluminous  services :  P'yi-'grub,  nan-
'grub,  gsan-'grub,  bla-'grub,  snen-grub,  'prin-las,  and  bzi-'grub.

Those  who  permanently  adopt  the  hermit  life  are  called  "  the
packed-up  ones  "  ^  and  those  of  the  highest  rank  are  "  the  great
recluses."  ^  They  are  engaged  in  ascetic  exercises  and  are  usually
followers  of  the  Vajrayana  system,  seeking  Siddhi  and  its  wizard
powers  by  the  aid  of  the  Dakkini  she-devils  and  the  king-devils
who  are  their  tutelaries.

TRADES  AND OCCUPATIONS.

Like  western  friars,  the  Lamas  have  a  considerable  proportion
of  their  number  engaged  in  trades  and  handicrafts.  The  monks
are  practically  divided  into  what  may  be  called  the  spiritual  and
the  temporal.  The  more  intelligent  are  relieved  of  the  drudgery
of  worldly  work  and  devote  themselves  to  ritual  and  meditation.
The  less  intellectual  labour  diligently  in  field  or  farm  and  in
trading  for  the  benefit  of  their  monastery ;  or  they  collect  the  rents
and  travel  from  village  to  village  begging  for  their  parent  monas-
tery, or  as  tailors,  cobblers,  printers,  etc.  Others  again  of  the
more  intellectual  members  are  engaged  as  astrologers  in  casting
horoscopes,  as  painters  or  in  image-making,  and  in  other  pursuits
contributing  to  the  general  funds  and  comfort  of  the  monastery.

^  mfs^avi-S'pa,  2  sffojn-ch'en.


TRABES  AND  DIET.


225


THE DIET.

The  diet  of  the  Lamas  is  the  ordinary  rather  Spartan  fare  of
the  country  ^  consisting  mainly  of  wheat,  barley,  or  buck-wheat
and  occasionally  rice,  milk  and  butter,  soup,  tea  and  meat.  The
only  flesh-meat  allowed  is  sheep,  goat,  and  yak ;  fish  and  fowl  are
prohibited.  The  fully-ordained  monks,  the  Ge-longs,  are  supposed
to  eat  abstemiously  and  abstain  totally  from  meat ;  though  even
the  Grand  Lama  of  Tashi-lhunpo  appears  to  eat  flesh-food.^

Neither  the  monks  of  the  established  church  nor  the  holier
Lamas  of  the  other  sects^  may  drink  any  spirituous  liquor.  Yet
they  offer  it  as  libations  to  the  devils.

1  For  food  of  Tibetans,  see  Tubnee's  Embassy,  24-48,  etc. ;  Pembeeton,  156 ;  Mooe-
CEOFT,  i.,  182,  etc. ;  Hue,  ii.,  258;  Cunningham's  Ladak,  305;  Rock.,  Z.,  passim.

2  Bogle  in  Maekham,  p.  100.


Libation-jug  and  Chalice-cup
(of  silver).


A  Grand  Lama  or  Bhotan.


X.


THE HIERARCHY AND RE-INCARNATE LAMAS.


"  Le  roi  est  mort,  vive  le  roi  !  "
"  Adam  .  .  .  his  soul  passed  by  transmigration  into  David
transmigrated  into  the  JVlessiah." — The  Talm.icd.^


.  his  soul


AELY  Buddhism  had  neither  church  nor  ecclesiastical
organization. It  was  merely  a  brotherhood  of  monks.
Even  after  Buddha's  death,  as  the  order  grew  in  size
and  affluence  under  the  rich  endowments  from  Asoka
and  other  kingly  patrons,  it  still  remained  free  from  anything  like


'  Hersbon's  Treasures  of  the  Talmud,  p.  242.


HIERARGBY AND PRIEST-KINGSHIP.  227

centralized  government.  The  so-called  patriarchs  had  only  very
nominal  power  and  no  generally  recognized  position  or  functions.
And  even  the  later  Indian  monasteries  had  each  its  own  separate
administration,  and  its  own  chief,  independent  of  the  others;  a
similar  state  of  affairs  seems  to  have  prevailed  in  Tibet  until  the
thirteenth  century.

The  hierarchical  system  of  Tibet  seems  to  date  from  the  thir-
teenth century  a.d,,  when  the  Lama  of  the  Sas-kya  monastery  was
created  a  pope  by  the  Grreat-Hongol  emperor  of  China,  Kubilai
Khan.  This  Sas-kya  Lama,  receiving  also  a  certain  amount  of  tem-
poral power,  soon  formed  a  hierarchy,  and  some  generations  later
we  find  the  other  sects  forming  rival  hierarchies,  which  tended  to
take  the  power  out  of  the  hands  of  the  petty  chiefs  who  now
parcelled  out  Tibet.  In  1417,  doctor  Tsoh  K'apa  founded  the
Gre-lug-pa  sect,  which  under  his  powerful  organization  soon  de-
veloped into  the  strongest  of  all  the  hierarchies,  and  five  genera-
tions later  it  leapt  into  the  temporal  government  of  Tibet,  which
it  still  retains,  so  that  now  its  church  is  the  established  one  of  the
country.

Priest-kingship,  a  recognized  stage  in  the  earlier  life  of  social
institutions,  still  extends  into  later  civilization,  as  in  the  case  of
the  emperors  of  China  and  Japan,  who  fill  the  post  of  high-priest.
It  was  the  same  in  Burma,  and  many  eastern  princes  who  no
longer  enjoy  "  the  divine  right  of  kings,"  still  bear  the  title  of
"  god,"  and  their  wives  of  "  goddess."

The  G-rand  Lama  who  thus  became  the  priest-king  of  Tibet
was  a  most  ambitious  and  crafty  prelate.  He  was  named
Nag-wan  L6-zah,  and  was  head  of  the  De-pung  monastery.  At
his  instigation  a  Mongol  prince  from  Koko  Nor,  named  Gusri
Khan,  conquered  Tibet  in  1640,  and  then  made  a  present  of  it  to
this  Grrand  Lama,  together  with  the  title  of  Dalai  or  "  the  vast "
(literally  "ocean")  Lama,i  and  he  was  confirmed  in  this  title
and  kingly  possession  in  1650  by  the  Chinese  emperor.  On
account  of  this  Mongol  title,  and  these  priest-kings  being  first
made  familiar  to  Europeans  through  the  Mongols,^  he  and  his


1  The  Tibetan  for  this  Mongol  word  is  xGya-mts'o,  and  in  the  list  of  Grand  Lamas
some  of  his  predecessors  auti  successors  bear  this  title  as  part  of  their  personal
name. And  the  Mongolian  for  rin-po-ch'e  is  "  Ertenni."

2  Through  the  works  of  Giorgi,  Pallas,  and  Klaproth.

(4 -.


228 THE  HIERABGHr  AND  RE-INGABNATE  LAMAS.

successors  are  called  by  some  Europeans  "  Dalai  (or  Tale)  Lama,"
though  the  first  Dalai  Lama  was  really  the  fifth  Grand  Lama  of
the  established  church ;  but  this  title  is  practically  unknown  to
Tibetans,  who  call  the  Lhasa  Grand  Lamas,  Gyal-wa  Kin-po-ch'e,
or  "The  gem  of  majesty  or  victory."

In  order  to  consolidate  his  new-found  rule,  and  that  of  his
church  in  the  priest-kingship,  this  prelate,  as  we  have  seen,  posed
as  the  deity  Avalokita-in-the-flesh,  and  he  invented  legends
magnifying  the  powers  and  attributes  of  that  deity,  and  trans-


Fohe-Handed  Avalokita.
(Incarnate  in  the  Dalai  Lama.)

ferred  his  own  residence  from  De-pung  monastery  to  a  palace
which  he  built  for  himself  on  "  the  red  hill "  near  Lhasa,  the  name
of  which  hill  he  now  altered  to  Mount  Potala,  after  the  mythic
Indian  residence  of  his  divine  prototype.  He  further  forcibly
seized  many  of  the  monasteries  of  the  other  sects  and  converted
them  into  his  own  Ge-lug-pa  institutions  ^ ;  and  he  developed  the

1  Amongst  others  he  seized  the  monastery  of  the  grodt  Taranatha,  and  demolished
many  of  that  Lama's  buildings  and  books,  for  such  an  honest  historian  was  not  at  all
to  his  taste.


THE  FIRST  DALAI  LAMA-POPE.


229


fiction  of succession  by  re-incarnate  Lamas,  and  by  divine  re-
flexes.

The  other  sects  accepted  the  situation,  as  they  were  indeed
forced  to  do ;  and  all  now,  while  still  retaining  each  its  own  separate
hierarchical  system,  acknowledge  the  Grand  Lama  of  Lhasa  to  be


PoTALA. The  Palace  of  the  Dalai  Lama.
(From  Kircher's  China  Illustrata.)


the  head  of  the  Lamaist  church,  in  that  he  is  the  incarnation  of
the  powerful  Buddhist  deity  Avalokita.  And  they  too  adopted
the  attractive  theory  of  the  re-incarnate  succession  and  divine
reflexes.

It  is  not  easy  to  get  at  the  real  facts  regarding  the  origin  and
development  of  the  theory  of  re-incarnate  Lamas,  as  the  whole
question  has  been  purposely  obscured,  so  as  to  give  it  the  appear-
ance of  antiquity.

It  seems  to  me  that  it  arose  no  earlier  than  the  fifteenth  century,
and  that  at  first  it  was  simply  a  scheme  to  secure  stability  for  the  suc-
cession to  the  headship  of  the  sect  against  electioneering  intrigues
of  crafty  Lamas,  and  was,  at  first,  a  simple  re-incarnation  theory  ;
which,  however,  must  not  be  confused  with  the  orthodox  Buddhist
theory  of  re-birth  as  a  result  of  Karma,  for  the  latter  is  never  con-
fined in  one  channel.  On  the  contrary,  it  holds  that  the  spirit  of  the
deceased  head  Lama  is  always  reborn  in  a  child,  who  has  to  be
found  by  oracular  signs,  and  duly  installed  in  the  vacant  chair;  and
he  on his death  is similarly  reborn,  and so  on  ad  infinitum,


230 THE  HTEBARGHY  AND RE-INCARNATE  LAMAS.


thus  securing,  on  quasi-Buddhisfcic  principles,  continuous  suc-
cession by  the  same  individual  through  successive  re-embodiments.

The  first  authentic  instance  of  re-incarnate  Lamas  which  I  can
find  is  the  first  of  the  Grand  Lamas  of  the  Gre-lug-pa,  namely,  Ge-
den-dub.  Had  this  theory  been  invented  prior  to  Tson  K'apa's  death
in  1417  A.D.,  it  is  practically  certain  that  the  succession  to  Tson
K'apa  would  have  begun  with  an  infant  re-incarnation.  But  we
find  the  infant  re-incarnationship  only  beginning  with  the  death  of
Tsoii  K'apa's  successor,  namely,  his  nephew  and  pupil,  Ge-den-dub
aforesaid ;  and  from  this  epoch  the  succession  to  the  Ge-lug-pa  Grand
Lamaship  has  gone  on  according  to  this  theory.  As  the  practice
worked  well,  it  was  soon  adopted  by  the  Lamas  of  other  sects,  and
it  has  so  extended  that  now  nearly  every  great  monastery  has  its
own  re-incarnate  Lama  as  its  chief,  and  some  have  several  of  these
amongst  their  higher,  officials.

The  more  developed  or  expanded  theory,  however,  of  celestial
Lama-reflexes,  which  ascribes  the  spirit  of  the  original  Lama  to  an
emanation  (NiTm,dna  kdya,  or,  changeable  body)^  from  a  par-
,  ticular  celestial  Buddha  or  divine  Bodhisat,  who  thus  becomes
incarnate  in  the  church,  seems  to  me  to  have  been  of  much  later
origin,  and  most  probably  the  invention  of  the  crafty  Dalai  Lama
Nag-wan,  or  Gyal-wa  Na-pa,^  about  150  years  later.  For,  previous
to  the  time  when  this  latter  Grand  Lama  began  to  consolidate
his  newly-acquired  temporal  rule  over  Tibet,  no  authentic  records
seem  to  exist  of  any  such  celestial  origin  of  any  Lamas,  and  the
theory  seems  unknown  to  Indian  Buddhism  .^  And  this  Dalai
Lama  is  known  to  have  taken  the  greatest  liberties  with  the  tra-
ditions and  legends  of  Tibet,  twisting  them  to  fit  in  with  his  divine
pretensions,  and  to  have  shaped  the  Lamaist  hierarchy  on  the  lines
on  which  it  now  exists.

This  Dalai  Lama,  Gyal-wa  Na-pa,  is  the  first  of  these  celestial
incarnate  Lamas  which  I  can  find.  He  was  made,  or,  as  I  consider,
made  himself,  to  be  the  incarnation  of  the  most  popular  Bud-
dhist divinity  possible,  namely,  Avalokita,  and  to  the  same  rank
were  promoted  the  four  Grand  Lamas  who  preceded  him,  and  who,

1  Cf.  ante.

2  Literally  "  The  fifth  Jina." Cf.  also  Pand.,  H.,  No.  46.

'  None  of  the  so-called  biographies  of  Atisa  and  earlier  Indian  monks  contain-
ing any  such  references  can  certainly  be  placed  earlier  than  this  period.


ORIGIN  OF  RE-INCARNATE  LAMAS.  231

together  with  himself,  were  identified  with  the  most  famous  king
of  Tibet,  to  wit,  Sron  Tsan  Grampo,  thus  securing  the  loyalty  of
the  people  to  his  rule,  and  justifying  his  exercise  of  the  divine
right  of  kings  ;  and  to  ensure  prophetic  sanction  for  this  scheme
he  wrote,  or  caused  to  be  written,  the  mythical  so-called  history,
Mani  kah-'bum.  It  was  then  an  easy  task  to  adjust  to  this  theory,
with  retrospective  effect,  the  bygone  and  present  saints  who  were
now  affiliated  to  one  or  other  of  the  celestial  Buddhas  or  Bodhisats,
as  best  suited  their  position  and  the  church.  Thus,  Tson  K'apa,
having  been  a  contemporary  of  the  first  Grand  Lama,  could  not
be  Avalokitesvara,  so  he  was  made  to  be  an  incarnation  of  Man-
jusri,  or  "  the  god  of  wisdom,"  on  whom,  also,  Atisa  was
affiliated  as  the  wisest  and  most  learned  of  the  Indian  monks  who
had  visited  Tibet;  and  so  also  King  Thi  Sron  Detsan,  for  his  aid
in  founding  the  order  of  the  Lamas.

It  also  seems  to  me  that  Na-pa  was  the  author  of  the  re-in-
carnate Lama  theory  as  regards  Tashi-lhunpo  monastery  and  the
so-called  double-hierarchy  ;  for  an  examination  of  the  positive
data  on  this  subject  shows  that  the  first  re-incarnate  Lama  of
Tashi-lhunpo  dates  only  from  the  reign  of  this  Na-pa,  and  seven
years  after  his  accession  to  the  kingship  of  Tibet.

Tashi-lhunpo  monastery  was  founded  in  1445  by  G-eden-dub,
the  first  Grand  Ge-lug-pa  Lama,  who  seems,  however,  to  have
mostly  lived  and  to  have  died  at  De-pung.

It  will  be  noticed  from  the  list  of  Tashi  Grand  Lamas  ^  that
Geden-dub,  the  founder  of  Tashi-lhunpo,  contrary  to  the  current
opinion  of  European  writers,  does  not  appear  as  a  Tashi  Lama  at
all.  This  official  list  of  Tashi-lhunpo,  read  in  the  light  of  the
biographies  of  these  Lamas,^  clearly  shows  that  previous  to  the
Lama  who  is  number  two  of  the  list,  and  who  was  born  during
the  latter  end  of  Dalai  Lama  Na-pa's  reign  as  aforesaid,  none
of  the  Tashi-lhunpo  Lamas  were  regarded  as  re-incarnations  at
all.  The  first  on  this  list,  namely,  Lo-zan  Ch'o-kyi  Gyal-ts'an,
began  as  a  private  monk,  and  travelled  about  seeking  instruction
in  the  ordinary  way,  and  not  until  his  thirty-first  year  was  he
promoted  to  the  abbotship,  and  then  only  by  election  and  on


1  Presently  to  be  given.

2  Some  of  which  have  been  translated  by  Sakat  (J.A.S.B.,  1882,  26  seq.).


232 THE  HIERARCHY  AND RE-INCARNATE  LAMAS.

account  of  distinguislied  ability.  It  is  also  interesting  to  note
that  on  the  death,  in  1614,  of  the  fourth  Grand  Lama  of  the
G-e-lug-pa  (named  Ycin-tan),  whom  he  had  ordained,  he  was
installed  in  the  abbotship  at  Grah-ldan  monastery,  and  in  1622,  at
the  age  of  53,  he  initiated,  as  fifth  Grand  Lama,  the  infant  Na-
pa, who  was  then  seven  years  old,  and  who  afterwards  became
the  great  Dalai  Lama.

And  he  continued  to  be  the  spiritual  father  and  close  friend  and
adviser  of  Na-pa,  and  seems  to  have  begun  those  political
negotiations  which  culminated  in  the  cession  of  Tibet  to  his
protege.  When  he  died,  in  1662,  his  spiritual  son  Na-pa,  who
was  47  years  old,  and  had  been  22  years  in  the  kingship,  promptly
re-incarnated  him,  and  also  made  him  out  to  be  his  own  spiritual
father,  even  as  regards  the  divine  emanation  theory.  Thus  the
new-born  babe  was  alleged  to  be  an  incarnation  of  Avalokita's
spiritual  father,  Amitabha,  the  Buddha  of  Boundless  Light ;  and
he  was  given  a  considerable  share  in  the  management  of  the
established  church.  This,  however,  merely  perpetuated  the  rela-
tions which  had  actually  existed  between  these  two  Grand  Lamas
as  father  and  soa,  and  which  had  worked  so  well,  and  had  such
obvious  political  advantages  in  providing  against  interregnums.

In  the  hierarchical  scheme  of  succession  by  re-incarnate  Lamas,
the  Lhasa  Grand  Lama,  who  wields  the  sovereign  power,  thus  gave
himself  the  highest  place,  but  allotted  the  Tashi-lhunpo  Grand
Lama  a  position  second  only  to  his  own.  Below  these  come  the
other  re-incarnate  Lamas,  ranking  according  to  whether  they  are
regarded  to  be  re-embodiments  of  Indian  or  of  Tibetan  saints.  The
former  class  are  called  "  the  higher  incarnations  "  or  Tul-Ku,'  and
by  the  Mongols  Khutuktu.  They  occupy  the  position  of  cardinals
and  archbishops.  The  lowest  re-incarnate  Lamas  are  regarded
as  re-embodiments  of  Tibetan  saints,  and  are  named  ordinary
Tul-ku  or  "Kv^s'o,"^  or  by  the  Mongols  Khublighan  or  Hobli-
ghan ;  these  mostly  fill  the  post  of  abbots,  and  rank  one  degree
higher  than  an  ordinary  non-re-incarnate  abbot,  or  ICan-po,
who  has  been  selected  on  account  of  his  proved  abilities. Most'  of


I  sPrul-siu.

-  sKu-s^OffS.  The  use  of  the  term  for  a  re-incarnate  Lama  seems  restricted  to
Ladak.  In  Tibet  proper  this  title  is  applied  to  any  superior  Lama,  and  is  even
used  in  polite  society  to  laymen  of  position.


SUGOESSIOlSr  OF  LAMAI8T  POPES.


233


these  so-called  re-incarnate  Lamas  are  by  a  polite  fiction  credited
with  knowing  all  the  past  life  and  deeds  of  individuals,  not  only  in
the  present  life,  but  also  in  former  births.

In  the  unreformed  sects,  where  the  priests  are  not  celibate,  the
children  succeed  to  the  headship.  The  ordinary  hierarchical  dis-
tinctions of  grades  and  ranks  have  already  been  noted  in  describing
the  organization  of  the  order.

The  greatest  of  the  Lama  hierarchs,  after  the  Grand  Lamas  of
Lhasa  and  Tashi-lhunpo,  are  the  great  Mongolian  Lama  at  TJrgya,
the  Sas-kya  Lama,  and  the  Dharma  Eaja  of  Bhotan,  this  last
being  practically  independent  of  Lhasa,  and  the  temporal  ruler  of
Bhotan.  Here  also  may  be  mentioned  the  female  incarnate
goddess,  "  The  diamond  sow  "  of  Yam-dok  Lake  monastery.

The  following  list  of  Tibetan  popes,  the  Grand  Lamas  of  Lhasa,
is  taken  from  the  printed  list.^  The  birth-dates  are  given  upon
the  authority  of  a  reliable,  trustworthy  Lamaist  calculator.^

List  of  Geand  (Dalai)  Lamas  or  Popes.


No.

Name.

Birth.

Deatl.

Remarks.

A.D.

A.D.

1

dGe-'dun  grub-pa

1391

1475

2

dGe-'dun  rGya-mts'o

1475

1543

3

bSod-nams ,,

1543
1589^

1589
1617

4

Yon -tan „

5

Sag-dban  blo-bsan  rGya-

mts'o

1617

1682

First  "Dalai."

6

Ts'ans-dbyans  rGya-mts'o

1683*

1706

Deposed  &  murdered.

7

sKal-bzan ,,

1708

1758

8

'Jam-dpal ,,

1758

1805=

9

Lun-rtogs , ,

1805"

1816

Seen  by  Manning.

10

Ts'ul-K'riras

ISIQ''

1837

11

mK'as-grub „

1837

1855

12

'P'rin-las ,,

1856

1874

13

T'ub-bstan ,,

1876

Present  pope.

The  first  Grand  Lama,  Ge-'dun-dub,  was  born  near  Sas-kya,  and


1  The  modern  list  precedes  the  historical  names  by  a  series  of  fifty  more  or  less
mythic  personages,  headed  by  Avalokita  himself.
'  Lama  S'e-rab  Gya-ts'o,  of  the  Ge-lug-pa  monastery,  Darjiling.
J  Desgodins  (.La  Miss.,  etc.,  p.  218)  gives  158S.
"  Desq.  gives  1682.

1  Other  accounts  give  1798,  1803,  1808 ;  cf.  also  Koppen's  List,  i.,  235.
"  Desg.,  and  this  corresponds  with  Manning's  account  (Makkh.,  265).
'  Desg.  gives  1815.


234 THE  HIERAECHY  AND BE-INCARNATE  LAMAS.

not  far  from  the  site  whereon  he  afterwards  founded  Tashi-lhunpo.
His  successors,  up  to  and  inclusive  of  the  fifth,  have  akeady  been
referred  to  in  some  detail.

On  the  deposition  and  death  of  the  sixth  Grand  Laina  for  licen-
tious living,  the  Tartar  king,  Gingkir  Khan,  appointed  to  Potala
the  Lama  of  O'ag-poh-ri,  named  Nagwan  Yeshe  Gya-mts'o,  into
whom  the  sorcerers  alleged  that,  not  the  soul  but  the  breath  of
the  former  Grand  Lama  had  passed.  It  was  soon  announced,
however,  that  the  sixth  Grand  Lama  was  re-born  in  the  town  of
Lithang  as  Kal-zan,  the  son  of  a  quondam  monk  of  De-pung
monastery.  This  child  was  imprisoned  by  the  Chinese  emperor,
who  had  confirmed  the  nominee  of  the  Tartar  king,  until  the  war
of  1 720,  when  he  invested  him  with  spiritual  rule  at  Lhasa  ;  but
again,  in  1728,  deposed  him,  as  he  was  privy  to  the  murder  of  the
king  of  Tibet.  So  he  set  in  his  place  the  Lama  "  Kiesri  "  Eim-
poch'e,  of  the  Chotin  monastery,  four  days' journey  from  Lhasa.^
He  seems  latterly  to  have  returned  to  power,  and  during  his  reign
in  1749,  the  Chinese  put  his  temporal  vice-regent  to  death,  when
the  people  flew  to  arms  and  massacred  the  Chinese.^

The  ninth  is  the  only  Grand  Lama  of  Lhasa  ever  seen  by  an
Englishman.  He  was  seen  by  Manning  in  181],  while  still
a  child  of  six  years  old.  Manning  relates  that :  "  The  Lama's
beautiful  and  interesting  face  and  manner  engrossed  almost  all  my
attention.  He  was  at  that  time  about  seven  years  old  ;  had  the
simple  and  unaffected  manners  of  a  well-educated  princely  child.
His  face  was,  I  thought,  poetically  and  affectingly  beautiful.  He
was  of  a  gay  and  cheerful  disposition,  his  beautiful  mouth  perpetu-
ally unbending  into  a  graceful  smile,  which  illuminated  his  whole
countenance.  Sometimes,  particularly  when  h6^  looked  at  me,  his
smile  almost  approached  to  a  gentle  laugh.  No  doubt  my  grim
beard  and  spectacles  somewhat  excited  his  risibiUty.  ...  He
enquired  whether  I  had  not  met  with  molestations  and  difficulties
on  the  road,"  etc.^  This  child  died  a  few  years  afterwards,  assassi-
nated, it  is  believed,  by  the  regent,  named  Si-Fan.

The tenth  Grand  Lama  also  dying  during  his  minority,  and


1  This  latter  Lama  was  in  power  at  Potala  in  1730  on  the  arrival  of  Horace  Della-
penna,  from  whose  account  (Mabkh,  ,  p.  321)  most  of  the  latter  details  have  been  taken.

2  Ibid.,  Ixv.
3H/<?.,p.  266.


GBAND  DALAI  LAMAS.  235

suspicions  being  aroused  of  foul  play  on  the  part  of  the  regent,
the  latter  was  deposed  and  banished  by  the  Chinese  in  1844,  at
the  instance  of  the  Grand  Lama  of  Tashi-lhunpo,  and  a  rising  of
his  confederates  of  the  Sera  monastery  was  suppressed.^

The  eleventh  also  died  prematurely  before  attaining  his  majority,
and  is  believed  to  have  been  poisoned  by  the  regent,  the  Lama  of
Ten-gye-ling.  A  young  Lama  of  De-pung,  named  Ra-deng,^  was
appointed  regent,  and  he  banished  his  predecessor  "  Pe-chi,"  who
had  befriended  Hue  ;  but  proving  unpopular,  he  had  eventually  to
retire  to  Pekin,  where  he  died.^  Pe-chi  died  about  1869,  and  was
succeeded  by  the  abbot  of  Grah-ldan.

The  twelfth  Grand  Lama  was  seen  in  1866  by  one  of  our
Indian  secret  surveyors,  who  styles  him  a  child  of  about  thirteen,
and  describes  him  as  a  fair  and  handsome  boy,  who,  at  the
reception,  was  seated  on  a  throne  six  feet  high,  attended  on  either
side  by  two  high  rank  officials,  each  swaying  over  the  child's  head
bundles  of  peacock  feathers.  The  Grand  Lama  himself  put  three
questions  to  the  spy  and  to  each  of  the  other  devotees,  namely :
"  Is  your  king  well  ?  "  "  Does  your  country  prosper  ?  "  "  Are
you  yourself  in  good  health  ?  "  He  died  in  1874,  and  his  death  is
ascribed  to  poison  administered  by  the  regent,  the  Tengye-ling
head  Lama.

The  thirteenth  is  still  (1894)  alive.  He  was  seen  in  1882  by
Sarat  Candra  Das,  whose  account  of  him  is  given  elsewhere.

The  Tashi-lhunpo  Grand  Lamas  are  considered  to  be,  if  possible,
holier  even  than  those  of  Lhasa,  as  they  are  less  contaminated
with  temporal  government  and  worldly  politics,  and  more  famous
for  their  learning,  hence  they  are  entitled  "  The  precious  great
doctor,  or  Great  gem  of  learning "  {Pan-ch'en  Mn-po-ch'e),'^  or
Oyal-gon  ^  Rin-po-ch'e,  or  "  The  precious  lordly  victor."  The
Sa-kya  Grand  Lamas  had  been  called  "  Pan-ch'en,"  or  the  "  Great
doctor  " from  the  twelfth  century,  but  have  ceased  to  hold  the


1  Hue,  ii.,  p.  166. This  account  is  disbelieved  by  Mr.  Mayers,  J.R.A .S.,  iv.,  305.

2  rva-sgren,  the  "  gyal-po  Riling  "  of  the  Pandit,  p.  xxiv.
Maekh.,  xcvii.

■*  Pan  is  a  contraction  for  the  Indian  "  Pandit,"  or  learned  scholar,  and  rin-po-ch'e  =
ratna  or  gem,  or  precious,  or  in  Mongolian  Irtini  or  Brdeni,  hence  he  is  called  by
Mongolians  "  Pan-ch'en  Irtini."

5  Vulgarly  "  gyaii-gSn."


236 THE  HIERARCHT  AND RE-INGARNATE  LAMAS.


title since  the  era of the  Dalai  Lamas,  when  the  established
church  appropriated  it  to  itself.

The  following  list  of  "  Tashi "  Lamas  is  taken  from  that  printed
at  the  monastery  itself.^

List  of  "Tashi"  Grand  Lamas.


No.

Name.

Birth.

Death.

Remarks.

1
•2

.3

4
5

6

bLo-bzan  cb'os-kyi  rgyal-mts'an
bLo-bzan  ye-she  dpal  bzan-po
bLo-bzan  dpal-ldan  ye-s'es

rJe-bstan  pahi  fiinia
rJe-dpal-ldau  ch'os-kyi  grags-pa )
bstan-pahi  dbaii  p'yig J

A.D.
1569
1663
1738=

1781
1854
1883

A.D.
1662

1737
1780

1854
1882

Bogle's  friend,  installed

1743.
Seen  by  Turner.

Died  in  August.

Installed  last  week  of
February,  1888.

The  third  Tashi  Lama  was  the  friend  of  ]\Ir.  Bogle,  who  seems
to  be  the  only  European  who  had  the  advantage  of  close  and
friendly  intercourse  with  one  of  the  Grand  Lamas.  Mr.  Bogle
gives  us  a  delightful  glimpse  into  the  amiable  character  of  this
holy  man.^

"  The  Lama  was  upon  his  throne,  formed  of  wood  carved  and  gilt,
with  some  cushions  about  it,  upon  which  he  sat  cross-legged.  He
was  dressed  in  a  mitre-shaped  cap  of  yellow  broad-cloth  with  long
bars  lined  with  red  satin;  a  yellow  cloth  jacket,  without  sleeves;
and  a  satin  mantle  of  the  same  colour  thrown  over  his  shoulders.


1  The  official  list  is  entitled  pan-rfH-/)')'c«.  Hm-pa  Itar  hjon-pa-ni,  and  gives  no  dates.
It  ends  with  No.  3  of  my  list  as  above,  and  extends  the  list  backwards  to  ten
additional  names,  beginning  with  the  somewhat  mythical  disciple  of  Buddlia,  Su-bhuti ;
and  including  legendary  Indian  personages  as  re-incarnations,  as  well  as  the  following  six
Tibetans,  the  fourth  of  which  is  usually  held  to  be  the  iirst  of  the  Tashi-lhunpo  Grand
Lamas.  As,  however,  Tashi-lhunpo  was  only  built  in  1445,  only  the  latter  two  of  this  list
could  be  contemporary  with  it,  and  as  is  noted  in  the  text,  their  biographies  show  that
they  were  ordinary  monks  who  held  no  high  post,  if  any  at  all,  at  Tashilhunpo.

SnPPLMENTABY LiST OF SO-CALLED PAN-CH'BN GeAND LaMAS.

1.  K'uff-pa  Ums-htscis,  of  rTa-nag  monastery.

2.  Sa-skija  Pandita  (1182-1252).

3.  grim-stoii  ido-rje  dpal  (1284-1376).

4.  mK'as-sgrub  AGe-legs-Apcd  zang-po  (1385-1439).

5.  ^3.Ti-Qh'en-\iSod-nains  p'yogs  Icyi-glaii-'^o  (1439-1505)

6.  dben-sa-pa  blo-bzan  Don-grvh  (1505-1570).

2  At  "  Tashi-tzay,"  N.E.  of  Tashi-lhunpo  (M.,  p.  92).
*  LiK.  cit.,  p.  83.


GRAND TA8HI-LAMAS.  237

On  one  side  of  him  stood  his  physician  with  a  bundle  of  perfumed
sandal-wood  rods  burning  in  his  hand ;  on  the  other  stood  his
So-pooi  Ghumbo  ^  or  cup-bearer.  I  laid  the  governor's  presents
before  him,  delivering  the  letter  and  pearl  necklace  into  his  own
hands,  together  with  a  white  Pelong  handkerchief  on  my  own  part,
according  to  the  custom  of  the  country.  He  received  me  in  the
most  engaging  manner.  I  was  seated  on  a  high  stool  covered  with
a  carpet.  Plates  of  boiled  mutton,  boiled  rice,  dried  fruits,  sweet-
m.eats,  sugar,  bundles  of  tea,  sheeps'  carcasses  dried,  etc.,  were  set
before  me  and  my  companion,  Mr.  Hamilton.  The  Lama  drank
two  or  three  dishes  of  tea  along  with  us,  asked  us  once  or  twice
to  eat,  and  threw  white  Pelong  handkerchiefs  on  our  necks  at
retiring.

"  After  two  or  three  visits,  the  Lama  used  (except  on  holidays)
to  receive  me  without  any  ceremony,  his  head  uncovered,  dressed
only  in  the  large  red  petticoat  which  is  worn  by  all  the  gylongs,
red  Bulgar  hide  boots,  a  yellow  cloth  vest  with  his  arms  bare,  and
a  piece  of  yellow  cloth  thrown  around  his  shoulder.  He  sat  some-
times in  a  chair,  sometimes  on  a  bench  covered  with  tiger  skins,
and  nobody  but  So-pon  Ghumbo  present.  Sometimes  he  would
walk  with  me  about  the  room,  explain  to  me  the  pictures,  make
remarks  on  the  colour  of  my  eyes,  etc.  For,  although  venerated
as  God's  vicegerent  through  all  the  eastern  countries  of  Asia,
endowed  with  a  portion  of  omniscience,  and  with  many  other
divine  attributes,  he  throws  aside  in  conversation  all  the  awful
part  of  his  character,  accommodates  himself-  to  the  weakness  of
mortals,  endeavours  to  make  himself  loved  rather  than  feared,  and
behaves  with  the  greatest  afifability  to  everybody,  especially  to
strangers.

"  Teshu  Lama  is  about  forty  years  of  age,  of  low  stature,  and
though  not  corpulent,  rather  inclining  to  be  fat.  His  complexion
is  fairer  than  that  of  most  of  the  Tibetans,  and  his  arms  are  as
white  as  those  of  a  European ;  his  hair,  which  is  jet  black,  is  cut
very  short ;  his  beard  and  whiskers  never  above  a  month  long  ;
his  eyes  are  small  and  black.  The  expression  of  his  countenance
is smiling  and good-humoured. His father  was  a  Tibetan,  his


1  He  held,  according  to  Turner  .(p.  246),  the  second  rank  in  the  court  of  the  Tashi
Lama,  and  was  by  birth  a  Manchu  Tartar.  He  was  then  only  about  twenty-tw»
years  of  age.


238 THE  HIERARGHY  AND  RE-INCARNATE  LAMAS.

mother  a  near  relation  of  the  Eajas  of  Ladak.  From  her  he
learned  the  Hindustani  language,  of  which  he  has  a  moderate
knowledge,  and  is  fond  of  speaking  it.  His  disposition  is  open,
candid,  and  generous.  He  is  extremely  merry  and  entertaining
in  conversation,  and  tells  a  pleasant  story  with  a  great  deal  of
humour  and  action.  I  endeavoured  to  find  out  in  his  character
those  defects  which  are  inseparable  from  humanity,  but  he  is  so
universally  beloved  that  I  had  no  success,  and  not  a  man  could
find  in  his  heart  to  speak  ill  of  him

"  Among  the  other  good  qualities  which  Teshu  Lama  possesses
is  that  of  charity,  and  he  has  plenty  of  opportunities  of  exercising
it.  The  country  swarms  with  beggars,  and  the  Lama  entertains
besides  a  number  of  fakirs  (religious  mendicants),  who  resort
hither  from  India.  As  he  speaks  their  language  tolerably  well
he  every  day  converses  with  them  from  his  windows,  and  picks  up
by  this  means  a  knowledge  of  the  different  countries  and  govern-
ments of  Hindiistan.  .  .  .  He  gives  them  a  monthly  allowance
of  tea,  butter,  and  flour,  besides  money,  and  often  bestows  some-
thing considerable  upon  them  at  their  departure.  The  Grosains
who  are  thus  supported  at  the  Lama's  expense  may  be  in  number
about  one  hundred  and  fifty,  besides  about  thirty  Musulman  fakirs.
For  although  the  genius  of  the  religion  of  Muhamad  is  hostile  to
that  of  the  Lama,  yet  he  is  possessed  of  much  Christian  charity,
and  is  free  from  those  narrow  prejudices  which,  next  to  ambition
and  avarice,  have  opened  the  most  copious  source  of  human
misery."  And  observing  the  universal  esteem  in  which  the
Grrand  Lama  is  held  by  the  monks  and  people,  the  looks  of
veneration  mixed  with  joy  with  which  he  is  always  regarded,
Mr.  Bogle  adds  "  one  catches  affection  by  sympathy,  and  I
could  not  help,  in  some  measure,  feeling  the  same  emotions
with  the  Lama's  votaries,^  and  I  will  confess  I  never  knew  a
man  whose  manners  pleased  me  so  much,  or  for  whom,  upon
so  short  an  acquaintance,  I  had  half  the  heart's  liking."  ^

This  Grand  Lama,  soon  after  Bogle's  departure,  died  of  small-
pox. He  had,  in  response  to  the  invitation  of  the  Chinese  emperor,
set  out  for  Pekin,  attended  by  1,500  troops  and  followers,  and
sumptuous  provision  was  made  for  his  comfort  during  the  whole

■"^v  ~  ■

^  Op.  clt.,  p.  95.  z  p.  133.


GRAND LAMAS OP  TASHI-LHUNPO.  239

of  the  long  journey  in  Chinese  territory.  The  emperor  met  him
at  Sining,  several  weeks'  march  from  Pekin,  and  advanced  about
forty  paces  from  his  throne  to  receive  him,  and  seated  him  on  the
topmost  cushion  with  himself  and  at  his  right  hand.  To  the  great
grief  of  the  empress  and  the  Chinese  the  Lama  was  seized  with
small-pox,  and  died  on  November  12th,  1780.  His  body,  placed  in
a  golden  cof&n,  was  conveyed  to  the  mausoleum  at  Tashi-lhunpo.^
His  successor,  while  still  an  infant  of  about  eighteen  months,
was  seen  by  Captain  Turner  as  the  envoy  of  the  British  govern-
ment. This  remarkable  interview  took  place  at  the  monas-
tery of  Terpa-ling.^  He  found  the  princely  child,  then  aged
eighteen  months,  seated  on  a  throne  of  silk  cushions  and  hangings
about  four  feet  high,  with  his  father  and  mother  standing  on  the
left  hand.  Having  been  informed  that  although  unable  to  speak
he  could  understand,  Captain  Turner  said  "  that  the  governor-
general  on  receiving  the  news  of  his  decease  in  China,  was
overwhelmed  with  grief  and  sorrow,  and  continued  to  lament  his
absence  from  the  world  until  the  cloud  that  had  overcast  the
happiness  of  this  nation  was  dispelled  by  his  re-appearance.  .  .  .
The  governor  anxiously  wished  that  he  might  long  continue  to
illumine  the  world  by  his  presence,  and  was  hopefal  that  the
friendship  which  had formerly  subsisted between them would

not  be  diminished " The  infant  looked  steadfastly

at  the  British  envoy,  with  the  appearance  of  much  attention,
and  nodded  with  repeated  but  slow  motions  of  the  head,  as
though  he  understood  every  word.  He  was  silent  and  sedate,
his  whole  attention  was  directed  to  the  envoy,  and  he  conducted
himself  with  astonishing  dignity  and  decorum.  He  was  one  of
the  handsomest  children  Captain  Turner  had  ever  seen,  and  he
grew  up  to  be  an  able  and  devout  ruler,  delighting  the  Tibetans  '
with  his  presence  for  many  years,  and  dying  at  a  good  old  age.^
He  is  described  by  Hue  *  as  of  fine  majestic  frame,  and  astonishing
vigour  for  his  advanced  age,  which  was  then  about  sixty.


1  Oriadal  Repertory,  ii.,  p.  145 ;  and  Markham,  p.  208.

2  On  the  4th  December,  1783.

3  Tdeneb's  Embassy,  etc.  The  new  Tashi  Lama  was  installed  in  October,  1784,  in  the
presence  of  the  Dalai  Lama,  the  Chinese  Minister  or  Amban,  the  Gesub  Rimboc'e,  and
the  heads  of  all  the  monastery  in  Tibet,  as  described  by  Purangir  Gosain,  the  native
agent  of  the  Warren  Hastings,  M.,  Ixxv.

4  ii.,  157.


240 THE HIERARCHY  AND RE-INCARNATE  LAMAS.

The  Mongolian  hierarch  at  Urgya-Kuren,  in  the  Khalka  country,
is  called  "  His  holy  reverence,"  or  Je-tsun  Dam-pa,"  ^  and  is  re-
garded as  an  incarnation  of  the  celebrated  historian  Lama,  Tara-
natha,  who,  it  will  be  remembered,  was  of  the  Sa-kya  sect,  which
had  identiiied  itself  with  Mongolian  Lamaism,  having  introduced
the religion  there and  given the translations of  the gospels.
Urgya  monastery  was  doubtless  founded  by  the  Sa-kya-pa.  However
this  may  be,  on  the  development  of  the  reincarnate  Lama  theory,
the  Khalka^  Mongols  fixed  upon  Taranatha  as  the  source  of  the
re-incarnations  for  their chief hierarch. And  the  Dalai  Lama,
Nag-pa,  who  had  climbed  into power  on  the  shoulders  of  the
Mongols,  had  to  accept  the  high  position  thus  accorded  to  Tara-
natha, whom  he  detested,  but  he,  or  one  of  his  early  successors,
converted  the  monastery  into  a  Gre-lug-pa  institution.

The  hierarch,  Je-tsun  Dam-pa,  was  the  most  powerful  person  in
the  whole  of  MongoUa^  during  the  reign  of  the  emperor  Kang-hi
(1662-1723),  and  had  his  headquarters  at  Koukou-Khoton,  or
"  Blue  town,"  beyond  the  bend  of  the  Yellow  river,  when  the
Khalkas  quarrelled  with  the  Kalmuks  or  Sleuths  and  escaped  into
territory  under  Chinese  protection.  The  Kalmuks  demanded  the
delivery  of  Je-tsun  Dam-pa  and  his  brother,  the  prince  Tuschetu-
Khan,  which  of  course  the  emperor  refused,  and  sought  the
mediation  of  the  Dalai  Lama.  But  the  latter,  or,  rather,  his  regent
(Tis-ri),  for  he  had  been  defunct  for  seven  years,  to  the  emperor's
surprise,  advised  the  delivering  up  of  these  two  princes,  and  such
a  decision  was,  perhaps,  the  first  sign  to  him  of  the  great  fraud
which  was  being  enacted  as  Lhasa.  To  make  matters  worse,  when
the  emperor  was  warring  with  the  Kalmuks  "  he  paid  a  visit  to
Je-tsun  Dam-pa,  and  owing  to  some  fancied  want  of  respect  on  the
part  of  the  holy  man,  one  of  the  emperor's  officers  drew  his  sword
and  killed  him.  This  violence  caused  a  tumult,  and  soon  after-
wards it  was  announced  that  Je-tsun  Dam-pa  had  reappeared
among  the  Khalkas,  who  threatened  to  avenge  his  former  death.
The  emperor  engaged  the  diplomatic  interposition  of  the  Dalai


^  rJe-btsun-gdam-pa.

2  The  Khalkas,  so  called  after  the  Khalka  river,  are  the  representatives  of  the
Mongol  or  Yuen  dynasty  of  China,  founded  by  Jingis  and  Kubilai  Khan,  and  driven
from  the  throne  in  1368.— Maekh.,  p.  xlix.

3  KoppEN,  ii.,  178.


TAR  AN  Aril  A AND SA-KYA BIERAKOHS.  241

Lama,  who  succeeded  in  pacifying  the  Khalkas.  But  it  was
arranged  that  the  future  births  of  the  Je-tsun  Dam-pa  should  be
found  in  Tibet,  so  that  the  Khalkas  might  not  again  have  a  sym-
pathizing fellow-countryman  as  their  high-priest."  ^

His  "  re-incarnation  "  is  now  always  found  in  central  or  western
Tibet.  The  present  one  is  said  to  have  been  born  in  the  bazaar
(S'ol)  of  Lhasa  city,  and  to  be  the  eighth  of  the  series.  He  is
educated  at  the  De-pung  monastery  as  a  Gre-lug-pa  Lama;  but  the
present  one  was  carried  off,  when  four  or  five  years  of  age,  to
Urga,  accompanied. by  a  Lama  of  De-pung  as  tutor.  A  complete
list  of  these  hierarchs  and  fuUer  historical  information  in  regard  to
them  is  much  needed.^

The  Sa-kya  hierarchs,  as  we  have  seen,  were  once  extremely
powerful  and  almost  de  facto  kings  of  Tibet.  Although  the
Sa-kya  hierarch  is  now  eclipsed  by  the  established  church,  he  still
retains  the  sympathy  of  the  numerous  adherents  of  the  unre-
formed  sects,  and  is  now  regarded  by  the  ]S"in-ma-pa  as  their
head  and  an  incarnation  of  the  Gruru  himself,  and  as  such  scarcely
inferior  to  the  Grrand  Lama  of  Lhasa.  Sa-kya  was  founded,  as  we
saw,  by  Kungah  S"in-po,  born  in  1090  A.D.,  and  became  famous
under  Sa-kya  Pandita,  born  1180,  and  his  nephew  was  the  first  of
the  great  hierarchs.

The  list  of  the  earlier  Sa-kya  hierarchs,  whose  most  prosperous
era  was  from  1270  to  1340,  is  as  follows''  : —

List  of  SA-KYA  HIERARCHS.

1.  Sas-kya  bsan-po.

2.  S'an-btsun.

3.  Ban-dKar-po.

4.  Chyan-rin  bsKyos-pa.

5.  Kun-gs'an.

6.  gS'an-dbaii.

7.  Chaii-rdor.

8.  Ari-len.

9.  Legs-pa-dpal.

10.  Sen-ge-dpal.

11.  'Od-zer-dpal.  i

Its  head  Lama  is  still  called  by  the  unreformed  Lamas  "Sa-kya


12.  'Od-ser-sen-ge.

13.  Kun-rin.

14.  Don-yod  dpal.

15.  Yon-btsun.

16.  'Od-ser  Sen-ge  II.

17.  rGyal-va  Sah-po.

18.  Dban-p'yng-dpal.

19.  bSod-Nam-dpal.

20.  i-Gyab-va-Tsan-po  II.

21.  dBan-btsun.


1  Maekham's  Tibet,  xlix.

■'  For  an  account  of  the  journey  of  the  present  hierarch  from  Lhasa  to  Urga,  see
PeUnff  Gazette  for  1874,  pp.  68, 74  and  124  (Shanghai  abstract  1875) .  The  new  incarna-
tion met  by  the  Abb^  Hue  in  1844,  journeying  from  Urga  to  Lhasa  appears  to  have
been  the  seventh.

3  Cf.  also  list  by  Sanang  Setsbn,  p.  121 ;  Csoma,  Gr.,  186 ;  Koppen,  ii.,  105  ;  Sarat,
/.^.S.B.,1881,p.  240.

E


242 THE  HIERARCHY  AND RE-INCARNATE  LAMAS.


Pan-ch'en."!  The  succession  is  hereditary;  but  between  father  and
son  intervenes  the  brother  of  the  reigning  l^ama  and  uncle  of  the
successor,  so  as  to  secure  an  adult  as  holder  of  the  headship.

The  Bhotan  hierarchy  is  still  a  strong  one  and  combines  the
temporal  rule  of  the  country.  It  ousted  all  rival  sects  from  the
land,  so  that  now  it  has  its  own  sect,  namely,  tbe  southern  Duk-pa
form  of  the  Kar-gyu-pa.  According  to  Mr.  (Sir  Ashley)  Eden,  the
Bhotan  ese  only  overran  the  country  about  three  centuries  ago,
displacing  the  then  natives,  who  are  said  to  have  come  originally
from  Koch  Bihar.  The  invaders  were  Tibetan  soldiers,  over  whom
a  Lama  named  "Dupgani  Sheptun"  acquired  paramount  influence
as  Dharma  Eaja.  On  his  death  the  spirit  of  the  Sheptun  became
incarnate  in  a  child  at  Lhasa,  who  was  conveyed  to  Bhotan.  "When
this  child  grew  up  he  appointed  a  regent  for  temporal  concerns,
called  Deb  Kaja,^  but  this  latter  office  seems  to  have  lapsed  long
ago,  and  the  temporal  power  is  in  the  hands  of  the  lay  governors
(Pen-lo)  of  the  country.

The  head  Lama  is  held  to  be  re-incarnate,  and  is  named  Lama
Ein-po-ch'e,  also  "  The  religious  king ''  or  Dharma  Eaja.  His
hat,  as  seen  in  the  illustration  at  the  head  of  this  chapter,^  bears
the  badge  of  cross  thunderbolts,  and  is  surmounted  by  a  spiked
thunderbolt,  typical  not  only  of  his  mystical  creed,  but  also  of  the
thunder  dragon  (D,ug),  which  gives  its  name  to  his  sect — the
Dug-pa.  His  title,  as  engraved  on  his  seal  figured  by  Hooker,*
describes  him  as  "  Chief  of  the  Eealm,  Defender  of  the  Faith,
Equal  to  Sarasvati  in  learning.  Chief  of  all  the  Buddhas,  Head
Expounder  of  the  Sastras,  Caster  out  of  Devils,  Most  Learned
in  the  Holy  Laws,  An  Avatar  of  God,  Absolver  of  Sins,  and
Head  of  the  Best  of  all  Eeligions."

List  of  the  BHOTaN  HIERARCHS.


1.

Nag-dbaii  rnam rgyal bdud 'jom-

7.

Nag

dbah  ch'os  kyi  dban  p'ug.

rdorje.

8.

„

))

'jig-med  rtags-pa  (second

2.

„ „ 'jig-med  rtags-pa.

re-incarnation).

3.

„ „ ch'os-kyi  rgyal  mtshan.

9.

„

„

'jig-med  rtags  norbu.

4.

„ „ 'jig  med  dbafi  po.

10.

„

„

„ „ ch'os-rgyal—

5.

„ „ Shakya  sen  ge.

the  present  Great  Bho-

6.

„ „ 'jam  dbyahs  rgyal  mts'an.

tan  Lanaa  in  1892.

1  He  is  entitled  by  Turner  {op.  cit.,  p.  315)  "  Gongoso  Rimbochhe."
'  Rept.  cf .  Maekh.,  p.  Iv.

3  The  figure  is  from  a  photo  of  a  Bhotan  Lama,  and  the  hat  is  that  of  the  present
(1893)  Grand  Lama  of  Bhotan.
*  Himal.  Jours^  i.


BHOTAN  HIEBAROH.  243

Each  of  these  Grand  Lamas  has  a  separate  biography  (or  na/ni-
far).  The  first,  who  was  a  contemporary  of  the  Grrand  Lama
Sonam  Grya-tsho,  seems  to  have  been  married ;  the  rest  are  celi-
bate. A  celebrated  Lama  of  this  Dug-pa  sect  was  named  Mi-
pam  ch'os-Kyi  gyal-po.

The  Dharma  Raja  resides,  at  least  in  summer,  at  the  fort  of  Ta-
shi-ch'o.  The  palace  is  a  large  stone  building,  with  the  chief
house  seven  storeys  high,  described  and  figured  by  Turner  and
others. Here  live  over  five  hundred  monks.

Bogle  describes  the  Lama  of  his  day  as  "  a  thin,  sickly-looking
man  of  about  thirty-five  years  of  age."  ^

He  exercises,  I  am  informed,  some  jurisdiction  over  Lamas  in
Nepal,  where  his  authority  is  officially  recognized  by  the  Grorkha
government.

The  number  of  the  lesser  spiritual  chiefs  held  to  be  re-embodied
Lama  saints  is  stated^  to  be  one  hundred  and  sixty,  of  which
thirty  are  in  Tibet  (twelve  being  "Shaburuh"),  nineteen  in  north
MongoUa,  fifty-seven  in  south  Mongolia,  thirty-five  in  Kokonor,
five  in  Chiamdo  and  the  Tibetan  portion  of  Sze-ch'wan,  and  four-
teen at  Pekin.  But  this  much  under-estimates  the  number  in
Tibet.

Amongst  the  re-embodied  Lamas  in  western  Tibet  or  Tsang
are  Sen-c'en-Ein-po-ch'e,^  Yanzin  Lho-pa,  Billun,  L6-ch'en,  Kyi-
zar,  Tihki,  De-ch'an  Alig,  Kanla,  Kon  (at  Phagri).  In.Kham,  Tu,
Ch'amdo,  Derge,  etc.

The  Lamaist  metropolitan  at  Pekin  is  called  by  the  Tibetans
"  IC'an-skya,"  and  is  considered  an  incarnation  of  Eol-pahi  Dorje.
His  portrait  is  given  in  the  annexed  figure.  He  dates  his  spiritual
descent  from  a  dignitary  who  was  called  to  Pekin  during  the  reign


1  Mabkh.,  p.  27.

2  In  the  Sheng  Wu  Ki,  and  registered  by  the  Colonial  Board  at  Pekin.  (Mayeh)
J.R.A.S.,  vi.,  p.  307.

3  The  last  re-incarnate  Lama  bearing  this  title,  and  the  tutor  of  the  Tashi  Grand
Lama,  was  beheaded  about  1886  for  harbouring  surreptitiously  Sarat  C.  Das,  who  is
regarded  as  an  English  spy ;  and  although  the  bodies  of  his  predecessors  were  con-
sidered divine  and  are  preserved  in  golden  domes  at  Tashi-lhunpo,  his  headless  trunk'
was  thrown  ignominiously  into  a  river  to  the  S.W.  of  Lhasa,  near  the  fort  where
he  had  been  imprisoned.  On  account  of  his  violent  death,  and  under  such
circumstances,  this  re-incarnation  is  said  to  have  ceased.  From  the  glimpse  got  of
him  in  Sarat's  narrative  and  in  his  great  popularity,  he  seems  to  have  been  a  most
ajniable  man.

E 2


244 THE  HIERARCHY  AND JiE-lNCARNATE  LAMAS.


of  K'ang  Hi,  probably  about  1690-1700  a.d.,  and  entrusted  with,
the  emperor's  confidence  as  his  rehgious  vicegerent  for  inner
Mongolia.!

In  Ladak  only  four  monasteries  have  resident  re-incarnate
Lamas  or  Ku-s'o. Although  they  are  of  the  red  sect,  these  head

Lamas  are  said  to  be
educated  at  Lhasa.
The  present  (1893)  re-
incarnate Lama  of
Spitak,  the  seventeenth
of  the  series,  is  thus  de-
scribed by  Captain
Eamsay.2  "A  youth,
26  years  of  age,  who
lately  returned  from
Lhasa,  where  he  had
been  for  14  years.  He
was  handsomely  dressed
in  a  robe  made  of  a
particular  kind  of  dark
golden  -  coloured  and
yellow  embroidered
China  silk,  which  none
but  great  personages
are  allowed  to  wear,
and  he  had  on  Chinese
long  boots,  which  he
did  not  remove  when  he  entered  the  house.  His  head  and  face
were  closely  shaved,  and  one  arm  was  bare.  On  entering
the  room  he  bowed,  and  then  presented  the  customary  '  scarf  of
salutation,'  which  I  accepted.  He  impressed  me  very  favourably;
his  manner  and  general  appearance  was  superior  to  anything  I  had
seen  among  other  Lamas  or  people  of  Ladak."

In  Sikhim,  where  few  Lamas  are  celibate  and  where  the  La-
brang  Lama  is  the  nominal  head  of  the  fraternity  with  the  title
of  "  Lord  protector  "  (sKyab  mGron),  the  fiction  of  re-incarnation
was  only  practised  in  regard  to  the  Pemiongchi  and  La-brang


Head  Lama  of  Pekin.  3


i^.£2I,Pand.,No.  53.


2  Op.  dt.,  p.


'  After  Griiuwedel,


FEMALE  RE-INGARNATIONS.  245


monasteries,  but  has  ceased  for  several  generations.  In  Sikhim,
too,  the- same  tendency  to  priest-kingship  cropped  out.  Several
of  the  Sikhim  kings  were  also  Lamas  ;  and  when  the  king  was
not  a  monk,  the  Lamas  retained  most  of  the  temporal  power
in  their  hands ;  and  the  first  king  of  Sikhim  was  nominated  by
the  pioneer  Lamas ;  and  the  ancestor  of  the  present  dynasty,  a
descendant  of  the  religious  king,  Thi-Sron  Detsan,  one  of  the
founders  of  Lamaism,  was  canonized  as  an  incarnation  of  the
Buddhist  god,  Maiijusri.

The  female  re-incarnation,  the  abbess  of  the  monastery  of  the
Yamdok  lake,  who  is  considered  an  embodiment  of  the  goddess
Vcbjra  vardhi,  or  "  The  diamond  sow,"  is  thus  described  by  Mr.
Bogle  ^ :  "  The  mother  went  with  me  into  the  apartment  of  Durjay
Paumo,  who  was  attired  in  a  gylong's  dress,  her  arms  bare  from  the
shoulders,  and  sitting  cross-legged  upon  a  low  cushion.  She  is  also
the  daughter  of  the  Lama's  (Tashi)  brother,  but  by  a  different
wife.  She  is  about  seven  and  twenty,  with  small  Chinese  features,
delicate,  though  not  regular  fine  eyes  and  teeth ;  her  complexion
fair,  but  wan  and  sickly ;  and  an  expression  of  languor  and  melan-
choly in  her  countenance,  which  I  believe  is  occasioned  by  the
joyless  life  that  she  leads.  She  wears  her  hair,  a  privilege  granted
to  no  other  vestal  I  have  seen ;  it  is  combed '  back  without  any
ornament,  and  falls  in  tresses  upon  her  shoulders.  Her  Gha-^wa
(touch),  like  the  Lamas',  is  supposed  to  convey  a  blessing,  and  I  did
not  fail  to  receive  it.  Durjay  Paumo  spoke  little.  Dr.  Hamilton,
who  cured  her  of  a  complaint  she  had  long  been  subject  to,  used  to
be  there  almost  every  day."

Let  us  now  look  at  the  manner  in  which  the  new  re-embodi-
ments or  re-births  of  the  hierarchs  are  discovered.  On  the  death
of  a  re-incarnate  Lama  his  spirit  is  believed  to  flit  into  the  soul  of
some  unknown  infant  who  is  born  a  few  days  after  the  death  of  the
Lama.  The  mode  of  determining  the  child  who  has  been  so
favoured  is  based  upon  the  practice  followed  in  regard  to  the  Grrand
Lama  of  Lhasa,  which  we  will  now  describe.

Sometimes  the  pontifi",  before  he  dies,  indicates  the  particular
place  and  even  the  family  in  which  he  will  be  re-born,  but  the
usual  practice  is  to  ascertain the  names  of  all  the  likely  male

1  Mabkh.,  p.  109.


246 THE  HIEEARCHY  AND RE-INOARNATE  LAMAS.

infants  who  have  been  born  under  miraculous  portents  just  after  the
death  of  the  deceased  Lama,  and  with  prayer  and  worship  to  ballot
a  selected  list  of  names,  which  are  written  by  a  committee  of
Lamas  on  slips  of  paper  and  put  into  a  golden  jug,  and  then  amid
constant  prayer,  usually  by  117  selected  pure  Lamas,  to  draw  by
lot  in  relays,  and  extending  over  31  to  71  days,  one  of  these,  which
is  the  name  of  the  new  incarnation. As,  however,  the  Pekin


Testing  a  Claimant  to  the  Gkand  Lamaship.  i

court  is  believed  to  influence  the  selection  under  such  circum-
stances, the  state  oracle  of  Na-ch'uh  has  latterly  superseded  the
old  practice,  and  the  present  G-rand  Lama  was  selected  by  this
oracle.  Lama  Ugyen  Grya-tsho  relates^  that  the  present  Na-ch'un-
oracle  prophesied  disaster  in  the  shape  of  a  monster  appearing  as
the  Dalai  Lama,  if  the  old  practice  were  continued.  On  the  other
hand  he  foretold  that  the  present  Dalai  would  be  found  by  a  pious
monk  in  person,  and  that  his  discovery  would  be  accompanied  with
"  horse  neighings."  The  "  pious  monk  "  proved  to  be  the  head
Lama  of  Gah-ldan  monastery,  who  was  sent  by  the  oracle  to  Chukor-


1  After  Hue.


2  Loc.  cit.,  para.  59 ;  cf.  also  Hue,  ii.,  197.


DISCOVERING THE  NEW  INCARNATION.  247

gye,  where  he  dreamed  that  he  was  to  look  in  the  lake  called  Lha-
moi-lamtsho  for  the  future  Dalai.  He  looked,  and  it  is  said  that,
pictured  in  the  bosom  of  the  lake,  he  saw  the  infant  Dalai  Lama
and  his  parents,  with  the  house  where  he  was  born,  and  that  at
that  instant  his  horse  neighed.  Then  the  monk  went  in  search
of  the  real  child,  and  found  him  in  Kongtoi,  in  the  house  of  poor
but  respectable  people,  and  recognized  him  as  the  child  seen  in
the  lake.  After  the  boy  (then  a  year  old)  had  passed  the  usual
ordeal  required  of  infants  to  test  their  power  to  recognize  the
property  of  the  previous  Dalai  Lama,  he  was  elected  as  spiritual
head  of  Tibet.

These  infant  candidates,  who,  on  account  of  their  remarkable
intelligence,  or  certain  miraculous  signs,'  have  been  selected
from  among  the  many  applicants  put  forward  by  parents  for
this,  the  highest  position  in  the  land,  may  be  born  anywhere
in  Tibet.2  They  are  subjected  to  a  solemn  test  by  a  court  com-
posed of  the  chief  Tibetan  re-incarnate  Lamas,  the  great  lay
officers  of  state,  and  the  Chinese  minister  or  Amban.  The  in-
fants are  confronted  with  a  duplicate  collection  of  rosaries,  dorjes,
etc.,  and  that  one  particular  child  who  recognizes  the  properties
of  the  deceased  Lama  is  believed  to  be  the  real  re-embodiment.

To  ensure  accuracy  the  names  are  written  as  aforesaid,  and  each
slip  encased  in  a  roll  of  paste  and  put  in  a  vase,  and,  after  prayer,
they  are  formally  drawn  by  lot  in  front  of  the  image  of  the
emperor  of  China,'  and  the  Chinese  minister,  the  Amban,  unrolls
the  paste  and  reads  out  the  name  of  the  elect,  who  is  then  hailed,
as  the  great  Grod  Avalokita  incarnate,  hence  to  rule  over  Tibet.
An  intimation  of  the  event  is  sent  to  the  emperor,  and  it  is  duly
acknowledged  by  him  with  much  formality,  and  the  enthrone-
ment and  ordination  are  all  duly  recorded  in  like  manner.

Interesting  details  of  the  ceremonies  as  well  as  of  the  prominent
part  played  by  China  in  regulating  the  pontifical  succession,  have


1  Circumstantial  stories  are  told  of  such  applicants  to  the  effect,  that  when  only  a
few  months  old  the  infants  have  ohtained  the  power  of  speech  for  a  few  moments  and
informed  their  parents  that  the  Lamas  have  left  Potala  to  come  and  claim  them.

2  The  distant  villages  of  Gada,  south-west  of  Darchhendo  (Ta-chhien  Lu)  and
Lithang,  have  each  produced  a  Dalai  Lama.

'  The  emperor  PureKien  Lung,  who  died  1796,  since  his  final  subjugation  of  Tibet,
has  continued  to  receive  homage  even  posthumously  as  sovereign  of  the  country.
(Marco  P.,  loc.  cit,  L.,  p.  290.)


248 THE  HIERARCHY  AND RE-INCARNATE  LAMAS.


been  supplied  by  Mr.  Mayers'  from  tbe  original  Chinese  docu-
ment of  Meng  Pao,  the  senior  Amban  at  Lhasa,  and  from  which
the  following  historic  extract  is  made  by  way  of  illustration  :—

I.  Memorial  drawn  up  on  the  9th  day  of  the  12th  month  of  the  20th
year  of  Tao  Kwang  (January  30th,  1841),  reporting  that,  on  instituting
an  investigation  among  young  children  for  the  embodiment  of  Dalai
Lama,  miraculous  signs,  of  undoubted  authenticity,  have  been  verified,
which  is  laid  in  a,  respectful  memorial  before  the  Sacred  Glance.

In  the  matter  of  the  appearance  of  the  embodiment  of  the  Dalai
Lama,  it  has  already  been  reported  to  your  majesty  that  a  communi-
cation had  been  received  from  K6-le-tan-si-leu-t'u-sa-ma-ti  Bakhshi  re-
porting the  di.spatch  of  natives  in  positions  of  dignity  to  inquire  into
the  circumstances  with  reference  to  four  young  children  born  of
Tibetan  parents,  respectively  at  Sang-ang-k'iiih-tsung  in  Tibet,  the
tribalty  of  K'ung-sa  within  the  jurisdiction  of  Ta-tsien-lu  in  Sze-ch'wan,
and  [two]  other  places.  The  chancellor  has  now  made  a  further  re-
port, stating  that  in  the  case  of  each  of  the  four  children  miraculous
signs  have  been  shown,  and  that  bonds  of  attestation  have  been  drawn
up  in  due  form  on  the  part  of  members  of  both  the  priesthood  and  laity
of  the  Tibetans.  He  annexes  a  detailed  statement  in  relation  to  this
matter  ;  and  on  receipt  of  this  communication  your  Majesty's  servants
have  to  observe  that  on  the  previous  occasion,  when  the  embodiment  of
the  tenth  Dalai  Lama  entered  the  world,  three  children  were  discovered
[whose  names]  were  placed  in  the  urn  for  decision  by  lot.  As  the
chancellor  now  writes  that  each  of  the  four  children  discovered  by  the
Khan-pu  on  this  occasion  has  been  attended  by  auspicious  and  en-
couraging omens,  we  do  not  presume  to  arrogate  to  ourselves  the  choice
of  any  one  of  their  number,  but,  as  regards  the  whole  four,  have  on  the
one  hand  communicated  in  a  Tibetan  dispatch  with  the  chancellor  re-
specting the  two  children  born  within  the  territory  of  Tibet,  and  as  re-
gards the  two  children  born  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  province  of
Sze-ch'wan,  have  addressed  a  communication  to  the  viceroy  of  that  pro-
vince calling  upon  them  respectively  to  require  the  parents  and  tutors
of  the  children  in  question  to  bring  the  latter  to  Anterior  Tibet.  On
this  being  done,  your  majesty's  servants,  in  accordance  with  the  exist-
ing rules,  will  institute  a  careful  examination  in  person,  conjointly  with
the  Panshen  Erdeni  and  the  chancellor,  and  will  call  upon  the  children  to
recognize  articles  heretofore  in  use  by  the  Dalai  Lama ;  after  which  your
servants  will  proceed  with  scrupulous  care  to  take  measures  for  in-
scribing their  names  on  slips  to  be  placed  in  the  urn,  and  for  the  cele-
bration of  mass  and  drawing  the  lots  in  public.  So  soon  as  the  indi-
vidual shall  have  been  ascertained  by  lot,  your  servants  will  forward  a
further  report  for  your  majesty's  information  and  commands.  They
now  present  for  imperial  perusal  a  translation of  the  detailed  state-

1  W.  F.  Mayer, Ulustrailons  of  the  Ldmaist  System in  Tibet,  drawn  from  Chinese
Sources,  J.R.A..%  vi.  (1872),  p.  284  seq.


DISCOVERING THE  NEW  INCARNATION.  249

ment  of  the  miraculous  signs  attending  the  children  that  were  dis-
covered on  inquiry.

[Enclosure.]

Detailed  statement  of  the  miraculous  signs  attending  upon  four
children,  drawn  up  for  his  majesty's  perusal  from  the  despatch  of  .the
chancellor  reporting  the  same  : —

I.  A-chu-cho-ma,  the  wife  of  the  Tibetan  named  Kung-pu-tan-tseng,
living  at  the  Pan-j§-chung  post-station  in  Sang-ang-k'iiih-tsung,  gave
birth  to  a  son  on  the  13th  day  of  the  11th  month  of  the  year  Ki-hai
(19th  December,  1839),  upon  a  report  concerning  which  having  been  re-
ceived from  the  local  headmen,  the  chancellor  despatched  Tsze-fSng-cho-
ni-'rh  and  others  to  make  inquiry.  It  was  thereupon  ascertained  that
on  the  night  before  the  said  female  gave  birth  to  her  child,  a  brilliant
radiance  of  many  colours  was  manifested  in  the  air,  subsequently  to  which
the  spring-water  in  the  well  of  the  temple  court-yard  changed  to  a  milk-
white  colour.  Seven  days  afterwards,  there  suddenly  appeared  upon
the  rock,  behind  the  post-station,  the  light  of  a  flame,  which  shone  for
a  length  of  time.  Crowds  of  people  hastened  to  witness  it,  when,  how-
ever, no  single  trace  of  fire  remained,  but  upon  the  rock  there  was
manifested  an  image  of  Kwan  Yin  (Avalokita)  and  the  characters  of
Na-mo  O-mi-to-Fo  (Amitabha),  together  with  the  imprint  of  footsteps.
On  the  night  when  the  child  was  born,  the  sound  of  music  was  heard,
and  milk  dropped  upon  the  pillars  of  the  house.  When  the  commis-
sioners instituted  their  inquiry,  they  found  the  child  sitting  cross-
legged  in  a  dignified  attitude,  seeming  able  to  recognize  them,  and
showing  not  the  slightest  timidity.  They  placed  a  rosary  in  the  child's
hands,  whereupon  he  appeared  as  though  reciting  sentences  froni  the
Sutra  of  Amita  Buddha.  In  addressing  his  mother  he  pronounced  the
word  A-md  with  perfect  distinctness.  His  features  were  comely  and  well-
formed,  and  his  expression  bright  and  intellectual,  in  a  degree  superior
to  that  of  ordinary  children.

In  addition  to  the  foregoing  report,  certificates  by  the  local  headmen
and  members  of  the  priesthood  and  laity,  solemnly  attesting  personal
knowledge  of  the  facts  therein  set  forth,  were  appended,  and  were
transmitted  after  authentication  by  the  chancellor  to  ourselves,  etc.,  etc.

II.  Memorial  drawn  up  on  the  8th  day  of  the  6th  month  of  the  21st
year  of  Tao  Kwang  (25th  July,  1841),  reporting  the  verification  of  the
child  in  whom  there-embodiment  of  the  Dalai  Lama  has  appeared,  the
drawing  of  lots  in  accordance  with  the  existing  rule,  and  the  fact  that
the  entire  population  of  Tibet,  both  clergy  and  laity,  are  penetrated
with  feelings  of  gratitude  and  satisfaction :  upon  the  memorial  bring-
ing which  to  the  imperial  knowledge  the  Sacred  Glance  is  reverently
besought.

Your  servants  have  already  memorialized  reporting  that  the  em-
bodiment of  the  Dalai  Lama  having  made  its  appearance,  a  day  had
been  fixed  for  the  drawing  of  lots  ;  and  they  have  now  to  state that


250 THE  HIERARCHY  AND RE-INCARNATE  LAMAS.

they  subsequently  received  a  letter  from  the  chancellor  to  the  effect  that
the  children  had  successively  arrived  and  had  all  been  lodged  in  the
Sangha  monastery  at  Te  K'ing,  to  the  eastward  of  Lassa,  whereupon  he
had  appointed  the  21st  day  of  the  5th  month  for  proceeding  to  put
them  to  the  proof.  On  that  day,  accordingly,  your  servants  proceeded
to  the  Sangha  monastery  in  company  with  the  Panshen  Erdeni,  the
chancellor,  and  all  the  hut'uTcht'u,  khan-pu,  ho-pu-lun,  etc.,  when  it  was
ascertained  by  a  careful  inquiry  into  each  individual  case  that  the  two
children  born  respectively  at  Sang-ang-k'iiih-tsung  and  at  La-kia-jih-wa
in  Tibet  are  both  aged  three  years,  and  the  two  children  born  re-
spectively in  the  tribalty  of  K'ung-sa  in  the  district  of  Ta-tsien-lu  and
at  the  Tai  Ning  monastery  are  both  aged  four  years — that  their  per-
sonal appearance  is  uniformly  symmetrical  and  proper,  and  that  all  alike
display  an  elevated  demeanour.  Hereupon  the  Panshen  Erdeni  and
his  associates  laid  before  them  for  recognition  the  image  of  Buddha
worshipped  by  the  late  Dalai  Lama,  together  with  the  bell-clapper,
swinging  drum,  and  other  like  articles  used  by  him,  all  in  duplicate,  the
genuine  objects  being  accompanied  by  imitations.  The  children  showed
themselves  capable  of  recognizing  each  individual  article,  without  hesi-
tation, in  presence  of  the  assembled  clergy  and  people,  who,  as  they
crowded  around  to  behold  the  sight,  gave  vent  aloud  to  their  admiration
of  the  prodigy.

A  despatch  was  subsequently  received  from  the  chancellor  to  the
effect  that  the  supernatural  intelligence  of  the  four  children  having
been  tested  by  joint  investigation,  and  having  been  authenticated  in
the  hearing  and  before  the  eyes  of  all,  he  would  request  that  the  names  be
placed  in  the  urn  and  the  lot  be  drawn  on  the  25th  day  of  the  6th
month  ;  in  addition  to  which,  he  forwarded  a  list  of  the  names  bestowed
in  infancy  on  the  four  children  and  of  the  names  of  their  fathers.
Your  servants  having  in  reply  assented  to  the  proposed  arrangement,
masses  were  performed  during  seven  days  preceding  the  date  in  ques-
tion by  the  hut'uJcht'u  and  Lamas,  of  mount  Potala  and  the  various
monasteries ;  and,  on  the  appointed  day,  the  Panshen  Erdeni,  the
chancellor,  and  their  associates,  followed  by  the  entire  body  of  Lamas,
chanted  a  mass  before  the  sacred  effigy  of  your  majesty's  exalted
ancestor,  the  emperor  Pure,  offering  up  prayers  subsequently  in  devout
sUence.  On  the  25th  day  of  the  5th  month  your  servants  reverently
proceeded  to  mount  P&tala,  and  placed  the  golden  vase  with  due  devo-
tion upon  a  yellow  altar  before  the  sacred  effigy.  After  offering  in-
cense and  performing  homage  with  nine  prostrations,  they  inscribed
upon  the  slips,  in  Chinese  and  Tibetan  characters,  the  infant-names  of
the  children  and  the  names  of  their  fathers,  which  they  exhibited  for
the  inspection  of  the  respective  relatives  and  tutors,  and  of  the
assembled  Lamas.  This  having  been  done,  your  servant,  Haip'u,  recited
a  chapter  from  the  scriptures  in  unison  with  the  Panshen  Erdeni  and
the  other  [ecclesiastics],  in  presence  of  the  multitude,  and,  reverently
sealing  up  the  inscribed  slips,  deposited  them  within  the  vase.  The
slips  being  small  and  the  urn  deep,  nothing  was  wanting  to  secure  per-


THE  CHILD-HIERARCH.  251

feot  inviolability.  Aftei'  the  further  recital  of  a  chapter  by  the  Pan-
shen  Erdeni  and  his  associates,  your  servant,  Meng  Pao,  inserting
his  hand  within  the  urn  upon  the  altar,  turned  the  slips  over  and  over,
several  times,  and  reverently  proceeded  to  draw  forth  one  of  their
number,  which  he  inspected  in  concert  with  the  children's  relatives  and
tutors  and  the  assembled  Lamas.  The  inscription  upon  the  slip  was  as
follows  :  "  The  son  of  Ts§-wang-teng-chu,  Tibetan,  from  the  Tai  Ning
monastery.  Infant-name,  Na-mu-kio-mu-to-urh-tsi.  Present  age,  four
years."  The  remaining  slips  having  been  drawn  out  and  inspected
publicly,  the  Penshen  Erdeni,  the  chancellor,  with  the  greater  and
lesser  hut'ukht'u  and  all  the  attendant  Lamas,  exclaimed  unanimously
with  unfeigned  delight  and  gladsomeness  that  "  by  the  favour  of  his
imperial  majesty,  who  has  given  advancement  to  the  cause  of  the
Yellow  Church,  the  established  rule  has  now  been  complied  with  for  ascer-
taining by  lot  the  embodiment  of  the  Dalai  Lama,  and  the  lot  having
now  fallen  upon  this  child — who,  the  son  of  a  poor  Tibetan  fuel-seller,
has  manifested  prodigies  of  intelligence,  abundantly  satisfying  the
aspirations  of  the  multitude — it  is  placed  beyond  a  doubt  that  the
actual  and  genuine  re-embodiment  of  the  Dalai  Lama  has  appeared  in
the  world,  and  the  Yellow  Church  has  a  ruler  for  its  governance.  The
minds  of  the  people  are  gladdened  and  at  rest,  and  the  reverential
gratitude  that  inspires  us  humble  priests  is  inexhaustible."  After  this
they  performed  with  the  utmost  devotion  the  homage  of  nine  prostra-
tions in  the  direction  of  your  majesty's  abode,  expressing  their  reve-
rential acknowledgments  of  the  celestial  favour.  Your  servants  ob-
served with  careful  attention  that  the  gratitude  not  alone  of  the  Pan-
shen  Erdeni  and  his  attendant  ecclesiastics  proceeded  from  the  most
sincere  feelings,  but  also  that  the  entire  population-  of  Lessa,  both  clergy
and  laity,  united  in  the  demonstration  by  raising  their  hands  to  their
foreheads  in  a  universal  feeling  of  profound  satisfaction.

The  infant  is  taken  to  Lhasa  at  such  an  early  age  that  his
mother,  who  may  belong  to  the  poorest  peasant  class,^  necessarily
accompanies  him  in  order  to  suckle  him,  but  being  debarred  from
the  sacred  precincts  of  Potala  on  account  of  her  sex,  she  is  lodged  in
the  lay  town  in  the  vicinity,  and  her  son  temporarily  at  the
monastic  palace  of  Ri-gyal  Phodah,^  where  she  is  permitted  to
visit  her  son  only  between  the  hours  of  9  a.m.  and  4  p.m.  She,
together  with  her  husband,  is  given  an  ofScial  residence  for  life  in
a  palace  about  a  mile  to  the  west  of  Potala  and  on  the  way  to  De-
pung,  and  the  father  usually  receives  the  rank  oiKuTig,  said  to  be
the  highest  of  the  five  ranks  of  Chinese  nobility.

1  As  tor  example,  in  the  case  of  the  eleventh  Grand  Lama,  whose  father  was  a
poor  fuel-seller.

2  Another  account  (Mayee,  loc.  cit.,  p.  295)  states  that  he  is  kept  at  the  "  Jih-kia  "
monastery  to  the  east  of  Lhasa,  or  "  Chih-ta-wang-pu."


252 THE  HIEBABCHT  AMI)  BE-INCABNATE  LAMAS.

At  the  age  of  four  the  child  assumes  the  monkish  garb  and  ton-
sure, and  receives  a  religious  name,  and  is  duly  enthroned  at
Potala  in  great  state  and  under  Chinese  auspices,  as  shown  from
the  annexed  state  paper : —

"  Memorial  dated  the  18th  day  of  the  4th  month  of  the  22nd  year  of
Tao  Kwang  (27th  May,  1842),  reporting  the  conclusion  of  the  ceremony
of  enthronement  of  the  embodiment  of  the  Dalai  Lama

"  In  obedience  to  these  commands,  Your  servants  proceeded  on  the
13th  day  of  the  4th  month  in  company  with  the  Chang-Chia  Hut'ukht'u
(the  Pekin  metropolitan)  and  the  chancellor,  followed  by  their  subor-
dinate functionaries,  the  hut'ukht'u,  Lamas,  and  Tibetan  officials,  to  the
monastery  on  mount  Jih-kia,  for  the  purpose  of  escorting  the  Dalai
Lama's  embodiment  down  the  mountain  to  the  town  of  Chih-ta-hwang-
pu,  on  the  east  of  Lassa,  where  his  abode  was  temporarily  established.
Your  servants,  in  respectful  conformity  with  the  rules  for  attendance
upon  the  Dalai  Lama,  appointed  detachments  of  the  Chinese  garrison
troops  to  form  an  encampment,  and  to  discharge  the  duty  of  body-
guards during  the  two  days  he  remained  there.  On  the  15th,  your
servants  escorted  the  embodiment  to  the  monastery  at  mount  P6ta]a,
where  reverent  prostrations  were  performed,  and  the  ceremonial  obser-
vances were  fulfilled  before  the  sacred  effigy  of  your  majesty's  ele-
vated ancestor,  the  emperor  Pure.  On  the  16th,  your  servants
reverently  took  the  golden  scroll  containing  the  mandate  bestowed  by
your  majesty  upon  the  Dalai  Lama's  embodiment,  together  with  the
sable  cape,  the  coral  court  rosary,  etc.,  and  the  sum  of  ten  thousand
taels  in  silver,  being  your  majesty's  donations,  which  they  caused  to  be.
conveyed  upon  yellow  platforms  to  the  monastery  at  mount  Potala,  and
deposited  with  devout  care  in  due  order  in  the  hall  called  Ta  Tu  Kang.
The  couch  and  pillows  were  then  arranged  upon  the  divan ;  and  on
the  arrival  of  the  Dalai  Lama's  embodiment  in  the  hall,  your  servants
and  the  secretary  of  the  Chang-chia  Hut'ukht'u,  reverently  read  out  the
golden  scroll,  embodying  your  majesty's  mandate,  to  the  perusal  of
which  the  embodiment  listened  in  a  kneeling  posture,  facing  toward
the  east.  After  the  reading  was  concluded,  he  received  with  venera-
tion the  imperial  gifts,  and  performed  the  ceremonial  of  three  genuflec-
tions and  nine  prostrations  in  the  direction  of  the  imperial  abode,  thus
testifjdng  his  respectful  gratitude  for  the  celestial  favours.  Having
been  invested  with  the  garments  conferred  by  your  majesty,  the  em-
bodiment was  supported  to  his  seat  upon  the  throne ;  whereupon  the
chancellor,  at  the  head  of  the  Tibetan  priesthood,  intoned  a  chant  of
Dharani  formulas,  invoking  auspicious  fortune.  All  the  hut'uhht'u  and
Lamas  having  performed  obeisances,  a  great  banquet  was  opened,  and
the  ceremonial  of  enthronement  was  thus  brought  to  a  close.  The  day
was  attended  by  the  utmost  fine  weather,  and  everything  passed  off
auspiciously  and  well,  to  the  universal  delight  of  the  entire  body  of
clergy  and  laity  of  Lassa.  This  we  accordingly  bring  to  your  majesty's
knowledge ;  and  in  addition  we  have  to  state,  that  as  the  embodiment


HIS  TRAINING  AND  MINORITY.  253

of  the  Dalai  Lama  has  now  been  enthroned,  it  is  proper,  in  conformity
with  the  existing  rules,  to  cease  henceforth  from  usin^  the  word  '  em-
bodiment.' This  we  accordingly  append,  and  respectfully  bring  before
your  majesty's  notice."  ^

He  i^  now  admitted  as  a  novice  to  the  Nam-gyal  monastery  of
Potala,  and  his  education  is  entrusted  to  a  special  preceptor  and
assistants  learned  in  the  scriptures  and  of  unblemished  character.^

At  the  age  of  eight  he  is  ordained  a  full  monk  and  abbot  of
the  Nam-gyal  convent  and  head  of  the  Lamaist  church.

The  Dalai  Lama  is,  as  regards  temporal  rule,  a  minor  till  he
reaches  the  age  of  eighteen,  and  during  his  minority  a  regent
carries  on  the  duties  of  temporal  government.  And  the  frequency
with  which  the  Dalai  Lama  has  died  before  attaining  his  majority
gives  some  >  support  to  the  belief  that  the  regents  are  privy  to  his
premature  death;  and  the  Chinese  government  are  usually  credited
with  supporting  such  proceedings  for  political  purposes.

On  the  death  of  a  re-incarnate  Lama,  his  body  is  preserved.  The
tombs  of  the  Dalai  and  Pan-ch'en  Lamas  form  conspicuous  gilt
monuments,  sometimes  as  many  as  seven  storeys  high,  named
Ku-tuh,8  at  Potala  and  Tashi-lhunpo.  The  holiness  of  such  a  Lama
is  estimated  in  proportion  to  the  shrinkage  of  his  body  after  death.

The  temporal  rule  of  Tibet  is  vested  in  a  Lama  who  has  the
-title  of  "  king."  For  when  Nag- wan  acquired  the  temporal
power  he  retained  this  title  for  one  of  his  agents,  also  called  "  The
regent,"*  and  "Protector  of  the  earth,"  ^  and  "  Grovernor,"  ^  and
by  the  Mongols  N'omen-Khan.

A  regent  is  necessary  to  conduct  the  temporal  government,
especially  under  the  system  of  papal  succession  by  re-births,  where
the  new  Dalai  Lama  does  not  reach  his  majority  and  nominal
succession  to  temporal  rule  till  his  eighteenth  year.  In  order  to
avoid  plotting  against  the  hierarchs,  Nag-wah  ruled  that  the  regent
must  be  a  Lama,  and  he  restricted  this  ofBce  to  the  head  Lamas  of
the  monastic  palaces  or  Ling  of  Lhasa,  named  Tan-gye-ling,^  Kun-
de-ling,^  Ts'e-ch'og-ling,^  and  Ts'amo-ling,i"  whom,  he  alleged,  by  a

1  Maybe,  loc.  cit.,  p.  296.

2  The  preceptor  of  the  tenth  and  eleventh  Grand  Lamas  was  "  Kia-mu-pa-le-i-hi-tan-

pei'-gyam-tso." Maybe,  loc  at.
■■■■  sku  «tdun.  *  Gyal-tshab.  =  Sa-Kyon.  "  de-sid.

'  bsTan-rgyas-glin. s  Kun-'dus  glin  s  T5e-mch'og  gliii.

1"  Ts'a-mo-glin.  A  Lama  of  this  monastic  paface  and  a  member  of  Sera,  became
the  celebrated  regent  Tsha-tur  numa-hang  (  ?  "  Nomen  Khan  ").


254 THE  HIEBABOHY  AND BE-INCAENATE  LAMAS.

polite  fiction,  to  be  re-embodiments  of  the  spirits  of  tbe  four  most
celebrated  ministers  of  the  monarchical  period.  Thus  the  spirit  of
king  Sron  Tsan  Grampo's  minister  Lon-po  Grar  is  believed  to  be
incarnate  in  the  Lama  of  Tan-gye-ling.  The  office  when  faUing
vacant  through  death  (or  deposition)  passes  casteris  paribus  to  the
surviving  senior  of  those  Lings.  The  present  regent  (1893)  is
the  Kun-de-ling  Lama.  The  regent  is  assisted  in  the  government '
by  four  ministers  called  Kd-lon,^  who  were  formerly  all  laymen,  but
now  some  of  them  are  being  replaced  by  Lamas ;  also  secretaries
(Kcl-dun)  and  district  magistrates  (Jon-pon).  And  the  two
Chinese  political  residents,  or  Ambans,^  have  administrative  as  well
as  consulting  functions.

With  such  large  bodies  of  monks  comprising  so  many  fanatical
elements,  and  not  at  all  subject  to  the  civil  authorities,  who,  in-
deed, possess  almost  no  police,  it  is  not  surprising  that  fracas  are
frequent,  and  bloody  feuds  between  rival  monasteries  occasionally
happen.  Every  monastery  has  an  armoury,  and  in  the  minor
quarrels  the  lusty  young  monks  wield  their  heavy  iron  pencases
with  serious  and  even  fatal  effect.

Since  the  temporal  power  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  Lamas,
the  Tibetans  •  who,  in  Sron  Tsan  Grampo's  day,  were  a  vigorous
and  aggressive  nation,  have  steadily  lost  ground,  and  have  been
ousted  from  Yunnan  and  their  vast  possessions  in  eastern  Tibet,
Amdo,  etc.,  and  are  now  hemmed  in  by  the  Chinese  into  the  more
inhospitable  tracts.

i  "  De-ba  zhun."

2  bKah-blon.

'  "  Amtan"  is  not  Chinese.  It  is  probably  Manchu  or  Mongolian,  cf.  Kock.,  L.,  51.
The  resident  imperial  minister  of  Tibet  is  colloquially  called  Chu-tsan  tu-chon,  and
he  is  always  a  Manchu,  that  is,  of  the  ruling  race.


MONASTEJKY  OF  ChOGOBTAN.1


XI.

MONASTERIES


JSOLATION  from  the  world  has  always  been  a  desidera-
tum of  Buddhist  monks  ;  not  as  penance,  but  merely
to  escape  temptations,  and  favour  meditation.  The
monastery  is  named  in  Tibetan  Gon-pa^  vulgarly
Gom-pa,  or  "  a  solitary  place "  or  hermitage ;  and  most  monas-
teries are  situated,  if  not  actually  in  solitary  places,  at  least  some
distance  off  from  villages,  while  around  others  which  were  origi-
nally Jiermitages  villages  have  grown  up  later.

The  extreme  isolation  of  some  of  the  Tibetan  cloisters  has  its

1  After  Hue.

2  dgon-pa.  The  title  C'og-sde,  or  Clioi-de,  a  "  religious  place,"  is  especially  applied
to  temple-monasteries  within  a  village  or  town.  "  Lin,"  or  "  continent,"  is  applied  to
the  four  greatest  monasteries  of  the  established  church  especially  associated  with  the
temporal  government,  and  is  evidently  suggested  by  the  four  great  fabulous  conti-
nents of  the  world.  gT'sug-lag-k'an'  is  an  academy,  though  it  is  used  for  temples
frequently.


•256  MONASTERIES.


counterpart  in  Europe  in  the  alpine  monasteries  amid  the  everlast-
ing snows.  Some  of  them  are  for  the  greater  part  of  the  year
quite  cut  off  from  the  outer  world,  and  at  favourable  times  only
reachable  by  dangerous  paths,  so  that  their  solitude  is  seldom
broken  by  visitors.  The  monastery  of  Kye-lang  in  Little  Tibet
stands  on  an  isolated  spur  about  12,000  feet  above  the  sea,  and  is
approached  over  glaciers,  so  that  sometimes  its  votaries  are  buried
under  avalanches.  And  the  site  is  usually  commanding  and  pic-
turesque. Shergol  in  Ladak,  like  so  many  monasteries  in  cen-
tral Tibet,  is  set  on  the  face  of  a  cliff.  It  is  "  carved  out  of  a
honeycombed  cliff,  forming,  with  some  other  cliffs  of  the  same
description,  a  giant  flight  of  stairs  on  the  slope  of  a  bleak  moun-
tain of  loose  stones.  The  Gonvpa  itself  is  painted  white,  with
bands  of  bright  colour  on  the  projecting  wooden  gallery,  so  that  it
stands  out  distinctly  against  the  darker  rocks.  There  is  not  a
sign  of  vegetation  near — all  round  is  a  dreary  waste  of  stone.'

Such  remote  and  almost  inaccessible  sites  for  many  of  the
convents  renders  mendicancy  impossible  ;  but  begging-with-the-
bowl  never  seems  to  have  been  a  feature  of  Lamaism,  even  when
the  monastery  adjoined  a  town  or  village.

Several  monasteries,  especially  of  the  Kar-gyu  sect,  are  called
"caves"  (hermitages)  (or  tak-p'u),  although  any  caves  which
may  exist  accommodate  only  a  very  small  proportion  of  the  residents
of  the  cloister  so  named.  Yet  many  gompas,  it  is  reported,  passed
through  the  state  of  cave-residence  as  a  stage  in  their  career.
Firstly  a  solitary  site  with  caves  was  selected,  and  when  the  monks
by  extra  zeal  and  piety  had  acquired  sufficient  funds  and  influence,
then  they  Ijuilt  a  monastery  in  the  neighbourhood.  While,  if  the
venture  were  not  financially  successful,  the  hermitage  remained  in
the  cave.  One  of  these  struggling  cave-hermitages  exists  at  Ei-
kyi-sum  near  Pedong,  in  British  Bhotan.  Such  caves,  as  a  rule,
are  natural  caverns,  wholly  unadorned  by  art,  and  are  specially
tenanted  by  the  wandering  ascetics  named  Yogacarya  and  Zi-
jepa.^

1  Mr.  Knioht,  loc.  cil.,  p.  127,  where  a  picture  of  the  monastery  also  is  given.

2  Under  tliis  heading  come  the  four  great  caves  of  Sikhim  hallowed  as  the  traditional
abodes  of  St.  Padma  and  Lhatsiin  Ch'embo,  and  now  the  objects  of  pilgrimage  even  to
Lamas  from  Tibet.  These  four  caves  are  distinguished  according  to  the  four  cardinal
points,  viz. : —

The  North  L/ia-ri  rdAp'u,  or  "the  old  cave  of  God's  hill." It  is  situated  about


THE  SITE  AND  NAME.  257

The  site  occupied  by  the  monastery  is  usually  commanding  and
often  picturesque.  It  should  have  a  free  outlook  to  the  east  to
catch  the  first  rays  of  the  rising  sun ;  and  it  should  be  built  in
the  long  axis  of  the  hill;  and  it  is  desirable  to  have  a  lake  in
front,  even  though  it  be  several  miles  distant.  These  latter  two
conditions  are  expressed  in  the  couplet : —

"  Back  to  the  hill-rook,
And  front  to  the  tarn."^

The  door  of  the  assembly  room  and  temple  is  cceteris  paribus
built  to  face  eastwards.  The  next  best  direction  is  south-east,
and  then  south.  If  a  stream  directly  drains  the  site  or  is  visible  a
short  way  below,  then  the  site  is  considered  bad,  as  the  virtue  of
the  place  escapes  by  the  stream.  In  such  a  case  the  chief  entrance
is  made  in  another  direction.  A  waterfall,  however,  is  of  very
good  omen,  and  if  one  is  visible  in  the  neighbourhoood,  the  en-
trance is  made  in  that  direction,  should  it  not  be  too  far  removed
from  the  east.

The  name  of  the  monastery  is  usually  of  a  religious  nature,
ideal  or  mystic,  or,  like  De-pun  g,  borrowed  from  the  name  of  a  ,
celebrated  Indian  monastery  ;  but  others  are  merely  place-names
which  are  often  descriptive  of  the  site,^  thus  : —

Tashi-Lhun-po,  "  The  mass  of  gloi-y."
Sa-skya,  the  tawny  soil.

MiN-DOL-LiN,  "  The  place  of  perfect  emancipation."
The  "  HiMis,"  monastery  in  Ladak  is  called  "  The  support  of  the
meaning  of  Buddha's  precepts."  ^


three  days'  journey  to  the  north  of  Tashiding,  along  a  most  difficult  path.

This  is  the  most  holy  of  the  series.
The  South  Kah-do  sail  p'u,  or  "cave  of  the  occult  fairies.'' Here  it  is  said  is  a

hot  spring,  and  on  the  rock  are  many  footprints  ascribed  to  the  fairies.
The  East  sEasp'u,  or  "secret  cave." It  lies  between  the  Tendong  and  Mainom

mountains,  about  jive  miles  from  Yangang. It  is  a  vast  cavern  reputed  to

extend  by  a  bifurcation  to  both  Tendong  and  Mainom. People  go  in  with

torches  about  a  quater  of  a  mile. Its  height  varies  from  five  feet  to  one

hundred  or  two  hundred  feet.
The  West  hDe-cW en p'u,  or  "cave  of  Great  Happiness." It  is  in  the  snow  near
^ Jongri,  and  only  reachable  in  the  autumn.

1  rgyab  ri  brag  dan  mdun  ri  mts'o.

2  See  my  "Place,  River  and  Mountain  Names  of  Sikhim,"  etc.,  J.A.S.B.,  1891.

3  SCHLAG.,  179.

S


258  MONASTERIES.


San-na-oho-lin  {Aug.,  Sangacliiling)  gsan,  secret  or  occult,  +  snags,
spell  or  magic  +  c'os  religion  +  glin,  a  place.  "The  place  of  the
occult  mystic  religion."  A  catholic  Buddhist  monastery  open  to  all
classes,  including  deformed  persons,  nuns,  Lepchas  and  Limbus.

PADMA-YAN-TSB(^>ig'.,Pemiongchi)  =  2>adma{pr.  "pama")alotus  +  yan,
perfect  or  pure  +  rise,  the  highest  "  the  monastery  of  the  sublime
perfect  lotus  (-born  one,  i.e.,  Padma-samhhava)."  A  monastery
professing,  we  believe,  only  well-born,  celibate,  and  undeformed
monks,  and  especially  associated  with  St.  Padma,  who  is  worshipped
here.

Ta-ka  TASHi-Diij(^}i^.,  Tashiding)  =  b7-ag  (=  tag,)  a  rock  -1-  d^a»-,  white
-t-  bkra-sis  (pr.  ta  shi)  glory  +  Iding,  a  soaring  up  or  elevation.
The  original  name  is  likely  to  have  been  'bring,  pronounced  "  ding,"
and  meaning  the  middle,  with  reference  to  its  romantically
elevated  site  between  two  great  rivers  at  their  junction.  "  The
gbmpa  of  the  elevated  glorious  white  rock."  The  site,  a  bold  high
promontory  at  the  junction  of  and  between  the  Great  Eangit  anJ
Katong  rivers,  is  believed  to  have  been  miraculously  raised  up  by
St.  Padma,  and  amongst  other  traces  a  broad  longitudinal  white
streak  in  the  rock  is  pointed  out  as  being  the  shadow  of  that
saint.

Pho-daij  {Anc/.,  Fadung)  =  p'o-ldan,  a  sloping  ridge  ;  such  is  the  site
of  this  gbmpa  and  the  usual  spelling  of  the  name.  As,  however,
this  is  the  "  chapel  royal "  of  the  raja,  it  seems  possible  that  the
name  may  be  p'o-hran  [pr.  p'o-dan)  =  palace,  "  the  gbmpa  of  the
palace."

La-bkan  =  hla,  a  contraction  of  Lama  or  high-priest  4-  hraii,  a  dwelling.
Here  resides  the  hierarch  or  chief  Lama.

[N.B. — This  is  one  of  the  very  few  words  in  which  h-  is  Hterally
pronounced  as  spelt.]

DoBJB-LiN  {Aug.,  Darjeeling)  =  rdd-rje  "the  precious  stone"  or  eccles-
iastical sceptre,  emblematic  of  the  thunder-bolt  of  Sakra  (Indra  or
Jupiter)  +  glin,  a  place.  The  monastery  from  which  Darjlling
takes  its  name,  and  the  ruins  of  which  are  still  visible  on  observa-
tory-hill, was  a  branch  of  the  Dorjeling,  usually  curtailed  into
D6-ling  {Aug.,  Bailing)  monastery  in  native  Sikhim ;  and  to  dis-
tinguish it  from  its  parent  monastery,  it  was  termed  AnJc-dii
Dorje-ling  (dhang,  power  +  bc^MS,  accumulated  or  concentrated)  on
account  of  its  excellent  situation,  and  powerful  possibilities.

De-t'an  =  De,  a  kind  of  tree  (Daphne  papyraceae,  Wall.),  from  the  bark
of  which  ropes  and  paper  are  made  -\-  ian,  a  meadow  =  "  the
gbmpa  of  the  Be  meadow." Here  these  trees  are  abundant.

Ri-obN  (Aug.,  Ringim  =  (ri  -)-  dgon,  a  hermitage  =  "the  hermitage
hill." It  is  situated  near  the  top  of  the  hUl.

T6-LUN  =  rcZo,  astone  -)-  Zmw,  a  valley.  This  valley  is  remarkably  rocky,
and  avalanches  of  stones  are  frequent.

En-oe  =  dben  {pr.  en),  a  solitary  place  ^-  Ic'e,  a  tongue.  A  monastery
on  a  tongue-shaped  spur.


THE  NAMES.  259


Ddb-de  =  sgruh  {pr.  "dub"),  a  hermit's  cell  +  scZe,  aplace. "The place
of  the  hermit's  cell  " — the  oldest  monastery  in  Sikhim,  founded  by
the  pioneer  missionary  Lha-tsiin  Chen-bo.
P'en-zan  =  p'an  bliss  or  profit  +  baa?i,  excellent. The  monastery  of
"  excellent  bliss."

Ka-o6-pal-bi  (Ang.  Ketsuperi)  =  rnk'd,  heaven  +  spyod  {pr.  cho)  to
accomplish  or  reach  +  dpaZ,  noble  +  ri  =  the  mona  tery  of  "the
noble  mountain  of  the  Garuda  (a  messenger  of  the  gods)  "  or  "  of
reaching  heaven."

Ma-ni  =  ma-ni,  a  tablet  inscribed  with  "  Om  mdni,  etc.,''  a  Mendoh.
"  The  gbmpa  of  the  Mendon  " ;  here  the  gompa  was  erected  near
an  old  mendong.

Sb-k-on"  =  Se,  a  sloping  ridge  +  non,  depressed.  It  is  situated  on  a
depressed  sloping  ridge  ;  and  is  also  spelt  gzigs  {pr.  zi),  a  see-er  or
beholder,  +  mnon,  to  suppress  ;  and  in  this  regard  it  is  alleged  that
here  St.  Padma-sambhava  beheld  the  local  demons  underneath  and
kept  them  under.

Yan-gan  =  ya-h,  perfect,  also  lucky  +  &gan,  a  ridge.  "  The  monastery
of  the  lucky  ridge."

Lhun-t&e  =  \hun,  lofty  +  rise,  summit.  "The  monastery  of  the  lofty
summit."

Nam-tsb  =  inam,  a  division  or  district  +  rise.  "  Lofty  division  "  one
of  the  subdivisions  of  native  Sikhim,  on  the  flank  of  Tendong.  It
is  probable  that  this  is  a  Lepcha  name  from  tsii  —  "  Seat  of  govern-
ment," as  the  site  is  a  very  old  Lepcha  one.

Tsun-t'a  if  (^mtjT. ,  Cheungtham)  =  htsun,  a.  queen;  also  "  respected  one,"
i.e.,  a  Lama  or  monk ;  also  marriage  +  than,  a  meadow.  This
gompa  is  situated  overlooking  a  meadow  at  the  junction  of  the
Lachhen  and  Lachhung  rivers.  It  may  mean  "the  meadow  of
marriage  (of  the  two  rivers),"  or  "  the  meadow  of  the  Lamas,"  or
"  the  meadow  of  Our  Lady  " — its  full  name  as  found  in  manuscript
being  "htsun-mo  rin-chen  t'cm,"  implies  that  the  Lamas  derive  its
name  from  "  the  precious  Lady  (Dorje-p'ag-mo)  "  whose  image  is
prominently  displayed  within  the  gompa.

B-AB-LiN  {Ang.,  Bawling)  =  rai,  excellent  or  high  +  glin,  a  place.  This
monastery  is  situated  on  a  high  cliffy  ridge.

NuB-LiN  (^«,^.,N'obling)  =  nub,  the  west  +  glin  =  "The  gompa  of  the
western  place  or  country." It  lies  on  the  western  border  of  Sikhim,

DB-KYi-LDir (^m^  , Dikiling)  =  bc^g-s^id, happiness  +  gUn  =  "The  place
of  Happiness."  It  is  a  rich  arable  site  with  the  beer-millet  {murwa)
cultivation.

The  site  chosen  for  a  monastery  must  be  consecrated  before  any
building  is  begun.  A  chapter  of  Lamas  is  held,  and  the  tutelary
deity  is  invoked  to  protect  the  proposed  building  against  all  injury
of  men  and  demons.  At  the  ceremony  of  laying  the  first  stone
prayers  are  recited,  and  charms,  together  with  certain  forms  of

s  2


260  MONASTERIES.


benediction  (Tashi-tsig  jod),  together  with  relics,  are  deposited  in
a  hollow  stone.i  And  other  rites  are  done.  And  in  repairing  a
sacred  building  somewhat  similar  services  are  performed.

The  size  of  the  Tibetan  monasteries  is  sometimes  immense,
several  containing  from  3,000  to  10,000  monks,  in  this  the  most
priest-ridden  country  in  the  world.  The  larger  monasteries  are
like  small  towns,  as  seen  in  the  original  drawing  of  Tashi-lhunpo
here  given,  with  long  streets  of  cells,  two  or  three  storeys  high,
and  usually  surrounding  small  courtyards  which  generally  con-
tain a  shrine  in  the  centre.  The  chief  building  is  "The  assembly
hall,"  which,  however,  is  practically  a  temple,  and  is  considered
under  that  head.

There  are  always  small  halls  for  teaching  purposes,  as  the
monasteries  serve  also  as  colleges.  But  these  colleges  are  for  the
clergy  alone,  as  Lamas,  unlike  Burmese  monks,  are  not  the
schoolmasters  of  the  people.  They  teach  only  those  who  enter
the  order.  And  the  lay  populace  have  to  be  content  with  the
poor  tuition  obtainable  in  a  few  schools  (Lob-ta)  conducted  by
laymen.

The  architecture  seems  to  have  preserved  much  of  the  mediaeval
Indian  style.  Mr.  Fergusson  shows  ^  that  Nepal,  in  its  architecture
as  well  as  ethnologically,  presents  us  with  a  microcosm  of  India
as  it  was  in  the  seventh  century,  when  Hiuen  Tsiang  visited
it ;  and  that  the  Sikhim  monasteries  show  a  perseverance  in  the
employment  of  sloping  jambs  (as  in  the  Tashiding  doorway),^
as  used  two  thousand  years  ago  in  the  Behar  and  early  western
caves ;  and  the  porch  of  the  temple  at  Pemiongchi  shows  the  form
of  roof  which  we  are  familiar  with  in  the  rock  examples  of  India.

The  architecture  of  the  monastery  resembles  that  of  the  houses
of  the  wealthy  Tibetans,  and  is  often  ostentatious.  It  has  been
described  in  some  detail  by  Schlagintweit,  Hue,  Eockhill,*  etc.,
as  regards  Tibet,  and  by  General  Cunningbam  and  Mr.  Conway  as
regards  the  large  monasteries  of  Ladak.  The  monasteries  in
Sikhim  are  mean  and  almost  devoid  of  any  artistic  interest.

1  ScHLAG.,  178,  who  there  translates  the  historical  document  on  the  founding  of
Himis ;  Csoma's  An.,  p.  503 ;  Cunningham's  Ladah,  309.

2  Hist.  Ind.  and  Easln.  Arch.,  p.  299,  et  seq.

3  Figured  by  Hookek,  Him.  Jour.

i  See  also  detailed  description  of  the  houses  of  the  Lamas  of  Kumbum  in  Land  of
the  Lamas,  p.  65.


Ss'i"


mnr


_^^- --■


1  Ji-^ A^.^'^Xiisr-Jri'-^ri^-^^^-


m


Tashi-lhcnpo  Monastery.
(From  a  native  drawing.)


GAITYAS  AND MENDONS.


26]


As  wood  is  scarce  iu  Tibet  most  of  the  monasteries  are  built  oi
stone  or  sun-dried  bricks.  Most  have  flat  roofs,  some  are  in  the
Chinese  style,  and^most  are  surmounted  by  the  cylinders  of  yak-
hair  cloth  crossed  by  a  few  white  ribbons  at  right  angles  to  each
other,  and  topped  by  a  crescent  and  spear,  as  in  figures,  and  a
curtain  of  yak-hair  cloth  bearing  similar  stripes  in  the  form  of  a
Latin  cross  closes  the  windows.  In  the  outer  Himalayas  the  cells
and  dormitories  and  other  buildings  cluster  round  the  temple.
And  in  the  temple-monasteries,  the  ground  floor  is  without  win-
dows and  is  generally  used  as  a  storehouse,  and  the  upper  storeys
are  reached  by  a  staircase  or  an  inclined  beam  on  which  notches
are  cut  for  steps  ;  and  the  scanty  furniture  is  of  the  plainest.
_  The  weU-known  Indian  name  of  a  Buddhist  monastery,  namely,
Arama,  or  Sangharama  (« the  resting-place  of  the  clergy  "),  more
strictly  appUed  to  the  grove  in  which  the  monastery  was  situated,
is  applied  in  Tibet,  which  is  almost  destitute  of  groves,  to  the
auditm'y  or  library  of  the  monastery.^


Ch'oeien  and  Mendon  in  Ladak.2


Lining  the  approaches to  the monastery are rows of  tall


1  Cf.,  Jaesoh.,  d.,  i.


2  After  Mr.  Knight.


262


MONASTERIES.


"prayer  "-flags,  and  several  large  funereal  monuments — Ch'orten
and  long  wall-Uke  Mendon  monuments.

The  Ch'or-
tens,^  literally
"  receptacle  for
offerings,"^  are
usually  solid
conical  masonry
structures,  cor-
responding to
the  Caityas  and
Stiipasor"Topes"
of  Indian  Budd-
hism, and  origi-
nally intended
as  relic-holders ;
they  are  now
mostly  erected
as  cenotaphs in

•^  FuNEEEAL  Buddhist  Monument

Buddha or of  (A  01i'ortenStu/OTOi-"Tope").

canonized  saints;  and  they  present  a  suggestively  funereal  appear-
ance. Some  commemorate  the  visits  of  Lamaist  saints  ;  and
miniature  ones  of  metal,  wood,  or  clay  often  adorn
the  altar,  and  sometimes  contain  relics.

The  original  form  of  the  Caitya,  or  Stiipa,^  was
a  simple  and  massive  hemisphere  or  solid  dome
(garbha,  literally  "  womb  "  enclosing  the  relic)  of
masonry,  with  its  convexity  upwards  and  crowned
by  a  square  capital  (toran)  surmounted  by  one  or
more  umbrellas,  symbols  of  royalty.  Latterly  they
became  more  complex  in  form,  with  numerous
plinths,  and  much  elongated,  especially  in  regard
MEDiiEvAL  Indian to  their  capitals,  as  seen  in  the  small  photograph

BKAZEN  Caitya. -,  .  ,

(from  Tibet.) here  given.^

1  mCh'od-r-ten.  ^  Skt.,  Da-garblia.

3  Cf.  HoDGS.,  Jl.,  30,  et  seq.,  for  descriptions ;  also  liis  views  about  the  respective
meanings  of  "  Caitya  "  and  "  Stupa."

*  In  Mr.  Hodgson's  collection  are  nearly  one  hundred  drawings  of  Caityas  in  Nepal ;
Fehgusson's  Hist.  Ind.  and  Hast.  Arch.,  303;  FERa.  AUD  Btjubess' Cave-Temples ;  also
Cunningham's  Bhiha  Topes,  p.  12.


CAITYAS—CH'ORTEN.


263


The  Lamaist  Caityas,  or  Ch'ortens,  are  mainly  of  the  two  forms
here  shown.  They  generally  adhere  to  the  Indian  type  ;  but  differ
most  conspicuously  in  that  the  dome  in  the  commonest  form
is  inverted.  Both  have  more  or  less  elaborate  plinths,  and  on  the
sides  of  the  capital  are  often
figured  a  pair  of  eyes,  like  the
sacred  eyes  met  with  in  ancient
Egyptian,  Greek,  and  Roman
vases,  etc.,  and  believed  to  be
connected  with  sun-worship.
Above  the  toran  is  a  bluntly
conical  or  pyramidal  spire,
Gu^dmani,  of  thirteen  step-
like segments,  typical  of  the
thirteen  Bodhisat  heavens  of
the  Buddhists.  This  is  sur-
mounted by  a  bell-shaped  sym-
bol (usually  copper-gilt)  called
the  kalsa,  the  handle  of  which
forms  a  tapering  pinnacle
sometimes  modelled  after  a
small  Caitya,  but  often
moulded  in  the  form  of  one  or
two  or  all  of  the  following
objects :  a  lotus  -  flower,  a
crescent  moon,  a  globular  sun,


i


^


J


Tibetan  Ch'okten,  common  fokm.


a triple canopy, which are
finally surmounted by
tongue-shaped spike, repre-
senting thejyoti  or  sacred  light
of  Buddha. And  sometimes

round  the  base  of  the  kalsa  is  a  gilt  canopy  or  umbrella  (catra).^
Many  of  the  Lamaist  Caityas  are,  like  those  of  the  Japanese,
symbolic  of  the  five  elements  into  which  a  body  is  resolved  upon
death  ;  thus,  as  in  the  annexed  figure,  the  lowest  section,  a  solid
rectangular  block,  typifies  the  solidity  of  the  earth ;  above  it  water
is  represented  by  a  globe  ;  fire  by  a  triangular  tongue  ;  ai/t'  by  a


1  Cunningham's  Bhilm  Tapes,  12.


264


MONASTERIES.


crescent — the  inverted  vault  of  the  sky,  and  ether  by  an  acuminated
circle,  the  tapering  into  space.

A  miniature  Gh'orten,  containing  an  enormous  number  of  small
images  of  Lamaist  deities,  in  niches  and  in  several
inner  compartments  within  folding  doors,  is  called
"the  glorious  (Ch'orten)  of  many  doors." ^  It  is
carried  about  from  village  to  village  by  itinerant
Lamas  for  exhibition  to  the  laity.

In  the  wealthier  monasteries  the Ch'ortens are
regularly  white-washed.

The  Mendons,  as  figured  on  page  261,  are  long
wall-like  erections  sometimes  over  a  mile  in  length,
which  divide  the  road  into  two  lateral  halves  to
allow  of  the  respectful  mode  of  passing  it,  namely,
with  the  right  hand  to  the  wall.  They  are  faced
with  blocks  bearing  in  rudely  cut  characters  the  six-
syllabled  mystic  sentence  "  Om  mani  pddTne  hum  "
— the  same  which  is  revolved  in  the  "prayer-
wheels,"  and  usually  called  Mani;  and  its  name  is  said  to  be
derived  from  these,  namely,  Marii-dmi,  or  "  The  JfaMz-faced."  It
usually  has  a  ch'orten  terminating  it  at  either  end;  and  occa-
sionally it  contains  niches  to  burn  incense  or  to  deposit  the  small
clay  funereal  Caityas,^  and  also  bears  coarsely  outlined  figures  of
the  three  especial  protecting  divinities  of  Lamaism.^  As  it  is
a  pious  act  to  add  to  these  "  Mani  "  slabs,  a  mason  is  kept  at  the
larger  temples  and  places  of  special  pilgrimage,  who  carves  the
necessary  number  of  stones  according  to  the  order  and  at  the
expense  of  the  donating  pilgrim.

The  small  cairns,  surmounted  by  a  few  sticks,  to  which  rags
are  attached  by  passers  by  as  offerings  to  the  genius  loci,  like
the  "rag-bushes  "  of  India,  are  called  Lab-ch'a,  and  figured  at  page
286.

As  with  all  sacred  objects,  these  monuments  must  always  be
passed  on  the  right  hand,*  according  to  the  ancient  custom  of
showing  respect.  And  thus,  too,  it  is  that  the  prayer-cylinders
must  always  be  turned  in  this  direction.

In  addition  to  the  foregoing  objects,  there  is  frequently  found  in


1  Ta-shi-g6-ma1i. ^  dharma-sarira. ^  The  Riff-sum  gon-po. »  pradakshina.


RANSOMED CATTLE.  265

the  vicinity  of  the  monastery  a  stone  seat  called  a  "  throne  "  for
the  head  Lama,  when  he  gives  al-fresco  instruction  to  his  pupils.
One  of  the  reputed  thrones  of  the  founder  of  Sikhim  Lamaism
exists  at  the  Pemiongchi  Ch'orten,  where  the  camp  of  visitors  is
usually  pitched.

There  is  no  regular  asylum  for  animals  rescued  from  the
butchers,  to  save  some  person  from  pending  death;  but  occasion-
ally such  ransomed  cattle  are  to  be  found  in  the  neighbourhood
of  monasteries  where  their  pension-expenses  have  been  covered  by
a  donation  from  the  party  cured.  The  animals  have  their  ears
bored  for  a  tuft  of  coloured  rags  as  a  distinctive  and  saving  mark.

In  Sikhim  not  far  from  most  monasteries  are  fertile  fields  of
murwa  {Meusine  corocana),  from  which  is  made  the  country  beer,
a  beverage  which  the  Sikhim  and  Bhotanese  monks  do  not  deny
themselves.

Over  3,000  monasteries  are  said  to  be  in  Tibet.  But  be-
fore giving  a  short  descriptive  list  of  some  of  the  chief  monas-
teries of  Lamadom  it  seems  desirable  to  indicate  the  chief  pro-
vinces into  which  Tibet  is  divided.^

Tibet  is  divided  into  three  sections,  namely : —

1.  Pod  or  "Tibet"  proper,  or  the  provinces  of  U  and  Tsang,
hence  the  name  "  Weitsang  "  applied  to  Tibet  by  the  Chinese.

2.  High  (or  Little)  Tibet,  or  the  northern  provinces  of  Tod,
Nari,  and  Khor-sum.

3.  Eastern  Tibet,  or  the  provinces  of  Kham,  Do,  and  Grang.

In  Tibet  proper  the  central  province  of  U  and  the  western  one  of
Tsang  have  their  capitals  at  Lhasa  and  Tashil-hunpo  respectively.  U
contains  the  districts  of  Gryama  (and  Kongbu,  including  Pema-
Koi),  Di-gung,  Tsal-pa,  Tsang-po,  Che'-va,  Phag-du,  Yah-sang,  and
Yaru-dag,  including  the  great  Yamdok  lake.  Tsang  comprises
the  districts  of  north  and  south  L6-stod,  Grurmo,  Ch'umig,  S'ang,
and  S'alu.

Little  Tibet  is  divided  into  the  three  circles  of  sTag-mo  Ladvags
("  Ladak  "),  Mang-yul  S'ang  Shurh, Gruge  Burang ("  Purang  "),

1  The  best  vernacular  account  of  the  geography  of  Tibet  is  contained  in  the
Dsam-ling  Gye-she  of  Lama,  Tsan-po  Neman  Khan  of  Amdo,  and  translated  by
Saeat,  J.A.S.B.,  1887,  p.  1,  seq.  ;  Csoma,  J.A.S.B.,  1832,  p.  123.  For  scientific
geography,  see  Makkham's  Tibet,  Indian  Survey  Reports,  Prejvalsky,  Rockliill,  etc.
D'Anvillb's  map  of  1793,  compiled  on  data  supplied  by  Lamas,  is  still  our  chief
authority  for  a  large  portion  of  Tibet.


266  MONASTERIES.


comprising  the  districts  of  Purang,  Mang-yul  Sangs-dKar,  bCh'i-
va,  bLas'a,  sBal-te,  Shang-sliung,  upper  and  lower  Khrig-se.
East  Nari  includes  Dok-t'al  and  lake  Manasarovar.  The  Ladak
and  Balti  districts  of  west  Nari  were  conquered  by  Kashmir  in
1840  and  are  now  British  dependencies.  Ka-che,  sometimes  used
synonymously  with  Kashmir,  includes  the  lofty  northern  steppes
and  the  gold  fields  of  Thog-Jalung.

Eastern  Tibet  is  the  most  populous  section  of  the  country.  The
greater  part  of  the  low-lying  Do  province  (Amdo)  seems  to  have
been  detached  from  Tibet  by  the  Chinese  about  1720.  The  south-
eastern province  of  Kham  borders  on  Assam  and  upper  Burma,
and  includes  the  districts  of  Po,  Lhari-go.  The  Gang  province
consists  mostly  of  high  bleak  ridges,  Pombor,  Tsawa,  and  'Tsa-
Ch'u.  The  northern  Tsai-dam,  comprising  many  marshes  between
Nan-s)ian  and  Altentagh  mountains,  is  peopled  by  Tanguts  and
Mongols.

The  chief  monasteries  of  central  Tibet  are  : —

Sam-yas,  which,  as  the  first  monastery  founded  in  Tibet,  deserves  first
mention.

Its  full  title  is  "  bSam-yas  Mi-'gyur  Lhun-gyis  grub-pai  Tsug-lug-
K'an "  or  "  The  academy  for  obtaining  the  heap  of  unchanging
Meditation.''

The  explorer  Nain  Singh  resided  in  this  monastery  in  1874  and  has
given  a  good  account  of  it.  It  is  situated  (N.  lat.  29°  20',  E.  long.
91°  26,  altitude  about  11,430ft.)  about  thirty  miles  to  the  S.E.  of
Lhasa,  near  the  north  bank  of  the  Tsang-po  river  amidst  hillocks  of
deep  sand,  clothed  with  scanty  herbage.  It  was  built  about  74  by
Thi-Sron  Detsan  with  the  aid  of  the  Indian  monks,  Padma-sambhava
and  Santa-rakshita,  after  the  model  of  the  Udandapur,'  temple-
monastery  of  Bihar.  But  the  building  is  believed  to  have  been  alto-
gether miraculous,  and  an  abstract  of  the  legend  is  given  underneath.''


^  For  some  details  see  Sahat,  in  J.  Biidd.  Texts.  Ind.,  i.,  p.  4,  seq.

2  To  consecrate  the  ground  and  procure  supernatural  workers  St.  Padma  made  the
magic-circle  of  rDo-r  je-P'ur-pa  with  coloured  stone-dust,  and  having  the  K'ro-wo  of
the  five  kinds,  and  all  the  necessary  offerings  arranged  in  his  presence,  he  worshipped
for  seven  days.  Then  the  five  Jinas  (Dhyani  Buddhas,  Gyal-wa-rigs-lna)  appeared
to  him,  and  the  king,  being  empowered,  also  saw  the  faces  of  these  five.  Then  the
Guru  created  several  incarnations  of  himself,  some  of  whom  entered  the  Mandala,
while  some  flew  up  into  the  sky.  These  incarnations  caused  the  Tibetan  devils  to
bring  stones  and  wood  from  the  hills  and  rivers,  and  thus  the  foundation  of  bSam-yas
academy  was  begun.  Human  beings  built  it  by  day,  while  the  devils  worked  at  it  by
night,  and  so  the  great  work  rapidly  progressed.

When  the  king  saw  the  great  piles  of  gathered  wood  he  was  surprised  and  was


SAM-YAS.  267


Part  of  the  original  building  yet  remains.  The  monastery,  which
contains  a  large  temple,  four  large  colleges,  and  several  other  buildings,
is  enclosed  by  a  lofty  circular  wall  about  a  mile  and  a  half  in  circum-
ference, with  gates  facing  the  cardinal  points,  and  along  the  top  of  the
wall  are  many  votive  brick  chaityas,  of  which  the  explorer,  Nain  Singh,
counted  1,030,  and  they  seemed  to  be  covered  with  inscriptions  in
ancient  Indian  characters.  In  the  centre  of  the  enclosure  stands  the
assembly  hall,  with  radiating  cloisters  leading  to  four  chapels,  facing
at  equal  distances  the  four  sides  of  the  larger  temple.  This  explorer
notes  that  "  the  idols  and  images  contained  in  these  temples  are  of  pure
gold,  richly  ornamented  with  valuable  cloths  and  jewels.  The  candle-
sticks and  vessels  are  nearly  all  made  of  gold  and  silver."  And  on
the  temple  walls  are  many  large  inscriptions  in  Chinese  and  ancient
Indian  characters.  In  the  vestibule  of  the  chief  temple,  to  the  left  of
the  door,  is  a  colossal  copy  of  the  pictorial  Wheel  of  Life.

The  large  image  of  "Buddha,"  over  ten  feet  high,  seems  to  be  called
"  the  Sam-yas  Jing  "  (Samyas  Gyal-po).

The  library  contains  many  Indian  manuscripts,  but  a  great  number
of  these  were  destroyed  at  the  great  fire  about  1810  a.d.

In  a  temple  close  by  among  the  sand  is  a  celebrated  chamber  of
horrors,  built  of  large  boulders,  and  containing  gigantic  figures  of  the
twenty-five  Oon-po  demons.  The  images  are  made  of  incense,  and  are
about  twenty  feet  high,  of  the  fiercest  expression,  and  represented
as  dancing  upon  mangled  human  corpses,  which  they  are  also  devour-
ing. And  great  stains  of  blood  are  pointed  out  by  the  attendants  as


awestruck,  and  asked  the  Guru  to  explain.  The  Guru  thereon  made  the  Mandala  of
the  "  Five,"  and  worshipping  for  seven  days,  the  Five  transformed  themselves
into  five  kinds  of  Garuda  birds,  which  were  visible  to  the  king.  And  at  that  very  time
the  Guru  himself  became  invisible,  and  the  king  saw  in  his  stead  a  great  garuda  hold-
ing a  snake  in  his  clutches  and  beak ;  but  not  seeing  the  Guru,  the  king  cried  out  in
fear.  Then  the  garuda  vanished  and  the  Guru  reappeared  beside  him.  The  country
to  the  south  of  Samye  was  then,  it  is  said,  inhabited  by  the  savage  "kLa-klo  "  tribes,
which  the  Tibetans,  through  their  Indian  pandits,  termed  Nagas  (cognate  with  those
of'  the  Brahmaputra  valley).  The  next  day,  a  Naga,  having  transformed  himself  into
a  white  man  on  a  white  horse,  came  into  the  presence  of  the  king  and  said,  "  0  king  !
How  much  wood  do  you  need  for  building  Sam-yas  p  as  I  will  supply  you  with  all  you
want."  On  being  informed  of  the  requirements,  the  Naga  collected  wood  to  an
enormous  extent.

The  building  of  the  Sam-ye  academy  (gtsug-lag-k'an)  swallowed  up  the  wealth
of  the  king.  So  the  Guru,  accompanied  by  the  king  and  his  ministers,  went  to  the
bank  of  Mal-gro  lake,  and  keeping  the  ministers  concealed  in  a  small  valley,  the
Guru  began  to  make  a  Mandala  of  the  "  Five  "  and  worshipped  for  seven  days,  after
which  Avalokita  sinhada,  with  Amitabha  on  his  head,  stood  at  each  of  the  four  direc-
tions, where  dwell  the  four  gods  of  the  Five.  On  this  the  Nagas  of  the  depths
became  powerless,  and  the  Guru,  addressing  them,  said,  "  The  wealth  of  my  king
being  exhausted,  I  have  come  to  ask  wealth."  Next  day  the  banks  were  found  lined
with  glittering  gold,  which  the  Guru  caused  the  ministers  to  carry  off  to  the  palace.
On  this  account  all  the  images  of  gods  at  Sam-yas  are  made  of  solid  gold,  and  of  a
quality  unequalled  in  any  part  of  our  world  of  Jambudvip.


268  MONASTERIES.


the  fresh  stains  of  bodies  which  the  demons  have  dragged  to  the  place
during  the  previous  night.

We  have  already  referred  to  the  miraculous  account  of  the  building
of  this  monastery,  which  is  said  to  rest  upon  Raksha  fiends.  On
account  of  the  peculiar  safety  imparted  to  the  locality  by  the  spells  of
the  wizard  priest,  Padma-sambhava,  the  Tibetan  government  use  the
place  as  a  bank  for  their  reserved  bullion  and  treasure,  of  which  fabu-
lous sums  are  said  to  be  stored  there.

Although  it  is  now  presided  over  by  a  Sa-kya  Lama,  the  majority  of

its  members  are  Nin-ma.

GiH-LDAN,  the  monastery  founded  by  Tsoh-K'a-pa,  is  one  of  the  four
great  Ge-lug-pa  or  established  church  monasteries,  the  others  being
De-pung,  Sera  and  Tashi-lhunpo.

Its  full  name  is  dGah-ldan  rNam-par  Gyal-wahi  glin,  or  the  Continent
of  completely  victorious  happiness.

This  monastery  stands  enthroned  on  the  AhAn-K'or  hill,  about
twenty-five  miles  E.  N.E.  of  Lhasa.  Its  founder,  Tsoii-K'a-pa,  raised  it
to  a  high  pitch  of  fame  and  filled  it  with  costly  images.  The  chief
object  of  veneration  is  the  grand  tomb  of  Tson-K'a-pa,  which  is  placed  in
the  Tsug-la-k'an.  It  is  a  lofty  mausoleum-like  structure  of  marble
and  malachite,  with  a  gilded  roof.  Inside  this  outer  shell  is  to  be  seen
a  beautiful  Ch'orten,  consisting  of  cube  pyramid  and  surmounting  cone,
all  said  to  be  of  solid  gold.  "Within  this  golden  casket,  wrapped  in  fine
cloths,  inscribed  with  sacred  Dharani  syllables,  are  the  embalmed
remains  of  the  great  reformer,  disposed  in  sitting  attitude.  Other
notable  objects  here  are  a  magnificent  representation  of  Cham-pa,  the
Buddha  to  come,  seated,  European  fashion,  on  a  throne.  Beside  him
stands  a  life-sized  image  of  Tsoh-K'a-pa,  in  his  character  of  Jam-pal
Nin-po,  which  is  supposed  to  be  his  name  in  the  Galdan  heavens.  A
rock-hewn  cell,  with  impressions  of  hands  and  feet,  is  also  shown  as
Tson-K'a-pa's.  A  very  old  statue  of  S'inje,  the  lord  of  Death,  is  much
reverenced  here  ;  every  visitor  presenting  gifts  and  doing  it  infinite
obeisance.  The  floor  of  the  large  central  chamber  appears  to  be
covered  with  brilliant  enamelled  tiles,  whilst  another  shrine  holds  an
effigy  of  Tson-K'a-pa,  with  images  of  his  five  disciples  (Shes-rab  Sen^ge,
K'a-grub  Ch'os-rje,  etc.)  standing  round  him.  The  library  contains
manuscript  copies  of  the  saint's  works  in  his  own  handwriting.^

Unlike  the  other  large  Ge-lug-pa  monasteries,  the  headship  of  Gah-
Idan  is  not  based  on  hereditary  incarnation,  and  is  not,  therefore,  a
child  when  appointed.  He  is  chosen  by  a  conclave  from  among  the
most  scholarly  of  the  monks  of  Sera,  De-pung,  and  this  monastery.  The
late  abbot  became  ultimately  regent  of  all  Tibet.  The  number  of  in-
mates here  is  reckoned  at  about  3,300.

Db-puno  ('bras-spuhs),  the  most  powerful  and  populous  of  all  the
monasteries  in  Tibet,  founded  in  and  named  after  the  great  Indian-
Tantrik monastery  of "  The rice-heap " (Sri-Dhanya Kataka) in

1  Abstract  from  Suneij  Reports,  etc.,  by  Eev.  G,  Sandberg.


DEPUNO  AND  SERA.  269

Kalinga  and  identified  with  the  Kalacakra  doctrine.  It  is  situated
about  three  miles  west  of  Lhasa,  and  it  contains  nominally  7,000'
monks.  It  is  divided  into  four  sections  clustering  round  the  great
cathedral,  the  resplendent  golden  roof  of  which  is  seen  from  afar.  It
contains  a  small  palace  for  the  Dalai  Lama  at  his  annual  visit.  Many
Mojigolians  study  here.  In  front  stands  a  stupa,  said  to  contain  the  body
of  the  fourth  Grand  Lama,  Yon-tenn,  who  was  of  Mongolian  nationality.
Its  local  genii  are  the  Five  nymphs  of  long  Life  (Ts'erin-ma),  whose
images,  accompanied  by  that  of  Hayagriva,  guard  the  entrance.  And
efl&gies  of  the  sixteen  Sthavira  are  placed  outside  the  temple  door.  In
its  neighbourhood  is  the  monastery  of  Na-Oh'un,  the  residence  of  the
state  sorcerer,  with  a  conspicuous  gilt  dome.

Sbr-ka,  or  "  The  Merciful  Hail."  ^  It  is  said  to  have  been  so  named
out  of  rivalry  to  its  neighbour,  "  The  rice-heap  "  (De-pung),  &s  hail  is
destructive  of  rice,  and  the  two  monasteries  have  frequent  feuds.  In
connection  with  this  legend  there  is  also  exhibited  here  a  miraculous
"  Phurbu,"  or  thunderbolt  sceptre  of  Jupiter  Pluvius.

It  is  romantically  situated  about  a  mile  and  a  half  to  the  north  of
Lhasa,  on  the  lower  slopes  of  a  range  of  barren  hills  named  Ta-ti-pu,
famous  for  silver  ore,  and  which  surround  the  monastery  like  an
amphitheatre.

Its  monks  number  nominally  5,500,  and  have  frequently  engaged  in
bloody  feuds  against  their  more  powerful  rivals  of  De-pung.  The  Indian
surveyor  reported  only  on  the  idols  of  the  temple.  He  says  :  "  They
differ  in  size  and  hideousness,  some  having  horns,  but  the  lower  parts
of  the  figures  are  generally  those  of  men."  Hue  gives  a  fuller  descrip-
tion :  "  The  temples  and  houses  of  Sera  stand  on  a  slope  of  the  moun-
tain-spur, planted  with  hollies  and  cypresses.  At  a  distance  these
buildings,  ranged  in  the  form  of  an  amphitheatre,  one  above  the  other,
and  standing  out  upon  the  green  base  of  the  hill,  present  an  attractive
and  picturesque  sight.  Hei^e  and  there,  in  the  breaks  of  the  mountain
above  this  religious  city,  you  see  a  great  number  of  cells  inhabited  by
contemplative  Lamas,  which  you  can  reach  only  with  difficulty.  The
monastery  of  Sera  is  remarkable  for  three  large  temples  of  several
storeys  in  height,  all  the  rooms  of  which  are  gilded  throughout.
Thence  the  name  from  ser,  the  Tibetan  for  'gold.'  In  the  chief  of
these  three  temples  is  preserved  the  famous  tortcM,  which,  having
flown  through  the  air  from  India,  is  the  model  from  which  all  others,
large  and  portable,  are  copied.  The  tortche  of  Sera  is  the  object  of  great
veneration,  and  is  sometimes  carried  in  procession  to  Lhasa  to  receive
the  adoration  of  the  people."  This  " dorje,"  or  rather  "phurbu,"  is
what  is  called  a  Tam-din-phurbu,  and  is  said  to  have  originally  be-
longed to  an  Indian  sage  named  G-rjub-thob  mdah-'phyar.  It  was
found  on  the  hill  in  the  neighbourhood  named  P'urba-Ch'og,  having
flown  from  India. In  the  12th  month  of  every  year  (about  the  27th


1  Lama  U.G.,  loc.  cit,  p.  34,  says  10,000.

2  This  word  is  usually  spelt  ser,  and  seems  never  to  be  spelt  gSer,  or  "gold."


270  MONASTERIES.


day)  it  is  taken  out  of  its  casket  and  carried  in  state  to  Potala,  where
the  Dalai  Lama  puts  it  to  his  head.  It  is  thereafter  carried  by  a  high
official  of  Sera  monastery  to  the  Chinese  Amban,  the  governors  (Shape)
and  the  regent,  all  of  whom  touch  their  heads  with  it.  Afterwards
thousands  throng  to  Sera  to  receive  its  holy  touch  on  their  heads  as  a
defence  against  all  evil  and  spells.

In  the  great  assembly  hall  is  a  huge  image  of  Avalokita  with  eleven
heads.

Tashi-lhunpo  (bkra-s'is  Lhun-po),  or  the  "  Heap  of  Glory,''  the
headquarters  of  the  Pan-ch'en  Grand  Lama,  who  to  some  extent  shares
with  the  Lhasa  Grand  Lama  the  headship  of  the  church.  Its  general
appearance  will  be  seen  from  the  foregoing  plate  on  page  260,  from  a
native  drawing.  The  monastery  forms  quite  a  small  town,  and  not
even  Lamas  other  than  established  church  can  stay  there  over-night.
It  is  well  known  through  the  descriptions  of  Bogle,  Turner,  etc.  It  is
situated  near  the  south  bank  of  the  Tsang-po,  at  the  junction  of  the
Xying  river,  in  89°  7'  E.  long.,  29°  4'  20"  N.  lat.,  and  altitude,  11,800
feet  (Markh.,  xxvii.).  This  celebrated  establishment  has  been  long
known  to  European  geographers  as  "  Teeshoo  Loombo."

Mr.  Bogle  describes  it  ^  as  being  built  on  the  lower  slope  of  a  steep
hill  (Dolmai  Ri,  or  hill  of  the  goddess  Tara).  The  houses  rise  one  over
another ;  four  churches  with  gilt  ornaments  are  mixed  with  them,  and
altogether  it  presents  a  princely  appearance.  Many  of  the  courts  are
flagged  with  stone,  and  with  galleries  running  round  them.  The  alleys,
which  are  likewise  paved,  are  narrow.  The  palace  is  large,  built  of
dark-coloured  bricks,  with  a  copper-gilt  roof.  It  is  appropriated  to  the
Lama  and  his  officers,  to  temples,  granaries,  warehouses,  etc.  The  rest
of  the  town  is  entirely  inhabited  by  priests,  who  are  in  number  about
four  thousand.  Mr.  Bogle  also  describes  the  interior  of  several  of  the
state  rooms  and  temples.  On  the  top  of  mount  Dolmai  Ri  is  a  stone
cairn,  where  banners  are  always  fluttering,  and  where,  on  high  festivals,
huge  bonfires  are  set  ablaze.  The  lay  capital  of  the  province,  Shigatse,
lies  on  the  upper  ridges  to  the  N.E.  of  this  hill,  hardly  a  mile  from
this,  the  ecclesiastical  capital.

The  lofty  walls  enclosing  the  monastic  town  are  pierced  by  five  gate-
ways. Over  the  eastern  gate  has  been  placed,  in  large  carved  letters,
a  prohibition  against  smoking  within  the  monastic  precinct's.  The
western  gateway  seems  to  be  regarded  as  the  main  entrance.  So,  enter-
ing the  monastic  premises  there,  you  find  yourself  in  a  sort  of  town,
with  lanes  lined  by  lofty  houses,  open  squares,  and  temples.

In  the  centre  of  the  place  is  the  grand  cathedral  or  assembly  hall.
Its  entrance  faces  the  east.  Its  i-oof  is  supported  by  one  hundred
pillars,  and  the  building  accommodates  two  to  three  thousand  monks
seated  in  nine  rows  on  rugs  placed  side  by  side  on  the  floor.  The  four
central  pillars,  called  the  Ka-ring,  are  higher  than  the  rest,  and  support
a  detached  roof  to  form  the  side  skylights  through  which-  those  seated
in  the  upper  gallery  can  witness  the  service. The  rows  of  seats  arranged


Mabk.,  p. !


TASHI-LUUNFO.


271


to  the  right  side  of  the  entrance  are  occupied  by  the  senior  monks,  such
as  belong  to  the  order  of  Rigch'en,  Pharch'enpha,  Torampa,  Kah-c'an,
etc.  The  seats  to  the  left  side  are  taken  up  by  the  junior  monks,  such
as  Oe-ts'id  and  apprentice  monks,  etc.,  of  the  classes  called  Dura  and
Eigding.

The  court  around  it  is  used  by  the  monks  for  religious  dances  and
other  outdoor  ceremonies.  Round  the  space  are  reared  the  halls  of  the
college,  four  storeys  in
height,  provided  with
upper-floor  balconies.
North  of  these  buildings
are  set  up  in  a  line  the
huge  tombs  of  deceased
Pan-ch'en  Lamas.  The
body  of  each  is  em-
balmed and  placed  with-
in a  gold-plated  pyramid
raised  on  a  tall  marble
table,  and  this  structure
stands  within  a  stone
mausoleum,  high  and
decorated  with  gilt
k  a  nj  i  r  a  and  '  small
cylinder-shaped  finials
made  of  black  felt.  One
of  these  tombs  is  much
bigger  than  the  rest.  It
is  that  of  Pan-oh'en  Er-
teni,  who  died  in  1779.

There  are  four  con-
ventual colleges  at-
tached to  Tashi-lhun-
po,  all  of  which  receive
students  from  everypart
of  Tibet,  who  are  in-
structed in  Tahtrik  rit-
ual, and  learn  large
portions  of  that  divi-
sion of  the  scriptures.
The  names  of  these
colleges  are  Shar-tse
Ta-ts'an,  Kag-pa  Ta-
ts'an,  Toi-sam  Lin,  and
Kyil-k'ah  Ta-ts'an.  Each  of  these  institutions  has  an  abbot,  who  is  the
tul-wa,  or  avatar  of  some  bygone  saint ;  and  the  four  abbots  have
much  to  do  with  the  discovery  of  the  infant  successor  to  a  deceased
Pan-ch'en,  or  head  of  the  monastery. From  these  abbots,  also, one


Tomb  of  Tashi  Lama.i


1  After  Turner.


272  MONASTERIES.


is  selected  to  act  as  the  prime  minister,  or  chief  ecclesiastical  adviser
in  the  government  of  Tsang.  The  most  imposing  buUding  of  the
monaster}'  is  the  temple  and  hall  of  the  Z^ag-pa  Ta-ts'an,  known  as
the  "  iTagk'an,"  which  is  the  chief  college  for  mystic  ritual  in  Tibet.
Another  college,  the  Toi-san-lin,  stands  at  the  extreme  northern  apex
of  the  walls,  some  way  up  the  slope  of  the  Dolmai-E,i  hill.

Hard  by  the  last-named  premises,  is  to  be  observed  a  lofty  building
of  rubble-stone,  reared  to  the  amazing  height  of  nine  storeys.  This
edifice,  which  forms  a  very  remarkable  object  on  the  hill-side,  was
sketched  by  Turner,  who  visited  Tashi-lhunpo  one  hundred  years  ago,
and  his  drawing  of  it  is  here  annexed  on  opposite  page.  It  is  called
Go-Ku-pea,  or  "  The  Stored  Silken  Pictures,"  as  it  is  used  to  exhibit
at  certain  festivals  the  gigantic  pictures  of  Maitreya  and  other  Buddhist
deities,  which  are  brought  out  and  hung  high  up  as  great  sheets  out-
side the  walls  of  the  tall  building.  By  the  vulgar  it  is  styled  Kiku
Tamsa.  It  is  used  as  a  storehouse  for  the  dried  carcases  of  sheep,
goats,  and  yak,  which  are  kept  in  stock  for  feeding  the  inmates  of  the
monastery.  A  wide-walled  yard  fronts  the  Kiku  Tamsa,  and  this  space
is  thronged  by  a  motley  crowd  when  (as  is  the  custom  in  June  and
November)  the  pictures  are  exhibited.

The  number  of  monks  generally  in  residence  at  Tashi-lhunpo  is  said
to  be  3,800.  The  division  into  wards  and  clubs  has  already  been  re-
ferred to.  •

The  head  of  the  whole  monastic  establishment  resides  in  the  building
called  6La-brang,  or  "  The  Lama's  palace."

Nam-gyal  Ch'oi-db  is  the  monastery-royal  of  the  Grand  Lama  on  the
red  hill  of  Potala,  where  the  Dalai  Lama  holds  his  court  and  takes  part
in  the  service  as  a  Bhikshu,  or  common  monk.

Eamo-ch'e  and  Karmakya  monasteries,  within  Lhasa,  are,  as  already
noted,  schools  of  sorcery,  and  the  latter  has  a  printing  house.

"  Dbshbrip-gay  "  (elevation  12,220  feet),  a  monastery  two  miles  from
the  fort  of  Ohamnam-ring  in  northern  Tsang,  is  subordinate  to  Tashi-
lhunpo,  where  the  Grand  Tashi  Lama  was  resident  at  Bogle's  visit  on
account  of  the  smallpox  plague  at  his  headquarters.  Bogle  describes
it  as  "  situated  in  a  narrow  valley,  and  at  the  foot  of  an  abrupt  and
rocky  hill  .  .  .  two  storeys  high,  and  is  surrounded  on  three
sides  by  rows  of  small  apartments  with  a  wooden  gallery  running  round
them,  which  altogether  form  a  small  court  flagged  with  stone.  All  the
stairs  are  broad  ladders.  The  roofs  are  adorned  with  copper-gUt  orna-
ments, and  on  the  front  of  the  house  are  three  round  brass  plates,
emblems  of  Om,  Han  (?  Ah),  Hoonq.  The  Lama's  apartment  is  at  the
top.  It  is  small,  and  hung  round  with  different  coloured  silks,  views
of  Potala,  Teshu  Lumbo,  etc."  '

Jan-laohb,  a  large  monastery  on  the  upper  Tsang-po,  in  long.  87°
38'  E. ;  elevation  13,580  feet.  It  is  eighty-five  miles  above  Tashi-
lhunpo.^


1  Markham,  op.  cit,  p.  82.  a  Mabkham's  Tib.,  p.  xxvii.


TABHI-LHUNPO.


273


The  "Go-Ku-pea"  oe  "Kiku-Tamsa"  Towek  at  Tashi-lhunpo.^


1  After  Turner.


274  MONASTERIES.


OHAMjfAMRiN  (Nam-lin),  in  the  valley  of  the  Shing  river,  a
northern  affluent  of  the  Tsang-po,  12,220  feet,  seen  and  visited  by  Mr.
Bogle.

DoBKYA  LUGu-DON,  On  the  bank  of  the  great  Tengri-nor  lake.

Ka-deng  (Ra-sgreu),  north-east  of  Lhasa, 'a  Ka-dam-pa  monastery,
founded  in  1055  by  Brom-ton,  Atisa's  pupil.

Sa-eya  (Sa-skya)  "  Tawny-soil,"  is  about  50  miles  north  of  Mount
Everest,  48  miles  east  from  Shigatse,  and  30  mUesf  rom  Jang-lache ;  E.  long.
87°  54',  lat.  28°  53'.  This  monastery  gives  its  name  to  the  Sakya  sect,
which  has  played  an  important  part  in  the  history  of  Tibet.  A  consider-
able town  nestles  at  the  foot  of  the  monastery.  The  foundation  of  the
monastery  and  its  future  fame  are  related  to  have  been  foretold  by  the
Indian  sage,  Atisa,  when  on  his  way  to  central  Tibet,  he  passed  a  rock,
on  the  present  site  of  the  monastery,  on  which  he  saw  the  mystic  Om
inscribed  in  "  self-sprung,"  characters.  Afterwards  this  establishment
became  famous  as  a  seat  of  learning  and  for  a  time  of  the  priest-king.

It  is  said  to  contain  the  largest  single  building  in  Tibet, — though  the
cathedral  at  Lhasa  is  said  to  be  larger.  It  is  seven  ^  storeys  in  height,  and
has  a  spacious  assembly  hall  known  as  "  the  White  Hall  of  Worship."
It  is  still  famous  for  its  magnificent  library,  containing  numerous  unique
treasures  of  Sanskrit  and  Tibetan  literature,  unobtainable  elsewhere.
Some  of  these  have  enormous  pages  embossed  throughout  in  letters  of
gold  and  silver.  The  monastery,  though  visited  in  1872  by  our  ex-
ploring Pandit  No.  9,  and  in  1882  by  Babu  Sarat  Candra  Das,  reniains
undescribed  at  present.  The  Sakya  Lama  is  held  to  be  an  incarna-
tion Kjf  the  Bodhisat  Maiijusri,  and  also  to  carry  Karma,  derivable
from  Sakya  Fandita  and  St.  Padma.

The  hall  of  the  great  temple,  called  'P'rul-pahi  Lha-k'an,  has  four
enormous  wooden  pillars,  Ka-wa-min  ches  zhi,  of  which  the  first  pillar
is  white,  and  called  Kar-po-zum-lags,  and  is  alleged  to  have  come  from
Kongbu ;  the  second  yellow,  Ser-po  zum-lags,  from  Mochu  valley ;  the
third  red,  Marpo  Tag  dzag,  from  Nanam  on  Nepal  frontier ;  and  the
fourth  pillar  black,  Nak-po  K'un-shes,  from  Ladak.  These  pillars
are  said  to  have  been  erected  by  K'yec^-'bum  bsags,  the  ancestor  of  the
Sikhim  king.

TiNG-GE  is  a  very  large  Ge-lug-pa  monastery  to  the  north  of  Sakya  and
west  of  Tashi-lhunpo.

PHtTNTSHOMNG  (p'un-ts'ogs-glih)  monastery,  formerly  named  9-Tag-
6rten  by  Taranatha,  who  built  it  in  his  forty-first  year,  was  forcibly
made  a  Ge-lug-pa  institution  by  the  fifth  grand  Lama,  Nag-wan.

It  is  situated  on  the  Tsangpo,  about  a  day's  journey  west  of  Tashi-
lhunpo,  and  one  mile  to  the  south-west  of  it  is  Jonang,  which  has  a  very
large  temple  said  to  be  like  Budh^Gaya,  and,  like  it,  of  several^storeys
and  covered  by  images ;  but  both  it  and  Phuntsholing  are  said  to  have
been  deserted  by  monks  and  now  are  occupied  by  nuns.

Sam-ding  (bsam-ldiii  ch'oinde). It  lies  in  N.  lat.  28°  57'  15",  and  E.

'  De-pung  and  the  larger  monasteries  in  Tibet  have  several  much  smaller  buildings-
distributed  so  as  to  form  a  town.


SAM-DIJVG  AND  BOBJE-FAG-MO.  275

long.,  90°  28'.  Altitude,  14,512  feet.  An  important  establishment,  note-
worthy as  a  monastery  of  monks  as  well  as  nuns,  presided  over  by  a
female  abbot — the  so-called  re-incarnate  goddess  already  referred  to.'
This  august  woman  is  known  throughout  Tibet  as  Borje-P'ag-mo,  or
"  the  diamond  sow "  ;  the  abbesses  of  Samding  being  held  to  be
successive  appearances  in  mortal  form  of  the  Indian  goddess,  Vajra-
varahi.  The  present  incarnation  of  this  goddess  is  thirty-three  years
old  (in  1889) ;  and  is  described  as  being  a  clever  and  capable  woman,
with  some  claim  to  good  looks,  and  of  noble  birth.  She  bears  the  name
of  S"ag-iZban  Rin-ch'en  Kun-Jzaii-mo  tZbAh-mo,  signifying  "  The  most
precious  power  of  speech,  the  female  energy  of  all  good  ").  Under  this
lady  the  reputation  which  Samding  has  long  enjoyed  for  the  good  morals
of  both  monks  and  nuns  has  been  well  maintained.  Among  other  rule.s,
the  inmates  are  forbidden  to  lend  out  money  or  other  valuables  on  interest
to  the  rural  folk,  usurious  dealings  being  commonly  resorted  to  by  the
monastic  orders.  It  is  said  to  be  of  the  Nih-ma  sect.  The  monastery
was  founded  by  one  Je-tsun  T'inle  Ts'oma,  a  flower  of  the  philosophy
of  Po-doh  P'yog  Legs  Nam-gyal,  whose  writings,  to  the  amazing  extent
of  one  hundred  and  eighteen  volumes,  are  treasured  up  in  the  monastic
library.

Yamdok  lake  is  remarkable  for  its  scorpionoid  shape,  the  grotesque
shaped  semi-island  anchored  to  the  main  shore  by  two  necks  of  land.
Samding  is  itself  placed  on  the  main  shore  at  the  juncture  of  the
northern  neck.  Being  built  on  a  conical  hill,  it  appears  to  be  guarding
the  sacred  island  from  intrusion.  The  monastery  stands  like  a  fortress
on  the  summit  of  the  barren  hill  some  300  feet  above  the  level  of  the
surrounding  country.  Huge  flags  of  stone  are  piled  in  ascending  steps
up  this  hill,  and  a  long  low  wall  mounts  beside  them  like  a  balustrade.
At  the  top  of  the  steps,  a  narrow  pathway  conducts  to  the  foot  of  the
monastery,  which  is  circled  by  a  high  wall.  Samding  is  finely
placed.  To  the  N.E.  it  fronts  the  dark  and  precipitous  mountain
spurs  which  radiate  from  the  lofty  central  peak  of  the  islands.  To  the
S.E.  it  looks  over  the  land  towards  the  illimitable  waters  of  the  weird
and  mighty  Yamdok  herself.  To  the  S.  it  frowns  down  on  the  Dumo
Ts'o,  the  inner  lake  betwixt  the  connecting  necks  of  land  above-
mentioned,  into  which  are  cast  the  bodies  of  the  defunct  nuns  and
monks,  as  food  for  fishes.

On  entering  the  gates  of  the  monastery,  you  find  yourself  in  an
extensive  courtyard,  flanked  on  three  sides  by  the  conventual  buildings.
Part  of  the  fourth  side  of  the  parallelogram  is  occupied  by  a  kind  of
grand-stand  supported  on  pilasters  of  wood.  Ladders  with  broad  steps,
cased  in  brass,  give  admission  to  the  first  floor  of  the  main  building.
Here,  in  a  long  room,  are  ranged  the  tombs  of  celebrities  connected  in
past  times  with  Samding,  including  that  of  the  founder,  T'inle  Ts'omo.
The  latter  tomb  is  a  richly  ornamented  piece  of  workmanship,  plated
with  gold  and  studded  with  jewels.  At  the  base,  on  a  stone  slab  is
marked  the  reputed  footprint  of  the  saint. In  a  private,  strongly-

j ^—  - -  — .

1  See  page  245.

T 2


276  MONASTERIES.


barred  chamber,  hard  by  to  which  no  one  may  be  admitted,  are  laid  the
dried  mortal  remains  of  all  the  former  incarnations  of  Dorje  P'ag-mo.
Here,  in  this  melancholy  apartment,  will  be  one  day  placed  the  body  of
the  present  lady  abbess,  after  undergoing  some  embalming  process.  To
the  grim  charnel-house,  it  is  considered  the  imperative  duty  of  each
incarnate  abbess  to  repair  once,  ^7hile  living,  to  gaze  her  fill  on  her
predecessors,  and  to  make  formal  obeisance  to  their  mouldering  forms.
She  must  enter  once,  but  only  once,  during  her  lifetime.

Another  hall  in  this  monastery  is  the  dus-h'an,  the  walls  of  which
are  frescoes  illustrative  of  the  career  of  the  original  Dorje  P'ag-mo.
There,  also,  have  been  put  up  inscriptions  recording  how  the  goddess
miraculously  defended  Samding,  when,  in  the  year  1716,  it  was  beset
by  a  Mongol  warrior,  one  Yung  Gar.  When  the  Mongol  arrived  in
the  vicinity  of  Yamdok,  hearing  that  the  lady  abbess  had  a  pig's  head
as  an  excrescence  behind  her  ear,  he  mocked  at  her  in  public,  sending
word  to  her  to  come  to  him,  that  he  might  see  the  pig's  head  for  him-
self. Dorje  P'ag-mo  returned  no  angry  reply,  only  beseeching  him
to  abandon  his  designs  on  the  monastery.  Burning  with  wrath,  the
warrior  invaded  the  place  and  destroyed  the  walls  ;  but,  entering,  he
found  the  interior  utterly  deserted.  He  only  observed  eighty  pigs  and
eighty  sows  grunting  in  the  du-khang  under  the  lead  of  a  bigger  sow.
He  was  startled  by  this  singular  frustration  of  his  project ;  for  he  could
hardly  plunder  a  place  guarded  only  by  hogs.  When  it  was  evident
that  the  Mongol  was  bent  no  longer  on  rapine,  the  pigs  and  sows  were
suddenly  transformed  into  venerable-looking  monks  and  nuns,  headed
by  the  most  reverend  Dorje  P'ag-mo ;  as  a  consequence,  Yung  Gar,
instead  of  plundering,  enriched  the  place  with  costly  presents.

A  certain  amount  of  association  is  permitted  between  the  male  and
female  inmates  of  this  convent,  who  together  number  less  than  200.
Dorje  P'ag-mo  retains  one  side  of  the  monastic  premises  as  her  private
residence.  It  is  asserted  by  the  inmates  that  the  good  woman  never
suffers  herself  to  sleep  in  a  reclining  attitude.  During  the  day  she  may
doze  in  a  chair,  during  the  night  she  must  sit,  hour  after  hour,  wrapt
in  profound  meditation.  Occasionally  this  lady  makes  a  royal  progress
to  Lhasa,  where  she  is  received  with  the  deepest  veneration.  Tip  in
northern  Tibet  is  another  sanctuary  dedicated  to  Dorje  P'ag-mo.  This
convent  also  stands  on  an  islet  situated  off  the  west  shore  of  the  great
lake,  70  miles  N.W.  of  Lhasa,  the  Nam  Ts'o  Ch'yidmo,  and  is  much
akin  to  Samding,  comprising  a  few  monks  and  nuns  under  an  abbess.
At  Markula,  in  Lahul,  is  a  third  shrine  of  the  goddess.^

Di-KUNG  ('bri-guh)  about  one  hundred  miles  N.E.  of  Lhasa,  is  one
of  the  largest  Kar-gyu-pa  monasteries.  It  is  said  to  receive  its  name,
the  "she- Yak,"  from  the  ridge  on  which  it  is  situated,  which  is  shaped
like  the  back  of  a  yak.  It  was  founded  in  1166,  by  the  son  of  the
Sakya  Lama,  Koncho  Yal-po.


1  Abstract  of  Saeat's  Report,  by  Eev.  G.  Sandbeeg.


MINDOLLING, DOEJE-BAG, ETG.  277

MiNDOLLiNG  (smLa  grol-glin),  close  to  the  S.  of  Samye,  a  great  Nih-ma
monastery,  sharing  with  Dorje  Dag,  not  far  off,  the  honour  of  being
the  supreme  monastery  of  that  sect.  It  lies  across  the  Tsangpo  from
Sam-yas  in  the  valley  of  the  MindoUing  river,  the  water  of  which  turns
numerous  large  prayer-wheels.  Its  chief  temple  is  nine  storeys  high,
with  twenty  minor  temples  with  many  "  beautiful  images  "  and  books.
A  massive  stone  stairway  forms  the  approach  to  the  monastery.

Its  chief  Lama  is  a  direct  descendant  of  the  revelation-finder
Dag-liii.  The  succession  is  by  descent  and  not  by  re-incarnation.
One  of  his  sons  is  made  a  Lama  and  vowed  to  celibacy,  another
son  marries  and  continues  the  descent,  and  in  like  manner  the  suc-
cession proceeds,  and  has  not  yet  been  interrupted  since  its  institu-
tion seventeen  generations  ago ;  but  should  the  lay-brpther  die  without
issue  the  Lama  is  expected  to  marry  the  widow.  The  married  one  is
called  giDun-pa  or  "  the  lineage."  The  body  of  the  deceased  Lama  is
salted  and  preserved.  The  discipline  of  this  monastery  is  said  to  be
strict,  and  its  monks  are  celibate.  A  large  branch  of  this  monastery
is  ISTa-s'i,^  not  far  distant  from  its  parent.

DoRjB-DAG,  between  Sam-yas  and  Lhasa,  is  a  headquarters  of  the
XJnreformed  Lamas.  It  has  had  a  chequered  history,  having  been  de-
stroyed several  times  by  the  Mongols,  etc. ,  and  periodically  restored.

Pal-bi  (dpal-ri),  a  Nih-ma  monastery  between  Shigatse  and  Gyangtse,
where  lives  the  pretended  incarnation  of  the  Indian  wizard,  L6-pon
Huhkara.

Shaltj  monastery,  a  few  miles  E.  of  Tashi-lhunpo.  Here  instruction
is  given  in  magical  incantations,  and  devotees  are  immured  for  years  in
its  cave-hermitages.  Amongst  the  supernatural  powers  believed  to  be
so  acquired  is  the  alleged  ability  to  sit  on  a  heap  of  barley  without  dis-
placing a  grain ;  but  no  credible  evidence  is  extant  of  anyone  display-
ing such  feats.

GuEcr  ch'o-wan,  in  Lhobrak,  or  southern  Tibet,  bordering  on
Bhotan.  This  monastery  is  said  by  Lama  TJ.  G.^  to  have  been  built
after  the  model  of  the  famous  monastery  of  Nalanda  in  Magadha.
The  shrine  is  surrounded  by  groves  of  poplars,  and  contains  some  im-
portant relics,  amongst  others  a  stuffed  horse  of  great  sanctity  (belong-
ing to  the  great  Guru)  which  is  called  Jamlih-nin-k'or,  or  "the  horse
that  can  go  roun(i  the  world  in  one  day." ''  Observing  that  the  horse
was  bereft  of  his  "  left  leg,"  U.  G.  enquired  the  cause,  and  was  told
how  the  leg  had  been  stolen  by  a  Khamba  pilgrim  with  a  view  of
"  enchanting  "  the  ponies  of  Kham.  The  thief  became  insane,  and  his
friends  took  him  to  the  high  priest  of  the  sanctuary  for  advice,  who
instantly  divined  that  he  had  stolen  some  sacred  thing.  This  so
frightened  the  thief  that  the  leg  was  secretly  restored,  and  the  thief
and  his  friends  vanished  from  the  place  and  never  were  seen  again.


'  U.  G.,  loc.  cit.,  p.  26.

2  Znc.  cit.,  p.  23.

■3  Compare  with  the  sacred  horse  of  Shintoism,  etc.


278  MONASTERIES


The  upper  Lhobrak  is  well  cultivated ;  barley,  pea,  mustard,  wheat,
and  crops  of  rape  were  noticed  by  U.  G.,  surrounding  the  monastery  of
Lha  Lung.  With  some  difficulty  he  obtained  permission  to  see  the
sacred  objects  of  the  monastery,  whose  saintly  founder,  Lha  Lung,  has
three  incarnations  in  Tibet.  One  of  them  is  the  present  abbot  of  the
monastery,  who  was  born  in  Bhotan,  and  is  a  nephew  of  the  Paro
Penlo.  The  monastery  is  well  endowed  by  the  Tibetan  government,
and  rituals  are  encouraged  in  it  for  the  suppression  of  evil  spirits  and
demons.

Sang-kak  Gu-t'ok,  also  in  the  Lhobrak  valley,  has  one  hundred
monks,  and  is  a  small  printing  establishment.^

Kar-ch'u,  also  in  the  Lhobrak  valley,  said  ^  to  be  one  of  the  richest
monasteries  in  jTibet,  and  to  contain  many  bronzes  brought  from
Magadha  in  the  Middle  Ages.  Pilgrims  carry  off  from  here  the  holy
water  which  percolates  into  a  sacred  cave.

Gyan-isb,  on  the  Painom  river,  east  of  Tashi-lhunpo.  Its  monastery
is  named  Palk'or  Ch'oide.  Its  hall  is  reported  by  Lama  Ugyan  Gyarts'o
to  be  lit  by  1,000  lamps.  In  lofty  niches  on  the  three  sides,  IST.,
E.,  and  W.  (implying  evidently  that  the  entrance  is  on  the  S.),  are
placed  "  three  huge  images  of  Buddha — Jam-yang,  Ghanrassig,  and
Maitreya,"  copper-gilt.  Here  also  he  notes  "  stone  images  like  those
at  Buddha  Gaya.  In  the  lobby  is  a  collection  of  stuffed  animals,
including  tigers."

The  foregoing  are  all  in  the  TJ  and  Tsang  provinces.  In  Kham,  in
eastern  Tibet,  are  many  large  monasteries,  the  largest  of  which  are
perhaps  Derge  and  Ch'ab-md6  (Ohiam6),  with  about  2,000  monks  and
large  printing  press.

Derge  (sDe-sge),  at  the  town  of  that  name,  and  capital  of  one  of  the
richest  and  most  populous  of  Tibetan  provinces,  containing  "  many  Lama-
serais  of  200  or  300  monks,  some  indeed  of  2,000  or  3,000.  Each  family
devotes  a  son  to  the  priesthood.  The  king  resides  in  a  Lamaserai  of
300  monks."'

Other  large  monasteries  of  eastern  Tibet  are  Karthok  and  (?)  Ei-
wochce  on  the  Jful  river,  under  the  joint  government  of  two  incar-
nate abbots.

In  southern  Tibet  in  the  district  of  Pema  Kod  (map-name  Pema-
koi)  are  the  monasteries  of  Dorje-yu  (founded  by  Terton  Dorje-thokmi),
Mar-pun  Lek-puh  (built  by  Ugyen  Dich'en-lin-pa),  Mendeldem,
Phu-pa-ron,  Kon-dem,  Bho-lun,  C'am-nak,  Kyon-sa,  Narton,  Einc'h-
ensun  (built  by  Ugyen  Dodulin-pa,  the  father j)f  Dich'en-liii-pa),  Tsen-
c'uk,  Gya-pun,  Gilin,  and  Demu,  which  are  all  Nin-ma,  except  Ohamnak
and  Demu,  which  are  Ge-lug-pa,  and  all  except  the  last  are  on  the
west  or  right  bank  of  the  Tsangpo  river,  and  the  number  of  monks  in
each  is  from  ten  to  thirty.  Amongst  the  chief  shrines  are  Horasharki
Oh'orten,  Mendeldem's  shrine,  and  "  Buddu  Tsip'ak."


'  Explorer  E.N.'s  account  {S.R.,  1889,  p.  50). 2  Lama  Ugyen  Gya-ts'o,  loc.  cit.,  25.
3  Babeb,  Snppl.  Papers,  R.  Qtog.  Socy.  ;  see  also  EocKHirx,  L.,  184,  etc.,  96.


m CHINA.


279


IN CHIJiTA.


In  China  proper  there  seem  to  be  no  truly  Lamaist  monasteries  of
any  size  except  at  Pekin  and  near  the  western  frontier.  The  Pekin
monastery  is  called  "  everlasting  peace  "  (Yun-ho  Kung),  and  is  main-
tained at  the  imperial  expense.'  Its  monks,  over  1,000  in  number,  are
almost  entirely -Mongolian,  but  the  head  Lama,  a  re-incarnate  abbot,
and  his  two  chief  assistants,  are  usually  Tibetans  of  the  De-pung,  Sera,
and  Gah-ldan  monasteries,  and  appointed  from  Lhasa.  The  abbot,
who  is  considered  an  incarnation  of  Rol-pa-dorje,  already  figured,
lives  within  the  yellow  wall  of  the  city,  and  near  by  is  the  great
printing-house,  called  "  Sum-ju  Si,"  where  Lamaist  books  are  printed
in Tibetan, Chinese, and Mongolian. In the chief temple  "  the


:H


i^-^V


Monastery  of  U-tai-Shan.^

great  wooden  image  of  Buddha,  seventy  feet  high,  richly  ornamented
and  clothed,  holding  an  enormous  lotus  in  each  hand,  and  with
the  traditional  jewel  on  his  breast.  In  each  section  of  his  huge  gold
crown  sat  a  small  Buddha,  as  perfect  and  as  much  ornamented  as  the
great  one.  His  toe  measured  twenty-one  inches.  On  each  side  of  him
hung  a  huge  scroll  seventy-five  feet  long,  bearing  Chinese  characters
and  a  series  of  galleries,  reached  by  several  flights  of  stairs,  surrounded
him.  The  expression  of  his  great  bronze  face  was  singularly  lofty.
Near  by  were  two  magnificent  bronze  lions  and  a  wonderful  bronze  urn ;
many  temples  filled  with  strange  idols  hung  with  thousands  of  silk
hangings, and  laid with Tibetan  carpets;  all  sorts of  bronze  and


Edkin's  Relig,  in  China,  65.


2  After  Hue,


280


MONASTERIES


enamel  altar  utensils,  presented  by  different  emperors,  among  them
two  elephants  in  cloisonne  ware,  said  to  be  the  best  specimens  of  such
work  in  China,  and  the  great  hall,  with  its  prayer-benches  for  all  the
monks,  where  they  worship  every  afternoon  at  five."

Another  celebrated  monastery  is  the  Wu-tai  or  U-tai-shan,  "The
five  towers"  in  the  north  Chinese  province  of  Shan-si,  and  a  cele-
brated shrine.

The  great  monastery  of  KtrsuM  (Kumbum),  in  Sifau,  lies  near  the
western  frontiers  of  China.  It  is  the  birth-place  of  St.  Tson-KVpa,
and  has  been  visited  and  described  by  Hue,  RockhiU,  etc. Its  photo-


KUMBUM (T'A-EKH-SSU).2

graph by  Mr. Rockhill  is  here  by  his  kind  permission  given. Its
Mongolian  name  is  T'a-erh-ssu."

Here  is  the  celebrated  tree,  the  so-called  "white  sandal"  {Syringa
Vdlosa,  Vahl),  which  the  legend  alleges  to  have  sprung  up  miracu-
lously from  the  placental  blood  shed  at  Tson-K'a-pa's  birth.  Its  leaves
are  said  to  bear  100,000  ima-ges,  hence  the  etymology  of  the  name  of
the  place  (sKu-'bum).  The  image  markings  on  the  leaves  are  said  to
represent  "  the  Tathagata  of  the  Lion's  Voice  "  (Sen-ge  ISTa-ro),  but  Hue
describes  the  markings  as  sacred  letters."


1  Newspaper  Acct. ,  18flO.

"  After  Bockhill.

"  Rockhill,  I.,  57-  said  to  mean  "  the  Great  Tent  (Tabernacle)  '

*  Cf.  also  ibid.,  5S,  etc.


IN  MONGOLIA.  281


Hue's  account  of  it  is  as  follows  :  "  At  the  foot  of  the  mountain  on
which  the  Lamaserai  stands,  and  not  far  from  the  principal  Buddhist
temple,  is  a  great  square  enclosure,  formed  by  brick  walls.  Upon
entering  this  we  were  able  to  examine  at  leisure  the  marvellous  tree,
some  of  the  branches  of  which  had  already  manifested  themselves  above
the  wall.  Our  eyes  were  first  directed  with  earnest  curiosity  to  the
leaves,  and  we  were  filled  with  absolute  consternation  of  astonishment
at  finding  that,  in  point  of  fact,  there  were  upon  each  of  the  leaves
well-formed  Tibetan  characters,  all  of  a  green  colour,  some  darker,
some  lighter,  than  the  leaf  itself.  Our  first  impression  was  suspicion
of  fraud  on  the  part  of  the  Lamas  ;  but,  after  a  minute  examination  of
every  detail,  we  could  not  discover  the  least  deception,  the  characters
all  appeared  to  us  portions  of  the  leaf  itself,  equally  with  its  veins  and
nerves,  the  position  was  not  the  same  in  all ;  in  one  leaf  they  would  be
at  the  top  of  the  leaf ;  in  another,  in  the  middle ;  in  a  third,  at  the
base,  or  at  the  side ;  the  younger  leaves  represented  the  characters
only  in  a  partial  state  of  formation.  The  bark  of  the  tree  and  its
branches,  which  resemble  those  of  the  plane-tree,  are  also  covered  with
these  characters.  When  you  remove  a  piece  of  old  bark,  the  young
bark  under  it  exhibits  the  indistinct  outlines  of  characters  in  a
germinating  state,  and,  what  is  very  singular,  these  new  characters  are
not  unfrequently  different  from  those  which  they  replace.  We
examined  everything  with  the  closest  attention,  in  order  to  detect  some
trace  of  trickery,  but  we  could  discern  nothing  of  the  sort,  and  the
perspiration  absolutely  trickled  down  our  faces  under  the  influence  of
the  sensations  which  this  most  amazing  spectacle  created.

"  More  profound  intellects  than  ours  may,  perhaps,  be  able  to  supply
a  satisfactory  explanation  of  the  mysteries  of  this  singular  tree  ;  but,
as  to  us,  we  altogether  give  it  up.  Our  readers  possibly  may  smile  at
our  ignorance ;  but  we  care  not  so  that  the  sincerity  and  truth  of  our
statement  be  not  suspected."  ^

The  large  temple  (Jo-wo-k'an)  is  described  by  Eockhill.^


TS MONGOLIA.

In  Mongolia  the  chief  monastery  is  at  Urgya-Kuebn,  on  the  Tula
river  in  the  country  of  the  i^balkas,  about  forty  days'  journey  west  of
Pekin,  and  the  seat  of  a  Russian  consul  and  two  Chinese  ambassadors.
It  is  the  seat  of  the  Grand  Lama,  who  is  believed  to  be  the  incarnate
historian,  Lama  Taranatha,  and  he  is  called  Je-tsun  Tamba,  as  detailed  in
the  chapter  on  the  hierarchy,  and  its  monks  are  said  to  number  over
14,000,  and  during  the  great  new  year  festival  over  20,000  are  present.
It  contains  twenty-eight  colleges  (sGgra-ts'ah).

The  monastery  is  named  Kurun  or  Kuren,  and  is  described  by  Hue.
The  plain  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain  is  covered  with  tents  for  the  use
of  the  pilgrims. Viewed  from  a  distance,  the  white  cells  of  the  Lamas,

1  Hno,  ii,,  p.  53.  ^  Rockhill,  L.,  66.


282  MONASTERIES


built  on  the  declivity  in  horizontal  lines  one  above  the  other,  resemble
the  steps  of  an  enormous  altar,  of  which  the  temple  of  Taranatha
Lama  appears  to  constitute  "  the  tabernacle."  Hue  says  it  contains
30,000  monks !

Kuku  Khotun,  or  "  blue  city,"  near  the  northern  bend  of  the  Yellow
river,  is  said  by  Hue  to  have  formerly  been  the  seat  of  Jetsun-Dam-pa.
It  contains  five  monasteries  with  about  20,000  Lamas.

IN SIBEEIA.

In  south  Siberia,  amongst  the  Buriats,  near  the  Baikal  lake,  a  large
monastery  is  on  a  lake  thirty  versts  to  the  north-west  of  Selinginsk,
and  the  presiding  monk  is  called  the  K'an-po  Pandita,  and  claims  to  be
a  re-incarnate  Lama.^

DSr BTJROPE.

The  Kalmak  Tartars  on  the  Volga  have  only  temporary,  nomadic
cloisters  and  temples,  that  is  to  say  tents,  in  which  they  put  up  their
holy  pictures  and  images,  and  celebrate  divine  service.  Such  temporary
cloisters  are  called  "  Ohurull,"  and  consist  of  two  different  sorts  of  tents
or  Jnrten  (Oergb),  the  assembly  hall  of  the  clergy  (OhurulHin-Oergb)
and  of  the  gods  and  image  hall  (Schitani  or  Burchaniin-Oergo).  Some
of  these  Churulls  contain  a  hundred  priests.

IN LADlK AND LITTLE TIBET.

He-mi  (or  "  Himis  "  of  survey  map).  This  fine  old  monastery  is
situated  about  11,000  feet  above  the  sea-level,  in  a  lateral  ravine  that
joins  the  Indus,  a  day's  journey  (eighteen  miles  SSE.)  above  Leh,  on
the  left  bank  of  that  river.  From  its  secluded  position  this  was  one  of
the  few  monasteries  which  escaped  destruction  on  the  invasion  of  the
country  by  the  Dogras  under  Wazir  Gerawar,  who  ruthlessly  destroyed
much  Lamaist  property,  so  that  more  interesting  and  curious  objects,
books,  dresses,  masks,  etc.,  are  found  at  Himis  than  in  any  other
monastery  in  Ladak.  It  was  built  by  sTag-stan-ras-ch'en,  and  its
proper  title  is  Ch'an-ch'uh  samAin.

The  "  Himis-fair,"  with  its  mask  plays,  as  held  on  St.  Padma-sam-
bhava's  day  in  summer,  is  the  chief  attraction  to  sight-seers  in  Ladak.
This  Lamasery  is  at  present  still  the  greatest  landowner  in  Ladak,  and
its  steward  one  of  the  most  influential  persons  in  the  country.  The
Lamas  seem  to  be  of  the  Nih-ma  sect  (according  to  Marx''  they  are
Dug-pa,  but  he  appears  to  use  Dug-pa  as  synonymous  with  Eed  cap
sect).  To  the  same  sect  also  belongs  Ts'en-re  and  sTag-na.  A  fine
photograph  of  this  monastery  is  given  by  Mr.  Knight,"  and  one  of  its
courts  is  shown  in  his  illustration  of  the  mystic  play  reproduced  at  p.  528

"  The  principal  entrance  to  the  monastery  is  through  a  massive  door,
from  which  runs  a  gently  sloping  and  paved  covered  way  leading  into  a

1  KopPEN,  op.  dt.  2  Loc.  cit,  133.  ^  -fy^g/.g  Three  Empires  Meet.


IN  LADAK.  283


courtyard  about  30  x  40  yards  square,  having  oh  the  left  hand  a  narrow
verandah,  in  the  centre  of  which  stands  the  large  prayer-cylinder
above  mentioned.  The  larger  picturesque  doorway,  the  entrance  of  one
of  the  principal  idol  rooms,  is  in  the  extreme  right  hand  corner,  massive
brass  rings  affixed  to  large  losses  of  brass  are  affixed  on  either  door,  the
posts  of  which  are  of  carved  and  coloured  woodwork.  The  walls  of  the
main  building,  with  its  bay  windows  of  lattice  work,  enclose  the  court-
yard along  the  right  hand  side,  the  roof  is  adorned  with  curious  cylin-
drical pendant  devices  made  of  cloth  called  "  Thook  "  ;  each  surmounted
with  the  Trisool  or  trident,  painted  black  and  red.  On  the  side  facing
the  main  entrance  the  courtyard  is  open,  leading  away  to  the  doorways
of  other  idol  rooms.  In  the  centre  space  stand  two  high  poles  "  Tur-
poche,"  from  which  hang  yaks'  tails  and  white  cotton  streamers  printed
in  the  Tibetan  character.  Innumerable  small  prayer-wheels  are  fitted
into  a  hitch  that  runs  round  the  sides  of  the  courtyard.  A  few  large
trees  throw  their  shade  on  the  building,  and  above  them  tower  the
rugged  cliffs  of  the  little  valley,  topped  here  and  there  by  Lhatos,  small
square-built  altars,  surmounted  by  bundles  of  brushwood  and  wild  sheep
horns,  the  thin  sticks  of  the  brushwood  being  covered  with  offerings  of
coloured  flags  printed  with  some  mantra  or  other.  "^

Lama-Ytje-ru,  elevation  about  11,000  feet.^  Said  to  be  of  the  DL-
kung  sect,  as  also  the  monasteries  of  .sGaii-non  and  Shan.

The  name  Yur-ru  is  said  to  be  a  corruption  of  Yuh-druii — the
Svastika  or  mystic  fly-foot  cross.

Tho-ling  or  Tho'lding  (mt'o-glih),  on  the  upper  Sutlej  (in  map  of
Turkistan  it  is  Totlingmat,  "  mat "  =  "  the  lower,"  i.e.  lower  part  of  the
city).  It  has  a  celebrated  temple  in  three  storeys,  said  by  some  to  be
modelled  after  that  of  Budha  Gaya,  and  the  Sham-bha-la  Lam-yig  con-
tains a  reference  to  this  temple  :  "  It  had  been  built  (a.d.  954,  Schl.)  by
the  Lo-tsa-wa  Ein-zan-po.  The  Hor  (Turks?)  burnt  it  down,  but  at
some  later  date  it  was  rebuilt,  and  now,  in  its  lowest  compartment,  it
contains  the  '  cycle  of  the  collection  of  secrets.' "  Adolph  von
Schlagintweit  visited  it.^

Theg-Ch'og  is  a  sister-Lamasery  to  He-mi,  north  of  the  Indus,  in  a
valley  which  opens  out  opposite  He-mi.  Che-de,  vulg.  Ohem-re  (survey
map  :  Ohim-ray)  is  the  name  of  the  village  to  which  the  Lamasery
belongs.

KoE-DzoGS  in  Ladak,  16,000  feet  above  the  sea  {J.D.,  11).  Tik-za
(Thik-se)  is  said  (Marx)  to  be  a  Ge-Zdan  (?Ge-lug-pa)  monastery,  as  also
those  of  Sah-kar  (a  suburb  oj  Leh),  Likir  and  Ri-dzoh.  It  is  pictured
by  Mr.  Knight."  _  ^ , ,

Wam-ib  (or  "  Han-le ")  in  Rukshu,  a  fine  Lamasery  figured  by
Cunningham.  It  is  about  14,000  feet  above  sea-level.  Its  proper
name  is  De-ch'en,  and  it  was  buUt  by  the  founder  of  the  one  at  Hemi.

Masho  is  affiliated  to  Sa-skya.


1  Godwin-Austen,  loc.  cit.,  p.  72.  '  Maex,  loc.  at. ;  Cunningham,  et.  al.

3  See  Results  of  Scientific  Mission.


284  MONASTERIES


Spi-t'ug,  Pb-tub,  or  "  Pittuk  "  (sPe-t'ub),  a  Lamasery  and  village  on
the  river  Indus,  five  miles  south-west  of  Leh.  The  Lamas  belong  to
the  "  Ge-ldan-pa  "  order  of  Lamas.  The  Lamasery  has  an  incarnated
Lama.

Shbk-gal,  figured  by  Knight,  loe.  cit.,  p.  127.

Kllang  (Kye-lan)  in  British  Lahtil,  romantically  situated  near
glaciers,  at  an  elevation  of  about  12,000  feet.

Gu-GE,  where  several  translations  were  made  over  800  years  ago,  and
still  of  repute  for  printing  and  for  its  elegant  manuscripts.

Kantjm,  in  Kunaor  or  Kanawar,  where  Gsoma  studied.  Also  Dub-lin,
Poyi,  and  Pangi,

IN NEPAL.

In  Nepal  there  appear  to  be  no  Lamaist  monasteries  of  any  size,
at  least  in  the  lower  valleys.  At  the  principal  Buddhist  shrines  in
that  country  a  few  resident  Lamas  are  to  be  found.


IN BHOTAN

In  Bhotan  the  largest  monasteries  are  Tashi-ch'o-dsong  and  Pun-t'an
or  ?  "  Punakha  "  (spun-t'ah  bde-ch'en),  each,  it  is  usually  said,  with  over
1,000  monks,  though  according  to  other  accounts,  under  500.

Tashi-oh'o-bson  (bKra-shis  ch'os  rdson),  or  "The  fortress  of  the
glorious  religion,"  forms  the  capital  of  Bhotan  and  the  residence,  at
least  in  summer,  of  the  Grand  Lama  of  Bhotan — the  Dharma  Raja  and
Deb  Raja.  It  has  been  visited  and  described  by  Manning,  Bogle,
Turner,'  Pemberton,^  etc.

The  other  chief  monasteries  in  Bhotan,  all  of  the  Duk-pa  sect,  the
established  church  of  the  country,  are:  dbU-rgyan  rtso,  Ba-kro
(Pato  or  Paro)  'Bah,  rTa-mch'og  rgan,  Kra-ha-li,  Sam-'jin,  K'a  Gh'ags-
rgan-K'a,  Oh'al-p'ug.  Of  these  the  first  three  were  formerly  Kart'og-pa.
In  British  Bhotan  there  are  a  few  small  monasteries,  at  Kalimpong,
Pedong,  etc.

IN SIKHIM.

In  regard  to  Sikhim,  as  my  information  is  complete,  I  give  it  in
detail  in  tabular  form  on  opposite  page.

In  addition  to  the  monasteries  in  this  list  are  several  religious  build-
ings called  by  the  people  gompas,  but  by  the  Lamas  only  "  temples  "
{Lha-k'an),  such  as  De-than,  Ke-dum,  etc.

The  oldest  monastery  in  Sikhim  is  Dub-de,  founded  by  the  pioneer
Lama,  Lhatsiin  Gh'embo.  Soon  afterwards  shrines  seem  to  have  been
erected  at  Tashiding,  Pemiongchi,  and  Sang-iia-ch'o-ling  over  spots  conse-
crated to  the  Guru,  and  these  ultimately  became  the  nuclei  of  monas-


'  Bogle  and  Turner  in  1774  and  1783. Madkham,  op.  cit.
2  In  1837-38. Op.  cit.


IN  SIKMIM.


285


teries.  As  the  last-named  one  is  open  to  members  of  all  classes  of
Sikhimites,  Bhotiyas,  Lepchas,  Limbus,  and  also  females  and  even
deformed  persons,  it  is  said  that  the  monastery  of  Pemiongchi  was


List  av  Monasteries  in  Sikhim.


d

■3
1

Map  Name.

Vernaciilar  Name.

Meaning  of  the  Name.

°  a
S'S

O

u  S

!2i

1

Sanga  Chelling

gsan  nags  ch'os
glin

The  place  of  secret  spells  . . .

1697

25

2

DuMi

sgrub-sde

The  hermit's  cell

1701

30

3

Pemiongchi ...

pad-ma  yaitse
Dtsan-mk'ar . . .

The  sublime  perfect  lotus. . .

1705

108

4

Gantok

The  Ts6n's  house

1716

3

5

Tashiding

bkra-s'is-ld  ii

The  elevated  central  glory

1716

20

6

Senan

gzil-gmon

The  suppressor  of  intense

fear

1716

8

7

Rinchinpong . . .

rin-ch'en  spuns

The  precious  knoll

1730

8

8

Ralong

ra-blan

1730

80

9

Mali

mad-lis

1740

.  15

10

Ram  thek

Ram-tek

A  Lepcha  village  name . . .

1740

80

11

Fadung

p'o-bian
btsun-t'an

The  chapel  royal

1740

100

12

Cheimgtong  ...

The  meadow  of  marriage

{of  the  two  rivers)

1788

8

13

Ketsuperri

mk'a  spyod

The noble heaven-reach-

dpal ri

ing  mountain

11

14

Lachung

t'an-mA-ch'en...

The  large  plain

1788

5

15

Talung

rdo-lun

The  stony  valley

1789

90

16

Entchi

rab-brten-glin

The  high  strong  place
The  excellent  banner,  or

1840

15

17

Phensung

p'an-bzan

good  bliss

1840

100

18

Kartok

bKah-rtog

The  Kartok  (founder  of  a

■r-'^

schism)

1840

20

19

Bailing'

rdo-gliu

"  The  stony  site,''  or  the
place  of the "  Dorjel-

ing  "  revelation-finder  ...

1840

8

20

Yangong

gyan  sgan

"  The  cliffyridge," or  "the

lucky  ridge  "

1841

10

21

Labrong  ■

bla-bran.

The  Lama's  dwelling

1844

30

22

Lacliung

pon-po  sgan ...
Ihun-rtse

The  Bon's  ridge

1850

8

23

Lintse

Tlie  lofty  summit

1850

15

24

Sinik

zi-mig

1850

30

25

Ringim

ri-dgon

Hermitage  hill

1852

30

26

Lingthem

lin-t'am

A  Lepcha  village  name . . .

1855

20

27

Changhe

rtsag-nes

28

Lachen

La-ch'en

The  big  pass

1858

'"s

29

Giatong

zi-'dur

1860

8

30

Lingc^ui

lin-bkod

The  uplifted  limb

1860

20

31

Fadung

'p'ags  rgyal ...

The  sublime  victor

1862

8

32

Nobling

nub-glin

The  western  place

1875

5

33

Namchi

rnam-rtse

The  sky-top

1836

6

34

Pabia

spa-'bi-'og

1875

20

35 Singtam

sin-ltam

A  Lepcha  village  name . . .

1884

6

286


MONASTERIES.


designed,  if  not  actually  built,  by  Lha-tsun  as  a  highi-class  monastery
for  orthodox  celibate  monks  of  relatively  pure  Tibetan  race.  Pemiong-
clii  still  retains  this  reputation  for  the  professedly  celibate  character
and  good  family  of  its  monks ;  and  its  monks  alone  in  Sikhim  enjoy
the  title  of  ta^san  or  "  pure  monk,"  and  to  its  Lama  is  reserved  the
honour  of  anointing  with  holy  water  the  reigning  sovereign.

The  great  majority  of  the  monasteries  in  Sikhim  belong  to  the  Lha-
tsiin-pa  sub-sect  of  the  5fih-ma,  only  Namchi,  Tashiding,  Sinbn,  and
T'ah-moch'e  belong  to  the  iSTa-dak-pa  sub-sect,  and  Kar-tok  and  Doling
to  the  Kar-tok-pa  sub-sect  of  the  same.  All  the  Nih-ma  monasteries  are
practically  subordinate  to  that  of  Pemiongchi,  which  also  exercises
supervision  over  the  Lepcha  convents  of  Ling-t'am,  Zimik,  and  P'ag-
gye. Lepohas  are  admissible  to  Pigbn  as  well  as  Sang-ha-ch'ohng.

Nuns  are  admitted  to  a  few  monasteries  in  Sikhim,  but  their
num^ber  is  extremely  small,  and  individually  they  are  illiterate.

The  names  of  the  monasteries,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  transla-
tions given  in  the  second  column  of  the  table,  are  mostly  Tibetan,
and  of  an  ideal  or  mystic  nature ;  but  some  are  physically  de-
scriptive of  the  site,  and  a  few  are  Lepcha  place-names,  which  are
also  of  a  descriptive  character.


A  Lamaist  Cairn.
LcLb-cTi'a,  afterHuc.


•#-


T-\'  --1


;-LS"  *_u  a_\  **  »JO-fr^  *^-


-jr.--»t;


Lhasa  and  its  Cathedral.
(Prom  a  native  drawing.)


ITofacep.  287.


XII.

TEMPLES AND CATHEDRALS.

N  primitive  Buddhism  the  temple  had,  of  course,  no  place.
It  is  the  outcome  of  the  theistic  development  with  its
relic- worship  and  idolatry,  and  dates  from  the  .later
and  impurer  stage  of  Buddhism.  The  Lamaist  temple
is  called  "  God's  house  "  {Lhw-k'an).

It  is  usually  the  central  and  most  conspicuous  building  in  the
monastery,  and  isolated  from  the  other  buildings,  as  seen  in  the
foregoing  illustrations.  The  roof  is  surmounted  by  one  or  two
small  bell-shaped  domes  of  gilt  copper^  ;  if  a  pair,  they  are
placed  one  on  either  end  of  the  ridge,  and  called  ^ir-a  ^ ;  if  a  soHtary
one  in  the  middle  of  the  ridge,  it  is  called  "  the  banner."  ^  They
are  emblematic  of  the  royal  umbrella  and  banner  of  victory.  At
the  corners  of  the  roof  are  erected  cloth  cylinders  called  gehi.^  The
building  is  often  two  storeys  in  height,  with  an  outside  stair  on
one  flank,  generally  the  right,  leading  to  the  upper  flat.  In  front  is
an  upper  wooden  balcony,  the  beams  of  which  are  rudely  carved,  also
the  doors. The  orientation  of  the  door  has  already  been  noted.

In  approaching  the  temple-door  the  visitor  must  proceed  with
his  right  iand  to  the  wall,  in  conformity  with  the  respectful
custom  of  pradakshirM  widely  found  amongst  primitive  people.^
In  niches  along  the  base  of  the  building,  about  three  feet  above
the  level  of  the  path,  are  sometimes  inserted  rows  of  prayer-barrels

1  See  pp.  271  and  273.

2  Spelt  "kSjira,"  (?)  from  the  Skt.,  kanca,  golden.

3  r^al-mts'an.

i  Oeii — cylindrical  erections  from  three  feet  high  and  about  a  foot  wide  to  a  greater
size,  covered  by  coiled  ropes  of  black  yak-hau-  and  bearing  a  few  white  bands  trans-
verse and  vertical,  and  when  surmounted  by  a  trident  are  called  Cah-dar.

^  The  Romans  in  circumambulating  temples  kept  them  to  their  right.  The  Druids
observed  the  contrary.  To  walk  around  in  the  lucky  way  was  called  Deasil  by  the
Gaels,  and  the  contrary  or  unlucky  way  withershms  or  widda-sinnis  by  the  lowland
Scotch.  Se&  3 mi^safs's  Scottish  Diet. ;  'R.  A..  ATtMSTROTSc's  Gaelic  Dict.,^.\&i;  Ceooke's
Xntrod. ;  Eockhill.  L.,  p.  67.


288


TEMPLES AND CATHEDRALS.


which  are  turned  by  the  visitor  sweeping  his  hand  over  them  as
he  proceeds.

The  main  door  is  approached  by  a  short  flight  of  steps  ;  on  as-
cending which,  the  entrance  is  found  at  times  screened  by  a  large

curtain  of  yak-hair  hung
from  the  upper  balcony,
and  which  serves  to  keep
out  rain  and  snow  from  the
frescoes  in  the  vestibule.

Entering  the  vestibule,
we  find  its  gateway
guarded  by  several  fear-
ful figures.!  These  usually
are —

1.  The  tutelary  demon
of  the  ground,  usually  a
red  devil  (Tsdn)  a  brawny-
limbed  creature  of  elabor-
ate ugliness,  clad  in  skins,
and  armed  with  various
weapons,  and  differing  in
name  according  to  the
locality.^

2 .  Especially  vicious  de-
mons or  dii  minor es  of  a
more  or  less  local  char-
acter. Thus,  at  Pemi-
ongchi  is  the  Gyal-po
S'uk-den  with  a  brown
face  and  seated  on  a  white
elephant.  He  was  form-
erly the  learned  Lama  Sod-nams  Grags-pa,  who  being  falsely
charged  with  licentious  living  and  deposed,  his  spirit  on  his  dpath
took  this  actively  malignant  form  and  wreaks  his  wrath  on  all  who
do  not  worship  him — infiicting  disease  and  accident.*

1  Compare  with  description  of  Chinese  Budd.  temples  by  Eitbl,  Lecis.  on  Buddhism.

2  Thus  the  local  devil  of  Ging  temple  near  Darjiling  is  called  "  The  Entirely  Victorious
Soaring  Eeligion  "  (Ch'os-ldin  rnam-rgyal).

^  Compare  with  the  malignant  ghosts  of  Brahmans  in  India. Of.  Tawnet's  Katlia
Sarit  Su(jaraj  ii.,  338,  511


Temple-dook  Demon.


THE VESTIBULE.


289


3.  A  pair  of  hideous  imps,  one  on  either  side,  of  a  red  and  bluish-
black  colour,  named  S'em-ba  Marnak,^  who  butcher  their  victims.


GuAKDiAN  King  of  the  West.


(^Virupakska.)

4.  Here  also  are  sometimes  portrayed  the  twelve  Tdn-ma— the
aerial  fiendesses  of  Tibet,  already  figured,  who  sow  disease  and  who
were  subjugated  by  St.  Padma.

Confronting  the  visitor  in  the  vestibule  are  the  four  colossal

1  vKl-han,


290  TEMPLES  AND CATHEDBALS.

images  (or  frescoes)  of  the  celestial  kings  of  the  Quarters,  who
guard  the  universe  and  the  heavens  against  the  attacks  of  the
Titans  and  the  outer  demons,  as  described  at  page  84.  They  are
clad  in  full  armour  and  are  mostly  of  defiant  mien,  as  seen  in  their
figures  over  the  page  and  at  pages  83  and  330.  Two  are  placed
on  each  side  of  the  doorway.

Sometimes  the  guardian  of  the  north  is  given  a  yellow,  and  the
guardian  of  the  south  a  green,  complexion,  thus  suiting  the  com-
plexion of  the  guardians  to  the  mythic  colours  of  the  cardinal
points.  They  are  worshipped  by  the  populace,  who  credit  them
with  the  power  of  conferring  good  luck  and  averting  the  calamities
due  to  evil  spirits.  And  in  the  vestibule  or  verandah  are  also
sometimes  displayed  as  frescoes  the  Wheel  of  Life  and  scenes
from  the  Jatakas  or  former  births  of  Buddha ;  and  here  also
may  be  figured  the  sixteen  great  saints  or  Sthavira  {Arkans  or
«  Rahans  ").'

In  the  smaller  temples  which  possess  no  detached  chapels  for
larger  prayer-barrels,  one  or  more  huge  prayer-barrels  are  set  at
either  end  of  the  vestibule,  and  mechanically  revolved  by  lay-
devotees,  each  revolution  being  announced  by  a  lever  striking  a
bell.  As  the  bells  are  of  different  tones  and  are  struck  alternately,
they  form  at  times  a  not  unpleasant  chime.

The  door  is  of  massive  proportions,  sometimes  rudely  carved
and  ornamented  with  brazen  bosses.  It  opens  in  halves,  giving
entry  directly  to  the  temple.

Such  grand  cathedrals  as  those  of  Lhasa  will  be  described
presently.  Meanwhile  let  us  look  at  a  typical  temple  of  ordinary
size.  The  temple  interior  is  divided  by  colonnades  into  a  nave  and
aisles,  and  the  nave  is  terminated  by  the  altar — generally  as  in  the
diagram-plan  here  annexed.  The  whole  of  the  interior,  in  which-
ever direction  the  eye  turns,  is  a  mass  of- rich  colour,  the  walls  to
right  and  left  being  decorated  by  frescoes  of  deities,  saints,  and
demons,  mostly  of  life-size,  but  in  no  regular  order  ;  and  the
lieams  are  mostly  painted  red,  picked  out  with  lotus  rosettes  and


^  For  their  descriptions  and  titles  see  p.  376.  Amongst  the  common  scenes  also  re-
presented here  are  "  The  Harmonious  Four  "  (mt'un-pa  rnam  b'zi),  a  happy  family,
consisting  of  an  elephant,  monkey,  rabbit,  and  parrot ;  and  the  long-lived  sage  (mi-
ts'e-rin)  with  his  deer,  comparable  to  the  Japanese  (?)  Ju-rd,  one  of  the  seven  genii  of
Good  Luck,  and  the  long-lived  hermit,  Se-nin.


THE  INTEEIOB.


291


other  emblems.  The  brightest  of  colours  are  used,  but  the  general
effect  is  softened  in  the  deep  gloom  of  the  temple,  which  is  dimly-
lit  only  by  the  entrance  door.

Above  the  altar  are  placed  three  colossal  gilt  images  in  a  sitting
attitude,  "The  Three  Earest  Ones,"  as  the  Lamas  call  their  trinity;
though  none  of  the  images  are  considered  individually  to  represent


DiAGKAMMATIC GbOUND-PLAN OP

1.  Fresco  of  local  demon.

2.  Fresco  of  Kl-kang  Mar-nak  devils.

3.  Fresco  of  guardian  kings  of  quarters.

4.  Prayer-barrels.

5.  Station  of  orderlies.

6.  Table  for  tea  and  soup.

7.  Seat  of  the  provost.

8.  Seat  of  the  water-giver.

of


i  Temple  in  Sikhim.
Seats  of  monks

10.  Seat  of  abbot  or  professor.

11.  Seat  of  choir-leader.

12.  Seat  of  king  or  visitant  head  Lama.

13.  Site  where  lay-figure  of  corpse  is  laid  for
litany.

14.  Head  Lamas'  tables.

15.  Idols.


the  two  other  members
namely  Dharma  or  Sangha.


the Tri-ratna or "Three Grems,"
The  particular  images  of  this  triad
u  2


292  TEMPLES  AND CATHEDRALS.

depend  on  the  sect  to  which  the  temple  belongs  ;  ^dkya  Muni  is
often  given  the  central  position  and  a  saint  (Tson  K'a-pa  or  Padma-
sambhava)  to  the  left  of  the  spectator  and  Avalokita  to  the  right.
Particulars  and  figures  of  the  principal  of  these  idols  are  given
in  the  chapter  on  images.

Sakya  Muni  is  figured  of  a  yellow  colour  with  curly  blue  hair,
and  often  attended  by  standing  figures  of  his  two  chief  disciples,
Maugdalayana  on  his  left  and  Sariputra  on  his  right,  each  with  an
alarm-staff  and  begging-bowl  in  hand.  In  the  temples  of  the
unreformed  sects,  St.  Padma-sambhava  and  his  two  wives  are
given  special  prominence,  and  many  of  these  images  are  regarded
as  "  self-sprung  :  "

"No  hammers  fell,  no  ponderous  axes  rung  ;
Like  some  tall  palm  the  mystic  fabric  sprung."'

But  even  this  order  of  the  images  is  seldom  observed.  Most
frequently  in  the  Ge-lug-pa  temples  Tson  K'a-pa  is  given  the
chief  place,  while  in  STin-ma  it  is  given  to  the  Guru,  and  this  is
justified  by  the  statement  put  into  his  mouth  that  he  was  a  second
Buddha  sent  by  Sakya  Muni  specially  to  Tibet  and  Sikhim,  as
Buddha  himself  had  no  leisure  to  go  there.  Sometimes  Sakya's
image  is  absent,  in  which  case  the  third  image  is  usually  the
fanciful  Buddha  of  Infinite  Light,  Amitdbha,  or  Amitdyus,  the
Infinite  Life.  In  many  sectarian  temples  the  chief  place  is
given  to  the  founder  of  the  particular  sect  or  sub-sect.

Eanged  on  either  side  of  this  triad  are  the  other  large  images
of  the  temple.  Though  in  the  larger  fanes  the  more  demoniacal
images,  especially  the  fiendish  "  lords  "  and  protectors  of  Lamaism,
are  relegated  to  a  separate  building,  where  they  are  worshipped
with  bloody  sacrifices  and  oblations  of  wine  and  other  demoniacal
rites  inadmissible  in  the  more  orthodox  Buddhist  building.  Some
of  such  idol-rooms  are  chambers  of  horrors,  and  represent  some  of
the  tortures  supposed  to  be  employed  in  hell.

The  alleged  existence  of  images  of  Grorakhnath  in  Tashiding,
Tumlong,  and  other  Sikhim  temples  ^  is  quite  a  mistake.  No  such
image  is  known.  The  name  evidently  intended  was  "  Guru
Rinbo-ch'e."


1  Heber's  Palestine.

2  Campbell,  J.A.S.B.,  1849  ;  Hooker,  Him.  Jours.,  i.,  323 ;  ii.,  p.  195  ;  SirR.  Temple,
Jou::,  p.  212 ;  Sir  M.  Williams,  Buddhism,  p.  490.


THE  INTEIUOB.  293


The  large  images  are  generally  of  gilded  clay,  and  in  Sikhim  the
most  artistic  of  these  come  from  Pd-to  or  "  Paro"  in  Bhotan.  A
few  are  of  gilded  copper  and  mostly  made  by  Newaris  in  Nepal.
All  are  consecrated  by  the  introduction  of  pellets  of  paper  inscribed
with  sacred  texts  as  detailed  in  the  chapter  on  the  pantheon.

Amongst  the  frescoes  on  the  walls  are  displayed  numerous
Lamaist  saints  and  the  pictorial  Wheel  of  Life,  though  this  last  is
often  in  the  vestibule.

There  are  also  a  few  oil-paintings  of  divinities  framed,  like
Japanese  Kakemonos,  in  silk  of  grotesque  dragon-patterns  with  a
border,  arranged  from  within  outwards,  in  "  the  primary  "  colours
in  their  prismatic  order  of  red,  yellow,  and  blue.  Some  of  these
pictures  are  occasionally  creditable  specimens  of  art.

The  seats  for  the  several  grades  of  officials  and  the  Lamaist
congregation  are  arranged  in  definite  order.  The  general  plan  of
a  small  temple  interior  is  shown  in  the  foregoing  diagram.  Along
each  side  of  the  nave  is  a  long  low  cushion  about  three  inches  high,
the  seat  for  the  monks  and  novices.  At  the  further  end  of  the
right-hand  cushion  on  a  throne  about  2^  feet  high  sits  the  abbot
or  professor  (Dorje  L6-pdn),^  the  spiritual  head  of  the  monastery.
Immediately  below  him,  on  a  cushion  about  one  foot  high,  is  his
assistant,  who  plays  the  si-nen  cymbals.  Facing  the  professor,  and
seated  on  a  similar  throne  at  the  further  end  of  the  left-hand
cushion,  is  the  IPm-dse^  or  chief  chorister  or  celebrant,  the
temporal  head  of  the  monastery;  and  below  him,  on  a  cushion
about  ■  one  foot  high,  is  the  deputy  chorister,  who  plays  the  large
ts'ogs-rol  or  assembly-cymbals  at  the  command  of  the  Um-clse,
and  officiates  in  the  absence  of  the  latter.  At  the  door-end  of  the
cushion  on  the  right-hand  side  is  a  seat  about  one  foot  high  for  the
provost-marshal,  who  enforces  discipline,  and  on  the  pillar  behind
his  seat  hangs  his  bamboo  rod  for  corporal  chastisement.  During
the  entry  and  exit  of  the  congregation  he  stands  by  the  right  side
of  the  door.  Facing  him  at  the  end  of  the  left-hand  cushion,  but
merely  seated  on  a  mat,  is  the  water-man.

To  the  left  of  the  door  is  a  table,  on  which  is  set  the  tea  and
soup  which  is  to  be  served  out,  by  the  unpassed  boy-candidates,
during  the  intervals  of  worship.


1  rdo-rje  slob-dpon.  ^  dbU-mdsad.


294  TEMPLES  AND CATHEDRALS.

THE  lamas' tables.

To  the  right  front  of  the  altar  stands  the  chief  Lama's  table,i
about  two-and-a-half  feet  in  length,  and  one  foot  in  height,  and
often  elaborately  carved  and  painted  with  lotuses  and  other  sacred
symbols,  as  figured  at  page  215.  Behind  it  a  cushion  is  placed,
upon  which  is  spread  a  yellow  or  blue  woollen  rug,  or  a  piece  of  a
tiger  or  leopard  skin  rug,  as  a  seat.  The  table  of  the  abbot  or
professor  contains  the  following  articles  in  the  order  and  position
shown  in  this  diagram  : —

The  other  two  monks  who  are
allowed  tables  in  the  temple  are
the  chief  chorister  or  celebrant
and  the  provost-marshal.  The
chief  chorister's  table  faces  that


5  4  3  2  1


,_ . . ^ . , .  of  the  abbot,  and  contains  only  a

1.  Magic  rice-onenng  oi  universe.  '  . •'

2.  Saucer  with  loose  rice  (CKen-du boly  water  vase,  bell,  dorje  and
or  ne-sel)  for  throwing  in  sacrifice.  the  large  cymbals. The  table  of

3.  Small  hand-drum.  ^^^ provost stands  in front of
4 Bell

5'.  X»o?:^-e-sceptre.  ^^^  seat  of  that  officer,  near  the

6.  Vase  for  holy-water.  door, and contains an  incense-

goblet  (sang-bur),  a  bell  anddorje.
At  the  spot  marked  "13"  on  the  plan  is  placed  the  lay-figure
of  the  corpse  whose  spirit  is  to  be  withdrawn  by  the  abbot.  At
the  point  marked  "12"  is  set,  in  all  the  larger  temples  in  Sikhim,
the  throne  of  the  king,  or  of  the  re-incarnated  Lama — the  "pro-
tecting lord"^ — when  either  of  them  visits  the  temple.

On  each  pillar  of  the  colonnade  is  hung  a  small  silk  banner  with
five  flaps,^  and  others  of  the  same  shape,  but  differently  named,*
are  hung  from  the  roof,  and  on  each  side  of  the  altar  is  a  large
one  of  circular  form.^


THE  ALTAR  AND  ITS  OBJECTS.

The  altar  ^  occupies  the  upper  end  of  the  nave  of  the  temple  ;
and  on  its  centre  is  placed,  as  already  mentioned,  the  chief  image.


^  mdum-lc'og.  ^  Kyab-mgon.  '■>  Ka-'p'an.

*  Ba-dan.  .  °  p'ye-p'ur.  "  mch'od  s'ani.


THE  ALTAR.


295


Above the altar is suspended a large silken parasol,^ the


AXTAR (domestic) OF  A fflN-MA LaMA.

oriental  symbol of  royalty, which  slightly revolves in one or


Umbbella-Canopt.

other  direction  by  the  ascending  currents  of  the  warm  air  from

1  dug.


296


TEMPLES  AND OATHEDBALS.


the  lamps.  And  over  all  is  stretched  a  canopy,  called  the
"  sky  "  1  on  which  are  depicted  the  thunder  dragons  of  the  sky.
The  altar  should  have  at  least  two  tiers.  On  the  lower  and
narrow  outer  ledge  are  placed  the  offerings  of  water,  rice,  cakes,
flowers  and  lamps. On  the  higher  platform  extending  up  to  the

images  are  placed  the
m  usical  instruments  and
certain  other  utensils
for  worship,  which  will
be  enumerated  pre-
sently.

In  front  of  the  altar,
or  sometimes  upon  the
altar  itself,  stands  the
temple-lamp,^  a  short
pedestalled  bowl,  into
a  socket  in  the  centre
of  which  is  thrust  a
cotton  wick,  and  it  is
fed  by  melted  butter.
As  the  great  mass  of
butter  solidifies  and  re-
mains mostly  in  this
state,  the  lamp  is  prac-
tically a  candle.  The
size  varies  according  to
the  means  and  the
number  of  the  temple
votaries,  as  it  is  an  act
of  piety  to  add  butter
to  this  lamp.  One  is
necessary,  but  two  or
more  are  desirable,  and
on  special  occasions  108  or  1,000  small  lamps  are  offered  upon
the  altar.  Sometimes  a  cluster  of  several  lamps  form  a  small
candelabrum  of  the  branching  lotus-flower  pattern.


Magic-Offering  of  The  Universe.
The  Rice-it/(7^^to.


1  uam-yv.l ;  but  its  more  honorific  title  is  hla-bras.

2  mch'od-skon.


THE OFFERINOS.


297


Below  the  altar  stand  the  spouted  water-jug '  for  filling  the
smaller  water-vessels,  a  dish  to  hold  grain  for  offerings,^  an  incense-
holder,  and  a  pair  of  flower-vases.  And  on  the  right  (of  the
spectator)  on  a  small  stool  or  table  is  the  magic  rice-oifering,
with  its  three  tiers,  daily  made  up  by  the  temple  attendant,  and


The  Five  Sensuous  Offbkings.


\^in


symbolic  of  an  offering  of  all  the  continents  and  associated  islands
of  the  world.

The  ordinary  water  and  rice-offerings  are  set  in  shallow  brazen
bowls,^  composed  of  a  brittle  alloy  of  brass,  silver,  gold  and
pounded  precious  stones.  Their  number  is  five  or  seven,  usually
the  former.  Two  out  of  the  five  or  seven  bowls  should  be  filled  with
rice  heaped  up  into  a  small  cone  ;  but  as  this  must  be  daily  re-
newed by  fresh  rice,  which  in  Tibet  is
somewhat  expensive,  fresh  water  is
usually  employed  instead.

Another  food-offering  is  a  high,
conical  cake  of  dough,  butter  and
sugar,  variously  coloured,  named  tor  ma
or  z^al-zi,,  that  is,  "holy  food."  It
is  placed  on  a  metal  tray  supported  by
a  tripod.  To  save  expense  a  painted
dummy  cake  is  often  substituted.

Upon  the top of  the altar are also  Saobed  Cakes.

usually placed the following,  objects,
though  several  of  them  are  special  to  the  more  demoniacal  worship  : —

1 .  A  miniature  funereal  monument.*


1  ch'ab-bum.  2  nas  bzfid.  ^  mch'od  tin.

1  cKorten.  In  the  room  in  which  worship  is  done  there  must  be  present  these  three
essential  objects :  sku-^sum  (Skt.,  Trihdyd)  (a)  an  image,  (i)  a  ch'orten,  and  (c)  a
holy  book,  which  are  symbolic  of  "the  Three  Holy  Ones."  In  the  early  Indian  caves
this  triad  seems  to  have  been  represented  by  (?)  a  Caitya  for  Buddha,  and  a  Wheel  for
Dharma.


298  TEMPLES  AND CATHEDRALS.

2.  One  or  more  sacred  books  on  each  side  of  the  altar.

3.  The  Lamaist  sceptre  or  Dmje,  typical  of  the  thunderbolt  of  Indra
(Jupiter),  and  a  bell.  The  dorje  is  the  counterpart  of  the  bell,  and
when  applied  to  the  shoulder  of  the  latter  should  be  of  exactly  the
same  length  as  the  bell-handle.

4.  The  holy-water  vase '  and  a  metal  mirror  hanging  from  its
spout. The holy-water of the  vase is tinged  with  saffron,  and  is


Some  Altae  Objects.
Lamp  (inverted),  caitya,  holy-water  jug.

spri&kled  by  means  of  a  long  stopper-rod,  which  is  surmounted  by  a
fan  of  peacock's  feathers  and  the  holy  kusa  grass.  Another  form  is
surmounted  by  a  ohaplet,  etc.,  as  its  frontispiece.

5.  The  divining-arrow  bound  with  five  coloured  sUks  called  dadar  ^
for  demoniacal  worship.

6.  A  large  metal  mirror "  to  reflect  the  image  of  the  spirits.

7.  Two  pairs  of  cymbals.  The  pair  used  in  the  worship  of  Buddha
and  the  higher  divinities  are  called  sl-nen,^  and  are  of  about  twelve  or
more  inches  in  diameter,  with  very  small  central  bosses.  They  are  held
vertically  when  in  use,  one  above  the  other,  and  are  manipulstted  gently.
The  pair  of  cymbals  used  in  the  worship  of  the  inferior  deities  and
demons  are  called  rol-mo,  and  are  of  shorter  diameter  with  very  much
broader  bosses.  They  are  held  horizontally  in  the  hands  and  forcibly
clanged  with  great  clamour. Chinese  gongs  also  are  used.

8.  Conch-shell  trumpet  (teji°),  often  mounted  with  bronze  or  silver,
so  as  to  prolong  the  valves  of  the  shell  and  deepen  its  note — used  with
the  sl-nen  cymbals.

1  k'rus-bum. See  flg.  Rock.,  L.,  106.  2  -iKdah-dar.  "  me-long.

*  sil-»myan.  '  dun.


DEVILS'  ALTAB.


299


Devils'  Altak.


300  TEMPLES  AXD CATHEDRALS.

9.  Pair  of  copper  flageolets.'

10.  Pair  of  long  telescopic  copper  horns  in  three  pieces,^  and  often
six  feet  long  (see  illustration  on  page  17).

11.  Pair  of  human  thigh-bone  trumpets.^  These  are  sometimes
encased  in  brass  with  a  wide  copper  flanged  extremity,  on  which  are
figured  the  three  eyes  and  nose  of  a  demon,  the  oval  open  extremity
being  the  demon's  mouth.  In  the  preparation  of  these  thigh-bone  trum-
pets the  bones  of  criminals  or  those  who  have  died  by  violence  are  pre-
ferred, and  an  elaborate  incantation  is  done,  part  of  which  consists
in  the  Lama  eating  a  portion  of  the  skin  of  the  bone,  otherwise  its  blast
would  not  be  sufiiciently  powerful  to  summon  the  demons.

12.  Pair  of  tiger  thigh-bone  trumpets.''  These  are  not  always
present,  and  the  last  three  instruments  are  only  for  the  worship  of
the  inferior  gods  and  demons.

13.  Drums  (ch'os  riia)  : —

(a)  A  small  rattle  hand-drum  or  na^ch'un "  or  damaru.,  like  a  large
double  egg-cup.  Between  its  two  faces  are  attached  a  pair
of  pendant  leather  knobs  and  a  long-beaded  flap  as  a  handle.
When  the  drum  is  held  by  the  upper  part  of  the  cloth  handle
and  jerked  alternately  to  right  and  left  the  knobs  strike  the
faces  of  the  drum.  It  is  used  daily  to  mark  the  pauses  be-
tween difierent  forms  of  worship.

(J)  The  big  drum,called  ch'6-na'  or  religious  drum.  These  are  of
two  kinds,  one  of  which  is  suspended  in  a  frame  and  beat  only
occasionally  and  in  Buddha's  worship.  The  other  is  carried
in  the  hand  by  means  of  a  stem  thrust  through  its  curved
border.  These  are  beaten  by  drum-sticks  with  straight  or
curved  handles.

(c)  The  human  skull-drum  made  of  skull-caps,  and  of  the  same
style  as  the  smaller  drum  (a)  above  described.

14.  Libation  jugs,  figured  on  page  225.

THE CATHEDEAL OF LHASA.

The  greatest  of  all  the  temples  of  Lamadom  is  the  great  cathe-
dral of  Lhasa,  the  St.  Peter's  of  Lamaism,  the  sketch  of  which,
here  given,  was  drawn  for  me  by  a  Lama  artist,  who  visited  Lhasa
with  this  object,  and  who  deliberately  sketched  the  sacred  citjf  and
its  great  temple  from  the  hillock  about  half  a  mile  to  the  south
of  the  city.  And  with  the  description  of  it  "^  we  will  close  our
account  of  temples.

This  colossal  temple,  called  "  The  Lord's  House  "  (Jo-wo  K'ah),


j'gye-</lin.  -  ra(/-dun.  3  j'kan-jflin.

stag  dun.  '  rna-ch'un.  c  ch'os-rna.

Summarized  from  the  accounts  of  Hue,  etc.,  and  from  Koppen,  ii.,  334.


LHASA OATHEDEAL.  301

stands  in  the  centre  of  the  city  of  Lhasa,  to  which  it  gives  its
name,  "  Grod's  place  ;  ^  and  it  is  also  considered  the  centre  of  the
whole  land.  All  the  main  roads,  which  cut  through  Tibet,  run  out
of  it  and  meet  again  in  it.  But  it  is  also  the  centre  of  the  united
Lamaist  church,  as  it  is  the  first  and  oldest  Buddhist  temple  of
Tibet,  the  triie  metropolitan  cathedral  of  Lamaism.  Founded  in
the  seventh  century,  on  commencing  the  conversion  of  the  gloomy
snowland,  by  king  Sroh  Tsan  Gampo,  for  the  preservation  of
those  wondrous  images  brought  to  him  by  his  two  wives,  as  before
mentioned,  it  has,  no  doubt,  in  the  course  of  a  millennium,  received
many  additions  and  enlargements,  and  in  the  seventeenth  century
it  was  restored  and  rebuilt.

Its  entrance  faces  the  east,  and  before  it,  in  a  square,  stands  a
flagstaff,  about  forty  feet  high  with  yak's  hair,  and  horns  of  yak
and  sheep,  tied  to  its  base.  The  main  building  is  three  storeys  high,
and  roofed  by  golden  plates.^  The  entrance  is  in  the  shape  of
a  hall,  which  rests  on  six  wooden  pillars,  very  handsomely  deco-
rated with  engravings,  paintings,  and  gilding.  The  walls  are
covered  with  rough  pictures  out  of  the  biography  of  the  founder
of  the  religion.  In  the  centre  of  the  hall  is  a  swing  door,  which
is  decorated  on  the  outside  with  bronze,  and  on  the  inside  with
iron  reliefs.-^

Through  this  you  pass  into  the  ante-court,  which  is  covered  by
the  first  storey.  In  the  wall,  opposite  the  entrance,  is  a  second
door,  which  brings  you  inside,  on  both  sides  of  which  stands  the
colossal  statues  of  the  four  great  guardian  kings ;  two  on  the
right  and  two  on  the  left  side.  This  brings  us  into  a  large  pillared
hall,  which  has  the  form  of  the  basilica,  and  is  divided  by  colon-
nades into  three  long  and  two  cross-aisles.  The  light  comes  from
above  in  the  middle  or  broadest  aisle,  where  a  transparent  oilcloth
serves  instead  of  glass.  Through  this  the  whole  temple  is  lighted,
because  there  are  no  side  windows. On  the  outside  of  the  two


1  The  name  Lhasa  is  properly  restricted  to  the  great  temple.  Sron  Tsan  Gampo
appears  to  have  been  the  founder  of  the  city  now  generally  known  to  Europeans  as
Lhasa.  It  is  recorded  that  he  exchanged  the  wild  Yarlung  valley,  which  had  been
the  home  of  his  ancestors,  for  the  more  central  position  to  the  north  of  the  Tsangpo,
a  village  named  Rasa,  which,  on  account  of  the  temple  he  erected,  was  altered  to
Lha-sa,  or  "  God's  place." An  old  form  of  the  name  is  said  to  be  ?nga-Man.

2  These  plates  are  said  to  be  of  solid  gold,  and  gifted  by  the  son  of  the  princehng
Ananmal,  about  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century  a.d.


302


TEMPLES  AND UATHEDRALS.


side  aisles,  i.e.,  on  the  north  and  south  side,  as  the  entrance  is
towards  the  east,  is  a  row  of  small  cells  or  chapels,  fourteen  to  the
right  and  just  as  many  to  the  left.  The  two  cross-aisles  form  the
background,  and  are  separated  from  the  long  aisle  by  silver  lattice-
work. Here  are  the  seats  of  the  lower  priests  for  common  prayer-


GllOUND-PLAN OF LHASA CATHEDRAL.^

meetings.  From  the  west  cross-aisle  a  staircase  leads  into  the
holy  of  hohes.  On  the  left  of  this  we  see,  by  ascending  behind
silver  rods,  fifteen  plates  of  massive  silver,  which  are  covered  with
innumerable  precious  stones,  and  contain  representations  of  the
Buddhist  dogmatics  and  mysticism.  We  see  there,  for  instance,
the  Buddhist  system  of  the  world,  the  circle  of  the  metempsychosis


1  After  Giorgi. I  have  not  reproduced  the  references  as  they  are  not  sufficiently

concise.


LHASA CATHEDRAL.  303

with  its  different  states.  From  the  stairs  above  we  come  into  a
cross-aisle,  which  has  just  as  many  pillars  as  the  two  lower  ones,
and  is  also  the  inner  front  hall  of  the  sanctuary.  The  latter  has
the  form  of  a  square,  in  which  are  six  chapels,  three  on  each  of
the  north  and  south  flanks.  In  the  middle  is  the  place  for  the
offering  altar,  which,  however,  is  only  erected  on  certain  occasions.
On  the  other  side  of  the  altar,  on  the  west  side  of  the  holy  of
holies,  also  in  the  lowest  depth  of  the  whole  edifice,  is  the  quad-
rangular niche,  with  the  image  of  Sakya  Muni.  Before  the  entrance
in  this,  to  the  left,  is  raised  the  throne  of  Dalai  Lama,  very  high,
richly  decorated,  and  covered  with  the  customary  five  pillows  of
the  Grand  Lamas.  Beside  this  stands  the  almost  similar  one  of
the  Tashi  Grand  Lama;  then  follow  those  in  rotation  of  the
regenerated  Lamas  •  The  abbots,  and  the  whole  non-incarnate
higher  priesthood  have  their  seats  in  the  cross-aisle  of  the  sanc-
tuary. Opposite  the  throne  of  Dalai  Lama,  on  the  right  from
the  entrance  of  the  niche,  is  the  chair  of  the  king  of  the  Law,
not  quite  so  high  as  those  of  the  regenerate  Grand  Lamas,  but
higher  than  those  of  the  others.  Behind  him  are  the  seats  of  the
four  ministers,  which  are  not  so  high  as  those  of  the  common
Lamas.

On  the  west  side  of  the  niche  stands  the  high  altar,  which  is
several  steps  high.  Upon  the  top  of  the  higher  ones  we  see  small
statues  of  gods  and  saints  made  of  massive  gold  and  silver ;  upon
the  lower  ones,  as  usual  on  Buddhist  altars,  lamps,  incensories,
sacrifices,  and  so  on ;  upon  the  highest,  behind  a  silver  gilt  screen,
the  gigantic  richly-gilded  image  of  Buddha  Sakya  Muni,  wreathed
with  jewelled  necklaces  as  native  offerings.  This  image  is  named
"  The  gem  of  majesty  "  ( Jo-vo  Ein-po-ch'e),  and  represents  Buddha
as  a  young  prince  in  the  sixteenth  year  of  his  age.  It,  according
to  the  opinion  of  the  believers,  was  made  in  Magadha  during
Buddha's  lifetime,  and  afterwards  gifted  by  the  Magadha  king  to
the  Chinese  emperor  in  return  for  assistance  rendered  against
the  Yavan  invaders  ;  and  given  by  the  Chinese  emperor  to  his
daughter  on  her  marriage  with  the  king  of  Tibet,  in  the  seventh
century  A.d.  Flowers  are  daily  showered  upon  it.  Beside  this
one the  highest  object  of  reverence — the  temple  has  also  in-
numerable other  idols;  for  instance,  in  a  special  room,  the
images  of  the  goddess  Sri Devi (Pal-ldan  Lha-mo). There  is


304  TEMPLES  AND CATHEDBAL8.

also  a  celebrated  image  of  the  Great  Pitying  Lord — Avalokita —
named  "  the  self-created  pentad."  ^  Also  images  of  historical  persons
who  have  made  themselves  worthy  of  the  church ;  amongst  whom
one  sees  there  the  aforesaid  pious  king  and  his  two  wives,  all  three
of  whom  are  canonized ;  also  his  ambassador,  who  was  sent  by  him
to  India  to  fetch  from  there  the  holy  books  and  pictures.^

In  this  large  and  oldest  temple  are  lodged  great  numbers  of
other  precious  things  and  holy  relics,  consecrated  presents,  gold
and  silver  vessels,  which  are  openly  exhibited  at  the  beginning  of
the  third  Chinese  month.

Round  about  these  stand  many  wooden  or  copper  prayer-
machines.  The  surrounding  wings  of  the  building  contain  the
state-treasures,  the  magazines,  in  which  are  stored  everything
necessary  for  divine  service,  the  monks'  cells,  the  lecture-rooms ;
in  the  higher  storeys  also  the  residences  of  the  highest  state  oflScers,
and  special  rooms  for  the  Dalai  Lama.  The  whole  is  surrounded
with  a  wall,  at  which  are  several  Buddhist  towers,  which,  as  in
the  case  of  the  large  temple,  are  covered  with  gilded  plates.  No
women  are  allowed  to  remain  within  the  walls  during  the  night,
a  prohibition  which  extends  to  many  Lamaist  cloisters.

1  ran  byun  toa-Han.  So  called  because  it  is  reputed  to  have  formed  itself  by  emana-
tions from :  Thug-je  ch'enpo  (Avalokita),  T'ul  -ku-geylon — ^the  artist,  Sron  Tsan  Gampo,
his  Chinese  wife,  and  his  Newari  wife.  And  the  location  of  each  of  these  in  the
image  is  pointed  out.  2  Koppen  says  an  image  of  Hiuen  Tsiang  is  also  there.


Dbnedictoey  Clay  Seal  of  Grand  Tashi  L.Ima,
BivEN  to  Pilgrims.
(Full  size.)


Lama-Pope  blessing  Pii.geims.i


XIII.


SHRINES, RELICS, AND PILGRIMS.

j  ILGtRIMAGtES  are  most  popular  in  Tibet.  The  country
contains  an  infinite  number  of  sacred  sites,  reputed
re-incarnated  or  supernatural  Lamas,  self-created
images,  relics  of  the  Buddhas,  holy  footprints,  sancti-
fied trees,  etc.,  to  which  the  pious  throng  with  gifts  of  gold  and
other  precious  offerings  ;  while  many  extend  their  pilgrimages  to
places  outside  Tibet,  to  China,  Bhotan,  Sikhim,  Nepal,  Kashmir,
Turkestan,  and  India,  to  places  hallowed  by  St.  Padma-sam-
bhava,  or  by  Buddha  himself.

The  most  holy  of  all  sites,  according  to  the  Lamas,  in  common
with  all  Buddhists — like  Mecca  to  the  Muhammadans — is  the
Tree  of  Wisdom  at  Buddh-Gaya,  in  India,  with  its  temple  known  to
Tibetans  as  Gandhola,^  where  Sakya  Muni  attained  his  Buddha-


^  After  Giorgi.

-  dri-gtsan-k'an,  or  "The  Untainted  (pure)  House."  It  was  built  in  seven  days  by
the  high-priest  "  Virtue  "  (dge-ba,).  See  also  Taranatha,  16,  4,  etc.  At  the  Bodhi-
man(jla  (byan-ch'ub-siiin-po)  is  the  diamond-throne  (vajrasana,  Tib.,  Dorje-dan),
so  called  on  account  of  its  stability,  indestructibility,  and  capacity  of  resisting  all
worldly  shocks.

X


306


SRBINES,  RELICS,  AND  PILGRIMS.


hood,  and  which  is  believed  to  be  the  hub  of  the  world.  After
this  come  the  site  of  Buddha's  death,  Kusinagara ;  and  the  eight
great  Cait^'as  which  enshrined  his  bodily  relics ;  the  mythical
mount  Potala^  in  the  south;  the  mythical  Shambhala  in  the
north ;  the  Guru's  Fairy-land  ^  in  Udyana  in  the  west ;  and
"  The  three  hills,''  or  U-tai  Shan,  in  northern  China,  the  original
seat  of  the  Grod  of  Wisdom,  MaiijusrT ;  and  Lhasa,  the  St.  Peter's
of  the  Lamas,  and  the  seat  of  Buddha's  vice-regent  upon  earth.

The  Indian  shrines  are  seldom  visited  by  Lamas  and  Tibetans
on  account  of  the  great  distance  and  expense.  I  have  listened
several  times  to  the  prayers  of  Lamas  and  Tibetan  laity  at  the
great  Buddh-Gaya  temple,  which,  strange  to  say,  is  still  held  by  un-
sympathetic Hindii  priests  who  prey  upon  the- Buddhist  pilgrims.

These  prayers  were  divided
between  petitions  for  temporal
prosperity  and  for  "  the  great
ultimate  perfection,"  or  Nir-
vana. They  make  offerings  to
the  Tree  of  Wisdom,  but  their
oblations  do  not  take  the  form
of  watering  it  with  eau  de
Cologne  and  gilding  it,  as  do
some  of  the  Burmese.

At  the  shrines  under  Bud-
dhist management,  the  pil-
grims carry  off,  as  relics,
printed  charms  and  fragments
of  the  robes  of  re-incarnated
Lamas  and  other  holy  men,
leaves  of  sacred  trees,  etc.,
which  are  carefully  treasured
as  amulets  and  fetishes.  And
these  objects  and  holy  water
work  most  miraculous  cures  in
a manner  which is not un-


PiLGRiM  Lamas.


known  even  in  Christian  Europe.'


1  ri-bo  gm-'dsin.  -^  mk'a-'gro  gliii.

3  Thoae  Europeans  who  sneer  at  the  "  pagan  "  superstitions  of  the  East  may  find


INDIAN  SHRINES.  307


The  fullest  Tibetan  account  of  Indian  shrines  is  found  in  the
book  named  Jambu-glin  spyi  hs'ad,  a  compilation  containing  a
very  confused  abstract  of  Hiuen  Tsiang's  celebrated  treatise.^

In  regard  to  the  site  of  Buddha's  death,  the  Lamas  have  placed
it  in  Asam.

In  conversations  some  years  ago  with  Lamas  and  lay  Buddhists
at  Darjiling,  I  was  surprised  to  hear  that  Asam  contained  a  most
holy  place  of  Buddhist  pilgrimage  called  "  Tsam^ch'6-(lun,"^  which,
it  was  alleged,  next  to  the  great  temple  at  Buddh-Gaya,  was  the
most  holy  spot  a  Buddhist  could  visit.  Asam  is  usually  regarded
as  being  far  beyond  the  limits  of  the  Buddhist  Holy  Land,  and
the  Chinese  pilgrims,  FaHian  and  Hiuen  Tsiang  in  the  fifth  and
seventh  centuries  of  our  era,  to  whom  we  are  mainly  indebted  for
our  knowledge  of  ancient  Buddhist  geography,  not  only  do  not
mention  any  holy  site  in  Asam,  but  Hiuen  Tsiang,  who  visited
Grauhati  at  the  invitation  of  the  king  of  Kamrup,  positively  notes
the  absence  of  Buddhist  buildings  in  Asam.^

I  therefore  felt  curious  to  learn  further  particulars  of  this
important  site  in  Asam,  which  had  apparently  been  overlooked
by  geographers.

amongst  themselves  equally  grotesque  beliefs.  For  example,  the  Holi/  Coat  of  Treces,
and  one  of  the  most  recent  miracles,  the  Lady  of  Lourdes.  Lourdes,  as  a  miracle  place,
dates  from  1858,  when  a  little  girl  had  a  vision  of  "a  beautiful  and  radiant  lady."
Eighteen  times  the  glorious  apparition  was  seen  by  the  girl ;  then  it  was  seen  no  more.
Twenty  thousand  persons  by  that  time  had  gathered  to  the  rendezvous.  On  one  of  the
last  occasions  the  girl,  as  if  obeying  a  sign  from  her  visitant,  went  to  a  corner  of  the
grotto  where  the  appearances  occurred,  and  scratched  in  the  dry  earth.  The  gaping
crowd  saw  water  rise  and  the  girl  drink.  Then  a  little  streamlet  made  its  way  to  the
river.  In  a  short  time  the  spring  gave  120,000  litres  a  day.  And  the  wonders  of
miraculous  healing  effected  by  this  water  are  the  theme  of  the  learned  and  the
ignorant  alike.  In  1872  the  number  of  pilgrims  amounted  to  140,000,  and  this
year  the  same  number  appeared  at  the  health-giving  spring.  Over  12,000  brought
1  100  sick.  They  had  come  from  Paris  and  the  north  in  seventeen  pilgrimage
trains  and  this  year  (1894),  according  to  the  newspapers,  two  train-loads  steamed
out  of  London  for  the  same  convent.  There  is  a  band  of  trained  attendants,  who
do  good  service,  and  the  sick  are  dipped  by  experts  and  cared  for.  As  the  patient
is  immersed,  some  of  the  assistants,  with  arms  uplifted,  pray  with  him.  Some
of  the  sick  quietly  undergo  the  dip,  as  if  resigned  to  whatever  may  befall  them.
Others  beat  the  water  in  agony,  and  clutch  at  hands  near,  but  all  pray — these  last
with  loud  cries  of  despair  to  heaven:  "  Cure  us,  Holy  Virgin.  Holy  Virgin,  you
■nmst  cure  us."  There  is  great  ecclesiastical  ceremonial,  elevation  of  the  host,  priests
with  lighted  tapers,  and  high  dignitaries  be-robed  and  be-mitred.  "The  cures  "  are
duly  certified— they  are  as  marvellous  as  any  by  a  well-advertised  specific.

1  For  a  translation  of  a  smaller  one  see  my  article  in  Proc.  A.S.B.,  Feb.,  1893.

2  rTsa-mch'og-groh. See /.^.-S.S.,  Ixi.,  pp.  33  sej.

3  Si-m-ki,  trans,  by  Beal,  ii.,  p.  196.

X  2


308  SHRINES,  RELICS,  AND  PILGRIMS.

In  Jaschke's  Tibetan  dictionary  ^  I  found  the  name  "  rTsa-
mch'og-gron "  defined  as  a  "  town  in  west  Asam  where  Buddha
died,"  and  this  statement,  it  is  noted,  is  given-  on  the  authority  of
the  "  Gryalrabs,"  a  vernacular  history  of  Tibet.  Csoma  de  Koros
also  notes  '  that  "  the  death  of  Shakya,  as  generally  stated  in  the
Tibetan  books,  happened  in  Asam  near  the  city  of  Kusa  or  Cama-
rupa  (Kamriip)."

Here,  then,  was  a  clue  to  the  mystery.  Buddha's  death,  it  is
well  known,  occurred  between  two  sal  trees  near  Kusinagara  or
Kusanagara,  in  the  north-west  provinces  of  India,  thirty-five
miles  east  of  Gorakhpur,  and  about  one  hundred  and  twenty  miles
N.X.E.  of  Benares ;  and  the  site  has  been  fully  identified  by  Sir
A.  Cunningham '  and  others  from  the  very  full  descriptions  given
by  Hiuen  Tsiang.  and  FaHian.  The  narne  Kusanagara  means
"  the  town  of  Kusa  grass  " ;  *  and  as  the  early  Lama  missionaries
in  their  translation  of  the  Buddhist  scriptures  habitually  trans-
lated all  the  Sanskrit  and  Pali  names  literally  into  Tibetan,  Ku-
sanagara was  rendered  in  the  "  Kah-'gyur  "  canon  as  "rTsa-mch'og-
groii,"  from  "  rtsa-mch'og,"  kusa  grass,  "  grong,"  a  town  (  =  Sskt.,
Qiagara).

Now,  near  the  north  bank  of  the  Brahmaputra,  almost  opposite
Gauhati,  the  ancient  capital  of  Kamriip,  is,  I  find,  an  old  village
named  Sat- Kusa,  and  it  lies  on  the  road  between  GauhatT  and
Dewangiri,  one  of  the  most  frequented  passes  into  Bhotan  and
Tibet.  With  their  extremely  scanty  knowledge  of  Indian  geo-
graphy, the  Lamas  evidently  concluded  that  this  "  town  of  Sdl-
Ktisa "  was  the  "  town  of  Kusa,"  where  Buddha  entered  into
Nirvana  between  the  two  sal  trees — seeing  that  the  word  sal  was
also  incorporated  with  the  equivalent  of  "  Tsam-ch'6-duh,"  and  that
in  the  neighbourhood  was  the  holy  hill  of  Hajo,  where,  as  will  be
seen  hereafter,  there  probably  existed  at  that  time  some  Buddhist
remains.


1  p.  437.

'  Asiatic  Researches,  xx,,  p.  295.

3  Arch.  Sure.  India  Mepts.,  i.,  76 ;  xvii.,  55,  etc.

"  Kusa  grass  {Poa  cijnosuroides),  the  sacrificial  grass  of  the  Hindiis,  is  also  prized  by
the  Buddhists  on  account  of  its  having  formed  the  cushion  on  which  the  Boddhisattva
sat  under  the  Bodhi  tree.  It  is  also  used  as  a  broom  in  Lamaic  temples  and  as
an  altar  decoration  associated  with  peacock's  feathers  in  the  pumpa  or  holy  water
vase.


SITE  OF  BUDDHA'S  DEATH.  309

No  description  of  this"  Buddhist  site  seems  to  be  on  record,
except  a  very  brief  note  by  Col.  Dalton  ^  on  the  modern  Hindi!
temple  of  Hajo,  which  shrines  a  Buddhist  image. So  as  I  have  had
an  opportunity  of  visiting  the  site,  and  enjoyed  the  rare  advantage
of  being  conducted  over  it  by  a  Lama  of  eastern  Tibet  who  chanced
to  be  on  the  spot,  and  who  had  previously  visited  the  site  several
times,  and  possessed  the  traditional  stories  regarding  it,  I  give
the  following  brief  description  of  it  in illustration  of  how  the
Lamas,  originally  misled  by  an  identity  of  name,  have  subse-
quently clothed  the  neighbourhood  with  a legendary  dress  in
keeping  with  the  story  of  Buddha's  death,  and  how  this  place,
with  its  various  associated  holy  spots,  is  now  implicitly  believed
by  the  pilgrims  to  be  the  real  site  of  Buddha's  pari-nirvdna.
And  in  this  belief,  undeterred  by  the  intemperate  heat  of  the
plains,  Buddhist  pilgrims  from  all  parts  of  Bhotan,  Tibet,  and
even  from  Ladak  and  south-western  China  visit  these  spots  and
carry  off  scrapings  of  the  rocks  and  the  soil  in  the  neighbourhood,
treasuring  up  this  precious  dust  in  amulets,  and  for  placing  beside
their  dBad  body,  as saving  from  dire  calamities  during  life,  and
from transmigration into  lower  animals  hereafter. Authentic
specimens  of  this  dust,  I  was informed,  commanded in Tibet
high  prices  from  the  more  wealthy  residents,  who  had  personally
been  unable  to  undertake  the  pilgrimage.

The  Hajo  hill,  or  rather  group  of  hills,  where  is  situated,  according
to  the  current  tradition  of  the  Lamas,  the  spot  where  Buddha  "  was  de-
livered from  paiQ,"  hes  to  the  north  (right)  bank  of  the  Brahmaputra
about  nine  miles  north-west  from  Gauhati  (Kamrup),  north  latitude  26°
11'  18"  and  east  long.  91°  47'  26",  and  four  or  five  miles  north  of  Sal-
Kusa.  The  hill  rises  directly  from  the  plain,  forming  a  strikingly  bold
and  picturesque  mass  ;  and  it  is  a  testimony  to  its  natural  beauty  to
find  that  the  hill  has  attracted  the  veneration  of  people  of  all  religious
denominations.  The  semi-aboriginal  Mech  and  Koch  worship  it  as  a
deity  under  the  name  of  Hajo,  which  means  in  their  vernacular  "  the
hill."  The  Buddhists  formerly  occupied  one  of  the  hillocks,  but  are
now  displaced  by  the  Brahmans,  who  restored  the  temple,  which  is  now
one  of  the  most  frequented  Hindu  temples  in  Asam.  The  Muham-
madans  also  have  crowned  the  summit  of  the  highest  peak  with  a
mosque.

The  cluster  of  hills  presents  a  very  symmetrical  appearance  as  seen
from  a  distance,  forming  a  bold  swelling  mass  culminating  in  three


1  J.A.S.B.,  1855,  Ixxi.,  p.  8,


310  SHBIJVES,  RELIOS,  AND  PILGRIMS.

trident-like  peaks,  the  central  one  of  which  is  pre-eminent,  and  is  re-
garded by  the  Buddhists  as  emblematic  of  Buddha.  The  high  peaks
on  either  side  of  this  are  identified  with  Buddha's  two  chief  disciples,
Sariputra  and  Maudgalyayana.  This  triad  of  peaks  is  seen  from  a
great  distance,  and  it  is  only  on  near  approach  that  the  smaller  hillocks
are  observed.  These  latter  number  about  sixteen,  and  are  called  Ne-
ten  c'u-du,  or  "  the  sixteen  disciples  "  of  Buddha.

The  most  holy  site,  according  to  the  Buddhists,  is  a  bare  flattish
shoulder  of  rock,  about  eight  yards  in  diameter,  situated  at  the  north-
west base  of  the  hill.  This  is  stated  to  be  the  Sil-wa  ts'al-yi  tur-dii,  or
"  the  pyre  of  the  cool  grove,"  where  Buddha  died,  and  where  his  body
was  cremated.  The  rock  here  bears  several  roughly-cut  inscriptions  in
Tibetan  characters  of  the  mystic  sentences,  "  Om  mani  padme  hum,"
"  Om  ah  hum,"  "  Om,"  etc.,  and  coloured  rags  torn  from  the  vestments
of  the  pilgrims  are  tied  to  the  bushes  m  the  neighbourhood.  The
Hindus  have  carved  here  on  the  rock  a  figure  of  the  four-armed  Vishnu,
which  the  Brahman  priests  call  Dhubi,  or  "  the  washerwoman  of  the
gods,"  and  the  rock  they  call  "■Letai  dhupinir  pat."

It  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  Lamas,  for  the  benefit  of  the  resident
population  of  Tibet,  have  made  copies  of  this  spot  in  at  least  four  places
in  Tibet,  viz.,  at : —

1.  Ra-rgyab,  in  the  south-east  outskirts  of  Lhasa  city.

2.  P'a-pon  h'ar,  in  the  north  suburbs  of  Lhasa.

3.  Pur-mo  c'he,  about  twelve  miles  to  the  north-east  of  Tashi-lhun-
po.

4.  SeUrag.

These  sites  were  consecrated  by  placing  on  them  a  piece  of  rock
brought  from  this  Asam  site,  now  under  report ;  but  the  latter  spot
beai'S  the  distinctive  prefix  of  Gya^gar,  or  Indian,  implying  that  it  is
the  original  and  genuine  site.

A  high  cliff,  close  to  the  west  of  this  spot,  is  called  "  the  vulture's
mound  hill,"  as  in  Tibet  vultui-es  usually  frequent  the  neighbourhood
of  the  tur-do  cemeteries,  and  in  belief  that  it  is  the  Gridha  Kuta  Giri
hermitage  of  Buddha.'^

A  short  distance  beyond  this  spot,  in  the  jungle,  is  a  roughly-hewn
stone  basin,  about  six  feet  in  diameter,  called  by  the  Lamas  San-gyama
ho-ho,  or  the  pot  in  which  the  S  m-je — the  death-demons — boil  the  heads
of  the  damned.  The  Brahmans,  on  the  other  hand,  assert  that  it  is  the
bowl  in  which  Siva  or  Adi-purusha  brewed  his  potion  of  lust-exciting
Indian  hemp,  and  they  point  to  its  green  (confervoid)  watery  con-
tents in  proof  of  this.  They  also  state  that  a  snake  inhabits  the
depths  of  the  bowl ;  but  it  was  certainly  absent  at  the  time  of  my
visit.

Advancing  along  the  pathway,  leading  up-hill,  we  pass  a  few  colum-
nar masses  of  rock  lying  near  the  path,  which  are  pointed  to  as  frag-
ments of  Buddha's  staff  with  which  he  unearthed  this  monster  bowl.


'  bya-)'gyod  p'un  poi  rl.


SITE  OF  BUDDHA'S  DEATH.  311

Climbing  up  the  hill  we  reach  the  temple  of  Kedaranath,  which  is
approached  by  a  very  steep  roughly-paved  causeway.  At  the  entrance
is  a  long  inscription  in  granite  in  old  Bengali  characters,  those  being
the  characters  adopted  by  the  Asamese.  Adjoining  this  temple  is  the
shrine  of  Kamalesvar  or  "  the  lord  of  the  Lotus."  Here  is  a  tank
called  by  the  Lamas  "  Ts6  mani  bhadra,"  or  "  the  lake  of  the  notable
gem "  ;  and  they  state  that  many  water-sprites  (Naga,  serpents  or
dragons)  came  out  of  this  pond  on  the  approach  of  Buddha  and  pre-
sented him  with  jewels.  A  small  cell  by  the  side  of  this  pond  is  said
to  be  the  place  where  Buddha  set  down  a  mass  of  butter  which  had
been  brought  to  him  as  a  gift,  and  the  stone  linga  and  yoni  (phallus
and  its  counterpart),  now  shrined  here  by  the  Hindus,  are  pointed  to  as
being  this  petrified  butter.

Crowning  the  summit  of  the  hill  is  a  large  masjid  built  byLutfuilah,
a  native  of  Shiraz,  in  the  reign  of  the  emperor  Shah  Jahan,  in  1656
A.D.,  with  a  Persian  inscription.^

A  detached  conical  hillock,  about  300  feet  above  the  plain,  lying
about  half-a-mile  to  the  north-east  of  the  hill,  and  now  crowned  by  the
Hindu  temple  of  Madhava,  is  identified  with  "  the  great  caitya  "
which  was  erected  over  the  cremated  relics  of  the  Tathagatha's  body.

The  present  shrine  of  the  temple  seems  to  be  the  original  shrine  of
an  older  Buddhist  temple,  which,  according  to  both  Buddhist  and
Asamese  tradition,  formerly  existed  here — the  upper  portion  only  is
modern.  Col.  Dalton  has  described  the  general  details  of  this  building,
and  he  states  :  "  The  Brahmans  call  the  object  of  worship  Madhab,  the
Buddhists  call  it  Mahamuni,  the  great  sage.  It  is  in  fact  simply  a
colossal  image  of  Buddha  in  stone.  Its  modern  votaries  have,  to  con-
ceal mutilation,  given  it  a  pair  of  silver  goggle-eyes  and  a  hooked  gilt
silvered  nose  and  the  form,  is  concealed  from  view  by  cloths  and  cbap-
lets  of  flowers ;  but  remove  these  and  there  is  no  doubt  of  the  image
having  been  intended  for  the  '  ruler  of  all,  the  propitious,  the  asylum
of  clemency,  the  all- wise,  the  lotus-eyed  comprehensive  Buddha.'"

This  large  image  of  Buddha  is  called  by  the  more  learned  Lama-visi-
tors Munir  Muni  Mahamuni,  i.e.,  "The  Sage  of  Sages,  The  Great  Sage."
It  is  the  original  image  of  the  shrine,  and  is  stated  by  the  Brahmanic
priests,  who  call  it  Madhab,  to  be  of  divine  origin  and  an  actual  embodi-
ment or  avatar  of  the  god,  in  contradistinction  to  the  other  images
which  are  called  mere  "murtis"  or  hand-fashioned  copies  of  typical
forms  of  the  respective  gods  represented.  This  may  merely  mean  that
the  Brahmans  found  this  image  here,  while  the  others  were  brought
from  the  neighbourhood  or  elsewhere.  What  seems  to  be  the  history
of  the  mutilation  of  this  image  is  found  in  the  account  of  the  invasion
of  the  Koch  kingdom  of  lower  Asam  by  the  Musalmans  under  Mir
Jumlah  in 1661  a.d. This  chief  issued  "  directions  to  destroy  all  the

idolatrous  temples  and  to  erect  mosques  in  their  stead To

evince  his  zeal  for  religion,  the  general  himself,  with  a  battle-axe,  broke
the  celebrated  image  of  Narain,  the  principal  object  of  worship  of  the

1  See/.J.^.^.,  lxi.,p.  37.


312  SHRINES,  BELICS,  AND  PILGRIMS.

Hindus  of  that  province."  '^  Navayana  is  one  of  the  names  of  Madhab
and  a  patronymic  of  the  Koch  raja's  ;  and  Hajo  was  a  seat  of  the  Koch
rajas.  And  it  was  at  Hajo  that  Mir  Jumlah  took  the  Koch  king
prisoner.^

The  other  images,  not  mentioned  by  Dal  ton,  but  which  must  have
existed  at  the  time  of  his  visit,  are  also  of  stone  and  are  placed  on
either  side  of  the  large  image.  They  are  four  in  number  and  are  of
considerable  size.  According  to  the  Lama-pilgrims  they  are  all  Buddhist
images  ;  but  the  crypt  was  so  dimly  lit,  and  the  images  so  enveloped  in
clothes  and  wreaths  of  flowers  that  I  could  not  distinguish  their  specific
characters,  with  the  exception  of  the  head  and  peculiar  trident  of  the
first,  and  the  head  of  the  second,  which  were  characteristic  and  justified
their  recognized  names,  viz. : —

No.  1. —  Ugyan  Guru  to  the  left  of  Mahamuni.

No.  2. — Borje  Bold  to  the  right  of  Mahamuni.

No.  3. — Sakya  Thuha  to  the  right  of  No.  2.

No.  4. — "  Sencha  "  Muni  to  the  right  of  No.  3.

Although  Hindu  priests,  as  a  rule,  are  not  very  methodical  in  their
bestowal  of  names  upon  the  images  which  they  have  appropriated  from
Buddhist  ruins,  still  I  here  give  the  Brahmanical  names  as  reported  by
the  attendant  priests,  as,  this  being  a  wealthy  temple,  the  priests  were
more  learned  than  usual,  arid  the  names  should  give  some  idea  of  the
nature  of  the  images.  After  stating  that  the  Buddhist  pilgrims  gave
the  above  noted  names  to  the  images,  these  priests  said  that  the  Brah-
manical names  were  as  follows,  which,  it  will  be  noticed,  are  Bengali.
I  give  them  in  the  order  of  the  previous  list  : —

No.  1.  Dwitiya  Madhaver  murti.

No.  2.  Lai  Kanaiya  Bankat  Viharer  murti.

No.  3.  Basu  Dever  murti.

No.  4. Hayagriver  murti.

In  the  vestibule  are  lotus  ornamentations  and  several  articles  of  the
usual  paraphernalia  of  a  Buddhist  temple,  including  the  following :
A  pyramidal  framework  or  wheeless  car  like  the  Tibetan  Ch'an-ga
chutuk,  with  lion  figures  at  the  corners  of  each  tier,  such  as  is  used  to
seat  the  image  of  a  demon  which  is  to  be  carried  beyond  the  precincts
of  the  temple  and  there  thrown  away.  The  present  frame  is  used  by
the  priests  of  this  temple  to  parade  in  the  open  air  one  of  the  smaller
images  of  the  shrine  (?  Hayagriver),  but  the  image  is  again  returned  to
the  shrine.  Above  this  throne  is  stretched  a  canopy  containing  the
figure  of  an  eight-petalled  lotus  flower,  and  has,  as  is  customary,  a
dependant  red  fringe.  On  either  side  is  hung  a  huge  closed  umbrella.
These  articles  have  been  in  the  temple  from  time  immemorial.

Of  the  external  decoration  of  the  temple,  the  row  of  sculptured
elephants  along  the  basement,  evidently  a  portion  of  the  old  Buddhist
temple,  has  been  figured  by  Col.  Dalton  in  the  paper  above  referred  to  ;

1  Stbwabt's  History  of  Bengal,  p.  289.

-  Bevekidge,  Oal,  Reciew,  July,  1890,  p.  12.


ASAM  SHRINE.  313


and  is  identical  with  the  decorative  style  of  the  Kailas  cave  temple  of
EUora  figured  by  Fergusson  in  Plate  xv.  of  his  Gave  Temples.  The
upper  walls  are  covered  with  sculptured  figures  nearly  life-size.  The
ten  avatdras  of  Vishnu  are  represented  with  Buddha  as  the  ninth.
The  remaining  figures  are  of  a  rather  nondescript  character,  but  they
are  mostly  male,  and  nearly  every  figure  carries  a  trident  {trisula) — the
khatam  of  the  Buddhists.  The  Lamas  state  that  these  figures  were  for-
merly inside  the  temple,  but  that  Buddha  ejected  them.  And  it  is
stated  that  the  temple  was  built  in  one  night  by  Visvakarma,  the
Vulcan  of  the  Hindus  and  Buddhists.

Attached  to  the  temple  is  a  colony  of  Natl,  or  dancing  girls,^  who
are  supported  out  of  the  funds  of  the  temple,  and  who  on  the  numerous
feast  days  dance  naked  in  a  room  adjoining  the  shrine.  These  orgies
are  part  of  the  Sakti  worship  so  peculiar  to  Kamrtip,  but  nowhere
is  it  so  grossly  conducted  as  at  this  temple.^  The  Natl  and  the  idol-car
are  also  conspicuous  at  the  degenerate  Buddhist  temple  of  Jagannath
at  Puri.

At  the  eastern  base  of  the  hillock,  on  which  this  temple  stands,  is  a
fine  large  tank,  called  by  the  Lamas  "  the  lake  of  excellent  water." "
This  pond,  it  is  said,  was  made  by  Buddha  with  one  prod  of  his  staff,
when  searching  for  the  huge  bowl  already  described  which  he  unearthed
here. This  pond  is  also  said  to  be  tenanted  by  fearful  monsters.

I  have  been  unable  to  ascertain  positively  whether  any  Buddhist
building  existed  here  previous  to  the  Lamas  fixing  on  the  site  as  the
Kusanagara  of  Buddha's  death.  Certainly  no  monastery  existed  here  at
the  time  of  Hiuen  Tsiang's  visit  to  the  Kamrtip  (Gauhati)  court  in  the
seventh  century  a.d.,  for  he  says  of  this  country  that  "the  people  have
no  faith  in  Buddha,  hence  from  the  time  when  Buddha  appeared  in  the
world  even  down  to  the  present  time  there  never  as  yet  has  been  built
one  Sangharama  as  a  place  for  the  priests  to  assemble."  The  refer-
ence which  Taranath*  makes  to  the  great  stupa  of  Kusanagara  as  being
situated  here,  in  Kamrtip,  was  taken  from  report,  and  thus  would
merely  show  that  the  present  Lama-tradition  was  current  during  his
time.  Any  chaitya  or  other  Buddhist  building  would  seem  to  have
been  subsequent  to  the  seventh  century  ;  and  in  all  probability  marked
a  site  visited  by  the  great  founder  of  Lamaism,  St.  Padma-sambhava,
or  one  of  his  disciples.  The  difierent  accounts  of  this  saint's  wander-
ings vary  considerably,  but  he  is  generally  credited  with  having
traversed  most  of  the  country  between  lower  Asam  and  Tibet.  And
in  this  view  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  Bhotan  Lamas  call  the  chief


1  "Asam,  or  at  least  the  north-east  of  Bengal  {i.e.,  Kamrtip),  seems  to  have  been  in
a  great  degree  the  source  from  which  the  Tantrica  and  Sakta  corruptions  of  the
religion  of  the  Vedas  and  Puranas  proceeded"  (H.  H.  Wilson,  Preface  to  Vishnu
PurdTujb),

2  They  have  their  counterpart  in  the  Up6SovAoi  of  the  Greek  Sthabo  :  viii.,  6,  p.  20.

3  Yon-ch'ab-mts'o.

*  Vassiliev's  Le  JBouddiime,  trad,  du  Russe  par  M.  G.  A.  Comme,  p.  44.


314  SHRINES,  BELICS,  AND  PILGRIMS.

image  of  this  shrine  Nanio  Guru  or  "  the  teacher,"  one  of  the  epithets
of  St.  Padma-sambhava.  And  the  images  on  either  side  of  it  are  also
forms  of  that  saint.

The  form  of  Buddhism  here  represented  is  of  the  highly  Tantrik  and
demoniacal  kind,  propagated  by  Padma-sambhava  and  now  existing
in  the  adjoining  country  of  Bhotan.  Even  this  mild  form  of  the  image
of  Ogyan  Guru  has  decapitated  human  heads  strung  on  to  his  trident.
The  second  image  is  of  a  more  demoniacal  kind.  The  third  image  is,  of
course,  Sakya  Muni.  The  fourth  image,  from  its  Brahmanical  name,
is  Tani-din  {Skt.,  Hay agriva),  one  of  the  fiercest  forms  of  demons  and
an  especial  protector  of  Lamaism.  The  trident  is  everywhere  con-
spicuous in  the  hands  of  the  sculptured  figures  on  the  walls,  and  Shakti
rites  are  more  pronounced  here  than  in  any  other  place  in  northern
India.'

It  is  also  remarkable  to  find  that  the  high-priest  of  the  Hajo
temple,  in  common  with  the  other  high-priests  in  Kamrtip,  is  called
Dalai, — a  title  which  is  usually  stated  to  have  been  conferred  on  the
fifth  Grand  Lama  of  Lhasa  by  a  Mongolian  emperor  in  the  seventeenth
century  A. r. ;  though  the  Tibetan  equivalent  of  this  title,  viz.,  Gyam-ts'o,
or  "  ocean,"  is  known  to  have  been  used  by  Grand  Lamas  previously.  As,
however,  the  word  is  Mongolian,  it  is  curious  to  find  it  naturalized  here
and  spontaneously  used  by  Brahmans.  It  seems  also  to  be  the  title  of
village-headman  in  the  adjoining  Garo  hills.  The  dalai  of  this  temple
is  a  married  man,  but  the  ofiice  is  not  hereditary.  He  is  elected  by  the
local  priests  from  amongst  their  number,  and  holds  ofiice  till  death.
He  resides  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  below  the  temple,  in  a  large  house,
the  exterior  of  which  is  profusely  decorated  with  the  skulls  of  wild
buffalo,  wild  pig,  deer,  and  other  big  game,  etc.,  like  the  house  of  an
Indo-Chinese  chieftain.

"  There  does  not  seem  to  be  in  Tibet,"  says  Mr.  Fergusson,^  "  a
single  relic-shrine  remarkable  either  for  sanctity  or  size,  nor  does
relic-worship  seem  to  be  expressed  either  in  their  architecture  or
their  religious  forms,"  and  he  supports  this  by  saying  that  as  their
deity  is  considered  to  be  still  living,  no  relics  are  needed  to  recall
his  presence.

Certainly  no  immense  mounds  of  the  colossal  proportions  com-
mon in  Indian  Buddhism^  and  in  Burma  and  Ceylon,  appear  to
exist  in  Tibet,  but  smaller  stiipas  are  of  very  common  occurrence ;
and  the  tombs  of  the  departed  Grrand  Lamas  at  Tashi-lhunpo,  etc.,
are  special  objects  of  worship.

It  is  said  that  Tibet  possesses  several  large  stupas  as  large  as

1  Dancing  girls  appear  to  figure  to  some  extent  in  certain  Lamaist  ceremonies  in
Bhotan,  vide  Turner's  Embassy  to  Tibet,  p.  32.
^  Hist,  of  Ind.  and  Eastern  Architecture,  p.  311.


NEPAL  SHRINES.  315


the  Maguta  stupa  of  Nepal.  This  latter  is  one  of  the  celebrated
places  of  Lamaist  pilgrimage  outside  Tibet.  It  is  called  the
Ja}-run  k'asor  ch'o-rten,  and  lies  about  two  miles  to  the  north-
east of  Khatmandu,  and  it  is  figured  at  page  262.  Immense
numbers  of  Tibetans,  both  Lamas  and  laity,  visit  the  place  every
winter,  and  encamp  in  the  surrounding  field  for  making  their
worship  and  offerings,  and  circumambulating  the  sacred  spot.  It
is  the  chief  place  of  Lamaist  pilgrimage  in  Nepal,  attracting  far
more  votaries  than  the  Svayambhiinath  stiipa,^  which  is  not  far
distant.  Its  special  virtue  is  reputed  to  be  its  power  of  granting
all  prayers  for  worldly  wealth,  children,  and  everything  else  asked
for.  Dr.  Buchanan-Hamilton,  in  his  account  of  Nepal,  written
about  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  gives  a  drawing  of
the  monument,  which  is  of  an  almost  simple  hemispherical  form,
of  the  type  of  the  earliest  stupas  ;  and  Wright,^  under  the  title  of
"  temple  of  Bodhnath,"  gives  a  rough  chromo-lithograph  of  its
more  modern  appearance,  with  its  additional  buildings  and  invest-
ing wall.  But  no  description  or  account  of  the  monument  seems
to  be  on  record.

As  I  have  obtained  a  copy  of  the  printed  booklet  which  is  sold
at  the  stiipa  to  the  pilgrims,  I  here  give  a  short  abstract  of  its
contents,  which  are  interesting  as  showing  how  the  stiipa  is
brought  into  intimate  relation  with  the  chief  legendary  and
historic  persons  of  early  Lamaism.  The  print  is  a  new  revision  by
Punya-vajra  and  another  disciple  of  "  the  great  Lama  Z'ab-dkar."
This  latter  Lama,  I  am  informed,  lived  about  thirty  years  ago,
and  gilded  the  short  spire  of  the  stupa  and  built  the  present
investing  wall.

The  book  states  as  follows  : —

"This  stupa  enshrines  the  spirit  of  the  Buddhas  of  the  ten
directions,  and  of  the  Buddhas  of  the  three  times  {i.e.,  the  present,
past  and  future),  and  of  all  the  Bodhisats,  and  it  holds  the  Dharma-
kaya.


1  Spelt  ^ya.

2  Called  by  the  Lamas 'P'ags-pa  Sin  Kun  (or  ?  Zan-bkod) ;  cf.  aXso  Smyamlhu pwrdna,
transld.,  J.R.A.8.,  1894,  297.  Another  stupa  not  far  off,  namely,  about  ten  miles  S.E.
of  Bhatgaon,  and  twelve  from  Khat-mandu,  is  called  sTags-mo-lus-sbyin,  and  identified
as  the  site  where  Buddha  in  a  former  birth  gave  his  body  to  a  starving  tiger,  though
the  orthodox  site  for  this  story  was  really  uorthern  India,  cf.  FaHian,  c.  xi.

»  jYepa?,  pp.22, 100.


316  SHEINES,  SELIOS,  AND  PILGIUMS.

"  When  king  Thi-Sroii  Detsan '  asked  the  Guru,^  at  Samyas/  to
tell  him  the  history  of  the  Ma-</u-ta  stupa  in  Nepal,  made  by  the  four
sons  of  '  the  bestower  of  gifts,'  named  '  the  poor  mother  Pya-j-dsi-ma
(fowl-keeper),'  then  the  Guru  thus  related  (the  story) : —

"  '  lb.  a  former  Kalpa — time  beyond  conception — the  Bodhisattva
Mahasattva  Avalokitesvara,  approached  the  Tathagatha  Amitabha  and
prayed  for  the  animals  immersed  in  the  miry  slough,  and  after  saving
these  he  went  to  mount  Potala.  There  he  saw  hosts  of  unsaved  animals,
innumerable  like  unto  mounds  of  nrnrwa  *  lees,  and  (seeing  this  he)
wept.  Two  of  his  pitying  tears  were  born  into  Indra's  heaven  as  god's
daughters,  named  respectively  Kan-ma  and  the  little  Kaii-ma  or
Kan-ch'un-ma.  This  latter  having  stolen  in  heaven  some  flowers,
was  as  a  punishment  reborn  in  earth,  in  a  low  pigherd's  family  in
Maguta  in  Nepal,  under  the  name  of  Samvara  or  "  the  Chief  Happi--
ness,"  her  mother's  name  being  Purna.  On  marriage  she  had  four
sons,  and  her  husband's  early  death  left  her  with  the  sole  care  of  the
family.  She  with  her  family  undertook  the  herding  and  rearing  of
geese  for  the  wealthy,  and  having  in  this  pursuit  amassed  much  wealth,
she — Ma-pya-rdsi-ma  (or  mother  fowl-keeper)— decided  to  build  a  large
sttipa  in  honour  of  the  Tathagatha.  She,  thereon,  went  to  the  king
and  begged  for  a  site,  saying  she  wanted  only  so  much  ground  as  one
hide  could  cover.  The  king  assented,  saying  '•  Ja-run,"  which  literally
means  "  do  "-|-" can," i.e.,  "you  can  do  (so)."  "  Then  she  cutting  a  hide
into  thin  thongs  (forming  a  long  rope),  enclosed  that  very  large  space
which  now  is  occupied  by  this  chaitya.  And  she,  with  her  four  sons,
and  a  servant,  and  an  elephant  and  an  ass,  as  beasts  of  burden,  brought
earth  and  stones,  and  commenced  to  build  this  chaitya  by  their  own
personal  labour.

"  '  Then  the  king's  ministers  appealed  to  the  king  to  stop  such  an
ambitious  building,  as  they  asserted  its  magnificence  put  to  shame  the
religious  buildings  of  the  king  and  the  nobles.  But  the  king  answered
"K'a-Sor" — which  literally  means  "  mouth  -|-  (has)  spoken" — and  so
refused  to  interfere.  (Thus  is  the  name  of  the  stupa — '  Ja-run  K'a-sor '
— accounted  for.)

"  '  After  four  years,  when  only  the  base  had  been  laid,  the  mother
died,  but  her  sons  continued  the  building  till  its  completion.  And  in
the  receptacle  was  placed  one  Magadha  measure  {drona)  of  the  relics  of
the  Tathagatha  Kasyapa.  This  event  was  celebrated  by  the  manifesta-
tion in  the  sky,  above  the  stupa,'of  Kasyapa  himself,  and  the  circles  of
celestial Buddhas and  Bodhisats, and their hosts of retinue, and


1  The  king  o£  Tibet  who  introduced  Lamaism.

^  i.e.,  Padma-sambhava,  or  Ugyan,  the  founder  of  Lamaism.

■!  The  first  Lamaist  monastery  in  Tibet.

4  The  millet  seed  (elusine  crocanum),  about  the  size  of  mustard  seed,  from  which  is
made  the  Himalayan  beer.

=  This  story,  and,  indeed,  the  greater  part  of  the  legend,  seems  to  have  its  origin  in
a  false  etymology  of  the  proper  names.


SBBINES  IN  NEPAL,  ETC.  317

amongst  showers  of  flowers  the  gods  contributed  divine  music  and
rained  perfume.  Earthquakes  thrice  occurred,  and  through  the  glory
of  the  assembled  divinities  there  was  no. darkness  for  five  nights.

"  '  One  of  the  sons  then  prayed,  "  May  I  in  my  next  re-birth  be  born  as
a  great  scholar  (to  benefit  mankind) " — and  he  was  born  as  Thunmi
Sambhota'  (the  introducer  of  the  so-called  "  Tibetan  "  character,  and
the  first  translator  of  Indian  Buddhist  texts  into  Tibetan),  circa
650  A.D.

" '  The  second  son  prayed  in  a  similar  manner,  and  was  re-born  as  "  The
Bodhisattva"  ^  (the  abbot  of  the  first  monastery  of  Tibet).

"  '  Then  the  elephant  or  lan-po  (hearing  these  prayers)  said,  "  These
two,  neglecting  me  who  contributed  so  much  assistance,  are  asking  all
the  good  things  for  themselves,  therefore  let  me  be  re-born  in  a  form  to
destroy  them  or  their  work."  And  he  was  afterwards  re-born  as  Laii-
darma  (the  persecutor  of  Lamaism).

"'The  third  son,  hearing  the  elephant's  request,  prayed  that  he
might  be  re-born  in  a  form  to  neutralize  the  evil  of  the  elephant's  incar-
nation; and  he  was  born  as  Lho-luii  phel  kyi  rdorje  (the  Lama  who
murdered  Lan-darma,  the  Julian  of  Lamaism).'

"  This  stupa  is  also  worshipped  by  the  Nepalese  Buddhists,  viz.,  the
Newars — the  semi-aborigines  of  the  Nepal  valley,  and  the  Murmi,  a
eis-Himalayan  branch  of  Tibetan  stock.  The  name  '  Maguta ' — pro-
nounced '  Makuta  ' — is  doubtless  a  contraction  for  Malcuta  bandhana,
the  pre-Buddhist  '  crested  chaitya,'  such  as  existed  at  Buddha's  death
at  Kusinagara,  in  the  country  of  the  Mallas."

The  G-yan-tse  Caitya-temple  is  thus  described  ^ : —
It  is  nine  storeys  high,  and  is  about  100  to  120  feet  high  and  capped
by  a  gilt  dome.  A  magnificent  view  of  Gyantse  town  and  monasteries
from  top  storey.  Numberless  niches  filled  with  images  of  Buddha  and
Bodhisatwas.  In  the  first  floor  is  an  image  of  the  religious  king
Rabtan.  The  hase  is  fifty  paces  square.  It  is  only  open  to  public  at
the  full  and  new  moon.

At  those  shrines  holding  or  professing  to  hold  relics  the  fiction
of  miraculous  increase  of  the  relics  is  frequently  enacted.  Thus
at  the  Maguta  stiipa  and  Tashiding  Cli'orten  are  sold  small
granules,*  alleged  to  be  obtained  by  miraculous  efflorescence  on


1  Who  introduced  a  written  character  to  Tibet.

2  The  Indian  monk  Sauta-rakshita,  abbot  of  the  first  monastery  of  Tibet  (Samyas).
°  Saeat's  Narrative.

■•  On  the  cremation  of  tlie  body  of  a  Buddha  it  is  believed  that  no  mere  ash  results,
but,  on  the  contrary,  the  body  swells  up  and  resolves  into  a  mass  of  sago-like  granules
of  two  kinds,  (a)  Phe-dun,  from  the  flesh  as  small  white  granules,  and  (b)  nnt/srel,
yellowish  larger  nodules  from  the  bones.  It  is  the  former  sort  which  are  believed  to
be  preserved  at  the  holiest  Caitya  of  Sikhim,  namely,  T'on-wa  ran  grol,  or  "  Saviour
by  mere  sight."  It  owes  its  special  sanctity  to  its  reputedly  containing  some  of  the
funereal  granules of  the  mythical  Buddha  antecedent  to  Sakya Muni,  namely


318  SBlilNES,  RELICS,  AND  PILGRIMS.

the  surface  of  the  building  from  the  legendary  relics  of  the  ficti-
tious Buddha,  Kasyapa,  alleged  to  be  enshrined  therein.  But
this  practice  is  common  also  to  southern  Buddhism.  In  the  Bur-
mese chronicles  ^  it  is  stated  that  the  tooth  of  Buddha,  enshrined  at
Ceylon,  yielded  in  the  eleventh  century  a.d.,  to  the  Burmese  king,
"  a  miraculous  incarnation  or  mysterious  growth  of  homogeneous
substances  from  the  holy  tooth,"  and  Col.  Phayre  adds  "  and  a
somewhat  similar  mission  with  a  like  result  occurred  about  twenty
years  ago  (about  1860  a.d.).

And  in  1892  similar  relies  were  sent  from  Ceylon  to  the  Tibetan
commissioner  at  DarjiUng.  But,  after  all,  such  relies  are  no  more
spurious  than  the  innumerable  "  bits  of  the  true  cross,"  holy
coats,  and  keys  of  St.  Peter,  of  Christendom  ;  nor  is  their  worship
more  remarkable  than  the  vestiges  of  relic-worship  which  still
survive  in  the  structural  features  of  our  chancels,  and  the  black-
letter  day  of  the  Holy  Cross  in  the  calendar.

The  temple  of  Buddha's  tooth  at  Fu-chau  in  China  is  also  a
known  place  of  Lamaist  pilgrimage.  The  tooth  is  evidently  an
elephant's  molar.^  That  one  also  at  the  "  Clear  water  P'u-hsein
monastery  "  in  western  Ssu-ch'an  seems  to  be  somewhat  similar.
It  is  described  by  Mr.  Baber  as  "  dense  fossil  ivory,"  "  about  a
foot  long,  and  of  a  rudely  triangular  outline."

The  sacred  mountain  of  Wu-t'ai  or  U-tai  in  northern  China,
and  the  alleged  birth-place  of  Manjusri,  now  identified  with
the  metaphysical  Bodhisat  of  Wisdom,  is  a  favourite  place  of  pil-
grimage. It  has  been  visited  and  figured  by  Hue  and  others.^

On  mount  0  in  western  Ssu-ch'an,  at  an  elevation  of  about
11,000  feet,  is  to  be  seen  "  The  glory  of  Buddha"* — a  mysterious
apparition  like  the  giant  of  the  Brocken,"  which  is  seen  occasion-
ally by  looking  over  the  top  of  a  cUff  about  2,000  feet  high  into
the  terrible  abyss  below.  It  is  a  radiant  halo  of  rainbow  tints  and
it  is  deemed  an  emanation  from  the  aureole  of  Buddha.  The
Tibetans  visit  the  place.

Od-srm'i,  or  Kasyapa,  the  relics  having been  deposited  there  by  Jik-mi  Pawo,  the
incarnation  and  successor  of  St.  Lha-tsiin.

1  Phayee's  History  of  Brit.  Burma.

2  Sir  Henky  Yule's  Marco  Polo,  iii.,  ch.  xv.,  where  it  is  figured  after  Mr.  Fortune.

'  Visited  and  described  also  by  Rev.  J. Edkins {Religion in  China), G-ilmour,
Reichthofen,  Rockhill,  and  more  fully  described  by  D.  Pokotiloff,  St.  Petersburg,  1893.
••  In  Chinese  Fo-Kvang. Cf.  Baber's  Snppl.  Papers  Geog.  Soc.,-p.  42.
'  Beewstee's  Xatural  Magic,  1833,  p.  130.


SJJR1N£S  IN  CHINA  AND  TIBET.  319

The  sacred  sites  of  Tibet  are  cited  in  considerable  detail  in  the
vernacular  geography  already  mentioned.  And  stories  abound
of  the  miraculous  efficacy  of  such  pilgrimages,  and  even  of  the
manifestations  of  the  divine  spirit  to  worthy  worshippers.

Thus  a  story  is  related  regarding  the  great  image  of  "the
Lord"  at  Lhasa,  which  is  a  parallel  to  that  of  the  widow's  mite  :
A  poor  old  widow,  destitute  of  friends  and  of  means,  made  a  long
pilgrimage  to  Lhasa,  but  had  nothing  left  as  an  offering.  By
begging  she  ultimately  obtained  a  morsel  of  butter,  which  she
offered  in  a  tiny  lamp  to  the  great  idol.  The  god  there-
upon revealed  himself  through  the  idol,  which  thanked  her  for  her
gift,  and  spoke  to  her  a  few  words  of  comfort.  On  this  miracle
getting  noised  abroad,  a  rich  merchant  set  out  for  Lhasa,  arguing
that  if  the  Lord  appeared  to  a  poor  woman  who  presented  only
one  tiny  lamp,  he  would  certainly  appear  to  the  donor  of  a  host.
So  he  offered  many  thousands  of  lamps  with  tons  of  butter,  but
the  idol  remained  impassive  and  irresponsive.

The  circling  of  the  great  temple  by  prostrations  on  the  ground  is
an  essential  part  of  the  devotions,  not  only  of  the  pilgrims  but  of
the  residents.  The  day's  devotions  begin  at  Lhasa  with  the  gun-
fire about  4  a.m.  from  the  Chinese  minister's  house,  and  they  close
with  another  gun  at  9  or  10  p.m.

After  the  morning  report  the  people  are  to  be  seen  in  dense
crowds  on  the  circular  road,  all  moving  in  one  and  the  same  direc-
tion, as  with  the  hands  of  a  watch.  A  similar  circuit  is  made  by
the  devout  in  the  evening,  to  say  nothing  of  smaller  circuits  around
individual  shrines  :  at  least  this  is  imperative  on  common  folk ;  as
to  the  great  and  wealthy ,i  they  urge  that  their  presence  would  only
interfere  with  the  piety  of  the  people,  so  they  engage  substitutes,
who,  however,  are  rigorously  required  to  circumambulate  for  their
masters.  But  whether  done  in  person  or  by  proxy,  a  careful
reckoning  is  kept  of  the  number  of  circuits  performed,  and  these,
in  occasional  cases  of  excessive  devotion,  are  even  executed  by  the
method  of  successive  prostrations  full  length  on  the  road,  each
prostration  beginning  where  the  preceding  one  ended,  called
"  Kiang  K'or."

Of  the  places  sacred  to  the  Gruru,  the  most  celebrated  is  the

i  Says  A.  K.  (Henessy's  Ahstmd,  p.  293).


320  SHRINES,  RELICS,  AND  PILGRIMS.

"  Lotus  lake "  (Ts'o  Padma-c'an),  on  which  he  is  believed  to
have  been  born.  It  is  usually  stated  to  be  in  Udyana,  but  other
accounts  place  it  near  Haridwar.'  In  Nepal  at  Halasi  on  the
bank  of  the  Dudh-Kusi  is  the  famous  hermitage  of  the  Gruru  on
a  hill  with  m.any  fossil  remains,  which  from  their  description
suggest  the  outlying  Siwaliks  range

In  the  mountains,  two  days' journey  south  of  Gryang-tse,  near  the
unreformed  monastery  of  Se-kar,  is  a  celebrated  rock-cut  cave  of
St.  Padma,  called  Kyil-k'or  ta-dub. It  is  thus  described^  : —

"  We  took  lighted  lamps,  and  after  going  130  paces  inside  the  cavern
we  reached  an  open  flat  space  about  twenty  feet  square,  from  which  a
rock-cut  ladder  led  us  up  to  another  open  space  about  ten  feet  square ;
thirty  paces  further  brought  us  to  a  stone  seat,  said  to  be  the  seat  of  Guru
Padma-sambhava.  Behind  the  seat  was  a  small  hole  drilled  through
the  rock :  through  this  hole  a  wooden  spoon  about  two  feet  long  was
passed  by  the  sister  of  the  Lama  who  accompanied  us,  and  a  small
amount  of  reddish  dust  was  extracted  which  is  said  to  be  the  refuse  of
the  Guru's  food.  This  we  ate  and  found  very  sweet  to  the  taste.  Then
after  lighting  some  sacred  lamps  and  asking  a  blessing,  we  descended  by
another  flight  of  steps  to  a  place  where  a  stream  issues  from  the  face  of
the  rock.  The  total  length  of  the  cave  from  the  entrance  of  the  stream
is  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile.  There  are  ascents  and  descents,  and  many
turns  and  twists  through  narrow  passages  where  only  one  man  can  go
at  a  time,  and  many  people  are  afraid  to  risk  exploring  the  place.  If
the  lamp  were  to  go  out  there  would  be  no  finding  the  way  back  again."

Colossal  images  of  Jam-pa  or  "  The  Loving  One  "  (the  Buddha
to  come),  and  sometimes  of  Avalokita  are  occasionally  carved  on
cliffs.  A  monster  image  of  the  god  Maitreya  (Jam-pa),  three
storeys  in  height,  is  mentioned  by  explorer  A.  K. ;  *  the  figure
is  internally  of  clay,  and  is  well  gilded  externally ;  it  is  seated
on  a  platform  on  the  ground  floor,  and  its  body,  passing  succes-


1  One  account  given  me  says  that  three  days  from  the  town  in  nortliern  India
named  Nirdun  (?  Dehra  Dun)  lies  Ramnagar,  thence  four  days  Haraduar,  where  there
is  a  railway  station,  thence  on  foot  two  days  to  Guruduar,  whence  Ts'o  Padma  is
eight  days  distant  amongst  seven  hills,  like  Mt.  Meru.  In  regard  to  it,  the  Slmm-bha-
la  Lam-yig  contains  the  following  passage :  "  At  the  city  of  the  king  Da-ya-tse  of
Pu-rang,  in  consequence  of  water  striking  against  coal,  at  night  the  coal  is  seen
burning.  It  is  said  of  this  coal  and  water,  that  they  have  the  peculiai-ity  that  the
water,  if  introduced  into  the  stomach  of  man  or  beast,  turns  into  stone."

=  Lama  D.  G.  H.R.,  loc.  cit.,  p.  20.

3  Henessy,  S.R.,  loc.  cit.,  para  19.  An  image  similar  to  this,  thirty  feet  high,  but  of
gilt  copper,  is  noted  by  the  Lama  U.  G.,  loc.  cit.,  p.  22.  Lake  at  Rohch'am  Ch'en,  near
the  crossing  of  the  Tangpo,  near  Yam-dok.


RECEPTION  BY  LAMAIST  POPE.  321

sively  through  the  second  and  third  floors,  terminates  in  a  jewelled
and  capped  colossal  head  above  the  latter  floor  ;  in  all,  the  figure
and  platform  are  said  to  be  seventy  or  eighty  feet  high.  Now,  as  an
essential  feature  in  Tibetan  worship  is  the  performance  of  circuits
around  an  image,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  pilgrim  in  circling
this  image  of  Jam-pa  is  compelled  by  circumstances  to  perform
three  different  series  of  circumambulations  on  as  many  floors  ;
at  first  around  the  god's  legs,  next  around  his  chest,  and  lastly
around  his  head.

But,  after  all,  the  greatest  pilgrimage  to  which  a  Lamaist  devotee
looks  is  to  the  Buddhist-god  incarnate  at  Lhasa,  the  Grand  Dalai
Lama.

Accounts  of  the  culmination  of  such  a  pilgrimage  have  been
recorded  by  Manning  and  others.  The  infant  Grrand  Lama,  who
received  Manning,  was  altogether  a  prodigy.  A  reception  by  the
Grrand  Tashi  Lama,  one  of  the  many  witnessed  by  Mr.  Bogle,  is
thus  described  by  that  gentleman  ^  (see  figure,  page  305) : —

^'  On  the  12th  November,  a  vast  crowd  of  people  came  to  pay
their  respects,  and  to  be  blessed  by  the  Lama.  He  was  seated
under  a  canopy  in  the  court  of  the  palace.  They  were  all  ranged
in  a  circle.  First  came  the  lay  folks.  Everyone  according  to
his  circumstances  brought  some  offering.  One  gave  a  horse,
another  a  cow ;  some  gave  dried  sheep's  carcasses,  sacks  of  flour,
pieces  of  cloth,  etc. ;  and  those  who  had  nothing  else  presented
a  white  Pelong  handkerchief.  All  these  offerings  were  received
by  the  Lama's  servants,  who  put  a  bit  of  silk  with  a  knot  upon  it
tied,  or  supposed  to  be  tied,  with  the  Lama's  own  hands,  about  the
necks  of  the  votaries.  After  this  they  advanced  up  to  the  Lama,
who  sat  cross-legged  upon  a  throne  formed  with  seven  cushions,
and  he  touched  their  head  with  his  hands,  or  with  a  tassel  hung
from  a  stick,  according  to  their  rank  and  character.  The  cere-
monial is  this  :  upon  the  gylongs  or  laymen  of  very  high  rank  he
lays  his  palm,  the  nuns  and  inferior  laymen  have  a  cloth  interposed
between  his  hand  and  their  heads ;  and  the  lower  class  of  people
are  touched  as  they  pass  by  with  the  tassel  which  he  holds  in  his
hand There  might  be  about  three  thousand  people


1  Op.  cit.,  p.  85. A  grander  reception  is  described  by  him  at  p.  98.

Y


322  SBJRINJES,  RELICS, AND PILGRIMS.

— men,  women,  and  children — at  this  ceremony.  Such  as  had
children  on  their  backs  were  particularly  solicitous  that  the  child's
head  should  also  be  touched  with  the  tassel.  There  were  a  good
many  boys  and  some  girls  devoted  to  the  monastic  order  by  having
a  lock  of  hair  on  the  crowQ  of  the  head  cropped  by  the  Lama  with
a  knife.  This  knife  came  down  from  heaven  in  a  flash  of  lightning.
.  .  .  .  After  the  Lama  retired,  many  people  stayed  behind
that  they. might  kiss  the  cushions  upon  which  he  had  sat."

The  ordinary  receptions  by  his  holiness  have  been  described  by
the  survey  spy  A.  K.i  Since  his  worshippers  are  in  thousands,  and
it  is  only  to  those  who  are  wealthy  or  of  high  degree  that  he  can
afford  to  address  even  a  brief  sentence  or  two,  this  is  always  done
in  a  deep  hoarse  voice,  acquired  by  training  in  order  to  convey  the
idea  that  it  emanates  from  maturity  and  wisdom.  Seated  cross-
legged  on  a  platform  some  six  feet  high,  he  is  dressed  to  be
worshipped  in  the  usual  colours  of  priesthood,  i.e.,  red  and  yellow,
and  with  bare  arms,  as  required  of  all  Buddhist  priests,  and  holds
a  rod  from  the  end  of  which  hangs  a  tassal  of  silk,  white,  red,  yellow,
green,  and  blue.  The  pilgrim,  coming  in  at  the  entrance  door,
advances  with  folded  hands  as  if  in  prayer,  and  resting  his  head
against  the  edge  of  the  platform  above  him,  mentally  and  hastily
repeats  the  petitions  he  would  have  granted.  These  unuttered
prayers  the  Dalai  Lama  is  understood  to  comprehend  intuitively ;
he  touches  the  pilgrim's  head  with  the  bunch  of  silk  in  token
of  his  blessing,  and  the  worshipper  is  hurried  out  at  the  east  door
by  attendants,  only  too  happy  if  he  has  passed  say  half  a  minute
ia  the  vicinity  of  the  great  priest.  This  is  the  common  procedure.
Persons  of  rank  or  substance  are  permitted  to  mount  the  platform
and  to  perform  obeisance  there,  receiving  the  required  blessing
by  actual  touch  of  the  Dalai  Lama's  hand;  subsequently  such
worshipper  may  be  allowed  a  seat  below  the  platform  where  a  few
hoarse  utterances  of  enquiry  may  be  addressed  to  him  by  the
Dalai  Lama,  and  he  may  also  be  given  some  food.

The  account  of  one  of  these  more  select  receptions,  to  which
Baber  Sarat  gained  admission  in  disguise,  is  here  abridged  from
his  narrative.

"  We  are  seated  on  rugs  spread  in  about  eight  rows,  my  seat  being  in
1  Loc.  cit.,  edited  by  Henesst,  para.  20,


RECEPTION  BY  LAMAIST  POPE.  323

the  third  row,  at  a  distance  of  about  ten  feet  from  the  Grand  Lama's
throne,  and  a  little  to  his  left.  There  was  perfect  silence  in  the  grand
hall.  The  state  officials  walked  from  left  to  right  with  serene  gravity,
as  becoming  their  exalted  rank  in  the  presence  of  the  supreme  vice-
regent  of  Buddha  on  earth.  The  carrier  of  the  incense-bowl  (suspended
by  three  golden  chains),  the  head  steward,  who  carried  the  royal
golden  teapot,  and  other  domestic  officials  then  came  into  his  holiness's
presence,  standing  there  motionless  as  pictures,  fixing  their  eyes,  as  it
were,  on  the  tips  of  their  respective  noses.

"  The  great  altar,  resembling  an  oriental  throne,  pillared  on  lions  of
carved  wood,  was  covered  with  costly  silk  scarves ;  and  on  this  his
holiness,  a  child  of  eight,  was  seated.  A  yellow  mitre  covered  the
child's  head,  his  person  was  robed  in  a  yellow  Inantle,  and  he  sat  cross-
legged,  with  the  palms  of  his  hands  joined  together  to  bless  us.  In
my  turn  I  received  his  holiness's  benediction  and  surveyed  his  divine
face.  I  wanted  to  linger  a  few  seconds  in  the  sacred  presence,  but  was
not  allowed  to  do  so,  others  displacing  me  by  pushing  me  gently.  The
princely  child  possessed  a  really  bright  and  fair  complexion  with  rosy
cheeks.  His  eyes  were  large  and  penetrating.  .  .  .  The  thinness  of
his  person  was  probably  owing  to  the  fatigues  of  the  ceremonies  of  the
court,  of  his  religious  duties,  and  of  ascetic  observances  to  which  he
had  been  subjected  since  taking  the  vows  of  monkhood.  .  .  .  When
all  were  seated  after  receiving  benediction,  the  head  steward  poured
tea  into  his  holiness's  golden  cup  from  the  golden  teapot.  Four  "assis-
tant servers  poured  tea  into  the  cups  of  the  audience.  Before  the
Grand  Lama  lifted  his  cup  to  his  lips  a  grace  was  solemnly  chanted.
Without  even  stirring  the  air  by  the  movements  of  our  limbs  or  ouv
clothes,  we  slowly  lifted  our  cups  to  our  lips  and  drank  the  tea,  which
was  of  delicious  flavour.  Thereafter  the  head  butler  placed  a  golden
dish  full  of  rice  in  front  of  his  holiness,  which  he  only  touched ;  and
its  contents  were  then  distributed.  I  obtained  a  handful  of  this  con-
secrated rice,  which  I  carefully  tied  in  one  corner  of  my  handkerchief.
After  grace  had  been  said,  the  holy  child,  in  a  low  indistinct  voice,
chanted  a  hymn.  Then  a  venerable  gentleman  rose  from  the  middle
of  the  first  row  of  seats,  and,  addressing  the  Grand  Lama  as  the  Lord
Avalokita  Incarnate,  recited  the  many  deeds  of  mercy  which  that
patron  saint  of  Tibet  had  vouchsafed  towards  its  benighted  people.
At  the  conclusion  he  thrice  prostrated  himself  before  his  holiness,  when
a  solemn  pause  followed ;  after  which  the  audience  rose,  and  the  Grand
Lama  retired.

"One  of  the  butler's  assistants  gave  me  two  packets  of  pills,  and  the
other  tied  a  scrap  of  red  silk  round  my  neck.  The  pills,  I  was  told,
were  Chinlab  (blessings  consecrated  by  Buddha-Kashyapa  and  other
saints),  and  the  silk  scrap,  called  sungdii  (knot  of  blessing),  was  the
Grand  Lama's  usual  consecrated  return  for  presents  made  by  pilgrims
and  devotees."


Y  2


334


XIV.

PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND  IMAGES.

"  Since  we  left  off  to  burn  incense  to  the  Queen  of  Heaven  and  to  pour  out
drink-offerings  to  her,  we  have  wanted  all  things  and  have  been  consumed  by
the  sword  and  famine." — Jeremiah  xliv.,  18.^

AMAIST  tnytiiology  is  a  fascinating  field  for  explor-
ing the  primitive  conceptions  of  life,  and  the  way  in
which  the  great  forces  of  nature  become  deified.  It
also  shows  the  gradual  growth  of  legend  and  idolatry,
with  its  diagrams  of  the  unknown  and  fetishes;  and  how  Buddhism
with  its  creative  touch  bodied  forth  in  concrete  shape  the  abstract
conceptions  of  the  learned,  and,  while  incorporating  into  its  pan-
theon the  local  gods  of  the  country,  it  gave  milder  meanings  to
the  popular  myths  and  legends.

The  pantheon  is  perhaps  the  largest  in  the  world.  It  is  peopled
by  a  bizarre  crowd  of  aboriginal  gods  and  hydra-headed  demons,
who  are  almost  jostled  off  the  stage  by  their  still  more  numerous
Buddhist  rivals  and  counterfeits.  The  mythology,  being  largely  of
Buddhist  authorship,  is  full  of  the  awkward  forms  of  Hindii  fancy
and  lacks  much  of  the  point,  force,  and  picturesqueness  of  the
myths  of  Europe.  Yet  it  still  contains  cruder  forms  of  many  of
these  western  myths,^  and  a  wealth  of  imagery.

Primitive  Buddhism,  as  we  have  seen,  knows  no  god  in  the
sense  of  a  Creator  or  Absolute  Being  ;  though  Buddha  himself

1  Compare  with  the  analogous  Buddhist  "  Queen  of  Heaven,"  Tara  or  Kwan-yin,  pp.
435,  etc.

^  Cf.  V.  A.  Smith  "  On  the  Grteco-Eoman  influence  on  the  Civihzation  ot  Ancient
India,"  J.A.S.B.,  1891-92,  p.  60,  etc. Also  Prof.  GniJNWEDEL,  loc.  cit.


EARLY  BUDDHIST  MYTHOLOGY.  325

seems  to  have  been  in  this  respect  an  agnostic  rather  than  an
atheist.

But,  however,  this  may  be,  the  earliest  Buddhist  mythology
known  to  us  gives  the  gods  of  the  Hindus  a  very  prominent  place
in  the  system.  And  while  rendering  them  finite  and  subject  to  the
general  law  of  metempsychosis,  yet  so  far  accepts  or  tolerates  the
current  beliefs  in  regard  to  their  influence  over  human  affairs  as  to
render  these  gods  objects  of  fear  and  respect,  if  not  of  actual
adoration  by  the  primitive  Buddhists.

The  earliest  books  purporting  to  reproduce  the  actual  words
spoken  by  the  Buddha  make  frequent  references  to  the  gods  and
demons.  And  in  the  earhest  of  all  authentic  Indian  records,  the
edict-pillars  of  Asoka,  we  find  that  model  Buddhist  delighting  to
call  himself  "the  beloved  of  the  gods."  The  earlier  Buddhist
monuments  at  Barhut,  etc.,  also,  are  crowded  with  images  of  gods,
Yakshas  and  other  supernatural  beings,  who  are  thfere  given  attri-
butes almost  identical  with  those  still  accorded  them  by  present-
day  Buddhists.  Every  Buddhist  believes  that  the  coming  Buddha
is  at  present  in  the  Tushita  heaven  of  the  gods.  And  the
Ceylonese  Buddhists,  who  represent  the  purer  form  of  the  faith,
still  worship  the  chief  Indian  gods  and  are  addicted  to  devil-
worship  and  astrology.^

But  the  theistic  phase  of  Buddhism  carried  objective  worship
much  further  than  this.  For  as  Buddha  himself  occupied  in
primitive  Buddhism  the  highest  central  point  which  in  other
faiths  is  occupied  by  a  deity,  his  popular  deification  was  only
natural.

In  addition  to  the  worship  of  Buddha,  in  a  variety  of  forms,  the
Mahayana  school  created  innumerable  metaphysical  Buddhas  and
Bodhisats  whom  it  soon  reduced  from  ideal  abstractness  to
idolatrous  form.  And  it  promoted  to  immortal  rank  many  of  the
demons  of  the  Sivaist  pantheon  ;  and  others  specially  invented  by


1  Khs-s  Davids,  B.,  p.  7.  "  In  the  courtyard  of  nearly  all  the  wiharas  (monasteries)  in
Ceylon  there  is  a  small  dewala  (or  god-temple)  in  which  the  Brahmanical  deities  are
worshipped  The  persons  who  officiate  in  them  are  called  Kapavas.  They  marry.
The  incantations  they  use  are  in  Sanskrit  (East.  Mm.,  p.  201).  The  chief  gods
worshipped  are  Vishnu,  Kataragama,  Nata  who  in  the  next  Kalpa  is  to  become
Maitreva  Buddha,  and  Pattini  Deva.  Other  temples  belong  to  tutelaries,  eg.,  Saman
Deva  the  tutelary  of  Buddha's  foot-print,  Sri-pade  (Rept.  Se,-vice  Tenures  G<mmum.on,
Ceylon  1872,  p.  62).  It  is  probable  that  this  Pattini  is  the  tutelary  goddess  of
Asoka's  capital,  Patua. Cf.  my  Discmery  of  exaM  site  ofPdtalipulm,  etc.,  1892."


326  PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND  IMAGES.

itself  as  defensores  fidei ;  and  to  all  of  these  it  gave  characteristic
forms.  It  also  incorporated  most  of  the  local  deities  and  demons
of  those  new  nations  it  sought  to  convert.  There  is,  however,  as
already  noted,  reason  for  believing  that  many  of  the  current
forms  of  Brahmanixjal  gods  were  suggested  to  the  Brahman  s  by
antecedent  Buddhist  forms.  And  the  images  have  come  to  be  of
the  most  idolatrous  kind,  for  the  majority  of  the  Lamas  and
almost  aU  the  laity  worship  the  image  as  a  sort  of  fetish,  holy  in
itself  and  not  merely  as  a  diagram  or  symbol  of  the  infinite  or
unknown.

The  Lamaist  pantheon,  thus  derived  from  so  many  different
sources,  is,  as  may  be  expected,  extremely  large  and  complex.
Indeed,  so  chaotic  is  its  crowd  that  even  the  Lamas  themselves  do
not  appear  to  have  reduced  its  members  to  any  generally  recognized
order,  nor  even  to  have  attempted  complete  lists  of  their  motley
deities.  Though  this  is  probably  in  part  owing  to  many  gods
being  tacitly  tolerated  without  being  specially  recognized  by  the
more  orthodox  Lamas.

The  nearest  approach  to  a  systematic  list  which  I  have  seen,  is
the  Pekin  Lama's  list  so  admirably  translated  by  the  late  Mr.
Pander,!  but  this,  as  well  as  all  the  other  extant  lists,  is
defective  in  many  ways  and  only  fragmentary.

The  chief  Tibetan  treatises  on  the  Lamaist  pantheon  according
to  my  Lama  informants,  are  : —

(a)  Z'a-lu  L6-tsa-wa's,  "  The  means  of  obtaining  The  Hundred  (gods).''
This  is  said  to  be  the  oldest  of  the  extant  systematic  works  on  Lamaist
deities  and  seems  to  date  from  about  1436  a.d.,  when  Z'a-lu  succeeded
to  the  great  Pandit  Atisa's  chair  at  Gah-ldan  monastery.  Zha-lu  Lo-
ch'en,  "the  great  translator,'.'  states  that  he  translated  his  description
from  one  of  the  three  great  Indian  works  by  Pandit  Bhavaskanda
entitled  "  Slokas  on  the  means  of  obtaining  (tutelary  and  other
deities)."  '  The  term  "  the  hundred  "  which  occurs  in  the  title  of  this
and  the  following  treatises  refers  only  to  the  chief  divinities ;  for  the
total  number  described  is  much  greater.

(6)  Pari  L8-tsa-was  "  The  Hundred  precious  Manifestations  of  Nar-
thang."  *  This  work  issuing  from  the  great  press  at  Narthang  near
Tashi-lhunpo  is  said  to  deal  mainly,  if  not  solely,  with  those  omitted  by
Z'alu,  and is  placed  about  the  sixteenth  century  a.d.

1  Das  Pantheon  des  Tscltangtsclia  HutuHu,  etc.

2  sGrubs-t'ub  brgya-rtsa.

3  Sgrub-t'ub  ts'ig  bo'ad,  Skt.  ?  Sadanait  sloka.
*  rin-'byuii  sNar-t'an  brgya-rtsa.


THE  LAMA18T  PANTHEON.  327

(c)  Taranatha's  "The  Hundred  precious  Appearances."  ^  This  work  by
the  great  historiographer  Lama  Taranatha  contains  mainly  residual  deities
omitted  by  the  two  previous  writers ;  but  it  is  chiefly  devoted  to  the
more  demoniacal  forms.^  This  work  dates  from  about  1600  a.d.  and
was,  I  think,  printed  at  Phun-ts'o-ling  near  Narthang  ;  but  I  omitted
to  note  this  point  specially  while  consulting  the  book  at  Darjiling."

{d)  The  Dalai  Lamal!^"ag-wanL6-zanGya-ts'6's  "autobiography,"  written
in  the  latter  half  of  the  seventeenth  century  a.d.  In  its  mythological
portion  it  describes  chiefly  those  aboriginal  Tibetan  deities  which  had
become  grafted  upon  orthodox  Lamaism.

All  the  foregoing  works  have  been  consulted  by  me  except  the  second
or  Narthang  text,  which  seems  to  be  the  same  book  referred  to  by
Pander.*  The  Pekin  work  translated  by  Pander  and  dating  from  1800
A.D.,  seems  to  have  been  a  compilation  from  the  above  sources  in  regard
to  those  particular  deities  most  favoured  by  the  Chinese  and  Mongolian
Lamas,  though  the  descriptions  with  the  Pekin  list  are  often  meagre  and
frequently  different  in  many  details  compared  with  the  earlier  work  of
Z'a-lu.°  Another  book,  also,  it  would  seem,  printed  in  China,  was  ob-
tained by  Mr.  Eockhill.''

I  cannot  attempt,  at  least  at  present,  to  give  any  satisfactory
classification  of  such  a  disorderly  mob,  but  I  have  compiled  from
the  foregoing  sources  a  rough  general  descriptive  list,  so  as  to  give
a  somewhat  orderly  glimpse  into  this  chaotic  crowd  of  gods,
demons,  and  deified  saints.

Arranged  in  what  appears  to  be  the  order  of  their  rank,  from
above  downwards,  the  divinities  seem  to  fall  under  the  following
seven  classes  : —

1.  Buddhas. — Celestial  and  human.

2.  Bodhisats Celestial  and  human,  including Indian saints

and  apotheosized  Lamas.

3.  Tutelar  ies. — Mostly  demoniacal.

4.  Defenders  of  the  Faith,  and  Witches  (Dakkini).

5.  Indian  Brdhmanical  gods,  godlings,  and  genii.

1  Ein-'byuii-brgya  rtsa.

^  Gon-po,  Skt.,  Natha  ;  and  Lha-mo,  Skt.,  Kali.

s  It  may  probably  be  a  version  of  this  work  which  Pander  (ZeiUchriftfilr  Eihnologie,
p.  54,  Berlin,  1889)  refers  to  as  published  at  Urgya  by  a  successor  of  Taranatha  rje-itsun
(/dam-pa.

*  Op.  cit.,  p.  63.

5  With  these  lists  may  also  be  compared  the  illustrated  Buddhist  pantheon  of  the
Japanese,  Bufsu  dso-dsui,  reproduced  in  parts  in  Prof.  J.  Hoffman  at  Leyden  in
Siebold's  Nippon  Archiv  zwr^  Besch-eibung  von  Japan,  Vol.  v. ,  and  by  Dr.  W.  Anderson
in  his  admirable  Cataloffue  of  Jap.  Paintings  in  Jiritish  Museum.

"  It  gives  pictures  of  the  gods  and  saints  with  their  special  mantras.


328  PANTHEON, SAINTS, AND  IMAGES.

6.  Country  gods  (yul-lha)  and  guardians  (srun-ma),  and  Local

gods.

7.  Personal  gods,  or  familiars.

The  tutelaries,  however,  overlap  the  classes  above  them  as  well  as
the  next  one  below,  and  some  of  the  "  guardians  "  are  superior  to
the  Indian  gods.  The  first  four  classes,  excepting  their  human
members,  are  mostly  immortal,^  while  the  remainder  are  within
the  cycle  of  re-births.

Before  giving  the  list  of  these  various  divinities,  and  descriptive
details  of  the  images  of  the  more  important  ones,  let  us  look  at
the  typical  forms  and  attitudes,  the  material,  and  methods  of  exe-
cution of  images  in  general.

The  immense  numbers  of  images  abounding  in  Tibet  are  not
confined  to  the  temples,  but  are  common  in  the  housQS  of  the
laity,  in  the  open  air,  as  talismans  in  amulet-boxes,  and  painted  or
printed  as  screens,  and  on  the  title-pages  of  books,  and  as  charms,
etc.

The  artists  are  almost  exclusively  Lamas,  though  a  few  of  the
best  idols  in  Lhasa  are  made  by  Newari  artisans  from  Nepal,  who
are  clever  workers  in  metal  and  wood.  Some  also  are  painted  by
lay-artists,  but  such  images  must  be  consecrated  by  Lamas  in
order  to  be  duly  efficacious  as  objects  of  worship,  for  most  of  the
images  are  credited  with  being  materially  holy,  like  fetishes,  and
capable  of  hearing  and  answering  prayers.  The  mode  of  executing
the  images,  as  regards  the  materials,  the  auspicious  times  to  com-
mence the  image,  and  to  form  the  most  essential  parts,  such  as
the  eyes,  are  all  duly  defined  in  the  scriptures,  whose  details  are
more  or  less  strictly  observed.  Many  of  the  more  celebrated  idols
are  believed  by  the  people  and  the  more  credulous  Lamas  to  be
altogether  miraculous  in  origin — "  self-formed,"  or  fellen  from
heaven  ready  fashioned.^

The  images  are  executed  in  various  ways :  as  statues  or  bas-
reliefs  (sku)  and  medallions,  and  as  pictures  (sku-t'an  or  z'al-t'an).'
The  statues  are  sometimes  of  colossal  size,*  especially  those  of

1  The  Lamas  do  not  generally,  as  do  the  Nepalese  Buddhists,  restrict  immortality  to
Adi-Buddha.

2  The  Hindus  entertain  the  same  belief  as  regards  their  dp-rupi  idols,  which  are
mostly  ancient  Buddhist  ones.

3  Lit.  =flat  +  image.

*  Schlagintweit  describes  {Biid.,  p.  220)  one  of  these  colossal  images  at  Leh  as  "the
Buddha  in  Meditation,"  and  as  higher  than  the  temple  itself,  the  head  going  through


THE  IMAGES  AND  PAINTINGS.


329


Maitreya,  or  "  The  coming  Buddha,"  which  are  occasionally  rock-
cut  ;  but  most  are  less  than  life-size.

Of  statues  the  most  common  form  is  the  plastic/  all  of  which
are  gilt  or  coloured.  They  are  often  cast,  as  bas-reliefs,  in
moulds,  and  are  formed  of  coarse  papier-macM,  or  clay,  bread-
dough,  compressed  incense,  or  variously-tinted  butter,^  and  the
larger  ones  have  a  central  framework  of  wood.  The  plastic  image
or  moulded  positive  is  then  dried  in  the  sun — excepting,  of  course,
those  made  of  butter, — and  it  is  afterwards  painted  or  gilt.

The  gilt-copper  images  ^  are  more  prized.  The  costly  ones  are
inlaid  with  rubies,  turquoises,  and  other
precious  stones.  Less  common  are  those
of  bell-metal,*  while  the  poorer  people  are
content  with  images  of  brass  or  simple
copper.  Wooden  images*  are  not  com-
mon, and  stone  images*  are  least  frequent
of  all,  and  are  m.ostly  confined  to  the
shallow  bas-reliefs  on  slabs,  or  rock-cut
on  cliffs.  Internal  organs  of  dough  or
clay  are  sometimes  inserted  into  the  bodies
of  the  larger  images,  but  the  head  is
usually  left  empty ;  and  into  the  more,
valued  ones  are  put  precious  stones  and
filings  of  the  noble  metals,  and  a  few  grains
of  consecrated  rice,  a  scroll  bearing  "  the
Buddhist  creed,"  and  occasionally  other

texts,  booklets,  and  relics.  These  objects  are  sometimes  mixed  with
the  plastic  material,  but  usually  are  placed  in  the  central  cavity,  the
entrance  to  which,  called  "  the  charm-place," ''  is  sealed  up  by  the
consecrating  Lama.*  And  the  image  is  usually  veiled  by  a  silken
scarf.®

Here  also  may  be  mentioned  the  miniature  funereal  images  or

the  roof.  "  The  body  is  a  frame  of  wood,  dressed  with  draperies  of  cloth  and  paper,
the  head,  the  arms,  and  the  feet  are  the  only  parts  of  the  body  moulded  of  clay."

1  'jim-gzugs.

2  Hue's  Souv.,  ii.,  p.  95 ;  Eookhili,,  Zatid,  i.,  p.  69. In  Ceylon  temporary  images  are
said  to  be  made  of  rice.— Hardy's  Hast.  Moa.,  202.

■!  gser-zans-sku.  *  U-ma.  '  S'in-sku.  « rdo-sku.  '  zun-zhug.

8  This  ceremony  is  called  "  rabs-gnas  zhug-pa.'' Cf.  Csoma,  A.,  p.  403.

9  The  images  of  the  fierce  gods  and  goddesses  especially  are  veiled. The  veil  cover-
ing the  face  of  Devi  is  called  "  Lha-moi  zhab-k'ebs. It  is  a  white  silken  scarf,  about


Amitayus.
(Grilt-copper  from  Lhasa.)


330


PANTHEON, SAINTS, AND IMAGJES.


caityas,  moulded  of  clay  or  dough,  with  or  without  the  addition^of
reliesji  and  corresponding  to  the  dharma-mrira  of  the  Indian
stupas,  and  mentioned  by  Hiuen  Tsiang  in  the  seventh  century

A.D.  Small  consecrated
medallions  of  clay  are
also  given  by  the  Dalai
and  Tashi  Grand  Lamas
to  donors  of  largess,  in
return  for  their  gifts,
one  of  which  is  figured
as  a  tail-piece  on  page
304.

The  pictures  are
mostly  paintings ,  seldom
uncoloured  drawings,
and  many  of  them  are
of  considerable  artistic
merit.  The  style  and
technique  are,  in  the
main,  clearly  of  Chinese
origin.  This  is
especially  seen  in  the
conventional  form  of
clouds,  water,  etc.,
though  the  costumes
are  usually  Tibetan,
when  not  Indian.  The
eye  of  the  Buddhas  and
the  more  benign  Bod-
hisats  is  given  a  dreamy
look  by  representing  the
upper  eyelid  as  dented
at  its  centre  like  a
cupid's  bow,  but  I  have
noticed  this  same  pecu-


GuAKDiAN  King  of  the  South.
Virudhaka.


liarity  in  mediaeval  Indian  Buddhist  sculptures

eighteen  inches  broad,  with  red  borders  about  a  foot  wide. And  on  it  are  dr  wn  in
colours  several  of  the  auspicious  symbols,  the  swastika,  elephants'  tusks,  conch,  jewels,
also  the  goad,  etc.,  and  the  mystic  spell  S/djc-  i.
1  Called  sa-tsch'a.


THE  PAINTINGS.  331


The  paintings  are  usually  done  on  cloth,  frescoes  ^  being  mostly
confined  to  the  mural  decoration  of  temples.  The  colours  are  very
brilliant  and  violently  contrasted,  owing  to  the  free  use  of  crude
garish  pigments,  but  the  general  colour  effect  in  the  deep  gloom
of  the  temple,  or  when  the  painting  is  toned  down  by  age,  is  often
pleasing.

The  cloth  used  is  canvas  or  cotton — seldom  silk.  It  is  prepared
by  stretching  it  while  damp  over  a  wooden  frame,  to  which  the
margin  of  the  cloth  is  stitched;  and  its  surface  is  then  smeared
over  with  a  paste  of  lime  and  flour,  to  which  a  little  glue  is  some-
times added.  On  drying,  its  surface  is  rubbed  smooth  and  slightly
polished  by  a  stone,  and  the  drawing  is  then  outlined  either  by
hand  with  a  charcoal  crayon,  or,  in  the  more  technical  subjects,  by
a  stencil-plate  consisting  of  a  sheet  of  paper  in  which  the  pattern
is  perforated  by  pin-holes,  through  which  charcoal  dust  is  sifted.

The  lines  are  then  painted  in  with  Chinese  ink,  and  the  other
colours,  which  are  usually  crude  pigments  imported  from  China  or
India.  The  colours  are  simply  mixed  with  hot  thin  glue,  and  as
the  picture  is  unvarnished,  Lamaist  paintings  are  especially
subject  to  injury  by  damp.

On  completion,  the  artist  puts  a  miniature  figure  of  himself  in  a
corner  at  the  bottom  in  an  adoring  attitude.  The  painting  is  then
cut  out  of  its  rough  easel-frame,  and  it  has  borders  sewn  on  to
it,  consisting  of  strips  of  coloured  silk  or  brocade,  and  it  is  mounted
on  rollers  with  brazen  ends,  somewhat  after  the  manner  of  a  map
or  a  Japanese  KakemoTW.^  But  it  is  not  so  elongated  as  the  latter,
nor  is  it  so  artistically  mounted  or  finished.

The  mounted  Tibetan  painting  has  a  tricoloured  cloth  border  of
red,  yellow,  and  blue  from  within  outwards,  which  is  alleged  to
represent  the  spectrum  colours  of  the  rainbow,  which  separates
sacred  objects  from  the  material  world.  The  outer  border  of  blue
is  broader  than  the  others,  and  broadest  at  its  lowest  border,  where
it  is  usually  divided  by  a  vertical  patch  of  brocade  embroidered
jvith  the  dragons  of  the  sky.

A  veil  is  usually  added  as  a  protection  against  the  grimy  smoke
of  incense,  lamps  and  dust. The  veil  is  of  flimsy  silk, often


1  'dabs-ris.

2  Cf.  W.  Anderson's  Catalogue  Japanese  Pictures;  Nott  and  Gliddon,  Indig.  Races,

302.


332  PANTHEON, SAINTS, AND  IMAGES.

adorned  with  sacred  symbols,  and  it  is  hooked  up  when  the
picture  is  exhibited.

Now  we  are  in  a  position  to  consider  the  detailed  description  of
the  images.  The  various  forms  of  images  fall  into  characteristic
types,  which,  whUe  mainly  anthropomorphic,  differ  in  many  ways
as  regards  their  general  form,  attitude,  features,  dress,  emblems,
etc.,  yet  all  are  constructed,  according  to  a  special  canon,  so  that
there  is  no  difficulty  in  distinguishing  a  Buddhist  image  from  a
Brahmanical  or  a  Jain.

The  forms  of  images  differ  broadly,  as  regards  the  general  type
■  or  mode  of  the  image,  the  posture  of  the  body  (sedent  or  other-
wise), and  the  attitude  in  which  the  hands  are  held,  the  number
of  arms,  which  are  emblematic  of  power,  and  the  symbols  or  in-
signia which  they  bear,  as  signifying  their  functions.

The  general  type  of  Buddha's  image  is  well-known.  It  is  that
of  a  mendicant  monk,  without  any  ornaments  and  with  tonsured
hair,  and  it  is  also  extended  to  most  of  the  mythical  Buddhas.  It
is  called  the  Muni  or  saint-type,^  and  it  is  usually  represented
upon  a  lotus-flower,  the  symbol  of  divine  birth.

Extra  to  this  type,  the  three  others  most  common  are : —
1st. «  The  Mild  "  calm  form  (Z'i-wa^)  or  Bodhisat  type.
2nd.  «  The  Angry  "  type  {T'o-wo%  of  the  "  Howler  "  (Rvdra

and  Marut),  or  Storm-deity  of  Vedic  times.

3rd. "  The  Fiercest " fiend type (Drag-po  or Drag-s'e^)  ;

a  fiercer  form  of  No.  2,  and  including  the  "  lord  "-

fiends.^

These  latter  two  types  are  confined  mainly  to  Tantrik  Buddhism,

which,  as  with  Tantrik  Hindiiism,  gives  each  divinity  a  double  or

treble  nature  with  corresponding  aspects. In  the  quiescent  state

the  deity  is  of  the  mild  Bodhisat  type  ;  in  the  active  he  is  of  the

Angry  or  Fiercest-fiend  type. Thus  the  Bodhisat  Manjusri,  the

Grod  of  Wisdom,  in  his  ordinary  aspect  is  a  "  Mild  "  deity  (Z'i-wa);

as  "  The  Fearful  Thunderbolt"  (Bhairava-vajra),  he  is  an  "Angry"


1  t'\ib-bzugs.

2  Tibeto-Sanski'it  dictionaries  give  "  Siva "  as  well  as  "  Santi "  as  the  Sanskrit
equivalent  of  this  word,  so  it  may  literally  mean  a  mild  form  of  the  Sivaist  gods.

8  K'xo-ho  from  the  Skt.  Krodha,  anger.

4  Drays-po  or  Drar/s-i/s'ecl.

5  mGon-po— Skt.,  JVatha.


THE  MILD DEITIES.


333


deity  (T'o-wo) ;  and  as  "  The  six-faced  dreadful  King-demon,"  i  he
is  of  "  The  Fiercest  Fiend  "  type  (Drag-po).^

To  avoid  unnecessary  repetition  in  the  detailed  descriptions,  it
seems  desirable  to  give  here  a  general  note  on  these  typical  mild
and  demoniacal  aspects,  and  also  on  the  attitudes  of  the  body  and
of  the  fingers.

The  "Mild"  (Z'i-wa)  deities  are  of  what  has  been  called  by  some  Euro-
pean writers  "  the  Bod-
hisat  type."  Tbey  are
figured  as  young  hand-
some Indian  princes  and
princesses,  seated
usually  on  lotus  thrones,
and  are  thus  described
by  Z'a-lu  :  The  figure
looks  proud,  youthful,
beautiful,'  and  refined.
The  body  emits  a  halo
of  innumerable  rays  of
light,  figured  as  radiat-
ing wavy  lines,  with
tremulous  lines  alter-
nating. The  "dress  is
of  the  Indian  style,
with  one  sUk  shawl  for
the  lower  limbs,  and
one  for  the  upper,  a
head  ornament  (or
crown)  of  predious
things,  an  ear-ring,  a
close  -  fitting  necklace,
and. a  doshal  or  garland
reaching  down  to  the
thigh,  and  a  Seniondo
or  shorter  garland  reach-
ing to  the  navel,  an
armlet,  wristlet,  brace-
let, anklet,  girdle  ^oh-
pags),  and  a  sash  {dar-
'p'yan)  with  fringes. The

1  gdon-drug-ch'an  'jig-byed  bdud-las  mam  rgyal.

2  According  to  the  rhyme :

rje-btsun  'jam  dbyaiis  k'ros-pa-ni
rdo-rje  'jigs  byed  'jjgs  par  byed,
k'ro-bor  rgyal-po  gdon  drug  c'an.

3  For  the  (80  or  84)  secondary  beauties,  cf.  Buknouf's  Lotus,  App.,  viii.,  Haedy's  Man.,
367,  Raj.  L.  Mitea's  Lalita  Vist.  For  description  of  Hindfi  Idols,  see  Briliat  Samhita,
translated  by  Dr.  Keen,  J.R.A.S.,vi.,  322.


Amitaytjs.
The  Buddha  of  Boundless  Life.

above  ornaments  are  accounted  thirteen.


334


PANTHEON, SAINTS;  AND  IMAGES.


The  hair  of  the  gods  is  dressed  up  into  a  high  cone  named  ral-pa'-t'or-
tshugs,  and  the  forehead  usually  bears  the  tilak  or  auspicious  mark.
The  goddesses  are  given  a  graceful  form  with  slender  waist  and  swelling
breasts,  and  their  hair  is  dressed  into  plaits  which  lie  on  the  hinder
part  of  the  neck,  and  they  beam  with  smiles.

The  "Angry"  type  (To^wo)  is  terrible  in  its  elaborate  ugliness,

with disproportion-
ately large head,i
scowling  brows,  and
cruel, callous eyes,
and usually  with a
third eye in the
centre of the fore-
head. ^ Z'a-lu  de-
scribes them  as  fat,
brawny-limbed, and
menacing in atti-
tude, standing or
half-seated  upon  some
animal,  their  lips  a-
gape,  showing  their
great canine,  fangs,
and  rolling  tongue ;
their wolfish eyes
are glaring, the
beards,  eyebrows,  and
hair are either
yellow,  red,  reddish-
yellow, or greyish-
yellow,  and  the  hair
is  erect,  with occa-
sionally a fringe  of
curls on the fore-
head, believed  by  some  to  represent  coiled  snakes. The  females,
as  in  the  annexed  figure,^  except  for  their  full  breasts  and  the
absence  of  beards,  do  not  differ  in  appearance  from  the  males.


The  She-devil  DEVI.
T.,  Lha-mo.


1  Cf.  ScHLAG.,5.,p.  222,  for  measurements  of  proportions  of  several  of  these  images.
z  Trilocana,  a  cliaracter  also  of  the  Hindu  Bhairava  and  Kali  and  their  demon  troop
of  followers,  the  gana.
'  After  Pander.


FIERCE  DEITIES  AND  POSTURES.


335


All  these  fiends  have  six  ornaments  of  human  bones,  namely:  (1)
ear  ornament,  (2)  necklet,  (3)  armlet,  (4)  bracelet,  (5)  anklet  (but  some
have  snake-bracelets  and  anklets),  and  (6)  a  garland  of  circular  bodies,
fixed  to  bone-heads  (seralkha),  and  corresponding  to  the  semodo.  of  the
Z'l-wa,  and  occasionally  they  have  a  doshal  garland.  The  foregoing
is  according  to  the  Indian  canon,  but  the  Tibetan  style  enumerates  for
them  thirteen  ornaments,  namely  :  (1 )  the  raw  hide  of  an  elephant,  as
an  upper  covering,  (2)  skins  of  human  corpses  as  a  lower  garment,  (3)
a  tiger  skin  inside  the  latter,  (4)  Brahma's  thread  (ts'an-skud),  (5  to  10)
the  six  bone  ornaments  above  noted,  (11)  Tilak  mark  on  forehead,  of
blood,  (12)  Grease  (Z'ag)  on  either  side  of  mouth,  and  (13)  ashes
smeared  over  body.

The  "Fiercest"  Fiends— (Z>TO^-po  and  Gon-po)  closely  re-
semble the  above  «  Angry  Deities."  Thpy  have  usually  chaplets
of  skulls  encircled  by
tongues  of  flames ;  and  they
tread  upon  writhing  victims
and  prostrate'  bodies.

As  regards  the  Pos^m res  of
the  images,:  the.  chief  sedent
postures,  and  especially  char-
acteristic of  the  several  forms
of  Buddha  himself,  and
secondarily  of  the  celestial
Buddhas  and  Bodhisats  are
as  follows : —

(1)  "The  adamantine,  un-
changeable, or  fixed  pose "
(Skt.,  Vajra  (?)  Pcdana^)  sedent
in  the  well-known  cross-legged
Buddha  posture.  The  legs  are
locked  firmly  and  the  soles
directed  fully  upwards.  This
is  the  pose  of  deepest  meditation,  hence  it  is  also  called,  when  the
hands  lie  loosely  in  the  lap,  the  "  Dhydna  or  meditative  mvdra."

(2)  "TheBodhisat-pose"  (^^t.,Satva  {V) palana'^)  differs  from  No.  1  in
having  the  legs  looser  and  unlocked.  The  soles  are  scarcely  seen.  This
is  the  pose  of  first  emergence  from  meditation.

(3)  "  The  sub-active  pose  "  (Skt.  (?)  Niyampalana) "  is  emerged  farther
from  meditation.  It  has  the  legs  unlocked,  the  left  being  quite  under
the  right,  and  the  soles  invisible.


Sakya  in  Meditation.


^  rdo-rje  skyil-drui'i.


oeniii-dpa  skyil  druh.


■*  Skyil  dkrun  chun  zad.


336


PANTHEON, SAINTS, AND IMAGES.


(4)  "The  Enclianter's  pose''  (Skt.,  Lcdita^),  i.e.,  after  the  manner  of
"  The  Enchanter  "  ManjusrT.  Here  the  right  leg  hangs  down  with  an
inchnation  slightly  inwards  and  the  left  is  loosely  bent.

(5)  Maitreya's  pose.^  Sedent  in  the  European  style  with  both  legs
pendant.

The  chief  attitudes  of  the  hands  and  fingers  {inudras^)  are  the
following,  and  most  are  illustrated  in  the  figures  :• —


The  Five  Celestial  Jinas  (oe  Buddhas).  ^

Amogha-siddhi.
Amitabha.  Vairocana.  Akshobhya.

Batna-sambhava.

1.  "Earth-touching,"' or the so-called  "Witness"  attitude (Skt.,
Bhusparsa' ),  with  reference to  the  episode  under  the  Tree  of  Wis-


'  I'ol-ba  bzugs.


'  byams  bzugs.


p'yag-rgya.


sa-gnon.


ATTITUDES  OF  HANDS.  337


dom,  when  Sakya  Muni  called  the  Earth  as  his  witness,  in  his  tempta-
tion by  Mara.  It  affects  only  the  right  hand,  which  is  pendant  with
the  knuckles  to  the  front.  It  is  the  commonest  of  all  the  forms  of  the
sedent  Buddha,  and  almost  the  only  form  found  in  Burma  and  Ceylon.
It  is  also  given  to  the  celestial  Buddha  Akshobhya,  as  seen  in  the
figure  on  the  preceding  page.

2.  "The  Impartial"  (Skt.,  Samafdtan}),  or  so-called  "meditative
posture  "  (Skt.,  Samddhi  ').  Resting  one  hand  over  the  other  in  the
lap  in  the  middle  line  of  the  body,  with  the  palms  upwards,  as  in
Amitabha  Buddha  (see  the  attached  figure).

3.  "The  best  Perfection"  (Skt.,  Uttara-hodhi'').  Index-finger  and
thumb  of  each  hand  are  joined  and  held  almost  in  contact  with  the
breast  at  the  level  of  the  heart,  as  in  the  celestial  Buddha  Vairocana
in  the  figure  on  the  opposite  page.

4.  "  Turning  the  Wheel  of  the  Law "  (Skt.,  Dharma-cakra  *").
Dogmatic  attitude  with  right  index-finger  turning  down  fingers  of
left  hand,  figured  at  page  134.

5.  "  The  best  Bestowing  "  (Skt.,  Varada  ').  It  signifies  charity.  The
arm  is  fully  extended,  and  the  hand  is  directed  downwards  with  the
outstretched  palm  to  the  front,  as  in  "  the  Jewel-born  "  Buddha  Ratna-
sambhava,  who  is  figured  on  the  opposite  page.

6.  "  The  Protecting,"  or  "  Refuge-giving  "  (Skt.,  Saran ").  With  arm
bent  and  palm  to  front,  and  pendant  with  fingers  directed  downwards,
as  in  No.  5.

7.  "  The  Ble-sing  of  Fearlessness  "  (Skt.  ?  Ahhaya).  The  arm  is
elevated  and  slightly  bent.  The  hand  elevated  with  the  palm  to  the
front,  and  the  fingers  directed  upwards,  as  in  Amogha-siddha  Buddha,
figured  over  page. It  is  also  the  pose  in  the  episode  of  the  mad  elephant.

8.  "  The  Preaching  " '  differs  from  JSTo.  7  in  having  the  thumb  bent,
and  when  the  thumb  touches  the  ring-finger  it  is  called  "  The
triangular  '*  (pose),  see  figure  on  page  5.

9.  "  The  Pointing  Finger."  "  A  necromantic  gesture  in  bewitching,
peculiar  to  later  Tantrism.

The  halo,  or  nimbus,  around  the  head  is  subelliptical,  and  never
acuminate  like  the  leaf  of  the  jpipal  or  Bodhi  tr6e  (Ficus
religiosa).  The  fierce  deities  have  their  halo  bordered  by  flames  (see
figure  page  330).  An  additional  halo  is  often  represented  as  sur-
rounding the  whole  body,  as  figured  at  pages  333  and  335.  This  con-
sists of  the  six  coloured  rays  of  light,  and  it  is  conventionally  repre-
sented by  wavy  gilt  lines  with  small  tremulous  lines  alternating.

Colour,  too,  is  frequently  an  index  to  the  mood. Thus,  white


1  mnam-bz'ag.  2  tin-ne  ?dsin.  •''  byan-chub-mch'og.

4  ch'os  'k'or-bskor.  »  mch'og-sbyin.  ^  skyab-sbyin.

'  ch'os  'c'ad.  *  pa-dan  rtse  gsum. °  sdigs-dsub.

Z


338


PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND IMAGES.


and  yellow  complexions  usually  typify  mild  moods,  while  the  red,
blue  and  black  belong  to  fierce  forms,  though  sometimes  light
blue,  as  indicating  the  sky,  means  merely  celestial.  Grenerally  the
gods  are  pictured  white,  goblins  red,  and  the  devils  black,  like  their
European  relative.

The  Buddhas  and  other  divinities,  as  well  as  the  superior
devils,  are  figured  upon  a  lotus-flower,  a  symbol  of  divinity.
The  lotus-flower,  on  which  the  Buddhas  and  mild  divinities  are
figured,  is  the  red  lotus  (Nelv/nbium  speciosuTn) ;  while  the  fiercer
divinities,  including  frequently  Avalokita,  and  aU  those  demons
who  are  entitled  to  lotus-cushions,  should  have  a  pinkish  variety
of  the  white  lotus  (NyTnphcea  esculenta),  the  petals  of  which  are
much  notched  or  divided,  so  as  to  resemble  somewhat  the
Acanthus  in  Corinthian  capitals.  The  blue  lotus  is  the  special
flower  of  Tara,  but  it  is  conventionally  represented  by  the  Lamas
as  different  from  the  Utpal  (Nymphcea  sp.),  as  figured  on  the  oppo-
site page.

A  remarkable  feature  of  most  Tantrik  Buddhist  images  is  the
frequent  presence  of  a  Buddha  seated  on  the  head  of  the  image

table  showing
The  Surmounting  JTNAS  in  Buddhist  Images.


JIKAS.

Vairocana.

Atshobhya.  "S

\ Batnasam-
* bhava.

Amitabha.

Amogha-
siddha.

Surmmmted
Buddhas.

Maitreya

Mnni-vajrasau

Amitayus

Maitreya

Stirmcntnted

?  Samanta-

Vajra-pani

Ratna-pan.i

Avalokita

Vieva-pani

BODHISATS.

bhadra

Manju-gHosha

Pita  Jambliala

Prajfiarpara-

(adhicakra)

Pita  Vaisra-

Taxa

mita

Jfianaaattva

(pita)

Maiijuari

Vasudhara

Vetuda-Marici

Sita

"  Kan-wa-

Mahasaliasran

Prajnarparamita

bbadra  "

Vijaya

Pita^Vijaya

Sita-TJshiiislia

Surmounted

KaJa-Yamari

Rakta-yakiha

Hayagriva

Kuru-kuUe

Ebodha.

Sasmuka-Tama

Krodha  Avalo-

Maha-

fimds.

Kala-Jambhala
Acala-Khroda

raja
Ri-kbra-loma-

gyon  mar
"  Hun  mdsad  "

Elkroda  raja
"  San-nags  rje

'dsin-ma  "
Maha-pratyan-

kita  Pita

Brikuti

(?.  .  .Kal-

pa)
Kuru-kuUe
' '  rTogs-pa  las-

junwa-

Kuru-

kuUa  "
*'gsilbatpal

Mayiui

gira

cb  en-mo  "

LOTUSES— SURMOUNTING  BUDDHAS.


339


or  amidst  the  hair.  The  existence  of  such  surmounting  images
in  the  Tantrik  Buddhist  sculptures  of  India  was  noted  by  Dr.
Buchanan-Hamilton  in  his  survey  of  Bihar  ^  at  the  beginning  of
this  century,  but  since  his  time  the  subject  has  attracted  only


Blue  Lotus.  White  Lotus.  Asok.

LOTUSES  and  other  flowers  of  conventional  form.

the  merest  incidental  notice  of  writers  on  Indian  Buddhist  an-
tiquities,^ who  seem  to  have  considered  all  such  images  to  be
figures  only  of  Avalokita,  because  Hiuen  Tsiang  mentioned  that  a
certain  image  of  Avalokita  had  Amitabha  seated  jn  his  hair.

As  the  subject  is  interesting,  and  of  some  importance,  I  give
in  the  table  the  results  of  my  study  of  a  large  series  of  Lamaist
pictures  containing  such  figures,  and  descriptions  of  others  ex-
tracted from  the  works  of  Pandits  "  gZ'onnu "  Gupta,  Sritari,
Kalamtara,  Lhan-skyes  rolwa-kun-rigs,  and  Bhavaskandha.

The  surmounting  image  represents  the  spiritual  father  of  the
particular  Bodhisat  or  deity ;  and  he  nearly  always  is  one  or  other
of  the  five  Jinas,  as  the  Tibetans  term  them,^  or  the  Buddhas
of  Meditation  (Bhydni-Buddha),  as  they  are  called  by  the
Nepalese  Buddhists.  In  a  few  cases  the  coming-Buddha  Maitreya
is  figured  with  Sakya  Muni  on  his  head,  as  indicating  spiritual
succession  rather  than  parental  relationship,  but  it  is  the  latter
which  is  the  rule.


1  Eastern  India,  i.

-  India  .irchaological  Survey  Septs.,  by  Sir  A.  Cunningham  ;  West  India  Arch.  S.
Repts.,  by  J.  Bukgess;  Catalogue  of  Archaolog.  Collection  in  Indian  Museum,  by  J.
Andebson.

3  rgyal-ba  rigs-lna — or  "  The  Pentad  Victors."  No  one  seems  to  have  noticed  this
constant  use  by  the  Lamas  of  the  word  Jina  for  the  celestial  Buddhas,  whom  the
Xepalese  t"""  riljyni-Kndrihi^,,  though  it  is  interesting  in  regard  to  Jainism  in  its
relations  to  Buddhism. \

z  2


«>


340


PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND  IMAGES.


Occasionally  the  surmounting  Jinas  are  represented  by  their
mystic  emblems  of  a  wheel,  vajra,  jewel,  lotus,  or  visva-vajra,  as
will  be  described  presently.  Thus  Eatnasambhava  is  usually
represented  by  a  jewel  on  the  head  of  his  spiritual  reflex  Jambhala,
the  god  of  wealth.  And  it  is  to  be  noted  that  when,  as  often
happens,  the  image  is  surrounded  by  figures  of  the  five  Jinas  in
an  arc  outside  the  halo,  then  its  own  special  surmounting  parent
occupies  the  central  position  in  that  arc,  whilst  the  others  are
placed  two  on  each  side  at  a  lower  level.


English  Name.

Tibetan.

Sanskrit.

1.

a  pike

K 'at  van

khatvanga

a  trident

K'a-  't  van-  rtse-gsum

trimla

2.

hand-drum

Da-ma-ru

damarv

3.

chisel-knife

Gri-gug

hartrika

4.

thunderbolt

rDo-rje

vajra

5.

cross-thunderholt

sNa-ts'ogs  rdo-rje

v^va-vajra

6.

rosary

Preri-ba

mfilcl

7.

Lotus-flower  (white  or

Pad-ma

red)

padma

blue  lotus  '■

Ut-pal

utpal

Agoka-flower '

Mya-nan-med  pahi-shin

asoka

' '  Naga's  tree  "  (cactus

ALu-shin

or  coral)  '■

ndga-tarii

8.

alarm-staft'

'K'ar-gail

hikile,  or  khakhara

begging-bowl

'Lun-bzed

patra

9.

wish-granting  gem

(Yid  bz'in)  Norbu

(cintd-)  maid

10.

flames

Me-ris,

11.

snare  ^

z'ags-p^
dril-bu

pasa

12.

bell

ghanta

13.

wheel

'K'or-lo

cakra

14.

skull-cup
thunderbolt-dagger

T'od-k'rag

kapala

15.

p'ur-bu

phnrbu  (?)

16.

spear
club

gDun

17.

Be-con

gada

18.

dirk  or  dagger

'Chu-gri

19.

sword

Eal-gri

adi

20.

axe

dGra-sta

parasu  (?)

21.

hammer

T'o-ba  mt'o-ba

mudgara

22.

iron-goad

IC'ags-kyu

23.

mace

Ben

24.

thigh-bone  trumpet

rKan-duii

25.

conch-shell  trumpet

Bun

^aiiklm

26.

iron -chain

IChags-sgrog

27.

skeleton-staff

dByug-pa

28.

See  No.  1  (a)

29.

water-pot

Bura-pa

kalasa

anointing  vase

sPyi-glugs

fly-whisk

rSa-yab

chauri

banner

rGj'al-mts'an

dlwajO'

1  See  figures  on  previous  page.

2  To  rescue  the  lost  or  to  bind  the  opponents.
Lakshmi.


A  symbol  of  Siva,  Varuua,  and


y^'


INSIGNIA.


341


The  objects  or  insignia  whicli  the  several  figures  hold  in  their
hands  refer  to  their  functions.  Thus,  Manjusri,  the  god  of
wisdom,  wields  the  sword  of  the  truth  in  dissipating  the  dark-
ness of  ignorance,  and  in  his  left  he  carries  the  book  of  Wisdom


INSISNIA  AND  WEAPONS  OF  THE  GODS,  ETC.

upon  a  Lotus-flower,  thus  symbolizing  its  supernatural  origin ;  and
he  rides  upon  a  roaring  lion  to  typify  the  powerfully  penetrating
voice  of  the  Law.


342  PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND  IMAGES.

The  chief  of  these  insignia  and  other  objects  held  in  the  hands
of  the  images  are  shown  in  the  foregoing  illustration  ^  and  are
as  follows ;  the  numbers  in  this  list  correspond  to  those  in  the
figures.

We  now  can  look  into  the  details  of  the  principal  members  of
the  pantheon.

The  vast  multitude  of  deities  forming  the  Lamaist  pantheon  is,
as  already  mentioned,  lar.gely  created  by  embodying  under  diflfer-
ent  names  the  different  aspects  of  a  relatively  small  number  of
divinities  with  changing  moods. Such expressed relationship,
however,  seems  occasionally  a  gratuitous  device  of  the  Lamas  in
order  to  bring  some  of  their  indigenous  Tibetan  deities  into  rela-
tionship with  the  earlier  and  more  orthodox  celestial  Bodhisats  of
Indian  Buddhism. But  the  various  forms  have  now  all  become
stereotyped,  and  even  a  trivial  difference  in  title  yields  a  different
form  of  image. Thus  the  images  of  "  Maitreya  "  and  "  Bhrikuti "
differ  much  from  those  of  "  Bhadraka  Maitreya  "  and  "  Arya  Bhri-
kuti." And  different  writers  differ  in  some  of  the  minor  details
in  their  description  of  some  of  these  stereotyped  forms. Thus  we
have  images  described  as  "  in  the  fashion  of  Nagarjuna,"  or  of  some
one  or  other  celebrated  Indian  monk  or  Lama.

First  in  our  classification  come  the  Buddhas,  human  and  celes-
tial.

I.  The  Buddhas.

The  innumerable  forms  of  the  Buddhas,  the  fabulous  terrestrial,
the  celestial  and  metaphysical,  are  all,  with  a  few  exceptions,  based
upon  the  five  conventional  attitudes  ascribed  to  the  historical
Buddha,  as  marking  the  chief  episodes  of  his  Buddhahood.  And
of  these  "  the  Witness  attitude ''  is  in  Tibet,  as  in  Indian  and
southern  Buddhism,  the  most  common.  Additional  varieties  are
obtained  by  giving  to  these  images  different  colours,  ornaments,
and  symbols.  Almost  all  are  sedent  in  the  well-known  cross-legged
attitude  of  Buddha's  image  ;  few  are  standing,  and  the  recumbent
or  dying  posture  is  very  rarely  seen  in  Tibet.

The  typical  Buddha  is  conventionally  represented  as  a  man  of


1  After  Pandee,  Panih.,  p.  108.


THE  BUDDHAS.  343


the  most  perfect  form  and  beauty.^  The  face,  usually  of  Aryan  type
and  unbearded,  wears  a  placid  and  benign  expression.  The  head
is  bare,  and  the  hair  roughly  tonsured  and  curly ,^  with  a  protu-
berance ^  on  the  crown  or  vertex  upon  which  is  sometimes  repre-
sented a  diadem/  He  is  clad  in  mendicant's  garb,  without  any
jewellery.  The  shawl  ^  usually  leaves  the  right  shoulder  bare,  ex-
cept when  representing  him  preaching  or  walking  abroad  in  public.
He  sits  under  the  pipa^-tree,  the  "  Tree  of  Wisdom,"  upon  a
cushion  of  lotus-flowers  set  upon  a  throne  covered  by  a  mat,^  sup-
ported by  lions  or  other  animals,  as  a  sort  of  heraldic  shield.  And
the  throne  is  sometimes  surmounted  by  a  framework  bearing  at
its  sides  the  figures  of  a  rampant  lion  trampling  upon  an  elephant,
and  surmounted  by  a  "  water-lion,"  ^  topped  by  a  garu^a-  bird  as
the  centre-piece  or  keystone  of  the  arch.
1.  ^dkya  Muni  Bhagavdn.

T.,  S'akya-t'ub-pa  bc'om-ldan  'das.

This  typical  form  of  the  Buddha  is  figured  as  at  page  6,  but
the  right  hand  should  be  in  the  pose  of  Akshobhya  at  page  336.  It
represents  Sakya  Muni  at  the  greatest  epoch  of  his  Hfe,  namely,
under  the  "  Tree  of  Wisdom,"  at  the  instant  of  his  attaining  his
Buddhahood.  He  has  the  general  characters  of  a  Buddha  as
already  described.  He  has  a  golden  complexion,  with  tonsured
indigo-coloured  hair,  and  wears  the  three  robes  of  a  religious
mendicant,  without  any  ornaments.  He  sits  in  "  the  indestructible  "
pose,  with  right  hand  in  "  witness  attitude,"  and  sometimes  a
begging-bowl  rests  on  his  lap. He  is  seated  upon  a  cushion  of


'  Possessing  "  the  thirty  beauties"  and  "the  eighty  secondary  beauties."  These
include  a  lotus  mark  on  each  palm  and  sole.

2  The  ragged  contour  of  Sakya's  cropped  hair  in  his  images  is  ascribed  to  his  having
on  his  great  renunciation  cut  off  his  tresses  with  his  sword.  The  cut  locks  of  hair
were  carried  to  heaven,  where  the  gods  enshrined  them  in  "  the  tomb  of  the  Jewelled
Tresses"  {Gvdamani  Gaitya),  which  is  still  a  regular  object  of  worship  with  Burmese
Buddhists.

3  Skt.,  Ushnlsha  ;  Tib.,  Tsug-tor.

4  Skt.,  Cuia.  The  peculiar  flame-like  process  intended  to  represent  a  halo  of
rays  of  light  issuing  from  the  crown,  so  common  in  Ceylon  images,  is  not  distinctly
represented  by  the  Tibetans,  and  at  most  by  a  jewel.

5  Tib.,  Zagoi.  ^  Tib.,  Ten-iab

'  Described  by  Hiuen  Tsiang,  Beal's  translation  of  Si-Fu-Ki,  ii.,  p.  122.


344  PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND  IMAGES.

sacrificial  grass,'  set  upon  a  lioa-supported  lotus-throne  at  the
spot  at  Buddh-Graya,  in  Gangetic  India,  afterwards  called  "  the
adamantine  throne."  ^  In  this,  his  final  struggle  for  the  Truth,
the  powers  of  darkness  which  assailed  him  are  concretely  repre-
sented as  Mara,  the  demon  of  Desire,  and  his  minions,  and  the
"  three  fires  "  of  desire  are  still  pictured  as  being  above  him.

Mara  denies  the  good  deeds  in  this  and  former  lives,  which
qualified  Sakya  Muni  for  the  Baddhahood,  and  calls  upon  him  to
produce  his  witness.  Whereupon  the  embryo  Buddha  touches
the  ground  and  instantly  the  old  mother  Earth,  Dharitri  or  Dharti
Mata,^  appears  riding  upon  a  tortoise  (symbolic  of  the  earthy,
bearing  in  her  hand  a  "pantsa"  garland,  and  she  addresses  the  saint,
saying,  "I  am  your  Witness," — hence  the  name  of  this  attitude  of
Buddha,  the  "Earth-touching  "  or  "  Witness."  The  legend  goes  on
to  relate  that  the  earth-spirit,  wringing  her  hair,  caused  a  huge
river  to  issue  therefrom,  which  swept-  away  Mara  and  his  hordes.
This  episode  of  wringing  the  hair  and  the  destruction  of  Mara  and
his  minions  is  frequently  depicted  in  Burmese  temples ;  and  the
custom  amongst  the  Burmese  of  pouring  water  on  the  ground  at
the  conclusion  of  a  religious  service  is,  I  am  informed  by  a
Burmese  monk,  an  appeal  to  the  earth-spirit  to  remember  and
bear  witness  to  the  particular  good  deed  when  men  have  forgotten
it.

In  the  larger  images  of  this  form  of  Buddha  he  is  frequently
figured  with  his  two  favourite  disciples  standing  by  his  side,  Sari-
putra  on  his  right,  and  Maudgalyayana  on  his  left.

This  title  of  Bhagavdn,  or  "  The  Victorious,"  *  is  in  Tibet  the
most  frequently  used  of  all  Buddha's  titles,  after  Sakya  Muni  and
Tathagata.

Other  recognized  forms  of  Sakya's  image  are  : —

(a)  Sakya  in  the  four  other  sedent  attitudes,  and  the  standing  and
dying,  or  the  so-called  "  lion  "-postures.

(6)  Jo-wo  Rin-po-che,  "  The  Precious  Lord,"  as  a  young  Indian
prince  of  sixteen.

(c) Vajrasan  Muni  (T'ub-pa  rdo-rje  gdan  tso-'k'or-gsum).


1  Kusa  {poa  cynomroides).

2  Vajrasana  (T.,  rdo-rje-gdan,  pron.  Dorje-dto).

3  Cf.  Taylor's  Primitive  Gxdture,  i.,  326  ;  ii.,  270.

-  Le  bien-heureux  (Burn.,  i.,  71 ;  and  Jaesch.,  D.,  147).


MYTHIC  HUMAN  BUDDHA8.  345

(d)  T'ub-pa  dam-ts'ig  gsum-bkod  (Pand.,  No.  86).

(e)  Bhagavan  ekajata  (Osoma's  An.,  p.  591).

if)  Buddha-kapala  (Sahs-rgyas  t'od-pa  :  Pajid.,  No.  69) — a  very  de-
moniacal form.

And  here  also  seem  to  come  the  mythological  series  of  "  The
Six  Muni,"  the  presidents  of  the  six  worlds  of  re-birth — see  "Wheel
of  Life."  These  appear  to  be  identical  with  "  The  Six  Jiz6  "  of
the  Japanese,  though  the  "Jizd"  are  usually  alleged  to  be  forms
of  Kshitigarbha.  Here  also  should  probably  come  "  The  King
of  the  powerful  Nagas "  ^  which  "seems  to  represent  Buddha
defended  by  the  Ndga  Muchilinda,  who  seems  to  be  a  historic
person,  a  helot  (that  is  Naga)  villager  of  Muchilinda,  a  hamlet
which  adjoins  Buddh-Gaya.

2.  The  Seven  Heroic  Buddhas  (of  the  Fast)  ^  or  Tathdgatas.^

This  is  a  fabulous  arrangement  of  human  Buddhas,  for  none
of  them  are  historical  except  the  last,  to  wit,  Sakya  Muni.  Yet
it  was  of  early  origin,  as  this  series  of  images,  and  each  of  the
number  with  his  special  tree  of  wisdom,  is  found  in  the  Stupa
of  Barhut,  which  is  assigned  to  about  150  B.C.,  and  they  are  also
enumerated  in  the  southern  scripture,  the  Digha-nikdya.

In  keeping  with  their  imaginary  character,  all  are  given  the  most
extravagant  size  and  duration  of  earthly  life.*

Their  number  is  sometimes  extended  to  nine.  The  most  cele-
brated of  the  antecedent  Buddhas  is  Dipamkara  (Tib.,  Mar-me-
mdsad),  "  The  Luminous."  This  imaginary  Buddha  is  considered
by  some  of  the  Lamas  to  be  the  first  of  the  series  of  the  seven
earthly  Buddhas  preceding  Sakya  Muni,  but  by  the  Ceylonese  he
is  placed  as  the  twenty-fourth  predecessor.^  He  is  represented  as
the  first  teacher  of  Sakya  in  one  of  the  former  births  of  the  latter,
and  a  favourite  Jataka-tale  frequent  in  the  Grandhara  sculptures  in
the  British  Museum,  and  as  a  current  picture  in  Burmah  shows


1  kLu-dban-gi-rgyal-po;  Skt.,  Nagesvara  raja. — His  face  is  white  and  his  body  blue ;
he  is  sitting  in  rdo-rje  skyil-krun.  Symb. — His  two  hands  are  in  the  mudra  of  rian-
'gre-las-'don-par-mdsad-pa  (or  causing  the  animal  beings  to  be  delivered  from  misery)
and  are  held  over  the  heart.  He  has  no  ornaments.  Behind  him  is  a  screen  and
flower  and  a  seven-hooded  snake  canopy. Cf.  Pandee,  p.  71.

2  Sans-rgyas  dpah-bohiduns.  ^  De-bz'in  gs'egs-pa.
»  Cf.  Cs.,  An. ;  Turner,  J.A.S.B.,  viii.,  789 ;  Habdy's  Man.,  94.

5  The  Nepalese  place  him  as  the  ninth  predecessor  of  the  historical  Buddha  (Hodgs.,
/.,  p.  135).  Cf.  Hoffmann  in  Siebold's  Nippon  Pantheon,  v.,  77.  "  The  Twenty-fotjr
Buddhas  "  are  Dipamkara,  Kaundinya,  Mangala,  Sumanas,  Eaivata,  Sobhita,  (?)  Ana-


346  PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND  IMAGES.

the  self-sacrifice  of  the  embryo  Sakya  Muni  in  throwing  himself
over  a  puddle  to  form  a  stepping-stone  for  the  Buddha  Dipaihkara
(Sumedh?) — suggestive  of  Sir  "W.  Raleigh's  gallantry  to  Queen
Elizabeth  under  somewhat  similar  circumstances.

I^ipaihkara's  image,  which  is  figured  in  the  Vajracedika,^  is
frequently  perforated  by  innumerable  sockets,  into  which  small
lamps  are  set.  This  practice  is  evidently  suggfestied  by  the
concrete  rendering  of  his  name  as  "  the  burning  lamp."

The  Seven  Buddhas  are  usually  enumerated  as: —

1 .  Vipasyin (T. ,  rNam-gzigs) ;  hands  "earth-touching "  and ' ' impartial. "

2.  Sikhiu  (T.,  gTsug-gtor-c'an) ;  hands  "  best-bestowing  "  and  "  im-
partial."

3.  Visvabhu  (T.,  T'am-ch'ad-skyob) ;  hands  "  meditative."

4.  Krakucandra  (T.,  K'hor-wahjigs) ;  hands  "  protecting"  and  "im-
partial."

5.  Kanaka-muni  (T.,  gSer-t'ub) ;  hands  "preaching"  and  "im-
partial."

6.  Kasyapa  (T.,  'Od-sruns)  has  his  right  hand  in  "  best  bestowing  "  ;
and  the  left  holds  a  piece  of  his  robe  resembling  an  animal's  ear  (see
figure  on  page  5).  Each  is  dressed  in  the  three  religious  garments,  and
sits  in  the  "  unchangeable  or  adamantine  "  pose,  or  stands.

7.  Sakya  Muni  (T.,  S'akya  t'ub-pa)  in  "the  preaching  attitude."

"  The  Three  Holy  Ones  "  are  seldom,  if  ever,  concretely  represented
in  Tibefe  by  Buddha,  Dharma,  and  Sangha ;  nor  have  I  found  such
a  triad  figured  in  Indian  Buddhism,  though  many  writers  have
alleged  the  existence  of  them,  without,  however,  bringing  forward
any  proofs.  A  triad  of  large  images  often  occupies  the  centre  of
the  Lamaist  altar,  the  central  one  being  usually  the  founder  of  the
particular  sect  to  which  the  temple  belongs,  and  the  other  two
varying  with  the  whim  of  the  local  Lama.

THE CELESTIAL BUDDHAS.

The  ideal  origin  of  the  celestial  Buddhas  has  already  been
referred  to  in  the  chapter  on  doctrine.  The  five  celestial  Bud-
dhas were  invented  in  the  earlier  theistic  stage  of  Buddhism.

The  first  of  the  series  seems  to  have  been  Amitabha,  or  "the
Boundless  Light,"  a  title  somewhat  analogous  to  the  name  of  the
oldest  of  the  mythical  human  Buddhas,  "  the  Luminous  "  (Dipam-
kara). This  metaphysical  creation  first  appears  in  works  about  the

vama-darsin,  Padma,  Narada,  Padmottara,  Sumedlias,  Sujata,  Priya-darsin,  Artha-
darsin, Dharma-darsin, Siddliarta, Tishya, Pushya, Vipasyin, Sikhin,  Visvabhu,
Krakucandra,  Kanaka-muni  (or  Konagamana),  and  Kasyapa.
1  CsoMA,  An.


CELESTIAL  BUBDHAS.  347

beginning  of  our  era,  and  seems  to  embody  a  sun-myth  and  to
sbow  Persian  influence.  For  he  was  given  a  paradise  in  the  west,
to  which  all  the  suns  hasten,  and  his  myth  seems  to  have  arisen
among  the  northern  Buddhists  when  under  the  patronage  of
Indo-Scythian  converts  belonging  to  a  race  of  sun-worshippers.
Indeed,  he  is  believed  by  Eitel  and  others  to  be  a  form  of  the
Persian  sun-god ;  and  he  was  made  the  spiritual  father  of  the
historical  Buddha.

Afterwards  he  was  quintupled,  apparently  to  adapt  him  to  the
theory  of  the  five  earthly  Buddhas,  the  coming  one  and  the  four
of  the  past,  as  well  as  to  the  other  mystical  groups  of  five — the  five
senses,  the  five  skandhas,  the  five  virtues,  five  cardinal  points
where  the  centre  makes  the  fifth.  And  each  one  of  these  five
celestial  Buddhas  was  made  to  preside  over  a  particular  direction,  as
already  detailed.  Images  of  this  series  of  Buddhas  are  found
amongst  the  lithic  remains  of  India  about  the  seventh  century
A.D.,  if  not  earlier.

In  the  more  developed  theory,  tending  towards  nionotheism,  a
First  Great  Cause,  under  the  title  of  the  primordial  or  Adi-Buddha,
is  placed  above  these  five  celestial  Buddhas  as  their  spiritual
father  and  creator.  And  to  this  rank  was  promoted  the  first  and
central  one  of  the  metaphysical  Buddhas,  namely,  Vairocana,  "  The
Omni-present "  or  his  reflex  Samantabhadra,  "  The  All  Good."

These  three  series  of  Buddhas  are  arranged  according  to  the
mystical  theory  of  the  three  bodies  of  Buddha  (Tri  kdya) ;  ^
namely,  (a)  the  Dharma-kdya,  or  law-body,  which  has  been
termed  "  essential  wisdom.  (Bodhi) ''  and  is  self-existent  and  ever-
lasting, and  represented  by  Adi-Buddha,  (6)  Sambhoga-kdya  or
adorned  body,  or  reflected  wisdom,  represented  by  the  celestial
Jinas,  and  (c)  Nirmd/^a-kdya,  or  changeable  body,  or  practical
wisdom  represented  by  Sakya  Muni  and  the  other  human
Buddhas.  Though  in  a  more  mystic  sense  Sakya  Muni  is  con-
sidered to  be  an  incarnate  aggregate  of  the  reflected  wisdom  of
all  the  five  celestial  Jinas.

But  these  five  celestial  Jinas  were  latterly  held  to  unite  also  within
themselves  both  the  forms  of  metaphysical  bodies,  both  the  Dharma-
kaya  and  the  Sambhoga-kaya.  Hence  arose  two  series  of  their
images.

1  Cf.  HoDGS.,-Bs«.,  27,58,64;  Koppen,  ii.,  25  ;  Schlag.,  51,210;  Eitel,  fiiro^ift., passim.


348  PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND IMAGES.

The  original  series  of  these  images  of  the  strictly  ascetic
Buddha-type  was  by  a  materializing  of  the  word  called  the  religiotis
(ascetic)  or  Dhar'ma  type — and  such  images  may  or  may  not
hold  begging-bowls;  while  the  other  is  literally  represented  as
"adorned  bodies"  (Sambhoga-kaya)  in  the  same  postures  as  the
foregoing,  but  adorned  with  silks  and  jewels,  and  wearing  crowns,
like  kingly  Bodhisats.  In  this  latter  series,  "  the  five  Jinas  "  bear
individually  the  same  names  as  their  prototypes,  except  the
second  and  fourth,  who  are  named  respectively  Vajrasattva  (or
"the  indestructible  or  adamantine-souled")  and  Amitdyus,  or
"the  boundless  life,"  instead  of  Akshobkya,  "the  immovable,"
and  Amitdbha,  "  the  boundless  light."  These  alternative  names,
however,  it  will  be  seen,  empress  very  similar  and  almost  synony-
mous ideas.

Side  by  side  with  these  developments  arose  the  theory  of  celestial
Bodhisat  sons.  The  celestial  Jinas  absorbed  in  meditation  in
heaven  could  hold  no  contact  with  the  sordid  earth,  so  as  agents  for
the  salvation  and  protection  of  mortal  men  and  animals  they  evolved
sons,  who,  though  celestial,  were  given  active  functions  on  the  earth.

As  in  the  other  developments,  this  new  theory  first  and  most
firmly  attached  to  those  creations  most  intimately  associated  with
the  historical  Buddha.  His  celestial  father,  Amitabha,  evolved  the
celestial  Bodhisat  Avalokita  or  Padma-pani,  who  still  remains  the
most  popular  of  all  the  celestial  Bodhisats.

But  the  popular  craving  for  creative  functions  in  their  gods  led,
in  the  Tantrik  stage,  to  the  allotment  of  female  energies  to  these
celestial  Bodhisats.  Thus  Tara,  the  goddess  of  Mercy,  was  given  to
Avalokita.  And  the  extreme  Tantrik  development  under  the  Kala-
cakra  system  ^  awarded  female  energies  also  to  each  of  the  celestial
Buddhas,  and  even  to  the  primordial  Adi-Buddha  himself.

Thus  we  have  celestial  Buddhas  and  Bodhisats  and  their  female
energies.  Of  the  celestial  Buddhas  there  are  the  following  series :
— (1)  The  primordial  Buddha-god,  or  3.di-Buddha.  (2)  The
five  celestial  Victors  (Jina).  (3)  The  adorned  forms  of  these
latter,  like  kingly  Bodhisats.  (4)  The  Tantrik  forms  with  ener-
gies, mostly  demoniacal  Buddhas.  And  from  several  of  these  were
latterly  evolved  other  forms  with  special  attributes ;  also  medical
and  other  Buddhas.

1  In  its  Anuttara-yoga  section.


CELESTIAL  BUDDHAS.  349

The  Primordial  Buddha-God.  ^

As  found  in  Lamaism,  he  is  most  actively  worshipped  by  the  old
or  unre formed  school,  under  the  title  of  "  The  all-good  religious
body."

Skt.,  Bharma-Tcaya  Sarnantabhadra  ;  Tib.,  Kun-tu  bzan-po.

He  is  figured  of  a  blue  colour,  and  often  naked,  sitting  in
Buddha  fashion,  with  his  hands  in  the  meditative  pose.

The  established  Lamaist  church  gives  somewhat  similar  func-
tions to  Vajradhara,  whom,  however,  they  regard  as  a  sort  of  celes-
tial offshoot  of  Sakya  Muni;  while  others  of  the  semi-reformed
sects  seem,  like  the  Nepalese,  to  credit  Vajrasattva  with  supreme
power  as  the  primordial  Buddha-god.

The,  Five  Celestial  Victors  or  Jina.

Skt.,  Pancajati  Jina  :  T.,  rgyal-ba  rigs-lha.

These  are  figured  on  page  336  ^ ;  and  for  the  sake  of  clearness
and  convenience  of  reference,  I  have  tabulated  (see  following
page)  the  objective  characters  and  relationships  of  these  divinities.
All  the  forms  sit  in  the  same  Buddha-like  attitude,^  but  the  pose
of  the  hands  is  characteristic.

The  technical  description  of  their  attitudes  and  colour  is  as
follows  : —

Akshobhya  (T.,  Mi-skyod-pa),  blue  in  colour,  has  his  right  hand  in
"  witness  "  attitude  and  left  in  "  impartial."

Vairocana  (T.,  rNam-snan),  white  with  hands  in  "best  perfection"
attitude.

Batnasambhava  (T.,  Rin-'byuii),  yellow,  has  his  right  hand  in
"  bestowing  "  attitude,  and  left  in  "  impartial."

Amitabha  (T.,  'Od-pag-med),  red,  in  "  meditative  "  (Tiii-he-'dsin)  atti-
tude.

Amogha-siddhi  (T.,  Don-yod-^rrub-pa),  green,  has  his  right  hand  in
"  protecting  "  (skyabs-sbyin)  attitude,  and  left  in  "  impartial."

Each  sits  in  the  indestructible  or  "  adamantine "  pose,  and  differs
only  from  the  images  of  the  human  Buddha  in  having  no  begging-bowl
in  the  lap.

In  another  and  more  common  series,  each  is  adorned  with  silks  and
jewels  like  a  kingly  Bodhisat,  see  page  333.

Other  Celestial  Tdntrik  Jinas.
Another  series  of  celestial  Buddhas  was  formed  by  adorning  the
five  Jinas  with  a  crown,  silks,  and  jewels,  like  a  kingly  Bodhisat,


1  t'og-mahi  Sans-rgyas.  ^  Conf.  also  Hodgson's  figures  from  Nepal  in  Asiatie

Researches,  xvi.  ^  i.e.,  Vajra-palanga. See  p.  335.


The  Objec
The  Five  CELEST


Colour.

Direction

Mode  of  holding

Animal  as
ThroTip

(These  seem
colours  of

Sjml

where

Names  of  the  Jinas.

hands.

J,  lli  UIIC-

Support.
{Vahan.)

the  five

Objec

located.i

(Mndra.)

elements —
not  the

Insig

quarters.)

Central.

Vairocana

"  Teaching,"  or,

Lion.

White

Wh

(rNam-par  «nan-

' '  Turning  the

=  space.

Cm

TOdsad).

WlieeloftheLaw."
Dharma-cakra. '

East.

Akshobhya

"Witness," —

Elephant."

Blue

Thun

{Mi-6skyod-pa).

"touching  the

ground."
Shufparsa.

=  air.

bo

Vaj

South.

Batnasambhava

"  Bestowing."

Horse.

Golden-

Jew

(Rin-ch'en'  byun-

Vara.

yellow

Rat

gaas).

=  earth.

West.

Amitdbha

"Meditative."

Peacock.

Red

RedL

(iNan-ba  mthaA-

Dhyana.

=  light.

Bal

yas,  or,  'Oi^-rfpag-

pad

med).

North.

Amogha-siddhi

"Blessing  of  Fear-

" Shang-
shang.

Green

Cro

(Don-yod-'f/rub-pa).

lessness.  "

=  water.

Thui

Abhaya.

a  winged
dwarf.

=  ?Kin-
nara.

bo

vaj

N.B. — The  Sanskrit  names  are  in  italics  and  the  Tibetan  equivalents  in  brack
1  In  magic-circles,  however,  the  special  form  of  the  celestial  Buddha  to  whicj
'  This  symbol  is  represented  on  the  special  Tantrik  vajra,  and  bell  of  each  of  1
'  This  refers  to  the  witness  episode  of  Mara's  temptation,  see  page  344.
^  Being  in  the  teaching  attitude,  Vairocana  Buddha  is  held  to  be  the  Buddha
''  He  is  usually  made  an  emanation  from  all  of  the  celestial  Jinas.


8ACTEKS OF

)DHAS  OE  JINAS.


Ltial  or
ferm"
>ell.
wo.)


"  Adorned"

Active  Keflex.

{Sambhogakayd.)


Female  Reflex  (P
Sanghd-prajnam
naya)  or  Energy.


Bodhisat Reflex,  or Earthly  Reflex,  afe
Spiritual  Sons.  Buddha.

iJinaputra,)  {Manvshi  Buddha.)


)M.


Vairoeana  2nd.


ItJM. l! Vajra-sattva

({•Do-j-je-sems-dpa).


AM  (or

IBAM).


f.


Batnasambhava
2nd


Amitayus
(Tse-rfpag-med).


A  mogha-siddhi
2nd.


Vajradhatisvari

{nam-mkah-
d6yids-p'ug-me).


Locana.


Mamakl.


?  Pandard  or  Sita
(gos-dKar-mo).


. . . Tara

(dam-ts'ig-sgroZ-

ma).


SamantabJmdra
(Kuntu-zan-po).


Vajrapani
(p'yag-rdo'r).


(p'ag-rin-ch'en).


A  valokita — the
common  title  of

Padma-pavi
(sbyan  ra«-zig«).


Vifvapdni
(p'ag  na-ts'og).


Krakucandra
{'K'or-ba-'jig*).


Kanaka  Muni
(^ser-t'ub).


Kd^yapa
('Od-sruns).


Sakya  Muni
(S'akya-t'ub-pa).'


(Byam-pa).


fflala  is  addressed  occupies  the  centre.

S  and  the  colour  of  the  vajra  and  bell  are  the  same  as  that  of  the  Jina  they  symbolize.


jially  personifies  Wisdom.


352  PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND  IMAGES.

of  "  the  mild  deity  "  type.  Of  these  the  best  known  are  Amitayus,
Vajradhara,  and  Vajrasattva.

"  The  Buddha  of  Infinite  or  Eternal  Life,"  Skt.,  Amitayus
or  Aparimitdyus ;  Tib.,  Ts'e-c^pag-med.  He  is,  as  figured  at
pages  329  and  333,  of  the  same  form  as  his  prototype  Amitabha
Buddha,  but  he  is  adorned  with  the  thirteen  ornaments,  and  he
holds  on  his  lap  the  vase  of  life-giving  ambrosia.

Other  forms  of  Amitayus  are  the  four-handed  white  A.,  the  red
A.,  the  King  A.,  Tantracarya  A.,  and  Ras-ch'un's  A.

The  following  two  divinities,  esoteric  so-called,  are  accorded  by
the  Lamas  the  position  of  Buddhas,  though  they  are  Bodhisat-
reflexes  from  or  metamorphoses  of  Akshobhya,  and  they  both
resemble  in  many  ways  their  relative  and  probable  prototype
Vajrapani : —

"The  Adamantine  or  Indestructible-souled."  (Skt.,-  Vajrasattva;
T.,  rDor-je  dSems-pa),  The  Everlasting.

"  The  Indestructible  or  Steadfast  holder."  Skt.,  Vajradhara  ;
T.,  rDorje  'Ch'an). '

He  is  figured  at  page  61,  and  holds  a  vajra  and  a  bell.  In  the
exoteric  cults  he  is  called  "  the  concealed  lord  "  {Guhya-pati,  T.,  San-
bahi'dag-po).  He  is  a  metamorphosis  of  Indra,  and,  like  him,  presides
over  the  eastern  quarter,  and  he  seems  the  prototype  of  most  of  those
creatures  which  may  be  called  demon-Buddhas.  And  though,  as
above  noted,  the  established  church  regards  this  Buddha  as  a  reflex
from  Sakya  Muni  himself,  it  also  views  him  as  the  presiding  celestial
Buddha,  analogous  to  the  Adi-Buddha  of  the  old  school.^

Some  Tantrik  forms  of  Amogha-siddha,  etc.,  are  :—
Don-yod  z'ags-pa  (P.4.,  96).

„ z'ags-pa  sna-ts'ogs  cZ6an-po.

„ Ic'ags-kyu.

,, mch'od-pa'i  hor-bu.

Other  forms  of  celestial  Buddhas  and  Bodhisats  are  : —
)'Do-rje  mi-k'rugs-pa  (Pa.,  No.  87).
Vajradhatu  : j-dor-c^byins  (Pa.,  No.  77).
rNam-snaii  miion-byah  (Pa.,  No.  83).
Vajragarbha  Jina  :  rG-yal-ba  rDo-rje  suiii-po.

„ rin-c'hen-'od-'p'ro.
Surasena  Jina  :  r6yal-ba  cZpa'bo'i-sde,  etc.,  etc.
(See  Pa.,  p.  71  for  about  thirty  more),  and  of.  Butsi.i  dzo-dmi,  p.  62,  for
"the  Secret  Buddhas  of  the  30  days."

1  Cf .  ScHL.,  50  ;  KiippEN,  ii,,  28, 367  ;  Hodgs.,  27, 46,  77,  83 ;  Schief.  ,  Tdra. ,  300  ;  Pand.,
No.  56.


MEDICAL BUDDHAS.  353

Demoniacal  Buddhas.
The  later  Tantrik  forms  include  many  demoniacal  Buddhas : —

Ouhya-Kala  (T.,  gSan-'dus).

Buddha  Kapala,  Saiis-rgyas  t'od-pa  (Pand.,  No.  69).

Vajrasana-mula,  j-Do-rje  grdan-Jzhi  (Pand.,  No.  70),  etc.

The  special  relationships  of  the  Buddhas  to  certain  fiends  is  seen
in  the  foregoing  table  of  surmounting  Jinas.

The  Thirty-five  Buddhas  of  Confession.

These  imaginary  Buddhas  or  Tathagatas  are  invoked  in  the  so-
called  Confession  of  Sins.i  Their  images  are  evolved  by  giving
different  colours  to  the  Buddhas  in  the  five  elementary  sedent
attitudes.  And  they,  together  with  "the  thousand  Buddhas,"^
may  be  considered  as  concrete  representations  of  the  titles  of  the
historical  human  Buddha.

The  Highest  Healers  and  Medical  Tathagatas.
T.,  sMan-bla-bde-gs'egs  brgynd.

This  is  a  very  popular  form  of  Buddha  as  "The  supreme
physician,"  or  Buddhist  J5sculapius,  and  is  probably  founded  upon
the  legend  of  the  metaphysical  Bodhisat,  "  The  medicine-king  "
(Bhaisajyaraja),  who  figures  prominently  in  several  of  the
northern  scriptures  as  the  dispenser  of  spiritual  medicine.  The
images  are  worshipped  almost  as  fetishes,  and  cure  by  sympathetic
magic.  The  first  of  the  series,  namely,  the  beryl,  or  Bediiriya
Buddha,  is  also  extremely  popular  in  Japan  under  the  title  of
"The  lord  Binzuru"  (Binzura  Sama),  a  corruption  evidently,  it
seems  to  me,  of  the  Indian  word  "  Bediiriya,"  although  the  Japan-
ese themselves'  believe  it  to  be  derived  from  Bharadhvaja,  one  of
the  sixteen  Arhats.

These  ^sculapic  Buddhas  are  much  worshipped  in  Tibet,  in
ritual  by  pictures,  seldom  by  images  as  in  Japan,  where,  as  the
latter  are  so  much  consulted  by  the  people,  and  also  doubtless
owing  to  their  essentially  un-Buddhist  character,  they  are  usually


1  Dig-pa  t'am-c'ad  s'ag-par  ter-ohoi,  details  in  Schlag.,  p. 12-3 seg. It  is  not  to
be  confused  with  the  section  of  the  Pratimoksha,  properly  so  called.

2  See  list  of  Buddha's  thousand  names  by  Prof.  Schmidt,  B.  Ac,  St.  Petersbg.

3  Banyio  Nanjio,  Chambeelain's  Handhoolc  to  Japan.

A  A


354  PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND  IMAGES.

placed  outside  the  central  shrine.  The  supplicant,  after  bowing
and  praying,  rubs  his  finger  over  the  eye,  ear,  knee,  or  the  particu-
lar part  of  the  image  corresponding  to  the  patient's  own  affected
spot,  and  then  applies  the  finger  carrying  this  hallowed  touch  to
the  afflicted  spot.  The  constant  friction  and  rubbing  of  this  rude
worship  is  rather  detrimental  to  the  features  of  the  god.

This  group  of  medical  Buddhas  is  figured  in  Schlagintweit's
atlas,  but  erroneously  under  the  title  of  "  Maitreya." They  are  :  —

.  1.  Saxis-rgyas  sman-gyi  61a  Bedtirya'i  'Od-Kyi  rgyal-po,  or,  "  King  of
beryl-light,  the  supreme  physician  Buddha."  Like  all  of  the  series,  he
is  of  Buddha-like  form,  garb,  and  sedent  attitude.  He  is  indigo-
coloured  ;  his  right  hand  is  in  mch'og-sbyin  pose,  and  in  his  palm  he
holds  the  golden  Arura  fruit  (myrobalans).  His  left  hand  is  in  mnam-
ftz'ag  pose,  and  holds  a  begging-bowl  of  Bai-dur-ya  (beryl-stone).  Cf.
Butsu  Yakushi  in  Butsu-dzo-dsui,  p.  26 ;  Schp.,  Leben,  84;  Band.,  No.  142.

2.  Milsron-??2k'yen-rgyal-po  is  red  in  colour,  with  hands  in  mch'og-
sbyin  and  miiam-bz'ag  pose. Cf.  Pan^d.,  No.  141.

3.  Ch'os-sgrag«-?-gya-mts'o'i-£^byans  is  red  in  colour,  with  hands  in
mch'og-sbyin  and  mnam-ftz'ag  pose. Cf.  Band.,  No.  140.

4.  Mya-nan-med-mch'og-cZpal  is  light  red  in  colour,  with  both  hands
in  mnam-6z'ag  pose. Of.  Band.,  No.  139.

5.  5fSer-6zan-dri-med  is  yellowish- white  in  colour,  with  right  hand  in
ch'os-'ch'ad  mudra,  and  his  left  in  mnam-5z'ag  pose. Of.  Pajjd.,  No.  138.

6.  Ein-ch'en-zla-wa (or  sgra-dbyans) is  yellow-red in colour; his
right  hand  is  in  ch'os-'ch'ad,  and  his  left  in  mrLam-Jz'ag  pose. Of Band
No.  137.

7.  mtsh'an-legs  yons-grags  dpal  is  yellow  in  colour.  His  right  hand
is  in  ch'os-'ch'ad,  and  his  left  in  mnam-6z'ag  pose. Of.  Band.,  No.  136.

And  in  the  centre  of  the  group  is  placed,  as  the  eighth,  the  image
of  Sakya  Muni.

In  this  relation  it  is  rather  curious  to  note  that  some  cele-
brated Europeans  have  come  to  be  regarded  as  Buddhas.  "The
common  dinner-plates  of  the  Tibetans,  when  they  use  any,  are  of
tin,  stamped  in  the  centre  with  an  effigy  of  some  European  ce-
lebrity. In  those  which  I  examined  I  recognized  the  third  IN^apo-
leon,  the  Prince  and  Princess  of  Wales,  and  Mr.  Grladstone,  aU
supposed  by  the  natives  to  represent  Buddhas  of  more  or  less
sanctity."  ^

II.  BoDHiSATs  (Celestial).

These  are  the  supernatural  Bodhisats,  the  active  reflexes  from
the  relatively  impassive  celestial  Buddhas. The  human  Bodhi-


Babbr,  Supp.  Papers,  Royal  Geog.  Soc. ,  p.  200.


CELESTIAL  BODHISATS.  355

sats,  or  the  saints,  are  referred  by  me  to  the  end  of  the  pantheon,
though  the  Lamas  usually  place  them  above  the  dii  minores,  and
many  of  them  next  to  the  celestial  Bodhisats  themselves.

The  Lamas  head  the  list  with  the  metaphysical  Bodhisat  of
wisdom,  Manjusri ;  but  following  what  appears  to  be  the  order  of
development  of  these  divinities,  I  commence  with  Maitreya,  the
coming  Buddha,  who,  indeed,  is  the  only  Bodhisat  known  to
primitive -Buddhism  and  to  the  so-called  "  southern  "  Buddhists
of  the  present  day,  the  Burmese,  Ceylonese,  and  Siamese ;  though
the  Lamas  place  him  fourth  or  later  in  their  lists,  giving  priority
to  the  especially  active  Bodhisats  which  the  Mahayana  created,  the
mythical  Manjusri,  Vajrapani,  and  Avalokita,  whom  they  have
made  their  defensores  fidei  of  Lamaism,  with  the  title  of  "  The
three  lords  "  ^  and  given  functions  somewhat  like  the  analogous
triad  of  Brahmanism,  Brahma,  Siva  and  Vishnu.

The  female  Bodhisats,  Tara,  etc.,  are  given  towards  the  end  of  the
list,  though  they  might  more  naturally  have  been  placed  beside
their  consorts.

Maitreya,  "  The  loving  one,"  the  coming  Buddha  or  Buddh-
ist Messiah. T.,  Byams-pa  (pr.  "  Jam-pa  "  or  "  Cham-pa.")

He  is  usually  represented  adorned  like  a  prince,^  and  sitting  on
a  chair  in  European  fashion  with  legs  down,  teaching  the  law.'  He
is  at  present  believed  to  be  in  the  Tushita  heaven.  His  image  is
frequently  rock-carved  or  built  in  colossal  form  several  storeys
high  in  Tibet,  as  he  is  credited  with  gigantic  size.

Manjusri  or  Manjughosha,  "  The  sweet-voiced,"  the  god  of
wisdom  or  Buddhist  Apollo,  and  figured  at  page  12.  T.,  'Jam-
pahi  dhyam  (pr.  Jam-yang).

He  is  Wisdom  deified,  and  seems  a  purely  metaphysical  creation
unconnected  with  any  of  his  later  namesakes  amongst  the
Buddhist  monks  in  the  fourth  or  fifth  centuries  of  our  era,  or
later.  His  chief  function  is  the  dispelling  of  ignorance.  He
presides  over  the  law,  and  with  his  bright  sword  of  divine  know-
ledge* cuts  all  knotty  points,  and  carries  in  his  left  the  bible  of
transcendental  Wisdom,  the  Prajna-paramita,  placed  upon  a  lotus.-
flower.^  He  is  the  especial  patron  of  astrology.  In  keeping  with
his  pure  character  he  is  strictly  celibate,  one  of  the  few  of  the


1  Rig-sum  mgon-po,  the  Lamaist  Tnmurti.  '  Of  the  mild,  z'i-wa  type.

'  Cf.  Pand.,  No.  151.  *  Ses-rab  ral-gn *  Cf.  Koppen,  ii.,  21.

A  A 2


356  PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND  IMAGES.

MahayaDa  deities  who  is  allotted  no  female  energy.'  He  usually
sits,  as  in  the  figure,  in  the  Buddha  attitude.  He  is  given  several
other  modes.

Most  of  the  countries  where  northern  Buddhism  prevails  have
their  own  special  Maiijusri.  Thus  China  has  a  quasi-historical
Marijusri  of  about  the  fifth  century  A.D.,  located  near  the  U-tai
Shan  shrine;  and  Nepalese  Buddhism  has  another  of  the  same
name  as  its  tutelary  saint."

Vajrapani,  "  The  wielder  of  the  thunderbolt,"  a  metamor-
phosis of  Jupiter  (Indra)'  as  the  spiritual  son  of  the  second  celestial
Buddha,  Akshobhya.  T.,  p'yag  -na-rdo-rje  (pronouced  chana-dorje
or  chak-dor.)

He  is  figured  at  page  13,  and  of  the  fierce  fiend  type,  black  or
dark  blue  in  colour,  and  wields  a  Vajra  (rdo^je)  in  his  uplifted  right
hand,  while  in  his  left  he  holds  a  bell  or  snare  or  other  implement
according  to  his  varying  titles,  of  which  there  are  fifteen  or  more.*

Hiuen  Tsiang  mentions  his  worship  in  India  in  the  seventh
century  a.d.*

AvALOKiTA  (or  Avalokitesvara  or  Mahdkarurta),  "  The  keen
seeing  lord,  the  great  pitier  and  lord  of  mercy."  T.,  spyan-ras-
gzigs  (pr.  Ckd-rd-zi),  T'ugs-rje-ch'en-po.

His  origin  and  various  forms  I  have  described  in  some  detail
elsewhere.^  The  spiritual  son  of  the  celestial  Buddha  Amitabha,
he  is  the  most  powerful  and  popular  of  all  the  Bodhisats,  and  the
one  which  the  Dalai  Lamas  pretend  to  be  the  incarnation  of.
Other  forms  of  this  deity  are  Padma-pdni,  the  Lotus-handed
Khasarpdni,  Siiihanada  (T.,  sen-ge-sgra),  the  Eoaring  Lion,
Hala-hala,  Arya-pala  ("  Aryabolo  "),  etc.

Avalokita,  being  a  purely  mythological  creation,  is  seldom  like
Buddha  represented  as  a  mere  man,  but  is  invested  usually  with
monstrous  and  supernatural  forms  and  attributes.  The  earliest
Indian  images  of  Avalokita  yet  found  by  me,  dating  to  about  the


1  Though  the  Prajna  must  be  somewhat  of  this  character.

2  Of.  Archceol.WJnd.,  9,  xxvi.,  18. Pa.,  No.  145.

'  DyatiA-pitar,  or  heavenly  father  of  the  Hindus,  becomes  "  Jupiter  "  or  "  Dies-
piter  "  of  the  Romans,  and  "  Zeus  "  of  the  Greeks.

*  Cf.  for  more  common  form,  Arch.  W.liid.,  9,  xxvii.,  23,  and  Pa.,  84,  146,  169,
170, 171.

5  Seal's  trans.,  ii.

6  J.R.A.S.,  1894,  p.  51,  eiseq.,  where  twenty-two  forms  are  described.


AVALOKITA OR  PADMA-PANI.  35*7

sixth  century  A.D.,  clearly  show  that  Avalokita's  image  was
modelled  after  that  of  the  Hindii  Creator  Prajdpati  or  Brahma  ;
and  the  same  type  may  be  traced  even  in  his  monstrous  images
of  the  later  Tantrik  period,  and  his  images  usually  bear  Brahma's
insignia,  the  lotus  and  rosary,  and  often  the  vase  and  book.  His
commonest  forms  found  in  Tibet  are  :

The  Four-handed  form,  see  figure  on  page  228.  This  repre-
sents him  as  a  prince,  with  the  thirteen  ornaments,  of  white  com-
plexion, and  sitting  in  the  Buddha  posture  with  the  front  pair  of
hands  joined  in  devotional  attitude  (and  often  as  clasping  a  jewel);
while  the  upper  hand  holds  a  crystal  rosary,  and  the  left  a  long-
stemmed  lotus-flower,  which  opens  on  the  level  of  his  ear.^

His  monstrous  eleven-headed  form  is  figured  at  page  15.  It  is
usually  standing.  In  addition  to  the  double  pair  of  hands,  it  has
others  carrying  weapons  to  defend  its  votaries.  It  represents  the
wretched  condition  of  Avalokita  when  his  head  split  into  pieces
with  grief  at  seeing  the  deplorable  state  of  sunken  humanity.
But  this  form,  too,  seems  based  on  the  poly  cephalic  Brahma.^

The  eleven  heads  are  usually  arranged,  as  in  the  figure,  in  the
form  of  a  cone,  in  five  series  from  below  upwards,  of  3,  3,  3,  1  and
1,  and  the  topmost  head  is  that  of  Amitabha,  the  spiritual  father
of  Avalokita.  Those  looking  forward  wear  an  aspect  of  benevo-
lence ;  the  left  ones  express  anger  at  the  faults  of  men;  while  the
right  faces  smile  graciously  at  the  good  deeds  or  in  scorn  at  evil-
doers.

This  form  is  frequently  given  a  thousand  eyes,  a  concrete
materialistic  expression  of  the  name  Avalokita,  "  He  who  looks
down"  or  Savianta-mukha, "  He  whose  face  looks  every  way."^  The
fixing  of  the  number  of  eyes  at  one  thousand  is  merely  expressive
of  multitude,  and  has  no  precise  numerical  significance.  And  un-
like the  thousand-eyed  god  of  Brahmanic  mythology— Indra —
Avalokita's  extra  eyes  are  on  his  extra  hands,  which  are  symbolic
of  power,  and  most  of  their  hands  are  stretched  forth  to  save  the
wretched  and  the  lost. The  eye,  which  is  ever  on  the  look-out  to


1  Cf.  A.W.I.,  xxvi.,  p.  17;  Pa.,  No.  147  and  my  Art.  J.R.A.S.,  loc.  cit.

2  Cf.  my  art.  above  cited.  The  head-splitting  is  associated  with  the  presence  of  an
obstacle,  in  early  Buddhist  works.  Thus  in  the  Dialogues  of  Menander  {Milinda,
Rhys  Davids'  trans.,  p.  222),  in  regard  to  the  raiser  of  an  obstacle  it  is  said,  « then
would  his  head  split  into  a  hundred  or  into  a  thousand  pieces."

3  Cf.  Buenouf's  Lotus,  p.  428  ;  Seal's  Catena,  384.


358  PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND  IMAGES.

perceive  distress,  carries  with  it  a  helping  hand — altogether  a  most
poetic  symbolism.  Of  this  type  there  are  many  modes,  differing
mainly  in  colour  and  degrees  of  fierceness.

The  other  supernatural  male  Bodhisats'  are  not  so  commonly
met  with. The  chief  are  :

Samantabhadea,  "  The  all  good."  T.,  Kuntu-bzan-po.
He  is  figured  at  page  14,^  and  is  the  son  of  the  celestial  Buddha
Vairocana,  and  is  to  Be  distinguished  from  the  Adi-Buddha  of  the
same  name.  He  is  of  the  "  mild  "  type,  and  usually  mounted  on
an  elephant,  and  he  is  frequently  associated  with  Manjusri'  as
attendant  on  Buddha.

KsHiTiGARBHA,  "  The  matrix  of  the  earth.""

'  T.,  Sa-yi  sniii-po.
AJedsagarbha,  "  The  matrix  of  the  sky.''

T.,  Nam-k'ahi-nih-po.'
Sarva  nivarama  vishkarnhhim.

T.,  sgRib-pa  rnam  sel."
(?  Jndnaguru),  Master  of  divine  foreknowledge.''

T.,  Ye-s'es  bla-ma.
(?  Prabhdketu),  The  crown  of  light  .^

T.,  'Od-kyi-tog.
Pranidhdnamati.

T.,  sMon-lam  blo-grop."
Sdntendra,  The  foundation  of  power.^"
T.,  dbAn-po  z'i.

FEMALE BODHISATS.

The  chief  and  most  active  of  the  supernatural  female  Bodhisats
or  "  energies  "  are  Tara  and  MaricT.

TarI,  The  saviour,  or deliverer. T., sgRol-ma  (pr.  Do-ma).

She  is  the  consort  of  Avalokita,  who  is  now  held  to  be  incarnate
in  the  Dalai  Lamas,  and  she  is  the  most  popular  deity  in  Tibet,

1  For  deBcription  of  some  of  these  in  the  Ajanta  caves,  see  art.  by  me  in  Ind.
Antiquary,  1898.

2  From  the  Japanese  Buizu  Dz6-dsid,  p.  127.  The  form  figured,  which  is  generally
like  that  in  Lamaism,  is  entitled  Samantabhadra-Yama.  Of.  also  W.  Anderson's  Cat. .
p.  81,  No.  57.

3  Cf.  Pand.,  No.  152,  and  No.  55. The  Japanese  call  him  Fugen..

4  Fig.  Band.,  No.  148.  s  Fig.  Panb.,  No.  150.

"  Fig.  Pand.,  No.  149.  '  Fig.  Pand.,  No.  153.

8  Fig.  Pand.,  No.  154.  »  Fig.  Pand.,  No.  155.
1"  Fig.  Pand.,  No.  166.


TABA, THE  SAVIOURESS.


359


both  with  Lamas  and  laity.  She  corresponds  to  the  goddess
of  mercy  and  queen  of  heaven  (Kwan-yin) '  of  the  Chinese,  and
has  her  literal  analogy  in  biblical  mythology  (see  the  heading
to  this  chapter),  and  she  has  several  analogies  with  "the  Virgin ; "  ^
but  she  is  essentially  Indian  in  origin  and  form.

Her  most  common  form  is  "  the  green  Tara,"  and  much  less
coramon  is  "  the  white  Tara,"  whose  worship  is  almost  confined  to
the  Mongols.  Her  other  numerous  forms,  of  which  the  names  of
"  the  twenty-one  "  are  daily  on  the  Hps  of  the  people,  are  seldom
pictured,  except  the  fiendish  form  Bhnkuti.^

The  green  Tdrd. T.,  sgRol-ma  Ijah-k'u — pronounced  Dol-jang.

She  is  represented  (see  the  figure)  as  a  comely  and  bejewelled
Indian  lady  with  uncovered  head,  and  of  a  green  complexion,
seated  on  a  lotus,  with  her
left  leg  pendant,  and  hold-
ing in  her  left  hand  a  long-
stemmed  lotus-flower.

The  white  Tdrd.  T.,
sgRol-ma  dkar-po — or
sgRol-dkar (pr. Do-kar).

She  is  figured  (see  p.  23)
as  an  adorned  Indian  lady
with  a  white  complexion,
seated  Buddha-like,  and
the  left  hand  holding  a
long-stemmedlotus-flower.
She  has  seven  eyes,  the
eye  of  foreknowledge  in
the  forehead,  in  addition
to  the  ordinary  facial  pair,
and  also  one  in  each
palm  and  on  each  sole.
Hence  she  is  called  "  The
seven-eyed  white  Tara."
She  is  believed  by  the  Mongols  to  be  incarnate  in  the  White  Czar.

Td/rd  with  the  frowning  brows — Bhrikuti  Tara. T.,  kKo-gner-
gyo-ba-hi  sgRol-ma  (pronounced  T'o-nyer-chan).

1  Or  in  Japanese  Kwim-non,  a  translation  of  "  Avalokita."

2  For  note  on  Tara's  origin,  see  my  article  in  J.R.A.S.,  1894,  pp.  63,  etc.
5  For  detailed  description  of  twenty-seven  forms,  see  ibid.


^Ill


TiRA, THE GEEEN.


360


■ PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND IMAGES.


This  Tara  is  dark  indigo-coloured,  and  usually  with  three  faces,
all  frowning.


The  Twenty-one  Tabas.

The  list  of  the  names  of  "  the  twenty-one  Taras  "  given  below,'
and  known  to  almost  all  lay  Tibetans,  indicates  many  of  her
attributes.


1  Titles  of  "  The

1.  Tara,  the  supremely  vaUant  (Pra-

snra.  Tar  a).

2.  „ of white-moon brightness

{Candrojasa  Sita  Tdvd).

3.  „ the golden coloured (Oauri

T).

4.  „ the  victorious  hair-crowned

{UsknishaJiiaya  T.),

5.  „ the  "  Hun  "-shouter  (Humdd

T).

6.  „ the  three-world  best  worker.

7.  „ suppressor.of  strife.

8.  „ the bestower of supreme

power.

9.  „ the  best  providence.


Twenty-one  Taras."

10.  Tara,  the  dispeller  of  grief.


11.

12.
13.
14.

15.
16.
17.

18.
19.
20.

21.


the  cherisher  of  the  poor.

the  brightly  glorious.

the  universal  mature  worker.

with the frowning brows
{BliHkiiii  Tara),

the  giver  of  prosperity.

the  subduer  of  passion.

the supplier of happiness
{Sarsiddhi  T.).

the  excessively  vast.

the  dispeller  of  distress.

the  advent  or  realization
spiritual  power  (SiddhdHaTdra).

the  completely  perfect.


TUTELARIES  AND  MABICl


361


MaricI,  The  resplendent. T.,  'Od-zer  'c'an-ma.

She  was  originally  the  queen  of  heaven,  a  Buddhist  Ushas,  or
goddess  of  the  dawn,  a  metamorphosis  of  the  sun  as  the  centre
of  energy,  curiously  coupled  with  the  oriental  myth  of  the  primaeval
productive  pig.  In  another  aspect  she  is  a  sort  of  Prosperine,  the
spouse  of  Yama,  the  Hindu  Pluto.
While  in  her  fiercest  mood  she  is
the  consort  of  the  demon-general,
"The  horse-necked  Tamdin,"  a
sort  of  demoniacal  centaur.  In
another  mode  she  is  "  The  adam-
antine sow"  (Ski., Vajra-vdrdhi;
T.,  rDo-rje  P'ag-mo),  who  is
believed  to  be  incarnate  in  the
abbess  of  the  convent  on  the
great  Palti  lake,'  as  already  de-
scribed.

In  her  ordinary  form  she  has
three  faces  and  eight  hands,  of
which  the  left  face  is  that  of  a
sow.  The  hands  hold  various
weapons,  including  an  araju,  axe,  and  snare.  She  sits  in  "  the  en-
chanting pose  "  upon  a  lotus-throne  drawn  by  seven  swine,^  as  in
the  figure.

III. TUTELAEIES.

Although  the  tutelaries  (T.,F'i-(^am)  belong  to  different  classes
of  divinities,  it  is  convenient  to  consider  them  together  under  one
group.

The  important  part  played  by  tutelaries  in  every-day  life,  their
worship,  and  the  mode  of  coercing  them,  have  already  been,
described.

The  qualifications  demanded  in  a  tutelary  are  activity  com-
bined with  power  over  the  minor  malignant  devils.  Thus  most  of
the  superior  celestial  Buddhas  and  Bodhisats  may  be,  and  are,
tutelaries. But  the  favourite  ones  are  the  great  demon-kings,


Maeici,  oe  Vaeahi.
(or  "  The  Diamond  Sow.")


1  Cf .  Chapters  x.  and  xi. ,  and  also  Giorgj.

^  Gf.  Pand.,  No.  163,  whose  figure  is  reproduced  above.


362  PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND  IMAGES.

and  also  some  of  the  inferior  fiends  who  have  been  promoted  in
diabolic  rank  for  their  adherence  to  the  cause  of  Buddhism.

All  the  five  celestial.  Jinas  are  tutelaries,  but  it  is  their  Tan-
trik  forms,  such  as  Vajrasattva  and  Vajradhara,  and  Amitayus,
which  are  especially  utilized  in  this  way  ;  and  most  common  of  all
are  those  who  have  consorts  (saJdi),  as  these  are  considered  to  be
most  energetic.

Of  the  Bodhisats,  those  most  common  as  tutelaries  are  Ava-
lokita  and  Manjusri,  the  demon  Vajrapani,  Tara,  and  Marici.

The  demon-kings,  however,  are  the  favourite  ones.  They  are
repulsive  monsters  of  the  type  of  the  Hindu  devil  Siva.'  These
morbid  creations  of  the  later  Tantrism  may  be  considered  a  sort  of
fiendish  metamorphoses  of  the  supernatural  Buddhas.  Each  of
those  demon-kings,  who  belong  to  the  most  popular  section  of
Lamaist  Tantrism — the  Anuttara  yoga — has  a  consort,^  who  is
even  more  malignant  than  her  spouse.

There  are  several  of  these  ferocious  many-armed  monsters,  all
of  the  fiercest  fiend  type  already  described,  and  all  much  alike  in
general  appearance.  But  each  sect  has  got  its  own  particular
tutelary-demon,  whom  it  believes  to  be  pre-eminently  powerful.

Thus  the  established  church,  the  Gre-lug-pa,  has  as  its  tutelary
Vajra-bhairava,  though  several  of  the  individual  monks  have  Sam-
bhara  and  Gruhyakala  as  their  personal  tutelaries.

Vajra-bhaieava,  or  "  The  Fearful  thunderbolt."  (T.,  rDo-rje-
'jigs-byed). See  figure  on  opposite  page.

This  is  a  form  of  Siva  as  the  destroyer  of  the  king  of  the  dead,
namely,  as  Yamdntaka.  Yet  with  truly  Lamaist  ingenuousness  this
hideous  creature  is  believed  to  be  a  metamorphosis  of  the  mild  and
merciful  Avalokita.  His  appearance  will  best  be  understood  from
his  picture  here  attached.^  He  has  several  heads,  of  which  the
lowest  central  one  is  that  of  a  bull.  His  arms  and  legs  are  in-
numerable, the  former  carrying  weapons,  and  the  latter  trample
upon  the  enemies  of  the  established  church.

It  will  be  noticed  that  these  writhing  victims  are  represented


1  As  in  the  type  also  of  the  "  Pancha  Eaksha. "

2  Skt.,  MatnM,  or  mother ;  T.,  Yum,  and  the  pair  are  called  "  the  father-mother,"  T. ,
Yah-yum.

3  After  Pander,  No.  61,  which  see  for  some  details.


TUTELABY-DEMONb.


363


of  the  four  ancient  classes  of  beings,  namely,  gods,  men,  quadru-
peds, and  birds.

Others  of  these  tutelary  devils  are  : —

Samvara  (T.,  bDe-mch'og  ^),  the  chief  of  happiness,  also  called  dpal-
'k'or-lo-sdom-pa

Guhyuhdla  (T.,  gSan-'dus^),  "the  secret  time."

Vajra-phurha,  the  p^wrfea-thunderbolt.

Duh-pa-lcah-gye  (or  ?  dGyes-pa-dorje).

These  are  the  tutelary  fiends  of  the  Kar-gyu,  Sa-kya,  and  the
unreformed Nih-ma sects  respectively. Others  are H6-vajra  (Kye-


Vajra-bhaibava.
(Tutelary  flend  of  established  church.)

rdorje),  Buddhakapala  (Sans-gyas-t'od-pa),  Yama  (gsin-rje),  but  they
do  not  here  require  special  description.

IV. Defenders  of  the  Faith.
8kt.,  Dharmapala  ;  T.,  Oh'os-skyori.
These are the demon-generals or commanders-in-chief who
execute  the  will  of  the  tutelaries — the  demon-kings. In  appear-


1  Pand.,  No.  63,  and  Osoma,  An.,  p.


Pand.,  Nos.  62and68.


364


PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND  IMAGES.


ance  they  are  almost as hideous and fierce as their  fiendish
masters,  and  each  commands  a  horde  of  demons.

They  are  of  the  fiercest  fiend  type  (the  Drag-po  and  To-wo)
already  described.  The  females  are  metamorphoses  of  the  Hindi!
fiendess,  Kali  Devi.  A  few  local  country  gods  have  also  been  pro-
moted to  the  position  of  defenders  of  the  faith.

Of  those  of  the  Brag-po  or  To-ivo  type,  the  chief  are  : —
"  The  horse-necked  (fiend),"  Skt.,  Hayagriva  ;  T.,  rTa-mgrin,
pron.  Tann-din.

He  is  figured  as  shown  here,'
with  a  horse's  head  and  neck
surmounting  his  other  heads.
There  are  many  varieties  of  him^;
see  also  his  figure  at  p.  62.

« The  immoveable,"  Skt.,
Acala ;  T.,  Mi-gyo-ba.

He  is  also  found  in  the  Japanese
Buddhist  pantheon  as  "Fu-do."'
"  The slayer of the death-
king," Skt., Yaviamdri,^ T.,
yS'in-rje  gs'ed,  a  form  of  Bhairava,
£flaOJ5)jw-3-3Ha?^-  and  held  to  be  incarnate  in  the

tam-din  Dalai  Lama  as  the  controller  of

I  (Geneval  tutelary  of  established  church.)  mctempSychosis.

"  The  G-Oddess  or  The  queen  of  the  warring  weapons."
Lha-mo  (or  pal-ldan-Lha-mo) ;  Skt.,  Devi  (or  Sri-Devi).  And
also,  in  Tibetan,  dMagzor  rgyal-mo.

This  great  she-devil,  like  her  prototype  the  goddess  Durga  of
Brahmanism,  is,  perhaps,  the  most  malignant  and  powerful  of  all
the  demons,  and  the  most  dreaded.  She  is  credited  with  letting
loose  the  demons  of  disease,  and  her  name  is  scarcely  ever  men-
tioned, and  only  then  with  bated  breath,  and  under  the  title  of
"  The  great  queen  " — Maha-rani.

She  is  figured,  as  at  page  334,^  surrounded  by  flames,  and  riding


1  After  Pander.

2  Cf.  Pa.,  No.  166,  167,  168,  213.

3  Cf.  Chamberlain's  Mattdhooh  to  Japan. Pand.,  No.  174.
«  Cf.  Pandee.No.  212.

■i  After  Pander,  No.  148. Cf.  Sohlag.,  112.


DEMON-PBOTEGTORS.  365


on  a  white-faced  mule,  upon  a  saddle  of  her  own  son's  skin  flayed
by  herself.  She  is  clad  in  human  skins  and  is  eating  human
brains  and  blood  from  a  skull ;  and  she  wields  in  her  right  hand  a
trident-rod.  She  has  several  attendant  "  queens  "  riding  upon
different  animals.

She  is  publicly  worshipped  for  seven  days  by  the  Lamas  of  all
sects,  especially  at  the  end  of  the  twelfth  month,  in  connection  with
the  prevention  of  disease  for  the  incoming  year.  And  in  the  cake
offered  to  her  are  added  amongst  other  ingredients  the  fat  of  a
black  goat,  blood,  wine,  dough  and  butter,  and  these  are  placed  in
a  bowl  made  from  a  human  skull.

THE LORD-DEMONS.
T.,  mGbn-po  ;  Skt.,  Natha.^
These  form  a  class  of  demon-generals,  of  the  fiercest  Drag-po
type. Each  Lamaist  sect  has  chosen  one  as  its  defender,  whom  it
claims  to  be  pre-eminently  powerful,  thus  : —

"  The  six -armed  lord,"  ^  T.,  mGon-po  p'yag-drug,  is  the  chief
minister  of  the  tutelary  fiend  of  the  established  church.

"The  lord  of  the  black  cloak,"  or  "The  four-armed  lord,"
T.,  mGron-po  Gur,  is  the  general  of  the  tutelary  Samvara  of  the
Kar-gyu-pa  sect.  And  he  is  the  fiend-general  of  the  old  unre-
formed  sect — -the  Nih-ma-pa. He  is  figured  at  page  70.

These  "lords  "  are  said  to  number  seventy-five.  Several  of  them
are  referred  to  in  regard  to  their  masks  in  the  chapter  on  the
mystic  play.  The  highest  is  the  bird-faced  Garuda.  Other
important  ones  are  : —

"The  lord  of  foreknowledge,"  T.,  ye-ses  mGron-po;  Skt.,
Jnancmdtha;  and  formerly  called  "  The  devil  Mata-ruta."

"  The  black  lord." T.,  mGon-po  Nag-po ;  Skt.,  Kdldndtha.

"The  great  potent  sage."  T.,  bLo-c'an  dban-p'ug-ch'en-po.
Both  of  these  latter  bear  titles  of  the  Hindu  Siva,  Mahakala.


1  This  name  suggests  relationship  with  the  "  JV^dts  "  of  the  Burmese  Buddists,  thougli
most  of  these  JVdts  are  clearly  Hindi!  Vedic  deities,  and  as  their  number  is  said  to  be
37,  probably  they  are  the  33  Vedic  gods  of  Indra's  heaven  plus  the  four-fold  Brahma
or  the  four  guardians  of  the  quarter.  For  hst  of  the  N^cits  cf.  App.  by  Col.  Sladen  in
Andehson's  Mandalay  to  Momein,  p.  457.

2  Pand.,  No.  230.


366  PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND  IMAGES.

Dakkinis,  or  Furies.
T.,  mkah-'gro-ma,  or  "  Sky-goer"  ;  Skt.,  Khecara.

These  Dakkinis  are  chiefly  consorts  of  the  demoniacal  tutelaries,
and  the  generals  of  the  latter.  Many  of  them  seem  to  be  of  an
indigenous  nature  like  the  B6n-pa  deities.  One  of  the  most
common  is  "  The  lion-faced  "  (Sen-gehi-grdon-c'an).  Several  others
are  described  and  figured  by  Pander."^

Here  also  may  be  placed  the  eight  goddesses,  who  are  probably
metamorphoses  of  "  the  eight  mothers."  They  encircle  the
heavens  and  are  figured  in  many  of  the  magic-circles,  usually  of
beautiful  aspect  and  with  the  following  characters  : —

1.  Lasya  (T.,  sGeg-mo-ma),  of  white  complexion,  holding  a  mirror
and  in  a  coquettish  attitude.

2.  Mala  (T.,  Preii-ba-ma),  of  yellow  colour,  holding  a  rosary.

3.  Gitd  (T.,  jrLu-ma),  of  red  colour,  holding  a  lyre  symbolizing
music.

4.  T.,  Gar-ma,  of  green  colour,  in  a  dancing  attitude.

5.  Pushpa  (T.,  Me-tog-ma),  of  white  colour,  holding  a  flower.

6.  Dhupa  (T.,  5Dug-spbs  ma),  of  yellow  colour,  holding  an  incense-
vase.

7.  Bipa  (T.,  sNan-psal-ma),  of  red  colour,  holding  a  lamp.

8.  Gandha  (T.,  Dri-ch'a-ma),  of  green  colour,  holding  a  shell-vase  of
perfume.

V. GrODLINGS AND ANGELS.

These  Dii  minores  are  the  gods  and  lesser  divinities  of  Aryan
and  Hindu  mythology,  degraded  to  this  -low  rank  on  account  of
their  inclusion  within  the  wheel  of  metempsychosis,  and  from  their
leading  lives  only  partially  devoted  to  Buddhist  duties.  The
morality  of  these  gods  is,  generally,  of  a  higher  order  than  their
counterparts  in  the  Greek  or  Roman  mythology.

Collectively  they  are  called  "  The  eight  classes,"  and  are  made
subordinate  to  the  tutelary-fiends  and  their  generals;  and  in  the
order  of  their  rank,  are  thus  enumerated^ : —

1.  The  Gods— Skt.,  Deva;  T.,  Lha.

2.  Serpent-demigods  (mermaids) — Ndgd  ;  kLu.


^  Nos.  127, 187, 188, 189, 191, 192,  223,  224,  226,  227,  228.
"  Cf.  BouBNOUF,  i.,  87.


GODLINQS  AND  ANGELS.  367


3.  Grenii — Yaksha ;  gNod-sbyin.
4. ,  Angels — Gandharva ;  Dri-za.

5.  Titans — Asura  ;  Lha-ma-yin.

6.  Phoenix — Garuda;  Namk'ah-ldin.

7.  Celestial  musicians — Kinnara ;  Mi-'am-c'i.

8.  TheG-reatEeptiles(creepers ),7lfa.Aoragra;  ITo-'bye-ch'en-po.
The  G-ODS  are  the  thirty-three  Vedic  gods,  which  have  already

been  described  as  regards  their  general  characters.^  They  are
usually  figured,  like  earthly  kings  of  the  "  mild  deity  "  type,  on
lotus-thrones.  The  chief  gods  are  made  regents  or  protectors  of
the  quarters;  though  in  the  later  legends  they  have  delegated
these  duties  to  subordinates,  the  "  kings  of  the  quarters  " ;  see
page  84.

The  great  Indra  (Jupiter,  T.,  brGya-byin),  on  the  east.

Yama  (Pluto,  T.,  gSin-rje),  on  the  south.

Varuna  (Uranus,  T.,  Ch'a-'lha^),  on  the  west.

Kuvera  (Vulcan',  T.,  gNod-sbyin),  on  the  north.
The  remainder  of  the  ten  directions  are  thus  apportioned  : —

S.E.  to  Agni  (Ignis,  the  fire-god ; T.,  Me-lha),  or  Soma  the
moon  or  Bacchus.

S.W.  to  Nririti  (the  goblin ;  T.,  Srin-po).

N.W.  to  Marut  (the  storm- god;  T.,  rLun-lha).

^i.E.  to  Isa  (T.,  dbAng-ldan).

Nadir  to  Ananta  (or  "mother-earth";  T.,  'Og-gis-bdag).

Zenith  to  Brahma  (Ts'ans-pa'').
The  first  and  the  last  of  the  above,  namely,  Indra  and  Brahma,
are  represented  as  attendant  on  Buddha  at  all  critical  periods  of
his  earthly  life — the  former  with  a  third  and  horizontal  eye  in  the
forehead,  acting  as  his  umbrella-carrier,  and  the  latter  usually  four-
handed  and  headed,  carrying  the  vase  of  life-giving  ambrosia.  The
Brahmanical  god  Vishnu  is  called  K'yab-'jug.

Yama  (T.,  S'in-rje),  the  Hindu  Pluto,  the  judge  of  the  dead
and  controller  of  metempsychosis,  is  the  most  dreaded  of  these


1  They  comprise  eleven  Rudras,  eight  Vasus,  and  twelve  Adityas.

2  The  god  of  the  Waters,  formerly  the  god  of  the  Sky.

3  Kuvera  or  Vaisravana  "the  renowned"  is  identified  by  Genl.  Cunningham  with
the  Greek  Hephaestus,  and  the  Homeric  epithet  Periklutos  always  applied  to  Vulcan.

*  Also  Me-mjad  kyi  bdag-po,  or  Master  of  the  Universe.


368  PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND  IMAGES.

divinities.  He  is  represented  in  the  Wheel  of  Life  as  the  central
figure  in  hell ;  but  he  too  has  to  suffer  torment  in  his  joyless
realm.  His  special  emblem  is  a  bull;  thus  the  great  tutelary
demon  Vajra-bhairava,  by  having  vanquished  the  dread  Yama,  is
represented  with  the  head  of  a  bull  under  the  title  of  Yamantaka
or  "  the  conqueror  of  Yama."

The  most  favourite  of  the  godlings  is  the  god  of  wealth,
Jamhhala,  a  form  of  Kuvera  or  Vaisravana.  He  is  of  portly  form
like  his  relative  or  prototype,  the  Hindi!  Ganesa.  In  his  right
hand  he  holds  a  bag  of  jewels,  or  money,  or  grain,  symbolic  of
riches,  and  in  his  left  an  ichneumon  or  "  mongoose,"^  which  is  the
conqueror  of  snakes — the  mythical  guardians  of  treasure.

The  NlGA  or  Dragon -demigods  are  the  mermen  and  mermaids
of  the  Hindu  myth  and  the  demons  of  drought.  They  are  of  four
kinds:  (1)  celestial,  guarding  the  mansions  of  the  gods;  (2)
aerial,  causing  winds  to  blow  and  rain  to  fall  for  human  benefit ;  (3)
earthly,  marking  out  the  courses  of  the  rivers  and  streams ;  (4)
guardians  of  hidden  treasures,  watching  the  wealth  concealed
from  mortals.

The  Nagas  are  usually  given  the  form  of  snakes,  as  these  inhabit
the  bowels  of  the  earth,  the  matrix  of  precious  stones  and  metals;
while  in  their  character  of  rain-producers  they  are  figured  as
dragons.  From  their  fancied  association  with  treasure  they  are
often  associated  with  the  god  of  wealth,  Vaisravana  and  his
mode  Jambhala.  Indeed,  the  great  Naga  king  Mahakala,  the
"  Dai  Koko ''  of  the  Japanese,  seated  on  his  rice-bales,  like  our
chancellor  of  the  exchequer  on  his  wool-sack,  and  his  attendant
rats  as  symbols  of  prosperity,  form  almost  a  facsimile  of  the
Buddhist  god  Jambhala,  who,  like  his  prototype  Ganesa,  seems
of  Naga  origin.  Indeed,  one  of  his  titles  is  "  lord  of  the  water  "
(Jalendra).'^  The  Naga  community,  like  the  human,  is  divided
into  kings,  nobles,  and  commoners,  Buddhists  and  non-Buddhists.^


1  Skt.,Nakula;  T.,Ne-'ule.  ifejyMstes  sp.  (  Ppharaonis). It  is  figured  vomiting  jewels.

2  Of.  also  Beal's  Catena,  417.

3  The  Naga  kings  Nanda,  Upananda,  Sagara,  Dritarasa,  and  Anavataptu  are
Buddliists  and  therefore  exempt  from  attack  by  Garudas.  For  many  particulars
regarding  Nagas,  cf.  Meglta-Sutra,  transl.  by  Prof.  C.  Bendall,  J.R.A.S.,  1880,  pp.  1
seq. ;  Beal's  Catena,  50,  etc. ;  Schiefner's  trans,  of  the  kLu-'bum  dKar-po ;  also  my  list
of  Naga  kings  and  commoners,  J.R.A.S.,  1894.


COUNTRY-GODS.  369


Of  the  remaining  classes,  the  Yaksha  and  Asura  have  already
been  described.  The  female  Yaksha — the  Yakshini — are  the
"  witch-women,"  the  stealer  of  children  of  general  myths.  In
addition  there  are  also  the  malignant  spirits  and  demons,^  of
whom  among  the  Eakshas,  the  already  mentioned  she-devil  Hariti,
"  the  mother  of  the  Daiiya-demons,"  is  the  chief.^

VI.  The  Country-Gods.

The  country-gods  (Yul-lha),  and  the  country-guardians  (Srun-
ma)  are  of  course  all  indigenous,  though  some  of  them  have  been
given  quasi-Buddhist  characters.  Ruling  over  a  wider  sphere,  they
occupy  a  higher  rank  than  the  more  truly  local  genii,  the  locality-
or  foundation-owners — the  Z'i-bdag  of  the  Tibetans.

These  indigenous  gods,  godlings,  and  demons  are  divided  after
the  Indian  fashion,  roughly  into  eight  classes,  namely  : —

1.  G-ods  (Lha),  all  male,  white  in  colour,  and  generally  genial.

2.  Goblins  or  Ghosts  (Tsan),  all  male,  red  in  colour.  These  are
usually  the  vindictive  ghosts  of  Lamas,  discontented  priests ;  and
they  are  vindictive. They  especially  haunt  temples.^

3.  Devils  (bDud),  all  male,  black  in  colour,  and  most  malignant.*
These  are  the  ghosts  of  the  persecutors  of  Lamaism,  and  cannot  be
appeased  without  the  sacrifice  of  a  pig.^

4.  Planets  (gZah),  piebald  in  colour  (Kra-bo).

5.  Bloated  fiends  (dMu),  dark-purple  colour  (smug-po).**

6.  Cannibal  fiends  (Srin-po),  raw  flesh-coloured  (sa-za),  and  blood-
thirsty.

7.  King-fiends  (rGyal-po),  the  wealth-masters  (dkor-bdag),
white  (?  always)  in  colour,  the  spirits  of  apotheosized  heroes.


1  The  malignant  spirits  are  also  divided  into :

Preta  (T.,  Yi-dvag).  Shanda  (T.,  sKyem  hyed).

Kitmbhanda  (Grul-bum).

Fisdcha  (Sa-za).

BMta  ('Byun-po).

Putana  (<Srul-po).

Kaiaputana  (Luj  srul-po).

Uninada  (sMyo  Syed).
■■'  On  Hariti,  of.  p.  99,  and  Eitel,  Handhk.,  p.  62.
3  Cf.  JAESCHKE,  p.  423.

*  The  'Dre  are  especially  virulent. Cf.  Jaesohke,  p.  269  and  434.
'  Cf .  also  Jaeschke,  p.  423.
«  Cf.  also  Jaesohke,  p.  284.

B  B


Apsmdra  (Br]ed-iyed).

G'hdyd  ?  (Grib  ^non).

Rdhs]M  (Srin-po).

Revati  gralid  (Nam  gru  hidden).

S'ak-uni  grahd  (Bya  hi  ^don).

iJrrtAma  i2flA:5Aa5a(Bram-zehi-srin~po).


370


PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND  IMAGES.


8.  Mother-she-devils  (Ma-mo),  black  coloured,  the  "  disease  mis-
tresses" (nad-bdag).  They  are  sometimes  the  spouses  of  the
foregoing  malignant  demons,  and  cannot  be  very  sharply  de-
marcated from  the  other  she-devils.

The  greatest  of  the  country-gods  and  guardians  have  been  made
defenders  of  Lamaism.,  They  are  chiefly  the  spirits  of  the  larger
mountains,  and  deified  ghosts  of  heroes  and  ancestors.

The  former  are  figured  either  as  fierce  forms  of  Vaisravana,  the
god  of  wealth,  but  clad  in  Tibetan  costume,  and  riding  on  lions,  etc.,

and  carrying  banners  of  victory,
such,  for  example,  as  mount  Kan-
chinjunga,  mount  Langch'enna,
of  western  Tsang,  etc.,  as  in  an-
nexed figure;  or  they  are  figured
as  fiendesses,  as  for  example,  the
Tan-ma,  or  as  mild  nymphs,  as
the  five  sisters  of  mount  Everest.^
The  mountain  Kanchinjunga,
on  the  western  border  of  Tibet.
is  known  to  most  visitors  to  Dar-
jiling  and  northern  Bengal.  This
graceful  mountain,  second  in
height  only  to  Everest,  was  for-
merly in  itself  an  object  of  wor-
ship, as  it  towers  high  above  every
other  object  in  the  country,  and  is  the  first  to  receive  the  rays
of  the  rising  sun  and  the  last  to  part  with  the  sun-set.  Kanfi-
chinjunga^  literally  means  "  the  five  repositories  or  ledges  of  the
great  snows,"  and  is  physically  descriptive  of  its  five  peaks — the
name  having  been  giving  by  the  adjoining  Tibetans  of  Tsang,  who
also  worshipped  the  mountain.  But  the  Sikhim  saint,  Lha-tsiin
Ch'enbo,  gave  the  name  a  mythological  meaning,  and  the  mountain
was  made  to  become  merely  the  habitation  of  the  god  of  that
name,  and  the  five  "  repositories  "  became  real  store-houses  of  the
god's  treasure.  The  peak  which  is  most  conspicuously  gilded  by
the- rising  sun  is  the  treasury  of  gold;  the  peak  which  remains  in
cold  grey  shade  is  the  silver  treasury,  and  the  other  peaks  are  the


The  Ked  God  of  Wealth.


I  Tse-rin  mc'ed-lna. They  arc  higher  in  ranis  than  the  Tan-ma.
^  Properly  Kan-ch'en-mdsod-Iha.


LOCAL GODS  AND QENII.  371

stores  of  gems  and  grain  and  holy  books.  This  idea  of  treasure
naturally  led  to  the  god  being  physically  represented  somewhat
after  the  style  of  "  the  god  of  wealth,"  as  figured  on  the  opposite
page.  He  is  of  a  red  colour,  clad  in  armour,  and  carries  a  banner
of  victory,  and  is  mounted  on  a  white  lion.  He  is  on  the  whole
a  good-nd,tured  god,  but  rather  impassive,  and  is  therefore  less
worshipped  than  the  more  actively  malignant  deities.

The  four  greatest  deified  mountains  of  Tibet  are  alleged  to  be
T'an-lha  on  the  north,  Ha-bo-gans-bzan  or  gNod-sbyin-gan-bza  on
the  west,  Yar-lha  z'an-po  on  the  east,  and  sKu-la  k'a-ri  on  the
south ;  but  mount  Everest,  called  by  the  Tibetans  Lap-c'i-gan,
is  not  included  here.

The  twelve  furies  called  Tdn-ma  have  already  been  referred
to  and  figured  in  connection  with  St.  Padma-sambhava's  visit.
They  are  divided  into  the  three  groups  of  the  four  great  she-
devils,  the  four  great  injurers,  and  the  four  great  medicine-
females,^  of  which  the  last  are  relatively  mild,  though  all  are
placed  under  the  control  of  Ekajati,  a  flendeSs  of  the  Indian  Kali
type,  who  rides  on  the  thunder-clouds.

The  deified  ghosts  of  heroes-  and  defeated  rivals  are  pictured
usually  of  anthropomorphic  form,  and  clad  in  Tibetan  style,  as  for
example,  "The  holy  rDorje  Legs-pa,"  figured  at  page  26,  and
others  at  page  385.  Though  some  are  pictured  of  monstrous
aspect,  and  of  the  fiercest-fiend  type  already  described,  as  for
instance,  Pe-har,^  the  especial  patron  of  the  sorcerers  of  the
established  church.

Pe-har  is  a  fiend  of  the  "  king  "  class,  and  seems  to  be  an
indigenous  deified-hero,  though  European  writers  identify  him  with
the  somewhat  similarly  named  Indian  god,  Veda  (Chinese  wei-to),
who  is  regularly  invoked  by  the  Chinese  Buddhists  ^  for  monastic
supplies  and  as  protector  of  monasteries  ( — Vihar ;  hence,  it  is
believed,  corrupted  into  Pe-har),  and  chief  of  the  army  of  the  four
guardian  kings  of  the  quarters.

VII.  Local  Gods  and  G-enii.
The  truly  "local  gods"  or  Genii  loci,  the  "foundation  owners"*

1  bdud-mo  ch'en-mo  bzhi,  gnod-sbyin  ch'en,  etc. ;  smau-mo  ch'eu,  etc.
^  See  his  figure  in  Sohlagintweit's  Atlas.

'  E^MUSAT's  JVoies  in  Foe-Koue-Ki; Edkin,  GAin.  Bwidh.,  Saeat.,  J.A.S.B.,  1882,
page  67.
i  (gZ'i-bdag).

B  B 2


372  PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND  IMAGES.

of  the  Tibetans,  are  located  to  a  particular  fixed  place,  and  seldom
conceived  of  as  separate  from  their  places.

In  appearance  they  are  mostly  Caliban-like  sprites,  ill-tem-
pered and  spiteful,  or  demoniacal,  Uke  the  temple-door  fiend
figured  at  page  288 ;  and,  unlike  the  higher  spirits,  they  have
no  third  or  "  heavenly  eye  of  second  sight  or  omniscience."

The  majority  are  of  the  "  earth  owner "  class  (sa-&dag),
occupying  the  soil  and  lakes  like  plebeian  Nagas  of  the  Hindiis.
Others  more  malignant,  called  "  gNan,"  infest  certain  trees,  rocks,
and  springs,  which  reputed  haunts  are  avoided  as  far  as  possible,
though  they  are  sometimes  daubed  with  red  paint  or  other  offer-
ing to  propitiate  the  spirit.

In  every  monastery  and  temple  the  image  of  the  genius  loci,  as
an  idol  or  fresco,  is  placed  within  the  outer  gateway,  usually  to
the  right  of  the  door,  and  worshipped  with  wine,  and  occasionally
with  bloody  sacrifice,  and  it  is  given  a  more  or  less  honorific  name.
The  local  demon  of  the  red  hill  near  Lhasa,  surnamed  Potala,
and  the  residence  fff  the  Grrand  Lama,  is  called  gNan-ch'en  Tan.
The  one  at  Darjiling  is  already  referred  to  at  page  288.

THE HOUSE-GOD.

The  House-god  of  the  Tibetans  seems  to  be  the  same  as  the
"Kitchen-god"  (Tsan-kiiin)  of  the  Chinese,  who  is  believed  to
be  of  Taoist  origin,  but  adopted  into  the  Chinese  Buddhist  pan-
theon' as  a  presiding  divinity  of  the  monastic  diet.  He  also
has  much  in  common  with  the  Door-god  of  the  Mongols.^

The  Tibetan  House-god,  as  shown  in  his  figure  at  page  573.


1  Edkins,  Ohin.  Buddh.,  207.  His  official  birthday  is  the  twenty-fourth  day  of  the
sixth  month.

2  Tlie  Mongol  Door-gods  are  thus  described  by  Galsang  Czomboyef,  a  recent  Kusso-
Mongol  writer,  quoted  by  Yule  {Marco  Poio,i.,'i5Ci):  "Among  theBuryats  (who  retain
to  greatest  extent  the  old  customs  of  the  Mongols),  in  the  middle  of  the  hut,  and
place  of  honour  is  the  Dsaiagaghi,  or  '  Chief  Creator  of  Fortune.'  At  the  door  is  the
Emelgelji,  the  tutelary  of  the  herds  and  young  cattle,  made  of  sheep-skins.  Outside  the
hut  is  the  QlmndaglMt  a,  a  name  implying  that  the  idol  was  formed  of  a  white  hare-skin,
the  tutelary  of  the  chase  and  perhaps  of  war.  All  these  have  been  expelled  by
Buddhism  except  Dsaiagachi,  who  is  called  Tengri  (=  Heaven),  and  introduced
among  the  Buddhist  divinities  "  as  a  kind  of  Indra.  Those  placed  at  side  of  door  are
not  prayed  to,  but  are  offered  a  portion  of  the  food  or  drink  at  meal  times  by  greas-
ing the  mouths  of  the  fetishes,  and  sprinkling  some  of  the  broth  by  them.


THE  HOUSE-QOD.  373


is  anthropomorphic,  with  a  piggish  head,  and  flowing  robes.  He
is  called  "  the  inside  god,"  ^  and  is  a  genius  loci  of  the  class  called
by  the  Tibetans  "  earth-masters  "  (Sab-dag).

As  he  is  of  a  roving  disposition,  occupying  different  parts  of
the  house  at  different  seasons,  his  presence  is  a  constant  source  of
anxiety  to  the  householders  ;  for  no  objects  may  invade  or  occupy
the  place  where  he  has  taken  up  his  position,  nor  may  it  be  swept
or  in  any  way  disturbed  without  incurring  his  deadly  wrath.
Thus  it  happens  that  an  unsophisticated  visitor,  on  entering  a
Tibetan  house  and  seeing  a  vacant  place  near  at  hand,  sets  there
his  hat,  only,  however,  to  have  it  instantly  snatched  up  by  his
host  in  holy  horror,  with  the  hurried  explanation  that  the  god  is
at  present  occupying  that  spot.

It  is  some  satisfaction,  however,  to  find  that  all  the  house-gods
of  the  land  regulate  their  movements  in  the  same  definite  and
known  order.  Thus  in  the  first  and  second  months  he  occupies
the  centre  of  the  house,  and  is  then  called  "  The  Gel-thwii  house-
god."

In  the  third  and  fourth  months  the  god  stands  in  the  doorway
and  is  called  "  the  door-god  of  the  horse  and  yak."

In  the  fifth  month  he  stands  under  the  eaves,  and  is  called
"  ya-ngas-pa."

In  the  sixth  month  he  stands  at  the  south-west  corner  of  the
house.

In  the  seventh  and  eighth  months  he  stands  under  the  eaves.
In  the  ninth  and  tenth  months  he  stands  in  the  fire-tripod  or
grate.

In  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  months  he  stands  at  the  kitchen
hearth,  where  a  place  is  reserved  for  him.  He  is  then  called
"  the  kitchen-god."

His  movements  thus  bear  a  certain  relation  to  the  season,  as  he
is  outside  in  the  hottest  weather,  and  at  the  fire  in  the  coldest.

Formerly  his  movements  were  somewhat  different ;  and  accord-
ing to  the  ancient  style  he  used  to  circulate  much  more  exten-
sively and  frequently.^


1  Nan-lJm.  , ■ ,  x ■ t j

2  As  detailed  in  my  article  on  the  subject  in  Journ.Anlhropolo(iicalIn.'stdate,l.onaon,

1894.


374  PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND  IMAGES.

The  other  precautions  entailed  by  his  presence,  and  the  penal-
ties for  disturbing  him,  are  these  : —

In  the  first  and  second  months,  when  the  god  is  in  the  middle  of
the  house,  the  fire-grate  must  not  be  placed  there,  but  removed  to
a  corner  of  the  room,  and  no  dead  body  must  be  deposited  there.
While  he  is  at  the  door,  no  bride  or  bridegroom  may  come  or  go,
nor  any  corpse.  Should,  however,  there  be  no  other  way  of  in-
gress or  egress,  such  as  by  a  window  or  otherwise,  and  there  be
urgent  necessity  for  the  passage  of  a  bride,  bridegroom,  or  corpse,
then  the  images  of  a  horse  and  a  yak  must  be  made  with  wheaten
flour,  and  on  each  of  them  is  placed  some  skin  and  hair  of  each  of
the  animals  represented.  Tea  and  beer  are  then  offered  to  the
god,  who  is  invited  to  sit  on  the  images  thus  provided  for
him.  The  door  is  then  unhinged  and  carried  outside,  and  the
bride,  bridegroom,  or  corpse  passes,  and  the  door  is  restored  to  its
place.

When  he  is  at  the  kitchen  fire,  no  part  of  the  hearth  can  be  re-
moved or  mended,  and  no  corpse  may  be  placed  there,  nor  must
any  marriage  then  take  place.  And  should  any  visitor  arrive,  he
must  be  screened  off  from  the  fireplace  by  a  blanket,  and  a  scrip-
ture (the  "  ch'os-mge-khri ")  read  to  avert  his  wrath.

When  he  is  in  the  verandah  he  gives  very  little  trouble.  Only
at  that  time  no  one  may  whitewash  or  repair  the  outside  of  the
house.

And  as  a  general  precautionary  measure  once  every  year,  and
at  extra  times,  whenever  any  suspicion  arises  that  the  god  may
have  been  slighted  or  is  offended,  it  is  necessary  to  get  the  Lamas
to  propitiate  him  by  doing  "  The  water  sacrifice  for  the  eight
injurers.''

VIII. Personal  Gods  or  "  Familiars."

These  are  comparable  to  the  daimon  or  familiar-spirits  of  the
Greeks.  But  in  Tibet  the  body  of  each  individual  is  beset  by  a
number  of  personal  sprites.'

Each  Tibetan  carries  the  following  familiar  spirits  extra  to  the  two
Buddhist  angels,  good  and  bad,  which  sit  upon  the  right  and  left
shoulder  respectively  and  prompt  to  good  deeds  or  to  sins,  namely,

^  Cf.  my  Ldmaism  in  Silchim.


BODILY  OR  PERSONAL GODS.  375

the  jj'o,  ma,  z'an,  da,  or  enemy  (-defeating)  god,  vulgarly  called
dab-lha.  This  enemy-god  sits  on  the  right  shoulder  of  every
Tibetan.

"Worship  of  the  p'o-lha  secures  long  life  and  defence  against
accident ;  by  worshipping  the  da-lha  enemies  are  overcome.
Worship  of  the  ma-lha  and  z'an-lha  procures  physical  strength ;
worship  of  the  yul-lha  glory  and  dominion,  and  of  the  nor-lha
wealth.

The  greatest  of  these  gods  is  the  Eneiny  (-defeating)  god,  a  sort
of  Hercules,  who  resembles  in  many  ways  the  war-god  of  the
Chinese — Kwan-te,  an  apotheosized  hero — though  the  Lamas
endeavour  to  identify  him  with  the  Buddhist  Mara,  the  god  of
passion.  As  seen  from  his  figure,  in  the  upper  compartment  of
the  Wheel  of  Life  at  page  102,  he  is  of  un-Indian  aspect : —

He  is  of  a  white  colour  clad  in  golden  mail  and  flying  on  a  white
horse  through  the  clouds.  In  his  uplifted  right  hand  he  holds  a  whip
with  three  knots  and  in  his  left  hand  a  spear  with  a  stream  of  the
five-coloured  silks.  The  blade  of  the  spear  is  blue,  bordered  by  fl'ames,
and  at  its  base  the  two  divine  eyes,  and  below  the  blade  is  a  ring  of  yak-
.  hair-bristle.  His  bow-sheath  is  of  a  leopard  hide  and  his  quiver  of
tiger  skin.  A  sword  is  thrust  into  his  waist-belt,  and  from  each
shoulder  springs  a  lion  and  a  tiger.  The  mirror  of  fore-knowledge  is
suspended  from  hia  neck.  He  is  accompanied  by  a  black  dog,  a  black
bear,  and  a  man-monkey;  and  birds  circle  around  his  head.

Each  class  of  these  local  and  personal  gods  has  its  particular
season  for  popular  worship,  thus  : —

The  Earth-gods  (sa-^z'i  mi-rig-gi  Iha)  are  worshipped  especially  in  the
spring.

The  Ancestral  gods  (.smra  z'an  ch'uh-gi  Iha)  are  worshipped  in  the
summer  season.

The  three  Upper  gods  (stod-sum  pahl  Iha)  in  the  autumn;  and-

The  royal  Ancestor  of  the  Tibetan  or  SiJchim  king  («ton  mi-iiag-gi  Jha)
in  the  winter.  The  first  king  of  Mi-nag  in  eastern  Tibet  was  a  son  of
Thi-Sron  Detsan,  and  the  Sikhim  king  is  alleged  to  be  of  the  same
ancestry.

It  is  beyond  the  scope  of  our  present  subject  to  refer  to  the
heterodox  duties  of  the  aboriginal  or  Bon-pa  order.  But  it  maybe
stated  that  this  latter  religion  having  existed  for  centuries  side  by
side  with  the  more  favoured  Lamaism,  it  has  now  come  to  model
its  deities  generally  on  the  Buddhist  pattern.  A  reference  to  one
of  the  Bon  gods,  namely,  the  Ked-IUger  devil,  will  be  found  in
the  chapter  on  the  mystic  play.


376  PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND  IMAGES.

The  Saints.

The  saints  of  Lamaism  may  be  divided  into  the  Indian  and  the
Tibetan,  inclusive  of  a  few  Chinese  and  Mongolian.  They  are
usually  figured  with  a  halo  around  their  heads,  and  when  attended
by  disciples  they  are  always  represented  much  larger  in  size  than
the  latter  ;  and,  in  keeping  with  the  later  fiction  of  re-incarnate
Lamas,  they  are  usually  surrounded  by  a  few  scenes  of  their  so-
called  former  births.

Of  the  Indian  saints  the  chief  are  : —

I.  The  Ten  Chief  Disciples  of  Buddha.
The  highest  of  these  is  "  the  model  pair,"  Sariputra  and  Maha-
Maugdalayana,  the  right-  and  left-hand  disciples  of  Buddha,  and
generally  represented  in  a  standing  posture,  carrying  a  begging-
bowl  and  alarm-staff,  or  with  the  hands  joined  in  adoration  of
Sakya  Muni.^  After  these  the  best  known  are  Maha-kasyapa,  the
president  of  the  first  council  and  the  first  "patriarch,"  Upali,
Subhuti,  and  Buddha's  cousin  and  favourite  attendant,  Ananda.

II. The  Sixteen  STSTA  VIMA,  or  Chief  Apostles  or  Missionaries. .
T.,  gNas-brtan  =  "The  Steadfast  Holders  (of  the  Doctrine)."

These  are  called  by  the  Chinese  and  Japanese  "the  sixteen
Eahan  "  (=  Skt.,  Arhat),  or  "  Lohan."

Several  of  them  lived  after  Buddha's  day;  and  latterly  two  other
saints  were  added  to  the  list,  namely,  Dharmatrata  and  Hvashang,
bringing  the  number  up  to  eighteen.  Other  conventional  groups
of  Arhats  are  the  108,  500,  1,000,  etc.^

Each  of  these  Sthavira  or  Arhats  is  figured  in  a  fixed  attitude,
and  each  has  his  distinctive  symbol  or  badge,  like  our  apostles,  as
Mark  with  a  lion,  Luke  with  a  book,  etc.

The  descriptive  list  of  these  sixteen  StJiavira  is  briefly^ : — •

1.  Angira-ja  (T.,  Yan-lag  'byun),  "the  limb-born."  Holds  incense
censer  and  cow  tail  fly-whisk  fan.  He  went  as  missionary  to  the  Te-Se
mountains  around  Manasrovara  lake  (Jaesch.,  Z>.,  203),  or  to  mount
Kailas  (Schibf.,  Lebensb.).

2.  Ajita (T., Ma-p'am-pa), "the unconquered." Hands in the

1  Cf.  CsobTa's  Ah.,  48  ;  Raj.  Lai  Mitea's  trans.  Lalita  Vist.,  10.

^  For  descriptions  of  many  of  these  see  Taeanatha's  niDsad-bri/ya,  and  his  Hist,  of
Ind.  Budd.,  trans,  by  Schiefner ;  also  Eitel's  Handhk.,  and  Pander's  Panth.
s  For  their  figures  and  some  details  cf.  Pandee's  Panth.  (loc.  cit),  pp.  83  et  seq.


THE  SAINTS— DISCIPLES.  377

"impartial"  attitude. A  rishi,  or  sage,  of  mount  Usira  (Nos-se-la).^
His  statue  is  one  of  the  few  which  is  prepared  singly.

3.  Vana-vasa  (T.,  Nags-na-gnas),  "  forest-dweller."  Right  hand  in
sdigs-Me  dsub  attitude  ;  left  holds  a  cow-tail  fly-whisk.  He  went  to
"  The  seven-leaves  mountain  "  (Loma-bdun).  According  to  Schief.,  he
remained  at  Sravasti.

4.  Kdlika  (T.,  Dus-ldan-rdorje),  "  timely."  Wears  a  golden  earring
as  a  badge. He  went  to  Tamradvipa  (  =  ?  Tamluk  in  S.W.  Bengal).

5.  Fajraputra  (T.,  rDo-rje-mo'-bu)  "  son  of  the  thunderbolt."  Right
hand  in  sDigs-mdsub  attitude,  and  left  carries  fly-whisk.  He  went  to
Ceylon.

6.  Bhadra  (T.,  bZah-po)  "  the  noble."  Right  hand  in  preaching,
and  left  in  meditative  attitude — the  latter  hand  usually  bearing  a
book. He  went  to  Yamunadvlpa.

7.  Kanaka-vatsa  (T.,  gSer-be'u),  "  golden  calf."  Carries  a  jewelled
snare. He  went  to  the  Saifron-peak  in  Kashmir.

8.  Kanaha-hhara-dvaja.  Hands  in  "  impartial  "  attitude.  He  went
to  Apara-Godhanya  (Nub-kyi-ba  glan  spyod-glin).

9.  Yahula,  carries  an  ichneumon  (Nakula)  like  the  god  of  riches.
On  this  account.  Pander  notes  (p.  86)  that  the  Tibetans  probably  knew
this  saint  as  "  Nakula."  He  went  to  Uttarakuru  (byan-gi-sgra-mi-
sBian).

10.  Rahula  (T.,  sGra-c'an-zin  [?  'dsin]).  Holds  a  jewelled  crown.
Pander  believes  that  this  simile  is  probably  suggested  by  interpreting
the  name  as  " sgra-rgyan-'dsin,"  or  "holding  a  crown."  He  went  to
Pri-yan-gu-dvipa  (  =  ?  Prayag,  or  Allahabad).

11.  Cuda-panihaka  (T.,  Lam-p'ran-bstan).  Hands  in  "impartial"
pose. He  went  to  Gridrakuta  hill  in  Magadha.^

12.  -BAarac^iJa/a  (T.,  Bha-ra-dva-dsa-bsod-snoms-len).  Holds  book  and
begging-bowl.  Went  to  the  eastern  Videka.  He  is  usually  identified
with  the  "  Binzuru  "  of  the  Japanese.

13.  Panihaku  (T.,  Lam-bstan).  Hands  in  preaching  attitude  with
a  book.

14.  Nagasena  (T.,  kLu'i-sde).  Holds  a  vase,  and  an  alarm-staff.  He
went  to  "  the  king  of  mountains,"  Urumunda  (Sos-yans).  This  seems
to  be  the  Arhat  who  is  known  to  southern  Buddhists  as  the  author  of
the  celebrated  dialogues  with  Menander  (Milinda).

15.  Gopaka  (T.,  shed-byed),  holds  a  book. Went  to  Mt.  Bi-hu.

16 (T.,  Mi-p'yed)  Holds  "  the  oaitya  of  perfection." He

went  to  the  Himalayas.

The  additional  pair  of  saints  who  are  usually  associated  with  the
above  are  : —

Dharmatrata  or  Dharmatala  (T.,  dGe-bsnen  dharma).  Holds  a  vase
and  fly-whisk  and  carries  on  his  back  a  bundle  of  books,  and  he  gazes  at  a
small  image  of  Buddha  Amitabha.  As  he  is  only  a  lay-devotee  he  has
long  hair. He  was  born  in  Gandhara  and  seems  to  be  the  uncle  of

1  Schief.,  Lebensb.,  92.  ^  Cf.  Jaesch.,  D.,  372.


378  PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND  IMAGES.

Vasumitra. Of  his  seven  works  the  chief  are  the  Udanavarga  (trans-
lated by  Rockhill),  and  the  Samyuktabhidharma  Sastra.

Hvashmig  corresponds  to  the  Chinese  "Huo-shang"  or  priest  with  the
sack.'  He  is  a  sort  of  lay-patron  or  "  dispenser  of  alms "  to  the
disciples ;  and  is  represented  as  a  good-natured  person  of  portly
dimensions,  in  a  sitting  position.  His  attributes  are  a  sack,  a  rosary
in  his  right  hand  and  a  peach  in  his  left,  while  little  urchins  or  goblins
play  around  him.  The  name  in  Chinese  is  said  by  Pander  to  be  also
rendered  "the  dense-smoke  Maitreya  Buddha,"  and  he  isexplained  as  the
last  incarnation  of  Maitreya  who  is  at  present  enthroned  in  the  Tushita
heavens.  In  the  entrance  hall  of  all  the  larger  temples  in  China  we  find
the  colossal  statue  of  this  big-bellied,  laughing  Maitreya  surrounded  by
the  four  kings  of  the  universe.

III.  Other  MahaySna  Saints.
The  other  Indian  saints  of  the  Mahayana  school  who  are  most
worshipped  by  the  Lamas  are :  Asvaghosha,  Nagarjuna  (kLu-grub),
Arya-deva  (P'ags-pa-lha),  Kumarala,  Asanga  (T'ogs-med),  Vasu-
bandhu  (dByig-gnan),  Dharma-kirti  (Ch'os-grags),  Candra-kirti
(zla-wa-grags) ;  and  the  more  modern  Santa-rakshita  and  Atisa-
Dipamkara. Figures  of  most  of  these  have  already  been  given.^

IV. T5.NTEIK  WIZAED-PEIESTS.

T.'Grub-t'ob  ch'en  or  "  grub-c'hen  (Skt.,  Siddlia  or  Mahdsiddha).

This  degraded  class  of  Indian  Buddhist  priest  (see  figure  on
page  16)  is  most  popular  with  the  Lamas.  They  are  credited  with
supernatural  powers,  by  being  in  league  with  the  demons.  They
are  usually  figured  with  long  untonsured  locks,  and  almost  naked.

The  chief  of  these  Indian  priests  is  St.  Padma-sambhava,  the
founder  of  Lamaism. Others  are

Savari  (Sa-pa-ri-pa),  Rahulabhadra  or  Saraha  (Sa-ra-ha-pa),  Matsyo-
dara  (Lu-i-pa),  Lalita-vajra,  Krishncarin  or  Kalacarita  (Nag-po-spyod-
pa) ;  and  more  modern  Telopa  or  Tila  and  Naro.'  These  latter  two  are
apparently  named  after  the  Indian  monasteries  of  Tilada  and  Nalanda.

St.  Padma-sambhava  receives  more  active  worship  than  any  of
the  others.  Indeed,  he  is  deified.  He  is  most  commonly  worshipped
in  the  form  shown  in  the  centre  of  the  plate  on  page  24.  He  sits
dressed  a;s  a  native  of  Udyana,  holding  a  thunderbolt  in  his  right

i  Of.  Pander,  Panth.,  p.  89.

'  For  additional  details  see  Taeanatha's  History  (Schiefner's  transl.),  and  Pander's
I'uidh.,  pp.  47,  etc. These  first  four,  cf.  Julien's  Mmeti  Tsiang,  ii.,  214.
■'  For  some  details  and  figures  see  Pander,  Panth.,  pp.  50,  etc.


TANTRIK  SAINTS— ST.  PADMA.  379

hand  and  a  skull  of  blood  in  his  left,  and  carrying  in  his  left  arm-
pit the  trident  of  the  king  of  death.  The  top  of  this  trident
transfixes  a  freshly  decapitated  human  head,  a  wizened  head,
and  a  skull.  And  the  saint  is  attended  by  his  two  wives,
offering  him  libations  of  blood  and  wine  in  skull-bowls,  while
before  him  are  set  offerings  of  portions  of  human  corpses.

He  is  given  seven  other  forms,  wild  or  demoniacal,  which  are
shown  surrounding  him  in  that  picture.

These,  his  eight  forms,  together  with  their  usual  paraphrase,
are  here  numerated: —

I. — Guru  Pddma  Jungnii,^  "'  Born  of  a  lotus  "  for  the  happiness  of
the  three  worlds,  the  central  figure  in  the  plate.
II. — Guru  Pad/ma-sainblmva, "  Saviour  by  the  religious  doctrine.''
III. — Guru  Pddma  Oyelpo,  "  The  king  of  the three  collections  of

scriptures"  (Skt.,  "  Tripitaka ").
IV. — Guru  Ddrje  Dd-l6j'  "  The  Dorje  or  diamond  comforter  of  all."

V. — Gv,ru  Mima  Od-zer,^  "  The  enlightening  sun  of  darkness."
VI. — Guru  S'akya  Sen-ge,  "  The  second  Sakya — the  lion,"  who  does

the  work  of  eight  sages.
VII. — Gii,ru  Seng-ge  da  dolc,^  The  propagator  of  religion  in  the  six
worlds — with  "the  roaring  lion's  voice."
VIII. — G^iru  Ld-ten  Ch'og-Se,'  "The  conveyer  of knowledge  to all
worlds."
These  paraphrases  it  will  be  noted  are  mostly  fanciful,  and  not  justi-
fied by  the  title  itself.

As  he  is  the  founder  of  Lamaism,  and  of  such  prominence  in  the
system,  I  give  here  a  sketch  of  his  legendary  history : —

The  Gruru's  so-called  history,  though  "largely  interwoven  with
supernatural fantasies is  worth abstracting,®  not only for the


i  guru  pad-ma  'by^dx  gnas. Cf.  Gioegi,  p.  242,  and  figure  p.  552.

-  rdO'YJe  gro-lod.

3  nyi'tna  'od  zev.

»  Sen-ge  sgra  sgrogs.

5  hlo-ldan,  mch'g-Sred  (or?  Srid).

^  The  account  here  given  is  abstracted  from  the  following  Tibetan  works,  all  of
which  are  of  the  fictitious  "revelation."  order,  and  often  conflicting,  but  dating,  prob-
ably, to  about  six  or  seven  hundred  years  ago,  uamfely :  PadTna-hkah-fan  (or  "  The
displayed  Cotamands  of  the  Lotus-one");  Than-yig  gser-'p'ren  (or  "The  Golden
Kosary  of  Displayed-letters  ") ;  T/ian'-yig-ade-la  (or  "  The  Five  Classes  of  Displayed-
letters"),  and  a  Lepcha  version,  entitled  Taslii  Sun,  or  "History  of  the  Glorious
One,"  written  by  the  Sikhim  king  (?Gyur-mei  Nami-gyal),  who,  about  two  centuries
ago,  invented  the  so-called  Lepcha  characters  by  modifying  the  Tibetan  and  Bengali
letters.  '


380  PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND  IMAGES.

historical  texture  that  underlies  the  allegorical  figures,  but  also
for  the  insight  it  gives  into  the  genesis  and  location  of  many  of  the
demons  of  the  Lamaist  pantheon  and  the  pre-Lamaist  religion  of
Tibet.  The  story  itself  is  somewhat  romantic  and  has  the  widest
currency  in  Tibet,  where  all  its  sites  are  now  popular  places  of  pil-
grimage, sacred  to  this  deified  wizard-priest : —

The  Legbndaey  History  of  the  Founder  op  LiMAiSM.

Once  upon  a  time,  in  the  great  city  of  Jatumati^  in  the  Indian
continent,  there  dwelt  a  blind  king  named  Indrabodhi,^  who  ruled
over  the  country  of  Udyana  or  Urgyan.  The  death  of  his  only  son
plunges  the  palace  in  deepest  sorrow,  and  this  calamity  is  followed  by
famine  and  an  exhausted  treasury.  In  their  distress  the  king  and
people  cry  unto  the  Buddhas  with  many  offerings,  and  their  appeal
reaching  unto  the  paradise  of  the  great  Buddha  of  Boundless  Light
— Amitabha — this  divinity  sends,  instantly,  like  a  lightning  flash,  a
miraculous  incarnation  of  himself  in  the  form  of  a  red  ray  of  light  to
the  sacred  lake  of  that  country.

That  same  night  the  king  dreamt  a  dream  of  good  omen.  He
dreamt  that  a  golden  thunderbolt  had  come  into  his  hand,  and  his
body  shone  like  the  sun.  In  the  morning  the  royal  priest  Trignadhara"
reports  that  a  glorious  light  of  the  five  rainbow-tints  has  settled  in  the
lotus-lake  of  Dhanakosha,  and  is  so  dazzling  as  to  illuminate  the  three
"unreal"  worlds.

Then  the  king,  whose  sight  has  been  miraculously  restored,  visits  the
lake,  and,  embarking  in  a  boat,  proceeds  to  see  the  shining  wonder,  and
finds  on  the  pure  bosom  of  the  lake  a  lotus-flower  of  matchless  beauty,
on  whose  petals  sits  a  lovely  boy  of  eight  years  old,  sceptred  and
shining  like  a  god.  The  king,  falling  on  his  knees,  worships  the
infant  prodigy,  exclaiming :  "  Incomparable  boy!  who  art  thou?  Who
is  thy  father  and  what  thy  country?"  To  which  the  child  made
answer  :  "  My  Father  /know  !  I  come  in  accordance  with  the  prophecy
of  the  great  Sakya  Muni,  who  said  :  '  Twelve  hundred  years  after  me,
in  the  north-east  of  the  Urgyan  country,  in  the  pure  lake  of  Kosha,  a
person  more  famed  than  myself  will  be  born  from  a  lotus,  and  be  known
as  Padma-samhhava,  or  "  the  Lotus-born,"  *  and  he  shall  be  the  teacher
of  my  esoteric  Mantra- Aoctvine,  and  shall  dehver  all  beings  from
misery.' "

On  this  the  king  and his  subjects acknowledge  the  supernatural

1  mDses,-\da'n.

2  This  is  the  form  found  in  the  text,  while  another  MS.  gives  Indrabhuti ;  but  its
Tibetan  translation  also  gbrenisSpyan-med-'hyor-ldan,  or  "The  Eyeless  Wealthy  One,"
which  could  give  an  Indian  form  of  Andhara-basuti.

3  THij-na-'dsin.

*  Also  an  epithet  of  Brahma.


ST.  PADMA-SAMBHAVA.


381


nature  of  the  Lotus-born  boy,  and  naming  him  "  The  Lake-born  Vajra,"^
conduct  him  to  the  palace  with  royal  honours.  And  from  thenceforth
the  country  prospered,  and  the  holy  religion  became  vastly  extended.
This  event  happened  on  the  tenth  day  of  the  seventh  Tibetan  month.

In  the  palace  the  wondrous  boy  took  no  pleasure  in  ordinary  pur-
suits, but  sat  in  Buddha  fashion  musing  under  the  shade  of  a  tree  in
the  grove.  To  divert  him  from
these  habits  they  find  for  him
a  bride  in  p'Od-'c'ah-ma,^  the
daughter  ^  of  king  Candra  Goma-
shi,  of  Singala."  And  thus  is  he
kept  in  the  palace  for  five  years
longer,  till  a  host  of  gods  appear
and  declare  him  divine,  and  com-
missioned as  the  Saviour  of  the
world.  But  still  the  king  does
not  permit  him  to  renounce  his
princely  life  and  become,  as  he
desired,  an  ascetic.  The  youthful
Padma-sambhava  now  kills  several
of  the  subjects,  who,  in  their  pre-
sent or  former  lives,  had  injured
Buddhism ;  and  on  this  the  people
complain  of  his  misdeeds  to  the
king,  demanding  his  banishment,
which  sentence  is  duly  carried  out,
to  the  great  grief  of  the  king  and
the  royal  family.

The  princely  pilgrim  travels  to  the  Shitani  cemetery  of  the  cool
grove,^  where,  dwelling  in  the  presence  of  the  dead  as  a  Sosaniho "  he
seeks  communion  with  the  gods  and  demons,  of  whom  he  subjugates
many.  Thence  he  was  conducted  by  the  Dakkinis  or  witches  of  the
four  classes  to  the cave  of  Ajiiapala,'  where  he  received  instruction


The  Lotus-born  Babe.


1  rrtTs'o-skyes  rdO'Vjej-  Skt.,  Sarorulia-vajra,

2  Skt.,  Bliasadliara  or  "  The  Light-holder."

3  The  text  gives  "  wife."

4  This  is  probably  the  Sinhapura  of  Hiuen  Tsiang,  which  adjoined  Udayana  or
Udyana; or  it  may  be  Sagala.

5  bSil-ba  ts'al.  This  is  said  to  lie  to  the  east  of  India  and  to  be  the  abode  oiMung-
kara,  the  greatest  of  the  eight  great  sages  or  rig-dsin.  For  a  Mahayana  Sutra
delivered  here  by  Buddha,  see  Csoma,  An.,  p.  617.

^  SasdniM  is  one  of  the  twelve  observances  of  a  Bhikshu,  and  conveys  just  ideas
of  the  three  great  phenomena,  impermanence,  pain,  and  vacuity,  by  seeing  the
funerals,  the  grieving  relatives,  the  stench  of  corruption,  and  the  fighting  of  beasts  of
prey  for  the  remains.  Buddha  in  the  Dulva  (Rock.,  S.,  p.  29)  is  also  stated  to  have
followed  the  ascetic  practice  of  a  Sosaniho,  or  frequenter  of  cemeteries.

'  bkah-skyon,  or  command  -|-  protector  ;  it  may  also  be  Sanskritized  as  pudarsanu-
pd/a.


382  PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND  IMAGES.

ia  tlie  Asvaratna  abatikdra,  after  which  he  proceeded  to  the  countries
of  Paficha,  etc.,  where  he  received  instruction  in  the  arts  and  sciences
direct  from  old  world  sages,  who  miraculously  appeared  to  him  for  this
purpose.

Other  places  visited  by  him  were  the  cemeteries  of  the  Biddha
(?  Videha)  country,  where  he  was  called  "  the  sun's  rays,"  the  cemetery
of  hDe-ch'en  hvdal  in  Kashmir,  where  he  was  called  "  the  chief  desire
sage"  (hlo-ldan  meh'og-sred),  the  cemetery  of  Lhun-gruh-hrtsegs-pa  in
Nepal,  subjugating  the  eight  classes  of  Dam-sri  at  Yaksha  fort,  where  he
was  named  "  the  roaring  voiced  lion,"  and  to  the  cemetery  of  Lanka
hrtsegs-pa  in  the  country  of  Zahor,  where  he  was  named  Padma-sambha.

At  Zahor  (?  Lahore),  the  king's  daughter,  a  peerless  princess  who
could  find  no  partner  worthy  of  her  beauty  and  intellect,  completely
.surrendered  to  the  Guru — and  this  seems  to  be  the  "  Indian  "  princess-
wife  named  Mandarawa  Kumari  Devi,  who  was  his  constant  companion
throughout  his  Tibetan  travels.  At  Zahor  the  rival  suitors  seize  him
and  bind  him  to  a  pyre,  but  the  flames  play  harmlessly  round  him,  and
he  is  seen  within  seated  serenely  on  a  lotus-flower.  Another  mii-acle
attributed  to  him  is  thus  related  :  Athirst  one  day  he  seeks  a  wine-
shop, and,  with  companions,  drinks  deeply,  till,  recollecting  that
he  has  no  money  wherewith  to  pay  his  bill,  he  asks  the  merchant  to
delay  settlement  till  sunset,  to  which  the  merchant  agrees,  and  states
that  he  and  his  comrades  meanwhile  may  drink  their  fill.  But  the
Guru  arrests  the  sun's  career,  and  plagues  the  country  with  full  day-
light for  seven  days.  The  wine-seller,  now  in  despair,  wipes  off  their
debt,  when  welcome  night  revisits  the  sleepy  world.

The  leading  details  of  his  defeat  of  the  local  devils  of  Tibet  are
given  in  the  footnote .^

'  When  the  Guru,  after  passing  through  Nepal,  reached  Man-yul,  the  enemy-god
{dgra-lha)  of  Z'an-z'nii,  named  Dm-mun,  tried  to  destroy  him  by  squeezing  him
between  two  mountains,  but  he  overcame  her  by  his  irdhi-povfer  of  soaring  in  the
sky.  He  then  received  her  submission  and  her  promise  to  become  a  guardian  of
Lamaism  under  the  religious  name  of  rDo-rje  Gyu-hun-Ma.

E-lca-dsa-ti. — When  the  Guru  reached  giVam-t'aa-mk'ar-ttaj',  the  white  iiendess  of  that
place  showered  thunderbolts  upon  him,  without,  however,  harming  him.  The  Guru
retaliated  by  melting  her  snow-dwelling  into  a  lake ;  and  the  discomfited  fury  fled
into  the  lake  T'an-Apal-mo-ipal,  which  the  Guru  then  caused  to  boil.  But  though
her  flesh  boiled  off  her  bones,  still  she  did  not  emerge ;  so  the  Guru  threw  in  his
thunderbolt,  piercing  her  right  eye.  Then  came  she  forth  and  offered  up  to  him  her
life-essence,  and  was  thereon  named  Gans-Akar-sha-med-TJDo-rje-sPyan-gciff-nia,  or  "  The
Snow-white,  Fleshless,  One-eyed  Ogress  of  the  Vajra."

The  twelve  Tdn-ma  Furies. — Then  the  Guru  marched  onward,  and  reached  U-jivjj-hre-
mo-snar,  where  the  twelve  hsian-ma  (see  figure,  page  27)  furies  hurled  thunderbolts  at
him,  and  tried  to  crush  him  between  mountains;  but  the  Guru  evaded  them  by
flying  into  the  sky,  and  with  his  "  pointing-finger  "  charmed  their  thunderbolts  into
cinders.  And  by  his  pointing-finger  he  cast  the  hills  and  mountains  upon  their  snowy
dwellings.  Thereupon  the  twelve  hstan-ma,  with  all  their  retinue  thwarted  and  sub-
dued, offered  him  their  life-essence,  and  so  were  brought  under  his  control.

Dam-c'au-rDor-legs.—Then  the  Guru,  pushing  onward,  reached  the  fort  of  U-jiug-hye-


TIBETAN  SAINTS.  383


The  Tibetan  and  other  non-Indian  canonized  saints  may  generally
be  recognized  by  their  un-Indian  style  of  dress,  and  even  when
they  are  bare-headed  and  clad  in  the  orthodox  Buddhist  robes
they  always  wear  an  inner  garment  extra  to  the  Indian  fashion.

The  various  Tibetan  saints,  excluding  the  apotheosized  heroes
already  referred  to,  are  held  in  different  estimation  by  the
different  sects,  each  of  whom  holds  its  own  particular  sectarian

tshan'-rdsoii,  where  he  was  opposed  by  dG-e-bsne)i  r Do-rje-legs-pa  (see  figure,  p.  26)
with  his  three  hundred  and  sixty  followers,  who  all  were  subjected  and  the  leader
appointed  a  guardian  (hsrung-nia)  of  the  Lamaist  doctrine.

Yar-lha-sham-po.  — Then  the  Guru,  going  forward,  reached  Sham-po-lim,  where  the
demon  Yar-lha-sham-po  transformed  himself  into  a  huge  mountain-like  white  yak,
whose  breath  belched  forth  like  great  clouds,  and  whose  grunting  sounded  like  thunder.
Bu-yug  gathered  at  his  nose,  and  he  rained  thunderbolts  and  hail.  Then  the  Guru
caught  the  demon's  nose  by  "  the  iron-hook  gesture,"  bound  his  neck  by  "  the  rope
gesture,"  bound  his  feet  by  "the  fetter-gesture";  and  the  yak,  maddened  by  the
super-added  "  bell-gesture,"  transformed  himself  into  a  young  boy  dressed  in  white
silk,  who  offered  up  to  the  Guru  his  life-essence ;  and  so  this  adversary  was  sub-
jected.

Tan'-lha  the  great  gS'an. — Then  the  Guru  proceeded  to  Phya-than-la  pass,  where
the  demon  gNan-cKen-fan-lha  transformed  himself  into  a  great  white  snake,  with  his
head  in  the  country  of  (rru-gxi,  and  his  tail  in  gYer-mo-thm  country,  drained  by  the
Mongolian  river  Sok-Ch'u,  and  thus  seeming  like  a  chain  of  mountains  he  tried  to  bar
the  Guru's  progress.  But  the  Guru  threw  the  lin-gyi  over  the  snake.  Then  the
T'ah'-lha,  in  fury,  rained  thunderbolts,  which  the  Guru  turned  to  fishes,  frogs,  and
snakes,  which  fled  to  a  neighbouring  lake.  Then  the  Guru  melted  his  snowy
dwelling,  and  the  god,  transforming  himself  into  a  young  boy  dressed  in  white  silk,
with  a  turquoise  diadem,  offered  up  his  life-essence,  together  with  that  of  all  his
retinue,  and  so  he  was  subjected.

The  Injurers. — Then  the  Guru,  proceeding  onwards,  arrived  at  the  northern  Phan-
yal-thang,  where  the  three  Injurers — sTing-lo-sman  of  the  north,  sTing-sman-zor
gdon-ina,  and  sTmg-sman-ston — sent  hurricanes  to  bar  the  Guru's  progress.  On  which
the  Guru  circled  "  the  wheel  of  fire  "  with  his  pointing-finger,  andthus  arrested  the  wind,
and  melted  the  snowy  mountains  like  butter  before  a  red  hot  iron.  Then  the  three
gyod-sbyia,  being  discomfited,  offered  up  their  life-essence  and  so  were  subjected.

The  Black  Devils. — Then  the  Guru,  going  onward,  xedMhed.  gNam-gyi-shug-mthon-
glang-sgrom,  where  he  opened  the  magic  circle  or  Mandala  of  the  Five  Families  (of  the
Buddhas)  for  seven  days,  after  which  all  the  commanders  of  the  host  of  hDud-Deril
offered  their  life-essence  and  so  were  subjected.

Tlie-u-ran. — Then  the  Guru  went  to  the  country  of  gLa-wa-t'kan-c'ig-ma,  where  he
brought  all  the  The-u-ran  demons  under  subjection.

The  Mi-ma-yin  Devils. — When  the  Guru  was  sitting  in  the  cave  of  Senge-h-ag-pMg,
the  demon  Ma-sans-gyah-spartg-shjes-skig,  desiring  to  destroy  him,  came  into  his
presence  in  the  form  of  an  old  woman  with  a  turquoise  cap,  and  rested  her  head  on
the  Guru's  lap  and  extended  her  feet  towards  Gye-mo-tkan  and  her  hands  towards
the  white  snowy  mountain  Ti-si.  Then  many  thousands  of  Mi-ma-yin  surrounded
the  Guru  menacingly ;  but  he  caused  the  Five  Fierce  Demons  to  appear,  and  so  he
subjected  the  Mi-ma-yin.

Ma-mo,  etc. — Then  he  subjected  all  the  Ma-mo  and  "blSemo  of  Ch'u-lo-ri  and  Klia-i-ah,
and  going  to  Sil-ma,  in  the  province  of  Tsang,  he  subjected  all  the  sMan-mo. And  going


384  PANTHEON,  SAINTS,  AND  IMAGES.

founder  to  be  pre-eminent.  Thus  the  established  church  gives
the  chief  place  to  Tson-K'a-pa  and  the  chief  pupils  of  Atisa ;  the
Kar-gyu  sect  to  Mila-ras-pa,  the  Sa-kya-pa  to  Sa-kya  Pandita,  and
so  on.  And  each  sub-sect  has  canonized  its  own  particular  chief.
The  innumerable  Lamas  who  now  pose  as  re-incarnations  of
deceased  Lamas,  also  receive  homage  as  saints,  and  on  their  decease
have  their  images  duly  installed  and  worshipped. Some  saints  are

to  the  country  of  Hon  he  subjected  all  the  Dam-m.  And  going  to  Rong-lung-Tiag-po
he  subjected  all  the  Snn-po.  And  going  to  central  Tibet  (db?7s)  towards  the  country
of  the  lake  Manasarova  {nial-dro),  he  subjected  all  the  Ndgds  of  the  mal-dro  lake,
who  offered  him  seven  thousand  golden  coins.  And  going  to  Gyu-'dsm-plmg-mo,  he
subjected  all  the  Pho-rgyud.  And  going  to  D\mg-yadog-hrag-<i.mar,  he  subjected  all
the  smell  eating  Jh-iza  {?  Gandharxa).  And  going  to  Qan-pa-ch'u-mig,  he  subjected
all  the  AGe-sfien.  And  going  to  Bye-Tiia-ral-hhar,  he  subjected  all  the  eight  classes
of  Lha-srin.  And  going  to  the  snowy  mountain  Ti-si,  he  subjected  all  the  twenty-
eight  Nahshetras.  And  going  to  Lha-rgoA-gans,  he  subjected  the  eight  planets.  And
going  to  Bu-le-gans,  he  subjected  all  the  'dre  of  the  peaks,  the  country,  and  the
dwelling-sites,  all  of  whom  offered  him  every  sort  of  worldly  wealth.  And  going  to
gLo-bor,  he  subjected  all  the  nine  IDan-ma-spvn.  Then  he  was  met  by  Gans-Tje-jo-wo
at  Pho-ma-gans,  where  he  brought  him  under  subjection.  Then  having  gone  to
rTse-lha-gafis,  he  subjected  the  vTse-snum.  And  going  to  sTod-lung,  he  subjected  all
the  hTsan.  Then  having  gone  to  Zul-p^ul-rkyan-gram-iu-Vsal^  he  remained  for  one
month,  during  which  he  subjugated  gzah-\ioliid  and  three  Dam-m.

And  having  concealed  many  scriptures  as  revelations,  he  caused  each  of  these
fiends  to  guard  one  apiece.  With  this  he  completed  the  subjection  of  the  host  of
malignant  devils  of  Tibet.

Then  the  Guru  proceeded  to  Lhasa,  where  he  rested  awhile,  and  then  went
towards  sTod-lmi.  At  that  time  mnah-bdag-rgyal-po  sent  his  minister,  Lha-hsa^-
i.hi-dpal,  with  a  letter  and  three  golden  Fata,  silken  clothes,  horses,  and  divers  good
presents,  accompanied  by  five  hundred  cavalry.  These  met  him  at  sTod-lnii-gshon-pa,
where  the  minister  offered  the  presents  to  the  Guru.  At  that  time  all  were  athirst,  but
no  water  or  tea  was  at  hand,  so  the  Guru  touched  the  rook  of  sTod-lun-gzhon-pa,
whence  water  sprung  welling,  out ;  which  he  told  the  minister  to  draw  in  a  vessel.
Hence  that  place  is  called  to  this  day  gz'on-pai-lha-ch'u  or  "  The  water  of  the  God's
vessel."

From  Sao-po-ri  the  Guru  went  to  Hufi-k'ar,  where  he  met  King  mS^ah-idag-
rgyal-po,  who  received  him  with  honour  and  welcome.  Now  the  Guru,  remembering
his  own  supernatural  origin  and  the  king's  carnal  birth,  expected  the  king  to  salute
him,  so  remained  standing.  But  the  king  thought,  "  I  am  the  king  of  the  black-
headed  men  of  Tibet,  so  the  Guru  must  first  salute  me."  While  the  two  were
possessed  by  these  thoughts,  the  Guru  related  how  through  the  force  of  prayers  done
at  Bya-ruii-E'a-shcrr  stripa  in  Nepal  (see  p.  315)  in  former  births,  they  two  have
come  here  together.  The  Guru  then  extended  his  right  hand  to  salute  the  king,  but
fire  darted  forth  from  his  finger-tips,  and  catching  the  dress  of  the  king,  set  it  on  fire.
And  at  the  same  time  a  great  thunder  was  heard  in  the  sky,  followed  by  an  earthquake.
Then  the  king  and  all  his  ministers  in  terror  prostrated  themselves  at  the  feet  of  the
Guru.

Then  the  Guru  spoke,  saying,  "  As  a  penance  for  not  having  promptly  saluted  me,
erect  five  stone  stiipas."  These  the  king  immediately  erected,  and  they  were  named
^wa-rf^kar-mch^od-rteih,  and  exist  up  till  the  present  day.


DEMONIFIED  PRIESTS.  385

entirely  of  local  repute,  and  the  ghosts  of  many  deceased  Lamas
are  worshipped  in  the  belief  that  they  have  become  malignant
spirits  who  wreak  their  wrath  on  their  former  associates  and
pupils.

Amongst  the  earlier  Tibetans  who  are  generally  accorded  the
position  of  saints  are  king  Sron  Tsan  Grampo,  his  two  wives
and  minister  Ton-mi,  who  were  associated  with  the  introduction
of  Buddhism  to  Tibet,  king  Thi-Sron  Detsan,  who  patronized


^^5\-  ^S]-^  ^^^  '^^  ^T  ^


Demonified  Tibetan  Pbiests.i

the  founding  of  Lamaism,  the  earlier  translators  of  the  scriptures,
and  especially  those  associated  with  St.  Atisa.

One  of  the  popular  saints  is  the  famous  engineer,  T'an-ton
rGryal-po,  whose  image  or  picture  is  often  found  in  Lamaist
temples.  He  lived  in  the  first  half  of  the  fifteenth  century  a.d.,
and  is  celebrated  for  having  built  eight  iron-chain  suspension-
bridges  over  the  great  river  of  central  Tibet,  the  Yarn  Tsah-po ;
and  several  of  these  bridges  still  survive.^

1  After  Uander.

2  Regarding  his  image  in  the  cathedral  of  Lhasa,  the  sacristan  related  the  following
legend  to  Sarat:  T'an-ton  feared  the  miseries  of  this  world  very  much,  having
inhabited  it  in  former  existences.  Accordingly  he  contrived  to  remain  sixty  years  in
his  mother's  womb.  There  he  sat  in  profound  meditation,  concentrating  his  mind
most  earnestly  on  the  well-being  of  all  living  creatures.  At  the  end  of  sixty  years
he  began  to  realize  that,  while  meditating  for  the  good  of  others,  he  was  neglecting
the  rather  prolonged  sufferings  of  his  mother.  So  he  forthwith  quitted  the  womb,
and  came  into  the  world  already  provided  with  grey  hair,  and  straightway  com-
menced preaching.

C  0


386


PANTHEON,  SAINTS, AND  IMAGES.


Certain  titles  have  come  to  be  restricted  to  particular  saints.
Thus  "  (His)  Precious  Eeverence  "  (Je-rin-po-c'e)  is  St.  Tson  K'a-pa,
"  (His)  Eeverence  "  (Je-tsiin)  is  St.  Mila-raspa,  "  (His)  Holy  Eever-
ence "  (Je-tsun  dam-pa)  is  Taranatha,  "  The  Teacher  "  (sLob-dpon)
is  St.  Padma-sambhava,  and  the  Sakya  Lama  is  "  (His)  High-
ness."


9»9S^


Mystic  Monogbam.
(Nam-cu-van-dan.)
See  p.  142,  f.-n.  6.


XV.


SACRED SYMBOLS AND CHARMS.

JOST  religions  of  the  present  day  teem  with  symboHsm,
which  is  woven  so  closely  into  the  texture  of  the
creeds  that  it  is  customary  to  excuse  its  presence  by
alleging  that  it  is  impossible  to  convey  to  the  people
spiritual  truths  except  in  material  forms.  Yet  we  have  only  to
look  at  Muhammadanism,  one  of  the  great  religions  of  the  world,
and  still  actively  advancing,  to  see  that  it  appeals  successfully  to
the  most  uneducated  and  fanatical  people,  although  it  is  prac-
tically devoid  of  symbolism,  and  its  sanctuary  is  a  severely  empty
building,  wholly  unadorned  with  images  or  pictures.  People,
however,  who  are  endowed  with  artistic  sense,  tend  to  clothe  their
religion  with  symbolism.

c  c  2


388  SACRED  SYMBOLS  AND CHASMS.

The  symbols  proper,  extra  to  the  symbolic  representations  of
the  deities  dealt  with  in  the  preceding  chapter,  are  conventional
signs  or  diagrams,  or  pictures  of  animals,  mythological  or  other-
wise, or  of  plants  and  inanimate  objects;  and  in  Tibet  they  are
very  widely  met  with.  They  are  painted  or  carved  on  houses  and
furniture,  and  emblazoned  on  boxes  and  embroidery,  and  on
personal  ornaments,  trinkets,  charms,  etc.

The  extremely  rich  symbolism  found  in  Lamaism  is  largely  of
Indian  and  Chinese  origin.  Its  emblems  are  mainly  of  a  conven-
tional Hindii  kind,  more  or  less  modified  to  adapt  them  to  their
Buddhist  setting.  Others  are  derived  from  the  Chinese,  and  a  few
only  are  of  Tibetan  '  origin.  These  latter  are  mostly  of  a  very
crude  kind,  like  the  rebuses  common  in  mediaeval  England  for  the
use  of  the  illiterate.

In  this  place,  also,  we  can  most  conveniently  glance  at  the
mystic  value  of  numbers ;  the  "  magic-circle  "  offering  in  effigy
of  the  universe,  etc.,  which  enters  into  the  daily  worship  of  every
Lama ;  and  the  charms  against  sickness  and  accidents,  ill-luck,
etc.,  and  the  printed  charms  for  luck  which  form  the  "  prayer-
flags,"  and  the  tufts  of  rags  affixed  to  trees,  bridges,  etc.

The  Lotus. — -Most  of  the  sacred  emblems,  as  well  as  the  images
of  divinities,  it  will  be  noticed,  are  figured  upon  a  lotus-flower.
This  expresses  the  Hindii  idea  of  super-human  origin.  The  lotus
upon  the  lake  seems  to  spring  from  the  body  of  the  waters  without
contact  with  the  sordid  earth,  and,  no  matter  how  muddy  the
water  may  be,  the  lotus  preserves  its  own  purity  undefiled.

The  various  kinds  of  lotuses  figured  at  page  S3^  are  given
special  uses.  The  red  lotus  is  common  to  most  deities  and  divine
symbols ;  the  white  lotus  is  special  to  Avalokita ;  the  blue  one  to
Tara ;  and  when  a  demon  is  figured  upon  a  lotus  the  latter  is  a
pinkish  variety  of  the  white  form,  with  the  petals  much  notched
or  divided.

The  Three  G-ems  {Tri-ratna}),  symbolic  of  the  Trinity :
Buddha,  his  Word,  and  the  Church.  These  are  usually  figured
(as  in  No.  2  on  next  page)  as  three  large  egg-shaped  gems,  with
the  narrow  ends  directed  downwards,  and  the  central  member  is
placed  slightly  above  the  other  two,  so  as  to  give  symmetry  to  the
group,  which  is  usually  surrounded  by  flames.

1  Tib.,  dKon-mch'og-gsum,  or  "  The  rarest  ones."


SVA8TIKA  AND THE  SEVEN  OEMS.


389


f  I


*■ 1

SVASTIKA.

a.  Orthodox  form.

b.  Unorthodox  form.


The  Svastika,^  or  "  fly-foot  cross,"  is  a  cross  witli  tlie  free  end
of  each  arm  bent  at  right  angles  to  the  limbs.  It  is  one  of  the
most  widely  diffused  of  archaic  symbols,  having  been  found  at
Troy  by  Schliemann,  and  among
ancient  Teutonic  nations  as  the  emblem
of  Thor.  In  Buddhism,  the  ends  of
the  arms  are  always  bent  in  the  re-
spectful attitude,  that  is,  towards  the
left;  for  the  Lamas,  while  regarding
the  symbol  as  one  of  good  augury,
'also  consider  it  to  typify  the  con-
tinuous moving, or "  the ceaseless

becoming,"  which  is  commonly  called  Life.  Sir  A.  Cunningham
believed  it  to  be  a  monogram  formed  from  the  Asoka  characters
for  the  auspicious  words  Su  +  Asti,  or  "  that  which'  is  good."  ^
It  was  especially  associated  with  the  divinity  of  Fire,  as  represent-
ing the  two  cross  pieces  of  wood  ^  which  by  friction  produce  fire.
The  Jains,  who  seem  to  be  an  Indian  offshoot  of  Buddhism,*
appropriate  it  for  the  seventh  of  their  mythical  saints.^  The
heterodox  Tibetans,  the  Bon,  in  adopting  it  have  turned  the
ends  in  the  reverse  direction.

The  Seven  Gems.^  These  are  the  attributes  of  the  universal
monarch,^  such  as  prince  Siddharta  was  to  have  been  had  he  not
become  a  Buddha.  They  are  very  frequently  figured  on  the  base
of  his  throne,  and  are  : —

1.  The  Wheel.*  The  victorious  wheel  of  a  thousand  spokes.  It
also  represents  the  symmetry  and  completeness  of  the  Law.  It  is
figured  in  the  early  Sanchi  Tope.^

2.  The  Jewel.i"  The  mother  of  all  gems,  a  wish-procuring  gem
(Cintamani).

1  Yun-drun.  Chinese,  Gkv,'-  Vang,  or  "  The  ten  thousand  character  "  ;  cf .  also  Iridian
Ardiquary,  ix.,  65,  etc.,  135,  etc.,  and  numerous  references  in  Dumoutiee,  op.  <dt.,  22-23.

2  Su,  meaning  "good"  or  "excellent"  (in  Greek,  eu),  and  Asti  is  the  third  person
singular  present  indicative  of  the  verb  As,  "  to  be,"  and  Ka  is  an  abstract  sufBx.

i  Skt.,  Arand.  *  But  see  Jacobi's  works.

5  Namely,  the  Jina  Su-par?va.

6  Skt., Sapta-ratrm. T.,  Ein-ch'en  sna-bdun; cf.  Hardy's  Man,  p.  130,  and  Ala-
baster's Wlieel  of  the  Law,  p.  81.

T  Cdkra-viixtin  Raja.
»  Skt.,  Gakra;  T.,  'K'or-lo.

^  Feegusson,  Tree  andSerp.  Woi-s.,t[iI.  xxix.,  Fig.  2.
10  Skt.,  Ratna ;  T.,  Norlni.


390


SAGRED SYMBOLS  AND OHABMS.


3.  The  jewel  of  a  Wife.^ "The  Jasper-girl"  who  fans  her  lord
to  sleep,  and  attends  him  with  the  constancy  of  a  slave.

4.  The  gem  of  a  Minister/  who  regulates  the  business  of  the
empire.

5.  The  (white)  Elephant.^ The  earth-shaking  beast,  who  as  a


rvgitCT'


^0,-^n;riS*tq|^'


The  Seven  Gems.


symbol  of  universal  sovereignty  the  Buddhist  kings  of  Burma  and
Siam  borrowed  from  Indian  Buddhism.  It  seems  to  be  Indra's
elephant  Airavata.*

6.  The  Horse.^  It  seems  to  symbolize  the  horse-chariot  of  the
sun,  implying  a  realm  over  which  the  sun  never  sets,  as  well  as
the  celestial  Pe^'asMS-steed,^  which  carries  its  rider  wherever  the
latter  wishes.'^

7.  The  gem  of  a  General,^  who  conquers  all  enemies.

1  Skt.,  Stri  ;  T.,  Tsun-mo.

2  Skt.,  (?)  O'irli  or  Mahfijana  ;  T.,  hLou-po.

3  Skt.,  Hasti  ;  T.,  glaii-jfo.

*  This  elephant  is  frequently  represented  as  a  miniature  bronze  ornament  or  flower-
stand  on  the  Lamaist  altar.  Mr.  Baber  records  (R.  G.  Soc.  Suppl.,  paper,  p.  33)  a
colossal  elephant  with  six  tusks,  cast  in  silvery-bronze,  in  western  Ssu-ch'uan.  It  is
of  artistic  merit,  and  carries  on  its  back,  in  place  of  a  howdah,  a  lotus-flower,  in
which  is  enthroned  an  admirable  image  of  Buddha.

^  Skt.,  ^l.jiw;  T.,rTa-mch'off.

"  Aswin  or  Uchchaihsravas.

I  Compare  with  the  divine  horse  named  "  Might  of  a  Cloud,"  from  the  thirty-three
heavens,  which  delivered  the  merchants  from  the  island  of  Rakshasis. — See  Hiuen
Tsiang's  Si-Yu-Ki.

"  Skt.,  Kshatn  or  Sena-pati ;  T.,  AMa^j-AplSii.


THE  SEVEN  PRECIOUS  THINGS.


391


And  to  these  the  Lamas  add  an  eighth,  namely,  the  Vase,'  for
storing  all  the  hidden  riches  of  the  three  regions  of  life.

The  Seven  (Royal)  Badges.^

1.  The  precious  House  (palace).

2.  ,,  ,,  royal  Eobes

3.  „  ,,  Boots  (embroidered).

4.  „  ,,  Elephant's  tusk.

5.  ,,  ,,  Queen's  earring.

6.  ,,  ,,  King's  earring.

7.  „  ,,  Jewel.


(Kan-sari

(Gos

(Lham

(Laii-ch'en  ch'em

(Tsunmo  na-ja

(Gyalpo  na-ja

(Norbn


Rinpoch'e)


The  above  list  seems  somewhat  confused  with  "  The  seven  world-


The  Seven  Woeld-eavishing  Gems,

ravishing  Gems  "  here  iigured.^

The  Seven  Personal  Gems.^

1.  The  yword-jewel — confers  invincibility.

2.  The  Snake  (iVa5fa)-skin  jewel.  It  is  ten  miles  long  by  five  broadj
water  cannot  wet  it,  nor  the  wind  shake  it;  it  warms  in  the  cold
weather  and  cools  in  the  hot ;  and  shines  brighter  than  the  moon.

3.  The  Palace-jewel.

4.  The  Garden-jewel.

5.  The  Robes.

6.  The  Bed-jewel.

7.  The  Shoe-jewel.  Conveys  the  wearer  one  hundred  miles  without
fatigue  and  across  water  without  wetting  the  feet.

1  Bum-pa-ter ;  Skt.,  Kalasa.

-'  Gyal-ts'an  sna  bdun.

»  'Jigs-yons-gyi  rin-po-ch'e,  namely,  hSent,  conch- ohell  curtl,  king's  earring,  queen's
earring,  jewelled  tiara,  three-eyed  gem,  and  the  eight-limbed  coral.  Another  enumer-
ation gives  Padmaraga,  indranila,  baidurya,  margad,  vajra,  pearl,  and  coral.

*  Ne-wai  rin-poch'e  sna  bdun.


392


SACEED  SYMBOLS  AND CHARMS.


A  selection  of  four  of  these,  with  the  addition  of  the  royal
umbrella,  is  termed  "The  five  Eoyal  Insignia," ^  namely: —


The  Seven  Peksonal  Gems.


1.  Ornamental  cushion  or  throne.

2.  Umbrella.

3.  Sword — emblematic  of  power  of  life  and  death

4.  Cow-tail  Hy-whisk  with  jewelled  handle.

5.  Parti-coloured  embroidered  shoes.

The  Eight  Glorious  Emblems.^
These  auspicious  symbols  are  figured  in  Buddha's  footprints,*
and  on  innumerable  articles,  lay  and  clerical.


f^i^^aiaw-s!''


1-jN-,3J«^X«M^^„  ^ajl.^/,y,«  ^^»,


H*?fe^»'^^'i=j


The  Eight  Gloeious  Emblems.


1  Cf.  Csojia's  ^«.,  p.  76;  Jaeschke's  Diet,  p.  454.

-  Skt.,  Ashta-inatgala  ;  T.,  bkra-s'i  I'tags-brgyad.

■'  Said  to  be  symbols  of  the  Vita-faga, Hodgson's  Z.L.,  p.  136;  also  J.A.S.B.,  art.

Xalpahja  Kalycina  "


THE  EIGHT GLORIOUS  EMBLEMS.


393


Ski.

Tib.

1.  The  Golden  Fish  1

matsya

gser-na

2.  The Umbrella  ("Lord of the White

Umbrella"  2)

chatra

gdugs

3.  Conch-shell  Trumpet — of  Victory

sankha

dun

4.  Lucky  Diagram '

5.  Victorious  Banner

srivatsa

dpalbe

dhvaja

rgyal-mts'an

6.  Vase

kala§  a

bum-pa

7.  Lotus

padma

padma
'k'or-lo

8.  Wheel

cakra

The  Eight  G-lorious  Offerings.*
1.  Mirror.— The  light-holding  goddess-form  offered  a  looking-glass
to  Buddha  Bhagavat when  he  was  turning the wheel of religion,


The  Eight  Gloeious  Offeeings.

and  he  blessed  it  and  rendered  it  holy. (Compare  with  the  mirror  in
the  Shinto  religion  of  Japan.)

2.  The  intestinal  concretion  (gi-ham  or  gi-'vaii  found  in  the  entrails

1  The  credulous  Lamas  of  north-eastern  Tibet  credited  Mr.  Rockhill  with  having
captured  the  golden  fish  in  the  Tosu  lake.  "When  I  came  back  from  Tosu-uor
to  Shang,  the  Khanpo  (abbot),  a  Tibetan,  asked  me  where  I  proposed  going ;  '  To
Lob-nor,'  I  replied,  not  wishing  to  discuss  my  plans.  'I  supposed  that  was  your
intention,'  he. rejoined ;  '  you  have  caught  our  horse  and  fish  of  gold  in  the  Tosu-nor,
and  now  you  want  to  get  the  frog  of  gold  of  the  Lob-nor.  But.  it  will  be  useless
to  try ;  there  is  in  the  whole  world  but  the  Panchen  Einpoche,  of  Tashi-lhunpo,  who  is
able  to  catch  it"  ("A  Journey  in  Mongolia  andTibet,"  The  Oeog.  Journ.,  May,  1894,
p.  376). The  Japanese  use  a  wooden  fish  as  a  gong.

2  In  Sanchi  Tope.  Feegus.,  Tree  and  Serp.  Worship,  pi.  xxxv..  Fig.  2.

3  Also  the  symbol  of  the  tenth  Jina  {Sitala)  of  the  Jains.  Compare  with
"  Buddha's  entrails,"  see  number  2  of  next  hst,  also  on  this  page.

*  bkras's-rdsas  brgyad.  These,  together  with  the  foregoing,  may  be  compared
with  the  Nwcahosa  or  Namnidhi,  or  nine  treasures  of  Kuvei-a,  the  god  of  riches,
namely,  Padma,  Mahapadma,  Makara,  Kacchapa,  Mukunda,  Nanda,  Nila,  Kharwa.
And  these  are  related  to  the  so-called  Naga  kings,  "the  nine  Nandas"  of  Magadha.


394


SAGBED  SYMBOLS  AND CHARMS.


of  certain  animals  and  on  the  neck  of  an  elephant. The  land-guard-
ing elephant  offered  this  to  Buddha,  and  he  blessed  it.

3.  Curds  {zo). — The  farmer's  daughter  (legs-skyes-ma)  offered  Buddha
curdled  milk,  and  he  blessed  it.

4.  Darwa  grass. — Mangalam,  the  grass-seller,  offered  Buddha  darwa
grass,  which  he  blessed.

5.  The  Bilwa  fruit  (.^gle  marmelos). — Brahma  offered  him  hilwa,
which  he  blessed  as  the  best  of  fruits.

6.  Conch-shell.—  Indra  offered  him  a  white  conch-shell,  and  he
blessed  it.

7.  Li-kTiri. — The  Brahman  "  King-star,"  offered  him  Li-khri,  and  he
blessed  it  as  the  overpowering  knowledge.

8.  The  white  turnip. — Yajrapani,  "  the  Secret  Lord,"  offered  him  a
white  turnip  (yaii-dkar),  which  he  blessed  as  the  demon-defeating
turnip.

The  Five  Sensuous  Qualities.^

These  are  figured  at  page  297.  They  seem  to  be  a  Buddhist
adaptation  of  the  Hindi!  "  eight  enjoyments "  (Ashtabhoga),
namely,  a  grand  house,  a  bed,  fine  clothes,  jewels,  wives,  flowers,
perfumes,  areca-nut  and  betel.  They  are  offered  on  the  altars  and
are: —


4.  Luscious  eatables  (Naiwete).

5.  Pleasing-touch  and  feelings  (S^arsa).


1 .  Pleasing  form  {Rupa).

2.  Sound  (Sapta).

3.  Perfumes  (Gandhe).

Distinctly  Chinese  in  origin  are  the  Trigrams  and  the  following
symbolic  animals.

The  Teigeams  are  especially  used  in  astrology,  and  are  de-
scribed in  the  chapter  on
that  subject.  They  are
based  upon  the  very
ancient  Chinese  theory  of
the  Yin-Yang  or  "the
great  extreme "  ("  Tai-
Ky"  2),  where  two  parallel
lines,  in  a  circle  divided
spirally  into  two  equal
tadpole-like  segments,
represent,  as  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Magi,  the  two  First  Causes  and
great  principles,  or  contrary  influences  (Yin+Yang); such as


la)  rGvdh  -'Kyil


S  YMD-OLfS

Ibl  HOBYIIi

Tbigeams.


(c)  Hqr-tad


1  Skt.,  Kdmmjwna,  T.,  'dod-yons.

i  DuMOUTiER,  Les  Sijmhohs,  etc.,  Amiaiiiltes.


TRIGBAMS  AND  DRAGONS.


395


V^^


^A.^yyj


light  and  darkness,  good and  evil,  male and  female,  heat  and
cold,  movement  and  repose,  and  so  on.

The  circular  diagram^  is  divided  by  the  Lamas,  like  the
Japanese,  into  three  segments  (as  in  the
annexed  figure  a) ;  and  it  will  be  noticed
that  the  tails  are  given  the  direction  of
the  orthodox  fly-foot  cross,  for  it  too,
according  to  the  Lamas,  signifies  ceaseless
•change  or  "  becoming."

The  LoNGEViTY-trigram  or  hexagram,
in  both  its  oblong  and  circular  forms
(fig.  h  and  c),  is  a  modification  of  the
Chinese  symbol  for  longevity  called  Tho.'^

The  Lamas  have  also  incorporated  the
four  greatest  amongst  the  Chinese  sym-
bolic animals,  to  wit,  the  Tortoise,  the
Phcenix,  Dragon,  and  Horse-dragon,  as
well  as  the  Chinese  Tiger,  and  the  Bats.

The  Toktoise  symbolizes  the  universe
to  the  Chinese  as  well  as  the  Hindiis.  Its
dome-shaped  back  represents  the  vault
of  the  sky,  its  belly  the  earth,  which
moves  upon  the  waters ;  and  its  fabulous
longevity  leads  to  its  being  considered
imperishable.

The  Deagon  ^  seems  to  perpetuate  the
tradition  of  primaeval  flying  saurian s  of
geologic  times,  now  known  only  through
their  fossilized  remains.  The  Lamas  and
Chinese  Buddhists  have  assimilated  them
with  the  mythical  serpents  (Naga)  of  Indian  myth.

The  Hokse-deagon  figures,  as  it seems  to  me,  very  promi-
nently in  the  prayer-flags  of  Tibet,  as  we  shall  presently  see.

The  Phcenix  (or  "  Garuda  "). This mythical  "  sky-soarer  " "
is  the  great  enemy  of  the  dragons,  and  has  been  assimilated  to


'  v^  i°i.


^E


Teibeams  as  Chakms.


1  Called  rGyan-'k'yil,  probably  a  corruption  of  the  Chinese  name.

2  Cf.  DUMOUTIEE,  op.  cit.,  Pj  21.

^  Tib.,  'drug  ;  Chinese  Long.

*  Tib.,  nam-K'ah-ldin. The  Chinese  call  it  Con-phu'ong  (Dumoutiee,  p.  48).


396  SACRED  SYMBOLS  AND CHAEMS.

the  Indian  Garu4a,  the  arch-enemy  of  the  Nagas.  And  anyone
who  has,  like  myself,  seen  the  bird  popularly  called  Oaru^a
(namely  the  Adjutant  or  Stork)  devouring  snakes,  must  realize
why  the  Indians  fixed  upon  such  g,  homely  simile  to  represent
their  myth.  It  seems  to  be  analogous  to  the  Thunder-bird
of  the  North  American  Indians.  In  a  more  mystic  sense  the
Lamas,  like  the  Chinese,  beHeve  it  to  symbolize  the  entire  world ;
its  head  is  the  heaven,  its  eyes  the  sun,  its  back  the  crescent
moon,  its  wings  the  wind,  its  feet  the  earth,  its  tail  the  trees  and
plants.^

The  Tiger  is  a  deity  of  the  pre-Lamaist  religion  of  Tibet;
and  the  "  Eed-Tiger,"  as  already  noted,  appears  to  me  to  be  the
prototype  of  the  favourite  Lamaist  demon  (Tam-din).  The  tiger  is
displayed  on  all  the  Tibetan  prayer-flags  in  contest  with  the
dragon,^  and  the  five  tigers  (see  figure,  page  519)  are  conspicuous
in  the  Chinese  symbolism  prevalent  in  Annam.^

The  group  is  mystically  reputed  to  symbolize  the  five  elements  :  the
central  yellow  tiger  is  the  earth,  the  upper  right  blue  one  is  wood,
the  lower  right  red  one  is  fire  (also  the  south),  the  upper  left  black
one  is  water  (also  the  north),  and  the  lower  left  is  metal  (also  the
west).

The  Bats,  five  in  number,  have  come  by  a  confusion  of  homo-
nyms to  symbolize  the  five  good  Fortunes,*
namely.  Luck,  Wealth,  Long  life.  Health,
and  Peace.  They  are  embroidered  on
dresses  of  high  Lamas,  sorcerers,  maskers,
etc.^

Astrology  also  uses  many  other  symbols.

Tee  Five  Bats  OF  Fortune.  .,,,1  „

as  Will  be  seen  hereafter.
The symbolism  of  colours is referred to in  the  chapter on
images  and  incidentally  elsewhere.

Symbolic  Words  used  as  Numerals  in  Cheonogeams.
In  chronograms  and  astronomical  and other works,  symbolic
names  are  often  used  instead  of  numerals. The  rationale  of  the


1  Cf.  also  DuMOUTiEB,  p.  48.  ^  Ngu  Ho,  see  figure,  p.  413.

^  DuMOUTiBE,  p.  55.  *  Chinese  ygu  Phu'o'c;  cf.  Dumoutier,  p.  51.

■*  See  also  their  form  on  page  4.


SYMBOLIC WORDS.  397

use  of  such  names  is  generally  obvious;  thus  the  individual's  body,
the  moon,  the  (one-horned)  rhinoceros,  express  unity  from  their
singleness.  The  hand,  the  eye,  wings,  twins,  denote  a  pair.  And
many  of  the  others  are  derived  from  the  mythology  of  the  Hindiis.
The  following  are  some  additional  illustration s^ : —

3  =  the world — i.e.,  the three  Buddhist worlds  of Kama,. Eupa,

Arupa.
=  quality — i.e.,  the  three  Guna.
=  fire— evidently  from  its  triangular  tongue.
=  top — probably  from  the  Chinese  ideograph  of  a  hill.

4  =  a  lake  or  sea — i.e.,  the  idea  of  fluid  requiring  to  be  hemmed  in  on

all  four  sides.

5  =  the  senses — the  five  senses.

=  an  element — the  five  elements.
=  an  aggregate — the  five  Shandha.

7  =  a  sage — ^the  seven  Bishi.

8  =  a  snake — the  eight  great  Nagas.

9  =  a  treasure — the  nine  treasures  of  Kuvera  and  the  Nandas.
10  =  points — the  ten  points  or  directions.

12  =  the  sun — with  its  twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac.
24  =  Jina  or  victor — the  twenty-four  Jina  and  Tirthankara.
32  =  tooth — the  human  set  of  thirty-two  teetli.
0  =  sky — the  "  empty  "  space.

The  "  Mandala  "  or  Magic  Circle-offering  of  the  Universe.

It  is  almost  a  matter  of  history  how  the  great  emperor  of  Asoka
thrice  presented  India  to  the  Buddhist  church,  and  thrice  redeemed
it  with  his  treasure.  But  it  seems  to  be  little,  if  at  all,  known  that
the  Lamas  systematically  ape  Asoka  in  this  particular  gift ;  and
they  are  much  more  magniiicently  generous  than  he.  For  every
day,  in  every  temple  in  Lamadom,  the  Lamas  offer  to  the  Buddhas
(as  well  as  to  the  saints  and  demons)  not  only  the  whole  of  India,
but  the  whole  universe  of  Jambudvlp  and  the  three  other  fabulous
continents  of  Hindii  cosmogony,  together  with  all  the  heavens  and
their  inhabitants  and  treasures.  And  although  this  offering  is
made  in  effigy,  it  is,  according  to  the  spirit  of  Lamaism,  no  less
effective  than  Asoka's  real  gifts,  upon  which  it  seems  to  be  based.

The  mode  of  making  this  microcosmic  offering  of  the  universe
in  effigy  is  as  follows  ;  but  to  fully  understand  the  rite,  reference


1  Taken  mostly  from  Csoma's  Grammar,  pp.  150,  et  seq.


398  SACRED  SYMBOLS  AND CHABMS.

should be  made  to  the  illustrated  description  of  the  Buddhist
universe,  already  given  at  page  79.

MODE OF OFFEEING THE MANDALA.

Having  wiped  the  tray  with  the  right  arm  or  sleeve,  the  Lama
takes  a  handful  of  rice  in  either  hand,  and  sprinkles  some  on  the
tray  to  lay  the  golden  foundation  of  the  universe.  Then  he  sets
down  the  large  ring  (see  figure,  p.  296),  which  is  the  iron  girdle  of
the  universe.  Then  in  the  middle  is  set  down  a  dole  of  rice  as
mount  Meru  (Olympus),  the  axis  of  the  system  of  worlds.  Then
in  the  order  given  in  the  attached  diagram  are  set  down  a  few
grains  of  rice  representing  each  of  the  thirty-eight  component
portions  of  the  universe,  each  of  which  is  named  at  the  time  of
depositing  its  representative  rice.  The  ritual  for  all  sects  of  Lamas
during  this  ceremony  is  practically  the  same.  I  here  append  the
text  as  used  by  the  Kar-gyu  sect.

During  this  ceremony  it  is  specially  insisted  on  that-  the  per-
former must  mentally  conceive  that  he  is  actually  bestowing  all
this  wealth  of  continents,  gods,  etc.,  etc.,  upon  his  Lamaisfc  deities,
who  themselves  are  quite  outside  the  system  of  the  universe.

The  words  employed  during  the  offering  of  the  Mandala  are  the
following,  and  it  should  be  noted  that  the  figures  in  brackets
correspond  to  those  in  the  diagram  and  indicate  the  several
points  in  the  magic  circle  where  the  doles  of  rice  are  deposited
during  this  celebration  or  service.

"  Ovi ! Vajra  hhimtmi  ah  Hum  /  "

"  On  the  entirely  clear  foundation  of  solid  gold  is  Om  !  bajra-rekhe-
ah  Hum.

"  In  the  centre  of  the  iron  wall  is  Hum  and  Ei-rab  (Meru),  the  kiug
of  Mountains  (1).

"  On  the  east  is  Liis-'p'ags-po  (2),

"  On  the  south  'Jam-bu-glin  (3),

"  On  the  west  Ba-lan-spybd  (4),  and

"  On  the  north  Gra-mi-siian  (5).

"  On  either  side  of  the  eastern  continent  are  Liis  (6)  and  Liis-
'p'ags  (7).

"  On  either  side  of  the  southern  continent  are  rNa-yab  (8)  and
rNa-yab-gz'an  (9).

"  On  either  side  of  the  western  continent  are  Yonten  (10)  and
Lam-mch'og-'gra  (11).


MAGIC  SYMBOL OF  UNIVERSE.


399


DIAGEAM
showing

THE  COMPOSITION  OP  THE  MANDALA

OFFERfNG  OF  THE UNIVERSE


FRONT.

The  nimbera  are  in  the  order  of  the  procejuro.

1

RiGyalpoRi-raba..

10.

ji.Qor-io -x

2,

Shar.lii  Phag-po:  . ..  \

19

N«r-bn -

3

Hl«  Jam-bu-ling

, THE  GREAT

30.

Taiin-mo

The  Seven

i.

Nub  Pa-langjo

CONTINENTS

ai.

L5n-po

►Precious

6

Chang  ^a-mi  nyen. .

so

Lang-po

Thinob.

F

Lii ,. .,*

23.

Tam-ohbog

1

Lu  phag

34.

Mag-p8n. -J

8

.Nga-yab

55.

Ter  chben-po-i  BMn-p

a.

9

Nga-yabzb^a „  ,  ;■

THE3ATELLITa

56

Geg-mo-ma.  . .  ■ ^

lU

T4-«ii  ■ ..

CONTINENTS

37.

Theng-wama. ...

11

T.am-chhogdo

58.

Lu-ma

?a-mi  nyen . .

39

THE  8  MiTRI

13

Da-mi  nyen  kyj  di.

30.

Me-togma .

Goddesses.

M.

Rin-pochhe-Tn-wfl.

31

Dug-p5  ma ■■

15

■pg-aam  Kyi  Shing

The  4  Worldl?

S3.

NangBol-ma. ^ .  -...

16.

Dod  J«-Moo,

Treasures.

S3.

Ei  chhab  ma J

17

Ma-mo  pa-1 16  thog.,..

S4.

Nyi-ma .-

Sun  and

[Moon.

36.

Da-wa

Huvpo-obhe-ting.

OiBog-W  napj-par  Oyal-i»»-;>  Oya*.48h«n.

Kam-par  Qyal-wa-i  Kbang  aang.  ■


400  SAGRED  SYMBOLS  AND G HARMS.

'•  And  on  either  side  of  the  northern  continent  are  sGra-mi-snan
(12)  and  sGra-mi-siian-gyi-mda  (13).

"  There  are  mountains  of  jewels  (14),  wish-granting  trees  (15),  wish-
granting  cows  (16),  unploughed  crops  (17),  the  precious  wheel  (18),  the
precious  Norhu  jewel  (19),  the  precious  queen  (20),  the  precious  minister
(21),  the  precious  elephant  (22),  the  precious  horse  (23),  the  precious
battle-chief  (24),  the  vase  of  the  great  treasure  (25),  the  goddesses
sgeg-pa-ma  (26),  'P'ren-wa-ma  (27),  gLu-ma  (28),  Gar-ma  (29),  Me-tog-ma
(30),  bDug-spbs-ma  (31),  sNan-gsal-ma  (32),Dri-ch'al-ma  (33), the  sun(34),
moon  (35),  jewelled  umbrella  (36),  the  ensign  of  victory  (37),  which  is
entirely  victorious  from  all  directions,  and  in  the  middle  are  the  gods
(38),  the  most  accomplished  and  wealthy  jrf  the  beings  I

"  I  offer  you  all  these  constituent  parts  of  the  universe  in  their  en-
tirety, 0  !  noble,  kind,  and  holy  Lama ! '  0  1  tutelary  gods  of  the  magic-
circle,  and  all  the  hosts  of  Buddhas  and  Bodhisats  !

"  I  beg  you  all  to  receive  these  offerings  for  the  benefit  of  the  animal
beings  !

"  I  offer  you  0  !  Buddhas !  the  four  continents  and  mount  Meru
adorned  with  the  sun  and  moon  on  a  foundation  of  incense  and  flowers.
Let  all  the  animal  beings  enjoy  happiness  !

"  I  offer  you  0  !  assembly  of  all  the  accomplished  supreme  beings  of
the  outside,  inside,  and  hidden  regions',  the  entire  wealth  and  body  of
all  these  ideal  regions.  I  beg  you  all  to  give  us  the  best  of  all  real
gifts,  and  also^he  real  gift  of  rDsogs-pa-ch'en-po  (the  mystic  insight
sought  by  the  Nin-ma)  !

"  I  offer  up  this  fresh  magic-circle,  through  the  virtue  of  which  let
no  injury  beset  the  path  of  purity,  but  let  us  have  the  grace  of  the
Jinas  of  the  three  times,  and  let  us,  the  innumerable  animal  beings,  be
delivered  from  this  illusive  world  !

"  I  offer  up  salutations,  offerings,  confessions  of  sins,  and  repent-
ance. What  virtue  has  been  accumulated  by  myself  and  others,  let  it
go  to  the  attainment  of  our  great  end.  Idam-ratna  mandala  hamnir-
yaiteyami  !

"  I  humbly  prostrate  myself  three  times  to  all  who  are  worthy  of
worship,  with  my  whole  heart  and  body." Let  glory  come !  '

But  the  commonest  use  of  sacred  symbols  is  as  talismans  to  ward
off  the  evils  of  those  malignant  planets  and  demons  who  cause
disease  and  disaster,  as  weU  as  for  inflicting  harm  on  one's  enemy.
The  symbols  here  are  used  in  a  mystical  and  magic  sense  as  spells
and  as  fetishes,  and  usually  consist  of  formulas  in  corrupt  and
often  unintelligible  Sanskrit,  extracted  from  the  Mahayana  and
Tantrik  scriptures,  and  called  dhdra'rj.i,^  as  they  are  believed  to
"hold"  divine  powers,  and  are  also  used  as  incantations. Shorter

1  For  details  of  the  rest  of  this  service,  see  my  Ldmaism  in  Sikhim,  p.  105.

2  z'm'is.


TALISMANS -EDIBLE  G HARMS.


401


forms  of  these,  consisting  often  of  a  single  letter,  are  also
used  as  representing  the  essence  or  "  germ  "  of  these  spells  or
Tnantras,  and  hence  named  vija.  And  the  mystic  diagram  in
which  they  are  often  arranged  is  named  Yantra,  as  in  Hindi!
Tantrism.^

The  forms  of  these  talismans  and  amulets  are  innumerable.
The  majority  are  luck-compelling,  but  different  diseases,  accidents
and  misfortune  have  each  their  special  kinds.

The  eating  of  the  paper  on  which  a  charm  has  been  written  is
an  ordinary  way  of  curing  disease,  as  indeed  it  had  been  in  Europe
till  not  so  many  centuries  ago,  for  the  mystic  IJ.  heading  our
prescriptions  is  generally  admitted  to  have  had  its  origin  in  the
symbol  of  Saturn,  whom  it  invoked,  and  the  paper  on  which  the
symbol  and  several  other  mystic  signs  were  inscribed  constituted
the  medicine,  and  was  itself  actually  eaten  by  the  patient.  The
spells  which  the  Lamas  use  in  this  way  as  medicine  are  shown  in
the  annexed  print,  and  are  called  "  the  edible  letters  "  {za-yig).
A  still  more  mystical  way  of  applying  these  remedies  is  by  the

washings  of  the  reflection  of  the
writing  in  a  niirror,  a  practice
not  without  its  parallels  in  other
quarters  of  the  globe.^  Thus  to
cure  the  evil  eye  as  shown  by
symptoms  of  mind-wandering  and
dementia  condition — called
"byad-'grol" — it  is  ordered  as
follows:  Write  with  Chinese  ink
on  a  piece  of  wood  the  particular
letters  and  smear  the  writing  over
with  myrobalams  and  saffron  as
varnish,  and  every  twenty-nine
days  reflect  this  inscribed  wood  in  a  mirror,  and  during  reflection
wash  the  face  of  the  mirror  with  beer,  and  collect  a  cupful  of
such  beer  and  drink  it  in  nine  sips.

1  MoNiER  Williams's  Hinduism,  127.

2  "In  Gambia,"  writes  the  colonial  surgeon  in  his  report  for  1890  (quoted  in  Nature)
"  the  treatment  relied  upon  for  cure,  and  much  practised  in  the  country,  is  to  call
in  a  man  who  is  supposed  to  be  a  '  doctor,'  who,  after  looking  at  the  patient,  sits
down  at  his  bedside  and  writes  in  Arabic  characters  on  a  wooden  slate  a  long  rig-
marole, generally  consisting  of  extracts  from  the  Koran.  The  slate  is  then  washed,
and  the  dirty  infusion  is  drunk  by  the  patient."

D  D


Edible  Chaem.


402  8ACBED  SYMBOLS  AND  GHABMS.

But  most  of  the  charms  are  worn  on  the  person  as  amulets.
Every  individual  always  wears  around  the  neck  one  or  more  of
these  amulets,  which  are  folded  up  into  little  cloth-covered  packets,
bound  with  coloured  threads  in  a  geometrical  pattern.  Others
are  kept  in  small  metalHc  cases  of  brass,  silver,  or  gold,  set  with
turquoise  stones  as  amulets,  and  called  "  Ga-ii."  These  amulets
are  fastened  to  the  girdle  or  sash,  and  the  smaller  ones  are  worn
as  lockets,'  and  with  each  are  put  relics  of  holy  men — a  few
threads  or  fragments  of  cast-ofif  robes  of  saints  or  idols,  peacock
feathers,  sacred  Kusa  grass,  and  occasionally  images  and  holy  pills.
Other  large  charms  are  affixed  overhead  in  the  house  or  tent  to
ward  off  lightning,  hail,  etc.,  and  for  cattle  special  charms  are
chanted,  or  sometimes  pasted  on  the  walls  of  the  stalls,  etc.^

Most  of  these  charms  against  accident,  disease,  and  ill-fortune
are  in  the  form  figured  on  the  opposite  page,  which  is  called
"  The  Assembly  of  all  the  Lamas'  Hearts,"  as  it  is  believed  to
contain  the  essence  of  all  that  is  most  powerful  in  the  Lamaist
spells.

It  consists  of  a  series  of  concentric  circles  of  speUs  surrounded
by  flames,  amid  which  in  the  four  corners  are  the  symbols  of  the
Buddhist  trinity  symbolized  as  three  gems,  a  lotus-flower,  a  thun-
der-bolt sceptre,  and  a  flaming  dagger  with  a  vajra-hilt.  In  the
interior  is  an  eight-petalled  lotus-flower,  each  petal  of  which  bears
mystic  syllables,  and  in  the  centre  of  the  flower  is  a  circular  space
of  about  an  inch  in  diameter,  in  which  is  placed  the  especial  mystic
charm,  prepared  as  presently  described,  and  varying  according  to
the  purpose  for  which  the  charm  is  wanted. The  outer  spells  are : —

In  the  Outmost  Circle. — Guard  the  Body,  Mind,  and  Speech  of  this
charm-holder  I  lialcliya  rakhya  Tcuruye  svaha  I  Angtadyaiha  !  Om
muni  muni  mahamuniye  svdhd.  (Here  follows  "  The  Buddhist  creed  "
already  given ;  followed  by  the  Dhyani  Buddhas  : — )  Vairocana  Om
vajra  Ahshohhya  Hum,  Eatna-samhhava  Hri,  Bargudhara  Hri,  Amoga-
siddha  Ah  I

In  Second  Circle. — Om  !  Nama  Samanta  Buddhanam,  Nama
Samanta  Dharmanam,  nama  Samant  i  Samghanam.  Om  Sititabatrai.
Om  Vimala,  Om  Shadkara,  Om  Brahyarigar  Vajra  ustsikhatsa
krawarti sarvayana manta mtila  varma hana dhanamha. Namkil-

1  Figured  on  page  571. The  kidney-shaped  ones  are  called  Ga-u  ke-ri-ma.

2  Cf.  also  CsoMA  and  W.  E.  Carte,  J.A.S.B.,  ix.,  904.  See  figures  of  some  of  these
charms  at  pages  568,  571,  and  572.


GENERAL  CHARM.


403


aniba  makriayena  keni  chatkramtamtata  sarban  ratsin  ratsin  dakhinda
bhinda  tsiri  tsiri  giri  giri  mada  mada  hum  hum  phat  phat

In  Third  Circle.— Guard  the  Body,  Mind,  and  Speech  of  this  charm-
holder  !  Mama  ralcya  rahhya  Icuruye  swdhd.  (Here  follows  the  letters  of
the  alphabet :— )  Ang,  a,  a,  i,  I,  u,  u,  ri,  rl,  li,  ll,  e,  ai,  o.  au,  ang,  a,  k,
kh,  g  gh,  h,  ts,  tsh,  ds,  dsa,  n,  ta,  th,  d,  dh,  n,  p,  ph,  b,  bh,  m,  y,  r,  1,
w,  s,  sh,  s,  h,  am  !  >. r , , ,  j, , ,

In  Fourth  Circle. — Hum,  Hum,  etc.
In  Fifth  Circle. — Hri,  Hri,  etic.


The  Geneeal  Chakm  Feint.

Entitled  "  The  Assembly  of  Lamas'  Hearts."

(Reduced  ^.)


In  Sixth  Circle. — Om  !  A  !  HUm  !  Hri  !  Guru  !  Deva  I  Balclcim  I
Sarvasiddhipala  Hum  1 A  !

The  special  charm,  which  occupies  the  centre  of  the  diagram,
varies  according  to  the  object  for  which  the  charm  is  required. It

D  D  2


404  SAG  BED  SYMBOLS  AND  OH  ARMS.

consists  of  a  monogram  or  mystic  letter  (Sanskrit,  vija,  or  seed),
which  represents  the  germ  of  a  spell  or  mantra.  This  letter  is
often  in  the  old  Indian  character  of  about  the  fourth  or  fifth
century  a.d.,  and  is  inscribed  in  cabalistic  fashion  with  special
materials  as  prescribed  in  the  manual  on  the  subject.

As  most  of  these  specific  charms  are  of  the  nature  of  sympa-
thetic magic,  and  evidently  derived  from  very  ancient  Indian
sources,  probably  dating  back  to  Vedic  times  when  the  ritual
consisted  largely  of  sympathetic  magic,^  I  give  here  a  few  ex-
amples :  ^ —

Thus  to  make  the

Charm  against  Bullets  and  Weapons. — The  directions  are  as
these :  "With  the  blood  of  a  wounded  man  draw  the  annexed
monogram  (D  GC)  and  insert  in  the  vacant  space  in  the  centre
of  the  aforesaid  print  of  "The  Assembly  of  the  Hearts  of  the
Lamas."  The  sheet  should  then  be  folded  and  wrapped  in  a  piece
of  red  silk,  and  tie  up  with  a  piece  of  string  and  wear  around  the
neck  or  an  unexposed  part  of  your  breast  immediately  next  the  skin,
and  never  remove  it.

Charm,  for  Clawing  Animals  (i.e.,  tigers,  cats,  bears,  etc.). —
On  a  miniature  knife  write  with  a  mixture  of  myrobalans  and
musk-water  the  monogram  (?  ZAH)  and  tie  up,  etc.  (Here  the
knife  seems  to  represent  the  animal's  claw.)

For  Dom,estic  Broils. — Write  the  monogram  (?  EE)  and  insert
in  print  and  fold  up  and  biud  with  a  thread  made  of  the  mixed
hairs  of  a  dog,  goat,  sheep,  and  enclose  in  a  mouse-skin,  and  tie,
etc. (This  seems  to  represent  union  of  domestic  elements.)

For  Kitchen  Cooking  Smells  offensive  to  the  House-Gods. —
With  the  blood  of  a  hybrid  bull-calf  write  the  monogram  GrAU
(  =  cow),  and  insert  it  in  the  print,  and  fold  up  in  a  piece  of  hedge-
hog-skin. (Compare  with  the  western  Aryan  myth  of  the  Greek
hearth-god  Vulcan,  whose  mother  Rera  as  lo  is  represented  as  a
cow.)

For  Cholera  (or  "  the  vomiting,  purging,  and  cramps  "  ). — With


1  Of.  Beegaione's  La  relic/ion  vediquc ;  also  Fkazek.

2  For  a  fuller  account,  with  illustrations,  see  my  article  in  Jour.  Anthroj}.  Institute,
1894.


PLAGUE  AND  S00RPI0N-0HABM8.  405

the  dung  of  a  black  horse  and  black  sulphur  and  musk-water  write
the  monogram  (?  ZA),  and  insert  in  the  print,  and  fold  up  in  a  piece
of  snake-skin,  and  wear,  etc.  (Here  the  dung  seems  to  represent
the  purging,  the  horse  the  galloping  course,  the  black  colour  the
deadly  character,  and  the  snake  the  virulence  of  the  disease.)

Charm  against  Plagues.

This  charm,  figured  at  the  head  of  this  chapter,  consists  of  a
monster  figure  of  the  Graruda,  the  king  of  birds,  with  a  snake  in
its  mouth,  and  each  of  its  outstretched  plumes  bears  a  text,  and
it  also  contains  the  "  Buddhist  creed." The  inscription  runs : —

Om  ! Bhrum  satrirbad  namlchamjamram.

Om  ! hisahhrilimili  halasvahd  !

Otn  ! hisakhrilimilihalaya  shachig  !

Guard  the  holder  (i.e.,  the  wearer)  of  this  from -all  the  host  of  diseases,
of  evil  spirits  and  injuries,  including  contagious  diseases,  sore-throat,
cough,  rheumatism,  the  black  "  rgyu-ghgyel,"  brum-bu,  and  all  kinds
of  plague  of  the  body,  speech,  and  mind  !  [Here  follows  the  Buddhist
creed.]  Habatse  habatse  hum  sod.  Sum  sum  Tium,  sod.  Sukarjuka
hum  sod.  Sati  Jcarur  hum  sod.  Kularahhyi  hum  sod.  Merumthuntse
hum  sod.  Mahakuruv-a  guru  triga  gurunwm  nagashara  ramram  duldul
nagatsita  pho  naga  chunglinga  shag  thumamnyogs  sos.

Guard  the  holder.

Om,  !  thamitharati  saduwte  dswaramghaye  svdhd  !

Another  charm  for  disease  is  given  at  page  62,  where  the
fierce  demon  Tam-din,  clad  in  human  and  animal  skins,  bears  on
his  front  a  disc  with  concentric  circles  of  spells.

Scokpion-Charm  against  Injury  by  Demons.
This  charm,  figured  at  page  474,  is  in  the  form  of  a  scorpion,
whose  mouth,  tipped  by  flames,  forms  the  apex  of  the  picture.
On  its  shoulder  are  seated  the  especial  demons  to  be  protected
against. The  inscription  runs  :—

Ayama  durur  cashana  zhamaya.

Hum  !  Om  !  A  !  Hum  !  Artsignirtsig  !

Namo  Bhagavati  Hum  !  Hum  !  Phat  !

A  guard  against  all  the  injuries  of  "  rgyalpo,"  "  dnmo  "  (a  malignant
demon  specially  injuring  women),  "  6tsan"  (or  red  demons),  "  sa-dag  "
(or  earth-demons),  ifclu  (or  naga),  including  "  jrnan  "  (a  plague-causmg
subordinate  of  the  naga).


406  SACRED  SYMBOLS  AND  CHARMS.

Against  injury  by  these  preserve  1

And  the  figures  are  hemmed  in  by  the  mystic  syllables :  Jsa !
Hum  !  Hum  !  Bam  !  Ho  !

The  huge  Tibetan  mastiffs  are  let  loose  at  night  as  watch-dogs,
and  roaming  about  in  a  ferocious  state  are  a  constant  source  of
alarm  to  travellers,  most  of  whom  therefore  carry  the  following
charm  against  dog-bite.  It  consists  of  a  picture  of  a  dog  fettered
and  muzzled  by  a  chain,  terminated  by  the  mystic  and  all-power-
fuljthunderbolt-sceptre ;  and  it  contains  the  following  inscribed
Sanskrit  mantras  and  statements :  "  The  mouth  of  the  bltie
dog  is  bound  beforehand ! Oviriti-sri-ti  swdhd  ! Omriti-sri-ti


t€2.


Charm  against  Dok-bitb.

swdhd ! " And this is repeated along the body of the dog,
followed  by : —

Dm  Yajra  ghana  harm  kulcuratsa  sal  sal  nan  marya  smugs  s^nugs
huJcuratsa  hJiathamtsa  le  tsa  le  mun  mun  sar  sar  rgyug  kha  iha  ma  chhu
chhinghchhang  maraya  raJcJchya  rakkhya  ! (It  is)  fixed  ! fixed  !

Charm  against  Eagles  and  Birds  of  Prey.
Eagles  play  havoc  with  the  young  herds  of  the  pastoral  Bhotiyas
of  the  Sikhim  uplands  and  Tibet.  For  this  the  people  use  the
annexed  charm,  which  they  tie  up  near  their  huts.  The  central
figure  is  a  manacled  bird,  representing  the  offending  eagle  or
other  bird  of  prey ;  and  around  it  is  the  following  text : —

"  A  guard  against  all  injuries  of  the  covetous,  sky-soaring  monarch
bird. (It  is)  fixed  1 fixed  ! Oin  smege  sniege  bhum  hhiimmu  !  "

Charm  foe  Killing  One's  Enemy.
The  necromantic  charms  for  killing  one's  enemy  are  resorted  to


CHARMS  AGAINST  ENEMIES.


407


mostly  in  inter-tribal  feuds  and  warring  with  foreigners.  I  have
given  details  of  these  rites  elsewhere.^  They  require  the  following
objects : —


1.  An  axe  with  three  heads,  the  right  of  which  is  bull-headed,  the
left  snake-headed,  and  the  middle  one  pig-headed.

2.  On  the  middle  head  a  lamp  is  to  be  kept.

3.  In  the  pig's  mouth  an  image  of  a  human  being  made  of  wheaten
flour  (a  lingo).  The  upper  part  of  the  body  is  black  and  the  lower  part
red. On  the  side  of  the  upper

part  of  the  body  draw  the  «
figure  of  the  eight  great
planets,  and  on  the  lower  part
of  the  body  the  twenty-eight
constellations  of  stars.  Write
also  the  eight  parMia  (tri-
grams),  the  nine  meuia,  the
claws  of  the  Garuda  in  the
hands,  the  wing  of  the  eagles
and  the  snake  tail.

4.  Hang  a  bow  and  an
arrow  on  the  left  and  load
him  with provisions on  the

back.  Hang  an  owl's  feather  on  the  right  and  a  rook's  on  the  left ;
plant  a  piece  of  the  poison-tree  on  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  and
surround  him  with  red  swords  on  all  sides.  Then  a  red  Egyangbu
wood  on  the  right,  a  yellow  one  on  the  left,  a  black  one  in  the  middle,
and  many  blue  ones  on  divers  places.

5.  Then,  sitting  in  quiet  meditation,  recite  the  following : —

"  Hum  !  This  axe  with  a  bull's  head  on  the  right  will  repel  all  the
injuries  of  the  l^ag-pas  and  Bon-pos — sorcerers  ;  the  snake  on  the  left
will  repel  all  the  classes  of  plagues  ;  the  pig's  head  in  the  middle  will
repel  the  sa-dag  and  other  earth-demons ;  the  linga  image  in  the  mouth
wUl  repel  all  the  evil  spirits  without  remainder,  and  the  lamp  on  the
head  wUl  repel  the  evil  spirits  of  the  upper  regions.  0  !  the  axe  will
cleave  the  heart  of  the  angry  enemy  and  also  of  the  hosts  of  evil
spirits  !  !  !  etc.,  etc.,  etc.,  etc.


Eagle-charm.


During  the  Sikhim  expedition  of  1888,  near  Mt.  Paul  on  the
Tukola  ridge,  where  the  final  attack  of  the  Tibetans  was  made,
there  was  found  one  of  the  mystic  contrivances  for  the  destruction
of  the  enemy. It  consisted  of  an  obliquely  carved  piece  of  wood,


My  Lumaism  in  Sikhim.


408  SACRED  SYMBOLS  AND  CHARMS.

about  fourteen  inches  long,  like  a  miniature  screw-propeller  of  a
steamer,  and  acted  like  the  fan  of  a  windmill.  It  was  admittedly
a  charm  for  the  destruction  of  the  enemy  by  cleaving  them  to
pieces,  a  device  for  which  there  are  western  parallels.  And  on  it
was  written  a  long,  unintelligible  Bon  spell  of  the  kind  called
z'an-z'un,  followed  by  a  call  for  the  assistance  of  the  fierce
deities  Tam-din,  Vajrapani,  and  the  Graruda,  and  concluding  with
"phat,phat" — Break!  Destroy!  It  may  also  be  mentioned  here
that  the  bodies  of  all  the  Tibetans  slain  in  these  encounters  were
found  to  bear  one  or  more  charms  against  wounds,  most  of  them
being  quite  new  j  and  some  of  the  more  elaborate  ones,  which  con-
tained in  their  centre  figures  of  the  other  weapons  charmed  against,
swords,  muskets,  etc.,  had  cost  their  wearers  as  much  as  twenty-five
rupees  a-piece.

And  for  torturing  one's  enemy  short  of  death,  there  is  the  same
popular  practice  which  is  found  amongst  occidentals,^  namely,  of
making  a  little  clay  image  of  the  enemy  and  thrusting  pins  into  it.

The  directions  for  this  procedure  are  :— -

Take  some  of  the  earth  from  his  footprints  ;  or  better  from'  the  house
of  some  wrecked  person,  and ,  mixing  with  dough  prepare  a  small
figure  of  a  man.  On  its  head  put  thorns.  Through  the  heart's  region
thrust  a  copper  needle.  Then  say  following  spell :  Om  GJiate  Jam-mo
Jidmo  hadsam  ;  during  the  recital  of  which  move  the  needle  briskly  over
the  region  of  the  heart.  If  this  process  is  long  continued  then  the
bewitched  person  will  surely  die  within  the  day ;  but  if  done  only  for  a
time,  and  the  needle  and  thorns  are  again  withdrawn,  and  the  image-
body  and  needles  are  washed,  the  enemy  who  is  thus  bewitched  will  only
suflfer  temporary  anguish,  and  will  recover  (for  it  is  against  Buddhist
principles  to  take  life).

"  Peayer-Flags."

The  tall  flags  inscribed  with  pious  sentences,  charms,  and  prayers,
which  flutter  picturesquely  around  every  Lamaist  settlement,
curiously  combine  Indian  with  Chinese  aud  Tibetan  symbolism.

It  seems  a  far  cry  from  Asoka  pillars  to  prayer-flags,  but  it  is
not  improbable  that  they  are  related,  and  that  "the  Trees  of  the
Law,"  so  conspicuous  in  Lamaism,  are  perverted  emblems  of  Indian
Buddhism,  like  so  much  of  the  Lamaist  symbolism.

Everyone  who  has  been  in  Burma  is  familiar  with  the  tall  masts

1  Cf.  ViEGiL,  BmoI.  viii. ;  Theocritus,  Pharmacetitria.


PBAYER-FLAQS.  409


(tagun-daing),^  with  their  streaming  banners,  as  accessories  of
every  Buddhist  temple  in  that  country.  Each  mast  in  Burma  is
surmounted  by  an  image  of  one  or  more  Brahmani  geese,  and  the
streamers  are  either  flat  or  long  cylinders  of  bamboo  framework
pasted  over  with  paper,  which  is  often  inscribed  with  pious
sentences.  The  monks  whom  I  asked  regarding  the  nature  of
this  symbol  believed  that  it  was  borrowed  from  Indian  Buddhism.

Now,  the  resemblance  which  these  posts  bear  to  the  Asoka
pillars  is  certainly  remarkable.  Both  are  erected  by  Buddhists
for  the  purposes  of  gaining  merit  and  displaying  aloft  pious  wishes
or  extracts  from  the  law;  and  the  surmounting  geese  form  an
essential  feature  of  the  abacus  of  several  Asoka  pillars.  The  change
from  pillar  to  post  could  be  easily  explained,  as  great  monoliths
were  only  possible  to  such  a  mighty  emperor  as  Asoka ;  but  every-
one could  copy  in  wood  the  pious  practice  of  that  great  and  model
Buddhist  who  had  sent  his  missionaries  to  convert  them.

Such  wooden  standards  may  have  been  common  in  Indian
Buddhism,  as  some  Burmese  believe,  and  yet,  from  their  perish-
able nature,  have  left  no  trace  behind.  At  most  of  the  old  rocky
Buddhist  sites  in  Magadha  I  have  seen  sockets  in  the  rock,  some
of  which  may  have  been  used  for  such  standards,  although  many
of  the  smaller  sockets  were  doubtless  used  for  planting  umbrellas
to  shelter  the  booth-keepers  in  their  sale  of  flower  and  other  offer-
ings for  the  shrines.  Most  also  of  the  clay  models  of  Caityas  in
relief,  dug  out  of  the  earlier  Indian  Stupas,  show  streamers  tied  to
the  top  of  the  Caityas ;  and  in  Ceylon  the  old  Stirpas  are  sur-
rounded by  what  seems  to  be  similar  posts.^

Lamaism,  which,  more  than  any  other  section  of  Buddhism,  has,
as  we  have  seen,  substituted  good  words  for  the  good  works  of  the
primitive  Buddhists,  eagerly  seized  upon  all  such  symbolism,  as  for
instance,  Asoka's  historic  gifts  in  their  daily  rice-offerings.  The
decided  resemblance  of  its  "  prayer-flags  "  to  the  tagun-daing  of
the Burmese  is'  not  more  striking,  perhaps,  'than  the  apparent

1  Mr.  St.  A.  St.  John  kindly  informs  me  that  the  etymology  is  ia,  something  long  and
straight  +  ff%m,  bark  or  husk  -|-  daing,  a  post.

2  See  figures  in  Feksuson's  History  of  iTidia  and  Easterrn  Architecture.

3  These  instances  seem  something  more  than  the  simple  cloths  and  banners  as  propitia-
toi-y  offerings,  which,  of  course,  are  found  in  most  animistic  religions— from  the  "  rag-
bushes  "of  India  to  the  shavings  of  the  Upper  Burmese  and  the  Ainos.  And  the
hypothetical  relationship  between  the  Bunneseand  the  Tibetans,  based  on  the  affinity


410


SACRED  SYMBOLS  AND  OHAEMS.


are


homology  which  they  present  to  the  Asoka  pillars.  They
called  by  the  Lamas  Da-cha,'^  evidently  a  corruption  of  the  Indian
Dhvaja,  the  name  given  by  the  earlier  Indian  Buddhists  to  the
votive  pillars  offered  by  them  as  railings  to  Stupas.^

The  planting  of  a  Lamaist  prayer-flag,  while  in  itself  a  highly
pious  act,  which  everyone  practises  at  some  time  or  other,  does  not
merely  confer  merit  on  the  planter,  but  benefits  the  whole  country-
side. And  the  concluding  sentence  of  the  legend  inscribed  on  the
flag  is  usually  "  Let  Buddha's  doctrine  prosper  " — which  is  practi-
cally the  gist  of  the  Asoka  inscriptions.^


Chinese  L0JVO-B.osse.
Or  Horse-Dragon,  "Long-ma."


But  the  Lamas  have  degraded  much  of  their  Indian  symbolism,
and  perverted  it  to  sordid  and  selfish  objects.

The  prayer-flags  are  used  by  the  Lamas  as  luck-commanding
talismans ; and  the  commonest  of  them, the so-called "  Airy


of  their  languages,  does  not  count  for  much,  as  no  real  racial  relation  has  yet  been
proved.  Probably  related  to  these  prayer-flags  are  the  stone  pillars  called  masts  or
poles  (wei-kan),  found  in  western  Su-Ch'uan  in  China,  and  figured  by  Mr.  Baber  ("  A
Journey,"  etc.,  Soj/.  Geog.  Soc.  Sitppl.  Papers,  i.,  p.  19).

1  dar-lch'og.

3  Cunningham's  Stupa  of  Barkut.

3  As  the  legend  usually  bears  a  lion  and  a  tiger  in  its  upper  corners,  while  below
are  a  Garuda-bird  and  dragon  (Naga),  it  seems  not  impossible  that  these  may  be  re-
lated to  the  surmounting  lion  and  the  so-called  geese  of  Asoka's  pillars.  The  rites
related  to  the  erection  of  the  Lamaist  standard  are  somewhat  suggestive  of  the  Vedic
rite  of  "  raising  Indra's  banner,"  which  in  its  turn  is  probably  the  original  of  our  May-
pole, and  Asoka's  pillars  seem  to  have  been  somewhat  of  the  nature  of  the  Jayai-
tamhJut.


P BAYER  ANB  LUCE-FLAGS.


411


horse,"  seems  to  me  to  be  clearly  based  upon  and  also  bearing  the
same  name  as  "  The  Horse-dragon  "  of  the  Chinese.

This  Horse-dragon  or  "  Long-horse  "  is  one  of  the  four  great
mythic  animals  of  China,  and  it  is  the  symbol  for  grandev/r.  It
is  represented,  as  in  the  figure  on  the  opposite  page,  as  a  dragon-
headed  horse,  carrying  on  its  back  the  civilizing  Book  of  the  Law.


The  Tibetan  lUNGSossb.

Now  this  is  practically  the  same  figure  as  "  The  Lung-hoise "
(literally  "Wind-horse")  of  the  Lamaist  flag,  which  also  is  used  for
the  expressed  purpose  of  increasing  the  grandeur  of  the  votary ;
indeed,  this  is  the  sole  purpose  for  which  the  flag  is  used  by  the
Tibetan  laity,  with  whom  these  flags  are  extremely  popular.

And  the  conversion  of  "  The  Horse-dragon  "  of  the  Chinese  into


412  SACRED  SYMBOLS  AND  CHARMS.

the  Wind-horse  of  the  Tibetans  is  easily  accounted  for  by  a  con-
fusion of  homonyms.  The  Chinese  word  for  "  Horse-dragon  "  is
Long-ma,^  of  which  io7i^  =  Dragon,  and  wta  =  Horse.  In  Tibet,
where  Chinese  is  practically  unknown,  Long,  being  the  radical
word,  would  tend  to  be  retained  for  a  time,  while  the  qualifying
word,  ma,  translated  into  Tibetan,  becomes  "  rta."  Hence  we  get
the  form  "Long-rta."  But  as  the  foreign  word  Long  was  unin-
telligible in  Tibet,  and  the  symbolic  animal  is  used  almost  solely
for  fluttering  in  the  wind,  the  "  Long  "  would  naturally  become
changed  after  a  time  into  Lung  or  "  wind,"  in  order  to  give  it
some  meaning,  hence,  so  it  seems  to  me,  arose  the  word  Lung-
rta,2  or  "  Wind-horse."

In  appearance  the  Tibetan  "  Lung-'hoT:se  "  so  closely  resembles
its  evident  prototype  the  "  Horse-dragon,"  that  it  could  easily  be
mistaken  for  it.  On  the  animal's  back,  in  place  of  the  Chinese
civilizing  Book  of  the  Law,  the  Lamas  have  substituted  the  Bud-
dhist emblem  of  the  civilizing  Three  Gems,  which  include  the
Buddhist  Law.  But  the  Tibetans,  in  their-usual  sordid  way,  view
these  objects  as  the  material  gems  and  wealth  of  good  luck  which
this  horse  will  bring  to  its  votaries.  The  symbol  is  avowedly  a
luck- commanding  talisman  for  enhancing  the  grandeur  ^  of  the
votary.

Indian  myth  also  lends  itself  to  the  association  of  the  horse  with
luck;  for  the  Jewel-horse  of  the  universal  monarch,  such  as
Buddha  was  to  have  been  had  he  cared  for  worldly  grandeur,
carries  its  rider,  Pegasus-lihe,  through  the  air  in  whatever  direc-
tion wished  for,  and  thus  it  would  become  associated  with
the  idea  of  realization  of  material  wishes,  and  especially  wealth
and  jewels.  This  horse  also  forms  the  throne-support  of  the  mythi-
cal celestial  Buddha  named  Ratna-sambhava,  or  "  the  Jewel-hoin
One,"  who  is  often  represented  symbolically  by  a  jewel.  And  we
find  in  many  of  these  luck-flags  that  the  picture  of  a  jewel  takes
the  place  of  the  horse.  It  is  also  notable  that  the  mythical  people
of  the  northern  continent,  subject  to  the  god  of  wealth,  Kuvera,
or  Vaisravana,  are  "  horse-faced."

The  flags  are  printed  on  the  unglazed  tough  country  paper,

1  DmiouTiEH,  op.  cit.,  p.  30.

2  i-Lun-rta ;  another  form  of  spelling  sometimes,  though  rarely,  met  with,  is  kLun
rta,  where  kLvH  is  said  to  mean  "  year  of  birth."

^  T.,  rgyas.


LUCK-FLAGS.


413


and  are  obtainable  on  purchase  from  the  Lamas,  but  no  Lama  is
necessarily  needed  for  the  actual  planting  of  the  flag  and  its
attendant  rites.

These  luck-commanding  or  "prayer-flags "  are  of  four  kinds  : —

I.  The  Lung-ta  proper,  as  above  figured. It  is  almost  square  in

foi'm,  about  four  to  six  inches  long,  and  contains  in  the  centre  the

figure  of  a  horse  with  the  mystic  jewel  Norbu  on  its  back. It  is


Wak  of  the  Tigeb  and  Deagon.


hung  upon  the  ridges  of  the  houses,  and  in  the  vicinity  of  dwel-
lings. The  printed  text  of  this  sort  of  flag  varies  somewhat  in
the  order  in  which  the  deified  Lamas  are  addressed,  some  giving
the  first  place  to  St.  Padma,  while  others  give  it  to  the  celestial
Bodhisat,  Manjursi ;  but  all  have  the  same  general  form,  with  the
horse  bearing  the  jewel  in  the  centre,  and  in  the  four  corners
the  figures  or  the  names  of  the  tiger,  lion,  the  monstrous  garu^a-


414  SAGRED  SYMBOLS  AND  CHARMS.

bird,  and  the  dragon — the  tiger  being  opposed  to  the  dragon,  in
accordance  with  Chinese  mythology,  as  figured  over  the  page.
A  translation  of  one  of  the  prayer-flags  is  here  given  : —

Hail ! Vagishwari  mum  !  {i.e.,  yellow
TIGER.  Maiijusri's  spell.)  LION.

HaU!  to  the  iewelinthe  Lotus  !  Hicml
(i.e.,  Avalokita's  spell).
Hail ! to the  holder of the  Dorje ! Hum  ! (i.e.,  Vajrapani's

spell).
Hail  !  to  Vajrasattva  (The  Diamond-souled  one  !)
Hail  !  AmarahniJidsiwantiye  swaha.

[The  above  is  in  Sanskrit. Now  follows  in  Tibetan  : — ]
Here  !  May  all  of  the  above  (deities  whose  spells  have  been

given)  prosper [here  is  inserted  the  year

of  birth  of  the  individual],  and  also  prosper —
the  Body  (i.e.,  to  save  from  sickness),
the  Speech  (i.e.,  to  give  victory  in  disputations),
and  the  Mind  (i.e.,  to  obtain  all  desires) ;
GARUDA.  of  this  year-holder  [above  specified]  DRAGON,

and  may  Buddha'^  doctrine  prosper  !

Here  it  will  be  noted  that  the  three  great  celestial  defensores
fidei  of  Lamaism  are  invoked  through  their  spells,  namely : —

1.  Manju^ri,  who  conveys  wisdom ;  2.  Avalokita,  who  saves
from  fear  and  hell ;  and  3.  Vajrapdni,  who  saves  from  accident
and  bodily  injury.  And  in  addition  to  the  above  are  also  given
the  spells  of :  4.  Vajrasattva,  who  purifies  the  soul  from  sin  j
and  5.  Amitdyus,  who  confers  long  life.

It  is  interesting  to  compare  with  these  Tibetan  luck-flags  the
somewhat  similar  prayer-flags  ^  which  the  Burmese  Buddhists
offer  at  their  shrines.  "  These,"  says  Mr.  Scott,*  "  are  fancifully
cut  into  figures  of  dragons  and  the  like,  and  in  the  centre  contain,
in  Pali  or  the  vernacular,  sentences  like  these  : —

"  By  means  of  this  paper  the  offerer  will  become  very  strong.

"  By  the  merit  of  this  paper  Wednesday's  children  will  be  blessed
by  spirits  and  men.

"  May  the  man  born  on  Friday  gain  reward  for  his  pious  offer-
ing.

"  May  the  man  born  on  Monday  be  freed  from  Sickness  and  the
Three  Calamities."


Kyet  sha-taing.  a  The  Bwrman,  i.,  p.  225.


LUCK-FLAGS.


415


The  large  Luck-flag  "The  Victoeious  Banner."
(Beduced  ^.)


416  SAGRED  SYMBOLS  AND  CHARMS.

The  second  form  of  the  Tibetan  luck-flag  is  called  cho-pen.^
It  is  of  a  long,  narrow,  oblong  shape,  about  eight  to  ten  inches  in
length.  This  sort  of  flag  is  for  tying  to  twigs  of  trees  or  to
bridges,  or  to  sticks  for  planting  on  the  tops  of  hills.  Its  text  has
generally  the  same  arrangement  as  form  No.  1,  but  it  wants  the
horse-picture  in  the  centre.  Its  Tibetan  portion  usually  closes
with  "  May  the  entire  collection  (of  the  foregoing  deities)  prosper
the  power,  airy  horse,  age  and  life  of  this  year-holder  and  make
them  increase  like  the  waxing  new  moon."

Very  poor  people,  who  cannot  afford  the  expense  of  the  printed
charms,  merely  write  on  a  short  slip  of  paper  the  name  of  the
birth-year  of  the  individual,  and  add  "  May  his  lung-horse  prosper."

One  lung-horse  for  each  member  of  a  household  must  be  planted
on  the  third  day  of  every  month  (lunar)  on  the  top  of  any  hill  near
at  hand,  or  on  the  branch  of  a  tree  near  a  spring,  or  tied  to  the
sides  of  a  bridge;  and  on  affixing  the  flag  a  stick  of  incense  is
burned.  And  a  small  quantity  of  flour,  grain,  flesh,  and  beer  are
offered  to  the  genius  loci  of  the  hill-top  by  sprinkling  them  around,
saying.  So  !  So  !  Take !  Take  !

A  more  expanded  form  of  the  luck-flag  is  the  Gyal-tsan  dse-
mo,  or  "  Victorious  banner,"  ^  which  is  generally  of  the  same  form
as  that  first  mentioned,  but  containing  a  much  larger  amount  of
holy  texts,  and  also  usually  the  eight  glorious  symbols,  of  which
the  lotus  forms  the  base  of  the  print.  It  prospers  not  only  luck
in  wealth,  but  also  the  life,  body,  and  power  of  the  individual,
and  seems  to  contain  also  spells  addressed  to  the  goddess  Durga,
Siva's  spouse.

The  Vast  Luck-flag.  This  fourth  form  of  Lung-ta  is  named
"gLan-po  stoh  ryyas,"  or  "  That  which  makes  vast  hke  the  Ele-
phant." ^  It  is  pasted  to  the  walls  of  the  houses,  or  folded  up  and
worn  around  the  neck  as  a  charm  for  good  luck.  It  consists  of
crossed  vajras  in  the  centre  with  a  Garuda  and  a  peacock,  the
jewelled  elephant  and  the  jewelled  horse,  each  bearing  an  eight-
leaved  lotus-disc  on  which  are  inscribed  the  following  Sanskrit
and  Tibetan  texts.  The  other  symbols  are  "  the  eight  glorious
symbols  "  already  described.

1  «byod-pan.

2  Sometimes  rendered  into  Sanskrit  as  Arya  dlwaja  agra-keyur  rana  maharani.
■'  gLaii-po  stob-i'gyas.


LUCK-PL  AGS.  417


And  around  the  margin  is  the  familiar  legend  "  the  Buddhist
creed,"  repeated  several  times,  also  the  letters  of  the  alphabet,
together  with  the  words  "  May  the  life,  body,  power,  and  the
'  airy  horse  '  of  the  holder  of  this  charm  prosper  his  body,  speech,
and  wishes,  and  cause  them  to  increase  like  the  growing  new
moon ;  may  he  be  possessed  of  all  wealth  and  riches,  and  be  guarded
against  all  kinds  of  injury."  .

In  the  upper  left  hand  disc  :  "  May  the  life  of  this  chavm-h older  be
raised  sublimely  (like  the  flight  of  the  garuda  here  represented).  Om  !
sal  sal  Jiobana  sal  sal  ye  swaha  !  Om, !  Om  1  sarha  Icata  hata  sata  hatg,
sola  ya  nata  sah  wa  ye  swdha  !  Om  !  kili  kili  mili  niili  hunt,  kuru  hum
hum,  ye  swdha,  '  O  !  May  the  life  of  this  charm-holder  be  raised  on
high!

In  the  upper  right-hand  disc  :  "  May  the  body  of  this  charm-holder
be  raised  sublimely  (like  the  flight  of  the  peacock  here  represented).
Om,  !  yer  yer  hobana  yer  yer  ye  svdhd  !  Om  !  sarba  Taihagata  bhiri
bhiri  bata  bata  miri  m,iri  mili  mili  ae  bata  sarba  gata-gata  shramana
sarba  gata-gata  sJiramana  sarba  !  0  !  May  the  body  of  this  chaim-
holder  be  raised  on  high."

In  lower  left-hand  disc  :  "  May  the  power  of  this  charm-holder  be
raised  sublimely  (like  the  precious  elephant  here  represented).  Om  !
Mer  mer  hobana  iner  mer  ye  swdha  !  Om  sarva  dhara  dhara  bara  dhara
ghi  kha  ye  swdha  I  Sarva  kili  kili  na  hah  kang  li  sarba  bhara  bhara
sambhara  sam,bhara  !  O  !  May  the  power  and  wealth  of  this  charm-
holder  be  increased  and  all  the  injuries  be  guarded  against.

In  lower  right-hand  circle  :  "May  the  'Airy  horse'  of  this  charm-
holder  be  raised  subhmely  (with  the  celerity  of  '  the  precious  horse '
here  represented).  Ovi  !  lam  lam  hobana  lam,  lam  lam  swdhd  !  Om,  !
Sarva  kara  kara  phat !  Sarbha  dhuru  dhuru  na  phat  I  Sdrbd  kata
kata  kata  na  phat !  Sarba  kili  kili  na  phat  I  Sarhha  mala  mala
swdhd !  0  !  May  the  '  iMJigr-horse '  of  the  charm-holder  be  raised
on  high  and  guarded  against  all  injury."

In  the  central  disc  over  the  junction  of  the  cross  Dor-je  is  written  :
"  Om  !  neh  ya  rani  jiwenti  ye  swdhd  !  O  !  May  this  charm-holder
be  given  the  und3ring  gift  of  soul  everlasting  (as  the  adamantine  cross
Dor-je  herein  pictured)."

In  planting  these  luck-flags  a  special  form  of  worship  is  ob-
served. And  the  planting  of  these  flags  with  the  due  worship
is  advised  to  be  done  when  ever  anyone  feels  unhappy  and  down  in
luck,  or  injured  by  the  earth-demons,  etc.  It  is  called  "  The
great  statue  of  the  Lung-horse,"  and  is  as  follows  : —

First  of  all  is  made  a  rice-ofiering  of  the  universe,  under  a  yellow
canopy,  but  screened  on  the  four  sides  by  curtains  of  different  colours,
blue  on  the  east,  red  on  the  south,  white  on  the  west,  and  black  on  the

E  £


418  SACRED  SYMBOLS  AND CHARMS.

north.  The  canopies  are  to  be  fixed  in  the  ends  of  a  perfect  square
set  in  the  four  directions,  around  which  are  the  twelve-year  cycle,  the
nine  cakes  (bs'os)  representing  the  nine  Mewas,  eight  lamps  represent-
ing the  eight  parkha,  eight  planets,  twenty-eight  constellations  of  stars,
five  Tortnas,  five  glud  (small  balls  of  wheaten  flour  offered  to  demons  as
ransom),  five  arrows  with  silk  streamers  (mda-dar)  of  the  five  different
colours,  and  many  more  mdd  rgyan-hu  and  'p'an.  The  above  must  be
arranged  by  a  practical  man,  and  then  the  ceremony  begins  with  the
fingers  in  the  proper  attitude  of  the  twelve  cycle  of  years,  and  recita-
tion of  the  following  in  a  raised  and  melodious  voice  : —

"  Kye  !  Kye  I  In  the  eastern  horizon  from  where  the  sun  rises,  ia
a  region  of  tigers,  hares,  an  1  trees.  The  enemy  of  the  trees  is  the  Iron,
which  is  to  be  found  in  the  western  horizon,  and  where  the  enemy,  the
life-cutting  bdiid-devil,  is  also  to  be  found.  In  that  place  are  the
demons  who  injure  the  life,  body,  power,  and  the  '  Lung-hovse.'  The
devil  who  commands  them  also  lives  in  the  occidental  region  :  he  is  a
white  man  with  the  heads  of  a  bird  and  a  monkey,  and  holds  a  white
hawk  on  the  right  and  a  black  I'emon-rod  on  the  left.  Oh  !  Bird  and
monkey-headed  demon  !  Accept  this  ransom  and  call  back  all  the  in-
juring demons.

"  Kye  !  Kye  !  In  the  southern  horizon  is  a  region  of  horses,  snakes,
and  fire.  The  enemy  of  the  fire  is  the  water,  etc.,  etc.  O  !  Rat  and
pig-headed  demon  !  Accept  this  ransom  and  call  back  all  the  injuring
demons.'" ..........

"  Kye  !  Kye  !  In  the  boundary  of  the  south-eastern  horizon  is  a
yellow  dragon-beaded  demon.  0  !  Dragon-headed  devil !  Accept  this
ransom  and  call  back  all  the  injuring  devils.

"  Kye!  Kye!  In  the  boundary  of  the  south-western  horizon  is  a
yellow  sheep-headed  woman.  O !  Sheep-headed  she-devil !  Accept
this  ransom  and  call  back  all  the  injuring  demons.

"  Kye  !  Kye !  In  the  boundary  of  the  north-western  horizon  there
is  a  yellow  dog-headed  demon.  0  !  Dog-headed  devil !  Accept  this
ransom  and  call  back  all  the  injui-ing  demons.

"  Kye  !  Kye  !  In  the  boundary  of  the  north-eastern  horizon  there
is  a  yellow  bull-headed  demoness.  O  !  Bull-headed  she-devil !  Accept
this  ransom  and all  back  all  the  injuring  demons  !

"  O  !  Upset  all  the  injuring  evil  spiiits,  the  ill-natured  devils,  the
demons  who  injure  the  life,  body,  power,  and  the  Lung-hovse,  the
wandering  demons,  the  ill-luck  of  bad  '  Zwn^-horses,'  the  fearful
goblins,  the  bad  omens,  the  doors  of  the  sky,  and  the  earth,  and
the  injuries  of  all  malignant  devils.

"  May  we  be  freed  from  all  kinds  of  injuries  and  be  '  favoured  with
the  real  gift,  which  we  earnestly  seek  ! '  "

"  May  virtue  increase  !  '
"  Globy  !  "


LUGK-FLAGS.


419


^^^^s^'^jMljifcto^^^fe^i^'Bi-'il^fe'g^^^'?'^''^^^


The  "Vast"  Luck-flag.
(Eeduced  §.)


E  E 2


\iimfi^tmkU4tni^'i'it^^tl±


^W¥fef  ^-ffii^/^^  ii«4^Mi


^^HiiitliiiiiilHlifiiiiM^


Dough  Sacrificial  Effigies  of  the  Tibetan  Bon  Religion.
(Reduced  J.)


XVI.
WOKSHIP AND RITUAL.

JOESHIP  and  priestcraft  had  no  place  in  primitive
Buddhism.  Pious  regard  for  admirable  persons,  such
as  Buddha  and  the  elders,  and  for  ancient  cities  and
sacred  sites,  was  Umited  to  mere  veneration,  and
usually  took  the  form  of  respectful  circumambulation  (usually
three  times),  with  the  right  hand  towards  the  admired  object,
as  in  western  ceremonial,^  and  this  veneration  was  extended  to
the  other  two  members  of  the  Buddhist  trinity,  namely,  Buddha's
Word  or  Dharma,  and  the  Assembly  of  the  Faithful.

After  Buddha's  death  such  ceremonial,  to  satisfy  the  religious
sense,  seems  soon  to  have  crystallized  into  concrete  worship  and
sacrifice  as  an  act  of  affection  and  gratitude  towards  the  Three


^  For  instance,  as  in  the  Scotch  highlands,  "to  make  the  deazil"  or  walk  thrice  in
the  direction  of  the  sun's  course  around  those  whom  they  wish  well  (Goedon-Cuming,
From  the  Hebrides  to  the  Himalayas,  ii.,  164).  We  also  follow  the  same  rule  in  passing
decanters  round  our  dinner-tables  ;  and  it  is  the  direction  in  which  cattle  tread  out
the  corn. — Cf.  Pradahhina,  p.  287


ORIGIN  OP  WORSHIP.


421


Holy  Ones ;  and  it  was  soon  extended  so  as  to  include  the  worship
of  three  other  classes  of  objects,  namely  (1),  Bodily  relics  {^ar-
irika);  (2),  Images  of  Buddha's  person,  etc.  (JJddesika) ;  and  (;^),
Vestments,  utensils,  etc.  (Paribhogika).  And  in  justification  of
such  worship  the  southern  Buddhists  quote  the  sanction  of
'Buddha  himself,^  though  of  course  without  any  proof  for  it.

And  we  have  seen  how,  in  the  objective  phase  of  Buddhism,
and  especially  in  its  Tantrik  development,  ritual  is  elevated  to  the
front  rank  in  importance,  and  binds
the  votaries  in  the  bonds  of  sacerdo-
talism and  idolatry.  Even  in  southern
Buddhism  there  is  a  good  deal  3f
priestcraftT  The  monks  draw  out  horo-
scopes, fix  auspicious  days  for  weddings,
etc.,  and  are  sent  for  in  cases  of  sick-
ness to  recite  the  scriptures,  and  the
pint  as  a  charm  against  snakes,  and
evil  spirits,  and  devil  dances.^

But  in  Lamaism  the  ritualistic  cults
are  seen  in  their  most  developed  form^
and  many  of  these  certainly  bear  a
close  resemblance  outwardly  to  those
found  within  the  church  of  Eome,  in
the  pompous  services  with  celibate
and  tonsured  monks  and  nuns,  candles,
bells,  censers,  rosaries, mitres, copes,

pastoral  crooks,  worship  of  relics,  confession,  intercession  of  "  the
Mother  of  God,"  litanies  and  chants,  holy  water,  triad  divinity,
organized  hierarchy,  etc.^

It is still uncertain,  however, how much of the Lamaist
symbolism  may  have  been  borrowed  from  Eoman  Catholicism,  or


A  Lama  Peiest.^


1  Hardy's  East.  Mon.,  216.

2  "  After  the  conclusion  of  the  perahera  (in  the  month  of  Ehala  [July]  in  the  god's
temples),  the  officers,  etc.,  engaged  in  it,  including  the  elephants,  have  ceremonies  for
the  conciliation  of  lesser  divinities  and  evil  spirits  performed,  called  Balibat-n^tima,
Gardyakun-n^tima,  and  Vi'aliyakun-niStima.  The  Balibat-n^tima  is  a  devil  dance  per-
tormedfor  iive  days  after  the  perahera  by  a  class  of  persons,  named  Balibat  Oammeliela,
superior  to  the  Yakdesso  or  devil-dancers." — Report  of  Seivke  Tenure  Gommiesioners,
Ceylon,  1872,  p.  60-82.

'  After  Giorgi.  *  Cf.  Hue,  ii.,  50.


422  WORSHIP  AND RITUAL.

vice  versa.  Large  Christian  communities  certainly  existed  in
western  China,  near  the  borders  of  Tibet,  as  early  as  the  seventh
century  a.d.'

Thus  has  it  happened,  in  a  system  which  acknowledged  no
Creator,  that  the  monks  are  in  the  anomalous  position  of  priests  to
a  host  of  exacting  deities  and  demons,  and  hold  the  keys  of  hell,
and  heaven,  for  they  have  invented  the  common  saying,  "without


1  At  Si-ngau-fu,  near  the  eastern  border  of  Tibet,  is  an  edict  stone,  erected  by
the  Chinese  emperor  Tetsung,  780-783  a.d.,  which  contains  an  account  of  the
an-ival  of  the  missionary  Olopan  (probably  a  Chinese  form  of  Eabban-monk)  from
Tat'sin  (Roman  empire),  in  the  year  equivalent  to  a.d.  635,  bringing  sacred  books  and
images  ;  of  the  translation  of  the  said  books ;  of  the  imperial  approval  of  the  doctrine,
and  permission-to  teach  it  publicly.  There  follows  a  decree  of  the  emperor  Taitsung,
a  very  famous  prince,  issued  in  638  in  favour  of  the  new  doctrine,  and  ordering  a
church  to  be  built  in  the  square  of  Peace  and  Justice  at  the  capital.  The  emperor's
portrait  was  to  be  placed  in  the  church  (in  the  royal  garden  of  Inifan).  Kaotsung
(650-683,  the  devout  patron  also  of  the  Buddhist  traveller  Hiuen  Tsiang)  continued  to
favour  it. — See  Yule  in  Marco  Polo,  ii.,  23,  where  a  photograph  of  the  inscription  is
given.  The  edict  also  states  (Kibchbe's  Ohina  lUmtrata)  that  in  the  years  699  and
713,  the  Bonzes,  or  Buddhist  idolatrous  priests,  raised  a  tumult  against  the  Christians,
which  was  quelled  by  order  of  the  emperor  Yven-Sun-ci-tao.

The  Muhammadan  traveller,  Abu  Zeid  al  Hassan,  writing  in  the  ninth  centui-y
(Eenaddot's  transl.,  Lond.,  1733,  p.  42),  states  that  "  thousands  of  Christians  "  were
massacred  in  S.  W.  China.

In  the  twelfth  century  Jenghiz  Klian  and  his  successors  were  well  inclined  to
Christianity ;  his  principal  wife  was  the  daughter  of  king  Ung  Khan,  who  was  a
Christian.

In  the  thirteenth  century  Marco  Polo  found  in  the  north  of  Yunnan  a  few  Nestorian
Christians. — Ydtie,  M,P.,  ii.,  52.

"  In  1246,"  writes  Hue  (Ghinese  Empire,  i.,  p.  141),  "  Plan-Carpin  was  sent  to  the  great
Khan  of  the  Tartars  by  pope  Innocent  the  Fourth.  At  Khara  Khoroum,  the  capital  of  the
Mongols,  he  saw,  not  far  from  the  palace  of  the  sovereign,  an  ediiice  on  which  was  a
little  cross ;  '  then,'  says  he, '  I  was  at  the  height  of  joy,  and  supposing  that  there  must
be  some  Christians  there,  I  entered,  and  found  an  altar  magnificently  adorned ;  there
were  representations  of  the  Saviour,  the  Holy  Virgin,  and  John  the  Baptist,  and  a  large
silver  cross,  with  pearls  and  other  ornaments  in  the  centre :  and  a  lamp  with  eight
jets  of  light  burned  before  the  altar.  In  the  sanctuary  was  seated  an  Armenian  monk
of  swarthy  complexion,  very  thin,  wearing  nothing  but  a  coarse  tunic  reaching  only
down  to  the  middle  of  his  leg,  and  a  black  mantle  fastened  with  iron  clasps.'  "

And  in  1336  letters  reached  pope  Benedict  XII.  from  several  Christian  Alans  holding
high  office  at  the  court  of  Cambaluc,  in  which  they  conveyed  their  urgent  request  for
the  nomination  of  an  archbishop  in  succession  to  the  deceased  John  of  Monte  Corvino.
John  Marignalli  says  of  these  Alans  that  in  his  day  there  were  30,000  of  them  at  the
great  Khan's  service,  and  all  at  least  nominally  Christians. — Yule,  M.P.,  ii.,  164.

And  in  the  foui'teenth  century,  still  before  Tsong  Khopa's  era,  not  only  were
missionaries  of  the  Roman  Church  established  in  the  chief  cities  of  China,  but  a
regular  trade  was  carried  on  overland  between  Italy  and  China  by  way  of  Tana,
Astracan,  Otrar,  and  Kamul. — Yule's  Marco  Polo,  i.,  135 ;  Conf.  also  The  Nestoriansand
their  Rihmh,  by  Dr.  Badoer.


THE  OFFERINGS.  423


a  Lama  in  front  (of  the  votary),  there  is  (no  approach  to)  Grod."
And  so  instilled  is  such  belief  in  the  minds  of  the  laity  that  no
important  business  is  undertaken  without  first  offering  worship
or  sacrifice.

The  necessity  for  offerings  at  the  shrines  of  the  images,  etc.,  is
now  insisted  on  in  all  the  forms  of  Buddhism.

The  regular  offerings  will  be  detailed  presently.  But  there  is
no  limit  to  the  variety  of  things  that  are  offered.  Wealthy  votaries
offer  art  objects,  rich  tapestries,  gold  and  silver  vessels,  jewels,  and
the  plunders  of  war,  including  weapons.  In  Burma,  some  of  the
earliest  knitting  and  embroidery  efforts  of  young  girls  are  devoted
to  Buddha's  shrine,  along  with  American  clocks  and  chandeliers,
tins  of  jam  and  English  biscuits,  sardines,  and  Birmingham  um-
brellas. And  most  of  these,  and  still  more  incongruous  objects,
are  offered  on  Lamaist  altars ;  even  eggs  are  sometimes  given.

We  have  already  seen  the  general  form  of  daily  service  as  prac-
tised at  Potala  and  lesser  cathedrals  and  temples,  and  by  isolated
monks  in  hermitage.  Here  we  shall  look  at  some  details  of  par-
ticular acts  of  worship  and  celebrations.

Personal  ablution  is  enjoined,  as  a  sacerdotal  rite  preparatory  to
worship,  on  the  principle  of  purity  of  body  being  emblematic  of
purity  of  heart.  But  this  ceremonial  purification  seldom  extends
to  more  than  dipping  the  tips  of  the  fingers  in  water,  and  often
even  not  that,  for  the  Tibetans,  like  most  mountaineers,  are  not
remarkable  for  their  love  of  water  or  soap.

Before  commencing  any  devotional  exercise,  the  higher  Lamas
perform  or  go  through  a  manoeuvre  bearing  a  close  resemblance
to  "  crossing  oneself,"  as  practised  by  Christians.  The  Lama
gently  touches  his  forehead  either  with  the  finger  or  with  the  bell,
uttering  the  mystic  Om,  then  he  touches  the  top  of  his  chest,  utter-
ing Ah,  then  the  epigastrium  (pit  of  stomach),  uttering  Hum.  And
some  Lamas  add  Sva-ha,  while  others  complete  the  cross  by  touch-
ing the  left  shoulder,  uttering  Dam  and  then  Yam.  It  is  alleged
that  the  object  of  these  manipulations  is  to  concentrate  the  parts
of  the  Sattva,  namely,  the  body,  speech  and  mind,  upon  the  image
or  divinity  which  he  is  about  to  commune  with.^

1  The  Svaha,  etc.,  are  held  to  mean  knowledge  (Yon-ton)  and  a  kind  of  Karma
Cp'rin-las),  and  the  five  syllables  are  mystically  given  the  following  colours  from
above  downwards  :  white,  red,  blue,  yellow  and  green.


424  WORSHIP  AND RITUAL.

In  the  worship  of  every  Buddhist  divinity  there  are  seven  recog-
nized stages,^  evidently  framed  on  a  Hindii  model.^  The  stages
are' : —

1.  The  Invocation — Calling  to  the  feast  or  sacrifice.

2.  Inviting  the  deity  to  be  seated.

3.  Presentation  of  ofiferiiigs,  sacred  cake,  rice,  water,  flowers,  in-

cense, lamps,  music,  and  occasionally  a  man^ala  or  magic-
circle  offering,  for  which  there  is  a  special  manual.

4.  Hymns  in  praise.

5.  Eepetition  of  the  special  spell  or  mantra.

6.  Prayers  for  benefits  present  and  to  come.

7.  Benediction.

Many  of  the  Lamaist  offerings  are  of  the  nature  of  real  sacrifice.
Some  of  the  objects  are  destroyed  at  the  time  of  offering.  Cere-
monies to  propitiate  demons  are  usually  done  after  dark,  and  the
objects  are  then  commonly  thrown  down  "  delibare."  Frequently
the  sacrifice  is  given  the  form  of  a  banquet,  and  accompanied  by
games  and  sacred  plays  and  dances.

What  are  called  "  the  Essential  Offerings  or  Sacrifice  "  *  seem  to
represent  the  earlier  and  purer  offerings  of  Indian  Buddhism,  and
are  little  more  than  the  fresh-cut  flowers  and  incense  which  were


1  Tib.,  Yan-lag-bdun.

2  In  the  Hindu  worship  of  a  deity  there  are  sixteen  stages  of  ceremonial  adoration
following  on  the  Invocation  to  come  {dvdhcm),  and  the  Invitation  to  be  seated  (dsan),
and  in  each  stage  mantras  are  chanted.  I  have  italicized  those  stages  which  are
found  in  the  above  Lamaist  ritual : —

1.  Padya,  washing  the  idol's  feet.

2.  Azgha,  washing  the  idol's  hands.

3.  Achmana,  offering  water  to  rinse

mouth.


^ The  Lamas

dress  and  bathe

their  idols  only

once  or  twice

a  year.

Chandan,  offering  sandal  wood,  saff-
ron, or  Mi  powder.


Snana,  bathing  the

idol.
V'astra,  dressing  the

idol.


7.  Akshat,  offering  rice.

8.  Pushpa,  offering  flowers.

9.  Dkiipa,  offering  incense.

10.  Dipa,  offering  lamp.

11.  Naividya,  offering  food.

12.  Achmana,  second  offering  of  water

to  rinse  mouth.

13.  Tambula,  offering  betel.

14.  Supari  or  puga,  offering  Areca  nuts

15.  Dakshana,  offering  money.

16.  Nizajan,  waving  lights  or  camphor.


It  may  also  be  compared  with  the  Jaina  ritual  by  Dr.  J.  Burgess,  Indian  Jntiqimry,
i.,  357,  etc.

3  Another enumeration  gives  : 1,  Salutation  ; 2,  Offering ; 3,  Confession  of sins
(sdig-'s'ags)  ;  4,  Eejoicing (yid-rangs) ; 5, Exliortation ('skul-wa)  ; 6,  Prayers  for
temporal  and  other  blessings  (gsol-gdeb) ;  7,  Prayers  for  spiritual  blessing  (bsno-ba).
*  Ner-spyod  mch'od-pa.


STAGES  IN WORSHIP.


425


customary  offerings  even  in  the  seventh  century,  at  the  time  of
Hiuen  Tsiang.  These  offerings  are  set  upon  the  altar  already  de-
scribed, before  the  image  worshipped,  accompanied  by  the  rhyth-
mic recital  of  incantations  and  music.

These "  essential  "  or  necessary  offerings,  which are  needed


'M^^^.


A'4'rri^'i'i'iM'if


Dough  Saceificial  effigies
of  the  Lamas.


in  every  service  of  worship,  are  seven  in  number,  and  each  bears  a
special  Sanskritic  name  descriptive  of  its  nature,'  and must  be


1  1.  Ar-gham  (in  Tibetan  cB-ySn),  or  excellent  drinking  river  water.

2.  Pu  dyam  (Tib.,  zdh-sel*),  or  the  cool  water  for  washing  feet.

3.  Fukh-pe  (Tib.,  me-tok^'),  flower.

4.  Dhu-pe  (Tib.,  du-pS),  incense  fumes.

5.  A-loke  (Tib.,  snan-^salf),  lamp.

6.  Gan-dhe  (Tib.,  ti-chaV),  perfumed  water  for  anointing  body.

7.  Nai-vi-dya  (Tib.,  :dl-:e\),  sacred  food.

8.  Shabta  (Tib.,  rol-^no%),  cymbals.

This  order  is  reversed  in  established  church  and  Kar-yyu-pa  temples  when  doing  a
certain  kind  of  tutelary  deity's  worship.  The  Lamaist  account  of  the  history  of  these
offerings,  is  that  each  was  offered  to  Buddha  by  some  celestial  or  other  person>
namely: —

Ar-gham. — Indra,  the  king  of  gods,  offered  this,  the  water  of  eight-fold  virtues,  to
the  Buddha  for  general  use.

"  Pa  dyam. — gTsug-na-rin-ch'en,  the  king  of  the  Nagas,  offered  z'abs-c/sil,  the  purify-
ing water,  to  the  Buddha  for  washing  his  feet.

Pukh-pe. — Ganga  Devi,  the  fiendess,  offered  a  flower-rosary  to  the  Buddha  for
decorating  his  head.

Dhu-pe. — "  The  glorious  Kheu,"  the  incense-seller,  offered  sweet-smelling  incense  to
the  Buddha.

A-loke. — The  gold-handed  king  offered  the  darkness-clearing  light  for  invigorating  his
eyes.

*  mch'od  yon.  t  z'abs  g-sil.  t  dug-spos.  ||  dri-ch'ab.  §  zal-xas.


426  WORSHIP  AND  RITUAL.

placed  in  the  bowls  already  described,^  and  in  line  in  the  above
order.  In  the  third  and  fourth  bowls  on  the  top  of  the  rice  heaps
should  be  placed  respectively  a  flower  ^  and  a  stick  of  incense ;  and
in  the  sixth  bowl  should  be  placed  perfumed  water ;  and  lastly  a
cake,  into  which  have  been  incorporated  a  few  filings  of  the  precious
metals  ^ ;  but  these  details  are  only  observed  on  special  occasions.
Ordinarily  all  of  the  bowls  are  filled  with  plain  water.  On  plac-
ing the  above  offerings  in  position  in  the  order  noted,  the  benefit
of  a  full  service  of  worship  is  obtained  by  merely  chanting  the
following  hymn  : —

A-va-td-ya,  A-va-td-ya.  Om  vajra !  Argham,  Pd-dyam,
Pukh-pe,  Dhu-pe,  A-loke,  Gaoi-dhe,  Ndi-vi-dya,  Shab-ta,  Prdti-
dsa-yl  Studhd  !  Which  being  interpreted  is  :  "  Come  !  Come  !
Om  !  The  Thunderbolt !  Partake  of  these  offerings  :  Excellent  river
water  for  drinking,  cool  water  for  washing  your  feet,  flowers  for
decking  your  hair,  pleasing  incense  fumes,  lamps  for  lighting  the
darkness,  perfumed  water  for  anointing  your  body,  sacred  food,  the
music  of  cymbals  !  (here  the  cymbals  are  sounded).  Eat  fully !
Sivdhd  !  "

But  the  high-church  Lama,  or  Gre-lug-pa  monk,  must  chant  a
longer  service,  which  is  noted  below.''


Gan-dhe. — Zui--j)hud-lnga-pa,  the  King  of  Gandai'vas,  offered  Dri-ch'al,  the  soothing
scent,  to  tlie  Buddha  for  refreshing  his  body.

Wai-im-dpa. — Mgon-Anatha-med-danu  athara  data  zas-sbyin  (tlie  lordless+food+
give)  the  house-owner,  offered  tlie  food  of  liundred  tastes  to  the  Buddlia  for  support-
ing his  health.

Shapta. — The  divine  and  Naga-smiths  offered  Gsil-snyan,  the  pleasant  music,  to  the
Buddha  for  cheering  his  ears.  The  Buddha  blessed  each  of  the  offerings,  and  since
then  they  are  considered  sacred.

1  Seep.  297.

2  The  flowers  most  commonly  used  for  this  purpose  at  Lhasa  and  sold  in  booths  near
the  temples,  are  the  common  marigold  {Calendula — Tib.,  gur-Kum  me-tog),  and  white
and  blue  asters  (skal-bzan),  and  hollyhocks.

•>  See  annexed  figm-e  for  the  block  containing  these  metals  (named  Ein-ch'en
brdar-ru,  [or  p'yema]) ;  the  metals  are  usually  gold,  silver,  copper,  brass  and  iron.

*  Name  ratnatrmjaya  I  Xamo  Bhagawate  mjm  sara  foramardtt  Tathaffatatja  arhate
samayagam  hudhhayal  Tadyatha!  Om  Vajra  Vagral  Mahabodhitsatim  Vajre/
Mahahodhima-ndop  asam  Kramana  Vajra  ! Sarlo  karma  awarana  bigodliana  tajra  sivdhd  !

This  mantra  invites  all  the  Jinas  and  their  (celestial)  sons).  Om  I  Narno  bhagawaU
piOipe  ketu  rajaya  !  Tatliagcdaya  t  Ar/iaie  samayalca  san  BtidhayaJ  TadyaOial  Om!
puhpe pukpe  swdM I  puJipesu  puhpesn  puJipesiidbhawe.'  piihpe  awakarane  simhal  This
should  be  repeated  seven  times,  after  which  the  magic-circle  and  food  grains  should
be  offered. When  the  lamp  is  offered,  the  following  should  be  repeated : —

"  I  arrange  this  lamp  with  great  reverence,  and  offer  it  to  the  Buddha,  the  Law,  and


THE  CAKES.


427


It  is  customary  for  every  votary  on  special  occasions  to  offer
one  hundred  and  eight  lamps,  together  with  an  equal  number  of


Filing  the  Five  Precious  Metals
for  the  sacrifice.


vessels  of  rice  and  of  cake. These  are  placed  in  four  rows,  the


the  Order.  Through  the  power  of  this  virtuous  deed,  let  me  be  possessed  of  illumi-
nating knowledge,  and  let  the  animal  beings  be  cleared  of  the  misty  impurities  which
surrounds  them."

Then  he  must  rise  up,  and  joining  his  hands  in  devotional  attitude,  chant "  The
Invitation  " : —

"  1  beg  you  0  Patrons  of  the  animal  beings  !  Demon-vanquishing  gods  !  Jinas
and  your  retinues  !  to  approach  this  humble  dwelling.  I  beg  you,  merciful  owners  of
miracles,  to  approach  this  humble  dwelling  and  receive  these  offerings."

[Then  holding  hands  horizontally,  bow  down  and  say ; — ]  "  I  bow  down  before  the
Lamas  of  the  three  times  and  of  the  ten  directions,  and  before  the  precious  Three
Holy  Ones  with  greatest  reverence  and  oceans  of  praise."  Oml  Navw  Manju^riyel
Namassce  Shriye  I  Namo  lUtamshriyesloa/ia  I  [bow  down  at  once  at  each  recitation  of
this  Trumtra].

The  Presentation  of  offerings :  "  I  here  offer  up  all  the  most  excellent  offerings  of


428


WORSHIP  AND  RITUAL.


order  of  which  from  before  backwards  is  rice,  water,  lamps,  and
cakes. And  for  the  great  demoniacal  tutelary's  service  extra  cakes

used  on  a  separate  altar  with  five
ledges  (see  also  figure  on  page  299),
on  each  of  which  are  set  a  series
of  one  hundred  and  eight  of  the
offerings  noted,  and  on  special  feasts
great  bas  reliefs  of  coloured  butter
are  offered,  many  of  them  of  artistic
designs.^

A  still  more  elaborate  arrange-
ment of  food-offerings  is  seen  in
the  banquet  to  the  whole  assembly
of  the  gods  and  the  demons,
entitled  Kon-ch'og  -  chi  -  dii,  or
"  sacrifice,  to  the  whole  assembly
of  Eare  Ones,''  which  is  frequently
held  in  the  temples.  This  feast  is
observed  by  Lamas  of  all  sects,  and  is  an  interesting  sample
of devil-worshiu, The old fashion is here detailed, but it


Offerings  to  Tutelaet-fiend.


1.  G-reat  cake.

2.  Wine  or  blood  in  a  skull,

3.  Hice.


I  4.  Cake.

5.  Butter.
I  6.  Lamps.


holy  drinking  water,  foot-washing  water,  flowers,  incense,  lamp,  scented  toilet  water,
food  and  music,  which  I  have  here  arranged  in  full,  to  you  with  all  my  heart.

"  I  confess  all  my  past  sins  and  repent  of  all  my  sinful  deeds.  I  beg  you  to  bless
me  with  mahabodhl,  so  that  I  may  turn  the  wheel  of  the  Law  and  be  useful  to  all  the
animal  beings.

"  I  have  here  arranged  the  flowers  on  the  pure  soil  of  incense,  and  the  Mt.  Meru,
decked  with  sun,  moon,  and  the  four  continents,  all  of  which  I  offer  up  to  the  Buddhas
with  my  whole  heart.

"  May  all  the  animal  beings  be  blessed  with  perfection  and  purity,  and  be  born  in
brighter  regions.  Idain  Qnru  ratim  mandala  ham  niryata  >iami!  [Then  offer  up  the
magic-circle  in  suitable  manner,  for  description  of  which  see  previous  chapter,  and
continue.]

"  May  my  Lama,  tutelary  deity  and  the  Holy  Ones,  and  the  potent  Maha-Vajradhara
remain  inseparably  with  the  Kumuda  flower.

"  May  all  the  animal  beings  be  freed  from  re-births  by  being  born  into  the  pure
regions.

"  May  I  be  endowed  with  firm  resolve  and  ability  to  rescue  animal  beings  from
the  worlds  of  woe.

"  May  I  be  endowed  with  an  unfailing  ocean  of  knowledge  to  enable  me  to  advance
the  holy  religion  among  both  orthodox  and  heterodox.

"May  my  misty  ignorance  be  cleared  by  the  bright  rays  of  Maiijusvi  from  on  high.

"  May  my  desires  be  all  realized  through  the  grace  of  the  Jinas  and  their  celestial
sons,  and  the  auspicious  breath  of  the  Supreme  Ones.

1  Cf.  Hue,  ii.,  42;  Rookhili,,  L.,  70.


BANQUET  TO  HOST  OF  DEITIES.


429


differs  from  that  of  the  reformed  or  high  church  only  in  provid-
ing for  a  slightly  larger  party  of  demoniacal  guests  ;  the  Gre-lug-pa
inviting  only  the  following,  to  wit,  their  chief  Lama,  St.  Tson-


o

s

u

a


CO

a
o

o


X


u


111


^ CO

5  <

tC 111

< i

111

X

o


3


<

CO


K'a-pa:,  their  tutelary  deity  Vajra-bhairava,  Vajrasattva  Buddha,  the
deified  heroes,  the  fairies,  the  guardian  demons  of  the  Gre-lug-pa
creed,  the  god  of  wealth,  the  guardian  demons  of  the  caves
where  the  undiscovered  revelations  are  deposited,  the  five  sister


430


WORSHIP  AND  RITUAL.


sprites of  mount  Everest,  the  twelve  aerial  fiendesses  (Tan-ma),
who  sow  disease,  and  the  more  important  local  gods.

This  sacrifice  should  be  done  in  the  temples  for  the  benefit  of
the  Lamas  on  the  10th  and  15th  of  every  month.  On  behalf  of
laymen  it  must  be  done  once  annually  at  the  expense  of  every
individual  layman  who  can  afford  it ;  and  on  extra  occasions,  as  a
thanksgiving  for  a  successful  undertaking,  and  as  a  propitiation  in
sickness,  death,  and  disaster.

The  arrangement  of  the  banquet  is  shown  in  the  foregoing
diagram : —

In  the  inmost  row  are  placed  the  large  coloured  and  ornamented
Baling  cakes  for  (a)  the  chief  Lama-saint,  who  in  the  case  of
the  old  school  is  St.  Padma,  (b)  the  tutelary  deity,  in  this  case
Gurio  tak-po,  a  fierce  demoniacal  form  of  the  saint,  and  (c)  the
she-devil  with  the  lion-face.  For  the  saint  there  is  also  placed  on
either  side  of  his  cake  a  skull-cap,  the  one  to  his  right  contain-
ing country  wine,  here  called  "  Ambrosia "  (amrita),  in  Tibetan
literally  "  devils'  juice  " ;  and  the  contents  of  the  other  are  called
blood  (rakta),  though  tea-infusion  is  usually  offered  instead.  In
the  second  row  are  the  cakes  for  the  guardians  and  protector  of
Lamaism,  usually  with  Buddha's  cake  (No.  4)  in  centre.  The
order  of  the  cakes  for  these  guardian  demons  is  as  follows — the
attached  figures  relate  to  the  foregoing  diagram  : —


No.  5.  The  Lion-faced  demoness.

„  6.  The  four-armed  "  Lord,"
a  form  of  Mahakala.

„ 7.  The  god  of  wealth.

„  8.  The  "Ruler  of  Tibet's
guardian"  (and  in  Sik-
him  the  special  guar-
dian of  the  Na-duh'pa
monasteries).

,,  9.  The  demon  blacksmith
(red  an  I  black  colour,
rides  a  goat  and  carries
an  anvil  and  a  bellows,
was  made  a  protector
of  Lamaism  by  St.  Pad-
ma).

„  10.  The  Lord  of  the  Rak-
shas  devils.

,,  11.  The  Locality  protector.

,,12.  The  ]S!aya  demi-gods,
white  and  black.


No.  13.  The  Nun-fiendess  of  Di-
kung  monastery.

,,  14.  The  five  everlasting  sis-
ters of  mount  Ever-
est.

„  15.  The  spirits  of  the  tank-
drowned  persons.

,,  16.  The  homestead  demon-
owner.

,,  17.  The  country-god  Kang-
chen-dsonga  (moun-
tain).

,,  18.  The  black  devil,  red
devil  and  Naga  of
Darjiling  or  special
locality  of  temple.

,,  19.  The  demons  who  cause
disease.

,,  20.  The  twelve  aerial  fien-
desses of -disease  {Tdn-
ma)


BANQUET  TO  DEVILS.  431


No.  21.  The  demon  owners  of
the  "Ter"  caves  where
the  hidden  revelations
are  deposited.


No.  22.  The  black  and  red  devils
and  Ndga  of  parent
monastery  of  the
priests  of  this  temple.


In  the  third  row  are  placed  the  "  essential  ofiferings "  already
described,  which  are  especially  intended  for  the  superior  gods.

In  the  fourth  and  outmost  row  are  an  indefinite  number  of
T'so^f-cakes,  which  are  especial  dainties  as  an  extra  course  for  all.
These  cakes  contain  ordinary  torma  cake  of  cooked  rice  or  barley,
with  the  addition  of  some  wine,  and  a  mixture  of  cooked  flesh  and
aU  sorts  of  eatables  available.

The  stages  of  the  worship  in  this  feast  are  as  follows : —

1st.  Invitation  to  the  deities  and  demons  to  come to the
feast  (Skt.,  dvdhan). This  is  accompanied  by  great
clamour  of  drums,  cymbals,  horns  and  fifes,  so  as  to
attract  the  attention  of  the  gods  and  demons.
291^.  Eequesting  the  guests  to  be  seated  (Skt.,  dsan).
3rd.  Begging  them  to  partake  of  the  food  offered.
4:th.  Praises the goodness and admirable qualities of  the
guests. This  is  done  while  the  guests  are  partaking  of
the  essence  of  the  food.
5th.  Prayers  for  favours  immediate  and  to  come.
Gth.  The  especial  delicacy,  the  T'sog-cake,  is  then  offered  to
all,  on  four  plates,  a  plate  for  each  row  of  guests,  and
one  plateful  is  reserved  for  the  Lamas  themselves.
Then  is  done  the  ceremony  of  "  Expiation  for  religious  duties
left  undone,"  ^  which  wipes  off  all  arreaTtl  of  idigious  duty. Here
the sacristan  throws  skywards,  amid  great  clamour  of  wind  and
brass  instruments,  several  of  the  T'so^-cakes  to  all  the  demi-gods
and  demons  not  specially  included  in  the  feast. One  T'sog-cake
is  then  given  to  each  Lama  in  the  order  of  his  rank,  from  the
highest  to  the  lowest,  as  the  food  has  been  consecrated  by  the  gods
having  partaken  of  it.

Each  Lama  must,  however,  leave  a  portion,  which  is  collected
carefully,  in  a  plate,  in  order,  from  the  lowest  to  the  head  Lama.
And  on  the  top  of  these  collected  fragments  is  placed  a  whole
cake.  Then  a  celebration  called  LJmk-dor  is  done,  and  the  whole
of  these  crumbs — the  leavings  of  the  Lamas — are  contemptuously
thrown  down  on  to  the  ground,  outside  the  temple-door  to  the


1  bsKan-gso.


432  WORSHIP  AND  RITUAL.


starveling  ghosts  and  those  evil-spirits  who  have  not  yet  been  sub-
jected by  St.  Padma  or  subsequent  Lamas.

The  efficacy  of  these  cake-ofFerings  is  urged  at  length  in  the
manual  of  the  established  church.^

The  special  rites  and  celebrations  are  usually  detailed  in  separate
manuals ;  but  each  Ge-lug-pa  monk  has  a  general  manual  of  worship,
etc.,  entitled  "  the  monk's  timely  Memoranda,"  ^  and  seems  to  corre-
spond in  some  measure  to  the  Dina  Chariyawa  of  the  Ceylonese,  ^
in  which  are  given  directions  for  personal  and  general  devotions
as  well  as  for  monastic  conduct,  from  which  I  have  already  made
extracts  in  the  chapter  on  the  order.

The  service  is  mostly  in  Tibetan,  which  is  like  the  Latin  of
the  papal  mass-books  used  throughout  Mongolia  and  Lamaist
temples  in  China,  the  only  exception  being  the  privileged  temple
at  Pekin.*  Music  is  much  used,  though  it  is  in  the  main  an  ear-
piercing  din  of  drums,  loud  trumpets,  horns,  and  clashing  cymbals.

The  leaders  of  the  choir  also  have  a  psalter  or  score  in  which  the
swelling,  rising,  and  falling  notes  are  curiously  represented  by
curves,  as  shown  in  the  annexed  photograph ;  and  the  points  at
which  the  several  instruments  join  in  the  choir  are  also  duly  noted
therein.  The  pauses  are  marked  by  bells  and  cymbals,  and  the
effect  at  times  of  the  noisy  din  and  clamour  suddenly  lapsing  into
silence  is  most  solemn,  and  even  impressive  in  the  larger  cathedrals
with  their  pious  and  sombre  surroundings.^


1  The  Ge-lug-pa  manual  says  : —

The  advantages  to  the  chanter  of  the  above  service  are  that :  His  wishes  will  be  all
realized ;  wealth  and  luck  will  increase  according  to  his  wishes  ;  he  will  obtain  power,
and  all  his  sins  will  be  blotted  out ;  he  will  subject  the  evil  spirits  and  will  diily  per-
form charity,  and  the  preta  will  obtain  deliverance  by  being  re-born  in  the  heavens,
and  he  himself  will  also  obtain  heaven,  and  it  has  been  said  that  he  ■«'ill  ultimately
obtain  Buddhahood.

The  burnt-offering  of  incense,  analogous  to  the  Vedic  Soma,  but  specially  in-
tended for  demons,  includes  by  name  the  Tan-ma  and  other  Tibetan  fiends.  It  is
a  mixture  of  incense  and  butter  heated  to  ignition  on  coals.  The  celebration  is
detailed  above. Cf.  also  Schlag.,  p.  249 ;  Jaesch.,  p.  210,  for  kinds  of  cakes.

*  dGe-slon-gi  dvis  dran.

'  East  Man.,  24,  and  also  "  the  Daily  Manual  of  the  Shaman  "  of  the  Chinese.  Beal's
aaitm.,  239.

■•  Cf .  KOPPEN,  ii.,  228.

'  Although  the  instruments  are  wielded  with  great  clamour,  each  is  manipulated
strictly  according  to  rule.  "  Thus  with  the  cymbals,  at  the  word  Argham  the  cymbals
are  held  horizontally  and  struck  with  mid-finger  erect.  On  ParglM-m,  held  below  waist
and  the  upper  cymbal  is  made  to  revolve  along  the  rim  of  the  lowest,  etc.,  etc.


MUSICAL  SCORE.


433


jmiSk^f-*^''


F F


434  WORSHIP  AND  RITUAL.

The  daily  celebrations  of  the  high  church  monk,  or  the  Gre-lug-
pa  Lama,  comprise  the  following  services  : —

1.  The  "Refuge-formula''  (mT'un-mon).

2.  mT'un-mon  ma-yiii-pa.

3.  The  four-fold  prayer  for  the  Animals  (Sems-bskyed).

4.  Another  prayer  for  Animals  (K'yad-par  gyi  smes-bskyed).

5.  Prayer  for  the  Earth  (Sa-gz'i  byin  brlabs).

6.  Sacrificial  offerings  (mCh'od-pa  byin  brlabs).

7.  Invocation  to  the  Jinas  (Spyan-'dren).

8.  Offering  of  bathing  water  to  the  Gods  and  Jinas (K'rus-gsol.

"  Tui-Sol)."

9.  Salutation  to  Buddhas,  Saints  and  Lamas  (P'yag-'t'sal).

10.  Offerings  of  "  the  necessary  things  "  (mCh'od-pa).

11.  Offerings  of  "  five  sensuous  things"  ('Dod-yon-lna).

12.  Offerings  of  "  seven  precious  things  "  (rgyal-sri  sna  bdun).

13.  Confession  of  Sins  (bS'ags-pa).

14.  In  praise  of  the  Jinas  and  Buddha-putras  (rJes-su  yi-rans).

15.  Turning  the  Wheel  of  the  Law  (Oh'os-'k'or  bskor-wa).

16.  Prayer  for  attaining  Nirvana  (Mya-nan las-mi  'das  was  gsol-wa

'debs-pa).

17.  Prayer  for  Blessing  (bsho-wa).

18 Magic-circle — -Oflering  of  the  Universe.

19.  Prayer  to  Lama-tutor.'

20.  The  Tutelary's  invocation — Yamantaka,  etc.  (for  Ge-lug-pa)  and

Guru  Tak-po  Kah-gye,  etc.,  for  ^in-ma.

21.  Sacrificial  worship  (ch'oga)  to  the  demons,  after  dark  with  cake

(torma),  incense  and  wine  with  the  libations  (gSer-skyems)
the  Kang-s6  banquet.^

We  will  illustrate  a  few  of  these  services  by  some  abstracts  and
extracts : —

A  good  sample  of  the  worship  of  a  Lamaist  divinity  is  seen  in
that  of  Tara,  the  Virgin  of  northern  Buddhism,  and  the  "  Goddess
of  Mercy."

The  manual  of  Tara's  worship "  is  one  of  the  commonest  booklets
in  Tibet,  and  is  in  the  hands  of  nearly  all  laymen,  most  of  whom
can  repeat  her  hymn  and  chief  service  by  heart.''

'  La-mai-gsol-'debs.  '  See  p.  429.

■'  Abstracted  by  me  in  considerable  detail  in  J.R.A.S.,  1894,  p.  68,  etc.

*  The  book  is  entitled  "  sGrol-ma  dkar  shon-gyi  bstod-pa  gzuhs,"  or  "  The  praise  and
spells  (Dhdrani)  of  The  Pure  Original  Tara."  And  in  some  editions  she  is  termed  "Mother
of  the  Jinas"  (rgyal-yum),  also  "Mother  of  the  Tathagathas."  The  manual  extends
to  thirty-eight  or  forty  pages  of  five  lines  each.  The  greater  portion,  including  "  The
Exhortation  "  and  "  The  Hymn,"  is  alleged  internally  to  have  been  composed  by  "  The
great  Vairocana-Buddha of  the Ultimate  Perfection"  [dsog,-pai  sans-rgyas rnam


TARA  THE  SAVIOUR  AND  GODDESS  OF  MERCY. 435

Tara's  "Worship.

Tara's  worship,  like  that  of  most  of  the  Mahayana  and  Tantrik
deities,  is  divided  into  the  seven  stages  already  mentioned.

The  service  is  chanted  in  chorus,  and  the  measure  used  in  chant-
ing the  hymn,  namely  trochaic  in  eight-syllabled  lines,  I  have
indicated  in  a  footnote  to  the  hymn.

Ajportion  of  thejnanuaHs  here  translatgd;^^ ^

"  If  we  worship  this  sublime  and  pure-souled  goddess  when  we
retire  in  the  dusk  and  arise  in  the  morning,  then  all  our  fears  and
worldly  anxieties  will  disappear  and  our  sins  be  forgiven.  She—
the  conqueror  of  myriad  hosts — will  strengthen  us.  She  will  do
more  than  this !  She  will  convey  us  directly  to  the  end  of  our
transmigration — to  Buddha  and  Nirvana  !

"She  will  expel  the  direst  poisons,  and  relieve  us  from  all
anxieties  as  to  food  and  drink,  and  all  our  wants  will  be  satisfied;
and  all  devils  and  plagues  and  poisons  will  be  annihilated  utterly ;
and  the  burden  of  all  animals  Will  be  lightened  !  If  you  chant  her
hymn  two  or  three  or  six  or  seven  times,  your  desire  for  a  son  will
be  realized !  Or  should  you  wish  wealth,  you  will  obtain  it,  and  all
other  wishes  will  be  gratified,  and  every  sort  of  demon  will  be
wholly  overcome."

Invocation.
"  Hall !  0  !  verdant  Tara  !
The  Saviour  of  all  beings  !

Descend,  we  pray  Thee,  from  Thy  heavenly  mansion,  at  Potala,
Together  with  all  Thy  retinue  of  gods,  titans,  and  deliverers  !
We  humbly  prostrate  ourselves  at  Thy  lotus-feet !
Deliver  us  from  all  distress  !  0  holy  Mother  !  "

Presentation  of  Offerings  (Sacrificial). ■
"  We  hail  Thee  !  0  rever'd  and  sublime  Tara  !
Who  art  adored  by  all  the  kings  and  princes
Of  the  ten  directions  and  of  the  present,  past  and  future.

par  snan-mdsad  ch'en-po]  and  usually  interpreted  by  the  Lamas  as  referring  to
Vairochana,  the  first  of  the  mythical  Jina-Buddhas ;  but  it  may  probably  be  the  Kash-
mir Monk  Vairocana,  of  the  "  Great  Ultimate  Perfection  (Maha-utpanna)  "  form  of  the
Buddhist  doctrine,  who  lived  in  the  eighth  century  a.d.,  and  a  noted  translator  of
Sanski-it  Scriptures  into  the  Tibetan.  An  appendix  is  signed  by  Gedun  Dub,  The
Grand  Lama,  who  built  Tashi-lhunpo  monastery  circd  1445  a.d.

F  F 2


436  WORSHIP  AND  RITUAL.


We  pray  Thee  to  accept  these  offerings

Of  flowers,  incense,  perfumed  lamps,

Precious  food,  the  music  of  cymbals.

And  the  other  offerings  !

We  sincerely  beg  Thee  in  all  Thy  divine  Forms  '

To  partake  of  the  food  now  offered  !

On  confessing  to  Thee  penitently  their  sins

The  most  sinful  hearts,  yea !  even  the  committers  of  the

Ten  vices  and  the  five  boundless  sins.

Will  obtain  forgiveness  and  reach

Perfection  of  soul — -through  Thee  !

If  we  (human  beings)  have  amassed  any  merit

In  the  three  states,^

We  rejoice  in  this  good  fortune,  when  we  consider

The  unfortunate  lot  of  the  poor  (lower)  animals

Piteously  engulphed  in  the  ocean  of  misery.

On  their  behalf,  we  now  turn  the  wheel  of  religion  !

We  implore  Thee  by  whatever  merit  we  have  accumulated

To  kindly  regard  all  the  animals.

And  for  ourselves  !

When  our  merit  has  reached  perfection

Let  us  not,  we  pray  Thee,

Linger  longer  in  this  world  !  "

Htmns  in-  Taka's  Pbaisb.  ^

(The  translation  I  have  made  almost  literal.  Each  separate  stanza
is  addressed  to  a  special  one  of  Tara's  twenty-one  forms — the  name  of
which  is  given  in  the  margin  for  reference. )

(Tara,  the  Mother.)  Arya  Tara  !  Hail  to  Thee  !

Our  Deliveress  sublime !


1  The  polymorphism  already  referred  to.  2  Kama,  Eupa,  and  Arupa.

3  As  this  hymn  is  so  popular  amongst  Lamaist  people  in  Tibet,  Sikliim,  etc.,  I  give
here  in  the  Lhasa  dialect  its  second  stanza,  which  is  the  proper  commencement  of  the
hymn,  in  order  to  show  its  metre.

Ch'as  ts'al  |  Do-ma  |  flur-ma  |  pa.m6  |
Ch'en-ni  |  k^-c'ig  |  log-tan  |  ta-ma  1
Jig-len  1  sum  gon  |  o'u  kye  |  z'al-Sj  i  |
Ke-sar  |  o'e-wa  |  le-ni  |  juh-ma  |  .


HYMN  TO  TARA.


437


(1.  Tara,  the  Supremely
Courageous.)


(2.  Tara,o£WJiite-inoon
Brightness.)


(3.  Tara, the Golden-
Coloured.)


(4.  Tara,  the  Grand
Hair-piled.)


<5.  Tara,  the  "Huh"
Shouter.)


<6.  Tara,  the  best  Three-
World  Worker.)


<7.  Tara,  the  Suppressor
of  Strife.)


8.  Tgra, the  BPBtower
of  SupremePower.)


Avalok'ta's  messenger

Eich  in  power  and  pity's  store.

Hail  0  Tara  !  quick  to  Save !
Lotus-born  of  pitying  tear
Shed  down  by  The  Three- World-Lord,
(Grieving  sad  for  sunken  souls.)

Hail !  to  Thee  with  fulgent  face,
Brilliant  as  a  hundred  moons
Of  harvest  gleaming  in  the  light
Of  myriad  dazzling  stars.


Hail  !  to  Thee  whose  hand  is  decked
By  the  lotus,  golden  blue.
Eager  Soother  of  our  woe,
Ever  tireless  worker,  Thou  !

Hail !  to  Thee  with  pil'd-up  hair.
Where  Taithagata  sits/shrin'd,
Victor'  of  the  univeKie.
Thou  a  saintly  victor  too  !


Hail  to  thy  "  tiW-tarw-liun^
Piercing  realms  6^  earth  and  sky
Treading  dowh  the  seven  worlds,
Bending  pr^trate  everyone !

Hail !  adol'ed  by  mighty,  gods,
Indra,  Bfahma,  Fire  and^Wind,
GhostlWliordes  and  GandJm;vas
Al un/te  in  praising  Thee  !


Hail !  with  Thy  dread  "  tre  "  a.Ti&s'' phat  " "

ThOiti  destroyest  all  Thy  foes  :

Striding  out  with  Thy  left  foot

Belching  forth  devouring  fire !
/

^ail  !  with  fearful  spell  "  tu-re"

Banishing  the  bravest  fiends,
(By  the  mere  frown  of  Thy  brows,
^Vanquishing  whole  hordes  of  foes  i
etc.,  etc.,  etc.,  etc.


'  >-gyal-wa  =  Sanskrit  Jitui.

'  This  is  a  portion  of  Tara's  spell,  for  which  ste  over  page.

'  Mystic  spells  us^ed  by  wizards — p/iat  means  break  or  smash  !


438  WOBSHIP  AND  RITUAL.

' Telling  the  Rosary.

[Here  is  repeated  on  the  rosary  108  times,  or  as  often  as  possible,  the
spell  or  mantra  of  Tara,  namely : Om  !  Ta-re-tu-ta-re  tu-re  Sva  hd  !

The  mantra  of  Sita  Tara  is  Om  !  Ta-re  tu-ta-re  ma-ma  a-yur-pun-ye  jna-
na-push-tin  Icu-i-u  Svd-hd  !

The  rosary  used  in  Sita  Tara's  worship  is  a  Bodhitse,  while  Tara  re-
quires either  a  Bodhitse  or  turquoise  one.']

Prayers  for  Blessings.

We  implore  thee,  0  !  Revered  Yictorious  BJiagavdti  ^  and  Merciful
One  !  to  purify  us  and  all  other  beings  of  the  universe  thoroughly  from
the  two  evil  thoughts  ;  and  make  us  quickly  attain  the  perfection  of
Buddhahood.  If  we  cannot  attain  this  perfection  within  a  few  life
cycles,  then  grant  us  the  highest  earthly  and  heavenly  happiness  and
•all  knowledge.  And  preserve  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  from  evil  spirits,
plague,  disease,  untimely  death,  bad  dreams,  bad  omens,  and  all  the
eight  fears  and  accidents.  And  in  our  passage  through  this  world
grant  unto  us  the  most  perfect  bliss,  beyond  possibility  of  increase,  and
may  all  our  desires  be  realized  without  exertion  on  our  part.

Let  the  holy  religion  prosper.  And  in  whatever  place  we  dwell,  we
beg  thee  to  soothe  there  disease  and  poverty,  fighting  and  disputes,  and
increase  the  Holy  Religion.

And  may  Thy  benign"  face  always  beam  on  us  and  appear  large  like
the  waxing  moon  in  forwarding  our  heart's  desire  of  admission  to  the
heavenly  circle  and  Nirvana.

Let  us  obtain  the  favourite  gods*  of  our  former  lives  and  entry
into  the  prophesied  paradise  of  the  Buddhas  of  the  past,  present  and
future  .'

Benediction.

Now  !  0  !  Thou  !  The  Great  Worker  !
Thou  Quick  Soother  and  Gracious  Mother,
Holding  the  uptal  flower  !
__Let  Thy  glory  come. Mangalam  !  '


The  offering  of  the  universe  as  a  so-called  "  magic-circle  "  is  an
essential  part  of  the  daily  service  of  the  Lamas,  and  has  been
described  in  the  previous  chapter.

The  following  hymn  in  praise  of  the  Three  Holy  Ones  is  recited
at  noon  with  the  presentation  of  the  offering  of  rice.


1  But  see  page  206  for  details  on  "  Lamaist  Rosaries."
-  bc'om-ldan-'daj!-raa,  pronounced  "  chom-den-d6-ma."

3  In  contradistinction  to  "fui-y-face"  (kliro-bo;  Skt.  hrodha).

4  sGrub-bahi-lha.

°  bgra-shia  shok,  pronounced  "  Td-shi-sho."


HYMN  TO  THE  BUDDHIST  TRINITY.


439


Hymn  to  the  Three  Holy  Ones.

OM  !  Salutation  to  the  Omniscient  Ones !  Buddha,  The  Law  and
The  Church  !

Salutation  to  Buddha  Bhagavan,  the  Victorious  and  All-wise  Tatha-
GATA  Arhat,  who  has  gone  to  happiness  !


He  is  the  guide  of  gods  and  men  !

He  is  the  root  of  virtue.

He  is  the  fountain  of  all  treasure.

He  is  adorned  with  perfect  en-
durance.

He  is  adorned  with  all-beauty.

He  is  the  greatest  flower  of  all
the  race.

He  is  admirable  in  all  his  actions.

He  is  admirable  in  the  eyes  of  all.

He  delights  in  the  faithful  ones.

He  is  The  Almighty  Power.

He  is  The  Universal  Guide.

He  is  The  Father  of  all  the  Bodhi-


He  is  The  King  of  all  the  revered

Ones.
He  is  The  Leader  of  all  the  dead.
He  owns  infinite  knowledge.
He  owns  immesisurable  fortitude.
His  commands  are  all-perfect.


His  melodious  voice  is  all-pleasing.

He  is  without  equal.

He  is  without  desires.

He  is  without  evil.

He  delivers  all  from  sorrow.

He  delivers  all  from  sin.

He  is  free  from  worldliness.

His  senses  are  the  sharpest.

He  bravely  cuts  all  knots.

He delivers all from deepest

misery.
He  delivers  all  from  this  woeful

world.
Hehas  crossed  the  ocean  of  misery.
He  is  perfect  in  fore-knowledge.
He  knows  the  past,  present  and

future.
He  lives  far  from  death.
He  lives  in  the  pure  blissful  land

where,  enthroned,  he  sees  all

beings !


Salutation  to  the  Holy  Law  !  — (Dharma)


It  was  the  virtue  of  the  ancient

times.
It  was  the  virtue  of  the  middle


It  is  all-perfect  and  illuminating.

It  is  the  all-pure  Law.

It  is  perfectly  clear.

It  is  free  from  disorder.
It  is  the  virtue  of  the  present  It  is  everlasting.

hour.  It  points  the  direct  path.

It  has  excellent  sense.  It  realizes  the  desires  of  all.

It  has  excellent  words.  It  benefits  the  wisest  men.

It  is  unalloyed  Law.

The  Law  has  been  well  ordered  and  taught  in  the  Vinaya  by  Bha-
gavan. It  brings  all  to  perfection  !  It  fulfils  all  desires  !  It  is  an
all-sufficient  support,  and  it  stops  re-birth.

Salutation  to  The  Assembly  or  Clergy  {Sangha)  of  the  Mahayana  !


They  live  in  peace.
They  live  in  wisdom.
They  live  in  truth.
They  live  in  unison.


They  merit  respect.

They  merit  glory.

They  merit  tlip  grandest  gifts.


440  WORSHIP  AND  RITUAL.

The  goodness  of  Buddha  is  immeasurable  !

The  goodness  of  The  Law  is  immeasurable  !

And  the  goodness  of  The  Clergy  is  immeasurable  !

By  planting  our  faith  on  The  Immeasurable  Ones  we  shall  reap  im-
measurable fruit  in  the  land  of  bliss.

Salutation  to  the  Tathagata !  The  Merciful  Patron,  the  omniscient
Guide,  the  ocean  of  knowledge  and  glory.

Salutation  to  the  softening  DJiarma  !  the  pure  gift  of  the  heart,  the
deliverer  from  evil,  and  the  best  of  Truth.

Salutation  to  the  Assembly !  the  deliverer,  and  guide  to  the  true
faith,  the  teacher  of  pure  wisdom,  and  the  possessor  of  the  holy  know-
ledge for  cultivating  the  (human)  soil.

The  "  Refuge-Fokmula  "  of  the  Lamas.

The  ' '  Eefiige-formula  "  of  the  Lamas,  which  I  here  translate,
well  illustrates  the  very  depraved  form  of  Buddhism  professed  by
the  majority  of  Lamas  ;  for  here  we  find  that  the  original  triple
Refuge-formula  (Skt.,  Trisarcma ;  Pali,  Saraimgamand)  in  the
Three  Holies,  the  Triratna — Buddha,  The  Word,  and  The  As-
sembly— has  been  extended  so  as  to  comprise  the  vast  host  of
deities,  demons  and  deified  saints  of  Tibet,  as  well  as  many  of
the  Indian  Mahayana  and  Yogacarya  saints.

The  version  here  translated  is  that  used  by  the  Kar -ma-pa  and
JTin-ma  sects  of  Lamas,  but  it  is  practically  the  same  as  that  in
general  use  in  Tibet,  except  among  the  reformed  Lamas  of  the
established  church — who  address  a  less  extensive  circle  of  saints
and  demons,  and  who  substitute  St.  Tson-K'a-pa  for  St.  Padma-
sambhava.  It  is  extracted  from  the  manual  of  worship  entitled
the  sKyabs-'gro,  commonly  pronounced  "Kyamd6,"i  which  literally
means  "the  going  for  protection  or  refuge";  and  its  text  is  as
follows : —

"  We — all  beings — through  the  intercession  of  the  Lama,^  go  for
refuge  to  Buddha !

"  We  go  for  refuge  to  Buddha's  Doctrine  (Bharma)  !

"  We  go  for  refuge  to  the  Assembly  of  the  Lamas  {Sangha)  !  ^

"  We  go  for  refuge  to  the  Host  of  the  Gods  and  their  retinue  of
tutelaries  and  she-devils,  the  defenders  of  the  Religion,  who  people
the  sky  !


1  Contributed  to  Ind.  Antiq.  1893.

2  It  is  a  Lamaist  axiom,  as  already  noted,  that  no  layman  can  address  the  Buddhas
except  through  the  medium  of  a  Lama.

3  The  Ge-lug-pa  formula  begins  thus :  bdag  sogs  nam-mkah  dan  mnams-pal  sems-
c'an  t'ams-c'ad  bLa-ma  la  skyabs  su  mch'io,  Sans-rgyas-kyi  skyabs-su  mch'io  Ch'os-
kyi  skyabs  su  mch'io,  dGe-'dun-gyi  skyabs  su-mch'io.


THE  REFUGE.  441


"  We  go  for  refuge  to  the  victorious  Lamas,  who  have  descended
from  heaven,  the  holders  of  "Wisdom  and  the  Tantras  !

"  We  go  for  refuge  to  the  Buddhas  of  the  Ten  Directions,  and  to
the  primordial  Samantabhadra. Buddha  with  his  spouse  ! "

Then  the  following  deities  and  saints  are  addressed  as  refuges :
The  Incarnate  Sambhoga-kaya,  the  Mild  and  Angry  Loving  One
the  Nirmcina-hdya  Maha  Vajradhara ;  the  Diamond-souled  Guide —
Vajrasatva ;  the  Jina — the  "Victorious  Sakya  Muni ;  the  most  pleas-
ing "Vajra  Incarnate  ;  the  Fierce  Holder  of  the  Thunderbolt —  Vajra-
pdni  ;  the  Goddess-Mother,  Marlc%  Devi  ;  the  Learned  Teacher,  Acdrya-
Manjum ;  the  Great  Pandita  Sri  Sinha  ;  the  Jina  Suda  ;  the  Great
Pandita  Bimala  Mitra  ;  the  Incarnate  Lotus-born  Dharmakaya  Padma-
sambhava  ;  (his  wife)  the  Fairy  of  the  Ocean  of  Fore-knowledge ;  the
Religious  King,  Thi-Sron-deu-Tsan  ;  the  Noble  Apocalypse-Finder,
Myan-ban ;  the  Teacher's  disciple,  the  Victorious  Sthavira  Dang-ma ;
the  Reverend  Sister,  the  Lady  SinJmwara  ;  the  Incarnate  Jina  "  Zhang-
ton  "  ;  the  Guru,  clever  above  thousands ;  the  Religious  Lord  (Bliarma-
ndtha)  Ouru  Jo-Ber ;  the  Illusive  Lion  (rydba  ;  the  Great  Siddhi,  the
Clearer  of  the  Misty  moon — grub-ch'en  zla-wa-miin-sel ;  the  Sage
Kumaraja  ;  the  Prince,  Bimdla  Bhdskara  ;  the  renowned  Gandraklrti  ;
the  Three  Incarnate  Kind  Brothers ;  the  Bodhisat,  The  noble  Ocean  ;
the  Incarnate  Sage,  the  Holder  of  the  religious  vajra  ;  the  Entirely
accomplished  and  renowned  Speaker ;  the  Great  Teacher  Mahdguru
Dharmardja ;  the  Revelation-Finder  T'ig-po-lin  ;  the  Religious  King
of  Accomplished  Knowledge  ^ ;  the  Banner  of  Obtained  Wisdom  ;  the
Peerless  active  Vajra;  the  Radical  (Skt.,  Mula)  Lama  Asoka  ;  ^  the
Lama  of  the  Mula  Tantra  of  the  Three  Times ;  the  Sage,  the  Accom-
plished Soul ;  the  Religious  Loving  King,  the  Holder  of  the  Doctrines  ■* ;
the  Reverend  Abbot,  the  Sky  Vajra  ;  the  Noble  Jewelled  Soul — "  Pal-
zaii " ;  the  Assembly  of  Mild  and  Angry  tutelary  Deities ;  the  Holy
Doctrine  of  the  Great  End — Mahotpanna !

"  We  go  for  refuge  to  the  Male  and  Female  Saints  of  the  Country  !

"  O  !  Lama  !  Bless  us  as  You  have  been  blessed.  Bless  us  with  the
blessings  of  the  Tantras  ! —

"  We  beg  You  to  bless  us  with  OM,  which  is  the  (secret)  Body.  We
beg  You  to  purify  our  sins  and  pollutions  of  the  body.  We  beg  You
to  increase  our  happiness  without  any  sickness  of  the  body.  We  beg
You  to  give  us  the  real  undying  gift  of  bodily  life  !

"  We  beg  You  to  bless  us  with  AH,  which  is  the  (secret  of  the)
Speech. "We  beg  You  to  purify  the  sins  and  pollution  of  our  Speech.


1  The  first  Bhotiya  king  of  Sikhim,  circ.  1650  a.d.

2  This  may  be  a  reference  to  the  great  emperor  Asoka,  or  his  confessor  Upagupta,
the  fourth  patriarch  of  the  early  Buddhist  church  in  India,  or  it  may  be  only  the
title  of  a  Lama.  Several  also  of  the  foregoing  titles  which  I  have  translated  are
proper  names.

3  The  sixth  Bhotiya  king  of  Sikhim,  drc.  1770-90  a.d.


442  WORSHIP  AND RITUAL.


We  beg  You  to  give  us  the  power  of  Speech. We  beg  You  to  confer
on  us  the  gift  of  perfect  and  victorious  Speech  !

"  We  beg  You  to  bless  us  with  HUM  (pronounced  "  hum  ")  which
is  the  (secret)  Thought.  We  beg  You  to  purify  the  pollution  and  sins
of  our  Mind.  We  beg  You  to  give  us  good  understanding.  We  beg
you  to  give  us  the  real  gift  of  a  pure  heart.  We  beg  You  to  em-
power us  with  The  Four  Powers  (of  the  heart)  !

"  We  pray  You  to  give  us  the  gifts  of  the  True  Body,  Speech,  and
Mind.^ Om  ! Ah  ! Hum  !

"  O  !  Give  us  such  blessing  as  will  clear  away  the  sins  and  defilement
of  bad  deeds  !

"  We  beg  You  to  soften  the  evils  of  bad  causes  !

"  We  beg  You  to  bless  us  with  the  prosperity  of  our  body  (i.e., health)  1

"  Bless  us  with  mental  guidance  !

"  Bless  us  with  Buddhahood  soon  !

"  Bless  us  by  cutting  us  off  from  (worldly)  illusions  !

"  Bless  us  by  putting  us  in  the  right  path  !

"  Bless  us  by  causing  us  to  understand  all  things  (religious) !

"  Bless  us  to  be  useful  to  each  other  with  kindliness  !

"  Bless  us  with  the  ability  of  doing  good  and  delivering  the  animal
beings  (from  misery)  !

"  Bless  us  to  know  ourselves  thoroughly  !

"  Bless  us  to  be  mild  from  the  depths  of  our  heart !

"  Bless  us  to  be  brave  as  Yourself  !

"  Bless  us  with  the  Tantras  as  You  Yourself  are  blessed !  "

"  Now  !  we — the  innumerable  animal  beings — conceiving  that
(through  the  elficacy  of  the  above  dAaranls  and  prayers,  we  have  become
pure  in  thought  like  Buddha  himself  ;  and  that  we  are  working  for  the
welfare  of  the  other  animal  beings  ;  we,  therefore,  having  now  acquired
the  qualities  of  the  host  of  the  Gods,  and  the  roots  of  the  Tantras,  the
Z'i-wa,  rOyas-pa,  dBana.ndP'rinlas,  we  desire  that  all  the  other  animal
beings  be  possessed  of  happiness,  and  be  freed  from  misery  !  Let  us —
all  animals ! — be  freed  from  lust,  anger,  and  attachment  to  worldly
.iffairs,  and  let  us  perfectly  understand  the  true  nature  of  The
Religion  !

"  Now  !  O  !  Father-Mother — Yah-yum — the  DharmaJcdya  Samanta-
hhadra  !  The  Sambhogakdya  Sdnti  Khrddaprasaraka,  mild  and  angry
Loving  Ones  !  The  Nirmdna-hdya,  Sages  of  the  skull-rosary !  And
the  Mula-tdntra  Lama ! I  now  beg  You  all  to  depart  !

"  0  !  Ghosts  of  Heroes  1  Witches  !  Demoniacal  Defenders  of  The
Faith  !  The  holy  Guardians  of  the  Commandments !  And  all  those
that  we  invited  to  this  place  !  I  beg  You  all  now  to  depart ! !

"  0  !  most  powerful  King  of  the  Angry  Deities  !  The  powerful
Isvara,  and  the host of  the  Country  Guardian  Gods  ! And  all  those

1  This  triad  refers  to  the  mystic  Yoga  or  union  of  "  Tlie  tliree  secrets,"  whicli  tlie
Japanese  call,  San-mitsu-so-o.


CONFESSION  OP  SINS.


443


others  that  we  invited  to  this  place,  with  all  their  retinue  !  I  beg  You
all  now  to  depart ! ! !  May  glory  come  !  TasU-shok  I  and  Virtue  !  Oe-o  !
Sarva-mangalam  !  "

Confession  of  Sins.

The  Confession  of  Shis'^  is  done  twice  a  montli  in  public
assembly,  in  presence  of  the  abbot  and  senior  monks.  It  is  no
proper  confession,  only  a  stereotyped  form  chanted  in  chorus.
The  full  form  is  practically  the  same  as  in  southern  Buddhism.^
The  shortest  form  is  here  given  : —

"  I  here  confess  the  sins  which  I  may  have  committed  by  the  body,
speech  and  mind,  and  through  lust,  anger  and  stupidity.

"  Listen  to  me,  O  !  great  Vajror-holding  Lamas  ^  and  all  the  Buddhas
and  Bodhisats  of  the  ten  directions  !  I  repent  of  all  the  sinful  acts
which  I  have  committed  from  the  time  of  my  birth  up  to  the  present,
such  as :  committing  the  ten  unvirtuous  deeds  and  the  five  waverings,
transgressing  the  vows  of  deliverance,  the  teachings  of  the  Bodhisats,
the  vows  of  the  secret  mantras,  irreverence,  and  want  of  faith  in  The
Three  Rarest  Ones,  irreverence  and  want  of  faith  in  the  abbots  and
teachers ;  separation  from  the  holy  religion  and  the  best  commands ;
want  of  reverence  to  the  revered  clergy  ;  want  of  reverence  to  parents,
and  want  of  reverence  to  one's  faithful  fellow-mortals.  In  short,  I
here  confess  to  all  the  Fa/m-holding  Lamas,  the  Buddhas  and  Bodh-
isats of  the  ten  directions,  all  the  sins  which  hinder  my  reaching  the
heaven  of  deliverance;  and  I  promise  never  again  to  commit  these
sins."

There  are  also  numerous  rites  on  the  same  lines  or  by  magic-


The  Maoic-Circle  Tabebnaci,e.

1.  Chart  or  Mosaic.  .  ■tJmlirella.

2.  Cakes.  4.  Banners.


circles,  posturing  and  mummery,  for  obtaining  supernatural  powers


1  gso-byon. See  pages  323  and  501 ;  and  cf.  Schlagintweit,  p.  123.

2  Cf .  Pratimoksha  sutra,  "  The  Book  of  Deliverance  "  and  its  Tibetan  version,  trans,
by  RocKHii.1..  ■<  Probably  mythical  Buddha,  Vajradhara.


444


WORSHIP  AND  RITUAL.


and  for  purposes  of  sorcery. Some  of  tiiese  latter  I  have  abstracted

in  the  chapter  on  necromancy.

Of  special celebrations  it  will  suffice  to  refer  only  to one of

the  most  interesting,  which  some  Europeans  who  witnessed  its

pompous  and  solemn  service,  have
compared  to  the  Christian  Eu-
charist.


The


"  EUCHABIST  "
OF
LlMAISM.'


I'he  Eucharist  ok  Lamaism.


Lamaist liturgy, the  cele-
bration of  which  is  pictured
as  the  frontispiece,  on  ac-
count of  its  dispensation  of
consecrated  wine  and  bread,
has  been  compared  by  Hue
and  others  to  the  Christian
Eucharist,  although  it  is  in
reality,  as here shown, a
ceremony  for  gratifying  the
rather  un-Buddhistic  crav-
ing after  long  earthly  life. Still,
it nevertheless presents many
parallels to the Christian rite
for  conferring  on  the  worthy  re-
cipient "  the  life  everlasting."

It  is  entitled  "  The  Obtaining
of  (long)  Life," "  and  is  a  very
good  sample  of  the  Lamaist  blend-
ing of Buddhists' ideas with
demon-worship. It  seems  to  in-
corporate  a good deal of the
pre-Lamaist ritual, and its
benedictions  and  sprinkling  of
holy  water  are  suggestive  of
Nestorian  or  still  later  Chris-
tian influences.

This  sacrament  is  celebrated
with much pomp  at stated


1  In  the  Asiatic  Qu  rterly,  1894,  part  of  this  article  was  published  by  me.
a  Tib.  Ts'e-grub.


THE  EUCHARIST  OF  LAMAISM.  445

periods,  on  a  lucky  day,  about  once  a  week  in  the  larger  temples,  and
attracts  numerous  votaries.  Crowds  throng  to  the  temple  to  receive
the  coveted  blessing.  Its  benefits  are  moi-e  particularlj'  sought  in
cases  of  actual  illness,  and  when  death  seems  imminent ;  but  every
village  must  have  it  performed  at  least  once  a  year  for  the  life  of
the  general  community,  and  after  its  performance  any  prolongation
of  life  is  credited  to  this  service  ;  while  a  fatal  result  is  attributed
to  the  excessive  misdeeds  of  the  individual  in  his  last  life  or  in
previous  births.

The  chief  god  addressed  is  Buddha  Amitdyus  or  Aparamifa,^  "  The
(god  of)  infinite  Life,"  or  "The  Eternal."  Unlike  the  Chinese  Bud-
dhists the  Lamas  never  confuse  Amitabha  (the  Buddha  of  infinite
Light)  with  his  reflex  Amitdyus  ;  they  represent  these  differently,  and
credit  them  with  different  functions.  The  other  gods  specially  identified
with  life-giving  powers  are  "  The  five  long-Life  Sisters,"  ^  mountain
nymphs  presiding  over  the  everlasting  snows,  and  to  a  less  degree  the
white  Tara,  and  Ushnisharani ;  and  even  Yama,  the  Lord  of  Death
himself,  may  occasionally  be  propitiated  into  delaying  the  day  of
death.

The  priest  who  conducts  this  ceremony  for  propitiation  of  Amitdyus
and  the  other  gods  of  longevity  must  be  of  the  purest  morals,  and  usu-
ally a  total  abstainer  from  meat  and  wine.  He  must  have  fasted  during
the  greater  part  of  the  twenty-four  hours  preceding  the  rite,  have
repeated  the  mantras  of  the  life-giving  gods  many  times,  100,000  times
if  possible,  and  he  must  have  secured  ceremonial  purity  by  bathing.
'I'he  rite  also  entails  a  lot  of  other-  tasks  for  the  preparation  of  the  con-
secrated pills  and  the  arrangement  of  utensils,  etc.,  and  extends  over
two  or  three  days.

The  arrangements  are  as  follow  : —

Upon  an  altar,  under  the  brocaded  dragon-canopy,  within  the  temple
or  in  a  tent  outside,  are  placed  the  following  articles  : —

1.  Las-bum,  the  ordinary  altar  water-vase.

2.  Ti-bum,  the  vase  with  pendant  mirror  and  containing  water  tinged  witli  saffron.

3.  dBan-bum,  the  "  empowering  vase  "  with  the  chaplet  of  the  Five  Jinas.

4.  Ts'e-bvm,  the  "  vase  of  Life,"  special  to  Amitdyus,  with  a  banner  of  peacock's
feathers  and  sacred  Kusa-grass.

5.  Ts'e-ch'an,  or  "  the  wine  of  Life,"  consisting  of  beer  in  a  skull-bowl.

6.  Ts'e-ril,  or  the  "  pills  of  Life,"  made  of  flour,  sugar  and  butter.

7.  Ohi-Tuar,  or  wafers  of  flour  and  butter  and  rice.

8.  mBaJi-Aar,  or  sacred  divining-dagger  with  silk  tassels.

9.  rdor-jeM  gmii,  tag,  or  the  divining-bolt,  a  vajra  or  thunderbolt-sceptre  with  eight
ridges  to  which  a  string  is  attached.

In  the  preliminary  worship  the  pills  are  made  from  buttered  dough,
and  the  ambrosia  or  amrita  (Tib.,  dud-tsi  or  "devil's  juice") is  brewed
from  spirit  or  beer,  and  offered  in  a  skull-bowl  to  the  great  image  of


1  Tib.,  Ts'e-pag-med.  ^  Ts'e-rin-che-ha.


44G  WOliSHlP  AND  RITUAL.

Baddha  Amitayus.  Everything  being  ready  and  the  congregation
assembled,  the  priest,  ceremonially  pure  by  the  ascetic  rites  above
noted,'  and  dressed  as  in  the  frontispiece,  abstracts  from  the  great
image  of  Buddha  Amitayus  part  of  the  divine  essence  of  that  deity,
by  placing  the  vajra  of  his  rdor-jehi  gzurirt'ag  upon  the  nectar-vase
which  the  image  of  Amitayus  holds  in  his  lap,  and  applying  the
other  end  to  his  own  bosom,  over  his  heart.  Thus,  through  the
string,  as  by  a  telegraph  wire,  passes  the  divine  spirit,  and  the  Lama
must  mentally  conceive  that  his  heart  is  in  actual  union  with  that  of
the  god  Amitayus,  and  that,  for  the  time  being,  he  is  himself  that  god.^
Then  he  invokes  his  tutelary-fiend,  and  through  him  the  fearful  horse-
necked  Hayagrwa  (Tamdin),  the  king  of  the  demons.  The  Lama,  with
this  divine  triad  (namely,  the  Buddha  and  the  two  demon  kings)  incor-
porate in  him,  and  exhibiting  the  forms  of  all  three  to  spiritual  eyes,
now  dispenses  his  divine  favours.  He  takes  up  the  Las-bum-va&e  and
consecrates  its  contents,  saying,

'' 0/Ji/  nanio  Tathdgata  Abhi-khita  samayasriri  hum  I  Nama  candra  vajra  hrodha
Amrita  liumphat/"

Then  he  sprinkles  some  of  the  water  on  the  rice-ofierings  (gtor-ma)  to
the  evil  spirits,  saying,  "I  have  purified  it  with  svabhava,  and  con-
verted it  into  an  ocean  of  nectar  within  a  precious  Bhum-ho-wl.  Om
aharomu-kham  !  Sarva  dharma  nantyanutpanna  tatto  !  O'm  !  A !
Hum  !  pliat !  Svdha  !  I  now  desire  to  bestow  the  deepest  life-power
on  these  people  before  me  ;  therefore,  I  beg  you  demons  to  accept  this
cake-ofiering,  and  depart  without  doing  further  injury."

Here  the  Lama,  assuming  the  threatening  aspect  of  the  demon-kings,
who  are,  for  the  time  being,  in  his  body,  adds,  "  Should  you  refuse  to
go,  then  I,  who  am  the  most  powerful  Hayagrlva  and  the  king  of  the
angry  demons,  will  crush  you — body,  speech  and  mind — to  dust !  Obey
my  mandate  and  begone,  each  to  his  abode,  otherwise  you  shall  suffer.
Om  sumbhani,"  etc.  Now,  the  Lamas  and  the  people,  believing  that  all
the  evil  spirits  have  been  driven  away  by  the  demon-king  himself,  shout,
"  The  gods  have  won  !  the  devils  are  defeated  !  "

The  Lama  then  proceeds  to  secure  for  himself  the  benedictory  power
of  life-conferring.  He  first  meditates  on*"  the  guardian-deities,"  mur-
muring thus  :  "The  upper  part  (of  the  divine  abode)  is  of  thunderbolt

1  He  usually  wears  a  mantle  (stod-gyog),  on  which  are  embroidered  mystic  Chinese
emblems  of  luck,  including  the  Bat,  etc. See  pp.  894,  396.

'  2  In  southern  Buddhism  is  found  a  very  similar  instance  of  ceremonial  union  with  a
Buddhist  fetish.  At  the  pirit  (parltta)  celebration  "a  sacred  thread,  called  the  pirit
nula,  is  fastened  round  the  interior  of  the  building,  the  end  of  which,  after  being
fastened  to  the  reading  platform,  is  placed  near  the  relic  (of  Buddha).  At  such  times
as  the  whole  of  the  priests  who  are  present  engage  in  chanting  in  chorus,  the  cord  is
untwined,  and  each  priest  takes  hold  of  it,  thus  making  the  communication  complete
between  each  of  the  officiating  priests,  the  rehc.and  the  interior  walls  of  tlie  building."
— Hakdy's  E.  AJonac/d'sm,  p.  241.


THE  EUCHARIST  OF  LAMAISM.  447

tents  and  hangings;  the  lower  part  of  earth-foundation  and  adamantine-
seat  ;  and  the  walls  are  of  thunderbolts.  The  entire  building  is  a  great
tent,  protected  by  precious  charms,  so  that  the  evil  spirits  can  neither
destroy  it,  nor  can  they  gain  entry.  Om  !  vajra  rahhya  rakJiya  siitra
tikJitha  vajraye  svaha  I "

Then  the  magic-circle  {mar!,clala)  is  offered  up,  saying  : —

"If  I  fail  to  refer  to  the  successive  Lama-saints,  my  -words  and  deeds  will  count
for  nothing.  Therefore  must  I  praise  the  holy  Lamas  to  secure  their  blessing  towards
the  realization  of  my  plans.  O  holy  Padma-mmbhava,^  in  you  are  concentrated  all  the
blessings  of  the  present,  past  and  future !  You  are  the  Buddha  of  the  great  final
Perfection  (Maha-utpanna)  who  beheld  the  face  of  Lord  Amitdyus.  O  Saint  possessed
of  the  gift  of  undying  lite,  of  life  lasting  till  the  worlds  of  re-births  are  emptied  !  You
Md  away  from  us,  in  the  snowy  regions,  the  revelation  upon  the  true  essence  of  the
five  hundred  '  Obtainings  of  Life.'  The  one  which  we  now  perform  is  '  the  iron  palace
of  the  attainment  of  life'  (Ts'e-grub  Ic'ags-kyi-pho-hran),  and  is  extracted  from  dKon-
mch'og-spyi-dus.  It  was  discovered  by  the  saint  ^ Dsah-Ts^on-snin-po  in  the  cave
where  you  hid  it ;  and  this  mode  of  endowering  a  person  with  life  has  come  down  to
me  through  many  generations  of  saints.  Now,  0  Lord  Amitdyus  and  the  host  of  radiant
gods  !  I  beg  you  to  sustain  the  animal  beings,  vast  as  the  starry  host,  who  now,  with
great  reverence  and  praise,  approach  you.  Om  a  hum!  0  holy  shrine  of  our  refuge  !
Hri!^  O  Hosts  of  the  Bright  World  of  Light!  Pad-ma  t'od-phren-rtsal-i>ajrasa-
liuiyaja  siddhi  pliala  hum  I "

Then  here  is  repeated  "  Ts'e-'guc/,"  or  "The  Invoking  of  Life,''  thus  :
"  O  Lord  Amitdyus,  residing  in  the  five  shrines  whence  glittering  rays  shoot  forth  '
O  !  Gandhan-a  in  the  west !  Yama  in  the  south  !  JVdga  raja  in  the  west !  Yaksha  in
the  north  !  Brdhma  and  Indra  in  the  upper  regions  !  and  Nanda  and  Taksha  in  the
lower  regions  !  And  especially  all  the  Buddhas  and  Bodhisatwas  !  I  beg  you  all  to
bless  me  and  to  gratify  my  wishes  by  giving  me  the  gift  of  undying  life  and  by  soften-
ing all  the  injuries  of  the  harmful  spirits.  I  entreat  you  to  grant  life  and  implore  you
to  cause  it  to  come  to  me.  Sri !  I  beg  your  blessing,  O  Buddhas  of  the  three  times.
(Dipaukara,  Sakya  Muni  and  Maitreya).

At  this  stage  the  celestial  Buddhas,  Bodhisats,  and  other  gods  are
now  supposed  to  have  consecrated  the  fluid  in  the  vase  and  transformed
it  into  immortal  ambrosia.  Therefore  the  priest  intones  the  following
chant  to  the  music  of  cymbals  :  "  This  Yase  is  filled  with  the  immortal
ambrosia  which  the  Kve  celestial  Classes  have  blessed  with  the  best
Life.  May  life  be  permanent  as  adamant,  victorious  as  the  king's
banner.  May  it  be  strong  like  the  eagle  {Oywn-drun)  and  last  for
ever.  May  I  be  favoured  with  the  gift  of  undying  life,  and  all  my
wishes  be  realized.

"Buddha!  Vajra!  Ratna!  Padma!  Karma,  Kapdlamala.  Uri  maJmrinisaayu
siddhi  ph/xla  !mm. ! Om  A  Bum  vajra  Guru  Padma  sidd/d  aynkke  Hurn,  nijd  !  "

The  priest  now  bestows  his  blessing  as  the  incarnate  Amitayus
as well as  the  other  gods  of  longevity,  by  laying-on  of  hands,  and

1  A  Lama  of  the  estabUshed  church  would  usually  invoke  St.  Tsoh-K'a-pa,  and  the
subsequent  prayer  would  be  slightly  different.

2  The  rija-mantra  of  Avalokita  and  Amitdbha.


448  WORSHIP  AND  RITUAL.

he  distributes  the  consecrated  water  and  food  to  the  assembled  multi-
tude. When  the  crowd  is  great,  the  votaries  file  past  the  holj'-  Lama.
In  smaller  congregations  the  Lama,  with  the  Ti-bum  vase  in  hand,
walks  along  the  rows  of  kneeling  worshippers  near  the  temple  door,  and
pours  a  few  drops  of  the  holy  fluid  into  the  hands  of  each  votary.  With
the  first  few  drops  the  worshipper  rinses  his  mouth,  and  with  the  next
few  drops  he  anoints  the  crown  of  his  head,  and  the  third  few  drops
are  reverently  swallowed.

Then  the  Lama  brings  the  vase  of  Life  and  places  it  for  an  instant
on  the  bowed  head  of  each  of  the  kneeling  votaries,  reciting  the  spell
of  Amitayus  {^Om  Aniaruni  jivaniiye  svaha),  which  all  repeat.  Then
the  Lama  touches  the  head  of  each  one  with  the  power-conferring  vase ;
and  afterwards,  in  similar  manner,  with  the  divining-dagger,  saying :
"  The  life  which  you  now  have  obtained  is  unfailing  like  the  vajra-
armour.  Receive  it  with  reverence  !  As  the  vajra  is  unchangeable,  so
now  is  your  life.  Vajra  rahhya  ralcliya  svahd  !  Worship  Amitayus,
the  god  of  boundless  Life,  the  chief  of  all  world-rulers  !  May  his  glory
come,  with  virtue  and  all  happiness."  And  all  the  people  shout,
"  Glory  and  all-happiness  !  "

Each  worshipper  now  receives  from  the  skull-bowl  a  drop  of  the
sacred  wine,  which  he  piously  swallows ;  and  each  also  receives  three  of
the  holy  pills,  the  plateful  of  which  had  been  consecrated  by  the  touch
of  the  Lama.  These  pills  must  be  swallowed  on  the  spot.  They  are
represented  as  beads  upon  the  vase  which  the  image  of  the  god
of  Infinite  Life  holds  in  his  lap.

The  Lama  then  takes  a  seat  on  a  low  throne,  and  the  votaries  file  past
him  ofl'ering  him  a  scarf  and  any  money  presents  they  may  have
to  make  ;  the  majority  pay  in  grain,  which  is  piled  up  outside  the  door
of  the  temple.  Each  then  receives  a  benediction  from  the  Lama,  who
places  his  hand  on  their  heads  and  repeats  the  spell  of  Amitayus  ;  and
on  its  conclusion  he  throws  over  their  shoulder  a  knotted  white  scarf
(Tsim-tn)  from  a  heap  of  consecrated  scarves  lying  at  his  side.  The
colours  of  the  scarves  are  white  for  the  laity  and  red  for  the  priests.

Other  ceremonies  for  prolonging  life,  especially  resorted  to  in  severe
sickness,  are  "The  Saving  from  Death  "  {'ch'i-bslu)  ;  the  "Ransoming  of
another's  Life "  (srog-hslu)  ;  Substitution-ofiering  to  the  devils  of  an
efligy  of  the  patient,  or  as  a  sacrifice  for  sin  (Ku-rim'-)  as  in  the  illustra-
tion given  on  the  opposite  page ;  Libation  of  wine  to  the  demons  {r/Ser-
shyems) ;  gyal-gsol,  etc.  All  of  these  services  are  more  or  less  mixed  up
with  demonolatry.

Numerous  other  ceremonies  have  already  been  referred  to  in
other  chapters,  such  as  the  "Water  Baptism"  ("  Tiii-Sol"),'  "The
Calling  for  Luck"  (Yan-gug),'  etc.,  "  The  Continued  Fast"  (STun-
gnas).''

isKu-rim:  cf.  Jaesch.,  Z*.,  22  ;  Giotlqi's,  Alpluib.  Tib., y.  i\2;  Rookhill's  i.,  p.  114.
^  bKrus-gsol  =  ablution  +  to  pray  or  entreat ;  see  Schlagintweit,  Budd.,  p.  239.
3  See  p.  447  ;  also  ScHr.Ac,.,  p.  263.  ■'  Schlag.,  p.  240.


SAGBIFIGE-OFFERINQS  TO  DEVILS.


449


The  rites  for  the  attainment  of  supernatural  powers,  and  for
downright  demonolatry,  are  detailed  in  the  chapter  on  sorcery
and  necromancy. And  it  is  evident  that  the  Lamas  or  professing


A  Guilt-Offerinb  at  Tankae.i


Buddhists  are  conscious  of  the  unorthodoxy  of  these  practices,  for
the  so-called  reformed  Lamas,  the  Gre-lug-pa,  do  their  demoniacal
worship  mostly  after  dark.


1  After  Eockhill.


G  G


Geomantic  Trigrams.


XVII.


ASTROLOGY  AND DIVINATION.

"  That  mendicant  does  right  to  whom  omens,  planetary  influences,  dreams,
and  signs  are  things  aholished ;  he  is  free  from  all  their  evils." — Samma
Paribbajaniya  Siitta,  2,

jIKE  most  primitive  people,  the  Tibetans  believe  tbat
the  planets  and  spiritual  powers,  good  and  bad,
directly  exercise  a  potent  influence  upon  man's  wel-
fare and  destiny,  and  that  the  portending  machina-
tions of  these  powers  are  only  to  be  foreseen,  discerned,  and
counteracted  by  the  priests.

Such  beliefs  have  been  zealously  fostered  by  the  Lamas,  who
have  led  the  laity  to  understand  that  it  is  necessary  for  each  indi-
vidual to  have  recourse  to  the  astrologer-Lama  or  Tsi-pa  on  each
of  the  three  great  epochs  of  life,  to  wit,  birth,  marriage,  and  death  ;
and  also  at  the  beginning  of  each  year  to  have  a  forecast  of  the
year's  ill-fortune  and  its  remedies  drawn  out  for  them.

These  remedies  are  all  of  the  nature  of  rampant  demonolatry
for  the  appeasing  or  coercion  of  the  demons  of  the  air,  the  earth,
the  locality,  house,  the  death -demon,  etc.

Indeed,  the  Lamas  are  themselves  the  real  supporters  of  the
demonolatry.  They  prescribe  it  wholesale,  and  derive  from  it
their  chief  means  of  livelihood  at  the  expense  of  the  laity.


ITS GHBONOLOGIGAL  BASIS.  451

Every  large  monastery  has  a  Tsi-pa^  or  astrologer-Lama,  re-
cruited from  the  cleverest  of  the  monks.

And  the  largest  monasteries  may  have  as  astrologer  a  pupil  of
the  great  government  oracle-I^ama,  the  Ch'o-c'on,
'  -  The  astrologer- Lamas  have  always  a  constant  stream  of  persons
coming  to  them  for  prescriptions  as  to  what  deities  and  demons
require  appeasing  and  the  remedies  necessary  to  neutralize  these
portending  evils.

The  nature  of  these  prescriptions  of  worship  will  best  be  illus-
trated by  a  concrete  example.  But  to  render  this  intelligible  it  is
necessary  to  refer,  first  of  all,  to  the  chronological  nomenclature
current  in  Tibet,  as  it  is  used  for  indicating  the  lucky  and  unlucky
times,  as  well  as  much  of  the  worship.  And  it  will  be  seen  to  be
more  Chinese  than  Indian  in  nature.  The  Chinese  calendar  is
said  to  have  been  introduced  by  king  Sron  Tsan's  Chinese  wife,
but  the  first  sixty-year  cycle  does  not  begin  until  1026  a.d.^

The  Tibetan  system  of  reckoning  time,  derived  from  China
and  India,  is  based  upon  the  twelve-year  and  sixty-year  cycles
of  Jupiter.^  The  twelve-year  cycle  is  used  for  short  periods,  and
the  particular  year,  as  in  the  Chinese  style,  bears  the  name  of  one
or  other  of  the^  twelve  cyclic  animals  : —

1.  Mouse,  5.  Dragon.  9.  Monkey.

2.  Ox.  6.  Serpent.  10.  Bird.

3.  Tiger.  7.  Horse.  11.  Dog.

4.  Have.  8.  Sheep.  12.  Hog.

And  in  the  case  of  the  sixty-year  cycle  these  animals  are  combined
with  the  five  elements  (namely :  "Wood,  Fire,  Earth,  Iron,  and
Water),  and  each  element  is  given  a  pair  of  animals,  the  first  being
considered  male  and  the  second  female.  I  append  a  detailed  list
of  the  years  of  the  current  cycle  as  an  illustration,  and  for  refer-
ence in  regard  to  the  horoscopes  which  I  shall  translate  pre-
sently.

The  Tibetan  Chronological  Table.

The  table  here  given  differs  from  that  of  Schlagintweit  (op.  cit.,  p.  282)  in
making  the  initial  year  of  the  current  sixty-year  cycle,  namely,  the  fifteenth

1  rTsis-pa — ^the  Ohebu  of  Hookbr's  Himalaijan  Jours.

2  CsoMA,  Qi:,  148.  The  Chinese  "  Description  of  Tibet,"  translated  by  Klapeoth
{Nouv.  Jour.,  Asiat.,  iv.,  138),  states  that  the  Chinese  system  was  introduced  by  the
Chinese  wife  of  Sron  Tsan  Gampo,  in  642  a.d.

3  There  is  also  a  cycle  of  252  years  seldom  used.  Conf .  aioRoi,  464-69.  Hue,  ii.,
368,  and  Schlag  ,  284.

GG  2


452


ASTROLOGY  AND  DIVINATION.


cycle  (iJaS-yw't),  coincide  with  the  year  1867  A.D.,  as  this  is  alleged  by  the
learned  astrologer  Lama  of  Darjiling  to  be  the  true  epoch,  and  not  the  year
1866.


Tibetan  Eba.

Tear

Tibetan  Eba.

Year

A,D.

%t

D

Tear-name.

A.D.

%f

Tear-name.

1858

XIV.

52

Earth-Horse

1890

XV.-

24

Iron-Tiger

1859

53

„ -Sheep

1891

contcl.

25

,, -Hare

I860

54

Iron-Ape
„  -Bird

1892

♦

26

Water-Dragon

1861

55

1893

27

„ -Serpent

1862

56

Water-Dog

1894

28

Wood-Horse

1863

57

„ -Hog

1895

29

„ -Sheep

1864

58

Wood-Mouse

1896

30

Fire-Ape

1865

59

„ -Ox

1897

31

„ -Bird

1866

60

Fire-Tiger

1898

32

Earth-Dog

1867

xV.

1

, , -Hare

1899

33

,. -Hog

1868

2

Earth-Dragon

1900

34

Iron-Mouse

1869

3

,, -Serpent

1901

35

„ -Ox

1870

4

Iron  Horse

1902

36

Water-Tiger

1871

5

,,  -Sheep

1903

37

,, -Hare

1872

6

Water-Ape
„ -Bird

1904

38

Wood-Dragon

1873

7

1905

39

„ -Serpent

1874

8

Wood-Dog

1906

40

Fire-Horse

1875

9

." -Hog

1907

41

, , -Sheep

1876

10

Fire-Mouse

1908

42

Earth-Ape
*„ -Bird

1877

11

„  -Ox

1909

43

1878

12

Earth-Tiger

1910

44

Iron-Dog

1879

13

, , -Hare

1911

45

..  -Hog

1880

14

Iron-Dragon

1912

46

Water-Mouse

1881

15

„  -Serpent
Water-Horse

1913

47

,, -Ox

1882

16

1914

48

Wood-Tiger

1883

17

,, -Sheep

1915

49

„ -Hare

1884

1«

Wood-Ape

1916

50

Fire-Dragon

1885

19

„ -Bird

1917

51

,, -Serpent
Earth-Horse

1886

20

Fire-Dog

1918

52

1887

21

" -Hog
Earth-Mouse

1919

53

,, -Sheep

1888

22

1920

54

Iron -Ape
„ -Bird.

1889

23

,. -Ox.

1921

55

•  It  is  by  giving  a  realistic  meaning  to  these  several  animals  and
elements,  after  which  the  years  are  named,  that  the  Lama-astro-
logers arrive  at  their  endless  variety  of  combinations  of  attraction
and  repulsion  in  regard  to  their  casting  of  horoscopes  and  their
prescriptions  of  the  requisite  worship  and  offerings  necessary  to
counteract  the  evils  thus  brought  to  light.  The  animals  are  more
or  less  antagonistic  to  each  other,  and  their  most  unlucky  combi-
nations are  as  follows  : —


THE  ELEMENTS  AND GTCLIG  ANIMALS.


453


Mouse  and  Horse.
Ox  and  Sheep.
Tiger  and  Monkey.


Hare  and  Bird.
Dragon  and  Dog.
Serpent  and  Hog.


But  it  is  with  the  iive  elements  that  the  degrees  of  affinity  and
antagonism  are  most  fully  defined,  according  to  certain  more  or

N


ASTEOLOGICAL  FlQUBES.l
(On  the  Tortoise.)

less  obvious  inter-relations  of  the  elements.  The  recognized  de-
grees of  relationship  are  :  (1)  'mother,  or  greatest  affection ;  (2)
son,  or  neutrality;  (3) /rmic?,  or  mediocre  affeg^ion,  and  {^)  enemy
or  antagonism.  The  relationships  of  the  eleffients  are  thus  stated
to  be  the  following  : —

Matebnai,.

Wood's  mother  is  "Water  (for  wood  cannot  grow  without  water).
Water's „ is  Iron  (for  water-channels  for  irrigation cannot  he

made,  and  therefore  water  cannot  come,  without

iron).
Iron's ,, is  Earth  (for  earth  is  the  matrix  in  which  iron  is

found).


1  Modified  from  Sarat's  figure.


454  ASTROLOGY  AND  DIVINATION.

Earth's  mother  is  Fire  (for  earth  is  the  ashiproduct  of  fire).
Fire's  ,, is  Wood  [for  without  wood  (carbon)  fire  is  not].

Filial,

Wood's son is  Fire

Fire's ,, is  Earth  /  rrn  • •  i  c  j.-

_ ,  , " . ^  (  This  IS  merely  a  reverse  way  or  presenting

Earths „ is  iron >  the  above  details.


Iron's „ is  Water
Water's ,, is  Wood


Hostile.


Wood's  enemy  is  Iron  (as  Iron  instruments  cut  down  wood).
Iron's „ is  Fire  (as  fire  melts  iron  and  alters  its  shape).
Fire's ,, is  Water  (as  water  extinguishes  fire).
Water's ,, is  Earth  (as  earth  hems  in  water).
Earth's ,, is  Wood  (as  wood  grows  at  the  expense  of  and  im-
poverishes earth).

Amicable.

Wflod's  friend  is  Earth  (as  wood  can't  grow  without  earth).

Water's ,, is  Fire  (as  it  warms  water).

Fire's  „ is  Iron  (as  it  absorbs  heat,  and  thus  assists  the  con-

tinuance of  the  fire).

Iron's  ,, is  Wood  (as  it  supplies  the  handles  to  iron-weapons  and

is  non-conducting).

The  Tibetan  year  is  lunar,  and  numbers  nominally  three  hundred
and  sixty  days  ;  so  that  in  order  to  bring  it  into  keeping  with  the
moon's  phases  one  day  is  occasionally  omitted,  and  as  it  is  the  un-
lucky days  which  are  omitted,  and  these  occur  irregularly,  the
Tibetan  year  and  months  do  not  always  correspond  exactly  with  the
Chinese  months  and  years.  And  the  solar  difference  is  compensated
by  inserting  seven  intercalary  months  (Da-s'ol)  every  nineteen'
years.

The  year  begins  in  February  with  the  rise  of  the  new  moon.
The  months  (Da-wa)°  are  named  first,  second,  etc.,  and  the  word
Da-wa  prefixed  thus,  Da-wa-tang-po,  "  first  month."  The  week  is
divided  into  seven  days  (Za),  bearing,  as  with  us  (for  the  Lamas
adopted  the  Aryan  system),  the  names  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  the
five  planets,  two  being  allotted  to  each  day,  and  is  represented
by  a  symbol  (see  figure)  which  is  a  concrete  picture  of  the  name.

1  So  says  Schlag.,o/j.  rit.,  288.  The  intercalary  month  seems  to  be  added  at  less  in-
tervals. According  to  the  Baidyur-Kar-po  in  1891  the  duplicated  month  was  the
tenth.

-  Zla-wa  =  moon.


THE  PLANETS  AND CALENDAR.


455


Name.

Celestial  Body.

Its  Symbol.

Sunday  (Tib. ,  Nima)

Monday  [Da  ma)

Tuesday  (^Mig  mar)

Wednesday  {L'ag-pa)

Sun

Moon

Mars

Mercury

Jupiter

Venus

Saturn

A  sun.

Crescent  moon.
A  red  eye.

Thursday  {Pur-bu)

Friday  (Pa-san)

Saturday  [Pen-ba)

A  thunderbolt.
A  garter.

^


The  different  days  of  the  week  are  associated  with  the  elements ;
thus  Sunday  and  Tuesday  with  Fire,  Monday  and  Wednesday  with
Water,  Thursday  with  Air,  and  Friday  and  Saturday  with  Earth.'

Each  hour  and  day  of  the  week  possesses  a  lucky  or  unlucky
character,  and  the  days  of  the  month  according  to  their  order  in
troduce  other  sets  of  unlucky  combina-
tions. Thus  the  individual  days  of  the
week  are  divided :  Monday  and  Thursday
are  best.  Sunday  and  Tuesday  are
rather  "  angry.''  Saturday  and  Wednes-
day are  only  good  for  receiving  things
(Yang-sa)  and  not  for  giving  away.
Saturday  is  not  quite  so  gloomy  and
malignant  as  in  Western  mythology.

The  days  of  the  month  in  their  numer-
ical order  are  unlucky  per  se  in  this  order.
The  first  is  unlucky  for  starting  any
undertaking,  journey,  etc.  The  second
is  very  bad  to  travel.  Third  is  good  pro-
vided no  bad  combination  otherwise.
Fourth  is  bad  for  sickness  and  accident
(Ch'u-'jag).  Eighth  bad.  The  dates
counted  on  fingers,  beginning  from
thumb  and  counting  second  in  the
hollow  between  thumb  and  index  finger,
the  hollow  always  comes  out  bad,  thus
second,  eighth,  fourteenth,  etc.  Ninth  is  good  for  long  journeys
but  not  for  short  (Kut-da). Fourteenth  and  twenty-fourth  are


<§g3:sd:>-


'  Symbols  of  Days  of  the  Week.


1  According  to  the  rhyme :

"Si-ma  mik-mar  me  K'am ;  Da-wa  Ihak-pa  Ch'u-  r  K'am  ;
P'ur-bu  da-c'en  luh-i  K'am ;  Pasaii  p'em-ba  Sa-i  K'am."


156  ASTROLOGY  AND  DIVINATION.

like  fourth.  The  others -are  iw\j  good  cceteris 'paribus.  In  ac-
counts, etc.,  unlucky  days  are  often  omitted  altogether  and  the
dates  counted  by  duplicating  the  preceding  day.^

Chinese  geomantic  figures,  the  Pu-Kwa  (Par-h'a)  and  the  Me-
wa,  enter  largely  into  the  calculations  of  the  Lama  astrologer,  and
these  are  usually  figured  on  the  belly  of  a  spread  tortoise,  as  in
the  above  figure,  whose  paws  sometimes  grasp  a  pole  surmounted
by  or  transfixing  a  frog.''

The  Pu-KwA  or  Par-k'a  symbolize  the  great  productive  and  an-
tagonistic powers  of  nature,  as  summarized  in  a  most  interesting
manner  by  Dr.  Legge.

The  first  character,  pu,  is  the  Chinese  symbol  for  divining  by  the  lines
produced  through  a  certain  process  on  the  back  of  a  tortoise-shell.  It
consists  of  two  lines/  which  may  possibly,  says  Dr.  Legge,  have  been
intended  to  represent  the  lines  appearing  on  the  shell.  The  second
character,  Kivd,  was  the  symbol  for  divining  by  means  of  the  eight
famous  trigrams  of  Fu-hsl,  themselves  called  "  the  eight  Kwa."  They
are  not  characters,  but  lineal  figures  composed  of  whole  and  divided
lines,  on  which  was  built  up  the  mysterious  book  called  the  Yi-Kiii,
or  "  Book  of  Changes,"  with  its  sixty-four  hexagrams.  The  eight  trigrams
are  hei-e  shown  :  —


The  whole  lines  in  the  figures  are  styled  "the  strong,"  and  the
divided  lines  "  the  weak."  The  two  represent  the  two  forms  of  the
subtle  matter,  whether  eternal  or  created  is  not  said,  of  which  all
things  are  composed.  Under  one  form  the  matter  is  active  and  is  called
Yanrj  ;  under  the  other  it  is  passive,  and  is  called  Yin.  "Whatever  is
strong  and  active  is  of  the  Yan^j  nature  ;  whatever  is  weak  and  passive
is  of  the  Yin.  Heaven  and  earth,  sun  and  moon,  light  and  darkness,
male  and  female,  ruler  and  minister,  are  examples  of  these  antinomies.

The  aggregate  of  them  makes  up  the  totality  of  being,  and  the  Yi  is
supposed  to  give  in  its  diagram  a  complete  picture  of  the  phenomeDa  of
that  totality.  It  does  not  give  us  a  sexual  system  of  nature,  though  of
course  the  antinomy  of  sex  is  in  it  ;  but  the  lines  on  which  it  is  con-

'  Ki.APEOTH,  iv.,  137  ;  Hue,  ii.,  370.

2  This  may  be  the  sacred  three-leggeil  f  rug. Cf.  also  my  article  {Ini.  Aniiq.,\'&^^
on  "  Frog  Worship  among  the  Xewars,"
'■'■  Legge's  The  Rdig.  of  China,  p.  14,  do.  1.5.


TlilGBAMS  AND QEOMANTIO  SIGNS.  457

structed  embrace  other  antinomies  as  well. Authority  and  power  on
one  side ;  inferiority  and  docility  on  the  other.

Further,  the  hidden  operation  in  and  through  which  the  change  takes
place  in  nature  is  said  to  be  that  of  the  Ktuei  shan,^  usually  meaning
"  spirits,"  but  here  held  to  be  technical.  "  Shan  is  Yanff,  and  indicates
the  process  of  expanding ;  Kwei  is  Tin,  and  indicates  the  process  of
contracting."  The  fashion  of  the  world  is  continually  being  altered.
We  have  action  and  reaction,  flux  and  reflux,  and  these  changes  are  in-
dicated in  the  diagrams,  which  are  worked  in  divination  by  manipulating
a  fixed  number  of  stalks  of  a  plant  called  shih  {Ptarmica  Sihirica),  and,
indeed,  the  form  of  the  trigrams  themselves  is  suggestive  of  divination
'by  tiuigs.

The  usual  geomantic  arrangement  of  the  Par-k'a  is  given  in
figure.  Individually  they  are  named  Heaven,  Earth,  Fire,  Thunder,
.  Mountains,  Celestial  Water,  Terrestrial  Water,  though  the  fourth  and
eighth  are  sometimes  called  Iron  and  Tree.  And  Mountain,  Iron,  and
Water  are  said  to  be  sons  of  the  Earth  and  Heaven,  while  Wind,  Fire,
and  Tree  are  their  daughters.

It  is  remarkable,  however,  that  while  the  Chinese  use  only  the
hexagrams  for  divination  purposes,  the  Tibetans  use  only  the  tri-
grams in  this  way.^

The  Nine  Mewa  ^  are  arranged  in  the  form  of  a  quadratic  square

or  circle,  and  the  figures  usually,  as  in  a  magic

^ ! g I .,  square,  so  disposed  as  to  give  the  same  total

i I in  all  directions.

„ I _  The  spirits  of  the  seasons  also powerfully

I  influence  the  luckiness  or  unluckiness  of  the

days. It  is  necessary  to  know  which  spirit  has
I  arrived  at  the  particular  place  and  time  when

an  event  has  happened  or  an  undertaking  is
entertained.  And  the  very  frequent  and  complicated  migrations
of  these  aerial  spirits,  good  and  bad,  can  only  be  ascertained  by  the
Lamas.  The  most  malignant  of  these  evil  spirits  are  a  black  dog,
a  monster  with  a  dragon-tail,  a  man  on  horseback,  and  the  fabulous
Phoenix;  and  the  seasons  are  specially  assigned  to  these  in  the
order  of  spring,  summer,  autumn,  and  winter  respectively.*
The  almanac  which  the  Lamaist  astrologer  uses,  gives  for  each

'  Legre,  op.  cit.,  p.  39.

2  Cf.  Prof.  DE  La  Couperies'  xincient  Chinese  Divination  Manual — The  Yi  King. —
Paris,  1889.

3  «Me-ba  =  a  blot. Cf.  Pallas,  Momj.,  it,  229 ;  Schcao.,  297.
*  SOHLAG.,  299.


458  ASTROLOGY  AND  DIVINATION.

day  the  six  presiding  influences. Thus  the  page  of  the  almanack
for  the  first  day  of  the  third  month  of  1891  (Iron-horse)  gives :—


Cyclic  Aniinal

Par-kha

Nidana

Tiger

Li

Mciva
C'ikar

Naraarupa

Week-day

Star

5

26

P'urba  (Thursday)

She-sa

(giving
Wind).

(giving
Water).

And  the  general  record  for  the  particular  month  is :  This  month's
star  is  moderate  and  the  celestial  Mansion  is  the  sheep.  Nidana,
Avidya.  Element  is  mid-summer,  and  named  Great  Fire-Horse.
It  is  time  for  plants  budding  and  marshes,  thunder  and  birds.  The
empty  vase  is  in  the  east  (.-.  do  not  go  E.).  On  the  15th  day  the
Teacher  taught  the  Kdldcakra  ;  it  is  a  holiday.  Thursday,  Sunday,
and  Tuesday  are  good.  Friday,  Saturday,  Monday,  and  Wednesday
are  bad.  The  "  Yas"  road  {i.e.,  the  road  on  which  cake  and  the
devil's  image  are  to  be  thrown)  is  N.W.  The  "Zin-p'uh"  (a  kind  of
genius  loci)  in  the  Ox  and  Sheep  days  at  dawn  passes  from  W.  to
E.  (.-.  at  that  time  be  careful).

Lamaist  Horoscopes.

The  Lamaist  horoscopes  or  Tsis  are  of  several  kinds.  Those
most  commonly  sought  are  for :  (a)  Birth  ^  (b)  Whole-Life  Fore-
cast ^  (c)  Marriage  ^  (d)  Death  *  and  the  (e)  Annual.^

They  are  written  in  cursive  characters  on  a  long  sheet  of  paper,
and  attested  by  the  stamp  of  the  astrologer.  Such  manuscript
divinations  usually  called  Sun-ta,  are  in  the  case  of  the  more
wealthy  clients  mounted  on  silk.  A  preliminary  fee  or  present
is  usually  given  to  the  astrologer  at  the  time  of  applying  for  the
horoscope,  in  order  to  secure  as  favourable  a  presage  as  possible.

Each  of  the  various  horoscopes  takes  into  account  the  conflict  or
otherwise  of  the  elementary  and  astral  influences  dominant  at  the
time  of  the  person's  birth,  as  compared  with  the  existing  influences

^  sKyed-rtsis  ^  ts'-rabs  las  rtsis.  s  pag-rtsis.  •*  gs'in-rtsis.

5  sKag-rtsis.  Other  horoscopes  for  general  and  extra  divinations  are  :  Gab-tsi  or
"  Concealed,"  and  Grub-tsi  or  "  the  perfect "  Astrology ;  and  the  Chinese  system  is
termed  Xcik-tsi  in  distinction  to  the  Indian  or  Eur-tsi.


HOBOSOOPES.  459


at  the  time  consulted.  The  ordinary  horoscope  is  usually  arranged
under  the  following  six  heads,  namely  : —

1.  The  year  of  birth  of  the  individual  in  its  auspicious  or  inauspicious
bearings.

2.  His  Parh'a,  influences.

3.  His  "  Reversed  calculation  "  of  age  {Log-men).  This  is  evidently
introduced  in  order  to  afford  a  further  variety  of  conflicts.

4.  "  The  Seizing-Rope  of  the  Sky." — This  seems  to  refer  to  a  popular
idea  of  ultimate  ascent  to  the  celestial  regions  by  means  of  an  invisible
rope.

5.  "  TheEarth-dagger." — This  is  an  invisible  dagger,  and  is  for  the
individual  the  emblem  of  stability  and  safety  so  long  as  it  is  reported  to
be  fixed  firmly  in  the  earth.

6.  The  Mewa.

And  each  of  these  several  heads  is  separately  considered  in  detail  with
reference  to  its  conflicts  in  regard  to — {a)  the  Life  (or  srog) ;  (b)  the
Body  (or  lus) ;  (c)  the  Power  or  capability  (baii-fan) ;  (d)  the  Luck-
horse  (or  rlun-rta) ;  and  («)  the  Intelligence  ibla).

The  particular  ParMia  and  Mewa  for  the  several  times  are  found
by  reference  to  the  Lama's  almanac  as  above  noted ;  but  the  other
details  are  elicited  by  divers  calculations  made  upon  the  astrologer's
board/  and  in  consultation  with  the  various  manuals  on  the  subject.

1  The  astrologer's  board  consists  of  a  large  napkin  on  which  are  drawn  squares  and
the  other  necessary  geomantic  figures,  all  in  a  definite  and  convenient  relation  to  eacli
other.  This  napkin  is  spread  on  a  table,  and  the  calculations  are  made  with  coloured
buttons  as  counters  which  are  kept  in  a  bag — the  several  elements  ha'S'ing  each  a
recognized  colour :  thus  wood  is  green^  lire  is  red,  earth  is  ydlmv,  iron  is  white,  and
water  is  hlue.  These  counters  are  placed  on  the  coloured  squares  as  in  a  chess-board,
and  are  moved  according  to  rule,  either  transversely  from  right  to  left  or  ince  versd,  or
longitudinally  over  the  requisite  number  of  squares.  In  the  top  row  of  the  board  are
the  sixty  squares  of  the  sixty-year  cycle,  all  named  and  in  the  proper  colour  of  their
elements.  And  the  succeeding  rows  of  squares  are  those  of  the  Life,  Body,  Power,
Luck,  and  Intelligence  series,  each  with  its  appropriate  series  of  coloured  elements.
The  other  divisions  relate  to  the  Parkhas  and  Mewas.

The  calculations  are  made  according  to  rule  backwards  or  forwards  a  certain  number
of  years  in  the  row  of  the  sixty-year  cycle  squares,  and  the  secondary  results  come  out  of
the  vertical  columns  of  the  Life,  Body,  etc.,  series  according  to  the  conflict  of  their
respective  elements  ;  the  results  being  noted  by  white  or  black  seeds  or  buttons,  which
have  the  following  values  : —

The  seven  recognized  degrees  of  affinity  or  repulsion  are  expressed  in  the  astrological
accounts  by  the  following  signs  of  circles  and  crosses,  and  during  the  calculation  the
circles  are  represented  by  white  buttons  and  the  crosses  by  black  buttons  or  seeds : —
When  the  conflict  of  the  elements  comes  out — Mother,  i.e.,  tlie  best  degree  = OOO

,,  „  ,,  „  Fnend,  i.e.,  the  better „  = OO

(  Water +WaterY-^^J^^;;^'''
" \Earth  +  Earth  \  "^od  =  O

( Continued  over  page.)


460  ■  ASTROLOGY  AND DIVINATION.

These  manuals  have  their  signs  inscribed  on  the  belly  of  a  tortoise
(see  page  453),  and  the  Mewa  occupies  the  centre.

With  this  explanation  I  now  give  here  a  sample  of  a  horoscope
for  one  family  for  one  year's  ill-luck,  in  which  the  prescribed
worship  is  italicized.  I  have  added  in  footnotes  some  further  ex-
planations which  may  ^be  consulted  by  those  interested  in  knowing
in  more  detail  the  methods  by  which  the  Lamaist-astrologer  makes
his  calculations.

"The  JIisfoetune  Account  of  the  Family  of for  the

Earth-.AIouse  Year  {i.e.,  1888  a. d.)."
Salutation  to MaSjusri  !  ^

A.— For  the  Father  of  the  FaiMILV.

I.—Acconlinij  to  the  Birth-conflict.

This  male,  aged  26  years,  being  born  in  the  A\'ater-Hog  year,  that  year  con-
flicts with  the  £arth-Mouse  year  (the  present  year)  as  t'<5llows  : —

Life  =  Oj  ox  good. '^

Body  =  OO. ot-bctter.^

Power  =  XX, or  worse.

Luck-horse =  OOOi  f>r  best.

Intelligence  =  X ,  or  bad.

1. As  modified  by  "  Parkha." — His  Pnr7i,-'«  f  or  the  year  is /sTAoii,  which
gives  the  Earth-Sheep  year  and  the  following  conflict : —

Life  =  worse.

Body  =  better.


Whentheconflict  of  the  elements  comes  out Son,  i.e.,  neutral  = Qx

\  i.e.,  mimiscibi-
y  liiy,  and ,'.  op-
]  ^^osicinrtatidbad  =  X

„  ,,  ,,  „ Enemy, 'i.e.,  worse  = XX

„  „  ,,  ,, Bead/ij  hate,  i.e.,  worst  = XXX

For  example,  water  meeting  iron,  i.e.,  its  "  mother,"  is  the  very  best  and  . .  =  OOO
and  the  same  would  be  true  of  lire  meeting  wood.  But  wood  meeting  earth  would
=  "friend,"  and  therefore  =  QQ;  but  should  earth  meet  wood,  then  it  would  be
"  enemy,"  and  therefore  =  XX  ;  and  water  meeting  wood  =  "neutrality,"  or  Qx.
While  fire  meeting  water  =  "  deadly  hate,"  and  therefore  =  X  X  X.  Then  the  average
of  the  total  is  taken  as  the  average  result  of  the  conflict.  And  the  several  remedies
necessary  to  avoid  each  and  all  of  the  calamities  thus  foretold  are  specified  categor-
icallj'  in  the  astrologers'  books.

•  The  metaphysical  Bodhisat  Maiijusri  is  the  presiding  divinity  of  the  astrologers,
and  he  is  always  invoked  at  the  Ircad  of  astrologic  prescriptions.

2  The  year  of  liis  birth  being  the  A^'ater-Hog,  gives,  according  to  the  astrologic  table.
Water  as  the  si-o(/  for  that  year,  and  the  present  year  being  the  Earth-Mouse  year,  its
sroff,  according  to  the  tabic,  is  also  'Water.  Therefore  Water  meeting  Water  =  Qi  *■*•>
"good."

'  The  his  of  tliesc  two  years  are  found  by  the  table  to  give  the  elements  respectively
of  Water  and  Fire.  Therefore  Water  meeting  its  friend  Fire  =  OO  ™  "  better,"  i.e.,
good  of  the  second  degree


■lements  comes

out

Son,

i.e..

1

'iVood

+

miod-

J)

■■ \

Fire

+

Fire

\

.Iro,i

+

Iron

AN  ANNUAL  HOROSCOPE.  461

Power  =  worse  than  bad.

Luck-horse =  bad.
Intelligence =  worse.

2.  As  modified  by  ' '  Reversed  Age  Calculation. " — This  gives  a  ' '  good  "

result,'  .•.  =  O-

3.  As  modified  by  "  The Seizing-Eope  of  the  Sky." — This  gives  "good,""

.•.  =  O- [If  it  were  bad,  then  prescribed  "  The  closure  of  the
door  to  the  sky  "  (spirits)].^

4.  As  modified  by  "  The  Earth  dagger." — This  gives  a  medium  average,

[If  it  were  bad  would  have  to  do  "  The  closure  of  the  door  to  the
earth  "  (spirits)].*
Thus  the  summary  of  the  year's  conflict  as  to  birth,  together  with  its
prescribed  remedies  is  : —

' '  Life  "  has  black  in  excess  ;  . '.  to  procure  long  life  have  read  very  much

The  Sutra  and  Dharanls  for  Long  Life.
"Body"  has  white  in  excess;  .  ■-  the  Body  will  be  free  from  sickness

(i.  f. ,  only  as  regards  this  one  aspect  of  the  calculation).
"Power"  has  black  in  excess; .  •. Food  shall  be  scanty,  and  crops
suffer,  and  cattle  die  or  be  lost. To  neutralize  it  (a)  have  read
very  much  "  Yan-gug  " or the Luck-Bestowing and "  Nor-
zan"  (the  Best  Wealth)  ;  (b)  offer  holy  cakes;  (c)  also  give  food
and  siveets  to  monks  and  children.
"Luck "  has  black  in  excess  ;  . •.  be  careful  not  to  provoke  a  law-suit  or
go  on  a  long  journey. To  neutralize  this  (a)  do  "  Du-kar  "  100
times  ;  (b)  plant  as  many  "  Ltiii-ta'-fiags"  as  years  of  your  age  ;
(c)  offer  in  the  temple  13  lamps  with  incense,  etc.  ; (d)  have  read
the  "  mDo-man  "  very  much;  (e)  make  an  image  of  yourself  [of
cooked  barley  or  rice)  and  throw  it  towards  your  enemy  ; (f)  also
•make  an  earthen  Caitya.
"Intelligence"  has  black  in  excess; .  •.  have  read  the  "  La-guk"  or
worship  for  recalling  the  Intelligence.
II. — According  to  Paek'A —

His  Park'a  for  the  year  being  "  khon"  he  cannot  during  the  year  excavate
earth  or  remove  stones.  Tlie  Nagas  and  the  Earth  master-demons  are  opposed
to  him.  He  is  especially  liable  to  the  diseases  of  stiffened  joints  and  skin  dis-
orders In  the  second  month  he  is  especially  subject  to  danger.  The  N.  and
E.  and  S.  directions  are  bad  for  him  ; he  must  not  go  there. For  removing

1  This  Log-men  or  "  Reversed  -f  downwards  "  is  a  more  abstruse  calculation
according  to  the  saying : —

"  skyes-pa  pu-yi  stag  t'og  nas  lo  grans  t'ur,
"  bud-med  ma-yi  sprel-t'og  nas  lo  grans  gyen."
For  males — the  sons  of  elements — begin  from  Tiger  and  count  age  downwards.
¥ov  females — the  mothers — begin  from  Ape  and  count  age  upwards.
Thus  the  birth-year  of  this  individual  being  Water-Hog,  and  he  being  a  -male,  and
the  son  of  Water  being  Wood,  gives  us  for  his  Log-men  the  Water-Tiger  year  (which  =
1854  A.D.). And  as  he  is  male,  en  counting  downwards  from  the  Wood-Tiger  the  num-
ber of  years  of  his  age  (i.e.,  26),  we  get  the  year  Earth-Hare  (i.e.,  1879  a.d.). And
according  to  the  Log-men  Manual,  the  Earth-Hare  year  is  "  'byor-pa  "  or  Miches,  which
is  given  the  value  of  "  good,"  i.e.,  =  Q.

2  This  is  calculated  on  the  srog  of  the  Log-men  year,  minus  five  years.  In  this  case
we  have  seen  Log-men  year  is  the  Earth-Hare  year.  Counting  back  to  the  fifth  year
gives  the  Wood-Hog,  which  has  its  srog  the  element  water,  and  the  srog  of  the
present  1888  a.d.  year,  viz.,  Earth-Mouse,  being  also  Water,  therefore  =  O  or  good  for
the  "  sky-seizing  Rope."

3  See  next  chapter.
*  See  next  chapter.


462  ASTROLOGY  AND  DIVINATION.

these  evils  (a)  haveread  the  "  Gye-tong-ba"  section  of  the  Prajna  Paramitd,  and
(b)  do  the  luorship  of  "  Gtia-zhi-tong"{  =  "  The  400,"  i.e.,  100  tormxa  or  holy
oakes,  100  lamps  and  100  riuc  and  100  water  offerings],  and  (c)  offer  alampdailij
in,  worship.

III.— According  to  Mewa—

His  mewa  is  Dim-mar  (=  the  7  reds)  :  therefore  the  Tsen  and  Gyalpo  demons
give  trouble.  Dieams  will  be  bad.  The  gods  are  displeased.  Head,  liver,  and
heart  will  give  pain,  and  boils  will  ensue.  To  prevent  these  evils  (a)  make  a
"  Tsen  mdos"  and  a  "  Gyal  indos  "  {this  is  somewhat  like  the  Sa-go,^  but  with-
out the  rain's  head);  (b)  The  favourite  gods  and  guardians  [srung-ina)  of
individual:  Do  their  worshijj  energeticcdlij ;  and  (c)  ransom  a  sheep  from  the
butchers.

B. — FoK  THE  Wife.

I.— According  to  BlETH-COXFLICT—

This  female  born  in  Iron-JIonkey  year  (i.e.,  29  years  ago).  That  year  com-
pared with  the  Earth-Mouse  j'ear  [i.e.,  1888  A.D.)  gives  : —

Life  =  O X

Body  =  O X

Power  =  O  O  O

Luck  =  X

Intelligence  =  Q X

1 .  As  modified  by  her  Parkha,  ?«hich  is  Li.  These  come  out  respectively,

X  X,  O  O.  X X,  O.  X  X.

2.  As  modified  by  "  Reversed  Age  Calculation  "  = x

3.  As  modified  by  "  The  Sky-rope  "  =  O X

4.  As  modified  by  "  The  Earth-dagger"  =  O  O  O
The  total  of  the  year's  conflict  is  .  .  : —

Life  and  Intelligence  are  bad,  like  No.  1,  and  must  be  treated  accord-
ingly, and  in  addition  to  No.  1.

Body  and  power  are  good.

Luck  is  neutral  ;  therefore  the  good  people  will  be  kind  to  you  ;  and  the
bad  people  will  trouble  ;  therefore  it  is  necessary  to  do  very
much  "  Mikha  ta-dot,"  to  drive  away  scandal  (from)  men's
mouth.

The  Sky -seizing  Rope  is  interrupted  (i.e.,  cut) ;  therefore —

(1)  do  very  much  "  te-gyed,"  and  "  ser-k'yem  "  (or  oblation  of  wine  to  the


(2) prepare  a  "  nam-go  "  to  close  breach  in  the  sky-connection.
The  conjunction  of  her  year  (Monkey  with  Mouse)  is  not  good  ; .  •. she
cannot  journey  far. And  if  she  does  any  business  she  will  suffer  ; .  •.  haveread
"  Tdshi  tsig-pa."
II. — According  to  Park'A—

The  Park'a  being  Li,  she  must  not  try  to  build  or  repair  a  house  or  allow
any  man-iage  in  her  house  or  spUl  any'water  on  the  hearth.  The  devil-spirit  of  a
dead  person  is  offended  with  her.  Headache  and  eyeache  will  occur  ;  .  •.  (a)  do
not  look  at  fresh  flesh  meat  or  blood  ;  (b)  in  the  8th  month  will  be  especially
bad  ;  (c)  must  not  go  W.  or  N.W.  ;  (d)  Imve  read  the  "  Dd-metng  "  and  "  Gye-
tong ;  "  (e)  be  careful  not  to  provoke  quarrels.
III.  —According  to  Mewa —

Her  Mewa  is  "  some  thing  "  ;  therefore  wOl  occur  sudden  domestic  quarrels
of  great  seriousness,  lying  reports  of  infidelity,  also  grief  among  relatives,  and
dropsy. To  prevent  these  do —

(a)  Gya  zhi  (i.e.,  100  lamps,  100  rice,  100  water,  and  100  torma) ;  (b)
Lu-tor,  or  offering  of  cake  to  the  Naqas  and  Dug-kar  (=  white
umbrella-god  with  1,000  heads)  ;  (c)  Also  ransom  a  goat.


Vide  p.  150.


AN  ANNUAL  H0R08G0PE.  463


C. — For  the  Daughtee,  aged  7.

/. — According  to  Bxeth-CONFLICT —

This  female,"  born  in  the  Water-Horse  year,  7  years  ago.  That  year
conflicted  with  the  Earoh-Mouse  year  as  follows: — X  X,  O  X,  X  X,
O  O.  X X.

1.  As  modified  by  her  "  Parkha,"  which  is  ztn.  It  is  ; — O  O  0>  O  O  Oj

O  X ,  X X ,  O  O  O-

2.  As  tnodified  by  her  "Reversed  Age  Calculation  "  =  Q

3.  As  by  "  Sky-rope  "  =  O X

4.  As  hj  "  The  Earth-dagger''  =  O X

The  total  of  the  year's  conflict  .".  is.  Life,  Intelligence,  Bocly,an(i  Luck  are
good  of  2nd  degree,  Power  is  bad  ;  therefore  do  as  for  her  father  No.  1,  pre-
viously noted.

"  Sky-seizing  Rope  "  and  Earth-dagger  "  are  neutral. For  evil  Sky-seizing
Rope,  have  read  the  Sutra  "  Akasgarblia. "
And  for  Earth-dagger  have  read  ' '  Sa-yi  snyinq  po-i  mdo, "
and  repeat  as  frequently  as  years  of  age,  i.e.,  7  times.

The  conjunction  of  her  birth  year,  the  Horse,  with  that  of  the  present  year,
the  Mouse,  is  very  bad,  as  these  two  are  enemies  ;  for  this  have  read  the
Chinese  "  zlon-gan-maii. "

//. — According  to  Park' A —

Her  Park'a  is  zin.  Be  careful  not  to  break  a  twig  or  demolish  any  tree
sacred  to  the  Nagas  or  other  deities  (j^nyan),  and  don't  handle  a  carpenter's
tool  for  the  same  reason.  In  2nd  month  when  buds  come  out,  it  is  somewhat
bad  for  you,  as  the  Nagas  are  then  pre-eminent.  The  West  and  N.W.
directions  are  bad,  and  have  to  be  avoided.  Eor  these  evils  have  read  the
"  Dd-mang."

III.— According  to  Mewa—

Her  Mewa  is  like  her  father  s  (No.  1),  and  therefore  do  accordingly.


D.— Foe  the  Son,  aged  5.

I. — According  to  Birth-conflict —

This  male (son),  born  in  the  Wood -Ape  year, 5  years  ago. That  year
compared  with  the  Earth-Mouse  year  gives  : — O  X,OOjOO)  X,0  X.

1.  As modified by his "  Parkha," which i^  kham. It  is O X,

0,000,000,00.0-

2.  Ashy  "'Reversed  Age  Calculation"  = x

3.  As  hj  "  Sky-rope."  =  O  O

4.  Ashy  " Earth-dagger.''  = X X
The  total  of  the  year's  conflict .  ■.  is  : —

Body,  Power,  and  Luck  are  good.
Life  and  Intelligence  are  neutral  or  middling.
The  Sky -rope  is  not  broken,  and  therefore  good.
The  Earth-dagger  is  withdrawn,  and  therefore  bad.
For  the  latter —

(a)  make  as  many  clay  Chaityas  as  possible  ;

(b)  the  torma-cake  of  the  earth-goddess  (Sa-yi-lha-mo) ;  and

(c)  give  also  torma-cake  to  the  Naga  demigods.
II. — According  to  "  Paek'A'' —

His  Park'a  being  k'am,  don't  go  to  a  large  river,  and  to  pools  and  other
waters  reputed  to  be  the  abode  of  water-spirits.  Don't  stir  or  disturb  the
water.  Don't  go  out  at  night.  Don't  eat  fish.  The  Tsan  fiends  are  ill  dis-
posed towards  you.  These  spirits  are  especially  malevolent  to  you  in  the  6th
month;  .-.  be  careful  then.  Don't  go  in  a  S.W.  and  N.E.  direction.  Save
read  (1)  kLu  'bum  and  (2)  Ser-'od  dampa  'don.


464  ASTROLOGY  AND  DIVINATION.

III.—According  to  Mewa—

This  Mewa  is  h%i-mar.  Tlie  Marao  and  Tsan  fiends  are  ill  disposed  towards
you.  For  this  as  (a)  make  "  de-gnis  kyi  mdos  gton,"  which  is  like  the  Sa-go
and  "Sky-door"  with  threads  and  masts,  and  (b)  have  read  well  " gser-'od
gyan  skyabs,"

General  Note  on  the  Grand  Average  of  the  above.

The  Meiva  is  excessively  red.  It  thus  betokens  shedding  of  blood  by
accident.  Therefore  make  "  Tsan  mdos"  and  the  bloody  "Mama  otc?o*" masts
(see  page  464).  And  have  read  as  much  as  possible — (1)  stabs  po-ch'e-t-gs^cns,
(2)  gza-l  yum,  (3)  nor-rgyun-ma-i  gzuns  gan-man  sgrogs.

The  extravagant  amount  of  worship  prescribed  in  the  above
horoscope  is  only  a  fair  sample  of  the  amount  which  the  Lamas
order  one  family  to  perform  so  as  to  neutralize  the  current
year's  demoniacal  influences  on  account  of  the  family  inter-
relations only.  In  addition  to  the  worship  herein  prescribed  there
also  needs  to  be  done  the  special  worship  for  each  individual  ac-
cording to  his  or  her  own  life's  horoscope  as  taken  at  birth ;  and
in  the  case  of  husband  and  wife,  their  additional  burden  of  wor-
ship which  accrues  to  their  life  horoscope  on  their  marriage,  due  to
the  new  set  of  conflicts  introduced  by  the  conjunction  of  their
respective  years  and  their  noxious  influences ;  and  other  rites
should  a  death  have  happened  either  in  their  own  family  or
even  in  the  neighbourhood.  And  when,  despite  the  execu-
tion of  all  this  costly  worship,  sickness  still  happens,  it  necessitates
the  further  employment  of  Lamas,  and  the  recourse  by  the  more
wealthy  to  a  devil-dancer  or  to  a  special  additional  horoscope
by  the  Lama.  So  that  one  family  alone  is  prescribed  a  sufl&cient
number  of  sacerdotal  tasks  to  engage  a  couple  of  Lamas  fairly
fully  for  several  months  of  every  year  !

A  somewhat  comical  result  of  all  this  wholesale  reading  of
scriptures  is  that,  in  order  to  get  through  the  prescribed  reading
of  the  several  bulky  scriptures  within  a  reasonable  time,  it  is  the
practice  to  call  in  a  dozen  or  so  Lamas,  each  of  whom  reads  aloud,
but  all  at  the  same  time,  a  different  book  or  chapter  for  the
benefit  of  the  person  concerned.

So  deep-rooted  is  the  desire  for  divination  even  in  ordinary
affairs  of  every-day  life,  that,  in  addition  to  these  elaborate
horoscopes,  nearly  every  Lama,  even  the  most  ignorant,  and
most  of  the  laity,  especially  the  poorer  class  who  cannot  afford
the  expense  of  spiritual  horoscopes,  seek  for  themselves  presages
by  more  simple  methods,  by  cards,  by  rosary  beads  or  pebbles,


BIVINATION  BY  BONES, CARDS, ROSARY.  465


by  dice,  by  sheep's  shoulder  blades,'  by  omens,  etc.  And  the
results  are  allowed  to  determine  the  movements  of  the  indi-
vidual, as  every  traveller  who  has  had  to  do  with  Tibetans  knows
to  his  cost.  It  is  a  sort  of  fortune-telling,  which,  however,  is  not
resorted  to  for  the  mere  idle  curiosity  of  ascertaining  fortune  long
beforehand,  but  seriously  to  find  the  issues  of  undertakings  in
hand  or  those  immediately  contemplated  by  the  consulter.

For  the  purposes  of  divination  most  families  possess  a  small
divining  manual  called  m6  or  "mo-jae."^  These  books  sho-w
the  portent  attached  to  the  particular  number  which  is  elicited
and  also  the  initiatory  spells.

The  cards  used  for  most  divination  purposes  are  small  oblong
strips  of  cardboard,  each  representing  several  degrees  of  lucky
and  unlucky  portents  suitably  inscribed  and  pictorially  illustrated,
and  to  each  of  these  is  attached  a  small  thread.

In  consulting  this  oracle,  an  invocation  is  first  addressed  to  a
favourite  deity,  frequently  the  goddess  Tara,  and  the  packet  is
held  by  the  left  hand  on  a  level  with  the  face,  and,  with  closed
eyes,  one  of  the  threads  is  grasped,  and  its  attached  card  is  drawn
out.  The  best  out  of  three  draws  is  held  to  decide  the  luck  of
the  proposed  undertaking,  or  the  ultimate  result  of  the  sickness  or
the  other  question  of  fortune  sought  after.

Divination  by  the  rosary  is  especially  practised  by  the  more
illiterate  people,  and  by  the  Bon  priests.  A  preliminary  spell  is
chanted : —

"  gSol  !  ye  dharma  !  Om  Sha-Jcya  Muneye  sva-hah  !  Kramuneye  svd-
Jiaih  !  Madahshumuneye  svahah  !  "  After  having  repeated  this,  breathe
upon  the  rosary  and  say  "  Namo-Guru !  I  bow  down  before  the
kind,  merciful  and  noble  Lama,  the  three  Holy  Ones,  the  yidam
(tutelary  deity),  and  before  all  the  collections  of  Dakkinis,  religious
protectors  and  guardians  of  the  magic-circle,  and  I  beg  that  you  will
cause  the  truth  to  descend  on  this  lot.  I  also  beg  you,  0 !  religious
protectors  and  guardians,  Brahma,  Indra,  the  others  of  the  ten  direc-
tions Nanda  and  Takshaka,  the  Naga  kings,  including  the  eight  great
Nagas,  the  sun,  the  eight  planets,  the  twenty-eight  constellations  of
stars,  the  twelve  great  chiefs  of  the  injurers,  and  the  great  locality
gods,  to  let  the  true  light  descend  on  my  lot,  and  let  the  truth  and
reality  appear  in  it."

After  repeating  the  above,  the  rosary  is  taken  in  the  palm  and
rolled  between  the  two  revolving  palms,  and  the  hands  clapped

1  See  description  by  Pallas,  quotei  by  Eockhill  (i.,  p.  341).
I.e.,  short  for  "  m6-pecha,"  or  "  Tlie  mS  boolj.'

H  H


466  ASTROLOGY  AND  DIVINATION.

thrice.  Then,  closing  the  eyes,  a  portion  of  the  rosary  is  seized
between  the  thumb  and  finger  of  each  hand,  and  opening  the
eyes  the  intervening  beads  are  counted  from  each  end  in  threes.
And  according  as  the  remainder  is  1,  2,  or  3  depends  the  result.
Thus  :—

(1)  If  One  as  a  remainder  co'nies  after  One  as  the  previous  remainder,
everything  is  favourable  in  life,  in  friendship,  in  trade,  etc.

(2)  If  Two  comes  after  Two  it  is  bad  :  "  The  cloudless  sky  will  be
suddenly  darkened,  and  there  will  be  loss  of  wealth.  So  B,im-'gro
must  be  done  repeatedly,  and  the  gods  must  be  worshipped,  which  are
the  only  preventions."

(3)  If  Three  comes  after  Three  it  is  very  good  ;  "  Prosperity  is  at
hand  in  trade  and  everything."

(4)  If  Three  comes  after  One  it  is  good :  "  Rice  plants  will  grow  on
sandy  hills,  widows  will  obtain  husbands,  and  poor  men  will  obtain
riches."

(5)  If  One  comes  after  Two  it  is  good  :  "  Every  wish  will  be  fulfilled
and  riches  will  be  found  ;  if  one  travels  to  a  dangerous  place  one  will
escape  every  danger."

(6)  If  One  comes  after  Three  it  is  good  :  "  God's  help  will  always  be
at  hand,  therefore  worship  the  gods."

(7)  If  Two  comes  after  Three  it  is  not  very  good,  it  is  middling  :
"  Legal  proceedings  will  come."

(8)  If  Three  comes  after  Two  it  is  good:  "Turquoise  fountains  will
spring  out  and  fertilize  the  ground,  unexpected  food  will  be  obtained,
and  escape  is  at  hand  from  any  danger."

(9)  If  Two  comes  after  One  it  is  hsL&  :  "Contagious  disease  will  come.
But  if  the  gods  be  worshipped  and  the  devils  be  propitiated,  then  it  wiJl
be  prevented."

The  most  ordinary  mode  of  divination  is  by  counters  of  seeds  or
pebbles  in  sets  of  tea,  fifteen,  or  twenty-one,  which  may  be  used
with  or  without  a  dice-board.  If  a  dice-board  be  used,  it  consists
of  small  squares  drawn  on  paper  to  the  number  of  fifteen  or  of
twenty-one,  and  each  square  has  got  a  number  within  a  circle
corresponding  to  a  number  in  the  md-pe  or  divination-book.  The
set  of  ten  is  called  "  The  Ten  Fairy  Circle,"  ^  and  requires  a  board
bearing  the  outline  of  an  eight-petalled  lotus  arranged  as  pairs
of  petals  which  correspond  to  the  Tantrik  symbols  of  the  five
Jinas  (vajra,  gem,  etc.),  the  fifth  being  in  the  centre,  and  its  pair
of  petals  is  named  the  "Consort"  of  the  Jina  and  the  Sakti.^ The


1  mKal-'gro-ma.

3  Thus  j-Dorje  Kahgro,  rdo-rje  shugs-'gro,  the  former having higher  rank and
better  prognosis.


DIVINATION  BY  SHEDS.


467


15
6

14

7

13

8

12
9

11

10

5

4

3

2

1

counters  are  white  and  black  pebbles  or  seeds,  only  one  black  one
to  each  series.  And  after  the  invocation  to  the  special  deity  and
shaking  up  and  mixing  all  the  seeds  in  the  closed  palm  they  are
then  told  out  between  the  forefinger  and  thumb  of  the  still  closed
palm  on  to  the  squares  in  the  numerical  order  of  the  latter,  and
the  number  on  which  the  black  seed  comes  out  determines  by
means  of  the  ind-pe  book  the  divination  result  of  the  particular
fortune  sought  for.

The  set  of  fifteen  squares  is  called  "  Grya-nag-sman-ch'u,"  or
"  The  Chinese  medicinal  water."  It  consists  of  a  triple  series  of
five  squares,  with  the  numbers  arranged  as  in  the  sketch.  But
properly,  as  its  name  implies,  the  seeds
should  be  dropped  into  a  vessel  of  water,
and  no  dice-board  is  then  needed.  This
kind  of  divination  is  used  especially  in
sickness,  hence  it  is  called  "  medicinal."
But  the  manual  most  commonly  consulted
for  the  prognosis  and  treatment  of  sickness
is  "  The  calculation  of  the  eight  god-
desses." This  book  gives  a  fixed  prognosis
and  prescriptions  of  remedial  worship  for  the  month  in  series  of
fours.  Thus  for  its  reference,  only  the  day  of  the  month  is  needed,
and  no  dice  or  seeds  are  necessary.'

The  set  of  twenty-one  squares  is  called  "  The  twenty-one
Taras,"  after  the  twenty-one  forms  of  that  obliging  goddess.
Above  the  centre  of  the  diagram  is  a  figure
of  that  goddess,  who  is  specially  invoked  in
this  divination.  The  numbers  run  as  in
the  diagram  here  given.  As  a  sample  of
the  oracles  I  give  here  a  few  of  the  divina-
tion-results from  Tara's  series.  If  the  black
seed  falls  on  1,  2,  8,  or  9,  the  divination  is
as  follows: —

No.  1.  The  Jewel. — If  you  do  not  go  to  sea
then  you  will  get  the  jewel.  For  merchants'
and  thieves'  adventures  it  is  good.  For  your
own  house  and  soul  it  is  excellent. But  if  you

1  Another  .manual  named  Dui-ts'od-)-tsis  gives  similar  information  in  regard  to  the
particular  time  of  the  day  of  the  occurrence  in  question.

H  H 2


Image  of  Dolma.


17
16

18
15

19

14

20
13

21
12

7
6

8
5

9

4

10
3

11

2
1

468


ASTEOLOQT  AND  DIVINATION.


are  sick  it  is  somewhat  bad.  Por  travelling  you  should  first  feed
people  and  dogs.  You  will  obtain  a  son  and  get  temporal  power.
Your  wishes  will  ultimately  be  gratified.  You  have  a  thief  as  an
enemy.

No.  2.  The  Turquoise  Spring. — The  dried  valley  will  yield  springs,
and  plants  will  become  verdant,  and  timely  rain  will  fall.  The  absent
will  soon  return.  Do  the  dPan-bstod  worship  of  the  enemy  god,
and  the  worship  of  your  own  special  god  (mch'od  Iha).  It  is  good  for
marriage.

The  Conch  Chaitya. — In  the  supreme  'Off-min  heavens  it  is

the lower  animals. In  the  three  worlds  of  existence  is

and  auspicious  time. Your  desires  will  be  realized. Life

If  you are ill,  whitewash  the  Oaitya  and  worship  in  the

The enemy  is somewhat near. For merchants the  time


No.  8.
good for
long  life
is  good,
temple,
is  rather  late,  but  no  serious  loss  will  happen. For  health  it  is  good.

No.  9.  The  Invalid. — If  an  actual  invalid  it  is  due  to  demon  of
grand-parents.  Agriculture  will  be  bad.  Cattle  will  suffer.  To  pre-
vent this  ofier  the  "  black  "  cake  of  the  three  heads  (jfTor  nag  mgo
sum)  and  do  "  calling  for  luck."  For  your  wishes,  business,  and
credit  it  is  a  bad  outlook.  For  sickness  do  "  obtaining  long  life."
Mend  the  road  and  repaint  the  "Mani"  stones.  Household  things
and  life  are  bad.  For  these  read  the  "  do  mang"  spells,  also  Du-Kar
and  Dok.  The  ancestral  devil  is  to  be  suppressed  by  Srignon.  Avoid
conflict  with  enemy  and  new  schemes  and  long  journeys.

The  titles  of  the  other  numbers  indicate  somewhat  the  nature  of
their  contents,  namely  : —


3.  Golden  Dorje.

4.  Painted  vase.

5.  Turquoise  parrot.

6.  Verdant  plants.

7.  Lady carrying

child.
White  lion.


1 1 .  Golden  vase.

12.  Turquoise  dragon.

13.  Garuda.

14.  Tigress.

15.  Sun  and  moon.

16.  Enemy  with  bow

and  arrows.


17.  Fiendess  with  red
mouth.

18.  'Gong  king-devil.

19.  Peacock.

20.  Glorious white
conch.

10.  White  lion.  and  arrows.  21.  The  great  king.

The  foregoing  are  the  forms  of  dice-boards  used  by  the  laity  and
the  lower  clergy.  The  more  respectable  Lamas  use  a  circular  disc
with  twenty-eight  divisions  in  the  form  of  three  concentric  lotus-
flowers,  each  of  the  petals  of  the  two  outer  whorls  bearing  a  number
which  corresponds  to  a  number  in  the  divining  manual  which  is
called  "  The  one  who  sees  all  actions."  '  The  margin  of  the  disc
is  surrounded  by  flames.  This  more  artistic  arrangement  is  shown
in  the  accompanying  figure.  As  a  sample  of  this  oracle  I  give
here  the  detail  of  No.  1  and  list  of  the  presiding  divinities  of  the
other  numbers.


"  Las-byecJ  )«t'on-ba  kun-/dan."


DIVINATION  BOARDS.


469


No.  1.,  Bhagavdn  (a  title  of  Buddha).  You  are  of  the  wise  class,
or  if  not  you  will  get  a  wise  son.  Your  god  needs  to  be  worshipped
fully,  and  what  you  desire  will  be  realized,  and  you  will  obtain  long
life  and  freedom  from  sickness.  And  if  you  are  a  male  this  blessing
will  last  for  nine  years. If  you  are  a  female  then  nine  monks  must  be


l|IS"lT^'^"'™'-9'Tr^ai-nj^


.^^^^^^-


Lotus  Dice-boakd.


engaged  to  read  the  N'ip.thi  Abidhai-ma,  and  four  monks  must  do
the  doJc-joa,  clapping  of  hands  to  drive  away  the  evil  spirits;  for  in  the
south  is  a  king  demon  who  is  angry  with  you  and  your  heart  is  disturbed
and  your  temper  bad.  On  this  account  do  the  worship  of  the  king
demon  and  wear  his  charm.  In  your  house  children  will  be  unsafe,
but  they  will  not  die.  Your  valuable  goods  are  likely  to  go,  there-
fore do  the  worship  of  Nor-t'ub  or  "  the  obtaining  of  wealth."


470


ASTROLOGY  AND  DIVINATION.


The  names  of  the  divinities  of  the  other  numbers,  which  give  some
indication  of  the  nature  of  the  divination,  are : —


2.  Avalokita.

3.  Ugyen  Rinboch'e.

4.  Tara.

5.  Yajrapani.

6.  Yes'e  Norbu.

7.  Candan.

8.  Indra.

9.  Maiijusri.

10.  Dorje  leg-pa.

11.  Sirge  Sashi.


12.  Dorje  Gya-t'am.

13.  Yuduk  Nonmo.

14.  Ton-iian  Lhamo.

15.  Tamch'en  Nagpo.

16.  Lungpa  Kyithik.

17.  Durpag  Nag.

18.  Garwa  Bishu.

19.  Gyacha  kua.

20.  Nad-bdak  Eemati,

god  of  sickness.


21.  Tsunpa.

22.  Ch'ui  Lhamo.

23.  Tuk-zig-pa.

24.  SipiKukhor.

25.  Damc'a  Dzema.

26.  Dreo  Dagyak.

27.  Purnan  Ukpu.

28.  Nag-nag.


The  dice  used  in  divination  and  fortune-telling  are  of  two  sorts,
namely,  (a)  ordinary  ivory  or  bone  dice  marked  with  black  dots  from
one  to  six  as  in  European  dice,  and  (6)  a  solitary  wooden  cube,  on
each  of  the  six  sides  of  which  is  carved  a  letter  corresponding  to  a
similar  letter  in  the  manual.  Here  also  may  be  mentioned  the
loaded  dice  used  in  "  The  scape-goat  ceremony,"  see  the  chapter
on  festivals.

The  ordinary  ivory  dice  are  used  in  a  set  of  three  with  the  Lhamo
M6  or  "  The  goddess'  divination  manual,"  which  provides  for
results  from  three  to  eighteen.  These  three  dice  are  usually
thrown  on  the  book  itself  from  the  bare  hand  after  having  been
shaken  up  in  the  closed  palm.  More  luxurious  people  possess  a
small  wooden  bowl  from  which  they  throw  the  dice,  also  a  pad  on
which  to  throw  them.

The  solitary  wooden  dice  is  used  for  divination  along  with  the
manual  of  Manjusri.  It  contains  on  its  six  sides  the  six  letters
compound  or  otherwise,  of  Manjusrl's  spell — A,  R,  P,  TS,  N,
DI.  The  wood  of  this  dice  should  be  made  of  either  Manjusri's
sacred  "  bla  "  tree,  or  sandal,  or  rose-wood,  or  if  none  of  these
woods  are  available,  then  the  dice  should  be  made  of  conch-shell
or  glass.

In  the  manual  of  this  dice  the  portent  of  each  letter  is  divided
into  the  following  sections,  namely — House,  Favours,  Life,  Medical,
Enemy,  Visitors,  Business,  Travel,  Lost  property,  Wealth,  Sickness,
etc.,  which  cover  all  the  ordinary  objects  for  which  the  oracle  is
consulted. As  an  example  I  here  extract  the  portents  of  A : —

" '  A '  is  the  best  of  all  for  great  Lamas  and  for  lay  officers,  and
what  you  will  perform  will  have  a  good  result.  For  low  people  it
means  a  little  sadness  ;  therefore  worship  yout  favourite  god.


AUGURIES.  471


"  House  section. — All  your  household  will  be  happy  and  lucky,  and
for  a  titae  your  house  will  be  safe ;  but  where  the  cattle  dwell,  there
a  thief  and  rogue  will  perhaps  come.  To  avoid  this  repeat,  or  get
repeated  (by  Lamas),  10,000  times  the  spell  of  Marlci.

"  Favours  section. — The  favours  you  wish  will  be  got  gradually.  To
remove  the  difficulty  in  the  way  of  getting  these  repeat,  or  get  repeated,
100,000  times  the  spell  of  gra-lha,  and  also  of,  Devi  16-gyon-ma  (this
latter  is  Oin!  pisha-tsi par-na-sha^wa-ri  sarha  ds6-la-ta-sha-ma-na-ye  swa-
ha  ! ),  and  do  the  Bug-kar  with  its  contained  6zlog-6sgyur  (clapping  of
bands)  celebration.

"Life  {Srog). — -This  is  good.  But  the  g'Don  demon  from  the  east
and  south  came  with  a  blue  and  black  article  you  got.  To  clear  away
this  cloud  do,  or  get  done,  100,000  grib-sd,  and  do  the  Naga  worship
and  read,  or  get  read,  1,000  times  Sherab-Ninpo.

"  Medical. — Taking  the  medicine  prescribed  for  you  for  a  long  time
secretly  you  shall  recover.  Also  burn  a  lamp  nightly  from  sunset  to
sunrise  as  an  offering  to  the  gods.

"  Enemy. — You  shall  not  suffer,  as  your  god  is  strong  and  will  pro-
tect you.

"  Visitors — probable. — They  are  coming,  or  news  of  their  visit  will
soon  be  received.

"  Business. — If  you  quickly  do  business  it  shall  be  profitable — delay
shall  be  unprofitable.

"  Travel. — The  actual  leaving  of  your  house  shall  be  difficult,  but  if
you  persevere  you  shall  travel  safely.

"  Lost  property. — If  you  go  to  the  north-west  you  shall  get  the  lost
property,  or  news  of  it."

A  most  peculiar  application  of  the  dice  is  for  determining  the
successive  regions  and  grades  of  one's  future  re-births.  Fifty-six
or  more  squares  of  about  two  inches  wide  are  painted  side  by  side
in  contrasted  colours  on  a  large  sheet  of  cloth,  thus  giving  a
chequered  area  like  an  ordinary  draught  or  chess-board.  Eacti
square  represents  a  certain  phase  of  existence  in  one  or  other  of
the  six  regions  of  re-birth,  and  on  it  is  graphically  depicted  a
figure  or  scene  expressive  of  the  particular  state  of  existence  in  the
world  of  man,  or  beast,  or  god,  or  in  hell,  etc.,  and  it  bears  in  its
centre  the  name  of  its  particular  form  of  existence,  and  it  also
contains  the  names  of  six  other  possible  states  of  re-birth  which
ensue  from  this  particular  existence,  these  names  being  preceded
by  one  or  other  of  the  following  six  letters  :  A,  S,  E,  Gr,  D,  Y,
which  are  also  borne  on  the  six  faces  of  the  wooden  cube  which
forms  the  solitary  dice  for  this  divination.

Starting  from  the  world  of  human  existence,  the  dice  is  thrown,
and  the  letter  which  turns  up  determines  the  region  of  the  next


472


ASTROLOGY  AND  DIVINATION.


Re-bibth  Dice-board.


DIVINATION  OF  RE-BIRTHS.  473

re-birth.  Then  proceeding  from  it  the  dice  is  again  thrown  and
the  letter  turned  up  indicates  the  next  state  of  re-birth  from  this
new  existence,  and  so  on  from  square  to  square  ad  infinitum.

Thus  for  the  Lamaist  layman  there  appear  only  six  states  of
re-birth  ordinarily  possible,  namely : —

A.  The  path  of  the  sorcerer;  S.  Many  days'  journey  (Nin  ts'og  lam) ;
R.  The  "bent  goers,"  i.e.,  the  beasts;  G.  The  Unorthodox,  i  e.,  a  follower
■of  the  Bon  or  pre-Lamaist  form  of  religion  in  Tibet ;  D.  an  Indian
heretic  ; Y.  a  ghostly  state  in  Limbo.

The  dice  accompanying  my  copy  of  this  board  seems  to  have
been  loaded  so  as  to  show  up  the  letter  Y,  which  gives  a  ghostly
■existence,  and  thus  necessitates  the  performance  of  many  expensive
rites  to  counteract  so  undesirable  a  fate.  But  in  addition  to  the
■ordinary  six  states  of  possible  re-birth  are  the  extraordinary  states
■of  re-birth  to  be  obtained  by  the  grand  coup  of  turning  up  the  letter
A  five  times  in  succession  or  the  letter  S  thirteen  times  in  succession.
The  former  event  means  direct  re-birth  in  the  paradise  of  St.
Padma  and  his  mythical  primordial  god,  Samantabhadra,  while
the  latter  event  is  re-birth  immediately  into  the  grander  paradise
of  the  coming  Buddha,  Maitreya.

Every  year  has  its  general  character  for  good  or  evil  foretold
in  the  astrological  books  (Uke  Zadkiel's),^  but  like  most  oracular
utterances,  these  prophecies  are  couched  in  rather  ambiguous
terms,  and  as  there  are  four  or  live  versions  of  these  forecasts
for  each  year  of  the  twelve-year  cycle  in  addition  to  a  separate  set
for  each  year  of  the  sixty-year  cycle,  there  is  thus  considerable
latitude  allowed  for  accounting  for  most  phenomena.

In  1891,  during  that  great  visitation  of  locusts  which  swarmed
over  India  and  into  Sikhim  as  well,  the  local  Lamas  were  in  great
glee  on  finding  that  the  plague  of  locusts^  was  down  in  the  Lamaist

1  The  ordinary  Lamaist  forecast  for  1891  ran  as  follows  :  During  this  year  of  the
Iron-Hare,  there  is  fear  for  the  cattle.  The  valuable  crops  •will  be  moderate.  Dew  and
hail  excessive.  Birds  and  mice  destructive.  Robbery  and  loss  of  land,  fleeing  in-
habitants. Slowly  crops  may  recover.  Black  (seeded  crops)  good,  white  not  good.
Human  sickness  excessive.  In  early  summer  water  scanty,  with  hail  and  heat  after-
wards. Slowly  progress.  If  those  who  otherwise  shall  certainly  die,  do  "  the  Life
Hansom,"  the  "Death  Eansom  "  (e.j'.  releasing  small  iish from  the  fishmongers),  and
the  "  Ceremony  to  Obtain  Life,"  then  they  shall  be  safe,  etc.,  etc.

2  The  great  oriental  locust  is  well-known  to  the  Nepalese  and  Sikhim  highlanders
as  an  occasional  visitant,  and  I  am  told  that  a  few  of  the  swarms  occasionally  pass
actually  into  Tibet.  The  Nepalese  during  this  last  visitation  were  to  be  seen  catching
basketfuls  of  these  insects,  which  they  cooked  and  ate  like  shrimps  with  much  relish.


474


ASTROLOGY  AND  DIVINATION.


forecast  for  that  year.  I  examined  the  old  printed  books  and
found  that  in  one  of  the  more  common  versions  of  the  twelve-year
cycle  a  plague  of  ch'aga  was  foretold  for  that  year,  and  ch'aga  is
a  short  form  of  the  word  for  "  locust."  And  it  seemed  that  it
could  not  have  come  out  in  the  forecaste  oftener  than  about  once
in  six  years.

The  more  demoniacal  forms  of  divination  practised  by  the  pro-
fessional oracles  and  wizards  are  described  in  the  following  chapter.


SCOSPIOV THARM

<»S1 inJUDT BV DCMONS


1.  JVa^ez  snake-spirit,

2,  Tsan  devil.


3.  Ma-mo  fiendess.

4.  "King "-fiend.


A Bl,ACK-HAT SOECEBER.


XVIII.


SORCERY  AND NECROMANCY.

"  He  drew  the  mystic  circle's  bound
With  skull  and  cross-bones  fenced  around  ;
He  traced  full  many  a  sigil  there  ;
He  muttered  many  a  backward  prayer
That  sounded  like  a  curse."

I ITH  the  Lamas,  as  with  the  ancient  Greeks  and  Romans,
the  oracle  is  a  living  and  highly  popular  institution.
Dwelling  in  an  atmosphere  of  superstition,  the  Lamas,
like  the  alchemists  of  old,  do  not  recognize  the  limita-
tion to  their  powers  over  Nature. They  believe  that  the  hermits


476  SORCERY  AND  NEGROMANCY.


in  tlie  mountains,  and  the  monks  in  their  cloisters,  can  readily
become  adepts  in  the  black  art,  and  can  banish  drought,  and  con-
trol the  sun,  and  stay  the  storm ;  and  many  of  their  necromantic
performances  recall  the  scene  of  the  "  witches'  cauldron "  in
Macbeth.

Magic,  and  this  mostly  of  a  sympathetic  kind,  seems  to  have
crept  into  Indian  Buddhism  soon  after  Buddha's  death.  In  the
form  of  irdhi,  or  the  acquisition  of  supernatural  power,  it  is  a
recognizedj  attribute  of  the  Arhats,  and  even  among  the  primitive
Hinayana  Buddhists.  The  Paritta  ("pirit")  rite  of  the  Southern
Buddhists  is  essentially  of  the  character  of  exorcism,^  and  portions
of  the  text  of  the  Saddharma  Pundarika,  dating  to  about  the  first
century  of  our  era,  are  specially  framed  for  this  purpose.

But  the  Indian  cult  does  not  appear  ever  to  have  descended  to
the  gross  devil-dancing ^  and  Shamanist  charlatanism  of  the  Lamas;
though  even  the  Lamas  seldom,  if  ever,  practise  such  common
tricks  as  swallowing  knives  and  vomiting  fire,  with  which  they  have
been  credited.  They  find  plenty  of  scope  for  their  charlatanism  in
playing  upon  the  easy  credulity  of  the  people  by  working  them-
selves into  the  furious  state  of  the  "possessed,"  so  as  to  oracidarly
deliver  auguries,  and  by  the  profitable  pursuits  of  necromancy  and
sorcery.

Every  orthodox  monastery  in  Tibet,  even  of  the  most  reformed
sects,  keeps  or  patronizes  a  sorcerer,  and  consults  him  and  follows


1  "  Pirit"  as  practised  by  the  southern  Buddhists,  is  a  reading  of  certain  scriptures
as  an  exorcism  against  evil  spirits  in  sickness.  It  addresses  itself  to  "all  spirits
here  assembled,"  and  says  :  "  therefore  hear  me,  0  ye  spirits  !  Be  friendly  to  the
race  of  men ;  for  every  day  and  night  they  bring  you  their  offerings  ;  therefore  keep
diligent  watch  over  them.  Ye  spirits,  etc."  (Hardy's  E.  Mon.).  Nagasena  in  Milinda
(circa,  150  A.D.)  is  made  to  say,  "  The  blessed  one,  O  king  .  .  .  sanctioned  Pirit.
And  Rhys  Davids  {Milinda,  p.  213),  commenting  on  this  remark,  states :  Tliis  is
the  oldest  text  in  which  the  use  of  the  service  is  referred  to.  But  the  word  Paritta
(Pirit)  is  used  Kullamgga,  v.,  6,  on  an  asseveration  of  love ;  for  snakes  to  be  used  as
what  is  practically  a  charm  against  snake-bite,  and  that  is  attributed  to  the  Buddha.
The  particular  Suttas,  Eataua  Sutta,  Klianda-paritta,  Mora  paritta  Dhai/agga-paritta,
and  the  Aianadya-paritta,  and  the  Ahguli-mala  paritta,  and  passages  here  referred
to  are  all  in  the  Pitakas.

Cf.  also  a  manual  of  exorcism  used  in  Ceylon,  entitled  Piruwana-pota. — Haeey's
Mast  Mon.,  p.  26,30.

2  It  will  be  interesting  to  find  whether  the  dancing  orgies  of  the  Ceylon  Buddliists
are  in  any  way  related  to  those  of  northern  Buddhism.  The  descriptions  of  Callaway
are  insufficient  for  this  purpose.  They  show,  however,  that  Yama  the  Death  king
figures  prominently  in  the  dances.


BEVIL-DANCINO  SORGEBERS.  477

his  dictates  upon  most  matters;  and  there  are  some  cloisters  near
Lhasa  specially  devoted  to  instruction  in  this  art.  Such  are,  Moru,
Eamo-ch'e,  and  Kar-mas'a.

The  chief  wizards  are  called  "  Defenders  of  the  faith  "  {ch'os-
skyoii),  and  the  highest  of  these,  namely,  Na-ch'un,  is  the  govern-
ment oracle,  and  is  consulted  on  all  important  state  occasions
and  undertakings.  But  every  monastery  of  any  size  has  its  own
sorcerer,  who,  however,  in  the  case  of  the  poorer  sects,  is  not
usually  considered  a  member  of  the  brotherhood,  and  he  is  allowed
to  marry.  They  possess  no  literature,  and  deliver  their  sayings
orally.

Their  fantastic  equipment  and  their  frantic  bearing,  as  in  figure
at  page  475,  their  cries  and  howls,  despite  their  name,  can  scarcely
be  of  Sivaite  origin,  but  seem  clearly  to  identify  them  with  the
Bon —  the  grossest  of  Shamanist  devil-dancers.  The  belief  both
in  ghosts  and  witchcraft  and  the  practice  of  exorcism  was  so  deep-
rooted  in  the  country,  that  Padma-sambhava  gave  it  a  prominent
place  in  his  system,  and  even  Tson-K'a-pa  could  not  do  otherwise
than  take  them  over  into  his  yellow  sect.  And  that  position  with-
in the  Lamaist  priesthood  once  granted  to  the  heathen  sorcerer  it
naturally  became  dogmatic  and  scholastic,'  and  seems  to  have  been
given  its  present  organized  shape  by  the  fifth  Grand  Lama,  Nag
Wan,  in  the  seventeenth  century ;  though  even  now  it  is  satisfac-
tory to  find  that  some  of  the  more  intelligent  and  respectable
Lamas  despise  such  gross  exhibitions  as  an  unholy  pandering  to
the  vulgar  taste  for  the  marvellous.

The  chief  sorcerers  are  called  "The  revered  protectors  of  re-
ligion," Gh'o-kyon  or  Gh'o-je,  and  are  believed  to  be  incarnations  of
the  malignant  spirit  called  "  kings,"  ^  who  seem  to  be  spirits  of
demonified  heroes,  and  still  the  object  of  very  active  popular
worship.'

These  king-fiends  are  alleged  to  have  been  originally  five
brothers,* who came from Ch'ad-dumin northern Mongolia,


■■  KoppEN,  ii.,  260.  ^  rgyal-po.

3  The  mode  of  worshipping  these  "  kings "  and  the  offerings  most  acceptable  to
them  are  detailed  in  the  book  Ku-na  gyal-pmi  Kan-Sag.  "  Confession  to  the  five  sacred
Kings  "  and  "  Confession  {Kan-Sag)  to  the  Incarnate  Great  CK  o-Kyoii,."

*  rgyal-po-sku-nga.  These  are  said  to  have  been  the  kings  of  the  east,  mystically
called  "the  Body"  and  resident  at  Sam-ya,  the  king  of  the  west,  entitled  the  Speech,


478  SORCERY  AND  NECROMANCY.

though  now  only  two  (or  three)  of  them  seem  to  be  known,  and
these  are  represented  by  the  oracles  of  Na-ch'un,  Karma-s'ar,  and
Gradon.

The  chief  of  these  necromancers  was  first  brought  into  the  order
of  the  Lamas  by  the  fifth  Grand  Lama,  who  seems  to  have  felt,
like  the  Eoman  governors,  the  necessity  for  placing  the  divination
for  government  service  under  the  control  of  the  priests,  and  he
doubtless  realized  the  political  advantages  of  having  so  powerful
an  instrument  entirely  within  the  order.  He  admitted  the  augur
of  Na-ch'un  ^  to  the  brotherhood,  and  made  him  the  state-oracle.

The NECKOMANCEE-m-OEDINAEY TO GOVEENMENT.

The  Na-ch'dn  Oeacle.

The  Necromancer-in-Ordinary  to  the  government  is  the  Na-ch'un
sorcerer.  The  following  details  regarding  him  I  have  obtained
from  a  resident  of  his  temple,  and  also  from  several  of  his  clientele.^

This  demon-king  was  originally  a  god  of  the  Turki  ^  tribes,  and
named  "  The  White  Overcast  Sky."  *  and  on  account  of  his  Turki
descent  the  popular  epic  of  the  famous  prince  Kesar,  who  had
conquered  the  Turki  tribes,  is  not  permitted  to  be  recited  at  De-
pung,  under  whose  eegis  the  Na-ch'un  oracle  resides  for  fear  of
offending  the  latter.

He  was  brought  to  Tibet  by  Padma-sambhava  in  Thi-Sron
Detsan's  reign,  and  made  the  Ch'o-Kyon  or  religious  guardian
of  the  first  monastery,  Sam-ya.  There  he  became  incarnate,  and
the  man  possessed  by  his  spirit  was  styled  "  The  Religious  Noble  "
or  Ch'6-je,  and  he  married  and  became  a  recognized  oracle  with
hereditary  descent.

This  demon-king  is  thus  identified  with  Pe-har  (usually  pro-
nounced Pi.-kar),^  although  other  accounts  make  him  the  fourth
and  younger  brother  of  Pe-har.

resident  at  Na-ch'un,  the  king  of  the  north,  the  Deeds,  resident  at  Norbu-gan  and
of  the  south,  the  Learning,  resident  at  Gah-dong,  eight  miles  west  of  Lhasa,  and  of
the  centre  (?  Lamo).  Schlagintweit  (p.  157)  names  them,  "  Bihar  Ch'oichon  Da-lha
Luvan  and  Tokchoi,"  but  this  seems  to  include  divinities  of  other  classes.

1  About  seven  miles  west  of  De-pung.

2  Cf .  also  the  vernacular  literatm-e :  gSer-p'ren ; gyu  p'ren ;  dfiul  p'ren,  and  the
deb-ther  of  Na-ch'un  temple,  and  of  Eeting  gyal  po.

s  Hor-pa  Iha  of  the  Bada  sgom-kaw  order.
*  ^Nam-t'b  dKar-po.

5  Although  he  is  specially  associated  with  monasteries  it  is  unlikely  that  his  name
is  a  corruption  of  Bihar  {Vihara),  as  it  is  spelt  rfpe-hai-,  and  he  has  Tibetan  attributes.


GOVERNMENT  SOOTHSAYER.  479

Many  centuries  later  Pe-har's  spirit  is  said  to  have  transferred
itself  to  Ts'al-gun-t'an,  about  four  miles  E.S.E.of  Lhasa,  on  the  way
to  Grah-dan,  and  thence  in  a  miraculous  manner  to  its  present
location.'

In  the  time  of  the  Grand  Lama  Jfag-Wan,  in  the  seventeenth
century,  when  he  extended  the  Ge-lug-pa  order  wholesale,  he  made
the  Na-ch'uh  ch'o-je  a  Lama  of  the  yellow  sect,  and  gave  him  the
monastery  called  De-yang  ta-tsan,^  and  made  him  the  state  oracle.
The  reason  alleged  for  the  pre-eminence  thus  conferred  is  said  to  be
that  he  frustrated  an  attempt  of  the  Newars  or  Nepalese  merchants
of  Lhasa  to  poison  the  tea-cistern  at  the  great  festival,  by  driving  a
knife  through  the  vessel,  and  thus  discharging  the  alleged  poison.

Since  his  promotion  within  the  ranks  of  the  established  'church
he  and  his  successors  have  been  celibate  and  educated.  His
monastery,  which  is  richly  furnished  and  surrounded  by  gardens,
including  a  conservatory  with  stuffed  birds,  and  leopards,  and  other
animals,  now  contains  one  hundred  and  one  monks,  many  of  whom
are  real  Gre-longs,  observing  the  two  hundred  and  fifty-three  Vinaya
rules,  and  from  amongst  these  his  successor  is  chosen — the  succes-
sion passing  by  breath  and  not  by  heredity,  and  it  is  said  that
these  sorcerers  are  very  short-lived  on  account  of  their  maniacal
excitement ;  and  they  probably  are  addicted  to  Indian  hemp.  He
has  the  title  of  Kung  from  the  Chinese  emperor,  a  title  which  is
seldom  bestowed  even  on  the  Sha-pe  or  governors  (dukes)  of
Tibet.

He  is  dressed  like  a  Gre-lug-pa  monk,  usually  in  red  robes,  but
wears  a  lotus-shaped  hat  of  a  yellow  colour  relieved  by  red  and
topped  by  a  ruby  button.

1  The  legend  states  that  the  spirit  of  Pehar  entered  into  a  resident  of  Ts'al-guh-
t'an,  and  said  to  a  Lama  named  Z'ari,  "Let  us  go  to  Udyana  (the  country  of
Padmarsambhava)."  The  Lama  then  shut  up  the  possessed  man  in  a  box,  which  he
flung  into  the  river  Kyi.  Now  tlie  abbot  of  De-purig  had  prophesied  the  previous  day
to  his  pupils,  saying,  "  A  box  will  float  down  the  river,  go  find  it  and  seize  it."  The
pupils  found  the  box  and  brought  it  to  the  spot  where  the  Na-ch'uh  temple  now
stands,  namely,  about  one  mile  to  the  S.E.  of  De-pung,  and  there  they  opened  it,  and
lo  !  a  great  fire  came  out  and  disappeared  into  a  tree,  and  the  dead  body  of  a  man
was  found  in  the  box ;  but  by  the  prayers  of  the  abbot  the  spirit  consented  to  re-
turn to  the  body.  And  the  resuscitated  corpse,  refusing  to  enter  the  pure  monastery
of  De-pung  on  the  plea  of  being  uncelibate,  requested  to  be  granted  "  a  small  dwell-
ing" where  he  stood — hence  the  name  of  the  place  Na-ch'un  or  "the  small  dwell-
ing." And  the  identical  tree  is  still  to  be  seen  there.

2  Jde-yans  gra-(/tsan.


480  SORGEBY  AND  NECROMANCY.

This  state-sorcerer  proceeds  in  great  pomp  to  Lhasa  once
a  year,  on  the  second  day  of  the  first  month,  attended  by  the
magistrate  ^  of  De-pung,  and  is  accommodated  in  a  special  temple
close  to  the  east  of  the  great  Jo-wo  temple,  where  he  prophesies  the
events  of  the  year.  His  rank  is  so  high  that  he  only  visits  the
Dalai  Lama.  Grovemment  officials  require  to  visit  him  when
seeking  information  in  regard  to  government  projects,  war,  sick-
ness, etc.  And  when  he  is  at  home  his  minister  ^  acts  as  the
government  go-between  on  ordinary  occasions,  and  he  and  other
sorcerers  accompany  troops  to  battle  and  interpret  the  portents  of
the  omens  of  birds,  animals,  etc.

He  is  also  consulted  by  private  people  who  can  afford  the
expense.  In  addition  to  any  presents  in  kind,  a  money  fee  of
from  ten  to  1,000  tankas  (silver  coins  about  sixpence)  or  more
are  needed,  and  these  are  applied  to  the  support  of  his  large
establishment.

The  applicant  to  the  oracle  must  have  his  request  presented  in
writing,  and  when  a  sufficient  number  of  applications  have  accumu-
lated, the  augur  is  disclosed  in  a  wildly  ecstatic  state.  He  throws
rice  at  the  applicants,  and  becoming  more  inflamed  by  fury,  he  falls
down  in  convulsions  and  then  replies  to  questions  addressed  to
him.  The  replies  are  noted  down  by  attendant  scribes,  and  the
document  is  afterwards  sealed — it  is  said  by  the  sorcerer  him-
self on  his  recovery.

The  utterances  are  often  couched  in  poetry  or  allegory,  with
the  brevity  and  ambiguousness  of  an  oracular  response.

One  of  the  Nd-ch'un  sorcerer's  responses  which  I  have  seen  bears
a  circular  red  seal  of  crossed  thunderbolts.  It  is  interesting
rather  as  a  sample  of  the  kind  of  questions  addressed  to  the  oracle
than  for  the  oracular  deliverance  itself,  which  is  of  the  ordinary
prosaic  kind.

"  To  the  exalted  throne  (made  of  the  corpses  of  infidels)  on  which
rest  the  feet  of  the  great  Religious  Protector,  the  Incarnate  Victor-
God  of  the  enemies  in  all  the  three  worlds, — The  Lamp  of  Wisdom  !

"  I,  this  child  (Sra«),  believing  in  you,  with  my  ten  fingers  resting  on
my  heart,  petition  thus : —

"  1.  What  is  the  evil  accruing  this  year  on  the  following  persons,
and  what  the  necessary  worship  (to  counteract  the  evil)  ?


ts'ogs-ch'en  z'al-'ho.  2  Entitled  Lon-po  rdo-rje  drag-ldan.


ORACLES  AND  AUGURIES.


481


The  Governor

...  birth  year

Iron-Monkey.

Male

... ... J,

Earth-Hare.

Male

... ... ,,

Fire-Tiger.

Female

Earth-Ox.

Male

„ Tiger.

Female

Iron-Bird.

Female

Fire-Hare.

Female

... ... ,,

Fire-Dog.

"  2.  "What  is  the  evil,  now  and  hereafter,  accruing  to  the  Guide
(Teacher)  of  Sikhim  and  Gang-ljong  (  =  Cis-Tibet)  from  the  foreign
harmers  ? And  what  can  be  done  ?

"  3.  At  the  Tibetan  farm  of  D6-ta  (near  Khamba-jong)  the  fields  for
several  seasons  have  yielded  no  crops  on  account  of  '  dew  from  want  of
clouds.' What  remedy  is  for  this  ?

"  Pray  relieve  our  anxiety.  You,  who  are  the  best  of  gods,  do  not
ever  abandon  us ;  but  ever  protect  us  on  all  sides  as  by  a  thick  '  tent ! '
Save  us  !  We  worship  Thee  !  And  we  offer  you  this  god-like  silken
robe  ;  also  this  pair  of  fowls  (male  and  female)  !

"  This  applicant's  name  is "


The  Reply.

"  Hai !  1.  Read  Tara's  ritual,  and  plant  '  prayer-flags  '  (in  number)
according  to  your  age.

"  2.  Worship  Tara  much,  and  plant  as  many  of  the  largest  '  prayer-
flags  '  as  possible.

"  3.  Read  the  Bum  (Prajiia  paramita)  and  (St.  Padma's)  T'an-yig,  the
three  roots  (Lama,  tutelary  and  Buddha)  ;  make  the  Ts'ogs  offering,
also  one  to  Dorje  Nam-ch'uh,  and  Yul-K'rus  (sprinkling  holy  water  to
purify  the  country) ;  and  mollify  the  country-gods  by  the  Gya-nan
Srun-ma."


THE KARMA-S'AR ORACLE.

But  the  Karma-s'ar  ^  oracle  seems  to  have  been  the  original  one,
and  it  still  is  one  of  those  most  popularly  resorted  to.  Its  sor-
cerer is  also  held  to  be  po^essed  by  the  demon-king  Pe-har.  It  is
within  Lhasa,  and  is  specially  under  the  aegis  of  the  Serra  monas-
tery, and  this  indeed  is  said  to  have  been  a  chief  reason  why  the
Grand  Lama  Nag-wan  eclipsed  it  by  attaching  the  state  oracle
to  his  own  and  rival  monastery  De-pung.

Yet Karma-s'ar too receives some direct countenance from


^  Or  rKar-ma-K'ya .


I  I


482  SORCERY  AND  NEGROMANGY.

government,  for  on  the  seventh  month  of  each  year  its  sorcerer
proceeds  to  Serra  and  delivers  there  his  fore-warnings  of  portend-
ing danger  to  the  church  and  state  for  the  forthcoming  year.
He  is  not  celibate,  but  has  received  some  education  and  is  able  to
read  and  write,  and  has  a  large  following  of  pupils.

He  is  extensively  consulted  about  political  events,  and  his
deliverances,  which  are  posted  up  at  the  south  door  of  his  resi-
dence at  Lhasa  as  well  as  at  Serra,  excite  much  notice.  I  quote
here  a  few  examples  of  his  oracular  responses  : —

The  dog  is  unlikely  to  catch  the  fox  thovigh  both  may  wear  off
their  tails  (advice  to  give  up  pursuing  some  small  though  wily
party).

The  prancing  steed  thinking  only  of  himself  falls  over  the  cliff
(compare  with  "  pride  meets  a  fall  ").

The  eagle's  wings  bring  the  fishes  under  its  power.

The  fox  will  become  greater  than  a  naountain-like  elephant  (fortell-
ing  advancement  of  a  crafty  underling).

The  path  of  the  voracious  wolf  is  barred  by  a  serpent.

The  grunting  pig  with  upturned  tusks  frightens  the  hawk.  (This
is  an  excuse  for  evading  reply  to  the  question  for  fear  of  offending  the
authorities.)

A  more  inferior  type  of  sorcerer  is  the  Lha-Ka  (probably
Lha-K'a  or  "  Grod's  mouth-piece,"  also  called  Ku-t'em-ba.  Such
are  found  frequently  in  western  Tibet,  and  may  be  females,'  and
in  which  case  the  woman  may  marry  without  hindrance  to  her
profession.  These  wizards  are  especially  resorted  to  for  the  relief
of  pain.

This  exorcist  puts  on  the  mirror  over  the  heart,  the  masker's
cope,  with  the  five  Bats  of  Fortune,  and  the  five-partite  chaplet
of  the  five  Jinas,  topped  by  skulls,  a  silken  girdle  (pah-den),  and
placing  a  cake  on  his  head,  he  calls  upon  Buddha  and  St.  Padma,
and  offers  a  libation^  and  incense  to  the  demons,  and  beating  a
large  drum  (not  a  tambourine  or  hautboy)  and  cymbals,  calls  on
the  several  country-gods  by  name,  sayi?ig :  Nd-K'ah  dira  de-den
sv^so-so  !  and  the  advent  of  the  deity  is  believed  to  be  seen  in
the  mirror. The  first  to  come  is  the  tutelary,  who  then  brings

1  They  somewhat  resemble  the  S^an-jorma  and  Pa-o  of  Sikhim,  but  are  not  devil-
dancers  like  the  latter.  Compare  also  with  the  witch-like  priestesses  called  "Day-
gals  "  of  the  Hunza  tribes  mentioned  by  Dr.  Leitner  as  the  mediums  of  the  divine
pleasure  and  supernatural  presence  being  manifest  by  ringing  of  bells,  etc.

2  ser-skyem.


NECEOMANCERS.  483


the  Ndgas,  dragon-demi-gods  and  the  Dre,  which  are  the  most
malignant  of  all  demons.

The  diviaing-arrow  is  then  taken  from  the  plate  of  flour  which
had  been  offered  to  these  demons,  and  its  blunted  point  is  put  on
the  affected  part.  The  Lha-ka  exorcist  now  applies  his  mouth
half-way  down  the  shaft,  and  sucks  forcibly.  On  this  a  drop  of
blood  appears  over  the  painful  part,  without  any  abrasion  of  skin,
and  evidently  dropped  by  sleight  of  hand  from  the  parti-coloured
ribbons  of  the  arrow.  It  is,  however,  considered  a  miracle,  and
the  patient  is  led  to  believe  that  the  demon  has  been  expelled
from  the  part.

The  commonest  sorcerer  is  called  Nag-pa  or  "  the  Expert  in
Incantations."  These  are  very  numerous  and  are  more  nearly
allied  than  the  Gh'o-je  to  the  original  type  of  the  Tibetan  devil-
dancer.  But  they  are  not  admitted  into  any  of  the  monasteries
of  the  reformed  and  semi-reformed  sects.

They  are  usually  illiterate,  they  marry  and  wear  a  peculiar
dress,  the  most  characteristic  part  of  which  is  the  tall  conical  hat
like  that  of  the  orthodox  western  witch,  and  pictured  at  page  475.
It  has,  however,  added  to  it  a  broad  rim  of  yak -hair  and  on  either
side  a  coiled  serpent,  and  it  is  surmounted  by  a  i;oyVa-topped  skull
and  peacock  feathers  with  long  streamers  of  the  five-coloured  silks
such  as  are  used  with  the  divining-arrow.

Their  special  weapons '  for  warring  with  the  demons  are : —

1.  The  Phurbu,  a  dagger  of  wood  or  metal  to  stab  the  denaons.  The
central  portion  is  in  the  form  of  a  f  o/ra-thunderbolt  which  is  the  part
held  in  the  wizard's  hand,  and  the  hilt-end  is  terminated  either  by  a
sample  fiend's-head,  or  by  the  same  surmounted  by  a  horse's  head,
representing  the  horse-headed  tutelary-devil  Tam-din.

2.  A  sword  with  thunderbolt-hilt.

3.  Sling,  bows  and  arrows.

4.  The  diviniag-arrow  (Dah-dar).  This  is  inserted  into  a  plate  of
flour  offered  to  the  demons.  Other  appliances  are  the  magic  triangle
(hun-hun)  containing  talismanic  sentences  within  which  the  wish  of
the  votary  is  inscribed  and  called  lin-ga.

A  sash  of  human  bones  (rus-rgyan)  carved  with  fiends  and
mystic  symbols  is  also  worn,  and  as  a  breast-plate  a  magic  mirror
of  metal  which  probably  is  identical  with  that  found  in  Taoism
and  Shintoism.

1  They  are  called  zm-,  and  the  edge  or  point  directed  against  the  demons  is  Zor-
kha.

II  2


484  SORCERY  AND  NECBOMANOT.


The  commonest  necromantic  rites  are  "  the  closing  of  the
doors  to  the  demons  of  the  earth  and  sky,"  the  exorcising  of  the
disease-demon,  the  death  ceremonies  as  a  whole,  expelling  the
death-demon,  the  lay  figure  of  the  deceased  and  its  rites,  etc.,
and  the  exorcising  of  ghosts.  And  I  here  give  some  details  of
these  rites.

Barring  the  Door  against  the  Earth-Demons.

The  Tibetan  genii  Loci  are  worshipped  in  a  way  presenting
many  parallels  to  the  Eoman  worship  of  their  iai'es,  the  horse-shoe
above  the  door  of  our  old-fashioned  houses,  and  the  skull-trophies
of  the  Indo-Chinese."^

The  local  erth-spirits  are  named  "  Master  Earth"  or  "Earth-
Masters,"  ^  and  are  comparable  to  the  terrestrial  Nagas  of  the
Hindiis.  The  most  malignant  are  the  "  gnan,"  who  infest
certain  trees  and  rocks,  which  are  always  studiously  shunned  and
respected,  and  usually  daubed  with  paint  in  adoration.

The  earth-demons  are  innumerable,  but  they  are  all  under  the
authority  of  "Old  mother  Khon-ma."  ^  She  rides  upon  a  ram,
and  is  dressed  in  golden  yellow  robes,  and  her  personal  attendant
is  "  Sa-thel-nag-po."  In  her  hand  she  holds  a  golden  noose,  and
her  face  contains  eighty  wrinkles.

The  ceremony  of  "  closing  the  door  of  the  earth,"  so  fre-
quently referred  to  in  the  Lamaist  prescriptions,  is  addressed  to
her.

In  this  rite  is  prepared  an  elaborate  arrangement  of  masts,
and  amongst  the  mystic  objects  of  the  emblem  the  strings,  etc. ;
most  prominent  is  a  ram's  skull  with  its  attached  horns,  and  it
is  directed  downwards  to  the  earth.

Inside  the  ram's  skull  is  put  some  gold  leaf,  silver,  turquoise,
and  portions  of  every  precious  object  available,  as  well  as  portions
of  dry  eatables,  rice,  wheat,  pulses,  etc.

On  the  forehead  is  painted  in  ochre-colour''  the  geomantic  sign


1  Certain  Himalayan  tribes  {e.g.  tlie  Linibu),  and  tlie  Lushais  (Riebeck's  Chittagmuj
Hilt  Tribes,  Lond.,  1882),  place  skulls  of  animals  outside  their  dwellings.  These,  I
beheve,  are  intended  less  as  trophies  than  as  charms  against  spirits.

'  Sa-bdag-po.

'  Apparently  derived  from  the  Chinese  name  of  the  Pa-Kva  for  "  earth."

*  The  symbolic  colour  of  the  earth.


Emblems  to  Bar  the  Demons.
For  the  earth-demons.  I'or  the  sky-demons.


486  SORCERY  AND  NECROMANCY.

of  the  park'a  Khon,  on  the  right  jaw  the  sun,  and  on  the  left  jaw

the  moon,  and  over  it  are  placed  masks,  around

which  are  wound  coloured  threads  in  geometric

patterns  ;  also  pieces  of  silk  (tarzab)  rag,  and

Chinese  brass  coins  (Aug.,  "  cash  ")  and  several paek'a  Khok.
wool-knobbed  sticks  (phan-k'ra).

Along  the  base  are  inserted  on  separate  slips  of  wood  the  follow-
ing images,  etc. :  1,  a  man's  picture;  2,  a  woman's  picture  with
a  spindle  in  her  hand ;  3,  a  house  picture ;  4,  a  tree  picture
(Jc'raTU-s'in)  ;  5,  figures  of  the  geomantic  signs  eight  Parkha  and
the  nine  Mewa.

The  whole  erection  is  now  fixed  to  the  outside  of  the  house
above  the  door ;  the  object  of  these  figures  of  a  man,  wife  and
house  is  to  deceive  the  demons  should  they  still  come  in  spite  of
this  offering,  and  to  mislead  them  into  the  belief  that  the  fore-
going pictures  are  the  inmates  of  the  house,  so  that  they  may
wreak  their  wrath  on  these  bits  of  wood  and  so  save  the  real
human  occupants.

Then  when  all  is  ready  and  fixed,  the  Ijama  turns  to  the  south-
west and  chants : —

"  0  !  0  !  ke  !  Ice  !  Through  the  nine  series  of  earths  you  are  known
as  Old  Mother  Khbn-ma,  the  mother  of  all  the  Sa-dak-po.  You  are
the  guardian  of  the  earth's  doors.  The  dainty  things  which  you  es-
pecially desire  we  herewith  offer,  namely,  a  white  skiill  of  a  ram,  on
whose  right  cheek  the  sun  is  shining  like  burnished  gold,  and  on  the
left  cheek  the  moon  gleams  dimly  like  a  conch-shell.  The  forehead
bears  the  sign  of  Khon,  and  the  whole  is  adorned  with  every  sort  of
silk,  wool,  and  precious  things,  and  it  is  also  given  the  spell  of  Khiin
(here  the  Lama  breathes  upon  it).  All  these  good  things  are  here
offered  to  you,  so  please  close  the  open  doors  of  the  earth  to  the  family
who  here  has  offered  you  these  things,  and  do  not  let  your  servant  Sa-
thel  ngag-po  and  the  rest  of  the  earth  spirits  do  harm  to  this  family.
By  this  offering  let  all  the  doors  of  the  earth  be  shut.  0  !  0  !  ke  !
he  !  Let  not  your  servants  injure  us  when  we  build  a  house  or  repair
this  one,  nor  when  we  are  engaged  in  marriage  matters,  and  let  every-
thing happen  to  this  family  according  to  their  wishes.  Do  not  be
angry  with  us,  but  do  us  the  favours  we  ask."  Here  the  priest  claps  his
hands  and  shouts  : —

"  Dm  kharal  dok  I  Dm  hliamrhil  dole  !  '  Benneu  swaha!"

'  "  The  images  of  men  and  women  made  of  wool  were  huug  in  the  streets,  and  so
many  balls  made  of  wool  as  there  were  servants  in  the  family,  and  so  many  complete
images  as  there  were  children  {Festus  pv.d  Lit.  Qyr). The  meaning  of  which  custom


BARRING  THE  DEMOSS.  487

Demons  of  the  Sky.

The  local-demons  of  the  sky  are  under  the  control  of  "  the
grandfather  of  the  three  worlds  "—Old  father  Khen-pa — who  is
represented  as  an  old  man  with  snow-white  hair,  dressed  in  white
robes  and  riding  on  the  white  dog  of  the  sky,  and  in  his  hand  he
carries  a  crystal  wand.  He  is  the  "  master  "  of  the  sky,  and  the
ceremony  named  nam-gd,  or  "the  closing  of  the  doors  of  the
sky,"  so  frequently  prescribed  by  the  astrologers,  is  addressed  to
him.

In  it  is  an  arrangement  of  masts,  threads,  images,  etc.,  exactly
similar  to  that  used  for  the  Earth-demons,  the  only  difference
being  that  in  this  case  a  dog's  skull  is  used  (note  that  the  dog
was  especially  associated  with  the  analogous  Lares  worship  of  the

Romans,')  and  it  is  directed  upwards,  pointing

to  the  sky;  and  the  sign  of  the  parkha  painted

on  the  forehead  is  that  of  Khen,  and  is  in  blue

colours. And  the  ceremony  is  the  same  except Parkha  Khen.
in  its  prelude  and  in  the  name  of  the  chief  servants  :-;—

"  0  !  0  !  we  turn  towards  the  western  sun,  to  the  celestial  mansion
where  the  sky  is  of  turquoise,  to  the  grandfather  of  the  three  worlds —
Old  Khen-pa,  the  master  of  the  sky.  Pray  cause  your  servant,  the
white  Nam-tel,  to  work  for  our  benefit,  and  send  the  great  planet
Pemba  (Saturn)  as  a  friendly  mes  enger,"  etc.,  etc.

Another  common  ceremony  of  a  necromantic  character  is  that
entitled  "  Prevention  from  injury  by  the  eight  classes  (of
demons).''  These  eight  classes  of  spirits  have  already  been
noted,  and  the  detailed  account  of  their  worship  has  been  given
by  me  elsewhere.^

The  demons  who  produce  disease,  short  of  actual  death,  are
called  She,  and  are  exorcised  by  an  elaborate  ceremony  in  which  a
variety  of  images  and  offerings  are  made.^  The  officiating  Lama
invokes  his  tutelary  fiend,  and  thereby  assuming  spiritually  the


was  this :  These  feasts  were  dedicated  to  the  Lares,  who  were  esteemed  infernal
gods ;  the  people  desiring  hereby  that  these  gods  would  be  contented  with  these
woollen  images  and  spare  the  persons  represented  by  them.  These  Lares  sometimes
were  clothed  in  the  skins  of  dogs  {Plutarch,  in  Proh.)  and  were  sometimes  fashioned  in
the  shape  of  dogs  (P/aMiiis),  whence  that  creature  was  consecrated  to  them." — Tooke's
Pantheon,  p.  280.

1  The  meaning  of  the  "  doh  "  is  "  let  all  evils  be  annihilated  !  "

2  Ldmaism  in  Sikhim.  ^  gsed.


488


SORCERY  AND  NECROMANCY.


dread  guise  of  this  king  evil,  he  orders  out  the  disease-demon
under  threat  of  getting  himself  eaten  up  by  the  awful  tutelary
who  now  possesses  the  Lama.  The  demons  are  stabbed  by  the
mystic  dagger  purba.  Charmed  seeds  and  pebbles,  consecrated
by  muttering  spells  over  them,  are  thrown  at  the  demon. The

charmed  seeds  are  stored  in  a
small  horn  (t'uoi-rva),  carved
with  scorpions,  caityas  and  var-
ious other  symbols  in  relief. "^

The  ritual  itself  is  a  curious
mixture  of  Indian  magic  cir-
cles with  Chinese  astrology  and
necromancy,  and  has  been  de-
tailed by  me  elsewhere.^


Death  Ceremonies.
As  the  rites  in  connection
with  a  death  include  a  consider-
able amount  of  devil  worship,
they  may  be  noticed  in  this
place.

On  the  occurrence  of  a  death
the  body  is  not  disturbed  in  any
way  until  the  Lama  has  ex-
tracted the  soul  in  the  orthodox
manner.  For  it  is  believed  that
any  movement  of  the  corpse
might  eject  the  soul,  which  then  Would  wander  about  in  an
irregular  manner  and  get  seized  by  some  demon.  On  death,
therefore,  a  white  cloth  is  thrown  over  the  face  of  the  corpse,  and
the  soul -extracting  Lama  ('^'o-feo)  is  sent  for.  On  his  arrival  all
weeping  relatives  are  excluded  from  the  death-chamber,  so  as  to
secure  solemn  silence,  and  the  doors  and  windows  closed,  and  the
Lama  sits  down  upon  a  mat  near  the  head  of  the  corpse,  and  com-
mences to  chant  the  service  which  contains  directions  for  the  soul
to  find  its  way  to  the  western  paradise  of  the  mythical  Buddha —
Amitabha.


Exorciseb's  Hobn.


1  For  the  Tartar  mode  of  exorcising  disease-demons,  of.  Hue,  i.,  75.
^  Ldmaism  in  Sik/um.


DEATH  RITES.  489


After  advising  the  spirit  to  quit  the  body  and  its  old  associations
and  attachment  to  property,  the  Lama  seizes  with  the  fore-finger
and  thumb  a  few  hairs  of  the  crown  of  the  corpse,  and  plucking
these  forcibly,  he  is  supposed  to  give  vent  to  the  spirit  of  the
deceased  through  the  roots  of  these  hairs;  and  it  is  generally
believed  that  an  actual  but  invisibly  minute  perforation  of  the
skull  is  thus  made,  through  which  the  liberated  spirit  passes.

The  spirit  is  then  directed  how  to  avoid  the  dangers  which  beset
the  road  to  the  western  paradise,  and  it  is  then  bid  god-speed.
This  ceremony  lasts  about  an  hour.

In  cases  where,  through  accident  or  otherwise,  the  body  of  the
deceased  is  not  forthcoming,  the  operation  for  extraction  of  the
soul  is  done  by  the  Lama  in  spirit  while  he  sits  in  deep  medita-
tion.

Meanwhile  the  astrologer-Lama  has  been  requisitioned  for  a
death-horoscope,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  requisite  ages  and  birth-
years  of  those  persons  who  may  approach  and  touch  the  corpse,
and  the  necessary  particulars  as  to  the  date  and  mode  of  burial,
as  well  as  the  worship  which  is  to  be  done  for  the  welfare  of  the
surviving  relatives.

The  nature  of  such  a  horoscope  will  best  be  understood  by  an
actual  example,  which  I  here  give.  It  is  the  death-horoscope  of  a
little  girl  of  two  years  of  age,  who  died  at  Darjiling  in  1890.

HAIL TO LAMA MANJUSRl  !

The  year  of  birth  of  this  female  was  the  Bull-year,  with  which  the
Snake  and  the  Sheep  are  in  conflict ;  therefore  those  individuals  born
in  the  Snake  and  the  Sheep  year  cannot  approach  the  corpse.  The
death-demon  was  hiding  in  the  house  inside  certain  coloured  articles,
and  he  now  has  gone  to  a  neighbouring  house  where  there  is  a  family
of  five  with  cattle  and  dogs  (therefore  that  other  family  needs  to  do
the  necessary  worship).  The  death-demon  will  return  to  the  house  of
the  deceased  within  three  months;  so  there  must  be  done  before  that
time  the  "  za-de-kha-gyur  "  service.

Her  Park'a  being  Bva  in  relation  to  her  death,  it  is  found  that  her
spirit  on  quitting  her  body  entered  her  loin  girdle  and  a  sword.  [In
this  case  the  affected  girdle  was  cast  away  and  the  sword  was  handed
over  to  the  Lama.]  Her  life  was  taken  to  the  east  by  Tsan  and  king
demons,  and  her  body  died  in  the  west ;  therefore,  small  girls,  cousins,
sisters  and  brothers  in  that  house  will  be  harmed.  The  deceased's
death  was  duo  to  Iron.  And  the  death-demon  came  from  the  south  and
has  gone  to  the  east.


490  SORCERY  AND  NECROMANCY.

Her  Mewa  gives  the  "  3rd  Indigo  blue."  Tlius  it  was  the  death-
demon  of  the  deceased's  paternal  grandfather  and  grandmother  who
caused  her  death;  therefore  take  (1)  a  Sats-ts'a  (a  miniature  earthern
caitya),  and  (2)  a  sheep's  head,  and  (3)  earth  from  a  variety  of  sites,
and  place  these  upon  the  body  of  the  deceased,  and  this  evil  will  be
corrected.

The  Day  of  lier  Death  was  Friday.  Take  to  the  north-west  a  leather
bag  or  earthern  pot  in  which  have  been  placed  four  or  five  coloured
articles,  and  throw  it  away  as  the  death-demon  goes  there.  The  death
having  so  happened,  it  is  very  bad  for  old  men  and  women.  On  this
account  take  a  horse's  skull, '  or  a  serpent's  skull  ^  and  place  it  upon  the
corpse.

Her  Death  Star  is  Gre.  Her  brother  and  sister  who  went  near  to
her  are  harmed  by  the  death-messenger  (s'in-je).  Therefore  an  ass's
skull  and  a  goat's  skull  must  be  placed  on  the  corpse.

Her  Death  Hotjk  was  soon  after  sunset.  And  in  the  twelfth  month
her  life  was  cut.  The  death-demon  therefore  arrived  in  the  earthern
cooking  pot  and  bowl  of  a  man  and  woman  visitor  dressed  in  red  who
came  from  the  south.  Thus  the  deceased's  father  and  mother  are
harmed,  and  especially  so  if  either  is  bom  in  the  Sheep-year.

Precautions  to  secure  a  Good  Ee-bieth. — It  is  necessary  to  prepare  an
image  of  Vajrapani,  Vajrasattva,  and  before  these  to  have  prayer^
done  for  the  good  re-birth  of  the  girl's  spirit.  If  this  be  done,  then  she
will  be  re-born  in  the  house  of  a  rich  man  in  the  west.

For  deceased's  Spirit. — It  is  necessary  to  get  the  Lamas  to  read  the
service  (smon-lam)  praying  for  re-birth  in  the  Paradise  of  Sukhavatl.

For  Survivors  of  family. — It  is  necessary  to  have  read  the  prayers
for  long  life,  viz.,  "  ts'e-mdo  ''  and  "  ts'e-gsuns."

Directions  for  Removal  of  Corpse. — Those  who  remove  the  corpse
must  have  been  born  in  the  Dog  or  the  Dragon  year.  The  body  must
be  taken  outside  of  the  house  on  the  morning  of  the  third  day  follow-
ing the  death,  and  it  must  be  carried  to  the  south-west,  and  be  buried
(not  burned,  or  abandoned  to  birds  or  dogs).

On  obtaining  this  death-horoscope  the  body  is  tied  up  in  a  sit-
ting posture  by  the  auspicious  person  indicated  by  the  horoscope,
and  placed  in  a  corner  of  the  room  which  is  not  already  occupied
by  the  house-demon.

Notice  is  sent  to  all  relatives  and  friends  within  reach,  and
these  collect  within  two  or  three  days  and  are  entertained  with
food  of  rice,  vegetables,  etc.,  and  a  copious  supply  oi  murwaheei

1  A  fragment  of  such  a  skull  or  its  image  made  of  dough  is  usually  all  that  is
used.

2  Dough  also  will  do.

3  It  has  frequently  been  asserted  that  no  prayer  is  practised  in  Lamaism. This  is
not  true :  real  prayer  is  frequently  done ;  the  word  used  here  in  i/sol-wa-^/tab.


TIBETAN  WAKES.  491


and  tea.  This  company  of  visitors  remain  loitering  in  and  around
the  house,  doing  great  execution  with  hand-prayer-wheels  and
muttering  the  "  Om-mani,"  until  the  expulsion  of  the  death-
demon,  which  follows  the  removal  of  the  body,  and  in  which  cere-
mony they  all  have  to  join.  The  expense  of  the  entertainment  of
so  large  a  company  is  of  course  considerable.

During  this  feasting,  which  is  suggestive  of  an  Irish  "  wake,"
the  deceased  is  always,  at  every  meal,  offered  his  share  of  what  is
going,  including  tobacco,  etc.  His  own  bowl  is  kept  filled  with
beer  and  tea  and  set  down  beside  the  corpse,  and  a  portion  of  all
the  other  eatables  is  always  offered  to  him  at  meal  times  ;  and
after  the  meal  is  over  his  portion  is  thrown  away,  as  his  spirit  is
supposed  to  have  extracted  all  the  essence  of  the  food,  which  then
no  longer  contains  nutriment,  and  is  fit  only  to  be  thrown  away.
And  long  after  the  corpse  has  been  removed,  his  cup  is  regularly
filled  with  tea  or  beer  even  up  till  the  forty-ninth  day  from  death,
as  his  spirit  is  free  to  roam  about  for  a  maximum  period  of  forty-
nine  days  subsequent  to  death.

And  to  feed  the  rrutnes  of  the  deceased  is  done  a  sacrifice  for
the  dead,  called  Tiii-s'ag,  suggestive  of  the  Indian  Buddhist
practice  of  Avalafmhana^  and  the  Hindii  rite  of  Sradh."  In
this  sacrifice  a  cake  and  a  quantity  of  rice  are  thrown  into  the
nearest  stream  or  river,  after  having  called  the  spirits  by  means  of
a  small  gong  struck  by  a  horn,  and  the  chanting  by  six  or  more
Lamas  of  the  eake-offering-service,'  followed  by  the  repetition  by
them  of  a  'mantra  to  the  number  if  possible  of  100,000  times.*

The  soul  is  now  assisted  in  winging  its  way  to  the  western
paradise  by  a  group  of  Lamas  who  chant  by  relays  all  night  and
day  the  litany  for  sending  the  soul  directly  to  that  paradise. And


1  As  a  festival  (in  Cliina  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  seventh  month),  cf.  Eitel
Handb.  "  Ulamba  " ;  Eeal,  The  Oriental,  Nov.  6th,  1875,  showing  that  the  Avalambana
sutra  of  sacrifice  for  the  dead  was  translated  into  Chinese,  drca  265  a.d.  Also  in
Ceylon,  Hakdy's  JfttK.,  p.  59.  It  is  still  kept  in  Europe:  "Even  at  the  cemetery  of
Pere  Lachaise,  they  still  put  cakes  and  sweetmeats  on  the  graves ;  and  in  Brittany  the
peasants  do  not  forget  to  make  up  the  fire,  and  leave  the  fragments  of  the  supper  on
the  table  for  the  souls  of  the  dead  of  the  family  who  will  come  to  visit  their  home."
Tyloe's  Anthrop.,  p.  351.

^  Theatre  of  the  Hindus,  i.,  322,  n.

'  Namo  sarva  Tathagata  Avalokita  om  Sambhara  hum.

■'  On  feeding  the  corpse,  cf.,  Taylor's  Pi-im.  Gult.,  i.,  482 ;  Spencer's  Sociology,  i.,
157,  206 ;  Farebr's  Primitive  Manners,  21 ;  Lady  Wildes,  I?-isk  Legends,  118, 140.


492


SORCERY  AND  NECROMANCY.


a  special  reading  of  this  service  by  the  assembled  monks  in  the
neighbouring  monastery  is  also  arranged  for  by  those  who  can
afford  the  expense.

One  or  more  Lamas  also  read  over  the  corpse  the  guide  ^  for  the
spirit's  passage  through  the  valley  of  horrors  intervening  between
death  and  a  new  re-birth.  This  passage  is  somewhat  suggestive  of
Bunyan's  "Pilgrim's  Progress,"  only  the  demons  and  dangers
which  beset  the  way  are  much  more  numerous  and  awful. Full


Summoning  the  Hungky  Demons.


directions  are  read  out  for  the  benefit  of  the  deceased  as  to  how
to  avoid  these  pitfalls  and  ogres,  and  how  to  find  the  proper  white
coloured  path  which  alone  leads  to  a  good  re-birth.

It  is,  however,  rather  incongruous  to  find  that  while  the  Lama
reading  this  service  is  urging  the  spirit  to  bestir  itself  to  the
necessary  exertions  for  a  good  re-birth,  the  other  Lama  by  his  side
in  the  De-wa-chan  service  is  sending  the  spirit  direct  to  the
western  paradise — a  non-Buddhist  invention  which  is  outside  the
regions  of  re-birth.


1  t'os-gi-ol.


RELEASING  FROM  HELL.  •  493

At  this  stage  it  often  happens,  though  it  is  scarcely  considered
orthodox,  that  some  Lamas  find,  as  did  Maudgalayana  by  his  second-
sight,  consulting  their  lottery-books,  that  the  spirit  has  been  sent  to
hell,  and  the  exact  compartment  in  hell  is  specified.  Then  must  be
done  a  most  costly  service,  by  a  very  large  number  of  Lamas.
First  of  all  is  done  "  virtue  "  on  behalf  of  the  deceased  ;  this  con-
sists in  making  offerings  to  the  Three  Collections,  namely :  To
the  Gods  (sacred  food,  lamps,  etc.) ;  to  the  Lamas  (food  and
presents) ;  to  the  Poor  (food,  clothes,  beer,  etc.).

The  virtue  resulting  from  these  charitable  acts  is  supposed  to  tell
in  favour  of  the  spirit  in  hell.  Then  many  more  expensive  services
must  be  performed,  and  especially  the  propitiation  of  "  The  Great
Pitying  One,"  for  his  intercession  with  the  king  of  hell  (a  form  of
himself)  for  the  release  of  this  particular  spirit.  Avalokita  is  be-
hind to  terminate  occasionally  the  torment  of  tortured  souls  by
casting  a  lotus-flower  at  them.  Even  the  most  learned  and  ortho-
dox Lamas  believe  that  by  celebrating  these  services  the  release
of  a  few  of  the  spirits  actually  in  hell  may  be  secured.^  But  in
practice  every  spirit  in  hell  for  whom  its  relatives  pay  suffi-
ciently may  be  released  by  the  aid  of  the  Lamas.  Sometimes
a  full  course  of  the  necessary  service  is  declared  insufficient,  as  the
spirit  has  only  got  a  short  way  out  of  hell, — very  suggestive  of
the  story  of  the  priest  and  his  client  in  Lever's  story, — and  then
additional  expense  must  be  incurred  to  secure  its  complete  ex-
traction.

Before  removing  the  corpse  from  the  house,  an  especial  feast  of
delicacies,  including  pork  and  drink  of  'sorts,  are  set  before  it.
And  a  Lama  presenting  a  "  scarf  of  honour  "  to  the  corpse  thus
addresses  it : —

"  You  !  (and  here  the  deceased's  name  is  stated)  now  have  received
from  your  relatives  all  this  good  food  and  drink  ;  partake  freely  of  its
essence,  as  you  shall  not  have  any  more  chances  !  For  you  must  under-
stand that  you  have  died,  and  your  spirit  must  be  gone  from  here,  and
never  come  back  again  to  trouble  or  injure  your  relatives. Eemember

the  name  of  your  Lama-teacher,  which  is ,  and  by  his

aid  take  the  right  path — the  white  one. Come  this  way !  "

Then  the  Lama  with  a  thigh-bone  trumpet  in  the  one  hand  and
a  hand-drum  in  the  other,  and  taking  the  end  of  a  long  white


Cf.  page  98  for  Maudgalayana  releasing  his  mother.


494  •  SORCERY  AND  NECROMANCY.

scarf,'  the  other  end  of  which  has  been  tied  to  the  corpse,  he  pre-
cedes the  carrier  of  the  corpse  blowing  his  trumpet  and  beating
the  drum  and  chanting  a  liturgy.  This  scene  is  figured  in  the
Wheel  of  Life,  in  the  upper  part  of  its  human  compartment.

He  frequently  looks  back  to  invite  the  spirit  to  accompany  the
body,  which  he  assures  it  is  being  led  in  the  right  direction.  And
the  corpse-bearer  is  followed  by  the  rest  of  the  procession,  some
bearing  refreshments,  and  last  of  all  come  the  weeping  relatives.
The  ceremony  of  guiding  the  deceased's  spirit  is  only  done  for  the
laity — the  spirits  of  deceased  Lamas  are  credited  with  a  know-
ledge of  the  proper  path,  and  need  no  such  instruction.  The  body
is  usually  carried  to  the  top  of  a  hillock  for  burial  or  cremation.

The  corpse  is  cremated  with  much  ceremony,  including  some
interesting  worship  of  the  Fire-god  Agni,  as  well  as  of  Avalokita,
the  Grreat-hearted  Pitying  Lord.^

But  the  cremation  or  interment  of  the  corpse  does  not  terminate
the  death-rites.  There  needs  still  to  be  made  a  masked  lay  figure
of  the  deceased,  and  the  formal  burning  of  the  mask  and  the  ex-
pulsion from  the  house  of  the  death-demon  and  other  rites.

Expelling  the  DEATH-DEMOPf.

This  rite  for  expelling  from  the  house  and  locality  the  demon
who  caused  the  death  must  be  done  within  two  days  after  the
removal  of  the  corpse.  It  is  called  "  The  turning  away  of  the  face
of  the  Destroying  J^evil."  ^

This  ceremony,  of  the  nature  of  a  sacrifice,  as  well  as  exorcism,
has  been  detailed  by  me  elsewhere.*

1  The  scarf  used  in  the  funeral  procession  may  probably  represent  the  Chinese
h  nrin-fan,  or  "  soul's  banner,"  "which  is  carried  before  the  coifin  in  China.

2  As  detailed  in  the  book  "  the  deliverance  of  the  entire  animal  (world)  by  the
revered  Grreat  Pitying  On§  ('gro-wa-Kun-grol)."

3  Za-'dre  K'a-sgyur.

*  Ldmaism  in  Sikhim  ;  part  of  its  ritual  is  the  following : —

On  a  small  wooden  platform  is  made  the  image  of  a  tiger  by  means  of  the  grass  and
mud  plaster ;  it  is  fashioned  in  a  walking  attitude,  with  mouth  wide  open.  The  mouth
and  tusks  are  made  of  a  dough,  and  the  body  is  coloured  with  yellow  and  brown
stripes,  in  imitation  of  a  tiger's  markings,  and  around  its  neck  is  tied  a  rope  of  threads
of  five  colours.

Then  a  small  image  of  a  man  is  made  by  kneaded  dough,  in  which  are  incorporated
iilings  from  the  alloy  of  the  five  precious  things.  Into  the  belly  of  this  image,
which  is  called  "the  eating-demon,"  is  inserted  a  piece  of  paper,  on  which  is  written
the  following  banishing  spell : "  Go,  thou  devouring  devil,  having  your  face  turned


EXPELLING  DEATH-DEVIL.  495

The  Lay  Figure  of  Deceased,  and  its  Rites.

The  day  on  which  the  corpse  was  removed  a  lay  figure  of  the
deceased  is  made  by  dressing  a  stool  or  block  of  wood  in  the
clothes  of  the  deceased,  and  as  a  face  a  mask  is  inserted  of  printed


to  the  enemy  ! " It  is  then  clad  in  pieces  of  silk,  and  is  placed  sitting  astride  the
tiger's  back.

Another  figure  is  of  human  form,  but  with  the  head  of  a  bird.  Its  face  is  painted
red,  in  its  belly  is  inserted  paper  on  -which  is  written,  "  You  devouring  devil,  don't
remain  in  this  village,  but  go  to  the  enemy's  country."  It  is  then  placed  in  front  of
the  tiger,  and  is  made  to  hold  the  free  end  of  the  rope  attached  to  the  tiger's  neck,  as
a  groom.

Another  figure  of  human  shape,  b^  with  an  ape's  head,  is  placed  behind  as
driver.

Then  around  these  figures  strew  morsels  of  every  kind  of  eatables,  grains,  fruits,
spices,  including  raw  meat  and  wine  ;  also  a  few  small  coins  of  silver  and  copper.

The  following  weapons  are  then  enchanted  for  the  conflict,  viz.,  pieces  of  iron,
copper,  small  stones,  preferably  of  white  and  black  colours,  grains,  the  root  of  rampu
for  the  use  of  the  Lamas.  And  for  the  lay  army  of  the  household  and  neighbours,  a,
sword,  knives,  reaping  hook,  yak's  tail,  a  rope  of  yak's  hair  with  hook  at  end  as
figured  with  the  fierce  G-'ore-^a-demons.

When  these  preparations  are  completed  a^id  the  sun  has  set — for  demons  can  only
move  in  the  darkness — then  the  ceremony  begins.  The  head  Lama  invokes  his  tute-
lary deity  to  assist  him  in  the  expulsion  of  the  death-demon.  And  with  an  impreca-
tory gesture  blows  his  breath  spiritualized  by  his  tutelary  deity  upon  the  images.
And  the  other  Lamas  loudly  beat  a  large  drum,  cymbals  and  a  pair  of  thigh-bone
trumpets.  And  the  laymen  armed  with  the  aforementioned  weapons  loudty  shout
and  wildly  cut  the  air  with  their  weapons,  crying  "  Bee/one  I "

After  a  long  incantation  the  Lama  concludes  :  "0  death-demon  do  thou  now  leave
this  house  and  go  and  oppress  our  enemies.  We  have  given  you  food,  fine  clothes
and  money.  Now  be  oif  far  from'  here  !  Begone  to  the  country  of  our  enemies  1  !
Begone  ! ! !  "  And  the  Lama  smites  his  palms  together,  while  the  other  Lamas  beat
their  drums,  etc.,  and  the  laymen  wield  their  weapons,  shouting  "  Begone  ! "
"  Begone  !  "  Amid  all  this  uproar  the  platform  containing  the  image  and  its  atten-
dants is  hfted  up  by  a  layman,  one  of  the  relatives,  selected  according  to  the
astrologer's  indications,  who  holding  it  breast  high,  at  arm's  length,  carries  it  out-
side, attended  by  the  Lamas  and  laity,  shouting  "  Begone  ! "  and  flourish  their
weapons.  And  it  is  carried  off  for  about  one-eighth  of  a  mile  in  the  direction  pre-
scribed by  the  astrologer  of  the  eneihy  of  the  people,  and  deposited,  if  possible,  at  a
site  where  four  roads  meet.

Meanwhile,  to  make  sure  that  the  demon  is  not  yet  lurking  in  some  corner  of  the  room,
the  sorcerer-Lama  (Ngag-pa)  remains  behind  with  a  dorje  in  Ms  right  hand  and  a  bell  in
his  left,  and  with  the  dorje  he  makes  frantic  passes  in  all  directions,  muttering  spells,
and  with  the  forefinger  and  thumb  of  the  right  hand,  without  relinqmshing  the  dorje,
he  throws  in  all  directions  hot  peebles  which  have  been  toasted  in  the  fire,  muttering
his  charms,  and  concludes  : —

"  Dispel  from  this  family  all  the  sorceric  injury  of  Pandits  and  Eons  !  !  etc.  Turn  all
these  to  our  enemy  !  Begone !  "  Afterwards  the  Lama,  addressing  the  people,  says,
■"  Now  by  these  angry  spells  the  demon  is  expelled !  0 1  Happiness !  "  Then  thf
people  triumphantly  shout :  "  God  has  won  !  The  Demons  are  defeated  !  ! "


496


SORCERY  AND  NECROMANCY.


paper,^  here  figured. Schlagintweit,  in  giving  a  specimen  of  one
form of this print,^ has mistaken its meaning. The figure

in  the  centre  is  not  "  the
Lord  of  the  Genii  of  Fire,"
but  it  is  merely  intended
to  represent  the  spirit  of
the  deceased  person  who
sits  or  kneels,  and  some-
times with  the  legs  bound,
in  an  attitude  of  adoration.
And  before  this  paper
figure,  occupying  the  posi-
tion of  the  face,  are  set  all
sorts  of  food  and  drink  as
was  done  to  the  actual
corpse.

This  seems  essentially  a
B6n-pa  rite,  and  is  referred
to  as  such  in  the  histories
of  St.  Padma,  as  being
practised  by  the  Bon,  and
as  having  incurred  the
displeasure  of  St.  Padma-
sambhava,  the  founder  of
Lamaism.

The  Lamas  then  do  the  service  of  the  eight  highest  Buddhas


The  Effigy  of  the  Dead  Person.

1,  Mirror. 3.  Lyre.

2.  CoDoh. 4.  Vase  with  flowers.

6.  Holy  Cake.


1  mts'an-spyan,  or  "  Jan-ku.''  Compare  with  the  mortuary  masks  of  ancient  Greeks,
Noi-th  American  Indians,  and  E.  R.  Emerson's  Masks,  Heads,  and  Faces,  pp.  152,  etc.
Its  inscription  usually  runs : —

"  I,  the  world-departing  One,  .  .  .  (and  here  is  inserted  name  of  the  deceased),
adore  and  take  refuge  in  my  Lama-confessor,  and  all  the  deities,  both  mild  and  wrath-
ful, and  'the  Great  Pitier'  forgive  my  accumulated  sins  and  impurities  of  former
lives,  and  show  me  the  right  way  to  another  good  world  !  "

And  in  the  margin  or  adown  the  middle  of  the  figure  are  inscribed  in  symbolic  form
— by  the  initial  letter  of  the  Sanskrit  title — the  sixth  states  of  rebirth,  viz.,  su  =  Sura,
a  god;  A  =  as«ra,  NA  =  Xara  or  man,  tei=  Tnyafcor  beast,  PKE  =  p'etoor  Glwst,B.VM  =
hell.  (This  also  is  a  mystic  interpretation  of  Avalokita's  mantra,  the  sixth  syllable
of  which  is  made  to  mean  hell,  and  is  coloured  black.)

Around  the  figure  are  depicted  "the  five  excellent  sensuous  things,"  viz.,  (1)  body
(as  a  mirror),  (2)  sound  (as  cymbals,  a  conch,  and  sometimes  a  lyre),  (3)  smell  (a vase
of  flowers),  (4)  essence  or  nutriment  (holy  cake),  (5)  dress  (silk  clothes,  etc.).

2  Op.  cit.,  p.  252.


BURNING  THE  EFFIGT  OF  TME  DEAD.  497

of  Medicine,  and  also  continue  the  service  of  the  western
paradise.

Next  day  the  Lamas  depart,  to  return  once  a  week  for  the
repetition  of  this  service  until  the  forty-nine  days  of  the  ghostly
Umbo  have  expired;  but  it  is  usual  to  intermit  one  day  of  the  first
week,  and  the  same  with  the  succeeding  periods,  so  as  to  get  the
worship  over  within  a  shorter  time.  Thus  the  Lamas  return  after
six,  five,  four,  three,  two,  and  one  days  respectively,  and  thus  con-
clude this  service  in  about  three  weeks  instead  of  the  full  term  of
forty-nine  days.

Meanwhile  the  lay  figure  of  the  deceased  remains  in  the  house
in  its  sitting  posture,  and  is  giyen  a  share  of  each  meal  until  the
service  is  concluded  by  the  burning  of  the  mask.

On  the  conclusion  of  the  full  series  of  services,  the  paper-
mask  is  ceremoniously  burned  in  the  flame  of  a  butter-lamp,  and
the  spirit  is  thus  given  its  final  co'ngL  And  according  to  the
colour  and  quality  of  the  flame  and  mode  of  burning  is  determined
the  fate  of  the  spirit  of  deceased,  and  this  process  usually  discovers
the  necessity  for  further  courses  of  worship/

The  ashes  of  this  burned  paper  are  carefully  collected  in  a  plate
and  are  then  mixed  with  clay  to  form  one  or  more  miniature
Caityas named Sa-tsch'a.^ One of these  is retailed for the


1  The  directions  for  noting  and  interpreting  the  signs  of  this  burning  paper  are  con-
tained in  a  small  pamphlet  which  I  have  translated,  entitled:  "  The.  ■mode  of  Dimning
the  signs  of  The  Flames  dnHng  the  Burning  of  the  '  Chang' paper,"  which  I  have  trans-
lated in  full  in  Ldmaism  in  Silchim. It  begins  : —

Salutation  to  "  Ch'e-mch'og,  Heruka,"  or  the  "  The  most  Supreme  Heruka  !  "  The
marking  of  the  five  colours  of  the  flames  is  as  follows  :—

If  the  flames  be  white  and  shining,  then  he  has  become  perfect  and  is  born  in  the
highest  region  of  Ok-min  (i.e..  The  supreme  paradise).

If  the  flames  be  white  and  burn  actively  with  round  tops,  then  he  has  become  pious
and  is  born  in  the  eastern  "  mngon-dgah,"  or  "  The  Paradise  of  Real  Happiness."

If  they  burn  in  an  expanded  form,  resemblmg  a  lotus  {padma),  then  he  has  finished
his  highest  deeds  and  has  become  rehgious.

If  they  be  yellow  in  colour  and  burn  in  the  shape  of  "  j-gyal-mtshan,"  or  "Banner  ct
Victorv,"  then  he  has  become  religious  nobly.

If  they  be  red  in  colour  and  in  form  like  a  lotus,  then  he  has  become  religious  and
is  born  in  Me-wa-chan,  or  "  The  Paradise  of  Happiness."

If  they  be  yellow  in  colour  and  burn  actively  with  great  masses  of  smoke,  then  he  is
born  in  the  region  of  the  lower  animals,  for  counteracting  which  a  (/tsug-lag-khang,  or
"An  Academy,"  and  an  image  of  the  powerful  and  able  Dhyani  Buddha  (roang-par-
™ang-»»dsad)  should  be  made ;  then  he  will  be  born  as  a  chief  in  the  middle  country
(i.e.,  The  Buddhist  Holy  Land  in  India). ....

^  Representing  the  d/iarma  sanra  of  Indian  Buddhism.

K  K


498  SORGEEY  AND  NEGB.OMANCY.

household  altar,  and  the  others  are  carried  to  any  liill  near  at  hand,
where  they  are  deposited  under  a  projecting  ledge  of  a  rock,  to
shelter  them  from  the  disintegrating  rain.

On  the  burning  of  this  paper  the  lay  figure  of  the  deceased  is  dis-
mantled, and  the  clothes  are  presented  to  the  Lamas,  who  carry
them  off  and  sell  them  to  any  purchasers  available  and  appropriate
the  proceeds.

After  the  lapse  of  one  year  from  death  it  is  usual  to  give  a  feast
in  honour  of  the  deceased  and  to  have  repeated  the  service  of  the
medical  Buddhas.  On  the  conclusion  of  this  service,  should  the
deceased  have  left  a  widow  or  widower,  the  latter  is  then  free  to
re-marry.

To  Exorcise  Ghosts.

The  manes  of  the  departed  often  trouble  the  Tibetans  as  well
as  other  peoples,^  and  special  rites  are  necessary  to  "  lay  "  them  and
bar  their  return.  A  ghost  is  always  malicious,  and  it  returns  and
gives  trouble  either  on  account  of  its  malevolence,  or  its  desire  to
see  how  its  former  property  is  being  disposed  of.  In  either  case
its  presence  is  noxious.  It  makes  its  presence  felt  in  dreams  or
by  making  some  individual  delirious  or  temporarily  insane.  Such
a  ghost  is  disposed  of  by  being  burned.^

For  the  foregoing  necromantic  services  the  dough  images
required  as  sacrificial  effigies  are  made  from  wooden  moulds,  and
the  practice  is  evidently  borrowed  from  the  Bon-pa  rites  which
entailed  sacrifices  of  animal  life. But  instead  of  the  animals

1  On  barring  the  retui'n  of  ghosts,  cf.  Wilson's  Essays,  ii.,  292 ;  Tyler's  Prim.  Gult,
ii.,  126 ;  Spencer's  Principles  of  Sociology,  i.,  147-  The  Chinese  call  the  Dead  or  Manes
of  men  Kwei,  alleged  to  mean  the  malicious  two-legged  ghost  (Jas.  Lbgge,  The  Rdigs.  of
China,  p.  13),  showing  that  they  did  not  think  that  man  when  he  was  dead  had  all
ceased  to  be.

3  For  this  purpose  a  very  large  gathering  of  Lamas  is  necessary,  not  less  than
eight,  and  a  "  burnt  offering "  (sbyin-sregs)  is  made.  On  a,  platform  of  mud
and  stone  outside  the  house  is  made,  with  the  usual  rites,  a  magic-circle  or  "  kyil-
'kAor,"  and  inside  this  is  drawn  a  triangle  named  "  huh-huh."  Small  sticks  are  then
laid  along  the  outline  of  the  triangle,  one  piled  above  the  other,  so  as  to  make  a
hollow  three-sided  pyramid,  and  around  this  are  piled  up  fragments  of  every  avail-
able kind  of  food,  stone,  tree-twigs,  leaves,  poison,  bits  of  dress,  money,  etc.,  to  the
number  of  over  100  sorts.  -Then  oil  is  poui'ed  over  the  mass,  and  the  pile  set  on  Are.
During  the  combustion  additional  fragments  of  the  miscellaneous  ingredients  reserved
for  the  purpose  are  thrown  in,  from  time  to  time,  by  the  Lamas,  accompanied  by  a
muttering  of  spells.  And  ultimately  is  thrown  into  the  flames  a  piece  of  paper  on
which  is  written  the  name  of  the  deceased  person — always  a  relative — whose  ghost
is  to  be  suppressed.  When  this  paper  is  consumed  the  particular  ghost  has  received
its  quietus,  and  never  can  give  trouble  again.


BAIN-UUMl'Ehhiiy  br.  499

themselves  only  their  dough-images  aire  now  offered.  At  page  424
are  given  ink  prints  from  the  original  dough  moulds,  reduced  to
one-fourth  of  their  size;  the  moulds  are  carved  in  longitudinal
series  on  the  four  faces  of  a  block  of  wood.  The  B6n-pa  moulds
are  called  "The  God's  food  to  go  to  the  Thousand.'"
Eain  Compelling.

Even  the  so-called  reformer  of  Lamaism,  Tsoh-K'a-pa,  seems  him-
self to  have  practised  sorcery.  The  orthodox  mode  of  compel-
ling rain  in  use  by  the  established  church  is  identified  with  his
name;  andis  done  according  to  the  instructions  contained  in  a  book  ^
of  which  he  is  the  accredited  author,  and  which  seems  to  be  based
upon  the  Naga  worship  as  contained  in  the  Siitra  "  on  asking  Rain
of  the  Great  Cloud," '  and  may  be  compared  with  the  method  used
by  the  Mongols.*

The  officiating  Lama  bathes  and  cleans  the  place  of  worship  and
sets  down  an  image  of  Tsoh-K'a-pa  and  non-poisonous  flowers,
grains  and  a  white  cake,  and  a  jewelled  vase  (or  if  no  jewelled
vase  a  pure  white  one  may  be  used  washed  over  with  chalk  and
sandal  wood),  and  inside  the  vase  place  pellets  made  of  dough,  spice
and  flowers,  and  over  each  ball  say  the  mantra  of  Yama  or  Tson-
K'a-pa^  one  hundred  and  eight  times  (or  twenty-one  or  seven  times),
and  blow  over  it  and  insert  all  the  pellets  in  the  vase  and  cover  it
by  a  red  cloth  and  thus  address  the  Nagas  : —

"  O  !  all  ye  Nagas  great  and  small  I  come  not  to  harm  you  but  to
ask  rain  for  the  good  of  the  world,  and  especially  for  this  place.  It  is;
the  command  of  Tson-K'a-pa  that  ye  obey.  And  if  you  do  not,  then
by  my  mantra  spells  I  will  break  your  heads  to  atoms.  Give  it  there-
fore without  delay  and  leave  not  this  place  till  rain  falls."

Then  he  places  three  stones  at  each  of  the  four  corners  and
repeats  the  names  of  the  Jinas  or  celestial  Buddhas  of  the  four

1  sTton-rgyas  Iha-bsaiis.  ^  dmigs  brtse-mai  las  ts'ogs.

'  bc'ig  las  c'ar  'bebs  skor. Compare  with  The  MahdmeglM  iSutra,  translated  by
Prof.  C.  Bendall,  J.R.A.S.,  xii,,  pp.  288-311.

i  Among  the  Mongols  the  soothsayers  throw  bezoar  stones  on  the  water  and  these
produce  vapor,  which  it  is  pretended  is  the  element  of  clouds — but  they  don't  operate
unless  the  sky  looks  rainy,  and  if  they  fail  they  excuse  themselves  on  the  plea  that
other  magicians  have  counteracted  them. E.  Eehatsek,  Bombay  Br.  R.  A.  S.  Jmir.
xiii.,  p.  188.  '  The  so-called  Miy-tse-ma : —

dmigs  med  brtse  pahi  gter  ch'en  spyan-ras  gzigs
Dri-med  mk'yen-pahi  dbang  po  'jam-pai  '6yam
Gaiis  ch'an  mk'as  pai  gtsug  rgyan  Ts'on-k'a-pa
bLo-bzan  grag*  pahi  z'abs  la  gsol-wa-'debs.

K  K  2


500


SORCERY  AND  NECROMANCY.


directions.  And  he  conceals  the  vase  and  its  pellets  in  the  water
of  a  spring  in  such  a  way  that  it  cannot  be  seen ;  and  he  erects  in
front  a  small  white  tent,  within  which  he  places  St.  Tson-K'a-pa's
image,  and  the  five  kinds  of  offerings  (cake,  water,  flowers,  lamps,
fruit  and  grain).  And  he  calls  on  the  location-god  for  assistance
and  goes  on  repeating  Tson-K'a-pa's  'mantra  and  conceives  that  on
each  lamp  a  glorious  image  of  Tson-K'a-pa  appears  seated  upon
a  Naga  and  raining  down  cleansing  ambrosia  upon  them,  and  that
they  sparkle  with  delight  and  dart  their  lightning  into  the  sky
where  clouds  gather  and  the  thunder-dragons  roar,  and  rain
falls.  Then,  naively  adds  the  scripture,  real  rain  wiU  certainly
come.


Thundek-Dbagons  of  the  Sky.


501


XIX.

FESTIVALS AND HOLIDAYS.


HE  regular  Buddhist  festivals '  are  all  found  in  Lamaism,
and  many  more  besides  of  an  indigenous  and  local
origin,  related  to  demonist  cults,  or  the  worship  of
Nature.

Originally,  in  Buddha's  day,  the  days  of  the  new'*  and  full  moon
were  set  apart  for  fasting,  confession,  and  listening  to  the  Law,
and  this  institution  is  strictly  observed  in  Lamaism.

On  the  first  and  fifteenth  days  of  each  lunar  month  no  animal
food  should  be  taken,  even  by  the  laity,  and  no  animal  killed,^  and
only  on  these  days  are  many  of  the  great  cathedrals  and  temples
in  Tibet  open  to  the  public.  These  days,  however,  were  afterwards
increased  to  three  or  four,*  so  that  many  monks  observe  a  fast  four
days  monthly,  and  hence  has  arisen  the  idea  of  some  writers  that
there  is  a  Tibetan  Sabbath  ^ ;  though  the  public  service  and  con-

1  'du»-ch'en.  nam-gaii.

On  the  reconversion  of  the  Mongols  to  Buddhism  in  the  sixteenth  century,  in  the
treaty  between  the  Dalai  Lama  and  Altun  Khan,  it  was  stipulated  that  on  the  monthly
fast  days  the  hunting  or  slaughter  of  animals  would  be  prohibited.

*  Hiuen  Tsiang  speaks  of  six  fasts  every  month,  and  Julien  quotes  a  Chinese
authority  giving  the  days  as  the  eighth,  fourteenth,  fifteenth,  twenty-third,  tweutj'-
uiuth,  and  thirtieth.  FaHian  notes  that  in  Ceylon  preaching  occurred  on  the  eighth,
fourteenth,  and  fifteenth  days  of  the  month.  On  the  fourteenth,  fifteenth,  twenty-
ninth  and  thirtieth  (says  Koppen,  ii.,  139,  307),  "by  rule,  among  the  Lamas  nothing
should  be  tasted  but  farinaceous  food  and  tea,  the  very  devout  refrain  from  all  food
from  sunrise  to  sunset.  The  temples  are  decorated,  and  the  altar-tables  set  out  with  the
holy  symbols,  with  tapers,  and  with  dishes  containing  offerings  in  corn,  meal,  tea,
butter,  etc.,  and  especially  with  small  pyramids  of  dough  or  of  rice  or  clay,  and
accompanied  by  much  burning  of  incense-sticks.  The  service  performed  by  the  priests
is  more  solemn,  the  music  louder  and  more  exciting,  than  usual.  The  laity  make
their  offerings,  tell  their  beads,  and  repeat '  Ommani  padme  huh.' "

°  Gnii-sait,


502  FESTIVALS  AND  HOLIDAYS.

fession '  (  Uposatha)  are  only  done  as  a  rule  twice  a  month.^  But
every  month  is  held  a  high  mass  or  celebration  of  divine  service
in  honour  of  a  special  deity  or  saint.  And  in  addition  are  the
great  festivals  in  which  the  laity  also  take  part.

The  special  feasts  for  the  deities  and  saints  of  the  established
church  at  Lhasa  are  here  enumerated.  The  Tibetan  year,  it
should  be  remembered,  begins  about  the  end  of  January,  so
that  the  Tibetan  month  is  thus  about  one  month  later  than  ours.

First  month. — On  the  eighth  day  is  Tagon,  and  from  the  ninth  to
fifteenth  the  liturgy  of  the  great  tutelary  fiend  Bhairava.

Second  month. — On  the  eighth  is  Tagon,  and  from  the  ninth  to
fifteenth  is  the  liturgy  of  "The  Medical  Buddhas."

Third  month. — On  the  fifteenth  is  Tagon,  and  from  the  sixteenth  to
twenty-second  is  the  celebration  of  Tu-K'or.

Fourth  month. — On  the  eighth  is  Tagon,  and  from  the  ninth  to
fifteenth  the  worship  of  "  The  Great  Pitier."

Fifth  month. — On  the  third  is  Tagon,  and  from  the  fourth  to  tenth  is
the  liturgy  of  the  tutelary  fiend  Sambhara.

Sixth  month. — On  the  first  is  Tagon,  and  from  the  second  to  fourth
rab-grnas,  and  from  ninth  to  fifteenth  is  the  "  white  Tara's  "  liturgy.

Seventh  month. — On  the  eighth  is  Tagon,  and  from  the  ninth  to
fifteenth  is  the  liturgy  of  Mi-'krugs-pa.

Eighth  month. —  On  the  eighth  is  Tagon,  and  from  the  ninth  to
fifteenth  the  liturgy  of  "  The  nine  gods  of  Immortality."

Ninth  month.  ^ — Fj^nf  the  first  to  fifteenth  the  Kah-gyur  scriptures
are  read,  and  from  the  seventeenth  to  twenty-third  is  the  service  of
"  The  Dead  Saints,"  the  Sthavira.

Tenth  month. — On  the  eighth  is  Tagon,  and  from  the  ninth  to
fifteenth  is  the  worship  of  the  tutelary  fiend  Guhyakala,  and  on  the
twenty-fifth  is  the  service  of  "  The  Five  "  of  Gah-ldan  monastery.

Eleventh  month.- — On  the  twenty-second  is  Tagon,  and  from  the
twenty-third  to  twentj'-ninth  is  the  celebration  of  the  Tor-gyak  of  the
fiendish  lords.

Twelfth  month. — On  the  twenty-second  is  Tagon,  and  on  the  twenty-
ninth  day  of  the  month  begins  the  great  carnival  and  masquerade  of
"  Drug-6c'u  Ichags-mk'ar-gyi  gtor  rgyags."

An  interesting  glimpse  into  the  Lamaist  feasts  of  saints  and
divinities  as  current  in  the  thirteenth  century  is  given  by  Marco
.Polo. The  Venetian  traveller  says : —

When  the  idol  festivals  come  round  these  Bacsi  (Lamas)  go  to  the
prince  and  say,  "  Sire,  the  feast  of  such  a  god  is  come  (naming  him).

1  T.,  gSo-sbyoii. Mongol. — Mamlr.

-  Including  the  Tu-i-sol  cleansing  ceremony  before  referred  to.


THE  FESTIVALS  AND  HOLY  DAYS.


503


My  lord,  you  know  that  this  god,  when  he  gets  no  offerings,  always
sends  bad  weather  and  spoils  our  seasons.  So  we  pray  you  to  give  us
such  and  such  a  number  of  black-faced  sheep,  and  we  beg  also  that  we
may  have  such  a  quantity  of  incense,  etc.,  etc.,  that  we  may  perform  a
solemn  service  and  great  sacrifice  to  our  idols,  and  that  so  they  may.  be
induced  to  protect  us  and  all  that  is  ours."  The  great  kaan  then
orders  the  barons  to  give  everything  the  Bacsi  have  asked  for.  And
when  they  have  got  those  articles  they  go  and  make  a  great  feast  in
honour  of  their  god,  and  hold  great  ceremonies  of  worship,  with  grand
illuminations,  and  quantities  of  incense  of  a  variety  of  aromatic  odours.
And  they  cook  the  meat  and  set  it  by  the  idols,  and  sprinkle  the  broth
hither  and  thither,  saying  that  in  this  way  the  idols  get  their  bellyful.
Thus  it  is  that  they  keep  their  festivals.  Each  of  the  idols  has  a  name  of
his  own  and  a  feast-day,  just  as  our  saints  have  their  anniversaries.

It  is  not  easy  to  give  a  categorical  list  of  the  great  popular  fes-
tivals of  the  Lamas,  for  the  Tibetans,  unlike  the  Chinese'  and
Japanese,  do  not  seem  to  possess  printed  lists  of  their  feast-days,
and  the  particular  event  which  certain  of  the  days  devoted  to
Buddha  is  intended  to  commemorate  is  not  generally  known.

As  much  confusion  has  been  caused  by  the  official  new  year
differing  in  its  epoch  from  the  popular  styles,  and  further  dis-
order is  introduced  by  the  official  Tibetan  style  differing  from
the  Chinese,  the  order  of  the  months  in  the  latter  being  about
two  months  earlier,  the  following  list,  therefore,  has  been  com-
piled by  me  from  somewhat  conflicting  information  supplied  by
different  Lamas,  and  can  only  be  considered  approximate.  Some
of  the  feasts,  such  as  the  Water-festival,  are  moveable,  as  men-
tioned in  the  text.


List  of  the  Chief  Lamaist  Festivals.


Month.

Day.

festival.

1st.

1st.

Carnival.

15th.

Buddha's  Incarnation  or  Conception.^  Feast  of
Flowers.

2nd.

29th.

Chase  and  Expulsion  of  the  "Scape-goat,''
Demon  of  Bad  Luck.

1  See  Edkins'  Ghiriese  Buddhism,  206-210,  for  list  of  Chinese  Buddliist  festivals.

2  Saiigyas-sku-iftams-pa,  or  Chums-su  zugs-pac  dus  mch'od. [Sacrificial  festival  of
the  Conception  (of  Buddha)].


504


FESTIVALS  AND  HOLIDAYS.


Month.


Day.


3rd.

15th.

4th.

: 8th.

, 15th.

5th.

( 5th.

10th.

6th.

4th.

7th.

! lOth.

8th.

Sth.

9th.

22nd.

10th.

25th.

11th.

1st.

12th.

29th.

Festival.


The  Kalacakra  Revelation'  and  Sacred  Masque-
rades.

"Attainment  of  Buddhahood."  Great  Renun-
ciation.^ >"'

Buddha's  Death,  or  parinirvana.^  Feast  of  the
Dead,  "All  Souls  Day."

The  Medical  Buddhas.*


Birth  of  St.  Padma-samhhava.=


'The


Buddha's Birth and Preaching," and

Picture  Feast."
Birth  of  St.  Padma-sambhava  (according  to  Sikhim

style).
The  Water-festival,  Rib- Chi.

Descent  from  Heaven.^

St.  Tsoii-K'a-pa's  Ascension."  Feast  of  Lanterns.

New  Year,  Old  Style.

Pantomime  and  expulsion  of  Old  Year.


The  Tibetan  new-year  was  formerly  celebrated  about  the
winter  solstice  in  what  is  now  the  eleventh  month,  when  the
larders  were  full,^  and  no  field  work  possible  in  the  snow-bound
country,  and  the  days  first  show  signs  of  lengthening.  The  return
of  the  sun,  so  to  say,  has  at  such  a  season  been  celebrated  by
every  nation  of  any  culture.  This  was  the  period  for  popular
festivity  and  general  joy.

Since  the  government  adopted  a  later  date  for  the  new  year,
namely,  about  the  beginning  of  February,"  most  of  the  people
have  transferred  their  festivities  to  the  new  date,  which  is  known


1  dus-'K'or  gsuns-pa.

'  rab-tu  byun-ba,  "  The  highest  Being  or  Becoming."

'  mya-h'an  las-' das-pa.

*  Sangyas  sman  bla  {=Skl.,  Bhaisyaguru  Buddha)  of  the  Eastern  World.

5  ch'os-gsun-pa  (K(.,=EeUgious  Speech).

'  Orgyan  rin-po  ch'e  sku  bltams-pa.

'  Iha-babs.

a  dga-ldan  ?fi'a  jrech'od.

9  The  grain  has  been  stored  since  two  months,  and  the  yak  and  sheep-flesh  since
four  to  six  weeks.

10  In  1892  it  was  on  the  29th  February.


TIBETAN  NEW-YEAR  FEAST.  505

as  the  "royal  new  year"'  in  contradistinction  to  the  old  style,
now  called  "  The  cultivators'  new  year."  ^

This  altered  date,  February  to  the  beginning  of  March,  makes
the  "  new  year  "  a  spring  festival.  Its  gay  carnival  is  doubtless
an  expression  of  the  self-same  feelings,  inspired  by  spring  upon
the  animate  and  inanimate  world,  which  prompted  the  analogous
Roman  festivals  of  Lupercalia,  the  Festum  Stultorum,  the  Matro-
nalia  Festa,  the  worship  of  the  goddess  Anna  Perenna,  and  the
festival  of  Bacchus,  all  held  about  the  same  season,  during  the
month  of  February  and  the  first  fortnight  of  March,  and  repre-
sented in  India  by  the  Holi  festival.

With  new-year's  eve  commences  a  grand  carnival,  which
lasts  the  greater  part  of  the  first  month.  The  people  decorate
their  doorways  and  houses  with  boughs  of  juniper,  etc.,  prepare
puddings,  and  lay  in  a  stock  of  wine,  and  pass  the  time  eating,
drinking,  dancing,^  singing,  and  games,''  combined  with  as  much
praying  as  they  may  feel  inclined  for.  The  people  flock  from  the
smaller  villages  into  the  larger  towns,  and  the  Lamas  contribute  to
the  general  amusement  by  masquerades  and  pompous  processions,
in  the  intervals  of  their  worship  for  the  general  welfare.

The  new  year  is  ushered  in  with  high  carousal,  and  first  foot-
ing and  health-drinking  are  the  order  of  the  day,  and  everyone
is  pressed  to  partake  of  sweet  cakes  and  puddings,  more  or  less
gaily  decorated,  and  beer  and  wine  ad  libitum.^

And  while  this  festivity  lasts,  that  is,  during  the  first  four  or
six  weeks  of  the  year,  the  temporal  government  of  the  city  of
Lhasa  is  removed  from  its  usual  custodians,  and  placed  in  the
hands  of  the  priests  of  De-pung  monastery,  the  chief  of  whom
becomes  for  the  tim.e  rex  sacrorum,  as  with  the  Romans.  It  is
possible  that  this  is  a  political  sop  to  the  most  powerful  monastery


'■  rgyal-po  lo-gsar.

2  So-nam  16-gsar. It  is  popular  in  Ladak  (Ramsay's  Diet.,  p.  43),  and  in  Sikhim.

3  The  dancing  is  usually  done  in  lines,  the  men  and  women  apart.

»  The  games  include  archery ;  putting  the  stone  (and  called  Lin-sin  ch'en  gyal-
po),  in  which  the  losers  pay  forfeits ;  acrobats,  in  the  Lhasa  festivals  these  come
usually  from  Shigatse  (Tsang-jo-mo-Kha-rag),  and  slide  down  long  ropes  of  yak-liair
from  the  gilt  umbrellas  on  the  top  of  Potala  to  the  foot  of  the  edict  pillars.

*  According  to  the  current  saying  "  The  Tibetan  New-Year  is  Wine,  the  Chinese  is
Paper,  and  the  Nepalese  is  Noise,"  with  reference  to  the  Chinese  celebrating  their
festivals  by  display  of  rod  paper  flags,  and  the  Nepalese  by  clamour  of  noisy  instru-
ments. Cf.  Hue's  description  of  these  gala  days.


506  FESTIVALS  AND  HOLIDAYS.

of  the  established  church  in  Tibet  to  reconcile  it  to  its  exclusion
from  the  ordinary  government  of  the  country,  which  is  now
restricted  to  the  four  monasteries  in  Lhasa  called  Lings.

The  Lama,  who  is  chief  judge  '  of  De-pung,  proceeds  to  Lhasa  in
state  on  the  third  day  of  this  month,  and  assumes  the  sovereignty
of  the  city.  He  is  received  with  regal  honours,  and  incense  is
burned  before  him  wherever  he  goes;  and  on  his  arrival  at  Lhasa
all  prisoners  are  set  free  except  those  convicted  of  the  most  aggra-
vated crimes.

During  his  dominion  he  holds  absolute  power  over  property,  life,
and  death;  and  assisted  by  thirty  deputies,  he  inflicts  severe
punishments  and  heavy  fines  for  trifling  offences,  to  the  financial
benefit  of  his  monastery.  It  is  said  that  many  of  his  retainers
commit  excesses,  so  that  such  of  the  richer  classes  as  may  have
incurred,  or  have  reason  to  believe  that  they  have  incurred,  the
displeasure  of  De-pung  Lamas,  leave  the  city  and  live  in  its
suburbs  during  this  period  of  priestly  rule.

The  poorer  classes,  usually  so  dirty,  now  sweep  and  whitewash
their  houses  through  fear  of  punishment  by  Lamas  for  unclean-
ness.  So  long  as  these  Lamas  govern  Lhasa  they  are  feasted  at  the
public  expense  or  by  the  richer  people,^  and  are  entertained  with
sports.

One  of  the  duties  of  this  Rex  Sacrorum  is  to  deliver  a  series
of  lectures  to  the  assembled  monks  on  religious  history,  philo-
sophy, and  polity ;  and  he  is  credited  with  divine  powers.

Lhasa,  during  this  festival,  contains,  it  is  said,  over  30,000
monks,''  from  Serra,  De-pung,  Grah-ldan,  etc.,  so  that  the  city  seems
red  with  the  red  cloaks  of  the  Lamas.  They  are  engaged  the
greater  part  of  the  day  in  worship  for  the  general  welfare  of
the  country  and  people.

1  His  title  is  Tsliogs-cli'eu-z'al-ngo.

2  Everyone  is  expected  on  tlie  last  day  of  the  old  year  to  bring  to  the  monasteries
half  a  month's  rations  for  the  monks,  in  flesh,  grain,  butter,  etc.

J  The  stupendous  size  of  the  cooking  arrangements  and  the  size  of  the  tea-cauldrons
for  ,'such  a  multitude  may  be  imagined.  Each  monk  receives  refreshments  at  each  of
the  three  daily  assemblies  at  the  Lhasa  cathedral.  After  the  first  assembly  at  six
a.m.,  each  monk  gets  tea  and  soup  at  government  expense,  and  one  penny.  At  the
second  assembly,  at  eleven  a.m.,  he  again  gets  similar  refreshment  and  one  or  two
tankas  (silver  coins  value  about  sixpence),  and  at  three  p.m.  further  refreshment.
During  this  festival  each  Lama  receives  about  twenty  to  twenty-five  ianka  coins,
which  money  is  mainly  provided  by  the  Tengyeling  regent.


FLO  WER-FEAST.  507


Public  worship  is  done  daily  in  the  great  cathedral  of  Lhasa
during  the  first  half  of  the  month,  from  before  dawn  till  after
dark,  and  clouds  of  incense  fill  the  air.  The  especially  holy  days
are  the  third,  eighth,  tenth,  thirteenth,  and  the  fifteenth,  or  full
moon,  which  latter  day  is  the  greatest  gala  day  of  the  year,  and
seems  to  be  considered  the  anniversary  of  Buddha's  conception,
and  "  the  goddess "  evidently  intended  for  Buddha's  mother,
Maya  Deva,  is  worshipped  with  red  flowers,'  and  it  is  believed
that  divine  blessings  if  then  asked  for  are  more  readily  granted
at  this  season  than  at  any  other.

People  don  their  gayest  dress  and  jewellery  on  that  day,  and  ex-
change presents  freely,  and  the  carnival  reaches  its  climax.  The
laity  wear  masks  of  coloured  cloth,  with  fringes  of  hair,  in  imita-
tion of  beards.  And  the  Dalai  Lama  is  especially  worshipped
on  this  day,  and  receives  many  presents.

On  the  second  day  of  the  month  the  state  sorcerer  of  Na-ch'un
enters  Lhasa,  as  already  noted,  and  his  entry  is  like  that  of  the
archaic  god-king,  for  none  dare  look  at  him,  and  even  high  state
officials  have  been  fined  for  looking  at  him  whilst  passing.

"On  the  twenty-sixth  day  are  horse-racing  and  shooting,  and
on  the  twenty-seventh  a  grand  review  of  the  troops  by  the
Chinese  Amban,  and  the  procession  of  the  holy  sceptre  from  the
Serra  monastery  for  solemn  salutation  by  the  Dalai  Lama,  the
officials,  and  people,  as  already  mentioned.

During  the  latter  half  of  the  month  the  demons  are  worshipped,
and  on  the  thirtieth  day  Tara's  celebration  concludes  the  feasts.

The  anniversary  of  Buddha's  death  is  held  on  the  full  moon
(or  fifteenth  day)  of  the  fourth  month,  and  is  evidently  combined
with  the  old  Nature-festival  in  honour  of  the  commencement  of
summer  and  the  propitiation  of  the  rain-deities.

In  the  first  half  of  this  month  (known  as  Sa-da-wa)  the  people
do  more  worship  than  in  any  other  season  of  the  year.  They
count  their  beads  and  ply  their  prayer-wheels  with  more  energy
than  usual,  and  at  the  larger  temples  of  Lhasa,  Tashi-lhunpo,  etc.,
the  devotees  go  round  the  holy  buildings  by  measuring  their
length  on  the  ground.

From  the  tenth  to  the  fifteenth  even  the  laity  abstain  from

1  For  an  account  of  this  "  Feast  of  the  Flowers,"  see  Hue,  ii.,  39.


508  FESTIVALS  AND  HOLIDAYS.

flesh,  and  give  away  as  much  alms  in  charity  as  they  can  afford ;
and  there  appears  also  to  be  some  idea  of  ancestor-worship  in  the
ceremonial.  Certainly  deceased  ancestors  and  relatives  are  often
prayed  for  at  this  time,  which  is  not  many  weeks  removed  from
the  great  Japanese  feast  of  the  dead.

During  this  feast  many  of  the  monks  encamp  in  tents,  and
colossal  pictures  are  displayed.  Thus  at  Tashi-lhunpo  the  pictures
are  hung  from  the  great  tower  named  Kiku.'

At  this  festival,  held  there  on  June  30th,  1882,  Lama  Ugyen
G-yats'o  informs  us,  a  great  picture  of  Dipamkara  Buddha  was  dis-
played about  a  hundred  feet  long,  in  substitution  for  other  pictures
of  the  previous  days.  Next  day  it  was  replaced  by  one  of
Sakya  Muni  and  the  past  Buddhas,  and  the  following  day  by  one
for  Maitreya  (Jam-pa).  On  this  day  women  are  admitted  to  the
monastery  shrines,  from  which  they  are  at  other  times  excluded,
and  all  the  people  seek  the  benediction  of  the  Coming  Buddha,
by  touching  the  lower  border  of  the  picture  with  their  heads.

The  rain-deities,  the  dragons,  or  Nagas  of  the  sky,  are  also  pro-
pitiated on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  fourth  month.  A  procession  is
formed  by  the  lay  governors  of  Lhasa,^  and  the  high  official
Lamas,"  and  some  other  officers,  who  proceed  from  the  court  at
Potala  to  the  great  Lhasa  cathedral,  where  the  great  image  of
Buddha  is  worshipped,  and  the  officers  feed  the  temple-lamp  by
pouring  into  it  melted  butter  in  silver  ladles.

Then  one  of  the  governors  and  a  secretary  of  state,  with
about  thirty  retainers,  go  to  the  Ramo-ch'e  temple,  via  the
Gyambum  K'an  Caitya,  where  they  also  feed  the  great  lamp  of
the  chief  shrine ;  and  here  they  distribute  largess,  in  the  shape
of  bits  of  brick-tea  to  the  paupers,  who  are  here  assembled  in
rows  to  receive  the  customary  bounty.

From  Ramo-ch'e  the  procession  passes  round  the  great  circular
road,  dispensing  tea  as  it  goes,  via  the  Mende  bridge  to  the  Naga
or  dragon-temple.  The  governor  and  party  here  embark  in  four
or  five  small  boats  of  hide  with  wooden  frame  work,  and  are  rowed
round  the  moat  once  in  the  respectful  Pradakshina  direction.
They  then  disembark  and  ascend  the  hillock  on  which  stands  the
dragon-temple, where, in an inner sanctuary, they deposit

1  Figured  at  p.  273. Its  base  Is  sixty  paces  long,  and  its  height  greater. — Usyen
Gyats'o.

bkah-blon  Tsi-tung.


WATER-FEAST.  509


offerings  of  gold  and  silver  among  the  snake-idols,  and  this  room
is  then  locked  and  sealed,  only  to  be  opened  again  the  following
year.

The  laity  are  now  permitted  by  payment  to  be  rowed  round  the
moat,  and  cheer  lustily  as  they  go.  The  avowed  object  of  this
ceremony  is  to  conciliate  the  Naga  demi-gods,  so  as  to  secure
timely  and  sufficient  rain  for  the  benefit  of  crops  and  animals.
And  if,  as  sometim.es  happens,  rain  does  fall,  it  is  considered  an
extremely  lucky  omen.

The  anniversary  of  the  birth  of  Padma-sambhava  is  observed
mainly  by  the  older  party  of  the  Lamaist  church.  It  is  held  in
Sikhim  on  the  tenth  day  of  the  seventh  month ;  but  in  many
parts  of  central  an<3  eastern  Tibet,  as  at  Sam-yas  and  mCh'og-^ling,
near  Gryantse,  and  also  at  Ladak,^  it  is  held  on  the  tenth  day  of
the  iifth  month,  and  the  tenth  day  of  every  month  is  sacred  to
him  and  called  "  Ts'e-&chu."

I  On  the  day  previous  to  this  anniversary  are  held  masked  dances
of  the  black-hat  Lamas  and  of  the  fiends  and  fiendesses,  as  fully
detailed  hereafter  in  the  chapter  on  the  mystic  plays,  followed  on
the  tenth  by  representations  of  the  saint  in  his  eight  forms,  and
the  "  Ging,"  father  and  mother  demons.  And  if  rain  now  happens,
it  is  deemed  of  good  augury,  and  due  to  these  pious  celebrations.

The  Water-Festival  marks  the  commencement  of  the  autumn,
and  usually  falls  about  September.^  It  is  a  thanksgiving  feast.
Water,  especially  of  springs,  becomes  holy  and  sacred,  a  veritable
elixir  vitce;  as  the  water  sprites  now  set  free  their  sacred  water.
At  this  season  the  Tibetans,  though  not  particularly  fond  of  wash-
ing and  bathing,  indulge  in  this  luxury  more  than  usual.^

This  festival  depends  on  the  appearance  above  the  horizon,
about  the  eighth  month,  at  early  dawn,  of  the  star  named  Rikhi  or
Eishi-agastya,  or  "Rib-chi,"  which  Colonel  C.  Strahan,  of  the  Indian


'  Kamsay's  Diet.,  p.  44.

'  In  1891  it  happened  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  eighth  month,  i.e.,  on  the  17th
September.

"  It  is  said  that  Buddha  ^sculapius,  the  founder  of  medical  science  according  to
the  Tibetans,  bathed  at  this  season,  hence  the  custom  (see  Jaeschke's  Diet,  p.  20).
the  cessation  of  the  rains,  when  nature,  having  reached  her  womanhood,  decks  her-
With  this  may  be  compared  the  so-called  Cocoa-nut  festival  of  the  Hindus,  held  at
self  in  all  her  wealth  of  leafy  charm,  when  the  grateful  people  cast  thousands  of  cocoa-
nuts  and  flowers  into  the  sea  to  the  sea-gods  in  gratitude,  and  to  secure  patronage
and  new  enterprises  during  the  current  year.


510  FESTIVALS  AND  HOLIDAYS.

survey,  informs  me  must  be  Canopus^  or  Sirios,  the  Dog-star.
The  Tibetans  consider  this  fixed  star  to  be  a  saint  who  dwells  in
heaven  in  deep  meditation,  but  who  appears  in  the  sky  in  the
beginning  of  the  eighth  month,  before  dawn^  in  the  southern
quarter,  and  through  his  influence  the  water  at  early  dawn  be-
comes ambrosia  or  life-giving  nectar.

Before  dawn,  therefore,  the  Tibetans  throng  to  springs  and
lakes,  and  watch  eagerly  for  a  glimpse  of  this  star  to  enable  them
to  snatch  a  draught  of  the  glorified  water.

And  the  Lamas  go  in  procession  to  the  lakes  and  rivers,  and
partake  in  this  practice.  They  cast  in  offerings  to  the  water-
nymphs  and  dragon-spirits  of  the  water,  and  draw  and  drink  the
life-giving  and  sin-cleansing  water,  attended  by  much  popular
festivity.^  Tents  are  erected  in  the  neighbourhood  for  about  two
weeks,  during  which  the  multitude  drink  and  bathe  in  the  water,
dance,  sing,  masquerade,  and  give  vent  to  their  joy,  in  what  may
be  considered  a  cleansing  or  9,tonement  feast,  as  well  as  a  thanks-
giving. And  monastic  discipline  even  is  relaxed  during  this  fes-
tival, and  many  monks  are  allowed  to  go  home  on  leave.

"  The  descent  of  the  gods "  is  evidently  founded  on  the  legend
of  Sakya  Muni's  descent  from  heaven,  where  he  had  gone  to  preach
the  saving  Law  to  his  regenerated  saintly  mother;  and  he  descended
thence  by  a  ladder — a  glorified  sort  of  Jacob's  ladder.  It  also
marks  the  end  of  the  rainy  season  {Varsha),  the  Buddhist  Lent,*
which  Buddha  was  wont  to  spend  in  retirement,  in  fasting,  pray-
ing, and  holy  exercises.

The  anniversary  of  Tson-K'a-pa's  ascent  to  heaven  is  the
special  festival  of  the.  established  church,  of  which  Tson-K'a-pa
was  the  founder.  It  is  a  Feast  of  Lanterns,  and  takes  -place  in
winter,  about  the  beginning  of  our  December,  when  the  days  are
near  their  shortest,  and  it  probably  is  associated  with  the  great
nature-festival  found  in  other  nations  at  this  season,  to  emphasize
the  loss  of  light,  and  desire  for  the  return  of  the  sun.


1  Arabic  Snhail,  "  to  be  level."  2  dbugs  (literally  "  breath  ").

3  KoPPEN,  ii.,  313,  speaks  of  the  Lamas  blessing  or  consecrating  the  waters,  but  this
seems  to  be  a  mistake.

4  This  according  to  General  Cunningham  (iTidian  Eras,  3),  on  account  of  the  ex-
tension latterly  of  the  Indian  year,  must,  in  the  time  of  Alexander  and  Asoka,  have
commenced  in  June  instead  of  July,  and  lasted  till  October.


FEAST  OP  LANTERNS.  511

It  is  celebrated  on  the  twenty-fifth  day  ^  of  the  tenth  Tibetan
month,  by  a  general  illumination  ^  of  both  lay  and  religious  build-
ings, like  the  analogous  Dewali  festival  of  the  Hindiis,  and  the
lamp  (Chiragh)  feast  of  the  Muhammadans,  and  the  festival  of
Buddha  the  Burning  Lamp  (Dipaihkara)  of  the  Chinese  Budd-
hists,^ which  also  are  celebrated  about  this  time.

On  this  day,  in  the  year  1417,  Doctor  Tson-K'a-pa  died,  or  was
transfigured  as  is  now  believed.  The  legend  says  that  he  appeared
on  the  stone  altar  in  front  of  the  throne  at  his  monastery  at  Gah-
Idan,  and  having  addressed  the  assembled  multitude,  and  pro-
phesied the  future  greatness  of  his  church,  he  ascended  into  the
Tushita  heavens.

The  anniversary  of  this  event  is  called  Grah-dan  Nam-ch'od,  and
is  celebrated  with  great  joy  and  torchlight  processions.  Altars
and  stages  are  for  this  purpose  erected  beforehand,  and  decorated
with  hundreds  of  lamps  and  ornamental  cakes.  On  the  evening  of
the  feast  is  a  great  procession,  before  which  is  carried  the  image  of
Tson-K'a-pa,  and  torches  and  lamps,  and  if  they  burn  brilliantly,
much  happiness  is  prophesied.

Advantage  also  is  taken  of  this  day,  at  the  onset  of  winter,  to
visit  the  Dalai  and  other  high  Lamas,  and  present  them  with
bundles  of  new  warm  robes,  thus  corresponding  to  the  ancient
Buddhist  "  Eobe-month  "  (Chivara  Masa),  which  was  the  month
following  the  end  of  the  rains,  and  on  which  the  mendicants  were
provided  with  new  robes  on  the  approach  of  the  cold  weather.

In  addition  to  these  great  feasts  are  innumerable  minor  and  local
ones,  as  Lamaism  is  not  behind  the  Catholic  church  in  accommoda-
ting herself  to  the  customs  of  the  people.  The  Mongols  have  their
Fire  and  other  special  festivals  all  in  Buddhist  dress.  The  worship
of  the  mountain-god  Kan-ch'en-dso-na  *  has  already  been  referred
to  as  peculiar  to  the  Sikhimite  form  of  Lamaism,  in  addition  to
which  are  other  local  feasts.^

1  On  the  twenty-fourth,  or  preceding  day,  the  monks  of  the  Serra  monastery  observe
a  special  illumination  in  honour  of  the  decease  of  their  great  Lama,  rje-byams  ch'en-
ch'os  rje-gzegs-pu.  '  bzhi-mch'od.

3  On  the  twenty-second  day  of  the  eighth  Chinese  month. — Edkins'  Chinese  Budd.,

p.  210.

4  It  is  held  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  seventh  month.  In  1891  it  happened  on  the
nineteenth  of  August.  It  lasts  for  three  days ;  and  the  fifteenth  of  every  month  is
sacred  to  this  god.

5  Among  the  local  feasts  in  Sikhim  are  the  Thanksgiving  and  Prayer-festival  (riih-
(jnas)  for  the  welfare  of  the  country,  held  in  the  ninth  month  of  every  year  at  the  To'n-


512  . FESTIVALS  AND  HOLIDAYS.

A  somewhat  droll  and  almost  dramatic  feast  is  the  chase  of  the
demon  of  ill-luck,  evidently  a  reUc  of  a  former  demonist  cult.i
It  is  called  "  Chongju  Sewang,"  and  is  held  at  Lhasa  on  the  twenty-
ninth  and  thirtieth  days  of  the  second  month,  though  it  sometimes
lasts  about  a  week.  It  starts  after  divine  service.  A  priest  represents
a  Grand  Lama,^  and  one  of  the  multitude  is  masqueraded  as  the
ghost-king.  For  a  week  previously  he  sits  in  the  market-place
with  face  painted  half  black  and  half  white,  and  a  coat  of  skin  is
put  on  his  arm  and  he  is  called  "  King  of  the  Years' "  (?  head)."  I[e
helps  himself  to  what  he  wants,  and  goes  about  shaking  a  black
yak's  tail  over  the  heads  of  the  people,  who  thus  transfer  to  him
their  ill-luck.

This  latter  person  then  goes  towards  the  priest  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  the  cloister  of  La-brang  and  ridicules  him,  saying  :
"  What  we  perceive  through  the  five  sources  (the  five  senses)  is
no  illusion.  All  you  teach  is  untrue,"  etc.,  etc.  The  acting  Grand
Lama  contradicts  this ;  but  both  dispute  for  some  time  with  one
another ;  and  ultimately  agree  to  settle  the  contest  by  dice ;  the
Lama  consents  to  change  places  with  the  scape-goat  if  the  dice
should  so  decide.  The  Lama  has  a  dice  with  six  on  all  six  sides
and  throws  six-up  three  times,  while  the  ghost-king  has  a  dice
which  throws  only  one.

When  the  dice  of  the  priest  throws  six  six  times  in  succession
and  that  of  the  scape-goat  throws  only  ones,  this  latter  individual,
or  "  Ldjon  "  as  he  is  called,  is  terrified  and  flees  away  upon  a  white
horse,  which,  with  a  white  dog,  a  white  bird,  salt,  etc.,  he  has  been
provided  with  by  government.  He  is  pursued  with  screams  and
blank  shots  as  far  as  the  mountains  of  Chetang,  where  he  has  to
remain  as  an  outcast  for  several  months  in  a  narrow  haunt,  which,
however,  has  been  previously  provided  for  him  with  provisions.

We  are  told  *  that,  while  en  route  to  Chetang,  he  is  detained

wa-ron-grol  Caitya,  at  Tashiding  monastery ;  and  the  tenth  month  the  anointing  and
blessing  of  the  Sikhim  king  by  the  head  Lama  of  Pemiongchi.

1  What  seems  a  version  of  this  ceremony  is  celebrated  in  Ladak  (at  the  village  of
Masho)  under  the  name  "  Nagh-rang,"  and  described  by  Ramsay,  Diet.,  p.  44.

2  I  did  not  enquire  mto  the  personality  of  this  Lama  and  his  relationship,  if  any,  to  the
temporary  Lama-king  of  De-pung  monastery.  Pandit  Nain  Sing  connects  this  Scape-goat
ceremony  with  the  termination  of  the  De-pung  Lama-regent's  rule,  and  makes  its
Lama  identical  with  the  latter,  while  Lama  U.  G.  (he.  cit.,  32),  states  that  the  dice-
throwing  Lama  belongs  to  tlie  Chang-chub-Ling  monastery.

3  Lo-gon  gyal-po.

»  Pandit  A.  K.'s  Sun-ei/  Rept.


CHASE  OF  SCAPE-GOAT  OF  BAD  LUCK.  513

for  seven  days  in  the  great  chamber  of  horrors  at  Sam-yas  monastery
filled  with  the  monstrous  images  of  devils  and  skins  of  huge
serpents  and  wild  animals,  all  calculated  to  excite  feelings  of
terror.  During  his  seven  days'  stay  he  exercises  despotic  authority
over  Sam-yas,  and  the  same  during  the  first  seven  days  of  his  stay
at  Ohetang.  Both  Lama  and  laity  give  him  much  alms,  as  he  is
believed  to  sacrifice  himself  for  the  welfare  of  the  country.  It  is
said  that  in  former  times  the  man  who  performed  this  duty  died
at  Chetang  in  the  course  of  the  year  from  terror  at  the  awful
images  he  was  associated  with ;  but  the  present  scape-goat  survives
and  returns  to  re-enact  his  part  the  following  year.  From  Chetang,
where  he  stays  for  seven  days,  he  goes  to  Lho-ka,  where  he  re-
mains for  several  months.

At  the  beginning  of  the  third  month  an  exhibition  is  held  of
the  holy  vessels  and  precious  things  in  the  La-brang  temple,  also
the  hanging  out  of  pictures  on  Potala.  There  are  sowing  and
harvest  and  other  non-Buddhist  festivals,  and  special  rogation
days  of  supplications  in  case  of  war,  famine,  and  pestilence.

The  old  year  with  all  its  bad  luck  is  despatched  with  rites  of  a
clearly  demonistic  character,  and  the  ceremony,  named  the
"Throwing  away  of  the  Dead  Year,"^  is  combined  with  a  devil-
dance,  as  described  in  the  next  chapter.

Every  household  contributes  to  "  ring  out  the  old  "  and  "  ring  in
the  new  "  year.  On  the  22nd  day  of  the  12th  month  each  family
prepares  a  dough  image  weighing  about  four  pounds,  and  on  it  stick
pieces  of  cloth,  woollen  or  silken,  and  coins,  etc.,  according  to  the
wealth  of  the  house-owner,  and  the  demon  of  ill-luck  is  invoked  to
enter  into  the  image,  which  is  then  worshipped,  and  on  the  29th
day,  or  the  last  but  one  of  the  old  year,  a  Lama  is  sent  for,  who
carries  the  image  out  of  the  house  and  beyond  the  village  to  a
place  where  four  paths  meet,  and  there  he  abandons  it.

But  for  the  general  community  a  huge  image  is  prepared,  and
attached  to  its  top  are  many  threads,  and  in  front  of  it  on  the  29th
day  a  grand  dance  of  the  death-devils,  etc.,  takes  place,  as  detailed
in  the  chapter  on  the  mystic  plays.  And  when  it  is  carried  off  and
abandoned  the  laity  vie  with  one  another  in  snatching  the  threads.


1  Lo-s'i  sKu-rim.

L  L


514  FESTIVALS  AISD  HOLIDAYS.

which  are  treasured  as  most  potent  charms,  while  the  Lamas
return  to  the  temple  and  perform  a  service  to  complete  the
expulsion  of  the  dead  old  year.

And  so  they  go  on,  feast  following  feast,  till  the  end  of  the  year,
when  the  pantomime  and  carnival  commence.


Some  Actoks  in  the  Mystic  Plat.i


XX.


MYSTIC PLAYS AND MASQUERADES.

1 ANCY-DKESS  balls  and  the  masked  carnivals  of  Europe
find  their  counterpart  in  Tibet,  where  the  Lamas  are
fond  of  masquerading  in  quaint  attire;  and  the  popu-
lace delight  in  these  pageants,  with  their  dramatic
display  and  droll  dances.  The  masked  dances,  however,  are
essentially  religious  in  nature,  as  with  the  similar  pageants  still
found  among  many  primitive  people,  and  probably  once  current
even  among  the  Greeks  and  Egyptians.^

The  Lamas  reserve  to  themselves  the  exclusive  right  to  act  in
"the  Mystery-Play,"  with  its  manifestations  of  the  gods  and  demons,
by  awe-inspiring  masks,  etc.,  while  they  relegate  to  lay  actors  the
sacred  dramas,  illustrating  the  former  births  of  Buddha  and  other
saints,  the  Jdtakas.


>  From  a  photograph  by  Mr.  Hoffmann.

2  The  myth  of  the  snaky-haired  Gorgon,  and  the  death-masks  found  in  ancient
tombs  of  Mycense,  Kertoh,  Carthage,  Mexico,  etc.

LL 2


516  MYSTIC  AND  SACREB PLAYS.

"  The  Mystery-Play  of  Tibet,"  the  name  by  which  the  acted
pageant  of  the  Lamas  is  known  to  many  Europeans,  has  been  seen
by  several  travellers  in  Tibet  and  adjoining  Lamaist  lands ;  but
the  plot  and  motive  of  the  play  seem  never  to  have  been  very
definitely  ascertained,  owing,  doubtless,  to  the  cumbrous  details
which  so  thickly  overlay  it,  and  the  difficulty  of  finding  competent
interpreters  of  the  plot,  as  well  as  the  confiicting  accounts  current
amongst  the  Lamas  themselves  in  regard  to  its  origin  and  mean-
ing.

As  I  have  had  opportunities  for  studying  the  various  versions
of  the  play  with  the  aid  of  learned  Lamas  of  several  sects,  I  give
here  a  brief  sketch  of  what  I  have  elicited  regarding  what  appears
to  have  been  its  original  character  and  subsequent  developments.

Originally  it  appears  to  have  been  a  devil-dancing  cult  for  ex-
orcising malignant  demons  and  human  enemies,  and  associated
with  human  sacrifice  and,  probably,  cannibalism.

Afterwards,  during  the  Buddhist  era,  the  devil-dance,  like  that
of  the  Ceylonese,  was  given  a  Buddhist  dress,  which  was  not  difii-
cult,  as  somewhat  analogous  displays  representing  the  temptation
of  Buddha,  seem  to  be  found  in  Indian  Buddhism,  as  seen  in  the
annexed  figure  of  a  frieze  from  Grandhara.^  And  several  leading
indigenous  names  lent  themselves  readily  to  perversion  into  Bud-
dhist names  or  titles,  by  a  process  already  practised  by  the  Brah-
mans  in  India,  who  Sanskritized  aboriginal  Indian  names  in  order
to  bring  them  within  the  mythological  pale  of  Hindiiism.

The  unsophisticated  Tibetans  still  call  the  mystery-play  the
"  Dance  of  the  Red-Tiger  Devil,"  ^  a  deity  of  the  Bon  or  pre-Bud-
dhist  religion  of  Tibet.  The  original  motive  of  the  dance  appears
to  have  been  to  expel  the  old  year  with  its  demons  of  ill-luck,  and
to  propitiate  with  human  sacrifice  and  probably  cannibalism  the
war-god  and  the  guardian  spirits,  most  of  whom  are  demonified
kings  and  heroes,  in  order  to  secure  good-luck  and  triumph  over
enemies  in  the  incoming  year.

Human  sacrifice  seems  undoubtedly  to  have  been  regularly  prac-
tised in  Tibet  up  till  the  dawn  there  of  Buddhism  in  the  seventh
century  a.d.  The  glimpses  which  we  get  of  early  Tibet  through
the  pages  of  contemporary  Chinese  history,  show,  as  Dr.  Bushell

^  Figured  by  Gkuenwedel,  Bitddh.  EuhsI  in  Inch  ^sTag-dmar-ciram.


MOTIVE OF  THE  MYSTERY-PLAY.


517


Demons  of  Mara  in  Gandhara  Sculpturii;-^.
(Lahore  Museum.)


518  MYSTIC  AND  SAGBED  PLAYS.

translates,!  that  "  at  tlie  new  year  they  (the  Tibetans)  sacrifice  men
or  ofifer  monkeys,"'  and  so  late  as  the  seventh  century  the  annual
rites  in  connection  with  the  defence  of  their  country  were  tri-
ennially  accompanied  by  human  sacrifice.^

Actual  cannibalism  is,  indeed,  attributed  to  the  early  Tibetans,'
and  the  survival  of  certain  customs  lends  strong  colour  to  the
probability  of  such  a  practice  having  been  current  up  till  about
the  middle  ages.  The  Tibetans  themselves  claim  descent  from  a
man-eating  ancestry,  and  they  credit  their  wilder  kinsmen  and
neighbours  of  the  lower  Tsang-po  valley  with  anthrophagous  habits
even  up  to  the  present  day.  Vestiges  of  cannibalism  appear  to  be
preserved  in  the  mystery-play.  And  of  similar  character  seems
to  be  the  common  practice  of  eating  a  portion  of  the  human  skin
covering  the  thigh-bone  in  preparing  the  bone  trumpets,  and  also,
probably,  of  like  origin  is  the  common  Tibetan  oath  of  aflSrmation,
"  By  my  father's  and  mother's  flesh."  *

The  Lamas,  however,  as  professing  Buddhists,  could  not  coun-
tenance the  taking  of  life,  especially  human.  So,  in  incorporating
this  ancient  and  highly  popular  festival  within  their  system,  they
replaced  the  human  victims  by  anthropomorphic  effigies  of
dough,  into  which  were  inserted  models  of  the  larger  organs,  and
also  fluid  red  pigment  to  represent  the  blood.  This  substitution
of  dough  images  for  the  living  sacrifices  of  the  Bon  rites  is  ascribed
by  tradition  to  St.  Padma-sambhava  in  the  second  half  of  the
eighth  century  a.d.  And  these  sacrificial  dough-images,  of  more
or  less  elaborate  kinds,  now  form  an  essential  part  of  the  Lamaist
daily  service  of  worship.

The  Lamas  also,  as  it  seems  to  me,  altered  the  motive  of  the
play  to  hang  upon  it  their  own  sacerdotal  story  for  their  own
glorification  and  priestly  gain.  Eetaining  the  festival  with  its
Bacchanalian  orgies  for  expelling  the  old  year  and  ushering  in
good-luck  for  the  new,  they  also  retained  the  cutting-up  of  their
enemies  in  effigy  ;  but  they  made  the  plot  represent  the  triumph
of  the  Indian  missionary  monks  {Acdrya)  under  St.  Padma-sam-
bhava over  the  indigenous  paganism  with  its  hosts  of  maHgnant
fiends  and  the  black-hat  devil-dancers,  and  also  over  the  Chinese
heretics.


1  J.R.A.S.,  New  Ser.,  xii.,  p.  440.  '  ^dem,  p.  441.

3  Yule's  Calhaii,  151,  and  Marco  Polo,  i.,  303.  ■>  a-pe-s'a  a-me-s'a.


MOTIVE  OF  THE  MYSTERY-PLAY.'  519

The  voracious  man-eating  devils  of  Tibet  were  mostly  assimi-
lated to  the  Sivaite  type  of  fiend  in  mediaeval  Indian  Buddhism,
with  which  they  had  so  much  in  common.  And  the  title  was
accordingly  altered  from  tag-mar,  "  the  (dance)  of  the  red  Tiger
(devil)  ''  to  its  homonym  tag-mar  (spelt  drag-dmar ),  or  "  the  red
fierce  ones."  Thus  Yama,  the  Death-king,  and  his  minions  form
a  most  attractive  feature  of  the  play,  for  it  is  made  to  give  the  lay
spectators  a  very  realistic  idea  of  the  dreadful  devils  from  whom
the  Lamas  dehver  them;  and  they  are  familiarized  with  the  appear-
ance of  these  demons  who,  according  to  the  Lamas,  beset  the  path
along  which  the  disembodied  soul  must  hereafter  pass  to  paradise.

As  this  tragedy  is  so  intimately  identified  with  Padma-sam-
bhava,  the  founder  of  Lamaism,  it  is  acted  in  its  most  gorgeous
style  on  the  birthday  of  that  saint,  namely,  on  the  tenth  day  of
the  fifth  Tibetan  month.

But  latterly  both  plot  and  date  were  again  altered  by  the
established  church  of  Tibet,  the  Gre-lug-pa  sect.  This  reformed
sect,  which  dissociates  itself  as  far  as  possible  from  St.  Padma-
sambhava,  who  now  is  so  intimately  identified  with  the  unre-
formed  sects,  transferred  the  festival  from  the  end  of  the  old
Tibetan  year,  that  is  the  eleventh  month  of  the  present  style,  to
the  end  of  its  own  year  according  to  the  new  official  year.

And  it  has  also,  in  its  version,  altered  the  motive  of  the  tragedy,
so  as  to  make  it  represent  the  assassination  of  the  Julian  of
Lamaism  (Lan-darma)  by  a  Lama  disguised  as  a  Shamanist  dancer,
and  this  is  followed  by  the  restoration  of  the  religion  by  the  aid
of  Indian  and  Chinese  monks,  and  the  subsequent  triumph  of
Lamaism,  with  its  superior  sorcery  derived  from  Buddhist  sym-
bolism.

This  version  of  the  play  calls  the  central  episode  "  the  strewing
food  of  the  sixty  iron  castles,"  '  and  it  still  further  alters,  as  I  take
it,  the  title  of  the  chief  character  to  its  further  homonym  of  "  Tag-
Tfiar,"  ^  the  red  horse-headed  Hayagriva,  a  name  borrowed  from
Hindu  mythology,  but  evidently,  as  it  seems  to  me,  suggested  by
the  cognomen  of  their  old  familiar  fiend.  Tag-mar,  the  red  Tiger-
devil,  of  the  pre-Lamaist  Bon  priests. Tiger-devils  are  also  well-


1  Drug-bchu-lchags  mk'ar-gyi  gtor-rgyags.
^  sTag-(mgrm)-iimar.


520


MYSTIC  AND SACRED  PLAYS.


known  to  Chinese  mythology,i  while  Hayagriva,  as  a Buddhist
creation,  appears  to  be  known  only  to  the  Lamaistic  form  of  Buddh-


Red  Tigek-devil  of  the  Bon.


ism,  and  his  Tantrik  book  is  admittedly  of  Tibetan  composition.

But  even  as  thus  adapted  by  the  established  church,  the  purest
of  all  the  Lamaist  sects,  the  play  still  retains,  as  will  be  presently


Tigee-Devils
(of  the  Ohiuese. The  lower  right-hand  one  is  the  Eed-tiger ;  the  central  one  is  yellow).

shown,  the  devil-dancing  Shamanist  features,  as  well  as  vestige
of  human  sacrifice,  if  not  of  actual  cannibalism.


1  See  page  396,  and  compare  also  their  relatives,  the  Cat-devils,  which  latter  take
the  only  form  of  the  cult  in  Japan.


THE  MYSTERY-PLAY.  521


Let  lis  first  look. at  the  mystery-play  or  tragedy  as  acted  by  the
Lamas  of  the  old  school,  at  Himis,  in  Ladak,  in  Sikhim,  Bhotan,
etc.,  and  afterwards  refer  to  the  versions  as  acted  by  the  reformed
and  established  church.

This  play  is  acted,  as  already  mentioned,  by  all  sects  of  Lamas,
on  the  last  day  of  the  year  when  the  community  is  en.  fete,  by
many  of  the  unreformed  sects  on  St.  Padma-sambhava's  day.

When  acted  at  the  end  of  the  year  it  forms  part  of  the  ceremony
called  "  The  sacrificial  body  of  the  dead  year," '  and  is  held  on  the
last  two  or  three  days  of  the  old  year,  from  the  28th  to  the  30th
of  the  twelfth  month.  As  the  performance  is  conducted  at  the
Himis  monastery,  in  Ladak,  in  a  much  grander  style  than  was
witnessed  by  me  in  Sikhim,  and  more  in  the  style  seen  in  Tibet,  and
as  it  has  been  there  witnessed  and  described  by  several  travellers,^  I
shall  take  the  Himis  performance  as  the  basis  of  my  description,
and  amplify  the  descriptions  of  it  where  necessary.

As  the  day  for  the  play  draws  near,  the  villagers  flock  in  from
the  country-side ;  and  on  the  morning  of  the  day  fixed  for  the
performance,  the  people,  decked  in  holidav  attire,  throng  to  the
temple  many  hours  before  that  fixed  for  the  performance,  to  secure
good  points  of  view.  Seats  are  provided  and  reserved  only  for
the  gentry  and  high  officials  and  visitors.  The  king  and  other
grandees  have  state  boxes.

The  performance  is  held  al  fresco  in  the  courtyard  of  the
temple  (see  the  photograph  on  page  528).  The  orchestra  is
sometimes  screened  off  from  view,  and  the  maskers  assemble
either  in  the  temple  or  in  yak-hair  tents,  and  are  treated  to  re-
freshments often,  and  soup  between  the  acts.

A  shriU  bugle-call,  from  a  trumpet  made  out  of  a  human  thigh-
bone,' notifies  the  commencement  of  the  play.

The  gongs  and  shawms  strike  up  a  wailing  sort  of  air,  which  the
musicians  accompany  by  a  low  chant,  and  out  come  trooping  a


1  L6-s'i  sku-rim.  The  term  sKu-rim  is  applied  to  certain  indigenous  sacrificial
ceremonies,  usually  with  bloody  offerings,  in  contradistinction  to  the  more  truly
Buddhist  ceremonial  offerings,  which  are  named  "  mch'od  "  and  "  ch'oga."

2  Notably  H.H.  Godwin-Austen  {J.A.S.B.,l?Sl,ll  seq.) ;  H.  A.  Jaeschke,  ibid.,p.  77;
ScHLAGT.,  p.  233;  Knight,  loc.  ci*.,  where  several  fine  photographs  of  the  play  are
given ;  A.  B.  Melville,  Froc.  B.A.S.,  1864,  p.  478  ; and  Ramsay's  West.  Tibet.,  p.  43.

3  Kan-lin.


522


MYSTIC  AND  SAO  RED  PLAYS.


crowd  of  the  pre-Lamaist  black-mitred  priests,  clad  in  rich  robes
ot  China  silk  and  brocade,  and  preceded  by  swingers  of  censers.
They  make  the  mystic  sign  of  «  The  Three,"  and  execute  a  stately
dance  to  slow  music.

Stretching  out  the  right  hand  and  left  alternately,  the  leaders  turn
to  the  right,  and  the  last  in  line  to  the  left,  both  advancing  and
retiring  towards  each  other  several  times,  and,  reforming  the  circle
a'lid  making  the  siga  of  the  Trident,  they  retire.

After  these  have  gone  out,  then  enter  a  troupe  of  the  man-eat-


Kings pai,ace


Secretariat Oftices S  Tbeasub'


H


3L


DiAGEAM OP KOYAL MONASTEBY  AT  TbNS-SYE-LING, LhaSa

(where  mystic  play  is  acted).

ing  malignant  demons,^  who,  with  their  hordes,  vex  and  harass
humanity.  They  infest  the  air,  the  earth,  the  water,  and  are
constantly  seeking  to  destroy  man,  not  unlike  their  better-known
relative,  who,  "  as  a  roaring  lion,  walketh  about  seeking  whom
he  may  devour."  ^  These  hordes  of  demons  are  intended  to  illustrate
the  endless  oppression  of  man  by  the  powers  of  evil,  against  whom
he  can  of  himself  do  nothing,  but  occasionally  the  exorcisms
or  prayers  of  some  good  Lama  or  incarnator  may  come  to  his
assistance  and  shield  him,  but  even  then  only  after  a  fierce  and
doubtful  contest  between  the  saints  and  the  devils.  And  only  for
a  time,  too,  can  this  relief  from  persecution  endure,  for  all  the  ex-


1  Tib.,  mGon-pa.


2  I.  Peter,  v.  8.


THE  BALLET  OF  THE  DEVLLS.


523


orcism's  of  all  the  saints  are  of  little  avail  to  keep  back  the  advan-
cing hordes.  The  shrieking  demons  must  close  in  upon  the  soul
again. 1

These  demons, now  incorporated in Tibetan Buddhism, are
regarded  as  forms  of  Durga  (Devi),  Siva  (Natha),  and  the  king  of


Demon-Maskehs.2

the  Dead  (Dharmaraja  or  Yama).'  "  Flames  and  effigies  of  human
skulls  were  worked  on  their  breasts  and  other  parts  of  their  raiment.
As  their  hoods  fell  back,  hideous  features  of  leering  satyrs  were
disclosed."''

"  In  their  right  hand  they  hold  a  bell  or  fan,  and  in  their
left  a  bowl  cut  out  of  a  human  skull,  and  round  the  edge  of  which
are  attached  narrow  streamers  of  silk  and  some  plaited  ends  of
hair.  This  ghastly  ladle  is  called  Bundah.  Some  of  the  maskers
hold  in  the  right  hand  a  short  stick,  with  red  and  blue  streamers


1  Knight,  loc.  cit.,  p.  201.

^  After  Godwin-Austen  in  J.A.S.B.,  loc.  dt.

3  The  chief  of  tliese  fiends  are  Devi,  Hayagriva,  Khyetapala,  Jinamitra,  Dakkiraja,
idud-goutrag-sag,  Iha-ch'en  brgya-po,  gzah-ch'en-brgyad-po,  kLu-ch'en,  brgyad-po,
etc.

"  Knight,  p.  203.


524  MYSTIO  AND  8A0RED  PLAYS.


of  silk ;  these  and  the  spoons  majestically  waved  about  as  they  go
round  in  their  solemn  dance  had  the  most  curious  effect  I  ever
saw." '

To  these  monsters  (now  coerced  by  Buddhism)  the  Lamas  offer  a
libation  of  beer,  and  some  rice  or  mustard-seed,  and  to  all  the  beings
of  the  six  classes,  and  especially  including  the  demons,  and  the
rice  or  seeds  are  thrown  about  freely ;  ^  and  each  Lama  present
inwardly  prays  for  the  realization  of  his  desire.

At  a  signal  from  the  cymbals  the  large  trumpets  (eight  or  ten
feet  long)  and  the  other  instruments,  pipes  and  drums,  etc.,  and
shrill  whistling  (with  the  fingers  in  the  mouth),  produce  a
deafening  din  to  summon  the  noxious  demons  and  the  enemies.
"  The  music  became  fast  and  furious,  and  troop  after  troop  of
different  masks  rushed  on,  some  beating  wooden  tambourines,
others  swelling  the  din  with  rattles  and  bells.  All  of  these  masks
were  horrible,  and  the  malice  of  infernal  beings  was  well  expressed
on  some  of  them.  As  they  danced  to  the  wild  music  with  strange
steps  and  gesticulations,  they  howled  in  savage  chorus.  .  .  .
The  solemn  chanting  ceased,  and  then  rushed  on  the  scene  a  crowd
of  wan  shapes,  almost  naked,  with  but  a  few  rags  about  them.
.  .  .  They  wrung  their  hands  despairingly,  and  rushed  about
in  a  confused  way  as  if  lost,  starting  from  each  other  in  terror  when
they  met,  sometimes  feeling  about  them  with  their  outstretched
hands  like  blind  men,  and  all  the  while  whistling  in  long-drawn
notes,  which  rose  and  fell  like  a  strong  wind  on  the  hills,  pro-
ducing an  indescribably  dreary  effect.  These,  I  was  told,  repre-
sented the  unfortunate  souls  of  dead  men  which  had  been  lost  in
space,  and  were  vainly  seeking  their  proper  sphere  through  the  dark-
ness. .  .  .  The  variously  masked  figures  of  Spirits  of  Evil
flocked  in,  troop  after  troop — oxen-headed  and  serpent-headed
devils ;  three-eyed  monsters  with  projecting  fangs,  their  heads
crowned  with  tiaras  of  human  skulls ;  Lamas  painted  and
masked  to  represent  skeletons  ;  dragon-faced  fiends,  naked  save  for
tiger-skins  about  their  loins,  and  many  others.  Sometimes  they
appeared  to  be  taunting  and  terrifying  the  stray  souls  of  men —


1  Godwin-Austen,  loc.  cit.,  p.  73.
Compare  with  the  confetti  pellets  and  odoured  powders  thrown  about  at  western
carnivals.


THE  SAINTS  AND THE  DEVILS.


525


grim  shapes  who  fled  hither  and  thither  among  their  tormentors,
waving  their  arms  and  wailing  miserably,  souls  who  had  not  ob-
tained Nirvana  and  yet  who  had  no  incarnation

Then the demons  were repelled again by  holy

men ;  but  no  sooner  did  these  last  exorcise  one  hideous  band  than
other  crowds  came  shriek-
ing on.  It  was  a  hopeless
conflict.  ...  At  one
period  of  the  ceremony  a
holy  man  .  .  .  blessed
a  goblet  of  water  by  laying
his  hands  on  it  and  intoning
some  prayer  or  charm.
Then  he  sprinkled  the
water  in  all  directions,
and  the  defeated  demons
stayed  their  shrieking,
dancing,  and  infernal
music,  and  gradually  crept
out  of  the  arena,  and  no
sound  was  heard  for  a  time
but  the  sweet  singing  of
the  holy  choir.  But  the
power  of  exorcism  was
evanescent,  for  the  routed
soon  returned  in  howling
shoals." '

The  superior  effect  of
Buddhism  over  the  indi-
genous Shamanism  is  now
shown  by  the  arrival  on
the scene of the Indian

monk,  Padma-sambhava,  and  his  assistants,  or  his  eight  forms  ;
or  sometimes  'these  are  represented  as  Buddha  himself,  or  the
group  of  the  "  Seven  Buddhas."  ^


Death-Skeleton  Masker.


1  Knight,  op.  cit.,  p.  207.

'  Cf.  page  345. The  same  motive  appears in  tlie  Burmese  religious  dramas  at
Arakan.— Haedy,  iasi.  MoiuuMsm,  p.  236.


526


MYSTIC  AND  SAOBED  PLAYS.


This  scene  is  thus  described;  "The  loud  music  suddenly
ceased,  and  all  the  demons  scampered  off  shrieking  as  if  in  fear,
for  a  holy  thing  was  approaching.  To  solemn  chanting,  low
music  and  swinging  of  censers,  a  stately  procession  came  through
the  porch  of  the  temple  and  slowly  descended  the  steps.  Under  a
canopy,  borne  by  attendants,  walked  a  tall  form  in  beautiful  silk
robes,  wearing  a  large  mask  representing  a  benign  and  peaceful
face.  As  he  advanced,  men  and  boys,  dressed  as  abbots  and
acolytes  of  the  church  of  Rome,  prostrated
themselves  before  him  and  addressed  him
with  intoning  and  pleasing  chanting.
He  was  followed  by  six  other  masks.


Devils  Fleeing  from  the  Buddhist  Saints.

who  were  treated  with  similar  respect.  These,  seven  deified  beings
drew  themselves  in  a  line  on  one  side  of  the  quadrangle  and
received  the  adoration  of  several  processions  of  masked  figures,
some  of  abbots,  and  others  beast-headed,  or  having  the  faces  of
devHs."!

These  last  are  the  demon-kings  who  have  been  coerced  by
Buddhism  into  becoming  guardians  and  defensores  fidei  of  that
religion.  And  amongst  the  worshippers  are  the  Pa- wo  or  "  heroes "
with  green  masks,  surmounted  by  triangular  red  flags,  and  girdles,
and  anklets  of  bells; and  the  solemnity  is  relieved  by  a  few


1  Knibht,  p.  204.  These  seven  masks  were,  says  Mr.  Knight,  variously  explained
as  being  the  Dalai  Lama  and  his  previous  incarnations,  wliile  another  "  explained
that  these  were  intended  for  the  incarnations  of  Buddha,  and  not  the  Dalai  Lama."


STABBING THE  ENEMY.  527

Acaryas,  or  jesters,  wlio  play  practical  jokes,  and  salute  the  holy
personages  with  mock  respect.

The  enemy  of  Tibet  and  of  Lamaism  is  now  represented  in
efBgy,  but  before  cutting  it  to  pieces,  it  is  used  to  convey  to  the
people  a  vivid  conception  of  the  manner  in  which  devils  attack
a  corpse,  and  the  necessity  for  priestly  services  of  a  quasi-Buddhist
sort  to  guard  it  and  its  soul.

Some  days  previous  to  the  commencement  of  the  play,  an  image  ^
of  a  young  lad  is  made  out  of  dough,  in  most  elaborate  fashion,
and  as  life-like  as  possible.  Organs  representing  the  heart,
lungs,  liver,  brain,  stomach,  intestines,  etc.,  are  inserted  into  it,
and  the  heart  and  large  blood-vessels  and  limbs  are  filled  with
a  red-coloured  fluid  to  represent  blood.  And  occasionally,  I  am
informed  on  good  authority,  actual  flesh  from  the  corpses  of
criminals 2  is  inserted  into  the  image  used  in  this  ceremony^  at
the  established  church  of  Potala.

This  effigy  of  the  enemy  is  brought  forth  by  the  four  cemetery-
ghouls,*  and  laid  in  the  centre  of  the  square,  and  freely  stabbed
by  the  weapons,  and  by  the  gestures  and  spells  of  the  circling
hosts  of  demons,  as  in  the  illustration  here  given.

The  necromantic  power  of  the  Lamas  is  here  shown  much  in  the
same  way  as  in  the  Burmese  sacred  play  at  Arakan.^  On  three
signals  with  the  cymbals,  two  Indian  monks  (Acaryas)  come  out
of  the  monastery,  and  blow  their  horns  and  go  through  a  series  of
droll  antics,  and  are  followed  by  two  or  more  Lamas  who  draw
around  the  effigy  on  the  pavement  of  the  quadrangle  a  magic  tri-
angle and  retire.  Then  rush  in  the  ghosts,  death-demons,  "figures
painted  black  and  white  to  simulate  skeletons,  some  in  chains,
others  bearing  sickles  or  swords,  engaged  in  a  frantic  dance  around
the  corpse. .  They  were  apparently  attempting  to  snatch  it  away
or  inflict  some  injury  on  it,  but  were  deterred  by  the  magic  efiect
of  the  surrounding  triangle  and  by  the  chanting  and  censer-swing-
ing of  several  holy  men  in  mitred  and  purple  copes. . . .

"A  more  potent  and  very  ugly  fiend,  with  great  horns  on  his  head


1  Named  liii-lca  or.

2  Preserved  and  stored  for  this  purpose  at  the  Eagyab  cemetery— in  such  cases,  the
Ge-lug-pa  Lamas  are  said  not  to  touch  this  defiling  flesh.

3  The  ceremony  is  called  drag-las.

Tur-t'od-bdag-po.  Cf.  Hardy's  JH.  Mon.,  p.  236.


528


MYSTIC  AND  SACRED  PLAYS.


and  huge  lolling  tongue,  ran  in,  hovered  threateningly  over  the
corpse,  and  with  a  great  sword  slashed  furiously  about  it,  just  fail-


Dance  of  the  Death-demons  in  Hemis  Monastery. ^

ing  by  little  more  than  a  hair's-breadth  to  touch  it  with  each
sweep  of  the  blade. He  seemed  as  if  he  were  about  to  overcome


1  After  Mr.  Knight.


THE  DANGE  OP  THE  SKELETONS.  529

the  opposing  enchanttneiit  when  a  saint  of  still  greater  power  than
he  now  came  to  the  rescue.  The  saint  approached  the  corpse  and
threw  a  handful  of  flour  on  it,  making  mystic  signs  and  muttering
incantations.  This  appeared  from  his  mask  to  be  one  of  the  in-
carnations of  Buddha.  He  had  more  control  over  the  evil  spirits
than  any  other  who  had  yet  contended  with  them.  The  skeletons,
and  also  he  that  bore  the  great  sword,  grovelled  before  him,  and
with  inarticulate  and  beast-like  cries  implored  mercy.  He  yielded
to  their  supplications,  gave  each  one  a  little  of  the  flour  he  carried
with  him,  which  the  fiends  ate  gratefully,  kneeling  before  him ;
and  he  also  gave  them  to  drink  out  of  a  vessel  of  holy  water."  ^

This  usually  concludes  one  day's  performance.^  On  the  follow-
ing day  adoration  is  paid  to  the  Jina,  by  whom  unreformed  Lamas
seem  to  intend  St.  Padma-Sambhava.  And  mustard-seed  is  blessed
and  thrown  at  the  enemy  with  singing,  dancing,  and  incantations.
And  then  occurs  the  ceremony  of  stabbing  the  enemy  by  the  phurbio
or  mystic  dagger.

Four  ghouls  bring  in  an  object  wrapped  in  a  black  cloth,  and
placing  it  on  the  ground,  dance  round  it  with  intricate  steps,  then
raising  the  cloth  disclose  a  prone  image  of  a  man,  which  has  been
made  in  the  manner  previously  described.

Then  enter  the  demon-generals  and  kings,  including  the  demon
Tam-din,  and  they  dance  around  the  image.  They  are  followed
by  the  fiendesses,  including  the  twelve  Tan-ma,  under  Devi.
These  are  followed  by  the  black-hat  devil-dancers,  and  these  are,
in  the  estabhshed  church  version,  held  to  represent  the  Lama
who  assumed  this  disguise  to  assassinate  king  Lah-darma.  The
four  guards  now  hold  the  door  to  prevent  entry  of  any  enemies  or
evil  spirits.  The  black-hats  dance  round  thrice  and  are  succeeded
by  the  god  of  Wealth,  fiendesses,  and  butchers,  the  five  great
"  ki/ngs,"^  and  their  queens  and  ministers,  also  the  state  sorcerer
of  Na-ch'uh,  and  his  eight-fold  attendants.*


1  Knight,  op.  cii.,  p.  208.

2  Mr.  Knight  (op.  cit.,  p.  209)  notes  that  "  Three  horses  and  three  dogs  were  smeared
over  with  red  paint,  and  thenceforth  dedicated  for  life  to  the  temple,  explained  as
scape-goats  for  the  sins  of  the  people,"  the  i-ed  paint  being  held  to  represent  the
sins.

•'  These  are  gyal-ch'en  sku  Ina,  yum-lna,  Sprul-pu-na  and  blon-pa.
'  gnas-ch'un,  and  rdorje  grags-ldan — the  attendants  are  male  and  female  with  dis-
hevelled hair.

M  M


530


MYSTIC  AND  SACRED  PLAYS.


Then  enters  a  fearful  fiend  named  "The  holy  king  of  Ee-
ligion,"!  with  the  head  of  a  bull,  holding  in  his  right  hand  a
dagger  with  silk  streamers,  and  in  his  left  a  human  heart  (in
effigy)  and  a  snare,  attended  by  a  retinue  of  fiends  and  fiendesses,
bearing  weapons  and  dressed  in  skins,^  human  beings,  tigers  and
leopards ;  and  the  last  to  enter  are  tiger-skin-clad  warriors  with


The  Keligious  King-devil.


bows  and  arrows.  This  part  of  the  Demon-king  can  only  be
taken  by  a  monk  of  the  purest  morals,  and  the  costly  dress  which
this  actor  wears  at  the  play  at  Potala  is  one  presented  by  the
emperor  of  China.


1  Dam-ch'an  ch'os-rgyal. By  some  regarded  as  Vajrabhairava  and  by  others  as
Yama  or  Heruka. On  Bull-lteaded  Demons  in  S.  Iiulia,  cf.  Ind.  Ant.,  p.  19.

2  These  are  made  of  painted  calico  or  silk.


THE  KING-DEVIL GUTS UP  THE  ENEMY.  531

The  King-devil,  surrounded  by  his  fiendish  hordes,  dances  and
makes  with  dagger  the  gesture  of  "  The  Three " ;  he  stabs  the
heart,  arms  and  legs  of  the  figure,  and  binds  its  feet  by  the  snare.
He  then  rings  a  bell,  and  seizing  a  sword,  chops  off  the  limbs  and
slits  open  the  breast  and  extracts  the  bleeding  heart,  lungs  and
intestines.

A  troupe  of  monsters,  with  the  heads  of  deer  and  yaks,  rush  in
and  gore  the  remains  and  scatter  the  fragments  with  their  horns
and  hands  to  the  four  directions.^

Underling  fiends  now  collect  the  fragments  into  a  huge  silver
basin  shaped  like  a  skull,  which  four  of  them  carry  to  the  Demon-
king  in  a  pompous  procession,  in  which  the  black-hat  devil-
dancers  join.  The  Demon-king  then  seizes  the  bleeding  frag-
ments, and,  eating  a  morsel,  throws  them  up  in  the  air,  when
they  are  caught  and  fought  for  by  the  other  demons,  who  throw
the  pieces  about  in  a  frantic  manner,  and  ultimately  throwing
them  amongst  the  crowd,  which  now  takes  part  in  the  orgie,  and
a  general  melee  results,  each  one  scrambling  for  morsels  of  the
fragments,  which  some  eat  and  others  treasure  as  talismans  against
wounds,  diseases  and  misfortunes.

The  service,  which  is  done  by  the  priest  who  represents  the  saint
Padma-sambhava,  is  here  summarized.  It  is  called  "  The  Expel-
ling Oblation  of  the  hidden  Fierce  Ones."^

"  Salutation  to  Padma-sambliava !  I  here  arrange  to  upset  the
hosts  of  demons,  by  the  aid  of  the  hidden  Fierce  Ones.  In  bygone
ages  you  guarded  the  Buddha's  doctrines  and  upset  all  the  harmful
spirits.  Now  the  charge  has  come  to  me,  O  !  St.  Padma !  Instruct
me  as  you  did  prince  Pearl  and  your  fairy  wife — the  Victorious  Ocean
of  Foreknowledge.  You  wrote  the  rite  and  hid  it  away  in  the  cave.
Samaya  I  rgya  ! The  sealed  secret !  "

Then  arrange  as  a  square  magic  mandala  the  cemetery,  as  the  abode
of  the  eight  classes  of  demons.  And  set  down  poison,  blood,  and  four
lotus  leaves  with  a  red  trident  in  the  centre.  And  draw  fire-flames,
doors,  etc.,  according  to  rule.  Above  it  place  a  small  table  and  on  it  a
vessel  filled  with  black  grains,  and  a  three-headed  cake.  Cover  it  up  with
an  umbrella  and  put  inside  this  house  a  linka  (image  of  wheaten  flour),
which  represents  the  injuring  demon. Then  arrange  everything  com-

1  According  to  the  reformed  Lamas,  these  animals  have  to  be  considered  as  repre-
senting tlie  Lama  who  assassinated  Lan-darma,  and  the  Demon-king  represents  the
god  Mahakala,  who  delivered  Lan-darma  into  the  Lama's  hands ;  and  the  graveyard
ghouls  are  the  scavengers  who  carried  off  the  king's  corpse.

2  gTor-zlog  and  is  extracted  from  the  pti  volume  of  bLa-ma-norbu-rgya-mts'o.

M  M 2


532  MYSTIC  AND  SACRED  PLAYS.

plete  with  the  various  sorts  of  offerings,  and  then  do  the  necessary
rites.

First  of  all  invoke  one's  own  tutelary  thus : —

"Hum  !  O  !  Chief  of  fiercest  thunderbolts,  immovable  and  vast  as  the
sky,  the  overruling  angry  one  !  I  invoke  you  who  are  possessed  of
supreme  strength,  and  able  to  subjugate  all  three  empty  worlds  to
do  my  desires.  I  invoke  you  to  rise  from  the  burning  sky.  I,  the
spell-holder,  invoke  you  with  great  reverence  and  faith.  You  must
ripen  all  the  fruits  of  my  desires,  otherwise  you  shall  suffer,  0 !  tutelary ! '
Arise  from  the  sky  and  come  forth  with  all  your  retinue,  and  quickly
route  the  demons."

Then  here  offer  a  libation  of  wine.

Now  the  mantra-holder  must  mentally  conceive  that  the  house  is  full
of  clouds  and  that  he  is  sitting  in  the  presence  of  his  tutelary ;  while
the  fire  of  anger  burns  outside,  the  mist  of  poison  floats  inside;  the
Las-byed-gs'ed-ma  is  killing  the  animals,  and  the  evil  spirits  are  wander-
ing about.  The  devil  now  must  assume  a  sorrowful  state  owing  to  his
separation  from  his  patron  and  protector.

Then  recite  the  following : —

"Namo  !  The  commands  of  the  Lama  are  true,  the  commands  of  the
Three  Holy  Ones  true;  and  so  are  those  of  the  fierce  Thunderbolt
Lama,  etc.,  etc.  Through  the  power  of  the  great  truths,  Buddha's
doctrines,  the  image  of  the  noble  Lama,  the  riches  of  wealthy  people
and  all  the  lucky  times,  let  the  hosts  of  demons  of  the  three  regions
come  forth  and  enter  this  litika  image. V ajra-Agushaja  !  "

Then  chant  the  following  for  keeping  the  demons  at  bay  : —

Hum  !  Through  the  blessing  of  the  blood-drinking  Fierce  One,  let
the  injuring  demons  and  evil  spirits  be  kept  at  bay.  I  pierce  their
hearts  with  this  hook ;  I  bind  their  hands  with  this  snare  of  rope ;  I
bind  their  body  with  this  powerful  chain ;  I  keep  them  down  with  this
tinkling  bell.  Now,  O  !  blood -drinking  Angry  One,  take  your  sublime
seat  upon  them.  Vajor-Agu-cha-dsa  !  vajora-pasha-hum  .'  vajora-s'po-da-
va  !  vajora-ghan-dhi-ho  .' "

Then  chant  the  following  for  destroying  the  evil  spirits : —

"  Salutation  to  Heruka,  the  owner  of  the  noble  Fierce  Ones  !  The  evil
spirits  have  tricked  you  and  have  tried  to  injure  Buddha's  doctrine,  so

extinguish  them Tear  out  the  hearts  of  the  injuring

evil  spirits  and  utterly  exterminate  them."

Then  the  supposed  corpse  of  the  linka  should  be  dipped  in  Eakta
(blood),  and  the  following  should  be  chanted  : —

"Hum/  0  !  ye  hosts  of  gods  of  the  magic-circle  !  Open  your  mouths
as  wide  as  the  earth  and  sky,  clench  your  fangs  like  rocky  mountains,
and  prepare  to  eat  up  the  entire  bones,  blood,  and  the  entrails  of  all
the  injuring  evil  spirits.  Ma-ha  mam-sa-la  Icha  hi  I  Ma-ha  tsitta-Ma-
hi  !  maha-rakta  kJia-Jii  !  maha-go-ro-tsa-na-kha-hi  !  Maha-hah-su-ta
hha-M  ! Maha-keng-ni  ri  ti  klia  hi  !  "


1  Compare  this  threat  with  the  kiUing  of  the  gods— in  Feazeh's  Ooldeti  Bough.


FIOHT  FOR  FRAGMENTS  OF  EFFIGY.  533

Then  chant  the  following  for  upsetting  the  evil  spirits : —

"  Hum  !  Bhyo  !  The  black  grains  and  a  three-headed  cake  are  duly
set  on  the  Buddha's  plate :  the  weapons  flash ;  the  poisonous  vapour
flows ;  the  Fierce  Ones  thunder  their  mantras ;  the  smell  of  the  plague  is
issuing;  but  this  three-headed  cake  cau  cure  all  these  disasters,  and
can  repress  the  injuring  demon  spirits.

"■  Bhyo  I  BTiyo  !  On  the  angry  enemies!  On  the  injuring  demon
spirits ! On  the  voracious  demons  !  turn  them  all  to  ashes  !

"  Mah-ra-ya-rhad  bhyo  1 Upset  them  all ! Upset ! Upset !
"  '  Let  glory  Come '  and  Virtue  ! Sddhu  !  "

A  burnt  sacrifice  is  now  made^  By  the  Demon-king.  He  pours
oil  into  a  cauldron,  under  whicli  a  fire  is  lit,  and  when  the  oil
is  boiling,  he  ties  to  the  end  of  a  stick  which  he  holds  an  image
of  a  man  made  of  paper,  and  he  puts  into  the  boiling  oil  a  skull
filled  with  a  mixture  of  arak  J^um),  poison,  and  blood,  and  into
this  he  puts  the  image ;  and  when  the  image  bursts  into  flame,
he  declares  that  all  the  injuries  have  been  consumed.

This  rite  is  followed  by  a  procession  to  abandon  a  large  three-
headed  image  of  dough,^  to  the  top  of  which  many  threads  and
streamers  are  tied.  This  procession  of  monks  is  preceded  by  the
maskers,  numbering  several  hundreds  in  the  larger  monasteries,^
clanging  noisy  cymbals  and  blowing  thigh-bone  trumpets,  etc.
The  laity  follow  in  the  rear,  brandishing  guns  and  other  weapons,
and  shouting  ^^  Brag-ge-^uk  c'am."  And  when  the  image  is
abandoned  the  crowd  tear  it  to  pieces  and  eagerly  fight  for  the
fragments,  which  are  'treasured  as  charms.  A  gun  is  then  fired
amid  general  shouts  of  joy,  and  the  Lamas  return  to  the  temple
for  a  celebration  of  worship.

The  play  is  now  practically  over.  The  black- cap  devil-dancers
again  appear  with  drums,  and  execute  their  manoeuvres,  and  the
performance  concludes  with  the  appearance  of  the  Chinese  priest.


1  Named  Hom-isreks ;  Skt.,  Huma. Cf.  Vasil.,  194  ;  Schlag.,  251.

'^  gtor-gyaJ£.

'  At  the  monastery  of  Tin-ge,  to  the  west  of  Tashi-lhunpo,  and  where  this  play  is
conducted,  as  at  other  6e-lug-pa  monasteries,  at  government  expense,  this  procession,
1  am  informed,  consists  of  six  pairs  of  thigh-bone  trumpet  blowers,  five  censer-
swingers,  two  pairs  of  long  horn  players,  several  skull  libationers,  100  maskers  with
small  drams,  100  maskers  with  cymbals,  and  100  with  large  drums,  beliind  whom
walk  the  ordinary  monks,  shouting  and  clapping  their  hands,  followed  by  the  laity
armed  with  guns  and,  other  weapons,  and  forming  a  procession  over  a  mile  in
length.


534  MYSTIC  AND  SACRED  PLATS.

entitled  Hwashang,  who  was  expelled  from  Tibet  by  St.  Padma.
This  Chinese  priest  is  represented  with  a  fatuous  grinning  large-
mouthed  mask  (see  fig.  3,  page  536),  and  attended  by  two  boys
like  himself.  They  go  through  a  form  of  worship  of  the  images,
but  being  unorthodox,  it  is  ridiculed  by  the  spectators.

This  mystic  play  is  conducted  at  all  monasteries  of  the  es-
tablished church,  at  government  expense.  The  greatest  of  these
performances  are  held  at  Potala,  Muru  Tasang,'  and  Tashi-lhunpo
at  the  end  of  the  old  year,  and%t  the  priest-king's  palace  of  Teng-
gye-ling  on  the  twenty-ninth  day  of  the  eighth  month.

At  Potala  it  is  held  in  the  courtyard  of  the  Grand  Lama's
chapel  royil,  the  Nam-gyal  temple -monastery.  The  dough-
images  and  cakes  begin  to  be  prepared  from  the  second  day  of
the  twelfth  month,  and  from  the  third  to  the  ninth  the  whole
convent  is  engaged  in  the  worship  of  the  terrible  guardian-demons^
of  the  country,  and  of  Ye-she-Gon-po  or  Mahakala.

The  rest  of  the  month  till  the  eventful  day  is  occupied  in  re-
hearsals and  other  preparations.  Before  dawn  on  the  twenty-
ninth,  the  play-manager,  after  worshipping  the  demons,  arranges
the  banners,  instruments,  and  carpets.^  At  the  first  blast  of  the
great  conch-shell  trumpet,  the  populace  assemble.  On  the  second
blast  the  state  ofiicials  enter  and  take  their  seats,  the  Shab-pe  or
state  ministers,  Dun-k'or,  and  Tse-dun.  And  on  the  third  blast,
the  Tibetan  king-regent  enters  with  all  his  attendants,  and  he
invites  the  attendance  of  his  Defending  Majesty,*  the  Dalai  Lama,
who  enters  a  small  state-box^  named  "  The  world's  transparency."

The  orchestra,  which  is  screened  off  in  a  tent,  begins  by  blowing
a  thigh-bone  trumpet  thrice,  followed  by  the  great  cymbals  ^  and
drums ;'  then  out  troop  the  black-hatted  Shamanist  dancers,  and
the  play  proceeds  as  above  detailed.  In  the  concluding  ceremony
the  large  cake,  surmounted  by  a  human  head,  is  burned,  and  is
considered  to  typify  the  burning  of  the  present  enemies  of
Lamaism.

But  the  grandest  display  takes  place  at  the  king-regent's  own
monastery  of  Teng-gye-ling,  of  which  I  have  given  a  sketch-
plan  of  the  buildings,  etc.,  from  information  supplied  to  me  by  a
monk  who  has  taken  part  frequently  in  the  play there. The


This  is  chiefly  attended  by  old  women  and  cliildren. \  6Srun-ma.
'  p'an-rgyal-mts'an  p'ye-p'ur,  s'am-bu,  ba-ran.  *  kyab-mgon  rin-po-ch'e.

'  Tim-ch'un  °  "The  glorious  great  cymbals.


ROYAL VBESIOJV OF  PLAY.  535

Lama  who  acts  as  regent  is  the  de  facto  ruler  of  Tibet,  and  is
generally  known  as  "  the  King'"  and  also  called  "  The  country's
Majesty."^  The  superior  guests  and  nobility  who  have  received
invitations  are  permitted  to  pitch  their  tents  upon  the  roof  of  the
monks'  quarters,  and  the  populace  are  kept  outside  the  arena  by
a  rope  barrier.

An  account  of  the  play  at  Tashi-lhunpo  has  been  given  by  Mr.
Bogle.^  It  took  place  in  a  large  court  under  the  palace,  and  the
surrounding  galleries  were  crowded  with  spectators.  Another
short  account*  describes  the  court  as  surrounded  by  pillared  bal-
conies, four  storeys  high.  The  Grand  Lama's  seat  was  on  the
second  storey.  The  other  seats  in  the  lower  balcony  were  oc-
cupied by  the  families  of  chiefs  and  nobles.  In  the  upper  were
pilgrims  and  merchants.  The  stage  manager  held  a  dorje  and
bell-like  Dorje-ch'ah,  but  had  an  abbot's  hat.  After  a  prayer
there  entered  a  figure  representing  "  the  celebrated  Dharmatala,
who  invited  the  sixteen  Sthaviras  to  China  for  the  diffusion  of
Buddhism."  His  mask  was  dark  with  yawning  mouth  to  mean
ecstasy.  Numerous  scarves  were  thrown  to  him  by  the  spectators,
which  were  picked  up  by  his  two  wives,  with  painted  yellow  com-
plexions. Then  came  the  four  kings  of  the  quarters,  dressed  in
barbaric  splendour.  Following  these  came  the  sons  of  the  gods,
about  sixty  in  number,  dressed  with  silk  robes,  and  glittering  with
ornaments  of  gold,  precious  stones,  and  pearls.  Following  these
were  Indian  acharyas,  whose  black-bearded  faces  and  Indian  dress
excited  loud  laughter  among  spectators.  Then  followed  the  four
warders  of  the  cemeteries  in  skeleton  dress.  Afterwards  "the
body  of  the  devil  in  effigy  was  burnt,  a  pile  of  dry  sedge  being  set
on  fire  upon  it."  Incense  was  burnt  on  the  hill-tops  in  the  neigh-
bourhood.

The  masks  used  in  this  play  deserve  some  notice.  In  Tibet  the
great  masks'^  are  made  of  mashed  paper  and  cloth,  and  occasionally
of  gilt  copper."  In  Sikhim  and  Bhotan,  etc.,  where  wood  is  abun-
dant, and  the  damp  cUmate  is  destructive  to  papier-machS,  they
are  carved  out  of  durable  wood.^ In  all  cases  they  are  fantastically


1  i-^yal-po.  2  bde-mo  rin-po-che.  s  Mahkh.,  p.  106.

4  On  the  17th  February,  1882,  by  Saeat,  in  Narmtice.

5  ?('bag.  6  gser-san.

'  In  Sikhim  they  are  made  from  the  giant  climber  called  "zai-:'


536


MYSTIC  AND  SACKED  PLAYS.


painted,  and  usually  provided  with  a  wig  of  yak-tail  of  different
colours.


Some  Masks.

1.  Ghoul.  i-  A  fiendess.

2.  Bull-headed  K'ang. 5.  A  locality  gen'us.

3.  HwBshang.  6.  A  "  Teacher."

7.  Hwashang's  s  'n.


THE  MASKS.


537


I. — King  of  the
Ogres  {sKu)


The  masks  may  be  broadly  classed  into  the  following  five
groups  1 ;  though  the  so-ualled  reformed  Lamas  have  modified  some
of  these,  as  already  noted.

1.  Drag-mar,-  or  "The  Terrible  Red  One."
Sometimes  called  Guru  Drag-s'ed,  or  Yes'e-
Gon-po,and  "Religious  Protector,'" andregarded
as  the  god  of  Death,  Mahakala,  and  also  as  a
form  of  St.  Padma-sambhava.  His  mask  is  of
hideous  anthropomorphic  appearance  and  huge
size,  with  great  projecting  tusks  and  three  eyes;
the  vertical  eye  on  the  centre  of  the  forehead  is
the  eye  of  fore-knowledge.  And  it  bears  a
chaplet  of  five  skulls,  with  pendants  of  human
bones.

The  Ten  Awful  Ogres,  and  the  Ten  Ogresses.  These  are  generally
like  the  above.  The  females  only  differ  in  having  no  beards  nor  horns.
The  chief  are  :

2.  Lha-mo  cUIag-zor-ma,  identified  with  Killi,
the  consort  of  Mahakala,  and  of  a  blue  colour ;
measly  lips.  As  Ran-'byun-ma  she  is  green,
and  her  mouth  is  shut  and  not  gaping  as  in  the

!  former.

3.  Ts'e-marra.^  Red  like  number  one.

4.  The  Bull-headed  (Lah).  Black  in  colour
with  three  eyes  and  bearing  a  banner"  on  ibs
forehead. It  is  also  called  "  ma-c'an." "

5.  The  Tiger-headed  (sTag),  brown  and  yellow-
striped.

6.  The  Lion  (Seh-ge). White.

7.  TheRoc,  orGaruda(Kyun).  Coloured  green.
8  The  Monkey  (spre-ul). Ruddy-brown.
9.  The  Stag  (S'a-ba).' Pawn-coloured.

10.  The  Yak. '  Coloured  black.


II.  — The Angry
Ogres  (To-wo).


III.— The  Ghouls-


J 11. Tw, or grave-yard ghouls, with skull
I  masks  and  clothes  representing  skeletons.


1  Excluding  those  of  the  Buddhas,  which  are  not  essential  to  the  play,  and  seldom
appear.

2  According  to  some  the  Garuda  (bya-m'kyuii)  or  Koc  should  occupy  the  highest
place.  It  is  yellow,  with  a'bird's  beak,  yak's  horns,  and  erect  hair,  forming  a  spiked
crest. It  is  said  to  be  even  superior  to  the  sixteen  great  saints,  the  Sthavira.

3  He  is  also  identified  with  forms  known  as  Na-nin-nag-po,  Legs-ldan  nag-po,  Ber-
nag-po.

■*  Ch'oR-skyon  brtse-dmar-ra.

'  rgyal-mts'an.

"  dma-c'an  c'os-rgyal.

'  This  seems  intended  for  the  Indian  SnnMar.


Master-Demons,


v.— The  Teachers.  <


538  MYSTIC  AND  SACRED  PLAYS.

12.  Sa-bdag  Genii.  These  have  large  hideous
masks  but  only  one  pair  of  eyes,  as  representing

IV. — The  Earth-J  their  subordinate  position. Their  chief  is  called
~  "The great guardian King,"' and he is

attended  by  red  demons  ( Tsan)  and  black  ones
{Dud),  etc.

13.  Acaryas.  These  have  small  cloth  masks
of  ordinary  size,  and  of  a  white,  or  clay,  or
black  colour  ;  and  their  wives  are  red-  or  yellow-
complexioned.  The  hair  of  these  "Teachers  "is
blue  in  colour,  and  done  up  into  a  chignon  on
the  crown  as  with  Indian  Yogis.  Although  they
represent  the  early  Indian  priests  who  brought
Buddhism  to  Tibei^,  they  are,  as  in  ancient
India,  the  buffoons  and  jesters  of  the  play.

14.  Hva-shang.  This  is  a  huge,  fatuous,  round
mask  of  a  red  colour,  to  represent  a  historical
Chinese  Buddhist  monk  of  the  eighth  century.
And  he  is  attended  by  several  of  his  sons  ^  with
similar  masks.

The  dresses  of  the  King-demon  and  Ogre  maskers  are  of  the
most  costly  silk  and  brocade,  and  usually  with  capes,  which  show
Chinese  influence.^  Those  of  the  others  are  usually  woollen  or
cotton.  And  the  robes  of  those  actors  who  represent  the  demons,
who  get  severely  cudgelled  by  their  superiors,  are  thickly  padded
to  resist  the  blows  which  fall  on  them.

Where  there  are  a  number  of  one  class  going  in  processions  or
dancing,  those  dressed  alike  go  in  pairs.  The  weapons  carried  by
the  maskers  have  already  been  referred  to.  Most  are  made  of
wood  carved  with  thunderbolts.  The  staves  of  the  skeleton
maskers  are  topped  by  a  death's-head.  The  sword  made  by  string-
ing together  Chinese  brass  coins  ("  Cash")  is  called  the  Silingtun,
from  the  province  of  Siling  in  western  China,  whence  these  coins
come  to  Tibet.

Another  religious  pantomime,  performed,  however,  by  lay  actors,
is  the  Lion-Dance.  It  is  not  enacted  at  the  new  year,  but  at
other  seasons,  when  the  people  are  en  fete.


1  rgyal-cli'en-po  bsrung*  bstan-po,  and  seems  related  to,  or  identical  with  the  "  Five
Kings  "  and  Heroes  (dpa-o).

^  Ha-p'ug.

3  These  capes  generally  show  the  trigrams  and  other  symbols  of  luck  and  long
life  including  the  Bat.


LION  DANCE— JATAKAS.


539


The  plot  is  based  upon  the  mythical  lion  of  the  Himalayan  snows,
which  is  believed  to  confer  fortune  on  the  country  where  it  resides.
One  of  these  lions  was  enticed  to  China  by  a  wizard,  and,  somewhat
like  La  Mascotte,  the  crops  and  cattle  prospered  as  long  as  it  lived,  and
when  it  died  the  Chinese  stripped  off  its  skin,  with  which  they  conduct
this  dance.  The  lion  is  represented  as  about  the  size  of  an  ox.
Its  head  and  shoulders  are  formed  by  a  framework,  which  one  man
manipulates  from  the  interior,  while  another  man  occupies  its  hind-
quarters. A  harlequin  mummer  with  a  variety  of  rough-and-tumble


Lion-dance.


antics  introduces  the  beast,  which  enters  with  leaps  and  bounds  and
goes  through  a  variety  of  manceuvres,  including  mounting  on  a  table,
and  the  performance  is  diversified  by  the  capers  of  clowns  and  acrobats.


The  Sacred  Dkamas.

The  sacred  dramas,  which  are  based  upon  the  JdtaJcas  or  former
births  of  Buddha,  are  very  popular.  They  are  performed  by  pro-
fessional lay  actors  and  actresses,  generally  known  as  "  A-lche-lha-
mo,"  though  this  title  "  goddess-sister  "  is  strictly  applicable  only
to  the  actresses  who  take  the  part  of  the  goddesses  or  their  in-
carnations. Strolling  parties  of  these  actors  travel  about  Tibet,
especially  during  the  winter  months,  and  they  frequently  act  in
the  presence  of  the  Grand  Lama  himself.

The  play  is  usually  performed  alfresco,  without  a  stage  frame  to


540


MYSTIC  AND  SACEEV  PLAYS.


the  picture,  but  to  obtain  the  due  sense  of  illusion  it  is  usually  done
at  night  by  lantern-light.  The  plot  is  presented  in  the  form  of  a
chanted  narrative,  comparable  to  the  chorus  of  the  Greek  plays,  in
the  course  of  which  the  several  leading  characters,  dressed  in  suit-
able costume,  come  forth  and  speak  for  themselves.  It  is  thus
somewhat  like  the  narration  of  a  novel  with  the  conversational
parts  acted.  Some  buffoonery  is  given  as  a  prelude  and  to  also
fill  up  the  intervals  between  tlie  acts. These  buffoons  usually  are


AcTons  oi'  THE  Visvaxtaea-Play.

the  so-called  hunters  ' ;  but  sometimes,  as  in  the  old  Hindii  dramas,
the  buffoons  are  Brahmans.

The  most  popular  of  all  the  dramas  which  they  play  are  the
Visvantara  (Vessantajra)  Jataka,  or  the  last  great  Birth  of  Buddha,
and  the  indigenous  drama  of  Nan-sa,  or  The  Brilliant  Light.  But
they  also  at  times  play  amongst  other  pieces  the  Sudhana  Jataka,^
the  marriage  of  king  Sron  Tsan  Gampo,^  the  Indian  king  (?)
Amoghasiddha,*  and  the  fiendess  D6-ba-zan-mo.^


1  rnon-pa  blue  masks  adorned -with  cowries,  and  have  Idlts  of  Yak's-hair  ropes  'whicli
fly  round  at  right  angles  as  the  men  pirouette  like  dancing  dervishes.
-  Cb'os-rgyal-nor-bzan.  ^  rgya-za  pal-za.

*  rgyal-po  don-grub.  »  'rgo-ba-bzan-mo,  the  consoit  cf  Kalesvaia.


PRINCE riSVANTARA.  541

VISVANTARA.

THE  GREATEST  OF  BUDDHA'S FORMER  BIRTHS.

Throughout  the  Buddhist  world  the  story  of  prince  Visvantara
is  the  most  favourite  of  all  the  tales  of  Buddha's  former  births.'
It  represents  the  climax  of  the  virtuous  practice  (the  pdrdmita)
of  charity,  in  which  the  princely  Bodhisat,  in  order  to  attain  Buddha-
hood,  cuts  himself  loose  from  all  worldly  ties  by  giving  away  not
only  all  his  wealth,  but  also  his  children  and  even  his  beloved  wife.

It  is  one  of  the  most  touching  of  the  legendary  tales  of  its  class,
and  still  exercises  a  powerful  fascination  for  orientals,  moving
many  to  tears.  Even  the  rough  Indo-Scythian  tribes,  who  invaded
India  about  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era,  could  not  refrain
from  tears  when  they  saw  the  picture  of  the  sufferings  of  this
prince.2  It  is  sculptured  on  the  Sanchi  Topes  at  Bhilsa,  and  it  is
also  the  most  favourite  of  all  the  sacred  plays  with  the  southern
Buddhists  ^ ;  though,  as  Mr.  Ealston  observes,  "  such  acts  of
renunciation  as  the  princely  Bodhisat  accomplished  do  not  com-

1  Of  the  ten  Great  (former)  Births  (Mahajataka)  this  is  considered  the  greatest,  and
it  was  the  last  earthly  birth  but  one  of  the  Bodhisat.  It  purports  to  have  been  nar-
rated by  Buddha  himself  at  the  monastery  of  the  Fig-tree  (Nigrodha,  Ficus  Ivdica)  in
Buddha's  native  country  of  Kapilavastu,  d,  pvjMs  of  the  over-weening  pride  of  his
own  kindred.  The  Miliiida  dialogues  {loc.  cit.),  written  about  150  a.d.,  contain  many
references  to  it.

^  Sung  Yun's  history,  translated  by  S.  Beal,  Records,  p.  201.

3  See  Hardy's  Man.,  pp.  116-124.  The  late  Captain  Forbes,  in  his  work  on  British
Bm-ma  and  its  People,  says  :  "  One  of  the  best  I  think,  and  certainly  the  most  inter-
esting performances  I  have  seen  in  Burma,  was  that  of  a  small  children's  company  in
a  village  of  about  two  hundred  houses.  The  eldest  performer  was  about  fourteen,
the  daughter  of  the  head  man,  a  slight  pretty  girl ;  the  others  boys  and  girls,  younger.
The  parents  and  villagers  generally  were  veiy  proud  of  their  talents,  and  they  were
regularly  trained  by  an  old  man  as  stage-manager,  prompter,  etc.  Their  principal  piece
was  the  Way-than-da-ra,  the  story  of  one  of  the  previous  existences  of  Gan-da-ma,  in
which  he  exemplified  the  great  virtue  of  alms-giving,  and  in  itself  one  of  the  most
affecting  and  beautifully  written  compositions  in  Bui-ma.  .  The  little  company
used  to  perform  this  piece  capitally,  but  the  acting  of  the  little  maid  of  fourteen  in
the  part  of  the  princess  could  not  be  surpassed.  She  seemed  really  to  have  lost  her-
self in  her  part ;  and  her  natural  and  graceful  attitudes  heightened  the  effect.  The
first  time  I  witnessed  the  performance  in  going  round  and  saying  a  word  to  the  tiny
actors,  when  I  came  to  the  little  fellow  of  ten  or  eleven  who  had  acted  the  part  of  the
surly  and  greedy  Brahmin,  I  pretended  to  be  disgusted  with  his  cruelty  to  the  two
poor  infants.  This  the  little  man  took  in  earnest,  so  much  to  heart  that  as  I  learnt,
on  my  next  visit,  nothing  would  induce  him  to  act  the  part  again,  and  it  was  not
till  his  father  almost  forcibly  brought  him  to  me  and  I  had  soothed  him  by  what  was
deemed  most  condescending  kindness  and  excited  his  vanity,  that  I  could  obtain  a
repetition  of  the  play."  Captain  Forbes  also  states  that  he  has  seen  men  moved  to
tears  by  the  acting  of  this  play.


542


MYSTIC  AND SACRED PLAYS.


30


28


■25


Key  to  Picture  of  Visvantara  Jataka.

34
37


■21


24


22


49


44


14


46


35


27

33

36

38

32

31

29-

39

40

16

26

41
43

42

9a
15

45


48


20


10


13

17  1


47


•1 The sonless  king and queen  be-
wailing their  lot.

2.  A  son  is  obtained  after  worshipping

the  Buddhas.

3.  A  princess  souglit  for  his  wife.

4.  His  suit  urged  by  princess's  father.

5.  Bride  leaving  her  father's  palace.

6.  Visvantara  meeting  his  bride.
■7.  Their  family.

.8.  Giving  charity.

9.  Brahman  sent  for  the  Wishing  Gem.

9a.  Brahman  begging  the  gem.
40.  Prince  hesitating  to  give  it.
11.  Leads  Brahman  to  his  treasury.
12 Brahman  refusing  other  jewels.

13.  Prince  giving  up  gem.

14.  Placing  it  on  white  elephant.
■15.  Arrival  of  Brahman  -with  jewel.

16.  Its  deposit  in  the  enemy's  palace.

17.  Prince  upbraided  by  his  family.

18.  Minister  urging  king  to  kill  prince.

19.  Prince  saved  from  lynching.
•20.  His  banishment.

21.  Citizens  bidding  him  farewell.

22.  Brahmans  beg  his  elephants.
-23.  Brahmans  beg  his  chariots.
.24.  He  and  family  proceed  on  foot.
J2S.  Miraculous  crossing  of  river.


11


7
12


19


6

26.  Travelhng  to  forest  of  banishment.

27.  In  forest.

28.  Brahman  begging  for  the  children.

29.  Children  leave-taking.

30.  Brahman  beating  the  children.

31.  Takes  them  to  his  home.

32.  Engaged  as  drudges.

33.  Forest  hut.

34.  Princess  gathering  food.

35.  Birds  assisting  her.

36.  She  is  begged  by  Indra  (Jupiter).

37.  And  is  given  and  taken  off.

38.  Prince  visited  by  1,000  Buddhas.

39.  Worship  by  animals,  Nagas,  etc.

40.  His  departure  from  forest  with  re-

stored wife.
41;  Gives  his  eyes  to  blind  beggar.

42.  The  restored  blind  man's  gratitude.

43.  The  blind  prince  led  onwards.

44.  The  Buddhas  restore  his  sight.

45.  The  wicked  king  begs  forgiveness.

46.  The  Brahman  returns  the  jewel.

47.  Prince's  joyous  reception.

48.  The prince and family  at  home

again.

49.  The  prince's  re-birth  as  St.  Padma,

the  founder  of  Lamaism.


The  Buddhism  of  Tibet.


The  oseat  Foembr  Birth  of  Buddha  as  the  Chaeitaele  Prince

ViSVANTABA.


[To  face  p.  mZ.


1
1

1
-1.
1

-II

r
11

1!
■2(
21
,2S
.2J
■24


PRINCE VISVANTARA.  543

mend  themselves  to  the  western  mind.  An  oriental  story-teller
can  describe  a  self-sacrificing  monarch  as  cutting  slices  of  flesh  out
of  his  own  arms  and  plunging  them  in  the  fire  in  honour  of  a
deity,  and  yet  not  be  afraid  of  exciting  anything  but  a  religious
thrill  among  his  audience.  To  European  minds  such  a  deed  would
probably  appear  grotesque."  '

The  text  of  the  story,  as  found  in  the  Tibetan  canon,^  agrees
generally  with  the  Pali"  and  Burmese*  accounts.  I  give  here
an  abstract  of  the  version^  which  is  currently  acted  in  western
Tibet.  It  differs  in  several  details  from  the  canonical  narrative
and  in  the  introduction  of  some  incidents,  such  as  the  bestowal  of
his  eyes,  which  are  usually  regarded  as  pertaining  to  other  Jatakas,
and  it  also  is  given  a  local  Tibetan  application,  and  the  founder  of
Lamaism,  St.  Padma,  is  made  to  appear  as  a  reincarnation  of  the
prince  Visvantara.  To  illustrate  the  text,  I  give  its  pictorial
representation  as  a  reduced  tracing  from  a  Tibetan  painting.

The  Omnipotent  Pure  One,"

OK

The  Pkince  op  Charity.

Salutation  to  the  Suhlime  Lord  of  the  World  ! '

Long  long  ago,  in  the  city  of  Baidha,"  in  India,  there  reigned  a  king
named  Gridhip,"  who,  after  propitiating  the  gods  and  dragons,  had  a


1  Tibetan  Tales,  p.  Ivii.

2  Kah-gyur,  iv.,  ff.  192-200,  translated  by  Schiefner  and  Englished  by  Ealston,  in
"■Tibetan  Tales,"  p.  257,  who  also  traces  its  comparative  aspect,  p.  Ivii.  In  the
following  account  those  portions  which  are  identical  with  the  canonical  version  are
put  in  quotation  marks  when  given  in  Ralston's  words.

3  Wessantara  Jdtaka,  Hahdy's  Mamial,  116-124,  and  ISast.  Monach.,  83-428.  Milinda
loc.  cit.  \  Upham,  Hist,  and  Doct.  of  Buddhism,  p.  25  ;  S.  de  Oldenburg,  J.R.A.S.,  1893,
p.  301.

*  "  The  Story  of  We-than-da-yu,"  Englished  from  the  Burmese  version  of  the  Pali
text  by  L.  A.  Goss,  Kangoon,  American  Bap.  Mission,  1886.

»  Translated  from  the  MS.  of  a  company  of  Tibetan  actors  from  Shigatse.  It
generally  agrees  with  the  version  in  the  Manikah-bum.

"  Dri-med-kun-Zdan  (pronounced  Ti-med  Kiln-den).

7  Ndmo  aryaloke^vara.

8  In  the  Mani-kah-bum  it  is  called  "  The  Sounding  "  (sGra-chau).  In  the  Kah-gyur
"  Yisvanagara."  It  is  believed  by  Tibetans  to  be  the  ancient  Videha  which  they
identify  with  the  modern  "Bettiah"  in  northern  Bengal,  but  it  was  evidently  in
northern  India.

9  According  to  the  Kah-gyur,  Visvamitra ;  the  Mani-kah-'bum  gives  "  the  Voice  of  the
Drum-Sound"  (sgra-tiftyang-crega-sgra),  and  the  Pali  "Sanda"  and  Burmese  •' Thaiu
See."— Goss,  loc  cit.,  p.  7.


544  MYSTIC  AND  SACEED  PLAYS.

son  born  unto  him  by  his  favourite  queen,  "  The  Pure  Young  Goddess,"  ^
and  the  prince  was  named  by  the  Brahmans  the  "  Omnipotent  Pure
Lord  of  the  World''  [but  we  shall  call  him  by  the  better  known  name  of
Visvantara].  This  prince  grew  luxuriantly,  "  like  a  lotus  in  a  pool,"
and  soon  acquired  all  accomplishments.  He  was  "  addicted  to  magna-
nimity, bestowing  presents  freely  and  quite  dispassionately  and  assiduous
in  giving  away."  When  men  heard  of  his  excessive  generosity,  num-
bei'less  crowds  flocked  to  beg  of  him  from  all  directions,  and  he  sent
none  of  them  away  without  having  fully  realized  their  expectations,  so
that  after  a  few  years  of  this  wholesale  almsgiving,  no  poor  people
were  left  in  the  country — all  had  become  rich.

Now,  this  country  owed  its  prosperity  to  an  enchanted  wish-granting
gem,'  which  was  kept  in  the  custody  of  the  king,  and  by  virtue  of
which  the  stores  in  his  treasury,  notwithstanding  the  enormous  amounts
which  were  daily  given  away  by  his  son,  never  grew  less.  The  traditional
enemy  of  this  country,  the  greedy  king "  of  a  barren  land,''  hearing  of
the  prince's  vow  to  bestow  any  part  of  his  property  on  anyone  who
asked  for  it,  seoi'etly  instructed  one  of  his  Brahmans  to  go  and  beg  from
the  prince  the  enchanted  gem.

So  the  Brahman  having  arrived  at  the  gate  of  the  palace,  threw
himself  before  the  prince,  exclaiming,  with  outstretched  hands :  "  Vic-
tory to  thee,  0  prince  !  our  land  is  famished  for  want  of  rain,  therefore
give  unto  me  the  enchanted  Jewel !  "

Now,  prince  Visvantara  was  deeply  distressed  at  hearing  such  n
request,  and  he  hesitated  to  give  away  this  precious  gem,  through  fear
of  offending  his  father,  the  king,  and  the  people ;  but  finding  that
the  Brahman  would  accept  nothing  less  than  this  gem,  and  reflect-
ing that  if  he  refused  to  give  away  any  of  his  property  which  had
been  asked  from  him,  his  charitable  merit  would  cease,  he  besought
the  blessing  of  the  gem  by  placing  it  on  his  head,  and  then  gave
it  away  without  regret,  saying,  "May  I,  by  this  incomparable  gift,  be-
come a  Buddha."  And  the  Brahman  carried  off  the  gem  on  a  white
elephant  to  the  foreign  king,  their  enemy,  who  by  virtue  of  the  gem
waxed  rich  and  threatened  to  invade  the  country,  which  now  became
afflicted  by  famine  and  other  disasters.

The  prince's  father  and  the  people,  hearing  of  the  loss  of  the  en-
chanted gem,  were  furious  with  vexation,  and  the  enraged  minister.


1  Lha-ch'ung  dri-ma  med-pa.

2  Tib.,  Nor-bu  (^gos-'dod-dbung-'jom. ;  Skt.,  Oinidmani.  Its  properties  are  analo-
gous to  La  MoMottr.  Tlie  Lamas  say  it  was  given  to  Buddha  Amitabha  by  a  white
Naga  of  the  ocean.  In  the  Burmese  version  {Joe.  cit. ,  p.  12),  it  is  made  to  be  the  white
elephant ;  but  the  word  Naga  means  both  elephant  and  the  serpent-dragons,  or  mermen,
the  guardians  of  treasure.

3  Shih-thi-bstan.

4  mt'a-'ic'ob  bye-ma-s'in  drun.  Kalinga  (on  the  west  of  the  Bay  of  Bengal)*  The
Ceylon  version  (Haedy's  Manual,  p.  116)  makes  the  rain-producing  elephant  be
brought  from  Jayaturil,  the  capital  of  Sibi,  by  Brahmans  sent  by  the  king  of
Kalinga.


PlilNCE VISVANTARA.  545

Tara-mdses,  seized  the  prince  and  handed  him  over  to  the  scaven-
gers' for  lynching,  and  he  was  only  rescued  by  the  entreaties  of  the
good  minister  Candrakirti  and  of  his  wife  and  children — for  he  had,
when  of  age,  married  the  beautiful  princess,  "  The  Enlightening  Moon-
Sun,"  ^  better  known  as  "  Madrl,"  by  whom  he  had  two  ^  children,  a  son
and  daughter.  The  ministers  decided  that  the  person  who  informed
the  prince  of  the  arrival  of  the  Brahman  should  lose  his  tongue ;  he
who  brought  the  Jewel  from  its  casket-box  should  lose  his  hands ;  he
who  showed  the  path  to  the  Brahman  should  lose  his  eyes ;  and  he
who  gave  away  the  Jewel  should  lose  his  head.  To  this  the  king
could  not  consent,  as  it  meant  the  death  of  his  beloved  son,  so  he
ordered  the  prince  to  be  banished  for  a  period  of  twenty-five  years
to  "  the  black  hill  of  the  demons  resounding  with  ravens."  *

Then  the  prince  prayed  his  father's  forgiveness,  and  the  king,  filled
with  sorrow  at  parting,  besought  his  son,  saying,  "  0,  son,  give  up
making  presents  and  remain  here."  But  the  prince  replied,  "  The
earth  and  its  mountains  may  perhaps  be  overthrown,  but  I,  0  !  king,
cannot  turn  aside  from  the  virtue  of  giving."

And  the  good  prince  implored  his  father's  permission  to  devote  seven
more  days  to  almsgiving,  to  which  the  king  consented.

Prince  Visvantara,  addressing  the  princess,  besought  her  to  cherish
their  darling  children,  and  to  accept  the  hand  of  a  protecting  consort
worthy  of  her  incomparable  virtue  and  beauty.  But  the  princess,  feeling
hurt  even  at  the  suggestion  of  her  separation,  refused  to  part  from
him,  and  inspired  by  a  desire  to  comfort  the  prince,  paints  in  glowing
colours  the  amenities  of  life  in  the  forest  of  banishment,  though  the
prince  protested  that  it  was  a  wilderness  of  thorns,  beset  by  tigers,
lions,  venomous  snakes,  and  scorpions  and  demons,  excessively  hot
during  the  day,  and  rigorously  cold  at  night,  where  there  are  no  houses
or  even  caves  for  shelter,  and  no  couch  but  grass,  and  no  food  but
jungle  fruits.

The  princess,  however,  replies,  "  Be  the  dangers  what  they  may,  I
would  be  no  true  wife  were  I  to  desert  you  now,"  and  thus  refuses  to
part  from  him ;  so  they  set  out  accompanied  by  their  children,"  riding
in  a  three-horse  chariot  and  on  one  elephant.

"  When  the  prince,  together  with  his  wife  and  children,  had  reached

1  Skt.,  Cliandal.

2  Ni-zla-sgron-ma,  daughter  of  king  Grags-pa  (=Skt.,  Kirti).  Another  account  says
he  also  married  "The  Lamp  of  the  Sky"  (Namk'ai  sgron-ma),  daugliter  of  king  Dri-
ma-Med-pa,  of  the  "  Lotus  "  country.  And  these  two  are  said  to  have  been  flrst  met
by  him  carrying  iidumwara  flowers  on  one  of  his  charitable  rounds  of  visiting  the
temple  of  Buddha  Yes'e-Aod-mdsad-tok,  or  "  the  Buddha  of  the  Light  Diadem  of  fore-
knowledge." The  Burmese  version  states  (Goss'  trans.,  p.  11)  that  he  visited  "The
Six  Temples  "  six  times  every  month,  mounted  on  his  white  elephant  Pis-sa-ya.

3  Another  version  gives  three  children.

*  The  place  of  banishment,  according  to  the  Pali,  was  Vankagiri.
=  Named  'Od-zer-tok,  and  Utpalmani. The  southern  version  gives  the  name  of  the
son  as  Jalin  and  of  the  daugliter  as  Krishnajina.

N  N


546  MYSTIC  AND  SACRED PLAYS.

the  margin  of  the  forest,  all  the  people  who  formed  his  retinue  raised  a
loud  cry  of  lament.  But  so  soon  as  it  was  heard,  the  Bodhisat  addressed
the  retinue  which  had  come  forth  from  the  good  city,  and  ordered  it  to
turn  back,  saying, —

"  '  However  long  any  thing  may  be  loved  and  held  dear,  yet  separation
from  it  is  undoubtedly  imminent.  Friends  and  relatives  must  un-
doubtedly be  severed  from  what  is  dearest  to  them,  as  from  the  trees
of  the  hermitage  wherein  they  have  rested  from  the  fatigues  of  the
journey.  Therefore  when  ye  recollect  that  all  over  the  world  men  are
powerless  against  separation  from  their  friends,  ye  must  for  the  sake  of
peace  strengthen  your  unsteady  minds  by  unfailing  exertion.'

"  \yhen  the  Bodhisat  had  journeyed  three  hundred  yojanas,  a  Brah-
man came  to  him,  and  said,  '  O  Kshatriya  prince,  I  have  come  three
hundred  yojanas  because  I  have  heard  of  your  virtue.  It  is  meet  that
you  should  give  me  the  splendid  chariot  as  a  recompense  for  my
fatigue.'

"  Madri  could  not  bear  this,  and  she  addressed  the  begging  Brahman
in  angry  speech  :  '  Alas !  this  Brahman,  who  even  in  the  forest  entreats
the  king's  son  for  a  gift,  has  a  merciless  heart.  Does  no  pity  arise
within  him  when  he  sees  the  prince  fallen  from  his  royal  splendour  ?  '
The  Bodhisat  said,  '  Find  no  fault  with  the  Brahman.'  'Why  not?'
'  Madri,  if  there  were  no  people  of  that  kind  who  long  after  riches,  there
would  also  be  no  giving,  and  in  that  case  how  could  we,  inhabitants  of
the  earth,  become  possessed  of  insight.  As  giving  and  the  other  Para-
mitas  (or  virtues  essential  to  a  Buddhaship)  rightly  comprise  the
highest  virtue,  the  Bodhisats  constantly  attain  to  the  highest  insight.'
"Thereupon  the  Bodhisat  bestowed  the  chariot  and  horses  on  that
Brahman  with  exceeding  great  joy,  and  said,  '  O  Brahman,  by  means  of
this  gift  of  the  chariot,  a  present  free  from  the  blemish  of  grudging,  may  I
be  enabled  to  direct  the  car  of  the  sinless  Law  directed  by  the  most  ex-
cellent Rishi !  '

"  When  Visvantara  had  with  exceeding  great  joy  bestowed  on  the
Brahman  the  splendid  chariot,  he  took  prince  Krishna  on  his  shoulder,
and  Madri  took  princess  Jalini.^  They  went  forth  into  the  forest,
proceeding  on  foot,  when  five  Brahmans  appeared  and  begged  for  their
clothes,  which  were  at  once  taken  off  and  given  to  them.  The  prince
and  his  family  then  clothed  themselves  with  leaves,  and  trudged  along
painfully  for  about  a  hundred  miles,  until  a  mighty  river  barred  their
progress.  The  prince  then  prayed,  '  O  !  Great  river,  make  way  for
us  !  '  Then  the  torrent  divided,  leaving  a  lane  of  dry  land,  across
which  they  passed.  On  reaching  the  other  side,  the  prince,  addressing
the  river,  said,  '  0  !  river,  resume  your  course,  otherwise  innumerable
animal  beings  lower  down  your  course  will  sufl'er  misery  from  drought ! '
On  which  the  river  straightway  resumed  its  course.

"  Then,  journeying  onwards, they  reached the forest  of  penance

i  In  Haudy's  Soidheni.  Recension,  the  boy  is  called  Jaliya  and  the  girl  Krishnayina
(Manual,  p.  116).— ScHiBPNtii,


PRINCE riSVANTARA.  547

among  snowy-white  mountains  and  forest-clad'  hiils;  and  by  the  aid  of
two  mendicants  of  the  Mahayana  creed  whom  they  accidentally  met,
they  fixed  on  a  hillock  for  their  abode.  And  the  prince  dwelt  there  in
a  separate  cell  like  a  celibate  monk,  and  took  the  vow  which  pleased  his
heart,  and  it  was  not  altogether  an  unpleasant  life.  The  water  welled
out  of  the  ground  conveniently  near,  and  flowers  and  most  luscious
fruits  appeared  in  abundance,  and  the  parrots  assisted  the  princess  and
children  in  gathering  fruit  by  nipping  the  stem  of  the  best  fruits  on  the
highest  trees.  And  the  carnivorous  animals  left  off  preying  on  animals
and  took  to  eating  grass.  The  most  pleasing  songsters  amongst  the
birds  settled  near  by,  and  the  wild  animals  treated  the  young  prince
and  princes.s  as  playmates,  and  rendered  them  useful  aid.  Thus
the  young  prince  riding  on  a  deer,  fell  off  and  bruised  his  arm,  when  a
monkey  at  once  carried  him  to  a  lake  and  bathed  and  soothed  the
wound  with  healing  herbs.

"  One  day,  when  Madri  had  gone  to  collect  roots  and  fruits  in  the
penance-forest,  a  Brahman  ^  came  to  Visvantara,  and  said,  '  0  prince  of
Kshatriya  race,  may  you  be  victorious  !  As  I  have  no  slave,  and
wander  about  alone  with  my  staif,  therefore  is  it  meet  that  you  should
give  me  your  two  children.'  As  the  Bodhisat,  Visvantara,  after  hear-
ing these  words,  hesitated  a  little  about  giving  his  beloved  children,  the
Brahmau  said  to  the  Bodhisat, —

"  '  0  prince  of  Kshatriya  race,  as  I  have  heard  that  you  are  the  giver
of  all  things,  therefore  do  I  ask  why  you  still  ponder  over  this  request
of  mine.  You  are  renowned  all  over  the  earth  as  the  possessor  of  a
compassion  which  gives  away  all  things  :  you  are  bound  to  act  constantly
in  conformity  with  this  renown.'

"  After  hearing  these  words  the  Bodhisat  said  to  the  Brahman,  '  O
great  Brahman,  if  I  had  to  giveaway  my  own  life  I  should  not  hesitate
for  a  single  moment.  How,  then,  should  I  think  differently  if  I  had
to  give  away  my  own  children  ?  O  great  Brahman,  under  these  cir-
cumstances I  have  bethought  me  as  to  how  the  children,  when  given
by  me,  if  I  do  give  away  these  two  children  who  have  grown  up
in  the  forest,  will  live  full  of  sorrow  on  account  of  their  separation
from  their  mother.  And  inasmuch  as  many  will  blame  me,  in  that
with  excessive  mercilessness  I  have  given  away  the  children  and  not
myself,  therefore  is  it  better  that  you,  O  Brahman,  should  take
me.'

"  The  Brahman  presses  his  petition  and  says,  '  It  is  not  right  that  J,
after  having  come  to  you,  should  remain  without  a  present,  and  all
my  cherished  hopes  be  brought  to  nought.'  On  hearing  this  the  prince,
.  though  torn  by  paternal  emotion,  gave  the  children,  saying,  '  May  I,  by
virtue  of  this  gift,  become  a  Buddha.'

"  Meanwhile,  Madrihad  set  off  for  the  hermitage,  carrying  roots  and
fruits,  and  when  the  earth  shook,  she  hurried  on  all  the  faster  towai'ds

1  The  chief  trees  were  "  Ka-det "  {Oralceea  Roxhurghii).

2  "  Zoo-za-ga  "  of  Don-nee-wee-ta  in  Kalinga,  according  to  the  Burmese  (Trans.,  loc.
cit.,  p.  35).

N  N 2


548  MYSTIC  AND SACRED PLAYS.

the  hermitage.  A  certain  deity  who  perceived  that  she  might  hinder
the  surrender  which  the  Bodhisat  proposed  to  make  for  the  salvation
of  the  world,  assumed  the  form  of  a  lioness  and  barred  her  way.  Then
Madri  said  to  this  wife  of  this  king  of  the  beasts,  '  0  wife  of  the  king  of
the  beasts,  full  of  wantonness,  wherefore  do  you  bar  my  way  ?  In  order
that  I  may  remain  truly  irreproachable,  make  way  for  me  that  I  may
pass  swiftly  on.  Moreover,  you  are  the  wife  of  the  king  of  the  beasts,
and  I  am  the  spouse  of  the  Lion  of  Princes,  so  that  we  are  of  similar
rank.  Therefore,  0  queen  of  the  beasts,  leave  the  road  clear  for
me.'

"  "When  Madri  had  thus  spoken,  the  deity  who  had  assumed  the
form  of  a  lioness  turned  aside  from  the  way.  Madri  reflected  for  a
moment,  recognizing  inauspicious  omens,  for  the  air  resounded  with
wailing  notes,  and  the  beings  inhabiting  the  forest  gave  forth  sorrowful
sounds,  and  she  came  to  the  conclusion  that  some  disaster  had  certainly
taken  place  in  the  hermitage,  and  said,  '  As  my  eye  twitches,  as  the
birds  utter  cries,  as  fear  comes  upon  me,  both  my  children  have  cer-
tainly been  given  away  ;  as  the  earth  quakes,  as  my  heart  trembles,  as
my  body  grows  weak,  my  two  children  have  certainly  been  given
away.'

"  With  a  hundred  thousand  similar  thoughts  of  woe  she  hastened
towards  the  hermitage.  Entering  therein  she  looked  mournfully
around,  and,  not  seeing  the  children,  she  sadly,  with  trembling  heart,
followed  the  traces  left  on  the  ground  of  the  hermitage.  '  Here  the
boy  Krishna  and  his  sister  were  wont  to  play  with  the  young  gazelles  ;
here  is  the  house  which  they  twain  made  out  of  earth  ;  these  are  the
playthings  of  the  two  children.  As  they  are  not  to  be  seen,  it  is  pos-
sible that  they  may  have  gone  unseen  by  me  into  the  hut  of  foliage
and  may  be  sleeping  there.'  Thus  thinking  and  hoping  to  see  the
children,  she  laid  aside  the  roots  and  fruits,  and  with  tearful  eyes
embraced  her  husband's  feet,  asking,  '  O  lord,  whither  are  the  boy  and
girl  gone  ? '  Visvantara  replied,  'A  Brahman  came  to  me  full  of  hope.
To  whom  have  I  given  the  two  children.  Thereat  rejoice.'  When  he
had  spoken  these  words,  Madri  fell  to  the  ground  like  a  gazelle  pierced
by  a  poisoned  arrow,  and  struggled  like  a  fish  taken  out  of  the  water.
Like  a  crane  robbed  of  her  young  ones  she  uttered  sad  cries.  Like  a,
cow,  whose  calf  has  died,  she  gave  forth  many  a  sound  of  wailing.
Then  she  said,  '  Shaped  like  young  lotuses  with  hands  whose  flesh  is  as
tender  as  a  young  lotus  leaf.^  My  two  children  are  suffering,  are
undergoing  pain,  wherever  they  have  gone.  Slender  as  young  gazelles,
gazelle-eyed,  delighting  in  the  lairs  of  the  gazelles,  what  sufferings  are
my  children  now  undergoing  in  the  power  of  strangers  ?  With  tear-
ful eyes  and  sad  sobbing,  enduring  cruel  sufferings,  now  that  they  are
no  longer  seen  by  me,  they  live  downtrodden  among  needy  men.  They
who  were  nourished  at  my  breast,  who  used  to  eat  roots,  flowers,  and


1  Properly,  "  lotus  arrow." According  to  Maximowicz  the  young  lotus  leaves  are
reed-like  or  arrow-like  in  appearance.— Schiefner.


PRINCE riSVANTARA.  549

fruits,  they  who,  experiencing  indulgence,  were  never  wont  to  enjoy
themselves  to  the  full,  those  two  children  of  mine  now  undergo  great
sufferings.  Severed  from  their  mother  and  their  family,  deserted  by
the  cruelty  of  their  relatives,  thrown  together  with  sinful  men,  my  two
children  are  now  undergoing  great  suffering.  Constantly  tormented
by  hunger  and  thirst,  made  slaves  by  those  into  whose  power  they
have  fallen,  they  will  doubtless  experience  the  pangs  of  despair.
Surely  I  have  committed  some  terrible  sin  in  a  previous  existence,  in
severing  hundreds  of  beings  from  their  dearest  ones.'

"After  gratifying  the  Bodhisat  with  these  words,  the  king  of  the
gods,  Sakra,  said  to  himself :  '  As  this  man,  when  alone  and  without
support,  might  be  driven  into  a  corner,  I  will  ask  him  for  Madri.'  So
he  took  the  form  of  a  Brahman,  came  to  the  Bodhisat,  and  said  to  him  :
'  Give  me  as  a  slave  this  lovely  sister,  fair  in  all  her  limbs,  unblamed
by  her  husband,  prized  by  her  race.'  Then  in  anger  spake  Madrl  to
the  Brahman  :  '  O  shameless  and  full  of  craving,  do  you  long  after  her
who  is  not  lustful  like  you,  0  refuse-  of  Brahmans,  but  takes  her
delight  according  to  the  upright  law  ? '  Then  the  Bodhisat,  Visvantara,
began  to  look  upon  her  with  compassionate  heart,  and  Madri  said  to
him  :  '  I  have  no  anxiety  on  my  own  account,  I  have  no  care  for  my-
self ;  my  only  anxiety  is  as  to  how  you  are  to  exist  when  remaining
alone.'  Then  said  the  Bodhisat  to  Madri  :  '  As  I  seek  after  the  height
which  surmounts  endless  anguish,  no  complaint  must  be  uttered  by  me,
0  Madri,  upon  this  earth.  Do  you,  therefore,  follow  after  this  Brah-
man without  complaining.  I  will  remain  in  the  hermitage,  living
after  the  manner  of  the  gazelles.'

"When  he  had  uttered  these  words,  he  said  to  himself  with  joyous
and  exceedingly  contented  mind  :  '  This  gift  here  in  this  forest  is  my
best  gift.  After  I  have  here  absolutely  given  away  Madri  too,  she
shall  by  no  means  be  recalled.'  Then  he  took  Madri  by  the  hand  and
said  to  that  Brahman :  '  Receive,  O  most  excellent  Brahman,  this  is  my
dear  wife,  loving  of  heart,  obedient  to  orders,  charming  in  speech,  de-
meaning herself  as  one  of  lofty  race.'

"  When  in  order  to  attain  to  supreme  insight,  he  had  given  away
his  beautiful  wife,  the  earth  quaked  six  times  to  its  extremities  like  a
boat  on  the  water.  And  when  Madri  had  passed  into  the  power  of  the
Brahman,  overcome  by  pain  at  being  severed  from  her  husband,  her
son,  and  her  daughter,  with  faltering  breath  and  in  a  voice  which
huskiness  detained  within  her  throat,  she  spoke  thus  :  '  What  crimes
have  I  committed  in  my  previous  existence  that  now,  like  a  cow  whose
calf  is  dead,  I  am  lamenting  in  an  uninhabited  forest  ? '  Then  the
king  of  the  gods,  Sakra,  laid  aside  his  Brahman's  form,  assumed  his
proper  shape  and  said  to  Madri :  '  O  fortunate  one,  I  am  not  a  Brah-
man, nor-am  I  a  man  at  all.  I  am  the  king  of  the  gods,  Sakra,  the
subduer  of  the  Asuras.  As  I  am  pleased  that  you  have  manifested  the
most  excellent  morality,  say  what  desire  you  would  now  wish  to  have
satisfied  by  me.'

"  Rendered  happy  by  these  words,  Madri  prostrated  herself  before


550  MYSTIC  AND  SAOBED  PLAYS.

Sakra,  and  said :  '  0  thou  of  the  thousand  eyes,  may  the  lord  of  the
three  and  thirty  set  my  children  free  from  thraldom,  and  let  them  find
their  way  to  their  great  grandfather.'  After  these  words  had  been
spoken  the  prince  of  the  gods  entered  the  hermitage  and  addressed  the
Bodhisat.  Taking  Madrl  by  the  left  hand,  he  thus  spoke  to  the  Bodhi-
sat :  'I  give  you  Madrl  for  your  service.  You  must  not  give  her  to  any-
one. If  you  give  away  what  has  been  entrusted  to  you  fault  will  be
found  with  you.'  ^

"  The  king  of  the  gods,  in  accordance  with  his  promise,  caused  angels
every  night  to  unloose  and  nurse  the  unfortunate  children  of  the
illustrious  recluse  when  the  wicked  Brahman  fell  asleep,  and  only  re-
tied  them  just  before  he  awaked.  Afterwards  he  deluded  the  Brahman
who  had  carried  off  the  boy  and  girl,  so  that  under  the  impression  that
it  was  another  city,  he  entered  the  self-same  city  from  which  they  had
departed,  and  there  set  to  work  to  sell  the  children.  When  the
ministers  saw  this  they  told  the  king,  saying  :  '  0  king,  your  grand-
children, Krishna  and  Jallni,  have  been  brought  into  this  good  city  in
order  to  be  sold,  by  an  extremely  worthless  Brahman.'  When  the
king  heard  these  words,  he  said  indignantly,  '  Bring  the  children  here,
forthvdth.' "

When  this  command  had  been  attended  to  by  the  ministers,  and
the  townspeople  had  hastened  to  appear  before  the  king,  one  of  the
ministers  brought  the  children  before  him.  When  the  king  saw  his
grand-children  brought  before  him  destitute  of  clothing  and  with  foul
bodies  he  fell  from  his  throne  to  the  ground,  and  the  assembly  of
ministers,  and  women,  and  all  who  were  present,  began  to  weep.  'Then
the  king  said  to  the  ministers  :  "  Let  the  bright-eyed  one,  who,  even
when  dwelling  in  the  forest,  delights  in  giving,  be  summoned  hither  at
once,  together  with  his  wife."

Then  the  king  sent  messengers  to  recall  his  son;  but  the  latter
would  not  return  until  the  full  period  of  his  banishment  was  over.

On  his  way  back  he  meets  a  blind  man,  who  asks  him  for  his  eyes,
which  he  immediately  plucks  out  and  bestows  on  the  applicant,  who
thus  receives  his  sight.^  The  prince,  now  blind,  is  led  onwards  by  his
wife,  and  on  the  way  meets  "  The  Buddhas  of  the  Three  Periods," —
the  Past,  Present,  and  Future,  namely,  Dipamkara,Sakya,"and  Maitreya,
who  restore  the  prince's  sight.

Journeying  onwards  he  is  met  by  the  hostile  king  who  had  been  the
cause  of  all  his  trouble,  but  who  now  returns  him  the  gem,  and  with
it  much  money  and  jewels,  and  he  implored  the  prince's  forgive-
ness for  having  caused  his  banishment  and  sufferings,  and  he  prayed
that  when  the  prince  became  a  Buddha  he  might  be  born  as  one  of  his
attendants.  The  prince  readily  forgave  him,  and  accorded  him  his
other  requests,  and  they  became  friends.


1  Ralston,  op,  cit.

2  Cf.,  The  "  Sihi  Jataka."

3  This  is  rather  absurd,  as  it  is  supposed  to  have  happened  before  Sakya's  birth.


PRINCE rmVANTARA.  551

On  the  approach  of  the  prince  to  the  capital,  the  old  king,  his
father,  caused  the  roads  to  be  swept  and  sti'ewn  with  flowers,  and
sprinkled  with  sweet  perfume,  and  met  him  with  flags  and  joyous
music.  And  he  gave  again  into  his  son's  charge  all  the  treasure  and
jewels.

The  prince,  thus  restored  to  his  former  position,  resumed  his  whole-
sale bestowal  of  charity  as  before,  and  everyone  was  happy.  The
young  princess,  Utpalmani,  married  the  son  of  the  Brahman  chief,
named  Ksheman.  And  the  young  prince  married  the  beautiful  princess
Mandharn,  daughter  of  king  Lja-wai-tok  ;  and  succeeding  to  the
throne,  he  left  his  father  free  to  indulge  in  his  pious  pursuit.  Charity.

The  play  concludes  by  the  chief  actor,  who  takes  the  part  of
the  charitable  prince,  giving  the  piece  a  local  Tibetan  applica-
tion.

He  states  :  I,  "  The  Lord  of  the  World,"  am  afterwards  king  Sroh-
Tsan  Gampo  (the  introducer  of  Buddhism  into  Tibet),  and  my  two
wives  are  afterwards  his  Chinese  and  Newari  princess-consorts.  The
two  Bhikshus,  who  assisted  me,  are  afterwards  Thonmi  Sambhota(the
minister  of  king  Sroh-Tsan,  who  introduced  writing  to  Tibet),  and
Maiijusri  (the  introducer  of  astrology  and  metaphysics),  the  demon
who  obstructed  the  two  queens  is  Sri  Vajrapani.  And  five  generations
later,  I,  Sron-Tsan  Gampo,  appeared  as  Padma-sanibhava,  the  founder  of
Lamaism.  The  prince  'Od-zer-tok  is  Norbu  'Dsin-pa,  the  princess
Utpalmani  is  Lhamo  dbyan  Chan-ma  (Saraswati  devi).  That  Brahman
is  the  black  devil  Tharba,  and  his  wife  is  j^Nod  sbyin-ma,  or  "  The
injuring  Yakshini."  That  uninhabited  wilderness  of  the  demons,  re-
sounding with  the  croaking  of  ravens,  is  the  snowy  region  of  Tibet.
The  dwelling  place  there  of  the  king  is  Yar-luhs  gyalwai-k'ra-'buk  ;  and
that  great  river  is  the  Yar-chab  Tsan-po  (The  "  Tsanpu  "  or  Brahma-
putra). Thus  history  repeats  itself  !  Mangalain  !  [and  here  the  people
all  shout  "  Mangalam — All  Happiness,"].

Another  popular  play  is  the  Sudhdna  Jdtaka,  which  is  men-
tioned by  FaHian,!  and  is  also  met  with  in  southern  Buddh-
ism.^ The  Tibetan  version  is  here  given.^

The  Sudhana  Jitaka.

Its  chief  dramatis  personx  are  the  following  : —

Nor-zan  eh'os-skyon,  The  Prince  Sudhana,  without  a  mask.
Mende-zan-mo,  the  beautiful  fairy  Kinnara  and  two  other  goddesses.
A  black-hat  sorcerer.
Non-ba,  a  hunter  in  a  blue  mask  holding  a  jewel.


1  Beal's  Records,  etc.,  157,  chap,  xxxviii. ;  also  Eaj  Mitba,  Xepalese  Skt.  Lit.,  p.  6:
a  By  Upham,  under  name  Sudana  or  Sutana ;  of.  Spencb  Hakdy's  Mamtal,  p.  116.
3  Nor-bzan.


562  MYSTIC  AND  SACMED  PLAYS.

Ma-olio  Ya-ma  gen-te,  the  chief  wife  of  the  prince.  Wears  mask  having
right  side  wliite  {=  divine  colour)  and  left  side  black  (=  satanie),  to  represent
her  composite  disposition.

Luk-zi  ch'un-me  tak-gye,  in  sheep-^kin  coat,  flour-smeared  face,  carrying
reel  of  wool  thread,  and  a  sling.

The  seven  S'em-pa  brothers,  armed  with  swords,  etc.,  two-eyed,  ferocious,
with  mouth  agape.

The  Hermit  Lama  Toil-son  ch'en  bo,  with  a  yellow  mask,  and  carrying  a
rosary.

The  plot  is  as  follows :  A  serpent-charmer  endeavours  by  in-
cantations to  capture  the  Naga  which  confers  prosperity  on  his
enemy's  country.  The  Naga,  alarmed  at  the  potency  of  the
sorcerer's  spells,  appeals  to  a  hunter,  who  kills  the  sorcerer,  and  is
presented  with  a  magic  noose  as  a  reward  for  his  services.  This
noose  he  bequeaths  to  his  son,  Utpala  or  Phalaka,  who  one  day  in
the  forest  near  Valkalayana's  hermitage  at  Hastinapura,  hearing  a
celestial  song  sung  by  a  marvellously  beautiful  Kinnari  fairy,  he
captured  the  fairy  with  his  magic  noose.  The  Kinnari  to  regain
her  liberty  offered  him  her  jewelled  crown,  which  conferred  the
power  of  traversing  the  universe.  Meanwhile  a  young  prince  of
Hastinapura  named  Sudhana,  or  Manibhadra,'  engaged  on  a  hunting
expedition,  appears  upon  the  scene.  He  gets  the  jewel,  marries  the
Kinnari,  and  gives  her  his  entire  affection.  His  other  wives,  mad
with  jealousy,  endeavour  to  kill  her  during  his  absence,  but  she
escapes  to  her  celestial  country,  leaving,  however,  with  the  hermit
a  charmed  ring  for  the  prince  should  he  seek  to  follow  her  to  her
supernatural  home.  The  prince  pursues  her,  overcoming  innu-
merable obstacles,  and  finally  gains  her,  and  also  obtains  her
father's  consent  to  their  marriage,  and  to  their  return  to  the  earth,
where  they  live  happy  ever  after.

This  story,  which  is  translated  in  detail  by  Mr.  Ralston,  presents
many  parallels  to  western  folk-tales.  Mr.  Ralston  remarks  in  this
regard  that  "  One  of  these  is  the  capture  by  the  hunter  Palaka  of
the  celestial  maiden,  the  Kinnari  Manohara,  who  becomes  Su-
dhana's  bride.  This  is  effected  by  means  of  a '  fast  binding  chain  '
which  the  hunter  throws  around  her  when  she  is  bathing  in  a
lake.  Her  companions  fly  away  heavenwards,  leaving  her  a  captive
on  earth.  This  incident  will  at  once  remind  the  reader  of  the
capture  of  '  swan-maidens '  and  other  supernatural  nymphs,
which so  frequently  occur  in  popular  romances. . . . Mano-

1  CsoMA.  Anali/.,  p.  542.


THE  SUDANA  JATAKA—NAN-SA.  553

hara  is  captured  by  means  of  a  magic  chain.  But  her  power  of
flying  through  the  air  depends  upon  her  possession  of  a  jewel.
.  .  .  .  Sudhana's  visit  to  the  palace  of  hjs  supernatural
wife's  father,  and  the  task  set  him  of  recognizing  her  amid  her
ladies,  bear  a  strong  resemblance  to  the  adventure  which  befall
the  heroes  of  many  tales  current  in  Europe.  A  mortal  youth
often  obtains,  and  then  for  a  time  loses,  a  supernatural  wife,
generally  represented  in  the  daughter  of  a  malignant  demon.  He
makes  his  way,  like  Sudhana,  to  the  demon's  abode.  There  tasks
are  set  him  which  he  accomplishes  by  means  of  his  wife's  help,
and  the  Eussian  story  of  *  The  Water  King,'  Grimm's '  Two  Kings'
Children,'  the  Norse  '  Mastermaid,'  and  the  Scottish  Highland
'  Battle  of  the  Birds,'  are  shown  to  be  European  variants  or
parallels  to  this  tale."  ^

Of  indigenous  Tibetan  plays  the  chief  is  : —

NAN-SA  ;

OR,

"  The  Brilliant  Light."

This  drama,  now  translated  from  the  Tibetan  ^  for  the  first  time,
is  one  of  the  most  popular  plays  in  Tibet,  and  its  popularity  is
doubtless  owing,  not  a  little,  to  its  local  colour  being  mainly
Tibetan,  though,  like  most  of  the  other  plays,  it  is  moulded  on  the
model  of  the  Buddhist  Jatakas.

Its  chief  scene  is  laid  at  Einang,  a  few  miles  to  the  south-east
of  Gryah-tse,^  the  well-known  fortified  town  between  Tashi-lhunpo
and  Lhasa,  where  the  several  sites  of  the  story  are  still  pointed
out,  and  an  annual  fair  held  in  honour  of  Nah-sa's  memory.  It
also  well  illustrates  the  current  mode  of  marriage  in  Tibet,  by
planting  an  arrow*  on  the  girl's  back,  so  clearly  a  survival  of  the
primitive  form  of  marriage  by  capture.


1  Op.  cit. ,  xlviii.

■i  I  obtained  the  MS.  from  a  strolling  company  of  actors  who  visited  Darjiling  under
the  auspices  of  the  Tibetan  commissioner.  I  have  curtailed  it  in  places,  on  account
of  the  inordinate  length  of  the  original  narrative.

3  The  Tibetan  words  are  romanized  according  to  Csoma  de  Koros'  method  of  trans-
literation.

4  The  arrow  was  the  primitive  national  weapon  of  the  Tibetans  ;  and  their  military
chief  or  general  is  still  called  //iDah-dpon,  or  "  Commander  of  the  Arrows  " ;  and  a
golden  or  gilt  arrow  is  a  symbol  of  military  command  in  Tibet.


554  MTBTIG  AND SACRED PLAYS.


Dramatis  Personal.

Naii-sa  ("  The  Brilliant  Light").

Kun-zande-ch'en("TheNoblyVirtuous")— iVa)i-«a's/"'''«'^''("'6arearedmask).
Myan-sa-sal-don  {"  The  Lamp  of  Bliss  ")~Nah-sa's  mother.
Pag-ch'en  duk  da^-pa  ("The  Roaring  Dragon  ")—Lord  of  Bhiang.
So-nam  pal-Kye— A4.S  minister.

Lha-pu-dar-po  ("  The  Gentle  Divinity  ",)—A'"«?i-.?fi!'s  son.
Ani  Nemo — Lord  JRinang's  sister.
Lama  Shakyai  gyal-ts'an — Monk  in.  beggar's  guise.
Shin-je  Ch'tj-wa — The  King  of  the  Dead.
Servants,  Soldiers,  etc.


Act  I.

The  He-births  of  the  Deer — A  Story  of  Naii-sa's  former  Births.
Scene — India. Time — Immemorial.

Om  ! Salutation  to  the  Revered  and  Sublime  Tilra  ! '

In  bygone  times,  far  beyond  conception,  there  lived  in  the  revered
country  of  India  an  old  couple  of  the  Brahman  caste  who  during  their
youth  had  no  children,  but  when  they  waxed  old  and  feeble,  a  daughter '
was  born  unto  them.

This  child  was  secluded  till  her  fifteenth  year,  when,  peeping  outside
one  da}',  she  for  the  first  time  saw  the  landscape  of  the  outer  world.
And  as  she  observed  the  different  classes  of  people  cultivating  their
plots,  whilst  her  own  family-plot  lay  neglected,  she  ran  to  her  mother
and  said :  "  Mother,  dear  !  the  giver  of  my  body  !  Listen  to  me,  your
own  daughter  !  All  the  different  classes  of  people  are  busy  tilling  their
fields  while  our  family-land  lies  neglected.  Now  as  the  time  for  culti-
vation has  come,  permit  me,  mother,  to  cultivate  our  fields  with  our
servants  1  "

The  mother,  having  granted  her  request,  the  daughter  proceeded  to
work  with  the  servants,  and  they  laboured  on  till  breakfast-time,  but
no  one  brought  them  food.  This  neglect  caused  the  girl  uneasiness,  not
so  much  on  her  own  account  as  on  that  of  the  servants  ;  but  in  the
belief  that  food  would  be  sent,  she  laboured  on  till  sunset,  when  she
and  her  companions  returned  home  starving.

As  they  neared  the  house  the  girl  met  her  mother  bringing  some  re-
freshment for  them  ;  and  she  asked  her  why  she  had  so  long  delayed,
as  the  servants  were  quite  famished.  The  mother  explained  that  in
entertaining  some  visitors  who  had  called  during  the  day,  she  had  quite
forgotten  the  food  for  her  daughter  and  servants.

Then  the  daughter  petulantly  exclaimed,  "Mother!  you  are  incon-
siderate like  a  grass-eating  beast !  "  On  this  the  mother  cried  out:  "  O !
ungrateful  one  !  I  your  mother  !  who  have  reared  you,  and  clad  and
fed  you  with  the  best,  you  now  in  return  call  me  a  beast  !  May  you  in
your  next  re-birth  be  born  as  an  ownerless  grass-eating  beast' !  "

1  Nan-sa  is  held  to  be  an  incarnation  of  the  Buddhist  goddess  Tara.


NAN-SA.  555


So  after  a  time  the  girl  died  and  was  re-born  as  a  deer,  according  to
the  curse  of  her  mother.

In  course  of  time  her  deer-parents  died,  and  the  young  doe  was  left
alone  in  strict  accordance  with  her  mother's  curse.

While  in  such  a  plight,  a  handsome  young  hart,  with  a  mouth  like  a
conch-shell,  came  up  to  her  and  said :  "  O,  ownerless  orphan  doe  !  hear  me,
the  hart  Dar-gyas,  '  The  Vast  Banner  !  '  Where  is  your  mate  in  grazing
during  the  three  months  of  spring?  Where  is  your  companion  to  tend
you  down  to  the  river  ?  Where  is  the  partner  who  will  remain  with  you
through  life  ? "

The  young  doe,  timidly  raising  her  head,  said:  "0,  master  hart!
pray  be  off !  I  graze  during  spring  without  a  partner  !  I  go  down  to
the  river  without  a  comrade.  Gambolling  on  the  hills  and  dales,  I  place
my  faith  on  The  Three  Holy  Ones  alone  !  "

The  hart  then  replied  :  "  O,  noble  and  virtuous  doe  !  pray  hear  me  !
I  am  the  ornament  of  all  the  herds  !  won't  you  become  my  mate  ?  I
will  be  your  companion  when  you  eat  grass.  I  will  be  your  comrade
when  you  go  to  the  river ;  and  I  will  support  you  in  all  your  difficulties.
So  from  this  time  forth  let  us  be  bound  in  wedlock  inseparably,  for
doubtless  we  have  been  brought  together  here  through  the  deeds  and
fate  of  our  former  lives."

Then  the  doe  consenting,  these  two  became  partners  and  lived
together  most  happily ;  and  not  long  afterwards  the  doe  gave  birth
to  a  fawn  who  was  named  sKar-ma-p'un-ts'ogs,  or  "  The  accomplished
Star."

One  night  the  doe  dreamt  a  most  inauspicious  dream  ;  and  at  mid-
night she  awoke  the  hart,  saying  :  "  Hearken  !  O  deer,  Dar-gya«  !  I
dreamt  as  I  slept  a  dreadful  dream  !  This  Yal-wa  mountain-ridge  was
overspread  by  a  terrible  thundering  noise,  and  I  saw  several  hunters
appear.  I  saw  the  dogs  and  hunters  pursuing  you — the  hart — towards
the  left  ridge  of  the  hill,  and  I,  with  our  child,  the  fawn,  fled  by  the
right  ridge  of  the  hill.  I  dreamt  again  that  the  decapitated  head  of  a
deer  was  arranged  as  a  sacrifice,  and  the  skin  was  stretched  out  to  dry
oa  the  meadow,  and  oh,  the  blood  !  it  flowed  down  and  formed  an  awful
pool  like  many  oceans  !  O,  deer  !  Sleep  no  longer  !  but  arise  and  let  us
fast  escape  to  the  highest  hills."

But  the  hart  refused  to  listen  to  the  advice  of  his  mate  :  and
saying  that  "  the  words  of  females  are  like  unto  the  dust,"  he  fell
asleep.

Not  long  afterwards,  a  ring-tailed  red  hunting  dog  seemed  to  be
approaching  from  the  distant  barks  which  now  were  to  be  heard  dis-
tinctly by  all  the  awakened  deer.

Too  late,  the  hart  then  realized  that  the  vision  of  his  doe  must  have
indeed  been  true ;  therefore  he  hurriedly  gave  the  following  advice  to
the  doe  and  the  fawn,  feeling  great  pity  for  them  :  "  0  !  poor  doe  and
fawn  !  flee  by  the  left  ridge  and  make  good  your  escape  !  and  if  we  do
not  meet  again  in  this  life,  let  us  meet  in  our  next  life  in  the  pure
kingdom  of  righteousness  1  "  On  so  saying  the  hart  fled ;  and  the
mother  and  the  fawn  made  their  escape  by  the  left  ridge.


556  MYSTIC  AND SACRED  PLAYS.

Meanwhile,  the  hart,  hotly  pursued  by  the  hunting-dog,  was  chased
into  a  narrow  gorge  where  he  could  not  escape ;  and  at  that  critical
moment  a  man  with  his  hair  bound  up,  bearded  and  fearfully  fierce-
looking,  with  pointed  eyebrows,  and  carrying  a  noose  and  a  bow  and
arrow,  descended  from  the  top  of  the  cliif,  and  catching  the  hart  in  the
tioose  he  killed  it  with  one  shot  from  his  bow.

Thus  everything  happened  exactly  according  to  the  doe's  dream.

The  deceased  hart  was  afterwards  re-born  in  a  respectable  family  of
Ri-nah-tZpah-k'a,  and  named  Grag-par5sam-grub,  or  "  The  famous
Heart "  ;  while  the  doe  after  death  was  reborn  in  ZJah-p'al-k'uh-naii-pa,
and  was  named  sNan^sa-'Od-'bum,  or  "  brilliant  above  a  hundred
thousand  lights."  The  fawn  after  death  was  re-born  as  their  son,  and
assumed  the  name  of  Lha-bu-dar-po,  or  "  the  gentle  divinity."
[Here  &deth  the  first  act  dealing  with  "  The  Re-births  of  the  Deer."]

Act  II.

l%e  Life,  Marriage,  and  Deaili  of  X ansa.
Scene — Rinang. Time — Latter  end  of  eleventh  century  a.d.

Om/  Ma-ni  pad-nie  Hum  !  Oin  ! the  Jewel  in  the  Lotus  ! Hum!

Long  ago,  there  lived  a  father  named  Kun-bzah-bde-ch'en  and  a
mother  named  Myan-sa-gsal-sgron  in  ZJan-ph'ah-k'uh-]Sran-pa,  on  the
right  of  Myah-stod-s'el-dkar-rgyal-rtse  (Gah-tse).

The  mother  once  had  a  strange  vision,  regarding  which  she  thus
addressed  her  husband  :  "  O,  great  father !  Listen  !  Whilst  asleep,  I
dreamt  a  most  auspicious  dream  !  I  dreamt  that  a  lotus-flower  blossomed
forth  from  my  body,  to  which  many  fairies  made  ofierings  and  paid
homage.  And  a  ray  of  light  in  the  form  of  the  letter  Tarn,  of  the
revered  goddess  Tara's  spell,  entered  my  head  !  "  On  hearing  this  the
father  was  overjoyed,  and  exclaimed,  "0!  Myan-sa-gsal-sgron-ma  !
Mark  my  words;  by  God'^  blessing,  through  our  making  ofierings
unto  Him,  and  as  the  fruit  of  our  charity  to  the  poor,  an  incarnate
Bodhisat  is  about  to  come  unto  us  !  We  must  again  ofier  thanks  unto
God  and  do  the  several  ceremonies."

In  course  of  time  a  divine-looking  daughter  was  born  unto  them.
She  was  peerlessly  beautiful,  and  so  was  named  Nan-sa,  "the  brilliant
above  a  hundred  thousand  lights,"  and  a  grand  festival  was  given  at
her  birth.

By  her  fifteenth  year  Nan-sa  was  fully  educated,  and  matchlessly
beautiful;  and  though  she  was  most  pious,  practising  fully  all  the
religious  rites,  she  was  most  modest,  and  forgot  not  her  filial  love  and
duty.

In  the  fourth  month  of  that  year,  during  the  summer  season,  a
grand  tournament  was  given  by  the  king,  to  which  everyone  was  in-
vited, and  the  whole  population  of  the  neighbouring  countries,  young
and  old,  flocked  to  rGyal-rtse-sger-tsa  to  see  the  sports.i The  games


'  Known  as  (/Sas-sfiin-i<Zun-'p'hi'ug.


NAN-SA.  557


were  held  by  order  of  the  great  king  of  Myan-stod-ni-nan-pa  for  the
selection  of  a  bride  fit  for  his  son.  The  king  himself  was  of  a  fiery
temper,  long  like  a  river,  round  like  a  pea,  and  slender  like  a  stick.

Naii-sa  also,  haAdng  taken  leave  of  her  parents,  set  out  for  the  sports.
Her  moon-like  face  was  white  as  milk,  and  her  neatly-dressed  hair
looked  like  a  bouquet  of  flowers.  Thus  went  she,  "  the  princess,"  as
she  was  called,  to  see  the  grand  spectacle,  accompanied  by  her  servants,
carrying  the  needful  presents.

As  she  neared  the  inarket,  where  the  great  gathering  was  held  the
king  and  prince  were  looking  down  from  the  balcony  of  their  palace,
and  the  prince  at  once  caught  sight  of  her,  and  his  eyes  remained
rivetted  on  the  princess.  Whilst  the  multitude  gazed  at  the  players,
the  prince  followed  only  the  movements  of  the  princess.

The  prince  being  fascinated  by  the  beauty  of  the  princess,  soon
despatched  to  her  his  chief  minister,  named  6Sod-nam-dpal-«kyed,
who,  in  compliance  with  his  master's  order,  brought  the  princess  before
the  prince,  just  as  the  eagle  Khra  carries  off  a  chicken.

And  the  prince,  drawing  the  princess  by  her  shawl  with  his  left
hand  and  offering  her  wine  with  his  right,  addressed  her,  saying,

"O  !  pretty  one!  sweet  and  pleasing-mouthed!  possessed  of  the  five  sen-
suous qualities  !  Tell  me  truly,  whose  daughter  are  you?  Are  you  the  daughter  of
a  god  or  a  Naga ,  or  are  you  an  angelic  Gandharva  ?  Pray  hide  nothing  from  me.
What  is  your  father's  name  ?  What  is  your  birth-giver's  name  ?  Who  are
your  neighbours  ?  I  am  the  overruling  lord  of  Mzang-sbod-ri-nang  !  and  called
'  The  famous  Roaring  Dragon  ! '  or  Da-c'hens-'brug-grag-pa.^  My  family  is
the  Grag-pa-bsam-'grub  !  I  am  the  jewel  of  these  sheltering  walls  !  My
age  is  sixliraes  three  (18). Will  you  consent  to  be  my  bride  ?  "

Naii-sa  now  thinking  escape  impossible,  though  she  had  desired  to
devote  herself  to  a  religious  life,  answered  the  lord  Da-oh'en  :  "  Om  !
Tara,  have  mercy  on  a  poor  girl  void  of  religion  I  0  !  lord  Da-ch'en,
I  am  called  '  The  Brilliant  above  a  Hundred  Thousand  Lights,'  and
am  of  a  respectable  family.  But  a  poisonous  flower,  though  pretty,  is
not  a  fit  decoration  for  an  altar  vase  ;  the  blue  Dole,  though  famous,
cannot  match  the  turquoise ;  the  bird  fchog-mo,  though  swift,  is  no
match  for  the  sky-soaring  T'an-dkar-eagle,  and  Nah-sa,  though  not
bad-looking,  is  no  match  for  the  powerful  lord  of  men."

On  hearing  this  reply  of  Nan-sa,  the  minister  took  up  the  tur-
quoise sparkling  in  rainbow  tints,  and,  tying  it  to  the  end  of  the
arrow  of  the  five-coloured  silks,  handed  it  to  the  prince,  saying,  "  As
the  proverb  runs,  '  Discontented  youths  aie  eager  to  war,  while  dis-
contented maidens  are  eager  to  wed.'  Thus,  while  this  maid  feigns
disqualifying  plainness,  she  is  really  anxious  to  comply  with  your
wishes ;  her  pretended  refusal  is  doubtless  owing  to  modesty  and  the
publicity  of  such  a  crowd.  Do  thou,  then,  O  powerful  king  !  plant
the  arrow  with  the  five-coloured  streamers  on  her  back,  and  thus  fix
the  marriage  tie."

1  dgra  ch'en.


558  MYSTIC  AND.  SAOREB  PLAYS.

The  prince,  thinking  that  the  advice  wns  good,  addi'essed  Nah-
sa,  saying,  "  0 !  angelic  princess  !  on  whom  one's  eyes  are  never  tired  of
gazing,  pray  hear  me.  0  !  pretty  one,  brilliant  amongst  a  thousand
lights  !  I,  the  great  lord  sGra-ch'en,  am  far-famed  like  the  dragon  !  I
am  the  most  powerful  king  on  earth  1  And  whether  you  choose  to
obey  my  commands  or  not,  I  cannot  let  you  go  !  We  have  been  drawn
here  by  the  bonds  of  former  deeds,  so  you  must  become  my  mate  for
ever.  Though  the  bow  and  bow-string  be  not  of  equal  length  and
materials,  still  they  go  together ;  so  you  must  be  my  mate  for  ever,  as
we  have  certainly  been  brought  together  here  through  fate  and  former
deeds.  The  great  ocean-fish  consort  with  the  affluent  river  fish,  so  must
you  live  with  me.  Though  I  and  you  difier  much  in  position,  you
must  come  with  me.  And  from  this  day  forth  the  maiden  Nah-sa  is
mine."

So  saying,  he  planted  the  arrow  with  its  five  rainbow-coloured
streamers  on  her  back,  and  set  the  turquoise  diadem  on  her  fore-
head. And  she,  being  duly  betrothed  in  this  public  fashion,  returned
to  her  own  home  with  her  servants.

Nan-sa  endeavoured  to  evade  the  betrothal  and  enter  a  convent
instead,  but  her  parents  pressed  the  match  upon  her  and  forced  her  to
accept  the  prince,  and  the  nuptials  were  duly  celebrated  with  great
feasting.

Seven  years  later,  Nah-sa  bore  a  son,  whose  beauty  excelled  the  gods,
hence  he  was  named  Lha-bu-Dar-pu,  "  The  god's  son,"  and  a  grand
festival  was  held  in  honour  of  his  birth.  And  Nah-sa,  so  clever  in  all
the  arts,  so  pretty  and  befitting  her  position,  and  so  universally  kind,
that  all  the  subjects  loved  her,  now  became  endeared  to  everyone  even
more  than  before.  And  the  three,  the  prince-father,  the  princeling,
and  Nah-sa,  were  never  separated  even  for  a  moment.  But  Nah-sa  was
the  jewel  of  them  all,  and  she  was  given  the  keys  of  the  treasury
which  had  formerly  been  held  by  the  prince's  elder  sister,  Ani-
Nemo-Ne-tso.

Now  this  old  Ani-Nemo,  on  beir\g  deprived  of  her  keys,  became
madly  jealous  of  Nah-sa,  and  began  contriving  means  to  injure  her
reputation  in  the  eyes  of  the  prince,  her  husband.

Ani-Nemo  helped  herself  to  the  best  food  and  clothes,  leaving  the
very  worst  to  Nah-sa,  who  was  too  mild  and  good  to  resent  such  treat-
ment. Ultimately  Nah-sa  began  to  feel  very  sad,  and  though  engaged
in  worldly  afiairs,  she  felt  keenly  the  desire  to  devote  herself  wholly  to
religion,  but  she  was  afraid  to  reveal  her  thoughts  to  her  husband  and
son.

One  day  while  sad  at  heart,  she  went  to  the  garden  carrying  the
young  prince,  and  they  all  sat  down  together,  the  lord  resting  his
head  on  Nah-sa's  lap.  It  was  autumn,  and  the  summer  flowers  had
ceased  blossoming,  and  the  gold  and  turquoise-coloured  bees  had  gone.
Then  Nah-sa  wept  on  thinking  that  she  could  not  realize  her  religious
desires,  and  that  she  was  separated  from  her  parents,  and  subject  to
the  torture  of  Ani's  jealousy. But her  lord comforted  her,  saying,


NAIS-SA.  559


"  0  !  beloved  Nan-sa,  you  shall  have  a  chance  of  seeing  your  parents
soon,  so  do  not  feel  sorry.  Have  patience  to  remain  till  the  harvest
is  gathered.  Let  us  now  go  to  6Z'un-z'in-rin-ma  with  our  servants  and
collect  the  harvest,  as  the  time  is  novsr  far  advanced."  Then  they  went
there  with  their  servants  and  Ani.

Now,  there  arrived  at  that  place  the  devotee,  Dor-grags-Ras-pa,^  and
his  servant,  and  the  devotee  addressed  Naii-sa  thus, —

"  Om!  Salutation  to  our  spiritual  father,  the  Lama  !

"  O  !  Nan-sa  !  You  are  like  the  rainbow  on  the  eastern  mead,  the  rainbow
beautiful  and  pleasing  to  see,  but  quickly  vanishing.  Now  the  time  for  de-
voting yourself  to  religion  has  arrived.

"  O  !  Nan-sa  !  you  are  like  the  warbling  bird  of  the  southern  forest,  whose
voice,  though  pleasing  and  cheery,  is  ephemeral.  Now  the  time  for  devoting
yourself  to  religion  has  come.

"  O  !  Nan-sa  !  you  are  like  the  Naga-dragon  of  the  western  ocean  ;  the  Naga
possessing  vast  wealth,  but  without  real  substance.  Now  the  time  for  your
devotion  to  religion,  which  is  the  only  true  reality,  has  arrived.  On  death
nothing  can  save  you  but  the  real  refuge  of  religion.  The  bravest  hero
and  the  wisest  man  cannot  escape.  Now  as  there  is  no  alternative,  you
should  avail  yourself  of  this  great  chance,  for  once  lost  it  may  never  be  re-
found.  "

On  hearing  this  speech  Nah-sa  was  overpowered  with  grief.  And  as
she  had  nothing  to  oifer  the  holy  man  as  alms,  for  everything  was  in
charge  of  Ani,  she,  with  faltering  voice,  said  :  "  Though  I  am  anxious
to  offer  you  whatever  alms  you  need,  yet  am  I  possessed  of  nothing,
but  pray  go  to  that  house  over  there,  where  you  will  find  Ani  with  a
sleek  face,  and  seek  alms  from  her."

The  devotee  and  his  servant  accordingly  went  and  requested  Ani-
Nemoto  givethein  some  alms,  but  slie  replied  :  "  0  !  you  beggars  !  why
have  you  come  begging  of  me  !  you  plundering  crew  !  you  steal  at
every  chance  !  You  neither  devote  yourself  to  religious  purposes  in
the  hills,  nor  do  you  work  in  the  valleys.  If  you  want  alms  go  to
that  person  over  there  with  the  peacock-like  prettiness,  and  the  bird-
like warbling  voice,  and  the  rainbow-like  lofty  mind,  and  with  a
mountain  of  wealth,  for  I  am  only  a  poor  servant  and  cannot  give  you
anything."

The  two  devotees,  therefore,  returned  to  Naii-sa,  and  told  her  what
Ani  had  said.  So  Nan-sa  gave  alms  to  the  devotees  in  spite  of  her  fear
of  displeasing  Ani.  The  holy  man  replied,  "  It  will  be  an  auspi-
cious meeting  an  event  to  look  forward  to,  when  Nan-sa  and  we  two
meet  again."  On  this  Nah-sa  became  more  cheerful,  and  giving  more
alms  to  the  devotees,  bowed  down  before  them  and  requested  their
blessings.

Now  these  proceedings  did  not  escape  the  wary  eye  of  Ani-Nemo,
who,  waxing  wroth,  came  out  with  a  cane  in  her  hand,  and  thus  abused
Nan-sa :


1  A  wandering  Lama  of  the  Kar-gyu-pa  sect  and  contemporary  of  the  great  Mila-ras-
pa  in  the  eleventh  century  a.d.


560  MYSTIC  AND  SAGRED PLAYS.

"You  look  lovely,  but  your  heart  is  black  and  venomous  !  Listen  to  me,
O  peacock-like  she-devil  Is  aii-sa  !  In  those  high  mountains  the  holy  Buddha
and  the  great  Indian  sages  sat,  but  whence  came  and  go  devotees  like  these
Kas-pas  ?  If  you  give  alms  to  all  of  them  according  to  their  requests  I
would  cut  you  even  though  you  were  my  own  mother  !  In  the  S'oii-z'in-riii-
nio  of  this  country  the  chief  products  are  barley  and  peas.  Now  you  have
given  away  as  alms  all  these  men  asked  for,  more  than  your  own  portion  ;  and
thus  as  you,  too,  are  a  beggar,  go  and  accompany  these  others,"  and  so  saying,
she  began  to  beat  Nan-sa.

Naii-sa,  imploring  mercy,  said  :  "  What  else  could  I  do  ?  I  gave
them  alms  to  avoid  scandal  according  to  the  saying,  which  runs,
'  beggars  carry  bad  news  to  the  valleys,  crows  flesh  to  the  peaks.'
The  giving  of  alms  to  the  poor  and  blind  and  offerings  to  the  holy  ones
is  a  most  important  duty  of  every  rich  family ;  for  wealth  collected  by
avarice,  like  the  honey  collected  by  house-bees,  is  of  no  use  to  oneself.
Do  not,  therefore,  call  these  venerable  Ras-pas  '  beggars,'  but  respect
and  honour  them ;  and  call  not  a  girl  a  devil  for  being  piously  in-
clined, or  hereafter  you  may  repent  it."  But  Ani  only  beat  her  more
mercilessly,  and  tore  her  hair,  which  was  like  delicate  Sete-lJang-pa  grass.
And  Nan-sa,  left  alone,  wept  bitterly,  thinking  of  her  misfortunes.

Meanwhile  Ani-Nemo  went  to  the  lord,  her  brother,  and  said,  "  Hear,
O  !  lord  !  Our  mistress  Naii-sa  without  doing  any  of  those  things
she  ought  to,  does  the  opposite.  This  morning  a  devotee,  beautiful  and
of  pleasing  voice,  came  up  to  this  place  accompanied  by  his  servant,  and
Nan-sa,  fascinated  by  his  beauty,  fell  madly  in  love  with  him  and
behaved  too  immodestly  for  me  even  to  describe  it  to  you.  As  I  was
unable  to  tolerate  such  conduct  I  ran  down  to  stop  this  intercourse,
but  was  beaten  and  driven  off.  Therefore,  0  !  lord  !  have  I  informed
you  so  that  you  can  take  such  steps  as  you  think  fit."

The  lord  rather  discredited  this  story,  but  remembering  the  proverb
"  women  and  sons  must  be  well  brought  up  when  young,  otherwise
they  will  go  wrong,"  he  went  to  seek  Naii-sa,  and  found  her  shedding
torrents  of  tears  in  solitude.  On  seeing  her  he  said,  "  Ah  !  Lah-se!
Listen  to  me  !  you  naughty  Nah-sa  !  Lah-se,  why  have  you  exceeded
all  the  bounds  of  propriety  !  Lah-se  !  Why  did  you  beat  my  young
sister !  who  gave  you  authority  to  do  that  ?  Lah-se .'  Like  a  dog  tied  on
the  house-top,  barking  at  and  trying  to  bite  the  stars  of  heaven  !  What
has  the  fiendess  Nah-sa  to  say  in  her  defence  ?  "

Nah-sa  meekly  replied,  "My  lord!  were  I  to  relate  all  that
happened  it  would  only  make  matters  worse,  and  our  subjects  shall  be
shown  such  strife  as  was  unknown  before.  Therefore  I  refrp,in  from
grieving  you,  O  !  my  lord,  with  any  details."

But  the  lord  interpreting  the  reticence  of  Nah-sa  as  sufficient  proof
of  her  guilt,  he  seized  her  by  the  remaining  hair,  and  beat  her  so  un-
mercifully that  no  one  but  Nah-sa  could  have  endured  it.  And  he
dragged  her  along  the  ground  and  inflicted  the  deepest  pain  by  prick-
ing reeds.  Just  then  the  male-servant  tSod-nam-c^pab-skyed  and  the
female  servant  'Dsom-pa-skyid-po  came  to  Nah-sa's  aid  and  besought
their  master  saying, —


NAN-SA.  561


"O!  Great  and  powerful  Lord!  Listen  to  us,  your  slaves!  What  can
have  maddened  your  majesty  to  have  inflicted  such  chastisement  on  your  life-
partner  ?  The  lovely  face  of  our  lady  Nan-sa,  which  shone  like  the  moon
of  the  fifteenth  day,  is  now  bruised  and  bleeding  by -your  hands.  0  !  Lord  of
Myan-«tod-Ri-nang  !  Pray  stay  your  wrath,  and  you,  O  I  lady,  cease  to
weep  ! "

Then  the  lord  and  his  lady  allowed  themselves  to  be  led  away,  each
to  their  own  room.

At  that  time,  Lama-S'akyahi-rgyal-mts'an,  versed  in  the  doctrine  of
"  The  Great  Perfection,"  lived  in  the  monastery  of  sKyid-po-se-rag-ya-
luii  in  the  neighbourhood.  And  perceiving  that,  according  to  the
prophecy  of  the  great  reverend  Mila-ra«,  the  princess  Nah-sa  was  really
a  good  fairy,  he  thought  fit  to  advise  her  to  pursue  her  holy  aims.
So  dressing  himself  in  the  guise  of  a  poor  beggar,  though  his  appear-
ance rather  belied  him,  and  taking  a  young  monkey  which  knew  many
tricks,  he  went  to  the  window  of  Nah-sa's  chamber  and  sang  this
song,—

"  0  !  lady  !  surpassing  the  godesses  in  beauty,  pray  sit  by  the  window,  and
cast  your  eyes  hither,  so  that  you  may  be  amused  at  the  tricks  of  this  young
monkey,  and  lend  me  your  ear  to  hear  clearly  the  songs  of  a  poor  travelling
beggar,  who  now  stands  in  your  presence.

"In  the  green  forests  of  the  eastern  Kong-bu  country  dwell  the  monkeys
with  their  young,  the  wisest  of  whom  climb  the  high  "trees,  but  the  foolish
ones  roam  recklessly  on  the  ground,  tasting  the  fruits  according  to  their
whims,  and  one  of  tbese  unlucky  young  ones  fell  into  the  clutches  of  a  passing
beggar,  who  tied  him  by  the  neck  as  it  deserved  (through  its  Karma),  and
subjected  it  to  various  tortures  in  teaching  it  his  tricks.

"In  the  forests  of  the  southern  craggy  Mon  country  the  birds  rear  their
young,  of  whom  the  wisest  and  the  strongest  soar  into  the  sky,  while  the
foolish  ones  perch  on  the  lower  trees.  Thus  the  speech-knowing  parrot  comes
within  the  grasp  of  the  king  who  imprisons  it  and  chains  it  by  the  feet,  as  it
deserved  ;  and  it  is  tortured  and  troubled  when  being  taught  to  speak.

"In  the  western  country  of  Nepal,  the  country  of  rice,  the  bees  breed  their
young,  of  whom  the  fortunate  ones  sip  the  juice  of  the  rice-flowers,  while  the
foolish  ones,  smelling  the  rice-beer,  come,  as  they  deserved,  within  the  grasp
of  the  cruel  boys,  who  tear  them  in  their  hands  for  the  sake  of  their  honey.

"  In  the  northern  country  of  Tsa-kha,  the  sheep  bring  forth  lambs,  of  whom
the  fortunate  ones  graze  on  the  green  meadow,  frolicking  and  skipping  in
their  wild  joy,  while  the  unlucky  ones  come  within  the  grasp  of  the  butchers,
who  kill  them  without  mercy.

"In  the  middle  country  of  MyaiL-stod-a'ser-<?z'on-rin-mo,  the  mothers  have
children,  of  whom  the  wisest  spend  their  lives  in  the  country ;  while  the  un-
lucky ones  stay  with  their  parents,  but  the  most  unlucky  of  all  the  pretty
girls  is  married  to  a  lord,  and  Ani-Nemo  treats  her  as  she  thinks  she  deserves.
Now  if  this  girl  fails  to  remember  the  inconstancy  of  life,  then  her  body,  though
pretty,  is  only  like  that  of  the  peacock  of  the  plains.  If  she  does  not  stead-
fastly devote  herself  to  religion,  her  voiCe,  though  pleasing,  is  like  the  vain
cry  of  the  'Jolmo  bird  in  the  wilderness."

Here  the  man  paused,  while  the  monkey  began  to  play  many  wonder-
ful tricks,  which  amused  the  young  prince ;  while  Nan-sa,  deeply  agi-
tated by  the  song,  ordered  the  beggar  to  enter  her  chamber,  and
addressing  him  said,  "  0  !  traveller  in  the  guise  of  a  beggar  !  fjisten
to  me!  My  earnest  wish  indeed  is  to  devote  my  life  to  religion;
I have  no earthly  desires  whatever  ;  I was  forced to  become  the

0  o


562  MYSTIC  AND  SACRED  PLAYS.


manager  of  a  worldly  house  only  through  filial  obedience  to  the  dictates
of  my  parents.  Now  pray  tell  me,  which  is  the  most  suitable  convent  for
me  to  enter,  and  who  is  the  most  learned  Lama  as  a  spiritual  father  ?  "

The  beggar  gave  her  the  information  she  desired.  And  Naii-sa,  in
her  gratitude,  bestowed  upon  him  all  her  silver  and  golden  ornaments.

Now,  it  so  happened  that  just  at  this  time,  the  lord  arrived,  and
hearing  the  voice  of  a  man  in  his  wife's  chamber  he  peeped  in  and,  to
his  great  surprise,  saw  Nan-sa  giving  a  beggar  all  her  jewels,  while
the  young  prince  was  playing  with  the  beggar's  monkey.

Furious  at  the  sight,  he  entered  the  chamber,  just  as  the  beggar  and
his  monkey  left ;  and  thinking  that  Ani's  story  must  indeed  be  true,
and  that  his  wife  had  bestowed  his  property  on  the  devotees,  and  had
scandalously  brought  beggars  even  inside  her  private  chamber,  he  seized
Nan-sa  by  the  hair  and  began  to  beat  her  most  unmercifully,  and
Nemo  also  came  and  assisted  in  beating  her.  They  tore  the  young
prince  away  from  her,  and  the  lord  and  Ani-Nemo  continued  beating
Nan-sa  until  she  died.

ACT  III.

Nan-sa's  return  from  the  Dead.

Om  ma-ni-pad-me  Hwrit  !  The  young  prince,  unable  to  bear  separa-
tion from  his  mother,  stole  to  her  room  after  the  tragedy  and  found  her
lying  dead.  Rushing  to  his  father  with  the  dreadful  news,  his  father,
in  alarm,  ran  to  her  prostrate  figure,  but  thinking  that  Nan-sa  was
merely  shamming,  he  exclaimed,  "  0  !  fair  Nah-sa,  arise  !  The  starry
heaven  betimes  is  obscured  by  clouds  ;  the  lovely  flowers  die  at  winter's
approach  ;  you  have  been  harshly  treated,  but  your  time  has  not  yet
come  •  so,  pray  arise  !  "  But  the  corpse  lay  still,  for  its  spirit  long
had  fled.

Then  the  lord  repented  him  bitterly,  but  being  powerless  to  revive
her,  he  had  to  consent  to  the  customary  funeral  offerings  being  made
to  'The  Three  Holy  Ones,  and  he  gave  alms  to  the  poor  and  blind,  and
feasts  to  the  priests.  And  the  death-astrologer  was  called  and  he
ordered  that  the  body  should  be  kept  for  seven  days  exposed  on  the
eastern  hill,  and  care  taken  that  no  animal  should  destroy  it,  and  that
after  the  eighth  day  it  should  be  cremated  or  thrown  into  a  river  or
lake.  Nah-sa's  body  was  therefoi'e  wrapped  in  a  white  blanket  and
bound  on  a  four-footed  bed,  and  taken  to  the  eastern  grassy  hill,  where
it  was  deposited  in  solitude.

Now  Nah-sa's  spirit  on  her  death  had  winged  its  way,  light  as  a
feather,  to  the  ghostly  region  of  the  intermediate  purgatory,  Bardo,
where  the  minions  of  the  Death-king  seized  it  and  led  it  before  the
dreaded  judge-king  of  the  dead.

At  that  tribunal  Nah-sa's  spirit  was  terrified  at  seeing  many  wicked
souls  condemned  and  sent  down  for  torture  to  the  hells,  in  cauldrons
of  molten  metal,  or  frozen  amongst  the  ice ;  while  she  was  pleased  to
see  the  souls  of  several  pious  people  sent  to  heaven.

But  in  her  fear  she  threw  herself  before  the great  judge  of  the


NAN-8A.  563


Dead  and  with  joined  hands  prayed  to  him  :  "  Have  mercy  upon  me  !  0  !
holy  mother  Tara  !  And  help  and  bless  me,  ye  host  of  fairy  she-devils  !
0 !  Judge  of  the  Dead  !  -who  separates  the  white  virtuous  from  the
black  sinful  ones,  hear  me,  O !  great  king !  I  longed  to  benefit  the
animals,  but  could  do  little  during  my  short  stay  in  the  world.  When
I  learned  that  the  birth  must  end  in  death,  I  cared  not  for  my  beauty ;
and  when  I  saw  that  wealth  collected  by  avarice  was  useless  to  oneself
I  gave  it  away  to  the  poor  and  blind. Have  mercy  upon  me !  "

Then  the  judge  of  the  Dead  ordered  her  two  guardian  angels — the
good  and  the  bad — to  pour  out  their  white  and  black  deed-counters.
On  this  being  done,  it  was  found  that  the  white  virtuous  deeds  far  ex-
ceeded the  black  sinful  ones,  which  latter  were  indeed  only  two  in
number ;  and  the  judge  having  consulted  his  magical  mirror  and  found
this  record  to  be  correct,  and  knowing  that  K"an-sa  was  of  intensely
religious  disposition,  and  capable  of  doing  much  good  if  allowed  to  live
longer  in  the  human  world,  he  reprieved  her  and  sent  her  back  to  life,
saying: —

"O  !  Nan-sa,  brilliant  above  a  hundred  thousand  lights  !  Listen  !  Lah-se!
Listen  to  king  Yama,  the  master  of  Death  !  I  separate  the  white  deeds  from
the  black,  and  send  the  persons  in  whom  the  white  virtue  preponderates  to
the  heavens ;  in  this  capacity  I  am  named  5.rya  Avalokitesvara  ('p'ags-pa-
royan-ras-^zigs-<?ban).  But  when  I  send  the  sinful  persons  to  hell,  I  am  named
Mrityupati  Yama-raja  ('ch'i-&dag-s'in-»'jehi-?'gyal-po)  !  Lah-se  1  I  am  the
inexorable  fierce  king  who  always  punishes  the  wicked  !  I  never  save  an
oppressive  king,  no  matter  how  powerful ;  nor  will  I  let  any  sinful  Lama  es-
cape. No  one  can  ever  escape  visiting  this  my  bar  of  Justice.  But  you,  O
Nan-sa  !  are  not  a  sinful  person  :  you  are  a  good  fairy's  incarnation,  arid  when
a  person  sacrifices  her  body  for  a  religious  purpose,  she  obtains  paradise,  and
if  she  is  profoundly  pious,  she  shall  obtain  the  rank  of  Buddhaship,  though
(he  former  state  is  much  to  be  preferred.  So  stay  no  longer  here,  but  return
to  the  human  world,  and  recover  your  old  body !  Lah-se !  Be  a  '  death-
returned  person,'  ^  and  benefit  the  animal  beings  !  "

Nan-sa,  now  overjoyed,  bowed  down  before  his  Plutonic  majesty,
and  besought  his  blessing,  and  after  receiving  it,  she  departed
by  the  white  heavenly  path,  and  then  descending  to  this  world,  re-
sumed her  former  body  lying  in  its  white  blanket-shroud,  and  folding
her  hands  in  the  devotional  attitude,  she  lay  with  her  feet  flexed,  like
a  holy  thunderbolt.  And  flowers  rained  down  from  heaven  upon  her,
and  a  rainbow  shed  its  halo  round  her.  And  she  prayed  to  the  fairies
and  she-devils : —

"  I  prostrate  myself  before  the  triad  assembly  of  the  Lamas,  the  tutelaries,
and  the  Dakkini— she-devils  and  fairies— to  whom  I  pray  for  deliverance
from  the  circle  of  re-births.  O  !  eastern  fairy  of  the  Vajra  class,  white  as
the  conch-shell,  sounding  the  golden  drum  (damaru)  in  your  right  hand,  't6-
l6-lo,'  and  ringing  the  silver  bell  in  your  left,  '  sUl-ll,'  surrounded  by
hundreds  of  mild  and  white-robed  attendants,  pray  forgive  all  my  short-
comings !  O  !  southern  fairy  of  the  Jewel  race,  golden-yellow,  sounding,
etc.,  etc.

Now  the  men  who  had  come  to  remove  the  corpse,  being  terrified  at

1  'das-log.

00  2


564  MYSTIC  AND  BACRED PLAYS.

hearing  the  dead  body  speak,  dared  not  approach.  The  more  frightened
amongst  them  fled,  while  the  braver  ones  prepared  to  defend  themselves
by  throwing  stones,  in  the  belief  that  the  ghost  of  Nan-sa  was  agita-
ting her  dead  body.  Then  Naii-sa  cried  out,  saying  "  I  am  not  a  ghost,
but  a  '  death-returned  person '  ;"  and  the  men  being  astonished,  drew
near  and  bowed  down  before  her,  and  paid  profound  reverence  to  the
resuscitated  one.

The  good  news  of  Nan-sa's  return  from  the  dead  soon  reached  the
lord  and  the  prince,  who  hurried  to  the  spot,  and  throwing  themselves
before  her,  implored  her  forgiveness,  and  conducted  her  back  to  their
home  ;  not,  however,  without  protests  from  Nan-sa,  who  had  decided
to  become  a  nun.  She  only  consented  to  resume  domestic  life  on  the
ardent  entreaties  of  her  son.

But  soon  her  excessive  piety  again  subjected  her  to  the  ill-treatment
of  her  husband  as  before,  and  forced  her  to  flee  to  her  parents'  home,
where,  however,  she  met  with  no  better  reception,  but  was  beaten  and
expelled.  And  now  driven  forth  from  home,  a  wanderer  for  religion's
sake,  she  seeks  admission  into  a  convent,  where,  throwing  herself  at  the
Lama's  feet,  she  prays  him,  saying, —

"  Om!  Salutation  to  our  spiritual  father,  the  Lama,  and  the  host  of  Fairy-
mothers  !  I  have  come  in  deep  distress  in  order  to  devote  myself  to  religion ;  and  I
appeal  to  you,  good  Lama,  for  help  and  permission  to  stay  here  (at^Ser-rag-eya-
lun),  O  Lama  !  I  beg  you  to  catch  me,  insignificant  fish  as  I  am,  on  your  hook  of
mercy  ;  for  otherwise  the  pious  resolves  of  this  poor  girl  will  perish,  and  the
injury  you  thereby  will  inflict  shall  be  my  utter  rum,  and  make  me  wretched  like
a  jackal  haunting  a  cave.  0  !  Lama  of  the  red  Lotus-cap,  if  you  fail  to  help  me
now,  then  I  am  indeed  undone  !  I  adore  The  Holy  Keligion  with  all  my  heart,
and  I  crave  your  blessing  !  "  and  so  saying  she  took  oflf  her  rich  robes  and  jewels,
and  offered  them  to  him.  And  the  Lama,  pitying  her,  blessed  her,  and  gave
her  the  vow  of  a  novice.

The  news  of  Nan-sa's  entry  to  the  convent  soon  reached  the  ears  of
the  lord  of  Rinang,  who  waxed  wroth  and  went  to  war  against  the
monastery.  Arriving  there  with  his  men  he  cried  unto  the  Lama,
saying  :  "  Lah-se  1  You  fellow,  why  have  you  made  a  nun  of  Nan-sa?
Unless  you  give  full  satisfaction,  I  will  crush  you  and  all  your  convent
like  butter !  "  And  so  saying  he  seized  the  Lama  and  pointed  his
sword  to  his  heart.

Now  Nan-sa,  driven  to  despair  on  seeing  that  the  life  of  her  Lama  was
thus  threatened  for  her  sake,  she,  in  the  dress  of  a  novice,  ascended
the  roof  of  the  convent,  and  in  the  sight  of  all,  sailed  away,  Buddha-
like, through  the  sky,  vanishing  into  space  like  the  rainbow.

Then  the  lord  of  Rinang  with  all  his  retinue,  dismayed  at  the
sight  of  Nah-sa's  miraculous  flight,  fell  to  the  ground.  And  stung  by
remorse  at  their  sacrilege,  they  ofiered  up  all  their  arms  and  armour
to  the  Lama  ;  and  promising  never  again  to  molest  him,  they  returned
home  gloomy  and  sad  ;  and  Nan-sa  was  seen  no  more.

May  glory  come  ! Tashi-s'o  ! May  virtue  increase  ! Oe-leg-'p'el  1 !

And  here  all  the  people  forming  the  audience  joyfully  shout :
"  Mangolam  !  !  ! All  happiness  ! ! !  " And  the  play  is  over.


NANS  A.


565


The  people,  old  and  young,  now  discuss  amongst  themselves  the
theme  of  the  play  and  its  moral  lessons.  They  are  profoundly
impressed  by  the  self-sacrifice  of  Nan-sa  and  the  other  pious  per-
sons, and  by  the  vivid  pictures  drawn  of  the  way  in  which  evil-
doers must  inexorably  pay  the  penalty  of  their  misdeeds.  Thus
even  these  crude  Tibetan  plays  point,  in  their  own  clumsy  way,
very  much  the  same  moral  lessons  as  are  taught  by  the  Western
Stage.


Some  Actoes  of  the  Play  of  NaSj-sa.


566


XXI.


DOMESTIC  AND  POPULAR  LAMA  ISM.

lAMAISM  is  not  merely  a  monastic  brotherhood ;  it  is
a  truly  popular  religion,  deeply
pervading and dominating
the  life  of  the  people.

On  it  the  Tibetan  builds
his  daily  fears  and  hopes,  and
it  is  not  without  some  eleva-
ting influence.  The  current
of  Buddhism  which  runs
through  its  tangled  paganism
has  brought  to  the  Tibetan
most  of  the  little  civilization
which  he  possesses,  and  has
raised  him  correspondingly
in  the  scale  of  humanity,
lifting  him  above  a  life  of
wild  rapine  and  selfishness,
by  setting  before  him  higher
aims,  by  giving  milder  meanings  to  his  mythotogy,  by  discoun-
teniancing  sacrifice,  and  by  inculcating  universal  charity  and
tenderness  to  all  living  things.

Unlike,  however,  the  Buddhism  of  the  Burmese,  it  is  not  an
educational  factor,  for  the  Lamas  restrict  their  learning  to  them-
selves, as  indeed  did  the  Brahmans,  and  most  priestly  orders  of
old,  and  they  contemptuously  call  the  laity  "  the  dark  (ignorant)
people,"  ^  "  the  worldly  ones,"  ^  or  "  the  givers  of  alms."  *  And
certainly  the  last  epithet  is  well  deserved,  for  the  Tibetans,  while,


Lama  receiving  homage  of  Childeen.^


1  After  Giorgi,  op.  Ht.
3  'jig-rten-pa.


mi-nag-pa.

sbyin-bdag,  "  owners  of  alms,"  cf ,  Kopp.,  i.,  487.


METEMPSYCHOSIS  IN  DAILY  LIFE.  5G7

perhaps,  the  mof3t  priest-ridden  people  in  the  world,  are  amongst
the  most  pious  and  the  most  lavish  in  their  religious  gifts.  The
popular  name  for  a  Lama  is  "  Father,"  as  with  Eoman  priests.

It  is  surprising,  in  view  of  the  excessive  amount  of  non-Bud-
dhist elements  in  Lamaism,  to  find  how  deeply  the  everyday  life
and  notions  of  the  laity  are  leavened  by  the  Buddhist  spirit.

The  doctrine  of  metempsychosis  and  its  Karma  enters  into  the
ordinary  habits  and  speech  of  the  people.  Their  proverbs,  folk-
lore,' songs,  and  lay  dramas,  are  full  of  it.  Friendships  also  are
explained  by  them  on  this  principle.

More  than  once  have  I  been  told  by  some  worthy  Tibetan  that
it  could  not  have  been  mere  chance  which  had  brought  us  to-
gether, across  so  many  thousand  miles  of  land  and  sea ;  but  that
we  must,  in  a  former  life,  have  been  friends,  who  now  have  met
again  in  this  life,  through  the  force  of  Ka/nr^a.  Similarly  as  re-
gards the  lower  animals.  A  Tibetan  seeing  my  dog  and  pony
playing  good-naturedly  together,  explained  the  situation  by  say-
ing that  in  a  former  birth  these  two  must  have  been  mates.

Even  practices  which  are  clearly  dishonest  and  sinful,  are  at
times  justified  on  the  same  principle,  or  rather  by  its  abuse.
Thus  the  more  sordid  Tibetan  reconciles  cheating  to  his  con-
science, by  naively  convincing  himself  that  the  party  whom  he  now
attempts  to  defraud,  had  previously  swindled  him  in  a  former  life,
and  that  justice  demands  retribution.

Congenital  defects  such  as  blindness,  dumbness  and  lameness,
and  accidents,  are  viewed  as  retributions  which  are  due  to  the
individual  having,  in  a  previous  life,  abused  or  sinned  with  the
particular  limb  or  organ  presently  affected.  Thus  a  man  is  blind
because  he  sinned  with  his  eye  in  a  former  life.  Indeed  this  is  a
common  dogma  of  Buddha's  own  teaching,  and  forms  the  basis  of
the  Jdtakas  or  tales  of  the  previous  Births  of  Buddha.

For  a  like  reason,  cattle  and  all  other  dumb  animals  are
humanely  treated  ;  life  is  seldom  wantonly  taken.  Indeed,  the
taking  of  animal  life  is  rather  strictly  prohibited  in  Tibet,  except
in  the  case  of  the  Yaks  and  sheep  needed  for  food,  for  in  such
a  cold  climate  flesh  forms  an  essential  staple  of  diet,  but  the
butchers  ^  being  thus  professional  sinners,  are  the  most  despised

•  Cf.  my  art.  on  Cats  in  Indian  Antiquary,  Dec,  1892.

''  gDol-pa.  Originally,  says  Jabsohke  (2>.,  p.  208),  these  were  probably  fishers.


568


DOMESTIC  AND  POPULAR  LAMAISM.


of  all  classes  in  Tibet.  Wild  animals,  and  even  small  birds,  are
seldom  killed,  nor  fish,  on  account  of  the  religious  penalties  at-
tached to  this  crime,  hence  game  is  so  extremely  abundant  in
the  country. Yet  human  prisoners  are,  at  times,  most  cruelly

tortured ;  though  this


probably  is  owing,  in
some  measure,  to  the
example  set  by  the
Chinese,  as  well  as
the  necessity  for  some
violent  punishment  to
check  the  commission
of  crime.  Nearly  every
offence,  even^  to  the
most  heinous,the  mur-
dering of  a  Lama,  may
be  condoned  by  a  fixed
scale  of  fine ;  but  fail-
ing the  payment  of
the  fine  and  the  extra
blackmail  to  the  ofii-
cials,  the  prisoner,  if
not  actually  killed,  is
tortured  and  mutila-
ted, and  then  usually
set  free,  in  order  not
only  to  avoid  the  ex-
pense of  detainment  in
jail,  but  also  to  serve
as  a  public  warning  to
others.  Thus  many  of
the  maimed  beggars
who  swarm  about  Lhasa  are  criminals  who  have  had  their  eyes
put  out  or  their  hands  cut  off  in  this  way.

The  tolerant  spirit  of  Buddhism  has,  however,  stamped  more  or
less  distinctly  the  national  character,  the  mildness  of  which  con-
trasts strongly  with  the  rough  exterior  and  semi-barbarous  state
of  the  people. Bogle's  high  testimony  to  this  trait  has  already


Tibetan  Laymen.


SOFTENING  INFLUENCE OF  BUDDHISM.  569


been  referred  to.  Hue,  writing  of  the  lay  regent  of  Lhasa, '  de-
scribes him  as  a  man  "  whose  large  features,  mild  and  remarkably
pallid,  breathed  a  truly  royal  majesty,  while  his  dark  eyes  shaded
by  long  lashes  were  intelligent  and  gentle."  And  Eockhill  and
others  who  have  been  brought  into  intimate  contact  with  the
people  have  remarked  an  unexpected  amount  of  mildness  of  tem-
per ;  and  my  own  experience  is  similar.

The  spirit  of  consideration  for  others  expresses  itself  in  many
graceful  acts  of  genuine  politeness.  A  stirrup-cup  of  wine°  is
presented  to  the  departing  visitor  or  traveller,  bidding  him  Grod-
speed,  and  adding,  "May  we  be  able  to  present  you  with  another
as  welcome  on  your  return."  The  seller  of  any  article,  other  than
eatables,  always  gives  his  blessing  to  the  buyer,  in  terms  such  as
these :  "  May  good  come  upon  you ;  may  you  live  long  ;  may  no
sickness  happen;  may  you  grow  rich" ';  to  which  the  buyer  replies
with  « thanks."  *

The  personal  names  of  both  boys  and  girls  are  largely  borrowed
from  mystical  Buddhism,  for  instance  "  The  Thunderbolt  of  Long-
Life"  (Dorje-ts'e-rin),  "Dolma"  (the  Indian  goddess  of  Mercy,
Tara) ;  and  the  influence  of  the  religious  habit  is  also  seen  in
several  of  the  names  of  places.

The  common  oaths  are  mainly  of  a  Buddhist  character.  The
oath  so  much  in  the  mouth  of  the  merchants,  and  used  at  times
by  most  of  the  laity  as  an  asseveration  in  ordinary  conversation,  is
"  (by)  the  precious  Lord  (Sakya  Muni) ! "  =  or  "  (by)  The  Three  Earest
Ones !  "  ° Though  others  also  are  in  use.'


1  Named  "  Pe-chi  "  (the  "  She-te  Shaffee "  of  Edgar  ?).  z  C'aii-kyel.

s  yag-po  byan-pa  s'og,  ts'e-riii-pa-s'og,  nad-med-pa  s'og,  p'ug-po  yoii-wa  s'og.

*  t'ug-r-je-ch'e,  literally  =  "  great  mercy,"  compare  with  French  merci,  used  on  simi-
lar occasions.  =  Jo-wo  Rin-po-ch'e.  e  dK'on-mch'og  sum.

'  The  other  Oaths  used  in  Tibet  are  :  "  May  I  die  ere  sunset "  (ni-ma  'di-las  ts'e-
t'un) ;  "  may  my  mother  be  separated  "  (a-ma-dan  bral).  In  Tsang  a  common  oath  is
"  May  my  life  be  separated  "  (srog-dan  bral ;  pron.  hrok  ta-te).  The  monks  of  De-pung
Serra,  etc.,  swear  by  their  own  tutelary  Tamdin,  or  Vajra-bhairava :-  "May  Tam-
din  devour  me  "  (rta-mgrin-Js'es).  And  in  the  courts  when  the  great  oath  is  taken,
which  is  seldom,  it  is  done  by  the  person  placing  a  holy  scripture  on  his  head,  and
sitting  on  the  reeking  hide  of  an  ox  and  eating  a  part  of  the  ox's  heart.  The  expense
of  this  ceremony  is  borne  by  the  party  who  challenges  the  accused.  In  Sikhim  the
common  oaths  are ;  "  May  I  die  "  (s'i-ge) ;  "  May  I  go  to  hell "  (na-rak-kan) ;  "  May  I
carry  all  your  ill-luck "  (bgeg«-chi  k'ur-rgyu) ;  "  May  I  be  deprived  of  succession  "
(mi-rabs-ch'ad) ;  "  May  the  mountain-god  Kangch'endsonga  or  the  Darjiling  ram-devil
have  first  taste  of  my  red  blood  "  (rdo-rje  glin-dgon-btsan  sha-k'rag-dmar  phuh  kyi-
bs'es  bchug).  i


570


DOMESTIC  AND  POPULAR  LAMAISM.


But  botii  Lamas  and  people  are  so  steeped  in  pagan  superstition
and  idolatry  that  their  un-Buddhist  features  and  practices  are
most  conspicuous.  As  the  Tibetans  see  nature  in  its  ultimate
stronghold,  in  all  its  pitiless  force  and  fury,  terrorizing  the  brave
as  well  as  the  timid,  their  child-like  character  impels  them  to
worship  the  more  proximate  agents  which  seem  to  visibly  wreck
their  fields  and  flocks,  and  vex  them  as  with  disease  and  disaster.

Their  inveterate  crav-
ing for  material  pro-
tection against  those  ma-
lignant gods  and  demons
has  caused  them  to  pin
their  faith  on  charms  and
amulets,  which  are  to  be
seen  everywhere  dangling
froin  the  dress  of  every
man,  woman,  and  child.
These  charms,  as  we
have  seen,  are  mostly
sentences  of  a  Sanskritic
nature  borrowed  from
mystical  Buddhism,  and
supplemented  by  relics  of
holy  Lamas,  by  which
they  muzzle  and  bind  the
devils,  as  in  the  illustra-
tion here  given.

But  these  appliances,
however  good  in  theory,
are  found  in  practice  to
be  deplorably  deficient.
The  priests  must  constantly  be  called  in  to  appease  the  menacing
devils,  whose  ravenous  appetite  is  only  sharpeiied  by  the  food
given  to  stay  it.

A  more  cheerful  and  graceful  side  to  their  demon- worship  is  seen
in  the  practice  of  planting  the  tall  prayer-flags,  which  picturesquely
flutter  around  every  village,  and  the  strings  of  flaglets  which
flaunt  from  house-tops,  bridges,  passes,  and  other  places  believed
to  be  infested  by  malignant  sprites.


Charm  to  bind  Disease-devils.
(Eeduced  4.)


AMULETS  AND CHARMS.  571

The  people  live  in  an  atmosphere  of  the  marvellous.  No  story
is  too  absurd  for  them  to  credit,  if  only  it  be  told  by  Lamas.
They  are  ever  on  the  outlook  for  omens,  and  the  every-day  affairs
of  life  are  governed,  as  we  have  seen,  by  a  superstitious  regard  for
lucky  and  unlucky  days.  Though  special  divinations  are  sought
from  professed  astrologers,  in  the'  more  serious  events  of  life,  in
birth,  marriage,  sickness,  and  death,  and  often  in  sowing,  reaping,
building,  etc.,  each  layman  determines  for  himself  the  auguries
for  the  more  trivial  matters  of  his  ordinary  business,  for  travelling,
buying  and  selling,  mending,  etc.

And  implicit  reliance  is  placed  on  all  these  auguries.  When
I  was  forced  to  send  a  party  of  Sikhimite  Tibetans  on  a  long


Amulets. 1
excursion  upon  a  day  which  was  unlucky  for  travelling,  and  in
consequence  of  which  my  men  were  unwilling  to  start,  I  at  once
secured  a  revival  of  their  spirits  and  their  ready  departure  by
making  the  head-man  draw,  in  orthodox  fashion,  a  good  augury
from  the  pack  of  divining-eards,  from  which,  however,  I  had
previously,  unknown  to  them,  withdrawn  all  the  unlucky  ones.
Pilgrimages  are  most  popular.  Every  opportunity  is  seized  to
visit  celebrated  shrines,  and  to  circumambulate  the  numerous  holy
buildings  and  sacred  spots  in  their  neighbourhood.

Reduced  J. See  also  photograph  on  uext  page,  by  Mr.  Hoffmann.


572


DOMESTIC  AND POPULAR LAMAISM.


Prayers  ever  hang  upon  the  people's  lips.  The  prayers  are
chiefly  directed  to  the  devils,  imploring  them  for  freedom  or
release from their cruel inflictions, or they are plain naive


A  TiBBTAX  Lady  with  Amulets.


requests  for  aid  towards  obtaining  the  good  things  of  this  life,
the  loaves  and  the  fishes. At  all  spare  times,  day  and  night,


PBAYEErWHEEL8  AND  DEVIL-WORSHIP.


573


the people  ply  their prayer-wheels, and  tell  their  beads, and

mutter the  mystic six syllables — Om ma-^yi pad-me  Hum!

"Om!  the  Jewel  in  the  Lotus,  Hum!" —

the sentence  which  gains  them

the
glorious  heaven


.Hand-Peayer-  "  Wheels  "
(Beduced  ^. The  one  on  the  right  has  its  case  removed.)

of  eternal  bHss,  the  paradise  of  the  fabulous  Buddha  of  boundless
Light — Amitabha.

Still,  with  all  their  strivings  and  the  costly  services  of  their
priests,  the  Tibetans  never  attain  peace  of  mind.  They  have  fallen
under  the  double  ban  of  menacing  demons  and  despotic  priests.
So  it  will  be  a  happy  day,  indeed,  for  Tibet  when  its  sturdy  over-
credulous  people  are  freed  from  the  intolerable  tyranny  of  the
Lamas,  and  delivered  from  the  devils  whose  ferocity  and  exacting
worship  weigh  like  a  nightmare  upon  all.


Finis.


The  Hodse-Devil.


575


Appendix I.


Chkonological  Table.^

Buddha's  death

Alexander  the  Great  invaded  India

Candragupta,  king  of  Magadha ...

Asoka,  emperor  of  India,  adopts  Buddhism

Buddhism  introduced  to  Ceylon ...

Menander  (Milinda)  of  Sagala

Scriptures  (pitaha)  first  reduced  to  writing  in  Ceylon

Buddhism  introduced  to  China ...

King  Kanishka  (Kanerkes),  patron  of  Buddhism

Council  of  Jalandhar

Buddhism  introduced  to  Korea ...

FaHian's  pilgrimage  in  Magadha

Buddha-ghosha's  commentary  in  Pali

Sung-yun's  pilgrimage  in  India ...

Buddhism  introd.  to  Japan

Hiuen  Tsiang's  pilgrimage  in  India,  from

Buddhism  introd.  to  Tibet  under  king  Srong  Tsan  Gampo

Arrival  of  the  Chinese  princess  Wen-cheng  in  Tibet

Building  of the  first  Buddhist  temple in Tibet, the

P'rul-snan  at  Lhasa ...
Birth  of  king  K'ri-Srong  Deu  Tsan
Arrival  of  St.  Padma-sambhava  in  Tibet


B.C.

477-370^
335-327
315

263-259
241
150
82

A.D.

62

78  circa
100  circa
372
404
420
518
552
637
638
640'

651

728
747


1  The  dates  of  the  Tibetan  events  are  taken  mainly  from  Csoma  (GVam.,  p.  181  et  seq.%
and  supplemented  to  a  slight  extent  by  those  of  Sum-pa  or  YSes-dpal-'byor  (trans,  by
Saeat,  J.A.S.B.,  1889,  37,  etc.),  except  where  otherwise  specified.  I  have  reduced,  by
one  year,  the  dates  of  Sum-pa  as  given  by  Sarat,  as  the  Lama  who  compiled  his
paper  included  the  ciu'rent  year  in  his  calculations.

2  The  usually  accepted  date  is  477  B.C.  (Fbeuusson,  Max  MiJLLEE  in  Sacred  JBooks  of
the  East,  x.,  xxxix.),  though  Ehys  Davids  adopts  412  {Budd.,  p.  213,  and  JVumis-
mata  Orientalia,  55);  and  Westeegaard  (Uber  Buddha's  Todesjahr,  p.  74),  Keen  and
others  place  it  about  370  B.C.  The  Tibetans  follow  the  popular  Chinese  accounts  in
giving  it  an  extravagant  antiquity  {see  Csoma's  Gram.,  p.  199  for  details).

'  BnSHELL,  loe.  cil.


676  APPENDIX  I.


A.D.

Building  of  the  first  Lamaist  monastery,  Sam-yas . . .  749

Birth  of  Laii-dar ma,  the  Julian  of  Lamaism ... ...  861

His  persecution  of  Lamaism ... ... ... ...  899

His  murder... ... ... ... ... ...  900

Kalacakra  system  introduced  to  India . . ... ...  950

St.  Atlsa,  born 980

'Brom-ston,  his  disciple,  born ... ... ... ...  1002-

gSol-nag-t'ah  monastery  founded ... ... ...  1015

'K'on  dKon-mc'og-rgyal-po,  the  founder  of  Sarskya  monas-
tery, born 1033

St.  Atisa  arrived  at  mNa-rigs ... ... ... ...  1 038

St.  Milaraspaborn 1038

Ati§adied 1053

Rva^sgren  mon.  founded  by 'Brom-ston  ... ... ...  1055

The 'fi'anslator  bLo-ldan-S'es-rab  born ... ... ...  1057

ZO'e-stom Nan-pa's  Nih-ma  revelation (ICe-btsun) ...  1066

Saskya  and  gSang-phu  mon.  founded ... ... ...  1071

Lha-rje  sgam-po-pa  of  Drag-po  born ... ... ...  1077

Ras-c'un-pa  born ... ... ... ... ... ...  1082

Kun-gah-snin  Sa-skya  Lama  born ... ... ...  1090

Karma^dus-sum-mK'an-po  born ... ... ... ...  1109

More  Nih-ma  revelations  discovered ... ... ...  1117

Milaraspa  died 1122

C'ag, translator,  born ... ... ... ... ...  1152

sNar-t'ang  monastery  founded ... ... ... ...  1152

'Bri-guh  monastery  founded ... ... ... ...  1177

sTag-lun  monastery  founded ... ... ... ...  1178

Sa-skya  Pan dita  born ... ... ... 1180

Buddhism  expelled  from  Magadha  by  the  Muhamadans,

under  BaMtyar  ZAilji ... ... :.. ...  1195

S'akya-sri,  the  Kashmiri  Pandit,  arrived  in  Tibet ...  1202

Karma Bakshi  born ... ... ... ... ...  1202

Ter-ton  Guru  Ch'os-dbah 1210

Kublai  Khan  born 1214'

'Gro-mgon-'pags-pa  born ... ... ... ... ...  1233

He  becomes  master  of  Tibet ... ... ... ...  1251

Bu-ston,  the  chronologist,  born ... ... ... ...  1288

Friar  Odoric  reaches  ?  Lhasa ... ... ... ...  1330

rTses-taii  monastery  founded ... ... ... ...  1349

St.  Tson-KVpa  born ... ,.. ... ... ...  1355

T'ah-stoh  rgyal-po  (the  great  bridge-builder)  born ...  1 383

dGe-'dun-grub-pa  born ... ... ... ... ...  1389

Ses-rab  rin-ch'en  (or  sTag),  the  translator,  born  .. . ...  1403

Tson-KVpa  established  the  Lhasa  prayer-feast  {smon-lam),

and  founded  dGah-ldan  monastery ... ... ...  1407

Panch'en  bzan-po  bkra-sis  (latterly  of  Tashi-lhunpo)  born  1408

J  According  to  Lamaist  (Sum-pa's)  data.


GURONOLOGIGAL TABLE.


577


De-pung  (dBras-spuii)  monastery  founded

Serra  monastery  founded  ...

Tson-K'a-pa  died ...

Nor  monastery  (of  Sa-skya-pa  sect)  founded

Ch'ab-mdo-byams-gon  monastery  founded

Z'a-lu  legs-pa-rgyal-mts'an,  succeeds  to  Ga-ldan  chair . . .

Ch'os-skyon-bzan-po,  the  translator,  born

Tashi-lhunpo  monastery  founded  by  dGe-'dun-grub

The  Lama  of  the  Mongols  (Hor-sTon  or  Nam-mK'ah-dpal)

died
bZah-po-bkra-sis  becomes  abbot  of  Tashi-lhunpo  ...
dGe-'dun-grub  died...
dGe-'dun-rgya-mts'o  born  ...

bZan-po  bkra-sis  died,  and  succeeded  by  Lun-rig  rgya-mts'6
rTa-nag  tdub-bstan-rnam-rgyal  monastery  founded

Panch'en  blo-bzan  don-grub  born

dGe-'dun-rgyar-mts'o  becomes  Grand  Lama  of  Tashi-lhunpo

The  Dug-pa  Lama  Padma^dKar-po  born  ...

dGe-'dun-rgyar-mts'o  died ...

bSod-nams  rgya-mts'o  born

Mongol  (or  "  Moghul  ")  invasion  of  Northern  Tibet

S'ya-lu  Lotsava  died

Taranatha  (Kun-siiin)  born

Grand  Lama  bSod-nam  proceeds  to  Mongolia  on  invitation

of  prince  Althun  Khan
Kum-bum  monastery  founded
Lama  bSod-nam  died
His  successor  (Yon-tan)  born  ih  Mongolia
Kum-bum  subordinated  to  Tsang
Yon-tan-rgya-mts'o  died ...
Nag-dbah-blo-bzah  rgya-mts'o  born
The  Tsang  army  invades  Serra  and  Depung  monasteries,

"  killing  many  thousand  monks  "
Nag-dbaii  became priest-king  of Tibet by aid of  the

Mongol  prince  Gusri  Khan  ...
He  built  Potala  palace  near  Lhasa
He  visited  Chinese  emperor
He  returned  to  Tibet
He  retires  to  self-communion,  leaving  government  with

the  viceroy  (sDe-srid),  Sans-rgyas  rgya-mts'o,  said  to

be  his  natural  son
He  died

His  successor,  Tsaiis-dbyans  born...
But  proving  dissolute,  he  is  deposed  and  assassinated
Dalai  Lama  sKal-bzan  born  at  Lithang  ...
The  Mongol  armies  of  C'un-gar  restore  Gelug-pa  Lama  to

kingship


A.D.

1414
1417
1417
1427
1435
1436
1439
1445

1445

1473

1473

1474

1476

1476

1503

1510

1510

1540

1541

1546  circa

1562

1573

1575
1576
1586
1587
1610
1614
1615

1616

1640
1643
1650
1651


1675
1680
1681
1703
1706

1716
P  P


578  APPENDIX  II.


A.D.

Civil  war,  during  which  the  Chinese  troops  destroy  many-
monasteries  in  restoring  order  ... ...  ...  1722

Nepalese  army  sacks  Tashi-lhunpo  ... ... ...  1768

Mr.  Bogle's  friendship  with  Tashi  Grand  Lama... ...  1778

,Capt.  Ttarner  received  by  succeeding  Tashi  Grand  Lama  1783

Mr.  Manning  reaches  Lhasa  and  meets  the  Dalai  Lama  1811

MM.  Hue  and  Gabet  enter  Lhasa  1845

Messrs.  EockhiU's,  Bonvalot's,  Prince  Henry  of  Orleans',

and  Bowers'  traverses  of  eastern  and  northern  Tibet  1887-92

Anglo-Tibetan  hostilities  on  Sikhim  frontier ... ...  1887

The  Tibet  Sikhim  trade  treatv  concluded  1893


Appendix II.


BiBLIOGEAPHT.

The  following  list  comprises  most  of  the  books  bearing  upon
Lamaism,  supplementary,  in  the  main,  to  the  earlier  register
given  by  Schlagintweit  {(/p.  cit.,  pp.  331,  etc.).

Anbeeson  (W.). — Description  and  Historical  Catalogue  of  a  Collection  of  Japanese  and
Chinese  Paintings  in  the  British  Museum. London,  1886.

Abnold  (E.). — The  Light  of  Asia;  or,  The  Great  Renunciation;  being  the  Life  and
Teaching  of  Gautama,  Prince  of  India  and  Founder  of  Buddhism.  8vo.  London,
1883.

Atkinson  (E,  T.). — Notes  on  the  History  of  Religion  in  the  Himalaya  of  the  North-
Western  Provinces  of  India. Calcutta,  1883.

Aynslby  (H.  G.  M.  M.). — Visit  to  Ladakh. 8vo. London,  1879.

Bailey  (H.  V.). Dorje-Ling. 8vo. Calcutta,  1838.

Bakth  (A.).— The  Religions  of  India. Translated  by  J.  Wood.  8vo. London,  1882.

Bastian  (a.). — Der  Buddhismus  in  seiner  Psychologic. 366  pp.,  Svo. Berlin)  1882.

Beal  (S.).— Catena  of  Buddhist  Scriptures. From  the  Chinese. Svo. London,  1878.

—  Romantic  Legend  of  Sakya  Buddha. From  the  Chinese. Svo. London,

1875.

—  Buddhist  Literature  in  China. Svo. London,  1882.

—  Texts  from  the  Buddhist  Canon  known  as  Dhammapada. With  accom-

panying Narratives. Fi-om  the  Chinese. Pp.  viii.  and  176. China,
1878.

—  Buddhism. 12mo.,  pp.  263. London,  1884.

—  Fo-sho-hing-tsan-King. A  Life  of  Buddha,  by  Asvaghosha  Bodhisattva.

From  the  Chinese. Svo.

—  Travels  of  Fa  Hian,  etc. 12mo.  1869.

—  Si-Yu-Ki. Record  of  Western  Kingdoms,  by  Hiuen  Tsiang. 2  vols.,  Svo.,

pp.  250  and  378. 1884.
Bendall  (C.).— a  Journey  in  Nepal  and  North  India. Svo. Cambridge,  1886.

_  Cat.  Buddh.  Skt.  MSS. Svo.,  pp.  xii.,  Ixi.,  225. Camb.,  1883.

Bhagvanlal  iNDEAJi. Appendix  to  Archaeological  Survey  West  India,  I.  (No.  9). Bom-
bay, 1879.  , „ ,
BiGANDET  (P.).— The  Ways  to  Neibban,  and  Notice  on  the  Burmese  Monks. 2  vols.,
Svo. London.  1880.  . ,
BoNVALOT  (G.)— Prince  Henry  of  Orleans. Across  Thibet. 2  vols,  Svo. Pans  an^

London,  1891.
BowEE  (H.). — Diary  of  a  Journey  across  Tibet. 1894.

Buchanan- Hamilton  (F.). — Account  of  the  Kingdom  of  Nepal. London,  182—.
—  Eastern  India,  ed.  Martin. 3  vols. London,  1839.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.  579


BuBGBSS,  see  Fergwson.

BuRNOUF  (E.). — Introduction  a  I'Histoire  du  Buddhisme  indien. Vol.  I.,  4to.
2nd  ed. Paris,  1876.

—  Le  Lotus  de  la  bonne  Loi,  tradult  du  Sanscrit,  accompagn^  d'un  Com-

mentaire  et  de  vingt  et  un  M^moires  relatifs  au  BuddUsme. 4to.
Paris,  1852.
BnTsu-zo-DSTT-i,  or  The  Buddhist  Pantheon  of  the  Japanese. 5  fasc. Kyoto,  1887.
•  BusHELL  (S.W.,  M.D.).—T:he  Early  History  of  Tibet  from  Chinese  sources. J.E.A.S.,
XII.  (1880),p.  435,  e(.  seq.
Conway,  (W.  M.).— Climbing  and  Exploration  in  the  Karakoram  Himalayas. 8^0.,

pp.  709. London,  1894.
CowEH.  (E.  B.).— Mahayana  Texts. Sacred  Bk.  East,  Vol.  XLIX.,  etc.

—  The  Jataka,  translated  from  the  Pali. Cambridge,  1894.

CsoMA  DE  KoRos  (A.).— Grammar  of  the  Tibetan  Language. 4to.,  204  pp.,  40  pp.
lithogr. Calcutta,  1834.

—  Dictionary, Tibetan  and  English. 4to.,  351  pp. Calcutta,

1834.

—  Analysis  of  the  Kah-gjmr,  etc. Asiatic  Researches. Vol.

XX.,  pp.  41,  etc.,  4to. Calcutta,  1820.
CoNNiNGHAM  (Sir  A.). — Coins  of  Ancient  India  from  the  earliest  times  down  to  the
seventh  century  a.d. 8vo. London,  1891.

—  Ladak,  physical,  statistical  and  historical. Loudon,  1854.

—  Mahabodhi,  or  the  Great  Buddhist  Temple  under  the  Bodhi

Tree  olBodhGa,ya,,  with  SI  plwtoyraphs. 4to. 1892.
Dalton  (Col.  E.  T.).— Descriptive  Ethnology  of  Bengal. Calcutta,  1872.
D'Alviblla  (Count  G.).— The  Migration  of  Symbols. Eng.  trans. Lond.,  1894.
D'Anvillb  (J.  B.).— Nouvel  Atlas  de  la  Chine,  de  la  Tartarie  Chinoise  et  du  Thibet.
Folio. La  Haye,  1737.  ^  ,  ■  j,

Davids  (T.  W. Rhys).— Buddhism ; being  a  Sketch  of  the  Life  and  Teachmgs of
Gautama,  the  Buddha. 12mo. London,  1878.

—  Buddhist  Birth  Stories ;  or  Jataka  Tales,  being  the  Jatakat-

thavannan4. Translation. Vol.  I., 8vo. London,  1880.

—  Buddhist  Siitras,  translated  from  PaU. (Vol.  XI.  of  F.  Max

MuUer's Sacred Books of the East.) 8vo. Oxford,
1881

—  The  Hibbert  Lectures,  1881. Lectures  on  the  Origin  and

Growth  of  Religion  as  illustrated  by  some  pomts  m  the
history  of  Indian  Buddhism. 8vo. London,  1881.

—  Article  "Lamaism"  in  EncyclopaidiaBritannica.

—  And  Oldenbeeg  (H.)— Vinaya  Texts,  translated  from  the  Pah.

Part  I The  Patimokkha. The  Mahavagga,  I.-IV. (Vol.

XIII.  of  Sacred  Books  of  the  East.) 8vo.  Oxford,  1881.

Davis  (E.).— "  Remarks  on  the  Religious  and  Social  Institution  of  the  Bouteas." Trans.

R.A.S.,  Vol.  IL 496.  ^^ . ,„„,

De  Milloue  (L-).— Catal.  du  Musee  Guimet. Lyon,  1883,  and  Pans,  1894.
De  Lacooperie,  see  Lacoup^e.
Desgodins  (Pere).—Le  Tibet,  etc. 8vo.,p.  475. 1885.
Douglas  (R.  K.).— Confucianism  and  Taoism. London,  1888.
Ddj£A  (T.).— The  Life  and  Works  of  Alexander  Csoma  de  Koros,  between  1819  ana

1849. ByT.  Duka. Pp.234. London,  1885. , ^ , .  .. t,„^„  ioqi

DnMouTiEE  (G.).— Les  Symboles,  les  Emblem,  du  culte  chez  les  Annamites.  Pans,  1891.
DuNMORE  (Lord).— The  Pamirs.  •  2  vols.,  sm.  8vo. London.  1893.  iui=,=;„„

Eden  (Honble.  A).— Report  on  the  State  of  Bootan  and  of  the  Progress  of  the  Mission

of  1863-64. Calcutta,  1864.  ^ ^. ni tt, ifi7i

Edgab  (J.).— Report  on  a  Visit  to  Sikhim  and  the  Tibetan  Frontier. Calcutta,  1874.
Edkins  (J.).— Chinese  Buddhism. Pp.454. 1880.  j„ i A=r,o^f= SvH

EiTEL  (E.  J.).-Buddhism: its Historical, Theoretical,  and  Popular  Aspects. 3rd
edition,  revised. 8vo. London,  1873.  „„  oqi 9r„i

—  Handbook  for  the  Student  of  Chinese  Buddhism. 8vo. pp.231. 2nd

edition. Hong-Kong,  1888.

Elias  (N.).— Reports  on  Leh  and  Central  Asia.  .  t.  „:„  iork  Pam

FEEE(L.).-Introductiondu  Buddhisme  dans  le  Kashmir. 8vo. Pans,  1866.  Fam.

—  fitudes  Bouddhiques. Premifere  S.5rie. 8vo. Pans,  1870.

—  :Etude  sur  les-jatakas. 8vo. Pans,  1875. ,r  ,„x„  r„i,T,o(-  TmnP?
Analyse  duKandjouretduTandjour. Annales  du  Musfe  Guimet.  Tome  2.

p  P  2


580  APPENDIX  II.


Feee  (L.)-— Le  Tibet. Paris,  188B.

—  Extraites  du  Kandjour. Annales  du  Mus.  (juimet.

Feesusson  (J.)- — History  of  Indian  and  Eastern  Architecture. 8vo. London,. 1876.

—  and  BuEGESS  (J ). — Cave  Temples  of  India. London,  188 — .

FoucADX  (Ph.  E. ).— Rgya-tcli'er-rol-pa  ou  Developpement  des' Jeux,  contenant  I'Histoire
du  Bouddha  Cakya  Mouni,  traduit  snr  la  version  Tib^taine  du
Blsah  hgyour,  et  revu  sur  I'original  Sanscrit  (Lalitavistara).  2
vols.,  4to. Paris,  1847-48.

—  Parabole  de  I'Enfant  Egar^  formant  le  chapitre  IV.  du  Lotus  de

la  Bonne  Loi,  publi^e  pqur  la  premifere  fois  en  Sanscrit  et  en
Tib^tain,  et  accompagnle  d'une  traduction  fran9ajse  d'apres  la
version  Tib^taine  du  Kanjour. 8vo. Paris,  1854.

—  Le  Tresor  des  Belles  Paroles,  choix  de  sentences  composfes  en

Tibetain  par  le  Lama  Saskya  Pandita;  suivies  d'une  dl^gie
tiree  du  Kandjour,  traduites  pour  la  premiere  fois  en  Fran^ais.
8vo. Paris,  1858.

—  La  Guirlande  Pr^cieuse  des  Demandes  et  des  Expenses  publi6e  en

Sanskrit  et  en  Tibetain,  et  traduite  pour  la  premiere  fois  en
Fran(;ais. 8to. Paris,  1867.
Le  Lalita  Vistara  traduit  du  Sanskrit.  Annales  du  Musee  Guimet
Tome  Sixieme.,  pp.  290. Paris,  1884.
,  Feanks  (Sir  A.  W.). — Brit.  Mus.  Art.  Catalogues  (on  Chinese  Symbolism).
'  Gaeniee  (F.).—De  Paris  au  Tibet. 8vo.,  pp.  422. Paris;  1882.
Geddie  (J. ). — Beyond  the  Himalayas. 8vo.,  pp.  256. London,  1882.
Gioegi  (A.  A.).  -  Alphabetum  Tibetanun. Romse,  1762.
Gill  (W.).— The  Elver  of  Golden  Sand. 2  vols.,  8vo. London,  1880.
GiLMOUE  (J  ). — Among  Mongols. London,  189—.
Geuenwedel  (a). — Buddhistische  Kunst  in  India. Hanb.  d.  Koniglichen  Mus.  Berlin,

1893.
Haedy  (E.  Spenoe). — Eastern  Monachism  ;  an  Account  of  the  Origin,  Laws,  Disciphne,
etc.,  of  the  Order  of  Mendicants  founded  by  Gotama  Buddha.
Compiled  from  Singhalese  MSS.  and  other  Sources.  8vo.  London,
1850.

—  A  Manual  of  Buddhism  in  its  Modern  Development. -Translated

from  Singhalese  MSS. 2nd  ed. 8vo. 1880.

—  The  Legends and  Tlieories  of  the  Buddhists  compared  with

History  and  Science. 8vo. 2nd  ed. 1881.

Hewitt  (J.  F.). — The  Ruling  Eaces  of  Pre-historio  Times. In  India,  etc. Lend.,  1894.

Hodgson  (B.  H.). — Essays  on  the  Languages,  Literature,  and  Religion  of  Nepal  and
Tibet ;  together  with  further  papers  on  the  Geography,  Ethnology,  and  Com-
merce of  those  Countries. 8vo. London. Reprint. 1874.

HOLLOWAY  (L.  C.).— Buddhist  Diet-Book. 8vo.,  pp.  80. New  York,  1886.

Hookbe  (J.). — Himalayan  Journals.  Notes  of  a  Naturalist  in  Bengal,  the  Sikkim  and
Nepal  Himalayas,  the  Khasia  Mountains,  etc.  2  vols.  With  Plates.  8vo.  London,
1854.

HowoETH  (Sir  H.  H.). — History  of  the  Mongols  from  the  9th  to  the  19th  Century.  Part
I.  :^The  Mongols  Proper  and  the  Kalmuks.  Part  II. : — The  So-called  "  Tartars  "  of
Russia  and  Central  Asia. 8vo. London,  1876-80.

Hue  (M.). — Travels  in  Tartary,  Thibet,  and  China,  during  the  years  1844-5-6.  Trans-
lated from  the  French  by  W.  Hazlitt. 2  vols.,  8vo. London  ( ?  1850).

Hdntee  (Sir  W.  W.). — A  Comparative  Dictionary  of  the  Languages  of  India  and  High
Asia. 4to. London,  1868.

—  Statistical  Act  of  Bengal. Vol. Darjiling,  etc. London,  1877.

—  The  Indian  Empire:  its  History,  People,  and  Products. 8vo. London,  1882.
HuTH  (G.). — Geschichte  des  Buddhismus  in  der  Mongolei. Aus  dem  Tibetischen  des

ojigs-med  nam-mk'a  herausgegeben,  uebersetzt  und  erliiutert. Vol.  I. :  Vorrede.

Text. Kritische  Anmerkungen. 8vo.,  pp.  x.,  296. Strassburg,  1892.

Hor  Ch'os  Byung.— Geschichte  des  Buddhismus. Trans.  Ninth  Intern.  Gmffress,

Orient.,  London,  1893.
Jaeschke  (H.  a.). — A  Tibetan-English  Dictionary. With  special  Eeference  to  the

Prevailing  Dialects. To  which  is  added  an  English-Tibetan  Vocabulary. 8vo.,

cloth,  pp.  xxii.,  671. London,  1881.
Jametel  (M.). — L'Epigraphie  chinoise  au  Tibet. 8vo. Peking,  1880,  etc.
Keen  (H.). — Geschiedenis  van  het  Buddhisme  in  Indie. 2  vOls.,  royal  8vo.,  Jialf  calf.
Haarlem,  1882-4.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.  581


Keen  (H.). — Der  Buddliismus. 8vo.,  2  vols. Liepzig,  1882,  etc.

—  Saddharma  Pundarika,  or  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law. Translated  into

English,  Vol.  XXI.,  Sac.  Books  of  East. 8vo. London.

—  The  Jataka-Mala,  or  Bodhisattvavadana-Mala by  Arya-9iira (Harvard

Oriental  Series,  VoL  I.). 8vo. Boston,  JMass.,  189  L.
KiBCHER  (A.). — China  Monumentis,  qua  Sacris  qua  Profanis,  uec  non  variis  Naturae  et
Artis  Spectaculis,  aliarumque  reruin  memorabilium  Argumentis  illustrata. Fol.
Amstelodami,  1667-
KiEKPATRiOK  (Col.). — An  account  of  the  Kingdom  of  Nepaul,  being  the  substance  of
observations  made  during  a  mission  to  that  country  in  the  year  1793. 4to.
London,1811.
Klapboth  (J.). — Description  du  Tibet  tradui'e  du  Chinois,  etc. Nouv.,  Jour.  Asiat.,

Vol.  IV.,  etc. Paris,  1831,  etc.
Knight  (E.  F.).— Where  Three  Empires  Meet. London,  1893.

Krishna (A.  K.). — Account  of  tii<t  Pandit's  Journey  in  Ureat  Thibet  from  Leh  in
Ladakh  to  Lhasa,  and  of  his  return  to  India  viA  Assam. 8vo. Vol.  47  of  Eoyal
Geographical  Society,  1877.
KoEPPEN  (C.  F.). — Die  Religion  des  Buddha  und  ihre  Entstehung,  und  die  Lamaische

Sierarchie  WTid  Kirche,  Vols.  I.-II.,  8vo. Berlin,  1857-59.
Kreitnee  (Lt.-G.). — In  Fernen  Osten,  Vienna,  1881.

Laooupeeie  (Tekkien  de). — ^Western  Origin  of  the  Early  Chinese  Civilization,  1894.
Lewin  (Major  T.  H.). — A  Manual  of  Tibetan. Being  a  Guide  to  the  Colloquial  Speech

of  Tibet,  in  a  Series  of  Progressive  Exercises. Pp.  xi.,  176. Calcutta,  1879.
LiLLiE  (A.). — Buddhism  in  Christendom. 8vo.,  pp.  410. London,  1887.

—  Koot  Hoomi  Unveiled  ;  Tibetan  "  Buddhists." pp.  24. London,  1884.

Macaulay. — Report  on  a  Mission  to  Sikhim. Calcutta,  1885.
Mackenzie  (A.).— Report  on  the  Tribes  of the  North-Eastern  Frontier  of  Bengal.

Calcutta,  1884.
Maekham  (C.  R.).— Narrative  of  the  Mission  of  George  Bogle  to  Tibet,  and  of  the
journey  of  Thomas  Manning  to  Lhasa,  with  notes,  etc.  8vo. 2nd  edition. London,
1879.
Mabx  (Kael;.— History  of  Ladakh. J.A.S.B. pp.  97,  et.  seq. Calcutta,  1891.
Maters. — Chinese  Reader's  Manual.
MiKHAiLOOSKii  (V.  M.). — Shamanstoo  (Shamanism  in  Siberia  and  European  Russia).

Translated  in  Jour.  Anthrop.  Inst. London,  1894.
MONiEE-WiLLiAMS  (Sir). — Buddhism,  in  its  Connection  with  Brahmanism  and  Hin-
duism, etc. 8vo.,  pp.  583. London,  1889.
MONTGOMERIE  (T.  G.).— Journey  to  Shigatze,  in  Tibet,  and  return  by  Dingri-Maidan
into  Nepaul  in  1871,  by  the  Native  ^Explorer,  No.  9. Vol.  45  of- Roy.  Geog.  Soc.
London,  1875.
Mueller  (F.  Max).— The  Dhammapada,  a  Collection  of  Verses ;  and  the  Sutta  Nipata,  a
Collection  of  Discourses ;  being  two  of  the  Canonical  Books  of
the  Buddhists. Translated  from  Pali. Vol.  X., Sacred  Books.
8vo. London.

—  Buddhist  Mahayana  Texts. Sac.  B.  East.,  Vol.  XLIX. 1894.
Nanjio  (Bdntio).— a  catalogue  of  the  Chinese  Translation  of  the  Buddhist  Tripitaka,

the  Sacred  Canon  of  the  Buddhists  in  China  and  Japan. 4to.
Oxford,  1883.

—  A  Short  History  of  the  Twelve  Japanese  Buddhist  Sects. Tokyo,

1886.  ,  .  J  «

Oldenberg  (Hermann).— Buddha ;  his  Life,  his  Doctrine,  his  Order. Translated  from

the  German  by  William  Hoey,  M.A. London,  1888.  ,  .  , .

Oldfield  (H.  a.).— Sketches  from  Nipal,  Historical  and  Descriptive,  etc.,  to  which  is
added  an  Essay  on  Nepalese  Buddhism,  and  illustrations  of  Religious  Monuments,
etc. 2  vols.,  8vo. London,  1880.  .

Olliviee  Beauregard  (G.  M.).—Kachmir  et  Tibet. 8vo.,  pp.  144 Pans,  1883.
Otto  and  Ejstnee.— Buddha  and  His  Doctrine. London,  1869. [Contains  a  bibho-

graphical  list.]  .,  ,  .

Pander  (E.).— Das  Pantheon  des  Tschangtscha  Hutuktu  ein  beitrage  zur  Iconographie

des  Lamaismus. Konl.  Museen,  Berlin. 4to. 1890.  r>  i «•

Pemberton  (R.  B.).— Report  on  the  Eastern  Frontier  of  British  India. 8vo. Calcutta,
1835
-r  Report  on  Bootan. With  maps. 8vo. Calcutta,  1839.

Prejevalski  (Col.  N.  M.).— The  Tangut  Country  and  the  Solitudes  of  Northern  Tibet,
being  a  Narrative  of  Three  Years'  Travels  in  Eastern


582  APPENDIX  II.


High  Asia. Translated  by  E.  D.  Morgan,  with  intro-
duction and  notes,  by  Col.  Henry  Yule,  C.B. 2  vols.
8vo. London,  1876.
Pebjevalski  (Col.  N.  M.). — Reisen  in  Tibet. 8vo.,  pp.  281. Jena,  1884
Peinsep  (H.  T.). — Tibet,  Tartary  and  Mongolia,  their  Social  and  Political  Condition,

and  the  Religion  of  Boodh,  as  there  existing. 8vo. London,  1851.
Rajendha  Lal  Mitea. — The  Sanskrit  Buddhist  Lit.  of  Kepal. Calcutta,  1882.
Ralston  (W.  R.  S.). — Tibetan  Tales,  from  Indian  Sources,  translated  from  the  German.

Shiefner,  with  Introduction. l?p.  Ixvi.  and  368. London,  1892.
Ramsat  (W.). — Western  Tibet:  A  Practical  Dictionary  of  the  Language  and  Customs

of  the  Districts  included  in  the  Ladak  Wazarat. Lahore,  1890.
Rennie  (Dr.). — The  Bhotan  and  Dooar  War. London,  1866.
RisLEY  (H.  H.). — Tribes  and  Castes  of  Bengal. 2  vols. Calcutta,  1891.
RiTTEE  (C.).— Erdkunde,  Vol.  VI. Berlin.

RoOKHiLL  (W.  W.). — Udanavarga,  a  Collection  of  Verses  from  the  Buddhist  Canon.
Compiled  by  Dharmatrata.  The  Northern  Buddliist  version
of  Dhammapada.  Translated  from  the  Tibetan  of  Bkahgyur.
Pp.  vii.  and  244. 1883.

—  The  Life  of  the  Buddlia,  and  the  Early  History  of  his  Order.

From  Tibetan  Works  in  the  Bkah-hgyur  and  Bstan-hgyur.
With  Notices  on  the  Early  History  of  Tibet  and  Khoten.  Pp.
284. 1884.

—  The  Land  of  the  Lamas. London,  1891.

RoEEO  (0.). — Ricordi  dei  Viaggi  al  Cashemire  Medio Thibet. 8vo.,  3  vols. Torino,

1881.
Saeatcandea  Das. — Narrative  of  Travels  in  Tibet. Calcutta,  1885.
SCHIEFNEE  (F.  A.).— Tibetische  Studien. St.  Peterb.  Bull.  Hist. Phil. Vol.  viii.

—  Taranatha's  Geschichte  des  Buddhlsmus in Indien  -  aus dem

Tibetischen  iibersetzt. ,  8vo. St.  Petersburg,  1869.

—  Herrn  Professor  Wassiljew's  Vorrede  zu  seiner  Russischen  Ueber-

setzung  von  Taranatha's  Geschichte  des  Buddhismus  in  Indien,
Deutsch  mitgetheilt. 8vo.,  St.  Petersburg,  1869. Pam.
— ■  Buddhistische  Triglotte,  d.  h.  Sanskrit-Tibetisch-Mongolisches

Worterverzeichniss. Oblong 4to., pp.  73. St. Petersburg,
1869.

—  Kalacakra  tantraraja,  Handschr.  aus  dem  Nachlasse  des  Aka-

demikers.
ScHLAGiNTWEiT  (E.). — Buddhism  in  Tibet,  illustrated  by  literary  documents  and  ob-
jects of  religious  worship,  with  an  account  of  the  Buddhist
systems  preceding  it  in  India. 8vo. London,  1 868.

—  Le  Bouddhisme  au  Tibet. Pp.  292,  1881  (Annales  du  Musee

Guimet,  tome  3).

—  Ladak  Gyal-rabs. Leipzig.

ScHLAGiNTWEiT— Sakuenbienski  (H.  von).— Das  Kaiserreich  Ostindienund  die  angren-

zenden  Gebirgslander. 8vo.,  pp. 639.
Jena,  1884.
Schmidt  (J.  J.). — Dsanglun,  der  Weise  und  der  Thor,  aus  dem  Tibetischen  iibersetzt
und  mit  dem  Original-texte  herausgegeben. 4to. St.  Petersburg,
1843.

Gescliichte  der  Ostmongolen  und  ihres  Fiirstenhauses  Verfasst  von

Ssanang  Ssetsen. St.  Petersburg,  1829.
ScHOPENHAUEE  (A.)  .—The  World  as  Will  and  Idea. English  translated  by  Haldane  and

Kemp. 3  vols. London,  1883.
Senaet  (E.).— Essai  sui-  la  Legende  de  Buddha. 8vo.,  pp.  496. Paris,  1882.
SiNNETT  (A.  P.). — Esoteric  Buddhism. 8vo.,  pp.  215. London,  1883.
Survey  of  India  Reports. Various. Calcutta.
Tawnby  (C.  H.)— Katha  Sarit  Sagara,  or  Ocean  of  the  Streams  of  Stoiy. Calcutta.

1880.
Temple  (Sir  R.  and  R.  C.).— Journals  kept  in  Hyderabad,  Kashmir,  Sikhim,  and  Nepal.
2  vols.,  1887.  , ,  „

Teottee  (Captain  H.).— Account  of  Pandit  Nain  Sing's  Jom-n.  (m  1865,  etc.). J.  R.

Geogr.  Soc,  Vol.47. 1887.
Tuenee  (S.).— An  account  of  an  embassy  to  the  Court  of  the  Teshoo  Lama  m  Tibet,
containing  a  narrative  of  a  journey  through  Bootan,  and  part  of  Tibet. 4to.
Lond. 1806.


BIBLIOGRAPHY, AND MUHAMMADAN MASSAOBE. 583

Vassilibp. — See  Wassiljew.

Waddell  (L.  a.). — ^Lamaism  in  Sikhim,  Part  II.  of  Gazetteer  of  Sikhim. 4:to.,  pp.  171.

Calcutta,  1893.
Wassiljew  (W.). — Der  Buddhismus,  seine  Dograen. Geschichte  und  Literatur. St.
Petersburg,  1860.
—  Le  Bouddisme;  ses  dogmas,  son  histoire  et  sa  litterature. Pre-

miere partie : — Aper9u  gte^ral. Traduit  du  Eusse  par  M.  G.  A.
Comme. 8vo. Paris,  1865.
Wilson  (A.).— The  Abode' of  Snow. London,  1875.
Wrioht  (D.). — History  of  Nepal. Cambridge,  1877.

Yule  (Sir  H.).— Cathay  and  the  Way  Thither. Vol.  36. Hakluyt  Soo. 8vo. London,
1868.
The  Book  of  Ser  Marco  Polo. 2nd  edition. 2  vols. 8vo. London,
1875.


Appendix  III.


MUHAMMADAN MaSSACEE OP LaMAISTS.

An  interesting  glimpse  into  the  religion  of  Northern  Tibet
during  the  sixteenth  century,  and  of  the  Moghul  holy  war  against
the  Lamas  of  that  period,  is  got  from  the  Tarikh-i-Rashidi  by
Mirza  Haidar,  Dughlat  of  Kashgar  :  a  book  recently  discovered
by  Mr.  Ney  Elias,  C.I.E.,  to  whom  I  am  indebted  for  the  following
extract,  illustrative  of  Muhammadan  fanaticism.  The  work  dates
to  about  1546  A.B.,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  Mr.  Elias'  translation
of  it  wiU  soon  be  published.

The  general,  Mirza  Haidar,  writes  :  "  On  the  day  appointed,  I
approached  the  fort  (of  Mutadar  in  Nubra),  and  the  talons  of  Islam
seizing  the  hands  of  Infidelity,  the  enemy  were  thrown  into  dis-
order and  routed.  Having  deserted  the  fort,  they  fled  in  confusion
and  dismay,  while  the  Musalmans  gave  them  chase  as  far  as  was
possible,  so  that  not  one  of  these  bewildered  people  escaped.
Burkapa  was  slain,  together  with  all  his  men,  and  their  heads
formed  a  lofty  minaret,  so  that  the  vapour  from  the  brains  of  the
infidels  of  that  country  reached  to  the  heavens.  Thenceforth  no
one  dared  offer  resistance."


585


INDEX.


Abacus  (of  Asoka  pil-
lars), 409.

Abbess,  233, 245, 275.

Abbot,  172.

Abhasvara  (deva),  86.

Abhi-dharma,  159.

Ablutions  (ceremonial),
214, 423,  445.

Abstinence,  134,  138, 445.

Abu,  Mt.,  95.

Acala,  131,  364.

Acanthus,  338.

Aoarya,  538.

Act-force,  30,  100.

Adam,  226.

Adi-Buddha, 126, 130,

_348-

Adityas,  367.

Admission (to order),

iEsculapius (Buddha),
^  353.  498.  509-
Afghan fanatics and

Indian  Buddhism,  16.
Afghanistan,  8,  26,  197.
Agni,  367,  494,  496.
Agnostic  views,  7,  122.
Ajanta  caves,  108,  128.
A.  It.,  Pandit,  322.
Akanishtha (deva), 85,
_  86.

Akasagarbha,  358.
Akshobhya,  349,  350.
Alala,  356.
Alasadda,  9.
Alaya, or pantheistic

soul-basis,  see  Atman.
Alchemy,  165.
Allahabad,  yjj.
Almanack,  458.
Alms  (giving),  135,  138.
Alms-bowl,  2n,  212.


Alphabet (introduced

into  Tibet),  21.
Altar, 294,  428  ; (offer-

ings),423, 425;  (devils'),

299.
Altun  Khan,  501.
Amban,  254.
Amd6,  43,  266.
Amitabha  (Buddha),  ix.,

12,  127,  335,  336,  338,

347. 348, 349. 350;

(paradise  of),  127,  217.
Amitayus,_348,  352,  444.
Amogha-pasa,  352.
Amogha-siddha,  349,350,

.  352-

Amnta  (ambrosia),  87.
Amsuvarman,  20.
Amulets,  571.
Anabhraka  (deva),  86.
An-agami,  136.
Ananda,  8,  108.
Anafcmaka,  in.
Ancestor-worship,  375,
Anger,  109.
Ani  (title  of  nuns),  160,

170,  202.
Aniccam,  iii.
Animals  (ransomed),  265 ;

killing  of,  211,  213.
Animism,  19,  26,  34,  55,

409.
Anitya,  in.
Antara-vasaka,  201.
Aparagodhana,  see  godh-

anya.
Apramanabha  (deva),  86.
Apsaras,  86.

Arahatlam,  105, 137,  376.
Archbishop,  187.
Architecture,  260.
Arhant,  105,  137,  376.
Arhatship,  137.


Armenian  Christians  (in-
fluence of),  422.
Arrows in ceremonies,

445.  483.  553-
Arupa,  85.
Arupa-loka,  85,  86.
Aryabolo,  356.
Arya-deva,  8.
Aryapala,  356.
Asam  (shrines),  307.
-Asafiasatya  (deva),  86.
Asanga,  14,  141.
Ascension,  feast  of,  504,

510  ;  (of  Buddha),  510;

(of St. Tson-K'a-pa),

510.
Asceticism,  5.
Ashta  mahgalam,  392.
Ashta  ratna,  393.
Asoka, 8  76.  442  ;  (gifts

of),  397  ;  ipillars),  409  ;

(railing  of),  11.
Asoka  (tree),  338.
Assembly-hall,  260,  282.
Astrology,  450.
Asura  (Titans),  8l.
Asva-ghosha,  8,  10.
Atapa-deva,  86.
Atlsa,  35,  54.
Atman  (or  soul),  76,  in,

112,  121,  126,  141.
Attitudes (of fingers),

141.  337; (of l50'ly).

335-
Aureole,  337.
Auspicious  (days),  455.-
Avadana,  162.
Avalambana  Sutra,  98.
Avalokita, 15,  39,  356;

(four-handed),  229, 357;

(eleven-headed),  1 5,357 ;

(thousand-armed),  357;

(female),  see  Tara.


586


INDEX.


Avalokitesvara,  see  Ava-

lokita.
Avatansaka,  69,  125.
Avatara-Lama,  227.
Avici  (hell),  95.
Avidya,  no,  119.
Avriha  (deva),  86.


Baotria,  8,  108,  541.

Baiduiya-kar-po  (chro-
nology), 20.

Baikal  (lake),  43.

Bairotsana,  29.

Bakshi,  56,  502,  see  also
Bhlkslm.

Balti,  266.

Bana,  156.

Banaras,  134.

Bandya,  171.

Baptism,  448,  510.

Bardo  (interval  between
death  and  re-birth),
113,  491,  562.

Barhut,  stupa,  345.

Bas-reliefs,  239.

Bathing  (ceremonial),
214,  423,  445,  510;  (of
images),  424,  427.

Bats  of good  luck, 4,

^395-

Beads,  see  Rosaries.

Becoming  (of),  121.

Beduriya  (Buddha),  353.

Beings  (classes  of),  loi.

Bel  (tree),  394.

Bells  (prayer),  298,  475.

Benares,  134.

Benediction (Cha-wa),

239.  245.  305.  322.
Benedictive  attitude  (of

images),  237.
Berkeley,  107,  I2I.
Besarh  (Vaisali),  10.
Bhagavan,  344.
Bhagavati,  438.
Bhairava-vajra,  62,  131,

362.
Bhaisajyaraja,  353.
Bhana,  156.
Bharadvaja,  353.
Bharhut  (stupa),  345.
Bhava,  no,  117.
Bhavaeakra,  109.
Bhavanam,  117.
Bhikshu,  170,  213.
Bhikshuni, 160, 170,

202.
Bhimmitra,  51.
Bhoga,  394.


Bhotan,  44,  226,  284,
(sect),  55,  68.

Bhrikuti,  20,  23,  359.

Bihar-gyal-po

Binzuru  Sama,  353.

Birth,  no,  117.

Birth-stories,  loi,  533.

Bishop,  187.

Blessing,  239,  245,  306,
(attitude  of),  237,  (be-
fore food),  214.

Blind  (curing  of),  550.

Bod  (=  Tibet).

Bodhi  (perfect  Wisdom).

Bodhi-dharma,  8,  138.

Bodhi-druma,  see  Bodhi-
tree.

Bodhisat  (Bodhisattva),
10,  137;  (celestial),  348,

„354-

Bodhisatship,  138  ;  (sta-
ges), 139.

Bodhi-tree,  6,  305,  343.

Bod-pa  (=  Tibetan).

Body  (three  -  fold  of
Buddha),  127,  347,
(luciform),  127.

Bogle  (Mr.),  236.

Bon  (religion),  19,  55,389;
(opposing  Lamaism),
29;  (extent),4i  ;(devils),
27 ;  (priests),  26,  34,
(sacrifices),  420.

Bone  (trumpets),  300,
493;  (ornaments),  483,
see  Skull.

Bonze,  171,  422,  and  see
Bon.

Books  (sacred),  60.

Bowl  (alms),  211,  212.

Boy-pupil,  173-

Brahma  (god),  85  ;  (hea-
vens of),  86.

Brahmanas,  6.

Brahmani  geese,  200, 409.

Brahmanism,  6,  17.

Bram-ze  =  Brahman.

Bre-pung,  see  De-pung.

Bribsun,  23,  359.

Bri-kung,  see  Di-kung.

Brom  Bakshi,  36.

Brom-ton,  36.

Brugpa,  see  Dug-pa.

Buddha,  see  ISakyaMuni;
(coming),  see  Maitreya.

Buddhas,  123, 342;  (celes-
tial), 12,  342;  (Prat-
yeka),  123.  _

Buddha  Gaya,  36,  305  >
temple,  1 1 ;  (railing  at),
II.


Buddha-pallta,  139.
Buildings(religious),  254.
Bum  (book),  161.
Burial,  7,  305,  420.
Buriat  (tribes), 41,  43,

282,  372.
Burma, 8;  (gods),  365;

(Mahayanaelementin),

123,  142,  476;  (monks

as  schoolmasters),  566  ;

(prayer -flags),  409,414;

(sacred  plays),  527,  541.
Burnt-offering,  432,  533.
Bu-ston,  20.
Butan,  see  Bhocan.
Butter (candles), 296,

bas-reliefs,  239.
Byam-pa,  355.


Caitya,  261.

Cakes,  219,  223,  297, 299,
429,  449.

Cakra,  390,  392.

Cakravartin,  389.

Calendar,  454.

Candles,  296.

Candragupta,  575.

Candrakirti,  36,  139,  378.

Canon,  12,  54,  157;
(Nepalese),  159;  (Sou-
thern), 10,

Canopus  (star),  510.

Canopy,  295,

Caps  (of  monks),  194;  (of
nuns),  199.

Cardinals,  187.

Car-procession,  312.

Cathedrals,  287,  300.

Cats,  520.

Catur-maharaj  akayika,
84,  290.

Cauldron,  533.

Causal  nexus,  105.

Causation,  chain  of,  105.

Cave  (hei-mitages),  254.

Celebrations,  434.

Celibacy,  193.

Cemetery-dweller,  381.

Cenotaphs,  262.

Censer,  323.

Ceremonies,  212,  42a

Ceylonese  Buddhism,  9,
123,  142,  476;  (cere-
monial union  and
fetishes  in),  446  ;  (rice
images  in),  329.

Chab-Iug,  201.

Chadayatana,  no,  115.

Chag-dor,  356.


INDEX.


587


Chag-na  dorje,  356.
Chag- wa  ( hand-  blessing) ,

239,  245,  305,  322.
Chag-z  i-pa  =  4-handea.
Chain  of  Causation,  105,

119.
Chaitya,  261.
Chalice-cup,  225.
Champa (Buddha), see

Maitreya.
Cham-pahi  Ch'b-na,  128.
Chana-dorje,  356.
Changachelling,  see

Sang-na-ch'oling.
Changes  in  Buddhism,  9.
Ch'ang-skya,  243,  252.
Chan-rassig,  see  Avalo-

kita.
Charity, 138, 398, 493,

566;  (by  words), 133,

146.
Charms,  387,  571.
Chase  of Scape-goat  of

ill-luck,  512.
Chechuling, see Ts'e-

ch'og-ling.
Chemiling,  see  Tso-mo-

ling.
Cheniesi,  see  Avalokita.
Chetaug  (mon.),  412,576.
Chiamde,  278,  577.
China,  8,  20,  43,  247.
Chinha,  341.
Ch'i-ner,  188.
Chin-lab,  176,  434.
Chinsregfljurnt  oliering),

432,  498,  533.
Chi)  (=  Dharma),  132,

156.
Ch'oga,  434.
Ch'oi-de,  255.
Ch'oikyong,  363,  477.
Ch'o-je,  186,  477.
Ch'o-k'ang,  see  Jo-k'ang.
Ch'orten,  262.
Ch'os  -  kyon (demons),

363,  sorcerers,  477.
Clioir-master,  188.
Chom-dan-das  (Buddha),

344-

Chongju  Sewang,  512.

Christian  (miracle-mon-
geriug),  307 ;  (relic-
worship),  318;  (ritual),
422.

Christians,  Nestorian,
influence  of,  421.

Christmas-tree,  81.

Chronology,  Tibetan,  20,
397  ;  ();able),  452,  575.


Chryse,  36.
Chuiamani,  263,  343.
Church,  169,  287.
Chutuktu,  232.
Cinha,  341.
Cintamani.
Circuniambulation, 287,

420.
Clairvoyance,  477.
Clapping  hands,  486.
Clergy, see Order and

Hierarchy.
Clock  (water-),  218.
Cloister,  see  Monastery.
Clothes,  200,  511.
Clothes  of  images  (nab-

ze),  424.
Colleges,  178.
Colossal  images,  320.
Colours,  331,  337.
Commandments,  134.
Commentaries,  164.
Conception  (festival  of),

S03.
Conch-shell (trumpet),

298.
Confession,  160.
Consciousness,  no.
Contemplation,  138,  141.
Continuity  (of  becoming) ;

112.
Corea,  8.
Cosmology,  77-
Costumes,  200,  511.
Council (great), 9 ; (of

Bajagriha),  159 ;  (Vais-

ali),  10  ;  (Kanishka),  9.
Country-gods,  369.
Court-ceremoniesjatLlia-

sa),  322;(atTashi-lhun-

po),  321.
Cow-god,  404.
Cowls,  195.
Creed (the Buddhist),

105.  133-
Cross,  30,  389.
Crossing  (oneself),  423.
Cuda-mani,  263,  343.
Cycle  of  Life,  105.
Czar,  167 ;  (as  the  goddess

Tara),  359.


I.)aba  (a  monk),  178.
Dab-chad (magical fig-
ure), 153.
Dab-lha, see  War  God.
Da-dar  (arrow),  445,  483,

553-
Dagarbha,  262.


Dagger (necromantic),

445.  483-
Dagoba,  262.
Dag-po,  330.
Dah-dar (arrow), 445,

^483,  553-
Dah-pon,  553.
Dai  Koko,  368.
Dakkini,  129,340,366, 562.
Dalai  Lama,  39,  227,  305  ;

(list  of),  233.
Da-lha,  88,  374.
Damaru,  48.
Dam-c'an,  371,  382.
Dana,  138.
Dance  (devil), 34, 477  ;

(lion),  539 ;  (sacred),  5 1 5.
Dante's  Inferno,  93.
Dapurig,  63,  269.
Dara  Eke,  see  Tara.
Darc'og,  410.
Darjeeling,  258,  288,  370,

430.
Darsana  {ta-%va),  61.
Dartya,  99,  369.
Darwinian descent, 21.
Dasa  bhumisvara,  139.
Dasa-slla,  134.
Daughters  (of  Mara),  6,

109.
Days,  names and  sym-
bols for,  455.
D6,  see  Dre,  494.
Death,  100  ;  (god  of),  see

Yama  ; (ceremonies),

488.
Deban^,  see  De-pung.
Deb-raja,  242.
Decalogue,  134.
Deer  (lord  of),  134,  360;

(masks  of),  531,  537.
Deer-park,  134.
Degrees,  185.
Deities,  324.

Delhi  (Hastinapura),  552.
De-lok,  100.
Dem-ch'og,  163,  363.
Demerit,  loi,  567.
Demo-jong  or  Den-jong

(Sikhim).
De-not  sum,  159.
Deparaja,  242.
De-pung  (monastery),  63,

189,  228,  269.
Der-chok,  see  (Darc'og),

410.
Der-ge,  159,  202,  278.
Descent (from  heaven),

504,  510.
Desid,  40,  240,  253.


588


INDEX.


Desire,  109,  no,  116  (see
Mara).

De-sritl,  40,  240,  253,  577.

Destiny,  30.

Deva  (gods).

Deva  (monk),  8.

Deva-chan,  127,  139.

Devaloka,  87.

Devi  (she-devil),  364.

Devils,  93,  99,  363,  369 ;
(dance),  34,  477  ;  (dis-
ease .  causing),  405 ;
(exorcising),  369,  494.

De-wa-chan,  127,  139.

De-wa  z'un,  254.

De-z'in-s'eg-pa,  345,  353.

Dhamek  (stupa),  134.

Dliamma-pada,  162.

Dhana,  138,  493.

Dhana  Nanda,  393.

Dliarani,  141.

Dharitri  (mother-earth),

Dharma,  133.
Dharma-cakra,  337.
Dharma-kaya, 127,  347.
Dharma-klrti,  30,  378.
Dharma-pada,  162.
Dharma-palas (devils),

363-
Dharma-raja  (of  Bhotan),

226, 233,242;(of  Lhasa) ,

303-
Dharmatrata,  377.
Dharma  sarlia,  320,  497.
Dharmasoka,  8,  76,  398.
Dhatu-garbha,  144.
Dhrita-rashfcra,  84.
Dhyana,  136,  138.
Dhyani-Bodhisats,  130.
Dhyani  -  Buddhas, 130,

336,  349-  „

Dialectic,  184.

Dialects  (Buddha's  ser-
mons in),  159.

Diamond  (souled),  352;
(throne),  305,  344.

Dice,  466,  (leaded),  512.

Diet  of  Lamas,  225.

Dikung  (monast.),  38,55,
69,  276.

Dina-cariyawa,  511.

Ding-pon,  3.

Dipamkara,  Buddha,  345,
511;

Dipamkara  (monk),  35,
see  Atisa.

Pipa-nam-sei,  358.

Disciples,  376  (the  Six-
teen), 376.


Discipline,  187,  192.

Disease  (remedies  for),
401,  405.

Divination,  450 ;  (by
cards),  46.5  ;  (l>y  beads),
465;  (by  dice,  466).

Divisions,  54.

Divyavadana,  108.

D6,  159.

Doctrine,  132.

Dogras  destroying  raons. ,
282.

Dogs  (metempsychosed
men)  567 ;  (bite  charm),
406.

Dol-jang,  359.

Dol-kar,  359.

Dol-ma,  358.

Do-ma,  358.

D6-mang,  163.

Dom-bakshi,  36.

Domestic  Lamaism,  566.

Dom-ton,  36

Dor-je  (Vajra),  298,  341  ;
(ch'an),  352 ;  (dan),  305 ;
(dan-z'i),344,353;(jig-
je),62;(kyil-dun),335;
(legs),  371,  382;  (16-
pon),  293;  (p'ag-mo),
233,  245, 275 ;  (sem-pa),
352;  (tak),  55,  73,  277.

Dor-ma,  297.

Dragon  (thunder),  395.

Drag-po,  330.

Drag-s'6,  330.

Drama,  539,  (Burmese),
541.

Dra-pa  (monks),  178.

Drawings  and  paintings,

239-
Dress  (monastic),  194, 200.

Dril-bu  (bell),  298,341.

Dri-med  kun-dan  (Ja-
taka  play),  540.

Drink  (tea),  215*  (spiri-
tuous), 225.

Dri-za,  84,  367.

Drugs  (mystic  words  as),
401.

Drum  (sacred),  48,  300.

Dsog-ch'en,  47,  72  ;  (a
monli),  47.

Dub-ch'en,  378.

Duck  (Brahmani),  200,
409.

Dild,  93,  99,  363,  369.

Diid  Dub-jed,  153.

Diid-tsi  (ambrosia),  87.

Dug-pa  (sect),  55,  66,  68,
242;  (southern),  55.


Dii-k'an"  (assembly  hall),

260,  287.
Dukkha,  iii.
Duk-pa,  see  Dug-pa.
Dul-va,  159.
Durga,  129,  364.
Dur-k'rod (graveyard

ghouls),  537.
Dyaus-pitar,  356,  367.
Dying,  100,  448.

Earth  (spirits),  344;  (de-
mons), 484.

Eating  charms,  401.

Ecstatic  state,  128.

Education,  173 ;  (of  laity),
566.

Eggs  (on  altar),  423.

Ego,  100,  112,  121,  124.

Eightfold  (path),  133 ;
(division  of  relics),  306;
(division  of  gods),  366,

369-
Ekotibhava,  112.
Elder  (monks),  174.
Election  of  Grand  Lamas,

246.
Elements  (five),  453;  (of

body),  263,
Elephant (white), 390;

(episode),  337.
Eleven-headed Avalo-

kita,  15,  357.
Emanation,  347.
Empedocles,  109.
Endowments,  194.
Energy  (female),  129.
Entrance  to  order,  171.
Epidemic  (remedies  for),

405.
Established  Church,  54.
Ether,  77,  264.
Ethics,  1 19,  132.
Eucharist  of La;iiaism,

444.
Europe  (Lamaism  in),  9,

282.

Everest  (Mt.),  371,  430.

Examination(candidates

orders),  182;  (physical),

173;  (for  degrees)  182;

(test  books),  174.  183;

(of  Grand  Lama),  216.

Excrescence (on  skull),

343.
Exercising death-devil,

494
Exoteric  Buddhism,

128.


INDEX.


589


Expiring  breath  (exer-
cise), 145.

Expulsion  from  Order,
192.

Eye  (bestowing  of),  550;
(thousand),  357.

Eye-shades,  306.

Eye  tooth  of  Buddha,
318.


Fa  Hian,  551.

Faith  (salvation  by),  12,

146,  153,  499.
Familiars  (spirits),  374.
Family  cults,  372,  566.
Fan  (paltn-leaf),  195.
Fan  (tribe),  33.
Fasting,  501.
Fatalism,  30,  567.
Father  (title  of  Jupiter),
356,  487  ;  (title  of  La-
mas), 566.
Features (of Buddha),
343  ;  (of  gods),  333  ;  (of
demons),  334.
Feet  (of  Buddha),  335.
Festivals,  501 ;  (monthly),

502  ;  (annual),  50.
Fetishes,  238,  446.
Fig-tree,  (sacred),  343.
Filigree  work,  572.
Fines,  192.
Fire  (sacred),  296.
Fish  (ransoming),  448.
Five  (groups  of),  347, 397.
Flags  (luck  or  "prayer"),

409.

Flames  (from  head),  343;

(enveloping  body),  337 ;

(in  hell),  93;  (thirst  as),

97-

Flesh  (sacrifice),  495, 529.

Flower-offerings,297,425.

Flowers (conventional

forms  of),  339.
Flux  (life  as  a),  121.
Flying-horse,  390,  410.
Fo,  see  Buddha.
Food  offerings,  see  Cakes,

Oblations
Footprints,  392.
Foretelling,  458.
Forms  of  prayer,  435.
Formula  (of  causal  nex-
us), 105;  (spells  for  ros-
ary), 150.
Fortune-telling,  458.
Foundation  of  Buildings,
259.


Four  paths,  133.
Four  trutlis,  132.
Frog  (three-legged),  456.
Full  moon  (day),  501.
Funeral  (rites),  488.


Gah-dan or Gah-ldan

(monastery), 61, 189,

268.
Gah-rab  dor-je,  73.
Gambling,  470
Games  (of  cliance),  465.
Gandhara,  14,  517.
Gandharvas,  84,  367.
Gandhola  (temple),  305.
Ganesa,  368.
Garbha,  260.
Garlands,  297,  425.
Garlic (forbidden to

monks),  225.
Garraa-khia, 272, 477,

481.
Garuda,  81,  367,  387.
Gatha,  162.
Gati,  loi.

Gautama,  see  Sakya,
Gaya,  305,  344.
Ge-dun  (clergy),  169.
Gedun-dub, see  Gedun-

grub.
Gedun-grub,  38,  63,  230,

233.
Geaun-gya-ts'6, 233,
Ge-k'o  (officer),  188,  193.
Ge-lon  (ordained  Lama),

171,213.
Gelon-ma, l6o,  170,  202.
Gelong,  see  Gelou.
Gelug-pa  (sect),  36, 38,

54.  59-
Geiien,  171.

Genii,  367;  (local),  371.
Ge-s'e,  185.
Gets'ul,  171.
Ghosts,  498.

Gifts,  138,  398,  493,  566.
Giorgi,  2.
Glacier (torture), 95  ;

(sods  of),  370.
Goblins,  369.
Godhauya,  80.
Gods,  86,  324.
Golden-fish,  393.
Gtimpa  (monastery),  255,

287.
Gon-po  (devil),  365.
Gorakhas,  53,  578.
Gorakhuth,  292.
Gosirsha,  394.


Gofcania,  see  Sakya.

Graces  (before  meat  and
drink),  214.

Gradesof  monkhood,  171.

Grain,  consecrated,  323,
488.

Grand  Lama,  37.  233,
303,  305 ;  (list  of  Dalai) ,
233  ;  (Tashi-lhunpo),
235  ;  (Sakya),  241  ;
(Urgya),  240;  (Bhotan),
226,  242  ;  (receptions).

^  321.

Greek  art-influence,  13.
Gridhra-kuta,  161,  377.
Grol-ma,  see  Tara.
Grub-pa,  141,  152,  378.
Guard  ans(supernatural),

^.  369-  374.-  ^

Guhyapati,  61,  352.

Guilt-offering,  449.

Gujarat,  80.

Gupta  characters,  22.

Gur-gon,  70.

Guru  Padma  (or  Bimbo-

ch'e),  see  Padma-sara-

bhava.
Gusri-khan,  39.
Gya-jin,  see  Indra.
Gyal-ch'en,  84,  290,  538.
Gyal-gijn  rimpo-ch'e,  235.
Gyal-po (king  -  devils),

369-
Gyalts'an  (banner),  408.
Gyal-wa-rimpo-ch'e, 39,

228.
GyamtshS,  227,  233.
Gyanfcse  (mon.),  278,  317
Gy6-bo  (Gyal-po),  369.
Gyud  (Taiitra),  129.

Hair  (of  Budda),  343  ;
(tonsure  of  candidates),
179.

Halo  318,  337.

Hanle  (monastery),  283.

Hanuman,  19.

Hare,  in  moon,  102.

Hariti,  99.

Harsha-vardhana,  20.

Hartmann,  107,  121.

Hastinapur,  552.

Hastings  (Warren),  mis-
sion of,  236.

Hats,  194;  (red),  68,  73,
195  ;  (yellow),  61,  195  ;
(black),  6r.

Haya-griva,  62,  164,  364,
529.


590


INDEX.


Heart  (the  sacred),  147.
Heavens,  84;  (Brahma's),

86;  (Indra's),  85,  87.
Hells,  9o;(cold),  95;(hot),

93-
Hemis  (monastery),  282;

(play  at),  521,  528.
Heraclitus,  121.
Hercules,  374.
Heredity,  100.
Hermits,  223.
Heruka,  51,131,496,  530.
He-vajra,  131,  363.
Hexagrams,  456.
Hierarchical  Buddhism,

227.
Hierarchy,  227;  (female),

226.
Hiraavat,  19.
Himis  (mon.),  282;  (play

at),  521.
Hina-yana,  10,  123.
Hindu  (mythology),  76.
History, nebulous, x. ,

19-

Hiuen  Tsiang,  15,  19,  26,
56,  108,  307,  330,  338,
501,  etc.

Hoblighan,  232.

Hodgson  (Brian  H.),  12.

Hog  (symbolizing  stu-
pidity), 109.

Holies  (the  three), 388,

39°-

Holy  days,  501.

Holy  plays,  515.

Holy- water,  298.

Homa,  432,  498,  533.

Homeric  views,  367.

Honouring  persons  or
things,  287,  420.

Hor  tribe  (Turki).

Horn  (exerciser's),  488.

Horoscopes,  459;  (an-
nual), 460  ;  (special),
481  ;  (death),  489.

Horse  (car  celestial),  32;
(dragon),  410;  (flying),
390 ;  (flags),  409.

Hoshang,  31,  378-  534-

Hospitals,  269.

Houris,  86.

Houses  (of  Lamas),  260  ;
(god  of),  372.

Howling  devil-dancer,
477.

Hri,  invocation  to  Avalo-
Idta,  147,  324,  402.  _

Hsuan-chuang,seeHiuen
Tsiang.


Hublighan,  227.
Hue,  Pere,  2.
Hum,  mystic  ejaculation.
Human  (bones),  300,  483,

493  ;  (sacrifices), 516,

518.
Hung,  see  Hum.
Hunterianspeliing,  xviii.
Hutuktu,  232.
Huxley  on  Karma,  100.
Hwa  Shang,  31,  378,  534.
Hymn-book  score,  433.
Hymns (to  Tara), 435;

(to  Trinity),  439.
Hypnotism  (self-),  141.

Ichneumon,  368,  377.

Iddhi,  128,  141.

Iddhi-pada,  141.

Identity  (personal),  112,
121.

Idolatry,  12,  13,  15,  324.

Ignorance,  105,  no,  119.

Illusion,  7,  loi,  107,  121.

Images,  13,  15,  291,  324;
(colossal),  32o;(insignia
of),  341;  (self -created),
292,  304;  (stone),  278,
339;  (union  with),  446.

Image-worship,  origin  of ,

13.  324-
Incantations,  141.

Incarnate  deities,  40.
Incarnate  Lamas,  see  Re-
incarnation.

Incense  222,  (butter),
222.

India  (origin  of  Buddh-
ism in),  5  ;  (changes),
9 ;  (expulsion  from),
16.

Indian  (gods),  76,  367;
(monks),  376;  (shrines),
305;  ( ?Vedic  charms),
401.

Individuality,  1 12,  124.

Indra,  86,  356,  367;  (as  a
Yaksha),  369.

Induction-ceremony,  178.

Inferno,  90;  (source  of
Dante's),  94.

Initiation,  178,  185.

Inspiration  (physical  in
Yoga),  145- „

Instruments,  298,  300.

Intercalation  of  days  and
months,  454.

Investure,  178,  185.

lo  (goddess),  373,  404.


Irdhi,  128,  141.
Iron-tower  (in  S.  India),

IS--
Islita-devata,  152.
Islam,  16,  387,  583,
Isvara,  141.
Itinerancy,  211,  212.


Ja,  see  Tea.

Jacob's  ladder,  510.

Jagannath  (idol  car),  313.

Jainism,  4,  339,  424;
(saints),  389,  393,  397.

Jai-yung,  see  Manjusri.

Jalandhara,  9.

Jalendra,  368.

Jambhala  (god),  151,  368.

Jambu  tree,  80.

Jambudvipa,  80.

Jambu-ling,  see  Jambu-
dvipa.

Jam-pa,  see  Maitreya.

Jam-yang,  355.

Japan,  9, 27,  136, I45>

327,345.332.353-393.

395;  (God  of  Wealth),

368;  (rosaries),  202.
Jaramarana,  no.
Jatakas  (former  births),

loi;  (as  plays),  533.
Jati,  no.
Jengiz  Khan,  37.
Je  rin-po-ch'e,  see  Tsoii-

K'a-pa.
Jetavana,  135.
Je-tsun  dampa,  see  Tara-

natha.
Jewel  (the  three),  33,  388,

390  ;  (wish- granting),

544-
Jig-ten-ba  (  =  worldly).
Jina,  130,  267,  336,  349-
Jizo,  345.
Jiiana,  1 38.
Joll,  263.
Jo-nau,  55,  70.
Jong-ni,  49.
Jo-rin-po-ch'e,  345.
Jo-wo-K'ang  (cathedral),

23,  281,  300-  ^ ,

Judgment  of  dead,  gi,
H3.

Jug^ery,  476.

Junior  monks,  177.

Jupiter,  86,  356,  367;
(planet),  451  ;(PIuvius),
269  ;  (thunder  -  bolt),
27;  (heavens  of).

Jyoti,  263.


INtTEX.


591


Ka-che,  266.
Kadam-pa  (sect),  36.
Kah-chan  (Kab-chu) ,  1 86.
Kah-dam-pa,  36,  54.
Kah-gyur  (canon),  157.
Kah-gvo, 129,  366,  429,

562.
Kah-lon,  254.
Kailasa(  mount),  19, 78,80.
Kaiser,  s.ee  Kesai-.
Kalacaki-a,  15,  131,  163,

269.
Kala-devi,  129,  334,  364,

537-
Kalanatha,  151, 363,  365,

537-
Kalasutra  (hell),  94.
Kali,  14,  129,  131,  334,

364,  537- „
KalimpoDg,  284.
Kalinga,  269,  544.
Kalmuk  (Tartars),  9,  42.
Kalpa,  76,  III.
Kalpa  tree,  86.
K'am  (eastern  Tibet).
Kama,  84.
Kamala-sila,  31.
Kama-loica,  84.
K'am-ts'an,  189.
Kanaka-muni,  346,  351.
Kanchinjunga  (moun-
tain), 49, 370, 430

511.
Kan-d8,  366,  429,  562.
Kang-gyur,  157.
Kaug-s'ag,  221,  477.
Kanishka  (Kanerkes),  8,

9,  12,  108,  573.
Kanjur,  157.
K'an-po  (an  abbot),  172.
Kant,  107.

Kapala,  341,  353,  363.
Kapilavastu,  541.
Kargyu-pa  (sect),  55,  63.
Karma  (act-force),  xviii. ,

30,  100,  106,  222,  567  ;

(Huxley on), 100.
Karma  (sect),  45,  52,  55.
Karma-bakshi,  67.
Karma-kya  (raon.),  272,

477  ;  (oracle),  481.
Karma-marga,  57.
Karmashar (mon.),  272,
^  477  ;  (oracle),  481.
Kart'og-pa,  55,  73.
Kar-tsis  (astrology),  450.
Karuna, 356, and see

Avalokita.
Ka'sarpani,  356.
Kashgar,'583.


Kashmir,  8,  II,  26,  163,

377-
K'as-tub-je,  59.
Kasyapa  (Buddha),  346;

(monk),  8,  346,  350.
Katak,  269.
Kaundinya,  345.
Kavaca (amulet), .148,

401.  573-
Ken-diiling  (Kun-de-ling

monastery),  253,  mon.
Kesar  (King), 20, 167,

478.
Kevalatma,  76.
Kha  -ba-c'an(Himalayas),

19-
Khakkava,  211,
Khalka  (Tartars),  70.
Khalsa,  163.
Khandha,  114.
Khan-po  (abbot),  172.
Khas-grub-je,  59.
Kha-s'or  ch'orten,  315.
Khatmandu (K'o-bom),

315-

Khatvanga,  341.

Khecara,  366.

Khorlo,  see  Cakra.

Khoten,  44.

Khri  Srong  de-tsan,  24,
245.

Khroda,  332,  334.

Khriis-sol,  448,  502,  510.

Khublai  Khan  (king),  37,
227.

Kublaighan  (incarna-
tions), 233.

Khutuktu,  232.

Kilang  (monastery),  384.

Kinchmjunga,  49,  370.

Kings  (4  guardian),  84  ;
(5  great),  369,  477,  538-

Kinnara,  367,  552.

Kirghis,  43- ^

Kitchen  (god),  373,  404;

(monastic).  191.
Knowledge  (true),  133.
KoboDaishi,27,(wayof).
Koko,  Dai,  368.
Koko-Kor,  227.
Konch'og-gyalpo.
Kon-ch'og-sum  (the  three

Gems,  see  Triratna).
Koot  Hoomi,  129.
Kraku-cchanda,  346, 351.
Krashi-Lunpo,  see  Tashi-

ihunpo.
Krishna,  378.
Kro-bo,  332,  334.
K'rodha,  332, 334,  438.


Kshatriva,  390.
Kshitigarbha, 181,  345,

358.
Kshitipati,  358,  372.
Ku  (see  body  and  image).
Kublai  Khan,  37,  227.
Kuchar  Khanpo,  323,
Kuku  Khotun,  43,  282.
Kuku  Nor,  227.
Kumarila, Brahmanical

opponent  of  Buddhism.
Kumbhanda,  84,  369.
Kumbum,  158,  280,  577.
Kun-de-ling,  253.
Ku-ner,  188.

Kun-gah-wo,  see  Ananda.
Kun-tu-zan-po,  349.
Kurim,  449,  521.
Kuru,  80.

Kurun  (or  Urgya),  281.
Kushok,  232.
Kusi-nagara,  307.
Ku-s'ok,  232.
Kutila  letters,  22,  149.
Kuvera,  368.
Kwan-non,  249,  356,  359^

' 435-

Kwan-she-yin,  356,  359.

Kwan-yin,'249,  356,  359.

435.
Kyab-gon,  244.
Kye-lang  (monast.),  384.
Kyil-k'or,  319.


La-brang  (mon.  ),258, 512.

Ladak,  43,  171,  265,  282,.
(mystic  play),  521.

Lag-na-Dorje,  see  Vajra-
pani.

Lahflil,  284.

Laity,  170,  566.

La-k'ang,  287.

Lalita  (posture),  336.

Lalita-vistara,  162.

Lama  (meaning  of
word),  28  ;  (the  first),
29;  (order),  170;  (num-
bers), 41 ;  (Grand),  226.

Lama  Yuru  (monast.  )>
283.

Lamaism,  17,  19,  30,  41 ;
(reformation),  36;  (sects
of),  54.

Lamas  (order  of),  169.

Lamaseries,  255.

Lam-d6,  57.

Lam-don  (sgron),  57.

Lamps,  296,  298;  (festival
of),  511.


692


WD  EX.


Lam-rim  (dogmatic  by
Tsoft-K'a-pa),  57.

Lanoa  (letters) ,  149.

Lan-darraa,  34,  54  ;  (as-
sassin of),  520,  529.

Lanka,  see  Ceylon.

Lanterns  (feast  of),  5 it.

Lapcha  (cairn),  283,  285.

Lapis  lazuli,  81.

Lares,  215,  484.

Latsiin  Ch'enibo,  45,  55.

Law,  see  Dharma;  (true),
126.

Lay-brothers,  170.

Laymen,  170,  566.

Leh,  282.

Lepchas,  285,  286,  379.

Letters  (Tibetan),  22,
149.

Levitation  of  body,  128,
141.

Lha  (gods),  see  Deva.

Lha-k'a  (sorcerer),  482.

Lha-k'an,  287.

Lha-mayin,  81.

Lha-mo  (she-devil),  334.

Lhasa  (name),  23 ;  (cathe-
dral), 23,  3O0;(Potala),
229  ;  (red  hill),  229,  see
Marpo-ri ;  (vicar  apos-
tolicus  of),  2.

Lhato  (cairn),  283,-285.

Lha-t'o  t'o-ri,  ig.

Lhatsiin  Ch'en-bo,  45,
48,  55  ;  (intvod.  Lama-
ism  to  Sikhim),  49-51.

Lh6-Pug-pa  (sect),  68.

Libation  to  devils,  215,
225.

Library,  168.

Licchavi  tribe,  19.

Life,  102,  (elixir  of),  81  ;
(eternal),  443 ;  (ransom-
ing), 265,  448.

Limbu  (tribe),  484.

Ling  (royal  monastery),
253.

Linga  (offering  to  devils),
423,  428,  483.

Xing-k'a,  423,  483.  532.

Lion  (pillars),  40Q,  414  ;
(posture),  343;  (throne),
336,  343 ;  (voiced),  151,
356,  379-

Litanies,  444.

Literature,  155.

Liturgy,  444.

Living,

Li-yuT,  44.

Lob-nor,  393.  i


L6b-pon,  i88,  see  Padma-
sambhava.

Lob-ta  (school),  260. -

Lob-zang  tak-pa,  see
Tson-K'apa.

Locana,  350.
.  Lfl-Dug-pa  (sect),  68.

Lokantarika,  96.

Lokesvara  (princes),  333.

Lok-pal,  84.

Long  (dragon),  410.

L6-pbn,  188.

L6-tsava,  187.

Lotus  (symbol  of  perfec-
tion, etc.),  338, 339, 388;
(birth  from),  86,  381.

Love  (brotherly),  136.

L6-zang,  see  Tson-K'apa.

Lu,  see  Naga.-

Lu-'bum.

Luck  (ill),  (scapegoat  of),
512.

Lucky  days,  455,  457.

Lung-ta,  409.

Lung-tog  Yam-Thso,  233.

L'un-se  (  begging-bowl),
2!l,  212.

Lust,  109,  115,  ifg.

Madhyamika (schools),

II,  124.
Madros(Mal-gro),266,376.
Magi,  doctrine  of,  394.
Magic-circles,  see  Man-

dala,  (-sentences),  142.
Magic  (sympathetic),  401,

404,  446.
Ma-gom,  74.
Maguta  (stupa),  315.
Maha-deva^  151, 363,  537-
Maha-jataka,  540.
Maha-kala,  151,221,363,

365.537-
Maha-Kasyapa, 8, 159,

160.
Maha  -  Maugdalyayana,

8,  98,  108,  376.
Maha-purusha,  129.
Maha-parinirvana  sutra,

162.
Maha-rajas  (of  quarters),

84. . ,
Maliaram,  364.
Maha-raurava  (hell),  95.
Maha-sanghika,  10,  123.
Maha7siddha,  378.
Maha-^ravaka,  378.
Maha-sthavira,  378.
Mahatma,  3.


Maha-utpanna,  72.
Maha-vagga,  123.
Maha-yana  doctrine,  10.

124,  137.
Mahoragas,  367.
Maitreya  (Buddha),  122,

320,355.  '

Maitrl  (love),  136.
Makara,  391.
Makuta  Stupa,  315.
Mallas,  crested  Stupa  of,

317-
Mamald,  350.
Mamo (she-devils),  370,

,.383- -

Manasarfivara,  266,  376.
Manchn(dynasty),49,254.
Manchuria,  43.
Mandala,  144,  163,  181,

217,  266,  296,  39.^  444.
Mandarawa,  382.
Mandong,  261.
Manes,  96.
Mangala  (ashta),  392.
Mangala-sutta,  135.
Mang-ja,  189.
Mang-yul,  260.
Mani (mystic prayer),

148;  (prayer-cylinders),

149  ;  (stone-walls,  261.
Mani-Kah-'bum,  x., 19,

166.
Manju-ghosha,  355.
Mariju-srl  (god  of  Wis-
dom),'12,  161,339,355,

460;  (incarnations),  35,

231.
Man-la (medical Bud-

dhas),  353.
Man-mo  (spirits),  371.
Manning  (Mr.),  2.
Mantra  (spells),  141,  149;

(for rosary), 150;

(vehicle),  128,  151.
Mantrayana,  15, 128, 143,

151.
Manu  (date  of),  92.
Manushi  or  human  Bud-

dhas,  350.
Mara  (god  of  desire),  6,

88, 344, 375; (Ws

daughters), 109  ; (ms

devUs),  6,  517.
Marici,  219,  361.
Mar-me-dsad,  see  Dipam  -

kara.
Mar -pa,  55,  64.
Matpo-ri  (hill),  21.
Marriage (by capture),

553 ;  (horoscopes),  458.


INDEX.


593


Mars  (planet),  45;.
Marut  (storm-gods),  332.
Masho  (vill.),  512.
Masks  (for  actors),  536  ;

(mortuary),  496, 497.
Masquerades,  515.
Materialism,  76.
Matl-dhvaja,  38.
Matrika  (yum),  129,  163,

362.
Matter  (views  of),  77.
Maudgalyayana, 8, 98,

108,  376.
Maya  (illusion),  7,  loi,

107,  121.
Maya(Buddha 'smother),

507.
May-pole,  410.
Mayurasana  (peacock

throne),  336,  350.
Mayuri,  340.
Me-ba (geomantic

figures),  457.
Medical Buddha-gods,

353,  498,  509.
Medicine  (sympathetic),

401,  404,  446.
Meditation (Dhyana),

136,  138,  335.
Meditative (attitude),

Me-lha (fire-god), 367,

,496,  533-.

Melong  (mirror),  393.

Menander,  124,  357,  541.

Mendicant  Lamas,  48.

Men-dong,  261.

Merchant  monks,  224.

Mercury  (planet),  199.

Mercy(god  of),  356;  (god-
dess of),  359,  435.

Merit  (action  of),  loi.

Meru  (mount),78,398,400.

Mesmwisra,  129.

Metamorphosis,  100.

Metaphysics,  76,  159.

Metempsychosis,  100,226.

Mewa,  457.

Middle-path,  11,  124.

Mig-mar  (Mars),  455.

Mig-tse-ma,  i^.

Mila-raspa  (saint),  55, 64,
167.

Milinda,  124,  357,  476,
541.

Muinda  paiiha,  124.

Milinda  pra§na,  124.

Mind,  114.

Mindolling,  55,  73,  173,-
277.


Ming  (dynasty),  38.
Miracles,247,249 ;  (Chris-
tian), 307.
Mirror  (magical),  393,441;,

482.
Misery, no, 132  ; (of

gods),  90.
Missals,  1^7.
Missionaries  (Buddhist),

8, 376 ; (Roman, in

Lhasa),  2.
Mitre,  24,  197.
M6  (divination),  465.
Moha,  109,  113.
Monasteries, 255  ; (list

of),  266.
Mongol, patronage of

Lamaism,  37,  39.
Mongolia  (Lamaism  in-

trod.  to), 38, 43,  70;

(re-introd.),  501.
Mongolian  (alphabet  and

scriptures), 38, 158;

(Lama),  45.
Monkeys, origin from,

19;  (symbol),  115.
Monkhood,  170.
Monlam (celebrations),

422.
Month  (festivals  of),  502.
Monuments (religious),

261.
Moral conduct, 133  ;

(rules),  134.
Morality,  132.
Moru  monastery,  477.
Moulmein,  36.
Mountain-gods,  370.
Mriga-dava,  134.
Mucalinda  (Na^a)  345.
Mudra  (attitudes), 141,

335-
Muhammadan  (expulsion

of  Buddhism),  16,  583.
Mummers,  515.
Mummery,  144,  224.
Muni  (sage),  5,  311,  345-
Music,  432.
Musical  instruments,  298,

300;  (notation),  433.
Musician  (heavenly),  83.
Mystery-play,  515.
Mystic  (sentences), 141,

146,  148.
Mystical  Buddhism,  120,

142.
Mysticism,  124,  128,  142.
Mythology, 76, 324 ;

(of  Hindus), 77, 324>

366.


Na-ch'un (oracle), 478,

.  521.

Na-dag-pa,  55,  73.

Na-dau  376.

Naga.  II,  84,  104,  164,
1 56, 289,  368;  (worship),
164,  267,  499,  508.

Naga-raja,  289.

Nagasena,  124,  377,  476-

Nag-pa (sorcerer), 209,

^475,  479,  483- ,,  ,
Nag-po  Ch'en-po  (Maha-
.  kala),  365.
Nag- wan  L6-zari  Gya-ts'o,

39,  47,  227,  233,  253,
■  327.

Nah-dag,  73.
Sfah-t'i-tsan-po,  19.
Nail-parings  of Lama  s

(as  charms),  402.
Nain  Singh,  266,  512.
Najarjuna,  8,  10,  II,  15,

69,  125  164,  378.
Nakula,  377.
Nalanda,  24,  64.
Nal-jor (=  Yogacarya),

141.
Nama-riipa,  no,  115.
Namchi  (monastery),  259,

285.
Nam-c'u  van-dan,  142.
Names  of  Buddha,  203,

353-
Names  of monasteries,

257,  266.
Nam-go  (masts),  487.
Namgyal  (monast.),  253,

272.
Nam-t'o-sras,  84,  370.

Nan  (devil),  372.
Nanda  (naga),  30o-
Nandas  (the  nine),  393.
Nan-sa  (play  of),  553-
Naraka  (hell),  90.
ISfari-K'or-sum,  265,  266.
Naro,  16.
Narbhang (mon.), 156,

158,  159.327-
Natha,  365.

Nats  (of  Burmese),  365.
Navakosa,  393.
Navaniddhi,  393.
Navang Lobsang, see

Nag-wan.
Nava-ratna,  393-
Nayablin,  81.
Nayakas,  180.
Ne-chung (oracle),  47».

521.

QQ


594


INDEX.


Necromancers,  478.
Ne-den  (chu-tug),  376.
S'en-na,  170.
Sfen-t'6,  170.
Neophyte,  178.
Nepal,  8, 20,  44,  260, 284,
315,  382,470;  (canon),

'39-  .
Nestorian influence in

China  and  Tibet,  421.
Netan  c'u-drug,  376.
Newars,  328,  456,  470.
New-moon  (day),  501.
New Year (festival),

513-
Nibbana,  see  Nirvana.
Nidana,  105,  107,  lib.
Nihilism  (sophistic),  125.
Nimbus,  337.
5fin-ma-pa,  55,  68,  72.
Nirmana-kaya,  127,  347.
Nirvana, 10, 119, 124,
_  163. '

Ni-t'i  (book),  161.
Nomen  Khan,  253.
Non-Ego,  124.
Norbu  (gem),  389.
Nor-pa,  55,  70.
Northern  school,  9.
Nostril  (closing),  145.
Nothingness,  125.
Novice,  178.
Novitiate ~  (admission),

178.
Number  of  Lamas,  41-52.
Numerals,  symbolic  use

of,  367-
Nuns,  160,  170,  202,  274,

275,  286.
Nya-thi-tsanpo(king),i9.
Nying-ma-pa  (sect),  55,

68,  72.
Nyi-thi,  161.

Oaths,  570.,?
Oblations,  215,225.
Occultism,  128.
Ocean  jewels,  88.
Ocean-Lama,  228.
Odantapura  vihara, 28,

'Od-pag-med,  349.
'Od-ser,  219,  361.
Offerings,  296,  423.
Officials,  187.
Og:min (heaven), 85,

497-
Olympus,  y7,  78,  86.
Urn,  142,  148,  160,  165.


Om  mani padme  hum,

139.  148.

'0-pa-me,  349.

Oracles,  475  ;  (of  govern-
ment), 478.

Order  (of  Lamas),  168.

Order,  168.

Ordination,  185.

Organs  (sense),  115.

Original  sin,  115,  160,
222.

Orisons,  219.

Otantipara  (vihara),  28,
36,  266.

Paccaya,  106.

Padma,  95.

Padma-jun-na,  see  Pad-
ma-sambhava.

Padma-Kar-po,  68.

Padma-pani,  see  Avalo-
kita.

Padma-sambhava(saint) ,
(founded  Lamaism),  x,
24,  29,  55,  68,  73,  195,
292  ;  (departure  from
'I'ibet),32;  (deification),
33.73.312.340.379.518,
525. 531.  543..  5.51;  (dis-
ciples),3i ;  (visit  to  Sik-
him),  44 ;  (to  Bhotan),
68.

Padmasana  (lotus-seat),

338.
P'ag-mo,  see  Dorje-p'ag-

mo.
Paintings,  331.
Palace-monastery, see

Ling.
Pal-dan,  title  of  Atisa,

Lhamo,  Yes'e,  etc.
Pali  (scriptures),  156, 159.
Palingene3is,ioo,i2l,227.
Panca-bala.  131.
Panca-rakshasa,  131.
Paiica-sila,  134.
Panca-tantra,  163.
Panch'en  Lama,  235.
Panch'en Rim-po-ch'e,

235- ' „,
Pandita,  186.
Pandura,  351.
Pantheism,  122,  129.
Pantheon,  324.
Paradise  (Buddha's),  127,

2i7;(Indra's),86;(St.

Padma's),  32.
Paramita  (virtues), 138,

54t.


Parasu,  341.
Pari  (Lama),  326.
Paribhogika,  420.
Pari -nirvana, II, 120,

122.
Paritta, 142, 446,

476.
Parivrajika,  178,  185.
Parkha  (signs),  456.
Paro  (monastery),  44, 278,

284,293;
Parsva  (monk),  8.
Patanjali,  128,  141.
Paternal  Buddhas,  339.
Path  (eight-fold),  133.
Patioca-samuppado,  105.
Patimokkha,  160.  ■
Pato  (mon.),  44,  278,  284,

293-
Patriarchs  (list  of),  8.
PattinI  (goddess),  325.
Peacock,  88 ;  (feathers),

298,  445 ;  (throne),  336,

^  3,49- „

Pedong,  284.

Pehar  (King-devil),  371,

479-
Peking,  43, 158,279,327;

(Lama),  243.
Pelong,  29,  237.
Pemakoi,  279.
Pemiongchi,  50,  173,  258,

265,  285,  512.
Penance,  6  ;  (by  proxy),

^319-

Penates,  484.
Perfumes,  394.
Personality,  112,  121.
Peshawar,  14.
Pessimism,  122.
Phag-mo, see Dorje-
p'agmo.

Pha-pa,  title  of  Avalo-
kita,  etc.

Philistinism  (otMuham-
maijans),  16.

Phungi,  30.

Phur-bu,  51,  341,  488.

Phylacteries,  402,  531.

Pictures,  331.

Pig(symbolof  stupidity),
109.

Pilgrims,  305,  278.

Pindar,  109.

Pingala,  99.

Pipal-tree,  337.

Pirit (ceremony), 142,
446,  476.

Pitaka,  159.

Pittuk  (mon.),  284.


INDEX.


595


Planets,  199,  454.
Plato,  10,  107,  109.
Plays,  515.
Plotinus,  141.
Pluto,  90,  367.
Pon-ba,  see  Bon.
P'ongi (Burmese monk

etyniol),  30.
Pope  (Lamaist),  37  ;  and

see  Grand  Lamas.
Popular  Lamaism,  566.
Postures,  145.
Potala palace, 21, 39,

40,  229.
Pradakshina,  287,  420.
Prajna,  125,  161,  356.
Prajiia-paramita,  11,  125,

160.
Prasanga-madhyaniika,

139- ..
Prasenajit,  19.
Pratimoksha,  160.
PratityaSainutpada,  105.
Pratyeka  (Buddhas),  123,

137.
Pravrajya,  178.
Prayag,  377.
Prayer, 12,  15,  141,  213,

^435- ,

Prayer-barrels,  149.
Prayer-cylinders, 149,

172,  218.
Prayer-flags,  408.
Prayer-formula,  141,213,

■r,435-

Prayer-macnmes, 149,

172,  218. 2^i&¥-
Prayar-wheels,  149,  172,

218,  573. :_  ■  ..
Preaching  attitude,  337.
Precentor,  188.
Precepts,  134.
Precious  things,  389.
Preta,  96.
Priest, see Order and

Worship.
Priestcraft,  18,  153,  217.
Priest-king,  227.
Printing,  157,219,  327.
Procession,  168.
Pronunciation (rules),

xvii.
Proverbs,  175.
Pu-kwa,  456.
Punakha  (mon.),  44,  284;
Pundarlka,  96.
Pungi,  30.
Punishments,  193.
P'unts'o-ling,  71,  274.
Punya,  30.


Pupil,  173.
Purang,  260.
P'ur-bu,  51,341,483,488.
Purgatory,  90.
Purusha,  129.

Quarters  (Kings  of),  84.
Quietists,  141.

Eab-jam-pa,  186.
Radeng  (Lama),  235.
Radeng  (mon. ),  56,  274.
Raga,  109.
Rag-bushes,  4C39.
Rahan,  376.
Rabat,  see  Arliant.
Rahu,  82,  269,  455.
Eahula,  82,  377.
Rain-bow  (cordon), 103,

331-
Rain  (compelling),  499  ;

(worship),  508.
Raivata,  345.
Raja-griha,  108.
Rakshasa,  32,  8f,  369.
Ralung,  68.
Rammoch'e  (monastery),

23,  272,  477,  508.
Ransoming (lite), 265,

448.
Ratna  (gem),  389.
Ratna-kuta Sutra, 99,

161.
Ratna-pani,  351.
Ratna-sambhava, 349,

350-
Ravana,  32.

Rays  '(of  light),  337,  343-
Re-birth, loi, 109; (of

Grand  Lamas),  229.
Red-hats,  73  ;  (sect),  68,

73-
Refectory,  189,  214.
Reformation (Lamaist),

36-
Refreshments  in  church,

214,  220.
Refuge  formula,  440.
Refuges  (three),  440.
Regenerated  Lamas,  227.
Regent,  235,  240,  253.
Re-incarnation,  100, 121,

227.
Relics,  305, 318, 330  ;  (of

Buddha),  7,  319.  42°;

(of  Grand  Lamas),  253.
Reting  (Lama),  235.
Retreat  (in  rains),  223.
Revelations,  56,  165.


Bhinosceros,  397.

Rice-offerings,  295  ;  (of
universe),  296  ;  (images
in  Ceylon),  329.

Rinang,  553.

Rin-ch'en-na-diin,  389.

Ri-rab  (Mt.),  78, 398,  400.

Rites,  420.

Ri-wp-ch'e  (mon.),  279.

Road  to  heaven,  492.

Robes,  '200  ;  (giving  of),
511.

Rol-pa  (Manjusri),  336.

Rol-pahi  dorje,  243.

Roman  Church  (ana-
logies), xi.

Rosaries,202  ;(spellsfor),
150.

Routine,  212.

Rudra  (god),  209,  332.

Rugs,  294.

Rules  (moral),  134,  138,
160  ;  (thirty-six),  171,
179  ;  (two  hundred  and
fifty -three),  171  ;  (of
monasteries),  188.

Rupa^(form),  84,  115.

Russia  (Lamaisui  in),
9,  41,  282.


Sabdag  (local  genii),  371,

484.
S'ab-dun  (title),  179.
Sacrifice,  425  ;  (flesh),  495,

527;  (burnt),  432,  533;

(dogs), 529  ;  (human),

516.
Saddharma  -  pundarlka,

126,  138,  142,  162;
Sa-go  masts,  484.
Saints,  376.
Saint-worship,  33,  376.
Sakra,  see  Indra.
Sakrid-agama,  136.
^akti (female energy),

129.
Sakya (monastery), 69,

274  ;  (sect),  37,  55,  69.
Sakya  (pandita),  37,  69,

227.
Sakya-muni,  5  ;  (image),

343 ; fdeath), 7, 163,

308  ;  (temptation), 6  ;

(the  "  Second  "),  379.
Sakya-pa  (sect),  37, 55,69.
Sala  (tree),  7,  185,  308.
Samadhi,  138,  141.
Saman  (God  in  Ceylon),

325-


596


INDEX.


Samanera,  136.

Samanta-bliadra,  14,  72,
131,  349,  358.

Sambhala,  283,  306.

Sambhara,  151,  163,  363.

Sambhoga-Icaya,  127,347.

Sam-bhota,  21.

Samsai-a,  10,  109,  126.

Samvara,  151,  163,  363.

Samyak-Sambuddlia
(title  of  Sakya  Muni).

Sam-yas  (monast.  foun-
ding), 28, 108, 266,

„  478,  513-

Sandal  (rosary),  207.

Sangacheling  (monast.),

50,  258.
Sangha,  169.
Sangharama,  261.
Sanghati,  200.
Sang-kar,  266,  278,  283.
San-gyas,  see  Buddha.
Sanssara,  10,  109,  126.
Sailskara,  106,  no.
§anta-raksliita,  28,  315.
Sapataratna,  390.
Saptaparna,  377.
Sarana,  337.
Saranga-nath,  360.
Sariputra,  8,  376.
Sarira,  330, 420.
Sarnath,  1 34,  360.
Sarvastivada,  124.
Sas-kya (monast.), 69,

274  ;  (sect),  37,  55,  69.
Satscha,  330,  497.
Sattva,  112,  423.
Saturn,  455.
Sautranfca,  162.
Scales  (ordeal  of ),  113.
Schools (northern and

southern),  9.
Schopenhauer,  107,  120.
Scorpion (charm), 405  ;

(exorcism),  488.
Scriptures,  155.
Sculpture,  239.
Scythian,  8,  108,  541.
Seal,  202;  (Grand  Lama's),

242,  304.
Seas  (seven),  78.
Sects,  54.

Sedent  (postures),  335.
Selenginsk,  282.
Self,  112.

Self -consciousness,  i  lo.
Self -extinction,  138.
Self-sacrifice,  138.
Self-sprung(images),  328.
Sen-c^n  rimpo-ch'e,  243.


Seng-dong-ma (devil),

. 430-

Sermons  (Buddha's),  135.

Serpent,  see  Naga ;  (char-
mer), 552.

Serra  (mon.),  63,  189,  269.

Seven  (jewels,  etc.),  389,
391.

Shab-(Jung  (title),  ]79.

Shadow  (of  Buddha),
318.

Shakya-thuba>  343.

Shamanism,  19,  26,  29,
is,  42Q.

Sha-mar,  8l.

Shambhala,  283,  306.

Sham-ch'o-dun,  307.

Shaving  head,  179.

Sheep's  shoulder-blades
(divining  by),  465.

Sheldrake,  200.

Shen-rab  (god),  30.

Sher-chin,  see  Prajiia
paramita.

Shi-je-pa,  74.

Shin-je,  see  Yama.

Shintoism,  27,  393.

Shrines,  305.

Siam,  8,  9.

Siberia,  43,  282.

Sibi  (Jataka),  550.

Sickness  (curing),  401.

Siddha,  152,  271.

Siddharta,  5.

Siddhi,  141,  152,  378.

Sikhim  (intro.  jof  Lama-
ism  to),  44,  51,52,  284;
(Lamas of), 45, 244;

(king).  341.  379.
Sikhin,  346.
$ila  (moral  rules),  134.
Siladitya,  138.
Silk  (i-obes),  200.
Sin  (word  for),  i75.
Sinhanada,  151,  267,  356.
S'inje,  see  Yama.
Sirios  (dog-star),  510.
Sita  (Tara),  359.
Siva,  14,  330.
Sixfold (states  of  life),

lOI.

Six-syllabled  spell,  148.
Skandha,  114.
Skull-bowl,  299.
Skull-drum,  300.
Sky -demons,  487.

Sling,  341, 375.  483-
Snake-demigods,  368.
Soap,  214.
So-b«n,  188,  237.


Sod-nam  Gya-ts'o,  233.

Sol-pijn,  188,  237.

Sooth-sayers,  451,  475.

Sorcery,  475.

Sorrow,  132.

Sosanika,  381.

Soul,  III,  112,  121,  126,

141.
Soup  in  church,  220.
Southern  school,  9.
Space,  77,  264.
Sparsa,  no.
Spells,  150.
Spinoza,  122.
Sraddha,  99.
Srag-dhara,  81.
Sramana,  136.
Sramanera,  136.
Sravaka  (hearer),  136.
Sravasti,  135,  161.
Srong-tsan-gam-po, 19,

22,551.
brot-appanna,  136.
Staff  (mendicants'),  211.
Stars  (influence  of),  450.
Statues,  339.
Stature of mythical

Buddhas,  345.
Sthavira,  171  ;  (sixteen),

376.
Storm  (-god),  332.
Siiupa,  262.
Styx  (Buddhist),  92.
Su-darsana,  88.
Sudhana  Jataka,  551.
Suffering  (origin  of),  133.
Sukhavati,  127,  139.
Sumatikirti (Tson-k'a-

pa).
Sumedha,  346.
Sumeru,  78,  398,  400.
Sum-pa  k'anpo,  20.
Sunday  (Buddhist),  501.
Sung-Yun,  541,
Sun-worship,  13, 127,347.
Sunyata,  125.
Supernatural (powers),

141,  152,378.
Surmounting Buddhas

(on  images),  338.
Sutra,.  1 59, 162.
Sutranta,  123, 162.
Suvarnadvipa,  36.
Svastika  (cross),  30,389.
Svayambhunath  (stupa),

315-
Swan  maidens,  552.
Syllables  (mystic),  142.
Symbols, 341, 387; (in

hats),  197.


INDEX.


597


Tables  (of  Lainas),  294.
Tachog,.  see  Flags,  and

Hayagriva.
Ta-em-ssu  (mon.),  280.
Tag-mar  c'ham,  516.
T'ag-p'u  (caves),  257.
Tag-ten  (monast.),  70.
Tale  Lama,  39, 227.
Talismans,  402,  531.
Talung (sect),  55, 6g.
Tamch'og, see Haya-
griva.
Tamdin,  see  Hayagriva.
Tam-ze  (= Brahman).
Tangut,  266,  581.
Tan-gya-ling,  253  ;  (plan

of),  522.
Tangy  ur  (commentaries ) ,

157,164.
Tanha,  no,  116.
Tanjur,  157-
Tan-ma  (she-devils),  27,

371,  382,  529.
,  Ta,ntalized  souls,  96.
T'an-t'on-gyal-po,  385.
Tantra,  129,  152,  163.
Tantrisra,  14.
T'an-yig  (hooks),  165.
Taoism,  19.
Tara, 22,  23, 258, 360,

551  ;  (worship  of),  435.
Taranatha, 43, 55, 70,

240,  282,  327.
Tartars,  9.
Tashiding, 50, 53, 258,

285,512.
Tashi-g6-man,  264.
Tashi  Lama,  230.
Tashi-lhunpo, 63, 189,

260,  270,  535.
Tashj-rab-ka,  49.
Tashisudon  (monast.),  44,
-  284.

Tathagata,  122,  345,  353.
Tats'in  (Home),  422.
Tawa,  61.
Tea service (general),

191,  215.
Tea-drinking,  214.
Teaching  attitude,  134.
Teeth  (relics),  to8.
Telopa  (monks),  64.
Temples,  287.
Temptation (Buddha's),

Ten  (prohibitions),  134.
Ten-del  (Nidana),  105.
Tengri,  372.
T'eng-pa,  10.
T'eng-wa,  202.


Ten-gye-ling,  253  ;  (plan

of),  522.
Tent  (god),  70; (taber-
nacle), 282.
Terma  (revelations),  57,

58,  165. .
Terminology  (Buddhist),

165.
Ter-pa-ling,  239.
Teshu  Lama,  230.
Text-books,  174.
Thang  Chu  (record),  20.
Thang-kar  pass,  I,  2.
Than-yig  ser-t'en,  45.
Theg-pa  (yana),  10.
Theistic  Buddhism,  126.
Theogony,  122.
Theosophy,  128.
Thigh-bone  trumpets,  48,

300.
Thin-le-Gya-ts'o,  233.
Thi-Srong-de-tsan,  24, 30,

24s.
Tho,  330.

Tho-ling  (mon.),  283.
Thonmi-Sambhota,2l,22.
Thor,  88.
Tho-wo,  330.
Three  gems,  346, 388, 390,

443.
Three  Holies,  346,  443.
Three  Refuges,  440.
Thug-je-ch'en-po,  356.
Thui-sol,  434, 448, 502,

510.
Thumi  Sambhota,  21,  22.
Thunderbolt,  15, 2S,27,&c
Tibet  (pre^Buddhist),  19.
Tiger-devils,  516.
T'ig-se,  266,  283.
Tilopa  (monk),  64.  ,
Timed  Kun-dan  (Jataka

play),  540.
Tinge  (mon.),  274,  533.
Tisri,  240,  577.
Titans,  81.
T'o,  330.

T61ung  (monast.),  51.
Tonsure,  179.
Tope,  262.
Top-knot,  179.
Tor-ma  cakes,  297.
Tortoise,  395.
Torture,  568.
T'o-t'ori;iian-tsan,  19.
Trading  monks,  224.
Transcendental  wisdom,

160.
Transmigration,  100,226.
Trayastrinsa,  86.


Tree  (of  heaven),  81,  86,
88,  96  ;  (Christmas),  81.
Trigrams,  394.
Tri-kaya,  127,  347.
Tri-murfci  (of  Lamaism),

Trinity,  346,  347.
Tri-pitaka,  159.
Tri-ratna,  33,  388,  390.
Ti'i-sarana,  340.
Trishna,  iio,  116.
Trisula,  342.
Trividagni,  114.
Tri-vidya,  in.
Trumpets,  298.
Truths,  132.
Tsa-cha,  330, 497.
Tsam-ch'6-dun,  307.
Tsa-mo-ling,  253.
Ts'e-gug,  447.
Ts'e-mch'uling,  253.
Ts'e-pag-med,  348.
Ts'e-ring  che-na,  370.  '
Tsi-pa,  451.
Tson-K'a-pa,  38,  54,  59,

198,  223,  227,  268,  280,

292.
Tsug-tor  (U  shnislia),  360.
T'uba  (=Sakya).
T'ug,  147."

T'ug-je  ch'en-po,  356.
Tui-sol, 434, 448, 502,

510.
T'ul-ku,  232.
Tung-rarapa,  186.
Tun-mon,  434.
Turquoises,  209,239,  557.
Tushita  (heaven),  77,  86,

.128.
Tutelaries,  152,  361;  (.sec-

tarial),  58,62,65,69,72.


U,  province,  265.
TJdanas,  162.
Udanavarga,  162.
Udandapura,  28,  36, 266.
Uddesika,  420.
Udyana, 26, 197, 306,

380.
Umbrella,  392,  393.
Um-dse (officer), 188,

293-
Universe  (Buddhist),  77  ;

(offering  of),  296,  397;

see  Mandala.
Upadana,  no.
Upadhyaya,  31,  171, 172.
Upagupta,  8,  120,  442.
Upali,  159,  376.


I^\j>u


INDEX.


Upa-me,  349.

Upananda,  368.

Upasaka,  170.

Upasampada  (full  ord-
ination), 185.

TJpasika,  170.

Uposatha  (fast  days),  1 78.

Uranus,  367.

Urga,  43,  70,  240,  281.

Urgyan-gya-ts'o  (Lama),
xii,  45.

Urgyan-pa  (sect).

Utai-shan,  279.

Utpala,  95.

Uttara  (title),  28.

Uttarakuru,  80,  377.

Uttara  sanga,  201.

Vag;isvara,  414.
Vaibhashika,  123.
V^ipula,  161,  162.
Vairocana  Buddha, 15,

127,  349.
Vairocana (Lama), 29,
,^435-

Vaigali  (council),  10,  123.
Vaisravana,  84,  368,  370.
Vaitarani,  92.
Vajra,  15,  25,  27,  etc.
Vajra-bhairava,  62,  131,

362.
Vajracarya,  151,  179.
Vajracedika,  161.
Vajra-dakkini,  366.
Vajra-dhara, 61, 130,

352.
Vajra-dhatu,  144,  145.
Vajra-garbha,  144,  145.
Vajra-pani,  13,  86,  150,

356,  365-
Vajra-p  urba, 70, 72,

.,363,.

Va^rasana,  305.
Va;)ra-sattva,  IJ,  352.
Vajra  varahi,  see  Dorje-

p'agmo.
Vajra-yana,  15,  151.
Vajriputia(?  Vasuputra),

,  377-

Vakula,  377.
Vandya  (?Baiide),  171.
Vanishing,  141,  564.
Varahi,  150,  163.
Varsha,  223.
Varuna,  367.
Vasubandhu,  13, 69,  128.
Vasu-mitra,  8.


Vasuputra,  57,  69.

Veda  (god),  371  ;  (scrip-
tures), 6.

Vedana,  no.

Vedanta,  122.

Vedic  charms,  401.

Vehicles,  10,  15.

Venuvana,  108,  161.

Vessantara  (tale  en-
acted), 541.

Vestments,  194.

Via  media,  11.

Vicar  apostolicus  of
Lhasa,  2.

Vidarbha,  11.

Videha,  80,  543.

Vihara  (mon.),  255.

Vijiiana,  no.

Vinaya,  60, 159.

Virgil,  100.

Virtues  (practice  of),  138.

Viru(Jhaka,  83,  84,  330.

Virupaksha,  84,  289.

Visions  (four),  91.

Visva-bhu,  346.

Visva-karma,  313.

Visvantara,  138 ;  (play),

„.540- _  .
Visva-pani,  350.

Vitaraga,  392.
Volga,  182.
Votive  offerings,  133.
Vulcan,  313,  367,  404.
Vulture's  peak,  161.


War-god,  89,  374.
Water (festival), 509;

(holy),  298;  (offerings),

427.
Way,  the  true,  133.
Weapons  (magical),  483.
Week  (days),  454.
Wench'eng  princess,  20,

23-

Wheel  (symbol),  389  ;
(of  the  Law),  134,  337,
390  ;  (of  Life),  102.

Widow's  mite,  319.

AVill  (unconscious),  113,
119.

Wine,  221,  225  ;  (obla-
tions), 225,  495.

Wisdom  (deified),  12,  35,
i6i,  339.  35S';(ti'ans-
cendental),  11, 125, 160.

Wish-gi-anting  (cow),
87;  (tree),  81, 86,  88, 96.


Witch-women,  366,  369.
Witness  (attitude),  336,
344,

Wizard-priests,  24,  378.
Works,  30,  100, 106, 222,

Worlds,  84,  loi.

Worship  (objects),  324,
387 ;  (celebrations),  17,
420  ;  (feast  days),  501.

Wu-tai  shan,  279.

Xylographs,  157.


Yab-yum  (conjugal  dei-
ties), 129,  362.

Yak  (god),  373  ;  (mask),
537-

Yaksha,  81,  84,  369  ;  (In-
dra  as  a),  84,  86.

Yakshini,  369.

Yama,  86,  90,  367.

Yama-mari,  364 ;  (hea-
vens), 86.

Yamantaka,  90,  362.

Yama  rocks,  81.

Yam-dog-ts'o  (lake),  233,

Yan-oan-ma (=  Saras-

vati).
Yan-gug,  448.
Yantra,  144,  387.
Yarlung,  20.
Yellow-hat  (sect),  61 .
Ye-s'e-gon-po,  365.
Yidag,  g6.=
Yidam,  361.
Yoga,  13,  128,  141.
Yogacarya,  14,  128,  147.
Yogi,  13,  128,  141.
Yong-grub.
Yon-tan,  222.
Yul-k'or-rung,  84.
Yum,  129,  163,  362.
Yun-drung,  389.
Yunnan,  254.


Z'al-thang,  328.
Z'alu  (Lama),  326,  333.
Zang-Kar,  266,  283,  278.
Zeus,  86,  356,  367.
Z'i-je-pa,  74. ^
Z'i-wa  (mild  deity),  333.
Z'nng  (spells),  141,  402,,
