AMONG THE HIMALAYAS
By Laurence Austine Waddell — Westminster: Archibald Constable and Co., 1899
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): This text reproduces the 1899 first edition as scanned by the Internet Archive (identifier himalayas00waddamongrich). The 1899 publication is in the public domain. The work is complete, including the 'hairy wild men' legends (index p. 223).

========================================================================


1

fm

Hb

%t^if

"V"*;'  l\i

H

»i

||jifi$

jMti-'^^lil

3r  Hi

Kisjfe;

tjl;i>gD<

tUP^

PIxmI!

IfciaaSft

t-'

l^jt-tl*1

Iffisstpsi

-    Mm'  1  1  11
HI1  1  i    1

i

1

1

III  H

II

l.  a/waddell


Mnos.


GIFT  OF
HORACE  W.  CARPENTER


CROSSING   A   TORRENT   BY   A   RICKETY   CANE-BRIDGE.


AMONG   THE

HIMALAYAS

By  Major  L.  A.  WADDELL

L.L.D.,  F.L.S.,  etc.,  Indian  Army  Medical  Corps,
Author   of  "The  Buddhism  of  Tibet"


SINIOLCHU   PEAK

With   numerous  Illustrations  by   A.   D.   McCormick
the  Author  and  others,  and  from  Photographs.


WESTMINSTER

ARCHIBALD    CONSTABLE    &    C  o.

2   Whitehall   Gardens
1899


T  O
MY     WIFE,

THE  BRIGHT   COMPANION   OF   SOME   OF  THE  JOURNEYS

HEREIN   DESCRIBED,    THESE   PAGES    ARE

AFFECTIONATELY  DEDICATED.


425928


PREFACE


The  grandest  part  of  the  grandest  mountains  on  the
globe  has,  strange  to  say,  no  book  devoted  to  it,  except
one  that  was  written  about  half  a  century  ago.  Since  that
time,  however,  these  lofty  regions,  on  the  rugged  borders
of  Tibet,  have  become  much  more  accessible.  Roads  have
penetrated  the  mountain  fastnesses  in  nearly  every  direction
in  the  state  of  Sikhim,  a  Switzerland  of  the  East,  situated
in  the  heart  of  the  Himalayas,  within  sight  of  the  culminating
pinnacle  of  the  world,  Mount  Everest.  The  worst  torrents
have  been  bridged,  and  travellers'  staging-houses  have  been
erected  along  some  of  the  chief  routes,  thus  facilitating  the
exploration  of  these  mighty  mountains,  and  creating  a  desire
for  further  and  more  general  information  in  regard  to  them
and  their  quaint  Tartar  tribes,  than  is  to  be  found  in
Hooker's  Journals.  '

Having  visited  many  of  the  less  frequented  parts,  and
possessing  an  intimate  knowledge  of  the  social  and  political
state  of  most  of  the  primitive  tribes,  I  venture  to  hope  that
some  account  of  my  travels  may  contribute  to  the  supply
of  this  want.  During  the  past  fourteen  years  I  have  traversed
portions  of  this  region  nearly  every  year,  sketching,  shooting,
collecting,  and  especially  exploring  the  customs  of  the  people
on  the  frontiers  of  Tibet,  and  of  Nepal — the  land  of  the
warlike  Goorkhas — where  I  lived  in  tents  for  four  or  five
months  of  several  successive  years.  In  regard  to  the  more
interesting  tribes,  such  as  the  Lepchas,  who  are  fast  dying


\iii  PREFACE

out  or  losing  their  ancient  customs,  I  have  endeavoured
to  rescue  some  of  the  curious  practices  of  these  wild  and
primitive  people;  and  I  have  simplified,  as  far  as  possible,
most  of  the  uncouth  native  names  which,  while  they  add
to  the  mystery  of  these  Tibetan  borderlands,  are  so  repellant
to  the  general  reader.  *

To  render  the  narrative  more  complete,  I  have  added  in
respect  to  some  glaciers  and  peaks,  which  were  not  reached
by  Hooker  or  myself,  a  summary  of  the  descriptions  of
these  by  Sherwill,  Graham,  White,  and  Hoffman,  and  also
some  geological  notes  by  VV.  T.  Blanford,  mostly  from
reports  that  are  buried  away  in  more  or  less  inaccessible
journals.  Mount  Everest  I  approached  somewhat  nearer
than  any  European  except  Hooker;  and  I  here  record
some  new  research  respecting  it  and  other  peaks  alleged
to  be  still  higher.

The  commercial  possibilities  of  Tibet  are  also  referred
to.  This  mysterious  land  has  at  the  present  time  a  very
special  interest  for  us,  in  view  of  the  imminent  disintegration
of  China.  Its  gold-mines,  which  are  probably  the  richest
in  the  world,  should  alone  make  it  of  commercial  importance,
though  most  of  this  riches  lies  in  regions  almost  as  inhospit-
able as  Klondyke.  Much  of  the  country,  however,  is  habit-
able and  has  many  promising  resources  undeveloped.  And
with  an  English  protectorate  over  Tibet,  replacing  the
shadowy  Chinese  suzerainty  over  that  country,  and  the  rich
valley  of  the  Yangtse  up  to  the  border  of  Eastern  Tibet
secured  within  the  English  "sphere  of  interest".  England
would  not  only  prevent  a  possible  Russian  wedge  being
interposed  between  her  Indian,  Burmese  and  Chinese  pos-
sessions, but  she  would  consolidate  her  position  from  the
Indian  Ocean  to  the  Northern  Pacific,  and  gain  thereby
the  paramount  position  throughout  Asia.


PREFACE  IX

The  illustrations  are  specially  numerous,  and  it  is  hoped
that  they  will  bring  vividly  before  the  eyes  of  the  reader
truthful  pictures  of  the  scenery  and  people.  As  most  of  them
are  photographs,  and  these  as  well  as  the  careful  sketches
by  Colonel  Tanner  and  myself  and  others,  done  on  the  spot,
and  the  sympathetic  drawings  by  that  Himalayan  artist,
Mr.  McCormick,  based  on  my  photographs,  have  all  been
reproduced  by  photo-mechanical  processes,  they  are  not
open  to  the  objections  offered  to  the  illustrations  in  Hooker's
Journals,  that  they  "  do  not  convey  by  any  means  a  correct
impression ;  like  most  lithographs  of  foreign  scenes  printed
in  England  the  characteristic  features  are  lost . . ,  everything
is  Europeanised."  3  For  several  of  the  photographs  I  am
indebted  to  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Hoffmann,  and  especially
for  the  splendid  one  on  the  title  page — an  icy  horn  that
lifts  its  glittering  pinnacle  about  7,000  feet  higher  than  Mont
Blanc,  and  surpasses  the  Weisshorn  in  boldness  and  grace.

These  attractive  regions,  still  to  a  large  extent  unexplored,
should  arrest  the  attention  of  travellers  and  climbers  thirst-
ing for  fresh  fields  of  adventure.  Their  valleys  vie  with
the  Andes  of  Brazil  and  Peru  as  the  paradise  of  the
butterfly  and  orchid-hunter.  And,  above  all,  there  is  the
varied  ever-present  human  interest  of  the  many  Tartar
tribes,  with  their  wild  picturesque  characters,  customs,  and
idyllic  surroundings;  and  the  awe  at  once  forbidding  and
alluring  of  the  strange  inhospitable  land  beyond  the
mountains.

The  facilities  for  travel,  in  the  way  of  roads  and  rest-
huts,  are  increasing  every  year  since  the  recent  war  with
Tibet,  detailed  in  these  passages,  which  has  brought  Sikhim
more  closely  under  British  suzerainty.  Thanks  to  the  energy
of  the  British  agent,  Mr.  White,  most  of  the  objection-
able  cane-bridges   that    beset    our   path   have    now  mostly


PREFACE


been  replaced  by  substantial  iron  structures.  The  attractive
valley  of  Choombi,  if  ever  it  shall  become  British  territory,
as  it  might  have  done,  will  surpass  most  parts  of  Cashmere.
And  already,  is  it  not  a  great  deal  to  find  that  the  new
roads  bring  the  glaciers  of  Kanchen-junga,  itself  one  of
the  most  magnificent  mountains  in  the  world  and  almost
the  highest,  within  five  or  six  days  of  Darjeeling,  which  is
under  one  day's  journey  from  Calcutta,  which  is  less  than
three  weeks  from  England.

This  illustrated  narrative  of  my  journeyings  I  hope  may
reflect,  in  some  measure,  the  keen  enjoyment  of  travel  in
these  regions,  may  awaken  further  interest  in  a  fascinat-
ing though  little  known  land,  may  assist  in  guiding  the
traveller  to  those  features  that  are  of  greatest  general
interest,  and  bring  home  to  the  reader  a  whiff  of  the
bracing  breezes  of  the  Himalayas.


L.  A.  WADDELL.


London,  December   1898.


CONTENTS

Page
CHAPTER    I
To  Darjeeling  and  the  Preparations  for  our  Journey.

The  views  and  the  people — Special  difficulties  of  travel  in  the  interior
of  the  Central  Himalayas — Our  arrangements I

CHAPTER    II
The  Start  and  Cross  into  Native  Sikhim.

Troubles  at  starting — Nepalese  fair  and  Feast  of  Lanterns — Tea-Gardens—
Lama-Temple  and  bloody  sacrifices— The  country — Lepchas  in  the
jungle — Great  Rang-eet  Valley — Our  camp    .  61

CHAPTER    III
Up  the  Teesta  Valley  to  the  King's  Capital.

The  Tribes  of  Sikhim — The  Lepchas — A  Native  Chief  and  his  Government —
Legends — Crossing  a  torrent  by  a  rickety  cane-bridge — The  Land-
Leeches  and  a  climb 90

CHAPTER    IV
At  the  Capital  of  Sikhim  to  the  Threshold  of  the  Snows.

The  King  and  Queen — Their  relations  with  the  British — Intrigues  with
the  Chinese — Monks  and  Monasteries — The  Upper  Teesta  to  the
Threshold  of  the  Snows 136

CHAPTER    V

The  Alpine  Lachoong  Valley  to  the  Tibetan  Frontier

and  Passes.

Amongst  the  Yaks  and  Tibetans — Tang-kar  snowfield — Death  of  a  fellow-
traveller — Tibetan  guard  and  their  captain— Dong-kia  and  other  passes
and  glaciers — The  true  Himalayas  or  Abode  of  Snow — An  unexplored
pass,  and  a  survey  beyond  into  Tibet 165

CHAPTER    VI

The  Lachen  Valley  and  Eastern  Glaciers

of  Kanchen-junga.

Political  Missions  to  Tibet — Eastern  Glaciers  of  Kanchen-junga —
Zemu  glacier 230


Xll  CONTENTS


Page


CHAPTER    VII
Through  British  Bhotan  to  Darjeeling.

( Hir  food  from  the  jungle — Snakes — Christian  Missions — Turbulent
Bhotanese,  and  our  annexation  of  their  country — Tibetan  traders —
The    wild   horse — Junction   of  Rang-eet   and   Teesta — Locust  plague.     239

CHAPTER    VIII

To  the  Eastern  Pass  of  the  Jelep,  and  the

Scene  of  the  late  War.

On  the  line  of  an  army  in  the  field — Storming  the  Tibetan  fort  at
Lingtoo — The  Anglo-Chinese  Convention — The  highest  European
fort  in  the  world — Jelep  pass,  the  trade  route  to  Lhasa  and  Pekin —
The  Choombi  valley,  its  political  and  strategical  importance — How
places  are  named — Game  in  the  Bhotanese  Terai — The  Koch  tribe —
Lepcha  songs  and  music — Cinchona  plantations 255

CHAPTER    IX

Along  the  Nepal  Frontier  towards  Everest,  etc.
to  Sandook-phu  and  Faloot.

The  warlike  Goorkhas  and  conquest  of  Nepal — Their  recent  adoption
of  Hindooism — The  other  tribes  of  Nepal — Paradise  of  the  orchid-
hunters — Rhododendron  forests — View  from  Tonglu — Sandook-phu,
"the  hill  of  the  poison-plant"  and  its  scenery — A  Nepalese  frozen  dead
in  the  snow — Faloot  Peak — Mauled  by  Bears — Everest,  its  names  and
form — Peaks  higher  than  Everest 300

CHAPTER    X

The  Southern  Peaks  and  Glaciers  of  the

Kanchen-junga  Group.

Spectre  of  the  Brocken — The  "Singalelah  ridge"  a  misnomer — Ridge
beyond  Chow-banjan — Camping  under  difficulties  —  Yampoong  yak-
station  and  its  Tibetan  herdsmen — Jongri  and  the  Guicha  pass  to
Pandim  and  the  glaciers  of  Kanchen-junga — Kanchen-junga,  its  form
and  structure — Its  worship  by  the  natives — Mr.  Graham's  ascent  of
"Kabru" — Expert  opinion  and  evidence  on  this  claim  to  the  highest  climb.     360

CHAPTER    XI

The  Kang  Pass  for  the  Western  Glaciers

of  Kanchen-junga  and  for  Jannu—

Nepalese  jealous  exclusiveness.

Across  the  unexplored  Dui  and  Chambab  passes  into  Nepal — Divisions
of  Eastern  Nepal — Geology  of  adjoining  part  of  Tibet — Flight  and
capture  of  King  of  Sikhim — Chinese  intrigues  in  Sikhim  and  Tibet —
Western  side  of  Kang-La — Northern  cliff  of  Everest — Nepalese  guards —
Game — Bivouac  in  cave — Return 394


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS

Page

Crussinc.  a  torrent  by  a  Rickety  Cane-bridge  (Frontispiece)  ii

Peak  D2  (Siniolchu)  (Title  page) iii

Initial    letter     showing    relative     sizes     of    Everest,

Mt.  Blanc,  etc i

The  Himalayas  of  Sikhim  rising  above  the  Clouds.     .     .  3

Entering  the  Mountain  Train 5

Fishing  in  the  Terai 7

Outer  Himalayas  in  North  West  Provinces n

Hill  Pedestrians 14

Steaming  up  through  an  Avenue  in  the  Sal  Forest    .  15

Girl  carrving  Child 17

A  Clearing  in  the  Forest 19

Nepalese  Villagers 21

Tibetan  twirling  a  "Praying  Wheel" 25

"Baksheesh"! 26

Snows  from  Senchal 30

Key  to  Snowy  Ranges  seen  from  Senchal 31

Everest  from  Senchal 3$

Curio-Sellers 42

A  Tibetan 43

A  Lepcha 44

Nepalese  Woman  of  Moormi  or  Tamang-Bhotiya  Tribe    .  45

Bhotiya  Women  selling  Eggs 46

Sikhimese  Matron 47

Nepalese  Children 49

Packing  up  the  Baggage 55

The  Start 60

Achoom,  our  chief  Lepcha  Servant 62

Our  "Caravan  of  Coolies" 64

Kintoop,  the  Tibetan  Explorer  "K.  P."  and  head  of  our

Coolies 65


\i\  LIST    'i  I'    I  1   l.  U  s  T  K  A  T  IONS

Page

Buddhist  Temple  at  Dortsook 6S

Nepalese  Swing  at  a  Fair 71

A  Monk  sipping  Murwa  Beer 75

R  wg-eet  River 80

"Their  parasols  grow  by  the  wayside" 86

A  Lepcha 92

Lepcha  Houses 96

A  Lepcha  Woman 99

Sikhimese  Chief  and  Retinue 102

The  Morning's  Bag  at  Gamotang 112

Crossing  Torrents 118

A  Limboo  Beauty 120

Dik-chu  Cane-bridge 131

Temple  Band  at  Phodang  Monastery 137

The  King  and  Queen  of  Sikhim 145

Crossing  Cliffs  on  Bamboo  Ladders 160

Log  Bridge  on  Cantilever  Principle 166

Yaks 169

The  polite  Tibetan  Salutation 172

Cascades  of  the  Lete 177

Himalayan  Larch 181

Downward  View  from  the  Cleft 184

Giant  wild  Rhubarb 185

View  into  Tibet  from  Tang-kar  Pass 189

Trying  to  boil  an  Altitude  Thermometer 191

Grave  and  Cairn  of  our  Fellow-Traveller 195

An  Avalanche  of  Rocks 199

Yoomtang  and  its  Yaks 205

Captain  of  the  Tibetan  Frontier  Guard  on  his  Yak  .     .  207

Kanchen-jow  and  Entrance  to  Seboo  Pass 215

The  God  of  Mt.  Kanchen-junga 217

Peak  D-  (Siniolchu) 234

North  Ridge  of  Kanchen-junga,  showing  Gap     ....  235

Nangna  Pass 237

Bhotanese  Chief  and  Retinue 246

The  Marriage  of  the  Rang-eet  and  Teesta  Rivers     .     .  251

A  Locust  (A.  Succintum) 254

Orchid  and  Moss-covered  Oak  Forest 257


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS  XV

Page

Tibetan  Fortifications  at  Yatoong 267

Tibetan  Soldiers 269

Chinese  Envoy  from  Lhasa,  and  Suite 272

Koch  or  "Cooch"  Tribe 291

A  Goorkha 302

The  Ruler  of  Nepal 305

Kiranti  or  Jimdar  Tribe 306

Mangar  Nepalese 309

A  hill  Musician 314

Through  a  Glade  of  feathery  Bamboos 318

Rhododendron  Trees 319

Sea  of  Clouds  rising  from  the  Plains 321

Poisoned  Arrows 326

Snows  from  Sandook-phu 327

Everest  Group  rising  above  the  Clouds 331

Nepalese  frozen  to  Death  in  the  Snow 335

Key  to  the  Everest  Group 342

Everest  from  Sandook-phu 343

Everest  and  Peak  XIII  from  the  South 353

Everest  and  Peak  XIII  from  Bangura  Trig.  Station   .     .  355

Nepalese  Himalayas  from  Someshwar  Range 357

My  Taxidermists  at  work 362

Peak  XIII  from  Migo 370

Shar-pa  Bhotyas 373

Pandim  from  Tong-shyong-tam 376

Glacier  at  Guicha  Pass 378

Kanchen-junga,  South-East  Face  from  Tong-shyong     .     .  381

Eastern  Glacier  of  Kanchen-junga  from  Tong-shyong     .  383

Worship  of  the  God  of  Kanchen-junga 387

Kanchen-junga  from  the  West 395

Crossing  Oma  Pass  on  a  Yak 397

"The  Enchanted  Lake  of  The  Peacock's  Tail"  ....  403

Anglo-Tibetan  Boundary  Commissioners 411

The  Lay-Governor  of  Lhasa,  and  Suite 414

Profile  of  Kabru  etc.,  from  Semo  Pass 416

Kang-La  from  the  West 417

North-East  Face  of  Everest 420

Bivouac  in  a  Cave 427


xvi  MAPS

MAPS

Page

Map  of  Ranges  and  Peaks  seen  from  Senchal     ....  32

Map  of  the  Environs  of  Everest  and  Eastern  Nepal  349

Sketch  Map  of  Pang  a  Pass  on  Flank  of  Everest    .     .     .  437

Himalayas   of   Sikhim   and  Adjoining   Countries  showing

Author's  Routes 453

APPENDIX.— Notes  to  the  Text .     .  431

INDEX 439


CHAPTER   I

TO   DARJEELING   AND   THE   PREPARATIONS   FOR
OUR  JOURNEY

"  In  a  hundred  ages  of  the  Gods  I  could  not  tell  you  of  all  the
glories  of  the  Himalaya." — Old  Sanskrit  Poem.


HE   long   cherished  dream
of  years   is   about  to  be
realized  !  To-morrow  we  plunge
into   the  wilds  of  the  mightiest
alps  in  the  world  to  explore
their  little-known  regions,
to     camp     among    their
breezy  heights  and  thun-
dering   torrents,    and    to
live    among   their    semi-
savage  Tartar  tribes.

We    are    starting  from
Darjeeling,  on  the  thres-
hold of  the  mountains,  and
famous    for   its  view  of  those
distant    peaks    with    which    we
are    now    going  to  make  closer  acquaintance.     Let  us  then
invite    the    reader    to    accompany    us  to   Darjeeling  to  look


2  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

at  our  preparations  for  the  journey,  to  see  some  of  the
strange  people  who  are  to  be  our  companions,  and  enjoy
the  magnificent  scenery  by  the  way.

The  journey  from  India  to  Darjeeling  can  now-a-days
be  done  comfortably  within  twenty-four  hours  from  Calcutta,
thanks  to  the  railway.  Vividly  do  I  remember  my  first
journey  to  that  mountain  health-resort.

How  refreshing  it  was  to  escape  from  the  vegetative
artificial  existence  and  steamy  heat  of  Calcutta,  and  after
speeding  along  on  the  leaden  wings  of  the  Northern  Bengal
express,  to  emerge  one  April  morning  from  the  train  at
the  comparatively  cool  station  of  Siligoori.  4  We  now  could
see  looming  high  above  the  quivering  haze  that  smothered
the  dusty  plains,  the  soaring  peaks  of  the  cool  "hills,"  as
Anglo-Indians  are  wont  to  call  these  loftiest  summits  of  the
earth.  In  the  distance  they  looked  as  if  they  belonged  to
another  world.  Their  lower  ranges  were  hid  in  the  grey
haze  and  rosy  morning  mist,  above  which  towered  the
purple  spurs  of  the  higher  ranges,  rising  above  the  clouds
in  long  lines,  tier  over  tier,  up  to  the  snows,  which  were
topped  by  the  dazzling  white  peaks  of  the  mighty  Kanchen-
junga,

"  Whose  head  in  wintry  grandeur  towers,
And  whitens  with  eternal  sleet;
While  summer  in  a  vale  of  flowers
Is  sleeping  rosy  at  his  feet."

When  we  had  fortified  ourselves  against  the  anticipated
cold  of  our  sudden  ascent  into  these  high  regions,  by  putting


IN  THE  MOUNTAIN  TRAIN


on  warmer  clothing  and  snatching  a  hasty  breakfast,  we
entered  the  little  toy-like  train  that  was  to  carry  us  up
the  mountains,  and  ensconced  in  arm-chairs  in  one  of  the
open  cars,  we  were  soon  rattling  gaily  across  that  dreaded
belt  of  fever-laden  forest — the  Terai,  which  separates  the
plains  from  the  foot  of  the  hills.
Passing  the  Tibet-Pekin  trade-road
on  our  right,  and  crossing  "The
Bent-going  River"
(Mahaldi,


ENTERING
THE

MOUNTAIN   TRAIN


C&%d"'-


corrupted  by  the  Bengalees  into  "Mahanadi  "),  we  steamed
through  some  deserted  tea-plantations  in  clearings  in  this
deadly  forest.  For  in  this  poisonous  atmosphere  no  la-
bourers can  be  induced  to  settle.  Each  fresh  batch  of
imported  coolies  soon  flees  panic-struck  before  the  "  Black-
Death"  (Kala-azar),  "Black-water  Fever"  and  other  malarial
pestilences  which  lurk  in  every  brake  and  lay  their  avenging


6  AM()N<;  THK  HIMALAYAS

hands  on  every  intruder  who  invades  their  reeking  solitude.
And  they  claim  their  victims  also  from  the  highest.  Here
it  was  that  a  former  English  vice-queen  of  India  caught
fatal  fever  when  halting  to  sketch  by  the  wayside  in  return-
ing from  a  visit  to  Darjeeling.  Amidst  this  desolate  tangle
of  grass-grown  tea-bushes  are  to  be  seen  a  few  ruined  huts
of  the  planters,  perched  on  tall  posts  to  lift  them  some-
what above  the  rank  exhalations,  telling  a  sad  tale  of
British  capital  and  enterprise  sunk  in  an  almost  hopeless
waste.

Nor  is  it  only  man  who  suffers  here.  The  tea-plant
itself  is  attacked  by  more  than  the  ordinary  number  of
blights  and  diseases,  from  which  the  plantations  over-
looking us  a  few  thousand  feet  up  the  mountain-side  are
comparatively  free.

Still  it  is  possible  to  get  acclimatized  even  to  such  an
unhealthy  place  as  this.  The  few  wild  aborigines,  the
Mech  and  Dhimal,  who  live  in  the  depths  of  these  forests,
and  who  will  undertake  no  hired  service,  have  acquired
almost  as  much  immunity  from  the  deadly  fevers  of  these
forests  as  the  tigers  and  other  wild  beasts  who  make  this
their  home.  And  as  we  steam  along  past  clumps  of  up-
standing Sal  trees,  which  look  like  pines  in  the  distance,
you  may  see  in  the  clearings  on  the  banks  of  the  streams
that  deeply  score  the  plain,  some  of  the  black  aborigines  s
fishing  in  the  shallows  with  long  push-nets  of  Chinese
pattern.

Further    on    we    passed    through    a    bit  of  real  "jungle"


THROUCxH  THE  TERM  JUNGLE  9

or  primeval  forest,  with  a  wild  luxuriance  of  vegetation  as
rank  as  any  in  the  heart  of  Brazil.  Its  tangled  thickets
of  sensitive  Mimosa  and  dark  greenery  between  the  tall
tufts  of  giant  grass  twenty  feet  in  height,  are  still  the
haunt  of  the  tiger  and  of  the  herds  of  deer  and  boars  on
which  he  preys,  also  of  wild  elephants,  rhinoceros,  buffalo
and  other  big  game.  And  here,  under  the  figs  and  the
stalwart  cotton-trees  with  their  fiery  crimson  blossoms,
clusters  of  fern  and  clumps  of  moss  carry  the  cool  influence
of  the  snowy  mountains  far  out  into  the  dust  beclouded
plains.

The  ascent  begins  quite  suddenly.  The  Himalayas  here
shoot  up  abruptly  from  the  Indian  plains  like  giant  cliffs
from  the  sea-shore,  so  that  here,  at  their  base,  notwith-
standing we  were  about  300  miles  inland  from  Calcutta,
we  are  yet  scarcely  more  than  300  feet  above  the  sea-level,
though  in  the  next  thirty-five  miles  or  so  of  railway  we
rise  over  7,000  feet,  and  pass  within  a  few  hours  up  through
all  the  gradations  of  climate,  ranging  from  tropical  to
temperate  and  sub-Alpine.  We  can  see  here,  from  this  deep
base,  at  one  glance,  the  striking  differences  in  the  foliage
that  sharply  demarcate  the  different  climatic  zones  as  detailed
by  Hooker,  and  which  give  such  magnificent  and  varied
scenic  effects  as  are  to  be  seen  in  no  other  part  of  the
world.  Not  even  in  this  very  same  range  further  to  the
north,  can  the  like  contrast  be  seen.  For  in  the  north-western
and  Panjab  Himalayas  the  mountains  do  not  rise  so  suddenly.
The    outlying    sandstone  range  of  the  Siwaliks,  famous  for


io  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

their  mammoth  fossils,  intervenes ;  and  owing  to  the  much
less  rainfall  there  and  the  greater  heat  and  drought  of
spring,  and  greater  cold  of  winter,  the  vegetation  is  not
only  very  much  less  luxuriant  and  varied  than  here,  but
many  of  the  lower  slopes  there  are  almost  burned  up  and
bare  of  trees.

This  part  of  the  Himalayas  that  we  are  now  entering  is
called  "  Sikhim  ",  which  seems  to  mean  "  The  Land  of  Moun-
tain Crests".  '"'  It  may  be  viewed  as  a  stupendous  stairway
hewn  out  of  the  western  border  of  the  Tibetan  plateau  by
glaciers  and  great  rivers  and  leading  down  to  the  Indian
plains,  with  a  fall  of  about  17,000  feet  in  a  hundred  miles.
The  face  of  this  vast  incline  is  roughly  cut  up  into  count-
less peaks  and  ridges  of  stupendous  height,  and  valleys  of
corresponding  depth,  adown  which  dash  the  glacial  streams
and  thundering  torrents  of  water  precipitated  by  the  exces-
sive rainfall  of  this  rainiest  section  of  the  Himalayas,  for  it
faces  the  Bay  of  Bengal  and  receives  the  full  force  of  the
heavy  summer  rains  or  "monsoon".  And  the  deep  gorges
of  the  rivers  so  interpenetrate  the  mountains  as  to  carry
a  hot  climate  far  along  their  banks,  till  the  semi-tropic
vegetation  becomes  almost  overhung  by  snowy  peaks,  thus
giving  endless  variety  of  climate  and  scenery,  from  the
torrid  heat  of  the  tropics  up  to  the  bleak  arctic  cold  of
Tibet  and  its  everlasting  snows.  Zoologically,  Sikhim  is
situated  on  the  borderland  between  the  Palaearctic  and
Oriental  regions,  and  at  the  junction  of  the  Chinese,  Ma-
layan   and    Indian    sections    of  the  latter  region.     Thus  its


OUTER   HIMALAYAS    IN    NORTH-WEST    PROVINCES.
(Kumaon,  about  6,000  feet.)


THE  SIKHIM  HIMALAYAS  13

animal  life  is  representative  of  all  these.  The  Palaearctic
animals  of  Tibet  enter  from  the  north  and  the  others
from  the  east  and  south — the  oriental  animals  ascend
no  higher  than  about  8,000  to  10,000  feet;  and  a  few
Ethiopian  animals  also  have  wandered  from  Africa  thus  far
eastwards.

It  is  peculiarly  isolated  from  the  Himalayas  on  either
side,  shut  in  as  it  is,  by  two  great  wall-like  ridges  that
run  out  into  the  plains,  the  so-called  "Singalela"  and  Chola
ranges.

We  now  ascend  a  low  gravelly  spur  of  the  former  or
western  ridge,  at  Sookna,  or  "The  Dry  Site,"  proceeding  at
the  exhilarating  rate  of  nine  or  ten  miles  an  hour;  for  this
miniature  railway,  quite  a  curiosity  of  engineering,  runs  with
its  two-feet  gauge,  for  the  most  part  along  the  carriage-
road  that  winds  by  long  zig-zags  up  the  mountain.  The
powerful  little  engine,  weighing  only  from  ten  to  fifteen
tons,  drags  the  train  of  ten  to  fifteen  laden  carriages
up  the  gradient  of  about  1  in  28  at  that  rapid  rate;
but  as  the  cars  are  mostly  open  trollies  and  there  is  no
plunging  into  tunnels,  this  journey  is  made  more  like
a  drive  in  an  open  carriage,  and  you  see  the  scenery  to
advantage.

As  we  advance  up  this  gravelly  spur,  which  is  clothed
with  a  forest  of  stately  Sal  trees,  our  narrow  path  seems
like  an  avenue  festooned  with  ferns,  pepper-vines  and  ropes
of  many-hued  climbers,  through  whose  thick  foliage  the
sunbeams  filter  in  broken  flecks  of  dancing  light.     One  of


i4  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

the  ferns  that  encircle  these  tall  trunks,  crowns  them  with
massive  coronets  of  stiff  feathery  fronds  that  stand  up  like
the  head-dress  of  a  red  Indian  chief,  and  many  of  the
trees  have  six  to  ten  of  these  coronets,  one  over  the  other.
Emerging  from  this  forest  at  a  red  clayey  ridge  about
one  thousand  feet  above  the  sea,  we  rose  through  the  haze,
and  then  the  hills  passed  from  grey  indefiniteness  into
bright  masses  of  form  and  colour.  The  twisting  train
curved  in  and  out  of  shaggy  ravines,  carrying  us  through
a  swift  succession  of  ever-changing  scenery.  We  catch
glimpses  now  of  the  blue  hills  and  curling  clouds  above
us,  and  now  of  the  rich  green  masses  of  the  woods  and
gorges  through  which  we  were  passing,  or  again  of  the  fast
dwindling  dusty  plains  below,  which  stretched  out  to  the
far  off  horizon   like  a  great  dark  restful  sea.     And   we  get


HILL   PEDESTRIANS.


picturesque  peeps   at  groups  of  the  bright-eyed  little  Mon-


STEAMING  UP   THROUGH   AN   AVENUE  IN   THE   SAL    FOREST.


THK  MOUNTAIN  FOLK


i7


goloid    people    of  these    hills,    sturdily    trudging    along  the
winding    forest    path,    some    of  the    women    carrying  their


GIRL   CARRYING   A   CHILD.


children  in  a  basket  slung  over  their  back,  and  the  men
with  their  loads  in  baskets  similarly  strapped  over  their
foreheads ;    and    all    occasionally   waking    the    echoes    with


i8  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

snatches  of  some  high-pitched  Tartar  melody.    The  refrain
of  one  of  these  songs  runs :


Travelling  with  a  pretty  maid

The  road  seems  very  short  and  charming,

And  so  seems  life  with  a  lovely  wife.


The  landscape  has  hitherto  presented  the  appearance  of
the  truly  tropical  evergreen  forest  with  its  rank  growth
of  gingers,  calladium  and  other  broad-leaved  herbs  and
shrubs,  its  wild  confusion  of  fallen  trunks  and  decompos-
ing leaves,  matted  with  thorny  twiners  and  bamboo
thicket,  through  which  the  tall  trees  struggle  in  the
choking  embrace  of  giant  creepers ;  while  others  shoot
aloft  like  tall  masts,  tied  down  by  countless  climbers
which  creep  along  the  ground,  cling  to  every  trunk  and
fling  themselves  from  tree  to  tree,  making  the  jungle  quite
impenetrable.

Now,  however,  the  forest  began  rapidly  to  change  its
character.  The  undergrowth,  which  was  almost  a  forest  in
itself,  thinned  perceptibly,  and  the  landscape  got  more
smiling.  Birds  and  gaudy  butterflies  and  other  insect-life
became  more  numerous  amongst  the  many-hued  wild  weeds,
including  velvety  Begonias,  tall  Cannas,  and  others  which
are  prized  hot-house  plants  at  home.  A  startled  deer  or
monkey  might  be  seen  where  the  wild  plantains  waved
their  broad  shiny  plumes  against  the  warm  slopes  and  the
Sikhim  screw-pine  bore  itself  aloft  like  a  giant  mop.  A  few
lar<{e-leaved  oaks  and  chestnuts  also  showed  themselves  as


CLEARINGS  ON  THE  MOUNTAIN  SIDE


19


stragglers  from  the  temperate  zone  above.  The  greatest
straggler  of  all,  however,  was  a  lowly  little  weed,  like  a
blue-flowered  groundsel  (Ageratum  conyzoides).  It  had
travelled  all  the  way  from  Mexico,  and  seems  only  recently
to  have  been  introduced  here,  probably  as  accidental  tares


WW&'^^W^

'  •^tWB*  •,'V  '^pH

4,

55       :.,<

t<

it

J

Hpb     ''

'."4,

^IHHHb^^

K

'3bfe^

^^

^EK^BB**£B353^^tiBk

^H*^  **

'1  ;

"f^C-*         *}    -       M   |„

UE'<^MRVa ^*t.     vbkji

Bik/'Sfi^S, "

;iL;*;'<*

.c  "    "^S»m               "^

•

;

.'-.

^tefcSW.

1

1

^

&

Ej.L.

A    CLEARING    IN   THE   FOREST.

amongst  the  American  Indian  corn  which  is  extensively  grown
higher  up.  But  it  is  rapidly  overrunning  the  hill  sides,
springing  up  everywhere  and  fast  displacing  the  native
weeds  on  all  the  fresh  landslips  and  clearings;  even  the
hardy  worm-wood  is  disappearing  before  it.

Steep  paths  struck  down  the  hill  side  to  clearings  in  the
forest;    and    here    and    there    in  these   clearings  amidst  the


20  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

fragrant  white  blossoms  of  the  orange  trees  and  the  pink
of  the  peaches,  and  the  bright  yellow  patches  of  mustard
beside  the  fresh  green  of  the  maize,  we  passed  several  huts
of  the  hardy  highlanders.  Wretched  hovels  they  are,  meaner
even  than  the  poorest  Irish  shanties,  but  the  cheery  inmates
with  flowers  in  their  hair  and  the  bright  splashes  of  colour
in  the  dress  of  the  women  and  children  make  a  pleasing
picture  in  spite  of  the  squalor  of  their  dwellings.

Our  thirsty  little  engine,  toiling  up  the  mountain,  stopped
frequently  in  the  ravines  for  water,  and  thus  enabled  us  to
get  out,  as  from  a  coach  when  changing  horses,  for  some
minutes  now  and  then,  to  pick  a  few  wild  flowers,  or
"  gold  "  and  "  silver"  ferns,  where  cascades  tumble  down  cliffs
of  gneiss  with  mica-schist  glistening  in  the  sun.  And  we
got  time  to  glance  at  our  fellow-passengers.

The  fresh  faces  and  robust  figures  of  the  planters  who
have  joined  us  by  the  way  attest  the  healthiness  of  their
exile  in  these  hills,  and  contrast  strikingly  with  the  pale
pinched  faces  of  the  tired  workers  whose  lot  is  cast  in  the
plains,  and  who  are  now  hurrying  to  the  cool  hills  to  restore
their  lost  strength.  There  are  a  few  soldiers  proceeding  to
their  batteries  or  detachments  in  the  mountains,  British  and
Indian ;  the  latter  including  some  Afghans  or  Pathans  and
Sikhs  (pronounced  somewhat  like  "Seeks"),  but  whom  the
British  soldier  (Tommy  Atkins)  perversely  calls  "Pythons"
and  "  Sykes  1 "  Then  there  are  several  of  the  perky  hill
peasantry,  the  women  loaded  with  jewelry  and  the  men
carrying    ugly    knives    stuck    in  their  girdles.     There  are  a


OUR  FELLOW-PASSENGERS  21

few  boisterous  young  Bengalees  venturing  to  visit  these
mountains  under  the  pax  Britannica.  They  are  clad  un-
romantically  in  European  ulsters  and  patent-leather  shoes,
and  their  warlike  eyes  flash  under  their  aniline-dyed  turbans
as  they  clutch  a  Birmingham  umbrella  in  their  "  National "
grasp.  And  there  are  a  few  belated  stragglers  from  the
flock   of  cold-weather  tourists,   or  "globe-trotters"  as  they


NEPALESE    VILLAGERS.


are  irreverently  called,  on  their  way  to  Darjeeling  to  try
to  get  a  peep  at  Everest,  the  highest  point  in  the  world ;
and  they  are  now  seeing  these  mountains  to  greater  advantage
than  their  fellows  who  flock  here  in  the  dry  dusty  winter
months,  when  the  lower  atmosphere  is  laden  with  dust  haze.


22  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

The  chance  reference  by  one  of  them  to  a  mutual  friend  at
home  makes  us  realize  how  small  the  world  is  after  all.

The  geological  formation  of  the  rocks  was  also  noticeable.
About  2,000  feet  up,  we  passed  in  the  cuttings  at  Choona-
buti  (or  "  The  Kime-kiln  "),  strata  of  lime-stone,  russet  veins
of  iron  ore,  and  shaly  outcrops  of  coal,  dipping  down  at
the  most  acute  angles.  But  these  seams  of  coal  were  so
contorted  by  the  enormous  crushing  force  which  threw  up
the  Himalayas  that  they  are  not  profitable  for  mining.
Further  on  we  passed  through  shiny  layers  of  mica-schist
up  into  stratified  gneiss,  which  was  often  crumpled  into
wavy  folds  and  ripple-like  markings.  Much  of  the  soil  of
this  part  of  the  outer  Himalayas,  and  that  which  is  most
preferred  for  tea-growing,  is  a  stiff  reddish  clay  of  the  kind
called  "  laterite."

Still  higher  up,  on  rounding  the  shoulder  of  a  spur,  we
got  a  whiff  of  the  deliciously  fresh  breeze  from  the  cooler
region  above ;  and  we  commanded  bird's-eye  views  of  the
lower  hills  and  plains,  such  as  are  got  from  balloons.  Far
below  us  we  saw  the  circling  kites  and  eagles;  and  the
rivers  from  the  ravines  that  we  have  crossed  threaded  their
way  like  streaks  of  silver  across  the  plains  that  stretched
out  as  in  a  map.  Our  train  then  boldly  skirted  the  top  of
precipitous  valleys,  alarmingly  near  the  edge  at  times.  To
circumvent  these  precipices  and  the  dangerous  water-courses
which  threatened  disaster,  demands  many  an  ingenious
engineering  device  of  spirals,  reversing  stations  and  deep
masonry  embankments.  One  of  the  most  dangerous  of  these


TIBETAN  PORTERS  23

torrents  is  the  Pagla  Jhora,  or  "The  Mad  Stream,"  so  called
from  its  being  subject  in  its  freshets  to  fits  of  fury,  during
which  it  swells  up  suddenly  into  a  raging  torrent  that  tears
madly  down  the  hill  side  and  hurls  great  rocks  headlong
down  the  valley.  In  such  places  the  roadway  has  to  be
supported  by  deep  buttresses  built  up  from  over  a  hundred
feet  below.

The  clearings  get  larger  and  more  numerous.  The  less
steep  slopes  are  shorn  of  their  forests  for  tea-cultivation,
which  with  its  trim  cabbage-like  rows  of  tea  bushes  does
not  enhance  the  beauty  of  the  landscape.  The  white  villas
of  the  hospitable  planters  dot  the  mountain  sides,  and  vil-
lages become  more  frequent.  At  one  of  the  largest  and
busiest  of  these  marts,  Kurseong,  about  5,000  feet  above
the  sea-level,  where  we  stopped  for  a  few  minutes,  we
notice  some  Tibetans,  conspicuous  amongst  the  many  divers
races  which  thronged  the  street.  They  are  lounging  about,
or  acting  as  porters :  big,  grimy,  deep-chested  men  and
women,  with  unkempt  pigtails,  and  clad  uncouthly  in  greasy
sheep-skins  or  blankets,  and  decked  with  massive  turquoise
trinkets.

Now  we  are  in  a  fresh  temperate  climate.  The  vege-
tation has  completely  changed,  and  we  recognise  the
bramble  and  raspberry — of  which  there  are  fourteen  kinds
here,  the  strawberry,  maple,  chestnut,  cherry,  willow,  sorrel,
stag-moss,  and  many  other  common  trees,  shrubs  and  weeds
of  temperate  Europe.  The  undergrowth  has  got  more  open
and   grassy;   and  almost  the  only  feature  of  the  landscape


24  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

which  suggests  the  tropics  is  the  feathery  frond  of  the  tall
tree-ferns,  which  lift  their  graceful  heads  like  stately  palms.

Further  up,  towards  Sonada,  or  "  The  Bears'  Den ",  sug-
gestive of  the  bruins  which  frequent  this  neighbourhood,
we  passed  above  the  clouds,  which  were  seen  hugging  the
mountain  side  far  beneath  us.  And  the  prevailing  dampness
showed  itself  in  the  moist  dripping  forest  and  frequent  moss-
covered  grottoes.  In  this  chilly  shade,  the  colours  grow
more  sombre,  the  foliage  loses  its  warm  olive  tints  and  gets
a  greenish  blue.  Magnificent  parasitic  orchids  cling  to  the
moist  moss  which  thickly  clothes  the  dripping  bark  of  the
tall  oaks,  ilex  and  magnolias,  and  long  tufts  of  stringy
lichens  hang  from  the  branches  in  fantastic  shapes,  and
stream  in  the  wind  like  hoary  beards.

In  this  rapid  ascent  of  over  6,000  feet  in  a  few  hours
I  had  been  watching  the  quick  revolution  of  the  index  of
my  aneroid.  Now  I  experienced  one  of  the  effects  of  this
rapid  ascent  by  a  slight  explosion  in  the  ear,  followed  by
the  instant  relief  of  a  feeling  of  tension  in  the  temples.
This  is  one  of  the  ways  in  which  Nature  adjusts  our  phy-
siology to  the  diminished  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  at
such  elevations.  The  air  in  the  inner  chamber  of  the  ear
behind  the  "drum"  expands  with  the  diminished  atmospheric
pressure,  and  so  causes  a  feeling  of  tension,  but  the  excess  in
this  volume  of  air  is  ultimately  expelled  through  that  passage
into  the  throat,  called  by  anatomists  the  Eustachian  tube,
and  then  equilibrium  is  restored.

Still    ascending,    ere  we  gain  the  elevation  of  7,470  feet


PRAYING-WHEELS


25


at  Ghoom,  on  the  bare  bleak  ridge  of  Jala-pahar,  or  "The
Burned  Hill",  which  a  forest  fire  has  shorn  of  its  timber,
the  chill  air  has  compelled  us  to  don  our  thickest  ulsters  and
wraps.  It  is  indeed  delicious  to  feel  really  cold  again  1  This
village  of  Ghoom  is  the  first  large  outpost  of  the  Tibetans,


TIBETAN   TWIRLING   A    PRAYING-WHEEL.

or  "Bhootiyas"  as  they  are  here  called.  Here  we  see  them
shod  in  snow-shoes,  busily  plying  their  prayer-wheels  and
counting  their  beads  and  mumbling  their  mystic  legend —
"Om  manee pad-me  Hoong",  "  Hail  to  the  Jewel  in  the  Lotus-
flower" — the  mere  utterance  of  which  sentence  gains  them
sure    entrance  into  heaven.   Their  huts,  most  of  which  are


26


AMONC,    II  IK  HIMALAYAS


built  of  empty  Kerosine-oil  boxes  and  tins,  are  gay  with  many-
coloured  bunting,  streaming  from  poles  topped  by  yaks'  tails
and  bearing  various  symbolic  devices  to  ward  off  devils.  And
from  tall  bamboos  inscribed  prayer-flags  flutter  in  the  breeze,
wafting    their  petitions  to  the  countless  demons  who  infest


"baksheesh!"
the    air    and    springs    and    hillsides    in    the    neighbourhood.
Among  the  many  beggars  here  who  clamour  for  baksheesh,
is   one   very  ancient  wrinkled  dame  commonly  called  "the


ARRIVAL  AT  DARJRELING  27

old  witch  of  Ghoom".  She  is  dirtier  even  than  most  of
her  fellows,  and  her  coat,  worn  into  tatters  and  a  greasy
polish,  seems  more  ancient  than  herself.  Few  Tibetans  are
conspicuous  for  personal  cleanliness,  most  of  them  wear
constantly  the  same  suit  day  and  night  for  months  without
changing,  and  often  till  it  is  a  thing  of  shreds  and  patches.
Needless  to  say  a  Tibetan  garment  is  always  a  zoological
preserve ;  and  both  here  and  along  the  road  it  is  no  un-
common sight  to  see,  as  in  India,  both  men  and  women
seated  on  the  ground  reciprocating  kind  and  necessary
attentions  to  each  other's  hair.

Leaving  Ghoom  we  glide  down  the  grassy  northern  slopes
of  this  ridge,  which  now  shuts  out  the  view  of  the  Indian
plains,  and  after  about  four  miles  of  curving  road,  each
bend  of  which  reveals  enchanting  views,  we  sweep  round
a  corner,  and  with  a  cheery  whistle  our  plucky  little  engine
runs  home  and  lands  us  in  the  station  of  Darjeeling.

When  we  have  rescued  our  luggage  from  the  group  of
eager  porters,  men,  women  and  children,  who  vigorously
fight  over  it,  we  are  free  to  look  about  us  and  see  that
Darjeeling  stands,  not  in  a  valley  like  ordinary  Alpine
towns,  but  perched  high  on  the  summit  and  shoulders  of
a  spur  which  runs  out  into  a  great  gulf  of  valleys  of  stu-
pendous depth,  beyond  which  rises  a  vast  amphitheatre  of  dark
shaggy  mountains,  rising  range  over  range  up  to  the  snows.
The  snowy  peaks  which  were  visible  in  the  morning  are
not  now  to  be  seen,  so  late  in  the  afternoon.  They  are
hidden    by   a    great  bank  of  cloud,  below  which,  however,


28  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

the  snow  showed  itself  in  silvery  streaks,  fingering  away
down  the  higher  gorges  in  delicate  traceries.

But  the  first  thing  that  strikes  the  traveller,  on  his  arrival
from  the  plains,  is  the  surprising  and  complete  change  in
climate,  and  in  the  country  and  its  inhabitants.  And  how
sudden  it  all  has  been!  We  have  shot  up  directly  from
the  burning  plains  of  India  into  a  European  climate  in  about
four  hours;  and  into  a  country  which  is  not  physically  a
part  of  India  at  all,  but  a  Tartar  land,  judging  from  the
oblique  Mongoloid  eyes  of  the  people,  their  pig-tails,  Chi-
nese hats  and  dress,  and  strange  non-Indian  speech,  and
the  freedom  of  the  women  whose  bright  and  happy
faces,  hidden  by  no  jealous  veil,  recall  in  many  ways  the
Japanese,  though  lacking  the  culture  and  refinement  of  the
latter.  It  is  refreshing  too  to  see  the  manly  independent
bearing  of  these  boisterous  good-humoured  mountaineers
after  the  mercenary  obsequiousness  of  the  fawning  plains-
people.  Indians  also  are  here,  as  servants  and  followers
of  their  European  masters,  but  their  lanky  legs  and  flabby
shivering  figures  are  strangely  out  of  keeping  with  their
surroundings.

It  is  also  pleasant  to  be  once  more  in  the  midst  of  a
real  spring,  to  breath  its  freshness,  and  feast  the  eye,
fatigued  by  the  monotonous  evergreen  of  the  Indian  plains,
on  its  budding  blossoms.  For  the  gradations  of  seasons
that  mark  the  opening  and  course  of  the  natural  year  in
temperate  Europe  are  almost  entirely  absent  in  India ;  and
this   contrast   increases  the  delight  of  the  traveller  to  Dar-


SUNRISE  OVER  SNOWS  FROM  SKNCHAL  29

jeeling,  when  he  meets  again  the  glad  season  which  "hangs
her  infant-blossoms  on  the  trees",  and  hears  the  cuckoo's
plaintive  note  that  recalls  sweet  memories  of  home.

Such  were  my  impressions  whilst  following  my  sturdy
Tibetan  porters  up  a  steep  path  to  one  of  the  villa-like
houses  perched  on  the  hillside,  where  I  found  awaiting  me
a  cozy  room  with  its  blazing  fire,  a  comfort  to  which  I
had  long  been   stranger.

To  see  the  famous  sunrise  on  the  snows,  I  was  up  next
morning  long  before  daybreak,  and  rode  up  to  Senchal,  a
peak  about  1,500  feet,  higher  than  Darjeeling,  and  com-
manding a  finer  view,  weather  permitting.  And  I  was  soon
rewarded  with  a  sight  of  the  grandest  snowy  landscape  in  the
world.  Far  away  in  the  yet  dusky  sky,  and  at  an  amazing
height,  a  rosy  peak  flashed  forth  for  an  instant  and  vanished
into  the  darkness.  This  was  the  summit  of  Kanchen-junga.
It  reappeared  almost  immediately,  and  brighter  than  before,
in  the  rising  glow  of  dawn,  which,  reflected  from  peak  to
peak,  streamed  down  the  lower  pinnacles,  bathing  them  in
a  soft  rosy  light  that  faded  quickly  away  into  cold  bluish
grey,  and  left  the  snowy  ranges  a  sea  of  dull  sapphire
peaks.  Then,  as  the  sun  shot  up  with  its  first  long  low
beams  glinting  on  the  highest  and  then  in  quick  succession
on  the  lower  peaks,  these  dim  blue  crests  and  crags  leaped
forward  tipped  with  ruddy  gold  and  splashed  with  fire,  which,
as  the  sun  rose  higher  and  higher,  melted  away  in  the  dis-
tance into  amber  and  frosted  silver  against  a  turquoise
sky.   In  the   full  flood  of  sunlight  these  snows  lost  most  of


3°


AMONG  THK  HIMALAYAS


their    broad    details    of  light  and  shade,  and  presented   an
almost    uniform    chalky   whiteness  through  the  pearly  haze.


SNOWS    FROM    SENCHAL.


Not  a  cloud  obscured  the  view.  Snowy  mountains  stretched
round    almost    half  the    horizon,  culminating  in  the    mighty


o

<ii

V-

o

o
o

vO

N

C)

m

in

a>

in
in

M_

OC

ro

m

6

ed

^

>

fi

O

s

o

O

M

O

ea

(3
0)

cj

aJ

a

x

3

^

o

<j

hn

hn

o

c

C

a

XI

n

a!

o

o

U

Q

M

Q

Q

r*5

-t

in

\o

r^

H

>>

ro
■*

'—

aS

ri

'—

N

c/f

W
O

(«

d

o
g

t/T

o
q.

o
S

x
o

hn

in

CO-

M

ho

c

3
U

o

P<

<u

rt

s

c
o

s

Ph

7.

O
7,

O

C

aj

O

Q

C/}

O

t^

CO

O

o

M

N

1-1

1-1

M

>

w

t*s

'be

a


w

^

r\

oo

n

0

O

1^

■—

m

g

M

in

bC

C

bC

O

3

Ih

c

tS-

C
X

X

o

bu

a

Eh

c

be

c

ed

aj

a

X    UJ    ^


►-•        M       ro      Tf      in     vO


SNOWY  RANGES  FROM  SENCHAL  33

mass  of  Kanchen-junga  (or  "  Kinchinjinga  ")  with  its  13,000
feet  of  everlasting  snow,  and  Everest  in  the  background.  From
this  latter  peak,  rising  on  our  left  over  the  dark  shoulder  of
Sandook-phu,  the  crowded  range  of  snowy  pyramids  extends
almost  continuously  eastwards  to  Jannoo  and  Kabroo  (25,000
and  24,015  ft.  respectively)  on  the  flanks  of  Kanchen-junga
(28,150  ft.),  and  thence  far  away  to  the  silvery  cone  of  the

Mount  Everest  j%  U8U

29002  ft


EVEREST    FROM    SENCHAL.

Tibetan  Choomo-lha-ri  (23,940  ft),  and  sinks  in  the  eastern
snows  of  Rhotan,  on  the  extreme  right.  It  was  sublime  1 —

"Northwards  soared
The  stainless  ramps  of  huge  Himala's  wall
Ranged  in  white  ranks  against  the  blue — untrod,
Infinite,  wonderful— whose  uplands  vast,
And  lifted  universe  of  crest  and  crag,
Shoulder  and  shelf,  green  slope  and  icy  horn,
Riven  ravine,  and  splintered  precipice
Led  climbing  thought  higher  and  higher,  until
It  seemed  to  stand  in  heaven  and  speak  with  God.
Beneath  the  snows,  dark  forests  spread,  sharp  laced
With  leaping  cataracts  and  veiled  with  clouds :
Lower  grew  rose-oaks  and  the  great  fir  groves
Where  echoed  pheasants'  call  and  panthers'  cry,
Clatter  of  wild  sheep  on  the  stones  and  scream
Of  circling  eagles:  under  these,  the  plain
Gleamed  like  a  praying-carpet  at  the  foot
Of  these  divinest  altars."  7


34  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

The  vastness  of  this  view,  vast  beyond  that  of  any  other
spot  of  earth  perhaps,  is  almost  oppressive.  In  every  direc-
tion the  eye  as  it  sweeps  the  horizon  traverses  some  hun-
dreds of  miles  of  the  earth's  surface ;  and  from  the  deep
gulf  of  the  silvery  Rang-eet  river,  flowing  7,000  feet
beneath  our  feet,  great  masses  of  dark  forest-clad  mountains
rise,  tier  over  tier,  carrying  the  eye  up  to  the  majestic
snows  with  the  graceful  Kanchen-junga  towering  up  27,000
feet  above  the  river  in  the  foreground.  Thus,  at  one  glance,
we  see  an  elevation  of  the  earth's  surface  of  considerably
over  five  miles  in  vertical  height.  As  if  we  were  to  imagine
Mont  Blanc  rearing  its  full  height  abruptly  from  the  sea-
shore, bearing  on  its  summit  Ben  Nevis,  the  highest
mountain  in  Great  Britain,  and  above  all  that,  two  Snow-
dons,  one  on  the  top  of  the  other,  and  were  able  with  one
glance  to  take  in  all  these  four  superposed  mountains.

The  surpassing  height  of  these  Himalayas  may  be  real-
ized by  comparison  with  the  peaks  of  the  Alps  of  Europe.
None  of  the  latter  peaks  exceed  15,784  feet,  and  only  six
or  seven  are  above  14,000  feet.  While  the  Himalayas  have
several  peaks  over  28,000  feet,  and  more  than  1,100  which
have  been  measured  exceed  20,000  feet.

So  enormous,  indeed,  is  this  great  projecting  mass  of
the  Himalayas  that  physicists  have  shown,  not  only  that
it  draws  the  plumb-line  considerably  towards  it,  but  that
it  so  attracts  the  sea  as  to  pull  the  latter  several  hundred
feet  up  its  sides.  8  Yet  this  fact  is  so  little  generally
known  that  most  sea-captains  would  stare  were  you  to  tell


SCENERY  FROM  SENCHAL  35

them  that  in  coming  from  Ceylon  to  Calcutta  they  had
been  actually  sailing  up-hill  1  Nothing  perhaps  gives  a  better
idea  of  the  enormous  size  of  the  Himalayas  than  this,  that
they  pull  the  very  sea  so  far  up  their  sides.

In  this  unique  view  of  snowy  mountain  scenery  from
Senchal,  it  takes  time  and  reflec'ion  to  adequately  conceive
the  dimensions  of  the  panorama  extended  before  one.  The
height  from  which  they  are  viewed  together  with  the
peculiar  atmospheric  conditions  modifying  the  perspective,
tend  to  dwarf  their  actual  extent,  both  in  horizontal  and
vertical  directions.  It  is  difficult  for  instance,  to  realise  that
the  summit  of  Kanchen-junga  is  nearly  forty  miles  distant
as  the  crow  flies,  from  the  Rang-eet  river  in  our  foreground.
But  the  longer  we  look  the  more  the  true  proportions  of
the  scene  grow  upon  us,  till  we  begin  to  gain  some  sense
of  its  stupendousness,  and  then  it  holds  us  spell-bound.

Such  a  view,  and  to  get  it  you  must  be  favoured  with
a  clear  day,  spoils  you  in  a  measure  for  vastness  in  scenery
ever  after.  Its  only  defect  is  the  want  of  variety  and
boldness  in  the  great  swelling  mountains  in  the  foreground
and  middle  distance,  owing  to  the  relative  absence  of  cliffs
in  the  outer  ranges.  For  very  bold  and  rugged  scenery
we  require  to  go  further  in  amongst  the  mountains,  nearer
to  the  snows.

I  was  much  amused  at  my  Indian  servant's  estimate  of
this  grand  scenery.  It  was  his  first  visit  to  the  mountains,
and  I  had  taken  him  with  me  to  carry  my  field-glasses  and
camera.     While  I  was  sitting  on  the  summit,  enjoying  the


36  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

view,  feasting  my  eyes  on  the  elegant  outline  of  the  higher
ranges,  of  which  the  detailed  formation  can  be  distinctly
made  out  through  a  telescope,  and  drinking  in  the  delicious
mountain  air,  and  watching  the  clouds  creeping  up  the
mountain  side,  and  the  swift  kaleidoscopic  change  in  colours
and  light  and  shade  from  the  clouds  which  were  drifting
lightly  over  head,  I  asked  him  what  he  thought  of  it  all.
He  replied  with  much  feeling  and  tears  in  his  eyes  as  he
gazed  again  at  the  view:  "It  is  a  horrid  country  1  It  is  so
covered  with  forest  and  so  steep  and  stony  that  few  or  no
crops  can  grow,  rice  cannot  grow  at  all,  and  every  eatable,
even  milk,  is  so  dear  that  it  can  scarcely  be  bought.  And
the  people  look  like  devils  and  will  certainly  kill  us  when-
ever they  get  a  chance.  I  beseech  your  honour  to  take
me  back  to  India  soon!"  His  ideal  of  a  lovely  country,
poor  fellow,  was  a  fever-breeding  rice-swamp  in  Bengal.  On
the  other  hand,  the  sprightly  highland  lad  who  had  come
to  look  after  my  pony,  took  unfeigned  pleasure  in  pointing
out  to  me  some  of  the  natural  beauties  of  his  country.  And
the  natives  of  the  hills  often  show  great  taste  in  planting
their  temples  and  headmen's  houses  in  the  most  picturesque
positions  possible.

Turning  from  the  natural  beauties  of  form  and  colour
in  this  vast  landscape,  to  the  rocky  materials  out  of  which
this  landscape  has  been  evolved,  we  find  in  these  mountains
an  object-lesson  in  land-sculpture.  Spread  out  before  us,  as
in  a  map,  we  see  how  the  valleys  have  been  carved  out
of  "the  everlasting  hills"  by  the  eroding  forces  of  rain  and


EARTH-SCULPTURE  SEEN  FROM  SENCHAL  37

wind,  ice  and  frost,  and  how  the  resulting  configuration  of
the  peaks  is  determined  by  the  particular  kind  of  rock  of
which  the  mountains  are  composed.  Thus  the  straight
angular  outlines  and  crystalline  form  of  the  highest  snowy
peaks  are  due  to  the  intensely  hard  crystalline  rocks,  quartz
and  granite  and  massive  gneiss  which  form  the  axis  of  the
Himalayas,  and  which  have  resisted  so  well  the  disinte-
grating forces.  The  irregularly  jagged  and  bold  contour  of
the  lower  peaks  is  owing  to  the  unequal  hardness  of  their
constituent  gneiss  and  granite  rocks,  which  have  weathered
unequally.  And  the  rounded  broadly  sweeping  outlines  of
the  lower  hills  are  due  to  the  thick  coating  of  silt  and
debris  and  the  relative  absence  there  of  denuded  rocks,
and  the  crumbling  character  of  the  soft  shales  and  schists.
The  whole  surface,  too,  of  these  outer  mountains  of  our
foreground  and  middle  distance,  so  deeply  carved  and  fur-
rowed by  the  water-channels,  exhibits,  in  the  most  impres-
sive way  possible,  the  powerful  influence  of  denudation  in
the  formation  of  the  valleys.

Here,  too,  we  see  how  the  running  water  of  the  countless
upland  rills  scoop  out  from  their  parent  hills  their  threadlike
tracks,  and  gathering  strength  and  volume  by  the  accession
of  numerous  tributaries  issuing  from  dark  ravines,  grow  into
impetuous  torrents  that  cut  deeper  and  deeper  down  into
the  mountain  sides,  and  at  length  collect  into  a  great  river
which  strews  the  plains  with  the  ruins  of  the  hills.  Thus
we  see  the  drainage-lines  take  the  form  of  a  mighty
many-branched    tree.      This    tree-like     ramification    of    the


38  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

water-channels,  as  seen  from  here,  has  impressed  itself  on
the  aboriginal  name  for  the  spur  of  Darjeeling,  in  our
foreground.  The  Lepcha  name  for  this  spur  is  "  The  Fallen-
Tree  Hill "  [Kung-gol-l '<?).  The  tortuous  spurs,  running  down
from  the  steep  foreshortened  ridge  of  Jalapahar,  represent
the  torn- up  roots  of  the  prostrate  tree;  the  trunk  is  the
ridge  extending  to  Darjeeling;  and  the  two  main  branches
are  the  spurs  of  Birch  Hill  and  Lebong,  from  which  extend
the  innumerable  ramifications  of  smaller  spurs  that  form
the  branchlets.

And  turning  from  the  natural  aspects  of  the  landscape
to  the  artificial,  we  find  how  Man  himself  has  helped  to
transform  this  scenery,  and  how  sudden  has  been  this
change !  It  is  not  easy  to  believe  that  all  these  cultivated
clearings  on  the  hill  sides  in  the  outer  ranges,  with  their
thriving  settlements,  busy  marts  and  villages  through  which
we  have  passed,  their  hundreds  of  square  miles  of  tea-
gardens,  the  white  villas  with  their  comfortable-looking
curling  smoke,  the  net-work  of  roads  all  over  the  mountains,
and  the  din  and  stir  of  life,  have  all  sprung  up  within  the
past  sixty  years.

Yet  so  it  is.  In  1835  when  the  Darjeeling  hills  were
ceded  by  the  Sikhimese  King  to  the  English,  as  a  sanita-
rium for  our  troops,  the  whole  stretch  of  these  mountains
was  covered  by  dense  virgin  forest,  and  the  scattered  popu-
lation, all  told,  numbered  not  more  than  about  200  souls ;
while  now  this  settlement  contains  a  population  of  over  a  quar-
ter of  a  million,  of  whom  some  thousands  are  Europeans,  and


FOUNDING  OF  DARJKELING  39

the  tea-gardening  industry  alone  represents  over  five  millions
sterling  of  invested  British  capital,  which  is  steadily  increasing.
Such  rapid  progress  in  material  development  and  commer-
cial prosperity  would  be  hard  to  beat  even  in  the  mushroom
growth  of  American  towns.  The  rapid  advance  of  the  new
settlement  by  leaps  and  bounds  was  owing  to  the  exertions
of  Dr.  A.  Campbell  of  the  Indian  Medical  Service.  He  had
been  our  political  Resident  at  the  Court  of  Nepal,  and  when
he  was  appointed  Superintendent  of  Darjeeling  he  attracted
hither  the  Nepalese  to  settle  in  their  thousands,  and  he
also  introduced  the  tea-plant,  the  cultivation  of  which  has
now  become  so  enormous  an  industry.

But  our  reveries  are  cut  short  by  the  rising  clouds,  which
gather  over  us  into  a  drenching  mist  that  drives  us  down
the  hill.  Our  way  passes  near  the  moss-grown  chimneys
of  the  ruined  barracks  on  the  ridge,  built  long  ago  as  a
sanitarium  for  our  European  troops ;  but  as  the  mists  and
rains  injured  the  health  and  spirits  of  the  men,  causing
several  to  commit  suicide,  the  buildings  had  to  be  abandoned.
Now  it  is  curious  in  this  regard  to  find  that  the  native
name  of  this  exposed  peak  (Senchal),  which  receives  the
full  force  of  the  rainy  monsoon  from  the  Bay  of  Bengal,
and  which  is  cloud-capped  most  of  the  year,  means  "The
Damp  Misty  Hill";  so  that  it  is  possible  had  the  Govern-
ment known  the  etymology  of  the  word  they  would  have
been  spared  much  needless  expense,  as  well  as  the  loss  of
several  lives  of  our  soldiers.

On    the    way  down  to  Darjeeling  we    saw  some  natives,


40  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

as  well  as  British  soldiers,  armed  with  butterfly-nets,  wildly
chasing  the  gorgeous  insects  that  abound  here.  One  local
species  that  is  confined  to  this  particular  mountain,  is  so
rare  that  one  specimen  of  it  fetches  about  a  pound  sterling.
The  pursuit,  however,  of  these  winged  gems,  though  exciting,
is  not  always  very  successful;  for  often,  like  Mark  Twain's
flea,  "when  you  have  got  it,  it  is  not  there."  We  passed  a
picnic  party,  the  ladies  of  which  were  dressed  in  silks,  for
Darjeeling  is  terribly  respectable.  They  were  travelling  in
"dandies",  a  common  mode  of  conveyance  here  for  those
who  do  not  ride.  The  dandy  is  a  sort  of  reclining  chair,
fixed  to  a  pole  (which  is  called  a  dandi  in  India,  and
hence  the  name) ;  and  by  this  pole  it  is  carried  on  the
broad  shoulders  of  three  or  four  sturdy  hillmen.  Tibetan
ponies  are,  however,  the  favourite  "mount";  and  very  com-
fortable and  sure-footed  they  are,  though  slow.  But  they
have  the  awkward  habit  of  keeping  to  the  extreme  outside
edge  of  the  path,  which  is  rather  alarming  when  you  are
skirting  a  precipice  and  the  path  is  not  fenced.  This  practice
is  said  to  be  acquired  when  they  are  young  pack-ponies
in  Tibet,  where  the  bulky  loads  which  they  carry  force  them
to  keep  out  from  the  inner  rocky  borders  of  the  narrow
mountain  tracks.

Back  again  at  Darjeeling,  as  the  ways  of  society  in  the
Himalayas  are  as  the  ways  of  any  fashionable  European
health-resort,  it  will  be  readily  understood  by  those  acquainted
with  the  late  hours  and  feverish  energy  by  which  the
Western    nations   pursue   health    and    pleasure,   that   active


DARJEELING  TOWN  41

participation  in  the  social  life  of  Darjeeling  was  not  com-
patible with  the  objects  which  had  brought  me  to  the  place.

The  town  itself  can  scarcely  be  considered  very  pictur-
esque, owing  to  the  fewness  of  trees  from  the  reckless
destruction  of  the  magnificent  forest  which  once  was  its
greatest  glory.  Of  these  moss-covered  monarchs  there
remain  now  only  a  group  of  oaks,  forming  an  oasis  in  the
grounds  of  Beechwood,  and  a  few  stragglers  dotting  the
hillside  here  and  there,  like  solitary  giants,  accentuating  the
general  bareness.  At  Beechwood  are  also  a  few  fine  pines
and  rhododendrons  planted  by  Sir  Joseph  Hooker  over
forty  years  ago.  The  Cryptomerias  which  have  been
introduced  from  Japan,  as  the  climate  is  too  moist  for  the
graceful  deodars  and  other  Himalayan  pines,  are  so  trim
and  solid-looking  as  to  suggest  the  conventional  trees  in
a  child's  box  of  toys.  Conspicuous,  too,  in  the  long  lines
of  the  bazaar,  are  the  inevitable  corrugated  iron  roofs,
announcing  in  more  homely  than  picturesque  fashion  the
invasion  of  yet  another  of  nature's  solitudes  by  modern
enterprise  and  invention.

Many  of  the  walks  are  very  pleasant  and  resemble
English  lanes,  not  only  those  which  zig-zag  up  and  down,
but  also  the  numerous  paths  which  stretch  like  ribbons  over
the  hillsides  for  those  who  love  the  level.  On  these,  however,
you  seldom  can  go  far  without  being  pestered  by  pedlars
to  buy  all  sorts  of  things  that  you  do  not  want ;  yet  these
hawkers  despite  your  protests  will  insist  on  spreading  out
their    whole    stocks    before    you,    jewellery,    plaids,  daggers


42


AMONG  THK  HIMALAYAS


and  swords,  carvings,  and  the  crudest  of  curios,  including
prayer-wheels,  amulets,  skull-drums  and  trumpets  of  human
bones,  and  "genuine"  antiquities  from  Tibet  and  China,  most
of  which  are  of  local  manufacture,  and  made  specially  for
sale  to  visitors.

The     bazaar     or     market,     though    not    beautiful    in    its


CURIO     SELLERS.

buildings,  is  on  Sunday  morning  a  scene  of  eager  bustle
and  bright  colour,  a  paletteful  of  tints.  Its  varied  groups
of  humanity,  too,  are  most  interesting  in  themselves  to  those
Europeans  who  are  not  hopelessly  prejudiced  against  every-
thing "native".  For  it  is  too  much  the  fashion  of  the
Anglo-Indians  at  Darjeeling  to  put  all  these  hillfolk,  from
the    mere    fact    of    their    being    "natives",    on    the    same


PICTURESQUE  NATIVES


43


low  platform  as  the  Indian  plains-people.  A  little  more
discrimination  might  show  them  that  the  much  despised
"niggers"  are  not  really  "so  black  as  they  are  painted".
They  are  not  Indian  at  all,  but  despite  their  want  of
civilization,  some  are  found  to  show  more  manly  and
generous    instincts    than    many  of  those  who  despise  them.


A    TIBETAN.


On  Sunday  morning,  the  villagers  from  the  hillsides,  for
many  miles  around,  troop  here  in  their  thousands  to  do
their  week's  marketing,  decked  in  all  their  finery.  The
women  and  children  are  especially  picturesque,  dressed  in
all  the  colours  of  the  rainbow,  and  laden  with  massive  gold


44  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

and    silver  jewellery,    and    necklets    of  rupees ;   they   wear
their  fortunes  on  their  necks.

Here  you  may  see  representatives  of  most  of  the  varied
native  population.  First  there  are  the  timid,  plaided  Lepchas,
the  aborigines  of  these  mountains.  They  live  in  the  jungles
and  have  brought  some  forest-produce,  such  as  yams,
cardamoms,  orchids,  wild  honey,  and  gorgeous  butterflies,  to


A   LEPCHA.


the  market  to  barter  for  salt  and  other  articles.  They  are
now  numerically  very  few  as  they  are  being  swamped  by
swarms  of  the  sprightly  little  chattering  Nepalese,  who  have
immigrated  in  enormous  numbers  to  settle  in  the  Darjeeling
district,  as  peasantry  or  as  the  well-paid  workers  on  the
tea-gardens  here.  The  bright-eyed  Nepalese  women,  gaily
parading    their   holiday  attire,  are  neatly  dressed  in  bright


THE  TRIBES  OF  DARJEELING  45

colours,  many  of  them  in  English  broad-cloths,  and  they
complete  their  toilet  with  a  gaudy  handkerchief  of  European
manufacture  thrown  gracefully  over  their  heads,  in  Italian
style.  Some  of  the  piquant  faces  of  the  youngest  would
be    almost   pretty    were    their    owners    not   addicted  to  the


NEPALESE   WOMAN.
Moormi  or  Tamang-Bhotiya  tribe.

unsightly  practice  of  chewing  betel-nut.  Then  there  are
many  of  the  stalwart  turbulent  Bhotiyas,  as  all  the  Tibetan-
speaking  races  are  here  called.  These  include  the  natives
of  Tibet  proper,  as  well  as  the  mixed  race  of  Lepchas  and
Tibetans  who  form  the  Sikhimese  Bhotiyas,  the  Bhotiyas
from  Bhotan  on  the  east,  forming  the  "  Doog-pa  "  Bhotiyas,


4<>


AMONG  THK  HIMALAYAS


and  the  more  numerous  Khotiyas  from  Nepal  on  the  west,
the  "S/ier-pa"  Bhotiyas.  Most  picturesque  of  all  are  the
mounted  Tibetans,  dashing  along  on  sturdy  ponies  with
jingling  harness-bells,  and  their  scarves  red  and  blue,
streaming  in  the  wind.  The  Bhotiya  women,  especially  those
of  Tibet,  are  great  awkward  figures,  most  of  them,  neither


BHOTIYA   WOMEN   SELLING   EGGS.


very  clean  nor  comely,  nor  over-burdened  with  false  mod-
esty ;  but  all  are  beaming  with  good  temper,  and  they  wear
massive  amulets  and  charms  like  breastplates,  of  gold
and  silver  filigree  work  set  with  turquoises ;  and  their
prayer-wheels  and  rosaries  are  also  be-jewelled.  The  richer
women    wear    chaplets    of   large    coral    beads,    costing    as


THE  TRIBES  OK  DARJEELING


47


much  as  ten  to  twenty  pounds  a  set,  and  many  wear,
hanging  from  their  girdles,  various  silver  ornaments  and
Chinese  chopsticks.  Lounging  among  these  groups  you  see
several  sleek  priests,  the  so-called  Lamas,  in  cherry-coloured
robes,  and  usually  capped  with  sugar-loaf-shaped  scarlet
hats,    like    mitred   abbots,   counting  their  rosary  in  the  left


SIKHIMESE   MATRON.


hand  and  twirling  a  praying-wheel  in  the  right,  and  solemnly
mumbling  their  spells  ;  but  who  are  always  ready  to  interrupt
their  devotions  to  take  part  in  ordinary  gossip  or  a  sip  of
beer,  with  as  little  suspicion  of  impropriety  as  the  Burmese
Buddhists  do  theirs  to  take  a  puff  at  their  huge  cheroots.
Above  the  general  hum  in  one  corner  of  the  bazaar,  rose


48  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

the    wail,    in    a    minor    key,    of  a    poor    old    blind    beggar
woman  calling  piteously  for  alms :


*


6


X


r   r  i  r  r


Sa  -  laam  Sahib  bak-sheesh    do  -  o !

But  quite  the  noisiest  of  all  are  the  strident  Indians— ser-
vants of  the  Europeans,  and  the  followers  and  traders  who
have  come  in  their  wake,  and  among  whom  are  many  sly
pink-turbaned  usurers,  the  "  Marwari  Baniyas"  and  "  Kani-
yas,"  the  Indian  Shylocks  who  scheme  to  get  the  easy-going
Lepchas  and  other  simple  hillmen  into  their  clutches.

The  wares  are  exposed  in  open  booths  and  stalls  in  the
bazaar  itself  as  well  as  along  the  paths  and  road-sides
leading  to  it;  and  the  sellers  sit  behind  their  great  piles
of  grain,  sweetmeats,  betel,  tobacco,  starchy  yams  and  other
food-stuffs,  that  are  spread  on  green  leaves,  with  a  variety
of  utensils,  trinkets  and  nicknacks.  These  include  matches
of  Japanese  manufacture,  Manchester  silks,  cotton  and  broad-
cloths ;  soap,  tobacco,  kerosine  oil,  and  Huntley  &  Palmer's
biscuits.  But  far  more  interesting  than  the  wares  are  the
figures  of  the  sellers  and  buyers.  The  struggling,  surging
crowd  amidst  all  the  turmoil  of  the  fair  supplies  endless
subjects  to  the  artist,  if  he  does  not  mind  the  ancient  and
fish-like  smells  which  here  abound.  The  eager,  expectant,
or  happy  faces,  and  the  complexions  ranging  from  ruddy
to  olive  and  bronzy  brown;  the  graceful  drapery  of  the
women  and  children,  the  long  full  flowing  robes  of  the  Lepcha
and  Bhotiya  women,  the  short-kilted  skirt  and  neat  bodice


THE  TRIBES  OF  DARJEELING


49


of  the  Nepalese,  with  girdles  of  brilliant  colour,  and  the
delicate  tints  of  many  of  the  silk  kerchiefs  thrown  coquet-
tishly    over    the    head,    tints    faded    by   the   sun    to    tender


NEPALESE   CHILDREN.


tones   of  green,  old  gold,  pale  pink  and  rose,  make  quite
a  study  of  colour.

Beyond  the  bazaar,  in  the  picturesque  little  cemetery,  is


50  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

the  tomb  of  Csoma,  the  Hungarian,  a  romantic  adventurer
who  fell  a  martyr  here  to  his  self-imposed  task  of  finding
out  the  origin  of  his  race.  The  Hungarians  or  Magyars
are  the  descendants  of  the  Tartar  nomads  from  Central
Asia,  who  burst  over  Europe  about  the  ninth  or  tenth
century  A.D.  Csoma,  when  but  a  poor  penniless  young
student,  set  out  on  his  errand  with  only  his  stick,  and
begged  his  way  across  Asia  Minor  to  the  borders  of  Tibet,
suffering  endless  hardships.  In  Tibetan,  he  believed  that
he  had  found  a  language  cognate  with  his  own;  and
after  many  years  of  seclusion  in  a  Tibetan  monastery  he
published  his  great  Tibetan  Dictionary  and  Grammar.  Af-
terwards he  tried  to  reach  Lhasa,  but  died  at  Darjeeling,
where  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal  erected  this  tomb  to  his
memory.

Soon  after  my  arrival  at  Darjeeling  I  made  the  usual
short  excursions  to  see  the  sights  of  the  neighbourhood —
the  cave  of  the  mystic  thunderbolt  or  "Dorfe"  on  Obser-
vatory hill,  from  which  cave  Darjeeling,  or  properly  "  Dorje-
ling",  derives  its  name;  down  to  Lebong,  the  Rang-eet
valley  and  the  Teesta-bridge,  and  up  to  the  peaks  of
Tongloo  and  Sandook-phu ;  all  of  which  points  are  easily
reached  by  good  riding-roads,  with  staging-houses  on  the
way,  thus  enabling  these  charming  trips  to  be  made  with
comparatively  little  trouble    or  expense.

Travelling  in  Upper  Sikhim,  however,  on  which  we  are  now
starting,  is  a  very  big  business  indeed,  and  not  to  be  carelessly
undertaken,  otherwise  one's  experiences  are  apt  to  be  more


l'RKPARATIONS  FOR  TRAVEL  TO  SNOWS  51

varied  than  agreeable.  The  expedition  has  to  be  thought
out  and  thoroughly  organised  beforehand.  Not  that  there
is  much  danger  of  being  attacked  by  man,  or,  like  Hooker,
seized  and  imprisoned,  if  only  one  be  armed  against  banditti,
and  be  careful  to  keep  outside  the  Tibetan  frontier.  Though,
only  a  few  weeks  before  we  are  starting,  Darjeeling  went
panic-mad  from  a  scaring  report  that  the  Tibetans  with
whom  we  had  just  had  a  little  war,  were  swarming  through
Sikhim  to  attack  the  town ;  and  the  military  to  reassure
the  residents  posted  pickets  all  round  the  station  and
paraded  the  troops  daily  through  the  streets.

The  reasons  why  travel  in  Sikhim  demands  costly  and
elaborate  preparation,  are  because  no  food  worth  mention-
ing is  to  be  obtained  locally ;  because  the  roads  are  so  few
and  bad,  that  everything  must  be  carried  on  men's  backs,
and  by  porters  taken  through  from  British  territory ;  and
because  frequently  there  is  no  shelter,  except  what  you
bring  with  you,  against  the  sudden  and  trying  changes  of
climate,  which  have  to  be  encountered  in  the  dipping  in
and  out  of  tropical  valleys  in  the  ascent  towards  the  snows.

For  Sikhim  so  rich  in  scenery  and  in  natural  products
is  most  inhospitable  to  the  traveller.  The  few  natives  you
chance  to  meet  in  the  interior  feed,  clothe  and  house  them-
selves almost  entirely  on  the  products  of  the  jungle.  Very
little  grain  is  ever  cultivated  by  them,  and  never  enough
for  their  own  yearly  wants,  so  they  have  none  to  spare  to
visitors.  Even  milk  and  butter  are  seldom  procurable  until
you  reach  the  upland  pastures  of  the  Tibetan  yak-herdsmen,


52  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

where  sheep  also  may  be  obtained.    And  shooting  for  the
pot  can  nowhere  be  much  depended  on.

Not  only  must  your  own  and  your  servants'  food,  cooking
utensils,  bedding,  baggage  and  tents  be  brought  with  you,
but  the  food  and  bedding  of  all  your  numerous  porters  as
well.  It  is  this  last  which  is  the  most  serious  drag  of  all,
for  the  badness  of  the  tracks  compels  everything  to  be
carried  on  men's  backs — only  for  a  few  short  distances  can
ponies  and  yaks  be  substituted, — and  it  thus  requires  almost  a
little  army  of  porters  or  coolies  to  carry  the  mere  food  alone
for  your  camp.  This  burden  hampers  you  most  heavily  in  your
movements,  for  the  coolies,  though  a  splendid  set  of  strong
fellows  and  willing,  eat  up  their  rations  as  they  go,  and  so
make  it  difficult  for  you  to  penetrate  to  very  distant  points.
To  provide  for  this  you  have  to  send  on  in  advance  some
bags  of  rice  and  Indian  corn,  so  as  to  establish  commissariat
depots  on  the  line  of  march.  Then,  you  must  not  overload
your  coolies.  Although  many  of  these  sturdy  Bhotiyas  can
carry  enormous  loads  of  two  or  three  hundredweight  for
considerable  distances — and  there  is  a  story  that  a  Bhotiya
woman  carried  a  cottage  piano  on  her  back  for  many  miles
up  the  mountain, — still  no  coolie  can  go  at  a  decent  pace,
about  fourteen  miles  a  day,  on  a  sustained  tour  in  these
mountains,  with  a  heavier  load  than  about  sixty  pounds
inclusive  of  his  bedding  and  wraps.  And  the  more  lightly
your  coolie  is  laden,  that  is  to  say,  the  greater  number  of
coolies  you  have,  the  more  quickly  you  get  over  the  ground
and  with  the  less  discomfort.  So  try  as  you  will  to  reduce


PREPARATIONS  FOR  TRAVEL  TO  SNOWS  53

them  you  must  inevitably  take  a  large  number  in  any  case ;
and  you  cannot  always  get  the  best  stamp  of  coolie,  the
tractable  Lepchas  and  Sikhimese  Bhotiyas,  in  sufficient
numbers  to  go  to  outlandish  places.

The  enormous  expense  of  all  this  porterage  is  indeed
one  of  the  chief  drawbacks  to  travel  in  these  mountains.
Darjeeling  is  a  notoriously  expensive  place  even  for  a
Himalayan  sanitarium,  but  the  most  exorbitant  item  of  all
is  porterage.  Even  the  casual  visitor  finds  this,  in  getting
his  baggage  moved  from  and  to  the  railway  station.  The
recognised  rate  for  each  coolie  is  eight  annas  a  day,  or
just  double  the  rate  in  every  other  part  of  the  Himalayas,
and  this  notwithstanding  that  Darjeeling  is  the  nearest  of
all  to  the  chief  source  of  food-stuffs  in  the  plains,  and  in
its  railway  it  has  quite  as  cheap  or  cheaper  carriage  than
the  long  strings  of  toiling  camels  and  bullock-carts  which
do  this  duty  for  the  other  Himalayan  stations.  Such  ficti-
tiously high  rates  may  have  been  necessary  in  the  earlier
days  to  attract  the  Nepalese  to  settle  in  what  was  then  an
uninhabited  country,  so  as  to  make  it  a  recruiting  ground  for
our  Goorkha  regiments.  Now,  however,  as  the  population
has  become  immense  and  settled,  surely  Government  might
do  something  to  remove  this  anomaly;  especially  so,  as
the  standard  of  comfort  among  the  people  here  stands  so
very  high,  and  is  so  much  higher  than  in  other  parts  of
the  Himalayas,  that  the  women  and  children  here  are
literally  loaded  with  necklets  of  rupees,  and  many  wear
massive    golden    jewellery    of    barbaric    size,    and    dress    in


54  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

expensive  silks  and  broadcloths.  Moreover,  the  persons
who  appear  most  of  all  to  benefit  by  these  easily  earned
gains,  thus  extracted  mainly  from  the  pockets  of  the  Euro-
peans, are  the  swarms  of  Indian  usurers  and  shopkeepers
and  grain  dealers  from  the  plains,  who  keep  up  the  prices,
— the  innumerable  jewellers  and  the  spirit-shop  keepers.

Another  difficulty  that  the  mountaineer  experiences  here
is  the  want  of  proper  guides.  There  are  as  yet  no  profes-
sional guides  in  the  Himalayas,  as  no  natives  of  these  regions
are  climbers  themselves.  The  sportsman  can  always  get
the  native  hunters  of  the  musk-deer  or  shepherds  to  pilot
him  along  the  beaten  tracks,  and  they  are  especially  useful
in  the  zone  of  the  almost  impenetrable  shrubby  rhododen-
dron, which  is  a  much  greater  obstacle  than  the  dwarf  pine
in  the  Eastern  Alps ;  but  these  men  are  of  little  or  no  use
to  the  climber  who  is  bound  for  the  higher  slopes  of  difficult
peaks.  He  must  trust  mainly  to  himself  and  his  compass,
if  he  has  not  brought  with  him  a  trained  Swiss  guide,  as
did  Mr.  W.  Graham,  who  is  practically  the  only  one  who
has  done  any  real  ice-climbing  in  these  parts.  9  The  climber
will  also  find  some  useful  hints  as  to  details  and  expense
in  Major  Michell's  paper,  10  though  the  cost  of  the  hill
journey  is  much  underestimated  there.  As  I  did  not  propose
at  first  to  do  any  ice-climbing,  I  was  fortunate  to  secure
as  guide,  a  native  of  Upper  Sikhim,  who  is  a  noted  ex-
plorer of  Tibet,  Kintoop  by  name,  and  whose  acquaintance
we  shall  presently  make  as  the  headman  of  our  coolies.
The  season  also  must  be    considered.     The  late  autumn


PREPARATIONS  FOR  EXPEDITIONS  57

and  spring  are  the  most  pleasant  for  travelling  in  these
mountains.  In  the  summer  months,  May  to  September,
heavy  rain  falls  almost  daily  on  the  high  peaks,  veiling
the  scenery  in  cloud,  and  the  unbridged  torrents,  landslips,
leeches  and  many  insect  pests  make  travelling  in  the  lower
levels  difficult  and  disagreeable.  May  is  the  month  of
avalanches.  In  the  winter  the  passes  and  uplands  are,  of
course,  closed  by  snow,  which,  however,  drives  the  game
down  into  more  accessible  places.  In  the  middle  of  Septem-
ber, the  atmosphere  clears  and  gives  magnificent  views ;
and  many  plants  and  flowers  still  carpet  the  uplands.
Snow  begins  to  fall  about  the  middle  of  October,  but  this
month  as  well  as  November  has  fine  clear  settled  weather.
In  March  and  April,  though  most  of  the  higher  passes  are
closed,  and  the  cold  is  too  intense  on  the  higher  peaks,  gor-
geous rhododendron  trees  cover  the  hillsides,  from  9,000  up
to  13,000  feet,  with  their  brilliant  bloom.  To  explore  the
higher  peaks  and  the  glaciers,-  therefore,  you  must  endure
the  discomforts  of  the  late  summer  rains  and  mists,  and
chance  the  weather.  At  that  season,  occasionally  the  clouds
lift,  giving  glorious  views ;  and  milk  and  butter,  as  well  as
yaks  and  sheep  for  meat,  can  be  obtained  up  to  about
14,000  to  15,000  feet;  and  the  yaks  can  carry  your  heavy
baggage  over  the  rocky  tracks  on  the  verge  of  snow  for  long
distances,  and  do  not  require  you  to  bring  their  food,  as  they
are  simply  turned  loose  to  find  it  for  themselves.  Settled
fine  weather  usually  begins  about  the  middle  of  September.
Restricted  in  these  many  ways,  you  must  draw  out  a  plan


58  \Mo\c.  THE  HIMALAYAS

of  your  journey  carefully  before  hand.  Our  present  scheme
is  that  we  start  in  the  beginning  of  October  when  the
rainy  season  is  nearly  over  (though  a  month  earlier  would
have  been  preferable  if  we  could  have  managed  it),  and
follow  the  valley  of  the  Teesta  upwards  to  its  chief  head-
water, the  La-chen,  and  ascend  that  river  northwards  to
the  upper  Zemoo  Valley,  which  Hooker  had  been  unable
to  penetrate ;  and  thence  pass  southwards  over  the  eastern
glaciers  of  Kanchen-junga  or  Kinchinjinga  to  the  valley  of
rocky  avalanches  (T6-loong).  This  route  will  take  us  for
a  considerable  distance  over  a  line  of  country  where  no  Euro-
pean has  yet  set  foot.  And  we  have  settled  all  the  knotty
points  as  to  the  instruments  we  are  to  take,  the  commis-
sariat question  as  to  the  kind  and  quantities  of  stores  and  their
transport,  the  best  form  of  tent,  collecting  apparatus,  maps,
books  including  Hooker's  Journals  and  Rlanford's  notes,  etc.
And  now,  on  the  eve  of  our  departure,  as  we  survey  with
satisfaction  the  last  finishing  touches  that  we  have  put  to
our  plans,  the  crowd  of  our  coolies  outside,  and  their  head-
man and  our  servants  inside,  busily  sorting  the  various  coolie-
loads  into  which  we  have  divided  our  baggage,  stores  of
edibles,  tents,  shooting,  collecting,  surveying,  photographic
and  other  apparatus,  we  feel  a  thrill  of  pleasant  half-anxious
expectancy  as  to  the  success  of  our  expedition,  and  the
possibilities  of  the  next  few  eventful  weeks.


CHAPTER    II


THE    START    AND    CROSS    INTO    NATIVE    SIKHIM


To  breathe  the  air  of  Sikhim  free,
To  wander  by  her  purling  rills,

And  seek  the  beauty  of  her  hills,

The  blueness  of  her  sky.

C.  Macaulay's  Lay  of  Lachcn.


It  was  a  bright  smiling  morning,  on  the  3rd  of  October,  "
and,  beyond  the  blue  hills,  the  snows  stood  forth  invitingly
clear,  giving  us  high  hopes  for  the  success  of  our  journey
as  we  stepped  out  from  Darjeeling,  alpenstocks  in  hand,
and  followed  by  a  small  string  of  personal  servants  carry-
ing our  guns,  field-glasses,  maps,  survey  and  photographic
apparatus,  collector's  paraphernalia,  and  last  but  not  least,
that  luxury  of  eastern  travel — the  lunch-basket,  which  it  is
never  wise  to  let  far  out  of  sight  in  the  hungry  hills.  Our
party  all  told,  including  B.  and  myself,  numbered  fifty-three
persons,  of  whom  forty-one  were  porters,  or  coolies.


62


AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS


Our  personal  servants  were  mostly  Lepchas  and  Sikhim-
ese  Bhotiyas,  lissom,  active,  and  pleasant-featured,  with  long
pig-tails  and  Chinese  hats,  shoulders  draped  with  blue  and
white  striped  plaids,  and  a  sword  like  a  Roman  warrior's,
suspended    in    an  open  scabbard  from  their  belt.  Of  these,


ACHOOM,    OUR   CHIEF   LEPCHA    SERVANT.

the  chief  is  Achoom,  who  is  our  courier,  commissariat  officer,
chef  de  cuisine,  waiter  and  valet,  all  rolled  into  one.  He
is  a  treasure  of  a  servant;  good-tempered,  truthful,  honest,
faithful  and  hardworking  as  a  slave  in  devotion  to  his
master's  interests,  and  full  of  wonderful  resources  in  the
many    makeshifts    of  camp  life.  There  is  scarcely  anything


OUR  CARAVAN  OF  COOLIES  63

his  deft  fingers  cannot  do,  from  cooking  some  recherche
dish,  to  carving  a  bamboo  flute  and  decorating  it  by  poker-
work,  or  shooting  game  and  dexterously  preparing  their  skins
for  my  collection,  a  work  in  which  he  delights,  as  he  is
like  all  true  Lepchas,  a  born  naturalist  at  heart.  He  is
under  the  average  height,  but  strong  and  wiry  in  build,
has  a  sympathetic  Mongolian  face,  an  almost  aquiline  nose,
slight  moustache,  well-formed  mouth,  usually  relaxed  in  a
pleasing  smile,  except  when,  in  virtue  of  his  high  office,
he  is  dressed  in  English  broadcloth  and  an  Indian  turban
on  his  head,  when  his  face  wears  a  dignified  sense  of  his
responsible  position.  His  sword,  hanging  by  his  side,  is
ordinarily  used  for  the  peaceable  purpose  of  chopping  off
branches  of  trees  for  the  camp  fire,  or  extra  pegs  for  our
tent,  though  it  is  ever  ready  in  the  defence  of  his  master,
whom  he  follows  in  dangerous  places  like  a  shadow.

We  have  also  a  few  Indian  servants*  And  one  of  us
has,  as  orderly,  a  fine-looking  stalwart  Sikh  from  my  old
regiment  of  Bengal  cavalry.

Our  coolies  are  a  motley  crowd.  They  contain  represent-
atives of  most  of  the  Tartar  tribes  to  be  found  at  Darjee-
ling;  and  strong  as  horses,  what  a  display  they  make  of
muscular  strength  and  of  vigorous  animalism  1  Many  of
them  have  brought  their  wives,  great  sturdy  good-natured
women  who  carry  even  heavier  loads  than  the  men.  The
variety  of  their  costumes  and  colours  is  very  great,  and
so  is  their  noisy  chatter  as  they  go.  They  carry  their  loads
on  their  backs,  either  in  large  conical  Lepcha  baskets  lined


64


AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS


with    broad    leaves   to  keep    out   the   wet,   or   tied   on  to  a

wooden  framework  which  is
strapped  over  their  shoulders
like  a  knapsack;  and  they
support  these  loads  by  a
broad  band  of  plaited  cane
that  is  passed  over  their  fore-
ixes  the  package
on  the  shoulders.


OUR  CARAVAN   OF   COOLIES.

And  in  their  hand  each  carries  a  hollow  stem  of  bamboo,
the    length    of  a   walking-stick,  to  support  their  load  when


THE  TIBETAN  EXPLORER  "K.  P."


65


resting    by    the    way,    and    it  also  serves  as  a  water-bottle,
while  traversing  the  sultry  ravines.

Quite  a  hero  in  his  way  is  Kintoop,  or  "  The  Almighty


KINTOOP,    THE   TIBETAN   EXPLORER   "  K.P.",   HEAD    OF    OUR   COOLIES.


One",  our  chief  guide  and  the  head  of  our  transport  and
coolies.  He  is  the  explorer  "  K.P."  of  the  survey  reports,
who    did    many    deeds    of   daring    in    Tibet.    With    an  iron

5


66  AMONG  THK  HIMALAYAS

constitution  he  has  inherited,  although  a  native  of  Sikhim,
all    the    sturdy     courage     and    roving    propensities    of    his
rugged  Tibetan  ancestors.    His  adventurous  spirit  found   an
outlet,  while  he  was  still  a  mere  youth,  in  exploring  many
of   the    then    unknown    parts  of  Tibet,  Bhotan,  and  Nepal,
as    assistant   to    the    trained    half-breed    Tibetan  spies    sent
by    the    Indian  Survey  to  map  out  these   jealously-guarded
regions  beyond  our  border.   His  qualifications  for  this  rough
and  risky  work,  attracted  the  notice  of  Captain  Harman,  R.E.,
who  sent  Kintoop  again  to  Tibet  to  solve  one  of  the  great
geographical   problems  of  the  day — namely,  as  to  whether
the  mighty  river  Tsang-po  of  Central  Tibet,  is  continuous  or
not  with  the  Brahmaputra  or  Dihong  river  which  pierces  the
Eastern   Himalayas  at  the  plains  of  Assam.     This  problem
had  baffled  all  attempts  at  direct  solution;  for  not  even  the
Tibetans  themselves  know  what  becomes  of  their  river  after
it    turns    southwards,  a  few  marches  to  the  S.E.  of  Lhasa,
and  enters  a  tract  of  country  absolutely  unexplored,  a  no-
man's    land,    peopled    by    fierce    savage    tribes    who    have
successfully  resisted  all  entry  of  strangers  into  their  country,
indeed  they  kill  the  Tibetans  on  principle.     How  Kintoop,
all     alone     and     unarmed,     forced    his    way    far    into    this
country,    carrying   his    life    in  his  hand,  and  almost  perish-
ing   from    hunger    and    cold ;    how    he    was    treacherously
sold  as  a  slave,  and  on  escaping,  and  while  still  a  fugitive,
he  struggled  painfully  on  down  the  Lower  Tsang-po,  faithful
to    his    mission,    till    he    came    almost    within    sight    of   the
Assam    plains,    and    then,    when    his    further    progress    was


KINTOOP,  OUR  HEADMAN  AND  GUIDE  67

absolutely  barred,  he,  according  to  arrangement,  threw  500
specially-marked  logs,  each  a  foot  long,  into  the  river;  and
how  this  experiment,  performed  at  such  pains,  miscarried,
through  no  fault  of  his,  but  through  no  one  having  been
sent  to  watch  for  these  logs  in  Assam,  owing  to  the  death
of  Captain  Harman  from  frost-bite  caught  among  the  snows
of  Kanchen-junga ;  yet  how,  notwithstanding  this  unfortunate
failure  to  direct  and  establish  the  connection  between
these  two  rivers,  he  brought  back  particulars  of  the  Lower
Tsang-po  for  nearly  a  hundred  miles  lower  than  any
previous  explorer;  all  the  details  of  these  achievements
have  been  repeatedly  related  to  me  by  Kintoop  himself,
and  they  are  summarized  in  the  reports  of  the  Indian  Survey
Department.

In  appearance,  Kintoop,  as  seen  in  the  foregoing  picture,
is  a  thick-set  active  man  of  medium  height  and  middle
age,  with  a  look  of  dogged  determination  in  his  rugged,
weather-beaten  features;  though  as  he  talks  his  little  dark
eyes  sparkle  beneath  his  oblique  Mongolian  eyelids,  and
prematurely  wrinkled  brows.  His  complexion  is  no  darker
brown  than  a  swarthy  Italian.  His  face  is  hairless  save
for  one  or  two  straggling  bristles  on  his  upper  lip.  And
altogether  he  is  a  picturesque  figure,  clad  in  his  dark  crimson
Tibetan  coat,  long  pig-tail,  Chinese  hat,  and  parti-coloured
snowshoes,  and  a  dagger  stuck  in  his  belt.  His  deep-chested
voice  I  have  often  heard  calling  clearly  from  a  hill-top
some  miles  away,  like  a  ship-captain's  in  a  storm.  He  has
all    the    alertness    of   a  mountaineer,  and  with  the  strength


68


AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS


of  a  lion  he  is  a  host  in  himself.  Indeed  he  is  quite  the
sort  of  man  you  can  depend  on  to  stick  by  you  fearlessly
through  thick  and  thin.

Our   first    day's    march    was    only    eight    miles  down  the


BUDDHIST   TEMPLE    AT   DORTSOOK.

deep  valley  of  the  great  Rang-eet  river,  that  here  divides
the  British  district  of  Darjeeling  from  Independent  Sikhim,
to  Badamtam,  where  there  is  a  staging-house  that  saved
us  the  trouble  of  pitching  our  tents.

Scarcely  had  we  begun  our  descent  from  the  Mall,  when


A  NEPALESE  FAIR  69

we  overtook  our  coolies,  who  had  been  despatched  an  hour
previously.  They  had  been  unable  to  tear  themselves
suddenly  away  from  civilization  and  the  attractions  of  the
Darjeeling  bazaar,  and  now  they  were  descending  the
winding  path  in  single  file,  like  a  long  line  of  ants.

Lower  down,  past  the  white  cupola  of  the  Buddhist  ceno-
taph or  Chor-ten  of  Dortsook  with  its  pairs  of  eyes  (see
sketch  on  page  64),  and  past  the  Lama-temple  with  its  rows
of  fluttering  prayer-flags,  and  its  prayer-barrels  turning  out
vicarious  prayers  for  the  neighbourhood,  we  meet  crowds
of  gay  holiday-makers  and  hear  unwonted  sounds  of  revelry
proceeding  from  the  village  below,  the  so-called  Bhotiya
Bustee ;  and  on  arrival  there  we  find  it  en  fete,  on  account
of  the  Feast  of  Lanterns  of  the  Nepalese.  The  latter  are
small  in  stature,  with  features  clearly  betraying  their  Tartar
descent.  They  now,  however,  pose  as  Hindoos,  and  have
adopted  the  externals  of  Hindooism,  and  amongst  others,
this  festival,  which,  though  nominally  held  in  honour  of
the  goddess  of  good-luck — Luckee  (or  Lakshmi) — is  really
one  of  Nature's  feasts,  a  harvest  home,  when  the  crops
have  been  harvested  and  the  granaries  are  full.  And  it  is
with  the  Nepalese  the  greatest  gala  day  of  all  the  year.
All  were  dressed  in  their  best,  and  the  fun  of  the  fair  was
raging  fast  and  furious.  Some  were  dancing  and  singing,
others  played  pipes  which  sounded  like  the  bag-pipes ;
swings,  of  the  type  of  the  great  wheel  at  Earl's  Court,
were  whirled  round  with  screaming  girls  and  children,  and
wine  was  being  freely  circulated.


70  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

During  this  festive  outburst  the  Nepalese  not  only  drink
deeply  themselves,  but  freely  treat  all  their  friends,  ir-
respective of  caste  and  creed ;  so  that  a  sober  man  at  such
a  time  is  quite  a  rarity  among  them.  "  And  will  the
gentlemen  be  pleased  to  drink  something,"  said  one  of
them,  offering  us  as  we  stood  on  the  roadway,  a  seat  and
a  not  overclean-looking  jug  of  beer.

We  declined  this  proffered  kindness,  and  began  to  feel
anxious  about  our  coolies,  lest  they  might  be  tempted  to
join  the  general  dissipation,  especially  as  most  of  them
belonged  to  this  very  village.  We  noticed  with  some  alarm
that  several  of  them  were  already  tipsy,  and  what  was
worst  of  all,  Kintoop,  the  headman,  himself  was  not  above
suspicion.  This  looked  serious ;  for  human  heroes  are,  after
all,  only  men  and  with  men's  weaknesses,  and  Kintoop's
weakness  was  his  fondness  for  wine ;  though  I  must  say
that  he  seldom  did  indulge  to  great  excess,  and  almost
never  when  he  had  important  business  in  hand.  And  here
it  certainly  was  not  easy  for  our  men  to  resist  the  pressing
invitations  of  their  hospitable  Nepalese  friends.  For  we  saw
several  of  the  latter,  good-naturedly  seizing  and  stopping
some  of  our  coolies  who  chanced  to  be  their  comrades,
and  forcing  their  not  unwilling  victims  to  have  a  drink.

Our  march  was  now  at  a  standstill,  as  most  of  the  coolies
had  deposited  their  loads  by  the  roadside,  and  were  joining
in  the  general  merry-making.  I  had  therefore  to  tackle
Kintoop  severely,  and  ordered  him  to  collect  his  men  and
pilot    them    through    this    village    without    delay.     And    we


•Irl^S^^

;S^i(fi|iSi

v  f^^HHk   \

■

1        £~

1  ■'      W

5fi  fdUrAj.a^mfll

Jm9 1  xSiyHHfifflfflnlhu

.•*■  '-.ait J  rlJIlft :b

9f\

111           ^*     •'      y/  '-V-

v^itli

tt-fll

-c               ^*

C2

NEPALKSE   SWINd   AT   A   l'AIR.


TIBETAN  DEVILS  AND  THEIR  WORSHIP  73

ourselves  proceeded  on  with  a  few  coolies  who  were  carrying
the  most  necessary  things.

Continuing  our  descent  we  pass  again  into  the  zone  of
tree-ferns,  of  which  there  are  eight  species  within  a  short
distance,  at  about  6,000  ft.  elevation,  and  giant  stag-moss ;
and  we  wind  along  the  hot  shadeless  flank  of  Lebong,  or
"  the  tongue-shaped  spur",  as  this  Lepcha  name  means.  Axe
and  fire  have  shorn  it  of  its  trees  for  tea  cultivation.  Whole
forests  have  been  annihilated,  leaving  here  and  there  only
a  solitary  tree,  or  narrow  belts  of  trees  in  the  ravines,  as
evidence  of  the  magnificent  woods  which  have  fallen  a
sacrifice  to  advancing  civilization.  One  of  the  results  of
this  wholesale  removal  of  forest  is  the  frequency  of  land-
slips, through  the  heavy  rain  ploughing  through  the  exposed
soft  soil.  In  several  places  stretches  of  the  hill-sides  had
slid  down,  carrying  with  them  their  tea-bushes,  so  that  the
old  adage  for  investors — "  there  is  nothing  like  land,  for  it
cannot  run  away" — is  not  strictly  applicable  to  property
in  the  Himalayas.

At  the  end  of  this  spur  is  the  little  Lamaist  monastery
of  Ging.  Its  altar  is  covered  with  idols,  objects  that  are
worshipped  as  fetishes,  and  candles  and  sacrificial  imple-
ments. Its  walls  are  frescoed  with  atrocious  daubs,  re-
presenting many  devils,  deities  and  saints  of  Chinese  design.
The  place,  however,  is  worth  visiting  by  those  who  have
not  seen  the  finer  paintings  in  Tashiding  and  the  larger
temples  of  Sikhim.  The  guardian  spirit  of  this  place  is
represented    on   the    wall    as    a    hideous,    tigerish    monster,


74  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

gorgon-headed,  with  tusks  and  out-thrust  tongue :  a  destruc-
tive demon  who  is  worshipped  with  bloody  sacrifices ;  and
we  saw  his  shrine  drenched  with  the  blood  of  kids,  fowls,
and  other  animals.  Yet  these  Lama-priests  profess  to  be
Buddhists,  with  whom  the  taking  of  life  is  absolutely
prohibited !  The  truth  is  that  this  bloody  sacrifice  is  a
vestige  of  the  old  devil-worship  of  the  country.  The  people
say,  that  God  is  a  good  spirit  and  harms  no  one ;  but  the
devils  are  actively  malignant,  and  therefore  their  goodwill
must  be  secured  by  peace-offerings.  So  God  is  neglected,
and  the  devils  are  worshipped  instead.

Still  descending  through  tea-gardens  for  several  miles,  we
enter  a  belt  of  semi-tropical  forest,  and  about  the  eighth
mile  we  reach  the  staging-house  of  Badamtam,  at  2,500
feet  above  the  sea.  It  is  picturesquely  perched  in  a  clearing
in  the  forest,  and  commands  fine  views  of  Darjeeling,  4,000
feet  above  us,  and  of  the  great  Rang-eet  river,  2,000  feet
below  us,  glistening  through  the  green  foliage  like  a  silver
ribbon,  and  filling  the  valley  with  the  soothing  sound  of  its
rushing  waters.

After  our  three  hours'  walk  we  were  not  sorry  to  find
on  entering  the  house,  that  Achoom,  who  had  preceded  us
with  the  commissariat,  had  ready  waiting  for  us  a  hot  lunch,
to  which  we  did  full  justice.  For  drink  we  had  a  large
bamboo  jugful  of  the  refreshing  beer,  that  the  Lepchas
brew  from  a  millet  seed  called  Murzva.  12  The  fermented
grain  is  put  into  a  jug  formed  by  cutting  off  a  joint  of  the
giant  bamboo,  and  this  jug  is  then  filled  up  with  hot  water.


THE  WINE  OF  THE  COUNTRY  75

The    liquor    is    imbibed    by    sipping    it    up    through    a  thin


A   MONK   SIPPING   MURWA-BEER.


reed    like    a    straw.     It    tastes   like    weak  whiskey-toddy  or
rum-punch   with   a    pleasant    acidity,    and   it  is  milder  than


76  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

the  mildest  English  beer.  It  is  the  wine  of  the  country
and  is  a  food  as  much  as  a  drink.  The  men,  women,  and
children  delight  to  sip  it  at  all  times  from  morning  till
night.  And  they  sing  its  praises  in  an  apostrophe  to  the
sipping  reed,  the  best  kind  of  which  comes  from  the  grassy
hills  of  Sarrie  (Tsari),  where  the  reed  is  also  used  as  an
arrow  in  the  chase : —

O!  sipping  reed  of  Sarrie!
Thou  'rt  born  to  make  us  merry.
Thy  stem  instils  the  luscious  wine,
The  drink  of  gods,  nectar  divine.
Thy  shaft  is  shaped  an  arrow  fine,
That's  fit  for  bravest  princes'  bow.
Thy  top  bears  up  the  banner-line
Of  praying-flags  that  Lamas  twine,
0 1  sipping  reed  of  Sarrie !

Even  the  priests  or  Lamas  are  so  addicted  to  this  beverage
that  they  sip  it  in  their  temples,  and  none  can  travel  far
without  an  attendant  carrying  a  store  of  it.  Indeed  one
of  the  commonest  sights  is  to  see  a  monk  going  his  rounds
sipping  a  jug  of  this  beer  as  a  solace  to  his  pessimistic
dogma  that  "all  life  is  misery,"  for  he  then  is  able  to
contemplate  the  world  with  full  approval.  Whilst  our  truant
coolies  were  dropping  in,  in  twos  and  threes,  we  spent  the
afternoon  in  sauntering  through  the  magnificent  forest,
revelling  in  the  jungle  sights  and  sounds — the  flashing  of  a
pheasant,  and  of  the  tiny  sun-birds  like  winged  gems,  across
the  depths  of  green ;  the  loud  whirring  of  the  Cicad  insects
on  the  fern-covered  trees  high  over  head,  the  fluty  cooing
of  a  kind  of  cuckoo  in  the  thick  undergrowth,  the  cheery


SNAKES  AND  BEARS  77

chirping  of  the  squirrels  as  they  scamper  up  and  down  the
frail  ladders  of  climbers,  the  sharp  rat-tat-tat  of  the  crimson-
crested  golden  woodpecker  on  the  stump  of  a  dead  tree,
the  ringing  echo  of  the  woodsman's  axe  followed  by  the
crash  of  falling  timber,  and  the  hoarse  bark  of  the  Kakar
deer  echoing  up  the  valley.  These  last-mentioned  deer
are  common  here,  and  I  shot  one  last  year  within  twenty
yards  of  this  very  house.  Black  bears  also  abound,  not
the  Indian  bear,  but  the  Himalayan  (Ursus  Tibetanus).
They  come  out  freely  into  the  clearings  of  the  tea-gardens
when  the  Indian  corn  is  ripening  in  June  and  July,  and  are
nasty  customers  to  meet  at  close  quarters.  You  must  also
be  on  your  guard  against  even  more  dangerous  though
more  lowly  foes.  For  we  here  encountered  a  deadly  serpent,
with  fatal  results — fatal  for  the  serpent.  It  was  an  enormous
cobra,  measuring  56  inches  in  length,  and  of  the  pale
variety.  It  raised  itself  with  expanded  hood  in  a  menacing
manner,  but  quickly  backed  away,  unlike  the  more  aggres-
sive dark  variety  which  generally  pursues  you.  It  was  the
Malayan  kind,  with  a  single  solitary  spot  on  its  neck,  and
not  with  the  pair  of  spectacles  of  the  Indian  variety.  It
is  somewhat  reassuring,  however,  to  know  that  poisonous
snakes  seldom  ascend  the  mountains  so  high  as  this,  though
I  found  two  as  high  as  Birch  Hill  (6,500  ft.)  at  Darjeeling,  of
other  species  than  the  cobra,  namely,  the  "Krait"  (Biingarns
ccerulus)  and  Calliophis  Mac/elandii,  yet  both  almost  as  deadly.
Going  through  these  forests,  you  cannot  possibly  have
a  more  interesting  companion  than  the  Lepcha,  a  true  son


78  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

of  the  forest.  He  is  a  born  naturalist  and  keen  sportsman.
He  knows  the  habits  of  every  bird  and  beast  and  creeping
thing ;  and  the  properties  of  every  plant.  He  is  steeped
in  romance,  and  few  are  braver  than  he  is,  or  so  full
of  resource  and  self-reliant  when  battling  against  physical
dangers  in  the  forest.  His  quiet,  impressionable,  affectionate
nature  wins  its  way  into  your  confidence,  and  his  unruffled
temper  under  difficulties  cheers  on  the  traveller  who  is  in
his  company.

It  was  interesting  to  watch  them  decoying  some  tiny
brilliantly  plumed  sun-birds  which  here  take  the  place  of
the  humming-birds  of  America.  When  these  were  hiding
in  the  thick  shrubs  and  not  one  to  be  seen  anywhere,  a
Lepcha  who  was  with  me,  by  blowing  into  his  closed  fists,
imitated  the  hooting  of  a  small  owl  which  preys  on  these
little  birds,  and  almost  immediately  the  adjoining  shrubs
were  alive  with  these  and  other  small  birds,  all  twittering
with  excitement  and  craning  their  necks  to  see  and  to  jeer
at  the  helplessness  of  their  nocturnal  enemy,  who,  they  well
knew,  could  not  see  them  in  such  broad  daylight.  And
when  this  ruse  failed  to  draw  them  after  a  few  times,  they
immediately  crowded  out  again  when  the  Lepcha,  with  his
lips  applied  to  the  back  of  his  hand,  imitated  the  squeaking
of  a  small  bird  when  it  is  seized  by  a  hawk  or  other  bird
of  prey.  So  curious  were  they  to  see  which  of  their  com-
panions was  being  seized  and  devoured,  that  they  exposed
themselves  freely  for  a  few  seconds,  and  then  promptly
hid  away  again.


THE  LEPCHA  IN  HIS  FORESTS  79

Or  when  you  see  some  lovely  orchids  growing  on  the
top  of  an  enormously  high  tree,  your  Lepcha  asks  you
whether  you  would  like  to  get  them,  and  he  nimbly  climbs
the  tree,  cutting  notches  here  and  there  for  foothold,  and
fearlessly  fetches  them  to  you  from  that  giddy  height.  And
he  also  gives  you  their  names,  and  tells  you  all  about  their
habits,  and  how  they  differ  from  other  species.

Altogether  the  Lepcha  is  a  very  different  sort  of  com-
panion in  the  jungle  from  the  Indian  who  knows  and  cares
nothing  about  flowers,  nor  animals — except  those  that  he
eats  or  that  eat  him.

As  the  darkness  closed  in  we  watched  the  pretty  effect
of  the  illuminations  of  the  Feast  of  Lamps  at  Darjeeling,
mapping  out  the  town  above  us,  and  the  thousands  of
twinkling  lights  in  the  clearings  all  over  the  hillsides.  We
retired,  after  an  early  dinner,  with  many  misgivings  for
the  morrow,  because  neither  Kintoop  nor  about  a  dozen
of  his  remaining  men  had  yet  turned  up.

At  daybreak  next  morning  we  found  a  messenger  from
Kintoop  to  say  that  he  was  delayed  in  getting  sober  por-
ters for  the  few  remaining  loads  of  luggage,  but  that  we
should  start  off  and  leave  him  to  follow.  But  we  decided
to  wait  and  see  the  baggage  off  in  front  of  us,  and  it
arrived  in  a  few  hours,  not,  however,  on  coolies,  as  no  sober
men  were  to  be  found,  but  on  ponies ;  and  fortunately  the
road  was  practicable  for  ponies  for  two  more  days'  march.
So  off  we  started  again,  and  our  coolies,  looking  ashamed
of  their  dissipation  of  yesterday,  now  that  the  effervescence


8o


AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS


of  their    mirth    had  subsided,  seemed  anxious  to  atone  for
their  misconduct  by  extra  zeal.

We   dipped  rapidly  down  the  gorge  of  the   great  Rang-
eet,  which  we  had  to  cross.    Below  us,  dense  woolly  white


RANG-EET   RIVER.


clouds  filled  the  [depths  of  the  lower  valleys,  giving  the
appearance  of  a  snowed-up  lake  or  frozen  Norwegian  fiord,
from  whose  white  shores  rose  up  the  dark  outlines  of  the
mountain  ridges,  range  upon  range,  up  to  the  dazzling
peak  of  Kanchen-junga.


THE  RANG-EET  VALLEY  81

As  we  descended  by  sharp  zig-zags  through  almost  five
miles  of  the  forest  of  Sal,  (that  timber  tree  inferior  only  to
teak,)  the  clouds  drifted  in  the  morning  breeze  up  the  moun-
tain sides  and  revealed  the  winding  river  with  its  silvery
strands  a  thousand  feet  below  us.  Soon  we  reached  the
bottom  of  the  gorge  amongst  whose  rank  vegetation  and
dark  boulders  "fever  lurks  in  every  brake".  The  passage
of  the  small  Rangnoo  by  a  wooden  bridge,  brought  us  down
to  the  bank  of  the  great  Rang-eet  rushing  noisily  between
steep  mountains.  This  river  is  never  fordable,  and  as  the
cane- bridge  was  broken  we  had  to  cross  in  a  canoe ;  but  the
skipper  of  this  craft  and  his  solitary  assistant,  whose  services
are  so  seldom  in  demand,  were  nowhere  to  be  found,
although  they  had  been  apprised  of  our  coming.  So  a
messenger  was  despatched  to  search  for  them  in  their  fields,
a  mile  up  the  valley.

Meanwhile,  we  breakfasted  among  the  boulders,  mocked
by  the  bare  bones  of  the  old  cane-bridge.  Tied  to  its
piers  as  well  as  to  the  twigs  of  trees  which  bend  over  into
the  stream  are  numerous  bundles  of  rags  and  prayer-flags,
as  offerings  to  the  devils  of  the  river.  The  water  itself
was  deliciously  cool,  only  580  Fah.,  as  it  had  come  down
from  not  far-distant  glaciers,  although  the  elevation  was
only  818  feet  above  the  sea-level,  and  the  temperature  of
the  air  at  noon  was  870  Fah.  Some  good  rod-fishing  is
to  be  got  here,  including  the  great  Indian  carp  or  the
Mahaseer.  We  came  upon  a  Lepcha  dining  off  a  huge
dragon-like  lizard  (Varanus  draccena),  generally  called  the


82  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

Bis  Cobra  as  it  is  erroneously  believed  to  be  poisonous.
Another  Lepcha  was  fishing  with  the  rudest  of  nets,  and
in  a  hap-hazard  way ;  for  the  Lepchas  shun  the  great  rivers,
as  few  of  them  can  swim.  He  was,  however,  quite  content
with  his  small  bag;  very  unlike  the  native  Indian  fishers,
who  make  clean  sweeps  of  even  the  smallest  fry ;  and  when
I  have  remonstrated  with  some  of  these  on  this  point,
they  replied,  "Why  should  we  leave  them  for  other  men
to  catch?"

Geologically,  we  were  now  down  again  amongst  the
slates  and  limestones  and  carboniferous  shales  ,3  which  we
encountered  at  the  foot  of  the  outer  hills.  As  we  descended,
the  gneiss  formation  got  more  and  more  micaceous  until
it  became  glistening  mica,  of  which  many  of  the  boulders
in  the  river  bed  are  composed,  though  many  are  also
blocks  of  gneiss,  fallen  from  the  rocks  some  thousands  of
feet  above.

Our  crossing-place  is  at  a  relatively  narrow  part  of  the
gorge  where  the  river  rushes  in  a  series  of  rapids,  though
the  actual  fall  of  the  river  in  the  course  of  twenty-three
miles  above  this  point,  as  measured  by  Dr.  Hooker,  is
only  987  feet.

In  crossing,  we  nearly  came  to  grief.  The  canoe  was
only  a  floating  beam  which  had  been  hollowed  out  by  fire
and  axe.  It  had  many  ominous  rifts,  no  rudder,  and  for
an  oar  a  bit  of  flat  wood  tied  to  a  pole.  When  we  had
wedged  ourselves  into  its  narrow  cavity,  and  several  coolies
had    crammed    in  themselves    and    their  bundles,  lading  it


CROSS  INTO  NATIVE  SIKHIM  83

to  its  last  inch,  the  two  ferrymen  dragged  the  laden  crazy
craft  up  stream  some  distance,  and  then  poled  it  out  with
a  long  bamboo,  broadside-on  to  the  rapids,  which  seized  it
and  hurled  it  swiftly  down  the  stream.  Then  the  ferrymen
wildly  plied  their  poles,  and  the  canoe  shot  obliquely  across
the  current,  under  the  double  impulse,  to  the  opposite
bank,  where  we  bumped  heavily  on  a  boulder  that  sent
us  with  a  jerk  into  a  swirl  of  relatively  shallow  backwater,
at  a  point  far  below  that  from  which  we  had  started.  It
took  some  time  to  transport  all  our  baggage  and  coolies
and  the  ponies,  which  latter,  poor  things,  were  tied  to  a
rope  cable  and  hauled  across,  partly  swimming,  at  consider-
able risk  to  their  lives  from  the  swift  current  and  the  great
boulders  in  its  bed.  As  luck  would  have  it,  the  only  package
which  was  damaged  in  this  rough  transit,  was  my  box  of
photographic  glass  plates,  about  which  I  had  given  the
strictest  orders  to  preserve  it  carefully  from  damp  or  falls;
for  paper  and  celluloid  films  do  not  keep  well  in  this  climate,
and  you  are  almost  forced  to  take  weighty  and  fragile  glass
plates.  One  of  the  men  in  the  excitement  of  landing  it,
dropped  it  bodily  into  the  river.  It  was  quickly  fished  out,
and  fortunately,  its  well-soldered  contents  were  little  the
worse  for  this  ducking.

On  the  river  bank  at  the  bottom  of  this  malarial  gorge
is  a  poor  hamlet  of  charcoal-burners  who  suffer  terribly
from  fever.  They  asked  for  medicine  and  I  gave  them  some
quinine,  though  this  deadly  fever  usually  lays  hold  of  them
with  a  grip  that  quinine  cannot  loosen.


84  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

We  were  now  in  Native  or  "Independent"  Sikhim,  and
missed  the  good  roads  of  the  British  territory.  The  rugged
narrow  goat-track  which  sufficed  the  Sikhimese  for  a  road
led  past  rank  crops  of  cardamoms,  growing  in  the  rich  silt
on  the  river  banks,  and  through  tall  gingers.  It  was  a
stiff  hot  climb  up  out  of  this  gorge  for  about  2,000  feet,
with  the  afternoon's  sun  beating  down  on  us.

The  stillness  of  these  semi-tropical  forests  in  the  noontide
heat  strikes  you  as  you  rest  to  recover  your  breath  in  toil-
ing up  hill.  Scarce  a  sound  is  to  be  heard,  or  any  life  to
be  seen,  except  a  solitary  bird,  or  squirrel;  or  sometimes
a  deer,  as,  startled  from  its  siesta  by  our  footsteps,  it
crashes  through  the  rotten  twigs  and  branches  which  strew
your  path ;  or  a  few  gorgeous  butterflies  float  lazily  among
the  foliage.  Even  the  hum  of  insects  seems  to  cease,  so
that  as  you  listen  you  are  almost  startled  by  the  sound  of
a  falling  leaf.

Higher  up,  past  the  cedar-like  timber-trees,  "Toon"
[Cedrela  toona),  of  which  tea-chests  are  made,  we  came  to
Cheer  pines  [Pinus  longifolia),  so  common  at  the  foot  of
the  Northern  Himalayas,  but  in  damp  Sikhim  only  found
in  a  few  relatively  dry  land-locked  slopes  like  this.  On
gaining  the  shoulder  of  the  gorge  we  emerged  on  to  the
open  slopes  of  the  hamlet  of  Kitam  (2,840  feet),  or  "The
Cotton  Field  ",  a  picture  of  pastoral  simplicity.  Its  well-cul-
tivated fields  and  meadows  stretch  up  for  many  miles  to
Namchi  on  the  flanks  of  Mount  Tendong,  where  we  had
intended   to    camp;    but  we  decided,  as  it  was  late  in  the


IN  NATIVE  SIKHIM  85

afternoon,  to  stay  here  for  the  night,  especially  as  it  seemed
to  be  beyond  the  range  of  malaria ;  for  after  a  height  of
of  3,000  feet  or  so,  even  dense  forest  ceases  to  be  mala-
rious, and  the  temperature  here  was  740  Fah.,  which  was
quite  tolerable  after  the  great  heat  of  the  day.

Whilst  our  tents  were  being  pitched  in  an  orange-grove
on  the  outskirts  of  the  village  we  were  regaled  with  Murwa-
beer  by  the  headman  of  the  place,  in  freshly-cut  bamboo
jugs,  and  new  sipping  reeds,  before  a  crowd  of  admiring
natives.  We  afterwards  strolled  through  the  hamlet,  among
the  homesteads  which  dot  the  hillside,  perched  on  stilts
amidst  clumps  of  feathery  bamboos,  broad-leaved  bananas
and  orange  trees,  now  bearing  their  bright  golden  fruit.  And
we  watched  many  of  the  villagers  at  their  primitive  looms,
weaving  their  homespun  cotton  and  nettle-fibre,  which  they
dye  with  the  wild  madder  or  Manjeet,  from  the  jungle
near  by.  Their  very  parasols  grow  by  the  wayside.  It  was
comical  to  see  children  sheltering  themselves  from  a  shower
of  rain  by  a  leaf  of  the  giant  calladium,  which  they  had
plucked  in  the  adjoining  jungle.

I  experienced,  as  usual,  much  difficulty  in  photographing
these  intensely  superstitious  people.  They  exhibited  a  lively
horror  and  hid  away  whenever  the  lens,  or  "the  evil  eye
of  the  box"  as  they  called  it,  was  pointed  at  them;  for
they  believed  that  it  worked  some  dark  magic  on  them
and  took  away  their  souls  with  their  pictures,  and  so  put
them  in  power  of  the  owner  of  their  photograph  to  cast
his    spells    over  them.      And  similarly  a  photograph  of  the


86


AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS


scenery   they   alleged    blighted    the    landscape.    Some    per-
suasion   coupled    with    a  small    present,  however,  generally


THEIR    PARASOLS   GROW   BY   THE  WAYSIDE.

overcame  their  scruples.

An  old  Lepcha  woman  here  presented  us  with  some  eggs.
A    present    of   eggs,    however,    may    be    embarrassing    at


EGGS  AND  MARRIAGE-LOVE  SONGS  87

times  in  Sikhim ;  for  it  is  a  common  way  of  proposing
marriage,  and  the  acceptance  of  the  basket  of  eggs  by
the  object  of  one's  affections  settles  the  question.  ,4  A  circum-
stantial story  is  told  of  the  sister  of  the  present  Rajah
or  king  of  Sikhim,  as  to  how  when  she  visited  Dar-
jeeling  for  the  first  time,  she  was  so  captivated  by  the
charms  of  a  certain  European  there,  that  she  wished  to
marry  him.  So  when  he  accepted  her  present  of  eggs,  she
bluntly  asked  him  to  marry  her  right  away ;  and  she  was
only  made  to  understand  with  difficulty  that  he  already
had  a  wife,  and  could  not  according  to  our  customs  take
another.

As  the  daylight  faded,  we  returned  to  our  tents,  and
after  dinner,  we  sat  outside  watching  the  picturesque  groups
of  our  people  at  their  camp  fires.  Some  men  and  women
were  cooking,  others  fetching  water  in  long  bamboo  pitchers;
some  men  lolling  lazily  or  stretched  on  the  grass  were
singing  snatches  of  Tartar  songs  in  a  quavering  minor  key :

My  love  is  like  the  image,  in  a  pure  silver  mirror

Beyond  the  reach  of  grasping  hands  and  only  won  by  loving  heart.

Like  a  tree  of  costly  coral,  like  a  leaf  gemmed  with  turquoise,

Like  a  fruit  of  precious  pearls,  you,  my  love,  are  rare.

You  are  the  loveliest  of  lovely  flowers,  and  where'er  you  go

I  as  a  turquoise  butterfly  will  follow  my  flower.

Others  were  jesting  in  rough  fashion  with  each  other,  or
playing  games  of  chance,  for  all  are  inveterate  gamblers.
Some  were  piously  counting  their  beads,  or  crooning  some
mystic  spell  in  a  low  deep  chant  and  pompous  supernatural
voice    which   seems   to   come   from    as    low   down    as  their


88  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

boots;  while  others  had  already  retired  for  the  night  into
the  flimsy  booths  which  they  had  rigged  up  with  branches,
and  the  sheets  of  waterproof  matting  {goom)  which  we  had
issued  to  each  coolie  to  protect  our  baggage  from  the  rain ;
and  in  these  rude  arbors  many  were  already  fast  asleep,
pillowing  their  heads  on  their  loads  or  empty  baskets.

To  our  leeward,  so  that  the  smoke  does  not  annoy
us,  is  our  indispensable  cook's  department.  Achoom  is  at
present  being  relieved  of  the  drudgery  of  the  actual  cooking
whilst  we  are  in  these  lower  valleys,  by  my  Indian  cook,
also  a  tried  man,  and  well  accustomed  to  camp  life,  having
been  with  me  through  the  Burmese  war  of  1886 — 87,  up
to  the  Chinese  frontier;  and  since  then  he  has  been  regu-
larly camping  about  with  me.  His  rough  active  life  has
given  him  a  haggard  appearance  very  unlike  the  sleek
comfortable  cook  of  towns.  Indeed  his  sharp  and  almost
cadaverous  features  are  so  suggestive  of  the  mummy  of
Rameses  the  Great,  that  we  have  dubbed  him  "Rameses";
and  he  takes  quite  kindly  to  this  name,  doubtless  because
his  real  name  is  Ram.  Rameses  may  be  trusted  to  serve
up  something  savoury  in  a  marvellously  short  time,  when-
ever and  wherever  we  call  a  halt  by  the  way.  But  what
a  weird  figure  he  cuts  as  he  crouches  over  his  pots  and
pans  amid  the  smoke,  his  thin  face  lit  up  by  the  lurid  glare
of  the  spluttering,  crackling  log-fire;  more  like  a  magician
concocting  some  mystic  potion,  than  our  worthy  domestic
preparing  al  fresco  a  simple  meal  for  to-morrow.

Then    Kintoop    came    up    for    orders    for    the    morrow's


TENT  LIFE  IN  SIKHIM  89

march.  And  after  dismissing  him  we  sat  discussing  our
plans  and  other  matters,  until  the  bustle  of  the  camp  ceased,
the  cooking  fires  died  down,  and  the  eerie  hooting  of  the
great  wood-owl,  the  screech  of  the  night-jar,  the  flickering
of  the  tiny  lamps  of  the  fire-flies,  and  the  cry  of  the  tiger-
cat,  suggested  that  it  was  time  for  us  to  turn  into  our  tents.


CHAPTER    III


UP   THE  TEESTA   VALLEY   TO   THE   KING  S   CAPITAL


They  journeyed  over  steep  Tendong

And  through  the  Vale  of  Teesta  fair.
By  Silling's  slopes  and  Yeung's  Mendong

And  Kubbi's  smiling  pastures  rare

And  Ryott's  roaring  falls,
To  where  high  perched  on  Man's  breast

With  banners  gay  and  brazen  crest

Shone  Sikhim  Raja's  1S  halls.

C.  Macaulay's  Lay  of  Lachen.


THE  rustle  of  the  early  breeze  amongst  the  trees,  the
crackling  of  the  freshly-lit  camp  fires,  and  the  stir  of  our
waking  servants  outside,  awoke  us  next  morning,  just  as
the  first  streaks  of  daylight  were  stealing  through  the  chinks
of  our  tent.  We  were  up,  dressed,  and  outside  in  a  few
minutes:  and  whilst  an  early  cup  of  tea  was  clearing  away
the  cobwebs  of  sleep,  our  tent  was  struck  and  packed  up ;
and  both  we  and  our  coolies  were  again  on  the  move,
soon  after  the  sun  had  risen.  To  get  the  men  started  off
in    the    chill   of  the   morning,   cost  Kintoop  much  trouble ;


PLEASURES  OF  MOUNTAINEERING  91

for  these  men,  unlike  the  coolies  of  the  plains,  always  eat
before  starting.  Nor  was  it  easy  to  get  the  strongest  men
to  carry  the  heaviest  loads,  for  these  were  usually  shuffled
on  to  the  weaker  back  of  some  "willing  horse",  and  the
strongest  coolie  often  contrived  to  make  up  a  bulky-looking
load,  containing  little  else  than  the  light  wraps  of  himself
and  his  comrades.

It  was  a  real  pleasure  to  step  out  briskly  in  the  keen
cool  air  to  get  warm ;  and  to  stop  here  and  there  by
the  wayside  to  pluck  some  of  the  tempting  brambles  and
yellow  raspberries  that  overhung  our  winding  path,  as  we
brushed  aside  the  dew-drops  which  hung  like  pearls  from
the  tips  of  the  foliage.  And  we  enjoyed  again  the  delights
of  drinking  delicious  water  from  the  crystal  streamlets  that
crossed  our  path.

As  we  ascended  this  open  valley  of  the  Mangpoo,  with
the  river  far  beneath  us,  past  the  picturesque  huts  of  the
Lepchas  that  dotted  the  clearings  on  the  hill  side,  Achoom
was  hailed  as  an  old  friend  by  everyone  we  met.  He  is
almost  the  only  Lepcha  in  service  at  Darjeeling  who  has
remained  true  to  the  traditions  of  his  fathers,  "  among  the
faithless,  faithful  only  he ".  One  amiable  old  man,  who
was  introduced  as  Achoom's  uncle,  pressed  us  to  "honour
his  hut  with  a  visit".  We  gladly  accepted  his  invitation,
especially  as  these  Lepchas,  who  are  the  aborigines  of
the  country,  are  extremely  interesting,  not  only  for  their
many  charming  traits,  but  also  chiefly  because  they  represent
the   state    of  primitive  man  when  he  subsisted  by  hunting,


Q2


AMONG  THK  HIMALAYAS


fishing,  and  gathering  wild  fruits  and  digging  roots;  and
they  now  are  a  vanishing  race,  fast  disappearing  before  the
tide  of  emigrants  from  the  more  active  and  civilized  tribes
who   have   lately    swept   in  great  waves  into  their  country.


A   LEPCHA.


These  "Lepchas",  as  they  are  called  by  Europeans,
following  the  Nepalese  name  of  the  tribe;16  "Rong",
as  they  call  themselves,  and  which  is  their  proper  name;
are   known  to  the  Tibetans  as  M'dn-ba  or  Mon-rik,  that  is


THE  LEPCHAS  93

"people  of  the  M011  country" — a  general  Tibetan  name
for  the  lower  Himalayas,  from  Kashmir  down  to  Assam  and
Burma.  The  Lepchas  were  the  sole  inhabitants  of  these
hills  until  about  250  years  ago,  when  Tibetans  entered  the
country  and  usurped  the  government,  and  appropriated
to  themselves  all  the  best  lands  on  the  cool  hills,  driving
the  Lepchas  down  to  seek  new  homes  in  these  lower
valleys  and  the  still  lower  malarial  gorges.  These  Tibetan
settlers  and  their  descendants  are  generally  known  to
Europeans  by  the  Indian  term  of  " Bhotiya"  that  is  "an
inhabitant  of  Bitot  or  Tibet;"  but  we  will  call  this  ruling
race  of  Sikhim,  "  Sikhimese  Bhotiyas  ",  to  distinguish  them
from  the  Bhotiyas  of  Tibet  proper,  and  those  of  Nepal
and  Bhotan,  all  of  whom  differ  considerably.

Now  that  you  see  a  pure  Lepcha,  side  by  side  with
these  other  tribes,  you  could  never  mistake  him,  not  even
for  a  Sikhimese  Bhotiya,  of  whom  many  possess  a  consider-
able strain  of  Lepcha  blood,  so  sharply  is  he  distinguished
from  all  these  in  physique,  features,  and  dress,  in  speech
and  manners,  in  customs  and  character.

He  is,  indeed,  with  his  distinctive  traits,  physical  and
moral,  very  much  what  his  environments  have  made  him.
Living  in  a  country  which  yields  to  him,  without  husbandry,
a  profusion  of  wild  fruits  and  edible  roots  and  other  jungle
products,  the  Lepcha  is  naturally  indolent  and  easy-going.
His  close  companionship  with  nature  has  made  him  a
naturalist,  a  tender  lover  of  flowers,  and  something  of  a
philosopher ;    though    his  narrow  gorges  have  narrowed  his


94  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

views.  His  solitary  life  in  the  peaceful  depths  of  the  great
forests    makes   him    timid    and  shy  of  strangers.     His  hard
experience   of  the    forces  of  nature,  the  storms  and  floods
which  wreck  his  home  and  scanty  crops,  and  scatter  desolation
and  death  around  him,  has  made  him  a  worshipper  of  malig-
nant devils,  and  intensely  superstitious.  His  exposed  bivouack-
ing at  night  in  malarial  gorges,  has  sapped  much  of  his  vigour
and  enervated  him.  His  roving  life  has  made  him  love  liberty
and  hate  restraint,  leading  him  to  shun  service,  and  preventing
him  ever  combining  with  his  fellow-tribesmen  against  a  com-
mon foe.  And  this  unwarlike  spirit,  crushed  under  generations
of  Tibetan  oppressors,  has  left  little  of  the  heroic  in  his  compo-
sition, when  he  is  pitted  against  disciplined  masses  of  other
tribes.  But,  as  we  have  seen,  he  is  a  keen  sportsman,  a  born
naturalist,  sympathetic,  frank  and  generous  to  a  fault,  and  no
one  can  be  braver  than  he  is  in  facing  danger  in  the  forest.
We    follow,    then,    this    genial  old  Lepcha  to  his  hutlike
home  in  one  of  the  clearings.  His  mild  Mongolian  features,
hair  parted  down  the  middle,  scanty  beard  and  moustache
impart  a  somewhat  effeminate  appearance ;  but  the  frank  happy
look  in  his  honest  eyes  stamps  him  as  the  simple  contented
child  of  the  forest,  who  dearly  loves  a  joke  and  laughs  heartily
at   the    comic  side  of  things.     And  his  soft,  slow,  staccato
speech  strikes  agreeably  on  the  ear  after  the  loud  harsh  tones
of  the  Bhotiya  or  the  shrill  hurried  jargon  of  the  Nepalese.
His   lissom   figure   is   clad   in   a   long    plaid  of  blue  and
white  striped  cloth  of  home-spun  nettle-fibre  or  cotton,  which
is    wound   round    his    body  and  descends  to  the  knee,  the


THE  LEPCHAS  95

loose  end  being  thrown  gracefully  over  his  shoulder,  leaving
the  right  arm  free.  His  waist  is  girdled  by  a  red  or  blue
band,  from  which  is  suspended  his  long,  formidable-looking,
straight,  one-edged  knife  (ban)  in  an  open  wooden  scabbard,
like  a  Roman  soldier's  sword.  This  knife  is  to  him  even  more
than  the  kookrie  is  to  the  Goorkha.  With  it  he  clears  the
jungle,  builds  his  hut,  skins  the  animal  he  shoots  with  his
arrow,  or  snares  in  the  forest;  "it  is  his  sword  in  battle,  his
table-knife,  his  hoe,  spade  and  nail-parer,"  his  gimlet,  ham-
mer and  razor.  His  hair  he  wears  in  a  pig-tail  (his  women-
folk plait  theirs  in  two),  and  when  a  hat  is  added,  on  ceremo-
nial occasions,  as  in  the  group  at  page  102,  it  is  usually
of  cane-work  and  like  an  inverted  flower-pot,  resembling
generally  those  of  the  wild  Naga  and  Abor  tribes  of  Assam,
and  bears  a  small  plume  of  grass  or  peacock  feathers  in  front.
Around  his  neck  he  hangs  small  packets  of  charms  against
the  evil  eye  etc.  For  leggings  he  has  a  broad  tape  tied  round
the  leg  from  the  ankle  to  the  knee.  His  feet  are  bare ;  and
when  he  travels  he  carries  a  wallet,  slung  over  his  shoulder,
to  hold  his  pipe,  food  etc.,  like  his  kinsmen,  the  Nagas  and
Kachins  and  other  Indo-Chinese  tribes  further  east,  and  in  his
hand  his  bow  and  arrows,  as  very  few  Lepchas  possess  a  gun.
His  flimsy  hut  is  almost  idyllic  in  its  simplicity.  It  is
perched  on  stout  posts  amid  a  few  orange  trees  and  bamboos,
and  surrounded  by  a  patch  of  cultivation — a  small  plot
fenced  in  by  thorny  branches,  for  a  few  gourds,  turnips  and
chillies,  and  beyond  this  a  few  small  crops  of  maize,  barley,
millet  for  beer,  and  a  little  terraced  land  for  irrigated  rice.


96


AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS


This  scanty  cultivation,  if  it  may  be  dignified  by  such  a  term,
is  usually  a  mere  scratching  of  the  ground,  and  is  done
mostly  by  the  women,  while  the  men  do  the  hunting.

The  house,  with  the  exception  of  the  log  framework,
is  built  almost  entirely  of  bamboo.  The  floor,  the  walls,
the  roof  and  the  thatch  are  all  of  bamboo,  as  well  as  the


LEPCHA  HOUSES


vessels  and  cook-
ing utensils.  On
the  ground  floor,
in  the  angular
space  between
the  sloping  hill-
side and  the  platform  or  floor  of  the  hut,  are  housed  the
pigs,  fowls  and  other  live  stock ;  and  I  have  rather  unpleasant
recollections  of  nights  spent  in  such  huts  over  the  squealing
pigs ;  for  the  Lepchas  treat  this  animal  quite  as  one  of  the
family,  and  deem  roasted  pig  the  most  delicious  of  morsels,
an  opinion  which  proves  merely  that  human  nature  here
is  very  much  like  the  same  brand  elsewhere.


LEPCHA  HOUSES  97

We  ascend  the  notched  log  of  wood  which  does  duty
for  a  stair,  to  the  landing,  where  we  are  received  by  the
matron  and  her  family.  And  we  have  to  stoop  humbly  to
enter  the  low  door.  Once  inside,  as  I  am  putting  down
my  hat  on  a  clean-looking  vacant  spot,  the  good  wife,  with
horror  on  her  face,  snatched  up  my  hat  and  placed  it  else-
where, and  apologetically  explained  that  the  devil  of  the
house  is  at  present  occupying  that  spot,  and  his  Satanic
Majesty's  fearful  wrath  would  be  incurred  were  anything
placed  on  that  tabooed  spot,  and  some  incantations  will
be  needed  to  undo  the  harm  I  have  done.  When  we  are
seated  on  a  low  stool,  and  our  eyes  get  accustomed  to  the
subdued  light  and  the  smarting  from  the  smoke — which,
as  there  is  no  chimney,  half  fills  the  room  before  it  finds
its  slow  escape  through  the  chinks  in  the  roof  and  walls,
tanning  these  with  dark  frescoes, — we  then  see  that  the
interior  reflects  the  simple  mode  of  living  of  its  inmates,
and  shows  that  their  few  wants  are  easily  satisfied.  There
is  no  division  into  rooms,  as  the  family  sleep  altogether,
untroubled  by  the  Western  scruples  on  such  matters ;  and
they  never  think  of  undressing  when  they  retire  to  rest,  pro-
bably from  the  need  of  remaining  ever  ready  to  defend  them-
selves and  their  cattle  from  wild  beasts.  At  one  end  is  an
open  fireplace  formed  of  a  few  stones  and  baked  mud.  Beside
it  are  a  few  bamboo  vessels,  and  leaves  for  plates ;  above-
it  hangs  a  frame  for  smoking  meat,  though,  considering
that  the  room  is  constantly  filled  more  or  less  with  smoke,
this    contrivance  seems  superfluous.    There  is  also  a  primi-

7


98  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

tive  loom  and  spindle ;  but  no  table  and  no  beds,  for  the
inmates  dine  and  sleep  on  the  floor.  At  the  other  end  is
the  granary,  containing  a  few  baskets  of  grain,  with  a  large
collection  of  Murwa  millet  and  yeast  for  brewing  beer ;
yams  and  miscellaneous  roots,  berries,  tender  shoots  of  ferns
and  other  forest  produce.  For  their  ordinary  food  consists
mainly  of  roots  which  they  dig  up  in  the  forest,  supple-
mented by  berries,  fungi,  and  spinach  of  boiled  leaves,  with
occasional  game;  but  even  frogs  are  not  refused.  There
is  scarcely  a  plant  too  tough  for  them  to  chew,  from  which
they  do  not  abstract  some  nourishment.  Salt  is  the  only
article  they  need  which  they  do  not  find  ready  to  hand ;
and  this  they  get  by  barter — not  by  money.  They  never
had  money  until  lately,  as  they  did  not  need  it,  and  did
not  know  the  use  of  it,  and  have  no  word  for  it  in  their
language.  When  money  was  first  given  to  them,  if  they
did  accept  it  they  used  to  wear  it  round  their  necks,  as
an  ornament.  Indeed  they  feed,  clothe  and  house  them-
selves almost  entirely  on  the  products  of  the  jungle.  They
never  depend  on  their  few  scanty  crops,  so  that  famine
from  which  the  Indians  every  now  and  then  suffer  so  ter-
ribly, is  to  them  practically  unknown.

Amongst  the  rafters  and  on  bamboo  brackets  on  the
wall  are  stored  away  some  bright  golden  heads  of  maize
as  seed  for  next  year's  crop ;  one  or  two  spare  garments,
a  bamboo  smoking-pipe,  a  bamboo  flute  and  harp.,  and  a
few  nick-nacks — including  charms  against  devils.  There  are
also  some  bows  and  arrows,  and  some  aconite  root  to  make


LEPCHA  WOMEN  99

a    deadly    paste    for    poisoning    their    arrows    when  used  in
war  or  against  tigers  and  other  big  game.

The  family  relations  of  the  Lepchas  show  traces  of
matriarchy,  in  which  the  children  trace  their  descent  through
their    mothers    and    not    through    their    fathers.     Now   the


A  LEPCHA   WOMAN.

Lepcha  has  usually  only  one  wife,  and  there  is  no
ceremonial  marriage.  Some  of  the  younger  women-folk
are  remarkably  comely,  considering  their  Spartan  up-
bringing; and  many  of  the  children  are  almost  fair  and
chubby,    but   their  hard  exposed  life  is  soon  fatal  to  good


ioo  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

looks,  especially  as  most  of  them  go  naked.  The  in-door
dress  of  the  women  is  a  close-fitting  gown  without  sleeves,
and  this  was  probably  their  full  dress  originally.  But  now,
for  out  of  doors,  they  wear  over  all  a  long,  loose,  wrapper-
like white  cotton  gown  with  long  wide  sleeves  turned  up  in
Tibetan  fashion  at  the  cuffs  to  show  the  red  lining — a  dress
which  effectually  masks  the  figure  and  has  little  grace  in
its  drapery.  Their  hair  is  parted  in  the  middle  and  done
up  into  two  pig-tails  which  are  usually  gathered  in  a  knot
on  the  crown  and  secured  with  a  silver  pin.  And  over  the
head  is  thrown  a  gaudy  silk  handkerchief,  drooping  negli-
gently over  the  neck,  somewhat  in  the  fashion  of  a  Spanish
peasant-girl's.  Around  the  neck  they  wear  as  much  jewellery
as  they  can  afford.  Their  stockingless  feet  are  unshod.  And
many  of  them  as  they  walk,  busily  twirl  a  distaff,  acting  up
to  the  old  Saxon  ideal  of  a  wife  and  maid — namely,  wif,
to  weave,  and  spinster.

In  domestic  life  these  Lepchas  are  gentle  and  especially
kind  to  their  children  and  their  elders.  They  offered  us
some  native  tea  and  Murzva  beer.  This  "tea",  however,  is
not  made  from  the  tea  plant,  which  these  poor  people
cannot  afford  to  buy.  It  is  a  decoction  brewed  from  the
leaves  of  the  maple,  vaccinium,  wild  vine  and  other  trees
and  herbs.  But  we  must  now  push  on  with  our  journey,
after  giving  each  of  the  girls  a  cheap  coral  necklace,  and
each  of  the  children  a  bright  new  two-anna-bit,  like  an
English  threepenny  piece.  We  had  laid  in  a  large  stock
of  these    coins,    as  they  come  in  handy  for  small  services


COPPER  MINES  IN  THE  TEESTA  VALLEY  ioi

and    for  overcoming  the  objections  of  many  of  the  people
to  have  their  photographs  taken.

Up  this  valley,  through  old  clearings  on  the  hillside  now
overgrown  with  rank  smelling  wormwood,  we  passed  some
copper  mines  on  our  right.  These  copper  mines  are  worked
on  very  primitive  and  wasteful  principles,  and  entirely  by
Nepalese  lessees,  for  the  superstitious  Sikhimese  intensely
dread  all  mining  operations.  They  believe  that  the  ores
and  veins  of  metals  are  the  stored  treasure  of  the  earth-
spirits  ;  and  that  the  removal  of  this  treasure  enrages  these
malignant  spirits,  who  visit  the  robbery  with  all  sorts  of
ill-luck,  plagues  of  sickness  on  men  and  cattle,  and  failure  of
their  too  scanty  crops.  The  Nepalese  call  these  mines  khaiii
or  panch-khani,  and  use  the  copper  chiefly  for  their  coinage.

Thence  through  more  stretches  of  wormwood,  which  with
the  American  ageratum  seizes  on  all  the  fallow  fields,  we  reach
the  village  or  Mik  (3,700  feet)  on  the  shoulder  of  Silok-vok,  or
the  "Stair  of  the  Rhinoceros."  These  animals  were  once
common  here,  says  tradition,  but  now  they  are  not  to  be
found  within  about  fifty  miles  down  the  valleys.  It  is  to
be  noted,  however,  that  "  Silok "  is  also  the  name  of  a
giant  tree  (Terminalia  pentaptera)  that  is  found  here.  We
soon  gained  the  ridge  leading  up  to  the  graceful  mountain,
Tendong.  Here  the  headman  invited  us  to  sit  down  in
front  of  his  house,  and  treated  us  to  Murwa  beer.  Then
continuing  our  ascent,  we  reached  Namchi  (5,608  feet)  and
pitched  our  tents  in  a  grove  of  chestnuts  near  the  so-called
"  fort "  of  the  feudal  chief  of  this  part  of  Sikhim,  the  Lasso  Kazi.


I02


AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS


The  Kazi  is  a  sort  of  baron,  the  hereditary  lord  of  half
a  hundred  villages  and  many  a  mile  of  forest ;  and  one
of  the  twelve  chiefs  among  whom  Sikhim  is  parcelled  out
for  revenue  purposes.  17  He  is  of  course  not  a  Lepcha,  but
a  Sikhimese  Bhotiya.

Soon    after  our  arrival  he  sent  his   steward  to  us  with  a


SIKHIMESE   CHIEF    AND   RETINUE.


present  of  a  few  oranges,  bananas,  milk,  butter,  eggs  and
fowls ;  and  a  message  that  he  himself  would  like  to  visit
us  in  the  afternoon.  Before  the  appointed  hour  a  large
mat  was  spread  near  our  tents,  and  on  it  were  placed
three  European  chairs  on  Tibetan  rugs ;  and  a  message
was  sent  to  say  that  the  chief  was  coming.  He  came,  at
tended    by    his    daughters    and   a  tail  of  retainers,  kinsmen


RECEPTION  BY  SIKHIMESE  CHIEF  103

and  vassals,  including  slaves, — for  regular  slavery  still  exists
here,  though  of  a  mild  type,  and  often  as  security  for  the
payment  of  some  debt.  We  exchanged  greetings,  he  taking
off  his  Chinese  hat  and  giving  a  formal  bow  in  Chinese
style,  after  which  he  asked  us  to  be  seated  and  sat  down
himself.  His  picturesque  retainers,  most  of  whom  wore
Lepcha  plaids,  remained  standing,  whilst  his  daughters,
bright-eyed,  giggling  girls,  seated  themselves  unceremoni-
ously on  the  mat  behind  him.  Three  jugs  of  his  own  special
brew  of  Murwa  beer  were  brought  forth,  of  which  one  was
set  down  on  a  stool  before  each  of  us,  and  as  often  as  we
sipped  some  up  through  reeds,  the  jug  was  replenished.

We  now  saw  how  much  these  Bhotiyas  of  Sikhim,  the
ruling  race  and  to  which  Kintoop  belongs,  differ  from  the
mild  Lepchas.  Although  leavened  to  some  extent  with
Lepcha  blood,  they  retain  most  of  the  rough  traits  and
features  of  their  Tibetan  ancestors  beyond  the  Himalayas.
They  are  tall,  hardy  mountaineers,  who  keep  mostly  to  the
cool  uplands  and  seldom  descend  to  the  unhealthy  gorges.
The  are  powerfully  built,  their  leg  muscles  are  especially
well  developed.  Their  ordinary  dress  is  like  that  of  the
Lepchas,  as  this  suits  the  country  better  than  Tibetan
costume,  but  they  usually  wear  a  soft  felt  Tibetan  hat.
Most  of  them,  however,  are  like  Kintoop,  dressed  somewhat
like  Tibetans.  Over  their  inner  vest  and  trousers  of  cotton
is  worn  a  large  loose  woollen  gown  of  a  claret  colour,  high
collared,  and  with  very  long  wide  sleeves,  turned  up  at
the  cuff  to  show  the  white  and  blue  lining,  and  girdled  at


to4  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

the  waist  by  a  scarf.  It  contains  no  pockets,  as  the  pocket
is  made  by  pulling  up  the  front  of  the  gown  above  the
girdle ;  and  into  this  capacious  cavity  is  stored  away  a
prodigious  number  of  articles ;  the  wooden  drinking-cup
(f  or-pa),  pipe  and  tobacco,  matches,  flint  and  steel,  small
knives,  purse,  charms,  rosary,  prayer-wheel,  books,  needles
and  thread,  and  varied  personal  nick-nacks  in  addition  to
food.  Needless  to  say  the  bulging  of  these  bulky  articles
often  gives  a  Falstaffian  roundness  to  the  figure.  In  the
girdle  is  stuck  a  sword  or  dagger.

Our  host  was  dressed  like  a  Tibetan  grandee,  in  a  long
robe  of  flowered  dark  blue  silk,  gathered  up  at  the  waist
by  a  red  girdle,  and  showing  an  inside  embroidered  vest,
with  high  brocaded  collar ;  loose  trousers  of  pale  blue  silk,
and  black  velvet  boots.  On  his  head  he  wore  a  pork-pie  hat,
instead  of  the  usual  skull-cap ;  and  from  his  right  ear  hung
a  long  pendant  golden  earring ,  set  with  turquoises.

He  was  a  middle-aged  man  of  pleasant  manners.  Speaking
in  Hindustanee,  he  asked  after  our  health,  where  we  were
going,  and  various  questions  about  Darjeeling  and  that
wonderful  city,  Calcutta.  Whilst  we  were  thus  engaged,  a
noisy  crowd  of  some  hundred  men  came  up  the  hill,  preceded
by  one  or  two  subordinate  officials.  This  uproar  we  learned
was  a  protest  by  the  peasantry  and  serfs  against  a  demand
for  forced  labour,  which  they  deemed  unusually  excessive
and  grievous.  Sikhim  has  a  sort  of  feudal  or  still  more  primi-
tive government,  which  forces  the  people,  other  than  the
priests    or    Lamas,    to    work    for  it  whenever  and  wherever


PRIMITIVE  LAWS  OF  PROPERTY  105

called  on,  without  remuneration.  An  order  had  been  sent  to
this  chief  to  send  a  large  quantity  of  building  materials
and  labour,  as  well  as  cash,  towards  the  erection  of  new
buildings  at  the  Rajah's  head-quarters ;  and  these  people
were  complaining  bitterly  that  they  had  no  money,  and
that  their  crops  would  be  ruined  were  they  to  leave  them
at  present.  They  were  still  louder  in  their  complaints  when
told  that  this  order  must  certainly  be  complied  with  at
once.  What  the  people  fear  most  in  such  cases  is  not  so
much  the  forced  labour  and  cash  tax  that  is  imposed,  as
the  "squeezing"  or  unscrupulous  blackmailing  by  rapacious
subordinate  officials;  for  even  "the  Kazi  himself",  says  Mr.
Edgar,  1S  "as  far  as  I  can  make  out,  keeps  the  greater  portion
himself,  paying  over  to  the  Rajah  a  certain  fixed  contri-
bution." It  was  some  time  ere  the  hubbub  ceased,  and
the  least  noisy  of  all  the  people,  though  not  the  least
numerous,  were  the  Lepchas,  whose  rule  of  conduct  almost
seems  to  be  "  Give  unto  every  man  all  he  asketh."

This,  indeed,  is  one  of  the  most  curious  survivals  of  the
primitive  stage  of  Society  and  the  Family,  in  that  the
Lepchas  seem  to  have  had  absolutely  no  true  conception
of  private  property  until  they  learned  the  idea  from  contact
with  Bengal  traders.  Previously,  as  with  their  cognates,
the  ruder  Indo-Chinese  tribes  on  the  Assamese  and  Burmese
frontiers,  everything  belonged  absolutely  to  the  chief,  who
as  a  rule  allowed  his  subjects  to  retain  possession  of  as
much  of  what  they  acquired  as  he  himself  did  not  immedi-
ately want;  but  it  was  only  by  way  of  a  loan.    Thus,  the


106  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

individual  had  no  motive  for  amassing  property,  as  he  could
not  expect  to  keep  it.  And  this  perhaps  is  the  chief  reason
for  the  so-called  "laziness"  of  the  Lepcha;  for,  robbed  of
his  incentive  to  exertion,  why  should  he  slave  to  amass
property  when  he  cannot  keep  it  and  reap  the  benefit  of
his  labours?  Even  now,  under  the  present  form  of  govern-
ment in  this  land  of  the  Lepchas,  the  cultivator  has  no
title  to  the  soil.  He  may  cultivate  any  unoccupied  land
without  any  formal  permission.  But  the  assessment,  as  in
Burma  and  Manipur,  is  on  the  number  of  persons  and  cattle
and  not  on  the  land.  Even  our  host  the  Kazi  has  no  real
proprietary  right  in  the  land,  says  Edgar,  though  he  has
a  kind  of  hereditary  title  to  his  office.

Now,  however,  that  the  English  assumed,  a  few  months
ago,  a  leading  hand  in  the  government  we  may  expect  a
re-arrangement  of  these  matters  upon  more  modern  lines,
and  the  commutation  of  service  for  money  payment,  that
is  to  say  rent;  as  in  the  old  feudal  system  in  England
when  liberties  of  all  kinds  had  to  be  paid  for  by  money.
Such  an  arrangement  is  needed,  not  only  to  emancipate
the  servile  class,  but  also  to  provide  funds  for  making  good
roads  and  opening  up  the  country.

A  curious  Tibetan  code  of  laws  supposed  to  guide
the  rulers  of  the  country  has  lately  been  found  by  Mr.
White.  It  is  an  odd  mixture  of  Buddhist  maxims  with
trial  by  ordeal  and  other  barbarous  pre-Buddhist  practices.
Its  most  interesting  features  have  been  thus  summarized  :  " —
"The  regulations  regarding  government  servants  are  delight-


TIBETAN  LAW  CODE  107

fully  general  in  form.  They  are  to  '  leave  off  their  own
work  and  apply  themselves  entirely  to  Government  work  ' :
they  are  never  to  use  the  name  of  Government  for  their
private  ends:  they  must  give  just  judgment  and  not  favour
those  who  can  reward  them :  inquire  diligently  into  all  cases
and  leave  no  case  undecided,  so  that  all  men  can  say,  '  your
work  has  been  well  done.'  The  laws  of  evidence  are
practically  that  a  patient  listening  must  be  given  to  both
sides.  The  punishments  for  offences  vary  according  to
the  gravity  of  the  offence.  The  murder  of  father  or  mother
or  holy  men  may  involve  the  death  penalty,  but  the  killing
of  others  is  punishable  by  fines  varying  from  10  oz.  to
300  oz.  of  gold.  Curiously  enough  '  old  lamas '  are  classed
with  men  of  '  no  rank '  and  personal  servants ;  they  can
be  killed  for  80  oz.  ahead.  In  cases  where  blood  is  shed,
without  life  actually  being  taken,  the  penalties  are  compara-
tively light;  though  in  the  interests  of  order  a  man  may
be  beheaded  for  wounding  a  superior.  For  wounding  his
own  servant  a  man  is  not  fined,  but  he  must  tend  the
wounded  man.  So  in  a  quarrel,  the  man  who  first  drew
his  knife  is  fined,  and  the  wounded  one  must  be  nursed  by
his  assailant.  Blood  feuds  are  obviously  not  encouraged  in
Sikhim :  the  Pathan  would  find  no  sympathy  under  the
shadow  of  Kanchen-junga.  For  the  false  and  avaricious,
certain  oaths  are  required ;  and  they  may  even  have  to
submit  to  the  ordeal  of  carrying  hot  stones  or  plunging
the  hand  into  boiling  oil.  Lamas  and  monks  should  not  be
sworn,  neither  should  '  magicians,  shameless  persons,  women,


io8  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

fools,  the  dumb  and  children.'  This  categorical  enumeration
of  persons  on  whom  oaths  will  probably  not  be  binding  is
not  complimentary  to  the  women-folk  of  Sikhim.  The  rela-
tions between  man  and  wife  are  according  to  primitive
ideas.  Divorce  is  simplicity  itself:  a  husband  who  wishes
to  be  separated  from  his  partner  pays  her  a  small  sum  of
money,  varying  according  to  the  length  of  the  time  they
have  been  married.  A  wife  gives  a  fixed  sum  and  '  one
suit  of  clothes' "1

Scarcely  had  we  left  the  Kazi  ere  we  received  further
insight  into  the  summary  methods  of  his  patriarchal  govern-
ment. The  headman  of  the  village  who  had  entertained  us
on  our  way  up  this  morning,  came  running  to  us  with
dishevelled  dress  and  uttering  in  loud  tones  the  truly
Hibernian  complaint : — "  The  landlord  came  a  few  hours  ago
and  demanded  an  exorbitant  sum  of  money  down  on  the
spot  for  the  king ;  and  when  I  protested  that  I  could  not
pay  it  and  had  not  got  it,  he  with  his  men  raided  my
house,  carrying  off  all  my  valuables  and  everything  he
could  lay  hands  on,  money,  jewellery  and  even  grain  and
beer;  and,"  he  added  plaintively,  "I  implore  you  gentle-
men of  the  just  English  Government  to  help  me  against
this  high-handed  robbery."  We,  of  course,  could  do  nothing,
so  he  left  us  vowing  that  he  would  go  to  Darjeeling  to
seek  redress  from  the  English  Governor.

The  house  of  the  Kazi,  or  baron,  is  called  a  fort  or  castle
(jong) ;  and  as  is  usual,  it  is  situated  on  a  spot  selected  for
defence    against    native    attack,   though  unprotected  against


BUDDHIST  MONASTERY  109

modern  weapons.  It  is  a  two-storied  stone  building  on
a  stone  platform,  with  a  balcony  and  several  rooms,  the
chief  of  which  contains  the  family  altar  with  the  image  of
Buddha  and  various  gods  ranged  on  shelves.  The  building
is  rather  mean  in  appearance,  although  built  of  stone  and
logs  in  place  of  the  bamboo  of  the  vassals '  huts,  to  mark
the  advance  since  the  Lepcha  rule,  when,  as  with  most
wild  tribes,  the  house  of  the  chief  differed  little  from  the
poorest  of  his  retainers.  There  is  a  little  rude  carving  on
the  doors.  The  floor  is  boarded  with  rough  hewn  planks ;
the  roof  of  the  usual  mushroom-head  shape,  is  thatched  with
strips  of  bamboo ;  but  part  of  this  roofing  was  being  replaced
by  corrugated  iron,  a  sign  of  advancing  civilization !

A  loud  noise  of  drums  and  bells  and  blowing  of  horns
at  sundown  attracted  our  attention  to  the  monastery-temple
near  by.  It  is  a  barn-like  building  of  the  usual  Sikhimese
style,  and  of  scarcely  more  architectural  interest  than  a  "Free"
or  dissenting  church.  The  door,  as  usual,  faces  the  east ;  and
by  its  side  is  a  huge  prayer-barrel  about  six  feet  high,
drowsily  turned  by  an  old  sitting  devotee,  by  jerking  a  string
in  the  manner  sketched  by  Hooker,  and  each  half  revolu-
tion is  registered  by  the  striking  of  a  bell,  giving  the  effect
of  a  chime,  as  the  bells  are  slightly  different  in  tone.
I  was  amused  at  the  clumsy  lying  of  the  Lama-priests
in  charge.  I  had  been  unable  to  procure  at  Darjeeling  a
certain  Tibetan  book  which  gives  a  legendary  history  of
Tibet,  and  of  which  most  monasteries  possess  copies.  In
reply  to  my  queries  the  Lamas  denied  having  a  copy,  but


no  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

on  looking  over  the  pigeon-holes  of  their  library,  where
great  bundles  of  books  are  stacked,  I  espied  one.  On  this,
the  Lamas  were  not  a  whit  abashed ;  they  smiled  and
stoutly  refused  to  lend  it  at  any  price.  Here,  however,  I
got  from  a  Tibetan  Lama,  who  chanced  to  be  passing,  that
exquisitely  carved  necromantic  sash  of  human  bones,  which
is  now  displayed  in  my  collection  in  the  British  Museum.
Over  our  camp-fire  the  Lepchas  told  us  weird  tales  till
phantoms  seemed  to  flit  in  the  surrounding  gloom.  There
is  a  certain  romantic  prettiness  in  their  peopling  all  the
streams,  woods  and  peaks  with  nymphs  and  dryads,  kelpies
and  other  sprites.  One  of  them  told  us  the  legend  of
Tendong,  the  graceful  mountain  that  towered  above  us,  and
which  we  were  to  cross  on  the  morrow.  Its  tall  cone  stands
between  the  two  greatest  rivers  of  Sikhim,  the  Teesta  and
the  Great  Rang-eet,  at  their  junction.

THE  LEGEND   OF  MOUNT  TENDONG
or  '  The  Uplifted  Horn '.

In  the  old.  old  days  when  there  were  none  but  the  Rong  (i.  e.  '  Lepchas ')
in  this  country,  a  great  flood  deluged  the  land.  The  waters  drowned
all  the  people  in  the  valleys  and  covered  all  the  mountains  except  this
peak  Tendong,  and  that  of  his  sister  Mainom,  the  adjoining  mountain
to  the  north.  The  few  survivors  who  had  fled  to  Tendong  saw  the
peak  of  Mainom  disappear  under  the  water,  and  hence  it  is  called
'Mainom',  (properly  Ma-nom)  or  'The  Disappearing  Sister';  and  the
shrieks  of  the  drowning  can  still  be  heard  from  Tendong,  which  then
alone  remained  above  the  flood.  The  still  rising  waters  lapped  this
peak  also,  and  threatened  to  swallow  it,  whereupon  the  surviving  people
prayed  to  the  mountain  to  save  them,  and  it  then  miraculously  elongated
itself,  and  kept  its  clinging  refugees  above  the  rising  flood.  Hence  this
mountain  was  named  Tendong,  properly  Tun-rong^  or  '  The  Uplifted
Horn'.  After  a  time  the  waters  fell,  but  ever  afterwards  the  grateful
Rong  (Lepchas)  have  fervently  worshipped  this  mountain,  which  had  in
this  miraculous  way  saved  their  ancestors.


LEGENDS  OF  THE  LEPCHAS         in

Now  this  legend  of  a  Sikhimese  Mount  Ararat  possibly
preserves,  I  believe,  the  tradition  of  a  local  flood  caused
by  the  damming  up  of  the  Teesta  river  by  a  great  land-
slip, below  its  junction  with  the  Rang-eet.  For  smaller  floods
are  occasionally  occurring  in  this  way ;  and  on  the  other
side  of  the  valley,  opposite  Tendong,  we  have  the  local
names  of  Rang-iroon  and  Rang-liot,  which  in  the  Lepcha
mean  "The  Turning  of  the  Great  River",  and  "The  Brimful
Great  River "  ;  and  which  the  Lepchas  explain  in  a  legend
which  tells  how  the  Rang-eet  river  quarrelled  with  his
spouse,  the  Teesta,  and  refusing  to  go  with  her,  carried
his  waters  high  up  the  valley  to  the  two  sites  above
mentioned.     This  legend  as  told  to  me,  runs :

THE  STRIFE  BETWEEN  THE   RANG-EET  AND  TEESTA   RIVERS.

la  the  beginning  of  the  world,  when  the  rivers  were  first  let  down  from
the  mountains,  the  King  of  Serpents,  '•Pa-ril-byuJ  led  the  Teesta  River,
straight  down  to  the  plains,  so  that  the  course  of  this  river  is  generally
straight,  and  hence  the  Teesta  was  called  '  The  Straight-going  Great
Female  River'  (Rang-nyo-ung).  On  the  other  hand,  the  other  chief  river
of  Sikhim,  the  great  Rang-eet,  was  led  down  by  the  quail-like  bird,
QTut-fo  '  {Pitta  Nepalensis).  Now  this  bird,  on  the  way,  feeling  hungry,
ran  about  here  and  there  searching  for  food,  and  thus  it  led  the  Rang-eet
an  extremely  winding  circuitous  course,  so  that  when  the  river  ap-
proached the  plains,  he  found  that  the  Teesta  had  already  arrived  there
and  had  occupied  the  only  available  outlet.  Waxing  wroth  at  being
thus  forestalled  by  a  female,  the  Rang-eet  turned  himself  round  and
retired  amongst  the  mountains,  till  his  waters  rose  to  Rang-iroon  and
Rang-liot.  Then,  fearing  lest  his  rashness  might  endanger  the  world,
he  repented  and  returned  and  espoused  the  Teesta,  and  they  twain  have
flowed  on  together  ever  after.

These  legends,  of  course,  may  possibly  have  arisen  through
false  etymologies  of  the  words,  especially  as  the  Lepcha
names    of  the   Rang-eet  and  Teesta  may  also  be  rendered


112


AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS


M


respectively,  "The  Beloved  Retiring  One  "  and  u The  Great
Sister  or  Queen "  rivers.  If  such  an  enormous  landslip
had    occurred,    it   must   soon   have    been   broken    through;

for  no  evidence  of  extensive
lacustrine  deposits  have  been
found  here,  such  as  exist  in  the
Valley  of  Nepal  where  such
a  cataclysm  certainly  did  take
place :  and  there  tradition  still
tells  us  that  the  plains  of
Katmandu  were
covered  by  a
great  lake  till
a  saint  named
"  The  Mellow-
Voiced  One  "
(Manjusri)  cut
the  dam  with
his  sword,  and
let  the  river  es-
cape ;  hence  that
river  is  now  call-
ed "The  Flee-
ing One' '  (BagJi-
mati).  With  regard  to  our  Sikhim  legends,  it  is  remark-
able that  the  bird  therein  mentioned  is  almost  wingless,
like  most  of  the  extinct  birds,  and  thus  presumably  of  a
most  ancient  type.


THE  MORNINGS  BAG  AT   GAMOTANG.


GAME  IN  SIKHIM  113

The  following  morning  (6th  October),  we  crossed  the
steep  shoulder  of  Tendong  (8,675  ft.)  through  a  fine  forest
of  oaks,  chestnuts,  maple,  birch  and  magnolias,  and  dipped
down  to  Temi  in  the  valley  of  the  Teesta.  We  were  told
there  were  leopards  about,  and  we  saw  the  tracks  of
bears,  wild  goats  (thar)  and  wild  sheep  ("  barhel",  the  Ovis
nehur).  The  latter  animals  had  been  digging  up  the  ashes
of  some  old  camp-fires  for  the  salt,  for  want  of  which  they
suffer  so  much.  We  also  saw  several  Kaleej  pheasants
{Gallopliasis  melanonotus),  and  higher  up,  the  fine  red
horned  pheasants  {Ceriornis  satyra),  the  Bap  of  the  Bhoti-
yas ;  but  we  had  no  time  to  go  after  them  just  then.

Game  is  not,  after  all,  so  scarce  on  these  mountains,  as
is  generally  believed ;  though  it  is  difficult  to  get  at,  in
the  evergreen  forest,  where  from  the  numerous  perennial
streams  it  is  widely  distributed  during  the  greater  part  of
the  year.  Sportsmen,  however,  who  care  for  something
more  than  big  bags  and  wholesale  slaughter  will  find  Sikhim
not  wanting  in  interest.  It  is  possible  in  the  higher  ranges
to  get  a  fair  amount  of  shooting,  though  even  after  long
days'  tramps  the  experience  of  the  too  eager  Nimrod  may
often  be  that  of  the  "Three  Jolly  Huntsmen  "  in  the  celebrated
legend  of  the  nursery.  Still,  several  men,  travelling  in  the
upper  ranges,  amid  scenery  not  to  be  surpassed,  have  brought
back  a  goodly  number  of  very  fine  horns  and  skins  of  stags,
musk  deer,  wild  sheep  and  goats,  a  snow-leopard  or  Ounce,
silver  fox,  and  even  an  occasional  Ovis  ammon,  not  to  speak
of  the  gorgeous  Monal  pheasants  (Bhotiya   "  Cham-dong"),


ii4  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

blood  pheasants,  snow-cocks  ( Tctragalhis  Tibetanus),  ptarmi-
gan, sand-grouse,  woodcock,  snow-pigeons,  etc.,  that  they
get  by  the  way.  And  on  the  Tibetan  side  of  the  range,
game  from  all  accounts  is  very  plentiful.

As  on  this  occasion  we  ourselves  did  not  leave  the  path,  in
passing  over  Tendong,  we  bagged  only  green  wood-pigeons
and  some  small  birds  and  animals  for  my  collection,  including
the  bright  scarlet  and  blue  fairy-chats  [Niltava  grandis)  and
brilliant  sun-birds  like  lustrous  gems,  and  a  new  species
of  Laughing  Thrush  [Gar.  Waddelli).  *°  Gorgeous  butterflies
abound  here,  more  than  four  thousand  species  are  found
in  Sikhim  alone,  and  some  of  these  are  so  beautiful  and
rare  that  collectors  pay  almost  fancy  prices  for  them.  One
of  the  swallow-tailed  is  said  to  be  worth  about  £20  for
a  good  female  specimen.  Especially  numerous  was  a  species
(Kallima  inaches)  which  conceals  itself  by  imitating  the
dead  leaves  amongst  which  it  lives.  The  under  surface
of  its  wings  is  marked  and  coloured  exactly  like  a  dead
leaf,  and  it  settles  on  a  twig,  with  closed  wings,  in  an  atti-
tude that  completely  supports  this  illusion,  as  noted  by
Wallace  in  regard  to  the  butterflies  of  Sumatra.  "  So
marvellously  close  is  this  imitation  of  the  dead  leaf  carried
out,  that  even  the  spots  of  fungus  which  grow  upon  these
decaying  leaves  are  faithfully  reproduced,  and  thus  enables
these  little  creatures  to  escape  their  sharp-eyed  enemies,
and  survive  in  the  struggle  for  existence.

The  change  in  the  foliage  was  noticeable  as  we  ascended
from  the  evergreen  forests  below  to  the  variegated  autumn


THE  SPIRITS  OF  THE  PASSES  115

tints  of  the  maples,  etc.,  of  the  temperate  zone.  Further
up,  beyond  the  rude  shelter  of  bamboo  [Ba-kyini)  in  the
forest,  a  path  leads  to  the  top  of  the  mountain,  where  is
said  to  be  a  lonely  cell  to  which  a  Lama  comes  every  year
to  offer  prayers  to  Mount  Tendong,  to  safeguard  the  country
from  another  deluge ;  for  the  Lamas  have  accepted  that  old
legend  of  the  aboriginal  Lepchas.

Where  the  path  crossed  the  crest  of  the  spurs  there  was
usually  a  cairn  of  stones,  or  a  rude  stone  altar,  sacred  to
the  spirit  of  the  mountain.  At  these  spots  our  men  laid
down  their  loads,  and  tearing  a  few  strips  of  rag  from  their
dress,  tied  them  to  a  twig  or  a  stone,  which  they  planted
on  the  cairn,  as  an  offering  to  the  mountain  spirit,  and
called  with  a  loud  shrill  voice  :  Ki-ki so-so  la-so-la!  Lha-gyal-ol
Diid-pam-bo !  (Pray  accept  our  offering !  The  spirits  are
victorious  1    The  devils  are  defeated  1)

In  passing  these  spots,  travellers  invariably  keep  them
on  their  right  side  in  token  of  respect.  This  is  an  old-
world  custom  which  still  survives  in  the  West,  where  it  is
considered  the  "lucky-way".  Thus,  it  is  practised  in  stirring
the  Christmas  puddings  etc.,  in  passing  wine  at  table,  from
right  to  left ;  in  cattle  treading  the  corn  in  this  direction ;
and  among  the  Scotch  Highlanders,  in  walking  thrice  in
this  way  around  those  to  whom  they  wish  well,  "to  make  the
deazeV\  as  it  is  called.  And  the  offering  of  the  rag  recalls
the  Western  custom  of  offering  a  stone  to  the  lonely  cairn  of
an   ill-fated   traveller,    who  has  died  among  the  mountains.

Leaving  to  our  left  the  dreary  path  through  a  wilderness


u6  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

of  bamboos,  leading  to  the  old  monastery  of  Tashi-ding  and
Pemiong-chi  and  Sanga-cheling — visits  to  which  I  have  already
described  in  my  "  Buddhism  of  Tibet " — we  struck  down  steep
zigzags  to  Temi.  And  here  our  alpenstocks  came  in  useful,
as  the  clayey  soil  was  very  slippery  from  recent  rain.

The  first  patches  of  cultivation  appear  in  the  forest  at  about
6,000  feet.  Above  this  height  little  tillage  is  done  on  account
of  the  cold  clouds,  and  the  destructive  hailstones  which  demolish
the  crops,  literally  bombarding  the  cereals  by  their  violent  down-
fall. I  have  seen  hailstones  hereabouts  as  large  as  a  walnut.

The  primitive  kind  of  agriculture  which  is  practised  here
is  the  same  which  is  common  among  the  wilder  Indo-Chinese
tribes,  and  in  the  earlier  clearings  which  I  have  seen  in
the  back-wood  settlements  of  America.  A  few  acres  of  the
virgin  forest  are  burned  down,  and  the  rich  black  loam,
enriched  by  the  wood-ashes,  between  the  charred  stumps
of  the  trees  is  scratched  or  scraped  on  the  surface  and
yields  abundant  crops  for  about  two  years,  after  which
period,  being  somewhat  exhausted,  it  is  abandoned  and  a
fresh  strip  of  forest  is  burned  down,  which  after  a  year  or
two  is  in  turn  abandoned  for  a  new  one ;  and  so  on,  until
after  ten  or  twenty  years  the  first  patch,  which  has  lain  so
long  fallow,  has  again  become  a  jungle,  and  it  is  brought
again  under  this  "jhooming"  process,  as  it  is  called.  The
great  destruction  of  forest  which  this  practice  entails,  is
perhaps  excusable  in  such  a  sparsely  populated  region
where  hundreds  of  miles  of  forest  timber  simply  falls  and  rots
through  the  impossibility  of  transporting  it  to  a  paying  market.


UP  THE  TEESTA  VALLEY  117

As  we  descended,  these  patches  of  "jhoomed"  fields
fringed  by  forest  belts,  got  more  numerous,  and  we  soon
emerged  on  the  bare  hill-side  of  Temi  (4,771  ft).  Here  the
son  of  the  chief  of  this  district  offered  us  his  house  for  the
night,  but  we  preferred  our  tents.  The  2ones  of  cultivation
here  on  the  flanks  of  Tendong  and  other  parts  of  central
Sikhim,  as  well  as  Darjeeling,  have  undergone  great  altera-
tion since  Hooker's  visit.  Much  of  the  forest  has  disap-
peared owing  to  the  increase  of  the  population.  The  view
up  the  Teesta  valley  was  very  fine  with  its  interlacing  moun-
tain ridges  leading  up  to  snows ;  in  the  foreground  were
the  dark  frowning  cliffs  of  Mainom,  while  to  the  right  were
the  snows  of  the  Chola  pass.

Our  next  two  days'  march  up  the  semi-tropical  valley
of  the  Teesta  to  the  cane-bridge  by  which  we  had  to  cross
that  river,  was  very  hot  and  rather  uninteresting.  The  steep
descent  of  over  3,000  feet  to  the  gorge  of  the  thundering
river  was  no  easy  matter  after  the  heavy  rain  of  the  night,
as  the  track  zig-zagged  down  over  slippery  clay  and  still
more  slippery  mica-schist  and  chlorite  slate ;  and  over
boiling  and  dashing  torrents  that  we  had  to  cross  by
slimy  logs  and  saplings  that  were  thrown  across  them.  In
the  deep  gorge,  so  intense  was  the  heat,  that  one  of  us
could  not  resist  a  plunge  into  the  cool  pool  of  the  Rangpo
rivulet,  despite  the  risk  from  the  blazing  sun  overhead.
Across  one  of  these  bridges  some  fishermen  had  made  a
weir  of  bamboo,  so  designed  that  the  fish  in  descending
the    rapids,  are  driven  into  this  basket  and  captured.     We


n8  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

tasted    some    of  the    fish,   but    found  them  very  bony  and


CROSSING    TORRENTS.


rather  insipid.   The  men  cooked  them  by  baking  them  for
a  few  minutes  in  the  camp-fire,  inside  a  joint  of  the  ubiqui-


THE  LIMBOO  TRIBE  119

tous  bamboo.  Our  little-used  track  led  through  such  luxuriant
forest  that  one  of  our  men  had  to  go  in  front  to  clear  the
way,  like  a  sapper,  cutting  down  projecting  branches  and
rope-like  vines  that  barred  our  path.  The  characteristic
vegetation  here  was  figs  and  nettles ;  and  we  were  especially
warned  by  our  men  against  the  so-called  "deadly"  nettle,
whose  great  smooth  glossy  leaves  look  so  innocent  of  the
deadly  venom  which  lurks  beneath.  The  wild  Mango  was
also  common,  and  its  fruit  though  small  was  pleasant  to
the  taste.  Amongst  the  birds,  wood-peckers  were  especially
numerous,  owing  to  the  large  quantity  of  dead  and  dying
timber.  I  got  no  fewer  than  eighteen  distinct  species  of
these ;  shewing  the  immense  range  and  variety  of  the
climate  hereabout.  The  head-man  of  the  village  of  "Fat
Earth"  (Nam-fak)  where  we  encamped,  brought  us  the  usual
poor  presents  of  stale  milk,  rancid  butter,  a  few  oranges
and  bananas.  He  belongs  to  the  tribe  which  the  Nepalese
call  Limboo,  and  the  Tibetans  "Ts'ong-pa,"  (or  merchants,)
as  they  were  and  are  still  the  chief  cattle-merchants  and
butchers  in  Sikhim,  where  cattle  used  to  be  the  chief  import
from  the  plains.  But  the  people  call  themselves  Yak-tamba
(Yak-herds?)  or  "Ek-tambo".  They  have  flatter  faces,  and
are  much  more  markedly  Mongolian  in  feature  than  the
Lepchas ;  though  they  have  adopted  the  dress  and  externals
of  Hindooism,  like  most  of  the  other  Nepalese  tribes.

They  seem  to  have  shared  with  the  Lepchas  the  western
half  of  Sikhim,  before  the  advent  of  the  Tibetans  and  other
Nepalese   tribes.     At   present   they    extend   westwards  into


i2o  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

Nepal  as  far  as  the  Arun  river,  which  pierces  the  Central
Himalayas,  and  by  which  possibly  they  have  descended
from  the  plateau  of  Central  Asia  (see  map  in  Chap.  IX).  The
divisions  of  the  tribe,  are  alleged  by  Mr.  Risley,  to  be  denoted


A   LIMBOO    BEAUTY.


by  nicknames.  This  would  be  curious  if  true ;  but  it  is
merely  the  result  of  an  attempt  to  find  the  meaning  of  the
Limboo  names  in  an  alien  language,  like  attempting  the
etymology  of  Gaelic  words  by  means  of  Greek,  and  the
results  are  so  absurd  as  to  seem  nicknames.  Mr.  Risley,
however,   has  otherwise  advanced  Indian  ethnology  by  the


UP  THE  TEESTA  VALLEY  121

methods  he  has  advocated,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  on
this  subject  he  will  continue  to  raise  his  voice.

Achoom  tells  me  that  these  Limboos  are  proverbially
stingy  and  inhospitable,  even  the  Lepcha  half-breeds  of  the
tribe,  such  as  the  Yangmo,  according  to  the  Lepcha  saying:
"  Though  a  Yangmo's  door  is  open  wide,  there's  nothing
to  eat,  though  plenty  inside".  In  Nepal  they  intermarry
to  some  extent  with  the  semi  aboriginal  Kiranti  tribe.

Our  pioneer  brought  us  the  disconcerting  news  that  the
cane-bridge  over  the  Teesta,  by  which  we  must  cross,  was
unsafe  without  extensive  repairs ;  so  we  despatched  some
men  to  repair  it.  A  drizzling  rain  prevented  our  going  up
the  hill  to  the  Yangong  monastery,  which  boasts  a  finely
carved  door.  Its  head  Lama  is  one  of  the  explorers  of
Tibet,  Ugyen  Gyatsho,  the  "U.  G."  of  the  Indian  Survey
Reports.  Here  are  some  caves  said  to  be  several  miles
long,  and  believed  to  connect  the  sacred  mountains  Tendong
and  Mainom,  all  infested  of  course  by  devils.

Higher  up  the  ridge  is  the  large  stone  carved  with  the
mystic  Om  mani,  which  Hooker  figures.  The  following  day
in  the  series  of  tiresome  ascents  and  descents  over  spurs,
a  ridge  which  we  crossed  was  pointed  out  to  us  as  the
scene  of  a  pitched  battle  between  the  Nepalese  invaders
and  the  Sikhimese  Bhotiyas  in  1787  A.D.,  when  the  former
were  forced  to  retire.  It  is  called  Neh  (about  2,500  ft.),
and  it  occupies  a  fairly  strong  defensive  position  on  a  spur
of  Mainom.

We   all    suffered  badly  from  the  bites   of  the  pipsee  flies


122  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

that  swarmed  here,  and  worried  us  almost  beyond  endur-
ance. This  insect,  in  appearance  like  a  diminutive  house-fly,
draws  blood  at  once;  and  in  so  doing  it  poisons  the  wound,
so  that  the  blood  continues  to  ooze  from  the  puncture  and
also  exudes  underneath  the  skin,  forming  bluish  patches
which  often  end  in  ulcers.  We  cleared  our  tents  of  them
for  a  time  by  fumigation  with  brown  paper  etc.,  but  our
coolies  in  the  open  suffered  severely.  The  land-leeches
were  also  troublesome ;  and  several  loathsome  blood-sucking
ticks  (Ixodes)  made  us  almost  regret  that  we  had  not  gone
by  the  much  longer*  road  (via  Kalimpong)  to  escape  all
these  pests.  A  leopard,  tiger-cat,  civet,  and  red  cat-bear
or  "white  face"  (Dong-kar)  of  the  Bhotiyas,  were  shot  by
my  collector  here ;  and  the  flesh  of  all  these  animals  was
eaten  by  the  Lepchas,  and  indeed  esteemed  a  delicacy.

We  could  not  but  admire  the  very  evident  usefulness  to
these  animals  of  their  specific  colours.  How  admirably
their  markings  conceal  these  beasts,  each  in  its  special  sur-
roundings, so  that  they  can  approach  their  prey  unawares,
as  well  as  escape  from  their  own  natural  enemies.  The
spotted  markings  of  the  leopard  render  it  practically  invisible
amongst  the  spotty  shades  of  the  tree-foliage  where  it  lives ;
just  as  the  yellow  and  black  stripes  of  the  tiger  assimilate
this  animal  to  the  withered  yellow  stems  of  grassy  reeds
with  their  dark  shadows  in  the  places  that  it  haunts.  So  too,
the  broad  markings  of  the  cat-bear  and  the  faggoty  pattern
of  the  civet  are  admirably  suited  to  conceal  their  owners
in  the  dusky  trunks  and  branches  among  which  they  live.


CROSSING  A  RICKETY  CANE-BRIDGE  123

Early  in  the  morning,  we  descended  the  gloomy  gorge
of  the  roaring  river,  amid  rank  decaying  vegetation  which
suggested  deadly  malaria.  As  we  reached  the  bridge,  our
men  sent  up  a  loud  shout,  calling  on  the  malignant  water-
spirit  to  let  us  cross  in  safety.  And,  certainly,  it  looked
as  if  special  prayers  for  our  safety  were  really  required,
for  the  bridge,  dangerous  at  all  times,  was  a  mere  ragged
skeleton  of  itself,  and  slippery  with  green  slime.

Spanning    the    yawning    chasm    about    300    feet   wide,   in
whose    depths    the    mighty    river  thundered  along,   sixty  or
eighty  feet  beneath  us,  in  leaping  waves,  dashing  over  great
boulders  of  gneiss  the  size  of  cottages,  and  scattering  clouds
of  spray,   and  hurling  uprooted  trees  like  matchwood,  this
frail    rickety    structure    seemed  by  aspect  and  surroundings
to    suggest    the    horrors    ascribed    by    the    ancients    to    the
knife-edge  bridge  over  the  Styx.     And  we  had  to  cross  it
somewhat    after  the  manner  of  Blondin  on  the  slack  rope.
Here,  however,  we  had  the   doubtful  advantage  of  a  loosely
knotted    rope    of  strips    of  rotten    cane    to    clutch   hold  of.
For  the  bridge  is  formed  by  two  suspended  ropes  of  cane
thrown    across    the    gorge,    and    their  ends   are    lashed    to
rocks    and    trunks    of  trees    in    the    neighbourhood ;    and
between  these  two    parallel   ropes,   and   tied    from  the  one
rope    to    the    other  at   intervals   of  a   yard  or  so,  are  sus-
pended  bits   of  cane  forming  V-shaped  slings ;   and  in  the
narrow    angle  of   these  V-slings  is  laid  a  line  of  bamboos,
end    to    end,    on    which    you    have    to    find    your    footing.
It   is   thus    like    walking  on  a  rope,  for  between  the  slings


i24  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

it   is  all   open  on  either  side,  and  as  you  cross  you  swing
in  mid-air,  as  seen  in  the  frontispiece.

I  had  already  crossed  several  of  these  primitive  bridges
in  Sikhim,  as  well  as  the  rope-bridges  (jhola)  in  the  Northern
Himalayas,  but  none  were  ever  so  alarmingly  rickety-
looking  as  this.  On  climbing  up  on  to  it,  it  proved  on
examination  to  be  not  only  frail  but  rotten!  And  we  now
found  that  the  men  who  had  been  sent  two  days  before
to  repair  it,  had  declined  the  hazardous  task  and  had
decamped  without  touching  it.  These  bridges  last  only
about  two  seasons,  and  this  one  was  already  several  years
old  and  had  not  been  repaired  at  all.  But  we  must  cross
this  river  anyhow,  as  a  night's  detention  in  this  gorge  meant
fever  in  a  fatal  form.

I  sent  one  of  my  Lepchas,  who  was  accustomed  to  these
bridges,  to  examine  it,  and  he  managed  to  go  over  it,  and
returned  to  say  that  he  thought  it  was  crossable.  Sending
him  across  again,  I  prepared  to  follow,  having  first  taken
off  my  boots,  as  the  bamboos  on  which  I  had  to  walk
were  so  slippery.  But  I  had  not  gone  many  yards  ere
I  found  that  there  was  only  a  single  line  of  bamboos  for
foothold,  and  that  these  single  bamboos  were  neither  lashed
end  to  end  nor  tied  to  the  V-slings,  and  that  many  of
these  V-slings  were  untied  or  wanting  altogether.  I  there-
fore retraced  my  steps,  and  sent  the  Lepcha  to  tie  it  up
a  bit.

I  then  mounted  the  bridge  again,  and  I  almost  shudder,
even   now,    to  think  of  that  awful  passage.     Had  I  known


CROSSING  A  ROTTEN  CANE-BRIDGE  125

what  was  in  store  for  me  I  should  never  have  attempted  it.
The  instant  that  you  step  on  to  these  bridges  they  recoil
from  you,  and  swing  and  shake  in  an  alarming  way,  rolling
from  side  to  side  and  pitching  with  every  step  you  take,
like  a  ship  in  a  storm.  They  swerve  with  a  sudden
jerk,  every  time  you  lift  your  foot ;  not  only  sideways  and
longways,  but  also  downwards  and  forwards,  as  your  weight
depresses  the  bridge,  until  you  pass  the  middle,  when  the
oscillating  structure  kicks  up  after  you,  as  you  ascend.  So,
seizing  the  two  suspension  cables,  one  in  either  hand,  for
a  railing,  you  have  to  work  your  way  across  this  jerky
swinging,  shaking,  writhing  thing.  I  got  along  a  short  way
without  much  difficulty,  so  long  as  I  could  look  to  see  the
bamboo  rod  on  which  I  had  to  walk,  although  the  open
sides  heightened  the  sense  of  insecurity.  But  on  clearing
the  bank,  the  instant  you  look  down  to  see  where  to  place
your  feet,  the  rush  of  leaping  water  in  the  deeply  sunk
torrent  underneath  you,  gives  you  the  giddy  sensation  that
both  you  and  the  bridge  are  running  swiftly  upstream.
Yet,  without  looking  down,  how  is  it  possible  to  see  the
single  bamboo  overhanging  the  abyss  and  on  which
you  must  find  your  shaky  footing,  and  to  miss  which
means  certain  death  ?  Hitherto  the  line  of  bamboos  had  been
tied  end  to  end,  but  now,  as  I  stepped  on  to  the  next
one,  it  tilted  up;  and  I  could  see  that  most  of  those  in
front  were  also  lying  loose  and  disjointed  in  their  widely
separate  V-slings,  and  some  also  of  these  slings  were
loosened  and  others  wanting ;  they  had  been  loosened  and


i26  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

broken  away  by  the  passing  of  the  person  who  preceded  me.
But  it  was  now  too  late  to  turn  back,  as  I  could  not  swing
round ;  so,  I  went  forward  with  long  strides  to  get  a  foothold
on  this  shaking,  swinging  line  of  slimy  bamboos  which
writhed  and  twisted  like  a  broken-backed  serpent.  I  had
to  take  darting,  furtive  peeps  at  the  slippery,  creaking  bam-
boo, and  after  each  step  I  had  to  half  close  my  eyes  for
an  instant  to  counteract  the  giddy  feeling  of  the  upward
rush  of  the  bridge.  Ah,  it  was  a  creepy,  ghastly  feeling!
One  false  step  meant  instant  death  in  the  raging  gulf  below.
Still  there  was  a  fascination  in  it  all,  suspended  at  that
giddy  height  over  the  rushing,  swirling  waters  far  beneath,
the  unceasing  deafening  roar,  the  bold  rocky  banks,  and
the  rainbow  tints  of  the  clouds  of  spray  rising  from  the
boiling  abyss  below.  At  last,  after  what  seemed  an  age,
the  other  bank  was  reached  and  the  danger,  so  far  as  I  per-
sonally was  concerned  was  past.  But  the  others  had  to
be  provided  for.

Once  across,  I  shouted  to  Kintoop,  who  had  arrived  by
this  time,  to  tie  up  the  loose  parts  along  the  whole  length
of  the  bridge,  before  the  laden  coolies  attempted  to  cross,
And  it  was  marvellous  to  watch  the  operations  of  him  and  his
assistants.  They  darted  into  the  jungle  with  their  knives,
and  cut  the  stringy  bark  of  a  giant  climber  into  convenient
lengths,  and  taking  a  bundle  of  these  strips  between  their
teeth,  they  scrambled  pluckily  along  the  ropes,  clinging
with  their  toes,  like  monkeys;  and  they  deftly  tied  up  several
of  the    loosest    parts,    using   only   their   prehensile    toes  in


CROSSING  A  ROTTEN  CANE-BRIDGE  127

this  operation,  in  places  where  they  needed  to  hold  on
with  both  hands.  Such  flexibility  in  their  toes  have  they
acquired  in  climbing  trees  and  otherwise,  that  they  use
them  dextrously  for  gripping  things ;  and  their  great  toe
acts  almost  like  a  thumb.

Even  when  these  repairs  were  done,  it  was  found  that
the  great  majority  of  the  coolies,  all  of  whom  were  natives
of  these  hills,  were  afraid  to  cross  it,  even  when  relieved
of  their  loads.  Their  loads,  therefore,  had  to  be  broken  up
into  small  parcels,  which  the  more  steady  men  tied  up  in
their  Lepcha  plaids  and  slung  on  to  their  backs,  leaving
both  hands  free;  and  in  this  way,  by  dint  of  crossing  and
re-crossing  some  scores  of  times,  our  baggage  was  finally
got  across.  As  for  the  terror-stricken  coolies,  it  was  pathetic
to  watch  them  struggling  over  the  bridge,  even  after  it
had  been  repaired  and  they  had  been  relieved  of  their  loads.
The  thrilling  horror  and  despair  pictured  in  their  faces  as
they  crawled  along  was  truly  pitiful  to  see.  At  a  critical
moment  more  than  one  squatted  down  in  the  middle  of  the
bridge,  half-paralysed  with  fear,  unable  to  go  either  forwards
or  backwards  till  someone  stole  to  their  aid ;  and  two  of
these  we  thought  must  certainly  have  been  lost  before
assistance  reached  them.  Not  a  few  refused  to  cross  on
any  account,  and  bolted  off.  And  all  of  us  who  crossed,
vowed  that  we  would  rather  go  a  month's  journey  round
about  than  cross  such  a  terrible  bridge  again.

We    studied    the    mechanism    of   the    bridge,    while    our
baggage  was  crossing.  w     Its  great  height  above  the  water


128  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

is  to  provide  against  the  rise  of  the  flood  waters.  It  is
situated  at  a  relatively  narrow  part  of  the  river,  where  the
latter  rushes  in  leaping  waves  between  the  cliffs  through
which  it  has  cut  its  way ;  and  these  cliffs  of  bare  rock  and
huge  boulders  form  the  natural  piers  and  bastions  of  the
bridge.  From  these  piers,  two  ropes  or  cables  are  thrown
across  the  gorge  and  their  ends  lashed  to  these  rocks,  and
to  the  trunks  of  trees,  and  pegged  into  the  ground ;  and
the  stays  and  slings  at  either  end  form  a  network  like
the  rigging  of  a  ship.  These  two  parallel  cables  which  sup-
port the  bridge,  each  consist  of  three  or  four  plaited  canes
of  the  rattan  palm  {Calamus  rotang),  about  400  feet  long.
As  these  had  become  rotten  they  had  been  strengthened  by
a  chain  of  bits  of  bamboo  bark  loosely  knotted  together.
From  these  cables  hang  the  V-shaped  slings  of  split  cane,
about  three  feet  apart,  and  each  about  two  and  a  half
feet  deep.  Into  these  hanging  slings  are  laid  the  bamboos
which  form  the  platform  or  footway.  There  originally
had  been,  we  were  told,  three  or  four  bamboos  dovetailed
side  by  side  and  securely  lashed  and  spliced  to  their
adjoining  bundles  of  bamboos  so  as  to  form  a  continuous
chain,  but  the  bundles  had  got  loosened  and  the  extra
bamboos  had  all  fallen  out  long  before  our  arrival.  An
ingenious  device  of  outriggers  prevents  the  bridge  from
closing  up  and  choking  the  passenger.  At  intervals  of  every
ten  feet  or  so,  a  rod  of  bamboo  is  passed  transversely
under  the  platform,  and  from  its  extremities  pass  ropes  of
cane    and   bark  that  are  tied  to  the  two  cables,  which  are


UP  THE  TEESTA  VALLEY  129

thus  kept  apart.  These  bridges  are  called  Jalang  by  the
Nepalese,  and  by  the  Bhotiyas  Scunpa;  and  the  site  of
the  Sam-pa  is  Sain-dong,  or  the  "  bridge  face."  The  Bhotiya
name  for  this  Teesta  river  is  Sang-choo,  or  "The  Pure
Water",  so-called  because  great  rivers  tend  to  purify  them-
selves from  contamination.  While  the  temperature  of  the  air
at  noon  was  730  Fahrenheit,  the  water  was  only  6o°  Fah.,
owing  to  its  having  come  directly  from  the  snows.  The
fall  of  this  river  as  measured  by  Hooker,  not  far  off,  was
found  to  be  821  feet  in  10  miles,  and  its  current  in  places
ran  at  the  rate  of  14  miles  an  hour.

Glad  were  we  to  get  away  from  this  fluvial  horror,  and
emerge  from  the  stifling  gorge  up  on  to  a  cool  flat,  where
we  encamped  at  the  cairn  or  Mendong  of  Tyun-tang,
amongst  wild  citrons.  And  here  a  refreshing  cup  of  tea  and
the  hot  lunch  that  Achoom  had  awaiting  us  made  us  forget
our  troubles  and  fatigues  of  the  day.

Next  morning  we  were  off  early  along  the  bold  and
cliffy  upper  valley  of  the  Teesta,  over  the  slopes  of  Silling,
with  fine  and  ever  changing  views  of  the  Kanchen-junga
snows,  and  crossing  the  Ryot  river,  reached  Toomlong,  "  On
Man's  Breast",  the  mountain  capital  of  the  King  of  Sikhim,
before  nightfall.  But  oh,  the  hateful  leeches  and  the  climb  I

The  damp  forest  through  which  we  passed  swarmed
with  legions  of  voracious  land-leeches.  No  thicker  than
a  knitting-needle  when  they  are  fasting,  they  stood  alert
on  every  twig  of  the  brushwood  that  overhung  our  track,
and  on  every  dead  leaf  on  the  path.  And  as  we  approach-

9


r3o  A.M0NG  THE  HIMALAYAS

ed    they   lashed   themselves    vigorously    to    and  fro,  in  the
wild    endeavour    to    seize    hold    of   us.    The    instant    they
touch   their    victim,    they    fix   themselves    firmly    and    then
mount  nimbly  up  by  a  series  of  rapid  somersaults  till  they
reach  a  vulnerable  point ;  and  then  they  lose  not  an  instant
in    commencing   their    surgical    operations.    Our  poor  serv-
ants   and    coolies   who    walked    bare-footed    were  of  course
badly  bitten.     From  their  ankles  and  legs  little  streams  of
blood  trickled  all  day,  and  at  every  few  steps  thsy  had  to
stop  and  pick  off  these  horrid  little  pests,  and  it  was  often
difficult   to    dislodge    them.     We  had   dusted  our  stockings
with    tobacco-snuff,    and    had  not  felt  the  usual  sharp  nip ;
and    our   legs    were    well  encased  in  putties  or  thick  wool-
len   bandages,    which    are    wound    round    the    leg  from  the
ankle  to  the  knee,  over  the  boots  and  stockings,  and  give
grateful    support    to  the  leg  and    more  freedom  to  the  calf
muscles  than  leggings.    We  had  each  picked  off  thousands
of   leeches    during   the    day,    from    outside    our   boots    and
putties,  and  were  congratulating  ourselves  on  having  escaped,
but  on  taking  off  these  articles  to  cross  the  small  substantial
cane-bridge    over   the    Dik-chu    river,    after   having  walked
about   sixteen    miles  through  forest,  we  found  that  a  large
number    of  leeches  had  sucked  their  fill  of  us.     They  had
insinuated  themselves  through  the  eyelets  of  our  boots,  and
between    the  folds   of  our  patties,    and   thence  through  the
meshes    of  our    stockings.     And,   after   gorging  themselves
to  repletion  with  our  blood,  some  had  withdrawn  themselves
and   were   lying    under  the  putties,  their  thread-like  bodies


DIK-CHU    CANE-BRIDGE.


VORACIOUS  LAND-LEECHES  133

swollen  with  our  blood,  to  the  size  of  small  chestnuts;
while  others  had  crept  down  into  our  boots,  and  had
there  got  squashed,  bathing  our  feet  in  gore;  and  all  this
had  happened  quite  unconsciously  to  us.  Washing  our
wounds  only  made  them  bleed  the  more  profusely.  B.  was
less  bitten  than  I  was,  probably  owing  to  his  blood  being
so  saturated  with  nicotine,  as  he  smokes  all  day  long.  It
was  pitiful  also  to  see  the  poor  cattle,  ponies  and  goats
in  these  leech-infested  forests.  Their  legs  were  always
bleeding  more  or  less,  and  these  pests  lodge  in  their  nostrils
and  hang  from  their  eyelids  and  various  parts  of  their  body.
To  dislodge  them  from  the  recesses  of  the  nose,  the  herds-
men, it  is  said,  keep  the  poor  beasts  from  water  for  a  day
or  so  and  then,  when  the  animal  drinks,  the  leeches  show
themselves,  and  may  be  removed.  All  the  Lepchas  have
their  legs  covered  with  the  scars  of  these  leech-bites;  and
the  actual  loss  of  blood  in  this  way  must  be  very  great.
I  have  no  doubt  that  these  pests  have  something  to  do
with  the  remarkable  absence  of  four-footed  game  in  these
regions.  They  range  in  these  damp  forests  from  about
4,000  to  10,000  feet  elevation.  The  Bhotiya  name  for  the
leech  is  "  The  Blood-drinker"  [tak-toong).  The  normal  food,
however,  of  these  myriad  leeches,  like  that  of  those  other
blood-suckers,  the  mosquitos,  is  vegetable  juice ;  and  not
one  out  of  many  millions  of  them  can  ever  possibly  taste
blood.

This   river,    the    Dik-chu    or    Ryot,  is  a  snow-fed  stream
which  descends  tumultuously,  about  10,000  feet  in  a  course  of


i34  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

about  twelve  miles.  Its  Bhotiya  name  means  "The  Stagger-
ing or  Reeling  Water";  whilst  its  Lepcha  name  of  Ryot-
oong  means  "The  Rapid  Reckless  Water"  or  "The  Bris-
tling Restless  Water " — all  of  which  names  well  describe
the  furious  character  of  this  torrent.

The  leeches  and  the  pelting  rain,  all  day  long,  had  so
delayed  us  and  disorganized  our  men,  that,  although  it  was
now  about  3  p.m.,  we  had  not  yet  had  breakfast,  only  the
morning  tea  and  toast.  We  were  now  ravenous ;  but  there
was  little  chance  of  our  getting  anything  till  we  reached
the  Rajah's  residence  on  the  hill,  about  3,000  feet  above
us ;  for  we  found  that  Achoom  and  the  lunch-basket  had
gone  on  ahead.  So  after  climbing  over  some  boulders  on
the  river  bank  to  wash  again  our  bleeding  leech-bites,  we
began  the  steep  climb  up  the  short  cut  to  Toomlong.  Short
cuts  are  proverbially  tedious,  and  this  track  went  right  up
the  rocky  face  of  the  gorge,  rising  about  3,000  feet  in  two
miles.  It  would  be  a  trying  climb  at  any  time;  but  coming
at  the  end  of  a  long  fast  and  a  fatiguing  day's  march,  it
taxed  our  strength  severely.  We  had  frequently  to  pull
ourselves  up  over  rocks  by  clutching  hold  of  creepers.  The
ascent  seemed  endless.  When  I  had  climbed  about  2,000
feet  I  sat  down  dead-beat,  while  B.,  puffing  away  at  his  invi-
gorating pipe,  pushed  on  slowly  ahead.  It  was  now  getting
dusk,  the  sun  had  dipped  behind  a  peak,  and  the  forest
showed  no  sign  of  any  habitation  near,  and  not  even  water
to  quench  our  thirst,  except  the  drizzling  mist,  as  I  was  on
a  ridge ;  when  suddenly  a  good  angel  appeared  in  the  person


QUARTERED  IN  A  MONASTERY  135

of  a  smiling  young  Lama,  carrying  a  jug  of  Murwa  beer,
which  he  presented  to  me.  Refreshed  by  this  reviving
beverage,  I  resumed  the  ascent,  accompanied  by  the  young
monk,  who  acted  as  my  guide.  He  told  me  that  the  news  of
our  approach  had  reached  the  monastery  of  Phodang,  which
was  only  about  a  mile  higher  up,  and  that  the  good  Lamas
had  immediately  sent  him  to  us  with  the  welcome  Murwa.
Wet  and  weary,  we  reached  the  monastery  (5,290  ft.)  just
as  the  darkness  was  closing  in,  and  here  the  hospitable
Lamas  installed  us  in  a  cloister  as  our  tents  were  not  up,
provided  us  a  blazing  fire  in  the  middle  of  the  room  to  dry
our  clothes,  and  a  lamp,  and  assisted  Achoom  in  spreading
our  rugs  on  the  floor  round  the  fire,  and  soon  Rameses
brought  in  an  ample  meal  which  completed  our  material
comforts.


CHAPTER    IV


AT   THE   CAPITAL   OF   SIKHIM — TO   THE
THRESHOLD   OF   THE   SNOWS


And  leaving  Sikhinvs  halls,  the  four

O'er  Man's  hill,  by  Ringon's  rill,
'Neath  stately  Narim's  summit  hoar,

By   Namga's  shades  and  Chakoong's  glades,
And  rapid  Teesta's  rocky  shore

Travelled  till  they  the  torrent  crossed.

C.  Macaulay's  Lay  of  Lachen.


I  WAS  rudely  awakened  next  morning,  at  daybreak,
by  a  deafening  din  of  trumpets  and  drums  outside  our
cloister;  and  on  looking  out  of  the  unglazed  window  of
our  cell,  I  found  the  noise  proceeded  from  a  band  of  Lama-
monks  who  were  parading  round  the  outside  of  the  temple,
blowing  discordant  horns,  fifes  and  shell-trumpets,  beating
drums  and  clashing  cymbals,  and  they  wound  up  their
noisy  orisons  with  a  still  more  ear-piercing  blast  at  the
front  door  of  the  temple.  One  pair  of  the  trumpets  was  so
immensely  long — over  six  feet — that  a  young  novice  had
to  march  in  front  to  support  their  ends.


OUR  CLOISTER  IN  THE  MONASTERY  139

Our  cloister  in  the  daylight  looked  a  severely  empty
room,  innocent  as  it  was  of  any  furniture.  Its  walls  were
frescoed  with  the  smoke  of  many  years;  and  we  were  not
the  only  inmates.  Several  bats  hung  solemnly  in  black
festoons  from  the  beams ;  and  during  the  night  many  fleas
had  crept  out  from  nooks  and  crannies  and  were  much  in
evidence.  Some  Keating's  insect  powder,  which  I  had
provided  for  such  emergencies,  had  not  yet  arrived,  as  still
about  a  dozen  of  our  coolies  had  not  yet  turned  up.  These
men  did  not  arrive  till  late  in   the  forenoon.

We  therefore  halted  here  for  the  day,  to  let  our  men
recuperate,  and  also  to  weed  out  the  weakliest,  and  leave
here  all  unnecessary  baggage,  such  as  the  extra  tent,  and
such  luxuries  as  camp-tables  and  chairs.  For  from  this  point
we  go  almost  right  up  into  rugged  Alpine  country  where
every  unnecessary  mouth  to  feed,  and  every  extra  ounce  of
baggage,  is  a  drawback.  We  also  wished  to  visit  the  King
of  Sikhim,  whose  head-quarters  are  here.  We  were  told,
however,  that  the  King  had  just  gone  to  the  residence  of
our  new  political  agent  at  Gantok,  and  had  taken  with
him  the  abbot  of  this  monastery,  but  the  prime  minister
sent   us   an    invitation  to  visit  the  palace  in  the  afternoon.

The  abbot  of  this  monastery,  which  is  called  Phodang,
or  "The  Chapel-Royal",  is  one  of  the  most  important
persons  in  the  state.  He  has  all  along  been  well  disposed
towards  Europeans,  and  now,  since  the  country  has  passed
more  under  our  control,  and  as  he  is  something  of  a  patriot,
he    has    been    made    one  of  the  chief  ministers  and  the  de


1 4o  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

facto  primate  of  the  Lamaist  Church  in  Sikhim.  This  kindly
old  man  is  a  friar  rather  than  a  monk,  frequenting  the  busy
haunts  of  men,  and  may  often  be  seen  at  Darjeeling.  He
has  imbued  his  subordinates  with  much  of  his  own  kindly
spirit.  The  young  Lama  who  was  acting  for  him  during
his  absence,  and  who  is  his  nephew,  and  son  of  the  prime
minister,  is  an  intelligent  well-mannered  youth ;  and  as  he
had  looked  so  well  after  us  and  our  coolies  B.  gave  him
some  bits  of  jewellery,  and  I  gave  him  some  tins  of  fancy
biscuits,  a  bottle  of  liqueur  and  a  Japanese  teapot,  all
of  which  things  he  carried  off  in  high  glee.

The  situation  of  this  monastery  overlooking  the  Dik-chu
Valley  is  fine.  It  commands  views  up  the  valley  to  the
snows  of  the  Chola,  or  "The  Lake  Pass"  (14,925  ft.),  so
called,  it  is  said,  from  its  chain  of  lakelets.  Below  these  snows
that  rise  above  us  only  thirteen  miles  off,  stretch  the  grassy
and  pine-clad  slopes  of  Chomnaga  (12,500  ft.),  surmounting
the  rocky  heights  of  Fyoom-gang,  or  "  The  Reedy  Bamboo
Ridge,"  whilst  in  the  foreground,  amongst  the  cottages  that
dot  the  fields  of  rice  and  maize,  is  the  small  monastery  of
Labrang,  or  "  The  Bishop's  Palace,"  where  resides  the
nominal  head  of  the  Church  of  Sikhim,  and  one  of  the
so-called  "living  Buddhas  "  or  re-incarnated  Lamas,  who  no
sooner  die  than  they  are  supposed  to  be  reborn  again  as
the  head  Lama  of  the  same  monastery.  The  saintly  reputa-
tion of  this  particular  one,  however,  has  worn  a  little
threadbare  through  his  too  frequent  potations  of  something
stronger   than   the  local  murwa  beer.  And  not  far  off  is  a


THE  KING'S  PALACE  141

small  convent  with  three  nuns,  the  chief  of  whom  is  a  sister
of  "Tcheeboo"   Lama,  the  friend  of  Hooker.

After  breakfast  we  sauntered  about  the  monastery,  watching
the  routine  of  the  monks,  and  the  peasantry  bringing  their
offerings  to  the  priests,  whilst  our  jaded  coolies  were  preening
their  draggled  features  and  dressing  their  leech-bites.  One
of  the  best  applications  to  these  bites,  to  prevent  the
inflammation  and  ulceration  so  apt  to  ensue,  was,  I  found,
the  ordinary  Friars'  Balsam,  which  I  had  brought  for  that
serious  trouble  to  travellers,  blistered  feet,  for  which  it  is
a  sovereign  remedy.

In  the  afternoon  we  availed  ourselves  of  the  invitation
to  visit  the  palace  at  Toomlong.  We  were  escorted  by
some  Lamas,  Kintoop  and  several  others  of  our  henchmen.
There  was  nothing,  however,  to  show  that  this  was  the
capital  of  Sikhim.  There  is  no  town,  scarcely  even  a
village,  except  for  the  huts  that  dot  the  hill-side  at  wide
intervals;  and  the  "palace"  was  most  disappointing  after
the  grand  accounts  of  it  given  by  Colman  Macaulay  and
some  other  officials.  But  then  we  were  only  ordinary
travellers,  for  whom  things  were  not  put  en  rose;  and  person-
ally we  prefer  to  see  things  as  they  really  are  in  every-
day life.

The  "  palace  ",  which  crowns  a  knoll,  is  a  barn-like  building
of  the  usual  Sikhim  style,  with  a  great  thatched  roof
projecting  in  mushroom-head  fashion,  and  tied  down  at
the  corners  to  prevent  it  being  blown  off.  Its  roof  is  sur-
mounted   by    a   small   gilt  turret,  like  a  factory  belfry,  but


i42  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

of  Chinese  pattern,  which  gleams  from  afar  in  the  sunlight.
The  whole  place  has  a  mean  look;  and  there  is  nothing
to  suggest  that  it  is  the  residence  of  the  king,  except  perhaps
the  two  or  three  scare-crow  sentries  who  hang  about  the
gate-way  in  the  low  wall  that  surrounds  the  building.  They
are  clad  in  Lepcha  garb  and  armed  with  antiquated  match-
locks.

Crossing  the  small  garden,  prolific  in  wormwood  weeds,
and  passing  through  the  squalid  courtyard,  we  were  con-
ducted by  a  round-about  way  to  the  main  door.  For  this
house,  as  the  residence  of  a  "priest-king,"  is  sacred,  and
must  be  approached  like  a  holy  temple,  in  the  respectful
direction;  that  is  to  say  with  the  right  hand  to  the  wall.
The  chief  door  by  which  we  entered  was  of  roughly  hewn
timber,  loopholed  for  musketry.  It  opened  into  a  dark
narrow  passage,  whence  we  were  ushered  up  a  dark  ladder-
like stair,  and  thence,  groping  our  way,  we  stumbled
into  what  has  been  grandiloquently  called  "The  Audience
Room",  where  the  Sikhim  Rajah  held  his  court.  It  had
a  mean  look,  a  low  ceiling,  and  was  floored  with  planks
rough  hewn  in  Robinson  Crusoe  fashion,  and  it  was  without
any  of  the  refinements  of  civilization.  Here  an  old  man
with  grizzled  hair,  shrewd  features,  and  dressed  like  the
ordinary  Bhotiyas,  in  a  not  over-clean  suit,  came  forward
and  bid  us  welcome  with  a  shake  of  the  hand.  He  was
the  Prime  Minister  or  Kang-sa  Deivan.  Speaking  in  Hindu-
stanee,  as  neither  of  us  at  that  time  were  fluent  with
Tibetan,  which  is  the  court  language  of  Sikhim,  he  invited


OUR  RECEPTION  BY  THE  MINISTER  143

us  to  be  seated  on  chairs ;  and  he  himself  sat  down  cross-
legged  on  a  cushion  upon  the  slightly  raised  dais  of  the
Rajah,  and  plied  his  prayer-wheel ;  whilst  our  men  seated
themselves  demurely  on  the  floor,  behind  us,  with  their  hats
in  their  hands.  Slaves  passed  round  Tibetan  tea,  a  broth-
like mess  of  boiled  Chinese  brick-tea,  butter  and  flour.  We,
as  guests,  were  first  served  with  it  in  small  Chinese
bowls,  but  our  men,  as  became  their  inferior  rank,  had  to
produce  their  own  wooden  cups,  which  every  Bhotiya  car-
ries in  his  breast-pocket.  This  tea  was  followed  by  some
murwa  beer,  which  was  about  the  worst  I  ever  tasted.  It
was  sour  as  vinegar.  I  conscientiously,  however,  sipped  a
little  for  politeness'  sake,  though  not  without  alarm  as  to
the  consequences.  After  our  host  had  made  the  customary
civil  enquiries  about  our  health,  and  as  to  whether  we  had
suffered  any  annoyance  through  the  neglect  of  any  of  his
people  since  we  entered  Sikhim,  he  questioned  us  closely
as  to  why  we  had  come  and  where  we  wished  to  go.  But
we  gave  him  no  very  precise  information  on  these  points,
as  we  did  not  wish  him  to  be  able  to  hinder  our  move-
ments, as  his  predecessors  had  done  Hooker's;  or  report
our  intended  route  to  the  Tibetans,  with  whom  many  of
these  officials  are  still  covertly  in  league.

He  told  us  that  if  we  proposed  going  up  the  Lachen
Valley,  (and  this  we  wished  to  do)  it  was  not  yet  open,
owing  to  several  bridges  having  been  swept  away :  this  in-
formation proved  to  be  true.  He  was  anxious  to  know
what    the    English    Government   intended    to    do    with    the


144  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

King,  since  our  expulsion  of  his  allies  the  Tibetans  from  the
country ;  and  he  apologized  for  the  non-appearance  of  the
Rajah's  sister,  she  of  the  story  of  the  basket  of  eggs.  I  asked
him  about  the  etymology  of  some  of  the  names  of  places ;
as  to  why  certain  mountains,  rivers  and  places  had  received
their  particular  names,  for  I  had  found  that  nearly  all  such
names  in  this  country  are  remarkably  descriptive  of  their
physical  peculiarities.  But  his  reply  was  of  the  usual
convincing  kind:  "They  are  called  so  and  so  because
that  is  their  name;"  so  I  had  to  fall  back  on  my  chief
sources  of  information  on  this  subject,  the  fountain-head
itself,  namely,  the  traditions  of  the  aborigines  of  the  local-
ities in  question.  When  we  got  up  to  go  he  rose  and
wished  us  a  pleasant  journey.  We  then  groped  our  way
down  the  creaky  stair,  through  the  dark  corridor ;  and  were
glad  again  to  get  into  the  open  air,  out  of  this  dreary
building  where  the  King  of  Sikhim  has  his  home.  We  had
no  idea  that  he  was  so  miserably  poor.  In  such  dismal
surroundings  and  hedged  in  by  his  priests,  it  is  indeed  a
wonder  that  he  has  not  turned  out  more  helpless  than
he  is.

The  King,  or  as  his  people  call  him  Gyal-po,  which  is
the  Tibetan  word  for  "king",  is  a  Tibetan  by  descent  and
sympathies.  The  first  of  his  dynasty,  2S  which  began  about
250  years  ago,  was  a  pure  Tibetan,  and  he  himself,  the
ninth  of  the  line,  is  largely  of  the  same  blood,  as  nearly
all  his  predecessors  married,  like  himself,  a  Tibetan  wife.
He  was  born  in   i860,  and  bears  the  grand  name  of  "The


THE  KING  AND  QUEEN  OF  SIKHIM


H5


Almighty  Necromancer"  (  Too' -top-nam-gyel).  His  appearance
is  well  shown  in  the  accompanying  photograph,  which  is,
I   believe,  the  only  photograph  which  has  ever  been  taken


THE  KING  AND   QUEEN   OF   SIKHIM.

of  him,  owing  to  his  extreme  sensitiveness  to  the  disfigure-
ment caused  by  his  hare-lip.

His  wife,  the  queen,  is  a  Tibetan,  the  daughter  of  a
personal  servant  of  the  Grand  Lama  of  Lhasa,  and  is  named
Ten-zam-drama.  As  seen  in  the  picture,  her  headdress  is  a
marvellous  arrangement,  a  hillock  of  pearls,  turquoises,  coral


146  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

and  other  precious  stones.  Personally,  she  is  bright  and
prepossessing,  and  rather  inquisitive.  Some  of  the  questions
she  asked  a  friend  of  mine  at  his  visit,  through  an  interpreter
of  course,  were  very  personal,  such  as — "How  old  are
you?"  "Are  you  married?"  "Why  are  you  not  married?"
She  has  been  credited  with  intriguing  in  political  matters
and  causing  some  of  our  recent  troubles  with  Tibet.

Her  husband,  however,  like  most  of  his  predecessors  in
the  kingship,  is  a  mere  puppet  in  the  hands  of  his  crafty
priests,  who  have  made  a  sort  of  priest-king  of  him.
They  encourage  him  by  every  means  in  their  power  to
leave  the  government  to  them,  whilst  he  devotes  all  his
time  to  the  degrading  rites  of  devil-worship,  and  the  ceaseless
muttering  of  meaningless  jargon,  of  which  the  Tibetan  form
of  Buddhism  chiefly  consists.  They  declare  that  he  is  a
saint  by  birth,  that  he  is  the  direct  descendant  of  the
greatest  king  of  Tibet,  the  canonized  Srong-tsan  Gampo,
who  was  a  contemporary  of  Mahomed  in  the  seventh
century  A.D.  and  who  first  introduced  Buddhism  to  Tibet.
They  say  that  a  great  grandson  of  that  saintly  king  settled
in  Kham,  in  eastern  Tibet,  and  was  the  ancestor  of  the
kings  of  Sikhim,  who  are  hence  calkd  Kham-ba,  or  "natives
of  Kham ",  a  title  which  has  misled  Mr.  Risley  and  other
writers  into  stating  that  "Kham-ba"  is  the  kingly  section
of  the  Lepcha  tribe,  whereas  it  is  a  purely  Tibetan  dis-
tinction and  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  Lepcha
race.

This  saintly  lineage  which  secures  for  the  king's  person


THE  KING  AS  A  PRIEST-GOD  147

popular  homage  amounting  to  worship,  is  probably,  however,
a  mere  invention  of  the  priests  to  glorify  their  puppet  prince
for  their  own  sordid  ends.  Such  devices  are  common  in
the  East.  Not  to  mention  the  Mikado  who,  in  the  old
order  of  things,  claimed  divine  descent  from  the  sun-goddess,
Theebaw  the  ex-king  of  Burma  was  a  priest-king,  who
claimed  to  be  descended  from  the  most  famous  king  the
Burmese  ever  heard  of,  to  wit,  a  somewhat  mythical  king
of  Buddha's  day  and  of  Buddha's  own  Sakya  tribe.  And
many  of  the  modern  Rajahs  of  India  boast  of  even  higher
descent — from  God  himself!  I  have  seen  several  examples
of  this  process  taking  place  at  the  present  day  among  the
aboriginal  tribes  of  Central  India.  Certain  of  these  non-
Aryan  headmen  set  themselves  up  as  Hindoos,  and  calling
themselves  Rajputs,  or  members  of  the  kingly  caste,  they
pay  unscrupulous  Hindoo  priests  to  invent  for  them  an
orthodox  though  mythical  pedigree.

Without  entering  much  into  the  government  or  mis-
government  of  this  country,  there  are  a  few  points  in  its
history  that  are  interesting,  as  illustrating  the  principles  on
which  the  enormous  British  Empire  has  been  built  up.

In  the  building  up  of  our  Indian  Empire,  our  policy  has
long  been  to  secure  along  our  frontiers,  as  buffers  between
these  and  the  neighbouring  empires,  a  fringe  of  thriving
semi-independent  states,  self-governing  as  regards  their
internal  affairs,  and  enjoying  an  amount  of  freedom  that
would  make  them  a  useful  force  in  case  of  invasion,  but
under    our    suzerainty — as    we  guarantee  their  autonomy —


148  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

and  open  to  our  trade.  For  trade,  after  all,  is  the  key-
stone of  our  policy,  and  not  land-hunger  or  territorial  ex-
pansion. "The  greatest  of  all  political  interests,"  says  Mr.
Chamberlain,  "  is  commerce,  as  our  nation  cannot  exist
without  trade."  Annexation  of  neighbouring  states,  or  even
direct  interference  in  their  management,  is  never  thought  of
until  oft- repeated  aggression  and  aggravating  injury  to  our
commerce  leaves  absolutely  no  alternative  but  that  the
country  should  be  brought  under  a  civilized  government.
Our  relations  with  this  little  Himalayan  state  arose  in
this  way.

When  the  warlike  tribe  of  Hindooised  Mongoloids,  the
Goorkhas,  after  conquering  Nepal,  towards  the  end  of  the
eighteenth  century,  encroached  on  India  in  1814,  they  over-
ran Sikhim  and  threatened  to  occupy  the  whole  stretch  of
the  Himalayas  as  far  south  as  Assam.  The  British,  however,
drove  them  out  of  Sikhim  in  18 17,  restored  the  late  king,
and  adding  to  his  state  a  considerable  tract  of  the  Terai
or  Morang,  at  the  foot  of  the  hills  which  had  been  ceded
to  us  by  Nepal,  our  government  undertook  the  defence  of
his  country,  and  interposed  it  as  an  effectual  barrier  against
the  expansion  southwards  of  the  aggressive  Nepalese,  whose
growing  power  at  that  time  endangered  India.  Then  after
fourteen  years  of  peace  a  frontier  dispute  again  broke  out
between  Sikhim  and  the  Nepalese,  and  to  settle  it  the
British  agent,  Mr.  Grant,  was  sent.  He  was  so  impressed
with  the  advantages  that  Darjeeling  offered  as  a  sanitarium
for  our  troops,  that  he  induced  our  Government  to  negotiate


BRITISH  EMPIRE-BUILDING  149

for  its  cession.  The  Rajah  yielded  in  1835  the  wished-for
territory,  namely  Darjeeling,  and  the  strip  of  hilly  land
connecting  it  with  the  plains,  in  exchange  for  an  annual
pension  of  £300,  soon  raised  to  £600,  which  sum  much
exceeded  the  revenue  that  he  had  ever  derived  from  it.

Whilst  the  young  settlement  of  Darjeeling  was  growing
by  leaps  and  bounds,  things  went  smoothly  for  several
years  between  it  and  our  feudatory  king,  or  rather  the
priests  who  acted  for  him.  A  change  came  with  the  acces-
sion to  power  of  a  crafty  Tibetan  minister  who  ruled  the
country  with  a  sole  eye  to  his  own  profit.  He  was  an  invete-
rate slave-dealer,  and  made  money  by  sending  slaves  from
Sikhim,  where  slavery  was  prevalent,  to  Tibet,  and  he,  as
well  as  the  local  chiefs,  with  this  object,  raided  into  our
territory,  and  kidnapped  British  subjects  and  refused  to
release  them;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  he  demanded  the
return  of  all  his  runaway  slaves  who  had  fled  to  Darjeeling.
In  the  hope  apparently  of  extorting  his  demands  he  seized
the  Governor  of  Darjeeling,  Dr.  Campbell,  in  1849,  when
the  latter  went  to  try  to  get  matters  on  a  friendly  footing,
and  imprisoned  him  for  six  weeks  at  this  very  place,  where
we  now  are ;  and  along  with  him  Dr.  Hooker,  who  was
then  travelling  in  the  country ;  and  both  nearly  lost  their
lives  here,  as  is  related  by  Hooker  in  his  Journals.  These
outrages  were  avenged  by  the  annexation  of  a  further  strip
of  Lower  Sikhim  including  all  the  Terai,  the  suspension  of
the  cash  allowance  for  a  few  years,  and  by  the  banishment
of  the  hostile  minister.


150  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

The  latter,  however,  continued  his  intrigues  and  his  evil
influence  over  the  king  from  the  adjoining  Tibetan  district
of  Choombi,  across  the  Chola  Pass,  where  in  order  to  escape
from  the  heavy  rains  of  Sikhim,  the  kings  usually  spent
their  summers.  Further  kidnapping  and  plundering  led  to
the  English  occupation  of  "the  palace  "  here  in  1861, 24  when
a  treaty  was  exacted  to  secure  free  trade,  the  protection
of  travellers,  road-making  and  to  facilitate  our  trade  with
Tibet ;  and  in  return  for  this  concession  the  king's  annual
allowance  was  raised  to  £1,200.

After  this,  though  no  actual  conflict  occurred,  the  King
kept  aloof  from  the  friendly  overtures  made  to  him  by  our
Government,  and  allowed  the  treaty  in  regard  to  trade  and
roads  to  remain  a  dead  letter.  In  1884  Mr.  Colman  Mac-
aulay,  one  of  the  few  who  have  realised  the  considerable
commercial  possibilities  of  Tibet,  finding  that  the  little  trade
there  had  been  between  India  and  that  country  was  languish-
ing, prevailed  on  the  government  of  Bengal,  of  which  he
was  secretary,  to  send  him  to  open  communications  with
that  jealously  isolated  land.  On  this  errand  he  passed
through  Sikhim  and  met  the  Tibetan  governor  of  the  frontier
district,  secured  his  good  will  and  obtained  a  friendly  letter
from  the  minister  of  the  Grand  Lama  of  Western  Tibet.
Following  up  this  opening,  Mr.  Macaulay  arranged  in  1885
for  a  commercial  mission  to  Lhasa,  and  he  procured  from
the  Chinese  a  passport  to  visit  that  sacred  city  of  their  vassal,
in  terms  of  the  Treaty  of  Tientsin  extracted  by  the  Euro-
pean powers  at  the  occupation  of  Pekin.  But  this  passport


CHINESE  AND  TIBETAN  INTRIGUES  IN  SIKH1M    151

proved  to  be  simply  a  paper  concession,  like  so  much  of
the  Chinese  concessions,  and  was  never  intended  to  be
used.  For  it  is  an  open  secret  that  the  Chinese,  who  hold
most  of  the  Tibetan  trade  in  their  own  hands,  sent  immedi-
ately secret  orders  to  Tibet  to  obstruct  the  mission,  with
the  result  that  an  armed  force  of  Tibetans  opposed  it  and
prevented  it  from  crossing  the  frontier.  So  jealously  did  the
Chinese  view  this  mission  that  they  actually  conceded  us
some  of  their  territory  on  the  Burmese  side  to  secure  its
withdrawal,  whilst  they  decorated  the  King  of  Sikhim  with
a   grand    title  and  a  high-class  button  of  rank  from  Pekin.

Our  abandonment  of  this  mission  was  regarded  by  the
Tibetan  Lamas  as  cowardice.  They  intrigued  more  actively
than  ever  in  Sikhim.  They  stopped  all  trade  over  the  passes
and  they  induced  the  King  to  desert  his  country  and  settle
in  Tibet.

For  over  two  years  there  was  the  strange  spectacle
of  the  King  absenting  himself  from  his  country,  and  he
deliberately  refused  to  return  notwithstanding  the  representa-
tions made  to  him  by  our  government  that  his  country
was  going  to  ruin  ;  that  his  impoverished  people  were  being
sorely  harassed  by  orders  issued  in  his  name,  extorting
extravagant  sums  of  money  from  them ;  that  they  were
almost  in  open  revolt;  and  that  if  he  did  not  return  soon
to  right  their  wrongs,  his  allowance  might  be  stopped.  He,
however,  refused  to  return  and  defied  our  Government;  and
his  Tibetan  friends,  emboldened  by  our  apparent  inaction,
threw    an    armed    rabble    of  Tibetan  troops  into  Sikhim  in


152  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

1887  and  blocked  our  trade-route  by  building  a  fortified
barrier  at  Lingtoo,  below  the  Jelep  pass,  well  within  the
Sikhim  territory.

This  move  ended  disastrously  for  the  Tibetans.  In  March

1888  they  were  driven  out  of  Sikhim  with  great  loss  to
them,  and  little  to  ourselves.  Since  then,  the  King,  who
had  meanwhile  returned,  has  had  a  British  Resident  imposed
upon  him,  and  the  policy  of  desertion  and  misrule  under
which  his  country  has  so  long  languished  is  now  over.  The
King  has  been  made  to  understand  that  henceforward  he
must  discharge  his  duties  to  his  state  and  must  have  no
more  dealings  with  the  Tibetans.  A  joint  Commission
representing  England  and  China  has  been  appointed  to
define  the  frontier  and  facilitate  trade  with  Tibet.  Good  roads
are  being  made,  and  torrents  bridged ;  and  already,  swarms
of  Nepalese  are  being  imported  into  the  country,  to  reclaim
its  forests  and  give  to  it  a  large  settled  population  of  in-
dustrious peasantry.  To  guarantee  the  performance  of  his
engagements,  and  counteract  the  intrigues  of  the  banished
minister,  his  own  Tibetan  wife,  and  their  Chinese  supporters,
a  detachment  of  our  troops  has  been  placed  near  his  resi-
dence ;  and  as  we  take  our  departure  we  can  see  on  more
than  one  hill  across  the  valley  the  white  tents  of  our
pickets,  the  outposts  of  our  little  army,  under  whose  watch
and  ward  the  country  has  been  for  several  months.

Under  an  enlightened  and  efficient  administration,  there
is  not  only  no  reason  why  Sikhim,  so  rich  in  fertile  valleys
and  with  some  mineral  wealth  as  well,  should  not  become


A  CHANCE  OF  LIBERATING  SIKHIM  153

prosperous  and  pay  its  way ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  there
is  every  prospect  of  the  country  becoming  as  rich  and
prosperous  as  the  Darjeeling  district.  The  chief  obstacle
to  advance,  now  that  the  political  power  of  the  priests  is
broken,  is  the  administrative  corruption,  which  in  the  East
eats  deeply  into  every  department ;  and  the  present  Rajah
certainly  does  not  seem  to  have  displayed  much  aptitude
for  his  trust.

Much  more  hopeful  is  his  younger  son,  who  is  his
presumptive  heir,  as  the  elder  son  has  been  made  a
monk  in  Tibet.  This  boy,  who  is  still  a  mere  child,  might,
if  suitably  educated,  become  a  creditable  ruler ;  and  those
who  have  the  best  interests  of  the  country  and  its  people
at  heart,  expect  that  our  Government  will  see  the  advisa-
bility, nay,  the  necessity,  of  putting  this  boy,  without  delay,
under  proper  European  instruction,  so  as  to  train  him  up
to  an  enlightened  sense  of  his  princely  duties  and  respon-
sibilities towards  his  people  and  country.

Such  training,  however,  to  be  effectual,  must  be  done
entirely  by  a  competent  European,  for  it  is  in  the  last
degree  undesirable  that  the  boy  be  made  a  Bengalee  Baboo ;
and  there  is  much  risk  of  this  happening,  for  even  the
Lama  Ugyen  Gyatsho  has  been  so  influenced  by  his  few
years'  association  with  Bengalees,  that  our  Sikh  orderly
stoutly  maintains  that  he  must  be  really  one  of  these,  and
not  a  Sikhimite  at  all.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  our  Govern-
ment will  see  to  this  important  matter,  and  so,  while  con-
tributing to  the  welfare  of  his  people  and  the  development


154  AMONG  THK   HIMALAYAS

of  his  country,  at  the  same  time  secure  to  ourselves  a  use-
ful ally.

On  returning  to  the  monastery  with  its  flags  fluttering
lazily  in  the  wind,  in  lazy  keeping  with  everything  else,
we  found  a  few  presents  of  fruit,  stale  milk  and  butter
etc.  awaiting  us  from  the  minister.  We  acknowledged  these
gifts  in  the  usual  way,  by  sending  him  in  return  much
more  than  their  equivalent  in  value,  and  also  paid  toll  to
the  servants  who  brought  the  things.  The  remainder  of
the  evening,  after  dinner,  we  spent  in  watching  the  curious
ritual  of  the  priests  in  the  temple.

The  monks  or  priests  sat  cross-legged  in  rows,  according
to  their  rank,  the  head-priest  sitting  next  to  the  high  altar,
on  which  were  ranged  the  idols  of  Buddha  and  the  mon-
strous Indian  and  Tibetan  divinities  of  the  Lamas.  On  it
also  were  set  brazen  candlesticks,  and  bowls  containing  holy
water,  flowers  stuck  in  English  beer-bottles  still  bearing
their  original  labels,  cake-offerings  and  sacrificial  implements.
Clouds  of  incense  filled  the  building,  and  in  the  smoky
gloom  of  the  temple,  dimly  lit  by  flickering  candles,  the
monks  half  veiled  and  half  visible  chanted  their  spells  to
appease  the  divine  wrath  and  to  banish  the  devils.  This
service,  at  times,  was  most  solemn  and  impressive.  When
the  sound  of  voices  rising  from  a  low  intoned  drone  swelled
up  into  a  loud  joyous  chant,  and  sank  again  into  a  whisper,
and  the  only  sound  was  the  slow  deep  sepulchral  tones  of
the  chief  priest,  the  influence  of  the  mysticism  seemed  to
steal   into  your  very  soul.     Then  suddenly  the  thunder  of


PUBLIC  PRAYERS  FOR  OUR  EXPEDITION  155

drums  and  the  shout  of  the  priests  and  people  and  the
clash  of  cymbals  crashes  on  your  startled  ear,  and  the
service  becomes  for  a  time  noisy  and  discordant.

We  were  surprised  to  find  that  part  of  this  service  was
specially  for  our  benefit,  as  Kintoop  had  offered  many
candles  and  had  arranged  for  special  prayers  for  the  success
of  our  expedition  and  our  safe  return.

What  immensely  tickled  our  Indian  servants  was  the
frequency  with  which  refreshments  of  soup,  tea  and  occasional
rounds  of  beer  were  served  out  to  the  monks  in  the  temple,
during  the  intervals  of  worship.  They  declared  that  they
would  much  like  to  belong  to  a  religion  which  provided
its  votaries  with  creature  comforts  so  abundantly.  Before
we  turned  in  for  the  night  we  noticed  an  extraordinary
procession  of  some  of  our  coolies,  who  had  evidently  been
paying  visits  and  been  too  hospitably  treated  to  murwa
to  drown  the  memory  of  their  fatigues  of  yesterday.  They
were  stumbling  along,  the  most  unsteady  bringing  up  the
rear,  but  all  were  in  good  humour  and  not  at  all  boisterous ;
and  Kintoop  assured  us  that  they  would  be  all  right  in
the  morning,  and  so  they  proved  to  be.

Early  next  morning  (12th  October)  we  were  off  again
to  Upper  Sikhim,  along  the  Teesta  Valley,  by  the  lower
road,  as  the  short  cut  over  the  Mafi  pass  was  blocked  by
a  landslip.  Over  undulating  spurs  we  passed  the  small
monastery  of  De-thang,  or  "  The  Meadow  of  the  Scented
Laurel".  This  is  a  species  of  Daphne  from  whose  tough
bark  the  natives  make  paper.  At  the  hamlet  of  Tingcham,


i56  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

where  we  encamped,  goitre  was  common.  One  of  the  afflicted
peasants,  a  rosy-cheeked,  buxom  girl,  was  brought  by  her
parents  to  see  if  I  could  do  anything  to  remove  the  dis-
figuring swelling  in  her  neck,  which  hindered  her  prospects
of  marriage.  I  gave  her,  as  well  as  the  others,  some  red
iodide  of  mercury  ointment  and  showed  them  how  to  apply
it.  But  neither  these  people  nor  the  headman,  who  brought
us  a  few  presents  of  food,  gave  us  any  useful  information
about  the  unexplored  To-loong  valley,  up  which  we  wished
to  go,  and  which  we  could  now  see  looming  dark  and
steep,  some  ten  miles  up  the  other  side  of  the  Teesta.

The  people  are  intensely  superstitious,  and  many  are  the
wild  legends  related  of  this  lonely  gorge,  whose  very  name,
"Valley  of  the  Rocky  Avalanches",  seems  appalling.  These
stories  tell  not  only  of  the  dangers  from  the  showers  of
rocks  that  are  shot  down  by  the  spirits  of  the  glaciers
and  precipices,  but  also  of  the  supernatural  horrors  which
await  the  foolhardy  person  who  dares  to  penetrate  its
lonely  glens  since  the  Lamas  have  placed  the  mausoleum
of  the  kings  there,  and  have  worked  their  spells  over  it.

One  of  the  few  monasteries  of  the  aboriginal  Lepchas  is
to  be  seen  across  the  Teesta,  almost  opposite  our  tent.
The  Lepchas  are  boycotted  by  their  disdainful  Bhotiya
rulers  from  the  regular  monasteries,  and  in  self-defence
they  have  established  this  one  of  Gyagong  and  two  or
three  others  of  their  own.  But  their  form  of  Lamaism
is  even  more  depraved  than  that  of  the  Bhotiyas.  Thus
they   offer  eggs  and  sacrifice  fowls  and  other  living  things


LEPCHA  SACRIFICES  TO  BUDDHA-HORNBILLS    157

before  the  idol  of  the  compassionate  and  sacrifice-abhorring
Buddha  I

Here  we  saw  several  birds  of  that  well-nigh  extinct
family,  the  Hornbills.  They  roosted  on  the  trees  like  great
vultures,  painting  their  beaks  bright  vermilion  from  the
paint-box  they  carry  under  their  tails.  Our  Lepchas  told  us
of  the  curious  habits  of  these  birds  in  regard  to  their
nesting,  how  the  male  bird  builds  a  thick  mud  wall  all  over
his  mate  whilst  she  is  hatching  her  eggs,  leaving  only  a
small  orifice  through  which  he  feeds  her  until  the  young
are  fully  fledged.

Next  day  we  crossed  a  valley  lined  with  many  landslips,
of  which  one  was  still  fresh  and  slightly  moving  as  we
scrambled  over  it.  Beyond  Ringon,  or  "The  Monastery  of
the  Hill",  and  its  mendong  or  cairn  of  Sim,  on  a  point  which
commands  a  fine  view  up  the  mysterious  To-loong  valley
to  the  Kanchen-junga  glaciers,  we  descended  to  the  village
of  Singtam,  where  we  encamped  on  the  bank  of  a  stream,
beside  two  huge  prayer-barrels  or  rather  prayer-mills.  They
were  turned  like  a  water-mill  at  home,  by  the  rushing
waters  of  the  brook.  When  the  headman,  or  Pi-pon,  came
to  pay  his  respects,  bringing  the  usual  small  presents,  we
tried  to  induce  him  to  get  us  some  grain,  as  our  coolies'
food  had  already  run  alarmingly  low,  and  we  had  been  told
that  some  maize  was  stored  in  this  village.  We  therefore
tried  to  tempt  him  to  bring  us  some  by  offering  four  times
the  Darjeeling  market  rate,  and  the  further  reward  of  a  fine
coral  necklace  for  his  womenfolk,  should  he  bring  not  less


158  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

than  two  hundredweight  of  the  grain  before  sunset.  Although
protesting  that  such  a  quantity  could  not  be  found,  he
afterwards  turned  up  with  it,  and  measured  it  out  with  his
own  hands,  giving  very  skimp  quantity.  On  receiving  the
money  and  the  promised  necklace,  he  put  out  his  tongue
and  bowed  his  thanks  in  true  Tibetan  fashion  (see  illus-
tration p.  172).  The  Kazi  or  baron  who  resided  here  in
Hooker's  time  has  transferred  himself  higher  up  to  Ringon.
I  got  some  information  about  the  lower  To-loong  Valley
and  its  lonely  monastery  from  a  monk  who  had  been  there.
He  advised  our  going,  as  we  had  intended,  by  way  of  the
Lachen  valley.  We  enjoyed  magnificent  sunset  views  up
the  wild  To-loong  Valley,  where  the  huge  rock  of  Pon-nay
stood  up  like  a  tall  beetling  tower  or  giant  campanile.

Our  track  next  day  led  down  to  the  bed  of  the  rapidly
rising  Teesta;  here  in  a  cliffy  canon  we  walked  through
shady  groves  of  overhanging  chestnuts,  oaks,  and  maples,
and  past  lovely  fern  and  moss-grown  grottoes,  making  many
detours  to  circumvent  precipitous  rocks,  over  which  cas-
cades tumble  down  the  cliffs  and  leap  into  mid-air  to
become  lost  in  rainbow  mist  long  before  they  reach  the
bottom  of  the  cool  gorge,  where  the  thundering  Teesta
churns  its  waters  into  milk-white  foam.  At  the  Lepcha  village
of  Namgor,  where  we  were  to  encamp,  we  met  a  party  of
Tibetan  shepherds,  who  had  come  with  a  large  flock  of
sheep,  that  they  were  bringing  to  Darjeeling.  They  had
come  from  the  Tsang  province  by  way  of  the  Lachoong
valley.     After   I  had    bought  two    sheep  for  ourselves  and


CROSSING  CLIFFS  ON  LADDERS  150

servants,  they  gave  us  the  disquieting  news  that  the  Lachen
route,  up  which  we  wished  to  go,  would  certainly  not  be
open  for  several  weeks  at  least.  We  thereupon  despatched
Kintoop  with  a  letter  and  present  to  the  abbot  of  the
Choong-tang  monastery  at  the  foot  of  the  Lachen  valley,
asking  him  to  get  the  necessary  bridges  constructed  at  our
expense  without  delay,  and  next  day  we  pushed  on  ourselves
to   Choong-tang.

Fording   a  stream  of  foaming  cataracts,  we  struck  down
again   to  the  canon  of  the  Teesta,  whose  cool  bed  is  now
over    4,000  ft.    above    the    sea.     And    after    fording    many
tributary  torrents  we  reached,  beyond  Chakoong,  the  open
gravelly    delta    of  the  many-armed  Ryot  river,  that  rushes
clear  and  sparkling  over  pebbly  strands  to  join  the  Teesta
close   at  hand.    As  we  passed  a  copse  of  alders,  on  a  ter-
race that  looked  like  an  old  moraine,  we   heard  pheasants
calling    in    the    tempting   cover,    and    my    man    afterwards
brought    in    some  silver  pheasants  that  he  had  shot  for  us
here.     Thence   we    threaded   the  broad  ancient  bed  of  the
Teesta,  now  a  wilderness  of  stones,  through  which  the  track
is  marked  out  for  the  traveller  by  small  pyramids  of  stones,
crowning  the  top  of  the  most  conspicuous  boulders.  On  we
went  until  our  course  was  suddenly  barred  by  a  great  bend
of  the  Teesta,  which  sweeps  round  under  a  huge  cliff.  This
we  had  to  scale  by  ladders  of  notched  bamboos,  the  "high
road"  to  Upper  Sikhim  in  a  very  literal  sense!    Descending
again    to    the    river-bed    beyond,    we    threaded    our   way
amongst    the    great   boulders    to    where,   at  an  elevation  of


i6o


AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS


5,200   ft.    above   the  [sea,  the  Lachen  and  Lachoong  unite
their    waters   to    form    the    commencement    of  the    Teesta.


Here  the
road  to  Tibet  branches  into
two,  one  of  which  leads  up
the  Lachen,  or  the  "Long
Pass",  and  the  other  up  the
"Short  Pass",  or  Lachoong,  and  from  these  two  valley-
passes  the  rivers  respectively  take  their  names.  Upon  the
promontory  formed  by  their  junction,  above  a  small  meadow,


CROSSING   CLIFFS
ON  BAMBOO  LADDERS.


DELAYED  BY  BROKEN  BRIDGES  161

stands  the  monastery  of  Choong-tang,   or  "  The  Meadow  of
Marriage  (of  the  two  rivers)."

On  crossing  the  Lachoong  torrent  by  a  good  cane-bridge,
we  found  Kintoop  and  the  head  Lama  awaiting  us  with
jugs  of  murzva,  on  the  marshy  meadow  below  the  monastery.
The  Lama,  though  quite  a  youth,  was  strikingly  handsome
and  dignified,  and  had  short  curly  hair  like  the  conventional
images  of  Buddha.  He  presented  a  ceremonial  scarf,  in
the  Tibetan  style,  and  said  that  immediately  on  receiving
our  message  he  had  collected  all  the  available  men  from
surrounding  hamlets  to  make  the  necessary  bridges;  and
that  all  these  men,  some  dozen  or  more,  were  then  present.
We  thereupon  held  a  council,  at  which  it  appeared  that
the  construction  of  the  three  bridges  over  the  Lachen  would
take  nearly  a  week,  as  the  largest  would  require  to  be
built  entirely  from  our  side  without  any  aid  from  the  op-
posite bank,  as  no  Tibetans  had  yet  come  down  that  valley.
There  was  no  doubt  as  to  the  chief  bridge  being  really  broken,
for  Kintoop  had  himself  gone  up  to  the  place,  to  ascertain
the  facts.  This  intelligence,  I  confess,  was  most  disappoint-
ing, especially  as  such  delay  at  this  time  of  the  year,  even
were  we  to  consent  to  wait  so  long  in  such  a  hole,  meant
almost  certainly  more  snow  on  the  upper  passes  to  which
we  were  bound.  So  we  decided,  reluctantly,  to  alter  our
programme  and  go  up  the  Lachoong  Valley  instead,  and
thence  try  to  work  round  into  the  Lachen  Valley  by  Kang-
ralamo,  as  Hooker  did,  in  the  reverse  direction,  or  by  the
unexplored    pass   of  Sherboo.     And  we  were  reconciled  to


162  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

this  change  when  we  looked  up  the  Lachoong  Valley.  Our
hearts  were  gladdened  by  the  sight  of  its  bold  pine-clad
slopes  and  peaks  tipped  with  snow,  only  a  few  miles  off;
for  it  rises  so  rapidly  that  it  is  almost  Alpine  at  this  its
lower  end.  Whilst  our  tents  were  being  pitched  on  the
meadow  and  breakfast  was  getting  ready,  we  responded  to
the  Lama's  invitation  to  visit  the  monastery.

We  were  received  as  honoured  guests,  and  we  must  have
formed  quite  a  picturesque  procession  as  we  climbed  the
winding  path  to  the  convent,  to  the  inspiriting  strains  of
the  temple  band !  First,  there  marched  the  band  in  single
file,  blowing  horns  and  trombones,  clashing  cymbals,  and
beating  drums  that  were  held  aloft  by  a  handle,  like  huge
uplifted  frying-pans,  such  as  we  had  seen  at  Phodang.  After
the  band,  and  immediately  preceding  us,  walked  the  stately
mitred  Lama,  carrying  burning  joss-sticks  or  tapers  of  sweet
incense.  We  were  escorted  by  several  red-robed  priests,  while
Kintoop  with  a  straggling  tail  of  our  followers  brought  up
the  rear.

The  monastery  is  perched  on  a  commanding  knoll,  over-
looking the  rivers.  It  is  a  small  two-storied  building  of
rude  stone,  with  an  upper  wooden  balcony  reached  by  a
notched  log  as  a  ladder.  One  of  the  chief  idols  in  this
temple  is  the  tutelary  goddess  called  "The  Diamond  Lady
Sow".25  This  lady  is  not  exactly  the  kind  one  would  care
to  introduce  to  one's  friends.  She  has  the  form  of  a  woman
with  three  heads,  one  of  them  a  sow's,  and  her  character
is  that  of  a  blood-thirsty  and  vindictive  she-devil.  To  account


THE  LEGEND  OF  CHOONG-TANG  MONASTERY     163

for  her  high  position  here,  the  Lamas  say  that  the  name
of  this  place  is  not  really,  as  the  villagers  call  it,  "  Choong-
tang";  but  that  it  should  be  "Tsoon-tang"  which  means
"The  Meadow  of  our  Lady  (-Sow)".

This  now  solitary  place  was  once  a  Tibetan  outpost,  of
which  the  ruins  are  still  visible ;  and  it  was  the  scene  of
much  excitement  about  ten  years  ago.  The  people  of  the
valleys  of  Lachen  and  Lachoong  which  meet  here,  are
Tibetan  herdsmen,  over  whom  the  abbot  or  Lama  of  this
monastery  claimed  spiritual  jurisdiction  and  extorted  so  many
tithes  that  they  rebelled  against  him.  It  is  related,  that
the  infuriated  mob  of  herdsmen  gathered  here,  and  slaugh-
tering two  bull-yaks,  one  from  each  valley,  at  the  spot
where  we  are  encamped,  they  dipped  their  hands  in  the
reeking  blood,  and  swore  a  great  oath  never  again  to  owe
allegiance  to  this  Lama,  or  send  their  sons  to  be  monks
of  this  monastery,  or  do  any  of  its  drudgery  or  cultivate
any  of  its  lands.  Then  they  marched  up  to  the  monastery,
brandishing  their  swords,  beating  drums,  and  shouting  ven-
geance on  the  Lama ;  but  he,  on  hearing  the  outcry,  had  fled
precipitately  down  the  valley  to  Ringon  monastery,  where
he  still  lives.  The  deserted  monastery  fell  into  decay,  and
remained  in  a  ruinous  state  till  1883,  when  a  more  popular
Lama  was  sent  from  Pemiongchi  to  re-establish  it.  This  new
Lama,  however,  went  to  the  opposite  extreme,  it  is  said ;  and
so  intimately  identified  himself  with  the  Tibetans,  that  he  joined
them  and  fled  to  Tibet  during  our  recent  war  with  that  country ;
and  at  present  our  handsome  young  host  is  in  charge.


1 64  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

He  acts  up  to  his  Buddhist  ideal  in  some  ways,  for  when
I  was  going  out,  gun  in  hand,  to  look  for  game,  he  lamented
over  my  sin  of  shooting,  and  appealed  to  me  not  to  take
any  animal  life,  at  least  within  some  miles  of  the  sacred
temple  of  Buddha.  So  I  had  to  go  botanizing  instead.
And  looking  up  out  of  this  deep  dark  gorge  to  the  inspirit-
ing snowy  peaks  rising  only  a  few  miles  up  the  valley,
we  were  cheered  to  feel  that  we  were  really  on  the  threshold
of  the  Himalayan  Alps,  at  last.


CHAPTER    V


THE   ALPINE   LACHOONG   VALLEY  TO    THE   TIBETAN

FRONTIER — THE   TANG-KAR,   DONG-KIA,

SEEBOO,    FATA   AND   GORA   PASSES


Dong-kia's  beetling  bastions  frowned
A  silent  warning  far  around
No  foot  may  venture  here.

C.  Macaulay's  Lay  of  Lachen.


Such  a  delightful  day's  walk  we  had  up  the  lovely
Alpine  valley  of  Lachoong.  It  well  repaid  us  for  all  our
many  days'  discomfort  in  the  hot  gorges  below.  Our  path
ran  along  the  bank  of  the  rushing  river.  At  first  it  led
over  gravelly  strands  in  the  cool  river-bed,  where  clumps
of  familiar  European  shrubs  and  flowers  showed  the  prox-
imity of  the  snowy  peaks,  which  now  almost  overhung  us,
although  the  forest  on  the  banks  was  still  semi-tropical.  But
every    step    carried    us   quickly  up  into  an  Alpine  climate.

After  about  a  mile,  we  crossed  to  the  opposite  bank  by
a  cane  bridge  near  the  place  where  Hooker  lost  his  Tibetan


[66


AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS


dog  "Kinchin";  and  beyond  this,  over  an  old  moraine,  the
valley    opened    out    a    little,    and    the   snow  fingered  down

the  peaks  on  either  side  of
us.  The  upper  reaches  ot  the
hillsides  got  more  and  more
bare  and  rugged,  and  the
contrast  between  their  south-
ern and  northern  sides  was
most  striking.  The  warm
southern  slopes  were  still
covered  by  dense  forest,
where  straggling  rattan-cane,
or  climbing    palms,    rose    to


LOG-BRIDGE   ON    CANTILEVER    PRINCIPLE.

the  tops  of  trees  70  or  80  feet  high,  and  trailing  over  100
yards    through   the   jungle,    penetrated   almost  to  the  pines


THE  ALPINE  LACHOONG  VALLEY  167

that  crowned  the  summits.  The  pines,  as  we  moved  upwards
into  cooler  altitudes,  were  reaching  farther  and  farther  down
the  mountain  sides;  while  in  the  cold  northern  shade,
snow  lay  low  down  below  the  peaks,  which  on  this  side
were  mostly  bare  of  trees.

At  the  hamlet  of  Kedoom  (6,400  feet)  we  halted  at  a
hut  in  an  orchard  of  peach  and  apricot  trees,  and  found
the  fruit  refreshing,  though  not  yet  ripe.  Here  there  is  a
very  marked  change  in  the  flora  and  fauna.  Indeed  this
place,  as  Mr.  Blanford  observes,  may  be  considered  the
boundary  between  the  Malay  and  Palaearctic  faunas,  a
boundary  which  on  the  eastern  Chola  range  is  3,000  to  4,000
feet  higher.     Wild  goats  {Gooral)  are  to  be  found  here.

We  recrossed  the  river  by  a  picturesque  bridge  on  the
cantilever  principle,  the  same  which  is  so  common  in  China,
and  figured  on  the  willow-pattern  plates ;  and  I  have  seen
the  same  style  of  bridge,  only  more  elaborate,  in  Upper
Burma.  They  resemble  somewhat  the  ancient  Gallic  bridges
described  by  Caesar,  and  much  the  same  are  still  to  be
seen  in  the  mountains  of  Savoy.  Great  logs  of  pine,  oak,
or  other  sturdy  trees,  are  laid  down  on  either  bank  and
"canted"  up,  so  that  one  end  projects  a  long  way  over  the
bank,  and  the  beams  are  fixed  in  this  position  by  loading
down  their  landward  ends  by  heavy  rocks.  Then  across
the  abutting  ends  of  these  piers,  stretching  from  the  one  to
the  other,  is  placed  a  platform  of  three  or  four  logs,  lashed
together;  and  on  this,  for  footway,  some  planks  and  brush-
wood are  laid  crosswise.  It  is  thus  a  fairly  strong  suspension-


168  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

bridge,    and  if  made  broad  enough,  as  this  one  was,  even
cattle  can  cross  it.

Beyond  this  bridge,  the  valley  broadened  out,  and  the
undergrowth  got  less  dense.  We  passed  up  through  a  fine
open  glade  in  the  forest,  amongst  walnut  trees,  where  the
squirrels  were  busy  at  work.  We  knocked  down  a  few  of
the  nuts  and  found  them  excellent.  Onwards  through  hazel,
holly,  maple,  crab-apple,  poplar  and  pines,  we  entered  an
open  grassy  meadow,  dotted  by  the  peculiarly  Tibetan
cattle,  the  yaks,  browsing  on  its  rich  pasture.

This  was  the  first  time  I  had  seen  these  Tibetan  oxen,
out  of  the  "Zoo"  in  Regent's  Park.  They  are  shaggy  beasts,
in  appearance  something  between  the  American  bison,
and  the  cattle  of  the  Scotch  highlands :  and  their  curious
grunting  call  is  aptly  denoted  in  their  scientific  name  of
"The  Grunting  Ox"  [Bos grunniens).  They  are  noble-looking
massive  animals,  especially  the  bull-yaks,  in  spite  of  their
oddly  round  and  squat  appearance,  their  broad  straight
backs,  short  legs,  and  long  silky  hair.  This  thick  coat  of
hair  which  protects  them  from  perishing  in  the  arctic  cold
of  the  snows,  is  longest  on  their  sides  and  undersurfaces,
and  in  some  of  the  older  animals  it  almost  sweeps  the
ground.  The  tail  ends  in  a  great  bushy  tuft,  which  serves
the  same  purpose  as  the  bushy  tail  of  the  hybernating
squirrel,  curling  over  its  owner's  feet  and  nose  when  asleep,
like  a  rug,  and  thus  affording  protection  against  the  intense
cold  of  the  Himalayan  nights.  These  bushy  yak-tails  are
much    in    demand  in  India,  as  fly-whisks  (chowrics)  for  In-


THE  YAKS  AND  THEIR  HERDSMEN


i6g


dian  princes,  and  as  royal  emblems  for  the  idols  in  Indian

temples.     The    colour    of  the    wild    yak    is   a   dark  brown,

almost  black ;  but  most  of  the  domestic  yaks  acquire  a  good

deal  of  white  with  the  black  predominating ;  and  those  most

valued       have        their

muzzles     tipped      with

white,   some   white  on

their   neck,    and    their

tails  entirely  white.  The

female  yaks  are  called

Di-mo ;   and    the  A-yn

are    a    kind    of  polled

yak.    Here    also    were


YAKS.


some  hybrids  between  these  domestic  yaks  and  the  common
Indian  cow ;  for  the  yak  interbreeds  freely  with  most  other
species  of  the  ox  tribe.  2fi  These  hybrids  are  called  Zo,  and
are  said  to  stand  these  warmer  valleys  better  than  pure
yaks,    though    even   they  cannot  survive  the  heat  of  much


170  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

lower  elevations  in  this  latitude.  Most  of  these  cattle  are
rather  fierce,  and  we  found  it  politic  to  give  them  a  wide
berth  in  passing.

Perhaps  nothing  gives  a  better  notion  of  the  essentially
pastoral  character  of  a  primitive  language  like  the  Tibetan,
than  the  evident  relation  of  the  name  of  the  Yak,  to  the
ideas  of"  wealth  "  and  "  excellence  ".  In  pastoral  Tibet,  where
the  use  of  money  is  almost  unknown  and  business  is  done
mainly  by  barter,  the  word  for  wealth  means  "  possessed
of  cattle" — the  herds  of  yaks  and  sheep.  While  the  word
"Yak"  itself  is  evidently  onomato-poetic,  coined  from  the
call  of  the  beast:  and  it  seems  to  have  conveyed  to  the
rude  Tibetan  mind  the  beau  ideal  of  excellence — nothing
seemed  better  than  a  good  fat  yak — and  hence  it  came  to  form
the  common  word  for  that  which  is  "good  and  excellent."

The  sight  of  these  Tibetan  cattle  with  their  Tibetan  herds-
men, the  so-called  "Dok-pa",  and  their  fierce  visaged  deep-
voiced  mastiffs,  who  are  marked  like  bears,  with  a  white
patch  on  the  breast,  and  hence  their  usual  name  is  "Bear"
[Tom-mo],  made  us  feel  that  we  were  nearing  the  borders
of  Tibet  itself.  And  this  was  still  more  evident  when  the
musical  jingle  of  harness  bells  heralded  the  approach  of
a  party  of  Tibetan  merchants,  who  came  riding  on  ponies
and  yaks,  and  driving  a  string  of  laden  yaks.  For  baggage-
animals  pass  regularly  along  this  track  from  Kedoom  to
and  from  Tibet.  Here,  too,  a  Lammergeyer  eagle  came
to  greet  us,  hovering  on  widespread  wings,  high  overhead,
the  unfailing  escort  of  the  traveller  in  these  high  regions.


PECULIAR  TIBETAN  SALUTATION  171

The  valley  now  had  grown  truly  Alpine.  On  either  side
of  us  rose  snow-capped  mountains,  almost  bare  of  trees,
except  in  the  ravines  where  rhododendrons  and  dark  pines
clustered  thickly.  These  elegant  pines  {Abies  Smithiana),  the
"Spruce"  of  Hooker,  and  another  {Tsuga  Brunnonid),  had
been  advancing  slowly  down  the  hillsides  and  first  reached
the  river  bank  on  the  cold  northern  aspect  of  a  head-land,
about  8,000  feet  above  the  sea-level,  and  about  ten  miles
above  Choong-tang,  whence  we  had  started  that  morning.

Suddenly,  on  rounding  a  grassy  spur,  we  came  on  the
village  of  Lachoong  (8,600  ft.),  lying  like  a  truly  Alpine
town  in  the  bottom  of  the  open  valley,  at  the  junction  of
the  Lete  river  with  the  Lachoong,  and  amidst  the  grass-
covered  moraines  noticed  by  Hooker.  We  were  met  outside
the  village  by  a  party  of  the  inhabitants  led  by  the  head-
man, who  presented  a  scarf  and  saluted  us  in  Tibetan  style,
pressing  forward  his  right  ear  and  putting  out  his  tongue
in  his  most  polite  way.

This  extraordinary  form  of  salutation  is,  I  think,  one  of
the  best  illustrations  possible  of  that  kind  of  salutation  which
Herbert  Spencer 27  classes  as  expressing  the  self-surrender
of  the  person  saluting  to  the  person  he  salutes.  And  it  has
never  been  properly  described  before.  There  is  no  "  scratch-
ing "  of  the  ear  as  stated  by  Hue  and  the  writers  following
him.  What  is  done  in  addition  to  the  uncovering  and  low  bow
or  prostration,  and  the  abject  putting  out  of  the  tongue,
is  that  the  Tibetan  presses  forward  his  left  ear.  This,  it
seems    to    me,    is    in    accordance    with  the  ancient  Chinese


172


AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS


custom  of  cutting  off  the  left  ears  of  all  prisoners  taken  in
war,  and  presenting  them  to  the  victorious  chief.

The  presentation  of  the  scarf  of  white  Chinese  silk  is  an
essential    part    of    Tibetan     courtesy.      Not     only    is    this


^y


THE  POLITE  TIBETAN   SALUTATION.


necessary  in  paying  formal  visits,  but  no  favour  can  be
asked  of  a  superior  without  it,  and  it  forms  the  envelope
for  all  important  letters.  So  extensively  indeed  are  these
articles  used  in  Tibet,  that  their  importation  forms  a  consider-
able trade  with  China.


LACHOONG  VILLAGE  173

We  pitched  our  tent  on  the  velvety  bank  of  grass  border-
ing the  river,  and  nestling  under  a  great  craggy  mountain
that  rose  abruptly  many  thousand  feet  above  us.  How
high  it  rose,  indeed,  we  could  not  see,  as  its  head  was  hid
in  mist;  but  a  glacier  peeped  over  its  cliffy  shoulder  and
patches  of  snow  lay  low  on  its  sides,  and  the  chill  blast
blew  down  its  slopes  and  made  us  quickly  don  our  warmest
overcoats.

Our  tent  was  soon  the  centre  of  an  admiring  crowd  of
villagers  who  watched  all  our  proceedings,  open  mouthed
and  open  eyed,  as  most  of  them  had  never  seen  Europeans
before.  Some  of  the  girls  looked  picturesque  in  tartan
skirts  and  small  round  hats,  and  dressed  generally  like  the
Bhotiya  women  at  Darjeeling.  Those  wearing  conch-shell
bracelets  on  their  wrist  are  usually  married.  The  greatest
attraction  of  all  for  the  people  was  to  see  us  dine,  which
we  did  al  fresco  to  enjoy  the  view.  It  was  interesting  to
watch  the  yaks  browsing  high  up  the  crags  above  us.  How
they  got  there  and  found  a  footing  was  a  marvel.  It  made
one  almost  dizzy  to  look  up  at  these  great  beasts  scrambling
like  chamois  along  the  slippery  face  of  the  cliffs,  which
by  fore-shortening  seemed  almost  perpendicular.  They
clambered  over  loose  masses  of  rock  where  at  every  moment
we  expected  either  to  see  them  dashed  down  before  our
eyes,  or  send  some  of  the  rocks  thundering  down  to  over-
whelm us  below.  At  sunset,  which  occurred  at  4  o'clock,
when  the  sun  suddenly  dipped  behind  Kanchen-junga  and
threw  the  valley  into  cold  shade,  the  herdsmen  called  their


i74  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

cattle  home ;  and  then  these  big  beasts  lumbered  down
the  precipitous  hills  at  a  run,  and  gathered  on  the  meadow
near  our  tent,  where  their  playful  antics,  so  clumsy  and
uncouth,  were  ludicrous  to  see.  Instead  of  lowing,  they
literally  grunted  with  joy,  and  most  of  them  have  tinkling
bells,  like  Alpine  cattle.  Here  I  got  my  first  glass  of  yak's
milk.  It  surpasses  in  richness  the  richest  Devonshire  cream,
and  is  too  rich  in  fact  to  drink,  but  with  oatmeal  porridge
next  morning  was  excellent.  A  young  yak  was  bought  as
meat  for  the  camp.  Amongst  some  presents  that  were
brought  us,  were  some  sweet  little  turnips,  grown  locally
from  Tibetan  seed ;  such  would  be  most  welcome  at  Darjee-
ling,  which  is  badly  off  for  vegetables.  They  have  no
Murwa  beer  here  as  millet  is  too  bulky  to  import  so  far.
Instead  of  this  they  drink  a  coarse  stuft  brewed  from  maize,
and  even  this  is  a  luxury.  Buckwheat  and  barley  are  the
only  grains  grown  locally.

I  had  some  interesting  conversation  with  several  of  the
people,  and  with  the  Lama  of  the  place.

The  inhabitants  of  this  valley  are  called  Ha-pa  or  Har-pa
Tibetans,  as  they  came  originally  from  the  Ha  province  of
south-western  Tibet,  bordering  Bhotan.  They  are  nomads
in  habit.  Though  they  have  fixed  their  head-quarters  at
this  village,  few  of  them  stay  here  for  more  than  a  few
months.  In  the  early  spring,  as  the  snows  melt  on  the
upland  pastures,  they  move  up  the  valley  with  their  herds,
by  stages,  to  their  summer  grazing-stations,  which  lie  at
intervals    of  four  or  five  miles  all  along  the  upper  valley.


A  NOMAD  TRIBE  175

And  at  each  of  these  stations  are  erected  rude  huts  as
shelters,  which  are  evacuated  as  the  herdsmen  move  on.
In  this  way,  they  ascend  gradually  higher  and  higher  as
the  weather  warms,  till  they  reach  the  summit  of  the  Dongkia
pass  (18,000  ft.)  about  June,  when  it  is  usually  unsnowed
and  open.  Thence,  they  cross  the  frontier  into  Tibet  and
move  slowly  along  with  their  black  yak-hair  tents,  a  few
of  their  cattle,  and  their  produce,  to  Kamba-jong,  the  head-
quarters of  the  adjoining  district  in  Tibet.  A  few  go  even
as  far  as  the  capital  of  Western  Tibet  (Shiga-tse  or  Tashil-
humpo).  At  those  marts  they  barter  their  goods  for  salt,
tea,  cloth,  rugs,  jewellery  etc.,  and  then  they  slowly  return
so  as  to  recross  the  frontier  into  Sikhim  about  the  end  of
August,  and  retreat  down  this  Lachoong  valley  before  the
advancing  snow.  In  mid-winter  they  leave  Lachoong  and
drive  their  yaks  and  other  cattle  still  further  down,  almost
to  Kedoom.  The  valley  has  thus  practically  only  one  vil-
lage, and  in  this  respect  the  neighbouring  valley  of  Lachen
is  said  to  resemble  it.  These  people  pride  themselves
immensely  on  their  pure  Tibetan  blood,  and  do  not  conceal
their  contempt  for  the  Sikhimese,  though  they  have  to  pay
revenue  to  the  Rajah  of  Sikhim.  This  is  paid  in  kind,  at
the  rate  of  two  pounds  of  butter  for  each  milk-yak,  and
a  blanket  and  two  pounds  of  salt  for  each  house.

Kintoop  announced  that  the  fugitive  ex-Lama  of  Choong-
tang  monastery,  of  whom  we  have  heard,  and  of  whose
capabilities  Mr.  Macaulay  had  formed  a  high  opinion,  had
returned  secretly  from  Tibet  and  desired  to  see  me.  He  came


176  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

carrying  a  presentation  scarf,  which  I  accepted,  although  at
that   time    I  was  unaware  that  my  acceptance  of  it  meant,
according  to  the  custom  of  these  people,  that  I  would  favour-
ably  consider  his  request.    He  was  a  jolly-looking,  typical
monk  of  middle  age,  with  an  intelligent  and  shrewd  expres-
sion,   and   he    rejoiced  in  the  title  of  "The  Holder  of  the
Religious  Mysteries",  "8  which  he  was  careful  to  write  on  his
card  in  the  vernacular.  He  said  that  he  had  all  along  been
loyal  to  the  English,  and  had  rendered  much  assistance  to  Mr.
Macaulay,  who  had  taken  him  to  see  the  sights  of  Calcutta ;
and  that  as  he  had  there  seen  with  his  own  eyes  evidence
of  the  great  power  of  the  English,  it  was  absurd  to  think
that    he    had    been    intriguing    against    us,    with   the    poor
Tibetans,  as  his  detractors  alleged.  "No,"  said  he,  "I  have
been  consistently  loyal  to  the  English,  and  that  is  why  the
Tibetans    carried    me  off  by  force." — "What  other  punish-
ment," I  asked  in  an  incredulous  tone,"  have  the  Tibetans
inflicted  upon  you  ? " — "  None,"  he  replied,  "  that  was  enough
to    compromise  me;  and  now  as  they  have  released  me,  I
wish   to    be    re-instated    in    my   monastery  here  in  Sikhim.
For,"  said  he,  "  although  this  monastery  belongs  to  my  sect
(Pemiongchi),  yet  the  new  English  political  officer  has  con-
fiscated it,  and  given  it  to  the  rival  sect,"  whose  head,  our
old  friend  the  Lama  of  Phodang,  is  now  politically  supreme.
I  advised  him  to  represent  his  case  to  our  political  officer.
The    view   up    the    Lete    Valley  towards  Tang-kar  Pass,
the  "  Tungra"  of  Hooker,  was  so  attractive  that  we  decided
to  go  there  next  day.  The  only  information  we  possess  of


CASCADES    OF   THE   LETE.


AT  LACHOONG  179

this  pass  is  the  brief  notice  by  Hooker,  of  his  visit  to  it
more  than  forty  years  ago,  and  since  that  time  no  European
appears  to  have  visited   it.

Our  coolies  now  got  quite  excited  at  the  prospect  of
getting  into  the  snow,  and  busied  themselves  in  preparing
for  this  arctic  weather.  Several  began  mending  their  snow-
boots  and  their  blanket-coats;  and  the  women,  as  if  their
faces  were  not  dirty  enough  already,  smeared  more  brown
paint  around  their  eyes  and  noses,  as  a  protection  against
possible  snow-blindness.  The  Tibetans  suffer  a  good  deal
from  this  affection,  and  always  use  goggles  when  they  can
get  them — coloured  glasses  stitched  into  a  band  of  cloth,
as  metal  is  so  painfully  cold.  The  commonest  eye-preservers
consist  of  a  gauze  netting  of  closely  plaited,  black  yak-
hair;  but  the  poorer  people  when  crossing  the  snow  merely
blacken  their  faces  around  the  eyes  and  nose  with  dark
pigment.  This  latter  practice  is  followed  by  the  women  of
the  lower  classes  of  Tibet  at  all  times  of  the  year,  even
at  Darjeeling  where  there  is  no  snow.  This  hideous  custom
is  said  to  have  been  forced  on  them  by  the  Lamas,  to
lessen  their  attractions  for  possible  admirers  amongst  the
wavering  members  of  the  celibate  monkhood.

It  was  almost  freezing  as  the  darkness  settled  in,  and  a
few  drops  of  sleety  rain  fell  from  the  threatening  sky.  During
the  night  I  was  awakened  by  a  rumbling  and  shaking  like
an  earthquake,  but  on  looking  out,  I  found  that  the  cause
of  the  disturbance  was  a  yak  that  had  strayed  amongst
the  tent  ropes,  and  it  was  more  alarmed  than  myself.


180  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

Next  morning  we  were  off  for  the  Tang-kar  pass,  leaving
here  at  Lachoong  our  heavy  stores  and  the  weakliest  of
our  coolies,  as  we  must  return  this  way.  We  crossed  the
river  on  some  logs  and  saplings  thrown  over  the  boulders,
the  regular  bridge  having  lately  been  swept  away  by  a
flood,  which  had  cut  a  fresh  section  through  the  end  of
the  moraine  on  which  the  village  is  built,  and  a  streamlet
poured  over  this  in  small  cascades.  The  bulk  of  the  village
stands  on  this  terraced  left  bank,  and  as  we  passed  upwards,
the  score  or  so  of  houses  presented  a  suggestively  Swiss
appearance  with  their  wooden  balconies,  projecting  eaves
and  truly  Alpine  setting,  amidst  dark  pines  and  snowpeaks.
Ascending  this  lateral  moraine  which  belts  the  Lete  valley,
we  rose  rapidly,  passing  on  the  way  the  small  monastery,
where  the  Lama  came  forward  and  pompously  presented
a  scarf,  and  received  in  return  a  couple  of  rupees,  or  eight
times  the  cost  of  the  scarf.

Continuing  our  ascent  over  a  bare  ridge,  dotted  here
and  there  with  the  graceful  Himalayan  larch  {Larix  Griffithii)
which  grows  at  about  from  8,000  to  12,000  feet,  we  struck
the  gorge  of  the  tumultuous  Lete,  and  followed  up  its  steep
bank  amidst  pines  and  rhododendrons.  Here  a  species  of
wild  red  currant,  pleasant  to  the  taste,  grows  abundantly.
After  a  time,  the  track  got  lost  in  the  rocky  bed  of  the
stream,  along  which  we  picked  our  way  amongst  the  great
boulders,  through  most  beautiful  scenery  :  avenues  of  magni-
ficent pines,  graced  by  cascades,  and  overhung  by  snowpeaks.
After  a  mile  or  so,  we  gained  the  track  on  the  opposite  side


TO  THE  TANG-KAR  PASS


181


and  passed  up  through  the  pine  forest  oi  Abies  Dwnosa  and  the
silver-fir  (A  Webbiana, — in  Tibetan  "Dura  Shing"),  and  here
and  there  great  black  juniper  trees  {J.  excelsa),  the  "  Shook-
pa"  of  the  Tibetans,  the  aromatic  wood  of  which  is  burnt  as


HIMALAYAN    LARCH.

incense  in  the  temples,  and  is  the  "pencil-cedar"  of  com-
merce. I  shot  here,  near  an  overhanging  rock,  a  speckled
wood  pigeon,  and  higher  up  a  snow  pigeon  {Columba  len-
conota),  and  very  good  eating  they  were — Hooker  tells  how
these  last  formed  his  chief  animal  food  for  some  months,
when   the    Sikhim   officials   cut   off  his  meat  supply  in  the


182  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

hope  of  starving  him  out  of  the  country.  Presently  we
reached  the  upper  limit  of  trees,  and  here  we  encamped
amongst  the  rhododendrons  and  red  and  blue  barberry,  at
about  12,000  feet  elevation.  The  cessation  of  trees  was
not  due  to  any  change  in  the  geological  formation,  but
merely  to  cold  and  height.  So  spongy  with  damp  was  the
boggy  soil,  that  we  had  to  cut  down  a  quantity  of  the
pine  branches  as  a  platform  on  which  to  pitch  our  tents.
Hanging  from  the  few  straggling  storm-tossed  pines  were
masses  of  a  stringy  white  lichen  {Usnea  barbatd),  which
fluttered  from  their  branches  like  grizzly  beards.

Our  men  always  preferred  the  forest  to  the  open  as  a  place
of  encampment;  not  only  for  shelter  from  the  cold  and
wind,  but  also  for  the  sake  of  fuel  for  their  cooking  fire,
and  the  convenient  fire-place  which  a  tree-trunk  offers,
especially  that  of  a  dead  tree.  They  kindle  their  fire  at
the  foot  of  such  a  tree,  and  the  rotten  touch-wood  at  the
centre  ignites,  and  the  trunk  thus  getting  hollowed  out  by
the  fire,  acts  as  a  reflector  in  throwing  the  heat  forward.
Some  of  the  half-rotten  logs  were  luminous,  and  glowed  in
the  dark— this  was  due  probably  not  to  ''phosphorescence",
but  rather  to  the  presence  of  luminous  micro-organisms,
for  this  wood  was  stained  dark  green  by  some  kind  of
fungus.

The  morning  dawned  intensely  cold,  the  thermometer
registered  two  degrees  Fah.  below  the  freezing-point.  The
grass  and  foliage  were  white  with  frost,  and  the  ice  spangles
of  the  frozen  forest  glittered  in  the  sun.   We  started  off  in


RHODODENDRON  MOORS  183

the  crisp  keen  air,  crackling  the  ice  over  the  shallow  puddles
of  yesterday.  The  many  streamlets  that  we  crossed  were
fringed  with  icicles,  hanging  from  the  dripping  banks  and
stones.  Ascending  the  bleak  open  valley — like  a  highland
moor,  with  rhododendron  instead  of  heather — for  about  two
miles,  the  rocks  closed  in  around  us,  and  we  entered  a  great
rocky  cul-de-sac,  whose  walls  rose  up  like  giant  towers  and
battlements,  that  shut  the  snows  from  our  view.  Through
a  deep  cleft  in  this  wall,  the  stream  tumbled  down  in  a
string  of  cascades,  and  here,  at  an  elevation  of  about  14,000
feet,  we  decided  to  encamp,  as  the  pass  could  be  easily
reached  from  this  point  the  following  day;  and  also  because
the  dwarf  rhododendron-brushwood  ended  here,  and  it  was
now  our  only  fuel.  After  selecting  a  picturesque  and  sheltered
spot  for  our  tent,  and  while  B.  went  botanizing  below,  I
climbed  the  precipice  to  the  cleft  in  the  rocky  wall,  through
which  the  rivulet  precipitated  itself  headlong.  The  cliff  was
not  so  sheer  as  it  looked  from  below.  A  steep  track  zig-
zagged up  its  face,  but  no  bridle-path  could  easily  be
made  here  for  mountain  artillery.

The  view  from  the  top  was  superb.  At  ten  o'clock  not
a  cloud  obscured  the  summits.  Westwards  the  view  ex-
tended away  down  the  rocky  valley  up  which  we  had  come,
to  the  black  tree-line,  and  down  the  deep  trough  to  the
silvery  Lachoong  river,  over  8,000  feet  below,  beyond  which
rose  range  upon  range  of  snowy  mountain  and  blue  glaciers
up  to  Kanchen-junga  and  Kabroo.  The  contour  of  this
latter  mountain  as  seen  from  here,  is  a  long  undulating  ridge,


1 84


AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS


not  the  elegant  tent-like  form  of  its  foreshortened  southern
view,  as  seen  from  Darjeeling.  And  looking  upwards  through
the  cleft  where  the  rushing  stream  wrestled  with  the  rocks
that    barred    its    progress,  was  a  peak  of  everlasting  snow,


DOWNWARD  VIEW   FROM   THE  CLEFT   (14,500  feet).

only    a    few    hundred  yards  off,  dazzling  white  against  the
dark  blue  of  the  Tibetan  sky.

On  passing  further  up  this  narrow  gorge,  the  stream  was
seen  to  turn  sharply  up  to  a  snowfield  on  the  right,  towards


RAREFIED  AIR  -GIANT  RHUBARB


185


the  pass;  so  I  sent  on  a  man  to  report  on  the  snow-track
to  the  pass,  and  I  climbed  a  few  hundred  feet  higher  to
the  crest  of  the  cliff  called  La-che-pia,  overlooking  our  camp,
and  found  it  to  be  a  miniature  tableland.  This  ascent  was
over  a  slope  of  patches  of  snow  overlying  loose  shingly
splinters  of  rock,  chipped  off  by
the  frost,  and  which  slid  down
under  foot  as  you  went.

In  this  ascent,
I  felt  for  the  first
time  the  effects  of
the  rarefied  air  of
this  great  eleva-
tion, for  I  was  now
about  the  height
of  Mont  Blanc,
although  no  ice-
climbing  had  yet
been  done.  The
slightest    exertion  giant  wild  rhubarb.

now  caused  short-
ness of  breath,  and  a  faint  headache  and  giddiness;  but
these  disagreeable  sensations  ceased  immediately  I  remained
at  rest.  The  natives  believe  that  these  symptoms  are  caused
by  a  poison  in  the  air,  which  they  call  "  the  poison  of  the
pass  "  {La-dook).

In   this   treeless    region   there   was    very   little  grass  and
turf,  but  many  flowers.  Indeed  the  number  of  "living  flowers


i86  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

that  skirt  the  eternal  frost"  was  here  remarkable.  Although
so  late  in  the  season,  there  were  still  a  few  gentians  bloom-
ing amongst  the  withered  primroses,  and  a  great  variety
of  flowers  of  the  "everlasting"  kind,  enveloped  by  Dame
Nature  in  such  warm  woolly  coats  of  hair  as  to  resemble
fleecy  tufts  or  balls  of  wool.  Of  these  the  most  striking  were
the  Alpine  lover's  favorite  flower,  the  Edelweiss  {Leontopo-
dium  alpinus)  or  "  Lion's  foot",  and  the  large  woolly  aromatic
Saussurea  gossypiphora,  which  the  Lamas  use  as  decora-
tion for  their  altars.  The  weirdest  of  objects  in  this  treeless  re-
gion is  the  giant  wild  rhubarb  {Rheum  nobile), 29  the  "  Cliuka  "
of  the  Tibetans.  Its  tall  pale  pyramids  of  about  four  feet
high  and  an  equal  diameter  at  the  base,  standing  on  all
the  topmost  cliffs  ranging  up  to  15,500  feet,  looked  like
sentries  guarding  these  gigantic  battlements ;  and  more  than
once  they  misled  me  into  stalking  them  for  a  possible
snow-bear  or  eagle.  As  few  Europeans  have  ever  seen  this
magnificent  plant  growing  in  its  home,  I  here  reproduce
its  photograph,  the  first  I  believe  that  has  ever  been  taken.
The  graceful  incurving  of  the  pale  pink  leaves  of  its  tall
stem  to  protect  its  bunches  of  seeds  is  remarkable.  Its
stem  contains  a  large  quantity  of  water,  a  grateful  beverage
to  the  thirsty  traveller,  and  the  stalks  of  its  leaves  are  as
pleasantly  acid  to  the  taste  as  our  cultivated  rhubarb.

No  trace  whatever  could  I  find  of  the  glacier  which
Hooker  places  here.  The  line  of  perpetual  snow  is  uneven,
and  strange  to  say,  it  here  descends  much  further  on  the
sunny  southern  side  than  on  the  cool  northern  shade,  though


THE  LINE  OF  PERPETUAL  SNOW  187

on  the  more  outlying  spurs  the  reverse  holds.  This  is
evidently  owing  to  the  greater  portion  of  the  rain-clouds
which  come  from  India  on  the  south  precipitating  them-
selves at  once,  as  snow,  and  leaving  little  of  their  mois-
ture for  the  drier  northern  sides  and  Tibet.  Here,  the  line
of  perpetual  snow,  although  in  places  over  18,000  ft.,  aver-
ages a  height  of  about  16,000  ft.  above  the  sea-level,  and
comes  as  low  as  15,000  ft.,  compared  with  about  9,000  ft.
in  the  latitude  of  the  Swiss  Alps.  In  winter  the  snow  falls
in  this  part  of  the  Himalayas  as  low  down  as  6,000  ft.,  but
it  seldom  lies  for  more  than  a  few  days  even  at  10,000  ft.
Though  it  was  not  yet  noon  the  clouds  which  had  been
creeping  up  the  valley  now  began  to  drift  over  me,  and  by
the  time  I  got  down  to  camp  all  the  snows  were  hidden
in  clouds.

The  tent  was  tied  to  rocks  and  boulders,  as  tent-pegs
could  not  be  used  in  such  a  stony  place.  We  spent  the
day  rambling  over  the  hillsides.  I  sighted  some  partridges
and  a  monal  pheasant  feeding  on  the  rhododendron  berries,
but  I  did  not  get  a  shot  at  them.  Achoom's  trouble  with
this  high  altitude  in  his  cooking  operations  was  amusing.
He  came  to  me  with  a  long  face,  and  said,  "  O,  sir,  the  water
of  this  place  is  very  bad  1  It  will  not  boil  properly.  I  have
boiled  the  potatoes  and  the  rice  and  vegetables  for  more
than  three  hours  and  still  they  are  hard."  The  real  reason
of  course  was  that  the  water,  under  the  reduced  atmospheric
pressure,  boiled  at  so  low  a  temperature  that  it  did  not
burst    the    starch    grains   fully.   So  I  told  Achoom  to  roast


188  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

his  potatoes  and  not  to  try  to  boil  them.  We  were  now
quite  out  of  bread,  which  grew  mouldy  in  less  than  a  week,
and  even  that  also  which  we  had  toasted  to  preserve  it
for  softening  down  in  stews,  tasted  now  like  old  Stilton.

We  started  for  the  pass  next  morning  (October  19th)
before  day-break,  so  as  to  secure  an  unclouded  view,  and
to  get  over  the  frozen  snow  before  it  began  to  thaw  in
the  sun.  Proceeding  upwards  through  the  rocky  throat  of
the  gorge,  we  entered  the  stony  valley  to  the  right,  between
bold  snowy  peaks,  and  crossing  the  frozen  streamlet,  we
soon  reached  the  snow-field,  which  stretches  up  in  an
unbroken  sheet  for  about  three  miles  to  the  top  of  the
pass.  From  this  expanse  of  perpetual  snow  the  name  is
derived — Tang-kar,  or  "The  White  (Snow-)  Field".  On  the
way  we  had  frequently  to  stop  to  recover  our  breath  in
the  rarefied  air.

On  reaching  the  top,  our  men  shouted  a  prayer  to  the
spirit  of  this  pass,  and  tearing  shreds  from  their  dresses,  tied
them  to  the  tops  of  some  prayer-flags  which  projected  from
a  rude  cairn  on  the  fine  sweep  of  snow  on  the  summit.

The  view  into  Tibet  from  here  is  striking.  The  snow
ceases  a  few  yards  below  the  summit,  and  beyond  this
rises  a  panorama  of  dark,  bare  peaks  streaked  with  a  fiery
welter  of  tints  like  the  burned  up  hills  of  Aden,  but  set
in  a  framework  of  dazzling  snow,  and  capped  by  snowy
peaks  soaring  up  into  a  clear  Italian  sky.  The  cold  was
bitter,  but  the  piercing  wind  that  swept  the  top  was  much
more   trying  than  the  cold  itself.     This  icy  blast,  sharp  as


TANG-KAR  PASS-VIEW  INTO  TIBET


189


a  razor,  cut  and  skinned  our  faces,  froze  our  breath  into
flakes  of  snow,  hung  icicles  from  moustaches,  and  striking
our  temples,  through  our  closely-fitting  woollen  arctic  caps,
caused  severe  headache.  Yet  thousands  of  tiny  birds,  like
wag-tails,  annually  migrate  over  such  exposed  passes  to  and
from  Tibet ;  though  when  the  temperature  of  such  winds  is
much    below  the  freezing-point,  we  were  told,    even  eagles


VIEW  INTO  TIBET   FROM  TANG-KAR  PASS  (16,500  feet).

and    other    large    birds    often    drop    stone   dead    in    their
flight.

We  descended  a  short  way  down  the  Tibetan  side,  as
there  was  no  guard  to  oppose  us;  and  Kintoop  pointed
out  the  position  of  a  distant  hot  spring  that  he  had  formerly
visited.  Returning  to  the  summit,  we  tried  to  boil  a  ther-
mometer to  control  the  reading  of  our  aneroid  which  gave
the  height  at  about   16,500  ft.,  as  on  the  survey  map,  but


190  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

after  half-an-hour's  assiduous  trial  and  the  expenditure  of
all  our  fuel  (spirit  as  well  as  a  large  bundle  of  firewood)
and  all  our  patience,  the  thing  would  not  boil.  This  in-
strument, a  "hypsometer"  of  the  latest  pattern  and  by  the
best  London  makers,  is  quite  unsuited  for  its  purpose  in
such  altitudes.  It  is  made  of  brass,  which  parts  so  quickly
with  its  heat  in  these  intensely  cold  regions,  that  the  water
cannot  be  heated  to  the  boiling-point.  What  is  needed  is
a  less  conductive  metal,  and  a  jacket  of  felt  or  other  non-
conducting material,  also  a  mica-screen  to  prevent  the  flame
being  extinguished  by  the  wind.  It  would  be  interesting
to  know  how  the  native  survey-spies  boiled  their  thermo-
meters in  Tibet,  as  they  were  supplied  with  these  badly
designed  instruments,  and  the  heights  of  most  of  the  passes
in  Central  and  S.  W.  Tibet,  as  found  in  the  maps,  are  given
on  their   authority.

Leaving  the  pass  about  10  a.  m.,  we  found  some  difficulty
in  retracing  our  steps,  as  the  snow  had  begun  to  thaw  and
we  sank  deeply  in  places,  and  the  dazzling  glare  was  very
trying  in  spite  of  our  dark  spectacles.  For  the  fierce  sun
in  this  latitude  so  heated  up  the  air  as  to  raise  its  temper-
ature to  1 1 50  Fah.  three  feet  above  the  snow,  when  out
of  the  wind;  so  that,  paradoxical  as  it  may  seem,  it  sometimes
happens  that  people  get  sunstroke    even  amidst  the  snow.

We  looked  again  for  the  glacier  mentioned  by  Hooker,
but  could  find  no  trace  whatever  of  it.  There  probably
has  been  some  mistake  in  placing  it  here,  for  it  would
indeed    be   remarkable   that   a  glacier  should  have  entirely


TANG-KAR  PASS


191


disappeared  within  forty  years  and  yet  have  left  behind  no
trace    of  any  very  recent  glacial  action.     The   stream  from


TRYING  TO    BOIL  AN  ALTITUDE  THERMOMETER  ON    THE  SUMMIT  OF
TANG-KAR  PASS   (16,500  feet).

the     snow-field     had  already    in   these   few    hours    become
swollen  to  twice  its  size  by  the  melting  snows.

At   night   the   temperature   in  our  tent   fell  four  degrees
(Fah.)    below     the    freezing-point,    and    we   needed    all  our


192  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

warmest  woollen  and  sheepskin  wraps;  and  our  poor  men
who  could  not  be  accommodated  in  the  servants'  tent,  sought
the  shelter  of  some  overhanging  rocks  to  our  leeward,  where
they  huddled  together;  for  rocks  get  heated  up  by  the
sun  during  the  day,  and  retain  much  of  this  heat  long
after  the  ground  has  radiated  it  off.  The  stars  in  this  high
altitude  sparkled  with  unwonted  brilliancy.

I  was  roused  next  morning  about  sunrise,  by  a  strange
European  voice  outside,  cheerily  calling  to  my  servants  in
Hindoostani,  "  Is  your  master  here  ? "  Wondering  who  this
could  be  at  such  a  place  where  no  European  had  been
for  so  many  years  and  at  such  a  time,  I  hurried  out  to
find  a  stalwart  figure  leaning  on  an  alpenstock.  Bidding
me  good  morning,  he  pointed  to  the  cleft,  and  said,  "  Is  that
the  pass?" — and  seemed  incredulous  when  I  replied  that  it
lay  over  two  miles  higher  up.  "  For,"  said  he,  "  my  aneroid,
which  I  have  just  received  from  the  Survey  office,  registers
16,000  ft.,  and  my  map  gives  16,100  ft.  as  the  height  of  the
pass."  I  showed  him  that  my  watch-aneroid  had  beaten
his,  as  it  recorded  over  22,000  ft.  for  this  height,  whilst
our  large  one  which  had  been  standardized  a  few  weeks
before  at  the  Survey  office,  gave  a  reading  of  a  few  feet
under  14,000,  which  coincided  with  the  results  of  our  boiling-
point  thermometer  or  hypsometer.  The  truth  is  that  small
aneroids  are  only  toys,  and  not  to  be  trusted.  After  a  cup
of  coffee,  he  said  he  must  push  on  as  he  was  going  over
the  pass  down  into  the  Choombi  Valley  of  Tibet.  I  suggested
that   this   might   lead   to   awkward    political    complications,


FRACAS  WITH  THE  CHINESE  GUARD  193

seeing  that  our  boundary  commissioners  had  just  arrived  at
some  understanding  with  the  Tibetans  and  Chinese  as  to
this  as  a  boundary  line  which  Europeans  must  not  cross,
and  the  Chinese  ambassador  was  himself  at  the  present
moment  on  the  Tibetan  side,  not  far  from  this  pass.  Our
gallant  friend,  however,  declared  that  he  would  risk  such
troubles ;  so  I  wished  him  good  luck,  and  he  and  his  coolies
clambered  up  the  cliff  and  soon  disappeared  through  the
cleft.  I  afterwards  heard  that  he  was  seized  by  the  Tibetans
and  carried  to  the  irate  Chinese  Commissioner,  who  promptly
deported  him  across  the  frontier  and  required  considerable
persuasion  to  hush  the  matter  up.

Our  canvas  tent  was  a  curious  sight  in  the  crisp  keen
air.  After  our  men  had  loosened  all  the  ropes,  it  still  remain-
ed standing,  as  it  had  been  frozen  stiff  as  a  board  with
the  moisture  of  our  breath.  And  it  had  to  be  beaten  with
the  tent  poles  and  sticks  to  fell  it  to  the  ground,  and  to
roll  it  up.

The  return  to  Lachoong  was  easy,  as  it  was  directly
down  hill.  On  arrival  at  Lachoong,  an  open  note  was  put
into  my  hand,  addressed  to  "The  Doctor  travelling  in  Upper
Sikhim".  It  was  from  an  unknown  correspondent,  and
implored  me  to  come  at  once  to  Kedoom  where  a  friend
of  his  was  in  an  alarming  and  apparently  dying  state.
Anxious  as  I  was  to  push  on  up  the  valley,  I  could  not
resist  such  an  appeal ;  so  although  I  had  already  done  a
fair  day's  march  in  our  descent  of  about  6,000  feet,  I  at
once  started  off  down  the  valley  on  foot,  as  no  pony  could

13


i94  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

be  got,  accompanied  by  Kintoop  and  the  man  who  brought
the  letter  as  a  guide.  The  man  led  me  to  the  small  temple-
cottage  outside  which  we  had  halted  to  eat  some  apricots
on  the  way  up,  and  there  in  a  room  I  met  my  correspondent
attending  a  prostrate  figure,  whom  I  found  unconscious  and
in  a  dying  condition.  As  a  last  resource  I  applied  a  few
medicines  that  I  had  brought  with  me,  but  he  never  rallied,
and  he  died  next  morning  about  4  a.m.  His  was  a  sad
death.  He  was  the  Reverend  S — h,  who  had  been  in  weak
health  in  Calcutta,  and  almost  immediately  after  coming  to
the  hills  had  started  off  to  the  Dong-kia  Pass,  where  the
rarefied  air,  combined  with  the  cold  and  glare  of  the  white
/ocks  and  snow,  had  caused  fatal  inflammation  of  both  lungs,
and  some  sun-stroke  as  well.  We  decided  to  bury  him  here,
as  his  remains  could  not  well  be  carried  back  to  Darjeeling,
which  was  more  than  a  week's  journey  along  the  hot
intervening  valleys.  So  we  fixed  on  a  romantic  spot  for
his  grave :  and  on  a  terrace  above  the  house  where  he  died,
and  overlooked  by  snowy  peaks,  the  rushing  waters  of  the
Lachoong  murmur  unceasingly  their  lament  over  the  last
resting-place  of  our  unfortunate  fellow-traveller.

Returning  to  our  camp  at  Lachoong,  I  found  B.  suffer-
ing from  a  slight  cold  caught  on  the  pass.  As  he  felt
disinclined  to  proceed  for  a  few  days,  and  we  had  just
entered  the  most  interesting  portion  of  the  mountains,  and
the  cloudy  sky  presaged  snow  on  the  higher  passes,  I
therefore  pushed  on  next  day  up  the  valley,  leaving  Achoom
and    Rameses   the    cook,    and   most   of  the    other   servants


DEATH  OF  A  FELLOW-TRAVELLER


195


with  B.,  and  arranged  for  letters  to  be  forwarded  on  to  me
by  runners.  Kintoop,  of  course,  I  took  with  me,  and  also
in  addition  to  two  yaks  for  baggage,  ten  strong  Sikhimese
and  Tibetan  coolies.    I  was  rather  loth  to  have  to  take  as


GRAVE    AND   CAIRN    OF   OUR   FELLOW-TRAVELLER.


cook  Rameses'  assistant,  who  rejoiced  in  the  name  of  "The
Mighty  Ocean"  (Gyatsho),  a  title  which  aptly  defined  his
insatiable  capacity  for  pilfering  and  devouring  our  scanty
stores ;  nor  was  his  cooking  very  tempting,  but  I  could
not  afford  to  be  fastidious.

I    was    glad    to    be    able    to    ride  up  the  greater  part  of


196  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

the  fifteen  miles  to  Yoomtang,  after  the  fatigues  of  the
previous  day  and  night.  My  mount  was  a  shaggy  little
Tibetan  pony,  not  much  to  look  at,  but  very  sure-footed.
The  tinkling  collar  bells  which  rang  out  a  chime  as  I  passed
along,  I  could  have  dispensed  with,  nor  was  the  high-peaked
Tibetan  saddle  at  all  comfortable.  Progress  was  slow,  as
I  could  only  go  at  a  walk  owing  to  the  uncertainty  of  the
track.  The  owner  of  the  pony  acted  as  guide.  He  was
a  native  of  this  valley,  and  told  me  as  we  went  the  quaint
legends  of  the  places  we  passed.     One  of  these  was

THE  LEGEND  OF  THE  LOST  TALISMAN.

In  the  heart  of  the  Tibetan  mountains,  to  the  north  of
the  neighbouring  pass,  the  Dong-kia,  lie  the  vast  ruins  of
a  deserted  city,  near  the  village  of  Ge.  In  the  olden  times
when  this  city  was  flourishing  it  was  the  size  of  2,000  villages
and  had  4  great  monasteries.  One  day  an  inhabitant
setting  out  for  the  city  of  Tashilunpo  with  firewood  for
sale,  finding  that  the  load  on  one  side  of  one  of  his  asses
was  heavier  than  the  other,  he  picked  up  a  stone  the  size
of  a  ram's  head,  and  tied  it  to  the  lighter  side  to  equalize
the  loads.  On  arrival  at  Tashilunpo,  the  Grand  Lama  saw
the  stone,  and  divining  that  it  was  a  lucky  talisman,  he
asked  the  man  about  it,  and  on  receiving  it  as  a  present,
he  carried  it  off  and  deposited  it  in  his  monastery.  Ever
since  that  time  the  monastery  of  Tashilunpo  has  prospered
enormously  and  come  to  rival  Lhasa,  but  Ge  has  decayed.
And    the    prophecy  has  come  true,  that  when  Ge  loses  its


POLYANDRY  197

talisman,  it  will  become  empty  both  inside  and  out.    Even
so  it  is.     Now  there  are  only  ten  huts  left.

My  guide,  like  most  of  the  Tibetans  hereabout,  is  a
polyandrist.  This  peculiar  institution,  Polyandry, — the  op-
posite of  polygamy, —whereby  two  or  three  or  more  men  are
married  to  one  wife  in  common,  seems  to  have  been  widely
prevalent  in  ancient  times.  It  even  existed  in  Great  Britain
according  to  Caesar.  Its  origin  cannot,  from  what  we  know
of  the  lack  of  chivalry  amongst  Tibetans,  be  explained
on  the  principle  that  "  the  single  possession  of  one  wife  is  a
blessing  too  great  for  one  individual  to  aspire  to  "  !  It  is
rather  regarded  in  this  pastoral  country  as  an  arrangement
to  protect  the  joint-family  when  its  head  is  away  for  weeks,
herding  the  cattle ;  and  it  is  also  viewed  as  a  device  to
keep  the  common  property  within  the  family,  in  a  country
which  cannot  support  a  large  population.  Here,  in  Sikhim,
however,  it  is  usually  a  fraternal  polyandry,  that  is  to  say
the  conjoint  husbands  are  usually  brothers.  And  the  practice
is  that  if  the  eldest  brother  marries,  his  wife  is  the  joint
wife  of  all  the  brothers;  while  if  the  second  brother  mar-
ries, then  his  wife  is  common  only  to  the  second  and
younger  brothers,  and  not  to  the  elder.  An  exception  to
this  rule,  however,  is  the  present  Queen  of  Sikhim,  who  was
originally  married  to  the  younger  half-brother  of  the  present
king,  and  she  now  is  the  joint  wife  of  both.  The  children
call  the  eldest  of  the  conjoint  brothers  their  "father".  The
family    relationships    are    therefore    somewhat    complicated,


iq8  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

especially  when,  as  sometimes  happens,  some  of  these
ladies   are  the  happy  possessors  of  half  a  dozen  husbands.

Ascending  the  right  bank  of  the  river,  we  picked  our
way  amongst  the  boulders,  and  soon  reached  the  junction
with  the  Si-boo,  which  rushes  down  a  fine  rugged  valley
from  the  steep  Gora  pass,  far  up  which  we  could  see  a
glacier.  Then  we  zigzagged  up  a  steepish  rocky  track
called  the  "Tired  Yak  Pass"  [Yak-che  La),  the  foot  of  which
is  the  usual  stage  for  tired  laden  yaks  coming  up  from
Lachoong ;  and  here  are  some  huts  of  a  grazing-station.
Beyond  this  we  passed  through  a  magnificent  pine  forest
whose  darkness  was  relieved  by  the  golden  autumn  tints  of
the  larch,  and  fording  many  crystal  streamlets  we  reached
the  Po-nying  rivulet  (10,850  ft.),  where  there  is  said  to  be
a  detached  mass  of  rock  that  rises  sheer,  like  a  pulpit,
about  2,000  feet  high.

Further  on  we  came  to  the  wreckage  of  a  tremendous
avalanche.  The  whole  side  of  a  great  mountain,  that
towered  above  us  about  three  miles  to  our  left,  had  broken
away,  and  come  thundering  down  some  six  years  ago ;  and
the  rocky  avalanche  had  covered  the  valley  for  many  miles
with  its  debris  and  buried  several  miles  of  forest  quite  out
of  sight,  leaving  only  a  fringe  of  splintered  pines  project-
ing from  its  borders.  The  enormous  mass  of  these  fallen
rocks  had  thrust  the  river  to  the  opposite  side  of  the  valley,
over  a  mile  out  of  its  course,  and  had  dammed  up  its
waters  there,  forming  a  lake.

This  is  a  common  way  in  which  lakes  are  formed  in  the


AN   AVALANCHE   OF   ROCKS.


AVALANCHES  AND  BARRIER  LAKES  201

Himalayas.  Instances  of  it  are  to  be  found  in  the  case  of
the  lacustrine  valley  of  Nepal,  and  probably  in  the  Lepcha
legend  of  the  lower  Teesta  already  referred  to,  and  in  the
lake  of  Naini  Tal,  and  the  Tals  or  lakes  in  its  vicinity.
And  such  lakes  thus  suddenly  formed  and  having  at  their
outfall  no  rocky  barriers  in  situ,  are  subject  to  quite  as
sudden  disappearance.  I  myself  witnessed  how  this  occurred
when  travelling  in  the  North  Western  Himalayas  in  1882.
On  the  night  of  the  23rd  August  of  that  year,  the  sudden
pressure  of  water  from  the  flood  of  an  excessive  rainfall  burst
through  the  outfall  dam  of  Bhim  Tal,  whose  waters  rushed
down  the  valley,  sweeping  away  stretches  of  the  forest,  and
when  I  saw  the  lake  early  next  morning,  its  level  had  fallen  over
twenty  feet,  leaving  the  greater  part  of  its  bed  a  muddy  plain.
High  above  this  great  landship  we  could  see  {vide  illus-
tration) the  scars  on  the  cliffs  that  had  been  rent  asunder,
still  standing  out  clear  and  sharp.  Luckily  this  catastrophe
happened  during  the  night,  and  no  human  lives  are  believed
to  have  been  lost,  and  only  a  few  cattle.  My  guide  said
that  all  this  havoc  was  wrought  by  the  malignant  spirit  of
the  mountain,  for  some  offence  that  had  been  given  him;
though  as  to  what  this  offence  was  opinions  differed  much.
The  rock  seems  to  be  a  weathered  granite,  and  its  fall
happened  during  a  sudden  frost,  which  by  expanding  the
water  in  the  crevices  of  the  rock,  splits  the  latter  asunder
like  dynamite;  but  probably  an  earthquake  also  had  to  do
with  it,  as  there  are  some  hot  springs  near,  which  indicate
volcanic  action  not  far  off.


202  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

Clambering  over  this  great  field  of  rock  like  a  vast
quarry,  the  aspect  of  the  valley  changed.  It  grew  darker
and  wilder.  Beetling  crags  and  bleak  stony  slopes  carried
the  blackness  of  the  pines  up  almost  to  the  snows.  But
our  track  wound  along  the  pleasanter  wooded  bottom  of
the  valley,  through  rhododendrons,  larches  and  willows  that
fringed  the  river  bank.  Here  and  there  we  crossed  the
shingly  bed  of  an  armlet  of  the  river,  which  split  up  into
many  branches,  rushing  swiftly  between  green  turfy   islets.

In  this  maze  of  tracks  my  guide  pointed  out  the  device
of  marking  the  trail  by  a  handful  of  freshly  cut  twigs.
Laid  lengthwise  on  one  of  the  diverging  tracks,  these  twigs
signify  that  that  one  so  marked  is  the  one  the  traveller  should
choose.     If  laid  crosswise  they  read  "no  passage  this  way."

A  hot  spring  (in  Tibetan  Sa-chod)  marked  its  position
far  up  the  valley  by  a  cloud  of  steam  that  hung  over  it.
And  my  men  became  loud  in  their  praises  of  the  marvellous
healing  virtues  of  its  waters  as  a  panacea  for  every  ailment
under  the  sun.  It  lay  on  the  opposite  bank,  and  we  had
to  cross  over  to  it  by  a  slippery  log-bridge.  The  hot  water,
smelling  of  rotten  eggs,  oozed  from  numerous  crevices  in
the  granite  rocks  at  an  elevation  of  11,730  ft.  At  the
largest  spring  a  well  or  pool  of  about  three  feet  has  been
excavated,  and  this  was  roofed  over  as  a  protection
against  snow  and  rain.  As  at  the  pool  of  Siloam,  the  first
comer  was  considered  to  get  the  best  of  it.  Here  he
certainly  got  the  cleanest  of  it.  For  all  my  men,  notwith-
standing   the    cold,  quickly  stripped  and    bathed  in  it,  and


HOT  SPRINGS  AMIDST  SNOW  203

drank  deeply  of  its  malodorous  waters,  and  they  invited
me  also  to  do  likewise.  But  I  contented  myself  with  climb-
ing up  the  hill  a  short  distance  to  taste  a  smaller  spring
which  there  welled  out,  and  which  though  not  deemed
sacred  was  uncontaminated  and  quite  as  hot.  The  water
tasted  of  the  usual  sulphureous  kind,  and  I  collected  some
for  chemical  analysis.  "  The  sides  of  the  pool  and  the  beds
of  the  several  issuing  streams  were  encrusted  with  stringy
white  sulphury  clots,  and  in  this  hot  water,  masses  of  a
green  confervoid  growth  waved  from  the  stones.  The  tempe-
rature of  the  hottest  spring  was  114.50  Fall.,  which  is  only
about  20  higher  than  at  Hooker's  visit  over  forty  years  be-
fore. 3l  The  contrast  between  the  great  heat  of  this  water
and  the  icy  air  (3 3. 50  Fah.),  and  the  cold  glacier  water  of
the  river,  flowing  amidst  streaks  of  snow,  with  a  temperature
of  440  Fah.,  only   a  few  feet  distant,  was  most  striking.

This  apparently  supernatural  character  of  the  spring  has,
of  course,  overawed  the  Tibetans,  who  allege  that  the  rock
at  this  spring  is  the  abode  of  a  devil  [Chab-dii)  who  causes
disease  if  she  be  not  conciliated.  They  also  believe  that  the
spring  is  hotter  in  the  morning  and  colder  during  the  day ;
whereas  it  is  only  their  subjective  sensations  that  lead  them
to  think  so,  as  the  difference  between  the  temperature  of
the  spring  and  the  air  at  mid-day  is  less  marked  than  in
the  colder  morning  air.  I  had  considerable  difficulty  in
getting  my  men  away  from  this  attractive  spot.

Above  this,  the  valley  presented  a  remarkably  weird
appearance,  as  most  of  the  granite  boulders,  blackened  by


204  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

dark  lichens,  were  covered  by  large  patches  of  a  bright
scarlet  fungus,  the  fiery  aspect  of  which  in  such  a  snowy
setting  reminded  one  somewhat  of  the  banks  of  that  Hades-
like lake  at  the  top  of  the  Geirangerfiord  in  Norway.  And
the  splintered  trees  were  transformed  into  fantastic  ghostly
shapes  by  masses  of  the  long  hoary  lichen  that  streamed
in  the  wind.

A  sudden  bend  of  the  river  revealed  the  grazing-station
of  Yoomtang  (11,650  ft.)  with  its  herds  of  yaks  and  sheep.
It  is  beautifully  situated  in  an  open  meadow,  through  which
the  river  winds  with  many  a  curve ;  on  every  side  are
dark  pine-clad  slopes,  leading  up  to  magnificent  snowy  peaks,
of  which  the  chief  is  Phaloong.  Several  glaciers  also  were
visible.  I  selected  for  my  quarters  one  of  the  best  of  the
empty  log-huts,  as  most  of  the  yak-herds  had  gone  further
down  the  valley ;  and  my  men  occupied  the  others.  In  one
of  the  huts,  in  addition  to  the  horns  and  skins  of  several
deer  and  boars,  said  to  have  been  killed  in  the  neighbour-
hood, I  saw  a  fine  pair  of  horns  of  the  great  "  Sikhim "
stag,  so  called,  though  it  is  not  found  within  Sikhim  at
all,  but  only  in  Tibet,  whence  these  horns  had  been
brought.  I  shot  here  a  few  snow  pigeons,  and  I  sighted  in
the  pine  woods  a  few  wary  partridges  and  pheasants,  but
did  not  go  after  them.  My  Tibetan  coolies  were  delighted
to  see  a  flock  of  the  red-billed  and  red-legged  crow  (or
properly,  "chough"),  which  they  said  was  the  common  crow
of  Tibet.  The  cold  at  night  was  intense,  although  there
was    no    wind ;    and    at  sunrise  the  thermometer  registered


YOOMTANG  AND  ITS  GLACIERS


205


30  Fah.  of  frost,  while  at  8  a.m.  it  was  360  Fah.  and  the
water  of  the  river  400  Fah.

Next  day  I  crossed  the  "Lachoong"  river  (here  called
Yoomtang  after  this  village)  by  a  rude  log-bridge.  Thence
I    ascended    the    eastern    side    of  the   valley    for    about   a


YOOMTANG   AND    ITS   YAKS.


thousand  feet,  and  over  a  terraced  moraine,  to  the  foot  of
the  great  glacier.  This  elevation,  about  13,000  ft.,  is  perhaps
the  lowest  limit  to  which  glaciers  descend  in  this  part  of
the  Himalayas.  On  the  northern  slopes  their  position  is
much  higher,  and  the  glaciers  themselves  are  larger  even,
although  the  rainfall  on  which  glacialization  depends  is
much  less.  The  southern  slopes  seem  too  steep  to  allow  of


206  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

the  ice  forming  a  stream  of  great  length.  The  ice  falls  into
the  lower  valleys  as  avalanches  from  the  fan-shaped  slopes,
and  soons  gets  melted  by  the  excessive  rainfall.  Here  I  shot
a  snow  partridge  [Lerva  vivicold),  a  piping  hare  [Lagomys
Roj'/ei),  and  the  curious  wingless  water-thrush,  the  Dipper.
Continuing  up  the  valley  for  four  miles,  we  re-crossed  the
river,  and  soon  reached  the  upper  limit  of  trees,  about
13,000  ft.  Many  logs  were  lying  cut  and  trimmed  into
planks  of  a  size  that  a  yak  could  carry,  ready  for  transport
to  Tibet,  where  timber  is  extremely  scarce.  Here  we  halted
for  a  little,  to  carry  up  some  smaller  pieces  for  our  own
firewood.  The  river,  now  called  the  Riv-la,  leaping  over
the  rocks,  here  became  a  chain  of  foaming  cataracts.

The  snowy  mass  of  Phaloong  towered  above  the  other
peaks ;  and  several  glaciers  came  down  its  sides,  as  well
as  between  the  sharp-pointed  black  crags  to  its  south.
They  were  streaked  with  blue  and  green  crevasses,  and
extended  to  within  a  few  hundred  feet  of  us.  And  it  was
noticeable  that  the  valley  had  broadened  out  from  the
narrow  V-shape  of  water-eroded  valleys  into  the  open  U-shape,
with  rounded  rocky  surfaces,  characteristic  of  glacier  action.
This  configuration,  however,  may  be  in  part  owing  to  the
very  low  dip  of  the  rocks  here ;  for  the  dip  of  the  gneiss  in
the  low  Teesta  valley  is  very  high,  and,  as  Blanford  notes,
it  is  still  considerable  as  far  as  Yoomtang;  but  hereabouts,
where  the  gneiss  is  granitoid,  with  veins  of  pure  granite,  its
dip  is  very  low  and  almost  horizontal ;  and  to  the  westward
it  dips  at  an  angle  rarely  exceeding  io°  to  200  .


PAINFUL  EFFECTS  OF  RAREFIED  AIR


207


Toiling  slowly  up  the  bare  stony  valley  and  over  old
moraines,  with  the  snows  and  glaciers  coming  down  nearer
and  nearer,  the  rarefied  air  began  to  tell  sorely  on  us.  Even
the  yaks  and  pony  suffered  severely  from  the  mal  de  montagne.
I  suffered  less  than  most  of  the  party  as  I  had  been  able
to  ride  a  great  part  of  the  way;  but  all  the  men  who
carried  loads,  and  most  of  these  were  hardy  Tibetans,  were


CAPTAIN   OF   THE   TIBETAN
GUARD.


attacked  more  or  less  severely.  All  of  us  had  splitting
headaches,  nausea,  palpitation,  and  bloodshot  eyes ;  and  we
had  to  rest  frequently  by  the  way  for  the  shortness  of
breath,  and  that  sensation  which  is  graphically  described
by  Hooker  as  a  feeling  of  "  having  a  pound  of  lead  on
each  knee-cap,  two  pounds  in  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  and
a  hoop  of  iron  around  the  head."  I  cannot  explain  why
we  were  all  so  much  more  affected  by  the  rarefied  air  of
this  place  than  by  the  much  higher  elevations  of  Tang-kar.


208  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

As  we  plodded  painfully  on,  several  of  our  men  bled  pro-
fusely at  the  nose.  We  were  all  in  a  sorry  plight  as  we
crossed  the  bridge,  or  Samdong,  about  the  fourteenth  mile,
and  struggled  into  the  few  bleak  stone-huts  of  Momay
(15,000  ft.).  This  is  the  highest  grazing-station  in  Sikhim,
and  it  is  so  inclement  that  it  is  only  occupied  for  a  few
weeks  during  mid-summer  by  the  hardy  mountaineers.

These  deserted,  weather-beaten  huts  are  built  of  rough
stone  without  any  mortar,  and  through  the  numerous  chinks
quite  an  icy  hurricane  blew,  so  that  I  had  to  pitch  my  tent
inside  the  hut,  and  even  then  it  was  bitterly  cold.  The  flat
roof  consisted  of  a  few  rough-hewn  pine  logs,  held  down
by  big  boulders.

A  few  minutes  after  my  arrival,  Kintoop  came  to  me
with  some  alarm  in  his  face,  to  say  that  the  captain  of  the
Tibetan  guard  of  the  pass  (the  Dong-kia)  and  his  men  were
in  this  station,  and  they  intended  to  prevent  us  proceeding
any  further.

Whilst  Kintoop  was  still  speaking,  several  Tibetans  arrived
at  the  door  of  my  hut,  attending  a  fine-looking  old  man
riding  on  a  yak,  and  who  proved  to  be  the  captain  (or
Ding-pon)  of  the  guard.  He  dismounted  and  came  forward,
carrying  a  ceremonial  scarf  which  he  offered  for  my  accept-
ance ;  and  on  my  taking  it  he  stated  who  he  was,  and
asked  if  it  were  true  what  he  had  heard  from  my  men
that  I  intended  going  up  to  the  Dong-kia  pass.  On  learn-
ing that  such  was  my  intention,  he  endeavoured  to  dissuade
me  from  going,  by  alleging  that  not  only  was  the  weather


STOPPED  BY  THE  TIBETAN  GUARD  209

up  there  terribly  inclement,  but  that  it  was  impossible  to
reach  the  pass  now,  as  snow  had  fallen  two  days  ago,  and
driven  him  and  his  men  down;  and  certainly  their  faces
with  blood-shot  eyes  and  blistered  peeling  skin  looked  as
if  they  had  been  exposed  to  arctic  weather.  I  found  him
quite  reasonable  and  civil.  He  apologised  for  himself  and
his  men  being  on  the  Sikhim  side  of  the  pass,  and  he  said
that  of  course  I  could  go  if  I  chose  to  the  summit  of  that
pass ;  but  that  it  was  his  duty  to  prevent  me  from  going
beyond  that  point  into  Tibetan  territory.  He  maintained
that  the  summit  of  the  pass  was  the  boundary,  although
I  told  him  that  the  recent  agreement  with  China  had  fixed
the  boundary  at  the  watershed  of  the  Lachen,  some  eight
miles  beyond  the  pass,  to  the  north.  Nor  would  he  consent
on  any  terms  to  allow  me  to  cross  this  way  into  the  Lachen
valley,  as  Hooker  had  done  in  the  reverse  direction.  He
maintained,  like  the  guard  who  also  stopped  Blanford  at
this  pass,  that  his  instructions  from  Lhasa  were  positive  as
to  the  absolute  closure  of  this  pass  against  everyone  except
a  few  privileged  Tibetans ;  and  he  added  with  much  pan-
tomime, the  old  story,  that  were  we  to  force  our  way  across,
the  throats  of  himself  and  his  men  would  be  cut.  Under
ordinary  circumstances  I  would  have  felt  much  inclined  to
force  my  way  over  it  into  the  Lachen  valley,  where  it  was
so  essential  that  I  should  arrive  quickly,  and  I  have  no
doubt  that  I  could  have  done  it ;  but  unfortunately  political
negotiations   were   going   on  just  then  with  the  Chinese  in

regard   to   this   very  boundary,  and  the  promise  had  been

14


2io  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

extracted  from  me  not  to  cross  this  frontier,  so  as  to  risk
any  undue  complications  in  this  settlement.  I  therefore  had
to  forego  the  attempt,  and  consent  to  go  no  further  than
the  summit  of  the  pass.

This  Tibetan  captain  turned  out  to  be  a  very  interesting
old  man.  He  had  attended  the  Tibetan  governor  or  Jong-
pon,  who  had  met  Mr.  Macaulay's  mission,  and  he  is  figured
in  the  photograph  of  that  group,  a  copy  of  which  I
shewed  him.  He  had  also  been  fighting  against  us  in  our
little  war  with  Tibet,  the  previous  year,  in  command  of  a
small  body  of  Tibetans,  and  he  had  there  imbibed  a  whole-
some fear  of  our  firearms.  In  referring  to  his  experiences
on  that  occasion,  he  lost  all  his  Mongolian  stolidity  and
grew  quite  excited,  as  he  recounted  to  the  awe-stricken
bystanders  how  our  quick-firing  rifles  could  fire  "  about  a
dozen"  shots  without  reloading,  whilst  the  Tibetans  took
about  five  minutes  to  reload  their  wretched  muzzle-loading
flint-lock  muskets,  and  then  as  often  as  not  the  flint  missed
fire.

My  shot-gun  interested  him  greatly.  He  handled  it
lovingly,  and  as  he  looked  down  the  barrels,  he  exclaimed
in  astonishment,  "  Why,  it  shines  clear  like  a  mirror !  " — and
certainly  it  was  even  in  this  respect,  a  contrast  to  their  own
dirty  barrels,  deeply  honeycombed  as  they  were  with  rust.
But  it  was  my  revolver,  with  its  quick-repeating  mechanism,
that  interested  him  most,  as  this  was  a  special  weapon  of
war.  I  had  not  brought  my  rifle,  on  account  of  its  weight,
and  the  few  chances  I  expected  of  using  it.  He  asked  me


TIBETAN  CAPTAIN  OF  THE  GUARD  211

to  show  its  working  by  firing  at  some  of  his  straggling
sheep.  I  could  not  consent,  of  course,  to  such  butchery,
so  fired  instead  a  quick  succession  of  shots  into  some
logs  of  wood,  and  scarcely  had  the  sharp  pinging  of  the
whistling  bullets  rung  out,  than  the  old  man  scampered  off
in  hot  haste,  to  see  how  deeply  the  bullets  had  penetrated.
My  hunting-knife  and  a  few  other  appliances  were  also
examined  with  eager  curiosity.  He  presented  me  with  a
sheep,  one  of  a  flock  he  was  sending  to  Darjeeling  for  sale.
Tibetan  mutton,  though  small,  is  not  to  be  excelled  for
nutty  sweetness.

At  Kintoop's  suggestion  I  offered  him  a  little  of  my
scanty  store  of  whiskey,  which  I  had  brought  with  me  in
case  of  accident;  for  tea  and  soup  were  the  only  restora-
tives I  ordinarily  took  at  these  altitudes,  as  I  had  found  that
spirit  acted  almost  as  poison,  it  so  exaggerated  the  breath-
lessness  and  palpitation.  He  promptly  produced  his  drinking
cup  from  his  breast  pocket,  and  he  drank  the  spirit  with
immense  relish,  to  the  dregs ;  though  he  magnanimously
pretended  to  leave  a  little  in  the  cup  for  his  men,  who
passed  the  empty  cup  round  from  hand  to  hand,  and  each
of  them  licked  it  more  than  clean,  with  so  much  smacking
of  lips  and  rueful  countenances,  that  I  took  pity  on  them
and  poured  a  little  more  of  this  precious  liquor  into  the
cup  for  them.  But  the  captain  again  took  the  lion's  share,
for,  naively  explained  he,  it  was  not  etiquette  for  his  men
to  drink  until  after  him.

Tibetans  seldom  taste  spirits  in  their  own  country.  Their


212  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

usual  alcoholic  drink  is  the  sour  beer  that  is  made  from
fermented  barley  and  strained  off  from  the  seeds  into
vessels,  and  drunk  cold,  not  hot,  like  the  murwa  of  Sikhim.
Jaesche  says  (in  his  dictionary)  that  spirit  or  arak  is  distilled
in  monasteries,  and  in  the  houses  of  the  big  men  in  Tibet ;
but  this  I  am  assured  is  not  frequent  in  Central  Tibet
nor  in  Tsang,  where  spirit  is  very  seldom  drunk  except  by
the  Chinese, — and  when  the  Tibetans  specially  require  it,
they  usually  buy  it  from  the  Chinese.  The  sour  beer  is  served
up  to  grandees  at  feasts,  in  the  horns  of  the  wild  yak,
{Dong)  like  the  Urus  horns  which  the  ancient  Germans  used
as  cups  for  their  strong  drink,  according  to  Caesar.  And
these  horns  are  mounted  in  silver  or  brass  and  slung  over
the  shoulder  when  travelling.  The  Bhotanese  use  for  this
purpose  the  horn  of  the  great  wild  ox,  or  mithan  [Bos
frontalis).

How  very  different  are  these  Tibetans  from  the  Lepchas,
and  even  from  their  kinsmen  the  Sikhimese  Bhotiyas  1  Yet
the  Tibetan  too  has  had  his  character  shaped  largely  by  his
environments.  Though  of  the  same  Mongolian  descent,  he  is  in
many  respects  almost  the  anti-type  of  the  Lepcha.  His  rugged,
wind-swept  country  has  given  him  a  rugged  character  and
features.  His  cold,  bracing  climate  and  full  animal  diet  has
given  him  a  robust  body  full  of  rude  blustering  animalism,
that  tends  to  make  him  when  uncontrolled  a  turbulent
bully,  with  all  the  fierceness  of  spirit  which  his  European
name  of  Tartar  [Tartaros,  hell)  suggests.  The  disastrous
storms    and   avalanches   that    wreck   his    herds   and    scanty


TIBETANS  AND  THEIR  ENVIRONMENTS  213

crops,  have  caused  him  to  worship  these  as  destructive  malig-
nant devils,  and  his  awestruck  mind,  thus  dominated  by  the
supernatural  forces,  has  become  intensely  superstitious  and
religious.  Whilst  the  isolation  of  his  country  by  protecting
and  perpetuating  his  numerous  and  jealous  hierarchy,  has
made  him  the  most  priest-ridden  mortal  in  the  world.  But
many  of  them,  especially  the  better  class  of  monks,  I  have
found  to  be  most  kind  and  considerate,  and  deeply  imbued
with  a  tolerant  spirit,  due  doubtless  to  education  and
temperament,  and  partly  also  derived  from  the  Buddhism
which  permeates  their  religion.  As  a  class,  they  cannot  be
said  to  be  broad-minded,  although  living  on  broad  table-
lands, in  the  free  mountain  air.  They  are  not  naturalists,
nor  even  skilful  sportsmen,  being  forbidden  to  take  life  by
their  priests.

The  presence  of  these  Tibetan  officials  cowed  my  men
into  uncommunicativeness.  The  latter  spoke  of  the  diabolical
tortures  that  would  be  inflicted  on  them  as  informers,  by
the  Tibetan  Government,  which  they  said  seized  even  people
in  Sikhim  and  carried  them  off  to  Tibet  for  punishment.
There  they  do  not  indulge  in  the  luxury  of  jails,  for  when
they  do  not  kill  their  prisoners  right  away,  or  put  them  to
a  slow  death  by  torture,  as,  although  professing  Buddhists,
they  do  not  hesitate  to  do,  they  simply  cut  off  their  ears
or  chop  off  a  hand  or  foot,  and  set  the  mutilated  person
free.  Such  mutilated  criminals  form  the  majority  of  the
beggars,  I  am  told,  in  Lhasa  and  other  large  Tibetan  towns.

In    particular,    my    guide,    the   owner    of  the    pony,    was


214  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

especially  reticent,  and  he  now  tried  to  run  away  with  his
pony,  but  was  caught  and  brought  back  by  one  of  my
men.  And  to  secure  his  presence,  or  rather  that  of  his  pony,
I  gave  the  latter  into  the  charge  of  one  of  my  men,  and
locked  away  his  saddle  and  harness.

As  it  was  now  clear  that,  for  political  reasons,  I  could
not  force  my  way  beyond  the  Dong-kia  pass,  my  only  way
of  getting  to  the  glaciers  of  Kanchen-junga  was  to  try  to
get  over  into  the  Lachen  valley  by  the  knife-edge  of  the
Seeboo  La,  or  "Pass  of  Frozen  Hailstones",  which  led  into
the  Lachen  valley.  And  to  facilitate  our  journey  thither,
on  our  return  from  the  Dong-kia  on  the  morrow,  I  took
Kintoop  and  two  of  my  men  in  the  afternoon  to  explore
the  entrance  of  the  Seeboo,  the  passage  of  which  seemed
not  hitherto  to  have  been  made  by  any  European.

Crossing  an  icy  torrent  on  boulders,  under  the  rounded
heavily  snowed  flanks  of  Kanchen-jow,  or  "The  Great  Beard-
ed Glacier"  (22,550  ft.),  and  below  the  glacier  of  Phaloong,
we  went  up  the  wild  stony  valley  of  Seeboo  for  about
three  miles,  and  over  the  moraine  and  small  glacier  noted
by  Blanford,  to  a  barren  rocky  plateau  with  a  few  icy
lakelets,  above  which  towered  great  piles  of  rocks  leading
up  to  the  pass.

The  utter  desolation  of  this  region  was  very  impressive
The  stony  waste,  bare  of  all  vegetation  owing  to  the  keen
winds,  and  buried  in  snow  for  eight  or  nine  months  of  the
year,  stretched  right  up  to  the  snow-covered  slopes  which,
rising   a  few  hundred  feet  above  us,  surrounded  us  with  a


THE  REAL  ABODE  OF  SNOW


215


circle  of  glittering  icy  spires  and  domes,  all  over  20,000  feet
high.  It  was  indeed  "The  Abode  of  Snow",  the  true  Hima-
laya at  last.  The  root  of  this  word  is  the  same  which
appears  in  the  Greek  Imaus,  and  the  German  Himmel,  the
Aryan  "heaven";  for  these  snowy  regions  are  the  highest


KANCHEN-JOW   AND   ENTRANCE   TO   SEEBOO   PASS.

"  /ieaven-up "    part   of  the   world,   and  therefore  nearest  to
the  abode  of  the  gods.

So  stern,  sombre,  and  solitary  was  this  scene,  that  we
seemed  to  have  passed  into  a  valley  of  distress,  if  not  of
death.  The  recent  frost  had  killed  even  the  insects,  and
besides  ourselves  there  was  no  trace  of  any  living  thing,
animal  or  vegetable.  The  solitude  was  unbroken,  save  by
the    sighing   of  the    wind,   and    the   subdued  gurgle  of  the


216  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

river,  which  too  had  lost  its  colour  under  the  leaden  sky,
and  ran  swiftly  dull,  scarcely  disturbing  the  universal  calm
which  rested  over  all.  The  loneliness  and  fixed  gloom
were  indescribable.  Plato  perhaps  rightly  said  that  "  whoso-
ever is  delighted  with  solitude,  entirely  and  absolutely,  is
either  a  wild  beast  or  a  god."  And  it  is  easy  to  see  how
the  Tibetans,  who  place  their  gods  in  such  regions,  picture
them  with  sullen  savage  features,  hurling  avalanches  and
thunderbolts,  and  other  death-dealing  weapons.  Just  so
have  the  Scandinavians  deified  the  more  sublime  and
terrible  aspects  of  nature.  So  their  Odin  and  Thor  fight
with  the  thunderbolt,  so  they  have  their  frost-giants  of  the
Jottenheim,  and  their  wind-giants  of  the  Muspelheim  and
Nifelheim.  These  anthropomorphic  gods  are  thus  evidently
deified  natural  forces,  and  so  far  support  Professor  Max
Miiller  in  his  contention  that  mythology  in  its  origin  was
physical,  whatever  it  may  have  become  in  its  later  develop-
ments.

We  did  not  find  the  hot  springs  of  this  pass,  having  no
one  to  guide  us.  These,  I  was  told,  received  more  worship
than  those  we  visited  the  previous  day,  as  they  are  the  reputed
abode  of  the  powerful  demon  of  the  Phaloong  glacier,  who
is  called  "  His  Lordship  the  Long-lived  Devil."  M

Returning  to  bleak  Momay,  also  desolate  in  appearance,
I  saw  four  sleek  ravens,  and  got  specimens  of  that  gor-
geously blue-plumaged  bird,  Grandula  ccelicolor.  My  men
reported  having  seen  some  of  the  wild  sheep,  "Burhel"
{Ovis  natiird).    One  of  these  was  shot  hereabouts  by  Elwes,


THE   GOD   OF   MOUNT   KANCHEN-JUNGA.


REPUTED  OVIS  AMMON  219

who  accompanied  Blanford,  and  in  regard  to  which  the
latter  writes :  "  We  subsequently  found  that  the  '  Ovis
ammon '  of  which  we  heard  so  much,  were  all  Burhel ;  and
Hooker,  I  think,  must  have  been  mistaken  in  supposing
that  he  saw  the  former  in  this  neighbourhood,  for,  by  the
unanimous  evidence  of  all  the  Tibetans,  none  occur  to  the
south  of  the  Dong-kia  and  Kongra-Lamo  passes,  although
they  are  to  be  met  with  a   little    further   north,  in  Tibet."

I  also  saw  some  tail-less  rats  or  marmots.  These  small
mammals  called  Goomcher  by  the  Bhotiyas,  are  credited  with
supernatural  powers,  in  that,  if  they  are  harmed  in  any  way,
they  produce  fearful  and  disastrous  storms.  This  belief  is
evidently  due.  I  think,  to  the  habits  of  these  animals
burrowing  into  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  where  live,  accord-
ing to  the  Tibetans,  the  dragon-spirits  or  Nagas  that
cause  thunder-storms.  Owing  to  this  superstition  few  na-
tives will  assist  you  in  catching  the  animal,  yet  they  do
not  scruple  to  rob  it  of  its  hoards  of  stored  grass  and
grain  whenever  they  are  in  need  of  fuel  or  fodder.  I
secured  a  beautiful  silvery  water-shrew  {Nectrogale  elegans),
so  unique  and  rare  that  no  perfect  specimen  of  it  was
hitherto  known.  In  the  icy  cold  river  I  could  find  no  trace
of  life,  but  about  2,000  feet  lower  down  I  had  seen  some
tadpoles  and  fish.

Plants,  however,  were  not  absent  on  the  hill  sides,  in  the
crevices  between  the  stones ;  but  they  were  almost  entirely
the  remains  of  flowering  plants,  and  but  very  few  grasses,
ferns   and   other    monocotyledons.     Mr.    Ball  observed   this


220  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

peculiarity  in  the  vegetation  of  high  altitudes  in  Europe,
and  on  this  fact  is  based  the  belief  that  flowering  plants
or  dicotyledons  originated  in  the  dry  and  rarefied  atmos-
phere of  elevated  plateaus  and  mountains.  This  too  would
explain  the  absence  of  well-developed  Exogens  in  the
tropical  coal-period,  and  their  late  and  sudden  appearance
in  the  cooler  times  of  the  cretaceous  period,  when  the
flowering  plants  descended  from  their  high  altitudes,  where
the  evidence  of  their  early  existence  at  this  remote  period
of  geological  time  has  been  destroyed  by  denudation  of
the  uplands.  Dwarf  bamboos,  which  are  grasses,  crop  up
on  the  hot  damp  southern  sides  of  peaks  as  high  as  12,000
feet.  The  especial  prevalence  of  this  rich  variety  of  flowers,
especially  of  primroses  and  pedicidaris,  on  the  southern
slopes  of  the  Himalayas  is  remarkable,  and  cannot  be  simply
accounted  for  on  the  hypothesis  of  a  migration  from  the
north  during  the  glacial  epoch.  In  Europe,  too,  "  some  of
the  most  ancient  fragments  of  the  Alpine  flora  are  now  to
be  found  only  on  the  southern  side  of  the  Alps,"  as  M.
de  Candolle  has  shown.  33

The  whitish  colour  of  the  flowers  in  these  Alpine  regions
is  also  remarkable.  Many  of  the  flowers  which  lower  down
are  blue  are  here  apparently  white,  but  they  become  blue
on  pressing.  This  fact,  together  with  the  excessive  thickness
of  their  petals,  shews  that  the  blue  pigment  is  still  there,
and  that  the  white  colour  is  due  to  the  air  that  inflates
the  interstices  of  their  tissue.

The  temperature  of  the  air  at  5  p.m.  was  30.80  Fah.,  and


EFFECTS  OF  RAREFIED  AIR  221

before  sunset  went  down  to  2 8°  Fah.,  and  snow  began  to
fall  in  a  disquieting  way,  suggesting  the  possibility  of  the
valley  becoming  blocked,  as  happened  during  Mr.  Macaulay's
visit  to  the  lower  valley,  when  deep  snow  stretched  down
to  below  Yoomtang.

We   all    passed   a  wretched    night,  owing  to  the  intense
cold,  and  partly  to  our  sudden  rise  in  the  rarefied  air.  My
warmest   woollen    clothes    with    my  sheepskin-coat  over  all
failed  to    keep  me  from  shivering  in  the  painfully  piercing
cold  wind ;  while  the  weight  of  the  clothes  further  oppress-
ed  my   breathing.     I    do    not    believe    my   heart   is  a  bad
one,    but   it    now    palpitated   so    violently    as  to  shake  my
whole    body,    yet    so    slowly    as    not    to    exceed    45    beats
per    minute,    and  at  times    it   seemed  as  if  about  to  cease
altogether.     Yet   on   the    slightest   exertion,  in  walking  up
hill,  the    beats    went   up    to    too  or   no.     These  alarming
symptoms    would   no    doubt   have    lessened,   and  the  heart
become    accommodated    in    some    measure    to   the    altered
pressure    and   thin    air,  had    we   remained    long    enough  at
that    altitude.     But   even   when    Hooker   had    remained    in
these    regions    and    at    higher    elevations  for  some  months,
he    says    "he   never  knew  what  it  was  to   go   a  few  miles
outside    his  tent    without    feeling   great    pressure,    and    he
always  returned  to  camp  with  nausea."  And  he  experienced
the  same  feelings  at  lofty  elevations  in  Africa  and  Europe,
as  well  as  in  the  Himalayas.     Even  Mr.  Graham  who  suf-
fered so  little  from  the  high  elevations  in  Sikhim  complained
of  the  "very    loud  and  perceptible   beating  of  the  heart".


222  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

To  find  the  effect  of  these  high  elevations  on  our  circula-
tion, I  had  been  carefully  recording  not  only  my  own
pulse-beats  and  respirations,  but  also  those  of  Kintoop  and
several  selected  coolies,  at  various  stages  on  the  way  up
from  Darjeeling,  but  the  results  are  not  sufficiently  decided
to  be  worth  detailing.  They  showed  remarkably  little
difference  from  the  normal,  even  in  the  highest  altitudes,
when  the  men  were  at  rest.  The  reduced  frequency  of
the  pulse-beats  in  the  higher  altitudes  was  not  marked
in  all,  and  seemed  due  in  part  to  the  excessive  work
thrown  on  the  heart  by  the  intense  cold.  As  Freshfield  and
Hooker  have  suggested,  the  breathlessness  and  the  attend-
ant discomfort  of  mountain  sickness  is  somewhat  comparable
to  sea-sickness,  and  those  persons  who  are  affected  more
than  others  need  not  necessarily  have  a  diseased  stomach
or  heart.

In  the  morning,  as  the  snow  had  ceased,  and  it  lay
only  about  a  foot  deep,  we  decided  to  push  on  to  the
pass.  But  as  the  thermometer  at  sunrise  registered  8°  of
frost,  or  240  Fah.,  it  was  some  time  ere  my  shrivelled-up
men  were  ready  for  starting.  The  Tibetan  soldiers  fortified
themselves  against  the  cold  with  bits  of  frozen  raw  meat,
like  Laplanders,  which  they  shredded  up  with  their  daggers.
No  wind,  fortunately,  was  then  blowing,  or  it  would  have
been  dangerously  keen.

The  track  was  marked  out  by  mounds  of  stones,  and
led  across  the  river  to  the  left  bank,  and  re-crossed
about   the   sixth    mile,   at   a  spot  called  Jarwa  (17,000  feet


WILD  MEN  OF  THE  MOUNTAINS  223

elevation),  near  which  are  two  small  lakes.  The  Tibetan
captain  and  his  men  accompanied  us,  and  as  his  yak  clam-
bered nimbly  over  the  snow-laden  stones,  far  outdistancing
my  pony,  which  slid  and  stumbled  so  badly  that  I  could
make  little  use  of  it,  he  kindly  offered  me  the  use  of  his
yak.  It,  however,  refused  to  let  me  mount,  and  made  several
plunges  at  me  as  I  approached  it,  although  held  back
by  the  rope  through  its  nose-ring.  And  I  was  not  sorry
that  I  had  failed  to  mount  it,  for  some  time  afterwards  the
tackle  of  ropes  that  fastened  on  the  rough  saddle  loosened,
and  the  captain  came  down  from  his  high  perch  with  a
rush,  and  on  the  top  of  him  came  all  his  cooking-pots  and
pans,  which  were  carried  in  two  bags  slung  on  behind
the  saddle.

Some  large  footprints  in  the  snow  led  across  our  track,
and  away  up  to  the  higher  peaks.  These  were  alleged  to
be  the  trail  of  the  hairy  wild  men  who  are  believed  to
live  amongst  the  eternal  snows,  along  with  the  mythical
white  lions,  whose  roar  is  reputed  to  be  heard  during  storms.
The  belief  in  these  creatures  is  universal  among  Tibetans.
None,  however,  of  the  many  Tibetans  I  have  interrogated
on  this  subject  could  ever  give  me  an  authentic  case.  On
the  most  superficial  investigation  it  always  resolved  itself
into  something  that  somebody  heard  tell  of.  These  so-
called  hairy  wild  men  are  evidently  the  great  yellow  snow-
bear  (Ursus  isabellinns),  which  is  highly  carnivorous,  and
often  kills  yaks.  Yet,  although  most  of  the  Tibetans  know
this    bear   sufficiently  to  give  it  a  wide  berth,  they  live  in


224  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

such  an  atmosphere  of  superstition  that  they  are  always
ready  to  find  extraordinary  and  supernatural  explanations
of  uncommon  events.  Looking  at  these  footprints,  I  thought
of  the  poor  snow-bears  pent  up  in  the  sweltering  heat  of
the  Calcutta  "Zoo",  and  what  they  would  not  give  to  get
into  such  arctic  regions.

Snow  now  fell  heavily,  and  a  driving  hurricane  of  loose
powdery  snow  was  fast  obliterating  our  footmarks,  so  that,  as
Kintoop  pointed  out,  there  was  a  great  danger  of  our  losing
our  way  and  sharing  the  fate  which  hereabout  befel  his
former  master,  the  late  Captain  Harman,  in  1881.  This
unfortunate  officer  was  employed  in  the  survey  of  Sikhim,
and  on  ascending  this  pass,  he  saw  in  the  distance,  the
great  snowy  range  of  Tibetan  peaks  as  seen  by  Hooker
and  Blanford,  and  extending,  as  he  estimated,  150  miles
from  east  to  west.  To  examine  them  more  in  detail  he
bivouacked  on  the  spot,  but,  as  his  baggage-coolies  did
not  turn  up,  he  was  fatally  frost-bitten.34

We  now  found  that  the  snow-storm  had  increased ;  the
wind  rose  furiously,  and  a  whirlwind  of  fine  snow,  blinding
and  choking  us,  drove  us  down,  when  almost  within  sight  of
the  top  of  the  pass.  Then  I  realized  more  emphatically  than
before,  that  Sherwill  and  Blanford  had  advised  too  late  a
date  of  starting;  that  I  had  started  over  a  month  too  late
in  the  season ;  and  that  to  reach  these  northern  passes
and  have  time  for  their  leisurely  exploration,  one  must
endure  the  discomforts  of  travelling  in  the  rainy  season.

The    scene    that   bursts   upon  the  eye  from  the  crest  of


GAME  IN  TIBET  225

this  pass  (18,100  ft.),  has  been  described  and  figured  by
Sir  Joseph  Hooker.  Mr.  Blanford  says,  "it  is  one  of  the
most  remarkable  landscapes  in  the  world,  and  alone  worth
the  journey  to  see  it. .  . .  Cholamo  lake  is  in  front,  beneath
the  feet  of  the  spectator,  beyond  is  a  desert  with  rounded
hills.  Further  away  range  after  range  of  mountains,  some
of  them  covered  with  snow,  extend  to  a  distance  the  eye
cannot  appreciate.  The  total  change  of  colour  and  form
from  the  valleys  of  Sikhim,  the  utter  barrenness,  the  intense
clearness  of  the  atmosphere,  produce  such  an  effect  as  if
one  were  gazing  upon  another  world  in  which  the  order
of  this  is  no  longer  preserved,  where  a  tropical  desert  is
seen  amongst  snow-capped  peaks,  beneath  the  unnaturally
clear  atmosphere  of  the  arctic  regions."  35

The  game  and  skins  which  Mr.  Blanford  procured  from
the  Tibetan  side  of  this  pass  through  the  Tibetan  guards,
included  three  perfectly  fresh  skins,  one  of  the  Tibetan
gazelle  (Gazella  picticauda;  in  Tibetan — God  or  Ra-gao)  the
others  of  Ovis  Amnion,  a  ewe  and  a  young  ram,  and  some  live
Tibetan  sand-grouse.  He  was  told  that  both  Ovis  Amnion
and  Ovis  natura  are  pretty  common  in  the  country  north  of
Sikhim,  the  Goa  Antelope  is  less  so ;  Tibetan  antelope
fC/iiru',  the  Kemas  Hodgsoni)  are  never  heard  of  in  that
neighbourhood ;    and  the   wild  yak  is  not  found  there  now.

The  name  of  this  pass,  I  find,  means  "The  Frozen  Wild

Yak",   and  a  legend  was  related  to  me  of  a  herd  of  wild

yak   (Dong)  that  had  strayed  here,  and  were  found  frozen

to  death  in  this  pass,  which   thus  obtained  its  name.

15


226  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

The  old  Ding-pon  and  his  guard  of  the  pass  seemed
unfeignedly  glad  at  our  being  driven  down  by  the  snow-
storm, and  they  were  still  more  so  when,  on  our  return  to
Momay,  as  the  storm  showed  no  signs  of  abating,  we  had
to  give  up  our  proposed  attempt  to  cross  the  Se-boo,  and
to  retreat  further  down  to  Yoomtang.  The  Ding-pon  also
accompanied  us  here,  on  the  plea  of  having  some  business
with  the  Lachoong  villagers  in  regard  to  the  transport  of
wood  and  sheep,  etc.;  but  it  was  probably  to  see  us  off
his  frontier,  and  make  sure  that  we  did  not  give  him  the  slip.

On  the  way  to  Lachoong  next  day,  I  followed  up  the
fine  glacier  valley  of  the  Si-bo36  or  "Cold"  river  for
some  way  towards  the  Gora  or  "  Top-of-the-Wall "  pass,  so
called  from  its  excessive  steepness.  No  European  seems
to  have  been  up  this  valley  before :  and  as  I  had  heard
that  this  pass,  which  leads  into  Tibet  between  the  Dong-kia
and  the  Tang-kar  passes,  was  seldom  used  and  never  guarded,
and  I  was  arranging  to  make  an  expedition  to  Lhasa  in
disguise,  I  had  sent  Kintoop  during  the  summer  to  recon-
noitre and  explore  this  pass  and  the  country  beyond  it  in
a  north-easterly  direction,  keeping  above  the  inhabited  part
of  Choombi,  until  he  struck  the  trade  route  from  that  province
to  Central  Tibet,  on  the  great  plateau  to  the  north  of  the
Tang  pass.

As  this  line  of  country  has  not  been  surveyed,  and  even
the  position  of  the  Gora  pass  is  wrongly  placed  on  the
maps,  I  give  here  some  details  of  Kintoop's  pioneer  survey,
and    a   sketch    of  his  route  (see  large  map),  as  plotted  out


GORA  AND  PATA  PASSES  227

by  me  from  his  narrative.  His  directions  may  be  taken  as
generally  approximate,  as  I  had  supplied  him  with  a  com-
pass ;  the  distances  in  miles,  however,  are  less  correct ;  but
he  and  his  party  certainly  penetrated  to  a  distance  of
seven  days '  hard  march  in  Tibet,  and  marched  beyond  the
Sikhimese  frontier  for  thirteen  days.  There  is  no  doubt
as  to  his  having  reached  the  Tibetan  plateau,  for  he  brought
back  several  plants  which  are  peculiar  to  the  dry  table-
lands of  Central  Asia.

Crossing  the  Lachoong  river,  i3/4  miles  above  the
village  of  that  name,  and  about  300  yards  above  the
junction  of  that  river  with  the  Si-bo,  and  following  up  the
latter,  it  was  found  to  rise  rapidly  after  its  third  mile  to
about  the  seventh  mile,  where,  at  the  upper  limit  of  trees,
it  turned  eastward  to  the  foot  of  a  great  glacier,  one  of  the
sources  of  this  river.  The  freezing  torrent,  which  spouted
from  an  ice-cave  in  this  glacier,  and  which  was  50  yards
wide  and  waist  deep  at  that  time  in  June,  had  to  be  forded.
A  yak-herdsman  here,  from  whom  Kintoop  asked  the  way
to  the  Gora  pass,  declared  that  they  were  all  forbidden
by  the  Tibetans  to  give  any  information  as  to  the  passes
into  Tibet,  and  he  bolted  off.  The  river  above  this  flowed
between  the  terraces  of  a  great  lateral  moraine  for  about
five  miles,  above  which  it  divided  into  two  headwaters.
The  southern  of  these  led  to  the  Pata  pass,  expanding
into  two  lakes,  each  about  three-quarters  of  a  mile  in  length ;
and  into  the  bright  green  water  of  the  uppermost  of  these,
just  below  the  summit  of  the  pass,  the  snow  was  falling  in


228  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

avalanches  in  June.  This  pass,  which  is  not  marked  in
any  map,  nor  its  lakes,  lies  about  5  miles  south  of  Tang-
kar  pass,  according  to  a  herd-girl  whom  Kintoop  met.
It  was  not  then  open,  but  it  was  occasionally  used
by  the  people  of  that  valley;  whereas  the  Gora,  on
account  of  its  steepness,  was  very  seldom  if  ever  used.
The  northern  branch  of  the  river  which  came  down
from  the  Gora  pass  was  found  to  lead  up  to  a  grazing-
station,  where  many  dead  yaks  were  seen  lying  around.
A  murrain  had  carried  off  about  80  per  cent  of  the  cattle.
This  disease,  called  Yor  or  Hlak-po,  seems  to  be  rinder-
pest. It  had  visited  these  parts  several  times  before,  and
is  also  known  in  Tibet,  where  it  also  attacks  the  wild  yaks.  v
It  was  believed  to  be  imported  from  India,  through  lower
Sikhim.  Here  again,  the  herdsmen  refused  to  give  any  in-
formation as  to  the  passes,  even  when  Kintoop  said  that
he  wanted  to  go  up  to  worship  the  mountain.  So  he  fol-
lowed up  the  stream,  which  widened  out  into  a  limpid
lake.  The  ascent  to  the  pass  beyond  was  excessively  steep,
and  so  precipitous  as  to  be  quite  impracticable  for  cattle.
The  summit,  about  17,000  feet  elevation,  commanded  an
extensive  view  of  snowy  peaks.  Thence  proceeding  north-east-
wards, across  Upper  Choombi,  Kintoop  and  his  companions
had  to  go  a  little  southwards  to  circumvent  some  great  cliffs
that  rose  over  4,000  feet  high,  and  they  had  to  cross  tor-
rents and  spurs,  till  they  sighted  the  uppermost  village  in
Western  Choombi.  Then  they  ascended  that  valley  of  the
Rido    river,  northwards,  and  crossed  the  water-parting  into


CAPTURE  OF  KINTOOP  BY  TIBETANS  229

the  great  plain  of  Central  Tibet.  Here  they  followed  down
a  stream  which  flowed  north-westwards  into  a  considerable
lake,  on  the  northern  bank  of  which  was  a  compact  village
of  about  twelve  houses.  On  sighting  this  they  hid  away
amongst  rocks,  but  were  discovered  by  some  huge  Tibetan
mastiffs,  whose  loud  barking  at  them  attracted  the  attention
of  the  villagers.  The  headman  of  the  village  recognizing
them  as  Sikhimese,  although  they  wore  Tibetan  dress,  and
suspecting  them  to  be  spies,  seized  them ;  and  stripping
them  of  the  best  part  of  their  clothes,  imprisoned  them  in
his  house,  saying  that  he  must  carry  them  off  to  Phari
in  a  few  days,  for  such  were  his  orders  in  regard  to  people
entering  from  Sikhim.  The  name  of  this  village  was  Kala-
pak-tang;  and  Kintoop  says  that  this  lake  resembled  the
Kala-tso,  which  he  had  passed  several  times  on  the  way
to  Gyantse  and  Lhasa.  The  Kala-tso  of  Boyle  and  Turner,
however,  would  appear  to  be  some  ten  miles  or  so  to  the
N.  E.  of  this  lake.  During  the  night,  Kintoop  and  his  party
effected  their  escape  and  fled  back  again  by  the  way  they
had  come  over  the  Gora  pass.

The  following  day  (28th  October)  I  returned  past  Kedoom,
with  its  sad  memories,  to  Choong-tang  at  the  bottom  of
the  Lachoong  valley.  The  great  and  rapid  changes  in  the
foliage  which  had  occurred  during  our  fortnight's  sojourn  in
the  valley,  showed  that  the  brief  flash  of  Alpine  summer
was  already  over.  The  leaves  had  turned  to  russet  and
orange  in  a  few  days,  and  soon  they  will  be  swept  off  by
the  whirlwind,  and  winter  will  have  come.


CHAPTER  VI


THE  LACHEN  VALLEY,  AND  EASTERN  GLACIERS
OF  KANCHEN-JUNGA


By  fairy  Lachen's  forest  green,
And  boiling  Zemoo's  silver  sheen,
Travelled  till  they  the  torrent  crossed
At  Tallinn  Samdong  hard  in  frost
And  Tungu  deep  in  snow.


Down  Kongra-lamo's  snowy  waste
The  Yaks  with  stately  movement  paced,
And  five  score  swordsmen's  weapons  glanced
As  Kamba's  chieftain  grave  advanced
The  mystic  Chorten  past.

C.  Macaulay's  Lay  of  Lachen.

BACK  at  Choong-tang,  we  were  glad  to  accept  the  young
Lama's  invitation  to  put  up  in  his  monastery.  It  commanded
a  view  up  the  Lachen  valley,  which  was  here  evergreen
with  semi-tropical  forest,  though  over-topped  by  snowy
peaks.  The  animals  in  the  upper  valley  were  found  by
Mr.  Blanford  to  be  more  thoroughly  Tibetan  than  in  the
Lachoong.  This  is  doubtless  owing  to  the  pass  from  Tibet
being  much  less  high  and  rigorous.

The  broken  bridges  and  ladders,  however,  still  barred  all


POLITICAL  MISSIONS  TO  TIBET  231

progress  up  this  precipitous  valley,  as  they  did  at  the  time
of  Maeaulay's  political  mission  in  1884.  The  latter's  visit
was  even  still  later  in  the  season  than  our  own,  so  that
after  the  bridges  were  repaired  at  great  cost,  and  after
some  days'  detention,  that  party  just  managed  to  push  on
to  Giagong  (15,764  ft.)  at  the  foot  of  the  Kongra-lamo
pass  to  Tibet,  and  then  had  to  beat  a  hasty  retreat  before
the  advancing  snow.

This  mission  of  the  late  Colman  Macaulay  I  have  already
referred  to.  Its  leader  achieved  the  diplomatic  feat  of
opening  communication  between  India  and  the  Tibetan
government,  for  the  first  time  since  the  days  of  Warren
Hastings,  over  a  hundred  years  before.  He  has  related
the  circumstances  of  his  journey  up  this  valley,  and  his
meeting  with  the  Tibetan  officials,  in  his  Lay  of  Lachen ;
and  how  he  was  benighted  in  the  snow  at  the  foot  of
the  icy  Chomiomo  (22,385  feet)  and  Kanchen-jow,  whose
eastern  slopes  we  had  just  crossed.

His  ballad  tells  how

The  moon  to  nearly  full  had  grown
Ere  they  the  frontier  cold  and  lone
Did  reach,  where  wind-swept  Giagong
Lies  white  and  chill  and  drear
'Twixt  Kanchen-jow  and  Chomiom.
No  man  or  beast  may  make  his  home
That  barren  snowfield  near.

The  day  was  waning,  and  the  crest
Of  Chomiomo  paler  grew,
As  sank  the  sun  into  the  west
And  ever  lengthening  shadows  threw
The  giant's  hoar  between.


232  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

The  north  wind  sharp  and  sharper  blew,
The  frost  was  piercing  keen ;

Night  followed  day,  but  still  no  sound
Was  heard  the  silent  snow  drift  round
Of  coming  footsteps,  and  no  light
Of  lantern  or  of  torch  did  peer
Across  the  waste  of  gleaming  white
To  say  that  help  was  near.

At  length  that  awful  night  was  past,

No  more  they  shuddered  'neath  the  blast;

The  morning  smiled  across  the  wild,

And  the  tentsmen  followed  fast,

As  Kamba's  chieftain  grave  advanced

The  mystic  chorten  past.

And  in  Macaulay's  tent  that  day,
In  high  durbar  and  bright  array,
With  welcome  glad  and  presents  fair
Was  Bengal's  greeting  told.

But  this  Tibetan  official,  the  Jong-pirn  or  Commander
of  the  adjoining  fort  of  Kamba,  was  not  to  be  readily
coerced.  He  stoutly  refused  to  receive  any  official  message
whatever,  on  the  plea  that  he  had  no  orders  to  do  so.
Mr.  M.  achieved  his  object  by  making  capital  out  of  the
fact  that  the  Tibetan  had  no  orders  not  to  receive  any
communication,  and  by  further  declaring  that  if  the  Jong-
pon  refused  to  receive  his  message  he  would  himself  go
on  to  the  capital,  Tashi-lunpo,  to  deliver  the  message  in
person.  This  last  alternative  was  too  dreadful  for  the
Tibetan  to  contemplate,  so  he  agreed  to  receive  the  com-
munication, and  it  was  duly  delivered ;  for  a  friendly  reply


THE  ZEMOO  VALLEY  233

was    received    from    the    chief  minister  of  Western  Tibet  a
few  months  later.

Now,  however,  restrained  as  we  were  by  the  broken
bridges  and  ladders,  we  could  but  look  wistfully  up  the
dark  vistas  of  this  Lachen  valley,  so  graphically  described
by  Hooker  and  Blanford,  trusting  to  be  able  the  following
year  to  accomplish  our  projected  journey  through  it
to  the  unexplored  Zemoo  glaciers,  thence  over  the
eastern  glaciers  of  Kanchen-junga,  and  back  by  rocky
T6-loong.

This  journey  was  done  two  seasons  later  by  the  political
agent,  Mr.  White,  who  commanded  the  resources  of  the
Sikhim  State  for  opening  the  roads  and  building  the
bridges.  He  went  in  the  reverse  direction,  entering  by  To-
loong  and  returning  this  way;  and  he  was  accompanied
by  Mr.  T.  Hoffmann,  to  whom  I  am  indebted  for  the
beautiful  photographs  of  the  glaciers  and  other  scenery
en  route,  never  visited  by  Europeans  before.  Starting  at
the  end  of  June  1891,  they  experienced  intervals  of  fine
clear  weather  whilst  traversing  the  glaciers  in  the  middle
of  July.

The  too  brief  narrative  of  this  interesting  journey,  writ-
ten by  Mr.  Hoffmann, :,s  tells  of  their  passage  from  To-loong
to  the  Zemoo  valley  (the  "Thlonok"  of  Hooker)  with  its
great  glacier,  which  descends  from  Kanchen-junga.  He
writes:  "After  a  hard  climb  we  reached  the  base  of  the
glacier  at  a  height  of  13,800  ft.  Here  we  counted  four
distinct    caves    in   the   ice.     The  face  of  the  ice-cliff  at  the


*34


AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS


end  of  the  glacier  is  about  400  to  500  ft.  deep,  and  the
immense  mass  of  ice  rested  between  the  two  slopes  of  the
valley.  ...  It  was  too  dangerous  to  remain  here  long  on
account  of  the  huge  stones  that  were  continually  falling
from  the  glacier.  We  crossed  over  one  of  the  snow-bridges
to  the  opposite  bank,  getting  some  excellent  photographs
of  these  curiosities  of  nature's  architecture."  Ascending  the

glacier  and  its  surmount-
ing debris  to  an  elevation
of  16,000  ft,  "the  mist
cleared  away  for  a  short
time,  and  we  saw  one
of  the  finest-shaped  peaks
in  the  Himalayas,  marked
on  the  map  D2,  or  Simiol-
chum."  Continuing  their
ascent  to  17,000  ft.,  they
started  the  following  day
peak  d  .  it  £0     cross    the     glacier,

intending  to  strike  a  rock  not  far  from  the  foot  of
Kanchen-junga.  The  glacier  descends  from  Kanchen-junga
almost  in  a  straight  line,  and  is  fed  by  many  minor
glaciers  coming  down  from  D2  and  the  peak  to  the  north
of  it.  We  counted  a  dozen  glaciers  on  one  occasion,
joining  the  main  glacier.  We  reached  a  height  of  17,500  ft.
To  the  south-west  was  a  gap  in  the  range  of  19,300  ft.
The  rock  we  had  hoped  to  reach  was  still  a  long  way
off  at    2    p.m.,    and   we    reluctantly   turned  back  to  camp.


KANCHEN-JUNGA  EASTERN  GLACIERS  235

The  rumbling  noise  of  the  avalanches  and  the  crashing  of
falling  rocks  never  cease,  and  it  is  dangerous  to  camp  here,
near  the  base  of  a  mountain.  The  next  day  dawned  glo-
riously. For  the  first  time  we  obtained  a  view  clear  from
all  clouds  and  mist."  Kanchen  towered  high  to  the  west.
"To   the    south    Sim-vovon-chum  (D1)  looked  like  a  burnt-


HOiVril   RIDGE  OF  KANCHEN-JUNGA — SHOWING   GAP   (21,000  FT.).

out  crater  filled  with  snow.  Then  came  a  17,450  ft.  gap
in  the  range,  with  a  wavy  snowfield  and  a  magnificent
group  of  splintered  peaks,  not  named  on  the  maps.  .  .  .
Before  leaving  this  neighbourhood  we  visited  a  narrow
valley  to  the  north-east  of  Kanchen-junga.  We  counted  here
eight  glaciers  coming  down  from  the  different  slopes,  some


236  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

joining  the  main  glacier,  and  others  ending  abruptly,  forming
a  jagged  wall  of  ice.  The  rays  of  the  sun  caused  the
masses  of  ice  to  act  like  huge  prisms,  reflecting  the  most
gorgeous  colours."  Mr.  White  then  followed  up  the  Lanok
("  Thlonok  "J  valley  northwards  to  the  Nakoo  pass  (1 7,000  ft.),
and  back  by  the  Nangna  pass  (17,590  ft.).


NANGNA  PASS  (.17, 593    FEE  I'  ,    EASTERN  JSIDE.


CHAPTER    VII


THROUGH   BRITISH   BHOTAN   TO   DARJEELING


In  returning  from  Choong-tang  to  the  capital,  Toom-
long,  I  came  across  some  Bhotiyas  making  elaborate  pre-
parations for  a  hot  bath,  on  the  bank  of  a  stream.  They
had  burned  out  a  piece  of  the  trunk  of  a  tree  into  a  sort
of  tub,  and  filling  it  with  water,  they  heated  up  the  latter
by  throwing  into  it  some  stones  which  they  had  roasted  in
a  bonfire ;  and  they  emerged  from  their  ablutions  with
marked  improvement  to  their  complexions.  So  who  will
now  say  that  the  Bhotiyas  never  bathe  ?  After  all,  these
Bhotiyas  and  Tibetans  have  perhaps  no  constitutional
distaste  for  cleanliness;  but  with  the  thermometer  near,
or  below  zero,  and  Boreas  blowing  keenly,  even  the
most  constant  bather  is  apt  to  desert  allegiance  to
his  tub.

The  number  of  snakes  I  found  on  our  track  was  sur-
prisingly  large,    though   this    may  have  been  partly  owing


24o  AMONC,  THE  HIMALAYAS

to  my  having  been  specially  on  the  outlook  for  them,
ever  since  I  had  been  bitten  by  one  some  years  previously.
Here  no  fewer  than  twelve  different  species  found  their
last  home  in  my  spirit-bottle.  Many  of  them  were  not
poisonous,  and  the  most  common  were  slender  iridescent
whip-snakes,  gliding  gracefully  through  the  foliage,  and
several  species  of  brightly  coloured,  large  eyed,  "  keel-
scaled"  snakes,  or  Tropidonotus.  The  poisonous  ones  were
a  huge  blue  "  krait "  (Bungarns  ccsruhcs),  that  was  sunning
itself  on  a  rock,  and  the  ugly  little  mountain  viper  (Trime-
surus  monticola)  which  the  Bhotiyas  call  "  The  Fierce  Slow-
going  One"  ftl  Barop-skep-pa"),  a  title  that  aptly  de-
scribes its  character;  for  though,  like  most  vipers,  it  can
only  move  very  slowly  out  of  your  path,  it  bites  with  the
utmost  swiftness  and  fierceness.  Both  Lepchas  and  Bhotiyas
have  a  wholesome  fear  of  snakes,  and  believe  that  all  of
them  are  poisonous,  a  very  safe-working  theory.  Such
gorgeous  spiders  too,  I  had  never  seen  before.  They  were
resplendent  in  brilliant  scarlet  and  metallic  blue,  and  of
giant  size,  about  four  to  six  inches  in  spread ;  and  their
webs  so  large  and  strong  as  to  catch  small  birds,  on
which  some  of  them  feed.  Few  of  these  spiders  have  ever
been  collected,  and  many  looked  as  if  they  would  be  nasty
venomous  customers  to  tackle.  The  number  of  small  locusts
was  noticeable,  and  some  of  them  mimicked  green  leaves.
Our  food  was  now  at  a  very  low  ebb,  and  had  to  be
eked  out  largely  by  what  I  could  shoot  for  the  pot,  not
even  rejecting  plump  parrots.  The  men  stayed  their  hunger


THROUGH  BRITISH  BHOTAN  TO  DARJEELING    241

to  some  extent  with  wild  berries  and  others  things  they
foraged  in  the  jungle,  such  as  the  tender  tips  of  juicy  ferns,
nettles,  etc.,  boiled  as  spinach;  wild  yams  and  other  roots;
mushrooms  and  several  fruits,  including  wild  mangoes,  and
when  near  a  village,  oranges  ad  libitum,  for  this  is  near
the  home  of  the  orange,  whence  it  spread  west  to  southern
Europe.  But  I  had  to  be  on  my  guard  against  some  of
the  jungle  products  which  my  Bhotiya  cook  brought  during
Achoom's  absence.  For  I  found  him  about  to  cook  some
pods  of  beans,  which  I  at  once  recognised  as  poisonous,  and
belonging  to  a  kind  of  laburnum.

At  one  of  the  poor  hamlets  which  we  passed,  a
Bhotiya  offered  me  a  domestic  fowl  for  twelve  times  the
ordinary  rate,  and  he  would  not  abate  the  price  one  whit;
"  for,"  said  he,  with  the  air  of  a  political  economist  who
had  studied  the  laws  of  supply  and  demand,  "this  is
positively  the  last  fowl  left  in  this  part  of  Sikhim,"  as
the  troops  of  the  recent  expedition  had  eaten  up  all  the
fowls  and  put  an  end  to  the  local  breed.  This,  I  ascer-
tained afterwards,  was  true,  and  there  was  probably  not
another  fowl  within  five  or  six  days'  journey,  and  very  few
for  much  longer  distances.

From    Toomlong    we    descended    to    our    old   friend  the

Dik-chu  river,  and  crossing  it  by  a  good  bridge,  we  struck

the    new  bridle-road,   where  my  pony  was  in  waiting;  and

then    I    proceeded    comfortably,    winding    through    pleasant

glades  and  glens  with   picturesque  views  over  the  Penlong

pass  (6,250  ft.),  to  Gangtok,  or  "The  Crown  of  the  Ridge"

16


242  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

(5,090  ft.),  where  our  new  Resident,  Mr.  White,  was  creating
an  oasis  of  civilization  in  the  wilds  of  Sikhim.

Here  there  burst  on  the  view  a  tennis-court,  rows  of
trim  huts  that  housed  a  small  force  of  our  soldiers  and
police,  and  other  signs  of  a  British  settlement,  including
a  newly  opened  telegraph-station  that  connects  us  again
with  the  outer  world.  Its  wire,  however,  was,  as  yet,  only
tied  from  tree  to  tree  through  the  forest.  I  got  a  welcome
budget  of  letters,  and  tasted  again  some  bread,  an  article
of  diet  that  is  not  sufficiently  appreciated  until  you  have
been  deprived  of  it  for  some  weeks.  Another  sign  of
civilization  we  met  here,  in  the  heart  of  Sikhim,  was  the
Indian  money-lender  usurer,  the  scourge  of  the  poor  natives,
the  pink-turbaned  Marwari,  who  has  come  under  the
wing  of  our  rule.

Next  day  we  crossed  over  more  hills  and  dales  to  "The
Bamboo  Hamlet",  or  Pakyong,  wheret  here  was  a  stockade
held  by  some  of  our  troops  (the  13th  Bengal  Infantry).
It  was  full  of  life  and  bustle,  the  band  was  playing,  and
English  ladies  graced  it  with  their  presence.

Beyond  this,  we  passed  another  copper  mine,  on  our
way  down  the  Rarhi  river.  This,  like  the  others,  is  worked
by  the  rich  Nepalese  (or  more  properly  Newar)  banker  of
Darjeeling,  Lachmi  Das ;  and  here  a  place  was  pointed  out
to  me  where,  in  a  squabble  over  the  revenue  from  these
mines,  the  Lamas  of  the  rival  monasteries  of  Phodang  and
Pemionchi  had  a  pitched  battle  in  1880,  and  one  at  least
of  the  monks  of  the  latter  monastery  was  killed  on  the  spot.


THROUGH  BRITISH  BHOTAN  TO  DARJEELING     243

Large  numbers  of  Nepalese  colonists  were  busily  felling
and  burning  the  virgin  forest,  to  form  settlements,  in  ac-
cordance with  our  new  policy  of  developing  the  resources
of  the  country,  and  raising  revenue  for  improvements,  by
leasing  out  the  land  on  easy  terms  to  the  Hindooized
Nepalese.  For  these  latter  make  an  excellent  settled
peasantry,  as  compared  with  the  easy-going  Lepchas  and
Rhotiyas,  who  are  neither  good  cultivators,  nor  yet  do  they
pay  any  revenue  worth  mentioning  in  cash.  To  preserve
these  aboriginal  Lepchas,  and  the  nominal  ruling  race,  the
Bhotiyas,  from  being  swept  away  altogether  by  these
active  Nepalese  emigrants,  the  latter  are  at  present  restricted
to  the  lower  and  most  fertile  part  of  native  Sikhim,  ad-
joining the  district  of  Darjeeling.  In  the  unreserved  portion,
the  racial  distribution  corresponds  to  some  extent  with  the
geological  formations ;  for  the  Lepchas  down  in  the  hot
valley  coincide  generally  with  the  limestones  and  schist
rocks,  while  the  Bhotiyas  occupy  the  massive  gneiss  and
granite.

In  a  placid  pool  in  the  Rarhi  some  fine  large  fish  were
rising  in  a  most  tempting  manner.  Thence  past  some
silvery-barked  giant  Gurjun  trees  (Dipterocarpus  sp.J,  we
entered  British  Bhotan  and  climbed  under  the  old  Bhotan-
ese  fort  of  Damsang,  perched  on  its  knife-edge  cliff,  up  to
Pedong  (4,780  ft.),  situated  on  the  grand  trunk  road  to
Tibet  and  China.

Here  we  found  the  staging-house  occupied  by  some  of
the    suite    of  the    Chinese    Minister   of  Lhasa,  the  Amluvi,


244  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

who  was  returning  to  Pekin  via  Lhasa  to  get  his  negotia-
tions with  the  Indian  Government  ratified.  He  had  crossed
the  frontier  several  days  previously;  but  many  stragglers
of  his  party,  which  was  said  to  include  over  1,000  baggage
coolies,  were  still  hurrying  along  the  road,  some  on  mules
and  ponies,  others  on  foot,  laden  with  all  sorts  and  sizes
of  packages,  amongst  which  I  noticed  several  cases  of
European  wines  and  tinned  provisions,  kerosine  oil,  pots
of  fuchsias  and  geraniums,  and  some  packages  said  to
contain  dynamite  for  blasting  purposes.

At  Pedong  I  encamped  near  the  small  chapel  of  Father
Desgodins,  the  Roman  Catholic  missionary,  who  for  over
twenty  years  conducted  a  mission  within  Tibetan  territory
on  the  borders  of  China,  and  then  when  he  was  driven
out  by  irate  Lamas,  who  razed  his  building  to  the  ground,  he
settled  here  on  the  Indian  side,  under  the  British  flag  and
on  the  high  road  to  Tibet,  with  a  small  staff  of  assist-
ants, carrying  on  educational  work,  and  lithographing
tracts  for  distribution  amongst  the  Tibetan  traders.  One
cannot  but  admire  the  self-sacrifice  of  these  men  who  have
given  up  their  lives  entirely  to  this  humanizing  work,  to
labour  here  without  salary  and  on  a  bare  subsistence  that
affords  them  little  better  food  than  the  poorest  native;  for
they  choose  to  die  here  amongst  their  life's  work  without
ever  thinking  of  returning,  like  most  missionaries,  to  home-
life  in  Europe.  It  is  a  pity  that  they  have  not  more
striking  results  to  show  for  all  their  labours.  Yet  it  is
something   to    accomplish   the    deliverance    even    of  a    few


THROUGH  BRITISH  BHOTAN  TO  DARJEELING     245

individuals  from  the  constant  terror  of  malignant  spirits,
under  which  these  poor  natives  labour.  And  there  are  not
a  few  of  their  flock  who  regard  these  benefactors  with  the
same  mingled  feelings  of  reverence  and  love,  as  the  Irish
peasant  expresses  towards  his  pastor,  the  "  Soggarth  aroon",
in  the  song  :  —

"Who  in  the  winter's  night

Soggarth  aroon,
When  the  cold  blast  did  bite,

Soggarth  aroon,
Came  to  my  cabin  door,
And  on  my  earthen  floor
Knelt  by  me  sick  and  poor,

Soggarth  aroon  ?  "

Kalim-pong,  which  we  reached  next  day,  on  the  same
ridge,  twelve  miles  nearer  to  Darjeeling,  is  also  a  mis-
sionary station,  where  Mr.  Sutherland  and  other  members
of  the  Church  of  Scotland  Mission  are  doing  some  good
work  amongst  the  mild  Lepchas,  of  whom  a  considerable
colony  is  settled  here.  I  was  surprised,  however,  to  find  that
the  Lepchas  were  being  taught  through  the  Nepalese  lan-
guage, and  not  through  their  own  vernacular.

This  village,  whose  name  means  "the  Governor's  hold",
as  it  was  formerly  the  head-quarters  of  a  Bhotanese  dis-
trict, is  now  the  head-quarters  of  "British  Bhotan ".  For
this  tract  of  hills  to  the  east  of  the  Teesta,  from  Pedong
to  the  plains,  was  annexed  by  us  from  Bhotan  in  1865  as
an  indemnity  against  the  raids  of  the  Bhotanese  into  British
territory   and    for  the  expenses  of  the  war  of  1864,  forced


24(>


AMONCi  THE  HIMALAYAS


on  us  therewith.  Their  country,  which  is  generally  known
by  the  Indian  term  of  "  Bhotan "  or  "The  End  of  Tibet",
has  physically  the  same  general  characters  as  Sikhim,  for
it  is  the  adjoining  southern  slopes  of  the  Himalayas  to  the
east  of  Sikhim.     Its  people,  who  are  under  fanatical  Lamas


BHOTANESE    CHIKF    AND    RETINUE.


from  Tibet,  call  their  country  "  The  Southern  Thunder-
Dragon  "  (Lo-Dook),  a  name  which  I  think  denotes  the
excessive  thunder  experienced  in  this  area,  which,  lying  at
the  head  of  the  Bay  of  Bengal,  receives,  even  more  than
Sikhim,  the  blast  of  the  rain  clouds,  and  is  by  far  the
wettest    portion    of  all   the    Himalayas.     Our   military  post


THROUGH  BRITISH  BHOTAN  TO  DARJEELING     247

stands  further  east  at  Buxar  or  "The  Mouth  of  the  Bam-
boo Bridge."  These  Bhotanese  are  naturally  lawless  and
notoriously  turbulent.  They  are  held  in  little  control  by
their  nominal  ruler,  the  "  Deb  Rajah  ",  as  he  is  called  by
the  plains-people;  and  their  Chiefs  or  "  Pen-lows "  are  each
petty  sovereigns  in  themselves,  as  independent  as  they  can
make  themselves,  and  are  constantly  warring  against  each
other,  knowing  no  law  but

The  good  old  rule,  the  simple  plan
That  he  should  take  who  has  the  power
And  he  should  keep  who  can.

As  these  predatory  marauders  were  constantly  raiding
into  our  territory,  destroying  villages  far  and  wide,  and
carrying  off  men  and  women  into  slavery  and  plundering
their  cattle,  etc.,  our  government  inflicted  a  variety  of  mild
punishments,  without,  however,  any  good  effect.  And  when
Sir  Ashley  Eden  was  sent  in  1864  to  try  to  make  satis-
factory arrangements,  he  was  so  grossly  assaulted  and  in-
sulted, that  we  annexed  this  part  of  Bhotan,  as  well  as  a
large  strip  along  the  foot  of  the  hills  up  to  Assam,  sub-
ject in  the  event  of  the  good  behaviour  of  the  tribes  to
an  annual  rent  of  about  £  5,000  as  a  preventive  of  further
aggression.

This  mountainous  tract,  however,  had  previously  be-
longed to  the  Lepchas,  according  to  the  local  traditions,
and  this  is  confirmed  by  the  older  names  of  the  rivers  and
mountains,  which  are  mostly  Lepcha.

Kalimpong  crowns  an    open,    cultivated  spur.     It  has  a


248  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

much   milder   climate   than  Darjeeling,  and  boasts  a  consi-
derable mart  to  which  Tibetan  traders  come.

Several  of  these  were  encamped  in  a  yak-hair  tent  and
other  improvised  shelters.  They  bring  for  sale  or  barter,
ponies,  wool,  coarse  blankets,  furs,  yak-tails,  musk,  turquoise,
gold-dust,  Chinese  silk,  brick-tea,  borax  and  salt.  These
last  are  brought  across  the  snows  fastened  on  the  backs  of
sheep.  And  they  take  back  English  broad-cloth,  piece  goods
and  other  European  manufactures ;  tobacco,  indigo,  rice,
sugar,  madder  and  other  tropical  products,  as  well  as  coral,
pearls,  glass  beads  and  precious  stones.

It  is  curious  to  find  that  the  brick-tea  is  brpught  all
the  way  from  China,  eight  months'  journey  or  more  across
the  most  difficult  and  mountainous  country  in  the  world,  from
Tasienloo  through  Tibet  to  this  place  and  Darjeeling.  Yet,
after  this  enormously  long  journey  it  is  sold  at  the  latter
place  at  a  cheaper  rate  than  the  tea  locally  grown  at  Dar-
jeeling. And  although  these  compressed  blocks  or  bricks
consist  for  the  most  part  of  coarse  twigs,  caked  with  refuse
tea-dust,  still  the  Tibetans  prefer  this  stuff  to  the  good
Indian  tea  and  will  even  pay  a  higher  price  for  it.

I  bought  from  one  of  these  Tibetan  merchants  an  ex-
ceptionally fine  pony.  It  was  creamy  fawn-coloured,  like
the  best  Tibetan  ponies,  but  it  was  so  extensively  covered
over  with  zebra-like  markings  that  to  see  it  would  have
delighted  the  heart  of  Darwin  and  his  followers,  who  be-
lieve that  the  horse  was  descended  from  a  zebra-like
ancestor — though  it  is  said  that  the  wild  horses  (or  Kyang)


THROUGH  BRITISH  B  HOT  AN  TO  DARJEELING     249

of  the  Tibetan  plateaus,  whose  flesh  is  esteemed  a  delicacy
by   the    native   hunters,    are  not  striped  or  brindled  at  all.

Many  of  the  fawn-coloured  Tibetan  ponies  are  brindled,
but  none  of  the  many  I  have  seen  were  marked  so  fully
as  this  one.  It  had  a  black  stripe  down  the  spine,  the
tips  of  the  ears,  nose  and  tip  of  tail  were  black,  and  it
had  broad  black  stripes  over  the  shoulders,  flanks  and
legs,  and  dappled  spots  over  the  haunches.  So  suggestive
of  a  tiger  were  its  markings  that  it  was  called  "Tiger"  by
the  natives.  And  it  proved  to  be  a  most  gentle,  good-
tempered  beast,  following  me  about  like  a  pet  dog.

The  inhabitants  of  this  part  of  Bhotan  are  still  in  con-
siderable proportion  Bhotanese.  These  differ  in  appear-
ance from  the  Sikhimese  Bhotiyas  and  the  Tibetans,  chiefly
in  that  both  men  and  women  wear  no  pigtails,  but  shave
their  heads,  like  Lamas  ;  and  they  often  wear  turbans  instead
of  the  usual  Chinese  hats.  They  are  generally  called  by
their  religious  title  of  "The  Southern  Dook-pa  "  (L'o-Dook-
pa),  as  they  belong  to  the  Dook-pa  sect  of  Lamaism,  and
own  as  their  spiritual  head  or  Grand  Lama,  the  King  of
Bhotan,  the  so-called  "  Dharma-  (or  religious)  Rajah",  as
opposed  to  his  temporal  governor,  the  "Deb  Rajah"  above
mentioned.  The  Lepchas  call  them  "Proo",  which  may
be  the  antiquated  form  of  their  present  name  Dook — which
is  spelt  "  Broog  ".

Here  at  Kalimpong  is  a  small  monastery  of  this  Bhotanese
or  Dook-pa  sect  of  Lamas.

Our   sudden   dip    down   from    here    to    cross   the    Teesta


250  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

river,  brought  us  to  the  lowest  depths  we  had  yet  reach-
ed, since  leaving  Darjeeling.  The  river  here  was  only  700
feet  above  the  sea,  and  in  this  deep  tropical  gorge  it  was
a  fine  river  flowing  swiftly,  but  much  less  tumultuously
than  where  we  crossed  it  by  that  awful  cane-bridge.  Here
we  crossed  it  by  an  elegant  iron  suspension  bridge,  and
passed  up  its  right  bank,  under  shady  foliage  that  over-
arched our  path  for  about  a  mile,  to  its  junction  with  the
Great  Rang-eet  river — the  so  called  "  Marriage-place  of
the  Rivers",  of  the  legend  of  which  we  have  heard  tell.
Here  the  crooked  Rang-eet  joins  the  straight-going
Teesta  almost  at  a  right-angle,  and  its  clear  silvery  waters
reflecting  the  foliage  of  its  banks,  refuse  to  mingle  with
the  turbid  Teesta  till  far  below  their  meeting-place.  These
two  differently  coloured  streams  flow  side  by  side  in  the
same  bed,  unmixed  for  some  hundred  yards.  The  Teesta
water,  too,  is  colder.

Along  the  Rang-eet,  our  path  led  us  through  lovely
forest,  till  we  reached  that  point  where  we  had  crossed  it
in  the  canoe,  and  thence  we  ascended  to  our  first  day's
staging-house  at  Badam-tam,  amongst  the  tea-gardens.

Many  acres  of  tea-bushes  through  which  we  passed  were
shrivelled  up  with  a  rusty  blight.  The  tea-planters  suffer
much  in  this  way  by  having  rudely  disturbed  the  balance
of  Nature,  in  removing  the  great  variety  of  rank  forest
growth,  and  substituting  for  it  only  one  kind  of  plant,
namely  tea.  Thus  the  parasitical  insects,  beetles  and  mites,
as   well    as    moulds,    finding    their   natural  food  gone,  have


THROUGH  BRITISH  BHOTAN  TO  DARJEELING     253

turned  their  attention  to  the  tea,  and  cause  devastating
"blights".  One  of  the  most  serious  of  these,  the  "Mos-
quito-blight", is  the  commonest  under  4,500  feet  elevation.
It  is  due  to  an  insect  somewhat  like  the  well-known  blood-
sucker, which  pierces  the  young  shoots  of  the  tea-bush
and  sucks  up  their  juice.  Another  is  caused  by  a  mite
known  as  "red-spider",  and  all  these  pests  require  very
active  measures,  dosing  with  insecticides,  liquid  and  gaseous,
to  repel  their  ravages.

A  great  swarm  of  locusts  swept  over  us  as  we  rode  up
next  day  (7th  November)  to  Darjeeling.  They  came  in
such  clouds  as  to  darken  the  air,  and  they  covered  the
roads,  trees  and  fields  everywhere,  some  inches  deep  in
places.  They  were  about  three  inches  in  length ;  and  the
Nepalese  villagers  rushed  about,  gathering  them  in  basket-
fuls  for  food,  as  they  ate  them  like  shrimps,  with  great
relish.  So  it  was  probably  these  insects,  after  all,  that
formed  the  diet  of  John  the  Baptist,  and  not  the  bean-pods
of  the  same  name ;  for  the  locusts  thus  swarming  up  from
India  were  the  Egyptian  species  [Acridium  peregrinum  and
a  few  A.  Succincturn) ;  and  these  are  said,  when  salted,  to
be  a  favourite  food  of  the  Arabs  in  Northern  Africa  during
long  journeys.  I  afterwards  learned 39  that  this  particular
plague  of  locusts  was  first  noticed  in  June  1889,  in  the
desert  of  Sind  and  Western  Rajputana,  over  a  thousand
miles  off,  where  they  laid  eggs  in  the  sandhills.  These  eggs
hatched  out  there  into  young  locusts  which  acquired  wings
about   August,  and  then  they  swarmed ;  and  the  flights  of


^54


AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS


these  young  locusts  spread  in  myriads  in  all  directions,
covering  the  whole  of  India,  making  their  way  to  the  Punjab
in  the  north,  to  Madras  and  the  Deccan  in  the  south,  and
to  Bengal  and  Assam  in  the  east,  doing  much  damage  to
the  crops.  In  the  arid  Punjab,  where  vegetation  is  so  pre-
cious, the  troops  were  turned  out  to  destroy  them,  and
rewards  were  offered  for  their  destruction.  In  this  way  in
one  station  alone  (Kohat)  twenty- two  tons  of  these  insects
were  killed  in  a  single  day.

They  did  little  damage  in  well-wooded  Sikhim,  beyond
stripping  many  of  the  trees  and  tea  bushes  bare.  They
penetrated  even  to  Tibet.  More  than  one  trustworthy
traveller  told  me  that  the  dead  insects  lay  several  feet  deep
on  the  Tang  pass  (15,700  ft.)  to  the  east  of  the  Dongkia,
blackening  the  snow  for  many  miles.  And,  curiously,  a  plague
of  locusts  was  predicted  in  the  Tibetan  astrological  horoscope
of  this  very  year,  as  a  Lama  proudly  pointed  out  to  me.


a  locust  {A.  succintum).
Natural  size.


CHAPTER    VIII


TO  THE  EASTERN  PASS  OF  THE  JELEP,  AND  THE  SCENE
OF  THE  LATE  WAR


No  travellers  come  from  far  Tibet,
From  the  mystic  land  no  tidings  yet

For  many  a  month  are  sent ;
No  more  the  tinkling  bells  ring  clear
On  Lingtoo's  heights,  by  Bedden's  mere,
On  lelep's  pass  no  step  resounds,
No  smoke  at  even  upward  bounds

From  weary  traders'  tent.

C.  Macaulay's  Lay  of  Larhen.


As  soon  as  the  snow  cleared  from  the  uplands  in  the
spring,  I  set  off  for  the  Jelep  pass,  on  the  direct  overland
trade-route  by  way  of  Lhasa  to  Pekin.  This,  too,  was
the  scene  of  our  late  war  with  Tibet,  of  which  many  traces
were  still  visible.

An  easy  canter  of  about  half  an  hour,  one  morning  in
the  middle  of  April,  carried  us  up  from  Darjeeling,  over
Jalapahar,  dotted  with  its  white  barracks  of  the  military
sanatarium    and  artillery  batteries,  and  gave  us  as  we  rose,


256  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

magnificent  views  of  the  snows.  Thence  we  descended  to
Jor-bungalow,  or  "The  Two  Cottages  ",  the  seat  of  a  Tibetan
colony,  where  about  a  month  previously  I  had  seen  these
people  joyously  celebrating  their  belated  new  year.  Like
the  ancient  Romans,  they  begin  their  new  year  in  the
spring,  when  the  winter  season  of  suspended  life  has  pass-
ed away,  and  when  the  fulness  of  Nature's  reawakening
energies  is  delightfully  exhibited  in  the  wondrous  pro-
fusion of  blooming  orchids  and  magnolias  in  the  fine  forest
of  Rang-iroon,  that  we  now  entered,  on  the  dripping  damp
northern  slopes  of  Senchal.

This  magnificent  forest,  which  has  been  preserved  by
government,  gives  us  some  idea  of  the  luxuriance  of  the
virgin  forest  that  once  covered  Darjeeling  and  its  sur-
rounding hills ;  but  which  has  been  ruthlessly  swept  away
since  Hooker's  visit.  It  stretches  for  several  hundreds  of
square  miles,  more  or  less  continuously,  from  the  top  of
Senchal  down  to  the  upper  limit  of  cultivation,  at  about
6,000  feet;  and  our  road  runs  through  it  for  about  ten
miles.  Its  giant  oaks,  chestnuts  and  magnolias  are  thickly
draped  with  moss  and  wreaths  of  aerial  orchids,  ferns  and
festooning  climbers  and  parasitic  plants,  which  hang  in  great
tufts  and  pendants,  waving  over  the  blue  hydrangeas  of
the  undergrowth.  Some  of  the  branches  of  these  trees  are
perfect  gardens  in  themselves.  In  the  soft  drapery  of  moist
moss  that  thickly  clothes  these  branches,  and  in  the  beds  of
fine  mould  from  the  decaying  leaves  that  fills  their  crevices,
are    to    be    found    not    only    luxuriant    clusters  of  exquisite


ORCHID  AND   MOSS-COVERED   OAK-FOREST.


«7


RANGIROON  FOREST  259

orchids  (PleurotJialis  etc.)  and  many  kinds  of  other  epiphytic
plants,  but  even  large  woody  shrubs  and  evergreens
(Vaccinia  etc.)  with  a  variety  of  flowers  and  foliage.  A
gorgeous  feature  of  the  forest,  at  this  season,  is  the  blaze
of  crimson  blossoms  of  the  Magnolia  Campbelli,  a  tree
which  has  just  flowered  for  the  first  time  in  Europe.
Here,  in  its  home,  it  is  a  forest  monarch  over  80  feet
high,  and  its  huge  flowers,  like  those  of  the  cotton  tree
below,  appear  curiously  on  its  bare  branches  before  its
leaves.  White  magnolias  also  abound,  scenting  the  air
with  their  fragance.  Delicately  pink  hydrangeas  18  to  20
feet  high  are  common,  and  ferns  are  so  numerous  that
over  sixty  species  may  be  found  along  this  forest  road
within  a  few  miles.

The  glimpses  of  the  snows,  framed  in  this  rich  forest
foreground,  were  very  varied,  and  there  vistas  comprised
the  deep  valley  of  the  Rang-eet,  and  to  our  left  Dar-
jeeling  in  the  middle  distance,  and  Kanchen-junga  more  fas-
cinating than  ever.  And  we  passed  several  mounted  Tibetans
and  Chinese,  with  strings  of  laden  pack-ponies,  also  several
detachments  of  our  troops  going  and  coming,  which  reminded
us  that  we  were  on  the  trade-route  to  Tibet,  and  on  a  line
of  march  held  by  our  forces.

After  winding  above  a  mineral  spring,  and  past  a  few
clearings  of  the  herdsmen  who  supply  milk  to  Darjeeling,
and  who  are  Bhotanese  of  the  Moo-sepa  clan,  we  emerged
from  the  forest  at  the  open  slopes  of  Lop-chok,  or  "The
cool  stone,"  where  Achoom  promptly  brought  us  breakfast,


260  AMONG  THP:  HIMALAYAS

in  the  little  rest-house,  with  its  wide  views  of  both  the
Teesta  and  Rang-eet  valleys.

Thence  a  steep  descent,  by  rapid  zig-zags,  led  us  through  the
trim  tea-gardens  of  Pashok,  or  "  The  Giant-bamboo  Jungle  ",
for  here  begins  the  zone  of  this  valued  bamboo  (Dendro-
calamus  Hamiltonii),  whose  stout  stem,  7  to  9  inches  in
diameter,  supplies  the  Lepchas  with  their  large  jugs  and
cooking-pots.  Further  down  we  re-entered  the  forest,  and
at  about  4,000  feet  below  Darjeeling,  reached  the  staging-
house  (3,300  ft.)  in  a  semi-tropical  forest,  which  generally
resembled  that  of  Badam-tam,  the  first  stage  of  our  pre-
vious journey.  Here  we  heard  again  the  shrill  chirping  of
the  cicad  insects,  and  the  subdued  roar  of  the  great  river
below.  Near  the  house  amongst  the  undergrowth  of  thick
stalked  arums,  spotted  like  serpents,  were  a  few  of  that
curious  old-world  type  of  tree,  the  cycad,  which  is  some-
what between  a  fern,  a  palm  and  a  pine.

The  descent  to  the  Teesta  bridge,  next  morning,  had
to  be  done  on  foot  as  the  road  was  too  steep  to  ride.
On  the  way  down  through  the  Sal  woods  to  the  tropical
forest  bordering  the  river,  we  got  occasional  glimpses  of
the  river,  and  a  fine  bird's-eye  view  of  its  junction  with  the
Rang-eet ;  and  we  sighted  a  marsh-deer  or  Sambhar,  (Lepcha,
Sa-ving,)  of  which  the  species  found  in  these  hills  are
decidedly  smaller  than  those  of  the  outer  plains.

At  the  bottom  of  the  gorge,  the  mighty  Teesta,  now  only
710  ft.  above  the  sea,  thunders  down,  carrying  a  tropical
climate    and  vegetation  up  along  its  banks  thus  far  within


TO  THE  EASTERN  PASS  OF  THE  JELEP  261

the  mountains.  We  soon  reached  the  iron  bridge  which  we
had  previously  crossed  in  coming  from  Kalimpong.  Here,
in  this  deep  hot  gorge,  quite  a  large  village  is  springing
up  since  the  increase  in  the  military  traffic  that  has
followed  our  little  war  with  Tibet.  And  now  we  realized
that  we  were  on  the  line  of  communications  of  a  small
army  in  the  field.  The  road  was  thronged  with  small
detachments  of  troops  and  endless  strings  of  transport
coolies,  laden  mules  and  pack-ponies  going,  and  empty  ones
returning  with  their  drivers,  and  droves  of  cattle  and  sheep
for  slaughter  for  the  commissariat.

The  mouth  of  the  bridge  was  quite  blocked  by  the
trains  of  transport  bullock-carts  that  had  come  directly
up  the  Teesta  valley  from  the  Indian  plains  of  Siligoori,
to  avoid  the  needless  climb  up  to  and  descent  from
Darjeeling.  The  block  of  carts  here  was  especially
great  owing  to  the  bridge  having,  through  an  oversight,
been  built  only  for  foot-passengers,  and  so  narrow  that
no  cart  could  cross  it.  These  vehicles  therefore  had  to
be  unloaded,  their  wheels  unshipped,  and  both  their  loads
and  the  bits  of  the  carts  carried  over  piecemeal,  and  put
together  and  reloaded  at  the  other  side ;  all  of  which
meant  a  chronic  block  of  the  traffic  at  this  narrow  throat
of  the  bridge.

The  frequency  and  severity  of  the  "Derbyshire  neck"
here  is  remarkable.  Most  of  the  residents  suffered  from
this  disfiguring  swelling;  and  whilst  I  was  at  breakfast  at
the   rest-house,    I   was  surprised  to  see  that  several  of  the


262  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

goats  and  the  domestic  fowls,  as  well  as  some  of  the
ponies  of  the  place  had  the  same  large  swellings.  The
villagers  blamed  particular  springs  in  the  neighbourhood,
which  they  said  gave  goitre  to  every  one  who  drank  that
water.  Probably  the  complaint  is  connected  with  the  lime-
stone-rocks that  crop  out  hereabouts ;  but  I  had  already
found  that  most  of  the  goitre-causing  springs  in  the  sub-
montane plains,  contained  in  addition  to  lime  an  excess
of  iron,  which  we  know  produces  readily  fulness  of  the
blood,  and  thus  a  swelling  of  this  large  vascular  and
unsupported  gland  of  the  neck  might  be  accounted  for  on
physical  principles.

At  the  entrance  to  the  bridge  a  warning  placard  caught
the  eye.  It  bore  the  very  necessary  military  notice  to
safeguard  this  slender  vibrating  structure  : — "  Troops  crossing
this  bridge  are  not  to  keep  step."  And  all  along  the
bridge  were  tied  countless  parti-coloured  streamers  and
fluttering  prayer-flags,  the  offerings  of  the  Tibetan  passengers
to  the  spirits  of  the  water.  I  helped  myself  to  a  few  of
these  flags  for  my  museum,  as  curios  are  seldom  to  be
had  free,  gratis  and  for  nothing.

Once  across  this  bridge  we  were  again  in  British  Bhotan.
In  the  steep  ascent  to  Kalimpong  we  followed  at  first  the
new  cart  road  which  had  been  made  since  our  last  visit
here,  but  after  a  time  we  took  to  the  short-cut,  which,
rising  over  3,000  feet  in  five  miles,  is  always  hot  work  to
climb,  and  tries  the  breath  of  the  pedestrian.  Our  troops
found    it   especially    trying   when   they  were  pushing  on  in


TO  THE  EASTERN  PASS  OF  THE  JELEP  263

1888  to  fight  the  Tibetans.  On  that  occasion  one  of  the
British  soldiers  is  said  to  have  exclaimed,  after  toiling,  under
a  broiling  sun,  up  some  2,000  feet  in  two  miles,  "  I've
heard  that  Tibet  was  a  ta&/e-\and,  so  these  must  be  the  legs
we  are  climbing  1 "

Beyond  Kalimpong,  after  several  miles  of  hot  shadeless
road,  we  rose  into  some  grateful  forest  at  Rissisoom,  or
"The  Three-spur  Ridge",  where  three  spurs  diverge;  and
descending  the  northern  of  these,  past  Choo-mik,  or  "  The
Spring  of  Water",  where  there  is  a  Lama  temple,  we  reached
again  Pedong,  and  encamped  not  far  from  the  French  mis-
sionaries'  chapel,  near  the  solitary  "incense-tree"  (Sal;  in
Tibetan,  Po)  which  gives  its  name  to  this  village.  The
resin  of  this  tree  is  largely  used  as  incense  in  the  Lama
temples  of  Tibet.  It  is  found  m  the  ground  at  the  foot
of  certain  of  these  trees  in  Sikhim,  in  large  masses,  often
nearly  30 — 40  cubic  inches  in  size,  but  how  it  is  produced
is  not  yet  known  exactly.

Pedong  is  now  a  considerable  military  station  and  commis-
sariat depot  for  our  small  army  of  troops  in  Sikhim.  The
mere  cost  for  the  transport  of  the  rations  for  our  troops,
in  this  little  war  and  the  subsequent  occupation  of  this
mountainous  country,  must  have  been  enormous.  All  the
food  was  brought  from  the  Indian  plains,  and  for  the
greater  part  of  the  way,  within  the  hills,  it  had  to  be
carried  by  mules  and  ponies,  and  on  men's  backs.  The
carriage  of  only  one  hundredweight  for  the  short  distance
from  the  Teesta  bridge  to  here  is  one  to  two  rupees  (one


264  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

shilling  and  threepence  to  half  a  crown),  according  to  the
number  of  porters  available.  In  this  way  these  thousands
of  coolies  have  been  making  a  month's  wages  in  a  few
days.  And  as  I  came  along  I  saw  scores  of  these  coolies
seated  by  the  roadside  gambling,  with  little  heaps  of  rupees
changing  hands;  and  it  was  no  uncommon  sight  to  see
coolies  resting  beside  their  loads,  throwing  up  rupees  and
striking  them  against  each  other,  and  gloating  over  the
sight  and  sound  of  their  new-found  treasure.  Yet  what
solid  advantage  have  we  yet  gained  for  all  this  enormous
outlay  1

From  there,  several  more  aggravating  descents  and  as-
cents, and  again  further  descents  still  awaited  us  ere  we
reached  the  final  climb  to  the  Pass.  These  ups  and  downs
seriously  obstruct  the  flow  of  trade  along  this  route ;  although
the  map  distance  from  Darjeeling  to  the  Jelep  is  only  about
40  miles,  the  distance  by  the  undulating  road  is  over  80,
and  the  ascents  must  be  over  20,000  feet  and  the  descents
over  15,0001  A  descent  from  here  to  about  2,800  feet
brought  us  to  the  Rishe,  or  "  Hillhead  ",  torrent,  which  comes
down  from  a  high  hill  of  that  name  (10,400  ft.  high),  and
which  we  crossed  by  a  strong  bridge,  at  an  elevation  of
2,030  feet  above  the  sea,  and  we  were  then  once  again  in
"Independent  Sikhim  ".  Thence  we  ascended  through  culti-
vated fields  to  Rhenok,  or  "The  Black  (-earth)  Hill";  and
crossing  that  ridge  at  an  elevation  of  about  5,000  feet,  we
wound  through  copses  alternating  with  many  fallow  fields
strongly  scented  with  rank  wormwood,  to  "  The  Great  Flat


TO  THE  EASTERN  PASS  OE  THE  JELEP  265

Stone",  which  gives  its  name  to  a  small  hamlet  at  a
traders'  halting-place.  The  deserted  barracks  that  we
passed  on  the  way  had  to  be  abandoned  a  few  weeks
previously  by  the  artillery,  on  account  of  a  bad  epidemic
of  fatal  fever  that  claimed  here  many  victims,  as  was
evidenced  by  the  fresh  graves  with  their  wooden  crosses.
This  epidemic  was  caused,  so  my  Tibetan  porters  alleged,
by  the  sylvan  deities  and  water-sprites  of  this  place,  in
revenge  for  some  outrage  perpetrated  on  them  by  our
soldiery;  but  this  "fact"  will  not,  I  fancy,  be  found  in  the
records  of  our  army.

Pushing  on  by  the  good  bridle-path  that  wound  through
rank  jungle  infested  by  venomous  pipsee  flies,  we  dipped
down  to  the  fine  river  called  "The  Water  of  the  Lepcha's
Hut"  (Rongli-chu)y  so  named  after  a  Lepcha's  house  at  the
crossing.  We  had  a  refreshing  bath  in  the  river  after  our
hot  march,  and  halted  here  for  the  night;  for  although
the  elevation  was  only  ,2,590  feet  above  the  sea,  the  site
was  exceptionally  cool  and  was  reported  to  be  free  from
malaria,  at  least  at  that  season,  and  here  was  a  staging-
house  prettily  situated  on  the  river's  bank.

The  woodwork  of  this  building  bore  abundant  marks  of
having  been  tenanted  by  the  British  soldier.  He  had
spared  few  of  the  beams  and  posts  in  his  eager  desire
to  carve  down  his  initials  or  name  to  posterity,  whilst
halting  here  with  his  detachments  of  troops  that  were
frequently  passing  this  way  to  and  from  the  frontier  fort,
near   the  Jelep    Pass.     Our    men    caught  a  few  fish  in  the


266  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

stream,     but     they    were    aggravatingly    bony    and    rather
insipid  to  eat.

From  this  place  the  ascent  was  practically  unbroken.
The  road  led  up  a  finely  wooded  gorge,  and  crossing
several  tributaries,  carried  us  into  open  glades  where  per-
manent cultivation  was  possible.  Here  were  several  new
settlements  of  the  Nepalese  colonists  whom  our  govern-
ment was  inducing  to  settle  in  these  hitherto  uninhabited
tracts,  so  as  to  create  a  fixed  population,  and  provide  a
local  supply  of  food  and  labour,  on  this  solitary  trade-
route.  Higher  up  we  reached  "The  Great  Se-tree  "  (Sedong-
chen),  where,  at  6,500  feet  elevation,  and  in  a  temperate
forest  of  oaks,  there  is  a  rest-house,  in  which  we  halted  for
the  night.

Towering  some  6,000  feet  above  us,  and  scarcely  two
miles  distant,  rose,  like  a  black  wall,  the  beetling  heights  of
Lingtoo,  the  strongest  of  the  fortified  Tibetan  positions
which  had  to  be  taken  by  our  troops,  and  which  we  had
to  cross  in  the  morning.

It  is  marvellous  how  our  forces  were  able  to  carry  such
a  strong  position  in  the  face  of  a  swarming  foe,  even
though  badly  armed,  so  excessively  steep  is  the  ascent,
not  to  mention  the  difficulties  of  making  active  exertions
in  the  rarefied  air  of  such  an  altitude  (12,617  ft-)>  anc^  the
badness  of  the  track  at  that  time.  Even  with  the  present
good  bridle-path,  the  strings  of  baggage  animals  have  to  stop
every  few  dozen  yards  to  take  breath.  The  first  Tibetan
stockade    was    built    on  a  ridge  at  9,060  feet  high,  thickly


TO  THE  EASTERN  PASS  OF  THE  JELEP


267


covered  with  dwarf  bamboo,  beside  a  small  tarn,  called  "  The
Fine  Sheep-pond"  (Jcluk-Tso).  Here
some  of  my  coolies  who  had  accom-
panied our  troops,  pointed  out  the  spots
where  the  Tibetans  had  lain  in  ambus-
cades, screened  by  the
undergrowth  and  mist,
and    the    remains    of
some    of    their    dead
were  still  to   be  seen
not  far  from  our  path.


TIBETAN    FORTIFICATIONS   AT   YATOOKG.

The   steep    ascent  up  the  cliffy  Lingtoo  led  us  beyond


268  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

the  bamboos,  winding  through  rhododendrons  ablaze  with
blossoms,  on  which  honey-suckers  were  feeding,  and  up
through  dwarf  junipers  (J.  recurva)  and  silver-firs  to  the
bleak  summit,  which  was  crowned  by  the  long  lines  of
Tibetan  masonry  fortifications,  after  the  style  of  the  Tibetan
block-house  at  Yatoong,  here  figured.  1  roamed  over  these,
examining  their  details,  whilst  Achoom  kindled  a  fire  in
one  of  the  deserted  barracks,  to  prepare  some  tea  and  hot
luncheon.

The  storming  of  this  Tibetan  stronghold  by  our  troops,
under  General  Graham,  was  effected  with  marvellously
little  loss  of  life  on  our  side,  seeing  that  the  natural
strength  of  the  position  made  the  place  practically  impreg-
nable, if  it  had  been  held  by  any  well-armed  and  disciplined
body  of  men.  But  the  Tibetans  were  only  armed  with
wretched  rusty  matchlocks,  and  some  had  merely  slings
and  bows  and  arrows,  which  latter  are  still  the  native
weapon  of  the  Tibetans.  Indeed,  the  Tibetan  word  for  "  gun  "
is  "  fire-arrow "  (Me-dahJ,  and  their  commanders  are  still
called  "Lords  of  the  Arrows"  (Dah-pdii).  More  than  to  their
weapons,  however,  did  they  trust  to  the  spells  of  their
priests,  and  especially  to  the  divinations  of  the  Ne-choong
oracle.  These  spells  they  believed  secured  to  them,  not
only  the  supernatural  assistance  of  the  gods ;  but  also
rendered  them  individually  invulnerable  against  the  shots
of  our  rifles.  And  even  when  their  men  were  being  rapidly
shot  down,  still  the  survivors  did  not  lose  faith  in  their
spells;  but  afterwards  with  complacent  confidence  they  as-


TIBETAN  MODK  OF  WARFARE


269


serted  that  something  had  gone  wrong  in  the  casting  of  their
spells,  but  that  in  the  next  war  they  must  certainly  prove  effica-
cious. Amongst  several  of  these  spells  found  in  their  camp,
was  one  like  a  windmill,  inscribed  with  the  words  "  Break
them!  Destroy  them!"     A  curious  Tibetan  map  of  Sikhim


TIBETAN    SOLDIERS.


and  Darjeeling  was  also  picked  up,  and  a  lithograph  of  it
is  now  displayed  in  the  Survey  Office  in  Calcutta.

Their  code  of  rules  to  be  followed  in  warfare,  though
quaintly  worded,  is  generally  admirable  in  theory,  as  seen
in  a  manuscript  copy  found  in  Sikhim  by  Mr.  White.
They  read:


270  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

"  Before  going  to  war,  the  strength  of  the  enemy
"should  be  carefully  ascertained,  and  diplomacy  is  to  be
"  exhausted  before  a  campaign  is  undertaken ;  and  care
"  should  be  taken  that  by  going  to  war  no  loss  be  sustained
"  by  your  Government.  Anyone  coming  with  overtures  of
"  peace  should  be  well  received.  Should  two  or  more
"  enemies  combine  against  you,  no  means  should  be  left
"  untried  to  separate  them,  and  if  possible  to  bring  one
"over  to  your  side;  but  false  oaths  should  not  be  resorted
"to,  nor  the  using  of  God's  name.  See  that  there  are  no
"  lazy,  sick,  or  timid  in  the  ranks ;  but  only  those  who  fear
"  not  death.  Experienced  men  only  should  be  sent.  The
"army  should  be  divided  into  three  divisions  under  differ-
"  ent  officers.  Your  horses,  tents  and  arms  should  be  kept
"  in  good  order.  A  doctor,  diviner,  astrologer  and  Lama
"should  be  appointed.  On  moving,  the  tent  fires  should
"  first  be  put  out,  the  wounded  be  cared  for ;  and  in  cross-
"  ing  rivers,  order  should  be  kept,  and  those  behind  should
"  not  push  forward.  Things  found  should  be  returned  with-
"out  asking  or  reward.  Any  disputed  booty  should  be
"drawn  for  by  lots.  The  General  should  appoint  sentries,
"who  must  look  to  the  water-supply,  and  see  they  become
"  not  easily  frightened.  They  should  allow  no  stranger  to
"enter  the  camp  armed;  but  should  be  careful  not  to  kill
"any  messenger.  If  a  sentry  kills  a  messenger  coming  to
"make  peace,  he  shall  be  sent  to  his  home  in  disgrace,
"mounted  on  some  old  useless  horse  with  broken  harness.

"  Again,    when    a   fort    is  surrounded,  those  in  it  should


TIBETAN  RULES  OF  WAR  271

"  remain  quiet  and  show  no  fear.  They  should  not  fire
"off  their  arms  uselessly,  and  with  no  hope  of  hitting  the
"  enemy.  The  well  within  the  fort  should  be  most  carefully
"  preserved.  If  you  be  defeated  you  must  give  up  your
"  arms,  and  those  who  give  these  up  must  not  be  killed.
"  Should  anyone  kill  one  who  has  given  up  his  arms,  he
"  must  be  derided  and  scoffed  at  as  a  coward.  If  you
"  capture  a  General  or  officer  of  rank  you  should  bind  his
"  hands  in  front  with  a  silk  scarf;  he  should  be  allowed  to
"  ride  his  own  horse  or  another  good  horse,  and  should  be
"treated  well;  so  that  in  the  event  of  your  ever  falling
"  into  his  hands  he  may  treat  you  also  well.  Prisoners
"  should  receive  necessary  subsistence,  and  also  expenses  for
"  religious  ceremonies.  Should  an  army  be  defeated  and
"  obliged  to  fly,  nothing  should  be  said  to  them,  but  they
"  should  not  be  rewarded  or  receive  any  presents,  even
"though  the  leader  be  a  great  man."

Our  artillery  proved  too  much  for  them.  When  it  poured
its  withering  shells  into  their  midst  they  broke  and  ran,
and  though  they  made  several  stands  higher  up,  they  soon
were  driven  from  their  position,  swept  over  the  pass,  and
pursued  into  the  valley  of  Choombi  beyond.  This  charming
Tibetan  valley  could  easily  have  been  held,  even  by  a
small  force  of  police ;  but  our  troops  were  quickly  with-
drawn, out  of  consideration  for  the  feelings  of  China,  the
nominal  suzerain  of  Tibet.

The  Chinese  immediately  on  hearing  of  this  defeat  of  the
Tibetans,  despatched   an  envoy  to  Darjeeling  to  settle  this


AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS


frontier  trouble,  although  they  had  hitherto  professed  their
inability  to  influence  the  Tibetans.  This  envoy  was  Sheng
Tai,  the  chief  Chinese  Resident  or  Amban  at  Lhasa,  and  he
was  accompanied  by  a  large  suite  of  Celestials  and  Tibetans,
who  astonished  us  during  the  past  winter  at  Darjeeling,  by
appearing  like   antediluvian    monsters,    dressed  in   the  most


CHINESE  ENVOY  FROM  LHASA,   AND   SUITE.


The  chief  Mandarin

of   Lhasa.

The  Amban-Sheng  Tai


Secretary   to
Amban.


eral    of  Troopt

at    LIi.tss.-i.


formidable  trappings  to  keep  out  the  cold,  such  as  they
use  in  the  arctic  winters  in  Tibet,  including  nose-pads,
ear-pads  and  temple-pads,  and  huge  padded  goggles.

And,  only  a  few  weeks  before  our  visit  here,  a  con-
vention was  signed  between  these  Chinese  and  England,
which  recognised  the  English  protectorate  over  Sikhim,
defined  the  boundary  in  general  terms,  and  appointed  a  com-
mission  to   facilitate  trade    across   this   frontier.     The  cere-


CHINESE  ENVOY  FROM  LHASA  273

mony    of    signing    this    convention    was    done    with    much

pomp   at   Government  House,  Calcutta,  before  the  Amban

with  his  Chinese  suite  returned  to  Pekin  over  this  demolished

Tibetan  fort,  by  the  way  we  had  come.

The  Chinese  plenipotentiary,  the  Amban,  whose  official  desig-
nation is  "  Chinese  Imperial  Associate  Resident  in  Tibet  and  Military
Lieutenant  Governor"  accompanied  by  his  suite,  as  shown  in  the
accompanying  illustration,  was  received  at  the  bottom  of  the
grand  staircaise  by  the  Under-Secretary  of  the  Foreign  Department,
and  conducted  to  the  top  of  the  stairs  where  Mr.  Cunningham,
Foreign  Secretary,  was  waiting  to  lead  him  to  the  Council  Chamber,
along  a  passage  lined  by  the  body-guard.  The  Amban  wore  a
dress  of  blue  and  black  silk,  with  a  richly  jewelled  belt  from  which
hung  a  short  sword.  He  and  his  secretaries  and  suite  all  wore
their  official  caps  with  their  buttons  of  rank.  A  couple  of  minutes
after  they  entered  the  chamber,  the  Viceroy  and  staff,  with  two
members  of  council  came  in,  in  procession,  and  the  Imperial
resident  was  presented  to  His  Excellency  by  Mr.  Cunningham.
The  Viceroy  showed  the  Amban  to  his  seat  at  his  right  hand,
and  all  the  other  officers  took  their  seats,  two  of  the  Chinese
having  places  at  the  table,  and  four  standing  apart.  Then  the
powers  of  the  Plenipotentiaries  were  presented  and  acknowledged.
The  door  was  then  closed,  while  the  Convention  was  read  out,
and  compared  in  the  English  and  Chinese  versions;  and  after
about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  the  door  was  opened,  and  four  copies
of  the  Convention  were  signed  by  their  Excellencies.  The  Amban
used  a  brush  like  a  camel-hair  pencil,  with  a  plain  wooden
handle.  He  dipped  this  in  a  small  metal  dish  of  Indian  ink  held
by  one  of  his  attendants,  and  stooping  over  the  parchment,  slowly
inscribed  two  characters,  one  below  the  other,  and  both  together
not  more  than  half  an  inch  in  length.  Beside  the  Viceroy's
"Lansdowne"  written  in  a  bold  hand,  they  had  the  appearance  of  a
mistake  that  had  been  scratched  out.  When  the  copies  were
signed  they  were  sealed  by  attendants,  and  here  the  stamping  of
the  red  seal  of  China  was  done  in  a  moment;  whereas  the  great
fan,  ox  punkah,  had  to  be  stopped,  and  a  number  of  matches  struck
under  the  table  and  in  sheltered  corners,  before  the  wax  seal  of
the  British  Government  was  affixed.

18


274  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

From  this  rugged  crest  of  Lingtoo,  with  its  ruined  fort,
a  sweep  of  fine  rolling  downs,  the  upland  pastures,  stretch
away  up  to  the  snows  of  the  Chola  range  and  its  pass  of
the  Jelep.  At  first  the  knolls,  amongst  which  we  find  our-
selves, are  covered  with  clumps  of  rhododendrons,  now  in
full  bloom  and  clothing  the  hillsides  with  almost  every
shade  of  bright  colour,  from  brilliant  vermilion  (R.  cinna-
barinnm)  to  pale  rose,  blue  and  yellow.  And  the  grassy
depressions  between  the  lichen-clad  rocks  are  enamelled
with  purple  primroses  (petiolaris),  blue  gentians  (quadrif.),
pink  and  white  anemones,  buttercups  and  other  bright
yellow  Alpine  flowers,  already  taking  advantage  of  the  brief
spell  of  sunshine  by  bursting  into  blossom ;  for  even  in
these  high  altitudes  many  flowers  are  "  born  to  bloom  and
blush  unseen",  and  summer  is  as  sweet  as  down  below.
Magnificent  views  of  the  snows,  too,  are  to  be  got ;  that
of  Kanchen-junga  is  especially  fine,  from  the  boldness  of
the  foreground.  The  numerous  little  pools  in  the  marshy
hollows  which  are  found  here,  are  considered  by  Blanford
to  be  traces  of  former  glaciers — the  dams,  being  little
moraines, — and  he  says,  "  I  had  been  carefully  watching  for
marks  of  glacial  action  at  a  lower  elevation,  but  could
find  none  whatever;  if  any  ever  existed  they  have  long
since  been  obliterated  by  the  tremendous  rainfall  and  con-
sequent disintegration  and  denudation  of  the  surface."

After  a  slight  descent  through  a  pine  forest  with  some
stunted  junipers,  a  turn  of  the  road  reveals  the  frontier
fort  of  Gnathong,  or  "The  Black  Meadow",  so  called  by  the


THE  FRONTIER  FORTRESS  OF  GNATHONG        275

Tibetans,  as  its  dark  pine-encircled  meadow  is  the  first
traders'  camping-ground  on  this  side  of  the  snowy  pass.
In  regard  to  this  name,  as  in  so  many  others,  it  is  a  pity
that  in  spelling  it,  our  map-makers  should  have  gone  out
of  their  way  to  introduce  an  initial  G  that  does  not  exist
in  the  Tibetan,  or  "T//ibetzan"  as  they  would  have  it,  for
the  native  word  is  plain  Na-t'ang.

The  fort  here  is  perhaps  the  highest  military  post  in
the  world  which  is  held  by  Europeans.  Its  elevation  is
12,030  feet  above  the  sea-level.  It  lies  in  the  bottom  of
a  bowl-like  valley,  commanded  all  round  by  heights  at  no
great  distance,  so  that  it  is  only  tenable  against  a  timid
and  badly  armed  foe  like  the  Tibetans.  Its  fortifications
are,  like  the  barracks  themselves,  of  wood,  backed  by
shallow  earthworks  and  trenches.  Yet  it  looks  picturesque,
especially  as  the  small  stream  that  meanders  down  the
land-locked  valley  has  been  dammed  up  to  form  a  consider-
able sized  lake,  which  gives  the  troops  who  are  cooped
up  in  this  dreary  place  some  recreation,  bathing,  boating
and  swimming  in  summer,  and  skating  in  winter,  in  addition
to  a  plentiful  supply  of  water.

Through  the  clouds  of  thick  mist  which  were  fast  settling
down,  we  saw  as  we  crossed  below  the  dam,  some  scores
of  European  soldiers,  and  our  ears  caught  the  cheery
brogue  of  the  jovial  Connaught  Rangers,  who  held  this
post,  assisted  by  some  artillery,  Goorkhas  and  pioneers ;  and
soon  we  experienced  the  warm  welcome  from  the  hospi-
table   officers,    who    ensconced   us  in  one  of  the  spare  log-


276  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

huts  within  the  fort.  It  was  amusing,  if  not  pathetic,  to
notice  that  the  streets  inside  the  fort  in  this  outlandish
edge  of  the  world,  were  named  "  Hyde  Park  Corner  ",  "  Rotten
Row",  etc.;  showing  how  the  Britisher  in  his  exile  here,
still  clings  in  loving  fancy  to  the  land  of  his  birth.

The  bitter  cold  of  the  winter  may  be  imagined  from  the
extra  warm  clothing  that  was  needed  for  the  troops  in
addition  to  their  ordinary  winter  clothing.  The  extra  cloth-
ing issued  on  this  account  to  the  troops  (2,000  British  and
native  and  930  followers)  employed  in  Sikhim,  is  given
officially  for  the  year  ending  1st  April,  1889,  as:  — 11,000
blankets,  4,100  pairs  of  boots  and  shoes,  3,600  cardigan
jackets  and  warm  coats,  2,200  sheep-skin  coats  or  poshteens,
and  over  8,000  pairs  of  worsted  socks,  as  well  as  8,500
warm  jerseys  and  pyjamas.  About  4,000  waterproof  sheets
were  also  issued,  besides  mittens,  putties  or  woollen  leggings,
turbans,  and  warm  waistcoats  in  proportion;  650  water-
proof capes  were  supplied  for  the  use  of  men  exposed  to
the  wet  during  guard  or  picket  duties.  The  protection  of
the  men's  eyes  fom  snow  blindness  was  not  forgotten,  the
force  being  supplied  with   1,200  pairs  of  goggles.

As  is  usual  at  most  military  stations  on  the  frontier,
the  natives  were  especially  polite.  The  Tibetans,  of  whom
there  were  a  goodly  number  here,  kowtowed  and  put  out
their  tongues  in  their  most  respectful  way ;  although  several
of  them  were  men  who  were  fighting  us  a  few  months
before,  but  who  were  now  profitably  employed  in  building,
road-making   and   carrying  loads,  for  which  they  got  good


TIBETAN  FORT-BUILDING  EXTRAORDINARY      277

pay.  This  peculiar  Tibetan  form  of  polite  salutation  which
we  have  already  seen,  was  not  at  first  understood  by  the
British  soldiers  here,  one  of  whom  complained  to  his
officer,  that  one  of  these  "dirty  rascals"  put  out  his  tongue
at  him,  and  "I  knocked  him  down;  and  when  he  got  up
again  he  put  out  his  tongue  even  more  than  before,  then
again  I  knocked  him  down."

Next  morning  we  ascended  to  the  Jelep  pass,  riding
most  of  the  way.  A  zig-zag  led  over  the  "Derby  Downs",
as  the  undulating  hill  to  the  north  of  the  fort  is  called,  to
commemorate  the  charge  of  the  Derbyshire  regiment  in
driving  the  Tibetans  from  the  Tooko  ridge  above.  It  was
along  this  ridge,  at  an  elevation  of  13,550  feet,  that  the  Tibet-
ans built  their  famous  wall  during  the  night  before  the
last  fight.  As  has  been  remarked,  it  seems  scarcely
credible  that  this  wall  which  was  breast  high,  and  extended
for  four  or  five  miles,  could  have  been  erected  in  a  single
night.  When  our  picket  was  withdrawn  from  this  Tooko
ridge  at  dark  one  evening,  not  a  Tibetan  was  to  be  seen
near,  nor  was  a  sound  heard  in  the  night  at  Gnathong,  which
was  only  a  mile  and  a  half  below,  and  yet  next  morning
there  was  this  wall  completed,  and  lined  by  a  mob  of  yelling
thousands.  Some  evidence  of  the  havoc  wrought  by  our
bullets  was  still  to  be  seen  in  a  few  pierced  skulls  lying
about,  and  gruesome  piles  of  dead  Tibetans  showing  through
the  thin  graves,  trenched  open  by  the  heavy  rains.

From  the  pass  through  this  Tooko  ridge,  we  passed  over
open  grassy  downs  and  moorland,   and  descended  through


278  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

scrubby  rhododendrons  to  a  little  lake  about  half  a  mile
long,  the  Bidang-Tso  (12,700  ft.),  fringed  with  ruby-co-
loured primroses  (P.  Kingii).  This  lake  is,  as  noted  by
Mr.  Blanford,  one  of  the  best  examples  of  a  glacier-lake.
Just  at  the  upper  or  north-west  end  there  is  a  horse-shoe
moraine,  which  has  formerly  enclosed  a  second  lake,  now
converted  into  a  marsh.  At  the  south  end  is  a  second
well-marked  moraine,  damming  up  the  lake.

A  sharp  rise  up  the  craggy,  yet  swampy  Kapap  valley,
and  a  sharper  rise  through  a  snow-streaked  gorge,  and
still  steeper  bit  over  frozen  snow,  on  foot,  brought
us,  at  14,390  feet  above  the  sea,  to  the  summit  of  the
"Lovely  Level"  pass,  as  the  name  Jelep,  I  found,  means.
And  certainly  it  deserves  this  name,  for  it  is  the  easiest
of  all  the  passes  between  Tibet  and  Sikhim.  It  is  rela-
tively low,  and  can  be  crossed  on  horseback  both  up  and
down,  and  is  seldom  closed  by  snow  for  more  than  a  few
weeks  during  winter.  We  went  down  the  other  side  some
distance.

The  view  into  Tibet  from  the  top  is  much  finer  than
from  the  Tang-kar  pass;  for  here,  one  sees  away  down
into  the  bold  pine-clad  valley  of  the  inhabited  Mo  river,
where  lies  its  capital  town  of  Choombi,  and  beyond  it  rise
the  heights  of  Phari  fort,  leading  up  to  the  snowy  peaks,
the  most  conspicuous  of  which  is  the  sugarloaf-like  cone
of  the  sacred  Chumo-lhari  (23,940  ft.),  or  "The  Hill  of  the
Lady-goddess",  the  tutelary  spirit  of  this  valley,  as  well  as
of  the    adjoining    Tibetan   tableland    to  the  north.     In  the


DESIRABILITY  OF  CHOOMBI  AS  A  SANITARIUM  279

foreground,  a  few  feet  below  the  pass,  on  the  Tibetan
side,  is  a  small  lake  whose  waters  leap  down  through  dark
fir-woods,  past  the  site  now  occupied  by  the  Tibetan
block-house  of  Yatoong,  (figured  on  page  267,)  into  the  Mo
river,  only  about  six  miles  distant,  at  the  flourishing  town
of  Rinchen-gong,  and  three  miles  below  the  fort  of
Choombi,  at  an  elevation  of  not  more  than  9,400  ft.

This  fine  valley  of  Choombi,  though  at  present  closed  to
Europeans,  has  been  visited  by  several  Englishmen.  Manning
passed  this  way  to  Lhasa  last  century,  as  well  as  the
missions  sent  by  Warren  Hastings — Bogle's  in  1773,  and
Turner's  in  1783.  Some  of  our  troops  also,  as  above
mentioned,  lately  pushed  into  this  valley.  And  all  testify
to  its  splendid  climate  and  scenery,  and  the  signs  of  material
well-being  and  comfort  there,  in  such  striking  contrast  to
Sikhim.  The  houses  are  said  to  be  well-built  stone  build-
ings, two  to  three  storeys  high,  surrounded  by  fertile  meadows
and  orchards ;  and  in  the  river,  good  fishing  is  said  to  be  got.

What  a  pity  it  is  that  this  fine  residential  valley  was
not  annexed  by  us,  when  we  had  the  legitimate  opportunity
of  doing  so  two  years  ago,  as  some  indemnity  for  the
enormous  cost  of  that  little  war  which  the  aggressive
Tibetans  forced  upon  us.  The  cost  to  our  Government
of  that  expedition,  and  the  subsequent  military  occupation
of  a  position  in  Sikhim  which  it  entailed,  can  scarcely  have
amounted  to  less  than  a  million  sterling,  and  was  probably
much  more.  Yet  all  this  expenditure,  so  far,  has  turned
out    dead  loss,  without  the  slightest  prospect  of  advantage


28o  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

in   any  way.     And  even  China,  in  view  of  all  the  circum-
stances, could  not  have  seriously  objected  to  its  annexation.

Amongst  other  reasons  for  this  annexation  in  these  days
of  geographical  boundaries,  is  the  fact  that  this  valley  is
not  geographically  a  part  of  Tibet  at  all,  but  lies  within
the  m-Himalayan  water-shed,  like  Sikhim,  Nepal  and
Bhotan ;  and  it  is  believed  to  have  belonged  to  Sikhim  or
Bhotan,  until  about  two  hundred  years  ago.  Several  of
the  inhabitants  have  told  me  that  they  would  welcome
annexation  by  the  British  Government,  as  they  are  so
harassed  by  the  Chinese  and  Tibetan  officials,  who  receive
no  wages  and  who  "squeeze"  the  inhabitants  accordingly.
And  the  political  as  well  as  the  physical  desirability  of
acquiring  it  is  immense.  Its  climate  is  far  better  fitted  for
a  sanitarium  than  Sikhim,  for  it  is  screened  from  the  rains
which  make  residence  in  Darjeeling  so  unpleasant  during
those  very  months  when  a  cool  sanitarium  is  most  needed ;  w
and  its  bold  Alpine  scenery  is  said  to  be  scarcely  equalled
by  the  best  parts  of  Kashmir.

Then,  this  valley  is  the  only  natural  trade-route  from
India  to  Central  Tibet,  and  is  therefore  of  commercial  as
well  as  strategical  importance.  The  route  through  Sikhim
by  which  we  have  come  is  so  extremely  circuitous,  so
bristling  with  endless  ups  and  downs,  dipping  into  tropical
valleys  and  ultimately  rising  to  the  14,390  feet  of  the
Jelep,  only  to  dip  down  again  to  the  9,000  feet  of  this
Choombi  valley,  that  it  is  indeed  remarkable  that  any  trade
at    all    finds  its  way  by  the  present  route  through  Sikhim,


POLITICAL  IMPORTANCE  OF  CHOOMBI  281

or  "The  Crested  Country,"  a  peculiarly  appropriate  name.
On  the  other  hand,  as  a  reference  to  the  map  will  show,
the  natural  and  direct  route  from  India  to  Central  Tibet
is  up  this  Mo  or  Torsha  river  from  the  plains  of  Jalpaigoori,
the  British  district  which  adjoins  Darjeeling  on  the  east.
Here  are  no  trying  ridges  to  cross,  but  one  simple  gradient
all  the  way,  through  a  productive  country  that  would  carry
a  remunerative  railway,  and  over  which  trains  could  easily
run  from  India  via  an  extension  of  the  existing  Bengal-
Doars    or  Rangpur  railway,  into  Choombi  in  a  few   hours.

The  advantages  of  this  route  struck  Sir  Ashley  Eden  so
forcibly,  when  he  was  crossing  this  river  on  his  mission  to
Bhotan  in  1864,  that  he  wrote :  "If  the  country  had  been  in
any  hands  but  those  of  the  Bhotanese,  a  road  into  Tibet  would
have  been  taken  up  this  (Mo)  valley,  and  would  have  opened
communications  with  the  plains,  avoiding  all  snoiv-passes"
— an  important  record  which  seems  to  have  been  forgotten.

Between  this  Choombi  valley  and  the  plains  of  British
India,  a  corner  of  Bhotan  intervenes,  it  is  true.  But  this
doubtless  could  be  easily  acquired  from  the  impecunious
Bhotanese,  who  have  already  ceded  to  us,  for  nominal
sums,  so  much  of  their  territory ;  and  especially  as  this
small  tract  in  question  is  so  sparsely  populated,  and  has
already  been  shorn  of  most  of  its  marketable  timber  and
india-rubber  trees,  so  that  it  is  now  of  little  value  to  the  Bho-
tanese themselves.

I  advocated  these  views  at  the  time  of  the  late  war;
and    I    believe    that  eventually  we  shall  have  to  take  over


282  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

Choombi.  Once  we  have  got  the  railway  there,  there  will
be  relatively  little  physical  difficulty  in  extending  it  up  to
the  Tibetan  plateau,  and  to  the  great  central  river,  the
Tsang-po,  if  necessary.  For  Tibet  is  certain  to  become
of  considerable  commercial  importance — its  rich  gold-fields,
perhaps  the  richest  in  the  world,  are  alone  sufficient  to
make  it  so.  And  it  lies  in  to  India  much  more  closely
than  to  Russia.  On  the  disintegration  of  China,  or  other
crisis,  demanding  the  occupation  of  Lhasa,  an  Indian  army
could  reach  that  city  from  Choombi  in  about  a  week's  march  ;
whereas  between  Kashgar  and  the  Pamirs  lies  an  almost
impassable  desert  which  would  take  many  months,  indeed
the  greater  part  of  a  year,  to  cross.  The  easiest  route  of  all
to  Lhasa  would,  of  course,  be  up  the  Tsang-po  or  Dihing
river  from  Assam.

The  cheapness  of  living  in  Choombi  and  in  the  adjoining
plateau  of  Tibet  is  remarkable,  and  all  the  more  so  when
compared  with  that  in  Sikhim.  I  was  told  by  some  of  the
natives  of  this  valley  of  Choombi  (which  is  generally  known
as  "  To-mo  ",  after  an  edible  tuber,  for  which  it  is  famous),
that  an  ordinary  native  traveller,  who  purchases  his  pro-
visions with  money  (though  in  some  places  in  Tibet  the
people  do  not  sell  goods  for  money,  but  only  barter  them),
can  live  on  about  i1/2  to  2  annas  (or  pence)  a  day,
compared  to  the  6  annas  or  so,  that  it  costs  in  the
neighbouring  British  territory  of  Darjeeling.  And  car-
riage is  still  cheaper.  The  ordinary  means  of  transport
is   by    ponies,    mules    or    yaks,    that    carry    about    i'/4  to


CHEAPNESS  OF  LIVING  IN  CHOOMBI  283

2  cwts.,  for  human  porterage  is  deemed  degrading  in
Tibet.  The  cost  of  the  carriage  of  one  maund^\%  ofacwt.,)
all  the  way  from  Choombi  to  Gyantse,  the  large  mart  of
Central  Tibet,  six  or  seven  days'  march  distant,  is  said  to
be  only  about  four  annas  (fourpence)  all  the  way  1  In  this
march,  two  days  are  usually  taken  from  Choombi  to  Phari
fort,  where  the  customs  are  levied,  and  Phari  is  ordinarily
five  days'  march  from  Gyantse,  seven  from  Shigatse,  and
thirteen  from  the  holy  city  of  Lhasa,  the  Mecca  of  the
Tibetans;  though  I  met  at  the  Jelep  a  man  who  had  left
Lhasa  only  eight  days  previously.  The  trade-duties  are  said
to  amount  to  four  annas  (pence)  a  head  going,  and  three
annas  returning,  in  addition  to  about  one-tenth  of  the  value
of  the  goods  imported,  and  this  is  often  taken  in  kind.  The
Nepalese  levy  heavier  duty  on  their  Tibetan  frontier,  as
much  as  five  rupees  (over  six  shillings)  per  head,  and
about  ten  per  cent  of  the  value  of  the  goods,  except  gold,
which  is  always  passed  free  of  duty  so  as  to  encourage
its  import.  Silver,  on  the  other  hand,  whilst  it  is  freely
exported  to  Tibet,  and  usually  of  a  base  quality,  is
strictly  forbidden  to  be  imported  from  Tibet  into  Nepal.

Returning  from  this  Jelep  pass,  we  saw  other  tracks  going
off  to  the  right  and  left,  to  the  neighbouring  passes,  between
the  jagged  snow-streaked  peaks  of  this  so-called  Chola
range — to  Pemberingo,  15,000  feet  on  our  left,  and  to  the
Nathu,  Yak  and  Cho  passes  on  our  right.  Following  this
last  track  over  the  moors  for  a  short  distance,  we  reached
the   wild  gorge  of  the  diamond-shaped  Nemi  lake,  fringed


284  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

with  firs,  beyond  which,  after  about  two  miles,  the  track
goes  up  to  the  Nathu  pass,  where  a  limited  view  of  this
Choombi  valley  is  obtained.  About  three  miles  farther  on,
through  a  picturesque  valley  with  a  succession  of  little
lakes,  is  the  steep  Yak  pass  with  a  fine  view  of  the
Choomolhari  peak.  The  Cho  or  Cho-La  pass  is  long,  steep
and  tedious,  and  commands  a  restricted  view.  This  range
consists  of  a  pale-coloured  gneiss  with  a  remarkable  low  dip,
so  that  the  peaks  are  somewhat  flattened.

Through  the  thick  mist  that  now  set  in,  we  heard  the
musical  tinkle  of  ox-bells,  and  met  several  yak-herdsmen
on  our  way  back  to  Gnathong ;  we  bought  some  milk  and
butter  from  them.  They  are  nomads  like  the  herdsmen  of
the  Lachoong  valley.  They  graze  their  cattle  on  both
the  Tibetan  and  Sikhim  sides  of  the  frontier.  In  the  sum-
mer they  drive  their  cattle  across  the  Jelep  and  adjoining
passes,  into  the  Choombi  valley,  where  they  grow  a  few
crops,  and  in  autumn  they  recross  the  passes.  As  the  snow
falls,  they  descend  into  the  lower  valleys  of  Sikhim,  where
they  have  scanty  crops  of  barley  and  buckwheat.  The
latter  is  a  hardy  cereal  of  the  dock  family,  which  is  made
into  poor  girdle  cakes ;  it  is  called  pJiyo  by  the  Bhotiyas,
pru  by  the  Lepchas  and  pha-phar  by  the  Nepalese.

One  of  the  few  pedestrians  we  met  was  a  Sikhimese
going  to  Choombi,  carrying  a  heavy  load  of  Murwa
seed  of  his  own  growing.  It  was  said  that  a  load  of  this
seed,  which  in  Sikhim  brings  only  Rs.  4]/2,  sells  for  Rs.
6    in     Choombi ;     and     this     amount,    if   invested  there  in


LEGENDS  OF  THE  JELEP  285

Tibetan  salt,  buys  about  2l/2  cwts.,  which  sell  in  Darjeeling
for  about  Rs.   30 — a  good  stroke  of  business  1

Some  of  the  legends  of  these  passes  were  related  to  me
as  I  descended  to  Gnathong:  how  that  the  wizard-saint,  Lo-
pon  Rimboo-che,  the  founder  of  Lamaism  in  Tibet,  passed
over  this  way  to  introduce  his  religion  into  Sikhim,  and  the
devils  of  these  mountains  conspired  against  him.  He  entered
by  the  Cho-la,  hence  called  " Jo-la" ',  or  the  "Pass  of  the
Lord",  to  which  he  thus  gave  his  name;  on  the  east  side  of
that  pass,  a  rock  is  pointed  out  as  "the  throne"  (zooti)  on
which  he  sat;  and  close  to  the  pass,  is  a  spot  where  he
surprised  some  she-devils  cooking  human  beings,  and
two  masses  of  columnar  rock  there,  are  alleged  to  be  two
of  the  stones  that  supported  their  colossal  cooking-pot.
He,  too,  created  the  pass  through  that  ridge  on  which  the
Tibetans  built  their  long  wall — the  Tooko  La,  or  "  Up-torn
Pass",  by  tearing  up  the  rock  there  to  crush  an  obnoxious
demon,  whom  he  buried  in  the  Bidang  lake  near  by.  And
all  these  lakes  are  tenanted  by  mermaids,  sirens  and  dragon-
spirits  who  allure  the  unwary  to  destruction.

The  names  of  these  mountains,  places  and  rivers  here-
abouts, I  find,  give  us  great  insight  into  the  way  in  which
primitive  people  have  coined  their  names  for  places,  and
given  names  which  now  convey  to  us  little  or  no  meaning.
In  England  and  most  parts  of  Europe,  where  so  many
waves  of  different  races  have  swept  into  the  country  in
ancient  times,  and  so  little  is  known  of  the  language  and
customs  of  the  aboriginal  natives  who  were  thus  displaced


286  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

or  driven  out,  it  is  not  easy  now  to  find  a  meaning  in  the
names  of  many  of  the  rivers,  mountains  and  places.  Here,
however,  the  aborigines,  who  gave  the  original  names,  are
still  in  possession,  and  as  they  themselves  have  occupied
much  of  their  country  only  comparatively  recently,  the
reasons  for  their  name-giving  have  not  yet  been  lost  sight
of.  But  there  is  no  time  to  lose  in  investigating  this  sub-
ject, for  the  language  of  the  real  aborigines,  the  Lepchas,
is  fast  becoming  extinct.  They  have  not  a  written  language,
nor  has  any  full  vocabulary  of  their  language  ever  been
published.  Thus  the  names  that  they  have  given  to  the
places  and  rivers  might,  through  much  longer  delay,  prove
unintelligible  by  their  meaning  becoming  lost.

I  had,  therefore,  in  this  research,  to  prepare  a  vocabu-
lary for  myself  by  taking  down  the  words  phonetically  from
the  lips  of  the  elder  Lepchas,  and  to  hunt  for  the  precise
shade  of  meaning  of  each  word.  And  then  I  had  to  elicit
by  enquiries  at  each  spot,  the  special  reasons  as  to  why
that  place  or  river  had  received  its  particular  name. 41  Here
I  shall  only  mention  that  while  all  the  oldest  names  in  this
part  of  the  Himalayas  are  of  Lepcha  origin,  there  are  also
many  Tibetan  names  which  have  been  bestowed  by  the
immigrant  Bhotiyas  who  settled  here ;  and  there  are
also  now  in  the  lower  ranges  recently  occupied  by
the  Nepalese,  several  Nepalese  names  for  places  already
bearing  aboriginal  names,  not  to  mention  several  English
ones.  So  that  several  of  the  hills  and  rivers  have
now     come     to    possess     three    different    names    or    syno-


HOW  PLACES  GET  THEIR  NAMES  287

nyms,  according  to  these  three  ethnic  groups.  Thus,  the
river  which  the  Lepchas  call  "The  Great  Straight-going
Water"  {Rang-nyoo-Oong),  and  which  the  Bhotiyas  call  "The
Pure  Water"  {Tsang-Chu),  is  called  by  the  Hindooized  Ne-
palese,  "The  Three  Currents"  {Teestota  or  "Teesta"),  on
account  of  its  stream  breaking  up  into  three  main  branches
in  its  course  through  the  plains.

It  will  already  have  been  noticed,  how  remarkably  de-
scriptive these  native  names  are,  as  a  rule ;  and  they  usually
embody  information  that  is  useful  to  the  roving  Lepcha
aborigines  of  the  forest,  or,  in  the  case  of  a  trade-route
such  as  we  were  now  traversing,  to  the  Tibetan  traders
who  frequent  it.  The  names  usually  well  express  some
very  obvious  physical  feature  of  the  site  or  river;  e.g.,
of  rivers,  an  especial  tortuosity,  steepness,  impetuosity,
shallowness  or  otherwise  of  a  course  or  channel ;  of  moun-
tains, their  shape,  appearance,  etc. ;  of  village  sites,  the
stony,  precipitous,  meadow-like  character,  quality  of  soil,
jungle-product,  conspicuous  tree,  etc.

Thus,  most  of  the  names  of  places  along  this  road  denote
halting-places,  or  stages  presenting  a  rock-shelter,  or  a
clearing  in  the  jungle  with  water  near,  and  occasionally
pasture.  These  sites,  being  on  lines  of  communication
and  always  near  a  water-supply,  occasionally  develop  into
villages.  The  names  were  probably  first  given  by  Tibetan
merchants  or  other  travellers,  such  as  priests  or  monks;
and  the  process  of  such  name-giving  probably  arose  through
a  pioneer  merchant  or  other  traveller,   narrating  the  stages


288  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

of  his  journey,  and  his  successors   adopting  his  stages  and
nomenclature.

Such  a  traveller  might  be  supposed  to  describe  how  on
going  from  "The  Tomo-tuber"  country  {Choombi)  to  the
"Country  of  Rice"  (or  " Den-jong"  as  the  Tibetans  call
Sikhim,  for  it  is  one  of  their  chief  granaries  for  this  staple
food),  and  on  crossing  "The  Lovely  Level  Pass  "  (Je-lep-la\  he
passed  "The  Saints'  Mount"  (Ku-phu)  and  the  "Uptorn
Pass"  through  the  ridge  (Tooko-la),  and  reached  "The  Black
Meadow  "  (Gna-tJiong),  where  he  halted.  Next  day  he  proceed-
ed down  "The  Steep  Descent"  (Ling-tu,  or  properly  Loong-
tu)  to  "The  Big  .SV-tree  Clearing"  (Se-dong-cheii).  Next  day,
continuing  his  descent  past  "  The  Big  Pigs  '  Wallow  ",  (Pha-
dom-chen)  he  crossed  "The  Water"  (Chi)  at  the  Lepcha's
house  (Rong-li)  and  ascended  to  "The  Big  Flat  Stone"  (Do-
lep-chen),  where  he  halted.  The  following  day  he  crossed  "The
Black  Hill"  (Rkenok)  and  "The  Mountain-Head  Torrent"
(Ri-she-Chu)  and  ascended  to  "The  Incense-tree  Clearing"
(Pe-dong).  Next  day  he  lunched  at  "The  Big  Spring"
(Choo-mik  chen),  and  crossing  the  ridge  at  the  junction  of
"The  Three  Hill-tops"  (Risisum),  reached  "The  Governor's
Fort",  or  "pong"  as  the  Lepchas  call  it  (Kalim-pong)  etc.,  etc.

On  returning  to  Pedong,  I  proceeded  eastwards  along
the  frontier  of  Bhotan.  A  charming  walk  through  a  fine
temperate  forest  led  over  the  exposed  crest  of  Labah,  or
"The  Windy  Site"  (6,600  ft),  down  to  Ambiokh  (2,920  ft.).
On  the  way,  we  saw  the  tracks  of  wild  elephants,  and  the
damage  they  had  done  to  the  trees  as  they  passed.   Large


BHOTANESE  FORT  289

herds  of  these  animals  roam  hereabouts,  and  are  said  to
ascend  as  high  as  10,000  feet  on  the  flanks  of  Lingtoo ;
and  every  year  numbers  are  caught  by  the  Indian  Govern-
ment, in  the  unreclaimed  forest  of  the  adjoining  plains  below.

Near  my  tent  in  the  forest,  at  Ambiokh,  rose  the  pic-
turesque ruins  of  the  old  Bhotanese  fort  of  Daling  (3,350),
that  gave  its  name  to  this  part  of  Bhotan,  which  was  known
to  the  Bengalees  as  the  Daling- Dooar,  or  "  pass."  This  fort,
which  occupies  a  very  strong  position,  is  perched,  as  its
name  "  The  Rocky  Site  "  implies,  on  the  precipitous  edge  of
the  gneiss-rocks,  which  rise  here  at  a  very  high  angle.  It
was  stormed  by  our  troops  in  our  war  with  Bhotan  1864,
already  referred  to.  This  fort  overlooks  the  great  Terai
jungle  at  the  foot  of  the  Himalayas,  and  the  sea  of  out-
stretching plains,  seamed  by  the  ever-shifting  channels  of
the  great  rivers.  We  saw  that  the  impetuous  torrents
which  had  hurried  down  from  the  cloudy  mountains  into
the  sunshine,  now  formed  majestic  rivers  that  creep  slug-
gishly along  their  winding  way  over  the  plains,  depositing
as  they  go  the  debris  of  the  hills  in  such  enormous  quantities,
that  the  river-beds  become  raised  above  the  surrounding  coun-
try and  force  the  rivers  to  seek  new  channels,  oscillating  for
many  miles  on  either  side.  One  of  the  largest  of  these  rivers
that  we  saw  is  thus  called  "The  Hidden  Water"  {Jal-daka),
because  it  sinks  down  and  disappears  for  several  miles,
flowing    underneath    the    porous  gravel  and  loose  detritus.

I  descended  this  Terai  jungle  by  following  a  path  past
the  "cow  station"  {Goora-bathan)  of  some  Nepalese  herds-

19


290  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

men.  These  shallow  passes  or  entrances  from  the  plains
into  the  hills  are  here  called  by  the  Indians,  Doo-ars,
equivalent  to  and  having  the  same  Aryan  root  as  the
Saxon  "door".  Several  others  of  these  shallow  valleys  or
Doo-ars  4:  have  been  ceded  to  us  by  the  Bhotanese  as  waste-
land, and  now  form  some  of  the  richest  tea-land  in  India.

The  jungle  here,  is  so  thick  and  dense  that  it  was  not
practicable  or  wise  to  go  very  far  from  the  path,  especially
as  I  had  no  elephant  to  ride ;  for  on  the  sandy  bank  of  one
of  these  streams,  amongst  tracks  of  rhinoceroses  and  deer,
I  came  across  the  fresh  foot-prints  of  a  tiger.  Here  I
got  several  birds  of  Malayan  type,  including  two  fine  grey
pea-pheasants  with  gorgeous  iridescent  spots  on  their  wings
and  tails,  a  Bhotanese  partridge,  and  the  great  racket-
tailed  Drongo,  a  sort  of  bird-of-paradise  {Dissemnrus  para-
diseus).  Jungle  fowl  were  common.  These  ancestors  of  our
common  domestic  fowl  are  said  to  have  been  domesticated
in  India  and  China  before  1400  B.C.,  and  introduced  into
Europe  amongst  the  Greeks  as  early  as  600  B.C.  The
shrill  clarion  call  of  the  wild  bird  is  much  more  sharp
and  staccato  than  that  of  the  domestic.  The  variety  of
butterflies  and  other  insect  life  is  even  greater  than  in
Sikhim,  also  the  rankness  of  the  vegetation,  for  the  rain-
fall in  this  outer  tract,  to  the  east  of  the  Teesta  and  in
the  basin  of  the  Brahmapootra,  is  almost  double  that  of  the
corresponding  parts  of  Sikhim.

The  semi-aborigines  who  inhabit  the  "  Doo-ars "  and
the    adjoining   plains   of  the    Brahma-pootra,    the    river  be-


THE  KOCH  OR  COOCH  TRIBE  291

yond,  are  in  many  ways  an  interesting  people.  They  do
not,  as  is  stated  by  Colonel  Dalton,  Mr.  Risley  and  other
writers,  belong  to  the  dark  negro-like  aborigines  of  India,
the  Dravidians;  but  they  are  a  distinctly  Mongoloid  race,
a  branch  of  the  "Kooki"  that  seems  to  have  entered  Bengal
from  the  east,  by  way  of  the  eastern  valley  of  the  Brahma-


KOCH   OR       COOCH       TRIBE.

pootra  and  not,  I  think,  from  Tibet.  They  have  become  so
much  Hindooized  by  contact  with  Bengalees,  that  they  have
lost  not  only  their  own  language,  but  even  their  tribal
name,  and  are  now  known  by  the  Bengalee  epithet  of
Koch,  or  "the  Terai"  (people),  just  as  their  kinsmen  across
the  Brahma-pootra  are  called  " Kochari"  or  "Cachari",  an
identical  term.  Most  of  them,  however,  prefer  to  call  them-
selves by  the  Hindoo  title  of  "  Raj -bans  i"  or  "The  Royal
Race",  to  affiliate  themselves  on  their  nobler  kinsmen,  the


292  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

reigning  chiefs  of  Koch  or  Cooch-Behar,  Tipperah,  Hajo,
etc.,  in  lower  Assam  and  Bengal.  A  few  of  the  still  more
aboriginal  tribes  are  to  be  found  in  the  deeper  parts  of
the  forest,  these  are  the  Meek  or  Boro,  and  the  Dhimal.
All  of  these  people  have  a  curious  form  of  inheritance  on
the  mother's  side,  instead  of  the  father's,  as  is  usual ;  and  some
traces  of  this  are  also,  as  we  have  seen,  to  be  found  amongst
the  Lepchas.

These  sturdy,  industrious  people  of  the  Koch  tribe  enjoy
remarkable  immunity  from  the  deadly  malaria  of  the  Terai
and  adjoining  plains.  This  is  owing,  in  some  measure,  I
think,  to  the  high  platforms  or  plinths  on  which  they  raise
their  huts,  and  to  their  clearing  away  the  rank  jungle  from
the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  their  dwellings,  where
their  trim  plots  of  tobacco  cultivation,  their  unveiled  women
in  brightly  striped  skirts,  and  the  straight  ridged  huts  along-
side a  few  areca-palms,  contrast  pleasingly  with  the  squalor
and  rank  setting  of  the  hog-backed  huts  of  Bengal.

In  a  cultivated  clearing  here  I  came  upon  a  young
leopard  in  broad  daylight,  skirting  a  field  of  sugar-cane
only  about  a  hundred  yards  away.  It  was  peering  so  in-
tently into  the  dense  cane-thicket  that  it  did  not  see  me
for  some  minutes,  and  just  as  it  was  disappearing  into
that  tall  growth,  I  sent  a  shot  after  it.  Immediately  there
rose  a  dreadful  outcry  from  a  village  which,  unseen  by
me,  lay  a  few  dozen  yards  beyond  where  I  had  fired.
Thinking  that  I  must  have  shot  some  person,  I  rushed  up
to   the    village,    and    was  relieved  to  find  that  no  one  had


LEPCHAS  DISAPPEARING  WITH  THEIR  FORESTS  293

been  hurt,  but  that  the  excitement  was  owing  to  a  herd  of
wild  pigs  which  the  leopard  had  been  stalking,  and  which
on  hearing  my  shot  and  seeing  the  leopard,  had  bolted
pell-mell  through  the  village,  scaring  the  inhabitants.

I  should  not  advise  anyone  to  return  to  Kalimpong
directly  across  the  hills  as  I  did,  for  the  seeming  short-
cut turned  out  deceptively  to  be  much  the  longer  and
more  fatiguing  route,  on  account  of  the  circuit  and  badness
of  the  tracks.  These  hill-people  have  even  less  true  con-
ception of  distance  than  the  people  of  the  plains.  They
under-estimate  distances,  so  that  in  their  "two  miles  and  a
bittock  "  the  latter  usually  turns  out  to  be  much  the  bigger
half,  and,  curiously,  they  often  tell  you  that  a  place  is  double
the  distance  going  up  hill,  to  what  it  is  coming  down.

On  the  way,  I  passed  through  several  flourishing  set-
tlements of  the  Lepchas.  The  families  averaged  four  to
five  children,  and  several  numbered  seven  or  eight ;  so  that
the  current  statement  that  this  race  is  dying  out  through
sheer  inanition  is  scarcely  correct.  The  real  reason  for
their  disappearance  in  British  Sikhim,  is  the  disappearance
or  "conservation"  of  their  forests,  which  by  cutting  off  in
great  measure  their  sources  of  food,  forces  them  into  the
unreserved  tracts  of  Bhotan  and  Nepal.  They  are  also  losing
their  identity  by  the  extensive  absorption  of  their  women
into  the  Bhotiya  and  Limboo  tribes,  with  whom  they  freely
intermarry,  as  they  find  that  their  own  race  is  so  much
despised  by  the  more  civilized  tribes.

Two   of  these    Lepcha    girls,   after   a   good  deal  of  per-


294  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

suasion,  sang  us  some  songs  to  the  accompaniment  of  a
bamboo  flute,  and  a  Malayan  harp  like  a  Jew's  harp,  — all
decorated  with  poker-work  of  a  plaited  basket-pattern.
As  none  of  the  Lepcha  songs  have  ever  been  recorded
before,  and  they  are  unlikely  to  survive  much  longer,  I
have  noted  down  a  few  of  them  from  the  lips  of  these
people,  and  translated  them  with  the  aid  of  Mr.  Dorje
Tshering,  and  one  of  us  has  rendered  their  simple  melody
into   European    notation.

The  words  of  these  idyllic  songs  refer  not  only  to  the
primitive  passion  of  love,  but  even  to  the  inscrutable
mystery  of  the  origin  and  destiny  of  man.  And  in  this
last  respect  it  is  pathetic  to  notice  how  these  Lepchas  or
Rongs  specially  associate  themselves  with  their  ubiquitous
bamboo,  whose  stout  stem  supplies  them  with  huts  for
shelter,  with  fuel,  bows  and  arrows ;  its  larger  joints  afford
water-jugs,  cooking-pots  and  pans ;  its  smaller  joints  bestow
bottles,  smoking-pipes  and  flutes  :  its  branches  make  a  springy
couch ;  its  bark  supplies  ropes  to  span  their  raging  torrents,
also  baskets  and  umbrellas  ;  and  its  tender  young  shoots  are
eaten  as  food.  Indeed,  the  Lepchas  believe  they  could  not
exist  without  their  beloved  bamboos,  and  no  wonder  they
glory  in  having  been  "born  of  equal  age  with  the  bamboos."

A-CHU-LE :

A  SONG  OF  THANKSGIVING.


i^^^^^^^fifW


A-chu-le    —   —   — kal    tak-bo-ram


LEPCHA  SONGS  AND  MUSIC


295


i


Kt


1


E£


nan  ya    it  -  tang    sa.  Lyang  Ta  -  she  ram  ya  nan  it  -  tang   sa.


tr*


T=T


^»


Zor-sak  dam  ku-lang  ming  tarn  a  -  re   -   ka.  Sham-man-mi  zon.


I


b=P=


a


it  -  to  -  tsat     ka.     Gyi  po-bong  po-mik  it  duk     kang    sa


=3=


?  ?  ^


*^-


s


?^Tfl^


4^3r


Mo-tan-chi  Rong-kap  ka  -  yu   gam      O !


O  Joy!  In  the  olden  time  the  Head-Father-Spirit  made  the  earth,
(He)  the  Sky-Existing-One  made  this  earth,

He  clothed  the  stony  bosom  of  this  tearful  earth  with  fertile  fields.
When  the  men  were  made  and  the  jointed  bamboos  and  the  trees,
At  that  same  time  were  we,  the  sons  of  the  (one-)  mother-flesh

jolly  Rongs. 43


O   Joy!    The   mulberry  trees  were  made  with  the  rice  and  other

vegetables,
The  running  rivers  were  made  with  their  fleeing  fishes,
The  fleeing  sky-birds  were  made  with  the  worms  and  insects,
And  the  rainbow  was  made  by  our  old  first  great-grandfather,
(But)   our  troubles  were  made  by  our  old  first  great-grandmother!

The  plaintive  wail  of  these  wild  tunes  reflects  the  stern
surroundings  that  tinge  the  lives  of  these  poor  people  with
sadness.     You  seem  to  hear  in  their  ancient  airs  the  moan


X)6


AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS


of  the  wind  sweeping  over  their  rugged  rock-cave  or  lonely
hut  in  the  forest,  or  the  sough  of  the  storm  down  the
glen.

The  simple  melody  of  this  ancient  tune  shows  traces  of
the  very  old  pentatonic  scale,  says  Sir  Sourindro  Mohan
Tagore,  to  whom  I  showed  the  score ;  and  he  adds  in
regard  to  this  scale,  "though  it  is  observable  in  the  Scotch
ballads,  it  is  the  scale  in  use  amongst  Chinese,  Japanese,
and  Siamese".

The  next  three  songs  are  love-laments,  the  first  by  a
spinster,  and  the  others  by  languishing  swains.

U-LA-DUNG  DUT:

A  LOVE-LAMENT.


U  -  la  -  dung  dut    sa  'lam  lop  -  la     na     tel   nom  go       lop


^


l=i


£S


:,


*  -#■  -0-  -#■

la  nat'-el  nom  go  nom      go.     Nyel  bli  diit  sa  shellop-la    na


«f


=3


t'el  nom  go    lop        la   na  t'el  nom   go  nom    go.

I  (am)  a  maiden  like  an  unopened  bud,

like  a  pretty  supple  shuttle,

like  a  whirling  spinning  staff.
I  am  a  maiden  standing  like  a  twirling  spinning  thread,

like  a  bright  golden  tassel,

standing  (forlorn)  behind.


FEPCHA  SONGS  AND  MUSIC  297

I  am  a  maiden  like  a  tender  coiled  bud
Shiing  like  a  sorrowing  bird,
loudly  lamenting  like  the  Tak-mok  bird,

I  feel  very  sad,  very  sad!

The  reference,  in  the  above  and  in  the  following  song,  to
the  "respected  sisters  standing  behind",  relates  to  the  custom
of  the  girls  of  the  family  of  standing  behind  the  guests,
as  waitresses  to  replenish  their  drinking-cups.

THE  PANGS  OF  LOVE.

Eh  Yeh!    I  feel  very  sad,  very  sad.

Listen!  O  maidens  behind,

My  heart  is  pierced  through  and  my  breath  is  chill,

Alas!  I  feel  very  sad.

0  great  head-father,  maker  of  Fate,
Pray  tell  me  my  luck.

1  feel  very  sad.

I  am  only  but  a  Sham-man  youth,  a  mere  boy!
Why  have  you  troubled  me  so?
I  feel  very  sad,  very  sad!

O  fair  one  with  the  flowing  hair!

O  fair  one  with  the  straight-parted  locks  !

Why  have  you  charmed  me  so?

O  fair  one  with  the  neat  parted  hair !

O  old  great-grandmother  Nyezong,  the  joiner  of  our  breath !

O  old  great-grandfather  Fadung,  praised  be  your  names !

But  why  have  you  created  me

To  suffer  such  heart-breaking  sorrow  ?

Other  songs  sing  the  praises  of  their  legendary  chiefs,  called
Tekong-Tek  and  Fadung  Ting,  and  their  wives  Nye-kong
Nal  and  Nye-zong  No,  all  of  whom  are  deified  and  invoked
in  worship.

Down  again  in  the  Sal-tree  forest,  in  the  tropical  gorge  of


298  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

the  Teesta,  we  saw  one  of  the  great  breeding-grounds  of
the  myriad  butterflies  that  swarm  over  Sikhim.  At  this
season,  May,  and  on  till  the  middle  of  June,  the  tender
leaves  of  the  great  Sa/  trees  were  literally  alive  with  vora-
cious caterpillars,  whose  droppings  fell  on  the  dry  leaves
underneath,  with  a  noise  like  a  brisk  shower  of  hail ;  and
this  was  going  on  all  day  long,  for  several  miles  deep,  in
a  forest  that  belts  the  Teesta  and  Rang-eet  and  other  tri-
butaries for  some  hundreds  of  miles.  These  caterpillars
seemed  mainly  of  two  species,  and  both  were  distasteful
to  birds,  which  explains  their  presence  in  such  overwhelm-
ing numbers.  I  collected  several  of  these  larvae  and  offered
them  to  some  fowls,  which,  however,  rejected  them  after  a
trial,  with  disgust,  and  went  on  wiping  their  bills  for  some-
time afterwards.  One  of  the  species  was  a  bright  coral
colour ;  and  the  other  greenish  with  longitudinal  stripes,
and  when  disturbed  it  exuded  a  bead  of  malodorous  fluid.
It  broke  its  fall  from  the  tall  trees  by  letting  itself  down
by  a  long  silky  thread.

Continuing  down  the  right  bank  of  the  Teesta,  to  its  dark-
affluent  "The  Black  Stream"  [Kali-jhora),  and  then  ascend-
ing towards  "the  height  of  the  great  bent-going  river"
{Mahaldi),  we  reached,  at  the  "  Foot  of  the  Hill"  {Rishaf),  the
great  Cinchona  plantations  on  the  eastern  flank  of  Senchal.
In  this  dense,  damp,  dripping  forest  the  Cinchona  plant
finds  a  climate  like  that  of  its  home  in  the  Andes  of  Peru.
The  Government  factory  here  was  well  worthy  of  a  visit.
The   successful   cultivation    of  this    Peruvian    bark,  and  the


DARJEELING-THE  PLACE  OF  THE  THUNDERBOLT  299

invention  of  cheap  methods  of  extracting  its  quinine,  by-
Sir  George  King  and  Mr.  Gammie,  have  reduced  the  price
of  this  drug  to  almost  nominal  rates,  and  so  prevented  this
valuable  aid  to  life  in  the  fever-stricken  tropics  from  getting
into  the  hands  of  commercial  monopolists.

A  ride  of  about  18  miles  by  the  new  road,  up  through
fine  moss-covered  forest,  brought  us  again  to  Rangiroon,
by  which  we  had  gone,  and  thence  back  to  Darjeel-
ing,  which  now  justified  its  name  as  "  The  Place  of  the
Thunderbolt".  For,  whilst  the  lower  ranges  were  bathed  in
bright  sunshine,  a  mass  of  thunder-clouds  hung  over  the
town,  hiding  its  houses  from  view,  and  the  rattling  peals
of  thunder  of  the  first  burst  of  the  rains,  echoed  up  and
down  the  valleys.  And  here  in  the  drenching  downpour  of
the  1 20  inches  of  rainfall,  and  the  clinging  dampness  of
the  next  few  summer  months,  one  has  almost  to  live  in  a
waterproof,  to  escape  being  soaked  by  the  rain,  through
and  through  like  a  sodden  sponge.  Darjeeling,  however,
is  going  to  make  some  capital  out  of  her  misfortune  in
this  respect,  for  a  movement  is  afloat  to  light  the  town  by
electricity  generated  from  its  excessive  rain-supply.


CHAPTER   IX


ALONG   THE   NEPAL   FRONTIER  TOWARDS  EVEREST,  ETC.,
TO   SANDOOK-PHU   AND   FALOOT


To  see  Mount  Everest  from  closer  quarters,  and  the  rhodo-
dendron forests  in  full  bloom,  we  set  out  for  Sandook-phu
and  Faloot,  going  northwards  along  the  spur  which  tends
southwards  from  Kanchen-junga,  for  about  sixty  miles,  towards
Darjeeling  and  the  Indian  plains,  and  which  forms  the
natural  boundary  between  Sikhim  and  Nepal.  This  journey
can  now-a-days  be  done  with  very  much  more  ease  than
in  Hooker's  time,  for  an  excellent  riding-road  now  runs
along  the  Nepal  frontier,  with  comfortable  staging  rest-
houses  en  route;  and  Tonglu,  the  nearest  of  the  higher
peaks,  which  took  Hooker  three  long  and  laborious  days
to  reach  by  a  bad  native  track  from  Darjeeling,  is  now
one  day's  easy  ride  of  about  twenty-three  miles,  and  all
the  way  along  the  cool  crest  of  the  spur.

So,  taking  advantage  of  a  spell  of  clear  weather  at  the
end    of  March,   when   a   slight   fall   of  snow  on  the  nearer


THE  NEPAL  FRONTIER  TOWARDS  EVEREST       301

ranges  had  swept  the  hills  from  the  haze  that  had  hid
their  features  for  some  weeks,  we  cantered  along  the  road
to  Ghoom,  past  the  large  rock  of  gneiss,  and  thence  on
foot  we  threaded  the  fine  forest  to  the  staging-house  of
Jorpokri,  on  the  frontier   of  Nepal.

This  ferny  and  moss-grown  forest  resembled  somewhat
that  of  Rangiroon,  and  a  walk  through  it  was  especially
exhilarating  in  the  crisp  air  of  early  spring.  Here  and
there  we  passed  fluttering  prayer-flags,  tied  to  twigs  where
water-kelpies  haunt  the  mossy  burns;  and  we  met  strings
of  sturdy  Nepalese  trudging  along  with  huge  baskets  of
provisions  that  they  were  carrying  to  or  from  the  Dar-
jeeling  market.

These  hardy  Nepalese  are  of  many  different  tribes;  and
though  of  Mongolian  blood,  they  are  all  now  adopting  the
externals  of  Hindooism,  since  their  ruling  tribe — the
Goorkhas — have  set  them  this  example.

This  ruling  race  of  Nepal,  or  the  "Goorkhas"  as  they
call  themselves,  after  the  name  of  their  former  head-
quarters at  Goorkha,  44  in  the  Central  Himalayas,  were  little
over  a  hundred  years  ago  a  small  band  of  military  adven-
turers, the  descendants  of  a  few  quasi-Rajpoots,  or  members
of  the  Hindoo  warrior  caste,  who  had  emigrated  from  India
and  settled  at  the  town  of  Goorkha,  and  had  intermarried
with  the  Mongoloids  there.  Seizing  advantage  of  the
breaking  up  of  the  old  powers  and  petty  dynasties  at  that
time,  when  India  and  the  principal  states  of  Asia  were  in
transition,    they  carved  out  for  themselves  a  little  kingdom


302  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

there.  And  attracting  to  their  ranks  the  more  warlike  members
of  the  other  tribes,  by  giving  them  the  honour  of  their  own
tribal  name  of  "Goorkha",  and  a  share  in  their  spoils,  they
carried  their  victorious  arms  for  nearly  a  thousand  miles
through  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  Himalayas,  covering


A   GOORKHA.


the  country  with  blood.  They  invaded  Tibet  in  1792,
and  were  spreading  beyond  Nepal,  northwards  towards
Cashmir,  and  southwards  into  Sikhim  (in  September  1788)
and  the  Indian  plains,  until  they  were  hemmed  in  and
defeated,  in  18 14,  by  the  British  troops  under  General
Ochterlony,    to     whose     memory    was    erected    that    great


GOORKHAS  AND  THEIR  PLUCK  303

tower  of  victory,  which  is  the  most  conspicuous  monument
at  Calcutta.

Now-a-days  these  Goorkhas  have  almost  disappeared
from  modern  politics,  though  their  name  is  still  famous  as
the  title  of  some  of  the  bravest  of  our  native  regiments,
which  are  recruited  from  their  ranks.  As  mercenary  troops,
they  have  fought  so  gallantly  under  British  officers,  cover-
ing themselves  with  glory,  that  their  name  is  almost  a
household  word  in  England.  And  they  have  been  induced
to  settle  in  large  numbers  in  British  territory,  in  the
Kumaon  Himalayas  to  the  north  of  Nepal,  and  in  Sik-
him  to  the  south-east,  in  order  to  supply  recruits  to  our
Indian  regiments  as  well  as  to  secure  them  as  industrious
colonists.

The  pluck  and  good  comradeship  of  the  Goorkhas  has
been  attested  on  many  occasions,  both  when  they  fought
with  us  and  against  us,  and  I  myself  have  experienced  it
in  the  Burmese  and  Chitral  wars.  So  long  ago  as  1790,
when,  after  returning  from  Tibet,  they  were  assisting  our
forces  in  the  storming  of  Bhartpur,  the  chronicler  of  that
campaign,  Captain  Smith,  says:  "It  was  an  interesting
and  amusing  sight  to  witness  the  extreme  goodfellowship
and  kindly  feeling  with  which  the  Europeans  and  the
Goorkhas  mutually  regarded  each  other.  A  six-foot-two
grenadier  of  the  59th  would  offer  a  cheroot  to  the  'little
Goorkhee,'  as  he  styled  him ;  the  latter  would  take  it  from
him  with  a  grin,  and  when  his  tall  and  patronising  com-
rade   stooped  down  with  a  lighted  cigar  in  his  mouth,  the


#>4  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

little  mountaineer  never  hesitated  a  moment  in  puffing  away
at  it  with  the  one  just  received,  and  they  were  conse-
quently patted  on  the  back,  and  called  '  prime  chaps.' "
And  when  they  were  pitted  against  us  as  our  foes,  Mr.
Marshman,  the  historian,  writes: — "The  Goorkhas  were
not  only  the  most  valiant,  but  the  most  humane  foes  we
had  ever  encountered  in  India,  and  they  also  proved  to
be  the  most  faithful  to  their  engagements."  They  can,
however,  be  savagely  cruel  in  their  own  country,  where
they  often  gave  no  quarter,  and  killed  women  and  children.
It  is  probable  that  in  addition  to  the  admiration  which  we
cannot  help  feeling  for  their  bravery,  the  Goorkhas  have
won  our  sympathy  and  confidence  by  their  unswerving
good  faith,  and  they  on  their  part  seem  to  reciprocate  our
sentiments.  As  an  instance  of  their  desperate  courage  may
be  cited  the  deeds  of  Colonel  Bahadur  Gambar  Singh,
when  assisting  our  troops  at  Lucknow,  during  the  Indian
mutiny.  At  that  time  he  was  only  a  private,  but  on  one
occasion  he  captured  three  cannon  single-handed,  and  killed
seven  mutineers.  This  deed  of  daring  was  performed  with
only  his  knife  or  kookree,  and  he  received  twenty-three
wounds.  45

Politically,  although  within  the  British  "sphere  of  influence",
and  acknowledging,  like  most  outlying  Mongoloid  states,
such  as  Burma,  by  its  periodical  embassies,  the  nominal
suzerainty  of  China,  the  state  of  Nepal  is  absolutely  inde-
pendent in  its  government.  And  it  has  all  along  jealously
closed    the    interior   of  its    country    against   all  Europeans,


POLITICAL  POSITION  OF  NEPAL


305


not  excepting  even  our  political  residents,  from  the  illustrious
Brian  Hodgson  downwards.  Its  government  is  of  the  auto-
cratic, oriental  kind.  The  present  Prime  Minister,  who  is  the
real   de-facto   ruler,    is   called    "  Ma/ia-ra/a/i",  or  Emperor,


THE  RULER   OF   NEPAL
Sir   Bir  Shumshere,   K.  C.  S.  I.


while  the  king  is  called  Adi-rajah,  or  "  Primordial  King ".
This  minister,  who  is  also  father-in-law  of  the  present  king,
won  his  position  by  a  coup  detat  in  1885.  He  was  edu-
cated  at    Calcutta,    I    have   heard,  and  has  proved  himself


306


AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS


an    enlightened  ruler,  introducing    several    useful    European
reforms.

We   are  now  passing,  on  their  way  to  and  from  Darjeeling,
many    representatives    of  the  various  Mongoloid   tribes   of


KIRANTI    OR  JIMDAR   TRIBE   OF   NEPALESE.

Aged  31.
Nepal.  Those  who  have  adopted  the  externals  of  Hin-
dooism,  who  crop  their  hair  and  wear  the  Indian  Rajpoot
dress,  are  broadly  classed  as  the  Nepalese  proper  or
"  Pahariyas" ,  i.e.,  Highlanders.  These  comprise,  in  addition
to  the  Goorkhas  proper,  the  Khas  tribe,  the  Mangar  or
Magar  (see  portrait  on  page  309)  of  the  lower  ranges,  and  the


THE  TRIBES  OF  NEPAL  307

Gooroongs,  a  nomad  pastoral  tribe  of  the  uplands ;  and  also  the
following  #<w-Goorkha  tribes  :  First  of  these  come  the  Newars,
who  were  the  semi-aborigines  and  the  ruling  race  of  Nepal
until  displaced  by  the  Goorkhas.  They  are  more  civilised
than  the  Goorkhas,  and  form  the  chief  clerks,  traders  and
artisans,  and  some  of  them  still  adhere  to  their  old  religion,
Buddhism,  despite  the  ridicule  of  the  Goorkhas.  Somewhat
resembling  the  Newars,  but  more  purely  Mongoloid  and  less
civilised,  are  the  Kiranti  (or  Kirat  or  Kichak)  tribe  of  the
wilder  valleys  of  Eastern  Nepal.  The  Limboos,  still  more
distinctly  Mongoloid  and  intermarrying  with  the  Kiranti,  we
have  already  seen.  And  in  addition  to  several  others,  there
are  those  semi-Tibetans,  the  Moormi  or  "  Tamang  Bhotiyas  ",
who  also  have  adopted  the  habits  and  dress  of  the  Hindooized
Nepalese.

But  as  yet,  the  Nepalese  allow  their  caste  rules  to  sit
very  lightly  upon  them.  A  Hindoo's  caste,  in  practice,
usually  resolves  itself  into  what  he  will  eat  and  drink,  and
what  he  will  not.  The  Nepalese,  however,  have  not  yet
much  altered  their  habits  in  these  respects,  but  eat  and
drink  things  that  are  tabooed  by  every  strict  Hindoo.
Thus,  most  of  the  Goorkhas,  at  home,  eat  buffalo-flesh,
sheep  and  pork,  and  are  very  skimp  with  their  ceremonial
ablutions.  The  Newars  and  the  other  above-mentioned  tribes
eat  also  goats  and  fowls  ;  and  the  highest  Nepalese  take  water
from  the  hands  of  the  pork-eating  Bhotiyas,  a  thing  that
would    scandalize    the    lowest    out-caste    Hindoo    of  India.

Though  small  in  stature,  these  Nepalese  have  big  hearts;


308  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

and  in  many  ways  resemble  the  bright  joyous  temperament
of  the  Japanese,  though  lacking  altogether  the  refinement
of  the  latter.  Naturally  vigorous,  excitable  and  aggressive,
they  are  very  law-abiding,  driven  as  they  have  been  to
obedience  by  the  draconic  punishments  of  their  Goorkha
rulers.  The  people  are  hanged  or  decapitated  for  very
trifling  offences,  as  was  the  case  in  England  not  so  many
decades  ago ;  and  this  doubtless  must  tend  to  purify  the
race  by  preventing  the  perpetuation  of  imperfect  types !
Certainly  in  Nepal,  these  heavy  punishments  have  made  the
people  afraid  to  commit  crime.  But  though  the  Nepalese
are  becoming  plodding  cultivators,  they  Have  not  yet
degenerated  to  the  dead  level  of  the  present  day  caste-
bound  Indian  cultivator.  In  appearance  the  various  tribes
vary  considerably,  in  proportion  to  the  extent  of  their
admixture  with  Aryan  blood.  Scratch  a  Russian,  it  is  said,
and  you'll  find  the  Tartar;  but  the  Nepalese,  even  with
their  thin  veneer  of  Hindooism,  do  not  require  this  operation
to  reveal  their  Tartar  character.  The  features  of  the  great
majority  are  markedly  Mongolian,  with  oblique  eyes,  and
little  or  no  moustache.

They  are  generally  undersized,  but  tough  and  wiry  as
whipcord,  and  so  full  of  energy  that  it  is  quite  common
to  see  old  people  scampering  nimbly  up  and  down  hill
in  preference  to  walking.  Their  rough  exposed  life  so
furrows  their  features  that  the  flat  wrinkled  faces  of  some
of  the  older  men,  as  in  our  illustration,  almost  suggest
crorillas.


THE  TRIBES  OF  NEPAL


309


All   dress  in  the   same  Hindooized  style,  and  none  wear
pigtails.     The  men's  dress  is  not  by  any  means  picturesque.


MANGAR  NEPALESE.

Aged  65.


It  is  that  of  the  Hindoo  Rajpoots  of  the  Northern  Hima-
layas. It  consists  of  cotton  trousers  and  puny  jackets,
originally  white,  but  so  dirty  that  it  is  remarkable  to  find


310  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

any  at  all  approaching  this  colour.  And  into  their  bulky
towel-like  girdle  they  thrust  their  peculiar  curved  knife,
the  Kookree,  of  which  the  leather  sheaths  are  sometimes
richly  encased  in  ornate  silver-work.  Their  head,  closely
cropped — except  in  the  wilder  tribes,  whose  matted  hair
reaches  to  the  neck — is  covered  by  a  small  pork-pie  cap,  worn
perkily  on  one  side,  after  the  manner  of  our  smart  cavalry
soldiers.  And  most  of  the  younger  men  beautify  them-
selves by  sticking  large  flowers  behind  their  ears,  and  the
more  wealthy  ones  insert  plugs  of  gold  into  holes  drilled
through  their  front  teeth.

The  Nepalese  women,  as  we  have  seen,  have  often
bright  and  pleasant  faces,  and  are  picturesquely  dressed
in  a  close-fitting  bodice  and  kilted  skirt,  with  bright
coloured  girdle  and  sash;  and  a  gaudy  silk  handkerchief
is  thrown  negligently  over  their  head.  They  overload
themselves  with  massive  jewellery;  enormous  gold  or  silver
ear-rings,  nose-rings,  bracelets,  anklets,  finger-rings,  and
necklets  of  huge  size,  made  of  coral  or  thinly  beaten  gold
or  massive  silver,  or  strings  of  coins  reaching  down  to
their  waist.  Indeed,  most  of  the  women  wear  all  their
wealth  as  well  as  that  of  their  husbands  on  their  necks
and  faces ;  and  whenever  they  get  hard  up  they  pawn
or  sell  their  jewellery.

Their  position  is  decidedly  free,  quite  as  much  as  in
Europe.  Indeed  in  married  life,  like  their  Lepcha  and
Bhotiya  sisters,  they  are  much  the  better  halves.  Marriage
is  with  them  almost  always  an  affair  of  the  heart.     Young


NEPALESE  MARRIAGE  CUSTOMS  311

men  and  maidens  become  acquainted  with  each  other,  and
courtships  and  real  love-matches  are  the  rule.  Whereas,
with  the  Indian  plains-people  everything  is  arranged  by
the  friends,  and  it  is  seldom  that  the  bride  and  bride-
groom see  each  other  before  marriage.  The  Nepalese  are
monogamous  as  a  rule,  and  seldom  take  a  second  wife
unless  they  are  not  blessed  with  a  family.  They  are  un-
compromising in  their  punishment  of  infidelity,  and  are
allowed  by  the  laws  of  Nepal  to  cut  down  their  aggressor
with  their  Kookree.  In  British  territory,  however,  where
they  cannot  take  the  law  into  their  own  hands,  they  have
to  be  content  with  a  fine  only.

All  these  tribes  agree  in  the  one  respect,  that  personal
cleanliness  is  rather  at  a  discount  amongst  them.  Like
most  mountaineers,  they  seldom  use  water  for  ablution,  nor
do  they  often  change  their  clothes,  but  sleep  in  the  same
suit  at  night.  While  the  Bhotiyas  are  certainly  the  most
immoderately  dirty  of  these  hillmen,  perhaps  the  Nepalese
are  the  cleanliest  on  the  whole,  though  most  of  these
satisfy  their  religious  scruples  by  performing  the  daily  cere-
monial bath  that  is  prescribed  to  professing  Hindoos,  by
merely  touching  their  lips  with  water,  and  one  or  two  rubs
with  a  few  invisible  drops  of  water  on  the  finger-tips,  with-
out undressing.  You  must  not,  however,  with  your  European
dress  and  known  nationality,  attempt  to  enter  their  houses  un-
ceremoniously, as  you  would  a  Lepcha's  or  Bhotiya's ;  for
in  such  matters  they  put  on  all  the  airs  of  the  most  pre-
judiced  of  high-caste  Hindoos,  and  would  bluntly  ask  you


3i2  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

to  withdraw,  although  your  pork-eating  Lepchas  and
Bhotiyas  and  native  Christians  have  the  run  of  the  house.
For  your  intrusion,  if  it  were  noticed  by  outsiders,  would
necessitate  the  throwing  away  of  all  their  cooked  food,
and  even  the  burning  and  rethatching  of  their  hut.  But
you  lose  little  by  not  entering  their  houses,  for  these
resemble,  as  a  rule,  those  of  the  very  meanest  class  of  Hindoos,
and  have  not  the  redeeming  interest  of  those  of  the  un-
pretentious Lepchas.

With  their  thin  veneer  of  Hindooism,  the  Nepalese  have
adopted  a  Hindoo  dialect,  called  "  the  hill  speech  "  (Parba-
tiya),  and  it  is  throughout  Nepal  like  what  French  used  to
be  on  the  Continent,  and  what  Hindustanee  or  "  Oordu  "  is
in  India.  It  forms  the  chief  medium  of  communication
between  the  heterogeneous  tribes  peopling  Nepal,  each  of
which  has  its  own  peculiar  language  or  dialect ;  but  by  means
of  this  common  Parbatiya  speech  all  are  able  to  converse
with  one  another.

They  are  great  believers  in  witch-craft,  like  the  Lepchas
or  Bhotiyas,  and  regularly  employ  exorcists  whenever  they
fall  ill,  instead  of  a  medicine-man,  as  they  attribute  disease
to  an  evil  spirit  who  must  be  driven  out.  These  exorcists
they  call  "the  spell-throwers"  {Bijooas),  as  they  cure
by  charms  and  enchantments;  and,  like  the  Lamas,  with
their  magic  they  ward  off  dangers  from  the  people,  their
cattle  and  crops ;  and  on  the  middle  of  the  road  on  the
outskirts  of  more  than  one  village,  we  passed  a  small  heap
of  bits  of  cloth,  and  rice,  an  old  shoe  and  reeking  embers,


NEPALESE  EXORCISTS  313

as  a  peace-offering  by  these  exorcists  to  the  evil  spirit  who
had  possessed  the  sick  person,  after  it  had  been  driven
out  by  their  beating  of  drums,  etc.,  and  bidden  to  depart
elsewhere.

Their  ascetics  are  somewhat  more  decently  clad,  and
less  hideous,  than  those  of  the  Indian  plains.  We  passed
a  party  of  them  coming  down  from  their  penance  in  the
wilderness  of  snows,  to  taste  the  luxuries  provided  by  their
lay  patrons  at  Darjeeling.  Their  faces  were  ghastly,  smeared
over  as  they  were  with  ashes.

The  personal  titles  of  the  Nepalese  are  peculiar,  in  that
the  proper  personal  name  of  the  individual  is  scarcely  ever
used,  even  by  their  nearest  friends.  This  is  not  done,
apparently,  because  it  is-  deemed  unlucky.  As  all  men
are  brothers,  they  are  usually  addressed  simply  as  "elder
brother"  [dajti),  and  the  women  are  called  "elder  sister";
or  they  may  be  called  by  one  or  other  of  certain  titles,
all  of  which  are  considered  to  be  more  polite  than  the
proper  name  of  the  individual.  These  tribes  do  not  appear
to  have  any  totems,  or  beasts  specially  sacred  to  the  clans,
like  the  mountaineers  of  Central  India,  as  found  by  V.
Ball  and  others.

In  our  walk,  after  passing  the  old  Lepcha  custom-house  [Ja-
gat)  and  "The  Pen  of  the  Pigs"  {Soongri-tar),  those  animals
so  dear  to  the  Nepalese,  we  reached  "  The  Dried-up  Tarn  "
that  gives  its  name  to  a  considerable  market  village  {Sookee-
pokree)  of  the  Nepalese,  where  we  met  a  marriage  procession
of  Limboos,    preceded  by  pipers  who  skirled  like  Scottish


3i4


AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS


bagpipers.     Thence,  we  ascended  through  the  woods  to  the

rest-house    at  "The  Pair  of  Tarns"  {Jor-pokree),  where  we

tasted   the  good  things  that  Achoom  had  provided  for  us.

Here  we  were  serenaded  by  a  wild-looking,  unkempt  mu-


A   HILL   MUSICIAN.


1

*      111

^

r

k  Mx  •  i

W--^1

I

..{AM

#1  ^

^3w/

'rffim

rs

^K

™

a

tm

v\^S|

Nf

':/>

1

1

j

;

^^J^pr'''    ■'     'J^*"-

fe

W1

'--.

■»>■

K£"v

•

k^

^H

.    <#

:

1

:  ■

sician  on  the  most  primitive  of  one-stringed  fiddles,  an
instrument  that  one  of  us  became  the  proud  possessor  of
for  sixpence.  And  we  had  other  serenaders.  Swarms  of
frogs,    embowered    among    the   reeds  of  the  adjoining  tarn,


WORSHIP  OF  FROGS— RARE  ORCHIDS  315

kept  up  a  nocturnal  chorus  of  murmurs.  The  natives  of
these  parts,  the  Newars  just  mentioned,  worship  these
animals  in  the  belief  that  they  send  rain  to  their  crops. 46
And  here  also  were  tree-frogs  with  a  bell-like  call,  who
capture  insects,  as  do  the  lizards,  by  darting  out  their  tongue
on  which  is  a  sticky  secretion  to  which  the  insects  adhere ;
the  pity,  however,  is,  that  not  only  are  vermin  thus  cap-
tured, but  lovely  species  of  butterflies  that  would  gladden
the  hearts  of  entomologists.

Next  day  our  path  led  us  through  a  grand  old  forest
of  stately  oaks  and  magnolias  that  stretched  out  high  over
head,  their  giant  arms  draped  with  a  thick  mantle  of  vel-
vety moss  and  lichens,  and  garlanded  with  ferns  and
ropes  of  twining  creepers.  Magnificent  orchids  clung  to
their  moist  mossy  bark,  with  flowers  of  many  colours  and
fantastic  shapes.  One  of  them  is  sweet-scented  like  the
climbing  orchid  of  Brazil,  which  yields  vanilla.  The  number
and  variety  of  the  orchids  hereabouts  is  prodigious.  They
are  scarcely  less  numerous  than  in  the  adjoining  Khasia
Hills,  where  Sir  Joseph  Hooker  discovered  fully  250  kinds.

For  some  of  the  rare  kinds  of  the  "aristocratic  orchid"
fancy  prizes  have  been  offered  by  devotees  of  the  cult.
The  Englishman  announced  recently  and  authoritatively,
that  "£  1,000  is  the  reward  attached  to  the  re-discovery  of
the  long  lost  Cypripedinm  Fairieamim.  A  popular  de-
scription of  its  leading  'points'  may  encourage  some  enthusi-
astic planter  to  the  search,  may  induce  him  to  follow  out
its    romance  of  botany,  unless,  indeed,  the  plant  is  extinct


316  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

in  its  native  habitat,  wherever  that  may  be.  The  flowers
are  produced  singly  and  are  exceptionally  attractive ;  the
dorsal  sepal  is  large  and  white,  yellowish  green  at  the
base,  beautifully  streaked  with  brownish  purple;  the  two
necktie-like  petals  are  similar  in  colour,  fringed  with  black
hairs,  deflexed  and  curiously  curved  at  the  ends ;  the  pouch
of  the  "lady's  slipper"  is  a  dull  purple,  suffused  with  dull
brown  and  veined  with  green — one  of  the  prettiest  of  the
Cypripediums.  Big  sums  have  been  spent  in  the  search  for
it,  and  the  offer  of  Messrs.  Sander  is  surely  sufficient
earnest  of  their  confidence,  and  they  ought  to  know  best,
that  it  will  yet  be  found,  probably  at  the  foot  of  the  hills
in  Assam,  probably  in  Bhotan  (probably  in  Sikhim).  The
'  long-felt  want '  among  orchid  growers  is  a  blue  orchid.
Curious  it  is  that  while  the  flowers  are  arrayed  in  all  the
tints  of  the  rainbow,  every  conceivable  gradation  of  colour,
tones  and  shades  innumerable,  blue  is  almost  unrepresented.
There  is  a  legend  that  a  blue  Habenaria  is  to  be  found
in  Sikhim,  somewhere  beyond  the  frontier;  that  it  has  been
found,  and  that  it  has  a  place  in  the  great  orchid  herbar-
ium bequeathed  in  trust  to  Professor  Reichenbach  to  be
kept  sealed  for  twenty  years,  the  contents  of  which  will,
however,  be  ultimately  given  to  botanical  science  in  the
stately  Reichenbachia,  an  illustrated  work  in  folio.  A  work
which  is  understood  to  be  in  course  of  preparation  on  the
Orchids  of  Sikhim,  by  the  learned  Director  of  the  Royal
Botanical  Gardens,  Calcutta,  Sir  George  King,  may  give
some  clue  as  to  the  whereabouts  of  this  rarity.     Queen  of


EXTERMINATION  OF  ORCHIDS  317

its  class  is  the  Ccelogyne  cristata,  in  great  vogue  in  culti-
vation. It  is  plentiful  above  Darjeeling,  at  8 — 9,000  feet,
whence  it  was  introduced  about  fifty  years  ago.  The
flowers  are  pure  white,  two  to  three,  sometimes  as  much
as  four  inches  across,  with  a  batch  of  yellow  on  the  lip.
One  seldom  fails  to  meet  with  good  specimens  of  it  in
those  baskets  of  miscellaneous  orchids  that  are  offered  for
sale  in  Darjeeling,  products  of  a  vandalism  that  is  as
wanton  as  it  is  wholesale.  It  is  a  great  delusion,  only
too  commonly  experienced,  to  attempt  to  cultivate  these
plants  in  the  plains.  They  may  flourish  quite  fashionably
one  cold  season,  but  they  can  seldom  muster  sufficient
courage  to  endure  a  second.  They  will  expend  all  their
strength  in  producing  new  leaves  and  have  none  left  for
the  supreme  effort  of  flowering,  unless  they  are  sent  to
the  hills  to  recuperate.  One  hesitates  to  compute  the
number  of  thousands  of  plants  that  are  thus  aimlessly  de-
stroyed in  each  year,  lost  not  only  to  cultivation,  but  to
science,  for  not  a  few  species  are  being  rapidly  and  surely
exterminated."  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  authorities  of  Dar-
jeeling and  Sikhim  may  discourage  and  prevent  this  whole-
sale and   woeful  waste  of  these  "glories  of  floral  creation."

Some  of  the  giant  acorns  [Quercus  lamellosa  et  annulate!)
strewing  our  path,  exceeded  two  inches  in  diameter.

Winding  down  this  forest,  over  veins  of  brittle  white
quartz  rock  amongst  the  dark  grey  gneiss,  we  reached  the
saddle  {bhanjan,  as  the  Nepalese  call  it)  in  the  ridge  at  a
crumbling    cairn    or  Mani  (6,500  ft.),  where  we  halted  for


318  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

lunch ;    and    then    zig-zagged    up    through   a  burned  forest,


THROUGH  A   GLADE  OF  FEATHERY  BAMBOOS.

where    the    array    of   tall    charred    stems   stood  weird  and
uncanny-looking.    Thence  we  ascended  through  a  glade  of


RHODODENDRON-TREE  FOREST


3i9


feathery  bamboos,  through  more  gnarled  oaks,  and,  more
steeply,  through  dense  thickets  of  dwarf  bamboos,  relieved
by  the  peach-like  blossom  of  the  still  leafless  paper  laurel
{DapJine  papyrifcra),    from    whose   tough    bark  the  natives


RHODODENDRON
TREES.


make  their  Japanese-like  paper, — to  a  ridge,  at  about  9,000
ft.  elevation,  where  there  burst  upon  our  view  the  gorgeous
rhododendron  forest  in  full  bloom.

This  glorious  sight  is  to  be  equalled  nowhere  else  in
the  world,  for  this  is  the  home  of  the  rhododendrons.  The
whole  hill-side  for  miles  was  aglow  with  the  brilliant  colours


320  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

of  the  rhododendron  flowers.  These  ranged  through  almost
every  hue,  from  the  bright  vermilion  of  cinnabarinum,  the
blushing  scarlet  of  fulgent,  to  the  crimson  of  arboreum  and
barbatum;  the  rose-red  of  nivale  and  Hodgsoni,  the  purple
of  virgatum,  the  yellow  of  Wightii,  the  bluish  of  campanula-
turn,  to  the  cream  of  Falconerii  and  the  white  of  Dalhousii,
anthopogon  and  argentum.  The  variety  in  form  and  size
of  the  plants  was  equally  great,  many  of  them  were  huge
trees  like  great  oaks  (as  seen  in  the  illustration  on  pre-
vious page),  and  the  profusion  of  their  fallen  petals  carpeted
the  ground  deep  with  fiery  flakes  like  rosy  snow,  recalling
somewhat  the  aspect  of  Japan  during  the  gay  festival  of
the  Cherry-blossoms.  Ascending  through  this  gorgeous  mass
of  colour  and  along  a  path  lined  with  pink  primroses  {P.
denticulata),  we  reached  the  rest-house  of  Toom-ling,  or
"Tonglu"  as  it  is  called  on  the  maps,  at   10,074  ft.

We  spent  the  afternoon  in  the  rhododendron  woods.
Hooker  has  described  and  figured  about  24  species  found
hereabouts.  The  first  that  we  met  on  the  way  up  is  a
parasitic  species  (R.  Dalhousii).  It  grows  upon  and  covers
with  its  beautiful  large  bell-shaped  white  blossoms,  often
seven  inches  in  length,  the  highest  branches  of  the  highest
oaks  and  chestnuts.  After  it,  appears  the  large  tree-
rhododendron  (R.  arboreum)  and  then  the  more  brightly
coloured  forms.  A  strikingly  beautiful  specimen  is  the
creamy  flowered  R.  Falconeri,  which  grows  about  thirty
feet  high.  Its  large  leaves  are  covered  with  a  rusty  down
underneath,    and    its    pale    pink    bark    peels    off  in    flakes,


RHODODENDRON  FORESTS  IN  FULL  BLOOM      323

giving  the  smooth  silky  stem  a  strikingly  fleshy  and
naked  appearance,  as  no  moss  or  orchids  can  cling  to
it.  R.  argentuni  differs  from  this  last  in  its  having  a
silvery  under-surface  and  its  flowers  pure  white ;  whilst
R.  Campbellia,  with  its  bright  orange  downy  leaves,  is  only
found  above  10,000  ft.  Several  have  sweet-scented  flowers,
for  example,  R.  DalJiousii,  Edgworthii  and  Wightii;  and
the  leaves  of  some  of  the  dwarf  species  are  aromatic  and
are  burnt  as  incense  by  the  Lamas.  We  did  not,  however,
relish  the  rhododendron-tree  as  fire-wood  for  our  log-fire,
as  its  smoke  was  most  irritating  and  malodorous.  Its  dark
heart  wood  is  used  for  making  the  handles  of  kookrees
and  other  knives.  Our  Lepchas  cooked  and  ate  the  petals
of  this  and  some  other  species ;  the  cinnabarinum,  however,
they  said  was  poisonous,  and  often  killed  sheep,  as  Hooker
has  noted.

The  sunrise  over  the  snows  as  seen  from  the  summit
of  this  mountain  was  very  fine.  Especially  graceful  as  viewed
from  here  is  the  outline  of  Kanchen-junga,  or  Kanchen '
as  we  shall  now  call  it  for  brevity;  but  Everest  is  not
visible,  as  the  dark  hill  of  Sandook-phu  shuts  it  out,  nor  is
the  range  of  view  so  wide  as  that  to  be  seen  from  our  next
stage,  Sandook-phu,  to  which  accordingly  we  now  set  out.

The  road  descended  gradually  to  8,250  feet,  passing  on
the  way  a  yak-grazing  station — Ghairi-bans,  as  the  Nepa-
lese  call  it,  where  some  half-breed  yaks  or  Zo  were  kept;
and  here  we  met  a  whole  village  of  Nepalese  emigrants
who    had  left  their  native  hills  and  were  en  route  to  settle


324  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

permanently  in  some  tea-gardens  near  Darjeeling.  The  party
numbered  about  a  hundred  individuals,  men,  women  and
children;  many  of  the  latter  were  scarcely  able  to  walk,
toddling  at  their  mothers '  heels ;  and  the  dust  of  travel
was  thick  upon  them  all,  as  they  had  been  about  a  week
on  the  march.

Beyond  a  deep  saddle  on  the  ridge,  where  on  a  pre-
vious visit  I  had  seen  a  pack  of  wild  red  dogs  hunting  a
deer,  we  emerged  all  of  a  sudden  from  the  denser  forest  on
to  the  open  grassy  slopes  of  Sandook-phu.  Here  at  a
tarn  of  dark  peaty  water  [Kala-pokree],  at  10,130  ft.  above
the  sea,  we  halted  for  lunch.

Here  the  grassy  slopes,  which,  sprinkled  with  pines,
stretch  up  to  the  summit  for  about  2,000  ft.,  are  thickly
covered  with  the  deadly  nightshade  or  aconite  plant;  and
it  is  from  this  feature,  I  believe,  that  this  mountain  de-
rives its  name — to  wit,  Sandook-phu,  which  means  in  the
Bhotiya  or  Tibetan  language  "  The  Hill  of  the  Poison-plant
or  Aconite."  So  abundant  is  this  plant  here,  and  so  deadly
to  the  cattle  of  these  pastoral  people,  that  all  the  sheep
and  cattle  passing  over  this  mountain  are  muzzled  by  their
drivers.  And  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain  are  great  heaps
of  these  discarded  bamboo  muzzles.

The  curious  circumstance  is  also  noted  here  regarding
this  poison,  which  Marco  Polo  records  of  this  or  a  similar
plant  in  Mongolia — namely,  that  it  only  affects  fatally  those
cattle  that  are  newly  imported  from  the  plains  or  lower
levels;    whilst   those   that   are   bred   in   the  locality  do  not


THE  POISONOUS  ACONITE  325

appear  to  suffer.  t7  This  is  believed  to  be  owing  to  the  native
sheep  learning  to  avoid  the  poisonous  leaves  or  to  shun
the  youngest  leaves,  which  are  the  most  virulent ;  but  it  is
difficult  to  see  how  they  can  entirely  succeed  in  doing  this
where  the  poison  grows  so  abundantly.  It  is,  I  think,  more
probable  that  they  get  habituated  to  it,  by  eating  the  drug
in  small  quantities,  as  opium-eaters  do  opium,  and  as  snake-
charmers  are  believed  to  render  themselves  and  their  per-
forming animals  immune  to  serpents'  venom,  by  the  re-
peated injection  of  small  doses  of  the  venom,  a  method
which  I  had  many  years  ago  ascertained  by  experiment  to
be  somewhat  prophylactic  against  snake-bite.  48

Much  of  the  aconite  of  commerce,  that  finds  its  way  to
Europe,  and  which  is  so  largely  used  now-a-days  by  homoe-
opaths, is  gathered  on  this  mountain ;  and  I  have  found  the
Bhotiyas  in  the  autumn,  digging  up  the  roots  wholesale  for
transport  to  Calcutta.  They  pay  a  small  fee  to  the  Rajah
of  Sikhim  for  this  privilege,  and  they  get  from  the  native
dealers  at  Darjeeling  about  fourteen  shillings  for  three-quarters
of  a  hundredweight  of  the  dried  roots.  There  are  several
species  of  the  plant  growing  here,  including  the  greenish
A.  palmatum  and  the  deeper  blue,  the  virulent  A.  ferox
that  is  exported  for  its  poison,  and  which  Hooker  says  is
merely  a  variety  of  "the  monkshood"  {A.  napellus)  of  our
gardens  at  home. 49  The  men  dig  up  its  roots  in  late  autumn
after  the  plant  has  withered  and  when  its  juices,  on  which  its
activity  mainly  depends,  have  mostly  returned  to  the  roots.

This   root    is   also    extensively  employed  throughout  the


326  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

Eastern    Himalayas   to    poison    the    arrows    that    are    used


I-A.WaddM.Oti

POISONED   ARROWS.
Half  actual  size.

after  big  game  and  in  warfare,  as  our  troops  found  in  the


POISONED  ARROWS-SNOWSTORM  329

expeditions  against  the  Sikhimese,  and  also  the  Abor  and  Aka
tribes  of  Assam.  These  arrowheads  are  sliced  with  valvular
crevices  to  hold  the  poisonous  paste,  or  made  of  barbed
pieces  so  cleverly  pieced  together,  that  any  attempt  to  drag
them  out  of  the  wound,  causes  the  splinters  to  penetrate
more  deeply.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  Lepchas  eat  the
cooked  flesh  of  the  game  that  they  have  killed  by  these
poisoned  arrows,  without  any  bad  effects  to  themselves.

Snow  lay  in  patches  on  the  path  as  we  zig-zagged  up
the  northern  slopes  of  the  mountain,  through  clumps  of
silver  pines,  and  it  covered  the  summit  with  an  almost
continuous  sheet,  over  which,  in  the  bitter  wind,  we  made
our  way  to  the  rest-house.  Here  we  found  the  front  room
invaded  by  a  pile  of  driven  snow  over  a  yard  deep,  that
had  been  blown  in  through  a  chink  in  the  door.  Fires
were  soon  lit,  but  it  took  us  some  time  to  thaw  our  frozen
limbs,  while  Achoom  was  busy  in  the  kitchen,  and  we
needed  our  warmest  wraps.

Outside,  the  baffled  tempest  still  howled  and  whistled
furiously.  The  storm-tossed  pines  threw  their  splintered
arms  about  and  sighed,  poor  things,  in  the  piercing  wintry
blast.  But  at  night  the  wind  died  down,  and  the  view  of
the  snows  in  the  moonlight  was  sublime.     After  the  storm

"the  mute  still  air
Was  Music  slumbering  on  her  instrument."

From  a  background  of  almost  inky  blackness,  the  graceful
white-robed  peaks  and  icy  horns  of  the  Kanchen-junga
range  gleamed  out  clear  and   colossal  in  the  dry  frosty  air.


33©  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

The  ice-spangles  on  the  dark  pines  and  rhododendrons
sparkled  like  diamonds  in  the  pale  moonbeams;  whilst  in
the  fore-ground,  fringing  the  ice-covered  lakelet,  the  frozen
"  everlastings  "  projected  from  the  snow,  bright  and  pure — a
picture  in  frosted  silver.

The  sunrise  over  the  snows  was  magnificent,  and  the
stretch  of  these  latter  much  wider  than  that  seen  from
Senchal,  extending  perhaps  for  nearly  200  miles.  We  were
up  early  to  the  topmost  of  the  three  nipple-like  peaks  of
the  craggy  summit,  to  see  this  famous  view.  As  the  eye
wanders  over  the  vast  amphitheatre  of  dazzling  peaks  it
is  at  once  arrested  by  the  great  towering  mass  of  Kan-
chen-junga;  and  the  first  thing  that  strikes  you  is  the
altered  outline  of  both  it  and  its  group  of  peaks,  as  com-
pared with  that  seen  from  Darjeeling.  The  long  strag-
gling lines  of  its  outlying  snowy  peaks  and  ridges,  the
tent-like  Kabru,  etc.,  as  seen  from  the  south-eastern  aspect
from  Darjeeling,  are  now  foreshortened,  and  the  peaks
cluster  closely  together  under  Kanchen ',  which  towers  up
majestically  over  all.  This  dazzling  mountain,  almost  the
highest  in  the  world,  is  magnificent,  even  as  seen  from  here,
in  its  dark  setting  of  pines,  and  without  the  deep  interven-
ing valley  of  the  Rang-eet.  It  is,  after  all,  only  852  feet
less  in  height  than  Everest  itself.

The  Everest  group,  no  longer  shut  out  by  the  dark  ridge
that  hid  its  peaks  from  view  at  Senchal,  soars  up  through
banks  of  clouds  far  to  our  left,  and  beyond  a  deep  gulf
of    valleys.     This  group,  however,  lies  much  lower  on  the


EVEREST  GROUP  RISING  ABOVE   THE  CLOUDS  FROM  SANDOOK.-PHU  VI2,000  FEET).


EVEREST  FROM  SANDOOK-PHU  333

horizon  than  Kanchen',  being  so  much  further  away — about,
90  miles — whilst  the  latter  is  about  43  miles.  Only  the
peak  of  Everest  is  visible.  Its  base  is  hid  behind  the
shoulder  of  a  great  armchair-like  snowy  mountain,  the  "Peak
No.  XIII. "  of  the  Survey  (see  p.  342).

Scarcely  less  magnificent  than  this  view  up  towards  the
snows  was  the  view  looking  downwards  to  the  plains.
Some  ten  thousand  feet  below  us,  the  rising  mist  and  clouds
formed  a  vast  woolly  white  sea,  whose  tide  of  rolling  bil-
lows surged  in  amongst  the  mountains,  of  which  the  dark
rugged  ridges  stood  out  against  the  fleecy  foam,  as  bold
capes  and  headlands  and  dark  islets  in  this  sea  of  curling
clouds.  And  as  we  gazed,  some  of  these  fleecy  clouds
surged  over  us  and  crept  slowly,  like  "sheep  of  the  sky"  as
the  Lepchas  call  them,  upwards  to  the  snowy  pinnacles,
on  which  they  settle  down  in  flocky  masses,  veiling  the
peaks  against  the  staring  mid-day  sun.  Towards  evening,
however,  these  clouds  disappear,  probably  condensed  into
snow  in  the  colder  atmosphere,  and  then  we  get  again
clear  views  at  sunset.

The  track  to  the  next  peak  led  along  the  undulating  crest
of  the  pine  forest,  through  patches  of  rhododendrons  blooming
brightly  amid  the  snow,  past  some  juniper  trees  after  a  few
miles ;  and  the  ranges  of  the  hills  got  more  and  more  rugged
and  rocky,  as  we  approached  the  everlasting  snows.  Amongst
the  patches  of  rhododendrons  by  the  way  I  got  two  Monal
pheasants  and  one  blood  pheasant;  and  I  saw  a  wild  pig,
also  tracks  in  the  snow  of  deer,  goat-antelope,  and  a  bear.


334  AMONCI  THE  HIMALAYAS

The  pine  forests,  however,  seemed  to  harbour  little  life,
and    their   stillness    at  times    seemed  uncanny  as  I  walked
through  them    a    long  way  ahead  of  my  men,  and  especi-
ally   so    near   the    ridges,    where    there    were    many   gaunt
splintered    pines    struck    dead    by    lightning,    and  gnarled
trunks  and  writhing  roots  tortured  into  weird  shapes  by  the
icy    blast.     As   I    was  climbing  up  the  ridge  called  Sabar-
goom,    or    "The    Cliff  of  the    Musk-deer",    so   called  after
those  animals  (Sa-bar  in  Lepcha  and  Lao  in  Tibetan)  which
used  to  frequent  this  ridge,  I  saw  a  ghastly  sight.  Athwart
the  path,  stretched  on  the  snow,  lay  a  Nepalese   frozen  to
death.     Several  jackals    and    an   animal  like   a  hyena  sur-
rounded the  dead  body,  beside  which  were  the  embers  of
a  small  fire,  and  not  far  off  lay  the  deceased's  basket  filled
with  his  food  and  belongings.     It  was  evident  that  he  had
perished  through  the  cold ;  that  he  had  arrived  here  benight-
ed   after   the    snowfall  had  ceased,  and,  unable  to  proceed
further,  had  lit  a  small  fire,  and  had  been  betrayed  into  a
sleep  which  proved  his  last.     There  was  no  evidence  of  a
struggle.     His  foot-prints  in  the  snow  led  up  to  here,  and
the  jackals  had  evidently  come  only  a  few  minutes  before
I    appeared  on   the   scene,    for  they  had  gnawed  only  one
arm,    and    were   searching   in   his   basket  when  I  disturbed
them  at  their  unholy  feast.

Hurrying  onwards  out  of  the  cutting  blast  that  swept
over  this  exposed  crest  (11,640  ft.),  we  emerged  from  the
pine  forest  on  to  the  treeless  slopes  of  Faloot,  properly
Fok-loot,    or  "The  Peeled  Summit"  as  the  Lepchas  call  it,


A   NEPALESE   FROZEN   TO   DEATH   IN   THE   SNOW.


SNOWY  RANGE  FROM  FALOOT  337

for  it  looks  from  the  forest-clad  ranges  below,  as  if  its
summit  were  "peeled"  of  trees;  and  my  Tibetan  porters  on
seeing  its  bare  grassy  snow-streaked  slopes,  sent  up  a  shout
of  joy,  and  exclaimed,  "  Now  we  are  again  in  a  treeless
country  like  our  own  Tibet ! "

It  was  a  long  and  cold  zig-zag  up  its  sides  to  reach  the
rest-house  nestling  on  the  leeward  side  of  its  windy  top
(11,810  ft.),  and  I  arrived  about  an  hour  before  my
porters,  with  a  perfectly  ravenous  appetite,  but  with  nothing
to  satisfy  it  except  some  Indian  corn  and  capsicums,  which
was  the  only  food  that  the  caretaker  of  the  house  pos-
sessed. He  made  up  for  me  some  of  the  Indian  corn  into
a  sort  of  porridge-like  mess,  but  the  capsicums  proved  ex-
cruciatingly hot.  I  was  foolhardy  enough,  on  his  recom-
mendation, to  eat  two  when  I  was  almost  paralysed  with  the
cold.  Their  effect  was  instanteous,  and  for  hours  my  blistered
tongue  reminded  me  of  this  fiery  food.

The  sunset  on  the  snows  was  almost  as  splendid  as  the
sunrise  had  been.  As  the  crimson  ball  of  the  sun  dipped
to  the  western  horizon,  the  snowy  pinnacles,  gleaming
fiery  red,  soared  out  of  the  purple  sea  of  pearly  haze
that  filled  the  dividing  valleys,  up  into  a  sky  of  deepest
turquoise,  laced  here  and  there  with  shafts  of  burnished
gold.  Then  followed  a  swift  kaleidoscopic  play  of  colours,
in  which  the  glittering  fiery  peaks  faded  to  crimson,  pale
rose,  and  a  cold  steely  grey  that  seemed  to  carry  them  far
away,  spectral-like,  into  another  world.

A  bear  had  mauled  badly  a  brother  of  the  care-taker  of


338  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

this  desolate  hut,  tearing  out  his  eye  and  the  side  of  his  face.
Such  shocking  mutilations  are  not  very  infrequent,  and  ex-
plain why  these  people  dread  a  bear  even  more  than  a  tiger
or  leopard.  Not  long  ago  in  these  same  hills  an  excited
Nepalese  came  breathless  to  my  tent,  with  the  news
that  a  large  bear  and  its  two  cubs  had  mangled  two
men  of  his  village,  and  had  for  several  days  been
chasing  others,  so  that  they  were  afraid  to  go  about;  and
hearing  that  a  European  traveller  had  arrived,  he  had
come  to  beseech  me  to  go  to  their  aid,  promising  that  if
I  would  go,  all  the  villagers  would  turn  out  and  assist  me
in  slaying  these  animals.  As  it  was  then  too  late  to  go
that  evening  I  started  early  next  morning,  with  my  shot-
gun and  shells  and  a  few  of  my  best  coolies  armed  with
their  knives.  It  was  a  long  and  hot  way  to  the  village,
down  many  miles  of  ravines.  On  reaching  it,  a  powerfully-
built  man  was  led  slowly  out  to  me.  His  head  was  swollen
to  twice  its  size,  and  both  eyes  and  his  two  cheeks  were
torn  out,  and  their  tattered  shreds  were  hanging  down  his
neck,  and  he  was  groaning  in  agony.  I  had  no  narcotics
with  me  to  relieve  his  pain,  but  I  had  him  laid  down  and
bathed  his  poisoned  and  inflamed  wounds  with  tepid  water.
I  was  then  told  that  he  was  the  village  blacksmith,  and
that  his  children  had  for  some  days  been  complaining  to
him  that  they  had  been  chased  by  these  bears  while  herd-
ing his  cattle,  and  yesterday  one  of  his  children  had  been
overtaken  and  clawed  in  the  back  by  one  of  the  young
bears.     Whereupon    the    indignant   blacksmith,    relying    on


MAULED  BY  A  BEAR  339

his  great  physical  strength,  and  he  was  indeed  a  Vulcan
in  physique,  went  unarmed  to  the  bears '  den  and  there
he  shouted  to  the  bears  to  come  out.  The  old  bear  rushed
out,  and  in  an  instant  inflicted  on  him  the  terrible  wounds
that  we  had  seen,  and  so  terror-struck  were  the  villagers
at  the  sight  of  these  proofs  of  the  power  of  the  bears,  that
although  I  had  come  at  their  special  invitation,  they  refused
to  go  with  me  to  attack  the  bears.  The  wives  pushed  their
husbands  inside  their  huts  and  barred  the  doors.  And  it
was  some  time  ere  my  men  could  force  open  the  doors  of
several  of  the  huts  and  drag  out  some  of  the  men.  With
these  and  my  informant  of  yesterday  and  a  few  others
who  showed  less  cowardice  I  went  off  to  seek  the  bears.
The  cave  lay  about  a  mile  from  the  village,  at  the  junction
of  two  streams,  amongst  cliffy  rocks  overgrown  with  a  good
deal  of  brushwood.  I  took  up  a  position  about  a  hundred
yards  off  and  sent  the  beaters  to  throw  in  stones,  but  the
bears  seemed  to  be  not  at  home.  At  least  they  gave  no
sign,  and  did  not  appear  even  when  I  approached  to  the
mouth  of  the  cave  and  fired  into  it;  and  we  scoured  the
hillsides  for  some  distance  without  finding  them,  though
the  trees  bore  fresh  marks  of  their  claws.  I  sent  the  poor
wounded  man  some  opium  from  my  camp  to  relieve  his
pain,  and  advised  his  friends  to  carry  him  into  the  nearest
hospital,  about  four  days '  journey  distant,  but  from  sub-
sequent enquiries  there,  I  learnt  that  he  had  never  come ;
he  must  certainly  have  died.

The  view  from  this  peak  of  Faloot,  or  "  Fa-le-loong "  as


340  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

the  Tibetans  mispronounce  the  Lepcha  name,  gives  much
nearer  views  of  the  Kanchen '  group,  of  which  the  culmin-
ating peak  is  now  only  about  thirty  miles  distant.  And
the  horn  of  "Jannu  "  in  Nepal  stands  grandly  up  on  the  left.

Everest,  however,  is  scarcely  visible  from  here,  as  it  is
hid  by  that  great  arm-chair-like  snowy  crater,  the  "  Peak  No.
XIII "  of  the  Survey  Department.  To  see  Everest  we  must
go  further  north  along  this  ridge,  or  return  to  Sandook-phu,
from  which  latter  place  the  top  of  its  peak  comes  into  view
over  the  shoulder  of  this  much  more  imposing  arm-chair
peak,  as  is  shown  in  the  previous  illustration  and  in  the
annexed  sketch  by  Colonel  Tanner.  And  this  view,  small
as  it  is,  is  one  of  the  very  best  that  is  to  be  got  of  it,
outside  Tibet  and  Eastern  Nepal,  which  unfortunately  are
at  present  closed  to  Europeans.  Indeed,  so  inconspicuous
is  Everest  from  any  point  of  view  to  which  Europeans
have  had  access  (in  Sikhim  or  the  Indian  plains,  or  in
Central  Nepal),  that  it  is  extremely  doubtful  whether  any
of  the  older  travellers  in  these  regions  were  ever  able  to
distinguish  Everest  at  all,  or  as  a  pre-eminently  high  moun-
tain. For  even  from  Sandook-phu  and  its  other  available
points  of  view  (it  is  not  visible  from  Tonglu  or  the  Kakani
ridge  above  Khatmandu),  owing  to  its  great  distance  in  the
interior,  behind  the  outer  snowy  peaks  that  tower  in  front
of  it,  its  enormous  height  is  not  apparent,  and  this  was
only  revealed  by  the  scientific  measurements  of  the  Indian
Survey  Department.

When    the    great    trigonometrical    survey    of   India  had,


IKti

V5.^                      v'"'

«v~

MB  40H^H^^^H^^Vfl^^^.  *aH

f  1 1

4^,^

*''           "^e^wf^bS

^^

^H   SKSksR

H|t_  JkxI

RuhH

^F

3Wl

EVEREST  AND  ITS  NATIVE  NAMES  345

about  the  year  1850,  extended  their  triangulation  to  the
foot  of  the  Himalayas,  from  this  newly  gained  base,
measurements  were  made  to  the  snowy  peaks  beyond  the
frontiers,  and  it  was  discovered,  between  November  1849
and  January  1850,  that  in  Tibet  at  270  59.3'  north  latitude
and  86°  54.7'  east  longitude  from  Greenwich,  a  peak  rose
to  the  enormous  height  of  29,002  feet,  or  8,840  metres —
the  highest  measured  elevation  on  the  earth.

The  Surveyor-General  of  that  day  proposed  to  the  Royal
Geographical  Society  of  London  to  give  this  giant  moun-
tain the  surname  of  his  predecessor  in  office,  Sir  George
Everest,  to  whom  the  great  merit  belonged  of  organising
the  Survey  of  India  on  a  scientific  basis,  between  the  years
1823-43.  A  protest  against  this  naming  was  raised  by  Mr.
Brian  Hodgson,  on  the  plea  that  the  Nepalese  had  already
given  to  this  mountain  the  name  of  "  Deva-dhunga" ,  or
"God's  Seat",  and  "  Bhairava  Langur",  or  "  The  Terrible
Pass".  At  the  meeting  of  the  Geographical  Society  held  on  the
nth  May,  1857,  to  discuss  this  objection,  and  at  which  Sir
George  Everest  was  himself  present,  it  was  shown  to  be  doubt-
ful whether  any  of  the  alleged  native  names  could  be  really
applied  to  this  particular  mountain  at  all.  The  name  "Everest"
therefore  was  given  to  this  king  of  mountains,  and  it  has
appeared  in  the  English  maps  ever  since.  On  the  continent,
however,  one  of  the  vague  Indian  mythological  names,  ob-
tained by  H.  Schlagintweit  from  the  Hindooized  Nepalese  of
Khatmandu,  for  a  mountain  which  he  supposed  to  be  iden-
tical  with   the    Everest   of  the  Survey,  is  usually  assigned


346  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

to  it — namely,  "  Gauri-sankar" ',  one  of  the  titles  of  the  con-
jugal Indian  god  Shiva,  the  Destroyer,  and  his  wife.  But
it  is  not  generally  known  that  the  identity  of  these  two
mountains  has  been  conclusively  disproved  by  General
Walker,  the  late  Surveyor  General  of  India,  and  by  Colonel
Tanner,  his  deputy.  Owing  to  the  curvature  of  the  earth,
and  the  interposition  of  other  ranges,  it  is  physically
impossible  to  see  Everest  either  from  Khatmandu  or  the
Kaulia  or  Kakani  peaks,  whence  H.  Schlagintweit  believed
he  saw  it  and  got  his  local  name  "  Gauri-sankar  ".  As  for
Kanchen-junga,  which  Schlagintweit  says  was  also  visible
from  that  position,  it  is  shown  to  be  "  fully  one  hundred
miles  beyond  the  most  remote  point  visible  from  that  locality."
And  Colonel  Tanner  has  directly  proved  that  the  "  Gauri-
sankar"  of  Schlagintweit  is  certainly  not  the  "Everest"  of
the  Survey,  but  a  much  smaller  and  totally  different  moun-
tain. He  writes :  "  I  have  now  before  me  the  panoramic
profiles  and  angular  measurements  of  Major  Wilson,  for
some  time  resident  in  Nepal,  who  observed  from  Sheopuri,
a  point  on  the  Kaulia  ridge.  Schlagintweit's  '  Gauri-sankar ',
the  '  Everest '  of  successive  (political)  residents  in  Nepal —
was  pointed  out  to  Major  Wilson,  and  from  his  angular
measurements  I  am  able  to  identify  that  peak  as  '  No.  XX',
23,447  feet,  more  than  a  mile  lower  than  Everest,  (see  map
on  p.  349)  and  in  point  of  distance  very  far  short  of  it."
What  then  is  the  native  name  of  the  highest  measured
mountain  in  the  world,  for  it  is  always  desirable  to  preserve
the    vernacular    names   of    great    mountains?     The   native


NATIVE  NAMES  OF  EVEREST  347

names  which  have  been  given  to  distant  Himalayan  peaks
are  misleading  and  confusing,  and  especially  so  are  the
Nepalese  names.  The  Nepalese,  who  seldom  themselves
go  near  the  peaks,  are  very  loose  in  their  nomenclature  of
these  mountains,  and  the  names  which  they  apply  to  them
generally  indicate  ranges  and  not  individual  mountains,
except  in  a  few  instances,  where  the  peaks,  unlike  Everest,
are  more  accessible  and  are  frequented  by  Hindoo  devotees.
Of  the  many  natives  of  Eastern  Nepal  of  whom  I  asked  the
name  of  Everest,  not  one  ever  called  it  "  Deva-dunga "  or
"  Gauri-sankar  ".  This  latter  name  for  a  hill  they  had  never
heard  of,  though  many  hills  were  called  Deva-dunga  or
"God's  seat".  But  in  regard  to  Everest  they  had  no  specific
name  for  it  all.  They  simply  called  it,  in  common  with  all  the
other  high  snowy  peaks,  "The  White  Mountain",  or  Dhan-
lagiri,  which  is  the  popular  generic  name  for  all  the  snowy
peaks:  "  Himalaya",  or  "The  Abode  of  Snow",  is  a  classic
term  which  is  unknown  to  the  common  people,  and  is  only
used  by  Brahmans  and  the  learned.  Nor  had  these  men
any  specific  name  even  for  that  striking  crater-like  peak
"  No.  XIII,"  which  towers  over  Eastern  Nepal  and  which
has  been  pointed  out  to  Colonel  Tanner  by  the  Bhotiyas
as  "  Khumba-lung,"  after  the  valley  at  its  foot;  although
these  Nepalese  knew  it  well  by  headmark,  and  likened  it,
aptly  enough,  to  a  white-shrouded  woman  in  a  sitting  posture.
On  the  other  hand,  the  Tibetans  who  inhabit  the  country
around  Everest  and  who  ascend  this  sacred  mountain
for  purposes  of  worship,  as  high  as  they  dare,    call    it  and


34«  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

the  other  neighbouring  mountains  by  names  which  do  not
seem  to  have  been  hitherto  published,  or  only  partially  or
incorrectly  so.  The  highest  range  of  snowy  peaks  in  this
region  in  question,  and  including  the  Everest  group,  was
pointed  out  to  me  by  a  Tibetan  native  of  Khumbu,  the
province  of  North-Eastern  Nepal  bordering  this  range  on
the  south,  as  "The  Five  Icy  Horns  of  Khumbu"  (Khumbu-
Gang-nga-Ra-waJ.  Whilst  the  highest  part  of  this  range,
that  is  to  say  what  we  have  called  the  "Everest  group"
and  including  "  Peak  No.  XIII",  was  called  by  him  Lap-chi-
Kang,  or  "The  Outer-Glacier  Pass";  and  the  culminating
peak,  i.e.  Everest,  was  called  Jomo-Ka7ig-kar,  or  "  The  Lady
White  Glacier".  These  latter  two  names  have  already  been
mentioned  by  Baboo  Sarat  C.  Das  as  the  cognomen  of  the
Everest  range  and  its  highest  peak.  But  my  informant  said
that  this  range  is  properly  the  "  Lower  Lap-chi-Kang,"  in  con-
tradistinction to  the  Upper  Lap-chi-Kang,  which  he  said,  was
much  higher,  and  lay  in  Upper  Tibet,  almost  due  north  of
this  Everest  group,  but  was  not  visible  from  Khumbu  or
any  part  of  Nepal.

There  seems  no  doubt  as  to  this  nomenclature,  for  I  have
seen  in  Tibetan  books  "the  Upper  Lap-chi-Kang "  noted  as
a  high  mountain,  as  well  as  the  Lap-chi-Kang  on  the  Nepa-
lese  frontier;  and  in  the  vernacular  topography  of  Tibet,
which  has  been  partly  translated  by  the  above-named  Baboo,
the  peak  of  Jomo-Kang-kar  comes  second  in  the  list  of  the
highest  mountains,  and  is  described  as  lying  in  this  locality,
in  these  words,  which  may  be  followed  in  my  accompanying


MAP   OF   THE   ENVIRONS   OF   MOUNT   EVEREST


ENVIRONS  OF  EVEREST  351

sketch-map.  "To  the  east  of  the  Kirong  district  lies
Nalam,  (Nyanam)  in  the  vicinity  of  which  are  Gung  Tang,
the  birthplace  of  the  translator  Rva;  also  the  Toipa  cave,
the  hermitage  of  saint  Milarapa ;  and  Chu-bar,  the  place
were  Milarapa  died, — all  these  places  lie  on  the  Tibet-Nepal
boundary.  Close  to  them  are  the  hermit-monasteries  of  Phel-
gya-ling  and  Tar-gya-ling,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  that
grand  and  very  lofty  snowy  mountain  called  Jomo-Kang-kar,
and  at  the  foot  of  Lap-chi-Kang,  on  the  top  of  which  dwell
the  five  fairy  sisters  of  long  Life,  the  Tse-ring-chenga,  the
patrons  of  St.  Milarapa.  At  the  foot  of  Lap-chi-Kang,  on
the  Tibetan  side,  are  five  glacial  lakes,  sacred  to  these  five
fairies,  and  each  differs  from  the  other  in  the  colour  of  its
water.  To  the  north  of  these  monasteries  lies  Kyema  lake,  one
of  the  four  great  glacier  lakes  of  Tibet  .  .  .  Travelling  north-
ward from  Nyanam,  one  arrives  at  the  foot  of  a  lofty  mountain
named  the  Gung-Kang  pass,  which  is  guarded  by  the  twelve
she-devils  called  Tan-ma,  who  were  bound  by  the  spells  of
"The  Lotus-born  One"  (the  founder  of  Lamaism)  to  prevent
the  entry  (this  way)  to  Tibet  from  India  of  the  enemies  of
Buddhism  .  .  .  After  crossing  the  Gung  Tang  pass  and  going
northwards,  you  arrive  at  the  district  of  Tengri  (Dingri) .  .  .
A  Chinese  guard  with  Tibetan  militia  is  posted  at  Tengri."
This  description  is  generally  confirmed  and  amplified  by
a  curious  Tibetan  picture  of  this  mountain,  for  a  copy  of
which,  as  well  as  some  notes  on  Everest,  I  am  indebted  to
Mr.  A.  W.  Paul,  C.  I.  E.  The  Tibetans,  as  I  some  years
ago  noted, 5I  worship  Everest  as  the  abode  of  the  five  celestial


352  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

nymphs  above  named,  who  are  supposed  to  confer  long
life — a  cult  which  is  also  common  to  the  Chinese  and
Japanese.  The  Tibetan  pilgrims  ascend  its  sides  up  to  the
glaciers  for  worship,  and  they  also  visit  the  tomb  of  the
great  high-priest  of  these  deities  of  long-life — namely,  the
popular  Saint  Milarapa.  In  this  picture  the  tomb  of  the
saint  is  shown  on  the  southern  flanks  of  Everest,  and  the
various  temples  and  hermitages  and  shepherds '  hamlets
there.  This  bird's-eye  view  of  the  lower  slopes  of  this
little-known  mountain  gives  interesting  details  of  the  tracks,
rivers  and  bridges,  and  is  inscribed  with  the  name  of  the
places.  The  summit  of  Everest  is  depicted  conventionally
by  the  Tibetan  artist  as  ending  in  five  snowy  horns  with
their  tips  cloud-capped.  In  the  vista  to  the  north  of  this
mountain  is  written  Na-lam  (a  colloquial  form  of  Nanam  or
Nyanam),  in  the  top  left-hand  corner,  and  "  Dingri  District"
in  the  top  right-hand  corner,  which  with  several  other  known
names  fix  its  topographical  position.  52

Until,  however,  we  obtain  access  to  the  Lap-chi-Kang  range
and  directly  confirm  these  identifications  of  the  peaks  on
the  spot,  it  would  be  premature  to  consider  what  should
be  the  ultimate  designation  of  the  peak  which  is  now  known
to  our  cartographers  as  "Everest" — whether  or  not  it  should
be  called  by  the  hybrid  term  "  Kang-kar-~Everest."

The  form  of  Everest  has  seldom  been  delineated.  The
reputed  drawing  of  it  by  H.  Schlagintweit  which  is
treasured  at  the  India  Office  was  made  from  the  peak
of    Tonglu,    whence,    as    Colonel    Tanner    points  out,  this


w

>

Pi

s

,_,

6

C/3

o

tv

W

s

fc

V*

o

<a

a

(1

H

5

CD

s

o

H

fc

<s>

>

3

T-l

<<
9

"h

[J,

cd

o

•*1

<0

t^

c

°o

tt

*o     a


*»


23


SHAPE  OF  THE  PEAK  OF  EVEREST


355


mountain  is  not  even  visible,  nor  is  it  scarcely  visible  from
Faloot;  and  we  have  seen  that  the  "  Gauri-sankar  "  of  the
Nepalese  is  a  different  and  much  smaller  mountain  al-
together. The  usual  authentic  picture  of  Everest  represents
its  peak  as  seen  from  Sandook-phu,  a  point  from  which  it
is  ioo  miles  distant.  This  has  already  been  shown  in  the
preceding  illustrations  (pp.  331  and  342),  and  in  the  telescopic


EVEREST   AND    "  PEAK   XIII  "    from   BANGURA   TRIG.    STATION.
{Distance  of  Everest  about  126  miles,  and  '■'■Peak  XII I"  about  11S  miles)

drawing  by  Colonel  Tanner.  And  here  it  is  to  be  noted,
that  the  fanciful  pictures  purporting  to  have  been  made
from  somewhat  the  same  point  of  view,  contained  in  the
book  entitled  "  Indian  Alps ",  are  quite  unworthy  of  con-
sideration, as  portraits  of  this  or  any  other  of  these  peaks.
The  shape  of  the  peak  of  Everest,  as  seen  from  points
further  to  the^west  in  the  Indian  plains,  is  sharper  and
shows     more     details    than    from    Sandook-phu.     The    ac-


356  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

companying  two  profiles  of  such  views  of  it  I  reproduce
from  Colonel  Tanner's  careful  telescopic  sketches,  as  they
give  its  outlines  much  more  distinctly  than  the  photographs
which  I  took  of  it,  when  traversing  that  line  of  country  at
the  foot  of  the  Himalayas,  from  the  north  of  Lucknow
along  the  border  of  the  Nepalese  Terai  to  Sikhim.  The
Himalayas  of  Central  Nepal  as  seen  from  the  Someshwar
range  on  the  Gandak  river  are  beautifully  shown  in  the
annexed  drawing  by  Colonel  Tanner.

Withj-egard  to  the  statement  by  Baboo  Sarat  Das,  that
"its  summit"  is  "a  rounded  dome",  Colonel  Tanner  writes
that  the  Baboo  "  is  not  an  explorer . . .  his  note  on  Everest
is  worthless . . .  The  sharpest  peak  as  seen  from  the  south,
whence  my  sketches  have  been  made,  would  from  the  north,
whence  Baboo  Sarat  C.  Das  supposed  he  saw  the  moun-
tain, bear  nearly  the  same  outline.  However,  supposing  that
from  the  Tibet  plateau  to  the  north  of  Everest  the  moun-
tain assumed  a  somewhat  rounded  aspect,  it  still  must  be
remembered  that  the  round-topped  peaks,  averaging  some
25,000  ft.,  situated  on  the  north  spur  of  Everest,  would  most
probably  intercept  the  view  of  the  highest  peak  from  the
Baboo's  point  of  view,  and  by  him  be  mistaken  for  it."

It  so  happens  that  I  visited  in  clear  weather  the  very
spot  whence  the  Baboo  saw  the  view  in  question.  His  point
of  view  was  not  at  all  north  as  Colonel  Tanner  believed,
but  the  Semo  pass,  or  in  Lepcha  "  Sema-rum  ",  to  the  west  of
the  Kang  La,  about  sixty-five  miles  E.S.E.  of  Everest,  and
it  will  be  seen  from  the  profile  and  description  of  that  view,


MOUNTAINS  HIGHER  THAN  EVEREST  359

which  I  give  in  Chapter  XI,  p.  420,  that  the  peak  supposed
by  him  to  be  Everest  was  certainly  not  that  mountain,  but
the  lower  "  Peak  No.  XIII.  "  There  also  I  give  a  sketch  of  the
precipitous  north-eastern  face  of  Everest  hitherto  unfigured,
and  refer  to  several  other,  as  yet  unidentified,  sacred
mountains  of  Tibet,  said  to  surpass  Everest  in  height.
Unfortunately,  the  travellers  who  have  of  late  years  visited
Tibet  have  traversed  a  line  of  country  too  far  to  the  north
to  throw  light  on  this  question  of  the  mountains  in  this
region,  which  are  alleged  to  be  higher  than  Mount  Everest.
As  to  the  possibility  of  anyone  ever  ascending  Everest,
a  celebrated  climber  53  says,  "  Considering  how  much  more
gradually  the  rarity  (of  the  air)  increases  between  20,000
and  30,000  feet  than  it  does  at  inferior  levels,  I  have
every  confidence  that  the  highest  mountain  in  the  world
will,  if  Nature  has  not  forgotten  a  ladder  to  it,  be  some
day  trodden  by  human  foot".


CHAPTER  X


THE  SOUTHERN  PEAKS  AND  GLACIERS  OF  THE
KANCHEN-JUNGA  GROUP


The  frosted  peaks  of  Chola  gleamed

Broken  and  bare  and  bold.
On  the  glittering  crest  of  Kanchen'  streamed

The  sunlight  clear  and  cold.
The  fleeting  clouds  brief  shadows  flung
On  mighty  Jannoo's  brow,  or  hung

On  Pandim's  forehead  near.

C.  Macaulay's  Lay  of  Lachen.


The  southern  glaciers  of  the  Kanchen-junga  group,  and
the  outlying  peaks  of  Kabru,  Pandim,  etc.  have  been  ap-
proached, on  the  few  occasions  they  have  been  visited,  usually
by  way  of  the  long  and  deep  tropical  valley  of  the  Rang-
eet,  with  all  its  attendant  discomforts  of  heat,  bad  roads,
and  insect-pests.  I  decided,  therefore,  to  try  the  track
along  the  cool  ridge  from  Sandook-phu,  as  there  was  a
good  road  and  rest-houses  for  two  stages  beyond  that  point,
without  any  dipping  down  into  tropical  forest,  and  only
thrice    apparently    had    part    of  this    ridge  beyond  the  last


SOUTHERN  PEAKS  OF  THE  KANCHEN'  GROUP  361

staging-house  been  traversed  by  Europeans,  and  the  greater
part  of  it  not  at  all.

Leaving  Darjeeling,  on  the  14th  September,  1896,  in  a
drizzle  like  a  mild  Scotch  mist,  that  scarcely  wetted  us  as
we  went,  but  brought  the  colour  to  our  cheeks,  and  that
cleared  up  every  now  and  then  to  give  us  charming  cloud
effects,  we  found  the  walk  through  the  woods  to  Jor-pokree
and  Tonglu  more  delightful  than  ever.  The  rich  variety
of  dark  greenery  in  the  mossy  dells  and  ferny  grottoes
under  the  giant  moss-covered  trees,  luxuriant  in  the  dripping
dampness  of  this  season,  was  relieved  by  the  bright  and
velvety  begonias,  delicately  oink  and  blue  hydrangeas,
orange  gingers,  and  giant-stag  moss  which  clambered  over
the  bare  cliffs  of  gneiss.  We  stopped  often  by  the  wayside  to
pick  the  black  brambles,  and  higher  up  the  red  raspberries
and  barberries  that  overhung  our  path,  keeping  a  sharp
look-out  for  the  leeches.  And  every  here  and  there  the
wild  cucumbers,  trailing  gracefully  like  vines,  covered  the
shrubby  undergrowth  of  polygons  with  a  profusion  of  bright
yellow  blossoms.  No  less  than  two  species  of  these  cucum-
bers have  been  named  after  a  former  official  of  this  dis-
trict— it  is  something,  perhaps,  to  be  famous  even  from  a
gastronomic  point  of  view.

It  was  still  showery  next  day,  and  windy,  as  we
pushed  on  to  Sandook-phu  through  the  rhododendron  forest,
which  now  was  in  seed ;  and  we  passed  frequent  clumps  of
holly,  wild  rose  trees  bearing  brilliant  scarlet  hips,  bar-
berries blue  and  yellow,  rowan  trees  with  bunches  of  rusty


362


AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS


red  berries,  and  juicy  red  currants.  And  when  we  emerged
on  to  the  almost  treeless  grassy  slopes  of  Sandook-phu  we
found  them  blue  with  the  flowers  of  the  deadly  aconite.
As  we  ascended  this  mountain,  the  rain  stopped  and  gave
us  good  views  of  the  neighbouring  hills,  but  no  sight  of
the    snows.      In    the    afternoon    the    rain    set    in  again,  and


MY   TAXIDERMISTS   AT   WORK.


with  heavy  wind  continued  all  night  and  next  day,  confin-
ing us  to  the  rest-house,  where  we  found  plenty  to  do  in
drying  the  skins  of  birds  etc.  shot  on  the  way.  Our  coolies,
mostly  Tibetan  Bhotiyas,  amused  themselves  at  various
pastimes  and  games  of  strength,  including  pitching  at  a
mark  and  putting  the  stone.  At  this  last  game,  in  trying
to  out-throw  my  men,  I  strained  the  muscles  of  my  back
badly,  and  was  in  agony  for  some  hours.  We  were  amused


SPECTRE  OF  THE  BROCKEN  363

to  find  in  the  faces  of  these  beardless  sons  of  Tibet
and  Sikhim,  despite  their  Mongolian  cast  of  the  eye,
several  absurd  resemblances  to  Europeans.  One  whose
features  clearly  suggested  Lord  Ripon  we  used  to  call
"His  Lordship";  and  another,  a  young  Lama,  broad-
jawed  and  deep-chinned,  was  so  full  of  unvarying  good
humour  and  high  spirits,  that  we  involuntarily  christened
him  "Pat".

We  marched  to  Faloot  next  morning  (the  1 8th),  as  the
weather  was  clearing  and  giving  splendidly  crisp  views  of
the  snows.  The  following  morning  we  witnessed  at  Faloot
that  striking  aerial  phenomenon,  the  Spectre  of  the
Brocken.  Wreaths  of  thin  mist  were  rising  and  floating
around  us  as  we  ascended  the  summit  of  this  hill  to  see
the  sunrise,  and  a  denser  cloud  of  fog  hung  below  us.  On
the  surface  of  this  last  misty  veil  our  shadows  were  pro-
jected by  the  rising  sun  as  silhouettes,  surrounded  in  con-
centric widening  circles  by  first  a  dazzling  white  halo,
then  a  rim  of  brilliant  rainbow,  and  finally  a  secondary
paler  rainbow  band.  As  we  moved  this  apparition  moved,
and  it  stopped  when  we  stopped.  Altogether  it  seemed  so
supernatural  that  Kintoop  and  the  other  man,  who  was
carrying  my  camera,  threw  themselves  on  the  ground  and
muttered  a  prayer  and  some  spells,  and  Kintoop  declared
that  he  had  only  seen  it  once  in  his  life  before,  and  that
the  Lamas  say  that  it  is  an  omen  of  great  good  fortune.
I  took  two  photographs  of  it,  but  the  plates  got  accident-
ally   spoiled.     It    lasted    about  half  an  hour,  until  the  mist


364  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

lifted.  Our  clothes  were  bedewed  with  the  mist,  and  this
may  have  contributed  to  the  prismatic  decomposition  of
the  light.  I  have  seen  it  several  times  when  camping  at
the  foot  of  the  Himalayas,  and  in  every  case  the  sun  was
low,  and  there  was  a  rainy  mist,  both  between  myself  and
the  sun,  and  in  the  opposite  direction,  where  the  spectre
appeared.

Beyond  Faloot,  the  road  zigzagged  over  the  ridge  down
to  a  rocky  tarn  amongst  the  pines,  where  we  got  a  bold
foreground  to  the  snowy  range,  and  here  I  shot  a  wood-
cock and  a  solitary  snipe.  Thence  we  rose  over  the  bare
hill  of  Pang-ka  (12,130  ft),  so  called  from  the  Pang-ka
pasture  grass  which  covers  it.

This  hill  is  erroneously  called  on  the  maps  "  Singalelah"
after  Hooker,  who  has  also  applied  this  name  to  the  whole
of  this  ridge  that  runs  Trom  Kanchen'  to  Darjeeling  and
the  plains.  It  is  always  difficult  to  find  the  proper  names
of  these  uninhabited  and  little  frequented  places,  as  Hooker
himself  notes ;  and  it  is  especially  so  when  the  traveller
does  not  know  the  language,  and  the  men  who  supply  his
information  are  not  natives  of  the  neighbourhood.  The
name  intended  by  Hooker's  informant,  was,  I  fancy,  "  Sing-
le-/ho'\  or  "The  Slope  of  the  Alder-tree,"  which  is  still  the
Lepcha  name  for  the  low-lying  and  insignificant  part  of
the  ridge  at  our  next  staging-house,  which  the  Nepalese
call  "  Ckozv-banjan."  As  that,  however,  is  a  depression
rather  than  a  hill,  and  there  is  no  such  native  name
as     "  Singalelah,"     it     is     a     pity     that     the     latter     name


THE  MISCALLED  "SINGALELAH"  RIDGE  365

should  be  retained  for  this  important  southern  offshoot
of  Kanchen-junga,  which  forms  a  well-defined  water-
parting  :  as  the  streams  on  its  western  side  drain  into
the  Ganges,  and  those  of  its  eastern  watershed  flow  into
the  Brahmaputra.  A  better  name  would  be  the  "  Kanchen'-
Senchal "  spur.

On  the  cold  northern  slopes  of  this  grassy  hill  the
rhododendrons  creep  up  to  the  very  summit  in  a  dense
tangle,  through  which  the  road  descends  and  winds  through
some  pine  forest  strewn  with  columnar  cliffs  of  gneiss  inter-
spersed with  bands  of  white  quartz,  like  cyclopean  masonry.
We  sighted  a  leopard  and  a  wild  boar,  and  passed  the
tracks  of  the  Serotv  deer  {Nemorhcedus  bubalinus)  as  we
dipped  to  10,320  ft.,  at  the  gap  of  Chow-banjan  (the  "  Chia-
bhanjan"  of  the  maps),  or  "The  Pass  of  the  Edible  Mush-
rooms", as  this  name  means  in  the  Nepalese.  These  plants
are  especially  abundant  here  on  the  decayed  trees.  They
are  called  by  the  Tibetans,  Shaino,  or  "the  hats",  from  their
resemblance  to  Chinese  caps.  Our  men  gathered  them  in
basketfuls  and  ate  them  cooked,  with  relish,  but  we  found
them  tough  and  tasteless.

The  wooden  rest-house  here  was  in  a  ruinous  state,
although  it  was  relatively  new,  for  I  had  seen  it  being
built  only  five  or  six  years  before,  and  already  it  was
tumbling  to  pieces  in  this  rotting  climate.  By  spreading
the  doors  down  over  the  least  holey  part  of  the  rotten
floor,  riddled  with  ominous  gaping  holes,  where  previous
occupants  had  sunk  through,  we  managed  to  secure  a  corner


366  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

for  our  chairs,  though  we  had  to  shift  these  frequently  to
prevent  them  bodily  disappearing  with  us.

A  pass  to  Nepal  leads  down  from  here  to  the  west,  to
the  lower  valley  of  Nepal,  which  Hooker  threaded ;  and  1
was  surprised  to  hear  from  some  Nepalese  who  had  been
to  Darjeeling  on  a  prolonged  visit,  that  they  would  each
have  to  pay  a  considerable  poll-tax  on  their  return  to
Nepal,  and  have  to  undergo  a  ceremony  of  drinking  water
with  an  official  in  order  to  restore  their  caste,  which  they
had  lost  by  entering  foreign  territory :  a  sort  of  a  re-initiation
into  their  tribe.

Few  Europeans  have  ever  passed  beyond  this  point,
along  the  ridge ;  54  for  the  road  from  here  goes  down  at  right
angles  on  the  Sikhim  side  to  Pemiong-chi  monastery.  I  felt
some  anxiety  as  to  the  track  beyond  this  place,  not  only
because  Captain  W.  Sherwill,  who  in  1852  attempted  to
pass  this  way  to  the  snows,  had  to  turn  back  as  he  reported
that  his  further  progress  was  barred  by  a  deep  precipitous
valley  which  he  could  not  cross,  but  also  because  the
existing  maps  were  not  very  correct  for  this  locality  and
did  not  show  the  route  by  which  I  was  to  go.  I  had  got,
however,  for  my  guide  the  headman  of  the  highest  village
in  this  part  of  Sikhim,  Yampoong,  who  assured  me  that
though  the  track  was  very  rough  and  became  more  and
more  rugged  as  we  approached  the  higher  ranges,  still  it
was  practicable  all  the  way  up  to  the  snows ;  and  he  added
that  no  European  had  ever  been  over  the  greater  part  of
the  route  by  which  we  were  going.


THE  SOUTHERN  RIDGE  OF  KANCHEN'     367

I  pushed  on  from  here  on  the  morning  of  the  20th  for
the  snows,  in  very  light  marching  order,  taking  Kintoop
and  a  few  picked  coolies  carrying  light  loads  slung  up  in
blankets  and  waterproofs,  and  with  two  very  light  tents,  as
there  are  no  more  rest-houses  nor  villages.

A  horribly  uneven  sheep-track  led  up  the  ridge,  amongst
shrubby  rhododendrons  and  copses  of  wild  rose  bushes,  and
a  few  alders,  which  lower  down  are  found  in  numbers,  and
give  this  hill-side  its  name  of  "  Sing-le."  It  was  like  walking
over  spikes  the  greater  part  of  the  way,  for  miles;  as  the
rugged  rock  here  is  a  stratified  gneiss  that  has  been  thrown
up  at  a  sharp  angle  of  about  450,  with  a  dip  to  the  N.  E.,
and  many  of  these  knife-edges  had  been  further  sharpened
by  the  splintering  action  of  the  frost,  so  that  this  constant
stepping  from  knife-edges  to  spikes  made  our  progress  very
tedious,  and  cut  through  the  boots  of  many  of  our  men,
laming  them  badly.

When  we  had  gone  beyond  the  peak  called  Tim-dim-
boo  (11,780  ft.),  with  its  tarns,  and  begun  the  next  steep
ascent,  my  guide,  the  headman,  complained  of  giddiness
and  sat  down,  and  I  too  was  attacked.  There  was  no
headache,  nor  shortness  of  breath,  but  a  faint  feeling,  and
everything  seemed  to  swim  and  tremble  before  my  giddy
eyes,  and  closing  them  did  not  relieve  this  sensation.  It  could
not,  I  think,  have  been  altogether  due  to  the  rarefied  air,  for
the  actual  elevation  was  only  about  12,000  feet.  It  was  per-
haps in  some  measure  owing  too  ur  rapid  ascent,  combined
with  the  dazzling  glare  of  the  highly  micaceous  gneiss  rock,


368  VMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

that  glanced  brightly  in  the  blazing  sun.  For,  after  a  short  rest
and  a  drink  of  water,  (as  I  always  had  a  man  with  me
carrying  my  water-bottle)  and  donning  my  dark  goggles,  a
pair  of  which  I  gave  to  the  guide,  we  were  able  to  proceed.

Our  toilsome  progress  along  the  narrow  precipitous  ridge
grew  monotonous,  owing  to  the  repeated  stiff  ascents  and
descents,  and  halts  to  recover  breath ;  and  the  great  clouds
only  lifted  now  and  then  to  give  us  glimpses  away  down
into  the  heart  of  Nepal.

The  track  ran  along  the  Nepalese  side  of  the  frontier,
under  cliffs  formed  by  the  dip  to  the  N.  E.,  and  past  the
hill  of  "Lambi",  called  on  the  map  "Lampheram"  (12,830),
and,  at  the  fourth  mile,  along  some  cliffs  of  gneiss  with  caves
at  the  deserted  grazing-station  called  Naya,  whence  the
stream  called  the  "Tawa"  drains  down  into  the  Yang-wa,
misnamed  "Changthap"  on  the  map.  Across  the  Senden
Pass  we  encamped  at  a  rock  on  the  southern  base  of
Migo  Hill,  twelve  and  a  half  miles  from  Chowbanjan,  by
my  pedometer,  which  was  trustworthy.

On  the  way  we  met  a  few  of  that  nomad  tribe  of  Nepalese
herdsmen,  the  Gooroongs,  a  shifting  people,  here  to-day  and
away  to-morrow,  who  live  in  rude  bowers  of  leafy  branches.
I  bought  a  sheep  from  them  for  our  larder,  and  as  it
refused  to  come  along,  one  of  my  coolies,  although  already
heavily  laden  and  exhausted,  agreed  to  carry  it  in  addition  to
his  load ;  and  he  staggered  along  the  precipices  with  it  tied
atop  of  his  basket,  quite  happy  in  the  prospect  of  receiving
the  lion's  share  of  it,  which  had  been  promised  to  him.


THE  SOUTHERN  RIDGE  OF  KANCHEN'     369

We    had    been    marching   all    day   long,    though  making
slow    progress,   till  darkness  set  in,  and  with  it  rain,  when
we    reached   an   overhanging    rock  in  the  forest,  where  we
halted    for   the    night.     My   men   built   up  a  ledge  for  my
tent   as   there  was  no  level  ground,  for  the  hillside  sloped
down  precipitously  for  some  thousands  of  feet  at  an  angle
of  about  70° ;  and  they  themselves  nestled  under  the  rock.
And  though  wet  and  weary  by  the  harassing  march,  they
all   cheerfully    worked    away,   helping  one  another  to  pitch
the  tent,  to  bring  firewood  and  to  fetch  water,  which  last,
as   we    were    near   the   top   of  the  ridge,  was  about  half  a
mile   down  the  mountain.    I  too  had  some  discomforts,  for
my   baggy   tent   leaked   badly   as   it  could  not  be  pitched
properly,    and   to    keep    myself  dry  I  had  to  throw  water-
proofs over  me  as  I  reclined,  and  to  get  up  now  and  then
to  shake  my  wraps  to  turn  out  scorpions  and  other  insects
more     irritating    than    interesting.     And    more    than    once
during  the  night  I  heard   a  tree   blown  down  by  the  storm,
with  a  crash  like  a  pistol  report.

In  the  morning  it  was  freezing  hard,  and  there  was  a
glorious  sunrise.  Fresh  snow  had  powdered  the  Dui  pass,
about  four  miles  distant,  and  Kabru  almost  hid  Kanchen '
from  sight,  and  the  great  cone  of  Chumo-lhari  in  Tibet
appeared  marvellously  crisp  and  near;  and  lower  down,
I  saw  the  monastery  of  Tashiding  perched  aloft  upon  the
top  of  its  isolated  conical  hill  above  the  Rang-eet.  Ascend-
ing the  grassy  hill  of  Migo  (13,250  ft.),  the  view  was  much
grander,  though  Everest  was  now  completely  hidden  behind

24


37o  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

the  crater-like  Peak  No.  XIII.  The  track  led  down  past
the  cliffs  of  Nego,  a  good  halting-place  with  a  small  stream
and  splendid  view.  Thence  obliquely  down  the  valley,  over
giant  flags  of  fine-grained  gneiss  like  hardened  slates  or
flags  of  paving-stones,  lying  almost  flat  with  scarcely  any
dip,  we  descended  till  we  struck  the  foaming  Yang-wa ;  thence
the  path  ascended  a  fine  valley  of  pines,  where  I  had  a
shot  at  a  Monal  pheasant,  and  thence  up  over  a  bleak
moorland    covered   with    dwarf  juniper    bushes,    and    dwarf


"  peak  xm  "  from  migo  (13,250).
rhododendrons  like  bog-myrtle.  Still  further  up  a  bare
rocky  defile,  weirdly  dotted  with  the  tall  cones  of  the
giant  rhubarb,  we  ascended  to  the  pass  of  Ghara  (14,000  ft.),
amongst  the  crags  of  which,  my  guide  said  that  he  has
shot  the  rare  Himalayan  giant  wild  sheep,  the  Ovis  ammon
(in  Sikhimese  "  Sha-pik"),  and  the  snow  leopard,  as  well
as  musk-deer  (in  Sikhimese  "/,#-<?").

This  guide  is  a  fine,  dignified,  elderly  man,  a  good  specimen
of  the  hardy  Sikhimese  Bhotiya.  He  has  taken  off  his
boots    and   walks    barefooted   on  the  stones.     He  shoots  a


YAMPOONG  AND  ITS  YAK-HERDS  371

good  deal  here,  especially  in  the  winter  months,  when  the
cold  drives  the  animals  down  from  the  snowy  passes,  and
he  sends  the  skins  and  horns  to  Darjeeling  for  sale.  He
can  shoot  pretty  straight  too,  for,  yesterday,  with  my  gun
he  shot  two  partridges  and  a  flying  squirrel  on  the  way.
He  points  out  as  we  go,  certain  plants,  and  discourses  on
their  healing  virtues — one  of  them  applied  externally  and
internally  was  so  valuable  for  broken  limbs,  that  it  was
"  better  than  all  the  hundred  and  eight  great  remedies
put  together."  He  gave  me  a  large  piece  of  turquoise-
coloured  stone,  and  asked  me  if  I  thought  it  was  really
turquoise.  It  was  evidently  quartzite  covered  over  with  a
thin  coating  of  that  brilliant  verdigris-coloured  copper  ore,
"  malachite.  "  On  my  telling  him  this,  he  said  that  a  great
mass  of  this  green  rock  towered  up  a  hundred  feet  high
about  a  mile  below  his  village.

From  this  pass  we  continue  northwards  along  the  Sikhim
side  of  the  frontier,  over  open  bare  undulating  pasture
land,  often  without  any  track,  until  we  reach  "  The  Tiger
Pass"  {Tag-La),  about  14,350  ft.,  with  its  large  tarn,  when
we  curve  round  to  the  east,  immediately  under  the  snow-
covered  Dui  Pass,  over  which  we  now  should  go.  But  at
the  pressing  invitation  of  our  guide,  who  is  the  headman
of  this  place  and  who  says  that  no  European  has  ever  been
to  his  village  before,  I  descend  tc  his  Yak  farm  at  Yam-
poong,  although  it  is  about  a  mile  down  off  our  route,
and  I  am  glad  once  more  to  be  again  amongst  the  yaks
and  their  Tibetan  herdsmen.


372  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

Yampoong  is  a  summer  grazing-station  for  yaks,  and  lies
on  the  open  undulating  grassy  slopes  above  the  limit  of
trees,  and  considerably  below  the  line  of  perpetual  snow.
It  affords  excellent  pasturage  and  is  well  watered  by  peren-
nial streams.  It  contains  several  marshy  flats,  a  sort  of  silted
up  "corries."  When  the  winter  sets  in  the  yaks  are
driven  to  warmer  quarters  farther  down  this  valley  of  the
Ringbi.  The  village  contains  only  three  houses,  the  largest
of  which  is  the  headman's.  It  is  a  two-storeyed  stone
building  with  a  shingle  roof,  and  the  upper  storey  is
occupied  by  our  host  and  his  family.  Ascending  the  sub-
stantial winding  stair,  I  found  a  huge  log  fire  blazing  on
the  stone  hearth  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  and  around  it
were  the  members  of  his  family.  These  made  way  for  my
cook,  a  brother  of  Achoom,  who  quickly  took  up  his
position  there,  and  commenced  to  boil  some  water  for  tea,
preparatory  to  his  culinary  operations  for  a  more  substan-
tial meal;  and  the  best  corner  of  the  room  was  cleared
for  me.  I  had  to  sit  on  the  floor  of  rough-hewn  logs,  as
there  was  no  chair  or  stool ;  but  what  I  missed  most  was
a  table,  it  being  by  no  means  easy  for  a  European  to  eat
off  the  floor,  sitting  level  with  one's  food ;  and  the  smoke
of  the  fire  caused  my  eyes  to  smart  badly,  as  there  was
neither  chimney  nor  window.

I  gave  the  headman  some  of  my  infused  tea,  sweetened
with  sugar  and  tinned  milk,  (as  the  yaks  were  not  yet
milked)  in  an  empty  soup  tin ;  and  after  tasting  it,  he  hand-
ed   it    round    the    family    for   each    member    down    to    the


TIBETANS  OF  EASTERN  NEPAL


.373


lowest    menial    to   take   a   sip,  for  these  people  share  their
little  comforts  freely  with  each  other.    This  sweetened  tea,


SHAR-PA   BHOTIYAS.


which  was  certainly  different  from  their  own  salted  and  but-
tered brick  tea,  was  unanimously  pronounced  to  be  deli-
cious;   but  a  few  spoonfuls  of  my  scanty  store  of  whiskey


374  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

which  I  gave  them,  was  declared  to  be  much  more  so.  They
were  eating  cakes  made  of  buckwheat,  harsh  and  some-
what acid  and  bitter  to  the  taste.  I  gave  them  a  few  trifling
presents.

The  Yak-herds  are  Nepalese  Tibetans,  that  is  Tibetans
who  have  settled  for  some  generations  in  Eastern  Nepal,
in  the  provinces  called  Shar-Kambu  and  Waloong,  and
they  are  known  as  "Shar-pa  Bhotiyas."  They  are  big,  deep-
voiced  men  like  the  Tibetans  in  general,  and  dress  like
them.  Their  women  usually  dress  a  little  in  the  Nepalese
style.  They  often  wear  their  hair  in  a  loose  knot,  and  not
done  up  into  a  pigtail ;  and  their  dress  is  a  coarse  woollen
cloth,  a  kind  of  tartan,  coloured  blue,  red,  green  and  yellow.

Whilst  dinner  was  getting  ready,  and  as  the  weather
was  clear,  I  ascended  the  hill  some  distance  to  get  a  peep
at  the  eastern  slopes  of  the  Kanchen'  range,  which  have
been  visited  to  some  extent  by  several  travellers — whereas
I  was  now  bound  for  the  unexplored  western  slopes  of
these  snows.  The  mighty  Kanchen',  under  twenty  miles
distant,  was  almost  hidden  from  view  by  the  bold  southern
end  of  Kabru,  which  rose  up  only  about  thirteen  miles
off,  and  Pandim  about  twelve.

These  two  last  mountains  as  well  as  the  eastern  glaciers
of  Kanchen  '  can  be  reached  from  here  in  three  to  four
days,  via  Jongri  and  the  Guicha  pass.  Several  Europeans
have  visited  the  former  since  Major  James  Sherwill's  journey
there  in  1861,  and  they,  like  him,  took  the  most  direct
road  to  Jongri,  namely,  up  the  hot  valley  of  the  Great  Rang-


ACCESSIBILITY  OF  GLACIERS  375

eet  river  to  its  source  amongst  the  glaciers;  and  this  is
now  certainly  much  the  best  and  quickest  route,  since  a
good  riding-road  has  just  been  made  to  Pemiong-chi  monas-
tery, on  this  route,  which  enables  the  glaciers  to  be
reached  comfortably  in  five  to  seven  days  from  Darjeeling.
And  as  these  glaciers  lie  amidst  some  of  the  grandest
scenery  in  the  whole  of  the  Himalayas,  I  have  no  doubt
that  many  visitors  to  Darjeeling  will  gladly  visit  them
when  they  realize  how  accessible  they  now  are.

Jongri  (13,140  ft.),  which  is  a  small  summer  yak-station
of  two  houses,  like  this  place  Yampoong,  from  which  it
is  distant  about  eight  miles  N.  E.,  was  visited  by  Ur.
Hooker,  who  so  admirably  describes  both  it  and  the  journey
thither  from  Pemiong-chi  monastery.  He  likens  the  view  of
Kanchen '  from  thereabouts  to  the  view  of  Mt.  Blanc  from
Chamonix,  but  he  was  prevented  ascending  beyond  Jongri
by  the  snow  in  the  depth  of  winter.  Major  James  Sherwill
(not  W.  S.  who  attempted  the  other  route)  was  the  first
traveller  to  visit  and  describe  the  glaciers  of  this  valley.  '"
He  visited  them  in  November,  and  says  that  the  path  led
through  the  grandest  scenery  up  the  river  (Praig)  to  the
glaciers  of  Kabru  at  the  grazing-station  of  Aluktang,  which
the  Lamas  visit  in  the  rains  to  worship  Mt.  Kanchen ' :
"The  grandeur  of  the  surrounding  snow-clad  mountains  and
the  wildness  of  the  scenery  of  the  valley  of  the  Ratong
(Praig)  surpasses  anything  of  the  kind  I  have  elsewhere
witnessed  in  the  Himalayas.  On  looking  directly  north  up
the  valley,  Kanchen-junga  rose  majestically  above  everything


376


AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS


else.     Between    us    and    it,    thrown    completely    across   the
valley    and    only  two  miles  distant,  was  seen  a  stupendous


moraine,  a  thou-
sand    feet    high,
which  forms   the
conspicuous    ob-
ject   seen     from
Darjeeling.      Im-
mediately   on   our  right,    rose  a  long
range  of  perpetually  snow-clad  moun-
tains, running  parallel  with  the  valley,
culminating  in  the  glacier-flaked  peaks
of  Kabui  Kang  (19,450  ft.),  and  to  the
north  Ting-ching-Kang,  to  the  west  of
which    rose    the    formidable    peak  of
Pandim,    22,015    ft.  in  height,  at  the
base  of  which  rests  the  glacier  above  alluded  to,  and  many
other  masses  of  debris   washed    down  from  above,  in  wild
confusion.  To  our  rear,  winding  its  course  down  the  broad


PANDIM
from  Tong-Shyong-Tam.


PANDIM  AND  GUICHA  GLACIERS  377

valley,    the    hills    on    either    side    covered    with    dense    fir
forests,  was  the  noisy  foaming  Ratong."

Pandim  proved  too  formidable  for  Mr.  Graham  and  his
two  trained  Swiss  guides.  He  says  that  they  purposed  "  to
attack  it  from  the  north,  but,  on  reconnoitring,  we  found
it  quite  impracticable.  I  do  not  know  of  any  more  formi-
dable peak.  On  the  west  side  it  drops  sheer,  while  the
other  three  are  guarded  by  the  most  extraordinary  over-
hanging glaciers,  which  quite  forbid  any  attempt ....  the
same  applies  to  Narsing  ('The  Uplifted  Nose')."  The  name
"Pandim"  or  "  Panden  "  means  in  Lepcha,  "The  King's
Minister",  as  it  is  considered  to  be  an  attendant  on  the
King  of  mountains,  Kanchen'.

To  resume  the  ascent  to  the  Guicha  pass,  Major  Sherwill

goes    on  to  say :     "  Having  ascended  the  immense  mass  of

debris    forming    the    moraine,    probably    at    an   elevation  of

15,000  ft.,  we  found  ourselves,  to  our  great  surprise,  standing

on   the   top    of  a    stupendous   glacier.     This  huge  mass  of

ice  and  debris  descending  from  the  Pandim  mountain  extends

nearly    across   the    valley,    where   it   is  met  by,  and  abuts

upon,    another  glacier  equally  vast  in    its  dimensions,  and

formed   at   the   base    of  (Kabru   and)   the    other  snow-clad

mountains    on    the    western    side   of   the    valley,    the    two

together    forming  a  complete  barrier  across  the  valley  and

choking   it   up   to    the  height  of  a  thousand  feet  or  more.

The    moraine    forming   the    retaining    wall    to  this  mass  of

moving  ice  and  debris  is  composed  of  rounded  and  angular

blocks   of  highly   contorted    gneiss,  intermixed  with  pieces


378  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

of    syenite,    micaceous    schist,    coarse    granite    quartz    with


GLACIER   AT   THE   OUICHA   PASS.


tourmaline  crystals,  white  and  pink  quartz  often  containing
veins  of  crystallized  felspar,  and  coarse  gravel  and  debris.


KABRU  AND  PANDIM  GLACIERS  379

Proceeding  onwards,  the  glacier  presented  a  perfect
wilderness  of  blocks  of  ice  invariably  covered  with  the
stones  and  debris  brought  down  from  the  mountain  above
by  avalanches,  with  deep  crevasses  through  which  the
sound  of  running  water  was  heard.  A  little  way  up  the
valley,  beyond  where  the  glaciers  meet,  we  observed  a
small  lake.  Although  the  surrounding  hills  were  literally
covered  with  glaciers  of  all  sizes,  and  the  valleys  overhung
with  masses  of  ice  and  snow,  we  observed  only  one
avalanche,  but  frequent  loud  cracking  of  the  ice  during
the  hottest  part  of  the  day  ....  Mounting  over  the  two
glaciers  and  proceeding  by  the  lake  500  yards  long  by
100  broad,  we  ascended  another  immense  moraine,  which
confined  a  third  glacier  on  the  west  side  of  the  valley
descending  from  Kochirang-Kang,  on  the  south-eastern
shoulder  of  Kabru  (24,015  ft.).  This  one  appeared  to  begin
nearly  on  a  level  with  the  top  of  the  mountain  range,  at
probably  20,000  feet,  then  descending  by  the  mountain
side,  came  sweeping  along  the  valley  in  a  curve  about  a
mile  in  length,  the  more  elevated  portion  being  formed
of  masses  of  ice  covered  with  snow,  rising  in  steps  one
above  the  other,  and  the  lower  portion  presenting  a  sea
of  broken  masses  of  ice  covered  with  snow  and  debris.
A  more  stupendous  mass  of  ice  and  snow  it  is  scarcely
possible  to  conceive.  Descending  from  the  glacier,  we
proceeded  for  a  mile,  occasionally  along  the  dry  smooth  bed
of  the  Ratong,  (past  a  silted-up  lake,  Chemtang.  15,250  ft.,)
and    over    frozen    snow,    when    we    arrived    at    the    fourth


380  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

and  last  great  glacier,  equal  in  extent  to  the  others."  On
reaching  the  northern  extremity  of  this  glacier,  he  arrived
at  the  Gukha,  or  "The  Locked  pass" — so  called,  as  the
legend  has  it,  because  it  was  locked  against  man  by  the
spells  of  a  saintly  Lama.

The  view  from  this  Guicha  pass  is  thus  described  by
Major  Sherwill.  "  We  found  ourselves  standing  on  the
watershed  between  Kanchen '  and  the  Pandim,  Kabroo,
and  Junnoo  ranges  to  the  south  and  west.  We  were  at  an
elevation  of  about  18,500  ft.  (?  16,430),  and  had  we  pro-
ceeded farther,  we  should  have  had  to  descend  into  what
appeared  to  us  a  perpetually  snow-covered  valley.  Kanchen '
stood  apart,  unconnected  with  any  of  the  high  mountain
ranges  to  the  south.  The  nearest  spot  not  covered  with
snow  in  its  southernmost  spur  was  probably  not  more  than
a  mile  and  a  half  or  two  miles  distant,  the  stratification
of  which  was  clearly  visible.  Its  formation  is  probably  of
gneiss,  not  of  a  contorted  type,  and  which  has  a  dip  of
200  to  25°  to  the  east.  Others  may  determine  the  interest-
ing point  of  its  geological  structure,  but  this  important
fact  was  elicited — namely,  that  Kanchen '  is  detached  from
the  other  mountains  forming  the  Kanchen '  group,  and  that
none  of  its  waters  find  their  way  into  the  Great  Rang-eet,"
as  Hooker  supposed.

The  south-eastern  glacier  of  Kanchen'  to  the  north  of
this  pass  was  visited  by  Mr.  W.  Graham  on  March  31st,
1883.  He  writes:  —  "We  crossed  the  pass,  rather  over
16,000  feet,  and  descended  first  to  a  level  bit  of  grass  land


KANCHEN-JUNGA :   SOUTH-EAST  FACE
from  Tong-Shyong  (17,000  feet).


KANCHEN-JUNGA,  STRUCTURE,  AND  GLACIERS  383

containing  five  small  tarns,  and  then  a  further  descent  to
the  great  glacier,  which  flows  almost  due  east  from  Kanchen'.
Right  above  us  rose  the  towering  crags  of  Siniolchum
(PSimvovonchum),  behind  us  lay  Kabru  and  Pandim,  so
that  we  were  absolutely  surrounded  by  the  snowy  giants."


EASTERN   GLACIER   OF   KANCHEN-JUNGA
from  Tong-Shyong  (17,000  feet).

The  stupendous  glittering  spire  of  the  south-eastern  face
of  Kanchen'  as  seen  to  the  north  of  this  pass,  is  beautifully
shown  on  page  381  from  a  photograph  by  Mr.  White,  who
also  took  the  other  fine  photographs  here  reproduced  to
illustrate  this  region.  Its  south-eastern  glacier  is  also  seen.
These  photographs  show  that  the  great  precipice  below
this   southern  pinnacle  of  Kanchen'  (27,820  ft.)  is  likely  to


384  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

prove  an  insuperable  obstacle  to  any  attempted  ascent  from
the  south ;  but  the  north  eastern  slopes  by  way  of  the
Zemu  glacier  or  across  the  "Gap,  19,300  feet",  look  more
hopeful ;  and  in  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Freshfield  these  photo-
graphs show  that  there  is  here  possibly  a  route  not  steeper
than  that  up  Mont  Blanc  from  Chamonix.  Here,  too,
there  is  obviously  a  "  Grand  Plateau "  at  the  base  of
the  final  crest.

Mr.  Graham,  describing  Kanchen '  from  a  climber's  point
of  view,  says,  "  I  do  not  call  it  impossible,  but  improbable
in  the  highest  degree.  The  peak  runs  east  and  west  like
a  wall,  the  two  aretes  being  the  most  frightful  imaginable.
From  the  south  nothing  but  a  fly  could  make  the  ascent,
as  it  is  overhung  in  two  or  three  places.  From  the  north
it  is  one  continuous  slope  of  rock  and  ice  at  a  mean  angle
of  50  and  more  than   15,000  ft.  of  rise".

The  north-eastern  glacier  of  Kanchen '  which  descends
the  Zemu  valley  already  referred  to,  is  about  sixteen  miles
long,  which  is  the  longest  in  Sikhim.

The  geological  position  of  Kanchen '  is  obviously  in  the
main  axis  of  the  Himalayas,  although  that  mountain  lies
considerably  to  the  south  of  the  line  of  water-parting  between
the  Tibetan  plateau  and  India,  and  on  a  spur  which  runs
at  right  angles  to  this  line,  so  that  even  the  drainage  of
its  northern  slopes  flows  directly  down  into  the  Indian
plains.  Still  Kanchen',  nevertheless,  may  be  regarded  as
lying  upon,  and  forming  part  of,  the  true  main  axis  or
back-bone  of  the  Himalayas,  and  its  position  to   the  south


KANCHEN-JUNGA  AND  AXIS  OF  HIMALAYAS      385

of  the  present  water-parting  may  be  accounted  for  by
its  northern  drainage  finding  its  way  through  a  gap  in
the  main  axis,  left  by  interruptions  of  the  force  which
elevated  the  Himalayas ;  while  the  basin  to  the  north  has
become  further  deepened  by  erosion  of  the  Tibetan  plateau.
Thus  several  of  the  great  Tibetan  rivers,  such  as  the
Gandak,  Kosi  and  Arun,  appear  to  pierce  the  main  chain
of  the  Himalayas  [vide  my  map  on  p.  349),  and  even  the
Tsang-po  itself  and  the  Indus  turn  round  the  ends  of  the
range  to  escape  into  the  Indian  Ocean.

In  the  upheaval  of  the  Himalayas  there  appear  to  be
three  main  lines  of  elevation  running  more  or  less  parallel.
The  middle  of  these  lines  or  axes,  the  so-called  "  Central
Himalayas",  contains  the  highest  peaks,  and  runs  through
Kanchen '  by  Jannu  to  Everest  etc.  The  line  of  the  "  Northern
Himalayas"  bounds  the  southern  side  of  the  Tsang-po  and
Upper  Indus  valleys — immediately  north  of  which  the  ranges
have  been  named  the  "  7>«;z^- Himalayas  "  (see  p.  349).  The
line  running  through  Tonglu,  including  Senchal  and  Darjee-
ling,  Tendong,  Lingtu  etc.,  forms  the  "  Southern  or  Outer
Himalayas  ".  And  the  small  outlying  detached  range  of  sand-
stone hills,  the  "  Siwaliks",  running  from  Dehra  Doon  by
Someshwar  to  Sookna,  have  been  called  the  "  Sz^-Himala-
yas".  Such  nomenclature  should  be  remembered  in  referring
to  the  different  portions  of  these  enormous  ranges  of  moun-
tains which  collectively  go  by  the  name  of  the  Himalayas,  if
we  would  avoid  unnecessary  confusion  or  ambiguity.

The    rocky    structure    or    formation   of  the  back-bone  of

25


386  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

the  Himalayas,  as  seen  in  Kanchen ',  seems  to  consist
mainly  of  white  granitic  rock  and  quartz  in  the  loftier
crests,  and  of  crystalline  schists  in  the  lower,  through  which
latter  numerous  veins  and  sheets  of  molten  granite  and
gneiss  have  been  extruded.  Some  of  the  peaks,  such  as
"No.  XIII  and  D1",  are  suggestively  like  extinct  craters,  and
the  numerous  hot  springs  in  the  higher  ranges  attest  the
present  existence  of  latent  volcanic  activity  in  these  regions.
The  highest  peak  of  Kanchen-junga  and  the  true  summit,
(28,150  ft.)  is  called  by  the  Tibetans  "The  Repository  of
Gold."  This  name,  it  seems  to  me,  has  arisen  from  the  inter-
pretation of  the  popular  name  of  this  mountain  in  too
literal  and  mythological  a  manner.  The  name  Kanchen-
junga  is  Tibetan  and  means,  literally,  "The  Five  Repositories
of  the  Great  Glaciers,"  and  it  is  physically  descriptive  of
its  five  peaks.  When,  however,  the  patron  saint  of  Sikhim
wrote  the  manual  of  worship  for  this  mountain-god  he  con-
verted these  five  "repositories"  into  real  storehouses  of  the
god's  treasure,  and  the  god  himself  was  represented  as  a  form
of  the  Buddhist  God-of- Wealth,  as  is  figured  at  page  217.  In
this  way  the  loftiest  crest,  which  was  most  conspicuously  gilded
by  the  rising  and  setting  sun,  was  made  the  treasury  of  gold  ;
the  southern  peak  which  remained  in  cold  grey  shade  till  it
whitened  in  the  rising  sunlight  was  made  the  treasury  of  silver,
and  the  remaining  peaks  were  made  respectively  the  treas-
uries of  gems,  grain  and  holy  books — the  chief  objects  worth
treasuring,  in  the  opinion  of  the  religious  Tibetans.

The   worship  of  this  mountain-god.  which  dates  back  to


WORSHIP  OF  MT.  KANCHEN-JUNGA


387


long  before  the  Buddhist  period,  is  celebrated  with  great
pomp  every  year  throughout  Sikhim.  It  is  of  the  devil-
dancing  or  Shamanist  kind.  The  Lamas  dress  themselves
in  the  costumes  of  the  pre-Ruddhist  Tibetan  religion,  the
so  called  "Bon",  and  carry  out  the  ritual  of  the  devil-
dancers,    as    seen    in   the  accompanying  photograph,  where


WORSHIP   OF   THE   GOD    OF   KANCHEN-JUNGA.

our  friend,  the  young  Lama  of  Phodang  who  so  hospitably
entertained  us,  is  seated  in  state  to  receive  the  offerings
from  the  people,  of  money,  jewellery  etc.,  to  defray  the
cost  of  these  ceremonies.

The    Lepcha    name    of  this    mountain    is   Kong-lo-chu,  or
"The  Highest  Screen  or  Curtain  of  the  Snows."


388  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

It  was  from  Jongri,  too,  that  Mr.  W.  Graham  made  his
famous  ascent  of  the  peak  which  he  believed  to  be  Kabru,
and  also  of  the  Kang-La  pass.  Leaving  Darjeeling  on  the  23rd
March,  1883,  with  a  Swiss  guide,  he  reached  Jongri  on  the
29th,  and  calculated  that  in  that  distance  of  forty-two
miles,  as  the  crow  flies,  the  road  ascended  23,000  ft.  and
descended  some  16,000  feet  in  vertical  height  to  reach
Jongri  (13,140  ft).

In  the  second  visit  in  September  he  climbed  Jubonu
(21,400  ft.).  Of  this  he  writes: — "Early  on  the  30th
September,  1883,  we  started  for  Jubonu,  which  lies  imme-
diately east  of  our  camp.  At  2  p.m.  we  had  reached  a
suitable  place,  well  above  snow-line,  and  camped  there.
Height  by  aneroid  was  18,300,  and  though  absolute  reliance
cannot  be  placed  on  such  uncorrected  observations,  I  think
that  at  least  18,000  may  be  taken  as  correct.  We  got
off  at  earliest  dawn  the  next  day,  i.e.  at  4-30,  and  settled
down  to  our  work  at  once,  leaving  the  coolies  behind.
The  snow  was  in  good  order,  and  Kauffmann  led  the  way
at  a  great  pace.  He  is,  I  believe,  generally  admitted  to
be  the  fastest  step-cutter  living,  and  this  day  and  afterwards
he  fairly  surpassed  himself.  The  glacier  was  crowned  with
steep  rocks  which  formed  the  edge  of  a  noble  amphitheatre
formed  by  Jubonu  and  Nursing.  We  were  now  on  the
peak  itself,  and  proceeded  to  cut  up  a  steep  snow  couloir.
This  gradually  got  steeper,  till  we  were  forced  to  take  to
the  rocks.  With  the  exception  of  one  place,  which  greatly
resembled   the    celebrated   Chimney  on  the  Matterhorn,  we


ASCENT  OF  JUBONU  AND  KABRU  389

got  along  very  well  till  we  reached  the  final  crags,  which
rose  some  300  feet  above  us.  We  now  turned  northwards
along  the  slopes  of  the  glacier  which  swept  down  from
the  rocks.  Fortunately  there  was  an  incipient  bergscJirund,
and  we  passed  along  in  this  to  the  north  side,  whence  a
short  but  exceedingly  steep  slope  of  neve  led  us  to  the
summit,  which  we  reached  at  II  a.m.,  without  a  halt.  This
was  incomparably  the  hardest  ascent  we  had  in  the  Hima-
laya, owing  to  the  great  steepness  of  the  glacier  work."

His  celebrated  ascent  of  the  peak,  which  he  believed  to
be  Kabru,  24,015  feet — the  ascent  of  which,  if  proved,
would  be  the  highest  point  hitherto  reached  by  any  mount-
aineer— has  been  disbelieved  by  the  Indian  surveyors.  His
ascent  is  thus  described  by  himself:  "On  the  third  of
October  we  examined  carefully  the  east  of  Kabru,  and
made  all  preparations  for  an  assault.  On  the  6th  we  finally
started,  and  made  our  way  up  the  eastern  glacier  of  Kabru.
On  its  banks  we  met  with  immense  quantities  of  Edelweiss,
the  climber's  flower,  and  success  was  prophesied  accordingly.
Up  the  highest  moraine  I  have  seen,  fully  800  ft.,  brought
us  right  under  the  east  cliff  of  Kabru.  There  was  only
one  route  to  the  higher  slopes,  and  that  we  could  not  find
in  the  mist.  Heavy  snow  fell,  and  we  camped  where  we
were.  Next  day  we  found  our  opening,  and  worked  up
it.  We  three  went  on  ahead,  and  pushed  straight  up  the
face  of  the  ridge,  intending,  if  possible,  to  camp  on  the
summit.  This  we  reached  at  midday,  but  found  that  we
were  cut  off  from  the  true  peak  by  a  chasm  in  the  arete,


39o  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

so  that  we  were  on  a  detached  buttress.  We  descended,
met  the  coolies  ascending,  and  turned  north  along  the
steep  snow  slope,  finding  at  last  a  small  ledge  just  big
enough  to  accommodate  the  Whymper  tent.

"  This  was,  I  think,  the  highest  camp  we  had,  being  cer-
tainly 18,500  ft.  The  night,  however,  was  mild,  and  the
coolies,  who  were  very  tired,  preferred  to  stay  up,  instead
of  descending  as  before.  We  were  off  next  morning  at
4-30,  and  found  at  once  all  our  work  cut  out  for  us.  The
very  first  thing  was  the  worst.  A  long  couloir  like  a  half-
funnel,  crowded  with  rocks,  had  to  be  passed.  The  snow
was  lying  loose,  just  ready  to  slide,  and  the  greatest
possible  care  had  to  be  taken  to  avoid  an  avalanche.  Then
a  steep  ice  slope  led  us  to  a  snow  incline,  and  so  to  the
foot  of  the  true  peak.  Here  we  had  nearly  1,000  ft.  of
most  delightful  rockwork,  forming  a  perfect  staircase.  At
ten  we  were  at  the  top  of  this,  and  not  more  than  1 ,000  ft.
above  was  the  eastern  summit.  A  short  snack,  and  then
came  the  tug  of  war.  All  this  last  slope  is  pure  ice,  at  an
angle  of  45  deg.  to  nearly  60  deg.  Owing  to  the  heavy
snow  and  the  subsequent  frost,  it  was  coated  three  or  four
inches  deep  with  frozen  snow,  and  up  this  coating  we  cut.
I  am  perfectly  aware  that  it  was  a  most  hazardous  proceed-
ing, and  in  cold  blood  I  should  not  try  it  again,  but  only  in
this  state  would  the  ascent  have  been  possible  in  the  time.
KaufTman  led  all  the  way,  and  at  12-15  we  reached  the
lower  summit  of  Kabru,  at  least  23,700  ft.  above  sea-level.

"The    glories    of   the    view    were    beyond    all    compare.


MR.  GRAHAMS  ASCENT  OF  "KABRU"  39*

North-west,  less  than  seventy  miles,  lay  Mount  Everest,  and
I    pointed   it    out   to    Boss,    who  had  never  seen  it,  as  the
highest   mountain   in   the    world.     '  That    it  cannot  be,'  he
replied;    'those   are    higher' — pointing  to  two  peaks  which
towered  far  above  the  second  and  more  distant  range,  and
showed  over  the  northern  slope  of  Everest.  I  was  astonished,
but  we  were  all  agreed  that  in  our  judgment,  the  unknown
peaks,    one   rock    and    one    snow,   were  loftier.     Of  course,
such    an    idea  rests    purely   on  eyesight;  but  looking  from
such    a   height,    objects    appear    in    their    true    proportions,
and    we    could    distinguish    perfectly    between  the  peaks  of
known  measurements,  however  slight  the  differences.   How-
ever, we  had  a  short  view,  for  the  actual  summit  was  con-
nected with  ours  by  a  short  arete,  and  rose  about  300  ft.,
of  the  steepest  ice   I  have  seen.    We   went  at  it,  and  after
an  hour  and  a  half  we  reached  our  goal.  The  summit  was
cleft  by  three  gashes,  and  into  one  of  these  we  got.     The
absolute    summit    was    little    more  than  a  pillar  of  ice,  and
rose  some  thirty  of  forty  feet  above  us  still,  but,  independ-
ently   of  the    extreme    difficulty    and  danger  of  attempting
it,  we  had  no  time.  A  bottle  was  left  at  our  highest  point,
and  we  descended.  The  descent  was  worse  than  the  ascent,
and   we    had    to    proceed    backwards,    as    the    snow    might
give  way  at  any  moment.  At  last  we  reached  the  rocks  and
there    fixed    a    huge    Bhotiya   flag,    and    finally  turned  into
camp  at  ten.  The  ascent  was  dangerous  rather  than  difficult,
but  without  the  new  snow  the  difficulties  would  have  been
enormously  increased.  '


392  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

Commenting  on  this  ascent,  Sir  Martin  Conway  writes
to  me: — "The  question  of  Mr.  Graham's  ascent  of  a  big
mountain  in  Sikhim  is  a  very  difficult  one.  His  recorded
sensations,  and  those  of  his  companion,  are  not  compatible
with  his  having  reached  an  altitude  exceeding  20,000  ft.
It  was  the  unanimous  opinion  of  the  Indian  officers  and
members  of  the  Survey  with  whom  he  conversed  shortly
after  his  ascent,  that  his  observations  were  not  consistent
with  an  ascent  of  Kabru.  The  natives  who  saw  him  on
the  mountain  said  that  it  was  not  Kabru  he  climbed,  but
another  and  much  lower  peak.  I  believe  he  stated  that  his
aneroid  read  about  24,000  feet  on  the  top.  Knowing  as
we  now  do,  and  as  at  that  time  was  not  known,  how
aneroids  behave  at  high  altitudes,  this  is  a  further  proof
that  his  peak  must  have  been  many  thousand  feet  less
than  24,000  feet  in  height.  All  this  implies  no  attack
upon  Mr.  Graham's  veracity.  He  carried  no  instruments,
and  made  no  observations  for  position.  He  merely
believed  that  the  peak  climbed  was  Kabru.  Nothing  is
easier  than  to  make  a  mistake  in  such  a  case.  It  is  only
when  an  observer's  position  is  determined  and  confirmed
by  a  series  of  observations,  and  his  altitude  measured
either  by  trigonometrical  measurement  or  observations  with
a  mercurial  barometer,  that  it  is  possible  to  be  sure
where  he  has  been.  Mr.  Graham  doubtless  climbed  a
difficult  and  high  peak,  but  it  cannot,  in  my  opinion,
have  been  Kabru  or  anything  like  the  altitude  of  Kabru.
Your   suggestion  that  it  may  have  been  Kang-tsen  (a  ridge


EXPERT  OPINION  ON  GRAHAM'S  ASCENT         393

of  Kabru,  2,000  ft.  less  in  height)  is  well  worthy  of  con-
sideration."

Colonel  Tanner,  who  has  specially  studied  the  forms  of
the  higher  peaks  of  the  Himalayas,  says,  "  Your  Kang-tsen
appears  to  have  the  sharp  knife-edge  crest  demanded  by
Graham's  account,  and  I  think  it  very  probable  in  the  light
thrown  on  the  neighbouring  topography  by  your  photograph,
that  Kang-tsen  is  what  he  ascended.  He  would  never  have
omitted  to  describe  the  wonderful  table-land  which  occupies
the  summit  of  Kabru,  had  he  ascended  that  position  after  the
fearful  climb  necessary  for  surmounting  its  awful  sides."  This
table-land  on  the  top  of  Kabru  is  seen  in  Colonel  Tan-
ner's drawing  at  p.  395  ;  and,  curiously,  this  characteristic
feature  is,  I  find,  denoted  in  the  Lepcha  name  for  "  Kabru  ",
which  means  "The  Straight  Snow-level"  (Nan-tam-chii).

This  point  is  further  referred  to  in  connection  with  my
visit   to   Kang-la  Pass   and   Kang-tsen,  in  the  next  chapter.


CHAPTER    XI


TO   KANG  PASS   FOR  THE   WESTERN   GLACIERS   OF   KANCHEN-

JUNGA  AND   FOR  JANNU — NEPALESE  JEALOUS

EXCLUS1VENESS


Whilst  something  is  thus  known  of  the  general  features
of  the  eastern  peaks  and  glaciers  of  the  Kanchen-junga
group,  almost  nothing  practically  is  known  of  the  western,
as  these  lie  within  the  jealously  guarded  territory  of  Nepal,
which  has  not  been  visited  by  Europeans.  For  Hooker,
the  only  European  who  has  travelled  in  Eastern  Nepal,
passed  somewhat  too  low  down  to  see  them,  and  Mr.
Graham,  whose  claims  to  have  scaled  Kabru  are  disput-
ed, has  recorded  only  the  brief  and  general  note  above
quoted.

In  my  attempt  to  see  a  little  of  this  western  side  of
the  peaks, — the  distant  telescopic  profile  of  which,  by  Col-
onel Tanner,  is  given  on  page  395 — I  experienced  much
difficulty    in    getting    a    guide    to    show    me    over    the  pass


THE  PASS  OF  THE  DEVIL


395


to  the  Nepalese  side  of  the  range,  as  the  natives  of
these  parts  dread  the  pains  and  penalties  that  the  Nepalese
rulers  inflict  on  all  who  impart  information,  or  assist  Euro-
peans in  gaining  information,  concerning  the  country  or  the
people.  Ultimately,  however,  a  Tibetan  trader  from  Waloong
(the  Walloon-choon  of  Hooker)  in  Nepal,  who  chanced  to
be  at  Yampoong,  and  who  knew  the  tracks  well,  was
prevailed   on  by  Kintoop,  for  a  small  present,  to  guide  us


to,      i  £    )   /  */w,  *-W/Wh-$'>^


KANCHEN-JUNGA   FROM   THE   WEST.
A.     Highest  crest  of  Kanchen'.     B,  B1.     Kabrn.

over,  and  keep  above  the  inhabited  part  of  the  Nepalese
valleys.

On  the  22nd  September,  1896,  I  set  out  from  Yampoong
in  company  with  this  guide  —who  was  rugged  and  hard,
like  his  own  rugged  hills, — and  the  headman  of  that  village,
seven  coolies  under  Kintoop,  and  three  yaks,  of  which  two
were  for  the  baggage  or  riding,  and  one  as  meat  for  the
camp.

The  ascent  of  about  two  miles  to  the  bare  rocky  "  Pass
of  the  Devil"  {Dai-Ld)  was  easy  walking,  over  great  sheets
of  gneiss  like  paving-stones,  as  this  stratified  rock  was
almost   horizontal    here.     We    passed    on    the    way    a    rude


396  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

trap  for  a  snow-leopard.  It  was  baited  with  the  leg  of  a
yak,  and  constructed  of  the  large  stone-flags  of  the  place,
on  the  principle  of  a  school-boy's  box-trap  of  bricks  and
slate  for  catching  birds.  Only  here,  the  falling  door  was
a  massive  paving-stone,  weighing  about  a  quarter  of  a  ton,
and  intended  to  crush  the  beast  to  death.

Just  below  the  pass  was  a  rocky  tarn  called  ''The  Lake
of  the  Tigress"  {Tag-mo  Tso);  and  its  legend  related  that
the  tigress  which  lived  in  a  cave  on  its  banks  was  the
devil  who  gave  its  name  to  the  pass.  It  was  no  ordinary
earthly  tiger,  but  a  fiend  in  that  form;  and  it  killed  all
the  yaks  and  people  who  came  here,  until  a  saintly  Lama
arrived,  and  by  his  spells  banished  this  devil,  and  now
every  passer-by  puts  a  stone  on  the  cairn  in  the  pass,  to
commemorate  this  happy  event.

On  penetrating  the  pass  (14,900  ft.),  our  track  wound
past  several  plants  of  the  giant  rhubarb  and  the  woolly
aromatic  balls  of  Saussurea,  along  the  eastern  shoulder  of
the  ridge  for  about  1 1  /2  miles,  over  flags  of  gneiss  per-
meated by  veins  of  quartz,  amongst  blocks  of  coarse
crystalline  grey  granite,  and  under  an  overhanging  cliff  call-
ed "The  Falling  Rock"  {Dang-bydbir),  which  was  a  favour-
ite haunt  of  wild  sheep,  according  to  my  guide.  Here  I
went  off  the  track  to  see  on  the  left  a  wild  tarn,  nearly
a  mile  in  length,  called  "  The  Loch  of  Everlasting  Life  "  {Tse1
pag-med  Tso),  and  reputed  to  contain  fabulous  gems ;  the
Nepalese  call  it  "The  Lake  of  Good  Luck"  {Luckee-pokree).

Rounding    a    corner    to    the    north,    at    the    Oma    Pass


THE  OMA  PASS  AND  BRIGANDS


397


(15,320  ft.),  we  came  suddenly  into  snow,  and  a  magnifi-
cent view  of  the  Kanchen'  range  burst  on  our  eyes.  Kanchen'
with  Kabru  seemed  quite  near,  the  top  of  the  latter  was
within  twelve  miles'  distance ;  but  they  were  fast  clouding
over  ere  I  got  my  camera  ready,  for  I  had  sprained  my
ankle    slightly,    and   was    riding   on  the  spare  yak.     Still  I


CROSSING   OMA   PASS   ON   A  YAK.


secured  the  accompanying  photograph  of  the  Kang  pass.
A  steep  descent  of  about  3,000  feet  in  three  miles,  led
down  through  a  gloomy  gorge  lined  with  landslips,  to  the
deserted  yak-station  of  Gamo-tang.

This  precipitous  gorge  was  infested  a  few  years  ago  by
a  gang  of  Tibetan  brigands.  They  murdered  and  robbed
the    traders     and     others     who     laboriously     threaded  the


398  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

narrow  neck  of  this  gorge — by  rolling  down  rocks  upon
them,  and  then  rushing  out  and  despatching  any  still
left  alive.  They  had  emissaries  resident  at  Darjeeling  who
kept  them  advised  not  only  of  the  traders '  movements,
but  also  of  the  police  who  were  sent  on  their  track ;  and
it  required  the  conjoint  efforts  of  the  military  police  of
Nepal  and  Darjeeling  for  some  years  to  disperse  them.
Only  a  few  were  captured,  and  these  were  hanged.  I  my-
self had  seen  the  tree  on  the  Nepal  frontier  where  one  of
them  was  hanged  about  a  year  before,  little  thinking  that
I  should  ever  visit  the  scene  of  their  exploits.  Several  of
the  band  were  still  at  liberty,  and  the  headman  of  Yampoong,
who  pointed  out  their  former  eyrie,  high  up  on  the  crags,
and  the  places  of  their  ambuscade,  said  that  travel  hereabouts
was  still  unsafe  on  this  account,  and  that  when  he  and
others  had  to  go  this  way,  they  armed  themselves  and
formed  a  big  party.

From  this  dark  defile  of  the  brigands  we  emerged  on
to  a  pretty  mountain-girt  dell,  Gamo-tang,  or  "  The  Level
Mead"  (12,550  ft.),  through  which  the  crystal  water  of
the  little  Rathong  river  rushed  noisily  over  a  pebbly  bed,
fringed  with  trailing  willows  and  sedges.  I  pitched  my
tent  on  the  bank  of  the  stream,  near  the  deserted  hut  of
the  yak-herdsmen,  of  which  latter  my  men  took  possession.
This  small  meadow  was  a  charming  spot  in  the  bright
sunshine.  On  all  sides  bold  rugged  cliffs  rose  above  the
pine  woods,  up  to  snow-tipped  peaks.  Below  these  patches
of  snow,  the  face  of  the  dripping  rocks,  wet  with  the  melt-


GAMOTANG  AND  ITS  LOST  TALISMAN  399

ing  snow,  glittered  and  gleamed  like  mirrors  in  the  sun-
light. And  a  curious  wintry  effect  was  produced  by  several
cascades  that  slid  and  tumbled  down  the  white  quartz  and
granite  cliffs,  forming  broad  white  streaks,  beyond  the  dark
pines,  a  thousand  feet  in  length.

This  pretty  meadow,  now  so  desolate,  was  once  a  thriving
settlement;  and  my  friend  of  Yampoong  pointed  out  traces
of  the  fields  of  buckwheat  which  had  flourished  here  in
his  grandfather's  day,  but  now  were  overgrown  by  the
young  pine  woods.  The  prosperity  of  the  place,  said  he,
was  owing  to  a  holy  milk-white  bull-yak  that  had  miracu-
lously appeared  and  roamed  over  these  hillsides.  It  was
reputed  to  be  an  incarnation  of  the  mountain-god  Kanchen '
himself,  and  it  acted  as  a  luck-commanding  talisman,  like
the  Mascotte.  When  this  lucky  yak  deserted  these  haunts
all  sorts  of  disaster  followed.  The  Nepalese  invaded  Sikhim.
Then  a  deadly  pestilence  broke  out  amongst  the  yaks,  and
all  the  people  who  ate  the  flesh  of  the  dead  beasts,  and
they  comprised  nearly  everyone  in  the  village,  died.  There-
upon the  survivors  fled,  in  the  belief  that  a  malignant
devil  had  taken  possession  of  the  place.  No  one  returned
for  many  years,  and  even  now  the  spot  is  only  occupied
as    a    grazing-station  for  a  few  weeks  in  the  summer  time.

I  went  after  some  partridges  and  pheasants  that  I  heard
calling  in  the  thick  cover,  and  got  one  partridge.  During
my  absence  the  young  yak  had  been  killed,  and  amongst
the  portions  reserved  for  me,  were  the  tongue  and  the
heart,  which  are  esteemed  especial  delicacies.


4oo  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

At  night  the  fear  of  the  brigands  weighed  heavily  on
our  little  camp.  All  lights  and  cooking  fires  were  put  out
at  dusk,  so  as  not  to  reveal  our  position,  and  Kintoop
came  to  my  small  tent  with  two  trustworthy  men  as  sentries.
They  mounted  guard  with  their  knives,  at  the  door  inside
the  tent,  as  the  temperature  outside  was  below  the  freezing
point.  In  this  rough  exposed  life,  it  is  needless  to  say
that  I  had  for  some  days  given  up  the  vulgar  habit  of
undressing  before  retiring  for  the  night.  My  bed  consisted
of  a  blanket  spread  over  springy  pine-branches,  and  under
my  pillow  and  alongside  me  were  laid  my  revolver  and
gun.  But  when  Kintoop  drew  his  ugly  knife  and  laid  it
down  beside  him  on  a  corner  of  my  couch,  I  felt  some
misgivings  lest  he  should,  in  a  night-mare,  mistake  me  in
the  dark  for  one  of  the  dreaded  robbers.  The  night,
however,  passed  without  mishap.  I  slept  soundly,  fatigued
by  the  day's  marching,  and  was  only  awoke  once  or  twice
by  the  high  wind  shaking  the  tent.

At  daybreak  the  temperature  registered  30  Fahr.  of  frost,
slight  snow  had  fallen,  and  the  tent  was  frozen  stiff  as
cardboard.  So  cold  was  the  wind  that  a  young  eagle  fell  dead
a  few  yards  from  my  tent,  the  shaggy  coats  of  our  yaks
glistened  with  a  thick  coating  of  ice  spangles,  and  one  of  our
men  seemed  to  have  caught  acute  inflammation  of  the  lungs  ;
he  was  delirious  with  high  fever.  I  gave  him  some  medicine,
and  Kintoop  had  to  leave  one  of  our  already  small  party  to
look  after  him,  or  as  Kintoop  grimly  put  it:  "to  feed  him
and  sacrifice  to  the  devils  for  him,  and  if  he  died  to  bury  him."


SNOWED  TO  DEATH  4°i

Fording    the    stream    on    boulders    and    following    it    up

towards  its  source  at  the  Chabab  pass,  over  which  we  had

to    cross  into  Nepal,  we  rose,  in  about  a  mile  and  a  half,

up  out    of   the    region  of  trees,  through  stunted  bushes  of

juniper  to  the  deserted  yak-hut  of  Bogto  (13,350  ft.).    The

grassy  shoulder  on  which  it  lay,  about  600  feet  above  the

river,  was  somewhat  suggestive  of  an  old  moraine,  though

no  glaciers  now  existed  in  this  valley ;  nor  did  the  stream

evidently  contain  any  glacier  water  from  sources  higher  up.

In    this    lonely    hut    of   Bogto,    I    was    told,    the    young

daughter  of  a  wealthy  Sikhimese,  with  her  maid,  had  halted

about   sixteen   years   ago    on   their   way  to  Tibet,  about  a

month   later   in   the   season  than  we  had  come.     A  heavy

snow-storm  not  only  prevented  them  from  proceeding,  but

cut   off  their    retreat   as    well,  and  the  unfortunate  damsels

died   here    of  starvation.     Some    of  their   bones   were  still

strewn   about   the   place,  and   their  skulls  had  been  made,

by  my  guide,  into  drums  for  summoning  the  devils.

Pursuing    our    track    up   the    valley,    we    flushed   several

Monal  pheasants,  which  characteristically  flew  downwards,

as  we  passed  through  the  stunted  junipers,  pruned  low  by

the    cutting   wind,    and  we  emerged  on  the  bleak  uplands.

Here   bears   were  to  be  found,  it  was  said,  but  few  or  no

wild  sheep,  on  account  of  some  poisonous  grass  that  grew

there.     We    passed    several    tempest-swept   tarns   variously

coloured  red,  black,  and  green,  and  named  accordingly.  They

were  the  reputed  abode  of  Caliban-like  spirits.    Near  these

bare  lochs  a  few  butterflies  still  hovered  over  the  last  few

26


402  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

flowers  of  summer,  at  an  elevation  of  over  14,000  feet.
The  most  numerous  were  the  silvery  spotted  "  Queen  of
Spain"  (Fritillary).

The  opposite  side  of  the  valley,  rising  steeply  with  its
knife-edge  ridge,  was  called  " The  Black  Tiger  Hill "  {Tak-
ri-nag-pd),  and  certainly  its  long  undulating  outline  and  its
crest  picked  out  with  snow  did  suggest  a  reclining  tiger.
The  body  of  the  beast  was  formed  by  the  black  lichen-
covered  granitic  gneiss,  which  was  broadly  striped  with
the  white  veins  of  granite  and  by  the  shoots  of  the
disintegrating  granite  crags  above.  And  a  columnar  form-
ation  of  the  rock  outlined  the  shoulder,  haunches  and  paws.

The  valley  suddenly  opened  out,  about  four  miles  above
Bogto,  into  a  broad  rounded  rocky  basin,  evidently  of
glacial  formation,  and  surrounded  by  an  amphitheatre  of
rugged  snow-streaked  peaks ;  on  the  one  side  the  Kanchen'
Senchal  ridge,  pierced  by  the  Chabab  pass  about  2  miles
off,  and  on  the  other  a  spur  of  Kang-La  and  Kabru,  which
latter  peak  towered  close  above  us,  on  our  right.

This  bleak  rocky  basin  was  strewn  with  great  white
blocks  of  quartz  and  light  grey  granite,  the  white  patches
of  which,  uncovered  by  bronzing  lichens,  must  give  this
landscape  a  snowy  wintry  aspect  even  in  summer.

A  weird  lake  lay  in  this  wild  setting,  under  the  white
horn  of  the  Kang-La  snows  to  our  right.  It  was  called  "  The
Enchanted  Lake  of  the  Peacock's  Tail"  (Tso  Dom-dong-
md) ;  and  from  its  blue  transparent  depths  there  gleamed
several    large    spots    of   brilliant    turquoise.     This    peculiar


ENCHANTED  LAKE  BELOW  KANG  PASS


4°3


appearance,  which  gave  the  lake  its  name,  was  due  to
the  great  blocks  of  dazzling  white  quartz  which  studded  its
dark-blue  bed.  It  was  evidently  a  "  Corrie  ",  or  a  lake  formed
in    the    dammed-up    end   of  the  latest  moraine  of  a  glacier


THE   ENCHANTED    LAKE   OF  THE   PEACOCKS   TAIL
(TSO   DOM-OONG-MA.)


which  had  come  down  from  the  Kang-La  peaks,  but  which
had  now  disappeared.  The  evidence  of  glacial  action  here
was  such  as  is  rarely  met  with  in  the  Himalayas.  The
smooth  face  of  the  projecting  cliff  to  our  left,  which  had
abutted    into    the  glacier,  was   scooped   out,   scratched   and


4o4  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

scored  in  characteristic  fashion  for  a  considerable  distance,
about  twenty  feet  above  the  present  level.

The  spirits  of  this  haunted  lake  were,  of  course,  wor-
shipped by  my  men.  These  spirits,  said  they,  were  dragons
who  occasionally  appeared  to  men  in  the  form  of  furious
bull-yaks,  or  as  mild  mermaids  who  siren-like  allured  the
lonely  traveller  to  a  cruel  death.  So  whilst  my  men  were
praying  to  the  deities  of  the  lake  and  the  mountain,  I
tasted  the  sweet  crystal  water.  The  loch  is  14,600  ft.  above
the  sea,  about  half  a  mile  in  length,  somewhat  triangular  in
shape,  and  into  its  further  narrow  northern  end  fall  several
thin  cascades  from  the  melting  snows  overhead.  Edelweiss
and   other  allied  woolly  flowers  bloomed  on  its  bleak  banks.

The  pass  (15,950  ft.)  was  reached  by  a  stiffish  climb
for  about  a  mile,  over  great  masses  of  sharp  splintered
rocks ;  yet  none  of  us  suffered  here  the  slightest  incon-
venience from  the  rarefied  air,  although  the  altitude  was
considerably  more  than  that  of  Momay  below  the  Dong-kia
pass,  which  had  tried  us  all  so  much.  The  view  from  the  cairn
at  the  top  was  not  very  extensive  owing  to  the  clouds  that
were  drifting  over  us.  The  summit  was  a  rugged  knife-edge,
with  the  most  precipitous  fall  to  the  western  or  Nepalese
side;  and  this  also  was  the  character  of  the  peaks  and
ridges  both  north  and  south  of  the  pass.  The  weathering
rocks  of  the  uplifted  crest  fell  away  abruptly  on  the  Nepalese
side,  leaving  jagged  columns  and  towering  pinnacles  that
looked  like  castellated  battlements  and  needle-shaped  spires.

Thin  snow  lay  for  over  a  hundred  yards  down  the  Nepal-


THE  KANG  PASS  FROM  THE  WEST  405

ese  side,  in  the  cold  northern  shade.  Thence  we  descended
the  precipitous  slope,  picking  our  way  over  about  a  mile
of  massive  blocks  of  sharp  splintered  rocks.  Here  it  was
marvellous  to  see  how  the  laden  yaks  lumbered  along
over  these  rocks,  and  skirted  precipices  that  were  formi-
dable enough  for  the  unladen  human  pedestrian.  The  yak
frequently  had  to  spring  up  on  to  ledges,  like  a  goat,  and
poise  itself  with  arched  body,  and  all  its  four  feet  close
together,  before  taking  another  spring ;  and  at  other  times
the  patient  beast  circumvented  sharp  curves  by  a  series
of  wriggles.  In  deep  snow,  such  as  is  said  to  lie  here
from  November  to  April,  this  passage  must  be  much  more
difficult  on  account  of  the  steepness  of  some  of  the  slopes
of  crumbling  loose  rock;  but  the  story  of  the  glaciers  and
crevasses  which  had  been  reported  here  by  the  Indian  tra-
veller Baboo  Sarat  C.  Das  is  unfounded.

From  the  western  foot  of  this  rocky  pass  the  view  up
towards  the  Kang-La  was  grand.  Several  huge  needles
traced  with  snow,  soared  into  the  air  like  cathedral  spires ;
and  between  these,  several  long  shoots  of  stones  from  the
splintering  granite  and  quartz  rocks  of  the  ridge  above
swept  down  for  full  two  thousand   feet  or  more.

We  crossed  a  short  distance  below  the  bottom  of  these
stone-shoots  (14,650  ft.)  to  the  other  side  of  the  valley,
and  thence,  after  five  weary  miles  round  a  spur,  we  gained
the  valley  of  the  Yaloong  river,  and  then  commanded
extensive  views  down  into  Eastern  Nepal,  which  spread  out
before  us  like  a  map,  in  that  remarkably  clear  atmosphere.


4o6  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

The  Everest  group,  with  its  most  prominent  peak
"No.  XIII ",  stood  up  boldly  about  sixty  miles  away,  though
in  the  distant  perspective  from  our  elevated  point  of  view
these  peaks  seemed  to  be  far  below  us.  And  through  the
deep  cleft  of  the  Arun  river,  I  could  see  to  the  north  of
the  Everest  group  some  other  snowy  peaks  further  in  the
interior  of  Tibet,  including  some  which  were  alleged  to
be  higher  than  Everest.  And  it  was  now  evident  that  the
Everest  range,  like  that  of  Kanchen-junga,  seemed  off  the
main  axis  of  the  Himalayas  and  the  margin  of  the  great
Tibetan  plateau,  and  appeared  as  a  spur  running  south,  and
at  right  angles  to  that  axis.  At  the  northern  end  of  this
spur  where  it  adjoins  the  Tibetan  plateau  of  Dingri  is  the
Tang-La,  or  "Terrible  pass"  (Bhairav-Langur),  which  Hodg-
son identified  with  Everest,  which,  however,  is  fifty  miles
farther  to  the  S.   E.

This  upper  part  of  Nepal  of  which  we  got  such  exten-
sive views  is  so  little  known,  even  in  regard  to  its  broad
territorial  and  tribal  divisions,  that  I  have  embodied  in
the  sketch-map  on  page  349  some  of  the  brief  information
supplied  by  my  guide.  The  upland  tract  to  the  south  of
Everest,  lying  between  the  Arun  river  and  the  glacial  "  milky  "
Kosi  (Doodk-Kosi,  a  corruption  of  the  Tibetan  Dud-tsi)
river,  is  called  Khoomboo  or  Khumbu,  and  its  inhabitants
are  Bhotiyas,  that  is  of  Tibetan  stock.  The  purest  of  these
occupy  the  northern  half,  which  is  called  "  .S/*dr- Khumbu  ".
The  southern  half  or  "^/^-Khumbu"  is  peopled  by  the
"  S/iar-pa"  or  "  Sher-pa"  tribe,  whom  we  have  already  seen,


EASTERN  NEPAL  AND  WESTERN  TIBET  407

and  who  are  slightly  Hindooized  by  contact  with  the
Kiranti  tribe  of  the  lower  ranges  and  with  their  Nepalese
neighbours,  but  they  still  retain  their  Tibetan  dress.  The
Bhotiyas  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Doodh-Kosi  and  between
the  San-Kosi,  in  the  lower  ravines  of  Rong-Shar  also  seem
to  be  called  "Shar-pa".  The  approximate  distribution  of
the  other  Bhotiya  tribes  I  have  also  indicated,  namely,
the  Shugu-pa,  Shing-sa-pa,  Tok-be-pa,  Waloong-pa,  as  well
as  the  Kiranti  and  Limboo  countries.

In  regard  to  the  adjoining  part  of  Tibet  to  the  north,
I  also  got  from  my  guide  some  interesting  geological
scraps  of  information,  as  he  had  resided  near  Tinki  fortress
and  travelled  much  thereabouts.  Fossils,  so  rare  on  the
southern  slopes  of  the  Himalayas,  are  not  uncommon  on
the  northern.  A  short  distance  north  of  Tinki,  across  the
Arun  (there  called  the  "  Ya-ru"),  is  a  great  deal  of  chalky
fossiliferous  limestone,  and  also  beds  of  yellow  and  red
ochre,  which  the  people  use  for  decorating  their  houses.  Also,
still  further  north  beyond  Sakya,  or  "  The  Yellow  Clay  ",
at  Jang-lache  on  the  south  bank  of  the  Tsang-po,  garnets
are  found  embedded  in  a  chalky  formation,  and  rock-crystal,
of  which  he  had  some  specimens  in  his  amulet-box.  And
close  to  the  north  of  fort  Shikar  (Shel-kar),  between  and
to  the  west  of  the  two  sites  above  mentioned,  are  very
large  fossil  shells.  This  is  interesting  with  reference  to  the
Eocene  nummulitic  limestone  found  by  Hooker  on  the
margin  of  the  Tibetan  plateau  above  the  Dongkia  pass,
and    evidently   a    deposit    similar   to  those  found  in   Ladak,


4o8  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

so  that  this  land  would  appear  to  have  been  raised  in  very
early  times,  and  the  nummulitic  sea  which  seems  to  have
run  as  a  gulf  up  the  Indus  valley  to  Ladak,  as  Godwin-
Austen  has  showed,  probably  extended  thus  far  southwards,
with  open  ocean  to  the  east.  As  to  the  gold  mines,  my
guide,  like  most  superstitious  Tibetans,  was  very  reticent
in  giving  information  as  to  these  supposed  treasure-houses
of  the  malignant  earth-spirits.  He  had  been  near  some  of
these  on  the  borders  of  the  snows,  and  said  they  were
strongly  guarded  by  troops,  and  the  miners  only  occasion-
ally worked.  They  offered  sacrifices  to  the  spirits  and  then
rushed  to  the  lodes,  and  after  a  few  hours  rushed  back
again  laden  with  their  treasures.  Mica  (Tibetan  Nam-do,
i.e.  "sky-stone")  is  quarried  in  considerable  quantities  near
Tinki,  about  six  or  seven  miles  below  the  line  of  perpetual
snow.  The  Tibetan  rock-salt  which  forms  such  a  large
trade  with  Nepal  and  Sikhim,  is  got  directly  from  the  great
lakes.  The  ordinary  rusty  sort  is  gathered  on  the  shores  of
the  lakes,  whilst  the  purer  kind  is  picked  up  in  large
crystals  on  the  wet  margin  of  the   water.

We  then  turned  northwards,  down  into  a  sort  of  "devils'
punch-bowl",  and  passing  above  the  very  small  tarn  in  its
bottom,  called  "The  Spoonful  of  Water"  {Choo-lok-nyd),  at
an  elevation  of  14,100  feet,  we  entered  a  gloomy  valley
of  rocks,  over  which  we  clambered  for  about  a  mile,  till  we
reached  a  point  at  which  the  small  stream  that  flowed
under  the  rocks  shewed  itself  on  the  surface  for  a  few
yards ;  and  here  we  encamped  under  a  great  boulder  about


TIBETAN  BOUNDARY  COMMISSION  409

40  feet  high,  that  had  fallen  from  the  ridge  above.  The
wildness  of  this  scene  was  forbidding.  The  valley  for  miles
around  seemed  a  vast  quarry  of  stones  hurled  down  pell-
mell.  And  overhead,  the  snowy  peak  of  Kang-La  sent
down  a  bitter  blast  of  icy-cold  glacier  air  on  us,  which
our  scant  shelter  and  poor  fire  of  faggots  did  little  to
relieve.  This  place  was  the  source  of  the  Nepalese  river
called  the  "  Cho-Gan-ga" ,  a  branch  of  the  Tambra  or  Tamru.

Yet,  even  so  desolate  a  region  as  this,  is  guarded  by
the  jealous  Nepalese.  So  far,  we  had  escaped  encountering
their  patrols,  but  these  latter  captured  the  King  of  Sikhim
not  far  from  here  when  he  tried  to  flee  to  Tibet  in  1892 —
for  since  our  last  reference  to  him,  on  the  occasion  of  our
visit  to  the  Jelep  pass,  several  political  developments  have
occurred.

The  King,  brooding  over  his  fancied  wrongs,  fled  from
Sikhim  in  1892,  and  tried  to  reach  Tibet  by  this  track  we
are  following;  but  was  captured  by  the  Nepalese  and  handed
over  to  the  Indian  Government.  Then,  after  having  been
kept  a  State-prisoner  in  Darjeeling  district  for  about  three
years,  he  was  restored  this  year  (1896)  to  his  throne,  and
returned  to  the  new  capital  at  Gantok,  which  has  grown
to  a  considerable-sized  village.  His  son  and  heir,  however,
still  remains  without  any  education  worthy  of  the  name.

Meanwhile  the  "  Sikhim-Tibet  Convention"  to  facilitate
trade  with  Tibet  and  to  demarcate  the  boundary,  a  Con-
vention of  which  such  great  things  were  expected,  has
ended,  like  most  of  our  other  arrangements  with  China,  in


4io  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

a  fiasco.  The  boundary  pillars  were  not  allowed  to  be
set  up,  and  the  opening  of  a  nominal  trade  mart  at  Yatoong
below  the  Jelep  pass  was  discounted  by  the  fact  that  no
Tibetan  trader  was  allowed  to  settle  there,  and  still  more
vexatious  restrictions  were  imposed  on  traders  than  before
the  war.  For  this  block  of  Tibetan  trade  and  this  policy
of  an  exclusion  more  rigorous  than  ever,  the  Chinese  excuse
themselves  by  alleging  that  it  is  all  the  doing  of  the  Lama-
priests  of  Lhasa.  But  it  is  the  Chinese  themselves  un-
doubtedly who  are  at  the  bottom  of  it  all,  and  they
merely  make  a  cat's-paw  of  the  Lamas.  The  Tibetans
are  not  unfriendly  to  Europeans,  and  the  Lamas  least  of
all  wish  the  trade  to  be  tied  up,  as  they  themselves  are
the  chief  traders  of  the  country.  China,  on  the  other  hand,
wishes  to  keep  the  Tibetan  markets  to  itself,  as  well  as  to
consolidate  its  political  power  there,  and  its  sinister  influence
at  Lhasa  in  instigating  the  Tibetans  against  us  on  every
opportunity  has  been  clearly  manifest  from  the  time  of
Hue  onwards.

So  evident,  indeed,  was  this  influence  in  regard  to  this
Sikhim-Tibet  question  that  a  casual  visitor  to  Darjeeling,
Count  d'Alviella,  remarked  it  many  years  ago.  He  wrote  :
"  On  sait  que,  d'apres  les  Autorites  du  Thibet  la  fermeture
"  de  cette  province  aux  etrangers  est  due  exclusivement  a
"  des  ordres  envoyes  de  Pekin  par  le  Gouvernement  Chinois.
"  A  Pekin,  au  contraire,  on  repond  aux  Anglais  que  e'est
"  uniquement  le  fait  des  Lamas  et  des  fonctionnaires  Thi-
"betains;"  and  he  quotes  a  letter  that  the  Chinese  resident


CHINESE  INTRIGUE  IN  TIBET  413

at  Lhasa  sent  to  the  king  of  Sikhim  in  1873,  and  which
fell  into  our  hands.  In  this  letter  the  Chinese  said :  "  Your
"state  of  Sikhim  borders  on  Tibet.  You  know  our
"  wishes  and  our  policy.  You  are  bound  to  prevent  the
"  English  from  crossing  our  frontier.  Yet  it  is  entirely  your
"  fault — thanks  to  the  roads  which  you  have  made  for
"them  in  Sikhim — that  they  have  conceived  this  project.
"  If  you  continue  to  act  thus,  it  will  not  be  good  for  you.
"  Henceforth  you  must  fulfil  your  obligations,  and  obey
"  the  commands  of  Grand  Lama  Rimboche  and  those  of  the
"twelfth  Emperor  of  China."

Yet  notwithstanding  this  recognised  deceit  of  China,
diplomacy  was  again  tried  with  it  over  this  very  question,
and  under  cover  of  their  old  excuse — blaming  the  Lamas
for  everything— the  Chinese,  without  suffering  any  sacrifice
themselves,  have  obtained  important  concessions, considerably
strengthened  their  grip  and  prestige  over  Tibet,  prevented
us  obtaining  any  solid  recompense  for  the  great  cost  of
the  late  war,  and  have  postponed  more  distantly  than  ever
the  opening  up  of  that  country  to  Europeans,  and  the
development  of  its  undoubted  trade  possibilities  in  the  export
of  gold,  wool,  etc.  in  exchange  for  British  and  Indian
goods.  The  situation,  however,  must  eventually  become
critical  again,  and  in  that  event  it  would  be  far  better
to  throw  over  China  altogether  with  its  deceit  and  false
promises,  and  deal  directly  with  the  Tibetans.

A  "  national  party  "  is  arising  in  Tibet  in  rebellion  against
the    grinding    yoke   of  the  Chinese.     I  had  the  pleasure  of


414


AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS


meeting  one  of  the  leading  spirits  in  this  movement  which
has  the  moral  and  political  progress  of  their  country  at
heart.  This  gentleman  came  to  Darjeeling  in  the  train  of
the  Chinese  Commissioners,  on  the  boundary  question,  and
he  is  now  the   chief  lay-Governor  at  Lhasa.


THE   LAY-GOVERNOR   OF   LHASA,   AND    SUITE.

It  was  he  who  stopped  M.  Bonvalot  and  Prince  Henry
of  Orleans  on  their  way  towards  Lhasa,  and  at  a  point
fully  a  week1  s  journey  from  that  city  instead  of  the  one
day's  journey  as  claimed  by  them.

In  talking  of  the  Chinese,  when  I  mentioned  that  our
troops  had  held  Pekin,  he  treated  the  matter  as  a  joke,
like    the    official    whom    Mr.    Blanford    met,  and  exclaimed


YOUNG  NATIONAL  PARTY  IN  LHASA  415

"Perhaps  your  general  reported  that  he  had  occupied  Pekin,
but  he  certainly  never  got  there,  for  such  a  thing  was
quite  impossible!" — so  successfully  have  the  Chinese  con-
cealed their  indignity  from  the  Tibetans.

But  I  cannot  here  refer  to  the  many  interesting  conver-
sations that  I  had  with  this  enlightened,  kindly  man,  who
seems  destined,  if  he  lives,  to  play  an  important  part  in
the  history  of  Tibet.

As  we  came  along  this  desolate  track  towards  Tibet  by
which  the  unfortunate  King  of  Sikhim  had  fled,  my  men
had  been  keeping  an  outlook  for  a  box  of  precious  jewels
which,  according  to  a  bazaar  report,  had  been  lost  here  by
the  king  in  his  flight.

Morning  broke  fiercely  cold  with  50  Fah.  of  frost,  and
a  keen  wind  raged.  I  was  up  two  hours  before  daylight  to
see  the  sunrise  from  the  western  side  of  the  peaks.  The
traders'  trail  to  the  north  led  over  a  pass  bearing  the
characteristic  name  of  "The  Cold  Pass"  (Se-mo  La),  or
Semarum  as  the  Lepchas  call  it,  at  an  elevation  of  15,370  ft.
At  the  summit  I  was  again  disappointed  to  find  absolutely
no  trace  of  the  glaciers  and  crevasses  reported  here  by
Baboo  Sarat  C.  Das.  There  was  at  this  season  not  only
no  snow  in  this  pass,  but  none  visible  from  it  except  the
tips  of  the  Everest  group,  which  showed  over  the  ranges
to  the  west,  and  the  distant  snow-streaked  ranges  of  Kam-
bachen.  To  the  north  and  east  all  the  snowy  peaks  of
the  Kanchen'  range,  including  the  Kang-La,  were  hidden
from  view  by  a  precipitous  ridge  which  rose  about  300  ft.


416  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

above  the  north  side  of  the  pass.  This  point,  which  had
not  been  reached  by  the  Baboo,  I  hurriedly  scaled,  with
Kintoop  and  two  of  my  men,  as  the  sun  was  just  rising,
and  I  then  got  a  magnificent  view,  not  marred  by  a
single  cloud.

The  wildness  and  majesty  of  this  panorama  was  awful.
The  western  side  of  the  Kang-La,  or  "Pass  of  the  Glaciers"
rose  up  about  two  miles  away  in  cold  grey  shade,  and  I
could  see  lying  within  it,  its  snowfields  and  glaciers  with
their  ice-falls,  and  the  outflowing  milky  grey  streams  that
ploughed  down  the  bare  grey  granite  valley,  over  4,000  feet


PROFILE  OF  KABRU,  JANNU  ETC.  FROM  SEMO  PASS.

almost  sheer  below  me,  for  I  was  on  the  knife-edge  ridge
of  the  shivered  cliff.  From  this  giddy  height  I  saw,  above
and  to  the  north  of  the  tooth-rocks  of  the  pass,  the  Kang-
La  Nang-ma,  or  "The  Interior  of  the  Pass  of  the  Glaciers",
which  is  not  a  pass  at  all  as  has  hitherto  been  stated,
but  is  only,  according  to  my  guides,  a  cul-de-sac  or  basin  of
snow  and  neve,  where  no  traffic  ever  goes.

Above  this,  rose  the  knife-edge  peak  of  Kang-tsen  on
the  southern  base  of  Kabru,  which,  for  the  reasons  already
stated,  I  believe  to  be  the  peak  which  Mr.  Graham  ascended
in  mistake  for  Kabru.  And  certainly  it  appeared  from  here
to    be    the    most    prominent    peak;    for   the    long  ridge  of


27


THE  KANG  PASS  AND  WESTERN  GLACIERS       419

"  Kabru "  (properly  "Kaboor")  fell  away  lower  in  the  per-
spective, over  the  bare  cliffy  shoulder  of  the  opposite  side
of  the  valley,  which  latter  also  unfortunately  blocked  out
from  my  view,  not  only  the  bases  of  Kabru  and  Jannu,  but
also  the  peaks  of  Kanchen-junga  itself.

The  tip  of  the  tremendous  southern  cliff  of  Jannu,  or
"Juona",  which  Hooker,  who  had  a  near  view  of  it,  estimat-
ed at  9,000  feet  and  in  appearance  like  that  of  Mont  Cervin
from  the  Riffel,  gleamed  with  its  warty  knobs  in  the  rising
sunlight,  over  the  dark  ridge.  My  men  called  it  Kanchen-
Jo,  or  "  The  Lord  of  the  Great  Glaciers ",  apparently
because  it  was  the  most  dominant  peak  visible.  As  to  the
possibility  of  climbing  it,  Mr.  Graham,  who  saw  it  from  the
east,  says :  "  I  think  it  is  possible  from  the  east,  but  there
is  an  enormous  glacier  at  least  twenty  miles  long  to  be
traversed  before  reaching  the  arete,  and  even  when  there
it  would  be  very  difficult.  From  west  and  south  the  peak
is  obviously  impassable."

West  of  Jannu,  a  sharply  serrated  snowy  peak  like  a
lion's  tooth  was  called  to  me  "The  Glacial  Goddess  of  Me-
dicine", {Man-lha-L a-mo  Kang)  and  is  an  object  of  worship.
It  seems  to  be  the  "Choonjerma"  of  Hooker.  Whilst,
behind  it,  showed  up  the  snowy  tip  of  a  higher  peak,  which
was  called  Tang-tong-Kang,  apparently  the  "  Nango "  of
Hooker.  Further  west,  beyond  this,  were  the  snows  of
Yangma  and  Tashi-raka,  bounding  Tibet;  and  still  further
west  were  the  tips  of  the  Khoombu  and  Everest  group  of
peaks.    The    northern   cliffy  face  of  Everest  was  very  bold


420


AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS


and  precipitous,  as  shown  in  the  accompanying  sketch ;
but  the  rounded  northern  spur  seen  by  Colonel  Tanner
from  Sandook-phu  and  estimated  at  about  25,000  feet  high,
was  not  visible,  it  must  have  been  hidden  by  the  rocky
ranges  in  my  middle  distance.  The  compass-bearings  of
these  peaks  are  detailed  in  the  appendix.  S7

Kang-La,    or    "The  Pass  of  the  Glaciers",  is  perpetually


1  •  '''  y^?£

'  .  <£y^

7s***

jfcfy

'y'fe^'  J2£~~±iA'sf*&

jSIIP

1     j
1  '

1
J
1

T

1

i
\

\
,1

|3

r

J2

!<

'4

NORTH-EAST  FACE  OF  EVEREST  FROM   SEMO   PASS   (15,670  FEET.).
1.  Everest. ,  2.  Peak  XIII."-  3.  Khnmbti  sno-ys.     4.   Tashi-raka  snows.

snowed.  Over  it  go  the  Tibetan  salt-traders,  bound  for
Jongri  in  western  Sikhim.  This  salt  is  carried  from  the  great
lakes  on  the  Tibetan  plateau  on  the  backs  of  sheep,  which
are  driven  up  the  valley,  beneath  us,  and  over  this  pass
in  summer.  A  little  also  comes  in  November,  after  the
October  snows  have  hardened  sufficiently  to  bear  the
weight  of  pedestrians  and  the  salt-laden  sheep.  The  salt
is  bartered  for  rice,  Murwa,  maize,  bundles  of  madder
dye-stuff,  etc.  Mr.  Graham  crossed  this  pass  from  Jongri,
and  his  description  of  it,  which  has  an  important  bearing
on  his  ascent  of  the  peak  which  he  believed  to  be  Kabru,


MR.  GRAHAM'S  ASCENT  OF  "KABRU"  421

will  now  be  more  intelligible  from  my  foregoing  photograph
on  p.  417  and  the  key  to  it  on  p.  416.     He   wrote:

"The  next  day  (30th  March,  1883,)  we  took  the  three
best  men  and  proceeded  west  to  the  foot  of  the  Kangla
pass,  which  leads  into  Nepal.  The  summit  of  the  pass  is
some  17,000  ft.,  and  is  crowned  by  a  noble  saddle  glacier,
whilst  on  either  side  rises  a  sharp  rock-tooth  some  1,500  ft.
higher.  We  turned  to  the  right,  to  the  foot  of  the  glacier,
which  flows  in  a  beautiful  stream  south-west  from  Kanchen-
junga.  Here  we  encamped  on  the  moraine  in  one  of  the
grandest  amphitheatres  imaginable.  Due  east  rose  Kabru,
2^,015  ft.,  its  western  face  almost  like  a  wall,  corniced  with
hugh  masses  of  glacier  and  snow,  from  which  thundered
an  incessant  volley  of  avalanches.  North-east  rose  Kanchen  ',
its  grey  precipices  even  now  but  lightly  touched  with  snow.
North,  Jannu  showed  its  awful  southern  cliff,  while  west,
rose  a  great  peak  of  snow  and  rock,  great  actually,  though
small  and  easy  as  compared  with  its  neighbours.  The
night  was  the  coldest  we  experienced  in  the  Himalayas —
8°  (?)  Fahr.  being  the  minimum  reading  of  the  thermo-
meter. Early  next  morning  Imboden  and  I  started  to  ascend
the  peak  on  our  west.  It  was  a  hard  and  interesting  scramble
of  some  five  hours  and  a  half,  rock  and  snow  alternately.
Only  one  place  offered  any  serious  difficulty,  and  at  10.15
we  were  at  the  summit.  Though  the  western  view  was
clouded,  we  had  a  noble  view  of  the  north-west  of  Kanchen  '.
Both  by  aneroid  and  by  comparison  with  surrounding  peaks,
we  estimated  the  height  at  rather  over  20,000  ft."


422  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

The  foregoing  sentences  which  I  have  placed  in  italics,
taken  in  connection  with  Mr.  Graham's  description  of  the
peak  which  he  ascended  in  the  belief  that  it  was  Kabru
appear  to  indicate  Kang-tsen  both  in  direction  and  physical
aspect,  rather  than  Kabru.

Mr.  Graham  is  not  the  only  one  who  has  claimed  to  have
ascended  Kabru.  The  patron  saint  of  Sikhim,  Latsun  Chembo,
is  said  to  have  miraculously  reached  that  peak  over  two  cen-
turies ago.  And  the  wild  bare  rocky  gorge  beneath  us
bears  the  ironical  name  of"  The  Pleasant  Garden  "  [Nam-gah-
tsal),  because,  says  the  legend,  that  saint  lived  "happily"
in  a  hermitage  here,  when  he  was  composing  the  ritual  for
the  worship  of  Kanchen'.  He  is  said  to  have  dwelt  under
this  western  side  of  the  pass  in  a  cave  called  Kant-pa
Kha-brag,  and  near  the  "  Monkey 's-back  Rock"  (Preu-gyab-
tak),  so  named  with  reference  to  its  outline,  as  suggesting
a  sitting  monkey.

My  panorama  also  included  some  ominous  smoke  from
the  village  of  Tseram  in  the  deep  valley  below,  where  a
Nepalese  guard  was  stationed.  I  had  hoped  to  have  been
able  to  reach  the  upper  glacier  valley  of  Yaloong,  and  so
right  up  to  the  great  western  glacier  of  Kanchen ' ,  without
sighting  any  Nepalese  villages;  but  now,  I  found  that,  in
order  to  get  round  the  opposite  spur,  I  must  descend  quite
close  to  the  guard-post  of  Tseram,  where  there  was  a
strong  probability  of  my  getting  discovered ;  and  the  political
complications  certain  to  ensue  in  such  an  event  were  more
than  I,  as  a  Government  official,  could   risk.     It  was  exas-


NEPALESE  RIGID  EXCLUSION  OF  EUROPEANS    423

perating,  after  undergoing  so  many  hardships  in  reaching
thus  far,  and  penetrating  for  more  than  thirty  miles  over
a  track  not  previously  traversed  by  any  European,  to  be
stopped  within  one  and  a  half  day's  journey,  from  what
must  be  one  of  the  grandest  bits  of  the  Himalayas,  namely,
the  south-western  glacier  of  Kanchen-junga  within  its  amphi-
theatre of  magnificent  peaks,  ranging  from  the  precipitous
Jannu  (25,300  ft.),  round  by  Kamba-chen  (25,780  ft.)  and  the
curving  crests  of  Kanchen '  (28,153  ft-)  to  Kabru  (24,015  ft.).

It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  existing  prohibition  to  travel
in  these  grand  regions  may  soon  be  relaxed,  as  so  many
interesting  geographical  and  geological  problems  there  await
solution ;  and  especially  so  as  the  country  that  is  thus
closed  against  Europeans  more  absolutely  than  any  other
in  the  world,  except  Tibet,  is  yet  within  our  "sphere  of
influence ",  and  its  Government  is  on  the  friendliest  terms
politically  with  the  British.

Until  I  commenced  to  descend  from  the  sharp  crest  of
this  tremendous  precipice  on  which  we  had  been  clinging,
I  had  not  realised  how  insecure  our  pinnacle  had  been.  It
was  such  a  knife-edge  that  I  had  to  be  held  by  my  men
when  I  stretched  out  to  take  the  photographs;  but  it  was
only  when  about  to  descend  that  the  rottenness  of  the  rocks
was  so  apparent.  These  latter  were  so  deeply  gashed  and
fissured  by  the  shivering  action  of  the  hot  sun  on  the
frozen  granite,  as  to  be  almost  a  wall  of  loose  splinters.
As  we  descended,  some  pieces  broke  off  and  fell  into  the
yawning  abyss  below.     In  fact  not  a  single  bit  of  this  rock


424  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

could  be  trusted.  Before  leaving  the  summit,  the  young
Lama — who  with  Kintoop  had  built  a  tiny  cairn  on  the
topmost  pinnacle  and  decorated  it  with  rags  torn  from  their
dress ;  for,  said  they,  no  human  being  had  likely  ever  been
there  before — stopped  behind  to  blow  a  farewell  blast  on
a  human  thigh-bone  to  the  spirit  of  that  monarch  of
mountains,  Kanchen-Junga.

As  we  retraced  our  steps  down  the  Semo  pass,  several
of  the  beautiful  Tibetan  snow-cocks  {Hrak-pa,  so  named
after  their  cry)  were  calling  amongst  the  rocks  of  grey
granite  and  quartz  on  our  left.  Lower  down,  we  came  on
a  covey  of  blood-pheasants  {Ithagenes  ententes),  of  which
I  shot  a  brace  as  they  scampered  upwards  over  the  stones.
Their  bright  coloured  plumage,  mottled  crimson  and  green,
is  admirably  adapted  to  conceal  them  amongst  the  green
and  crimson  lichen-covered  rocks  in  their  bare  mountain
home.  On  returning  to  our  bivouac  of  the  previous  night,
my  collector  brought  me  a  splendidly  plumaged  Monal
pheasant  in  one  hand,  and  the  shattered  fragments  of  his
gun  in  the  other,  and  dolefully  explained  that  as  he  fired
his  gun  it  had  burst.  He  was  relieved  when,  instead  of
receiving  the  expected  scolding,  I  congratulated  him  on  his
escape.  These  men  cram  so  much  powder  and  shot  into
their  rusty  old  muzzle-loading  guns,  that  the  wonder  is
that  fatal  accidents  are  not  more  frequent.

Slight  snow  then  began  to  fall  from  the  murky  clouds
that  were  quickly  banking  up  overhead,  so  that  we  decided
to    push    quickly    over   the  Cha-bab  pass  that  day,  in  case


RETURN  FROM  THE  RANG  PASS  425

a  heavy  snowfall  might  cut  off  our  retreat  in  that  direction.
But  the  baggage-yak  was  nowhere  to  be  found ;  these
beasts  when  unloaded  are  turned  loose  to  forage  for  their
food  in  the  scanty  tufts  of  grass  and  herbage  amongst
the  rocks.  The  yak-herd  after  looking  high  and  low  for
it,  to  see  whether  it  had  not  fallen  over  a  precipice  in
the  neighbourhood,  decided  that  it  probably  had  gone  back
to  seek  its  companion  who  had  been  left  behind  at  the
Cha-bab  pass,  where  it  had  been  lamed  by  the  sharp  rocks ;
and  sure  enough  this  had  happened,  for  as  we  approached
that  pass  we  heard  through  the  snowy  fog  the  musical
tinkle  of  their  bells,  and  found  them  quietly  herding  together
near  the  foot  of  the  pass,  much  to  the  joy  of  the  yak-
herd  who  had  himself  been  carrying  most  of  the  absent
beast's  burden.

The  pass  was  now  powdered  with  freshly  fallen  snow
for  about  a  mile  from  the  top ;  a  little,  too,  had  fallen
on  the  other  side,  as  far  as  the  weird  lake  of  "The  Pea-
cock's Tail ".  It  was  dark  ere  we  reached  the  verdant
dell  of  Gamotang,  embowered  in  wooded  hills,  and  presenting
such  a  grateful  contrast  to  the  bleak  regions  from  which
we  had  come.  Here  we  were  pleased  to  find  a  blazing
fire  in  the  herdsman's  hut,  and  a  large  heap  of  firewood
collected  by  our  two  coolies  who  had  been  left  behind,
of  whom  the  sick  one  was  now  recovering.

In  the  morning,  which  rose  bright  and  sunny,  I  went
after  some  pheasants  that  were  calling  in  the  woodlands,
and    I   got   two    fine    Monal  cocks    and  four  partridges  as


426  AMONG  THE  HIMALAYAS

the  morning's  bag.  These  gorgeously  plumaged  Monal,
which  are  so  abundant  in  the  mountains  hereabouts,  are
snared  and  slaughtered  wholesale  by  the  natives,  for  the
sake  of  their  skins,  which  are  sent  down  to  Calcutta  for
export.  In  the  latter  place  as  many  as  a  thousand  skins
are  offered  for  sale  at  one  time.

My  men  were  delighted  at  the  prospect  of  returning
homewards  from  these  wild  regions,  and  started  up  hill
with  light  hearts, — and  lighter  loads  as  we  had  eaten  up
almost  all  our  stores.  And  as  we  re-crossed  "  The  Pass  of
the  Devil",  where  the  white  snow  among  the  black  cliffs
was  weeping  away  in  tears,  the  young  Lama  collected
bunches  of  juniper  and  the  aromatic  rhododendron  leaves
to  burn  as  incense  before  the  altar  of  the  great  Buddha,
as  a  thanksgiving  offering  for  our  safe  return.

Some  zest  was  added  to  our  threading  of  the  track  down
the  lower  slopes  on  the  Nepalese  side  of  the  ridge,  when
we  saw  in  the  places  where  we  crossed  the  thawing  mud,
between  the  rocks,  the  fresh  footprints  of  a  bear  who  also
was  evidently  going  along  this  track,  a  short  way  ahead  of
us;  but  after  about  a  mile  they  disappeared  amongst  the
rhododendrons,  whence  the  brute  doubtless  had  a  peep  at
us  as  we  passed.

We  spent  the  night  in  the  shallow  cave  of  Nego  (13,170  ft.).
It  was  little  more  than  an  overhanging  ledge  of  rock,  and
could  have  afforded  scant  shelter  from  rain;  but  the  night
fortunately  was  dry,  with  little  wind,  though  very  cold.
From  my  corner  of  the  cave,  the  figures  of  my  men  seemed


BACK  TO  CIVILIZATION  429

weird  and  spectral-like  as  they  flitted  about  in  the  gloom,
or  crouched  over  the  camp-fire  which  lit  up  their  features
with  its  lurid  glare.  It  is  only  by  being  placed  in  such
close  relations  to  these  natives  that  one  fully  realizes  their
many  good  traits,  and  how  very  human  they  are  after  all.
Their  hearty  good  humour  under  hardships,  their  willing
and  untiring  energy  when  work  is  heaviest,  their  good
comradeship,  and  generous  sharing  of  their  few  comforts
with  each  other,  all  this  redeems  them  from  much  of
what  they  lack  in   civilization.

The  next  day  brought  us  through  fine  forests  and  moun-
tains, back  to  our  larger  tents  and  a  fresh  store  of  much
needed  provisions ;  and  in  this  free  open-air  life  amidst
magnificent  scenery,  we  go  on  gathering  fresh  trophies  and
quaint  experiences,  till  our  tents  are  struck  for  the  last
time,  and  we  return  to  the  tyranny  and  comforts  of  civi-
lization.

And  as  we  bid  farewell  to  our  trusty  Tartar  servants —
our  genial  fellow-travellers  — and  our  train  races  us  down
from  Darjeeling,  and  the  silver  vision  of  Kanchen-junga
recedes  from  our  view,  we  regretfully  realize  that  these
wanderings  have  become  a  memory   of  the  past.


APPENDIX


NOTES   TO   THE   TEXT


Dr.  Hooker  was  the  first  European  to  explore  and  survey  Sikhim  and  the

Eastern  border  of  Nepal  scientifically,  and  he  did  this  work  with  such

fulness  of  knowledge  that  his  book  [Himalayan  Journals  by  (Sir)  Joseph

D.  Hooker,  M.D.,  2  Vols.,  1854,]  must  always  remain  the  leading  authority

on  the  botanical  and  physical  history  of  these  regions.  Of  other  books

referring  to  parts  of  these  regions,  the  Gazetteer  of  Sikhim  is  restricted

to  that  portion  of  Sikhim  which  still  remains  under  native  rule,  and  it

consists  of  detached  official  reports  upon  a  few  topics,  the  greater  portion

being    my    contributions    on   the  religion  of  one  of  the  tribes,  and  on

the    birds  of  this   section  of  the  Himalayas.    Dr.  Buchanan-Hamilton's

Account     of    Nepal     (1820)     and     Brian     Hodgson's     Essays    contain

miscellaneous    notes    of  interest  to  students  of  ethnology :  Sir  William

Hunter's   Imperial   Gazetteer^   and   Account  of  Bengal  embody   some

statistical  information  in  regard  to  Sikhim;  and  Sir  Clement  Markham's

Tibet    and     Mr.     Saunders'     compilation     on     the     Himalayas     refer

incidentally    to    a    few    of  the  passes  and  general  physical  features  of

the  mountain  ranges  thereabouts.  Colonel  Gawler  published  in  1873  a

few  notes  on  his  military  expedition  to  Sikhim  in  1871 ;  and  "  A  Lady

Pioneer"  gives  in  her  Indian  Alps  a  vague  account  of  a  short  ramble

in  the  outer  ranges  of  the  same  country.  The  political  reports  on  Sikhim

by  Messrs.  Edgar  and  Macaulay,  containing  some  observations  of  general

interest,  were  not  made  public.

Whilst  generally  following  the  current  map-forms  of  the  names,  I  have
spelt  some  of  the  chief  names  nearer  the  vernacular  form,  yet  in  a  way
to  be  pronounceable  by  English  readers,  and  recognizable  by  the  natives
themselves,  which  many  of  the  current  forms  are  not.  Thus  u  Kanchtn-
junga"  for  "Kinchinjinga"  " Rang-eet"  for  "Ranjeet",  "  C/wong-laug"
for  "Cheungtong",  "Sana/ook-p/iu"  for  "Sundakfu"  etc.

W.  T.  Blanford,  F.R.S.,  in  Bengal  Asiatic  Socy.  Jour.   1871,  p.  393.


4,^2  APPENDIX

4.  The    name    of  this  place,  "Siligoori",  I  find,  means  in  the  patois  of  the

Dative  Koch  tribe  "The  Stony  Site",  for  it  is  the  outermost  point  at
which  pebbles  from  the  Himalayas  appear  upon  the  surface  of  the
muddy  Delta  of  Bengal.

5.  These  are  the  Hindooized  aboriginal  Chandals.  and  those  members  of  this

tribe  who  have  been  proselytized  to  Mohammedanism,  the  Nashyas.
There  are  also  some  Mongoloid  Koch,  and  in  the  recesses  of  the  forest
on  the  bank  of  the  Mech  river  are  to  be  found  a  few  survivors  of
those  semi-aborigines  who  have  given  their  name  to  this  river,  which
divides  the  Terai  or  Morang  of  Sikhim  from  that  of  Nepal

6.  This,    I    think,    is    the  etymology  of  the  Nepalese  name  for  this  country

(namely  "SiLiim"  and  not  "Sikhim"  as  it  is  sometimes  misspelt  in
English  books).  The  word  seems  to  me  to  be  derived  from  the  Nepalese
or  Parbatiya  Sikhin,  "  The  Crested'",  which  well  denotes  the  leading  feature
of  the  country  as  seen  from  Nepal,  where  its  mountain  ridges  running
transversely  to  those  of  Eastern  Nepal  seem  to  form  a  bristling  series
of  crests.  The  aborigines,  the  Lepchas,  however,  call  it  Nelyang  or
"The  Place  of  Caves  ",  while  the  Tibetans  call  it  Den-Jong  or  Demo-jong,
or  "The  Country  of  Rice  and  Fruit",  as  it  is  a  granary  for  bleak  Tibet.

7.  Sir  Edwin  Arnold's  Light  of  Asia,  II,  42 — 43.

8.  Colonel    Everest,    after    whom    the    great    mountain    was    named,    when

organising  the  Trigonometrical  Survey  of  India,  recognised  the  disturbing
influence  of  the  local  attraction  exercised  by  the  Himalayas,  and
endeavoured  to  minimize  it  by  placing  the  northernmost  station  for
the  observation  of  his  great  Indian  arc  of  meridian  at  Kaliana,  over
sixty  miles  from  the  Himalayas.  Still  he  found  a  discrepancy  existed
between  the  length  of  the  arc  as  measured  and  as  astronometrically
observed.  Archdeacon  Pratt,  who  took  up  this  questioii  about  1852,
showed  that  the  disturbing  effect  of  the  Himalayas  was  much  greater
than  had  been  supposed,  and  he  attempted  to  estimate  the  amount  of
this  local  attraction,  and  published  his  results  in  the  Transactions  of
the  Royal  Society  for  i860 — 62.

9.  Proceedings  Royal  Geographical  Society,   1884,  pp.  429  etc.

10.  "Twenty    Years'    Climbing    and    Hunting    in  the  Himalayas"   in  Alpine

Journal  about  1880.

11.  1889.

12.  Eleusina  crocana.


APPENDIX  433

13.  For    geological    notes    on    this    part  of  Sikhim  see  Mallet's  paper  in  the

Indian  Geological  Survey  Reports.  lie  calls  these  slates  and  schists.
the  "Daling"  series,  after  a  place  of  that  name  in  the  east  of  the
Darjeeling  district.

14.  This  custom,  as  I  have  shown  elsewhere  (Jour.  Bengal  Asiatic  See.  III.  1898),

seems  a  survival  of  the  matriarchy  or  molhership  of  the  clan,  which
appears  to  have  heen  prevalent  in  this  tribe.

15.  The  less-known  Hindoo  title  of  Pati  or  '-.Master"  was  used  in  the  ballad.

16.  The  proper  form  of  this  Nepalese  name  for  them  is  ■•  Lap-die",  which  I

find  means  the  '-vile  speakers"-  for  the  Lepchas,  unlike  their  Nepalese
neighbours,  adhered  to  their  own  vernacular  and  did  not  adopt  tin-
fashionable  Hindoo  dialect  of  the  Goorkhas  as  did  the  Nepalese.  and
hence  these  latter  applied  this  contemptuous  name  to  them.  This  tribal
name  is  curiously  paralleled  in  the  case  of  the  K  Welsh ".  According  to
Canon  Taylor  {Words  and  Places^  p.  67)  this  is  a  similar  derisive  term
applied  by  the  neighbouring  Saxons  and  meaning  the  "Jabberers''.

17.  The  other   Kazis  in  addition  to  this  one  of  Lasso,  are  Vangthang,  Gangtok.

Rhenok,  Dallom,  Barmiak,  Tashiting.  Song,  Living,  Mating,  Simik,  and

Pendom.  The  word  Kazi  seems  to  me  to  be  borrowed  through  the
Nepalese  from  the  Mahomedan  rulers  of  India,  and  to  be  the  Persian
word  A'azi  or  A'adi.  a  magistrate,  a  name  familiar  to  the  readers  of
the  ^  Arabian  Xighls".  Other  titles  thus  adopted  by  the  Nepalese  are
Sttbah,  a  governor;  and  Jung  Bahadtn  (••  Prave  Warrior").  These  Kazis
are  called  by  the  Photiyas  L"ihipi\  or  --Ministers  ",  and  by  the  Lepchas
Pano-Sadatn-bo,  or  ••  King's  Chiefs".  The  subordinate  officials  in  order
of  precedence  are  the  military  officer,  the  Ding- f  on  or  Mak-pon;  the
larger  village  headman,  Gytt-mi  in  (Lepcha  Ta-so  or  .Ity.ih-bo);  and
the  smaller  village  headman,  Gya-pon  or  Pi-pen.

18.  J.    W.    Edgar's    Report    on  a    Visit  to  Sikhim  and  the   Tibetan  Frontier.

Calcutta.   1874.

19.  In  the  Pioneer  of  March   7th.    1895.

20.  The  description  of  this  new  species,  named  after  me  by  Mr.  W.  Ogilvie

( rrant  of  the  Pritish  Museum,  is  thus  given  in  the  Bulletin  0/  the
British  Ornithological  Club  and  reprinted  in  the  Ibis  1894,  p.  424:--
"Like  G.  pectoralis^  but  with  the  rufous  collar  almost  obselete;  the
superciliary  stripe  grey,  not  while:  ear  coverts  pale  buff,  witli  blackish
shaft-stripes  instead  of  black,  or  black  streaked  with  white:  and  the  tail
rather     narrowly    tipped    with     ashy:     whereas     in     G.    pectoralis    it    is

28


4.S4


APPENDIX


broadly  tipped  with  white.  Habitat. — Rimgeet  (Rangit)  Sikhim.  4x00
feet."  The  type  specimen  is  in  the  British  Museum,  and  three  other
skins  {Vide  (i.  pectoralis  sp.  "Gazetteer  of  Sikhim'\  p.  231.)  are  in
my    large   collection   in  the  Hunterian  Museum  of  Glasgow  University.

21.  Malay  Archipelago*  204  (5th  edition.    130)  with   figure.

22.  Major    Sherwill    has    described    the    mechanism    of    these    bridges  in  the

Journal  of  the  Bengal  Asiatic  Society,  also  Hooker.

23.  Details  of  his  dynasty  are  given  in  my  '■•Buddhism  of  Tibet"  and  in  the

Gazetteer  of  Sikhim.  p.  24  etc.

24.  This  expedition  was  under  Colonel  Gawler  who  details  it  in  his  booklet

afore-cited.

25.  In  Tibetan  Dorje-fag-mo.

26.  W.  T.  Blanford's  Mammalia  of  British  India.  \V.  B.  Tegetmeier  in  Field,

September  4th,  1897.

27.  Ceremonial  Institutions.

28.  In  Tibetan  Sang-nag  cho-zin.

29.  Hooker's  Journals,  II,  p.  48.    An  eye-sketch  of  the  plant  was  figured  by

Captn.  \V.  S.  Sherwill  in  Jour  ft.  Bengal  Asiatic  Society,  1853,  p.  618.

30.  The    water    blackened    a    silver    coin    in    three  minutes  and  was  faintly

alkaline  to  litmus  paper.  And  I  found  on  analysing  a  sample  that  it
had  the  following  chemical  composition: — Total  solid  matter  including

free  Sulphur,  Iron,  Lime  and  Silica.      .      .  16-38     grains  per  gallon.

Calcium  carbonate 2-08           ..        ,,         .,

Chlorine  , °'14          55        55         »

Ammonia,  free 0-0014      »        n         35

do.          albuminoid 00008      „        „         „

Nitrates  and  Sulphates traces.

31.  Himal.  Journals,  II.  p.   116.

32.  Jo-dud-lse,  which  may  also  mean  •*  the  honourable  ambrosia".

^^.  On  the  origin  of  the  Flora  of  the  European  Alps  by  J.  Ball,  Proc.  Royal
Geographical  Society,  I.  (1879),  PP-  564—588.  A.  Wallace  in  Darwinism,
p.  401,  and  Thistleton  Dyer  in  Trans.  IJnnean  Secy.  July  1856.  p.  121.

34.  Proc.  Roy.  Geog.  Socy.,  1884,  p.  416.

35.  Jour.  Bengal  Asiatic  Society,  1871,  p.  407.


APPENDIX


435


36.    Sil-bo  is  the  written  form.

37.  A  great  ca'.tle  eptdem'c  was  reported  from  Upper  Tibet  under  the  name
of  "Chunneah",  also  foot-and-mouth  disease  (AVu/r/ia),  as  detailed  in
the  report  of  the  Indian  Cattle  Plague  of  1871.

38.  Published    in    the    Indian  Daily  Xews,   1891,  and  reproduced  in  part    in

the  Proc.  Roy.  Geog.  Society  for  Sept.   1892,  p.  613,  etc.

39.  Report    on    Locusts    by    E.  Cotes,    in  India  Museum  .Voles,  from  which

also  the  illustration  is  derived.

40.  The    remarkable    local    differencies    in  the  rainfall  in  this  portion  of  the

Himalayas,  due  to  the  intervention  of  elevated  mountain  ridges
precipitating  the  rain-clouds,  are  detailed  in  the  following  table,  for
the  data  of  which  I  am  indebted  to  the  Meteorological  Reporter  of  the
Government  of  Bengal.


Rain/a

U  in

Si/cJ

im  Himalayas  and  Ch

umbi

Valley  of

Tibet.

3

O

1 — 1

>>

2

<

2

V

>>

■n

<

V

Oh

1)

C/3

O
0
0

•—

5

>

0

■-

V

£

V

0
0

Q

Yearly
Total

I.  Siligoori  .

o-6o

0-54

I  22

421

10-15

25-49

32-29

2537

I79O

5-04

o-37

009

123-27

2.  Kurseong .

074

i-6o

1-47

608

12-41

28-30

49-26

36-32

23-46

546

0-39

0-26

I65-75

3.  Darjeeling

0-67

°95

1-65

4-6 1

850

23-69

3245

25-6I

1731

583

0-20

022

I  2169

4.  Pedong  . .

1-07

[•08

2-82

5-31

992

1683

2556

22-02

I4-34

3\33

O32

0.38

102-98

5.  Gantok.  .  .

0-65

191

4-52

1014

2846

21.46

2182

24-96

22-75

7-79

i-33

0-57

14636

6.  Yatung
Chumbi

0-41

o-6o

3'94

5-69

4-91

6-72

7'95

977

12-96

3-7o

0.31

0-05

57-01

The  above  average  rainfall  has  been  computed  from  the  rainfall  recorded
during  a  period  of  over  ten  years  in  the  case  of  Darjeeling,  Siligoori
Pedong,  7  years  for  Kurseong,  and  4  and  3  years  respectively  for  Gantok
and  Yatung.  The  rainfall  at  the  latter  place  in  a  valley  of  Tibet
was  registered  by  Mr.  Hobson  of  the  Imperial  Chinese  Customs  Service.

41.    For    further    details  of  the   etymology   of  the  Mountain.  River,  and   Place
Names    of  these  Himalayas  see  my  article  your.  Bengal  Asiatic  Socy..

1891,  pp.  53—79-

2S*


436  APPENDIX

42.  These  '••Dooars"  are  usually  estimated  at   18  in  number,  of  which  11  lie

on  the  frontier  of  Bengal,  where  this  Dooar  of  Daling  and  that  of
Buxar  are  the  chief.  The  other  seven  are  on  the  corresponding
frontier  of  Asam.

43.  This  is  a  literal  translation  of  the  tribal  prefix  " MolanchV  and  seems  to

me  to  be  a  vestige  of  the  former  matriarchal  organisation  of  this
tribe  (see  my  articles  in  the  Berlin  Ethnological  Journal,  1898,  and
Bengal  Asiatic  Socy.  Journal,  part  III,  1898).

44.  See    map    on    p.  349.     Their    eponymous    patron    saint  is  Goorkha-nath,

a  form  of  the  Indian  god  Shiva,  the  Destroyer.

45.  For  further  instances  of  their  valour,  see  a  paper  by  Captain  E.  Vansittart

in  Jour.  Bengal  Asiatic  Socy.,  1895.

46.  Detailed    in    my    paper  on  "Frog  Worship"  in  Indian  Antiquary,   1893.

47.  Yule's  Alar co  Polo,  I.  220.  "On  the  road  from  Kashmir  towards  Tibet",

writes  Feiishta  (Brigg.  IV.  449),  "there  is  a  plain  on  which  no  other
vegetable  grows  but  a  poisonous  grass  that  destroys  all  the  cattle  that
taste  it,  and  therefore  no  horsemen  venture  to  travel  that  route."  In  the
North-Western  Himalayas  the  plant  Andromeda  ovalifolia  is  notorious
for  poisoning  sheep  and  goats,  while  those  living  in  the  locality  are
exempt  (H.  Cleghorn,  Jour.  Indian  Agricult.  Socy.,  XVI,  4).  And  in
regard  to  a  plant  of  the  same  order  (Ericacea)  Mr.  Marsh  "Man  and
Nature",  40,  attests  the  like  fact  regarding  the  Kalmia  angusiifolia  of
New  England.  Some  of  the  Himalayan  rhododendrons  affiliated  to
the  Ericacea  are  also  poisonous.

48.  My    Monograph    "Are    Venomous  Snakes  Auto-toxic?"    Calcutta  1887 —

which  anticipated  the  line  of  enquiry  followed  by  Calmette  and  Frazer
in  regard  to  "  Antivenene".

49.  Seven    species  are  found  in  the  Himalayas,  of  which  at  least  four  occur

in  Sikhim.  The  most  deadly,  A.  ferox  was  described  by  Dr.  Buchanan-
Hamilton  in  his  "Nepal".  A.  vncinatum  is  confined  to  Sikhim  and  is
very  rare,  its  stems  turn.  A.  luridum  is  found  at  a  higher  elevation,
about  14,000  feet,  and  has  dull  red  flowers.  A.  faltnatum  has  kidney-
shaped  leaves  and  greenish-blue  flowers  and  grows  at  elevations  of
8  —  10,000  feet.  The  two  species  hetero-thyllum  and  lycoctonum  are
confined  to  the  Western  Himalayas.  The  former  yields  the  " alees"
drug  of  the  Indian  bazaars.


APPENDIX


437


50.  This  sketch-map  gives  a  correction  in  detail  to  the  larger  map  (appearing
on  p.  349)  and  is  derived  from  Native  Explorer  M.II.s  report  which  was
not  available  when  the  original  map  was  prepared.  This  explorer  also
reports  that  the  track  from  Dingri  passes  to  the  south  of  the  Palgo  lake.
See  also  note  No.  52.


86"

v'

*.■»

•'fMtfi-ralC           ---'

\                    *  "  "*■  "

*      D~Tf          *
U—fr7=k,a

v)

if

WEoz-rewt —

51.  My  Buddhism  of  Tibet,  pp.  67,  370,  371,  382  f.n.,  430.

52.  The  chief  pass  in  this  picture  appears  to  be  the  -'Pangu"  pass  (see  Map

in  preceding  note  No.  50  where  this  name  is  spelt  ''Pangji")  traversed
by  Native  Explorer  M.H.  in  passing  from  Nepal  to  Tibet  in  18S5 — 86,
of  whose  report  no  full  details  seem  to  have  been  published.  He
mentions  that  he  saw  from  this  pass,  a  high  black  rock  with  the
outline  of  a  horse  crowning  an  inaccessible  spur,  also  ice-tables,  and
masses  of  rock  piled  up  in  the  form  of  pillars  20  to  30  feet  high  and
standing  on  solid  beds  of  ice.


53.  D.  Freshfield,  '-Geograph.  Jour."  loc.  cit.

54.  The    only    Europeans  who  seem  to  have  passed  along  part  of  this  ridge

beyond  this  point  are  Captn.  W.  Sherwill.  Messrs.  White  and  G.  Gammie


438  APPENDIX

and  possibly  "A  Lady  Pioneer".  Baboo  P.  N.  Bose  accompanied
Mr.  White  as  geologist  {Records  Geological  Survey  India,  XX1Y.
j).  46  etc.)

55.  In  Jour.  Bengal  Asiatic  Socy.,  1862,  p.  457  etc.  The  words  and  sentences

in  brackets  have  been  added  by  me,  in  order  to  render  the  narrative
more  intelligible.

56.  In  Jour.  Royal  Geographical  Socy.  loc.  cit.

57.  The  bearings  from  the  cliff  above  the  Semo  or  Semarum  pass,  which  on

my  map  should  be  marked  three-eighths  of  an  inch  N.N.W.  from  the
end  of  my  route  as  given  therein,  were: —

S.  Peak  of  Khumbu  Kang-nga-rawa 2820  W.

Peak  Xo.  XIII 2930  „

Everest 2960  .,

Middle  Peak  of  Lamo  Rang 353°  53

Jannu io°.5  E.

Rabur,  S.  Peak 470  „

Rang-tsen  (N.  Peak) 68°.5  „

Rang  La-Xangma 770  „

Rang  La  Peak 980  „


INDEX


INDEX


Abor  tribe,  95,  329.

Aconite,  poison  of,  99,  324;  species

of,  435-

Air,  rarefied,  185,  187;  alarming
effects  of,  207,  221.

Alpine  vegetation,  186;  origin  of,
220,  433.

Alps  compared  with  Himalayas,  1,34.

Altar  in  Lama-temples,  155.

Altitude,  and  boiling  point,  187;
estimation  of,  by  native  explorers,
190;  vegetation  of  high,  220.

Amban,  243,  272.

Aneroid,  rapid  rise  of,  24;  uncer-
tainty of  small,  192,  392.


Annexation,  English  policy  of,  [48.
Antelope,  Tibetan,  225.
Antivenene,     my     researches    on,

325,  435-
Apricots,  167.

Ararat,  a  Sikhimese  Mt.,  111.
Arrows,  chief  weapon  of  Tibetans,

210;  poisoned,  99,  326.
Arums,  260.

Arun  river,  120;  and  Limboos,  149.
Assessment,  primitive,  106.
Atmosphere,  pressure  of,  187,  221.
Avalanche  of  rocks,  198.
Ayu  Yaks,  169.


Badamtam,  68,  74.

Bamboo,  bridges  of,  123,  131;  giant,

260;  jugs,  74;  uses  of,  294.
Band  of  Buddhist  temples,  136,  162.
Bap  pheasant,  113.
Barberry,  182.
Bath,     curious     hot,    239;    in     hot

springs,  202.
Bazaar  of  Darjeeling,  48.
Bear,  black  Himalayan,  24,  77,  426;

mauled  by,  338;  great  yellow,  223.
Beer,  Himalayan,  74;  in  Tibet,  212.
Beggars,  26;  call  of,  48.
Bhim  Tal  lake,  bursting  of,  201.


Bhotan,  246;  chiefs  of,  247;  people
of,  249,  259;  forts,  243,  289;  British,

243.  245-
Bhoteas,  see  Bhotiyas.
Bhotiyas,  45,  93  ;  of  Sikhim,  93,  103  ;

dress  of,  103;  women,  46.
Bis  cobra,  82.
Blanford,  W.  T„  viii,  58.
Blindness,  snow-,  179.
Blistered  feet,  141.
Bogto,  legend  of,  401.
Bones,  sash  of  carved  human,  no;

trumpet  of  human,  424.
Bonvalot,  M.,  414.


442


INDEX


Boodhist,  see  Buddhist.

Boundary  commission,  410,  411.

Brahmaputra  river,  problem  of,  66.

Brambles,  23,  91.

Brick-tea,  248.

Bridges,  cane,  123,  131;  cantilever,
166;  rope,  124;  snow,  234;  delay-
ed by  broken,  161.

Brigands,  397,  400.

Buckwheat,  284.


Buddhas,  living,  140.
Buddhist,    priests,    45,   47,    75,  76;
temple,  68,  136;  bloody  sacrifices,

74-

Burhel  wild  sheep,  113,  216.

Butterflies,  at  great  altitudes,  402;
breeding  ground  of,  298;  mi-
micking dead  leaves,  114.

Buxar,  247.


Campbell,  Dr.  A.  Founder  of
Darjeeling,  39;  introduced  tea-
plant,  39;  imprisoned  by  Sikhim-
ese,  149.

Camping  under  difficulties,  369.

Cane-bridge,  crossing  a  rotten,  173;
mechanism  of,  127.

Canes,  rattan,  166.

Cantilever  bridges,  167.

Cairn,  of  dead  fellow-traveller,  194,
195;  worship  of  the,  115.

Caravan,  our,  63.

Cattle  murrain,  228,  434.

Cave,  bivouac  in,  426,  427 ;  long,  121.

Chabab  pass,  404,  424,  425.

Chakoong,  159.

Cham-dong  pheasant,  113.

Cheebo-Lama,  141.

Chief,  reception  by,  102,  143.

Chinese,  intrigues  of,  in  Sikhim,  151,
410,  413 ;  deceit  of,  413;  minister
of  Lhasa,  243,  272;  (Anglo-)  con-
vention, 273;  passports,  150.

Chola  pass,  283, 285 ;  etymology,  140.

Chola  range,  13.

Cholamoo,  225.

Chomiomo,  31,  231.

Chomnaga,  140.


Choombi,  150;  hot  springs  in,  189;

view    into    N.W.,    188;   traverse

of,  228.
Choomolhari  peak,  33,  278.
Choonabati,  23.

Choongtang  monastery,  161,  230.
Chorten,  64,  69.
Chortennima    misplaced    west    on

map,  over  Chabuk  pass.
Chough  crow,  204.
Chowbanjan,  365.
Chowries,  168.
Chumulari,  33,  278.
Cinchona  plantations,  298.
Citrons,  wild,  129.
Cliffs,  crossing,  on  ladders,  159.
Cloister  in  monastery,  139.
Clouds  rising,  3,  80.
Coal,  22.

Cold  of  snow-passes,  189, 194,208,400.
Colours,  usefulness  of  specific,  122.
Conch-shell  bracelets,  173.
Cooch  tribe,  291,  292,  431.
Cooking    in    camp,    88;    at    great

altitudes,  187.
Coolies  as  porters,  52,  63,  64.
Copper  mines,  101, 242 ;  dread  of,  101.
Corries,  403.


INDEX


443


Cosi,  see  Kosi.

Cost  of  travelling  in  Himalayas,  54.

Cotton,   cultivation   of,  84;  tree,  9.

Cradle,  Nepalese,  17.

Crime,  punishments  of,   in  Nepal,

107 ;  in  Tibet,  213.
Cryptomerias,  41.


Csoma,  the  Hungarian,  50.
Cuckoo,  29.
Cucumbers,  wild,  361.
Curio-sellers,  42.
Currants,  wild,  180,  362.
Cymbals  in  temples,  155.


D


Dl  peak,  235,  386.

D'     „     31,  234.

D:'      „     31.

Daling  fort,  289.

Damsang  fort,  243.

Dandy,  40.

Daphne  bark,  for  paper,  155.

Darjeeling.  Cession  of,  to  English,
148',  founding  of,  38,  149;  exten-
sion, 149, 1 50- growth  of,38;  journey
to,  2—27;  expense  of  living,  53;
market,  42 ;  name,  50,  299;  people
of,  28,  44;  rainfall  at,  299,  434;
situation,  27 ;  view  from,  28,  29.

Death  of  fellow-traveller,  193,  194.

Deb  Rajah,  247,  249.

Decoying  birds,  78.

Deer,  barking,  77;  Sambhar,  260.

Deluge,  legend  of,  no,  115.

Denjong,  431.

Denudation,  37.

Desgodins,  Father,  244.


Devil,  of  hot  springs,  203;  of  the
houses,  97;  paintings  of,  73;  wor-
ship of,  74,  154.

Dewan,  142.

Dharma  Rajah,  249.

Dhaulagiri,  347.

Dhimal  tribe,  86.

Dihong  river,  problem  of,  66.

Dikchu,  river,  133,  cane-bridge,  131.

Dimo  yaks,  169.

Dingri,  351,  406.

Dipper,  206.

Divorce  amongst  Tibetans,  108.

Dogs,  wild,  324.

Dongkia  pass,  31,  165,  175,  224;
game  at,  225;  peak  of,  31 ;  cold  at,
194,  209.

Dooars  290,  435;  annexation  of,  247.

Doobdi  monastery,  31.

Dookpa  Bhotiyas,  45,  249.

Dragon-lizard,  81.

Dudh-Kosi  river,  406.

Dui  pass,  395.


Earth-sculpture,  37.

Edelweiss,  186,  389,  404.

Eggs,  significance  of  present  of,  87.


Empire-building,  147.
Equipment  for  travel,  5S,  60,  61.
Etymology  <>!'  place-names,  144-


444


INDEX


Everest,  Colonel,  4.31.

Everest,  mount.  Discovery  of,  345;
how  named,  345  ;  its  native  names,
346,  348;  its  environs,  349,  351,
436;  inconspicuousness  of,  340;
view  from  Sandook-phu,  331,  333,
340,  342,  343;  from  Senchal,  33;
its  form,  352,  419,  420;  possibility


of  ascending,  359;  axis  of  range

of,   406;  peaks  higher  than,  359,

391,  406.
Exorcism,  312.

Expense  of  travel  in  Sikhim,  51.
Explorer  K.  P.,  63—67,  226;  U.  G.,

121;  M.  H.,  436.


Face,  blackening  of,  179.

Fairs,  70.

Faloot,  334,  337;  view  from,  340.

Feet,  remedy  for  blistered,  141.

Ferns,  14;  edible,  241;  tree- 24,  73.

Festival,  Nepalese,  69,  79;  Tibetan,

256.
Feudal  government,  105.
Firs,  181.
Fishing,    6,    81,   243;  with  bamboo

weirs,  117;  with  push-nets,  6,  7.
Flora,  origin  of  Alpine,  220,  433.
Flutes,  63,  294.
Fly  pests,  121.


Forests,  tropical  18;  stillness  of  at
noon,  84;  semi-tropical,  76;  of
temperate  zone,  24,  256,  257.

Fortifications,  Tibetan,  267,  271;
storming  of,  268.

Fossils,  407,  408.

Freshfield,  D.,  on  possibility  of
scalingEverest,359;  also  Kanchen,

384.
Frogs,  as  food,  98;  worship  of,  315.
Frost-bite,  death  from,  224.
Frozen  in  snow,  334.
Fyoomgang,  141.


Game  in  uplands,  113,  114,399,424.
Gamotang,  112,  398,  425.
Gangtok,  241,  409.
Gaurisankar,  not  Everest,  346.
Gazelle,  Tibetan,  225.
Geological  formations,  72,  37,  82;  of

Kanchen-junga,     384,     385;     of

Tibetan  plateau,  407.
Ghoom,  25.

Glacial  action,  traces  of,  205, 275, 403.
Glaciers,  lowest  limit  of,  205,  206;

smallest  on  southern  slopes,  205 ;

of  Kanchen-junga,  380,  381,  393,

421,  423;  direct  route  to,  375.


Gneiss,  82,  367,  395.

Gnathong,  274;  fort  at,  275;  cold
at,  276.

Goats,  wild,  113,   167.

Goitre,  156,  261;  amongst  animals,
262.

Gold,  mines  in  Tibet,  408 ;  dust  from
Tibet,  248;  import  to  Nepal,  283.

Goggles,  179,  272,  276.

Gooral,  167.

Goorkhas,  origin  of,  301;  non-
Hindoos,  302,  308;  aggressiveness
of,  148,  302;  bravery  of,  303.

Gooroong  nomads,  307,  368.


INDEX


445


Gora  pass,  198,  226,  228.
Government,    of   Bhotan,    247 ;   of

Nepal,  304;  of  Sikhim,  105,  147.
Graham,  Mr.  W.  Climbing  in  Sikhim,

54,  380;  ascent  of  'Kabru',  389;

Sir  M.  Conway  on,  392;  Colonel

Tanner   on,  393;  peak  probably

ascended,  393,  421,  422


Grass,  giant  or  elephant,  Q.
Grazing-stations,   174,  372;  highest,

208.
Great  Rung-eet,  see  Rang-eet.
Guicha  pass,  3  r ;  direct  route  to,  375 ;

glaciers  of,  378;  view  from,  380.
Guides,  want  of,  54.


H


Hailstones,  large,  116.

Ha-pa  Tibetans,  174.

Hare,  piping,  206.

Harman,  Captn.  Researches  of,  on
Tsangpo  river,  66;  death  of,  from
frost-bite,  224.

Harpa  Tibetans,  174.

Harvest  home,  69.

Hastings,  Warren,  missions  of  to
Tibet,  231,  279.

Himalayas.  Attraction  of  sea,  34 ;  axis
of,  385 ;  surpassing  height  of,  1  (dia-
gram), 34;  the  true,  215; 'Outer',
385;  of  Central  Nepal,  356;  of
N.W.  Provinces,  n;  of  Panjab,  9;
of  Sikhim,  9,  10.

Hodgson,  Brian,  305,  430.


Hoffmann,  Mr.  T.,  ix,  233.
Hooker,    Sir  Joseph,    journals  of,

vii,   430;   imprisoned  by  Sikhim-

ese,  149.
Hornbills,  157.
Hot   springs,  in  Choombi,  189;  at

Momay,   216;  at  Yoomtang,  202;

medicinal  virtues  of,  202;  analysis

of  water  of,  203,  443.
House  gods,  97.
Human-bones,  sash  of,  carved  no;

trumpet  of,  424.
Humming  birds,  78.
Hungarians  as  Tartars,  50.
Hunter,  Sir  W.  W.,  430.
Hypsometer,    suggestion    for    im-
proved, 190,  191.


Ice  caves,  233.

Ice  climbing,  54,  388,  390.

Incarnate  Buddhas,  141.


Incense  resin,  263 ;  twigs,  426.
Iron  ore,  22.


Jackals,  335.
Jakcham,  31.
Jalang  bridge,  129.


Jalapahar,    25,   255;  Lepcha  name     Jhooming,  116.


Jannu,  3,  31,  416,  419.

Jelep  pass,  254,  278;  legends  of,  285.

Jew's  harp,  294.


of,  38.


•  Jigatzi,  see  Shiga-tso.


446


INDEX


Jimdar  tribe,  306.
Jong  fort,  108.
Jong-pon,  210,  232.
Jongri,  375,  388.

Jorpokree,    in  spring,  314;   in  au-
tumn, 36  r.


Jubonu,  ascent  of,  388.

Jungle,  tropical,   9,  18;  Sounds  of,

76;  noontide  stillness  of,  84;  food

from,  241.
Junnoo,  3,  31,  416,  419.


K


Kaboor,  419.

Kabroo,  see  Kabru.

Kabru,  3,  31,  330,  379,  393-  from
Kang  La,4i6;  from  below Tangkar
pass,  183 ;  from  the  west  plains,
395;  ascent  by  Mr.  Graham,  389;
Sir  M.  Conway  on,  392;  Colonel
Tanner  on,  393;  peak  probably
mistaken  for,  393,  421,  422.

Kachin  tribe,  95.

Kala  pak-tang,  229.

Kala  tso,  229.

Kakani  ridge,  346.

Kaleej  pheasant,  113.

Kalimpong,  247,  262 ;  annexation  of,
245,  249;  mission  at,  243.

Kambajong,  175,  232.

Kanchen-junga,  2,  3,  31,  386;  sun-
rise on,  29;  from  Senchal,  30;
from  Sandook-phu,  330;  glaciers
of,  ^eastern)  234,  (western)  395,
423;  direct  route  to,  375,  388;  S.E.
face,  381;  possible  ascent  of,  384;
geology  of,  384;  386;  worship  of,
216,  217,  386,  387;  Lepcha  name
of,  387.

Kanchen-jow,  31,  114,  231.


Kang  (La)  pass,  331,  416,  420,421;
Nangma,  416.

Kang-chen,  see  Kanchen-junga.

Kang-tsen,  3,  31,  392,  393,  416,  417.

Katmandu,  112,  340,  346.

Kazis,  102;  list  of,  432.

Kedoom,  167,  193.

Kham,   146.

Khamba-jong,  175,  232.

Khas  tribe,  306.

Khatmandu,   112,  340,  346.

Khoomboo,  406.

Khumbu,  406.

Kinchinjhow,  31,  114,  231.

Kinchinjinga,  see  Kanchen-junga.

King,  of  Bhotan,  247 ;  of  Nepal,  305 ;
of  Sikhim— dynasty  restored  by
English,  148;  appearance,  145;  as
priest,  146;  palace  of,  141;  flight,
409;  restoration,  409.

Kintoop,  explorer  of  Tibet,  54,
65,  226.

Kiranti  tribe,  121,  306,  307.

Kitam,  84.

Koch  tribe,  291,  292,  431.

Krait  snake,  240.

Kurseong,  23.


Lachen,  pass,  160;  valley,  230;  Lay

of,  231.
Lachoong,  pass,  t6o;  river,  160, 165;

village,  171,  180.


Ladders  across  cliffs,  159.
Lakes  formed  by  landslips,  111,  112,
198,  201.


INDEX


447


Lamas,  25,  47,  75,  135,  140,  154;  as
living  Buddhas,  141 ;  intrigues  by,
in  Sikhim,  151, 176;  battle  amongst
rivals,  242;  revolt  against,  163.

Landslips  23,  73;  of  rocks,  198.

Lanok  valley,  236.

Lanterns,  feast  of,  69,  79.

Lapchi  Kang,  348.

Larch,  Himalayan,  180.

Laterite,  22.

Law-code  of  Tibetans,  106.

Leaf,  mimicry  by  butterflies,  114;
by  locusts,  240.

Lebong,  73.

Leech-bites,  remedy  for,  141.

Leeches,  voracious,  130;  nicotine
and,  133.

Legends  of,  Chola,  285 ;  Gamotang,
399;  Ge,  196;  Rang-eetandTeesta,
in ;  Tendoag,  no.

Leopard,  122;  snow-,  396;  trap  for,
396;  use  of  markings  of,  122.


Lepchas,  44,  63,  78,  93;  women,  99;
character,  93;  dress,  94,  99,  100;
environments,  93;  matriarchy,  99;
tribal  names,  92, 423;  distribution,
243;  temples,  156;  dying  out,  293;
knife,  95 ;  music  and  songs,  294.

Lete,  valley,  176.

Lhasa,  railway  to,  281,  282;  lay-
governor  of,  414  \  Chinese  minister
of,  243;  Manning's  route  to,  279.

Life,  Lamas'  regard  for,  164,  213.

Limboo  tribe,  119,  120,  307,  349.

Limestone,  22,  82 ;  on  Tibetan
plateau,  407,  408.

Lingtoo,  Tibetan  fort  at,  152,  226;
storming  of,  268.

Loads  for  coolies,  52,  55.

Locusts,  plagues,  253,  254;  eaten
by  Nepalese,  253.

Luck,   Goddess   of  Good,  69,  396.


M


Macaulay  (Colman),  mission  of,  150,

210,  231.
Madder,  wild,  85.
Magar  tribe,  306,  309.
Magnolias,  259,  315.
Mahanadi  river,  5.
Mahaseer,  81.

Mainom  mt.,  no,  117;  caves  in,  121.
Malaria,  deadlv,  5,  6,  81,  83;  limit

of,  85.
Mangar,  306,  309.
Mango,  wild,  119.
Markings,   usefulness    of,   114,  122.
Marmots,  219.
Mascotte,  a,  196,  399.
Mass  in  Buddhist  temples,  154.
Mastiff,  Tibetan,  170.


Matriarchy,  99,  292,  432.

Meat,  raw,  eaten  by  Tibetans,  222.

Mech  tribe,  6,  292.

Medicinal  herbs,  371.

Men,  fairy  wild,  legend  of,  223.

Mermaids,  404.

Mica,  20,  407.

Migo  peak,  370.

Migrating  plants,   19.

Mikado  as  priest-king,  147.

Milarapa's  hermitage  on  Everest,35 1.

Millet  beer,  74;  ode  to,  76.

Mimosa,  9.

Mines,  copper,  101, 242 ;  native  dread

of,  1 01,  408.
Mimicry   in  butterflies  114;  locusts

240.


M«


INDEX


Momay,  208,  216.
Mon  country,  93.
Monal  pheasants,  113,  401.
Monastery,  Buddhist,  at  Ging,  73;
at  Tumlong,  137;  our  quarters  in,

i35.  139-
Monba,  92.

Money,  absence  of,  92.
Monks  in  temple,  154.
Months  for  travelling,  57.
Moormi,  45,  307.
Morang,  431.
Morik  tribe,  92.


Mountain,  railway,  5,  13,  22 ;  sculp-
ture, 37  ;  worship  of,  no,  115,  216,
347,  35 1,  386.

Mt.  Blanc  compared  with  Himalayan
peaks,  1  (diagram),  34,  185.

Murwa  beer,  74,  135;  ode  to,  76.

Music,  of  Lepchas,  294;  of  Tibetans,
314;  in  temple,  136;  beggar's
call,  48.

Musk,  248.

Musk-deer,  334.

Mystic  spells,  87.


N


Naga,  tribes,  95;  dragons,  219.

Naini  Tal  lake,  201.

Nakoo  pass,  236.

Namehi,  101.

Names  of  places,  how  coined,  144,
285.

Nangna  pass,  236,  237.

Narseng,  31,  377.

Native  explorers,  altitude  observa-
tions of,  190.

Nego  cave,  370,  426,  427.

Neh  Mendong,  121.

Nepal,  political  position  of,  304;
ruler  of,  303 ;  closure  of,  422,  423 ;


Eastern,  349,  406;  Himalayas  of,

356.
Nepalese,    20,    21,    44,    301 — 304;

character  of,  303;  women,  17,  21,

44,  310;  dress  of,  45,  49,  310;  Bho-

tiyas,  46  \  invasion  of  Sikhim,  171 ;

colonization  of  Sikhim,  39, 152, 243.
Nettle,  cloth  of  fibre  of,  85;  deadly,

119.
Newar  tribe,  307 ;  bankers,  242.
New  Year  of  Tibetans,  256.
Nicotine  and  leeches,  133.
Nomads,  174,  284.
North  Western  Himalayas,  9, 11,  84.


Oaths,    in  Tibet,   107;  by  dipping

hands  in  yak's  blood,  163.
Offices  in  Sikhim,  list  of  titles,  432.
Om  Mani  Padme  Hoong,  25.
Oma  pass,  397.
Orange  trees,  19,  85.


Orchids,  epiphytic,  24,  79,  257,  259;
home  of,  315 ;  rare,  316 ;  extermin-
ation of,  317.

Ordeal,  Trial  by,  107.

Orisons  in  Buddhist  temples,  136.

Ovis  ammon,  219,  225,  370.


INDEX


449


Packing  up,  52,  55,  58.

Pagla  Jhora,  23.

Pakyong,  242.

Pahariyas,  306.

Palace  of  Sikhim,  141.

Palm,  rattan,  128.

Pandim,  31,  376,  377;  direct  route
to,  375 ;  glaciers  of,  375, 378 ;  ascent
impracticable,  377.

Pangji  pass,  436.

Pangu  pass,  436.

Panjab  Himalayas,  9,  10.

Paper  laurel,  155,  319.

Partridges,  snow-,  204,  206.

Pashok,  260.

Pass  of  Chabab,  403;  Chola,  284
Dongkia,  31,  225 ;  Dui,  395;  Gora
198;  Guicha,  31,  377;  Jelep,  278
Kang,  416,  417;  Oma,  397;  Pata
227;  Pangu,  436;  Seeboo,  114
Tangkar,  191;  worship  of  spirits
of,  115;  closed  by  Tibetans
guard,  204.

Pata  pass,  227  ;  lake  of,  228.

Peaches,  19,  167.

Peak  XIII,  331,  3^3,  342,  347,  353,
355,  37°,  420.

Peak  XX,  346,  349.

Pedong,    244,    263;   annexation  of,

245,  247- _
Pemiongchi  monastery,  31,  116, 176.
Perpetual  snow,  line  of,  187.
Phaloong  glaciers,  206.
Pheasants,  113,  204,  401 ;  silver-,  159;

snow-,  424.


Phodang  monastery,   135,  136,  139.

Phosphorescence,  182.

Photography,  glass  plates  v.  films,  83 ;
native  dread  of,  85.

Picturesque,  Eastern  ideas  of  the,  36.

Pig,  wild,  scare  by,  293.

Pigeon,  snow-,  181.

Pines,  Cheer,  84.

Pipon,  157.

Pipsee  flies,  121.

Plains,    view  of,  from  hills,  14,  33.

Plants,  migrating,  19;  of  high  alti-
tudes, 220.

Poisoned  arrows,  99,  326.

Poisonous,  aconite,  324,  435 ;  air,
185;  grass,  401,  435.

Polyandry  in  Sikhim,  197.

Ponies,  Tibetan,  40,  196,  248.

Porterage,  27,  52,  63,  64,  264.

Pradakshina  rite,  115.

Prayers  in  Buddhist  temples,  15s.

Praying-barrel,  109;  -cylinders,  25,
47,  143;  -flags,  26,  68;  -water-mills,
157 ;  -wheels,  25,  47,  143.

Preparations  for  journey,  50.

Presentation  scarf,  161,  172,  176,  208.

Presents,  to  Lamas,  140 ;  from  people,
119;  to  officials,  154;  to  people,
100,  158.

Pressure  of  atmosphere,  24,  187,
221 ;  on  ear,  24.

Property  amongst  Indo-Chinese
tribes,  105.

Punishments  for  crime,  107,  213.

Pundim,  see  Pandim.


Queen   of  Sikhim,  145;  as  polyan-  I  Quinine,  cheapening  of,  298.
drist,  197.


45o


INDEX


R


Railway,  mountain,  59,  13,  20,  22;
to  Choombi  valley  and  Lhasa,
2S1,  282.

Rainfall,  to;  in  Sikhim  and  Choombi,
434;  in  Bhotan,  290;  in  Darjeeling,
299,  434;  in  relation  to  glaciers,
205,  206.

Rajah,  of  Bhotan,  247 ;  of  Nepal,  305  ;
of  Sikhim,  145  ;ofKuchBehar,  292.

Rang-eet  river,  34,  80,  1 10 ;  crossing
in  canoe,  83;  fishing  in,  82;  junc-
tion with  Teesta,  250,  251.

Rang-po  river,  117.

Rangiroon  forest,  in,  256,  257.

Rangliot,  in.

Rang  nyo-oong,  in.

Rarefied  air,  alarming  effects  of,
1S5,  207,  221.

Raspberries,  23,  91,  361.


Ratong  river,  498.
Rattan  palms,  128.
Reception,  at  Buddhist  temple,  162 ;

by  Sikhimese  chiefs,  102,  142.
Rhenok,  264.
Rhododendron,  forest  of,  in  bloom,

320;  in  Chola  range,  270;  as  trees,

319;  poisoning  by  leaves  of,  323.
Rhubarb,  giant  wild,  185.
Rivers,  erosion  by,  37,  289.
Rocks,  erosion  of,  37,  206 ;  splitting

by  frost,  201.
Rong,  tribal  name  of  Lepchas,  92,

no,  295,  435.
Rong  Shar,  349,  407.
Rose,  wild,  361.
Rungaroon,  in,  256,  257.
Rung-eet,  see  Rang-eet.
Ryot  river,  133,  134.


Sacrifices,    bloody,     by     Buddhist

priests,  74.
Sakya  monastery,  49.
Sal     forest,     13,     15;   incense-resin

of,  263.
Salt,  trade  in  Tibetan,  98,  248,  285,

408,  420.
Salutation,   Peculiar   Tibetan,    171,

172,  279.
Sambhar  deer,  260.
Sand-grouse,  225.
Sandook-phu,    in    spring,    324;    in

autumn,  361;  the  name,  324;  view,

327,  33°,  333-
Scarf  presentation,  161,  172, 176,  208.
Schlagintweit  on  Everest,  345,  352.
Scorpions,  369.
Screw  pine,  18.
Sea,  attraction  of,  by  Himalayas,  35.


Season  for  travelling,  57.

Seeboo  pass,  215.

Semo  pass,  415,  437.

Semoram  pass,  415,  437.

Senchal,  29,  355;  view  from,  29 — 39;
meaning  of  name,  39 ;  forest  on,
256.

Serbo  pass,  215.

Serpents,  77,  240.

Service  in  temple,  154.

Sharpa  Bhotiyas,  46,  373,  374,  406.

Shales,  22,  82.

Sheep,  Tibetan,  158,  211;  wild,  dig-
ging salt,  113.

Shell  bracelets,  173.

Sherpa  Bhotiyas,  46,  373,  406.

Shigatse,  175.

Shingsapa  tribe,  407.

Sibo  river,  198,  226;  glacier  in,  227.


INDEX


451


Sikhim,  9,  10,  84;  annexation  of,
149,  152;  birds  of,  431;  Chinese
intrigues  in,  93,  150,  151,  410,413  ;
King  and  Queen  of,  145;  flight
of  King,  409;  slavery  in,  103,  149;
Tibetan   invasion    of,   93;  tribes

of,  43-

Siligoori,  2;  meaning  of  name,  431.

Silok-vok,  101.

Simvovonchu,  235.

Singalelah  range,  13,  364.

Siniolchu,  31,  234.

Singpho  or  Kachins,  95.

Siwaliks,  9,  385.

Slaves  in  Sikhim,  103,  149.

Snakes,  77,  239;  my  researches  on
venom  of,  325,  435.

Snow,  line  of  perpetual,  187 ;  -bears,
223 ;  -leopard,  396 ;  -partridge,  204 ;
-pheasant,  424;  -pigeons,  204;  sun-
stroke in  snow,  190,  194;  -storm,
224,  401.

Snow-blindness,  179.


Someshwar  range  and  snows,  357.

Sonada,  24.

Songs,  Tartar,  18,76,87  ;Lepcha,  295.

Sookna,  13,  385.

Spectre  of  Brocken,  362.

Spells,  87  ;  in  Tibetan  warfare,  269.

Spiders,  gorgeous  giant,  240.

Spinning,  100,  296.

Spirits  of  mountains,  no,  351,  386;

of  passes,  115;  of  rivers,  no,  262,

265,   301;   of  lakes,  401,  404;  of

hot  springs,  189,  202.
Springs,  hot,  189,  202;  analysis  of

v/ater  of,  202,  433.
Stag,  the  Sikhim,  204.
Strawberries,  23.
Sub-Himalayas,  385.
Sunbirds,  78.

Sunrise  on  snowy  range,  29,  386.
Sunset  on  snows,  337.
Sunstroke  in  snows,  190,  194.
Swing  at  fair,  69,  71.


Taboo,  97,  313.

Talisman,   legend  of  the  lost,  197.

Tanner,  Colonel,  sketches  by,  ix;
on  Everest,  346.

Tangkar  pass,  176,  180,  188,  189.

T'ar,  wild  goat,  113.

Tartars,  Tibetans  as,  212;  Hungari-
ans, as  50.

Tashiding,  116,  368.

Tashihumpo  Governor  of,  232;  le-
gend of,  196.

Taxidermists,  63,  362.

Tcheeboo  Lama,  141.

Tea-plant.  Introduced  to  Darjeeling
by  Dr.  Campbell,  39,  73 ;  blights
of,  6,  250,  253 ;  other  leaves  used
as  tea,  100 ;  Chinese  brick-tea,  248.


Tea  service  in  temples,  155.

Teesta  river,  in;  Tibetan  name  of,
129;  Lepcha  name  of,  129;  junc-
tion with  Rang-eet,  250;  bridge
over,  123,  260.

Temple,  Buddhist,  at  Darjeeling,  68;
at  Choongtang,  162  ;  at  Ging,  73;
at  Phodang,  135, 137 ;  band  of,  136.

Tendong,  legend  of,  no;  worship
of,  115;  caves  in,  121.

Tengri  town,  351,  352,  406.

Tent,  frozen,  192.

Terai,  annexation  of,  149;  unhealth-
iness  of,  5 ;  vegetation  of,  9, 18,  289.

Theebaw  as  priest-king,  147.

Thlonok  valley,  236.

Thrush,  new  species  of,  144,  432.


15-


I  N  I  >  I '.  X


Tibet,  annexation  of,  viii,  282;
frontier  delimitation  troubles,  152,
409;  national  party  in,  413;  trade
with,  218,  259,  410;  treaty  with,
401 ),  411;  Chinese  intrigues  in,
i5°>    151,   410;   invades   Sikhim,

Tibetans,  23, 25,  43,  46, 93  ;character,
212,  213;  dress,  104;  food,  222;
fortifications,  267;  guard,  193,  207,
20S;  mastiff,  170;  ponies,  40,
196,  248;  saddle,  196;  salute,  277;
sheep,  158,  211;  soldiers,  269;  war-
fare rules,  270;  weapons,  210,  268.

Ticks,  122.

Tientsin  treaty,  150.

Tiger-hill,  33;  see  Senchal.

Timber  for  Tibet,  206.


Tinki   fort,  407.

Toloong  valley,  156,  158,  233  sepul-
chre of  the  Kings,  156.
Tonglu,  300,  320,  361,  385.
Toon  tree,  84.

Torture  of  criminals  in  Tibet,  213.
Trade  with  Tibet,  150,  248,  259,  410.
Train,  5,  9,  13,  20.
Tree-ferns,  24,  73.
Trees,  upper  limit  of,  182,  206.
Tribal  re-initiation,  366.
Tsang,  government  of,  232;  sheep,

158.
Tsangpo  river,  problems  of,  66.
Tsoontang.  163.
Tumlong  monastery,  133 ;  our  cloister

in,  139.
Tungra  pass,  176.


V


Valleys,  glacier-formed,  206,  403.
Vegetation  of  high  altitudes,  220;  of
damp  temperate  zone,  24,  257.


Vipers,  240.

Volcanic  action  in  Himalayas,  386.


W


Waloong,  395.
Weapons  of  Tibetans,  210.
Wheel  swing,  69,  71.
White,  Mr.  J.  C,  ix,  233,  236, 242,383.
Wild  men,   legends   of  hairy,  223.
Wild   yak's  horns  as  drinking-cups
212.


Wine  of  country,  74,  ode  to  76.

Witchcraft,  312.

Woodpeckers,      immense     variety

of,  119.
Worship    of  Everest,   348,  351;  of

Kanchen-junga,  386;  of  Tendong,

no,  115.


Yaks,  168  •,  meaning  of  name,  179;

climbing  agility  of,  173,  405 ;  milk

of,    174,    284;   riding,   223,    397;

disease  of,  228;  sacrifice  of,  163;

wild,  225.
Valoong  river,  405.


Yams,  wild,  98,  241.

Yampoong,  371.

Yangma  tribe,  371.

Yatung,  267,  279;  rainfall  of,  434.

Yoomtang,  204.


Zemoo  glacier,  233.


Zones,  climatic,  9,  73,  182.


London :  1


T"'   ersit


THIS  BOOK  IS  DUE  ON  THE  LAST  DATE
STAMPED  BELOW


AN     INITIAL     FINE     OF     25     CENTS

WILL  BE  ASSESSED  FOR  FAILURE  TO  RETURN
THIS  BOOK  ON  THE  DATE  DUE.  THE  PENALTY
WILL  INCREASE  TO  50  CENTS  ON  THE  FOURTH
DAY  AND  TO  $I.OO  ON  THE  SEVENTH  DAY
OVERDUE.


JUL  24  1933


5   1937


R  11

6Way5  2Lu
40tfWPL
CT1  3  1955  LV

27%'56/IV


DEC  2  71962
OCT  291966      5

RECEIVED

DEC  16'66-10  AM

LOAN  DEPT.


NOV  0  5  1987

UCBERKELrY

FEB  0  9  2001
ENVt
fEB  1  1   2Q04

LD  21-50m-l,*3


YD   10578
UC  BERKLEY  UBRMW

1


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY


A:
