Lives of Alchemystical Philosophers
========================================
A. E. Waite (1888) — Waite's biographical dictionary of alchemy — the Victorian reference for the alchemical tradition. Source: https://archive.org/details/livesofalchemyst1888wait. Public domain.

LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

Open  Knowledge  Commons  and  Harvard  Medical  School


J  loot  t  J/ era  tic  JznJla^tA
LIVES

(Ail  .

alchemystical  Philosophers

BASED  ON  MATERIALS  COLLECTED  IN  1815

AND

SUPPLEMENTED   BY  RECENT  RESEARCHES

WITH    A    PHILOSOPHICAL    DEMONSTRATION    OF    THE    TRUE

PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  MAGNUM  OPUS,  OR  GREAT  WORK

OF  ALCHEMICAL  RE-CONSTRUCTION,  AND  SOME

ACCOUNT  OF  THE  SPIRITUAL  CHEMISTRY

ARTHUR  EDWARD  WAITE

author  of

'the  real  history  of  the  rosicrucians ; "  "the  mysteries  of  magic:

a  digest  of  the  writings  of  eliphas  levi,"  etc.

TO   WHICH   IS   ADDED

A    BIBLIOGRAPHY    OF   ALCHEMY   AND
HERMETIC   PHILOSOPHY

LONDON
GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN

i883

PREFACE.

The  foundation  of  this  work  will  be  found  in  "  The  Lives
of  Alchemystical  Philosophers ;  with  a  Critical  Catalogue
of  Books  in  Occult  Chemistry,  and  a  Selection  of  the  most
celebrated  Treatises  on  the  Theory  and  Practice  of  the
Hermetic  Art,"  which  was  published  in  the  year  1815  by
Lackington,  Allen,  &  Company,  of  Finsbury  Square,
London.  This  anonymous  book  has  been  attributed  by
certain  collectors  to  Francis  Barrett,  author  of  the  notori-
ous treatise  entitled  "The  Magus,  or  Celestial  Intelli-
gencer ; "  but  it  may  be  safely  affirmed  that,  alike  in
matter  and  treatment,  it  far  transcends  the  extremely
meagre  capacities  of  that  credulous  amateur  in  occultism.
It  is  indeed  a  work  of  much  sense  and  unpretentious
discrimination,  and  is  now  a  bibliographical  rarity  which
is  highly  prized  by  its  possessors.

The  independent  researches  which  have  supplemented
the  biographical  materials  of  the  original  compilation  have
produced  in  the  present  volume  what  is  practically  a  new
work  under  an  old  title ;  those  lives  which  have  been  left
substantially  untouched  as  to  facts  have  been  more  or  less
rewritten  with  a  view  to  the  compression  of  prolixities  and
the  elimination  of  archaic  forms,  which  would  be  incon-
gruous in  a  work  so  extensively  modified  by  the  addition
of  new  details.     The  "Alphabetical  Catalogue  of  Works

6  PREFACE.

on  Hermetic  Philosophy  "  has  been  considerably  enlarged
from  such  sources  as  Langlet  du  Fresnoy's  Histoire  de  la
Philosophie  Hermetique.  The  preliminary  account  of  the
"  Physical  Theory  and  Practice  of  the  Magnum  Opus  "  is  a
slight  original  sketch  which,  to  readers  unacquainted  with
alchemy,  will  afford  some  notion  of  the  processes  of
accredited  adepts.  The  introductory  essay  on  the  object
of  alchemical  philosophy  advocates  new  and  important
views  concerning  the  great  question  of  psychal  chemistry,
and  appreciates  at  their  true  worth  the  conflicting  theories
advanced  by  the  various  schools  of  Hermetic  interpretation.

IMPORTANT  NOTE.

I  AM  forced  to  append  to  this  Preface  a  correction  of  one  or  two  errors
of  absolutely  vital  importance,  which  were  unfortunately  overlooked
in  the  text.  On  page  188,  line  18,  the  date  was  intended  to  read  1643  ;
on  page  189,  line  5,  read  a?mo  trigesimo  tertio  for  trigesimo  anno;  and
on  line  6,  anno  vigesimo  tertio  instead  of  vigesimo  anno.  But  if  these
emendations  restore  the  passage  to  its  original  integrity,  a  discovery
which  I  have  made  while  this  work  was  passing  through  the  press  has
entirely  cancelled  its  value.  I  have  been  gratified  with  a  sight  of  the
original  edition  of  Philalethes'  Introitus  Apertus — a  small  octavo
pamphlet  in  the  original  paper  cover  as  it  was  published  at  Amsterdam
in  the  year  1667.  It  definitely  establishes  that  its  mysterious  author
was  born  in  or  about  the  year  1623,  or  two  years  later  than  the  Welsh
adept,  Thomas  Vaughan,  with  whom  he  has  so  long  been  identified.
This  original  edition  is  excessively  scarce ;  I  believe  I  am  the  only
English  mystic  who  has  seen  it  during  the  present  generation.  The
reader  must  please  understand  that  the  calculation  in  the  pages  re-
ferred to  was  based  on  the  date  1643 ;  this  date,  in  the  light  of  the
original  edition,  has  proved  erroneous,  and  by  a  curious  chance,  that
which  was  accidentally  printed,  turns  out  to  be  correct  at  the  expense
of  the  calculation.

ANALYSIS    OF    CONTENTS.

PAGE

Preface   5

Introductory  Essay  on  the   True    Principles    and
Nature  of  the  Magnum  Opus,  and  on  its  Relation

to  Spiritual  Chemistry 9

On  the  Physical  Theory  and  Practice  of  the  Magnum

Opus 38

LIVES  OF  THE  ALCHEMISTS.

Geber 44

Rhasis •'      .  46

Alfarabi .  48

Avicenna 51

Morien 53

Albertus  Magnus 57

Thomas  Aquinas :       .        .  61

Roger  Bacon 63

Alain  of  Lisle 67

Raymond  Lully 68

Arnold  de  Villanova .       .  88

Jean  de  Meung       .        .        .        ...        .        .        .  90

The  Monk  Ferarius 92

Pope  John  XXII 93

Nicholas  Flamel 95

Peter  Bono .       .        .        .  118

Johannes  de  Rupecissa        . 119

Basil  Valentine 120

Isaac  of  Holland  . 123

Bernard  Trevisan .124

John  Fontaine .129

Thomas  Norton 130

Thomas  Dalton 133

8  CONTENTS.

PAGE

Sir  George  Ripley i34

PlCUS  DE  MlRANDOLA I36

Paracelsus l37

Denis  Zachaire H°

Berigard  of  Pisa J48

Thomas  Charnock 148

Giovanni  Braccesco 151

Leonardi  Fioravanti 153

John  Dee 153

Henry  Khunrath J  59

Michael  Maier 160

Jacob  BOhme 161

J.  B.  van  Helmont .        .  166

Butler 168

Jean  D'Espagnet 170

Alexander  Sethon 171

Michael  Sendivogius 175

GUSTENHOVER l8l

Busardier 182

Anonymous  Adept 184

Albert  Belin 186

ElRENiEUS  PHILALETHES 1 87

Pierre  Jean  Fabre 200

John  Frederick  Helvetius 201

Guiseppe  Francesco  Borri 208

John  Heydon 210

Lascaris 211

Delisle 216

John  Hermann  Obereit 219

Travels,  Adventures,  and  Imprisonments  of  Joseph

Balsamo 220

An  Alphabetical  Catalogue  of  Works  on  Hermetic

Philosophy  and  Alchemy 274

Appendix 307

Index 313

INTRODUCTORY    ESSAY

ON   THE   TRUE   PRINCIPLES   AND   NATURE   OF   THE

MAGNUM   OPUS,   AND   ON   ITS   RELATION

TO   SPIRITUAL   CHEMISTRY.

THOSE  unfamiliar  with  modern  alchemical  criticism,  even
if  they  have  some  acquaintance  with  the  mystical  laby-
rinth of  the  turba  philosopkorttm,  will  probably  learn  with
astonishment  that  the  opinions  of  competent  judges  are
divided  not  only  upon  the  methods  of  the  mysterious  Her-
metic science,  but  upon  the  object  of  alchemy  itself.  That
it  is  concerned  with  transmutation  is  granted,  but  with
the  transmutation  of  metals,  or  of  any  physical  substance,
into  material  gold,  is  strenuously  denied  by  a  select  sec-
tion of  reputable  students  of  occultism.  The  transcendental
theory  of  alchemy  which  they  expound  is  steadily  gain-
ing favour,  though  the  two  text-books  which  at  present
represent  it  are  both  out  of  print  and  both  exceedingly
scarce.

In  the  year  1850  "A  Suggestive  Inquiry  concerning
the  Hermetic  Mystery  and  Alchemy,  being  an  attempt
to  recover  the  Ancient  Experiment  of  Nature,"  was  pub-
lished anonymously  in  London  by  a  lady  of  high  intel-
lectual gifts,  but  was  almost  immediately  withdrawn  for
reasons  unknown,  and  which  have  given  occasion,  in  conse-
quence, to  several  idle  speculations.  This  curious  and
meritorious  volume,  quaintly  written  in  the  manner  of  the

IO  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

last  century,  originated  the  views  which  are  in  question
and  opened  the  controversy.

Fifteen  years  after  the  appearance  of  the  "  Suggestive
Inquiry,"  an  American  writer,  named  Hitchcock,  after
apparently  independent  researches  arriving  at  parallel  con-
clusions, made  public,  also  anonymously,  in  the  year  1865,
some  "  Remarks  on  Alchemy  and  the  Alchemists,"  in  a
small  octavo  volume  of  very  considerable  interest.  A
psychic  interpretation  was  placed  by  the  previous  author
on  the  arcana  of  Hermetic  typology,  and  Mr  Hitchcock,
by  adopting  a  moral  one,  brought  the  general  subject
within  the  reach  of  the  most  ordinary  readers,  and  attracted
considerable  attention  In  consequence.

The  views  thus  enunciated  have  filtered  slowly  through,
and,  combined  with  the  Paracelsian  theory  of  the  psychic
manufacture  of  material  gold  by  the  instrumentality  of  the
interior  magnes,  have  considerably  influenced  the  revived
occultism  of  the  present  day.  The  question  in  itself,  taken
at  its  lowest  standpoint,  is  one  of  the  most  curious  to  be
found  within  the  whole  circle  of  esoteric  archaeology ;  and
for  students  whose  interest  in  the  great  alchemical  mystery
is  of  another  than  antiquarian  kind,  it  is  truly  of  palmary
interest,  and  of  supreme  importance.  In  an  account  of  the
lives  and  labours  of  the  Hermetic  adepts,  it  calls  for
adequate  consideration  ;  and,  after  careful  researches,  I
believe  myself  to  have  discovered  a  true  alchemical
theory  which  will  be  equally  acceptable  to  all  schools  of
interpretation.

The  supreme  and  avowed  object  of  every  hierophant,  as
well  as  of  every  postulant  and  pretender,  in  the  ars  magna
discovered  by  Hermes  Trismegistus,  has  been  commonly
supposed  to  be  the  chemical  manufacture  of  material  gold
from  commercially  inferior  substances.  On  the  other  hand,
Hitchcock,  marshalling  an  impressive  series  of  verbatim

INTRODUCTORY  ESSAY.  1  I

citations  from  writers  of  all  ages  and  all  nationalities,
undertakes  to  demonstrate  that  the  concealed  subject  of
every  veritable  adept  is  one  only — namely,  MAN,  the
triune,  and  that  "  the  object  also  is  one,  to  wit,  his  improve-
ment, while  the  method  itself  is  no  less  one,  to  wit,  nature
directed  by  art  in  the  school  of  nature,  and  acting  in  con-
formity therewith  ;  for  the  art  is  nothing  but  '  nature  acting
through  man.'  "  Again,  "  the  genuine  alchemists  were  not
in  pursuit  of  worldly  wealth  or  honours.  Their  real  object
was  the  perfection,  or,  at  least,  the  improvement  of  man.
According  to  this  theory,  such  perfection  lies  in  a  certain
unity,  a  living  sense  of  the  unity  of  the  human  with  the
divine  nature,  the  attainment  of  which  I  can  liken  to
nothing  so  well  as  to  the  experience  known  in  religion  as
the  New  Birth.  The  desired  perfection,  or  unity,  is  a
state  of  the  soul,  a  condition  of  Being,  and  not  a  mere
condition  of  KNOWING.  This  condition  of  Being  is  a
development  of  the  nature  of  man  from  within,  the  result
of  a  process  by  which  whatever  is  evil  in  our  nature  is  cast
out  or  suppressed,  under  the  name  of  superfluities,  and  the
good  thereby  allowed  opportunities  for  free  activity.  As
this  result  is  scarcely  accessible  to  the  unassisted  natural
man,  and  requires  the  concurrence  of  divine  power,  it  is
called  Donum  Dei."

When  the  individual  man,  by  a  natural  and  appropriate
process,  devoid  of  haste  or  violence,  is  brought  into  unity
with  himself  by  the  harmonious  action  of  intelligence  and
will,  he  is  on  the  threshold  of  comprehending  that  transcen-
dent Unity  which  is  the  perfection  of  the  totality  of  Nature,
"  for  what  is  called  the  '  absolute,'  the  '  absolute  perfection,'
and  the  perfection  of  Nature,  are  one  and  the  same."

In  the  symbolism  of  the  alchemists  this  writer  tells  us
that  sulphur  signifies  Nature,  and  mercury  the  supernatural.
The  inseparable  connection  of  the  two  in  man  is  called  Sol,

12  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

but  "  as  these  three  are  seen  to  be  indissolubly  one,  the  terms
may  be  used  interchangeably."  According  to  Hitchcock,
the  mystical  and  mysterious  instrument  of  preparation  in
the  work  of  alchemy  is  the  conscience,  which  is  called  by
a  thousand  misleading  and  confessedly  incongruous  names.
By  means  of  this  instrument,  quickened  into  vital  activity
under  a  sense  of  the  presence  of  God,  the  matter  of  the
stone,  namely,  Man,  is,  in  the  first  place,  purged  and
purified,  to  make  possible  the  internal  realisation  of  Truth.
"  By  a  metonymy,  the  conscience  itself  is  said  to  be  purified,
though,  in  fact,  the  conscience  needs  no  purification,  but
only  the  man,  to  the  end  that  the  conscience  may  operate
freely."  *

One  of  the  names  given  by  the  alchemists  to  the  con-
science, on  this  theory,  is  that  of  a  middle  substance  which
partakes  of  an  azurine  sulphur— that  is,  of  a  celestial  spirit
— the  Spirit  of  God.  "  The  still  small  voice  is  in  alchemy,
as  in  Scripture,  compared  to  a  fire,  which  prepares  the  way
for  what  many  of  the  writers  speak  of  as  a  Light."

Hitchcock  elsewhere  more  emphatically  asserts  that  there
is  but  one  subject  within  the  wide  circle  of  human  interests
that  can  furnish  an  interpretation  of  the  citations  which  he
gives,  and  it  is  that  which  is  known  under  the  theological
name  of  spiritual  Regeneration.  This  gift  of  God  the
alchemists  investigated  as  a  work  of  Nature  within  Nature.
"  The  repentance  which  in  religion  is  said  to  begin  conver-
sion, is  the  '  philosophical  contrition  '  of  Hermetic  allegory.
It  is  the  first  step  of  man  towards  the  discovery  of  his
whole  being.  They  also  called  it  the  black  state  of  the
matter,  in  which  was  carried  on  the  work  of  dissolution,

*  There  is  no  need  to  suppose  a  metonymy.  The  conscience  is  a  guide
which  education  easily  perverts.  Therefore,  supposing  it  to  be  really  the
instrument  of  the  alchemists,  it  may  eminently  stand  in  need  of  purification,
and,  except  in  the  most  general  matters,  is  at  best  an  uncertain  guide.

INTRODUCTORY  ESSAY.  I  3

calcination,  separation,  &c,  after  which  results  purification,
the  white  state,  which  contains  the  red,  as  the  black  con-
tained the  white."  The  evolution  of  the  glorious  and
radiant  red  state  resulted  in  the  fixation  or  perfection  of
the  matter,  and  then  the  soul  was  supposed  to  have  entered
into  its  true  rest  in  God.

As  this  interpretation  is  concerned  chiefly  with  the  con-
science, I  have  called  it  the  moral  theory  of  alchemy  ;  but
Hitchcock,  as  a  man  of  spiritual  insight,  could  not  fail  to
perceive  that  his  explanatory  method  treated  of  the  way
only,  and  the  formless  light  of  an  "  End,"  which  he  could
not  or  would  not  treat  of,  is,  upon  his  own  admission,  con-
tinually glimmering  before  him.

For  the  rest,  when  the  alchemists  speak  of  a  long  life  as
one  of  the  endowments  of  the  Stone,  he  considers  that  they
mean  immortality ;  when  they  attribute  to  it  the  mira-
culous properties  of  a  universal  medicine,  it  is  their  inten-
tion to  deny  any  positive  qualities  to  evil,  and,  by  inference,
any  perpetuity.  When  they  assert  that  the  possession  of
the  Stone  is  the  annihilation  of  covetousness  and  of  every
illicit  desire,  they  mean  that  all  evil  affections  disappear
before  the  light  of  the  unveiled  Truth.  By  the  transmuta-
tion of  metals  they  signified  the  conversion  of  man  from  a
lower  to  a  higher  order  of  existence,  from  life  natural  to
life  spiritual,  albeit  these  expressions  are  inadequate  to
convey  the  real  meaning  of  the  adepts.  The  powers  of  an
ever  active  nature  must  be  understood  by  such  expres-
sions as  "fires,"  "  menstruums,"  &c,  which  work  in  unison
because  they  work  in  Nature,  the  alchemists  unanimously
denying  the  existence  of  any  disorder  in  the  creation  of
God.

In  conclusion,  Hitchcock  states  once  more  that  his  object
is  to  point  out  the  subject  of  alchemy.  He  does  not
attempt  to  make  its  practical  treatment  plain  to  the  end  of

14  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

the  sublime  operation.  It  is,  therefore,  evident  that  he,  at
any  rate,  suspected  the  existence  of  more  transcendent
secrets  which  he  distrusted  his  ability  to  discuss,  and
declined  to  speak  of  inadequately.

The  author  of  the  "  Suggestive  Inquiry "  had  already
taken  the  higher  standpoint  of  psychic  interpretation,  and
developed  her  remarkable  principles,  which  I  must  en-
deavour to  reproduce  as  briefly  as  possible.

According  to  this  work,  the  modern  art  of  chemistry  has
no  connection  with  alchemy  except  in  its  terminology,
which  was  made  use  of  by  the  adepts  to  veil  their  divine
mysteries.  The  process  of  the  whole  Hermetic  work  is
described  with  at  least  comparative  plainness  in  the  writ-
ings of  the  philosophers,  with  the  exception  of  the  vessel
which  is  a  holy  arcanum,  but  without  the  knowledge  of  it
no  one  can  attain  to  the  magistery.  Now,  the  publication
of  the  writings  of  Jacob  Bohme  caused  the  alchemists  who
were  his  contemporaries  to  fear  that  their  art  could  not
much  longer  remain  a  secret,  and  that  the  mystic  vase  in
particular  would  be  shortly  revealed  to  all.  This  vase  is
the  vas  insigne  electionis,  namely,  Man,  who  is  the  only  all-
containing  subject,  and  who  alone  has  need  to  be  investi-
gated for  the  eventual  discovery  of  all.  The  modern
adepts  describe  the  life  of  man  as  a  pure,  naked,  and
unmingled  fire  of  illimitable  capability.  Man,  therefore,
is  the  true  laboratory  of  the  Hermetic  art ;  his  life  is  the
subject,  the  grand  distillery,  the  thing  distilling,  and  the
thing  distilled  ;  and  self-knowledge  is  at  the  root  of  all
alchemical  tradition.

"  Modern  discoveries  are  now  tending  to  the  identification
of  light,  the  common  vital  sustenant,  as  in  motive  accord
throughout  the  human  circulatory  system  with  the  planet-
ary spheres,  and  harmonious  dispositions  of  the  occult
medium  in  space  ;  and  as  human  physiology  advances  with

INTRODUCTORY  ESSAY.  15

the -other  sciences,  the  notion  of  our  natural  correspond-
ency enlarges,  till  at  length  the  conscious  relationship
would  seem  to  be  only  wanting  to  confirm  the  ancient
tradition."

In  addition  to  the  faculties  which  he  commonly  exerts
to  communicate  with  the  material  universe,  man  possesses
within  him  the  germ  of  a  higher  faculty,  the  revelation
and  evolution  of  which  give  intuitive  knowledge  of  the
hidden  springs  of  nature.  This  Wisdom-faculty  operates
in  a  magical  manner,  and  constitutes  an  alliance  with  the
Omniscient  Nature,  so  that  the  illuminated  understand-
ing of  its  possessor  perceives  the  structure  of  the  universe,
and  enjoys  free  perspicacity  of  thought  in  universal  con-
sciousness.

In  support  of  this  statement  it  is  argued  that  the  evidence
of  natural  reason,  even  in  the  affairs  of  common  life,  is
intuition,  that  intuitive  faith  has  a  certainty  above  and
independent  of  reason,  that  the  subsistence  of  universals  in
the  human  mind  includes  a  promise  far  beyond  itself,  and
is  stable  proof  of  another  subsistence,  however  consciously
unknown.

The  true  methods  and  conditions  of  self-knowledge  are
to  be  learned  from  the  ancient  writers.  The  discovery  of
the  veritable  Light  of  alchemy  is  the  reward  of  an  adequate
scrutiny  of  true  psychical  experience.  Alchemy  proposes
"  such  a  reducation  of  nature  as  shall  discover  this  latex
without  destroying  her  vehicle,  but  only  the  modal  life  ;
and  professes  that  this  has  not  alone  been  proved  possible,
but  that  man  by  rationally  conditionating  has  succeeded  in
developing  into  action  the  Recreative  Force."

The  One  Thing  needful,  the  sole  act  which  must  be  per-
fectly accomplished  that  man  may  know  himself,  is  the
exaltation,  by  the  adequately  purified  spirit,  of  the  cognis-
ing faculty  into  intellectual  reminiscence.     The  transcen-

1 6  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

dental  philosophy  of  the  mysteries  entirely  hinges  on  the
purification  of  the  whole  understanding,  without  which
they  promise  nothing.

The  end  in  view  is  identical  with  Hermetists,  Theurgists,
and  with  the  ancient  Greek  mysteries  alike.  It  is  the
conscious  and  hypostatic  union  of  the  intellectual  soul  with
Deity,  and  its  participation  in  the  life  of  God  ;  but  the  con-
ception included  in  this  divine  name  is  one  infinitely  tran-
scendental, and  in  Hermetic  operations,  above  all,  it  must
ever  be  remembered  that  God  is  within  us.  "  The  initiated
person  sees  the  Divine  Light  itself,  without  any  form  or
figure  —  that  light  which  is  the  true  astrimi  solis,  the
mineral  spiritual  sun,  which  is  the  Perpetual  Motion  of  the
Wise,  and  that  Saturnian  Salt,  which  developed  to  intellect
and  made  erect,  subdues  all  nature  to  His  will.  It  is  the
Midnight  Sun  of  Apuleius,  the  Ignited  Stone  of  Anax-
agoras,  the  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony,  the  Armed
Magnet  of  Helvetius,  the  Fiery  Chariot  of  Mercaba,  and
the  Stone  with  the  new  name  written  on  it  which  is
promised  to  him  that  overcometh,  by  the  initiating  Saviour
of  mankind."

This  method  of  interpreting  the  Hermetic  allegories  is
calculated  to  exalt  the  alchemists  indefinitely  in  the  estim-
ation of  all  thinking  minds.  From  possibly  avaricious
investigators  of  a  by-way  of  physical  science,  they  are  trans-
figured into  dreamers  of  the  sublimest  imaginable  dream,
while  if  that  which  they  conceived  was  accomplished,  they
are  divine  and  illuminated  monarchs  who  are  throned
on  the  pinnacles  of  eternity,  having  dominion  over  their
infinite  souls.

A  theory  so  attractive,  devised  in  the  interests  of  men
whom  romance  has  already  magnified  in  the  auriferous
cloud  of  mystery  which  envelopes  both  their  claims  and
their  persons,  is   eminently  liable  to  be  accepted  on  in-

INTRODUCTORY  ESSAY.  I  7

sufficient  grounds,  because  of  its  poetical  splendour,  so  it
will  be  well  to  ascertain  the  facts  and  arguments  on  which
it  is  actually  based.

Both  Hitchcock  and  the  unparalleled  woman  to  whom
we  are  indebted  for  the  "  Suggestive  Inquiry  "  appeal  to  -
alchemical  writings  in  support  of  their  statements.     A  few
of  their  quotations  and  commentaries  must  therefore  be
submitted  to  the  reader.

The  first  point  which  strikes  the  alchemical  student
is  the  unanimous  conviction  of  all  the  philosophers  that
certain  initiatory  exercises  of  a  moral  and  spiritual  kind
are  an  indispensable  preliminary  to  operations  which  are
commonly  supposed  to  be  physical.  Here  the  incongruity
is  evident,  and  it  is  therefore  urged  that  the  process  itself
is  spiritual,  and  that  it  was  materialised  in  the  writings  of
the  adepts  to  confuse  and  mislead  the  profane,  as  well
as  for  the  protection  of  esoteric  psychologists  in  the  days
of  the  Inquisition  and  the  stake.

The  following  preparation  for  the  study  of  Antimony  is
recommended  by  Basil  Valentin.  "  First,  Invocation  to
God,  with  a  certain  heavenly  intention,  drawn  from  the
bottom  of  a  sincere  heart  and  conscience,  pure  from  all
ambition,  hypocrisy,  and  all  other  vices  which  have  any
affinity  with  these  ;  as  arrogance,  boldness,  pride,  luxury,
petulancy,  oppression  of  the  poor,  and  other  similar  evils,
all  of  which  are  to  be  eradicated  from  the  heart ;  that  when
a  man  desires  to  prostrate  himself  before  the  throne  of
grace,  for  obtaining  health,  he  may  do  so  with  a  conscience
free  from  unprofitable  weeds,  that  his  body  may  be  trans-
muted into  a  holy  temple  of  God,  and  be  purged  from  all
uncleanness.  For  God  will  not  be  mocked  (of  which  I
would  earnestly  admonish  all),  as  worldly  men,  pleasing
and  flattering  themselves  with  their  own  wisdom,  think.
God,  I  say,  will  not  be  mocked,  but  the  Creator  of  all

u3

lb  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

things  will  be  invoked  with  reverential  fear,  and  acknow-
ledged with  due  obedience  .  .  .  Which  is  so  very  true  that
I  am  certainly  assured  no  impious  man  shall  ever  be  par-
taker of  the  true  medicine,  much  less  of  the  eternal,
heavenly  bread.  Therefore  place  your  whole  intention
and  trust  in  God  ;  call  upon  him,  and  pray  that  he  may
impart  his  blessing  to  you.  Let  this  be  the  beginning  of
your  work,  that  by  the  same  you  may  obtain  your  desired
end,  and  at  length  effect  what  you  intended.  For'the  fear
of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom."

The  second  qualification  is  contemplation,  by  which,
says  Basil,  "  I  understand  an  accurate  attention  to  the
business  itself,  under  which  will  fall  these  considerations
first  to  be  noted.  As,  what  are  the  circumstances  of  any-
thing ;  what  the  matter ;  what  the  form ;  whence  its
operations  proceed ;  whence  it  is  infused  and  implanted  ;
how  generated  .  .  .  also  how  the  body  of  everything
may  be  .  .  .  resolved  into  its  first  matter  or  essence.  This
contemplation  is  celestial,  and  to  be  understood  with
spiritual  reason ;  for  the  circumstances  and  depths  of
things  cannot  be  conceived  in  any  other  way  than  by  the
spiritual  cogitation  of  man  :  and  this  contemplation  is  two-
fold. One  is  called  possible,  the  other  impossible.  The
latter  consists  in  copious  cogitations  which  never  proceed
to  effects,  nor  exhibit  any  form-  of  matter  which  falls  under
the  touch,  as  if  any  should  endeavour  to  comprehend  the
Eternity  of  the  Most  High,  which  is  vain  and  impossible  ;
yea,  it  is  a  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  so  arrogantly  to  pry
into  the  Divinity  •  itself,  which  is  immense,  infinite,  and
eternal ;  and  to  subject  the  incomprehensible  counsel  of
the  secrets  of  God  to  human  inquisition.  The  other  part
of  contemplation  which  is  possible  is  called  theory.  This
contemplates  that  which  is  perceived  by  touch  and  sight,
and  hath  a  nature  formed  in  time ;  this  considers  how  that

INTRODUCTORY  ESSAY.  19

nature  may  be  helped  and  perfected  by  resolution  of  itself;
how  every  body  may  give  forth  from  itself  the  good  or
evil,  venom  or  medicine,  latent  in  it ;  how  destruction  and
confection    are   to   be    handled,  whereby,   under   a    right
proceeding,  without  sophistical  deceits,  the  pure  may  be
severed  and  separated  from  the  impure.    This  separation  is
made  and  instituted  by  divers  manual  operations  .  .  .  some
of  which  are  vulgarly  known  by  experience,  others  remote
from  vulgar  experience.     These  are  calcination,  sublima-
tion, reverberation,  circulation,  putrefaction,  digestion,  dis-
tillation, cohobation,  fixation,  and  the  like  of  these ;  all  the
degrees   of  which   are   found    in   operating,  learned,  and
perceived,  and   manifested    by   the   same.      Whence   will-
clearly  appear  what   is   movable,  what   is    fixed,  what  is
white,  what  red,  black,  blue,  green,  namely,  when  the  opera-
tion is  rightly  instituted  by  the  artificer;  for  possibly  the
operation   may  err,  and  turn  aside  from    the  right  way  ;
but  that  Nature  should  err,  when  rightly  handled,  is  not
possible.     Therefore  if  you  shall  err,  so  that  nature  cannot
be  altogether  free,  and  released  from  the  body  in  which  it  is
held  captive,  return  again  unto  your  way ;  learn  the  theory
more    perfectly,  and    inquire    more    practically   into    the
method   of  your   operating,   that   you    may   discover   the
foundation  and  certainty  in  the  separation  of  all  things ;
which  is  a  matter  of  great  concern.    And  this  is  the  second
foundation  of  philosophy  which  follows  prayer ;  for  in  that
the   sum    of  the   matter   lies,  and   is   contained  in  these
words  : — Seek  first   the  kingdom   of  God  and  his   right-
eousness by  prayer,  and  all  other  things  shall  be  added  unto
you."

Perhaps  it  will  be  thought,  even  at  this  preliminary  stage
of  citation,  that  there  is  much  to  be  said  for  the  physical
theory  of  alchemy.  A  particular  appeal  is,  however,  made
to  the  celebrated  "  Canons  of  Espagnet,"  and  to  the  follow-

20  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

ing  passage  : — "  The  light  of  this  knowledge  is  the  gift  of
God,  which  by  his  freeness  he  bestoweth  upon  whom  he
pleaseth.  Let  none,  therefore,  set  himself  to  the  study
hereof,  until,  having  cleared  and  purified  his  heart,  he
devote  himself  wholly  unto  God,  and  be  emptied  of  all
affection  to  things  impure.  Those  that  are  in  public
honours  and  offices,  or  be  always  busied  with  private  and
necessary  occupations,  let  them  not  strive  to  attain  to  the
top  of  this  philosophy  ;  for  it  requireth  the  whole  man  ;
and  being  found,  possesseth  him,  and  being  possessed,
challengeth  him  from  all  long  and  serious  employments,
esteeming  all  other  things  as  strange  unto  him,  and  of  no
value.  Let  him  that  is  desirous  of  this  knowledge  clear
his  mind  from  all  evil  motions,  especially  pride,  which  is
abomination  to  heaven,  and  the  gate  of  hell.  Let  him  be
frequent  at  prayers  and  charitable ;  have  little  to  do  with
the  world ;  abstain  from  too  much  company-keeping,  and
enjoy  constant  tranquillity,  that  the  mind  may  be  able  to
reason  more  freely  in  private,  and  be  more  highly  lifted
up ;  for  unless  it  be  kindled  with  a  beam  of  divine  light,
it  will  hardly  be  able  to  penetrate  the  hidden  mysteries  of
truth.  ...  A  studious  Tyro  of  a  quick  wit,  constant  mind,
inflamed  with  the  love  of  philosophy,  very  quick  in  natural
philosophy,  of  a  pure  heart,  perfect  in  manner,  mightily
devoted  to  God,  even  though  ignorant  of  chemistry,  may
enter  with  confidence  the  highway  of  Nature,  and  peruse
the  books  of  the  best  philosophers.  Let  him  seek  out  an
ingenious  companion  for  himself,  and  not  despair  of  accom-
plishing his  desire."

Here  Hitchcock  points  out  that  the  operation  is  obviously
not  chemical,  for  the  chief  instrument  is  determined  and
concentrated  thinking  on  the  loftiest  intellectual  planes.
The  inference  that  skill  in  natural  philosophy  is  indis-
pensable, is    contradicted   by  the   counter-statement   that

INTRODUCTORY  ESSAY.  2  I

ignorance  of  chemistry  is  not  necessarily  a  source  of
failure.  In  this  connection,  it  must  be  remembered  that
the  distinction  between  alchemy  and  chemistry  can  scarcely
be  said  to  have  existed  at  the  period  of  Espagnet,  and  the
statement  would  at  first  sight  seem  almost  equivalent  to
asserting  that  it  was  unnecessary  to  be  versed  in  the
properties  of  metals  to  accomplish  the  magnum  opus.

"  Let  a  lover  of  truth,"  continues  the  author  of  the
Canons,  "  make  use  of  but  a  few  philosophers,  but  of  best
note  and  experienced  truth ;  let  him  suspect  things  that
are  quickly  understood,  especially  in  mystical  names  and
secret  operations,  for  truth  lies  hid  in  obscurity ;  nor  do
philosophers  ever  write  more  deceitfully  than  when  plainly,
nor  ever  more  truly  than  when  obscurely/'

In  the  same  manner,  "The  New  Light  of  Alchemy,"
falsely  ascribed  to  Sendivogius,  and  which  is  in  high
appreciation  among  Hermetic  students,  declares  that
"  the  most  commendable  art  of  alchemy  is  the  gift
of  God,  and  truly  it  is  not  to  be  attained  but  by  the
alone  favour  of  God  enlightening  the  understanding,
together  with  a  patient  and  devout  humility,  or  by  an
ocular  demonstration  from  some  experienced  master."

In  Anima  Magica  Abscondila,  Eugenius  Philalethes
gives  the  following  advice  to  the  student,  whether  of
magic  or  alchemy: — "Attempt  not  anything  rashly.
Prepare  thyself  till  thou  art  conformable  to  Him  whom
thou  wouldst  entertain.  Thou  hast  Three  that  are  to
receive,  and  there  are  three  that  give.  Fit  thy  house  to  thy
God  in  what  thou  canst,  and  in  what  thou  canst  not,  He
will  help  thee.  When  thou  hast  set  thy  house  in  order,
do  not  think  thy  guest  will  come  without  invitation.  Thou
must  tyre  Him  out  with  pious  importunities.  This  is  the
way  in  which  thou  must  walk,  in  which  thou  shalt  perceive  a
sudden  illustration,  eritque  in  te  cum  Lumine  Ignis,  cum  Igne

2  2  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

Ventus,  cum  Vento  Potestas,  cum  Potestate  Scientia,  cum
Scientid  sauce  mentis  integritas.  This  is  the  chain  that
qualifies  a  magician.  This  is  the  place  (viz.,  the  abode  of
the  Archetype)  where  if  thou  canst  but  once  ascend,
and  then  descend —

"  Tunc  ire  ad  Mundum  Archetyptan  scepe  atque  redire,
Citndarumque  Patrem  rerum  spectare  licebif —

thou  hast  got  that  spirit  Qui  quicquid portentosi  Mathematici,
quicquid  prodigiosi  Magi,  quicquid  invidentes  Naturae
persecutors  Alckymista?,  quicquid  Dmnonibus  deteriores
malefici  Necromantes  promittere  audent.  Ipse  novit  dis-
cernere  et  efficere  idque  sine  omni  crimine,  sine  Dei  offe7isd,
sine  Religionis  injuria.  Such  is  the  power  he  shall  receive,
who  from  the  clamorous  tumults  of  this  world  ascends  to  the
supernaturall  still  voice,  from  this  base  earth  and  mind
whereto  his  body  is  allyed,  to  the  spirituall,  invisible
elements  of  his  Soul."

After  the  same  fashion,  the  still  greater  Eirenasus
Philalethes  declares  that  God  alone  communicates  the
whole  secret  of  the  aqua  philosophorum,  that  all  untaught
by  Him  must  wander  in  mists  and  error,  but  that  it
is  revealed  to  those  who  labour  in  study  and  prayer.

Quotation  might  be  continued  indefinitely.  The  Centrum
Natural  Concentratum,  ascribed  to  Alipili,  and  a  treatise  of
some  reputation,  declares  that  "The  highest  wisdom  con-
sists in  this,  for  man  to  know  himself,  because  in  him  God
has  placed  his  eternal  word,  by  which  all  things  were  made
and  upheld,  to  be  his  Light  and  Life,  by  which  he  is
capable  of  knowing  all  things  in  time  and  eternity.  .  .  .
Therefore  let  the  high  inquirers  and  searchers  into  the  deep
mysteries  of  nature,  learn  first  what  they  have  in  them-
selves, before  they  seek  in  foreign  matters  without  them ;
and  by  the  divine  power  within  them,  let  them  first  heal
themselves  and  transmute  their  own  souls  ;  then  they  may

INTRODUCTORY  ESSAY.

go  on  prosperously  and  seek  with  good  success  the  mysteries
and  wonders  of  God  in  all  natural  things."

These  quotations,  some  of  which  are  unknown  to,  or,  at
any  rate,  uncited  by  Hitchcock,  do  not  by  any  means
establish  the  points  which  are  debated  in  his  book.  If  the
philosophers  from  whom  they  are  selected  were  in  posses-
sion of  the  whole  secret  of  wealth,  they  saw  fit  to  conceal
it  from  the  profane,  and  their  works,  full  of  practically
insoluble  enigmas,  are  proclamations  of  the  fact  of  their
success,  rather  than  lights  for  those  who  sought  to  follow
in  their  steps.  Under  these  circumstances,  they  saw  that
in  the  blind  guess-wOrk  which  their  symbols  created  of
necessity,  no  student  would  ever  attain  to  the  true  light  of
alchemy  except  by  pure  chance — in  other  words,  by  the
favour  of  Heaven,  which,  accordingly,  they  counselled  him
to  supplicate.  None  of  the  passages  in  question  are  incon-
sistent with  the  physical  object  of  alchemy,  and  in  the
citation  from  Alipili,  it  is  evident  that  the  mysteries  and
wonders  referred  to  include  metallic  transmutation  in  the
mind  of  the  writer.  The  investigator  of  natural  secrets  was
advised  to  take  counsel  with  the  Author  of  natural  secrets
after  the  only  possible  manner.

"  Whoever  attempteth  the  search  of  our  glorious  stone,
he  ought,  in  the  first  place,  to  implore  the  assistance  of  the
all-powerful  Jehova,  at  the  throne  of  his  mercy,  who  is
the  true  and  sole  author  of  all  mysteries  of  nature  ;  the
monarch  of  heaven  and  earth,  the  King  of  kings,  omni-
potent, most  true  and  most  wise ;  who  not  only  maketh
manifest  in  the  microcosm,  the  truth  of  every  science  to
worthy  philosophers,  and  liberally  bestoweth  both  natural
and  divine  knowledge  on  the  deserving  and  faithful ;  but
also  layeth  open  his  treasures  of  wealth  and  riches  which

24  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

are  locked  up  in  the  abyss  of  nature  to  those  who  devoutly
worship  him.  And  forasmuch  as  none  are  permitted  to
touch  the  mysteries  of  nature  with  foul  fingers,  therefore  it
behoveth  all  who  attempt  such  matters,  to  lay  aside  their
natural  blindness  from  which,  by  the  light  of  the  holy
Scripture  and  a  stedfast  faith,  they  may  be  freed,  that  being
the  means  by  which  the  Holy  Spirit  doth  clearly  make
manifest  the  most  profoundly  hidden  light  of  nature,  which
light  alone  lays  open  the  way  to  the  wisdom  of  nature,  and
to  unlock  the  most  abstruse  mysteries  thereof."

Even  the  subdued  imagination  which  is  claimed  by  the
author  of  "  Remarks  on  Alchemy  and  the  Alchemists,"  is
likely  to  go  astray  in  the  labyrinth  of  alchemical  sym-
bolism, and  some  of  the  interpretations  of  Hitchcock  are
exceedingly  forced  and  unnatural.  His  citations  are  indis-
criminately gathered  from  the  most  transcendental  writers,
and  from  those  who,  like  George  Starkey,  have  exhausted
language  in  emphatic  declarations  that  their  subject  and
their  object  are  actual  metallic  gold.

-"  Zoroaster's  Cave,  or  the  philosopher's  intellectual  echo
to  one  another  from  their  caves,"  is  the  title  of  a  small
work  quoted  by  Hitchcock.  It  opens  thus  : — "  Dry  water
from  the  Philosophers'  Clouds !  Look  for  it  and  be  sure
to  have  it,  for  it  is  the  key  to  inaccessibles  and  to  those
locks  that  would  otherwise  keep  thee  out.  It  is  a  middle
nature  between  fixed  and  not  fixed,  and  partakes  of  a
sulphureous  azurine.  It  is  a  raw,  cool,  feminine  fire,  and
expects  its  impregnation  from  a  masculine  solar  sulphur."
Hitchcock's  interpretation  is  this  : — a  pure  conscience !
Look  for  it  and  be  sure  that  you  have  it,  &c.  It  is  of  a
middle  nature  between  soul  and  body,  and  partakes  of  a
heavenly  spirit.     It  expects  its  life  from  God.

It  is  needless  to  say  that  with  this  method  any  meaning
could   be   extracted    from  any  allegorical  writings.     The

INTRODUCTORY  ESSAY.  25

author  of  the  "  Suggestive  Inquiry "  is  far  more  pro-
found and  evinces  a  far  keener  insight.  It  is  evident,
however,  that  the  truth  (or  the  fallacy)  of  both  methods
of  interpretation  depends  on  the  connection  of  the
alchemists  with  practical  chemistry.  On  this  vital  ques-
tion, the  uniocular  condition  of  both  writers  is  utterly
astounding.

"  No  modern  art  or  chemistry  has  anything  to  do  with
alchemy,  beyond  the  borrowed  terms  which  were  made  use
of  in  continuance  chiefly  to  veil  the  latter."  That  is  to
say,  the  alchemists  did  not  lay  the  foundations  of  the
science,  the  beginnings  of  which  are  attributed  to  them,
and  in  this  matter  we  are  not  by  any  means  indebted  to
them.  This  extreme  statement  is  qualified  by  the  later
commentator,  who  gives  a  more  detailed  expression  to  his
views.

"  That  chemistry  is  indebted  for  its  introduction  among
the  sciences  indirectly  to  the  alchemists  is  certainly  true  ;
at  least  I  have  no  disposition  to  question  it ;  but  not  to
the  immediate  labours  of  the  alchemists  themselves,  whose
peculiar  work  was  one  of  contemplation  and  not  of  the
hands.  Their  alembic,  furnace,  cucurbit,  retort,  philosophical
egg,  &c,  in  which  the  work  of  fermentation,  distillation,
extraction  of  essence  and  spirits,  and  the  preparation  of
salts  is  said  to  have  taken  place,  was  man — yourself,
friendly  reader;  and  if  you  will  take  yourself  into  your
own  study,  and  be  candid  and  honest,  acknowledging  no
other  guide  or  authority  but  Truth,  you  may  easily  dis-
cover something  of  Hermetic  philosophy;  and  if  at  the
beginning  there  should  be  '  fear  and  trembling,'  the  end
may  be  a  more  than  compensating  peace.

"  It  is  a  plain  case,  that,  for  the  most  part,  the  experi-
ments which  led  the  way  to  chemistry  were  made  by  men
who  were  misled  by  the  alchemists,  and   sought  gold   in-

26  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

stead  of  truth ;  but  this  class  of  men  wrote  no  books
upon  alchemy.  Many  of  them  no  doubt  died  over  their
furnaces,  '  uttering  no  voice]  and  none  of  them  wrote
books  upon  the  philosopher's  stone,  for  the  simple  reason
that  they  never  discovered  anything  to  write  about.  I
know  that  some  impostors  purposely  wrote  of  mysteries  to
play  upon  the  credulity  of  the  ignorant,  but  their  works
have  nothing  alchemical  about  them.  It  is  true  also  that
many  books  were  written  by  men  who  really  imagined  that
they  had  discovered  the  secret,  and  were  nevertheless  mis-
taken. But  this  imaginary  success  could  never  have  had
place  when  gold  was  the  object,  because  in  the  bald  fact
no  man  was  ever  deceived :  no  man  ever  believed  that  he
had  discovered  a  method  of  making  gold  out  of  inferior
metals.  The  thing  speaks  for  itself.  It  is  impossible  that
any  man  can  ever  be  deluded  upon  this  bare  fact ;  but  it
is  quite  otherwise  with  the  real  object  of  alchemy,  in  which
men  have  been  deceived  in  all  ages  .  .  .  for  the  subject  is
always  in  the  world,  and  hence  the  antiquity  claimed  for
the  art  by  the  alchemists."

This  passage  is  a  long  series  of  simply  incredible  mis-
statements. The  history  of  chemistry  and  the  lives  of  the
adepts  alike  bear  witness  against  it.  My  object  in
publishing  this  book  is  to  establish  the  true  nature  of  the
Hermetic  experiment  by  an  account  of  those  men  who
have  undertaken  it,  and  who  are  shewn  by  the  plain  facts
of  their  histories  to  have  been  in  search  of  the  trans-
mutation of  metals.  There  is  no  need  for  argument ;  the
facts  speak  sufficiently.  It  is  not  to  the  blind  followers  of
the  alchemists  that  we  owe  the  foundation  of  chemistry ;  it
is  to  the  adepts  themselves,  to  the  illustrious  Geber,  to  that
grand  master  Basilius  Valentinus,  to  Raymond  Lully,  the
supreme  hierophant.     What  they  discovered  will  be  found

INTRODUCTORY  ESSAY.  2  J

in  the  following  pages ;  here  it  will  be  sufficient  for  my
purpose  to  quote  the  views  of  a  French  scientist  who  has
made  a  speciality  of  alchemy,  and  who  is  also  a  high
authority  on  the  subject  of  modern  chemistry.

"  It  is  impossible  to  disown  that  alchemy  has  most  directly
contributed  to  the  creation  and  the  progress  of  modern
physical  sciences.  The  alchemists  were  the  first  to  put  the
experimental  method  in  practice,  that  is,  the  faculty  of
observation  and  induction  in  its  application  to  scientific
researches  ;  moreover,  by  uniting  a  considerable  number  of
facts  and  discoveries  in  the  order  of  the  molecular  actions
of  bodies,  they  have  introduced  the  creation  of  chemistry.
This  fact  ...  is  beyond  every  doubt.  Before  the  eighth
century,  Geber  put  in  practice  the  rules  of  that  experimental
school,  the  practical  code  and  general  principles  of  which
were  merely  developed  later  on  by  Galileo  and  Francis
Bacon.  The  works  of  Geber,  the  '  Sum  of  all  Perfection,'
and  the  'Treatise  on  Furnaces,'  contain  an  account  of
processes  and  operations  wholly  conformed  to  the  methods
made  use  of  to-day  in  chemical  investigations  ;  while  Roger
Bacon,  in  the  thirteenth  century,  applying  the  same  order
of  ideas  to  the  study  of  physics,  was  led  to  discoveries
which,  for  his  time,  were  astounding.  It  is  impossible,
therefore,  to  contest  that  the  alchemists  were  the  first  to
inaugurate  the  art  of  experience.  They  prepared  the
arrival  of  the  positive  sciences  by  basing  the  interpretation
of  phenomena  on  the  observation  of  facts,  and  openly
breaking  with  the  barren  metaphysical  traditions  which  had
so  long  checked  the  progress  of  the  human  mind."  *

With  all  their  mystery,  their  subterfuges,  and  their
symbolism,  the  testimony  of  the  alchemists  themselves  to
the  physical  nature  of  their  object  is  quite  unequivocal  and
conclusive.       One   of   the   most   celebrated    experimental

*  "L'Alchimie  et  les  Alchimistes,"  p.  93.

28  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

treatises  in  the  English  language  is  that  entitled  "  The
Marrow  of  Alchemy."  It  professes  to  discover  the  secrets
and  most  hidden  mystery  of  the  philosopher's  elixir,  both
in  theory  and  practice.  It  was  published  by  Eirenaeus
Philoponos  Philalethes,  that  is  George  Starkey,  and  is
generally  supposed  to  be  the  work  of  the  true  Philalethes  ;
at  any  rate  it  develops  his  principles,  and  derives  its
inspiration  from  the  author  of  the  Introitus  Apertus.  Now,
this  little  book  testifies  over  and  over  again,  and  that  in
the  most  emphatic  manner,  to  the  physical  object  of  the
alchemists,  and  to  the  fact  that  they  operated  on  common
gold.

"  The  first  matter  which  we  take  for  our  work  is  gold,  and
with  it  mercury,  which  we  decoct  till  neither  will  forsake
the  other,  in  which  work  both  die,  rot  by  putrefaction,  and
after  that  are  regenerate  in  glory.  It  is  actual  gold  and
nothing  else.  What  does  not  equal  a  metal  in  weight  will
never  enter  it  in  flux.  Nothing  but  the  metalline  will
dwell  with  metals."  A  severe  criticism  is  passed  on  the
blind  folly  of  those  who  endeavour  to  reap  the  secret  stone
from  strange  material  subjects.  "  Gold  is  the  subject  of  our
art  alone,  since  by  it  we  seek  gold."  Those  who,  like  the
noble  son  of  art,  Morien,  advise  students  to  descend  into
themselves  to  find  the  true  matter,  only  intended  to  point
out  how  kind  begets  kind  : —

"  As  then  himself  his  likeness  did  beget,
So  gold  must  gold,  this  law's  to  Nature  set."

Morien  adds  that  the  secret  stone  must  be  sought  in  the
dunghill,  which  signifies,  says  the  "  Marrow  of  Alchemy,"
that  the  metal  must  be  brought  to  putrefaction.  "  Those
who  assert  that  common  gold  is  not  the  matter  are  in
error.  Gold  is  one.  No  other  substance  under  Heaven
can  compare  with  it.  Gold  is  the  noble  seed  of  our  art.
Yet  it  is  dead.     It  needs  to  be  unloosed,  and  must  go  to

INTRODUCTORY  ESSAY.  29

water.  It  must  be  tempered  with  its  own  humidity ;  it
must  be  blent  with  our  true  water,  disposed  in  a  due
vessel,  closed  with  all  caution,  settled  in  a  due  nest,  and
with  due  fire  inclined  to  motion."  It  becomes  the  true  gold
of  the  philosophers  when  by  a  retrograde  motion  it  tends
to  resolution.  "  Then  it  is  our  Sun,  our  Marchasite,  and,
joined  with  our  Moon,  it  becomes  our  bright  crystal
Fountain."

But  if  the  lives  and  the  writings  of  the  alchemists  so
clearly  establish  the  physical  nature  of  the  Hermetic  aim
and  opus,  it  may  well  be  demanded  how  a  psychical  or
moral  interpretation  could  be  reasonably  set  upon  the
symbols  and  the  ambition  of  all  the  adepts.  Such  inter-
pretations can  never  be  wholly  exonerated  from  the  charge
of  extravagance,  and  of  a  purblind  indifference  to  the  most
plain  and  notorious  facts,  but  they  may  be  to  some  extent
justified  by  a  consideration  of  the  allegorical  methods  of
the  alchemists  and  by  the  nature  of  the  Hermetic  theory.

The  profound  subtleties  of  thought  seldom  find  adequate
expression  even  when  the  whole  strength  of  a  truly  intel-
lectual nature  is  brought  to  bear  upon  the  resources  of
language,  and  where  the  force  of  direct  appeal  is  unwil-
lingly acknowledged  to  be  insufficient,  the  vague  generali-
ties of  allegory  can  scarcely  be  expected  to  succeed.  It  is
the  province  of  symbolism  to  suggest  thought,  and  the
interpretation  of  any  sequence  of  typology  inevitably  varies
in  direct  proportion  with  the  various  types  of  mind.  Each
individual  symbol  embodies  a  definite  conception  existing
in  the  mind  of  its  inventor,  and  in  that  symbol  more  or  less
perfectly  expressed,  but  every  student  of  allegory  out  of
every  individual  symbol  extracts  his  own  meaning,  so  that
the  significance  of  typology  is  as  infinite  as  the  varieties  of
interpreting  intelligence.     For  this  reason,   the  best   and

30  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

truest  adepts  have  always  insisted  on  the  necessity  of  an
initiated  teacher,  or  of  a  special  intellectual  illumination
which  they  term  the  grace  of  God,  for  the  discovery  of  the
actual  secret  of  the  Hermetic  art.  Without  this  light  or
guidance  the  unelected  student  is  likely  to  be  adrift  for
ever  on  a  chaotic  sea  of  symbols,  and  the  prima  materia,
concealed  by  innumerable  names  and  contradictory  or
illusory  descriptions,  will  for  ever  escape  him.  It  is  in
this  way  that  a  thousand  unassisted  investigators  have
operated  upon  ten  thousand  material  substances,  and  have
never  remotely  approached  the  manufacture  of  the  Grand
Magisterium,  and,  after  the  same  manner,  outwearied  by
perpetual  failures  in  the  physical  process,  that  others  have
rejected  the  common  opinion  concerning  the  object  of
alchemy,  and  with  imaginations  at  work  upon  the  loftier
aspirations  expressed  by  Hermetic  adepts,  have  accredited
them  with  an  exclusively  spiritual  aim,  and  with  the  pos-
session of  exclusively  spiritual  secrets.

If  the  authors  of  the  "  Suggestive  Inquiry "  and  of
"  Remarks  on  Alchemy  and  the  Alchemists "  had  con-
sidered the  lives  of  the  symbolists,  as  well  as  the  nature  of
the  symbols,  their  views  would  have  been  very  much
modified ;  they  would  have  found  that  the  true  method  of
Hermetic  interpretation  lies  in  a  middle  course ;  but  the
errors  which  originated  with  merely  typological  investiga-
tions were  intensified  by  a  consideration  of  the  great
alchemical  theorem,  which,  par  excellence,  is  one  of  universal
development,  which  acknowledges  that  every  substance
contains  undeveloped  resources  and  potentialities,  and  can
be  brought  outward  and  forward  into  perfection.  They
applied  their  theory  only  to  the  development  of  metallic
substances  from  a  lower  to  a  higher  order,  but  we  see  by
their  writings  that  the  grand  hierophants  of  Oriental  and
Western  alchemy  alike  were  continually  haunted  by  brief

INTRODUCTORY  ESSAY.  3  I

and  imperfect  glimpses  of  glorious  possibilities  for  man,  if
the  evolution  of  his  nature  were  accomplished  along  the
lines  of  their  theory.

Eugenius  Philalethes  enlarges  on  the  infinite  capacity  of
our  spiritual  nature  and  on  the  power  of  our  soul's  imagi-
nation. "  She  has  an  absolute  power  in  miraculous  and
more  than  natural  transmutations,"  and  he  clothes  his  doc-
trine of  human  evolution  in  the  terminology  of  alchemical
adepts.

In  one  of  the  twelve  treatises  attributed  to  Sendivogius,
there  are  the  following  remarkable  passages  : — "  We  know
the  composition  of  man  in  all  respects,  yet  we  cannot
infuse  the  soul,  which  is  out  of  the  course  of  nature.
Nature  does  not  work  before  there  be  material  given  unto
her.  .  .  ."  The  problem  that  all  composites  are  subject
to  dissolution,  and  that  man  is  composed  of  the  four
elements,  and  how,  therefore,  he  could  have  been  immortal
in  Paradise,  is  considered  thus.  "  Paradise  was  and  is  a
place  created  of  the  most  pure  elements,  and  of  these  man
also  was  formed,  and  thus  was  consecrated  to  perpetuity  of
life.  After  his  fall,  he  was  driven  into  the  corruptible
elementated  world,  and  nourished  by  corruptible  elemen-
tated  elements,  which  infected  his  past  nature  and  generated
disease  and  death.  To  the  original  creation  of  man  in
state  immortal  the  ancient  philosophers  have  likened  their
stone,  and  this  immortality  caused  them  to  seek  the  stone,
desiring  to  find  the  incorruptible  elements  which  entered
into  the  Adamic  constitution.  To  them  the  Most  High
God  revealed  that  a  composition  of  such  elements  was  in
gold,  for  in  animals  it  could  not  be  had,  seeing  they  must
preserve  their  lives  by  corrupt  elements  ;  in  vegetables  also
it  is  not,  because  in  them  is  an  inequality  of  the  elements.
And  seeing  all  created  things  are  inclined  to  multiplication,
the  philosophers  propounded  to  themselves  that  they  would

32  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

make  tryal  of  the  possibility  of  nature  in  this  mineral
kingdom,  which  being  discovered,  they  saw  that  THERE
were  innumerable  other  secrets  in  nature,  of
which,  as  of  Divine  secrets,  they  wrote  sparingly."

Here  the  reference  probably  intended  is  to  the  possi-
bilities which  their  theory  revealed  for  other  than  the
mineral  kingdoms,  a  theory  the  truth  of  which  they
believed  themselves  to  have  demonstrated  by  accomplish-
ing metallic  transmutation.  In  this  connection,  it  should
be  noticed  that  the  philosophical  stone  was  generally  con-
sidered a  universal  medicine — a  medicine  for  metals  and
man,  the  latter,  of  course,  by  inference.

The  occasional  presence  of  these  possibilities  in  the
minds  of  adepts,  and  the  comprehensive  nature  of  the
Hermetic  theory,  fully  explain  the  aberrations  of  mystical
commentators,  who  have  mistaken  the  side  issues  for  the
end  in  view,  not  altogether  inexcusably,  because  the  end
in  view  sinks  into  complete  unimportance  when  compared
with  the  side  issues,  and  all  that  is  of  value  in  alchemy  for
the  modern  student  of  occultism  is  comprised  in  these  same
possibilities,  in  the  application  of  the  Hermetic  theory  to
the  supreme  subject,  Man.  It  is  impossible  within  the
limits  of  a  brief  introduction  to  do  justice  to  an  illimitable
subject,  to  the  art  of  psychic  transmutation,  to  the  spiritual
alchemistry,  the  principles  of  which  are  contained  in  the
arcane  theory  of  the  adepts,  and  which  principles  are  by
no  means  dependent  for  their  truth  on  the  actuality  of
metallic  transmutation,  so  I  must  confine  myself  to  a  few
general  observations.

The  admirable  lesson  which  we  may  learn  of  the  alche-
mists is  the  exaltation  of  things  in  virtue  beyond  the
unassisted  ability  of  Nature.  Such  exaltation  is  possible,
according  to  the  adepts,  both  within  and  without  the  metal-
lic kingdom.     Man  and  the  animals  are  alike  included  by

INTRODUCTORY  ESSAY.  $3

this  comprehensive  theory  of  development,  and  it  is  there-
fore conceivable  that  a  few  of  the  Hermetic  symbolists
taught  in  their  secret  and  allegorical  fashion  the  method
of  alchemical  procedure  when  man  was  the  subject,  and
revealed  the  miraculous  results  of  this  labour  in  the  type-
written books  which  they  bequeathed  to  posterity.  That
Henry  Khunrath  was  in  search  of  the  transmutation  of
metals  up  to  a  certain  point  and  period  is,  I  think,  very
clearly  indicated  by  his  visit  to  Dr  Dee.  That  the  Amphi-
theatrum  Sapienticz  JEternce,  which  was  published  in  1609,
treats  of  a  spiritual  alchemy,  is,  however,  evidenced  by  the
nature  of  its  symbols  and  by  the  general  tenor  of  the
strange  esoteric  commentary  on  some  of  the  Hebrew
psalms.  Those  who  worked  in  metals  may,  or  may  not,
have  failed  ;  it  is  by  no  means  a  point  of  importance  to  the
discriminating  student  of  occultism  ;  but  they  have  left
behind  them  a  theory  which  is  wholly  true  in  its  applica-
tion to  that  one  substance  in  Nature  which  we  know  to  be
capable  of  indefinite  perfectibility,  and  the  splendour  and
glory  of  the  accomplished  Magnum  Opus,  when  the  young
King  issues  from  the  Everlasting  East,  from  the  land  of
the  Morning  and  of  Paradise,

"  Bearing  the  crescent  moon  vipon  his  crest,"

though  it  be  a  dream — say  even,  which  no  one  can  actually
affirm — though  it  be  an  impossibility  for  the  metal,  is  true  for
the  man  ;  and  all  that  is  beautiful  and  sublime  in  alchemical
symbolism  may  be  rigorously  applied  to  the  divine  flower
of  the  future,  the  young  King  of  Humanity,  the  perfect
youth  to  come,  when  he  issues  from  the  Spiritual  East,  in
the  dawn  of  the  genuine  truth,  bearing  the  Crescent  Moon,
the  woman  of  the  future,  upon  his  bright  and  imperial  crest.
I  am  of  opinion,  from  the  evidence  in  hand,  that  metallic
transmutations  did  occur  in  the  past.     They  were  pheno-

C

34  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

mena  as  rare  as  a  genuine  "  materialisation  "  of  so-called
spirits  is  generally  considered  at  the  present  day  among
those  believers  in  physical  mediumship  who  have  not  been
besotted  by  credulity  and  the  glamour  of  a  world  of
wonders.  Like  modern  spiritualism,  the  isolated  facts  of
veritable  alchemy  are  enveloped  in  a  crowd  of  discredit-
able trickery,  and  the  trade  of  an  adept  in  the  past  was  as
profitable,  and  as  patronised  by  princes,  as  that  of  modern
dealers  with  familiar  spirits.

But  the  fact  of  an  occasional  transmutation  gives  little
reason  to  suppose  that  the  praxis  alchemics  in  metallic  sub-
jects is  ever  likely  to  succeed  with  modern  students  of  the
turba  philosophorum.  The  enigmas  of  the  alchemists  admit,
as  I  have  said,  of  manifold  interpretations.  Their  recipes
are  too  vague  and  confused  to  be  followed.  They  insist
themselves  that  their  art  can  only  be  learned  by  a  direct
revelation  from  God,  or  by  the  tuition  of  a  master.  Their
fundamental  secrets  have  not  only  been  never  revealed  in
their  multitudinous  treatises,  but  they  scarcely  pretend  to
reveal  them,  despite  the  magnificent  assurances  which  are
sometimes  contained  in  their  titles.  The  practical  side  of
alchemy  must  be  surrendered  to  specialists  in  chemistry,
working  quite  independently  of  the  books  or  the  methods
of  the  philosophers.  Only  the  theory  is  of  value  to  neo-
phytes, or  initiates,  or  to  any  student  of  the  higher  occult-
ism ;  and  it  is  of  value,  as  I  have  said,  because  it  can  be
applied  outside  the  kingdom  of  metals,  as  the  alchemists
themselves  acknowledge,  and  as  some  of  them  seem  to
have  attempted.

The  psychic  method  of  interpretation  as  propounded  in  the
"  Suggestive  Inquiry "  exalted  the  seekers  for  the  philo-
sophical stone  into  hierophants  of  the  mystery  of  God ;  it
endowed  them  with  the  altitudo  divitiariun  sapientia  et
scientice  Dei.     They  had  crossed  the  threshold  of  eternity  ;

INTRODUCTORY  ESSAY.  35

they  had   solved    the   absolute ;    they   had    seen    Diana

unveiled  ;  they  had   raised  the  cincture  of   Isis,  and  had

devoured   her   supernatural    beauties — that    is,   they   had

accomplished  the  manifestation  of  the  incarnate  spirit  of

man,  and  had  invested  it  with  deific  glory.     They  did  not

grope  after  physical  secrets ;  they  did  not  investigate,  with

Paracelsus,  the  properties  of  ordure  and  other  matter  in

putrefaction  ;  they  did  not  work  with  mercury  and  sulphur  ;

they  did  not  distil  wine ;  they  did  not  decoct  egg-shells.

They  were  soul  seekers,  and  they  had  found  the  soul ;  they

were  artificers,  and  they  had  adorned  the  soul ;  they  were

alchemists,  and  had  transmuted  it.     Sublime  and  romantic

hypothesis  !    But  we  know  that  they  worked  in  metals  ;  we

know  that  they  manipulated  minerals ;  we  know  that  they

ransacked  every  kingdom  of  nature  for  substances  which,

by  a  bare  possibility,  through  some  happy  guess,  might

really  transform  the  baser  metals  into  gold.     They  were

often  extravagant  in  their  views,  they  were  generally  absurd

in  their  methods  ;  they  seldom  found  their  end,  but,  judged

as  they  actually  were,  stripped  of  all  glamour  and  romance,

self-educated  seekers  into  Nature  at  the  dawn  of  a  physical

science,  they  are  eminently  entitled  to  our  respect,  because,

in  the  first  place,  unenlightened  and  unequipped,  with  their

bare  hands,  they  laid  the  foundations  of  a  providential  and

life-saving  knowledge,  and  in  the    second,   because  their

furnaces  were  erected,  intellectually,  "on  a  peak  in  Darien"

— that  is,  they  worked  in  accordance  with  a  theory  which

had  an  unknown  field  of  application,  and  through  the  smoke

of  their  coals  and  their  chemicals  they  beheld  illimitable

vistas  where  the  groaning  totality  of  Nature  developed  its

internal  resources,  and  advanced  by  degrees  to  perfection,

upon  lines  which  were  quite  in  accordance  with  their  vision

of  mineral  culture.     "  A  depth  beyond  the  depth,  and  a

height  beyond  the  height,"  were  thus  revealed  to  them,  and

2,6  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

their  glimpses  of  these  glorious  possibilities  transfigured
their  strange  terminology,  and  illuminated  their  barbarous
symbolism.

Eliminating  obviously  worthless  works,  the  speculations
of  needy  impostors  and  disreputable  publishers,  it  is  from
those  who  have  least  contributed  to  the  advancement  of
chemical  science  that  we  must  seek  information  concerning
the  spiritual  chemistry — those  who  have  elaborated  the
theory  rather  than  those  who  exclusively  expound  the
practice.  In  all  cases,  we  shall  do  well  to  reflect  that  the
object  in  view  was  metals,  except  in  such  rare  instances
as  are  presented  by  Henry  Khunrath  and  the  anonymous
author  of  the  treatise  concerning  Mary  of  Alexandria,  with
a  few  Rosicrucian  philosophers.  We  must  read  them  for
what  they  suggest,  and  not  for  what  they  had  in  view.

The  dream  of  the  psycho-chemistry  is  a  grand  and
sublime  scheme  of  absolute  reconstruction  by  means  of  the
Paracelsian  Orison  JEternitatis,  or  supercelestial  virtue  of
things,  the  divinisation,  or  deification,  in  the  narrower  sense,
of  man  the  triune  by  an  influx  from  above.  It  supposes
that  the  transmutation  or  transfiguration  of  man  can  be
accomplished  while  he  is  on  this  earth  and  in  this  body,
which  then  would  be  magically  draped  in  splendoribus
sanctorum.  The  Morning  Star  is  the  inheritance  of  every
man,  and  the  woman  of  the  future  will  be  clothed  with  the
sun,  and  Luna  shall  be  set  beneath  her  feet.  The  blue
mantle  typifies  the  mystical  sea,  her  heritage  of  illimitable
vastness.  These  marvels  may  be  really  accomplished  by
the  cleansing  of  the  two-fold  human  tabernacle,  the  holy
house  of  life,  and  by  the  progressive  evolution  into  outward
and  visible  manifestation  of  the  infinite  potencies  within  it.
In  the  facts  and  possibilities  of  mesmerism  and  in  the
phenomena  of  ecstatic  clairvoyance,  in  ancient  magic  and
modern  spiritualism,  in  the  doctrines  and  experiences  of

INTRODUCTORY  ESSAY.  2)7

religious  regeneration,  we  must  seek  the  raison  d'etre  of
the  sublime  dream  of  psycho-chemistry — that,  namely,
there  is  a  change,  a  transmutation,  or  a  new  birth,  possible
to  embodied  man  which  shall  manifestly  develop  the
esotoric  potencies  of  his  spiritual  being,  so  that  the  flesh
itself  shall  be  purged,  clarified,  glorified,  and  clothed  upon
by  the  essential  light  of  the  divine  pneuma.  Those  of  my
readers  who  are  interested  in  this  absorbing  subject  I  must
refer  to  a  work  entitled,  "  AZOTH,  OR  The  Star  IN  THE
East,"  which,  I  trust,  will  be  ready  for  publication  early
in  1889,  and  which  will  treat  of  the  First  Matter  of  the
Magnum  Opus,  of  the  evolution  of  Aphrodite  Urania,  of  the
supernatural  generation  of  the  Son  of  the  Sun,  and  of  the
alchemical  transfiguration  of  humanity.

ON  THE   PHYSICAL  THEORY  AND  PRACTICE
OF  THE  MAGNUM  OPUS.

The  physical  theory  of  transmutation  is  based  on  the
composite  character  of  metals,  on  their  generation  in  the
bowels  of  the  earth,  and  on  the  existence  in  nature  of
a  pure  and  penetrating  matter  which  applied  to  any  sub-
stance exalts  and  perfects  it  after  its  own  kind.  This
matter  is  called  The  Light  by  Eugenius  Philalethes  and
by  numerous  other  writers.  In  its  application  to  animals,
it  exalts  animals ;  in  its  application  to  vegetables,  it  exalts
vegetables,  while  metals  and  minerals,  after  the  same
manner,  are  refined  and  translated  from  the  worst  to  the
best  condition.

All  the  elements  which  enter  into  the  composition  of
metals  are  identical,  but  they  differ  in  proportion  and  in
purity.  In  the  metallic  kingdom,  the  object  of  nature  is
invariably  to  create  gold.  The  production  of  the  baser
metals  is  an  accident  of  the  process,  or  the  result  of  an
unfavourable  environment.

The  generation  of  metals  in  the  earth  is  a  point  of  great
importance,  and  must  be  well  studied  by  the  amateur,  for
without  this,  and  the  faithful  imitation  of  Nature,  he  will
never  achieve  anything  successful.  It  is  by  means  of  the
seed  of  metals  that  their  generation  takes  place.  Their
composite  character  indicates  their  transmutable  quality.
Such  transmutation  is  accomplished  by  means  of  the
philosophical  stone,  and  this  stone  is,  in  fact,  the  com-
bination of  the  male  and  female  seeds  which  beget  gold  and
silver.     Now  the   matters  or  elements  of  this  stone,  and

THEORY  AND  PRACTICE  OF  THE  MAGNUM  OPUS.       39

the  prima  materia  above  all,  are  concealed  by  a  multitude
of  symbols,  false  and  allegorical  descriptions,  and  evasive
or  deceptive  names.

According  to  Baron  Tschoudy,  all  who  have  written  on
the  art  have  concealed  the  true  name  of  the  prima  materia
because  it  is  the  chief  key  of  chemistry.  Its  discovery  is
generally  declared  to  be  impossible  without  a  special
illumination  from  God,  but  the  sages  who  receive  this
divine  favour  and  distinction  have  occasionally  perpetuated
its  knowledge  by  the  instruction  of  suitable  pupils  under
the  pledge  of  inviolable  secresy.  The  author  of  LEtoile
Flamboyajite  supplies  an  immense  list  of  the  names  which
have  been  applied  to  this  mysterious  substance  under  one
or  other  of  its  phases.  "As  those  that  sail  between
Scylla  and  Charybdis  are  in  danger  on  both  sides,"  says
D'Espagnet,  "unto  no  less  hazard  are  they  subject,  who,
pursuing  the  prey  of  the  golden  fleece,  are  carried  between
the  uncertain  rocks  of  the  philosophers'  sulphur  and
mercury.  The  more  acute,  by  their  constant  reading  of
grave  and  credible  authors,  and  by  the  irradiant  sun,  have
attained  unto  the  knowledge  of  sulphur,  but  are  at  a  stand
in  the  entrance  of  the  philosophers'  mercury,  for  writers
have  twisted  it  with  so  many  windings  and  meanders,  and
involved  it  with  so  many  equivocal  names,  that  it  may  be
sooner  met  with  by  the  force  of  the  seeker's  intellect  than
be  found  by  reason  or  toil."

The  prima  materia  has  been  defined  as  a  fifth  element,
or  quintessence,  the  material  alpha  and  omega,  the  soul  of
the  elements,  living  mercury,  regenerated  mercury,  a
metallic  soul,  &c.  It  is  designated  by  such  allegorical
names  as  the  Bird  of  Hermes,  the  Virgin's  Son,  the  Son  of
the  Sun  and  Moon,  the  Virgin's  Head,  Azoth,  &c.

Where  it  appears  to  be  seriously  described  the  adepts
are  in  continual  contradiction,  but  it  is  generally  allowed

4-0  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

to  be  a  substance  found  everywhere  and  continually  seen
and  possessed  by  those  who  are  ignorant  of  its  virtues.
"Although  some  persons,"  says  Urbiger,  "possessed  with
foolish  notions,  dream  that  the  first  matter  is  to  be  found
only  in  some  particular  places,  at  such  and  such  times  of
the  year,  and  by  the  virtue  of  a  magical  magnet,  yet  we
are  most  certain,  according  to  our  divine  master,  Hermes,
that  all  these  suppositions  being  false,  it  is  to  be  found
everywhere,  at  all  times,  and  only  by  our  science."  *

In  similar  terms,  we  are  told  by  the  "  Commentary  on
the  Ancient  War  of  the  Knights,"  that  the  matter  of  the
art,  so  precious  by  the  excellent  gifts  wherewith  Nature  has
enriched  it,  is  truly  mean  with  regard  to  the  substances
from  which  it  derives  its  original.  "  Its  price  is  not  above
the  ability  of  the  poor.     Tenpence  is  more  than  sufficient

to   purchase  the  Matter   of  the  Stone The  matter

is  mean,  considering  the  foundation  of  the  art,  because  it
costs  very  little ;  it  is  no  less  mean  if  one  considers
exteriorly  that  which  gives  it  perfection,  since  in  that
regard  it  costs  nothing  at  all,  in  as  much  as  all  the  world
has  it  in  its  power,  says  Cosmopolite,  so  that  it  is  a  con-
stant truth  that  the  stone  is  a  thing  mean  in  one  sense  but
most  precious  in  another,  and  that  there  are  none  but  fools
that  despise  it,  by  a  just  judgment  of  God."

The  same  authority  assures  us,  with  regard  to  the  actual
nature  of  the  prima  materia,  that  it  is  one  only  and  self-
same thing,  although  it  is  a  natural  compound  of  certain
substances  from  one  root  and  of  one  kind,  forming  to-
gether one  whole  complete  homogeneity.  The  substances
that  make  up  the  philosophical  compound  differ  less
among  themselves  than  sorrel  water  differs  from  lettuce
water.     Urbiger  asserts  that  the  true  and  real  matter  is

*Baro  Urbigerus — "  One  Hundred  Aphorisms  demonstrating  the  prepara-
tion of  the  Grand  Elixir."

THEORY  AND  PRACTICE  OF  THE  MAGNUM  OPUS.       4 1

only  "  a  vapour  impregnated  with  the  metallic  seed,  yet  un-
determined, created  by  God  Almighty,  generated  by  the
concurrence  and  influence  of  the  astrums,  contained  in  the
bowels  of  the  earth,  as  the  matrix  of  all  created  things."
In  conformity  with  this,  one  earlier  writer,  Sir  George
Ripley,  describes  the  stone  as  the  potential  vapour  of
metals.  It  is  normally  invisible,  but  may  be  made  to
manifest  as  a  clear  water.  So  also  Philalethes  cries  in  his
inspired  way : — "  Hear  me,  and  I  shall  disclose  the  secret,
which  like  a  rose  has  been  guarded  by  thorns,  so  that  few
in  past  times  could  pull  the  flower.  There  is  a  substance
of  a  metalline  species,  which  looks  so  cloudy  that  the
universe  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  it.  Its  visible  form
is  vile ;  it  defiles  metalline  bodies,  and  no  one  can  readily
imagine  that  the  pearly  drink  of  bright  Phoebus  should
spring  from  thence.  Its  components  are  a  most  pure  and
tender  mercury,  a  dry  incarcerate  sulphur,  which  binds  it
and  restrains  fluxation.  .  .  .  Know  this  subject,  it  is  the
sure  basis  of  all  our  secrets.  .  .  .  To  deal  plainly,  it  is
the  child  of  Saturn,  of  mean  price  and  great  venom.  ...  It
is  not  malleable,  though  metalline.  Its  colour  is  sable
with,  with  intermixed  argent,  which  mark  the  sable  field
with  veins  of  glittering  argent."  *

The  poisonous  nature  of  the  stone  is  much  insisted  on
by  numerous  philosophers.  "  Its  substance  and  its  vapour
are  indeed  a  poison  which  the  philosophers  should  know
how  to  change  into  an  antidote  by  preparation  and
direction."  -f-

No  descriptions,  supplied  ad  infinitum  by  the  number-
less adepts  who  were  moved  by  unselfish  generosity  to
expound  the  arcana  of  alchemy,  for  the  spiritual,  intel-
lectual, and  physical   enrichment  of  those  who  deserved

*  Aphorismi  Urbigerani.

t  Commentary  on  the  "  Ancient  War  of  the  Knights."

42  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

initiation,  expose  the  true  nature  of  the  prima  materia,
while  the  vas  philosophoriim  in  which  it  is  contained  and
digested  is  described  in  contradictory  terms,  and  is  by  some
writers  declared  a  divine  secret.

Given  the  matter  of  the  stone  and  also  the  necessary
vessel,  the  processes  which  must  be  then  undertaken  to
accomplish  the  magnum  opus  are  described  with  moderate
perspicuity.  There  is  the  Calcination  or  purgation  of  the
stone,  in  which  kind  is  worked  with  kind  for  the  space  of
a  philosophical  year.  There  is  Dissolution  which  prepares
the  way  for  congelation,  and  which  is  performed  during
the  black  state  of  the  mysterious  matter.  It  is  accom-
plished by  water  which  does  not  wet  the  hand.  There  is
the  Separation  of  the  subtle  and  the  gross,  which  is  to  be
performed  by  means  of  heat.  In  the  Conjunction  which
follows,  the  elements  are  duly  and  scrupulously  combined.
Putrefaction  afterwards  takes  place,

"  Without  which  pole  no  seed  may  multiply."

Then  in  the  subsequent  Congelation  the  white  colour
appears,  which  is  one  of  the  signs  of  success.  It  becomes
more  pronounced  in  Cibation.  In  Sublimation  the  body
is  spiritualised,  the  spirit  made  corporeal,  and  again  a  more
glittering  whiteness  is  apparent.  Fermentation  afterwards
fixes  together  the  alchemical  earth  and  water,  and  causes
the  mystic  medicine  to  flow  like  wax.  The  matter  is  then
augmented  with  the  alchemical  spirit  of  life,  and  the
Exaltation  of  the  philosophic  earth  is  accomplished  by  the
natural  rectification  of  its  elements.  When  these  processes
have  been  successfully  completed,  the  mystic  stone  will
have  passed  through  three  chief  stages  characterised  by
different  colours,  black,  white,  and  red,  after  which  it  is
capable  of  infinite  multiplication,  and  when  projected  on
mercury,  it  will  absolutely  transmute  it,  the  resulting  gold

THEORY  AND  PRACTICE  OF  THE  MAGNUM  OPUS.       43

bearing  every  test.  The  base  metals  made  use  of  must  be
purified  to  insure  the  success  of  the  operation.  The
process  for  the  manufacture  of  silver  is  essentially  similar,
but  the  resources  of  the  matter  are  not  carried  to  so  high  a
degree.

According  to  the  "  Commentary  on  the  Ancient  War  of
the  Knights,"  the  transmutations  performed  by  the  perfect
stone  are  so  absolute  that  no  trace  remains  of  the  original
metal.  It  cannot,  however,  destroy  gold,  nor  exalt  it  into
a  more  perfect  metallic  substance  ;  it,  therefore,  transmutes
it  into  a  medicine  a  thousand  times  superior  to  any  virtues
which  can  be  extracted  from  it  in  its  vulgar  state.  This
medicine  becomes  a  most  potent  agent  in  the  exaltation  of
base  metals.

Among  the  incidental  properties  of  the  perfect  mineral
agent  is  the  conversion  of  flints  into  precious  stones,  but
the  manufacture  of  gold  and  of  jewels  is  generally  declared
to  be  the  least  of  the  philosophical  secrets,  for  the  spirit
which  informs  the  mysterious  prima  materia  of  the  great
and  sublime  work  can  be  variously  used  and  adapted  to
the  attainment  of  absolute  perfection  in  all  the  "  liberal
sciences,"  the  possession  of  the  "  whole  wisdom  of  nature,
and  of  things  more  secret  and  extraordinary  than  is  the
gift  of  prophecy  which  Rhasis  and  Bono  assert  to  be  con-
tained in  the  red  stone."

LIVES    OF    THE    ALCHEMISTS.

G  E  B  E  R.

The  first,  and,  according  to  the  general  concensus  of
Hermetic  authorities,  the  prince  of  those  alchemical  adepts
who  have  appeared  during  the  Christian  era,  was  the  famous
Geber,  Giaber,  or  Yeber,  whose  true  name  was  Abou
Moussah  Djafar  al  Sofi,  and  who  was  a  native  of  Haman,
in  Mesopotamia,  according  to  the  more  probable  opinion.
He  is  also  said  to  have  been  a  Greek,  a  Spanish  Arabian
born  at  Seville,  and  a  Persian  of  Thus.  Romance  repre-
sents him  as  an  illuminated  monarch  of  India.  According
to  Aboulfeda,  he  flourished  during  the  eighth  century,  but
later  and  earlier  periods  have  been  also  suggested.  His
life  is  involved  in  hopeless  obscurity  ;  but  his  experiments
upon  metals,  undertaken  with  a  view  to  the  discovery  of
their  constituent  elements  and  the  degrees  of  their  fusi-
bility, led  him  to  numerous  discoveries  both  in  chemistry
and  in  medicine,  including  suroxydised  muriate  of  mercury,
red  oxyde  of  mercury,  and  nitric  acid.  "  It  is  thus  that
Hermetic  philosophy  gave  rise  to  chemistry,"  says  a  writer
in  the  Biographie  Universelle,  "  and  that  the  reputation  of
Geber  is  permanently  established,  not  upon  his  search  for
an  impossible  chimera,  but  for  his  discovery  of  truths
founded  on  actual  experience."

With  the  characteristic  prodigality  of  the  Middle  Ages,
no  less  than  five  hundred  treatises  have  been  attributed  to
the  Arabian  adept.     They  are  supposed  to  have  embraced

GEBER.  45

the  whole  circle  of  the  physical  sciences,  including  astro-
nomy and  medicine.  A  few  fragments,  comparatively,
alone  remain  of  all  these  colossal  achievements.  Cardan
included  their  author  among  the  twelve  most  penetrating
minds  of  the  whole  world,  and  Boerhave  spoke  of  him  with
consideration  and  respect  in  his  celebrated  Institutiones
Chemicce.  According  to  M.  Hoefer,  he  deserves  to  be
ranked  first  among  the  chemists  and  alchemists  who
flourished  prior  to  Van  Helmont.  "  He  is  the  oracle  of
mediaeval  chemists,  who  frequently  did  nothing  in  their
writings  but  literally  reproduce  their  master.  Geber  for
the  history  of  chemistry  is  what  Hippocrates  is  for  the
history  of  medicine."

The  name  of  Geber  has  been  borne  or  assumed  by  several
writers  subsequent  to  the  Hermetic  adept ;  in  this  way  the
few  extant  facts  concerning  his  life  have  been  variously
distorted,  and  books  of  later  date  and  less  value  falsely
ascribed  to  him.  An  astronomical  commentary  on  the
Syntaxis  Magna  of  Ptolemy,  in  nine  books,  must  be  in-
cluded in  this  number.  It  is  a  work  of  the  twelfth  century,
as  may  be  proved  by  internal  evidence.

The  extant  works  of  Geber  are,  for  the  most  part,  in
Latin,  and  are  all  open  to  more  or  less  legitimate  sus-
picion. In  the  library  at  Leyden  there  are  said  to  be
several  Arabic  manuscripts  which  have  never  been  trans-
lated, and  there  is  one  in  the  Imperial  Library  at  Paris,
together  with  a  Fragmentum  de  Triangulis  Sphcericis  which
is  still  unprinted.  The  most  complete  edition  of  Geber  is
that  of  Dantzich,  published  in  1682,  and  reproduced  in
the  Collection  of  Mangetus.*  First  in  importance  among
the  works  of  the  Arabian  adept  must  be  ranked  his  "  Sum
of  Perfection  "  —  Summce  Perfectionis  magisterii  in  sua
naturd  Libri  IV.    The  next  in  value  is  the  treatise  entitled

*  J.  J.  Mangeti,  "Bib.  Chem.  Curiosa,"  2  v.  fol.  1702.

46  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

De  Investigatiofie  perfectionis  Metallorum,  with  his  Testa-
ment, and  a  tract  on  the  construction  of  furnaces.

The  "  Sum  of  Perfection,  or  the  Perfect  Magistery,"
claims  to  be  a  compilation  from  the  works  of  the  ancients,
but  with  the  doubtful  exception  of  pseudo-Hermes,  we
are  acquainted  with  no  alchemical  authors  previous  to  the
supposed  period  of  Geber.  A  knowledge  of  natural  prin-
ciples is  declared  to  be  necessary  to  success  in  the  art.
The  natural  principles  in  the  work  of  nature  are  a  potent
spirit,  and  a  living  or  dry  water.  The  disposition  of  the
philosophical  furnace  and  of  the  vas  philosophorum  is  clearly
described  ;  the  latter  is  a  round  glass  vessel  with  a  flat
round  bottom,  and  has  several  elaborate  arrangements.  A
marginal  note,  however,  declares  that  the  account  of  it  is
hard  to  be  understood.  Among  all  the  obscurities  of  the
treatise,  it  is  absolutely  plain  that  it  is  concerned  with
metals  and  minerals.  The  properties  of  sulphur,  mercury,
arsenick,  gold,  silver,  lead,  tin,  copper,  iron,  magnesia,  lut,
marchasite,  are  discussed  in  such  a  manner  that  it  is  im-
possible to  establish  an  allegory,  or  to  interpret  the  words
of  the  writer  in  other  than  a  physical  sense.

RHASIS.

Rhazes,  or  Rasi,  whose  true  name  was  Mohammed-Ebn-
Secharjah  Aboubekr  Arrasi,  was  a  celebrated  Arabian
physician  and  chemist,  who  was  born  about  the  year  850
at  Ray  in  Irak,  upon  the  frontiers  of  Khorassan.  In  his  youth
he  was  passionately  devoted  to  music  and  to  frivolous
amusements ;  he  did  not  begin  the  study  of  medicine  till
he  was  thirty  years  of  age,  but  he  soon  surpassed,  both  in
skill  and  in  knowledge,  all  the  physicians  of  his  time.  He
devoted  himself  with  equal  zeal  to  philosophy,  is  said  to

RHASIS.  47

have  journeyed  into  Syria,  Egypt,  and  even  into  Spain,
and  successively  took  charge  of  the  famous  hospital  at
Bagdad,  and  of  another  in  his  native  town.  He  was
naturally  good  and  generous,  and  he  devoted  himself  to
the  service  of  the  poor.  His  oriental  panegyrists  call  him
the  Imam  among  the  scholars  of  his  time,  and  western
writers  describe  him  as  the  Galen  of  the.  Arabians.  By
his  assiduous  attention  to  the  multitudinous  varieties  of
disease  he  obtained  the  appellation  of  the  experimenter,  or
the  experienced.  No  less  than  two  hundred  and  twenty-
six  treatises  are  said  to  have  been  composed  by  him.  To
some  of  these  Avicenna  was  largely  indebted,  and  even  in
Europe  he  exercised  considerable  influence,  for  his  writings
on  medicine  were  the  basis  of  university  teaching  up  to
the  seventeenth  century.

Of  the  twelve  books  of  chemistry  which  have  been
attributed  to  Rhasis  several  are  probably  spurious,  and  few
have  been  printed.  He  was  an  avowed  believer  in  the
transmutation  of  metals,  and,  having  composed  a  treatise
on  the  subject,  he  presented  it  in  person  to  Emir  Alman-
sour,  Prince  of  Khorassan,  who  was  highly  delighted,  and
ordered  one  thousand  pieces  of  gold  to  be  paid  to  the
author  as  a  recompense.  However,  he  desired  to  witness
the  marvellous  experiments  and  the  prolific  auriferous
results  with  which  the  work  abounded.  Rhasis  replied
that  he  might  certainly  be  gratified  in  his  sublime  curiosity  if
he  provided  the  necessary  instruments  and  materials  for  the
accomplishment  of  the  magnum  opus.  The  Emir  consented  ;
neither  pains  nor  expenses  were  spared  over  the  prelimin-
ary preparations,  but  when  the  time  came  the  adept  failed
miserably  in  his  performance,  and  was  severely  belaboured
about  the  head  by  the  enraged  potentate  with  the  unprofit-
able alchemical  treatise.  Rhasis  was  old  at  the  time,  and
this  violence  is  by  some  declared  to  have  been  the  cause  of

48  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

his  subsequent  blindness.  He  died  in  poverty  and
obscurity,  a  point  which  is  not  supposed  to  disprove  his
possession  of  the  powerful  metallic  medicine.  The  date  of
his  death  is  uncertain,  but  it  was  probably  in  the  year  932.

The  writings  of  Rhasis,  like  those  of  Geber,  enlarge  on
the  planetary  correspondences,  or  on  the  influence  exerted
by  the  stars  in  the  formation  of  metallic  substances  beneath
the  surface  of  the  earth.  The  explicit  nature  of  the
recipes  which  he  gives  may  be  judged  by  such  directions  as
Recipe  aliquid  ignotum,  quantum,  volueris.  It  is  to  him,
nevertheless,  that  we  owe  the  preparation  of  brandy  and
several  pharmaceutic  applications  of  alcohol.  He  was  the
first  to  mention  orpiment,  realgar,  borax,  certain  combina-
tions of  sulphur,  iron,  and  copper,  certain  salts  of  mercury
indirectly  obtained,  and  some  compounds  of  arsenic*  He
was  also  a  zealous  promoter  of  experimental  methods.

ALFARABI.

The  middle  of  the  tenth  century  was  made  illustrious  by
one  of  those  celebrated  men  who  do  honour  to  the  sciences
in  which  they  engage.  This  was  Abou-Nasr-Mohammed-
Ibn-Tarkan,  commonly  called  Farabi  and  Alfarabi — a
man  of  universal  genius,  who  penetrated  all  subjects  with
equal  facility,  fathoming  the  most  useful  and  interesting
sciences,  and  passing  for  the  greatest  philosopher  of  his
time.

He  was  born  at  Farab,  now  known  as  Othrar,  in  Asia
Minor.  He  was  of  Turkish  origin,  but  repaired  to  Bagdad
to  acquire  a  more  perfect  knowledge  of  Arabic  ;  there  he
devoted  himself  with  zeal  and  enthusiasm  to  the  study  of
the  Greek   philosophers   under  Abou  Bachar  Maltey,   an

*  Figuier,  V Ahhimie  et  les  Alchimistes,  pp.  95,  96.

ALFARABI.  49

expounder  of  Aristotle.  From  Bagdad  he  proceeded  to
Harran,  where  John,  a  Christian  physician,  was  teaching
logic.  In  a  short  time  Alfarabi  surpassed  all  his  other
scholars,  but  he  left  Harran  and  visited  Damas,  thence
penetrating  into  Egypt.  Early  attracted  towards  the
secrets  of  nature,  he  spent  a  great  portion  of  his  life  in
incessant  wanderings,  collecting  the  opinions  of  all  the
philosophers  he  could  meet  with  on  these  and  on  kindred
subjects.  He  despised  the  world,  and  took  no  pains  to
acquire  wealth,  though  he  wrote  upon  alchemy,  that  is,
if  the  Hermetic  works  which  are  attributed  to  him  be
genuine.  His  erudition  and  indefatigable  activity  are
attested  by  his  other  writings,  which  variously  treat  of
philosophy,  logic,  physics,  astronomy,  and  mathematics.
His  chief  reputation  is  based  on  a  sort  of  encyclopaedia,
where  he  gives  a  description,  with  an  exact  definition,  of  all
the  arts  and  sciences ;  and  on  a  celebrated  musical  treatise,
wherein  he  ridicules  the  pythagorean  speculations  upon  the
music  of  the  spheres,  and  proves  the  connection  of  sound
with  atmospheric  vibrations.

According  to  several  authorities,  he  was  protected  and
supported  in  his  later  years  by  the  cultured  and  enlightened
Sei'f  Eddoula,  who  is  represented  as  Prince  of  Damas,  but
who  seems  to  have  been  Sultan  of  Syria,  and  to  have  made
the  acquaintance  of  the  scholar  in  the  following  curious
manner.

Alfarabi  was  returning  from  a  pilgrimage  to  Mecca,
when,  passing  through  Syria,  he  stopped  at  the  Court  of
the  Sultan,  and  entered  his  presence  while  he  was  sur-
rounded by  numerous  sage  persons,  who  were  discoursing
with  the  monarch  on  the  sciences.

Alfarabi,  ignorant  of,  or  else  wholly  ignoring,  the  usages
of  society,  presented  himself  in  his  travelling  attire ;  and
when  the  Sultan  desired  that  he  should  be  seated,  with

D

50  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

astonishing  philosophical  freedom,  he  planted  himself  at
the  end  of  the  royal  sofa.  The  prince,  aghast  at  his  bold-
ness, called  one  of  his  officers,  and  in  a  tongue  generally
unknown  commanded  him  to  eject  the  intruder.  The
philosopher,  however,  promptly  made  answer  in  the  same
tongue :  "  Oh,  Lord,  he  who  acts  hastily  is  liable  to  hasty
repentance ! "  The  prince  was  equally  astounded  to  find
himself  understood  by  the  stranger  as  by  the  manner  in
which  the  reply  was  given.  Anxious  to  know  more  of  his
guest,  he  began  to  question  him,  and  soon  discovered  that
he  was  acquainted  with  seventy  languages.  Problems  for
discussion  were  then  propounded  to  the  philosophers  who
had  witnessed  the  discourteous  intrusion  with  considerable
indignation  and  disgust,  but  Alfarabi  disputed  with  so
much  eloquence  and  vivacity  that  he  reduced  all  the
doctors  to  silence,  and  they  began  writing  down  his  dis-
course. The  Sultan  then  ordered  his  musicians  to  perform
for  the  diversion  of  the  company.  When  they  struck  up,
the  philosopher  accompanied  them  on  a  lute  with  such
infinite  grace  and  tenderness,  that  he  elicited  the  un-
measured admiration  of  the  whole  distinguished  assembly.
At  the  request  of  the  Sultan  he  produced  a  piece  of  his
own  composing,  sung  it,  and  accompanied  it  with  great
force  and  spirit  to  the  delight  of  all  his  hearers.  The  air
was  so  sprightly  that  even  the  gravest  philosopher  could
not  resist  dancing,  but  by  another  tune  he  as  easily  melted
them  to  tears,  and  then  by  a  soft  unobtrusive  melody  he
lulled  the  whole  company  to  sleep.

Great  was  the  anxiety  of  the  Sultan  to  retain  so  accom-
plished a  person  about  him,  and  some  say  that  he  suc-
ceeded, others  that  the  philosopher  declined  the  most
brilliant  offers,  declaring  that  he  should  never  rest  till  he
had  discovered  the  whole  secret  of  the  philosopher's  stone
of  which  he  had  been  in  search  for  years,  and  to  which,

AVICENNA.  5 1

from  his  discourse,  he  appeared  to  be  on  the  point  of
attaining.  According  to  these  biographers,  he  set  out,  but
it  was  to  perish  miserably.  He  was  attacked  by  robbers
in  the  woods  of  Syria,  and,  in  spite  of  his  courage,  was
overpowered  by  numbers  and  killed.  This  occurred  in  the
year  954.  Others  say  that  he  died  at  Damas,  enjoying  the
munificence  of  the  Sultan  to  the  last.

AVICENNA.

Khorassan  produced  another  celebrated  adept  at  the  end
of  the  tenth,  or,  according  to  an  alternative  opinion,  about
the  middle  of  the  eleventh  century.  This  was  the  illustrious
Ebn  Sina,  commonly  called  Avicenna,  who  was  born  at
Bacara,  the  principal  city  of  that  province  of  Persia.  The
exact  date  of  his  birth  has  been  fixed,  but  in  the  absence
of  sufficient  authority,  at  the  year  980.  He  is  equally
celebrated  for  the  multiplicity  of  his  literary  works  and  for
his  adventurous  life.  At  an  early  age  he  had  made
unusual  progress  in  mathematics,  and  his  gifted  mind  soon
penetrated  the  mysteries  of  transcendental  philosophy.
He  was  only  sixteen  when  he  passed  from  the  preparatory
sciences  to  that  of  medicine,  in  which  he  succeeded  with
the  same  celerity ;  and  great  is  the  sagacity  attributed  to
him  in  the  knowledge  of  diseases.  He  is  praised  in
particular  for  having  discovered  that  the  illness  of  the
King  of  Gordia's  nephew  was  occasioned  by  an  amorous
passion  which  he  had  carefully  concealed,  and  for  the
stratagem  by  which  he  discovered  the  object  of  the  young
man's  affections.

His  credit  as  a  physician  and  philosopher  became  so
great  that  the  Sultan  Magdal  Doulet  determined  to  place
him  at  the  head  of  his  affairs,  and  appointed  him  to  the
distinguished  position  of  Grand  Vizier ;  but,  notwithstand-

52  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

ing  the  religion  of  Mohammed,  which  Avicenna  professed,
he  drank  so  freely,  and  his  intemperance  led  to  so  much
immorality  and  disorder,  that  he  was  deprived  of  his
dignities  in  the  State,  and  died  in  comparative  obscurity
at  the  age  of  fifty-six.  He  was  buried  at  Hamadan,  a
city  of  Persia,  which  was  the  ancient  Ecbatana.

Though  his  history  gave  rise  to  the  saying  that  he  was
a  philosopher  devoid  of  wisdom,  and  a  physician  without
health,  the  Arabs  long  believed  that  he  commanded  spirits,
and  was  served  by  the  Jinn.  As  he  sought  the  philosophic
stone,  several  oriental  peoples  affirm  him  to  be  still  alive,
dwelling  in  splendid  state,  invested  with  spiritual  powers,
and  enjoying  in  an  unknown  retreat  the  sublime  nectar  of
perpetual  life  and  the  rejuvenating  qualities  of  the  aurum
potabile.

Six  or  seven  treatises  on  Hermetic  philosophy  are
ascribed  to  Avicenna ;  some  of  them  are  undoubtedly
spurious.  There  is  a  treatise  on  the  "  Congelation  of  the
Stone  "  and  a  Tractatulus  de  Alckimia,  which  may  be  found
in  the  first  volumes  of  the  Ars  Aurifera,  Basle,  1610.  In
1572  the  Ars  Chimica  was  printed  at  Berne.  Two  Her-
metic tracts  are  also  attributed  to  Avicenna  by  the  com-
pilers of  the  Tlieatrum  Chimicum,  and  an  octavo  volume
Porta  Elementorum,  appeared  under  his  name  at  Basle
during  the  third  quarter  of  the  sixteenth  century.

The  grimoires  and  magical  rituals  frequently  appeal  to
Avicenna  as  the  authority  for  their  supernatural  secrets.

The  Tractatulus  Alchimitz  treats  of  the  nature  of  the
sophic  mercury,  which  contains  the  sophic  sulphur,  and
wherefrom  every  mineral  substance  was  originally  created
by  God.  This  mercury  is  the  universal  vivific  spirit ;  there
is  nothing  in  the  world  to  compare  with  it ;  it  penetrates,
exalts,  and  develops  everything ;  it  is  a  ferment  to  every
body  with  which  it  is  united  chemically ;  it  is  the  grand

MORIEN.  53

metallic  elixir,  both  to  the  white,  or  silver,  and  red,  or  gold
producing,  degrees.  Its  potencies  develop  under  the  action
of  fire.  Though  found  in  all  minerals,  it  is  a  thing  of  the
earth.  It  possesses  lucidity,  fluidity,  and  a  silverine  colour.
The  perfection  and  the  praise  of  gold  are  elaborately
celebrated  in  succeeding  pages.  The  prima  materia  is
declared  to  be  of  a  duplex  nature,  and  the  duplex  elixir,
which  is  the  result  of  successful  operation,  has  powers  that
are  beyond  nature,  because  it  is  eminently  spiritual.  The
strength  of  the  perfect  magisterium  is  one  upon  a  thousand.
The  chemical  knowledge  of  Avicenna  is  derived  from
Geber,  as  his  medical  erudition  was  borrowed  from  Galen,
Aristotle,  and  other  anterior  writers.  He  describes  several
varieties  of  saltpetre,  and  treats  of  the  properties  of
common  salt,  vitriol,  sulphur,  orpiment,  sal  ammoniac,  &c.

MORIEN,

or  Morienus,  was  a  recluse  born  at  Rome  in  the  twelfth
century,  and  who  took  up  his  habitation  in  Egypt,  where
he  became  profoundly  versed  in  the  chemistry  and  physics
of  the  period.  While  his  education  was  still  progressing  in
his  native  city,  and  under  the  eyes  of  a  father  and  mother
who  tenderly  cherished  him,  he  heard  of  the  reputation  of
Adfar,  the  Arabian  philosopher  of  Alexandria,  and  con-
trived to  get  a  sight  of  his  writings,  when  he  was  im-
mediately seized  with  a  desperate  desire  to  understand
their  meaning.  The  first  impressions  of  youth  carried  him
away  ;  he  abandoned  his  home,  and  set  out  for  Alexandria,
where,  after  some  difficulty,  he  discovered  the  abode  of  the
philosopher.  He  made  known  to  him  his  name,  his
country,  and  his  religion,  and  both  appeared  well  contented
with  each  other — Adfar  at  having  found  a  young  man
whose  docility  he  could  depend  on,  and  Morien  that  he  was

54  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

under  the  discipline  of  a  master  who  promised  to  unveil  to
him  the  source  of  all  treasures.

They  studied  together;  the  amiability  of  the  pupil
encouraged  his  instructor  to  make  known  to  him  all  his
secrets,  after  which,  according  to  one  account,  Morien  went
on  a  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem,  and  then  turned  hermit.  It
seems  more  probable  that  he  tarried  with  Adfar  till  his
death,  which  in  spite  of  his  immense  treasures,  his  illumina-
tion, and  his  acquirements  in  arcane  philosophy,  eventually
occurred,  and  that  then  Morien,  having  paid  the  last  duties
to  his  deceased  initiator,  quitted  Alexandria,  and  proceeded
on  his  pilgrimage.  He  purchased  a  retreat  near  the  city
of  Jerusalem,  where  he  settled  in  the  company  of  a  pupil,
whom  he  doubtless  intended  to  form  for  science.

In  the  meantime,  the  papers  of  the  adept  Adfar  appear
to  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  Kalid,  the  Soldan  of  Egypt,
a  wise  and  curious  prince.  On  the  title-page  of  these
manuscripts  it  was  stated  that  they  contained  the  price-
less secret  of  the  philosophical  stone.  The  Soldan  studied
them  with  avidity,  but  made  no  progress  towards  their
comprehension,  and  not  being  able  to  accomplish  the
magnum  opus  in  his  own  person,  he  instituted  a  careful
search  for  some  one  who  was  qualified  ,to  interpret  the
unintelligible  mysteries  of  the  manuscripts.  He  convened
all  the  philosophers  to  Cairo,  promised  to  maintain  them,
and  to  provide  them  with  all  the  materials  and  machinery
required  for  the  success  of  alchemical  processes,  and
guaranteed  a  magnificent  reward  to  any  person  who
succeeded.  As  it  might  happen  even  at  this  day,  many
persons  presented  themselves  who  had  their  minds  fixed
upon  the  profits  to  be  derived  from  such  transactions.

Morien,  hearing  with  pain  how  much  Kalid  was  deceived
by  worthless  pretenders,  quitted  his  retreat  and  repaired  in
all  haste  to  Egypt,  with  the  ultimate  conversion  of  the

MORIEN.  55

Soldan  quite  as  much  at  heart  as  the  communication  of  the
mysteries  of  Adfar.  The  labours  of  the  pretended  alche-
mists had  produced  nothing,  as  the  initiated  hermit  had
expected,  but  something  in  the  manner  of  Morien  im-
pressed the  prince,  who  appointed  him  a  house  in  which  he
might  remain  until  he  had  finished  the  process.  The  work
in  due  course  was  brought  to  its  absolute  perfection  ;  the
philosopher  inscribed  these  words  on  the  vase  in  which  he
placed  the  elixir : — "  He  who  possesses  all  has  no  need  of
others,"  and,  immediately  quitting  Alexandria,  he  returned
to  his  hermitage.

Possessed  though  he  now  was  of  the  great  and  supreme
elixir,  Kalid  had  no  notion  how  to  make  use  of  it  for  the
transmutations  he  desired  to  accomplish.  He  was  equally
penetrated  with  regret  at  the  loss  of  a  veritable  artist,  and
filled  with  indignation  at  the  false  alchemists  who  had
promised  him  all  things,  but  had  accomplished  nothing,
he  ordained  by  an  edict  the  capital  punishment  of  every
exposed  pretender.  Some  years  passed  away,  during
which  the  Soldan  vainly  sought  the  possessor  of  the  potent
secret.  At  length  one  day,  being  at  the  chase,  and
accompanied  by  a  favourite  slave,  an  incident  occurred
which  led  to  the  eventual  fulfilment  of  his  ambition.  The
slave,  whose  name  was  Galip,  riding  a  little  apart,  discovered
an  aged  man  at  prayer  in  a  solitary  place.  He  questioned
him,  and  learned  that  he  came  from  Jerusalem,  where  he
had  been  abiding  in  the  hermitage  of  a  holy  man.  He  had
heard  of  the  anxiety  of  Kalid  to  accomplish  the  mystery  of
Hermes,  and  knowing  that  the  hermit  in  question  was  a
man  of  unparalleled  skill  in  the  sacred,  supernal  science,
he  had  quitted  Palestine  to  inform  the  prince  thereof.

"  Oh!  my  brother,  what  do  you  say?  "  exclaimed  Galip.
"  No  more  !  I  do  not  wish  you  to  die  like  those  impostors
who  have  vaunted  themselves  to  my  master."

56  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

"  I  fear  nothing,"  returned  the  hermit.  "  If  you  be  able
to  present  me  to  the  prince,  I  will  at  once  go  before  him
with  confidence."

Galip  accordingly  presented  him,  and  the  old  man
informed  Kalid  that  he  could  enable  him  to  accomplish
the  Hermetic  work,  that  he  was  acquainted  with  an  adept
hermit  of  the  solitudes  of  Jerusalem,  who,  by  illumination
from  the  Deity,  had  received  supernatural  wisdom,  and  by
his  own  admission  was  in  possession  of  the  precious  gift.
The  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  which  he  brought  each  year
to  Jerusalem  was  a  conclusive  proof  of  the  fact.

The  Soldan  represented  the  danger  of  false  promises  to
the  venerable  man,  and  warned  him  how  many  deceptive
and  boasting  adventurers  had  already  met  their  death.
The  hermit,  however,  persisted  in  his  confident  assertions,
and  Kalid,  hearing  the  description  of  Morien,  commanded
Galip,  his  slave,  to  accompany  the  old  man  with  a  sufficient
escort  to  Jerusalem,  where  they  eventually  arrived  after
many  labours,  and  were  rejoiced  by  the  discovery  of
Morien,  who  beneath  his  hair-cloth  shirt  is  declared  to  have
preserved  a  perpetually  youthful  frame.  Galip  recognised
him  at  once,  saluted  him  on  the  part  of  his  master,  and
persuaded  him  to  return  to  the  prince,  who  received  him
with  unbounded  satisfaction,  and  would  have  engaged  him
in  a  worldly  situation  at  his  court.  Morien,  however,  was
intent  only  on  the  conversion  of  Kalid ;  he  made  known  to
him  the  mysteries  of  Christianity,  but  in  spite  of  his  wisdom
was  unable  to  effect  the  desired  end.  He  appears,  not-
withstanding, to  have  discovered  to  him  the  secret  of  the
transcendent  science,  and  the  conversation  of  Morien  and
Kalid  has  been  written  in  Arabic,  and  translated  into  Latin
and  French.

The  subsequent  history  of  Morien  is  not  recorded.     In
the   collections  of  Hermetic  philosophy  there  are   some

ALBERTUS  MAGNUS.  57

small  tracts  attributed  to  Kalid,  and  also  to  Galip,  who
appears  to  have  participated  in  the  secret.  Morien  himself
is  cited  as  the  author  of  three  works,  said  to  have  been
translated  from  the  Arabic,  but  their  authenticity  is,  of
course,  very  doubtful.  The  first  is  entitled  Liber  de
Distinctione  Mecurii  Aquarum,  of  which  a  manuscript  copy
existed  in  the  library  of  Robert  Boyle.  The  second  is  the
Liber  de  Compositione  Alchemice,  printed  in  the  first  volume
of  the  Bibliotheca  Chemica  Curiosa.  Finally,  several
editions  have  appeared  of  a  treatise  entitled  De  Re
Metallica,  metallorum  Transmutatione,  et  occulta  summaque
aiitiquorum  medkina  libellus.  It  was  first  printed  at  Paris
in  the  year  1559.

Bacon  and  Arnold,  who  appeared  one  at  the  beginning,
and  the  other  at  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century,  have
cited  Morien  as  an  authority  among  the  Hermetic  philoso-
phers, and  Robertus  Castrensis  assures  us  that  he  translated
Morien 's  book  from  the  Arabic  language  in  the  year  1182.

The  Liber  de  Compositione  Alchemice  contains  a  Hermetic
conversation  between  Morien,  Kalid,  and  Galip.  It  appeals
to  the  authority  of  Hermes,  whom  it  states  to  have  been  the
first  who  discovered  the  grand  magisterium,  the  secret  of
which  he  transmitted  to  his  disciples.  It  declares  the  prima
materia  to  be  one,  quoting  the  testimony  of  the  wise  king
and  philosopher  Hercules  and  the  adept  Arsicanus,  with
other  pseudo  authorities,  which  discredit  the  date  of  the
dialogue  far  more  than  they  support  the  alchemical  theory
in  question.

ALBERTUS  MAGNUS.

The  universal  genius  of  Albert,  joined  to  a  laudable
curiosity  in  so  great  a  philosopher,  say  the  original  "  Lives
of  Alchemysticall  Philosophers,"  did  not  allow  him  to  pass
by  the  Hermetic  science  without  giving  it  due  attention.

58  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

Counter  authorities,  while  admitting  that  in  things
scientific  he  must  be  counted  the  most  curious  and  investi-
gating of  the  children  of  men,  emphatically  assert  that  he
has  been  erroneously  included  by  demonographers  among
the  number  of  magicians,  and  that  in  the  twenty-one  goodly
folio  volumes  which  comprise  his  opera  omnia,  there  is  no
trace  of  sorcery.  In  one  place  he  declares  formally  that  "  all
those  stories  of  demons  prowling  in  the  regions  of  the  air,
and  from  whom  the  secrets  of  futurity  may  be  ascertained,
are  absurdities  which  can  never  be  admitted  by  sober
reason."  The  works  on  incredible  secrets,  so  numerously
attributed  to  him,  are,  therefore,  condemned  as  spurious,
Albertus  Magnus  having  no  more  hand  in  their  production
than  in  the  invention  of  the  cannon  and  the  pistol,  which
has  been  attributed  to  him  by  Matthias  de  Luna.

So  early,  however,  as  the  year  1480  the  Great  Chronicle
of  Belgium  records  him  magmis  in  magia,  major  in  philo-
sophia,  maximus  in  theologia.  It  is  futile  for  the  historians
of  his  order  to  argue  that  Albert  never  applied  himself  to
the  Hermetic  art,  says  an  anonymous  writer.  His  books
alone — those  which  are  his  incontestably — bear  witness  to
his  alchemical  erudition,  and  as  a  physician  he  carefully
examined  what  regards  Natural  History,  and  above  all  the
minerals  and  metals.  His  singular  experiments  are  re-
corded in  the  Secretum  Secretorum,  which  first  appeared
at  Venice  in  1508.

Michael  Maier  declares  that  he  received  from  the
disciples  of  St  Dominic  the  secret  of  the  philosophical
stone,  and  that  he  communicated  it  in  turn  to  St  Thomas
Aquinas  ;  that  he  was  in  possession  of  a  stone  naturally
marked  with  a  serpent,  and  endowed  with  so  admirable  a.
virtue  that  on  being  set  down  in  a  place  infested  with  such
reptiles,  it  would  attract  them  from  their  hiding  places ;
that  for  the  space  of  thirty  years  he  employed  all  his

ALBERTUS  MAGNUS.  59

knowledge  as  a  magician  and  astrologer  to  construct,  out
of  metals  carefully  chosen  under  appropriate  planetary
influences,  an  automaton  endowed  with  the  power  of
speech,  and  which  served  him  as  an  infallible  oracle,  reply-
ing plainly  to  every  kind  of  question  which  could  possibly
be  proposed  to  it.  This  was  the  celebrated  Android,  which
was  destroyed  by  St  Thomas  under  the  impression  that  it
was  a  diabolical  contrivance.

The  most  marvellous  story  of  his  magical  abilities  is
extant  in  the  history  of  the  University  of  Paris.  He  in-
vited William  II.,  Count  of  Holland  and  King  of  the
Romans,  to  a  supper  in  his  monastic  house  at  Cologne.
Although  it  was  midwinter  Albertus  had  tables  prepared
in  the  garden  of  the  convent ;  the  earth  was  covered  with
snow,  and  the  courtiers  who  accompanied  William  mur-
mured at  the  imprudence  and  folly  of  the  philosopher  in
exposing  the  prince  to  the  severity  of  such  weather.  As
they  sat  down,  however,  the  snow  suddenly  disappeared,
and  they  felt  not  only  the  softness  of  spring,  but  the
garden  was  filled  with  odoriferous  flowers ;  the  birds  flew
about  as  in  summer,  singing  their  most  delightful  notes,
and  the  trees  appeared  in  blossom.  Their  surprise  at  this
metamorphosis  of  nature  was  considerably  heightened
when,  at  the  end  of  the  repast,  these  wonders  disappeared
in  a  moment,  and  the  cold  wind  began  to  blow  with  its
accustomed  rigour.

The  life  of  Albertus  belongs  to  the  history  of  theology.
He  was  born  in  Suabia,  at  Larvigen,  on  the  Danube,  in
1205.  He  is  accredited  with  excessive  stupidity  in  his
youth,  but  his  devotion  to  the  Virgin  was  rewarded  by  a
vision,  which  was  accompanied  by  an  intellectual  illumina-
tion, and  he  became  one  of  the  greatest  doctors  of  his
time.  He  was  made  provincial  of  the  Dominicans,  and
was  appointed  to  the  bishopric  of  Ratisbon,  which  he  sub-

60  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

sequently  resigned  to  pursue  his  scientific  and  philosophic
studies  in  a  delightful  conventual  retreat  at  Cologne.  In
his  old  age  he  relapsed  into  the  mediocrity  of  his  earlier
years,  which  gave  rise  to  the  saying  that  from  an  ass  he
was  transformed  into  a  philosopher,  and  from  a  philosopher
he  returned  into  an  ass.

The  term  Magnus,  which  has  been  applied  to  him,£is
not  the  consequence  of  his  reputation.  It  is  the  Latin
equivalent  of  his  family  name,  Albert  de  Groot.

Among  the  spurious  works  attributed  to  him  is  that
entitled  Les  Admirables  Secrets  cV Albert  le  Grand,  which  is
concerned  with  the  virtues  of  herbs,  precious  stones,  and
animals,  with  an  abridgment  of  physiognomy,  methods  for
preservation  against  the  plague,  malignant  fevers,  poisons,
&c.  The  first  book  treats  of  the  planetary  influences  in
their  relation  to  nativities,  of  the  magical  properties
possessed  by  the  hair  of  women,  of  the  infallible  means
of  ascertaining  whether  a  child  still  in  the  womb  is  male  or
female,  &c.  In  the  others  there  is  a  curious  chaos  of  re-
markable superstitions  concerning  urine,  vermin,  old  shoes,
putrefaction,  the  manipulation  of  metals,  &c.

A  magical  grimoire  entitled  Alberti  Parvi  Lncii  Liber
de  Mirabilibus  Natures  Arcanis,  adorned  with  figures  and
talismans,  appeared  at  Lyons,  bearing  the  Kabbalistic
date  6516.  The  composition  of  philtres,  the  interpretation
of  dreams,  the  discovery  of  treasures,  the  composition  of
the  hand  of  glory,  the  ring  of  invisibility,  the  sympathetic
powder,  the  sophistication  of  gold,  and  other  marvels,  are
familiarly  explained  ;  but  this  work  is  another  forgery,  and
an  insult  to  the  memory  of  a  really  illustrious  man.

In  the  treatise  which  he  wrote  upon  minerals,  Albert
informs  us  that  he  personally  tested  some  gold  and  silver
which  had  been  manufactured  by  an  alchemist,  and  which
resisted  six  or  seven  exceptionally  searching  fusions,  but

THOMAS  AQUINAS.  6  I

the  pretended  metal  was  reduced  into  actual  scoriae  by  an
eighth.  He  recognises,  however,  the  possibility  of  trans-
mutation when  performed  upon  the  principles  of  Nature.
He  considers  that  all  metals  are  composed  of  an  unctuous
and  subtle  humidity,  intimately  incorporated  with  a  subtle
and  perfect  matter.

If  the  purely  alchemical  works  which  are  ascribed  to
Albertus  have  any  claim  to  authenticity,  he  must  be
ranked  as  a  skilful  practical  chemist  for  the  period  in
which  he  flourished.  He  employed  alembics  for  distilla-
tion, and  aludels  for  sublimation ;  he  also  made  use  of
various  lutes,  the  composition  of  which  he  describes.  He
mentions  alum  and  caustic  alkali,  and  seems  to  have  been
aware  of  the  alkaline  basis  of  cream  of  tartar.  He  knew
the  method  of  purifying  the  precious  metals  by  means  of
lead  and  of  gold,  by  cementation,  likewise  the  method  of
testing  the  purity  of  gold.  He  mentions  red  lead,  metallic
arsenic,  and  liver  of  sulphur.  He  was  acquainted  with
green  vitriol  and  iron  pyrites.  He  knew  that  arsenic
renders  copper  white,  and  that  sulphur  attacks  all  the
metals  except  gold.*

THOMAS  AQUINAS.

If  Albertus  Magnus  must  be  considered  an  adept  in
possession  of  the  philosophic  stone,  there  is  little  doubt
that  he  discovered  it  to  his  favourite  pupil,  St  Thomas,  the
most  illustrious  of  the  kings  of  intelligence  who  glorified
the  scholastic  period  of  Christian  philosophy.  There  are
some  alchemical  treatises  ascribed  to  the  angel  of  the
schools  which  he  certainly  did  not  write.  "  That  of  the
'  Nature  of  Minerals '  is  unworthy  of  so  great  a  philosopher,"
says  a  certain  anonymous  authority,  "  and  so  is  the
*  Thomson,  "  Hist,  of  Chemistry,"  vol.  i.,  pp.  32,  33.

62  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

'  Comment  on  the  Turba!  But  his  Thesaurus  Alchemic?,
addressed  to  Brother  Regnauld,  his  companion  and  friend,
is  genuine.  He  cites  Albert  in  this  as  his  master  in  all
things,  especially  in  Hermetic  philosophy.  He  addressed
other  books  to  Regnauld  on  the  curious  sciences,  amongst
which  is  a  treatise  on  Judicial  Astrology."

This  opinion  deserves  due  consideration,  yet  in  all  his
theological  works  St  Thomas  carefully  avoided  every
suspicion  of  alchemy,  persuaded,  says  the  same  writer,  that
it  would  bring  dishonour  to  his  name  as  the  height  of
human  folly.  Moreover,  in  one  of  his  treatises  he  distinctly
states  that  "  it  is  not  lawful  to  sell  as  good  gold  that  which
is  made  by  Alchemy,"  proof  positive  that  he  considered
the  transmutatory  art  to  be  simply  the  sophistication  of
the  precious  metal.

On  the  other  hand,  the  Thesaurus  Alchemic?,  generally
attributed  to  him  by  adepts,  testifies  that  "  the  aim  of  the
alchemist  is  to  change  imperfect  metal  into  that  which  is
perfect,"  and  asserts  the  possibility  of  the  thing.  These
contradictions  scarcely  afford  convincing  proof  of  a  com-
mon authorship  ;  but  spurious  or  otherwise,  the  works  on
the  Hermetic  science  which  are  attributed  to  the  angelic
doctor  are  of  importance  in  the  history  of  alchemy.  Their
leading  character  is  secrecy,  and  they  insist  on  the  preser-
vation of  the  sublime  operation  from  unworthy  men,  only
the  children  of  light,  who  live  as  in  the  presence  of  God,
being  fit  for  the  knowledge  or  custody  of  so  supernal  a
mystery.

The  Thesaurus  Alchemicb  has  the  brevity  which  charac-
terised St  Thomas,  for  it  is  comprised  in  a  very  few  leaves.
The  other  works  attributed  to  him  are  Seer  eta  AlchymicB
Magnalia  and  De  Esse  et  Essentia  Mineralium,  together
with  the  comment  on  the  Turba.  Some  of  the  terms  still
employed  by  modern  chemists  occur  for  the  first  time  in

ROGER  BACON.  63

these  supposititious  writings  of  Thomas  Aquinas — e.g.,  the
word  amalgam,  which  is  used  to  denote  a  compound  of
mercury  and  some  other  metal.

In  the  tractates  addressed  to  Brother  Regnauld,  we  learn
that  the  students  of  alchemy  are  in  search  of  a  single  sub-
stance which  absolutely  resists  the  fierce  action  of  fire,  which
itself  penetrates  everything,  and  tinges  mercury.  The  work
is  a  work  of  the  hands,  and  great  patience  is  required  in  it.
Instruments  are  necessary,  but  in  the  true  Hermetic  opera-
tion there  is  but  one  vase,  one  substance,  one  way,  and  one
only  operation.

ROGER  BACON.

Roger  Bacon  was  the  first  Englishman  who  is  known  to
have  cultivated  alchemical  philosophy.  This  learned  man
was  born  in  12 14,  near  Ilcester,  in  Somerset.  He  made
extraordinary  progress  in  the  preliminary  studies  of  boy-
hood ;  when  his  age  permitted  he  entered  the  order  of
St  Francis,  and  passed  from  Oxford  to  Paris,  where  he
learned  mathematics  and  medicine.  On  his  return  he
applied  himself  to  languages  and  philosophy,  and  made
such  progress  that  he  wrote  grammars  of  the  Latin,  Greek,
and  Hebrew  tongues.

Pronouncing  the  panegyric  of  Bacon,  Figuier  calls  him
the  greatest  intellect  which  has  arisen  in  England,  a  stu-
dent of  nature  who  was  more  physician  than  chemist,  and
a  scientist  to  whom  the  world  owes  many  extraordinary
discoveries.  He  was  almost  the  only  astronomer  of  his
time,  and  to  him  we  are  indebted  for  the  rectification  of
the  Julian  Calendar,  in  regard  to  the  solar  year,  which  in
1267  he  submitted  to  Clement  IV.,  but  which  was  not  put
in  practice  till  the  pontificate  of  Gregory.  The  physical
analysis  of  the  properties  of  lenses  and  convex  glasses,  the

64  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

invention  of  spectacles  and  achromatic  lenses,  the  theory,
and  possibly  the  first  construction,  of  the  telescope,  are  all
due  to  the  superior  and  penetrating  genius  of  Bacon.

An  adequate  notion  of  his  schemes  in  mechanical  science
may  be  gathered  from  one  of  his  own  letters — Epistola
Fratris  Rogerii  Baconis  de  Secretis  Operibus  Artis  et  Natures
et  de  nullitate  Magicz,  Hambourg,  1618.  Having  under-
taken to  demonstrate  that  by  the  help  of  natural  science  it
is  possible  to  actually  perform  the  pretended  prodigies  of
magic,  he  further  assures  us  that  machines  may  be  con-
structed for  navigation  without  the  aid  of  rowers,  in  such
a  manner  that  vessels  will  be  borne  through  the  water  with
extraordinary  velocity,  under  the  direction  of  a  single
man.  "  It  is  equally  possible  to  construct  cars  which  may
be  set  in  motion  with  marvellous  rapidity,  independently  of
horses  or  other  animals.  Flying  machines  may  also  be
made,  the  man  seated  in  the  centre,  and  by  means  of
certain  contrivances  beating  the  air  with  artificial  wings."
In  the  same  way  Bacon  anticipated  the  invention  of  the
crane,  diving  apparatus,  suspension  bridges,  &c.  These
things,  he  declares,  were  known  to  the  ancients,  and  may
still  be  recovered.

"  Should  we  be  surprised,"  demands  one  of  his  bio-
graphers, "  if  all  these  prodigies  obtained  for  him  the  name
of  magician  in  an  age  of  superstition  and  ignorance  ?
the  friars  of  his  own  order  refused  to  let  his  works  into
their  library,  as  if  he  were  a  man  who  ought  to  be  pro-
scribed by  society.  His  persecution  increased  till,  in  127S,
he  was  imprisoned  and  forced  to  confess  his  repentance  of
his  pains  in  the  arts  and  sciences.  He  was  constrained  to
abandon  the  house  of  his  order,  and  to  form  a  retreat
where  he  might  work  in  quiet."

The  reputation  of  Bacon  as  a  magician  spread  over
Western  Europe.     He  was  supposed  to  be  indebted  for  his

ROGER  BACON.  65

wisdom  to  incessant  communication  with  demons.  Wierus
accuses  him  of  goetic  magic,  and  erudite  persons  affirm
that  Antichrist  will  make  use  of  his  enchanted  mirrors  for
the  performance  of  lying  miracles.  He  really  believed  in
judicial  astrology  and  in  the  philosophical  stone.  "  By
neglecting  the  lights  of  experience,"  he  says,  "  alchemy
can  seldom  produce  gold  of  twenty-four  carats.  Few  per-
sons have  carried  the  science  to  so  high  a  point.  But  with
the  help  of  Aristotle's  '  Secret  of  Secrets,'  experimental
science  has  manufactured  not  only  gold  of  twenty-four  de-
grees, but  of  thirty,  forty,  and  onward  according  to  pleasure."

The  application  of  alchemy  to  the  extension  of  life  was
another  subject  of  study  with  Roger  Bacon.  The  grand
secret,  he  assures  us,  does  not  only  ensure  the  welfare  of  the
commonwealth  and  of  the  individual,  but  it  may  be  used
to  prolong  life,  for  that  operation  by  which  the  most  inferior
metals  is  purged  from  the  corrupt  elements  which  they
contain  till  they  are  exalted  into  the  purest  gold  and  silver
is  considered  by  every  adept  to  be  eminently  calculated  to
eliminate  so  completely  the  corrupt  particles  of  the  human
body,  that  the  life  of  mortality  may  be  extended  to  several
centuries.

A  citation  by  Franciscus  Picus  from  Bacon's  "  Book  of  the
Six  Sciences  "  recounts  how  a  man  may  become  a  prophet
and  predict  the  future  by  means  of  a  mirror  which
Bacon  calls  Almuchefi,  composed  in  accordance  with  the
laws  of  perspective  under  the  influence  of  a  benign  con-
stellation, and  after  the  body  of  the  individual  has  been
modified  by  alchemy.

On  the  word  of  a  man  who  enjoyed  his  full  confidence,
he  tells  us  how  a  celebrated  Parisian  savant,  after  cutting
a  serpent  into  fragments,  taking  care  to  preserve  intact  the
skin  of  its  belly,  subsequently  let  loose  the  animal,  which
began  immediately  to  roll    upon  certain  herbs,  and  their

E

66  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

virtues  speedily  healed  him.  The  experimenter  examined
these  herbs,  and  found  them  of  a  remarkably  green  colour.
On  the  authority  of  Artephius,  he  relates  how  a.  certain
magician,  named  Tantalus,  and  who  was  attached  to  the
person  of  the  King  of  India,  had  discovered  by  his  pro-
ficiency in  planetary  lore,  a  method  of  preserving  life  over
several  centuries.  He  enlarges  on  the  potency  of  theriac
in  the  excessive  prolongation  of  life.  He  lauds  the  flesh  of
winged  serpents  as  a  specific  against  senility  in  mankind.
By  the  hygiene  of  Artephius  he  informs  us  that  that  adept
lived  over  a  thousand  years.  If  Plato  and  Aristotle  failed  to
prolong  their  existence  it  is  not  surprising,  for  they  were
ignorant  even  of  the  quadrature  of  the  circle,  which  Bacon
declares  to  have  been  well  known  at  his  time,  and  which
is  indefinitely  inferior  to  the  grand  medical  doctrine  of
Artephius.*

The  chemical  investigations  of  the  great  English  Fran-
ciscan have  proved  valuable  to  the  science  which  he  loved.
He  studied  carefully  the  properties  of  saltpetre,  and  if  he
did  not  discover  gunpowder,  he  contributed  to  its  perfection
by  teaching  the  purification  of  saltpetre  by  its  dissolution
in  water  and  by  crystallisation.  He  also  called  attention
to  the  chemical  role  played  by  the  air  in  combustion.-f*

Many  of  Bacon's  works  still  remain  in  manuscript,  but
his  Speculum  Alchimics  was  done  into  French  by  Girard  de
Tourmes,  and  published  at  Lyons  in  duodecimo  and  octavo
in  1557.  De  Po testate  Mirabili  Artis  et  Natures,  which  is
merely  a  chapter  of  the  Epistle  already  cited,  was  trans-
lated by  the  same  hand.

In  another  work,  entitled  Radix  Mundi,  the  supreme
secret  of  Hermetic  philosophy  is  said  to  be  hidden  in  the

*Nam  quadraturam  circuli  se  ignorasse  confitetur,  quod  his  diebus  scitur
veraciter.

t  Figuier,  U Alchimie  et  les  Ahhimistes,  p.  97.

ALAIN  OF  LISLE.  67

four  elements.     This  treatise,  which  quotes  Paracelsus,  is,
however,  an  impudent  forgery.

The  "  Mirror  of  Alchemy,"  like  other  works  of  the  philo-
sophers, appeals  to  Hermes  as  to  a  master-initiate,  whose
authority  is  not  only  sufficient  but  final.  The  natural
principles  of  all  metals  are  argent  vive,  that  is,  sophic
mercury,  and  sulphur.  The  various  proportions  in  which
these  principles  are  combined,  together  with  their  degrees
of  purity,  constitute  the  sole  difference  between  the  best
and  the  basest  metal.

ALAIN  OF  LISLE.

An  alchemical  treatise,  entitled  Dicta  de  Lapide  Philoso-
phico,  appeared  in  octavo  at  Leyden  during  the  year  1600.
It  was  attributed  to  Alanus  Insulensis,  and  was  reprinted
in  the  TJieatrum  Ckimicum,  Argentorati,  1662.  It  is  denied
that  this  work  is  the  production  of  that  Alain  de  Lisle  who
was  called  the  universal  doctor,  and  who,  after  a  brilliant
period  passed  in  the  University  of  Paris,  retired  to  a  cloister
as  a  lay  brother,  in  order  to  be  master  of  his  time,  and  to
devote  himself  entirely  to  philosophy.  Migne's  Diction-
naire  des  Sciences  Occultes  asserts  that  another  Alanus
flourished  at  the  same  period,  but  the  existence  of  the
alchemical  volume  is  the  sole  ground  for  this  statement.
It  cannot  be  shown,  on  the  other  hand,  that  Alain  practised
the  Hermetic  Science,  but  he  was  the  author  of  a  "  Com-
mentary on  the  Prophecies  of  Merlin."  He  was  made
bishop  of  Auxerre,  and  died  in  1278.  The  publishers  of
alchemical  treatises  were  accustomed  to  trade  upon  brilliant
reputations  of  the  past  by  attributing  worthless  works  to
great  authorities.  The  name  of  Alanus  Insulensis  appear-
ing on  the  title-page  of  the  Dicta  de  Lapide  Philosopliico
may  perhaps  be  accounted  for  in  this  manner.

The  treatise  itself  is  short  and  not  of  abnormal  value.

68  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

It  represents  the  Hermetic  art  as  the  gift  of  God,  and
counsels  the  neophyte  to  love  Him  with  all  his  heart  and
soul.  It  describes  the  mysteries  of  sublimation,  and  follows
preceding  authorities  on  the  problem  of  the  prima  materia.
Its  generally  indefinite  and  unprofitable  character  from
any  practical  standpoint  should  make  it  an  exceptional
field  for  every  species  of  fanciful  interpretation.

RAYMOND  LULLY.

The  comparison  of  a  brilliant  but  ephemeral  reputation
to  "  the  comet  of  a  season  "  has  been  transferred  from  the
region  of  poetry  into  that  of  proverb,  and  is  certainly
applicable  to  no  figure  in  the  history  of  literature  or  science
more  completely  than  to  the  subject  of  this  memoir.  The
name  of  Raymond  Lully  has  indeed  passed  so  completely
into  oblivion  that  it  awakes  no  recollections  whatever  except
in  the  minds  of  certain  specialists  in  history  and  philosophy.
Yet  he  exercised  no  small  influence  on  his  generation,
while  for  a  century  after  his  death  all  intellectual  Europe
was  acquainted  with  his  method  for  the  acquisition  of  the
sciences  and  his  voluminous  literary  and  evangelistic
labours.  Raymond  Lully  united  the  saint  and  the  man  of
science,  the  philosopher  and  the  preacher,  the  apostle  and
the  itinerant  lecturer,  the  dialectician  and  the  martyr ;  in  his
youth  he  was  a  courtier  and  a  man  of  pleasure  ;  in  mature
age  he  was  an  ascetic  who  had  discovered  the  universal
science  through  a  special  revelation  from  God ;  after  his
death  he  was  denounced  as  a  heretic,  and  then  narrowly
escaped  beatification  as  a  saint.  While  his  relics  worked
miracles  in  Majorca,  colleges  were  founded  in  various  parts
of  Europe  for  teaching  the  Ars  Lulliana,  which  was  to
replace  the  scholastic  method ;  but  the  miracles  ceased,  the
universal  science  fell  into  neglect,  and,  as  the  last  scene  in
this  eventful  history,  Raymond  Lully  appears  in  popular

RAYMOND  LULLY.  69

legends  as  an  adept  in  alchemy,  whose  age  was  prolonged
through  centuries  by  the  discovery  of  the  elixir  of  life.

Having  succeeded  in  rescuing  from  oblivion  and  mis-
representation this  singular  man,  whose  sanctity  was  as
eminent  as  his  attainments  were  unique,  I  shall  here  present
the  first  true  history  of  his  life  and  works  to  the  reading
public  of  England ;  the  romantic  narrative  will  be  as
interesting  to  the  general  student  as  to  the  occultist  and
the  man  of  letters.

The  father  of  Raymond  Lully  was  a  gentleman  of
Barcelona,  who,  having  served  under  the  banner  of  John  I.,
King  of  Arragon,  at  the  conquest  of  the  Balearic  Isles  from
the  Mohammedans,  was  gifted  with  lands  in  Majorca,  and
there  settled.  He  was  of  an  old  and  noble  Catalonian  family,
and  was  wedded  to  a  lady  whose  name  is  not  known.
Though  possessed  of  considerable  wealth,  his  happiness  was
marred  by  the  sterility  of  his  wife  ;  but,  addressing  them-
selves to  the  goodness  of  God,  the  lady  was  eventually
delivered  of  a  son,  who  was  named,  like  his  father,  Raymond
Lully.  He  was  born,  according  to  Segui,  in  1229,  but
according  to  Jean  Marie  de  Vernon,  and  other  authorities,
in  1235,  which,  on  the  whole,  is  the  more  probable  date.
When  the  young  Raymond  had  attained  the  use  of  reason,
his  parents  endeavoured  to  imbue  him  with  love  for  the
liberal  arts,  but  his  mercurial  and  impetuous  disposition
was  unsuited  to  serious  study,  and  he  was  permitted  to
follow  his  father's  profession  of  arms.  He  was  made  page
to  the  King,  with  whom  he  acquired  such  high  favour
that  he  was  installed  as  Grand  Prevot,  or  Master  of  the
Palace,  and  subsequently  as  Seneschal  of  the  Isles  ;  but  he
employed  the  advantages  of  these  distinguished  positions
in  the  dissipations  of  a  youth  without  curb  or  restraint.
The  flower  of  his  manhood  was  wasted  in  the  gaieties  of
court  life,  in  winning  the  favours  of  ladies,  and  in  compos-

JO  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

ing  amorous  verses  in  their  honour.  He  spared  no  pains  to
make  himself  pleasing  to  those  who  were  beautiful,  and  his
excesses  were  so  glaring  that  his  parents,  and  King  James
II.  himself,  were  forced  to  make  great  complaints  to  him.
As  a  remedy  for  the  irregularities  of  his  life,  it  was  proposed
that  he  should  marry,  and  a  wife  at  once  beautiful,  virtuous,
and  wealthy  was  selected  by  his  advisers  and  friends.
She  was  named  Catherine  de  Sabots.  Though  he  became
much  attached  to  this  lady,  the  bond  of  marriage  did
not  prove  strong  enough  to  confine  his  errant  inclina-
tions, and  there  was  one  person  in  particular  for  whom  he
conceived  a  great  passion,  though  he  was  already  the  father
of  two  male  children  and  of  one  girl.  This  was  the
Signora  Ambrosia  Eleonora  de  Castello  de  Genes,  whose
virtue  was  superior  to  her  personal  attractions,  though  she
eclipsed  in  loveliness  all  the  beauties  of  the  Court.  She
was  married  to  a  man  whom  she  loved,  but  such  was  the
infatuation  of  Raymond  Lully  that  he  paid  her  the  most
marked  attentions,  and  on  one  occasion,  lost  to  all  around
him  except  the  object  of  his  admiration,  he  is  said  to  have
followed  her  on  horseback  into  the  church  of  Palma,  a  town
in  Majorca,  where  she  had  gone  one  morning  to  mass.  So
outrageous  an  act  could  not  fail  to  cause  great  scandal,
more  particularly  on  account  of  the  high  rank  of  both
parties  concerned.  The  lady,  thus  suddenly  raised  to  such
undesirable  notoriety,  took  counsel  with  her  husband  as  to
the  course  which  she  should  pursue  to  put  an  end  to  the
persecutions  of  her  admirer.  In  the  meantime,  Raymond
Lully,  conscious  no  doubt  that  he  had  exceeded  all  bounds
of  moderation,  wrote  an  incoherent  apology,  accompanied
with  a  sonnet,  in  which  he  particularly  described  the  beauty
of  her  neck.  To  this  the  lady  replied  by  a  letter,  written
in  the  presence  of  her  husband,  and  which  is  here  copied
verbatim  from  the  old  French  writer  who  relates  this
portion  of  the  story.

RAYMOND  LULLY.  J  i

Letter  from  the  Signora  di  Castello  de  Genes  to
Raymond  Lully,  which  is  a  civil  reply  to  a  lover  to
dissuade  him  from  profaning  love.

"  Sir, — The  sonnet  which  you  have  sent  me  is  evidence
of  the  superiority  of  your  genius  and  the  imperfection,
or,  rather,  the  perversity  of  your  judgment.  With  what
vivacity  would  you  depict  true  beauty  since  by  your  verses
you  even  embellish  ugliness !  But  how  can  you  employ
such  exalted  talents  in  the  laudation  of  a  little  clay  briefly
tinged  with  vermilion  ?  Your  industry  should  be  employed
in  eradicating  and  not  in  publishing  your  passion.

"  'Tis  not  that  you  are  unworthy  of  the  affection  of  the
noblest  woman  in  the  world,  but  you  become  unworthy  of
it  by  devoting  yourself  to  the  service  of  one  who  is  the  least
of  all.  Is  it  possible  that  an  intelligence  created  for  God
alone,  and  illuminated  as  it  is,  can  be  so  blind  on  this
point  ?

"Abandon  then  a  passion  which  deprives  you  of  your
native  nobility.  Do  not  tarnish  your  reputation  by  the
pursuit  of  an  object  which  you  can  never  possess.  I  could
terribly  disillusion  you  by  showing  you  that  what  you  so
much  admire  should  rather  be  held  in  aversion.  Yet  rest
well  assured  that  I  love  you  all  the  more  truly  because  I
appear  to  have  no  regard  for  you."

This  letter  served  only  to  feed  the  flame  in  the  breast  of
Raymond  Lully,  till,  other  means  having  failed,  the  lady,
still  acting  under  the  advice  of  her  husband,  called  her  lover
into  her  presence,  and  exposed  to  him  her  breast  which
was  almost  eaten  away  by  a  cancer,  whence  an  offensive
odour  issued.

"  Look  on  what  thou  lovest,  Raymond  Lully,"  she  cried,
with  tears  in  her  eyes,  "  Consider  the  condition  of  this
wretched  body  in  which  thy  spirit  centres  all  its  hopes  and

72  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

pleasures,  and  then  repent  of  thy  useless  attempts ;  mourn
for  the  time  which  thou  hast  wasted  in  persecuting  a  being
whom  thou  didst  fondly  deem  perfect,  but  who  has  so
dreadful  a  blemish  !  Change  this  useless  and  criminal
passion  into  holy  love,  direct  thine  affections  to  the
Creator,  not  to  the  creature,  and  in  the  acquisition  of  eter-
nal bliss  take  now  the  same  pains  which  thou  hast  hitherto
vainly  spent  to  engage  me  in  thy  foolish  passion !  "

The  sight  had  already  melted  the  heart  of  Raymond
Lully  and  restored  him  to  reason.  After  expressing  to  the
noble-hearted  lady  how  deeply  he  felt  for  her  misfortune,
he  withdrew  from  the  house,  ashamed  of  the  passion  he
had  conceived,  and  reaching  home,  overwhelmed  with  con-
fusion, he  cast  himself  at  the  feet  of  a  crucifix,  and  vowed
to  consecrate  himself  henceforth  to  the  service  of  God
alone.  He  passed  a  more  than  usually  tranquil  night,
being  filled  with  this  zealous  resolution,  and  the  vision  of
Christ  is  said  to  have  appeared  to  him,  saying,  "  Raymond
Lully,  from  henceforth  do  thou  follow  me  ! "  This  vision
was  repeated  several  times,  and  he  judged  it  to  be  an
indication  of  the  Divine  Will.  Raymond  was  at  this
period  about  thirty  years  old ;  he  filled  one  of  the  most
noble  situations  at  court,  and  might  have  aspired  to  any
honour  for  himself  or  his  family.  He  resolved,  neverthe-
less, to  renounce  the  world,  and  soon  arranged  his  affairs,
dividing  so  much  of  his  estate  among  his  family  as  would
enable  them  to  live  honourably,  retaining  a  small  portion
for  his  personal  necessities,  and  distributing  the  rest  among
the  poor.  His  plans  in  the  matter  were  so  punctually
fulfilled,  that  he  was  accused  of  plunging  from  one  folly  to
another.

At  this  period  he  is  said  to  have  made  a  pilgrimage  to
St  John  in  Galicia,  and  a  retreat  thereat.  He  returned  in
due  course  to  Majorca,  and  took  the  habit  of  religion,  but

RAYMOND  LULLY.  73

did  not,  however,  embrace  the  religious  life.  He  retired
to  a  small  dwelling  on  the  mountain  of  Randa,  a  pos-
session which  had  not  been  included  in  the  general  sale
of  his  estate.  Here  he  fell  ill,  and  was  consoled  by  two
visions  of  the  Saviour.

After  his  change  of  life,  the  first  boon  which  he  asked  of
God  was  so  to  illuminate  his  mind  that  he  might  compose
a  book  capable  of  completely  annihilating  the  errors  of
Mahomet,  and  of  forcing  the  infidels,  by  good  and  solid
reasoning,  to  embrace  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ.  In  answer
to  this  prayer,  he  was  conscious,  it  is  asserted,  of  a  perfect
spiritual  illumination,  and  became  instantaneously  capable
of  reasoning  powerfully  on  all  subjects,  so  that  he  passed
henceforth  for  a  great  and  subtle  doctor  both  in  human
and  divine  sciences.  A  more  sober  account  informs  us
that  "  he  prepared  himself  to  labour  for  the  conversion  of
the  Mahometans,  by  studying  their  books  in  the  Arabic
language,"  and  that  his  preparation  continued  for  the
space  of  six  years.  According  to  another  authority,  this
missionary  zeal  did  not  date  from  an  earlier  period  than
1268 — three  years  after  his  reformation — when  in  another
of  his  visions  he  beheld  upon  the  leaves  of  a  myrtle  or  a
mastic  tree,  certain  marks  which  resembled  Turkish  or
Arabic  characters.  On  awaking,  he  regarded  himself  as
called  to  a  mission  among  the  heathen.

Convinced,  says  one  of  his  biographers,  that  the  Spirit
of  God  had  not  inspired  him  with  the  Celestial  Science  to
let  it  rest  idle,  and  that  he  would  be  betraying  his  vocation
if  his  light  were  hidden  under  a  bushel,  he  resolved  to
journey  to  Paris  and  there  publish  the  eternal  truths  which
had  been  revealed  to  him.  Others  have  supposed  that  in
undertaking  this  journey  he  was  simply  seeking  instruction
in  the  Latin  tongue  at  one  of  the  centres  of  learning.
Several  of  his  treatises  on  Philosophy,  Theology,  Medicine,

74  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

and  Astronomy  are,  however,  referred  to  this  period,  as
well  as  some  works  on  alchemy,  but  this  point  will  receive
adequate  consideration  hereafter.

Still  imbued  with  his  evangelistic  and  missionary  zeal,
he  engaged  a  young  Arab  as  his  valet,  that  he  might
perfect  himself  in  colloquial  Arabic ;  but  he,  discovering
that  his  master  intended  to  demolish  the  divine  principles
of  the  Koran,  and  preach  against  the  holy  law  of  Mahomet,
piously  resolved  to  assassinate  him,  and  one  day  plunged
a  dagger  into  his  breast.  He  sought  to  repeat  the  blow,
but  Raymond  Lully,  wounded  and  bleeding  as  he  was,
contrived  to  disarm  him,  perhaps  with  the  assistance  of  a
holy  and  opportune  anchorite,  who  is  advanced  at  this
critical  moment  by  one  of  the  biographers.  The  young
Arab  was  imprisoned  with  the  reluctant  consent  of  his
over  magnanimous  master,  who  does  not  appear  to  have
proceeded  further  against  him  ;  but  the  unhappy  Moham-
medan enthusiast  was  so  overwhelmed  with  vexation  at
the  failure  of  his  heroic  design  to  destroy,  at  all  costs,  the
implacable  foe  of  the  prophet,  that  he  strangled  himself  in
his  dungeon  in  a  paroxysm  of  impotent  fury.

It  was  after  this  episode,  and  after  the  recovery  of  Ray-
mond Lully  from  the  violence  of  his  valet,  that,  according
to  another  historian,  he  retired  to  Mount  Randa,  and  that
then,  and  then  only,  he  received  from  the  Father  of  Lights
that  new  illumination  with  which  others  have  accredited
him  at  a  much  earlier  period.  This  was  probably  a  second
visit  paid  to  his  Balearic  solitude ;  he  tarried  there
seven  months,  "  always  absorbed  in  prayer,  and  conversing,
as  it  seemed  to  him,  continually  with  angels,  whose  conso-
lations he  received — consolations,"  says  the  pious  writer,
"  which  the  soul  can  indeed  realise,  but  which  the  lips
cannot  worthily  describe."

Having  left  his  retreat,  he  determined  to  travel  to  Rome,

RAYMOND  LULLY.  75

to  exhort  his  Holiness  to  establish  in  Europe  several
monasteries,  where  monks  should  be  occupied  in  acquiring
and  teaching  languages,  in  order  to  spread  everywhere  the
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  labour  for  the  conversion  of
the  infidels.  But  Honorius  IV.,  from  whose  piety  he  had
everything  to  hope,  died  as  soon  as  Lully  reached  Rome,
and  he  therefore  returned  to  Paris,  where  he  explained
publicly  his  General  or  Universal  Art  for  the  acquisition  of
all  sciences.  From  Paris  he  went  to  Mont  Pelin,  where  he
also  taught  and  wrote  ;  thence  to  Genoa,  where  he  trans-
lated his  Art  Invejitif  mto  Arabic.  From  Genoa  he  again
proceeded  to  Rome,  but  seeing  that  it  was  impossible  to
attain  his  ends  on  account  of  the  obstacles  which  presented
themselves  in  the  Sacred  Court,  he  returned  to  Genoa,
intending  to  start  for  Africa,  and  personally  labour  in  the
conversion  of  the  infidels.  He  made  terms  with  the  owner
of  a  vessel,  shipped  his  books  on  board,  with  the  other
necessities  of  his  journey,  but,  when  he  was  himself  on  the
point  of  embarking,  a  vision  of  all  the  dangers  he  was
about  to  encounter  so  worked  upon  his  mind,  that  he  was
deprived  even  of  the  power  of  walking,  and  was  obliged  to
renounce  his  intention.  His  effects  were  consequently
returned  to  him,  and  with  these  he  re-entered  Genoa  in
the  midst  of  a  crowd  of  vagabonds,  who  derided  his  weak-
ness. Whether  consequent  on  this  raillery,  or  through
shame  at  his  cowardice,  he  became  dangerously  ill*  On
the  Vigil  of  Pentecost,  1291,  he  was  carried  to  the  Convent
of  Friars  Preachers,  and  received  the  care  which  his  con-

*  This  illness  is  referred  to  by  another  writer,  with  details  of  a  miraculous
kind.  "  About  1275  (the  chronology  of  all  the  biographers  is  a  chaos  of  con-
fusion) he  fell  ill  a  second  time,  and  was  reduced  to  such  an  extremity  that  he
could  take  neither  rest  nor  nourishment.  On  the  feast  of  the  Conversion  of
St  Paul,  the  crucified  Saviour  again  appeared  to  him,  glorified,  and  sur-
rounded by  a  most  exquisite  odour,  which  surpassed  musk,  amber,  and  all
other  scents.  In  remembrance  of  this  miracle,  on  the  same  day,  in  the  same
bed  and  place  where  he  lived  and  slept,  the  same  supernal  odour  is  diffused."

j6  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

dition  required.  He  received  the  last  sacraments,  and
dictated  his  last  will  and  testament ;  nevertheless,  he  was
destined  to  recover,  and  had  scarcely  regained  his  strength
when,  to  repair  his  previous  fault,  he  embarked  upon  the
first  vessel  bound  for  Tunis.  During  the  voyage  he  com-
posed his  "  General  Tabulation  of  the  Sciences."

Immediately  on  his  arrival  at  Tunis,  he  held  conferences
with  those  who  were  most  erudite  in  the  law  of  Mahomet.
He  proved,  at  least  to  his  own  satisfaction,  that  they  were
in  error  and  darkness,  and  that  truth  was  on  the  side  of
Jesus  Christ.  He  was  accused  before  the  King  of  Tunis
of  seducing  the  people,  was  arrested,  cast  into  prison,  and
ultimately  condemned  to  death.  But  a  learned  Arabian
priest,  overcome  by  his  arguments,  obtained  his  pardon  on
condition  of  his  instant  departure.  He  left  the  town
amidst  the  insults  and  opprobrium  of  the  populace,  pro-
hibited to  return,  on  pain  of  certain  death.

In  1293  he  arrived  at  Genoa  from  this  disastrous  mission,
and  he  appears  to  have  proceeded  immediately  to  Naples,
where  he  remained  till  the  pontificate  of  Celestin  V.,  teach-
ing publicly  his  Ars  Magna  and  Arbor  Scientiariim.  In
December  1294,  he  repaired  to  Rome  to  persuade  the  Pope
to  send  missionaries  to  the  infidels,  and  he  appears  to  have
obtained  the  establishment  of  several  colleges  for  the  study
of  oriental  languages.  Moreover,  the  University  of  Paris,
by  an  authentic  act,  adopted  and  recommended  the  use  of
his  short  method  of  acquiring  knowledge,  and  some  of  his
more  important  philosophical  doctrines.  Still,  his  missionary
efforts  were  not  generally  successful,  and  he  again  wandered
from  place  to  place,  confuting  heretics.  He  travelled  to
Montpellier,  where  he  was  received  with  distinction  by
Raymond  Gauffredy,  General  of  the  Order  of  St  Francis.
He  obtained  letters  of  association,  as  a  benefactor  to  the
order,  the  superiors  of  which  were  put  under  his  direction,

RAYMOND  LULLY.  J?

and  he  taught  his  method  in  their  houses.  He  preached
in  Cyprus  against  the  Nestorians  and  Georgians,  striving  to
bring  them  back  to  the  bosom  of  the  Church.  He  addressed
himself  for  assistance  in  his  manifold  enterprises  to  the
Kings  of  France,  Sicily,  Majorca,  and  Cyprus,  but  generally
in  vain.

In  1308  he  returned  to  Paris,  where  he  conversed  with
the  celebrated  Johannes  Scotus,  who  is  known  as  the  subtle
doctor.  He  had  the  satisfaction  to  find  that  King  Philip
le  Bel  had  directed  the  oriental  languages  to  be  taught  in
the  University  of  Paris.  This  induced  Raymond  to  proceed
in  the  following  year  to  Ferdinand  IV.,  King  of  Castile,  to
engage  him  to  unite  with  the  King  of  France  for  the
recovery  of  the  Holy  Land,  but  this  oft-repeated  and
invariably  disastrous  and  futile  enterprise  was  fortunately
not  undertaken.  He  ventured  again  to  Africa,  landed  at
Bona,  that  ancient  Hippo  which  was  the  diocese  of  St
Augustine,  and  despite  the  opposition  of  its  Mohammedan
inhabitants  he  succeeded  in  converting  seventy  followers  of
the  philosopher  Averroes.  Thence  he  travelled  to  Algiers
and  converted  many,  which  brought  down  on  him  the
persecution  of  the  authorities.  A  bridle  was  put  into  his
mouth,  as  if  he  were  a  horse,  and  he  was  deprived  by  this
means  of  the  free  use  of  speech  for  the  space  of  forty
days ;  he  was  then  publicly  beaten,  and  expelled  from  the
kingdom.  He  had  no  other  road  open  to  him  but  to  return
to  Tunis,  where  sentence  of  death  awaited  him,  but  he
remained  concealed,  and  shortly  after  proceeded  to  Bugia.
There  he  confounded  the  doctrines  of  the  Mohammedan
priests,  successfully  avoiding  innumerable  deadly  snares
prepared  by  the  people  against  him  at  the  suggestion  of
their  religious  teachers.  He  was  at  length  cast  into  a
miserable  dungeon,  where  he  might  well  have  perished,  but
the  solicitations  of  certain  Genoese  merchants  obtained  him

78  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

a  better  prison,  in  which  he  was  confined  for  six  months.
Here  the  Mohammedan  doctors  came  to  him  in  troops,  to
persuade  him  to  embrace  their  law,  promising  him  the  most
alluring  recompences — slaves,  palaces,  wealth,  beautiful
women,  and  the  King's  friendship.  "The  result,"  says
one  of  Lully's  biographers,  "was  that  they  were  almost
persuaded  to  embrace  His  law,  Who  alone  could  promise
them  eternal  beatitude."

The  gates  of  Raymond's  prison  were  at  length  thrown
open,  and,  as  a  disturber  of  the  public  peace,  he  was
enjoined  to  quit  those  parts  at  once.  The  illustrious
wanderer  embarked  in  a  Genoese  vessel  with  his  books  and
papers,  but  he  was  wrecked  ten  miles  from  the  town
of  Pisa,  escaping  hardly  with  the  loss  of  all  his  effects.
At  Pisa  he  fell  sick,  and  was  carefully  attended  by  the
Dominicans.  On  his  recovery  he  resumed  his  public
teaching.  The  conversion  of  the  Mohammedans  and  the
conquest  of  the  Holy  Land  were  still  his  chief  ends,  and
he  so  eloquently  solicited  the  inhabitants  of  Pisa  to  in-
stitute an  order  of  Christian  Knights  for  the  deliverance  of
Judea,  that  they  sent  him  with  letters  to  the  Holy  Father  ;
he  was  entrusted  by  the  inhabitants  of  Genoa  with  similar
documents,  and  bore  also  the  voluntary  offer  of  the  ladies
in  that  town  to  contribute  towards  such  a  pious  and  praise-
worthy purpose  a  considerable  sum  of  money.  With  these
assurances  he  sought  the  Pope  at  Avignon,  presented  his
letters,  and  added  the  most  powerful  reasons  of  his  own  to
persuade  him  to  proclaim  another  crusade.  Naturally,  he
obtained  nothing  from  the  Papal  Court,  and  he  retired  to
Paris,  sorrowful  at  his  failure  and  at  the  coldness  of  the
prelates  of  the  Church.  He  continued  writing  and  teaching,
and  in  October  131 1,  hearing  that  a  general  council  would
be  held  at  Vienna,  he  considered  this  a  favourable  oppor-
tunity  and   presented  himself  before  it  to  demand  three

RAYMOND  LULLY.  79

things : — r.  The  establishment  of  several  monasteries  com-
posed of  learned  and  courageous  men,  who,  willing  to
expose  their  lives  in  the  quarrel  of  Christ,  would  take
pleasure  in  acquiring  languages  in  order  to  publish  the
Gospel  more  effectually.  2.  The  reduction  of  all  the
Military  Orders  in  the  Christian  world  into  a  single  order,
so  that  living  under  one  religious  rule,  and  inspired  with  the
same  desires,  they  might  all  do  battle  with  the  Saracens,
and,  suppressing  all  seeds  of  jealousy,  all  selfish  interests,
by  a  laudable  emulation,  with  true  Christian  piety,  seek  to
deliver  the  Hoi)'  Place  from  the  hands  of  the  miscreants.
3.  The  condemnation,  by  authority  of  the  Pope  and  the
Council,  of  all  the  works  of  Averroes  used  in  Christian
colleges  and  schools,  because  they  were  distinctly  and
directly  opposed  to  the  doctrines  of  true  religion.  In  order
to  throw  more  light  on  this  last  point  he  composed  a  treatise
entitled  De  Natale  Pneri.  He  was  again  unsuccessful,  and
returned  to  Paris  without  having  accomplished  anything.
With  unconquerable  perseverance  he  again  set  himself
more  diligently  than  ever  to  the  composition  of  books
in  Latin,  Spanish,  and  Arabic,  for  the  edification  of  the
Faithful  and  the  instruction  of  the  Saracens.  He  became
indeed  one  of  the  most  voluminous  authors  in  the  world,
and  when  weary  of  the  repose  of  letters  he  returned  to
Majorca,  far  advanced  in  years,  he  embarked,  despite  the
peril,  for  Tunis,  hoping  to  work  secretly  in  the  conversion
of  its  inhabitants.

According  to  another  account,  he  publicly  proclaimed
his  return,  crying,  "  Do  you  not  remember  that  I  am  the
man  whom  your  princes  formerly  hunted  from  this  country
and  from  Tunis  in  dread  that  I  should  illuminate  your
souls  with  the  truths  of  our  holy  religion,  towards  which
you  already  had  some  disposition  ?  The  single  hope  of
your  salvation,  and  the  resolution  I  have  taken  to  suffer  all

80  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

the  torments  of  the  world  for  the  love  of  my  God,  lead  me
back  among  you,  to  do  with  me  as  you  please."

In  either  case  his  return  was  discovered  ;  as  one  man
the  people  rose  in  tumult  against  him,  and  having  covered
him  with  opprobrium  and  atrocious  injuries,  they  chased
him  with  stones  from  the  town  to  the  port,  where  he  fell
miserably  overwhelmed.

According  to  numerous  biographers,  certain  merchants,
either  of  Majorca  or  Genoa,  passing  Tunis,  saw  a  great
light,  in  the  shape  of  a  pyramid,  near  to  the  port,  on  the
night  of  this  catastrophe.  This  light  seemed  to  issue  from
a  heap  of  stones,  and,  curious  to  discover  its  cause,  they
put  ashore  in  a  boat,  and  thus  came  upon  the  precious  body
of  Raymond  Lully,  whom,  in  spite  of  his  disfigured  condi-
tion, they  immediately  recognised.

But  M.  E.  J.  Delecleuze,  writing  in  the  Revue  des  Deux
Mondes,  gives  us  the  same  narrative  unadorned  by  the
veneer  of  the  miraculous.  "  The  night  fell,  and  the  body
of  Raymond  Lully  remained  on  the  sea-shore.  During  the
whole  of  this  terrible  scene  none  of  the  converts,  and  still
less  the  European  Christians  then  sojourning  in  the  town,
had  dared  to  defend  the  missionary,  or  even  to  intercede
in  his  favour.  Certain  Genoese  merchants,  however,  desir-
ing to  pay  the  last  honours  to  his  corpse,  came  in  a  boat,
under  cover  of  the  darkness,  to  bear  it  away.  In  the
accomplishment  of  this  pious  duty  they  perceived  that
Raymond  Lully  was  still  breathing.  They  carried  him  in
haste  to  their  ship,  and  immediately  set  sail  for  Majorca,
in  sight  of  which  island  that  holy  and  learned  man  expired
on  the  29th  of  June  1 3 1 5,  at  the  age  of  eighty  years."  *

*  The  following  variation  is  also  related: — "Finding  him  still  alive  when
they  bore  him  to  the  ship,  the  merchants  put  back  towards  Genoa  to  get  help,
but  they  were  carried  miraculously  to  Majorca,  where  the  martyr  expired  in
sight  of  his  native  island.  The  merchants  resolved  to  say  nothing  of  their
precious  burden,  which  they  embalmed  and  preserved  religiously,  being  deter-

RAYMOND  LULLY.

It  has  already  been  stated  that  Raymond  Lully  was  one
of  the  most  prolific  writers  of  his  own  or  of  any  age.  The
following  list  of  his  works  is  given  by  Alfonso  de  Proaza
in  1515,  and  is  reproduced  by  A.  Perroquet : —

Names  of  Subjects.  No.  of  Treatises.

On  the  Ars  Veritatis  Demonstrativ7is,         .  60

Grammar  and  Rhetoric,      ....  7

Logic, 22

On  the  Understanding,                         ,  7

On  Memory,       ......  4

On  Will, 8

On  Moral  and  Political  Philosophy,    .         .  12

On  Law,     .         .         .         .         .         .         .  8

Philosophy  and  Physics,     .         .         .         .  32

Metaphysics,        .         .         .         .         .         .  26

Mathematics, 19

Medicine  and  Anatomy,      ....  20

Chemistry,           ......  49

Theology, 212

Total  number  of  treatises,

486

This  list  is  accepted  without  suspicion  or  criticism  by  M.
Delecleuze,  but  as  Raymond  Lully  did  not  begin  writing
till  1270,  and  as  he  died  in  13 18  at  latest,  this  calculation
requires  us  to  suppose  that  he  produced  ten  treatise  every
year  without  intermission  for  the  space  of  eight  and  forty

mined  to  transport  it  to  Genoa.  Three  times  they  put  to  sea  with  a  wind  that
seemed  favourable,  but  as  often  they  were  forced  to  return  into  port,  which
proved  plainly  the  will  of  God,  and  obliged  them  to  make  known  the  martyr-
dom of  the  man  whom  they  revered,  who  was  stoned  for  the  glory  of  God  in
the  town  of  Bugia  (?)  in  the  year  of  grace  1318."  From  this  account  it  will
be  seen  that  the  place  of  Lully's  violent  death,  as  well  as  the  date  on  which
it  occurred,  are  both  involved  in  doubt.  He  was  born  under  the  pontificate
of  Honorius  IV.,  and  died,  according  to  Genebrand,  about  1304;  but  the
author  of  the  preface  to  the  meditations  of  the  Hermit  Blaquerne  positively
fixes  his  decease  on  the  feast  of  the  martyrdom  of  SS.  Peter  and  Paul,  June
29>  1315,  and  declares  that  he  was  eighty-six  years  old.

F

82  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

years,  which  would  have  been  perfectly  impossible  for
the  most  cloistered,  book-devoted  student,  and  Raymond
Lully  was  a  man  of  indefatigable  activity,  as  the  facts  of
his  itinerant  existence  abundantly  reveal.  A  writer  in  the
Biographie  Universelle,  Paris,  1820,  has  the  following  perti-
nent remarks  on  this  subject : — "  Some  of  his  biographers
have  extended  the  number  of  his  treatises  to  several
thousand.*  The  more  moderate  have  reduced  them  from
five  hundred  to  three  hundred,  which  lie  scattered  among
the  libraries  of  Majorca,  Rome,  Barcelona,  the  Sorbonne,
St  Victor,  and  the  Chatreux  at  Paris  ;  but  scarcely  two
hundred  can  be  found  distinguished  by  their  titles  and
the  first  words  of  the  work  ;  and  this  number  must  be  still
further  diminished  as  the  difference  between  some  of  them
is  very  slight,  as  chapters  have  been  given  for  the  titles  of
separate  works,  and  as  the  explanations  of  professors  or
disciples  have  often  been  mistaken  by  uncritical  writers  for
the  lessons  of  the  master."

Now,  the  great  problem  in  the  chequered  life  of  the
illuminated  theosophist  and  possessor  of  the  universal
science  who  died  thus  violently  at  Tunis,  or  Bugia,  in  the
cause  of  his  Master,  is  this — whether  or  not  he  is  to  be
identified  with  that  Raymond  Lully  whom  Eliphas  Levi
terms  "  a  grand  and  sublime  adept  of  Hermetic  science,"
who  is  said  to  have  made  gold  and  Rose  nobles  for  one
Edward,  King  of  England,  and  who  left  behind  him,  as
monuments  of  his  unparalleled  alchemical  proficiency,  those
world-famous  treatises,  testaments,  and  codicils  which,
rightly  or  wrongly,  are  attributed,  under  the  title  "chemistry,
49  treatises,"  to  the  heroic  martyr  of  Majorca.     On  this

*  E.g.,  Jean- Marie  de  Vernon,  who  extends  the  lists  to  about  three  thousand,
and,  following  the  Pere  Pacifique  de  Provence,  prolongs  his  life  by  the  discovery
of  the  universal  medicine.

RAYMOND  LULLY.  8

J

important  point,  the  writer,  already  quoted,  in  the  Biblio-
theque  Uuiverselle,  testifies  that  "  the  works  on  alchemy-
must  be  referred  to  another  Raymond,  of  Ferrago,  a
Jewish  neophyte,  who  lived  after  13 15,  and  with  whom
Abraham  Bzovius  confounded  the  first  in  attributing  to
him  some  propositions  condemned  by  Gregory  XI."  And
again  : — "  The  works  on  alchemy  attributed  to  him  are  too
opposed  to  the  evangelical  poverty  of  a  man  who  had
renounced  everything  in  his  zeal  for  the  religion  of  Jesus
Christ,  and  who  protests  in  many  places  against  the
chimera  of  the  philosopher's  stone,  sought  in  his  time
by  Arnaud  de  Villeneuve,  whose  disciple  he  was  supposed
to  be.  The  circumstances  and  the  dates  even  in  several
of  these  books  —  of  which  that  on  natural  wisdom  is
addressed  to  Edward  III. — prove,  moreover,  that  they
must  be  referred  to  a  later  epoch."

The  problem  is  eminently  difficult  of  solution,  and  must
be  considered  at  some  length.

Raymond  Lully  repaired  to  Vienna  to  be  present  at  a
general  council  of  the  Church  in  the  year  131 1.  While  in
this  city  it  is  alleged  that  he  received  letters  from  Edward,
King  of  England,  who  had  ascended  the  throne  in  1 307,
and  from  Robert,  King  of  Scotland,  who  both  invited  him
with  much  persuasion  to  visit  their  realms.  Hoping  to
encourage  these  princes  to  assist  him  in  his  plans  against
the  infidels,  he  soon  arrived  in  London  in  the  company  of
John  Cremer,  Abbot  of  Westminster.

This  ecclesiastic  is  said  to  have  been  one  of  the  most
celebrated  Hermetic  artists  of  his  age.  He  worked  thirty
years  to  attain  the  end  of  alchemy,  but  the  obscurities  of
the  Hermetic  writers,  which  he  could  not  clear  up,  cast
him  into  a  labyrinth  of  errors.  The  more  he  read,  the
more  he  wondered  ;  at  last,  tired  of  the  loss  of  his  money,
and  much  more  of  his  precious  time,  he  set  out  to  travel,

84  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

and  had  the  good  fortune  to  meet  with  Raymond  Lully  in
Italy.  With  him  he  formed  a  strict  friendship,  remaining
some  time  in  his  company,  edified  by  his  penitent  life,
and  illuminated  by  his  philosophical  conversations.  The
adept,  though  he  spoke  upon  alchemy,  would  not,  how-
ever, entirely  discover  the  essential  points  of  the  operation.
Cremer  was  insinuating  and  affectionate  ;  he  perceived
that  Lully's  zeal  for  the  conversion  of  the  infidels  extended
to  the  false  enthusiasm  of  exciting  open  war  against  the
Mohammedans,  and  easily  persuaded  him  to  visit  England,
in  the  hope  of  King  Edward's  assistance.  The  adept
lodged  with  his  friend  in  the  Abbey  of  Westminster,  where
he  worked,  and  perfected  the  stone  which  Cremer  had
so  long  unsuccessfully  sought.  He  was  duly  presented
to  the  King,  who,  previously  informed  of  the  talents
of  the  illustrious  stranger,  received  him  with  regard  and
attention.

When  he  "communicated  his  treasures,"  the  single
condition  which  he  made  was  that  they  should  not  be  ex-
pended in  the  luxuries  of  a  court  or  in  war  with  a  Christian
prince,  but  that  the  King  should  go  in  person  with  an  army
against  the  infidels.

Edward,  under  pretence  of  doing  honour  to  Raymond,
gave  him  an  apartment  in  the  Tower  of  London,  where  the
adept  repeated  his  process.  He  transmuted  base  metal
into  gold,  which  was  coined  at  the  mint  into  six  millions
of  nobles,  each  worth  three,  pounds  sterling  at  the  present
day.  These  coins  are  well  known  to  antiquarians  by  the
name  of  Rose  Nobles.  They  prove  in  the  assay  of  the  test
to  be  a  purer  gold  than  the  Jacobus,  or  any  other  gold  coin
made  in  those  times.  Lully  in  his  last  testament  declares
that  in  a  short  time,  while  in  London,  he  converted  twenty-
two  tons  weight  of  quicksilver,  lead,  and  tin  into  the
precious  metal.

RAYMOND  LULLY.  85

His  lodging  in  the  Tower  proved  only  an  honourable
prison,  and  when  Raymond  had  satisfied  the  desires  of  the
King,  the  latter  disregarded  the  object  which  the  adept
was  so  eager  to  see  executed,  and  to  regain  his  own  liberty
Lully  was  obliged  to  escape  surreptitiously,  when  he
quickly  departed  from  England.

Cremer,  whose  intentions  were  sincere,  was  not  less
grieved  than  Raymond  at  this  issue  of  the  event,  but  he
was  subject  to  his  sovereign,  and  could  only  groan  in
silence.  He  declares  his  extreme  affliction  in  his  testa-
ment, and  his  monastery  daily  offered  up  prayers  to  God
for  the  success  of  Raymond's  cause.  The  Abbot  lived  long
after  this,  and  saw  part  of  the  reign  of  King  Edward  III.
The  course  of  operations  which  he  proposes  in  his  testa-
ment, with  apparent  sincerity,  is  not  less  veiled  than  are
those  in  the  most  obscure  authors.  *

Now,  in  the  first  place,  this  story  is  not  in  harmony  with
itself.  If  Raymond  Lully  were  at  Vienna  in  131 1,  how  did
John  Cremer  contrive  to  meet  him  in  Italy  at  or  about  the
same  time  ?  In  the  second  place,  the  whole  story
concerning  the  manufacture  of  Rose  Nobles  is  a  series  of
blunders.  The  King  who  ascended  the  throne  of  England
in  1307  was  Edward  II.,  and  the  Rose  Nobles  first  appear
in  the  history  of  numismatics  during  the  reign  of  Edward
IV.,  and  in  the  year  1465.

"  In  the  King's  fifth  year,  by  another  indenture  with
Lord  Hastings,  the  gold  coins  were  again  altered,  and  it
was  ordered  that  forty-five  nobles  only,  instead  of  fifty,  as
in  the  last  two  reigns,  should  be  made  of  a  pound  of  gold.
This  brought  back  the  weight  of  the  noble  to  one  hundred
and  fifty  grains,  as  it  had  been  from  135 1  to  1412,  but  its
value  was  raised  to  10s.  At  the  same  time,  new  coins
impressed  with   angels  were  ordered  to  be  made,  sixty-

*  "  Lives  of  Alchemystical  Philosophers,"  ed.  1S15.

86  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

seven  and  a  half  to  be  struck  from  one  pound  of  gold,  and
each  to  be  of  the  value  of  6s.  8d. — that  is  to  say,  the  new-
angel  which  weighed  eighty  grains  was  to  be  of  the  same
value  as  the  noble  had  been  which  weighed  one  hundred
and  eight  grains.  The  new  nobles  to  distinguish  them  from
the  old  ones  were  called  Rose  Nobles,  from  the  rose  which  is
stamped  on  both  sides  of  them,  or  ryals,  or  royals,  a  name
borrowed  from  the  French,  who  had  given  it  to  a  coin
which  bore  the  figure  of  the  King  in  his  royal  robes,  which
the  English  ryals  did  not.  Notwithstanding  its  inappro-
priateness,  however,  the  name  of  royal  was  given  to  these
ios.  pieces,  not  only  by  the  people,  but  also  in  several
statutes  of  the  realm."  *

In  the  third  place,  the  testament  ascribed  to  John
Cremer,  Abbot  of  Westminster,  and  to  which  we  are
indebted  for  the  chief  account  of  Lully's  visit  to  England,
is  altogether  spurious.  No  person  bearing  that  name  ever
filled  the  position  of  Abbot  at  any  period  of  the  history  of
the  Abbey.

The  only  coinage  of  nobles  which  has  been  attributed
to  alchemy  was  that  made  by  Edward  III.  in  1344.  The
gold  used  in  this  coinage  is  supposed  to  have  been  manu-
factured in  the  Tower  ;  the  adept  in  question  was  not
Raymond  Lully,  but  the  English  Ripley.

Whether  the  saint  of  Majorca  was  proficient  in  the
Hermetic  art  or  not,  it  is  quite  certain  that  he  did  not  visit
the  British  Isles.  It  is  also  certain  that  in  the  Ars  Magna
Sciendi,  part  9,  chapter  on  Elements,  he  states  that  one
species  of  metal  cannot  be  changed  into  another,  and  that
the  gold  of  alchemy  has  only  the  semblance  of  that  metal ;
that  is,  it  is  simply  a  sophistication.

As  all  the  treatises  ascribed  to  Raymond  Lully  cannot
possibly  be  his,  and  as  his  errant  and  turbulent  life  could

*  Kenyon,  "  Gold  Coins  of  England,"  pp.  57,  58.

RAYMOND  LULLY.  87

have  afforded  him  few  opportunities  for  the  long  course  of
experiments  which  are  generally  involved  in  the  search  for
the  magnum  opus,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  his
alchemical  writings  are  spurious,  or  that  two  authors,
bearing  the  same  name,  have  been  ignorantly  confused.
With  regard  to  "  the  Jewish  neophyte,"  referred  to  by  the
Biographie  Universelle,  no  particulars  of  his  life  are  forth-
coming. The  whole  question  is  necessarily  involved  in
uncertainty,  but  it  is  a  point  of  no  small  importance  to
have  established  for  the  first  time  the  fabulous  nature  of
the  Cremer  Testament.  This  production  was  first  pub-
lished by  Michael  Maier,  in  his  Tripus  Aureiis,  about  the
year  16 14.  The  two  treatises  which  accompany  it  appear
to  be  genuine  relics  of  Hermetic  antiquity.

The  "  Clavicula,  or  Little  Key "  of  Raymond  Lully  is
generally  considered  to  contain  the  arch  secrets  of  alchemical
adeptship  ;  it  elucidates  the  other  treatises  of  its  author,
and  undertakes  to  declare  the  whole  art  without  any  fiction.
The  transmutation  of  metals  depends  upon  their  previous
reduction  into  volatile  sophic  argent  vive,  and  the  only
metals  worth  reducing,  for  the  attainment  of  this  prima
materia,  are  silver  and  gold.  This  argent  vive  is  said  to  be
dryer,  hotter,  and  more  digested  than  the  common  substance,
but  its  extraction  is  enveloped  in  mystery  and  symbolism,
and  the  recipes  are  impossible  to  follow  for  want  of  the
materials  so  evasively  and  deceptively  described.  At  the
same  time,  it  is  clear  that  the  operations  are  physical,  and
that  the  materials  and  objects  are  also  physical,  which
points  are  sufficient  for  our  purpose,  and  may  be  easily
verified  by  research.

Moreover,  the  alchemist  who  calls  himself  Raymond
Lully  was  acquainted  with  nitric  acid  and  with  its  uses  as
a  dissolvent  of  metals.     He  could    form  aqua   regia   by

88  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

adding  sal  ammoniac,  or  common  salt,  to  nitric  acid,  and
he  was  aware  of  its  property  of  dissolving  gold.  Spirit  of
wine  was  well  known  to  him,  says  Gruelin  ;  he  strengthened
it  with  dry  carbonate  of  potash,  and  prepared  vegetable
tinctures  by  its  means.  He  mentions  alum  from  Rocca,
marcasite,  white  and  red  mercurial  precipitate.  He  knew
the  volatile  alkali  and  its  coagulations  by  means  of  alcohol.
He  was  acquainted  with  cupellated  silver,  and  first  obtained
rosemary  oil  by  distilling  the  plant  with  water.*

ARNOLD  DE  VILLANOVA.

The  date  and  the  birthplace  of  this  celebrated  adept  are
alike  uncertain.  Catalonia,  Milan,  and  Montpellier  have
been  severally  named  for  the  locality,  and  1245  is,  on  the
whole,  the  probable  period.

Arnold  studied  medicine  at  Paris  for  twenty  years,  after
which  for  ten  more  he  perambulated  Italy,  visiting  the
different  universities.  He  subsequently  penetrated  into
Spain,  but  hearing  that  Peter  d'Apono,  his  friend,  was  in
the  hands  of  the  Inquisition,  he  prudently  withdrew,  and
abode  under  the  patronage  of  Frederick,  King  of  Naples
and  Sicily,  writing  his  tracts  on  medicine  and  his
"  Comment  on  the  School  of  Salerno."  He  is  said  to  have
perished  in  a  storm  during  the  year  13 14,  but  a  circular
letter  written  by  Pope  Clement  V.  in  131 1  conjures  those
living  under  his  authority  to  discover,  if  possible,  and  send
to  him,  the  "  Treatise  on  Medicine,"  written  by  Arnold,
his  physician,  who  promised  it  to  the  Holy  Father,  but
died  before  he  could  present  it.  In  this  case  the  date  of
his  decease  may  be  more  accurately  fixed  at  13 10.

Arnold  was,    according   to  the   custom  of  the   period,

*  Gruelin,   Geschichte  der  Chemie,  i.    74.

ARNOLD  DE  VILLANOVA.  89

charged  with  magical  practices.  Frangois  Pegna  declares
that  all  his  erudition  in  alchemy  was  derived  from  the
demon.  Mariana  accuses  him  of  attempting  to  create  a
man  by  means  of  certain  drugs  deposited  in  a  pumpkin.
But  he  is  justified  by  Delrio  from  these  imputations,  and  the
orthodox  Dictionnaire  des  Sciences  Occultes  considers  that
Clement  V.  would  not  have  chosen  an  initiate  of  magical
arts  as  his  physician.  In  13 17  the  Inquisition  of  Tarra-
gona condemned  his  books  to  be  burned,  but  this  was  for
the  heretical  sentiments  which  they  contained.  He  wrote
strictures  on  the  monastic  state  and  the  service  of  religion,
and  maintained  that  works  of  divine  faith  and  charity  were
more  agreeable  to  God  than  the  Sacrifice  of  the  Mass.

His  skill  in  Hermetic  philosophy  has  been  generally
recognised.  His  contemporary,  the  celebrated  Jurisconsult,
John  Andre,  says  of  him  : — "  In  this  time  appeared  Arnold
de  Villeneuve,  a  great  theologian,  a  skilful  physician,  and
wise  alchymist,  who  made  gold,  which  he  submitted  to  all
proofs."  Arnold  has  also  the  character  of  writing  with
more  light  and  clearness  than  the  other  philosophers.  His
alchemical  works  were  published  in  1509,  in  one  folio
volume.  His  Libellns  de  Somniorum  Interpretatione  et
S omnia  Danielis  is  excessively  rare  in  its  original  quarto
edition.  Several  alchemical  and  magical  works  are  gratui-
tously ascribed  to  him.  Among  these  must  be  classed  the
book  called  De  Physicis  Ligaturis,  supposed  to  be  trans-
lated from  the  Arabic — De  Sigillis  duodecim  Signorum,
which  is  concerned  with  the  zodiacal  signs — and  the  book
of  the  "  Three  Impostors,"  which  the  Dictionnaire  des
Sciences  Occidtes  denominates  "  stupid  and  infamous."

The  Thesaurus  TJiesaurorum  and  the  Rosarium  Philoso-
phorum,  the  Speculum  Alchemice  and  the  Perfectum  Magis-
terium,  are  the  most  notable  of  all  his  alchemical  treatises.
To  these  the  student  should  add  his  Scientia  Scientice  and

90  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

brief  Testamentum.  The  editions  are  various,  but  the  tracts
will  be  found  in  collected  form  in  the  Bibliotheca  Chemiccs
Curiosa  of  J.  J.  Mangetus.

Arnold  asserts  that  argent  vive  is  the  medicine  of  all  the
metals,  that  vulgar  sulphur  is  the  cause  of  all  their  imper-
fections, that  the  stone  of  the  philosophers  is  one,  and
that  it  is  to  be  extracted  from  that  in  which  it  exists.  It
exists  in  all  bodies,  including  common  argent  vive.  The
first  physical  work  is  the  dissolution  of  the  stone  in  its  own
mercury  to  reduce  it  to  its  prima  materia.  All  the  opera-
tions of  the  magnum  opus  are  successively  described,  includ-
ing the  composition  of  the  white  and  the  red  elixirs,  and
the  multiplication  of  the  metallic  medicine.

The  marcasite  frequently  mentioned  by  Arnold  is
thought  to  be  identical  with  bismuth.  He  was  acquainted
with  the  preparation  of  oil  of  turpentine,  oil  of  rosemary,
and  performed  distillations  in  a  glazed  earthen  vessel  with
a  glass  top  and  helm.

JEAN  DE  MEUNG.

Poet,  alchemist,  and  astrologer,  a  man  of  some  fortune,
and  issued  from  an  ancient  family,  Jean  de  Meung  was  one
of  the  chief  figures  at  the  Court  of  King  Philippe  le  Bel.
He  was  born,  according  to  the  latest  authorities,  about  the
middle  of  the  thirteenth  century,  and  his  continuation  of
the  Roman  de  la  Rose,  which  Guillaume  de  Lorris  had
begun  some  time  before  the  year  1 260,  was  undertaken  not
in  his  nineteenth  year,  as  generally  stated,  but  about  or  a
little  before  the  age  of  thirty,  and  at  the  instance  of  the
French  King.

The  Romance  of  the  Rose,  "  that  epic  of  ancient  France,"
as  Eliphas  Levi  calls  it,  has  been  generally  considered  by
alchemists  a  poetic   and    allegorical   presentation   of  the

JEAN  DE  MEUNG.  9 1

secrets  of  the  magnum  opus.  It  professes,  at  any  rate,
the  principles  of  Hermetic  Philosophy,  and  Jean  de  Meung
was  also  the  author  of  "  Nature's  Remonstrances  to  the
Alchemist "  and  "  The  Alchemist's  Answer  to  Nature."
Hermetic  commentaries  have  been  written  upon  the  ro-
mance-poem, and  tradition  has  ascribed  to  the  author  the
accomplishment  of  great  transmutations.  The  sermon  of
Genius,  chaplain  and  confessor  to  Dame  Nature,  in  the
Romance,  is  an  exhibition  of  the  principles  of  chemistry,
as  well  as  a  satire  on  the  bombastic  and  unintelligible
preaching  which  was  in  vogue  at  that  period.  From  verse
16,914  to  verse  16,997  there  is  much  chemical  information.

The  year  12 16  is  the  probable  period  of  the  poet's  death.
The  story  told  of  his  testament  has  only  a  foundation  in
legend,  but  it  is  worth  repeating  as  evidence  of  the  general
belief  in  his  skill  as  an  alchemist.

He  chose  by  his  will,  says  the  story,  to  be  buried  in
the  Church  of  the  Jacobins,  and,  as  an  acknowledgment,
left  them  a  coffer  that  appeared,  at  least  by  its  weight,  to
be  filled  with  things  precious,  probably  with  the  best  gold
which  could  be  manufactured  by  the  skill  of  the  Hermetists.
He  ordered,  however,  that  this  coffer  should  not  be  opened
till  after  his  funeral,  when,  touched  with  the  piety  of  the
deceased,  the  monks  assembled  in  great  numbers  to  be
present  at  its  opening,  and  to  offer  up  thanks  to  God.
They  found  to  their  great  disappointment  that  the  coffer
was  filled  with  large  pieces  of  slates  beautifully  engraved
with  figures  of  geometry  and  arithmetic.  The  indignation
of  the  fathers  was  excited  by  the  posthumous  imposture,  and
they  proposed  to  eject  the  body  of  Jean  de  Meung  from
their  consecrated  precincts ;  but  the  Parliament  being  in-
formed of  this  inhumanity,  obliged  the  Jacobins,  by  a
decree,  to  leave  the  deceased  undisturbed  in  the  honourable
sepulchre  of  their  conventual  cloisters.

92  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

In  "  Nature's  Remonstrance  to  the  Alchemist,"  who  is
described  as  a  foolish  and  sophistical  souffleur,  making
use  of  nothing  but  mechanical  arts,  the  complainant  bitterly
abuses  the  fanatical  student  who  diffuses  over  her  beauti-
ful domain  the  rank  odours  of  sulphur,  which  he  tortures
in  vain  over  his  furnaces,  for  by  such  a  method  he  will
assuredly  attain  nothing.  The  alchemist  in  his  "  Reply "
figures  as  a  repentant  being,  convinced  of  his  errors,  which
he  ascribes  to  the  barbarous  allegories,  parabolic  sentences,
and  delusive  precepts  contained  in  the  writings  of  the
adepts.

THE  MONK  FERARIUS.

About  the  beginning  of  the  fourteenth  century,  this
Italian  artist  gave  to  the  world  two  treatises — De  Lapide
PhilosophoYum  and  Thesaurus  Philosophic,  which  are
printed  in  the  Theatrum  Chimicum.

The  "  admirable  spectacle  "  of  the  palingenesis  of  plants
is  described  by  this  Jesuit.  "  Immediately  consequent  on
exposing  to  the  rays  of  the  sun  the  phial,  filled  with
quintessence  of  the  rose,  there  is  discovered  within  the
narrow  compass  of  the  vase  a  perfect  world  of  miracles.
The  plant  which  lay  buried  in  its  ashes  awakes,  uprises,
and  unfolds.  In  the  space  of  half-an-hour  the  vegetable
phoenix  is  resuscitated  from  its  own  dust.  The  rose
issues  from  its  sepulchre  and  assumes  a  new  life.  It  is
the  floral  symbol  of  that  resurrection  by  which  mortals
lying  in  darkness  and  in  the  shadow  of  death  will  pass
into  beautiful  immortality."

The  treatise  on  the  philosophical  stone  very  pertinently
remarks  that  in  alchemy  the  first  thing  to  be  ascertained
is  what  is  really  signified  by  the  myrionimous  argentum
vivum  sapieittum,  a  point  on  which  the  author  gracefully

POPE  JOHN  XXII.  93

declines  information.  Both  works  are  exceedingly  obscure
and  vexatious.  The  Thesaurus  Philosophies  testifies  that
the  plain  speaking  of  the  philosophers  is  completely
illusory,  and  that  it  is  only  in  their  incomprehensible
profundities  that  we  must  seek  the  light  of  Hermes.

Alchemy  is  the  science  of  the  four  elements,  which  are
to  be  found  in  all  created  substances,  but  are  not  of  the
vulgar  kind.  The  whole  practice  of  the  art  is  simply  the
conversion  of  these  elements  into  one  another.  The  seed
and  matter  of  every  metal  is  mercury,  as  it  is  decocted  and
otherwise  prepared  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  and  each  of
them  can  be  reduced  into  this  prima  materia,  by  the  help
of  which  they  are  also,  one  and  all,  susceptible  of  augmen-
tation and  multiplication,  even  to  infinity.

POPE  JOHN  XXII.

This  pontiff  is  claimed  as  an  adept  by  the  alchemists,
a  fact  which  is  denied,  but  not  disproved,  by  his  orthodox
biographers.  That  he  believed  in  the  power  of  magic  is
shown  by  the  accusation  which  he  directed  against  Geraud,
Bishop  of  Cahors,  whom  he  accredited  with  the  design  of
poisoning  him,  together  with  the  entire  college  of  car-
dinals, and  with  having  in  particular  contrived  sorceries  and
diabolical  enchantments  against  all  of  them.  He  was  the
contemporary  of  Raymond  Lully  and  Arnold  de  Villa-
nova,  and  is  said  to  have  been  the  pupil  and  friend  of
the  latter.  Nevertheless,  the  mischief  occasioned  at  that
period  by  the  impostures  of  pretended  alchemists  led  him
to  issue  a  bull  condemning  the  traders  in  this  science  as
charlatans  who  promised  what  they  were  unable  to  per-
form. Hermetic  writers  assert  that  this  bull  was  not
directed  against  veritable  adepts,  .and  his  devotion  to  his
laboratory  at   Avignon   seems    a   fairly    established    fact.

94  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

Franciscus  Pagi,  in  his  Breviarum  de  Gestis  Romanorum
Pontificum,  has  the  following  passage : — Joannes  scripsit
quoque  latino  sermone  artem  melallorum  transmutorium ;
quod  opus  prodiit  Gallici  incevto  translative  Lugduni,  anno
1557  in  Svo.  It  is  allowed  that  he  was  a  writer  on
medicine.  His  Thesaurus  Pauperum,  a  collection  of
recipes,  was  printed  at  Lyons  in  1525,  and  he  was  the
author  of  a  treatise  on  diseases  of  the  eye,  and  of  another
on  the  formation  of  the  foetus.  He  was  born  at  Cahors,
according  to  the  general  opinion,  of  poor  but  reputable
parents  ;  he  showed  at  an  early  period  his  skill  in  law
and  in  the  sciences.  The  circumstances  of  his  life  are
exceedingly  obscure  until  his  consecration  as  Bishop  of
Frejus  in  1300.  Subsequently  he  was  promoted  to  the  see
of  Avignon,  and  Clement  V.  created  him  cardinal-bishop
of  Porto.  He  was  raised  to  the  pontificate  at  Lyons,
and  reigned  at  Avignon  till  his  death  in  1334.  He  left  be-
hind him  in  his  coffers  the  sum  of  eighteen  million  florins
in  gold  and  seven  millions  in  jewels,  besides  valuable  con-
secrated vessels.  Alchemists  attribute  these  vast  treasures
to  his  skill  in  their  science,  and  assert  in  addition  that  he
manufactured  two  hundred  ingots,  apparently  on  a  single
occasion.  By  a  calculation  of  one  of  his  biographers,  this
quantity  of  the  precious  metal  was  equivalent  to  £660,000,
British  sterling.  A  treatise  entitled  "  The  Elixir  of  the
Philosophers,  or  the  Transmutatory  Art  of  Metals,"  is
attributed  to  him.  It  was  translated  from  the  Latin  into
French,  and  published  in  duodecimo  at  Lyons  in  1557.
It  is  written  ad  clerum,  and  for  this  reason  is  probably
the  more  misleading.  It  represents  the  constituents  of
the  perfect  medicine  to  be  vinegar,  salt,  urine,  and  sal
ammoniac,  with  the  addition  of  an  undescribed  substance
called  sulphur  vive.

NICHOLAS  FLAMEL.  95

NICHOLAS  FLAMEL.

The  name  of  this  alchemical  adept  has  been  profoundly-
venerated  not  only  in  the  memory  of  the  Hermetists  but
in  the  hearts  of  the  French  people,  among  whom  he  is  the
central  figure  of  many  marvellous  legends  and  traditions.
"  Whilst  in  all  ages  and   nations  the  majority  of  hiero-
phants  have  derived   little  but  deception,  ruination,  and
despair  as  the  result  of  their  devotion  to  alchemy,  Nicholas
Flamel  enjoyed  permanent  good  fortune  and  serenity.    Far
from  expending  his  resources  in  the  practice  of  the  mag-
num   opusy   he    added    with   singular   suddenness    a   vast
treasure  to  a  moderate  fortune.     These  he  employed  in
charitable  endowments  and  in  pious  foundations  that  long
survived  him  and  long  sanctified  his  memory.     He  built
churches    and   chapels  which  were  adorned  with   statues
of   himself,    accompanied   by   symbolical    characters    and
mysterious  crosses,  which   subsequent  adepts  long  strove
to  decipher,  that  they  might  discover  his  secret  history,
and  the  kabbalistic  description  of  the  process  by  which  he
was  conducted  to  the  realisation  of  the  Grand  Magisterium."
Whether  Flamel  was  born  at  Paris  or  Pontoise  is  not
more  uncertain  than  the  precise  date  of  his  nativity.     This
occurred  some  time  during  the  reign  of  Philippe  le  Bel,  the
spoliator  of  the  grand  order  of  the  Temple,  and,  on  the
whole,  the  most  probable  year  is  1330.     His  parents  were
poor,  and  left  him  little  more  than  the  humble  house  in
Paris  which  he  continued  to  possess  till   his  death,  and
which  he  eventually  bequeathed  to  the  Church.     It  stood
in  Notary  Street,  at  the  corner  of  Marivaux  Street,  oppo-
site the  Marivaux  door  of  the  Church  of  Saint-Jacques-la-
Boucherie.

Authorities  disagree  as  to  the  amount  of  education  that

96  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

Flamel  obtained  in  his  youth,  but  it  was  sufficient  to  qualify
him  for  the  business  of  a  scrivener,  which,  in  spite  of  his
wealth  and  his  accredited  wisdom,  he  continued  to  follow
through  life.  He  was  proficient  in  painting  and  poetry,
and  had  a  taste  for  architecture  and  the  mathematical
sciences  ;  yet  he  applied  himself  steadily  to  business,  and
contracted  a  prudent  marriage,  his  choice  falling  on  a
widow,  named  Pernelle,  who,  though  handsome,  was  over
forty  years,  but  who  brought  a  considerable  dowry  to  her
second  husband.

In  his  capacity  as  a  copyist  before  the  age  of  printing,
books  of  all  classes  fell  into  the  hands  of  Flamel,  and
among  them  were  many  of  those  illuminated  alchemical
treatises  which  are  reckoned  among  the  rarest  treasures  of
mediaeval  manuscripts.  Acquainted  with  the  Latin  lan-
guage, he  insensibly  accumulated  an  exoteric  knowledge  of
the  aims  and  theories  of  the  adepts.  His  interest  and
curiosity  were  awakened,  and  he  began  studying  them  in
his  leisure  moments.  Now  tradition  informs  us  that,
whether  his  application  was  great,  his  desire  intense,  or
whether  he  was  super-eminently  fitted  to  be  included  by
divine  election  among  the  illuminated  Sons  of  the  Doc-
trine, or  for  whatever  other  reason,  the  mystical  Bath-
K61  appeared  to  him  under  the  figure  of  an  angel,  bearing
a  remarkable  book  bound  in  well-wrought  copper,  the
leaves  of  thin  bark,  graven  right  carefully  with  a  pen  of
iron.  An  inscription  in  characters  of  gold  contained  a
dedication  addressed  to  the  Jewish  nation  by  Abraham  the
Jew,  prince,  priest,  astrologer,  and  philosopher.

"  Flamel,"  cried  the  radiant  apparition,  "  behold  this  book
of  which  thou  understandest  nothing ;  to  many  others  but
thyself  it  would  remain  for  ever  unintelligible,  but  one  day
thou  shalt  discern  in  its  pages  what  none  but  thyself  will
see ! "

NICHOLAS  FLAMEL.  97

At  these  words  Flamel  eagerly  stretched  out  his  hands
to  take  possession  of  the  priceless  gift,  but  book  and  angel
disappeared  in  an  auriferous  tide  of  light.  The  scrivener
awoke  to  be  ravished  henceforth  by  the  divine  dream  of
alchemy  ;  but  so  long  a  time  passed  without  any  fulfilment
of  the  angelic  promise,  that  the  ardour  of  his  imagination
cooled,  the  great  hope  dwindled  gradually  away,  and  he
was  settling  once  more  into  the  commonplace  existence  of
a  plodding  scribe,  when,  on  a  certain  day  of  election  in  the
year  1357,  an  event  occurred  which  bore  evidence  of  the
veracity  of  his  visionary  promise-maker,  and  exalted  his
ambition  and  aspirations  to  a  furnace  heat.  This  event,
with  the  consequences  it  entailed,  are  narrated  in  the  last
testament  of  Nicholas  Flamel,  which  begins  in  the  following
impressive  manner,  but  omits  all  reference  to  the  legendary
vision : —

"  The  Lord  God  of  my  life,  who  exalts  the  humble  in
spirit  out  of  the  most  abject  dust,  and  makes  the  hearts  of
such  as  hope  in  Him  to  rejoice,  be  eternally  praised.

"  Who,  of  His  own  grace,  reveals  to  the  believing  souls
the  springs  of  His  bounty,  and  subjugates  beneath  their
feet  the  crowns  of  all  earthly  felicities  and  glories.

"  In  Him  let  us  always  put  our  confidence,  in  His  fear
let  us  place  our  happiness,  and  in  His  mercy  the  hope  and
glory  of  restoration  from  our  fallen  state.

"  And  in  our  supplications  to  Him  let  us  demonstrate  or
show  forth  a  faith  unfeigned  and  stable,  an  assurance  that
shall  not  for  ever  be  shaken.

"  And  Thou,  O  Lord  God  Almighty,  as  Thou,  out  of  Thy
infinite  and  most  desirable  goodness,  hast  condescended  to
open  the  earth  and  unlock  Thy  treasures  unto  me,  Thy
poor  and  unworthy  servant,  and  hast  given  into  my  posses-
sion the  fountains  and  well-springs  of  all  the  treasures  and
riches  of  this  world.

98  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

"  So,  O  Lord  God,  out  of  Thine  abundant  kindness,
extend  Thy  mercies  unto  me,  that  when  I  shall  cease  to
be  any  longer  in  the  land  of  the  living,  Thou  mayst  open
unto  me  the  celestial  riches,  the  divine  treasures,  and  give
me  a  part  or  portion  in  the  heavenly  inheritance  for  ever.

"Where  I  may  behold  Thy  divine  glory  and  the  ful-
ness of  Thy  Heavenly  Majesty,  a  pleasure,  so  ineffable,
and  a  joy,  so  ravishing,  which  no  mortal  can  express  or
conceive.

"  This  I  entreat  of  Thee,  O  Lord,  for  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  Thy  well-beloved  Son's  sake,  who  in  the  unity  of
the  Holy  Spirit  liveth  with  Thee,  world  without  end.
Amen.

"I,  Nicholas  Flamel,  Scrivener,  living  at  Paris,  anno
1399,  in  the  Notary  Street,  near  St  James,  of  the  Bouchery,
though  I  learned  not  much  Latin,  because  of  the  poorness
and  meanness  of  my  parents,  who  were  notwithstanding
(by  them  that  envy  me  most)  accounted  honest  and  good
people.

"  Yet,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  I  have  not  wanted  an
understanding  of  the  books  of  the  philosophers,  but  learned
them  and  attained  to  a  certain  kind  of  knowledge,  even  of
their  hidden  secrets.

"  For  which  cause  sake  there  shall  not  any  moment  of
my  life  pass,  wherein  remembering  this  so  vast  a  good,  I
will  not  on  my  bare  knees,  if  the  place  will  permit  of  it,  or
otherwise  in  my  heart,  with  all  the  entireness  of  my  affec-
tions, render  thanks  to  this  my  most  good  and  precious
God.

"  Who  never  forsakes  the  righteous  generation,  or  suffers
the  children  of  the  just  to  beg  their  bread,  nor  deceives
their  expectations,  but  supports  them  with  blessings  who
put  their  trust  in  Him.

"  After  the  death  of  my  parents,  I,  Nicholas  Flamel,  got

NICHOLAS  FLAMEL.  99

my  living  by  the  art  of  writing,  engrossing  inventories,
making  up  accounts,  keeping  of  books,  and  the  like.

"  In  this  course  of  living  there  fell  by  chance  into  my
hands  a  gilded  book,  very  old  and  large,  which  cost  me
only  two  florins.

"  It  was  not  made  of  paper  or  parchment,  as  other  books
are,  but  of  admirable  rinds  (as  it  seemed  to  me)  of  young
trees.  The  cover  of  it  was  of  brass ;  it  was  well  bound,
and  graven  all  over  with  a  strange  kind  of  letters,  which  I
take  to  be  Greek  characters,  or  some  such  like.

"  This  I  know  that  I  could  not  read  them,  nor  were  they
either  Latin  or  French  letters,  of  which  I  understand  some-
thing.

"  But  as  to  the  matter  which  was  written  within,  it  was
engraven  (as  I  suppose)  with  an  iron  pencil  or  graver  upon
the  said  bark  leaves,  done  admirably  well,  and  in  fair  and
neat  Latin  letters,  and  curiously  coloured.

"  It  contained  thrice  seven  leaves,  for  so  they  were  num-
bered in  the  top  of  each  folio,  and  every  seventh  leaf  was
without  any  writing,  but  in  place  thereof  there  were  several
images  or  figures  painted.

"  Upon  the  first  seventh  leaf  was  depicted — I.  A  Virgin.
2.  Serpents  swallowing  her  up.  On  the  second  seventh,  a
serpent  crucified ;  and  on  the  last  seventh,  a  desert  or
wilderness,  in  midst  whereof  were  seen  many  fair  fountains,
whence  issued  out  a  number  of  serpents  here  and  there.

"  Upon  the  first  of  the  leaves  was  written  in  capital
letters  of  gold,  Abraham  the  Jew,  Priest,  Prince,  Levite,
Astrologer,  and  Philosopher,  to  the  nation  of  the  Jews  dis-
persed by  the  wrath  of  God  in  France,  wisheth  health.

"  After  which  words,  it  was  filled  with  many  execrations
and  curses,  with  this  word  MARANATHA,  which  was  oft
repeated  against  any  one  that  should  look  in  to  unfold  it,
except  he  were  either  Priest  or  Scribe.

IOO         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

"  The  person  that  sold  me  this  book  was  ignorant  of  its
worth  as  well  as  I  who  bought  it.  I  judge  it  might  have
been  stolen  from  some  of  the  Jewish  nation,  or  else  found
in  some  place  where  they  anciently  abode.

"  In  the  second  leaf  of  the  book  he  consoled  his  nation,
and  gave  them  pious  counsel  to  turn  from  their  wicked-
ness and  evil  ways,  but  above  all  to  flee  from  idolatry,
and  to  wait  in  patience  for  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,
who,  conquering  all  the  kings  and  potentates  of  the  earth,
should  reign  in  glory  with  his  people  to  eternity.  Without
doubt,  this  was  a  very  pious,  wise,  and  understanding  man.

"  In  the  third  leaf,  and  in  all  the  writings  that  followed,
he  taught  them,  in  plain  words,  the  transmutation  of
metals,  to  the  end  that  he  might  help  and  assist  his
dispersed  people  to  pay  their  tribute  to  the  Roman  Em-
perors, and  some  other  things  not  needful  here  to  be
repeated.

"  He  painted  the  vessels  by  the  side  or  margin  of  the
leaves,  and  discovered  all  the  colours  as  they  should  arise
or  appear,  with  all  the  rest  of  the  work.

"  But  of  the  prima  materia  or  first  matter,  or  agent,  he
spake  not  so  much  as  one  word ;  but  only  he  told  them
that  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  leaves  he  had  entirely  painted
or  decyphered  it,  and  depicted  or  figured  it,  with  a
desirable  dexterity  and  workmanship.

"  Now  though  it  was  singularly  well  and  materially  or
intelligibly  figured  and  painted,  yet  by  that  could  no  man
ever  have  been  able  to  understand  it  without  having  been
well  skilled  in  their  Cabala,  which  is  a  series  of  old
traditions,  and  also  to  have  been  well  studied  in  their
books.

"  The  fourth  and  fifth  leaf  thereof  was  without  any  writ-
ing, but  full  of  fair  figures,  bright  and  shining,  or,  as  it
were,  enlightened,  and  very  exquisitely  depicted.

NICHOLAS  FLAMEL.  IOI

"  First,  there  was  a  young  man  painted,  with  wings  at
his  ankles,  having  in  his  hand  a  caducean  rod,  writhen
about  with  two  serpents,  wherewith  he  stroke  upon  an
helmet  covering  his  head.

"  This  seemed  in  my  mean  apprehension  to  be  one  of
the  heathen  gods,  namely,  Mercury.  Against  him  there
came  running  and  flying  with  open  wings,  a  great  old  man
with  an  hour-glass  fixed  upon  his  head,  and  a  scythe  in
his  hands,  like  Death,  with  which  he  would  (as  it  were  in
indignation)  have  cut  off  the  feet  of  Mercury.

"  On  the  other  side  of  the  fourth  leaf  he  painted  a  fair
flower,  on  the  top  of  a  very  high  mountain,  which  was
very  much  shaken  by  the  north  wind.  Its  footstalk  was
blue,  its  flowers  white  and  red,  and  its  leaves  shining  like
fine  gold,  and  round  about  it  the  dragons  and  griffins  of
the  north  made  their  nests  and  habitations.

"  On  the  fifth  leaf  was  a  fair  rose-tree,  flowered,  in  the
midst  of  a  garden,  growing  up  against  a  hollow  oak,  at
the  foot  whereof  bubbled  forth  a  fountain  of  pure  white
water,  which  ran  headlong  down  into  the  depths  below.

"  Yet  it  passed  through  the  hands  of  a  great  number  of
people  who  digged  in  the  earth,  seeking  after  it,  but,  by
reason  of  their  blindness,  none  of  them  knew  it,  except  a
very  few,  who  considered  its  weight.

"  On  the  last  side  of  the  leaf  was  depicted  a  king,  with  a
faulchion,  who  caused  his  soldiers  to  slay  before  him  many
infants,  the  mothers  standing  by,  and  weeping  at  the  feet
of  their  murderers.

"  These  infants'  blood  being  gathered  up  by  other  soldiers,
was  put  into  a  great  vessel  wherein  Sol  and  Luna  came  to
bathe  themselves.

"  And  because  this  history  seemed  to  represent  the  de-
struction of  the  Innocents  by  Herod,  and  that  I  learned  the
chiefest  part  of  the  art  in  this  book,  therefore  I  placed  in

102         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

their  churchyard  these  hieroglyphic  figures  of  this  learning.
Thus  have  you  that  which  was  contained  in  the  first  five
leaves.

"  As  for  what  was  in  all  the  rest  of  the  written  leaves,
which  was  wrote  in  good  and  intelligible  Latin,  I  must
conceal,  lest  God  being  offended  with  me  should  send  His
plague  and  judgments  upon  me.  It  would  be  a  wicked-
ness much  greater  than  he  who  wished  that  all  men  in  the
world  had  but  one  head,  that  he  might  cut  it  off  at  a  blow.

"  Having  thus  obtained  this  delicate  and  precious  book,
I  did  nothing  else  day  and  night  but  study  it ;  conceiving
very  well  all  the  operations  it  pointed  forth,  but  wholly
ignorant  of  the  prima  materia  with  which  I  should  begin,
which  made  me  very  sad  and  discontented.

"  My  wife,  whose  name  was  Perrenelle,  whom  I  loved
equally  with  myself,  and  whom  I  had  but  lately  married,
was  mightily  concerned  for  me,  and,  with  many  comforting
words,  earnestly  desired  to  know  how  she  might  deliver  me
from  this  trouble.

"  I  could  no  longer  keep  counsel,  but  told  her  all,  shewing
her  the  very  book,  which,  when  she  saw,  she  became  as
well  pleased  with  it  as  myself,  and  with  great  delight  be-
held the  admirable  cover,  the  engraving,  the  images,  and
exquisite  figures  thereof,  but  understood  them  as  little  as  I.

"  Yet  it  was  matter  of  consolation  to  me  to  discourse  and
entertain  myself  with  her,  and  to  think  what  we  should
do  to  find  out  the  interpretation  and  meaning  thereof.

"At  length  I  caused  to  be  painted  within  my  chamber,  as
much  to  the  life  or  original  as  I  could,  all  the  images  and
figures  of  the  said  fourth  and  fifth  leaves.

"These  I  showed  to  the  greatest  scholars  and  most
learned  men  in  Paris,  who  understood  thereof  no  more
than  myself:  I  told  them  they  were  found  in  a  book  which
taught  the  philosophers'  stone.

NICHOLAS  FLAMEL.  IO3

"  But  the  greatest  part  of  them  made  a  mock  both  of  me
and  that  most  excellent  secret,  except  one  whose  name
was  Anselm,  a  practiser  of  physic  and  a  deep  student  in
this  art.

"He  much  desired  to  see  my  book,  which  he  valued
more  than  anything  else  in  the  world,  but  I  always  refused
him,  only  making  him  a  large  demonstration  of  the
method.

"  He  told  me  that  the  first  figure  represented  Time,  which
devours  all  things,  and  that,  according  to  the  number  of
the  six  written  leaves,  there  was  required  a  space  of  six
years  to  perfect  the  stone ;  and  then,  said  he,  we  must  turn
the  glass  and  see  it  no  more.

"  I  told  him  this  was  not  painted,  but  only  to  show  the
teacher  the  prima  materia,  or  first  agent,  as  was  written  in
the  book.  He  answered  me  that  this  digestion  for  six  years
was,  as  it  were,  a  second  agent,  and  that  certainly  the  first
agent  was  there  painted,  which  was  a  white  and  heavy  water.

"  This,  without  doubt,  was  argent  vive,  which  they  could
not  fix  ;  that  is,  cut  off  his  feet,  or  take  away  his  volubility,
save  by  that  long  digestion  in  the  pure  blood  of  young
infants.

"  For  in  that  this  argent  vive  being  joined  with  Sol  and
Luna  was  first  turned  with  them  into  a  plant,  like  that
there  painted,  and  afterwards  by  corruption  into  serpents,
which  serpents,  being  perfectly  dried  and  digested,  were
made  a  fine  powder  of  gold,  which  is  the  stone.

"  This  strange  or  foreign  discourse  to  the  matter  was  the
cause  of  my  erring,  and  that  made  me  wander  for  the
space  of  one  and  twenty  years  in  a  perfect  meander  from
the  verity ;  in  which  space  of  time  I  went  through  a
thousand  labyrinths  or  processes,  but  all  in  vain ;  yet  never
with  the  blood  of  infants,  for  that  I  accounted  wicked  and
villainous.

104         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

"  For  I  found  in  my  book  that  the  philosophers  called
blood  the  mineral  spirit  which  is  in  the  metals,  chiefly  in
Sol,  Luna,  and  Mercury,  to  which  sense  I  always,  in  my
own  judgment,  assented.  Yet  these  interpretations  were,
for  the  most  part,  not  more  subtle  than  true.

"  Not  finding,  therefore,  in  my  operation  or  course  of  the
process,  the  signs,  at  the  time  written  in  my  book,  I  was
ever  to  begin  again.

"  In  the  end,  having  lost  all  hope  of  ever  understanding
those  symbols  or  figures,  I  made  a  vow  to  God  to  demand
their  interpretation  of  some  Jewish  priest  belonging  to
some  synagogue  in  Spain.

"Whereupon,  with  the  consent  of  my  wife  Perrenelle,
carrying  with  me  the  extract  or  copy  of  the  figures  or
pictures,  I  took  up  a  pilgrim's  habit  and  staff,  in  the  same
manner  as  you  see  me  figured  without  the  said  arch,  in  the
said  churchyard  in  which  I  put  these  Hieroglyphic  Figures.

"  Whereupon  also  I  have  set  on  the  wall,  on  both  hands,
the  process,  representing  in  order  all  the  colours  of  the
stone,  as  they  rise  and  go  away  again.

"  This  is,  as  it  were,  the  very  beginning  of  Hercules  his
book,  entitled  '  Iris,  or  the  Rainbow,'  which  treats  of  the
stone  in  these  words: — The  process  of  the  work  is  very
pleasing  unto  nature.

"  And  these  words  I  also  put  there  expressly,  for  the  sake
of  great  scholars  and  learned  men,  who  may  understand  to
what  they  allude.

"  In  this  same  manner,  I  say,  I  put  myself  upon  my
journey  to  Spain,  and  so  much  I  did  that  I,  in  a  short
time,  arrived  at  Mountjoy,  and,  a  while  after,  at  St  James,
where,  with  much  devotion,  I  accomplished  my  vow.

"  This  done,  in  Leon,  I,  at  my  return,  met  with  a  merchant
of  Boulogne,  who  brought  me  acquainted  with  a  physician,
M.  Canches,  a  Jew  by  nation,  but  now  a  Christian,  dwelling
at  Leon  aforesaid.

NICHOLAS  FLAMEL.  IO5

"  I  showed  him  the  extract  or  copy  of  my  figures,  by  which
he  was,  as  it  were,  ravished  with  great  astonishment  and
joy.  He  desired  immediately  if  I  could  tell  him  any  news
of  the  book  whence  they  were  drawn.

"  I  answered  him  in  Latin  (in  which  language  he  asked
me  the  question)  that  I  doubted  not  of  obtaining  the  sight
of  the  book,  if  I  could  meet  with  any  one  who  could
unfold  the  enigmas.  Hearing  this,  and  being  transported
with  great  earnestness  and  joy,  he  began  to  decypher
unto  me  the  beginning.  To  be  short,  he  was  much  pleased
that  he  was  in  hopes  to  hear  tidings  of  the  book,  and  I  as
much  pleased  to  hear  him  speak  and  interpret  it.  And,
doubtless,  he  had  heard  much  talk  of  the  book,  but  it  was,
as  he  said,  of  a  thing  which  was  believed  to  be  utterly  lost.
Upon  this,  we  resolved  for  our  voyage,  and  from  Leon  we
passed  to  Oviedo,  and  thence  to  Sareson,  where  we  took
shipping,  and  went  to  sea  in  order  to  go  into  France.

"  Our  voyage  was  prosperous  and  happy,  and,  being
arrived  in  the  kingdom  of  France,  he  most  truly  interpreted
unto  me  the  greatest  part  of  my  figures,  in  which,  even  to
the  points  and  pricks,  he  could  decypher  great  mysteries,
which  were  admirable  to  me.  Having  attained  Orleans,
this  learned  man  fell  sick,  even  to  death,  being  afflicted
with  extreme  vomitings,  which  still  continued  with  him,  as
being  first  caused  by  sea-sickness.  Notwithstanding  which,
he  was  in  continual  fear  lest  I  should  leave  or  forsake  him,
which  was  a  great  trouble  to  him.  And  although  I  was
continually  by  his  side,  yet  he  would  be  almost  always
calling  for  me.  At  the  end  of  the  seventh  day  of  his  sick-
ness he  died,  which  was  no  small  grief  to  me,  and  I  buried
him,  as  well  as  my  condition  would  permit  me,  in  a  church
at  Orleans.

"He  that  would  see  the  manner  of  my  arrival  and  the  joy
of  Perrenelle,  let  him  look  upon  us  two  in  the  city  of  Paris,

106         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

upon  the  door  of  the  chapel  of  James  of  the  Boucherie,
close  by  the  one  side  of  my  house,  where  we  are  both
painted,  kneeling  and  giving  thanks  to  God.  For  through
the  grace  of  God  it  was  that  I  attained  the  perfect  know-
ledge of  all  I  desired.

"  Well,  I  had  now  the  prima  materia,  the  first  principles,
yet  not  their  first  preparation,  which  is  a  thing  most
difficult  above  all  other  things  in  the  world  ;  but  in  the
end  I  had  that  also,  after  a  long  aberration,  and  wandering
in  a  labyrinth  of  errors  for  the  space  of  three  years,  or
thereabouts,  during  which  time  I  did  nothing  but  study
and  search  and  labour,  so  as  you  see  me  depicted  without
this  arch  where  I  have  placed  my  process  ;  praying  also
continually  unto  God,  and  reading  attentively  in  my  book,
pondering  the  words  of  the  philosophers,  and  then  trying
and  proving  the  various  operations,  which  I  thought  to
myself  they  might  mean  by  their  words.  At  length  I
found  that  which  I  desired,  which  I  also  soon  knew  by  the
scent  and  odour  thereof.  Having  this,  I  easily  accom-
plished the  magistery.  For  knowing  the  preparations  of
the  prime  agents,  and  then  literally  following  the  directions
in  my  book,  I  could  not  then  miss  the  work  if  I  would.

"  Having  attained  this,  I  come  now  to  projection  ;"the
first  time  I  made  projection  was  upon  mercury,  a  pound
and  a  half  whereof,  or  thereabouts,  I  turned  into  pure
silver,  better  than  that  of  the  mine,  as  I  proved  by  assaying
of  it  myself,  and  also  causing  others  to  assay  it  for  me
several  times.  This  was  done  in  the  year  of  our  Lord
1382,  January  17,  about  noon,  being  Monday,  in  my  own
house,  Perrenelle  only  present.

"Again,  following  exactly  the  directions  in  my  book,
literally  and  word  by  word,  I  made  projection  of  the  red
stone,  on  the  like  quantity,  Perrenelle  only  being  present,
and  in  the  same  house,  which  was  done  in  the  same  year

NICHOLAS  FLAMEL.  IC>7

of  our  Lord,  namely,  1382,  April  25,  at  five  in  the  after-
noon. This  mercury  I  truly  transmuted  into  almost  as
much  gold,  much  better,  indeed,  than  common  gold,  more
soft  also,  and  more  pliable.

"  I  speak  it  in  all  truth :  I  have  made  it  three  times,
with  the  help  of  Perrenelle,  who  understood  it  as  well  as
myself,  because  she  assisted  me  in  my  operations.  And
without  doubt,  if  she  would  have  done  it  alone,  she  would
have  brought  it  to  the  same,  or  full  as  great,  perfection  as
I  had  done.  I  had  truly  enough  when  I  had  once  done  it ;
but  I  found  exceeding  great  pleasure  and  delight  in  seeing
and  contemplating  the  admirable  works  of  Nature  within
the  vessels,  and  to  show  to  you  that  I  had  thus  done  it
three  times,  I  caused  to  be  depicted  under  the  same  arch,
three  furnaces,  like  to  those  which  serve  for  the  operations
of  this  work.

"  I  was  much  concerned  for  a  long  time  lest  Perrenelle,
by  reason  of  extreme  joy,  should  not  hide  her  felicity,
which  I  measured  by  my  own,  and  lest  she  should  let  fall
some  words  among  her  relations  concerning  the  great
treasure  we  possessed.  For  an  extremity  of  joy  takes
away  the  understanding  as  well  as  an  extremity  of  grief
and  sorrow.  But  the  goodness  of  the  most  great  God
bad  not  only  given  and  filled  me  with  this  blessing,  to
give  me  a  chaste  and  sober  wife,  but  she  was  also  a  wise
and  prudent  woman,  not  only  capable  of  reason  but  also
to  do  what  was  reasonable,  and  was  more  discreet  and
secret  than  ordinarily  other  women  are.  Above  all,  she
was  exceedingly  religious  and  devout :  and  therefore  see-
ing herself  without  hope  of  cnildren,  and  now  well  stricken
in  years,  she  made  it  her  business,  as  I  did,  to  think  of
God,  and  to  give  ourselves  to  the  works  of  charity  and
mercy.

"  Before  the  time  wherein  I  wrote  this  discourse,  which

108         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

was  at  the  latter  end  of  the  year  of  our  Lord  1413,  after
the  death  of  my  faithful  companion,  whose  loss  I  cannot
but  lament  all  the  days  of  my  life,  she  and  I  had  already
founded,  and  endowed  with  revenues,  fourteen  hospitals,
three  chapels,  and  seven  churches,  in  the  city  of  Paris,  all
which  we  had  new  built  from  the  ground,  and  enriched
with  great  gifts  and  revenues,  with  many  reparations  in
their  churchyards.  We  also  have  done  at  Boulogne  about
as  much  as  we  have  done  at  Paris,  not  to  speak  of  the
charitable  acts  which  we  both  did  to  particular  poor
people,  principally  to  widows  and  orphans,  whose  names
should  I  divulge,  with  the  largeness  of  the  charity,  and
the  way  and  manner  of  doing  it,  as  my  reward  would  then
be  only  in  this  world,  so  neither  could  it  be  pleasing  to  the
persons  to  whom  we  did  it.

"  Building,  therefore,  these  hospitals,  chapels,  churches,
and  churchyards  in  the  city,  I  caused  to  be  depicted  under
the  said  fourth  arch  the  most  true  and  essential  marks  or
signs  of  this  art,  yet  under  veils,  types,  and  hieroglyphic
covertures,  in  imitation  of  those  things  which  are  contained
in  the  gilded  book  of  Abraham  the  Jew ;  demonstrating  to
the  wise,  and  men  of  understanding,  the  direct  and  perfect
way  of  operation,  and  lineary  work  of  the  philosophers'
stone.  Which  being  perfected  by  any  one,  takes  away
from  him  the  root  of  all  sin  and  evil,  which  is  covetousness,
changing  his  evil  into  good,  and  making  him  liberal,
courteous,  religious,  devout,  and  fearing  God,  however
wicked  he  was  before.  For  from  thenceforward  he  is
continually  ravished  with  the  goodness  of  God,  and  with
His  grace  and  mercy,  which  he  has  obtained  from  the
fountain  of  Eternal  Goodness,  with  the  profoundness  of
His  divine  and  adorable  power,  and  with  the  consideration
of  His  admirable  works."

According  to  Langlet  du  Fresnoy,  the  evidence  of  these

NICHOLAS  FLAMEL.  IO9

things  remained  in  the  year  1742.  In  the  cemetery  of  the
Holy  Innocents  stood  the  arch  built  by  Flamel  with  the
hieroglpyhic  figures  upon  it.  In  two  niches,  without  the
arch  and  on  the  cemetery  side,  were  statues  of  St  James
and  St  John.  Below  that  of  St  John  was  the  figure  of
Flamel  himself,  reading  in  a  book,  with  a  Gothic  N.  F.  to
mark  his  name.  The  progression  of  the  colours  in  the
order  of  the  process,  originally  represented  on  the  wall,
was,  however,  effaced.

In  the  same  cemetery  was  a  charnel  house,  or  receptacle
for  the  skulls  and  bones  disinterred  in  the  digging  of  new
graves.  Upon  one  of  the  pillars  of  this  charnel  there  was
a  Gothic  N.  F.,  with  this  inscription  : —

Ce  charmer  fut  fait  &  donne  a  VEglise,
Pour  V amour  de  Dieu,  Van  1399.

The  second  of  these  evidences  was  upon  the  Marivaux
door  of  the  Church  of  Saint  Jacques-la-Boucherie,  where
on  the  left  side  at  entering  was  the  figure  of  Flamel,  kneel-
ing at  the  feet  of  St  James,  with  a  Gothic  N.  upon  the
pedestal.  The  figure  of  Perrenelle  was  represented  on  the
opposite  side,  kneeling  at  the  feet  of  St  John,  the  pedestal
bearing  a  Gothic  P.

The  third  evidence  was  in  the  street  of  Notre  Dame,
at  the  portal  of  Genevieve  of  Arden.  There  Flamel's  statue
was  to  be  seen  in  a  niche,  kneeling  with  a  desk  at  his
side,  looking  towards  St  James.  There  was  a  Gothic
N.  F.  below  and  the  inscription,  "  This  portal  was  built  in
1402,  by  the  alms  of  many."  Flamel  is  supposed  to  have
concealed  in  this  manner  that  he  was  the  principal  donor,
but  the  figure  may  have  been  erected  to  his  memory.

The  fourth  and  final  evidence  was  in  the  street  of  the
cemetery  of  St  Nicholas  of  the  Fields,  where  there  was  the
wall  of  an  unfinished  hospital  with  figures  engraven  on  the
stone  and  the  initials  of  Flamel.

1IO         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

After  the  death  of  Perrenelle  the  bereaved  adept  is
supposed  to  have  prepared  for  posterity  several  works  on
the  supreme  science  which  had  enriched  him : — Le  Livre
des  Figures  Hieroglyphiques ;  Le  Sommaire  Philosophique,
written  in  verse  after  the  manner  of  the  Roman  de  la
Rose ;  Trois  Traites  de  la  Transformation  Metallique,  also
in  rhymed  verse  ;  Le  Desir  Desire",  ou  Tre'sor  de  Philo-
sophie ;  Le  Grand  Eclaircissement  de  la  Pierre  Philoso-
phale  pour  la  Transmutation  de  tons  Metaux ;  I,a  Musique
Chimique  ;  Annotationes  in  D.  Zacharmin,  &c.

Approaching  near  the  end  of  his  life,  and  having  no
children,  he  chose  his  burial  place  in  the  parish  church  of
St  Jacques-la-Boucherie,  before  the  crucifix.  To  this  end
he  made  a  contract  with  the  wardens  of  the  church,  which
is  mentioned  in  his  testament.  He  then  disposed  of  his
property  and  goods  to  the  church  and  to  the  poor,  as  may
be  seen  in  his  will,  which  is  lodged  in  the  archives  of  St
Jacques.  It  is  dated  the  22nd  November  1416,  and  begins
thus : — "  To  all  those  to  whom  these  present  letters  shall
come,  I,  Annegny  du  Castel,  chevalier,  counsellor  cham-
bellan  of  the  King,  our  Sire,  Keeper  of  the  Prevot  of  Paris,
greeting  :  Know  ye,  that  before  Hugues  de  la  Barre  and
Jean  de  la  Noe,  notary  clerks  of  the  King,  at  the  Chatelet,
was  established  personally,  Nicholas  Flamel,  scrivener,
sound  in  body  and  mind,  speaking  clearly,  with  good  and
true  understanding,"  &c.  It  fills  four  sheets  of  parchment,
which  are  sewed  one  to  the  end  of  the  other,  like  the  rolls
of  ancient  writing.  It  contains  thirty-four  articles ;  in  the
twentieth  he  bequeaths  to  his  relations  the  sum  of  forty
livres.  He  lived  three  years  after  making  this  will,  dying
about  14 1 9.

Hostile  criticism  has  endeavoured  to  destroy  the  testi-
mony which  the  history  of  Flamel  affords  to  the  reality  of

NICHOLAS  FLAMEL.  I  I  I

transmutation,  and  has  adopted  various  means.  It  has
attempted  to  disprove  his  wealth  by  reducing  his  munifi-
cence, representing  him  simply  as  an  honest  bourgeois,
who,  thanks  to  his  economy  and  his  assiduity,  acquired
a  comfortable  competence,  which  a  childless  condition
enabled  him  to  devote  to  works  of  benevolence,  and  to  the
erection  of  public  buildings  on  a  moderate  scale.  The
alchemical  testaments  and  treatises  attributed  to  him  are
condemned  one  and  all  as  absolutely  spurious.  The  chief
expositor  of  this  view  is  the  Abbe  L.  Vilain  in  his  Essai  stir
line  Histoire  de  Saint-Jacques-la-Boucherie,  published  in  duo-
decimo at  Paris,  in  1758,  and  again  in  a  Histoire  Critique
de  Nicolas  Flamel  et  de  Pemel  sa  Femme,  Paris,  1782,  &c.

It  must  be  granted  out  of  hand  that  all  the  alchemical
compositions  which  have  passed  under  the  name  of  Flamel
are  open  to  more  or  less  suspicion,  and  some  are  undoubtedly
forgeries.  The  work  on  metallic  transmutation,  which  is
the  earliest  traceable  treatise,  was  unheard  of  till  a  hundred
and  forty-three  years  after  the  death  of  its  accredited
author.  It  was  published  in  the  year  1561  by  Jacques
Goharry.  Le  Grand  Eclaircissement  first  saw  the  light  in
1628,  when  the  editor,  who  apparently  abounded  in  Flamel
manuscripts,  promised  the  publication  in  addition  of  La
Joie  Parfaite  de  Moi,  Nicolas  Flamel,  et  de  Pemelle,  ma
Femme,  which  has  not,  however,  appeared.

On  the  other  hand,  there  are  strong  arguments  for  the
genuineness  of  the  Tresor  de  PJiilosophie.  "  There  exists  in
the  Bibliotheque  du  Roi"  says  M.  Auguste  Vallet,  "  a  small
manuscript  book,  grossement  relie,  according  to  all  appear-
ance belonging  to  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  century,  and
which  treats  of  alchemical  operations.  It  commences  with
these  words : —

" '  Excipit  the  True  Practice  of  the  Noble  Science  of
Alchemy,  the  desired  desire,  and  the  prize  unappraisable,

112         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

compiled  from  all  the  philosophers,  and  drawn  out  of
ancient  works.'

"  It  teaches  the  manner  of  accomplishing  the  Magnum
Opus  by  the  aid  of  successive  operations,  which  are  termed
Lavures  in  this  treatise.  On  the  last  leaf  of  the  manu-
script is  the  following  inscription  written  by  the  same
hand  as  the  rest  of  the  text : — '  The  present  book  is  of  and
belonging  to  Nicolas  Flamel,  of  the  Parish  Saint-Jacques-
de-la-Boucherie,  who  has  written  and  illuminated  it  with
his  own  hand.' "

With  regard  to  the  extent  of  the  scrivener's  resources,
the  genuine  testament  of  Pernelle,  dated  1399,  and  the
endowments  of  hospitals  and  churches  which  undoubtedly
took  place  on  a  scale  of  great  munificence,  are  a  sufficient
evidence  that  he  was  an  exceedingly  wealthy  man.

Other  critics,  including  Louis  Figuier,  admit  the  fact  of
his  riches,  but  enlarge  upon  the  remunerative  nature  of  a
scrivener's  occupation  previous  to  the  invention  of  printing,
and  upon  the  careful  frugality  of  the  supposed  alchemist ;
but  in  the  teeth  of  their  own  theory  they  are  obliged  to
admit  that  Flamel  did  become  a  student  of  alchemy,  that
the  hieroglyphics,  figures,  and  emblems  in  the  Cemetery  of
the  Holy  Innocents  are  evidence  of  this  fact ;  that,  unlike
most  followers  of  Hermes,  he  was  not  impoverished  by  his
experiments ;  and  that  he  fostered  the  report  that  his
wealth  was  in  the  main  a  result  of  his  possession  of  the
mysterious  book  of  Abraham,  by  which  he  had  been  able
to  compose  the  philosophical  stone.

Gabriel  Naude,  who  detested  magic,  and  seems  to  have
despised  alchemy,  vilifying  the  possessors  of  both  of  these
sciences  alike,  accounts  for  the  riches  of  Flamel  by
asserting  that  he  managed  affairs  for  the  Jews,  and  upon
their  banishment  from  the  kingdom  of  France,  and  the
confiscation  of  their  property  for  the  king,  "  he,  knowing

NICHOLAS  FLAMEL.  113

the  sums  due  by  several  individuals,  compromised,  by
receiving  a  part,  which  they  paid  him  to  prevent  his  giving
information  which  would  oblige  them  to  surrender  it
entirely."

This  explanation  of  the  source  of  Flamel's  riches  is  a
purely  unfounded  assertion.  If  we  carefully  examine
history,  there  were  three  expulsions  of  the  Jews  from
France  between  1300  and  1420.  They  were  banished  in
1308,  were  soon  after  allowed  to  return,  and  were  again
banished  in  1320.  These  persecutions  occurred  before  the
birth  of  Flamel.  The  Jews  were  re-established  by  Charles
V.  in  1364,  and  they  remained  in  quiet  until  the  riots
which  occurred  in  Paris  in  1380,  at  the  beginning  of  the
reign  of  Charles  VI.,  when  the  people  rose  up  against  the
Jews,  committing  great  outrages  and  demanding  their
expulsion.  The  sedition,  however,  was  quelled,  and  the
Jews  protected  until  1393,  when,  upon  several  charges
preferred  against  them,  they  were  enjoined  to  quit  France,
or  else  become  Christians.  The  historian  Mezeray  says
that  some  of  them  chose  rather  to  quit  their  religion  than
the  kingdom,  but  others  sold  their  goods  and  retired.  Thus
it  appears  that  the  only  expulsion  of  the  Jews  which  could
agree  with  Naude's  surmise  was  without  the  confiscation  of
their  property,  and,  therefore,  could  not  give  Flamel  the
opportunity  alleged,  if,  indeed,  it  were  reasonable  to  sup-
pose that  all  the  Parisian  Israelites  entrusted  their  affairs
to  a  single  person,  when  it  does  not  appear  that  necessity
required  such  an  agency.  There  is,  therefore,  no  reason  to
suppose  that  Flamel  was  enriched  by  the  property  of  the
Jews,  or  that  those  who  owed  them  money  compounded
with  Flamel,  lest  he  should  denounce  them  to  the  king.*

*  According  to  Louis  Figuier,  there  were  two  minor  persecutions  of  the
Jews,  one  in  1346,  when  Flamel  was  merely  a  boy,  and  the  other  in  1354,
when  he  was  scarcely  established  in  business.

I  14        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

Thus  the  theories  of  hostile  criticism  break  down  before
impartial  examination,  and  to  whatever  source  we  may
choose  to  ascribe  the  wealth  of  Nicholas  Flamel,  we  have
no  reason  to  question  his  integrity,  nor  to  deny  the
explanation  of  the  alchemists,  except  upon  the  a  priori
ground  of  the  impossibility  of  transmutation.

The  divine  gift  which  was  so  fortunate  a  possession  to
Flamel  is  supposed  to  have  been  a  curse  to  his  descendants.
He  is  reported  to  have  given  some  of  the  transmuting
powder  to  M.  Perrier,  a  nephew  of  Perrenelle.  From  him
it  descended  to  Dr  Perrier,  and  was  found  among  his
effects  at  his  death  by  his  grandson,  Dubois.  The  prudence
and  moderation  that  accompanied  the  gift  to  the  Perriers
was  not  found  in  Dubois.  He  exhibited  the  sacred  miracle
to  improper  persons,  says  an  anonymous  writer  on  alchemy,
and  was  brought  before  Louis  XIIL,  in  whose  presence  he
made  gold  of  base  metal,  and  this  gold  augmented  its
weight  in  the  cupel.  The  consequence  of  this  generosity
was  an  infamous  death.  The  vanity  of  Dubois  was  in
proportion  to  his  imprudence.  He  fancied  that  he  could
make  or  augment  the  powder,  and  promised  to  do  so,  but
without  success.  It  seems  that  he  was,  consequently,
suspected  of  withholding  the  art  from  the  king,  a  circum-
stance sufficient  in  politics  to  justify  strong  measures,  lest
the  possessor  of  the  sinews  of  war  should  go  over  to  the
enemy.

Whatever  were  the  charges  against  Dubois,  he  was
hanged,  and  his  fate  should  be  a  proof,  says  the  writer
already  quoted,  that  a  science  producing  unbounded  riches
is  the  greatest  misfortune  to  those  who  are  unfitted  and
unprepared  to  manage  the  dangerous  trust  with  discretion.

After  the  death  of  Flamel,  many  persons  supposed  that
there  must  be  doubtless  some  buried  treasures  in  the  house
which   he  had  inhabited  during  so  many  years,  and   in

NICHOLAS  FLAMEL.  115

which  all  his  Hermetical  triumphs  had  been  performed.
This  opinion  existed  in  all  its  strength,  at  least  in  the
mind  of  one  individual,  so  late  as  the  year  1576,  when  a
stranger  applied  to  the  Prevot  of  Paris,  and  stated  that  he
had  been  entrusted  by  a  deceased  friend  with  certain  sums
for  the  restoration  of  Flamel's  house.  As  the  building  was
exceedingly  dilapidated,  the  magistrates  availed  themselves
of  the  opportunity,  and  repairs  were  begun  under  the
direction  of  delegates  of  the  works  of  Saint-Jacques-de-la-
Boucherie.  The  true  object  of  the  stranger  soon  became
evident  by  the  determination  with  which  he  sought  to  lay
bare  the  whole  foundations  of  the  house,  which  was  ran-
sacked from  top  to  bottom  in  search  of  the  treasures  it  was
supposed  to  conceal.  No  discoveries  rewarded  the  zeal  of
the  investigation,  which  ended  in  the  sudden  disappearance
of  the  stranger,  without  paying  for  the  operations  which
he  had  caused  to  be  set  on  foot.

As  a  completion  to  the  history  of  Flamel,  it  may  be
entertaining  to  quote  an  extraordinary  account  which  is
seriously  narrated  by  Paul  Lucas  in  his  "  Journey  through
Asia  Minor."

"  I  was  at  Bronosa,  in  Natolia,  and  going  to  take  the  air
with  a  person  of  distinction,  came  to  a  little  mosque,  which
was  adorned  with  gardens  and  fountains  for  a  public  walk  ;
we  were  quickly  introduced  into  a  cloister,  where  we  found
four  dervishes,  who  received  us  with  all  imaginable  civility,
and  desired  us  to  partake  of  what  they  were  eating.  We
were  told,  what  we  soon  found  to  be  true,  that  they  were
all  persons  of  the  greatest  worth  and  learning ;  one  of
them,  who  said  he  was  of  Usbec  Tartary,  appeared  to  be
more  accomplished  than  the  rest,  and  I  believe  verily  he
spoke  all  the  principal  languages  of  the  world.  After  we
had  conversed  in  Turkish,  he  asked  me  if  I  could  speak
Latin,  Spanish,  or  Italian.     I  told  him,  if  he  pleased,  to

Il6         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

speak  to  me  in  Italian ;  but  he  soon  discovered  by  my
accent  that  it  was  not  my  mother-tongue,  and  asked  me
frankly  what  country  I  came  from  ?  As  soon  as  he  knew
that  I  was  a  native  of  France,  he  spoke  to  me  in  as  good
French  as  if  he  had  been  brought  up  at  Paris.  '  How  long,
sir,'  said  I,  '  did  you  stay  in  France  ? '  He  replied  he  had
never  been  there,  but  that  he  had  a  great  inclination  to
undertake  the  journey.

"  I  did  all  in  my  power  to  strengthen  that  resolution,
and  to  convince  him  that  France  was  the  nursery  of  the
learned,  and  its  king  a  patron  of  the  sciences,  who  defrayed
the  expense  of  my  travels  for  collecting  notices  of  anti-
quities, drawings  of  monuments,  correcting  maps,  and
making  a  collection  of  ancient  coins,  manuscripts,  &c,  all
of  which  he  seemed  to  approve  civilly.  Our  conversation
being  ended,  the  dervishes  brought  us  to  their  house,  at  the
foot  of  the  mountain,  where,  having  drank  coffee,  I  took
my  leave,  but  with  a  promise,  however,  that  I  would  shortly
come  and  see  them  again.

"  On  the  ioth,  the  dervish  whom  I  took  for  an  Usbec
came  to  pay  me  a  visit.  I  shewed  him  all  the  manuscripts
I  had  bought,  and  he  assured  me  they  were  very  valuable,
and  written  by  great  authors.  He  was  a  man  every  way
extraordinary  in  learning ;  and  in  external  appearance  he
seemed  to  be  about  thirty  years  old,  but  from  his  dis-
course I  was  persuaded  he  had  lived  a  century.

"He  told  me  he  was  one  of  seven  friends,  who  travelled
to  perfect  their  studies,  and,  every  twenty  years,  met  in  a
place  previously  appointed.  I  perceived  that  Bronosa  was
the  place  of  their  present  meeting,  and  that  four  of  them
had  arrived.  Religion  and  natural  philosophy  took  up
our  thoughts  by  turns  ;  and  at  last  we  fell  upon  chemistry,
alchemy,  and  the  Cabala.  I  told  him  all  these,  and  espe-
cially the  philosophers'  stone,  were  regarded  by  most  men
of  sense  as  mere  fictions.

NICHOLAS  FLAMEL.  1  I  7

"  '  That,'  replied  he,  '  should  not  surprise  you ;  the  sage
hears  the  ignorant  without  being  shocked,  but  does  not
for  that  reason  sink  his  understanding  to  the  same  level.
When  I  speak  of  a  sage,  I  mean  one  who  sees  all  things
die  and  revive  without  concern  :  he  has  more  riches  in  his
power  than  the  greatest  king,  but  lives  temperately,  above
the  power  of  events.'

"  Here  I  stopped  him  : — '  With  all  these  fine  maxims,
the  sage  dies  as  well  as  other  people.'  '  Alas  ! '  said  he,  '  I
perceive  you  are  unacquainted  with  sublime  science.  Such
a  one  as  I  describe  dies  indeed,  for  death  is  inevitable,  but
he  does  not  die  before  the  utmost  limits  of  his  mortal
existence.  Hereditary  disease  and  weakness  reduce  the
life  of  man,  but  the  sage,  by  the  use  of  the  true  medicine,
can  ward  off  whatever  may  hinder  or  impair  the  animal
functions  for  a  thousand  years.'

"  Surprised  at  all  I  heard,  '  And  would  you  persuade
me,'  said  I,  '  that  all  who  possessed  the  philosophers'  stone
have  lived  a  thousand  years  ? '  He  replied  gravely  : —
'  Without  doubt  every  one  might ;  it  depends  entirely  on
themselves.'  At  last  I  took  the  liberty  of  naming  the
celebrated  Flamel,  who,  it  was  said,  possessed  the  philo-
sophers' stone,  yet  was  certainly  dead.  He  smiled  at  my
simplicity,  and  asked  with  an  air  of  mirth  : — '  Do  you
really  believe  .  this  ?  No,  no,  my  friend,  Flamel  is  still
living  ;  neither  he  nor  his  wife  are  dead.  It  is  not  above
three  years  since  I  left  both  the  one  and  the  other  in  the
Indies  ;  he  is  one  of  my  best  friends.'  Whereupon  he  told
me  the  history  of  Flamel,  as  he  heard  it  from  himself,  the
same  as  I  had  read  in  his  book,  until  at  last  when  Charles
VI.,  who  was  then  upon  the  throne,  sent  M.  Cramoisi,  a
magistrate,  and  his  master  of  requests,  to  enquire  from
Flamel  the  origin  of  his  riches,  when  the  latter  at  once
saw  the  danger  he  was  in.     Having  sent  her  into  Switzer-

Il8        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

land  to  await  his  coming,  he  spread  a  report  of  his  wife's
death,  had  her  funeral  celebrated,  and  in  a  few  years
ordered  his  own  coffin  to  be  interred.  Since  that  time
they  have  both  lived  a  philosophic  life,  sometimes  in  one
country,  sometimes  in  another.  This  is  the  true  history,
and   not   that  which    is    believed   at   Paris,  where   there

r

are  very  few  who  ever  had  the  least  glimpse  of  true
wisdom.' "

According  to  the  "  Treasure  of  Philosophy,"  alchemy  as
a  science  consists  in  the  knowledge  of  the  four  elements
of  philosophers,  which  are  not  to  be  identified  with  the
vulgar  so-called  elements,  and  which  are  convertible  one
into  another.  The  true  prima  materia  is  mercury,  prepared
and  congealed  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth  by  the  mediation
of  the  heat  of  sulphur.  This  is  the  sperm  and  semen  of
all  metals,  which,  like  other  created  things,  are  capable  of
a  growth  and  multiplication  that  may  be  continued  even
to  infinity.  The  first  step  in  transmutation  is  the  reduc-
tion of  the  metals  worked  upon  into  their  first  mercurial
matter,  and  this  reduction  is  the  subject  of  the  whole
treatise.

It  does  not  appear  that  the  alchemical  works  attributed
to  Nicholas  Flamel  have  added  anything  to  our  knowledge
of  chemistry.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  perfectly  clear  from
his  history  that  the  physical  object  of  Alchemy  was  the
end  which  he  kept  in  view,  and  that  also  which  he  is
supposed  to  have  attained.

PETER  BONO.

This  adept,  born  in  Lombardy,  was  an  inhabitant  of  Pola,
a  seaport  of  Istria,  where  he  affirms  that  he  made  the  much
desired  transmuting  metal  of  the  sages,  in  the  year  1330.

JOHANNES  DE   RUPECISSA.  II9

He  wrote  and  published  a  complete  treatise  on  the  art
under  the  title  Margarita  Pretiosa.  Lacinius,  a  monk  of
Calabria,  has  printed  a  faithful  abridgment  of  it,  which
appeared  at  Venice  in  1546.  An  Introductio  in  Artem
Divinam  Alchimice,  1602,  and  De  Secreto  Omnium  Secre-
torum,Venet  1546,  are  ascribed  to  this  adept.

The  first  of  these  works  is  an  exceedingly  comprehensive,
conscientious  treatise  on  the  history,  the  theory,  and  the
practice  of  alchemy,  written  after  the  manner  of  the  schol-
astics, and  naturally  containing  much  irrelevant  matter,
but  for  all  this  very  useful  and  even  interesting.  The
difficulties  of  the  art  are  manfully  faced,  the  sophistications,
deceptions,  and  contradictions  of  its  professors  are  reproved,
and  the  author  attempts  to  show  that  alchemy  is  in  reality
a  short  art  and  a  slight  practice,  though  full  of  truth  and
nobility.  His  other  opinions  are  also  of  a  revolutionary
character.

JOHANNES  DE  RUPECISSA.

This  writer  is  considered  one  of  the  most  remarkable
of  the  Hermetic  philosophers.  He  abounds  with  prophetic
passages,  and  denounces  the  fate  of  nations,  but  in  his
alchemical  explanation  of  things  physical  is  obscure  even
for  an  adept.  Nothing  is  known  of  his  life,*  beyond  the
nobility  of  his  origin  and  his  imprisonment  in  1357,  by
Pope  Innocent  VI.,  whom  he  had  reprehended,  The
illustrious  Montfaucon  was  one  of  his  descendants,  and  he
poses  as  an  initiate  of  the  secret  chemistry  in  the  follow-
ing works : — "  The  Book  of  Light,"  "  The  Five  Essences,"
C(zlum  PJiilosoplwrum,  and  his  most  celebrated  treatise  De
Confectione  Lapidis.  There  he  declares  that  the  matter  of
the  philosophical  stone  is  a  viscous  water  which  is  to  be

*  He  is  said  to  have  been  a  French  monk  of  the  order  of  St  Francis.

120         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

found  everywhere,  but  if  the  stone  itself  should  be  openly
named,  the  whole  world  would  be  revolutionised.  The
divine  science  possessed  by  the  wise  is  somewhat  poetically
celebrated  as  an  incomparable  treasure.  Its  initiates  are
enriched  with  an  infinite  wealth'  beyond  all  the  kings  of
the  earth  ;  they  are  just  before  God  and  men,  and  in  en-
joyment of  the  special  favour  of  Heaven.

BASIL  VALENTINE.

One  of  the  most  illustrious  of  the  adept  philosophers  is
unquestionably  Basilius  Valentinus,  born  at  Mayence,  and
made  prior  of  St  Peter's  at  Erfurt  in  1414.  His  name  was
supposed  to  be  fictitious  and  adopted  for  the  purpose  of
concealing  some  accomplished  artist,  but  the  history  of  the
city  of  Erfurt,  published  by  J.  M.  Gudemus  assures  us  of
the  existence  and  name  of  the  philosopher,  on  the  autho-
rity of  the  public  records,  and  shows  us  that  in  141 3  he
was  an  inmate  of  the  monastic  house  already  mentioned,
and  that  he  distinguished  himself  by  a  profound  know-
ledge of  nature.*  As  the  work  of  Gudemus  was  printed  in
1675,  the  veracity  of  the  Dictionnaire  des  Sciences  Occultes,
written  in  the  interests  of  religion  and  for  the  blackening
of  the  secret  sciences,  may  be  judged  by  the  following
passage  : — "  His  life  is  so  mixed  up  with  fables  that  some
have  disbelieved  in  his  existence.  He  is  represented
flourishing  in  the  twelfth,  thirteenth,  fourteenth,  and
fifteenth  centuries ;  it  is  even  added,  without  the  smallest
proof,  that  he  was  a  benedictine  at  Erfurt."

According  to  Olaus  Borrichius,  he  enclosed  his  writings
in  one  of  the  pillars  of  the  abbey  church ;  they  remained
for  many  years  in  this  hiding-place,  but  were  at  length

*  Eadem  aetate  (scilicet  anno  1413)  Basilius  Valentinus  in  divi  Patri  monas-
teris  vixit  arte  medica  et  natarale  indagatione  admirabilis.

BASIL  VALENTINE.  121

discovered  by  the  fortunate  violence  of  a  thunderbolt.  He
was  the  first  who  introduced  antimony  into  medicine,  and
it  is  said  that  he  originally  tried  the  effects  of  antimonial
medicines  upon  the  monks  of  his  convent,  upon  whom  they
acted  with  such  undue  violence  "  that  he  was  induced  to
distinguish  the  mineral  from  which  these  medicines  had
been  extracted  by  the  name  of  antimoine  —  hostile  to
monks."  But  Thomson,  who  relates  this  anecdote  in  his
"  History  of  Chemistry,"  shows  the  improbability  of  it,  for
the  works  of  Basil  Valentine,  and  in  particular  his  Currus
Triumphalis  Antimonii,  were  written  in  the  German  lan-
guage. Now  the  German  name  for  antimony  is  speissglas
and  not  antimoi?ie,  which  is  French.

Basil  Valentine  denounces  the  physicians  of  his  time
with  the  fury  of  Paracelsus.  The  most  ancient  systems
of  chemical  philosophy  are  preserved  in  his  experiments.
He  exalts  antimony  as  an  excellent  medicine  for  those
who  are  acquainted  with  alchemical  secrets.  To  others  it
is  a  poison  of  the  most  powerful  nature.

No  further  particulars  of  the  life  of  Basil  Valentine  have
descended  to  posterity.  Numerous  works  have  been
printed  in  his  name,  and  the  authenticity  of  several  is
questionable.  He  wrote  in  high  Dutch,  and  compara-
tively few  of  his  treatises  have  been  translated  into  other
languages.  The  best  are  as  follows  : — I.  De  Microcosmo
deque  Magno  M7indi  Mysterio  et  Medecina  Hominis,  Mar-
purg,  1609,  8vo ;  2.  Azotk,  sive  Aurelia  PJiilosopJwrum,
Francfurt,  161 3,  4to ;  3.  Practica,  unci  cum  duodecim  Cla-
vibus  et  Appendice,  Francfurt,  161 1,  4to ;  4.  Apocalypsis
Chymica,  Erfurt,  1624,  8vo ;  5.  Manifestatio  Artificiorum,
Erfurt,  1624,  8vo  ;  6.  Currus  Triumphalis  Antimonii,  Lipsiae,
1624,  8vo ;  7.  Tractatus  Chimico-Philosophicus  de  Rebus
Naturalibus  et  Prceternaturalibus  metallorum  et  mineral-
ium,  Francfurt,   1676,  8vo ;   8.   Haliographia,  de  prcepara-

122  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

Hone,  usu,  ac  virtutibus  omnium  Salium  Mineralium,  Ani-
malium,  ac  Vegetabilium,  ex  manuscriptis  Basilii  Valentini
collecta  ab  Ant.  Salmincio,  Bologna,  1644,  8vo.

Every  letter  and  syllable  of  the  "  Triumphal  Chariot  of
Antimony"  is  declared  to  have  its  special  significance.
"  Even  to  the  pointes  and  prickes  "  it  bristles  with  divine
meanings  and  mysteries.  The  metrical  treatise  on  the  first
matter  of  the  philosophers  declares  that  this  stone  is  com-
posed of  white  and  red,  that  it  is  a  stone,  and  yet  scarcely
a  stone  ;  one  nature  operates  therein.  Those  who  desire  to
attain  it,  Basil  elsewhere  informs  us,  must  labour  in  much
prayer,  confess  their  sins,  and  do  good.  Many  are  called,
but  few  chosen  to  this  supreme  knowledge.  The  study  of
the  works  of  the  philosophers  and  practical  experiment  are
both  recommended.  There  is  much  in  the  writings  of
Basil,  in  his  suggestive  if  impenetrable  allegories,  in  his
curious  Kabbalistical  symbols,  and  in  his  earnest  spiri-
tuality, to  suggest  a  psychic  interpretation  of  his  aims
and  his  principles.  This  is  particularly  noticeable  in  the
"  Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony,"  and  yet  it  is  clear  from
this  remarkable  work,  which  is  the  masterpiece  of  its
author,  that  Basil  Valentine  was  one  of  the  most  illustrious
physical  chemists  of  his  age.  He  was  the  first  to  describe
the  extraction  of  antimony  from  the  sulphuret,  though
it  does  not  appear  that  he  was  the  inventor  of  this
process.  Previous  to  his  investigations  the  properties  of
antimony  were  almost  unknown.  He  was  also  acquainted
with  the  method  of  obtaining  chlorohydric  acid  from  sea-
salt  and  sulphuric  acid,  with  the  method  of  obtaining
brandy  by  the  distillation  of  beer  and  wine,  and  the  recti-
fication of  the  result  by  means  of  carbonate  of  potassium,
and  with  many  other  operations  which  eminently  assisted
the  progress  of  chemistry.

ISAAC  OF  HOLLAND.  I  23

ISAAC  OF  HOLLAND.

Contemporary  with  Basilius  Valentinus  were  Isaac  the
Hollander  and  his  son,  who  are  supposed  to  have  worked
with  success.  They  were  the  first  alchemists  of  Holland,  and
their  operations  were  highly  esteemed  by  Paracelsus,  Boyle,
and  Kunckel.  In  practical  chemistry  they  followed  the
traditions  of  Geber,  and  their  alchemical  experiments  are
the  most  plain  and  explicit  in  the  whole  range  of  Hermetic
literature.  They  worked  principally  in  metals,  describing
minutely  the  particulars  of  every  process.  Their  lives  are
almost  unknown.  "  Buried  in  the  obscurity  necessary  to
adepts,  they  were  occupied  in  the  practice  of  the  Hermetic
science,  and  their  study  or  laboratory  was  the  daily  scene
of  their  industrious  existence."  *

They  are  placed  in  the  fifteenth  century  by  conjecture,
from  the  fact  that  they  do  not  cite  any  philosophers  subse-
quent to  that  period.  They  speak  of  Geber,  Dastin,  Morien,
and  Arnold,  but  not  of  more  modern  authorities,  while,  on
the  other  hand,  their  references  to  aquafortis  and  aqua-regiae,
which  were  discovered  in  the  fourteenth  century,  prevent  us
from  assigning  their  labours  to  an  anterior  epoch.

The  two  Isaacs  were  particularly  skilful  in  the  manufac-
ture of  enamels  and  of  artificial  gem-stones.  They  taught
that  the  Grand  Magisterium  could  convert  a  million  times
its  own  weight  into  gold,  and  declared  that  any  person
taking  weekly  a  small  portion  of  the  philosophical  stone
will  be  ever  preserved  in  perfect  health,  and  his  life  will  be
prolonged  to  the  very  last  hour  which  God  has  assigned  to
him.

The  Opera  Mineralia  Joannis  Isaaci  Hollandi,  sive  de
Lapide  Philosophico  is  a  long  and  elaborate  treatise  on  the

*  "Lives  of  Alchemysticall  Philosophers."     Ed.  of  1815.

124  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

one  method  of  exalting  the  dead  and  impure  metals  into
true  Sol  and  Lima.  The  first  matter  is  said  to  be  Saturn,
or  lead,  and  the  vessels  in  which  it  is  to  be  calcined  and
otherwise  adapted  to  the  purposes  of  aurific  art,  are  plainly
figured  in  illustrations  introduced  into  the  text.

BERNARD  TREVISAN.

Bernard  Compte  de  la  Marche  Trevisane  is  accredited
by  the  popular  legends  of  France  with  the  powers  of  a
sorcerer  in  possession  of  a  devil's  bird  or  familiar  spirit ;
nevertheless,  he  is  called  "the  good,"  and  enjoyed  a
particular  reputation  for  benevolence.

Descendant  of  a  distinguished  Paduan  family,  Bernard
Trevisan  began  to  study  the  time-honoured  science  of
alchemy  about  the  time  that  Basil  in  Germany,  and  the
two  Isaacs  in  Holland  were  prosecuting  their  labours  with
supposed  success.  His  father  was  a  physician  of  Padua,
where  he  himself  was  born  in  the  year  1406.  The  account
of  his  alchemical  errors  must  rank  among  the  most  curious
anecdotes  in  the  annals  of  occult  chemistry.

At  the  age  of  fourteen  years,  under  the  auspices  of
a  grandfather,  and  with  the  full  consent  of  his  family,  he
devoted  his  attention  to  alchemy,  which  henceforth  was  the
absorbing  occupation  of  his  life.  Seeking  initiation  into
the  first  principles  of  the  art,  he  began  by  the  study
of  Geber  and  Rhasis,  believing  they  would  supply  him
with  a  method  of  multiplying  his  patrimony  a  hundred
fold.  The  experiments  which  he  undertook  during  his
costly  tuition  by  these  oracular  masters  resulted  in  the
futile  dissipation  of  eight  hundred,  or,  according  to  another
account,  of  three  thousand  crowns.  He  was  surrounded
by  pretended  philosophers,  who,  finding  him  wealthy  and
eager  in  the  penetration  of  tantalising  mysteries,  proffered

BERNARD  TREVISAN.  I  25

the  secrets  which  they  neither  possessed  nor  understood,
obtaining  a  fraudulent  subsistence  at  the  expense  of  the
boy  alchemist.

Disappointed,  but  not  discouraged,  he  dismissed  these
impostors  at  length,  and  devoted  his  concentrated  attention
to  the  works  of  Rupecissa  and  Archelaus  Sacrobosco,  whom
he  literally  followed  for  a  time  in  all  his  practical  operations.
Hoping  to  profit  by  the  help  of  a  prudent  companion,  he
associated  himself  with  a  good  monk  with  whom  he
experimented  in  concert  for  the  space  of  three  years.  They
rectified  spirits  of  wine  more  than  thirty  times  "  till  they
could  not  find  glasses  strong  enough  to  hold  it."  These
operations  cost  nearly  three  hundred  crowns.

For  fifteen  years  he  continued  his  preliminary  experiences,
and  at  the  end  of  that  time  he  had  purchased  a  perfect
knowledge  of  all  the  highways  and  byways  of  alchemical
rogueries,  and  was  intimately  acquainted  with  an  enormous
variety  of  substances,  mineral,  metallic,  and  otherwise,
which  did  not  apparently  enter  into  the  composition  of  the
stone  philosophical.  He  calculates  the  cost  of  these
experiences  to  have  been  roughly  six  thousand  crowns.
He  had  laboured  in  vain  to  congeal,  dissolve,  and  sublime
common  salt,  sal  ammoniac,  every  variety  of  alum,  and
copperas.  He  even  proceeded  upon  ordure,  both  of  man
and  beasts,  by  distillation,  circulation,  and  sublimation.
These  experiments,  based  on  the  literal  interpretation  of
the  allegories  of  the  turba  philosophorum,  again  resulted  in
failure,  and  at  last  discouraged  beyond  words  at  the  loss
of  his  time  and  his  fortune,  he  betook  himself  to  prayer,
hoping  to  discover  the  aim  of  the  alchemists  by  the  grace
and  favour  of  God.  In  conjunction  with  a  magistrate  of
his  country,  he  subsequently  endeavoured  to  compose  the
philosophical  stone  with  sea  salt  as  the  chief  ingredient.
He  rectified  it  fifteen  times  during  the.  space  of  a  year  and

126        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

a  half  without  finding  any  alteration  in  its  nature,  where-
upon he  abandoned  the  process  for  another  proposed  by
the  magistrate,  namely,  the  dissolution  of  silver  and  mercury
by  means  of  aquafortis.  These  dissolutions,  undertaken
separately,  were  left  to  themselves  for  a  year,  and  then
combined  and  concentrated  over  hot  ashes  to  reduce  their
original  volume  to  two-thirds.  The  residuum  of  this  opera-
tion, placed  in  a  narrow  crucible,  was  exposed  to  the  action
of  the  solar  rays,  and  afterwards  to  the  air,  in  the  hopes
that  it  would  crystallize.  Twenty-two  phials  were  filled
with  the  mixture,  and  five  years  were  devoted  to  the  whole
operation,  but  at  the  end  of  that  period  no  crystallization
had  taken  place,  and  thus  was  this  operation  abandoned,
like  the  rest,  as  a  failure.

Bernard  Trevisan  was  now  forty-six  years  old,  and  at
the  end  of  his  experimental  resources  he  determined  to
travel  in  search  of  true  alchemists.  In  this  manner  he
met  with  a  monk  of  Citeaux,  Maitre  Geofroi  de  Lemorier,
who  was  in  possession  of  a  hitherto  unheard  of  process.
They  purchased  two  thousand  hens'  eggs,  hardened  them
in  boiling  water,  and  removed  the  shells,  which  they
calcined  in  a  fire.  They  separated  the  whites  from  the
yolks,  which  they  putrified  in  horse  manure.  The  result
was  distilled  thirty  several  times  for  the  extraction  of  a
white  and  red  water.  These  operations  were  continually
repeated  with  many  variations,  and  vainly  occupied  eight
years  more  of  the  toil-worn  seeker's  life.

Disappointed,  disheartened,  but  still  pertinaciously  ad-
hering to  his  search  after  the  Grand  Secret,  Trevisan
now  set  to  work  with  a  protonotary  of  Bruges,  whom  he
describes  as  a  great  theologian,  and  who  pretended  to
extract  the  stone  from  sulphate  of  iron  (copperas)  by
distillation  with  vinegar.  They  began  by  calcining  the
sulphate   for   three  months,  when  it  was   soaked   in   the

BERNARD  TREVISAN.  12J

vinegar,  which  had  been  eight  times  distilled.  The  mix-
ture was  placed  in  an  alembic,  and  distilled  fifteen  times
daily  for  a  year,  at  the  end  of  which  the  seeker  was
rewarded  by  a  quartan  fever  which  consumed  him  for
fourteen  months,  and  which  almost  cost  him  his  life.

He  was  scarcely  restored  to  health  when  he  heard  from
a  clerk  that  Maitre  Henry,  the  confessor  of  the  German
Emperor,  Frederick  III.,  was  in  possession  of  the  philo-
sophical stone.  He  immediately  set  out  for  Germany,
accompanied  by  some  baffled  sons  of  Hermes  like  him-
self. They  contrived,  par  grands  moyens  et  grands  amis,
to  be  introduced  to  the  confessor,  and  began  to  work  in
conjunction  with  him.  Bernard  contributed  ten  marks  of
silver,  and  the  others  thirty-two,  for  the  indispensable
expenses  of  the  process,  which  consisted  in  the  combina-
tion of  mercury,  silver,  oil  of  olives,  and  sulphur.  The
whole  was  dissolved  over  a  moderate  fire,  and  continually
stirred.  In  two  months  it  was  placed  in  a  glass  phial,
which  they  covered  with  clay,  and  afterwards  with  hot
ashes.  Lead,  dissolved  in  a  crucible,  was  added  after
three  weeks,  and  the  product  of  this  fusion  was  sub-
jected to  refinement.  At  the  end  of  these  operations  the
imperial  confessor  expected  that  the  silver  which  had
entered  into  the  combination  would  be  augmented  at  least
by  a  third,  but,  on  the  contrary,  it  was  reduced  to  a  fourth.

Bernard  Trevisan  in  utter  despair  determined  to
abandon  all  further  experiments.  The  resolution  was
applauded  by  his  family,  but  in  two  months  the  Circean
power  of  the  secret  chemistry  had  asserted  its  former
dominion  over  the  whole  being  of  its  martyr,  who,  in  a
fever  of  eagerness,  recommenced  his  travels,  and  visited
Spain,  Italy,  England,  Scotland,  Holland,  Germany,  and
France.  Then,  anxious  to  drink  at  the  oriental  fountains
of  alchemy,  he  spent  several  years  in  Egypt,  Persia,  and

128         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

Palestine,  after  which  he  passed  into  southern  Greece,
visiting  remote  convents  and  experimenting  in  conjunction
with  monks  of  reputation  in  the  science.  In  every  country-
he  found  there  were  alchemists  at  work,  but  of  those  who
were  successful  he  could  hear  no  account.  The  true
philosophers  declined  to  make  themselves  known,  while
impostors,  in  search  of  the  credulous,  presented  themselves
on  all  sides.  Bernard  expended,  in  these  travels,  and  in
false  operations  connected  with  them,  about  thirteen
thousand  crowns,  and  was  forced  to  sell  an  estate  which
yielded  eight  thousand  German  florins  per  annum.  He
was  now  sixty-two  years  of  age,  and  as  he  had  been  deaf
to  the  remonstrances  of  his  family,  he  saw  himself  despised
and  on  the  threshold  of  want  and  misery.  He  en-
deavoured to  conceal  his  poverty,  and  fixed  on  the  Isle
of  Rhodes,  wherein  to  live  entirely  unknown.  Now,  at
Rhodes  he  became  acquainted  with  un  grand  clerc  et  re-
ligieux,  who  was  addicted  to  philosophy,  and  commonly
reported  to  be  enjoying  the  philosophical  stone.  He
managed  to  borrow  eight  thousand  florins,  and  laboured
with  this  monk  in  the  dissolution  of  gold,  silver,  and
corrosive  sublimate ;  he  accomplished  so  much  in  the
space  of  three  years  that  he  expended  the  funds  he  had
raised,  and  was  again  at  the  end  of  his  resources.  Thus,
effectually  prevented  from  continuing  the  practice,  he  re-
turned to  the  study  of  the  philosophers,  and  after  eight
years,  at  the  age  of  seventy-three,  he  professes  to  have
discovered  their  secret.  By  comparing  the  adepts  and
examining  in  what  things  they  agree,  and  in  what  they
differ,  he  judged  that  the  truth  must  lie  in  those  maxims
wherein  they  were  practically  unanimous.  He  informs  us
that  it  was  two  years  before  he  put  his  discovery  to  the
test ;  it  was  crowned  with  success,  and  notwithstanding  the
infirmities  of  old  age,  he  lived  for  some  time  in  the  enjoy-
ment of  his  tardy  reward.

JOHN  FONTAINE.  129

The  chief  work  of  Trevisan  is  La  Philosophie  Naturelle
des  Me'tanx.  He  insists  on  the  necessity  of  strong  and
discreet  meditation  in  all  students  of  Hermetic  philosophy.
Their  operations  must  wait  on  nature,  and  not  nature  on
their  arbitrary  processes.  Mercury  is  said  to  be  the  water
of  metals,  "  in  which,  by  a  mutual  alteration,  it  assumes  in
a  convertible  manner  their  mutations."  Gold  is  simply
quicksilver  coagulated  by  the  power  of  sulphur.  The
secret  of  dissolution  is  the  whole  mystery  of  the  art,  and
it  is  to  be  accomplished  not  by  means  of  fire,  as  some  have
supposed,  but,  with  the  help  of  mercury,  in  an  abstruse
manner,  which  is  not  really  indicated  by  the  adept.  The
work  of  nature  is  assisted  by  alchemy,  which  mingles  ripe
gold  with  quicksilver,  the  gold  comprising  in  itself  a  well-
digested  sulphur,  by  which  it  matures  the  mercury  to  the
"  anatide  proportion  "  of  gold,  subtilising  the  elements  and
wonderfully  abbreviating  the  natural  process  for  producing
the  precious  metal  of  the  mines.

JOHN   FONTAINE.

The  life  of  this  artist  is  buried  in  the  obscurity  of  his
closet  or  laboratory,  where  he  divided  his  time  between
attention  to  his  furnaces  and  the  composition  of  curious
verses.  He  was  alive  at  Valenciennes  in  the  year  141 3.
His  Hermetic  poem,  Aux  Amonreux  de  Science,  has  been
printed  several  times.  The  author  announces  that  he  is  an
adept,  and  describes  in  an  allegorical  manner,  after  the
fashion  of  the  "  Romance  of  the  Rose,"  and  in  the
same  quaint  and  beautiful  tongue,  the  different  processes
which  enter  into  the  art  of  transmutation.  His  little
work  may  be  profitably  studied  by  the  neophytes  of
practical  alchemy,  though  its  benefits  are  of  a  negative
kind,  but  its  paradise  of  dainty  devices  and  its  old  world

I

I30         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

nature  pictures  are  better  suited  to  the  poet  and  the  poetic
interpretation  of  symbols.

THOMAS   NORTON.

The  scientific  methods  of  Ripley  were  followed  by  this
alchemist,  who  was  born  in  the  city  of  Bristol.  He  wrote
anonymously,  but  the  initial  syllables  in  the  six  first  lines,
and  the  first  line  in  the  seventh  chapter  of  his  "  Ordinall
of  Alchemy,"  compose  the  following  couplet : —

"  Thomas  Norton  of  Briseto,
A  parfet  master  you  may  him  trow."

At  the  age  of  twenty-eight,  and  in  the  brief  space  of  forty
days,  he  is  recorded  to  have  mastered  "  the  perfection  of
chymistry,"  obtaining  his  knowledge  from  a  contemporary
adept,  who  appears  to  have  been  Ripley  himself.  He
describes  his  initiator  as  a  person  of  noble  mind,  worthy  of
all  praise,  loving  justice,  detesting  fraud,  reserved  when
surrounded  by  a  talkative  company,  quite  unassuming,  and
if  ever  the  conversation  turned  upon  the  Great  Art,
preserving  complete  silence.  For  a  long  time  Norton
sought  him  in  vain  ;  the  adept  proved  him  by  various
trials,  but  when  he  was  satisfied  of  his  disposition,  manners,
and  habits,  as  well  as  of  his  strength  of  mind,  his  love
yielded  to  the  fidelity  and  perseverance  of  his  postulant,
and  in  answer  to  one  of  his  letters  he  addressed  him  as
follows  : —

"  My  trusty  and  well-beloved  Brother, — I  shall
not  any  longer  delay  ;  the  time  is  come  ;  you  shall  receive
this  grace.  Your  honest  desire  and  approved  virtue,  your
love  of  truth,  wisdom,  and  long  perseverance,  shall  accom-
plish your  sorrowful  desires.

"  It  is  necessary  that,  as  soon  as  convenient,  we  speak

THOMAS  NORTON.  131

together  face  to  face,  lest  I  should  by  writing  betray  my
trust.  I  will  make  you  my  heir  and  brother  in  this  art,  as
I  am  setting  out  to  travel  in  foreign  countries.  Give  thanks
to  God,  Who,  next  to  His  spiritual  servants,  honours  the
sons  of  this  sacred  science."

Norton  lost  no  time  in  undertaking  a  journey  to  his
instructor,  and  rode  upwards  of  a  hundred  miles  on  horse-
back to  reach  the  abode  of  the  adept.  During  the  forty
days  already  mentioned  he  received  the  advice  and
directions  of  his  friend.  He  was  already  to  a  great  extent
prepared  for  initiation  by  a  long  course  of  natural
philosophy,  as  well  as  by  the  study  of  the  occult  and
curious  sciences.  The  "  disclosure  of  the  bonds  of  nature  "
took  place,  and  he  became  convinced  of  the  truth  and
certainty  of  the  art  by  the  rationality  of  its  theorems.
He  felt  confident  of  success  in  the  practice,  but  the  adept,
on  account  of  his  youth,  refused  to  instruct  him  in  the
process  from  the  white  to  the  red  powder,  lest  the  divine
gift  should  be  misused  in  a  moment  of  passion.  In  due
time,  and  after  further  proofs  of  his  capacity  and  integrity,
he  would  communicate  the  work  of  the  medicinal  stone.
This,  the  supreme  desire  of  the  neophyte,  was  afterwards
accomplished.

The  chemical  operations  of  Norton  were  destined,  how-
ever, to  meet  with  two  signal  disappointments.  He  had
almost  perfected  the  tincture,  when  his  own  servant,  who
was  employed  in  the  care  of  the  furnace,  believing  that  the
prize  was  complete,  carried  it  away.  He  again  undertook
the  process  and  succeeded  in  making  the  elixir,  but  he
complains  that  it  was  stolen  by  the  wife  of  a  merchant,
said  to  be  William  Canning,  Mayor  of  Bristol,  who
suddenly  started  into  great  wealth,  and  who  built  the
splendid  and  lofty  steeple  of  St  Mary's,  Radcliffe,  besides
enlarging  Westbury  College.

I32         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

It  is  doubtful  whether  Thomas  Norton  ever  enjoyed
the  fruits  of  his  supposed  knowledge.  He  does  not  speak
of  his  own  transmutations,  and  if  he  is  called  by  one  of  his
contemporaries  alchemista  suo  tempore  peritissimus,  by
others  he  is  termed  Nugarum  opifex  in  frivola  scientia.
The  latter  declare  that  he  undid  himself  by  his  labours,
and  that  all  his  friends  who  trusted  him  with  their  money
were  as  much  ruined  as  himself.  According  to  Fuller,  he
lived  and  died  very  poor ;  nevertheless  his  family  appears
to  have  been  held  in  high  repute  under  King  Henry  VIII.
There  were  nine  brothers  of  the  name  of  Norton.  One
anonymous  writer  asserts  that  they  were  all  of  them
knights.  The  tomb  of  Sampson  Norton,  master  of  the
king's  ordnance,  and  buried  in  Fulham  Church,  was
adorned  with  Hermetic  paintings,  according  to  one
account,  but  Faulkner,  in  his  historical  account  of  Fulham,
describes  it  as  a  rich  Gothic  monument,  ornamented  with
foliage  and  oak-leaves,  and  bearing  an  obliterated  in-
scription.

Thomas  Norton  died  in  1477.  His  grandson  Samuel
followed  in  his  steps  as  an  alchemist,  and  was  the  author
of  several  Hermetic  treatises,  which  are  not  very  highly
esteemed.

"  The  Ordinal  of  Alchemy  "  testifies  that  the  stone  is
one.  In  appearance  it  is  a  subtle  earth,  brown,  and
opaque  ;  it  stands  the  fire,  and  is  considered  to  be  of  no
value.  There  is  also  another  and  glorious  stone,  which  is
termed  the  philosophical  magnesia.  Alchemy  is  a  wonder-
ful science,  a  secret  philosophy,  a  singular  grace  and  free
gift  of  the  Almighty,  which  was  never  discovered  by  in-
dependent human  labour,  but  only  by  revelation  or  the
instruction  of  one  of  the  adepts.

"  It  helpeth  a  man  when  he  hath  neede,
It  voideth  vaine  Glory,  Hope,  and  also  Dreade :

THOMAS  DALTON.  133

It  voideth  Ambitiousnesse,  Extorcion,  and  Excesse,
It  fenceth  Adversity  that  shee  doe  not  oppresse.
He  that  thereof  hath  his  full  intent,
Forsaketh  Extremities,  with  Measure  is  content."

A  certain  mineral  virtue  is  said  to  be  the  efficient  cause
in  the  production  of  metals  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth  ;  it
is  in  correspondence  with  the  virtues  of  the  celestial  spheres.
The  red  stone  lengthens  life,  but  it  is  vain  to  seek  it  till
after  the  confection  of  the  white.

THOMAS  DALTON.

The  only  account  of  this  English  adept  is  preserved  by
Thomas  Norton.  He  was  alive  in  the  year  1450,  and  is
described  as  a  religious  man,  who  enjoyed  a  good  reputa-
tion till,  upon  suspicion  that  he  had  a  large  mass  of  trans-
muting powder,  he  was  taken  from  his  abbey  in  Gloucester-
shire by  Thomas  Herbert,  one  of  the  squires  of  King
Edward,  and  being  brought  into  the  royal  presence  he  was
confronted  by  Debois,  another  of  the  king's  squires,  to
whom  Dalton  was  formerly  a  chaplain.  Debois  alleged  that
Dalton,  in  less  than  twelve  hours,  made  him  a  thousand
pounds  of  good  gold,  and  he  attested  the  fact  upon  oath.
Then  Dalton,  looking  at  Debois,  said,  "  Sir,  you  are  for-
sworn." Debois  acknowledged  that  he  had  vowed  never
to  reveal  the  benefit  which  he  had  received,  but  for  the
king's  sake  and  the  good  of  the  commonwealth  he  ought
not  to  keep  his  oath.  Dalton  now  addressed  the  king,  and
informed  him  that  he  had  received  the  powder  of  projection
from  a  canon  of  Lichfield,  on  condition  that  he  forbore  to
make  use  of  it  till  after  the  death  of  the  donor.  Since  that
event  he  had  been  in  so  much  danger  and  disquietude  on
account  of  its  possession  that  he  had  destroyed  it  in  secret.
The  king  dismissed  Dalton,  giving  him  four  marks  for  his
travelling    expenses ;   but   Herbert   lay   in   wait  for   him

134         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

brought  him  from  Stepney,  and  thence  conveyed  him  to
the  castle  of  Gloucester,  where  every  means  were  vainly
tried  to  induce  him  to  make  the  philosophers'  tincture.

After  four  years'  imprisonment,  Dalton  was  brought  out
to  be  beheaded  in  the  presence  of  Herbert.  He  obeyed
with  resignation  and  joy,  saying  :  "  Blessed  art  thou,  Lord
Jesus  !  I  have  been  too  long  from  you  ;  the  science  you
gave  me  I  have  kept  without  abusing  it ;  I  have  found  no
one  apt  to  be  my  heir,  wherefore,  sweet  Lord,  I  will  render
Thy  gift  to  Thee  again."

Then,  after  some  devout  prayer,  with  a  smiling  counte-
nance he  desired  the  executioner  to  proceed.  Tears
gushed  from  the  eyes  of  Herbert  when  he  beheld  him  so
willing  to  die,  and  saw  that  no  ingenuity  could  wrest  his
secret  from  him.  He  gave  orders  for  his  release.  His
imprisonment  and  threatened  execution  were  contrived
without  the  king's  knowledge  to  intimidate  him  into  com-
pliance. The  iniquitous  devices  having  failed,  Herbert  did
not  dare  to  take  away  his  life.  Dalton  rose  from  the  block
with  a  heavy  countenance  and  returned  to  his  abbey,  much
grieved  at  the  further  prolongation  of  his  earthly  sojourn.
Herbert  died  shortly  after  this  atrocious  act  of  tyranny,  and
Debois  also  came  to  an  untimely  end.  His  father,  Sir
John  Debois,  was  slain  at  the  battle  of  Tewksbury,  May  4,
1471,  and  two  days  after,  as  recorded  in  Stow's  Annates,
he  himself,  James  Debois,  was  taken,  with  several  others  of
the  Lancastrian  party,  from  a  church  where  they  had  fled
for  sanctuary,  and  was  beheaded  on  the  spot.*

SIR   GEORGE   RIPLEY.

This    illustrious    alchemical    philosopher,   whose   works
paved  the  royal  road  to  the  initiation,  in  after  times,  of  his
*  Stow,  "Annates  of  England,"  p.  424,  ed.  1615.

SIR  GEORGE  RIPLEY.  1 35

still  more  illustrious  pupil,  the  sublime  and  mysterious
Philalethes,  entered,  at  an  early  age,  among  the  regular
canons  of  Bridlington,  in  the  diocese  of  York.  The  tran-
quillity of  monastic  life  afforded  him  a  favourable  oppor-
tunity for  the  study  of  the  great  masters  in  transcendental
chemistry,  but  he  found  himself  notwithstanding  incom-
petent for  their  full  comprehension,  and  in  considerable
consequent  disappointment  he  determined  to  travel,  per-
suading himself  that  he  should  discover  in  the  conversa-
tions of  philosophers  what  he  could  not  glean  from  books.
In  Italy,  Germany,  and  France  he  became  acquainted
with  various  men  of  learning,  and  was  present  at  a  trans-
mutation which  was  performed  in  Rome.  He  proceeded
afterwards  to  the  island  of  Rhodes,  where  a  document  is
supposed  to  exist  testifying  that  he  gave  £100,000  to  the
Knights  of  St  John  of  Jerusalem.  He  was  dignified  by
the  Pope,  which  fact,  on  his  return  to  Bridlington,  excited
the  jealousy  of  his  brethren,  and  in  consequence  of  their
hostility  he  entered  the  Carmelite  order  at  Butolph,  in
Lincolnshire,  and,  by  an  indulgence  from  Innocent  VIII.,
had  permission  to  live  in  solitude,  exempt  from  cloistral
observances,  and  in  his  now  uninterrupted  leisure  he  wrote
twenty-four  books,  some  scientific,  and  others  on  devout
subjects.  The  "Twelve  Gates  of  Alchemy"  he  composed
in  147 1,  and  he  declares  that  any  of  his  experiments
recorded  from  1450  to  1470  should  be  entirely  discredited,
as  he  wrote  them  from  theory,  and  found  afterwards  by
practice  that  they  were  untrue.  Hence  it  may  be  con-
cluded that  he  employed  twenty  years  in  mastering  the
secrets  of  the  science.     He  died  at  Butolph  in  1490.

"  The  Twelve  Gates  of  Alchemy"  describe  the  stone  as
a  triune  microcosm,  whence  Ripley  has  been  cited  as  an
adept   of  the  spiritual    chemistry.     He   insists   upon   the

I36         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

necessity  of  proportion  in  its  composition,  and  declares
that  the  principle,  ox  prima  materia,  may  be  found  every-
where. It  flies  with  fowls  in  the  air,  swims  with  fishes  in
the  sea,  it  may  be  discerned  by  the  reason  of  angels,  and
it  governs  man  and  woman.  An  astronomical  year  is
required  for  the  manufacture  of  the  stone.

PICUS  DE  MIRANDOLA.

John  Picus,  Earl  of  Mirandola,  was  born  on  the  24th
February  1463.  He  is  equally  celebrated  for  his  precocity,
the  extent  of  his  learning,  his  prodigious  memory,  and  his
penetrating  intellect.  As  the  pupil  of  Jochanum,  a  Jew,  he
became  early  initiated  in  the  Kabbalistic  interpretation  of
Scripture,  and  at  the  age  of  twenty-four  years  he  pub-
lished nine  hundred  propositions  in  logic,  mathematics,
physics,  divinity,  and  Kabbalism,  collected  from  Greek,
Latin,  Jewish,  and  Arabian  writers.  In  his  treatise  De
Auro,  he  records  his  conviction  of  the  success  of  Hermetic
operations,  and  gives  us  the  following  narrations  : —

"  I  come  now  to  declare  that  which  I  have  beheld  of
this  prodigy,  without  veil  or  obscurity.  One  of  my  friends,
who  is  still  living,  has  made  gold  and  silver  over  sixty
times  in  my  presence.  I  have  seen  it  performed  in  divers
manners,  but  the  expense  of  making  the  silver  with  a
metallic  water  exceeded  the  produce."

In  another  place  he  tells  us  that  "  a  good  man  who  had
not  a  sufficiency  to  support  his  family,  was  reduced  to  the
last  extremity  of  distress  ;  with  an  agitated  mind  he  went
one  night  to  sleep,  and  in  a  dream  he  beheld  a  blessed
angel,  who,  by  means  of  enigmas,  instructed  him  in  the
method  of  making  gold,  and  indicated  to  him,  at  the  same
time,  the  water  he  should  use  to  ensure  success.  At  his
awaking  he  proceeded  to  work  with  this  water,  and  made

PARACELSUS.  137

gold,  truly  in  small  quantity,  yet  sufficient  to  support  his
family.  Twice  he  made  gold  of  iron  and  four  times
of  orpiment.  He  convinced  me  by  the  evidence  of  my
own  eyes  that  the  art  of  transmutation  is  no  fiction."

PARACELSUS.

Philippus  Aureolus  Theophrastus  Bombast  von  Hohen-
heim  was  born  in  the  year  1493,  at  Maria  Einsiedeln,  in
the  canton  of  Zurich,  in  Switzerland.  He  was  descended
from  the  ancient  and  honourable  family  of  Bombast,  which
had  abode  during  many  generations  at  the  castle  of
Hohenheim  near  Stuttgart,  Wlirtemberg.  His  father  was  a
physician  of  repute,  and  in  possession  of  a  large  collection
of  curious  books.  His  mother  had  been  the  matron  of  a
hospital,  and  Theophrastus,  their  only  child,  was  born  one
year  after  their  marriage.  He  is  said  to  have  been  emas-
culated in  his  infancy,  a  tradition  which  may  have  been
invented  to  account  for  his  beardless  and  feminine  appear-
ance, and  for  his  hatred  of  women.

Paracelsus  received  the  first  rudiments  of  education  from
his  father,  and,  as  he  advanced  in  his  studies  and  capacity,
he  was  instructed  in  alchemy,  surgery,  and  medicine.  One
of  the  works  of  Isaac  Holland  fell  into  his  hands,  and
from  that  moment  he  was  inflamed  with  the  ambition  of
curing  diseases  by  medicine  superior  to  the  materia  at  that
time  in  use.  He  performed  several  chemical  operations,
according  to  the  books  of  the  celebrated  Hollander,  and
adopted  from  his  writings  the  ancient  principles  that  a  salt,
mercury,  and  sulphur  form  a  trinity  in  every  substance.
This  system  he  enlarged  and  explained  by  his  own
intellectual  illumination.  He  imbibed  much  of  his  father's
extensive  learning,  and  then  continued  his  studies  under
the  guidance  of  monks  in  the  convent  of  St  Andrew  of

I38         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

Savon,  afterwards  at  the  University  of  Basel,  and  finally
devoted  himself  to  the  occult  sciences  with  the  illustrious
Johann  Trithemius,  Abbot  of  Spanheim,  for  his  teacher
and  director.  In  this  way  he  acquired  "  the  Kabbalah  of
the  spiritual,  astral,  and  material  worlds."  He  was  after-
wards placed  under  the  care  of  Sigismond  Hagger  or
Fagger,  to  be  improved  in  medicine,  surgery,  and  chem-
istry. At  twenty  years  of  age  he  started  on  his  travels
through  Germany,  Hungary,  Italy,  France,  the  Nether-
lands, Denmark,  Sweden,  and  Russia.  In  Muscovy  he  is
said  to  have  been  taken  prisoner  by  the  Tartars,  who
brought  him  before  "the  great  Cham."  His  knowledge  of
medicine  and  chemistry  made  him  a  favourite  at  the  court
of  this  potentate,  who  sent  him  in  company  with  his  son
on  an  embassy  to  Constantinople.  It  was  here,  according
to  Helmont,  that  he  was  taught  the  supreme  secret  of
alchemistry  by  a  generous  Arabian,  who  gave  him  the
universal  dissolvent,  the  Azoth  of  western  adepts,  the
alcahest  or  sophic  fire.  Thus  initiated,  he  is  said  to  have
proceeded  to  India.  On  his  return  to  Europe  he  passed
along  the  Danube  into  Italy,  where  he  served  as  an  army
surgeon,  performing  many  wonderful  cures.

At  the  age  of  thirty-two  he  re-entered  Germany,  and
was  soon  after  invited  to  take  a  professorship  of  physic,
medicine,  and  surgery  at  the  University  of  Basel,  then
illuminated  by  the  presence  of  Erasmus  and  Oporinus.
There,  in  his  lectures,  he  professed  "internal  medicine,"
denounced  the  antiquated  systems  of  Galen  and  other
authorities,  and  began  his  instruction  by  burning  the  works
of  these  masters  in  a  brass  pan  with  sulphur  and  nitre.
He  created  innumerable  enemies  by  his  arrogance  and  his
innovations,  but  the  value  of  his  mineral  medicines  was
proved  by  the  cures  which  he  performed.  These  cures
only  increased  the  hatred  of  his  persecutors,  and  Paracelsus

PARACELSUS.  1 39

with  characteristic  defiance  invited  the  faculty  to  a  lecture,
in  which  he  promised  to  teach  the  greatest  secret  in  medi-
cine. He  began  by  uncovering  a  dish  which  contained
excrement.  The  doctors,  indignant  at  the  insult,  departed
precipitately,  Paracelsus  shouting  after  them  : — "  If  you
will  not  hear  the  mysteries  of  putrefactive  fermentation,
you  are  unworthy  of  the  name  of  physicians."  Subse-
quently, he  came  into  conflict  with  the  municipal  autho-
rities, and  was  forced  to  flee  from  Basel.  He  resumed  his
strolling  life,  lodging  at  public  inns,  drinking  to  excess,  but
still  performing  admirable  cures.  Oporinus  testifies  that
even  during  the  period  of  his  professorship  he  never  seemed
sober.

In  1528,  Paracelsus  proceeded  to  Colmar.  In  1530  he
was  staying  at  Nuremberg,  where  the  faculty  denounced
him  as  an  impostor,  but  he  transfixed  his  opponents  by
curing  in  a  few  days  some  desperate  cases  of  elephantiasis.
"  Testimonials  to  this  effect,"  says  Hartmann,  his  latest
biographer,  "  may  still  be  found  in  the  archives  of  the  city
of  Nuremberg."  He  continued  his  wanderings  and  his
intemperate  manner  of  life,  dying  on  the  24th  of  September
1541.

The  actual  manner  of  his  death  has  been  variously
recounted.  The  original  "  Lives  of  Alchemysticall  Philoso-
phers "  says  that  it  occurred  on  a  bench  of  the  kitchen  fire
of  the  inn  at  Strasburg.  Dr  Hartmann,  on  the  other  hand,
tells  us  that  he  "  went  to  Maehren,  Kaernthen,  Krain,  and
Hongary,  and  finally  landed  in  Salzburg,  to  which  place
he  was  invited  by  the  Prince  Palatine,  Duke  Ernst  of
Bavaria,  who  was  a  great  lover  of  the  secret  arts.  In  that
place,  Paracelsus  obtained  at  last  the  fruits  of  his  long
labours  and  of  a  wide-spread  fame.  But  he  was  not
destined  to  enjoy  a  long  time  the  rest  he  so  richly
deserved.   .    .    .    He  died,  after  a  short  sickness  (at  the  age

I40         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

of  forty-eight  years  and  three  days),  in  a  small  room  of  the
'  White  Horse '  Inn,  near  the  quay,  and  his  body  was
buried  in  the  graveyard  of  St  Sebastian."  His  death  is
supposed  to  have  been  hastened  by  a  scuffle  with  assassins
in  the  pay  of  the  orthodox  medical  faculty.

The  last  commentator  on  Paracelsus,  Dr  Franz  Hart-
mann,  has  devoted  a  chapter  to  the  alchemical  and  astro-
logical teachings  of  the  seer  of  Hohenheim.  The  first  art,
according  to  Paracelsus,  separates  the  pure  from  the
impure,  and  develops  species  out  of  primordial  matter.  It
perfects  what  Nature  has  left  imperfect,  and,  therefore,  its
principles  are  of  universal  application,  and  are  not  restricted
to  the  metallic  and  mineral  kingdoms.  Gold  can  be  made
by  physical  chemistry,  but  the  process  is  poor  and  unpro-
ductive in  comparison  with  the  gold  which  can  be  produced
by  an  exercise  of  the  occult  powers  which  exist  in  the  soul
of  man.  Actual  and  material  gold  can  be  psycho-chemically
manufactured.  By  this  amazing  theory,  Paracelsus  created
a  new  school  of  alchemy,  which  abandoned  experimental
research,  and  sought  within  themselves  the  secret,  subject,
and  end  of  alchemystical  philosophy.

DENIS   ZACHAIRE.

It  appears  that  the  true  name  of  this  persevering  and
indefatigable  seeker  after  the  end  and  truth  of  alchemy  has
not  in  reality  come  down  to  us,  that  which  is  placed  at  the
head  of  his  Opuscidum  Chimicum  being  simply  pseudony-
mous. It  is  to  this  little  work  that  we  are  indebted  for  one
of  the  most  singular  histories  in  the  annals  of  the  Hermetic
art.

Denis  Zachaire  was  born  of  a  noble  family,  in  an  unmen-
tioned  part  of  Guienne,  during  the  year  1510.  He  was
sent,  as  a  youth,  to  Bordeaux,  under  the  caue  of  a  tutor,  to

DENIS  ZACHAIRE.  J  4 1

prosecute  the  study  of  philosophy  and  belles  lettres.  His
preceptor,  however,  had  a  passion  for  alchemy,  and  inocu-
lated his  pupil  with  the  fatal  fever  of  the  sages.  They
speedily  abandoned  the  common  academical  courses  for
the  thorny  pathways  of  the  magnum  opus,  and  Denis,  in
particular,  devoted  himself  to  the  assiduous  compilation  of
a  vast  volume  of  Hermetic  receipts,  indicating  a  thousand
processes,  with  a  thousand  various  materials,  for  the
successful  manufacture  of  gold.  From  Bordeaux  he  pro-
ceeded to  Toulouse,  still  in  the  society  of  his  tutor,  and  for
the  ostensible  study  of  law,  but  in  reality  for  the  experi-
mental practice  of  alchemy.  Two  hundred  crowns  with
which  they  were  supplied  for  their  maintenance  during  the
next  two  years  were  speedily  expended  in  the  purchase  of
furnaces,  instruments,  and  drugs,  for  the  literal  execution
of  the  processes  contained  in  the  books  of  the  adepts.

"  Before  the  end  of  the  year,"  as  he  himself  informs  us,
"  my  two  hundred  crowns  were  gone  in  smoke,  and  my
tutor  died  of  a  fever  he  took  in  summer  from  his  close
attention  to  the  furnace,  which  he  erected  in  his  chamber,
and  stayed  there  continually  in  extreme  heat.  His  death
afflicted  me  much,  and  still  more  as  my  parents  refused
to  supply  me  with  money,  except  what  was  just  necessary
for  my  support.  I  was  therefore  unable  to  proceed  in  my
grand  v/ork.

"To  overcome  these  difficulties  I  went  home  in  1535,
being  of  age,  to  put  myself  out  of  guardianship ;  and  I
disposed  of  some  of  my  property  for  four  hundred  crowns.
This  sum  was  necessary  to  execute  a  process  which  was
given  me  in  Toulouse,  by  an  Italian,  who  said  he  saw  it
proved.  I  kept  him  living  with  me,  to  see  the  end  of
his  process.

"  We  dissolved  gold  and  silver  in  various  sorts  of  strong
waters,  but  it  was  all  in  vain  ;  we  did  not  recover  from

142         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

the  solution  one  half  of  the  gold  and  silver  which  we  had
put  into  it.  My  four  hundred  crowns  were  reduced  to
two  hundred  and  thirty,  of  which  I  gave  twenty  to  the
Italian,  to  proceed  to  Milan,  where,  he  said,  the  author  of
the  process  lived,  and  whence  he  would  return  with  his
explanations.  I  remained  at  Toulouse  all  the  winter,
awaiting  him,  and  I  might  have  tarried  there  still,  as  I
never  have  heard  of  him  since.

"  In  the  ensuing  summer  the  city  being  visited  by  the
plague,  I  went  to  Cahors,  and  there  continued  for  six
months.  I  did  not  lose  sight  of  my  work,  and  became
acquainted  with  an  old  man  who  was  called  the  philo-
sopher, a  name  given  in  the  country  to  any  one  of  superior
information.  I  communicated  to  him  my  practices  and
asked  his  advice.  He  mentioned  ten  or  twelve  processes
which  he  thought  better  than  others.  I  returned  to
Toulouse  when  the  plague  ceased,  and  renewed  my
labours  accordingly.  The  only  consequence  was  that
my  money  was  all  spent,  except  one  hundred  and  seventy
crowns.  To  continue  my  operations  with  more  certainty,
I  made  acquaintance  with  an  abb6,  who  dwelt  in  the
neighbourhood  of  this  city.  He  was  taken  with  a  passion
for  the  same  pursuit  as  myself,  and  he  informed  me  that
one  of  his  friends,  who  lived  with  Cardinal  Armanac,  had
sent  him  a  process  from  Rome  which  he  believed  genuine,
but  it  would  cost  two  hundred  crowns.  I  agreed  to  furnish
one  half  of  this  sum,  and  he  gave  the  rest,  so  we  began
to  work  together.  Our  process  required  a  large  supply  of
spirits  of  wine.  I  purchased  a  cask  of  excellent  wine,
from  which  I  drew  the  spirit  and  rectified  it  many  times.
We  took  two  pounds  weight  of  it  and  half  a  pound  weight
of  gold,  which  we  had  calcined  for  a  month.  These  were
included  in  a  pelican  and  placed  in  a  furnace.  This  work
lasted  a  year,  but,  not  to  remain  idle,  we  made  some  other

DENIS  ZACHAIRE.  1 43

experiments  to  amuse  ourselves,  and  from  which  we
expected  to  draw  sufficient  profit  to  pay  the  cost  of  our
great  work.

"The  year  1537  passed  over  without  any  change  appear-
ing in  the  subject  of  our  labours.  We  might  have  re-
mained through  our  whole  lives  in  the  same  state,  for  we
should  have  known  that  the  perfect  metals  are  unaltered
by  vegetable  or  animal  substances.  We  took  out  our
powder  and  made  projection  upon  hot  quicksilver,  but  it
was  in  vain !  Judge  then  of  our  grief,  especially  as  the
abbe  had  notified  to  all  his  monks  that  they  would  have
to  melt  the  lead  cistern  of  their  house  in  order  that  he
might  convert  it  into  gold  as  soon  as  our  operations  were
finished.

"  My  bad  success  could  not  make  me  desist.  I  again
raised  four  hundred  crowns  on  my  property  ;  the  abbe  did
the  same,  and  I  set  out  for  Paris,  a  city  containing  more
alchemists  than  any  other  in  the  world.  I  resolved  to
remain  there  as  long  as  the  eight  hundred  crowns  lasted,
or  until  I  succeeded  in  my  object.  This  journey  drew  on
me  the  displeasure  of  my  relations,  and  the  censure  of
my  friends,  who  imagined  I  was  a  studious  lawyer.  How-
ever, I  made  them  believe  that  the  design  of  my  sojourn
in  Paris  was  the  purchase  of  a  situation  in  the  law  courts.

"After  travelling  for  fifteen  days  I  arrived  at  Paris  in
January  1539.  I  remained  a  month  almost  unknown,  but
no  sooner  had  I  visited  the  furnace  makers  and  conversed
with  some  amateurs  than  I  became  acquainted  with  more
than  a  hundred  artists,  who  were  all  at  work  in  different
ways.  Some  laboured  to  extract  the  mercury  of  metals  and
afterwards  to  fix  it.  A  variety  of  systems  were  held  by
others,  and  scarcely  a  day  passed  in  which  some  of  them
did  not  visit  me,  even  on  Sundays  and  the  most  sacred
festivals  of  the  Church,  to  hear  what  I  had  done.

144         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

"  In  these  conversations  one  said  : — '  If  I  had  the  means
to  begin  again,  I  should  produce  something  good.'  Another
— '  Would  that  my  vessel  had  been  strong  enough  to  resist
the  force  of  what  it  contained.'  Another — 'If I  had
possessed  a  round  copper  vessel  well  closed,  I  would  have
fixed  mercury  with  silver.'  There  was  not  one  without  a
reasonable  excuse  for  his  failure,  but  I  was  deaf  to  all  their
discourses,  recollecting  my  experience  as  the  dupe  of
similar  expectations.

"  I  was  tempted,  nevertheless,  by  a  Greek  who  had  a
process  with  cinnabar,  which  failed.  At  the  same  time  I
became  acquainted  with  a  strange  gentleman,  newly  arrived,
who  often,  in  my  presence,  sold  the  fruit  of  his  operations
to  the  goldsmiths.  I  was  a  long  time  frequenting  his  com-
pany, but  he  did  not  consent  to  inform  me  of  his  secret.
At  last  I  prevailed  over  him,  but  it  was  only  a  refinement
of  metals  more  ingenious  than  the  rest.  I  failed  not  to
write  to  the  abbe,  at  Toulouse,  enclosing  a  copy  of  the
process  of  the  stranger,  and  imagining  that  I  had  attained
some  useful  knowledge,  he  advised  me  to  remain  another
year  at  Paris,  since  I  had  made  so  good  a  beginning.

"  After  all,  as  to  the  philosophers'  stone,  I  succeeded  no
better  than  before.  I  had  been  three  years  at  Paris,  and
my  money  was  nearly  expended,  when  I  had  a  letter  from
the  abbe,  informing  me  that  he  had  something  to  communi-
cate, and  that  I  should  join  him  as  soon  as  possible.

"  On  my  arrival  at  Toulouse,  I  found  that  he  had  a  letter
from  King  Henry  of  Navarre,  who  was  a  lover  of  philosophy ,
and  who  requested  that  I  should  proceed  to  Pau,  in  Berne,
to  teach  him  the  secret  I  had  received  from  the  stranger  at
Paris.  He  would  recompense  me  with  three  or  four
thousand  crowns.  The  mention  of  this  sum  exhilarated  the
abbe,  and  he  never  let  me  rest  till  I  set  out  to  wait  on  the
prince.     I  arrived  at  Pau  in  May  1542.     I  found  the  prince

DENIS  ZACHAIRE.  145

a  very  curious  personage.  By  his  command  I  went  to  work,
and  succeeded  according  to  the  process  I  knew.  When  it
was  finished  I  obtained  the  expected  recompense,  but
although  the  king  wished  to  serve  me  further,  he  was
dissuaded  by  the  lords  of  his  court,  even  by  those  who  had
engaged  me  to  come  to  him.  He  dismissed  me  with  great
acknowledgments,  desiring  me  to  see  if  there  was  anything
in  his  estates  which  would  gratify  me,  such  as  confiscations
or  the  like,  and  that  he  would  give  them  to  me  with  pleasure.
These  promises,  which  meant  nothing,  did  not  lead  me  to
entertain  the  hopes  of  a  courtier,  and  I  returned  to  the
abbe  at  Toulouse.

"  On  my  road  I  heard  of  a  religious  man,  who  was
very  skilful  in  natural  philosophy.  I  went  to  visit  him ;
he  lamented  my  misfortunes,  and  said,  with  a  friendly  zeal,
that  he  advised  me  to  amuse  myself  no  longer  with  these
various  particular  operations,  which  were  all  false  and  sophis-
tical, but  that  I  should  rather  peruse  the  best  books  of  the
ancient  philosophers,  as  well  to  know  the  true  matter  as  the
right  order  that  should  be  pursued  in  the  practice  of  this
science.

"  I  felt  the  truth  of  this  safe  counsel,  but  before  I  put  it  in
execution,  I  went  to  see  my  friend  at  Toulouse,  to  give  him
an  account  of  the  eight  hundred  crowns  that  we  had  put  in
common,  and  to  divide  with  him  the  recompense  I  had
received  from  the  King  of  Navarre.  If  he  proved  not
content  with  all  I  told  him,  he  was  still  less  so  at  the  resolu-
tion I  had  taken  to  discontinue  my  operations.  Of  our
eight  hundred  crowns,  we  had  but  eighty-six  left.  I
departed  from  him,  and  returned  home,  intending  to  go  to
Paris,  and  there  remain  until  I  was  fixed  in  my  theory  of
reading  the  works  of  the  adepts.  I  reached  Paris  in  1 546,
and  remained  there  a  year,  assiduously  studying  the  Turba
Philosophorum,  the  good  Trevisan,  the  "  Remonstrance  of

K

I46        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

Nature,"  and  some  other  of  the  best  books.     But  as  I  had
no  first  principles,  I  knew  not  on  what  to  determine.

"At  length  I  went  out  of  my  solitude,  not  to  see  my  old
acquaintances,  the  searchers  after  particular  tinctures  and
minor  works,  but  to  frequent  those  who  proceeded  in  the
great  process  by  the  books  of  the  genuine  adepts.  I  was,
nevertheless,  disappointed  herein,  by  the  confusion  and
disagreement  of  their  theories,  by  the  variety  of  their  works,
and  of  their  different  operations.  Excited  by  a  sort  of  inspira-
tion, I  gave  myself  up  to  the  study  of  Raymond  Lully  and
Arnold  de  Villa  Nova.  My  reading  and  meditation  con-
tinued another  year.  I  then  formed  my  plan,  and  only
waited  to  sell  the  remainder  of  my  land  to  enable  me  to  go
home,  and  put  my  resolution  into  practice.  I  commenced
at  Christmas,  1549,  and  after  some  preparations,  having
procured  everything  that  was  necessary,  I  began  my
process,  not  without  inquietude  and  difficulty.  A  friend
said  to  me  : — "  What  are  you  going  to  do  ?  have  you
not  lost  enough  by  this  delusion  ? "  Another  assured  me
that  if  I  continued  to  purchase  so  much  coal,  I  should  be
suspected  of  counterfeiting  coin,  of  which  he  had  already
heard  a  rumour.  Another  said  I  ought  to  follow  my
business  of  a  lawyer.  But  I  was  chiefly  tormented  by  my
relations,  who  reproached  me  bitterly  with  my  conduct,  and
threatened  to  bring  the  officers  of  justice  into  my  house  to
break  my  furnaces  in  pieces.

"I  leave  you  to  judge  my  trouble  and  grief  at  this
opposition.  I  found  no  consolation  but  in  my  work,
which  prospered  from  day  to  day,  and  to  which  I  was
very  attentive.  The  interruption  of  all  commerce,  which
was  occasioned  by  the  plague,  gave  me  the  opportunity  of
great  solitude,  in  which  I  could  examine  with  undisturbed
satisfaction  the  success  of  the  three  colours  which  mark  the
true  work.     I  thus  arrived  at  the  perfection  of  the  tincture,

DENIS  ZACHAIRE.  1 47

and  made  an  essay  of  its  virtue  on  common  quicksilver,  on
Easter  Monday,  1550.  In  less  than  an  hour  it  was  con-
verted into  pure  gold.  You  may  guess  how  joyful  I  was,
but  I  took  care  not  to  boast.  I  thanked  God  for  the
favour  he  shewed  me,  and  prayed  that  I  should  be
permitted  to  use  it  but  for  His  glory.

"  The  next  day  I  set  out  to  find  the  abbe,  according  to
the  promise  we  gave  each  other,  to  communicate  our
discoveries.  On  my  way,  I  called  at  the  house  of  the
religious  man  who  had  assisted  me  by  his  good  advice.  I
had  the  grief  to  find  that  both  he  and  the  abbe  had  been
dead  about  six  months.  I  did  not  go  back  to  my  house,
but  sought  another  place,  to  await  the  arrival  of  one  of  my
relations  whom  I  had  left  at  my  dwelling.  I  sent  him  a
procuration  to  sell  all  that  I  possessed,  both  house  and
furniture,  to  pay  my  debts,  and  to  distribute  the  remainder
among  those  of  my  relations  who  were  in  want.  He  soon
after  rejoined  me,  and  we  set  out  for  Lausanne,  in
Switzerland,  resolved  to  pass  our  days  without  ostentation
in  some  of  the  celebrated  cities  of  Germany."

In  his  unknown  retreat*  the  adept  recorded  his  adventures
and  experiences  when  in  search  of  the  philosophical  stone,
nt  divertarem  bonos  piosque  vivos,  a  sophisticationibus,  ad
viam  rectam  perfectionis  in  hoc  opere  divino.  His  little
work  is  entitled  simply  Opusculum  Chemiciim ;  it  opens
with  the  romantic  narrative  which  I  have  cited  almost
in  extenso.  It  calls  Hermes  magnns  propheta  noster,  insists
that  the  art  is  the  gift  of  God  alone  on  the  authority
of  all  the  initiates,  and  quotes  so  largely  from  previous
writers  that  it  can  scarcely  be  considered  an  original  work
on  the  Hermetic  philosophy.

The  life  of  Bernard  Trevisan  has  abundantly  testified
to   the   physical   nature   of   his    object,   which   is   amply

*  See  Appendix  I.

I48         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

confirmed  by  this  treatise.  The  methods  of  projection
upon  metals,  the  composition  of  precious  stones,  and  the
application  of  the  tincture  as  a  medicine  for  the  human
body,  are  successively  considered.  One  grain  of  the
divinum  opus,  dissolved  in  white  wine,  transmutes  that
liquor  into  a  rich  citron  colour,  and  has  innumerable
hygienic  uses.

BERIGARD  OF  PISA.

The  following  account  of  a  transmutation  performed  by
himself,  is  recorded  by  the  celebrated  Italian  philosopher,
Claude  Berigard,  and  will  be  found  on  the  twenty-fifth
page  of  his  Circulus  Pisanus,  published  at  Florence  in  1641.

"  I  did  not  think  that  it  was  possible  to  convert  quick-
silver into  gold,  but  an  acquaintance  thought  proper  to
remove  my  doubt.  He  gave  me  about  a  drachm  of  a
powder  nearly  of  the  colour  of  the  wild  poppy,  and  having
a  smell  like  calcined  sea-salt.  To  avoid  all  imposition,
I  purchased  a  crucible,  charcoal,  and  quicksilver,  in  which
I  was  certain  that  there  was  no  gold  mixed.  Ten
drachms  of  quicksilver  which  I  heated  on  the  fire  were  on
projection  transmuted  into  nearly  the  same  weight  of
good  gold,  which  stood  all  tests.  Had  I  not  performed
this  operation  in  the  most  careful  manner,  taking  every
precaution  against  the  possibility  of  doubt,  I  should  not
have  believed  it,  but  I  am  satisfied  of  the  fact."

CHARNOCK.

Thomas  Charnock  was  born  in  the  Isle  of  Thanet,  in
the  year  1524.  He  calls  himself  an  unlettered  scholar,
and  student  in  astronomy  and  philosophy.  He  practised
surgery,  and,  though  he  knew  only  the  rudiments  of  Latin,

THOMAS  CHARNOCK.  149

it  appears  that  he  was  famous  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Salisbury,  where  he  had  established  himself,  for  his  accom-
plishments in  the  liberal  sciences.     He  had  two  masters  in

alchemy,  the  first  being  Sir  James  S ,  a  priest,  dwelling

in  the  cloisters,  near  Salisbury,  who  informed  Charnock
that  he  did  not  derive  his  knowledge  from  any  living
adept,  but  that  by  meditation  upon  the  words  of  the
philosophers,  he  had  mastered  the  principal  secrets  of
alchemy  as  he  lay  in  his  bed,  and  had  accordingly  suc-
ceeded in  making  the  silver  powder.

The  other  master  who  instructed  Charnock  was  a  blind
man,  led  by  a  boy,  whom  the  neophyte  accidentally  dis-
covered at  an  inn  among  other  travellers,  by  a  few  words
of  the  occult  chemistry,  which  he  perceived  in  his  conversa-
tion. As  soon  as  the  company  had  retired,  Charnock
questioned  the  speaker,  and  requested  instruction  in
natural  philosophy.  To  this  the  adept  objected  that  he
was  unacquainted  with  his  interrogator,  saying  he  would
render  up  his  knowledge  to  God  who  gave  it,  if  he  did  not
meet  with  a  certain  Master  Charnock,  the  fame  of  whose
learning  and  charity  had  reached  him.

At  these  words  Charnock  made  himself  known,  and  the
old  man  discoursed  with  him  for  an  hour,  during  which
time  he  found  him  expert  in  many  mysteries  of  the  sacred
science.  He  promised  Charnock  that  if  he  made  a  vow
not  to  reveal  the  secret  for  gold,  preferment,  or  through
affection  for  great  men,  but  only  at  death  to  one  who  was
truly  devoted  to  the  search  into  nature,  he  would  make
him  the  heir  of  his  knowledge.  Accordingly,  on  the
following  Sunday  they  received  the  Eucharist  together,
and  then,  withdrawing  into  the  middle  of  a  large  field,
the  boy  was  sent  away  out  of  hearing,  and,  in  a  few  words,
the  blind  man  uttered  "  the  mystery  of  mineral  prudence."
Their  conversations  were  continued  for  nine  days.     The

I50         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

secrets  of  alchemy  were  disclosed,  and  the  adept  also
related  his  own  private  history,  acquainting  Charnock  that
his  name  was  William  Bird,  that  he  had  been  a  prior  of
Bath,  and  had  defrayed  the  expense  of  repairing  the
abbey  church  from  treasure  which  he  had  acquired  by
means  of  the  red  and  white  elixirs.  At  the  suppression  of
the  abbey,  he  concealed  the  inestimable  powder  in  the
wall,  and  returning  in  ten  days  it  was  gone.  He  found  a
few  rags  in  the  place  where  he  had  left  it.  This  misfortune
almost  deprived  him  of  his  senses  ;  he  wandered  about,
and  lost  his  sight.  He  was  therefore  unable  to  repeat
his  process,  and  continued  to  travel  over  the  country,  led
by  a  boy.  He  had  received  his  Hermetic  knowledge  from
a  servant  of  Ripley.

At  the  time  of  this  communication,  Charnock  was
twenty-eight  years  old,  and  two  years  after  his  first  master
fell  sick  while  attending  his  furnace  for  the  completion  of
the  red  stone.  He  sent  for  Charnock,  made  him  the  heir
of  his  work,  and  died  after  giving  him  instructions  how  to
proceed.  Charnock  began  his  operations  on  the  materials
left  by  his  leader,  and  was  much  perplexed  by  the  difficulty
of  keeping  the  fire  equal.  He  often  started  out  of  his  sleep
to  examine  the  fuel ;  but  after  all  his  care,  which  continued
during  the  space  of  several  months,  the  frame  of  wood  that
covered  the  furnace  took  fire  during  a  short  period  of  his
absence,  and  when,  smelling  the  burning,  he  ran  up  to  his
laboratory,  he  discovered  that  his  work  was  completely
destroyed.  This  occurred  on  January  1,  1555.  To  repair
the  mischief  he  was  obliged  to  recommence  at  the  first  part
of  the  process,  and  he  hired  a  servant  to  assist  in  taking  care
of  the  fire.  In  the  course  of  two  months  certain  signs  filled
him  with  hopes  of  success,  when  his  dependence  on  his
servant  proved  the  ruin  of  his  work.  He  discovered  that
this  unfaithful  assistant  would  let  the  fire  nearly  out,  and

GIOVANNI  BRACCESCO.  I  5  I

then,  to  conceal  his  neglect,  would  rekindle  it  with  grease
till  it  was  so  hot  as  to  scorch  the  matter  beyond  recovery.

In  the  third  attempt,  Charnock  resolved  to  proceed
without  help.  His  fire  cost  him  three  pounds  a  week,
and  he  was  obliged  to  sell  some  rings  and  jewels  to
maintain  it.  He  made  good  progress  in  the  course  of
eight  months,  and  expected  to  be  rewarded  in  a  little  time
for  all  his  labours ;  but  at  this  critical  period  he  was
impressed  to  serve  as  a  soldier  at  the  siege  of  Calais.
Furious  with  disappointment,  he  took  a  hatchet,  smashed
his  glasses,  furnace,  and  apparatus,  and  threw  them  out  of
the  house.

He  wrote  his  "Breviary  of  Philosophy"  in  1557,  and
the  "Enigma  of  Alchemy"  in  1572,  with  a  memorandum,
dated  1574,  when  he  was  fifty  years  old.  Therein  he
declares  his  attainment  of  the  gold-producing  powder  when
his  hairs  were  white.  The  "  Breviary  "  claims  to  describe
all  the  vessels  and  instruments  which  are  required  in  the
science ;  a  potter,  a  joiner,  and  a  glassmaker  must  lend
their  several  services.  The  address  of  one  of  these  arti-
ficers, specially  recommended  by  the  author,  is  said  to  be
Chiddinfold  in  Sussex ;  he  could  manufacture  egg-shaped
glasses  which  opened  and  shut  "  as  close  as  a  hair."  The
regulation  of  the  philosophical  fire  is  described  in  this
curious  poem,  but  the  rest  of  its  information  is  of  a  purely
autobiographical  kind.

GIOVANNI  BRACCESCO.

This  alchemist  of  Brescia  flourished  in  the  sixteenth
century.  He  was  the  author  of  a  commentary  on  Geber,
which  is  not  supposed  to  cast  much  light  on  the  obscurities
of  the  Arabian  philosopher.  The  most  curious  of  his  ori-
ginal treatises  is  Legno  della  Vita,  vel  quale  si  dichiara  la

152         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

medecina  per  la  quale  i  nostri  primi  padri  vivevano  nove
cento  anni,  Rome,  1542,  8vo. — "The  Wood  of  Life,  wherein
is  revealed  the  medicine  by  means  of  which  our  Primeval
Ancestors  lived  for  Nine  Hundred  Years."  This  work,
together  with  La  Esposizione  di  Geber  Filosophe,  Venice,
1 544,  8vo,  was  translated  into  Latin,  and  may  be  found  in
the  collections  of  Gratarole  and  Mangetus.  They  were
also  published  separately  under  the  title  De  Alchimia
dialogi  duo,  Lugd.,  1548,  4to.  The  Wood  of  Life  is  one
of  the  innumerable  names  given  by  the  alchemists  to  the
matured  and  perfected  stone,  the  composition  whereof  is
the  accomplishment  of  the  magnum  opus.  It  is  more
generally  denominated  the  Universal  Balsam  or  Panacea,
which  cures  all  diseases  and  insures  to  its  most  blessed
possessor  an  unalterable  youth.  The  name  Wood  of  Life  is
bestowed  by  the  Jews  on  the  two  sticks  which  confine  the
scroll  of  the  Law.  They  are  convinced  that  a  simple  con-
tact with  these  sacred  rods  strengthens  the  eyesight  and
restores  health.  They  also  hold  that  there  is  no  better
means  of  facilitating  the  accouchement  of  females  than  to
cause  them  to  behold  these  vitalising  sticks,  which,  how-
ever, they  are  in  no  wise  permitted  to  touch.*

The  work  of  Braccesco  is  written  in  the  form  of  a  dia-
logue, and  is  explanatory  of  the  Hermetic  principles  of
Raymond  Lully,  one  of  the  interlocutors,  who  instructs  an
enthusiastic  disciple  in  the  arcane  principles  of  the  divine
art,  the  disciple  in  question  being  in  search  of  a  safeguard
against  the  numerous  infirmities  and  weaknesses  of  the
"  humid  radical."  Such  a  medicine  is  declared  by  the
master  to  be  extracted  from  a  single  substance,  which  is
the  sophic  aqua  metallorum.  The  dialogue  is  of  interest,  as
it  shows  the  connection  in  the  mind  of  the  writer  between
the  development  of  metallic  perfection  and  the  physical
regeneration  of  humanity.

*  Dictionnaire  des  Sciences  Occultes,  i.  p.  232.

JOHN  DEE.  153

LEONARDI  FIORAVANTI.

Doctor,  surgeon,  and  alchemist  of  the  sixteenth  century,
this  Italian  was  a  voluminous  author,  who  is  best  known
by  his  "  Summary  of  the  Arcana  of  Medicine,  Surgery,  and
Alchemy,"  published  in  octavo  at  Venice  in  1 571,  and
which  has  been  reprinted  several  times.  It  contains  an
application  of  Hermetic  methods  and  principles  to  the
science  of  medicine,  but  the  author's  account  of  the  petra
philosophorum  shows  the  designation  to  be  of  a  purely
arbitrary  kind,  for  it  is  a  mixture  of  mercury,  nitre,  and
other  substances,  intended  to  act  on  the  stomach,  and  has
no  connection  with  the  transmuting  lapis  of  the  alchemical
sages.

JOHN  DEE.

The  life  of  this  pseudo-adept,  and  of  Edward  Kelly,  his
companion  in  alchemy,  is  involved  in  a  cloud  of  necromancy
and  magico-Hermetical  marvels,  so  that  the  fabulous  and
historical  elements  are  not  to  be  easily  separated.

The  true  name  of  Edward  Kelly  is  supposed  to  have
been  Talbot.  He  is  said  to  have  been  born  at  Worcester
in  1555,  and  to  have  followed  the  profession  of  a  lawyer  in
London.  His  talents  in  penmanship  appear  to  have  been
utilised  in  the  falsification  of  deeds.  He  was  prosecuted
at  Lancaster,  according  to  a  narrative  of  his  enemies,
for  an  offence  of  this  nature,  and  was  condemned  to
lose  his  ears.  By  some  he  is  said  to  have  suffered
this  punishment,*  by  others  to  have  evaded  it,  seeking
safety  in  Wales,  where  he  lodged  at  an  obscure  inn,
and  concealed  his  identity  by  adopting  a  new  name.
During  this  sojourn  an  old  manuscript  was  shown  him  by

*  Morhof,  Epistola  ad  Langlelotum  de  Metallorim  Transmulatione.

154        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

the  mnkeeper,  which  was  indecipherable  by  himself  or  his
neighbours.  The  so-called  Edward  Kelly,  being  initiated
into  the  mysteries  of  ancient  writing,  discovered  it  to  be  a
treatise  on  transmutation,  and  his  curiosity  was  highly
excited.  He  inquired  as  to  its  history,  and  was  told  that
it  had  been  discovered  in  the  tomb  of  a  bishop  who  had
been  buried  in  a  neighbouring  church,  and  whose  tomb  had
been  sacrilegiously  uptorn  by  some  wretched  heretical
fanatics  at  that  epoch  of  furious  religiomania  and  rampant
Elizabethan  persecution.  The  object  of  this  desecration
was  the  discovery  of  concealed  treasures  in  the  resting-place
of  the  prelate,  to  whom  immense  riches  were  attributed
by  popular  tradition.  The  impiety  was,  however,  rewarded
by  nothing  but  the  manuscript  in  question,  and  two  small
ivory  bottles,  respectively  containing  a  ponderous  red  and
white  powder.  These  pearls  beyond  price  were  rejected  by
the  pigs  of  apostasy ;  one  of  them  was  shattered  on  the
spot,  and  its  ruddy,  celestine  contents  for  the  most  part
lost.  The  remnant,  together  with  the  remaining  bottle  and
the  unintelligible  manuscript,  were  speedily  disposed  of  to
the  innkeeper  in  exchange  for  a  skinful  of  wine.  The
unbroken  bottle  was  transferred  by  the  new  owner  as  a
plaything  to  his  children,  but  the  providence  which  in  the
main  overwatches  the  accomplishment  of  the  sublime  act
preserved  its  contents  intact.  When  Edward  Kelly,  with
an  assumed  antiquarian  indifference  about  objects  which
were  more  curious  than  valuable,  offered  a  pound  sterling
for  all  the  articles,  a  bargain  was  promptly  effected.  The
lawyer  was  by  no  means  an  alchemist,  but  he  believed  him-
self possessed  of  a  Hermetic  treasure ;  he  determined,  at
all  risks,  to  return  to  London,  and  consult  with  his  friend
Dr  Dee,  who  abode  in  a  cottage  at  Mortlake,  and  who,  in
matters  of  magical  devilment,  and  in  the  tortuosities  of  the
occult,  was  considered  a  man  of  men.

JOHN  DEE.  155

Whether  he  had  been  accused  of  forgery,  whether  he  had
lost  his  ears,  or  not,  the  discovery  of  Edward  Kelly  caused
the  necromantic  doctor  to  be  blind  to  his  faults  or  his
crimes ;  he  at  once  set  to  work  in  his  company,  in  the  year
1579,  and  in  the  month  of  December  a  stupendous  success
was  the  crown  of  their  labour  in  common.  The  richness
of  Kelly's  tincture  proved  to  be  one  upon  two  hundred
and  seventy-two  thousand  two  hundred  and  thirty  ;  but
they  lost  much  gold  in  experiments  before  they  knew  the
extent  of  its  power.  In  Dr  Dee's  "  Diary  in  Germany  "  he
mentions  the  book  of  St  Dunstan,  which  is  probably  the
manuscript  of  Kelly,  and  also  the  powder  "  found  at  the
digging  in  England,"  which  indicates  some  foundation  for
the  narrative  just  given.  The  place  where  the  treasure
was  obtained  is  reported  to  have  been  the  ruins  of  Glaston-
bury Abbey,  founded  by  St  Dunstan.  The  last  abbot  was
hanged  by  Henry  VIII.  for  his  adherence  to  the  Papal
cause.

Kelly  appears  to  have  taken  up  his  quarters  at  Islington.
In  June  1583  an  attachment  was  issued  against  him  for
coining,  of  which  his  companion  declares  him  guiltless.
In  the  following  September,  Dr  Dee,  his  wife  and  children,
and  Edward  Kelly,  with  his  wife,  accompanied  by  a  certain
Lord  Albert  Alasco,  of  Siradia,  in  Poland,  departed  from
London  for  Cracow.  As  soon  as  they  had  arrived  in  the
north  of  Germany,  Dr  Dee  received  a  letter  from  one  of
his  friends  in  England,  informing  him  that  his  library  at
Mortlake  had  been  seized  and  partially  destroyed,  on  the
vulgar  report  of  his  unlawful  studies,  and  that  his  rents
and  property  were  sequestered.  Despite  the  possession  of
the  Donum  Dei,  all  parties  appear  to  have  been  in  con-
siderable penury  in  consequence.

In  1585  we  find  them  at  Prague,  then  the  metropolis  of
alchemy,  and  the  headquarters  of  adepts  and  adeptship.

I56         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

Edward  Kelly  and  his  companions  presently  abounded  in
money,  and  the  owner  of  the  Hermaic  Benediction  made
no  secret  of  his  prize  or  his  powers,  indulged  in  all  kinds
of  extravagance,  performed  continual  projections  for  him-
self and  his  friends,  as  well  as  for  many  persons  of  distinc-
tion who  sought  his  acquaintance.  Much  of  the  result  was
distributed.  The  transmutations  of  Kelly  at  this  period
are  attested  by  several  writers,  including  Gassendus.  The
most  authenticated  and  remarkable,  according  to  Figuier,
is  that  which  took  place  in  the  house  of  the  imperial
physician,  Thaddeus  de  Hazek,  when,  by  the  mediation  of
a  single  drop  of  a  red  oil,  Kelly  transmuted  a  pound  of
mercury  into  excellent  gold,  the  superabundant  virtue  of
the  agent  leaving  in  addition  at  the  bottom  of  the  crucible
a  small  ruby.  Dr  Nicholas  Barnaud,  the  assistant  of
Hazek,  and  an  alchemical  writer,  whose  works  are  as  rare
as  they  are  reputable,  was  a  witness  of  this  wonder,  and
subsequently  himself  manufactured  the  precious  metal,  the
desir  desire,  with  the  assistance  of  Edward  Kelly.

The  report  spread,  and  the  adept  was  invited  by  the
Emperor  Maximilian  II.  to  the  Court  of  Germany,  where
his  transmutations  raised  him  into  highest  favour  ;  he  was
knighted,  and  created  Marshal  of  Bohemia.  Now  perfectly
intoxicated,  he  posed  as  a  veritable  adept,  who  was  able  to
compose  the  inestimable  projecting  powder.  This  gave  a
handle  to  the  enemies  whom  his  exaltation  had  made  him  ;
they  persuaded  the  Emperor  to  practically  imprison  this
living  philosophical  treasure,  and  to  extract  his  alchemical
secret.  His  misfortunes  now  began.  Absolute  inability  to
obey  the  imperial  mandate  and  compose  a  considerable
quantity  of  the  stone  philosophical,  was  interpreted  as  a
contumacious  refusal ;  he  was  cast  into  a  dungeon,  but  on
engaging  to  comply  with  the  demand  if  he  had  the  liberty
to  seek  assistance,  he  was  speedily  set  free,  whereupon  he

JOHN  DEE.  157

rejoined  Dr  Dee,  and  they  again  set  to  work  in  concert.
The  Book  of  St  Dunstan  indicated  the  use  but  not  the
preparation  of  the  powder,  and  their  experiments,  vigilantly-
overwatched  to  prevent  the  escape  of  Kelly,  proved
entirely  futile.  In  the  desperation  which  succeeded  their
failure,  the  outrageous  disposition  of  Kelly  broke  out,  and
he  murdered  one  of  his  guards.  He  was  again  imprisoned,
his  companion,  for  the  most  part,  remaining  unmolested,
and  employing  his  opportunities,  it  is  said,  to  interest
Queen  Elizabeth  in  the  fate  of  the  Emperor's  prisoner.
She  claimed  the  alchemist  as  her  subject,  but  his  recent
crime  had  rendered  him  obnoxious  to  the  laws  of  the  empire,
and  he  was  still  detained  in  his  dungeon.

In  1589,  Dr  Dee  set  out  himself  for  England.  He
halted  at  Bremen,  and  was  there  visited  by  Henry
Khunrath,  one  of  the  greatest  adepts  of  the  age.  The
Landgrave  of  Hesse  sent  him  a  complimentary  letter,  and
was  presented  in  return  with  twelve  Hungarian  horses.  Dr
Dee  arrived  in  England  after  an  absence  of  six  years  ;  he
was  received  by  the  Queen,  who  subsequently  visited  him  at
his  house,  presented  him  with  two  hundred  angels  to  keep
his  Christmas,  and  gave  him  a  license  in  alchemy.  Sir
Thomas  Jones  offered  him  his  Castle  of  Emlin,  in  Wales,
for  a  dwelling ;  he  was  made  Chancellor  of  St  Paul's,  and
in  1595,  Warden  of  Manchester  College.  He  repaired
thither  with  his  wife  and  children,  and  was  installed  in
February  1596.  He  does  not  appear  to  have  accomplished
any  transmutation  after  his  return  to  England.  In  1607
we  again  find  him  at  Mortlake,  living  on  the  revenue  which
he  derived  from  Manchester,  but  subject  to  much  persecu-
tion by  the  Fellows  of  that  College.  He  died  in  1608,  at
the  age  of  eighty  years.

The  Hermetic  abilities  of  Kelly  were  always  believed
in  by  the  Emperor ;  he  continued  to  detain  him,  hoping

I58        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

to  extract  his  secret.  Some  friends  of  the  unfortunate
alchemist  endeavoured,  in  the  year  1597,  to  effect  his
escape  by  means  of  a  rope,  but  he  fell  from  the  window  of
his  prison,  and  died  of  the  injuries  which  he  received.

During  his  confinement  he  composed  a  treatise  on
the  philosophical  stone,  and  the  Diary  of  Dr  Dee  was
published  from  a  genuine  Ashmolean  manuscript  in  1604.
The  son  of  John  Dee  became  physician  to  the  Czar  at
Moscow,  and  in  his  Fasciculus  Chemicus,  he  states  that,
in  early  youth,  he  witnessed  transmutation  repeatedly  for
the  space  of  seven  years.

The  metrical  account  of  Sir  Edward  Kelly's  work  in  the
Theatrum  Chemicum  Britannicum  informs  all  who  are
broiling  in  the  kitchen  of  Geber  to  burn  their  books  "  and
come  and  learn  of  me,"  for  they  can  no  more  compound
the  Elixir  Vitce  and  the  precious  stone  than  they  can
manufacture  apples.  The  progenitor  of  magnesia,  wife  to
the  gold  of  the  philosophers,  is  not  a  costly  thing.  The
philosophical  gold  is  not  common  but  Hermetic  sulphur,
and  magnesia  is  essential  mercury.

The  Testamentum  Johannis  Dee  Philosophi  Summi  ad
Johannem  Gwynn,  transmission  1568,  is  lucidly  worded  as
follows  in  its  reference  to  the  magnum  opus : — ■

"  Cut  that  in  Three  which  Nature  hath  made  one,
Then  strengthen  yt,  even  by  it  self  alone ;
Wherewith  then  cutte  the  powdered  sonne  in  twayne,
By  length  of  tyme,  and  heale  the  wounde  againe.
The  self  same  sonne  troys  yet  more,  ye  must  wounde,
Still  with  new  knives,  of  the  same  kinde,  and  grounde  ;
Our  monas  trewe  thus  use  by  Nature's  Law,
Both  binde  and  lewse,  only  with  rype  and  rawe,
And  aye  thank  God  who  only  is  our  Guyde,
All  is  ynough,  no  more  then  at  this  tyde."

HENRY  KHUNRATH.  I  59

HENRY  KHUNRATH.

This  German  alchemist,  who  is  claimed  as  a  hierophant
of  the  psychic  side  of  the  magnum  opus,  and  who  was
undoubtedly  aware  of  the  larger  issues  of  Hermetic
theorems,  must  be  classed  as  a  follower  of  Paracelsus.  He
was  a  native  of  Saxony,  born  about  the  year  1560.  He
perambulated  a  large  portion  of  Germany,  and  at  the  age
of  twenty-eight  received  the  degree  of  medical  doctor  at
the  University  of  Basle.  He  practised  medicine  at
Hamburg  and  afterwards  at  Dresden,  where  he  died  in
obscurity  and  poverty,  on  the  9th  of  September  1601,  aged
about  forty-five  years.  The  Amphitheatrum  Sapientia
JEternce  solius  verce,  Chris tiano  Kabbalisticum  divino
magicum,  &c,  published  in  folio  in  1609,  is  the  most
curious  and  remarkable  of  his  works,  some  of  which  still
remain  in  manuscript*  It  was  left  unfinished  by  its
author,  appearing  four  years  after  his  decease,  with  a  pre-
face and  conclusion  by  his  friend  Erasmus  Wohlfahrt.

The  prologue  directs  the  aspirant  to  the  supreme  temple
of  everlasting  wisdom  to  know  God  and  Jesus  Christ  whom
He  hath  sent,  to  know  also  himself,  and  the  mysteries  of
the  macrocosmos.  The  whole  treatise  is  purely  mystical
and  magical.  The  seven  steps  leading  to  the  portals  of
universal  knowledge  are  described  in  an  esoteric  commen-
tary on  some  portions  of  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon.  The
lapis  philosophorum  is  declared  to  be  identical  with  the
Ruach  Elohim  who  brooded  over  the  face  of  the  waters
during  the  first  period  of  creation.  The  Ruach  Elohim  is
called  vapor  virtutis  Dei,  and  the  internal  form  of  all
things.  The  perfect  stone  is  attained  through  Christ,
and,  conversely,  the  possession   of  that  treasure  gives  the

*  Chausepie,  Dictionnaire.

l6o        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

knowledge  of  Christ.  The  Amphitheatrum  Sapientice
JEternce  seems  to  be  the  voice  of  the  ancient  chaos,  but  its
curious  folding  plates  are  exceedingly  suggestive.

MICHAEL  MAIER.

This  celebrated  German  alchemist,  one  of  the  central
figures  of  the  Rosicrucian  controversy  in  Germany,  and
the  greatest  adept  of  his  age,  was  born  at  Ruidsburg,  in
Holstein,  towards  the  year  1568.  In  his  youth  he  applied
himself  closely  to  the  study  of  medicine,  and  establishing
himself  at  Rostock,  he  practised  that  art  with  so  much
success  that  he  became  physician  to  the  Emperor  Rudolph
II.,  by  whom  he  was  ennobled  for  his  services.  Some
adepts,  notwithstanding,  succeeded  in  enticing  him  from
the  practical  path  which  he  had  followed  so  long  into  the
thorny  tortuosities  of  alchemical  labyrinths.  Use  passionna
pour  le  grand  cenvre  and  scoured  all  Germany  to  hold  con-
ferences with  those  whom  he  imagined  to  be  in  posses-
sion of  transcendent  secrets.  The  Biographie  Universelle
declares  that  he  sacrificed  his  health,  his  fortune,  and  his
time  to  these  "  ruinous  absurdities."  According  to  Buhle,*
he  travelled  extensively ;  and  on  one  occasion  paid  a  visit
to  England,  where  he  made  the  acquaintance  of  the  Kentish
mystic,  Robert  Fludd.

He  appears  as  an  alchemical  writer  a  little  before  the
publication  of  the  Rosicrucian  manifestoes.  In  the  con-
troversy which  followed  their  appearance,  and  which  con-
vulsed mystic  Germany,  he  took  an  early  and  enthusiastic
share,  defending  the  mysterious  society  in  several  books  and
pamphlets.  He  is  supposed  to  have  travelled  in  search  of
genuine  members  of  the  "  College  of  Teutonic  Philosophers
R.C.,"  and,  failing  to  meet  with   them,   is   said   to  have

*  See  De  Quincey's  "  Rosicrucians  and  Freemasons."

JACOB  BOHME.  l6l

established  a  brotherhood  of  his  own  on  the  plan  of  the
Fama  Fraternitatis.  These  statements  rest  on  inadequate
authority,  and  there  is  better  ground  for  believing  that  he
was  initiated,  towards  the  close  of  his  life,  into  the  genuine
order.  A  posthumous  tract  of  Michael  Maier,  entitled
"  Ulysses,"  was  published  in  1624  by  one  of  his  personal
friends,  who  added  to  the  same  volume  the  substance  of  two
pamphlets  which  had  already  appeared  in  German,  but
which,  by  reason  of  their  importance,  were  now  translated
into  Latin  for  the  benefit  of  the  literati  of  Europe.  The  first
was  entitled  Colloquium  Rhodostauroticum  trium  person-
arum,  per  Famam  et  Confessionem  quodamodo  revelatam  de
Fraternitate  Rosetz  Cruets.  The  second  was  an  EcJw
Colloquii,  by  Benedict  Hilarion,  writing  in  the  name  of  the
Rosicrucian  Fraternity.  It  appears  from  these  pamphlets
that  Maier  was  admitted  into  the  mystical  order,  but  when
or  where  is  uncertain.  He  became  the  most  voluminous
alchemical  writer  of  his  period,  publishing  continually  till
his  death  in  the  year  1622.

Many  of  his  works  are  Hermetic  elaborations  of  classical
mythology,  and  are  adorned  with  most  curious  plates.  They
are  all  hopelessly  obscure,  if  his  Rosicrucian  apologies  be
excepted ;  the  latter  are  not  deficient  in  ingenuity,  but
they  are  exceedingly  laboured,  and,  of  course,  completely
unsatisfactory.  He  does  not  appear  to  have  been  included
among  the  adepts,  and  he  is  now  almost  forgotten.  His
chemical  knowledge  is  buried  in  a  multitude  of  symbols  and
insoluble  enigmas,  and  believers  in  spiritual  chemistry  will
not  derive  much  comfort  or  profit  from  his  writings.

JACOB  BOHME.

After  the  publication  of  the  psycho-chemical  philosophy
of  the   illuminated    shoemaker  of  Gorlitz,  the  adepts  are

L

1 62         LIVES  OF   ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

believed  to  have  despaired  of  any  longer  retaining  their
secrets,  and  in  their  own  writings  they  began  to  speak
more  freely.  In  this  way  the  mystery  of  the  vas  philo-
sophorum  is  said  to  have  become  less  impenetrable  than
previously,  when  it  was  considered  a  divine  secret  in  the
keeping  of  God  and  his  elect.

Jacob  Bohme,  who  may  perhaps  be  considered  as  the
central  figure  of  Christian  mysticism,  was  born  in  the  year
1 57  5,  at  Old  Seidenberg,  a  village  near  Gorlitz,  in  what
was  then  called  German  Prussia.  His  parents  were  poor
but  honest  and  sober  peasants,  and  were  unable  to  procure
him  more  than  the  usual  religious  schooling  and  the
most  simple  elements  of  common  education.  In  his  spare
time  he  tended  cattle  with  other  boys  of  the  village.  "He
was  a  quiet,  introspective  lad,"  says  one  of  his  latest
biographers,  "whose  face  bore  somewhat  of  the  dreamy
expression  which  is  frequent  in  poetic  natures."  Even  at
this  early  age  he  was  rich  in  inward  visions.  On  one
occasion  he  retired  into  a  cave,  in  the  rock  called  Land's
Crown,  and  discovered  a  large  wooden  vessel  full  of  money,
from  which  he  precipitately  retired  without  touching  it,  as
though  it  were  something  diabolical.  He  told  his  com-
panions, but  there  was  no  such  cavern  to  be  found  at  the
place  in  question,  though  they  often  visited  the  spot
in  search  of  the  concealed  treasure.

On  leaving  school,  Jacob  was  apprenticed  to  a  shoe-
maker, and  while  he  was  one  day  serving  in  the  shop
during  the  absence  of  his  master,  an  old  man,  of  remark-
able and  benevolent  mien,  entered  and  asked  for  some
shoes,  for  which  the  lad,  fearing  to  conclude  a  bargain
without  his  employer,  demanded  an  extravagant  price  to
deter  the  stranger  from  buying.  The  latter,  however,  paid
the  sum  asked,  and  then  calling  him  by  his  name,  beckoned
him  into  the  street,  when  taking  him  by  the  hand,  with

JACOB  BOHME.  1 63

sparkling  eyes  and    earnest,    angelical    countenance,    he
said: —

"Jacob,  thou  art  as  yet  but  little;  nevertheless,  the  time
will  come  when  thou  shalt  be  great,  and  the  world  shall
marvel  at  thee.  Therefore,  be  pious,  fear  God,  and
reverence  the  Word.  Read  the  Holy  Scriptures  diligently  ;
in  these  thou  shalt  have  comfort  and  instruction  through
the  misery,  poverty,  and  persecution  which  are  in  store  for
thee.  Be  courageous  and  persevere  ;  God  loves  thee,  and  is
gracious  unto  thee."

The  stranger  then  disappeared,  or  departed,  leaving
Jacob  more  serious  and  devotional  than  ever.  The  words
of  instruction  and  inspired  admonition  which  he  was
frequently  prompted  to  give  to  his  fellow  apprentices
brought  him  into  disputes  with  his  master,  and  eventually
led  to  his  dismissal.  He  became  a  journeyman  shoemaker,
but  returned  to  Gorlitz  in  1594,  where  he  married  the
daughter  of  a  tradesman,  by  whom  he  had  four  children.

In  1598  he  imagined  himself  to  be  surrounded  with  the
divine  light  for  several  consecutive  days  ;  he  beheld  the
virtue  and  nature  of  the  vegetable  world,  gazing  into  the
very  heart  of  creation,  and  learning  the  secrets  of  the
physical  cosmos  by  means  of  the  self-interpreting
"  signatures  "  which  seemed  to  be  impressed  on  all  around
him.  A  similar  experience  recurred  in  1600,  when  he
passed  into  the  hypnotic  state  by  accidentally  fixing  his  eye
on  a  burnished  pewter  dish.  These  visions  did  not  interfere
with  his  capacity  for  work,  or  with  his  attention  to  his
domestic  affairs.  Ten  years  passed  away,  and  his  psychic
perceptions  became  suddenly  clearer.  "What  he  had
previously  seen  only  chaotically,  fragmentarily,  and  in
isolated  glimpses,  he  now  beheld  as  a  coherent  whole  and
in  more  definite  outlines."  He  wrote  what  he  experienced
under  a  fervour  of  inspiration,  and  in  this  way  his  first  book

164         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

was  produced — "Aurora,  the  Day  Spring,  or  Dawning  of
the  Day  in  the  East,  or  Morning  Redness  in  the  Rising  of
the  Sun."  It  was  not  originally  intended  for  publication,  but
manuscript  copies  were  circulated  by  one  of  his  friends,  and
he  suffered  much  consequent  persecution  from  the  ecclesias-
tical authorities  of  Gorlitz.  He  was  forbidden  to  write  any
more  books,  and  was  commanded  to  stick  to  his  trade.  For
five  years  he  meekly  obeyed  the  tyrannous  mandate,  and
afterwards  contented  himself  with  writing  simply  for  his
intimate  friends.  From  1619  to  1624  he  produced  a  number
of  voluminous  treatises,  of  which  the  book  of  the  "  True
Principles,"  the  "  Mysterium  Magnum,"  and  the  "  Signatura
Rerum  "  are  perhaps  the  most  characteristic  and  important.
The  publication,  apparently  surreptitious,  of  his  "  Way  to
Christ "  again  brought  him  into  conflict  with  the  orthodoxy
of  Gorlitz,  and  led  to  his  temporary  exile.  He  was  invited
to  the  electoral  court  at  Dresden,  where  a  conference  of
eminent  theologians  examined  him,  and  was  so  greatly
impressed  by  the  man  that  they  declared  themselves
incompetent  to  judge  him.

In  1624  he  was  attacked  by  a  fever  at  the  house  of  a
friend  in  Silesia,  was  carried  at  his  own  request  to  his  native
town,  and  there  on  the  22nd  November  he  expired  in  a
semi-ecstatic  condition.

While  serving  his  apprenticeship  at  Gorlitz,  Jacob
Bohme  acquired  some  knowledge  of  chemistry,  and  he
subsequently  made  use  of  Hermetic  terminology  in  a
transfigured  and  spiritual  sense.  His  example  was  followed
by  his  disciples,  including  the  illustrious  Saint  Martin,
Dionysius  Andreas  Freher,  and  William  Law.  The  second-
named  writer  has  treated  of  the  analogy  in  the  process  of
the  philosophic  work  to  the  Redemption  of  man  through
Christ  Jesus,  as  unfolded  by  Jacob  Bohme.

A  treatise  on  metallurgy  is  ascribed  to  the  theosophist

JACOB  BOHME.  165

himself,  and  there  are  several  alchemical  references  in  his
numerous  private  epistles.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  stated  to
be  the  key  to  alchemy ;  there  is  no  need  of  hard  labour  and
seeking  (presumably  among  physical  substances).  "  Seek
only  Christ,  and  y  oil,  will  find  all  things."  He  describes  the
philosophers'  stone  as  dark,  disesteemed,  and  grey  in
colour.  It  contains  the  highest  tincture.  Like  Henry
Khunrath  before  him,  he  deprecates  any  expenditure  be-
yond that  of  the  time  and  cost  of  the  operator's  mainte-
nance. "  It  doth  not  cost  any  money,  but  what  is  spent
upon  the  time  and  the  maintenance,  else  it  might  be  pre-
pared with  four  shillings.  The  work  is  easy,  the  act  simple.
A  boy  of  sixteen  years  might  make  it,  but  the  wisdom
therein  is  great,  and  it  is  greatest  mystery."

The  seal  of  God  is  elsewhere  declared  to  be  set  on  the
secret  of  alchemy,  "  to  conceal  the  true  ground  of  the  same
upon  pain  of  eternal  punishments,  unless  a  man  know  for
certain  that  it  shall  not  be  misused.  There  is  also  no
power  to  attain  it,  no  skill  or  art  availeth ;  unless  one  giv&
the  tincture  into  the  hands  of  another,  he  cannot  prepare
it,  except  he  be  certainly  in  the  new  birth."

The  following  lines,  copied  from  a  manuscript  inserted
in  a  volume  of  his  works,  are  included  in  the  original  edi-
tion of  the  "  Lives  of  Alchemysticall  Philosophers  "  : —

"  Whate'er  the  Eastern  Magi  sought,
Or  Orpheus  sung,  or  Hermes  taught,
Whate'er  Confucius  could  inspire,
Or  Zoroaster's  mystic  fire  ;
The  symbols  that  Pythagoras  drew,
The  wisdom  God-like  Plato  knew  ;
What  Socrates  debating  proved,
Or  Epictetus  lived  and  loved  ;
The  sacred  fire  of  saint  and  sage
Through  every  clime,  in  every  age,
In  Bohmen's  wondrous  page  we  view
Discovered  and  revealed  anew.

I  66        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

'  Aurora '  dawned  the  coming  day  :
Succeeding  books  meridian  light  display.
Ten  thousand  depths  his  works  explore,
Ten  thousand  truths  unknown  before.
Through  all  his  books  profound  we  trace
The  abyss  of  nature,  God,  and  grace  ;
The  seals  are  broke,  the  mystery's  past,
And  all  is  now  revealed  at  last.
The  trumpet  sounds,  the  Spirit's  given,
And  Bohmen  is  the  voice  from  Heaven."

J.  B.  VAN  HELMONT.

In  the  year  1557,  at  Bois  le  Due,  in  Brabant,  John  Baptist
van  Helmont  was  born  of  a  noble  family.  He  studied  at
Louvain,  and  became  eminent  in  mathematics,  algebra,
the  doctrines  of  Aristotle  and  Galen,  and  the  medicine  of
Vopiscus  and  Plempius.  At  seventeen  he  lectured  on
physics  as  praelector,  and  took  his  degree  of  medical  doctor
in  1599.  He  read  Hippocrates  and  the  Greek  and  Arabian
authors  before  he  was  twenty-two  years  old.  He  then
passed  ten  years  in  the  unsuccessful  practice  of  physic,
until  he  met  a  Paracelsian  chemist,  who  discovered  various
chemical  medicines  to  him.  He  retired  thereupon  to  the
castle  of  Vilvord,  near  Brussels,  and  laboured  with  unre-
mitting diligence  in  the  chemico-experimental  analysis  of
bodies  of  every  class.  He  passed  his  life  in  retirement,  and
was  almost  unknown  to  his  neighbours,  whom  he,  never-
theless, attended  in  illness,  without  accepting  a  fee.  He
declined  an  invitation  and  flattering  offers  from  the  Em-
peror and  the  Elector  Palatine,  and  after  writing  several
tracts,  which  even  at  this  day  are  held  in  considerable
estimation,  he  died  in  the  sixty-seventh  year  of  his  age.

This  author,  so  illustrious  throughout  Europe  for  his
scientific  knowledge,  and  no  less  celebrated  for  his  noble
rank  than  by  the  probity  of  his  character,  testifies  in  three

J.  B.  VAN  HELMONT.  1 67

different  places  that  he  has  beheld,  and  himself  performed,
transmutation.  In  his  treatise,  De  Vita  Etema,  he  declares
himself  as  follows  : — "  I  have  seen  and  I  have  touched  the
philosophers'  stone  more  than  once ;  the  colour  of  it  was
like  saffron  in  powder,  but  heavy  and  shining  like  pounded
glass.  I  had  once  given  me  the  fourth  part  of  a  grain — I
call  a  grain  that  which  takes  six  hundred  to  make  an  ounce.
I  made  projection  therewith,  wrapped  in  paper,  upon  eight
ounces  of  quicksilver,  heated  in  a  crucible,  and  immediately-
all  the  quicksilver,  having  made  a  little  noise,  stopped  and
congealed  into  a  yellow  mass.  Having  melted  it  in  a
strong  fire,  I  found  within  eleven  grains  of  eight  ounces  of
most  pure  gold,  so  that  a  grain  of  this  powder  would  have
transmuted  into  very  good  gold,  nineteen  thousand  one
hundred  and  fifty-six  grains  of  quicksilver."

Had  Helmont  possessed  the  art  of  making  the  trans-
muting powder,  his  testimony  might  be  open  to  suspicion.
He  says,  on  another  occasion,  that  an  adept,  after  a  few
days  of  acquaintance,  presented  him  with  half  a  grain  of
the  powder  of  projection,  with  which  he  transmuted  nine
ounces  of  quicksilver  into  pure  gold.  He  tells  us  further,
that  he  many  times  performed  a  similar  operation  in  the
presence  of  a  large  company,  and  always  with  success.  On
these  grounds  he  believed  in  the  certainty  and  in  the  pro-
digious resources  of  the  art,  citing  his  acquaintance  with  an
artist  who  had  so  much  of  the  red  stone  as  would  make
gold  to  the  weight  of  two  hundred  thousand  pounds.

Though  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  this  powder  of  projec-
tion, Helmont  professed  the  knowledge  of  the  alcahest,
and  the  methods  of  preparing  medicines  of  transcendent
efficacy  by  its  means.

l68        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

BUTLER.

In  the  reign  of  James  the  First  the  attention  of  the
curious  was  attracted  by  a  report  of  several  transmutations
performed  in  London  by  an  artist  of  the  above  name.  He
was  an  Irish  gentleman,  who  had  recently  returned  from
his  travels.  It  was  said  that  he  was  not  himself  acquainted
with  the  secret  of  the  stone,  so  far  as  regards  its  manufac-
ture. To  account  for  possessing  it,  the  following  story  was
related : — The  ship  in  which  he  took  passage  during  one
of  his  voyages  was  captured  by  an  African  pirate,  and  on
arriving  in  port  he  was  sold  as  a  slave  to  an  Arabian,  who
was  an  alchemical  philosopher.  Butler,  appearing  to  his
master  skilful  and  ingenious,  was  employed  in  most  difficult
operations  in  the  laboratory.  Having  a  perfect  knowledge
of  the  importance  of  the  process,  as  soon  as  it  was  finished
he  bargained  with  an  Irish  merchant  for  his  ransom,  and
made  his  escape,  taking  with  him  a  large  portion  of  the  red
powder.

The  performers  of  public  transmutations  generally
found  it  necessary  to  conceal  their  real  knowledge  by
similar  inventions.  A  physician,  who  was  a  countryman  of
Butler,  however  formed  a  plan  for  discovering  his  secret.
He  presented  himself  as  a  servant  in  search  of  a  place,
and  was  hired  in  that  capacity  by  Butler.  He  found  the
philosopher  so  circumspect  that  he  sought  in  vain  for
some  circumstance  to  justify  the  public  report  of  his
treasures,  until  at  last  Butler  sent  him  into  the  city  to
purchase  a  large  quantity  of  lead  and  quicksilver.

The  disguised  doctor  now  hoped  to  make  a  discovery.
He  executed  his  commission  with  dispatch,  and  prepared
a  little  hole  in  the  wall  of  his  master's  room,  through
which,  from  the  adjoining  apartment  he  could  see  what

BUTLER.  169

was  going  on.  He  soon  perceived  Butler  taking  some-
thing out  of  a  box,  which  he  put  on  the  melted  lead,  and
deposited  the  box  in  a  concealed  place  under  the  floor  of
his  room.  At  this  moment  the  table  and  chair  on  which
the  doctor  was  elevated  to  the  spy-hole,  gave  way,  and  he
fell  with  a  loud  noise  to  the  ground.  Butler  rushed  out
of  his  room  to  learn  the  cause  of  this  disturbance,  and
perceiving  the  spy-hole,  he  with  difficulty  refrained  from
running  his  servant  through  the  body  with  his  sword.

Finding  there  was  no  hope  of  obtaining  anything  from
Butler,  the  doctor  expected  to  surprise  his  treasures  by
reporting  to  the  officers  of  justice  that  he  was  a  coiner  of
false  money.  A  vigilant  search  was  made  according  to
his  directions,  but  nothing  was  found,  for  Butler  had
already  removed  whatever  could  betray  him — his  furnace,
crucibles,  and  eighty  marks  of  gold  were  all  he  appeared
to  possess.  He  was  therefore  liberated  from  the  prison
in  which  he  had  been  confined  during  the  investigation.

Butler  was  afterwards  entombed  in  the  Castle  of  Vilvord,
in  Flanders,  where  he  is  said  to  have  performed  wonder-
ful cures  by  means  of  Hermetic  medicine.  A  monk  of
Brittany,  who  was  one  of  his  fellow-prisoners,  having  a
desperate  erysipelas  in  his  arm,  was  restored  to  health  in
an  hour  by  drinking  almond  milk  in  which  Butler  had
merely  dipped  the  stone.  The  next  day  at  the  rumour
of  this  circumstance,  the  celebrated  Helmont,  who  abode
in  the  neighbourhood,  went  with  several  noblemen  to  the
prison,  where  Butler  cured,  in  their  presence,  an  aged
woman  of  a  megrim  by  dipping  the  stone  into  oil  of  olives
and  then  anointing  her  head.  An  abbess,  whose  arm  was
swelled,  and  whose  fingers  had  been  stiff  for  eighteen
years,  was  also  cured  by  a  few  applications  of  the  same
stone  to  her  tongue.

These  cases  are  attested  by  the  illustrious  van  Helmont
in  his  works.

I  70        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

JEAN  D'ESPAGNET.

This  Hermetic  philosopher  is  known  to  us  by  two
treatises  —  Enchiridion  Physictz  Restitutes  and  Arcanum
Philosophic?  Hermeticcs,  which,  however,  has  also  been
claimed  as  the  production  of  an  unknown  individual  who
called  himself  the  Chevalier  Imperial*  "  The  Secret  of
Hermetical  Philosophy "  comprises  the  practical  part  of
the  magnum  opus  and  the  Enchiridion,  the  physical  theory
on  which  the  possibility  of  transmutation  is  founded.
D'Espagnet  is  also  the  author  of  the  preface  to  the  Tableau
de  I Inconstance  des  Demons,  by  Pierre  Delancre.

"  The  Arcanum  of  Hermetic  Philosophy "  is  better
known  under  the  title  of  the  "  Canons  of  Espagnet,"  and,
as  I  have  shown  in  the  Introduction,  it  is  claimed  as  a
treatise  on  mystical  alchemy.  The  author,  however,  very
plainly  states  that  "  the  science  of  producing  Nature's
grand  Secret  is  a  perfect  knowledge  of  Nature  universally
and  of  art,  concerning  the  realm  of  metals  ;  the  practice
whereof  is  conversant  in  finding  the  principles  of  metals  by
analysis."  Moreover,  the  authors  whom  Espagnet  recom-
mends as  a  guide  to  the  student  include  those  who,  like
Trevisan,  are  known  to  have  spent  their  existence  in  practi-
cal alchemy.  The  Sethon-Sendivogius  treatises  are  also
respectfully  cited.  At  the  same  time,  it  may  be  freely
granted  that  much  of  the  matter  in  the  canons,  though
treating  of  a  physical  object,  may  be  extended  to  the
psychic  side  of  the  Hermetic  art.

*  Ce  chevalier,  tres-rever^e  des  alchimistes,  est  mentionnee  souvent  dans  la
Trompette  Frangaise,  petit  volume,  contenant  une  Proph&tic  de  Bombast  sur  la
Naissancc  de  Louis  XIV.  On  a,  du  Chevalier  Imperial,  le  Miroir  des  Alchi-
mistes, avec  instructions  aux  dames  pour  dorenavant  etre  belles  sans  plus  user
de  leurs  dards  venimeux,  1609,  i6mo.     Dictionnaire  des  Sciences  Occultes.

ALEXANDER  SETHON.  Ijl

ALEXANDER  SETHON.

None  of  the  adepts  suffered  from  imprudent  exposure  of
their  power  more  than  the  subject  of  this  article.  He  was
a  native  of  Scotland,  and  is  supposed  to  have  inhabited  a
mansion  at  a  village  in  the  vicinity  of  Edinburgh,  and  close
to  the  sea-shore.*  In  the  summer  of  1601  a  Dutch  vessel
was  wrecked  upon  the  coast,  and  some  of  the  crew  were
saved  through  the  instrumentality  of  Sethon,  who  received
them  into  his  house,  treated  them  with  great  humanity,  and
provided  them  with  the  means  to  return  to  Holland.  One
year  later  he  visited  James  Haussen,  the  pilot  of  the  ship,
one  of  the  rescued  persons,  at  Erkusen,  in  that  country.
The  sailor  received  him  with  joy,  and  detained  him  for
several  weeks  in  his  house,  during  which  period  he  beheld
with  astonishment  several  transmutations  performed  by  his
guest,  who  confessed  that  he  was  an  alchemical  adept.  He
was  bound  in  gratitude  and  friendship  to  the  most  inviol-
able secrecy,  but  he  could  not  refrain  from  confiding  the
wonder  which  he  had  witnessed  to  Venderlinden,  the  phy-
sician of  Enkhuysen,  who  was  a  man  of  integrity  and
prudence,  and  to  whom  he  presented  a  piece  of  gold,  which
had  been  transmuted  in  his  presence  from  lead  on  the  13th
March  1602.  This  curiosity  came  into  the  hands  of  the
doctor's  grandson,  who  showed  it  to  the  celebrated  George
Morhoff,  by  whom  it  was  mentioned,  with  its  history,  to
Langlet  du  Fresnoy,  in  an  epistle  on  the  transmutation  of
metals.

From  Enkhuysen,  Sethon  proceeded  to  Amsterdam  and

The  names  Seton  or  Seatoun  have  been  given  as  that  of  the  village  in
question,  but  in  Camden's  "  Britannia"  it  appears  as  the  name  of  the  house
itself.  The  alchemist  himself  is  sufficiently  myrionimous,  being  variously
denominated  Sethon,  Sidon,  Sethonius,  Scotus,  Sitonius,  Sidonius,  Suthoneus,
Suethonius,  and  even  Seehthonius.

172         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

Rotterdam,  subsequently  embarking  for  Italy,  where,  after
a  short  stay,  he  passed  into  Switzerland,  and  so  entered
Germany,  accompanied  by  Wolfgang  Dienheim,  an  adver-
sary of  Hermetic  philosophy,  whom  by  ocular  demonstra-
tion he  convinced  of  his  error,  in  presence  of  several  dis-
tinguished persons  of  Basle.

To  this  adversary  we  are  indebted  for  a  description  of
Sethon,  whom  he  declared  eminently  spiritual  in  appear-
ance, short  in  stature,  but  very  stout,  having  a  high  colour,
and  a  beard  of  the  French  style.  He  calls  him  Alexander
Sethonius,  and  states  that  he  was  a  native  of  Molier,  "  in  an
island  of  the  ocean."

The  lead  required  for  the  transmutation  was  brought  by
Jacob  Zwinger  from  his  own  house,  a  crucible  was  borrowed
from  a  goldsmith,  and  common  sulphur  was  purchased  on
the  road  to  the  house  where  the  operation  was  to  be  per-
formed. During  the  whole  course  of  the  experiment,  Sethon
touched  nothing,  simply  supplying  the  small  packet  which
contained  the  powder  of  projection,  and  which  transformed
the  base  metal  into  gold  of  the  purest  quality,  equivalent
in  weight  to  the  original  lead.

The  experiment  was  repeated  on  another  occasion  with
the  same  brilliant  success,  and,  in  addition  to  the  testimony
of  Dienheim,  we  have  also  that  of  Zwinger,  a  name  highly
respected  by  the  Germans  in  the  history  of  medicine.*

Alexander  Sethon  departed  from  Basle,  and  went  under
an  assumed  name  to  Strasbourg,  whence  he  proceeded  to
Cologne,  and  abode  with  an  amateur  alchemist  named
Anton  Bordemann,  by  whom  he  was  brought  into
acquaintance  with  the  other  souffleurs  of  that  city.  He
began  a  kind  of  alchemical  crusade  among  them,  im-
prudently exposing  his  knowledge  to  credulous  and  scep-

*  Epislola  ad  doctorem  Schobinger,  printed  by  Emmanuel  Konig  in  his

Ephemerides.

ALEXANDER  SETHON.  I  73

tical  alike,  and  producing  on  one  occasion  six  ounces  of
the  precious  metal  by  means  of  a  single  grain  of  his  great
philosophical  tincture.*

Leaving  Cologne  altogether  petrified  by  his  marvellous
operations,  the  illustrious  hierophant  of  the  art  Hermetic
betook  himself  to  Hamburg,  where  his  further  amazing
projections  are  described  by  George  Morhoff.  At  Munich,
the  next  stage  in  his  alchemical  pilgrimage,  he  performed
no  transmutations,  suddenly  disappearing  with  the  daughter
of  one  of  its  citizens,  whom  he  appears  to  have  legally
married,  and  to  whom  he  was  henceforth  most  devotedly
attached.

The  renown  of  Sethon  about  this  time  attracted  the
attention  of  Christian  II.,  the  young  Elector  of  Saxony.
He  sent  for  the  alchemist,  but  the  latter,  absorbed  by  his
passion,  had  merged  the  Hermetic  propagandist  in  the
lover,  and  sent  William  Hamilton,  his  apparent  domestic,
but  in  reality  a  confidant  and  friend,  to  convince  the
Elector  of  the  verity  of  alchemical  operations  by  ocular
evidence.  A  projection  was  performed  by  Hamilton  with
perfect  success  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  court,  and  the
gold  then  manufactured  resisted  every  test.f

The  Elector,  previously  a  sceptic,  was  now  more  desirous
than  ever  to  behold  the  adept.  Sethon  reluctantly  con-
sented, and  at  this  juncture  seems  to  have  been  deserted
by  Hamilton.  He  was  received  with  distinction  and
favour,  and  presented  a  small  quantity  of  the  powder  to
Christian  II.,  who  soon  endeavoured  to  possess  himself
of  the  whole  secret  of  the  philosopher.  Sethon  refused  to
gratify  him,  and  was  deaf  to  persuasions  and  menaces ;
but  the  Elector,  convinced  that  he  was  in  possession  of  a

*  Theobald  de  Hoghelande,   Historic  aliquot    Transmutationis  Rlettalica
pro  defensione  Alchemicc  contra  Hostium  Rabrein.     Cologne,  1604.
t  Galdenfalk,  "Alchemical  Anecdotes."

I  74        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

living  treasure,  determined  to  overcome  his  reluctance,
whatever  the  means  employed.  He  imprisoned  him  in  a
tower,  which  v/as  guarded  by  forty  soldiers,  who  had  strict
orders  to  keep  a  constant  watch  on  him.  The  unfortunate
adept  was  subjected  to  every  torment  which  covetousness
and  cruelty  could  suggest.  He  was  pierced  with  pointed
iron,  scorched  with  molten  lead,  burnt  by  fire,  beaten  with
rods,  racked  from  head  to  foot,  yet  his  constancy  never
forsook  him.  At  length  he  outwearied  his  torturers,  and
was  left  in  solitary  confinement.

At  this  time  Michael  Sendivogius,  a  Moravian  gentle-
man, generally  resident  at  Cracovia,  in  Poland,  chanced  to
be  tarrying  at  Dresden.  He  was  a  skilful  chemist,  who,
like  others  of  his  period,  was  in  search  of  the  philosophical
stone,  and  who  naturally  took  interest  in  the  case  of
Alexander  Sethon.  Having  some  influence  at  the  court
of  the  Elector,  he  obtained  permission  to  see  him ;  and
after  several  interviews,  at  which  the  adept  was  exceedingly
reserved  on  all  subjects  connected  with  the  divine  science,
he  proposed  to  contrive  his  escape.  The  tortured  alchemist
gladly  consented  to  his  plans,  and  promised  to  assist  him
in  his  Hermetic  pursuits.  As  soon  as  the  resolution  was
formed,  Sendivogius  departed  to  Cracovia,  sold  his  house
in  order  to  raise  money,  and  returning  to  Dresden,  estab-
lished himself  in  the  vicinity  of  the  prison,  gaining  the
favour  of  its  warders  by  his  prodigality  and  indirect  bribes.
At  length  the  day  came  for  the  execution  of  his  plan ;  he
regaled  the  guards  better  than  usual,  and  when  they  were
all  drunk,  he  carried  Sethon,  who  was  unable  to  walk,  on
his  back  to  a  post-chaise,  in  which  they  proceeded  without
discovery.  They  called  at  the  house  of  Sethon  for  his
wife,  who  was  in  possession  of  a  quantity  of  the  transmut-
ing powder,  and  then  made  all  haste  to  reach  Cracovia.
There  Sendivogius  required  from  the  alchemist  the  fulfil-

MICHAEL  SENDIVOGIUS.  I  75

ment  of  his  promise,  but  was  blankly  refused  by  the  adept,
who  referred  him  to  God,  saying  that  the  revelation  of  so
awful  a  mystery  would  be  a  heinous  iniquity.

"  You  see  what  I  have  endured,"  he  continued,  "  my
nerves  are  shrunk,  my  limbs  dislocated ;  I  am  emaciated
to  the  last  extremity,  and  my  body  is  almost  corrupted  ;
even  to  avoid  all  this  I  did  not  disclose  the  secrets  of
philosophy."

Sendivogius  was  not,  however,  destined  to  be  deprived
of  all  recompense  for  his  pains  and  self-sacrifice.  Alex-
ander Sethon  did  not  long  enjoy  the  liberty  which  his
friend  had  obtained  for  him,  and  on  his  death,  which
occurred  two  years  after  his  escape,  he  presented  his
preserver  with  the  remains  of  his  transmuting  powder.

MICHAEL  SENDIVOGIUS.

Sendivogius,  whose  true  name  was  Sensophax,  was  born
at  Moravia  in  1566,  and  was  therefore  about  thirty-eight
years  of  age  on  the  death  of  his  taciturn  master.  He  is
said  by  some  of  his  biographers  to  have  been  the  natural
son  of  a  Polish  nobleman,  named  Jacob  Sendimir.  His
life  has  been  written  at  some  length  by  his  advocate,  an
anonymous  German,  who,  however,  produced  a  romance
rather  than  a  history,  among  other  fictions  representing
his  hero  to  have  been  sent  by  the  Emperor  Rodolph  II.
to  the  east,  where  he  received  from  a  Greek  patriarch  the
revelation  of  the  grand  mystery.  As  a  matter  of  fact,
Sendivogius  had  made  no  progress  in  alchemy  before  his
acquaintance  with  Sethon.

Having  almost  exhausted  his  fortune  to  obtain  the
liberation  of  that  adept,  and  having  a  taste  for  extravagant
living,  he  was  dissatisfied  with  the  mere  possession  of  a
portion  of  the  transmuting  powder,  and  was  more  eager

I  76         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

than  ever  to  penetrate  the  mysteries  of  the  Hermetic
art.  He  married  the  widow  of  Sethon,  but  she  was  wholly-
unacquainted  with  the  process,  and  her  only  possession
was  the  manuscript  of  that  celebrated  treatise,  "  The  New
Light  of  Alchemy,"  with  the  dialogue  of  Mercury  and
the  alchemist,  which  Sendivogius  appropriated  and  even-
tually published  as  his  own  composition.  From  this
work  the  uninitiated  inquirer  believed  himself  to  have
discovered  a  method  of  augmenting  the  powder,  but  he
only  succeeded  in  diminishing  it.

Foiled  in  this  attempt,  he  was  still  anxious  at  any  rate
to  appear  as  an  adept,  and  acquired  an  immense  reputation
by  incessant  projections,  which,  assisted  by  his  sumptuous
living,  made  him  pass  for  a  great  hierophant.  At  Prague
he  presented  himself  to  the  Emperor  Rodolph  II.,  and,  in
presence  of  several  nobles,  the  king  himself  made  gold  by
projection,  and  overjoyed  at  the  success  of  the  operation
he  appointed  Sendivogius  as  one  of  his  counsellors  of
state.     A  marble  tablet  with  the  inscription —

Faciat  hoc  quispiam  alms
Quod  fecit  Sendivogius  Polomis,

was  set  up  in  the  chamber  where  the  transmutation  had
been  performed,  and  the  occasion  was  celebrated  in  verse
by  the  court  poet,  Mardochie  de  Delle.

This  achievement  Sendivogius  followed  by  printing  at
Prague  the  treatise  written  by  Sethon  under  the  name  of
Cosmopolita.  It  passes  for  the  work  of  its  editor,  as  he
included  his  name  anagrammatically  on  the  title-page,  in
the  motto — Divi  Leschi  genus  amo,  and  gave  no  informa-
tion concerning  the  real  author.  Some  time  after  he
issued  a  tract  on  sulphur,  which  was  probably  his  own
composition.  The  motto  on  the  title-page — Angelus  doce
mihi  jus — is   another  anagram  of  his   name.     There   are

MICHAEL  SENDIVOGIUS.  LJ7

discrepancies  between  this  tract  and  the  twelve  treatises
which  comprise  the  work  of  Sethon.  This  Sendivogius
perceived,  and  in  the  second  edition  of  the  latter  work  he
made  alterations  in  its  text.

From  the  Court  of  Rodolph  II.  the  alchemist  proceeded
to  that  of  Poland.  As  he  passed  on  his  way  through
Moravia,  a  lord  of  the  country,  who  had  heard  of  his
transmutations  at  Prague,  and  suspected  !that  he  had
abundance  of  the  transmuting  powder,  laid  an  ambush  for
him  on  the  road,  seized  him,  and  secretly  imprisoned  him,
with  the  threat  that  he  should  never  be  liberated  until  he
communicated  the  secret  of  his  treasure.  Sendivogius,
dreading  the  fate  of  Sethon,  cut  through  the  iron  bar  that
crossed  the  window  of  his  dungeon,  and  making  a  rope  of
his  clothes,  he  escaped  almost  naked  from  the  power  of  the
little  tyrant,  whom  he  summoned  to  the  emperor's  court,
where  he  was  condemned  to  be  fined,  a  village  on  his  estate
was  confiscated  and  transferred  to  Sendivogius,  who  after-
wards gave  it  as  dower  with  his  daughter  at  her  marriage.

Sendivogius  made  several  transmutations  at  Varsovia,
but  his  powder  was  visibly  diminishing.  Duke  Frederick
of  Wiirtemberg  invited  him  to  visit  him,  and  two  projec-
tions took  place  in  the  presence  of  this  noble,  who,  to  place
him  on  the  footing  of  a  prince  of  the  blood,  gave  him  the
territory  of  Nedlingen.

He  was  destined,  however,  to  meet  with  a  severe  reverse
at  Wiirtemberg  through  the  machinations  of  an  envious
alchemist  already  attached  to  the  Court,  and  who  per-
suaded him  that  the  Duke  Frederic  had  formed  plans
which  menaced  the  freedom  of  his  guest  and  the  safety  of
his  transmuting  treasure.  Sendivogius,  once  more  vividly
reminded  of  the  fate  of  his  master,  precipitately  fled,  only
to  be  pursued  by  his  treacherous  brother  in  science,  who
overtook    him   with    twelve    armed    men,   well    mounted,

M

I  J$         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

arrested  him  in  the  name  of  the  prince,  robbed  him  of  the
philosophical  treasure,  and  caused  him  to  be  cast  into
prison.  Then  this  infamous  souffleur,  whose  star  had  been
overwhelmed  by  the  sun  of  Sendivogius,  proceeded  to  per-
form transmutations,  more  than  regaining  his  lost  reputa-
tion ;  but  the  report  of  this  discreditable  transaction  spread,
public  opinion  decided  that  the  duke  was  a  party  to  it,  and
the  wife  of  the  victim  applying  to  the  King  of  Poland,  soon
obtained  the  liberty  of  alchemist.

Once  more  Sendivogius  appealed  for  redress  to  the
Emperor  Rodolph,  who  demanded  the  person  of  the  souf-
fleur from  the  Duke  of  Wiirtemberg.  The  possessions  of
Sendivogius  were  at  once  restored,  with  the  exception  of
the  powder,  all  knowledge  of  which  was  denied.  The  souf-
fleur was  hanged  by  the  duke,  but  from  this  time  the  pupil
of  Sethon  perceived  his  sign  descending.  He  had  but  an
infinitesimal  quantity  of  the  powder  in  his  possession,
which,  ever  in  search  of  notoriety,  he  dissolved  in  spirits  of
wine,  carefully  rectified,  and  began  to  astonish  the  phy-
sicians of  Cracovia,  whither  he  had  again  repaired,  by  the
marvellous  cures  which  he  performed  with  this  for  a  medi-
cine. Desnoyers,  secretary  to  the  Queen  of  Poland,  and
one  of  the  alchemist's  biographers,  was  in  possession  of  a
crown  piece  which  Sendivogius  dipped  red-hot  into  the
same  spirit,  in  the  presence  of  Sigismund  III.,  King  of
Poland,  and  which  was  partially  transformed  into  gold.*
The  elixir  relieved  the  same  king  from  the  effects  of  a
serious  accident.

When    every   particle    of    his    powder   was    expended,

*  See  Desnoyer's  Letter  in  Langlet  du  Fresnoy's  Histoire  de  la  Philosophie
Hermetique.  Borel,  in  his  Gallic  Antiquities,  recounts  that  he,  with  many
others  at  Paris,  saw  this  crown-piece.  He  describes  it  as  partly  gold,  so  far
only  as  it  was  steeped  in  the  elixir.  The  gold  part  was  porous,  being  specifi-
cally more  compact  than  in  its  silver  state.  There  was  no  appearance  of  sol-
dering, or  of  the  possibility  of  deception.

MICHAEL  SENDIVOGIUS.  1  79

Sendivogius  appears  to  have  degenerated  into  a  mere
charlatan,  obtaining  large  sums  on  the  pretence  of  manu-
facturing the  powder  of  projection.  On  one  occasion  he
so  far  descended  as  to  silver  a  piece  of  gold,  and  pretend-
ing that  he  possessed  the  elixir,  he  caused  the  silver  to
disappear  by  a  chemical  process,  which  he  imposed  on  the
ignorant  as  a  projection  of  the  tincture  and  a  conversion
of  silver  into  gold.

His  confidential  servant,  Bodowski,  explains  this  decep-
tion as  a  finesse  to  conceal  his  real  character,  having
learned  from  experience  the  necessity  of  defending  him-
self from  the  violence  of  covetous  men.  He  sometimes
feigned  poverty,  or  lay  in  bed  as  one  attacked  with  the
gout  or  other  sickness.  By  these  means  he  diverted  the
general  suspicion  that  he  possessed  the  philosophers'  stone,
preferring  to  pass  for  an  impostor  than  for  one  in  the
enjoyment  of  illimitable  wealth.  He  frequently  travelled
in  a  servant's  livery,  concealing  most  of  his  red  powder  in
the  footstep  of  his  chariot,  and  causing  one  of  his  servants
to  sit  inside.  He  kept  some  of  the  powder  in  a  small  gold
box,  and  with  a  single  grain  of  it  would  convert  so
much  mercury  into  gold  as  would  sell  for  five  hundred
ducats.*

He  was  at  his  castle  of  Groverna,  on  the  frontiers  of
Poland  and  Silesia,  when  he  was  visited  by  two  strangers,
one  of  whom  was  old  while  the  other  was  young.  They
presented  him  with  a  letter  bearing  twelve  seals,  and
addressed  to  Sendivogius.  He  declared  that  he  was  not
the  person  whom  they  sought,  but  was  at  length  persuaded
to  open  the  document,  and  learned  that  they  were  a
deputation  from  the  Rosicrucian  Society,  who  wished  to
initiate  him.  He  pretended  not  to  understand  them  when
they  spoke  of  the  stone  of  the  philosophers,  but  they  drew

*  See  Vie  de  Sendivogius,  tirie  de  la  Relation  de  Jean  Bodowski.

ISO         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

him  into  conversation  on  several  abstruse  subjects,  he,
however,  declining  to  the  last  the  initiation  which  was
offered  him.

Michael  Sendivogius  died  at  Parma  in  1646,  aged  eighty-
four  years,  having  been  counsellor  of  state  to  four  em-
perors successively.  His  only  daughter  had  married  an
army  captain  against  her  father's  wish.  He  left  her  no-
thing but  a  "  Treatise  on  the  Salt  of  the  Philosophers,"
which  has  never  been  printed,  and,  therefore,  must  not  be
confused  with  a  spurious  work  which  has  been  ascribed
to  him  under  a  similar  title.

The  Sethon-Sendivogius  treatises  are  generally  known
under  the  collective  title,  "A  New  Light  of  Alchemy."
They  were  written  to  counteract  the  many  adulterated  and
false  receipts  composed  through  the  fraud  and  covetousness
of  impostors.  The  procedure  they  indicate  is  declared  to
be  the  result  of  manual  experience.  "  Many  men,  both
of  high  and  low  condition,  in  these  last  years  past,  have  to
my  knowledge  seen  Diana  unveiled.  The  extraction  of
the  soul  out  of  gold  or  silver,  by  what  vulgar  way  of
alchymy  soever,  is  but  a  mere  fancy.  On  the  contrary,  he
which,  in  a  philosophical  way,  can,  without  any  fraud  and
colourable  deceit,  make  it  that  it  shall  really  tinge  the
basest  metal,  whether  with  gain  or  without  gain,  with  the
colour  of  gold  or  silver  (abiding  all  requisite  tryals  what-
ever), hath  the  gates  of  Nature  opened  to  him  for  the
enquiring  into  further  and  higher  secrets,  and  with  the
blessing  of  God  to  obtain  them."

It  is  thus  in  the  writings  of  the  alchemists  that  we  are
continually  glimpsing  or  hearing  of  altitudes  beyond  trans-
mutation, of  regions  of  achievement  which  nothing  in  the
pages  of  the  adepts  prove  them  to  have  actually  explored,
but  which    in   possession   of  a   comprehensive   theory  of

GUSTENHOVER.  1 8  I

organic    and    inorganic    development    they   beheld    as    a
Promised  Land.

The  "  New  Light  of  Alchemy  "  insists  on  the  existence
of  a  sperm  in  everything,  and  that  all  Nature  originated  at
the  beginning  from  one  only  seed.  It  treats  of  the  genera-
tion of  metals  and  the  manner  of  their  differentiation,  of
the  extraction  of  their  seed,  and  of  the  manufacture  of  the
stone  or  tincture.

GUSTENHOVER.

A  respectable  goldsmith,  named  Gustenhover,  resided
at  Strasburg  in  1603.  In  a  time  of  great  peril  he  gave
shelter  to  a  certain  M.  Hirschborgen,  who  is  described  as
good  and  religious.  On  leaving  his  house  after  a  consider-
able stay,  this  person  presented  his  humane  host  with
some  powder  of  projection,  and  then,  departing  on  his
journey,  was  heard  of  no  more.

Gustenhover  imprudently  made  transmutations  before
numerous  people,  and  the  fact  was  reported  to  the  Emperor
Rodolph  II.,  himself  an  amateur  in  alchemy.  He  wrote
to  the  magistrates  of  Strasburg,  directing  that  the  gold-
smith should  be  forthwith  sent  to  him.  The  order  was
zealously  obeyed,  the  man  arrested,  and  guarded  with
vigilance  from  all  possibility  of  escape.  When  he  dis-
covered that  the  intention  of  his  imprisonment  was  to  send
him  to  the  Emperor  at  Prague,  he  divined  the  whole  of  the
business,  and  invited  the  magistrates  to  meet  together,
desiring  them  to  bring  a  crucet  and  charcoal,  and  without
his  approaching  to  melt  some  lead.  Musket  balls  were
used  for  the  purpose,  and  when  the  metal  was  molten,  he
handed  them  a  small  portion  of  red  powder,  which  they
cast  into  the  crucet,  and  the  result  of  their  calcination  was
a  considerable  quantity  of  pure  gold.

1 82         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

When  he  was  brought  into  the  presence  of  the  gold-
seeking  Emperor,  Gustenhover  was  forced  to  admit  that
he  had  not  himself  prepared  the  miraculous  powder,  and
that  he  was  in  total  ignorance  about  its  nature  and  com-
position. The  monarch  regarded  this  merely  as  one  of  the
subterfuges  which  were  common  in  his  experience  of
jealous  adepts.  The  goldsmith  reiterated  his  protestations
in  vain  ;  the  whole  of  his  powder  was  speedily  exhausted,
yet  he  found  himself  still  set  to  the  now  impossible  task  of
making  gold.  He  sought  a  refuge  from  the  fury  of  the
avaricious  wretch,  who  has  been  denominated  the  German
Hermes  by  an  alchemical  blasphemy  accursed  by  all  sons
of  the  doctrine ;  but  he  was  pursued,  dragged  back,  and
immured  in  the  White  Tower,  where  the  imperial  dragon,
blindly  and  obstinately  convinced  that  the  alchemist  was
concealing  his  secret,  detained  him  for  the  rest  of  his  life.

The  adept  who  presented  the  goldsmith  with  the  auri-
ferous gift  of  misery,  the  so-called  Hirschborgen,  is  sup-
posed to  be  identical  with  Alexander  Sethon,  at  that  period
errant,  under  various  disguises,  in  Germany.

BUSARDIER.

Few  particulars  are  recorded  of  this  adept.  He  dwelt
at  Prague  with  a  lord  of  the  Court,  and,  falling  sick,  he
perceived  that  his  immediate  death  was  inevitable.  In  this
extremity  he  wrote  a  letter  to  his  chosen  friend  Richtausen,
at  Vienna,  begging  him  to  come  and  abide  with  him  during
his  last  moments.  On  the  receipt  of  this  letter,  Richtausen
set  out,  travelling  with  all  expedition,  but,  on  arriving  at
Prague,  he  had  the  mortification  to  find  that  the  adept  was
no  more.  He  inquired  diligently  if  he  had  left  anything
behind  him,  and  he  was  informed  by  the  steward  of  the
nobleman  with  whom  he  had  lodged  that  a  powder  alone

BUSARDIER.  1 53

had  been  left,  which  the  nobleman  seemed  anxious  to  pre-
serve, but  which  the  steward  did  not  know  how  to  use.
Upon  this  information,  Richtausen  adroitly  got  possession
of  the  powder,  and  then  departed.  The  nobleman,  hearing
of  the  transaction,  threatened  to  hang  his  steward  if  he  did
not  recover  the  powder,  and  the  latter,  judging  that  no  one
but  Richtausen  could  have  taken  it,  pursued  him,  well-
armed.  He  overtook  him  on  the  road  and  presented  a
pistol  to  his  head,  saying  he  would  shoot  him  if  he  did  not
return  the  powder.  Richtausen,  seeing  there  was  no  other
way  to  preserve  his  life,  acknowledged  his  possession  of  the
treasure,  and  pretended  to  surrender  it,  but,  by  an  ingenious
contrivance,  he  abstracted  a  considerable  quantity.

He  was  now  the  owner  of  a  substance  the  value  of  which
was  fully  known  to  him.  He  presented  himself  to  the
Emperor  Ferdinand  III.,  who  was  an  alchemist,  and  who,
aided  by  his  mine-master,  Count  Russe,  took  every  precau-
tion in  making  projection  with  some  of  the  powder  given
him  by  Richtausen.  He  converted  three  pounds  of  mercury
into  gold  with  one  grain.  The  force  of  this  tincture  was
one  upon  19,470.  The  emperor  is  said  to  have  caused  a
medal  to  be  struck,  bearing  the  effigy  of  Apollo  with  the
caduceus  of  Mercury,  and  the  motto — Divina  metamor-
phosis exhibita  Pr agues,  Jan.  15,  anno  1648,  in  prasentia
Sac.  Cces.  Majest.  Ferdiriaridi  Tertii.  The  reverse  bore
another  inscription — Raris  hczc  ut  hominibus  est  ars ;  ita
raro  in  lucent  prodit,  laudetur  Deus  in  ceterniim,  qui  partem
suce  infinites  potentics  novis  suis  abjectissimis  creaturis
communicat.

Richtausen  was  ennobled  by  the  title  of  Baron  Chaos.

Among  many  transformations  performed  by  the  same
powder  was  one  by  the  Elector  of  Mayence  in  165 1.  He
made  projection  with  all  the  precautions  possible  to  a
learned   and   skilful   philosopher.      The  powder,  enclosed

184        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

in  gum  tragacanth  to  retain  it  effectually,  was  put  into  the
wax  of  a  taper,  which  was  lighted,  the  wax  being  then
placed  at  the  bottom  of  a  crucet.  These  preparations  were
undertaken  by  the  Elector  himself.  He  poured  four  ounces
of  quicksilver  on  the  wax,  and  put  the  whole  into  a  fire
covered  with  charcoal,  above,  below,  and  around.  Then
they  began  blowing  to  the  utmost,  and  in  about  half  an
hour,  on  removing  the  coals,  they  saw  that  the  melted  gold
was  over  red,  the  proper  colour  being  green.  The  baron
said  that  the  matter  was  yet  too  high,  and  it  was  necessary
to  put  some  silver  into  it.  The  Elector  took  some  coins
out  of  his  pocket,  put  them  into  the  melting-pot,  combined
the  liquefied  silver  with  the  matter  in  the  crucet,  and  having
poured  out  the  whole  when  in  perfect  fusion  into  a  Hngot,
he  found,  after  cooling,  that  it  was  very  fine  gold,  but
rather  hard,  which  was  attributed  to  the  lingot.  On  again
melting,  it  became  exceedingly  soft,  and  the  master  of  the
mint  declared  to  his  highness  that  it  was  more  than  twenty-
four  carats,  and  that  he  had  never  seen  so  fine  a  quality  of
the  precious  metal.

ANONYMOUS  ADEPT.

Athanasius  Kircher,  the  illustrious  German  Jesuit,  re-
cords, in  his  Mundus  Subterraneus,  that  one  of  his  friends,
whose  veracity  he  could  not  doubt,  made  him  the  following
relation  : —

"  From  my  youth  I  made  a  peculiar  study  of  alchemy,
without  ever  attaining  the  object  of  that  science.  In  my
course  of  experiments  I  received  a  visit  from  a  man  who
was  entirely  unknown  to  me.  He  asked  very  politely  what
was  the  object  of  my  labours,  and  said,  without  giving  me
time  to  reply,  '  I  see  very  well  by  these  glasses  and  this
furnace  that  you  are  engaged  in  a  search  after  something

ANONYMOUS  ADEPT.  1S5

very  great  in  chemistry,  but,  believe  me,  you  never  will  in
that  way  attain  to  the  object  of  your  desire.'

"I  said  to  him — '  Sir,  if  you  have  better  instructions,  I
flatter  myself  that  you  will  give  them.'

'  Willingly,'  replied  this  generous  unknown.

"  Immediately  I  took  a  pen  and  wrote  down  the  process
he  dictated.

"  '  To  show  you  the  result,'  said  the  stranger,  '  let  us  both
work  together  according  to  what  you  have  written.'

"  We  proceeded,  and  our  operation  being  finished,  I  drew
from  the  chemical  vessel  a  brilliant  oil ;  it  congealed  into
a  mass,  which  I  broke  into  a  powder.  I  took  part  of  this
powder  and  projected  it  on  three  hundred  pounds  of  quick-
silver ;  it  was  in  a  little  time  converted  into  pure  gold,
much  more  perfect  than  that  of  the  mines  ;  it  endured  all
the  proofs  of  the  goldsmiths.

"  A  prodigy  so  extraordinary  struck  me  with  surprise
and  astonishment.  I  became  almost  stupid,  and,  as  another
Crcesus,  fancied  I  possessed  all  the  riches  in  the  universe.
My  gratitude  to  my  benefactor  was  more  than  I  could
express.  He  told  me  that  he  was  on  his  travels  and
wanted  nothing  whatever ;  '  but  it  gratifies  me,'  said  he,
'  to  counsel  those  who  are  unable  to  complete  the  Hermetic
work.'  I  pressed  him  to  remain  with  me,  but  he  retired  to
his  inn.  Next  day  I  called  there,  but  what  was  my  sur-
prise at  not  finding  him  in  it,  or  at  any  place  in  the  town !
I  had  many  questions  to  ask  him  which  left  me  in  doubt.
I  returned  to  work  according  to  the  receipt,  but  failed  in
the  result.  I  repeated  the  process  with  more  care  ;  it  was
all  in  vain !  Yet  I  persevered  until  I  had  expended  all  the
transmuted  gold  and  the  greater  part  of  my  own  property."

"  We  see,"  remarks  Kircher,  very  gravely,  "  by  this  true
history,  how  the  devil  seeks  to  deceive  men  who  are  led  by
a  lust  of  riches.     This  alchemist  was  convinced  he  had  an

l86         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

infernal  visitor,  and  he  destroyed  his  books,  furnace,  and
apparatus,  by  the  timely  advice  of  his  confessor."

ALBERT  BELIN.

Of  this  Benedictine,  who  was  born  at  Besancon  in  1610,
the  amateurs  of  alchemy  and  the  occult  sciences  have  much
prized  the  following  opuscula  : — "  A  Treatise  on  Talismans
or  Astral  figures,  demonstrating  the  exclusively  natural
origin  of  their  no  less  admirable  virtues,  with  the  manner
of  their  composition  and  their  practical  utility  ;  "  "  Justifi-
cation of  the  Sympathetic  Powder,"  published  together  at
Paris,  1 67 1,  i2mo  ;  and,  in  particular,  "  The  Adventures  of
an  Unknown  Philosopher  in  the  search  after  and  on  the
discovery  of  the  Philosophical  Stone."  This  is  divided  into
four  books,  and  the  manner  of  accomplishing  the  magnum
opus  is  indicated  with  perspicacity  in  the  fourth.  It  was
published  in  duodecimo  at  Paris  in  1664,  and  has  since
been  reprinted.  In  the  dedicatory  epistle  the  authorship
is  disclaimed  by  Belin,  who  remarks  that,  in  accordance
with  his  profession,  he  should  be  occupied  with  the  great
work  of  divine  grace  rather  than  with  the  natural  magnum
opus.  The  adventures  are  the  production  of  a  young  man
with  whom  he  was  once  well  acquainted,  and  who  was  then
lately  deceased.  In  the  fourth  book,  the  narrator  of  the
story  relates  how,  with  a  copy  of  Raymond  Lully  in  his
hand,  he  went  by  himself  into  a  wood,  and  there  he  was
interrupted  in  his  studies  by  a  wonderful  lady,  in  a  wonder-
ful silverine  dress,  embroidered  with  flowers  of  gold.  She
proves  to  be  Wisdom,  and  is  greeted  by  the  student  as  his
adorable  mistress.  In  her  infinite  grace  and  condescension,
the  divine  incarnation  of  philosophy  instructs  her  ravished
listener,  during  three  several  discourses,  in  the  nature,  effects,
and  excellences  of  the  rich  and  fruitful  stone,  of  the  matter

EIREN^EUS  PHILALETHES.  15/

whereof  it  is  composed,  and  of  its  development  into  abso-
lute perfection.

The  story  is  suggestive  and  curious,  but  in  literary  and
romantic  merit  it  will  bear  no  comparison  with  the  "  Che-
mical Nuptials  of  Christian  Rosencreutz."

EIRENiEUS  PHILALETHES.

In  "  The  Real  History  of  the  Rosicrucians,"  having  no
space  for  an  adequate  discussion  of  the  question,  I  followed
the  more  general  opinion  of  Hermetic  writers  by  identify-
ing the  author  of  the  Introitus  Apertas  with  the  author  of
the  Lumen  de  Lumine,  Thomas  Vaughan,  and  concluded
that  he  wrote  indifferently  under  the  pseudonyms  of  Euge-
nius  Philalethes  and  Eirenseus  Philalethes.

Certain  misleading  references  in  great  but  fallible  biblio-
graphies, and  one  piece  of  inextricable  confusion  in  the  text
of  the  Introifus  Apertus,  made  this  view  appear  to  be  fairly
reasonable.  However,  in  the  course  of  a  somewhat  detailed
notice,  a  writer  in  the  Saturday  Review  has  taken  me  to
task,  by  no  means  discourteously,  be  it  said,  for  inaccuracy
in  my  account  of  Vaughan.

On  the  authority  of  Ashmole  and  Wood,  he  states  that
this  personage  was  the  brother  of  the  Silurist  poet,  Henry
Vaughan,  that  he  was  born  at  Llansaintfraid,  in  Brecknock-
shire, during  the  year  1621,  that  he  graduated  at  Jesus
College,  Oxford,  took  orders,  and  returned  to  hold  the
living  of  his  native  parish.  Under  the  Commonwealth  he
was  ejected  as  a  Royalist,  and  then  betook  himself  to
chemical  experiments,  one  of  which  cost  him  his  life  on
the  27th  of  February  1665.

Now,  it  is  clear  that  these  facts  do  not  correspond  with
the  life,  such  as  we  know  it,  of  the  author  of  the  Introitus
Apertus,   and  the  identification  of  the  two  Philalethes,  a

I  88         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

habit  which  is  apparently  unknown  to  the  Saturday  Re-
viewer, must  be  therefore  abandoned.  Why  this  identifi-
cation has  hitherto  taken  place,  and  why,  with  some  mis-
givings, it  was  continued  in  my  work  on  the  Rosicrucians,
may  be  very  easily  explained.

The  grounds  of  the  confusion  are  these : — First,  the
similarity  of  the  assumed  name,  half  of  which  was  common
to  them  both,  while  the  other  half  appears  to  have  been
interchangeable  in  the  minds  of  historians  and  biblio-
graphers alike,  including  the  compilers  of  the  Catalogue
in  the  Library  of  the  British  Museum,  which  attributes  the
Introitus  Apertus  indiscriminately  to  both  Philalethes.
Second,  the  fact  that  almost  every  edition  and  translation
of  this  treatise  contains  the  following  passage  in  the  initial
paragraph  of  the  preface  : —

"  I  being  an  adept,  anonymous,  and  lover  of  learning,
decreed  to  write  this  little  Treatise  of  physical  secrets  in
the  year  1645,  in  the  twenty-third  year  of  my  age,  to  pay
my  duty  to  the  sons  of  art,  and  lend  my  hand  to  bring
them  out  of  the  labyrinth  of  error,  to  show  the  adepts  that
I  am  a  brother  equal  to  them.  I  presage  that  many  will
be  enlightened  by  these  my  labours.  They  are  no  fables,
but  real  experiments,  which  I  have  seen,  made,  and  know,
as  any  adept  will  understand.  I  have  often  in  writing  laid
aside  my  pen,  because  I  was  willing  to  have  concealed  the
truth  under  the  mask  of  envy ;  but  God  compelled  me  to
write,  Whom  I  could  not  resist :  He  alone  knows  the  heart
— to  Him  only  be  glory  for  ever.  I  undoubtedly  believe
that  many  will  become  blessed  in  this  last  age  of  the  world
with  this  arcanum.  May  the  will  of  God  be  done  !  I  con-
fess myself  unworthy  of  effecting  such  things — I  adore  the
holy  will  of  God,  to  Whom  all  things  are  subjected  !  He
created  and  preserves  them  to  this  end."

A   simple   arithmetical   operation   will    show   that    the

EIREN^EUS  PHILALETHES.  I  89

author  was  consequently  born  in  the  year  1621,  when  also
Eugenius  Philalethes,  otherwise  Thomas  Vaughan,  first
saw  the  light.  This  would  remain  unchallenged,  but  for
the  fact  that  the  original  edition*  of  the  Introitus  is  asserted
to  read  trigesimo  anno,  in  the  thirty-third  year,  instead  of
vigesimo  anno.  There  is  no  copy  of  this  original  edition
in  the  British  Museum,  and  my  knowledge  of  it  is  derived
from  the  reprint  in  Langlet  du  Fresnoy's  Histoire  de  la
PJiilosopJiie  Hermetique.  Eirenaeus,  in  accordance  with
the  later  impressions,  is  venerated  by  the  faithful  of
Hermes  as  the  adept  who  accomplished  the  grand  and
sublime  act  at  the  age  of  twenty-two.

These  grounds,  which  in  themselves  are  considerable,
may  be  supplemented  by  the  fact  that  there  is  much
similarity  in  the  style  and  methods  of  the  two  writers.

Eugenius  Philalethes  wrote  AntJiroposophia  Theomagica  ;
Anima  Magica  Abscondita,  published  together  in  1650;
Magia  Adainica,  1650;  "The  Man-Mouse"  (a  satire  on
Henry  More,  the  Platonist);  "The  Second  Wash,  or  The
Moore  {i.e.,  Henry  More)  Scoured  once  more,"  1651  ;
Lumen  de  Lumine,  165 1 ;  "  The  Fame  and  Confession  of  the
Fraternity  R.C.,"  1652  ;  Aula  Lucis,  1652  ;  "  Euphrates,  or
The  Waters  of  the  East,"  1655.  "A  Brief  Natural  History,"
published  in  1669,  also  bears  his  name,  and  in  1679  his
poetical  remains  were  published  by  Henry,  his  brother,  along
with  some  effusions  of  his  own,  entitled  Thalia  Rediviva.

Some  idea  of  the  confusion  which  exists  in  the  minds  of
biographers  and  bibliographers  alike  on  this  point  may  be
gathered  from  the  fact  that  some  authorities  represent
Thomas  Vaughan  as  dying  in  1656,  while  Chalmers'
Biographical  Dictionary  attributes  all  the  works  of
Eugenius  Philalethes  to  Henry  the  Silurist,  whom  he
terms  a  Rosicrucian  fanatic.

*  It  was  published  at  Amsterdam  in  1667,  and  is  supposed  to  have  been
free  from  the  numerous  typographical  errors  of  the  later  editions.

I90         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

If  much  be  confusion  which  concerns  Thomas  Vaughan,
all  is  chaos  in  respect  of  Eirenseus  Philalethes.  He  would
appear  to  have  emigrated  to  America  at  a  comparatively-
early  period.  The  Amsterdam  original  edition  of  his
Experimenta  de  Prceparatione  Mercurii  Sophici,  which  was
issued  by  Daniel  Elzevir  in  1668,  describes  that  work  as
ex  mannscripto  philosophi  A  mericani,  alias  ALyrencei  Phila-
lethes, natu  Angli,  habitatione  Cosmopolites.  In  this  way,
those  who  have  refrained  from  identifying  him  with
Thomas  Vaughan,  carefully  confuse  him  with  George
Starkey,  also  an  Anglo-American,  who  claimed  a  familiar
acquaintance  with  Philalethes,  and  who,  owing  his  initia-
tion to  him,  may  be  considered  his  philosophical  son,  but
not  his  alter  ego.  Starkey  returned  to  London,  and  wrote
several  chemical  books,  some  of  which  detail  the  transmu-
tations performed  by  Philalethes  in  the  apothecary's  trans-
atlantic laboratory.  He  died  of  the  plague  in  London  in
1665,  while  Eirenaeus  continued  publishing  for  many  years
after  that  date,  and  lived  for  some  time  on  intimate  terms
with  the  illustrious  Robert  Boyle,  who,  however,  has  given
us  no  biographical  particulars  concerning  him.

Not  the  least  curious  fact  in  the  history  of  this  mysterious
adept  is  the  apparently  complete  disappearance  of  numbers
of  his  printed  works,  which  an  authentic  list  extends  to
some  forty  volumes,  some  of  which  seem  perfectly  un-
known and  unheard  of  by  bibliographers  and  collectors
alike.  Langlet  du  Fresnoy  enumerates  several  manuscript
treatises,  but  gives  no  clue  to  their  whereabouts.

It  is  from  the  books  of  Philalethes  himself  that  we  must
be  contented  to  glean  the  scanty  facts  of  his  life.  The
thirteenth  chapter  of  the  Introitus  Apertus  ad  Occlusam
Regis  Palatium  contains  the  following  remarkable  account
of  its  author : —

"  All  alchemical  books  abound  with  obscure  enigmas  and

EIRENtEUS  PHILALETHES.  191

sophistical   operations.     I   have  not  written   in  this  style,
having  resigned  my  will  to  the  Divine  pleasure.     I  do  not
fear  that  the  art  will  be  disesteemed  because  I  write  plainly,
for  true  wisdom  will  defend  its  own  honour.     I  wish  gold
and  silver  were  as  mean  in  esteem  as  earth,  that  we  need
not  so  strictly  conceal  ourselves.     For  we  are  like  Cain,
driven  from  the  pleasant  society  we  formerly  had  without
fear ;  now  we  are  tossed  up  and  down  as  if  beset  with
furies  ;  nor  can  we  suppose  ourselves  safe  in  any  one  place
long.     We  weep  and  sigh,  complaining  to  the  Lord,  '  Be-
hold, whosoever  shall  find  me  will  slay  me  ! '     We  travel
through  many  nations  like  vagabonds,  and  dare  not  take
upon  us  the  care  of  a  family,  neither  do  we  possess  any
certain  habitation.     Although  we  possess  all  things  we  can
use  but  a  few ;  what,  therefore,  do  we  enjoy  except  the
speculations  of  our  minds  ?     Many  strangers  to  this  art
imagine  that  if  they  enjoyed  it  they  would  do  great  good  ;
so  I  believed  formerly,  but  the  danger  I  have  experienced
has  taught  me  otherwise.    Whoever  encounters  the  eminent
peril  of  his  life  will  act  with  more  caution  thenceforward.
I  found  the  world  in  a  most  wicked  state,  scarce  a  man
but  is  guided  by  some  selfish  and  unworthy  motive,  how-
ever honest  or  upright  he  is  judged  in  public.     An  adept
cannot  effect  the  works  of  mercy  to  an  uncommon  extent
without  in  some  degree  confiding  to  the  secrecy  of  others,
and  this  is  at  the  hazard  of  imprisonment  and  death.     I
lately  had  a  proof  of  it ;  for,  being  in  a  foreign  place,  I
administered  the  medicine  to  some  distressed  poor  persons
who  were  dying,  and  they  having  miraculously  recovered,
there  was  immediately  a  rumour  spread   abroad   of  the
elixir  of  life,  insomuch  that  I  was  forced  to  fly  by  night
with  exceeding  great  trouble,  having  changed  my  clothes,
shaved  my  head,  put  on  other  hair,  and  altered  my  name,
else  I  would  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  wicked  men  that

I  0,2         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

lay  in  wait  for  me,  merely  on  suspicion,  excited  by  the
thirst  of  gold.  I  could  mention  other  dangers  which  would
seem  ridiculous  to  those  who  did  not  stand  in  a  similar
situation.  They  think  they  would  manage  their  affairs
better,  but  they  do  not  consider  that  all  those  intelligent
people,  whose  society  is  chiefly  desirable,  are  extremely
discerning,  and  a  slight  conjecture  is  enough  to  produce  a
conspiracy ;  for  the  iniquity  of  men  is  so  great  that  I  have
known  a  person  to  have  been  strangled  with  a  halter  on
suspicion  ;  although  he  did  not  possess  the  art,  it  was  suffi-
cient that  a  desperate  man  had  report  of  it.  This  age
abounds  with  ignorant  alchemists ;  however  ignorant  of
science,  they  know  sufficient  to  discover  an  adept,  or  to
suspect  him.  An  appearance  of  secresy  will  cause  them  to
search  and  examine  every  circumstance  of  your  life.  If
you  cure  the  sick,  or  sell  a  large  quantity  of  gold,  the  news
is  circulated  all  through  the  neighbourhood.  The  gold-
smith knows  that  the  metal  is  too  fine,  and  it  is  contrary
to  law  for  any  one  to  alloy  it  who  is  not  a  regular  metal-
lurgist. I  once  sold  pure  silver  worth  £600  in  a  foreign
country.  The  goldsmith,  notwithstanding  I  was  dressed
as  a  merchant,  told  me  '  this  silver  was  made  by  art'  I
asked  the  reason  he  said  so.  He  replied,  '  I  know  the
silver  that  comes  from  Spain,  England,  &c.  This  is  purer
than  any  of  them.'  Hearing  this  I  withdrew.  There  is
no  better  silver  in  trade  than  the  Spanish,  but  if  I  had
attempted  to  reduce  my  silver  from  its  superior  purity,  and
was  discovered,  I  would  be  hanged  for  felony.  I  never
called  again  for  either  the  silver  or  the  price  of  it.  The
transmission  of  gold  and  silver  from  one  country  to  another
is  regulated  by  strict  laws,  and  this  is  enough  to  condemn
the  adept  who  appears  to  have  a  quantity  of  it.  Thus,
being  taught  by  these  difficulties,  I  have  determined  to  lie
hid,  and  will  communicate  the  art  to  thee  who  dreamest  of

EIRENJEUS  PHILALETHES.  I  93

performing  public  good,  that  we  may  see  what  you  will
undertake  when  you  obtain  it.

"  The  searcher  of  all  hearts  knows  that  I  write  the  truth  ;
nor  is  there  any  cause  to  accuse  me  of  envy.  I  write  with
an  unterrified  quill  in  an  unheard  of  style,  to  the  honour  of
God,  to  the  profit  of  my  neighbours,  with  contempt  of  the
world  and  its  riches  ;  because  Elias  the  artist  is  already
born,  and  now  glorious  things  are  declared  of  the  city  of
God.  I  dare  affirm  that  I  do  possess  more  riches  than  the
whole  known  world  is  worth,  but  I  cannot  make  use  of  it
because  of  the  snares  of  knaves.  I  disdain,  loathe,  and
detest  the  idolizing  of  silver  and  gold,  by  which  the  pomps
and  vanities  of  the  world  are  celebrated.  Ah,  filthy  evil !
Ah,  vain  nothingness  ?  Believe  ye  that  I  conceal  the  art
out  of  envy  ?  No,  verily  I  protest  to  you,  I  grieve  from
the  very  bottom  of  my  soul  that  we  are  driven  like  vaga-
bonds from  the  face  of  the  Lord  throughout  the  earth.
But  what  need  many  words  ?  The  thing  we  have  seen,
taught,  and  made,  which  we  have,  possess,  and  know,  that
we  do  declare ;  being  moved  with  compassion  for  the
studious,  and  with  indignation  of  gold,  silver,  and  precious
stones,  not  as  they  are  creatures  of  God,  far  be  it  from  us,
for  in  that  respect  we  honour  them,  and  think  them  worthy
of  esteem,  but  the  people  of  God  adore  them  as  well  as
the  world.  Therefore  let  them  be  ground  to  powder  like
the  golden  calf!  I  do  hope  and  expect  that  within  a  few
years  money  will  be  as  dross ;  and  that  prop  of  the  anti-
Christian  beast  will  be  dashed  to  pieces.  The  people
are  mad,  the  nations  rave,  an  unprofitable  wight  is  set  up
in  the  place  of  God.  At  our  long  expected  and  approach-
ing redemption,  the  New  Jerusalem  shall  abound  with
gold  in  the  streets,  the  gates  thereof  shall  be  made  with
entire  stones,  most  precious  ones,  and  the  tree  of  life  in
the  midst  of  Paradise  shall  give  leaves  for  the  healing  of

N

194         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

the  nations.  I  know  these  my  writings  will  be  to  men
as  pure  gold  ;  and  through  them  gold  and  silver  will  be-
come vile  as  dirt.  Believe  me,  the  time  is  at  the  door,  I
see  it  in  spirit,  when  we,  adeptists,  shall  return  from  the
four  corners  of  the  earth,  nor  shall  we  fear  any  snares  that
are  laid  against  our  lives,  but  we  shall  give  thanks  to  the
Lord  our  God.  I  would  to  God  that  every  ingenious  man
in  the  whole  earth  understood  this  science ;  then  it  would
only  be  valued  for  its  wisdom,  and  virtue  only  would  be
had  in  honour.  I  know  many  adepts  who  have  vowed  a
most  secret  silence.  I  am  of  another  judgment  because
of  the  hope  I  have  in  my  God  ;  therefore  I  consulted
not  with  my  brethren,  or  with  flesh  and  blood,  in  these
my  writings :  God  grant  that  it  be  to  the  glory  of  His
name ! "

We  are  told  in  the  preface  to  "  Ripley  Revived "  the
authors  to  whom  he  was  at  any  rate  chiefly  indebted.
"  For  my  own  part,  I  have  cause  to  honour  Bernard
Trevisan,  who  is  very  ingenious,  especially  in  the  letter  to
Thomas  of  Boulogne,  where  I  seriously  confess  I  received
the  main  light  in  the  hidden  secret.  I  do  not  remember
that  ever  I  learned  anything  from  Raymond  Lully.  Some
who  are  not  adepts  give  more  instruction  to  a  beginner
than  one  whom  perfect  knowledge  makes  cautious.  I
learned  the  secret  of  the  magnet  from  one,  the  chalybs  from
another,  the  use  of  Diana's  Doves  from  a  third,  the  air  or
cameleon  from  another,  the  gross  preparation  of  the  dis-
solvent in  another,  the  number  of  eagles  in  another ;  but
for  operations  on  the  true  matter  and  signs  of  the  true
mercury,  I  know  of  none  like  Ripley,  though  Flamel  be
eminent.  I  know  what  I  say,  having  learned  by  experience
what  is  truth  and  what  is  error.

"  I  have  read  misleading,  sophistical  writers,  and  made
many  toilsome,  laborious  experiments,  though  but  young  ;

EIREN^US  PHILALETHES.  195

and  having  at  length,  through  the  undeserved  mercy  of
God,  arrived  at  my  haven  of  rest,  I  shall  stretch  out  my
hand  to  such  as  are  behind.  I  have  wrote  several  treatises,
one  in  English,  very  plain  but  not  perfected — unfortunately,
it  slipped  out  of  my  hand.  I  shall  be  sorry  if  it  comes
abroad  into  the  world — two  in  Latin,  Brevis  Manuductio
ad  Rubinem  Ccelestem,  and  Fons  Chymiccz  Philosophies — ■
these,  for  special  reasons,  I  resolve  to  suppress.  Two
others  I  lately  wrote,  which,  perhaps,  you  may  enjoy,
namely,  Ars  Metallorum  Metamorphoses,  and  Introitus
Apertus  ad  Occlusum  Regis  Palatium.  I  wrote  two  poems
in  English,  which  are  lost ;  also,  in  English,  an  Enchiridion
of  experiments,  a  diurnal  of  meditations,  with  many
receipts  declaring  the  whole  secret,  and  an  Enigma
annexed.  These  also  fell  into  the  hands  of  one  who,  I
conceive,  will  never  restore  them."

The  delinquent  in  question  was  undoubtedly  George
Starkey,  who  published  the  "  Marrow  of  Alchemy  "  under
the  name  of  Eirenseus  Philoponos  Philalethes  ;  this  metrical
account  of  the  Hermetic  theory  and  practice  is  apparently
the  vanished  verse  of  the  adept,  but  it  contains  in  addition
an  account  of  the  editor's  own  initiation,  which  is  certainly
worth  transcribing.

"  I  have  now  to  assert,  from  my  own  experience,  facts  of
transmutation  of  which  I  was  an  eye-witness.  I  was  well
acquainted  with  an  artist  with  whom  I  have  often  con-
versed on  the  subject,  and  I  saw  in  his  possession  the  white
and  the  red  elixir  in  very  large  quantity.  He  gave  me
upwards  of  two  ounces  of  the  white  medicine,  of  sufficient
virtue  to  convert  120,000  times  its  weight  into  the  purest
virgin  silver.  With  this  treasure  I  went  to  work  ignorantly
upon  multiplication,  and  was  caught  in  the  trap  of  my  own
covetousness,  for  I  expended  or  wasted  all  this  tincture.
However,  I  made  projection  of  part  of  it,  which  is  sufficient

I96         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

for  my  present  purpose,  enabling  me  to  assert  the  pos-
sibility of  the  art  from  ocular  demonstration.  I  have
tinged  many  times  hundreds  of  ounces  into  the  best  silver.
Of  a  pound  of  mercury  I  have  made  within  less  than  a
scruple  of  a  pound  of  silver ;  of  lead,  little  more  waste ;
but  'tis  wondrous  to  see  tin — although  a  dross  was  burnt
from  it,  yet  its  weight  increased  in  the  fire.  I  essayed  the
medicine  on  copper,  iron,  even  on  brass  and  pewter,  on
spelter,  solder,  tinglass,  mercury,  and  on  regulus  of  anti-
mony ;  and  I  can  say  with  truth  it  conquers  all  metallic
things,  and  brings  them  all  to  perfection.  I  found  there
was  nothing  akin  to  it  but  it  would  tinge  into  pure  silver.
Even  perfect  gold  was  penetrated  and  changed  into  a  white
glass,  that  would  transmute,  but  in  small  quantity,  inferior
metals  into  silver ;  but  when  this  silver  was  assayed  it  was
found  to  abide  aquafortis,  cupel  of  antimony,  and  weighed
as  gold,  so  that  it  was  white  gold.  This  was  because  the
white  tincture  had  fermented  with  red  earth,  and  both
virtues  coming  into  projection,  produced  silver-coloured
gold,  or  silver  equalling  gold  in  perfection,  but  wanting  its
hue.  I  did  not  know  the  value  of  this  silver  till  my
medicine  was  nearly  gone,  and  sold  eighty  ounces  of  it  at
the  common  price,  though  it  was  as  valuable  as  gold.  I
projected  the  medicine  on  pure  silver,  and  had  a  chrystal-
line  metal,  like  burnished  steel  or  mirror,  but  there  was  no
increase  of  virtue  in  this ;  it  tinged  only  so  much  as  it
would  if  it  had  not  been  projected  on  silver.

"  The  artist  who  gave  me  this  is  still  living  ;  I  prize  him
as  my  own  life ;  I  wish  his  happiness,  for  he  has  been  a
sure  friend.  He  is  at  present  on  his  travels,  visiting  artists
and  collecting  antiquities  as  a  citizen  of  the  world.  He  is
an  Englishman  of  an  ancient,  honourable  family,  who  now
live  in  the  place  wherein  he  was  born.  He  is  scarcely
thirty-three  years  of  age,  and  is  rarely  learned.     You  can-

EIREN^EUS  PHILALETHES.  197

not  know  more  of  him  from  me,  nor  can  you  be  acquainted
with  him  ;  his  acquaintance  with  me  is  as  unexpected  as
his  love  was  cordial.  I  had  often  seen  by  experiment  that
he  was  master  of  the  white  and  red  before  he  would  vouch-
safe to  trust  me  with  a  small  bit  of  the  stone,  nor  would  I
press  him,  trusting  for  his  courtesy  soon  or  late,  which  I
shortly  received,  by  what  I  have  said  of  the  white  medicine,
and  also  a  portion  of  his  mercury.

"  He  told  me  this  mercury  was  a  matchless  treasure,  if
God  would  open  my  eyes  to  the  use  of  it,  else  I  might
grope  in  blindness.  With  this  dissolvent,  which  is  the
hidden  secret  of  all  masters,  he  exceedingly  multiplied  his
red  stone.  I  saw  him  put  a  piece  of  the  red,  by  weight,
into  that  same  mercury,  which  then  digested,  dissolved  it,
and  made  it  change  colour,  and  in  three  days  it  passed
through  the  process  of  black,  white,  and  red.

"  I  thought  that  if  the  red  and  white  could  be  multiplied
that  one  lineal  progress  led  to  either,  and  on  this  false
ground  I  destroyed  ten  parts  in  twelve  of  my  medicine.
This  loss  did  not  suffice  me,  for  I  mixed  the  remaining  two
parts  with  ten  times  their  weight  of  Luna,  and  fell  to  work
again,  hoping  to  make  up  for  my  first  error.  I  then  began
to  think  upon  the  maxims  of  the  old  books,  revolved  in  my
mind  thejagreement  of  my  work  with  the  laws  of  Nature,
and  at  length  I  concluded  that  each  thing  is  to  be  disposed
according  to  its  condition.

"  When  I  found  that  my  vain  attempts  only  threw  away
the  tincture,  I  stopped  my  hand,  resolving  to  keep  the  few
grains  left  for  some  urgent  necessity,  which  for  its  preserva-
tion I  mixed  with  ten  parts  of  Luna.

"  I  tried  some  of  the  mercury  before  mentioned  on  gold,
my  desire  being  to  see  the  work  carried  forward  and
brought  to  Luna,  if  not  to  Sol.  This,  then,  I  projected  on
mercury.     After  having  alloyed  it  with  silver  it  tinged  fifty

I98         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

parts,  and  I  strove  to  imbibe  it,  but  in  vain,  because  I  had
let  it  cool.  I  foolishly  supposed  to  obtain  the  oil  by  im-
bibition. However,*Nature  carried  on  the  work  into  black-
ness, the  colours,  and  whiteness,  which  yet  was  far  short  of
what  I  looked  for.

"  In  these  trials  I  wasted  nearly  all  my  mercury  likewise ;
but  I  had  for  my  consolation  the  witnessing  of  transmuta-
tions, and  those  extraordinary  processes  which  I  beheld
with  mine  own  eyes,  and  blessed  God  for  seeing.

"  In  some  time  I  met  my  good  friend  and  told  all  my
mishaps,  hoping  that  he  would  supply  me  as  before ;  but
he,  considering  that  my  failures  had  made  me  wise,  would
not  trust  me  with  more,  lest  I  should  pluck  the  Hesperian
tree  as  I  chose  for  my  own  and  other  men's  hurt.  He  said
to  me,  '  Friend,  if  God  elects  you  to  this  art,  He  will  in  due
time  bestow  the  knowledge  of  it ;  but  if  in  His  wisdom  He
judge  you  unfit,  or  that  you  would  do  mischief  with  it,
accursed  be  that  man  who  would  arm  a  maniac  to  the
harm  of  his  fellow-creatures.  While  you  were  ignorant,  I
gave  you  a  great  gift,  so  that,  if  Heaven  ordained,  the  gift
should  destroy  itself.  I  see  it  is  not  right  you  should  enjoy
it  at  present ;  what  providence  denies  I  cannot  give  you,
or  I  should  be  guilty  of  your  misconduct'

"  I  confess  this  lesson  of  divinity  did  not  please  me ;  as
I  hoped  so  much  from  him,  his  answer  was  a  disappoint-
ment. He  further  said  that  God  had  granted  me  know-
ledge, but  withheld  the  fruit  of  it  for  the  present.

"  Then  I  gave  him  to  understand  how  I  had  discovered
the  skill  of  the  water,  '  by  which,  in  time,  I  may  obtain
what  you  deny,  and  which  I  am  resolved  to  attempt'

"  '  If  so,  then,'  he  replied,  •  attend  to  what  I  say,  and  you
may  bless  God  for  it.  Know  that  we  are  severely  bound
by  strong  vows  never  to  supply  any  man  by  our  art  who
might  confound  the  world,  if  he  held  it  at  will ;  and  all

EIREN^EUS   PHILALETHES.  199

the  evil  he  does  is  left  at  the  door  of  that  adept  who  is  so
imprudent.  Consider  what  a  prize  you  had  both  of  the
stone  and  of  the  mercury.  Would  not  any  one  say  that  he
must  be  mad  that  would  throw  it  all  away  without  profit  ?

" '  Had  you  been  guided  by  reason  you  might  have
enough  of  what  I  gave  you.  Your  method  was  to  add  to
the  purest  gold  but  a  grain  of  the  stone  ;  in  fusion  it  would
unite  to  it,  and  then  you  might  go  about  the  work  with
your  mercury,  which  would  speedily  mix  with  that  gold
and  greatly  shorten  the  work,  which  you  might  easily  govern
to  the  red  ;  and  as  you  saw  how  I  wedded  new  gold  to  such
sulpliur  and  mercury,  you  saw  the  weight,  time,  and  heat,
what  more  could  you  have  wished  ?  And  seeing  you  know
the  art  of  preparing  the  fiery  merairy,  you  might  have  as
much  store  as  any  one.

"  '  But  you  do  not  perceive  by  this  that  God  is  averse  to
you,  and  caused  you  to  waste  the  treasure  I  gave  you.  He
sees  perhaps  that  you  would  break  His  holy  laws  and  do
wrong  with  it ;  and  though  He  has  imparted  so  much
knowledge,  I  plainly  see  that  He  will  keep  you  some  years
without  the  enjoyment  of  that  which  no  doubt  you  would
misuse.  Know,  that  if  you  seek  this  art  without  a  ferment,
you  must  beware  of  frequent  error ;  you  will  err  and  stray
from  the  right  path,  notwithstanding  all  your  care,  and
perhaps  may  not  in  the  course  of  your  life  attain  this
treasure,  which  is  the  alone  gift  of  God.  If  you  pursue
the  straightest  course  it  will  take  a  year  to  arrive  at  per-
fection ;  but  if  you  take  wrong  ways,  you  shall  be  often  left
behind,  sometimes  a  year,  and  must  renew  your  charge  and
pains,  repenting  of  your  loss  and  error,  in  much  distraction,
care,  and  perils,  with  an  expense  you  can  hardly  spare.
Attend  therefore  to  my  counsel,  and  I  shall  disclose  the
secret  conditionally.  Swear  before  the  mighty  God  that
you  will,  for  such  a  time,  abstain  from  the  attempt  or  prac-

200         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

tice  ;  nor  shall  you  at  that  time,  even  if  you  are  at  the
point  of  death,  disclose  some  few  points  that  I  will  reveal
to  you  in  secrecy.'

"  I  swore,  and  he  unlocked  his  mind  to  me,  and  proved
that  he  did  not  deceive  by  showing  me  those  lights  which
I  shall  honestly  recount,  as  far  as  my  oath  will  admit."

Eirenaeus  Philalethes  has  the  credit  of  unexampled  per-
spicuity, and  his  Introitus  Apertus,  in  particular,  is  an
abridgement  or  digest  of  the  whole  turba  philosophorum.
Those  who  are  in  search  of  the  physical  secret  should  begin
by  the  careful  study  of  his  works ;  thence  they  should  pro-
ceed to  a  consideration  of  the  authors  whom  he  himself
recommends,  after  which  the  best  Hermetic  writers,  from
the  days  of  Geber  downward,  should  be  taken  in  their
chronological  order,  carefully  analysed,  and  their  points  of
difference  and  agreement  duly  noted.

The  physical  nature  of  the  alchemical  arcana  in  the
custody  of  the  true  Philalethes  are  best  seen  by  the  narra-
tives and  commentaries  of  his  pupil,  George  Starkey.  The
mystery  which  surrounds  the  adept  stimulates  unbalanced
imaginations,  and  dilates  into  Titanic  stature  the  projects
which  he  cherished  and  the  wonders  he  is  supposed  to  have
accomplished.  The  Introitus  Apertus,  amid  much  that  is
mystical  and  much  that  suggests  an  exceedingly  romantic
interpretation,  is  a  treatise  of  practical  alchemy,  and  further
elaborates  the  principles,  evidently  physical,  that  are  ex-
pounded in  the  metrical  essays  which  were  preserved  and
made  public  by  Starkey.

PIERRE  JEAN  FABRE.

This  physician  of  Montpellier,  to  whom  chemistry  is
indebted  for  some  steps  in  its  progress,  flourished  at  the

JOHN  FREDERICK  HELVETIUS.  201

beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century.  He  believed  in  the
transmutation  of  metals,  but  is  not  considered  as  an  adept,
though  he  wrote  seventeen  treatises  on  this  subject,  and  on
the  Spagiric  Medicine.  His  most  curious  work  is  Alchi-
mista  Christianas.  Toulouse,  1632,  8vo.  In  Herades
Pioc/iymicus,  published  at  the  same  place  two  years  later,
he  maintains  that  the  labours  of  Hercules  are  allegories,
which  contain  the  arcana  of  Hermetic  philosophy.

He  defines  the  philosophical  stone  as  the  seed  out  of
which  gold  and  silver  are  generated.  It  is  three  and  yet
one  ;  it  may  be  found  in  all  compounded  substances,  and
is  formed  of  salt,  mercury,  and  sulphur,  which,  however,
are  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  vulgar  substances  so
denominated.

HELVETIUS.

The  following  singularly  impressive  and  even  convincing
testimony  to  the  alleged  fact  of  metallic  transmutation  was
published  by  the  eminent  Dutch  physician,  John  Frederick
Helvetius,  at  the  Hague  in  1667,  and  was  dedicated  to  his
friends,  Dr  Retius  of  Amsterdam,  Dr  Hansius  of  Heidel-
berg, and  Dr  Menzelin  of  Brandeburg.

"  On  the  27th  December  1666,  in  the  afternoon,  a  stranger,
in  a  plain,  rustic  dress,  came  to  my  house  at  the  Hague.
His  manner  of  address  was  honest,  grave,  and  authorita-
tive ;  his  stature  was  low,  with  a  long  face  and  hair  black,
his  chin  smooth.  He  seemed  like  a  native  of  the  north  of
Scotland,  and  I  guessed  he  was  about  forty-four  years  old.
After  saluting  me,  he  requested  me  most  respectfully  to
pardon  his  rude  intrusion,  but  that  his  love  of  the  pyro-
technic art  made  him  visit  me.  Having  read  some  of  my
small  treatises,  particularly  that  against  the  sympathetic
powder  of  Sir  Kenelm  Digby,  and   observed  therein  my

202         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

doubt  of  the  Hermetic  mystery,  it  caused  him  to  request
this  interview.  He  asked  me  if  I  still  thought  there  was
no  medicine  in  Nature  which  could  cure  all  diseases,  unless
the  principal  parts,  as  the  lungs,  liver,  &c,  were  perished,
or  the  time  of  death  were  come.  To  which  I  replied,  I
never  met  with  an  adept,  or  saw  such  a  medicine,  though  I
read  much  of  it,  and  often  wished  for  it.  Then  I  asked
if  he  was  a  physician.  He  said  he  was  a  founder  of  brass,
yet  from  his  youth  learned  many  rare  things  in  chemistry,
particularly  of  a  friend — the  manner  to  extract  out  of
metals  many  medicinal  arcana  by  the  use  of  fire.  After
discoursing  of  experiments  in  metals,  he  asked  me,  Would
I  know  the  philosophers'  stone  if  I  saw  it  ?  I  answered,  I
would  not;  though  I  read  much  of  it  in  Paracelsus,  Hel-
mont,  Basil,  and  others,  yet  I  dare  not  say  I  could  know
the  philosophers'  matter.  In  the  interim  he  drew  from  his
breast  pocket  a  neat  ivory  box,  and  out  of  it  took  three
ponderous  lumps  of  the  stone,  each  about  the  size  of  a
small  walnut.  They  were  transparent  and  of  a  pale  brim-
stone colour,  whereto  some  scales  of  the  crucible  adhered
when  this  most  noble  substance  was  melted.  The  value  of
it  I  since  calculated  was  twenty  tons  weight  of  gold.  When
I  had  greedily  examined  and  handled  the  stone  almost  a
quarter  of  an  hour,  and  heard  from  the  owner  many  rare
secrets  of  its  admirable  effects  in  human  and  metallic
bodies,  also  its  other  wonderful  properties,  I  returned  him
this  treasure  of  treasures,  truly  with  a  most  sorrowful  mind,
like  those  who  conquer  themselves,  yet,  as  was  just,  very
thankfully  and  humbly.  I  further  desired  to  know  why
the  colour  was  yellow,  and  not  red,  ruby  colour,  or  purple,
as  the  philosophers  write.  He  answered,  that  was  nothing,
for  the  matter  was  mature  and  ripe  enough.  Then  I
humbly  requested  him  to  bestow  a  little  piece  of  the  medi-
cine on  me,  in  perpetual  memory  of  him,  though  but  of  the

JOHN  FREDERICK  HELVETIUS.  203

size  of  a  coriander  or  hemp  seed.  He  presently  answered,
'  Oh  no,  this  is  not  lawful,  though  thou  wouldst  give  me
as  many  ducats  in  gold  as  would  fill  this  room,  not  for  the
value  of  the  metal,  but  for  some  particular  consequences.
Nay,  if  it  were  possible,'  said  he,  '  that  fire  could  be  burnt
by  fire,  I  would  rather  at  this  instant  cast  all  this  substance
into  the  fiercest  flames.'  He  then  demanded  if  I  had  a
more  private  chamber,  as  this  was  seen  from  the  public
street.  I  presently  conducted  him  into  the  best  furnished
room  backward,  not  doubting  but  he  would  bestow  part
thereof  or  some  great  treasure  on  me.  He  entered  without
wiping  his  shoes,  although  they  were  full  of  snow  and  dirt.
He  asked  me  for  a  little  piece  of  gold,  and,  pulling  off  his
cloak,  opened  his  vest,  under  which  he  had  five  pieces  of
gold.  They  were  hanging  to  a  green  silk  ribbon,  and  were
of  the  size  of  breakfast  plates.  This  gold  so  far  excelled
mine  that  there  was  no  comparison  for  flexibility  and
colour.  The  inscriptions  engraven  upon  them  he  granted
me  to  write  out ;  they  were  pious  thanksgivings  to  God,
dated  20th  August  1666,  with  the  characters  of  the  Sun,
Mercury,  the  Moon,  and  the  signs  of  Leo  and  Libra.

"  I  was  in  great  admiration,  and  desired  to  know  where
and  how  he  obtained  them.  He  answered,  '  A  foreigner,
who  dwelt  some  days  in  my  house,  said  he  was  a  lover  of
this  science,  and  came  to  reveal  it  to  me.  He  taught  me
various  arts — first,  of  ordinary  stones  and  chrystals,  to
make  rubies,  chrysolites,  sapphires,  &c,  much  more  valuable
than  those  of  the  mine ;  and  how  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour
to  make  an  oxide  of  iron,  one  dose  of  which  would  infallibly
cure  the  pestilential  dysentery,  or  bloody  flux  ;  also  how  to
make  a  metallic  liquor  to  cure  all  kinds  of  dropsies  most
certainly  and  in  four  days ;  as  also  a  limpid,  clear  water,
sweeter  than  honey,  by  which  in  two  hours  of  itself,  in  hot
sand,  it  would  extract  the  tincture  of  garnets,  corals,  glasses,

204         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

and  such  like.'  He  said  more,  which  I,  Helvetius,  did  not
observe,  my  mind  being  occupied  to  understand  how  a
noble  juice  could  be  drawn  out  of  minerals  to  transmute
metals.  He  told  me  his  said  master  caused  him  to  bring
a  glass  of  rain-water,  and  to  put  some  silver  leaf  into  it,
which  was  dissolved  therein  within  a  quarter  of  an  hour,
like  ice  when  heated.  '  Presently  he  drank  to  me  the  half,
and  I  pledged  him  the  other  half,  which  had  not  so  much
taste  as  sweet  milk,  but  whereby,  methought,  I  became
very  light-headed.  I  thereupon  asked  if  this  were  a  philo-
sophical drink,  and  wherefore  we  drank  this  potion  ;  but
he  replied,  I  ought  not  to  be  so  curious.'  By  the  said
master's  directions,  a  piece  of  a  leaden  pipe  being  melted,
he  took  a  little  sulphureous  powder  out  of  his  pocket,  put
a  little  of  it  on  the  point  of  a  knife  into  the  melted  lead,
and  after  a  great  blast  of  the  bellows,  in  a  short  time  he
poured  it  on  the  red  stones  of  the  kitchen  chimney.  It
proved  most  excellent  pure  gold,  which  the  stranger  said
brought  him  into  such  trembling  amazement  that  he  could
hardly  speak  ;  but  his  master  encouraged  him  saying,  '  Cut
for  thyself  the  sixteenth  part  of  this  as  a  memorial,  and
give  the  rest  away  among  the  poor,'  which  the  stranger  did,
distributing  this  alms,  as  he  affirmed,  if  my  memory  fail
not,  at  the  Church  of  Sparenda.  '  At  last,'  said  he,  '  the
generous  foreigner  taught  me  thoroughly  this  divine  art.'

"  As  soon  as  his  relation  was  finished,  I  asked  my  visitor
to  show  me  the  effect  of  transmutation  and  so  confirm  my
faith  ;  but  he  declined  it  for  that  time  in  such  a  discreet
manner  that  I  was  satisfied,  he  promising  to  come  again  in
three  weeks,  to  show  me  some  curious  arts  in  the  fire,
provided  it  were  then  lawful  without  prohibition.  At  the
three  weeks  end  he  came,  and  invited  me  abroad  for  an
hour  or  two.  In  our  walk  we  discoursed  of  Nature's  secrets,
but  he  was  very  silent  on  the  subject  of  the  great  elixir

JOHN  FREDERICK  HELVETIUS.  2C>5

gravely  asserting  that  it  was  only  to  magnify  the  sweet
fame  and  mercy  of  the  most  glorious  God  ;  that  few  men
endeavoured  to  serve  Him,  and  this  he  expressed  as  a
pastor  or  minister  of  a  church  ;  but  I  recalled  his  attention,
entreating  him  to  show  me  the  metallic  mystery,  desiring
also  that  he  would  eat,  drink,  and  lodge  at  my  house,  which
I  pressed,  but  he  was  of  so  fixed  a  determination  that  all
my  endeavours  were  frustrated.  I  could  not  forbear  to
tell  him  that  I  had  a  laboratory  ready  for  an  experiment,
and  that  a  promised  favour  was  a  kind  of  debt.  'Yes,
true,'  said. he,  'but  I  promised  to  teach  thee  at  my  return,
with  this  proviso,  if  it  were  not  forbidden.'

"  When  I  perceived  that  all  this  was  in  vain,  I  earnestly
requested  a  small  crumb  of  his  powder,  sufficient  to  trans-
mute a  few  grains  of  lead  to  gold  ;  and  at  last,  out  of  his
philosophical  commiseration,  he  gave  me  as  much  as  a
turnip  seed  in  size,  saying,  '  Receive  this  small  parcel  of
the  greatest  treasure  of  the  world,  which  truly  few  kings  or
princes  have  ever  seen  or  known.'  *  But,'  I  said,  '  this
perhaps  will  not  transmute  four  grains  of  lead,'  whereupon
he  bid  me  deliver  it  back  to  him,  which,  in  hopes  of  a
greater  parcel,  I  did ;  but  he,  cutting  half  off  with  his  nail,
flung  it  into  the  fire,  and  gave  me  the  rest  wrapped  neatly
up  in  blue  paper,  saying,  '  It  is  yet  sufficient  for  thee.'  I
answered  him,  indeed  with  a  most  dejected  countenance,
'  Sir,  what  means  this  ?  The  other  being  too  little,  you
give  me  now  less.'  He  told  me  to  put  into  the  crucible
half  an  ounce  of  lead,  for  there  ought  to  be  no  more  lead
put  in  than  the  medicine  can  transmute.  I  gave  him  great
thanks  for  my  diminished  treasure,  concentrated  truly  in
the  superlative  degree,  and  put  it  charily  up  into  my  little
box,  saying  I  meant  to  try  it  the  next  day,  nor  would  I
reveal  it  to  any.  '  Not  so,  not  so,'  said  he,  '  for  we  ought
to  divulge  all  things  to  the  children  of  art  which  may  tend

206         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

alone  to  the  honour  of  God,  that  so  they  may  live  in  the
theosophical  truth.'  I  now  made  a  confession  to  him,  that
while  the  mass  of  his  medicine  was  in  my  hands,  I  endea-
voured to  scrape  away  a  little  of  it  with  my  nail,  and  could
not  forbear ;  but  scratched  off  so  very  little,  that,  it  being
picked  from  my  nail,  wrapped  in  a  paper,  and  projected  on
melted  lead,  I  found  no  transmutation,  but  almost  the
whole  mass  of  lead  sublimed,  while  the  remainder  was  a
glassy  earth.  At  this  unexpected  account  he  immediately
said,  'You  are  more  dexterous  to  commit  theft  than  to
apply  the  medicine,  for  if  you  had  only  wrapped  up  the
stolen  prey  in  yellow  wax,  to  preserve  it  from  the  fumes  of
the  lead,  it  would  have  sunk  to  the  bottom,  and  transmuted
it  to  gold ;  but  having  cast  it  into  the  fumes,  the  violence
of  the  vapour,  partly  by  its  sympathetic  alliance,  carried
the  medicine  quite  away.'  I  brought  him  the  crucible,  and
he  perceived  a  most  beautiful  saffron-like  tincture  sticking
to  the  sides.  He  promised  to  come  next  morning  at  nine
o'clock,  to  show  me  that  this  tincture  would  transmute  the
lead  into  gold.  Having  taken  his  leave,  I  impatiently
awaited  his  return,  but  the  next  day  he  came  not,  nor  ever
since.  He  sent  an  excuse  at  half-past  nine  that  morning,
and  promised  to  come  at  three  in  the  afternoon,  but  I
never  heard  of  him  since.  I  soon  began  to  doubt  the
whole  matter.  Late  that  night  my  wife,  who  was  a  most
curious  student  and  inquirer  after  the  art,  came  soliciting
me  to  make  an  experiment  of  that  little  grain  of  the  stone,
to  be  assured  of  the  truth.  '  Unless  this  be  done,'  said  she,
'  I  shall  have  no  rest  or  sleep  this  night.'  She  being  so
earnest,  I  commanded  a  fire  to  be  made,  saying  to  myself,
'  I  fear,  I  fear  indeed,  this  man  hath  deluded  me.'  My
wife  wrapped  the  said  matter  in  wax,  and  I  cut  half  an
ounce  of  lead,  and  put  it  into  a  crucible  in  the  fire.  Being
melted,  my  wife  put  in  the  medicine,  made  into  a  small

JOHN  FREDERICK  HELVETIUS.  2C>7

pill  with  the  wax,  which  presently  made  a  hissing  noise,
and  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  the  mass  of  lead  was  totally-
transmuted  into  the  best  and  finest  gold,  which  amazed  us
exceedingly.  We  could  not  sufficiently  gaze  upon  this
admirable  and  miraculous  work  of  nature,  for  the  melted
lead,  after  projection,  showed  on  the  fire  the  rarest  and
most  beautiful  colours  imaginable,  settling  in  green,  and
when  poured  forth  into  an  ingot,  it  had  the  lively  fresh
colour  of  blood.  When  cold  it  shined  as  the  purest  and
most  splendid  gold.  Truly  all  those  who  were  standing
about  me. were  exceedingly  startled,  and  I  ran  with  this
aurified  lead,  being  yet  hot,  to  the  goldsmith,  who  wondered
at  the  fineness,  and  after  a  short  trial  by  the  test,  said  it
was  the  most  excellent  gold  in  the  world.

"  The  next  day  a  rumour  of  this  prodigy  went  about  the
Hague  and  spread  abroad,  so  that  many  illustrious  and
learned  persons  gave  me  their  friendly  visits  for  its  sake.
Amongst  the  rest,  the  general  Assay-master,  examiner  of
coins  of  this  province  of  Holland,  Mr  Porelius,  who  with
others  earnestly  besought  me  to  pass  some  part  of  the  gold
through  all  their  customary  trials,  which  I  did,  to  gratify
my  own  curiosity.  We  went  to  Mr  Brectel,  a  silversmith,
who  first  mixed  four  parts  of  silver  with  one  part  of  the
gold,  then  he  filed  it,  put  aquafortis  to  it,  dissolved  the
silver,  and  let  the  gold  precipitate  to  the  bottom  ;  the  solu-
tion being  poured  off  and  the  calx  of  gold  washed  with
water,  then  reduced  and  melted,  it  appeared  excellent  gold,
and  instead  of  a  loss  in  weight,  we  found  the  gold  was
increased,  and  had  transmuted  a  scruple  of  the  silver  into
gold  by  its  abounding  tincture.

"Doubting  whether  the  silver  was  now  sufficiently  sepa-
rated from  the  gold,  we  mingled  it  with  seven  parts  of
antimony,  which  we  melted  and  poured  out  into  a  cone,
and  blew  off  the  regulus  on  a  test,  where  we  missed  eight

208         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

grains  of  our  gold  ;  but  after  we  blew  away  the  red  of  the
antimony,  or  superfluous  scoria,  we  found  nine  grains  of
gold  for  our  eight  grains  missing,  yet  it  was  pale  and  silver-
like, but  recovered  its  full  colour  afterwards,  so  that  in  the
best  proof  of  fire  we  lost  nothing  at  all  of  this  gold,  but
gained,  as  aforesaid.  These  tests  I  repeated  four  times  and
found  it  still  alike,  and  the  silver  remaining  out  of  the
aquafortis  was  of  the  very  best  flexible  silver  that  could  be,
so  that  in  the  total  the  said  medicine  or  elixir  had  trans-
muted six  drams  and  two  scruples  of  the  lead  and  silver
into  most  pure  gold.

GUISEPPE  FRANCESCO  BORRI.

"  The  Rape  of  the  Lock  "  and  the  graceful  romance  of
"  Undine  "  have  familiarised  every  one  with  the  doctrine  of
elementary  spirits ;  but  the  chief  philosophical,  or  pseudo-
philosophical,  account  of  these  unseen  but  not  extra-mun-
dane intelligences  has  been  the  little  book  of  the  Comte  de
Gabalis,  a  series  of  conversations  on  the  secret  sciences.  It
is  generally  unknown  that  this  work  is  little  more  than  an
unacknowledged  translation  of  "  The  Key  to  the  Cabinet
of  the  Chevalier  Borri,  wherein  may  be  found  various
epistles — curious,  scientific,  and  chemical — with  politic  in-
structions, matters  which  deserve  well  of  the  curious,  and  a
variety  of  magnificent  secrets."  *  Borri,  who  appears  to
have  been  a  microcosmic  precursor  of  Cagliostro,  was  born
at  Milan  in  1627.  Some  proceedings  of  an  equivocal
nature  caused  him,  in  his  earlier  years,  to  seek  sanctuary
in  a  church,  but  subsequently,  like  Joseph  Balsamo,  he
underwent  a  complete  transformation,  announced  that  he

*  La  Chiave  del  Gabinetto  del  Cavagliere  G.  F.  Borri,  col  favor  della
quella  si  vedono  varie  lettere  scientifiche,  chimice,  e  curiosissime,  con  varie
istruzioni  politiche,  ed  altre  cose  degne  da  curiosita  e  molti  segreti  bellissimi.
Cologne  (Geneve),  1681,  i2mo.

GUISEPPE  FRANCESCO  BORRI.  2O9

was  inspired  of  Heaven,  that  he  was  elected  by  the  omni-
potent God  to  accomplish  the  reformation  of  mankind,  and
to  establish  the  Regnum  Dei.  There  should  be  henceforth
but  a  single  religion,  with  the  Pope  as  its  head,  and  a  vast
army,  with  Borri  as  general,  for  the  extermination  of  all
anti-catholics.  He  exhibited  a  miraculous  sword  which  St
Michael  had  deigned  to  present  him,  declared  that  he  had
beheld  in  the  empyrean  a  luminous  palm-branch  reserved
for  his  own  celestial  triumph,  announced  that  the  Holy
Virgin  was  divine  by  nature,  that  she  conceived  by  inspira-
tion, that  she  was  equal  with  her  Son,  and  was  present  in
the  Eucharist  with  him,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  had  taken
flesh  in  her  person,  that  the  second  and  third  persons  of  the
Trinity  are  inferior  to  the  Divine  Father,  that  the  fall  of
Lucifer  involved  that  of  a  vast  number  of  angels,  who  now
inhabit  the  regions  of  the  air,  that  it  was  by  the  inter-
vention of  these  rebellious  spirits  that  God  created  the
world  and  gave  life  to  all  beasts,  but  that  men  were  in
possession  of  a  Divine  soul  which  God  made  in  spite  of
himself.  Finally,  with  a  contradiction  more  French  than
Italian,  he  gave  out  that  he  was  himself  the  Holy  Spirit
incarnate.

Needless  to  say,  this  novel  gospel,  according  to  mystical
imposture,  brought  him  into  conflict  with  hierarchic  autho-
rity. He  was  arrested,  and,  on  the  3d  of  January  1661,  he
was  condemned  as  a  heretic,  and  as  guilty  of  various  mis-
deeds. He  managed  to  escape,  took  flight  northward,  and
by  the  expectation  of  the  stone  philosophical  contrived  to
cheat  Christina,  Queen  of  Sweden,  out  of  a  large  sum  of
money.  He  perambulated  various  parts  of  Germany,
making  many  supposed  projections,  visited  the  Low  Coun-
tries, and  in  1665  entered  as  a  professional  alchemist  into
the  service  of  the  King  of  Denmark.  He  announced  that
he  was   the  master  of  a   demon,   who   responded   to   his

O

2IO         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

magical  evocations,  and  dictated  the  operations  required
for  the  successful  transmutation  of  metals.  The  name  of
this  spook  was  Homunculus,  which,  according  to  Paracelsus,
signifies  a  minute  human  being  generated  unnaturally  with-
out the  assistance  of  the  female  organism,  from  the  sperm
of  a  man  or  a  boy.

The  monarch,  determined  to  monopolise  the  talents  of
his  adept,  decided  that  the  laboratory  of  Borri  should  be
transferred  to  his  own  palace.  The  alchemist,  with  an  eye
to  his  freedom,  objected  that  the  power  of  his  imp  would
be  destroyed  on  the  first  attempt  to  divide  him  from  a
certain  vast  iron  furnace,  which  was  the  sulphureous  abode
of  Homunculus ;  but  his  royal  patron  was  a  man  of  re-
sources, and  the  furnace  was  also  transported.  Five  years
passed  away,  and  Frederick  III.  having  died,  his  successor
determined  on  a  closer  investigation  of  the  transmutatory
secrets  of  Borri,  who  took  flight  at  the  rumour,  but  was
arrested  on  the  frontiers  of  Hungary,  and  imprisoned  at
Vienna,  where  he  was  claimed  by  the  Papal  Nuncio  as  a
fugitive  condemned  for  his  heresies.  He  was  sent  to
Rome,  and  entombed  in  the  Castle  of  St  Angelo.  There
he  was  permitted  to  continue  his  alchemical  processes,
which  were  pursued  unsuccessfully  till  his  death  in  the
year  1695.

"  The  Key  to  the  Cabinet  of  the  Chevalier  Borri "  has
never  been  actually  translated ;  the  adaptation  by  the
Abbe  de  Villars  is,  of  course,  of  European  celebrity.  As
to  the  chemical  secrets  contained  in  the  original  letters,
it  may  be  safely  concluded  that  they  are  few  and
unimportant.

JOHN  HEYDON.

This  mountebank  royalist  mystic  has  no  claim  to  be
included    among    alchemical    philosophers,    and   is    only

LASCARIS.  211

noticed  here  to  advise  students  that  everything  relating
to  alchemy  in  the  whole  of  his  so-called  works  was
impudently  stolen  from  Philalethes.  He  practised  whole-
sale piracy  on  his  contemporaries  and  on  ancient  authors
with  equal  effrontery.  The  account  of  his  voyage  to  the
land  of  the  Rosicrucians  is  a  mangled  version  of  Bacon's
"  Atlantis ; "  his  apologues,  epilogues,  enigmas,  &c,  are
also  stolen  goods;  in  short,  whatever  is  of  value  in  his
books  is  matter  borrowed  from  the  highways  and  byways
of  occultism,  and  heaped  indiscriminately  together.  Every-
thing emanating  from  his  own  weakly  intelligence  is  utterly
contemptible ;  he  was  grossly  superstitious  and  pitiably
credulous,  as  may  be  seen  by  his  medical  recipes.  He
claimed  a  familiar  acquaintance  with  the  most  arcane
Rosicrucian  mysteries,  and  pretended  that  he  had  visited
the  temples,  holy  houses,  castles,  and  invisible  mountains
of  the  Fraternity.  Of  all  the  alchemical  liars  and  of  all
mystical  charlatans  who  have  flourished  in  England  since
the  first  days  of  Anglo-occultism,  John  Heydon  is  chief.

LASCARIS.

German  writers  have  principally  occupied  themselves
with  the  transmutations  of  this  singular  personage,  who  so
successfully  shrouded  himself  in  mystery,  that  his  name,
his  age,  his  birthplace,  and  everything  which  concerns  his
private  life  are  completely  unknown.

He  called  himself  Lascaris,  but  also  adopted  other  appel-
lations. He  claimed  an  Oriental  origin,  and  as  he  spoke
Greek  fluently,  he  has  passed  for  a  descendant  of  the  royal
house  of  Lascaris.  He  represented  himself  as  the  archi-
mandrite of  a  convent  in  the  Island  of  Mytilena,  and  bore
letters  from  the  Greek  patriarch  of  Constantinople.  His
mission  in  the  West  was  the  solicitation  of  alms  for  the

212         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

ransom  of  Christian  prisoners  in  the  East.  He  appeared
for  the  first  time  in  Germany  at  the  beginning  of  the
eighteenth  century,  a  man  seemingly  some  forty  or  fifty
years  old,  of  attractive  mien,  agreeable  in  manner,  and
fluent  in  his  conversation.  Finding  himself  indisposed  at
Berlin,  he  sent  for  a  certain  apothecary,  who  for  some
reason  was  unable  to  attend,  and  on  several  occasions
was  represented  by  a  pupil  at  the  bedside  of  the  stranger.
With  this  youth  Lascaris  fell  into  conversation,  and  a  sort
of  friendship  sprung  up  between  them.  The  apothecary's
pupil  had  studied  Basil  Valentine,  and  had  attempted
experiments  on  the  principles  of  this  adept.  Lascaris
recovered,  and  at  the  moment  of  departing  from  Berlin  he
took  the  youth  aside,  and  presented  him  with  a  quantity
of  the  transmuting  powder,  commanding  him  to  be  silent
as  to  whence  he  had  derived  it,  and  while  forbidding  him  to
make  use  of  it  till  some  time  after  his  departure,  assured
him  that  when  Berlin  unbelievers  beheld  its  amazing  effects,
no  one  would  be  able  to  tax  the  alchemists  with  madness.

The  name  of  this  young  man  was  John  Frederick
Botticher.  Intoxicated  at  the  possession  of  such  an  un-
expected treasure,  he  determined  to  devote  himself  entirely
to  alchemy.  The  apothecary,  his  master,  vainly  endea-
voured to  dissuade  him  from  a  pursuit  which  he  considered
chimerical,  for  he  astonished  both  him  and  his  friends  by
changing  silver  into  gold  in  their  presence.

The  experiment  was  repeated  with  mercury  for  the
benefit  of  a  friend  of  Botticher,  the  tale  spread,  and  the
apothecary's  pupil  became  the  lion  of  Berlin,  more
especially  as  he  spread  the  report  that  he  was  able  to
compose  himself  the  philosophical  tincture.

He  was  summoned  before  the  King,  Frederick  William  I.,
who  wished  to  witness  his  performances,  but  he  fled  to  an
uncle  at  Wittenburp-.    He  was  claimed  from  the  authorities

LASCARIS.  213

of  that  town  as  a  Prussian  subject,  but  he  was  now  a  prize
of  value,  and  the  Elector  of  Saxony  opposed  a  counter
claim  for  the  possession  of  his  person,  and  to  him  Botticher
decided  to  proceed.  He  was  warmly  welcomed,  and  when
his  transmutations  had  been  witnessed,  the  title  of  baron
was  conferred  on  him.  He  took  up  his  residence  at  Dresden,
living  in  a  style  of  great  magnificence  and  prodigality,  till
every  particle  of  his  powder  was  expended,  when  his  ex-
travagance involved  him  in  debt.  His  servants,  whom  he
was  unable  to  repay,  spread  the  report  that  it  was  his
intention  to  take  flight,  and  the  purblind  Elector,  refusing
to  perceive  in  this  sudden  failure  of  resources  a  proof  that
Botticher  was  unable  to  compose  or  increase  the  philoso-
phers' stone,  surrounded  his  house  with  guards,  and  detained
him  practically  as  a  prisoner.

At  this  juncture,  Lascaris,  who  was  still  wandering  in
Germany,  took  pity  on  the  misfortunes  of  his  young  neo-
phyte, and  endeavoured  to  extricate  him  from  his  embar-
rassing position  by  means  of  a  young  doctor  named  Pasch,
who  was  a  personal  friend  of  the  ennobled  apothecary's
boy.  Their  manoeuvres  resulted  in  the  imprisonment  of
Pasch  at  the  fortress  of  Sonneinstein,  while  Botticher  was
closely  confined  in  another  castle  at  Kcenigstein.

Two  years  and  a  half  passed  away.  At  the  end  of  that
time  Pasch  succeeded  in  escaping  at  the  expense  of  his
limbs,  and  died  after  a  few  months,  bitterly  complaining  of
the  treachery  of  the  adept  Lascaris,  who  had  deserted  him
completely  in  his  danger.

Botticher  remained  in  confinement  with  every  oppor-
tunity to  manufacture  the  philosophical  stone,  which,  how-
ever he  failed  to  accomplish  ;  but  what  with  his  apothecary's
training  and  his  prison  experiments,  he  had  become  skilled
in  several  departments  of  chemistry.  He  discovered  the
process  for  the  production  of  red  porcelain,  and  afterwards

214         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

that  of  white,  very  superior  in  quality  to  the  substances
already  known  by  that  name.  These  inventions  proved  as
valuable  to  the  tyrannical  Elector  as  the  accomplishment  of
the  magnum  opus.  Botticher  was  restored  to  his  favour,
and  again  enjoyed  his  baronial  title,  but  in  his  liberty  he
surrendered  himself  to  an  immoderately  luxurious  life,  and
died  in  17 19  at  the  age  of  thirty-seven  years.

Botticher  was  by  no  means  the  only  apothecary's  boy
who  was  enriched  with  the  powder  of  Lascaris,  and  de-
spatched to  preach  the  gospel  of  alchemy  with  practical
demonstrations.  Godwin,  Hermann,  Braun,  and  Martin  of
Fitzlar  are  mentioned  among  these  half-initiated  labourers,
who  shone  till  their  stock-in-trade  was  exhausted,  and  then
disappeared  in  succession.

In  the  meantime,  Lascaris  himself  was  not  idle.  On  the
1 6th  February  1609  he  is  believed  to  have  changed  mercury
into  gold  and  gold  into  silver,  a  double  transmutation,  con-
sidered by  alchemical  connoisseurs  to  be  the  evidence  of  an
unparalleled  adeptship.  Liebkneck,  counsellor  of  Werther-
bourg,  was  a  witness  of  this  transmutation.

In  the  same  year  a  goldsmith  of  Leipsic  was  visited  by
a  mysterious  stranger,  who  is  unanimously  identified  with
Lascaris,  and  who  showed  him  a  lingot,  which  he  declared
was  manufactured  by  art,  and  which  proved  in  assaying  to
be  gold  of  twenty-two  carats.  It  was  purified  by  the
goldsmith  with  antimony,  and  part  of  it  was  presented  to
him  by  the  unknown  as  a  memorial  of  the  alleged  trans-
mutation.

Shortly  after,  a  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  Polish  army,
whose  name  was  Schmolz  de  Dierbach,  and  who  had  in-
herited from  his  father  a  belief  in  alchemical  science,  was
conversing  on  the  subject  at  a  cafe,  when  he  was  accosted
by  a  stranger,  who  presented  him  with  some  powder  of
projection.     It  was   of  a  red    colour,   and    a  microscopic

LASCARIS.  2  I  5

examination  revealed  its  crystalline  nature.  It  increased
the  weight  of  the  metals  which  it  was  supposed  to  trans-
mute to  an  extent  which  chemical  authorities  declare  to  be
physically  impossible.  The  recipient  made  use  of  it  gene-
rously, distributing  to  his  friends  and  acquaintance  the  gold
it  produced  in  projection.  The  unknown  donor  is  identified
in  the  imagination  of  German  historians  with  the  myste-
rious Lascaris,  who  is  supposed,  in  the  same  anonymous
and  unaccountable  manner,  to  have  enriched  the  Baron  de
Creux  with  a  box  of  the  precious  powder,  and  to  have
gratified  the  amateur  Hermetic  ambition  of  the  Landgrave
of  Hesse  Darmstadt  through  the  commonplace  medium  of
the  post.  In  a  word,  every  anonymous  adept  who  appeared
at  this  period  in  or  about  Germany  is  supposed  to  be
Lascaris.

The  last  of  his  debtors  or  victims  was  the  son  of  a
Neapolitan  mason,  Domenico  Manuel,  who  claims  to  have
been  mysteriously  initiated  into  the  transmutatory  art  in
the  year  1695.  He  was  put  in  possession  of  a  small
quantity  both  of  the  white  and  red  tinctures.  Being
insufficient  to  really  enrich  himself,  he  determined  to  trade
upon  the  wonders  they  produced,  and  obtained  large  sums
from  wealthy  amateurs  for  the  privilege  of  beholding  the
consummation  of  the  great  work.  He  perambulated
Spain,  Belgium,  and  Austria,  obtaining  large  sums,  under
the  pretence  of  preparing  the  tincture,  not  only  from
private  individuals,  but  from  the  Emperor  Leopold  and
the  Palatine  Elector.  In  different  places  he  assumed
names  that  were  different.  Now  he  was  Count  Gaetano,
now  Count  de  Ruggiero  ;  at  other  times  he  called  himself
Field  Marshal  to  the  Duke  of  Bavaria,  Commandant  of
Munich,  a  Prussian  major-general,  and  by  other  titles.  In
1705  he  appeared  at  Berlin,  where  he  imposed  on  the  King
himself  for  a  brief  period,  after  which,  unable  to  ratify  his

2l6         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

transmutatory  engagements,  he  was  convicted  of  treason
and  hanged.     This  occurred  on  the  29th  of  August  1709.

DELISLE.

This  artist,  whose  Christian  name  is  unmentioned  by  his
biographers,  is  included  by  Figuier  among  the  emissaries
or  disciples  of  Lascaris,  and  much  information  concerning
him  will  be  found  in  the  Histoire  de  la  Philosophic  Her-
metigue  by  his  contemporary,  Langlet  du  Fresnoy.  He
was  a  rustic  of  low  birth  in  Provence,  and  he  became
acquainted  with  alchemical  experiments  by  entering  the
service  of  a  gentleman  who  was  believed  to  be  in  posses-
sion of  the  stone.  This  gentleman  is  supposed  to  have
received  the  prize  from  Lascaris.  His  operations,  however,
fell  under  suspicion,  and  he  was  forced  to  quit  France.  He
retired  into  Switzerland,  accompanied  by  Delisle,  who  is
said  to  have  assassinated  him  in  the  mountains,  and  to
have  thus  got  possession  of  a  considerable  quantity  of  the
transmuting  powder.  However  this  may  be,  the  servant,
re-entered  France  in  disguise,  and  about  the  year  1708
attracted  general  attention  by  changing  lead  and  iron  into
silver  and  gold.  He  perambulated  Languedoc,  the
Dauphine,  and  Provence.  At  Sisteron  he  connected  him-
self with  the  wife  of  a  certain  Alnys,  who  eventually  shared
his  fortunes  for  the  space  of  three  years.  His  renown  was
increased  by  the  apparent  simplicity  of  his  operations.
He  spread  powder  and  oil  over  iron,  thrust  it  into  the  fire,
and  brought  it  out  a  bar  of  gold.  He  distributed  nails,
knives,  and  rings  partially  transmuted,  and  was  particularly
successful  in  his  experiments  with  common  steel.

Cerisy,  prior  of  New  Castel,  was  employed  by  the  Bishop
of  Senez  to  collect  evidence  concerning  the  truth  of  these
marvels.    An  old  gentleman  offered  Delisle  a  retreat  at  his

DELISLE.  2  I  7

castle  of  La  Palud,  where  the  alchemist,  surrounded  by
admirers,  received  the  daily  visits  of  the  curious.  In
Lenglet's  "  History  of  Hermetic  Philosophy,"  there  is  a
letter  from  the  Bishop  of  Senez  to  the  Minister  of  State
and  Comptroller-General  of  the  Treasury  at  Paris,  in  which
the  prelate,  who  at  first  was  incredulous,  professes  his
inability  to  resist  the  evidence  of  actual  transformation
performed  before  himself  and  several  vigilant  witnesses,
who  took  every  precaution  against  deception.  There  is
also  the  Report  of  M.  de  Saint-Maurice,  President  of  the
Mint  at  Lyons,  who  testifies  to  the  following  facts.  That
he  was  accompanied  by  Delisle  into  the  grounds  of  the
Chateau  de  Saint  Auban  in  May  1710,  where  he  uncovered
a  basket  that  was  sunk  in  the  ground.  In  the  middle  of
this  basket  there  was  an  iron  wire,  at  the  end  of  which  he
perceived  a  piece  of  linen  with  some  object  tied  up  in  it.
He  took  possession  of  this  parcel,  carried  it  into  the  dining-
room  of  the  Chateau,  and  by  the  direction  of  Delisle  he
exposed  its  contents — a  blackish  earth  about  half  a  pound
in  weight — to  the  rays  of  the  sun.  After  a  quarter  of  an
hour  the  earth  was  distilled  in  a  retort  of  a  portable
furnace,  and  when  a  yellow  liquor  was  perceived  to  flow
into  the  receiver,  Delisle  recommended  that  the  recipient
should  be  removed  before  a  viscous  oil  then  rising  should
flow  into  it.  Two  drops  of  this  yellow  liquor,  projected  on
hot  quicksilver,  produced  in  fusion  three  ounces  of  gold,
which  were  presented  to  the  Master  of  the  Mint.  After-
wards three  ounces  of  pistol  bullets  were  melted  and
purified  with  alum  and  saltpetre.  Delisle  handed  Saint-
Maurice  a  small  paper,  desiring  him  to  throw  in  a  pinch  of
the  powder  and  two  drops  of  the  oil  used  in  the  first
experiment.  This  done,  the  matter  was  covered  with  salt-
petre, kept  fifteen  minutes  in  fusion,  and  then  poured  out
on  a  piece  of  iron  armour,  which  reappeared  pure  gold,

2l8         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

bearing  all  assays.  The  conversion  to  silver  was  made  in
the  same  manner  with  white  powder,  and  the  certificate
which  testifies  to  these  occurrences  was  officially  signed  on
the  14th  December  1760.

A  part  of  the  gold  manufactured  in  this  manner  by
Delisle  was  subjected  to  refinement  at  Paris,  where  three
medals  were  struck  from  it ;  one  of  them  was  deposited  in
the  king's  cabinet.  It  bore  the  inscription  Aurum  Arte
Factum.

With  all  his  alchemical  skill,  Delisle  was  unable  to  read
or  write,  and  in  disposition  he  was  untractable,  rude,  and
fanatical.  He  was  invited  to  Court,  but  he  pretended  that
the  climate  he  lived  in  was  necessary  to  the  success  of  his
experiments,  inasmuch  as  his  preparations  were  vegetable.
The  Bishop  of  Senez,  suspecting  him  of  unwillingness
rather  than  inability,  obtained  a  lettre  de  cachet,  after  two
years  of  continual  subterfuge  on  the  part  of  the  alchemist,
who  was  thereupon  arrested  and  taken  on  the  road  to
Paris.  During  the  journey,  his  guards,  after  endeavouring
to  extort  his  supposed  riches,  wounded  him  severely  on  the
head,  in  which  state,  on  his  arrival  at  the  Bastille,  he  was
forced  to  begin  his  alchemical  operations,  but  after  a  short
time  he  persistently  refused  to  proceed,  tore  continually
the  bandages  from  his  wound  in  the  frenzy  of  his  des-
peration, and  in  the  year  following  his  imprisonment  he
poisoned  himself.

His  illegitimate  son,  Alnys,  by  some  means  inherited
a  portion  of  the  powder  from  his  mother.  He  wandered
through  Italy  and  Germany  performing  transmutations.
On  one  occasion  he  made  projection  before  the  Duke
of  Richlieu,  then  French  ambassador  at  Vienna,  and  who
assured  the  Abbe  Langlet  that  he  not  only  saw  the
operation  performed,  but  performed  it  himself,  twice  on
gold  and  forty  times  on  silver.

JOHN  HERMANN  OBEREIT.  219

Alnys  made  a  considerable  collection  of  gold  coins,
ancient  and  modern,  while  on  a  journey  through  Austria
and  Bohemia.  On  his  return  to  Aix  he  presented  himself
to  the  President  of  Provence,  who  desired  him  to  call  the
next  day.  Alnys,  suspecting  an  intention  to  arrest  him,
fled  in  the  interim.  He  was  afterwards  imprisoned  at
Marseilles,  whence  he  contrived  to  escape  to  Brussels.
It  was  here,  in  1731,  that  he  gave  some  philosophic
mercury  to  M.  Percell,  the  brother  of  Langlet  de  Fresnoy,
which  mercury  the  recipient  fermented  imperfectly,  but
succeeded  so  far  as  to  convert  an  ounce  of  silver  into
gold.  The  death  of  a  certain  M.  Grefier  shortly  after
some  operations  on  corrosive  sublimate,  by  which  Alnys
proposed  to  instruct  him  in  alchemy,  made  it  necessary
for  him  to  depart,  and  he  was  heard  of  no  more.

JOHN  HERMANN  OBEREIT.

This  writer,  as  much  mystic  as  alchemist,  was  born  at
Arbon  at  Switzerland  in  1725,  and  died  in  1798.  He
inherited  from  his  father  a  taste  for  transcendental
chemistry,  and  the  opinion  that  metals  could  be  de-
veloped to  their  full  perfection,  but  that  the  chief  instru-
ment was  the  grace  of  God,  working  in  the  soul  of  the
alchemist.  He  laboured  unceasingly  at  the  physical  pro-
cesses, hoping  thereby  to  restore  the  fallen  fortunes  of  his
family,  but  his  laboratory  was  closed  by  the  authorities  as
endangering  the  public  safety.  He  contrived  to  make
evident  the  harmless  nature  of  his  employment,  and  was
received  into  the  house  of  a  brother  of  the  physiognomist
Lavater.  He  celebrated,  he  informs  us,  a  mystical  mar-
riage with  a  seraphic  and  illuminated  shepherdess  named
Theantis,  the  ceremony  taking  place  in  a  castle  on  the  ex-
treme summit  of  a  cloud-encompassed  mountain.    His  bride

220        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

after  thirty-six  days  of  transcendental  union,  which  was
neither  platonic  nor  epicurean,  but  of  a  perfectly  indescrib-
able character,  departed  this  life,  and  the  bereaved  husband,
during  the  whole  night  of  her  decease,  bewailed  her  in
a  mystical  canticle.  La  Connexio?i  Originaire  des  Esprits
et  des  Corps,  d'apres  les  principes  de  Newton,  Augsbourg,
1776,  and  Les  Promenades  de  Gamaliel,  juif  Philosophe,
were  bequeathed  by  Obereit  to  a  neglectful  posterity.

TRAVELS,    ADVENTURES,    AND    IMPRISON-
MENTS OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.

The  notorious  Count  Cagliostro  appears  from  an  im-
partial review  of  his  history  and  phenomenal  exploits,  to
have  been  one  of  those  characters  not  uncommonly  met
with  in  the  chequered  annals  of  occultism.  Even  as  the
modern  "  mediums,"  who  outrage  the  confidence  of  their
believers  by  leavening  the  supernatural  bread,  whereof  the
ghastly  patent  is  their  prerogative  and  birthright,  with  the
unrighteous  mammon  of  material  conjuring,  and  even  as
those  conjurors  who  are  sometimes  supposed  to  still  further
perplex  their  audience  by  supplementary  compacts  with
"  spooks,"  this  high  priest  of  transcendental  trickery  would
seem  to  have  possessed,  perhaps  unconsciously,  a  certain
share  of  occult  gifts,  which  assisted  no  little  his  unparal-
leled rogueries.  Mystical  knowledge  beyond  that  of  the
age  in  which  he  lived  was  undoubtedly  his,  and  though  it
was  still  superficial,  he  had  a  genius  for  making  the  most
of  it.

Joseph  Balsamo,  whatever  has  been  advanced  to  the  con-
trary by  himself*  or  his  admirers,  was  the  son  of  Peter

*  In  the  Memoir  written  by  Joseph  Balsamo  during  his  imprisonment  in
the  Bastille,  he  surrounds  his  origin  and  infancy  with  romantic  and  glamorous
mystery.     "  I  am  ignorant,"  he  asserts,  "not  only  of  my  birthplace,  but  even

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  221

Balsamo  and  Felicia  Bracconieri,  both  of  humble  extrac-
tion. He  was  born  at  Palermo,  in  Sicily,  on  the  8th  of  June
1743.  His  parents  are  authentically  described  as  honest
tradespeople  and  good  Catholics,  who  were  careful  in  the
education  of  their  offspring,  and  solicitous  for  their  spiritual
welfare.  Their  shop  drew  much  custom  in  the  populous
neighbourhood  which  divided  the  handsome  Rue  del  Ccesaro.
While  his  children  were  still  young,  Peter  Balsamo  died,
and,  left  under  the  inadequate  control  of  a  widowed  mother,
Joseph  betrayed,  even  in  his  earliest  years,  a  selfish  and
indolent  disposition,  greatly  neglecting  the  scanty  educa-
tional advantages  which  were  afforded  him.  According  to
other  accounts,  he  was  taken  under  the  protection  of  his
maternal  uncle,  who  endeavoured  to  instruct  him  in  the
principles  of  religion,  and  to  give  him  an  education  suit-
able to  his  age  and  prospects  ;  but,  even  from  his  infancy,
he  showed  himself  uniformly  averse  to  a  virtuous  course  of
life.  His  uncle  was  a  worthy  bourgeois  of  Palermo,  who
foresaw,  by  the  vivacity  and  penetration  of  his  nephew,

of  the  parents  who  bore  me.  All  my  researches  on  these  points  have  afforded
me  nothing  but  vague  and  uncertain,  though,  in  truth,  exalted,  notions.  My
earliest  infancy  was  passed  in  the  town  of  Medina,  in  Arabia,  where  I  was
brought  up  under  the  name  of  Acharat — a  name  which  I  afterwards  used
during  my  Asiatic  and  African  travels — and  was  lodged  in  the  palace  of  the
muphti.  I  distinctly  recollect  having  four  persons  continually  about  me — a
tutor,  between  fifty-five  and  sixty  years  of  age,  named  Altotas,  and  three
slaves,  one  of  whom  was  white,  while  the  others  were  black.  My  tutor  in-
variably told  me  that  I  had  been  left  an  orphan  at  the  age  of  three  months,  and
that  my  parents  were  noble,  and  Christians  as  well,  but  he  preserved  the  most
absolute  silence  as  to  their  name  and  as  to  the  place  where  I  was  born,  though
certain  chance  words  led  me  to  suspect  that  I  first  saw  the  light  at  Malta.
Altotas  took  pleasure  in  cultivating  my  natural  taste  for  the  sciences  ;  he  him-
self was  proficient  in  all,  from  the  most  profound  even  to  the  most  trivial.  It
was  in  botany  and  physics  that  I  made  most  progress.  Like  my  instructor  I
wore  the  dress  of  a  Mussulman,  and  outwardly  we  professed  the  Mohammedan
law.  The  principles  of  the  true  religion  were,  however,  engraven  in  our  hearts.
I  was  frequently  visited  by  the  muphti,  who  treated  me  with  much  kindness
and  had  great  respect  for  my  instructor,  through  whom  I  became  early  pro-
ficient in  most  oriental  languages."

222         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

that  he  might  easily  become  proficient  in  letters  and  the
sciences.*      By  him  he  was  desired  to  embrace  an  eccle-
siastical career,  as  the  royal  road  to  distinction  in  those
days.    Accordingly,  at  the  age  of  thirteen  he  was  placed  in
the  Seminary  of  St  Roch  di  Palermo,  where  he  proved  his
independence  and    aversion   to  discipline   by  continually
running  away.     Recaptured  in  vagabond  company,  he  was
committed,  with  no  very  favourable  character,  to  a  certain
father-general  of  the  Bon  Fratelli,  who  was  passing  through
Palermo.      The   father-general   took   charge    of   him   and
straightway  carried  him  to  a  Benedictine  convent  on  the
outskirts  of  Cartagirone.     There  the  walls  were  high,  and
the  caged  dove  was  in  the  keeping  of  an  inflexible  frere
tourier.     He  assumed  perforce  the  habit  of  a  novice,  and
the  father-general  discovering  his  aptitude  for  natural  his-
tory and,  more  especially,  his  herbalistic  tastes,  placed  him
under  the  tuition  of  the  conventual  apothecary,  from  whom,
as  he  afterwards  acknowledged,  he  learned  the  first  prin-
ciples of  chemistry  and  medicine.     Figuier  states  that  in  a
short   time   he  was    able   to   manipulate   the   drugs  with
astonishing  sagacity  ;  but  even  then  it  was  remarked  that
he  seemed  eager  to  discover  those  secrets  which  would
further  the  interests  of  charlatanry.!     In  strict  accordance
with  his  natural  perversity,  he  did  not  fail  to  give  various
instances  of  his  innate  viciousness,  and  drew  down  upon
himself  the  continual  chastisements  of  his  superiors.     One
day  the  involuntary  novice,  whose  irregularities  were  to
some  extent   excusable  on  the  ground  of  the  constraint
that  was  put  on  him,  but  who  often  outstripped  all  bounds,
was  set  to  read  during  dinner  in  the  refectory  a  certain  por-
tion of  an  exceedingly  edifying  martyrology,  and  yielding,

*  "  Life  of  the  Count  Cagliostro,  compiled  from  the  original  Proceedings
published  at  Rome  by  order  of  the  Apostolic  Chamber.  With  an  engraved
Portrait."     London,  1 791.

+  V  Histoire  du  Merveilleux  dans  les  Temps  Modernes,  torn.  iv.

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  2  23

says  one  writer  with  pious  indignation,  to  an  inspiration  of
Belial,  he  substituted  for  the  sacred  text  a  blasphemous
version  suggested  by  his  own  dissolute  imagination,  per-
verting the  sense  and  the  incidents,  and  pushed  his  audacity
so  far  as  to  substitute  for  the  saintly  names  those  of  the
most  notorious  courtesans  of  the  period.  A  severe  penance
was  imposed  on  the  insolent  offender ;  but  one  night  he
found  means  to  evade  the  vigilance  of  his  guardians,  escaped
from  the  convent,  crossed  the  intervening  country,  and  after
some  days  of  joyous  gipsying  and  vagabond  wanderings,
he  arrived  at  Palermo.  Some  knowledge  of  the  principles
of  chemistry  and  medicine  was  about  the  total  of  the
advantages  he  had  derived  from  the  discipline  of  conventual
life.  His  uncle  began  to  despair  of  him,  but  advice  and
remonstrances  were  alike  lost  upon  the  young  reprobate,
who  derided  them  all,  and  employing  a  certain  portion  of
his  time  in  the  cultivation  of  a  natural  taste  for  drawing,
he  otherwise  abandoned  himself  to  unbridled  excesses.  He
associated  with  rascals  and  ne'er-do-wells;  his  drunken-
ness, gambling,  and  general  libertinage,  led  him  into  per-
petual brawling ;  and  he  was  frequently  in  the  hands  of
the  police,  whom  he  is  said  to  have  taken  special  pleasure
in  resisting,  frequently  delivering  by  force  the  prisoners
whom  they  had  arrested.  He  has  been  also  accused  of
forging  tickets  of  admission  to  the  theatres,  and  selling
them  with  characteristic  effrontery.  One  of  his  uncles
coaxed  him  back  for  a  time  into  his  house,  and  was  re-
warded by  the  robbery  of  a  considerable  quantity  of  money
and  some  valuable  effects.  He  became  an  intermediary  in
the  amorous  intercourse  of  a  female  cousin  with  one  of  his
friends.  He  carried  billets-doux  to  and  fro  between  them,
and  made  the  entire  transaction  personally  profitable  by
extorting  money  from  his  friend,  persuading  him  that  the
fair  cousin  had   a  partiality  for  presents,  including  both

224        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

money  and  jewellery,  and,  of  course,  appropriating  the
funds  which  were  entrusted  to  him.  Graver  crimes  were
soon  laid  to  his  charge.  There  was  a  certain  dissolute
Marquis  Maurigi  in  Palermo  who  coveted  an  inheritance
which  had  been  willed  to  a  pious  establishment,  and  know-
ing Balsamo,  to  him  were  his  projects  confided,  and  an
expedient  was  presently  forthcoming.  Joseph  had  a  rela-
tive who  was  a  notary,  and  by  frequenting  his  office  he
found  means  to  forge  a  will,  bearing  every  mark  of  authen-
ticity, in  favour  of  the  Marquis,  who  made  good  his  claim
to  the  estate,  and  no  doubt  liberally  recompensed  the  skill
and  pains  of  his  confederate.  The  falsification  was  dis-
covered many  years  after,  but  the  guilty  parties  were  both
of  them  far  away.  It  was  also  rumoured  that  Balsamo  was
a  party  to  the  assassination  of  a  wealthy  canon,  but  the
matter  is  exceedingly  doubtful.  He  was  many  times
arrested  on  various  charges,  but  eluded  justice,  either  by
the  absence  of  direct  proof  against  him,  or  by  the  credit  of
his  relations,  and  the  exertions  of  reputable  persons  of
Palermo,  who  took  interest  in  his  family.  It  will  scarcely
be  credited  that  at  this  period  Balsamo  was  only  fourteen
years  of  age.  Naturally  endowed  with  artistic  aptitudes,
he  soon  began  to  give  lessons  in  drawing,  and  seems  to
have  been  many  times  on  a  fair  way  to  reformation.  His
skill  in  arms  is  also  acknowledged,  but,  conscious  of  his
superiority,  his  street  brawls  frequently  ended  in  duels ;
his  impetuosity  even  prompted  him  to  take  up  the  gauntlet
for  his  companions,  and  he  scorned  danger.

The  most  notorious  of  his  youthful  exploits,  and  that
which  caused  him  to  commence  his  life-long  wanderings,
was  the  adventure  of  the  concealed  treasure,  which  has
been  variously  related.

An  avaricious  goldsmith,  named  Marano,  resided  at
Palermo.     He  was  a  weak,  superstitious  man — a  believer

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  225

in  magic,  says  M.  Louis  Figuier — and  he  was  much
attracted  by  the  mystery  which,  even  at  this  period,  is
declared  by  Figuier  to  have  surrounded  the  life  and  esca-
pades of  Balsamo,  who  already  posed  as  an  initiate  of  the
occult  sciences.  Joseph  was  now  seventeen  years  of  age,  of
handsome  mien  and  haughty  carriage,  speaking  little,  but
holding  his  hearers  spell-bound  by  the  magnetic  fascination
of  his  glance.  He  had  been  seen  evoking  spirits  ;  he  was
believed  to  converse  with  angels,  and  to  obtain  by  their
agency  an  insight  into  the  most  interesting  secrets.  He
had,  in  fact,  radically  changed ;  the  common  rogue  was
developing  into  the  transcendental  impostor.  Marano  lent
an  attentive  ear  to  the  stories  concerning  him,  and  burned
with  anxiety  to  behold  "the  friend  of  the  celestial  spirits."
The  first  interview  took  place  in  the  lodging  of  Balsamo  ;
the  goldsmith  fell  on  his  knees  before  him,  and  Balsamo,
after  receiving  his  homage,  raised  him  condescendingly
from  the  ground,  and  demanded  in  a  solemn  manner  why
he  had  come  to  him.

"  Thanks  to  your  daily  communion  with  spirits,  you  will
easily  know,"  answered  Marano,  "  and  you  should  have  no
difficulty  in  assisting  me  to  recover  the  money  which  I
have  wasted  among  false  alchemists,  or  even  to  procure  me
more."

"  I  can  perform  this  service  for  you,  provided  you
believe,"  said  Balsamo,  with  composure.

"  Provided  I  believe  !  "  cried  the  goldsmith  ;  "  I  believe,
indeed."  ,  '

An  appointment  was  made  for  the  next  day  in  a  meadow
beyond  the  town,  and  the  interview  ended  without  another
word.

This  version  of  the  story  is  more  romantic  than  probable,
and  we  owe  it  to  the  vivacity  of  a  Frenchman's  imagina-
tion, which  is  never  more  brilliant  than  when  employed  in

P

2  26         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

the  perversion  or  embellishment  of  history.  According  to
the  more  sober  Aventures  de  Cagliostro,  Marano  had  for
some  time  been  acquainted  with  the  youthful  charlatan,
who  sought  him  one  day  at  his  own  residence,  and  said  to
him :  "  You  are  aware  of  my  communications  with  the
supernal  spirits ;  you  are  aware  of  the  illimitable  potency
of  the  incantations  to  which  I  devote  myself.  Listen  !
In  an  olive  field,  at  no  great  distance  from  Palermo,  there
is  a  buried  treasure  according  to  my  certain  knowledge,
and  by  the  help  of  a  ceremonial  evocation  I  can  discover
the  precise  spot  where  the  spade  of  the  seeker  should  be
driven  in.  The  operation,  however,  requires  some  expen-
sive preliminaries ;  sixty  ounces  of  gold  are  absolutely
needed.     Will  you  place  them  at  my  disposal  ? "

Marano  declaimed  against  the  preposterous  extravagance
of  the  demand,  maintaining  that  the  herbs  and  drugs
utilised  in  alchemical  experiments  were  exceedingly
moderate  in  their  price.

"  Tis  well,"  said  Balsamo,  coldly.  "  The  matter  is  soon
settled  ;  I  shall  enjoy  the  vast  treasure  alone.  A  blessing
when  shared  is  but  half  a  blessing  for  those  who  participate
in  it."

On  the  morrow,  however,  Marano  sought  out  the
enchanter,  having  been  agonised  by  the  gold  fever  the
whole  night.

"  I  am  furnished  with  the  sum  you  require,"  he  said.
"  But  I  pray  you  to  bargain  a  little  with  the  spirits,  and
endeavour  to  beat  them  down."

"  Do  you  take  them  for  sordid  speculators  ? "  cried  the
magician,  indignant.  "The  devil  is  no  Jew,  though  he
abode  full  long  in  Judea.  He  is  a  magnificent  seigneur,
living  generously  in  every  country  of  the  world.  Treat
him  with  respect,  he  returns  a  hundredfold.  I  shall  find
elsewhere  the  sixty  ounces  of  gold,  and  can  afford  to
dispense  with  your  assistance."

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  2  27

"  It  is  here,"  said  Marano,  drawing  quickly  a  leather  bag
from  his  pocket,  and  the  arrangements  were  soon  made.

At  moonlight  they  repaired  to  the  olive  field,  where
Balsamo  had  secretly  made  preparations  for  the  approach-
ing evocation.  The  incantatory  preliminaries  were  suffi-
ciently protracted,  and  Marano  panted  with  terror  under
the  influence  of  the  magical  charms,  till  it  seemed  to  him
that  the  very  earth  shivered  beneath  his  feet  and  phantoms
issued  from  the  ground.  Marano  fell  prostrate  on  his  face,
an  action  apparently  foreseen,  for  there  and  then  the
wretched  goldsmith  was  belaboured  unmercifully  with
sticks  by  the  infernal  spirits,  who  left  him  at  length  for
dead,  taking  flight  in  the  company  of  the  enchanter,  and
fortified  by  the  possession  of  the  sixty  ounces  of  gold.
On  the  morrow,  the  goldsmith,  fortunately  discovered  by
muleteers,  was  carried  disconsolately  home,  and  forthwith
denounced  Balsamo  to  the  law.  The  adventure  spread
everywhere,  but  the  magician  had  sailed  for  Messina.

These  are  the  facts  of  the  case,  but  the  mendacious
chronicle  of  Louis  Figuier,  alchemical  critic  and  universal
manufacturer  of  light  scientific  literature,  offers  us  a  far
more  ornate  and  attractive  version.  There  the  adept  and
his  miserable  dupe  repair  to  a  place  appointed  at  six
o'clock  in  the  morning,  Balsamo  in  dignified  silence  motion-
ing the  goldsmith  to  follow  him,  and  proceeding  with  a  pre-
occupied aspect  along  the  road  to  the  chapel  of  Saint
Rosalia  for  the  space  of  a  whole  hour.  They  stopped  at
length  in  the  middle  of  a  wild  meadow,  and  in  front  of  a
grotto,  before  which  Balsamo  extended  his  hand,  and
solemnly  declared  that  a  treasure  was  buried  within  it
which  he  himself  was  forbidden  to  touch,  which  was
guarded  by  devils  of  hell,  which  devils  might,  however,
be  bound  for  a  brief  period  by  the  angels  who  commonly
responded  to  his  potent  magical  call.

2  28         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

"  It  only  remains  to  be  ascertained,"  he  remarked  in
conclusion,  "  whether  you  will  scrupulously  fulfil  the  con-
ditions which  must  be  imposed  on  you.  At  that  price,  the
treasure  may  be  yours."

The  credulous  goldsmith  impetuously  implored  him  to
name  them.

"  They  cannot  be  learned  from  my  lips,"  said  Balsamo
loftily.     "  On  your  knees,  in  the  first  place  !  "

He  himself  had  already  assumed  the  posture  of  adoration.
Marano  hastened  to  imitate  him,  and  immediately  a  clear,
harmonious  voice  in  the  celestial  altitude  pronounced
the  following  words — words,  says  the  Frenchman,  more
delicious  in  the  ears  of  the  covetous  miser  than  all  the
symphonies  of  aerial  choirs.

"  Sixty  ounces  of  pearls,  sixty  ounces  of  rubies,  sixty
ounces  of  diamonds,  in  a  coffer  of  enchased  gold,  weighing
one  hundred  and  twenty  ounces.  The  infernal  genii  who
protect  this  treasure  will  place  it  in  the  hands  of  the
worthy  man  whom  our  friend  has  brought,  if  he  be  fifty
years  of  age,  if  he  be  no  Christian — if — if — if — "  and  a
series  of  conditions  followed  which  Marano  perfectly
united  in  his  own  penurious  person,  even  to  the  last,
which  was  thus  formulated : — "  And  if  he  deposit  at  the
entrance  of  the  grotto,  before  setting  foot  therein,  sixty
ounces  of  gold  to  propitiate  the  guardians."

"  You  have  heard,"  said  Balsamo,  who,  already  on  his
feet,  began  to  retrace  his  steps,  completely  ignoring  the
utter  stupefaction  of  his  companion.

"  Sixty  ounces  of  gold  !  "  ejaculated  the  miser  with  a
dismal  groan,  and  torn  by  the  internal  conflict  of  avarice
and  cupidity;  but  Balsamo  heeded  the  exclamation  as
little  as  the  groan,  and  regained  the  town  in  silence.

When  they  were  on  the  point  of  separating,  Marano
appeared  to  have  resolved.

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  2  29

"  Grant  me  one  instant ! "  he  cried  in  a  piteous  voice.
"  Sixty  ounces  of  gold  ?  Is  that  the  irrevocable  con-
dition ?  "

"  Undoubtedly,"  said  Balsamo,  carelessly.

"  Alas !  alas !     And  at  what  hour  to-morrow  ? "

"  At  six  o'clock  in  the  morning  and,  mark,  at  the  same
spot."

"  I  will  be  there."

This  was  the  parting  speech  of  the  goldsmith,  and,  as  it
were,  the  last  gasp  of  his  conquered  avarice.  On  the
morrow,  punctual  to  the  appointed  time,  they  met  as
before,  Balsamo  with  his  habitual  coolness,  Marano  with
his  gold.  They  arrived  in  due  course  at  the  grotto,  where
the  angels,  consulted  as  on  the  previous  day,  returned  the
same  oracles.  Balsamo  assumed  ignorance  of  what  would
take  place.  With  a  terrific  struggle,  Marano  deposited  his
gold  and  prepared  to  cross  the  threshold.  He  took  one  step
forward,  then  started  back,  inquired  if  there  were  no  danger
in  penetrating  into  the  depths  of  the  cavern,  was  assured
of  safety  if  the  gold  had  been  faithfully  weighed,  entered
with  more  confidence,  and  again  returned,  these  manoeuvres
being  repeated  several  times,  under  the  eyes  of  the  adept,
whose  expression  indicated  the  most  uninterested  indif-
ference. At  length,  Marano  took  courage  and  proceeded
so  far  that  a  return  was  impossible,  for  three  black,
muscular  devils  started  out  from  the  shadows  and  barred
his  path,  giving  vent  to  the  most  alarming  growls.  They
seized  him,  forced  him  to  whirl  round  and  round  for  a  long
time,  and  then  while  the  unhappy  creature  vainly  invoked
the  assistance  of  Balsamo,  they  proceeded  to  cudgel  him
lustily  till  he  dropped  overwhelmed  to  the  ground,  when  a
clear  voice  bade  him  remain  absolutely  silent  and  motion-
less, for  he  would  be  instantaneously  despatched  if  he
stirred  either  hand  or  foot.     The  wretched  man  did  not

23O         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

dare  to  disobey,  but  after  a  long  swoon  the  complete  still-
ness encouraged  him  to  raise  his  head  ;  he  dragged  himself
as  best  he  could  to  the  mouth  of  the  terrible  grotto,  looked
round  him,  and  found  that  the  adept,  the  demons,  and  the
gold  had  alike  vanished.

When  Balsamo  arrived  at  Messina  he  was  furnished  with
a  very  handsome  sum  to  support  the  expenses  of  his  sojourn
therein,  for  the  lion's  share  of  the  booty  obtained  from  the
goldsmith  had,  of  course,  fallen  to  himself.  He  lodged  in
one  of  the  chief  inns  near  the  port,  and  had  prepared  him-
self for  further  adventures,  when  he  suddenly  remembered
that  he  had  an  old  and  affluent  aunt  in  the  town  whom  he
took  occasion  to  visit,  but  only  to  discover  that  she  had
recently  died,  leaving  the  bulk  of  her  fortune  to  different
churches  of  Messina,  and  distributing  the  rest  to  the  poor.
Doubtless  the  dutiful  nephew  paid  to  the  memory  of  this
ultra-Christian  relation  a  just  tribute  of  regrets,  and  anxious
to  inherit  at  least  something  from  a  person  so  eminent  in
sanctity,  he  determined  to  assume  her  family  name,  joined
to  a  title  of  nobility,  and  from  that  time  forward  he  com-
monly called  himself  the  Count  Alessandro  Cagliostro.
His  penetrating  and  calculating  mind,  says  one  of  his
biographers,  understood  the  prestige  which  attached  to  a
title  at  a  period  when  the  privileges  of  birth  still  exercised
an  almost  undisputed  influence.

It  was  in  the  town  of  Messina  that  Balsamo  first  met
with  the  mysterious  alchemist  Altotas,  whom  in  his  fabulous
autobiography  he  represented  as  the  oriental  tutor  of  his
infancy.  As  he  was  promenading  one  day  near  the  jetty
at  the  extremity  of  the  port,  he  encountered  an  individual
singularly  habited,  and  possessed  of  a  most  remarkable
countenance.  This  person,  aged  apparently  about  fifty
years,  seemed  to  be  an  Armenian,  though,  according  to

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  23  1

other  accounts,  he  was  a  Spaniard  or  Greek.  He  wore  a
species  of  caftan,  a  silk  bonnet,  and  the  extremities  of  his
breeches  were  concealed  in  a  pair  of  wide  boots.  In  his
left  hand  he  held  a  parasol,  and  in  his  right  the  end  of  a
cord,  to  which  was  attached  a  graceful  Albanian  greyhound.

Whether  from  curiosity  or  by  presentiment,  Cagliostro
saluted  this  grotesque  being,  who  bowed  slightly,  but  with
satisfied  dignity.

"  You  do  not  reside  in  Messina,  signor  ? "  he  said  in  Sici-
lian, but  with  a  marked  foreign  accent.

Cagliostro  replied  that  he  was  tarrying  for  a  few  days,
and  they  began  to  converse  on  the  beauty  of  the  town  and
on  [its  advantageous  situation,  a  kind  of  oriental  imagery
individualising  the  eloquence  of  the  stranger,  whose  re-
marks were,  moreover,  adroitly  adorned  with  a  few  appro-
priate compliments.  He  eluded  inquiries  as  to  his  own
identity,  but  offered  to  unveil  the  past  of  the  Count  Cagli-
ostro, and  to  reveal  what  was  actually  passing  in  his  mind
at  that  moment.  When  Cagliostro  hinted  at  sorcery,  the
Armenian  smiled  somewhat  scornfully,  and  dilated  on  the
ignorance  of  a  nation  which  confused  science  with  witch-
craft, and  prepared  faggots  for  discoverers.

His  hearer,  much  interested,  ventured  to  ask  the  address
of  the  illustrious  stranger,  who  graciously  invited  him  to
call.  They  walked  past  the  cathedral  and  halted  in  a
small  quadrilateral  street  shaded  by  sycamores,  and  having
a  charming  fountain  in  the  centre.  ,  -

"  Signor,"  said  the  stranger,  "  there  is  the  house  I  inhabit.
I  receive  no  one ;  but  as  you  are  a  traveller,  as  you  are
young  and  courteous,  as,  moreover,  you  are  animated  by  a
noble  passion  for  the  sciences,  I  permit  you  to  visit  me.  I
shall  be  visible  to  you  to-morrow  a  little  before  midnight.
You  will  rap  twice  on  the  hammer  " — he  pointed  as  he
spoke  to  the  door  of  a   low-storied  house — "  then   three

232  LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

times  more  slowly,  and  you  will  be  admitted.  Adieu  1
Hasten  at  once  to  your  inn.  A  Piedmontese  is  trying  to
possess  himself  of  the  seven  and  thirty  ounces  of  gold  that
are  secured  in  your  valise,  and  which  is  itself  shut  up  in  a
press,  the  key  of  which  is  in  your  pocket  at  this  moment.
Your  servant,  signor !  "  and  he  departed  rapidly.

Cagliostro,  returning  in  all  haste,  discovered  the  thief  in
the  act,  and,  as  a  lawful  and  righteously  indignant  pro-
prietor, he  forthwith  delivered  him  to  justice.

On  the  morrow,  at  the  time  appointed,  he  knocked  at
the  door  of  the  little  house  inhabited  by  the  Armenian.
It  was  opened  at  the  fifth  blow  without  any  visible  agency,
and  closed  as  soon  as  the  visitor  had  entered.  Cagliostro
cautiously  advanced  along  a  narrow  passage,  illuminated
by  a  small  iron  lamp  in  a  niche  of  the  wall.  At  the
extremity  of  the  passage  a  spacious  door  sprang  open,
giving  admittance  into  a  ground-floor  parlour  which  was
illuminated  by  a  four-branched  candelabra,  holding  tapers
of  wax,  and  was,  in  fact,  a  laboratory  furnished  with  all
the  apparatus  in  use  among  practical  alchemists.  The
Armenian,  issuing  from  a  neighbouring  cabinet,  greeted
the  visitor,  inquired  after  the  safety  of  the  gold,  had
intelligence  of  the  truth  of  his  clairvoyance,  and  of  the
deserved  fate  of  the  malefactor,  but  cut  short  the  expressed
astonishment  and  admiration  of  Cagliostro  by  declaring
that  the  art  of  divination  was  simply  the  result  of  scientific
combinations  and  close  observations.  He  ended  by  asking
his  hearer  if  he  denied  the  infallible  certitude  of  judicial
astrology,  but  the  self-constituted  count  denied  nothing
except  the  superior  power  of  virtue  over  self-interest,
whereat  the  Armenian  inquired  to  whom  he  was  indebted
for  his  training.

"  I  was  about  to  say  to  the  solicitude  of  my  uncles  and
to  the  apothecary  in  the  Convent  of  the  Bon  Fratelli,"  said

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  233

Cagliostro ;  "  but  to  what  purpose  ?  You  undoubtedly
know."

"  I  know,"  replied  the  strange  individual,  "that  you  have
trained  yourself;  that  the  apothecary,  equally  with  your
uncles,  has  but  opened  for  you  the  door  to  knowledge.
What  are  your  plans  ? "

"  I  intend  to  enrich  myself."

"  That  is,"  said  the  other,  grandiloquently,  "  you  would
make  yourself  superior  to  the  imbecile  mob — a  laudable
project,  my  son  !     Do  you  propose  to  travel  ?  "

"  Certainly,  so  far  as  my  thirty-seven  ounces  of  gold  will
take  me."

"  You  are  very  young,"  said  the  Armenian.  "  How  is
bread  manufactured  ? "

"With  flour."

"  And  wine  ? "

"  By  means  of  the  grape."

"  But  gold  ?  "

"  I  come  to  inquire  of  yourself."

"We  will  solve  that  problem  hereafter.  Listen  to  me,
young  man.  I  propose  to  depart  for  Grand  Cairo,  in
Egypt.     Will  you  accompany  me  ?  "

"  With  all  my  heart !  "  exclaimed  Cagliostro,  overjoyed,
and  they  sat  down  in  large  oak  chairs,  each  at  one  end  of
the  table  where  the  candelabra  was  placed.

"  Egypt,"  said  the  Armenian,  "  is  the  birthplace  of  all
human  science.  Astronomy  alone  had  Chaldea  for  its
fatherland ;  there  the  shepherds  first  studied  the  courses  of
the  stars.  Egypt  availed  itself  of  the  astro-Chaldean
initiations,  and  soon  surpassed  the  methods  and  increased
the  discoveries  of  the  shepherds.  Since  the  reign  of  the
Pharaoh  Manes,  and  of  his  successors,  Busiris,  Osymandyas,
Uchoreas,  and  Moeris,  Egyptian  knowledge  has  advanced
with  giant  strides.     Joseph,  the  dream-reader,  established

234        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

the  basis  of  chiromancy;  the  priests  of  Osiris  and  Isis
invented  the  Zodiac ;  the  Cosmogonies  of  Phre  and  Horus
revealed  agriculture  and  other  physical  sciences ;  the
priestesses  of  Ansaki  unveiled  the  secrets  of  philtres  ;  the
priests  of  Serapis  taught  medicine.  I  might  proceed  with
the  sublime  enumeration,  but  to  what  end  ?  Will  you
faithfully  follow  me  to  Egypt  ?  I  hope  to  embark  to-
morrow, and  we  shall  touch  at  Malta  on  the  way — possibly
also  at  Candia — reaching  the  port  of  Phare  in  eight
days."

"  Tis  settled  ! "  cried  the  delighted  Cagliostro.  "  I  have
my  thirty-seven  ounces  of  gold  for  the  journey."

"  And  I  not  a  single  crown."

"  The  devil !  "  ejaculated  Cagliostro.

"  What  matters  it  ?  What  need  to  have  gold  when  one
knows  how  to  make  gold?  What  need  to  possess  diamonds
when  one  can  extract  them  from  carbon  more  beautifully
than  from  the  mines  of  Golconda  ?  Go  to !  you  are
excessively  simple."

"  Therefore,  by  your  leave,  I  intend  to  become  your
disciple."

The  Armenian  extended  his  hand,  and  their  departure
was  fixed  for  the  morrow.

This  Altotas,  or  Althotes,  we  are  assured  by  Figuier,  was
no  imaginary  character.  The  Roman  Inquisition  collected
many  proofs  of  his  existence,  without,  however,  ascertain-
ing where  it  began  or  ended,  for  the  mysterious  personage
vanished  like  a  meteor.  According  to  the  Italian  bio-
graphy of  Joseph  Balsamo,  Altotas  was  in  possession  of
several  Arabic  manuscripts,  and  assumed  great  skill  in
chemistry.  According  to  Figuier,  he  was  a  magician  and
doctor  as  well,  though  others  represent  him  despising  and
rejecting  the  abused  name  of  physician.  As  to  his  divina-
tory  abilities,  he  had  already  given  a  signal  proof  of  their

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  235

extent  to  his  pupil,  but  he  showed  him  that  he  was
acquainted  with  all  his  Palermese  antecedents.

They  embarked  on  board  a  Genoese  vessel,  sailed  along
the  Archipelago,  landed  at  Alexandria,  where  they  tarried
for  forty  days,  performing  several  operations  in  chemistry,
by  which  they  are  said  to  have  produced  a  considerable
sum  of  money,  but  whether  by  transmutation  or  by  im-
posture is  not  apparently  clear.  Cagliostro's  respect  for
his  master  did  not  prevent  him,  with  true  Sicilian  subtlety,
inquiring  as  to  his  own  antecedents,  till  Altotas,  weary  of
resorting  to  the  same  stratagems  of  evasion,  declared  to
him  once  for  all  that  he  was  himself  in  complete  ignorance
as  to  his  birth  and  parentage.

"  This  may  surprise  you,"  he  said,  "  but  science,  which
can  enlighten  us  on  the  part  of  another,  is  almost  invariably
impotent  to  instruct  us  concerning  ourselves."

He  declared  himself  to  be  much  older  than  would  appear,
but  that  he  was  in  possession  of  certain  secrets  for  the  con-
servation of  strength  and  health.  He  had  discovered  the
scientific  methods  of  producing  gold  and  precious  stones,
spoke  ten  or  twelve  languages  fluently,  and  was  acquainted
with  almost  the  entire  circle  of  human  sciences.  "  Nothing
astonishes  me,"  he  said,  "  nothing  grieves  me,  save  the  evils
which  I  am  powerless  to  prevent,  and  I  trust  to  reach  in
peace  the  term  of  my  protracted  existence."

He  confessed  that  his  name  of  Altotas  was  self-chosen,
yet  was  it  truly  his.  His  early  years  had  been  passed  on
the  coast  of  Barbary,  near  Tunis,  where  he  belonged  to  a
Mussulman  privateer,  who  was  a  rich  and  humane  man,
and  who  had  purchased  him  from  pirates,  by  whom  he  had
been  stolen  from  his  family.  At  twelve  years  of  age  he
spoke  Arabic  like  a  native,  read  the  Koran  to  his  master,
who  was  a  true  believer,  studied  botany  under  his  direc-
tion, and  learned  the  best  methods  for  making  sherbet  and

236         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

coffee.  A  post  of  honour  was  in  store  for  him  in  the  house-
hold of  his  master ;  but  destiny  decreed  that  when  Altotas
was  sixteen,  the  worthy  Mussulman  should  be  gathered  to
his  fathers.  In  his  will  he  gave  the  young  slave  his  liberty,
and  bequeathed  him  a  sum  which  was  equivalent  to  six
thousand  livres,  wherewith  Altotas  quitted  Tunis  to  indulge
his  passion  for  travelling.

Cagliostro  represented  that  he  had  followed  his  instructor
into  Africa  and  the  heart  of  Egypt,  that  he  visited  the
pyramids,  making  the  acquaintance  of  the  priests  of  dif-
ferent temples,  and  penetrating  into  the  arcana  of  their
mysterious  sanctuaries.  Moreover,  he  declares  himself  to
have  visited,  during  the  space  of  three  years,  all  the  prin-
cipal kingdoms  of  Africa  and  Asia.  These  statements  are
identical  in  their  value  with  the  romantic  story  of  his  edu-
cation in  the  palace  of  the  muphti  at  Medina.  It  is  alto-
gether doubtful  whether  he  ever  visited  Arabia,  which  was
in  any  case  the  extreme  limit  of  his  wanderings,  and  he  is
subsequently  discovered  at  Rhodes  still  in  the  society  of
Altotas,  and  pursuing,  in  common  with  that  mysterious
being,  his  doubtful  chemical  operations.

At  Malta  they  had  letters  of  introduction  to  the  Grand
Master,  Pinto,  and  tarried  for  some  time  to  work  in  his
laboratory,  for  the  "  supreme  chief  of  Maltese  chivalry "
was  infatuated  with  alchemical  experiments,  and,  after  the
fashion  of  that  extravagant  period,  had  a  strong  bias  to-
wards the  marvellous.  The  history  of  the  failure  or  success
of  the  errant  adepts  remains  in  the  laboratory  of  the  Grand
Master ;  but  from  this  moment  Altotas,  the  chemist  and
alchemist — Altotas,  the  phenomenal,  the  wise  man,  the  scien-
tist— disappears  completely.  "  Malta  was  his  sepulchre,  or
haply  the  place  of  his  apotheosis."  "  There,"  says  the  Count,
in  his  Memoir,  "  it  was  my  misery  to  lose  my  best  friend,
the  most  wise,  the  most  illuminated  of  mortals,  the  vener-

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  2  7,7

able  Altotas.  He  clasped  my  hands  shortly  before  his
death.  "  My  son,"  he  said,  in  a  failing  voice,  "  keep  ever
before  thine  eyes  the  fear  of  the  Eternal  and  the  love  of
thy  neighbour.  Thou  wilt  soon  learn  the  truth  of  all  which
I  have  taught  thee."

With  every  mark  of  respect  on  the  part  of  the  Grand
Master,  and  accompanied  by  the  Chevalier  d'Aquino,  of
the  illustrious  house  of  Caramania,  and  himself  a  Knight
of  Malta,  Cagliostro  repaired  to  Naples,  where  he  sup-
ported himself  for  some  time  with  money  which  had  been
presented  to  him  by  Pinto,  and  perhaps  by  loans  from
his  possibly  opulent  companion,  who,  however,  eventually
quitted  him  to  proceed  into  France.  In  Naples  Cagliostro
met  with  a  Sicilian  prince  who  was  infected  by  the  pre-
valent gold  fever,  and  was  so  enraptured  with  the  high-
sounding  theories  of  Cagliostro  that  he  invited  him  to  his
chateau  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Palermo,  where  they
might  pursue  their  operations  in  common.  It  was  im-
prudent, but  the  pupil  of  the  great  Altotas  could  not
resist  the  desire  to  revisit  his  native  land.  He  tarried  a
certain  period  with  his  companion,  but  going  one  day  into
Messina,  he  encountered  an  old  acquaintance,  a  certain
dissolute  priest,  his  confederate  in  the  affair  of  Marano,
and  who  had,  in  fact,  acted  as  one  of  the  sable  fiends
whose  stout  clubs  had  agonised  the  unfortunate  gold-
smith. The  adventurer  warned  Cagliostro  not  to  enter
Palermo,  where  justice  was  highly  offended  at  his  youthful
indiscretions.  He  persuaded  him  to  join  fortunes  with
himself,  return  to  Naples,  and  there  open  a  gaming-house
for  the  benefit,  or  rather  for  the  bleeding,  of  the  wealthy
foreigners  who  visited  Italy.  This  method  of  gold-mak-
ing was  quite  after  the  heart  of  his  hearer,  who  soon  took
his  leave  of  the  Sicilian  prince,  but  they  were  regarded
with  so  much  suspicion  by  the  Neapolitan  Government
that    they   retired    into    the    Papal    states.      Cagliostro's

238        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

companion  had,  however,  received  the  tonsure,  and  he
trembled  for  his  safety  on  the  consecrated  ground  which
was  the  stronghold  of  the  Holy  Inquisition,  so  he
hastened  his  departure  to  less  orthodox  places,  and  does
not  figure  further  in  the  chequered  history  of  his  brother
in  chicanery.

Cagliostro  remained,  and  is  said  to  have  assumed  several
different  characters,  occasionally  including  the  sacerdotal
habit.  According  to  some  accounts,  he  made  himself  re-
markable for  his  extreme  piety,  visiting  all  the  churches,
fulfilling  the  duties  of  religion,  and  frequenting  the  palaces
of  cardinals.  By  means  of  some  letters  of  recommendation
which  he  had  brought  with  him  from  Naples,  he  obtained
access  to  several  persons  of  distinction,  among  others  to
the  Seneschal  de  Breteujl,  at  that  time  Ambassador
from  Malta  to  Rome,  and  who,  hearing  of  his  former
connection  with  the  Grand  Master,  received  him  with
much  warmth,  and  procured  him  other  honourable  con-
nections. One  illustrious  dupe  ensured  others,  and  we
find  him  in  a  short  time  established  in  the  Holy  City,
retailing  wonderful  recipes  and  specifics  for  all  the  diseases
which  afflict  fallen  humanity  in  Rome  and  the  universe.
Crowns  and  ducats  flowed  in  upon  him  ;  he  lived  in  some
state  and  luxury,  refraining,  however,  from  scandalous
enjoyments.

The  Italian  biography  which  represents  the  opinions,
embodies  the  researches,  and  champions  the  cause  of  the
Inquisition,  draws,  however,  a  different  picture  to  those  of
Saint-Felix  and  Louis  Figuier.  "  He  employed  himself
at  this  period,"  says  this  doubtful,  because  indisputably
biassed,  authority,  "  in  making  drawings  on  paper,  the
outlines  of  which  were  produced  by  means  of  a  copper-
plate engraving,  and  afterwards  were  filled  up  with  Indian
ink.  These  he  sold  as  designs  made  by  means  of  the  pen
alone.     Having  taken  up  his  abode  at  the  Sign  of  the  Sun,

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  239

in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Rotunda,  he  quarrelled  with  one
of  the  waiters  and  suffered  imprisonment  for  three  days."

Whatever  these  statements  are  worth,  there  is  no  doubt
hanging  over  the  most  important  incident  of  his  Roman
career.  It  was  in  that  place  and  at  this  period  that  he
first  beheld  the  young  and  beautiful  Lorenza  Feliciani,
and  having  in  two  days  fallen  violently  in  love  with
her,  he  demanded  her  in  marriage  from  her  father,  who,
fascinated  by  his  birth,  his  aristocratic  name,  and  opulent
appearance,  consented,  together  with  the  lady.  The  mar-
riage took  place,  not  without  eclat,  says  one  section  of  the
witnesses,  and  the  pair  resided  in  the  house  of  the  father-
in-law.  The  Italian  life,  minimising  to  the  uttermost  the
success  of  Cagliostro,  says  that  he  received  as  a  dower  a
trifling  fortune  proportionate  to  their  condition.

According  to  the  testimony  of  all  the  biographers,
inquisitorial  or  otherwise,  Lorenza  was  not  only  young  and
beautiful,  but  "rich  in  every  quality  of  the  heart,  being
tender,  devoted,  honest,  and  modest ; "  but  her  husband
conceived  the  diabolical  design  of  advancing  his  fortunes
at  the  expense  of  her  honour,  and  in  private  conversation
took  occasion  to  rally  her  notions  of  virtue,  which  he
sought  to  undermine.  The  first  lesson  which  the  young
bride  received  from  her  husband,  according  to  her  own
confession,  was  intended  to  instruct  her  in  the  means  of
attracting  and  gratifying  the  passions  of  the  opposite  sex.
The  most  wanton  coquetry  and  the  most  lascivious  arts
were  the  principles  with  which  he  endeavoured  to  inspire
her.  The  mother  of  Lorenza,  scandalised  at  his  conduct,
had  such  frequent  altercations  with  her  son-in-law,  that  he
resolved  to  remove  from  her  house,  and  in  other  quarters
found  it  a  simpler  task  to  corrupt  the  mind  and  morals  of
his  wife.  Then,  according  to  the  Italian  author,  he  pre-
sented her  to  two  persons  well  qualified  for  the  exercise  of

24O        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

her  talents,  having  instructed  her  to  entangle  them  both
by  her  allurements.  With  one  of  these  she  did  not
succeed,  but  over  the  other  she  acquired  a  complete
victory.  Cagliostro  himself  conducted  her  to  the  house
destined  for  the  pleasure  of  the  lover,  left  her  alone  in  his
company,  and  retired  to  another  chamber.

The  interview  and  the  offers  made  to  her  were  such  as
entirely  corresponded  to  the  wishes  of  the  husband,  but
the  wife  on  this  occasion  did  not  exhibit  a  proper  instance
of  conjugal  obedience,  and  upon  imparting  the  whole  affair
confidentially  to  her  husband,  received  the  most  bitter
reproach  and  the  most  violent  and  dreadful  menaces.  He
also  repeatedly  assured  her  that  adultery  was  no  crime
when  it  was  committed  by  a  woman  to  advance  her
interests,  and  not  through  affection  for  other  men.  He
even  added  example  to  precept,  by  showing  how  little  he
himself  respected  the  ties  of  conjugal  fidelity  —  that  is,
apparently,  he  sold  himself  to  lascivious  females  of
advanced  age,  and  on  these  occasions  aroused  his  dormant
passions  by  drinking  a  certain  Egyptian  wine,  composed
of  aromatics  which  possessed  the  necessary  qualities  for
the  completion  of  his  intention.  His  wife,  hearkening  at
length  to  his  instructions,  was  conducted  several  times  to
the  place  where  she  had  formerly  proved  so  disobedient  to
his  orders.  She  sometimes  received,  says  the  same  witness,
either  clothes  or  trinkets,  and  sometimes  a  little  money,  as
the  reward  of  her  condescension.  One  day  her  husband
wrote  a  letter,  in  the  name  of  his  wife,  in  which  he  begged
the  loan  of  a  few  crowns ;  these  were  immediately  sent.
In  return  for  them  an  interview  was  promised  during  the
course  of  the  next  day,  and  the  lady  was  faithful  to  the
appointment.

Such  is  the  version  of  this  disgraceful  business  given  by
the  enemies  of  Cagliostro,  but  all  biographers  agree  that

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  2/j.I

he  corrupted  the  morals  of  his  wife.  Indeed,  the  only-
question  is  whether  the  transaction  took  place  on  the
sordid  scale  described  by  the  Italian  writer.  Other
authorities  tell  us  that  his  success  tempted  "  a  beautiful
Roman — Lorenza  Feliciani — to  share  his  rising  fortunes.
Unscrupulous,  witty,  and  fascinating,  Lorenza  was  an
admirable  partner  for  Cagliostro,  who  speedily  made  her
an  adept  in  all  his  pretended  mysteries."  Whatever  were
her  natural  virtues  or  failings,  it  is  highly  improbable  that
she  sold  her  uncommon  attractions  for  such  paltry  and
miserable  advantages.

The  house  which  was  taken  by  Cagliostro  became  the
resort  of  sharpers,  two  of  whom,  Ottavio  Nicestro,  who  was
eventually  hanged,  and  a  so-called  Marquis  d'Agriata,  both
Sicilians,  became  intimate  associates  of  their  host.  With
the  latter  he  was  frequently  closeted  for  hours  together.
Their  occupation  is  uncertain  ;  but  as  Cagliostro's  wealth
increased  at  no  ordinary  rate,  and  as  the  Marquis  was  an
unparalleled  proficient  in  the  production  of  counterfeit
writing,  they  are  supposed  to  have  succeeded  in  forging
numerous  bills  of  exchange ;  and  it  is,  at  any  rate,  certain
that  the  letters  patent  by  which  the  great  charlatan  was
authorised  to  assume  the  uniform  of  a  Prussian  colonel,
which  he  subsequently  did  to  his  definite  advantage,  were
the  production  of  this  skilful  miscreant.  But  a  quarrel
arose  between  the  three  confederates ;  Nicastro  betrayed  his
accomplices,  the  Marquis  fled  from  Rome,  Cagliostro  and
the  unhappy  Lorenza  incontinently  following  his  example.

Our  three  fugitives  took  the  road  to  Venice,  reached
Bergamo,  and  there  practised  several  unparticularised
rogueries,  till  their  identity  was  discovered  by  the  Govern-
ment. The  marquis  again  managed  to  escape,  the  others
after  a  short  imprisonment  were  expelled  from  the  town,
and  being  stripped  of  all  their  resources,  undertook  a  pil-

Q

242        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

grimage  into  Galicia,  hoping  to  cross  Spain,  through  the
charity  of  the  clergy  and  conventual  communities.  They
travelled  through  the  territories  of  the  King  of  Sardinia,
through  Genoa,  and  so  arrived  at  Antibes.  From  this
moment  the  life  of  the  Count  Cagliostro  was  for  several
years  one  of  incessant  wandering.  According  to  the  Italian
biographer,  as  beggary  proved  unprofitable,  Lorenza  was
again  forced  by  her  husband  to  augment  their  resources
through  the  sale  of  her  charms.  In  this  way  they  arrived
at  Barcelona,  where  they  tarried  for  six  months,  the  same
course  of  infamous  prostitution,  followed  by  Lorenza  with
the  most  manifest  reluctance,  contributing  in  the  main  to
their  support.

From  Barcelona  they  proceeded  to  Madrid,  where  also
certain  noble  Spaniards  proved  sensible  to  the  charms  of
Lorenza.  From  Madrid  they  journeyed  to  Lisbon,  and
thence  sailed  to  England,  where  Cagliostro  is  said  to  have
adopted  the  profession  of  a  common  quack,  to  have  fallen
into  prison,  to  have  been  bought  out  by  his  wife,  in  whose
person  he  still  continued  to  traffic,  bartering  her  charms  to
every  opulent  man  who  wished  to  become  a  purchaser ;
but  the  frequency  of  her  prostitutions  has  probably  been
grossly  exaggerated.

An  English  Life  of  the  Count  Cagliostro,  dedicated,  in
1787,  to  Madame  la  Comtesse,  and  written  in  the  interests
of  the  charlatan,  gives  a  singular  account  of  his  mis-
fortunes in  London,  showing  that  when  he  arrived  there
he  was  in  possession  of  plate,  jewels,  and  specie  to  the
amount  of  three  thousand  pounds,  that  he  hired  apart-
ments in  Whitcomb  Street,  where  he  dedicated  a  large
portion  of  his  time  to  his  favourite  studies  of  chemistry
and  physics,  and  that  all  he  suffered  must  be  entirely
attributed  to  the  profuse  generosity  and  charity  of  him-
self and  his  lady.

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  243

In  1772,  Cagliostro  and  his  wife  crossed  over  to  France,
accompanied  by  one  M.  Duplaisir,  who  lodged  with  them
at  Paris,  and  seems  to  have  been  intimate  with  Lorenza.
But  Cagliostro  was  insatiable,  says  St  Felix.  He  sold  his
honour  at  a  high  price,  and  the  fortune  of  Duplaisir  melted
in  the  crucible  of  another's  follies  and  extravagances.  At
length,  in  alarm,  the  victim  took  leave  of  his  rapacious
guests,  not  without  strongly  warning  Lorenza  to  return  to
her  parents,  for  he  had  learned  to  esteem  the  natural  good
qualities  which  she  possessed.  According  to  one  account,
she  attempted  to  follow  this  advice,  but  others  say  that  she
sought  refuge  from  incessant  prostitution  with  Duplaisir
himself.  In  either  case,  Cagliostro  had  recourse  to  the
authority  of  the  king,  and  obtaining  an  order  for  her
arrest,  she  was  imprisoned  in  the  penitentiary  of  Sainte
Pelagie,  and  was  detained  there  several  months,  during
which  Cagliostro  abandoned  himself  to  a  life  of  congenial
dissipation.  The  sale  of  a  certain  wash  for  beautifying  the
complexion  appears  to  have  procured  him  a  considerable
revenue  about  this  period

The  imprisonment  of  Lorenza  did  not  prevent  a  recon-
ciliation with  her  husband  immediately  after  her  release,
which  occurred  on  December  21,  1772,  on  which  date,
having  obtained  under  false  pretences  some  magnificent
dresses  from  the  costumiers,  Cagliostro  appeared  at  the
ball  of  a  dancing-master  in  a  peculiarly  brilliant  costume.

It  is  from  this  period  that  our  adventurer's  success  as  an
alchemist  must  be  dated.  Here  he  found  means  to  form
an  acquaintance  with  two  persons  of  distinction,  who
carried  their  love  of  chemistry  to  a  ridiculous  excess.  He
pretended  to  have  discovered  some  miraculous  secrets  in
the  transcendent  science,  proclaimed  himself  publicly  a
depository  of  the  Hermetic  Mystery,  and  posing  as  a
supernatural  personage  in  possession  of  the  great  arcanum

244         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

of  the  philosophers'  stone  and  of  the  glorious  life-elixir.
This  also  was  the  epoch  of  mesmerism,  of  which  novel
science  Cagliostro  decided  to  avail  himself.  After  a  time,
according  to  the  Italian  biography,  his  two  dupes  enter-
tained suspicions  of  his  veracity,  and  being  in  fear  of  arrest,
he  obtained  a  passport  under  a  fictitious  name,  fled  with
great  precipitation  to  Brussels,  traversed  Germany  and
Italy,  and  once  more  arrived  at  his  native  city  Palermo.*

At  Palermo  he  was  speedily  arrested  by  the  implacable
Marano,  but  the  protection  of  a  noble,  to  whom  he  had
obtained  a  powerful  recommendation  while  at  Naples,
ensured  his  speedy  release,  and  he  embarked  with  his  wife
for  Malta,  where,  according  to  the  Italian  biographer,  he
ostensibly  supported  himself  by  the  sale  of  his  pomade  for
the  improvement  of  the  complexion,  but  his  more  certain
income  appears  to  have  been  his  wife.  Monsieur  Saint-
Felix,  however,  declares,  and  this,  on  the  whole,  is  most
probable,  that  they  were  received  with  the  most  marked
distinction  by  the  Grand  Master.  In  either  case,  they  soon
retired  to  Naples,  when  Cagliostro  professed  in  public  for
three  months  both  chemistry  and  the  Kabbalah.  At  Naples
they  were  joined  by  a  younger  brother  of  Feliciani,  a  lad
named  Paolo,  who  was  remarkable  for  his  extraordinary

*  "At  a  later  period,  when  Cagliostro,  uplifted  by  notoriety  and  fortune,
returned  in  state  to  Paris  with  a  sumptuous  equipage,  he  strenuously  denied
his  first  sojourn  in  our  capital,  and  the  disgraceful  episode  of  Sainte-Pelagie.
He  maintained  that  his  wife,  to  whom  he  now  gave  the  name  of  Seraphina,
had  no  connection  with  the  imprisoned  Lorenza  Feliciani,  nor  he,  the  Count
Cagliostro,  with  the  quack  who  at  this  epoch  was  prohibited  from  continuing
his  rogueries.  But  certain  legal  documents  of  irrefutable  authenticity  sub-
stantiate the  contrary  assertion  of  his  enemies.  It  is  interesting  to  know  that,
as  a  fact,  during  the  incaixeration  of  Lorenza,  depositions  were  made  before
the  tribunal  of  police  by  M.  Duplaisir,  who  stated  that,  in  addition  to  support-
ing Balsamo  and  his  wife  for  the  space  of  three  months,  they  had  contracted
debts  to  the  amount  of  two  hundred  crowns,  chiefly  for  clothes,  for  the  perru-
quier,  and  the  dancing-master."  These  depositions,  with  others,  will  be  found
in  a  pamphlet  entitled,  Ma  Correspondence  avec  le  Comte  de  Cagliostro.  Figuier.
Histoire  du  Merveillexix  dans  les  Temps  Modernes,  t.  iv.  pp.  83,  84.

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  245

loveliness.  Cagliostro,  seeing  that  he  might  prove  useful,
persuaded  him  to  share  their  fortunes.  They  embarked
with  a  great  train  for  Marseilles,  and  thence  proceeded  to
Barcelona.  The  star  of  the  great  adventurer  was  now  fairly
in  the  ascendant,  and  from  this  time  he  seems  always  to
have  travelled  in  considerable  state.  He  met,  however,
with  no  dupes  of  importance  in  the  peninsula  till  he  reached
its  extremity,  where  he  cheated  a  fanatical  alchemist  of  a
hundred  thousand  crowns,  under  the  pretence  of  a  colossal
accomplishment  of  the  magnum  opus.  After  this  signal
success  he  incontinently  departed  for  England,  while  Paolo,
with  whom  he  had  quarrelled,  returned  to  Rome,  much  to
the  grief  of  his  sister.

The  commencement  of  the  grandeur  of  Cagliostro  is  to
be  dated  from  his  second  visit  to  London.  It  was  then
that  he  was  initiated  into  masonry,  and  conceived  his  titanic
project  of  the  mysterious  Egyptian  rite.  Saint  Felix  ac-
credits him  even  from  the  moment  of  his  admission  into
the  order  with  an  unavowed  object.  Cagliostro,  he  informs
us,  was  resolved  one  day  to  seat  himself  on  the  throne  of
the  grand  master  of  a  rival  and  more  potent  institution,
and  he  appears  to  have  lived  henceforth  in  the  light  of  his
high  aspiration,  and  to  have  eschewed — theoretically  at
least — all  petty  rogueries.

He  incessantly  visited  the  various  London  lodges,  and
a  correspondence  printed  in  English  at  Strasburg  during
the  year  1788,  relates  that  by  a  pure  chance  he  picked  up
a  curious  manuscript  at  an  obscure  London  bookstall.  This
manuscript  appears  to  have  belonged  to  a  certain  George
Gaston,  who  is  absolutely  unknown.  It  treated  of  Egyp-
tian masonry,  and  abounded  in  magical  and  mystical  notions
which  excited  the  curiosity  of  its  purchaser,  nourished  both
his  ambition  and  his  imagination,  and  in  a  short  time  he
developed  his  own  system  from  its  suggestive  hints.     The

246         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

source  of  his  inspiration,  of  course,  remained  concealed.
He  pretended  to  have  received  his  masonic  tradition  by
succession  from  Enoch  and  Elias.  Privately,  however,  he
pursued  his  former  rogueries,  and  his  sojourn  in  London
was  not  infrequently  disturbed  by  his  squabbles  with  the
police.  Those  who  are  interested  in  this  part  of  the  Cagli-
ostro  controversy  will  do  well  to  refer  to  the  English  bio-
graphy, dedicated  to  the  countess,  and  which  contains  much
curious  information.

When  all  his  plans  were  matured  he  departed  for  the
Hague,  and  thence  proceeded  to  Venice,  where  some  of  his
English  creditors  seem  to  have  disturbed  his  serenity,
and  prompted  him  in  consequence  to  retire  through  Ger-
many into  Holstein,  where  he  is  supposed  to  have  visited
the  renowned  Count  de  St  Germain.

According  to  the  Memoires  Authentiques  pour  serviv  a
VHistoire  du  Comte  de  Cagliostro,  published  in  1785,  he
demanded  an  audience  with  this  man  of  inscrutable  mystery,
in  order  that  he  might  prostrate  himself  before  the  dieu  des
croyants.  With  characteristic  eccentricity  the  Count  de  St
Germain  appointed  two  in  the  morning  as  the  hour  for  the
interview,  which  moment  being  arrived,  say  the  "  Memoirs,"
Cagliostro  and  his  wife,  clothed  in  white  garments,  clasped
about  the  waist  with  girdles  of  rose-colour,  presented  them-
selves at  the  castellated  temple  of  mystery,  which  was  the
abode  of  the  dubious  divinity  whom  they  desired  to  adore.
The  drawbridge  was  lowered,  a  man  six  feet  in  height,
clothed  in  a  long  grey  robe,  led  them  into  a  dimly-lighted
chamber.  Therein  some  folding  doors  sprang  suddenly
open,  and  they  beheld  a  temple  illuminated  by  a  thousand
wax  lights,  with  the  Count  de  Saint-Germain  enthroned
upon  the  altar ;  at  his  feet  two  acolytes  swung  golden
thuribles,  which  diffused  sweet  and  unobtrusive  perfumes.
The  divinity  bore  upon  his  breast  a  diamond  pentagram  of

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  247

almost  intolerable  radiance.  A  majestic  statue,  white  and
diaphanous,  upheld  on  the  steps  of  the  altar  a  vase  in-
scribed, "  Elixir  of  Immortality,"  while  a  vast  mirror  was
on  the  wall,  and  before  it  a  living  being,  majestic  as  the
statue,  walked  to  and  fro.  Above  the  mirror  were  these
singular  words — "  Store  House  of  Wandering  Souls."  The
most  solemn  silence  prevailed  in  this  sacred  retreat,  but  at
length  a  voice,  which  seemed  hardly  a  voice,  pronounced
these  words —  "  Who  are  you  ?  Whence  come  you  ?  What
would  you  ? "  Then  the  Count  and  Countess  Cagliostro
prostrated  themselves,  and  the  former  answered  after  a
long  pause,  '  I  come  to  invoke  the  God  of  the  faithful,  the
Son  of  Nature,  the  sire  of  truth.  I  come  to  demand  of  him
one  of  the  fourteen  thousand  seven  hundred  secrets  which
are  treasured  in  his  breast,  I  come  to  proclaim  myself  his
slave,  his  apostle,  his  martyr."

The  divinity  did  not  respond,  but  after  a  long  silence,
the  same  voice  asked  : — "  What  does  the  partner  of  thy
long  wanderings  intend  ?  "

"  To  obey  and  to  serve,"  answered  Lorenza.

Simultaneously  with  her  words,  profound  darkness  suc-
ceeded the  glare  of  light,  uproar  followed  on  tranquillity,
terror  on  trust,  and  a  sharp  and  menacing  voice  cried
loudly  : — "  Woe  to  those  who-  cannot  stand  the  tests  !  "

Husband  and  wife  were  immediately  separated  to
undergo  their  respective  trials,  which  they  endured  with
exemplary  fortitude,  and  which  are  detailed  in  the  text  of
the  memoirs.  When  the  romantic  mummery  was  over,
the  two  postulants  were  led  back  into  the  temple,  with  the
promise  of  admission  to  the  divine  mysteries.  There  a
man  mysteriously  draped  in  a  long  mantle  cried  out  to
them : — "  Know  ye  that  the  arcanum  of  our  great  art  is
the  government  of  mankind,  and  that  the  one  means  to
rule  them  is  never  to  tell  them  the  truth.     Do  not  foolishly

248         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

regulate  your  actions  according  to  the  rules  of  common
sense  ;  rather  outrage  reason  and  courageously  maintain
every  unbelievable  absurdity.  Remember  that  reproduc-
tion is  the  palmary  active  power  in  nature,  politics,  and
society  alike  ;  that  it  is  a  mania  with  mortals  to  be  im-
mortal, to  know  the  future  without  understanding  the
present,  and  to  be  spiritual  while  all  that  surrounds  them
is  material.

After  this  harangue  the  orator  genuflected  devoutly
before  the  divinity  of  the  temple  and  retired.  At  the
same  moment  a  man  of  gigantic  stature  led  the  countess
to  the  feet  of  the  immortal  Count  de  Saint-German,  who
thus  spoke : —

"  Elected  from  my  tenderest  youth  to  the  things  of
greatness,  I  employed  myself  in  ascertaining  the  nature
of  veritable  glory.  Politics  appeared  to  me  nothing  but
the  science  of  deception,  tactics  the  art  of  assassination,
philosophy  the  ambitious  imbecility  of  complete  irra-
tionality ;  physics  fine  fancies  about  Nature  and  the  con-
tinual mistakes  of  persons  suddenly  transplanted  into  a
country  which  is  utterly  unknown  to  them ;  theology  the
science  of  the  misery  which  results  from  human  pride  ;
history  the  melancholy  spectacle  of  perpetual  perfidy  and
blundering.  Thence  I  concluded  that  the  statesman  was
a  skilful  liar,  the  hero  an  illustrious  idiot,  the  philosopher
an  eccentric  creature,  the  physician  a  pitiable  and  blind
man,  the  theologian  a  fanatical  pedagogue,  and  the
historian  a  word-monger.  Then  did  I  hear  of  the  divinity
of  this  temple.  I  cast  my  cares  upon  him,  with  my  in-
certitudes and  aspirations.  When  he  took  possession  of
my  soul  he  caused  me  to  perceive  all  objects  in  a  new
light ;  I  began  to  read  futurity.  This  universe  so  limited,
so  narrow,  so  desert,  was  now  enlarged.  I  abode  not  only
with  those  who  are,  but  with  those  who  were.    He  united  me

TRAVELS,  ETC..  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  249

to  the  loveliest  women  of  antiquity.  I  found  it  eminently-
delectable  to  know  all  without  studying  anything,  to  dis-
pose of  the  treasures  of  the  earth  without  the  solicitation
of  monarchs,  to  rule  the  elements  rather  than  men.
Heaven  made  me  liberal ;  I  have  sufficient  to  satisfy
my  taste ;  all  that  surrounds  me  is  rich,  loving,  predes-
tinated."

When  the  service  was  finished  the  costume  of  ordinary
life  was  resumed.  A  superb  repast  terminated  the  cere-
mony. During  the  course  of  the  banquet  the  two  guests
were  informed  that  the  Elixir  of  Immortality  was  merely
Tokay  coloured  green  or  red  according  to  the  necessities
of  the  case.  Several  essential  precepts  were  enjoined  upon
them,  among  others  that  they  must  detest,  avoid,  and
calumniate  men  of  understanding,  but  flatter,  foster,  and
blind  fools,  that  they  must  spread  abroad  with  much
mystery  the  intelligence  that  the  Count  de  Saint-Germain
was  five  hundred  years  old,  that  they  must  make  gold,  but
dupes  before  all.

The  truth  of  this  singular  episode  is  not  attested  by  any
sober  biographer.  If  it  occurred  as  narrated,  it  doubtless
served  to  confirm  Cagliostro  in  his  ambitious  projects.
The  change  which  had  taken  place  in  the  adventurer  since
his  second  visit  to  England  is  well  described  by  Figuier.
"  His  language,  his  mien,  his  manners,  all  are  transformed.
His  conversation  turns  only  on  his  travels  in  Egypt,  to
Mecca,  and  in  other  remote  places,  on  the  sciences  into
which  he  was  initiated  at  the  foot  of  the  Pyramids,  on  the
arcana  of  Nature  which  his  ingenuity  has  discovered.  At
the  same  time,  he  talks  little,  more  often  enveloping
himself  in  mysterious  silence.  When  interrogated  with
reiterated  entreaties,  he  deigns  at  the  most  to  draw
his  symbol — a  serpent  with  an  apple  in  its  mouth  and
pierced  by  a  dart,  meaning  that  human  wisdom  should  be

25O         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

silent  on  the  mysteries  which  it  has  unravelled.  .  .  .
Lorenza  was  transfigured  at  the  same  time  with  her
husband.  Her  ambitions  and  deportment  became  worthy
of  the  new  projects  of  Cagliostro.  She  aimed,  like  himself,
at  the  glory  of  colossal  successes."

The  initiates  of  the  Count  de  Saint-Germain  passed  into
Courland,  where  they  established  Masonic  lodges,  accord-
ing to  the  sublime  rite  of  Egyptian  Freemasonry.  The
countess  was  an  excellent  preacher  to  captivate  hearts  and
enchant  imaginations,  her  beauty  fascinated  a  large  number
of  Courlandaise  nobility.  At  Mittau,  Cagliostro  attracted
the  attention  of  persons  of  high  rank,  who  were  led  by  his
reputation  to  regard  him  as  an  extraordinary  person.  By
means  of  his  Freemasonry  he  began  to  obtain  an  ascen-
dency over  the  minds  of  the  nobles,  some  of  whom,
discontented  with  the  reigning  duke,  are  actually  said  to
have  offered  him  the  sovereignty  of  the  country,  as  to  a
divine  man  and  messenger  from  above.  The  Italian
biography  represents  him  plotting  with  this  end  in  view.
"  He  pretends,"  say  the  documents  of  the  Holy  Inquisition,
"  that  he  had  virtue  enough  to  resist  the  temptation,  and
that  he  refused  the  proffered  boon  from  the  respect  due  to
sovereigns.  His  wife  has  assured  us  that  his  refusal  was
produced  by  the  reflection  that  his  impostures  would  soon
be  discovered."  He  collected,  however,  a  prodigious
number  of  presents  in  gold,  silver,  and  money,  and
repaired  to  St  Petersburg,  provided  with  regular  passports.
But  the  prophet  soon  found  that  a  sufficiently  brilliant
reputation  had  not  preceded  him,  and  he,  therefore,  simply
announced  himself  as  a  physician  and  chemist,  by  his
retired  life  and  air  of  mystery  soon  attracting  attention.

His  assumption  of  the  role  of  physician  leads  to  a  brief
consideration  of  the  miraculous  cures  which  have  been
attributed  to  him.     They  are  generally  referred  to  a  broad

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  25  I

application  of  the  principles  and  methods  of  Mesmer,  his
contemporary.  They  were  performed  without  passes,  iron
rods,  or  any  of  the  cumbrous  paraphernalia  of  his  rival  in
the  healing  art ;  he  trusted  simply  to  the  laying  on  of
hands.  Moreover,  he  did  not  despoil  his  patients,  but
rather  dispensed  his  wealth,  which  now  appeared  unlimited,
among  the  poor,  who  flocked  to  him  in  great  numbers  as
his  reputation  increased.  The  source  of  this  wealth  is  not
accurately  known,  but  it  is  supposed  to  have  been  derived
from  the  Masonic  initiates,  whose  apostle  and  propagandist
he  was.

Many  of  the  miraculous  cures  which  Cagliostro  performed
in  Germany  spread  widely,  and  in  Russia  he  was  soon
surrounded  by  the  curious.  Lorenza  played  her  own  part
admirably ;  she  answered  discreetly  and  naturally,  making
the  most  outrageous  statements  with  apparently  complete
unconsciousness.  The  physician-chemist,  besides  his  heal-
ing powers,  had  his  reputation  as  an  alchemist  and  adept
of  the  arcane  sciences.  The  supposed  restoration  in  a
miraculous  manner  of  the  infant  child  of  an  illustrious
nobleman  to  health  exalted  him  to  the  pinnacle  of
celebrity,  and  his  extravagant  pretensions,  assisted,  as  they
powerfully  were,  by  the  naive  beauty  of  his  wife,  were
beginning  to  be  taken  seriously,  but  the  combined  result
of  an  amour  between  Lorenza  and  Prince  Poternki,  Prime
Minister  and  favourite  of  the  Czarina,  Catherine,  and  the
discovery  that  the  nobleman's  child  had  been  apparently
changed,  caused  them  to  depart  hastily  with  immense
spoils  towards  the  German  frontier.

They  tarried  at  Warsaw  for  a  time,  and  there  the
Italian  biographer  tells  us  that  Cagliostro  made  use  of  all
his  artifices  to  deceive  a  prince  to  whom  he  was  intro-
duced, and  who  was  exceedingly  anxious  to  obtain,  with
the  help  of  the  pretended  magician,  the  permanent  com-

252         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

mand  of  a  devil.  Cagliostro  puffed  him  up  for  a  long
time  with  the  expectation  of  gratifying  this  preposterous
ambition,  and  actually  procured  presents  from  him  to
the  amount  of  several  thousand  crowns.  The  prince  at
length  perceiving  that  there  was  no  hope  of  retaining
one  of  the  infernal  spirits  in  his  service,  wished  to  make
himself  master  of  the  earthly  affections  of  the  countess,
but  in  this  too  he  was  disappointed,  the  lady  positively
refusing  to  comply  with  his  desires.  Finding  himself  thus
balked  in  both  his  attempts,  he  abandoned  every  senti-
ment but  revenge,  and  intimidated  our  adventurer  and  his
wife  so  much  by  his  menaces  that  they  were  obliged  to
restore  his  presents.

The  veracity  of  this  account  is  not,  however,  beyond
suspicion,  and  other  of  his  biographers  represent  Cagliostro
proceeding  directly  to  Francfurt  and  thence  to  Strasbourg,
into  which,  more  wealthy  and  successful  than  ever,  he
made  a  triumphal  entry.  The  distinguished  visitor,  the
Rosicrucian,  the  alchemist,  the  physician,  the  sublime
count,  had  been  expected  since  early  morning  by  the
bourgeois  of  the  old  town,  and  the  following  extraordinary
account  in  the  Dictionnaire  des  Sciences  Occultes  has  been
given  by  an  anonymous  biographer.

"  On  the  19th  of  September  1780,  in  a  public-house  just
outside  Strasburg,  surrounded  by  a  group  of  humble  tip-
plers, who  stared  from  the  little  window  at  the  vast  crowd
collected  below  them,  there  might  have  been  remarked  the
countenance  of  a  bald  and  wrinkled  man,  some  eighty
years  of  age,  and  evidently  of  southern  origin  ;  this  was
the  goldsmith  Marano.  Successive  failures,  and  debts
which  he  did  not  see  fit  to  liquidate,  had  forced  him  to
leave  Palermo,  and  he  had  established  himself  in  his
former  trade  at  Strasbourg.  Like  the  rest  of  the  towns-
folk he  had  come  out  to  behold  the  phenomenal  personage

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  253

whose  arrival  was  expected,  and  who  made  a  greater  sen-
sation than  many  a  powerful  monarch.  He  had  come  by
way  of  Germany  from  Varsovia,  where  he  had  amassed
immense  riches,  said  popular  rumour,  by  the  transmuta-
tion of  base  metals  into  gold,  for  he  was  possessed  of  the
secret  of  the  philosophic  stone,  and  had  all  the  incalcul-
able talents  of  an  alchemist."

"  By  my  faith,"  said  a  hatter,  "  I  am  indeed  happy  since
I  am  destined  to  behold  this  illustrious  mortal,  if  indeed
he  be  a  mortal."

"  'Tis  asserted,"  added  a  druggist,  "  that  he  is  a  son  of
the  Princess  of  Trebizond,  and  that  he  has  withal  the  fine
eyes  of  his  mother."

"  Also  that  he  is  a  lineal  descendant  of  Charles  Martel,"
said  a  town  clerk.

"  He  dates  still  further  back,"  put  in  a  rope-maker,  "  for
he  took  part  in  the  marriage  feast  of  Cana."

"  Beyond  doubt  then,  he  is  the  wandering  Jew ! "  ex-
claimed Marano.

"  Still  better,  some  credible  persons  assert  that  he  was
born  before  the  deluge."

"  What  hardihood  !     Yet  suppose  he  is  the  devil."

These  notions  here  reproduced  with  fidelity,  and  which
were  adorned  by  the  most  extravagant  commentaries,
were  actually  at  that  period  in  general  circulation
among  the  crowd.  Some  regarded  the  mysterious  Count
Cagliostro  as  an  inspired  saint,  a  performer  of  miracles,
a  phenomenal  personage  outside  the  order  of  Nature.  The
cures  attributed  to  him  were  equally  innumerable  and  un-
explainable.  Others  regarded  him  merely  as  an  adroit
charlatan.  Cagliostro  himself  boldly  asserted  that  all  his
prodigies  were  performed  under  the  special  favour  and
help  of  heaven.  He  added  that  the  Supreme  Being  had
deigned  to  accord  him  the  beatific  vision,  that  it  was  his

254         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

mission  to  convert  unbelievers  and  reinstate  Catholicism,
but  in  spite  of  this  exalted  vocation  he  told  fortunes,
taught  the  art  of  winning  at  lotteries,  interpreted  dreams,
and  held  seances  of  transcendental  phantasmagoria.

"  But,"  contended  the  ropemaker  with  much  animation,
"a  man  who  converses  with  angels  is  never  the  devil."

"  Is  he  in  communication  with  angels  ? "  cried  Marano,
struck  by  the  circumstances,  "  In  that  case  I  must  see
him  at  all  costs.     How  old  is  he  ?  "

"  Bah  !  "  said  the  druggist,  "  as  if  such  a  being  could  have
an  age !     He  looks  about  thirty-six."

"  Oh  !  "  muttered  the  goldsmith.  "  What  if  he  were  my
rascal  ?     My  rascal  should  now  be  thirty-seven."

As  the  hoary  Sicilian  ruminated  over  his  lamentable
past,  he  was  roused  by  a  tumult  of  voices.  The  supernal
being  had  arrived,  and  he  passed  presently  in  the  road,
surrounded  by  a  numerous  cortege  of  couriers,  lacqueys,
valets,  &c,  all  in  magnificent  liveries.  By  his  side,  in  the
open  carriage,  sat  Lorenza  or  Seraphina  Feliciani,  his  wife,
who  seconded  with  all  her  ability  the  intrigues  of  her  hus-
band, whom  reasonable  people  regarded  as  a  wandering
member  and  emissary  of  the  masonic  templars,  his  opulence
insured  by  contributions  from  the  different  lodges  of  the
order.

A  great  shout  rose  up  when  Count  Cagliostro  passed
before  the  inn.  Marano  had  recognised  his  man,  and  fly-
ing out  had  contrived  to  stop  the  carriage,  shouting  as  he
did  so — "  Joseph  Balsamo  !  It  is  Joseph!  Coquin,  where
are  my  sixty  ounces  of  gold  ?  "

Cagliostro  scarcely  deigned  to  glance  at  the  furious  gold-
smith ;  but  in  the  middle  of  the  profound  silence  which  the
incident  occasioned  among  the  crowd,  a  voice,  apparently
in  the  clouds,  uttered  with  great  distinctness  the  following
words :  "  Remove  this  lunatic,  who  is  possessed  by  infernal
spirits !  "

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  255

Some  of  the  spectators  fell  on  their  knees,  others  seized
the  unfortunate  goldsmith,  and  the  brilliant  cortege  passed
on.

Entering  Strasburg  in  triumph,  Cagliostro  paused  in
front  of  a  large  hall,  where  the  equerries  who  had  preceded
him  had  already  collected  a  considerable  concourse  of  the
sick.  The  famous  empiric  entered  and  cured  them  all,
some  simply  by  touch,  others  apparently  by  words  or  by
a  gratuity  in  money,  the  rest  by  his  universal  panacea ;  but
the  historian  who  records  these  things  asserts  that  the  sick
persons  thus  variously  treated  had  been  carefully  selected,
the  physician  preferring  to  treat  the  more  serious  cases  at
the  homes  of  the  patients.

Cagliostro  issued  from  the  hall  amidst  universal  accla-
mations, and  was  accompanied  by  the  immense  crowd  to
the  doors  of  the  magificent  lodging  which  had  been  pre-
pared against  his  arrival.  The  elite  of  Strasburg  society
was  invited  to  a  sumptuous  repast,  which  was  followed  by
a  seance  of  transcendental  magnetism,  when  he  produced
some  extraordinary  manifestations  by  the  mediation  of
clairvoyant  children  of  either  sex,  and  whom  he  denomi-
nated his  doves  or  pupils.  The  unspotted  virginity  and
innocence  of  these  children  were  an  indispensable  condition
of  success.  They  were  chosen  by  himself,  and  received  a
mystical  consecration  at  his  hands.  Then  he  pronounced
over  a  crystal  vessel,  filled  with  water,  the  magical  formulae
for  the  evocation  of  angelic  intelligences  as  they  are  written
in  the  celestial  rituals.  Supernal  spirits  became  visible  in
the  depths  of  the  water,  and  responded  to  questions  occa-
sionally in  an  intelligible  voice,  but  more  often  in  characters
which  appeared  on  the  surface  of  the  water,  and  were  visible
to  the  pupils  alone,  who  interpreted  them  to  the  public.

Contemporary  testimony  establishes  that  these  manifes-
tations, as  a  whole,  were  genuine,  and  there  is  little  doubt

256         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

of  the  mesmeric  abilities  of  Cagliostro,  who  had  probably-
become  acquainted  in  the  East  with  the  phenomena  of
virginal  lucidity,  especially  in  boys,  and  had  supplemented
the  oriental  methods  by  the  discoveries  of  Puseygur,  which
were  at  that  time  sufficiently  notorious.

For  three  years  Cagliostro  remained  at  Strasburg  and
was  feted  continually.  Here  he  obtained  a  complete  ascen-
dency over  the  mind  of  the  famous  cardinal-archbishop,
the  Prince  de  Rohan.  His  first  care,  on  taking  up  his
abode  in  the  town,  was  to  prove  his  respect  for  the  clergy
by  his  generosity  and  zeal.  He  visited  the  sick  in  the
hospitals,  deferentially  participated  in  the  duties  of  the
regular  doctors,  proposed  his  new  remedies  with  prudence,
did  not  condemn  the  old  methods,  but  sought  to  unite  new
science  with  the  science  which  was  based  on  experience.
He  obtained  the  reputation  of  a  bold  experimenter  in
chemistry,  of  a  sagacious  physician,  and  a  really  enlight-
ened innovator.  The  inhabitants  of  the  crowded  quarters
regarded  him  as  a  man  sent  from  God,  operating  miracu-
lous cures,  and  dispensing  riches  from  an  inexhaustible
source  with  which  he  was  alone  acquainted.  Unheard-of
cures  were  cited,  and  alchemical  operations  which  sur-
passed even  the  supposed  possibilities  of  the  transmutatory
art.

Anything  which  savoured  of  the  marvellous  was  an
attraction  for  the  cardinal-archbishop,  and  he  longed  to
see  Cagliostro.  An  anonymous  writer  states  that  he
sought  an  interview  with  him  again  and  again  unsuccess-
fully ;  for  the  cardinal-prince  of  trickery  divined  even  at  a
distance  the  character  of  the  prince-cardinal,  and  enveloped
himself  in  a  reserve  which,  to  the  imagination  of  his  dupe,
was  like  the  loadstone  to  the  magnet.  Others  represent
him,  however,  courting  the  favour  of  the  great  ecclesiastic's
secretary,  and  so  obtaining  an  introduction.     At  the  first

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  257

interview  he  showed  some  reserve,  but  permitted  certain
dazzling  ideas  to  be  glimpsed  through  the  more  ordinary
tenour  of  his  discourse.  After  a  judicious  period  he
admitted  that  he  possessed  a  receipt  for  the  manufacture
of  gold  and  diamonds.  A  supposed  transmutation  com-
pleted his  conquest  of  the  cardinal,  and  the  Italian  historian
confesses  that  he  accordingly  lavished  immense  sums  upon
the  virtuous  pair,  and  to  complete  his  folly,  agreed  to
erect  a  small  edifice,  in  which  he  was  to  experience  a
physical  regeneration  by  means  of  the  supernal  and
auriferous  elixir  of  Cagliostro.  The  sum  of  twenty
thousand  francs  was  actually  paid  the  adept  to  accomplish
this  operation.

Doubtless  during  his  sojourn  at  Strasburg  he  propagated
with  zeal  the  mysteries  of  his  Egyptian  Freemasonry,  and
at  length,  laden  with  spoils,  he  repaired  to  Bordeaux,  where
he  continued  his  healing  in  public,  and  then  proceeded  to
Lyons,  where  for  the  space  of  three  months  he  occupied
himself  with  the  foundation  of  a  mother-lodge,  and,  accord-
ing to  the  Italian  biographer,  here  as  elsewhere,  in  less
creditable  pursuits.  At  length  he  arrived  at  Paris,  where,
says  the  same  authority,  he  soon  became  the  object  of
general  conversation,  regard,  and  esteem.  His  curative
powers  were  now  but  little  exercised,  for  Paris  abounded
with  mesmerists  and  healers,  and  the  prodigies  of
simple  magnetism  were  stale  and  unprofitable  in  conse-
quence. He  assumed  now  the  role  of  a  practical  magician,
and  astonished  the  city  by  the  evocation  of  phantoms,
which  he  caused  to  appear,  at  the  wish  of  the  inquirer,
either  in  a  mirror  or  in  a  vase  of  clear  water.  These
phantoms  equally  represented  dead  and  living  beings,  and
as  occasionally  collusion  appears  to  have  been  well-nigh
impossible,  and  as  the  theory  of  coincidence  is  preposter-
ous, there  is  reason  to  suppose  that  he  produced  results

R

258         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

which  must  sometimes  have  astonished  himself.  All  Paris
at  any  rate  was  set  wondering  at  his  enchantments  and
prodigies,  and  it  is  seriously  stated  that  Louis  XVI.  was  so
infatuated  with  le  divin  Cagliostro,  that  he  declared  anyone
who  injured  him  should  be  considered  guilty  of  treason.
At  Versailles,  and  in  the  presence  of  several  distinguished
nobles,  he  is  said  to  have  caused  the  apparition  in  mirrors,
vases,  &c,  not  merely  of  the  spectra  of  absent  or  deceased
persons,  but  animated  and  moving  beings  of  a  phantasmal
description,  including  many  dead  men  and  women  selected
by  the  astonished  spectators.

The  mystery  which  surrounded  him  abroad  was  deepened
even  when  he  received  visitors  at  home.  He  had  lived  in
the  Rue  Saint  Claude,  an  isolated  house  surrounded  by
gardens  and  sheltered  from  the  inconvenient  curiosity  of
neighbours.  There  he  established  his  laboratory,  which  no
one  might  enter.  He  received  in  a  vast  and  sumptuous
apartment  on  the  first  floor.  Lorenza  lived  a  retired  life,
only  being  visible  at  certain  hours  before  a  select  company,
and  in  a  diaphanous  and  glamourous  costume.  The  report
of  her  beauty  spread  through  the  city ;  she  passed  for  a
paragon  of  perfection,  and  duels  took  place  on  her  account.
Cagliostro  was  now  no  longer  young,  and  Lorenza  was  in
the  flower  of  her  charms.  He  is  said  for  the  first  time  to
have  experienced  the  pangs  of  jealousy  on  account  of  a
certain  Chevalier  d'Oisemont,  with  whom  she  had  several
assignations.  Private  vexations  did  not,  however,  interfere
with  professional  thaumaturgy,  and  the  evocation  of  the
illustrious  dead  was  a  common  occurrence  at  certain
magical  suppers  which  became  celebrated  through  all
Paris.  These  were  undoubtedly  exaggerated  by  report,
but  as  they  all  occurred  within  the  doubtful  precincts  of
his  own  house  of  mystery,  they  were  in  all  probability
fraudulent,  for  it  must  be  distinctly  remembered  that  in

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  259

his  normal  character  he  was  an  unparalleled  trickster,  that
the  genuine  phenomena  which  he  occasionally  produced
were  simply  supplements  to  charlatanry,  and  not  that  his
deceptions  were  aids  to  normally  genuine  phenomena.

On  one  occasion,  according  to  the  Memoires  authentiques
pour  servir  a  Vhistoire  du  Comte  de  Cagliostro,  the  distin-
guished thaumaturgist  announced  that  at  a  private  supper,
given  to  six  guests,  he  would  evoke  the  spirits  of  any  dead
persons  whom  they  named  to  him,  and  that  the  phantoms,
apparently  substantial,  should  seat  themselves  at  the
banquet.  The  repast  took  place  with  the  knowledge  and,
it  may  be  supposed,  with  the  connivance  of  Lorenza.  At
midnight  the  guests  were  assembled ;  a  round  table,  laid
for  twelve,  was  spread,  with  unheard-of  luxury,  in  a  dining-
room,  where  all  was  in  harmony  with  the  approaching
Kabbalistic  operation.  The  six  guests,  with  Cagliostro,
took  their  seats,  and  thus  the  ominous  number  thirteen
were  designed  to  be  present  at  table.

The  supper  was  served,  the  servants  were  dismissed  with
threats  of  immediate  death  if  they  dared  to  open  the  doors
before  they  were  summoned.  Each  guest  demanded  the
deceased  person  whom  he  desired  to  see.  Cagliostro  took
the  names,  placed  them  in  the  pocket  of  his  gold-embroi-
dered vest,  and  announced  that  with  no  further  preparation
than  a  simple  invocation  on  his  part  the  evoked  spirits
would  appear  in  flesh  and  blood,  for,  according  to  the  Egyp-
tian dogma,  there  were  in  reality  no  dead.  These  guests
of  the  other  world,  asked  for  and  expected  with  trembling
anxiety,  were  the  Due  de  Choiseul,  Voltaire,  d'Alem-
bert,  Diderot,  the  Abbe  de  Voisenon,  and  Montesquieu.
Their  names  were  pronounced  slowly  in  a  loud  voice,  and
with  all  the  concentrated  determination  of  the  adept's  will ;
and  after  a  moment  of  intolerable  doubt,  the  evoked  guests
appeared  very  unobtrusively,  and  took  their  seats  with  the
quiet  courtesy  which  had  characterised  them  in  life.

260         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

The  first  question  put  to  them  when  the  awe  of  their
presence  had  somewhat  worn  off  was  as  to  their  situation
in  the  world  beyond.

"  There  is  no  world  beyond,"  replied  d'Alembert.
"  Death  is  simply  the  cessation  of  the  evils  which  have
tortured  us.  No  pleasure  is  experienced,  but,  on  the
other  hand,  there  is  no  suffering.  I  have  not  met  with
Mademoiselle  Lespinasse,  but  I  have  not  seen  Lorignet.
There  is  marked  sincerity,  moreover.  Some  deceased
persons  who  have  recently  joined  us  inform  me  that  I  am
almost  forgotten.  I  am,  however,  consoled.  Men  are
unworthy  of  the  trouble  we  take  about  them.  I  never
loved  them,  now  I  despise  them."

"  What  has  become  of  your  learning  ? "  said  M.  de

to  Diderot.

"  I  was  not  learned,  as  people  commonly  supposed.  My
ready  wit  adapted  all  that  T  read,  and  in  writing  I  borrowed
on  every  side.  Thence  comes  the  desultory  character  of
my  books,  which  will  be  unheard  of  in  half  a  century.  The
Encyclopaedia,  with  the  merit  of  which  I  am  honoured,
does  not  belong  to  me.  The  duty  of  an  editor  is  simply  to
set  in  order  the  choice  of  subjects.  The  man  who  showed
most  talent  in  the  whole  of  the  work  was  the  compiler  of
its  index,  yet  no  one  has  dreamed  of  recognising  his
merits."

"  I  praised  the  enterprise,"  said  Voltaire,  "  for  it  seemed
well  fitted  to  further  my  philosophical  opinions.  Talking
of  philosophy,  I  am  none  too  certain  that  I  was  in  the
right.  I  have  learned  strange  things  since  my  death,  and
have  conversed  with  half  a  dozen  Popes.  Clement  XIV.
and  Benedict,  above  all,  are  men  of  infinite  intelligence  and
good  sense."

"  What  most  vexes  me,"  said  the  Due  de  Choiseul,  "  is
the  absence  of  sex  where  we  dwell.     Whatever  may  be

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  26  I

said  of  this  fleshly  envelope,  'twas  by  no  means  so  bad  an
invention."

"  What  is  truly  a  pleasure  to  me,"  said  the  Abbe  Voise-
non,  "  is  that  amongst  us  one  is  perfectly  cured  of  the  folly
of  intelligence.  You  cannot  conceive  how  I  have  been
bantered  about  my  ridiculous  little  romances.  I  had  al-
most confessed  that  I  appreciated  these  puerilities  at  their
true  value,  but  whether  the  modesty  of  an  academician  is
disbelieved  in,  or  whether  such  frivolity  is  out  of  character
with  my  age  and  profession,  I  expiate  almost  daily  the  mis-
takes of  my  mortal  existence."

Amid  these  marvels,  Cagliostro  proceeded  with  the
dearest  of  all  his  projects,  namely,  the  spread  of  his  Egypto-
masonic  rite,*  into  which  ladies  were  subsequently  ad-
mitted, a  course  of  magic  being  opened  for  the  purpose  by
Madame  Cagliostro.  The  postulants  admitted  to  this
course  were  thirty-six  in  number,  and  all  males  were  ex-
cluded. Thus  Lorenza  figured  as  the  Grand  Mistress  of
Egyptian  Masonry,  as  her  husband  was  himself  the  grand
and  sublime  Copt.  The  fair  neophytes  were  required  to
contribute  each  of  them  the  sum  of  one  hundred  louis  to

*  "It  was  his  ambition  to  inaugurate  a  mother-lodge  at  Paris,  to  which  the
rest  should  be  entirely  subordinate.  He  proclaimed  himself  as  the  bearer  of
the  mysteries  of  Isis  and  Anubis  from  the  far  East.  Though  he  threatened
common  masonry  with  a  radical  reform,  his  innovations  triumphed  over  all
obstacles.  He  obtained  numerous  and  distinguished  followers,  who  on  one
occasion  assembled  in  great  force  to  hear  Joseph  Balsamo  expound  to  them
the  doctrines  of  Egyptian  freemasonry.  At  this  solemn  convention  he  is  said
to  have  spoken  with  overpowering  eloquence,  and  such  was  his  signal  success
that  his  auditors  departed  in  amazement  and  completely  converted  to  his
regenerated  and  purified  masonry.  None  of  them  doubted  that  he  was  an
initiate  of  the  arcana  of  Nature,  as  preserved  in  the  temple  of  Apis  at  the  epoch
when  Cambyses  belaboured  that  capricious  divinity.  From  this  moment  the
initiations  into  the  new  masonry  were  numerous,  albeit  they  were  limited  to
the  aristocracy  of  society.  There  are  reasons  to  believe  that  the  grandees  who
were  deemed  worthy  of  admission  paid  exceedingly  extravagantly  for  the
honour." — Figuier,  Hist,  du  Merveilleux,  t.  iv.  pp.  23,  24.

262        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

abstain  from  all  carnal  connection  with  mankind,  and  to
submit  to  everything  which  might  be  imposed  on  them.
A  vast  mansion  was  hired  in  the  Rue  Verte,  Faubourg
Saint  Honore,  at  that  period  a  lonely  part  of  the  city.
The  building  was  surrounded  with  gardens  and  magnificent
trees.  The  seance  for  initiation  took  place  shortly  before
midnight  on  the  7th  of  August  1785.

On  entering  the  first  apartment,  says  Figuier,  the  ladies
were  obliged  to  disrobe  and  assume  a  white  garment,  with
a  girdle  of  various  colours.  They  were  divided  into  six
groups,  distinguished  by  the  tint  of  their  cinctures.  A
large  veil  was  also  provided,  and  they  were  caused  to  enter
a  temple  lighted  from  the  roof,  and  furnished  with  thirty-
six  arm-chairs  covered  with  black  satin.  Lorenza,  clothed
in  white,  was  seated  on  a  species  of  throne,  supported  by
two  tall  figures,  so  habited  that  their  sex  could  not  be  deter-
mined. The  light  was  lowered  by  degrees  till  surrounding
objects  could  scarcely  be  distinguished,  when  the  Grand
Mistress  commanded  the  ladies  to  uncover  their  left  legs
as  far  as  the  thigh,  and  raising  the  right  arm  to  rest  it  on  a
neighbouring  pillar.  Two  young  women  then  entered
sword  in  hand,  and  with  silk  ropes  bound  all  the  ladies
together  by  the  arms  and  legs.  Then  after  a  period  of
impressive  silence,  Lorenza  pronounced  an  oration,  which
is  given  at  length,  but  on  doubtful  authority,  by  several
biographers,  and  which  preached  fervidly  the  emancipation
of  womankind  from  the  shameful  bonds  imposed  on  them
by  the  lords  of  creation.

These  bonds  were  symbolised  by  the  silken  ropes  from
which  the  fair  initiates  were  released  at  the  end  of  the
harangue,  when  they  were  conducted  into  separate  apart-
ments, each  opening  on  the  Garden,  where  they  made  the
most  unheard-of  experiences.  Some  were  pursued  by  men
who  unmercifully  persecuted  them  with  barbarous  solicita-

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  263

tions  ;  others  encountered  less  dreadful  admirers,  who
sighed  in  the  most  languishing  postures  at  their  feet.
More  than  one  discovered  the  counterpart  of  her  own
lover,  but  the  oath  they  had  all  taken  necessitated  the
most  inexorable  inhumanity,  and  all  faithfully  fulfilled  what
was  required  of  them.  The  new  spirit  infused  into  re-
generated woman  triumphed  along  the  whole  line  of  the
six  and  thirty  initiates,  who  with  intact  and  immaculate
symbols  re-entered  triumphant  and  palpitating  the  twilight
of  the  vaulted  temple  to  receive  the  congratulations  of
the  sovereign  priestess.

When  they  had  breathed  a  little  after  their  trials,  the
vaulted  roof  opened  suddenly,  and,  on  a  vast  sphere  of
gold,  there  descended  a  man,  naked  as  the  unfallen  Adam,
holding  a  serpent  in  his  hand,  and  having  a  burning  star
upon  his  head.

The  Grand  Mistress  announced  that  this  was  the  genius
of  Truth,  the  immortal,  the  divine  Cagliostro,  issued  without
procreation  from  the  bosom  of  our  father  Abraham,  and
the  depositary  of  all  that  hath  been,  is,  or  shall  be  known
on  the  universal  earth.  He  was  there  to  initiate  them  into
the  secrets  of  which  they  had  been  fraudulently  deprived.
The  Grand  Copt  thereupon  commanded  them  to  dispense
with  the  profanity  of  clothing,  for  if  they  would  receive
truth  they  must  be  as  naked  as  itself.  The  sovereign
priestess  setting  the  example  unbound  her  girdle  and
permitted  her  drapery  to  fall  to  the  ground,  and  the  fair
initiates  following  her  example  exposed  themselves  in  all
the  nudity  of  their  charms  to  the  magnetic  glances  of  the
celestial  genius,  who  then  commenced  his  revelations.

He  informed  his  daughters  that  the  much  abused
magical  art  was  the  secret  of  doing  good  to  humanity.
It  was  initiation  into  the  mysteries  of  Nature,  and  the
power  to   make   use   of  her  occult  forces.      The  visions

264        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

which  they  had  beheld  in  the  Garden  where  so  many-
had  seen  and  recognised  those  who  were  dearest  to  their
hearts,  proved  the  reality  of  hermetic  operations.  They
had  shewn  themselves  worthy  to  know  the  truth ;  he
undertook  to  instruct  them  by  gradations  therein.  It  was
enough  at  the  outset  to  inform  them  that  the  sublime
end  of  that  Egyptian  Freemasonry  which  he  had  brought
from  the  very  heart  of  the  Orient  was  the  happiness  of
mankind.  This  happiness  was  illimitable  in  its  nature,
including  material  enjoyments  as  much  as  spiritual  peace,
and  the  pleasures  of  the  understanding.

The  Marquis  de  Luchet,  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for
this  account,  concludes  the  nebulous  harangue  of  Cagliostro
by  the  adept  bidding  his  hearers  abjure  a  deceiving  sex,
and  to  let  the  kiss  of  friendship  symbolise  what  was  passing
in  their  hearts.  The  sovereign  priestess  instructed  them
in  the  nature  of  this  friendly  embrace.

Thereupon  the  Genius  of  Truth  seated  himself  again
upon  the  sphere  of  gold,  and  was  borne  away  through  the
roof.  At  the  same  time  the  floor  opened,  the  light  blazed
up,  and  a  table  splendidly  adorned  and  luxuriously  spread
rose  up  from  the  ground.  The  ladies  were  joined  by  their
lovers  in  pi'opria  persona;  the  supper  was  followed  by
dancing  and  various  diversions  till  three  o'clock  in  the
morning.

About  this  time  the  Count  Cagliostro  was  unwillingly
compelled  to  concede  to  the  continual  solicitations  of  the
poor  and  to  resume  his  medical  rdle.  In  a  short  time  he
was  raised  to  the  height  of  celebrity  by  a  miraculous  cure
of  the  Prince  de  Soubise,  the  brother  of  the  Cardinal  de
Rohan,  who  was  suffering  from  a  virulent  attack  of  scarlet
fever.  From  this  moment  the  portrait  of  the  adept  was  to
be  seen  everywhere  in  Paris.

In  the  meantime,  the  cloud  in  his  domestic  felicity,  to

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  265

which  a  brief  reference  has  been  made  already,  began  to
spread.  A  certain  adventuress,  by  name  Madame  de  la
Motte,  surprised  Lorenza  one  day  in  a  tete-a-tete  with  the
Chevalier  d'Oisemont.  The  count  at  the  time  was  far
away  from  Paris,  and  the  adventuress  promised  to  keep  the
secret  on  condition  that  Lorenza  should  in  turn  do  all  in
her  power  to  establish  her  as  an  intimate  friend  in  the
house,  having  free  entrance  therein,  and  should  persuade
Cagliostro  to  place  his  knowledge  and  skill  at  her
disposal,  if  ever  she  required  it.  The  result  of  this
arrangement  was  the  complicity  of  Cagliostro  in  the  extra-
ordinary and  scandalous  affair  of  the  Diamond  Necklace.
When  the  plot  was  exposed,  Cagliostro  was  arrested  with
the  other  alleged  conspirators,  including  the  principal  vic-
tim, the  Cardinal  de  Rohan.  He  was  exonerated,  not
indeed  without  honour,  from  the  charge  of  which  he  was
undoubtedly  guilty,  but  his  wife  had  fled  to  Rome  at  his
arrest,  and  had  rejoined  her  family.  He  himself  began  to
tremble  at  his  own  notoriety,  and  grew  anxious  to  leave
France.  He  postponed  till  a  more  favourable  period  his
grand  project  concerning  the  metropolitan  lodge  of  the
Egyptian  rite.*  A  personage,  calling  himself  Thomas
Ximenes,  and  claiming  descent  from  the  cardinal  of  that
name,  sought  to  reanimate  his  former  masonic  enthusiasm  ;
but  the  vision  of  the  Bastile  seemed  to  be  ever  before  his
eyes,  and  neither  this  person,  nor  the  great  dignitaries  of
the  Parisian  lodges,  could  prevail  with  him.  In  spite  of  his
acquittal  he  nourished  vengeance  against  the  Court  of
France,  and  more  than  once  he  confided  to  his  private
friends  that  he  should  make  his  voice  heard  when  he  had
passed  the  frontier.     He  prepared  to  depart,  and  one  day

*  These  projects  included  a  determination  to  force  the  royal  government  to
recognise  the  new  order,  and  to  obtain  its  recognition  in  Rome  as  an  institu-
tion constituted  on  the  same  basis,  and  therefore  to  be  endowed  with  the  same
great  privileges  which  had  belonged  to  the  order  of  St  John  of  Jerusalem.

266        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

his  disconsolate  adepts  learned  that  he  was  on  the  road  to
England.

Once  in  London  he  recovered  his  energy.  He  was
received  with  great  honour;  many  of  his  disciples  from
Lyons  and  Paris  followed  him.  The  English  masons  in-
vited him  to  the  metropolitan  lodge,  and  gave  him  the
first  place,  that  of  grand  orient.  He  was  entreated  to  con-
vene a  masonic  lodge  of  the  Egyptian  rite,  and  consented
with  some  sadness,  for  the  memory  of  the  brilliant  Paris
lodge  which  he  had  been  on  the  point  of  founding  was  in-
cessantly before  him.  He  could  not  console  himself  for  the
fall  of  that  beautiful  and  long-cherished  plan,  which  had
cost  him  so  much  study,  pains,  and  preaching.

It  was  from  this  discreet  distance  that  Cagliostro  ad-
dressed his  famous  Letter  to  the  People  of  France,  which
was  translated  into  a  number  of  languages,  and  circulated
widely  through  Europe.  It  predicted  the  French  Revolu-
tion, the  demolishment  of  the  Bastile,  and  the  rise  of  a
great  prince  who  would  abolish  the  infamous  lettres  de
cachet,  convoke  the  States-General,  and  re-establish  the
true  religion.

The  publication  was  intemperate  in  its  language  and
revolutionary  in  its  sentiments,  and  close  upon  its  heels
followed  his  well-known  quarrel  with  the  Conrrier  de
VEnrope,  which  resulted  in  the  exposure  of  the  real  life  of
Cagliostro  from  beginning  to  end.

Dreading  the  rage  of  his  innumerable  dupes,  and  ex-
treme measures  on  the  part  of  his  creditors,  he  hastened  to
quit  London,  disembarked  in  Holland,  crossed  Germany,
took  refuge  in  Basle,  where  the  patriarchal  hospitality  of
the  Swiss  cantons  to  some  extent  reassured  the  unmasked
adept.  From  the  moment,  however,  of  this  exposure,  the
descent  of  Cagliostro  was  simply  headlong  in  its  rapidity.
Nevertheless,  he  was  followed  by  some  of  his  initiates,  who

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  267

pressed  him  to  return  to  France,  assuring  him  of  the  power-
ful protection  of  exalted  masonic  dignitaries.  In  his
hesitation  he  wrote  to  the  Baron  de  Breteuil,  the  king's
minister  of  the  house,  but,  as  it  chanced,  a  personal  enemy
of  the  Cardinal  de  Rohan.  Considering  Cagliostro  as  a
protege  of  the  prince,  he  replied  that  if  he  had  sufficient
effrontery  to  set  foot  within  the  limits  of  the  kingdom,  he
should  be  arrested  and  transferred  to  a  prison  in  Paris,
there  to  await  prosecution  as  a  common  swindler,  who
should  answer  to  the  royal  justice  for  his  criminal  life.

From  this  moment  Cagliostro  saw  that  he  was  a  per-
petual exile  from  France,  and  feeling  in  no  sense  assured
of  his  safety  even  in  Switzerland,  he  left  Basle  for  Aix,  in
Savoy.  He  was  ordered  to  quit  that  town  in  eight  and
forty  hours.  At  Roveredo,  a  dependency  of  Austria,  the
same  treatment  awaited  him.  He  migrated  to  Trent,  and
announced  himself  as  a  practitioner  of  lawful  medicine,
but  the  prince-bishop  who  was  sovereign  of  the  country
discerned  the  cloven  hoof  of  the  sorcerer  beneath  the
doctor's  sober  dress,  and  showed  him  in  no  long  space  of
time  his  hostility  to  magical  practices.  The  wandering
hierophant  of  Egyptian  masonry,  somewhat  sorely  pressed,
took  post  to  Rome,  and  reached  the  Eternal  City  after
many  vicissitudes.  Here,  according  to  Saint-Felix  and
Figuier,  he  was  rejoined  by  his  wife ;  according  to  the
Italian  biographer,  Lorenza  had  accompanied  him  in  his
wanderings,  and  persuaded  him  to  seek  refuge  in  Rome,
being  sick  unto  death  of  her  miserable  course  of  life.  The
former  statement  is,  on  the  whole,  the  most  probable,  as  it
is  difficult  to  suppose  that  she  left  Italy  to  rejoin  Cagliostro
at  Passy,  and  she  appears  to  have  returned  to  him  with
marked  repugnance.  She  endeavoured  to  lead  him  back
to  religion,  which  had  never  been  eradicated  from  her
heart.     He  lived  for  some  time  with  extraordinary  circum-

268        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

spection,  and  consented  at  last  to  see  a  Benedictine  monk,
to  whom  he  made  his  confession.  The  Holy  Inquisition,
which  doubtless  had  scrutinised  all  his  movements,  is  said
to  have  been  deceived  for  a  time,  and  he  was  favourably
received  by  several  cardinals.  He  lived  for  a  year  in
perfect  liberty,  occupied  with  the  private  study  of  medicine.
During  this  time  he  endeavoured  to  obtain  loans  from  the
initiates  of  his  Egyptian  rite  who  were  scattered  over
France  and  Germany,  but  they  did  not  arrive,  and  the
sublime  Copt,  the  illuminated  proprietor  of  the  stone
philosophical  and  the  medicine  yclept  metallic,  came  once
more,  to  the  eternal  disgrace  of  Osiris,  Isis,  and  Anubis,  on
the  very  verge  of  want.

His  extremity  prompted  him  to  renew  his  relations  with
the  masonic  societies  within  the  area  of  the  Papal  States.
A  penalty  of  death  hung  over  the  initiates  of  the  superior
grades,  and  their  lodges  were  in  consequence  surrounded
with  great  mystery,  and  were  convened  in  subterranean
places.  He  was  persuaded  to  found  a  lodge  of  Egyptian
Freemasonry  in  Rome  itself,  from  which  moment  Lorenza
reasonably  regarded  him  as  lost.  One  of  his  own  adepts
betrayed  him  ;  he  was  arrested  on  the  27th  of  September
1789,  by  order  of  the  Holy  Office,  and  imprisoned  in  the
Castle  of  St  Angelo.  An  inventory  of  his  papers  was
taken,  and  all  his  effects  were  sealed  up.  The  process
against  him  was  drawn  up  with  the  nicest  inquisitorial
care  during  the  long  period  of  eighteen  months.  When
the  trial  came  on  he  was  defended  by  the  Count  Gaetano
Bernardini,  advocate  of  the  accused  before  the  sacred  and
august  tribunal,  and  to  this  pleader  in  ordinary  the
impartial  and  benign  office,  of  its  free  grace  and  pleasure,
did  add  generously,  as  counsel,  one  Monsignor  Louis
Constantini,  "whose  knowledge  and  probity,"  saith  an
unbought  and  unbuyable  witness  (inquisitorially  inspired),

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  269

"  were  generally  recognised."  They  did  not  conceal  from
him  the  gravity  of  his  position,  advised  him  to  refrain  from
basing  his  defence  on  a  series  of  denials,  promising  to  save
him  from  the  capital  forfeit,  and  so  he  was  persuaded  to
confess  everything,  was  again  reconciled  to  the  church ;
and  being  almost  odoriferous  with  genuine  sanctity,  on  the
21st  of  March  1791  he  was  carried  before  the  general
assembly  of  the  purgers  of  souls  by  fire,  before  the  Pope
on  the  7th  of  the  following  April,  when  the  advocates
pleaded  with  so  much  eloquence  that  they  retired  in  the
agonies  of  incipient  strangulation,  Cagliostro  repeated  his
avowal,  and  as  a  natural  consequence  of  the  unbought
eloquence  and  the  purchased  confession,  the  penalty  of
death  was  pronounced.

When,  however,  the  shattered  energies  of  the  advocates
were  a  little  recruited,  a  recommendation  of  mercy  was
addressed  to  the  Pope,  the  sentence  was  commuted  to
perpetual  imprisonment,  and  the  condemned  man  was
consigned  to  the  Castle  of  St  Angelo.  After  an  imprison-
ment of  two  years,  he  died,  God  knows  how,  still  in  the
prime  of  life,  at  the  age  of  fifty.

Lorenza,  whose  admissions  had  contributed  largely
towards  the  condemnation  of  her  husband,  was  doomed
to  perpetual  seclusion  in  a  penitentiary.  The  papers  of
Cagliostro  were  burned  by  the  Holy  Office,  and  the
phantom  of  that  institution  keeps  to  the  present  day
the  secret  of  the  exact  date  of  its  victim's  death.  It
carefully  circulated  the  report  that  on  one  occasion  he
attempted  to  strangle  a  priest  whom  he  had  sent  for  on
the  pretence  of  confessing,  hoping  to  escape  in  his  clothes  ;
and  then  it  made  public  the  statement  that  he  had
subsequently  strangled  himself.  When  the  battalions  of
the  French  Revolution  entered  Rome,  the  commanding
officers,  hammering  at  the  doors  of  Saint-Angelo,  deter-

27O        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

mined  to  release  the  entombed  adept,  but  they  were  in-
formed that  Cagliostro  was  dead,  "  at  which  intelligence,"
says  Figuier,  "  they  perceived  plainly  that  the  former  Parle-
ment  de  France  was  not  to  be  compared  with  the  Roman
Inquisition,  and  without  regretting  the  demolished  Bastile,
they  could  not  but  acknowledge  that  it  disgorged  its  prey
more  easily  than  the  Castle  of  Saint  Angelo."

The  personal  attractions  of  Cagliostro  appear  to  have
been  exaggerated  by  some  of  his  biographers.  "  His
splendid  stature  and  high  bearing,  increased  by  a  dress  of
the  most  bizarre  magnificence,  the  extensive  suite  which
invariably  accompanied  him  in  his  wanderings,  turned  all
eyes  upon  him,  and  disposed  the  minds  of  the  vulgar  to-
wards an  almost  idolatrous  admiration."

With  this  opinion  of  Figuier  may  be  compared  the
counter-statement  of  the  Italian  ^biographer  : — "  He  was  of
a  brown  complexion,  a  bloated  countenance,  and  a  severe
aspect ;  he  was  destitute  of  any  of  those  graces  so  common
in  the  world  of  gallantry,  without  knowledge  and  without
abilities."  But  the  Italian  biographer  was  a  false  witness,
for  Cagliostro  was  beyond  all  question  and  controversy  a
man  of  consummate  ability,  tact,  and  talent.  The  truth
would  appear  to  lie  between  these  opposite  extremes.
"  The  Count  de  Cagliostro,"  says  the  English  life,  pub-
lished in  1787,  "is  below  the  middle  stature,  inclined  to
corpulency ;  his  face  is  a  round  oval,  his  complexion  and
eyes  dark,  the  latter  uncommonly  penetrating.  In  his
address  we  are  not  sensible  of  that  indescribable  grace
which  engages  the  affections  before  we  consult  the  under-
standing. On  the  contrary,  there  is  in  his  manner  a  self-
importance  which  at  first  sight  rather  disgusts  than  allures,
and  obliges  us  to  withhold  our  regards,  till,  on  a  more  inti-
mate acquaintance,  we  yield  it  the  tribute  to  our  reason.

TRAVELS,  ETC.,  OF  JOSEPH  BALSAMO.  2jl

Though  naturally  studious  and  contemplative,  his  conver-
sation is  sprightly,  abounding  with  judicious  remarks  and
pleasant  anecdotes,  yet  with  an  understanding  in  the  highest
degree  perspicuous  and  enlarged,  he  is  ever  rendered  the
dupe  of  the  sycophant  and  the  flatterer."

The  persuasive  and  occasionally  overpowering  eloquence
of  Cagliostro  is  also  dwelt  upon  by  the  majority  of  his
biographers,  but,  according  to  the  testimony  of  his  wife,  as
extracted  under  the  terror  of  the  Inquisition  and  adduced
in  the  Italian  life : — "  His  discourse,  instead  of  being  elo-
quent, was  composed  in  a  style  of  the  most  wearisome
perplexity,  and  abounded  with  the  most  incoherent  ideas.
Previous  to  his  ascending  the  rostrum  he  was  always
careful  to  prepare  himself  for  his  labours  by  means  of  some
bottles  of  wine,  and  he  was  so  ignorant  as  to  the  subject  on
which  he  was  about  to  hold  forth,  that  he  generally  applied
to  his  wife  for  the  text  on  which  he  was  to  preach  to  his
disciples.  If  to  these  circumstances  are  added  a  Sicilian
dialect,  mingled  with  a  jargon  of  French  and  Italian,  we
cannot  hesitate  a  single  moment  as  to  the  degree  of  credi-
bility which  we  are  to  give  to  the  assertions  that  have
been  made  concerning  the  wonder-working  effects  of  his
eloquence."

But  the  Inquisition  was  in  possession  of  documents  which
bore  irrefutable  testimony  to  the  extraordinary  hold  which
Cagliostro  exercised  over  the  minds  of  his  numerous  fol-
lowers, and  it  is  preposterous  to  suppose  it  could  have  been
possessed  by  a  man  who  was  ignorant,  unpresentable,  and
ill-spoken.  Moreover,  the  testimony  of  Lorenza,  given
under  circumstances  of,  at  any  rate,  the  strongest  moral
intimidation  is  completely  worthless  on  all  points  whatso-
ever, and  the  biassed  views  of  our  inquisitorial  apologists
are  of  no  appreciable  value.

I  have  given   an  almost  disproportionate  space  to  the

272         LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

history  of  Joseph  Balsamo,  because  it  is  thoroughly  repre-
sentative of  the  charlatanic  side  of  alchemy,  which
during  two  centuries  of  curiosity  and  credulity  had  de-
veloped to  a  deplorable  extent.  There  is  no  reason  to
suppose,  despite  the  veil  of  mystery  which  surrounded
Altotas,  that  he  was  an  adept  in  anything  but  the  sophisti-
cation of  metals,  and  his  skill  in  alchemical  trickery
descended  to  his  pupil.  That  Balsamo  was  a  powerful
mesmerist,  that  he  could  induce  clairvoyance  with  facility
in  suitable  subjects,  that  he  had  dabbled  in  Arabic
occultism,  that  he  had  the  faculty  of  healing  magnetically,
are  points  which  the  evidence  enables  us  to  admit,  and
these  genuine  phenomena  supported  his  titanic  impostures,
being  themselves  supplemented  wherever  they  were  weak
or  defective  by  direct  and  prepared  fraud.  Thus  his
miraculous  prophecies,  delineations  of  absent  persons,
revelations  of  private  matters,  &c,  may  to  some  extent  be
accounted  for  by  the  insatiable  curiosity  and  diligence
which  he  made  use  of  to  procure  knowledge  of  the  secrets
of  any  families  with  which  he  came  into  communication.
Lorenzo  declared  upon  oath  during  her  examination  that
many  of  the  pupils  had  been  prepared  beforehand  by  her
husband,  but  that  some  had  been  brought  to  him  unawares,
and  that  in  regard  to  them  she  could  only  suppose  he  had
been  assisted  by  the  marvels  of  magical  art.

His  powers,  whatever  they  were,  were  imparted  to  some
at  least  of  his  Masonic  initiates,  as  may  be  seen  in  a
genuine  letter  addressed  to  him  from  Lyons,  and  which
describes  in  enthusiastic  language  the  consecration  in  that
town  of  the  Egyptian  lodge  called  Wisdom  Triumphant.
This  letter  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Inquisition.  It  relates
that  at  the  moment  when  the  assembly  had  entreated  of
the  Eternal  some  explicit  sign  of  his  approval  of  their
temple  and  their  offerings,  "  and  whilst  our  master  was  in

CONCLUSION.  273

mid  air,"  the  first  philosopher  of  the  New  Testament
appeared  uninvoked,  blessed  them  after  prostration  before
the  cloud,  by  means  of  which  they  had  obtained  the
apparition,  and  was  carried  upwards  upon  it,  the  splendour
being  so  great  that  the  young  pupil  or  dove  was  unable  to
sustain  it.

The  same  letter  affirms  that  the  two  great  prophets  and
the  legislator  of  Israel  had  given  them  palpable  signs  of
their  goodwill  and  of  their  obedience  to  the  commands  of
the  august  founder,  the  sieur  Cagliostro.  A  similar  com-
munication testifies  that  the  great  Copt,  though  absent,  had
appeared  in  their  lodge  between  Enoch  and  Elias.*

CONCLUSION.

It  has  now  been  made  plain  beyond  all  reasonable  doubt
by  the  certain  and  abundant  evidence  of  the  lives  and
labours  of  the  alchemists,  that  they  were  in  search  of  a
physical  process  for  the  transmutation  of  the  so-called
baser  metals  into  silver  and  gold.  The  methods  and
processes  by  which  they  endeavoured  to  attain  this  desir
desire,  and  the  secrets  which  they  are  supposed  to  have
discovered,  are  embodied  in  allegorical  writings,  and  their
curious  symbolism  in  the  hands  of  ingenious  interpreters
is  capable  of  several  explanations,  but  the  facts  in  their
arduous  and  generally  chequered  careers  are  not  allegorical,
and  are  not  capable  of  any  mystical  interpretations  ;  con-
sequently, the  attempt  to  enthrone  them  upon  the  loftiest
pinnacles  of  achievement  in  the  psychic  world,  however
attractive  and  dazzling  to  a  romantic  imagination,  and
however  spiritually  suggestive,  must  be  regretfully  aban-
doned. Their  less  splendid  but  substantial  and  perma-
nent reputation  is  based  on  their  physical  discoveries  and

*  See  Appendix  II.

S

274        LIVES  OF  ALCHEMYSTICAL  PHILOSOPHERS.

on  their  persistent  enunciation  of  a  theory  of  Universal
Development,  which  true  and  far-sighted  adepts  well  per-
ceived, had  an  equal  application  to  the  triune  man  as  to
those  metals  which  in  their  conception  had  also  a  triune
nature.

As  stated  in  the  Introduction  to  this  work,  I  have  little
personal  doubt,  after  a  careful  and  unbiassed  appreciation
of  all   the   evidence,  that   the   Magnum    Opus  has   been
performed,  at   least   occasionally,  in   the  past,   and  that,
therefore,  the  alchemists,  while  laying  the  foundations  of
modern  chemistry,  had    already  transcended   its   highest
results   in   the    metallic   kingdom.      Now,   the    Hermetic
doctrine  of  correspondences  which  is,  at  any  rate,  entitled
to  the  sincere  respect  of  all  esoteric  thinkers,  will  teach  us
that  the  fact  of  their  success  in  the  physical  subject  is
analogically  a  substantial  guarantee  of  the  successful  issue
of  parallel  methods  when    applied  in  the   psychic  world
with  the  subject  man.     But  the  revelations  of  mesmerism,
and  the   phenomena  called   spiritualism,  have  discovered
thaumaturgic  possibilities  for  humanity,  which  in  a  wholly
independent  manner  contribute  to  the  verification  of  the
alchemical  hypothesis  of  development  in  its  extension  to
the  plane  of  intelligence.     These  possibilities  I  believe  to
be  realizable  exclusively  along  the  lines  indicated  in  Her-
metic parables.     I  am  not  prepared  to  explain  how  the
alchemical  theory  of  Universal  Development  came  to  be
evolved  in  the  scientific  and  psychological  twilight  of  the
middle  ages,  but  the  fact  remains.     Nor  am  I  prepared  to
explain  how  and  why  the  method  of  a  discredited  science
which  is  not  commonly  supposed  to  have  attained  its  end,
should  not  only  be  consistent  within  its  own  sphere,  but
should  have  a  vast  field  of  application  without   it ;   yet,
again,  the  fact  remains.     I  have  brought  a  wide  acquaint-
ance with  the  history  of  modern  supernaturalism  to  bear

CONCLUSION.  2  75

on  the  serious  study  of  alchemy,  and  have  found  the  old
theories  illustrated  by  the  novel  facts,  while  novel  facts
coincided  with  old  theories.  As  all  this  has  occurred,  in
the  words  of  the  alchemists,  "  by  a  natural  process,  devoid
of  haste  or  violence,"  I  may  trust  that  it  is  no  illusory
discovery,  and  that  its  future  enunciation  may  give  a  new
impulse  to  the  study  of  the  Hermetic  writings  among  the
occultists  of  England  and  America.

AN   ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE

OF  WORKS  ON  HERMETIC  PHILOSOPHY  AND
ALCHEMY.

Antonius  de  Abbatia — Epistolse  duse.  {German.)  Hamburg,
1672.

Abrahamus  e  Porta  Leonis — De  Auro,  dialogi  tres.  Venice,
1514-1584-1586.     (Disesteemed.~)

D'Acqueville  (Le  Sieur) — Les  effets  de  la  Pierre  Divine.  121110.
Paris,  1 681.

^Egidius  de  Vadis — Dialogus  inter  Naturam  et  Filium  Artis.
Francfurt,  1595.

Tabula  Diversorum  Metallorum.    (Printed  in  the  Thea-

trum  Chymicum.)

F.  Aggravio — Sourano  Medicina.     8vo.     Venice,  1682.

Georgius  Agricola — De  Re  Metallica,  libri  xii.  Fol.  Basilise,
1546-1621.     ( Curious,  and  embellished  with  figures  and  diagrams. )

De  Ortu  et  Causis  Subterraneorum,  libri  v.    De  Natura

eorum  quae  effluunt  Terra,  libri  v.  De  Natura  Fossilium,  libri  x.
De  Veteribus  et  Novis  Metallis,  libri  ii.  Bermannus,  sive  De  Re
Metallici.     Fol.     Basil,  1546.

Lapis  Philosophorum.    {Rare.)    i6mo.   Colonise,  1531.

Johannes  Agricola — Of  Antimony.  {Gentian.)  4to.  Leipsic,
1639.

Luigi  Alamanni — Girone  il  Cortese,  Poema.  4to.  In  Parigi,
1548.     {Rare  chymical  romance?)

Alani  Philosophi  Germani,  Dicta  de  Lapide  Philosophorum.
Lugduni  Batavorum.     8vo.     1599.

Albertus  Magnus — Opera  Omnia,  21  v.    Folio.    Lugduni,  1653.

Libellus  de  Alchymia.    (Theatrum  Chemicum,  v.  2.)

. De   Rebus   Metallicis   et   Mineralibus,  libri  v.      4to.

Augustas  Vindelicor,  1 5 1 9.

Alchimia  Denudata,  adept  Naxagoras  {pseud).  {In  German.)
8vo.     Breslaw,  1708.

ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.  277

Alchemia  Opuscula,  nine  scarce  tracts.     4to.     Franco,  1550.

Alchymia  vera  lapidis  philos.     (German?)     8vo.     Magd.,  16 19.

A  Revelation  of  the  Secret  Spirit  of  Alchemy.  Anon.  8vo.
London,  1523.

Alchemia — Volumen  Tractatum,  10.  (Esteemed)  4to.  Norim.,
1541-

Oder  Alchymischer  particular  Zeiger  :  id  est.  Unterricht  von
Gold,  und  Silbermachen.     8vo.     Rostoch,  1707.

Alkahest  (Bedencken  von).     8vo.     Frank.,  1708.

Alcaest — Merveilles  de  l'Art  et  de  la  Nature.  i2mo.  Paris,
1678.

Alstedii  (Joh.  Henric.) — Philosophia  digne  restituta.  8vo.  Her-
bornae,  161 2.

Panacea  Philosophica  cum  critico  de  infmito  Harmo-

nico  Philosophise  Lullianae.     8vo.     Herb.,  16 10.

La  Ruine  des  Alchimistes.     i6mo.     Paris,  1612.

Alvetanno  (Cornelius) — De  Conficiendo  Divino  Elixire  sive
Lapide  Philosophico.     Theatri  Chimici,  t.  5.

Amelungii  (D.  Petri) — Tractatus  Nobilis,  in  quo  de  Alchimise
Inventione,  necessitate  et  utilitate  agitur.     8vo.     Lipsise,  1607.

Apologia,  seu  Tractatus  Nobilis  Secundus  pro  defen-

sione  Alchimise.     8vo.     Lipsiae,  1601.

Amelungs  (J.  C.)— Stein  Tinctur.     4to.     1664.

Anthoris  (Caspar) — Chrysoscopion,  sive  Aurilogium.  (A  trea-
tise on  the  extension  of  life  by  auriferous  preparations.)  4to.  Jenal,
1632.

Andaloro  (Andrea) — La  Miniera  dell'  Argento  Vivo.  Messina,
1672.

Angelique  (Le  Sieur  d') — La  Vraye  Pierre  Philosophale  de  Me-
decine.     12  mo.    Paris,  1622.

Altus  Mutus  Liber,  in  quo  tota  Philosophia  Hermetica  figuris
Hieroglyphicis  depingitur.     Fol.     Rupellae,  1677.

Apocalypses  Hermeticorum.     4to.     Gedani,  1683.

Apologie  du  Grand  CEuvre,  ou  Elixir  des  Philosophes.  12 mo,
Paris,  1657.

Avantures  du  Philosophe  Inconnu  en  la  recherche  et  Inven-
tion du  Pierre  Philosophale,  divisees  en  quatre  livres,  au  dernier
desquels  il  est  parle  si  clairement  de  la  fagon  de  la  faire,  que  jamais
on  n'en  a  parle  avec  tant  de  canduer.  i2mo.  Paris,  1646.  (At-
tributed to  the  celebrated  Abbe  Bebris.)

Aurifontana  Chimiae  incomparabilis.    4to.    Lugd.  Batav.,  1696.

278         ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.

Vier  Ausserlesene  Chymische  Buchlein.     8vo.     Ham.,  1697.

Aureum  Seculum  Patefactum,  oder  Entdeckung  dess  Men-
strivi  Universal.     8vo.     Nurnberg,  1706.

L'Ayman  Mystique.     i2mo.     Paris,  1659.

Arludes — Mysteres  de  la  Grace  et  de  la  Nature.     1646.

Area — Artificiosissimi  Arcani  Area.  (German?)  i8mo.  Franc.,
1617.

Arcana — Antiquorum  Philosophorum  Arcana.  8vo.  Leip.,
1610.

Magni  Philosophi  Arcani  Revelator.      i2mo.     Hamb.,

1672.     (Rare.)

A  Strange  Letter  of  the  Treasure  of  an  Adept.  241110.  London,
1680.

Ars  Transmutationis  Metallicse.     8vo.     1550.

Aristoteles — De  Perfecto  Magisterio.    In  Theatrum  Chymicum.

t-  3-

Arnaud,  see  Villeneuve.

Ancient  War  of  the  Knights,  by  an  adept.    1 2mo.    London,  1723.

Aphorisms.  153  Chemical  Aphorisms.  (Esteemed.)  London,
1680.

Artephius  (adept,  12th  cent.) — Secret  Book  of  the  Occult  Art  and
Metallic  Transmutation.     241x10.     London,  1657.

La  Clef  majeure  de  Sapience  et  Science  des  Secrets  de

la  Nature.     8vo.     (  Without  date  or  place  of  printing?)

De  Vita  Proroganda,  aitque  se  anno  1025  setatis  suae

scripsisse  libum  suum.

Alphonso  (King) — Of  the  Philos.  Stone.     4to.     Lond.,  1657.

Pseudo  Athenagoras — Du  Vrai  et  Parfait  Amour.  i2mo.
Paris,  1599.      Very  curious.

Artis  Aurifer^e,  47  treatises.     3  vols.  8vo.     Basil,  16 10.

Alciata,  Andreas,  Emblemata.     Patav.,  16 18.

Aurifontina,  chym.,  14  tracts  on  the  Philosophical  Mercury.

Arrais  (G.  M.) — Tree  of  Life.     8vo.     London,  1683.

Ashmole  (Elias) — Theatrum  Chemicum  Britanicum.  (Esteemed. )
25  tracts.    English  adepts.

Avicenna — De  Tinctura  Metallorum.     4to.     Franc,  1530.

Porta  Elementorum.     8vo.     Basiliae,  1572.

Epistola  ad  Regem  Hasen.    Theatrum  Chymicum,  t.  4.

De    Mineralibus.      Dantzick,     1687.       Printed    with

Geber.
(All  these  treatises  of  Avicenna  are  doubtful.)

ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.  279

Bacon  (Roger) — Art  of  Chemistry.     i6mo.     London.

Mirror  of  Alchemy.     4to.     1597.

Admirable  power  of  Art  and  Nature.     (Alchemical.)

Opus     Majus,   ad    Clementum    IV.      Fol.      Dublin,

T733-

Care  of  Old  Age  and  Preservation  of  Youth.     8vo.

London,  1683.

Radix  Mundi  (alchemical,  English).     i2mo.     1692.

Opus  Minus.     M.S.  Lambeth  Library.

Thesaurus     Chimicus.        De    Utilitate    Scientiarum.

Alchimia  Major.  Breviarnm  de  Bono  Dei.  Verbum  abbreviarum
de  Leone  Viridi.  Secretum  Secretorum.  Trium  Verborum.
Speculum  Secretorum.     Seven  Treatises.     8vo.     Francof.,  1603.

De  Secretis  Operibus  Artis  et  Naturae.      8vo.     Hamb.,

1598.

(Fr.  Lord  Verulam) — History  of  Metals.    Fol.     Lond.,

1670.

Baker  (Geo.) — New  Jewel  of  Health.     4to.     London,  1576.

BalbianQ.) — Tractatus  SeptemdeLapidePhilosophico.  (Rare.)
8vo.     Lug,  1599.

Specchio  Chimico.     8vo.     Roma.,  1624.

Balduini  (C.  A.) — Aurum  Superius  et  Inferius.  i2mo.  Lipsias,
1674.

Phosphorus  Hermeticus,  sive  magnes  luminaris.  Lipsise,

1674.

Hermes  Curiosus.     i2mo.     Lips.,  1680.

De  Auro  Auras  et  ipsum  hoc  Aurum  Aura?.       i2mo.

1674.

Venus  Auras — See  Miscellanea  Curiosa.     4to.     Lips.,

1678.

Barchusen  (J.  C.) — Elementa  Chemise.  (Contains  seventy-eight
alchemical  emblems?)     Lug.  Bat.,  17 18.

Barlet  (A.) — L'Ouvrage  de  l'Univers.     i2mo.     Paris,  1653.

Barnaudi  (N.) — Triga  Chimica.     8vo.     Lug.  Bat.,  1600.

Brevis  Elucidatio  Arcani  Philosophorum.    8vo.    Lugd.

Batav.,  1599.

Bartoleti  (Fabr.) — Encyclopedia  Hermetico-Medica.  4to.
Bononias,  16 19.

Batfdorff  (Henric  a.) — Filum  Ariadnes.    8vo.     1636.

Bazio  (Antonia) — Florida  Corona.     Lug.,  1534.

Beato  (G.) — Azoth,  seu  Aurelise  Occulta?  Philosophorum,  ma-

280  ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.

teriam  primam  et  decantatum  ilium  Lapidem  Philosophorum,
filiis  Hermetis  solide  explicantes.     4to.     Franc,  1613.

Beausoleil  (Baron) — De  Materia  Lapidis.  {Esteemed.)  8vo.
1627.

De  Sulphure  Philosophorum  Libellus.

Becher  (J.  J.) — Transmutations  at  Vienna.     London,  1681.

Physica  Subterranea.    {Esteemed.)    8vo.    Franc,  1669.

Institutiones  Chimicae.     4to.     Moguntiae,  1662,

Oedipus  Chimicus. .  Franc,  1664.

Laboratium  Chimicum.    8vo.    Francfurt,  1680.

Opera  Omnia.     2  v.  fol.     {In  German.)

Beguinus — Tyrocinium  Chimicum.  {In  English.)  London,
1669.

Benedictus — Liber  Benedictus,  Nucleus  Sophicus.  {Allegorical.)
8vo.     Franc,  1623.

Benzius  (A.  C.)  —  Philosopische  Schanbuhne  nebst  einen,
Anhaug  der  Weisen.     8vo.     Hamb.,  1690.

Tractatlein  von  Menstruo  Universali.     8vo.     Nurem.,

1709.

Lapis  Philosophorum,  seu  Medicina  Universalis.     8vo.

Franc,  17 14.

Thesaurus   Processuum  Chemicorum.     4to.     Nurem.,

1715-

Bergeri — Catalogus  Medicamentorum  Spagirice  praeparatorum.
4to.     1607.

Bericht — Von  Universal  Arts  Neyen.     8vo.     1709.

Berle  (John  de) — Opuscule  de  Philosophic

Berlichius — De  Medicina  Universali.     410.     Jena,  1679.

Bernardi  (Comitis,  an  adept)  —  Liber  de  Chimia.  i2mo.
Geismarias,  1647.

De  Chimico  Miraculo.     8vo.     Basil,  1600.

La  Turbe  des  Philosophes.     Svo.     Paris,  161 8.

Opus  de  Chimia.     {Curious.)     Svo.     Argent,  1567.

Traite  de  l'OZuf  des  Philosophes.     8vo.     Paris,  1659.

La  Parole  Delaissee.     i2mo.     1672.

Epistle  to  Thomas  of  Bononia.    24mo.    London,  1680.

Trevisan's  Fountain.     Lond.

Bernard — Le  Bernard  d'Alemagne,  cum  Bernardo  Trevero.
Svo.     1643.

Beroalde  (P.) — Histoire  des  Troisj  Princes.  ]|  2  v.'^Svo.  1610.
(Disesteemed.)

ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.  251

Beroalde  (P.) — Le  Palais  des  Curieux.  {Poem.)  121110.  Paris,
1584.

— Le  Cabinet  de  Minerva.     Rouen,  1601.

Berteman  (M.) — Dame  de  Beau  Soliel — Restitution  de  Pluton.
8vo.     Paris,  1640.

Besardi  (J.  B.) — Antrum  Philosophicum,  De  Lapide  Physico,
&c.     4to.     Aug.,  161 7.

Beuther(D.) — Universale  et  Particularia.     8vo.     Hamb.,  1718.

Bickeri  (O.) — Hermes  Redivivus.     8vo.     Hanov.,  1620.

Billikius  (A.  G.)- — De  Tribus  Principiis.     8vo.     Bremen,  162 1. .

Deliria  Chimica  Laurenbergii.     8vo.     Bremse,  1625.

Assertionem   Chymicarum   Sylloge    Opposita   Lauren-

bergio.     8vo.     Helmestadii,  1624.

Birelli  (G.  B.) — De  Alchimia.     4to.     Firenze,  1602.

Birrius  (Martinus) — Tres  Tractatus  de  Metallorum  Transmuta-
tione.     8vo.     Amsterdam,  1668.

Blarvenstein  (Sol.) — Contra  Kircherum.     4to.     Vienna,  1667.

Boerhave  (H.) — De  Chimia  Expurgante  suos  errores.  4to.
Lugduni  Batavorum,  17 18.

Bohme  (Jacob) — "  Teutonicus  Theosophus."  Works.  Contain-
ing The  Aurora,  Three  Principles,  Threefold  Life  of  Man,  Answers
to  Forty  Questions  concerning  the  Soul,  Treatise  of  the  Incarna-
tion, Clavis  Mysterium  Magnum,  Four  Tables  of  Divine  Revela-
tion, Signatura  Rerum,  Predestination,  Way  to  Christ,  Discourse
between  Souls.  The  Four  Complexions,  Christ's  Testaments,  &c.
Fol.     London,  1764-81.

Works,  by  Elliston  and  Sparrow.     10  vols.  4to.    Lond.,

1659.

Miroir  Temporel  de  l'Eternite.     8vo.     Franc,  1669.

Idsea   Chimiae   Adeptae   Bohmianse.       i2mo.       Amst-

1690.

Bolnesti  (Edw.) — Aurora  Chimica.     Lond.,  1672.

Bolton  (Samuel) — Magical  but  Natural  Physic.  8vo.  Lond.,
1656.

Bonardo  (G.  M.) — Minera  del  Mondo.     8vo.     Mantua,  159 1.

Bono  (P.,  an  adept) — Margarita  Novella.     4to.     Basil,  1572.

Introductio  in  Divinam  Artem  Alchemise.     8vo.     1692.

De  Secreto  Omnium  Secretorum.     8vo.     Venet.,  1546.

Bonveau  (J.  D.) — De  l'Astronomie  Inferieure.    4to.  Paris,  1636.

Bade  ( de  la) — De  l'Enigme  trouve  a  Pillier.     4to.     Paris,

1636.

252  ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.

Borelli  (Petri) — Hermetic  Catalogue.     i2mo.     Paris,  1654.

Bornetti  (D.) — Jatrochimicus.     Franc,  162 1.

Borri  (G.  F.) — La  Chiave  del  Cabinetto.  121110.  Colon.,
1681.

Borrichius  (O.) — De  Ortu  et  Progressu  Chemise.  4to.  Hafnia,
1668.

Borro  (Tomaso) — Ze  Fieriele  Tomaso  Borro  Opere.  Venez.,
1624.

Boyle  (Hon.  Robert) — Works,  useful,  many  editions.

Braceschi  (J.) — Gebri  Explicatio.     4to.     Lugd.,  1548.

Bradley  (Richard) — Work  of  Nature.   {Rare)    8vo.    Dub.,  1721.

Brachel  (P.) — On  Spurious  Potable  Gold.  (German.)  8vo.
Col.,  1607.

Brandaw  (M.  Erbineusa) — 12  Columnae  Naturae  et  Artis.  8vo.
Lip.,  1689.

Brebil  (J.  F.) — Concursus  Philosophorum.     8vo.     Jena,  1726.

Brendelius  (Zac.) — De  Chimia  in  Artis  Formam  Redacta,  ubi
de  Auro  Potabile  Agit.     8vo. '    Jenae,  1630.

Brentzius  (Andrew) — Farrago  Philos.     8vo.     Ambergae,  161 1.

Breton  (L.) — Clefs  de  la  Philosophie  Spagirique.  i2mo.  Paris,
1726.

Broault  (T.  D.) — Abrege  de  l'Astronomie  Inferieure  .  .  .  Des
Planetes  Hermetiques.     4to.     Paris,  1644.

Brown  (Thomas) — Nature's  Cabinet.     i2mo.     Lond.,  1657.

Buchlein  ( ) — Von  Farben,  und  Kiinsten,  auch  der  Alchi-

misten.     8vo.     1549.

Burchelati  (B.) — Dialogicum  Septem  Philosophorum.  4to.
Trevisis,  1603.

Burgavii  (J.  Ernest) — Balneum  Dianae.     Lud.,  1600-16 12.

Introductio  in  Philosophiam  Vital  em.      4to.      Franc,

1623.

Caesar  (T.) — Alchemiae  Speculum.  (German)  8vo.  Franco,
1613.

Caesii  (B.) — Mineralogia.     (Rare.)     Fol.     Lug.,  1636.

Calid — Regis  Calid  Liber  Secretorum.     8vo.     Franc,  161 5.

Campegii  (M.) — De  Transmutatione  Metallorum.     4to.     Lud.,

i5°3-

Carellis  (J.  de) — De  Auri  Essentia  ejusque  Facultate  in  Me-
dendis  Morbis.     8vo.     Venet,  1646.

Carerius  (A.) — Quaestio  an  Metalla  Artis  Beneficio  permutari
possint.     4to.     Patavii,  1579.

ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.  283

Casi  (Jo.) — Lapis  Philosophicus.     4to.     Oxonii,  1599.

Castagne  (Gabriel  de) — (Euvres  Medicinales  et  Chimiques — 1.
Le  Paradis  Terrestre.  2.  Le  Miracle  de  la  Nature  Metallique.
3.  L'Or  Potable.  4.  La  Medecine  Metallique.  80.  Paris,
1661.

Cato — Chemicus.     i2mo.     Lypsige,  1690.

Cephali  (Ar.) — Mercurius  Triumphans.  4to.  Magdeburgi,
1600.

Charles  VI. — Tresor  de  Philosophic     8vo.     Paris.

Chartier  (J.) — Antimoine,  Plomb  Sacre.     4to.     Paris,  165 1.

Chesne  (J.) — De  Plus  Curieuses  Etrares.     Paris,  1648.

Chevalier  Imperial — Miroir  des  Alchimistes.     i6mo.     1609.

Chiaramonte  (G.) — Elixir  Vitse.     4to.     Genoa,  1590.

Christop — Paris.  {Adept,  \$th  age.)  Chimica.  8vo.  Paris,
1649.

Chymia  Philosophica.     8vo.     Norimberg,  1689.

Cicollini  (Barab.) — Via  Brevis.     Romas,  1696.

Claf  (E.  Lucii) — De  Lapide  Christo  Sophico.  4to.  Ingol.,
1582.

Claves  (E.  de) — Des  Principes   de  la  Nature.      8vo.     Paris,

l633-

Clavei  (Gas.,  adept.) — Apologia  Argyropoeise.  8vo.  Niverius,
1590.

De   Ratione   Proginendi   Lap.    Philosophorum.      8vo.

Nivers,  1592,

Philosophia   Chimica,     Prep.    Auri.      8vo.      Frank.,

1602-1612.

Clinge  (F.) — Philosophia  Hermetica.     {German.)    4to.     1712.

Cogitationes  Circa  Alchsest.     {German.)     8vo.     Fran.,  1708.

Collectanea  Chimica.     Ten  tracts.     i6mo.     Lond.,  1684.

Collesson  (J.) — De  la  Philosophic  Hermetique.  (Disesteemed.)
8vo.     Paris,  1630.

Colletel  (G.) — Clavicule  et  Vie  de  Raymond  Lulle.  8vo.
Paris,  1642.

Colson  (L.) — Philosophia  Maturata.  {German.)  8vo.  Hamb.,
1696.

Combachius  (L.) — Salt  and  Secret  of  Philosophy.  i6mo
Lond.,  1657.

Comenius  (J.  A.) — Natural  Philosophy  Reformed.  i6mo.
London,  165 1.

Commentatio — De  Lapide  Philosoph.     8vo.     Cologne,  1595.

284  ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.

Couringii  (Herm.) — De  Hermetica  ^gyptiorum  vetere  et  Para-
celsicorum  nova  Medecina.     4to.     Helmstadii,  1648.

Cooper  (N.) — Catalogue  of  Alchemical  Books.     8vo.     Lond.,

1675-

Cosmopolita — Novum  Lumen.  (Adept.)  Twelve  Treatises,
Enigma,  Dialogue,  &c.  By  Alexander  Sethon.  8vo.  Prague,
1604.

Ses  Lettres.     (Spurious.)     2  v.  i2mo.     Paris,  1691.

Cozzandi  (L.) — De  Magisterio  Antiq.     Colon.,  1684.

Crameri  (J.  A.) — Fossilium.     2  v.  8vo.     Lug.  Bat.,  1730.

Creilingius  (J.  C.) — De  Transmutatione  Metallorum.  4to.
Tubing.

Cremeri  (Gaspar) — De  Transmutatione  Metallorum.     8vo.

Crollii  (Osw.) — Philosophy  Reformed.     12 mo.     Lond.,  1657.

Basilica  Chimica.     (English?)     Fol.     Lond.,  1670.

Crollius  Redivivus.     Stein  Tinchtur.     4to.     Fran.,  1635.

Culpeper  (Nic.) — Three-Fold  World.     8vo.     Lond.,  1656.

Curiosities  of  Chemistry.     Lond.,  1691.

Dammy  (Mathieu)  —  Observations  sur  La  Chimie.  8vo.
Amst.,  1739.

Dastinii  (Johan.) — Visio,  seu  de  Lapide  Philosophico.  (English
adept.)     8vo.     Franc,  1625.

Rosarium  Correctius.     8vo.     Geismar,  1647.

Deani  (E.) — Tractatus  Varii  de  Alchimia.  (Eare.)  4to.  Fran.,
1630.

Dee  (Dr  Arthur) — Fasciculus  Chimicus.     i2mo.     Lond.,  1650.

(Dr  Joannes) — Monas  Hieroglyphica.     1564.

PropEedemnata  Aphoristica  de  Naturae  Virtutibus.     4to.

Lond.,  1568.

Democritus — De  Arte  Sacra.     (Adept.)     8vo.     Patav.,  1573.

Deodato  (C.) — Pantheum  Hygiasticum.     Brunstruti,  1628.

Dichiaratione,  di  Enimoni  de  gl'  Antichi  Filosifi  Alchimisti.
4to.     Rome,  1587.

Dickinson  (E.) — De  Chrysopoeia.     8vo.     Oxon.,  1686.

Disputatio  Solis  et  Mercurii  cum  Lapide  Philos.  (The  Ancient
War  of  the  Knights.)     8vo.     Tolos.,  1646.

Donato  (Fra.,  Eremita).    (Adept.)     Elixir  Vitse.     Napoli,  1624.

Dorneus     (Gerard) — Clavis     Philosophise.       i2mo.      Lugd.,

1567-

Doux  (Gaston  le) — Dictionnaire  Hermetique.  i2mo.  Paris,
1695.

ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.  285

Drebellius    (C.) — Quinta    Essentia.      (Not    an   adept.)      8vo.
Hamb.,  1621.

Dubourg  (Jacques) — Saint  Saturne  de  la  Chimie.
Duchesne — Les  CEuvres  diverses  de  M.  Duchesne  sieur  de  la
Violette.     6  v.  8vo.     Paris,  1635.

Dumbelei   (J.) — Hortus   Amoris    Arboris    Philosophical.     8vo.
Fran.,  1625.

Dunstan  (Saint) — On  the  Philosopher's  Stone.     Lond.

Eclaircissement  de  la  Pierre  Philosophale.     8vo.     Paris,  1628.

Efferarius    (an   adept.)  —  De   Lapide   Philos.     8vo.     Argent.,
1659.

Thesaurus  Philosophicus.    (Esteemed  and  scarce.)     8vo.

Argent,  1659.

Elmulleri  (M.) — Opera  Omnia.     Venet,  1727.

Emblemata  de  Secretis  Naturse  Chimicse.     4to.     Oppen.,  16 18

Epistola,  cujusdam  Patris  ad   Filium.      8vo.      Lugd.  Lyons,
1601.

Epistolarum  philos.  Chemicarum.     Fol.     Francofurti,  1598.

Erasti  (Thomas.) — De  Auro  Potabili.    8vo.     Basil,  15 78-1584.

Erkern  (Laz.) — De  Re  Metallica.  (English  and  excellent.)
Fol.     Francof.,  1629.

L'Escalier  des  Sages,  avec  figures.  (Curious  and  scarce.)  Fol.
Gronigen,  1689.

Espagnet  (John) — Enchyridion  Physicse  Restitutse.  Paris,
1601.

Enchyridion  Philosophise  Hermeticae.     (The anonymous

works  of  this  esteemed  adept  in  English.)     i6mo.     Lond.,  1651.

Euchiontis  (A.) — De  Aquis,  Oleis,  et  Salibus  Philos.  8vo.
Francof.,  1567.

Examen  des  Principes  des  Alchimistes.     i2mo.     Paris,  1711.

L'Expositione  de  Geber  Filosofo.  (Disesteemed.)  i2mo.
Venet.,  1544.

Eygeum  (M.) — Le  Pilote  de  l'Onde  vive,  ou  le  Secret  du  Flux
et  Reflux  de  la  Mer  et  du  Point  Fixe.  (Scarce.)  i2mo.  Paris,
1678.

Fabri  (P.  J.,  not  an  adept) — Alchimista  Christianus.  8vo.
Tolv.,  1632.

Fabricius  (G.) — De  Rebus  Metallicis.     8vo.     Tiguri,  1565.

Fallopius  (G.) — Secreti  Diversi  Raccolti  del  G.  F.    8vo.    Venet.,
1578.  _
Faniani  (J.  C.) — De  Arte  Alchimise.     8vo.     Basil,  1576.

286  ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.

Faniani  (J.  C.) — Metamorphosis  Metallica.    8vo.     Basil,  1660.
Faustia   (J.    M.) — Philalethse    Illustratus.     8vo.      Francofruts,
1706.

Pandora  Chemica.     (Hermetic  Extracts.}     1706.

Fenton  (Ed.) — Secrets  and  Wonders  of  Nature.    Lond.,  1659.
Fernelius  (J.) — De  Abditis  Rerum  Causis.    {Doubtful.)     8vo.
Paris,  1560.

Fernei  (Phil.) — Soliloquium  Salium.     Neapoli,  1649.
Ferarius — Fratris  Ferarii — Tractatus  Integer.     i2mo.     1647.
Ferro(Josua) — Trattato  de  Meravigliosi  Secreti.    8vo.    Venet,
1606.

Figuli   (B.) — Paradisus    Aureolus  Hermeticus.      4to.      Fran.,
1600.

Auriga  Benedictus  Spagiricus.     i2mo.     Norimbergse,

1609.

(G.) — Medicina  Universalis.     i2mo.     Brux.,  1660.

Filareto  Racolto  di  Secreti.     8vo.     Fioren.,  1573.
Le  Filet  d Ariadne.     (Hermetic.)     8vo.     Paris,  1693.
Fincki  (T.  V.) — Enchiridion  Hermetico.     i6mo.     Lip.,  1626.
Flamel   (Nicholas,    an    adept)  —  Explanation    of    his    Hiero-
glyphics.    8vo.     Lond.,  1624.

Le  Grand  Eclaircissement.     8vo.     Paris,  1628.

Summary.     241x10.     Lond.,  1680.

Le   Desir   Desir£,  ou  Tresor   de   Philosophic     8vo.

Paris,  1629.

La  Musique  Chimique.

Annotationes     in    D.    Zacharia.       (Spurious.)      See

Theatrum  Chemicum.

Fludd  (Robert) — Clavis  Philosophise  et  Alchimise.     2  v.  Fol.
Francof.

La  Fontaine  des  Amoureux  de  Science.      i6mo.     Paris,  156 1.
La  Fontaine  Perilleuse.     (Repitted.)     8vo.     Paris,  1572.
Fradin  (P.) — Histoire  Fabuleuse.    (Scarce.)   8vo.    Lyons,  1560.
Frankenberg  (Von) — Gemma  Magica.     8vo.     Amstelodami.
Freind  (J.) — Prelectiones  Chemicae.     8vo.     Amst.,  17 10.
Frickius  (J.) — De  Auro    Potabile  Sophorum  et  Sophistarum.
4to.     Ham.,  1702.

Frischi  (D.  G.) — Anatomia  Alchimiae.     8vo.     Parma,  1696.
Frundeck  (L.) — De  Elixire  Arboris  Vitas.     8vo.    Hague,  1660.
Furichius  (J.  N.) — De  Lapide  Philosophico.    4to.    Argentorati,
1631.

ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.  287

Gabella  (Phil,  a,)— De  Lapide  Philos.     4to.     Cassel.,  1615.

Secretions  Philosophise   Consideratio.     4to.     Cassel.,

1616.

Gamon  (C.) — Tresor  des  Tresors.     2  v.  i2mo.     Lyons,  1610.

Garlandii  (J.) — Dictionarium  Alchimise.     8vo.     Basil,  1571.

Gault — Les  Erreurs  de  l'Art  Refutees.     4to.     Paris,  1588.

Geber,  Works  {Adept  of  Chorasan  in  the  Eighth  Age).  1.
Sum  of  Perfection.  2.  Investigation  of  Perfection.  3.  Invention
of  Verity.     4.  Furnaces.     8vo.     Gedani,  1682.

Gerhardi  (J.  C.) — Panacea  Hermetica.     8vo.     Ulm.,  1640.

In  Apertorium  Lullii.     8vo.     Tabing.,  1641.

Germanni  (D.) — Judicium  Philosophicum.     8vo.     1682.

Gerzan  (Francois  de  Soucy  sieur  de  Gerzan)— Le  Vrai  Tresor
de  la  Vie  Humaine.     8vo.     Paris,  1653.

L'Histoire  Africaine.     {Chemical?)     8vo.     Paris,  1634.

Historie  Asiatique  Mystique.     8vo.     Paris,  1634.

Giangi  (Rinaldo) — Istruzione  Speziele.     Roma.,  17 15.

Girolani  (Flavio) — La  Pietro  Philosophica.  4to.  Venet.,
1590.

Givry  (P.) — Arcanum  Acidularum.     i2mo.     Amst.,  1682.

Glauber  (J.  R.) — Works.    {Chemistry.)     Fol.     Lond.,  1689.

Glissenti  (Fabio) — Delia  Pietra  de  Filosofi.    4to.    Venet,  1596.

Gloria  Mundi.     Hamb.,  1692.

Glutten — Minerale  de  Mercurio  Philos.     8vo.     Lips.,  1705.

Godfrey  (B.) — Miscellaneous  Experiments.     8vo.     Lond.

Gonelli  (Jos.) — Thesaurus  Philos.     Neapoli,  1702.

Gohory  (J.) — Ancien  Poeme,  science  minerale.  8vo.  Paris,
1572.

Grand  CEuvre — Apologie  pour  le  G.  O.  par  D.  B.  i2mo.  Par.,
1659.

Granger  (G.) — Paradox  que  les  Metaux  out  Vie.  8vo.  Par.,
1640.

Gratarole  (William) — Vera  Alchimia.  Twenty-three  tracts.  2
v.  8vo.     Bas.,  1572.

On  the  Philosopher's  Stone.     4to.     Lond.,  1652.

Greveri  (Jod.) — Secretum  Magnum.     8vo.     Lugd.,  1588.

Grevin  (Jac.) — De  L'Antimoine  Contre  Launay.     4to.     Par.,

i567-
Guinaldi  (J.) — Dell'  Alchimia  Opera.    4to.    Palermo,  1645.
Groschedeli  (J.  B.) — Proteus  Mercurialis.    4to.    Francof,  1629,
Hermetisches  Kleebat,  weisheit.     8vo.     Fran.,  1629.

2  65  ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.

Groschedeli  (J.  B.) — Mineralis,  seu  Physici  Metallorum  Lapidis
Descriptio.     8vo.     Hamb.,   1706.

Guiberto  (Mi.) — De  Alchimise  Ratione  et  Experientia.  8vo
Arg.,  1603.

De  Interitu  Alchymiae.     Tulli,  16 14.

Guide  to  Alchemy.     Lond.

Guidi  (J.) — De  Mineralibus,  De  Alchimisticis,  De  Thesauris.
4to.     Venet.,  1625.

Guissonius  (P.) — De  Tribus  Principiis.     8vo.     Fran.,  1686.

Gulielrni  (Dom) — De  Salibus.     8vo.     Lugd.  Batav.,  1707.

Hadrianeum  —  De  Aureo  Philosophorum  Lapide.  8vo.
Rothomagi,  1651.

Haffeurefferi  (J.)  —  Officina  Hermetico  Paracelsica.  8vo.
Ulmmae,  n.d.

Hagedon  (E.) — Secreta  Spagirica.     Jena,  1676.

Hannemanni  (J.  L.) — Ovum  Hermetico  Trismegistum.  Franc,
1694.

Hapelius   (N.    N.) — Chieragogia   Heliana.      8vo.      Marpurgi,

T6l2.

Hartman  (J.) — Opera  omnia  Medico-Chimica.  Fol.  Franc,
1684.

Haumerie  (C.)— Les  Secrets  les  Plus  Caches.     Par.,  1722.

Helbegii  (J.O.) — Introitus  in  veram,  atque  Inauditam  Phisicam.
8vo.     Ham.,  1680.

Centrum   Naturas    Concentratum.      i2mo.      Gedani,

1682.

Judicium  de  Viribus  Hermetecis.     121110.    Amst.,  1683.

Salt  of  Nature,  by  Alipili.      i6mo.     Lond.,  1696.

Helise  (A  Franciscan) — Speculum  Alchemise.  8vo.  Era.,
1614.

Helmont  (J.  B.) — Works,  translated.     Fol.     Lond.,  1664.

Helvetius  (J.  E.) — Of  a  Transmutation.     8vo.     Lond.,  1670.

Helwig  (J.  O.) — Curiositates  Alchemic.     8vo.     Leip.,  17 10.

Hermetis  Trismegisti,  7  capitula.    (Adept.)     8vo.     Lips.,  1600.

Seven    Chapters,    Tablet   and   Second    Book.      8vo.

Lond.,  1692.

Hermetical  Banquet.     8vo.     London,  1652.

Hermophile — Canones  Hermetici.     8vo.     Marpurgh,  1608.

Heydon  (John) — Theomagia,  or  the  Temple  of  Wisdome.  In
three  parts — spirituall,  celestiall,  and  elementall.  8vo.  London,
1262-3-4.

ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.  289

Heydon  (John)— The  Wise  Man's  Crown  .  .  .  With  the  Full
Discovery  of  the  true  Ccelum  Terras,  or  First  Matter  of  the
Philosophers,  with  the  Regio  Lucis.     8vo.     London,  1664.

Saphiric  Medicine.     Fol.     Lond.,  1665.

Hieroglyphica    Egyptio-Grseca    (de     Lapide).       4to.       Basil,

1571.

Hoffmann  (F.) — Dissertationes  Phisico-Medico-Chimicse.  4to.
Haf.,  1726.

Hoghelande  (Ewald) — Historia  Transmutat.  8vo.  Colon.,
1604.

(Theo.) — De  Alchimiae  Difficultatibus.     8vo.     Colon.,

1594-

Holland  (Isaac,  adept)— Mineralia  Opera  de  Lapide  Phil.
Middl.,  1600.

De  Triplici  Ordine  Elixiris  et  Lapidis  Theoria.     8vo.

B-ernse,  1608.

•  Opera  Universalia  et  Vegetabilia.     Amh.,  161 7.

Vegetable  Work.     4to.     London,  1659.

Universali  Opere.     (Sicut  filio  suo  M.  Johanni,  Isaaco

Hollando  e  Flandria  Pater  no  animo.)     8vo.     Fran.,  1669.

Hornei  (C.) — De  Metallis  Medecis.     8vo.     Helm.,  1624.

Hortulanus  Hemeticus.     (Cum fig.)     8vo.     Franc,  1627.

Reign  of  Saturn  Revived.     Lond.,  1698.

Hydropyrographum,  true  Fire-Water.     24mo.     London,  1680.

Hylealischen,  Natural  Chaos.     8vo.     Franc,  1708.

Icon  Phil.  Occultse.     (Esteemed.)     8vo.     Par.,  1672.

Imperial — Chevalier  Imperial.  Le  Miroir  d'Alchimie.  i6mo.
Paris,  1607.

Inconnu — Chevalier  Inconnu.  La  Nature  au  Decouvert.  8vo.
Aix.,  1669.

Isabella — Secret!  della  Isabella.     Venet.,  1665.

Isagoge — Triunus  Dei  et  Naturae.     8vo.     Ham.,  1674.

Isnard  (Abel) — La  Medecine  Universelle.     4to.     Par.,  1655.

Jean — Pope  John  XXII.    L'Art  Transmutatoire.    8vo.    Lyons,

*557-

Jebsenii(J.) — De  Lapide  Philosophorum  Discursus.    4to.    Ros-

tochii,  1645.

Johnsoni  (Guil.) — Lexicon  Hemeticarum.     8vo.    London,  1652.

Jonstoni  (J.) — Notilia  Regni  Mineralis.     i2mo.     Lips.,  1661.

Jungkin  (J.  H.)  Chimia  Experimentalis  Curiosa.  8vo.  Franc,
1687.

29O  ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.

Kalid  {Arabian  adept).    Secreta  Alchimise.    8vo.    Lond.,  1692.
Kelleus  (Edw.) — De  Lapide  Philos.     8vo.     Ham.,  1673.
Kergeri  (M.) — De  Fermentatione.     Wittenb.,  1663.
Kerneri  (A.) — De  Auro  Mercurio  Antimonio.     i2mo.     Erfurt.,
1618.

Khunrath  (H.  Conrad) — Symbolum.    {Esteemed.)    8vo.    Magd.,

1599-

Magnesia  Catholica.     121110.     Argen.,  1599.

Amphitheatrum  Sapientise  ./Eternge.    4to.     Mag.,  1608.

Kieseri  (F.) — Azoth  Solificatum.     Mulhusit,  1666.

Kirch eri  (Athan.) — Mundus  Subterraneus.  2  v.  Fol.  Amst.?
1678.

Kircmayer  (G.) — De  Natura  Lucis,  de  Igne  Philos.  4to„
Vittebergse,  1680.

Keickringii  (T.) — Commentarius  in  Currum  Triumphalem
Antimonii.     8vo.     Amst.,  167 1.

Kleinold — Oder  Schatz  der  Philosophen,  &c.  8vo.  Fran.,.
1 7 14.

Knorr  (L.  G.) — Basil  Redivivus.    {German.)    8vo.    Lip.    17 16.

Koffski  (V.) — Vonder  Ehrste  Tinctur  Burtzel.  4to.  Dan.,
1687.

Kriegsmanni  (G.  C.) — Commentariolus  interpres  Tabulae  Her-
metis.     {Sine  loco.)

Kruger  (A.  A.) — De  Sol.  Chemicorum.     Erunswici,  1713.

Kunckel  (J.) — Experiments.     8vo.     Lond.,  1705.

Kunst  (J.  C.) — De  Menstruo  Universali.     4to.     Hal.,  1737.

Lacinium  (J.) — Pretiosa  Margarita.     8vo.     Venet,  1546.

Lagnei  (D.) — Consensus  Philosophorum.     8vo.     Paris,  1601.

Harmonie   Mystique,    ou    Accord    des    Philosophes

Chimiques.     8vo.     Paris,  1636.

Lambye  (S.  B.) — Revelation  of  the  Secret  Spirit.  8vo.  Lond.,
1623.

An  Italian  Comment  on  the  above  work,  by  Agnelli.

1665.

Lamy  (Guillaume) — Sur  L'Antimoine.     i2mo.     Paris.

Lancilotti  (C.) — Guida  alia  Chimia.     12 mo.     Modene,  1672.

Triumfo  del  Mercurio.     i6mo.     Modene,  1677,

■ —  Triumfo  D'ell.  Antimonio.     i2mo.     Modene,  1683.

Langlet  du  Fresnoy — Histoire  de  la  Philosophic  Hermetique,
avec  Catalogue  des  Livres  Hermetiques.     3  v.  8vo.     Hay,  1742.

The  Hermetic  Catalogue  separately.    8vo.    Paris,  1762.

ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.  29  I

Lanis  (Francisie  Tertii  de) — Magisterium.      3  v.  Fol.     Brix.,
1684.
Lampas  Vitae  et  Mortis.     i2mo.     Ludg.  Bat.,  1678.
Lapis  Philosophicus — Lapis  Metaphisicus.    (Rare.)    8vo.    Paris,,

i57°-

De  Lapidis  Physici  Conditionibus.    8vo.    Colon.,  1595.

De  Lapide  Philosophico.     16 18.

Disceptatio  de  Lapide  Philos.     8vo.     Col,  1671.

Lasnioro  (J.) — Tractatus  Aureus.     8vo.     1612.

Lavini  (Ven.) — De  Coelo  Terrestre.     8vo.     Marp.,  1612.

Lazarel  (Louis) — Le  Basin  D'Hermes.     8vo.     Paris,  1577.

Lee  (Thomas) — Of  the  Sovereign  Balsam.     Lond.,  1665.

Lemery  (Nic.) — De  L'Antimoine.     i2mo.     Paris,  1707.

Lemnius  (Lav.) — Secret  Miracles  of  Nature.  Fol.  London,.
1658.

Lettre  sur  le  Secret  du  Grand  CEuvre.     12 mo.     Hay,  1606.

Leonardi  (Camilla) — Speculum  Lapidem.     Paris,  16 10.

Libavius  (And.)  of  Halle  in  Saxony — 44  works  on  the  various
branches  of  Alchemy.     Fol.     Franc,  1595.

Liberii  (B.) — Explanatio  in  Tincturam  Physicorum.  8vo.
Franc,  1623.

Locatelli  (Lud.) — Theatro  DArcani  Chimici.  8vo.  Venet.,.
1648.

Locques  (J.) — Philosophic  Naturelle.  (Scarce.)  8vo.  Par.,.
1665.

Longino(C) — Trinum  Magicum.    (Rare.)    i2mo.    Fran.,  16 16.

Long  Livers.     Folio.     Lond.,  1722.

Lossii  (F.) — De  Martis  Curationibus.     Lip.,  1685.

Lucerna  Salis  Philos.  \Curious.  It  is  by  John  Harprecht  of
Tubingen,  a  professed  adept.)     8vo.     Amst.,  1658.

Lucii  (C.) — De  Lapide  Christo  Sophico.     4to.     Ingold.,  1582.

Ludovicus  Comitibus — Practical  Manualis.     Francof.

Lulli  (Raymundi,  an  adept) — Opera  Alchemia.  2  v.  Lond.,
1673.

Opera  Omnia.     8vo.     Argent.,  1677.

Practica  Artis.     Fol.     Lug.,  1523.

De  Secretis.     8vo.     Aug.,  1541.

De  Aquis  Super  Accurtationes.     8vo.     Aug.,  1541.

Alchimia  Magia  Naturalis.     8vo.     Norimb.,  1546.

Tertia    Distinctio    Transmutatione.      4to.       Norimb.,.

1546.

292  ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.

Lulli  (Raymundi,  an  adept) — Cantilena  ad  Regem  Anglorum.
8vo.     Colon.,  1553.

Summaria  Lapidis  Abbreviationes.     Fol.     Basil,  1561-

Mercuriorum  Repertorium  Apertorium.     8vo.     Colon.,

1566.

Paris.

De  Aquis  Mineral  Epist.  Rupert.     8vo.     Colon.,  1567.
Testamentum  Novissimum.     8vo.     Basil,  1572.
De  Secretis  Medicina  Magna.     Basil,  1600.
Secreta  Magnalia  Alchimia.     Lugd.  Bat,  1602.
Le  Vade  Mecum.    Abregedel'Art.    8vo.    Paris,  16 13.
De  Conservatione  Vitae.     8vo.     Argent.,  1616.
Testament  and  Codicil.     8vo.     Lond.,  1680.
Clavicule,  or  Little  Key.     24010.     Lond.,  1680.
Blaquerna  in  Lullium — De  Amico  et  Amate.       321110.

Lullius  Redivivus.     8vo.     Norim.,  1703.

Histoire  R.  L.  par  Vernon.      i2mo.     Paris,  1668.

Lumiere — LaLumiere  sdrtant  desTenebres.   i2mo.  Paris,  1687.
Maffei  (G.  E.) — Scala  Naturale.     8vo.    Venet,  1564.
Magni   Philosopliorum    Arcani   Revelator.       121110.      Geneva,
588.
Majeri  (M.) — Lusus  Serius.      50  Figs.    4to.     Fran.,  1617.

Simbola  Aureae  Mensae.     ^to.    Franc,  1617.

Tripus  Aureus.     4to.     Franc,  16—.

Septimana  Philosophica.     4to.     Franc,  1620.

De  Circuito  Physico  Quadrate    4to.    Franc,  16 16.

Arcana  Arcanissima.    4to.     Londini,  1614.

Atalanta  Fugiens.    4to.    Oppenheimii,  16 18.

Silentium  Post  Clamores.     8vo.    Franc,  161 7.

■ —  Themis  Aurea.     8vo.    Franc,  1618.

Jocus  Severus.     4to.    Franc,  16 17.

Maieri  Viatorium.    4to.    Franc,  16 18.

De  Rosea  Cruce.    4to.     Franc,  1618.

Cantilenas  Intellectuales.    i6mo.    Roma.,  1622.

—  Quatuor  Anguli  Mundi.

—  Ulyssus.    8vo.     Franc,  1628.

—  Verum  Inventum.    8vo.    Franc,  16 19.

—  Civitas  Corporis  Humani.     8vo.    Franc,  162 1.
Museum  Chimicum.    4to.    Franc,  1708.

(Some  of  these  rare  works  are  embellished  with  curious  and  beautiful
copperplates. )

ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.  293

Mangeti  (J.  J.) — Bibliotheca  Chemica  Curiosa.  2  v.  Fol.  It
contains  133  alchemical  tracts,  of  which  33  are  reprinted  from
Theatrum  Chemicum,  viz.,  Arisleus,  Artephius,  Aristotle,  Avicenna,
Arnold,  Altus  Liber  Mutus,  Angenelli,  Albinus,  Bacon,  Becher,
Blavvenstein,  Borrichius,  Brachesky,  Bono,  Bernard,  Basil,  Bernaud,
Balduinus,  Cato,  Clauder,  Chortalasseus,  Cuoffelius,  Dornea,  Dastin,
Espagnet,  Faber,  Fanianus,  Ficinus,  Friben,  Geber,  Gerard,  Guido,
Hermes,  Hogheland,  Helvetius,  Icon,  Johnson,  Kalid,  Kircher,
Kuigman,  Libavius,  Lewis,  Lully,  Massa  Solis,  Merlin,  Morhoff,
Morien,  Malvisius,  F.  Mirandola,  T.  Norton,  Orthelius,  Paracel-
sus, Philalethes,  Pantaleon,  Ripley,  Richard,  Rupescissa,  Sachs,
Sendivogius,  Stoleius,  Todenfeld,  Zadith,  Zacharia.  Col.  1702.
Manna — Of  the  Blessed  Manna  of  the  Philosophers.  Lond.,  1680.
Margarita  Philosophica.  4to.  Basil,  1583.
Maria  Egypti  Dialogues.  {An  adept.)  a.m.  3630.  8vo.  Leip.,
1708.

Mark(B.) — Hermetischen  Philos.  Herren.    8vo.    Strasb.,  1701.
Mars  Philosophische,  vel  Azoth.     8vo.     Fran.,  1656.
Martiniere  (La) — Le  Tombeau  de  la  Folie.     12 mo.     Paris.
Massin  (P.) — De  la  Pierre  Philosophale.

Mazotta  (B.) — De  Triplici  Philosophia.     4to.     Banonise,  1653.
Medices  (C.  de) — Concursus  Philosophorum.     8vo.     1706.
Medicina  Metallorum,  seu  Transmutatio.     4to.     Lip.,  1723.
Medicinesche,  Universal-Sonne.     8vo.     Hamb.,  1706.
Meerheim   (T.    G.) — Discours    Curieuser   Sachen,    &c.      8vo.
Leip.,  1708.

Melceri  (N.) — Lapis  Philosophorum.     Fol.      1449-
Menneus  (G.) — Sacrae  Philosophise.     4to.     Antwerp,  1604.
Mercurii  Trismegisti — Sapientia  Dei.     Basil,  1532.
Mercurius  Redivivus.     {Scarce.)     4X0.     Franc,  1630.
Mercurius  Triumphans.     (Scarce.)     4to.     Magd.,  1600.
Mercury's  Caducean  Rod,  by  Cleidophorus.     16 mo.     Lond.,
1704.

Meresini  (Thi.) — Metal  Transubstant.     8vo.     Han.,  1593.
Meun  (Jean  de) — Ses  CEuvres.    3  tomes.     i2mo.     Paris,  1735.

—  Le  Miroir  d'Alchimie.     i8mo.     Paris,  16 13.

Meurdrack  (Maria) — Light  of  Chemistry.    {German?)     i2mo.
Fran.,  1712.

Meysonnier  (L.) — La  Belle  Magie.     Lyons,  1669.
Milii  (J.  D.) — Opus  Medico-Chemicum,  cum  Fig.   (Disesteemed.)
4to.     Franc,  1620.

294  ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.

Milii(J.D,) — PhilosophiaReformata.  (Curious.)  4to.  Fran.,1622.

Minderii  (R.) — Disquisitio  Jatrochimica.     Aug.,  16 18.

Minera  del  Mondo,  Secreti  di  Natura.     i2mo.     Ven.,  1659.

Minzicht  (H.) — Thesaurus  Medico-Chimicus.  8vo.  Hamb.,
1638.

Mizaldi  (A.) — Memorabilium  IX.  Centuriae.  i6mo.  Colonise,
1572.

De  Lapide  Aureo  Philosophico.     4to.     Hamb.,  1631.

Mollii  (H.) — Physica  Hermetica.     8vo.     Franc,  1619.

Montani  (J.  B.) — De  Arte  Alchemia,  libri  xviii.

Monte  (J.) — De  Medicina  Universali.     8vo.     Fran.,  1678.

Hermetis,   Erlauterung   dess  Hermetischen  Guldenen

Fluss.     8vo.     Ulmse,  1680.

Morestel  (P.) — De  La  Pierre  Naturelle.     i2mo.     Rouen,  1667.

Morhom  (D.  G.)— De  Metal  Transmut.    8vo.     Hamb.,  1673.

Morienus  (adept) — De  Transfiguratione  Metallorum.  4to.
Han.,  1565.

Morleii  (C.  L.) — Collectanea  Chemica.  (Esteemed.)  8vo.  Ant.,
1702.

Mormii  (P.) — Arcana  Naturaa.     Lugd.,  1630.

Mortii  (J.) — Opera  Varia.     Lug.  Bat.,  1696.

Mose(DerVon) — Urtheilende  Alchymist.    8vo.    Chern.,   1706.

Motren  (M.) — Amadis  de  Gaule  Livre.  i4me.  (Various
editions.)

Moiiilhet  (P.) — La  Vie  de  P.  M.  de  Carcassonne,  avec
figs.     8vo.     Par.,  1613.

Muller(A.) — Paradiess-Spiegel.     8vo.     Leips.,  1704.

(J.  E.) — Des  Steins  der  Weisen.      8vo.     Franc,  1707.

Mulleri  (P.) — Miracula  Chemica.     i2mo.     Regio,  16 14.

Mutus  Liber  (Alius) — The  Process  in  Fifteen  Views.  Fol
Rup.,  1677.

Museum  Hermeticum — 2 1  tracts,  by  the  following  authors  :
Alze,  Cremer,  Flamel,  Hydrolitus,  Helvetius,  Lampspring,  De
Meun,  Mynsicht,  Maierus,  T.  Norton,  Philalethes,  Pansophus,
Sendivogus.     Franc,  1677.

Mylii  (J.  D.) — Philosophia  Reformata.     Fran.,  1622.

Mysii  (F.) — De  Secretis  Antimonii.     8vo.      Basil,  1575.

Nabre  (G.  B.) — II  Metamorfosi  Metallicoe  Humano.  4to.
Brescia,  1564.

Nadasti  (Teodo.) — Teorica  Prattica.     Cosmop.,  17 18.

Nasari  (J.  B.) — Delia  Transmutat.     4to.     Bresc,  1599.

ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.  295

Nasari  (J.  B.) — Concordanza  dei  Filosofi.     4to.     Bresc,  1599.

Nature — History  of  Nature  Confirmed  by  Experience.  8vo.
Lond.,  1678.

Naxagoras  (J.  Equitis  von) — Veritas  Hermetica.  8vo.  Vratis-
lau,  1 7 12.

Alchimia  Denudata.    {German.}  8vo.     Vratislau,  17 16.

Aurea  Catena  Homeri.     i2mo.     Lipsise,  1728.

Concorda  Philosophica.

Neander  (Theop.) — Heptas  Alchimica.     8vo.     Hallse,  1621.

Nehusi  (Henr.) — Tres  Tractatu  de  Lapide.  {Curious?)  i6mo.
Hanoviae,  1618.

Nollius  (H.) — Theoria  Philosophise  Hermetica?.  8vo.  Hanov.,
1617/

Corruption  and  Generation.     8vo.     Lond.,  1657.

Nortoni  (Samuelis) — Septem  Tractatus  Chimici,  cum  Figuris.
1.  Catholic  Physic.  2.  Elixir  Vitriol.  3.  Mercury  Revived.
4.  Medicine  of  Life.  5.  Saturn  Saturated.  6.  Gems  of  Pebbles.
7.    Alchemy.     4to.    Fran.,  1630.

Norton  (Thomas) — Ordinall  of  Alchemy.     410.     Lond.,  1652.

Nuysement  (Dom) — True  Salt  of  Philosophers.  8vo.  London,
1657.

Ohacan  (D.  A.,  Spaniard) — Commentum  in  Parabolas
Arnoldi.     Fol.     Hisp.,  15 14.

Olympe — Le  Grand  Olympe,  ou  Explication  de  79  Metamor-
phoses. {The  author  of  this  treatise  is  said  mendaciously  to  have
been  a  frie7id  of  Flamel.)     8vo.     Franc,  16 14.

Opuscula  Diversorum  Authorum.     8vo.     Franc,  16 14.

Opus  Tripartitum  de  Philosophorum  Arcanis.  8vo.  Lond.,
1678.

Orontii  (Finei) — De  Philosophorum  Lapide.  4to.  Paris,
1542.

Or  Potable — Discours  des  Vertus  de  l'Or  Potable.  i2mo.
Paris,  1575.

Ortholanus — Practica  Vera  Alkimik.     Parisiis,  1358.

Padua  (J.) — Sapientia  Consummata.

Pagez  (J.) — Les  Miracles  de  la  Creation.     8vo.     Paris,  1632.

Palissy  (B.) — Les  Moyens  de  devenir  Riche.  i2mo.  Paris,
1636.

■  Du  Jardinage  et  de  la  Chimie.     8vo.     Paris,  1580.

Palladis  Chimicse  Arcana  Detecta,  J.  B.  Marnigue.  (Rare.)  8vo.
Genev.,  1674.

296  ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.

Palladium  Spagiricum.     8vo.     Paris,  1624.

Palmarii  (Petri,  M.D.,  Paris) — Lapis  Philosophicus.  8vo.
Paris,  1609.

Pamphilus  (Lucidas) — Theatri  Alchymistico-Medici  breve  et
jucundum  spectaculum.     8vo.     1681.

Pansse  (Mart.) — Libellus  Aureus.     8vo.     Lips.,  1615.

Pantaleonis — Bifolium  Metallicum.     8vo.     Norimbergse,  1676.

Pantheus  (J.  A.)— Sacerdos  Venetus,  de  Arte  et  Theoria
Transmutationis  Metallicis.     8vo.     Paris,  1550.

Paracelsi  Theophrasti  Opera  Omnia.     3  V.  Fol.     Gen.,  1662.

Compendium  Vitse  et  Catalogus.     Basil,  1568.

Pyrophilia  Vexationem.     8vo.     Basil,  1568.

Septem  Libri  de  Gradibus  Philosophise  Magnse.

De  Tartaro.     8vo.     Basil,  1570.

Archidoxorum,  lib.  x.     8vo.     Colon.,  1570.

Aurora.     8vo.     Basil,  1577.

Key  of  Philosophy.     8vo.     Lond.,  1580.

De  Mercuriis  Metallorum.     8vo.     Colon.,  1582.

Medico-Chimico  Chirurgica.     12  t.    4to.    Franc,  1603.

■ Sympathy.     8vo.     Lond.,  1656.

" Chemical  Transmutation.     8vo.     Lond.,  1657.

Philosophy  to  the  Athenians.      i2mo.     Lond.,  1657.

Prescription  of  114  Cures.     4to.     1659.

Archidoxis   of  Arcana  and  Elixirs.      8vo.      London,

1663.

Philosophise  Adeptse.     8vo.     Basil.

Parkhurst's  Sympathetic  Mummy.     Lond.,  1653.

Partricii  (F.) — Magia  Philos.  Zoroastris.     8vo.     Hamb.,  1593.

Partridge  (John) — Treasury  of  Secrets.     8vo.     Lond.,  1591.

Paysan — Le  Petit  Paysan.  Alchemical.  {German,  rare.)  8vo.
Strasb.,  16 19.

Pellagii  Greci,  In  Democritum  Abderitam,  de  Arte  Sacra,  sive
de  •  Rebus  Mysticis,  et  Naturalibus  comment.  8vo.  Colonise,
1574.

Pelletier,  L'Alcsest  de  Helmont.  {Esteemed.)  12  mo.  Rouen,
1704.

Penotus  (B.) — Alchemist's  Enchiridion.     121110.    Lond.,  1692.

De  Materia  Lapidis    Philosophorum.      8vo.      Bern.,

1608.

Persons  (David) — Salamandra.    4to.    Lond.,  1636.

Petrei  (H.) — Nosologia  Hermetica.    4to.     Marpurg,  16 14.

ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.  297

Petty  (John) — Mine  Laws  of  England.    Fol.    Lond.,  1610.
Pharmundi  (J.  P.) — Compendium  Hermeticum.    i2mo.    Fran.,

1635-

Philadelphia,  or  Brotherly  Love.     Lond.

Philalethes  (Eirenaeus) — Introitus  Apertus  ad  Occlusum  Regis
Palatium,  edente  Joanne  Langio.     8vo.    Amstelodami,  1667.

Medulla  Alchymise.    8vo.    Lond.,  1664.     (In  verse  and

in  English.)

Ripley  Revised.    With  the  Commentaries  of  Philalethes.

8vo.     Lond.,  1678.

Experiments  de  Praeparatione  Mercurii  Sophici.     8vo.

Amstel.,  1668.

— : Enarratio  Methodica  trium  Gebri  Medicinarum.     8vo.

Amstel.,  1668.

Tractatus  Tres    .    .    .    edente  Martino  Birrio.     8vo.

Amstel.,  1668.

Vera  Confectio  Lapidis  Philosophici.      8vo.     Amstel.,

1678.

(Eugenius) — Anthroposophia     Theomagica.      Anima

Magica  Abscondita.     8vo.     London,  1650.

Magia  Adamica.     Whereunto  is  added  a  perfect  and

full  Discovery  of  the  Cozlum  Terrce.    8vo.    London,  1650.

Lumen  de  Lumine.    8vo.    Lond.,  165 1.

Aula  Lucis.     1652.

Euphrates  ;  or,  The  Waters  of  the  East.     8vo.     Lond.,

l655-

Fame  and  Confession  of  the  Fraternity  of  R.  C.     With

a  Declaration  of  their  Physicall  Work.     8vo.    Lond.,  1659.

(Eirenaeus  Philoponos,  i.e.,  George  Starkey) — Marrow  of

Alchemy.     i2mo.    Lond.,  1709.

(B.  P.) — Enchiridion  Alchemiae.    Lond.,  1692.

Philalethae — Tractatlein  von  Verwandelung  der  Metallen,  &c.
i2mo.  Ham.,  1675.

Philaleta  (T.) — Theosophischer  Wunder  Saal.      8vo.     1709.

Philosophus  Callus — De  Arbore  Solari.     8vo.    Arg.,  1659.

Picus  de  Mirandola  (J.  F.) — De  Auro.    4to.    Venet.,  1586.

Pietra  de  Philosopha  Catala.     Ascoli,  1737.

Pinseus  (V.) — De  Concordia  Hipoc  et  Parcels.  8vo.  Arg.,
1569.

Pittore  (M.  G.)— Dialogi.     Venet.,  1550.

Plan — Projet  du  Plan  de  la  Creation.    8vo.     Paris,  1653.

298  ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.

Planis  Campi  (D.) — L'Ecole   Transmutatoire.       8vo.      Paris,

J633-

De  la  Medecine  Universelle.     8vo.     Paris,  1633.

Piatt  (H.) — Jewel  House  of  Art.     4to.    Lond.,  1594.

Politii  (A.) — Libri  duo  de  Quinta  Essentia  Solutiva.  4to.
Panormi,  16 13.

Pontanus  (John,  adept) — Sophie  Fire.     241110.     Lond.,  1624.

De  Rebus  Celestibus.     Fiorenza,  1520.

Poppii  (J.) — Hodogeticus  Chemicus.     [German.)     1627.

Poppius  (H.) — Basilica  Antimonii.     4to.     Fran.,  16 18.

Porta  (J.  B.) — De  JExh  Transmutationibus.  4to.  Romse,
1610.

Magia  Naturale.     Napo.,  161 1.

Potier  (M.) — Apologia  Hermetico-Philosophica.  4to.  Franc.,
1630.

De  Vera  Materia  et  Processu  Lapidis.     8vo.     Franc,

1617.

Philosophia  Pura.    -8vo.     Francof.,  16 17.

Fons  Chimicus,  id  est,  Vera  Auri  Conficienda.      4to.

Col.,  1637.

(P.) — Opera  Omnia.    (Disesteemed.)   4to.    Franc,  1692.

Privy  Seal  of  Secrets,  or  First  Matter.     Lond.,  1680.

Processes  for  the  Philosophical  Stone.  {German.)  8vo.  Jena,
1704.

Prudhomme  (P.) — Deux  Merveilles.     i2mo.     Paris,  1669.

Pruggmayr  (M.) — De  "Vero  Elixire  Vitse.  8vo.  Salisburgi,
1687.

Quercetan  (J.) — Hermetical  Physic     4to.     London,  1605.

Rabbard's  (Raphael)  Book  of  Alchemy.     4to.     Lond.,  1591.

Ramsaia  (C.  A.) — Observationes,  J.  Kunkell.     Rottj  1678.

Rantse  (Mariani),  English  Prophetess  —  Apocaliptica  Clavis
Auri  Facturum  Brevi  Promittens.     (Rare.)     Svo.     Tolosas.

Raphaelis  (S.) — De  Sale,  Sulphure,  et  Mercurio.     T2mo.

Rattri  (Silv.) — Theatrum  Sympatheticum.     Norim.,  1658.

Reconditiorum  Opulentias,  sapientseque  mundi  magni,  &c.
(Esteemed.)     Amst.,  1666.

Regio  Salutifera — Prima  Materia.     Svo.     Fran.,  1708.

Reinecerri  Thesaurus  Chimicus.     Svo.     Lipsise,  1609.

Renaudot  (E.) — De  LAntimoine  Justifie.     4to.     Paris,  1653.

Respom — Sur  L'Esprit  Minerale.     i2mo.     Paris,  1668.

Reyheri  (S.) — De  Juridice  Philosophica.     4to.     Kibiae,  1692.

ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.  299

Rhenani  (J.) — Aureus  Tractatus.     4to.     Franc,  161 2.

Decades  Duse,  seu  Syntagma  harmonise  Chimicorum —

Rhasis,  Merlin,  Guido,  Saure,  Wittich,  Dumbel,  Gratian,  Antonio,
Aquinas,  Dastin,  Salamon,  Small  Rosary.     8vo.     Fran.,  1625.

De  Solutione  Materise.     8vo.     Fran.,  1635.

Rhodagiri  (L.) — De  Solutione  Philosophica.  8vo.  Lugd.,
1566.

Richebourg  (J.  M.) — Bibliotheque.  Eighteen  tracts.  Arte-
phius,  Azot,  Ancient  War,  Bernard,  Basil,  Flamel,  Geber,  Hermes,
Hortulain,  Morien,  Mary,  Turba,  Zachary.  3  vols.  i2mo.  Paris,
1741.

Riplei  (Georgii,  adept) — Opera  Omnia.     8vo.     Casselis,  1649.

— Treatise  of  Mercury.     Lond.,  1680.

Bosom  Book,  Accurtations.     8vo.     Lond.,  1680.

Riviere  (Cesare  della) — II  Mondo  Magico.     Milano,  1605.

Robertus  (Valensis)  —  De  Antiquitate  Artis  Chemise.  8vo.
Lugd.,  1602.

Rochas  (H.) — La  Physique  Demonstrative.     8vo.     Paris,  1643.

Rodostanticum  Speculum.     (German.)     4to.     16 18.

Rodocanacis  (C.) — Of  Antimony.     4to.     Lond.,  1664.

Rolfincius  (G.) — Mercurius  Metallorum  et  Mineralium.  4to.
Jena,  1670.

Rosarium  Novum — De  Lapide  Benedicto.     4to.     Germ.,  1668.

ROSICRUCIANS.

Communis  et  Generalis  Reformatio  Totius  Mundi.  {German?)
8vo.     Casselis,  1614.

Fama  Fraternitatis  of  the  meritorious  order  of  the  R.  C.  (Ger-
man.)    8vo.     Casselis,  16 14.

Secretioris  Philosophise  Consideratio  Brevis  a  Philippo  a,  Gabella,
Philosophise  studioso,  conscripta ;  et  nunc  primum  una  cum  Con-
fessione  Fraternitatis  R.  C,  in  lucem  edita.  4to.  Cassellis,
1615.

Exercitatio  Paracelsica  Nova  de  Notandis  ex  Scripto  Fraterni-
tatis de  Rosea  Cruce.  (See  Andreas  Libavius'  Examen  Philo-
sophise Novse,  quae  veteri  abrogandse  opponitur.)     Fol.     16 15.

Analysis  Confessionis  Fraternitatis  de  Rosea  Cruce  pro  admo-
nitione  et  instructione  eorum,  qui,  quia  judicandum  sit  de  ista
nova  factione  scire  cupiant.     Fol.     16 15.

Chymische  Ffochzeit :  Christiani  Rosencreutz.  Anno  1459.
8vo.     Strasbourg,  161 6.

300  ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.

Echo  of  the  God-illuminated  Brotherhood  of  the  Worthy
Order  R.  C.     (?  By  Julius  Sperber).     8vo.     Dantzig,  1615.

Julianus  de  Campis — An  Open  Letter  or  Report  addressed  to
all  who  have  read  anything  concerning  the  new  Brotherhood  of
the  R.  C.     {German.)     8vo.     1616.

Andreas  Libavius — Well  wishing  Objections  concerning  the
Fame  and  Confessions  of  the  Brotherhood  of  the  R.  C.  {German?)
8vo.     Francfurt,  16 16.

Fama  Remissa  ad  Fratres  Rosea?  Crucis.  (German.)  8vo.
1616.

Radtichs  Brotoffer — Elucidarius  Major,  oder  Ekleuchterunge
iiber  die  Reformatio  der  Ganzen  Weiten  Welt.     8vo.      161 7.

Fraternitatis  Rosatse  Crucis  Confessio  Recepta.  (Written  by
A.  O.  M.  T.  W.)     8vo.      161 7.

Fredericus  G.  Menapius  (i.e.,  Johann  Valentin  Alberti) — Epi-
timia  F.  R.  C.  The  Final  Manifestation  or  Discovery  of  the
worthy  and  worshipful  Order  R.  C.  .  .  .  Written  by  command
of  the  above-mentioned  Society  by  Irenaeus  Agnostus  (Menapius).
An  attack  on  the  Society.     (German.)     8vo.     16 19.

I.  Menapius  Rosea?  Crucis,  to  wit :  Objections  on  the

part  of  the  Unanimous  Brotherhood  against  the  obscure  and  un-
known writer,  F.  G.  Menapius.  ( With  other  matters.  Is  also  a
covert  attack  written  by  Menapius.)     8vo.      16 19.     (German.)

Florentinus  de  Valentia  —  Rosa  Florescens  contra  F.  G.
Menapii  Calumniis.     8vo.      1617.

Judicia  de  Statu  Fraternitatis  de  Rosea  Cruce.     i2mo.     16 17.

Responsum  ad  Fratres  Rosacea?  Crucis  Illustres.  12 mo.
1618.

F.  R.  C. — Fama  e  Scanzia  Redux.     12 mo.     16 18.

pXzvodiovpzdag. — Hoc  est  Redintegratio.  (Addressed  to  the
Brotherhood  of  the  Rose  Cross.)     8vo.     16 19.

Johann  Valentin  Andreas — Turris  Babel,  sive  Judicium  de
Fraternitatis  Rosea?  Crucis  Chaos.     241x10.     Argentorati,  16 19.

S.  R.  (i.e.,  Sincerus  Renatus,  a  pseudonym  of  Sigmund  Richter)
— Perfect  and  True  Preparation  of  the  Philosophical  Stone,  ac-
cording to  the  Secret  of  the  Brotherhood  of  the  Golden  and  Rosy
Cross.  With  the  Rules  of  the  above-mentioned  Order  for  the
Initiation  of  New  Members.     8vo.     Breslau,  17 10.

Secret  Symbols  of  the  Rosicrucians  of  the  Sixteenth  and
Seventeenth  Centuries.     Fol.     Altona,  1785-88.

Joachim  Fritz  (?  Robert  Fludd) — Summum  Bonum,  quod  est

ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.  3OI

verum  subjectum  verse  magicse,  cabalae,  alchymiae  Fratrum  Rose?e
Crucis  verorum  in  dictarum  scientiarum  laudem,  et  insignis  calum-
niatoris  .  .  .  M.  Mersenni  dedecus  publicatum.  Fol.  Franc-
furt,  1629.

Thomas  Vaughan  (Eugenius  Philalethes) — The  Fame  and
Confession  of  the  Fraternity  of  R.  C,  with  a  Preface  annexed
thereto,  and  a  short  declaration  of  their  Physicall  Work.  8vo.
London,  1652.

John  Heydon — The  Rosie  Crucian  Infallible  Axiomata.  i2mo.
London,  1660.

The   Holy  Guide,  leading  the  Way  to  the  Wonder  of

the  World.     8vo.     London,  1662.

Theomagia ;   or,  The  Temple  of  Wisdome.     In  three

parts — spirituall,  celestiall,  and  elemental!.  8vo.  London,
1662-3-4.

The   Wise  Man's  Crown,   or  The  Glory  of  the  Rosy

Cross.    8vo.    London,  1664.

■ —  El  Havarevna ;  or  The  English    Physitian's  Tutor  in

the  Astrobolismes  of  Mettals  Rosie  Crucian.    8vo.    London,  1665.

Hargrave  Jennings — The  Rosicrucians :  Their  Rites  and
Mysteries.  With  chapters  on  the  Ancient  Fire  and  Serpent  Wor-
shippers, and  Explanations  of  the  Mystic  Symbols  Represented
on  the  Monuments  and  Talismans  of  the  Primeval  Philosophers.
8vo.    London,  1870.

Arthur  Edward  Waite — The  Real  History  of  the  Rosicrucians.
Founded  on  their  own  Manifestoes  and  on  Facts  and  Documents
collected  from  the  writings  of  Initiated  Brethren.  8vo.  London,
1887.

Rosnel(P.) — Le  Mercure  Indien.    {Curious)    4to.    Paris,  1672.

Rossello  (T.) — Secreti  Universali.     8vo.     Venet,  1574.

Rossinus  (H.) — De  Opera  Dei  Creationis.     4to.     Fran.,  1597.

Rothscoltzii  (F.)— Bibliotheca  Chimica.     4:0.     1719.

Bibliotheca  Chemia  Curiosa  Adornata.    121110.    Noren.,

1720.

Rouillac  (P.) — Practica  Operis  Magni.     8vo.     Lugd.,  1582.

Rousselet — La  Chrysospagirie.     8vok     Lyons,  1582.

Rudenius  (M.) — Bendencten  Von  der  Alchimistichen  Artzen
Kunst.     8vo.     Lip.,  1605.

Ruelli  (J.)— De  Natura  Stribium.     2  vols.  8vo.     Venet.,  1538.

Rullandi  (M.) — Progymnasmata  Alchimise.     8vo.     Fran.,  1607.

302  ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.

Rullandi  (M.) — Lexicon  Alchimise.     4to.     Fran.,  1612.
Rupecissa    (Johan,    adept)  —  Coelum    Philosophorum.        8vo.
Parisiis,  1543.

De  Quinta  Essentia  Rerum  Omnium.      8vo.      Basil,

1561.

De  Secretis  Alchemiae.     4to.     Col.  Agi.,  1579.

Livre  de  Lumiere.     i6mo.     Paris.

Sabor  (Chr.  Fer.)  —  Practica  Naturse  vera  Preparatio   Lapidis
Mineralis  de  Antimonio.     {German.)     8vo.     1721.

Saignier   (J.) — Magni    Lapidis    Naturalis    Philosophia.       4to.
Brem.,  1664.

Saint  Romain — Effets  de  la  Pierre  Divine.      i2mo.      Paris,
1679.

Salae  (Angeli) — Opera  Medico-Chymica  Omnia.     4to.     Rotho-
magi,  1650.

Sale  (De) — De  Secreto  Philosophorum.     8vo.     Cass.,  165 1.

Salmon   (William,    M.D.)  —  Hermes,   Kalid,    Pontanus,  Arte-
phius,  Geber,  Flamel,  Bacon,  Ripley.     8vo.     Lond.,  1692.

Bibliotheque.      Containing  twelve    tracts    by   reputed

adepts.      121110.     Paris,  1672.

Saltzhal    (S.)  —  De    Potentissima    Medicina    Univali.       8vo.
Argent,  1659.

Sapientia  —  Clavis    Majoris     Sapientise     (Artephius).       8vo.
Paris,  1609.

Sawtree  (John) — Of  the  Philosopher's  Stone.     4to.      Lond.,
1652.

Schennemannus   (Ff.) — De  Medecina  Reformata  seu  denario
Hermetico-Chemico.     8vo.     Fran.,  1617.

Schleron   (F£.) — De  Lapide  Philosophorum.      8vo.      Marpus,
1612.

Schlussel  —  Zur   Findung   dess   Steins   der   Weissen.        8vo.
Leip.,  1706.

Scholzii  (L.) — Summum  Philosophise.     Fol.     Ffano.,  1610.

Schotti  (C.)  —  Physica  Curiosa  cum    Figuris.      4to.      Herb.,
1667.

Mirabilia-Artis.     2  v.  4to.     Norim.,  1664.

Schuleri  (C.) — De  Miraculo  Chemico.     1616.

Schwertzer  (Sibald) — Chrysopceiae.     {Esteemed.)    8vo.     Hamb.,
1618.

Scientia  Exemplar  {ex  Lagneo).     4to.     Ulm.,  1641.

Scot  (Patrick) — Tillage  of  Light.     8vo.     Lond.,  1623.

ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.  303

Scoti  (Michael) — De  Secretis  Naturae.     i2mo.     Fran.,  16 14.

Sebilista  (W.) — Manuale  Hermeticum.     4to.     Wolf.,  1655.

Secrets  Disclosed  of  the  Philosopher's  Stone.     241110.     1680.

Seilerus — Of  a  Transmuting  Powder  Found.     4to.    Lond.,  1633.

Sel — Du  Sel  de  Sapience.    (Disesteemed).     8vo.     Paris,  16 19.

Semita  Rectitudinis  de  Alchemia.     8vo.     Gratianopoli,  16 14.

Sendivogius  (Mich.) — De  Vero  Sale.    {Spurious.)    Franc,  165 1.

New  Light  of  Alchymy.

Senfrid  (J.  H.) — Medulla  Naturae.      8vo.     Taltzlach,  1679.

Sennertus  (D.) — Institutions  of  Chemistry.     8vo.     London.

Severini  (Petri) — Totius  Philos.  Adeptse.     8vo.     Basil,  1572.

Severino  (Scipione) — Triomfo  d'Ell  Alchimia.  8vo.  Venet.,
1691.

Filosofia  Alchemia.     Venet.,  1695.

Commentary  on  Lully.     (Italian?)     1684.

Seyfarti  (A.) — Klar  und  Deutliche  Luorterung.  8vo.  Leypsich,
1723.

Sferza  (La) — De  Gli  Alchemisti.     Lion.,  1665.

Sidrach — Le  Grand  Fontaine  de  Science.     4to.     Paris,  15 14.

Simpson — Of  Fermentation.     Lond.,  1675.

Snoyus  (R.) — De  Arte  Alchimia;.     Fol.     Francof.,  1620.

Sol  Sine  Vesta  {anonymous  adept).     Amst,  1684.

Spacheri  (S.) — Alchimia,  cum  Figuris.     4to.     1616.

Sperberi  (J.)— Argumentum  in  Veram  Triunius  Dei  et  Naturae.
8vo.     Hamb.,  1672.

De  Materia  Lapidis.     8vo.     Ffamb.,  1674.

Stahli  (G.  E.) — Fundamenta  Chimise.     4to.     Norim.,  1723.

Starky  (G.) — Pyrotechny  Asserted.     i2mo.     Lond.,  1658.

Nature's  Explication.      1658.

Marrow  of  Chemical  Physic.     i2mo.     1661.

Steebe  (I.  S.) — Elixir  Solis.     i2mo.     Francof.,  1672.

Coelum  Sephiroticum.     Fol.     Moguntiae,  1679.

Stisseri  (J.  A.) — Acta  Laboratorii  Jesiae.     4to.     Helen.,  1701.

Stolcii  (D.) — Viridiarium  Chimicum,  cum  Figuris.  Franc,
1624.

—  Hortulus  Hermeticus,  cum  Figuris.    8vo.    Franc,  1627.

Struthius  (J.) — Medecina  Priscorum.    Lugd.,  1600.

Struvius  (E.  G.)— Chimicum  sine  Igne.    8vo.     Jenas,  17 15.

Surmiti  (J.) — Physica  Electiva.    4to.    Nor.,  1697.   .

In  Collegium  Experimentale  Curiosum.     4to.     Norim.,

1701.

304  ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.

Suchten  (Alex.) — Clavis  Alchemiae.  (German?)  8vo.  Montis.,
1614.

Secrets  of  Antimony.    8vo.    Lond.,  1670.

Sudum  Philosophicum.     8vo.     Hamb.,  1660.

Swedenburgii  (Em.) — Regnum  Minerale.      3  v.    Fol.       Liq,,

1734-

Synes — De  Sapientia  Divina.     i2mo.     Lutet,  1635.

T.  W.' — Marrow  of  Chemical  Physic.     Lond.,  1659.

Tabulae  Septem  Synopsim  Lapidis.     Erph.,  1598.

Tachemius  (Oth) — De  Liquore  Alksest.     4to.     Hamb.,  1655.

Hippocrates'  Viperine  Salt.     410.     London,  1677.

Tackii  (J.) — Triplex  Phasis  Sophicus  Solis  arbe  expiditus.  4to.
Franc,  1673.

Tankins  (J.) — Collection  of  Alchemy  in  German.  Leipsic,
1610.

Teichmeyeri  (H.  F.) — Institutiones.     Jenae,  1729.

Tenzelius  (A.) — Medecina  Diastatica.     i2mo.     Jenae,  1629.

Theatrum  Chimicum.  Two  hundred  and  nine  treatises  by
Arnold,  Albert,  Augmelli,  Aristotle,  Aquinas,  Alanus,  Alvetanus,
Alphonso,  Avicenna,  Artephius,  Aphorisms,  Bacon,  Balbius,  Ber-
nard, Bernaud,  Bona,  Brentzius,  Brosse,  Blawenstein,  Caravantis,
Colleson,  Christopher,  Dee,  Dornea,  Democritus,  Egidius,  Eck,
Ficinus,  Fanian,  Flamel,  Ferarius,  Gaston,  Greverius,  Grossius,
Haymonis,  Hermes,  Hogheland,  Hornius,  Isaac,  Kalid,  Lagneus,
Lasinoro,  Lavinius,  Lacinius,  Lampsprink,  Lully,  Muffetus,  Mary,
P.  Mirandola,  Micreris,  Meneus,  Monachus,  Nigrius,  Orthelius,
Odomar,  Ortholan,  Ponlanus,  Penotus,  Pantheus,  Plato,  Phedio,
Quercetan,  Rhedargii,  Rupecissa,  Ripley,  Richard,  Rosary,  Phasis,
Sendivogius,  Silento,  M.  Scott,  Trithemius,  Turba,  Troginani,
Vogelius,  Ventma,  Vallensis,  Vigenerus,  Zacharia,  Zonetus,  Zadith.
6  v.  8vo.     Argent.,  1662.

Theobaldi  (Zach.) — Arcana  Naturae.     4to.     Norin.,  1628.

Thomae  Aquinatis — Secreta  Alchemiae.     4to.     Colon.,  1579.

Thesaurus  Alchemiae.     8vo.     Lugd.,  1602.

De  Esse  et  Essentia  Mineralium.      {Spurious)     4to.

Venet,  1488.

Thor  (G.) — Cheiragogia  Heliana.  (English.)  8vo.  Lond.,
1659.

Thornburgh  (John) — Nihil,  aliquid,  omnia  in  gratiam  eorum
qui  artem  auriferam  Phisico-chimice  et  pie  profitentur.  4to.,
Oxon.,  1621.

ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.  305

Thurneyssers  (Leo.) — Hoechste  sublilitad  der  Alchimia.  4to.
Munst.,  1569.

Tombeau  de  la  Pauvret£,  par  Atramont.     121110.    Par.,  1673.

Tombeau  de  Semiramis.     8vo.     Par.,   1689.

Tractat — Gulden  Rose  Chit  der  Natur,  &c.     8vo.      1706.

Tractatus  Anti quorum  Arcanorum.     8vo.      161 2.

Tractat.     7  Von  Stein  der  Weissen.     8vo.     Ham.

Tranas  Facilis  ad  Hermetis  Artem.     nmo.     Corolopili,  1686.

Transformation  Metallique.     8vo.     Paris,  165  r.

Transfiguratione  Metallorum  (De).     8vo.     Hanov.,  1593.

Treasure  of  Treasures.    241x10.    Lond.,  1680.

Tres  Tractatus  de  Metallorum  Transmutatione.    Amst.,  1668.

Trinum — Koffski,  Alphidius,  and  Lully.    8vo.    Arg.,  1699.

Triomphe  Hermetique  (i.e.,  Ancient  War  of  the  Knights).
i2mo.     Amst,  1689.

Trifolium  Hermeticum.     (German.)    1629.

Trimosin  (S.,  adept) — La  Toison  d'Or.     8vo.      161 1.

Trithemius  (J.) — De  Lapide  Phil.    8vo.    161 1.

Trinum  Magicum  Opus  Secretorum.    i2mo.    Trail.,  16  1809.

Trompette  de  Philosophie  Hermetique.     121110.     Paris,

Tubicum  Conviviale  Hermeticum.   4to.    Gedani,  1682.

Tymme  (J.) — Nature's  Closet  Opened.     4to.     Lond.,  1612.

Ulstadii  (P.) — Ccelum  Philosophorum.      i2mo.     Lugd.,  1553.

Untzerus  (M.) — Anatomia  Mercurii.      4to.      Hale  Sax.,  1620.

Urbigero  (Baro.,  adept) — Aphorisms.     121110.     Lond.,  1690.

Vallensis  (R.) — De  Veritate  et  Antiquitate  Artis  Chemicse.
161110.     Par.,  1 65 1.

Valentine  (Basil,  adept) — Last  Will,  Practica,  Twelve  Keys,
Manual,  Natural  and  Supernatural  Things,  Microcosm,  &rc.  8vo.
Lond.,  1671.

Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony.     8vo.     1656.

Scripta  Chimica.     8vo.     Hamburgi,  1700.

Vallerlis  (V.) — Lulliam  Explicano.     4to.     August.,  1.589.

Vanderlinden — De  Scriptis  Medecis.     4to.     Norim.,  1686.

Vanner  (T.) — Way  to  Long  Life.     4to.     Lond.,  1623.

Vannucio  Pyrotecnia  della  Minere.    4to.     Venet.,  1540.

Vargas  (B.  P.)— De  Re  Metallica.     8vo.     Madrid,  1569.

Vigam  of  Verona — Medulla  Chymise.     Lond.,  1683.

Vigenerus  (B.) — Of  True  Fire  and  Salt.     Lond.,  1649.

Vigani  (J.  A.) — Medulla  Chymige.     Lug.  Bat.,  1693.

Villanova  (Arnoldus  de) — Opera  Omnia — Conversion  of  Metals,

U

306  ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE.

Rosary,  Speculum,  Questions,  Flos  Florum,  &c.  Fol.  Lugd.,
1520.

Villanovani  (Petri),  compiler — Speculum.     Duse,  1626.

Vittestein — De  Quinta  Essentia.     8vo.     Basil,  1582.

Vogelii  (Ewal.) — De  Lapide  Physici.     Colon.,  1575.

Vonderbeet  (D.) — Experimenta.     Ferrarise,  1688.

Wallerus — C hernia  Physica.     8vo.     Lond.

Water — The  Water  Stone  of  the  Wise.     8vo.     Lond.,  1659.

Webster's  History  of  Metals.     4to.     Lond.,  167 1.

Wecker  (Dr,  of  Basle) — Secrets.     8vo.     Lyons,  1643.

Weidenfeld  (J.  J.) — Secrets  of  the  Adepts.     4to.     Lond.,  1685.

Weidnerus  (J.) — De  Arte  Chimica.     4to.     Basil,  16 10.

Wickffbain  (J.  P.) — Salamandra.      Norimb.,  1683.

Williams  (W.) — Occult  Physics.     8vo.     Lond.,  1660.

Willis  (T.) — Theophisical  Alchemy.     8vo.     Lond.,  1616.

Opera  Omnia  Medicin.     2  v.     Lugd.,  1681.

Wilson  (G.) — Three  Hundred  Unknown  Experiments.  Lond.,
1699.

Wirdig  (Sebas.) — Medicina  Spiritum.     Norimberg,  1675.

Wittestein  (C.) — De  Quinta  Essentia.     8vo.     Basil,  1583.

Wittichius  (J.) — De  Lapide  Philos.     8vo.     Francof.,  1625.

Zacharia — Clavis  Spagirica.     4to.     Venet,  161 1.

Zacharii  (D.,  adept) — La  Vraie  Philosophie  des  Metaux.  8vo.
Anvers.,  1567.

De  Chimico  Miracule.     8vo.     Basil,  1583.

Zadith — Antiquissimi  Philos.     8vo.     Argent.,  T566.

Zelator  (J.) — Alchemistici.     8vo.     Basil,  1606.

Note. — The  titles  of  some  of  the  treatises  enumerated  above
have  been  mutilated  by  the  original  bibliographers,  and  owing
to  the  extreme  rarity  of  most  alchemical  books,  it  has  been
impossible  to  correct  all  errors.

APPENDIX.

I.

The  life  of  Denis  Zachaire  has  been  made  the  subject  of  an
interesting  and  well-written  novel — "A  Professor  of  Alchemy" —
by  "  Percy  Ross,"  recently  published  by  Mr  George  Redway.
The  life  of  the  great  adept,  after  his  accomplishment  of  the
Magnum  Opus,  is  detailed  at  some  length,  M.  Louis  Figuier  being
apparently  the  authority  for  the  bare  facts  of  the  case.  The
alchemist  is  represented  by  the  French  writer  as  having  travelled
to  Lausanne,  where  he  became  enamoured  of  a  young  and  beauti-
ful lady,  whom  he  carried  from  Switzerland  into  Germany,  and
then  abandoned  himself  completely  to  a  life  of  dissipation  and
folly,  which  closed  tragically  at  Cologne  in  the  year  1556.  He
was  strangled  in  the  middle  of  a  drunken  sleep  by  the  cousin  who
had  accompanied  him  in  his  travels,  and  who  coveted  his  wealth
and  his  mistress.  The  murderer  effected  his  escape  with  the  lady,
who  appears  to  have  been  his  accomplice.  The  sole  authority
for  this  narrative  appears  to  be  a  poem  by  Mardoche  de  Delle,
who  was  attached,  as  a  sort  of  laureate,  to  the  court  of  Rodolph  II.
It  is  not  improbably  a  mere  invention  of  the  versifier;  there
is  nothing  in  the  sober  treatise  of  Denis  Zachaire,  written  at
the  period  in  question,  to  give  colour  to  the  account  of  his
extravagance.

-     II.

The  manuscript  volume  entitled  "  Egyptian  Freemasonry  "  fell,
with  the  other  papers  of  Cagliostro,  into  the  hands  of  the  Inquisi-
tion, and  was  solemnly  condemned  in  the  judgment  as  containing
rites,  propositions,  a  doctrine  and  a  system  which  opened  a  broad
road  to  sedition  and  were  calculated  to  destroy  the  Christian
religion.  The  book  was  characterised  as  superstitious,  blas-
phemous, impious,  and  heretical.  It  was  publicly  burnt  by  the
hands  of  the  executioner,  with  the  instruments  belonging  to  the

308  APPENDIX.

sect.  Some  valuable  particulars  concerning  it  are,  however,  pre-
served in  the  Italian  life ;  they  are  reproduced  from,  the  original
proceedings  published  at  Rome  by  order  of  the  Apostolic
Chamber.

"  It  may  be  necessary  to  enter  into  some  details  concerning
Egyptian  Masonry.  We  shall  extract  our  facts  from  a  book  com-
piled by  himself,  and  now  in  our  possession,  by  which  he  owns
he  was  always  directed  in  the  exercise  of  his  functions,  and  from
which  those  regulations  and  instructions  were  copied,  wherewith
he  enriched  many  mother  lodges.  In  this  treatise,  which  is
written  in  French,  he  promises  to  conduct  his  disciples  to  per-
fection by  means  of  physical  and  moral  regeneration,  to  confer
perpetual  youth  and  beauty  on  them,  and  restore  them  to  that
state  of  innocence  which  they  were  deprived  of  by  means  of
original  sin.  He  asserts  that  Egyptian  Masonry  was  first  pro-
pagated by  Enoch  and  Elias,  but  that  since  that  time  it  has  lost
much  of  its  purity  and  splendour.  Common  masonry,  according
to  him,  has  degenerated  into  mere  buffoonery,  and  women  have
of  late  been  entirely  excluded  from  its  mysteries ;  but  the  time
was  now  arrived  when  the  grand  Copt  was  about  to  restore  the
glory  of  masonry,  and  allow  its  benefits  to  be  participated  by
both  sexes.

"  The  statutes  of  the  order  then  follow  in  rotation,  the  division
of  the  members  into  three  distinct  classes,  the  various  signs  by
which  they  might  discover  each  other,  the  officers  who  are  to
preside  over  and  regulate  the  society,  the  stated  times  when  the
members  are  to  assemble,  the  erection  of  a  tribunal  for  deciding
all  differences  that  may  arise  between  the  several  lodges  or  the
particular  members  of  each,  and  the  various  ceremonies  which
ought  to  take  place  at  the  admission  of  the  candidates.  In  every
part  of  this  book  the  pious  reader  is  disgusted  with  the  sacrilege,
the  profanity,  the  superstition,  and  the  idolatry  with  which  it
abounds — the  invocations  in  the  name  of  God,  the  prostrations,
the  adorations  paid  to  the  Grand  Master,  the  fumigations,  the  in-
cense, the  exorcisms,  the  emblems  of  the  Divine  Triad,  of  the
moon,  of  the  sun,  of  the  compass,  of  the  square,  and  a  thousand
other  scandalous  particulars,  with  which  the  world  is  at  present
well  acquainted.

"  The  Grand  Copt,  or  chief  of  the  lodge,  is  compared  to  God
the  Father.  He  is  invoked  upon  every  occasion ;  he  regulates  all
the  actions  of  the  members  and  all  the  ceremonies  of  the  lodge,

APPENDIX.  309

and  he  is  even  supposed  to  have  communication  with  angels  and
with  the  Divinity.  In  the  exercise  of  many  of  the  rites  they  are
desired  to  repeat  the  Veni  and  the  Te  Deum — nay,  to  such  an
excess  of  impiety  are  they  enjoined,  that  in  reciting  the  psalm
Memento  Doviine  David,  the  name  of  the  Grand  Master  is  always
to  be  substituted  for  that  of  the  King  of  Israel.

"  People  of  all  religions  are  admitted  into  the  society  of  Egyp-
tian Masonry — the  Jew,  the  Calvinist,  the  Lutheran,  are  to  be
received  into  it  as  well  as  the  Catholic — provided  they  believe  in
the  existence  of  God  and  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  have
been  previously  allowed  to  participate  in  the  mysteries  of  the
common  masonry.  When  men  are  admitted,  they  receive  a  pair
of  garters  from  the  Grand  Copt,  as  is  usual  in  all  lodges,  for  their
mistresses ;  and  when  women  are  received  into  the  society,  they
are  presented  by  the  Grand  Mistress  with  a  cockade,  which  they
are  desired  to  give  to  that  man  to  whom  they  are  most  attached.

"  We  shall  here  recount  the  ceremonies  made  use  of  on  admit-
ting a  female.

"The  candidate  having  presented  herself,  the  Grand  Mistress
(Madame  Cagliostro  generally  presided  in  that  capacity)  breathes
upon  her  face  from  the  forehead  to  the  chin,  and  then  says,  '  I
breathe  upon  you  on  purpose  to  inspire  you  with  the  virtues
which  we  possess,  so  that  they  may  take  root  and  flourish  in  your
heart,  I  thus  fortify  your  soul,  I  thus  confirm  you  in  the  faith
of  your  brethren  and  sisters,  according  to  the  engagements  which
you  have  contracted  with  them.  We  now  admit  you  as  a  daughter
of  the  Egyptian  lodge.  We  order  that  you  be  acknowledged  in
that  capacity  by  all  the  brethren  and  sisters  of  the  Egyptian
lodges,  and  that  you  enjoy  with  them  the  same  prerogatives  as
with  ourselves.'

"  The  Grand  Master  thus  addresses  the  male  candidate  :  '  In
virtue  of  the  power  which  I  have  received  from  the  Grand  Copt,
the  founder  of  our  order,  and  by  the  particular  grace  of  God,  I
hereby  confer  upon  you  the  honour  of  being  admitted  into  our
lodge  in  the  name  of  Helios,  Mene,  Tetragrammaton.'

"  In  a  book,  said  to  be  printed  at  Paris  in  1789,  it  is  asserted
that  the  last  words  were  suggested  to  Cagliostro,  as  sacred  and
cabalistical  expressions  by  a  pretended  conjuror,  who  said  that  he
was  assisted  by  a  spirit,  and  that  this  spirit  was  no  other  than  the
soul  of  a  cabalistical  Jew,  who  by  means  of  the  magical  art  had
murdered  his  own  father  before  the  incarnation  of  Jesus  Christ.

3IO  APPENDIX.

"  Common  masons  have  been  accustomed  to  regard  St  John  as
their  patron,  and  to  celebrate  the  festival  of  that  saint.  Cagliostro
also  adopted  him  as  his  protector,  and  it  is  not  a  little  remark-
able that  he  was  imprisoned  at  Rome  on  the  very  festival  of  his
patron.  The  reason  for  his  veneration  of  this  great  prophet  was,
if  we  are  to  believe  himself,  the  great  similarity  between  the
Apocalypse  and  the  rites  of  his  institution.

"  We  must  here  observe  that  when  any  of  his  disciples  were
admitted  into  the  highest  class,  the  following  execrable  ceremony
took  place.  A  young  boy  or  girl,  in  the  state  of  virgin  innocence
and  purity,  was  procured,  who  was  called  the  pupil,  and  to  whom
power  was  given  over  the  seven  spirits  that  surround  the  throne
of  the  divinity  and  preside  over  the  seven  planets.  Their  names
according  to  Cagliostro's  book  are  Anael,  Michael,  Raphael,
Gabriel,  Uriel,  Zobiachel,  and  Anachiel.  The  pupil  is  then  made
use  of  as  an  intermediate  agent  between  the  spiritual  and  physical
worlds,  and  being  clothed  in  a  long  white  robe,  adorned  with  a
red  ribbon,  and  blue  silk  festoons,  he  is  shut  up  in  a  little  closet.
From  that  place  he  gives  response  to  the  Grand  Master,  and  tells
whether  the  spirits  and  Moses  have  agreed  to  receive  the  can-
didates into  the  highest  class  of  Egyptian  masons.  .  .  .

"  In  his  instructions  to  obtain  the  moral  and  physical  regenera-
tion which  he  had  promised  to  his  disciples,  he  is  exceedingly
careful  to  give  a  minute  description  of  the  operations  to  which
they  are  to  submit.  Those  who  are  desirous  of  experiencing  the
moral  regeneration  are  to  retire  from  the  world  for  the  space  of
forty  days,  and  to  distribute  their  time  into  certain  proportions.
Six  hours  are  to  be  employed  in  reflection,  three  in  prayer  to  the
Deity,  nine  in  the  holy  operations  of  Egyptian  Masonry,  while  the
remaining  period  is  to  be  dedicated  to  repose.  At  the  end  of  the
thirty-three  days  a  visible  communication  is  to  take  place  between
the  patient  and  the  seven  primitive  spirits,  and  on  the  morning  of
the  fortieth  day  his  soul  will  be  inspired  with  divine  knowledge,
and  his  body  be  as  pure  as  that  of  a  new-born  infant.

"  To  procure  a  physical  regeneration,  the  patient  is  to  retire
into  the  country  in  the  month  of  May,  and  during  forty  days  is  to
live  according  to  the  most  strict  and  austere  rules,  eating  very
little,  and  then  only  laxative  and  sanative  herbs,  and  making  use
of  no  other  drink  than  distilled  water,  or  rain  that  has  fallen  in
the  course  of  the  month.  On  the  seventeenth  day,  after  having
let  blood,  certain  white  drops  are  to  be  taken,  six  at  night  and

APPENDIX.  311

six  in  the  morning,  increasing  them  two  a  day  in  progression.  In
three  days  more  a  small  quantity  of  blood  is  again  to  be  let  from
the  arm  before  sunrise,  and  the  patient  is  to  retire  to  bed  till  the
operation  is  completed.  A  grain  of  the  panacea  is  then  to  be
taken  ;  this  panacea  is  the  same  as  that  of  which  God  created  man
when  He  first  made  him  immortal.  When  this  is  swallowed  the
candidate  loses  his  speech  and  his  reflection  for  three  entire  days,
and  he  is  subject  to  frequent  convulsions,  struggles,  and  perspira-
tions. Having  recovered  from  this  state,  in  which,  however,  he
experiences  no  pain  whatever,  on  the  thirty-sixth  day,  he  takes
the  third  and  last  grain  of  the  panacea,  which  causes  him  to  fall
into  a  profound  and  tranquil  sleep ;  it  is  then  that  he  loses  his
hair,  his  skin,  and  his  teeth.  These  again  are  all  reproduced
in  a  few  hours,  and  having  become  a  new  man,  on  the  morning
of  the  fortieth  day  he  leaves  his  room,  enjoying  a  complete  re-
juvenescence, by  which  he  is  enabled  to  live  5557  years,  or  to
such  time  as  he,  of  his  own  accord,  may  be  desirous  of  going  to
the  world  of  spirits."

Concerning  the  Lodge  of  Freemasons  discovered
at  Rome.

The  final  chapter  of  the  Italian  life  of  Cagliostro,  which
appeared  before  the  death  of  its  subject,  contains  a  curious  and
interesting  account  under  the  above  title.  The  lodge  was  situated
in  the  quarter  of  the  city  called  the  Holy  Trinity  of  the
Mountain.  It  was  visited  on  the  night  of  Cagliostro's  capture,
but  -the  members  had  been  evidently  forewarned ;  they  had  taken
precautions  as  to  their  personal  safety,  had  removed  the  symbols
of  their  craft  and  the  greater  part  of  their  books  and  papers,
which  perhaps,  says  the  writer,  contained  secrets  of  great  import-
ance. The  Inquisition  claims  to  have  a  true  insight,  notwithstand-
ing, into  the  origin,  establishment,  and  other  particulars  of  this
lodge,  drawn  in  part  from  the  depositions  of  "  a  multitude  of  well-
informed  persons."

The  founders  were  seven  in  number,  five  Frenchmen,  an
American,  and  a  Pole,  all  of  whom  had  been  previously  initiated
into  other  lodges.  It  assumed  the  title  of  the  Lodge  of  the
Reunion  of  True  Friends,  and  the  first  meeting  took  place  on
November  1,  1787.  Proselytes  were  immediately  made,  and
included  candidates  who  had  not  been  received  into  any  other

312  APPENDIX.

society.  Its  numbers  rapidly  increased,  and  to  establish  it  with
all  the  necessary  formalities  approbation  was  procured  from  the
Mother  Lodge  at  Paris,  and  a  deputy  was  sent  to  reside  in  that
city  as  its  representative.  Its  letters  were  transported  by  special
messengers.  Mention  is  made  in  the  register  of  archives  kept
under  three  locks,  in  which  the  statutes,  the  mysteries,  and  the
symbols  transmitted  from  Paris  were  preserved,  with  all  the  most
interesting  speeches  delivered  within  the  lodge.  However,  the
Egyptian  lodge  is  affirmed  to  have  been  in  this  instance  devoid  of
special  characteristics.  The  list  of  its  officers  was  as  follows  : —
r.  The  Venerable,  or  Grand  Master.

2.  The  Superintendent,  or  Deputy  Grand  Master.

3.  The  Terrible.

4.  The  Master  of  the  Ceremonies.

5.  The  Treasurer.

6.  The  Almoner.

7.  The  Secretary.

8.  The  Orator,  or  Export  Broker.

The  entire  Lodge  was  composed  of  two  chambers,  or  halls.
The  first  was  called  the  Chamber  of  Reflections.  A  death's
head  was  placed  on  a  table,  and  above  it  were  two  inscriptions  in
French,  which  contained  an  arcane  significance.  The  second
apartment  was  called  the  Temple;  it  was  adorned  according  to
the  various  rites  performed  in  it.  On  all  occasions  it  was  provided
with  a  throne,  on  which  the  Venerable  constantly  sat.  Some
emblems  of  masonry  adorned  the  walls — among  them  were  the
sun,  moon,  and  planets.  On  the  two  sides  of  the  throne  several
magnificent  pillars  were  placed,  and  opposite  to  these  the  brother-
hood were  arranged  in  order,  each  of  them  wearing  his  leathern
apron,  and  a  black  ribbon  in  the  form  of  a  deacon's  stole  about
his  neck,  while  in  his  hands,  which  were  covered  with  a  pair  of
white  gloves,  he  brandished  a  naked  sword,  a  hammer,  or  a  com-
pass, according  to  the  different  formalities  prescribed  by  the
institution.

With  the  secret  signs  and  passports,  the  Inquisition  does  not
seem  to  have  been  acquainted.

INDEX.

Abraham  the  Jew,  99

Adfar,  an  Arabian  adept  of  Alex-
andria, 53

Alain  of  Lisle,  67

Albertus  Magnus,  57

Alcahest,  157

Alchemy — Diversity  of  opinion  on  the
object  of  alchemical  science,  9  ;
the  avowed  object,  10 ;  the  aim
said  to  be  concealed,  11  ;  sym-
bolism of  the  science,  11  ;  distinc-
tion between  alchemy  and  chemistry,
21  ;  alchemy  as  a  factor  in  the
progress  of  the  physical  sciences,
27  ;  physical  nature  of  the  alchemical
aim  established  by  the  lives  and
writings  of  the  adepts,  29 ;  side
issues  of  alchemical  theories,  32  ;
application  of  alchemy  to  the  ex-
tension of  life,  65  ;  modification  of
the  human  body  by  alchemy,  65  ;

.  alchemy  the  science  of  the  four
elements,  93 ;  the  Seal  of  God  set
on  the  secret  of  alchemy,  165

Alfarabi,  48

Alipili,  22,  23

Altotas,  221,  234

Ancient  War  of  the  Knights,  43

Anima  Magica  Abscondita,  21

Anonymous  adept,  184

Antimony,  Basil  Valentine's  prepara-
tion for  the  study  of,  17  ;  the
Triumphal  Chariot  of  Antimony,
121

Aphrodite  Urania,  37

Apono,  Peter  d',  88

Aquinas,  St  Thomas,  61

Argent  Vive  —  Reduction  of  metals
into  sophic  Argent  Vive,  87  ;  the
Medicine  of  all  Metals,  90 ;  the
first  thing  to  be  ascertained  in  al-
..chemy  is  the  significance  of  this
term,  92

Arnold  de  Villanova,  88

Ars  Lulliana,  68

Avicenna,  51

Azoth,  or  The  Star  in  the  East,  a
forthcoming  work  on  the  psychic
potencies  which  enter  into  the  higher
act  of  transmutation,  on  the  mysteries

of  spiritual  chemistry,  and  on  the
possibilities  of  practical  transcen-
dentalism, 37

Bacon,  Roger,  63

Balsamo,  Joseph,  Travels,  Adven-
tures, and  Imprisonments,  220

Basil,  Valentine,  120

Belin,  Albert,  186

Berigard  of  Pisa,  148

Bird,  William,  unknown  adept,  150

Bohme,  Jacob,  161

Bono,  Peter,  118

Born,  Guiseppe  Francesco,  208

Botticher,  John  Frederich,  neophyte,
212

Braccesco,  Giovanni,  151

Busardier,  unknown  adept,  182

Butler,  168

Cagliostro,    Count   Allesandro,  name

assumed  by  Balsamo,  230
Calcination,    an    alchemical    process,

13.  19

Canons  of  Espagnet,  19

Charnock,  Thomas,  148

Chemistry,  said  to  have  no  connection
with  alchemy,  14 ;  distinction  be-
tween alchemy  and  chemistry,  21,
25  ;  a  counter  view,  44

Contemplation,  a  preparation  for  al-
chemical practices,  18

Cremer,  John,  pseudo-abbot  of  West-
minster, 83

Dalton,  Thomas,  133

Dee,  John,  153

Delisle,  216

D'Espagnet,  Jean,  170,;  on  the  ob-
stacles which  beset  the  alchemist,  39

Diana  Unveiled,  180

Dissolution,  an  alchemical  process,  12

Dominic,  St,  said  to  have  been  an
adept,  58

Dubois,  descendant  of  Flamel,  1 14

Dunstan,  St,  Book  of,  154,  155

Egyptian    Masonry,    245,    250 ;    and

Appendix  II.
Elias  the  Artist,  193

3^4-

INDEX.

Eliphas  Levi,  82

Elixir,  the  White  and  Red,  195

Etoile  Flamboyante,  59

Eugenius  Philalethes,  21,  31,  189

Exaltation,  an  alchemical  process,  32

Fabre,  Pierre  Jean,  200

Ferarius,  92

Figuier,  Louis,  alchemical  critic,  27,

.63

Fioravanti,  Leonardi,  153     ■

Flamel,  Nicholas,  95
Fontaine,  John,  129

Galip,  55

Geber,  44

Generation  of  Metals,  38,  48,  133

Goe'tic  magic,  65

Gold,  10,  28,  140

Grand  Magisterium,  57,  123

Grand   Secret   and  Grand  Act,   170,

189
Great  Art,  130
Grimoire,  60
Gustenhover,  181

Helmont,  J.  B.  Van,  166
Helvetius,  John  Frederick,  201
Hermetic — Aim  of  Hermetic  science,
29 ;    true  method  of  Hermetic   in-
terpretation, 30 ;  supreme  secret  of
Hermetic  philosophy,  66  ;  the  Her-
metic art  a  gift  of  God,  68
Heydon,  John,  210
Hitchcock — His  Remarks  on  Alchemy
and  the  Alchemists,  10,  14,  23,  30

Interpretation  of  Hermetic  theories,
&c. — Hermetic  typology,  10 ;  the
moral  method,  13 ;  the  Psychic
method,  122

Invocation  as  a  preparation  for  the
practice  of  alchemy,  17

Isaac  of  Holland,  123

Jean  de  Meting,  90
Johannes  de  Rupecissa,  119
John  XXII.,  Pope,  93

Kalid,  an  initiated  monarch,  54
Khunrath,     Henry,     159  ;     treats    of
spiritual  alchemy,  33,  36

Lascaris,  211

Lavures,  alchemical  operations,  112
Light — Veritable  light  of  alchemy,  15  ;
vision    in    the   Divine   Light,    16  ;
light  the  First  Matter  of  the  Mag-
num Opus,  38

Magic  Chain,  22

Magnum  Opus — The  first  Matter  of
the  Magnum  Opus  in  its  psychic
aspect  to  be  revealed  in  a  forthcom-
ing work,  Azoth,  or  The  Star
in  the  East,  37  ;  processes  for  the
accomplishment  of  the  Magnum
Opus,  42  ;  these  described  by
Arnold,  90 ;  the  composition  of
the  Stone  is  the  accomplishment  of
the  Magnum  Opus,  152  ;  manner
of  the  accomplishment  of  the  Mag-
num Opus  described  in  "The  Ad-
ventures of  an  Unknown  Philoso-
pher," 186

Maier,  Michael,  58,  87,  160

Man — The  concealed  subject  of  every
adept,  11;  the  mystic  vase  of  elec-
tion, 14

Manuel,  Domenico,  215

Mary  of  Alexandria,  36

Matter,  the  first  matter  of  the  Magnum
Opus,  said  to  be  gold,  28 ;  defined
as  a  fifth  element,  39 ;  one  only
and  self-same  thing,  40;  its  true
nature  not  disclosed  by  the  adepts,
41  ;  its  informing  spirit  variously
adaptable,  43  ;  a  duplex  nature,  53  ;
contained  in  silver  and  gold,  87  ;
the  seed  of  every  metal  can  be
reduced  into  the  first  matter,  93 ;
figured  in  the  book  of  Rabbi  Abra-
ham, 103 ;  found  by  Nicholas
Flamel,  106  ;  mercury  the  true  first
matter,  118;  the  matter  of  the
philosophical  stone  a  viscous  water,
119;  said  to  be  Saturn,  or  lead,
124;  is  found  everywhere,  136;
may  be  discovered  by  studying  the
best    books    of    the    philosophers,

Medicine — Properties  of  a  universal
medicine  attributed  to  the  Stone,
13  ;  the  Stone  a  medicine  for
metals  and  man,  32  ;  life  is  pro-
longed by  the  stone,  123  ;  applica-
tion of  the  tincture  as  a  medicine
for  the  human  body,  148

Mercury — Identified  with  the  super-
natural, 11  ;  obstacles  to  its  dis-
covery, 39 ;  sophic  mercury  de-
scribed by  Avicenna,  52  ;  mercury
the  water  of  metals,  129  ;  a  match-
less treasure,  197

Morien,  53.

Morning  Star,  36

New  Birth,  11,  12
Norton,  Thomas,  1 30

INDEX.

315

Obereit,  John  Hermann,  219

One  Thing  Needful — The  exaltation

of  the  cognising  faculty,  15
Orizon  /Eternitatis,  mystical  term  of

Paracelsus,  36

Palingenesis,  92

Philalethes,  Eirenceus,  187  ;  on  the
Aqua  Philosophorum,  22

Picus  de  Mirandola,  136

Psychic  Chemistry  —  A  Scheme  of
Absolute  Reconstruction,  36 ;  ac-
complished by  the  Divine  Power  in
the  Soul,  22 ;  general  observations
on  spiritual  alchemistry,  32-37

Regnauld,  Brother,  63

Rhasis,  46

Richthausen,  his  transmutations  with
stolen  powder,  183

Ripley,  George,  134  ;  his  description
of  the  Stone,  41  ;  supposed  to  have
initiated  Thomas  Norton,  130

Romance  of  the  Rose,  90

Rose  Nobles,  82,  84,  86

Rosicrucians — Had  other  alchemical
objects  than  metallic  transmuta-
tions, 36 ;  the  associates  defended
by  Michael  Maier,  160 ;  initiation
offered  by  the  Rosicrucians  to  Sen-
divogius,  179

Sendivogius,  Michael,  175;  "The
New  Light  of  Alchemy "  falsely
ascribed  to  this  neophyte,  21,  3!

Separation  an  alchemical  process,  12,

17

Sethon,  Alexander,  171

Son  of  the  Sun,  37

Sophistication  of  metals,  62

Starkey,  George,  165,  195,  197,  &c.

Stone  of  the  Philosophers — Said  to  be
a  symbol  of  immortality,  13  ;  ana-
logous in  its  nature  to  the  state  of
primeval  man,  31  ;  Transmutation
accomplished  by  its  means,  38 ;  in
appearance  a  subtle,    brown,   and

opaque     earth,     132  ;     dark,     dis-

esteemed,  and  grey  in  colour,  165  ;

the   seed   out   of  which   gold  and

silver  are  generated,  201
Subject   of    Alchemy — According    to

Hitchcock,  13;  according  to  George

Starkey,  24
Suggestive     inquiry    concerning     the

Hermetic  Mystery,   9,    14,   17,  24,

3°'  34
Sulphur  (Sophie) — Said  to  symbolise
Nature,  11  ;  sophic  sulphur  and
the  conscience,  12 ;  difficulties  in
its  discovery,  39 ;  described  by
Avicenna,  52

Transmutation — Doubts  as  to  the  sig-
nificance of  the  term,  9 ;  identified
with  spiritual  conversion,  13;  the
physical  theory  of  Transmutation,
38,  &c, ;  possibility  of  the  fact,  33

Transmutations  performed  by  adepts
and  their  emissaries,  84,  94,  106,
1 18,  133,  136,  148,  156,  167,  168,
177,  178,  181,  183,  184,  185,  196,
201-208,  212-216,  217,  218

Tr*5visan,  Bernard,  124;  honoured  by
Philalethes,  194

Tschoudy,  Baron,  39

Typology — Possibility  of  an  infinite
variety  of  interpretations  of  any
sequence  of  typology,  29

Urbigerus  —  His  alchemical  apho-
risms, 40

Vase  of  the  Philosophers — Identified
with  man,  14 ;  its  true  nature  un-
explained by  adepts,  41  ;  described
by  Geber,  46

Vaughan,  Thomas,  187

Wisdom  Faculty,  15
Wood  of  Life,  152

Zachaire,  Denis,  140

Tumbull  6°  Spears,  Printers,  Edinburgh.

PUBLISHED  BY  MR  GEORGE  REDWAY.

With  Illustrations.     Crown  8uo.     Historico-Symbolical  Binding.
454  pp,  price  7s.  6d.

THE  REAL  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROSICRUCIANS.

Founded  on  their  own  Manifestoes,  and  on  Facts  and  Documents  col-
lected from  the  Writings  of  Initiated  Brethren.  By  ARTHUR
EDWARD  WAITE.

"We  desire  to  speak  of  Mr  Wake's  work  with  the  greatest  respect  on  the  points  of
honesty,  impartiality,  and  sound  scholarship.  Mr  Waite  has  given,  for  the  first  time,  the
documents  with  which  Rosicrucianism  has  been  connected  in  extenso'' — Literary  World.

"There  is  something  mysterious  and  fascinating  about  the  history  of  the  Virgin  Frater-
nity of  the  Rose." — Saturday  Review.

"  A  curious  and  interesting  story  of  the  doings  of  a  mysterious  association  in  times  when
people  were  more  ready  to  believe  in  supernatural  phenomena  than  the  highly-educated,
matter-of-fact  people  of  to-day." — Morning  Post.

Crown  8vo,  cloth,  with  Frontispiece,  price  7s.  6d.     Third  Edition,
revised  and  enlarged.

MAGIC,  WHITE  AND  BLACK ;  or,  The  Science  of

Finite   and    Infinite   Life,    containing    Practical   Hints    for  Students   of
Occultism.     By  FRANZ  HARTMANN,  M.D.

"  Dr  Hartmann's  '  Magic,'  as  compared  with  '  Light  on  the  Path,'  is  a  bulky  tome  ;  and
in  its  closely-printed  pages  students  of  occultism  will  find  hints,  '  practical '  and  otherwise,
likely  to  be  of  great  service  to  them  in  the  pursuit  of  their  studies  and  researches.  It  was
not  the  author's  '  object,  in  composing  this  book,  to  write  merely  a  code  of  Ethics,  and
thereby  to  increase  the  already  existing  enormous  mountain  of  unread  moral  precepts,  but  to
assist  the  student  of  occultism  in  studying  the  elements  of  which  his  own  soul  is  composed,
and  to  learn  to  know  his  own  physical  organism.  I  want  to  give  an  impulse  to  the  study  of
a  science  which  may  be  called  the  "anatomy  and  physiology  of  the  Soul,"  which  investigates
the  elements  of  which  the  soul  is  composed,  and  the  source  from  which  man's  desires  and
emotions  spring.'  Dr  Hartmann's  compendium  is  '  an  attempt  to  show  the  way  how  man
may  become  a  co-operator  of  the  Divine  Power,  whose  product  is  Nature,'  and  his  pages,  as
described  by  himself,  ■  constitute  a  book  which  may  properly  have  the  title  of  "  Magic,"  for
if  the  readers  succeed  in  practically  following  its  teaching,  they  will  be  able  to  perform  the
greatest  of  all  magical  feats,  the  spiritual  regeneration  of  Man.'  Dr  Hartmann's  book  has
also  o-one  into  a  third  edition,  and  has  developed  from  an  insignificant  pamphlet,  '  written
originally  for  the  purpose  of  demonstrating  to  a  few  inexperienced  inquirers  that  the  study  of
the  occult  side  of  nature  was  not  identical  with  the  vile  practices  of  sorcery,'  into  a  compen-
dious volume,  comprising,  we  are  willing  to  believe,  the  entire  philosophic  system  of
occultism.  There  are  abundant  evidences  that  the  science  of  theosophy  has  made  vast  strides
in  public  estimation  of  late  years,  and  that  those  desirous  of  experimenting  in  this  particular
and  in  many  respects  fascinating,  branch  of  ethics,  have  leaders  whose  teaching  they  can
follow  with  satisfaction  to  themselves." — Saturday  Review.

GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN.

Crown  8uo,  Cloth,  price  7s.  6d.

POSTHUMOUS  HUMANITY;  A  Study  of  Phantoms.

By  ADOLPHE  D'ASSIER,  Member  of  the  Bordeaux  Academy  of
Sciences.  Translated  and  Annotated  by  HENRY  S.  OLCOTT,
President  of  the  Theosophical  Society.  To  which  is  added  an  Appendix
shewing  the  Popular  Beliefs  current  in  India  respecting  the  Post-
mortem Vicissitudes  of  the  Human  Entity.

Truth  says — "If  you  care  for  ghost  stories,  duly  accredited,  excellently  told,  and
scientifically  explained,  you  should  read  the  translation  by  Colonel  Olcott  of  M.  Adolphe
d'Assier's  '  Posthumous  Humanity,'  a  study  of  phantoms.  There  is  no  dogmatism  so  dogged
and  offensive  as  that  of  the  professed  sceptic — of  the  scientific  sceptic  especially — who  ex  vi
termini  ought  to  keep  the  doors  of  his  mind  hospitably  open ;  and  it  is  refreshing,  therefore,
to  find  such  scientists  as  Wallace,  Crookes,  and  M.  d'Assier,  who  is  a  Positivist,  in  the  ranks
of  the  Psychical  Research  host.  For  my  own  part,  though  I  have  attended  the  seance  of
a  celebrated  London  medium,  and  there  convinced  myself  beyond  all  doubt  of  his  imposture,
I  no  more  think  that  the  detection  of  a  medium  fraud  disposes  of  the  whole  question  of
ghosts,  &c,  than  that  the  detection  of  an  atheist  priest  disposes  of  the  whole  question  of
Christianity.  Whatever  view  you  take  of  this  controversy,  however,  I  can  promise  you
that  you  will  find  the  book  interesting  at  least  if  not  convincing."

Pott  8uo,  Cloth,  Limp,  price  1s.  6d.

LIGHT  ON  THE  PATH.    A  Treatise  written  for  the

Personal  Use  of  those  who  are  ignorant  of  the  Eastern  Wisdom,
and  who  desire  to  enter  within  its  influence.  Written  down  by  M.  C,
Fellow  of  the  Theosophical  Society.  New  Edition,  with  Notes,  by
the  Author.

"  So  far  as  we  can  gather  from  the  mystic  language  in  which  it  is  couched,  '  Light  on  the
Path'  is  intended  to  guide  the  footsteps  of  those  who  have  discarded  the  forms  of  religion
while  retaining  the  moral  principle  to  its  fullest  extent.  It  is  in  harmony  with  much  that
was  said  by  Socrates  and  Plato,  although  the  author  does  not  use  the  phraseology  of  those
philosophers,  but  rather  the  language  of  Buddhism,  easily  understood  by  esoteric  Buddhists,
but  difficult  to  grasp  by  those  without  the  pale.  '  Light  on  the  Path '  may,  we  think,  be  said
to  be  the  only  attempt  in  this  language  and  in  this  century  to  put  practical  occultism  into
words;  and  it  may  be  added,  by  way  of  further  explanation,  that  the  character  of  Gautama
Buddha,  as  shown  in  Sir  Edwin  Arnold's  '  Light  of  Asia,'  is  the  perfect  type  of  the  being
who  has  reached  the  threshold  of  Divinity  by  this  road.  That  it  has  reached  a  third  edition
speaks  favourably  for  this  multum  in  j>arvo  of  the  science  of  occultism ;  and  '  M.  C  may  be
expected  to  gather  fresh  laurels  in  future." — Saturday  Review.

GEORGE  RED  WAY,  YORK  STREET,  CO VENT  GARDEN.

Grown  8uo,  cloth,  price  6s.
A  BIOGRAPHICAL  ROMANCE.

A  PROFESSOR  OF  ALCHEMY  (Denis  Zachaire).

By  PERCY  ROSS,  Author  of  "A  Comedy  without  Laughter"  and  "A
Misguidit  Lassie."

"A  clever  story.  .  .  .  The  hero  is  an  alchemist  who  actually  succeeds  in  manufacturing
pure  gold." — Court  Journal.

"Shadowy  and  dream-like." — Athencsum.

"  An  interesting  and  pathetic  picture." — Literary  World.

"  The  story  is  utterly  tragical,  and  is  powerfully  told." — Westminster  Review.

"  A  vivid  picture  of  those  bad  old  times." — Knowledge.

"  Sure  of  a  special  circle  of  readers  with  congenial  tastes." — Graphic.

"  This  is  a  story  of  love — of  deep,  undying,  refining  love — not  without  suggestions  of
Faust.  The  figure  of  Berengaria,  his  wife,  is  a  noble  and  touching  one,  and  her  purity  and
sweetness  stand  out  in  beautiful  relief  from  the  gloom  of  the  alchemist's  laboratory  and  the
horrors  of  the  terrible  Inquisition  into  whose  hands  she  falls.  The  romance  of  the  crucible,
however,  is  not  all  permeated  by  sulphurous  vapours  and  tinged  with  tartarean  smoke.
There  is  often  a  highly  dramatic  element." — Glasgow  Herald.

Demy  8uo,  bevelled  cloth,  gilt,  price  10s.  6d.

THE  MYSTERIES  OF  MAGIC:    A  Digest  of  the

Writings  of  Eliphas  Levi.     With  Biographical  and  Critical  Essay,  by
ARTHUR  EDWARD  WAITE.

The  Morning  Post  says  : — "  Of  the  many  remarkable  men  who  have  gained  notoriety  by
their  proficiency,  real  or  imaginary,  in  the  Black  Arts,  probably  none  presents  a  more  strange
and  irreconcilable  character  than  the  French  magician,  Alphonse  Louis  Constant.  Better
known  under  the  Jewish  pseudonym  of  Eliphas  Levi  Zahed,  this  enthusiastic  student  of
forbidden  art  made  some  stir  in  France,  and  even  in  London,  and  was  frequently  consulted
by  those  who  were  inclined  to  place  some  credit  in  his  reputation  as  a  magician.  His  works
on  magic  are  those  of  an  undoubted  genius,  and  divulge  a  philosophy  beautiful  in  conception
if  totally  opposed  to  common  sense  principles.  There  is  so  great  a  fund  of  learning  and  of
attractive  reasoning  in  these  writings  that  Mr  Arthur  Waite  has  published  a  digest  of  them
for  the  benefit  of  English  readers.  This  gentleman  has  not  attempted  a  literal  translation  in
every  case,  but  has  arranged  a  volume  which,  while  reproducing  with  sufficient  accuracy  a
great  portion  of  the  more  interesting  works,  affords  an  excellent  idea  of  the  scope  of
entire  literary  remains  of  an  enthusiast  for  whom  he  entertains  a  profound  admiration.

"With  regard  to  the  contents  of  the  present  volume,  there  is  nothing  in  it  very  suggestive
of  sulphur.  No  apprehension  need  be  felt  if  the  book  be  left  about  the  house  that  the  ad-
venturous members  of  the  family  circle  will  commence  incantations  in  mystic  robes  with  the
aid  of  Abracadabra,  the  Pentagram  and  incense.  In  fact,  Eliphas  over  and  over  again  sets
his  face  against  amateur  attempts  at  magical  practices.  The  reader  may,  however,  with  pro-
fit peruse  carefully  the  learned  dissertations  penned  by  M.  Constant  upon  the  Hermetic  art
treated  as  a  religion,  a  philosophy,  and  a  natural  science.  As  a  religion,  Eliphas  holds  it  to
be  that  of  the  ancient  Magi  and  the  initiates  of  all  ages  ;  as  a  philosophy  its  principles  are
traced  in  the  Alexandrian  school,  and  in  the  theories  of  Pythagoras;  as  a  science,  he
indicates  the  methods  to  be  ascertained  from  Paracelsus,  Nicholas  Flamel,  and  Raymond
Lully.  In  view  of  the  remarkable  exhibitions  of  mesmeric  influence  and  thought-reading
which  have  recently  been  given,  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  thoughtful  reader  may  find  a
clue  in  the  writings  of  this  cultured  and  amiable  magician  to  the  secret  of  many  of  the  mani-
festations of  witchcraft  that  formerly  struck  wonder.and  terror  into  the  hearts  of  simple  folks
eager  to  behold  and  ready  to  believe  in  supernatural  powers."

GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN.

Fcap.  8uo,  cloth,  price,  including  the  pack  of  cards  78  in  number,  5s.

FORTUNE-TELLING  CARDS.— THE  TAROT;  Its

Occult  Signification,   Use  in  Fortune-Telling,  and  Method  of  Play,  &c.
By  S.  L.  MACGREGOR  MATHERS.

"  The  designs  of  the  twenty-one  trump  cards  are  extremely  singular ;  in  order  to  give
some  idea  of  the  manner  in  which  Mr  Mather  uses  them  in  fortune-telling  it  is  necessary  to
mention  them  in  detail,  together  with  the  general  signification  which  he  attaches  to  each  of
them.  The  would-be  cartomancer  may  then  draw  his  own  particular  conclusions,  and  he
will  find  considerable  latitude  for  framing  them  in  accordance  with  his  predilections.  It
should  further  be  mentioned  that  each  of  the  cards  when  reversed  conveys  a  meaning  the
contrary  of  its  primary  signification.  No.  i  is  the  Bateleur  or  Juggler,  called  also  Pagad  ;
the  latter  designation  is  adduced  by  Count  de  Gebelin  in  proof  of  the  Oriental  origin  of
Tarots,  it  being  derived  from  fag,  chief  or  master,  and  gad,  fortune.  The  Juggler  sym-
bolizes Will.  2.  The  High  Priestess,  or  female  Pope,  represents  Science,  Wisdom,  or  Know-
ledge. 3.  The  Empress,  is  the  symbol  of  Action  or  Initiative.  4.  The  Emperor,  represents
Realization  or  Development.  5.  The  Hierophant  or  Pope  is  the  Symbol  of  Mercy  and
Beneficence.  6.  The  Lovers,  signify  Wise  Disposition  and  Trials  surmounted.  7.  The
Chariot,  represents  Triumph,  Victory  over  Obstacles.  S.  Themis  or  Justice,  symbolizes
Equilibrium  and  Justice.  9.  The  Hermit,  denotes  Prudence.  10.  The  Wheel  of  Fortune,
represents  Fortune,  good  or  bad.  11.  Fortitude,  symbolizes  Power  or  Might.  12.  The
Hanged  Man — a  man  suspended  head  downwards  by  one  leg — means  Devotion,  Self-Sacri-
fice. 13-  Death,  signifies  Transformation  or  Change.  14.  Temperance,  typifies  Combination.
15.  The  Devil,  is  the  image  of  Fate  or  Fatality.  16.  The  Lightning-struck  Tower,  called
also  Maison-Dieu,  shows  Ruin,  Disruption.  17.  The  Star,  is  the  Emblem  of  Hope.  18.  The
Moon,  symbolises  Twilight,  Deception,  and  Error.  19.  The  Sun,  signifies  Earthly  Happi-
ness. 20.  The  Last  Judgment,  means  Renewal,  Determination  of  a  matter.  21.  The
Universe,  represents  Completion  and  Reward,  o.  The  Foolish  Man,  signifies  Expiation  or
Wavering.  Separate  meanings,  with  their  respective  converses,  are  also  attached  to  each  of
the  other  cards  in  the  pack,  so  that  when  they  have  been  dealt  out  and  arranged  in  any  of
the  combinations  recommended  by  the  author  for  purposes  of  divination,  the  inquirer  has
only  to  use  this  little  volume  as  a  dictionary  in  order  to  read  his  fate." — Saturday  Review.

GEORGE  REDWAY,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN.

I^^^^^^^S

M

W                     CATALOGUE

£/->.                                                                 OF

yJ$S^f

P     REMARKABLE    BOOKS

9  i

s

5^0*                                                       PUBLISHED    BY

!MB|/K

|w              MR.  GEORGE   RED  WAY

WM**

tfjfS

1111

iTU                                           '■•  TOLLE,    LEGE  "

Pil

\}))l

1

£fik                                       LONDON

tf/fk            15,   YORK   STREET,   COVENT   GARDEN

\w/~t

M

1^^^^^^^^

/^/^ffva

^i

I^^^^^^fe

L   «■*-                   1

Handsomely  printed  mid  bound  in  one  vol.  Svo.,  price  \0s.  6d,
Kabala  Denudata.

THE  KABBALA  UNVEILED,

CONTAINING   THE    FOLLOWING    BOOKS   OF   THE   ZOHAR  !  —

1.  7%i?  Book  of  Concealed  Mystery.

2.  The  Greater  Holy  Assembly.

3.  The  Lesser  Holy  Assembly.

Translated  into  English  from  the  Latin  version  of  KNORR  VON  Rosenroth,
and  collated  with  the  original  Chaldee  and  Hebrew  Text,  by  S.  L.  MacGregor
Mathers.

"We  have  seen  that  the  Therapeuts  listened  every  Sabbath  to  discourses  on  the
traditionary  lore  which  was  handed  down  in  secret  amongst  themselves.  Has
this  secret  lore  passed  away  from  the  earth  ?  Scholars  of  the  calibre
of  Reuchlin  Joel  and  M.  Franck,  of  the  Institute  of  France,  affirm  that  we  have
it  still  in  the  'Kabbalah.'  This  word  implies  secret  tradition.  The  legend  runs
that  this  secret  wisdom  was  first  taught  by  Jehovah  to  the  seven  angels  that  stand
round  his  throne.  It  was  then  handed  down  orally  through  the  seven  earthly
messengers  (Adam,  Moses,  David,  &c).  Finally,' the  Rabbi  Simon  Ben  Jochai,
in  a  cavern  amid  earth  rocking  and  supernatural  coruscations  delivered  it  to  the
world  in  a  "  Book  of  Splendour,"  the  "  Sohar." — Arthur  Lillie's  "  Buddhism
in  Christendom"  (1887).

Dr.  Ginsburg  speaks  of  the  Kabbalah  as  : — "A  system  of  religious  philosophy,
or,  more  properly,  of  theosophy,  which  has  not  only  exercised  for  hundreds  of  years
an  extraordinary  influence  on  the  mental  development  of  so  shrewd  a  people  as-
the  Jews,  but  has  captivated  the  minds  of  some  of  the  greatest  thinkers  of  Christen-
dom in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries,  claims  the  greatest  attention  of
both  the  philosopher  and  theologian.  When  it  is  added  that  among  its  captives
were  Raymond  Lully,  the  celebrated  scholastic  metaphysician  and  chemist  (died
1315)  ;  John  Reuchlin,  the  renowned  scholar  and  reviver  of  Oriental  literature  in
Europe  (born  1455,  died  1522)  ;  John  Picus  de  Mirandola,  the  famous  philosopher
and  classical  scholar  (1463- 1494)  ;  Cornelius  Henry  Agrippa,  the  distinguished
philosopher,  divine,  and  physician  (1577-1644)  ;  as  well  as  our  own  countrymen,

A   STUDY  OF  PHANTOMS.

Robert  Fludd,  the  famous  physician  and  philosopher  (1574-1637),  and  Dr.  Henry
More  (1614-1687)  ;  and  that  these  men,  after  restlessly  searching  for  a  scientific
system  which  should  disclose  to  them  '  the  deepest  depths  '  of  the  divine  nature,  and
show  them  the  real  tie  which  binds  all  things  together,  found  the  cravings  of  their
minds  satisfied  by  this  theosophy,  the  claims  of  the  Kabbalah  on  the  attention  of
students  in  literature  and  philosophy  will  readily  be  admitted.  The  claims  of  the
Kabbalah,  however,  are  not  restricted  to  the  literary  man  and  the  philosopher  ;
the  poet,  too,  will  find  in  it  ample  materials  for  the  exercise  of  his  lofty  genius."

In  -crown  %vo.,  cloth,  price  Js.  6d.

POSTHUMOUS  HUMANITY:

A  Study  of  Phantoms.

By  Adolphe  D'Assier,  Member  of  the  Bordeaux  Academy  of  Sciences.
Translated  and  annotated  by  Henry  S.  Olcott,  President  of  the  Theosophical
Society.  To  which  is  added  an  Appendix  showing  the  popular  beliefs  current  in
India  respecting  the  post-mortem  vicissitudes  of  the  human  entity.

Contents  : — Facts  establishing  the  existence  of  the  posthumous  personality  in
man — Its  various  modes  of  manifestation — Facts  establishing  the  existence  of  a
second  personality  in  the  living  man — Its  various  modes  of  manifestation — Facts
establishing  the  existence  of  the  personality  in  animals,  and  concerning  a  posthumous
animality — Fluidic  form  of  vegetables — Fluidic  form  of  gross  bodies — Character  of
the  posthumous  being — Its  physical  constitution — Its  aversion  to  light — Its  reser-
voir of  living  force — Its  ballistic — The  nervous  fluid — Electric  animals — Electric
persons — Electric  plants — The  mesmeric  ether  and  the  personality  which  it  engen-
ders— The  somnambule — The  sleep-talker — The  seer — The  turning-table — The
talking-table — The  medium  — Miracles  of  the  ecstatics — Prodigy  of  magic — The
incubus — The  obsessing  spirit — Causes  of  the  rarity  of  the  living  phantom — Causes
of  the  rarity  of  the  trans-sepulchral  phantom — Resemblance  of  the  spiritistic  phe-
nomena to  the  phenomena  of  the  posthumous  order — Lycanthropy — Glance  at  the
fauna  of  the  shades — Their  pre-occupations — How  they  prolong  their  existence —
The  posthumous  vampire.

In  demy  8vo.,  cloth,  price  \os.  6d.

INCIDENTS  IN  THE  LIFE  OF  MADAME
BLAVATSKY.

Compiled  from  information  supplied  by  her  relatives  and  friends,  and  edited  by
A.  P.  Sinnett,  with  a  portrait  reproduced  from  an  original  painting  by  Hermann

SCHMIECHEN.

"Mr.  Sinnett's  memoir  is  fluently  written,  and  is  free  from  unsympathetic
scepticism.  Theosophists  will  find  both  edification  and  interest  in  the  book  ;  and
the  general  student  of  science  will  profit  more  or  less  by  having  his  attention  called
to,  &c.   .   .   ."—Pa//  Ma//  Gazette.

MIND-GROWTH.

"  Mr.  Sinneit,  however,  offers  on  all  the  disputed  points  explanations  which  will
be  perfectly  satisfactory  to  those  who  do  not  agree  with  the  committee  of  the.
Psychical  Society." — Pall  Mall  Gazette.

"For  any  credulous  friend  who  revels  in  such  stories  I  can  recommend  'Inci-
dents in  the  Life  of  Madame  Blavatsky.'  I  read  every  line  of  the  hook  with
much  interest." — Truth.

In  f>ost  Svo.,  with  numerous  plates  coloured  and  flam,  cloth,  price  Js.  6d.

GEOMETRICAL  PSYCHOLOGY ;

or,  The  Science  of  Representation.
Being  the  Theories  and  Diagrams  of  B.  W.  Betts  explained  by  Louisa  S.  Cook.

"  His  attempt  seems  to  have  taken  a  similar  direction  to  that  of  George  Boole
in  logic,  with  the  difference  that,  whereas  Boole's  expression  of  the  Laws  of
Thought  is  algebraic,  Betts  expresses  mind-growth  geometrically  ;  that  is  to  say,
his  growth-formulae  are  expressed  in  numerical  series,  of  which  each  can  be  pic-
tured to  the  eye  in  a  corresponding  curve.  When  the  series  are  thus  represented,
they  are  found  to  resemble  the  forms  of  leaves  and  flowers." — Extract  from  "Sym-
bolic Methods  of  Sttidy,"  by  Mary  Boole.

The  Pall  Mall  Gazette,  in  a  characteristic  article  entitled,  "Very  Methodical
Madness,"  allows  that  "  Like  Rosicrucianism,  esoteric  Buddhism,  and  other  forms
of  the  mjstically  incomprehensible,  it  seems  to  exercise  a  magnetic  influence  upon
many  minds  by  no  means  as  foolish  as  its  original  inventor's."

"  This  work  is  the  result  of  more  than  twenty  years'  application  to  the  discovery  of
a  method  of  representing  human  consciousness  in  its  various  stages  of  development
by  means  of  geometrical  figures — it  is,  in  fact,  the  application  of  mathematical
symbology  to  metaphysics.  This  idea  will  be  new  to  many  of  our  readers  ;  indeed,
so  far  as  we  know,  Mr.  Betts  is  the  only  man  who  has  tried  to  work  out  a  coherent
system  of  this  kind,  though  his  work  unfortunately  remains  imperfect." — Theoso-
phist,  June,  1887.

In  demy  8t'o. ,  cloth,  price  \os.  6d.

THE  MYSTERIES  OF  MAGIC;

A  Digest  of  the  Writings  of  Eliphas  Levi,  with  Biographical  and  Critical:  Essay  by
Arthur  Edward  Waite.

"  A  very  curious  book." — Time.

"To  the  rapidly-extending  catalogue  of  remarkable  books  published  by  Mr.
George  Redway,  of  London,  an  important  addition  has  been  made  by  the  issue  of
a  digest  of  the  writings  of  Eliphas  Levi.  Many  people,  we  dare  say,  will  consider
the  volume  to  be  '  full  of  nonsense,'  but  it  is  really  a  very  curious  and  improving

A   NEW  HIEROPIJANT.

work,  going  over  a  vast  space  of  ground,  and  presenting  a  great  deal  of  matter  that  is
worth  thinking  over.  The  author  has  earned  a  title  to  be  heard.  As  a  contribu-
tion to  what  is  called  '  occult  science,'  the  present  book  will,  of  course,  find  a
welcome  from  many  readers,  among  those  especially  whose  passion  it  is  to  grope
for  the  unseen,  and  to  these  the  varied  contents  will  give  delight.  The  matter
contained  in  Mr.  Waite's  volume  is  wonderfully  varied,  and  much  of  it  worth
reading,  even  by  those  who  do  not  believe  in  magic  of  any  kind,  black  or  white. "
—  Glasgow  Herald.

"  No  determined  student  of  Nature's  higher  mysteries,  setting  out  from  the  stand-
point of  modern  European  culture,  can  afford  to  remain  ignorant  of  Eliphas  Levi's
works.  But  to  study  them'  in  the  original  is  a  wearisome  task,  if  for  no  other
reason,  on  account  of  their  aggregate  length.  The  present  single  volume  is  a
digest  of  half  a  dozen  books  enumerated  by  the  present  author  in  a  '  biographical
and  critical  essay  '  with  which  he  prefaces  his  undertaking.  These  are  the  Dogme
et  Rituel  de  la  Haute  Magie,  the  Histoire  de  la  Magie,  the  Clefdcs  Grands  Mysteres,
the  Sorcier  de  Meudon,  the  Philosophie  Occulte,  and  the  Science  des  Esprits.  To
attack  the  whole  series — which,  indeed,  it  might  be  difficult  to  obtain  now  in  a
complete  form — would  be  a  bold  undertaking,  but  Mr.  Waite  has  endeavoured  to
give  his  readers  the  essence  of  the  whole  six  books  in  a  relatively  compact  com-
pass. " — Light.

"Let  no  man  think  that  such  transcendental  mysteries  as  the  astrologer  and  the
magician  plunge  into  have  disappeared  from  the  face  of  the  earth.  Their  votaries
defy  derision,  they  meet  contempt  with  a  calm  consciousness  of  power,  and  a
sublime  sense  of  superiority;  for,  in  this  generation  the  magicians  have  found  a
new  prophet,  a  new  hierophant — almost  a  new  gospel.  .  .  .  Meanwhile,  lest  our
readers  should  suppose  that  the  modern  students  of  the  science  of  magic  are  not  in
deadly  earnest,  or  that  they  are  few  in  number  or  poor  in  substance,  let  them,
with  all  due  awe  and  thankfulness,  buy  this  handsome  volume,  and  as  they  open
it  let  them  cast  a  glance  at  the  amazing  list  of  works  published  and  publishing  by
a  single  firm  on  the  various  branches  of  the  occult  sciences.  Having  done  that,
let  them  ask  themselves  whether  some  forms  of  faith — for  we  dare  not  drop  a  hint
of  disrespect — do  not  die  hard." — Athenmum,  Aug.  6th,  1887.

\imo.,  cloth,  2S.

NATURE  AND  LAW.

An  Answer  to  Professor  Drummond's  "Natural  Law  in  the  Spiritual  World."

Professor  Drummond  subordinates  the  Spiritual  universe  to  the  Material ;  the
author  of  "  Nature  and  Law  "  sustains  a  thesis  diametrically  opposed  to  this.  His
conclusion  is  "that  there  is  more  of  heaven  than  of  earth  in  all  terrestrial  things,
more  of  spirit  than  of  matter  in  what  are  termed  material  laws."

AN  AMAZING  LIST   OF   WORK:-.

Post  free,  price  3</.

THE  LITERATURE  OF  OCCULTISM  AND
ARCH/EOLOGY.

Being  a  Catalogue  of  Books  ON  sale  relating  to  :  —

Ancient  Worships.  — Astrology.  —  Alchemy. —  Animal  Magnetism. —  Anthro-
pology.— Arabic. — Assassins. — Antiquities. — Ancient  History. — Behmen  and  the
Mystics.  —  Buddhism.  —  Clairvoyance.  —  Cabeiri.  —  China.  —  Coins.  —  Druids.  —
Dreams  and  Visions. — Divination. — Divining  Rod. — Demonology. — Ethnology. —
Egypt.  — Fascination.  —  Flagellants.  —  Freemasonry.  — Folk-Lore.  —  Gnostics.  —
Gems. —  Ghosts.  —  Hindus. — Hieroglyphics  and  Secret  Writing.  —  Herbals. —
Hermetic. — India  and  the  Hindus. — Kabbala. — Koran. — Miracles. — Mirabilaries.
— Magic  and  Magicians. — Mysteries. — Mithraic  Worship. — Mesmerism. — Mytho-
logy. —  Metaphysics.  —  Mysticism.  —  Neo-platonism.  —  Orientalia.  —  Obelisks. —
Oracles.  — Occult  Sciences.  —  Philology.  —  Persian.  —  Parsees.  —  Philosophy.  —
Physiognomy. — Palmistry  and  Handwriting. — Phrenology.  —  Psychoneurology. —
Psychometry.  — Prophets.  —  Rosicrucians.  —  Round  Towers.  —  Rabbinical.  — Spiri-
tualism.— Skeptics,  Jesuits,  Christians  and  Quakers. — Sibylls. — Symbolism. —
Serpent  Worship.  — Secret  Societies.  —  Somnambulism. — Travels.  —  Tombs. —
Theosophy. — Theology  and  Criticism. — Witchcraft.

Monthly.     Subscription,  \os.  per  annum.

THE  PATH :

A  Magazine  devoted  to  the  Brotherhood  of  Humanity,  Theosophy  in  America,
and  the  Study  of  Occult  Science,  Philosophy,  and  Aryan  Literature.  Edited  by
William  Q.  Judge.  Published  under  the  auspices  of  The  Aryan  Theosophical
Society  of  New  York.

Price  is.  monthly.

"LUCIFER:"

A  Theosophical  Monthly,  designed  to  bring  light  "  to  the  hidden  things  of  dark-
ness" on  both  the  physical  and  psychic  planes  of  life.  Edited  by  H.  P.  Blavatsky
and  Mabel  Collins.

This  Magazine  is  published  with  a  dual  purpose.  The  first  is  to  direct  the
searching  light  of  impartial  truth  on  the  dark  problems  of  human  life,  chiefly  on
the  present  psychic  and  spiritual  state  of  our  cultured  classes  throughout  Europe
and  America.  The  second  is  to  apply  it  fearlessly  as  a  dissecting  knife  to  every
prejudice,  whether  social  or  religious,  and  as  a  microscope  by  which  to  reveal
the  hidden  essence  underlying  external  appearances,  the  accepted  routine  of  life,
forms  of  accustomed  thought,  existing  institutions,  sciences,  and  creeds.  The
true  light-bearer  is  at  war  with  no  man ;  but  it  is  his  duty  to  serve  humanity  by
opposing  and  denouncing  everything  which  tends  to  hypocrisy,  egotism,  and  the
hurt  of  the  many  for  the  gain  of  the  few.  "Lucifer"  will  endeavour  to  carry
out  this  duty  to  the  full.     This  is  the  secondary  task  which  falls  to  the  lot  of  all

THE   HAND   AND    THE    FACE.

who  oppose  the  dark  .serried  mass  of  materialists.  But  the  primary  one,  and  that
which  in  this  Magazine  will  always  take  the  first  place,  is  that  of  applying  theo-
sophic  thought  to  the  problems  of  life.  There  are  things  which  can  only  be
scrutinized  to  any  effectual  purpose  by  the  application  of  a  higher  knowledge  than
that  which  is  sufficient  to  deal  with  external  facts.  The  Editors  have  the  Courage
to  undertake  so  great  an  effort  as  the  launching  of  this  Magazine  because  they  have
promise  and  good  earnest  of  help  from  those  who  possess  that  higher  knowledge,
and  who  consider  the  time  is  ripe  for  truths,  which  have  existed  from  all  ages,  to
be  born  again  in  the  minds  of  men.  The  best  known  students  of  mysticism  and
occult  philosophy  will  contribute  to  its  pages,  while  fiction,  the  mirror  of  life,  will
be  used  to  reveal  some  of  the  marvellous  phases  of  existence.  The  attempt  will
be  not  merely  to  promote  the  comprehension  of  inner  truths  and  mysteries  con-
nected with  the  spiritual  progress  of  humanity,  but  to  show  that  occult  philosophy
may  shed  a  new  light  on  the  practical  conduct  of  our  destinies  in  their  relation
with  the  physical  world.

Monthly,  25.  ;  yearly  subscription,  2.0s.

THE  THEOSOPHIST:

A  Magazine  of  Oriental  Philosophy,  Art,  Literature  and  Occultism.  Conducted
by  H.  P.  Blavatsky.      Vols.  I.  to  VIII.  now  ready.

"  Theosophy  has  suddenly  risen  to  importance.  .  .  .  The  movement  implied  by
the  term  Theosophy  is  one  that,  cannot  be  adequately  explained  in  a  few  words
....  those  interested  in  the  movement,  which  is  not  to  be  confounded  with
spiritualism,  will  find  means  of  gratifying  their  curiosity  by  procuring  the  back
numbers  of  'The  Theosophist '  and  a  very  remarkable  book  called  '  Isis  Un-
veiled,' by  Madame  Blavatsky." — Literary  World.

Demy  8vo.,  wrapper,  price  \s.

THE  HANDBOOK  OF  PHYSIOGNOMY.

By  Rosa  Baughan.

"The  merit  of  her  book  consists  in  the  admirable  clearness  of  her  descriptions
of  faces.  So  vivid  is  the  impression  produced  by  them  that  she  is  able  to  dispense
with  illustrations,  the  reader  using  the  faces  of  his  acquaintances  for  that  purpose.
The  classification,  too,  is  good,  although  the  astrological  headings  may  be  regarded
by  the  profane  as  fanciful.  Physiognomy  may  now  be  scientifically  studied  by
means  of  composite  photography." — Pall  Mall  Gazette.

Fourth  edition,  nciuly  revised,  with  illustrative  plates,  price  is.

THE  HANDBOOK  OF  PALMISTRY.

By  Rosa  Baughan,  author  of  "  Indications  of  Character  in  Handwriting."

"  It  possesses  a  certain  literary  interest,  for  Miss  Baughan  shows  the  connection
between  palmistry  and  the  doctrines  of  the  Kabbala." — Graphic.

AS  TROLOGIA   REST  A  URA  TA.

"  Miss  Rosa  Baughan,  for  many  years  known  as  one  of  the  most  expert  pro-
ficients in  this  branch  of  science,  has  as  much  claim  to  consideration  as  any  writer
on  the  subject." — Sussex  Daily  News.

' '  People  who  wish  to  believe  in  palmistry,  or  the  science  of  reading  character
from  the  marks  of  the  hand,"  says  the  Daily  News,  in  an  article  devoted  to  the
discussion  of  this  topic,  "  will  be  interested  in  a  handbook  of  the  subject  by  Miss
Baughan,  published  by  Mr.  Redway. "

Nos.  3  to  13,  and  each  succeeding  number  as  issued,  may  be  had,  price  is.

TRANSACTIONS  OF  THE  LONDON  LODGE
OF  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY:

Nos.  1  and  2. — Out  of  print.

No.  3-^On  the  Higher  Aspect  of  Theosophic  Studies.  By  Mohini  M.
Chatterji.

No.  4. — A  Synopsis  of  Baron  Du  Prel's  "  Philosophie  der  Mystik. "  By
Bertram  Keightley.

No.  5. — A  Paper  on  Reincarnation.  By  Miss  Arundale.  And  other  Pro-
ceedings.

No.  6. — The  Theosophical  Movement.     By  A.  P.  Sinnett.

No.  7.— The  Higher  Self.     By  A.  P.  Sinnett.

No.   8. — The  Theosophical  Society  and  its  Work.    By  Mohini  M.  Chatterji.

No.  9. — A  Paper  on  Krishna.     By  Mohini  M.  Chatterji.

No.   10. — On  Mesmerism.     By  A.  P.  Sinnett.

No.  11. — Theosophy  in  the  Works  of  Richard  Wagner.  By  W.  Ashton
Ellis.

No.    12. — Buddha's  Teaching.     By  A.  P.  Sinnett.

No.  13.— The  Relations  of  the  Higher  and  the  Lower  Self.  By  A.  P.  Sin-
nett.

Printed  on  antique  paper  and  tastefully  bound,  price  Js.  6d.
The  Astrologer's  Guide.

ANIMA  ASTRQLOGI/E;

or,  A  Guide  for  Astrologers.

Being  the  One  Hundred  and  Forty-six  Considerations  of  the  Astrologer,
Guido  Bonatus,  translated  from  the  Latin  by  Henry  Coley,  together  with  the
choicest  Aphorisms  of  the  Seven  Segments  of  Jerom  Cardan,  of  Milan,  edited
by  William  Lilly  (1675)  '■>  now  first  republished  from  the  original  edition  with
Notes  and  Preface  by  W.  C.  Eldon  Serjeant.

"  Mr.  Serjeant  deserves  the  thanks  of  all  who  are  interested  in  astrology  for
rescuing  this  important  work  from  oblivion.  .  .  .  The  growing  interest  in  mystical
science  will  lead  to  a  revival  of  astrological  study,  and  advanced  students  will  find
this  book  an  indispensable  addition  to  their  libraries.  The  book  is  well  got  up  and
printed. " —  Theosophist.

B

HERMETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

In  post  ijo.,  illustrated  with  engravings  on  wool,  most  chastely  bound
in  white  vellum,  price  \os.  6d.

Astrology  Theologized.

THE  SPIRITUAL  HERMENEUTICS  OF
ASTROLOGY  AND  HOLY  WRIT.

Being  a  Treatise  upon  the  Influence  of  the  Stars  on  Man,  and  on  the  Art  of
Ruling  them  by  the  Law  of  Grace.  Reprinted  from  the  Original  of  1649.  With
a  Prefatory  Essay  on  Bible  Hermeneutics.      By  Anna  Kingsford,  M.D.,  Paris.

"It  is  well  for  Dr.  Anna  Kingsford  that  she  was  not  born  into  the  sidereal
world  four  hundred  years  ago.  Had  that  been  her  sorry  fate,  she  would  assuredly
have  been  burned  at  the  stake  for  her  preface  to  '  Astrology  Theologized.'  It  is  a
very  long  preface — more  than  half  the  length  of  the  treatise  it  introduces  ;  it
contains  some  of  the  finest  flowers  of  Theosophical  philosophy,  and  of  course
makes  very  short  work  of  Christianity. " — St.  fames 's  Gazette.

"  Mrs.  Kingsford,  amid  many  things  which  we  do  not  understand,  and  some  few
which  we  think  we  comprehend  afar  off,  gives  a  more  detailed  analysis  of  ghosts
than  we  remember  to  have  met  with  in  any  of  the  ancient  hermetic  writers." — St.
James 's  Gazette.

"  The  only  pleasing  features  of  the  book  are  the  reproductions  of  a  number  of
beautiful  symbolical  figures  with  which  it  is  illustrated.  That  on  p.  28,  represent-
ing Christ  surrounded  by  an  elliptical  glory  and  carried  up  to  heaven  by  angels,  is
taken  from  an  illuminated  manuscript  of  the  fourteenth  century  in  the  Bibliotheque
Royale  ;  and  the  figure  of  the  Virgin  in  an  aureole,  on  p.  94,  is  from  a  tenth-
century  illuminated  manuscript  in  the  same  library.  Some  of  the  figures  here
reproduced  are  among  the  finest  things  in  Christian  iconography." — St.  James's
Gazette.

Small  A^o.,  with  illustrations,  bound  in  vegetable  parchment,  price  \Os.  6d.

THE  VIRGIN  OF  THE  WORLD.

By  Hermes  Mercurius  Trismegistus.  A  Treatise  on  Initiations,  or
Asclepios  ;  the  Definitions  of  Asclepios  ;  Fragments  of  the  Writings  of  Hermes.
Translated  and  edited  by  the  authors  of  "  The  Perfect  Way."  With  an  Introduc-
tion to  "The  Virgin  of  the  World"  by  A.  K. ,  and  an  Essay  on  "The  Hermetic
Books  "  by  E.  M.

"  It  will  be  a  most  interesting  study  for  eveiy  occultist  to  compare  the  doctrines
of  the  ancient  Hermetic  philosophy  with  the  teaching  of  the  Vedantic  and  Buddhist
systems  of  religious  thought.  The  famous  books  of  Hermes  seem  to  occupy,  with
reference  to  the  Egyptian  religion,  the  same  position  which  the  Upanishads  occupy
in  Aryan  religious  literature." — Theosophist,  November,  18S5.

PARACELSUS.

Just  published,  32  pages,  wrapper,  price  is.

THE  NEW  ILLUMINATION.

By  Edward  Maitland,  author  of  "  The  Pilgrim  and  the  Shrine."

Contents: — The  Revival  of  Mysticism. — -The  "Modus"  of  Illumination. — ■
Cyclical  Illuminations. — Propositions  Involved. — Previous  Illuminations. — The
Obscuration. — The  New  Illumination. — The  Crucial  Tests. — Further  Tokens.

In  crown  Svo.,  price  Js.  6J.

MAGIC,  WHITE  AND  BLACK;

or,  The  Science  of  Finite  and  Infinite  Life.

Containing  Practical  Hints  for  Students  of  Occultism,  by  Franz  Hartmann,
M.D.  Illustrated  with  magical  signs,  and  a  symbolical  frontispiece  etched  by
Mackaness,  from  a  design  by  the  Author.

Post  2>vo.,  cloth,  price  I  or.  6cl.

The  Life  of  Philippus  Theophrastus,  Bombast  of  Hohenheim,
known  by  the  name  of

PARACELSUS,

And  the  substance  of  his  teachings  concerning  Cosmology,  Anthropology,
Pneumatology,  Magic  and  Sorcery,  Medicine,  Alchemy  and  Astrology,  Theosophy
and  Philosophy.  Extracted  and  translated  from  his  rare  and  extensive  works  and
from  some  unpublished  Manuscripts,  by  Franz  Hartmann,  M.D.,  author  cf
"  Magic,"  &c.

"  Paracelsus  was  a  high  priest  among  mystics  and  alchemists  ;  he  left  behind  him
one  hundred  and  six  treatises  upon  medical  and  occult  subjects,  which  are  likely  to
be  read  by  the  curious  as  long  as  mysticism  remains  a  necessary  study  for  whoever
would  trace  the  developments  of  civilization.

"From  some  considerable  acquaintance  with  the  writings  of  Paracelsus,  we  can
say  that  Dr.  Hartmann  has  made  his  excerpts  from  them  with  a  good  deal  of  skill.
Students,  indeed,  should  be  grateful  for  this  book,  despite  its  setting  of  Theo-.
sophical  nonsense  ;  since  to  read  one  of  Bombast's  Latin  or  German  treatises  is  a
very  stiff  exercise  indeed,  unless  you  are  well  versed  in  his  very  recondite  termi-
nology.

"  Dr.  Hartmann  has  compiled  a  very  full  and  accurate  glossary  of  occult  terms,
which  will  be  of  great  use  to  future  readers  of  Paracelsus ;  and  for  so  much  he  is  to
be  thanked.

"Dr.  Hartmann  quotes  some  of  his  recipes  for  transmuting  metals  and  pro-
ducing the  'electrum  magicum.'  But  Paracelsus  is  the  most  transcendental  of
European  mystics,  and  it  is  not  always  easy  to  know  when  he  is  writing  alle-
gorically  and  when  practically.  Dr.  Hartmann  says  he  has  tried  these  prescrip-
tions and  found  them  all  right ;  but  he  warns  the  uninitiated  against  running  the
risk  of  blowing  themselves  up  in  the  endeavour  to  follow  the  master's  instructions.

ORIENTAL   PHILOSOPHY.

"Paracelsus  held  firmly  to  the  belief  of  some  of  the  hermetic  writers  of  the
Middle  Ages,  that  it  is  perfectly  possible  to  create  human  beings  by  alchemical
means  ;  and  he  even  gives  directions  (in  his  treatise  '  De  Natura  Rerum ')  for  the
production  of  homunculi.

"  On  the  whole,  however,  Dr.  Hartmann  has  produced  a  very  amusing  book
and  a  book  which  will  have  some  rermanent  value  to  the  student  of  the  occult." —
St.  James's  Gazette.

64//.,  8vo.,  wrapper,  price  is.  6d.

THE  "OCCULT  WORLD  PHENOMENA,"

and  The  Society  for  Psychical  Research.

By  A.  P.  Sinnett,  with  a  Protest  by  Madame  Blavatsky.

"An  interesting  addition  to  the  fast-expanding  literature  of  Theosophy. " —
Literary  World.

"  All  who  are  interested  in  Theosophy  should  read  it." — Glasgow  Herald.

"Mr.  Sinnett  scores  some  points  against  his  adversary,  and  his  pamphlet  is  to-
be  followed  by  some  memoirs  of  Madame  Blavatsky.  which  may  contain  further
refutations.  Madame  Blavatsky  herself  appends  to  the  pamphlet  a  brief  and
indignant  denial  of  the  grave  charges  which  have  been  made  against  her." — -
Graphic.

In  crown  Sz'o. ,  cloth,  price  "js.  6d.

THEOSOPHY,  RELIGION,  AND  OCCULT

SCIENCE.

By  Henry  S.  Olcott,  President  of  the  Theosophical  Society.

"This  book,  to  which  we  can  only  allot  an  amount  of  space  quite  incom-
mensurate with  its  intrinsic  interest,  is  one  that  will  appeal  to  the  prepared  student
rather  than  to  the  general  reader.  To  anyone  who  has  previously  made  the
acquaintance  of  such  books  as  Mr.  Sinnett's  'Occult  World,'  and  'Esoteric
Buddhism,'  or  has  in  other  ways  familiarized  himself  with  the  doctrines  of  the  so-
called  Theosophical  Society  or  Brotherhood,  these  lectures  of  Colonel  Olcott'swillbe
rich  in  interest  and  suggestiveness.  The  American  officer  is  a  person  of  undoubted
social  position  and  unblemished  personal  reputation,  and  his  main  object  is  not  to
secure  belief  in  the  reality  of  any  '  phenomena,'  not  to  win  a  barren  reputation  for
himself  as  a  thaumaturgist  or  wonder-worker,  but  to  win  acceptance  for  one  of  the
oldest  philosophies  of  nature  and  human  life — a  philosophy  to  which  of  late  years
the  thinkers  of  the  West  have  been  turning  with  noteworthy  curiosity  and  interest.
Of  course,  should  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena  in  question  be  satisfactorily
established,  there  would  undoubtedly  be  proof  that  the  Eastern  sages  to  whom
Colonel  Olcott  bears  witness  do  possess  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  the  physical
universe  far  wider  and  more  intimate  than  that  which  has  been  laboriously  acquired
by  the  inductive  science  of  the  West ;  but  the  theosophy  expounded  in  this  volume

A   STUDY  IN  ALCHEMY.  13

is  at  once  a  theology,  a  metaphysic,  and  a  sociology,  in  which  mere  marvels,  as
such,  occupy  a  quite  subordinate  and  unimportant  position.  We  cannot  now  dis-
cuss its  claims,  and  we  will  not  pronounce  any  opinion  upon  them  ;  we  will  only
say  that  Colonel  Olcott's  volume  deserves  and  will  repay  the  study  of  all  readers
for  whom  the  byways  of  speculation  have  an  irresistible  charm." — Manchester
Examiner.

In  crozvn  Svo. ,  cloth,  price  6s.

A  PROFESSOR  OF  ALCHEMY

(DENIS   ZACHAIRE).

By  Percy  Ross,  author  of  "  A  Comedy  without  Laughter  "  and  "  A  Misguidit
Lassie."

The  above  work  is  not  so  much  a  novel  as  a  study  in  alchemy.  Its  incident  and
detail,  with  a  few  exceptions,  are  not  fiction  but  fact,  being  drawn  from  contempo-
rary works,  including  Denis  Zachaire's  own  "  Opusculum."

In  2  vols.,  crown  %vo.,  cloth,  price  10s.  6J.

UNITED.

By  A.  P.  SlNNETT.

"Mr.  Sinnett's  previous  works  on  'Esoteric  Buddhism'  and  'The  Occult
World '  in  some  way  prepare  the  reader  for  the  marvellous  psychological  pheno-
mena with  which  the  present  volumes  abound,  and  which  cannot  fail  to  have  an
irresistible  charm  for  all  those  who  love  the  byways  of  speculation." — Literary
World.

"There  is,  nevertheless,  a  weird  attractiveness  about  'United'  which  makes
even  the  non-believer  in  theosophy  loth  to  put  down  the  book  when  once  he  has
taken  it  up  ;  while  to  the  lovers  of  occult  phenomena  it  will  prove  irresistibly
fascinating. " — Literary  World.

"  Literary  ability  is  evident  throughout  the  book." — St.  Jameses  Gazette.

"  It  would  be  difficult  to  point  to  a  more  earnest  writer  than  Mr.  Sinnett,  and
all  he  says  invariably  carries  force  and  weight.  .  .  .  The  book  has  a  power  of  its
own  which  compels  respect,  and  Mr.  Sinnett  is  so  much  the  same  as  he  always  is,
so  eager  and  sincere  in  expounding  the  mysteries  in  which  he  is  a  fervent  believer,
that  one  seems  to  be  inspired  with  some  of  the  curious  fascination  of  his  teaching.
...  In  spite  of  all  the  improbable  and  weird  fancies  which  have  to  be  accepted
by  the  student  of  the  occult  religion,  it  should  always  be  borne  in  mind  that  its
tenets  are  eminently  elevating  and  beautiful ;  that  it  appeals  to  the  best  side  of  our
nature.  ...  But  all  is  vague  confusion  to  the  uninitiated,  and  it  has  to  be  reluc-
tantly admitted  that  if  attracted  one  is  sadly  dazzled  by  the  perusal  of  such  a  couple
of  volumes  as  '  United.'  The  purpose  of  '  United  '  is  a  good  one  ;  it  is  written
with  marked  ability,  and  the  story  is  pleasantly  related  in  the  happy  vein  of  a  cha-
racteristic author. " — Morning  Advertiser,  Dec.  31st,  1886.

14  TEXT-BOOK  FOR  SMOKERS.

Bound  infancy  cloth,  uncut  edges,  price  2s.

TOBACCO  TALK  AND  SMOKERS'
GOSSIP,

An  amusing  Miscellany  of  Fact  and  Anecdote  relating  to  "  The  Great  Plant '
in  all  its  forms  and  uses,  including  a  Selection  from  Nicotian  Literature.

Contents  : — A  Tobacco  Parliament — Napoleon's  First  Pipe — A  Dutch  Poet
and  Napoleon's  Snuff-Box — Frederick  the  Great  as  an  Ass — Too  Small  for  Two —
A  Smoking  Empress — The  Smoking  Princesses — An  Incident  on  the  G.W.R. —
Raleigh's  Tobacco  Box — Bismarck's  Last  Cigar — Bismarck's  Cigar  Story — Moltke's
Pound  of  Snuff — Lord  Brougham  as  a  Smoker — Mazzini's  Sang-froid  as  a  Smoker
— Lord  Clarendon  as  a  Smoker — Politics  and  Snuff-Boxes — Penn  and  Tobacco — ■
Tobacco  and  the  Papacy — The  Snuff-Mull  in  the  Scotch  Kirk — Whately  as  a
Snuff-Taker — The  First  Bishop  who  Smoked — Pigs  and  Smokers — Jesuits'  Snuff
— Kemble  Pipes — An  Ingenious  Smoker — Anecdote  of  Dean  Aldrich — Smoking
to  the  Glory  of  God — Professor  Huxley  on  Smoking- — Blucher's  Pipe-Master —
Shakespeare  and  Tobacco — Ben  Jonson  on  Tobacco — Lord  Byron  on  Tobacco —
Decamps  and  Horace  Vernet — Milton's  Pipe — Anecdote  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton —
Emerson  and  Carlyle — Paley  and  his  Pipe — Jules  Sandeau  on  the  Cigar — The
Pickwick  of  Fleet  Street — The  Obsequio  of  Havana — The  Social  Pipe  ( Thackeray)
— Triumph  of  Tobacco  over  Sack  and  Ale — The  Smoking  Philosopher — Sam
Slick  on  the  Virtues  of  a  Pipe — Smoking  in  1610 — Bulwer-Lytton  on  Tobacco-
Smoking — Professor  Sedgwick — St.  Pierre  on  the  Effect  of  Tobacco — Ode  to
Tobacco  (C.  S.  Calverley) — Meat  and  Drink  (Charles  Kingsley) — The  Meerschaum
[0.  IV.  Holmes) — Charles  Kingsley  at  Eversley — Robert  Burns's  Snuff-box — -
Robinson  Crusoe's  Tobacco — Guizot — -Victor  Hugo — Mr.  Buckle  as  a  Smoker —
Carlyle  on  Tobacco — A  Poet's  Pipe  (Baudelaire) — A  Pipe  of  Tobacco — The
Headsman's  Snuff-box — The  Pipe  and  Snuff-box  (Cowper) — Anecdote  of  Charles
Lamb — Gibbon  as  a  Snuff-Taker — Charles  Lamb  as  a  Smoker — Farewell  to
Tobacco  (Chas.  Lamb) — The  Power  of  Smoke  (Thackeray) — Thackeray  as  a
Smoker — Dickens  as  a  Smoker — Chewing  and  Spitting  in  America — Tennyson  as
a  Smoker — A  Smoker's  Opinion  of  Venice — Coleridge's  First  Pipe — Richard  Por-
son — Cruikshank  and  Tobacco — Mr.  James  Payn — Mr.  Swinburne  on  Raleigh —
The  Anti-Tobacco  Party — "This  Indian  Weed" — Dr.  Abernethy  on  Snuff-Taking
— Abernethy  and  a  Smoking  Patient — Tobacco  and  the  Plague — "  The  Greatest
Tobacco-Stopper  in  all  England " — Dr.  Richardson  on  Tobacco — Advice  to
Smokers — Some  Strange  Smokers — The  Etymology  of  Tobacco — The  Snuff  called
"Irish  Blackguard" — A  Snuff-Maker's  Sign — Mr.  Sala's  Cigar-Shop — Death  of
the  "  Yard  of  Clay  " — A  Prodigious  Smoker — A  Professor  of  Smoking — Tobacco
in  Time  of  War — Ages  attained  by  Great  Smokers — A  Maiden's  Wish — "  Those
Dreadful  Cigars" — How  to  take  a  Pinch  of  Snuff — The  Tobacco  Plant — Fate  of
an  Early  Smoker — Adding  Insult  to  Injury — Tom  Brown  on  Smoking — The  Snuff-
Taker — Tobacco  in  North  America — National  Characteristics — Smoking  at  School
— Carlyle  on  "  The  Veracities  " — Children's  Pipes — The  Uses  of  Cigar  Ash — An
Inveterate  Smoker — A  Tough  Yarn — Some  French  Smokers — Riddles  for  Smokers
— Cigar  Manufacturing  in  Havana.

"  One  of  the  best  books  of  gossip  we  have  met  for  some  time.  .  .  .  It  is  literally
crammed  full  from  beginning  to  end  of  its  148  pages  with  well-selected  anecdotes,
poems,  and  excerpts  from  tobacco  literature  and  history." — Graphic.

LIFE    OF  CRANMER.  15

"The  smoker  should  be  grateful  to  the  compilers  of  this  pretty  little  volume.
.  .  .  No  smoker  should  be  without  it,  and  anti-tobacconists  have  only  to  turn  over
its  leaves  to  be  converted." — Pall  Mall  Gazette.

"  Something  to  please  smokers  ;  and  non-smokers  ms.y  be  interested  in  tracing
the  effect  of  tobacco — the  fatal,  fragrant  herb— on  our  literature." — Literary
World.

In  crown  Svo.,  cloth,  price  $s.

THE  HISTORY  OF  TITHES.

By  H.  W.  Clarke.

"  We  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  he  has  produced  the  best  book  of  moderate
size  yet  published  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  an  ordinary  reader  to  thoroughly
understand  the  origin  and  history  of  this  ancient  impost.  .  .  .  The  author  gives  a
great  deal  of  interesting  information  concerning  the  planting  and  growth  of
Christianity  in  these  islands,  the  origin  of  parishes,  and  the  founding  and  endow-
ment of  parish  churches.  .  .  .  Mr.  Clarke  declares  himself  in  his  book  to  be  a
member  of  the  Church  of  England.  He  thus  writes  in  no  spirit  of  hostility  to  her.
But  he  rightly  uses  very  plain  language  in  giving  his  opinion  on  the  wilful  dis-
tortion of  facts  by  Church  writers  aiming  to  defend  their  Church.  .  .  .  No  one
who  wishes  thoroughly  to  understand  the  history  of  tithes  should  be  without  this
book.  It  will  well  repay  perusal  as  a  book  of  ecclesiastical  history  apart  from  its
special  object." — Literary  World.

"  The  change  of  front  which  the  defenders  of  the  Church  have  been  executing
in  the  face  of  the  enemy  has  exposed  them  to  some  awkward  attacks,  and  Mr.
Clarke  has  no  doubt  seized  on  a  weak  point  in  the  line  which  seems  to  have  been
now  adopted.  Nor  must  we  take  leave  of  Mr.  Clarke  without  praising  his  twelfth
chapter,  which  contains  an  impartial  and  valuable  array  of  facts  and  figures,  which
should  be  read  by  all  who  are  interested  in  the  solution  of  the  tithe  problem." — -
Athcnceum,  July,  1887.

Demy  Svo. ,  cloth,  price  Js.  6d.

THE  LIFE,  TIMES,  AND  WRITINGS  OF
THOMAS  CRANMER,  D.D.

(The  first  Reforming  Archbishop  of  Canterbury).

By  Charles  Hastings  C.ollette.

In  small  Svo.,  cloth,  price  $s.

"Mr.  Collette  brings  to  his  task  both  breadth  and  depth  of  knowledge,  and  a
desire  to  be  scrupulously  free  from  prejudice.  That  he  will  please  every  reader  is
not  to  be  expected,  but  it  will  be  generally  admitted  that  he  has  made  every  effort
to  arrive  at  and  record  the  truth,  nothing  extenuating  nor  setting  down  aught  in
malice." — Globe,  Aug.  19th.

1 6  THE  NEW  HEPTAMERON.

Small  Sz'o.,  cloth,  price  z>s.

MOUNTAINEERING  BELOW  THE  SNOW-
LINE;

or,  The  Solitary  Pedestrian  in  Snowdonia  and  Elsewhere.

By  M.  Paterson,  illustrated  with  etchings.

Vanity  Fair  says  : — "  Mr.  Paterson  writes  charmingly  of  a  charming  subject.
He  is  a  cultured  and  an  athletic  man,  and  tells  of  the  climbs  he  has  done  in  ner-
vous, descriptive  English.  He  confesses  to  some  partiality  for  getting  along  alone,
but  he  is  evidently  not  a  churl,  and  he  opens  the  store  of  his  experiences  under  the
snow-line  in  Wales,  Cumberland,  Scotland,  and  Norway  with  a  skill  which  will
make  his  wanderings  acceptable  to  a  much  larger  number  of  people  than  can  ever
climb  mountains  themselves."

Small  crown  Sz'o.,  cloth,  $s.

AMBULANCE  SERMONS:

Being  a  series  of  Popular  Essays  on  Medical  and  Allied  Subjects,  by
J.  A.  Austin,  M.D.

"  The  essays  are  very  readable  and  convey  much  instruction  on  elementary
topics  of  therapeutics  in  a  pleasant  and  agreeable  form.  A  reader  may  learn  from
them  how  to  cure  a  cold  or  manage  a  baby,  both  difficult  things  to  do  ;  and  will
find  much  to  help  him  in  the  treatment  of  such  accidents  and  ailments  as  are
usually  considered  too  slight  to  warrant  a  resort  to  professional  assistance." — Scots-
man.

"  It  is  not  merely  a  doctor's  book  for  family  use,  as  the  writer  endeavours  to
explain  the  physiological  principles  upon  which  medical  treatment  rests,  although
he  gives  practical  applications  in  the  way  of  directions  and  prescriptions." — Glasgow
Herald,  Aug.  19th.

Large  crown  8vo.,  illuminated  cover,  price  \os.  6d.

THE  FORTUNATE  LOVERS.

Twenty-seven  novels  of  the  Queen  of  Navarre,  translated  by  Arthur  Machen.
Edited  and  selected  with  notes  and  an  introduction  by  A.  Mary  F.  Robinson.
With  etched  frontispiece  by  R.  Jacomb  Hood.

/;/  crown  &z>o.,  cloth,  price  $s.

THE  HEROIC  ENTHUSIASTS

(Gli  Heroici  Furori).

An  Ethical  Poem  by  Giordano  Bruno.

Part  the  First  translated  by  L.  Williams.  With  an  introduction,  compiled
chiefly  from  David  Levi's  "  Giordano  Bruno  o  la  Religione  del  Pensiero. "

THE    WASSAIL-BOWL.  17

In  crown  8vo.,  cloth,  price  $s.

A  SOUL'S  COMEDY.

By  Arthur  E.  Waite.

_  "The  spiritual  history  of  Jasper  Cartwright,  which  Mr.  Waite  has  narrated  in
his  dramatic  poem,  'A  Soul's  Comedy,'  is  as  complex  as  any  student  of  humanity
could  desire.  .  .  .  The  story,  as  such,  is  not  without  interest,  though  some
of  the  interest  is  disagreeable.  .  .  .  Yet  Mr.  Waite  often  writes  very  forcibly ;
his  imagery  is  good  ;  and  there  is  plenty  of  idealism  in  his  pages." — Scotsman.

Price  2s.  6</.

THE  RUEING  OF  GUDRUN,

And  Other  Poems.     By  the  Hon.  Mrs.  Greville-Nugent.

"  Mrs.  Greville-Nugent  has  succeeded  very  fairly  well  with  her  villanelles  and
rondeaux,  her  triolets  and  sestines,  her  ballades  and  chants  royal." — St.  James's
Gazette.

"Where  she  shows  herself  at  her  best  is  in  the  French  forms  of  verse,  which
exactly  suit  her  talent." — Times.

In  preparation.

THE  PRAISE  OF  ALE;

or,  Songs,  Ballads,  Epigrams,  and  Anecdotes  relating  to  Beer,  Malt,

and  Hops.

Collected  and  arranged  by  W.  T.  Marchant.

Contents  : — Introduction. — History. — Cards  and  Wassail  Songs. — Church
Ales  and  Observances. — Whitsun  Ales. — Political. — Harvest. — General. — Barley
and  Malt. — Hops. — Scotch  Songs. — Local  and  Dialect. — Trade  Songs. — Oxford
Songs. — Ale  Wives. — Brewers. — Drinking  Clubs  and  Customs.  — Royal  and  Noble
Drinkers. — Black  Beer. — Drinking  Vessels. — Warm  Ale. — Facts,  Scraps,  and
Ana.

The  volume  will  contain  much  curious  and  out-of-the-way  information,  em-
bracing a  short  sketch  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  the  art  of  brewing  in  this  country  ;
an  account  of  the  laws  relating  to  beer,  and  the  statutes  against  drunkenness  ;  of  the
manners  and  customs  of  "  malt  worms  "  and  mug-house  clubs;  and  the  obsolete
phraseology  of  "toss-pots,"  such  as  "  super-nagulum,"  "  upsee-freeze,"  "shoeing
horns,"  and  "carousing  the  hunter's  hoop."  The  author  will  pay  attention  to  the
drinking  customs  more  or  less  connected  with  the  Church — Whitsun  Ales,  Bride
Ales,  Bride  Bush,  Bride  Wain,  and  the  like  ;  the  chants  of  the  wassail-bowl,  of  the
Hock  Cart,   and  the  Sheepshearing  and  Harvest  Home  rejoicings —

"  Here's  a  health  to  the  Barley  mow,  brave  boys,
Here's  a  health  to  the  Bailey  mow  " —

SOME  ACADEMY  PICTURES.

and  Brazenose  songs  in  honour  of  the  brew  for  which  that  college  is  renowned.
Then  there  are  lyrics  pertaining  to  particular  sorts  and  conditions  of  men,  as  the
songs  of  the  threshers  and  tinkers,  sailors  and  soldiers,  and  the  clubs,  which  may
be  considered  as  forming  a  class  of  themselves.  This  work  will  doubtless  prove
a  valuable  and  pleasant  addition  to  the  library  of  the  student  of  history  and  lover
of  poetry.

Printed  on  Whatman  s  hand-made  paper  at  the  Chiszoick  Press,  price  Is.

IMMODESTY  IN  ART.

An  Expostulation  and  Suggestion  in  a  Letter  to  Sir  Frederick  Leighton,  by
Frederick  George  Lee,  LL.D.,  F.S.A.

"  With  the  general  spirit  and  drift  of  Dr.  Frederick  George  Lee's  vigorous
pamphlet  we  entirely  and  heartily  concur.  On  certain  points  of  detail  we  may
venture  to  differ  from  the  author.  Not  all  representations  of  the  nude  are  of  neces-
sity immodest  :  witness,  for  example,  the  works  of  such  an  artist  as  Mr.  G.  F.
Watts.  Conversely,  there  are  scores  of  pictures  (chiefly  French)  which,  though
they  do  not  come  under  the  category  of  which  we  speak,  are  nevertheless  flagrantly
immodest.  We  deem  it  unnecessary  to  discuss  the  matter  further,  especially  as
we  have  already  and  more  than  once  expressed  a  very  definite  opinion  upon  it — in
substantial  agreement  with  Dr.  Lee — in  the  articles  devoted  to  Art  criticism.  To
that  opinion  we  intend  to  adhere,  though  in  doing  so  we  may  stand  alone  in  the
public  press.  As  to  Dr.  Lee's  protest,  it  is,  in  our  opinion,  both  timely  and  ser-
viceable."— John  Bid/.

In  2  vols. ,  cloth,  price  6s.

THE  CURATE'S  WIFE.

A  Novel  by  J.  E.  P ANTON,  author  of  "  Sketches  in  Black  and  White,"  "  Less

than  Kin,"  &c.

"The  author  of  '  Less  than  Kin  '  has  produced  in  '  The  Curate's  Wife  '  a  story
as  powerful  and  full  of  genuine  human  interest  as  has  appeared  for  some  long  time
past.  This  tale  of  '  country  life  '  is  realistic  in  the  best  sense  of  the  word.  Faithful
as  a  photograph  in  all  its  minor  details,  it  show<s  clear  insight  into  the  character
of  both  the  sexes,  and  under  very  varied  conditions.  The  gradual  transformation
of  the  heroine  from  a  young  girl,  full  of  high  purposes  and  enthusiasm,  into  the
hopeless  drudge  who  in  despair  lays  herself  down  to  die,  is  painted  with  an  almost
Zola-like  fidelity.  Her  tyrant,  the  popular  curate,  is  also  a  powerful  sketch.  It
is  difficult  not  to  think  that  an  expiation  worked  out  in  the  scene  of  his  misdeeds,
with  people  who  pity  while  they  blame  him,  is  insufficient  punishment  for  so  con-
temptible a  cur.  It  would  have  been,  doubtless,  more  satisfactory  had  Meta  con-
quered in  the  unequal  contest  between  her  well-meaning  inexperience  and  her
husband's  brutal  self-love,  but  in  real  life  the  chances  would  be  against  her,  and
this  clever  novel  is,  above  all,  an  exact  picture  of  certain  phases  of  human  nature
as  it  is,  and  in  this  lies  its  chief  merit." — Morning  Post.

A   MULTI-COLOURED  BOOK.  19

In  crown  Svo.,  2  vols.,  cloth,  price  6s.

THE  VALLEY  OF  SOREK.

By  Gertrude  M.  George,  with  a  Critical  Introduction  by  Richard  Herne

Shepherd.

"There  is  in  the  book  a  high  and  pure  moral  and  a  distinct  conception  of
character.  .  .  .  The  dramatis  persona  .  .  .  are  in  reality  strongly  individual,  and
surprise  one  with  their  inconsistencies  just  as  real  human  beings  do.  .  .  .  There
is  something  powerful  in  the  way  in  which  the  reader  is  made  to  feel  both  the
reality  and  the  untrustworthiness  of  his  (the  hero's)  religious  fervour,  and  the
character  of  the  atheist,  Graham,  is  not  less  strongly  and  definitely  conceived.
.  .  .  It  is  a  work  that  shows  imagination  and  moral  insight,  and  we  shall  look
with  much  anticipation  for  another  from  the  same  hand." — Contemporary  Reviezu.

Price  is.

LOW  DOWN.

Wayside  Thoughts  in  Ballad  and  other  Verse.     By  Two  Tramps.

"This  is  a  collection  of  short  pieces,  most  of  which  can  fairly  be  considered
poetry — no  slight  merit,  as  verses  run  just  now.  Some  of  the  pieces  are  singularly
pathetic  and  mournful ;  others,  though  in  serious  guise,  are  permeated  by  quaint
humour ;  and  all  of  them  are  of  considerable  merit.  From  the  variety  and
excellence  of  the  contents  of  this  bundle  of  poetical  effusions,  it  is  likely  to  attract
a  great  number  of  readers,  and  many  passages  in  it  are  particularly  suitable  for
recitation." — Army  and  Navy  Gazette,  Aug.  14,  1886.

"But  '  Low  Down,'  as  it  is  called,  has  the  distinction  of  being  multi-coloured,
each  sheet  of  eight  pages  consisting  of  paper  of  a  special  hue.  To  turn  over  the
leaves  is,  in  fact,  to  enjoy  a  sort  of  kaleidoscopic  effect,  a  glimpse  of  a  literary
rainbow.  Moreover,  to  complete  the  peculiarity  of  the  thing,  the  various  poems
are  printed,  apparently  at  haphazard,  in  large  or  small  type,  as  the  case  may  be.
There  are  those,  perhaps,  who  would  take  such  jokes  too  seriously,  and  bring
them  solemnly  to  the  bar  of  taste,  there  to  be  as  solemnly  condemned.  But  that
is  scarcely  the  right  spirit  in  which  to  regard  them.  There  is  room  in  life  for  the
quaint  and  curious  as  well  as  for  the  neat  and  elegant." — Globe.

2  vols. ,  cloth,  price  6s.

FIFINE:

A  Novel.     By  Alfred  T.  Story.

"  The  account  of  the  various  families  is  most  amusing.  Soon  after  Fifine's
arrival  her  husband  reappears,  and  begins  to  persecute  her  ;  but  she  is  saved  by  a
clever  stratagem  of  the  Professor's,  one  that  we  do  not  remember  having  previously
come  across  in  a  novel.     It  would  not  be  fair  to  spoil  the  interest  of  this  story  by

ETCHINGS   OF  SEA   AND  RIVER.

even  hinting  how  Fifine  is  relieved  from  her  husband,  and  how  all  ends  happily.
If  the  author  will  only  change  his  style  and  be  content  to  use  plain  language,  he
bids  fair  to  be  successful  in  writing  novels." — Saturday  Review.

"  Exhibiting  genuine  ability." — Scotsman.

"  Readers  will  be  glad  that  the  morally  unpleasant  portions  of  the  book  are
briefly  narrated. " — Scotsman.

Twenty -four  pages,  wrapper,  price  3d.

AN  OMITTED  INCIDENT  IN  THE  "GREAT
NAVAL  WAR  OF  1887."

By  Lieut. -Colonel  W.  Hope,  V.C.

"This  witty,  sarcastic,  and  drastic  brochure  is  just  what  might  have  been
expected  from  a  brave,  and  of  late  persecuted,  soldier.  It  is  feigned  to  be  pub-
lished in  1907  ;  its  origin  is  due  to  recent  contributions  in  the  '  St.  James's
Gazette,'  and  it  is  dedicated  to  the  Auxiliary  Naval  and  Military  Forces  of  the
British  Empire.  .  .  .  The  incident  related  by  Colonel  Hope  is  not  without  its
lessons,  and,  though  at  times  bordering  on  the  region  of  improbability,  is  very
well  worth  reading." — Western  Daily  Mercury.

In  large  crown  Svo.,  handsomely  printed  in  borders,  with  original  headpieces,  on  a
special  make  of  toned  paper,  and  bound  in  best  cloth,  the  cover  designed  by
Matthew  Bell,  price  \os.  6d.

SEA  SONG  AND  RIVER  RHYME

From  Chaucer  to  Tennyson.

Selected  and  edited  by  Estelle  Davenport  Adams.  With  a  New  Poem  by
Algernon  Charles  Swinburne.     Illustrated  with  Twelve  Original  Etchings.

"The  selections  have  been  made  with  judgment  and  taste." — Glasgow  Herald.

"  The  book  is  on  the  whole  one  of  the  best  of  its  kind  ever  published." — Glas-
genv  Herald.

"  Its  illustrations  are  really  exquisite." — Glasgow  Herald.

"  The  editor  has  made  the  selection  with  praiseworthy  judgment." — Morning
Post.

"The  value  of  the  work  is  enhanced  by  a  new  poem  from  the  pen  of  Mr.
Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  which  displays  deep  and  heroic  feeling." — Morning
Post.

"  Twelve  really  exquisite  and  delicately  executed  etchings  of  sea  and  river  side
accompany  and  complete  this  beautiful  volume." — Morning  Post.

THE  SPIRIT  OF  "PICKWICK."

"A  special  anthology  delightful  in  itself  and  possessing  the  added  graces  of
elegant  printing  and  dainty  illustrations." — Scotsman.

"An  attractive  volume.  .  .  .  Mr.  Swinburne's  very  spirited  and  patriotic  lay
appropriately  heads  the  collection,  while  in  addition  to  this  new  poem  the  editor
has  included  some  judicious  selections  from  the  poet's  works." — Saturday  Review.

"Mrs.  Davenport  Adams  has  evidently  expended  a  prodigious  amount  of  labour
in  making  the  collection  comparatively  exhaustive." — literary  World.

"The  volume  is  got  up  in  the  handsomest  style,  and  includes  a  dozen  etchings
of  sea  and  river  scenes,  some  of  which  are  exquisite." — literary  World.

Fourth  edition,  witli  engraved  frontispiece,  in  crown  ivo.,  $s.

COSMO  DE'  MEDICI :

An  Historical  Tragedy.     And  other  poems.     By  Richard  Hengist  Horne,
author  of  "  Orion."

"This  tragedy  is  the  work  of  a  poet  and  not  of  a  playwright.  Many  of  the
scenes  abound  in  vigour  and  tragic  intensity.  If  the  structure  of  the  drama
challenges  comparison  with  the  masterpieces  of  the  Elizabethan  stage,  it  is  at  least
not  unworthy  of  the  models  which  have  inspired  it." — Times.

Demy  iSmo.,  200  pages,  cloth,  uncut,  price  2s.

WELLERISMS

From  "  Pickwick  "  and  "  Master  Humphrey's  Clock."

Selected  by  Charles  F.  Rideal.    Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by  Charles
Kent,  author  of  "  The  Humour  and  Pathos  of  Charles  Dickens."

Among  the  Contents  are  : — ■

Sam  Weller's  Introduction. — Old  Weller  at  Doctor's  Commons. — Sam  on  a
Legal  Case. — Self-acting  Ink. — Out  with  It. — Sam's  old  White  Hat. — Indepen-
dent Voters. — Proud  o'  the  Title. — The  Weller  Philosophy. — The  Twopenny  Rope.
— Job  Trotter's  Tears. — Sam's  Misgivings  as  to  Mr.  Pickwick. — Clear  the  Way  for
the  Wheelbarrow. — Unpacking  the  Lunch  Hamper. — Battledore  and  Shuttlecock.
— A  True  Londoner. — Spoiling  the  Beadle. — Old  Weller's  Remedy  for  the  Gout.
— Sam  on  Cabs. — Poverty  and  Oysters. — Old  Weller  on  Pikes. — Sam's  Power  of
Suction.  — Veller  and  Gammon. — Sam  as  Master  of  the  Ceremonies. — &am  before
Mr.  Nupkins.  —  Sam's  Introduction  to  Mary  and  the  Cook. — Something  behind
the  Door. — Sam  and  Master  Bardell. — Good  Wishes  to  Messrs.  Dodson  and
Fogg.  —  Sam  and  his  Mother-in-law. — The  Shepherd's  Water  Rates. — Stiggins  as
an  Arithmetician. — Sam  and  the  Fat  Boy. — Compact  and  Comfortable. — Apologue
of  the  Fat  Man's  Watch. — Medical  Students. — Sam  Subpoenaed. — Disappearance
of  the  "  Sassage  "  Maker. — Sam  Weller's  Valentine. — Old  Weller's  Plot. — Tea
Drinking  at  Brick  Lane. — The  Soldier's  Evidence  Inadmissible.— Sam's  il  Wision  "
Limited. — A  Friendly  "Swarry." — The  Killebeate. — Sam  and  the  Surly  Groom.

REMARKABLE   NOVELS.

—Mr.  Pickwick's  Dark  Lantern.— The  Little  Dirty-faced  Man.— Old  Weller
Inexorable. — Away  with  Melancholy. — Post  Boys  and  Donkeys. — A  Vessel.  — Old
Welter's  Threat. — Sam's  Dismissal  of  the  Fat  Boy. — Is  shea  "Widder"? — Bill
Blincler's  Request. — The  Watch-box  Boy.

"  Some  write  well,  but  he  writes  Weller." — Epigram  on  Dickens.

"  Some  of  the  best  sayings  of  the  immortal  Sam  and  his  sportive  parent  are
collected  here.  The  book  may  be  taken  up  for  a  few  minutes  with  the  certainty
of  affording  amusement,  and  it  can  be  carried  away  in  the  pocket." — Literary
World.

"  It  was  a  very  good  idea  ....  the  extracts  are  very  humorous  ....  here
nothing  is  missed." — Glasgow  Herald.

One  vol.,  crown  Svo.,  400 pages,  cloth,  price  6s.

A  REGULAR  PICKLE:

How  He  Sowed  his  Wild  Oats.

By  Henry  W.  Nesfield,  author  of  "  A  Chequered  Career."

"  Mr.  Nesfield's  name  as  an  author  is  established  on  such  a  pleasantly  sound
foundation  that  it  is  a  recognized  fact  that,  in  taking  up  a  book  written  by  him,
the  reader  is  in  for  a  delightful  half-hour,  during  which  his  risible  and  humorous
faculties  will  be  pleasantly  stimulated.  The  history  of  young  Archibald  Highton
Tregauntly,  whose  fortunes  we  follow  from  the  cradle  to  when  experience  is  just
beginning  to  teach  him  a  few  wholesome  lessons,  is  as  smart  and  brisk  as  it  is
possible  to  be." — Whitehall  Review.

"  It  will  be  matter  for  regret  if  the  brisk  and  lively  style  of  Mr.  Nesfield,  who
at  times  reminds  us  of  Lever,  should  blind  people  to  the  downright  wickedness  of
such  a  perverted  career  as  is  here  described. " — Daily  Chronicle.

In  crown  Svo. ,  price  6s.

LEICESTER:  AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY.

By  Francis  W.  L.  Adams.

"  Even  M.  Zola  and  Mr.  George  Moore  would  find  it  hard  to  beat  Mr.  Adams's
description  of  Rosy's  death.  The  grimly  minute  narrative  of  Leicester's  schoolboy
troubles,  and  of  his  attempt  to  get  a  living  when  he  is  discarded  by  his  guardian,
is,  too,  of  such  a  character  as  to  make  one  regret  that  Mr.  Adams  had  not  put  to
better  use  his  undoubted,  though  undisciplined  powers." — Academy.

"  There  is  unquestionable  power  in  '  Leicester.'  " — Athenaum.

ALL   ABOUT  BURMA.  23

In  post  Svo.,  cloth,  old  style,  price  $s.
Ebenezer  Jones's  Poems.

STUDIES  OF  SENSATION  AND  EVENT.

Poems  by  Ebenezer  Jones.  Edited,  Prefaced,  and  Annotated  by  Richard
Herne  Shepherd.  With  Memorial  Notices  of  the  Author  by  Sumner  Jones
and  W.  J.  Linton.     A  new  Edition.     With  Photographic  Portrait  of  the  Poet.

"This  remarkable  poet  affords  nearly  the  most  striking  instance  of  neglected
genius  in  our  modern  school  of  poetry.  His  poems  are  full  of  vivid  disorderly
power."' — Dante  G.  Rossetti.

Small  ^to.,  ilhtstrated,  cloth,  price  5.5-.

FAMOUS  FROSTS  AND  FROST  FAIRS  IN
GREAT  BRITAIN.

Chronicled  from  the  Earliest  to  the  Present  Time.     By  William  Andrews,

F.R.Hist.S.

"It  forms  an  interesting  chronological  record  of  the  great  frosts  and  frost  fairs
that  have  taken  place  in  Great  Britain  from  the  year  A.D.  134  to  Christmas,
1SS6-7,  and  contains  some  curious  and  out-of-the-way  information  on  past
customs.  .  .  .  There  are  some  quaint  illustrations  representing  the  old  fairs  ;  and
also  a  good  index." — Hull  Portfolio.

I?i  demy  Svo.,  wrapper,  uncut,  with  extra  portrait,  price  $s.

"PHIZ"

(HAELOT    KNIGHT    BROWNE).

A  Memoir  ;  including  a  Selection  from  his  Correspondence  and  Notes  on  his
Principal  Works.  By  Fred.  G.  Kitton.  With  a  Portrait  and  numerous  Illus-
trations.

Popular  edition,  crown  8vo. ,  cloth,  price  2s.  6d.

BURMA:    AS  IT  WAS,   AS  IT  IS,   AND
AS  IT  WILL  BE.

By  J.  G.  Scott  ("  Shway  Yoc  ").

"  Before  going  to  help  to  govern  them,  Mr.  Scott  has  once  more  written  on  the
Burmese.  .  .  .  Mr.  Scott  claims  to  have  covered  the  whole  ground,  to  show  Burma
as  it  was,  is,  and  will  be;  and  as  there  is  nobody  competent  to  criticise  him  except

24  OMENS   OF  SPORT.

himself,  we  shall  not  presume  to  say  how  far  he  has  succeeded.  What,  however,
may  be  asserted  with  absolute  confidence  is,  that  he  has  written  a  bright,  readable,
and  useful  book." — Saturday  Review,  March  27.

"  Very  lively  and  readable." — Pall  Mall  Gazelle.

"  The  author  knows  what  he  writes  about." — St.  Stephcris  Review.

"  There  is  a  good  deal  of  curious  reading  in  the  book." — Literary  World.

"The  book  is  amusing  and  instructing,  and  Mr.  George  Redway,  the  publisher,
will  have  done  the  public  and  himself  a  service." — Court  Journal.

"  The  print  is  clear,  and  the  binding  in  excellent  taste." — Bookseller,

"  Evidently  full  of  genuine  information." — Society.

"  A  handy  guide  to  Burma,  as  readable  as  it  is  accurate." — Glove.

"Mr.  Scott  should  have  called  this  volume  'A  Book  for  Members  of  Parliament.' "
— Loudon  and  China  Telegraph.

"The  sketch  of  Burmese  cosmogony  and  mythology  is  very  interesting." —
Nature.

"  A  competent  historian.      He  sketches  Burma  and  the  Burmans  with  minute
fidelii  y. " —  Daily  Chronicle.

"  Probably  no  Englishman  knows  Burma  better  than  Mr.  J.  G.  Scott." — Con-
temporary Review.

"An  excellent  description  both  of  land  and  people." — Contenporary  Revieiv.

"  Most  interesting." — St.  James's  Gazette.

"  Shway  Yoe  is  a  graphic  writer  ...  no  one  can  supply  this  information  better
than  Mr.  Scott." — Asiatic  Quarterly  Review.

Crown  8vo.,  picture  cover,  is.

DREAMS  OF  THE  DERBY:

Together  with  many  curious  tips  and  omens  for  other  Races,  now  first  collected
and  arranged  for  the  printer.     By  Fortunatus.

Contents  : — About  Sir  Peter  Teazle — Derby  Dreams — Eleanor — Lapdog  and
Cadland — Dangerous — Spaniel,  winner  of  the  Derby  in  1831 — Plenipotentiary —
Flying  Dutchman — Daniel  O'Rourke — Caractacus  :  Snewing's  Dream — A  Hop-
Merchant's  Dream — Dreams  of  Caractacus — Ellington — A  Story  of  ,£25,000 —
Pyrrhus  the  First — Macaroni — Cremorne — Derby  Sweeps — Dugdale's  Dream —
Uncle  John's  Dream— A  Club  Steward's  Luck — Doncaster's  Derby — Another  of
Fred  Booth's  Stories — Bluegown — A  Waif's  Tips — Blair  Athol — Bloomsbury'sYear
— Sham  Dreamers — Couronne  de  Fer — Lottie  Fowler — About  Derby  and  other  Tip-
sters— "  Chanticleer's"  Tip — Executor — Kisber — Miscellaneous — Poetic  Prophets
of  the  Derby — The  Oaks  and  St.  Leger — Marie  Stuart's  Oaks— St.  Leger — Caller
Ou — Hawihomden — Craig  Millar's  Year — Knight  of  St.  George — Achievement —

THE   HACHISH  EATER.  25

Earlier  Dreams  and  Omens — Dreams  of  Handicap  and  other  Race  Winners — A
Dream  of  Diophantus — The  Fate  of  Dundee — Another  Dundee  Story — See- Saw — •
Fanciful  Backing — Prevision  of  an  Accident — A  Conspiracy  of  1843 — Flash-in-the-
Pan — -One  Act — Bob  Smart's  Glenlivat  Dream — Inveresk — Julius — Tips  for  the
Northumberland  Plate — A  Clever  Backer — The  Chief's  Presentiment — Lowlander's
Victory  at  Ascot — Gubat.

Fcap.  8vo. ,  cloth,  price  y.  6d.

THE   LOVE  AFFAIR:

A    DRAMA   OF   AN    ANCIENT    DEMOCRACY.

In  five  Acts,  with  six  Tableaux.  By  W.  W.  Aldred,  author  of  "A  Lost
Cause."

"  There  are  gleams  of  nature,  of  wit,  of  observation,  and  even  of  verse,  in  'The
Love  Affair.'  The  style  is  free  from  mere  verbiage  and  line  padding  ;  and  it
changes  with  freedom  from  the  old  and  stately  to  the  modern  and  familiar. " — Pall
Mall  Gazette.

An  edition  de  luxe,  in  demy  l8mo,  price  is.

CONFESSIONS  OF  AN   ENGLISH
HACHISH   EATER.

"There  is  a  sort  of  bizarre  attraction  in  this  fantastic  little  book,  with  its  weird,
unhealthy  imaginations." — Whitehall  Review.

"  Imagination  or  some  other  faculty  plays  marvellous  freaks  in  this  little  book."
— Lloyds  Weekly.

"A  weird  little  book.  .  .  .  The  author  seems  to  have  been  delighted  with  his
dreams,  and  .  .  .  carefully  explains  how  hachish  may  be  made  from  the  resin  or
the  common  hemp  plant." — Daily  Chronicle.

"To  be  added  to  the  literature  of  what  is,  after  all,  a  very  undesirable  subject.
Weak  minds  may  generate  a  morbid  curiosity  if  stimulated  in  this  direction." —
B-7-adford  Observer.

"  The  stories  told  by  our  author  have  a  decidedly  Oriental  flavour,  and  we  would
not  be  surprised  if  some  foolish  individuals  did  endeavour  to  procure  some  of  the
drug,  with  a  view  to  experience  the  sensation  described  by  the  writer  of  this  clever
brochure. " — Edinburgh  Courant.

c

NEW  POEM  BY  MR.    SWINBURNE.

In  crown  Svo. ,  parchment,  price  3-r.  61.

THE  ANATOMY  OF  TOBACCO;

Or,  Smoking  Methodised,  Divided,  and  Considered  after  a  New  Fashion.  By
Leolinus  Siluriensis.

' '  A  very  clever  and  amusing  parody  of  the  metaphysical  treatises  once  in  fashion.
Every  smoker  will  be  pleased  with  this  volume." — Notes  and  Queries.

"  We  have  here  a  most  excellent  piece  of  fooling,  evidently  from  a  University
pen.  .  .  .  Contains  some  very  clever  burlesques  of  classical  modes  of  writing,  and
a  delicious  parody  of  scholastic  logic."— Literary  World.

"A  delightful  mock  essay  on  the  exoteric  philosophy  of  the  pipe  and  the  pipe
bowl  .  .  .  reminding  one  alternately  of  '  Melancholy '  Burton  and  Herr  Teufels-
droch,  and  implying  vast  reading  and  out-of-the-way  culture  on  the  part  of  the
author. " — Bookseller.

Edition  limited  to  250  copies,  each  numbered,  price  5s.

A  WORD  FOR  THE  NAVY.

By  Algernon  Charles  Swinburne.

'"'  Mr.  Swinburne's  new  patriotic  song,  '  A  Word  for  the  Navy,'  is  as  fiery  in  its
denunciation  of  those  he  believes  to  be  antagonistic  to  the  welfare  of  the  country
as  was  his  lyric  with  which  he  startled  the  readers  of  the  Times  one  morning."
— Athenceum.

The  publisher  of  this  poem  is  also  the  sole  proprietor  of  the  copyright ;  it  cannot
therefore  be  included  in  Mr.  Sivinbuiwe's  collected  works.

Crown  %vo. ,  cloth,  price  $s.  6d.
Literary  and  Historical  Edition  of  Poe's  Raven.

THE  RAVEN.

By  Edgar  Allan  Toe,  with  Historical  and  Literary  Commentary  by
John  H. Ingram.

"This  is  an  interesting  monograph  on  Poe's  famous  poem.  First  comes  the
poet's  own  account  of  the  genesis  of  the  poem,  with  a  criticism,  in  which  Mr.
Ingram  declines,  very  properly,  we  think,  to  accept  the  history  as  entirely  genuine.
Much  curious  information  is  collected  in  this  essay.  Then  follows  the  poem  itself,
with  the  various  readings,  and  then  its  after-history  ;  and  after  these  '  Isadore,'  by
Albert  Pike,  a  composition  which  undoubtedly  suggested  the  idea  of  '  The  Raven '
to  its  author.  Several  translations  are  given,  two  in  French,  one  in  prose,  the
other  in  rhymed  verse  ;  besides  extracts  from  others,  two  in  German  and  one  in
Latin.  But  perhaps  the  most  interesting  chapter  in  the  book  is  that  on  the
'  Fabrications.'  " — Spectator.

DICKENS  IN  STAGELAND.  27

"There  is  no  more  reliable  authority  on  the  subject  of  Edgar  Allan  Poe  than
Mr.  John  H.  Ingram.  .  .  .  The  volume  is  well  printed  and  tastefully  bound  in
spotless  vellum,  and  will  prove  to  be  a  work  of  the  greatest  interest  to  all  students
of  English  and  American  literature." — Publishers  Circular.

544  pages,  crown  Svo.,  green  cloth  boards,  price  Js.  61.

DICKENSIANA.

A  Bibliography  of  the  Literature  relating  to  Charles  Dickens  and  his  Writings,
compiled  by  Fred.  G.  Kitton,  author  of  "'Phiz'  (Hablot  K.  Browne),  a
Memoir,"  and  "John  Leech,  Artist  and  Humourist,"  with  a  portrait  of  "  Boz,"
from  a  drawing  by  Samuel  Laurence.

"  This  book  is  honestly  what  it  pretends  to  be,  and  nothing  more.  It  is  a  com-
prehensive catalogue.of  all  the  writings  of  Mr.  Charles  Dickens,  and  of  a  good
quantity  of  books  written  about  him.  It  also  contains  copious  extracts  from  reviews
of  his  works  and  from  sermons  on  his  character.  The  criticisms  are  so  various,
and  some  of  them  are  so  much  at  variance  with  others,  that  the  reader  of  them
can  complain  of  nothing  less  than  a  lack  of  material  on  which  to  form  his  judg-
ment, if  he  has  not  formed  it  already,  on  the  claim  of  Mr.  Dickens  to  occupy  a
front  place  in  the  rank  of  English  classics.  Assertions,  if  not  arguments,  are
multiplied  on  either  side." — Saturday  Review.

"Mr.  Fred.  G.  Kitton  .  .  .  has  done  his  work  with  remarkable  thorough-
ness, and  consequently  with  real  success.  It  is  a  subject  on  which  I  may  fairly
claim  to  speak,  and  I  may  say  that  all  I  know,  and  a  great  deal  I  did  not
know,  about  Dickens  is  to  be  found  in  Mr.  Kitton's  work." — "Atlas,"  in  the
World.

"DICKENSIANA."

"  If  with  your  Dickens-lore  you'd  make

Considerable  headway,
The  way  to  be  well-read's  to  take

This  book  brought  out  by  REDWAY.
'Tis  clear,  exhaustive,  and  compact,

Both  well  arranged  and  written  ;
A  mine  of  anecdote  and  fact,

Compiled  by  F.  G.  KITTON."— Punch.

In  preparation.

DICKENS  AND  THE  STAGE.

By  T.  Edgar  Pemberton,  author  of  "Dickens's  London."

With  new  portraits  of  Mr    Irving  as   "Jingle,"  Mr.   Toole  as  "The  Artful
Dodger,"  and  Miss  Jennie  Lee  as  "Jo."

28  CRUIKS HANK  AND    THACKERAY.

Uniform  with  "  Hints  to  Collectors"  price  6s.

THE  BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF  SWINBURNE.

A  Bibliographical  List  arranged  in  Chronological  Order  of  the  Published  Writings
in  Verse  and  Prose  of  Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  (1857-1887).

Preface  to  the  New  Edition.

Born  on  April  5,  1837,  in  the  year  of  Queen  Victoria's  accession,  of  which  the
whole  nation  is  now  celebrating  the  Jubilee,  Algernon  Charles  Swinburne  to-day
attains  the  jubilee  or  fiftieth  year  of  his  own  life,  and  may  be  therefore  claimed  as
an  essentially  and  exclusively  Victorian  poet.  Of  the  half-century  of  life  now  com-
pleted, more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century  has  been  devoted  to  fruitful  and  noble
work  in  song  and  to  work  hardly  less  fruitful  and  noble  in  the  field  of  criticism.

In  issuing  this  new  edition,  revised  throughout  and  brought  down  to  date,  of  a
bibliographical  record  originally  published  nearly  four  years  ago,  the  compiler
cannot  deny  himself  the  pleasure  of  associating  with  the  date  the  coincidence,  not
only  of  a  double  jubilee,  but  also  of  a  double  birthday,  viz.,  his  own.

Long  distant  may  the  day  be  when  this  record,  already  so  goodly  an  one,  can  be
made  complete  in  a  final  sense,  and  collectors  of  the  books  of  our  greatest  Victorian
poet  and  critic  be  able  to  echo  Lord  Melbourne's  callous  expression  of  grateful
relief  that  they  can  bind  him  up  !

As  on  former  occasions,  the  compiler  invites  the  co-operation  of  literary  corre-
spondents, and  will  be  grateful  to  anyone  who  will  correct  an  error  or  supply  an
omission.

A  few  large-paper  copies,  with  India  proof  portrait,  in  imperial 8vo.,  parchment-
paper  covers,  price  Js.  6d.

AN  ESSAY  ON  THE  GENIUS  OF  GEORGE
CRUIKSHANK.

'  By  "  Theta  "  (William  Makepeace  Thackeray),  with  all  the  original
woodcut  illustrations,  a  new  portrait  of  Cruikshank,  etched  by  Pailthorpe,
and  a  prefatory  note  on  Thackeray  as  an  Art  Critic,  by  W.  E.  Church.

"Thackeray's  essay  'On  the  Genius  of  George  Cruikshank,'  reprinted  from  the
Westminster  Review,  is  a  piece  of  work  well  calculated  to  drive  a  critic  of  these
days  to  despair.  How  inimitable  is  its  touch  !  At  once  familiar  and  elegant,
serious  and  humorous,  enthusiastically  appreciative,  and  yet  just  and  clear-sighted;
but,  above  all,  what  the  French  call  personnel.  It  is  not  the  impersonnel  reviewer
who  is  going  through  his  paces  ...  it  is  Thackeray  talking  to  us  as  few
can  talk — talking  with  apparent  carelessness,  even  ramblingly,  but  never  losing  the
thread  of  his  discourse  or  saying  a  word  too  much,  nor  ever  missing  a  point  which
may  help  to  elucidate  his  subject  or  enhance  the  charm  of  his  essay.  .  .  .  Mr.  W.
E.  Church's  prefatory  note  on  '  Thackeray  as  an  Art  Critic  '  is  interesting  and  care-
fully compiled." — Westminster  Review.

"As  the  original  copy  of  the  Westminster  is  now  excessively  rare,  this  re-
issue will,  no  doubt,  be  welcomed  by  collectors." — Birmingham  Daily  Mail.

"The  new  portrait  of  Cruikshank  by  F.  W.  Pailthorpe  is  a  clear,  firm  etching.'*
—  The  Artist.

HINTS   TO  BOOK  COLLECTORS.  29

Printed  on  hand-made  paper  and  bound  in  vellum,  crown  Svo.,  price  6s.
Hints  to  Collectors  of  Original  Editions  of  the  Works  of

WILLIAM  MAKEPEACE  THACKERAY.

By  Charles  Plumptre  Johnson.

"  .  .  .  .A  guide  to  those  who  are  great  admirers  of  Thackeray,  and  are  collect-
ing first  editions  of  his  works.  The  dainty  little  volume,  bound  in  parchment  and
printed  on  hand-made  paper,  is  very  concise  and  convenient  in  form  ;  on  each  page
is  an  exact  copy  of  the  title-page  of  the  work  mentioned  thereon,  a  collation  of
pages  and  illustrations,  useful  hints  on  the  differences  in  editions,  with  other  matters
indispensable  to  collectors.  .  .  .  Altogether  it  represents  a  large  amount  of  labour
and  experience. " — Spectator.

"  .  .  .  .  Mr.  Johnson  has  evidently  done  his  work  with  so  much  loving  care
that  we-  feel  entire  confidence  in  his  statements.  The  prices  that  he  has  affixed  in
every  case  form  a  valuable  feature  of  the  volume,  which  has  been  produced  in  a
manner  worthy  of  its  subject-matter." — Academy.

"The  list  of  works  which  Mr.  Johnson  supplies  is  likely  to  be  of  high  interest
to  Thackeray  collectors.  His  preliminary  remarks  go  beyond  this  not  very
narrow  circle,  and  have  a  value  for  all  collectors  of  modern  works."- — Notes  and
Queries.

"  ....  It  is  choicely  printed  at  the  Chiswick  Press  ;  and  the  author,  Mr.
Charles  Plumptre  Johnson,  treats  the  subject  with  evident  knowledge  and  enthu-
siasm. .  .  .  It  is  not  a  Thackeray  Bibliography,  but  a  careful  and  minute  descrip-
tion of  the  first  issues,  with  full  collations  and  statement  of  the  probable  cost.  .  .  .
Mr.  Johnson  addresses  collectors,  but  is  in  addition  a  sincere  admirer  of  the  greatest
satirist  of  the  century." — Book  Lore.

Printed  on  hand-made  paper,  and  bound  in  vellum,  crown  Svo.,  price  6s.
Hints  to  Collectors  of  Original  Editions  of  the  Works  of

CHARLES  DICKENS.

By  Charles  Plumptre  Johnson.

"  Enthusiastic  admirers  of  Dickens  are  greatly  beholden  to  Mr.  C.  P.  Johnson
for  his  useful  and  interesting  'Hints  to  Collectors  of  Original  Editions  of  the
Works  of  Charles  Dickens  '  (Redway).  The  book  is  a  companion  to  the  similar
guide  to  collectors  of  Thackeray's  first  editions,  is  compiled  with  the  like  care,  and
produced  with  the  like  finish  and  taste." — Saturday  Review.

"This  is  a  sister  volume  to  the  'Hints  to  Collectors  of  First  Editions  of
Thackeray,'  which  we  noticed  a  month  or  two  ago.  The  works  of  Dickens,  with
a  few  notable  '  Dickensiana,' make  up  fifty-eight  numbers,  .  .  .  and  Mr.  Johnson
has  further  augmented  the  present  volume  with  a  list  of  thirty-six  plays  founded
on  Dickens's  works,  and  another  list  of  twenty-three  published  portraits  of
Dickens.  As  we  are  unable  to  detect  any  slips  in  his  work,  we  must  content
ourselves  with  thanking  him  for  the  correctness  of  his  annotations.  It  is  un-
necessary to  repeat  our  praise  of  the  elegant  format  of  these  books." — Academy.

3o  BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF  THACKERAY.

Only  ioo  copies  printed,  foolscap  Zvo.,  printed  on  hand-made  paper  at  the  Chiswick
Pi-ess,  and  bound  in  parchment  by  Burn  to  form  a  companion  volume  to  "  Tamer-
lane" price  \os.  6d.

BEAUTY  AND  THE  BEAST;

or,  A  Rough  Outside  with  a  Gentle  Heart.

By  Charles  Lamb.     Now  first  reprinted  from  the  original  edition  of  1S1 1,  with
Preface  and  Notes  by  Richard  Herne  Shepherd.

Price  2 1  j.

TAMERLANE,

And  Other  Poems.     By  Edgar  Allan  Poe.

First  published  at  Boston  in  1S27,  and  now  first  republished  from  a  unique  copy
of  the  original  edition,  with  a  preface  by  Richard  Herne  Shepherd.

100  copies  printed.      Tzuo  copies  only  remain.

An  edition  de  luxe  in  demy  \Zmo.,  price  is.

JOHN  LEECH,  ARTIST  AND  HUMOURIST.

A  Biographical  Sketch  by  Fred.  G.  Kitton.     New  edition,  revised.
The  only  published  biography  of  John  Leech.

"In  the  absence  of  a  fuller  biography  we  cordially  welcome  Mr.   Kitton's  in-
teresting little  sketch." — Notes  and  Queries.

"  The  multitudinous  admirers  of  the  famous  artist  will  find  this  touching  mono-
graph well  worth  careful  reading  and  preservation." — Daily  Chronicle.

"  The  very  model  of  what  such  a  memoir  should  be." — Graphic.

In  large  8vo.,   -uniform  with  the  new  "  Standard"  edition  of  Thackeray's  Works,

price  1  or.  6d.

SULTAN  STORK,

And  other  Stories  and  Sketches  by  William  Makepeace  Thackeray  (1S29-
44),  now  first  collected,  to  which  is  added  the  Bibliography  of  Thackeray,
revised  and  considerably  enlarged.

The  Athencmin  says  : — "  Admirers  of  Thackeray  may  be  grateful  for  a  reprint
of '  Sultan  Stork.'  "

POPULAR    CULTURE.

"  The  remains  of  Thackeray  are  now  in  the  hands  of  the  resurrectionists.  Writers
in  the  Athenaum  have  been  gloating  over  them,  and  Mr.  George  Redway,  a
London  publisher  of  peculiar  and  quaint  literature,  has  issued  a  handsome  volume
of  Thackerayan  fragments." — Glasgow  Herald.

"  Thackeray  collectors,  however,  have  only  to  be  told  that  none  of  the  pieces
now  printed  appear  in  the  two  volumes  recently  issued  by  Messrs.  Smith,  Elder,
and  Co.,  in  order  to  make  them  desire  their  possession.  They  will  also  welcome
the  revision  of  the  Bibliography,  since  it  now  presents  a  complete  list,  arranged  in
chronological  order,  of  Thackeray's  published  writings  in  prose  and  verse,  and
also  of  his  sketches  and  drawings." — Daily  Chronicle.

"'Sultan  Stork'  ....  which  purports  to  be  told  by  Scheherazade  on  the
thousand  and  second  of  the  'Arabian  Nights,'  is  undoubtedly  the  work  of  Mr.
Thackeray,  and  is  quite  pretty  and  funny  enough  to  have  found  a  place  in  his  col-
lected miscellanies.  '  Dickens  in  France  '  is  as  good  in  its  way  as  Mr.  Thackeray's
analysis  of  Alexander  Dumas'  '  Kean  '  in  the  '  Paris  Sketch-Book. '  .  .  .  There
are  other  slight  sketches  in  this  volume  which  are  evidently  by  Mr.  Thackeray,
and  several  of  his  obiter  dicta  in  them  are  worth  preserving.  .  .  .  We  do  not  assume
to  fix  Mr.  Thackeray's  rank  or  to  appraise  his  merits  as  an  art  critic.  We  only
know  that,  in  our  opinion,  few  of  his  minor  writings  are  so  pleasant  to  read  as
his  shrewd  and  genial  comments  on  modern  painters  and  paintings." — Saturday
Review.

In  large  crown  %vo. ,  price  3s.  6d.

SITHRON,  THE  STAR  STRICKEN.

Translated  (Ala  bere/cet  Allah)  from  an  ancient  Arabic  Manuscript,  by  Salem
Ben  Uzaik,  of  Bassora.

"This  very  remarkable  book,  '  Sithron,'  ...  is  a  bold,  pungent,  audacious
satire  upon  the  ancient  religious  belief  of  fhe  Jews."  .  .  ."No  one  can  read  the  book
without  homage  to  the  force,  the  tenderness,  and  the  never-failing  skill  of  its
writer." — St.  James's  Gazette.

Handsomely  printed  and  tastefully  bound,  436  pages,  large  crown  8z>o. ,
cloth  extra,  'js.  6d.

ESSAYS  IN  THE  STUDY  OF  FOLK-
SONGS.

By  the  Countess  Evelyn  Martinengo-Cesaresco.

"  A  pleasant  volume  on  a  pleasant  topic.  .  .  .  The  Countess,  with  her  sincere
enthusiasm  for  what  is  simple,  passionate,  and  sensuous  in  folk-song,  and  with  her
lucid  and  unaffected  style,  well  understands  the  mode  in  which  the  educated
collector  should  approach  the  shy  singers  or  story-tellers  of  Europe.  .  .  .  Her
introduction  is  perhaps,  to  the  scientific  student  of  popular  culture,  the  best  part  of
her  book.  .  .  .  Next  to  her  introduction,  perhaps  her  article  on  '  Death  in  Folk-
Poetry  '  is  the  most  serviceable  essay  in'  the  volume.   .   .  .   '  Folk  Lullabies '  is

32  ORIENTAL   STORIES.

perhaps  the  most  pleasant  of  the  remaining  essays  in  the  admirable  volume,  a
volume  remarkable  for  knowledge,  sympathy,  and  good  taste." — Extracts  from  a
page  notice  in  the  Saturday  Review,  April  24,  1886.

"  This  is  a  very  delightful  book,  full  of  information  and  thoughtful  suggestions.
It  deals  principally  with  the  Folk-songs  of  Southern  peoples,  Venetian,  Sicilian,
Armenian,  Provence,  and  Greek  Songs  of  Calabria,  but  there  are  several  essays
devoted  to  the  general  characteristics  of  Folk-Poetry,  such  as  the  influence  of
Nature,  the  Inspiration  of  Death,  the  idea  of  Fate,  the  numerous  songs  connected
with  the  rites  of  May,  Folk- Lullabies,  and  Folk-Dirges.  There  is  also  an  inte-
resting essay  on  what  is  called  the  White  Paternoster,  and  Children's  Rhyming
Prayers.  This  is  one  of  the  most  valuable,  and  certainly  one  of  the  most  interesting,
books  which  have  been  written  on  a  subject  which  has  of  late  years  been  exciting
an  ever-increasing  attention,  and  which  involves  many  important  problems  con-
nected with  the  early  history  of  the  human  race." — Standard.

"'Folk-Songs,'  traditional  popular  ballads,  are  as  tempting  to  me  as  King
Charles's  head  to  Mr.  Dick.  But  interesting  as  the  topic  of  the  origin  and  diffusion
and  literary  merit  of  these  poems  may  be — poems  much  the  same  in  all  European
countries — they  are  rather  caviare  to  the  general.  The  Countess  Martinengo-
Cesaresco  is,  or  should  be,  a  well-known  authority  among  special  students  of  this
branch  of  literature,  to  whom  I  heartily  commend  her  '  Essays  in  the  Study  of
Folk-Songs. '  The  Countess  is,  perhaps,  most  familiar  with  Southern  volksleider,
as  of  Greece,  Italy,  and  Sicily.  Her  book  is  a  treasure-house  of  Folk-lore  of
various  kinds,  and  the  matter  is  handled  with  much  poetic  appreciation  and  a  good
deal  of  learning. " — Daily  News.

"  A  kind  of  popular  introduction  to  the  study  of  Folk-lore." — St.  James's
Gazelle.

About  500  pages,  crown  8z>o.,  cloth,  price  lew.  6d.

THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  FORTY  VEZIRS ;

or,  The  Story  of  the  Forty  Morns  and  Eves.

Written  in  Turkish  by  Sheykh-Zada,  and  now  done  into  English  by  E.  ].  W.
Gieb,  M.R.A.S.

"  The  interest  of  this  compilation  is  naturally  not  to  be  compared  to  that
aroused  by  the  ever-fresh  '  Thousand  and  One  Nights  ;  '  but  it  has  had  high  repu-
tation among  particular  admirers,  and  the  gentleman  to  whom  we  are  indebted
for  this  English  version — apparently  the  most  complete  in  any  language  of  Western
Europe — merits  the  thanks  of  the  reading  public  for  the  work  performed." —
Athenceum.

"A  delightful  addition  to  the  wealth  of  Oriental  stories  available  to  English
readers  is  '  The  History  of  the  Forty  Vezirs  '  (Redway),  done  into  English  by  Mr.
E.  J.  W.  Gibb,  from  the  Turkish  of  Sheykh-Zada.  The  collection  comprises  112
stories.  To  the  forty  told  by  the  Lady  and  those  of  the  forty  Vezirs,  Mr.  Gibb  has
added  four  from  Belletete,  twenty  from  a  MS.  in  the  India  Office,  six  from  Dr.
Behrnauer's  translation,  and  two  from  a  MS.  recently  purchased  by  Mr.  Quaritch.
The  results  of  collation  are  admirably  summarized  in  a  comparative  table  that
analyzes  the  contents  of  the  various  texts.  In  the  preface  Mr.  Gibb  deals  with  the
bibliography  of  the  French  and  German  versions,  and  indicates  some  of  the  more

PRIMITIVE  BELIEFS  AND   CUSTOMS.

interesting  parallels  suggested  by  those  old  stories  in  the  '  Gesta  Romanorum,'  the
'Decameron,'  the  'Thousand  and  One  Nights,'  the  '  Mabinogion,'  and  other
treasures  of  old-world  fable.  In  short,  Mr.  Gibb  has  considerately  done  everything
to  help  the  reader  to  an  intelligent  appreciation  of  this  charming  book." — Saturday
Review.

"  In  my  opinion  the  version  is  definite  and  final.  The  style  is  light  and  pleasant,
with  the  absolutely  necessary  flavour  of  quaintness  ;  and  the  notes,  though  short
and  few,  are  sufficient  and  satisfactory.  Mr.  Gibb  does  not  write  only  ad  clerum  ;
and  thus  he  has  been  obliged  to  '  leave  in  the  obscurity  of  an  Eastern  language  '
three  whole  tales  (pp.  353,  366,  and  399),  No.  2  being  exceedingly  witty  and
fescennine.  He  has  the  good  sense,  when  he  supplants  a  broad  joke  by  a  banal
English  phrase,  to  subjoin  in  a  note  the  original  Turkish  (pp.  109,  140,  199,  215,
and  3S2)..  Yet  some  of  the  novelle  are  highly  spiced  enough :  see  the  amorous
princess  in  the  Eleventh  Wazir's  story  (pp.  381-3)  ;  and  the  truly  Turkish  and
unspeakable  version  of  modest  iEsop's  'Countryman  and  his  Son.'  Of  the  less
Milesian  I  would  especially  commend  the  story  of  the  Venus-star  and  the  magical
angels,  Harut  and  Marut  (p.  167) ;  the  explanation  of  the  proverb,  '  Take  counsel
of  the  cap  that  is  on  thy  head  '  (p.  362),  and  the  Thirty-seventh  Wazir's  tale,
showing  why  'men  have  beaten  their  wives  since  the  clays  of  Saint  Adam'  (p.  349)."
— Sir  Richard  F.  Burton,  in  the  Academy.

Large fost  Sz>o.,  cloth,  ztncut,  price  Is.  6d.

THE  BLOOD  COVENANT:

A  Primitive  Rite  and  its  Bearings  on  Scripture,  by  H.  Clay  Trumbull,  D.D.

"  An  admirable  study  of  a  primitive  belief  and  custom.  One  of  the  utmost
importance  in  considering  the  growth  of  civilization."

"A  profound  interest  will  be  aroused  by  the  keenness  and  clearness  of  vision,  no
less  than  by  the  wealth  of  learning,  by  means  of  which  he  follows  a  line  of  research,
tracing  through  this  one  rite  the  cannibalism  of  savages  to  a  religious  impulse  not
essentially  different  in  its  symbolical  aspect  from  one  of  the  most  vital  principles  of
Christianity.  In  the  details  of  the  work  will  be  found  much  to  attract  the  attention
of  the  curious.  Its  fundamental  and  essential  value,  however,  is  for  the  student  of
religions  ;  and  all  such  will  be  grateful  to  Dr.  Trumbull  for  this  solid,  instructive,
and  enlightening  work." — Scotsman.

Demy  Sz'o.,  cloth,  price  10s.  6d.

SERPENT-WORSHIP  AND  OTHER  ESSAYS,

With  a  Chapter  on  Totemism,  by  C.  Staniland  Wake,  Member  of  the  Anthro-
pological Institute  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland.

Contents  : — Rivers  of  Life — Phallism  in  Ancient  Religions — The  Origin  of  Ser-
pent-Worship— The  Adamites — The  Descendants  of  Cain — Sacred  Prostitution —
Marriage  among  Primitive  Peoples — Marriage  by  Capture — Development  of  the
Family— The  Social  Position  of  Woman  as  affected  by  "Civilisation  " — Spiritism
and  Modern  Spiritualism — Totems  and  Totemism — Man  and  the  Ape.

34  WORTHIES   OF  SOMERSET.

In  demy  %vo.,  choicely  printed,  cloth,  or  Japanese  parchment,  price  J's.  6a.

PRIMITIVE  SYMBOLISM

As  illustrated  in  Phallic  Worship  ;  or,  The  Reproductive  Principle,  by  the  late
Hodder  M.  Westropp.  With  an  Introduction  by  Major-General  Forlong,
author  of  "  Rivers  of  Life."

"This  work  is  a  ;«!(//«/«  in  parvo  of  the  growth  and  spread  of  Phallicism,  as  we
commonly  call  the  worship  of  nature  or  fertilizing  powers.  I  felt,  when  solicited
to  enlarge  and  illustrate  it  on  the  sudden  death  of  the  lamented  author,  that  it
would  be  desecration  to  touch  so  complete  a  compendium  by  one  of  the  most  com-
petent and  soundest  thinkers  who  have  written  on  this  world-wide  faith.  None
knew  better  or  saw  more  clearly  than  Mr.  Westropp  that  in  this  oldest  symbolism
and  worship  lay  the  foundations  of  all  the  goodly  systems  we  call  Religions." —
J.  G.  R.  Forlong.

"  A  well-selected  repertory  of  facts  illustrating  this  subject,  which  should  be  read
by  all  who  are  interested  in  the  study  of  the  growth  of  religions." — Westminster
Review.

In  crown  Svo.,  676  pages,  cloth,  price  IOJ.  6d.

MYTHS,  SCENES,  AND  WORTHIES  OF
SOMERSET.

By  Mrs.  E.  Boger.

The  author  has  somewhat  departed  from  her  original  intention  of  making  a  col-
lection of  the  myths  and  legends  of  Somerset.  Unwittingly  fiction  glided  into
fact,  and  the  story  developed  into  history,  and  it  was  found  difficult,  if  not  impos-
sible, to  define  their  respective  limits.  For  instance,  though  Arthur  is  an  impal-
pable and  shadowy  personage,  while  Alfred  is  a  most  real  and  substantial  one,  yet
the  mingling  of  truth  and  fable  in  the  story  of  each — as  connected  with  Somerset
— is  only  one  of  degree  ;  and  even  in  later  times,  myth  is  so  intertwined  with  the
lives  of  St.  Dunstan,  of  Sir  John  de  Courcy,  of  Roger  Bacon,  &c,  that,  if  one
tries  rudely  to  tear  away  the  accretions  of  myth  and  fable,  a  maimed  and  distorted
picture  is  all  that  is  left.

Among  the  legends  of  Saints  are  some  of  rare  beauty,  full  of  earnest  thought  and
quaint  suggestiveness.  It  has  been  endeavoured  to  show  that,  instead  of  being,  as
they  are  generally  and  conveniently  classed — with  a  charming  simplicity — as  the
"lying  inventions  of  the  monks,"  they  are  in  most  cases  but  the  loving  exaggera-
tions of  a  simple  age,  to  which  every  unexplained  wonder  was  a  miracle.

Some  of  the  articles  may  be  thought  to  be  of  undue  length  ;  but  St.  Dunstan  is
a  character  so  strangely  misrepresented  in  most  histories,  that  the  author  was
anxious  to  prove  incontestably  his  claim  to  be  one  of  the  worthiest  of  the  worthies
of  Somerset ;  again,  as  to  the  unhappy  Duke  of  Monmouth,  though  the  story  of
his  rebellion  is  of  necessity  taken  chiefly  from  Macaulay,  the  story  of  his  quasi-
royal  progress  is  little  known,  and  Macaulay  studiously  omits  any  palliating  or
softening  circumstance  in  the  terrible  record  of  the  battle  of  Sedgmoor  and  the
Bloody  Assize.

POPULAR  HERALDRY.  35

In  Preparation.

HOW  TO  TRACE  A  PEDIGREE ;

or,  The  Science  of  Heraldry  Explained.

By  Charles  Worthy,  Esq.,  late  of  the  College  of  Arms.

Introductory. — Science  of  Heraldry,  Coats  of  Arms,  Varieties  of  Arms,  Partition
Lines,  Tinctures,  Furs,  Ordinaries,  &c. ,  &c. — Common  Charges,  Lions  and  other
Beasts,  Heraldic  Monsters,  &c,  &c.  —  Miscellaneous  Objects  Alphabetically
arranged. — Technical  Terms  used  in  Heraldry. — The  Rules  of  Blazon. — The
Marshalling  of  Arms,  Hatchments,  &c,  &c.  —  Crests,  Mottoes,  Helmets,
Mantlings,  Supporters,  and  Coronets. — The  Rules  of  Precedence. — Peers,  Baronets,
Knights,  Esquires,  Gentlemen. — Advice  to  Pedigree  Hunters,  How  to  Trace  a
Pedigree,  Parochial  Registers,  Public  Documents,  Probate  Court,  Fees,  &c,  &c.
— The  College  of  Arms,  Officers  of  Arms,  Heraldic  Records,  Heraldic  Fees,
Grants  of  Arms,  Change  of  Name. — Liveries,  with  some  Remarks  upon  Cockades,
and  those  who  are  entitled  to  use  them. — General  Remarks,  Drawing  and  Illumi-
nating, Taxes  in  respect  of  Arms.

Handsomely  printed  on  antique  paper,  and  tastrfully  bound,  priee  2s.  6d.

POPE  JOAN

(The  Female  Pope).

A  Historical  Study.     Translated  from  the  Greek  of  Emmanuel  Rho'idis.     With
Preface  by  Charles  Hastings  Collette.

"When  Dr.  Dollinger  wrote  to  the  effect  that  'the  subject  of  Pope  Joan  has  not
yet  lost  interest,'  he  said  no  more  than  the  truth.  The  probability  is  that  the  topic
will  always  have  its  attractions  for  the  lovers  of  the  curiosities  of  history.  Mr.
Baring-Gould  has  declared  that  'the  whole  story  of  Pope  Joan  is  fabulous,  and
rests  on  not  a  single  historical  foundation  ;'  but  others  are  not  so  firmly  convinced
in  the  matter,  and  at  all  times  there  are  those  who  are  anxious  to  investigate  sin-
gular traditions.  .  .  .  Rho'idis  discusses  the  topic  with  much  learning  and  inge-
nuity, and  Mr.  Collette's  introduction  is  full  of  information. " — Globe.

"  It  is  interesting  enough,  and  is  accompanied  by  curious  illustrations." — Notes
and  Queries.

In  crown  8z>o.,  about  450  pages,  with  illustrations,  and  historico- symbolical  binding,

price  Js.  6d.

THE  REAL  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROSI-
CRUCIANS.

Founded  on  their  own  Manifestoes,  and  on  Facts  and  Documents  collected  from
the  Writings  of  Initiated  Members,  by  Arthur  Edward  Waite,  author  of  "The
Mysteries  of  Magic  :  a  Digest  of  the  Writings  of  Eliphas  Levi."

36  A    ROSICRUCIAN  BOOK.

Influence  of  the  Secret  Societies. — Derivations  of  the  name  Rosicrucian. — On
the  State  of  Mystical  Philosophy  in  Germany  at  the  close  of  the  Sixteenth  Century.
— The  Prophecy  of  Paracelsus. — The  Fama  Fraternitatis  of  the  Meritorious  Order
of  the  Rosy  Cross. — The  Confession  of  the  Rosicrucian  Fraternity. — The  Chymical
Marriage  of  Christian  Rosencreutz. — The  Connection  of  the  Rosicrucian  Claims
with  those  of  Alchemy  and  Magic. — On  the  Antiquity  of  the  Rosicrucian  Frater-
nity.— Theories  as  to  the  Authorship  of  the  Rosicrucian  Manifestoes. — Progress  of
Rosicrucianism  in  Germany. — Rosicrucian  Apologists  :  Michael  Maier,  Robert
Fludd,  Thomas  Vaughan,  &c. — Rosicrucianism  in  France. — Connection  between
the  Rosicrucians  and  Freemasons. — Modern  Rosicrucian  Societies,  &c,  &c.

In  the  present  work  every  important  and  available  fact  has  been  carefully
collected,  and  the  manifestoes  and  other  documents  of  the  Fraternity  are  repub-
lished in  revised  versions.  The  Rosicrucians  as  represented  by  themselves  are,
therefore,  offered  to  English  readers  for  the  first  time  in  the  literature  of  the
subject.  The  task  has  been  performed  by  a  sympathetic  but  impartial  writer,
purged  from  the  bias  of  any  particular  theory,  and  above  all  uncontaminated  by
the  pretension  to  superior  knowledge,  which  claimants  have  never  been  able  to
substantiate.

A  few  copies  o)i!y  remain  of  the  following  important  work,  by  the  author  of  "  The

Rosicrucians ."

PHALLICISM:

Its  connection  with  the  Rosicrucians  and  the  Gnostics,  and  its  Foundation  in
Buddhism,  by  Hargrave  Jennings,  author  of"  The  Rosicrucians.''

"  This  book  is  written  ad  clerum,  and  appeals  to  the  scholar  only,  and  not  to  the
multitude.  It  is  a  masterly  and  exhaustive  account  of  that  worship  of  the  creative
powers  of  nature  which,  under  various  names,  has  prevailed  among  all  the  nations
of  antiquity  and  of  mediaeval  times,  alike  in  Egypt  and  India,  in  Italy  and  Gaul,
among  the  Israelites  of  old,  and  among  the  primitive  inhabitants  of  Great  Britain
and  Ireland  ....  a  most  valuable  auxiliary  to  all  who  care  to  pursue  such  a  sub-
ject of  inquiry,  a  subject  for  which  Mr.  Jennings  is  the  better  fitted  on  account  of
his  long  and  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  Rosicrucians,  their  tenets,  and  their
practices." — Antiquarian  Magazine  and  Bibliographer.

"  Unpleasant  as  this  subject  is,  we  are  quite  prepared  to  agree  that  in  its  scien-
tific aspect,  as  a  form  of  human  worship,  it  has  considerable  importance.  .  .  .  Mr.
Jennings  deals  almost  entirely  with  the  subjective  part  of  his  inquiry,  and  he  has
evidently  made  a  considerable  amount  of  research  into  the  literature  of  early  reli-
gions. .  .  .  He  has  produced  something  which  is,  at  all  events,  worth  the  attention
of  the  student  of  comparative  psychology." — Antiquary.

"  This  book  ....  is  profoundly  learned,  and  gives  evidence  on  each  page  of
deep  thought,  intense  powers  of  research,  clear  and  unmistakable  reasoning,  and
thorough  mastership  of  the  subject.  The  appendix  also  contains  much  very  curious
matter  which  will  interest  those  who  desire  to  study  the  subject  under  all  its
different  aspects  and  bearings." — Reliquary.

"  WE  ARE    THE    GLEANERS  AFTER    TIME."  37

In  small  4/0.,  bound  in  cloth,  price  y.  6d.

THE  DANCE  OF  DEATH

In  Fainting  and  in  Print,  by  T.  Tindall  Wildridge.     With  Woodcuts.

"  The  origin  of  the  Dance  has  been  conjectured  to  have  been  one  of  the  religious
mysteries,  moralities,  or  dramatic  exhibitions  which  at  the  same  time  supplied  a
comedy  and  a  homily.  There  certainly  was  an  acted  processional  dance  in  which
the  players  one  by  one  were  snatched  away  ;  Cervantes  in  '  Don  Quixote  '  mentions
it  as  the  'Cortes  of  Death.'  .  .  .  The  earliest  painting  of  the  Dance  of  Death  is
said  to  be  that  at  Basil,  though  it  is  probable  that  many  of  which  we  have  infor-
mation are  as  old.  The  German  and  Swiss  bridges,  so  often,  too,  the  site  of
religious  buildings,  were  decollated  with  the,  representation  ;  an  example  is  upon
the  Pont  des  Moulins  leading  into  Lucerne,  where  is  a  fine  Dance,  restored  within
the  last  few  years."  The  blocks  illustrating  this  work  are  a  series  found  in  a
northern  printing  office  many  years  ago.  They  seem  to  be  of  considerable  age,
and  are  somewhat  close  copies  of  Holbein's  designs.

Monthly,  is.      Volumes  I.  to  XI.,  now  ready,  price  Js.  6d.  each.

WALFORD'S  ANTIQUARIAN  MAGAZINE
AND  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  REVIEW.

Edited  by  G.  W.  Red  way,  F.R.Hist.S.

The  following  are  the  Contents  of  the  first  Four  Numbers  published  this  year.
Articles  : — Domesday  Book. — Frostiana. — Some  Kentish  Proverbs. — The  Lite-
rature of  Almanacks. — "Madcap  Harry"  and  Sir  John  Popham. — Tom  Coryate
and  his  Crudities. — Notes  on  John  Wilkes  and  Boswell's  Life  of  Johnson. — ■
Rarities  in  the  Locker-Lampson  Collection. — A  Day  with  the  late  Mr.  Edward
Solly. — The  Defence  of  England  in  the  16th  Century. — The  Ordinary  from  Mr.
Thomas  Jenyns'  Booke  of  Amies. — A  Forgotten  Cromwellian  Tomb. — -Visitation
of  the  Monasteries  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII. — The  Rosicrucians. — The  Seilliere
Library. — A  Lost  Work. — Sir  Bevis  of  Hampton. — More  Kentish  Proverbs. — ■
Cromwell  and  the  Saddle  Letter  of  Charles  I, —Recent  Discoveries  at  Rome. —
Folk-Lore  of  British  Birds. — An  Old  Political  Broadside. — Notes  for  Coin  Col-
lectors.— Higham  Priory. — Byways  of  Periodical  Literature. — How  to  Trace'  a
Pedigree. — The  Curiosities  of  Ale. — The  Books  and  Bookmen  of  Reading. — The
Language  of  the  Law. — Words,  Idioms,  &c,  of  the  Vulgar. — Notes  on  Old  Chel-
sea.— The  Romans  in  Cumbria.

Collectanea. — Early  Italian  Prints. — Tercentenary  of  the  Potato. — Chaucer
Discovery. — Sir  John  Soane's  Museum. — Copyright  in  Government  Publications.
— Pausanias. — The  Loan  of  Manuscripts. — Paper  Making  in  1588. — Portraits  of
Charles  Dickens. — Hopton  Castle. — A  very  Ancient  Watch. — The  Value  of  Anti-
quarian Study. — Curious  Forestry  Privilege. — A  "Factory." — Thimbles  Old  and
New. — Mrs.  Glasse's  Cookery  Book. — A  Bucks  Estate. — Chalfont  St.  Giles. —
Greek  Coins. — Shakespearian  Literature. — Geography  in  the  Sixteenth  Century. —
Welsh  Place  Names. — Japanese  Art. — Duelling  in  1760. — Shelleyana. — English
Archers.  — Oriental  Porcelain.  — South  Italian  Folk-Lore.  — Serpent-Lore.  — Modern

LOCAL    HISTORY,

Witches. — The  Domesday  Plough. — A  Bishop  of  the  Olden  Time. — Historical
Treasures  in  the  TJpsala  Cathedral. — The  Witches  Laider. — Old  Prayer-Book. —
A  Relic  of  James  II. — Pontefract  and  Ripon. — Old  Shoes. — Love  Charms. —
County  Families. — A  Roman  Fire  Brigade. — Parish  Registers. — Border  Raiding.
— Peasant  Proprietors. — Queen  Mary's  Tree. — The  Turks  and  Persians  as  Book-
lovers. — Epitaph  of  John  Ruskin's  Parents. — Quakers. — "Yankee"  and  the
"  Stars  and  Stripes." — Gipsies. — The  Royal  Academy. — Chigwell  Church,  Essex.
■ — Printers'  Errors. — A  Village  CluK — An  Historical  Fishery. — A  Survival. — A
Cock  Match. — Early  Publishing. — Pancakes  at  Westminster  School. — The  Arch-
bishop's Palace  at  Croydon. — The  Art  of  the  Saracens  in  Egypt. — The  Early
Custody  of  Domesday  Book.

Correspondence. — The  late  Bishop  Hannington's  Ancestry. — A  Reader  of
Curious  Books. — Throwing  the  Dart  in  Cork  Harbour. — The  De  la  Poles. — The
Family  of  John  Hampden. — The  "  Olla  Podrida"and  T.  Monro. — Life  of  Bertram
Montfichet. — Magdalen  College,  Oxford. — Book  Bound  in  a  Murderer's  Skin. — A
Forgotten  Society. — Latin  Verses  by  Dr.  Johnson. — "Merchet"  and  the  "Jus
Prima?  Noctis." — Hanna,  Hanet,  and  Wallace. — Another  Book  Bound  in  a  Mur-
derer's Skin. — Humorous  Portrait  of  Charles  Dickens. — Beating  Boys  at  Parish
Boundaries. — Destruction  of  National  Antiquities.

Reviews. — Obituary  Memoirs. — Meetings  of  Learned  Societies. — News

and  Notes.

Fttblished  periodically  y  four  numbers  out,  is.  each.

JOURNAL  OF  THE  BACON  SOCIETY.

Contents  : — Bacon  as  Viewed  by  his  Biographers — Mr.  Donnelly's  Shakespeare
Cipher — Did  Francis  Bacon  write  Shakespeare  ? — Hamlet's  Note  Book — Shake-
speare the  Lawyer ;  Bacon  the  Poet — Bacon  and  Shakespeare  on  the  Solace
derived  from  Contemplation — What  Lawyers  say  about  the  Law  in  Shakespeare
— Shakespeare  the  Lawyer;  Bacon  the  Poet,  Part  II. — Higgins  on  the  Bacon-
Shakespeare  Controversy — Parallelism — Mr.  Donnelly  and  the  Alleged  Cipher — ■
England's  Helicon.

Monthly.     Annual  Subscription,  $s.

THE  EAST  ANGLIAN;

or.  Notes  and  Queries  on  Subjects  connected  with  the  Counties  of
Suffolk,  Cambridge,  Essex,  and  Norfolk.

Edited  by  C.  H.  Evelyn  White,  F.S.A.

Monthly.     Annual  Subscription,  8s.

THE  WESTERN  ANTIQUARY;

or,  Notebook  for  Devon,  Cornwall,  and  Somerset.

Containing  Original  Articles,  Notes,  Queries,  and  Replies.     Illustrated.     Edited
by  W.  H.  K.  Wright,  F.R.H.S.

ENGLAND  IN  THE  SEVENTEENTH  CENTURY.  39

Elegantly  printed  on  Dutch  paper,  and  bound  in  parchment-paper  cover,  price  is.

THE  SCOPE  AND  CHARM  OF  ANTI-
OUARIAN  STUDY.

By  John  Batty,  F.  R.Hist.S.

"  It  forms  a  useful  and  entertaining  guide  to  a  beginner  in  historical  researches."
— Notes  and  Queries.

"  The  author  has  laid  it  before  the  public  in  a  most  inviting,  intelligent,  and
intelligible  form,  and  offers  every  incentive  to  the  study  in  every  department,
including  Ancient  Records,  Manorial  Court-Rolls,  Heraldry,  Painted  Glass,
Mural  Paintings,  Pottery,  Church  Bells,  Numismatics,  Folk-Lore,  &c,  to  each  of
which  the  attention  of  the  student  is  directed.  The  pamphlet  is  printed  on  a
beautiful  modern  antique  paper,  appropriate  to  the  subject  of  the  work."- — Brighton
Examiner.

"  Mr.  Batty,  who  is  one  of  those  folks  Mr.  Dobson  styles  'gleaners  after  time,'
has  clearly  and  concisely  summed  up,  m  the  space  of  a  few  pages,  all  the  various
objects  which  may  legitimately  be  considered  to  come  within  the  scope  of  anti-
quarian study. " — Academy.

In  preparation,  2  vols.,  Sz>o.

THE  WHITE  KING;

or,  England  and  Englishmen  in  the  Reign  of  Charles  I.

By  W.  H.  Davenport  Adams.

This  work  opens  with  a  sketch  of  Charles's  life,  and  goes  on  to  deal  with  the
leading  statesmen,  courtiers,  authors,  artists,  &c.  The  worthies  of  Charles's  reign
— apart  from  the  Civil  War,  which  is  not  dealt  with — are,  to  many  readers,
unfamiliar,  and  it  has  been  the  aim  of  the  author  to  throw  light  on  these
more  obscure  characters  and  aspects  of  the  earlier  portion  of  the  seventeenth
century.

In  preparation,  price  Is.

THE  SHAKESPEARE  CLASSICAL
DICTIONARY;

Or,  Mythological  Allusions  in  the  Plays  of  Shakespeare  explained,  for  the  Use
of  Schools  and  Shakespeare  Reading-Societies.     By  H.  M.  Selby.

CHISWICK    PRESS  : — C.  WHITTINGHAM    AND    CO.,    TOOKS    COURT,
CHANCERY   I.ANE.

/
