The Mysteries of Magic
========================================
A. E. Waite (1886) — Waite's digest of Éliphas Lévi — the book that carried Lévi's system to English readers before the full translation. Source: https://archive.org/details/a.-e.-waite-mysteries-of-magic-of-eliphas-levi. Public domain.

MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

Digitized by Google

Ji-23

To

THE SUBLIME SPIRIT OF
ALPHONSE LOUIS CONSTANT,

$3 Dedicate this Book.

Digitized by Google

THE

yog /
ie iy Copenh

Pe,

MYSTERIES OF MAGIC


A DIGEST OF THE WRITINGS OF

ELIPHAS LEVI :
WITH BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY

BY

ARTHUR EDWARD WAITE .

** Mon livre sera sans portée pour mon siécle . . . . mais que m'importe? J'ai voué
ma vie 2 la vérité, et je le dira pour qui voudra et saura l'entendre. S1 Ce NEST PAS DANS
UN JOUR, IL SERA DANS UN AN, SI CE N'EST PAS DANS UN AN,CE SERA DANS UN SIRCLE, MAIS
JE SUIS TRANQUILLE CAR JE SAIS QU'ON Y VIENDRA. —La Science des Esprits, p. 23.

. LONDON
GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN
1886

BF/6/2
C74

PR

Mi ] Ht

set 01 0064

iy

ies

CONTENTS.
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF ALPHONSE LOUIS CONSTANT . a
CRITICAL ESSAY ON HIS WRITINGS . ; ‘ ' XVii
INTRODUCTION ; : ; ; : , ; : I
INITIATORY EXERCISES AND PREPARATIONS 22

RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS AND HYPo-

THESES—

THE HERMETIC AXIOM. : : ; ‘ . 33
FAITH. : se : : : : 34
THE TRUE GOD. : : : : : : ; : 38
THE CHRIST OF GOD . : : ; ; ; : 42
MYSTERIES OF THE LOGOS : : ; : 48
THE TRUE RELIGION ; : : ; ; : 52

THE REASON OF PRODIGIES, OR THE DEVIL BEFORE
SCIENCE : . , : . : . . P 60

SCIENTIFIC AND MAGICAL THEOREMS—

ON NUMBERS AND THEIR VIRTUES , . Bias 66
THEORY OF WILL-POWER . . . 3 . : : 70
THE TRANSLUCID : : ; , F ; : ; 73

THE GREAT MAGIC AGENT, OR THE MYSTERIES OF THE

ASTRAL LIGHT . : : : , 74
MAGICAL EQUILIBRIUM . : : : ; ; : 79
THE MAGIC CHAIN . ‘ , ’ : 83

THE GREAT MAGIC ARCANUM. . .  ..... 89

Vill CONTENTS.

x

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES, OR KABBALISTIC
PNEUMATICS ; WITH THE MYSTERIES OF EVOCATION,
NECROMANCY, AND BLACK MaGIc—

INTRODUCTION .

IMMORTALITY

THE ASTRAL BODY

UNITY AND SOLIDARITY OF SPIRITS . oy :

THE GREAT ARCANUM OF DEATH, OR SPIRITUAL TRAN-
SITION . : : °

HIERARCHY AND CLASSIFICATION OF SPIRITS
FLUIDIC PHANTOMS AND THEIR MYSTERIES .

ELEMENTARY SPIRITS AND THE RITUAL OF THEIR CON-
JURATION . : : ; : ; ;

NECROMANCY . ° . : , ° ; ‘ :
MYSTERIES OF THE PENTAGRAM AND OTHER PANTACLES ’

MAGICAL CEREMONIAL AND CONSECRATION OF TALIS-
MANS . : ; : ° : ; : .

BLACK MAGIC, AND THE SECRETS OF THE WITCHES’
SABBATH . , ‘ ‘ : : .

WITCHCRAFT AND SPELLS
THE KEY OF MESMERISM
MODERN SPIRITISM . , ‘ . : : : :

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS, OR REALISATIONS OF
MAGICAL SCIENCE—

INTRODUCTION. .

THE MAGNUM OPUS 2S os w2 ws se
THE UNIVERSAL MEDICINE

RENEWED YOUTH

TRANSFORMATIONS

DIVINATION :

ASTROLOGY

THE TAROT, THE BOOK OF HERMES, OR OF THOTH
ETERNAL LIFE, OR PROFOUND PEACE

CONTENTS.

EPILOGUE—
I. THE VISION OF THE WANDERING JEW
2. THE FAREWELL TO CALVARY
3. THE REIGN OF THE MESSIAH
4. THE FINAL VISION

SUPPLEMENT—

THE KABBALAH ~

THAUMATURGICAL EXPERIENCES OF FELIPHAS LEVI—
EVOCATION OF APOLLONIUS OF TYANA .
GHOSTS IN PARIS— THE MAGICIAN AND THE

MEDIUM—ELIPHAS LEVI AND THE SECT OF

EUGENE VINTRAS : : : ‘

THE MAGICIAN AND THE SORCERER—SECRET HIS-
TORY OF THE ASSASSINATION OF THE ARCH-
BISHOP OF PARIS

NOTES ; : . :

1X

309

313

326

342

BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL
ESSAY.

DESPITE the wide reputation in his own country and the
growing European celebrity of the great French Kabbalist
and occultist, who, in the third quarter of this century,
published his immortal elucidations of the Mysteries of
Magic for the instruction of France and the world, under
the Hebraistic pseudonym of Eliphas Lévi Zahed, the
materials for a biography of Alphonse Louis Constant are
meagre and unsatisfactory in the extreme. He was born
in an obscure street of Paris, and was the son of a shoe-
maker in a small way of business, and apparently in the
poorest circumstances. The exact date of his birth I am
unable to state, but it was at the beginning of the century,
and probably at or about the year 1809. He was delicate
in his childhood,* and received no regular education, “but
his aptitude for learning, and his avidity for picking up °
stray bits of knowledge were so great that at last the
neighbours used to talk of him as ‘the clever lad.” + This
precocity introduced him to the notice of the Curé of his
parish, who obtained him a gratuitous education at the
Seminary of Saint Sulpice, where he entered on his studies
for the priesthood, and in addition to proficiency in the two
languages of classical antiquity which would be expected of
an ordinary ecclesiastic, he became “a first-rate Hebrew
scholar.” Thus in this probationary period, he laid the
foundations of that Kabbalistic knowledge which eventually
led him through the darkest paths of esoterism to his recon-
ciliation of religion and science. Grave doubts on matters
of doctrinal belief presented themselves at an early period
to his mind, but they were probably the result of an
acquaintance with Voltairian free-thought, which is the basis
of his occult philosophy, rather than of a juvenile initiation
into the mysteries of magical art. His friend and disciple,
the famous chiromancist Desbarrolles, speaks of his religious

4 Desbarrolles—AMystéres de la Matn. + Theosophist, Jan. 1886.

Xi BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY.

exaltations, and of those doubts and scruples which led him
to relinquish the sacerdotal career when on the point of
engaging himself definitely and irrevocably therein. On
this point we are indebted to Madame Gebhard for the
following curious story :-—

“Before his last vows were taken he was sent as a punish-
ment to an old out-of-the-way monastery, it having been
discovered that he had on several occasions, while preaching
in some country villages, given expression to opinions which
were not considered consistent with the Catholic faith.
He was kept a prisoner in this monastery for some months.
His food was very scanty, consisting of little more than
bread and water. He had a large room allotted to him on
the ground floor; the roof was vaulted, bare cold stones
formed the floor, and the furniture consisted of a pallet
bed, one chair, and a table.

“This part of the monastery was said to be haunted, and
he once related a very curious anecdote in connection with
it. One night being in the dark (for he was not allowed a
light), he heard sounds as if an immense number of people
were marching across the end of the room; they seemed to
come in at one door and go out at another, though in the
day-time he had never found any second mode of ingress
or egress.

“ After passing many agitated and unpleasant hours, he
slept, and on awakening towards dawn saw the figure of a
monk sitting by his side. He was startled, thinking it was
a ghost, when the apparition said to him, ‘ Do not fear; I
ani not a denizen of the other world, but a real living man.’
This monk proved a good friend to him, for from that day
he was better treated, received sufficient food, was given a
smaller and more comfortable room, and had even books
lent to him, and writing materials placed at his disposal.”

Whatever may be otherwise thought of this story, the
imprisonment of Louis Constant was not of a very rigor-
ous kind; the deScription of his original cell corresponds,
except in the matter of size, to those which are in daily
use among many monks of unblemished orthodoxy, and it
is difficult to see how a young cleric who had not taken
final vows, and could have been only in minor orders, was
permitted to perambulate the country preaching indepen-
dently, in defiance of all the law and order so scrupulously
observed in these matters by the whole of the Latin Church.

BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY. Xi!

Even the preaching of deacons who have taken irrevo-
cable vows, is a wholly exceptional thing. Nevertheless,
as a friend and a pupil of Eliphas Lévi in the advancing
years of his life, Madame Gebhard had good opportunities
to ascertain the facts of the case, and, of course, her autho-
rity is very high.

That delightful little pastoral story, Le Sorczer de Meudon,
which Eliphas describes as “d peu pres notre biographie,” *
apparently gives us an idealised picture of the writer's
monastic experiences. The Frére Lubin of that story is
the young Alphonse Louis Constant. Maitre Francois
Rabelais, “le Frére Médecin,” personifies the occult sciences,
and surely it is a device of no ordinary genius to embody
the sublime wisdom of the Magi, which supplies to all “ the
most efficacious consolations and the most salutary coun-
sels,” in “la personne sacrée du joyeux curé de Meudon,”
that supreme “ magician of the gay science in a century of
furious fanaticism and insane extravagance.” *

liphas Lévi at length returned to the world; as in so
many candidates for the Catholic priesthood, it was pro-
bably the scruples to which Desbarrolles refers as much as
the doubts which interfered with his vocation. It does not
appear that he was on bad terms in after life with his
ecclesiastical superiors, for in the year 1850 I find him con-
tributing to that noble and marvellous series of cheap
theological encyclopzdias projected by the Abbé Migne,
his voluminous and interesting “ Dictionary of Christian
Literature,” which is a perfectly orthodox work, though it
avoids dangerous and debateable subjects. His renuncia-
tion of the sacerdotal career was followed by a runaway
Marriage with “a beautiful young girl of sixteen,” who
was the exquisitely-sketched Madeline, “a gentzlle et blonde
petite jouvencelle” of the “ Sorciér de Meudon.” ‘The parents
of the young lady, who had originally refused their consent,
became afterwards reconciled to the match in spite of this
escapade, but “the union,’ says Madame Gebhard, “ was
unfortunately not a happy one; they lost their two children
at an early age, and one morning Eliphas woke up to find
that his wife had left him for ever. He sought consolation
in books, and gave himself up altogether to the occult
sciences,”

* Le Sorcier de Meudon, Preface.
b

XIV BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY.

This tragical finale to a hasty and ill-considered match
is also commemorated in the novel I have referred to.
Frére Lubin is rewarded for the infidelity of his wife by
the inspiration of the poet, and this gift of song again
typifies the occult sciences under a new aspect, for the
power of the Magus is wholly in his discernment of the
natural analogies between God, man, and the universe, as
was divined by Saint Martin, the disciple of Pasqualis
Martinez, in his mystical “ Zadleau.” Eliphas Levi pos-
sessed, moreover, in an eminent degree the two-fold endow-
ment which we find in great poets, namely, profound
knowledge of the human heart, and keen insight, with the
power of discerning correspondences, which is a part of
poetical insight.

After this heartless desertion of her husband, Madame
Constant (whose maiden name I have been unable to dis-
cover) is said to have supported herself by sculpture. She
was not only very handsome but extremely talented ; and
she exhibited at the salon several busts, which she had
herself sculptured, under the name of Madame Claude de
Vingmy. Some time after the Franco-German war she is
said to have married a Monsieur Ronére, who was at that
time a member of the French Parliament. Of her history
subsequent to this event I can find no information.

A divinatory calculation in the Dogme de la Haute
Magze throws a vague glimmer of light on certain epochs
in the life of the author.

“In 1825 family life came to an end for me, and I was
definitively engaged in a fateful path which conducted me
to knowledge and misfortune. In 1843 I travelled as a
pioneer addressing the common people, and persecuted by
ill-intentioned individuals,—in a word, I was honoured and
proscribed.* In 1847, I was violently separated from my
family, and great sufferings for mine and me resulted from
this separation. In 1851 I had employment, which was
moderately but sufficiently remunerative, with some em-
barrassment of position.”

In 1853 Eliphas Lévi repaired to London, where his
reputation as an occultist had preceded him, and where he

* He was apparently engaged in a political propaganda, and was on one
occasion imprisoned for a couple of weeks, on account of some newspaper
article against the (? Imperial) Government.

BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY. XV

performed his celebrated ceremonial evocation of Apol-
lonius of Tyana.* Some passages in the writings of
Eliphas Lévi suggest that he made the acquaintance of
the late Lord Lytton, and the absolute identity between
the mysterious v7t/ of “The Coming Race” and the
universal force of the Astral Light, is conclusive as to the
great novelist’s acquaintance with the works of his Kab-
balistic contemporary. I, therefore, addressed an inquiry
to the present Earl of Lytton, and I am indebted to his
courtesy for the information which follows.

His lordship is almost certain that his father was per-
sonally acquainted with M. Constant, of whose works
there is a copy at Knebworth, presented, he thinks, by the
author. He is under the impression that Eliphas Lévi
made the acquaintance of the late Lord Lytton either at
Paris or at Nice. Among the papers at Knebworth there
is a letter from M. Constant on the existence of a universal
force, and the requisite conditions of its employment for
the é€vocation of spiritual visions and presences. The
letter is only dated “Sunday, 10 April,” the date of the
year is wanting, and from the style it would appear to be
addressed either to a stranger, or to a very distant
acquaintance.

The Dictionnaire de la Littévature Chrétienne was pub-
lished in 1851. It had been preceded by some obscure
efforts, such as the Evangile de la Liberté, written, I
imagine, in conjunction with Alphonse Esquiros, the
fantastic author of “ The Magician,” and one of Louis Con-
stant’s earliest friends.f The Dogme et Rituel de la Haute
Magie were issued separately in 1854 and 1856, but there is
internal evidence to show that they existed originally as a
whole, and were afterwards separated in a somewhat
arbitrary manner, and not without detriment to their
general coherence. These volumes, which set their author
in the foremost rank of occultists, were followed by the
Histoire de la Magie, a work of the first interest, written on
a philosophical plan, but manifesting already a wide diver-

* See ‘* Thaumaturgical Experiences,” chapter i.

+ ‘* The Last Incarmation,” by A. Constant of Geneva, has been translated
from a copy of the French original, which the owner supposed to be unique,
and has been published at Springfield, Ill., U.S.A. This is an unknown
work by Lévi, advocating Socialistic principles. Some of its legends were
subsequently embodied in Za Science des Esprits.

XVI BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY.

gence in the views of its author. In 1861 appeared a
second edition of the Dogme et Rituel, with a long pre-
fatory dissertation embodying the later opinions just
referred to, and scarcely consonant with the work to which
it was prefixed. La Clef des Grands Mystéres was pub-
lished in the same year in which also the admirers of
Eliphas Lévi were delighted by the appearance of the
Sorcier de Meudon. In 1862 the first series of the PAzlo-
sophie Occulte was issued under the title of Fables et
Symboles, and consisted of poetical apologues, containing
rather more of the gold of wisdom than is generally to be
met with in the ore of the fabulists, together with an
occult and philosophical commentary which is full of the
keen insight and characteristic ingenuity of its author.
The second series followed in 1865; this was La Sctence
des Esprits, a defence of the symbolical spirit of the
Christian gospel against the spirits of table-rapping, for, as
Madame Gebhard tells us, Eliphas Levi had “a horror of
Spiritualism, and used to say that mediums and spiritualists
were like children playing with lighted matches near a barrel
of powder, which any moment might explode and destroy
them.” His horror, however, was exaggerated, and origin-
ated, partially at any rate, in the indignation of an initiated
thaumaturge at such a general invasion of the realm of
prodigies by the profanum vulgus of unqualified investi-
gators. The physical and moral deterioration accompany-
ing the indiscriminate use of mediumistic gifts was, however,
in itself a justification for the author’s denunciations, and
La Science des Esprits will take rank among the most
interesting of his productions. It was followed by a silence
of ten years, and in 1875 the gifted spirit of Alphonse
Louis Constant passed to the next stage of its eternal
progress.

We are indebted to Madam Gebhard for the following
portraiture of her revered teacher :—“ He was of ashort and
corpulent figure ; his face was kind and benevolent, beam-
ing with good nature, and he wore a long grey beard which
covered nearly the whole of his breast. His apartment
resembled a bric-d-brac shop, with specimens of the most
beautiful and rare old china, tapestry, and valuable paint-
ings. In one of the rooms there was an alcove in which
stood a bed, covered with a gorgeous quilt of red velvet
heavily embroidered with gold ; the curtains were also of

BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY. XVil

red velvet bordered with massive gold fringe, and a red
velvet step stood before this magnificent couch, having a
soft cushion also of red and gold laid on the top of it... .
He lived a quiet and retired life, having few friends... .
His habits . .. were simple, but he was no vegetarian.
. . . He had a wonderful memory, and a marvellous flow
of language, his expressions and illustrations being of the
choicest and rarest character. ... Never,” says this lady
in her interesting but too brief narrative, “did I leave his
presence without feeling that my own nature had been up-
lifted to nobler and better things, and I look upon Eliphas
Levi as one of the truest friends I ever had, for he taught
me the highest truth which it is in the power of man or
woman to grasp.”

The hand of Eliphas Lévi was engraved by Desbarrolles
in his ALystéres de la Main; it has the highest psychical
and philosophical peculiarities; it indicates “ irresistible
attractions towards sensual gratifications followed immedi-
ately by aspirations towards ascetical life’”—pride and the
most complete indifference alternately ruling his behaviour
—‘and that fatality which, through all his days, impelled
him towards the secret sciences, for which he was created
and of which he bears all the signs, by successively depriv-
ing him of whatever could attach him to actual life, and in
the end of his most cherished affections.”

In the Dogme .et Rituel dela Haute Mage, Eliphas Levi
claims to be in possession of a secret which has once, at
least, revolutionised the world; he claims to have dis-
covered a force by which all miracles divine and diabolical
have been, and may still be, performed, to possess the key
of prophecies, to have traced the exoteric doctrines of all
theogonies to one primal and universal dogma. He has
recovered the claviculz of Solomon, and has “ opened with-
out difficulty every door of the ancient sanctuaries where
absolute truth seemed to slumber ;” he has unravelled the
transcendent secrets which medizval adepts concealed
under the more or less equivocal expressions of the Magnum
Opus, the philosopher's stone, the quadrature of the circle,
the universal medicine, and the transmutation of metals.
He has discovered, in fine, “the secret of human omnipo-

XVII BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY.

tence and of indefinite progression—he is, in one word, the
master of the absolute.

Now, in attempting to estimate the value of this gigantic
claim, and of Eliphas Lévi’s contributions to the elucida-
tions of occult science, we are brought face to face with the
fact, that after posing as an initiate in possession of the
Great Arcanum, he has done his best to stultify himself by
attempting to pose also as a faithful and humble child of
the Catholic Church, and this without abandoning his pre-
vious position. Such a course has naturally led him into
flagrant contradictions, which cannot but scandalise his
students in proportion to their personal earnestness, and
is calculated to make many reject his claims to secret
knowledge as utterly unfounded.

We must not, however, be misled by appearances ; the
subtlety of the human intellect delights in the attempt to
establish a harmony between things which are essentially
opposite and a division between things which are similar.
Moreover, the discoveries of science are unaffected by the
recantations of any Galileo. I shall, therefore, begin boldly
by stating the inconsistencies of liphas Lévi, to ascertain
how far they really modify his claims ; I shall next consider
those claims, and afterwards briefly define the nature of his
true greatness.

The Dogme et Rituel de la Haute Magie establishes or
seeks to establish the following points with regard to
religious belief :-—

1. The domain of faith is the infinity of the unknown.

2. To expressly define anything which we may believe
to exist in this domain is to formulate the unknown, and,
of course, is absurdity.

3. The laws of human reason should control the imagina-
tion in its excursions into the domain of the unknown.

4. All our conceptions concerning this region must be
characterized by a sublime vagueness.

5. God is an explanatory hypothesis of the human mind
—an aggrandized conception of himself which man sets on
the throne of infinity.

6. There is an underlying principle in all so-called revela-
tions, and this principle is the doctrine of analogy—viz.,
that there is a correspondence between things seen and
things unseen ; earth is the shadow of heaven, man a reflec-

BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY. XIX

tion of divinity, a spiritual sun corresponds to the physical
sun, &c.

7. The reasonable religion which results from this doctrine,
and which is the only indefectible Catholic faith, is unsuited
to the multitude for whom fables and nurse tales are
necessary.

8. Therefore the secrets of Nature are dressed up by
means of allegory in the guise of dogmas, and are presented
to the multitude as innocuous substitutes for truths which
are dangerous to the profane.

9g. The doctrine of analogy is the basis of magic, which
is the only formidable enemy of hierarchic religions, because
by revealing the allegories of dogmas it makes these “
mensonge de la vérité et la vérite du mensonge,” and thus
utterly destroys that claim of absolute truth which every
religion makes in regard to its doctrines. Every religion,
therefore, condemns magic.

10. The initiate knows the significance of all symbolism
and all forms of worship, and he may practise or abstain
from them without compromising sincerity or good faith.*

It is plain that this teaching aims a death-blow at exoteric
theologies ; it reduces all their dogmas, small and great, to
the same level as the puppets of the Pilgrim’s Progress.
They are “shows that show.” Now, the life of theological
faith is in the assumption of the absolute, as opposed to the
symbolical, truth of its dogmas, It follows also from the
philosophy of the Dogme et Rituel:

1. That no intelligence from the unseen world has ever
come down among men to make known the mysteries of
the unseen world.

2. That no God has ever really become incarnate in
humanity to prove God more than a reasonable hypothesis,
or that man has been created after God’s image and not
God after the likeness of humanity.

3. That no church possesses or has ever possessed a
direct mission from above to teach and define truths con-
‘cerning the eternal world.

4. That it is legitimate for one who is initiated into the
secret of the transfiguration of dogmas, that is, the evolution

**¢ He (the initiate) knows the reason of all symbolism and all forms of
worship ; he dares to practise or abstain from them without hypocrisy or im-
piety, and he is silent on the one dogma of supreme initiation.” —Dogma, p.
219.

XX BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY.

of all theologies from the one assumption of pseudo- Hermes,
to revolutionise heaven and earth by the creation of a new
dogmatic symbolism, provided the moment be opportune.

Now, what should be the position of such a thinker
towards the hierarchic religion of his country, towards the
dominant orthodoxy of the moment? In the eleventh
chapter of the Dogme de la Haute Magie he describes him-
self as a “savant pauvre et obscur” who has recovered
Archimedes’ lever, and who offers it gratuitously to those
who by their exalted social position will be able to use it
effectually. “This knowledge has come to me too late for
myself, and I have lost in its acquisition the time and
resources which might have enabled me to make use of it.”
That is to say, Eliphas Lévi cannot himself accomplish
another divine revolution in the world, he is devoid of an
adequate initiative for the propaganda of a loftier symbolism,
very properly, therefore, he refrains from devising small in-
surrections or futile departures in sectarianism. He pub-
lishes his books that he may, if possible, make new priests
and new kings for the Regnum Dei of the age to come, but
personally, and in his private character, he submits to the
reigning religion, whose dogmas he, moreover, considers to
be the most perfect allegorical drapery which has yet been
woven round the secrets of Nature.

This is perfectly intelligible, and cannot be reasonably
objected to. But though an individual does right in con-
forming to the constitution of his country despite its im-
perfections, and does not thereby compromise his sincerity,
however transparent such imperfections may be to him,
yet if in gratuitously undertaking to champion the cause
of that constitution, he should obstinately shut his eyes to
its shortcomings, and even endeavour to hide them, he
would undoubtedly place himself in an equivocal position,
disinterested though his motives might be. We should not,
therefore, expect Eliphas Lévi, who has openly proclaimed
the common disabilities of all exoteric theologies, whose
books are of a most revolutionary character, who under-
takes to put into the hands of his readers a key to every
religious symbol, so that they can worship anywhere with
equal sincerity or refrain from any form of worship without
impiety, we should not expect him to come forward as the
uncompromising champion of a special form of dogmatism,
bent at the risk of all kinds of self-contradiction, on re-

BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY. XX1

establishing what he has previously demolished. This,
however, is actually the case. The results of the Dogme et
Rituel being such as I have stated, he becomes in his sub-
sequent works the declared champion of the Roman
orthodoxy, endeavouring to unsay what he has said against
her, yet without confessing that he has changed his views,
and without any apparent consciousness of his fundamental
discrepancies, some of which I shall now lay before the
reader to substantiate my statements. I am forced to
select those which present a sharp contrast, but no quota-
tions, and no contrasts of a verbal kind, can give an
adequate idea of the writer’s radical change of front.

THE LATIN CHURCH AND DEMONOLOGY.

“The Church, in her exor-
cisms, has consecrated the belief
in all these things (diabolical com-
pacts, &c.), and we may Say that
black magic and its prince of
darkness are a true, living, ter-
rible creation of Roman Catholi-
cism, that they are, in fact, its
special and characteristic work,
for priests do not invent God.
Moreover, true Catholics cling
from the bottom of their hearts to
the preservation and regeneration
even of this magnum opus, which
is the philosophers’ stone of the
oficial and positive cultus.”—
Rituel, p. 233.

The Histotre de la Magzte, on
the contrary, describes the Church
as most reserved on the subject
of Satan, and admires this re-
servation (p. 196). Good Chris-
tians do not even name him, and
religious moralists recommend the
faithful not to think about him,
but to direct their minds to God.
Instead of representing the Church
as answerable for the creation of
the medizval Satan, he refers the
importance assumed by this phan-
tom to the fenchant of diseased
imaginations and weak heads for
things monstrous and horrible (p.
290). Finally, instead of repre-
senting black magic as the crea-
tion of the Roman Church, the
Histoire represents it as the work
of sectarians and dissidents.

PAPAL INFALLIBILITY AND THE KABBALISTIC KEYS.

“ The Gnostic revelations have
separated the Church from the
supreme truths of the Kabbalah,
which contains all the secrets of
transcendental theology. Thus
the blind have become leaders of
the blind, and great obscurities,
great lapses,and deplorable scand-
als have resulted ; afterwards the
sacred books whose keys are en-
tirely Kabbalistic, from Genesis

“The loss of the Kabbalistic
Keys could not involve that of
the infallibility of the Church,
ever assisted by the Holy Spirit,
but it has caused great obscurities
in exegesis, and has made the
majestic images of Ezekiel’s pro-
phecy and St John’s Apocalypse
completely unintelligible.”—//zs-
Loire, p. 222.

XXII BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY.
to the Apocalypse, have become

so unintelligible to Christians that

their pastors have rightly judged

it needful to forbid their perusal

to simple believers.”—Ritwuel, p.

143.

Comment here is hardly needed. It is preposterous to
accredit blind leaders with infallibility; if they be in-
fallible, they are not blind. Notice, also, that the loss of
the Kabbalistic Keys, according to the Rztuel, not only
makes Ezekiel and the Apocalypse unintelligible, but also
the whole Bible.

CONNECTION OF PAGAN AND CHRISTIAN SYMBOLISM.

On p. 16 of the Aituel we are
assured that Christian symbolism
was created from the débris of all
worships which had been over-
come by the “ queen of the world ”
—that is, by Rome.

In the /7tstotre, on the contrary,
we are told that it is wrong to
accuse Christianity with having
borrowed what was most beauti-
ful in the old worships. “ Chris-
tianity —last form of universal
orthodoxy—has preserved all that
belonged to her, and has rejected
nothing but dangerous observ-
ances and futile superstitions ” (p.

159).
ST PAUL AND MAGICAL BOCKS.

‘‘ The successive phases of fana-
ticism have almost brought men
to despair of scientific or religi-
ous rationality. St Paul burned
the books of Trismegistus ; Omar
burned the disciples of Trisme-
gistus and St Paul. O persecutors!
O incendiaries! O scoffers! when
will ye finish your work of dark-
ness and destruction ?°—Rituel,
Pp. 327.

“We read in the Acts of the
Apostles, that St Paul collected at
Ephesus all the works which
treated of ‘curious arts’ and
burned them publicly. Doubtless
the goétic or necromantic works
of the ancients are here referred
to. The loss is much to be re-
gretted, for even from the monu-
ments of error gleams of truth
and scientifically valuable infor-

mation may be frequently ob-
tained.”— Histotre (p. 181).

What is remarkable here is the suggestive toning down ;
instead of the fanaticism, persecution, and incendiarism of
a frantic iconoclast, who is accredited with destroying the
sublime works of Hermes, we have a mild invitation to
regret the loss of some books on dlack magic. Eliphas
Lévi had not, however, made his last remarks on this sub-
ject ; it seemed good to him that previous discrepancies

BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY. XXlil
should be further accentuated. “ Was St Paul a barbarian ?
Did he commit outrage on science when he burned the
books of the hierophants ? No; he consumed the winding-
sheets that death might be forgotten” (Za Clef des Grands
Mysteres, p. 79). Therefore, fanaticism, persecution, and
incendiarism do not constitute barbarism, and the works
of the hierophants, the works of “thrice-great” Hermes,
are the pestiferous cerements of the sepulchre! And this is
from a writer who tells us that “the supreme and absolute
science 1s magic” !

CHRISTIANITY AND NEOPLATONISM.

On p. 65 of the Dogme, the
author speaks of positive Chris-
tianity at length triumphing over
the sublime dreams and gigantic
aspirations of the Alexandrian
school, and daring publicly to ful-
minate its anathemas against this
philosophy.”

The Histfotre, while acknow-
ledging that the school of Plato
diffused a great light in Alexan-
dria, says that “ Christianity, after
three centuries of struggle, had
assimilated all that was true and
durable in the doctrines of an-
tiquity” (p. 223). What is notice-
able here is the complete change
of attitude; instead of the auda-
city of fledgling faith we have the
lawful appropriation of hardly-won
spoils.

BIBLICAL MIRACLES.

‘Let us start by declaring that
we believe in all miracles, because
we are convinced and certain,
even by our own experience, of
their complete possibility. There
ave some which we do not attempt
lo explain, but which we consider
Zo be none the less explicable.
From the greater to the lesser,
from the lesser to the greater, the
consequences are identically con-
nected and the proportions pro-
gressively rigorous” (Aztuel, p. 33).
That the Biblical miracles are re-
ferred to in the passage I have
italicised is, of course, evident,
but Eliphas Lévi does _ subse-
quently explain them. ‘ When
Moses struck the rock, he did not
create a source of water; he re-
vealed it to the people, occult
science having previously made

“Be far from us the notion of
attributing to magic the miracles
of this man (Moses), inspired by
God” (Histotre, p. 83). Here the
contradiction is complete and ir-
retrievable ; but even were there
no contradiction, what are we to
think of a writer who, on p. 327 of
the Aituel de la Haute Magie,
informs us that by the use of the
treatise of Trithemius—De Septem
Secundeis — one may easily sur-
pass the prevision of Isaiah or
Jeremiah, yet would see the inter-
vention of Deity to assist in the
production of parasitic insects ?
Little, however, is the dependence
to be placed on what is said in
either case, for in his very next
book—La Clef des Grands Mys-
teres, p. 214—Wwe find the author
attributing the same Mosaic pro-

XXIV

‘it known to himself by means of
the divining-rod ” (Dogme, p. 181)
—that is, by an instrument of
diabolical magic from the stand-
point of accredited Catholic theo-

logians.

BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY.

digies to science and address—
by implication, it is true. He
also explains why the magicians
of Pharaoh cried, “ Miracle!”
when they were beaten, namely,
that it is more soothing to the
vanity of a charlatan to consider
himself overcome by the interven-
tion of supermundane power than
by the superior chicanery of a
confrére. Finally, the “ Histoire
de la Magie” declares to us that
Moses and the magicians of |
Pharaoh both made use of one _
instrument in the performance of —
their prodigies, and that this in-
strument was the Great Magical
Agent of the Astral Light. There- —
fore the miracles of Moses are to
be explained by magic since they
are explained by the magical hypo-
thesis of the Astral Light. (//zs-
Loire, pp. 19, 20.)

The most glaring contradiction which Eliphas Lévi's
new views on matters of belief have occasioned, is the last
of its kind which I shall cite, though quotations might be

continued much further.

IMMORTALITY.

*““One of the great benefits of
magnetism is that it renders evi-
dent, by incontestable facts, the
spirituality, unity, and immortality
of the soul. Spirituality, unity,
and immortality once proved, God
would be manifested to all intelli-
gences and all hearts."— Histoire,
p- 22.

Immortality is proved by
one passage ;
other.

“The immortality of the soul,
being one of the most consoling
dogmas of religion, must be re-
served for the aspirations of faith,
and will consequently never be
proved by facts accessible to the
criticism of science.”—Aistoire,

P- 529.

incontestable facts, says the

it can never be proved by facts, says the
This is the universal science!

This, too, between

the pages of the same book—ludicrous instance of obstinate
determination to sit at the same time on the throne of
science and the footstool of childlike faith in the decisions of
the dominant sacerdotal orthodoxy !

It is time, however, to ascertain what influence has been
exercised by this singular change of views on Eliphas Lévi’s

BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY. XXV

previous estimation of the facts, theories, and possibilities of
magical science, as this is the point which will more nearly
concern the ordinary student of occultism. The author of
the Dogme et Rituel dela Haute Magie comes before us as
one speaking with authority on the existence of elementary
spirits, fluidic phantoms, the survival of the astral body
after the decease of the physical organism, and after the
departure of the divine spirit; he comes before us as one
who has personally practised white or permissible necro-
mancy, as one who has evoked, seen, and touched, has
beheld clearly and distinctly, an apparition in the Astral
Light, and has thus proved the terrible efficacy of
magical ceremonies. He comes before us as one who is in
possession of “the first book of humanity,” “the keystone of
the whole edifice of occultism,” the inspiring instrument of
all revelations, and “the most perfect method of divination,”
one indeed which “may be employed with complete con-
fidence.” This is the marvellous Tarot. Let us briefly
consider these claims in the light of his later books.

La Sctence des Esprits tells us that angels and demons
alike are purely hypothetical or legendary beings, which
must be relegated to the domain of poetry, since they can
never belong to that of science (p. 6). It also tells us that
satyrs and ghouls, and three-headed monsters, “and all the
vest of the darksome phantasmagoria are nightmares of
madness” (p. 314). The Hiéstoive had already characterised
the occult doctrine of fluidic phantoms as _ hypothesis
(p. 114); it now appears as the hypothesis of insanity.
The former distinction between white and black necro-
mancy is entirely ignored, and the whole practice is bodily
characterised as “a crime against nature.’* The spiritists
are told that their mediums evoke the dead, and that
necromantic evocation is “the blackest of the sciences of
the abyss, the most accursed of sacrilegious operations.” +
All that can be said is that Eliphas Lévi has himself
committed this unnatural crime and frightful sacrilege,
for no one can consider it permissible to perform what
is detestable and accursed under the plea of scientific
experiment. It is the Tarot itself, to which he was
indebted for all his science, which, however, fares the
worst. That “true key to the oratorical art and to the
great art of Raymund Lully,” that “secret of the trans-

* La Science des Esprits, p. 245. + Ibid., p. 299.

XXVI1 BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY.

mutation of darkness into light,” that “first and most im-
portant of all the arcana of the magnum opus, is declared
to be an instrument which cannot be consulted without
danger and without crime.* It is a method of divination,
divination is a compact with vertigo, vertigo is falsehood,
evil, and hell itself.t This is the instrument to which

liphas Lévi owes his universal science, this is “the occult
and sacred alphabet” composed of ideas and numbers, and
which realises the mathematics of thoughts.~ Again, in
regard to the faculty of vision in the Astral Light, the
Dogme et Rituel dela Haute Magie is loud in the praise of
the lucidity of the supreme adept, and we are told that the
Kabbalists who speak of the world of spirits “have simply
recounted what they have beheld in their evocations, visions,
and intuitions in what they have denominated the light of
LZlory.”§ La Science des Esprits, on the contrary, tells us
that ‘‘the things which are beyond this life may be con-
jectured on in two manners, either by the calculations of
analogy, or by the intuitions of extasis, in other words, by
reason or madness, The sages of Judea chose reason, and
have left us their magnificent hypotheses in books which
are generally ignored.” || The falsehood, folly, and wicked-
ness of all visionary exaltation of the imagination and
mind of man is insisted on continually in the later books.
And then in regard to the soul’s eternal destiny the contra-
dictions are both numerous and notable; on this point,
however, the Jewish Kabbalists seem to be as little in har-
mony with one another as Eliphas Levi is with himself. I
have referred to these contradictions in the Notes, so here
I need only remark that whereas the Dogme et Rztuel both
direct us to conquer our individual immortality by achieving
in the isolation of self-conquest, and by resisting and eradi-
cating the propensities of Nature, a personal and imperish-
able life, the Hzstozre tells us that life is “a universal com-
munion,’ and that it is in this communion that immortality is
to be found. The isolation of self is death by self-condem-
nation, and an eternity of isolation would be eternal death.

It is unnecessary to continue these contrasts; the dis-
crepancies of less importance are too numerous for tabu-
lation, and as they arise, one and all, from the author's

* Histotre de la Magie, p. 466. + La Science des Esprits, p. 298.
t La Clef des Grands Mysteres, p. 3. § Dogme, p. 260.
|| La Sctence des Esprits, p. 125. YJ Atstoire de la Magie, p. 40.

BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY. XXVIl

change of front towards the Catholic religion, or else from
his grotesque and sometimes comic detestation of modern
spiritualism, my purpose is already served, and I shall
conclude this portion of my subject by determining as far
as possible the sincerity or otherwise of such a change.
That it was dictated by no motive of personal gain or in-
terest will be readily believed, but that it was sincere it is im-
possible to maintain, and the author himself in one of those
side-lights which he is in the habit of occasionally flashing
on some of his paradoxical positions,* informs us that it is
“Ja haute convenance”’ which actuates him, and with ludic-
rous inconsequence he contradicts his own submission to
the decisions of the hierarchy by sowing broadcast through
the books which contain them the most audacious contra-
dictions of orthodox teaching on vital and fundamental ques-
tions of current religious belief. He says, “ Be it well un-
derstood that our scientific revelations pause before faith,
and that, as Christian and Catholic, we submit our work
entirely to the supreme judgment of the church.” Then
he at once proceeds to discuss the personality of Satan.
“ All that has a name exists,” he says; of course, he means
us to add, “even if it be in name only.” “The devil,” he
continues, “is named and personified in the Gospel, and he
may, therefore, be considered as a person.” This admission
is due, however, to his complaisance as a Christian. “Let
science speak, or reason, which is the same thing.” So
science speaks, and does not hesitate to inform us that if
such a personification must be taken seriously, the devil
would be the most absolutely dead and deceived of all
beings; in other words, “the affirmation of his existence
would imply an evident contradiction.” The devil, how-
ever, is a blind force abused by malicious intelligence, and
the Lucifer of the heterodox—read orthodox—legend is
‘“‘a rash, monstrous, and impious conception.” Such is the
commentary of reason on the personifications of the
Gospel; such is Bliphas Lévi’s commentary on his own
concessions to the ideal code of “da haute convenance.”
Again, he informs us that “ every definition of God which
is hazarded by human intelligence is a recipe of religious

* For instance, the statement that ‘‘the ancient sanctuaries had their secrets
which have not come down to us” is a curious commentary on some of the
same writer's anterior claims.

t+ Histoire, p. 14.

XXVI1I1 BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY.

empiricism, by means of which superstition will sooner or
later be able to fabricate a devil.” The assertion may be
absolutely true in the overwhelming majority of instances,
but does it not raise a smile when we consider the logical
result of such a doctrine on the rage for theological defini-
tion, which is a chief characteristic of the Roman Church ?
The submissions of Eliphas Lévi are, in fact, thoroughly
disingenuous, and how he could have imagined they would
deceive any one—that is, any one worth deceiving—it is
impossible to conjecture. He will never convince a reason-
able man that it is necessary to believe in dogmas on the
authority of Rome, when he has told us that all dogmas
are the puppets of allegory, and that the key of their mys-
tery is discoverable by any one who searches with sufficient
diligence, and, of course, in the right direction. La haute
convenance may keep us silent whenever it is expedient ; it
may even prompt us to perform the outward duties of
“the official cultus,” but it will not justify us in wilfully
substituting the veil of symbolism for the truth it hides ;
it will not prevent us from speech in season, nor will it
cause us to come forward as gratuitous champions of the
evanescent orthodoxy of the moment. We are definitely
assured, even in the later books, that religious dogma is
merely a nurse-story, but “ provided that it is ingenious
and morally beneficial, it is perfectly true for the child.”*
Nothing, however, can be expected from grown men but a
certain mild and kindly interest in the folk-tales of their
childhood. They will not tell children that there are no
such things as fairies, but it would be utterly preposterous
to parade their absolute submission to the fables and saws
of their grandmothers. It does not improve matters to
tell us that orthodoxy in religion is respect for the hier-
archy,f for this is a definition which the hierarchy would
be certainly the first to reject. Orthodoxy in religion is
absolute faith in the truth of hierarchic teaching. I have
a great respect for Mr Gladstone, but I have no faith in
his foreign policy. Moreover, the veneration of Kabbalistic
tlluminat: and possessors of the universal science for the
haute raison of “blind leaders,” is a little paradoxical in
sound, and is hardly more dignified in the one than it is
complimentary to the other. If any of my readers be in-
clined to prefer the positivism of Latin dogma to the some-

* Histotre, p. 31. t+ Histoire, p. 34.

BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY. XXIX

what nebulous poetics of indefinite religious aspiration, I
should be the last to endeavour to dissuade them, but let
them ground their judgment on the involuntary apologists
of the Abbé Migne, and not on the gratuitous defences of
Eliphas Lévi. He has told us to respect the Church in
her old age, and this we will cheerfully, but we do not feel
called on to identify ourselves with that old age. The
point missed throughout all the author’s arguments on the
importance of the hierarchy in matters of religion is that
authority may abdicate its right to rule.* On his own
showing, a hierarchic cultus can become effete, and then
may be rightly replaced.f If Christian dogmas are to
undergo a final transfiguration, as Eliphas Lévi desires,
this transfiguration must begin as a cu/tus illicitus, as Chris-
tianity itself began. It is equally erroneous to assert that
articles of belief are not legitimate objects of discussion.{
It is the duty of an intelligent Christian man, when he is
requested to receive a new article of faith, to examine
what is offered him, to compare it with the opinions of
antiquity, with other doctrines which he already adheres
to, and with his notions of God and Nature, unless from
previous consideration he be absolutely convinced that the
authority which propounds the novelty is wholly divine
and infallible. Such a conviction is, of course, outside
the pure rationalism of Eliphas Lévi’s philosophy; his
arguments in defence of the Church of his childhood are,
therefore, bad as well as disingenuous; they originate in
false notions of expediency, and in a kind of pseudo-chivalry
which seems to have overtaken their author by fits and
starts.§ As it is difficult to believe that they could have
deceived himself, we might be justified in concluding from
the evidence in hand that Eliphas Lévi’s description of the
writings of the demonologist Bodin has a peculiar applica-
tion to his own, and that, in fact, “they are profoundly
Machiavelian, and strike at the root of the institutions
which they appear to defend.” He calls La Clef des Grands
Mystéres, which is full of these paradoxical submissions, “a

* See c.g., Histoire, p. 136. t+ lbid., p. 160. t Lbid., p. 183.

2 ‘‘ If thy mother, the Church, be sleeping with disordered garments, cover
her with thy mantle, walking backwards if necessary, todo so. To , retro-

de thus is to advance.”—La Clef des Grands Mystores, p. 364. Eliphas

‘yi did not practise what he preached, or he could not have written as he has
written. ,

XXX BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY.

mystification or a monument ;” it is probably a monumental
mystification.

What would appear to .be most genuine in the virtual
retractations of Eliphas Lévi are those which concern the
occult sciences, and they are merely a natural revulsion
from the transcendental charlatanry and poetic exaggera-
tions of the Dogme et Rituel. Those volumes, the most
suggestive and beautiful in their way which have ever been
contributed to the elucidation of magical mysteries, are the
product of an enthusiasm which beheld all the vistas of
occultism through the rose-hued medium of a light which
was certainly never on the land or sea of the known actu-
alities of mysticism; and the romantic assertions of the
inspired visionary who produced them, in the evanescent
ecstasy consequent on his supposed solution of all prob-
lems, scientific, philosophical, or religious, are successively
though stealthily toned down as the true theosophical
adept emerged into scientific realism from the wonder-
world of the neophyte.

Let it be once for all plainly understood before proceed-
ing further that I do not accuse Eliphas Lévi of wilful
falsification anywhere. There is the gold of wisdom on
every page of his unparalleled books, and to me they have
been gain inestimable; but the natural enthusiasm conse-
quent on his extraordinary discoveries has occasionally
carried him away, and I believe myself to deserve well at
the hands of all students of occultism by pointing out
where facts do not warrant his assertions, and where his
earlier assertions are qualified by his own later and maturer
statements.

The basis of Eliphas Lévi’s philosophy and of all magic
is declared to be the single assumption which is contained
in the great Hermetic axiom: That which is above is
equivalent to that which is below, and that which is below
is equivalent to that which is above. This is the introduc-
tory statement of the celebrated “Table of Emerald,”
which claims to be the work of Hermes Trismegistus, but
which cannot be traced in history to a more considerable
antiquity than the seventh century of the Christian era.*
The ultimate basis of Eliphas Lévi’s teachings is not, how-
ever, to be found in any single dogma, but in Voltairian
free-thought, and he has read Voltairian principles into the

* Figuier, LZ’ Adchemie et les Alchemistes, p. 42.

BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY. XXX1

theurgic and theosophic obscurities of Kabbalistic writings.
He is a pure rationalist who has adopted the hypothesis of
the Kabbalah as the most trustworthy calculus of proba-
bilities concerning an unseen world with which there is no
real communication from either side in life. He considers
God to be a hypothesis only, “trés probablement nécessaire,”
and the question of personal immortality falls within the
same category. Revelation in the true sense of the word—
not in the sense of sacerdotal charlatanism—is so much out
of the question that it does not strike our author as a pos-
sibility which need be seriously discussed, and the divinity
which he attributes to Jesus Christ is the divinity of the
natural man, who by sacrifice of self, and by passing into
the region of symbolism, identifies himself, humanly speak-
ing, with God, that is, with the human conception of Deity.
It is evident that the simple naturalism of these assump-
tions, however much it may be supplemented by Kabbalistic
reasonings whose hypothetical nature he allows, can never
provide us with an absolute religious certitude, which he
promised in the Dogme et Rituel, nor with a universal
science, which he has also promised us, and so, as a fact, it
proves, for the magical science of Eliphas Lévi is essentially
one of power—the power of an emancipated will over wills
which are not emancipated, the power of a self-controlled
and self-containing man over the ill-governed passions of
the multitude, the power of an intelligence which is initiated
into the doctrine of the transfiguration of dogmas over the
innumerable children of credulity, the power of the en-
lightened man over his proper self, and his unlimited power
over nature. The secrets contained in his books are con-
cerned with the development and direction of these energies
for the progression of humanity at large, for the elevation
of those who possess them, and for the multiplication of
natural resources. The occult doctrine of revelation by
analogy and correspondences in the three intelligible worlds
finds in Eliphas Lévi its only lucid exponent, and yet there
is little doubt that, with the characteristic ingenuity of the
symbolist, he has read into “the universal dogma” a far
more extensive meaning than it possessed for the author of
“the admirable symbol.” For the traditional Hermes it
was simply an assertion which modern science is slowly and
painfully working up to by the @ posteriori method, that there
is only one substance of which all material things are tran-

XXXII BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY.

sitory modifications. Quod superius sicut quod infertus, and
conversely, but for what? Not to establish a system of
correspondence between the known and the unknown, but
ad perpetranda miracula ret unius, that is, the magnum
opus of metallic transmutation. The doctrine of universal
analogy as the basis of progressive revelation is a noble
and beautiful hypothesis which eminently recommends
itself to reason, and once properly understood it would be
an inexhaustible fountain of purest inspiration for the
poetry of the age to come; it transforms the whole visible
universe into one grand symbol, and the created intelli-
gence of man becomes a microcosmic god whose faculties
are in exact though infinitesimal proportion with the
uncreated and eternal mind. Apart from direct revelation,
it would be truly “the sole possible mediator between the
seen and the unseen,” establishing the grounds of faith in
the rationality of a single assumption, and harmonising the
positivism of physical science with the religion of legitimate
aspirations towards the infinity of the unknown. But the
possibility of direct communication with the invisible
worlds, based on the claim of the ages, is of solemn and
palmary importance, and is not to be excluded from con-
sideration by the exigencies of any hypothesis; so when
the hypothesis of universal analogy in the hands of Eliphas
Levi practically rejects this possibility, it is right to point
out that his doctrine of correspondences is a pure assump-
tion, which, from his own rationalistic standpoint, is utterly
unproveable, and the possible fact of communication
between the seen and the unseen is a preferable object of
investigation to a plausible theory. - The doctrine, more-
over, supposes operations which are intellectually incon-
ceivable. ‘Measure a corner of creation, make a propor-
tionally progressive multiplication, and all infinity will
multiply its circles filled with universes, which will pass in
proportional segments between the ideal ever-extending
branches of your compass.”* Mathematics and reason
alike contradict this statement ; the multiplication of the
finite will produce only the finite. But even if the opera-
tion were possible, what would follow from this romance
of arithmetic? What is meant to follow is this: that the
knowledge of a part gives the knowledge of the whole. -Not
always! If the circumference of a circle be so enormous
* Histoire dela Magie, p. 7.

BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY. XXXII

that in its visible portion we can perceive no curve, we
shall never know the extent of that circle. The best
argument in favour of the hypothesis, though it may seem
paradoxical to say so, is that it gives full and complete
expression to the inevitable anthropomorphism and
materialism of the human mind, which “idealises itself
to conceive God,” and idealises the world around it to
conceive the eternal world. The impossibility of doing
otherwise is the best excuse for doing so, and we may take
refuge with Leibnitz in the veracity of the causa causarum,
which will not doom us to permanent intellectual decep-
tion. The doctrine of analogy may be taken, therefore,
as a great help provided by natural necessity, but do not
let us exalt it into the sole guide and mediator! Lect us
seek rather to establish the philosophy of the transcendental
on a basis of psychic fact. Assumptions, however plausible,
are no better evidence of things unseen than faith which is
now considered insufficient.

Passing, at length, from the assumptions of Eliphas
Levi to his matter and method, it will be seen that, in
accordance with the traditions of occultism, he has sur-
rounded his teachings with enigmas and mysteries. I
have not felt justified in removing these veils, which serve
a purpose, but I have endeavoured to arrange them so that
the secrets which they are supposed to hide will scarcely
escape the student. It will be evident to any one that the
true adepts of a divine science would never really enclose
dangerous or “indicible” arcana in anagrams and word-
puzzles, which exert only the ingenuity of the inquirer, and
give absolutely no guarantee of the moral or other quali-
fications of those who solve them. These ingenuities are
the stock-in-trade of the thaumaturge, “pour égarer les
profanes.” The verbum inenarrabile of the Neo-Platonists,
the Tetragrammaton, Ararita, and Agla of the Hebrews,
the “om occulte du grand Arcane,’ are mysteries of no
importance in themselves. They are signs and pantacles
which of themselves have no virtue or significance. A
universal science may be resumed in a single figure, but
the figure of itself will never give the universal science to
an uninitiated student ; the volumes devoted to the philo-
sophy of the Magi by rliphas Lévi reveal the secrets of
magic to the careful inquirer without the false lights of
double meanings and the delusive elucidations of crypto-

XXXIV BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY.

grams. When we are told that the revelation of the Great
Arcanum would revolutionise earth and heaven, it is the
heaven of human conceptions which is referred to, the
Quod Superius of the Hermetic formula, according to the
interpretation of Eliphas Lévi. The Jdouleversement in
question is the application of the secret doctrine to the
creation of a new sequence of theological ideas, and Eliphas
Lévi is the illuminated pioneer who has opened up the way
for such a change.

An excessively scarce pantacle of Trithemius, described
in the Aistozre de la Magie,* is declared by Eliphas Lévi
to contain the final secret and indicible formula of the Great
Arcanum. “This pantacle is composed of two triangles—
one white and one black—which are joined at the base.
Beneath the inverted apex of the black triangle there is a
fool crouching, painfully twisting his head, and looking
with a grimace of terror at his own image reflected in
the obscurity of the black triangle, while a man in
knightly garments, in the vigour of maturity, with a steady
glance and a strong yet pacific attitude of command, is
balanced on the apex of the white triangle, within which
are the letters of the divine tetragram.”

liphas Lévi provides the exoteric explanation as
follows :—“ The wise man depends on the fear of the true
God, while the fool is crushed by his terror of the false god
made in his own image.” Its esoteric significance is as
follows :—Uninitiated humanity creates God by a black-
ened, magnified, and distorted resemblance of itself which
it reflects on the illimitable background of stupidity and
ignorance, then it crouches and shivers in the presence of
the monstrous phantom. The adept also creates God, not
however, by reflecting his likeness on infinity, but the con-
ception of his power and knowledge, figured by a symbol.
This conception is reflected on the white triangle, that is,
on the unknown world enlightened by the analogies of
science. The initiate is represented as poised above this
triangle, not only because the hypothesis which he has
formed becomes the source of his intellectual and moral
stability, but because the creation of this hypothesis is a
theurgic act, and the intellect is above that which it creates.
The initiate is, therefore, God for the profane, he is the
actual finite deity who stands on earth for the hypothe-

* Pp. 345, 346.

BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY. XXXV

tical, infinite God, and he has the right of life and death
over any particular conception of divinity which. may at
any time dominate the crowd of men. The end of magic
is thus the creation of the gods and the evolution of the
Deific conception in the 4&z¢e of humanity. From the
Christian standpoint all this is outrageous blasphemy,
but it is the outcome of Eliphas Lévi’s philosophy. If
any proof were wanting it would be supplied by the
following passage :—“ Jehovah is he who overcomes nature

(understand human nature to be included) as we tame a
rebellious horse and makes it proceed where we will.” *
This is the absolute, indicible,t theurgic secret. Here
Jehovah cannot mean the all-creating God, to whom every-
thing that exists must be necessarily in complete subjection,
and who cannot be described as overcoming by force what lies
in the hollow of his hand. Jehovah here is the God-creat-
ing man, the self-conqueror, who by the création de sot-méme
has power over the chaos of human passion and over the
blind forces of nature. The Great Magic Arcanum is thus
in its primary phase the secret of the power of a completely
emancipated mind over the slaves of superstition and
ignorance. The unique Athanor, the philosophic and moral
alchemy, is the transmutation of darkness into light, in the
intellectual order, of gross matter into gold refined, of ignor-
ance into knowledge, of dead substances into substances
quickened by the energies of veritable life, of the mere
animal into the conscious man, and of maninto God. “The
stone becomes a plant, the plant an animal, thé animal a
man, and man greatens into Deity.” “ Quand Phomme
grandit Dieu s deve™

The Great Magic Agent is a good working hypothesis to
conciliate science and religion by a natural explanation of
all prodigies, and to direct qualified investigators to the
discovery of a universal force. But we must bear in mind
that although the exuberant dogmatism of the Dogme et
Rituel de la Haute Magte couches all statements concerning
it in extremely authoritative language, it is a hypothesis
and a hypothesis only, as the author himself admits at a

* La Clef des Grands Mysteres, p. 219.

t+ It is of course an absurdity to speak of any secret as really indicible.
According to the Dogme dela Haute Magie, every idea has its form, that 1s,
its expression, and no idea is conceivable without its corresponding expression
in speech. It may be imprudent, difficult, or wicked to proclaim it publicly,
but there are no inexpressible ideas.

XXXVI BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY.

later stage of his revelations. “The secret agent of the
magnum opus ... is Magnetised Electricity. The union
of these two words does not reveal us much, never-
theless they ferhaps enclose a force which can revolu-
tionise the world. We say perhaps out of philosophic
benevolence, for on our part, we do not doubt the high import-
ance of this great Hermetic Arcanum.”* The parts which
I have italicised, are conclusive, as regards the hypotheti-
cal nature of the force which Eliphas Lévi believed him-
self to have discovered in the alchemical allegories, and
the most he can assert concerning it is a supreme personal
conviction. This force he usually terms the Astral Light,
a name which is borrowed from Saint-Martin and the
French mystics of the eighteenth century. It is an unfor-
tunate one, because, in the first place, he does not pretend
to determine the real nature of the agent he denominates,
and, in the second place, because it is eminently liable to
multiply false analogies. The metaphorical use of the
word “light” in philosophy has been a source of very
serious misconceptions precisely on this score.f The pre-
servation of the images of all forms in the universal agent,
which is the mirror of visions, supplies the author with his
natural explanation of all kinds of apparitions, including
those which are seen in necromantic evocations. It is in-
vented to conciliate the reality of such visions with the
futility of their general results, “for the supposed spirits
reveal nothing of the life beyond.” Modern Spiritualism
has amply supplied this deficiency, though its mediums
seem eminently liable to the control of Ananias. With
regard to the magical experiences of Eliphas Lévi, we shall
do well to remember that the conservation of the images
of objects in the Astral Light is a hypothesis, but the
evocation of Apollonius is a fact, and though the sceptical
philosophy of the Magus degraded his own prodigy, the
serious student will perhaps find therein something more
than a mere “ pathological fact,” or the “ réve d'un homme
évellé.”t ... The Great Magic Agent, like the Arcanum by
means of which it is directed, is, at least in one of its
phases, a moral force. The power which is_promised_to
the emancipated and enlightened mind is dominion over
*La Clef des Grands Mysteres, p. 207.

+ Balmes’ Fundamental Philosophy, vol. i.
} Dogme, p. 273.

BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY. XXXVI

Azoth, the domain of Magnesia, and the secret of quicken-
ing the dead substances of the alchemical symbolists. But,
unlike electricity, steam, &c., this mysterious Azoth cannot
be directed by a man of science working in secret and
possessing only his knowledge and his instruments. He
must form the magic chain; he must be able to set in
motion and direct a current of enthusiasm in unenlightened
humanity. It is not, therefore, primarily a physical force.
The hopes, the fears, the caprices, the weaknesses, the
imaginations of the crowd, in a word, its FREEWILL, these
are the monster tobe. conquered, these are the blind force
which equally lends itself to good or evil. The ill-directed
force of will, the undirected strength of passion, the blind
and mad enthusiasm and the savage excesses of fury, the
natural sense and instincts, the crude reasoning powers,
and the plastic conscience of humanity, these are Azoth,
these are the maticre premiere of the_maguum_ opus of
universal reconstruction; these are the mysterious force
whose equilibrium is social life, progress, civilisation, and
whose disturbance is_ anarchy, revolution, barbarism, from
whose chaos a new equilibrium at length evolves, the
cosmos of a new order, when another dove has brooded
over the blackened and disturbed waters. This is the force
by which the world is upset, the seasons are changed, by
which the night of misery and misrule may be transfigured
into the day of Christ —

“* Dies ventt, dies tua,
In qua refiorent omnia ”—

into the era of a new civilisation, when the miorning
stars sing together, and all the sons of God utter a joyful
shout.

With regard to the Tarot, yes may at once set aside its
subsequent condemnation by Eliphas Lévi as utterly un-
serious, but as magic art depends on no special form of
divination and on no single assumption, but on the experi-
mental methods of science, we need not fear to moderate,
if necessary, the importance he originally attributed to it.
When hypothesis, which is necessarily tentative, arrays
itself in dogmatism, and assumes the terminology of his-
tory, and when history supplies the lacune in its materials
from the imaginative realms of hypothesis, neither brilliant
talent, nor even some inherent probability, can make the

XXXVII1 BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY.

result worthy of serious consideration. This, however, is

liphas Lévi’s method of proving the immense antiquity
of the Tarot. He begins by stating that it is perhaps
more ancient than the book of Henoch.* Outside the
erudition of Dr Kenealy, no modern scholarship attributes
any more remote antiquity to the latter work than the
fourth century B.c. But Eliphas Lévi believes the Tarot
to be the work of Hermes Trismegistus,f

“ Who uttered his oracles sublime,
Before the Olympiads in the dew
Of the early dawn and dusk of time.”

And the book of Henoch is by implication of the same
primeval epoch. Afterwards he speaks of the Tarot
variously as the hieroglyphic work of Hermes, the Claviculz
of Solomon, &c.; it is declared to have existed certainly
before Moses and the prophets, and throughout the whole
Dogme et Rituel this assumption is continued, its justification
being reserved till the final chapter, when he promises to
demonstrate that it is “the primitive book.” { This
demonstration is simply a series of ingenious suppositions
which beg successively every important question. Thus
he assumes that it was reserved only for the high priests,
that it was identical with the divinatory instrument in-
vented by Michas, and described in Philo, that after the
destruction of Jerusalem its figures were drawn on ivory,
parchment, copper, and finally on cards, and thus has the
Tarot come down to us. All this, of course, is romancing.
Court de Gebelin in his Monde Primitif, vol. viii. is
content with the attempt to establish its Egyptian origin
and divinatory utility. Modern Egyptology has not corro-
borated his opinions on the former point, and the Egyptians
do not seem to have been a card-playing nation. The
facts, therefore, as opposed to the hypothesis are these—
that a hieroglyphic game and instrument of divination,
having some quasi-Egyptian figures, but of unknown origin,
was discovered by a French antiquary at the close of the
last century. Its name Tarot suggests a connection with
Tora, “the sacramental name which the Jews give to their
inspired book.”§ Its twenty-two trump cards recall the
twenty-two letters of the Hebrew Alphabet, the twenty-two

* Dogme, p. 68. t+ Lbid., p. 84. } Jbid., p. 234.
§ La Clef des Grands Mystores, p. 321.

BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY. XXXIX

chapters of the mystical book of the Apocalypse, &c. In
the sixteenth century William Postel, the Kabbalist, in his
Clavis Absconditorum a Constitutione Mundi, inscribes on
the circlet of his symbolic key the four letters T A R O,
but arranged in such a manner that it is uncertain how
they should be read, and he writes of a hieroglyphic book
which he calls the Genesis of Henoch. Finally, Eliphas
Lévi solemnly testifies—1. That without the Tarot the
magic of the ancients is a sealed book. 2. That it alone
gives the true interpretation of the magic squares of the
planetary genii as they are represented by Paracelsus. 3.
That the ‘rabbinical notary art is at bottom nothing else
but the science of the Tarot signs, and their complex and
various application to the divination of all secrets. 4.
That he himself has opened all the doors of the ancient
sanctuaries and ascertained the significance of all symbols
by the means of this instrument. All this deserves our
most serious attention, and the publication of a Tarot
which shall be accurate in all its figures is much to be
desired. If there be any key existing to the symbolism of
the ages, besides that which is provided by internal evi-
dence and analogy, the Tarot may be that key, but take
notice, that according to the same author, “ Magnetic
astrological calculations, puerile perhaps and completely
arbitrary if they are made without inspiration, by frigid
curiosity, or in the absence of a determining force of will.’*
This is the conclusion of a chapter which treats of the
Tarot and of magical astrology. The Tarot is, therefore,
like all- instruments of divination, “a pretext for self-
magnetisation.” Elsewhere he declares it to require “ the
assistance of a good medium.”* What has unlocked the
secrets of universal symbolism to Eliphas Lévi is not the
bald symbolism of the Tarot, but the intuitions of his own
gifted mind and his power of discerning analogies. In the
creation of allegorical hieroglyphs there is in them so much
meaning as the intelligence of their contriver can infuse,
but in their interpretation there is so much meaning as the
inspiration of the student can extract. The significance of
symbols, therefore, varies in essence and extent with each
individual, and their absolutely correct interpretation is
eminently difficult to arrive at in a labyrinth of plausible

* Histoire, p. 156.

x] BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY.

possibilities. While, therefore, acknowledging to its full
extent the extreme interest attaching to the Tarot, it will
be well to suspend our judgment with regard to its history,
and to attribute the prodigies it works in the main to the
clairvoyance of its consulters.

The practical magic of Eliphas Lévi traces thaumaturgic
art to its purely natural genesis. His universal medicine
is a moral specific based on the philosophy of the
interaction of mind and body, with special reference to
the science of prestige in its application to curative pur-
poses. The magnum opus of so-called metallic transmuta-
tion is the application of will-power to the modification of
those natural substances which are the matzéres mortes of
the philosophers. The condemnation of much that is in-
cluded in the scope of magical practices is a solemn warn-
ing to psychic investigators. Eliphas Lévi doubtless lived
to find, as did Cornelius Agrippa before him and as others
will probably after, that there is much which is vain and
futile in the pursuits of occult science, that evocation in the
universal glass of visions is fatiguing in practice, and after
the first few times generally barren in result, that the
mysteries of the life beyond are seldom if ever revealed to
the lucidity of clairvoyants, that the magical creation of
gold is a conquest wrung from nature by the heart’s blood
of the alchemist as hardly as it is commercially manufac-
tured in the grinding mills of the competition of social life.
The indiscriminate condemnation of spiritualism has a side
of truth, but it originates in the exclusiveness of the adept.
Just as the great Roman orthodoxy looks with suspicion
and distrust on all independent religious speculation, on all
“lay theology,” just as she denounces most miraculous
phenomena occurring outside her own spiritual jurisdiction,
so does Eliphas Lévi regard with contempt and dislike all
magical wonders produced outside the sanctum regnum of
initiation. He is right in so far as initiation provides pre-
cautions against the dangers of psychical research. But
whatever may be thought of modern spiritualism in its in-
tellectual and moral aspects, it has proved the existence of
spiritual natures within and without us, so that it is not in
hypothesis but in fact that our conviction may be grounded.

I have reached the extreme limits of this criticism and
must briefly sum up. The Great Arcanum is the secret
of will-ability. It is the secret of the subjection of the
sphinx of human liberty, the serpent of passionate desire,

BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY. xli

the Baphomet of superstitions, not by their destruction but

by making all and each perform unconsciously the will of

the adept. The science of Eliphas Lévi is the science of

power and prestige. But the great secret_is the will and

the great agent is enthusiasm with its ten thousand illu- |
sions, by which cataclysms are caused and by which the

world is renewed. That this science should be occult is

comprehensible, for to reveal the arcana of leadership to

those who are led is to take the reins out of the hands of
the charioteers and cast them to the winds. Those who are

seeking an absolute religious certitude will not get the help

they may have expected from Eliphas Lévi as a possessor

of “the universal science.” His system reduces God to a

sensible and rational hypothesis, and it gives no proof of
the soul’s immortality. It does not direct us to the eternal

truth, but it tells us how we may reign over superstition and

by superstition.* Some of us, however, are seeking God

and the soul; we have no wish to pose as deities in the

presence of our benighted fellow-creatures, we have no

ambition to be adored as gods. Doubtless, we could pre-

sent to may sections of humanity a nobler notion of Deity,

but it would be of our own conceiving, and conscience

forbids us to impose on others an idea which has been

developed within us as an eternal truth with us; we can-

not undertake to lead humanity until we have established

a certainty for ourselves, and the Hermetic doctrine of
correspondences is not a certainty—it is a dogma.

Still less have we any desire to reign over superstition
or by superstition, which we detest with our whole hearts,
and with which we will have no connection either as
masters or servants. But a debt, of indefinite magnitude
we still owe to the writings of Eliphas Lévi, whose_true
greatness is first and foremost in the supreme elevation of —_
his beautiful moral philosophy. He has taught us to con-.
ciliate those opposing forces, physical and spiritual, whose
equilibrium is life and immortality; to harmonise the __
“liberty of individuals with the necessity of things,” and
the divine privileges of self-devotion. In the second place,
the true greatness of Eliphas Lévi is in his bold attempt to
establish a harmony between religion and science by re-
vealing to reason the logical necessity of faith, by proclaim-
ing to faith the sanctity of natural reason, and by a rational

* Dogme, p. 217.

xii BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY.

explanation of all prodigies. He has taught us to venerate
religion, but also to make way for science, and in a century
of doubt and disillusion he has endeavoured to. create,
without the help of miracle or revelation, a reasonable hope
for man in an unseen world and an eternal future.

In the third place, the true greatness of Eliphas Lévi
consists in his revelation for the first time to the modern
world of the great Arcanum of will-power, which com-
prises in one word the whole history and mystery of
magical art. Doctrine and theory are nothing—all magic
is in the will, that secret of universal power in heaven and
onearth. “ God is but a great will pervading all things by
reason of its intentness,” says Glanvil, and man by the
same faculty can raise himself from the circle of necessity
into the circle of creative providence; as a part of the
Grand Totality, which is the super-personal God, he can
create and adapt in his turn. The transmutation of the
philosophical metals is not a chemical process, or, rather,
it is a process of transcendental and mystical chemistry by
the application of. the purified and emancipated will to the
psycho-chemical instrument of a diaphanous imagination.
Any neophyte who expends more than the thirty thalers of
Khunrath the Teutonic adept over the accomplishment of
the magnum opus, deserves no part in the Regnum Dei of
the life to come, for he misunderstands the first principles
of the Hermetic philosophy.

The question of will-power is closely connected with the
greatest danger of modern Spiritualism. The medium sub-
mits himself to the will of an unseen individuality with no
guarantee about the consequences. The adept in will-
ability seeks, on the contrary, to establish his intellectual
dominion over all the powers of the air by the force of in-
vincible determination, and to attract by the sympathy of
kindred inspiration, kindred faith, kindred greatness, kin-
dred moral elevation, the intelligences of a higher order
whom he cannot indeed command, but whom he may draw
towards him.

When, in addition to what I have enumerated, we
remember that Eliphas Lévi has originated a new departure
in Kabbalistic exegesis, that his interpretations have in-
fused new life into old symbolism, and that his doctrine of
the transfiguration of dogmas — whatever may be its
ultimate value—casts much light on comparative theology,

BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY. xiii

it is sufficient for one incarnation, and with a certain modi-
fication of meaning we need have no hesitation in proclaim-
ing him an initiate of the first order and the prince of the
French adepts.

A word must be added on the method of this translation.
I have not confined myself within the barren limits of a
slavish literalism, because the references in the original to
the various subjects treated of are scattered over the pages
of six large volumes, and their collation and arrangement,
which I have taken great pains to accomplish as harmoni-
ously as possible, in the present digest have necessitated
adaptation and élimination. Moreover, in spite of in-
numerable beauties of thought, in spite of a fresh, animated,
and unconventional style, with occasional passages of really
splendid eloquence, the originals as a whole are diffusive
and tautological. Large portions of Eliphas Levi’s works
are no more connected with magic, as ordinarily under-
stood, than the theosophical speculations and fire-philo-
sophy of Berkeley’s Siris are connected with the virtues of
tar-water. The substance of these portions will be found
under the title of Religious and Philosophical Problems, at
the beginning of this book. I have struggled to eliminate
discrepancies from this digest, but some of necessity
remain which I trust the discernment of my readers will
attribute to their true cause. A certain faculty of inter-
pretation should also be brought to bear upon several
extreme statements. I have undertaken this criticism in
the interest of no system, but in the cause of truth, and I
now recommend what follows to earnest and determined
seekers for the supernatural as a light to guide them
amidst the aberrations of mysticism and the dangers of
magical practices. The noble and generous spirit of

liphas Levi has passed behind the veil, and has doubtless
achieved the immortality he aspired to, and the Absolute
which he sought in life. May the Benediction of AGOTH
be upon him, and the Crown of Life reward him, and from
his throne

“* Built beyond mortal thought
Far in the Unapparent,”

may his approval follow this translation, which I have
undertaken in the cause of that Synthesis of Religious
Belief of which he was the pioneer and the prophet!

INTRODUCTION.

BEHIND the veil of all the hieratic and mystical allegories
of ancient dogmas, behind the shadows and _ fantastic
ordeals of all initiations, beneath the seal of all sacred
writings, amidst the ruins of Nineveh or of Thebes, on the
crumbling stones of ancient temples, and on the scorched
visage of the Sphinx of Assyria or Egypt, in the monstrous
or marvellous paintings which translate for the faithful of
India the sacred pages of the Vedas, in the strange
emblems of our old alchemical works, in the initiatory
ceremonies adopted by all secret societies, we find the
traces of a doctrine which is everywhere the same and
everywhere carefully concealed. Occult philosophy seems
to have been the nurse and godmother of all intellectual
forces, the key of all divine obscurities, and the absolute
mistress of society, in those ages when it was exclusively
reserved for the education of priests and of kings.

It reigned in Persia with the.Magi, who one day perished,
as the masters of the world do perish, because they abused
their power ; it endowed India with the most wonderful
traditions, and with an incredible wealth of poetry, of
grace, and of terror in its emblems; it civilised Greece to
the sounds of the lyre of Orpheus; it concealed the first
principles of every science and of all intellectual progress
in the daring calculations of Pythagoras; fable was replete
with its marvels, and history, when it undertook to estimate
this unknown power, confused itself with fable. It shook
or established empires by its oracles, made tyrants grow
pale on their thrones, and governed all minds by curiosity
or fear. For this science, saith the crowd, there is nothing
impossible : it commands the elements, knows the language
of the stars, and directs the course of the planets; the
moon at its voice falls blood-red from the sky; the dead
rise up and articulate into ominous words the night-wind
which sighs through their skulls. Mistress of love or of

A

2 THE MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

hate, this science can bestow at will on human hearts either
paradise or hell It disposes at pleasure of all forms, and
with ease distributes either beauty or ugliness. By turns
it changes, with the wand of Circe, men into animals and
animals into men; it even dispenses life or death, and can
confer wealth on its adepts by the transmutation of metals,
and immortality by its quintessence and elixir compounded
of gold and light. Such was magic from Zoroaster to
Manes, from Orpheus to Apollonius of Tyana, when
dogmatic Christianity, at length victorious over the sublime
dreams and gigantic aspirations of the Alexandrian school,
dared to fulminate publicly its anathemas against this
philosophy, and thus compelled it to become more secret
and mysterious than ever.

Subsequently, strange and alarming reports began to!
circulate in respect of the initiates or adepts; these men
were everywhere surrounded with a baleful influence. They
slew or sent mad those who permitted themselves to be
carried away by their persuasive eloquence, or by the
prestige of their knowledge. The women whom they
loved became vampires, their children disappeared at their
nocturnal gatherings, and folks spoke shudderingly and
in whispers of their sanguinary orgies and abominable
banquets. Bones had been discovered in the vaults of

ancient temples, shrieks had been heard in the night ; the ; ce

harvests withered and flocks languished when the magician ‘
went by. Diseases which defied medical skill made occa-
sionally their appearance in the world, and always, it was
said, beneath the venomous glance of the adepts. Finally,
a universal shout of reprobation rose up against magic,
whose very name became a crime, and the hatred of the
rabble was expressed in this outcry—“ To the flames with
the sorcerers!’”” as some centuries earlier it had been
vociferated—*“ To the lions with the Christians! ” _
Now, the multitude conspires only against veritable
powers ; it has not the knowledge of what is true, but by
instinct it knows what is strong. It was reserved for the
eighteenth century to deride alike Christianity and magic,
even while infatuated with the homilies of Rousseau and
the fascinations of Cagliostro. Notwithstanding, the basis
of magic is science, as the foundation of Christianity is
love, and in the gospel symbolism we find the incarnate
Logos adored in his childhood by three Magi, who are

!

INTRODUCTION. . 38

conducted by a star—the triad and the sign of the micro-
cosmos—and receiving from them gold, frankincense, and
myrrh—a second mysterious triplicity, beneath whose
emblem the highest kabbalistic secrets are allegorically
contained. Tradition further applies to these Magi the title
of kings, because initiation into magic constitutes a true
kingdom, and because the grand Art of the Magi is called
by all adepts the voyal art, or holy kingdom, sanctum
vegnum. The star which led them is that Blazing Star
whose symbol is to be met with in all initiations. For
the alchemists, it is the sign of the quintessence; for the
Magicians, the great Arcanum; for the Kabbalists, the
sacred and mysterious Pentagram.

Christianity, therefore, owes no hatred to magic, but
human ignorance has ever stood in awe of the unknown.
The science was forced to hide itself to avoid the zealous
assaults of a blind love; it clothed itself in new hiero-
glyphics, dissimulated its aims, disguised its hopes. Thus
was the jargon of the alchemists created, that continual
deception for the uninitiated who are covetous of gold, and
a living language only for the true followers of Hermes.

Singular fact! In the sacred books of the Christians
are included two works which the infallible Church does
not pretend to understand, and never ventures to explain
—the prophecy of Ezekiel and the Apocalypse —two
kabbalistic claviculz, doubtless reserved by heaven for
the commentaries of magian kings, books which for faithful
believers are sealed with seven seals, yet are perfectly clear
to the infidel who is an initiate of the occult sciences.

There exists also another book, but this, though in a
certain sense it is popular and circulates everywhere, is
of all the most hidden and unknown, because it is the key
of all the rest ; it is in circulation without being known by
the public ; where it is, no one expects to discover it, and
should anyone suspect its existence, he would a thousand ~
times over vainly waste his time if he sought it under any
but one form. This book, more ancient perhaps than that
of Enoch, has never been translated, and it exists only in
primitive characters, on single leaves, like the tablets of
antiquity. A distinguished scholar has revealed, though
no one appears to have noticed it, not exactly its secrct
but its antiquity and extraordinary preservation ; another
scholar, though of a genius more fantastic than judicious,

4 THE MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

passed thirty years in the study of this book, and has barely
divined its importance. It is, in truth, a monumental and
phenomenal work, strong and simple as the architecture of
the Pyramids, durable, therefore, as are those; a book
which epitomises all sciences, and whose infinite combina-
tions can solve all problems; a book which speaks by
evoking thought, the inspirer and controller of all possible
conceptions, the masterpiece perhaps of the human mind,
and undoubtedly one of the finest things which antiquity
has bequeathed to us, a universal clavicula, whose name
was understood and explained by the learned zd/umuné,
William Postel; a unique text, whose first characters alone
favished into ecstasy the devotional spirit of St Martin,
and might have restored reason to the sublime and unfor-
tunate Swedenborg. We shall treat of this work later on,
and its mathematical and exact explanation will be the
completion and crown of our conscientious undertaking.

The original alliance between Christianity and the
science of the Magi, once satisfactorily proved, will be a
discovery of no small importance, and we do not doubt
that the result of a serious study of magic and the Kab-
balah will lead earnest minds to the reconciliation, till now
regarded as impossible, of science and dogma, of reason
and faith.

Before proceeding further, let us precisely define magic.
Magic is the traditional science of the secrets of Nature
which comes to us from the Magi. It unites in a single
science all that is most certain in philosophy and most
infallible and eternal in religion. It provides the human
mind with an instrument of philosophical and religious
certitude as exact as mathematics, and accounting for the
exactitude of mathematics themselves. Consequently, the
Absolute does exist in the order of intelligence and of
faithe The Supreme Reason has not left human under-
standing to vacillate at hazard. There is an incontestable
truth ; there is an infallible method of knowing that truth,
and, by its knowledge, those who adopt it as the rule of
their conduct can endow their will with a sovereign power,
which will make them masters of inferior things and of all
wandering spirits, that is, arbiters and monarchs of the
world.

If this be the case, why is this supreme science still un-
known? How are we to assume ina dark and clouded sky

: INTRODUCTION. 5

the existence of so brilliantasun? . . . Thesupreme science
has been always known, but only by the flower of intelli-
gences, who have understood the necessity of being silent,
and biding their time. Ifaskilful surgeon succeeded, in the
middle of the night, in opening the eyes of a man born blind,
how would he make him understand before morning the ex-
istence and nature of the sun? Science has its nights and
mornings, because it endows the intellectual world with a
life which has its regulated movements and progressive
phases. Yes, the supreme and absolute science is magic,
the science of Abraham and Orpheus, of Confucius and
Zoroaster. Its doctrines were engraved on stone tables by
Enoch and Trismegistus. Moses purified and revezled them

—this is the sense of the word veveal—when he made the -
holy Kabbalah the exclusive heritage of the people of -

Israel and the inviolable secret of its priests. The mysteries
of Eleusis and of Thebes preserved among the nations some
symbols already mutilated, and whose mysterious key was
lost among the instruments of an ever increasing supersti-
tion. Jerusalem, the destroyer of her prophets, and so often

prostituted to the false gods of the Assyrians and Babylo-'

nians, had at length, in her turn, lost the sacred word, when a
Saviour announced to the Magi by the holy star of initia-
tion appeared to rend the threadbare veil of the old temple,
and to endow the church with a new tissue of legends and
symbols which always conceal from the profane, and always
preserve for the elect, the same eternal truth.

We have said that the Church, whose special attribute is
the custody of the keys, does not claim to have those of the
Apocalypse, or of Ezekiel’s visions. For Christians, and in
their opinion, the scientific and magical keys of Solomon
are lost. It is, nevertheless, certain that, in the sphere of
intelligence, governed by the Locos, nothing which is
written perishes. What men cease to understand simply
ceases to exist for them, at least as a Logos; it then enters
the domain of enigma and mystery.

Moreover, the antipathy, and even open hostility, of the
official Church against everything which is included within
the scope of magic, is connected with causes which are neces-
sary and even inherent in the hierarchic and political con-
stitution of Christian sacerdotalism. The Church ignores
. magic, because ignore it she must or perish ; she none the
less recognises that her mysterious founder was saluted in

6 THE MYSTERIES OF MAGIC. ;
his cradle by three Magi, that is, by hieratic ambassadors
from the three divisions of the known world, and the three
analogical worlds of occult philosophy.

In the Alexandrian School, magic and Christianity nearly
join hands under the auspices of Ammonius, Saccus, and
Plato. The doctrine of Hermes is found almost in its
entirety in the writings attributed to Dionysius the Areo-
pagite, which are valuable for science, as they consecrate
the union of the initiations of the old world with the Chris-
tian revelation, by joining a perfect comprehension of tran-
scendental philosophy with the most complete and irre-
proachable orthodoxy. Synesius, one of the greatest philo-
sophers, and the greatest poet, of the first Christian centuries,
sketches the plan of a treatise on dreams which deserved
later on to be annotated by Cardan, and composes hymns
which might do duty as the liturgy of the Swedenborgian
Church, could a church of the illuminated possess a liturgy.
With this period of fervent abstractions and impassioned
logomachy must also be connected the philosophical reign
of Julian, called the Apostate, because in his youth he made
an unwilling profession of Christianity. Everyone knows
that Julian was guilty of being an unseasonable hero of
Plutarch, and was, so to speak, the Don Quixote of Roman
chivalry, but what everyone does not know is this, that
Julian was an z/luminé and initiate of the highest order,
that he believed in the unity of God, and in the universal
doctrine of the Trinity, that, in a word, he regretted nothing
in the ancient world but its magnificent symbols and its
too alluring images. Julian was no pagan, he was a gnostic
seduced by the allegories of polytheism, and who had the
misfortune to find the name of Jesus Christ less sonorous
than that of Orpheus. The Emperor paid in his own per-
son for his tastes as an academician, philosopher, and
rhetorician, and having afforded himself the gratification
and the spectacle of expiring like Epaminondas with the
sentiments of Cato, he had, in public opinion, which already
was wholly Christian, anathemas for his funeral oration,
and a disgraceful epithet for his subsequent celebrity. _,

Let us skip the small things and small personages of |
the Bas-Empire, and pass on to the Middle Ages... .
Stay, take this book and read the seventh page, then be |
seated on this mantle I have spread, and with the corner ;
of which we will cover our eyes. . . . Your head whirls, does

INTRODUCTION. 7

it not? and the earth seemsto spin beneath yourfeet ? Hold |
tightly, and do not look round. . . . The vertigo ceases, we ,
have reached our journey’s end. Stand up and open your.
eyes, but be careful to make no sign and to pronounce no
Christian word. We are ina landscape of Salvator Rosa.
It is a troubled waste, reposing after a tempest. The
moon shines no longer in the sky, but can you not discern
small stars dancing in the heather? Do you not hear about
you the flight of monstrous birds, who seem whispering
strange words in their passage? Approach stealthily this
cross-road among the rocks! <A hoarse and funereal trum-
pet is heard; lurid torches burn on every side; a dis-
orderly assembly surges round an empty seat; all look
round them in expectation, then suddenly fall prostrate and
mutter—“ He is here! He is here! ’Tis himself!” A
goat-headed prince comes forward with bounds ; he ascends
the throne, turns round, and, stooping, presents to the
assembly a human posterior, which everyone approaches,
black taper in hand, to salute and to kiss ; then he stands
up with a discordant laugh, and distributes to his favourites
gold, secret instructions, occult medicines, and poisons,
Meanwhile, fires are lighted, in which fern and aloe-wood
are burning pell-mell with human bones and the fat of
executed criminals. Druidic priestesses, crowned with
vervain and wild parsley, immolate unbaptized children
with golden knives, and prepare revolting love-feasts.
Tables are garnished, masked men seat themselves beside
half-naked females, and a bacchanalian banquet begins ; no-
thing but salt is wanting, which is the symbol of wisdom
and immortality. Wine flows in streams, leaving stains
like those of blood; obscene proposals and extravagant
caresses begin, and behold the whole assembly is intoxi-
cated with wine, wickedness, indulgence, and singing!
They rise in confusion, and hasten to form infernal rings.
. .. Then come all legendary monsters, all phantoms of .
nightmare. Enormous toads blow the flute backwards and ©
whistle, with paws pressing their flanks ; limping scarabs
mingle in the dance, crabs play the castanets, crocodiles
make Jew’s harps of their scales, elephants and mammoths
come in the guise of Cupids, and foot it inthe dance; then
the distracted circles break and disperse; each merry-
maker draws shrieking after him a dishevelled female. The
lamps and candles formed of human fat go out smoking in

«

= ee

8 THE MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

the gloom. . . . Cries are heard here and there, peals of
laughter, blasphemies, and rattlings in the throat. . . . Let
us be gone, rouse up, do not cross yourself! See, I have
brought you safely home, and now you are at rest in your
bed! You are a little fatigued, perhaps even a little shat-
tered, by your journey and your night; but you have be-
held something which most people speak of without know-
ledge; you are initiated into secrets as terrible as that of
Triphonius—you have been present at the Sabbath! It

biel

remains for you now to preserve your reason, to keep your-

self in wholesome fear of the law, and at a respectful |
distance from the Church and her stakes.

Would you behold something less fantastic and of greater
reality ? You shall assist at the punishment of Jacques de
Molay and his accomplices or brothers in martyrdom. . .
Do not err, however; confound not the guilty and the
innocent! Did the Templars in reality worship Bapho-
met? Did they offer a humiliating salutation: to the
buttocks of the goat of Mendes? What was that secret
and mighty association which imperilled both Church and
State, and which thus was destroyed without a hearing ?
Judge nothing hastily! They are guilty of a great crime;
they have permitted the sanctuary of antique initiation to
be seen by the profane; they have once more gathered
and shared the fruits of the knowledge of good and evil.
The sentence which condemns them comes from a higher
source than the Pope or King Philippe le Bel. ‘‘ In what day
soever thou shalt eat of this fruit thou shalt die the death,”
said God Himself, as we read in the Book of Genesis.

What then is taking place in the world, and why do
priests and kings tremble? What secret power threatens
both tiaras and crowns? You perceive certain madmen
who are reported to be concealing the stone of the philo-
sophers beneath the rags of their wretchedness. They can
change earth into gold, and they are destitute of food or
habitation. Their brows are circled by a nimbus of glory
and a shadow of disgrace. One has discovered the universal
science and seeks death vainlyas a refuge from the agonies of
his triumph—it ts the Majorcan Raymond Lully. Another
cures imaginary diseases by fantastic remedies, and gives
a formal denial beforehand to the proverb which asserts
the uselessness of a cautery on a wooden leg—it is the
marvellous Paracelsus, always drunk and always lucid,

INTRODUCTION. 9

like the heroes of Rabelais. Here is William Postel
writing naively to the fathers of the Council of Trent;
because he has discovered the absolute doctrine concealed
from the foundation of the world, and is burning to share
it with them. The council does not even do so much as
disturb itself on the maniac’s account, does not deign to
condemn him, and proceeds to the examination of the
‘grave questions of efficacious grace and sufficing grace.
He whom we see perishing poor and abandoned is Cornelius
Agrippa, the least magician of all, but one whom the
uninitiated persist in mistaking for the greatest sorcerer,
because he was sometimes a satirist and mystifier. What
secret do these men bear with them into their tombs?
Why are they admired without being understood ? Why
are they condemned without being heard ? Why are they
initiated into those terrific secret sciences which the Church
and society are afraid of ? Why are they proficient in
what others know nothing of? Why do they disguise
what every one longs to learn? Why are they invested
with a terrible and unknown power? The occult sciences !
Magic! These are the words which will reveal all, and give
food for further thought! De omni re scibilt et quibusdam
alits.

And what then was magic? What then was the power
of these men so proscribed and so spirited? If thus
strong, why did they not vanquish their enemies? If
they were weak and beside themselves, why did people do
them the honour of being afraid of them? Is there a
magic, is there a secret science, which is truly a power, as
we have declared, and which performs prodigies fit to be
compared with the miracles of authorized religions. To
these two palmary questions we reply by a sentence and
by a book. The book shall justify the sentence, which is
this—Yes, there has existed, and there still is, a potent
and true magic; all that legends have related of it was
fact, but, in this instance, and contrary to what commonly
happens, the popular exaggerations have been not only
beside but below the truth. Yes, there is a formidable
secret whose revelation has once already revolutionized the
world, as the religious traditions of Egypt, epitomized
symbolically by Moses at the beginning of Genesis, attest.
This secret constitutes the fatal knowledge of good and
evil, and its result, when divulged, is death. Moses repre-

IO THE MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

sents it under the emblem of a tree which is in che centre of
the terrestrial paradise, and which is connected by its roots
with the tree of life; the four mystic rivers rise at the foot
of this tree, which is guarded by the fiery sword and by
the fourfold Biblical sphinx, the cherub of Ezekiel. ...
Here I must pause, and I already fear that I have said
too much.

Yes, there is a unique, universal, imperishable dogma,
powerful as supreme reason, simple like everything great,
intelligible like all that is universally and absolutely true,
and this dogma has been the father of all others. Yes,
there is a science which confers on man prerogatives appar-
ently superhuman. I find them enumerated as follows in
a Hebrew manuscript of the sixteenth century.

“These are the privileges and power of the man who
holds in his right hand the Keys of Solomon, and in his
left the Branch of the Blossoming Almond :—

“ Aleph. He beholds God face to face, without dying,
and convrsees intimately with the seven genii who com-
mand the whole celestial army.

“ Beth. He is superior to every affliction and to every fear.
, “ Ghimel. He reigns with all heaven, and is served by all

ell.

“ Daleth. He disposes of his own health and life, and can
equally influence the health and life of others. |
“He. He can neither be surprised by misfortune, nor
overwhelmed by disasters, nor vanquished by his enemies.

“ Vav. He knows the reason of the past, present, and
future.

“ Dzain. He holds the secret of the resurrection of the
dead, and the key of immortality.

“Such are the seven transcendent privileges. Those
which rank next are as follows :—

“ Cheth. To find the stone of the philosophers.

“ Teth. To possess the universal medicine.

““Jod. To know the laws of perpetual motion, and the
demonstration of the quadrature of the circle.

“Caph. To change into gold not merely all metals, but
also the earth itself, and even the refuse of the earth.

“Lamed, To subdue the most savage animals, and to
know the words which paralyse and charm serpents.

“Mem. To possess the numerical art which gives the
universal science,

INTRODUCTION. II

“‘ Nun. To speak learnedly on all subjects without pre-
paration and without study.

“Finally, the seven least privileges of the Magus are
these :—

“ Samech. To pierce at a glance the depths of men’s souls
and the secrets of women’s hearts.

“Gnain. To force Nature to give in to him whenever it
may please him.

“ Phe. To foresee all future events which do not depend
on a superior free arbiter, or on an indiscernible cause.

“ Tsade. To give at once and to all the most efficacious
consolations and the most salutary counsels.

“Coph. To triumph over adversities.

“ Resch. ‘To conquer love and hate.

“ Schin. To possess the secret of wealth; to be always
its master, and never its slave; to know how to enjoy even
poverty, and never to fall into abjectness or wretchedness.

“ Thav. Add to these three septenaries that the wise man
governs the elements, stills tempests, cures diseases by the
touch, and resuscitates the dead.

“But there are some things which Solomon hath sealed
with his triple seal. The initiates know it is enough !, As for
others, whether they laugh, believe, or doubt, whether they
threaten or are afraid, what matters it to science or to us ?”

Such, in fact, are the consequences of occult philosophy,
and we are in a position to brave an accusation of folly, or
a suspicion of charlatanry, when we assert that all these
privileges are real. The object of our entire work on
occult philosophy is to prove this.

The philosophical stone, the universal medicine, the
transmutation of metals, the quadrature of the circle, the
secret of perpetual motion are, therefore, neither mystifica-
tions of science, nor insane dreams; they are terms which
are to be interpreted in their veritable sense; they express
the various applications of a single secret, the several quali-
ties of a single operation which is more generally defined
by the appellation of the magnum opus.

These are the secrets of occult philosophy; such magic
appears to us in history; let us now consider it in its books,
its initiation, and its rites.

The key of all magical allegories is found in the tablets
we have referred to, and which we believe to be the work
of Hermes. Round this work, which may be called the

12 THE MYSTERIES OF MAGIC,

keystone of the whole edifice of the secret sciences, are
grouped innumerable legends, which are either its partial
translation or its commentary endlessly renewed under a
thousand different forms. Sometimes these ingenious
fables are arranged symmetrically, and form a great epic
which is characteristic of an epoch, though the crowd
knows neither how nor why. Thus the fabulous history of
the Golden Fleece epitomises, while it veils, the Hermetic
and magical doctrines of Orpheus, and if we refer only to
the mysterious poetry of Greece, it is because the sanctuaries
of Egypt and India to some extent overwhelm us with
their wealth, and our choice is embarrassed in the midst of
so many riches. The Golden Fleece is the spoil of the
sun, it is light appropriated to the use of men; the great
secret of magical achievements—initiation, in fine—is what
the allegorical heroes go in search of into Asia. This
fable joins Hermetic magic with the Greek initiations.
The celestial ram, whose fleece must be obtained in order
to be the sovereign of the world, is the symbol of the
magnum opus. The Argonautic ship built of the prophetic
oaks of Dodona, the speaking vessel, is the bark of the
mysteries of Isis, the ark of seeds and renovation, the
coffin of Osiris, the ovum of divine regeneration. The
adventurer, Jason, is the man called to initiation; he is
only a hero in audacity, he has all the weakness and fickle-
ness of humanity, but he leads forth with him the personi-
fications of every power. Hercules, who signifies brute
force, can by no means concur in the enterprise, and he
strays from the path in pursuit of unworthy love; thé rest
reach the country of initiation, in Colchis, where some
Zoroastrian secrets were still preserved; but how was their
key to be obtained ? Science is again betrayed by a woman.
Medea delivers to Jason the arcana of the magnum opus ;
she sacrifices the kingdom and the life of her father, for it
is a fatal law of the occult sanctuaries that the revelation
of their secrets entails death to those who are unable to
preserve them. Medea informs Jason of the monsters he
must do battle with, and how he can vanquish them.
First, there is the terrestrial and winged serpent, the astral
fluid, which must be seized and condensed ; its teeth must
be drawn and sown in a plain, which has been previously
dug up by yoking the oxen of Mars to the plough. The
dragon’s teeth are the acids which dissolve the metallic

INTRODUCTION. 13

earth, prepared by a double furnace and by the magnetic
forces of the earth. Then a fermentation and, as it were,
a strife takes place, the impure is devoured by the impure,
and the brilliant fleece becomes the recompense of the adept.

So ends the magic romance of Jason; that of Medea
follows, for Greek antiquity has sought to include in this
fable the epic of the secret sciences. After Hermetic magic
comes the Goétic, with parricide, fratricide, infanticide,
sacrificing everything to their passions, and never en-
joying the fruit of their crimes. Medea betrays her
father, like Cham; assassinates her brother, like Cain.
She poniards her children, poisons her rival, and reaps only
the hatred of the man whose love she sought. One is
astonished to see that Jason, when master of the Golden
Fleece, is none the wiser for it; but it must be remembered
that he owes the discovery of its secrets to treason. He is
not an adept like Orpheus, he is a robber, like Prometheus.
What he sought was not knowledge, but wealth and power.
Therefore he died wretchedly, and the inspiring and sove-
reign properties of the Golden Fleece can be understood
by none save the disciples of Orpheus.

But we are anxious to approach the Thebaid, that ap-
palling synthesis of all dogma, present, past, and to come,
that infinite fable, so to speak, which touches, like the deity
of Orpheus, the two extremities of the cycle of human life.
Singular fact! The seven gates of Thebes, defended and
assaulted by seven heroes who have sworn upon the blood of
victims, have the same meaning as the seven seals of the
sacred book, explained by seven genii, and attacked bya
seven-headed monster, after being opened by a living but
immolated lamb, in the symbolic work of St John. The
mysterious origin of Cédipus, who was found suspended
from a tree, like a bleeding fruit, recalls the symbols of
Moses and the narratives of Genesis. He makes war on
his father and slays him unawares—tremendous prophecy
of the blind emancipation of reason devoid of knowledge ;
then he comes into the presence of the sphinx! The
sphinx—that symbol of symbols, the everlasting enigma
of the uninitiated, the granite pedestal of the science of
the sages, the devouring and silent monster whose unmov-
ing form expresses the unique dogma of the great, uni-
versal mystery, the living palladium of humanity, the
symbolic key of the science of nature, whose metaphysic

14 THE MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

is represented by the Pyramids!* How is the tetrad
changed into the duad and explained by the triad? In
more common but more emblematic words, what is that
animal which has four feet in the morning, two at noon,
and three in the evening? Speaking philosophically, how
does the dogma of elementary forces produce the dualism
of Zoroaster, and how is it summarised by the triad of
Pythagoras and Plato? What is the ultimate significance
of allegories and numbers, the final word of all symbol-
isms? (&édipus replies with a simple and terrible word,
which destroys the sphinx and crowns the diviner King of
Thebes—the solution of the enigma is Man! .. . Unfortu-
nate! He has discerned too much, yet not with sufficient
perspicuity, and he will soon atone for his calamitous and —
incomplete clairvoyance by a voluntary blindness. Then
will he vanish in a storm, like all civilisations which shall
at any time divine the solution of the sphinx’s enigma
without understanding its whole purport and mystery. All
is symbolical and transcendental in this gigantic epic of
mortal destinies. The two hostile brothers signify the
second part of the great mystery divinely completed by
the sacrifice of Antigone ; then the last battle, the brothers
destroyed by one another, Capaneus slain by the lightning
he defies, Amphiaraiis swallowed by the earth, are’so many
allegories which fill those who can penetrate their triple
hieratic meaning with astonishment by their truth and their
grandeur.

The secret book of antique initiation was not unknown
to Homer, who sketches its plan and chief figures on the
shield of Achilles with minute precision. But Homer's
graceful fables seem to have soon obscured the simple
abstract truths of primeval revelation. Man clings to the
form and lets the idea slide into oblivion; signs lose their
power in their multiplication. Magic also became cor-
rupted at this period, and descended to the most infamous
enchantments among the sorcerers of Thessaly. The
crime of C&dipus produced its deadly fruits, and the know-
ledge of good and evil erects evil into a sacrilegious
divinity. Men grown tired of light take refuge in the
darkness of material substance; the conception ofthat
void which is filled by Deity seems to them greater than
God, and thus hell is created.

* See Note I.

INTRODUCTION. 15

Whenever in the course of this work we make use of the
consecrated words God, Heaven, and Hell, let it be once
for all plainly understood that we depart as much from the
meaning which is attached to these terms by the profane
as initiation is remote from ordinary thought. God for us
is the AZOTH of the sages,* the efficient and final principle
of the magnum opis. We shall explain later on what is
obscure in these words.

Returning to the fable of Cdipus, the crime of the
Theban king was that he did not understand the sphinx,
that he destroyed the scourge of Thebes without being
pure enough to complete the expiation in the name of his
people. <A pestilence in consequence soon avenged the
death of the sphinx, and the king, forced to abdicate,
sacrificed himself to the terrible manes of the monster,
who is more living and voracious than ever when it has
passed from the domain of form into that of idea. Cédipus
discerned what man was, and he put out his own eyes
for not having seen what God was. He divulged half
of the Great Magic Arcanum, and, to save his people, it
was necessary that he should take the other half of the
awful secret into exile and the tomb.

After the colossal fable of CEdipus we find the graceful
poem of Psyche, of which Apuleius was certainly not the
inventor. The Great Magic Arcanum reappears herein
under the image of the mysterious union between a god
and a weak mortal, who is abandoned naked and alone
upon a rock. Psyche must remain ignorant of the secret
of his ideal royalty, and if she behold her husband, she
must lose him. Here Apuleius annotates and interprets
the allegories of Moses, but did not the Elohim and the
gods of Apuleius alike issue from the sanctuaries of
Memphis and Thebes? Psyche is the sister of Eve, or
rather, she is Eve spiritualised. Both desire to know and
lose innocence for the honour of the trial. Both deserve to
descend into Hades, one to carry away the antique box of
Pandora, the other to seek and to crush the serpent’s head,
the symbol of time and evil. Both commit the crime
which must be expiated by the Prometheus of ancient
days and the Lucifer of the Christian legend, the one
delivered by Hercules, the other conquered by the Saviour.

After the wonderful golden ass of Apuleius, we find no

* See Note 2.

16 THE MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

more magical epics. Science, overcome in Alexandria by
the fanaticism of the murderers of Hypatia, became Chris-
tian, or, rather, concealed itself in the guise of Christianity
with Ammonius, Synesius, and the pseudonymous author
of the works of Dionysius the Areopagite. In such times
it was needful to excuse miracles by the semblance of
superstition, and knowledge by an unintelligible language.
Hieroglyphic writing was revived, pantacles and characters
were invented which epitomized a whole doctrine in a sign,
a whole chain of tendencies and revelations in a sentence.
What was the aim of these aspirants to knowledge? They
sought the secret of the magnum opus, or the philosophers’
stone, or the secret of perpetual motion, or the area of the
circle, or the universal medicine, formule which frequently
preserved them from persecution and hatred by taxing
them with insanity, but which each gave expression to
some aspect of the great magic secret, as we shall prove
later on. This absence of magical epics continued till the
Romance of the Rose, that profound work in trivial guise,
a revelation of the mysteries of occultism as learned as that
of Apuleius. The rose of Flamel the alchemist, of Jean de
Meung, of Dante, and, we may add, of Apuleius himself,
flourished on the same rose tree. The Romarice of the
Rose and the Divine Comedy are the two opposite sides of
the same achievement—initiation through independence of
the intellect, satire on all contemporary institutions, and
the allegorical formulation of the great secrets of the
Rosicrucian Society. The rose, which from time im-
memorial has been the symbol of beauty and life, of love
and pleasure, expressed in a mystical manner all the pro-
testations of the Renaissance. It was the flesh revolting
against the oppression of the spirit, it was nature declaring
herself to be, like grace, the daughter of God, it was love
refusing to be stifled by the celibate, it was life desiring to
be barren no longer, it was humanity aspiring to a natural
religion, full of love and reason, founded on the revelation
of the harmonies of existence of which the rose was for
initiates the living and blooming symbol. This symbol is
borrowed from the transcendent Kabbalah, and it is time
that we should consider that immense and secret source of
universal philosophy. |

The Bible, with all the allegories it contains, only ex-
presses the religious knowledge of the Hebrews in an in-

INTRODUCTION. 17

complete and veiled manner. The book we have before
spoken of, and whose hieratic characters we shall explain,
that book which William Postel calls the Genesis of Enoch,
certainly existed before Moses and the prophets, \ whose doc-
trine, fundamentally identical as it is with that of the
ancient Egyptians, had also its exoterism and its veils.
When Moses spoke to the people, says the sacred book,
allegorically, he placed a veil over his face, and he removed
it before addressing the Deity—such is the cause of those
pretended Biblical absurdities which so much exercised the
satirical genius of Voltaire. The books of the Bible were
committed to writing only to recall tradition, and they were
inscribed in symbols unintelligible to the profane. The
Pentateuch and poems of the prophets were, moreover,
merely elementary works, whether as regards doctrine,
ethics, or liturgy. The true secret and traditional philo-
sophy was not committed to writing till a later period, and
then under still less transparent veils. There originated in
this manner a second Bible, unknown, or rather misunder-
stood, by the Christians, and which they denominate a
collection of monstrous absurdities (for here the believers
talk like the sceptics with whom they are confounded in a
common ignorance), while we affirm it to be a monument
which harmonises all the sublimity ever attained or imagined
by religious and philosophical genius, a treasure encom-
passed by thorns, a diamond concealed in a gross and
opaque stone—our readers will have divined already that
we refer to the Talmud.

How strange is the destiny of the Jews ! those scapegoats,
martyrs, and saviours of the world, that long-lived, cour-
ageous, and hardy race, which persecutions have ever pre-
served intact, because it has not yet accomplished its mission!
Do not our apostolical traditions affirm that, after the decay
of faith among the Gentiles, salvation will again come forth
from the house of Israel, and that then the crucified Jew
will surrender the empire of the world into the hands of
His Father ?

On penetrating into the sanctuary of the Kabbalah, one
is seized with admiration at the sight of a doctrine so simple
and at the same time so absolute. The necessary union of
ideas and signs, the consecration of the most fundamental
realities by primitive characters, the trinity of words, letters,
and numbers ; a philosophy simple as the alphabet, pro-

B

oe

18 THE MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

found and infinite as the Logos ; theorems more luminous
and complete than those of Pythagoras; a theology which
may be epitomized by counting on the fingers; an infinity
which can be held in the hollow of an infant’s hand ; ten
numerals and twenty-two letters, a triangle, a Square, and a
circle—such are the elements of the Kabbalah, such are the
primary principles of the written word, shadow of that
spoken Logos which created the world!

All truly dogmatic religions have issued from the Kabba-
lah and return therein ; whatever is scientific and grandiose
in the religious dreams of all z//uminati—Jacob Boehmen,
Swedenborg, Saint Martin, and the rest—has been borrowed
from the Kabbalah; all masonic associations owe their
secrets and their symbols thereto. The Kabbalah alone
consecrates the alliance of universal reason and the Divine
Word ; it establishes, by the counterpoise of two forces in
apparent opposition, the eternal balance of existence ; it
reconciles reason with faith, power with liberty, knowledge
with mystery; it has the keys of the present, past, and
future.

To be initiated into the Kabbalah jt js insufficient to
read and digest the writings of Reuchjp, Galatinus, Kir-
cher, or Mirandola; it is needful also ttstudy the Hebrew
writers in the collection of Pistorius, t¢ Sepher Jezirah
above all, and then the philosophy of he By Léon “the:
Israelite. We must also master the gre book of Sahar
in the collection of 1684, entitled Cale Deny gy the
treatise on Kabbalistic Pneumatics, and tt of the Rey a
lution of Souls; then enter boldly ints. 7, minguc
obscurity of the whole dogmatic and allefica) substance
of the Talmud ; after which we shall un.ang William

Postel, and confess in an undertone that, hi, ceeqin gly pre.

mature and over-generous dreams of fer, emancipation

set aside, this famous and erudite dlumtia, nop Suches

maniac as is pretended by those who hav read him.
We have sketched rapidly the history occult philo-

sophy, we have indicated its sources and fly analysed

i law of 4.0.0 &=
power alone, such is the supreme tions, “So
the great Revealer says, “The kingdom seaven suf.
fereth violence, and the violent only sha}, j, away.”

INTRODUCTION. 19

The gate of truth is closed, like the sanctuary of a virgin ;
he must be a man who would enter. All miracles are
promised to faith, but what is faith except the audacity of
a will which does not falter in the darkness, and which
advances towards the light through all trials, and over-
coming all obstacles ? : |

It is unnecessary here to repeat the history of old initia-
tions ; the more dangerous and terrible they were, the
greater was their efficacy, and thus the world had true
men to govern and instruct it in those days. The priestly
art and the kingly art consisted above all things in trials of
courage, discretion, and will-power. There were noviciates ~
similar to those of the priests, who under the name of
Jesuits are so unpopular in our own day, but who would
still be the rulers of the world had they a truly wise and
intelligent leader.

After spending our lifetime in the search for the absolute
in religion, science, and justice, after revolving in the circle
of Faust, we have arrived at the first doctrine and the first
book of humanity. There do we pause, there have we dis-
covered the secret of human omnipotence and of indefinite
progress, the key of all symbolisms, the first and final doc-
trine ; and we have comprehended the significance of that
sentence, so often repeated in the Gospel, “the kingdom of
God.” * aa
~-To provide a fixed point as a fulcrum for human activity
is to solve the problem of Archimedes, by realising the use
of his famous lever. This is what was done by the great
initiates who convulsed the world, and they could only have
accomplished it by means of the Great and Incommuni-
cable Secret. Moreover, as a guarantee of his renewed
youth, the symbolic phoenix never reappeared to the world
without having solemnly consumed the ashes and proofs of
his anterior life. Thus, Moses caused all those who had
known Egypt and her mysteries to die in the desert ; thus,
St Paul at Ephesus burned all books which treated of the
occult sciences ; thus, finally, the French Revolution, that
daughter of the great Johannite Orient, and the ashes of
the Templars, spoliated the churches and blasphemed the
allegories of the divine cultus. But all doctrines and all
restorations proscribe magic, and doom its mysteries to
the flames or oblivion. This is because every cultus or

* See Note 3.

20 THE MYSTERIES OF MAGIC,

philosophy is a Benjamin of humanity, which lives by the
death of its mother, because the symbolic serpent revolves
ever by devouring its own tail, because a void is necessary
as a condition of existence to every plenitude, a negation
for each affirmation; it is the eternal realisation of the
phoenix allegory.

Two illustrious scholars have already proceeded me in
the path I travel, but they have, so to speak, passed the
night there, and have had no beacon. I refer to Volney
and Dupuis; to Dupuis above all, whose immense erudition
has produced only a negative work. He has seen astron-
omy alone in the origin of all religions, mistaking thus the
symbolic cycle for doctrine, and the calendar for legend.
He lacked a single branch of knowledge—that of true
magic which comprises the secrets of the Kabbalah.
Dupuis has passed through the sanctuaries of eld, like the
prophet Ezekiel through the plain covered with dry bones,
and he has perceived death only, for he did not know the
word which collects the virtue of the four winds of heaven,
and which can make a living people of all that vast
charnel-house by crying to the ancient symbols—“ Arise!
take up a new shape, and walk !”

What no one has therefore been able or has dared to do
before us, it is time that we should have the boldness to
attempt. Like Julian, we would rebuild the Temple, and
do not conceive that we shall thereby give the lie to a
wisdom which we adore, and which Julian himself was
worthy to adore also, had the rancorous and fanatical
doctors of his time permitted him to understand it. The
Temple for us has two pillars, on one of which Christianity
has inscribed its name. We have, therefore, no wish to
attack Christianity ; far from it—we would mterpret and
fulfil it. Understanding and will have alternately exercised
their power in the world; in our own days religion and
philosophy still wage war, but must end by agreeing. The
provisional object of Christianity has been the establish-
ment by obedience and faith of a supernatural or religious
equality among men, and the petrifaction of intelligence by
faith, in order to provide a fulcrum for virtue, which came
to destroy the aristocracy of knowledge, or rather, to
replace that aristocracy already destroyed. Philosophy,
on the contrary, has laboured to bring back men by liberty
and reason to natural inequality, and to substitute savozr-

INTRODUCTION. 21

faire for virtue by inaugurating the reign of industry.
Neither of these two courses has been complete and suffic-
ing, neither has led man to perfection and happiness.
What is now being dreamed of, almost without daring to
hope it, is an alliance between these two forces long con-
sidered contrary, and there is good reason for desiring
their union; these two great energies of the human soul
are no more opposed to one another than the male sex is
opposed to the female; doubtless, they are different, but
their apparently contrary appearances come only from their
aptitude to meet and unite.

We propose nothing less than a universal solution of all
problems, the explanation of the philosopher’s stone,
perpetual motion, the secret of the magnum opus, and the
universal medicine. Men will charge us with insanity, as
they did the divine Paracelsus, or with charlatanism, as
they did the great and unfortunate Agrippa. If the stake
_ of Urban Grandier be extinguished, the inexorable pro-
scriptions of silence and calumny remain. We do not defy
them, but we are resigned to them. We have not sought
of ourselves the publication of this work, and we believe
that if the time be come for speaking, speech will produce
itself, through us or through others. We shall, therefore,
remain calm and wait.

INITIATORY EXERCISES AND
PREPARATIONS.

THOU who art holding this book in thy hands and dost
undertake to read it, who art thou? On the pediment of a
temple which was dedicated by antiquity to the god of
light, there might be read this inscription—‘ Know_thy-
self!” I give the same advice to every man who is seeking
fo approach science.

Magic, called by the ancients the sanctum regnum, the
holy kingdom, or the kingdom of God, vegnum Det, exists
but for kings and for priests—art thou a priest? art thou.
a king? The priesthood of magic is no common sacer-
dotalism, and its royalty has nothing to dispute with the
princes of this world. The kings of science are the priests
of truth, and their dominion is concealed from the multi-
tude, like their sacrifices and their prayers. The kings of
science are men who have attained truth, and whom the
truth has made free, according to the formal promise of the
most mighty of all the initiators.

Whosoever is the slave of his passions or of worldly
prejudices can never be initiated, can never, at least till he
reforms, attain that height. Whosoever loves his own
opinions, and fears to lose them; who looks with dis-
favour on new truths, and who is not disposed to doubt all
things rather than admit anything on hazard, should close
this book, which is useless and dangerous for him ;_ he will
understand it badly, and it will vex him; but should he,
peradventure, divine its whole significance, far more will he
be troubled thereby.

If thou art attached to anything in the world more than
to reason, truth, and justice; if thy will be uncertain and
fluctuating either in good or evil; if logic alarm thee, if
naked truth make thee blush, if thou art hurt when received
errors are assailed, condemn this work out of hand.

Whosoever aspires to wisdom, and to solve the great
enigma of nature, must be the inheritor and despoiler of

INITIATORY EXERCISES AND PREPARATIONS. 23

the sphinx ; he must have its human head to possess the
word, the eagle’s wings to achieve the heights, the bull's
flanks to furrow the depths, and the lion’s talons to make
room on the right and on the left, both before and behind.
Thou, therefore, who dost aspire to initiation, art thou
learned like Faust ? Art thou impassible like Job? No; is
it not so? But thou canst become so by willing it. Hast
thou vanquished the vortices of vague thoughts? Art thou
free from uncertainties and caprices? Dost thou accept
pleasure only when thou willest it, and dost thou will it
only when it is legitimate? No; is it not so? It is not
always thus; but it may become so by determining thereon.
The sphinx has not only a man’s head, but also the breasts
of a woman—canst thou resist feminine attractions? No;
is it not so? And here thou dost laugh in replying,
parading thy moral weakness for the glorification of the
vital and physical power within thee. Be it so, however !
I allow this homage to be paid to the ass of Sterne or
Apuleius ; that the ass has its merits I dispute in no way ;
it was sacred to Priapus, as the goat was to the god of
Mendes. But leave it for what it is, and decide if it shall
be thy master, or if thou wilt be master of it. He alone
can truly possess the pleasure of love who has conquered
the love of pleasure. To be able to make use of anything,
and to abstain from doing so, is to be twice able. By thy
passions the woman enchains thee; be master of thy
passions and thou wilt enchain her. The greatest injury
which can be inflicted on a man is to call him a coward.
Now a coward is one who neglects the care of his moral
dignity to obey the instincts of nature blindly. In pre-
sence of danger it is, as a matter of fact, natural to be
afraid, and why then is it a shameful thing? Because
honour has laid down as a law that we should prefer duty
to inclination or fear. What is honour from this stand-
point? It is the universal fore-consciousness of immortality,
and the valuation of the means which can lead to it. The
final victory that man can achieve over death is to conquer
the relish of life, not by despair but by a nobler hope which
is comprised in faith, for all that is honourable and beauti-
ful, by the consent of the universal world.

To learn self-conquest is, therefore, to learn how to live,
and the austerities of stoicism were no idle boast of liberty.
To yield to the forces of nature is to follow the current of

24 THE MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

collective life and to be the slave of secondary causes.
To resist and overcome nature is to achieve for oneself a
personal and imperishable existence; it is to set oneself
free from the vicissitudes of life and death. Every man who
is prepared to die rather than renounce truth and justice is
veritably living, for he is immortal in his soul. The end of
all ancient initiations was to find or form such men.
Pythagoras exercised his disciples by silence and all kinds
of self-denial ; in Egypt the neophytes were tried by the
four elements; in India it is well known to what incredible
austerities the faquirs and brahmins devote themselves in
order to attain the realm of free-will and divine independ-
ence. All the macerations of asceticism are borrowed from
the initiations of the ancient mysteries, and they have
ceased because those eligible for initiation, no longer finding
initiators, and the leaders of conscience having become in
the long run as ignorant as the profane, the blind have
grown weary of following the blind, and no one has been
willing to submit to trials which issued but in doubt and
despair—the path of light was lost.

We must not enter rashly the domain of the transcen-
dental sciences, but once on the road, we must reach their
goal or perish. To doubt is to lose reason, to pause is to
fall, to go back is to fling one’s self into an abyss. The
operations of science are not devoid of danger. Their
result may be madness for those who are not.e
on the base of the supreme, absolute, and infallible reason.
They may over-excite the nervous system, producing
terrible and incurable diseases. When the imagination
overawes and alarms itself, they may produce swoons and
even death by cerebral congestion. We cannot, there-
fore, too strongly dissuade from attempting them all ner-
vous and excitable people, women, young persons, and all
who are unaccustomed to complete self-control and the
command of fear. In like manner, nothing is more dan-
gerous than to make magic a pastime, ora diversion at
parties, as some make it. Even magnetic experiments
performed under such conditions will only fatigue the
subject, mislead opinions, and perplex science. We cannot
with impunity make sport of the mysteries of life and
death; and things which are serious should be treated
seriously and with the greatest reserve.

Never yield to the temptation to convince by producing

INITIATORY EXERCISES AND PREPARATIONS. 25

phenomena. The most astounding effects would be no
proof to one who is not convinced beforehand. They can
always be attributed to ordinary prestige, and the Magus
will be considered as a more or less skilful rival of Robert
Houdin or of Hamilton. To demand prodigies as a ground
of faith in science, is to show one’s self unworthy or in-
capable of knowledge. SANCTA SANCTIS. Moreover,
never boast of the works you have performed, even if you
have raised the dead. The Great Master ever recom-
mended silence to the sick whom he healed, and had this
silence been faithfully preserved, the Initiator would not
have been crucified before the completion of his work.
Remember the grand symbol of Prometheus, and hold thy
peace! All the Magi who have made known their achieve-
ments have died violently, and some have been reduced to
suicide, like Cardan, Schroeppfer, and others.

Magical operations are the exercise of a power which is
natural, though superior to the common forces of nature.
They are the result of a science and a discipline which
exalt human will above its normal limits. The super-
natural is but the natural in an extraordinary or exalted
state ; a miracle is a phenomenon which astounds the mul-
titude because it is unexpected. The marvellous is that
which amazes; it is an effect which surprises those who
are unacquainted with its cause, or who assign it a cause
disproportioned to such a result. Nothing is miraculous
except for the ignorant, but as there is scarcely any absolute
knowledge among men, the wonder-world can still exist,
and it does so for every one. Let us start by declaring that
we believe in all miracles, because we are convinced and cer-
tain, even by our own experience, of their entire possibility.
There are some which we do not attempt to explain, but
which we consider to be no less explicable. From the
greater to the lesser, from the lesser to the greater, the con-
sequences are identically connected, and the proportions
progressively rigorous. But in order to work miracles we
must be outside the ordinary conditions of humanity—we
must either be exalted by wisdom or excited by folly,
either above all passions or else beside them through
ecstasy or frenzy. Such is the first and most indispensable
preparation of the operator. Thus, by a providential and
necessary law, the magician cannot exercise omnipotence
except in an inverse proportion to his material interest ;

26 THE MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

the alchemist makes so much the more gold as he is so
much the more resigned to privations, and esteems that
poverty which protects the secrets of the magnum opus.
The adept whose heart is unimpassioned will alone dispose
of the love and the hatred of those whom he would make
the instruments of his knowledge ; the mythos of Genesis
is eternally true, and God permits the tree of science to be
approached by such alone as are sufficiently self-denying
and strong not to covet its fruits.

Let those, therefore, who seek in magic the means to
satisfy their passions, pause in that deadly path, where
they will find nothing but death or madness. This is the
significance of the vulgar tradition that the devil finished
sooner or later by strangling the sorcerers. The Magus
must, therefore, be impassible, moderate and chaste, disin-
terested, impenetrable and inaccessible to every kind of
prejudice or fear. He should be devoid of bodily defects,
and tested by all contradictions and all afflictions. The
first and most important of all magical works is to secure
this exceptional superiority.

We have said that the ecstasy of passion may produce
the same results as absolute superiority, and this is true so
far as regards the issue but not as regards the control of
magical operations. Passion forcibly projects the vital
fluid and imprints unforeseen movements on the universal
life-agent, but it cannot so easily restrain what it has
launched, and its destiny then resembles that of Hippolytus
carried away by his own steeds, or of Phalaris tortured
himself by the instrument he had invented for others.
Human will, realised by its acts, is like the cannon-ball
which recoils before no obstacle. When projected with
violence it passes through it or is lost in it, but if it proceed
with patience and perseverance it is never lost; it is like the
wave which returns incessantly and ends by undermining
the rock. Man can be changed by habit, which, according
to the proverb, becomes his second nature. By means of
persevering and graduated athletic exercises, the energies
and agility of the body are developed or created in an
astonishing degree. It is the same with the soul’s powers.
If you would reign over yourselves and over others, learn
how to will! ae

How can we learn to will? This is the first arcanum
of magical initiation, and it was to make the very inmost

INITIATORY EXERCISES AND PREPARATIONS. 27

depth of this secret understood, that the ancient custodians
of the sacerdotal art surrounded the approaches to the
sanctuary with so many terrors and illusions. They
believed in no will till it had stood its tests, and they were
right. Power can only manifest itself by achievement.
Idleness and forgetfulness are the enemies of will, and this
is why all religions have multiplied observances and made
their cultus difficult and full of minutiz. Are not those
children the favourites of their mothers, who have cost them
the most suffering and anxious care? So does the strength
of religion consist exclusively in the inflexible will of those
who follow it. As long as there is one faithful believer in
the holy sacrifice of the mass, there will be a priest to cele-
brate it for him, and so long as there is one priest who
daily says his office, there will be a pope in the world.
Observances which are apparently the most insignificant,
and in themselves foreign to the end which they propose,
conduce to that end notwithstanding, through education and
the exercise of will. The peasant who each morning rises
at two or three o'clock and goes far from home to gather
a sprig of the same herb before the sun rises, may perform
innumerable prodigies by simply carrying this herb about
him, for it will be the sign of his will, and thereby will be-
come all that he wants it to be in the interests of his desires.

To accomplish anything we must believe in our ability
to accomplish, and this faith must be at once translated
into action. Faith has no tentative efforts; it begins in
the certainty of finishing, and works calmly as though it
had omnipotence at its disposal and eternity before it.
Thou, therefore, who hast introduced thyself to the science
of the Magi, what dost thou ask thereof? Dare to formu-
late thy desire, whatever it be, then set to work immedi-
ately, and cease not to act in the same manner and for the
same end; what you wish for will take place, and has
already begun for you and by you. Sixtus V., while tend-
ing his sheep, said:—“I determine to be pope.” Thou
art a mendicant and dost seek to make gold. Set to work, -
and never give in—I guarantee thee, in the name of science,
all the treasures of Flamel and Raymond Lully.

What is the first requisite? To believe in one’s ability,
and then to act. But how act? Rise daily at the same hour
and at an early hour, bathe summer and winter before day-
break, in a fountain ; never wear soiled clothes, wash them

28 THE MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

yourself if necessary ; exercise yourself by voluntary priva-
tions, that you may be better able to bear involuntary
ones; finally, impose silence on all desires save that of
achieving the magnum opus.

“What! By washing daily at a fountain I shall make
gold ?” will be asked.

“You will work in order to make it.”

“This is a jest.”

“No, it is an arcanum.”

“ How can I avail myself of an arcanum which I do not
understand ?”

_“ Believe and act; you will understand afterwards.”

A sluggard will never be a magician. Magic is an
exercise of all hours and moments. The operator of great
works must be absolute master of himself, must know how
to subdue the allurements of pleasure, appetite, and sleep,
must be as insensible to renown as to reproach. His life
should be a will directed by one thought and served by
entire nature, which will be made subservient to his
mind in his own organs, and by sympathy in all the uni-
versal forces which correspond to them. Every faculty
and sense should share in the work, nothing in the priest of
Hermes has the right to be idle; understanding must be
formulated by signs and summarised by characters or pan-
tacles ; the will must be determined by words, and words
must be fulfilled by acts; the magical idea must be trans-
lated into light for the eyes, harmony for the ears, perfumes
for the sense of smell, savours for the mouth, and shapes
for the touch ; the operator, in a word, must realise in his
whole life what he seeks to realise in the exterior world;
he must become a magnet to attract the desired thing,
which, when he shall be sufficiently magnetic, will come of
itself, and without him thinking of it.

It is important that the Magus should know the secrets
of science, but he can do so by intuition and without study.
Hermits who dwell in the habitual contemplation of nature
frequently divine her harmonies, and in their simple good
sense are often more learned than doctors, whose natural
perceptions are distorted by the sophistry of the schools.
The true practical magicians are found almost always
in the country, and are frequently uncultured persons and
simple shepherds. There are also certain physical. organis-
ations better adapted than others to the revelations of the

INITIATORY EXERCISES AND PREPARATIONS. 29

occult world; there are sensitive and sympathetic natures

.. with whom intuition in the Astral Light is, so to speak,
innate. Certain afflictions and certain complaints may
modify the nervous system, and make it, without the con-
currence of the will, a more or less perfect apparatus for.
divination, but these are exceptional phenomena, and gener-"
ally magic power must and can be acquired by perseverance
and application. There are also cértain substances which
produce ecstasy and provoke the magnetic sleep. There
are some which place at the disposition of the imagination
all the liveliest and most highly coloured reflections of the
elementary light; but the use of these is dangerous, for
they commonly produce stupefaction and intoxication.
They are employed notwithstanding, but in rigorously cal-
culated quantities and in wholly exceptional cases.

He who desires to devote himself seriously to magical
exercises, after having ensured his mind against all hallu-
cination and terror, should purify himself outwardly and
inwardly for the space of forty days. The number forty is
sacred. In Arabic ciphers it is composed of a circle,
image of the infinite, and a 4 which resumes the triad by
unity. In Roman numerals, arranged in the following
manner, it represents the sign of the fundamental dogma of
Hermes, and the character of Solomon’s seal :—

X I N
xX X X X
X Ne

X

The purification of the Magus consists in abstinence from
gross enjoyments and from strong liquors, and in regulating
the period of sleep. This preparation has been indicated
and represented in every cultus by a time of penitence and
trial which precedes the symbolic festivals of life-renewal.

The most scrupulous cleanliness of person must be
observed, as we have said; the poorest can find spring-
water. Garments also must be carefully washed, as well
as the furniture and utensils made use of. All slovenliness
is evidence of negligence, and negligence is mortal in
magic. The air must be purified at rising and retiring with
a perfume composed of the resin of laurels, salt, camphor,

30 THE MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

and sulphur, and the four sacred names* should at the
same time be pronounced in turning successively towards
the four cardinal points. The operations that are accom-
plished must be divulged to no one; mystery is the
rigorous and indispensable condition of the whole science.
The curious must be baffled by the simulation of other
occupations and researches, such as chemical experiments
for commercial purposes, hygienic prescriptions, the search
after some natural secrets, etc., but the decried name of
magic must never be pronounced.

The Magus should live in seclusion, and be approached
with difficulty. Attachments and friendships are needful
to him, but he should select them with care, and preserve
them at all costs. He must concentrate his energies within
him, and choose his points of contact; but in proportion
as he is uncouth and unapproachable at first, so will he be
subsequently popular and sought after, when he _ has
magnetised his chain, and determined his position in a
current of ideas and of light. He should have another
profession besides that of a magician, for magic is not a
trade. A poor and laborious life is so favourable to
practical initiation that the greatest masters have sought
for it, even when the wealth of the world was at their dis-
posal. To devote oneself to ceremonial magic, one must
be free from disturbing pre-occupations, must be able to
obtain all the instruments of the science, and if necessary
know how to make them oneself; an inaccessible laboratory
must also be ensured, where there will be no fear of ever
being surprised or troubled.

The sight of hideous objects and of deformed persons
must be avoided as far as possible; the Magus should not
eat with those whom he does not esteem, and must live in
the most uniform and methodical manner. He should
have the most exalted self-respect, and should consider
himself a dethroned sovereign, who consents to existence
that he may recover his crown. Being amiable and well-
behaved towards everyone, he should never permit himself
to be absorbed in social relations, and should withdraw
from circles where he does not possess some initiative.

He who devotes himself to the works of science should
daily take some moderate exercise, and forbear from vigils
unduly prolonged, should avoid poisonous emanations, the

* See Note 4.

INITIATORY EXERCISES AND PREPARATIONS. 31

vicinity of stagnant water, and indigestible or impure food.
He should above all divert himself daily from magical
preoccupations by mundane cares or toils, whether artistic,
industrial, or even manual. In order to see clearly we
should not be always looking, and he who spends his life
in shooting at a single mark will cease in the end to strike
it. A precaution, which must be equally borne in mind, is
never to experiment when ill.

It is also an essential condition that the Magus should know
how to equilibriate forces and restrain the ardour of indi-
vidual impulse. This is represented by the eighth figure of the
keys of Hermes, where a female is seated between two pillars,
holding in one hand an upright sword, and in the other a
balance. To equilibriate forces, they must be simultaneously
maintained, and made to act alternately, a twofold operation
which is represented by the use of the balance, and also by
the double cross of the pantacles of Pythagoras and of
Ezekiel, where the crosses are equilibriated by each other,
and the planetary signs are in permanent opposition.
Thus Venus equates the works of Mars, Mercury tempers
and accomplishes those of the sun and moon, Saturn
balances Jupiter. It was through this antagonism of the
ancient gods that Prometheus —that is, the genius of
knowledge—contrived to enter Olympus and steal the
celestial fire.

Need I speak more plainly? The milder and calmer
thou art, the more will thy wrath be effectual; the more
ageressive thou art, the higher will be the worth of thy
meekness ; the more skilful thou art, the better wilt thou
profit by thine intelligence, and even by thy virtues; the
more indifferent thou art, the easier will it be to make
others love thee. This is matter of experience in the
moral order, and is rigorously realised in the sphere of
action. Undivided human passions inevitably produce an
effect contrary to their unbridled longing. Extreme love
creates antipathy, blind hatred counteracts and chastises
itself, vanity leads to abasement and the cruellest humili-
ation. So the Great Master revealed a mystery of positive
magical science when He said :—“ If thine enemy hunger,
feed him, if he thirst, give him drink, for in so doing thou
shalt heap coals of fire upon his head.”

It may be urged that such a forgiveness is hypocritical
and strongly resembles a refined revenge, but it must be

32 THE MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

remembered that the Magus is sovereign. Now, a monarch
never avenges himself, he has the right to punish ; when he
exercises this right he does his duty, and is inexorable as
justice. Let it be also borne in mind, so that no one may
pervert the meaning of these words, that the point in_ques-
tion is the chastisement of evil by good, and the opposition
of mildness to violence. If the exercise of virtue be a
scourge to vice, no oné has a right to beg that vice may be
spared, or that pity be extended to its shame and its
sufferings.

Finally, the Magus can and should accomplish the duties
and observe the rites of the cultus to which he belongs.
Now, of all religions the most magical is that which realises
the greatest number of miracles, which grounds the most
inconceivable mysteries on the most conclusive reasons,
whose lights are equal to its shadows, which popularises
the miraculous, and incarnates God in men by faith. This
religion has always existed in the world, and under various
names has been always the dominant religion. It has, at
the present moment, among the nations of the earth, three
apparently hostile forms, which will eventually unite for the
constitution of a Universal Church. I refer to the Russian
orthodoxy, to Roman Catholicism, and to a final trans-
formation of the religion of Buddha.

We believe it to have been sufficiently made clear by
what precedes that our magic is opposed to Goétic and
necromantic magic. Ours is at once an absolute science
and an absolute religion, which should not destroy and
swallow all opinions and all religions, but regenerate and
direct them, by reconstituting the circle of initiates, and
thus providing the blind masses with wise and clear-headed
leaders.

The intellectual and social chaos in the midst of which
we are perishing originates in the neglect of initiation and
its mysteries and trials.’ The essential law of nature, that
of initiation by achievement and by laborious and voluntary
progress, has been fatally misconstrued. To raise up a
tottering and foundering society, the hierarchy and init.
ation must be re-established. The task is difficult, but the
whole intelligent world already feels the necessity of
undertaking it, and this work is an appeal to all still living
to reconstitute life in the very centre of decomposition and
death.

\.

RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL
PROBLEMS.

I—THE HERMETIC AXIOM.

THE synthesis of all religions is in the unity of a single
dogma, which is the affirmation of existence, and its
equality with itself, which constitutes its mathematical
value. There is only one dogma in magic, and it is this:
The visible is the manifestation of the invisible, or, in other
terms, the perfect Logos is, in things which are appreciable
and visible, in exact propdrtion with those which are “in-
appreciable to our senses and invisible to. our eyes. The
Magus raises one hand towards heaven and points with the
other to earth, and he says :—‘‘ Above, immensity! below,
immensity also! Immensity is equivalent to immensity.”
This is true in the order both of the seen and the unseen.

The ancient sages, of whom Trismegistus is the organ,
formulated the unique dogma in the following terms :—
“ That which is above is as that which is below, and that
which is below is as that which is above.” In other words, '
the form bears proportion to the idea, which is the sole
vatson détre of all forms; the shadow is the measure of |
the body calculated with its relation to the luminous ray.
The depth of the scabbard corresponds to the length of the
sword ; negation is proportional to the contrary affirma-
tion ; production is equal to destruction in the movement
which conserves life; and there is no point in infinity
which cannot be the.centre of a circle whose circumference
expands and indefinitely recedes into space.

The tradition of the Kabbalah rests wholly on this
one magical dogma—that the visible is for us the propor-
tional measure of the invisible. Measure a corner of
creation, and make a progressive, proportionate multiplica-
tion, when all infinity will multiply its circles, filled with

Cc

34 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

universes, which will pass in proportional segments be-
tween the ideal and increasing branches of your compass.
Therefore, this primeval, unique, magical, kabbalistic, and
immovable dogma indicates correspondences and analogies,
and is, in fact, that of revelation by analogy in the three
intelligible worlds. Analogy is the final word of science
and the first of faith. It is the sole possible mediator be-
tween the seen and the unseen, between the finite and
infinite. It is the key of all the secrets of nature and the
only Logos of all revelations. It invests the Magus with
every natural power ; it is the quintessence of the philoso-
phers’ stone, the secret of perpetual motion, the quadrature
of the circle; it is the Temple based on the two pillars
JAKIN and BOHAS, it is the key of the grand secret, it is
the root of the Tree of Life, it is the knowledge of good
and evil. To find the exact scale of analogies in things
which are cognizable by science is to establish the grounds
of faith and seize the rod of miracles. Metallic transmu-
tation is performed spiritually and materially by the posi-
tive key of analogies. Everything in magic is predeter-
mined by this universal dogma, in virtue whereof the pos-
sibility of true evocations can be satisfactorily proved. It
is this dogma which is eternally reproduced in the sym-
bolism of all religious forms, and by it we know that the
innate virtue of things has created words, and that there
exists an exact proportion between ideas and _ words,
which are the first forms and articulate realisations of
ideas.

II.— FAITH.

FAITH is the firm adhesion of the soul to its reasonable and
necessary hypotheses, and this faith may itself be called
reason. The obstinate adherence of the mind to impos-
sible and unreasonable hypotheses is superstition, fanaticism,
folly.

Faith is the confidence of the human soul ina higher
reason than its own reason. It, therefore, exalts the in-
telligence of man instead of degrading it. The expansé of —
heaven begins where the peaks of the mountains finish.
I cannot believe the reverse of what I know, and I cannot
know the opposite of that which I believe, without at once

23 a, =
i

RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS. 35

renouncing either my faith or knowledge. The object of
faith is, therefore, necessarily hypothetical, but the object
of rational faith is necessary hypothesis. Where science
pauses faith begins, and it is defined by St Paul in the
following terms :—Accedentem ad Deum oportet credere,
quia est et inquirentibus se remunerator sit.

To enlarge the sphere of science is apparently to defraud
faith, but it is in reality to extend its domain in proportion,
for it widens its basis. Faith is superstition and madness
if reason be not at its base. We must believe in causes
whose existence reason compels us to admit on the evidence
of effects which are known and appreciated by science.
Any faith which does not illuminate and extend reason is a
superstition ; any dogma which denies the life of the under-
standing and the spontaneity of free-will is also a supersti-
tion. To believe is to acquiesce in what we do not now
know, but which reason assures us beforehand that we
shall know, or, at least, recognise, some day. Faith is
the supplement to reason in the darkness which the latter
leaves both before and behind her. It emanates from
reason, but must not be confounded with it. Its apparent
opposition to reason is the strength of both, for it establishes
their distinct and separate provinces, by fructifying the
negative side of the one with the positive side of the other.
What has caused all religious errors and confusions is the
ignorance of the great law of the analogy of contrary things ;
we have sought to make religion a philosophy and philo-
sophy a religion; we have endeavoured to subject the
things which are of faith to the critical methods of science,
which is quite as ridiculous as to subject science to the
blind submissions of faith. To reason upon faith is to
destroy faith, whose object is beyond reason. Faith is
aspiration towards the infinite; it is not the stupid credulity
of astonished ignorance. It is the consciousness and con-
fidence of love; it is the cry of reason, which persists in
the denial of the absurd, even in the presence of the un-
known. It is a sentiment as necessary to the soul as
breathing is to life, it is the heart’s dignity, it is the reality
of enthusiasm. It does not consist in the affirmation of
this or that symbol, but in true and constant aspiration
towards the truths which are veiled by all symbolisms.
To deny a religion, or even all religions, rather than adhere
to formulz which the conscience reproves, is a courageous

36 | MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

and sublime act of faith. Every man who suffers for his
convictions is a martyr for faith. He may explain himself
_ badly, but he prefers truth and justice before all else; do
not let him be condemned without a hearing !

To believe in the supreme truth is not to define it, and
to declare our belief in it is to admit the possibility of
things beyond our knowledge. To define and circumscribe
the object of faith is to formulate the unknown. Profes-
sions of belief are statements of human ignorance and
aspiration, while scientific theorems are monuments of
human conquests. Man can realise that which he believes
in the measure of that which he knows, and in virtue of
that which he does not know; and he can accomplish all
that he desires in the measure of that which he believes,
and in virtue of that which he knows. Analogy is the final
word of science and the first of faith ; it is the sole possible
mediator between the finite and the infinite, between the
visible and invisible. Dogma is the ever-ascending hypo-
thesis of a presumable equation. For the ignorant, it is
the hypothesis which is the absolute affirmation, and the
absolute affirmation which is hypothesis. Science has its
necessary hypotheses, and he who seeks to realise them
ennobles science without restraining faith, for on the other
side of faith is infinity.

Faith is greater than all religions, because it determines
less than any of them the articles of belief. A definition
of faith is, at most, the settlement of the terms of a common
hypothesis, for it is impossible to divine the unknown
except by the supposed and supposable proportions which
it bears to the known, and thus analogy, the one and only
dogma of the ancient Magi, has been and ever will be the
begetter of all others. No specialised dogma constitutes
more than a persuasion which belongs to a particular com-
munity, but faith is a sentiment common to humanity at
large. The more we argue with a view to definition, the
less we believe ; an additional dogma is an opinion which
a sect appropriates to itself, and, in some sense, abstracts
from universal faith. Let the sectarians cast and recast
their dogmas; let the superstitious elaborate and formulate
their superstitions, let the dead bury their dead, and believe
in the inexpressible truth, in the Absolute which reason
admits without understanding, and which we perceive
without knowing! Believe in the Supreme Reason! Be-

RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS. 37

lieve in infinite love, and commiserate the stupidities of the
schools and the barbarisms of false philosophy !

Moral equilibrium is the concurrence of science and
faith. It no more belongs to a theologian to affirm a
mathematical absurdity, or deny the demonstration of a
theorem, than to a savant to cavil, in the name of science,
for or against dogmatic mysteries. An article of faith is
not a subject for dispute, it is believed or not believed in,
but it is of faith precisely because it excludes the examina-
tion of science. When the Count Joseph de Maistre
asserts that our present stupidity will one day be the ‘cause
of as much astonishment as the barbarism of the Middle’
Ages, he, doubtless, alludes to those so-called strong minds
who are daily saying :—“I will believe when the truth of
dogma shall be scientifically proved to me.” That is to
say, I will believe when nothing remains to believe in,
when dogma, as such, shall have ceased to exist, having
become a scientific theorem, or, in other words, I will not
admit the infinite till it be explained, determined, circum-
scribed, and defined for me, in a word, till it has been
limited. I will believe in the infinite when I know there
is no infinity, in the immensity of ocean when I have
seen it sealed up in bottles. But, good folks, what has
been clearly proved to you, you believe no longer, for you
know it!

Faith is a divination by intelligence and love, directed
by the indices of Nature and reason. It is, therefore, the
essence of the things which are of faith to be inaccessible
to science, doubtful for philosophy, and indefinite for certi-
tude. Faith is the hypothetical realisation and conven-
tional settlement of the final ends of hope. It is the
adherence to the visible sign of things unseen.

Sperandarum substantia rerum
Argumentum non apparentium.

Science is purely human, and faith cannot reasonably
affirm itself to be divine unless it be immensely collective.
It is this collectiveness which deserves for opinions the
name of religion, that is, the moral bond which unites men
to one another. An isolated belief does not deserve the
name of faith, which signifies confidence. Scientific truth
is proved by exact demonstrations, truth in religion by
the unanimity of belief and the sanctity of works, which

38 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC. |

are the proof of faith. To defy all social authority, bey
only put trust in one’s self, is insanity. The Catholic
lieves in the Church because the Church represents for h
the 4zte of believers. It is this which justifies the faith
the charcoal-burner, who not only should be a believer 1-
matters of religion, but also in matters of science. Shal
he deny or contest the genius of Newton because he can-

not understand his theorems? I am no expert in painting, .

but I submit willingly to the judgment of great artists,
who, not being experts in exegesis, in theology, and in
Kabbalah, would be unreasonable if they did not, in such
matters, defer to the opinion of those who have made the
transcendental sciences a special study.

This, then, is the foundation of faith. It is the confi-
dence of those who do not know in those who do; and as
the formulation of beliefs should borrow from science the
grounds of its hypotheses, as we cannot reasonably believe
in what science shows to be false, as it is necessary that
science should at least admit the possibility of such hypo-
theses, as the hypotheses of faith are such that science
confesses itself permanently unable to transform them into
axioms or theorems, it follows that in matters of belief,
above all, authority is needful, and that this authority
should be collective, hierarchic, and universal; in other
words, catholic.

III.—THE TRUE GOD.

THE idea of God is a psychological, real, universal, incon-
testable fact. Logic or reason, the Logos of supreme
power, is God. This reason, this universal logic, illuminates
all rational souls. It is the great soul of all souls, the im-
movable centre round which intelligences gravitate like
star-dust. To believe that there does not exist an intel-
ligent cause in being, is the most rash and absurd of creeds
—a creed, because it is the negation of the indefinite and
undefinable ; rash, because it is isolating and desolating ;
absurd, because it supposes the most complete nothingness
in place of the most complete perfection. To believe in
the reason of God, and in the God of reason, is to render

RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS. 39

atheism impossible. Idolaters have made atheists. When
Voltaire said that “if God did not exist he must be in-
vented,” he felt rather than understood the necessity of
God. Does the Deity exist in reality? We do not know;
we believe it, but have no certainty; if we were cer-
tain we should not believe, we should know it. We hope
and desire that He does exist, and this is the cause of our
faith, which, thus formulated, is reasonable faith, for it
admits the doubt of science; and, in fact, we only believe
in what seems probable, but which we cannot ascertain.
To think otherwise is to rave, to speak otherwise is to talk
like fanatics or z/luminés.

God, in philosophy, cannot be more than a hypothesis,
but it is a hypothesis imposed by good sense and reason, a
hypothesis so necessary, that without it all theorems be-
come absurd or doubtful. God is the absolute object of
human faith. Is the Universal Being a blind machine which
eternally evolves intelligences by chance, or a providential
intelligence which directs forces for the amelioration of
spirits? The first supposition is repugnant to reason, and,
therefore, science and reason should defer to the second.

For the initiates of the Kabbalah, God is the absolute
unity which creates and animates numbers, and for them
the unity of human intelligence proves the unity of God.
Mathematics cannot demonstrate blind fatality, since they
are the expression of that exactitude which is the character
of the most supreme reason. The man who denies God is
as fanatical as he who defines Him with assumed infallibility,
and the blasphemy is as great in both. Every definition of
God is a receipt of religious empiricism, by whose means
superstition will be sooner or later enabled to fabricate a
devil. God is commonly defined by enumerating all that
He is not, for He is necessarily the most unknown of all
beings ; He can only be defined in the inverse sense of
our experiences, He is all that we are not, He is the infinite
opposed to the finite by a contradictory hypothesis. Man
realises that he is made in the image of God when he has
conceived the Deity by enlarging to infinity his conception
of himself. Understanding God as man the infinite, man
says to himself, Iam God the finite. He makes God, by
analogy. trom less to greater. Absolute magical science

ids us, nevertheless, and before all things, believe in God,
and adore without seeking to define Him, for a God defined

40 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC,

is in some sense a finite God. The less we define God, the
more are we forced to believe in Him. God is that which we
shall be eternally learning to know, and, consequently, that
which we shall never know. The greatest of all mysteries
is this existence of Him, for whom alone there is no mystery.
Containing the infinite, which is essentially incomprehen-
sible, He is Himself the infinitely and eternally insoluble
mystery ; that is to say, He is in all appearance that pre-
eminent absurdity which Tertullian believed in. Credo quia
absurdum. Necessarily absurd, since reason must for ever
renounce attaining it ; necessarily credible, since science and
reason, far from proving that it does not exist, are absolutely
and necessarily forced to permit the belief that it does, and
to adore it themselves with closed eyes, for this absurdity
is the infinite source of reason.

God, nevertheless, cannot subsist without some supreme
and inevitable reason, and it is this reason which is the
absolute, it is in this that we should fix our faith, if we seek
a substantial base for it. St Thomas has said :—“ A thing
is not just because God wills it, but God wills it because it
is just.” If he had logically deduced all the consequences
of this beautiful thought, he would have found the philo-
sophers’ stone, and instead of being only the Angel of the
Schools, he would have been their reformer.

From the idea which men conceive of God, have always
proceeded their notions of power, whether spiritual or
temporal, and the word which expresses Divinity having
been in all ages the formulation of the absolute both in re-
velation and natural intuition, the meaning which is attached
to this word has been invariably the dominant idea of every
religion and philosophy, as of all politics and_ ethics.
Divinity, one in its essence, has two essential conditions for
the fundamental bases of its being—necessity and liberty.
To conceive in God, liberty without necessity is to imagine
an omnipotence without rule or reason, it is to enthrone
the ideal of tyranny in heaven. Such was the most perni-
cious error of the Middle Ages in many mystical and en-
thusiastic minds. To conceive in God necessity without
liberty, is to suppose an infinite machine, of which we are,
unfortunately for us, the intelligent wheels. To obey or
be broken, such would be our eternal doom, and we should
be knowingly obeying something which would command
without knowing why ; unhappy wanderers should we be,

RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS. 4!I

shut up in waggons which a terrible locomotive carries at full
steam on the road to the abyss. This pantheistic, material-
istic, and fatalist doctrine is at once the absurdity and
calamity of our century. But the laws of supreme reason
necessttate and rule /1derty in God, who is necessarily wise
and reasonable.

We have said that in the heaven of human conceptions it
is humanity that creates God, and men think that God has
made them in His likeness because they represent Him in
theirs.* But let us now dare to affirm that there exists an
immense fact, equally appreciable by faith and by science,
a fact which renders God in a certain sense visible on
earth, an incontestable fact and one of immense significance ;
it is the manifestation in the world, from the epoch of the
Christian revelation, of a spirit unknown to the ancients, a
spirit evidently divine, more positive than science in its
works, more magnificently ideal in its aspirations than the
highest poetry, a spirit for which it has been necessary to
create a new name, wholly unheard of in the Sanctuaries of
antiquity, and which in religion, both for science and faith,
is the expression of the absolute. This word is CHARITY,
and the spirit which we speak of is called the spzrtt of
charity, which is God in His earthly manifestation. Before
charity, faith prostrates itself, and science bows down over-
come, for it is evidently something greater than humanity;
it is stronger than all passions, it triumphs over suffering
and death; it reveals Deity to every heart, and seems
already to fill eternity by that realisation of its legitimate
hopes which it commences here below. By the spirit of
charity Jesus, expiring on the Cross, triumphed over the
anguish of the most frightful torments; by the spirit of
charity twelve artizans of Galilee conquered the world; it
is by charity, in fine, that the folly of the Cross has become
the wisdom of nations, because all noble hearts have felt it
a more sublime and worthy thing to believe with those who
love and who sacrifice themselves, than to doubt with the
egotists and slaves of self-indulgence !

* See Note 5.

42 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

IV.—THE CHRIST OF GOD.

THE author of this book calls once more on the Oriental
Magi to come forward and acknowledge that Divine
Master whose cradle they saluted, the supreme initiatior of
all the ages.

All His enemies have fallen, all those who condemned
Him are dead, those who persecuted Him are asleep for
ever, but He is eternally alive. The envious have combined
against Him, they have agreed on one single point; the
promoters of discord have united to destroy Him, they have
crowned themselves kings and proscribed Him; they have
become hypocrites and accused Him, judges, and have
pronounced His sentence of death; they have become
executioners and destroyed Him ; they have forced Him to
drink hemlock, they have crucified Him, they have stoned
Him and burned Him; His ashes they have cast to the wind ;
then they haVe grown white with terror, for He is standing
erect before them, accusing them by His wounds, and over-
whelming them with the radiance of His scars.

They planned His destruction in the manger at Bethle-
hem, and He is alive in Egypt! They carry Him to a
mountain that they may cast him down it; the mob of His
murderers surrounds Him, and rejoices already over His
inevitable destruction. Is not that He who is dashed to
pieces on the crags of the precipice? They grow livid and
turn to one another, while He, calm and smiling with com-
passion, passes through the midst of them and disappears.

Behold another mountain, which they have dyed with
His blood! Behold a cross and a sepulchre! Soldiers
are guarding His tomb! Madmen, that tomb is empty, and
He whom you looked on as dead is walking quietly between
two travellers on the road to Emmaus !

Where is He? Whither doth He go? Warnthe masters
of the -world! Tell Casar that his power is threatened!
By whom? By a pauper who has no stone to lay his head
on, by a man of the people condemned to the death of a
slave. What insolence or what folly! But it matters not ;
all the power of the Cesars is arrayed, cruel edicts proscribe
the fugitive, everywhere scaffolds are erected, arenas open
swarming with lions and gladiators, torrents of blood are
poured out, pyres are lighted, and the Czsars, who believe

RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS. 43

they are victorious, dare add another name to those they
rehearse on their trophies; then they die, and their own
apotheosis dishonours those deities whom they thought to
defend. The hatred of the world confounds Jupiter and
Nero in a common contempt; temples, which servility has
turned into tombs, are demolished above the ashes of the
proscribed, and over the d@édris of idols, over the ruins of
empires, He only, He whom the Czsars denounced, whom
sO many satellites hunted down, so many executioners
tortured, He only survives, alone reigns, alone is victorious !

His own disciples, notwithstanding, soon misuse His
name. Pride enters the sanctuary, those who should pro-
claim His resurrection seek to perpetuate His death, that
they may feast like the crows on his ever-reviving flesh.
Instead of imitating Him in His sacrifice, and shedding
their blood for their children in faith, they imprison Him
in the Vatican, as on a second Caucasus, and become the
vultures of this divine Prometheus. But of what conse-
quence is their evil dream? They can only confine His
image ; He himself is always free, proceeding from exile
into exile, and from conquest to conquest; for, though a
man may be thrust into prison, no one can make captive
the Word of God. Speech is free, and nothing can suppress
it. This living Logos is the sentence of the wicked, and
so they seek to destroy it, but it is they only who perish,
and the word of truth survives to pass judgment on their
memory !

Orpheys may have been destroyed by the bacchantes ;
Socrates may have quaffed the poisoned draught ; Jesus
and His apostles may have perished in the utmost tortures ;
John Hus, Jerome of Prague, and a thousand others, may
have been burned; Saint Bartholomew’s Day, and the
massacres of September may have had in turn their victims;
the Russian Emperor has still his Cossacks, Knouts, and
the wilds of Siberia at his command; but the spirit of
Orpheus, of Socrates, of Jesus, and of the other martyrs
will survive for ever their deceased persecutors; it will
survive amidst overthrown institutions and perishing do-
minions, for it is that Divine Spirit, the Spirit of the only
Son of God, which St John represents in his Apocalypse,
standing in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks,
because He is the centre of all lights, holding seven stars
in His hand, like the seed of a whole new heaven, and

44 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

sending down His word on earth under the symbol of a
two-edged sword.

When the wise in their discouragement slumber during
the night of doubt, the Spirit of Christ is abroad and
watching. When the people, weary of the labour which
sets them free, rest and fall asleep in their chains, the
Spirit of Christ is awake, and it protests. When the blind
partisans of sterilised religions prostrate themselves in the
dust of ancient temples, and crouch slavishly in a super-
stitious terror, the Spirit of Christ is erect and praying.
When the strong become weak, when virtue is corrupted,
when everything bends and sinks down in search of a
shameful pasturage, the Spirit of Christ is erect, gazing
heavenward, and awaiting the hour of His Father.

The word Christ signifies priest and king pre-eminently.
The Christ-initiator of modern times appeared to create
new kings and new priests by means of knowledge, and,
above all, by charity. Man, being unable to conceive any-
thing superior to his own nature, idealises himself in order
to conceive God. Christ, by His sublime thoughts and
admirable virtues, has realised this ideal. It is, therefore,
in Jesus Christ that we must study God, and as the medi-
ator is also the prototype and model of humanity, it is in
Him still that we must study man, considered exclusively
from the spiritual point of view. The whole science of
spirits is thus summed up in Jesus Christ. Angels and
demons are purely hypothetical or legendary beings ; let
them remain in the region of poetry, they cannot belong to
science. Let us content ourselves with men, let us study
Jesus Christ, and let us seek God!

The Gospel is the Spirit of Jesus, and this Spirit 1s
divine. That is our profession of faith, plainly formulated,
on the divinity of Jesus Christ. ‘“ My words are spirit and
life,” said this sublime initiator, “and here the flesh pro-
_ fiteth nothing.” The Gospel is the history of His Spirit ;
it is not the chronicle of His flesh. Man according to the
flesh, God according to the Spirit, He is dead and He is
arisen. “If you live by My Spirit,” He said to His apostles,
“your flesh shall be My flesh, and your blood My blood ;”
and these pre-eminently spiritual things, materialised
through the density of barbarous theologians, have provided
us with bleeding hosts and anthropophagus communions.
The time has come for us to confound no longer the spirit

RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS. 45

with the flesh. When the Spirit of Jesus Christ shall be
understood, that spirit which the Church invokes and adores
under the names of spirit of knowledge, spirit of under-
standing, spirit of power, spirit of initiative, or of counsel,
and, consequently, spirit of liberty, we shall no longer seek
oracles from sleep, from catalepsy, from somnambulism, or
from table-turning.

Logic or reason, the Logos of supreme power, is God.
This reason, this universal logic enlightens all rational
souls; it shines in the obscurities of doubt; it pierces,
penetrates, rends the darkness of ignorance, and the dark-
ness cannot grasp or imprison it. This reason speaks by
the mouth of sages, it is synthetized in a single man, who,
for this cause, has been called the Logos made flesh, or
the great incarnate reason. The miracles of this man were
miracles of light. He taught men that true religion is
philanthropy ; he shewed them that it was not in one city,
nor on one mountain, nor in the Temple, that God must be
sought, but in spirit’ and in truth. His doctrines were
simple like his life. Love God, that is, spirit and truth,
above all things, and thy neighbour as thyself; this, said
He, is the whole law.

In this manner He opened the eyes of the blind, caused
the deaf to hear and the lame to walk. The wonders
which He worked on minds have been recounted in the
allegorical form so familiar to the Easterns. His speech
became bread which multiplied itself, His moral force a foot
which walked upon the waves, and a hand which stilled
storms. These legends increased with the ever-growing
admiration of His disciples. They are charming stories,
similar to those of the Thousand and One Nights, and it
was worthy of the barbarous ages which we imagine have
passed by, but which have not yet ended, to take these
graceful fictions for gross and material realities, to debate
anatomically the virginal motherhood of Mary, to institute
in the hands of Jesus an invisible and miraculous bakery
for the multiplication of loaves, and to see a globular and
serous blood flowing from the white and pure hosts which
protest against blood, and which announce for ever the
completion of sacrifice.

The Gospel is the symbol and expression of the great
aspirations of humanity which are as ancient as the world,
and the ideal legend of the perfect man. The conception

46 MYSTERIES OF’ MAGIC.

of an incarnation or manifestation of God in man is found
in all the dogmas of olden sanctuaries. That the Gospel
is a symbolic book, the Apostles have not concealed from
us. St John says :—“ There are also many other things
which Jesus did, which if they were written everyone, the
world itself, I think, would not contain the books that
should be written.” Now, the field of -history is limited,
but that of allegory is immense, and if St John did not
mean to indicate by these words the true scope of the
Gospel, he would have uttered an absurdity. But when the
Apostles were silent, the evidence spoke sufficiently. Is
there any need, for example, to prove to reasonable people
that the devil, that is, the fictitious personage who repre-
sents evil, did not actually and bodily carry away Jesus
to a mountain so high that He could behold from thence all
the kingdoms of the world? The Gospel is full of similar
histories composed in harmony with the genius of the
Hebrews, who always surrounded their secret doctrine with
enigmas and images, and in harmony with the genius of
Jesus Himself, who, according to the Evangelists, scarcely
ever spoke without parables.

Must it be said that under all these allegories the person
of the historical Christ disappears and is destroyed? Must
we think, with Dupuis and Volney, that the personal and
human existence of Jesus is as doubtful as that of Osiris,
as fabulous as that of the Indian Chrishna, who was also
the son of a virgin? Can any one have the temerity to
affirm it when Jesus Christ is still living in His works, still
present in His spirit, which has already changed, and will
certainly transfigure, the whole face of the earth? The
existence of Homer has been doubted, but of what Homer?
Of the commentators, perhaps, but does this mean that the
Iliad and the Odyssey have no existence? Have these
divine poems composed themselves? And is it not far
from these doubtless admirable works to the living poem
of Christianity, to that Iliad of martyrs, wherein gods
combat and are overcome by women and children, to
that Odyssey of the Church which after so many storms
and persecutions arrives, a sublime mendicant, at the
threshold of the palace of the Czsars, launches with
victorious arm the javelins which transfix the hearts of her
enemies, and takes her seat upon the throne of the world ?

The spirit of Jesus exists far more certainly and far more

RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS. 47°

evidently than the genius of Homer. But this spirit is one
of abnegation and sacrifice, for which reason it is divine.
The less a man seeks, the more does he find himself. The
greater his self-abandonment is, the better he deserves the
adoption of heaven. The more he forgets himself, the
more will he be remembered. Such, in a few words, are
the great secrets of the omnipotence of Christianity, and
Jesus, who gave these precepts, has also set the example.
The man has passed into the symbol, and it is thus that He
has become God. The Gospel tells us that He led His
disciples up to a high mountain apart, and was transfigured
before them. His face shone like the sun, and His gar-
ments became white as snow, that is to say, the man was
obliterated in the light of the new revelation, and tradition,
completing the legend later on, says that Jesus, when
ascending to heaven, left nothing of Himself on earth
but His Spirit spread abroad in all the Church, and the
ineffaceable imprint of His feet on the summit of the
mountain.

The Gospel is Jesus transfigured ; it is the epic of His
admirable intelligence, and the wonders of His ethics
represented by the most affecting images. Not a word of
this book must be expunged, not a letter added, for it is
the divine testament of the man who has annihilated Him-
self for us. Therein let us seek lights for faith and not
documents for history, consoling beliefs and not scientific
probabilities. When the ancient eastern sculptors repre-
sented their deities, they gave them hybrid and monstrous
forms to make it known to all that the gods were not men.
In the same way the Evangelists by sowing their narrative
with facts materially impossible, or formally contradictory,
have meant to convey to us that they were not writing a
simple history, but a profound symbol, and that here, as
in all sacred writings, the letter which kills is a veil of the
spirit which alone vivifies.

But this Gospel symbolism does not disprove, as we
have said, the historical existence of Jesus. Rousseau
declared that the inventor of such a history would be more
astonishing than the hero. We fully endorse the senti-
ment. The Jesus who in His understanding and heart is
sufficiently great to create this admirable legend, is superior
to him whom the crowd foolishly adore, or still more
foolishly deny; He is truly the ever-living incarnation of

48 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

the Word of Truth, and we hail Him Son of God in all the
splendour and in all the fullness of the term.

Alfred de Vigny has said that legend is frequently more
true than history, because legend recounts not acts which
are often incomplete and abortive, but the genius itself of
great men and great nations. It is pre-eminently to the
Gospel that this beautiful thought is applicable, for the
Gospel is not merely the narration of what has been, it is
the sublime revelation of what is and what always will be.
Ever will the Saviour of the world be adored by the kings
of intelligence, represented by the Magi; ever will He
multiply the eucharistic bread, to nourish and comfort our
souls; ever, when we invoke Him in the night and the
tempest, will He come to us walking on the waters, ever
will He stretch forth His hand and make us pass over the
crests of the billows ; ever will He cure our distempers and
give back light to our eyes; ever will He appear to His
faithful luminous and transfigured upon Tabor, interpreting
the law of Moses and moderating the zeal of Elias.

The miracles of the Eternal are eternal. To admit the
symbolism of the Gospel miracles is to intensify their
light, is to proclaim their universality and perpetuity. No,
these things have by no means passed away, as it is said,
they endure eternally. The things which pass away are
accidents that pass, the things which divine genius reveals
by symbolism are immutable truths.

V.—MYSTERIES OF THE LOGOS.

THAT intelligent power which acts in the universal move-
ment of things we denominate the WORD or LOGOS in a
transcendental and absolute manner. It is the initiative
of God which can never be ineffectual and can never be
arrested before it has attained its end. With God, to
speak is to create, and even among men such should be
the purport of speech, for true speech is the seed of actions.
A projection of intelligence and will can never be barren
unless it be an abuse or profanation of its original dignity.
This is why the Saviour of men demands a severe reckon-
ing not only for all errant thoughts and thoughts without

RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS. 49

a legitimate object, but also for idle words, that is, words
which have no corresponding action or consequence. A
pleasantry, a drollery which causes diversion and laughter
is not an idle word.

Jesus, says the Gospel, was powerful in works and in
words—the works before the speech—thus He established
and proved His right to teach. Jesus began to act and to
speak, says another evangelist, and frequently in the pri-
mitive language of Holy Scripture an action is called
verbum. Moreover, in every tongue that which expresses
both being and doing is called the VERB, and there is no
verb which cannot be supplemented by the verb Zo act
through a change in construction. “Inthe beginning was
the Word,” says St John. In what beginning? In the
first, the absolute principium which is before all else—in
this beginning—was the Word, that is, action. This is
philosophically incontestable, since the first prificiple, origin,
or cause, all which terms are also included in the scope of
the word principium, is necessarily the first mover. The
Logos is not an abstraction, it is the most positive principle
in the world, since it proves itself incessantly in deeds.
Speech may occasionally be sterile, as in the harvest we
find some empty ears of corn, but the Logos is never
unfruitful—it is full and productive speech, which its
hearers accomplish always, though often without under-
standing, and seldom without having resisted it. Doctrines
most talked of are not those which succeed most. Chris-
tianity was a mystery still when the Cesars were conscious
of being ousted by the Christian Logos. A system admired
by the world and applauded by the crowd can never ‘be
more than a brilliant assemblage of barren verbosity; a
system to which humanity, so to speak, submits in spite of
itself is A LOGos.

When a will modifies the world, there is a Logos
speaking.

The Word manifested by life is realisation or incarna-
tion. The life of the Word accomplishing its cyclic move-
ment is adaptation or redemption. Do you wish to know
the true religion? Seek that which realises most in the
divine order, that which humanises God and deifies man,
which incarnates the Logos by making Deity visible and
tangible to the most ignorant, that, finally, whose doctrine
is suitable to all and can be adapted to all; the religion

D

50 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

which is hierarchic and cyclical, which has allegories and
images for children, a sublime philosophy for grown men,
and high hopes and sweet consolations for the old. The
Word is the reason of belief, and therein also is the
expression of that faith which verifies science.

In the human order, things are as our interior Logos
makes them. To believe one’s self happy is to be happy ;
what we esteem grows precious in the ratio of our esteem,
and it is thus that magic may be said to change the nature
of things. The Word creates forms, which react in their
turn on the Word to modify and complete it. Every
utterance of truth is the beginning of an act of justice.
The question is sometimes asked whether man may not
occasionally be driven into evil. Yes, when his judgment
is false and his Logos consequently unjust, but we are as
responsible for a false judgment as we are for a bad action.
What falsifies judgment is the unjust vanity of egotism.
The unjust word, not able to realise itself by creation, is
realised by destruction. It must destroy or die. If it
rested inactive, it would be the greatest of disorders, a per-
manent blasphemy against truth.

The beauty of speech is a‘radiation of truth; a true
utterance is always beautiful, and a beautiful utterance is
invariably true. This is the reason that artistic works are
always holy when they are beautiful. What does it signify
to me if Anacreon celebrate Bathyllus, provided that I
listen in his verses to that divine harmony which is the
eternal hymn of beauty? Poetry is pure like the sun ; it
spreads its veil of light over the errors of humanity. Woe to
him who would strip off that veil to investigate deformities!
A statue of Nero or Heliogabalus executed like the master-
pieces of Phidias would be an absolutely beautiful and ab-
solutely good work. Scandalous statues are statues ill-ex-
ecuted, and bad books are books ill-conceived or ill-written.

Every Logos of beauty is a word of truth, a light
formulated in speech, for light is- the instrument—of_the
Word, the shining caligraphy of God on the great
book of the night. But in order that the most brilliant
splendour may be produced and become visible, it requires
a shadow ; and in order to the efficacy of creative speech,
it has need of contradiction, it must experience denial,
derision, and—what is more cruel than either—indifference
and oblivion. The grain which is sown in the earth must

RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS. 5I

die before it can germinate. The Logos which affirms and
the voice which denies must intermarry, and then practical
truth and real progressive speech will issue from their
union. Therefore, never let contradiction discourage men
of enterprise. A plough is required for the earth, but the
earth resists because it is in labour; it defends itself, like
all virgins; it conceives and brings forth slowly, like all
mothers. Ye, therefore, who seek to sow a new plant in
the field of intelligence, understand and respect the bashful
resistance of limited experience and reluctant reason.
When a new Logos comes into the world it needs bonds
and swaddling-clothes; genius has brought it forth, but
experience must nourish it. Fear not when it is unbound
and apparently perishes; oblivion for it is a healthful repose,
and contradictions are its cultivation. When a sun evolves
in infinity, it creates or attracts planets; a single spark of
developed light is the promise of a universe to space.

All magic is in a word, and this word, Kabbalistically
pronounced, is stronger than the powers of heaven, earth,
and hell. Nature is commanded with the name of Jod he
vau he; the kingdoms are conquered in the name of
Adonai, and the occult forces which comprise the empire of
Hermes are all obedient to him who can pronounce, accord-
ing to science, the incommunicable name of Agla. To pro-
nounce these great names of the Kabbalah according to
science, we must do so with full understanding, with a will
unchecked by anything, with an activity which nothing can
rebuff. In magic, to have said 1s to have done; the word
begins with letters and ends with acts. We do not will
anything really except when we will it with our whole
hearts—even to the point of destroying our most cherished
affections for the sake of it—and with all our strength—
even to staking health, fortune, and life on it. It is by
absolute self-devotion that faith is constituted and proved.
But the man who is armed with such a faith will move
mountains. =
“Plato was the first to proclaim the divinity of the Word,
that is, of speech, and he seems to have foreseen the near in-
carnation of this Logos on earth (for Jesus is the Word in-
carnate) ; he announces the passion and death of the perfect
just man, condemned by the iniquity of the world. But this
sublime philosophy of the Logos was not his invention, it
belongs to the pure Kabbalah, and Plato derived it therefrom.

52 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

VI. THE TRUE RELIGION.

RELIGION exists in humanity as in love, and it is one like
love. Like that also, it exists or does not exist in such or
such soul, but, received or denied, it is in humanity; it is,
therefore, in life, it is in nature, it is incontestable before
science and even before reason. The true religion is that
which has always existed, which does, and ever will exist.
It alone can be called one, infallible, indefectible, and truly
catholic, that is, universal. This religion, of which all others
have been successively the veils and shadows, superstitions
imitated or borrowed, and false reflections, is that which
proves the actual by the actual, truth by reason, reason by
evidence and common-sense. It is that which demonstrates
by realities the cogency of hypotheses, and which forbids
reasoning on hypotheses independently and outside of
realities. It is that, whose basis is the dogma of universal
analogies, but which never confounds the things of know-
ledge with those of faith. It can never be de fide that two
and one make more or less than three, that, in physics, that
which is contained is greater than that which contains it,
that a solid body, as such, can act like a fluid or a gaseous
body—that a human being, for example, can pass through
a closed door without dematerialisation or opening. To
assert such a thing is to speak like a child or a madman;
but it is no less insane to define the unknown and to reason
- from hypotheses to hypotheses up to the @ priori denial of
evidence for the affirmation of precipitate suppositions.
The wise man affirms what he knows, and does not believe
in what he is ignorant of, except in conformity with the
reasonable and known necessities of hypotheses.

But this rational religion cannot be that of the multitude,
for which fables, mysteries, definite hopes, and fears mater-
ially induced, are necessary. It is for this reason that the
priesthood has been established in the world.

The religion of the Kabbalists is the religion of religions.
It is at once wholly hypotheses and wholly certitude, for
it proceeds from the known to the unknown by analogy.
The Kabbalist recognises religion as a need of humanity,
and his prayer can be united to that of all men to direct
it by illustrations from science and reason, and to lead it
to orthodoxy. If Mary be spoken of, he will reverence

RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS. 53

that realisation of all that is divine in the dreams of inno-
cence, and all that is adorable in the holy folly of every
mother’s heart. It is not he who will refuse flowers to
decorate the altars of the mother of God, or white ban-
ners for her chapels, or even tears for her ingenuous
legends! It is not he who will deride the new-born God
weeping in the manger, or the bruised victim of Calvary ;
he repeats, nevertheless, from the bottom of his heart,
with the sages of Israel and the faithful believers of Islam,
“There is no God but God!” which means for an initiate
of the true science, “There is but one Being, and that is
Being!” But all that is expedient and touching in beliefs,
but the splendour of rituals, the pomp of divine creations,
the grace of prayers, the magic of heavenly hopes—are
not these the lustre of moral life in all its youth and
beauty ? If anything could alienate the true initiate from
public prayers and temples, if anything could raise his
disgust or indignation against all religious forms whatsoever,
it is the manifested incredulity of priests or people, want
of dignity in the ceremonies of the cultus, the profanation,
in a word, of holy things. God is really present when
recollected souls and feeling hearts adore Him; He is
sensibly and terribly absent when spoken of without light
or enthusiasm, that is without intelligence or love.

But so far as sentiments are concerned, association mul-
tiplies these by the reunion of those who share them, so
that all are electrified by the enthusiasm of all, and ideas
produce forms, while forms in their turn reflect and repro-
duce ideas. These great laws of nature, observed by
the ancient Magi, made them see the necessity of a public
worship, single, obligatory, hierarchic, and symbolic, like
religion in its entirety, splendid as truth, rich and varied as
nature, starry as the sky, full of fragrance like earth, of
that cultus, in a word, which was later on established by
Moses, realised in all its glory by Solomon, and which
once more transfigured abides at this day in the great
metropolis of St Peter at Rome. Humanity has really
never had but one religion and one worship. This uni-
versal light has had its uncertain reflections and its sha-
dows, but ever after the night of error we behold it reappear
one and pure like the sun.

The magnificence of the cultus is the life of religion,
and if Christ chose poor ministers, His sovereign divinity

54 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

did not wish for poor altars. Protestants have failed to
understand that the ritual is an instruction, and that a
sordid or despicable god must not be created in the
imagination of the multitude. The English, who lavish so
much wealth on their own dwelling-places, and who affect
to prize the Bible so ‘highly, if they remembered the un-
paralleled pomp of Solomon’s Temple, would find their
own churches exceedingly cold and bare. But what withers
their cultus is the dryness of their own hearts; and with a
cultus devoid of magic, dazzlement, and pathos, how can
their hearts be ever informed with life ?

Forms of worship are essentially magical. They operate
of themselves the religious work, that is, the creative exalta-
tion of the intuitions of faith and visions, whether celestial
or infernal. According to their greater or lesser morality,
they are a medicine or a poison to the mind. Religions
devoid of ceremonies are cold and inefficacious. Protes-
tantism can, therefore, produce only a rare and isolated en-
thusiasm, being a negation rather than a religious affirma-
tion. It possesses neither the key of prophecies, nor the
source of inspirations, nor the rod of miracles. It is in-
capable of creating God, and will, therefore, never make
great saints, which shows how much those people deceive
themselves who imagine rational religions, religions devoid
of mysteries, mythology, and sacrifices. Mythologies are
the fantastic realisations of the religious dogma; superstt-
tions are the sorcery of mistaken piety ; but even mytholo-
gies and superstitions are more efficacious to the human
will than a purely speculative philosophy, exclusive of all
exterior observances.

Religion is the magical creation of a fantastic world
made sensible by faith. It is the apparent realisation of
ultra-rational hypotheses; it is the satisfaction of a craving
common to women, children, and all who resemble them.
If the Catholic religion be sick of any complaint, it is of
having made too many concessions to the reason of the
eighteenth century, and it survives only by the remnant of
its intolerance. Those who seek to humanise it seek to
destroy it, and of this it is fully aware. Should another reli-
gion succeed it, it will be inevitably a more unreasonable
and, by consequence, a stronger religion, as such. The
religious affirmation is the antithesis of the reasonable
affirmation, and philosophical harmony results from the

RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS. 55

analogy of these two contrary things. The Christian who
looks on heaven as his true country, walks, morally speak-
ing, with his feet upward and his head downward, and it
is thus that heaven becomes a reflection of earth. The
union of religion and philosophy must be accomplished by
the very fact of their distinction, which permits an alliance
between them, as between the two triangles of Solomon's
star, as between the sword and sheath, as between the
plenum and the void. For this reason the spiritual must
be the negative of the temporal, and the royalty of wealth
will be always the downfall of sacerdotal power, by de-
stroying the marvellous character of its mission, and excit-
ing the distrust and jealousy of material instincts. For this
reason also the temporal power covers itself with ridicule
when it interferes with the spiritual, as it will be always
suspected of an interested motive. A master is invariably
derided who says—“ God wills you to obey me.” But let
a man, truly independent of Czsar, say to the world—
“Obey Cesar!” and this man will be believed, above all
if it be evident that he receives nothing from Czsar. For
the same reason priests cannot marry and remain priests.
No one is a prophet in his own home, and jealous wives
would demand from their husbands an account of their
neighbours’ confessions. The ancient Magi were celibates ;
Pythagoras and Apollonius abstained from women; Pagan-
ism itself had its vestals. The abnormal and, in one sense,
irrational character of the celibate makes him essentially
religious ; the world is aware of this, for while it inveighs
against the celibacy of the priesthood, it despises wedded
priests.

Singular fact! Religion is the most human of all
institutions, and philosophy is that which is truly divine in
the intellectual life of humanity. Religion is the synthesis
of the passions—desire of an infinite good, ambition driven
to the delirium of a deific aspiration, despair of a surfeited
or unquenchable enjoyment which takes refuge in ecstasy,
above all pride—overweening pride—which thinks to
humble itself before God, which accuses itself of offending
God and disturbing the harmony of the spheres! Phil-
osophy, on the contrary, bold in its doubt, modest in its
assurance, believes only in experience, and will owe nothing
except to industry. But, as we have already suggested,
religion alone and philosophy alone are both erroneous.

56 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

At the bottom of the one are ascetical suicide and all the
errors of fanaticism, at the bottom of the other the despair
of scepticism and the corruption of absolute indifference.
Religion and philosophy, like the Eros and Anteros of old
mythology, are made to support each other mutually by
struggling continually together. The success of Voltaire
was necessary to stimulate the pride of Chateaubriand, and
without the “Bible Explained” we should never have
admired the “ Genius of Christianity.”

Motion is life, and the law of motion always drives
opinion towards extremes, but a proverb says that
extremes meet, and the exaggerations of the Comte de
Maistre differ little from those of Marat. We are still
divided between them, and Fénélon, Vincent of Paul, and
Volney are confounded between the two camps in the same
estimation and indifference. Men too good and too strong
are out of the combat. Truth is set up for competition,
but all who attain it are doomed to silence, otherwise the
chase would be at an end. “For this,” said Christ, “I
speak in parables, that seeing they may not see, and
hearing they may not understand ; otherwise they would
be converted and saved.”

It is not necessary then that all should be converted, or,
to better render it, should turn at the same time from their
own way. It is not necessary then that all should be
saved, that is, placed by initiation outside the strife of con-
trary forces. All are called, notwithstanding, but the elect
are ever in a minority, that is, the conditions of initiation
are such that they can only be fulfilled by a few com-
petitors out of an immense concourse renewing from age
to age and continuing till the election and salvation of all.

Neither religion nor philosophy alone make initiates, but
the alliance of the two lights united in one only. Then
the initiates create at their wilk both philosophy and
religion for the crowd. Fables on one side, rash specula-
tions on the other, between them the science of faith and
the faith of science which embrace and join to govern the
world. Religion is feminine, and it rules by poetry and
love. Scientific progress is male, and it should govern and
defend the woman, when needed, by energy and reason.
Those who place themselves at Voltaire’s extreme and
uncompromising standpoint to judge religion must be
astonished and indignant to find it still upheld and
dominant. In their eyes, as a fact, itis only a degrading

RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS. 57

series of interested falsehood and imbecile practices, but
they judge it as badly as Blessed Margaret Mary Alacoque
would judge, if she were still living, the things of progress,
science, and liberty. We must always take actualities into
account.

Let the rigid puritanism of a celibate philosophy refuse
to understand that fables may be told to children, or
amiable little falsehoods to soothe them ; let it be indignant
with nurses and mothers, but Nature will not heed the wrath
of the philosopher ; a wise man, however, while giving full
play to the feminine priesthood, will watch over the choice
of fables, will oppose himself to hideous fictions, will deny
the existence of the wehr-wolf and of Croquemetaine, and
thus will prevent the dawning reason of the child from
being enfeebled. |

To deceive the people in order to get the better of them,
to enslave them and retard their progress, to prevent it
even if possible, such is the crime of black magic ; to create
darkness in order to increase fear, to redouble the obscurity
of mysteries, to exact a blind obedience, is the black magic
of religions, is the secret of ambitious sacerdotalism, which
would substitute the priest for divinity, the temple for
religion itself, and observances for virtues. This was the
crime of the Magi who all perished in a fatal reaction ; it
was the crime of the Jewish priests, against whom Jesus
protested, and who crucified Jesus.

But to instruct the people progressively by the allegories
of dogma and the poetry of mysteries, to ennoble their souls
by the grandeur of hope, to win them to wisdom by sublime
and ingenious extravagances, is the sacerdotal art in all its
purity, is the magic of light, is the Kabbalistic secret of
true religion. To avail one’s self of blind forces, and to
direct them for the construction of the lever of intelligence,
is the Great Secret of Magic. To appeal to passions which
are the most blind and illimitable in their play, and to
subject them to slavish obedience, is to create omnipotence.
To place the mind under the dominion of dream, to extend
cupidity and fear to infinity, by promises and threats which
are thought supernatural, because they are against Nature,
to make an army out of the multitude of weak heads and
effeminate hearts turned generous through interest or fear,
‘and with this army to achieve the conquest of the world—
such is the great sacerdotal dream, and all the secret policy

»

58 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

of the pontiffs of black magic. On the contrary, to enlighten
the ignorant, to set wills free, to make truth and justice
accessible to all, to impose on faith only those hypotheses
which are necessary to reason, and thus direct all people to
a single, simple, consoling and civilising doctrine, such ts
divine reality, and it is this which has been published to
the world by the Gospel.

But a great misfortune befell Christianity. The betrayal
of the mysteries by the false Gnostics—for the Gnostics,
that is, those who knew, were the initiates of primitive
Christianity—caused the Gnosis to be rejected, and
alienated the Church from the supreme truths of the Kab-
balah, which contain all the secrets of transcendental
theology. Thus the people chose the ignorant for their
leaders, equality in the sight of faith was proclaimed, the
blind became leaders of the blind, great obscurations
resulted, great lapses and lamentable scandals. The virtues
of the inferior grades being almost impossible in the higher,
the chiefs of the priesthood found themselves deficient in
the knowledge and the virtues necessary for their elevated
dignity. They, therefore, constituted themselves into a
caste, to support each other mutually, and attempted to
re-establish the old tests, without, however, progressive
initiation ; so that to subjugate permanently the will of the
neophyte, clerical education warps the heart and paralyses
the intellect. Thence come all religious abuses, and by
consequence those of society. This is why the eloquence
of preachers is so cold and inefficacious. How can they
cause a law to be loved which they bear themselves like a
yoke from their childhood? How can they appeal to
hearts whose hearts are sentenced to an eternal silence?
The existing priesthood, moreover, makes despairing
attempts to maintain the dogmas exposed by the eighteenth
century in their previous position. But the veil of Isis
cannot be mended, and divinities in patched garments do
not inspire confidence. What is needed is a new veil, and
popular poetry is already at work on one, for the world is
never long without a religion.

The Gnostics were rightly condemned by the Church for
divulging the secret doctrines and profaning the mysteries
of the Master. Their principles issued from the Kabbalah
misunderstood, and they borrowed from the false Kabbalah
of India their dreams, which by turns were horrifying and

RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS. 59

obscene. The Church, therefore, forbade the faithful the
study of Kabbalistic science, whose keys should be reserved
by the supreme priesthood for itself alone.- The false
Gnostics thus caused magic to be condemned, but the
true science of the Magi is essentially Catholic, because it
grounds its entire realisation on the principle of the
hierarchy. Now, in the Catholic Church alone is there a
serious and absolute hierarchy, and to this we should return
as to the sole principle of unity. For this reason, the true
adepts have always professed the most profound respect
and absolute obedience towards this Church. Henry
Khunrath alone was a determined Protestant, but herein
he was a German of his period rather than a mystic citizen
of the eternal kingdom.

In revealing for the first time to the world the mysteries
of magic, we have no wish to revive practices buried
beneath the ruins of ancient civilisations, but we proclaim
to the humanity of to-day that it also is called to its omni-
potent and immortal self-creation by its own works. God
has created humanity, but each individual of the race is
called to his own self-creation as a moral and consequently
immortal being. For ourselves, with all our admiration
for the Kabbalah and its secret doctrines which are so full
of consolation and hope, we do not think that a new Church
can make them the subject of a novel teaching. They
belong essentially to occult philosophy, and become con-
demnable immediately they are divulged.

If we detest with all our heart the crass Pharisaism
which has accumulated with the centuries over the pure
gold of the sanctuary, we are none the less an avowed
partisan of orthodoxy, of authority, and hierarchy ; and if
our Messianic mission were nothing but a new sectarian
departure, if it were not the very foundation of Judaistic
science and Christian doctrine, if we did not unreservedly
submit to the decision of legitimate authority in all that
concerns the bearing and the manner of our instructions,
we should have added another dream to those of the Saint-
Simoniens and Fourieristes ; we should not have recovered
true science and eternal truth.

Liberty does not come of itself, it must be seized, says
a modern writer; it is the same with science, and this ts
why the revelation of absolute truth is never of use to the
crowd. But at an epoch when the sanctuary is devastated

60 — MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

and in ruins, because its key has been thrown into the
ditch without profit to any one, I have felt myself bound
to pick it up, and I offer it to ‘whomsoever is qualified to
take it; such an one will become in his turn a teacher of
nations and a liberator of the world.

Let the most absolute science, let the highest reasoh,
become once more the patrimony of the leaders of the
people; let the sacerdotal art and the royal art take back
the double sceptre of antique initiations, and the social
world will once more issue from its chaos. Burn the holy
images no longer, demolish the temples no more; temples
and images are necessary for men; but drive the hirelings
from the house of prayer, let the blind be no longer the
leaders of the blind, reconstruct the hierarchy of intelligence
and holiness, and recognise only those who know as the
teachers of those who believe! This book is Catholic, the
magnum opus is a hierarchic and Catholic work, and d if our
revelations are calculated to alarm the conscience of the
simple-minded, it is a consolation to think that they will
not read them. We address ourselves to men free from
prejudices, and we have no more wish to flatter irreligion
than fanaticism. Buf if there be anything in this world
which is essentially unfettered and inviolable, it is belief.
It is our duty by knowledge and persuasion to turn misled
imaginations from what is absurd, but it would invest their
errors with all the dignity and truth of the martyr if we
attempted to threaten or constrain them. So, in religion,
universal and hierarchic orthodoxy, restoration of temples
in all their splendour, re-establishment of all ceremonial
in its primeval pomp, hierarchic teaching of symbolism,
mysteries, miracles, legends for the children, light for the
grown men, who will be far from scandalizing the little
ones in the simplicity of their faith,—such, in religion, is
our whole Utopia; and it is also the desire and the need
of humanity.

VII.—THE REASON OF PRODIGIES, OR THE DEVIL
BEFORE SCIENCE.

WHEN science and philosophy, reconciled with faith, shall
unite in one all the various symbolisms, then will the
splendours of the ancient worships flourish once more in

RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS. 61

the remembrance of men, proclaiming the progression of
the human mind in the intuition of the light of God.
But of all forms of progress the greatest will be that
which, surrendering the keys of nature into the hands of
science, shall bind for ever the frightful phantom of Satan,
and, by explaining all the exceptional phenomena of the
natural world, shall destroy the dominion of superstition
and foolish credulity. It is to the accomplishment of this
progress that we have consecrated our life, and spent years
in the most laborious and difficult researches. We seek to
enfranchise the altars by overturning the idols ; we desire
that the man of understanding should again become the
priest and king of nature, and we would preserve, while
explaining them, all the images of the universal sanctuary.
For a large number of readers, magic is the science of
the devil, as the science of light is the black science. Zhe
devil and science! It seems that in joining two words so
incongruous, the author of this work has revealed before-
hand his whole idea. To bring the mystical personifica-
tion of darkness face to face with light, is not this to destroy
the spectre of falsehood by truth? Is it not to disperse
the deformed nightmares of the night-time before the
brightness of the day? We doubt not that under this
impression superficial readers will condemn us unheard.
Ill-instructed Christians will think that we are about to
sap their fundamental doctrine of ethics by denying hell,
while others will inquire what is the use of denouncing
those errors which have ceased to deceive anyone. It is
important, therefore, that we should state our object clearly,
and solidly establish our principles. To the Christians we
say first of all: The author of .this book is a Christian
like you ; his faith is that of a Catholic deeply and strongly
convinced, therefore his mission is not to deny dogmas,
but to combat impiety under one of its most dangerous
forms, that of erroneous belief and superstition. Hecomes
to bring forth out of the darkness the black successor of
Ahriman, that he may expose in open day his gigantic
impotence and formidable misery ; he comes to proffer for
the solutions of science the antique problem of evil, to
dethrone the King of Hades, and abase his head beneath
the foot of the Cross. Is not virginal and maternal science,
that science of which Mary is the gentle and luminous
symbol, predestined also to crush the serpent’s head ?

62 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

To so-called philosophers the author says: Why deny
that which you do not understand? Is not the incredulity
which asserts itself in the face of the unknown more rash
and less consoling than faith? Does the affirighting figure
of personified evil make you smile? But moral evil
exists, it is a lamentable fact ; it reigns in certain souls, it
is incarnate in certain men, demons therefore do exist, and
the worst of these demons is Satan. Nevertheless, good
only is infinite ; evil is not so, and for this reason, if God
be the eternal object of faith, the devil belongs to science.
As a fact, in what Catholic symbol is he mentioned?
Would it not be blasphemy to say, “I believe in him” ?

I believe in the devil, the most mighty destroyer, dis-
turber of heaven and of earth, and in Antichrist his only
son, our persecutor, who will be conceived by an evil spirit,
born of a violated virgin, will be glorified, will reign, and
will ascend to seat himself on the altar of God, the Father
Almighty, from whence he will insult the living and the
dead. I believe in the spirit of evil, the synagogue of
Satan, the confederacy of the wicked, the perpetuity of
sins, the perdition of the flesh and eternal death. —

Who will daretoadd Amen? Whodoes not see that the
black Credo is wholly opposed to the Church’s, and that the
believer who affirms the one must necessarily deny the other?

The devil is named but not defined in Holy Scripture ;
Genesis nowhere speaks of a supposed fall of angels, it
attributes the sin of the first man to the serpent, the most
subtle of the beasts of the field. We know the Christian
tradition on this subject, but if this tradition be explainable
by one of the greatest and most universal allegories of
science, in what way will the solution affect the faith which
aspires to God alone and despises the pomps and works of
Lucifer ?

Lucifer! The Light-Bearer! How strange a name is
given to the spirit of darkness! What, is it he who bears
light and who blinds weak souls? Yes, doubt it not, for
traditions are full of divine revelations and inspirations.
“ Satan himself transformeth himself into an angel of light,”
says St Paul. “I have seen Satan fall from heaven like a
thunderbolt,” says the Saviour of the world. “ How art
thou fallen from heaven,” cries the prophet Isaiah, “ bright
star who didst herald the morning!” Lucifer is, therefore,
a fallen star, a meteor which burns when it no longer

RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS. 63

illuminates. But is this Lucifer a person or a force? Is
it an angel or a lost thunderbolt ? Tradition supposes it
to be an angel, but does not the Psalmist say, “ He makes
his angels spirits and his ministers a flaming fire” ? The
word angel is given in the Bible to all things commissioned
of God—messengers or new creations, revealers or scourges,
resplendent spirits or dazzling objects. The fiery shafts
which the Most High darts from the clouds are the angels
of His anger, and this figurative language is familiar to all
readers of oriental poetry.

If we define evil as want of rectitude in the being, moral
evil as falsehood in acts, as falsehood is crime in speeeh,
injustice as the essence of falsehood, the death of moral
life, as falsehood is the poison of intelligence, the spirit of
evil will then be a spirit of death. Those who hear him
are his dupes, whom he poisons, and if the personification
of this spirit must be seriously understood, he would him-
self be absolutely dead and absolutely deceived, that is,
the affirmation of his existence implies an evident contra-
diction. Satan is the personification of all errors, all per-
versities, and, as a consequence, also all weaknesses. If
God may be defined as He who exists necessarily, can we
not define His antagonist and enemy as he who necessarily
does not exist ?

Jesus has said, “ The devil is a liar like his father.”* Who
is the father of the devil? Whosoever gives him a personal
existence by living in conformity with his inspirations ; the
man who diabolizes himself is the father of the incarnate
evil spirit. But there is a rash, impious, monstrous concep-
tion, a conception which is traditional, like the pride of the
Pharisees, a hybrid creation which has provided the paltry
philosophy of the eighteenth century with an apparent
argument against the splendours of Christianity. It is
the false Lucifer of the heterodox legend; it is that angel
proud enough to believe himself God, courageous enough to
purchase independence at the price of an eternity of tortures,
beautiful enough to be able to adore himself in the flood
of divine light, strong enough to reign still in darkness and
suffering, and to make a throne of his inextinguishable
pyre ; it is the Satan of the heretical and republican Milton ;
it is the pseudo-hero of the darksome eternities calumniated
by hideousness, disguised in horns and talons which would

* See Note 6.

64 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

befit rather his implacable tormentor. It is the diabolical
king of evil, as if evil were a kingdom, that devil more in-
telligent than the men of genius who fear his deceptions,
that black light, that darkness which sees, that power
which God has not willed and which a mutilated creature
could not have created, that prince of anarchy served by a
hierarchy of pure spirits, that exile of God who is, like God,
everywhere on earth, more visible, more present to the
majority, better served than God himself, that conquered
one to whom the conqueror gives his children to be eaten,
that manufacturer of the sins of the flesh to whom the flesh
is nothing, and who can consequently be nothing to the
flesh, unless he be acreator and master like God, that
immense, realized, personified, eternal falsehood, that
death which cannot die, that blasphemy which the Word of
God can never silence, that soul-poisoner whom God
tolerates in contradiction to His power, or preserves as the
Roman emperors preserved Locusta among the instruments
of His dominion, that tortured one eyer living to curse his
Judge and to withstand Him, since he will never repent.
There is the irreligious phantom which belies religion!
Away with this idol which hides our Saviour! Down with
the tyrant of falsehood! Down with the black god of the
Manichzans! Down with the Ahriman of the old idola-
ters! Live God alone and His incarnate Logos, Jesus
Christ, the Saviour of the world, who beheld Satan preci-
pitated from Heaven! Live Mary the divine mother, who
has crushed the head of the infernal serpent! Thus the
traditions of the saints and the hearts of all the truly faith-
ful unanimously cry :—To attribute any grandeur whatso-
ever to the despoiled spirit, is to calumniate divinity ; to
invest the rebellious spirit with any royalty is to encourage
revolt, is to be guilty, at least in thought, of the crime of
those who in the Middle Ages were called sorcerers. For
all the crimes punished formerly by death on the sorcerers
of old are real and the greatest of all crimes. They stole
fire from heaven, like Prometheus. They bestrode, like
Medea, the winged dragons and flying serpent. They
poisoned the breatheable air, like the shadow of the man-
chineel. They profaned holy things, and made even the
body of the Saviour subservient to works of destruction
and infamy. How is all this possible? Because there
exists an agent which is natural and divine, material
and spiritual, a universal plastic mediator, a common re-

RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS. 65

ceptacle of the vibrations of motion and the images of
forms, a fluid and a force, which may be called in some way
the Jmagination of Nature. By means of this force all
nervous apparatuses secretly communicate together ; thence
come sympathy and antipathy, thence dreams, thence are
produced the phenomena of second sight and extra-natural
vision. This universal agent of Nature’s operations is the
Od force of the Hebrews and of Baron Reichenbach, it is
the Astral Light of the Martinists, and we prefer the latter
explanation as more explicit. The existence and possible
use of this force is the Great Arcanum of practical magic ;
it is the thaumaturgic rod and the key of black magic.
The Astral Light magnetizes, heats, lights, toughes as with
loadstone, attracts, repels, vivifies, destroys, ‘ coagulates,
separates, breaks, and reunites all things under the impetus
of powerful wills. God created it on the first day when
He said, “FraT Lux!” It is in itself a blitid force, but
can be directed by the leaders of souls, who are spirits of
action and energy. This at once explains the whole
theory of prodigies and miracles. How, in fact; could both
bad and good force Nature to expose her exceptional
forces? How could there be both djvine and diabolical
miracles? How could the reprobate, erring, perverse spirit
have in some cases greater power than the spirit of justice,
so powerful in its simplicity and wisdom, if we do not
assume the existence of an instrument which all can make
use of, under certain conditions, on the one side for the
greatest good, on the other for the greatest evil ?

The magicians of Pharaoh at first performed the same
prodigies as Moses; the instrument they used was, there-
fore, the same, the influence alone was different, and when
they confessed themselves conquered, they proclaimed that
for them human power had reached its limits, and that
Moses must be possessed of superhuman attributes. Now,
this took place in Egypt, mother of magical initiations, in
that land where all was occult science and sacred, hier-
archic teaching. Notwithstanding, was it more difficult to
cause flies to appear than to cause frogs? Certainly not;
but the magicians were aware that the fluidic projection by
which they fascinated the eyes could not extend beyond
certain limits, and that for them already those limits had
been surpassed by Moses.

We shall return to the Great Magic Agent at the second
division of this work.

E

SCIENTIFIC AND MAGICAL THEOREMS.

I—On NUMBERS AND THEIR VIRTUES.

THE duad is unity reproducing itself to create, and this is
why the sacred allegories picture Eve issuing from the very
breast of Adam. It is also the number of the Gnosis and
the generative number of society and law. One is the
cause, two the logos. Unity can only be manifested by
means of the duad, for unity itself and the idea of unity
already make two. Divinity, which is one in its essence,
has two essential conditions as the fundamental basis of its
being ; these are necessity and liberty. Revelation is the
duad—every logos is two-fold and supposes two. The
ancients, in their symbols and magical operations, multi-
plied the signs of the duad, that its law, which is that of
equilibrium, might not be forgotten. In their evocations
they invariably constructed two altars and immolated two
victims, a white and a black one; the operator, holding the
sword in one hand and the rod in the other, should have
one foot shod and the other bare. But the final hieratic
secret of the duad cannot be made known; the reason,
according to Hermes Trismegistus, being the stupidity of
the vulgar, who would give all the immoral attributes of
blind fatality to the sacred necessities of science. We
must restrain the multitude, he tells us, by the fear of the
unknown, and Christ also has said, “Cast not your pearls
before swine, lest trampling them under foot they turn and
rend you.” The tree of the knowledge of good and evil,
whose fruits are deadly, is the image of this hieratic secret
of the duad, which, as a fact, if divulged, would not fail to
be misconstrued, and the impious negation of that Supreme
Arbiter who is the ethical cause of being would be com-
monly deduced therefrom. It is, therefore, in the essence
of things that the revelation of this secret inflicts the

SCIENTIFIC AND MAGICAL THEOREMS. 67

penalty of death, and it is not for all this the Great Arcanum
of Magic; but the secret of the duad leads to that of the
tetrad, or, more properly, precedes it and is resolved by
the triad, which contains the word of the sphinxitic enigma
as it should have been discovered in order to save the life,
expiate the involuntary crime, and establish the kingdom
of Gdipus. The reproduction of unity by the duad neces-
sarily brings us to the conception and dogma of the triad,
as we have said, and we pass on to this great number,
which is the plenitude and perfect logos of unity.

The triad is the universal dogma, and the basis of magical
doctrine. It supposes an intelligent cause, a cause which
speaks, and an expressed principle. The Absolute, which
is revealed in speech, endows the latter with a significance
equivalent to itself, and itself creates a third in the com-
prehension of this speech. Grammar invariably attributes
three persons to the logos or verb. The first is that which
speaks, the second that which is spoken to, and the third that
which is spoken of. The Infinite Prince in creating speaks
of Himself to Himself. Such is the explanation of the
Triad and the origin of the dogma of the Trinity. The
magical dogma is also triple. That which is above
resembles or equals that which is below. Thus two similar
things, and the word which expresses their similitudé,
make three. In magic we have origin, realisation, adapta-
tion ; in“alchemy, azoth, incorporation, transmutation ; in
theology, God, incarnation, redemption; in the human
soul, thought, love, and action; in the family, father,
mother, and child. The triad is the supreme end and
expression of love; two seek each other only to become
three. * |

There are three intelligible worlds which correspond one
to another by hierarchic analogy :—The natural or physical
world, the spiritual or metaphysical world, and the divine
or religious world. From these come the hierarchy of
spirits, who are divided into three orders, and in these are
always subdivided by the triad. All these revelations are
logical deductions from the first mathematical notions of
being and number. Unity to become active must repro-
duce itself. An indivisible, immovable, and unfruitful
principle would be a dead and incomprehensible unity.
Were God one only, He would be neither Father nor Crea-

* See Note 7.

68 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

ior ; were He two, there would be antagonism and division
n the Infinite; He is triple, therefore, for the creation of
the infinite multitude of existences and numbers from Him-
self and in His image. Thus He is really one in His
essence and triple in our conception, by which we also
behold Him triple in Himself, and one in our understand-
ing and our love. This is a mystery for the believer, and
a logical necessity for the initiate of the absolute and true
sciences. The triad issues of itself from the duad; the
movement which produces two begets also three. Three is
the key of numbers, for it is the first numeral synthesis ;
it is the triangle of geometry, the first complete and en-
closed figure, the generator of an indefinite number of
similar or dissimilar triangles.

In the Tetragyam, the triad, or He, taken at the begin-
ning of the word, signifies divine copulation, taken at the
end it signifies womanhood and maternity. Eve bears a
name of three letters, but the primitive Adam is expressed
by the single letter Jod, so that the Tetragram Jehovah;
mm, should be pronounced Java. This leads us to the
great and supreme mystery of magic, represented by the
tetrad.

The triad resumed by unity, and with the conception of
unity, added to that of the triad, produces the first square
and perfect number, source of all numerical combinations,
and origin of all forms—the quaternary or tetrad, the
tetractys of Pythagoras, whence all is derived. This num-
ber produces the cross and square in geometry. All that
exists, whether of good or evil, light or darkness, exists
and is revealed by the tetrad. The affirmation of unity
supposes the number four, unless this affirmation revolves
in unity itself, as in a vicious circle. So the triad, as we
have already observed, is explained by the duad and re-
solved by the tetrad, which is the squared unity of even
numbers, and the quadrangular basis of the cube, the unity
of construction, solidity, and measure.

The perfect word, that which is adequate to the thought
which it expresses, always virtually contains or supposes a
tetrad—the idea, with its three necessary and correlative
forms, then the image of the thing signified or expressed,
with the three terms of the judgment which qualifies it.

A height, a breadth, which the height geometrically
divides into two, and a depth separated from the height by

2 ee ee A oe pe le ee ii -W —

x

SCIENTIFIC AND MAGICAL THEOREMS. 69

the intersection of the breadth, such is the natural tetrad
composed of two lines which are crossed. There are also
four movements in Nature produced by two forces which
sustain each other by their tendency in a contrary direc-
tion. Now the law which rules bodies is analogous and
proportional to that which governs minds, and that which
governs minds is the manifestation even of God’s secret,
the mystery of creation. Visible nature reveals the unseen,
and secondary causes are proportional and analogous to
the manifestations of the First Cause, which is thus always
revealed by the cross, that key of the mysteries of Egypt
and India, the Tau of the patriarchs, the divine sign of
Osiris, the Stauros of the Gnostics, the keystone of the
Temple, the symbol of occult masonry, the central point
of the junction of the right angles of two infinite triangles.

The Great Magic Agent is revealed by four phenomena,
and the secret of its direction is the supreme arcanum of
the sublime and ineffable tetrad, which we shall treat of
under the title of the Great Magic Arcanum. By the
addition of unity to the quaternary, we obtain together
and separately the ideas of divine synthesis and analysis,
and attain the number five, which is that of the soul repre-
sented by the quintessence resulting from the equilibrium
of the four magical elements, and the sublime and myste-
rious Pentagram. The quinary is the religious number, for
it is that of Deity joined to that of the woman. In the
Tarot this number is represented by the high priest or
spiritual autocrat, symbol of human will, that supreme
power whose direction decides our eternal destinies.

The number six, or the senary, is that of initiation by
trial: it is the number of equilibrium, and the hieroglyphic
of the knowledge of good and evil. The number seven, or
the septenary, is the sacred number of all theogonies and
all symbols, because it is composed of the triad and tetrad.
It represents magic power in its whole scope; it is the
mind assisted by all elementary forces, it is the soul served
by nature, it is the sanctum regnum of the Clavicule Salo-
_ monis, the great biblical number, the key of the creation of
Moses, and the symbol of all religion. The number eight
is that of reaction and equilibriating justice. The tetrad
joined to the tetrad represents form equilibriating form,
creation issuing from creation, the eternal balance of exist-
ence ; seven being the number of the repose of God, the

7O MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

unity which succeeds represents man, who toils and co-
operates with nature in the work of creation. The number
nine is that of initiation and prophecy, because, being
composed of three times three, it represents the divine idea
and the absolute philosophy of numbers, for which reason
Apollonius says that the mysteries of the number nine
must never be revealed ; for this reason, also, it is called
the absolute number. The number ten is the number of
matter, whose special sign is zero; in the Kabbalistic tree
of the Sephiroth, ten represents Malchut, or exterior and
material substance. The sin of Adam was materialism,
and the fruit which he plucks from the tree represents the.
flesh isolated from the spirit, zero divided from unity.

II.-—THEORY OF WILL-POWER.

Axiom 1.

NOTHING can resist the will of man when he knows what
is true and wills what is good.

Axiom 2.

To will evil is to will death. A perverse will is the
beginning of suicide. ne:

Axiom 3.

_To will what is good with violence is to will evil, for
violence produces disorder and disorder produces evil. _

Axiom 4.

We can and should accept evil as the means to good,
but we must never will it or practise it, otherwise we should
demolish with one hand what we erect with the other.
A good intention never justifies bad means ; when it submits
to them it corrects them, and condemns them while it
makes use of them.

Axiom 5.

To earn the right to possess permanently, we must will
long and patiently.

SCIENTIFIC AND MAGICAL THEOREMS. 7X

Axiom 6.

To pass one’s life in willing what it is impossible to
retain for ever is to abdicate life and accept the eternity of
death.

Axiom 7.
The more numerous the obstacles which are surmounted

by the will, the stronger the will becomes. It is for this
reason that Christ has exalted poverty and suffering.

Axiom 8.

When the will is devoted to what is absurd, it is repri-
manded by eternal reason.

Axiom 9.

The will of the just man is the will of God Himself, and
it is the law of Nature.

Axiom 10.

The understanding perceives through the medium of the
will. If the will be healthy, the sight is accurate. God
said—“ Let there be light!” and the light was. The will
says— Let the world be such as I wish to behold it!” and
the intelligence perceives it as the will has determined.
This is the meaning of the word Amen which confirms the
acts of faith.

Axiom it.

When we produce phantoms we give birth to vampires,
and must nourish these children of nightmare with our own
blood and life, with our own intelligence and reason, and
still we shall never satiate them.

Axiom 12.
To affirm and will what ought to be is to create; to
affirm and will what should not be is to destroy.
Axiom 13.

Light is an electric fire, which is placed by man at the
disposition of the will; it illuminates those who know how
to make use of it, and burns those who abuse it.

wre eee eee

72 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

Axiom 14.
The empire of the world is the empire of light.

Axiom 15.
- Great minds with wills badly equilibrated are like comets,
which are abortive suns.

Axiom 16.

To do nothing is as fatal as to commit evil, and it is
more cowardly. Sloth ‘is the most unpardonable of the
deadly sins.

Axiom 17.

To suffer is to labour. A great misfortune properly
endured is a progress accomplished. Those who suffer
much live more truly than those who undergo no trials.

Axtom 18.

The voluntary death of self-devotion is not a suicide—
it is the apotheosis of free-will.

Axtom 19.

Fear is only indolence of will; and for this reason public
opinion brands the coward.

Axiom 20.

An iron chain is less difficult to burst than a chain of
flowers.

Axion 21,

Succeed in not fearing the lion, and the lion will be
afraid of you. Say to suffering—“I will that thou shalt
become a pleasure,” and it will prove such, and more even
than a pleasure, for it will be a blessing.

Axiom 22.

Before deciding that a man is happy or otherwise, seek
to ascertain the bent of his will. Tiberius died daily at
Caprea, while Jesus proved His immortality, and even His
divinity, upon Calvary and the Cross.

SCIENTIFIC AND MAGICAL THEOREMS. 73

III.—THE TRANSLUCID.

EVERY individuality is indefinitely perfectible, since the
moral order is analogous to the physical, and in the
physical order we cannot conceive a point which is
unable to dilate and enlarge itself, and radiate in a philo-
sophically infinite circle. What can be said of the entire
soul must be also predicated of each faculty thereof. The
understanding and the will of man are instruments whose
power and capacity are incalculable. But the will and
understanding have an auxiliary and instrument in a faculty
which is too little understood, and whose omnipotence
exclusively belongs to the domain of magic. I speak of
the imagination which Kabbalists call the Diaphane or the
Translucent.

Imagination is actually as the eye of the soul, and it is
therein that forms are delineated and preserved; by its
means we behold the reflections of the invisible world, it is
the mirror of visions and the apparatus of magical life.
Thereby we cure diseases, modify the seasons, ward off
death from the living, and resuscitate those who are dead,
because this faculty exalts the will and gives it power over
the universal agent.

Imagination determines the form of the child in its
mother’s womb, it gives wings to contagion, and points the
weapons of warfare. Are you exposed in a battle?
Believe yourself as invulnerable as Achilles, and you will be
so, says Paracelsus. Fear attracts bullets, and courage
turns them back on their path. It is well known that
persons whose limbs have been amputated complain often
of pains in the members which they no longer possess.
Paracelsus operated on living blood by medically treating
the result of a bleeding; he cured headaches at a distance
by operating on locks of hair; he forestalled, by the science
of the imaginary unity and solidarity of the whole with its
parts, all the theories, or rather all the experiences, of our
most famous mesmerists. So were his cures miraculous,
and he deserved that there should be added to his name of
Philip Theophrastus Bombastes that of Aureolus Para-
celsus, with the further epithet of divine!

Imagination is the instrument of the adaptation of the

74 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

Logos. In its application to reason it is genius, for reason,
like genius, is one amidst the complexity of its operations.

The soul can perceive by itself and without the mediation
of the corporeal organs, by means of its sensibility and its
Diaphane, the objects, whether spiritual or corporeal, which
exist in the: universe. There is no invisible world, there

—_—_——

their Logos or light. The man of genius differs from the
dreamer and the madman in this only, that his creations are
analogous to truth, while those of madmen and dreamers
are lost reflections and wandering images. Thus for the
sage to imagine is to see, as for the magician to speak is to
create.

Demons, souls, and the rest, can therefore be really and
truly beheld by means of the imagination ; but the imagina-
tion of the adept is diaphanous, whilst that of the uninitiated
is opaque. The light of truth traverses the one as through
a crystal window, and is refracted in the other as in a
vitreous mass full of scoriz and foreign matter.

What contributes most to the errors of the vulgar and
the extravagances of the insane are the reflections of
depraved imaginations in one another. But the seer knows
with an absolute knowledge that the things he imagines are
true, and experience invariably confirms his visions. The
means by which such lucidity can be acquired will be
described in due course.

IV.—THE GREAT MaGIc AGENT, OR THE MYSTERIES
OF THE ASTRAL LIGHT. |

THERE exists a force in Nature which is far more powerful
than steam, and by whose means a single man, who can master
itand knows how to direct it, might throw the world into

SCIENTIFIC AND MAGICAL THEOREMS. 75

confusion and transform its face. This force was known to
the ancients ; it consists of a universal agent whose supreme
law is equilibrium, and whose direction depends immediately
on the Great Arcanum of transcendent magic. By the
direction of this agent we can change the very order of the
seasons, produce in the night the phenomena of day, corre-
spond instantaneously from one end of the earth to the
other, discern, like Apollonius, what is taking place at the
Antipodes, heal or hurt at a distance, and endow human
speech with a universal reverberation and success. This
agent, which barely manifests under the uncertainties of
the art of Mesmer and his followers, is precisely what the
medizval adepts called the first matter of the szagnum opus.
The Gnostics made it the burning body of the Holy Ghost,
and this it was which was adored in the secret rites of the
Sabbath or the Temple under the symbolic figure of
Baphomet, or of the Androgyne Goat of Mendes.

This ambiant and all-penetrating fluid, this ray detached
from the sun's splendour, and fixed by the weight of the
atmosphere and by the power of central attraction, this
body of the Holy Ghost, which we call the Astral Light
and the Universal Agent, this electro-magnetic ether, this
vital and luminous caloric is represented on ancient monu-
ments by the girdle of Isis, which twines in a love-knot
round two poles, by the bull-headed serpent, by the serpent
with the head of a goat or dog, in the ancient theogonies,
and by the serpent devouring its own tail, emblem of pru-
dence and of Saturn. It is the winged dragon of Medea,
the double serpent of the caduceus, and the tempter of
Genesis; but it is also the brazen snake of Moses, encir-
cling the Tau, that is, the generative lingam; it is the
Hyle of the Gnostics, and the double tail which forms the
legs of the solar cock of Abraxos. Lastly, it is the devil
of exoteric dogmatism, and is really the blind force which
souls must conquer, in order to detach themselves from the
chains of earth ; for if their will should not free them from
its fatal attraction, they will be absorbed in the current by
the same power which first produced them, and will return
to the central and eternal fire.

The Great Magic Agent is revealed by four kinds of
phenomena, and has been subjected to the uncertain mani-
pulations of profane science under four names—caloric,
light, electricity, magnetism. These four imponderable

76 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

fluids are, therefore, the diverse manifestations of one and
the same force, which is that substance created by God
before all else, when He said, “ Let there be Light!” and
there was light. Everything which exists has been evolved
from it, and it preserves and reproduces all forms.

The Great Magic Agent is the fourth emanation of the
life-principle, of which the sun is the third form (see the
initiates of the Alexandrian School and the dogma of
Hermes Trismegistus), for the day-star is only the reflec-
tion and material shadow of the sun of truth which illu-
minates the intellectual world, and which itself is but a
gleam borrowed from the Absolute. The sun of the divine
world is the infinite, spiritual, and uncreated light; this
light is, so to speak, verbalised in the philosophical world,
and becomes the focus of souls and of truth; then it is
incorporated and changed into visible light in the sun of
the third world, the central sun of suns, of which the fixed
stars are the immortal sparks. :

Thus the world’s eye, as the ancients called it,* is
the mirage of the reflection of God, and the soul of
the earth is a permanent glance from the sun which
the earth conceives and conserves by impregnation. -
The moon concurs in this impregnation of the earth by .
projecting towards her a solar image during the night,
so that Hermes was correct when he said, speaking of the
Great Agent, “The sun is its sire, the moon its mother.” .
Then he adds, “ The wind has borne it in its belly,” for the
atmosphere is the recipient, and, as it were, the crucible of
the solar rays, by means of which there is produced that
living image of the sun which penetrates, vivifies, and fruc-
tifies the entire earth, determining all that is brought forth
on its surface by its continual currents and emanations,
which are analogous to those of the sun itself.

The Astral Light, being the instrument of life, naturally
settles at living centres ; it cleaves to the kernel of planets
as to the heart of man (and by the heart we understand, in
magic, the great sympathetic), but it identifies itself with -
the individual life of the existence which it animates.
Thus it is terrestrial in its connection with the earth, and
exclusively human in its connection with man. We are, in
fact, saturated with this light and continually project it to
make room for more; by this projection the personal

* See Note 8.

SCIENTIFIC AND MAGICAL THEOREMS. 77

atmosphere of Swedenborg is created. The settlement
and polarisation of light about a centre produces a living
being ; it attracts all the matter necessary to perfect and
preserve it, but it is not the immortal spirit, as the Indian
hierophants, and every school of Goétic magic, have ima-.
gined. It is by no means the body of the frotoplastes, as
was supposed by the Theurgists of the Alexandrian sect ;
it is the first physical manifestation of the Divine Breath.
God creates it eternally, and man, in the image of the
Deity, modifies and apparently multiplies it in the repro-
duction of his species.

The primordial light, vehicle of all ideas, is the mother
of every form, and transmits them from emanation to ema-
nation, merely diminished or altered in proportion to the
density of the mediums. All forms correspond to ideas,
and there is no idea without its proper and individual form.
Secondary forms are reflections which return to the focus
of emanated light. The forms of objects being a modif-
cation of light remain where the reflection relegates them.
Thus the Astral Light or terrestrial fluid is saturated with
images or reflections of all kinds, which can be evoked by
our soul and submitted to its Diaphane, as the Kabbalists
call it; this is the modus operand: of all visions. What we
call imagination is simply the inherent faculty of the soul
to assimilate the images and reflections contained in the
living light which is the Great Magnetic Agent. It is by
means of this light that statical visionaries place themselves
in communication with all the worlds, as so frequently
occurred to Emanuel Swedenborg, who was, nevertheless,
not perfectly lucid, since he could not distinguish between
direct rays and reflections. Clairvoyants merely evoke the
images of places in the Astral Light; they do not actually
travel to those places, and they can see nothing but what
exists in this light, which is latent, and acting on the
nerves, enables somnambulists to perceive by means of the
nerves only and without the help of radiating light.

The Book of Consciences which, according to the
Christian doctrine, will be opened on the Last Day, is
nothing more than the Astral Light, in which are preserved
the impressions of every Logos, that is, every action and
every form. There are no solitary acts and there are no
secret acts ; all that we truly will, that is, all that we con-
firm by our deeds, is written in the Astral Light. It is in

78 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

this light that the forms of those no longer on earth are
evoked, and by its means are accomplished the contested
but veritable mysteries of necromancy. When summoned
by an illuminated reason, these forms are harmoniously
manifested ; summoned by folly, they appear disorderly
and monstrous.

The Astral Light was the instrument of the omnipotence
of Adam, and afterwards became that of his punishment,
being disturbed by his fall, which intermingled an impure
reflection with those primitive images that composed, for
his still maiden imagination, the book of universal know-
ledge. The fall of Adam, according to the initiators, was
an erotic intoxication which rendered his generation the
slave of the fatal light ; all amorous passion is a whirlpool
of this light which draws us towards the abyss of death,

The Great Magic Agent, when subordinated to a blind
mechanism and proceeding from centres automatically
produced, is a dead light which works mathematically
according to given impulses or necessary laws. On the
contrary, the human light is only fatal to the ignorant; it
is subject to the intelligence, subordinate to the imagina-
tion, and dependent on the will of man. It is a compound
agent, natural and divine, material and spiritual; ever
active, ever rich in séve, ever alive with ravishing dreams
and luxurious images ; it may be called, in a certain sense,
the Imagination of Nature, as we have said. Blind in
itself, and submitted to every will either for good or evil,
this cerculus always renewing an unconquerable life which
causes vertigo in the imprudent, this universal seducer,
conveys light, yet propagates darkness; it may be named
equally Lucifer and Lucifuge; it is a serpent but also a
nimbus ; it is of the nature of fire, but it may belong equally
to the torments of hell and to the incense-offerings dedi-
cated to Heaven. To master it, we must, like the pre-
destined woman, set a foot upon its head.

The Astral Light is the key of all dominion, the secret
of all powers, the universal glass of visions, the bond of
sympathies, the source of love, prophecy, and glory. To
know how to master this agent so as to profit by and to
direct its currents is to accomplish the magnum opus, to be -
master of the world, and the depositary even of the power of
God. The absolute secret of this direction has been pos-
sessed by certain men, and can yet be recovered—it is the

SCIENTIFIC AND MAGICAL THEOREMS. 79

Great Magic Arcanum ; it depends on an incommunicable
axiom, and on an instrument which is the great and unique
Athanor of the Hermetists of the highest grade. All
magic science consists in the knowledge of this secret. To
know it and dare to make use of it is human omnipotence;
to reveal it to an outsider is to lose it; to reveal it to a
disciple is to abdicate in favour of such disciple, who, from
that moment, has the right of life and death over his
initiator, and will certainly kill him for fear of dying him-
self. (This has nothing in common with deeds defined as
murder in criminal legislation; practical philosophy, the
basis of those laws, denies the facts of bewitchment and
occult influences.)

The Great Magic Agent has four properties—to dissolve,
to consolidate, to quicken, and to moderate. These four
properties, directed by the will of man, can modify all phases
of Nature. In making use of the term fluid in connection
with this force, we employ a received expression, but we
are far from deciding that the latent light is a fluid ; every-
thing, on the contrary, leads us to prefer the system of vibra-
tions, in the explanation of this phenomenal force. How-
ever this may be, the coming synthesis of chemistry will
probably lead our physicists to a knowledge of the universal
agent, and then what will hinder them from determining
the strength, number, and direction of its magnets? A
complete revolution in science will follow, and we shall
return to the transcendent magic of the Chaldeans.

or ce ee ee

V.—MAGICAL EQUILIBRIUM.

THE universe is balanced by two forces which maintain it in
equilibrium, those of attraction and repulsion. These forces
- exist alike in physics, philosophy, and religion. They pro-
duce equilibrium in physics, criticism in philosophy, and
progressive revelation in religion. The ancients repre-
sented this mystery by the strife of Eros and Anteros, by
the struggle of Jacob with an angel, and by the equilibrium
of the golden mountain, which the gods on one side and the
demons on the other hold balanced by means of the symbolic
serpent of India. It is also represented by the two cherubim
of the ark, by the two sphinxes of the chariot of Osiris, and

80 | MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

by the two seraphim, one black and one white. Its
scientific reality is proved by the phenomena of polarity,
and by the universal law of sympathies and antipathies.

In the soul of the world, which is the universal solar
agent, there is a current of desire and a current of wrath.
All motion and life consist in the extreme tension of these
two forces or principles of universal equilibrium, which are
not contrary, though in apparent opposition, for supreme
wisdom opposes them one to another. The Great Magic
Agent subsists then by two forces, one of attraction and
one of repulsion, whence Hermes says that it is continually
ascending and descending. By this two-fold force all is
created and preserved. It is at once substance and motion;
the inherent power which originates its movement is called
magnetism, and the movement itself is an uprolling and un-
rolling which are consecutive and unlimited, or rather sim-
ultaneous and perpetual in spiral lines of opposite motions,
which never come into collision. It is the same movement
as that of the sun which draws and repels at one time all
the planets of his system.

Equilibrium is the result then of two forces, but if these
were absolutely and permanently equal, equilibrium would
be immobility, and consequently the negation of life.
Movement is the result of alternated preponderance. The
impulse given to one plate of a balance determines neces-
sarily the motion of the other. Thus contraries act upon
contraries by correspondence and analogical connection
throughout all Nature. All life is composed of an aspiration
and a respiration ; creation is the supposition of a shadow
to serve as a limit to light, of a vacancy to serve as space
for the plenitude of being, of a fecundated passive prin-
ciple to support and realise the potency of the active and
generative principle. All nature is bi-sexual, and the
movement which produces the phenomena of death and
life is a continual generation. To understand the law of :
this exchange, to know the alternative or simultaneous pro-
portion of all opposite forces, is to possess the first principles
of the Great Magic Secret, which constitutes true human
divinity. Scientifically, the diverse manifestations of uni-
versal motion may be appreciated by electrical or magnetic
phenomena. Electrical phenomena above all reveal
materially and positively the affinities and antipathies of
certain substances. The union of copper with zinc, the

SCIENTIFIC AND MAGICAL THEOREMS. 81

action of all metals in the galvanic pile, are perpetual and
irrecusable revelations. Let the physicists seek and find
out, the Kabbalists will explain the discoveries of science.

Equilibrium is order, and motion is progress ; the science
of equilibrium and of motion is the absolute science of
Nature ; it conducted the initiates to that of universal gravi-
tation about the centres of life, heat, and light. By its
means man can produce and direct natural phenomena
through a continual self-elevation towards a higher and
more perfect intelligence than his own.

The alternate use of contrary forces—warmth after cold,\
mildness after severity, affection after anger—is the secret \
of perpetual motion and the prolongation of power ; this
is instinctively felt by coquettes, who cause their lovers to
pass from hope to fear and from joy to sorrow. To operate
always on the same side and in the same manner is to
overload one side of a balance, and the complete destruc-
tion of equilibrium will soon result. Everlasting caressing
quickly engenders satiety, disgust, and antipathy, in the
same way that constant coldness or severity alienates and
discourages affection in the end. In alchemy a fire which
is continually the same, and burns without intermission,
calcines the first matter and sometimes causes the hermetic
vase to explode; it is necessary to substitute at regular
intervals the heat of lime or mineral manure for that of
fire. And thus in magic the works of wrath or rigour
must be tempered by operations of benevolence and love,
while if the Magus should keep his will fixed always in
the same direction and in the same manner, great fatigue
and a species of moral impotence would very soon result.
The Magus should not, therefore, live exclusively in his
laboratory, amidst his Athanor, his elixirs, and his pantacles.
However consuming may be the glance of that Circe called
occult power, we must be able to point to it when neces-
sary the sword of Ulysses, and remove in time from our
lips the chalice which she offers us. A magical operation
should invariably be followed by a rest of equal duration
and an analogous diversion, but one contrary in its object.
To strive continually against Nature, so that we may over-
come and dominate it, is to endanger both life and reason.
Paracelsus ventured to do so, but even in the midst of such
a struggle he made use of equilibrated forces, and opposed
the intoxication of wine to that of the intellect; then he

F

$2 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

conquered drunkenness by bodily fatigue, and bodily
fatigue by fresh intellectual occupation. So was Paracelsus
a man of miracles and inspiration, but he consumed his
life in this devouring activity, or rather he rapidly wore out
and rent its envelope. Men like Paracelsus can use and
abuse without fear of anything—they well know that they
can no more die than they can grow old.

Nothing disposes us for joy more than grief, and nothing
is nearer to grief than joy. So an ignorant operator is
astonished that he invariably reaches other results than he
proposed himself, because he knows neither how to cross
nor alternate his action ; he wishes to bewitch his enemy,
and he makes himself ill and wretched. He wishes to
make himself loved, and he consumes himself with desire
for women who scorn him ; he wishes to manufacture gold,
and he exhausts his last resources ; his torment is eternally
that of Tantalus, the water always flowing back when he
stoops down to drink.

To dominate the circle of the Astral Light, we must
succeed in getting beyond the reach of its currents, that is,
we must attain self-isolation. The torrent of universal life,
which is represented in religious dogmas by the expiatory
fire of hell, is the instrument of initiation, the enemy to be
overcome. It is this which sends to our evocations and to
Goétic conjurations so many larve and phantoms; therein
are preserved all those forms whose fantastic and fortui-
tous assemblage peoples our nightmares with such abomin-
able monsters. To allow one’s self to be carried away by
the drift of this whirling stream, is to fall into abysses of
madness more frightful than those of death; but to chase
the shadows of this chaos and endow them with the per-
fect forms of thought, is to be a man of genius, is to create,
is to have triumphed over hell! The Astral Light directs
the instincts of animals, and does battle with the intelli-
gence of man, which it tends to pervert by the luxury of
its reflections and the deception of its images; its fatal
and necessary action is rendered still more calamitous by
the elementary spirits and souls in pain, whose restless wills
seek sympathies in our weaknesses, and tempt us less with
the intention of destroying us than with the desire to win
friends.

To accomplish isolation from the Astral Light, it is in-
sufficient to clothe ourselves in the woollen mantle of

ae

SCIENTIFIC AND MAGICAL THEOREMS. 83

Apollonius ;* we must, above all, impose absolute serenity
on mind and heart ; we must issue from the realm of pas-
sions and be convinced of our perseverance in the spon-
taneous acts of an inflexible will; as fatality is an inevit-
able concatenation of effects and causes ina given order,
so the will is the governing faculty of intelligent forces for
the conciliation of the liberty of individuals with the
necessity of things. <A lucid will can act on the mass of
the Astral Light, and, with the concurrence of other wills,
which it absorbs and draws after it, can set great and irre-
sistible currents into motion. Every intelligent projection
of the will is a projection of the human fluid or light.

To dispose of the Astral Light, we must also understand
its two-fold vibration, and the balance of forces which con-
stitutes magical equilibrium—the sezary of the Kabbalah.
This equipoise, considered in its originating cause, is the
will of God, in man it is liberty, in matter mathematical
equilibrium. Equilibrium produces stability and perman-
ence, liberty gives birth to immortality in man, and the
will of God puts in operation the laws of eternal reason.
Omnipotence is the most absolute liberty. Now absolute
liberty cannot exist without perfect equilibrium. Magical
equilibrium is, therefore, one of the first conditions of
success in the operations of the science, and must be sought
even in occult chemistry by the combination of opposing
forces. without their neutralisation. By magical equilibrium
is explained the grand and primeval mystery of the exist-
ence and relative necessity of evil. Moral equilibrium is
the concurrence of science and faith, distinct in their forces
and joined in their action, to provide the mind and heart of
man with that rule which is reason.

V.—THE MAGIc CHAIN.

THE magnum opus in practical magic, after the education

of the will and the personal creation of the Magus, is the

formation of the magnetic chain, and this secret is truly

that of the priesthood and the monarchy. To form the

magic chain is to establish a magnetic current of ideas
* See Note 9.

84 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

which produces faith and carries away a large number of
wills in a given circle of active manifestations. The mag-
netic current becomes stronger in proportion to the extent
of the chain, which, when well-formed, is like a whirlpool
drawing in and absorbing all. The chain may be estab-
lished in three manners—by signs, speech, and contact. It
may be established by signs in causing some particular
gesture or symbol to be adopted as the representation of a
force. Thus all Christians communicate together by the
sign of the Cross, masons by that of the square beneath a
sun, magicians by the microcosm, made with the five ex-
tended fingers. Signs, once accredited and propagated,
acquire force of themselves. The sight and imitation of
the sign of the Cross sufficed in the first centuries to make
proselytes to Christianity. The miraculous medal, as it is
called, still performs in our own days a large number of
conversions by the same magnetic law. The vision and
illumination of the young Jew Alphonse de Ratisbonne is
the most remarkable fact of this kind. Imagination is
creative not only within us but without us, by means of
our fluidic projections.

The magic chain formed by speech was represented
among the ancients by the chains of gold which issue from
the mouth of Hermes. Nothing equals the electricity of
eloquence. Speech creates intelligence of the - highest
kind in the most grossly-natured crowds. Even those
who are out of earshot comprehend by excitement, and
are borne away with the mass. Peter the Hermit shook
Europe by crying, “God wills it!” One single word of
the Emperor electrified his army and made France invin-
cible. Proudhon destroyed socialism with his famous para-
dox, “Property is robbery!” A chance word is often
sufficient to overthrow an authority. Voltaire knew this
well—Voltaire, who upset the world by sarcasms. So he
who feared neither pope, prince, parliament, nor Bastile,
stood in dread of a pun. We are not far from accomplish-
ing the desires of those men whose maxims we repeat.

The third method of establishing the magnetic chain is
by contact. Among persons who often come into com-
munication, the head of the current is soon revealed, and
the strongest will does not fail to absorb the rest; the
direct and positive contact of hand to hand completes the
harmony of inclinations, and it is for this reason that it is a

SCIENTIFIC AND MAGICAL THEOREMS. 85

mark of sympathy and intimacy. Children, who are
prompted instinctively by nature, form the magnetic chain
when playing at Prisoner’s Base. Then gaiety circulates
and laughter ripples. Round tables are also more favour-
able to festivity than those of any other form. The great
circle-dance of the Sabbath, which terminated the mysterious
meetings of the adepts of the Middle Ages, was a magic
chain, which united all in the same wishes and in the same
acts ; they formed it by standing back to back and holding
hands with the face outside the circle, in imitation of those
antique sacred dances which are still to be seen represented
on the basrelievos of old temples. The electric fur of the
lynx, panther, and even the domestic cat were attached to
their clothes in imitation of the ancient bacchantes. Thence
came the tradition that the miscreants at the Sabbath
each carried a cat hung from the girdle, and danced in this
guise.

The trough of Mesmer was an imperfect magic chain;
several great circles of illuminati, in different northern
countries, possess more powerful ones. Even the society of
certain Catholic priests, celebrated for their occult power
and their unpopularity, is established after the plan, and in
observance of the conditions, of the most powerful magic
chains, and this is the secret of their strength, which they
attribute solely to the grace or will of God, a common-
place and simple solution of all the problems of powerful
influence and enthusiasm. |

All enthusiasm propagated in a society by a series of
communications and definitive practices produces a mag-
netic current, and is conserved or augmented by that
current, whose tendency is to carry away, and often excite
beyond measure, weak and impressionable people, nervous
organisations, and temperaments disposed to hysteria or
hallucinations. Such persons soon become powerful
vehicles of magical force, and energetically project the
Astral Light in the direction of the current itself; to oppose
oneself under such circumstances to the manifestations of
this force would be in some sense to struggle with fatality.
When the young Pharisee Saiil, or Schél, threw himself,
with all the fanaticism and obstinacy of a sectarian, across
the stream of aggressive Christianity, he placed himself
unconsciously at the mercy of the power he thought to
combat, and so was overwhelmed by a formidable magnetic

86 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

explosion, whose effect was doubtless rendered more instan-
taneous through the combined help of a cerebral congestion
and a sunstroke. We know a certain sect of enthusiasts
which people at a distance laugh at, but in which they
enroll themselves when they come near it, even to
assail it. We may go further: magic circles and magnetic
currents are established of themselves, and affect those
whom they subject to their action according to fatal laws.
Each one of us is drawn into a circle of affinities which is
his world, and by whose influence he is controlled. Great
circles often make great men, and reciprocally. There are
no misunderstood geniuses, there are eccentric men, and the
word seems to have been coined by an adept. The man of
eccentric genius is one who seeks to form for himself a
circle by striving against the central force of attraction
inherent in established chains and currents. His destiny is
to be broken in the struggle, or to succeed. What is the
two-fold condition of success in such a case? A fixed
central standpoint and a persevering circular action of
initiative. The man of genius is one who has discovered a
real law, and who, consequently, possesses an invincible force
of action and direction. He may die in his work, but that
which he wishes will be accomplished in spite of his
death, and frequently even on account of it, for death is a
veritable assumption of genius. ‘When I shall be lifted
above the earth,” ‘said the greatest of the Initiators, “I will
draw all men unto me.”

The law of magnetic currents is that of the movement of
the Astral Light. This movement is always double, and
reproduces itself in a contrary sense. A great action
invariably produces an equal reaction, and the secret of
gigantic success is always in the foreknowledge of such
reactions. So Chateaubriand, inspired with disgust for the
revolutionary saturnalia, foresaw and prepared the immense
success of his “Genius of Christianity.” To oppose one’s
self to a current whose revolution is beginning is to seek
to be broken thereby, as was the great and unfortunate
emperor Julian ; to oppose one’s self to a current which
has described the circle of its action is to take the lead of a
contrary current. The great man is he who comes at the
right time and knows how to innovate seasonably. Vol-
taire, in the age of the Apostles, would have found no echo
for his speech, and would perhaps have been nothing more

SCIENTIFIC AND MAGICAL THEOREMS. 87

than an ingenious parasite of the feasts of Trimalcyon.
At the epoch we live in, all is ready for a fresh outburst of
evangelical enthusiasm and Christian disinterestedness,
precisely because of the universal disillusion, egotistic
positivism, and public cynicism of the grossest interests.
The success of certain books, and the mystical tendencies
of minds are no unequivocal symptoms of this general dis-
position. We restore churches and build new ones, the
more do we feel the want of faith, the more do we hope for
faith; the entire world expects once again its Messiah, and
he will not tarry in coming. Let there be found, for
example, a man highly placed by rank or by fortune—a
pope, a king, or even a Jewish millionaire, and let this man
publicly and solemnly sacrifice all his material interests for
the good of humanity, let him become the saviour of the
poor, the propagator, and even the victim, of doctrines of
self-devotion and charity, and he will draw round him a
vast concourse, and a complete moral revolution will be
produced in the world. But the high position of the per-
son is before all things requisite, for in these times of
meanness and charlatanism, every Logos coming from the
lower ranks is suspected of ambition and interested
trickery. Ye, then, who are nothing, and who own no-
thing, hope not to be apostles or messiahs. If ye have faith,
and would act in accordance with your faith, find first the
means of action, which are the influence of rank and the
prestige of fortune. Formerly, gold was made by science ;
to-day, science must be reconstructed by gold. That
which was volatile has been fixed, and now we must fix
the volatile ; in other words, we have materialised spirit,
and now we must spiritualise matter. The sublimest
utterance is unheeded now-a-days, unless it is produced
under the guarantee of some name. What is the value of
a manuscript? It is that of the author's signature at the
publisher’s. The firm of Alexandre Dumas et C*, for
example, represents one of the literary guarantees of our
epoch; but it is of account only for its habitual pro-
ductions, romances. Let Dumas invent a magnificent
Utopia, or find an admirable solution of the religious
problem, and his discoveries will only be considered the
entertaining caprices of a novelist, and no one will take
them seriously, despite the European celebrity of the
Panurge of modern literature. We are in the age of

88 . MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

acquired positions; everyone’s worth is appraised in pro-
portion to his social and commercial position. Unlimited
liberty of speech has produced such a conflict of talk that
no one asks any longer what is said, but who has said it.
To those therefore who ask me: “If you possess the
secret of great successes and of the force which can change
the world, why do you not use it?” I reply: “This
knowledge has come to me too late for myself, and I have
spent in its acquisition the time and the resources which
would, perhaps, have enabled me to make use of it.
Illustrious men, rich men, great ones of this world, who are
unsatisfied by what you possess, and who are conscious in
your hearts of a nobler and larger aspiration, will you
become the fathers of the new world, the kings of a
renovated civilisation? A poor and obscure scholar has
found the lever of Archimedes, and he offers it to you for
the good of humanity alone, asking nothing whatever in
return for it. |
The printing press is an admirable instrument for the
formation of the magic chain by the extension of speech.
As a fact, no book is lost ; writings find their way infallibly
where they are meant to go, and the aspirations of thought
attract speech. We have proved this a hundred times
_ during the course of our initiation into magic; the rarest
books have presented themselves to us without seeking as
soon as they became indispensable to us. It is thus that
we have discovered intact that universal science which
numerous scholars have believed to be buried under
several consecutive cataclysms; it is thus that we have
entered into that great magic chain which began with
Hermes or Enoch, and will only end with the world. So
we have been able to evoke and bring before us the spirits
of Apollonius, of Plotinus, of Synesius, of Paracelsus, of
Cardan, of Cornelius Agrippa, and of many others more or
less famous, but too religiously distinguished to be lightly
named. We continue their sublime work, which others
will take in hand after us, but to whom will it be given to
- complete it ?

SCIENTIFIC AND MAGICAL THEOREMS. 89

VI—THE GREAT MAGICAL ARCANUM.

THERE exists a principle and a rigorous formula which is
the Great Arcanum. Let the wise man seek it not, for he
has already found it; let the vulgar seek for ever, they will
never attain it. This universal arcanum, the crowning and
eternal secret of supreme initiation, is represented in the
Tarot by a young and naked girl who only touches the
earth with one foot, who holds a magnetic rod in each
_ hand, and who appears to be running inside a crown which
is supported by an angel, an eagle, a bull, and a lion. This
figure is fundamentally analogous to the cherub of Ezekiel,
and to the Indian symbol of Addhanari, corresponding to
the Ado-nai of the prophet just mentioned. The compre-
hension of this figure is the key of all the occult sciences.
The Great Magical Secret is represented by the lamp and
poniard of Psyche, the apple of Eve, the fire stolen from
heaven by Prometheus, the burning sceptre of Lucifer, but
also by the Cross of the Redeemer. It is the ring of
Gyges, the Golden Fleece, the allegorical picture of Cebes,
which is its most audacious demonstration.* It is also
represented by the lingam, for the Great Arcanum is con-
nected with the mystery of universal generation, and by
the serpent pierced with an arrow, which formed the seal
of Cagliostro.

This secret is the kinghood of the sage, the crown of the
initiate, whom it renders the master of gold and of light,
which are fundamentally the same thing. By its means he
solves the problem of the quadrature of the circle, directs
the perpetual motion, and possesses the philosopher's stone.
This great and indicible arcanum was never referred to
even among adepts; it is essentially unexplainable in its
‘nature, and is destruction both to those who divine it and
those who reveal it. It is that terrible secret of life and
death which is expressed in the Bible by those formidable
and symbolical words of the serpent, which was itself
symbolical, I. NEQUAQUAM MORIEMINI, II. SED ERITIS,
ITI. SicutT Du, IV. SCIENTES BONUM ET MALUM. It is

* See Note 10.

gO MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

the secret of Nature herself, of the generation of angels
and worlds, and of God’s omnipotence. It is the absolute

oe

replies Divine Wisdom. Thus good and evil flourish on
the same tree and issue from the same root. Good per-
sonified is God; evil personified is the Devil. To know
the secret or science of God is to be God; to know the
secret or science of the Devil is to be the devil. To seek
to be at once Deity and Satan is to concentrate in our-
selves the most absolute contradiction, the most unchange-
ably opposing forces ; it is to strive to contain an infinite
antagonism, it is to partake of poison which would quench
suns and consume worlds, to assume the garment of
Dejanira, and to doom ourselves to the swiftest and most
terrible of deaths. Woe to him who wishes to know too
much! If excessive and imprudent knowledge do not
kill him, it will drive him mad. To eat of the fruit of the
tree of knowledge of good and evil is to associate and
assimilate good and evil one with another; it is to cover
the radiant face of Osiris with the mask of Typhon, it is to
raise the veil of Isis, and profane the sanctuary. The tree
of knowledge has become the tree of death. For six
thousand years the martyrs of Sinai have laboured and
perished at the foot of this tree, that it might become once
more the tree of life.

The Great Magical Secret is the secret of the direction
of the Great Magical Agent ; it depends on an incommunic-
able axiom, and on an instrument which is the supreme
and unique Athanor of the Hermetists of the highest grade.
When the adepts in alchemy speak of a great and unique
Athanor which all can make use of, which is within the
grasp of all, and which all men possess without knowing it,
they allude to the philosophic and moral alchemy.* A-
strong and resolute will can arrive in a short time at
absolute independence, and we all possess the Athanor, the
chemical instrument, by which that which is ethereal is
separated from that which is gross, and the fixed is divided
from the volatile. This instrument, complete as the world,
and precise as mathematics themselves, is designated by

* See Note II.

SCIENTIFIC AND MAGICAL THEOREMS. gI

the sages under the emblem of the Pentagram, the body of
man and the absolute sign of human intelligence. The in-
communicable axiom is kabbalistically enclosed in the four
letters of the Tetragram, arranged in the following manner :
: in the letters of the

words AZOTH and
INRI kabbalistically
written, and in the
monogram of Christ
as it is embroidered
on the labarum, and
which Postelthe Kab-
balist interprets by
the word Rota, from
which the adepts have
formed their Tarot.

To understand the
alternative or simul-
taneous proportion of
the forces which pro-
duce equilibrium is
to possess the first
principle of the Great Magic Arcanum, which constitutes
true human divinity. It is the science of fire; everywhere
we find the enchanter who pierces the lion and leads the
serpents—the lion is the celestial fire, and the serpents are
the electrical and magnetic currents of the earth. It is to
this great secret of the Magi that we must refer all the
marvels of Hermetic Magic, whose traditions still declare
_ that the arcanum of the magnum opus consists in the
government of fire.

It is forbidden to us to speak more plainly, but we com-
plete our revelation by the following tables, whose union
will reveal to the neophyte the Grand Secret of Secrets.

le e

On f The Providence
= of God.

By To live in union with Light.

= fz Motion.

Be Creation.

92 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

The truth
of mystery,
To know of life, |
in the spirit made visible
by universal gravitation.

As

Justice
by sacrifice
To will to harmony
and the progress
l of liberty.

In the ratio
| of blind faith

on the equilibrium
fe modifiable substance
\ by balancing.

To dare

THEORY OF THE G. ..

on the reality
| of dogma,
To be silent { action
of the soul which is perfectible
by antagonism.
Charity, which is above all Being.
| Mystery, which is beyond all Science.
God is + Sacrifice, which transcends all Justice.
| [Frovidence which is above all Reason.
Perfection, which is beyond all Conception.

The void in opposition to all being.

Ignorance in opposition to all know-

: ledge.

Satan is Hatred and Absurdityin opposition to all reason.
Despotism in opposition toall justice.

Falsehood in opposition to all truth.

[ Intelligence, in its correspondence
with Being. |
The Divine Paraclete Progress, in its correspondence with

i knowledge.

is— Genius — En- 5 ;

thusiasm — Har- eae its correspondence with

pe ae hae cane Wisdom, in its correspondence with
ectitude. Resecn

Light, in its correspondence with
Truth.

SCIENTIFIC AND MAGICAL THEOREMS. 93

The Four Characters of the Absolute.

The identity of the idea with existence is—Truth.
The identity of knowledge with existence is—Reality.
The identity of the Logos with existence is—Reason.
The identity of action with existence is—J ustice.

3
4
N

pox psy
w
§
n

oie ONY

VANS NN TWN NY

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES ;
OR, KABBALISTIC PNEUMATICS,

WITH THE MYSTERIES OF EVOCATION, NECROMANCY,
AND BLACK MAGIC.

aa : : Cd

INTRODUCTION.

THE great and indispensable hypothesis of the destinies of
futurity has been elaborated and directed from deduction
to deduction by the seers of the ancient world. Kabbalistic
pneumatics are a veritable science, which proceeds methodi-
cally and exactly, ascending from the known to the un-
known by the way of the least questionable analogies,
because facts make known laws to it, and on these laws it
substantially lays the foundation of its ever-prudent hypo-
theses. It is, therefore, Kabbalistic Pneumatics which we
are about to unveil to our readers, and we shall add an
analysis of Isaac de Loria’s profound treatise on the cir-
cular progression of the soul—De Revolutionibus Animarum
—and that of the Sepher Druschim by the same doctor.
We shall bring forth from the shadows of occultism these
amazing books, whose key the modern world no longer
possesses, and by so doing we believe ourselves to deserve
well at the hands of science and reason.

By the help of these powerful lights we shall explain the
strange phenomena which scientific smatterers find it so
convenient to deny, but which overwhelm them, neverthe-
less, by their evidence. Yes, images tremble, statues weep,
the consecrated bread is injected with blood, a hand may
issue from the wall to alarm the impious festivities of
Balthazar by a menacing inscription. The author of this
book does not fear to acknowledge that he has himself had
the most astounding and formidable visions; he has seen
and touched angels and demons, as Maximus of Ephesus,
and Schroepfer of Leipsic, caused them to be seen and

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 95

touched by their adepts. He has been enabled to compare
the hallucinations of the waking state with the illusions of
dreams, and from all this he has concluded that reason
directing faith and faith supporting reason are the only
true lights of our souls, and that all else is but a vain
exertion of the mind, aberration of the senses, and delirium
of thought. He is not, therefore, writing what is of mere
conjecture, he boldly affirms what he knows.

It was after he had descended from gulf to gulf and
from horror to horror to the bottom of the seventh circle
of the abyss, it was after he had traversed in all its length
the darkness of the dolorous city, that Dante returning,
and taking the devil, so to speak, against the grain, rose
consoled and victorious towards the light. We have per-
formed the same voyage, and we present ourselves before
the world with tranquillity on our countenance and peace
in our heart. We come calmly to assure mankind that
hell and the devil, the hopeless gulf, the chimeras, satyrs,
ghouls, personified vices, three-headed dragons, and all
the rest of the dismal phantasmagoria are a nightmare of
madness, but that God only living, alone real, alone every-
where present, fills and leaves no void, fills, I repeat, the
unlimited immensity with the splendours and eternal con-
solations of the sovereign reason.

The things which are above this life can be conjectured
in two ways, either by the calculations of analogy, or by
the intuitions of extasis, in other words, by reason or by
folly. The sages of Judea chose reason, and have left us,
in books which are generally ignored, their magnificent
hypotheses. On reading them, it becomes evident at once
that our creeds have come out of them like inexplicable
fragments, and that the apparent absurdity of our dogmas
disappears when they are completed by the splendid reason-
ing of these masters. One is astonished, moreover, to find
all the most beautiful and grandiose aspirations of our
modern poetry philosophically realised .and completed
therein. Goéthe studied the Kabbalah, and the epic of
“Faust” has issued from the doctrines of the Sohar.
Swedenborg, Saint .Simon, and Fourier seem to have
glimpsed the divine Kabbalistic synthesis through the
darkness and hallucinations of a more or less extraordi-
nary nightmare, according to the different characters of
these dreamers. In reality, this synthesis is the most

96 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

perfect and beautiful thing which can be attained to by
human understanding.

The books which treat.of spirits according to the Kab-
balists are the Paeumatica Kabbalistica, found in the Kaé-
bala Denudata of Baron de Rosenroth; the Liber de Revolu-
trontbus Animarum, by Isaac de Loria; the Sepher Drus-
chim, the book of Moscheh of Cordova, and some others
less celebrated. We shall give hére not merely their
abridgement, but, in a certain way, their quintessence.

I.— IMMORTALITY.

ON matters which our science cannot in this life ascertain
we can only reason by hypotheses. Humanity can know
nothing of the superhuman, since the superhuman is that
which exceeds the scope of humanity ; the phenomena of
decomposition which accompany death seem to protest in
the name of science against this innate necessity of faith in
another life which has brought forth so many dreams.
Science, nevertheless, must take account of the want, for
Nature, which does nothing without object, does not endow
beings with desires that are not to be satisfied. Science,
therefore, though necessarily ignorant of, must, at least,
suppose the existence of things which are beyond her, and
cannot put in question the continuity of life after the phe-
nomenon called death, since no abrupt interruption is found
in the magnum opus of Nature, which, according to the
philosophy of Hermes, never proceeds by Jumps.

The immortality of the soul is kabbalistically proved by
analogy, which is the one doctrine of the universal religion,
as it is the key of science and the inviolable law of Nature.
Death, in fact, can no more be an absolute end than birth
is a real beginning. What we call death is birth into a
new life. Nature does not unmake what she has made in
the order of the necessary progressions of existence, and
she cannot belie her own fundamental laws. Birth proves
the pre-existence of the human individual, since nothing is
produced from nothing, and death proves immortality, as
being can no more cease to be than nothing can cease to
be nothing. Being and nonentity are two absolutely irre-

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 97

. concilable ideas, with this difference, that the wholly nega-
tive notion of nothingness is derived from the very concep-
tion of existence, whose antithesis cannot even be under-
stood as an absolute negation, whilst the idea of being
cannot even be compared with that of nonentity, to say
nothing of being derived from it.

Pythagoras believed above all things in the immortality
of the soul and the eternity of life. The perpetual succes-
sion of the seasons, of days and nights, of sleeping and
waking, sufficiently explained to him the phenomenon of
death. The individual immortality of the human soul
consisted according to him in the persistence of memory.
The Bible seems to give this idea a divine sanction when
it says in the Book of Psalms—/n memoria eterna erit
Justus. |

According to Synesius, the dream state proves the indi-
viduality and immateriality of the soul, which, in this con-
dition, creates itself a heaven, a landscape, palaces blazing
with light, or darksome caverns, according to its affections
or desires.

But the immortality of the soul, being one of the most
consoling doctrines of religion, must. be reserved for the
aspirations of faith, and, consequently, never will be proved
by facts accessible to the examination of science. Who
indeed can be assured beforehand of his eternal destiny ?
Life here below appears to be a school in which we learn
how to live. It is to be concluded from this that we shall
live elsewhere. This is a dramatic farce which precedes
the grand mystery. *

II.—_THE ASTRAL BODY.

WE have spoken at length of a substance diffused through
infinity, the single substance which is heaven and earth,
that is, volatilised or fixed, according to its different
degrees of polarisation. This substance is what Hermes
Trismegistus calls the Great Telesma. When it produces
refulgence, it is called light. This is the substance which
God created before all things, when He said, Let there be

* See Note 12.
G

98 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

light! It is at once matter and motion, a fluid and a
perpetual vibration. The inherent force which puts it in
motion is called magnetism. In the infinite this unique
substance is ether or etherised light. In the stars, which it
renders magnetic, it becomes astral light. In organised
creatures, it is magnetic light or fluid. In man, it forms
the astral body, or plastic mediator, which is a magnet
that draws or repels the Astral Light under the pressure of
the will.

The Astral Light transformed at the moment of con-
ception into human light, is the first envelope of the soul,
and it is by combining with the most subtil fluids that it
forms this etherised body or sidereal phantom which
Paracelsus speaks of in his philosophy of intuition—
Philosophia Sagax—and which reproduces with the greatest
facility the forms corresponding to ideas. It is the mirror
of imagination, and is nourished by the Astral Light pre-
cisely as the physical body is nourished by the produce of
the earth. During sleep it absorbs this light by immer-
sion, and in the waking state by a kind of more or less
slow respiration. When the phenomena of natural som-
nambulism occur, the plastic mediator is overcharged with
ill-digested nourishment. The will then, though weighted
by the torpor of sleep, instinctively drives the mediator
towards the organs to disengage it, and a reaction occurs
which is in some way mechanical, and which equilibriates
the light of the mediator by the motion of the body. For
this reason it is dangerous to awake somnambulists with a
start, for the congested mediator may then suddenly retire
towards the common reservoir and wholly abandon the
organism, which thereby will be separated from the soul,
and death will result. —The somnambulistic state is, therefore,
extremely dangerous, because, by blending the phenomena
of the waking state with those of sleep, it constitutes a
sort of great digression between the two worlds. The
soul agitating the springs of individual life, while plunged
in the universal life, experiences an inexpressible happi-
ness, and would willingly loosen the nervous cords which
keep it suspended above the current. The situation is
identical in every species of extasis; if the will should
plunge therein by an impassioned effort, or even abandon
itself entirely therein, the subject may remain idiotic or
paralysed, and may even die.

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 99

Hallucinations and visions result from injuries inflicted
on the plastic mediator, and from its local paralysis. Some-
times it ceases to radiate, and substitutes, as it were, con-
densed images for the realities revealed by light ; sometimes
its radiation is excessive, and it condenses without about
some fortuitous and irregular centre, as the blood does in
fleshly excrescences; then the chimeras of the brain take
shape, and seemingly assume a soul, we appear to our-
selves either radiant or deformed, according to the ideal of
our desires or fears. Hallucinations, being dreams of
waking persons, always suppose a state analogous to som-
nambulism, but, on the contrary, somnambulism is sleep
borrowing phenomena from the waking state; hallucina-
tion is the waking state still subject in part to the astral
intoxication of sleep.

Our fluidic bodies attract and repel one another, accord-
ing to laws conformed to those of electricity. It is this
which produces instinctive sympathies and antipathies.
They are thus equilibriated by each other, and this is why
hallucinations are frequently contagious ; abnormal projec-
tions change the direction of luminous currents; the ner-
vous excitement of a diseased person takes possession of
the most sensitive natures about it, a circle of illusions is
established, and a whole crowd is easily drawn away
after it.

The fluidic body can be dissolved or coagulated by the
volition of the soul acting on the Astral Light of which it
is formed. It reacts on the nervous system, and thus pro-
duces the motions of the physical body. This light can
indefinitely dilate and communicate its images to consider-
able distances ; it magnetizes objects which are subject to
the action of man, and by contracting can draw them
towards him. It can assume all forms evoked by thought,
and, in those fleeting coagulations of its radiating part
which have been already referred to, can appear before the
eyes and even offer a species of resistance to the touch. But
these manifestations and exercises of the plastic mediator
being abnormal, that luminous instrument of precision can-
not produce them without being distorted, and they neces-
sarily cause either permanent hallucination or madness.

The fluidic body, subject, like the mass of the Astral
Light, to two opposite movements, attractive on the left
and repulsive on the right, or reciprocally, in the two sexes,

100 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

produces within us the struggle of opposite tendencies, and
contributes to anxieties of conscience; frequently, it is
influenced by the reflections of other spirits, and thus are
produced either temptations or subtle and unexpected
graces. This is the explanation of the traditional doctrine
of two angels who aid and try us. The two forces of the
Astral Light may be represented by a balance, wherein our
good intentions for the triumph of justice and the emancipa-
tion of our liberty are poised.

The astral body is not invariably of the same sex as the
physical, that is to say, that the proportions of the two
forces often seem to contradict the visible organisation ; it
is this which produces the apparent errors of human
passions, and which explains, without in any way justify-
ing them from a moral point of view, the amorous eccen-
tricities of Anacreon or Sappho.

The sidereal body, when disengaging itself at death,
attracts and long preserves, by the sympathy of homo-
geneous things, the reflections of the past life. If a powerful
sympathetic will can draw it into a particular current,
it is manifested naturally, for nothing is more natural
than prodigies. Thus apparitions are produced. But we
shall develop this point more completely in the chapter
devoted to necromancy.

III.—UNITY AND SOLIDARITY OF SPIRITS.

ACCORDING to the Kabbalists, God creates eternally the
great Adam, the universal and perfect man, who contains
in a single spirit all spirits and all souls. Intelligences
therefore live two lives at once, one general, which is
common to them all, and the other special and individual.
Solidarity and reversibility among spirits depend therefore
on their living really in one another, all being illuminated
by the radiance of the one, all afflicted by the darkness of
the one.

The great Adam was represented by the tree of life,
which extends above and below the earth by roots and
branches ; the trunk is humanity at large, the various races
are the branches, and the innumerable individuals are the

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. IOI

leaves. Each leaf has its own form, its special life, and its
share of the sap, but it lives by means of the branch alone,
as the life of the branch itself depends on the trunk. The
wicked are the dry leaves and dead bark of the tree. They
fall, decay, and are transformed into manure, which returns
to the tree through the roots. |

The Kabbalists also compare the wicked, or reprobate,
to the excrement of the great body of humanity. These
excretions serve as manure to the earth, which brings forth
fruits to nourish the body; thus death returns always to
life, and evil itself serves for the renewal and nourishment
of good. Death thus has no existence, and man never
departs from the universal life. Those whom we call dead
still survive in us, and we subsist in them; they are on the
earth because we are here, and we are in heaven because
they are located there.

The more we live in others, the less need we fear to die.
Our life, after death, is prolonged on earth in those we
love, and we draw on heaven to give them tranquillity and
peace. The communion of spirits in heaven with earth,
and on earth with heaven, is accomplished naturally, with-
out disturbance and without prodigies; universal intelligence
is like the sun’s light, which falls at once on all the planets,
and which the planets reflect to illuminate one another in
the night.

The saints and angels have no need of words, nor of
any sound, to make themselves understood ; they think in
our thoughts and they love in our hearts. The good which
they have not had the opportunity to accomplish they
suggest to us, and we perform it for them; they enjoy it
in us, and we share its recompense with them, for spiritual
rewards increase in proportion as they are shared, and
what we give to another we double for ourselves.

The saints suffer and toil in us, and their perfect happi-
ness will not be attained till the whole of humanity shall
be happy, for they are a part of that indivisible humanity
which in heaven, has a radiant and smiling face, on earth
a toiling and suffering body, while in hell, which for sages
is but a purgatory, it has fettered and burning feet. We
are all members of one body, and the man who endeavours
to supplant and destroy another man is like the right hand
seeking to cut off the left through jealousy. He who kills
another slays himself, he who steals from another defrauds

TO2 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

himself, he who wounds another maims himself, for others
exist in us and we in them.

The rich weary themselves, detest each other, and turn
in disgust from life, their wealth itself tortures and burdens
them, because there are poor in want of bread. The weari-
ness of the rich is the distress of the poor, who suffer in
their persons. God exercises His justice by the medium
of Nature and His mercy by the mediation of His elect.
If you thrust your hand into the fire, Nature will burn you
without pity, but a charitable man can dress and soothe the
burn. Law is inflexible, but charity is unlimited. Law
damns, but charity pardons, The gulf of itself will never
disgorge its prey, but a rope can be let down to him who
thas allowed himself to fall therein.

IV.—THE GREAT ARCANUM OF DEATH, OR
SPIRITUAL TRANSITION.

WE are saddened, frequently, by remembering that the
most beautiful life must end, and the approach of that
terrible unknown called death embitters the joys of exist-
ence. Why are we born if existence must be so brief?
Why bring up children, who must die, with so much care?
This is what human ignorance asks in its most frequent
and sorrowful doubts. This also is what the human embryo
might vaguely demand at the approach of that birth which
is about to usher it into an unknown world by despoiling
it of its conserving envelope. In studying the mystery of
birth, we shall find the key to the great secret of death.
Cast by the laws of Nature into the womb of a woman,
the incarnated spirit slowly wakes therein, and laboriously
creates for itself those organs which will be indispensable
later on, but which in proportion to their growth increase
its inconvenience in its present situation. The most bliss-
ful period in the embryo’s life is that when, under the simple
chrysalid form, it weaves about it the membrane which
serves it as an asylum, and floats with it in a nourishing
and preserving fluid. Then it is free and impassible, it
shares in the universal life, and receives the impression
of the memories of Nature which later on will determine

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 103

the configuration of its body, and the individuality of its
appearance. This happy age may be called the childhood
of the embryo.

Its adolescence follows, the human form becomes distinct
and the sex is determined ; a motion takes place in the
maternal egg, which is like the vague yearnings of the
period which succeeds childhood. The placenta which is
the exterior but real body of the foetus, feels something un-
known germinating within it and which tends already
towards escape by breaking through it. The child at this
time enters more distinctly into the dream life. Its brain,
inverted as if it were a mirror of the mother’s, reproduces the
imaginations of the latter so forcibly, that it communicates
their form to its own members. The mother is then for it
what God is for us, an unknown, invisible Providence, towards
which it aspires, even to the identification of itself with all
that she desires. It depends on her, lives by her, but sees
her not, it cannot even understand her, and could it philo-
sophise it might possibly deny the personal existence and
intelligence of that being, who for it is as yet only a
necessary prison and a preserving environment. Little by
little, however, this slavery troubles it, it grows restless,
suffers, worries, and feels that its life is ending. An hour
of anguish and convulsion comes, its bonds drop off, it feels
itself sliding into the gulf of the unknown. This comes to
pass, a painful sensation contracts it, it heaves a final sob,
which changes into a first cry—it is dead to the embryonic
life, it is born into human life! ~ | j
_ In the embryonic period it seemed to it that the placenta
was its body, and it was actually its special embryonic body,
useless in another stage and rejected as refuse at the moment
of birth. Our body in human life is like a second envelope
which is useless to the third life, and for this reason wé
reject it at the moment of our second birth. Human life
compared with the celestial is truly embryonic.” When
evil passions destroy us, Nature has a miscarriage, and we
are born prematurely into eternity and are exposed to that
terrible dissolution which St John calls the second death”
" According to the constant traditions of ecstatics, the abor-
tions of human life remain floating in the terrestrial atmos-
phere, above which they cannot rise, and which little by little
absorbs and drowns them. They possess a human form, but
it is always imperfect and mutilated; to one a hand is

104 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC,

wanting, to another an arm, this one has already but the
trunk remaining, that is only a ghastly revolving head.
What prevents them from ascending heavenward is a
wound received during earthly life,a moral injury which
has resulted in a physical deformity, and by this wound
little by little their whole nature ebbs away. The im-
mortal soul will soon be left naked, and to conceal its
shame, by manufacturing at all costs a new vestment, it
will be obliged to wade through the exterior darkness and
slowly traverse the dead sea, that is, the still and sleeping
waters of the primeval chaos. ,

These wounded souls are the larve of the second em-
bryotic state, they nourish their zrial bodies with the
vapour of spilt blood and fear the points of swords. They
frequently attach themselves to vicious men and share their
life, as the embryo lives in the mother’s womb; they can
assume the most horrible forms, and it is these who appear
in the guise of demons to the miserable performers of the
nameless works of black magic. These larve fear the
light, above all the light of. spirits. A ray of intelligence
is sufficient to overwhelm and precipitate them into that
dead sea which must not be confounded with the asphaltite
lake of Palestine.

All that we here unfold belongs to the hypothetical
tradition of seers, and can only be affirmed before science
in the name of that exceptional philosophy which Para-
celsus terms the philosophy of sagacity—phzlosophia sagax.
Those Kabbalists who speak of the world of spirits have
simply narrated their intuitions in what they call the Light
of Glory. Let us expose still further the teachings of these
masters.

We read in the Hebrew book, De Revolutionibus Anti-
marum, that there are souls of three kinds—the daughters
of Adam, the daughters of angels, and the daughters of
sin. There are also, according to the same work, three
kinds of spirits—imprisoned spirits, wandering spirits, and
free spirits. Souls are sent forth in couples ; nevertheless
there are some who are born widowed, and whose brides
are held captive by Lilith and by Naémah, the queens of the
vampires: these are souls who have to expiate the temerity
of celibate vows. Thus, when a man renounces from
infancy the love of women, he enslaves the bride who was
destined for him to the fiends of debauch. Souls grow

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. IO5
and multiply their species in heaven as physical beings do
= earth. Immaculate souls are the daughters of angels’

isses.

When the soul is separated from the body, it necessarily
changes its environment, since it changes its envelope.
The individual falls into his final sleep, and lapses into a
species of dream before awaking on the other side of life.
Each one then beholds, in a sweet vision or in an appalling
nightmare, the paradise or perdition he believed in during
his mortal existence. Those who are subject to nightmare
can form some conception of the horror of the infernal
visions which are the chastisement of an atrocious creed,
and which take hold of the superstitiously credulous and
the ascetically fanatical above all. Imagination has created
its own tormentors, and in the delirium which follows .
death these monsters confront the soul with a frightful
reality, surround, attack, and tear it to pieces, seeking to
devour it in every way. The sage, on the contrary, is wel-
comed by pleasing visions; he imagines that he beholds
his former friends approaching him and smiling. All this,
however, is but a dream, as we have said, and the soul does
not fail to awake from it. Then it has changed its environ-
ment. It has departed this life clothed only in its astral
. form, it ascends of itself above the atmosphere, as the air
rises above the water when it escapes from a broken vial.
The atmospheric air becomes solidified beneath the feet of
its infinitely more ethereal envelope, the weight of which
varies, however, in different persons, and while some can-
not rise above their new earth-plane, others, on the con-
trary, ascend and soar at pleasure in space like the eagle.

But as nothing can enter Heaven save that which comes
from Heaven, the divine spirit must ultimately return alone
into the empyrean,* and thus two corpses are left by it in
the earth and in the atmosphere, the one terrestrial and
elementary, the other aerial and sidereal—the one already
inert, the other still animated by the universal move-
ment of the soul of the world, but destined to die gradually,
being absorbed by the astral energies which produced it.
The terrestrial body is visible, the other is unseen by earthly
eyes in life, and can only be perceived by the application of
the Astral Light to the Translucid, as we have explained
elsewhere.

* See Note 13.

106 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

When a man has lived well, the astral body evaporates
like a pure incense, ascending towards the superior regions ;
but if he have lived in sin, his astral body, which holds him
captive, still seeks the objects of its earthly passions and
endeavours to resume its life. It torments the dreams of
young girls, bathes in the vapour of spilt blood, and hovers
round places where the pleasures of its life elapsed; it still
keeps watch over the treasures it possessed and concealed ;
it exhausts itself in grievous efforts to manufacture material
organs and so live again. But the stars inhale and suck
it up; it feels its understanding diminish, its memory is
slowly lost, all its being dissolves. Its former vices appear
to it, and pursue it under monstrous forms ; they attack and
devour it. The unhappy being thus loses in succession all

. the members which were subservient to its iniquities.

Then it dies for the second and final time, for it forfeits
self-consciousness and memory.

Souls which are destined to live, but which are not yet
completely purified, remain imprisoned in their astral body
for a longer or shorter period, and are burned therein by
the odic light, which strives to assimilate and dissolve them.
It is to liberate themselves from this body that such suffer-
ing souls occasionally obsess the living and abide within them
in a state which the Kabbalists call embryotic. ‘Those also
who have neglected the cultivation of their minds duri
their mortal existence remain after death in a benumbed and
torpid state, full of pains and disquietude ; they recover
their self-consciousness with difficulty, they dwell in dark-
ness and the abyss, unable either to rise or to sink, and in-
capable of corresponding with heaven or earth. They are
gradually drawn from this state by the elect, who instruct
them, console them, and enlighten them; then they are
allowed admission to new trials whose nature is unknown
to us, for it is impossible that the same individual should
be incarnated twice on the same earth.* The leaf once
fallen from the branch can never be regrafted. The aurelia
becomes a butterfly, but the butterfly never returns into the
chrysalis state. Nature shuts the door on all that passes ©
and impels life forward. The same morsel of bread cannot
be twice eaten and digested. Forms pass, thought remains,
and never does it reassume what it has once cast aside.

The Kabbalists compare the spirit to a substance which

* See Note 14.

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 107

remains fluidic in the divine environment, and under the
‘ influence of the essential light, but whose exterior hardens,
like a cortex exposed to the air, in the colder regions of
the rational or of visible forms. These cortices, or petrified
envelopes, are the cause of errors or evil, which belong to
the heaviness or hardness of their animal nature. In
the Book of Sohar, and in that of the Revolution of Souls,
perverse spirits or evil demons are invariably called cortices.

The cortices of the spirit world are transparent, those of
the material are opaque ; bodies are only temporary cortices
from which souls must be liberated ; but those who obey
the flesh in this life create for themselves an interior body,
or fluidic cortex, which becomes their prison and their
torment after death, until the moment when they succeed
in dissolving it in the heat of the divine light, whither their
grossness long prevents them from ascending. They reach
it only after infinite efforts and by the help of the just, who
stretch forth their hands towards them, and during all this
time they are devoured by the internal activity of the cap-
tive spirit as by a fiery furnace. Those who arrive at the
pyre of expiation immolate themselves thereon, like
Hercules on Mount (Eta, and thus are delivered from their
pains, but the courage of the majority fails before this
supreme trial, which seems to them a second death more
appalling than the first, and thus they remain in hell, which
is everlasting by right and in fact, but into which souls are
never precipitated, and in which they are never detained
despite themselves.

The dead cannot return to earth any more than a child
into its mother’s womb. The human soul served, but also
limited, by its organs, cannot place itself in communication
with the objects of the visible world except by means of
these organs. The body is an envelope which is propor-
tional to the material environment in which the soul has
to abide here below. By limiting the scope of the soul, it
concentrates and makes its action possible. In effect, a
soul devoid of body would be everywhere, but everywhere
in so inappreciable a degree that it could act nowhere ; it
would be lost in infinity, absorbed, and as it were, annihil-
ated in God. Imagine a drop of fresh water enclosed in
a globule and thrown into the sea; so long as the globule
remains unbroken the drop of water will preserve its own
nature, but if the globule be destroyed, the drop of water

108 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

must be sought in the vast sea. God in creating spirits
could only endow them with individual self-consciousness
by providing them with an envelope which centralises their
action and prevents it from being dissipated by the very
fact of its limitation. |

After death the soul ascends because its envelope as-
cends, and its activity and consciousness are attached to
its envelope, as we have said.

The Kabbalists formulate in a single axiom all the
doctrine which we have been unfolding here. The spirit,
they say, clothes itself to come down and unclothes itself
togoup. The life of intelligences is wholly ascensional ;
the child in its mother’s womb lives a vegetative life, receiv-
ing its nourishment by means of a cord which is attached
to it, as the tree is attached to the earth and at the same
time is nourished by its root. When the child passes from
the vegetative to the instinctive and animal life, this cord is
broken, and he can walk. When the child becomes a man
he escapes from the bonds of instinct and can act as a
reasonable being. When the man dies, he is freed from
those laws of gravitation which pinned him in life to the
earth. When the soul has expiated its faults, it becomes
strong enough to leave the exterior darkness of the ter-
restrial atmosphere, and to rise up towards the sun. Then
begins the eternal ascent of the holy ladder, for the eternity
of the elect cannot be idle; they progress from virtue to
virtue, from felicity to felicity, from triumph to triumph,
from splendour to splendour. They see God as He is,
that is, everywhere present in the infinite justice of natural
law, in the rectitude which ever triumphs over all that may
bechance, and in the infinite charity which is the com-
munion of the elect. The chain of being, nevertheless,
remains uninterrupted, and those of the highest grade can
still exercise an influence on the lowest, but in accordance
with hierarchic order, and in the same way that a king, by
governing wisely, does good to the least of his subjects.
Bonds of sympathy attach them always to the earth they
have lived on, and on which they are more conscious than
ever of being alive. From series to series prayers ascend and
graces flow down without ever mistaking their path. But
spirits once ascended can descend no more, for in the
measure that they rise, degrees solidify beneath them.
‘“‘ The great chaos is closed,” says Abraham in the parable

~

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 109

of Dives, “and those who are here cannot go lower.”
Extasy may excite the energies of the sidereal body to
such a pitch that it will bear up with it in its transport the
material envelope, which proves that ascent is the soul’s
law. The facts of aérial suspension are possible, but for a
man to live under earth or in water is unheard of.
It would be equally impossible for a soul separated from
its body to remain, even for a single instant, in the heavi-
ness of our atmosphere. Therefore the souls of the dead
are not around us, as the table-turners suppose. Those
whom we love may still see and appear to us, but only by
mirage and reflection in the common mirror of the light.
Moreover, they can no longer interest themselves in mortal
things, and are bound to us only by such of our sentiments
as are sufficiently elevated to bear some conformity or
analogy to their life in eternity.

IV.—HIERARCHY AND CLASSIFICATION OF SPIRITS.

THERE are spirits of exalted species, spirits of inferior
degree, and spirits of a middle rank. Among the highest
we may distinguish those most elevated, those least ele-
vated, and those between the two; it is the same with the
inferior and middle degrees. This division gives us three
classes and nine categories of spirits. This natural hier-
archy of men has created the hypothesis by analogy of the
three ranks and nine choirs of angels, and also by inver-
sion the three circles and nine degrees of hell. We read
as follows in an ancient clavicle of Solomon, translated out
of the Hebrew for the first time :—

“Now will I present to thee the key of the kingdom of
Spirits ; it is the same as that of the mysterious numbers of
Jezirah. Spirits are governed by the natural and universal
hierarchy of things. Three command three by means of
three. Know, however, that the principalities, virtues, and
powers of Heaven are not persons but dignities. They are
the degrees of the holy ladder on which spirits ascend and
descend. Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, and others, are not
names but titles. The first number is one; the first of the
divine conceptions named Sephiroth is Keter or the Crown.

11o MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

The first category of spirits is that of Hajoth Haccadosch,
or the intelligences of the Tetragram whose letters are
represented by the mysterious animals of Ezekiel’s pro-
phecy. Their empire is that of unity and synthesis, and
they correspond to understanding. Their adversaries are
Thamiel or the Two-headed, demons of revolt or anarchy,
whose two chiefs, ever waging war with one another, are
Satan and Moloch.

“The second number is two; the second Sephira is
Chocmah, or Wisdom. The spirits of wisdom are the
Ophanim, a name signifying wheels, because all discharge
functions in heaven like vast wheels studded with stars.
Their empire is that of harmony, and they correspond to
reason. Their adversaries are the Chaigidel, or cortices
which cleave to material and illusory appearances. Their
chief, or rather guide, for evil spirits obey no one, is Beel-
zebub, whose name signifies the God of flies, because flies
swarm round putrefying carcases,

“The third number is three; the third Sephira is
Binah, or Understanding. The spirits of Binah are the
Aralim, or strong ones. Their empire is the creation of
ideas, and they correspond to activity and energy of
thought. Their adversaries are the Satariel, or velatours,
demons of absurdity, intellectual sloth, and mystery. The
chief of the Satariel is Lucifuge, called falsely and anti-
phrastically Lucifer, as the Eumenides, who are the furies,
are called the benevolent goddesses.

“The fourth number is four; the fourth Sephira is
Gedulah or Chesed, magnificence or benignity. The
spirits of Gedulah are the Haschmalim, or lucid ones.
Their empire is that of beneficence, and they correspond
to imagination. Their adversaries are Gamchicoth, or the
disturbers of souls; the leader or guide of these demons is
Astaroth or Astarte, the obscene Venus of the Assyrians,
who is represented with the head of an ass or bull and the
breasts of a woman.

“The fifth number is five; the fifth Sephira is Geburah,
or Justice. The spirits of Geburah are the Seraphim, or
fiery spirits of zeal. Their empire is that of the punish-
ment of crimes. They correspond to the faculty of com-
parison and selection. Their adversaries are the Galab or
incendiaries, genii of wrath and sedition, whose chief is
Asmodeus, who is also called the black Samael.

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. II!

“The sixth number is six. The sixth Sephira is
Tiphereth, Supreme Beauty. The spirits of Tiphereth are
the Malachim or kings, and their empire is that of universal
harmony; they correspond to judgment. Their adver-
saries are the Targaririm or disputatious, whose chief is
Belphegor.

“The seventh number is seven; the seventh Sephira is
Netsah, or Victory. The spirits of Netsah are the Elohim,
or gods, that is, the representatives of God. Their empire
is that of life and progress, and they correspond to the
sensorium, or to sensibility. Their adversaries are the
Harab-Serapel, or death-ravens, whose chief is Baal.

“The eighth number is eight; the eighth Sephira is
Hod, or Eternal Order. The spirits of Hod are the Beni-
Eloim, or sons of the gods. Their empire is that of order,
and they correspond to deep feeling. Their adversaries
are the Samael, or disputatious, whose chief is Adra-
melech.

“The ninth number is nine; the ninth Sephira is Jesod,
or the fundamental basis. The spirits of Jesod are the
Cherubim, or angels which fructify the earth, and who are .
represented in Hebrew symbolism under the figure of
bulls. Their empire is that of productiveness, and they
correspond to correct ideas. Their adversaries are the
Gamaliel or obscene, whose queen, Lilith, is the demon of
abortions.

“The tenth number is ten; the tenth Sephira is Mal-
chuth, or the realm of forms. The spirits of Malchuth are
the Ischim or virile, who are the souls of the saints, whose
chief is Moses. Their adversaries are the wicked, who
obey Nahema, the demon of impurity. The wicked are re-
presented by the five accursed nations which Joshua had
to exterminate. Johsua or Jehoshua the saviour is a type
of the Messiah. His name is composed of the letters of the
divine Tetragram changed into the Pentagram by the
addition of the letter Schin—mym. Each letter of this
Pentagram represents a faculty of goodness assailed by
one of the five accursed nations, For the actual history of
God’s people is the allegorical legend of humanity. The
five accursed nations are the Amalekites or aggressors, the
Geburim or violent, the Raphaim or poltroons, the Nephi-
lim or voluptuous, and the Anakim or anarchists. The
Anakim are conquered by the god which is the paternal

II2 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

sceptre ; the violent are conquered by the He, which is
maternal mildness ; the cowardly are conquered by the
Vau which is the sword of Michael, and generation by
labour and suffering ; the voluptuous are vanished by the
second He, which is the painful child-bearing of the mother.
The aggressive, finally, are conquered by the Schin, which
is the fire of the Saviour and the equilibriating law of
justice.

“ The princes of perverse spirits are the false gods which
they adore. Hell has, therefore, no other government than
the blind law which punishes perversity and corrects error,
for false gods exist only in the false opinion of their. wor-
shippers. Baal, Belphegor, Moloch, Adramelek were idols
of the Assyrians—soulless idols long since annihilated, and
whose names alone remain. The true God has conquered
all these demons, as truth triumphs over error. This has
taken place in men’s opinions, and the wars waged by
Michael against Satan are emblems of the evolution and
progress of minds. The devil is ever a refuse god. The
idolatries of to-day were religions in the past ; superannu-
ated idolatries are superstitions and sacrileges. The pan-
theon of fashionable phantoms is the heaven of the ignorant.
The sewer of phantoms with which even folly desires ‘no
further connection is hell. But all this exists only in the
imagination of the crowd. Heaven for the wise is the
Supreme Reason, as hell is foolishness. Here it will be
seen that we make use of the word heaven in the mystical
sense which is attributed to it by contrasting it with the
word hell. To evoke phantoms we need only get drunk
or go mad. Spectres are the families of intoxication and
vertigo. The phosphorescence of the imagination, aban-
doned to all the vagaries of over-excited and diseased
nerves, swarms with the monstrosities of absurd visions.
Hallucination may also be attained by the confusion of
sleeping and waking through the graduated use of stimu-
lants and narcotics; but such works are crimes against
nature. Wisdom dispels phantoms and enables us to com-
municate with superior intelligences by the contemplation
of natural laws and the study of sacred numbers,”

Here King Solomon addresses his son Roboam :—

“ Remember, my son, that the fear of Adonai is only the
beginning of wisdom. Maintain and preserve those who
are devoid of understanding in the fear of Adonai which

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 113

will give and ensure thee my crown. But learn thyself to
triumph over fear by wisdom, and spirits wall come down
out of heaven to serve thee. I, Solomon, thy father, King
of Israel and Palmyra, have sought and obtained for my
portion the holy Chocmah, which is the wisdom of Adonai.
And I have become the king of spirits both of heaven and
earth, the master of the powers of the air and the living
souls in the sea, because I possessed the key of the secret
Gates of Light. I have accomplished sublime things by
the power of the Schema Hamphorasch, and by the thirty-
two paths of Jezirah. Number, weight, and measure deter-
mine all forms; the substance is single, and God eternally
creates it. Blessed is he who comprehendeth letters and
numbers. Letters are numbers, numbers notions, notions
powers, and powers are the Elohim. The synthesis of the
Elohim is the Schema. The Schema is one, its pillars are
two, its power is three, its shape four, its reflection gives
eight, which, multiplied by three, will produce the twenty-
four thrones of wisdom. A three-gemmed crown is laid on
each throne, each gem bears a name, each name represents
an absolute idea. There are seventy-two names on the
twenty-four crowns of the Schema.

“Thou shalt write these names on thirty-six talismans,
two on each talisman, one on each side. Thou shalt divide
these talismans into four series of nine each, according to
the number of the letters of the Schema. On the first
series thou shalt engrave the letter Jod represented by the
Blossoming Rod of Aaron, on the second the letter He,
represented by the cup of Joseph, on the third the Vau,
represented by the sword of David my father; and on the
fourth the final He, represented by the golden shekel.
The thirty-six talismans shall be a book containing all
natural secrets, and angels and demons shall speak to thee
in its diverse combinations.”

VI.—FLUIDIC PHANTOMS AND THEIR MYSTERIES.

PARACELSUS* tells us that the vital fluid emitted in dreams

or regularly by the celibates of both sexes peoples the air

with phantoms. We assume that we are here indicating
* See Note 15.

H

114 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC,

with sufficient perspicuity, after the manner of the masters,
the supposititious origin of these larve and that additional
details are unneeded. These larvz possess an zrial body
formed from the steam of blood. For this reason they
seek out spilt blood, and were formerly nourished by the
smoke of sacrifices. They are the monstrous offspring of
impure nightmares once known as incubi and _ succubi.
When sufficiently condensed to be visible, they are a mere
vapour tinged by the reflection of an image; they have no
individual life, but they imitate the life of those who evoke
them, as the shadow imitates the body. They are not
spirits, for they are mortal. They are a kind of animated
mirage, imperfect emanations of human life. The tradi-
tions of black magic represent them as the offspring of the
celibacy of Adam; all these notions are so ancient that we
find traces of them in Hesiod, who expressly forbids linen
stained by any defilement to be dried before fire.

Persons obsessed by phantoms are usually inflamed by
an over-rigorous abstinence or weakened by the excesses
of debauch. Such larvez are above all produced round
idiots and beings devoid of morality whose isolation
abandons them to irregular habits. The ancients de-
signated them under different names—larve, lemures, &c.
They are the abortions of the vital light, plastic mediators
devoid of body and soul, born of mental excesses and
physical derangements. The cohesion of the parts of their
fantastic organisms is so feeble that they fear a strong
wind, large fires, and above all the points of swords. They
become in a certain sense the vaporous appendices of the
real bodies of their parents, for they live only by the life of
those who have created or those who have appropriated
them by evocation, so that if their semblance of bodies be
wounded, the father may be really hurt, as the unborn
child is actually disfigured by the imaginations of its
mother. The whole world is full of phenomena which
justify these extraordinary revelations and which cannot
be otherwise explained.

These larve attract to themselves the vital heat of
portly persons, and rapidly exhaust weak ones. Thence
come the histories of vampires, which are terribly real and
periodically established beyond doubt, as indeed is well
known. It is for this reason that on the approach of
mediums, that is, of persons obsessed by larvz, a coldness
is felt in the air.

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. TI5

These roving mediators can be attracted by certain
diseased persons who are in fatal sympathy with them, and
who lend them a more or less durable existence. They
then serve as supplementary instruments of the wills of
these people, never however for their cure, but invariably
to mislead and hallucinate them further.

If physical embryos have the faculty of assuming the
forms impressed on them by the mother’s imagination, still
more are these wandering fluidic phantoms prodigiously
variable, and transformable with astonishing facility. Their
tendency to create themselves a body in order to attract a
soul causes them to condense and naturally assimilate the
corporeal molecules which float in the atmosphere. Thus,
in coagulating the vapour of blood they reproduce blood,
that blood which frenzied hallucinés behold flowing from
pictures or statues. But it is not the hallucinated alone who
see it. Vintras and Rose Tamisier are neither impostors
nor people who are subject to vertigo; blood really flows,
doctors examine and analyse it, it is true, human blood,
and whence comes it? Can it form spontaneously in the
atmosphere? Can it issue naturally from marble, from an
oil painting, or from a Host? Certainly not; this blood
has circulated in veins, then has been spilt, evaporated, and
dried up; the serum has become vapour, the globules impal-
pable dust, the whole has floated and hovered in the air, and
has then been drawn into the current of a specified electro-
magnetism. The serum has again become liquid, it has
reassumed and imbibed new globules, which have been
coloured by the Astral Light, and blood has flown. Pho-
tography has abundantly proved that images are real
modifications of light. Now, there exists an accidental
and fortuitous photography which produces from the wan-
dering mirages in the atmosphere, durable impressions on
the leaves of trees, on their wood, and even in the heart of
stones : it is thus those natural figures'are found to which
Gaffarel has consecrated several pages in his book on
“‘Unheard of Curiosities,” those stones to which secret
virtue is attributed, and which are called gamahés; thus
are traced those writings and drawings which so highly
astonish the observers of fluidic phenomena. They are
astral photographs, traced by the imagination of mediums
with or without the concurrence of fluidic larve.

The existence of these larvz has been demonstrated to us

116 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

in a decisive manner by an exceedingly curious experience.
Several persons, in order to test the magic power of Home,
the American, requested him to evoke relatives whom they
pretended to have lost, but who really had never existed.
The spectres did not fail to respond to the appeal, and the
phenomena which commonly followed the evocation of the
medium were fully manifested. This experience alone
suffices to convict those who believe in the intervention of
spirits in these strange phenomena of lamentable credulity
and formal error. In order for the dead to return, it is
before all things imperative that they should have existed,
and demons would not be so easily made the dupes of our
mystifications.

Like all Catholics, we believe in the existence of spirits
of darkness, but we know also that Divine Power has made
darkness their eternal prison, and that the Redeemer be-
held Satan fall from Heaven like a thunderbolt. If demons
tempt us, it is by the wilful complicity of our own bad
passions ; they are not permitted to insult God’s empire
and disturb the eternal order of Nature by useless and
foolish manifestations.

Diabolical characters and signatures produced uncon-
sciously by mediums are evidently no proof either of a tacit
or formal compact between these diseased persons and the
intelligences of the abyss. Such signs have served in all
times to represent the astral vertigo, and have remained in
the mirage state among the reflections of the misguided
light. Nature has also her reminiscences and sends us the
same signs @ propos of the same ideas. In all this there is
nothing supernatural or infernal.

“ How can you expect me to admit,” the Abbé Charvoz,
the first convert of Vintras, said to us, “that Satan would
dare impress his hideous stigmata on the consecrated
species which have become the very body of Christ?”
We declared at once that it would be equally impossible
for us to pronounce in favour of so horrible a blasphemy,
but, nevertheless, the signs printed in characters of blood
on the Hosts of Vintras, consecrated regularly by Charvoz,
were those which in black magic are absolutely recognized
as the signatures of demons.

Astral writings are often ridiculous or obscene. The
pretended spirits, questioned on the greatest mysteries of
Nature, frequently reply by a coarse expression, once

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 117

heroic in the military mouth of Cambronne. The designs
traced by pencils left to themselves often reproduce those
ill-formed priapuses which the pél/e voyou, to borrow the
picturesque expression of Auguste Barbier, sketches, as he
whistles, along the great walls of Paris, fresh proof of what
we have advanced, that is, that mind in no way presides
over these manifestations, and that it would be above all a
sovereign absurdity to recognise the intervention of dis-
embodied souls.

The Jesuit, Paul Saufidius, who has written on the manners
and customs of the Japanese, narrates a very remarkable
anecdote. A troup of Japanese pilgrims, when crossing a
desert, one day beheld a band of spectres whose number
was equal to that of the pilgrims, and who walked at the
same pace. These spectres, at first undefined and like
larvz, assumed as they approached all the semblance of the
human form. They soon encountered the pilgrims, and
mingled with them, gliding in silence between their ranks ;
then the Japanese saw themselves duplicated, each phantom
having become the perfect image and, as it were, mirage of
each pilgrim. The affrighted people cast themselves pro-
strate on the ground, and the bonze who conducted them
fell to praying for them with great contortions and great
cries. When the pilgrims ventured to rise, the apparitions
had disappeared, and the pious band could continue its
journey freely. This phenomenon, whose actuality we do
not call in question, presents t!:e two-fold character of a
mirage and a sudden prejc.cion of astral larve, occasioned
by the heat of the atmosphere and the exhaustion of the
pilgrims.

Doctor Brierre de Boismont, in his curious work on
“ Hallucinations,” narrates that a perfectly sensible man,
who had never been subject to visions, was one morning
tormented by a most insupportable nightmare. He beheld
in his room a monstrous ape, horrible to see, who ground
his teeth at him and made the most frightful contortions.
He woke with a start, it was broad day, he sprang out of
bed, and was terrified at finding the frightful object of his
dream actually present before him, perfectly resembling
that of the nightmare, equally grotesque, equally alarming,
and making the same grimaces. The person in question
could not credit his eyes ; he remained motionless for half-
an-hour, watching this singular phenomenon and wondering

118 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

whether he was in a high fever or insane. He at length
approached the fantastic animal to tcuch it, and the appar!-
tion vanished.

Cornelius Gemma, in his “Critical Universal History,”
tells us that in the year 454, in the Island of Candia, the
phantom of Moses appeared to the Jews on the sea coast,
and invited them to follow him, pointing with his finger
towards the horizon in the direction of the Holy Land.
He had his luminous horns on his forehead and his wand
in his hand. The news of this prodigy spreads, and
the Israelites in a crowd rush towards the coast. All
saw or pretended to see the marvellous apparition; they
numbered twenty thousand, says the chronicler, whom
we suspect of a slight exaggeration in this respect.
Their heads are turned at once, imaginations are excited,
they expect a more glorious miracle than was formerly the
passage of the Red Sea; they form in a serried column and
direct their course towards the water ; those behind push
those in front with frenzied eagerness ; they believe them-
selves to perceive the pretended Moses walking on the water.
A terrible disaster resulted, for nearly all this multitude
sank, and the hallucination was extinguished only with the
life of the majority of the unhappy visionaries.

Human thought creates what it imagines ; the phantoms

: "Of “suprsatition project their real deformity in the Astral
Light and live Sv.the very terrors they produce. They owe
their being to the delusiors of imagination and to the aberra-
tion of the senses, and are never Droduced in the presence
of any one who knows and can expose the mystery of their
monstrous birth.

VII.—ELEMENTARY SPIRITS AND THE RITUAL OF
THEIR CONJURATION,

THE material elements, analogous to the divine elements, are
popularly classified as four, are explained as two, and really
exist as three. The magical elements are in alchemy salt,
mercury, sulphur, and azoth; in the Kabbalah, the Macro.
prosopus, the Microprosopus, and the two Mothers ; in sym-
bolism, the man, eagle, lion, and bull ; in old physics, accord-
ing to common notions and nomenclature, air, water, earth,

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 119

and fire. But in magical science the water is no ordinary
water, the fire is not merely fire, &c. These expressions
conceal a more exalted meaning. The primitive substance
is the only simple one; there is, therefore, but one material
element, and this is invariably manifested in tetradic phases.
Air and earth represent the male principle, fire and water
are connected with the female. To these four elementary
forms correspond the four following philosophical con-
ceptions :—

Mind,
Matter,
Motion,
Rest.

All science consists actually in the comprehension of
these four things which alchemy has reduced to three.

The Absolute,
The Fixed,
The Volatile,

and which the Kabbalah connects with the essential idea of
God, who is absolute reason, necessity, and liberty, a triadic
notion expressed in the secret books of the Jews.

The Astral Light is the physical soul of the four elements,
which are the four polar forces of the universal magnet,
and are represented in symbolism by the Cross. The; are
the expression of two fundamental laws, resistance and
motion. The beginning of the comprehension of the
magnum opus is that of the four philosophic elements, which
are primarily intellectual, for they are designated and
realised by the Logos, the supreme formulation of reason.
‘The water of the philosophers is the divisible substance, and
the force also which divides and dissolves it ; it corresponds
to the Kabbalistic woman. The philosophic earth is the
quotient which coagulates on issuing from the divisor.
Fire is movement ; it is to water as one is to three, and it
corresponds to the serpent. Air is the matrix of fire, it is
to earth as a half is to eight.

The symbolic tetrad represented in the mysteries of
Memphis and Thebes by the four-fold sphinx corresponded
to the four elements. The chalice held by the man, or
aquarius, corresponded to water; air was represented by
the circle, or nimbus, which surrounds the head of the

120 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC,

celestial eagle ; fire by the wood which feeds it, by the tree
which is fructified with the heat of the sun and earth, and
by the royal sceptre symbolized in the lion; earth is repre-
sented by the sword of Mithra, who annually immolates
the sacred bull, and mingles its blood with the sap which
fills all earthly fruits.

The four elementary forms roughly divide and specialise
the created spirits which the universal movement dis-
engages from the central fire. In fact, created spirits,
being called to emancipation through trials, are placed
from their birth between these four forces, and it is in their
power to declare for good or evil, to choose life or death.
To find the fixed point, that is, the moral centre of the
Cross, is the first problem they are set to solve, and their
first conquest is that of their individual liberty. They
begin, therefore, by being drawn some towards the north,
others towards the south, some towards the right, others
towards the left, and so long as they are not free agents,
they cannot have the use of reason, nor can they be
incarnated except in animal forms. These unemancipated
spirits, the slaves of the four elements, are what the
Kabbalists call elementary demons, or occult elements,
and they people those elements which correspond to their
condition of servitude. Sylphs, undines, gnomes, and sala-
manders, therefore, really exist, some wandering and seek-
iny ~“s<carnation, others incarnate and living on the earth.
These are vicious and imperfect men.*

The Astral Light is saturated with souls, which it
releases, as we have said, in the incessant generation of
existences, and whose imperfect wills can be dominated
and employed by stronger ones, thus forming vast invisible
chains which may occasion or determine great elementary
commotions. The phenomena established in trials for
sorcery have no other causes. The elementary spirits are
like children, they torment those who concern themselves
about them, unless at any rate they are governed by a
lofty reason and excessive severity. It is these who
frequently. occasion our disturbing or fantastic dreams,
who produce the movements of the divining rod, and the
raps on our walls and furniture; but they can never mani-
fest thoughts other than our own, and if we are not thinking
at all, they address us with all the incoherence of dreams.

* See Note 16.

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. I21

They reproduce good and evil indifferently, because they
are devoid of free will, and are consequently irresponsible
agents ; they appear to ecstatics and somnambulists under
imperfect and fleeting forms, occasioning the nightmares of
St Anthony, and probably the visions of Swedenborg ;
they are neither damned nor guilty, they are innocent and
curious, and as they may be used or abused like children
or animals, the magus who employs their services assumes
a terrible responsibility, for he must expiate in his own
person all the evil he has caused them to perform, and
the magnitude of his torments will be proportioned to the
extent of the power which he has exercised by their
mediation.

To rule the elementary spirits, and become thus the
_ king of the occult elements, the four trials of antique

initiation must be undergone; and, as these initiations exist
no longer, they must be supplied by analogous actions,
as, for instance, by exposing oneself fearlessly in a burning
house, by crossing a precipice on a plank or the trunk of
a tree; by climbing a perpendicular mountain during
a storm; by vigorously swimming out from a cascade or
dangerous whirlpool. He who is afraid of the water will
never reign over the undines; he who shrinks from the
flames will never command salamanders; let him who is
subject to giddiness leave the sylphs in peace, and forbear
from irritating the gnomes, for inferior spirits will obey no
power which has not been proved their master in their own
individual element. * |

When courage and perseverance have acquired this
incontestible power, the Logos of will-force must be im-
posed on the elements by particular consecrations of the
air, fire, water, and earth, and this is the indispensable
beginning of all magical operations. The air is exorcised
by blowing towards the four cardinal points, and saying :—

Spiritus Dei ferebatur super aquas, et inspiravit in faciem
hominis spiraculum vite. Sit Michael dux meus et Sabta-
biel servus meus, in luce et per lucem. Fiat verbum halitus
meus; et imperabo spiritibus zris hujus, et refrenabo.
equos solis voluntate cordis mei, et cogitatione mentis
mez, et nutu oculi dextri. Exorciso te, creatura zris,
_per Pentagrammaton et in nomine Tetragrammaton, in
quibus sunt voluntas firma at fides recta. Amen. Sela,
fiat.

122 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

The sylphide prayer must be then recited after tracing
their sign in the air with an eagle’s quill.

Prayer for the Sylphs.

Spirit of Light, Spirit of Wisdom, thou whose breath
imparts and recalls the shape of every object ; thou before
whom the life of all creatures is a shadow which trans-
forms, and a vapour which passes away; thou who sittest
upon the clouds and fliest on the wings of the wind; thou
whose outbreathing peoples the limitless immensity ; thou
whose inbreathing draws back within thee all that eman-
ated from thee, unending movement in the everlasting
stability, be thou blessed for ever! We praise thee and
bless thee in the inconstant empire of the created light, of
shadows, reflections, and images, and we aspire without
ceasing towards thine immutable and imperishable splen-
dour. May the beam of thine intelligence and the warmth
of thy love come down on us; then shall the unsteady be
established, the shadow be substance, the spirit of the air
shall receive a soul, and dream be thought! No more
shall we be swept away by the tempest, but shall bind with
the bridle the winged steeds of the morning, and direct
the course of the evening winds, that we may fly away
and come into thy presence! O Spirit of spirits, O ever-
lasting Soul of souls, O Imperishable Breath of Life,
creative sigh, mouth which dost breathe forth and draw in
the life of all beings in the ebb and flow of thine eternal
speech, which is the divine sea of motion. and truth!
Amen.

Water is exorcised by the laying on of hands, by breath,
and by speech, mixing consecrated salt with a little of the
ash which is left in the incense pan. The aspergillus is
made of branches of vervain, periwinkle, sage, mint, ash,
and basil, tied by a thread taken from a virgin’s distaff,
with a handle of hazelwood which has not yet borne fruit,
and on which the characters of the seven spirits must be
graved with the magic awl. The salt and ashes of the
incense must be separately consecrated by saying—

Over the Salt.

In isto sale sit sapientia, et ab omni corruptione servet
mentes nostras et corpora nostra, per Hochmaél et in
virtute Ruach-Hochmaél, recedant ab isto fantasmata hylez

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 123

ut sit sal ccelestis, sal terre, et terra salis, ut nutrietur bos
triturans et addat spei nostrae cournua tauri volantis.
Amen.

Over the Ash:

Revertatur cinis ad fontem aquarum viventium, et fiat
terra fructificans, et germinet arborem vite per tria
nomina, quz sunt Netsah, Hod, et Jesod, in principio et in
Pi per Alpha et Omega qui sunt in spiritu AZOTH.

men.

In mingling the Water, Salt, and Ash.

In sale sapientiz zternz, et in aqua regenerationis, et in
cinere germinante terram novam, omnia fiant per Eloim
Gabriel, Raphael, et Uriel, in szecula et zonas. Amen.

Exorcism of the Water.

Fiat firmamentum in medio aquarum et separet aquas
ab aquis, que superius sicut que inferius, et que inferius
sicut que superius, ad perpetranda miracula rei unius.
Sol ejus pater est, luna mater, et ventus hanc gestavit in
utero suo, ascendit a terra ad ccelum et rursus a ccelo in
terram descendit. Exorciso te, creatura aque, ut sis mihi
speculum Dei vivi in operibus ejus, et fons vite, et ablutio
peccatorum. Amen.

Prayer of the Undines.

Terrible King of the Sea, thou who bearest the keys of
the floodgates of heaven, and dost imprison the waters of
the under world in their earthy caverns; King of the
deluge and of the floods of the springtime; thou who
unsealest the sources of the streams and fountains ; thou
who commandest the moisture, which is like the blood of
earth, to become the sap of plants, we adore and invoke
thee! Speak unto us in the great tumult of the sea, and
we shall tremble before thee ; speak also in the ripple of
limpid waters, and we shall long for thy love! O Immensity,
wherein all rivers of life are lost, and which are always re-
born in thee! Ocean of infinite perfections, height which
reflects itself in the depth, depth which projects itself on
the height, lead us to true life by love and intelligence!

124 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

Lead us to immortality by renunciation, that we may be
worthy one day to offer thee water, blood, and tears for the
remission of sins, Amen.

Fire is exorcised by casting salt, incense, white resin,
camphor, and sulphur therein, and pronouncing thrice
the three names of the genii of fire—MICHAEL, king of
the sun and lightning; SAMAEL, king of volcanos; and
ANAEL, king of the Astral Light; then by reciting the
the Prayer of the Salamanders.

Prayer of the Salamanders.

Immortal, everlasting, ineffable, and uncreated Father of
all things, who art borne on the ever-rolling chariot of
worlds revolving unceasingly ; ruler of the ethereal im-
mensities, where the throne of thy power is established,
from whose altitude thine insupportable eyes discern all
things, and thy holy and beautiful ears do hear all things,
listen to thy children, whom thou hast loved before the ages
began; for thy golden, overwhelming, everlasting majesty
shines over the world and over the starry Heaven; thou art
exalted above them, O Glittering Fire, thence thou illu-
minest and dost commune with thyself by thine own
splendour, and there issue from thine essence inexhaustible
streams of life to nourish thine infinite spirit, which itself
doth nourish all things, and is that unfailing storehouse of
substance ever ready for generation, which adapts and
appropriates the forms thou hast impressed on it from
the beginning. From this spirit the three most holy kings
who surround thy throne and form thy court, derive their
immemorial origin, O universal Father! O sole and only
father of beatified immortals and mortals!

Thou hast in particular created powers which are
marvellously similar to Thine own eternal thought, and
Thine adorable essence ; Thou hast made them superior to
the angels who proclaim Thy will to the world; finally, Thou
hast created us third in the rank of our elementary empire.
There our continual occupation is to praise Thee and adore
Thy good pleasure; there we burn unceasingly in our
aspiration to possess Thee. Father, mother, most tender
of all mothers, admirable archetype of chaste love and
maternity! Son, flower of sons! Form of all forms, soul,
spirit, harmony, and number of all things. Amen!

The earth is exorcised by the sprinkling of water, by

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 125

breathing, and by fire, with the perfumes proper to each
day, and the prayer of the gnomes.

The Prayer of the Gnomes.

Invisible King, who hast taken the earth as a support
and hast hollowed its depths to replenish them with Thine
omnipotence! Thou, whose name shaketh the pillars of
heaven, Thou, who causest the seven metals to circulate in
the veins of the earth, monarch of the seven lights, recom-
penser of the subterranean workers, lead us into the desir-
able light, into the realm of splendour! We watch and we
labour unceasingly, we seek and we hope, by the twelve
stones of the Holy City, by the buried talismans, by the
pole of loadstone which passes through the world’s centre.
Saviour, Saviour, Saviour, have pity on those who suffer,
enlarge our hearts, detach our minds, elevate them, ennoble
us. O stability and motion! O day clothed with night!
Master, who never dost retain the wages of thy workers!
O silvered whiteness! O golden splendour! O crown of
living and melodious diamonds! Thou, who wearest the
heavens on thy finger as a sapphire ring, Thou, who con-
cealest beneath the earth, in the stone kingdom, the mira-
culous seed of stars, live, reign, be ever the dispenser of
that wealth whereof Thou hast made us the custodians !

It must be borne in mind that the special kingdom of
the gnomes is at the north, that of the salamanders at the
south, that of the sylphs at the east, and that of the undines
‘ at the west. They influence the four temperaments of
man, that is, the gnomes influence the melancholic, sala-
manders the sanguine, undines the phlegmatic, and sylphs
the bilious. Their signs are—the hieroglyphic of the bull
for the gnomes, who are commanded with the sword ; of
the lion for the salamanders, who are commanded with the
cloven rod, or magical trident ; of the eagle for the sylphs,
who are ruled by holy pantacles; and finally, of the
aquarius for the undines, who are evoked by the cup of
libations. Their respective sovereigns are Gob for the
gnomes, Djin for the salamanders, Paralda for the sylphs,
and Nicksa for the undines.

When an elementary spirit torments, or, at any rate,
troubles the inhabitants of this world, it must be adjured
by air, water, fire, and earth, with breathing, sprinkling,
burning of perfumes, and by tracing on the ground the star

126 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

of Solomon and sacred Pentagram. These figures should
be absolutely correct, and drawn either with the ash of con-
secrated frre, or with a reed soaked in various colours,
mixed with pulverised loadstone. Then, holding the pan-
tacle of Solomon in the hand, and taking up by turns the
sword, rod, and cup, the conjuration of the four should be
repeated in the following terms :—

Caput mortuum, imperet tibi Dominus per vivum et
devotum serpentem. Cherub, imperet tibi Dominus per
Adam Jotchavah! Aquila errans, imperet tibi Dominus
per alas Tauri. Serpens, imperet tibi tetragrammaton per
angelum et leonem! Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, Anael!
FLUAT UDOR per spiritum ELOIM. MANEAT TERRA per
Adam JOT-CHAVAH. FIAT FIRMAMENTUM per J AHUVEHU-
ZEBAOTH. FIAT JUDICIUM per ignem in virtute MICHAEL.

Angel with the blind eyes, obey or pass away with this
holy water. Work, winged bull, or return to earth if thou
wouldst not be pricked with this sword. Fettered eagle,
obey this sign, or retire before my breath. Writhing ser-
pent, crawl at my feet, or be tortured by the sacred fire
and evaporate with the perfumes I am burning. Water,
return to water, fire burn, air circulate, earth return to
earth by the power of the Pentagram, which is the morning
star, and in the name of the Tetragram, which is written in
the centre of the cross of light! Amen.

The sign of the Cross adopted by Christians does not
exclusively belong to them. It is also Kabbalistic, and
represents the oppositions and tetradic equilibrium of the
elements. There were originally two methods of making
it, the one reserved for priests and initiates, the other set
apart for the neophytes and profane. Thus, for example,
the initiate, raising his hand to his forehead, said: “ Thine
is,’ then brought down his hand to his breast, “the king-
dom,” then transferred it to the left shoulder, “justice,”
finally to the right shoulder, “and mercy ;” then joining
his hands, he added, “through the generating ages.” Tibi
sunt Malchut et Geburah et Chesed per aeonas—a sign of
the Cross which is absolutely and splendidly Kabbalistic,
and which the profanations of the Gnosis have entirely lost
to the official and militant church. This sign made in this
manner should precede and terminate the conjuration of
the Four.

To conquer and subjugate the elementary spirits, we

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 127

must never be guilty of the faults which are their charac-
teristics. Never will a capricious and changeable mind be
able to rule the sylphs. Never will a soft, cold, and fickle
disposition be able to govern the undines; anger irritates
the salamanders, and gross covetousness makes those whom
it enslaves the sport and plaything of the gnomes. But we
must be prompt and active, like the sylphs; pliant and
observant as the undines ; energetic and strong, like the sala-
manders; laborious and patient, like the gnomes; in a
word, we must overcome them in their strength without
ever being overcome by their weakness. When he is per-
manently established in this disposition, the whole world
will be at the command of the enlightened thaumaturge.
He will pass through the storm, and no rain will fall on his
head ; the wind will not displace a single fold of his gar-
ments ; he will go through fire and not be burned, he will
walk on the water and discern diamonds through the
opacity of the earth. These promises, which may seem
hyperbolic, are so only to the vulgar mind; for if the
initiate do not materially and literally perform what is
expressed by these words, he will accomplish things which
are far greater and far more admirable.

Why, for example, if it be an established fact that per-
sons in the ecstatic state temporarily lose their gravity,
should it be impossible to walk or glide on the water?
The convulsionaries of St Médard felt neither fire nor steel,
and begged the most violent and incredible tortures as a
relief. The extraordinary ascensions and amazing equili-
brium of certain somnambulists are a revelation of Nature’s
secret forces. But we live in a century wherein no one has
the boldness to acknowledge the miracles they have wit-
nessed ; and if any one should declare that he has beheld,
or performed himself what he narrates, he will be told that
he is joking at the expense of his hearers, or that he is ill.
It is far better to be silent and to act.

The metals which correspond to the four elementary
forms are gold and silver for air, mercury for water, iron
and copper for fire, and lead for earth. Talismans are com-
posed of these relatively to the forces they represent, and to
the effects it is proposed to produce by their means. Divina-
tion by the four elementary forms, called aeromancy, hydro-
mancy, pyromancy, and geomancy, is performed in various
ways, all of which depend on the will and translucid, or

128 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

imagination, of the operator. In fact, the four elements are
merely instruments to assist second sight, which is the
faculty of seeing into the Astral Light, and which is natural
as the first, or sensible and ordinary sight, though it can
operate only by means of the abstraction of the senses.
Somnambulists and ecstatics are naturally gifted with
second sight, but this vision is more lucid when the ab-
straction is more complete. Abstraction is produced by
astral intoxication, that is, by a superabundance of light,
which completely saturates and consequently deadens the
nervous instrument. Sanguine temperaments are more dis-
posed to aeromancy, the choleric to pyromancy, the phleg-
matic to hydromancy, and the hypochondriac to geomancy.
Aeromancy is confirmed by oneiromancy, or divination by
dreams; pyromancy is supplemented by magnetism, hydro-
mancy by crystallomancy, and geomancy by cartomancy.
These are transpositions and improvements of methods.
But divination, in whatsoever manner it be performed, is
dangerous, or, at least, useless, for it weakens will-power,
consequently impedes liberty, and fatigues the nervous
system. .

VIII.—NECROMANCY.

THE Abbé Trithemius, who in magic was the master of
Agrippa, explains in his “ Stenography ” the secret of con-
jurations and evocations in an exceedingly natural and
philosophical manner. To evoke a spirit, he says, is to
enter into the ruling idea of that spirit, and if we rise
morally higher in the same line, we shall draw that spirit
after us and it will serve us. To conjure is to oppose to
an isolated spirit the resistance of a current and of a chain
—cum jurare, that is, to make a collective act of faith.
The greater the power and enthusiasm of this faith, the
more efficacious is the conjuration. We may be alone to
evoke a spirit, but to conjure it we must speak in the name
of a circle or association, and it is this which is represented
by the hieroglyphic circle traced round the Magus while
he is operating, and which he cannot leave without at the
same moment losing all his power.

In virtue of the great magical dogma of the hierarchy

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 129

and of universal analogy, the possibility of real evocations
may be Kabbalistically demonstrated ; as to the phenomenal
reality of the result of magical operations conscientiously
accomplished, it is a question of experience ; in our own
case we have established it, and we place it in the power of
our readers to renew and confirm our experiences.

There are evocations of intelligence, evocations of love,
. and evocations of hatred. There are two kinds of necro-
mancy—the necromancy of light and the necromancy of
darkness, evocation by prayer, pantacle, and perfumes,
and evocation by blood, imprecations, and sacrileges. We
have practised the first only, and we advise no one to
devote themselves to the second. It is certain that the
images of the departed appear to the magnetised persons
who evoke them; it is equally certain that they never
unveil to them any mysteries of the life beyond. They
are beheld just as they would still be in the memory of
persons who have known them. When the evoked spectres
reply to those who address them, it is always by signs, or
by an interior and imaginary impression, never with a
voice which really strikes on the ears, and this is easily
comprehensible—how should a shadow speak? With
what instrument could it make the air vibrate by striking
it in such a manner as to cause distinguishable sounds ?

Electric touches on the part of the apparitions are never-
theless experienced, and these contacts sometimes seem to
be produced by the hands of the phantom; this pheno-
menon however is wholly subjective, and the power of
imagination, acting in concert with the occult force which
we call the Astral Light, is its sole and only cause. This,
is proved by the fact that the spirits, or at least the spectres
which pretend to be such, touch us certainly sometimes,
but we never can touch them, which is one of the most
alarming adjuncts of apparitions, for the visions seem
occasionally so real that we cannot without agitation feel
the hand pass through what appears to be a body and yet
encounter no resistance.

There is no proof that spirits really leave the superior
spheres to communicate with us, and the very contrary is
probable. We evoke the reminiscences contained in the
Astral Light, which is the common reservoir of universal
magnetism. It is in this light that the Emperor Julian be-
held the manifestation of his gods, but old, ill, and decrepit

I

130 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

—fresh proof of the influence of current and accredited
opinions on the reflections of this same magic agent which
causes tables to speak and answers by taps on the walls.

We read in ecclesiastical historians that Spiridion,
bishop of Tremithante, subsequently invoked as a saint,
called up the spirit of Irene, his daughter, to ascertain from
her where a deposit of money, which she had received from
a traveller, had been concealed. Swedenborg habitually
communicated with the pretended dead whose forms
appeared to him in the Astral Light. We have known
several credible persons who have assured us that they
beheld for years the dead who were dear tothem. The
well-known atheist, Sylvanus Maréchal, appeared to his
widow and to a friend to inform them of a sum of 1500
francs in gold which he had hidden in a secret drawer of
his desk. We have received the anecdote from an old
friend of the family.

There should be always an adequate motive and lawful
object in evocations, otherwise they are works of darkness
and folly, most dangerous to health and reason. To evoke
out of pure curiosity, and simply to know if we shall see
anything, is to be disposed beforehand for fruitless fatigue.
The supreme sciences tolerate neither doubt nor puerilities,
The laudable motive in an evocation can be either love or
intelligence. vocations of love need less apparatus and
are in every way more easy. The method of procedure is
as follows :—

We must first carefully collect all the memories of him
or her whom we seek to behold again, and the articles he
or she made use of, and which preserve their impress ; then
we must either furnish a room where the person dwelt. in
life, or a similar place, where their portrait must be hung
with white and surrounded by the flowers which they
loved, and which should be daily renewed. We must then
fix on a definite day, either that of their birth, or the one
which was most propitious for their and our affection, a
day of which we suppose that the soul, however blessed it
may be elsewhere, cannot lose the remembrance, and this
must be selected for the evocation, for which we must pre-
pare ourselves during a space of fourteen days. During
this period we must be careful to give no one the same
proof of affection which the defunct had a right to expect
from us ; we must observe rigorous chastity, live in retire-

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. I3!

ment, and make only a simple and slight collation daily.
Every evening at the same hour we must shut ourselves in
the chamber consecrated to the memory of the lamented
person, with only a dim light such as a small funereal lamp
or taper would afford, and placing this light behind us, we
must unveil the portrait, before which we must remain an
hour in silence, then perfume the chamber with a little
good incense, and go out backwards.

On the day fixed for the evocation, we must array our-
selves before morning as if for a festival, give no one the
first greeting, take only one meal, consisting of bread, wine,
and roots or fruits; the cloth should be white, two covers
should be laid, and one portion of the bread, which should
be served whole, must be broken; some drops of wine
must also be placed in the person’s glass whom we desire
to evoke. This repast should be made in silence in the
chamber of evocations, and in presence of the veiled
portrait; all that was used at the meal must be then
cleared away, except the glass of the dead person and his
share of the bread, which must be left before the portrait.
In the evening, at the time of the ordinary visit, we must
repair to the chamber in silence, light a clear fire of cypress
wood, and seven times cast incense therein, pronouncing
the name of the person we desire to behold; the lamp
must be afterwards extinguished and the fire suffered to
go out. This day the portrait must not be uncovered.
When the flame is extinguished, more incense must be
placed on the ashes, and God must be invoked according
to the formulz of that religion which the deceased person
professed, and according to the notion they entertained
themselves of God. In reciting this prayer, we must identify
ourselves with the evoked person, speak as they would
speak, in a way, believe as they believed; then, after a
silence of fifteen minutes, speak to them as if they were
present, with faith and affection, praying them to manifest
to us. Renew this prayer mentally, covering the face with
both hands, then call on the individual thrice with a loud
voice ; wait, kneeling with closed or covered eyes, for some
minutes, while mentally communing with them. Then call
on them three times more ina gentle and affectionate tone,
and slowly open the eyes. If we behold nothing, the
experience must be renewed the year following, and up to
the third time, on which, at least, it is certain that the

132 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

desired apparition will be obtained, and the longer it has
delayed the more will it be visible and startling in its
reality.

Evocations of knowledge and intelligence are performed
with more solemn ceremonies. Should a celebrated person
be concerned, we must meditate on his life and writings for
twenty-one days, form an idea of his appearance, counte-
nance, and voice, mentally address him and imagine his
replies, bear about us his portrait, or his name at least,
submit to a vegetable diet for the twenty-one days, and
observe a severe fast during the last seven, then construct
the magical oratory as we shall describe it.* The oratory
should be wholly shut up, but if we operate in the daytime,
we may leave a small opening on the side where the sun
will be found at the time of evocation, placing before. this
opening a triangular prism, and before the prism a crystal
globe filled with water. If we operate at night, we must so
arrange the magic lamp that its single ray shall fall on the
smoke rising from the altar.

The object of these preparations is to endow the magical
agent of the elements with a corporeal appearance, and to
relieve the tension of imagination, which is not exalted
without danger to the absolute illusion of dream. It will
be readily understood, moreover, that a ray from the sun
or from a lamp, variously coloured and falling on an
unsteady smoke, cannot in any way create a perfect image.
The brazier of sacred fire should be in the centre of the
oratory, and the altar of perfumes at a little distance from
it. The Magus should turn to the east for prayer and to
the west for evocation ; he should be alone or else assisted
by two persons, who must observe rigorous silence; he
must wear the magic vestments as described in the
tenth chapter, and a crown of gold or vervain; he
should take a bath before the operation, and all his
under garments must be of unsullied and absolute clean-
liness. He must then begin with a prayer suited to the
disposition of the spirit to be evoked, and which would
be approved by it were the person still living. Voltaire,
for example, would never be evoked by reciting prayers
in the style of St Bridget’s. For the great men of
old the hymns of Cleanthes or Orpheus should be repeated,
with the oath which concludes the Golden Verses of Pytha-

* See ‘‘ Thaumaturgical Experiences of Eliphas Levi,” c. i.

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 133

goras. At our own evocation of Apollonius, we used the
magical philosophy of Patricius, which contains the doc-
trines of Zoroaster and the works of Hermes Trismegistus,
as a Ritual. We recited in a loud voice the Nuctemeron
of Apollonius in Greek, and added the following conjura-
tion :-—

BovAns 8 o warp TaVTwY, Kat abnynrns O Tplope to TOS
‘Epping. ‘larptxins 60 ’Aoxdnmios é 0 " Hparo Gov. "Ioyvos Te
Kal Mepis mavw Ocitpis me 0 dv & TEKVOV aurocau. Pi\0c0-
guas de ’ApveSacxens. LLowgrixns d€ madw o ’AckX\emtos, 0
"TnovO ns.

*Ourot Ta kpuTTa, iow “Epuns, TOV emo ET! YYWO OVT AL
a POR EAT ON TavTwv, Kae ovax WvOUG, Kat Tiva UEVaYTOL NOTES
-xoow & de cat apos evepyectas Ivyrov POaver, ondrat xa
oSeAloKots Xapafwow.

Mayéayv, o AzoAXwyvios, 0 A7roddwvios, 0 AroAAwviog
dtdacxes Tov Zopoartpov Tov Qpouaou, eari 6 TovTo, Oewv
Oeparrera.*

For the evocation of spirits belonging to religions which
have emanated from Judaism, the Kabbalistic invocation
of Solomon must be made use of, either in Hebrew or in
any other language with which the spirit to be evoked was
familiar.

Powers of the Kingdom, be under my left foot and in
my right hand—Glory and Eternity, touch my two shoulders
and direct me in the paths of Victory—Mercy and Justice,
equilibrate and be the splendour of my life—Intelligence
and Wisdom, bestow the crown on me—Spirits of MAL-
CHUTH, lead me between the two pillars on which the
whole edifice of the Temple depends—Angels of NETSAH
and Hob, establish me on the Cubic Stone of JESOD! O
GEDULAEL! O GEBURAEL! O TIPHERETH! BINAEL,
be my desire—RUACH HOCHMAEL, be my light—be that
which thou art and thou wilt be, OQ KETHERIEL! J/schim,
assist me in the name of SADDAI! Cherubim, be my
strength in the name of ADONAI! Bent-Elohim, be my
brethren in the name of the Son, and by the virtues of
ZEBAOTH. £éoim, do battle for me in the name of
TETRAGRAMMATON. Malachim, protect me in the name
of mm. Seraphim, purify my affection in the name of
. ELVOH. Hasmalim, enlighten me with the splendours of
* This quotation, as it exists in the French text, is made almost unintel-

ligible by innumerable typographical mistakes, which in the absence of any
reference to the original are very difficult to correct in a satisfactory manner.

134 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

ELO!I and Shechinah. Avralim, act— Ophanim, revolve and -
shine—Hajoth a Kadosh, cry, speak, shout—Kadosh,
Kadosh, Kadosh—SaADDAI, ADONAI, JOTCHAVAH, EIEA-
ZEREIE! Hallelu-jah, hallelu-jah, hallelu-jah! Amen.
TON.

It must be remembered, above all, that the names Satan,
Beelzebub, Adramelek, and others which occur in the
conjurations, do not designate spiritual individuals, but
legions of impure spirits. “Our name is legion,” says the
spirit of darkness in the Gospel, “because we are many.”
In hell, or the kingdom of anarchy, the majority is the law,
and progression is accomplished in an inverted sense, that
is, the most advanced in Satanic development, the most
degraded consequently are the weakest and most unintelli-
gent. Thus, a fatal law forces the demons downward when
they wish and believe themselves to be rising, and those
who call themselves chief are the most impotent and
despised of all. As to the mob of the perverse it trembles
before an unknown, invisible, capricious, implacable prince,
who never explains his laws, and whose arm is always
raised to strike those who cannot understand him. They
give this phantom the names of Baal, Jupiter, and others
far more venerable, and which cannot be uttered without
profanation in hell, but this phantom is only the shadow
and remembrance of God, disfigured by wilful perversity,
and remaining in their imagination as a visitation of justice
and a reproach of truth.

When the evoked spirit of light appears with a doleful
or irritated countenance, we must offer it a moral sacrifice,
that is, be interiorly willing to refrain from what offends it,
then before leaving the oratory, we must dismiss it by
saying :—“ May peace be with thee! I have not wished
to trouble thee, I shall endeavour to correct myself in
whatever offends thee; I do and will pray both with thee
and for thee: pray then for me and with me, and return
to thy long sleep, awaiting that day when we shall wake
together. Silence and farewell!”

We must not end this chapter without adding, for the
benefit of the curious, some details of the ceremonies of
black necromancy. We find in several ancient authors how
it was practised by the sorcerers of Thessaly. A pit was
dug, on the brink of which a black sheep was killed; then
the psyllae and larve supposed to be present and hasten-

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES, 135

ing to drink the blood were driven away by the Magic
Sword. The triple Hecate and the infernal gods were called
on, and thrice the shadow they desired to see was invoked.

In the middle ages, the necromancers profaned tombs
and compounded philtres and ointments with the grease
and blood of corpses; they mixed aconite, belladona, and
poisonous fungi therewith ; then they boiled and skimmed
these frightful mixtures over fires composed of human
remains and crucifixes stolen from churches ; they added the
dust of dried toads and the ashes of consecrated hosts ; then
they rubbed their foreheads, hands and stomachs with the
infernal ointment, drew the Satanic pantacle, and evoked
the dead beneath gibbets or in desecrated cemeteries.
Their howlings were heard at great distances, and the belated
traveller fancied that legions of phantoms wert issuing from
the earth; the very trees assumed in his eyes affrighting
shapes, flaming orbs seemed glaring in the thickets, while
the frogs of the marshes appeared to repeat hoarsely the
words of the Sabbath. It was the mesmerism of hallucina-
tion and the contagion of madness.

The end of the proceedings of black magic is to disturb
reason and produce all those feverish excitements which
supply courage for the commission of great crimes. The
grimoires, which were formerly seized by authority and
burned whenever they were met with, are certainly anything
but harmless books. Sacrilege, murder, and theft are in-
dicated or hinted at as means to realisation in nearly all
these operations. Thus in the Great Grimoire and in the
Red Dragon, a later imitation of the Great Grimoire, we
find necromantic proceedings which consist in tearing up
the earth over tombs with one’s nails, dragging out the
bones beneath, and setting them crosswise on the breast, and
thus arrayed assisting at the midnight mass on Christmas eve
in a church, where at the moment of the elevation we must
rise and rush out, shouting—“ Let the dead rise from their
tombs!” Then we must go back to the cemetery, take
up a handful of the earth which lies nearest to the coffin,
return at a run to the church which has been startled by
‘the previous outcry, set down the two bones still cross-
wise and again shout—“Let the dead rise from their
tombs!” When, if no one be found to arrest us and take
us to the madhouse, we may retire at a slow pace, counting
four thousand five hundred steps without turning aside,

139 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC,

which supposes us to be either on a high road or capable
of scaling walls. At the end of these paces we must lie
down on the ground as if on a coffin, having previously
strewn cross-wise the earth in our hand, after which we
must once again repeat, this time in a lugubrious tone, the
words, ‘“ Let the dead rise from their tombs!” and then
call thrice on the person desired to appear. It is not to be
disputed that anyone sufficiently idiotic and perverse as to
abandon themselves to such practices must be disposed
before-hand for all chimzras and phantoms. The receipt
in the Great Grimoire is therefore certainly most effica-
cious, but we advise none of our readers to make use of it.

IX.—MYSTERIES OF THE PENTAGRAM AND OTHER
PANTACLES.

THE Pentagram expresses the mind’s domination over the
elements and it is by this sign that we bind the demons
of the air, the spirits of fire, the spectres of water, and the
ghosts of earth. It is the Star of the Magi, the burning
star of the Gnostic schools, the sign of intellectual omnipot-
ence and autocracy. It is the symbol of the Word made
Flesh, and, according to the direction of its rays, it repre-

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 137

sents good or evil, order or disorder, the sacred lamb of
Ormuz and St John, or the accursed goat of Mendes. It is
initiation or profanation, Lucifer or Vesper, Mary or Lilith,
victory or death, light or darkness.

The Pentagram, with two horns in the ascendant, repre-
sents Satan, or the goat of the Sabbath, and with the single
horn in the ascendant it is the sign of the Saviour. It is
the figure of the human body with the four members anda
point representing the head ; a human figure head down-
ward naturally represents the demon, that is, intellectual
subversion, disorder, and folly.

Now, if magic be a reality, if this secret science be the true ©
law of the three worlds, this absolute sign, this sign as old
as and older than history, should and must actually exercise
.~an incalculable influence on souls disengaged from their
material envelope. Armed therewith and suitably disposed,
we can behold infinity through the medium of that faculty
which is as the Soul’s Eye, and can cause ourselves to be
served by legions of angels and by demon hordes. The
empire of the will over the Astral Light, which is the
physical soul of the four elements, is represented in magic
by the Pentagram. That which was used by the author in
his evocation at London, scientifically perfected, is that
which is engraved at the beginning of this chapter, and it
is not to be found so complete either in the clavicles of
Solomon or in the magic calendars of Tycho-Brahe and
Duchenteau. If it be asked how a sign can exercise that
immense power over spirits which is claimed for the Penta-
gram, we inquire in turn why the Christian world bows
before the sign of the Cross. The sign by itself is nothing,
it derives strength from the doctrine it resumes, and of
which it is the Logos. Now, a sign which epitomizes by
signification all the occult forces of Nature, and which has
always manifested to elementary and other spirits a power
superior to their own, naturally strikes them with fear and
respect, and enforces their obedience by the empire of
knowledge and will over ignorance and weakness.

The sign of the Pentagram is called also the sign of the
Microcosm, and it represents what the Kabbalists of the
Sohar term the Microprosopus. Its complete comprehen-
sion is the key of the two worlds—it is absolute natural
philosophy and natural science. Its use, however, is most
dangerous to operators who do not completely and per-

138 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

fectly understand it. It should be composed of seven
metals, or at any rate be graved in pure gold on white
_ marble, but it may be also designed in vermilion on a

lambskin free from every defect and stain, this being the
symbol of integrity and light. The marble should be
virgin, that is, should never have been previously used ;
the lambskin should be prepared under the auspices of the
sun. The lamb should have been killed in Paschal time
with a new knife, and the skin must have been salted with
salt consecrated by magical ceremonies. Negligence in
even one of these difficult and, at first sight, arbitrary ob-
- servances completely stultifies the great operations of
science. The Pentagram is consecrated with the four ele-
ments; the magic figure is breathed on five times, it is
sprinkled with consecrated water, and dried by the smoke
of five perfumes, namely, incense, myrrh, aloes, sulphur,
and camphor, with which a little white resin and ambergris
may be mixed; then we must breathe five times, pro-
nouncing the names of the five genii, who are Gabriel,
Raphael, Anael, Samael, and Oriphiel; the pantacle must
be subsequently laid on the earth and turned towards the
north, south, east, and west, and to the centre of the astro-
nomical cross, pronouncing the letters of the sacred Tetra-
gram one after another. Finally, we must repeat softly
the blessed names Aleph and the mysterious Thau, united
in the kabbalistic name of Azoth.

The Pentagram must be placed on the altar of perfumes
and on‘the tripod of evocations. The operator must also
wear one about his person, with the figure of the Macro-
cosm, that is, the six-pointed star composed of two inter-
laced triangles. When a spirit of light is to be evoked,
the head of the star, that is, one of its points, must be
turned towards the tripod of evocation, and the two lower
points towards the altar of perfumes. The reverse is to be
done where a spirit of darkness is concerned, but, in this
case, the operator must be careful to hold the end of the
rod or the point of the sword towards the top of the Pen-
tagram. We have said already that signs are the active
voice of the will. Now the will must produce its voice
perfectly in order to transform it into action; and a single
negligence, representing a useless word or a doubt, stamps
every operation with falsehood and inefficacy, and turns
back all the vainly expended energies on the operator.

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 139

Magical ceremonial must, therefore, be absolutely abstained
from, or scrupulously and exactly accomplished in every-
thing. The Pentagram graved in luminous lines on glass
by means of the electrical machine also exercises a great
influence on spirits and terrifies them. It was traced by
the old magicians on the threshold of the door, to prevent
evil spirits from entering and good ones from going out.
This restraint resulted from the direction of the star’s
points. Two points on the outside repelled the evil, two
on the inside detained them captive, one point only on the
inner side captivated the good spirits. All these magical
theorems, based on the unique dogma of Hermes, and on
the analogical inductions of science, have been invariably
confirmed by the visions of ecstatics and by the convul-
sions of cataleptics under the supposed possession of spirits.
The G which Freemasons place in the centre of the Burn-
ing Star signifies GNOSIS and GENERATION, the two
sacred words of the ancient Kabbalah. It also signifies
GRAND ARCHITECT, for the Pentagram, from whatever side
it may be looked at, always represents an A. By placing
it in such a manner that two of its points are above and
only one below, we may see the horns, ears, and beard of
the hieratic goat of Mendes, when it becomes the sign of
infernal evocations.

The allegorical star of the Magi is nothing else, as we
have said, than the mysterious Pentagram ; and these three
kings, children of Zoroaster, conducted by the Burning
Star to the cradle of the microcosmic God, would. be suffi-
cient to prove the wholly kabbalistic and truly magical
origines of Christian doctrine. One of these kings is black,
another white, the third brown; the white ting offers gold,
symbol of life and light ; the black myrrh, image of death
and darkness ; the brown presents incense, emblematic of
the divinity of the conciliating dogma of the duadic
cause; then they return into their own country by another
road, to show that a new cultus is but a new path which
leads humanity to the one and only religion, which is that
of the sacred triad and the shining Pentagram, the sole
eternal Catholicism. In the Apocalypse, St John beholds
this same star fall from heaven to earth; it is then called
absynth or bitterness, and all the waters of the sea become
bitter—striking image of the materialisation of dogma,
which produces the fanaticism and arid sourness of contro-

{40 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

versy. It is to Christianity itself that the words of Isaiah
may be then addressed—“ How art thou fallen from hea-
ven, bright star, which wert so splendid in the morning ?”
But the Pentagram, profaned though it be by men, shines
unclouded for ever in the right hand of the Word of truth,
and the inspired voice promises to whomsoever shall con-
quer, that he will give him the morning star—a solemn
restitution held out to the star of Lucifer.

As will be seen, all mysteries of magic, all symbols of
the gnosis, all figures of occultism, all kabbalistic keys of
prophecy, are resumed in the sign of the Pentagram, which
Paracelsus proclaims to be the greatest and most potent of
all. Must we be astonished after this at the real influence
exercised by this sign on the intelligences of every
hierarchy ? Those who brave the sign of the Cross
shudder at the aspect of the Star of the Microcosm. The
Magus, on the contrary, when he feels his will grow weak,
casts his eyes on that symbol, takes it in his right hand,
and feels himself to be armed with intellectual omni-
potence, provided that he is truly a king worthy to be
conducted by the star to the cradle of divine realisation ;
provided he knows, dares, wills, and can hold his peace;
provided he understands the uses of the pantacle, cup,
wand, and sword; provided, lastly, that the intrepid
glances of his soul correspond to those two eyes which the
upper ray of the Pentagram always presents to him open.

The intelligence of the wise man gives value to his ~
pantacle, as his knowledge gives weight to his will, and
spirits comprehending this power are at once subject to the
sign when intelligently usec. Let us briefly explain this
marvel. All created spirits communicate with each other
by means of signs, and all adhere to a certain number of
truths expressed by certain determined forms, whose per-
fection increases in proportion to the detachment of the
spirits, those who are not weighted by the chains of matter
recognising by the first intuition whether a sign is the
expression of a true power or of an imprudent will. Thus
by the Pentagram spirits may be forced to appear in dream,
either during the waking state or in sleep, dy bringing
themselves before our Diaphane their own reflection which
exists in the Astral Light, uf they have lived, or a reflection
analogous to their spiritual Logos tf they have not lived on
earth, This explains all visions, and, more than all, shows

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 14!

why the dead invariably appear to seers either as they
were on earth, or as they still are in the tomb, but never
as they exist in the life which escapes the perceptions of
our present envelope.

Women with child are more than others under the
influence of the Astral Light, which concurs in the forma-
tion of the infant, and unceasingly presents to them the
reminiscences of the forms with which it is replete. It is
thus that the most virtuous women sometimes deceive the
malice of observers by equivocal resemblances ; they fre-
quently impress on the fruit of their marriage an image which
strikes them in a dream, and it is thus that the same physiog-
nomies are perpetuated from generation to generation. The
kabbalistic use of the Pentagram may then determine the
appearance of the child to be born, and an initiated woman
could give her son the features of Nero or Achilles, as much
as those of Louis XIV. or of Napoleon.

Solomon's Seal.

The double triangle of Solomon, forming the six-pointed
star, is the sign of the Macrocosmos, but it is less powerful
than the Pentagram, the microcosmic sign. It is repre-
sented in the following manner :—

The double triangle of Solomon is explained by St John
in a remarkable way. He says, “ There are three who give
testimony in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost . . .; and there are three which give testimony on

142 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

earth, the spirit, the water, and the blood.” St John is thus
in accordance with the masters of Hermetic philosophy,
who give to their sulphur the name of ether, to their
mercury the name of philosophic water, and to their salt
the qualification of the dragon’s blood, or menstruum of
the earth. The blood or salt corresponds by opposition
with the Father, the azotic or mercurial water with the
Word or Logos, and the breath or spirit with the Holy
Ghost—but the things of transcendental symbolism cannot
be properly understood except by the true children of
science.

Independently of these signs, the ancients made use,
when evoking, of mystical combinations of the Divine
names. The magic triangle of pagan theosophists is the
celebrated ABRACADABRA, to which they attributed extra-
ordinary virtues, and which they represented thus :—

ABRACADABRA
ABRACADABR

This combination of letters is a key of the Pentagram.
The initial A is repeated five times and reproduced thirty
times. The isolated A represents the unity of the first
cause or of the intelligent, active agent. A united to B
represents the fertilization of the duad by unity. R is the
sign of the triad, because it hieroglyphically represents the
effusion resulting from the union of the two principles, The
number 11 of the letters of the word adds the unity of the
initiate to the denary of Pythagoras, and the number 66,
the total of the added letters, forms kabbalistically the
number 12, which is the square of the triad,* and conse-
quently the mystical quadrature of the circle We may
remark in passing that the author of the Apocalypse, that
clavicle of the Christian Kabbala, has composed the num-

* Surely the square of the triad is 9! 12 is the triad multiplied by the
tetrad. —TR.

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 143

ber of the beast, that is, of idolatry, by adding a 6 to the
double senary of the ABRACADABRA, which gives kabba-
listically the number 18, assigned in the Tarot to the hiero-
glyphic symbol of the night of the uninitiated, the moon
with the towers, the dog, wolf, and crab (the sceptic, the
blind believer, and the enemy of progress),—a mysterious
and obscure number, whose kabbalistic Key is 9, that of
initiation. On this subject the sacred Kabbalist expressly
says: “ He that hath understanding (that is, the key of the
kabbalistic numbers), let him calculate the number of the
beast, for it is the number of a man, and the number of it
is 666. It is, in fact, the decade of Pythagoras multiplied
by itself and added to the sum of the triangular pantacle
ABRACADABRA ; it is therefore the epitome of all the magic
of the ancient world, the entire programme of human genius,
which the Divine Genius of the Gospel sought to absorb
and supplant.

These hieroglyphical combinations of letters and num-
bers belong to the practical part of the Kabbalah. Such
calculations, which now seem to us arbitrary or dry, be-
longed to oriental philosophical symbolism, and were of
the gredtest importance in the teaching of sacred things
emanating from the secret sciences. The absolute kabba-
listic alphabet, which connected primitive ideas with alle-
gories, allegories with letters, letters with numbers, was
what was then called the Keys of Solomon, preserved,
though completely misunderstood, in the game of Tarot,
whose antique symbols were noticed and appreciated for
the first time, in our own days, by the erudite archzologist,
Court de Gebelin.

X.—MAGICAL CEREMONIAL AND CONSECRATION OF
TALISMANS.

CEREMONIES, vestments, perfumes, characters, and figures
being necessary, as we have said, to employ the imagina-
tion in the education of the will, the success of magical
operations depends on the faithful observance of every rite.
These rites have nothing fantastic or arbitrary about them ;
they have been transmitted to us from antiquity, and sub-
sist always by the essential laws of analogical realisation

144 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

and the correspondence which necessarily exists between
ideas and forms. After passing several years in consulting
and comparing all the most authentic grimoires and magi-
cal rituals, we have been enabled, not without trouble, to
reconstruct the ceremonial of universal and primitive magic.
The only serious books that we have seen on this subject
are manuscripts written in conventional characters, which
we have deciphered by the help of the polygraphy of Tri-
themius. The value of others is wholly contained in hiero-
glyphics or in the symbols with which they are adorned,
and they disguise the truth of their images by the super-
stitious fictions of a mystifying text. Such, for example, is
the Enchiridion of Pope Leo III.,* which has never been
printed with its true figures, and which we have recovered
for our private use from an ancient manuscript.

The Rituals known under the name of the Clavicule of
Solomon are very numerous. Many have been printed,
others remain in manuscript; a beautiful copy in extremely
graceful caligraphy is preserved at the Bibliothéque
Impériale; it is enriched with pantacles and characters
which are, for the most part, to be found in the magical
calendars of Tycho-Brahe and Duchentan. ‘Here are,
lastly, printed Clavicule and grimoires which are disgraceful
speculations and mystifications of low publishing houses.
The book so well known, and so much decried by our
fathers, under the name of Petit Albert, belongs for the
most part to this class ; its only serious sections are some
calculations borrowed from Paracelsus and some talismanic
figures.

In questions of realisation and ritual, Paracelsus is an
imposing authority on magic. No one has accomplished
greater works than his, and for this very reason he has
concealed the power of ceremonial, and teaches only in his
occult philosophy the existence of the magnetic agent of
the omnipotence of will-force ; he epitomises the whole
science of characters in two signs, which are the mmacro-
cosmic and mucrocosmic stars. This was sufficient for
adepts, and it was of importance that the crowd should
remain uninitiated. Paracelsus, therefore, did not teach
the Ritual, but he practised, and his practice was a sequence
of miracles. -

The triad and tetrad are of great importance in magic.

* See Note 17. |

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 145

Their union composes the great religious and kabbalistic
number which represents the universal synthesis. The
world, in the belief of the ancients, was governed by seven
secondary causes, called by Trithemius secundzi, and
these universal forces are designated by Moses under the
plural name of Eioim, the gods. These forces, analogous
yet contrary one to another, produce equilibrium by their
contrasts, and regulate the revolution of the spheres. The
Jews called them the seven great archangels, and gave
them the names of Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, Anael,
Samael, Zadkiel, and Oriphiel. The four last were called
by the Gnostic Christians Uriel, Barachiel, Scaltiely and
Jehudiel. Other nations have attributed to these spirits
the government of the seven chief planets, and have given
them the names of their great divinities. All have
believed in their relative influence, and astronomy has
divided the ancient sky among them, and has attributed to
them successively the government of the seven days of the
week. This is the reason of the diverse ceremonies of the
magic week and of the septuary cultus of the planets. We
have said already that here the planets are signs and
nothing more ; they possess the influence which universal
faith attributes to them because they are more truly the
stars of the human mind than the stars of the sky.

The sun, which olden magic always regarded as fixed, is
only a planet for the ignorant, so does it represent in the
week the day of repose which we call, like the ancients,
the day of the sun. The seven magical planets, that is,
the seven strings of the human lyre, correspond to the seven
colours of the prism and the seven notes of the musical
octave ; they also represent the seven virtues, and, by
opposition, the seven vices of Christian morality. Thus
faith, that aspiration towards the infinite, that noble self-
confidence, sustained by the belief in all virtues, faith which
in feeble natures can degenerate into pride, was represented
by the Sun; hope, enemy to avarice, by the Moon ;
charity, opposed to luxury, by Venus, the brilliant star of
the morning and evening; strength, superior to anger, by
Mars; prudence, in opposition to idleness, by Mercury ;
temperance, opposed to gluttony, by Saturn, to whom a
stone was given in place of his children; and, finally,
justice, in opposition to envy, was represented by Jupiter,
the conqueror of the Titans. Such are the symbols

kK

146 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

borrowed by astrology from the Hellenic cultus. In the
Jewish Kabbalah, the Sun represents the angel of light ;
the Moon, the angel of aspirations and dreams; Mars, the
exterminating angel ; Venus, the angel of love; Mercury,
the angel of culture ; Jupiter, the angel of power; Saturn,
the angel of the solitudes. These governing powers of
souls divide the human life into periods among themselves,
and astrologers compute these periods on the revolutions
of corresponding planets.

The spiritual sky has never changed, and astrology has
been more invariable than astronomy. The seven planets
are really nothing else but the hieroglyphic symbols of the
keyboard of our affections. To compose talismans of the
Sun, Moon, or Saturn is to attach one's will magnetically
to signs which correspond to the principal energies of the
soul; to consecrate anything to Mercury or Venus is to
magnetise that thing with a direct intention either of
pleasure or of knowledge or profit. Metals, animals,
plants, and their analogous perfumes are here our auxili-
aries. The seven magical animals are—among birds,
corresponding to the divine world, the swan, the owl, the
vulture, the stork, the eagle, and the pewit; among fishes,
corresponding to the spiritual or scientific world, the seal,
the celurus, the lucius, the thimallus, the dolphin, and the
cuttle-fish; among quadrupeds, corresponding to the natural
world, the lion, the cat, the wolf, the goat, the ape, the
stag, and the mole. The blood, fat, liver, and gall of these
animals are used in enchantments; their brains combine
with the perfumes of the planets, and it is recognised by
the practice of the ancients that they possessed magnetic
virtues corresponding to the seven planetary influences.

The seven sacraments are equally in correspondence with
the great universal septenary. Baptism, which consecrates
the element of water, corresponds to the moon; severe
penitence is under the auspices of Samael, the angel of
Mars; confirmation, which gives the spirit of understanding,
and imparts to the true believer the gift of tongues, is
under the providence of Raphael, the angel of Mercury ;
the Eucharist substitutes the sacramental realisation of
God made man in place of the empire of Jupiter; matri-
mony is consecrated to the angel Anael, the purifying
genius of Venus; Extreme Unction is the safeguard of the
sick on the point of falling beneath the sickle of Saturn ;

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 147

and Holy Orders, which consecrate the priesthood of Light,
is more specially marked by the characters of the Sun.
Almost all these analogies were remarked by the erudite
Dupuis, who thence concluded that every religion is false,
instead of discovering the sanctity and perpetuity of a
single dogma, ever reproduced in the universal symbolism
of successive religious observances. He did not com-
prehend the permanent revelation transmitted to the mind
of man by nature’s harmonies, and has beheld only a suc-
cession of errors in the sequence of ingenious images and
everlasting truths.

Magical works are also seven in number—1. Works of
light and wealth, under the patronage of the Sun. 2.
Works of divination and mysteries, under the invocation
of the Moon. 3. Works of skill, science, and eloquence,
under the protection of Mercury. 4. Works of wrath and
chastisement, consecrated to Mars. 5. Works of love,
favoured by Venus. 6. Works of ambition and policy,
under the auspices of Jupiter. 7. Works of malediction
and death, under the care of Saturn. In theological sym-
bolism the Sun represents the Word of Truth; the Moon,
religion itself; Mars, justice; Mercury, the interpretation
and knowledge of mysteries; Venus, mercy ‘and love;
Jupiter, the risen and glorified Saviour; Saturn, God the
Father, or the Jehovah of Moses. In the human body,
the Sun is analogous to the heart, the Moon to the brain,
Jupiter to the right hand, Saturn to the left, Mars to the
left foot, Venus to the right, Mercury to the parts of
generation, which has sometimes caused the genius of this
planet to be represented by an androgynous figure. In the
human face, the Sun rules the forehead, Jupiter the right
eye, Saturn the left; the Moon reigns between the two
eyes at the root of the nose, whose two wings are governed
by Mars and Venus. Lastly, Mercury exercises his influ-
ence over mouth and chin. These notions of the ancients
formed their occult science of physiognomy, since imper-
fectly recovered by Lavater.

The Magus who seeks to proceed to the operations of
Light, should work on a Sunday from midnight to eight in
the morning, or from three in the afternoon to ten in the
evening. He must be vested in a purple robe, with a tiara
and bracelets of gold. The altar of perfumes and the
tripod of sacred fire must be surrounded by wreaths of

148 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

laurel, heliotrope, and sunflowers; the perfumes must be
cinnamon, strong incense, saffron, and red sandal-wood; the
ring must be of gold, with a chrysolith or ruby, the carpets
of lion-skin, the screens of hawk’s feathers.

On Monday he should wear a white robe, embroidered
with silver, with a triple necklace of pearls, crystals, and
selenite ; the tiara should be covered with yellow silk, and
have silver characters forming in Hebrew the monogram of
Gabriel, as it is found in the secret philosophy of Agrippa ;
the perfumes should be white sandal-wood, camphor, amber,
aloes, and the ground seed of cucumber; the garlands
should be of mugwort, moonwort, and yellow ranun-
culuses. Tapestries, garments, and objects of a black
colour should be avoided, and no metal but silver should
be worn. |

On Tuesday, a day for the works of vengeance, the robe
should be flame-coloured, or of the colour of rust, or blood,
with belt and bracelets of steel; the rod should not be
used, but merely the magic dagger and sword. The gar-
lands should be of absynth and rue, and a steel ring with
an amethyst for its stone should be worn on the finger.

On Wednesday, a day favourable to supreme science, the
robe should be green, or of a stuff shot with various colours;
the necklace should be of pearls in hollow glass beads, con-
taining mercury; the perfumes should be benzoin, mace,
and storax; the flowers, the narcissus, lily, the mercury,
fumitory, and marjolane; the precious stone should be
agate.

On Thursday, the day for great religious and political
achievements, the robe must be scarlet, and on the forehead
should be a brass tablet having the character of the spirit
of Jupiter, and these words—GIARAR, BETHOR, SAM-
GABIEL ; the perfumes must be incense, ambergris, balm,
seed of paradise, macis, and saffron; the ring must be
ornamented with an emerald or sapphire; the garlands
and crowns: must be of oak, poplar, fig, and pomegranate.

On Friday, the day for amorous operations, the vest-
ment should be of azure blue, the hangings green and rose
colour, the ornaments of polished copper, the crowns of
violets, the garlands of roses, myrtle, and the olive leaf ;
the ring should be ornamented with a turquoise; lapis-
lazuli and bery] will answer for tiara and bracelets; the
screens must be of swan’s feathers, and the operator must

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. I49

wear on his breast a copper talisman with the character of
Anael and these words—AVEEVA VADELILITH.

On Saturday, a day of funereal operations, the vestment
should be black or brown, with characters embroidered in
orange-coloured silk; round the neck must be worn a
leaden medal having the character of Saturn, and these
words — ALMALEC, APHIEL, ZARAHIEL; the perfumes
should be diagridium, scammony, alum, sulphur, and assa-
foetida; the ring should have an onyx; the garlands
should be of ash, cypress, and black hellebore; on the
onyx of the ring, during the hours of Saturn, should be
engraved the double head of Janus by means of the con-
secrated awl.

Such are the antique magnificences of the secret cultus
of the Magi. With similar ceremonies the great magicians
of the middle ages proceeded to the daily consecration of
pantacles and talismans relating to the seven genii. A
pantacle is a synthetic character resuming the whole
magical dogma in one of its special phases. It is thus the
real expression of a completed thought and act of will; it
is the signature of a mind. The ceremonial consecration
of this sign attaches the intention of the operator still
more strongly thereto, and establishes between himself and
the pantacle a veritable magnetic chain. Pantacles may
be indifferently traced on virgin parchment, paper, or
metals. A talisman is a piece of metal which bears either
pantacles or characters, and has received a special conse-
cration for a defined intention. Gaffarel, in his learned
work on the antiquities of magic, has scientifically demon-
strated the real power of talismans, and the faith in their
virtue is otherwise so great in nature that we gladly bear
about us the keepsakes of those we love, persuaded that
such relics will preserve us from danger and ensure our
happiness. Talismans may be made either of the seven
kabbalistic metals—gold, silver, iron, copper, fixed mer-
cury, brass, and lead—or of precious stones, such as car-
buncles, crystals, diamonds, emeralds, agates, sapphires,
and onyxes. The Pentagram must be always engraved on
one side of the talisman, with a circle for the Sun, a cres-
cent for the Moon, a winged caduceus for Mercury, a sword
for Mars, a G for Venus, a crown for Jupiter, and a scythe
for Saturn. The other side of the talisman should bear
the sign of Solomon, that is, the six-pointed star formed

T50 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

by two interlaced triangles ; in the centre there should be
placed a human figure for the Sun talismans, a cup for those
of the Moon, a dog’s head for those of Jupiter, a lion’s for
those of Mars, a dove’s for those of Venus, a bull’s or goat’s
for those of Saturn.* The names of the seven angels should
be added either in Hebrew, Arabic, or magic characters
similar to those of the alphabets of Trithemius. The two
triangles of Solomon may be replaced by the double cross
of Ezekiel’s wheels, this being found on a great number of
ancient pantacles. All objects of this nature, whether in
metals or in precious stones, should be carefully wrapped
in silk satchels of a colour analogous to the spirit of the
planet, perfumed with the perfumes of the corresponding
day, and preserved from all impure looks and touches.
Pantacles and talismans of the Sun should not be seen or
handled by deformed and ugly persons, or by immoral
women; those of the Moon are profaned by the glances
and touches of debauched men and menstruous women ;
those of Mercury lose their virtue if seen or fingered by
paid priests; those of Mars should be concealed from
cowards ; those of Venus from depraved men, and from
such as are under a vow of celibacy; those of Jupiter from
the impious ; and those of Saturn from virgins and chil-
dren, not that the looks or contact of these can ever be
impure, but because the talisman would bring them mis-
fortune, and thus lose all its power.

Crosses of honour and similar decorations are veritable
talismans which increase personal importance and worth.
Their solemn distributions are consecrations. Public
opinion may invest them with prodigious power. The
reciprocal influence of signs on ideas and of ideas on signs
has not been sufficiently noticed. It is equally true that
the revolutionary achievement of modern times has been
summed up symbolically in its entirety by the Napoleonic
substitution of the Star of Honour in place of the Cross of
St Louis. It is the Pentagram substituted for the labarum ;
it is the rehabilitation of the symbol of light ; it is the typical
resurrection of Adonhiram. They say that Napoleon be-
lieved in his star, and could he have been made to state
what he understood by this star, it would have been found
to be his genius. He did rightly, therefore, in adopting
the Pentagram as his sign, for it is the symbol of human

* See Note 18.

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. I5!I

sovereignty by intelligent initiative. The mighty soldier of
the Revolution knew little, but he divined almost every-
thing ; so was he the instinctive and practical magician of
modern times. The world is still full of his wonders, and
the country folk will never believe him to be dead.

Blessed and indulgenced objects, objects touched by
holy images or by venerable persons, beads from Palestine,
the Agnus Det (composed of wax from the Paschal candle,
and the annual remains of consecrated chrism) scapulars,
and medals, are real talismans.

The greater the importance and solemnity brought to
bear in the confection of talismans and pantacles, the
greater is the virtue they acquire. Their consecration
should be performed on the special days we have enumerated,
with the apparatus described. They are consecrated by
the four exorcised elements, after conjuring the spirits
of darkness by the Conjuration of the Four. When taking
up the pantacle, and sprinkling some drops of magic water
thereon, we must say :—

In nomine Eloim et per spiritum aquarum viventium, sis
mithe in sugnum lucis et sacramentum voluntatis.

Presenting it to the smoke of the perfumes,

Per serpentem aneum sub quo cadunt serpentes ignet, sis
mihi, &c.

Breathing seven times on the pantacle or talisman,

Per fermamentum et spiritum vocts, sis, mthi, &c.

Lastly, placing thereupon some grains of purified earth
or salt,

In sale terra et per virtutem vite eterna, sis mihi, &c.

Then the conjuration of the Seven must be made in the
following manner :—Throwing alternately on the sacred
fire one pastile of the seven perfumes, we must say :-—

In the name of Michael, let Jehovah command thee and
drive thee hence, Chavajoth !

In the name of Gabriel, let Adonaf command thee and
drive thee thence, Belial !

In the name of Raphael, vanish before Elchim,
Sachabiel !

By Samael Zebaoth and in the name of Elotm Gibor,
depart Adramelek !

By Zachariel and Sachiel-Meleck, be subject to Elvah,
Samgabiel !

In the divine and human name of Schaddat and by the

152 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

sign of the Pentagram which I hold in my right hand, in
the name of the angel Anaél, by the power of Adam and
of Heva, who are Jotchavah, begone, Lilith! Let us rest
in peace, Nahemah !

By the holy Elotm and the names of the genii Cashiel,
Sehaltiel, Aphiel, and Zarahiel, at the mandate of Orifiel,
withdraw from us, Moloch! We refuse thee our children
to devour.

The chief magic instruments are—the rod, the sword,
the lamp, the cup, the altar, and the tripod. In the opera-
tions of supreme and divine magic, the lamp, rod, and cup
are used ; in black magic, the rod is replaced by the sword,
and the lamp by the candle of Cardan. The magic rod,
which must not be confused with the simple divining rod,
nor with the fork of the necromancers, nor with the trident
of Paracelsus, the true and absolute magic rod, must be a
single and perfectly straight beam of the almond or
hazel tree, cut by a single blow with the magic pruning-
knife, or golden sickle, before the sun rises, and at the
moment when the tree is about to blossom. It must be
longitudinally perforated without splitting or breaking it,
and a needle of magnetized iron, occupying its whole extent,
must be introduced ; then a polyhedral prism triangularly
cut must be fitted to one of its ends, and to the other a
similar figure of black resin. In the middle of the rod must
be placed two rings, one of red copper, the other of zinc ;
the rod must be gilt on the side of the resin, and silvered on
the side of the prism up to the central rings, and it must
be wrapped in silk to the extremities exclusively. On the
copper ring must be engraved these characters pynpno'sen,
and on the zinc one p~pby ~bopn, The consecration of the rod
should last seven days, beginning at the new moon, and
should be made by an initiate, possessing the Great Ar-
canum, and himsclf having a consecrated rod. This is the
transmission of the magical priesthood, which has never
ceased since the misty origin of the transcendant science.
The rod and other instruments, but the rod above all, must
be carefully hidden, and under no pretext should the magus
permit it to be seen or touched by the profane ; otherwise
it will lose all its virtue. The manner of transmitting the
rod is one of the secrets of science which it is never per-
mitted to reveal. The length of the magic rod should not
exceed that of the operator's arm; the magician should

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 153

never use it except when alone, and should not even handle
it unnecessarily. Many ancient magi made it only the
length of the fore arm, and concealed it beneath their long
mantles, shewing the simple divining rod only in public, or
some allegorical sceptre made of ivory and ebony, accord-
ing to the nature of their operations. The magic rod is the
Verendum of the magus; he should not so much as refer
to it in any clear and precise way ; no one should boast of
having it, and the secret of its consecration should be
transmitted on condition of absolute confidence and dis-
cretion alone.

The sword is less occult, and must be made in the follow-
ing manner :—It must be of pure steel with a copper handle
made in the form of a cross with three pommels, as it is
represented in the Enchiridion of Leo III., or else with two
crescents for guard. On the middle knot of the guard,
which should be covered with a gold plate, the sign of the
Macrocosm must be engraved on one side, and that of the
Microcosm on the other. On the pommel must be inscribed
the Hebrew monogram of Michael, as it is seen in Agrippa,
and on the blade these characters pay *p mpm S95 On one side,
and on the other the monogram of Constantine’s labarum
with the following words Vince in hoc, Deo duce, ferro comite.
The consecration of the sword must take place on Sunday,
in the hours of sunlight, under the invocation of Michael.
The sword blade must be thrust into a fire of laurel and
cypress wood ; it must then be dried and polished with ashes
of the sacred fire, moistened with the blood of the mole
or serpent, these words being said:— Szs mzhi gladius
Michaelis, in virtute Eloim Sabaoth fugtant a te spiritus tene-
brarum et reptilia terre ; it must then be perfumed with the
perfumes of the Sun, and wrapped up in silk with branches
of vervain, which must be burned on the seventh day.

The magic lamp should be made of four metals—gold,
silver, brass, and iron. The pedestal should be of iron,
the joint of brass, the reservoir of silver, and the central
triangle of gold. It should have two arms, composed of
three metals intertwisted, but in such a manner as to leave
a triple conduit for the oil. It should have nine wicks,
three in the middle and three in each arm. On the pede-
stal must be engraved the Hermetic Seal, with the two-
headed Androgyne of Khunrath above. The lower rim of
the pedestal should represent a serpent biting its own tail.

154 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

On the reservoir for the oil the-seal of Solomon must be
engraved. Two globes must be adapted to this lamp, one
ornamented with transparent pictures representing the
seven genii, the other larger and double, arranged to hold
water tinctured with various colouring in four compart-
ments between the two glasses. The whole must be en-
closed in a revolving pillar of wood, which shall permit at
will the escape of one of the lamp’s rays, which may be
turned on the altar of perfumes at the moment of invoca-
tion. This lamp is of great use in assisting the intuitive
operations of slow imaginations, and in instantaneously
creating for magnetised persons shapes of terrible reality,
which, multiplied by mirrors, will at once enlarge and
change the operator’s cabinet into one vast hall filled with
visible souls. The intoxication of perfumes, and the exalta-
tion of invocations, soon transform this phantasmagoria
into a real dream; we recognise those whom we have
known, and ghosts speak ; then if we close the pillar of the
lamp, an extraordinary and unexpected phenomenon will
be produced by redoubling the perfumes.

XI.—BLACK MAGIC.

WE approach the domain of black magic. We are about
to assail, even in his sanctuary, the darksome deity of the
Sabbath, the formidable goat of Mendes, the phantom full
of horrors, the dragon of every theogony, the Ahriman of
the Persians, the Typhon of the Egyptians, the Python of
the Greeks, the old serpent of the Jews, the bearded idol
of medizval alchemists, the Baphomet of the Templars.
Let us declare, for the edification of the uninitiated, for the
satisfaction of M. le Comte de Mirville, for the justification
of Bodin the demonologist, and for the greater glory of
the Church, which has persecuted the Templars, burned
the magicians, and excommunicated the Freemasons, let us
say boldly and loudly, that all initiates of the occult
sciences—I speak of the inferior initiates and the betrayers
of the Great Arcanum—have adored, do, and will always
adore that which is signified by the frightful figure of the
sabbatic goat.

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 155

Yes, in our profound conviction, the grand masters of
the order of the Templars adored Baphomet, and caused
him to be adored by their initiates; yes, there have
existed, and there may still be, assemblies presided over
by this figure, seated on a throne and with a flaming torch
between its horns; only the worshippers of this sign do
not think it the representation of the devil as we do, but
rather that of the god Pan, the god of our modern philo-
sophical schools, the god of the Alexandrian theurgists, and
of our present neoplatonic mystics, the god of Lamartine
and Cousin, of Spinoza, Plato, and the early Gnostics ;
even the Christ of dissident sacerdotalism; and this last
designation should not astonish students of religious anti-
quities who have followed through their various transfor-
mations the phases of doctrine and symbolism in India,
Egypt, and Judea. The bull, dog, and goat, are the three
symbolical animals of Hermetic magic, wherein all the
traditions of Egypt and India are summed up. The bull
represents the earth or salt of the philosophers; the dog, that
is, Hermanubis, the Mercury of the sages, fluid air and water;
the goat represents fire, and is at the same time the symbol of
generation. In Judea, two goats, one pure and one unclean,
were consecrated ; the clean one was sacrificed in expiation
of sins, the other, loaded by imprecation with the same
sins, was turned adrift into the desert—a strange observ-
ance, but one profound in its symbolism—reconciliation by
self-sacrifice, and expiation by liberty! Now, all the
fathers who have concerned themselves with Jewish types,
have recognised in the immolated goat the figure of Him
who took on Himself the very form of sin. Thus the
Gnostics were not beside symbolic traditions when they
gave to the Christ deliverer the mystical figure of the goat.
All the Kabbalah and all magic is, in fact, divided between
the cultus of the sacrificed goat and that of the emissary
goat. There is, therefore, a magic of the sanctuary and
one of the wilderness, a white church and a black church,
a priesthood of public assemblies, and the Sanhedrim of
the Sabbath.

The Baphomets of the Templars, whose names should be
spelt kabbalistically backward, is composed of three abbre-
viations—TEM OHP AB, Zempl: omnium hominum pacts
abbas, the father of the temple, universal peace of men.
According to some, it was a monstrous head, according to

156 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

others, a goat-shaped demon. A sculptured casket, un-
earthed in the ruins of an ancient commandry of .the Temp-
lars, was observed by antiquaries to be a baphometic figure,
conformable in its attributes to our goat of Mendes and the
androgyne of Khunrath. It is bearded, but with the entire
body of a woman; in one hand it holds the sun, in the
other the moon, joined to it by chains. This virile head is
a beautiful allegory which attributes to thought alone the
first and creative cause. The head here represents mind,
and the female body matter. The stars, bound to the
human form and directed by that nature of which intelli-
gence is the head, have also a sublime significance. The
terrible Baphomet is, in fact, like all monstrous enigmas
of ancient science, nothing more than an innocent and
even pious hieroglyph. Let us declare emphatically to
combat the remnants of manichzanism that Satan, as a
superior personality and power, has no existence. THE
DEVIL, IN BLACK MAGIC, IS THE GREAT MAGIC AGENT
EMPLOYED FOR EVIL PURPOSES BY A PERVERSE WILL.

We have spoken of Manichzanism, and it is by this
monstrous heresy that we shall account for the aberrations
of black magic. The doctrine of Zoroaster misunderstood,
the magical law of two forces producing universal equili-
brium, has created in illogical minds a negative divinity,
subordinate but hostile to the active divinity, and thus has
caused the madness of dividing God. The evil divinity,
born in the imagination of sectarians, became the prompter
of all follies and crimes. Sanguinary sacrifices were offered
him, monstrous idolatry usurped the place of the true reli- -
gion, black magic caused the supreme and luminous magic
of veritable adepts to be calumniated, and atrocious gather-
ings of sorcerers, ghouls, and vampires took place in caverns
and abandoned places; for imbecility soon changes into
frenzy, and it is only a step from human sacrifices to can-
nibalism.

The mysteries of the Sabbath have been variously
described ; all the revelations made on this subject may
be divided into three series: 1, Those which are connected
with a fantastic and imaginary Sabbath ; 2, Those which
betray the secrets of the occult assemblies of real adepts;
3, Revelations of lunatic and criminal assemblies, whose
object was the practice of black magic. Fora great num-
ber of pitiable wretches abandoned to these stupid and

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 157

abominable pursuits, the Sabbath was only a long night-
mare, whose dreams appeared to be realities, and which
they obtained by means of beverages, fumigations, and
narcotic frictions. Baptista Porta gives us, in his Natural
Magic, the pretended receipt for the sorcerer’s unguent,
by means of which they were carried to the Sabbath.
It was composed of children’s fat, of aconite boiled
with poplar leaves, and some other drugs; soot must be
mixed with these, which would render the nakedness of
sorceresses, who go to the Sabbath rubbed over with this
pomade, the very reverse of attractive. A more serious
receipt is given by the same mystificator, and which we
leave in its original Latin to retain its grimoire character :—
Recipe—suim, acorum vulgare, pentaphyllon, verspertillionts
Sanguinem solanum somniferum et oleum, the whole to be
well boiled and stirred to the consistence of an ointment.
We imagine that opiates like the pith of green hemp,
datura stramonium, and the laurel-almond, would enter
with no less success into similar compounds. The fat or
blood of night-birds joined to such narcotics, with the cere-
monies of black magic, would impress the imagination and
determine the direction of dreams. It is to Sabbaths
dreamed in this manner that we must refer the tales of
goats issuing from pitchers and returning therein at the
conclusion of the ceremony, of infernal powders collected
behind the same creature, known as Maitre Leonard; of
banquets where abortions were eaten without salt and
along with toads and serpents ; of dances where monstrous
animals or human beings with impossible shapes took part,
&c. Nightmare alone could produce and alone explain
such horrors. But the Sabbath was not always a dream, it
was a real fact; secret nocturnal assemblies exist even at
this day, and the rites of the ancient world are practised
there ; some of these assemblies have a religious character
and a social object, others are conspiracies and orgies.
When Christianity proscribed the public exercise of the
ancient forms of worship, it reduced their partisans to the
necessity of meeting in secret to celebrate their mysteries.
Initiates presided at these assemblies and soon established
among the different shades of such persecuted beliefs a
sort of orthodoxy which true magic enabled them to do
with the greater facility, because proscription unites wills
and strengthens the bonds of brotherhood between men.

158 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

In this manner, the mysteries of Isis, of the Eleusinian
Ceres, and of Bacchus, were blended with those of the
benevolent goddess and primeval druidism. The assem-
blies were commonly held between the days of Mercury
and Jupiter, or between those of Venus and Saturn; the
rites of initiation were celebrated ; mysterious signs ex-
changed, symbolic hymns sung, banquets partaken of, and
the magic chain was successively formed at the table and
in the dance; then the assembly broke up after renewing
their pledges in the presence of the chiefs, and receiving
their instructions in return. The neophite of the Sabbath
was led, or rather carried, to the meeting with his eyes
covered by the magic mantle, in which he was indeed
wholly enveloped; he was made to pass between great
fires, and alarming noises were caused round him. When
his face was uncovered he found himself surrounded by
infernal monsters and in front of a colossal and monstrous
goat, which he was required to adore. All these cere-
monies were trials of his strength of character and his
belief in his initiators. The final trial was decisive above
all, because it presented, at first sight, something ridiculous
and humiliating to the mind of the neophyte; it was a
question of respectfully kissing the goat’s posterior, and the
order was given without circumlocution. If he refused, his
head was again covered, and he was borne away with such
rapidity that he believed himself transported on a cloud ;
if he consented, he was taken behind the symbolic idol,
and there found not a repulsive and obscene object, but the
youthful and gracious face of a priestess of Isis or Maia,
who gave him a maternal salute, and he was then admitted
to the banquet. As for the orgies which, in many assem-
blies of this nature, were said to follow the feast, we must
beware of supposing that they were generally allowed at
these secret agape, but it is known that various Gnostic
sects did practise them at their gatherings from the earliest
Christian centuries. That the flesh had its protestants in
the ages of asceticism and compression of the senses is no
cause for surprise, but we should not accuse transcendant
magic of the irregularities which it never has authorised.
Isis is chaste in her widowhood, Diana Panthea is a virgin,
Hermanubis having both sexes can satisfy neither, the
Hermetic Hermaphrodite is pure, Apollonius Tyaneus
never yielded to the seductions of pleasure, the Emperor

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 159

Julian was a man of repellant austerity, Plotinus was
rigorous as an ascetic in his morals, Paracelsus was such a
stranger to the extravagances of love that even his sex was
doubtful, Raymond Lully was initiated into the final mys-
teries of science only after a hopeless love which made him
chaste for ever. It is also a tradition of supreme magic
that pantacles and talismans lose all their virtue when he
who wears them enters a house of ill-fame or commits an
adultery. The Sabbath of debauchery should not, there-
fore, be considered as that of the veritable adepts. As to
the appellation Sabbath, some derive it from the name of
Sabasius, and other etymologies have been conjectured.
The simplest, in our opinion, is that which makes it come
from the Jewish Sabbath, for it is certain that the Jews, the
most faithful trustees of the secrets of the Kabbalah, were
almost always the great masters of magic in the middle
ages. The Sabbath was the Sunday of the Kabbalists, the
day of their religious assembly, or rather the night of their
habitual meeting. This festival, surrounded with mysteries
as it was, found its safeguard in the very fright of the
vulgar, and escaped persecution through the terror it occa-
sioned. As for the diabolic Sabbath of the necromancers,
it was a spurious imitation of that held by the magi.
Horrible rites were practised at it and abominable potions
composed. Here sorcerers and sorceresses made their plans
and instructed one another how to sustain mutually their
repute for prophecyand divination, for diviners were generally
consulted at that epoch, and exercised a lucrative calling
while possessing a veritable power. These assemblies of
sorcerers and sorceresses neither had nor could have regular
rites ; all depended on the caprice of the chiefs and the
whims of the assembly. What was recourtted by those who
assisted thereat served as a type to the nightmares of all
such dreamers, and it is from the medley of these impos-
sible realities and demoniacal hallucinations that the
revolting and stupid histories figuring in magic trials and
in the works of Spranger, Delancre, Delrio, and Bodin,
have undoubtedly issued.

After attributing a positive existence to the absolute
negation of good, after enthroning the absurd and creating
a god of lies, it remained for human imbecility to invoke
this impossible idol. We were lately informed that the
most venerable father Ventura, formerly superior of the

160 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

Theatines, on reading one of our books, declared that the
Kabbalah was, in his opinion, an invention of the devil,
and that the star of Solomon was another artifice of the
same personage to persuade the world that he, the devil,
was the same as God. Such is the serious teaching of
those who are rulers in Israel! The ideal of darkness and
nothingness inventing a sublime philosophy which is the
universal basis of faith and the keystone of every temple !
The demon setting his signature by the side of God's!
My vencrable masters in theology, you are more sorcerers
than you suppose or is imagined ; and He who said—The
devil is a liar like his father—would also have something
to remark on the decisions of your reverences.

The evokers of the devil must before all things belong to
a religion which believes in a devil who is the rival of God.
To have recourse to a power we must believe init. A
firm faith being therefore granted in the religion of Satan,
here is the method of communicating with this pseudo-
God :—

Magical Axiom.

Within the circle of its action, every Logos creates

what it affirms.
Direct Corssaience
He who affirms the devil creates the devil.

Conditions of Success in Infernal Evocations.

1. Invincible obstinacy. 2. A conscience at once hard-
ened by crime and most subject to remorse and terror.
3. Affected or natural ignorance. 4. Blind faith in every-
thing incredible. 5. A completely false notion of God.

It is requisite afterwards :—Firstly, to profane the cere-
monies of the religion one belongs to and trample its
holiest symbols under foot ; secondly, to make a bloody
sacrifice ; thirdly, to procure the magic fork. This is a
branch of a single beam of hazel or almond, which must be
cut at a single stroke with the new knife used in the
sacrifice ; the rod must terminate in a fork which must be
bound with iron or with steel made from the same knife
that it has been cut with. A fifteen days fast must be
observed, taking only one meal without salt after sundown;
this repast must be made off black bread and blood
seasoned with unsalted spices, or off black beans, and milky,
narcotic herbs; every five days, after sunset, one must get

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 161

drunk on wine in which five heads of black poppies and
five ounces of bruised hemp have been steeped, the whole
being contained in a cloth woven by a prostitute, or,
strictly, the first cloth at hand may be used, if woven by a
woman. The evocation may be performed either during
the night between Monday and Tuesday or that between
Friday and Saturday. A solitary and prohibited place |
must be chosen, such as a cemetery haunted by evil spirits,
an avoided ruin in the country, the vault of an abandoned
convent, the spot where an assassination has been per-
petrated, a druidic altar, or a former temple of idols. A
black robe without seams or sleeves must be provided, a
leaden cap blazoned with the signs of the Moon, Venus,
and Saturn, two candles of human fat set in crescent-
shaped candlesticks of black wood, a magic sword with a
black handle, the magic fork, a copper vase holding the
blood of the victim, a censer containing incense, camphor,
aloes, ambergris, and storax, mixed and moistened with the
blood of a goat, a mole, and a bat; four nails torn from
the coffin of an executed criminal, the head of a black cat
which has been fed on human flesh for five days, a bat
drowned in blood, the horns of a goat cum quo puella
concubuertt, and the skull of a parricide, are also indis-
pensable. All these horrible and with difficulty collected
objects being obtained, they must be arranged as follows :—

A. perfect circle must be traced with the sword, an open-
ing or way out being, however, left ; in the circle a triangle
must be inscribed, and the pantacle thus traced by the
sword must be dyed with blood ; then, at one of the angles
of the triangle the three-footed chafing-dish must be
placed, which should also have been mentioned among the
indispensable objects ; at the opposite base of the triangle
three small circles must be made for the operator and his
assistants, and behind the circle of the former, not with the
blood of the victim but with the operator’s own blood,
there must be traced the sign of the labarum or the mono-
gram of Constantine. The operator or his acolytes should
have naked feet and covered heads. The skin of the
immolated victim must have also been brought, and, cut
up into strips, must be placed. within the circle forming
an inner circle fastened at four corners with the four nails
already spoken of. Near these nails, but without the
circle, must be placed the cat’s head, the human, or rather

L

162 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

the inhuman skull, the goat’s horns, and the bat; they
must be aspersed with a branch of birch dipped in the
victim’s blood, then a fire of cypress and alder wood must
be lighted, and the two magic candles placed on the right
and left of the operator circled with vervain wreaths.

The formule of evocation found in the magical elements
of Peter d’Apono or in the Grimoires, whether printed or
in manuscript, may then be recited. Those in the Great
Grimoire, repeated in the common Red Dragon, have
been wilfully altered in printing, and should read as
follows :—

“Per Adonat Elofm, AdonaY Jehova, AdonaY Sabaoth,
Metraton On Agla AdonaY Mathon, verbum pythonicum,
mysterium salamandre, conventus sylvorum, antra gnomo-
rum, dzmonia Cceli Gad, Almousin, Gibor, Jehosua, Evam,
Zariatnatmik, veni, veni, veni.”

The great invocation of Agrippa consists only in these
words :—“ DIES MIES JESCHET BOENEDOESEF DOUVEMA
ENITEMAUS.” We do not pretend to understand what
they mean, they have possibly no meaning, and can cer-
tainly have none which is rational, since they are of efficacy
in conjuring up the devil, who is supreme senselessness.
Doubtless in the same opinion, Mirandola affirms that the
most barbarous and absolutely unintelligible words are the
best and most powerful in black magic. Ridiculous prac-
tices and imbecile evocations induce hallucination better
than rites which are calculated to keep the understanding
vigilant. Dupotet affirms that he has tried the power of
certain signs over ecstatics, and those in his “ Magic Un-
veiled” are analogous if not absolutely identical with the
diabolical signatures found in old editions of the “Great
Grimoire.” The same causes will always produce the same
effects, and there is nothing new under the moon of the
sorcerers any more than beneath the sun of the sages.

The conjurations should be repeated in a raised tone,
accompanied by imprecations and menaces till the spirit
responds. The spirit is usually preceded by a violent wind
which seems to howl through the whole country. Domestic
animals tremble at it, and seek a hiding place; the as-
sistants feel a breath upon their faces, and their hair, damp
with cold sweat, stands up on their heads. The great and
supreme charge is, according to Peter d’ Apono :—

“ Hemen-Etan! Hemen-Etan! Hemen-Etan! EwL*

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 163

ATI* TITEIP* AziA* Hyn * TEU* MINOSEL* ACHA-
DON* vAay* vAA* EvE* AAA* EIE* ExeE* A EL
EL EL A* HY! Hau! Hau! Hau! va! va!
vA! vA! CHAVAJOTH.

“Aie Saraye, aie Saraye, aie Saraye! per Eloym, Ar-
chima, Rabur, BATHAS super ABRAC ruens supervenius
ABEOR SUPER ARBERER Chavajoth! Chavajoth! Chava-
joth! impero tibi per clavem SALOMONIS et nomen mag-
num SEMHAMPHORAS.”

Evocations were frequently followed by pacts, which
were written on parchment of goat skin with an iron pen
and blood drawn from the left arm of the victim. The
memorandum was double, the demon took away one and
the voluntary reprobate swallowed the other. The mutual
engagement was that the devil should serve the sorcerer
for a certain number of years, and that the sorcerer should
belong to the devil after a definite time. The Church by
her exorcisms has consecrated the belief in all these things,
and it may be said that black magic with its prince of
darkness is a realistic, living, and terrible creation of
Roman Catholicism; that it is even its special and
characteristic work, for the priests do not invent God.*
So true Catholics cling from the bottom of their hearts to
the preservation and even regeneration of this magnum opus
which is the philosophic stone of the official and positive
cultus, In thieves’ slang the devil is called the doulanger;
all our desire, and we speak no longer as a magus but as a
devoted child of Christianity, and of that Church to which
we owe our first education and our earliest enthusiasms, all
our desire, we say, is that the phantom of Satan may
be no longer called the pot-boiler of the ministers of
morality and the representants of the highest virtue. Will
they understand our sentiment? Will they pardon the
boldness of our aspirations in view of our unselfish inten-
tions and of the sincerity of our faith? The devil-creating
magic which dictated the Grimoire of Honorius, f+ the
Enchiridion of Leo III., the exorcisms of the Ritual, and
the sentences of the Inquisition, the black magic of sor-
cerers, and of pious people who are not sorcerers, is some-
thing truly detestable in the one and infinitely deplorable
in the others. It is above all to combat, by exposing them,

* See Critical Essay. + See Note 19.

164 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

these unhappy aberrations of the human mind,{that we
have published this book. May it help in the cause of the
holy work!

XII.—WITCHCRAFT AND SPELLS.

“ WHOSOEVER looketh on a woman to lust after her hath
already committed adultery with her in his heart,” said the
Great Master. What we desire persistently we perform.
Every true will is confirmed by acts; every will confirmed
by an act is an action. Every action is subject to a
judgment, and this judgment is eternal. The good or evil
which you desire, whether for yourself or others, within the
scope of your will and the sphere of your activity, follows
infallibly, if your w!ll be confirmed and your determination
fixed by deeds. Actions should be analogous to the
desire. The wish to do harm or to be loved should be
confirmed by works of hatred or love if it is to be efficacious.
Whatever bears the impress of the human soul belongs to
that soul ; whatever man appropriates, in whatever manner,
becomes his body in the wider sense of the term, and
whatever is done to the body of a man is experienced
mediately or immediately by his soul. For this reason
every species of hostile action towards our neighbour is
looked on by moral theology as a beginning of homicide.
A bewitchment is a homicide, and the baser because it
eludes the victim’s right of self-defence and the punish-
ment of the laws. This principle established, for the
acquittal of our conscience and the warning of the weak,
let us make bold to assert that bewitchment is possible,
and not only possible, but, in a certain sense, necessary and
fatal. It is continually taking place in the world, unknown
both to agents and victims. Involuntary witchcraft is one
of the most terrible dangers of human life.

Sensual sympathy necessarily subjects the most ardent
desire to the most powerful will. Moral diseases are more
contagious than physical ones, and we can die of an evil
acquaintance even as of a contagious contact. The horrible
plague which for some centuries only has avenged on
Europe the profanation of the mysteries of love is a
_ revelation of the analogical laws of nature, and, hideous as

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 165

it is, presents only a feeble image of the moral corruptions
daily consequent on an illicit sympathy. A story is told
of a jealous and infamous man who, to avenge himself on
a rival, voluntarily contracted an incurable complaint, and
made it at once the common scourge and curse of a divided
couch. This appalling history is that of every sorcerer
who practises witchcraft. He poisons himself that he may
poison, he condemns’ himself to hell that he may torture
others, he inhales perdition that he may breathe it forth,
he wounds himself to death that he may inflict death ;
but possessed of so much unhappy courage, it is positive
and certain that he will empoison and destroy by the
mere projection of his perverse will.

There are then two kinds of bewitchment—involuntary
and voluntary bewitchment; we may also distinguish
physical from moral witchcraft. Power attracts power, life
attracts life, and health attracts health—this is a law of
nature. If two children live, and above all sleep together,
and if one of them be strong and the other weakly, the
strong one will absorb the sickly one, who will waste
gradually away. In boarding-schools certain pupils absorb
the intelligence of others, and in every circle of men an
individual will soon be found who avails himself of the
wills of the rest. Bewitchment by means of currents is a
very common thing; one is carried away by the crowd
both morally and physically. But we have to establish
specially in this chapter the almost absolute power of the
human will over the determination of its acts, and the
influence of every exterior demonstration of a will on
things themselves exterior.

Voluntary bewitchments are still frequent in rural dis-
tricts, because among ignorant and isolated people the
forces of nature have full play, not being weakened by any
doubt or deflection. An open, absolute hatred, unmixed
with disappointed passion or personal cupidity, is a death-
sentence for its object, under certain given conditions. I
say, unmixed with amorous passion or self-interest, because
a desire, being an attraction, counterbalances and annuls
the power of projection. A jealous man will never effica-
ciously bewitch his rival, nor will a covetous heir shorten,
by the mere fact of his will, the lifetime of an avaricious
uncle. Bewitchments attempted under such conditions fall
back on their performers, and are rather favourable than

166 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

hurtful to their object, as they deliver them from a hostile
action which destroys itself through unmeasured over-
excitement.

The instrument of witchcraft is nothing else than the
Great Magic Agent itself, which under the influence of an
"evil will becomes really and positively the demon. Witch-
craft properly so called, that is, ceremonial operation with
a view to bewitching, acts only on the performer, and
serves to fix and confirm his will by laboriously and per-
severingly formulating it, the two conditions necessary to
render the will efficacious. The more difficult and horrible
the operation, the more potent it is, because it acts better
on the imagination, and confirms the effort in direct ratio
of resistance. This explains the fantasticalness and even
the atrocity of the operations of black magic among the
ancients and in the Middle Ages—the devil’s masses, the
administration of the sacraments to reptiles, the effusions of
blood, the human sacrifices, and other monstrosities, which
are the very essence and reality of witchcraft and necro-
mancy. These and similar practices have in all ages
brought down on sorcerers the just repression of the laws.
Black magic is really but a combination of sacrileges and
murders graduated with a view to the permanent perver-
sion of the human will and the realisation in a living man
of the monstrous phantom of the fiend. It is, therefore,
properly speaking, the religion of the devil, the worship of
darkness, the hatred of goodness exaggerated to the point
of paroxysm ; it is the incarnation of death and the per-
manent creation of hell.

What sorcerers and necromancers sought above all in
their evocations of the impure spirit was that magnetic
power which is the possession of the true adept, and which
they sought to usurp that they might abuse it shamefully.
The true magus, without ceremonial, and by his simple
reprobation, casts spells on those whom he condemns and
whom he deems it necessary to punish ; he even does so by
his pardon of those who do him evil, and never do the
enemies of the initiates carry far the impunity of their
injustice. The executioners of martyrs always perish miser-
ably, and the adepts are the martyrs of intelligence; Pro-
vidence seems to contemn those who contemn them and to
inflict death on those who would deprive them of life. The
legend of the Wandering Jew is the popular version of this

a

_ THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 167.

arcanum. A nation drove a wise man to his execution; it
cried to him, “Go forward!” when he wished to rest a
moment; and lo, this nation undergoes the same doom !
It is proscribed wholly and for centuries, it is told to get
onward, finding neither rest nor compassion. . . . The magi
condemn after the fashion of skilful physicians, and for this
reason there is no appeal from their sentences when they
have passed judgment on a guilty person. They use neither
ceremonies nor invocations; they have only to forbear
from eating at the same table with the doomed individual,
and if they be forced to do so, they must neither accept
from nor offer him salt.

Far different are the bewitchments of sorcerers, which
may be compared to a real poisoning of the Astral Light.
They exalt their will with ceremonies till it becomes
venomous at a distance, but they expose themselves most
frequently to the danger of being the first to be destroyed
by their infernal machinations. Let us reveal here a few
of their infamous proceedings.

They procure either some of the hair or garments of
the person whom they wish to curse; then they choose an
animal which they consider the symbol of that person ;
by means of the hair or garments, they place this animal
in magnetic rapport with the individual; they give it his
name, then they slay it with one blow of the magic knife,
open its breast, tear out the heart, which they envelop
while still palpitating in the magnetised objects, and for
three days they hourly pierce this heart with nails, red-hot
pins, or long thorns, pronouncing maledictions at the same
time on the name of the bewitched person. They are
then convinced (and often rightly) that the victim of their
infamous manceuvres experiences as many torments as if
he had himself been probed to the heart with every one of
the points. He begins to waste away, and at the end of a
certain time dies of an unknown complaint.

Another spell used in the country consists 1n consecrat-
- ing certain nails for works of vengeance with the feetid
fumigations of Saturn, and invocations of evil genii, then
in following the footsteps of the person whom it is desired
to torment, and pricking in the form of a cross every step
which can be traced on the earth or in the sand.

One still more abominable is practised as follows :—A
large toad is taken, baptism is administered to it, and it is

™~

—™

168 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

given the name and surname of the person whom it is desired
to curse ; it is made to swallow a consecrated host whereon
the formulz of execration have been pronounced ; then it
is enveloped in the magnetised objects, bound with the
hair of the victim, on which the operator has previously
spat, and the whole is buried either beneath the threshold
of the bewitched person’s door, or in a place which he is
bound to pass daily. The elementary spirit of the toad
becomes a nightmare and vampire for the victim’s dreams,
unless, at anyrate, he knows how to send it back to the
malefactor.

Let us come now to bewitchment with waxen images.
The necromancers of the Middle Ages, anxious to please
by means of sacrileges him whom they looked on as their
master, mixed baptismal oil, and the ashes of burnt hosts,
with wax. Apostate priests were always found to surrender
to them the treasures of the Church. With this accursed
wax they formed an image resembling as closely as pos-
sible the person they desired to bewitch; they clothed the
image with garments similar to his, gave it the sacraments
which he himself received, called down on its head all the
maledictions which could give expression to the hate of the
sorcerer, and inflicted daily on this anathematised figure im-
aginary tortures, so that the person whom the figure repre-
sented might be sympathetically reached and tormented.

Witchcraft is more infallible if the hair, blood, or, better
than either, a tooth of the person to be bewitched can be
obtained. Bewitchment is also accomplished by the glance,
which is called in Italy the jettatura, or the evil eye.

The method of Ceremontal Witchcraft varies with times
and with persons. All crafty and domineering people
find its secrets and practice in themselves, without even
actually computing them or reasoning on their sequence.
They follow the instinctive inspirations of the great agent,
which marvellously assimilates itself to our vices and
virtues ; but it may be generally said that we are subjected
to the will of others by the analogies of our attractions,
and above all by our failings. To flatter the weaknesses
of an individuality is to avail one’s self of it and make it
an instrument in the order of the same errors or depravities.
Now, when two natures with analogical defects are brought
to bear on one another, there occurs a sort of substitution
of the stronger for the weaker, and a veritable obsession of

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 169

one mind by the other. Frequently the weaker struggles
and seeks to revolt, then he falls deeper than ever into
servitude. Thus, Louis XIII. conspired against Richelieu,
and afterwards bought his forgiveness, so to speak, by
abandoning his accomplices. We have all a dominant
weakness, which is for our soul like the umbilical cord of
its birth in sin, and it is by this that the enemy can always
seize us—vanity for some, idleness for others, egotism for
the greater number. You become, thereupon, not mad,
not idiotic, but positively deranged, in all the force of the
expression, that is, subjected to foreign impetus. In this
state you have an instinctive horror of everything that
may restore you to reason, and will not even hear repre-
sentations which are contrary to your lunacy. This is one
of the most dangerous maladies which can attack the moral
nature of man. The sole remedy for such witchcraft is to
make use of madness for the cure of madness, and to find
for the sufferer imaginary satisfactions in a contrary ordcr
to that in which he has lost himself. Thus, for example,
we may cure an ambitious person by making him desire
the glories of Heaven—mystical remedy; we may cure a
debauched person by an innocent affection—natural remedy;
we may obtain honourable successes for a vain person,
give an example of disinterestedness to an avaricious one,
and procure him a just profit by an honourable participa-
tion in generous enterprises, &c. Acting thus on the moral
nature, we shall heal a large number of physical diseases,
for the moral nature influences the physical in virtue of
the magical axiom—“ That which is above is like that which
is below,” for which reason the Master said, speaking of a
paralytic woman—“ Satan hath bound her!” <A disease
comes always from defect or excess, and you will invariably
find a moral disorder at the root of a physical evil.* This
is an unvarying law of Nature.

A threat is a real spell, because it acts vividly on the
imagination, above all, if this imagination easily receive
belief in occult and illimitable power. The frightful menace
of hell, that bewitchment of humanity during so many
centuries, has created more nightmares, more violent mad-
ness than all vices and excesses put together. It is this
which the medieval Hermetic artists represented in the
incredible and unheard of monsters which they carved

* See Note 20.

170 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

over the doorways of their basilicas, But bewitchment by
threat produces an absolutely contrary effect to that which
the operator desired when the menace is evidently vain,
when it revolts the legitimate pride of the threatened
individual, and consequently provokes his resistance, finally,
when it is ridiculous in its atrocity. The sectaries of the
hell-dogma have discredited heaven. Inform a reasonable
man that equilibrium is a law of life and motion, and that
moral equilibrium, or liberty, rests on an eternal and
immutable distinction between truth and falsehood, good
and evil; tell him that, endowed as he is with free-will, he
' must place himself by his works in the empire of truth and
goodness, or fall back eternally, like the rock of Sysiphus,
into the chaos of falsehood and wickedness, then he will
understand your dogma; and if you call truth and good-
ness heaven, falsehood and evil hell, he will believe in
your heaven and hell, above which the divine ideal rests
calm, perfect, and equally inaccessible to anger and offence,
beeause he will comprehend that if perdition as a principle
be eternal, like liberty, it cannot be as a fact more than a
passing purgation for souls, since it is an expiation, and
the idea of expiation necessarily supposes that of repara-
tion and the destruction of evil.

The first method—moral and rational—of counteracting
witchcraft is to be reasonable and just, and never to give a
handle or argument to anger. Legitimate anger is a thing
to be feared, for which reason we should hasten to acknow-
ledge and expiate our wrongdoings. Should anger persist
after this, it certainly proceeds from vice; seek to know
what vice, and unite yourself firmly to the magnetic
currents of the opposite virtue. No spell will then have
further power over you. Cause all linen and garments
which you have worn to be carefully washed before giving
them away, or else burn them; never use a garment worn
by a stranger without purifying it with water, sulphur, and
such aromatics as camphor, incense, or amber.

Paracelsus, the greatest of the Christian magi, opposed
to bewitchment a spell of an opposite character. He com-
pounded sympathetic remedies, and applied them not to the
suffering parts but to representations of the same, formed
and consecrated according to ceremonial magic. His
success was prodigious, and never has any physician
approached the phenomenal cures of Paracelsus, who, how-

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. I7!I

ever, had discovered magnetism long before Mesmer,
and had carried to its final consequences this brilliant
discovery, or rather, this initiation into the magic of the
ancients, who understood better than we do the Great
Magic Agent, and did not make the Astral Light, the
universal magnesia of the sages, an animal and special
fluid emanating only from some particular individuals.
Bewitchment is also cured by substitution, when possible,
and by the rupture or turning aside of the astral current.
Rural traditions on this subject are admirable, and
undoubtedly come from remote antiquity—they are rem-
nants of the teaching of the Druids, who were initiated
into the mysteries of Egypt and India by wandering
hierophants. Now, in vulgar magic, a bewitchment, that
is, a will determined and confirmed in ill-doing, invariably
produces its effect, and cannot retract without danger of
death. The sorcerer who frees some one from a spell
must have another object for his malevolence, or it is
certain that he himself will be assailed, and perish by his
own witchcraft. The astral movement being circular,
every azotic or magnetic projection which does not
encounter its medium returns with increased force to its
starting-point; this explains one of the strangest histories
in any sacred book, that of the demons sent into the swine,
who precipitated themselves into the sea. Demoniacal
possessions are nothing but bewitchment, and an incredible
number of possessed persons still exist in our own day.
Antipathy itself is the presentiment of a possible bewitch-
ment, which may be one of love or hate, for affection is
frequently known to succeed antipathy. The Astral Light
warns us of coming influences by a more or less sensible
and lively action on the nervous system. Instantaneous
sympathies, electrifying loves are explosions of the Astral
Light as exactly produced, ‘and as mathematically
explicable and demonstrable as the discharges of power-
ful electric batteries. The nervous apparatuses destined
for attraction or projection are particularly the eyes and
hands. The polarity of the hands is situated in the thumbs,
for which reason, according to the magical tradition still
preserved in country places, we must, when we find our-
selves in suspicious company, keep the thumb doubled
up and concealed in the hand, taking care not to attract
the notice of any one, but for all that endeavouring to be

172 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

the first to look at those from whom we have anything to
fear, so as to avoid unexpected fluidic projections and
fascinating glances. There are also certain animals who
have the property of breaking the currents of Astral
Light by an absorption peculiar to them. These animals
are violently antipathetic to us, and have something
fascinating in their glance. Among such are the toad, the
basilisk, and the tard. These animals when tamed and
carried alive about the person, or kept in the rooms that
we live in, guarantee us from the hallucinations of ASTRAL
INTOXICATION, a term which explains all phenomena of
insane passions, mental exaltations, and madness.

A great means of resisting bewitchment is not to fear it ;
bewitchment acts like contagious diseases. In times of
pest, those who are afraid are the first to be attacked.
The way not to fear an evil is not to think about it, and
I strongly counsel -nervous people, the weak, credulous,
hysterical, and superstitious, devotees and foolish persons,
devoid of energy and will, never to open a work on magic,
never to listen to those who speak of the occult sciences,
even to scout them, and to drink water only, as the great
pantagruelist magician, the excellent curé of Meudon,
maitre Frangois Rabelais, recommends. As for the wise,
they have few witcheries to fear save those of fortune, but,
as they are priests and physicians, they may be called on
to cure the bewitched, and should then proceed as follows :
They must cause the victim to perform some good action
towards the sorcerer, to render him some service which he
cannot refuse, and to seek, directly or indirectly, to lead
- him to the communion of salt. A person who believes
himself bewitched by execration and the interment of a
toad should carry about him a living toad in a box of
horn. For the bewitchment of the pierced heart, the
sufferer must be made to eat a lamb’s heart, seasoned
with sage and vervain, as also to wear a talisman of Venus
or of the moon in a purse filled with camphor and salt.
For bewitchment by the waxen figure, a more perfect figure
must be fashioned, everything possible belonging to the
person must be put on it, seven talismans must be placed
round the neck with a large central pantacle representing
the Pentagram, and it must be every day rubbed lightly with
a mixture of oil and balsam, after pronouncing the Conju-
ration of the Four to turn aside the influence of elementary

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 173

spirits. At the end of seven days the image must be
consumed in consecrated fire, and we may rest assured that
the statue fabricated by the sorcerer will at the same time
lose all its virtue.

There are certain loves which destroy as much as ever
hatred does; there are absorbing passions under which we
feel ourselves wasting away like the brides of vampires.
The bewitchments of benevolence are a torment to the
wicked. The prayers we address to God for the conversion
of aman do him harm if he will not be converted. The
vows of parents pledging the future of their children are
bewitchments which cannot be sufficiently condemned ;
children dedicated in white, for example, scarcely ever
prosper; those formerly vowed to celibacy commonly fell
into debauchery, or ended in despair and insanity. It is
not permitted to man to do violence to destiny, still less to
impose restrictions on the lawful use of liberty.

We come now to the most criminal abuse of Magic, the
fabrication of philtres and sorcery in its application to
poisoning. Here it must be understood that we write not
to instruct others in this diabolical art, but to forewarn.
Had human justice, when punishing the adepts, arraigned
only the sorcerers, it is certain that its penalties would
have been just, and that the severest intimidations could
never be excessive for these and similar wretches.
Alexandre Dumas, in his romance of “ Monte Cristo,” has
exposed some practices of this deadly science. We shall
not reproduce after him its miserable criminal experiments,
how the sorcerers poisoned plants, how animals nourished
on such plants became unwholesome flesh, and when they
were made, in their turn, the food of men, caused death,
yet left no trace of poison; we shall not.relate by what
venomous unguents they poisoned the walls of houses, and
the air by fumigations which required for the operator the
glass mask of St Croix; we leave the ancient Canidia, her
abominable mysteries, and will not inquire how far the
infernal rites of Sagane have perfected the art of Locusta.
It is enough to say that these malefactors of the worst
kind distilled together the virus of contagious diseases, the
venom of reptiles, and the noxious sap of plants; that they
extracted the poisonous and narcotic humour from fungi,
from the datura stramonium its asphyxiating properties,
from the peach and the laurel-almond that liquid one drop

174 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

of which, placed on the tongue or in the ear, destroys, like
a flash of lightning, the strongest and best constituted
living being. They stewed milk, in which vipers and asps
had been drowned, with the white juice of the milk-thistle;
they collected carefully and brought with them from their
long voyages, or else caused to be imported at great
expense, the essence of the upas, or the deadly fruit of
Java, the juice of the manioc, and other poisons; they
pulverised silex, mixed up the dried saliva of reptiles with
polluted ashes, composed hideous philtres with the virus of
mares or secretions of bitches on heat, mingled human
blood with vile drugs, and thence fabricated oil whose mere
odour was fatal ; they even disguised recipes for poisoning
in the technical terms of alchemy, and in more than one
pseudo-hermetic book the secret of the powder of projection
is nothing more than the powder of consecution. In the
Great Grimoire one of these recipes is still to be found,
less disguised than others, but entitled “ Method of Making
Gold;” it is a frightful decoction of verdegris, vitriol,
arsenic, and sawdust, which, when in condition, should
immediately consume a twig dipped therein, and eat
through a nail. Baptista Porta, in his “ Natural Magic,”
gives a recipe for the poison of the Borgias ; but, as may
be well imagined, he is deceiving his readers, and does not
divulge the truth, which would have been too dangerous
in such a matter. We may therefore give his recipe to
gratify the curiosity of our readers.

The toad by itself is not venomous, but it is like a sponge
for poisons; it is the fungus of the animal race. “ Take,
therefore, a large toad,” says Porta, “and shut it up in a
glass bowl with asps and vipers, feed them for several days
on poisonous fungi, foxglove, and hemlock exclusively,
then irritate them by beating, burning, and torturing them
in every conceivable way till they expire of rage and
hunger, sprinkle their bodies with the dust of pulverised
crystal and spurge, place them in a well-corked retort, and
gradually evaporate all their moisture by heat; allow the
whole to grow cool, and separate the ashes of the dead
reptiles from the incombustible dust which will be found at
the bottom of the retort; you will then have two poisons, a
liquid one and one in powder. The first will be as powerful
as the terrible Agua Toffana, the second will, in a few days,
dry up, age, and finally cause death amidst horrible suffer-

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 175

ings, or in a universal debility, to any one who has swal-
lowed a single pinch with his drink. It must be con-
fessed that this recipe has the most hideous and blackest
magical complexion, and revoltingly recalls the abomin-
able concoctions of Canidia and Medea.

Similar powders the sorcerers pretended to receive at .
the Sabbath, and sold them at great prices to the ignorant
and malicious. By the tradition of such mysteries they
spread terror in country places, and succeeded in casting
their spells. The imagination once impressed, the nervous
system once attacked, the victim rapidly wasted away, the
very fear of his relatives and friends completing his destruc-
tion. The sorcerer was almost always a species of human
toad swollen with long-cherished spite; they were poor,
rebuffed by all, and consequently full of hatred. The fear
they inspired was their consolation and revenge. Poisoned
themselves by a society whose vices and refuse only were
known to them, they in turn poisoned all who were weak
enough to dread them, and avenged on youth and beauty
their accursed old age and unendurable hideousness.

The mere operation of these evil works and the accom-
plishment of these hideous mysteries constituted and con-
firmed what was then called the compact with the evil
spirit. It is certain that the performer was dedicated body
and soul to evil, and justly merited the universal and irre-
vocable reprobation expressed by the allegory of hell.

To preserve oneself from bad influences, the first condi-
tion is to forbid any over-excitement to the imagination.
All excitable people are more or less foolish, and a fool is
always governed by his folly. Set yourself, therefore,
above puerile fears and vague desires; believe in the
supreme wisdom, and be assured that this wisdom, having
given you intelligence as the one means of attain-
ing the knowledge of itself, can never seek to lay snares
for your reason or understanding. You behold everywhere
about you effects which are in proportion to causes, causes
directed and modified by intelligence in the domain of
humanity; in a word, you find goodness stronger and
more esteemed than evil; why should you assume an im-
mense irrationality in infinity, when there is reason in the
finite? God is visible in His works, and asks nothing
from His creatures which contradicts the laws of their
nature; have confidence, not in men who slander reason,

176 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

for such are impostors or fools, but in the eternal reason
which is the divine Logos, that veritable light offered like
the sun to the intuition of every human being coming into
this world. If you believe in the absolute reason, and if
you desire truth and justice above all things, you need fear
. mo one, and will love only the loveable. Your natural
light will instinctively repel that of the wicked, because it
will be governed by your will. Thus, even venomous sub-
stances which may be administered you will not affect
your understanding ; they will indeed make you sick but
never criminal.

The beverages which enfeeble the mind and disturb
reason may assure the ascendancy already acquired by a
perverse will. Prussic acid is the most terrible agent of
such mental poisoning, for which reason we should .avoid
all distillations which savour of almonds, remove from our
‘bedrooms all almond plants, the datura stramonium, almond
soaps, essence of almonds, and in general all compositions
with a predominating almond scent, above all, when their
action on the brain is seconded by that of amber. To
diminish the activity of the intelligence is to proportionately
augment the strength of an insensate passion, and the love
which is inspired by the philtres of sorcerers is a veritable
stupefaction and the most shameful of all moral slaveries.
The more we debilitate a slave the less is he able to free
himself, and this is actually the secret of the sorceress of
Apuleius and the beverages of Circe. The use of tobacco is
a dangerous auxiliary of stupefying philtres and the poison-
ing of the rational faculties. The absorption of one will by
another frequently changes a whole series of destinies, and
it is not for ourselves only that we should watch over our
relations and learn to distinguish between pure and impure
atmospheres, for the most dangerous philtres are invisible
—those currents of radiating vital light which, mingling
and interchanging, produce attractions and sympathies, as
magnetic experiences leave no room to doubt. But the
most terrible of all philtres are the mystical exaltations of
misdirected devotion. What impurities will ever equal the
nightmares of St Anthony, or the torments of St Theresa
and St Angele de Foligny? The last mentioned applied
a red-hot iron to her rebellious flesh, and found the material
fire a refreshment to her concealed ardours. With, what
violence does nature demand what we refuse her, but what

~

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 177

we are continually thinking of in order to detest it more
strongly! The excessive fear of a thing renders it almost
invariably inevitable.

What contributes to rendering women hysterical is their
soft and hypocritical education. If they took more exer-
cise, if they were instructed frankly and freely in worldly
matters, they would be less capricious, less vain, less
frivolous, and consequently less accessible to sinful seduc-
tions. Weakness is always in sympathy with vice, because
vice itself is weakness under the mask of strength. Folly
holds reason in horror, and in every way delights in ‘the
exaggerations of falsehoods. Cure, therefore, first, your
diseased intelligence. The cause of all bewitchments, the
poison of all philtres, the power of all sorcerers, are there.

XIII.—THE KEY OF MESMERISM.

MESMER recovered the secret science of Nature, he was not —
its inventor. The primeval, one, and elementary substance
whose existence he proclaims in his Aphorisms, was known
to Hermes and Pythagoras. Synesius, who celebrates it in
his hymns, discovered its revelation among the Platonic
reminiscences of the Alexandrian School. “A single source,
a single root of light springs up and spreads out into three
branches of splendour. An air circulates round the earth
and vivifies, under innumerable forms, every portion of
animated substance.” *

Animal magnetism is nothing else than an artificial sleep
produced by the voluntary or enforced union of two souls,
one of which is awake while the other is sleeping, that is,
one of which directs the other in the choice of reflections
so as to change dreams into visions and ascertain truth by
means of images. The Astral Light has an immediate
action on the nerves, which are conductors in the animal
economy, and convey it to the brain; so, in the somnam-
bulistic state, it is possible to see by the nerves, without the
need of radiating light, the astral fluid being a latent light,
as physics have recognised the existence of latent caloric.
Magnetism between two persons is undoubtedly a marvel-
lous discovery, but the magnetizing of one person, whose

* Hymns of Synesius, Hymn 2.
M

178 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

will makes himself lucid, and the direction of one’s own clair-
voyance, is the perfection of magical art ; the secret of this
magnum opus does not need seeking, it was known and
made use of by a large number of initiates, and above all
by the famous Apollonius of Tyana, who has left us a
theory concerning it. The secret of magnetic lucidity, and
the direction of the phenomena of magnetism, depend on
two things—on the harmony of minds and the perfect
union of wills in a possible direction and in a direction
determined by science; this is for magnetism operated
between several. Solitary magnetism demands the pre-
parations we have detailed at the beginning when we enu-
merated and described in all their arduousness the requisite
qualities for a veritable adept.

If it have been up to the present almost impossible to
direct the phenomena of magnetism, it is because no
initiated and truly emancipated mesmerist has yet been
found. Who, in fact, can flatter himself that he is such?
Have we not always to make new efforts at self-control ?
It is certain all the same that Nature obeys the sign and
command of one who feels strong enough not to doubt it.
I say she will obey, I do not say that she will belie herself
or that she will disturb the order of her possibilities. The
cure of nervous disorders by a word, a breath, or a touch ;
resurrection in certain cases; resistance of evil wills suffi-
cient to disarm and overthrow murderers ; even the faculty
of rendering one’s self invisible, by influencing the sight of
those whom it is important to escape from—all these are
natural effects of the projection or retention of the Astral
-Light. The magus magnetist should command the natural
medium, and, consequently, the astral body which estab-
lishes communication between the soul and the organs; he
can therefore say to the material body—* Sleep!” and to
the astral mediator—‘ Dream!” Then visible objects
change their appearance, as in opium visions. The Astral
Light is projected by the glance, by the voice, by the
thumbs and palms of the hands. Music is a powerful
auxiliary of the voice, and hence comes the word enchant-
ment. No musical instrument is more of an enchanter than
the human voice, but the distant sounds of the violin or
harmonica increase its efficacy. The subject whom it is
desired to influence is thus prepared ; then when he is half
asleep, and as it were is enveloped in the charm, the hand

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 179

must be extended towards him, he must be commanded to
slumber or to see, and he will obey despite himself. If he
resist, looking fixedly at him, a thumb should be placed on
the forehead between the eyes, and the other thumb on his
breast, touching him lightly with an even and rapid con-
tact, then slowly inhale or draw in the breath, softly exhale
it, and repeat in a low voice—“ Sleep!” or “ Behold!”

The human body is subject, like the earth, to a double
law—it attracts and it radiates; it is magnetized by an
androgyne magnetism, and reacts on the two powers of
the soul, the intellectual and sensitive, in inverse reason,
but in proportion to the alternated preponderances of the
two sexes in the physical organism. The art of the
magnetist is wholly in the knowledge and use of this law.
To polarise the action, and give the agent a bi-sexual and
alternated force, is the means still unknown and vainly
sought of directing at will the phenomena of magnetism ;
but a tact well exercised, and great precision in the interior
movements so as not to confound the signs of magnetic
inbreathing with those of outbreathing, are of palmary
importance ; while the occult anatomy and _ individual
temperament of persons under control must also be per-
fectly known. What causes the greatest obstacle to the
direction of magnetism is the bad faith or ill-will of
subjects, of women above all, who are essentially and
invariably attitudinising, who love to impress themselves:
by the impression of others, and who are th¢ first to be
deceived when they act their nervous melodramas—this is
the true black magic of magnetism. So is it impossible
for operators uninitiated into the supreme arcana, and un-
assisted by the illumination of the Kabbalah, to ever
govern this refractory and fugitive element. To be master
of the woman we must divert and deceive her skilfully
by permitting her to imagine that it is she who is deceiv-
ing us.

There are two methods of magnetizing—firstly, in acting
on the will of the subject either by intimidation or by
persuasion in such a manner that the impressed will shall
modify, according to our desire, the plastic mediator and
the actions of that person. Secondly, in acting by the will
on the plastic mediator of another, whose will and acts
are consequently subordinated to such action.

There is magnetizing by radiation, by contact, by glance,

180 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

and by speech. The vibrations of the voice modify the
motions of the Astral Light and are a powerful instrument
of magnetism. Warm breathing magnetizes positively and
cold breathing negatively. By placing the right-hand on
the head and the left on the feet of a person wrapped in wool
or silk, a magnetic spark passes through them, and a com-
plete nervous revolution in the organism may be occasioned
with the rapidity of lightning. Magnetic passes are useful
only in directing the will of the mesmerist and confirming
it by acts. They are signs and nothing more.* The act
- of will is expressed and not operated by such signs.
Pulverized coal absorbs and retains the Astral Light, which
explains the magic mirror of Du Potet. Figures drawn
with charcoal appear luminous to a magnetized person,
and assume for such, according to the direction determined
by the will of the operator, the most attractive or terrifying
forms. The astral or rather vital light of the plastic
mediator absorbed by the charcoal becomes wholly nega-
tive, and this is why animals whom electricity tortures, as
cats for example, like to roll among the ashes. Medicine
will one day utilize this peculiarity, and nervous persons
will find great benefit therefrom.

In his “ Magic Unveiled” the Baron Du Potet states,
with some hesitation, that it is possible, by a powerful
projection of the magnetic fluid, to kill a living being as if
he were struck with lightning. Magic power extends
further ; but it is not only the pretended magnetic fluid, it
is the whole Astral Light, it is the element of electricity
and of thunder, which can be placed at the disposal of the
human will. What must be done to acquire this formidable
power? Zoroaster tells us: we must be acquainted with
those mysterious laws of equilibrium which subject to the
empire of good even the powers of evil themselves; we
must have purified our body by holy trials, wrestled with
the phantoms of hallucination, and grappled bodily with
the light, as Jacob strove with the angel; we must have
overcome those fantastic dogs which bark in dreams, and
in a word, according to the oracle’s energetic expression,
have heard the light speak. Then shall we be master
thereof, then shall we be able to turn it, like Numa, against
the enemies of the sublime mysteries; but if we are not
perfectly pure, if the ascendancy of some animal passion

* See Note 21.

e

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRIT JAL ESSENCES. 181

still subject us to the fatalities of the tempests of life, we
shall be burned by the fire that we kindle and perish like
Tullus Hostilius. ;

It was the glory of Mesmer to have recovered, without
an initiator and without occult knowledge, this universal
agent of life and its prodigies ; his “ Aphorisms,” which the
scientists of his time could only look on as paradoxes, will
become one day the basis of the physical synthesis. He
recognised the existence of a primitive, fluidic, universal
matter, capable of stability and motion, which, by becom-
ing fixed, determines the constitution of substances, and
which by continual motion modifies and renews its forms.
Only one step remained for him to make; it was to
declare that the effects attributed in physics to the four
imponderable fluids are the manifestations of a single force
diversified in its applications, and that this force, insepar-
able from the first and universal matter whose motion it
causes, now radiant, now ablaze, now electrical, and now
magnetic, has but one name indicated by Moses in Genesis,
when he makes it appear, at the summons of the Almighty,
before all substances, and all forms—-LIGHT !

XIV.—MODERN SPIRITISM.

THE existence of the universal magnet specialised in
metals, plants, animals, and men, was known to the
ancient hierophants. To that mysterious force the names
of Od, Ob, and Aour, were given among the Jews. It is
the double vibration of the universal and vital light—astral
light in the stars, magnetic light in stones and minerals,
animal magnetism in animals and men. Everything in
Nature reveals its existence. The experiments of Mesmer
and his successors have proved that animal magnetism can
communicate to inert objects the life and will of man.
There is, therefore, small room for astonishment at the
phenomenon, so frequent in our own days, of speaking and
moving tables; but ignorance loves to be surprised, because
surprise makes it wonder, and wonder enchants it; then it
has no wish to be disillusioned, and will not hear the
simple truth-speakers. Nearly ‘the whole truth on the

182 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

phenomena of table-turning is most simply and clearly
expressed in the letter of an anonymous savant which is
cited by M. Morin.

“Be sure,” says this savant, “that there are neither
spirits, nor the souls of the dead, nor angels, nor demons,
in the tables, but all these may be there if you wish it,
when you wish it, and how you wish it, since it depends on
your imaginativeness, your temperament, and your private
opinions old or new. Mensambulance is only a phenomenon
ill observed by the ancients, misunderstood by the moderns,
yet perfectly natural, and which concerns physics on the
one part and psychology on the other, but it was inexplic-
able before the discovery of electricity and heliography,
because, in order to explain a fact in the psychical order,
we are forced to lean on the corresponding fact in the
material order, as the ancient poets did in their comparisons
and the prophets in their parables.

“ Now, it is well known that the daguerreotype has not
only the faculty of receiving impressions from objects, but
also from the images of objects, and the phenomenon under
consideration, which could well be called mental photo-
graphy, does not only produce realities but also the dreams
of our imagination, with such fidelity that we are occasion-
ally deceived, being unable to distinguish between a copy
from life and a proof taken from the image. It will be
said that this mental photography is a very extraordinary
thing, and as much was declared of ordinary photography,
but we have since become familiar with it. It will be the
same with the last discovery ; we shall become accustomed
to it and each of us will be able to try his hand at the
tables as others at the daguerreotype, some successfully,
some badly, for a number of indispensable precautions and
conditions are required to ensure success. The first hair-
brained and clumsy person who comes to it is no more
eee to obtain a ‘good test’ on one side than on the
other.

“The magnetizing of a card-table and of a person is
absolutely identical ; it is the invasion of a foreign body
by the intelligent vital electricity, or by the thoughts of the
magnetist and his assistants. Nothing can afford a more
just and easily grasped idea of it than the electric machine
collecting the fluid on its conductor, to obtain therefrom a
third force, which is manifested in outbursts of light, &c.

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 18 3

Thus electricity accumulated on an isolated body acquires
an energy of reaction equal to the action, whether for
magnetism, decomposition, inflammation, or the despatch
of its vibration to a distance. These are the sensible effects
of blind as distinguished from intelligent electricity, which
corresponds to the former, and is produced by the cerebral
pile of man. This electricity of the soul, this spiritual and
universal ether, which is the ambient medium of the meta-
physical or incorporeal world, needs to be investigated be-
fore admitted by science, which knows nothing of the great
phenomenon of life beyond.

“Cerebral electricity, which, for myself and my co-
workers, is no longer a matter of hypothesis, seems to
require, before it can be manifested to the senses, the help
of ordinary statical electricity, so that when this is want-
ing in the atmosphere, as when the air is full of moisture,
no motion can be obtained in the tables, which will clearly
tell you on the morrow what they lacked the previous day.

“The intelligence of the table is the sum, or, if it be
preferred, the reflection of the intelligence of those who
magnetize it, it may be even said of a whole assembly
which is attentive and united in sentiments and opinions.
At other times it is only the repercussion of the ideas of a
single person, whose will is stronger, who can arrest or
quicken the table at a distance, and can impose on it any
sequence of ideas which may please him. There is no
need that the ideas should be consciously in the brain of
the sitters; the table discovers and formulates them of
itself, and always in suitable terms; it frequently requires
time to accomplish certain crambos; it begins a verse,
erases it, corrects or inverts it after our own fashion. If
the sitters are sympathetic and on good terms with one
another, it trifles, jokes, and laughs with us like an edu-
cated talker, it joins in the general tone of the conversa-
tion, it is a social spirit, but if we ask it for an epigram on
an absent person it offers us a plagiarism ; and as for things
of the other world, it is as full of conjectures as we are ;
it makes up its little philosophical systems, discusses and
sustains them with the most crafty eloquence. In a word,
it contrives for itself a reason and a conscience out of
materials found in ourselves.

“All this may appear fantastic and incredible in the
extreme, but after investigation others besides ourselves

184 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

will come to the same conclusion. The Americans are
convinced that the dead return, others that angels and
demons do so, and to each group comes the reflection of
his own preconceived belief; so the initiates of the temples
of Serapis, Delphos, and other theurgico-medical establish-
ments of the same kind, were convinced beforehand that
they entered into communication with the deities adored in
each sanctuary, which never failed to take place. To us
who know the value of the phenomenon, nothing ever occurs
which we are unable to explain without difficulty in accord-
ance with our principles; we are absolutely certain that
after charging a table with our magnetic influx, we have
created an intelligence analogous to our own, which pos-
sesses free-will like ourselves, can converse and dispute
with us with a superior degree of lucidity, because the
mass is stronger than the individual, as the whole is greater
than the part.

“The most favourable condition is to have children
almost without mental influence as our only collaborateurs ;
then it is almost as if one stood alone in the presence of
his conscience and in private conversation with himself,
save that the ephemeral reasoner formulates what exists in
our own conscience in a merely chaotic or nebulous state.
There is no response in all the ancient oracles that does not
find its natural explanation in the theory whose key we
give here. Christianity, which undertook to deliver the
world from superstitious beliefs, whose dangers and inanities
it discerned, but did not discover their cause, had great
battles to fight for the extinction of oracles and sybillism,
and had to employ something more than persuasion, the
Inquisition itself having no other end in view. Read
Ammianus Marcellinus, the persecution of the consulters
of tables, instituted by early Christian emperors, and the
sermons of Tertullian on those who interrogated Capellas
et Mensas. No less than seventeen centuries and a half
were required to exterminate the sorcerers by fire and
sword ; the last survivors were Urbain, Grandier, and
Cagliostro, but the phenomenon being natural, reappeared
now under the form of the convulsionaries of St Médard,
now under the Aallucinés of St Paris, whose reality was
borne witness to by Talleyrand in his youth, he himself
having crucified a sybil with the help of the Abbé de
Lavauguillon without doing any injury to her. Mesmer

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 185

resuscitated the same thing. The phenomenon is, indeed,
as old as man. The Indian and Chinese priests prac-
tised it before the Egyptians and Greeks; it is known to the
Esquimaux ; it is the phenomenon of Faith, that source of
all prodigies ; when faith grows weak, miracles disappear.
He who said, ‘ By faith ye may move mountains,’ would
not be surprised at a table being lifted. By faith the mes-
merist charms away rheumatism, and rural shepherds ob-
tained from the end of their cranes, as we from the feet of
our tables, responses analogous to the personal beliefs of
the questioners, and were as much astounded at finding
their thoughts, instincts, and feelings thus formulated, as
the savage is amazed at beholding his likeness reflected in
a looking-glass. The worst off are those who think they
are having commerce with the devil, who re-echoes their
fancies, and sometimes the state of their conscience.

‘ Glassed in the table, man so monstrous seems
At times, that he himself the demon deems.’

“The greater the number of believers joined in any single
faith about a table, the more the pile is charged, and the
more powerful and wonderful are the results. The primi-
tive Christians gathered round the holy table to communi-
cate with God and they beheld God, as those who believe
in magic and sorcery see sorcery and enchantments every-
where. The guests at Balthazar’s feast beheld the menace
which originated in their consciences against the author of
such orgies reproduced on the walls and nothing more.
Those who believe in apparitions, in phosphorescent lights,
in mysterious noises, are equally provided for according to
their notions, for it is rendered to every man according to
his faith.

“Man is a microcosm or little world; he bears within
him a portion of the great whole in a chaotic state. The
task of our semidei is to disentangle that part which is due
to them by incessant mental and physical labour. They
must fulfil their service by the continual invention of new
products, new moralities, and set in order the coarse and
formless materials distributed by the Creator, who made
them in his own image that they in turn may create and
may complete the work of creation—a vast labour which
will only be accomplished when the whole shall have attained
such a height of perfection that it will be like to God and

186 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

worthy to survive to itself. We are far from this final
moment, for it may be said that everything has still to be
made, remade, and finished here below, institutions, systems,
and products.

Mens non solum agitat sed creat molem.

We exist in life, that ambient intellectual medium
which nourishes a necessary and perpetual solidarity in
man and things; each brain is a ganglion, a station of the
universal neuralgic telegraph constantly en rapport with the
central station and with all others by means of thought-
vibrations. The spiritual sun enlightens souls as the mate-
‘rial sun illumines bodies, for the universe is double and
follows the law of couples. The ignorant station-holder mis-
interprets the divine despatches and often renders them in
a false and ridiculous sense. Therefore, education and true
science can alone destroy superstitions, and the nonsense
sown broadcast by ignoramus interpreters placed in the
stations of instruction among all the peoples of the earth.
These blind interpreters of the Logos have always sought
to impose on their disciples the obligation of judging
without examination 2” verba magistri. We would ask no
more, alas! if they would interpret exactly the interior
voices which deceive false minds alone. ‘It is for us,’
they declare, ‘to disentangle the oracles, that mission is
exclusively ours, sfirztus flat ubi vult, and it breathes only
on us.’ No, it breathes everywhere, and the beams of
spiritual light enlighten every conscience, but as there are
owls that fly the day, there are also refracting bodies and
many which are destitute of the reflecting power. These
are indeed the majority ; O when all souls and bodies shall
equally reflect the two-fold light how far clearer shall we
see then than to-day!”

We believe with the savant of M. A. Morin that present
phenomena open to us the way to the greatest and most
important discoveries. This mental photography of current
ideas is of immense importance in revealing the great com-
munion of life. One soul does in fact sustain life through-
out the whole of Nature. It is active in intelligent
creatures and passive in others. Now, the active acts on
the passive and borrows its strength ; man can appropriate
the strength of the lion, the agility and cunning of the ape;
he can also impose his own thought on both and make use
of them as instruments—all this is a question of magnetism.

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 187

Do you think the great painter, for example, finds the
colours which glow on his canvas in the wares of the artists’
colourman? No, his genius commands the sun which
yields its reflections to him. Intellectual omnipotence is a
Magic, and matter placed at the disposal of mind becomes
itself intelligence. Day stands in need of night in order
to shew itself, and

‘* Apollo’s time of abdication comes,
We know what genius now to call on most ;
Its virtue ALL THE WORLD, ’tis NO ONE named ;
They best dispense it who possess it not,
Just as the magnet’s positive effect
Its constant agent finds in pole opposed.
Dumb Nature speech inspires, wide ignorance
Creates the symbol, in a single word,
The man of genius is perchance that man
Who most attracts the mind of all the fools.”

We do not yet know the powers which human magnetical-
ness can dispose of, and when the prodigies of faith become
the conquests of science, man, enthroned above all supersti-
tions, will have taken his place in the universe, will know
that he is born to command Nature, and is the plenipoten-
tiary of God here below.

But, returning to Spiritism, something strange and un-
heard of seems now taking place inthe world. Christianity
by setting all our hopes in death disgusted men with life,
and here a new belief seems trying to reconcile us to exist-
ence by annihilating death. For spiritists, in fact, there is
no death. Life present and life to come, barely divided by
a thin partition which spirits can pass through, are hence-
forth one and the same life. We are surrounded by those
we loved, they touch us, make signals to us, write to us,
walk with us, and bear half our burdens. At times even
their hands become visible’'and palpable to clasp our own.
No more tears shed over tombs, no more wailing, no more
funereal wreaths in memory of those who are no more, for
so far from having ceased to exist they are living more
truly than we are. The old broken-down wall which once
separated definitely the two existences of man, is like the par-
tition which divided the dwellings of Pyramus and Thisbe;
it permits speech to pass between, it does not even prevent
kisses. All this is so specious, so astounding, so beautiful,
that we easily allow ourselves to be possessed by a flatter-
ing credulity, and do not sufficiently reflect to perceive that

188 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

the pretended new religion destroys the cultus and the hier-
archy, renders the priesthood useless, overturns the temple
for the tomb’s profit, and substitutes for the sacraments of
the living the doubtful and problematic contact of the dead.
In these multiplied evocations reason is fatigued, faith mate-
rialised, the severe grandeurs of theology are transformed
into romantic and sentimental trivialities, a Christ as ridicu-
lous as Rénan’s is talked of, and a Virgin Mary who comes
every evening to kiss the withered and toothless mouth
of the old man Girard de Caudemberg. In the same way
that solar photography reproduces with infuriating fidelity
the blemishes and scars on a face, this astral photography re-
produces the nothingness of silly conversations, the temerity
of conjecture, and the follies of idiotic thoughts. The
medium Rose evokes Madame Lafarge and makes her
acknowledge her guilt—an impious outrage on the grave
of an unfortunate woman, whose memory, protected by a
doubt, concerns the honour of an honourable family, some
of whose members still live and believe in her innocence.
By the side of enormities like this, we find from the pencil
of mediums pages which may not have been actually
written before, but which we seem to have already read, so
much do these verbiages resemble one another. Sometimes
the pretended spirit naively copies from an author whom,
doubtless, he thinks little known. The writer of this book
was one day astonished at finding ina number of La Vérité,a
spiritualistic journal published at Lyons, a page from the in-
troduction to his “ History of Magic,” under the signature of
Plato. The pencil writes dull and vapid songs which it attri-
butes to Béranger, and ridiculous discourses which it fathers
.on Lacenaire; it is a tohu-bohu of pretentious stupidities
and mutilated reminiscences, it is the Sabbath of the most
drivelling devils imaginable, it ts a chaos of extravagances.
Then by the side of all this are observations full of keen-
ness, bold hypotheses, and real fragments of science sewn
up with the old pack thread of Tabarin or Jocrisse. Apollo-
nius Tyaneus writes St-Simonian tirades and signs them St
-Augustine ; St Augustine declaims against the Church
Catholic ; St Louis talks like Jean Journet; St Vincent de
Paul speeghifies ; it is altogether the anarchic noise of mobs,
the madness of crowds, the confusion of multitudes photo-
graphed while in motion; it is the impersonal and multiple
spirit which idiotically drowns the animals it seeks refuge

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 189

in, that spirit whose name is legion and which is everywhere
driven out by the gentle influence of the Word of Truth.

In the opposite camp, M. de Mirville blows the infernal
‘trumpet and proclaims the reign of Satan. M. Gougenot
Desmousseaux, his double, offers him the aspergillus to
exorcise the Prince of Darkness. Insults rain down in place
of holy water : the voltairian strong-minded absurdly deny
facts to avoid investigating causes. The respectable M.
Velpeau explains by a slight cracking of the muscles of the
calf, those blows which break tables and almost demolish
walls. For many people still, Home, the American, is only
a skilful conjuror, a greater number shrug their shoulders
and will hear nothing on the subject, while true science in
the midst of all this chaos, grave, silent, and dejected, is
studying, observing, and waiting.

Luther one day had a visit from a spirit, whether white
or black the reformer does not tell us; but he believed it,
nevertheless, to be the devil. And behold the devil argu-
ing with the monk, and the monk convinced by his argu-
ments, and so came the Reformation into the world!
Spiritists and table-turners, this is your whole history.
A voice addresses you, you know not whose it is; often
your pretended revelations swarm with falsehoods and con-
tradictions, yet you think yourselves free of the hierarchy,
and that you know more than your curé and the Pope. The
world beyond is revealed to you directly or by the media-
tion of beings beneath yourselves, diseased and ignorant,
or insane creatures, who are entranced and know not what
they write, yet behold you are, like Israel, strong against
God! You arrange eternal dogma as you please, you deny
this, admit that, you invent fantastic paradises and an
endurable perdition; you retail cheap morality along with —
all this, for it certainly looks well, and carries no obligation

- along with it.

Thus, after the thunders of the prophets, after the glories
of the apostles, after the splendours of the fathers, after the
patient, laborious, but incomplete reasoning of the schol-
astic philosophers, after the despairing courage of reformers
and philosophy, God, at the end of His resources, sends
talking-tables to spell out in jumps the indecent saying of
Cambronne, a complaisant seasoning of idiotic doctrines
and an encouragement to intellectual onanism. Is it God?
No, it is the God you have made yourselves who is reduced

190 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

to such paltry expedients! Yet you pass before Bedlam
without taking your hat off and repeating that passage in
Scott—

“This is my own, my native land !”

Faith in God is the firm adhesion of the soul to the
necessary hypotheses of the understanding. Faith in Jesus
Christ and in His Church is the soul’s firm adherence to
the necessary hypotheses of the heart. If God be, He is
good ; if good, He loves us; if He love us, He must efh-
caciously cure our evils. He must come to us since we
cannot goto Him. The Incarnation, redemption, the sac-
raments, the unchangeable dogma, the indefectible hier-
archy, become necessary, and all these are proved by the
real existence and perpetual presence in the Church of an
evidently divine power which changes the ignorant into
sages, the weak into heroes, the simplest women, and even
the poorest children, into veritable angels on earth. Woe
to him who misunderstands, shame to him who resists and
denies this power, for it is the Spirit of Charity! By the
side of this reasonable faith, a fond and fanciful faith,
anarchic as madness and capricious -as dreams, has always
endeavoured to establish itself—it is the faith of visionaries
who take the phantoms of their imaginations to be divine
revelations, of those who seek knowledge from ecstacy,
intoxication, sleep, catalepsy, in fine, from all states which
by suspending free will in man, render him more or less
insane. And they see not that alienation is forfeiture of
manhood, that the spirit of vertigo is the spirit of lies and
wickedness, and that by abandoning themselves to auto-
matic trances, they leave the direction of their thought to
the dark unknown, and become voluntarily deranged, which
is horrible and wholly contrary to Nature. They develop
thereupon into prophets of the vortex, seers of vertigo,
oracles of the great chaos, interpreters of fatality. They
gaze into a broken glass, and fancy they behold the multi-
tude of celestial spirits which have already served as nour-
ishment to their minds, while their doctrinal reveries
resemble the nightmares of painful digestion. Where is
the essential difference between our modern hypnotists and
those ancient Indian gnostics who with eyes fixed on their
navel awaited the manifestation of the uncreated light?
Necromancy replacing Christianity, death-lights substituted

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. IOI

for the speech of the living God, spectral fluid descending
on us instead of grace, the eucharistic communion neglected
for I know not what banquets where the soul is asphyxiated
by breathing the phosphorus emanating from corpses—
this, pitiable beings, is what you take for a religious renov-
ation, this is your faith and your cultus, this the darksome
God whfom you adore!

Read the Fathers of the first centuries, scan the great
epochs of Christianity, listen to St Augustine aspiring
towards the infinite, and St Jerome meditating on heaven,
amidst the noise of the falling Roman Empire, hearken to
the peal of the eloquence of Chrysostom and St Ambrose,
then come down to the spiritualistic vagaries of Home, or
the pantheistic lucubrations of Allan Kardec, and you will
smile in pity and disgust. Is death but a bitter deception ?
_ Are the realities of the life beyond to be the derision of our
aspirations in this? Is the true Paradise less radiant than
Dante’s, and perdition less terrible than his hell? What,
do disembodied spirits, like those of Swedenborg, pro-
menade with hats on their heads? Do they obsess the
living to make them write puerilities? Don’t you see
that the hell of the Middle Ages with its grandiose terrors
would be preferable to this ridiculous degradation of
souls? Let God torture me if there be a God who is
capable of torturing me, but do not let Him make me a
fool!

Spiritism is a photography of current notions. The
books of Allan Kardec swarm with Saint-Simonism, Swe-
denborgianism, and Mormonism, but they are less learned
than Saint-Simon, less elevated than Swedenborg, less
logical than Joe Smith. Must we believe that we continue
growing old after death and that we reject on earth the
dotage of the life beyond? What asad prospect for great
men! What a melancholy advantage for the living!

Magical doctrine is not that of mediums. Dogmatising
mediums can only teach anarchy since their inspiration is
the result of disorderly excitation. They are ever pre-
dicting disasters, ever denying hierarchic authority, ever
posing as sovereign pontiffs. The initiate, on the contrary,
respects the hierarchy above all, loves and preserves order,
is deferential to sincere belief, rejoices at every sign of im-
mortality in faith, and of redemption by charity, which
wholly consists in discipline and obedience.

192 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

The study of the strange phenomena which take place
in the presence of men like Home is no less of the highest
importance. It is a question of seriously recanting the
too premature denials of the eighteenth century, of unfold-
ing before science and reason less narrow horizons than
those of a bourgeois criticism which denies everything it is
unable to explain. Mr Home is a person afflicted with
contagious somnambulism and contagious hallucination.
The facts which take place in his presence prove that the
forms of an over-excited imagination are as real as the im-
pressions of photography. We cannot see that which has
no existence ; the phantoms of dreams and the reveries of
the waking state are real images existing in the Astral
Light. But if the images attracted by diseased brains have
any reality about them, can they not be really projected
outside the brain or entire nervous organism of the
medium, and thus influence the organism of those who
voluntarily or otherwise enter into nervous sympathy with
the medium ?

And now let us answer those who see manifestations of
the other world, and facts of necromancy in these pheno-
mena. Our teaching on this point is that of the rabbins
who compiled the Sohar.

Axiom.

The spirit clothes itself to come down, and strips itself
to go up.

‘Created spirits are clothed with bodies because they
must be limited, in order that their existence may be pos-
sible. Denuded of all body, and consequently unlimited,
created spirits would lose themselves in the infinite, and
for want of the ability of self-concentration somewhere
they would be dead and impotent everywhere, plunged, as
they would be, in the immensity of God. All created
spirits, therefore, have bodies, some more subtle, some
grosser, according to their environment. The soul of a
dead person cannot live in our atmosphere any more than
we could exist in the earth or water. It dwells above the
air, which is an earth for it,* as the Saviour declares in the
Gospel—* The great gulf is fixed, and those who are above
can no longer go down to those below.” The hands which
Mr Home causes to appear are, therefore, air coloured

* See Note 22.

THE DOCTRINE OF SPIRITUAL ESSENCES. 193

by the reflections which his diseased imagination attracts
and projects. They may be touched as they are seen;
they are part illusion, part nervous and magnetic force.
Such phenomena of the Astral Light are always produced
at critical epochs for humanity. They are phantoms of the
world’s fever, the hysterics of an out-wearied society. In
the days of the Cxsars Romej(was full of spectres ; the doors
of the Temple opened of themselves in Vespasian’s time,
and the cry of “The gods depart!” was heard. Now,
when the gods depart, the devils return ; religious senti-
ment is transformed into superstition when faith is lost ;
for souls have need of faith, because they are athirst for hope.

Sacred and beautiful kingdom of the sky, Jesus the
Man-God, and Mary the mother of God! Angels of Fra
Angelico, saints of the Golden Legend, Virgins of the
paradise of Dante, how far more sublime and poetic, how
far more fair are ye than the ghosts of Cahagnet or the
wandering larvae of Allan Kardec! Severe and_incor-
ruptible dogma, which distributes the elect on the golden
ladder of the hierarchy, profound teaching, full of light for
docility of mind, and ‘of darkness for pride ; sun of glory
and of justice, men see you not, because their eyes are
blinded! Let them return to reason, and they will return
to faith, for faith and true reason are sisters, and both are
God’s cherished daughters. Woe be to him who discerns
nas not, but threefold woe to him who would divide

em !

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS ;
OR,

REALISATIONS OF MAGICAL SCIENCE.

ee

INTRODUCTION,

THE transcendant sciences of the Kabbalah and of magic
guarantee to man an exceptional, true, efficient, practical
power, and we must condemn them as vain and untruthful
if they do not impart it. Judge the doctors of the law by
their works, said the Great Master, and the rule is in-
fallible. If you wish me to believe in what you know, shew
me what you do!

In order to upraise man to moral emancipation, God
hides Himself from him, and, in a certain sense, surrenders
to him the government of the world. He leaves His exist-
ence to be divined by the grandeurs and harmonies of
Nature, so that man may progressively perfect himself by
continually enlarging the idea he conceives of his Maker.
Man knows God only by the names which he gives to this
Being of beings, and distinguishes Him only by the re-
presentations of Him which he attempts to trace. He is
thus in a certain sense the creator of Him by whom he
was created. He believes himself to be the image of God,
and by indefinitely enlarging his own reflection he believes
that he is outlining in infinite space the shadow of One who
is bodiless, shadowless, and unconfined.

TO CREATE GOD, TO ACCOMPLISH OUR OWN CREA-
TION, TO MAKE OURSELVES INDEPENDENT, IMPASSIBLE,
AND IMMORTAL—here certainly is a programme more
rash than the dream of Prometheus. Its foundation is
bold even to impiety, the thought ambitious even to mad-
ness. Nevertheless, it is a programme which is only

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 195

paradoxical in the form, which lends itself to a false and
sacrilegious interpretation. In one sense it is perfectly
reasonable, and its realisation and complete fulfilment is
promised by the science of the adepts. Man, in fact,
makes himself a God conformed to his own intelligence
and goodness; the God he adores is always his own
magnified likeness. To conceive the Absolute in goodness
and justice is to be one’s self most just and good. In-
tellectual and moral qualities are riches and the greatest of
all riches. They must be acquired by toil and struggle.
The inequality of aptitudes and the case of children born
with a more perfect organisation than others will be
objected, but we must believe such organisms to be the
result of a more advanced labour of Nature, and that the
children so endowed have acquired them, if not by their
individual efforts, at least by the joint efforts of the human
beings with whom their existence is bound up. It isa
secret of Nature who does nothing by chance. The
possession of more developed intellectual faculties, as also
that of money and lands, constitutes an imprescriptable
right of transmission and inheritance.

Yes, man is called to finish the work of his Creator, and
each of the moments he employs to improve or spoil him-
self is decisive for eternity. It is by the acquisition of an
invariably upright mind, and an invariably just will, that he
makes himself alive for life eternal, since nothing survives
to injustice and error but the wretchedness of their disorder.
To understand what is good is to desire it, and, in the
order of justice, to desire is to perform. For this reason
the Gezeel tells us that men will be judged according to
their works. Our works constitute us what we are to such
an extent that our bodies receive from our habits a
modification and sometimes a complete change of appear-
ance. A shape acquired or imposed becomes a providence
or fatality for our entire existence. Those bizarre figures
with which the Egyptians endowed their human symbols
of divinity represent the fatal forms. Typhon, by his
crocodile mouth, is doomed to devour unceasingly to fill
his hippopotamous belly. So is he devoted by his voracity
and ugliness to eternal destruction.

Man can destroy his faculties by negligence or abuse.
He can create for himself new faculties by the good
use of those which he has received from Nature. It

196 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

is said frequently that the affections are not to be com-
manded, that faith is not possible for all, that character
cannot be transformed, but all these assertions are only true
for the perverse or the indolent. We can make ourselves
confiding, pious, loving, self-sacrificing, when we sincerely
wish to be so. We can enrich the mind with the serenity
of justice, and the will with the omnipotence of justice. We
can reign in heaven by faith and on earth by knowledge.
The man who can govern himself is the king of all Nature.

We are now about to show by what means the true
initiates became masters of life by subduing suffering and
death, how they operated on themselves and others the
transformations of Proteus, how they exercised the divina-
tion of Apollonius, how they manufactured the gold of
Raymond Lully and of Flamel, how to renew their youth
they possessed the secret of Postel the Resuscitated, and
the fabulous Cagliostro. We shall reveal, in fine, the
ultimate secrets of magic.

I.—THE MAGNUM OPUS.

THE magnum opus is pre-eminently the creation of man,
by himself, that is, the full and complete conquest which
he can make of his faculties and his future; it is pre-
eminently the perfect emancipation of his will, which
assures his universal dominion over Azoth and the domain
of Magnesia, that is, a full power over the Great Magical
Agent. This Magic Agent, which the old Hermetic philo-
sophers disguised under the name of the first matter
of the magnum opus, determines the species of modifiable
substance, and metallic transmutation, as well as the
universal medicine, can be really attained by its means.
This is no hypothesis, it is a fact already tested and rigor-
ously demonstrable.

Nicolas Flamel and Raymond Lully, both poor, have
evidently distributed immense riches. Agrippa never pro-
gressed beyond the first part of the »agnum opus, and he
died in the attempt, struggling towards complete self-
possession and to establish his independence.

Like all magical mysteries, the Hermetic operations, and

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 197

the secrets of the sagnun: opus, are triple; they are religious,
philosophical, and natural, or material, all interdependent.
The gold of the philosophers is, in religion, the absolute
and supreme reason; in philosophy it is truth; in visible
nature it is the sun, which is the emblem of the sun of
truth, as that is itself the shadow of the First Source
whence all splendours spring; in the subterranean and
mineral world it is the purest and most perfect gold. For
this reason the search after the sagnuim opus is called the
search after the Absolute, and the great work is itself called
the work of the sun.

All Hermetic science is contained in the doctrine of
Hermes Trismegistus, sculptured primitively, it is said, on
an emerald table. We have explained already its first
articles; those which refer to the operation of the magnum
opus are as follows :—

“Thou shalt separate the earth from the fire, the ethereal
from the gross, gently, and with great industry.

“Tt ascends from earth to heaven, and again it comes
down from heaven to earth, and it is invested with the
potency of superior and inferior things.

“ Thou wilt possess by this means the glory of the whole
world, and all darkness will depart from thee.

“It is the strong power of every power, for it will over-
come all things subtle and pénetrate all things solid.

“It is thus that the world was created.”

To separate that which is ethereal from that which is
gross, in the first operation, which is wholly interior, is to
emancipate the soul from every vice and prejudice, which
is accomplished by the-use of the philosophic salt, namely,
wisdom; of mercury which is personal skill and toil;
finally, of sulphur which représents vital energy and the
warmth of will. By this means is achieved the transmuta-
tion of the least precious things, even the refuse of the
earth, into spiritual gold. It is in this sense that we must
understand the parables of the ¢urba phtlosophorum of
Bernard Trevisan, Basilius Valentininus, Marius the
Egyptian, and other alchemical prophets; but in their
works, as in the szagnuum opus, we must skilfully separate
the ethereal from the gross, the mystical from the positive,
allegory from theory. If we wish to read them with
pléasure and profit, we must first interpret them allegori-
cally in their entirety, then descend from allegories to

198 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

realities by the way of the correspondences or analogies
indicated in the one dogma—that which is above is as that
which is below, and conversely.

All the masters in knowledge have recognised that it is
impossible to arrive at material results if the analogies of
the universal medicine and the philosophers’ stone have
not been found in the two superior degrees of the religious
and philosophical werlds, Then they say the work is easy,
simple, and inexpensive ; otherwise, it dissipates unprofit-
ably the fortune and life of the seekers.

The first matter of the »agnum opus is, in the superior
world, enthusiasm and activity ; in the intermediate world,
-it is intelligence and industry ; in the inferior world, it is
toil ; in science, it is sulphur, mercury, and salt, which con-
densed and volatilized by turns composes the azoth of the
sages.

The Hermetic art is, therefore, at once a religion, a
philosophy, and a natural science. As a religion it is that
of the ancient Magi and the initiates of all the ages; as a
philosophy, its principles may be found in the Alexandrian
School, and in the theories of Pythagoras; as a science, its
methods must be ascertained from Paracelsus, Nicholas
Flamel, and Raymond Lully. The science is real for those
alone who admit and understand both the philosophy and
the religion, and its processes will succeed only for the
adept who has attained to sovereign power of will, and
thus has become the monarch of the elementary world.

The disciples of Hermes before promising to their
adepts the elixir of perpetual youth and the powder
of projection recommend them to seek the _ philoso-
phical stone. What is this stone, and why is it thus
named? The great Initiator of the Christians invites
His believers to build upon the rock or stone if they
do not wish their edifices to be destroyed. He is Him-
self called the corner stone, and He tells His most faithful
disciple, “ Zz es PETRUS et super hanc PETRAM @aificabo
ecclesiam meam.” This stone, say the masters in alchemy,
is the true salt of the philosophers, which is the third in-
gredient in the composition of azoth. Now AZOTH, as we
know, is the name of the great Hermetic and true philoso-
phical agent, so their salt is represented under the form of
a cubic stone, as may be seen in the twelve Keys of Basi-
lius Valentinus, or in the allegories of Trevisan. This

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 199

stone is the foundation of absolute philosophy; it is the
supreme and immoveable reason, and the doctrine of
universal harmonies by the sympathy of contrary things.
Before thinking of the metallic work we must be for ever
éstablished on the absolute principles of wisdom; we must
possess that reason which is the touchstone of truth. Never
will a prejudiced man be the king of Nature _and_the
master of transmutations. The philosophical stone is,

then, before all things, needful. To find the absolute in
the infinite, the indefinite, and the finite, such is_the_
magnum opus of the sages; such is the whole secret of |

a ee

Hermes ; such is the stone of the_philosophers. This
stone is one and multiple; it is decomposed by analysis
and recomposed by synthesis. In the analysis it is a
powder, the alchemical powder of projection; before the
analysis, and in the synthesis, it is a stone. This stone,
say the masters, must not be exposed to the air, nor to the
glances of the profane; it must be kept concealed and
preserved with care in the most secret place of the owner’s
laboratory, and the key of that place must be always
carried about the person.

He who possesses the Great Arcanum is a true king, and
more than a king, for he is inaccessible to all fears and to
all vain hopes. In_any malady of soul or body, a single
morsel detached from the precious stone, a single grain of
the divine powder, are more than sufficient to cure him.
He that hath ears to hear let him hear, as the Master sayeth.

To find the philosopher’s stone, we must then, as Hermes
tells us, separate the volatile from the fixed with great
care and minute attention. Thus, we must separate our
certitudes from our beliefs, and clearly distinguish the
respective domains of science and faith; clearly under-
stand that we do not know what we only believe in, and
that we no longer believe anything which we have attained
to the knowledge of; and that thus the essence of the
things of faith is the unknown and indefinite, whilst it is
entirely the reverse in the things of science. It will thence
be concluded that knowledge rests on reason and experi-
ence, whilst the basis of faith is in sentiment. In other
words, the philosophical stone is the true certitude which
human prudence assures to conscientious researches and to
modest doubt, whilst religious enthusiasm gives it exclu-
sively to faith. Now, it belongs neither to reason devoid

200 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

of aspirations, nor to aspirations devoid of reason. True
certitude is the reciprocal acquiescence of the reason which
knows in the sentiment which believes, and of the senti-
ment which believes in the reason which knows. The
definitive alliance of faith and reason will result not from
their absolute distinction and separation, but from their
mutual control and fraternal concurrence. Such is the
meaning of the two pillars of Solomon’s porch, one of
which is called Jakin, and the other Bohas, one being white
and the other black. They are distinct and separate, they
are even contrary in appearance, but if blind force should
seek to unite them, the arch of the Temple would fall in.
In their separation they are one sustaining force, but joined
they are two forces which mutually destroy each other. In
the same way the spiritual power diminishes so soon as it
attempts to usurp the temporal, and the temporal power is
the victim of its encroachment on the spiritual. Gregory
VII. lost the papacy, and the schismatic kings have lost
and forfeited the monarchy. Human equilibrium has need
of two bases, the world gravitates by means of two forces,
generation requires two sexes. Such is the meaning of the
Arcanum of Solomon represented by the two pillars of the
Temple, Jakin and Bohas.

The sun and moon of alchemists correspond to the same
symbol, and concur in the perfection of the philosopher's
stone. The sun is the hieroglyphic sign of truth, because
‘it is the visible source of light, and the brute stone is the
symbol of stability. For this reason the ancients adored
the sun under the figure of a black stone, which the
called Heliogabalus, and the alchemists of the Middle
Ages also indicated the philosophic stone as the first
means of manufacturing the gold of the philosophers, that
is, of transforming all vital powers, represented by the
six metals, into the sun, that is, into truth and light, the
first and indispensable operation of the magnum opus, and
one which leads to the secondary adaptations, and makes
known by the analogies of nature the natural and unre-
generate gold to the creators of the spiritual and living
gold, to the possessors of the true salt, the true mercury,
and the true sulphur of the philosophers.

To find the philosophic stone is then to have discovered
the Absolute, as it is otherwise called by the masters.
Now, the Absolute is that which tolerates no errors, it 1s

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 20I

the separation of the fixed from the volatile, it is the rule
of the imagination, it is the very necessity of being, it is
the immutable law of truth and reason; the Absolute is
that which is. God Himself cannot exist save in virtue of
a supreme and inevitable reason. It is therefore this
reason which is the Absolute; it is in this we must believe
if we desire our faith to possess a reasonable and solid
basis. :
He who would attain to the comprehension of the
Grand Word,* and to the possession of the Grand Secret,
must, after studying the principles here laid down, read
the Hermetic philosophers attentively, and he will attain
initiation as others have attained it, but the unique dogma
of Hermes must be taken as the key of their allegories,
and the order indicated in the kabbalistic alphabet of the
Tarot must be followed to classify the subjects and direct
the operation. All the alchemical masters who have
written on the magnum opus have employed symbolical
and figurative expressions, and they have rightly done so,
as much to repel the profane from a work which for them
would be dangerous as to make themselves understood
by the adepts by revealing to them the entire world of
analogies ruled by the one and sovereign dogma of Hermes.
Thus for them gold and silver are the king and queen, or
the moon and sun; sulphur is the flying eagle ; mercury
the winged and bearded goat, seated on the cube and
crowned with flames; matter, or salt, is the winged dragon;
the metals in ebullition are lions of various colours; finally,
the whole work has the pelican and phoenix for its symbols.
The transformations of Hermetic chemistry are the
artificial development of natural germs. No one makes
gold, but we can assist nature to make it, and all the
science of Hermes consists in the sagacity which selects
and arranges nature’s own materials in order that she may
perform her work, which she never fails to do when the
instruments she makes use of are found naturally or
artificially disposed as she herself disposes them. The
whole secret of Hermetic philosophy is contained in this
single indication. We have discovered pisciculture and
Hermeticism is metalliculture. But who will reap carps
by sowing herring-roe? How then can gold be produced

* See Note 23.

202 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

from salt, sulphur, and mercury?* M. Louis Lucas, the
learned inventor of the biometer, has already demonstrated
that, according to the notions of the ancients, substance is
single, and owes its special forms to the diversity of its
modes of molecular polarisation and to the varied angularity
of its magnetic _radiation. All beings are thus individual
magnets, and the problem to be resolved by the magic o

Hermes is this:—How to accumulate and fix the latent
caloric in an artificial body in such a manner as to change
the molecular polarisation of natural bodies by their amal-
gamation with the artificial body.

The creation of gold in the magnum opus is performed
by transmutation and multiplication. Raymond Lully, one
of the grand and sublime masters of the science, says that
to make gold we must have gold, ex nzhilo nihil fit; we
cannot actually create wealth, we augment and multiply
it. Let the aspirants to knowledge, therefore, thoroughly
understand that neither miracles nor conjuring tricks are
to be expected of the adept. Hermetic science, like all
true sciences, 1s mathematically demonstrable; even its
material results are as rigorous as those of a well-done
equation. Hermetic gold is not only a true doctrine, a
light wherein there is no shadow, a truth devoid of all
alloy of falsehood, it is also a real, material, pure gold, the
most precious which can be found in the mines of earth.
But the vivific gold, the vivific sulphur, or the true fire of
the philosophers, must be sought in the house of mercury.
This fire is alimented by air; to describe its attractive and
expansive power, we cannot suggest a better comparison
than that of the thunderbolt which is at first only a dry,
terrestrial exhalation joined to a humid vapour, but which,
by dint of excitation, assuming a fiery nature, acts on the
humidity inherent in it, which it attracts to itself and
changes into its own nature, after which it precipitates
itself with rapidity towards the earth, whereto it is attracted
by a fixed nature similar to its own. The salt and sulphur
serve only to prepare the mercury.

These words, enigmatic in their form but fundamentally
clear, express briefly what the philosophers understand by
their mercury fecundated with sulphur which becomes the
lord and regenerator of the salt: it is AZOTH the universal
magnesta, the Great Magic Agent, the Astral Light,

* See Note 24.

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 203

fecundated by animal energy, by intellectual power, which
they compare to sulphur because of its affinities with
divine fire. As for salt, it is absolute matter. Every
material thing contains salt,-and all salt can be converted
into pure gold by the combined action of sulphur and
mercury, which sometimes act so rapidly that transmuta-
tion can be instantaneously accomplished without fatigue
to the operator and almost without expense; at other
times, and according to the more contrary disposition of
the atmospheric media, the operation requires several days,
months, and sometimes even years. All depends on the
interior magnes of Paracelsus. The work wholly consists
in projection, and the projection is perfectly accomplished
by the effective and realisable comprehension of a single
word. There is indeed but one important operation in the
work; it consists in sublimation, which is nothing else,
according to Geber, than the elevation of the dry substance
by means of fire, with adherence to its proper vase.

As we have already said, there exist two palmary natural
laws, two essential laws which produce by counterpoise the
universal equilibrium of things; these are stability and
motion, analogous, in philosophy, to truth and invention,
and, in absolute conception, to necessity and liberty, which
are the very essence of God. The Hermetic philosophers
give the name of fixed to all that is ponderable, to all that
by its nature tends to central rest and immobility; they
call everything which more naturally and readily obeys the
law of motion volatile, and they form their stone of the
analysis, that is, of the volatilisation of the fixed, then of
the synthesis, that is, of the fixation of the volatile, which
they accomplish by the application to the fixed, called
their salt, of sulphurated mercury or the light of life
directed and rendered all-powerful by a secret operation.
They avail themselves also of all nature and their stone is
found wherever salt exists, which causes it to be said that
no substance is foreign to the magnum opus, and that even
the most seemingly contemptible and vile materials may
be changed into gold, which is true in this sense that, as we
have said, they all contain the productive salt, represented
in our emblems by the cubic stone itself. To know how to
extract from all matter the pure salt concealed therein is
to possess the secret of the stone, which is therefore a
saline stone, decomposed and reconstituted by the Od or

204 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

universal Astral Light; it is one and multiple, for, like
common salt, it can be dissolved and incorporated with
other substances. Obtained by analysis, it might be called
the universal quicksilver; recovered by the synthetic
method, it is the true panacea of the ancients, for it cures
every disease, whether of soul or body, and has been called
pre-eminently the medicine of all nature. When by abso-
lute initiation we dispose of the forces of the Universal
Agent, we have always this stone at our disposal, for its
extraction is a simple and easy operation quite distinct
from projection or metallic realisation. This stone in its
sublimated state must not, as we have said, come in con-
tact with atmospheric air, which may partly dissolve it and
destroy its virtue ; it would not be safe, moreover, to inhale
its emanations. The wise man more readily preserves it
in its natural envelopes, which the Kabbalists call skins.
To express hieroglyphically this law of prudence, they. gave
to their mercury, which was personified in Egypt by Her-
manubis, a dog’s head, and to their sulphur, represented
by the Baphomet of the Templars, or the prince of the
Sabbath, that goat’s head which has caused the secret
associations of the middle ages to be so much decried.*

The magnum opus of Hermes is an essentially magical
operation, and the most supreme of all, for it supposes the
absolute in knowledge and in will. There is light in gold,
gold in light, and light in all things. The intelligent will,
which assimilates light, thus directs the operations of sub-
stantial form, and only employs chemistry as a very
secondary instrument. The influence of human will and
intelligence on the operations of nature, partly dependent
on its Logos, is besides a fact so certain that all serious
alchemists have succeeded in proportion to their attain-
ments and faith, reproducing their thought in the pheno-
menon of the fusion, salification, and recomposition of
metals.

The Great Agent of the sun’s operation is that force
described in the symbol of Hermes on the Emerald Table,
it is universal magic power, it is the igneous spiritual
motor, the Jewish Od, and the Astral Light according to
the expression adopted in this work. It is the secret,
living, philosophical fire of which no Hermetic philosopher
speaks, save with the most mysterious reserves; it is the

* See Note 25.

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 205

universal sperm whose secret they guarded, and which they
only represented under the figure of the caduceus of
Hermes. An immense physical secret was thus concealed
under the kabbalistic parables of the ancients. We have
succeeded in unravelling it, and we present it literally to
the investigations of gold-makers :—

1, The four imponderable fluids are only diverse mani
festations of one universal agent, which is light.

2. Light is the fire which is used in the magnum opus
under the form of electricity.

3. Human will directs the vital light by means of the
nervous organisation ; this is now called magnetizing.

4. The secret agent of the magnum opus, the Azoth of
the sages, the living and vivifying gold of the philosophers,
the universal productive metallic agent, is MAGNETIZED
ELECTRICITY, the first matter of the magnum opus.

The great Hermetic Arcanum, revealed for the first time
clearly and without mystic figures, is this:—What the
adepts call dead substances are bodies as they exist in
nature ; living substances are those assimilated and
magnetized by the will of the adept. So that the magnum
opus is more than a chemical operation; it is a veritable
creation of the human Logos initiated into the power of
the Logos of God Himself. This secret is contained in
the thirty-first Semita of the Sepher Jezirah, commented
on by the alchemist Rabbi Abraham. (Ed. Amsterdam,
1642, p. 144.)

Semita XXXI.

Vocatur intelligentia perpetua; et quare vocatur ita?
Eo quod ducit motum solis et lunz juxta constitutionem
eorum ; utrumque in orbe sibi conveniente.

Rabbi Abraham F.:. D.°
dicit:
Semita trigesima prima vocatur intelligentia perpetua:
et illa ducit solem et lunam et reliquas stellas et figuras,
unum quodque in orbe suo, et impertit omnibus creatis
juxta dispositionem ad signa et figuras.

“The thirty-first path is called perpetual intelligence,
and it rules the sun and moon with the other stars and
objects, each in its respective orb. And it distributes what
is fitting to all created things according to these.”

This text, it will be seen, is still completely obscure for
those who do not know the value of each of the thirty-two

206 . MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

paths. These are the ten numbers and twenty-two hiero-
glyphical letters of the Kabbalah. The thirty-first is con-
nected with w, which represents the magic lamp or light
between the horns of Baphomet. It is the kabbalistic
sign of Od or the Astral Light, with its two poles and
equilibriated centre. As we have said, in alchemical
language the sun signifies gold, the moon silver, and the
other stars or planets correspond to the other metals. The
secret fire of the alchemical masters was therefore elec-
tricity and this is half of their Great Arcanum, but they
knew how to equilibriate its force by a magnetic influence
which they concentrated in their Athanor.

II.—THE UNIVERSAL MEDICINE,

MosT of our physical maladies are derived from our moral
diseases, following the universal and magical dogma, and
by reason of the law of analogies. Any great passion to
which we abandon ourselves is always a great disease in
preparation. Mortal sins are so named because positively
and physically they cause death. So soon as the will is
irrevocably confirmed in the path of absurdity, the man is
dead, and the rock which he will break on is at hand. It
is, therefore, true that wisdom preserves and prolongs life.
Every one knows that a sober, moderately industrious, and
perfectly regulated life usually lengthens existence. The
Great Master has said :—“ My flesh is meat indeed, and my
blood is drink indeed. He that eateth my flesh and
drinketh my blood hath everlasting life.” And when the
crowd murmured, He added :—“ Here the flesh profiteth
nothing ; the words which I speak to you are spirit and
life.” Therefore He meant to say :—“ Drink of my spirit
and live by my life.” And when He was about to die, He
attached the memory of His life to the sign of bread, and
that of His spirit to the sign of wine, and instituted thus
the communion of faith, hope, and charity. In the same
sense, the Hermetic masters say :—Make gold potable, and
you will have the universal medicine; that is, appropriate
truth to your use, let it be the spring which you daily drink
of, and then you will have within you the immortality of

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 207

the sages. Temperance, tranquillity of soul, simplicity of
character, calmness and reasonableness of will, not only
make us happy but. strong and healthy, It is by becoming
good and rational that man makes himself immortal; we
are all the authors of our destinies, and God does not save
us without our own concurrence.

Death has no existence for the wise man, it is a phantom
made hideous by the ignorance and weakness of the crowd.
Change is the evidence of movement and movement is life.
The very corpse would not decompose were it dead; all _
the molecules which form it remain alive and are in motion.
to disintegrate. And you think that mind is the first to be
deipaed and lives no more! You believe that thought
and love can cease when the grossest matter never perishes.
If change must be called death, we are daily dying and daily_
being born anew, for our bodies are always changing. Fear,
therefore, to soil and tear our garments but fear not to leave
them when the hour of rest has come. The embalming
and preservation of bodies are a superstition against Nature.
It is an attempt to create death, it is the enforced immob-
ility of a substance which life has need of. But we must
not destroy or make away with corpses, for nothing is
abruptly performed by Nature, and we must not run the
risk of violently breaking the bonds of a soul that is releas-
ing itself. Death is never instantaneous, it is accomplished
by degrees. So long as the blood is not absolutely cold, so
long as the nerves can be galvanised, the man is not wholly
dead, and if none of the essential organs of life be destroyed
the spirit may be recalled, either accidentally or by a power-
ful will. A philosopher has said that he would reject uni-
versal testimony rather than believe in a resurrection from
the dead, and therein he has spoken rashly, for it is on the
faith of universal evidence that he believed in the impos-
sibility of resurrection.

Let us now be bold enough to assert that resurrection is
possible, and even occurs more often than is imagined. How
many persons whose dissolutions have been judicially and
scientifically established have been subsequently discovered
in their coffins dead, it is true, but who have come back to
life and have bitten through their hands to open the arteries
and escape by a new death from unendurable agonies? A
doctor will tell us that such persons were in a lethargy.
What is lethargy, however? The etherisation or stupor

208 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

produced by chloroform is a real lethargy which sometimes
ends in actual death, when the soul, rejoiced at its tem-
porary liberation, makes an effort of the will to depart
finally, which is possible with those who have conquered
hell, that is, with those whose moral strength is greater than
that of astral attraction. Thus resurrection is possible only
for elementary souls, and these above all are exposed to
awake unwillingly in the tomb. Great men and true sages
are never buried alive.

The body is a garment of the soul, to which the latter is
joined by sensibility, and when sensibility ceases it is a
sure sign that the soul is departing. When the garment is
completely worn out or seriously and irreparably torn, it
quits it and never reassumes it. But when, by some
accident, it loses this garment without it being worn or
destroyed, the soul, in certain cases, can take it up again,
either by its own effort or by the help of another will
stronger and more active than its own. ~

Death is neither the end of life nor the beginning of im-
mortality, it is the continuation and transformation of life.
Now, a transformation being always a progress, few dead
persons consent to return to this life, and reassume the
garment they have just rejected. This makes resurrection
one of the most difficult achievements of supreme initiation,
and its success is never certain but should be regarded as
accidental or unexpected. To resuscitate a dead person,
the most powerful chains of attraction which can bind it to
the form it has quitted must be suddenly and energetically
brought together. It is necessary, therefore, to be before-
hand acquainted with this chain, then to seize it, then to
produce a will-effort strong enough to rejoin it instan-
taneously and with irresistible power. The method of pro-
cedure is indicated in Scripture. The prophet Elias and
St Paul employed it with success. The dead person must
be magnetized by placing our feet upon their feet, our
mouth against their mouth, then concentrating the whole
will, and calling the soul which has escaped for a long time
towards us with all the mental caresses and affection of
which we are capable. If the operator can inspire the soul
of the defunct with great love or respect, if in the thought
which he magnetically transmits to it, the thaumaturge can
persuade it that life is still necessary to it, and that happy
days are still in store for it here below, it will certainly return.

_ THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 209

It suffices sometimes to take the person by the hand and
raise them quickly, calling them in a loud voice. This
method, which commonly succeeds in swoons, may be also
efficacious in death, when the magnetist who exercises it
is endowed with a powerfully sympathetic speech and
possesses what may be called the eloquence of voice. He
must also perform the work by a great outburst of faith.

In the same way, it is the faith as well as the knowledge
of the doctor which is the real virtue of remedies, and the
only true efficacious medicine is thaumaturgy. So occult
therapeutics are exclusive of all common medication. They
chiefly employ words, insufflations, and communicate by
the will a varied virtue to such simple substances as water,
oil, wine, camphor, and salt. The water of the homco-
pathists is a veritably magnetized and enchanted water
which works by means of faith. The tonic substances
added in almost infinitesimal quantities are consecrations
and as it were signs of the doctor’s will.

What is vulgarly called charlatanism is a great means
of real success in medicine, if such charlatanry be skilful
enough to inspire great confidence and to form a circle of
belief. In medicine more than all it is faith which saves.
There is scarcely a village without its compounder of
occult medicines, and such persons have almost everywhere
and always achieved an incomparably greater success than
the doctors approved by the faculty. The remedies they
prescribe are often bizarre or ridiculous, and succeed better
on account of it, because they exact and obtain more faith
on the part of subjects and operators.

Insufflation is one of the most important practices of
occult medicine, because it is a perfect sign of life-transfer.
To inspire, in fact, means to breathe on some one or
something, and we already know, by the one dogma of
Hermes, that it is the virtue of things which has created
words, and that an exact proportion exists between ideas
and words, which are the first forms and verbal realisations
of ideas. Accordingly as the breathing is warm or cold, it
is attractive or repulsive. The warm breathing corresponds
to positive electricity, and the cold to negative electricity.
Electrical and nervous animals fear the cold breathing, as
we may ascertain by breathing on a cat whose fa™*rities
are importunate. By fixedly regarding a lion i -r, and
breathing in their face, we should so stupify th . that we

O

210 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC,

should force them to recoil before us. Warm and prolonged
insufflation restores circulation, cures rheumatic pains, re-
establishes equilibrium in the humours of the body, and
dissipates weariness. Coming from a good and sym-
pathetic person, it is a universal composer. Cold insufflation
appeases those pains which are caused by congestions and
fluidic accumulations. These two breathings must there-
fore be alternated, by observing the polarity of the human
organism, and by acting in an opposite manner on the
poles, subjected, one after another, to a contrary magnetism.
Thus, to cure an inflamed eye, the healthy one should be
gently and warmly insufflated, then cold insufflations must
be practised at a distance on the irritated organ in exact
proportion with the warm ones. Magnetic passes them-
selves act like a breathing by the transpiration and radia-
tion of the interior air, which is all phosphorescent with
vital light; slow passes are a warm breathing which
collects and raises the spirits, rapid ones are a cold breath-
ing which disperses the energies and neutralises tendencies
to congestion. The warm insufflation should be made
either transversely or from beneath upwards; the cold
insufflation is more efficacious when directed from above
downwards.

All the power of the occultist doctor is in the conscious-
ness of his will, and all his art consists in producing faith
in his patient. Everything is possible to him who believes,
as the Master has told us. He must dominate his subject
by his presence, tone, and gestures, must inspire confidence
by something of paternal manner, and divert him by some
pleasant and cheerful talk. Rabelais,who was more magician
than he seemed, chose pantagruelism as his special panacea.
He made his patients laugh, and all the remedies they
subsequently used succeeded the better in consequence ;
he established between himself and them a magnetic cur-
rent, by means of which he transmitted to them his assur-
ance and good temper; he flattered them in his prefaces
by calling them his most illustrious and cherished patients,
and he dedicated his works to them. So we are convinced
that Gargantua and Pantagruel have cured more ill-
humours, more dispositions to folly, more ultra-bilious
manias in that epoch of religious animosities and _ civil
wars, than all the medical faculty could then ascertain and
study.

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 21T

Occult medicine is essentially sympathetic. A reciprocal
affection, or at least good-will, must be established between
doctor and patient. Syrups and juleps have little: inhe-
rent virtue, they are what the opinion common to, agent
and patient makes them, so homceopathy suppresses them
without grave inconvenience. Oil and wine combined
either with salt or camphor would be sufficient for the:
healing of all wounds, and for all exterior frictions or
soothing applications. Oil and wine are the pre-eminent
medicaments of evangelical tradition. It is the balm of
the Samaritan, and in the Apocalypse the prophet, describ-
ing the great exterminations, prays the avenging powers to
spare the oil and wine, that is, to leave a hope and a cure
for so many wounds. Extreme unction among the primi-
tive Christians, and in the mind of the apostle St James,
who has transmitted the precept in his epistle to the faith-
ful of the whole world, was the pure and simple practice of
the Master’s traditional medicine. ‘Is any man sick
among you? Let him call in the priests of the church
and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the
name of the Lord.” This divine therapeutic was progres-
sively lost, and Extreme Unction has come to be regarded
as a religious formality necessary in the hour of death.*
Nevertheless, the thaumaturgic virtue of Holy Oils cannot
be wholly consigned to oblivion by the traditional dogma,
and its memory is retained in that passage of the Cate-
chism which refers to Extreme Unction.

III.—RENEWED YOUTH.

THE universal principle of life is a substantial movement,
or a substance eternally moved and motive, invisible and
impalpable, in a volatile state, and which is materially
manifested when fixed by the phenomena of polarisation.
This substance is indefectible, incorruptible, and immortal,
but its form manifestations are continually changed by the
perpetuity of motion. Thus, all dies because all lives, and
if we could immortalise a form, we should arrest motion

* And yet the forgiveness of sin was in some way attached to the ceremony

or to the prayer of faith which accompanied it, and which evidently was the
life of the ceremony.—TRr.

212 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

and create the only true death. To imprison a soul for
ever in a mummified human body, such would-be the hor-
rible solution of the paradox of pretended immortality in
the same body and on the same earth. Everything is
regenerated by the universal solvant, whose power is con-
secrated in the quintessence, that is, in the equilibrating
<entre of the two-fold polarity. The four elements of the
ancients are the four polar forces of the universal magnet,
and it is in their exact proportion that we must seek the
universal medicine of the body, as that of the soul is offered
us by réligion in Him who eternally sacrifices Himself on
’ the Cross for the salvation of the world.

The great magical means of preserving the youth of the
- body is to prevent the soul from growing old, by carefully
preserving its primeval freshness of sentiments and thoughts,
which the corrupt world calls illusions, and which we name
the primitive reflections of eternal truth. To believe in
bliss on earth, to believe in friendship and love, to believe
in a maternal Providence which takes account of all our
steps and recompenses all our tears, is to be completely
duped, says the corrupted world, and it fails to perceive
that the dupe is he who thinks himself to be strong when
depriving himself of all the delights of the soul. To
believe in good, in the moral order, is to possess good, and
this is why the Saviour of the world promised the Kingdom
of Heaven to those who become as little children. Infancy
is the age of faith ; the child as yet knows nothing of life,
so is he glowing with confiding immortality. Can he
doubt of self-devotion, tenderness, friendship, love, when
he is in the arms of his mother? Become children in
heart and you will keep young in body!

The realities of God and Nature infinitely surpass all the
dreams of men both in goodness and beauty. Thus the
blasés are those who have never known how to be happy,
and the disillusioned prove, by their disgust, that they have
only drunk at muddy springs. To enjoy even the sensual
pleasures of life, we must possess moral sense, and those
who calumniate existence have certainly abused it.
Supreme magic directs man to the purest moral code.
Vel sanctum invenit, vel sanctum facit, an adept has said,
for it shews us that to be happy even in this world we
must be holy. To be holy! something said with ease, but
how shall we obtain faith when we believe no longer?

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 213

How recover the taste for virtue in a heart depraved by
vice? . .. It is a question of recurrence to the four maxims
of science—to know, to dare, to will, and to keep silent.
Silence must be imposed on our disgusts, we must study |
duty and begin practising it as if we loved it. You are a
sceptic, for example, and you wish to be a Christian. Per-
form the exercises of a Christian, pray regularly, using
Christian formule, approach the sacraments assuming faith,
and faith will come. By analogous exercises, a fool, if he
willed it persistently, might become a man of under-
standing.

By changing the habits of the soul we assuredly change
those of the body. What contributes above all to make us
old by deforming us are rancorous and bitter thoughts,
unfavourable judgments on others, the fury of wounded
pride and of ill-satisfied passions. A benevolent and mild
philosophy would save us from all these evils. If we
closed our eyes on our neighbour's faults, taking account
of his good qualities only, we should find goodness and
kindness everywhere. The most perverse man has his
good points, and softens when we know how to take him.
Had we nothing in common with human vices we should
not even perceive them. Friendship and the self-abnega-
tion which it inspires, are found even in the prisons and
galleys. The abominable Lacenaire faithfully returned
money when it was lent to him and many times performed
acts of generosity and benevolence. No one is absolutely
bad or absolutely good. “No one is good but God,” said
the best of masters.

What we mistake for the zeal of virtue in ourselves is
often only a secret self-love, dissimulated jealousy, and a
haughty instinct of contradiction. ‘“ When we see manifest
disorders and scandalous sinners,” say the authors of mys-
tical theology, “believe they are subjected by God to
greater trials than we are, that certainly, or at least very
probably, we are not of such worth as they, and that we
should do far worse in their place.”

Peace, peace! This is the supreme soul-good, to give us
which Christ came into the world. “Glory to God in the
highest and peace on earth to men of goodwill!” The
early Christian fathers reckoned sadness as an eighth
deadly sin. In fact, the very repentance of the Christian
is not a sadness but a consolation, joy, and triumph. “I

214 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

desired evil and I desire it no longer, I was dead and am
alive.” The father of the prodigal son has killed the fatted
calf for his son has returned, and what can the prodigal
do? Weep, feel a little confused, but above all be joyful.
Folly and wickedness are the only sad things in the world.
As soon as we are delivered from them, let us laugh and
utter cries of joy, for we are saved and all the dead who
love us rejoice in Heaven.

We all bear within us a principle of death and a principle
of immortality. Death is the animal, and the animal ever
produces folly.* God loves not fools, for his Divine Spirit
is named the Spirit of Intelligence. Folly is atoned for by
suffering and enslavement. The rod is made for beasts.

IV.—TRANSFORMATIONS.

ST AUGUSTINE seriously doubts whether Apuleius could
really have been changed into an ass by a Thessalian sor-
cerer, and theologians have debated long on the transmu-
tation of Nabuchodonosar into a wild beast. This merely
proves that the eloquent doctor of Hippo was ignorant of
magical secrets, and that the theologians in question had
not advanced far in exegesis. In the opinion of the vulgar,
transformations and metamorphoses have ever been the
very essence of magic. Now, the crowd, which is the echo
of opinion, is never entirely right and never wholly wrong.
Magic really changes the nature of things, or, rather, modi-
fies their appearances at pleasure, according to the strength
of the operator's will and the fascination of aspiring adepts.
Speech creates forms, and when a person reputed infallible
gives anything a name, he really transforms the object into
the substance which is signified by the name that he gives
it. The masterpiece of speech and of faith, in this order,
is the real metamorphosis of a substance whose outward
semblance does not alter. Had Apollonius presented to
his disciples a cup of wine, and had he said to them, “ This
is my blood which ye shall drink for ever to perpetuate my
life within you,” and had his disciples for centuries believed
this transformation continued by the repetition of the same
words, had they taken the wine, notwithstanding its scent

* “Ta mort est la béte et la bbte produit dg hint la bétise.” The play on
words in the original cannot be rendered into English.—TR.

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 215

and its savour, for the true, human, living blood of Apol-
lonius, this master in theurgy would have to be acknowledged
the most skilful of fascinators and the most powerful of
magi; it would remain for us to adore him.

It is well known that mesmerists can, in the imagination
of their somnambulists, endow water with any taste they
may choose, and if we suppose a magus with sufficient
power over the Astral Light to mesmerise at the same
time a whole assembly, otherwise prepared for mesmerism
by a sufficient over-excitement, we could easily explain,
not indeed the gospel miracle of Cana, but others of the
same kind.

The fascinations of love, resulting from the universal
magic of nature, really transform persons and objects.
Love is a dream of enchantments which transfigures the
world, all becomes music and fragrance, all is intoxication
and bliss. The being beloved is beautiful, is goed, is
splendid, sublime, infallible, radiant with health and happi-
ness ... then when the dream is dispelled, we appear to
have fallen from the clouds, we look with disgust on the
shameless sorcerer who has taken the place of the fair
Mélusine, on the Thersites whom we took for Achilles or
Nereus. Love begins as magician and ends a sorcerer.
After creating the illusions of heaven on earth, it realises
those of hell; its hatred is as outrageous as its enthusiasm,
because it is passional, that is, subjected to influences
which are fatal for it. For this reason, the sages proscribe
love, which they proclaim the enemy of reason.

The life of creatures is a progressive transformation
whose forms may be determined, renewed, and preserved
longer, or else destroyed sooner. If the notion of metem-
psychosis were true, might we not say that debauch, repre-
sented by Circe, changes men really and materially into
swine, for the chastisement of vices would, on this hypo-
thesis, be a lapse into those animal forms which correspond
to them? Now, metempsychosis, which has been frequently
misunderstood, has a perfectly true side—animal forms
communicate their sympathetic imprints to the astral body
of man and are soon reflected on his features, according to
the force of his habits. A man of intelligent and passive
mildness assumes the ways and inert physiognomy of a
sheep, but in somnambulism it is no longer a person of
sheep-like appearance but a sheep itself which is seen, as

216 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

the ecstatic and learned Swedenborg experienced times out
of number. Thus we can really change men into animals
and animals into men, we can metamorphose plants and
alter their virtues, we can give minerals ideal properties—
it is all a question of will-power. We can equally become
visible or invisible, and in this is the explanation of the
ring of Gyges and its mysteries.

Let us first remove from the minds of our readers all
absurd suppositions of effects destitute of causes or which
contradict their causes. To become invisible one of three
things is necessary—either to interpose an opaque medium
between the light and our body, or between our body and
the eyes of the spectators; or we must fascinate the eyes
of those present in such a manner that they cannot make
use of their faculty of seeing. Now of these three methods
of becoming invisible, the last alone is magical. Have we
not noticed that, under the influence of a strong preoccu-
pation, we may look without beholding and knock up
against an object which was actually before our eyes? *
“Seeing, let them see not,” said the Great Initiator, whose
history, moreover, tells us that one day when on the
point of being stoned in the Temple, he made himself
invisible and went out.

It is unnecessary to reproduce the mystifications of
common grimoires on the ring of invisibility. Jamblichus
and Peter d’Apono are the only authors who have treated
the subject seriously. What they say is plainly allegorical,
and those representations which they give of it, or which
can be reproduced after their descriptions, prove that they
are indicating nothing else but the great magic Arcanum.
One of these figures represents the cycle of universal
harmonical movement equilibrated in imperishable being ;
another, which should be made from an amalgamation of
the seven metals, deserves a detailed description. It should
have a double collet and two precious stones, a topaz
constellated at the sign of. the sun, and an emerald at the
sign of the moon. On the inner side it should bear the
occult characters of the planets and on the outer their
known signs, twice repeated and in kabbalistic opposition
to one another, that is, five on the right and five on the
left, the signs of the sun and moon resuming the four
diverse intelligences of the seven planets. This configura-

* See note 26.

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 217

tion is nothing less than a pantacle expressing all the
mysteries of magical dogma, and the syntbolic:sense of the
ring is that, to exercise omnipotence, of which ocular
fascination is one of the most difficult proofs that can be
afforded, we must possess the whole science and know how
to make use of it.

Fascination is performed by magnetism. The Magus
commands interiorly a whole assembly not to see him, and
it does not see him. Thus he enters guarded doors and
issues from prisons in the face of his stupified jailers, who
experience a kind of strange numbness and recollect hav-
ing beheld him as in a dream, but only after he has passed.
Thus the secret of invisibility consists wholly in a definable
power, that of averting or paralysing the attention, so that
the light reaches the visual organ without exciting the
seeing faculty of the soul. To exercise this faculty we
must have a will habituated to sudden and energetic
action, great presence of mind, and no less great skill in
producing distractions among a crowd. For example, let
a man who is hunted by assassins, after dashing into a
cross street return at once, and come with collected mien
before his pursuers, or let him mix with them and seem
occupied in the same chase, and he will undoubtedly make
himself invisible. He who wishes to be seen always makes
himself conspicuous, and he who would remain unperceived
obliterates himself and disappears. The true ring of
Gyges is the will; it is also the rod of transmutations, and
by a clear and strong formulation it creates the magical
Logos. The all-powerful words of enchantments are those
which express this creative power over forms. The Tetra-
gram, which is the supreme word of magic, means—It Its
what it will be, and applied with a plenitude of intelligence
to any transformation whatsoever, it will renew and modify
all things, in the face of evidence and common-sense. The
hoc est of the Christian sacrifice is a translation and
application of the Tetragram, and thus this simple phrase
operates the most complete, invisible, incredible, and
clearly-stated of all transformations. A still stronger word
than ‘transformation has been judged necessary by the
councils to express the miracle, that of ¢vansubstanttation.

The Hebrew words, mm, xbox, mone, ION, have been re-
garded by all Kabbalists as the keys of magical transfor-
mation. The Latin words, est, sit, esto, fiat, have the same

218 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

virtue when pronounced with a complete comprehension.
The Comte de Montalembert narrates seriously, in his
legend of St Elizabeth of Hungary, that one day this pious
lady, surprised by her princely husband, from whom she
wished to conceal her good works, at the moment when she
was carrying some food to the poor in her apron, declared
to him that she was carrying roses, and on examination
she was not found to have spoken falsely, for the loaves had
changed into roses. This story is a graceful magical apo-
logue, and means that the truly wise man cannot lie ; that
the Logos of wisdom determines the form of objects, or
even their substance, independently of their forms. Why,
for example, should not the noble spouse of St Elizabeth,
a good and solid Christian like herself, and who believed
firmly in the real presence of the Saviour in true human
body on an altar where he saw only a host of flour, why
should he not believe in the real presence of roses under
the form of loaves?* Doubtless, she showed him bread,
but as she had said, “ They are roses,” and he believed her
incapable of the smallest untruth, he beheld, and wished
only to behold, roses. This is the secret of the miracle.
We must speak here of lycanthropy, or the nocturnal
transformation of men into wolves, histories so well substan-
tiated that sceptical science has had recourse to furious
manias, and to masquerading as animals, for explana-
tions. But such hypotheses are puerile, and explain no-
thing. Let us seek elsewhere the solution of the mystery,
and establish—First, That no person has been killed by a
were-wolf except by suffocation, without effusion of blood
and without wounds. Second, That were-wolves, though
tracked, hunted, and even maimed, have never been killed
on the spot. Third, That persons suspected of these trans-
formations have always been found at home, after the pur-
suit of the were-wolf, more or less wounded, sometimes
dying, but invariably in their natural form. And now let
us establish phenomena of another order. Nothing in the
world is better attested, and more incontestably proved,
than the real and visible presence of St Alphonsus de
Ligouri by the bedside of the dying pope, whilst the same
personage was seen at his own home, a great distance fro
Rome, transported in prayer and ecstasy. The simulf-
taneous presence of the missionary Francis Xavier ; in
* See note 27. !

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 219

several places at once has been no less rigorously proved.
These may be said to be miracles, but real miracles are
still objects for scientific investigation. The apparitions of
those who are dear to us, coincident with the moment of
their death, are phenomena of the same order, and refer-
able to the same cause.

We have spoken of the sidereal body, which is the
mediator between the soul and the material organisn.
This body remains awake very often while the other is
asleep, and by thought transports itself through all space
which universal magnetism opens to it. It thus lengthens,
without breaking, the sympathetic chain which attaches it
to the heart and brain, and this is why there is danger in
waking up dreaming persons with a start, for a shock may
sever the chain at a blow, and cause instantaneous death.
The form of our sidereal body is conformable to the
habitual condition of our thoughts; and, in the long run,
it is bound to modify the features of the material organism.
Let us now be bold enough to assert that the were-wolf is
nothing more than the sidereal body of a man whose
savage and sanguinary instincts are represented by the
wolf, and who, whilst his phantom is wandering abroad,
sleeps painfully in his bed, and dreams that he is a veritable
wolf. What renders the were-wolf visible is the almost
somnambulistic over-excitement caused by the fear of those
who see it, or their disposition, more particularly among
simple country-folk, to place themselves in direct commu-
nication with the Astral Light, which is the common
medium of dreams and visions. The blows inflicted on
the were-wolf really wound the sleeper by the odic and
sympathetic congestion of the Astral Light, and by the
correspondence of the immaterial with the material body.*
Many persons will believe themselves to be dreaming when
they read of such things, and will ask us if we are really
ourselves awake; but we only beg scientific men to reflect
on the phenomena of gestation, and the effects of the
imagination of women on the form of their offspring. A
woman who had been present at the execution of a man
who was broken on the wheel gave birth to a child, every
one of whose limbs was broken. Let them explain how
the impression produced on the soul of the mother could
reach and break the infant’s members, and we will explain

* Note 28.

220 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

how blows dealt and received in dream can really bruise,
and even grievously wound, the body of the person who
receives them in imagination, above all when his body is
in pain and subject to nervous and magnetic influences.

We act by the imagination on the imagination of others,
by our sidereal body on theirs, and by our organs on their
organs. So that by sympathy, whether of inclination or of
obsession, we possess one another, and are identified with
those whom we would influence. Reactions against this
empire make the most pronounced antipathy succeed the
liveliest sympathy. The identification of existences is the
aim of love, but in identifying them, it frequently makes
them rivals and consequently enemies, if at the bottom of
the two natures there be an unsociable disposition like
pride ; to saturate two united souls with an equal degree
of pride is to disjoin them by making them rivals.

The fatal ascendancy of one person over another is the true
rod of Circe. Almost every human countenance bears some
resemblance to an animal, that is, it has the szgnature of a
specialised instinct. Now, instincts are balanced by con-
trary instincts, and dominated by stronger ones. To govern
sheep, the dog evokes the fear of the wolf. If you area
dog and would be loved by a pretty little cat, be metamor-
phosed into a cat and you will win her. But how is this
change to be accomplished? By observation, imitation,
and imagination. We think that our figurative language
will be understood here, and we commend this revelation
to all magnetists as the most profound secret of their art.
It may be formulated technically as follows: Zo polartse
one's own animal light in equilibrated antagonism with an
opposite pole. Or better still: To concentrate in one’s self
absorbing specialities in order to direct radiations towards
an absorbent reservoir, and vice versa. This regulation of
our magnetic polarisation may be performed by help of the
animal forms we have spoken of, and which will serve to
fix imagination. For example, you seek to act magneti-
cally on a person polarised like yourself, which you will
know at first contact if you be a magnetist ; they are merely
a trifle less strong than yourself—they are a mouse, you a
rat. Turn into a cat and you will catch them.

When we dream of a living person, their sidereal body
is either present to ours in the Astral Light, or at any rate
the reflection of this body, and the way in which we are

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 221

impressed by meeting it, frequently reveal to us the secret
dispositions of that person in our respect. Love, for
example, fashions the sidereal body of the one to the
image and resemblance of the other, so that the sensuous
medium of the woman is like a man and that of the man
is like a woman. It is this change which the kabbalists
sought to express in a hidden way when they remark in
explaining an obscure passage of Genesis: “God created
love by placing a rib of Adam in the breast of Eve, and a
portion of the flesh of Eve in the breast of Adam, so
that the depth of the female heart is the bone of man,
and the basis of the male heart is feminine flesh ”"—an

beauty. ae ee

The wand of Circe is the fascinating power of woman,
and the companions of Ulysses transformed into swine are
no mere history of the past. But no metamorphose is
accomplished without destruction. To change a hawk into
a dove, it must first be killed, then cut in pieces, so as to
annihilate the least vestige of its original form, and then
boiled in the magic bath of Medea. Remark how the
modern hierophants proceed to accomplish human re-
generation; for example, what is done to transform a
more or less weak and passionate man into a stoical Jesuit
missionary, which is the great secret of this order, ever
misconstrued, often calumniated, but invariably victorious.
Read the “ Exercises of St Ignatius” attentively, and mark
with what magic power this man of genius operates the
realisation of faith. He counsels his disciples to see, touch,
smell, and taste things invisible; he desires the senses to
be exalted in prayer up to the point of voluntary hallu-
cination. If you are meditating on an article of faith,
St Ignatius would have you, in the first place, construct
the locality, dream of it, see it, touch it. If it be hell, he
gives you burning rocks to handle, he makes you float in
darkness as thick as pitch; he places liquid sulphur on
your tongue, he fills your nostrils with an abominable
stench, he shows you frightful torments, and makes you
hear superhuman groans; he bids your will create all this
by constant exercises. Each one does it after his own
fashion, but always in the way most likely to impress him.
It is no longer the intoxication of opium; it is a dream
without sleep, a hallucination devoid of madness, a rational

allegory which is certainly not devoid of profundity and | » 2
Vou et

'
cf

222 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

and voluntary vision, a veritable creation of intelligence
and faith. Henceforth, in his preaching, the Jesuit may
truly say: “What we have seen with our eyes, what we
have heard with our ears, what our hands have handled,
that we declare unto you.” The Jesuit thus formed is
in communication with a circle of wills exercised like
his own; each of the fathers is as strong as the whole
society, and the society is stronger than the world.

V.—DIVINATION.

ONE of the privileges of the initiate of the Great Arcanum,
and that which resumes them all, is Divination. According
to the vulgar meaning of this word, to divine is to conjec-
ture what we do not know, but its true significance is
ineffable in its sublimity. To divine (adzvinare) is to
exercise divinity. The Latin word divinus has another
and higher meaning than @zvus, which is equivalent to the
man-god. JDevzn (diviner), in French, contains the four
letters of the word DIEU (God), plus the letter N, whose
shape corresponds to the Hebrew ®& aleph, and which
kabbalistically and hieroglyphically expresses the Great
Arcanum, whose symbol in the Tarot is the figure of the
juggler. He who perfectly understands the absolute
numerical value of ® multiplied by N with the gram-
matical force of the N final in words expressing sczence,
art, or power, who then adds the five letters of the word
DEVIN in such a manner as to make five go into four, four
into three, three into two, and two into one, by translating
the resulting number into primitive Hebrew characters,
will write the occult name of the Great Arcanum, and will
be in possession of a word of which the sacred Tetragram
itself is only the equivalent and image.

To be a diviner in all the force of the term is, therefore,
to be divine, and something still more mysterious. The
two signs of human divinity or of divine humanity are
prophecies and miracles. To be a prophet is to perceive
beforehand the effects which exist in causes, it is to read in
the Astral Light; to perform miracles is to act on the
universal agent and subject it to our will. The essence of

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 223

divination, that is, of the Great Magic Arcanum, is repre-
sented by all the symbols of silence, and is closely bound
‘up with the single and primitive dogma of Hermes. It
gives absolute certitude in philosophy, the secret of universal
faith in religion ; in physics, the compositon, decomposition,
recomposition, realisation, and adaptation of the philo-
sophical mercury, named Azoth by the alchemists ; in
dynamics, it multiplies our powers by those of the perpetual
motion ; it is at once mystical, metaphysical, and material,
with correspondences of effects in the three worlds; it
procures charity in God, truth in science, and gold in
riches ; for metallic transmutation is at once an allegory
and reality, which is well known to all the adepts in the
true knowledge. |

Divination is intuition, and.the key of intuition is the
universal and magical dogma of analogies. By analogies
the Magus interprets dreams, for the analogies in the
reflections of the Astral Light are as rigorous as the shades
of colours in the solar light, and can be calculated and
explained with consummate exactitude. The one indis-
pensable condition is a knowledge of the dreamer’s degree
of intellectual life, which he will reveal of himself by his
own dreams in a way that will profoundly amaze him.

Somnambulism, presentiments, and second sight are only
an accidental or habitual disposition to dream in a volun-
tary or waking sleep, that is, to perceive the analogical
reflections of the Astral Light, which is the great book of
divination. There are two classes of seers, the instinctive
and the initiated. This is why children, ignorant persons,
shepherds, and even idiots, have more tendency to natural
divination than scholars and thinkers. The simple herd-
boy, David, was a prophet even as Solomon, the King of
the Kabbalists and Magi. The perceptions of instinct are
frequently as exact as those of knowledge. Those least
clairvoyant in the Astral Light are those who reason most.
Somnambulism is a purely instinctive state, and therefore
somnambulists require to be guided by a seer of science ;
sceptics and reasoners only lead them astray. Divinatory
vision occurs only in ecstatic trance, and to attain this state
doubt and illusion must be rendered impossible by enchain-
ing or lulling thought.

Divinatory instruments are merely means to _ self-
magnetisation and diversion from the exterior light in

224 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

order to fix the attention on the inner light exclusively ;
they are a means of communication between diviner and
consultant, and often serve alone to concentrate the two -
wills on one sign. Vague, complicated, variable figures
assist in collecting the reflections of the Astral Light, and
it is thus that we see visions in coffee-grouts, clouds, the
white of eggs, &c., those fatidic forms which only exist in
the Translucid, or imagination of the operators. Vision
in water is occasioned by dazzling and fatiguing the optic
nerve, which transfers its natural functions to the Trans-
lucid and produces a cerebral hallucination which mistakes
the reflections of the Astral Light for real images ; thus
nervous persons, with weak sight and lively imagination,
are best fitted for this kind of divination, which is more
successful still when performed by children. But let us
not misapprehend the function that we attribute to imagina-
tion in the divinatory arts. Doubtless we see by means of
imagination, which is the natural side of the miraculous ;
but what we behold is true, and the marvellous side of this
natural operation consists in this, We appeal to the ex-
perience of all veritable adepts. The author of this book
has performed all kinds of divination, and the results he
has obtained have been invariably in proportion to the
exactitude of his scientific operations and the good faith of
those who consulted him.

The magic mirror of Dupotet, like the mantle of Apollo-
nius, is a method of concentrating the attention on the
interior light. Vision in the thumb-nail, when very smooth
and blackened, is a variety of the magic mirror; the colour,
black, like water, absorbs the visual rays, dazzlement and
vertigo ensue, followed by lucidity in subjects naturally
apt to it, or suitably disposed. Geomancy and carto-
mancy are other means of reaching the same ends; com-
binations of symbols and numbers, being at once fortuitous
and necessary, present a sufficiently true likeness of the
chances of destiny to enable imagination to behold the
realities called up by such symbols. The more the interest
is excited, the greater is the desire to see, the more com-
plete is the confidence in intuition, and the clearer also is
the vision. To cast the geomantic points by chance, or to
tell fortunes by cards in a trifling manner, is to play like
children. Chances are oracles only when magnetised by
intelligence and directed by faith.

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 225

Of all oracles the Tarot is the most astonishing in its
results, because every possible combination of this universal
key of the Kabbalah gives as solutions the oracles of
science and truth, on account of the analogical precision of
its numbers and figures. This miraculous and unique book
of the ancient Magi is an instrument of divination which
may be employed with complete confidence; its information
is always correct, at least in a certain sense, and when it
predicts nothing it reveals hidden things, and gives the
most sage advice to those who consult it.

The more ceremonies we employ in the exercise of
divination, the more we excite the imagination of ourselves
and our consultants. The conjuration of the four, the
prayer of Solomon, the magic sword to drive away phan-
toms, may, therefore, be successfully used. The genius of
the day and hour should be also invoked, and a special
perfume offered to him ; then we must place ourselves in
magnetic and intuitive rapport with the consultant, by ask-
ing him what animal is sympathetic with him and which in
antipathy, what is his favourite flower, and which colour he
prefers. Flowers, colours, and animals are connected in
analogical classification with the seven genii of the Kab-
balah. Those who love blue are idealists and dreamers ;
those who like red are materialistic and passionate ; those
who like yellow are fantastical and capricious ; the lovers
of green have frequently a mercantile or crafty character ;
those who give the preference to black are ruled by Saturn.
Those fond of horses are industrious and of noble character;
the friends of dogs are affectionate and faithful, those of
the cat independent and libertine. Frank persons have a
horror of spiders; proud minds are antipathetic to the
serpent. Upright’and fastidious souls cannot tolerate rats
and mice; the voluptuous hold toads in horror, because
they are cold, solitary, hideous, and dreary. Flowers have
analogous sympathies to those of animals and colours, and
magic being the science of universal analogies, by one
taste, one only tendency in any person, all others may be
divined. It is an application of the analogical anatomy of
Cuvier to facts in the moral order.

The physiognomy of the face and body, the lines on the
forehead, the lines on the hand, also furnish invaiuable
indices to the Magus. Metoposcopy and chiromancy have
become sciences in themselves, and the Chevalier d’Arpen-

P

226 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

tigny has given the latter a new degree of certitude by his
remarks on the analogies which really exist between the
characters of individuals and the general or detailed pecu-
liarities of their hands. The consultant should be also in-
terrogated on his habitual dreams, for these are the reflec-
tions of both the outer and inner life. Great attention was
paid to them by the ancients; they were looked on as
certain revelations by the patriarchs, and most religious
revelations have been given in drearns. The monsters of
hell are Christianity’s nightmares; never could brush or
chisel have produced such deformities if ghey had not been
beheld in dream. »

Temperament also is made known by dréams, and as
the temperament exercises a continual influence om life, it
is requisite to understand it well in order to conjectuxe the
destiny of an individual with certitude. We,should mMWls:
trust those whose imagination habitually reflects monstrosi-
ties. Dreams of blood, of enjoyment, and of light, are
indices of-a sanguine temperament ; dreams of water, mud,
rain, and tears, result from a more phlegmatic disposition ;
nocturnal sweats, darkness, terrors, phantoms, belong to the
choleric and hypochondriac.

VI.— ASTROLOGY.

OF all the arts derived from ancient Magian wisdom,
astrology is in these days the most misunderstood. The uni-
versal harmony of Nature and the necessary connection
between all effects and all causes are no Jonger believed in.
True astrology, moreover, that which refers to the one and
universal dogma of the Kabbalah, was profaned by the
Greeks and Romans of the Decline ; the doctrine of the
seven firmaments and three mobilities issued of old from
the decade of the ten Sephiroths, the character of the
planets governed by angels, whose names have been
changed into those of pagan divinities, the influence of the
spheres on each other, the destiny inherent in numbers, the
scale of proportion between the celestial hierarchies corre-
sponding to those of humanity, all have been materialised
and reduced to superstition by the calculators of nativities
and the casters of horoscopes in the Decadence and Middle

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. | 227

Ages. To restore astrology to its primitive purity would
be, in a certain sense, to create a new science; let us only
attempt to indicate its first principles, with their more im-
mediate and approximate consequences.

We have said that the Astral Light receives and pre-
serves the imprints of things visible; it follows that the
daily aspect of the heavens is reflected in this light, which,
being the chief life-agent, operates, by a series of apparatus
naturally adapted to this end, the conception, gestation, and
birth of children. Now, if this light be sufficiently pro-
digal of images to endow the fruit of pregnancy with the
visible marks of the mother’s fancy or craving, much more
should it transmit to the still mobile and unformed tempera-
ment of the newly-born child the atmospheric impressions
and various influences which result at a given moment in
the whole planetary system from such and such particular
disposition of the stars.

Nothing is indifferent in Nature ; a pebble more or less on
a road may crush or profoundly alter the fortunes of the
greatest men, or even of the greatest empires; much more
then the position of a particular star cannot be indifferent
to the destinies of the child who is being born, and who
enters by the fact of his birth into the universal harmony
of the sidereal world. The stars are bound together by
attractions which balance them and cause them to perform
their revolutions with. regularity in space, the network of
light extends from sphere to sphere, and there is no point on
any planet to which one of these indestructible threads is not
attached. The precise place and moment of birth should
therefore be calculated by the true astrological adept, then,
after an exact computation of the starry influences, it
remains for him to reckon the chances of condition, that is,
the opportunities or obstacles which the child must one day
meet with in his state of life, in his relatives, in the disposi-
tion he inherits, and, consequently, in his natural aptitude
for the fulfilment of his destinies. Human liberty and
enterprise must also be taken into account, should the child
come to be truly a man and to extricate himself by a bold:
will from blind influences and the chain of fatality. It will
be seen that we do not allow too much to astrology, but
what we leave it is incontestable, it is the scientific and
magical calculus of probabilities.

Kabbalistic astrology must not be confounded with

228 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

judicial astrology. We will explain this distinction. In-
fancy is dedicated to the Sun, childhood to the Moon, youth
to Mars and Venus, the age of puberty to Mercury, mature
age to Jupiter, old age to Saturn. Now, the whole of
humanity lives under laws of development which are ana-
logous to those of the individual. It is on this basis that
Trithemius establishes his prophetic clavicula of the seven
spirits, and by means of which it is possible, following the
analogical proportion of successive occurrences, to predict
great future events with certainty, and fix beforehand, from
age to age, the destinies of nations and the world.
Astrology is as ancient as, and even more ancient than,
astronomy, and all seers of clairvoyant antiquity have
accorded to it the most complete confidence ; now, what
comes to us surrounded and supported by such imposing
authorities should not be lightly condemned and rejected.
Long and patient observations, decisive comparisons, ex-
periments continually repeated, led the ancient sages to
their conclusions, and those who pretend to refute them
should begin the same labour in an inverse sense. Para-
celsus was perhaps the last of the great practical astrologers ;
he healed the sick by talismans formed under astral in-
fluences, and recognised in all bodies the mark of their
ruling star; this was according to him the true universal
medicine, the absolute natural science, lost by men through
their own fault, and recovered by a small number of initiates
only. To recognise the sign of each star on men, animals,
and plants is the true natural science of Solomon, that
science said to be lost and whose principles are preserved
notwithstanding, like all such secrets, in the symbolism of the
Kabbalah. It will be understood that to read the writing
of the stars, we must be acquainted with the stars them-
selves, a knowledge which must be obtained by the Kab-
balistic domification of the Heavens, and by the compre-
hension of the Kabbalistic planisphere, recovered and ex-
plained by Gaffarel. In this planisphere, the constellations
form Hebrew characters, and the mythological figures may
be replaced by the Tarot figures. To this same planisphere
Gaffarel refers the origin of patriarchal writing, and the
first outlines of primitive alphabets might be discovered in
the concatenations of starry attractions; the celestial
book would thus have served as the model for that of Enoch,
and the Kabbalistic alphabet would be the synthesis of

ae epee =

a

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 229

heaven. This is not wanting in poetry, nor above all in
probability, and the study of the Tarot, which is evidently
the primitive and hieroglyphic book of Enoch, as was
divined by the erudite William Postel, will be sufficient
to convince us of this.

The signs impressed in the Astral Light by the reflec-
tions and attractions of the stars are then reproduced, as the
ancient sages discovered, on all bodies by the conjunction
of this light. Men bear the seals of their planets on their
foreheads, and especially on their hands; animals in their
entire shapes and special peculiarities ; plants reveal them
on their leaves and in their seed; minerals in their veins,
and in the peculiarities of their fractures. The study of
these characters was the occupation of the whole life of
Paracelsus, and the figures on his talismans are the fruit of
his researches; but he has given no key to them, and the
astro-Kabbalistic alphabet, with its correspondences, still
remains to be accomplished; the science of unconventional
magical writing is confined, as regards publicity, to the
planisphere of Gaffarel. The serious art of divination
consists wholly in the knowledge of these signs. Chiro-
mancy is the art of discerning in the lines of the hand the’
writing of the stars, and metoposcopy seeks the same or |
analogous characters in the countenances of its consultants.
In reality the lines formed on the human face by nervous
contractions are determined by necessary laws, and the
radiation of the nervous tissue is absolutely analogous to
the network formed between the spheres by the chains of
stellar attractions. The fatalities of life are, therefore,
necessarily written in our wrinkles, and one or more mystic
letters of the Kabbalistic planisphere may often be recog-
nised at first sight on the face of a stranger. If the letter
be fretted and indented, there is an internal struggle
between destiny and will, and already in his strongest
emotions and tendencies his whole past is laid bare to the
Magus; the future may then be easily conjectured, and if
events deceive at times the sagacity of the diviner, the
consultant remains none the less astonished at the super-
human knowledge of the adept.

The head of man is shaped on the model of the starry
spheres ; it attracts and repels, and it is this which first is
formed and appears in the gestation of the infant. It is,
therefore, affected in an absolute manner by the astral

230 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

influence, and its diverse protuberances bear witness to the
variety of its attractions. Phrenology, therefore, should
find its final message in scientific and purified astrology,
whose problems we indicate as objects of the patience and
good faith of students.

According to Ptolemzus, the sun dessicates, the moon
moistens ; according to the Kabbalists, the sun represents
rigorous justice, and the moon is in sympathy with mercy.
It is the sun which causes storms, and the moon who, by a
kind of gentle atmospheric pressure, induces the sea to ebb,
flow, and, as it were, to breathe.

We read in the Sohar, one of the great sacred books of
the Kabbalah, that “the magic serpent, son of the Sun,
sought to devour the world, when the Sea, daughter of the
Moon, set her foot on his head and subdued him.” For
this reason, among the ancients, Venus was the daughter
of the sea, as Diana was identified with the moon, and for
this also the name of Mary signifies Star or Salt of the sea.
To consecrate this Kabbalistic doctrine in the faith of the
uninitiated, it is said in prophetic language, “ The woman
shall crush the serpent’s head.”

Jeréme Cardan, one of the boldest speculators, and indis-
putably the most accomplished astrologer of his day—
Jer6me Cardan, who, if the legend of his death may be
believed, was a martyr to his faith in astrology—has left a
calculation by means of which every one can forecast the
good or evil fortune of every year in his life. He grounds
his theory on his own experiences, and declares that this
calculation has never deceived him. To know then what
will be the destiny of any year, he collects the events of
those which preceded it by four, eight, twelve, nineteen, and
thirty : the number four is that of realisation; the number
cight that of Venus, or natural things ; the number twelve,
which is that of the cycle of Jupiter, corresponds to successes;
the cycles of the moon and Mars correspond to the number
nineteen ; thirty is that of Fatality, or Saturn. Thus, for
example, I seek to ascertain what will befall me in this
year 1855, and I pass over in my mind what really decisive
events took place, in the order of life and progress, four
years back; what I experienced of either natural happiness
or misfortune eight years ago, what I can recall in the way
of success or failure twelve years back, the vicissitudes and
misfortunes, or sicknesses, of nineteen years since, and what

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 231

sad or calamitous occurrences I experienced at a distance
of thirty years. Then, taking into account irrevocably
accomplished facts and the progress of age, I calculate the
chances analogous to those which I already owe to the
influence of the same planets, and find that in 1851 I had
moderately but sufficiently remunerative occupations, with
some embarrassment in my position; that in 1847 I was
violently separated from my family, and from this separa-
tion ensued great sufferings for mine and me; that in 1843
I travelled as a pioneer, addressing trowds, and persecuted
by ill-intentioned persons, in a word, I was at once honoured
and proscribed; and that, finally, in 1825 the family life
ceased to exist far me, and I was definitely devoted to
a fateful path, which led me to knowledge and misfortune.
I may, therefore, expect that I shall this year undergo toil,
poverty, weariness, banishment of the heart, change of
place, notoriety, and contradictions, with some event which
will be decisive for the rest of my days, and I already find
in the present -every reason to put faith in this future. I
conclude that, for myself and for this year, experience
completely confirms the accuracy of Cardan’s astrological
prediction.

This calculation, moreover, is connected with that of the
climacteric years of old astrologers. Climacteric means
arranged in gradations, or calculated on the degrees of a
scale. Johannes Trithemius, in his work on Secondary
Causes, has very curiously computed the return of fortunate
or disastrous years for all the empires of the world.

According to the great masters of astrology, comets are
the stars of exceptional heroes, and only visit the earth to
herald great changes therein ; planets preside over collec-
tive existences, and modify the destinies of men in the
aggregate ; the fixed stars, the furthest and feeblest in their
action, attract individuals and decide their tastes; some-
times a group of stars influences, all together, the destinies
of a single man, and often a large number of souls are
drawn by the distant rays of the same sun. When we
die, our interior light follows on the attraction of its star,
and thus we live in other universes, wherein the soul
creates for itself a new envelope analogous to the progress
or decadence of its beauty, for our souls separated from
our bodies resemble shooting stars; they are globules of
animated light which always seek their centre to recover

232 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC,

equilibrium and motion, but they must first of all disen-
gage themselves from the serpent’s folds, that is, from the
unpurified Astral Light which surrounds and i imprisons them,
so long as their will-power cannot elevate them above it.
The immersion of the living star in the dead light is a
frightful torture ; the soul at once freezes and burns there-
in, and has no other means of escaping than by entering
the current of exterior forms and taking a fleshly envelope,
then energetically struggling against blind instincts to
strengthen that moral liberty which will allow it, at the
moment of death, to burst the chains of earth and take
flight triumphantly towards its consoling star, whose light
has smiled upon it.

Following this hint, the nature of hell-fire will be under-
stood (it is identical with the demon or old serpent), also
in what the salvation or reprobation of men consists, all
called and all in turn elected, but in a small number, after
having been liable by their own act to fall into the eternal
fire. Such is the grand and sublime revelation of the
Magi, a revelation which is the mother of all symbolism,
all doctrines, and all forms of worship. It will be under-
stood already how far Dupuis was mistaken in believing
religions to be issued from astronomy only. On the con-
trary, it is astronomy which is born of astrology, and
primitive astrology is one of the branches of the holy
Kabbalah, the science of sciences and the religion of
religions.

The ancients, comparing the calm and peaceful immen-
sity of heaven, all peopled by immutable lights, with the
agitations and darkness of this world, believed themselves
to have found in this beautiful gold-lettered book, the final
message on the destinies of men; they traced in imagina-
tion lines of correspondence between those brilliant points
of the divine writing, and the first constellations sketched
by Chaldean shepherds are also said to have been the first
characters of Kabbalistic writing. These characters, ex-
pressed originally by signs, then comprised in hieroglyphi-
cal figures, would, according to M. Moreau de Dammartin,
author of a very singular treatise on the origin of alpha- -
betical characters, determine the ancient Magi in the
selection of the Tarot figures, which this scholar, like our-
selves, recognises as essentially a hieratic and primitive
book. Thus, in his opinion, the Chinese ¢sex, the Hebrew

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 233

Aleph, and the Greek A/pha, expressed hieroglyphically by
the figure of the Juggler, were borrowed from the constel-
lation of the Crane, near the astral Fish of the eastern
hemisphere. The Chinese ¢cheou, the Hebrew Beth, and
the Latin B, represented by the Empress, are taken from
the constellation of the Great Bear, &c. The Kabbalist
Gaffarel erected a planisphere where all the constellations
form Hebrew letters; but it is to be confessed that the
configuration appears often more than arbitrary, and one is
at a loss to understand why, on the indication of a single
star, Gaffarel traces, for example, a Dad/eth rather than a
Dezain; four stars again give 7a as well as a He or an
Aleph.

Scholars, moreover, are not agreed on the. shape of the
letters of the primitive alphabet. The Italian Tarots, the
recovery of whose Gothic originals is much to be desired,
corresponds in the arrangement of its figures to the Hebrew
alphabet used since the Captivity, and called the Assyrian ;
but fragments of anterior Tarots exist whose disposition is
not the same. As nothing should be conjectured in matters
of research, we must wait for new and more convincing
discoveries to determine our conclusions.

As regards the alphabet of the stars, we consider it as
variable as the configuration of clouds, which seem to
assume all the shapes that imagination can give them. It
is the same with star groups as with points in geomancy,
and with the card-medleys of modern fortune-telling.
They are all pretexts for self-magnetisation and instru-
ments to fix and determine natural intuition. Thus, a
Kabbalist used to mystical hieroglyphics, will perceive
signs in the stars which a shepherd will not find there ; but,
on his side, the shepherd will discern combinations which
will escape the Kabbalist. Country folk recognise a rake
in the belt and sword of Orion ; a Jewish Kabbalist would
see in the same constellation, taken as a whole, all the
mysteries of Ezekiel, the ten Sephiroths arranged triad-
wise, a central triangle composed of four stars, then a line
of three stars, forming the jod, and the two figures united
expressing all the mysteries of Bereschit; then four stars,
making the wheels of Mercavah, and completing the divine
chariot. Looking at it in another way, he would see a
well formed g/imel placed abovea jod within a large daleth
upside down, a figure representing the conflict between

234 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

good and evil, with the final triumph of good. In reality,
glimel superposed on jod is the triad emanating from unity,
the divine manifestation of the Word, whilst the inverted
daleth is the triad composed of the maleficent duad multi-
plied by itself. The constellation of Orion thus considered
would be identical with the figure of St Michael doing
battle with the dragon, and the appearance of this sign
under this form would be for the Kabbalist an omen of
victory and happiness.

The imagination is exalted by a long contemplation of
the sky, and then the stars respond to our thoughts.
Lines traced mentally from one to the other by the first
observers must have supplied men with the earliest notions
of geometry. Accordingly as the soul is disturbed or
placid, the stars seem scintillating with menaces or spark-
ling with hope. Heaven is thus the mirror of the human
soul, and when we think that we are reading the stars it is
in ourselves we read.

Gaffarel, applying the presages of celestial writing to
the destinies of empires, declares that the ancients did not
vainly represent all signs of evil augury as situated in the
northern division of the sky, for in every time calamities
have been looked on as coming from the north to spread
abroad over the earth by the invasion of the south. For
this reason, he says, “the ancients have pictured in the
borcal sky a serpent or dragon, near two bears, since those
animals are the true symbols. of tyranny, pillage, and
oppression of all kinds. And, as a fact, go over the
annals, and you will see that all the great desolations
which have ever taken place came from the north. The
Assyrians or Chaldeans, incited by Nabuchodonosor and
Salmanasar, sufficiently proved this truth by the con-
flagration of the most sumptuous and sacred town and
Temple in the universe, and by the entire destruction of a
people whom God Himself had taken under His particular
protection, and of whom He called Himself specially the
father. And that other Jerusalem,.Rome the blessed, has
it not often experienced the fury of the evil northern race,
when, by the cruelty of Alaric, Genseric, Attila, and other
princes of the Goths, Huns, Vandals, &c., she has beheld
her altars overthrown, and the towers of her superb build-
ings made level with the railings? . . . . Most fittingly,
therefore, in the secrets of this celestial writing do we read

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 235

miseries and misfortunes on the northern side, since @
seplentrione pandetur omne malum. Now, the word which
we translate jfandetur means equally depingetur and
scribetur, and the prophecy equally signifies—All the
miseries of the world are written in the northern side of
the sky.”

We have transcribed' the whole of this passage because
it is not without significance for our own time, when the
north is again menacing Europe, but it is also the fate of
Boreal frosts to be overcome by the sun, and darkness
dissipates itself before the light. Such is our final pro-
phetic message and the secret of the future.

The following is the table of the magical characters
traced by the old astrologers on the model of the zodiacal
constellations; each of these characters represents the
name of a good or evil genius. It is well known that the
signs of the Zodiac are connected with various celestial
influences, and consequently express an annual alternative
of good or evil.

The names of the genii signified by the above charac-
ters are :-—

236 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

For Aries, SATAARAN and Sarahzel.
For Taurus, BAGDAL and A raziel.

for Gemini, SAGRAS and Saraiel.

For Cancer, RAHDAR and Phakiel.

For Leo, SAGHAM and Seratzel.

For Virgo, IADARA and Schatlttel,

For Libra, GRASGARBEN and Hadakiel.
For Scorpio, RIEHOL and Sazssaied.

For Sagittarius, VHNORI and Sarittatel.
For Capricornus, SAGDALON and Semakzel.
For Aquarius, ARCHER and Ssakmakiel.
For Pisces, RASAMASA and Vacadvel.

The sage who seeks to read the heavens must observe
also the doings of the moon, whose influence is very strong
in astrology.. The moon successively attracts and repels
the magnetic fluid of the earth, and thus the ebb and flow
of the sea is produced ; we must, therefore, well understand
its phases and be able to discern its days and hours. The
new moon is favourable to the commencement of all
magical works ; from the first quarter to the full moon its
influence is warm ; from the full moon to the last quarter
it is dry ; from the last quarter to the end it is cold.

We give as follows the special characteristics of each of
the moon’s days, with the twenty-two keys of the Tarot
and the seven planetary signs :—

1. The Juggler or Magus.

_The first day of the moon is that of the creation of the
moon itself. This day is consecrated to mental enter-
prises, and should be propitious to well-timed innovations.

2. Lhe Female Pope, or Occult Sctence.

The second day, whose genius is Enediel, was the fifth
of creation, for the moon was made on the fourth day.
The birds and fishes are living hieroglyphics of magical
analogies and of the universal dogma of Hermes. The
water and the air, which were then filled with the forms of
the Word, are the elementary figures of the Mercury of the
sages, that is, of intelligence and speech. This day is
favourable to revelations, initiations, and the great dis-
coveries of science.

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 237

3. The Celestial Mother, or Empress.

The third day was that of man’s creation. So the moon
in the Kabbalah is called the MOTHER when it is repre-
sented as accompanied by the number three. This day is
favourable to generation, and generally to all productions,
whether physical or mental.

4. The Emperor, or Ruler.

The fourth day is unlucky; it was that of the birth of
Cain ; but it is favourable to unjust and tyrannical under-
takings.

5. The Pope, or Hierophant.

The fifth day is fortunate; it was that of the birth of
Abel.

6. The Lover, or Liberty.

The sixth day is one of pride; it was that of the birth of
Lamech, who said to his wives: “I have slain a man to
my own hurt, and a stripling to my own bruising. Seven-
fold vengeance shall be taken for Cain, but for Lamech
seventy times sevenfold.” This day is propitious to con-
spiracies and revolts.

7. The Chariot.

The seventh day was that of the birth of Hebron, who
gave his name to the first of the holy cities of Israel. A
day of religion, prayers, and success.

8. Justice.
Murder of Abel. A day of expiation.
9. The Anctent, or Hermit.
Birth of Methusaleh. Day of blessing for children.

10. Ezekiels Wheel of Fortune.

Birth of Nabuchodonosor. Dominion of the animal.
Fatal day.

238 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

11. Strength.

Birth of Noah. Visions on this day are deceiving, but it
is one of health and longevity to children born on it.

12. The Sacrifice.

Birth of Samuel. Prophetic and Kabbalistic day, favour-
able to the accomplishment of the magnum opus.

13. Death.

Day of Chanaan’s birth, An unlucky day and fatal
number.

14. Angel of Temperance.
Benediction of Noah. The angel Cassiel of the hierarchy
of Uriel governs this day.
15. Lyphon, or the Devil.

Birth of Ishmael. Day of exile and reprobation.

16. The Blasted Tower.

Day of the birth of Jacob and of Esau, and of the pre-
destination of Jacob to Esau’s ruin.

17. Lhe Shooting Star.

Fire from heaven burns Sodom and Gomorrah. Day of
salvation for the good and destruction to the wicked ;
dangerous if it fall on a Saturday. It is under the domi-
nion of Scorpion.

~—18. The Moon.

Birth of Isaac; wife’s triumph. Day of conjugal affec-
tion and virtuous hope.

19. The Sun.

Birth of Pharaoh. A beneficent or unfortunate day for
the great ones of the world, according to the different
merits of the great.

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 239

20. The Judgment.
Birth of Jonas, the instrument of God’s judgments. A
day propitious to divine revelations.
21. The World.

Birth of Saul, earthly royalty. Danger to mind and
reason. |

22. Influence of Saturn.
Birth of Job. A day of trial and sorrow.

23. Influence of Venus.

Birth of Benjamin. A day of preference and tenderness.
24. Influence of Jupiter.

Birth of Japhet.

25. Influence of Mercury.
Tenth Plague of Egypt.

26. Influence of Murs.
Deliverance of the Israelites and passage of the Red Sea.

27. Influence of Diana, or Hecate.
Splendid victory gained by Judas Machabeus.

28. Influence of the Sun.

Samson carries away the gates of Gaza. Day of strength
and rescue.

29. The Fool of the Tarot.
Day of miscarriage and failure in all things.

By means of this rabbinical table, which Jean Belot and
others have borrowed from the Hebrew Kabbalists, it will
be seen that the old masters concluded @ posteriori from
facts to presumable influences, which is completely within
the logic of the secret sciences. It will be seen also how
many various meanings are included in the twenty-two
Keys which form the universal alphabet of the Tarot, and

240 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC,

the truth of our asserticns when we claim that all the
secrets of the Kabbalah and magic, all the mysteries of the
ancient world, all the science of the patriarchs, all historical
traditions of primeval times, are comprised in this hiero-
glyphical book of Thoth, Enoch, or Cadmus.

A very simple method of finding celestial horoscopes
by onomancy is that which we are about to describe; it
reconciles Gaffarel with ourselves, and gives results which
are most astonishing in their accuracy and depth. Takea
black card, wherein you must cut the name of the person
you are consulting for; place this card at the end of a tube,
which diminishes on the side of the observer’s eye and in-
creases towards that of the card; then look through it at
the four cardinal points alternately, beginning at the east
and ending at the north. Take note of all the stars you
see through the letters, then convert the letters into num-
bers, and with the sum of the addition similarly written down,
renew the operation ; count how many stars you have, then,
adding this number to that of the name, you again cast up,
and write the total of the two numbers in Hebrew characters.
Renew the operation, and set down separately the stars
you have met with; seek next in the celestial planisphere
the names of all the stars; classify them according to size
and brilliancy, choosing the largest and most brilliant as
the polar-star of your astrological operation. Find, lastly,
on the Egyptian planisphere (a sufficiently complete copy
may be seen in the atlas to Dupuis’ larger work) the names
and figures of the genii to whom the stars belong, and you
will then know what fortunate or unfortunate signs enter
into the name of the person, what their influence will be,
whether in infancy (which is the name traced at the east),
in youth (the name traced at the south), in maturity (the
name traced at the west), or in old age (for which the name
is traced at the north), or, finally, in the whole life (to
which belong the stars entering into the entire number
formed by the addition of the letters and stars). This
operation is plain, easy, and requires few calculations ; it
carries us back to the furthest antiquity, and evidently be-
longs to the primeval magic of the patriarchs, of which we
may be convinced by studying the works of Gaffarel and
his master, Rabbi Chomer.

This onomantic astrology was that of all the ancient
Hebrew Kabbalists, as is proved by the observations pre-

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 241

' served by Rabbi Chomer, Rabbi Kapol, Rabbi Abjudan,
and other masters. The menaces of the prophets to various
empires of the world were based on the characters of the
stars found vertically above them in the uniform correspond-
ente between the celestial and terrestrial spheres. Thus,
by inscribing in the sky of Greece its Hebrew name, and
rendering that into numbers, they found the word Charab,
whose sum is twelve, and which signifies destroyed, deso-
lated. They concluded that after a cycle of twelve periods
Greece would be desolated and destroyed.

Shortly before the conflagration and overthrow of Jeru-
salem by Nabuzardan, the Kabbalists noticed eleven stars
arranged vertically above the Temple after this fashion—

# * # + * * * *

and which all entered into the word AHzbschich, written
from north to south, and which signifies reprobation and
abandonment without mercy. The sum of the numbers of
the letters is 423, precisely that of the duration of the
Temple.

The empires of Persia and Assyria were threatened with
destruction by four vertical stars which entered into the
letters of the word od, and the fatal number indicated by
these letters was 208 years. Four stars also foretold to the
Kabbalistic rabbins of that time the fall and dismember-
ment of the empire of Alexandria, by their entering into
the word jarad, to divide, whose number, 284, indicates
the entire period of that kingdom both in its root and
branches,

According to Rabbi Chomer, the destinies of the Otto-
man power at Constantinople were fixed and announced
beforehand by four stars, which, arranged in the word caah,
signify to be feeble, sick, and drawing to its end. The
stars which were most brilliant in the letter a/eph give that
letter the value of one thousand. The three letters united
make 1025, which must be reckoned from the taking of
Constantinople by Mahomet II., a computation which pro-
mises still some centuries of existence to the enfeebled
empire of the Sultans.

The MANE THECEL PHARES, which Balthasar, in his in-
toxication, beheld written on the wall of his palace by the

Q

242 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

flicker of the torches, was an onomantic intuition of the
same kind as the rabbins. Balthasar, doubtless initiated
by his Hebrew diviners into the reading of the heavens,
mechanically and instinctively operated on the lamps of
his festival, as he might have done on the stars of the sky.
The three words which he formed in his imagination be-
came soon ineffaceable in his eyes, and eclipsed all the
glare of his banquet. It was not difficult to predict to a
king who surrendered himself to orgies in a besieged town
an end like that of Sardanapalus. We have said, and we
repeat, in concluding this chapter, that magnetic intuitions
alone give value and reality to all Kabbalistical and astro-
logical calculations, puerile possibly, and completely arbi-
trary, if made without inspiration, by cold curiosity, and
without a powerful will.

VII.—THE BOOK OF HERMES OR OF THOTH.

WE approach the conclusion of our work, and it is here
that we must provide its universal key and impart its
final secret. The universal key of magical arts is the key
of all ancient religious dogmas, the key of the Kabbalah
and the Bible, the clavicula of Solomon. Now, this clavi-
cula or little key, looked on as lost for centuries, has been
recovered by us, and we have been enabled to open the
sepulchres of the elder world, to make the dead speak, to
behold the monuments of the past in all their splendour, to
understand all the enigmas of the past, and penetrate into
every sanctuary. The use of this key was, among the
ancients, permitted only to the high priests, and its secret
was confided to the flower of the initiates alone. This key
consisted of a hieroglyphical and numeral alphabet, giving
expression to a series of universal and absolute ideas by
means of characters and numbers; then a scale of ten
numbers multiplied by four symbols and bound together
by twelve figures, representing the twelve signs of the
zodiac, plus four genii, those of the four cardinal points.
The symbolic tetrad, represented in the mysteries of
Memphis and Thebes by the four forms of the sphinx, the
man, the eagle, the bull, and the lion, corresponded with

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 243

the four elements of the old world—water being signified
by the chalice which the man or aquarius holds; air by the
circle or nimbus which surrounds the head of the celestial
eagle; fire by the wood which feeds it, by the tree which
the heat of the sun and earth fructifies, and lastly by the
sceptre of royalty, of which the lion is the emblem; earth
by the sword of Mithra, who annually immolates the
sacred bull and pours out with its blood the sap which
swells in all the fruits of the earth. .

Now, these four signs, with their analogies, are the ex-
planation of the one word hidden in every sanctuary, of
that word which the bacchantes seemed to divine, when,
during the celebration of the feasts of Iacchos, they were
exalted into delirium for the glory of Io EVOHE! What
then was meant by this mysterious word? It was the
name of the four primitive letters of the mother tongue:
the JOD, symbol of the vine-stock or paternal sceptre of
Noah; the HE, symbol of the chalice of libations; the
VAU, which joins the preceding signs, and was represented
in India by the great and mysterious lingam. Such, in the
divine word, was the three-fold sign of the triad ; then the
maternal letter appeared a second time to express the
fecundity of nature and woman, to formulate also the
dogma of universal and progressive analogies, descending
from causes to effects and remounting from effects to
causes. The sacred word, moreover, was not pronounced ;
it was spelt and read off in four words, which are the four
sacred words: JOD HE VAU HE.

In the sixteenth century, a man of exalted faith and
wide erudition had discovered the key of all religious
mysteries, and published a small work: Clavis Abscon-
ditorum a Constitutione Mundi, “ The Key of Things kept
Secret from the Foundatton of the World.” This man
was an illuminated Hebraist and Kabbalist, named
William Postel.* He believed that he had found the
true signification of the Tetragram in a hieroglyphic book
anterior to the Bible, and which he called the Genesis
of Enoch, doubtless to conceal its real name from the un-
initiated ; for on the ring of his symbolic key, whose

* He was born in the Diocese of Avranches and was so precocious that he
was made maftre d’école at the age of fourteen. He visited the far East, and
died in 1581, being ninety-six years old. He was persuaded that the King of

France was destined to universal monarchy as the lineal descendant of Noah’s
eldest son.

a

244 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

representation he gives as an occult explanation of his
singular work, he thus traces his mysterious tetrad :—

T

OSS | ae

a

forming in this manner a word which, read from left to
right, beginning below, makes ROTA, by beginning at the
top, makes TARO, and even TAROT, if the initial letter be
repeated to mark the circle more distinctly, and which,
read from right to left, as Hebrew should be read, makes
TORA, the sacramental name which the Jews give to their
sacred book.

Let us compare with this enigma of Postel the erudite
observations made by Court de Gebelin, in the sixth
volume of his Monde Primitif, on a book of the ancient
Egyptians, which has come down to our own times under
the futile pretext of a game of cards: let us examine the
mysterious figures of these cards, of which the first twenty-
two are evidently a hieroglyphic alphabet, where symbols
are explained by numbers, while the entire game is divided
into four tens, each accompanied by four figures with four
colours and four different symbols, and we shall have the
right to ask if the Tarot of the Bohemians be not the
Genesis of Enoch, the Taro, Rota, or Tora of William
Postel, and his initiates the true Hebrew Kabbalists! If
in this state of doubt we penetrate the learned obscurities
of the Sohar, the great sacred book of the supreme Kabba-
lah, our conjectures will soon change into certitude when
we learn that the Jod, the tenth and principal letter of the
Hebrew alphabet, has been always regarded by initiated
Kabbalists as the sign of the First Cause, represented by
the Egyptian phallus and by the rod of Moses; that the
He, the second letter of the name of M7 and the fifth of
the alphabet, signifies the passive and demonstrative form
of the‘ active principle, and corresponds to the ctefs of
ancient sacred hieroglyphs ; that the Vau, the third letter
of the Tetragram, and the sixth of the alphabet, signifies

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 245

crook, entanglement, attraction, and corresponds to the
hieroglyphic signs of the cross, the sword, and the lingam,
as we have before said; finally, that the He, repeated at
the end of the Tetragram, possibly represented the circle
which would result from the superposition of two cups, one
upright, the other inverted. We have then the key of the
denary symbols of the Tarot, the first of which represents
a blossoming rod, the second a royal chalice, the third a
sword piercing a crown, and the fourth a circle enclosing a
lotos flower.

It remains for us, in order to be fully initiated into the
mysteries of the Genesis of Postel, to thoroughly under-
stand the series of absolute theological and philosophical
ideas which the ancients attached to the ten first numbers.
Here Pythagoras is in agreement with the depositaries of
the secret of Moses, for they all have drawn from the same
fountain ; and we have seen that in the tetrad the secret
signs of the supreme Kabbalah express precisely the same
doctrine as the hieroglyphs of Egypt and the sacred
symbols of India. The phallus, the ctefs, the lingam of
life, the sceptre of Osiris, the cup or flower of Isis, the
lingam of Horus and the cycle of Hermes, Aaron’s blossom-
ing rod, the patera which contains the manna, the sacrificial
sword and the dish for offerings, the pontifical staff, the
eucharistic chalice, the Cross and the Divine Host, all
religious signs, correspond to the four hieroglyphic signs of
the Tarot, which are the hieratic explanation of the four
letters of the great and divine Tetragram.

What most attracted the attention of Court de Gebelin
when he discovered the Tarot, were the hieroglyphs of
the twenty-first card, entitled the World. This card, which
is no other than the identical key of William Postel, repre-
sents naked and victorious Truth in the centre of a crown
which is divided into four parts by four lotos flowers. At
the four corners of the card are seen the four emblematic
animals which are the analysis of the sphinx, and which St
John borrowed from the prophet Ezekiel, as Ezekiel him-
self had borrowed them from the bucephalous or other
sphinxes of Egypt and Assyria. These four figures, which
a tradition, incomprehensible to the Church herself, still
gives as the attributes of our four evangelists, represent the
four elementary forms of the Kabbalah, the four seasons,
the four metals, and lastly the four mysterious letters of

246 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC,

the Jewish ToORA of Ezekiel’s wheel, ROTA, and of the
TAROT which, according to Postel, is the key of things
hidden from the beginning of the world. It must be also
remarked that the word Tarot is composed of the sacred
letters of the monogram of Constantine—a Greek P crossed
by a T between the Alpha and Omega, which signify the
beginning and the end. Disposed in this manner, it is a
word analogous to the INRI of the Freemasons, whose two
I’s express equally the beginning and the end, since in the
Kabbalah the Iod and all its derivations are symbolic of
the phallus and of creation; the beginning and the end,
expressed thus by the same letter, gives the notion of the
eternal evolution of the divine cycle, and therein the INRI
is more profound, and belongs to a higher grade of initia-
tion than the Tarot.

If we compare the hieroglyphic form of the Cross in the
primitive Church with these discoveries, we shall be struck
by many additional analogies. The first Christians usually
composed the Cross from the four segments of the circle.
I have seen one with ten branches issuing from one another,
and four rivers at its root; a copy may be found in the
Latin work of Bosius on the triumph of the Cross. The
first crosses were without Christ, and sometimes bore a
dove with the inscription, INRI, to suggest that there 1s a
concealed sense in this inscription, and that it is the pro-
vince of the Holy Spirit to make us understand it. The
four Kabbalistic animals are also frequently at the four
arms of the Cross, which thus becomes a philosophical
emblem of the Tetrad.

Those who doubt what we advance here may consult the
Gnostic yet orthodox writings attributed to St Dionysius,
the Areopagite, and those of St Irenzus, Synesius, and
Clement of Alexandria. But without leaving the canon of
the New Testament, they will find in the Apocalypse an
ample magical and kabbalistical clavicula, which appears
to have been devised according to the numbers, symbols,
and hieroglyphic figures of the Tarot. There, in fact, we
find the sceptres, chalices, swords, and crowns, disposed by
determined numbers and corresponding to each other by
means of the denary and sacred septenary; there we find
the four kings of the four quarters of the world, and the
four horsemen which figure in our ordinary cards; we find
the winged woman, and the Logos in kingly garments,

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 247

afterwards in pontifical costume with several diadems on
His tiara. Finally, the Apocalyptic key, which is the
vision of Heaven, is identical with the number twenty-one
of the Tarot, and reveals to us a throne surrounded by a
double rainbow, and at the four corners of this crown the
four sacramental animals of the Kabbalah. These coin-
cidences are, at least, very curious, and afford much food
for thought.

Enraptured by his discovery, Postel natvely imagined that
he possessed the bond of universal religious concord, and
the future tranquillity of the world. It was at this period
that he wrote his Zvatté de la Concorde Universelle, his
book on the Razsons d’étre du Saint Esprit, and that he
dedicated to the fathers of the Council of Trent, then
assembled, the Clavts absconditorum a consttitutione Mund.
The epistle he addresses them is curious :—he poses frankly
as a prophet, and declares to the bishops and doctors that —
their anathemas are unseasonable, since all men must ulti-
mately be saved, this being the consequence he draws
from the unity and perpetuity of analogical and rational
revelation in the world.

The fathers of the council did not even do him the
honour of chastising him. His book and letter were looked
on as the productions of a madman and remained un-
answered ; but a little later on, having advanced some pro-
positions on the redemption of the human race which
appeared to be heterodox, he was shut up in a monastery,
wherein he died in the conviction that he should rise again
to explain to men his great discovery of the keys of the
occult world and the mysteries of the Tetragram ; for it
seemed to him impossible that such a revelation could be
wholly lost to posterity.

The erudite Gaffarel does not doubt that the Theraphim
of the Hebrews, by means of which they consulted the
Urim and Thumim, were the figures of the four Kabba-
listic animals, whose symbols were summarised, as we
shall presently show, by the sphinxes or cherubim of the
Ark. But he cites in connection with the usurped Thera-
phim of Michas, a curious passage of Philo, which is an
entire revelation on the ancient and sacerdotal origin of
our Tarots. Gaffarel expresses himself as follows: “ He
(Philo the Jew) says, speaking of the history concealed in

248 MYSTERSES OF MAGIC.

the before-mentioned chapter of Judges, that Michas made
of fine gold and silver three figures of young boys and three
young calves, in addition to a lion, an eagle, a dragon, and
a dove, in such a manner that if any one sought him to
learn a secret concerning his wife, he interrogated by the
dove ; if touching his children, by the young boy; if for
wealth, by the eagle; if for power or authority, by the
lion ; if for fecundity, by the cherub or calf; if for length
of days, by the dragon.” This revelation of Philo, though
treated lightly by Gaffarel, is of palmary importance to us.
Here, in fact, we have the key of the tetrad, the figures of
the four symbolic animals in the twenty-first key of the
Tarot, or the third septenary, thus repeating and epitomis-
ing all the symbolism expressed by the three superposed
septenaries ; next the antagonism of colours signified by
the dove and the dragon; then the circle or ROTA, formed
by the dragon or serpent to express longevity ; finally, the
Kabbalistic divination of the complete Tarot, as it was
afterwards practised by the Egyptian Bohemians, whose
secrets were imperfectly divined and recovered by Etteilla.

We find in the Bible that the high priests consulted the
Lord on the golden table of the holy Ark, between the
cherubim, or bull-headed and eagle-winged sphinxes, and that
they consulted by means of the Theraphim, by the Urim, the
Thumim, and the Ephod. The Ephod, as we know, was a
magic square of twelve numbers and twelve words graven
on precious stones. The word 7heraphim in Hebrew means
hieroglyphs or symbolical signs; the Urim and Thumim
were the above and below, the east and west, the yea and
nay, and these signs corresponded to the two columns of
the Temple, Jakin and Bohas. When, therefore, the high
priest wished to elicit an oracle, he drew by lot the Thera-
phim, or golden plates which bore the images of the four
sacred words, and placed them in threes round the breast-
plate or Ephod, between the Urim and Thumim, that is,
between the two onyxes which served as the clasps to the
chains of the Ephod. The right onyx signified Gedulah,
or mercy and magnificence, the left corresponded to Gebu-
rah, and signified justice and wrath; and if, for example,
the sign of the lion was found near the stone where the
name of the tribe of Judah was engraved, on the left side,
the high priest would interpret the oracle thus: “The rod
of the Lord is provoked against Judah.” If the Theraphim

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 249

represented the man, or the chalice, and was also found on
the left, near the stone of Benjamin, the high priest would
read: “The mercy of the Lord is wearied by the offences
of Benjamin, which outrage him in his love. For this reason
will He pour forth on him the chalice of his indignation,
&c.” When the sovereign priesthood ceased in Israel, when
all the oracles of the world were silenced in the presence of
the Word made flesh, and speaking by the mouth of the
most pope and the mildest of sages, when the ark was
lost, the sanctuary profaned, and the Temple destroyed,
the mysteries of the Ephod and the Theraphim, no longer
traced on gold and precious stones, were written, or rather
drawn, by some erudite Kabbalists on ivory, on parch-
ment, on silvered or gilt copper, then, lastly, on simple
cards, which were always suspected by the official Church
as containing a dangerous key to her mysteries. ‘Thence
have come those Tarots whose antiquity, revealed to the
learned Court de Gebelin by the science of numbers and
hieroglyphics itself, so much exercised at a later period
the questionable perspicacity and persevering investiga-
tion of Etteilla. —

Etteilla or Alliette, an 2//uminé hair-dresser, exclusively
engrossed by his divinatory system, and the emolument he
could derive from it, neither proficient in his own language
nor in orthography, pretended to reform, and thus attribute
to himself the Book of Thoth. On the Tarot which he
published, and which has become very scarce, we find
the following natve advertisement: “ Ettiella, professor of
Algebra, reformer of Cartomancy, and correctors (szc) of
the modern znaccuracies of the ancient Book of Thoth, lives
in the Rue de IJ'Oseille, No. 48 a Paris.” Etteilla would
have certainly done wisely not to have corrected the
inaccuracies which he speaks of; his works have caused
the ancient book discovered by Court de Gebelin to descend
into the region of common magic and fortune-telling. He
proves nothing who tries to prove too much, says an axiom
of logic ; of this Etteilla is another example, but his efforts,
nevertheless, led him to a certain acquaintance with the
Kabbalah, as may be seen in some rare passages of his
unreadable works.

The true initiates, contemporaries of Etteilla, the Rosi-
crucians, for example, and the Martinists, who were in
possession of the real Tarot, as is proved by a book of

250 MYSTERIES OF MAGIG.

St Martin, where the divisions are those of the Tarot, and
this passage of an enemy of the Rosicrucians: “ They
claim to possess a volume wherein they can learn all that
is to be found in other books which now are or which can
ever come into existence. This volume is their own reason,
in which they find the prototype of all that subsists by their
facility in analysing, summarising, and creating a kind of
intellectual world and of all possible beings. See the philo-
sophical, theosophical, and microsmic cards”—(‘‘Conspiracy
against the Catholic Religion and against Crowned Heads,”
by the author of “ The Veil raised for the Curious.” Paris,
Crapard, 1792)—the true initiates, we repeat, who included
the secret of the Tarot among their greatest mysteries,
were far from protesting against the errors of Etteilla,
and left him to re-veil, not reveal, the arcanum of the
veritable claviculza of Solomon. So is it not without pro-
found astonishment that we have recovered intact and
unknown this key of all the doctrines and all the philo-
sophies of the elder world. I speak of it as a key, and
such it truly is, having the circle of four decades for its
ring, and for its trunk or body the scale of twenty-two
characters, then the three degrees of the triad for its wards,
as Postel understood and represented it in his “ Key of
things kept Secret from the Foundation of the World.”

Without the Tarot, the magic of the ancients is a sealed
book to us, and it is impossible to penetrate any of the
great mysteries of the Kabbalah. It only provides the in-
terpretation of the magic squares of Agrippa and Para-
celsus, as we may prove by forming these same squares
with the keys of the Tarot, and in reading the hieroglyphs
which will thus be found collected.

The seven magical squares of the planetary genii are,
according to Paracelsus, as follows :—

Saturn.
2|9 | 4
7 5 3

m-

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS.

Jupiter.

Mars.

20

8

The Sun.

MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.
Venus.

co | a ti_auwtrestaoaytw
N | = | MO | N | &
OS | = | OH hl i)
o jf 7," | MB ]T_veoya
+ ) = | Se TT NU | ON
+ | = Nn | Om | /Y
1972 a |
Ce  - ee 32
n~ | & nN
a | wm } Oo [oe]
s[el[e}ela|s

Mercury.

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 253

The Moon.
37 70 29 70 21 62 12 14 4!
16 28 70 30 71 12 53 14 46

Cn NT emma tiie el

53 27 59 10 5! 2 4! 75 | 35

36 68 19 60 II 65 43 | 76

77 28 | 20 69 61 12 25 | 5
|

By adding up each column of these squares, the charac-
teristic number of the planet is invariably obtained, and by
finding the explanation of this number among the hiero-
glyphs of the Tarot, the significance of all those figures,
whether triangular, square, or transverse, which are formed
by the numbers, may be obtained. The result will be a
complete and profound knowledge of all the allegories and
all the mysteries concealed by the ancients under the
symbol of each planet, or rather of each personification of
their influences, whether celestial or human, on all the
events of life.

The religious and Kabbalistical key of the Tarot will
be now given in technical verses after the fashion of the
ancient lawgivers.

1. &. All things announce a conscious, active cause,
2. 3. Vivific Oneness based on number's laws ;

3. 3 Who all containing is by nought confined,

4. 1. And all preceding hath no bound assign’d.

254 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC,

m. This only Lord should man adore alone,
). Who doth true doctrine to pure hearts make known.
;. But acts of faith require a single chief,
n. Whence we proclaim one altar, law, belief;
y. The changeless God will never change their base.
10. », He rules our days and dooms through every phase.
5. His mercy’s wealth, which vice to nought will bring.
4 His people promises a future King.

». The tomb’s a path which to new worlds ascends,

And life through all subsists, death only ends.

Pure, sacred, steadfast truths we here repeat
The venerated numbers thus complete!

5. The angel blest doth calm and moderate,
p. The evil is the fiend of pride and hate.
16. y. God doth the lightning and the fire subdue ;

p. He rules the dewy eve and evening dew ;

y. The watchful moon He sets to guard our heights,
19. p. His sun’s the source of life’s renewed delights.
20. His breath revivifies the dust of graves,

O
or l w. Where crowds descend who are of lust the slaves ;

21.J

21
or bn The mercy-seat He covers with His crown,
22. And on the cherubs pours His glory down.

By means of this purely dogmatic explanation the figures
of the Kabbalistic alphabet of the Tarot will be already
understood, but a table of its variations, according to divers
Kabbalistic Jews, may also be added,

1. Alpha. Being, spirit, man or god, the intelligible object ;
unity the mother of numbers, the primitive substance.

All these ideas are hieroglyphically expressed by the
figure of the JUGGLER, who, in other words, represents the
active principle in the oneness of divine and human auto-
cracy. His body and arms form the letter x; he wears a
nimbus about his head in the form of 00 , the symbol of life
and the universal spirit ; in front of him there are swords,
cups, and pantacles, and he lifts the miraculous rod towards
heaven. Hehasa juvenile aspect and curly hair, like Apollo

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 255

or Mercury ; he has a smile of assurance on his lips, and the
glance of intelligence in his eyes.

2. Beth. The house of God and of man, the sanctuary, the
law, the gnosts, the Kabbalah, the occult church, the
duad, woman, the mother.

Hieroglyph of the Tarot, vulgarly called the Female
Pope, POPE JOAN; a woman crowned with a tiara, with
the horns of the moon or Isis, the head surrounded by a
veil, the solar cross on her breast, and supporting on her
knees an open book, which she partly conceals beneath
her mantle.

The author of a pretended history of Pope Joan has-
discovered and adapted to his thesis for good or for bad,
two curious and ancient figures of the female pope or
sovereign priestess of the Tarot, who is endowed in them
with all the attributes of Isis; in the one she holds and
caresses her son Horus, in the other she has long and
flowing hair. She is seated between the two columns of
the duad, wears a sun with four rays on her breast, sets
one hand on a book, and makes with the other the sign of
sacerdotal esoterism, 2.¢, she opens only three fingers,
keeping the rest clasped to signify mystery; the veil is
behind her head, and on either side of her seat there is a
sea whereon the flowers of the lotus are blooming. I
deeply commiserate the unfortunate scholar who declines
to see anything in this time-honoured symbol but a monu-
mental portrait of his so-called Pope Joan.

In other Tarots the duad is symbolised by the Greek
Juno, with one hand elevated towards heaven and one
pointing to the earth, as if formulating by this gesture the
unique and dualistic dogma which is the base of magic,
and which begins the marvellous symbols of the Hermetic
Emerald Table.

3. Ghimel. The Word, the triad, plenitude, fruitfulness

nature, generation in the three worlds.

Symbol, THE EMPRESS, a winged woman, crowned,
seated, and bearing on the top of her sceptre the globe of
the world; she has the eagle, image of life and the soul,
as her sign. This figure is the Greek Venus Urania, and
was represented by St John in his Apocalypse as the

256 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

woman clothed with the sun, crowned with twelve stars,
and with the moon beneath her feet. It is the mystical
quintessence of the triad, spuatueuly, immortality, the
Queen of Heaven.

4. Daleth. The door or government among the Easterns,
initiation, the Tetragram, the tetrad, the cubic stone, or
the base thereof.

Hieroglyph, THE EMPEROR, a sovereign whose body
represents a right-angled triangle, and the legs a cross, the
image of the Athanor of the philosophers.

5. He. Indication, demonstration, instruction, law, symbol-
ism, philosophy, religion.

Hieroglyph, THE POPE, or supreme hierophant. In the
more modern Tarots this sign is replaced by the image of
Jupiter. The grand hierophant seated between the two
columns of Hermes and Solomon makes the sign of eso-
terism, and supports himself on a cross with three hori-
zontals of triangular form. Before him are two inferior
ministers on their knees, so that having above him the
capitols of the two columns, and below him the two heads
of his ministers, he is the centre of the quinary, and repre-
sents the divine Pentagram, of which he affords the com-
plete significance. In effect, the pillars are necessity or
law, the heads, liberty or action. From each pillar to each
head a line may be drawn, and two lines from each pillar
to each of the two heads. Thus will be obtained a square
divided into four triangles by a cross, and in the centre of
this cross will be the supreme hierophant, we had almost
said like the garden spider in the centre of its web, if such
a comparison were appropriate to the things of truth, glory,
and light.

6. Vau.  Concatenation, interlacement, lingam, entangle-
ment, union, embrace, strife, antagonism, conbinatton,
equilibrium.

Hieroglyph, man between vice and virtue. Above him
beams the Sun of Truth, and in this sun is Love bending
his bow and threatening vice with the shaft. In the order
of the ten Sephiroth, this symbol corresponds to Tiphe-

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 257

reth, that is,-to idealism and beauty. The number six
represents the antagonism of the two triads, that is, of
absolute negation and absolute affirmation; it is, conse-
quently, the number of labour and liberty; and for this
reason it corresponds to moral beauty and glory.

7. Dzain. Weapon, sword, cherub’s sword of fire, sacred
septenary, triumph, royalty, priesthood.

Hieroglyph, a cubic chariot with four pillars, and an
azure and starry drapery. Within the chariot, and between
the four pillars, a victor crowned with a circle, from which
rise and radiate three golden pentagrams. The victor has
three superposed squares on his cuirass; he has the Urim
and Thumim of the sovereign sacrificer on his shoulders,
represented by the two crescents of the moon in Gedulah
and Geburah; he holds in his hand a sceptre surmounted
by a globe, a square, and a triangle; his attitude is proud
and calm. To the chariot is harnessed a double sphinx or
two sphinxes joined at the buttocks, but one of them
turns his head, so that they look in the same direction.
The one turning his head is black, the other is white. On
the square which forms the front of the chariot there is the
winged disc of the Egyptians surmounting the lingam ‘of
India. This symbol‘is perhaps the most beautiful and
complete of all those which compose the clavicula of the
Tarot.

8. Cheth. Balance, attraction and repulsion, life, terror,
promise, and menace.

Hieroglyph, JUSTICE, with sword and balance.

9. Teth. Good, hatred of evil, morality, wisdom.

Hieroglyph, a sage supported on his staff and holding a
lamp in front of him; he is wholly enveloped in his
mantle. His inscription is THE HERMIT OR CAPUCHIN,
because of his oriental hood; but his real name is PRU-
DENCE, and he completes thus the four cardinal virtues
which appeared imperfect to Court de Gebelin and Etteilla.

10. Jod. Cause, manifestation, praise, manly honour, phallus,
virile fecundity, the paternal sceptre.
Hieroglyph, THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE, that is, the
cosmic wheel of Ezekiel, with a Hermanubis ascending on
R

258 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

the right, a Typhon descending on the left, and a Sphinx
equilibrating both, and holding a sword in its lion-like
claws—admirable symbol, disfigured by Etteilla, who re-
placed Typhon by a man, Hermanubis by a mouse, and
the Sphinx by an ape, an allegory in all respects worthy
of the Kabbalah of Etteilla.

11. Caph. The hand in the act of grasping and holding.

Hieroglyph, STRENGTH, a woman crowned with the
vital 00, and closing calmly and without effort the jaws of a
raging lion.

12. Lamed. Example, teaching, public lesson.

A man hanging by one foot with his hands tied behind
his back, so that his body forms a triangle with inverted
point, and his legs a cross above the triangle. The gibbet
has the shape of a Hebrew Tau; the two trees which sup-
port it have six lopped branches each. The cross, super-
posed on an inverted triangle, is an alchemical symbol
known to all adepts, and represents the accomplishment of
the magnum opus. This personage who is thus hanging is
therefore the adept, bound by his engagements, and with
his feet turned towards heaven, signifying spiritualization ;
it is also the antique Prometheus, expiating by an immortal
agony the penalty of his glorious theft. It is vulgarly the
traitor Judas, and his execution menaces those who reveal
the Great Arcanum.

13. Mem. The firmament of Jupiter and Mars, domination
and power, new birth, creation, and destruction.

Hieroglyph, DEATH reaping crowned heads in a pasture
where men are growing.

14. Nun. The firmament of the sun, temperatures, seasons,
motton, revolutions of life, which is ever new and ever
the same.

Hieroglyph, TEMPERANCE, an angel, bearing the sign of
the sun on her forehead, and the square and triangle on her
bosom, pours from one ewer into another the two essences
which compose the elixir of life.

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 259

15. Samech. The firmament of Mercury, occult science,
magic, commerce, eloquence, mystery, moral strength.

Hieroglyph, THE DEVIL, the goat of Mendes, or the
Baphomet of the Templars, with all his pantheistic attri-
butes. This is the only hieroglyph which Etteilla perfectly
understood and properly interpreted.

16. Gnuain. The firmament of the Moon, deteriorations,
subversions, changes, weaknesses.

Hieroglyph, a tower struck by lightning, probably that
of Babel. Two individuals, doubtless Nimrod and his
false prophet, or minister, are precipitated from top to
bottom of the ruins. One of them in his fall represents
perfectly the letter y, gnain.

17. Phe. The firmament of the Soul, outpouring of thought,
moral influence of the idea on forms, immortality.

Hieroglyph, THE BURNING STAR and eternal youth, an
admirable allegory :—A naked woman, who represents at
once Truth, Nature, and Wisdom unveiled, inclines two
urns towards the earth, and pours out fire and water on it;
above her head glitters the Septenary, circling round an
eight-pointed star, that of Venus—symbol of peace and
love; the plants of earth flourish round the woman, and
on one has alighted the butterfly of Pysche, emblem of the
soul, replaced in some copies of the sacred book by a bird,
a more Egyptian and probably more ancient symbol.
This figure is analogous to many Hermetic symbols, and is
not without analogy with the Burning Star of Masonic
initiates, which gives expression to most of the mysteries of
the secret Rosicrucian doctrine.

18. Tsade. The elements, the visible world, reflected light,
material forms, symbolism.

Hieroglyph, THE Moon, dew falling, a crab in the water,
rising towards the earth, a dog and a wolf tied to the
foot of two towers and barking at the moon, a path lost in
the distance, and sprinkled with drops of blood.

19. Coph. Compounds, the head, the Apex, the Prince of
Heaven,

Hieroglyph, a radiant SUN, and two naked children
joining hands in a fortified enclosure. In other Tarots, it

260 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC,

is a spinner unwinding destinies ; in others, again, a naked
child mounted on a white horse, and displaying a scarlet
standard.

20. Resch. The vegetative, the generative power of the earth,
eternal life.

Hieroglyph, THE JUDGMENT. A genius sounds a
trumpet, and the dead rise from their graves. These dead
people revivified are a man, a woman, and a child—the
triad of human life.

21. Schin. The sensitive, flesh, eternal life.

Hieroglyph, THE FooL. A man in fool’s dress wander-
ing aimlessly, burdened with a wallet which he carries
behind him, and which is doubtless full of his follies and
vices. His disordered clothes reveal what should be con-
cealed, and a pursuing tiger is biting him, while he does not
know how to avoid it or defend himself.

22. Thau. The microcosmos, the universal synthests.

Hieroglyph, Kether, or the Kabbalistic CROWN, between
the four mysterious animals; in the midst. of the Crown is
Truth, holding a magic wand in each hand.

Such are the twenty-two keys of the Tarot which explain
all its numbers. Thus, the juggler, or key of the unities, ex-
plains the four aces with their quadruple progressive signi-
fication in the three worlds and in the First Cause. Thus,
the ace of deniers or of the circle, is the soul of the world ;
the ace of swords is militant intelligence: the ace of cups
is loving intelligence; the ace of clubs is creative intelli-
gence. They are also the principles of motion, progress,
productiveness, and virility. Each number multiplied by a
key gives another number, which, explained in its turn by
the keys, completes the philosophical and religious revela-
tion contained in every sign. As each of the fifty-six cards
can be multiplied by the twenty-two keys in turn, a series
of combinations results which gives all the most astonishing
consequences of revelation and of light. It is a truly philo-
sophical machine which prevents the mind from going
astray, even while leaving it its own initiative and freedom ;
it is mathematics in their application to the absolute, the

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 261

alliance of the real and the ideal, a lottery of thoughts, all
of which are as rigorously exact as numbers ; in fine, it is
perhaps at once the simplest and grandest thing ever con-
ceived by human genius.

If we now take a Tarot and join by fours all the pages
comprising the Wheel or ROTA of William Postel, if we
place the four aces, the four duads, &c., together, we shall
have ten packets of cards giving the hieroglyphical explana-
tion of the triangle of the Divine Names on the scale of
the denary which we give on page 286. They may be then
read off as follows, comparing each number with its corre-
sponding Sephiroth.

mit
Four letters of the name all names combining—

I. Keter. The four aces.
See on God’s crown four mystic gems are shining!

2. Chocmah. The four twos.
His wisdom’s fount a four-fold stream diffuses.

3. Binah. The four threes.
His intellect its four-fold proof produces.

4. Chesed. The four fours.
Four bounties ever from His mercy rise,

5. Geburah. The four fives.
Four times His rigour will four faults chastise.

6. Tiphereth. The four sixes.
His beauty is revealed by four pure rays.

7. Netsah. The four sevens.
As oft His conquest in our songs we praise.

8. Hod. The four eights.
Four times He triumphs in His life eternal.

g. Jesod. The four nines.
Foundations four support His throne supernal.

10. Malchut. The four tens.
Four times the same His single realm declare,
Like to the gems that star His crown of glory rare !

262 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

By this simple arrangement the Kabbalistic sense of each
plate may be seen. Thus, for example, the five of clubs
signifies rigorously the Geburah of Jod, that is, the justice
of the Creator and the wrath of man ; the seven of cups the
victory of mercy, or the triumph of woman; the eight of
swords signifies conflict or eternal equilibrium ; and so on
for the rest. We may thus understand how the ancient
pontiffs made use of it to elicit oracles ; the plates drawn
by lot, always gave a new Kabbalistic sense rigorously
exact in its combination, which alone was fortuitous; and
as the faith of the ancients attributed nothing to chance,
they read the responses of Providence in the Tarot, which
were called by the Hebrews Theraph or Theraphim, as was
perceived first of all by the erudite Gaffarel, one of the
accredited magicians of the Cardinal de Richelieu.

As to the trump cards they may be explained by a final
couplet :—

King, Queen, Knight, Knave.
The bridegroom, youth, and child, then all the human race—
Thy path by these degrees back to the One retrace.

The ten Sephiroths and twenty-two Tarots form what
the Kabbalists call the thirty-two paths of the absolute
science. The method of reading the hieroglyphs of the
Tarot is to arrange them either in a square or triangle,
placing the even numbers in opposition and conciliating
them with the uneven. Four signs always express the
absolute in any order whatsoever, and are explained by a
fifth. Thus the solution of all magical questions is that of
the Pentagram, and all antinomies are explained by har-
monious unity.

So disposed, the Tarot is a veritable oracle, and answers
all possible questions with more clearness and accuracy than
the Android of Albertus Magnus ; so that a prisoner devoid
of books, had he only a Tarot which he knew how to make
use of, could, in a few years, acquire a universal science, and
could converse with an unequalled doctrine and inexhaust-
ible eloquence. This wheel, in fact, is the true key of the
oratorical art, and of the great art of Raymond Lully; it is
the true secret of the transmutation of darkness into light ;
it is the first and most important of all the arcana of the
magnum opus. By means of this universal key of symbolism
all the allegories of India, Egypt, and Judea are made
intelligible; the Apocalypse of St John is a Kabbalistic

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 263

book, whose sense is exactly indicated by the figures and
numbers of the Urim, Thumim, Theraphim, and Ephod, all
summarised and completed by the Tarot; the sanctuaries of
eld are no longer full of mysteries, and the signification of
the objects of the Hebrew cultus may for the first time be
understood. As a fact, who does not recognise in the
golden table, crowned and supported by cherubim, which
covered the ark of the covenant and served as the pro-
pitiatory, the same symbols as in the twenty-first key of
the Tarot? The ark was a hieroglyphical synthesis of
the whole Kabbalistic doctrine; it contained the Jod, or
blossoming staff, of Aaron; the He, or cup; the gomor,
which held the manna; the two tables of the law, a symbol
analogous to that of the sword of justice; and the manna
contained in the gomar, four objects which wonderfully
interpret the letters of the divine Tetragram.

We have ourselves discovered, in a sufficiently extra-
ordinary manner, a sixteenth-century medal, which is a
key to the Tarot. We scarcely know whether we should
confess that this medal, and the place where it was to be
found, were shown to us in a dream by the divine Para-
celsus ; however this may be, the medal is in our posses-
sion. On one side it represents the juggler, in a German
costume of the period, holding his girdle in one hand, and
the Pentagram in the other. On the table in front of him,
between an open book and a clasped purse, he has ten
deniers or talismans arranged in two lines of three each,
and in a square of four; the legs of the table form two 4,
and those of the juggler two inverted 1. The back of the
medal contains the letters of the alphabet disposed within
a magic square, after the following manner :—

D

I

©: ef. =
HD 2 © ww
nO Sf Ww OO
< as A F&F

264 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

It will be seen that this alphabet has only twenty-two
letters, the V and N being repeated, and that they are
arranged in four quinaries, with a tetrad for basis and
key. The four final letters are two combinations of the
duad and triad, and read Kabbalistically they form the
word Azoth, by ascribing to the configuration of the letters
their value in primitive Hebrew, and in reckoning N as x,
Z as it is in Roman characters, V as the Hebrew 3} Vau,
which between two vowels, or letters of the value of vowels,
is pronounced O, and X as the primitive Tau, which was
precisely of this shape. The whole Tarot is therefore
explained in this wonderful medal, truly worthy of Para-
celsus, and which we offer for the examination of antiquaries.
The letters disposed by four times five are summarised by
the word miZx, analogous to those of the Tetragram and
INRI, and containing all the mysteries of the Kabbalah.

Vestiges of the Tarot are found among all nations of
the world. The Italian version is the most faithful and
the best preserved, but it may be still farther improved by
precious indications borrowed from the Spanish game; the
two of cups, for example, in the Vaidi, is completely
Egyptian, and we there see two antique vases whose. -
handles are formed by two ibises superposed cn a cow;
in the same cards a unicorn is seen in the centre of the
four of deniers ; the three of cups shows us the figure of
Isis issuing from a vase; while from two other vases two
ibises come forth, one bearing a crown for the goddess, the
other a lotus, which he appears to be offering to her. The
four aces bear the image of the sacred hieratic serpent,
and, in certain games, the double triangle of Solomon is
found instead of the symbolic unicorn.

The German Tarots are more mutilated, and little
beyond the numbers of the keys can be found in them,
these being crowded with pantagruelian figures. The
Chinese Tarot preserves several emblems; the deniers
and swords may be easily recognised, but it would be more
difficult to identify the cups and clubs.

It was at the epoch of the Gnostic and Manichzan
heresies that the Tarot was lost to the Church, and it
was at the same period that the meaning of the divine
Apocalypse was also lost. It was no longer known that
the seven seals of this Kabbalistic book are seven pantacles
to be explained by the analogies of the numbers, characters,

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 265

and symbols of the Tarot. Thus the universal tradition of
the one religion was for an instant broken, the darkness of
doubt spread over the whole earth, and to the uninitiated
it appeared that true catholicism, universal revelation, had
for a moment vanished. The explanation of the work of
St John by the signs of the Kabbalah will be a perfectly
new revelation.

ETERNAL LIFE, OR THE PEACE OF GOD.

THE end of all occult philosophy is to assure us that
unalterable serenity of soul which is the life of Heaven
and the surpassing peace of the elect. To attain such
peace it is necessary :—

1.

To believe in the wisdom of God and the harmony of
natural laws. This faith will prevent us from anticipating
evil, and being vexed by disorders which we cannot pre-
vent, for what appears irregular to us is often the result of
a law which escapes us. We shall find in this considera-
tion the great secret of resignation.

II.

Never to disturb ourselves by the apprehension of evil,
for the evil which may overtake us will never be stronger
than ourselves. There is but one real evil, injustice, and
it is in our power to be just. Calamities which are foreign
to our conscience are either trials or favours of Providence.

, IIT.

To labour unceasingly in the reformation of our charac-
ters. By our characteristic vices we torment ourselves and
others. A vicious character is therefore a habitual in-
Justice, which deserves, and entails unfailingly, both trouble
and reprobation.

IV.

Never to surrender ourselves wholly to pleasure. Plea-
sure exists for us, but we are not made for it.

266 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

V.

To believe sincerely in the indestructibility of all that
is good, all that is true, all that is beautiful, and all that is
pure.

VI.

To believe that suffering is production, production a
struggle, struggle progress, and progress true life.

VII.

Never to permit the cynicism of incredulity to parade
itself before us.

VIII.

To believe in the reality of all that is good, even in the
most fleeting forms of life. A glass of water given in my
name shall deserve eternal life, said the great Initiator.
It is then of an infinite value like all that comes from God.

IX.

To be humble, and never imagine that we are great
because we possess a great knowledge or profound
thoughts. One dewdrop reflects all the glories of a beautt-
ful day, yet nothing thereof belongs to it; it is thus with
our souls. The sun drinks the dew, and God can draw to
Himself all our intelligence and genius. We are but
trembling and fugitive mirrors, like the drop of water, and
should nature break us, there would be no void in immen-
sity. Heaven has no need of us, it is we who have need of
Heaven.

X.

To preserve ourselves from puerile beliefs which trouble
the conscience, and to hold one idea more than all in
detestation—that God desires to confound human reason
and is honoured by prejudice and folly, that, like the
Sphinx, He proposes enigmas for solution, and kills cr
tortures everlastingly those who solve them, and those
who, unable to do so, do not harass themselves about
them ; whereas the Supreme Reason which exists in God
seeks the elevation of man’s reason to itself by faith in His
rectitude and justice, the God of the sages being the light
of generous souls, and not the murky agitation of the
slothful and servile mind.

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. 267

XI.

To raise the independence of the conscience above all
human influences and all fears, since nothing worse than
death can befall us, and death we have no cause to dread,
for it is a natural and necessary thing, which independence |
and mental greatness will survive, when the mind irrevoc-
ably joins itself to truth and justice, which are eternal.

XII.

Never to be overcome by love. Love because we ought,
and because we wish to. Love becomes a glory when it is
in no sense shameful. Its joys wait on those who never
purchase them at the price of infamy. To prefer one’s
pleasure before one’s honour is to be base. Now, by base-
ness we become unworthy even of a courtesan’s love. A
woman despises the man she degrades, and when she feels
herself contemptible, she esteems the man who contemns her.

XITI.

Not to leave the performance of our own duties to
Providence. Never to complain of the evil we can prevent.
To look upon the struggle against evil as our first duty,
assured that we should be fools and impious if we imputed
to God the inconveniences which result from our own folly
and idleness.

XIV.

To seek the infinite in the intellectual and moral order
only. The whole world is not large enough to satisfy our
soul ; it thirsts for an infinite perfection, which sufficiently
proves that it is immortal. The treasures of earth when
immense are only an immense embarrassment, and never
satisfy their owner. The dignities of this world are often
great calamities ; all that can end is as if it were already
ended, and the vulture of Prometheus returns unceasingly
to enlarge the void in the heart of man who is chained to
the rock of power, for the more he is elevated above others
the more is he lonely, and God weighs with an infinite
weight on the isolation of pride.

XV.

Not to believe in delusions; God's realities being a
thousand times more admirable than man’s dreams, we

268 . MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

must never be content to imagine what we can estimate
and know. Youth, friendship, love, poetry, glory—all
these are true, all these are eternally true, notwithstanding
that everything changes its zone like spring. Spring is no
illusion for the swallows, they have the boldness to follow
and overtake it always.

XVI.

To do one’s duty in the present and fear nothing for the
future. To be happy when happiness offers itself as if we
had but one day to live, provided that we find happiness
in the satisfaction of legitimate desires. Resignation to
God, confiding joy in the midst of nature's festivals, gaiety
which intoxicates itself in the sunlight, enthusiasm for the
beautiful, devotion to the good, all these do not calculate,
do not reason with, the anxiety of the morrow. Happy ts
he, says Horace, who each day can say to himself—This
day I have lived ; let the tempest come to-morrow, it can-
not deprive me of the serenity of the day that is closing.
You have enough of daily trial, said the Christus ; do not
store up disquietude for the morrow; sufficient to each day
is the evil thereof... . Do you wish to have no appre-
hension for the morrow? Do good to-day ; good actions
are the seed of happiness.

XVII.

To obey the law; forestall duty, but never endure
slavery. The deaths of the martyrs were sublime because
the outrage of their conscience was attempted. We cannot
renounce our convictions, affections, or national habits, at
the command of an imperious master. We may be silent
in the face of oppression, we may abstain from armed
resistance, but let us die, if need be, embracing the altar
of the fatherland.

XVIII.

Never to dispute about the essential nature of God.
Faith in God should make men better, not lead their
reason astray; and how should we define the Infinite?
How explain what we cannot understand? The more we
dispute, the less we adore. Let us reason as we please on
the necessity of adoration, but when we pronounce the
name of the Indefinable, let us preserve supreme silence.

THE GREAT PRACTICAL SECRETS. - 269

Let us bow and adore! It is not the elephant of the
Brahmans, nor the three-headed Ancient of the Gnostics,
nor anything which the idolatry of the nations has conse-
crated ; it is nothing that we can see, handle, hear, taste,
or describe. It is that which we should worship in the pro-
found peace of the spirit and in the heart’s enthusiasm.

XTX.

To respect the conscience of others and never impose on
them even truth. Break not forcibly the yoke of slaves
who love their yoke! Be devoted always, never too
zealous! If souls rejoice in their folly, it is cruel to deprive
them of it without restoring their reason. We must have
patience ; we must leave the faquir to his chain and the old
world to its idols, waiting till all this shall end of itself.
Lose not the time in denouncing the darkness with vain
discourses ; make the light shine, but let it not be the light
of a consuming torch. Overthrow henceforth neither the
statues of Jupiter, nor of St Nicholas, even when an imbecile
people attempt to adore St Nicholas. Philosophers, respect
relics if you wish not your books to be burned. The light
shines for all men coming into the world, but all have the
right to open or shut their eyes as may please them.

XX.

To allow no real existence to evil. God, in fact, does
- not will it; Nature rejects it ; suffering protests against it.
Reasonable beings cannot desire it; universal harmony
leaves no place for it. Life triumphs continually over it,
as over death. Satan cannot therefore be a king; he is
the most abject slave of the fatality he has evoked. The
eternal reprobation of evil consists in the eternal triumph
of good. Order cures disorder by punishment, and punish-
ment itself is a good, since it is a cure. Evil, moreover,
condemns and destroys itself. Pride is a diadem of
humiliation, lust an abortion of pleasure, avarice the cultus
of wretchedness. The ways of evil are broad at the begin-
ning, but they contract in proportion to our advance, and
end by the prolonged crushing and suffocation of their
victim. They are blind alleys where we must perish if we
lack the boldness and strength to turn back. In order to
prove the existence of another world, it is sometimes asserted

270 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

that the wicked can be happy in this life. This is untrue ;
the wicked are the last and most miserable of men.

XXI.

Not to seek the glory which comes from the premature
esteem of men, but that derived from honour, that conscious-
ness of justice and self-devotion which soon or late will
produce its effect. Men finish by submitting to the
ascendency of genius and talent, but they detest it because
envy is the vice and torment of the weak. For them glory
is but a triumph of egotism, because, egoists as they are,
they cannot understand it otherwise. They invariably
deny the existence of voluntary sacrifice, and seek for some
slavish and infamous motive in the renunciation of the
heroes of humanity. Let them rail; they speak without
knowledge, and with no wish to listen. They crown
willingly the inanity which does not give them umbrage.
Having no need of their crowns, it may well be that they
may bear them one day to our tombs. And should they
even despoil our tombs, what harm could that do to our
remains? What would that matter above all to our souls,
if these, as we doubt not, survive our earthly errors? Love
good for good’s sake, knowledge for the sake of knowledge,
the beautiful for beauty’s sake, truth for the sake of truth.
Think you that Homer composed his admirable poems in
view of those alms which he nevertheless stood in need of ?
The cities of Greece, wherein he begged his bread, dispute
his name and birthplace, and it is uncertain which performed
for him the final honours and deserved to possess his
remains. “ Let the dead bury their dead,” says the Christus.
“ Seek first the kingdom of God and His justice, and all
other things shall be added unto you.”

Vd

EPILOGUE,

EMBODYING THE SPIRIT OF THE AUTHOR'S
PHILOSOPHY.

I].—THE VISION OF THE WANDERING JEw. ae

“GO onward!” cried the Jew Ahasuerus to Christ as He
staggered beneath His Cross. ‘“ Do thou go onward,”
replied the Saviour of the world, “till I return hither and
bid thee rest.”

From that time Ahasuerus has traversed the world un-
ceasingly, and every year, about Easter, he returns to the
home of his accursed race, to see if he shall meet Jesus.
He approaches, ‘he arrives, broken-down, breathless, ready
to expire with fatigue—he arrives and finds no one. He
raises his eyes and beholds in the ever implacable sky a
hand which points westward! “Go onward!” cries a voice
to him which seems to be an eternal echo of his own on
the day of his crime, and the old Ahasuerus bows his head;
the sigh of deliverance which swelled already in his heart
sinks silently and without tears ; he recommences his age-
long journey.

In the days when the Crusaders took Jerusalem, the
Wandering Jew was told that Christ had returned to the
Holy Mount; but he found only a priest encircled by
military. “A Jew! a Jew!” cried some whose hands
were blood-stained. ‘Get on! get on!” shouted the
soldiers, as they smote the old man with their truncheons
and goaded him with the points of their lances. Ahasuerus
bowed his head and took his departure amidst the male-
dictions of the crowd.

“ Alas!” he murmured, “ not yet can the Cross absolve
me, since it has not taught forgiveness to its defenders.
Men venerate it only as an instrument of torture and a
recollection of revenge! Madmen, they would avenge
Him who saved them by pardoning them, and they do not

272 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

see that they condemn themselves by annulling the forgive-
ness of the man-god! They see not that persecution
practised by the Christians is an abjuration of the martyrs
and a restoration of their executioners !”

Therefore, when Ahasuerus found the Jews oppressed by
the Christians, he pledged them to die rather than renounce
the faith of their fathers, and he himself, with his world-old
staff in his hand, his beard and hair blown by'the wind, led
them forward from exile to exile. Better than anyone,
nevertheless, did he know that Jesus was the only Son of
God!

At a later period he saw the Cross cast down and the
scaffolds rise up; he heard the holy guillotine spoken of,
and was in no way surprised—had not the Inquisition
already inaugurated its festivals of death in the name of
the Holy Cross? The cultus was the same, the altar alone
was changed. There was talk also of humanity and pro-
gress, and justly, for the axe is more speedy and less cruel
than the bloody pillory of Golgotha.

Once more he beheld the solemnities of the Golden Calf
established; he knew how such orgies end, and when
they asked him, “What is the carpenter's son making
now ?” he answered, shaking his head, “A coffin!” For
he felt that the time was short and his pace seemed to
slacken ; he surveyed in turn the expiring century and the
whirl of events.

On the day when the successor of St Peter fell, to be
supported henceforth by a sceptre, when he departed from
the Eternal City exiled and cursed in his turn, Ahasuerus
entered the deserted Vatican, and, with his elbow resting
on the empty chair of the popes, he let his head fall on his
hand, and for a moment seemed to sleep. He saw in a
dream the country about Jerusalem clothed once more
with its primeval fertility ; the vine of the Promised Land
with its giant grapes, and the olive trees loaded with fruit,
clad the hills, while the valleys were rich in bay trees and
roses in full bloom. The mountain of Moria was covered
with an innumerable multitude, formed by deputations
from every nation of the earth, and on the summit of the
Holy Mount rose a vast altar. In the centre of the altar
was a gigantic golden candlestick reaching to the clouds,
surmounted by a golden monstrance, in whose centre there
appeared, white and transparent, the Divine Host of the

EPILOGUE. 273

Sacrifice of Love, the wheaten synthesis, the symbol of
divine and human unity, the bread of social union and
universal communion.

An old man was standing erect before the altar, holding
in one hand a white and thin cake, like that in the mon-
strance, and in the other a chalice. Celestial music was
heard, and from the front row of every phalanx rose clouds
of incense. Several men in splendid vestments brought
forward a table which they covered with white linen. One
of these men wore the dress of the sovereign pontiff of the
Christian Law, the second that of the chief of the Imans,
the third was habited like the high priest of the Jewish
Law, a fourth wore the ornaments of the Grand Lama, and
all acted and prayed in concert, seeming as united as
brethren.

It was the day on which Christ rose from the dead, and
already more than two thousand times the world had cele-
brated the anniversary, but none had been so splendidly
impressive as this one. The music ended; silence fell on
the throng, and every eye turned towards the West. Then
another old man: was seen to appear, whose beard and hair
covered his breast and shoulders ; he cast down his staff of
travel, straightened himself with a long sigh, and, raising
his tear-filled eyes to Heaven, allowed himself to be clothed
in a white garment. He looked at the Host, and ex-
claimed, weeping, “’Tis He!” He looked at the priest,
who, elected by universal suffrage, performed on this day
the office of supreme pontiff, and repeated, “’Tis He!”
He looked at the silent and recollected crowd, and extended
his hands in an attitude of thanks, still saying, “It is He!
It is He, living in all; He only everywhere and for ever!”

Then the priest of the people came down from the altar ;
a chair was set before the Holy Table, on which was placed
the Host and chalice, and the pastor, addressing the
ancient man, said, “ Rest thyself, Ahasuerus!”

Then the pontiffs of every past religion came after the
priest of the universal association to imprint the kiss of
peace on the white beard of the reconciled outcast, after
which all gathering about the table communicated with
him. Then Ahasuerus felt himself informed with new
life ; it seemed to him as if he were himself the Christ, and
that breaking the bread which multiplied on the Holy
Table, he distributed it to the multitude.

S

274 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

So finished the dream of the Wandering Jew; a clatter
of arms and anguished cries awoke him, as the brigands of
the nations pillaged the Holy City. He issued from the
palace of the popes, which tottered over tombs torn open,
and again set out to continue his circuit of the world,
which soon, perchance, he will recommence no more. Pity
him not, all ye who encounter him bent, breathless, and
travel-stained. He is more fortunate than all the great
politicians of our century or the last monarchs of the
world ; he knows whither he is going.

II.—THE FAREWELL TO CALVARY.

JESUS crossed the desolate meadows of Judea, and paused
on the arid summit of the ancient Calvary. There an
angel with frowning brow and darkened eye was seated
enveloped in his two vast wings. It was Satan, the King
of the old world.

The rebel angel was sad and fatigued, and he turned
away his eyes in disgust from a world where the sin was
without genius, and where the satiety of a cowardly cor-
ruption had succeeded the titanic combats of the giant
passions of eld. He felt that in tempting mankind he had
instructed the strong and had deceived only the weak ; he
therefore deigned no longer to tempt any one, and gloomy
beneath his golden diadem, he heard vaguely the fall of
souls into eternity, like the monotonous drops of an un-
ceasing rain.

Prompted by a power which was unknown to him, he
had taken his seat on Calvary, and pondering over the
death of the Man-God, he felt jealous of it. He was a
powerful and beautiful angel, but he was Jealous of the
Christus, and this jealousy was typified by a serpent
plunging its fangs into his breast and devouring his heart.
Jesus stood before him, with Mary His mother, and gazed
at him in silence with profound compassion. Satan in his
turn beheld the Redeemer, and bitterly smiled.

“Comest thou,” he asked, “to endeavour to die once
more for a world which thy first passion could not save?
Hast thou tried vainly to change stones into bread for the
nourishment of thy people, and dost thou come to confess

EPII.OGUE. 275

thy defeat? Hast thou fallen from the summit of the
.Temple, and has thy divinity been broken in the descent ?
Dost thou come to adore me that thou may’st possess the
world? Go, it is now too late, and I would not deceive
thee! The empire of the world has passed over to those
who adored me in thy name, and I myself am weary
of dominion devoid of glory. If thou be discouraged as
I am, sit down beside me, and think no longer of either
God or men.”

“JT come not to sit down beside thee,” replied Christ ;
“I come to raise thee up, to forgive, and to console thee,
that thou mayest cease being wicked.”

“I desire not thy pardon,” the evil angel answered,
“and it is not I who am wicked. The wicked one is he
who implants the thirst for knowledge in minds and then
shrouds truth in an impenetrable mystery. It is he who
reveals to their desire an ideal virgin, whose intoxicating
beauty is able to make them delirious, and who gives her
to them only to tear her immediately from their embraces,
and load her with eternal chains. It is he, in fine, who
endows angels with liberty, and has prepared infinite tor-
ments for those who would not be his slaves—he who has
slain his innocent son with the pretext of visiting the
crimes of the guilty upon him, and who yet has not par-
doned the guilty, but has laid the death of his son as a new
crime at their doors!”

“Why do you remind me so bitterly of the ignorance
and errors of men?” said Jesus. ‘“ Better than thou do I
know how they have distorted the image of God, but well
dost thou also know that God is not like the image they
have made of Him. God has not endowed thee with the
thirst of knowledge except to slake it for ever in the waters
of eternal truth, but why close thine eyes and seek the day
within thee instead of looking up to the sun? If thou
seek the light where it is, thou shalt find the light, for in
God there are neither shadows nor mysteries ; the shadows
are in thee alone, and mysteries are the limitations of thine
own mind. God has not given liberty to his creatures to
take it back again, but He has given it as a bride and not
asan illegitimate love; He desires us to possess it, not to
outrage it, for this chaste daughter of Heaven never sur-
vives violence, and when its virginal dignity is wounded,
liberty is dead for him who has misused it. God does not

276 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

wish for slaves, revolted pride has created servitude. God's
law is the royal rule of His creatures and the title-deeds of
their eternal liberty. God has not killed His Son, but the
Son of God laid down His life freely that He might destroy
death, and for this reason He now lives in the whole of
humanity, and will save all generations, for from trial to
trial he leads the human family into the Promised Land,
whose first fruits have been already tasted. I come therefore
to announce to thee, O Satan, that thy last hour has arrived,
unless, at least, thou art willing to be free and reign over
the world with me, by love and intelligence. But thou shalt
be called Satan no longer, thou shalt reassume the glorious
name of Lucifer, and I will set a star upon thy forehead and
a torch in thy hand. Thou shalt be the genius of toil and
industry, because thou hast much struggled, much suffered,
and dolorously thought. Thou shalt spread thy wings from
pole to pole, and brood over the world. Instead of the
haughtiness of isolation, thou shalt be the sublime pride of
self-devotion, and I will give thee the sceptre of earth and
the key of heaven.”

“T understand thee not, I shall never understand thee;
well dost thou know that I can love no longer,” and with a
sorrowful gesture the fallen angel showed Christ the wound
which furrowed his breast, and the serpent devouring his
heart.

Jesus turned towards his mother and looked at her;
Mary understood the glance of her son, she drew near to
the unhappy angel, and did not disdain to stretch forth her
hand towards him and touch his wounded breast. The
serpent thereupon dropped of itself and expired at the feet
of Mary, who crushed its head; the wound in the angel's
heart was healed, and a tear, the first he had shed, coursed
slowly down the face of the repentant Lucifer; this tear
was as precious as the blood of a god, and all the blas-
phemies of hell were atoned for by it. The regenerated
angel prostrated himself on Calvary, and, weeping, kissed
the place where the Cross was once driven in. Then he
rose triumphant in hope and radiant with love, to cast
himself into the arms of Christ. Calvary trembled thereat ;
its arid summit was suddenly clothed with fresh and bril-
liant verdure, and blossomed out in flowers, while, in the
place where the Cross had stood, a young vine rose loaded
with ripe and fragrant grapes.

EPILOGUE. 277

Then said the Saviour: “This is the vine which shall
provide the wine of universal communion, and it shall grow
till all its branches encircle the earth.” Then taking his
mother by one hand he extended the other to the angel,
and said to him: “ Let our symbolic forms now return into
heaven, I shall never more come down to die on this
mountain. Here shall Mary weep her son no more, nor
Lucifer bring remorse for his now obliterated crime. We
are one spirit henceforth—the spirit of intelligence and -
love, the spirit of liberty and courage, the spirit of life
victorious over death.”

All three then took their flight through space, and rising
to an immense height, they beheld the earth and all its
kingdoms extending roads towards each other, like inter-
lacing arms; they saw the country green already with the
first fraternal harvests, and from East to West they heard
the mysterious prelude of the canticle of union, while
northward on the crest of a bluish mountain they saw, in
dim outline, the gigantic form of a man raising his arms to
heaven. On his limbs were still the recent traces of the
fetters he had broken, and his breast was scarred like
Lucifer’s. Beneath his right foot, on the sharpest peak of
the mountain, there still palpitated the dead body of a
- vulture whose wings and head hung down. This mountain
was Caucasus, and the liberated giant was the antique
Prometheus. Thus the great divine and human symbols
met and acknowledged each other under the same sky;
then they vanished to make place for God Himself, who
came to dwell for ever among men.

III.-—THE REIGN OF MESSIAH.

WHEN the spirit of understanding shall have spread over
the whole earth, a time will come when the Gospel spirit
shall be the light of nations. The basis of power will be
understood to be absolute reason, as it is declared in the
long misconstrued proem of the Gospel according to St
John. Then will Christ be daily born no longer symboli-
cally on our altars, but'really and corporeally in every part
of the earth. Has He not declared that the least among

278 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

us is Himself? So the birth of every child shall be a
Christmas, and all shall venerate the Saviour in one an-
other. Christ will be no longer poor, hungry, proscribed,
destitute of bride and of children, hunted and crucified.
He will be rich like Job when his trials were over, in
universal abundance ; He will be bridegroom and father, He
will reign and pardon all His persecutors. For one day all
nations shall be one nation, all thrones be subject to one
throne, and on this will be seated a just man filled with
the spirit of Jesus Christ, and who thus will be Jesus
Christ Himself, as we all may be if He be within us. This
King shall reconcile the East with the West and the North
with the South; he will endow the peoples with true
liberty, for he will immoveably establish the pillars of
justice. By repressing license, he will abolish misery. All
will have the right and opportunities to do well, none to
degrade themselves and do viciously. Punishment will be
succeeded by moral hygiene, criminals will be looked on as
diseased, and will be subjected to the treatment of the
deranged. The great expiation of the Cross is sufficient
for all human offences, and will eventually abolish the
gibbet, which will be execrable from the moment that it is
useless. ,

Error will thenceforth be accorded no real existence ; -
truth only exists, falsehood is as perishable as a dream.
There will be then only one religion in the world, and the
universal pontiff will declare from the pinnacle of supreme
authority that Jews, Mohammedans, Buddhists, &c., are
Christians ill-instructed, of whom he is none the less
father and head. He will bless them and convene them to
the great council of the nations; he will throw open to
them the inexhaustible wealth of prayers and indulgences,
and will really and truly bestow his benediction ON THE
CITY AND ON THE WORLD.

This will be the period of the return of the Prodigal Son,
who no longer possesses anything, but his brother will lend
to him, and he will work that he may regain his portion.
It will be the hour when the five foolish virgins, having at
length procured oil for their lamps, will come back knock-
ing at the gatep AND SHOULD THE BRIDEGROOM
REFUSE TO OPEN TO THEM, THE PRUDENT
VIRGINS WILL STRETCH OUT THEIR HANDS
AND HELP THEM TO COME IN BY THE WIN-

EPILOGUE. 279

DOW, for the final message of Christianity is reciprocity,
restoration, universal love ; and I assure you, in all truth,
that there is not a saint in heaven who is not willing to
descend into hell to deliver poor souls therefrom, even were
it necessary to take their place with the doors shut against
them for ever. Can you even conceive a heaven poised
over hell ? an eternal feast in face of an eternal pyre, a
house of peace and prayer with a vault full of groans and
torments beneath? One only dream can fill the everlast-
ing repose of each of the beatified, the deliverance of some
reprobate; and if this were a hopeless dream, it would
become a nightmare more terrible than even the torments
of hell.

It was in this manner that the Gnostics—that is, those
who knew, in other words, the initiates of primitive Christi-
anity—interpreted the oracles uttered by the spirit of Jesus
Christ ; they were followed by the disciples of Origen, but
the Church condemned them, and rightly, for they divulged
the secret doctrines, and profaned the mysteries of the
Master. In extending the hopes of the multitude, the law
must not be deprived of its awful penalty, and the dogma
of eternal perdition only signifies after all the eternal
divorce between good and evil.

IV.—THE FINAL VISION.

ABOVE material forms and the terrestrial atmosphere,
there is a realm where souls break from the chains which
bind them. The ethereal aromas, obedient to fancy, clothe
it successively with all the splendours of ideal grace, and
populate the spiritual world of poetry and vision with crea-
tures of marvellous beauty. Into this region our fairest
dreams transport us while we sleep; there in laborious
watches inspiration carried those great poets, who, in all
ages, were enabled to foresee, by the perceptions of har-
mony, the great destinies of humanity. There images
exist and analogies reign, for poetry is in imagery, and
the harmony of images is essentially analogical. In this
ideal region A¢‘schylus beheld the torments of Prometheus,
and Moses heard Jehovah speak. There the greatest of
the Oriental poets, the Eagle of Patmos, the singer of the

280 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

Apocalypse, saw the Christian Church, under the figure of
a woman in labour who brings forth painfully the Man of
the Future. In this wondrous world of poetry and revela-
tion, God appeared to him veiled in light and holding the
everlasting Gospel in His hand, which opened slowly, while
plagues tormented the world and angels of destruction
furrowed the earth to make place for the city of harmony
and holy unity, the New Jerusalem which comes down
ready built out of heaven, because the conception of har-
mony exists in God, and will be realised of itself on earth
when men understand it.

The glorious vision of Christ, after traversing the earth,
ascended into this ethereal region, and there the Redeemer
disclosed to the once rebellious and henceforth regenerate
angel the great army of martyrs. All the victims of human
despotism might be seen there, all who had chosen to die
rather than be false to their consciences, the victims of
Antiochus, the martyrs of ancient Rome, and those tortured
by the second Rome—some for their legitimate beliefs,
others for dreams and delusions, had faced human tyranny
bravely, and all were pure in God's sight, for they had
suffered in the preservation of the noblest and most beau-
tiful of gifts—liberty.

Long had their white-robed souls sighed beneath the
altar and cried out for justice. At length the hour was
come, and all, with their palms in their hands, came before
the Redeemer, as He stood between His mother and the
restored angel to ask what revenge they desired on their
persecutors.

“Lord, let their souls be delivered to us, that we may
dispose of them for eternity as they disposed of us in
time!”

Christ thereupon committed to their keeping the keys of —
heaven and hell, saying, “ The souls of your oppressors are
in your power.”

A cry of joy and triumph pealed from the heights of
heaven to the depths of the abyss, the martyr-spirits threw
open the gates of hell, and stretched forth their hands to
their murderers. Each of the reprobates found an elect for
his protector, heaven enlarged its boundary, and the virgin
mother wept with joy when she beheld so many children
whom she thought she had lost for ever crowding around
her. While all heaven was smiling on this magnificent

EPILOGUE. 281

spectacle, a new sun rose over the earth, and night folded
its wings in the west. The darksome clouds of the past
fled, crowded with phantoms, which were the shades of the
grand extinct monarchies and the ancient vanished reli-
gions. Between the night and coming morning, the light
whitened the head of an aged man, as he sat with his face
turning eastward. This was the wanderer of the Christian
centuries, the outlaw of a savage civilisation, the type of
the Parias, the old Ahasuerus at length resting. The
people had found a fatherland, the Wandering Jew had
received his pardon.

The earth now was the Temple of God; universal
reciprocity had realised Christian charity ; all laboured and
lived for each, as each for all. All rejoiced peaceably in the
fruit of their toil ; none of God’s children perished through
want beside the table of their father, for the fair division of
labour made life easy to the whole race; confederacy had
increased the wealth of the earth, and the union of every
interest had given human toil a direction so divine, and an
energy so marvellous, that the very seasons had altered ;
there was a new heaven and a new earth, according to the
promise of the apostle ; and Jesus said to the angel of light
and genius,—“ Behold the work thou must accomplish!
Behold the new city of intelligence and love !

“The earth is ready, it thrills with expectation. Men
now see it, as once it was seen by the prophet, covered with
bones and ashes; but fresh life stirs already in the dust,
and a divine tremor passes through the dry bones. Soon
will they rise, and a new people will cover the countries of
the world. Then shall humanity issue as from a long
sleep, and will seem to behold the day for the first time!”

Having spoken these words, Christ prostrated Himself
before the throne of His Father, saying, “ Lord, Thy will
be done on earth, as it is in heaven.”

And the Virgin, who is the type of the regenerated woman,
and the angel of liberty transformed into the genius of
order and harmony, with all the compensated martyrs,
and all repentant reprobates delivered from their agonies,
responded together by that mysterious word which joins
the will of creatures to that of their Creator, and all human
energes to divine power—Amen!

282 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

THANKS be unto Thee, oh my God, that Thou hast led
me to this admirable Light! Thou art the supreme intel-
ligence and absolute life of those numbers and those forces
which obey Thee to populate the infinite with an inex-
haustible creation. Thou art proved by mathematics,
Thou art celebrated by the harmonies of existence, Thou
art adored by all perishable forms!

Thou wast known to Abraham, Thou wast divined by
Hermes, Pythagoras calculated Thy movements, Plato
aspired unto Thee in all the dreams of his genius, but one
only initiator, one sage alone, hath revealed Thee to the
little ones of earth, one alone has been able to say of Thee
—I and my Father are one; to Him be glory, therefore,
since all His glory is thine!

Father, Thou knowest that he who writes these lines has
much struggled and much suffered ; he has endured poverty,
calumny, revengeful proscription, imprisonment, the deser-
tion of those he loved, and never, notwithstanding, has he
considered himself unfortunate, since truth and justice
remained for his consolation.

Thou only art holy, oh, God of truthful hearts and up-
right souls, and Thou knowest if ever I have thought
myself pure in Thy sight! Like all men I have been the
sport of human passions; at length I have conquered
them, or Thou, rather, hast overcome them in me, and
hast given me to repose in the profound peace of those
who seek and who covet Thee only.

I love mankind, because men, unless they are beside
themselves, are only wicked through error or infirmity.
They naturally love what is good, and it is by this love,
which Thou hast given them as a support in the midst of
their trials, that they must be, sooner or later, led back to
the religion of justice by the love of truth.

Let my book now go wherever Thy Providence may
send it. If it contain the words of Thy wisdom, it will be
stronger than oblivion; if, on the contrary, it abound but
in errors, I know that my love of justice and of truth will,
at least, survive it, and thus immortality cannot fail to en-
garner the aspirations and desires of my soul which Thou
has created immortal !

SUPPLEMENT.

THE KABBALAH.

ALL religions have preserved the remembrance of a prim-
eval book, written in emblems by the sages of the first
centuries of the world, and whose symbols, afterwards
simplified and made common, furnished letters to the art
of writing, characters to speech, and to occult philosophy
its mysterious signs and pantacles. This book, attributed
to Enoch, seventh lord of the earth after Adam, by the
Hebrews ; to Hermes Trismegistus by the Egyptians; to
Cadmus, the mysterious founder of the sacred city, by the
Greeks, was the symbolical synthesis of primeval tradition,
since called Kabbalah, or Cabala, from a Hebrew word
which is the equivalent of tradition.

This tradition wholly reposes on the single dogma of
magic—that the visible is for us the proportional measure
of the invisible. Now, the ancients having observed that
equilibrium is the universal law of physics, and one which
results from the apparent opposition of two forces, argued
from physical to metaphysical equilibrium, and asserted
that in God, that is, in the first living and active cause, two
properties necessary to one another must be recognised—
stability and movement, necessity and liberty, rational
order and volitional autonomy, justice and love; conse-
quently also, severity and mercy; and it is these two
attributes which, in a certain sense, the Kabbalistic Jews
personified under the names of Geburah and Chesed. Above
Geburah and Chesed dwells the supreme Crown, the equi-
librating power, designated under the name of Malchut in
the occult and Kabbalistic verse of the Paternoster, which
is found in the Greek text of the Gospel according to St
Matthew, and in several Hebrew copies—'Ori on eat 7
Bacitea kat 4 dvvapis, Kai 4 doa, eis Tovs aiwvas. * Amny.

284 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

“ For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, world
without end. Amen.’’*

Malchut based on Geburah and Chesed is the Temple of
Solomon, having Jakin and Bohas, unity and the duad, for
its pillars ; it is the Adamic doctrine founded on the resig-
nation of Abel for the one part, and on the labours and
remorse of Cain for the other part; it is the demonstration
of the universal lever sought in vain by Archimedes. But
Geburah and Chesed, maintained in equilibrium by the
Crown above and the Kingdom beneath, are two principles
which may be viewed in their abstract nature or in their
realisation. As abstract or idealised, they take the superior
names of Chocmah, wisdom, and Siaah, intelligence. In
their realisation they are called stability and progress,
that is, eternity and victory, Hod and Netsah.

Such, according to the Kabbalah, is the basis of all
religions and all sciences, the primal.and immutable con-
ception of things, a threefold triangle and a circle, the
idea of the triad explained by the balance multiplied by
itself in the domains of the ideal, then the realisation
of this idea in forms. Now, the ancients attached the first
principles of this simple and sublime theology to the essen-
tial conception of numbers, and thus qualified all the figures
of the primitive decade :—

1. Keter. The Crown, the equilibrating power.

2. Chocmah. Wisdom, equilibrated in its immutable
order by the impulse of intelligence.

3. Binah. Active Intelligence, equilibrated by Wisdom.

4. Chesed. Mercy, Wisdom in its second conception,
ever benevolent because it is strong.

5. Geburah. Severity, necessitated by Wisdom itself
and by Goodness. To permit evil is to prevent
good.

6. Tiphereth. Beauty, luminous conception of equilib-
rium in forms, intermediate between the Crown and
the Kingdom, mediating principle between the

* The sacred word Malchut, employed for Aefer, which is its Kabbalistic

correspondent, and the balance of Gedurak and Chesed repeated in the circles
or firmaments, which the Gnostics called ALons, provide in this occult verse
the keystone of the whole Christian temple. The Protestants have trans-
lated and eae it in their New Testament, without discovering its su-
preme and wonderful significance, which would have unveiled to them all

the mysteries of the Apocalypse; but it is a tradition of the Church that the
revelation of these mysteries 1s reserved for the last days.

.SUPPLEMENT. 285

Creator and creation. (What a sublime conception
is to be found here of poetry and its sovereign
priesthood !) |

7. Netsah. Victory, that is, the eternal triumph of intel-
ligence and justice.

8. Hod. Eternity of the mind’s conquests over matter,
of the active over the passive, of life over death.

9g. Jesod. The Foundation, that is, the base of every
creed and truth, what in philosophy we call the
ABSOLUTE.

10. Malchut. The Kingdom, that is. the universe, entire
creation, the work and mirror of Deity, proof of the
Supreme Reason, formal consequence which obliges
us to go back to virtual premises, the enigma whose
answer is God, that is, the Supreme and Absolute
Reason.

These ten palmary notions attached to the ten first
characters of the primeval alphabet, signifying at once
numbers and principles, are what the masters in Kabbalah
call the ten Sephiroth. The sacred Tetragram, traced in the
following manner, indicates the number, source, and cor-

respondence of the Divine names. It is to the name of
Iotchavah, written with these twenty-four signs, crowned
with a triple flower of light, that the twenty-four thrones
in heaven and the twenty-four crowned ancients of the
Apocalypse must be referred. In Kabbalah the occult
principle is called the Ancient, and this principle multiplied
and, as it were, reflected in secondary causes, creates its
own images, that is, as many Ancients as there are diverse
conceptions of his single essence. These images, less per-
fect as they recede from their source, cast in the darkness
a final reflection or glimmer, which represents a horrible
and disfigured Ancient, who is vulgarly called the devil.
Thus an initiate has dared to say that “ the devil is God as

286 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

He is understood by the wicked,’ and another, in still
stranger terms, that “the devil is formed from the shreds
of Deity.” We may resume and elucidate these exceed-
ingly novel assertions, by remarking that in symbolism
itself the demon is an angel cast out of heaven for desiring
to usurp divinity. This belongs to the allegorical language
of prophets and legendaries. Philosophically speaking,
the devil is a human idea of divinity which has been sur-
passed and dispossessed of heaven by the progress of
science and reason. Moloch, Adramelek, Baal, were,
among primitive Eastern peoples, personifications of the
one God, but dishonoured by barbarous attributes. The
God of the Jansenists, creating the majority of human
beings for hell, and delighting in the eternal tortures of
those He will not save, is a conception still more barbarous
than that of Moloch; thus the God of the Jansenists is
already, for all wise and enlightened Christians, a true
Satan fallen from heaven.

The Kabbalists, when multiplying the Divine Names,
have joined them all either to the unity of the Tetragram
or to the figure of the triad, or to the sephiric scale of the
decade ; they trace the scale of these Divine Names and
Numbers in a triangle, which may be rendered as follows
into Roman letters :—

The total of these Divine Names, formed from the single
Tetragram, but outside of the Tetragram itself, is one of the
bases of the Hebrew Ritual, and composes the occult force
which Kabbalistic rabbins invoke under the name of Sem-
hamphoras. The Jews, the depositaries of the tradition of
Seth, the first tradition of the one only revelation, brought
from Chaldea by Abraham, taught by Joseph to the Egyptian
priesthood, garnered and purified by Moses, and concealed

SUPPLEMENT. 287

beneath the symbolism of the Bible, did not preserve it in
all its purity, and allowed themselves to be carried away
by the unjust ambitions of the posterity of Cain. They
believed that they were a chosen people, and thought that
God had given them truth as a patrimony, rather than
confided it as a deposit which belonged to humanity at
large. We find, in fact, in the Talmudists, beside the
sublime traditions of the Sepher Jezirah, sufficiently strange
disclosures. Thus, they do not hesitate to attribute the
idolatry of the nations to the patriarch Abraham himself,
when they say that he transmitted his heritage to the
Israelites, that is, he gave them the knowledge of the true
Divine Names—the Kabbalah, in a word, was to be the
legitimate and hereditary possession of Isaac—but they
tell us that the patriarch gave presents to the children of
his concubines, and by these presents they understand
veiled dogmas and obscure names which soon became
materialised and transformed into idols. False religions
and their absurd mysteries, eastern superstitions and their
detestable sacrifices, what a gift from a father to his de-
spised family! Was it not sufficient to drive Agar with
her son into the desert? Was it necessary, with their one
loaf and pitcher, to give them a burden of falsehood to
aggravate and empoison their exile ?

The glory of Christianity is that it called alt men to the
truth, without distinction of peoples or castes, but not,
however, without distinction of intellect and virtue. ‘ Cast
not your pearls before swine,” said the Divine Founder of
Christianity, “lest, trampling them under their feet, they
turn and rend you.”

The Apocalypse, or Revelation of St John, which con-
tains all the Kabbalistic secrets of the doctrine of Jesus
Christ, is a book no less obscure than the Sohar. It is
hieroglyphically written with numbers and images, and
the apostle appeals frequently to the intelligence of initiates.
St John, the beloved disciple, and the depository of the
secrets of the Saviour, did not, therefore, write to be under-
stood by the multitude.

The Sepher Jezirah and the Apocalypse are the master-
pieces of occultism; they contain more meanings than
words, their expression is as figurative as poetry and as
exact as mathematics. The Apocalypse epitomises, com-
pletes, and surpasses all the science of Abraham and

288 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

Solomon, as we shall prove in explaining the keys of the
transcendent Kabbalah. The beginning of the Sohar is
astonishing in the comprehensiveness of its outlines and the
grand simplicity of its images. This is what we read :—

“The intelligence of occultism_is the science of equili-
brium. Forces which are produced without being balanced
perish_in the void. Thus perished the kings of the old
world, the princes of the giants. They have fallen like
trees without roots, and their place is no more found. It
was through the conflict of unequilibrated forces that the
devastated earth was bare and unformed when the breath
of God made itself a place in the heaven and spread out
the mass of waters. All the aspirations of Nature were
then directed towards unity in form, towards the living
synthesis of equilibrated forces, and the forehead of God,
crowned with light, rose over the vast sea, and was reflected
in the inferior waters. His radiant eyes appeared, darting
two shafts of light which intersected the rays of the reflec-
tion. The forehead of God and His two eyes formed a
triangle in heaven, and the reflection formed a triangle in
the waters. Thus was the number six revealed, which was
that of universal creation.”

The text, which would not be intelligible in a literal
version, we here translate by interpretation. Moreover,
the author of the work takes care to intimate that the
human form, which he attributes to God, is merely an
image of his concept, and that God cannot be expressed
by any thought, nor by any form. Pascal has said that
the Deity is a circle whose centre is everywhere and whose
circumference is nowhere.* But how can a circle be con-
ceived without a circumference? The Sohar inverts this
paradoxical figure, and would say freely of Pascal’s circle
that the circumference is everywhere and the centre no-
where. It is not, however, to a circle, but to a balance,
that he compares the universal equilibrium of things.
“Equilibrium is everywhere,” he says, “and the central
point where the balance is suspended may, therefore, be _
found everywhere.” We here find the author of the Sohar
stronger and more profound than Pascal.

The author of the Sohar continues his sublime dream.
The synthesis of the Logos formulated by the human
figure ascends slowly and issues from the water like the
rising sun. When the eyes appeared, Light was created ;

* See Note 29.

SUPPLEMENT, 289

when the mouth was revealed, spirit was created and speech
was heard. The shoulders, arms, and breast come forth,
then labour begins. The Divine Image with one hand
puts back the waters of the sea, and with the other raises
continents and islands. Ever it grows taller and taller;
the generative organs appear, and all creatures begin to
multiply. At length it stands erect, it sets one foot on
the land and one on the sea, it is mirrored wholly in the
ocean of creation, it breathes on its reflection, it calls its
image into life. ‘“ Let us make man,” its says, and man is
created! We know nothing so splendid in any poet as
this vision of creation accomplished by the ideal type of
humanity. Man is thus the shadow of a shadow, but he
is the representation of divine power. He also can extend
his hands from east to west, earth is given to him for a
domain. Behold the Adam Kadmon, the primitive Adam
of the Kabbalists! Behold in what sense he is represented
as a giant! Behold wherefore Swedenborg, pursued in his
dreams by reminiscences of the Kabbalah, affirms that all
creation is but a gigantic man, and that we are made in
the likeness of the universe !

The Sohar is a Genesis of light, the Sepher Jezirah is a
scale of truths. Therein are =e plained tic thirty-two ab-
solute signs of speech, numbers, and letters; each letter
reproduces a number, an idea, and a form, so that mathe-
matics are applied to ideas and forms no less rigorously
than to numbers in an exact proportion and by a perfect
correspondence. By the science of the Sepher Jezirah the
human mind is grounded in truth and reason, and can take
account of all possible progress of intelligence by the evolu-
tions of numbers. The Sohar represents, therefore, absolute
truth, and the Sepher Jezirah provides the means of attain-
ing, appropriating, and using it.

The Kabbalists held all that resembled idolatry in detes-
tation ; they gave, nevertheless, a human figure to God, as
we have seen, but it was purely hieroglyphic. They held
God to be the intelligent, loving, and living Infinite. He
was for them neither the collection of existences, nor ab-
stract existence, nor a philosophically definable Being. He
is in all, distinct from, and greater than all; His very name
is ineffable, and yet this name expresses only the human
Ideal of His Divinity. What God is in Himself it is not
given to man to understand.

T

290 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

' God is the absolute of faith; but the absolute of reason
is Being. Being is of itself, and because it is, its vazson
a’étre is in itself. It may be asked, “ Why does something
exist? That is, why does such or such a thing exist?”
But it cannot be asked without absurdity, “ Why does Being
exist?” This is supposing existence before existence.
Reason and science prove to us that the modes of Being
are equilibrated according to harmonious and hierarchic
laws. Now, the hierarchy is synthetised by ascending and
becoming more and ae monarchic. Reason, neverthe- —
less, cannot pause at the conception of a single universal
chief without being overwhelmed by the heights which she
seems to leave above this supreme King; she is silent,
therefore, and makes place for adoring faith. What is cer-
tain, even for reason and science, is that the idea of God is
the greatest, holiest, and most serviceable of all human
aspirations, and that on it morality reposes with its eternal
sanction. In humanity this belief is, therefore, the most
real of all the phenomena of Being, and, were it false,
Nature would be asserting what is absurd, the void would
give expression to life, God would at once be and not be.
It is to this philosophical and incontestible reality, called
the idea of God, that the Kabbalists gave a name. All the
characters of this name produce numbers, the hieroglyphs
of its letters express all the laws and all the actualities of
Nature.

The Kabbalists write the Divine Tetragram in four chief
ways—J H V H, which they do not pronounce but spell,
Jod, he, vau, he, and which we pronounce Jehovah, contrary
to all analogy, for the Tetragram thus disfigured is com-
posed of six letters—ADNI, which we pronounce Adonai,
and which means Saviour—AHIH, which we pronounce Lzete,
and which signifies Being—finally, AGLA, which is pro-
nounced as it is written, and which hieroglyphically en-
closes all the mysteries of the Kabbalah. In fact, the letter
Aleph is the first of the Hebrew Alphabet; it expresses
unity and represents the dogma of Hermes hieroglyphically.
“That which is above is as that which is below.” This
letter has, in fact, two arms, one of which points to earth
and the other to heaven with a similar gesture. The letter
Ghimel is the third of the alphabet ; it expresses numeri-
cally the triad and hieroglyphically child-birth, fecundity.
The letter Lamed is the twelfth; it is the expression of the

SUPPLEMENT. 2QI

perfect cycle. As a hieroglyphical sign, it represents the
circulation of the perpetual movement and the relation of
the radius to the circumference. The letter A/eph repeated
is the expression of the synthesis. Thus, the name AGLA
signifies unity, which by the triad accomplishes the cycle of
numbers to return into unity; the fruitful principle of
Nature which is one with unity; the primal truth which
fertilises science and directs it back to unity; syllepsis,
analysis, science, and synthesis; the three Divine Persons,
who are one God ; the secret of the magnum opus, that is,
the fixation of the Astral Light by a supreme projection of
will-power, which the adepts represented by a serpent trans-
fixed by a dart, and forming therewith the letter A/ph ;
then the three operations—to dissolve, to evaporate, and to
condense, corresponding to the three indispensable sub-
stances—salt, sulphur, and mercury, all expressed by the
letter Ghimel; then the twelve keys of Basilius Valentinus
expressed by Lamed ; finally, the work accomplished con-
formably to its principle, and reproducing the principle
itself.

Such is the origin of that Kabbalistic tradition which
comprises all magic in a word. To know how to read and
pronounce this word, that is, to understand the mysteries
of and translate into practice these absolute branches of
knowledge, is to have the key of prodigies. To pronounce
the word AGLA we must turn to the East, that is, unite
ourselves in intention and knowledge with Eastern tra-
dition. We must not forget that, according to the Kab-
balah, the perfect word is speech realised by acts, whence
comes that expression frequently found in the Vulgate,
facere verbum, in the sense of accomplishing an action. To
pronounce the word AGLA Kabbalistically, is therefore to
undergo all the trials of initiation and fulfil all its works.

The name of Jehovah is subdivided into seventy-two ex-
planatory names which are called Schemhamphoras. The
art of employing these names and finding therein the keys
of universal science, is what Kabbalists have called the c/avz-
cule of Solomon. As a fact, at the end of the collection of
evocations and prayers which bear this title, there are
usually found seventy-two magic circles forming thirty-six
talismans. This is four times nine, that is, the absolute
number multiplied by the tetrad. Each of these talismans
bears two of the seventy-two names with the emblematic

292 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

sign of the number, and of that one of the four letters of
Jehovah’s name to which they correspond. It is this which
gave rise to the four emblematic decades of the Tarot—the
club represents the /od, the cup, the He, the sword, the
Vau ; and the denier the final He. In the Tarot the comple-
ment of the ten is added, which synthetically repeats the
character of unity.

The popular traditions of magic declare that the pos-
sessor of the Clavicles of Solomon can converse with all
orders of spirits and compel all natural forces into his
service. Now, these Keys, several times lost and again
re-discovered, are nothing more than the talismans of the
seventy-two names, and the mysteries of the thirty-two
paths symbolically reproduced in the Tarot. By help of
these signs, and by means of their combinations, which are
as infinite as those of numbers or letters, we may, in effect,
attain to the mathematical and natural revelation of all
Nature’s secrets, and, consequently, enter into communica-
tion with the whole hierarchy of intelligences and genii.

It is certain that the secrets of the supreme Kabbalah
were lost to the Synagogue when Jesus Christ recovered
them, as the Jewish author of the Sepher Toldos Jeschu
avows. Catholic ‘doctrine is wholly derived from it, but
under how many veils and with what strange modifications !
The plurality of persons in the unity of God has issued from
the three first letters of the Tetragram, the Ye having merely
been taken for the Son to avoid the deification of the
mother, who must continue human, and who, in accordance
with Postel’s prevision, has later on seemed to absorb all
the honour of the other persons. In the Sohar we find the
Divine Mother, the second conception of the Elohim, co-
operating in the creation, which would have been impos-
sible without her. It is she who softens and moderates the
severities of the paternal /od, and who opposes water to fire,
mercy to anger. “Fire,” say the authors of the Sohar,
“sprang forth from the Divine /od like a serpent, and would
have consumed the earth in its embraces, when the Divine
Mother (blessed be her name!) led forth the waters and
poured the liberating waves upon the serpent’s burning head.”
Here, recollecting that Mary in Hebrew means “the Sea,”
or “the Salt of the Sea,” we understand why she is repre-
sented with the new moon beneath her feet, for the rabbins
say that the moon is the image of the divine ctefs of the

‘SUPPLEMENT. 293

tetradic He, or maternal power of the Elohim, and we are
no longer astonished at the immense influence imputed to
a simple mortal, who by her immaculate conception goes
back beyond the beginning of time. Her Son has given
the honour of His birth to His mother, and the mother
of the Eternal Son should be eternalas Heis. Everything
in the Catholic cultus recalls the numbers of Pythagoras,
the triad of Divine Persons, the tetrad of the Gospels, the
septenary of the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit and of the
Sacraments, the sacred decade of the Decalogue, and the
duodenary of the patriarchs and apostles. The frightful and
Manichzan creation of hell counterpoising heaven, is only
an exaggerated realisation of the equilibrating duad of
Zoroaster, equilibrated in the tradition of the Sohar, by the
two ancients, one of whom is the shadow of the other, the
Macroprosopus and the Muicroprosopus, the shadow of
humanity veiling God, and the light of God illuminating
humanity, so that_God seems to be for us the celestial man,
while man _ is as the god of earth. Thus, all apparent
doctrinal absurdities conceal the lofty and primeval revela-
tions of the wisdom of the ages, and this is the reason that
Christianity, enriched by so many opulent inheritances,
prevailed over dessicated and impoverished Judaism, which
had even ceased to understand the allegories of its Ark and
Golden Candlestick. But by just so much as the internal
riches of the universal and Kabbalistic doctrine are beauti-
ful and precious, so are the materialised interpretations,
given in our own days to these mysteries, deplorable. To
deny the ancient doctrine is easy, but it refutes denial by
the very fact of its existence. What must be done, then, to
overcome the Sphinx of modern times? Its enigma must
be explained and revealed to itself; all minds must be
directed to that science which accounts even for the aberra-
tions.of faith, and a return must be made to the conscious-
ness of a single revelation, permanent and universal in
humanity. This revelation is analogy explained by the
Logos, it is Nature unceasingly addressing herself to reason,
it is the mathematical harmony of existences proving that
the part is in proportion to the whole, and that the whole,
necessarily indefinite in the absolute, necessitates without
explaining it, the hypotheses of infinity. |

It is in the vast field of this hypothesis that humanity
unceasingly enlarges the circle of the sciences, and puts

2904 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

back, by the conquests of knowledge, the limits of the
kingdom of faith. Now, what becomes of faith in pre-
sence of this ever aggressive boldness? Faith is that
confidence which impelled Columbus forward when Ame-
rica receded before him; it is belief in the unknown por-
tions of the grand totality, whose existence is demonstrated
by its known parts; it will be plainly seen that it can be
no negation of reason, and that the object of faith being
necessarily hypothetical in form, since knowledge alone
can define, all definitions of it are a confusion of faith and
science. The true act of faith consists, therefore, solely in
the adhesion of our intelligence to the immoveable and
universal reason, which excludes all monstrosity and false-
hood from the domain of first causes. The reasonable
being supposes necessarily the raison a’étre, it is the abso-
lute, it is the law; it is, because it is. God himself, in
whatever manner He be conceived, cannot exist without
raison détre, only insanity will provide a personal, arbit-
rary, and unexplainable authority as the cause of immut-
able law. The impassible, unmcrited, and irresponsible
supremacy of God would be the highest of injustices, and
the most revolting of absurdities. What, then, is Deity
forus? It is the undefined conception of a supreme per-
sonality. With dogmatic religions it is otherwise; for
them God is the first and final definition of the hypotheti-
cal world; but so often as God is defined He is limited,
and beyond His altars and cultus there dawn always on the
unwearied aspirations of humanity, the formless altar of the
coming worship, and the nameless inscription which the
Athenians placed on the most divine and philosophical of
their temples—IGNOTO DEo.

RELIGION FROM THE KABBALISTIC STANDPOINT.

The religious sentiment exists in man. Nature creates
nothing without an end in view. Religion is therefore
a real thing. What is, is! The religion of the Kabbalists
is at once all hypothesis and certitude, for it proceeds by
analogy from the known to the unknown. They recognise
religion as a need of humanity, as an evident and necessary
fact, and there alone for them is the divine, permanent,

SUPPLEMENT. 295

and universal revelation. They contest nothing which
exists, but account for everything. So their doctrine, by
clearly marking the line of eternal separation between
science and faith, gives the highest reason as a basis of
faith, which guarantees it a lasting and incontestable dura-
tion. The popular forms of dogma, which alone can vary
and be destroyed by one another, follow afterwards; the
_ Kabbalist is not shaken by so small a thing, and provides
at once a reason for the most astonishing formule of
mysteries.

The word God expresses an ideal unknown in its essence,
but well known by the various notions which men conceive
of it. Above all these more or less intelligent conceptions
rules that of a supreme intelligence and primal power.
The abstract notion of the mathematical laws which govern
universal motion, saddens the greater number of minds,
who, seeing human liberty involved, in a certain sense, in
the immense machine of the universe, find this machine,
however grand it be, inferior to man, if it have no self-
consciousness. There the universal sentiment is stayed,
and phantasy does the rest. Some make God uni-personal,
others multi-personal ; it is no less certain that, for science,
God is the most probably inevitable hypothesis of a su-
preme conscience in the eternal mathematics. We say
most probably inevitable, out of respect to the liberty of
conscience of sincere atheists, but the Kabbalah, which is
the mother of the exact sciences, admits of no doubt when
it authorises a hypothesis; and starting from the very
existence of the religious sentiment, and from the name
which signifies in all nations and for all men this invisible
and infinite Being, the Kabbalah, we say, would conclude
out of hand His necessary existence, because the Word
attests the thing, as the shadow the body.

Man can only conceive of God as an infinite, or, rather,
indefinite man, for whence would he obtain the terms of
comparison for a different image of Divinity? It follows
that whatsoever tends to define and personify God falls
necessarily into anthropomorphism, and, consequently, into
idolatry. For this reason the Kabbalists have distinguished
the essence of Deity from the conception of Him in man,
and to the human idea alone do they give a name, that of
Jehovah or Adonai. As to the supreme reality, it is for
them the oz ens, the inappreciable, the unspeakable, the

296 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

undefined. Estimating, moreover, as we have said, the
Divine actualities by their mirage or shadow in the human
mind, they consider that this shadow or mirage presents to

us all the divine notions in an inverted way, and that

science should reverse them to reach the harmony which
results from_the analogy of contrary things. This judg-
ment by antithesis on vulgar notions is one of the greatest
secrets of- the Kabbalah, and one of the occult keys of
exegesis. This key is represented by the two triangles,
one upright and the other inverted, which form the six-
pointed star of the mysterious seal of Solomon. Each of
these two triangles, taken separately, represents an incom-
plete, and therefore radically false, conception of the
Absolute ; truth is in the union of the two.

Let us apply this to the interpretation of the Bible.
Open it at the first chapter of Genesis, for example. We
there find the history of the creation of the world in six
days. Invert the sense, take the antithesis, and we shall
have the creation of God in six nights. This requires
explanation. God, says Genesis, made man in His own
image, and philosophy proves that man also makes God
after his own likeness. Well, the philosophical fact serves
as basis to the theurgic affirmation, by virtue of the analogy
of contrary things. The observed progress of the human
mind, seeking to define God, revealed to Moses, by anti- |
thesis and by the analogy of contraries, the successive
periods of creation. In two words, being unable to judge
of Deity except by its reflection in the human mind, Moses
followed all the outlines of that reflection and mentally
reproduced them. Thus he obtained his cosmogony by
the study of universal theology.

The first chapter of Genesis Kabbalistically inverted gives
a luminous summary of universal theogony and its pro-
gressive growth in the human mind. Isolated, this sum-
mary would seem irreligious, and would represent divinity
as, a fiction of man, while the isolated text of Moses re-
sembles a fable and ‘distorts reason. But the two united,
the star formed with the double triangle, we shall be
astonished at the truth and light we shall discover. The ©
text in the Bible can be read by all, the inversion we give
as follows, so far as the first chapter is concerned,

SUPPLEMENT. 297

THE OCCULT GENESIS.—-CHAPTER I.

From the beginning the vastness of heaven and the extent
of earth have created in man the idea of God.

But this conception was unformed and vague; it was a
veil of darkness over an immense apparition, and the spirit
of man brooded upon his conceptions as over the face of
the waters.

And man said: Let there be a supreme intelligence.
And there was a supreme intelligence. And man saw that
this idea was good, and he distinguished the spirit of light
from the spirit of darkness; and he called the spirit of
light, God, and the spirit of darkness, the devil ; and there
was a realm of good, and a realm of evil. This was the
first night.

Man also said: Let there be an impassable boundary
between the dreams of heaven and the realities of earth.
And man made a division, and he separated the things
which were above from the things which are below, and so
it was arranged. And man called his imaginary separa-
tion, heaven, and the evening and the morning were the
second night.

And man said: Let us divide in our worship the mass
of vapours from the dry vault of heaven. He gave to the
heaven which was without water, the name of father; to
the mass of vapours, the name of mother. And man saw
that this was good. And he said: Let us make all the
vegetation of symbols, where doctrines issue from one
another, as the seed from the herb, and the herb from the
seed, to germinate in heaven.

Let us plant the Edenic apple, with its mysterious and
ever-renewing fruits. And the sky brought forth symbols
like grass, and mystic trees flourished. And man saw that
this was good. And the evening and the morning were the
third night.

Man also said: Let there be mystical stars in my sky,
and let them divide knowledge and ignorance, day and
night! And it was so done; and man made two splendid
divinities ; a greater for the initiated, and a lesser for the
common people, and small gods numerous as the stars.
And he placed them in the asylum of his sky, to rule the

298 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

earth and to divide knowledge and ignorance. And man
saw that this was good, and the evening and the morning
were the fourth night.

Man also said: Let the clouds bring forth flying dragons
and fantastic animals. And the clouds brought forth
monsters to terrify children, and winged devils. And man
blessed them, saying: Increase and multiply, and fill
heaven and earth; and man set in turn upon his altars all
the animals of earth. And the evening and the morning
were the fifth night.

Man then adored animals and reptiles of every kind;
and having seen that this throve with him, he said: Let us
make a god to our own image and likeness, and let Him be
King of the mythological Teviathans, of the celestial mon--
strosities, and the colossi of hell. And man created God to
his own image and likeness, and said to Him: Grow and
multiply Thy images: I give thee the empire of heaven
and the domain of earth. And it was so done; and man
saw all that he had created, and it was very good. And
there was an evening, and there was a morning, which were
the sixth night.

This occult Genesis was what Moses thought out before
writing his own, and here is how he must have reasoned.
Matter is the external form of mind, and it reacts on in-
telligences. Harmony results from the analogy of these
two contraries. In the mind of man, which wars against
matter, the laws of progress are analogous to those of pro-
gress and motion in matter itself. Therefore, the creation
of the world outside of God must be parallel to that of the
conception of God in man. And it is thus that, taking for
numerical basis the sacred_triad and its duplication, which
signifies its reflection, Moses wrote his cosmogony of six
days, analogous to the six great nights of human initiation
into all religious mysteries. This key of revelation is also
that of all religious practices, and of their influence on the
civilisations and destinies of men. We will explain our
meaning. The action of thought on form and the reaction
of form on thought being given, it must be concluded that
exterior objects act on man, or react on him as much as he
can act on them. Man, following his divine ideal, builds a
temple, then he is influenced by the temple he has made,
and cannot enter it without remembering his God. The

SS ee ee ee Se

SUPPLEMENT. 299

vague ideal has taken a shape, a body, and it becomes a
visible and palpable reality. Must it be said that man
deceives himself? Yes, doubtless, in all defects that the
form attributes to his ideal, but not in all that it realises of
perfection and truth. Thus, religion has made forms of
worship which create that piety which is the strength of
religion. Religious ceremonies are transcendental Kabbal-
istic practices, and proscribed magic would not be so
dangerous except by the power of which it can avail itself
in imitating them.

Religious observances are the Word inaction. The man
who performs them is, with or without his will, taken
possession of by the doctrine whose rites he fulfils. If
Julian could forsake Christianity, it was because he never
practised it of his free will, and because also he was
secretly addicted to the Hellenic ritual. The Church has
full knowledge of this power, and it is for this reason that
she less apparently concerns herself in interior sentiments
than in exterior observances. Confess, she says, and go to
Church, the rest will come of itself.

It is certain that the devotees of Black Magic evoked
and saw the devil, thus giving form and actuality to the
ideal of absurdity itself. The authentic reports of numerous
magical prosecutions do not permit us to doubt this. The
exaltation which produces vision is contagious, and pro-
pagates itself with the rapidity of electricity in all those
whose mental strength does not protect them against this
natural influence. Thus the so-called spiritual phenomena
in America are to be accounted for. So also all serious
theologians agree in declaring that a vision proves nothing
in doctrinal matters. This declaration of the masters
should warn the uninitiated against supernatural revela-
tions and prophecies based on visions.* The great and
unhappy Emperor Julian had the misfortune to believe
sincerely in his gods on the faith of the apparitions pro-
cured him by Jamblichus and Maximus of Ephesus. This
completely Jewish or Christian credulity placed him at the
mercy of new enthusiasms, stronger and more widespread
than his own, and he was overwhelmed and borne away by
their current.

There is a story told of St Louis, the king, which does
him infinite credit. He was sought out one day in great

* See Note 30.

300 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC,

haste and invited to witness a miracle occurring at that
time in his chapel. Christ had become visible in the
Host, and had manifested His presence before a multitude
of witnesses. “Why should I go?” asked St Louis: “I
believe in the real presence of Jesus Christ in the sacra-
ment because I do not see it; if I saw it I should have to
believe no longer.”

A public miracle is a proof of exultation, and, conse-
quently, of collective folly ; it produces faith only as the pest
produces the pest. The folly of the Cross, as St Paul calls
it, has been merely a homeopathic remedy for the riotous
and luxurious insanities of the age of the Caligulas and
Neros. The fasts of the Stylites were only a deliberately
unreasonable reaction from the suppers of Claudius and
the feasts of Trimalcyon. St Anthony protested against
Petronius, and the unclean animal which served him for a
. dog was the living satyr of Roman morals during the
Decline. So Seneca, at the feasts of Nero, praised and
envied the austerities of Diogenes, and St Anthony in his
desert dreamed epics of intoxication and debauchery which
shamed the inventions of Tigellinus. Harmony results
from the analogy of contraries.
~ Exaltation is produced by physical means, which are—
1, Continued and periodical tension of the mind. 2, Fasting.
3, Images and pictures. 4, Music and chants analogous to
the object of enthusiasm. 5, Fumigations and perfumes.
Who then will be astonished if pious people are subject to
revelations and ecstacies? But it is also true to say that
by the same means we may attain to the intuitive vision of
Kichatan, Pimpocan, or Parabavastu, see even the hideous
phantom which is the synthesis of all false Gods, Satan.
From this it follows that forms of worship are all essentially
magical, as we have said, and that religious practices are a
means of producing ecstacy ; now the natural phenomena
of ecstacy are what the vulgar habitually look on as miracles.
These phenomena are—1, Insensibility to all pain and
injury. 2, More or less lucid vision or somnambulism.
3, Extempore eloquence and knowledge infused by over-
excitement and by direct communication with the common
medium of the thoughts of others. 4, A fluidic superabun-
dance capable of operating extraordinary effects, such as
the immediate communication of ecstacy and all its phases,
instantaneous cure of certain affections, apparent suspension

SUPPLEMENT. 301

of some natural laws, that of gravity, for example, which
daily happens in America and elsewhere, when tables are
seen to rise up and remain suspended in the air while no
one is touching them. Similar phenomena are known to
have been produced at the time of the convulsionaries of
the cemetery of St Médard. Ecstatic women were lifted
from the earth; even the foes of Jansenism bear witness
to the fact, though they attribute the miracle to the devil,
and cite in proof the immodesty of such aérial ascensions,
where, as it is asserted in the controversies of the time,
women’s clothes were raised and tucked up of themselves,
contrary to all physical laws, during the ascensional motion
of the convulsionary’s body. Does not this complication
of the miraculous prove the presence of a natural agent, of
a motive power brought into action by the over-excitement
not only of one person but of a whole circle of enthusiasts ?
Nature is invariably the producer of miracles ; fanaticism
profits by them, science explains them; it is for wisdom to
make use of them for the triumph of reason and progress.

KABBALISTIC CLASSICS.—THE TALMUD AND
TALMUDISTS.

The importance of the Talmud, denied with derision by
the ignorance of Christians and blindly sustained by the
superstition of the vulgar among the Jews, rests entirely
on the great and immutable truths of the sacred Kabbalah.
The Talmud, whose name is composed of the sacred Tau
and a Hebrew word which means instruction, contains
seven distinct parts which science should be careful not to
confound—The Mischna or Talmud of Jerusalem, the two
Ghemara or Talmud of Babylon, the Thosphata or additions,
the Berichta or appendices, the Maraschim or allegorical
commentaries, and the Haggada or traditional histories.

The Talmudists, compilers of this multifarious work,
belonged to three classes of Rabbins, whose successive
authority has preserved, interpreted, and annotated the
primitive texts. These were the Tenaimes or initiates, the
Amoraimes or vulgar disciples of the former; then came
the Massoretes and the Chachamines, blind preservers of
texts, systematic calculators of signs, whose absolute value
they did not know, doctors who no longer saw the Kabba-
lah, save in some mathematical diversions of a misunder-

302 “MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

stood Gematria and an inadequate Temurah. With the
Jews, as with the Christians, the tendency of the official
church or synagogue has always been directed towards the
materialisation of signs, to substitute the hierarchy of tem-
poral influence for the hierarchy of knowledge and virtue.
Thus, previously to Christ’s advent, prophecy, representing
initiation and progress, had always been in open conflict or
secret hostility with the priesthood ; so also the pharisaism
of the time of Jesus persecuted the new Essenian school of
which He was the founder, and opposed itself later on to
the more liberal teachings of the disciples of Hillel and
Chamai. Later still, the Kohanimes were again hostile to
the initiated Israelites of the Alexandrian school, and the
synagogue of Chachamines and Massoretes only left the
Kohanimes or excellent masters in peace, thanks to an
occultism which was doubtless one of the secret roots of
Masonic institutions during the darkness of the Middle
Ages. It is not, then, from the official synagogue that we
must demand the keys of the supreme Kabbalah and the
concealed sense of the Talmud ; the present representatives
of ancient Biblical theology will tell you that Maimonides,
the great light of Israel, not only was no Kabbalist, but
regarded the study of the Kabbalah as useless or danger-
ous. Maimonides, notwithstanding, venerated the Talmud,
and thus resembled those Utopians in mysticism who
reject Christianity while adoring the Gospel. Never at
any period have inconsistencies dismayed the human mind!

If the Talmud had not been originally the great Kabba-
listic key of Judaism, its existence, and the traditional vene-
ration of which it is the object, would be incomprehensible.
In fact, a text of the Israelite catechism imposes on all the
Jewish faithful the consideration of the Talmud as the
classical and authentic storehouse of Jehovah's secret laws,
reserved by the wisdom of Moses for the traditional teach-
ing of the sacerdotal tribe. We know, besides, that the
body of this occult philosophy is positively what all serious
initiates have considered the harmony of the Kabbalah.
So the key of this science, which alone opens all the secret
doors and enables us to penetrate all the profundities of the
Bible, may be equally adapted to the mysteries of the
Talmud—another conventional Bible fabricated only for
testing the biblical keys. For this reason the Talmudists,
anxious to show the allegorical sense of certain absurd

SUPPLEMENT. 303

passages ine the sacred books, surpassed this absurdity
itself, and gave as the explanation of an improbable text
a completely impossible commentary. Here is an example
of their method :—

The author of the allegorical book of Job represents blind
force under the emblem of two monsters, one of whom
is terrestrial and the other marine, and which he names
respectively Behemoth and Leviathan. Doubtless, it is
not without a Kabbalistic meaning that he employs the
number 2, or the duad, for blind force is always in com-
petition with itself through the fatal or providential law of
equilibrium, and just as in the eternal generation of things
harmony results from the analogy of contraries, so in titanic
excess of power, harmony is preserved or re-established by
the antagonism of two equal forces. This is what the
author of the book of Job intended to convey, and this is
how the Talmudists surpassed his fiction.

“Elohim permitted the sea to produce a master for itself
and the earth likewise a king. The sea brought forth
Leviathan and the earth Behemoth from its lacerated womb.
Leviathan was the great sea-serpent, and Behemoth the
cherub with immense horns. But soon Leviathan so filled
the sea that the waters cried out to Elohim, unable to find
refuge. The earth lamented on her part, being ground
under the feet of Behemoth and despoiled of all verdure.
Elohim took pity on them, removing Leviathan from the
sea and Behemoth from the earth. And He salted them
to preserve them for the feast on the Last Day. Then shall
the elect eat the flesh of Leviathan and of Behemoth,
which will be found delicious because the Lord Himself
hath preserved and prepared it.”

Where is Voltaire to deride this monstrous salting, to
laugh at this god-cook, and at this festal consumption of
frightful mummies? We frankly grant him that rabbinical
allegories often shock good taste and that fine flower of
literary polish which they neither knew nor could divine.
But what will scoffers say if by the fable of Leviathan and
Behemoth they can be made to understand the solution of
the enigma of evil? What would they answer were it said
to them—The devil of Christianity represents the blind
excesses of vital force, but Nature preserves and maintains
equilibrium, monstrosities themselves have their cause and
serve sooner or later for the nourishment of universal har-

304 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

mony. Fear not, therefore, phantoms; all that is above
man must be more beautiful and better than man; below
him is the beast, and the beast, however overgrown he may
be, must be either the help or the pasturage of man!
Cowardly children, fear no more that the devil will eat
you! Be men, and it is you who will eat the devil, for the
devil, that is, the spirit of absurdity and unintelligence, can
never raise himself above the animal. This is what we are
to understand by the final and Kabbalistic banquet of
Behemoth and Leviathan!

Picture now, a Kohanimic or Massoretic commentator
taking the Talmudic allegory on facts literally, establishing,
for example, that the moon is the saltery of the Eternal
Father, that He transported Leviathan and Behemoth
thither after He had opened and salted them, and then
you will have some notion of the Talmud’s compilation, of
its veiled lights and ingenuous errors.

The first Talmud, the only truly Kabbalistic one, was
collected during the second century of the Christian era by
the last chief of the Tenaims, Rabbi-Jehuda-Hakadosch-
Hanassi, that is, Juda the most holy and the prince. The
names of Kadosch and prince were given to the great
initiates of the Kabbalah, and are preserved among adepts
of occult Masonry and the Rose-Cross. R. Jehuda com-
posed his book according to all the rules of supreme initia-
tion; he wrote it within and without, as Ezekiel and St
John have it, and he indicated its transcendental sense by
the sacred letters and numbers corresponding to the
Bereschit of the first six Sephiroths. The Mischna con-
sists of six books, named Sederim, whose order and subject
correspond to the absolute signs of Kabbalistic philosophy,
as we are about to explain.

We have already said that the Kabbalists do not define
God but adore Him in His manifestations, which are idea
and form, intelligence and love; they suppose a supreme
power based on two laws, which are stable wisdom and
active intelligence, in other terms, necessity and liberty.
It is thus that they form a primal triangle conceived in the
following manner :—

Kether, the Crown.
Binah, “understanding. Chocmah, wesdom.

Then, as a reflection of this supreme conception in our own

SUPPLEMENT. 305

ideality, they establish a second triangle in an inverted -
sense. Absolute justice, corresponding to supreme wisdom
or necessity, absolute love, corresponding to active intelli-
gence or liberty, and supreme beauty, which results from
the harmonies of justice and love, corresponding to divin
power. |

Gedulah, Love. Geburah, Justice.
Tiphereth,
Beauty.

By joining and interlacing these two triangles there is
formed the Burning Star or Solomon’s Seal, that is, the
complete expression of the theological philosophy of
Bereschit, or universal Genesis.

On this basis R. Jehuda establishes the divisions of his
work. The first book, or Sederim, corresponding to the
notion of Kether, is entitled ZERAIM, the seeds, because in
the notion of the Supreme Crown is contained that of the
fructifying principle and of universal production. The
second book corresponds to the Sephira of Chocmah ; it is
entitled MOED, and treats of sacred things in which nothing
must be changed because they represent eternal order.
The third book, in correspondence with Binah, liberty or
creative power, treats of women and the family, and bears
the name of NASCHIM. The fourth book, inspired by the
idea of Geburah or justice, treats of crimes and their
punishment ; its title is NAZCHIM. The fifth book, corre-
sponding to Gedulah, that is, to mercy and love, is entitled
KADOSCHIM, and treats of consoling beliefs and things holy.
Finally, the sixth book, analogous to the Sephira of
Tiphereth, contains the most hidden secrets of life and the
morality which concerns it; it treats of purifications, that
is, of spiritual medicine, and bears the mysterious name of
THAROTH or TAROT, expressing in itself alone all the con-
cealed sense of the symbolic wheels of Ezekiel, and the
name of Thorah, still given by the rabbins to the whole of
Scripture. At the head of the Mischna, Rabbi Jehudah-
Hakadosh- Hanassi, places the tradition of the old Jewish
sages—the proverbs and maxims of Solomon’s successors in
the study of sovereign wisdom.

“ By three things does the world subsist,” said Simon the
Just, “by the teaching of the law, the obligations of the
cultus, and works of mercy.” So we have once more the

U

306 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

Kabbalistic triangle, the fixed law, progressive religion, and
charity, which is the common life and reason both of law
and cultus.

Antigonous has said—“ Be not as the servant who obeys
for recompense ; let your reward be in your obedience itself,
and be the respect of things above inherent in you.”
There is nothing superstitious in this, and it should be
pondered over by a number of Catholics.

“The journey is short,” said R. Tarphon, “the need is
great, and the workmen are idle, but they will not gain less
abundantly the meed of their day’s labour; the Master
answers for them, and his activity supplements their indol-
ence.” Promise of salvation to all, bold denial of sin and
misery, responsibility of Providence, which excludes the
notion of chastisement in the temporal necessity of suffer-
ing, suffering being looked on only as a spur to human
indifference.

Akabiah said—“ Know these three things well and thou
wilt never sin—whence thou comest, whither thou goest,
and unto whom thou art responsible.” Here are three
things which must be known in order to be never more
guilty of deliberate sin. He who knows them will sin no
more, otherwise he would be insane. He who does not yet
know them cannot sin—how, in fact, can we fail over duties
of which we are ignorant ?

Such are the maxims collected by Judas the holy and
princely at the head of the book of seeds or universal prin-
ciples. He proceeds afterwards from the figurative to the
positive, and treats of agriculture. Here Volney and
Dupuis would discover the calendar in the highest mysteries
of Judaistic religion, and why should not the calendar be
found there? Does not the Crown of Kether correspond
to the crown of the year, and are not religious festivals the
visible jewels of that diadem of supreme belief? But
the transcendent philosophy of the Talmud leaves far
behind all the superstitions of materialised faiths. “He
who says—I will sin and the day of pardon will absolve me,
makes void the day of pardon, and will by no means be
absolved from his wilful wickedness.”

“Sins,” say the Talmudists once more, “when they are
between man and God can be absolved by God on the day
of pardon, but when they are between man and man, that
is, when they concern justice between brothers, man only

SUPPLEMENT. 307

can remit them by declaring before the law that restitution
has been made.” This is magnificent and needs no com-
mentary.

Such is the wisdom which presides over the festivals of
Israel described in the second book of the Talmud of
Jerusalem, so closely connected with the first, since the one
treats of the culture of fields and souls, the other of the
cultus of God and of the symbolic calendar. The third
book, or Sederim, is more particularly consecrated to
women and the fundamental basis of the family. Tal-
mudic jurisprudence does not divide man from woman,
and does not seek, by irritating questions of respective
equality or superiority, to establish antagonism in love;
for Kabbalists, woman is neither the equal, nor servant,
nor mistress, nor companion of man; she is man himself,
conceived from the maternal or affectionate standpoint ;
woman possesses all the rights of man in man, and man
respects himself in woman. “ Never, therefore, let human
folly divide those whom divine wisdom has pleased to
unite, and woe to those who live single!’”” The questions
of female emancipation and social equality are, in fact, the
dreams of celibate women, and from the standpoint of natu-
ral law the celibate is a monstrosity. “O, soul of my soul,
heart of my heart, and flesh of my flesh,” said an initiate
in the mysteries of the Mischna, with characteristic oriental
pomposity, “ you speak of becoming my equal! you would
therefore become other than myself; you would tear your
heart from mine, you would make two of those who are
one; and just as God formed thee from the very bone and
flesh of my body, you would draw something monstrous
out of you to complete yourself and replace me in your
nature. But when you are my rival in love, will you ever
be my equal in desolation and regret ?”

“ The altar weeps,” said a Talmudic rabbin, “when the
husband and wife separate.”

The fourth book of the Mischna, on injustice and com-
pensation, is a collection of civil laws far superior to any
code of the Middle Ages, and it is to the source of this
secret legislation that the preservation of Israel through
SO many persecutions must be referred, as also its eman-
cipation by industry, which is the final material term of
civilisation, and the safeguard of all the political rights so
painfully and completely recovered in our own days by the
reinstated children of the old Jewish pariahs.

308 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

The books entitled Kadoschim and Tharoth complete
by their details the body of the great Jewish traditions.
Wide is the distance between this splendid work of initia-
tion and the commentaries of the two Ghemara, or the
Aristotelian legislation of Moses Maimonides, who was,
nevertheless, an erudite doctor and great man, but he was
prejudiced against the Kabbalistic keys of the Talmud by
his horror of superstition and his reaction against mysti-
cism. In his “Guide to the Lost,” and in his “ Eight
Chapters,” he directs Talmudic traditions to the common
Jaws of nature and reason; then in the Jad Hacksaka or
“ Assistance,” he welds Jewish belief into a symbol of
thirteen articles, which is a masterpiece of simplicity and
reasonableness, -but which, unconsciously to Maimonides
himself, is so connected with pure Kabbalistic principles,
that the first thirteen keys of the Tarot precisely correspond
by their Kabbalistic signs to the thirteen fundamental
articles of the symbol of Maimonides.

Masonic associations were formed in his time; they col-
lected the traditions lost to the Jews and proscribed by
the Christians, for the very name and attributes of masonry
have reference to the reconstruction of the Temple, that
universal dream of the Kabbalah. “ The reign of Messiah
will come,” said one of the fathers of the synagogue,
“when the people shall be for ever delivered from the
oppression of the kings of the earth.”

“There is no true Israelite,” said another master, “for
whom the Temple is not an immediately realisable edifice,
for he reconstructs it in his heart.” The Temple was,
therefore, a social Utopia, and asymbol of perfect govern-
ment founded on the democratic hierarchy of merit and
intelligence. The Templars, initiated in the East into this
doctrine, were, therefore, real and dreadful conspirators,
whom popes and kings were obliged to exterminate in
order to secure their own existence. Then came the French
Revolution, which confounded in a universal chaos the
memories of the Amoraimes, the hopes of the Jesuits, and
the initiations of Freemasonry. The spirit of the Ruins
had breathed, and the rebuilders of the Temple left their
plans, squares, and compasses in the débris.

TheTemple, nevertheless, should and will be rebuilt, for
human intelligence eventually attains its ends, and a per-
fect and rational Logos has never been articulated and

SUPPLEMENT. 309

repeated through the ages without creating, sooner or
later, its realisation in proportion to the largeness of its
aspirations and the exactitude of its calculations.

THAUMATURGICAL EXPERIENCES OF
ELIPHAS LEVI.

I.—EVOCATION OF APOLLONIUS OF TYANA.

IN the spring of the year 1854, I repaired to London to
escape from internal disquietude, and to devote myself,
without distraction, to study. I had letters of introduction
to persons of distinction, and to those seeking communica-
tions from the supernatural world. Of the latter I met
with several, and, amidst much affability, I discovered in
them a fund of indifference and triviality. They imme-
diately required of me the performance of prodigies, as
from a charlatan. I was not a little discouraged, for, to
speak truly, so far from being disposed to initiate others
into the mysteries of ceremonial magic, I had always
dreaded its delusions and weariness for myself. Moreover,
such ceremonies require a paraphernalia which is expensive
and difficult to collect. J immersed myself, therefore, in
the study of the supreme Kabbalah, and thought no further
of English adepts, when one day, on returning to my hotel,
I found a note in my room. This note enclosed half of a
card transversely divided, and on which I at once recognised
the character of Solomon’s seal, with a tiny slip of paper,
on which was written in pencil: “ To-morrow at 3 o'clock,
in front of Westminster Abbey, the other half of this card
will be given you.” I kept this singular appointment. A
Carriage was waiting at the place; I held unaffectedly my
portion of the card in my hand ; a footman approached and
made a sign to me, opening the carriage-door as he did so.
Within there was a lady in black whose face was concealed
by a thick veil; she motioned me to a seat beside her,
displaying the other part of the card I had received. The
door was shut, the carriage rolled away, and the lady rais-
ing her veil, I saw that my appointment was with an elderly
person, who beneath her grey eyebrows had bright black

310 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC,

eyes of preternatural fixity. “Sir,” she began, with a
strongly-marked English accent, “ Iam aware that the law
of secrecy is rigorous among adepts; a friend of Sir B. L,
who has seen you, knows that you have been asked for
phenomena, and that you have declined to gratify curiosity.
It is possible that you do not possess the necessary mate-
rials; I can show you a complete magical cabinet, but I
must require of you, first of all, the most inviolable secrecy.
If you do not guarantee this on your honour, I will give
orders for you to be driven home.” I made the required
promise, and have kept it faithfully by not divulging the
name, quality, or abode of the lady, whom I soon recognised
as an initiate, not actually of the first degree, but still of a
most exalted grade. We had several long conversations,
during which she insisted always on the necessity of prac-
tical experiences to complete initiation. She showed mea
collection of vestments and magical instruments, even lend-
ing me certain curious books which I was in want of; ina
word, she determined me to attempt at her house the ex-
perience of a complete evocation, for which I prepared
myself during twenty-one days, scrupulously observing the
rules laid down in the Ritual.

All was completed on the 24th of July; it was proposed
to evoke the phantom of the divine Apollonius, and to
interrogate it about two secrets, one of which concerned
myself, while the other interested the lady. The latter had
at first counted on assisting at the evocation with a trust-
worthy person, but at the last moment this person proved
timorous, and, as the triad or unity is rigorously prescribed
in magical rites, I was left alone. The cabinet prepared for
the evocation was situated in a turret; four concave mir-
rors were hung within it, and there was a kind of altar
whose white marble top was surrounded with a chain of
magnetic iron. On the marble the sign of the Penta-
gram was engraved and gilded; the same symbol was
drawn on a new white sheep-skin stretched beneath the
altar. In the middle of the marble slab there was a small
copper brazier with charcoal of alder and laurel wood,
while a second brazier was placed before me on a tripod.
I was vested in a white robe very similar to those worn by
Catholic priests, but longer and more ample, and I wore
upon my head a chaplet of vervain leaves entwined about
a golden chain. In one hand I held a new sword, and in

SUPPLEMENT. 311

the other the Ritual. I set alight the two fires with the
requisite and prepared materials, and I began, at first ina
low voice, but rising by degrees, the invocations of the
Ritual; the flame invested every object with a wavering
light, and finally went out. I set some more twigs and per-
fumes on the brazier, and when the flame started up again,
I distinctly saw before the altar a human figure larger than
life, which dissolved and disappeared. I recommenced
the evocations, and placed myself in a circle which I had
already traced between the altar and the tripod; I then
saw the depth of the mirror which was in front of me, but
behind the altar, grow brighter by degrees, and a pale form
grew up there, dilating and seeming to approach gradually.
Closing my eyes, I called three times on Apollonius, and,
when I reopened them, a man stood before me wholly
enveloped in a winding-sheet, which seemed to me more
grey than white; his form was lean, melancholy, and
beardless, which did not quite recall the picture I had
formed to myself of Apollonius. I experienced a feeling
of intense cold, and when I opened my lips to interrogate
the apparition, I found it impossible to utter a sound. I
therefore placed my hand on the sign of the Pentagram,
and directed the point of the sword towards the figure,
adjuring it mentally by that sign not to terrify me in any
manner, but to obey me. The form thereupon became
indistinct, and immediately after disappeared. I com-
manded it to return, and then felt, as it were, an air
pass by me, and something having touched me on the
hand which held the sword, the arm was immediately
benumbed as far as the shoulder. Conjecturing that the
weapon displeased the spirit, I set it by the point near me,
and within the circle. The human figure at once re-
appeared, but I experienced such a complete enervation in
all my limbs, and such a sudden exhaustion had taken
possession of me, that I made two steps to sit down. I
had scarcely done so when I fell into a deep coma, accom-
panied by dreams of which only a vague recollection
remained when I recovered myself. My arm continued
for several days benumbed and painful. The figure had
not spoken, but it seemed to me that the questions I was
to ask it had answered themselves in my mind. To that
of the lady, an inner voice replied, “ Dead!” (it}concerned
a man of whom she was seeking news). As for myself, I

312 | MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

wished to learn whether reconciliation and forgiveness
were possible between two persons who were in my
thoughts, and the same interior echo impiteously answered,
“Dead!”

Here I narrate facts as they actually occurred, I impose
faith on noone. The effect of this experience on myself
was incalculable. I was no more the same man; some-
thing from the world beyond had passed into me. I was
neither gay nor depressed any longer, but I experienced a
singular attraction towards death, without, at the same
time, being in any way tempted to suicide. I carefully
analysed what I had experienced, and, in spite of a keenly
felt nervous antipathy, I twice repeated, at an interval of a
few days only, the same experiment. The phenomena
which then occurred differed too little from the former to
require their addition to this narrative. But the conse-
quence of these further evocations was for me the revela-
tion of two Kabbalistic secrets, which, if universally known,
might change in a short period the basis and laws of
society at large.

Am I to conclude from this that I have really evoked,
seen, and touched the great Apollonius Tyaneus? lam
neither so far hallucinated as to believe it, nor sufficiently
unserious as to affirm it. The effect of the preparations,
the perfumes, the mirrors, the pantacles, is a veritable in-
toxication of the imagination, which must act strongly on
a person already nervous and impressionable. I seek not
to explain by what physiological Iaws I have seen and
touched ; I assert solely that I have seen and that I have
touched, that I saw clearly and distinctly, without dream-
ing, which is sufficient ground for believing in the absolute
efficacity of magical ceremonies. I look upon the practice,
however, as dangerous and objectionable; health, both
moral and physical, would not long withstand such opera-
tions, if once they become habitual. The old lady I speak
of, and whom, subsequently, I had cause to complain of,
was a case in point, for, in spite of her denials, I do not
doubt that she continually practised necromancy and
goétic magic. She at times talked complete nonsense, at
others yielded to insane fits of passion, whose object could
be scarcely determined. I left London without revisiting
her, but I shall faithfully keep my promise to say nothing
whatsoever which may disclose her identity, or give even a

SUPPLEMENT. 313

hint about her practices, to which she doubtless devoted
herself unknown to her family, which, as I believe, is
numerous, and in a very honourable position.

II.— GHOSTS IN PARIS— THE MAGICIAN AND THE
MEDIUM—ELIPHAS LEVI AND THE SECT OF EUGENE
VINTRAS.

THE other week Mr Home determined once more to
leave Paris, that city where even angels and demons would
not long pass for wonders, and would have no alternative.
but a speedy return to heaven or hell to escape oblivion
and abandonment by mortals. Mr Home, with a dejected
and disillusioned air, took leave of a lady of quality whose
generous welcome had been one of his chief felicities in
France. Madame B., hospitable on this day as always,
wished to keep him to dinner; the mysterious being was
on the point of accepting, when it was remarked that a
Kabbalist, known in the world of occult sciences by the
publication of a work entitled “The Doctrine and the
Ritual of Transcendent Magic,” was expected. Mr Home
changed countenance at once, and declared, stammering
and with visible anxiety, that he could not stay, and that
the approach of this professor of magic caused him invin-
cible fear. All that could be done to reassure him was
useless. “I do not judge this man,” he said, “I do not
say that he is good or. bad, I know nothing of him, but his
atmosphere distresses me; near him I should feel deprived
of strength and, as it were, of life.” And after this explana-
tion Mr Home hastened to take his leave.

This terror on the part of men of prestige in presence of
the true initiates of science is no new fact in the annals of
occultism. The history of a vampire who trembled at the
approach of Apollonius may be found in Philostratus. We
could not say whether Cagliostro would have worked
miracles before Swedenborg, but he would have certainly
dreaded the presence of Paracelsus or Henry Khunrath,
had these great men been his contemporaries.

Be it far from us, notwithstanding, to denounce Mr
Home as a low-class sorcerer, that is, as a charlatan. The
celebrated American medium is as nafve and amiable as a
child. He is an unfortunate being, alive with sensibility,
unintriguing and defenceless; he is the sport of a terrible

314 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

force whose nature he is unaware of, and his first dupe 1s
undoubtedly himself.

The study of the phenomena produced in the presence
of this young man are of the highest importance. On one
occasion, a Polish gentleman, who was present at one of
Mr Home’s séances, placed a pencil and a sheet of paper
between his feet on the ground, and requested some sign
of the spirit’s presence. For some moments nothing
occurred ; then suddenly the pencil was flung from one
end of the room tothe other. The gentleman stooped,
picked up the paper, and found thereon three Kabbalistic
signs which were understood by none present. Mr Home
alone seemed to feel great annoyance at seeing them, and
manifested a certain terror; but he refused to explain
himself on the nature and meaning of the characters.
They were, therefore, preserved and brought to that pro-
fessor of magic whose approach was so dreaded by the
medium. We have examined them, and their description
is minutely as follows :—

They were scored deeply, and the pencil had almost
torn the paper. They were drawn without order and not
in a straight line. The first was the sign which the
Egyptian initiates usually place in the hand of Typhon.
A Tau with a double vertical line open in the form of a
compass, a crux ansata with a circular ring above; below
the ring a double horizontal line, and beneath this a
double oblique line in the form of a V turned upside down.

The second ‘character represented the cross of a grand
hierophant with the three hierarchic transverse lines. This
symbol, which belongs to the highest antiquity, is still the
attribute of our sovereign pontiffs, and terminates the
superior extremity of their pastoral crook. But the sign
traced by the pencil had this peculiarity that the upper
branch, the head of the cross, was double, and formed
again the terrible Typhonian V, the sign of antagonism
and separation, the symbol of hatred and eternal strife. .

The third character was that which the Freemasons call
the philosophic cross, a cross with four equal branches, with
a point in each of the angles. But, instead of the four
points, there were two only, placed in the two right
hand angles, once more a sign of separation, strife, and
negation.

The professor, whom it will be permitted us to distinguish

SUPPLEMENT. 315

from the narrator, to avoid wearying our readers by an
appearance of egotism, the professor then, Maitre Eliphas
Lévi, gave to those assembled in the drawing-room of
Madame de B , the scientific explanation of these three
characters, in the following manner :—

“These three signs belong to the series of sacred and
primitive hieroglyphs known only to initiates of the first
order. The first is the signature of Typhon. It expresses
the blasphemy of this evil spirit by establishing dualism in
the creative cause. For the crux ansata of Osiris is an in-
verted lingam, and represents the paternal and active
power of God—the vertical line issuing from the circle—
fertilising the passive Nature—the horizontal line. To
double the vertical line is to assert that nature has two
fathers, it is the substitution of adultery in place of divine
maternity, it is the affirmation of blind fatality, with the
eternal conflict of appearances in the void as its result,
instead of the affirmation of an intelligent first cause ; it is,
therefore, the most ancient, authentic, and terrible of the
stigmata of hell. It signifies the god athetst, it is Satan’s
signature, and being of a hieratic character, it corresponds
to the occult characters of the divine world.

“The second signature belongs to philosophical hiero-
glyphs; it represents the ascensional measure of the idea and
the progressive extension of the form. It is a triple Tau in-
verted, it is human thought by turns affirming the absolute
in the three worlds, and here this absolute is terminated by
a fork, that is, by the sign of doubt and antagonism. So
that if the first character means, Zhere its no God, the
rigorous signification of the second is that There is no
hierarchic truth.

“The third, or philosophic cross, has been in all initi-
ations the symbol of Nature and her four elementary
forms ; the four points represent the four inexpressible and
incommunicable letters of the occult Tetragram, that
_eternal formula of the great Arcanum G.°. A.*. The
two points on the right side represent power, those
on the left love, and the four letters should be read from
right to left, beginning at the top right-hand side, and
thence proceeding to the bottom letter of the left, and
so on for the others, making St Anthony’s Cross. The
suppression of the two points to the left signifies, therefore,
the negation of the Cross, the negation of mercy and love ;

316 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

the affirmation of the absolute reign of force, and its eternal
antagonism, from above below, and from below above ;
the glorification of tyranny and revolt; the hieroglyphic
sign of the nameless vice which rightly or wrongly was
reproached against the Templars; the sign of eternal dis-
order and despair.”

Such then are the first revelations of the hidden science
of the Magi on these extra-natural manifestations. And
now let us be permitted to compare other contemporary
apparitions of phenomenal writings with these signatures, for
it is a process which science should institute before appeal-
" ing to the tribunal of public reason. No investigation and
no indication should, therefore, be disdained.

At Tilly-sur-Seulles, in the vicinity of Caen, a series of
inexplicable phenomena occurred some years ago, under
the influence of a medium named Eugéne Vintras. Certain
ridiculous processes and a swindling law-suit caused this
thaumaturge to fall speedily into oblivion and contempt ;
he was attacked besides with virulence in pamphlets whose
authors were formerly admirers of his doctrines, for the
medium Vintras meddles with dogmatism. One thing is,
nevertheless, noteworthy in the invectives to which he is
subject, that his adversaries, while seeking to defame him,
acknowledge the truth of his miracles, and content them-
selves with ascribing them to the devil.

What, then, are these authenticated miracles of Vintras ?
On this point we are better informed than any one, as will
presently be seen. Official reports signed by honourable
witnesses, artists, doctors, priests, otherwise irreproachable,
have been communicated to us; we have examined eye
witnesses, and, better than all, we have seen for ourselves.
The matters deserve to be related with some detail.

A writer who, to say the least, is eccentric, and whose
name is M. Madrolle, now lives at Paris. He is an old man
whose family and connections are reputable. He wrote
formerly in the most exalted Catholic strain, and received
the most flattering encouragements from ecclesiastical autho-
rity, even approbations emanating from the Apostolic Seat ;
finally, he saw Vintras, and drawn away by the prestige of
his miracles, he has changed into an obstinate sectarian and
an irreconcilable enemy of the hierarchy and priesthood.

At the period when Eliphas Lévi published his Dogme et
Rituel de la Haute Magzte, he received a broadside from M.

SUPPLEMENT. 317

Madrolle which astounded him. The author maintained
_ loudly therein the most unheard of paradoxes in the con-
fused style of ecstatics. According to him, life was suffi-
cient for the expiation of the greatest crimes, since these
were the result of a death sentence. The most wicked
men, being the most unfortunate of all, appear, in his eyes,
to offer God a more sublime expiation. He declaimed
against every check and every condemnation. “A religion
which condemns is a condemned religion!” he cried, and
subsequently preached the most complete licence under the
pretence of charity, forgetting himself so far as to say that
the most imperfect and apparently reprehensible act of
love was of more value than the most perfect prayer.
Finally, he denied the existence of the devil with a vehe-
mence which was occasionally full of eloquence.

“Imagine to yourself,” said he, “a devil tolerated by
God, commissioned by God! Imagine, further,a God who
has created the devil, and permits him to fall furiously on
creatures so weak already and so quick to deceive them-
selves! A God of the devil, in fine, seconded, anticipated,
and even surpassed by a Satanic God.” The rest of the
performance was of similar force. The professor of magic
was almost frightened, and obtained the address of M.
Madrolle. It was not without some trouble that he
discovered this singular pamphleteer, and the conversation
which then took place between them was very nearly as .
follows :—

Eliphas Lévi.— Monsieur, I have received your brochure ;
I have come to thank you for your present, and venture at
the same time to testify to you my astonishment and regret.”

M. Madrolle.—“ Your regtet, Monsieur. Will you kindly
explain yourself? I scarcely understand you.”

“T regret poignantly, monsieur, to see you guilty of
errors into which I fell formerly myself, but I had, at least,
the excuse of youth and inexperience. Your brochure
misses fire because it wants moderation. Your intention
was, doubtless, to protest against errors in faith and abuses
in morals, but it turns out that it is faith itself, and morality,
that you attack. The exaltation whith overflows in your
little work must itself do you considerable wrong, and some
of your best friends have been reasonably anxious about
your health.”

“TI don’t doubt it! They have said, and still say, that I

318 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

am mad, but it is not the first time that believers must ex-
perience the folly of the Cross. 1 am excited, monsieur,
and you would be the same in my place, because it is im-
possible to be unmoved in the presence of prodigies.”

“Ah! you speak of prodigies; this interests me. Come
now, frankly and between OuISEIVES what wonders are in
question ?”

“What wonders indeed if not ees of the great prophet
Elias, returned to earth under the name of Pierre Michel!” -

“IT see, you are speaking of Vintras ; I have heard his per-
formances spoken of. But does he really work wonders?”

At this M. Madrolle leaped on his chair, lifted his eyes
and hands to heaven, and ended by smiling with a con-
descension which was akin to profound piety.

“ Does he work wonders, monsieur? Why, the greatest,
the most astounding, the most incontestable, the most
veritable miracles performed on earth since the days of
Jesus Christ? . . . What! Thousands of Hosts appear
on altars where there were none; wine rises in empty
chalices, and it is no delusion, it is wine, a delicious wine ;
celestial music is heard; the fragrance of another world
diffuses itself, and, finally, blood—true human blood which
doctors have examined—oozes and sometimes flows copi-
ously from the Hosts, leaving mysterious characters thereon.
I tell you here what I have seen, what 1 have heard, what
I have touched, what I have tasted! And you would have
me keep cool in the face of an ecclesiastical authority
which finds it easier to deny all than to examine the
smallest thing.”

“ Allow me, monsieur; it is pre-eminently in matters of
religion that authority can never be wrong. What is good
in religion is the hierarchy, and what is evil is anarchy ; to
what, in fact, would sacerdotal influence be reduced if you
assert as a principle that we must believe in the testimony
of our senses rather than in the decisions of the Church?
Is not the Church more visible than all your miracles?
Those who behold miracles and do not see the Church are
more to be pitied than the blind, for they have not even
the resource of being led.”

“ Monsieur, I know all this as well as yourself, but God
cannot contradict Himself; He will not allow sincerity to
be deceived, and the Church herself cannot decide that I
am blind when I have eyes. . . . Stay, here is what we

SUPPLEMENT. 319

read in the letters of John Hus, towards the end of the
forty-third letter :—‘ A doctor told me that I should sub-.
mit to the Council in all things, and then all would be well
and legitimate for me. He added: If the Council said you
had one eye though you have two, it must still be main-
tained that the Council is not wrong. I answered that if
the universal world declared such a thing, so long as I had
the use of my reason, I could not admit it without injuring
my conscience. With John Hus I reply to you that
truth and reason existed before any Church and Council.”

“JT must interrupt you, my dear monsieur. Formerly
you were a Catholic; you are such no longer, but con-
sciences are free. I simply submit that the institution of
hierarchic infallibility in matters of religion is far more
reasonable and far more incontestable than all the miracles
in the world. Besides, what should not be done to preserve
peace? Do you think that John Hus would not have been
a greater man had he sacrificed one of his eyes to universal
concord instead of inundating Europe with blood? Oh,
monsieur, let the Church decide when it pleases that I am
blind of one eye, I beg but a single favour, it is to tell me
of which one, that I may close it up henceforth, and see by
the other only with irreproachable orthodoxy.”

“T confess I am not orthodox after your fashion.”

“T see that well; but let us return to the prodigies!
You have then seen, touched, smelt, and tasted! But,
exaltation apart, will you describe me something cir-
cumstantially and in detail, something which above all
shall be evidently miraculous? Am I overbold in asking
this?”

“Not the least in the world, but what shall I select?
There are so many. . . . Stay!” he added, after a mo-
ment’s reflection, and with a slight emotional tremor in
his voice, “the prophet is in London and we are here.
Very well; now if, mentally only, you should ask him to
send you the Sacrament immediately, and if in a place
closen by yourself, in your own house, say, in a cloth or in
a book, you should find a Host on your return, what would
you think ?”

“T should declare the fact inexplicable by common
critical methods.”

“Well, sir,” cried M. Madrolle triumphantly, “that is
exactly what frequently happens to me! Yes, monsieur,

es OS ee

320 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

when I wish it, that is, when I am prepared and trust that

‘I am worthy of it, I find the Host where I ask for it, I find

it really and palpably, though often ornamented with little
miraculous hearts which might have been the work of
Raphael.”

liphas Lévi, who felt ill at ease during the discussion
of facts with which a kind of profanation of the most sacred
things was mixed up, took his leave of the former Catholic
writer, and went away pondering on the strange influence
of Vintras, who thus had turned this old-established faith

and this old scholar’s understanding.

Some days after, the Kabbalist “Eliphas was aroused at
an early hour in the morning by an unknown visitor. He
was a white-haired man, dressed entirely in black, having
the countenance of an extremely devout priest ; in a word,
he was of highly respectable appearance. This ecclesiastic
was provided with a letter of introduction couched in the
following terms :—

: DEAR MASTER,

“I present you an old scholar who would jabber
with you the jargon of sorcery. Receive him as myself
(that is, as I have myself received him), by getting rid of
him as quickly as possible.

“Yours wholly in the sacred and saintly Kabbalah,
“ AD. DESBARROLLES.”

“ Monsieur l’abbé,” said Eliphas, smiling as he finished
reading, “I am quite at your service, and can refuse
nothing to the friend who has written to me. So you have
seen my excellent pupil Desbarrolles ?”

“Yes, monsieur, and have found him a most amiable and
erudite man. I consider yourself and him to be worthy
of the truth recently manifested by the astounding
miracles and undoubted revelations of the archangel St
Michael.”

“Monsieur, you honourus. Has Desbarrolles astonished
you by his knowledge ?”

“Undoubtedly! He possesses in no common degree
the secrets of chiromancy; on the mere inspection of my
hand he told me nearly all the history of my life.”

“ He is quite able to; did he go into minute details?”

“ Sufficiently minute to convince me of his extraordinary
knowledge.”

SUPPLEMENT. 321

“ Did he say that you were formerly curé of Saint-Louis,
in the diocese of Tours, that you are the most zealous
follower of the ecstatic Eugéne Vintras, and that your
name is Charvoz ?”

This was a perfect coup de thédtre ; the old priest at each
of these questions leaped on his chair; when he heard his
name, he turned pale and started up as if a spring had
been touched and impelled him.

“You are indeed a magician,” he cried. “Charvoz is
certainly my name, but it is not the one which I now pass
under—I call myself La Paraz.”

“] know it; La Paraz is your mother’s name. You have
left an enviable position, monsieur, that of a country curé
with a most charming presbytery, to share the perturbed
existence of a sectarian.”

“ Say, rather of a great prophet!”

“Monsieur, I believe confidently in your own good faith,
but you will permit me to examine slightly the character
and mission of your prophet.”

“Yes, Monsieur, investigation, broad daylight, the light
of science, are precisely what we seek. Come to London
and see for yourself—the miracles are permanent !”

“Monsieur, will you first give me some scrupulously
exact details on these miracles ?”

“As many as you please.” And thereupon the old
priest began to narrate things which everyone would have
considered impossible, but which in no way astonished the
professor of transcendent magic. For instance, one day,
in a paroxysm of enthusiasm, Vintras was preaching before
his heterodox altar, twenty-five persons being present at
his discourse. There was an empty chalice on the altar,
one well known to the Abbé Charvoz, for he had brought
it from his church at Mont Louis, and was absolutely
certain that the sacred vessel had neither secret conduit
nor double bottom.

“To prove,” said Vintras, “that God Himself inspires
me, He has revealed to me that the chalice is about to fill
with drops of blood under the semblance of wine, that all
of you may taste the juice of the vine of futurity, that wine
which we shall drink with the Saviour in the kingdom of
His Father.”

“Seized with astonishment and fear,” said the Abbé
Charvoz, “I went up to the altar, took the chalice, looked

Xx

322 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

into it, and found it quite empty. I turned it upside down
before all, then descended to kneel at the foot of the altar,
holding the chalice in my two hands. Suddenly, a slight
noise, like a drop of water falling from the ceiling into the
chalice, was distinctly audible, and a drop of wine appeared
at the bottom of the cup. All eyes were turned towards
me, and then to the ceiling, for our simple gathering was
held in a poor room; the ceiling had neither break nor
fissure, nothing was seen to fall, and, nevertheless, the
sound of the drops as they descended increased in rapidity,
while the wine rose towards the brim. When full, I passed
it slowly under the eyes of all present, then the prophet
wetted his lips with it, and all, one after another, tasted
the miraculous wine. No recollection of delicious savour
gave any idea of it... . And then what shall I tell you
of the blood-prodigies which daily astonish us? Thousands
of bleeding hosts fall on our altars. The sacred stigmata
are manifested to those who desire it. Hosts, which at
first were white, are slowly imprinted with characters and
bleeding hearts. Must we believe that God would abandon
the holiest of things to the wonder-working of the demon?
Must we not rather adore and confess that the hour of the
supreme and final revelation has arrived ?”

While thus speaking, the Abbé Charvoz had the same
kind of nervous tremor in his voice which Eliphas Lévi
had already noticed in M. Madrolle. The magician bent
his head thoughtfully, then all at once—‘ Monsieur,” he
said to the Abbé, “you have one or more of these
miraculous hosts about you—be good enough to show
me them!”

“ Monsieur!”

“T am convinced that you have; why attempt to
deny it?”

“I do not deny it,” said the Abbé Charvoz, “but you
will excuse me from exposing to the investigations of
incredulity the objects of the most sincere and exalted
faith.”

“Monsieur Charvoz,” said Eliphas gravely, “incredulity
is the distrust of an ignorance almost certain to deceive
itself. Science is not incredulous. In the first place, I
believe in your conviction, since you have embraced a life
of privation and even of reprobation for your unhappy
opinion. Show me, therefore, your miraculous hosts, and

SUPPLEMENT. 323

be assured of my respect for the objects of a sincere
adoration.”

“Well,” said the Abbé Charvoz, after some further
demur, “I will do so,” and he unbuttoned the top of his
black waistcoat and took out a small silver reliquary,
before which he knelt down with tears in his eyes and
prayers on his lips. Eliphas knelt beside him, and the
Abbé opened the reliquary, which contained three hosts,
one whole and the others almost in a paste, and as if
kneaded with blood. The whole host bore upon each side
a heart in relief on the centre—a clot of blood in the shape
of a heart, and which seemed formed within the host itself
in an inexplicable manner. The blood could not have been
applied from without, for the colouring by imbibing had
left white the particles which adhered to the outer surface.
The phenomenon had the same characteristics on both
sides. The professor of magic was seized with invol-
untary trembling, which did not pass unnoticed by the
old priest, who, having again venerated and locked his
reliquary, took out an album from his pocket and silently
placed it in the hands of Eliphas. It contained copies of
all the bleeding characters which had been seen on the
hosts from the beginning of the miracles and ecstaciés of
Vintras. There were hearts of all kinds, emblems of all
sorts, but three above all excited the curiosity of Eliphas
to the highest point.

“ Monsieur |’Abbé,” said he to Charvoz, “do you know
these three signs?”

“No,” answered the Abbé, frankly; “but the prophet
assures us that they are of palmary importance, and that
their secret significance is soon to be made known—that is,
at the end of time.”

“Well, monsieur,” said the professor of magic, solemnly,
“even before the end of time I will explain them to you;
these three Kabbalistic signs are the devil's signature!”

“Impossible!” cried the old priest.

“Tt is true,” replied Eliphas, with emphasis.

The signs were as follows :—1. The star of the microcosm,
or the magic Pentagram, that star wherein the human
figure was sketched by Agrippa, with the head in the as-
cending point and the four members in the four other
points—the Burning Star which, when inverted, is the hiero-
glyphic sign of the goat of black magic whose head can

324 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

then be sketched in the star with the two horns above, the
ears on the right and left, and the beard below, sign of an-
tagonism and blind fatality, the goat of lewdness assault-
ing heaven with its horns, a sign execrated even in the
Sabbath by initiates of a superior order. 2. The two
Hermetic serpents, but the heads and tails, instead of con-
verging in two parallel semicircles, diverged, and there
was no intermediate line representing the caduceus. Above
the serpents’ heads was the ominous V, the typhonian fork,
the character of hell. On the right and left were the sacred
numbers III. and VII. relegated to the horizontal line
which represents passive and secondary things. This,
therefore, was the significance of the character :—Antagon-
ism is eternal ; God is the strife of blind causes which per-
petually create by destroying ; religious things are passive
and passing, boldness makes use of them, war profits by
them, and discord is perpetuated by both. 3. Lastly, the
Kabbalistic monogram of Jehovah, the Jod and He, but
reversed, which forms, according to the doctors of occult
science, the most frightful of blasphemies, meaning, in
whatever way it might be read :—‘ Fatality alone exists,
God and spirit do not exist. Matter is the grand totality,
spirit the dream of demented matter. The form is more
than the idea, the woman more than the man, pleasure
more than thought, vice more than virtue, the multitude
greater than its chiefs, children above their fathers, and
madness more than reason.’”

This is what was hieroglyphically written in characters
of blood on the pseudo-miraculons hosts of Vintras! We
declare on our honour that all the facts above stated are
such as we have described them, and that we ourselves
have explained the characters according to true magical
science and the true Kabbalistic keys.

The disciple of Vintras also imparted to us the descrip-
tion of the pontifical vestments given, said he, by Jesus
Christ Himself to the pretended prophet in one of his
ecstatic sleeps. Vintras caused the vestments to be made,
and clothes himself in them to perform his miracles. Their
- colour is red ; he must wear on his forehead the cross in
the form of a lingam, and must have a pastoral crook, sur-
mounted by a hand of which all the fingers are shut save
the thumb and index. Now, all this is diabolical in the
highest degree, and is not this intuition of the symbols of

SUPPLEMENT. 325

a lost science something truly marvellous, for it is transcen-
dent magic which, basing the universe on the two pillars
of Hermes and Solomon, has divided the metaphysical
world into two intellectual zones, one white and luminous,
comprising positive ideas, the other black and opaque, in-
cluding those which are negative, and which has given to
the synthetic notion of the first the name of God, and to
the synthesis of the second the name of the devil, or Satan.
The sign of the lingam borne on the forehead is, in India,
the distinctive mark of the worshippers of Seeva, the de-
stroyer; for this sign, being that of the Great Magic
Arcanum, which is connected with the mystery of universal
generation, to carry it on the forehead is to make a pro-
fession of doctrinal immodesty:* Now, say the Orientalists,
on the day when modesty shall have ceased in the world,
the world, abandoned to debauchery, which is barren, will
soon come to an end for want of mothers. Modesty is the
acceptation of maternity. The hand with three fingers
closed expresses the negation of the triad and the assertion
of purely material forces. A hand showing only the auri-
cular is equivalent, in the sacred, symbolical language, to
the exclusive affirmation of passion and savotr-faire. It is
the scurrilous and materialistic version oi the great words
of St Augustine—“ Love, and then do what you will.”
Now, compare this sign with M. Madrolle's doctrine :—‘ The
most imperfect and apparently most culpable act of love is
of greater value than the best of prayers.” If it be asked,
what is that force which independently of human will, and
more or less of human knowledge (for Vintras is an illiter-
ate and uneducated man), formulates its doctrines with
signs buried in the ruins of the ancient world, unearths the
mysteries of Thebes and Eleusis, and writes the most cul-
tured of Indian reveries in the most secret Hermetic alpha-
bet, we answer that these wonders are reproduced by
magnetic intuition of the fluidic thought-pictures in the
universal vital fluid.

* See Note 31.

326 ' MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

II].—TuHE MAGICIAN AND THE SORCERER.—SECRET
HISTORY OF THE ASSASSINATION OF THE ARCH-
BISHOP OF PARIS.

An artisan called one day on Eliphas Lévi. He was a
man of some fifty years old, of impressive appearance,
straightforward and rational in speech. Questioned on the
object of his visit, he answered, ‘You should know well
enough ; I come to beg and entreat of you to return me
what I have lost.”

It must be owned in sincerity that Eliphas Lévi knew
nothing of his visitor, nor of the object he was in search of,
so he answered: “ You suppose me a greater sorcerer
than I am; I know not who you are nor what you seek,
so if you think I can serve you, you must explain and
define your request.”

“Well, since you refuse to understand me, you will at
least recognise this,” said the unknown, taking from his
pocket a little black, well-thumbed book. It was the
Grimoire of Honorius, which consists of an apocryphal
constitution of Honorius II. for the evocation and control
of spirits, plus some superstitious recipes. The work was
the manual of wicked priests who practised black magic
during the darkest periods of the Middle Ages. Sanguinary
rites, mixed with profanations of the Mass and the con-
secrated elements, formulz for bewitchment and witch-
craft, finally, practices which idiocy alone could permit
and knavery counsel, are to be found therein. For the
rest, the work is complete of its kind, and, being conse-
quently scarce at the booksellers, is run up by amateurs
to a high price at public auctions.

“Dear monsieur,” said the workman, sighing, “from the
age of ten years I have not once neglected to perform my
office. This book never leaves my person, and I conform
rigorously to all the prescriptions it contains. Why, then,
have those who came to me deserted me? Eli, Eli,
Lamma”

“Stop!” cried Eliphas. “Do not caricature the most
formidable words which agony ever caused to be uttered
in the world. Who are the beings that come to you by
the virtue of this horrible book? Do you know them ?
Have you promised them anything? Have you signed
any compact ?”

SUPPLEMENT. 327

“No,” interrupted the owner of the Grimoire, “I do not
know them, and have entered into no bond with them;
I know only that their leaders are good, the intermediaries
alternately good and evil, the inferiors evil, but not blindly
so, nor without the possibility of growing better. He whom
I have evoked, and who has so often appeared to me,
belongs to the most exalted hierarchy, for he is of comely
appearance, well clad, and always gave me favourable
answers. But I have lost the first page of my Grimoire,
the most important, that which bears the autographic
signature of the master spirit, and since then he has no
longer appeared to me when I call him. 1 am a lost man,
I am bereft like Job, I have no longer strength nor
courage. Qh, master, I conjure you,—you who have only
a word to say, but a sign to make, and the spirits will
obey,—take pity on me, and recover for me what I have
lost!” ——

“Lend me your Grimoire,” said Eliphas. “What name
do you give the spirit which appears to you ?”

“T call him Adonat.”

“ And in what language was his signature ? ”

“T do not know, but I suppose it was in Hebrew.”

“Hold,” said the professor of transcendental magic,
tracing two Hebrew words at the beginning and end of
the book, “here are two signatures that spirits of darkness
will never counterfeit. Go in peace, sleep well, and evoke
no more phantoms!”

The workman departed, and eight days after he returned
to the scientist.

“You have restored hope and life to me,” he said; “my
strength has partially returned ; by the signatures which
you gave me, I can soothe those who are in pain and
liberate the obsessed, but 4277, him I cannot see, and until
I behold him I shall be sad unto death. Formerly, he was
always near me; sometimes he touched me in the night
and woke me to tell me everything I wished to know.
Master, I entreat you, grant that I shall see him again!”

“Whom ?”

“* Adonat.”

“Do you know whom Adonat is ?”

“No; but I wish to behold him once more.”

“ Adonat is invisible.”

“T have seen him.”

328 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

“ He is without form.”

““T have touched him,”

“ He is infinite.”

“He is pretty much about my own height.”

“The prophets tell us that the hem of his vestment
sweeps away the stars of the morning.”

“ He has a very neat surcoat and the whitest linen.”

“Holy Scripture, moreover, says that none can behold
him without dying.”

“He has a benevolent and jovial countenance.”

“But how do you proceed to obtain these apparitions ?”

“T perform all that is appointed in the great Grimoire.”

“What! even the bloody sacrifice ?”

“ Certainly.”

“Wretch! But what is the victim?”

At this question the artisan started slightly; he grew
pale, and his look was disconcerted.

“ Master, you know better than I do what it is,” he said
humbly, and in a low voice. “Oh, it cost me a hard
struggle, above all the first time, to cut with one blow of
the magic knife the throat of the innocent creature! One
night I had just ended the mournful rites, I was seated
within the circle on the inner threshold of my door, and
the conflagration of the victim was being finished in a large
fire of alder and cypress-wood. Suddenly, close at hand I
again saw it, or rather felt it pass; a heartrending cry rang
in my ears, and from that moment I seem to be hearing it
always.”

liphas rose and looked fixedly at his interlocutor.
Was there a dangerous madman capable of renewing the
atrocities of the Seigneur de Retz before him? The appear-
ance of this person was, however, gentle and honest. No,
it was not possible!

“ But come now, this victim, say plainly what it is! You
suppose that I know it already, and perhaps I do, but I
have my reasons for wishing you to tell me.”

“ According to the magic ritual, it is a kid of a year old,
virginal and unblemished.”

“A real kid?”

“ Certainly. Rest assured that it was neither a plaything
nora straw-stuffed dummy !”

Eliphas breathed freely.

“Come!” thought he, “ this man is not a sorcerer worthy

SUPPLEMENT. . 329

of the stake. He knows not that when the abominable
authors of the Grimoires speak of a virgin kid, they mean
a young child.” “ Well,” he continued, turning to his client,
“give me the details of your visions; what you have
related interests me in the highest degree.”

The sorcerer, for he may well be called by this name,
then recounted a series of strange facts, of which two
families had been witnesses, and which were perfectly
identical with those of the medium Home—hands issuing
from walls, motions of furniture, phosphorescent appari-
tions, &c. One day, the rash novice in magic dared to call
Astaroth, and beheld the apparition of a gigantic monster,
with the body of a hog and the head taken from the
_ Skeleton of a colossal ox. All this was told with a truth-
ful accent, with a certitude of having actually seen, which
excluded any suspicion of the good faith and complete con-
viction of the narrator. Eliphas, as an zsthete in magic,
was delighted at this lucky find. A true medizval
sorcerer, a sincere, undoubted sorcerer, in the nineteenth
century! A sorcerer who had beheld Satan, under the
name of Adonai, dressed like a citizen; and Astaroth
under his true, diabolical form! What an artistic object,
what an archeological treasure!

‘My friend,” he said to his new pupil, “I am inclined to
assist you in recovering what you have lost. Take my book,
conform to the prescriptions in the Ritual, and come to see
me again in eight days’ time.”

On the date appointed, a fresh conversation took place,
and then the artisan declared that he was the inventor of a
life-saving machine of great naval importance; one thing
only was amiss in it, it would not work ; there was an im-
perceptible defect in the movement. What this defect was
the demon of perversity alone could reveal, and it was
absolutely necessary to invoke him.

“ Bewaré!” said Eliphas Lévi. “Try this Kabbalistic
invocation instead for nine days,” and he gave him a leaf
in manuscript. “Begin this evening, and to-morrow let
me know what you have seen, for to-night you will have a
manifestation.”

The next day our individual did not fail to appear.

“TI was woke up suddenly, towards one in the morning,”
saidhe. “I sawa great light at the foot of my bed, and in
this light a phantom arm, making passes in front of me as

350 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

if to magnetize me. Then I again fell asleep, and a little
time after, being woke up a second time, I saw the same
light, but it had changed its place. It had passed from left
to right, and in its luminous depth I distinguished the
semblance of a man, who was looking at me with folded
arms.”

“What was he like?”

“ Much of your size and appearance.”

“’Tis well! Go and continue doing what I prescribed.”

Nine days elapsed and then came a new visit from the
adept, who this time was all radiance and animation. The
moment he saw Eliphas, “Thanks, master!” he cried,
“the machine works—some unknown persons have pro-
vided me with the necessary funds for the completion of —
my enterprise. I have regained peace and sleep — all
thanks to your power!”

“ Say rather, thanks to your own faith and docility. And
now, farewell, I must study. .... What now? Why do
you assume that supplicating air? What more do you
want ?”

“Oh! if you would only ’——

“Well, what? Have you not had all and more than you
wanted, and there has been no question of remuneration ?”

“Yes, truly,” said the other, sighing ; “ but I long to see
him again.”

“Incorrigible!” exclaimed Eliphas.

Some weeks after, the professor of transcendent magic
was roused about two in the morning by a severe pain in
the head. For several moments he anticipated congestion
of the brain ; but he rose, lit his lamp, opened the window,
.walked up and down in his study, then, soothed by the fresh
morning air, returned to bed, where he slept profoundly.
Subsequently, he had a nightmare; he saw with terrific
realism the ox-headed giant of the artisan-mechanist. This
monster pursued and attacked him. When he awoke it
was broad daylight, and some one was knocking at the
door. Eliphas rose, threw a garment round him, and
opened it. There was the workman!

“Master,” said the latter, entering hastily, and with an
alarmed aspect, “ how are you ?”

“ Excellently well,” answered Eliphas.

“ But were you in no danger to-night about two o'clock ?”

liphas was not under cross-examination, and no longer
remembered his indisposition.

SUPPLEMENT. 331

“In danger?” he repeated. “In none that I know of.”

“Were you not attacked by ‘a monstrous phantom,
which tried to strangle you? Did you experience no-
thing ?”

Eliphas recollected.

“Yes,” said he, “I had truly an incipient apoplexy and
a horrible dream. But how did you know of it?”

“ At the same hour an invisible hand struck me roughly
on the shoulder and woke me with a start. I then dreamed
that I saw you in the clutches of Astaroth. I sat up in
bed, and a voice cried in my ear, ‘Get up and hasten to
your master’s help, he is in danger!’ I rose hurriedly, but
where should I run to first ? What danger menaced you?
The voice had told me nothing on these points. I deter-
mined, therefore, to wait till sunrise,-and as soon as it was
daylight I hastened to you, and here I am.”

“Thank you, my friend,” said the Magus, offering his
hand. ‘“ Astaroth is a vicious jester, but I had merely a
slight determination of blood to the head, and now I am
perfectly well. You may be quite reassured and go back
to your work.”

Strange as the facts may be which have just been nar-
rated, a still more extraordinary, and this time tragical,
drama remains to be revealed. It is connected with the
sanguinary event which, at the beginning of this year,
plunged Paris and all Christendom in sorrow and stupe-
faction, an occurrence which no one suspected had black:
magic mixed up with it.

During the winter, at the beginning of last year, a book-
seller informed the author of the Dogme et Rituel de la
Haute Magie that an ecclesiastic had been inquiring for
his address, and manifested a: strong desire to see him.

liphas Lévi did not feel himself inspired with such imme-
diate confidence towards this stranger as to expose himself
without precautions to his visits; he named a friend’s
house where he would be present with his faithful pupil
Desbarrolles. On the appointed day he repaired to Madame
A ’s, and found the ecclesiastic, who had already been
awaiting him several minutes. He was a young, some-
what emaciated man, with a prominent pointed nose and
dull blue eyes. His bony and projecting forehead had a
breadth disproportioned to its height; his head was elon-
gated behind, his smooth and short hair, parted at the side,

332 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

was of grizzly flaxen, approaching light chestnut, but with
a queer disagreeable tint about it. His mouth was sensual
and combative ; his manner, however, was affable, his voice
gentle, and his utterance occasionally a little embarrassed.
Questioned by Eliphas Lévi on the object of his visit, he
answered that he was in search of the Grimoire of Honorius,
and he desired information from the professor of occult
science on the best way to procure the little book, now
scarcely to be met with.

“TI would give fully a hundred francs for a copy of this
Grimoire,” said he.

“The work in itself is worthless,” answered Eliphas.
“It is a pseudo-constitution of Honorius II. that you may
have seen quoted by some learned collector of apocryphal
constitutions.”

“Not exactly, but I wish to fulfila fancy ; I have some-
thing to perform.”

“JT trust that something is not an evocation of black
magic; you know, as I do, Monsieur l’Abbé, that the
Church has always condemned, and stil! condemns severely,
everything connected with those forbidden practices.”

A slight smile, mingled with a kind of sarcastic irony,
was the sole response of the abbéd, and the conversation
fell. The chiromancist Desbarrolles was, however, examin-
ing the priest’s hand attentively ; the latter perceived it, a
natural explanation ensued, and the abbé cheerfully offered
his hand to the experimentalist. Desbarrolles knitted his
brows and seemed embarrassed. The hand was damp and
cold, the fingers smooth and spatulated ; the mountain of
Venus, or that part of the palm which is connected with
the thumb, was of unusual development, the line of life
was short and broken; there were crosses in the centre of
the hand and stars on the mountain of the moon.

“Monsieur |’Abbé,” said Desbarrolles, “if you have not
received solid religious instruction, you may easily become
a dangerous sectarian, for you are drawn on the one hand
towards the most exalted mysticism, and on the other to
the most concentrated obstinacy and incommunicativeness
in the world. You investigate much but imagine more,
and as you confide your fancies to no one, they may well
attain proportions which will make them your real enemies.
Your habits are contemplative and a little indolent, but it
is an indolence whose arousing is perhaps to be dreaded.

SUPPLEMENT. 333

You are impelled towards a passion which your calling
.. . . but, your pardon, Monsieur |’Abbé, I think I have
passed the limits of discretion.”

“ Say all, Monsieur, I can hear, and wish to know, every-
thing.”

“Well, if, as I do not doubt, you turn to the profit of
charity all the restless activity which is caused you by the
desires of the heart, you must be blessed very often for
your good works.”

The abbé gave once more that doubtful and ominous
smile, which lent his pale face such a singular expression.
He rose and took leave, without telling his name, and with-
out it occurring to any one to ask it. Eliphas and Des-
barrolles conducted him to the staircase out of respect for
his priestly dignity. Near the head of the stairs he turned
and said slowly, “ Before long you will hear of something.
.... You will hear me spoken of,” he added, emphasizing
each word. Then he bowed, waved his hand, and, turning
without another word, descended the staircase. The two
friends returned to Madame A :

“There goes a most extraordinary person,” said Eliphas.
“What he uttered at parting seemed very like a menace.”

“You intimidated him,” said Madame A “ Before
you arrived he was beginning to speak out plainly, but you
talked of conscience and the commandments of the Church,
till he no longer dared to confess what he wanted.”

“Pshaw! What did he want then?”

“To see the devil.”

“ Did he think I carried him in my pocket ?”

“No, but he is aware you give lessons in the Kabbalah
and magic, and hoped you would help him in his enter-
prises. He informed my daughter and myself, that, in his
country presbytery, he had already performed an evocation
one evening by the help of acommon Grimoire. He told us
that a sudden gust of wind seemed to shake the building,
the rafters groaned, timbers creaked, doors trembled, windows
were flung open with great noise, and hissing sounds were
heard in every corner of the house. He awaited the for-
midable vision, but saw nothing, no monster presented
itself; in a word, the devil refused to appear, and this is
the reason that he is in search of the Grimoire of Honorius,
where he hopes to find more powerful conjurations and
efficacious rites.”

334 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

“ But this man must be a monster or a madman.”

“ He may be madly in love,” said Desbarrolles. “ He is
tormented by some passion, and absolutely looks for nothing
less than that the devil should take interest in it.”

“ But then how shall we hear him talked about ?”

“Who knows? Perhaps, he has planned the abduction
of the Queen of England or the Sultana?”

Here the conversation ended, and an entire year elapsed
without any intelligence concerning the strange young
priest. On the night between the first and second of
January 1857, Eliphas Lévi was awakened with a start of
agitation consequent on a bizarre and ominous dream. He
seemed to be in a dilapidated Gothic room, very like the
deserted chapel of an old castle. A door concealed by
black drapery opened out of this chamber; behind the
drapery the ruddy light of candles could be just caught
sight of, and it appeared to Eliphas that, prompted by a
curiosity which was full of terror, he approached the black
drapery, which parted thereupon, and an outstretched hand
seized his arm. He beheld no one, but heard a low voice
saying in his ear :—“ Come and see thy father, who is about
to die!”

The Magus woke with palpitating heart and brow bathed
in perspiration. ‘What doesthis dream signify ?”’ thought
he. “ My father is long since dead—why tell me that he is
about to die?” The following night the same dream came
to him, with the same circumstances, and Eliphas Lévi
again woke up, hearing those words in his ear :—“ Come
and see thy father, who is about to die!”

, This repetition of the nightmare painfully impressed
Eliphas. He had accepted an invitation to dine, on the
third of January, in some cheerful society, but he now wrote
to excuse himself, finding that he was ill-disposed for the
gaiety of an artist's banquet. He remained therefore
in his study; the weather was cloudy; at noon he
received a visit from one of his pupils in magic, M. le
Vicomte de M The rain was then falling in such
torrents that Eliphas offered the Vicomte his umbrella,
which the latter would not accept. A courteous little dis-
pute followed, which ended by Eliphas walking back with
his pupil. Out of doors the rain stopped, the Vicomte found
a coach, and Eliphas, instead of returning home, crossed the
Luxembourg mechanically, issued by the gate which opens

SUPPLEMENT. 335
on the Rue d’ Enfer, and found himself in front of the
Panthéon. A double line of barriers improvised for the
novena of St Geneviéve, showed pilgrims the way to St
Etienne-du-Mont. Eliphas, whose heart was saddened and,
therefore, disposed to prayer, followed this path and entered
the Church. It might then have been four in the afternoon.
The church was filled with the faithful, and the daily office
was performed with great recollection and unusual solem-
nity. The banners belonging to the churches of the city
and the suburbs bore witness to the public devotion towards
the virgin who had saved Paris from famine and invasion.
At the bottom of the church the tomb of St Geneviéve was
ablaze with lights. Litanies were chanted, and the proces-
sion issued from the choir.

After the cross-bearer, accompanied by his acolytes and
followed by the choir-boys, came the banner of St Genevieve,
and the Genevevan nuns in double file, clothed in black,
with white veils on their heads, blue ribbons with the medal
of the legend round their necks, and a taper in their hand,
surmounted by a little Gothic lantern, as tradition gives to
the images of that saint. After the nuns of St Geneviéve
came the clergy, and finally the venerable Archbishop of
Paris in a white mitre, and wearing a cope which on either
side was held back by his two vicars-general. The prelate,
leaning on his pastoral staff, proceeded slowly, and blessed to
the right and left the crowd, which knelt down as he passed.

liphas saw the Archbishop for the first time, and remarked
that his features expressed goodness and mildness, but a
look of great fatigue, and even a painfully concealed nervous
suffering, were noticable. The procession passed to the end
of the church, traversing the nave; it returned by the aisle
to the left of the porch, and made a pause at the tomb of
St Genevieve, then it went back by the right aisle, continu-
ing the chant of the Litany. A crowd of the faithful followed
the procession, walking immediately behind the Archbishop.
Quite pensive and affected by the pious solemnity, Eliphas
mingled with this group, so as to pass more easily through
the mass, which was closing up, and to regain the door of the
church. The head of the procession had already returned
into the choir, the Archbishop had reached the nave railing,
where the passage was too narrow for three persons to walk
abreast ; the Archbishop was, therefore, in front and his two
vicars-general were behind him, still holding the corners of

335 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

his cope, which was thus open and drawn back, so that the
_ prelate exhibited his breast protected only by the cross-
ornamented embroideries of his stole.

It was then that those who were behind the Archbishop
saw him stagger, and an out-call was heard, made in a loud
voice, but without noisy clamour. What was uttered? It
seemed to be—“ Down with the goddesses!” but this was

- considered a mistake, so much did the words seem mis-

placed and senseless. The exclamation was nevertheless
repeated two or three times, and some one cried, “ Save the
Archbishop!” while others vociferated, “To arms!” The
crowd thereupon receded, overturning chairs and barriers
and hurrying towards the door. There were shrieks from
children, the clamours of women, and Eliphas, borne away
by the crowd, was in a way carried out of the church, but
the last glance he was able to cast therein fell on an awful
and ineffaceable tableaux.

In the middle of a circle, increased by the terror of all
who surrounded him, the prelate was standing alone, still
supported by his crozier and sustained by the stiffness of
the cope which his vicars-general had dropped, and which
now hung down to the ground. The archbishop’s head
was slightly turned, his eyes, and disengaged hand, were
raised towards Heaven ; there was all the epic of the martyr
in his mien ; it was a submission and a holocaust, a prayer
for his people and pardon to his murderer. The day was
waning and the church had begun to darken; the arch-
bishop, with his uplifted arms, illuininated by a last sun-
beam which stole across the nave, stood out in relief against
a black background, wherein could be dimly distinguished
a pedestal without a statue, on which was inscribed these
two words of the Passion of Christ, Ecce homo, and further
still into the gloom an apocalyptic painting, representing
the four last plagues about to be let loose on the world, and
the whirlwinds of the abyss following the dusty train of the
wan horse of death.

In front of the Archbishop an upraised arm, sketched
in shadow like an infernal silhouette, was clutching and
brandishing a knife, while, through all the uproar at the
bottom of the church, the chant in the choir continued, as
the harmony of the heavenly spheres is prolonged for ever
regardless of our revolutions and anguish.

Eliphas Lévi had been borne outside by the crowd, and

SUPPLEMENT. 337
had issued by the right door. At almost the same moment,
the left opened violently, and an infuriated crowd poured
out of the church, seething round a single man, who was
held by fifty hands, and whom a hundred more strove to
buffet. This individual, later on, complained of maltreat-
ment at the hands of the police, but as soon as they could
distinguish him in the tumult, they protected him against
the rage of the mob.

Women followed him, crying “ Kill him!”

“But what has he done?” was asked by other voices.

“The wretch! He has stabbed the Archbishop,” answered
the women. Other people, however, coming out of the
church, contradictory statements multiplied.

« The Archbishop has been terrified and is ill,” said some.

“ He is dead,” others declared.

“Did you see the knife?” asked a new sptalker “It is
as large as a sword, and the blood streamed from the
blade.” |

“Our poor monseigneur has lost one of his shoes!”
ejaculated an old woman, clasping her hands.

“It is nothing, nothing at all,” said a pew-opener there-
upon. ‘“ You may go back into the church—monseigneur
is not wounded, they are about to enthrone him.” 3

At this the crowd made a motion to re-enter the church.

“Keep back! keep back!” uttered the solemn and
mournful voice of a priest at this very moment. “The
service cannot continue, the church is being closed, it has
been profaned !”

“ How is the Archbishop?” asked a man.

“Monsieur,” answered the priest, “the Archbishop is
dying, and perhaps even while I am speaking he may be
dead.”

The crowd dispersed in consternation to spread this
disastrous news through all Paris. <A bizarre circumstance
took place in the case of Eliphas, and caused a certain dis-
traction from his profound sorrow at what had taken place.
In the midst of the tumult, an elderly lady of exceedingly
respectable appearance took hold of his arm and claimed
his protection. It was his duty to respond to this appeal,
and when they were out of the crowd, she said: “ How
fortunate I am to have met with a man who laments
this great crime, which so many wretches rejoice over at
this moment!”

Vv

338 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

“What say you, Madam? How can any creature
‘exist who is depraved enough to exult over such a
calamity ?”

“Silence!” the old lady enjoined, “ perchance we are
overheard. Yes,” she continued, lowering her voice, “ there
are some who are delighted at this event; there was a
sinister-looking man saying to the crowd, when interro-
gated as to what had taken place: ‘Oh! it is nothing. A
spider has fallen.’ ”

“No, Madam; you misunderstood. Tre crowd would
never have endured such an abominable remark, the man
would have been immediately arrested.”

“Would to God that every one thought like you!” said
the lady; then she added, “I commend myself to the
charity of your prayers, for I see plainly that you are a
godly man.”

“ That is not perhaps the verdict of the world at large,’
answered Eliphas.

“And what does the world signify to us?” asked the
lady with animation. “It is lying, calumnious, impious!
Perhaps it speaks ill of you, and I am not surprised ; if you
knew what it said of me, you would understand very well
why I despise its opinion.”

“Does the world speak evil of you, Madam ?”

“ The worst evil that can possibly be conceived.”

“What is that ?”

“It accuses me of sacrilege.”

“You alarm me! And of what sacrilege, if you please ?”

“Of a guilty farce which I am supposed to have played
to deceive two children on Mount Salette.”

“What! are you ee

“T am Mademoiselle de la Merliére.”

“T have heard your law-suit spoken of, Mademoiselle,
and the scandal which it occasioned, but it seems to me
that your age and respectability should have set you above
the reach of such an accusation.”

“ Come and see me, Monsieur, and I will introduce you
to my solicitor, M. Favre, a man of talent whom I am seek-
ing to turn to God.”

Thus conversing, the two speakers reached the Rue du
Vieux-Colombier. The lady thanked her temporary escort,
and renewed the invitation to visit her.

“J will endeavour to do so,” said Eliphas, “and if I

SUPPLEMENT. 339

come I shall ask at the door for Mademoiselle de la
Merliére.”

* Be sure that you don’t, I am not known by that name
—ask for Madam Dutruck.”

“Dutruck, so be it, Madam! _ I humbly present you my
respects,” and they separated.

The trial of the assassin began, and Eliphas, reading in
the newspapers that the accused was a priest, that he was
of the society of St Germain |’Auxerroie, that he had been
a country cur€ ind that he seemed excited to the pitch of
insanity, recollected the pallid priest ‘who, a year before, had
been in search of the Grimoire of Honorius. But the de-
scription of the criminal given in the public prints contra-
dicted the suspicion of the magical professor, for most of
them gave him black hair. “It is not he, then,” thought

liphas, “ but there still rings in my ear, notwithstanding,
the speech which this atrocious crime would now explain,
‘You will not fail to learn something before long, and to
hear me spoken of.”

The trial took place with all the frightful circumstances
universally known, and the accused was condemned to
death. The next morning Eliphas read in a legal print
the description of this scene unheard of in the annals of
justice, and a mist passed over his eyes when he saw in the
description of the criminal, “ He is fair.” '

“It must be he,” said the professor of magic.

A few days afterwards some one present at the trial, and
who had contrived to sketch the profile of the accused,
shewed it to Eliphas.

“Let me copy this design,” said the latter, quite palpi-
tating with terror.

He did so, and took it to his friend, Desbarrolles, asking,
without previous explanation, “ Do you know this face ?”

“Yes,” answered Desbarrolles, with animation, “it is
that of the mysterious priest whom we saw at Madam
A ’s, and who wished to perform magical evocations.”

“Well, my friend, you confirm me in my sad conviction,
That man whom we saw we shall never more see ; the hand
you examined has been imbrued in blood. We have
indeed heard him talked of as he asserted, for do you know
the name of this pale priest ?”

“Oh, my God!” cried Desbarrolles, changing colour, aay |
fear that I do.”

340 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

“It is true—he is the miserable Louis Verger.”

Some weeks after, Eliphas Lévi was chatting with a
bookseller whose speciality was old works on the occult
sciences. The subject was the Grimoire of Honortus.

“Tt is seldom to be met with now,” said the bookseller ;
“the last copy in my possession I disposed of to a young
priest who offered me a hundred francs for it.”

“A young priest! Can you recall his appearance?”

“Perfectly! But you must know it yourself, for he told
me he had seen you, and indeed it was I who referred him
to you.”

Thus beyond doubt, the unhappy priest had obtained
the fatal Grimoire, and had prepared himself for murder
by a succession of sacrileges. The wretched man felt
certain he would not die; he believed that the emperor
would be forced to pardon him; some honourable exile
awaited him; his crime had brought him immense
notoriety ; his musings would be worth their weight in gold
at the booksellers; he would become fabulously rich,
would attract the notice of some great lady, and would
marry beyond the seas. By similar promises the phantom
demon formerly prompted and drove on Gilles de Laval,
lord of Retz, from crime to crime. A man capable of
evoking the devil, according to the rites of the Grimoire of
Honorius, is so far on the road to evil that he is inclined
to all kinds of hallucinations and falsehoods; but the
aberrations of perversity do not constitute madness, as the
execution of this criminal proved. The desperate resist-
ance he offered to his executioners is well known. “ It is
a deception,” he cried; “I cannot die thus, An hour
only—one hour—to write to the emperor; he would save
me!”

Who, then, had deceived him? Who had promised him
life? Who had assured him beforehand of an impos-
sible clemency, for his reprieve would have outraged the
public conscience? Ask all this of the Grimoire of
Honorius!

Two things in this tragical history correspond with the
phenomena of Home,—the stormy sound heard by the
wicked priest during his first evocation, and the perturba-
tion which prevented him speaking his mind in the presence
of Eliphas Lévi. There may also be noticed the appari-
tion of a sinister man rejoicing in the public sorrow, and

SUPPLEMENT. 341

making a truly diabolical speech in the middle of the dis-
mayed crowd—an apparition seen only by the ecstatic of
La Salette, the too notorious Mademoiselle de la Merliére,
who has the aspect, notwithstanding, of a good and re-
spectable person, though one strongly impressionable, and
perhaps liable to talk and act unconsciously under the
influence of a kind of ascetic somnambulism.

NOTES.

NoTE 1, The Sphinx (page 14).—This “eternal enigma” is
elsewhere said to be the synthesis of ancient wisdom, as the Cross
is the key of future wisdom. It is the law of mystery which
guards the door of initiation to keep off the profane. It repre-
sents the Great Magic Mystery, whose elements are wholly
expressed by the septenary, which, however, does not give the
final word. Every man who thinks is an CEdipus called on to
divine the enigma of the sphinx, or perish. The harmony of
reason and faith, of science and religion, of liberty and authority,
has become in modern times the true problem of the sphinx.
Faith succeeding the daring dreams of antique initiation has
been, in humanity, the voluntary blindness of the Theban king.
The modern (Edipus has rebelled against the expiation of a
crime which he has ceased to understand; he has sought to
reopen his eyes, and the monstrous phantom of the sphinx has
reappeared more menacing and terrible than ever. The empire
of humanity is offered once more to him who can divine the
enigma ; we must reply to the human head and do battle with the
lion’s claws ; intelligence henceforth is inseparable from power.

It will be seen that this interpretation is purely moral, and as
such casts some light on the passage in the text. Eliphas Lévi's
mystical version of the question propounded by the sphinx—how
is the tetrad changed into the duad and explained by the triad?
—has also some light cast on it by the statement that the matenal
elements analogous to the divine elements are conceived as four,
explained as two, and exist finally as three.

NoTE 2, Azoth (page 15).—Eliphas Lévi has censured the
Indian hierophants for confusing the blind and dead light of the
universal agent with the living and intellectual light of the crea-
tive, originating cause, and he has censured the Neo-Platonic
initiates for confusing it with the body of the frofoplastes. His
own terminology, however, is likely to cause some embarrassment,
at any rate to those unaccustomed to the tortuousness of mystical
reasoning. Surely, if the God of the sages, “the efficient and
final principle of the magnum opus,” be denominated Azoth, this
name should not be applied to the “universal seducer,” the
‘‘ monster to be overcome,” that is, the Astral Light !

NOTES. 343

NoTE 3 (page 19).—The secret of the Regnum Dei or Kingdom
of Jesus Christ is elsewhere said to be the discovery of the stable
centre between the unopposed and unlimited power of sacerdotal
autocracy on the one hand, and republican tyranny emancipated
from all duties imposed and consecrated by the hierarchy on the
other. This stable centre is declared to have been discovered by
the Christian hierophants “‘ who aspired to create a society dedi-
cated to self-sacrifice by solemn vows, protected by rigorous rules,
recruited by initiation, and which, itself the sole custodian of great
religious and social secrets, would constitute kings and pontiffs
without being exposed to the corruptions of power.”

NOTE 4 (page 30).—The four sacred names are—JHVH, that is,
Jehovah ; ApNI, that is, Adonai; AHIH, pronounced Elele ; and
AGLA.

NoTE 5 (page 41).—Eliphas Lévi’s whole theory on this sub-
ject originates in a sarcasm of Voltaire: ‘‘ Si Dieu a fait homme
a son image, Vhomme le lui a bien rendu,”

NoTE 6 (page 63).—The received translation is—“ The devil
is the father of lies.”

NoTE 7 (page 67).—But also two seek each other that they
may become one. And the Nucterneron, according to the
Hebrews, says that when Adam and Eve entered the nuptial
couch they were two, but when they rose they were four.

Nore 8 (page 76).—It should be noticed that while the Great
Magic Agent is called the world’s eye, imagination is charac-
terised as the eye of the soul. Now the faculty of intuition is very
closely connected, and in one sense identical with imagination, so
that the Astral Light may be called the za¢uztion of Nature.

NoTE 9 (page 83).—“ Apollonius Tyaneus wholly enveloped
himself in a mantle of fine wool, on which he set his feet, and
which he drew over his head ; then he bent his spinal column
into a semicircle, and closed his eyes after performing certain
rites, such as magnetic passes and sacramental words, whose
object was to concentrate the imagination and determine the
action of the will. The woollen mantle is of great use in magic,
and is the usual vehicle of sorcerers when proceeding to the
Sabbath, which proves that the sorcerers did not really go to the
Sabbath but that the Sabbath came to the sorcerers when isolated
in their mantle, and brought to their Translucid images analogous
to their magical preoccupations, mixed with reflections of all
similar acts accomplished previously in the world.” .

344 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

NoTE ro (page 89).—“ All true initiates have recognised the
immense utility of labour and suffering. Suffering, says a German
poet, is the dog of that invisible shepherd who leads the flock of
humanity. To learn how to suffer, to learn how to die, is the
gymnastics of eternity, the noviciate of immortality. This is the
moral of Dante’s ‘ Divine Comedy,’ sketched so early as the time
of Plato in the allegorical picture of Cebes. This picture, whose
description has come down to us, is at once a magical and philo-
sophical monument. It is an extremely perfect moral synthesis,
and at the same time the most audacious demonstration of the
Great Arcanum, of that secret whose revelation would revolu-
tionise heaven and earth. This secret is the royalty of the sage,
the crown of the adept who in the beautiful allegory of Cebes is
represented descending victorious from the summit of trials.”—
fiistoire de la Magie, p. 147.

NoTE 11 (page 90).—The instrument of philosophical and
moral alchemy which Eliphas Lévi here refers to is that faculty
of the risen and emancipated mind—

‘* By which from evil things,
And things held worthless is the soul enrich’d.”
—A Soul's Comedy.

The light proceeding from the Translucid and investing the
world, “the light that never was on land or sea,” that light in
which the “ fairy-gifted poet beholds THE SAME THING EVERY-
WHERE,” is the true alchemy which transmutes into gold “not
only all metals, but also earth itself, and even the refuse of the
earth.” The province of supreme and divine magic is to per-
petuate the transmutation of the poet.

Norte 12 (page 97).—‘ There is not a people, and I may say
there is not 2 man in possession of his true selt, for whom the
temporal universe is not a great allegory or fable which must give
place to a GRAND Moratity.”—Louis Claude de Saint-Martin,
the philosophe inconnu, in his Tableau Naturel des Rapports gut
existe entre Dieu £ Homme et l Univers.”

NoTE 13 (page 105).—In utter contradiction to this express
statement, and the occult tradition which it may be supposed to
represent, Eliphas Lévi insists elsewhere that created spirits must
be clothed with bodies, the limitation consequent on which alone
making their existence possible. Otherwise, he says, the spirit
would be everywhere, but everywhere in so imperceptible a
degree that it would act nowhere. Even if it be correct that the
Indian hierophants confuse the divine pneuma with the Astral
Light, the blunder is not so ridiculous as this virtual identifica-

NOTES. 345

tion of the intellectual and immortal essence with a tenuous
vapour indefinitely diffused whenever the enclosing capsule is
destroyed.

NoTE 14 (page 106).—How can this statement be harmonised
with that in the chapter on the Kabbalah which says that the
elect are invariably in a minority, because ‘“‘the conditions of
initiation can only be fulfilled by a small proportion of a vast
multitude renewed from age to age, and which will continue 2/7
the election and salvation of all?” This passage is intelligible only
on the supposition of successive reincarnations of the same soul
in different generations of humanity, in some one of which it will
receive the crown of the adept.

NoTE 15 (page 113).—The Generation of Spirits of the Air.
‘‘Lemures gignuntur per deperditiones eestaticas spermatis et
sanguinis menstrualis. Sunt ephemeri et maximi mortales. Con-
stant aere coagulato in vapore sanguinis vel spermatis, et quasi
bulla, que si ferro frangatur perit anima imperfecta lemurum.
Querunt simplices et credulos, fugiunt autem et doctos et ineptos
insolentes ebriosos, &c. Timidi sunt et fugitivi sicut aves cceli et
semper mori reformidant, quia bulla zris est vita eorum et statu
facile corrumpitur.”——PARACELSUS.

NOTE 16 (page 120).—It has just been remarked that these
unemancipated spirits, these slaves of the elements, these beings
devoid of free will, can only be incarnated as animals, and now we
are told that they can be incarnated as vicious and imperfect
men. Imperfection is common to the whole of humanity, even
on the pinnacles of adeptship, and vice may degrade man below
the level of the beast, but it cannot make him merely an animal.

NoTE 17 (page 144).—It is almost unnecessary to say that this
pseudo-constitution is not the work of the pope to whom it is
attnbuted. It is a production of the twelfth century ; Leo III.
was elected in 792. Those who believe it to be genuine, if there
be any at the present day, would be rendering good service to
occultism by tracing its history during the period which succeeded
the pontificate of its pretended author. See on this question the
Dictionnaire des Sciences Occultes, in Migne’s Premiére Encyclopédie
Théologigue, article Léon III.

Note 18 (page 150).— Elsewhere the author tells us that the
figures of the seven planets with their squares are found in the
Petit Albert, but that these allegorial and mythological symbols
have become too classical and commonplace to be successfully

346 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

traced on talismans in these days, and that we must have recourse
to more expressive and recondite signs. But the signs which he
himself provides in addition to those in the text are certainly any-
thing but vulgarised. ‘The Kabbalistic signs of the seven spirits
are—a lion-headed serpent for the Sun, a globe crossed by two
crescents for the Moon, a dragon gnawing the hilt of a sword for
Mars, a lingam for Venus, a hermetic caduceus and cyno-
cephalous for Mercury, the burning pentagram in the claws or
beak of an eagle for Jupiter, an old cripple or a serpent twined
about the heliacal stone for Saturn. All these signs are found on
archaic gems, and particularly on the Gnostic talismans known
by the name of Abraxas. In the collection of talismans of
Paracelsus, Jupiter 1s replaced by a priest in sacerdotal garb, a
substitution which is not wanting in a well-defined mystical
significance.” .

NOTE 1g (page 163).—In an interesting notice of this Grzmotre
found in his ‘‘History of Magic,” Eliphas Lévi, with much
appearance of plausibility, fixes its authorship on Cadulus, bishop
of Parma, that is, the anti-pope set up by the emperor Henry IV.,
and a man who by his intrigues, debauchery, and simony, may be
supposed to have been capable of every enormity. The argument,
however ingenious, is of course entirely conjectural, and no proof
is offered that the personage in question had any connection with
the sorcery and diabolism of his century. What is certain in any
case is this, that the saintly and eminent pontiff whose name it
bears, neither was, nor could have been its author. By a typo-
graphical error, or an error in transcription, this Grimoire is
occasionally attributed to Honorius III.

NoTE 20 (page 169).—But this moral disorder must not be
necessarily attributed to the individual who pays its physical
penalty ; otherwise, what of hereditary diseases ?

NOTE 21 (page 180).—And yet we have been told that the
Astral Light is projected by the thumbs and palms of the hands, in
which case magnetic passes are certainly more than signs; the
will of the operator projects the vital fluid by means of them ; but
the eternal right of self-contradiction, formally claimed by Charles
Baudelaire as an imprescriptible part of liberty, has ever been
included among the nights of the Frenchman.

Nore 22 (page 192).—We are distinctly and authoritatively
told in the chapter devoted to Spiritual Transition that the divine
and immortal spirit of a man who has lived viciously is held

NOTES. 347

captive after death by its astral body, that in this envelope it
torments dreaming girls, and haunts the places where the pleasures
of its human life elapsed, in which case, in blank and utter con-
tradiction to the statement made in the text, it is evident that
souls can and do exist in the terrestrial atmosphere after they
have departed this life, and that as vicious men are unhappily
very numerous the air must be swarming with imprisoned spirits.
Without being in any way committed to the spiritualistic hypo-
thesis, which Eliphas Lévi was bent on disproving, and, it may
be added, of vilifying, one is bound to confess that the animus
thus gratified in the face of consistency and reason, is a triumph
for the doctrine against which it is directed.

NoTE 23 (page 201).—-This is apparently the verdum inenar-
rabile of the Alexandrian School, called Ararita by the Kabbalists.
*‘ All is enclosed in one word, and in a word of four letters—it is
the Tetragram of the Hebrews, the Azoth of the Alchemists, the
Thot of the Bohemians, and the Kabbalistic Tarot. This word
expressed in such various ways signifies God for the profane,
man for the philosophers, and gives to the adept the final word
of human science and the key of divine power ; but he alone can
avail himself of it who understands the necessity of never re-
vealing it.” (Dogme de la Haute Magie, p. go.) ‘This is un-
doubtedly that word referred to in the chapter on Divination, the
occult name of the Great Arcanum, “ of which the sacred Tetra-
gram itself is only the equivalent and image.” Those who are
mystified by the childish puzzle in which it is there supposed to
be enclosed will be gratified to learn that according to the H/rstotre
de la Magie the mot unique hidden in every sanctuary is Agla.
See chapter on “ The Kabbalah,” page 2go of this digest.

NoTE 24 (page 202).—That is, how can gold be produced from
salt, sulphur, and mercury of the common and material kind?
But the gold of the philosophers can be, and is, produced from
the salt, sulphur, and mercury of the philosophers. The so-called
metallic transmutation, not being accomplished by the manipula-
tion of ordinary metals and minerals, is not really the transmuta-
tion of metals, but the application of the adapting powers of the
divine and immortal spirit to the dead exterior substances of the
material world.

NoTE 25 (page 204).—The following mystification was appended
as an “important note” on this subject in the second edition of
the Dogme et Rituel de la Haute Magie. For the mineral work,
the first matter is mineral exclusively, but it is not a metal ; it is

348 MYSTERIES OF MAGIC.

a metallic salt. This matter is called vegetative, because it
resembles a fruit, and animal, because it produces a species of
milk and blood. It contains the fire used to dissolve it.

NoTE 26 (page 216).—And it is absolutely true that if a man
be bidden to look for anything by another whose will dominates
but perturbs his own, and whom he fears to displease, his anxiety
to find it will sometimes so confuse him that he will not see the
object, though it may be under his very eyes.

NoTE 27 (page 218).—This reasoning is ingenious but purely
Machiavelian, and the legend itself represents the deliberate per-
formance of a miracle to cover and, what is worse, to verify a
falsehood. It should also be noticed that the falsehood was of
the most inexcusable kind, being told not to conceal a good deed
trom those who would interfere to prevent it, but that the merit
of the deed might be increased by its secrecy. It is a curious
instance of human subtlety turning to evil even such a beautiful
counsel as that which exhorts us not to let the mght hand know
the charitable actions of the left. And now, if we turn to Eliphas
Lévi’s Histotre de la Magte, we find him condemning, in Indian
philosophy, the very principle which he has upheld—namely, that
the wise man cannot lie. In the Oupnek’hat, a book of Indian
occultism, the following passage occurs :—“ God is truth, and in
Him light and shadow are one only. Whoever knows this can
never lie, for even when he tries to do so his falsehood becomes a
truth.” Again, the same work tells us that “it is permitted to lie
in order to facilitate marriages, to exalt the virtues of a Brahman
or the qualities of a cow.” This is immoral, doubtless, but it
does not surpass the spiritual wickedness of the Christian legend
which, by representing a divine miracle covering a falsehood,
practically teaches that it is allowable to lie in order to exalt the
merits of a good work.

NOTE 28 (page 219).—There is no attempt to explain the
' suffering—the actual physical maltreatment—of the victims of
were-wolves on this theory.

NoTE 29 (page 288.)—It is not to Pascal but to the mystical
theology of the Seraphic Doctor, S. Bonaventura, that we owe this
idea. In the sixth chapter of the /tinerarium Mentis ad Deum
(a work which should be in the hands of every student of mysti-
cism),. he says :—‘‘ Russus revertentes dicamus, quia igitur esse
purissimum et absolutum, quod est simpliciter esse, est primarium
et novissimum, ideo est omnium orgo et finis consummans.

NOTES. 349

Quia eternum et prasentissimum, ideo omnes durationes ambit
et intrat, quasi simul existens earum centrum et circumferentia.
Quia simplicissimum et maximum, ideo totum intra omnia, et
totum extra omnia, ac per hoc est sphera intelligibilis, cujus
centrum est ubtque et arcumferentia nusquam.”

NoTF. 30 (page 299).—Jn the chapter on Divination we were
told that most religious revelations have been given in dreams, and
that the patriarchs looked on dreams as “certain revelations.”
Are the masters in modern Israel, of whom Eliphas Lévi has
made himself the uncommissioned and unaccredited spokesman,
“‘preater than our father Abraham,” and wiser than Joseph the
diviner ?

Note 31 (page 325).—And yet in the Dogme et “Rituel de la
flaute Magie, there is an engraving of ADDHANARI, the great
Indian Pantacle, which is distinctly said to represent Religion and
Truth, and to be analogous to the Apo-Nnai of Ezekiel, but which
bears upon its very forehead that /izgam which is here declared to
be a confession of doctrinal shamelessness. The contradiction is
as complete as words can make it, and its object is obviously to
discredit all magical marvels occurring outside the hierarchy of
initiation or the authority of the Latin orthodoxy.

Turnbull & Spears, Printers, Edinburgh.

Digitized by Google

Digitized by Google

Digitized by Google

A Selection

FROM

Mr. Redway’s Publications.

GEORGE REDWAY,
15, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON.
1886.

Digitized by Google

15, Yorn Srreetr, Covent Garvey,
Lonpon, September, 1886.

Nearly ready.
In large 8v0, uniform with the New “ Standard” Edition.

Sultan Stork,

AND OTHER STORIES AND PAPERS HITHERTO
UNCOLLECTED.

BY

WILLIAM MAKEPEACE THACKERAY.

None of these pieces are included in the two recently pub-
lished volumes issued by Messrs. Smita, Expepr, and Co.

With an Appendix containing the Bibliography of Taackrrar
(first published in 1880), in a revised and enlarged form.

CONTENTS.

I. PROSE.

1. SULTAN STORK: Being the One Thousand and Second Night. By
Major G. O’ G. Ganaaan. [1842.]

2. LITTLE SPITZ. A Lenten Anecdote. [1841.]

3. DICKENS IN FRANCE. An Account of a French dramatic version of
“‘ Nicholas Nickleby,” performed at a Paris theatre. [1842.]

4. THE PARTIE FINE. [1844. ]

5. ARABELLA |; or, the Moral of the Partie Fine. [1844.]

6. CARLYLE’S FRENCH REVOLUTION. [1837.]

7. ELIZABETH BROWNRIGGE: A Tale. [1832.]

8. AN EXHIBITION GOSSIP. [1842.]

9. LETTERS ON THE FINE ARTS. [1843.]

10. PARIS CORRESPONDENCE, [1833.]

II. VERSE.

11. SATIRICAL VERSES descriptive of (1) Lours Puitiprs; (2) Mr.
BranaM; (3) N. M. Roruscuitp, Esq.; (4) A. BUNN; (5) Sim BR
Lavnir (Petrus Laureus). (1833.

12. LOVE IN FETTERS. A Tottenham Court Road Ditty. [1833.]

13. “DADDY, ’!M HUNGRY.” Scene in an Irish Coachmaker's tress j

_—_— 1843.
THE BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THACKERAY. A Bibliographical List,
arranged in chronological order, of the published Writings in Prose and
Verse, and the Sketches and Drawings, of W1tL1aM MAKEPRACE THACKR-
RaY (1829-1886). Revised and Enlarged.

INTRODUCTION.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

Sue ys i)

4 MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS.

In crown 8vo, in French grey wrapper. Price 6s.

A few copies on Large Paper. Price 10s. 6d.

The Bibliography of Swinburne ;

A BIBLIOGRAPHICAL LIST, ARRANGED IN CHRONOLOGICAL
ORDER, OF THE PUBLISHED WRITINGS
IN VERSE AND PROSE

OF

ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE
(1857-1884).

This Bibliography commences with the brief-lived College
Magazine, to which Mr. Swinsurne was one of the chief con-
tributors when an undergraduate at Oxford in 1857-8. Besides
a careful enumeration and description of the first editions of all
his separately published volumes and pamphlets in verse and
prose, the original appearance is duly noted of every poem,
prose article, or letter, contributed to any journal or magazine
(e.g., Once a Week, The Spectator, The Cornhill Magazine, The
Morning Star, The Fortnightly Review, The Examiner, The Dark
Blue, The Academy, The Atheneum, The Tatler, Belgravia, The
Gentleman’s Magazne, La République des Lettres, Le Rappel, The
Glasgow University Magazine, The Daily Telegraph, &c., &c.),
whether collected or uncollected. Among other entries will be
found a remarkable novel, published in instalments, and never
issued in @ separate form, and several productions in verse not
generally known to be from Mr. Swrnsugne’s pen. The whole
forms a copious and it is believed approximately complete record
of a remarkable and brilliant literary career, extending already
over a quarter of a century. 7

*,* ONLY 250 COPIES PRINTED.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS. 5

HINTS TO COLLECTORS

OF ORIGINAL EDITIONS OF

THE WORKS OF

Charles Dickens.

CHARLES PLUMPTRE JOHNSON.

Printed on hand-made paper, and bound im vellum.
Crown 8wvo, 68.

The Edition 2s limited to fe hundred and fifty copies, fifty of
which are on large paper.

“Enthusiastic admirers of Dickens are tly beholden to Mr. C. P.
Johnson for his useful and interesting ‘Hints to Collectors of Original
Editions of the Works of Charles Dickens’ (Redway). The book is a com-
panion to the similar guide to collectors of Thackeray’s first editions, is
compiled with the like care, and produced with the like finish and taste.”—
The Saturday Review.

“This is a sister volume to the ‘ Hints to Collectors of First Editions of
Thackeray,’ which we noticed a month or two ago. The works of Dickens,
with a few notable ‘ Dickensiana,’ make up fifty-eight numbers... . and
Mr. Johnson has further augmented the present volume with a list of thirty-
six plays founded on Dickens's works, and another list of twenty-three published
portraits of Dickens. As we are unable to detect any slips in his work, we
must content ourselves with thanking him for the correctness of his annotations.
It is unnecessary to repeat our praise of the elegant format of these books.
... ."—The Academy. —

“‘ These two elegantly-produced little books, printed on hand-made paper
and bound in vellam, should be welcomed by the intending collector of the
works of the two authors under treatment, and the more experienced biblio-
grapher will find the verbatim reproductions of the original title-pages not
without use... . . For the purpose of checking the correct numbers of these
illustrations, verifying the collations, and detecting possible frauds... .
Mr. Johnson’s books are unique. The ‘ Hints,’ moreover, incorporated in his
prefaces . .. . and the ‘ Notes’ appended to each entry are serviceable, and
often shrewd ; indeed, the whole labour, evidently one of love, bestowed upon
the books is exceptionally accurate and commendable, and we hope to welcome
Mr. Johnson at no distant date as a bibliographer of a more pretentious
subject.” — Time.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN,

6 MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS.

HINTS TO COLLECTORS

OF ORIGINAL EDITIONS OF

THE WORKS OF

William Makepeace Thackeray.

CHARLES PLUMPTRE JOHNSON.

Printed on hand-made paper and bound in vellum. Crown 8vo, 68.

The Edition 1s limited to five hundred and fifty copies,
twenty-five of which are on large paper.

«

. ... A guide to those who are great admirers of Thackeray, and are
collecting first editions of his works. The dainty little volume, bound in
parchment and printed on hand-made paper, is very concise and convenient in
form ; on each page is an exact copy of the title-page of the work mentioned
thereon, a collation of pages and illustrations, useful hints on the differences
in editions, with other matters indispensable to collectors. . .. . Altogether it
represents a large amount of labour and experience.” —The Spectator.

‘‘ Those who remember with pain having seen the original yellow backs of
Thackeray’s works knocked to pieces and neglected years ago, may be recom-
mended to read Mr. C. P. Johnson’s ‘ Hints to Collectors.’ ”—The Saturday
Review.

“,. ... Mr. Johnson has evidently done his work with so much loving care
that we feel entire confidence in his statements. The prices that he has affixed
in every case form a valuable feature of the volume, which has been produced
in a manner worthy of ite subject matter.”—The Academy.

“The list’ of works which Mr. Johnson supplies is likely to be of high
interest to Thackeray collectors. His preliminary remarks go beyond this not
very narrow circle, and have a value for all collectors of modern works.” —
Notes and Queries.

“,... It is choicely printed at the Chiswick Press; and the author,
Mr. Charles Plumptre Johnson, treats the subject with evident knowledge and
enthusiasm. .... It is not a Thackeray Bibliography, but a careful and
aAninute description of the first issues, with full collations and statement of the
probable cost... .. Mr. Johnson addresses collectors, but is in addition a
sincere admirer of the greatest satirist of the century.”— Book Lore.

“ ,.. . This genuine contribution to the bibliography of Thackeray will
be invaluable to all collectors of the great novelist’s works, and to all who
treasure an ‘ editio princeps’ the account here given of the titles and charac-
teristics of the first issues will form a trustworthy guide. .... The special
features which will enable the purchaser at once to settle any question of
authenticity in copies offered for sale are carefully collated.” —The Publisher's
Circular.”

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

MR. REDWAY’'S PUBLICATIONS. 7

Demy 18mo, 200 pages, cloth, uncut. Price 2s.

Wellerisms

FROM
© Pickwick” and“ Master Humphreys Clock.”

Selected by Cuarues F. Rrprat.

EDITED, WITH AN INTRODUCTION,
BY
CHARLES KENT,

AUTHOR OF “THE HUMOUR AND PATHOS OF CHARLES DICKENS.”

“ Some write well, but he writes Weller.”—Epigram on Dickens.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

In crown 8vo, 2 vols., cloth. Price 6s.

The Valley of Sorek.

GERTRUDE M. GEORGE.

With a Critical Introduction by Ricnharp Hennz SHEPHERD.

of character. .... The dramatis One - are in reality strongly
individual, and surprise one with their inconsistencies just as real human
beings do. .... There is something powerful in the way in which the reader

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

8 MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS.

Firth THousanp.
An édttion de luxe in demy 18mo.
Bound in fancy cloth, uncut edges. Price 2s.

Tobacco Talk and Smokers’
Gossip.

An Amusing Miscellany of Fact and Anecdote relating to
“The Great Plant’ in all its Forms and Uses, including
a Selection from Nicotian Literature.

**One of the best books of gossip we have met for some time. .. . . It is
literally crammed full from beginning to end of its 148 pages with well-
pir anecdotes, poems, and excerpts from tobacco literature and history.”—

aphiec.

“The smoker should be grateful to the compilers of this pretty little
volume. .... No smoker should be without it, and anti-tobacconiste have
only to turn over its leaves to be converted.”—Pall Mall Gazette.

“Something to please smokers; and non-smokers may be interested in
tracing the effect of tobacco—the fatal, fragrant herb—on onr literature.” —
Interary World.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

NEW BOOK BY MISS BAUGHAN.
Th

Handbook of Physiognomy.

ROSA BAUGHAN.
Demy 8vo, wrapper, 1s.

“The merit of her book consists in the admirable clearness of her descrip-
tions of faces. So vivid is the impression produced by them that she is able
to dispense with illustrations, the reader using the faces of his acquaintances
for that purpose. The classification, too, is good, although the astrological
headings may be regarded by the profane as fanciful. Physiognomy may now
be scientifically studied by means of composite photography.”—Pall Mail
Gazette.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

MR. REDWAY’S PUBLIOATIONS. 9

In preparation.
Price to Subscribers, 68

The Praise of Ale;

R,

Songs, Ballads, i and Anecdotes relating -to

Beer, Malt, and Hops.

Collected and arranged by
W. T. MARCHANT.

Contrenrts.—Introduction; History; Carols and Wassail Songs; Church
Ales and Observances; Whitsun Ales; Political; Harvest; General; Barley
and Malt; Hops; Scotch Songs; Local and Dialect; Trade Songs; Oxford
Songs; Ale Wives; Brewers; Drinking Clubs and Customs; Royal and
Noble Drinkers; Black Beer; Drinking Vessels; Warm Ale; Facts, Scraps,
and Ana; Index.

The volume will contain much curious and out-of-the-way information,
embracing a short sketch of the rise and progress of the art of brewing in
this country; an account of the laws relating to beer, and the statutes against
drunkenness ; of the manners and customs of “malt worms” and mug-house
clubs ; and the obsolete phraseology of ‘‘ toss-pote,” such as “ super-nagulam,”
“ upsee- ,»” “shoeing horns,” and “carousing the hunter’s hoop.” The
author will pay attention to the drinking customs more or less connected with
the Church—Whiteun Ales, Bride Ales, Bride Bush, Bride Wain, and the
like; the chants of the wassail-bowl, of the Hock Cart, and the Sheepshearing
and Harvest Home rejoicings—

‘© Here’s a health to the Barley mow, brave boys,
Here’s a health to the Barley mow”—

and Brazenose songs in honour of the brew for which that college is renowned.
Then there are lyrics pertaining to particular sorts and conditions of men, as
the songs of the threshers and tinkers, sailors and soldiers, and the clubs,
which may be considered as forming a class of themselves. This work will
doubtless prove a valuable and pleasant addition to the library of the student
of history and lover of poetry.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN

10 MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS.

In crown 8vo, price 6s.
Illustrated with magical signs, and a symbolical frontispiece etched
by Mackaness, from a design by the Author.

MAGIC,

WHITE AND BLACK;
Or, The Science of Finite and Infinite Life.

CONTAINING
Practical Hints for Students of Occultism.

BY

FRANZ HARTMANN, M.D.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

In preparation.
NEW TRANSLATION OF “THE HEPTAMERON.”

The Heptameron;

OR,
Tales and Novels of Margaret, Queen of Navarre.

Now first done completely into English prose and verse, from the
original French, by ArrHur Macuen.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

Just ready, in small 8vo, cloth. Price 5s.
Mountaineering Below the

Snow-Line;
Or, the Solitary Pedestrian in Snowdonia and Elsewhere.

BY
M. PATERSON.
WITH ETCHINGS BY MACKANESS.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS. 11

Fourth Edition. With Engraved Frontispiece. In crown 8vo, 5s.

Cosmo de’ Medici:

An Historical Tragedy. And other Poems.
BY
RICHARD HENGIST HORNE,

Author of “ Orion.”

“This tragedy is the work of a poet and not of a playwright. Many of
the scenes abound in vigour and tragic intensity. If the structure of the
drama challenges comparison with the masterpieces of the Elizabethan stage,
it is at least not unworthy of the models which have inspired it.’”’—TZGmes.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

Feap. 8vo, parchment.

Tamerlane and other Poems.

BY

EDGAR ALLAN POE.

First published at Boston in 1827, and now first republished
from a unique copy of the original edition, with a preface by
Ricoakp Hegnr SHEPHERD.

Mr. Swinburne has generously praised “so beautiful and valuable a little
volume, full of interest for the admirers of Pog’s singular and exquisite
genius.”

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

12 MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS.

Just ready, in demy 8vo, choicely printed, and bownd in Japanese
parchment. Price 7s. 6d. |

Primitive Symbolism

As Illustrated in Phallic Worship; or, the Reproductive
Principle.
BY
The late HODDER M. WESTROPP.

With an Introduction by Masor-Generat Fortone, Author of
“ Rivers of Life.”

“This work is a multwm in parvo of the growth and spread of Phallicism,
as we commonly call the worship of nature or fertilizing powers. I felt, when
solicited to enlarge and illustrate it on the sudden death of the lamented
author, that it would be desecration to touch so complete a compendium by
one of the most competent and soundest thinkers who have written on this
world-wide faith. None knew better or saw more clearly than Mr. Westropp
that in this oldest symbolism and worship lay the foundations of all the goodly
systems we call Religions.” —J. G. R. Forione.

“ A well-selected repertory of facts illustrating this subject, which should
be read by all who are interested in the study of the growth of religions.”—
Westminster Review.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

In large crown 8vo. Price 38. 6d.

Sithron, the Star Stricken.
Translated (Ala bereket Allah) from an ancient Arabic
Manuscript.

SALEM BEN UZAIR, of Bassora.

“This very remarkable book, ‘Sithron,’ . . . is a bold, pungent, audacious
satire upon the ancient religious belief of the Jews. . . . No one can read the
book without homage to the force, the tenderness, and the never-failing skill
of its writer.”—St. James's Gazette.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

MR. REDWAY’'S PUBLICATIONS, " 13

THE ONLY PUBLISHED BIOGRAPHY OF JOHN LEECH.

An édition de luxe in demy 18mo. Price 1s.

John Leech,
ARTIST AND HUMOURIST.

A BIoGRaAPHIcaL SKETCH.

BY
FRED. G@. KITTON.

New Edition, revised.

“In the absence of a fuller biography we cordially welcome Mr. Kitton’s
interesting little sketch.” — Notes and Queries.

“ The multitudinous admirers of the famous artist will find this touching
monograph well worth careful reading and preservation.”—-Daily Chronicle.

‘““The very model of what such a memoir should be.”— Graphic.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.
Nearly ready, about 500 pages, crown 8vo, cloth. Price 10s. 6d.

The History of the Forty Vezirs;

The Story of the Forty Morns and Eves.

Written in Turkish by Suryxu-Zapa, and now done into
English by E. J. W. Grss, M.R.A.S.

The only complete translation of this collection of tales that
has hitherto appeared in any European language is that pub-
lished in German by Dr. Behrnauer in 1851. A complete text
of the romance contains eighty subordinate stories, and this is
the number given by Behrnauer; but MSS. differ widely in the
selection of such tales, and Mr. Gibb has collected one hundred
and twelve distinct stories from different versions that have
come under his notice. Among these, all of which will appear
in the forthcoming volume, will be found variants of many
widely distributed popular tales.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

14 MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS.

Fourth Edition, newly revised, in demy 8vo, with IUustrative Plates.
Price 1s.

The Handbook of Palmistry,

ROSA BAUGHAN,
AUTHOR OF “INDICATIONS OF CHARACTER IN HANDWRITING.”

“It arcing a certain literary interest, for Miss Baughan shows the con-
nection between palmistry and the doctrines of the Kabbala.”— Graphic.

“Miss Rosa Baughan, for many years known as one of the most expert
proficients in this branch of science, has as much claim to consideration as any
writer on the subject.” —Sussex Daily News.

“People who wish to believe in palmistry, or the science of reading
character from the marks of the hand,” says the Daily News, in an article
devoted to the discussion of this topic, “‘ will be interested in a handbook of
the subject by Miss Baughan, published by Mr. Redway.”

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN,

In 2 vols., cloth, 6s.

The Curate’s Wife.

A NOVEL.

BY
J. BE. PANTON,

Author of “Sketches in Black and White,”
“Less than Kin,” &.

“The author of “ Less Than Kin’ has produced in “ The Curate’s Wife”
a story as powerful and full of genuine human interest as has appeared for
some long time past. This tale of ‘country life” is realistic in the best sense
of the word. Faithful as a photograph in all its minor details, it shows clear
insight into character of both the sexes, and under very varied conditions.
The gradual transformation of the heroine from a young girl, full of high
urposes and enthusiasm, into the hopeless drudge who in despair lays herself
een to die, is painted with an almost Zola-like fidelity. Her tyrant, the
popular curate, is also a powerful sketch. It is difficult not to think that
an expiation worked out in the scene of his misdeeds, with people who pity
while they blame him, is insufficient punishment for so contemptible a cur.
It would have been, doubtless, more satisfactory had Meta conquered in the
unequal contest between her well-meaning inexperience and her husband’s
brutal self-love, but in real life the chances would be against her, and this
clever novel is, above all, an exact picture of certain phases of human nature
as it is, and in this lies its chief merit.”— Morning Post, May. 19th, 1886.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

MR. REDWAY’'S PUBLICATIONS. 15

NEW NOVEL BY MR. A. P. SINNETT,
Author of “Karma,” &.

In 2 vols., crown 8vo, cloth.
Published at 21s. Now offered at 10s. 6d.

United:

A. Pp. SINNETT.

“Mr. Sinnett’s previous works on ‘ Esoteric Buddhism’ and ‘ The Occult
World” in some way prepare the reader for the marvellous psychological
phenomens with which the present volumes abound, and which cannot fail
to have an irresistible charm for all those who love the byeways of speculation.”
—Literary World.

“There is, nevertheless, a weird attractiveness about UNITED which makes
even the non-believer in theosophy loth to put down the book when once he
has taken it up; while to the lovers of occult phenomena it will prove irresis-
tibly fascinating.”— Literary World.

“ Literary ability is evident throughout the book.”—St. James's Gazette.

“Mr. Sinnett bas produced a novel turning on psychic, mesmeric, and
magnetic causes operating on English men and women of ordinary and very
extraordinary types, and he has succeeded in making it of special interest
for spiritualists and readable by common people.” —The Lady.

“It is even doubtful whether Mr. Sinnett will win one genuine convert to
occultism by ‘ United ;’ but those who are occult already will take his powerful
romance to their hearts; will pour out libations before him, and loudly cry
well done.” — Court and Society Review.

“Over this thrice-silly subject the author has expended some most
excellent writing, ideas that equal in breadth and strength some of those of

our best writers, pure English, and undeniable grammar.” — The Whitehall
Review.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

Just published, $2 on wrapper. Price 1s.
The New Illumination,

BY
EDWARD MAITLAND,
Author of “The Pilgrim and the Shrine.”

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

16 | MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS.

In Preparation.

The Life and the Substance of the Teachings of
Philipp Theophrastus, Bombast of Hohenheim,

KNOWN BY THE NAME OF

Paracelsus,
An Adept of the Secret Science.

Containing his essential doctrines in regard to Cosmology,
Pneumatology, Magic, Medicine, Alchemy, Theosophy, and
Philosophy, and some important secrets, such as the preparation
of the true Elixir of Life, the Electro-Magicon, the generation
of Homunculi, the nature of Elemental Spirits, &.

Extracted and translated from his extensive works and from
some unpublished Manuscripts, and supplied with
Annotations, by

F. HARTMANN, M.D.,
AUTHOR OF “ MAGIC,” ETC.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

64 pp., 8v0, wrapper. Price 1s. 6d.
The

“Occult World Phenomena,”
The Soctety for Psychical Research,

BY
A. P. SINNETT,
AUTHOR OF “‘ THE OCCULT WORLD,” “ ESOTERIC BUDDHISM,” ETC.

With a Protest by Mapamse Bravarsry.

“ An interesting addition to the fast-expanding literature of Theosophy.”
—Literary World.

‘All who are interested in Theosophy should read it.”—-Glasgow Herald.

“Mr. Sinnett scores some points against: his adversary, and his pamphlet
is to be followed by some memoirs of Madame Blavatsky, which may contain
further refutations. Madame Blavatsky herself appends to the pamphlet a
brief and indignant denial of the grave charges which have been made against
her.”’— Graphic.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

MR. REDWAY'S PUBLICATIONS 17

In crown 8v0, parchment. Price 38. 6d.
The

Anatomy of Tobacco;

Or, Smoking Methodised, Divided and Considered after
a New Fashion.

BY

LEOLINUS SILURIENSIS.

“A very clever and amusing parody of the metaphysical treatises once
in fashion. Every smoker will be pleased with this volume.”—Notes and
Queries.

“* We have here a most excellent piece of fooling, evidently from a Univer-
sity pen... . contains some very clever burlesques of classical modes of
writing, and a delicious parody of scholastic logic.”—Literary World.

“A delightful mock essay on the exoteric philosophy of the pipe and the
ipe bowl . . . . reminding one alternately of ‘Melancholy’ Burton and Herr
eufelsdrich, and implying vast reading and out-of-the-way culture on the

part of the author.”— Bookseller.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

In demy 8vo, with Illustrative Plates. Price lo. 6d.

Chirognomancy;

Or, Indications of Temperament and Aptitudes Manifested by
the Form and Texture of the Thumb and Fingers.
. BY
ROSA BAUGHAN.

“‘ Miss Baughan has already established her fame as a writer upon occult
subjects, and what she has to say is so very clear and so easily verified that it
comes with the weight of authority.” —Lady’s Pictorial.

“Ingenious and not uninteresting.” — The Queen.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN

18 MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS.

Annual subscription, payable in advance, post free, 58.

The East Anglian;

Ry

Notes and Queries

ON SUBJECTS CONNECTED WITH THE COUNTIES OF SUFFOLK:
CAMBRIDGE, ESSEX, AND NORFOLK.

Issued Monthly.
EDITED BY THE |

Rev. C. H. EVELYN WHITE, F.RB.Hist.8., Ipswich,
HONORARY SECRETARY OF THE SUFFOLK INSTITUTE OF ARCHEOLOGY AND
NATURAL HISTORY.

“ Antiquities are history defaced, or remnants that have escaped the ship-
wreck of time .... wiecks of history wherein the memory of things is almost
lost; or such particulars as industrious persons, with exact and scrupulous
diligence can anyway collect from genealogies, calendars, titles, inscriptions,
monuments, coins, names, etymologies, proverbs, traditions, archives, instru-
ments, fragments of private and public history, scattered passages, of books no
way historical, &c., by which means something is recovered from the deluge of
time. .... In this imperfect history no deficiency need be noted, it being of
its own nature imperfect.”—Lord Bacon, Advancement of Learning.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

In imperial 16mo, Dutch paper, cloth extra. Price 2s. 6d.

The Rueing of Gudrun,

And other Poems.
BY THE
Hon. Mrs. GREVILLE-NUGENT.

“It is clear from many exquisite passages that Mrs. Nugent, if she were
so minded and in earnest, might be a real poetess.”—Daily Jelegraph.

“ The writer touches the various chords of her lyre with no inexperienced
hand.”— Morning Post.

“Mrs. Greville-Nugent has succeeded very fairly well with her villanelles
and rondeaux, her triolets and sestines, her ballades and chante royal.”—
St. James's Gazette.

“‘Where she shows herself at her best is in the French forms of verse,
which exactly suit her talent.”—The Times.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS. 19

In preparation.

THE PLAYS OF GEORGE COLMAN THE YOUNGER.

EEE

The Comedies and Farces

OF
GEORGE COLMAN THE YOUNGER.

Now first collected and carefully reprinted from the Original
Editions, with Annotations and Critical and
Bibliographical Preface,

BY
RICHARD HERNE SHEPHERD.

In Two Volumes.

“Mr. R. H. Shepherd is engaged in collecting and reprinting, with a
critical and biographical introduction and annotations, the-dramatic works of
George Colman the younger, which will shortly be published in two volumes
by Mr. Redway, of York Street. Most of them were issued in Colman’s life.
time in pamphlet form, but many have, nevertheless, become scarce, and of
those which, like the ‘ Heir-at-Law,’ ‘ Johu Bull,’ and ‘The Poor Gentleman’
have held the stage, the text has become more or less corrupted. Considering
the great popularity of Colman’s plays, the spirit and humour of their scenes,
and their association with the names of great actors in the past, it is a curious
fact that Mr. Shepherd’s publication, though it appears more than a century
after the production of the earliest of Colman’s pieces on the stage, will be the
first collected edition. It will comprise, of course, the suppressed preface to
‘The Iron Chest,’ in which Colman made his famous personal aitack upon
John Kemble.”— Daily News.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

20 MR. REDWAY’'S PUBLICATIONS.

An édition de luxe, in demy 18mo. Price 1s.

Confessions of an English
Hachish Eater.

“There is a sort of bizarre attraction in this fantastic little book, with its
weird, unhealthy imaginations.” — Whitehall Review.

“‘ Imagination or some other faculty plays marvellous freaks in this little
book.”—Lloyd’s Weekly.

“A charmingly written and not less charmingly printed little volume. The
anonymous author describes his experiences in language which for picturesque-

ness is worthy to rank with De Quincey’s celebrated sketch of the English
Opium Eater.”—Lincolnshire Chronicle.

‘“‘A weird little book . . . . The author seems to have been delighted with
his dreams, and . . . . carefully explains how hachish may be made from the
resin of the common hemp plant.”— Daily Chronicle.

“To be added to the literature of what is, after all, a very undesirabl
subject. Weak minds may generate a morbid curiosity if stimulated in this
direction.”— Bradford Observer.

“ The stories told by our author have a decidedly Oriental flavour, and we
would not be surprised if some foolish individuals did endeavour to procure

some of the drug, with a view to experience the sensation described by the
writer of this clever brochure.” —Edinburgh Courant.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

Monthly, One Shilling.

Walford’s Antiquarian:
A Magazine und Bibliographical Review.
EDITED BY

EDWARD WALFORD, M.A.
*,* Volumes I. to [X., Now Ready, price 88. 6d. each.

“The excellent archwological monthly.”—Cassell’s Art and Literatere.

“This magazine is dear to the hearts of the lovers of antiquities. The
meetings of the various learned societies are also described . . . . and a number
of articles of both antiquarian and bibliographical interest.”—Nonconforsnist.

“There is not much in Walford’s Antiquarian that any connoisseur in
literary curiosities would care to pass over.” —S¢. James’s Garette.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS. 21

Monthly, 2s.; Yearly Subscription, 20s.

The Theosophist.

A Magazine of Oriental Philosophy, Art, Literature, and
Occultism.

CONDUCTED BY
H. P. BLAVATSKY.
Vols. I. to VII. Now Ready.

=

“Theosophy has suddenly risen to importance... .. The movement
implied by the term Theosophy is one that cannot be adequately explained in
a few words .... those interested in the movement, which is not to be
confounded with spiritualism, will find means of gratifying their curiosity by
procuring the back numbers of The Theosophist and a very remarkable book
called Isis Unveiled, by Madame Blavatsky.”—Literary World.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

NEW WORK BY JOHN H. INGRAM.

The Raven.

BY
EDGAR ALLAN POE.
With Historical and Literary Commentary. By Jonn H. Inaram.
Crown 8vo, parchment, gilt top, uncut, price 6a.

“ This is an interesting monograph on Poe’s famous poem. First comes
the poet’s own account of the genesis of the poem, with a criticism, in which
Mr. Ingram declines, very properly, we think, to accept the history as entirely
genuine. Much curious information is collected in this essay. Then follows
the poem iteelf, with the various readings, and then its after-history ; and after
these ‘ Isadore,’ by Albert Pike, a composition which undoubtedly suggested
the idea of ‘The Raven’ to its author. Several translations are given, two in
French, one in prose, the other in rhymed verse; besides extracts from others,
two in German and one in Latin. But perhaps the most interesting chapter
in the book is that on the ‘ Fabrications.’”—The Spectator.

“There is no more reliable authority on the subject of Edgar Allan Poe than
Mr. John H. Ingram ... . the volume is well printed and tastefully bound
in spotless vellum, and will prove to be a work of the greatest interest to all
students of English and American literature.”—The Publisher’s Circular.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN,

22 MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS.

Now ready, at all Booksellers’, and at Smith's Railway Bookstals.
Popular Edition, price 2s. 6d.

Burma:
AS IT WAS, AS IT IS, AND AS IT WILL BE-

BY

I@ SCOTT.

Crown 8vo, cloth.

“ Before going to help to govern them, Mr. Scott has once more writtrr n
the Burmese .. .. Mr. Scott claims to have covered the whole grouna, to
show Burma as it was, is, and will be; and as there is nobody competent to
criticise him except himself, we shall not presume to say how far he has suc-
ceeded. What, however, may be asserted with absolute confidence is, that he
i written a bright, readable, and useful book.”’—Saturday Review,

arch 27.

“Very lively and readable.’’—Pall Mall Gazette.
‘The author knows what he writes about.”—St. Stephen's Review.
‘‘ There is a good deal of curious reading in the book.” —Literary World.

‘“‘The book is amusing and instructing, and Mr. George Redway, the
publisher, will have done the public and himself a service.”— Court Journal.

“ The print is clear, and the binding in excellent taste.”— Bookseller.
“ Evidently fall of genuine information.”— Society.
‘“‘A handy guide to Burma, as readable as it is accurate.” — Globe.

“Mr. Scott should have called this volume ‘ A book for Members of Parlia-
ment.’ ”"—London and China Telegraph.

** The sketch of Burmese cosmogony and mythology is very interesting.” —
Nature. '

‘‘ A competent historian. He sketches Burma and the Burmans with minute
fidelity.” — Daily Chronicle.

‘Probably no Englishman knows Burma better than Mr. J. G. Scott.”—
Contemporary Review.

“« An excellent description both of land and people.” — Contemporary Review.

“ Most interesting.” —St. James’s Gazette.

“‘Shway yoe is a graphic writer . . . . no one can supply this information
better than Mr. Scott.” —Asiatic Quarterly Review.

GEORGE REDWAY. YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS. 23

Just published, handsomely printed and tastefully bound, 436 pages
large crown 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d.

Essays in the Study of Folk-.
songs.

BY THE

COUNTESS EVELYN MARTINENGO-CESARESCO.

“A pleasant volume on a pleasant topic. ,... The Countess, with her
sincere enthusiasm for what is simple, passionate, and sensuous in folk-song,
and with her lucid and unaffected style, well understands the mode in which
the educated collector should approach the shy singers or story-tellers of
Europe. .... Her introduction is perhaps, to the scientific student of popular
culture, the best part of her book.... . Next to her introduction, perhaps
her article on ‘ Death in Folk-Poetry’ is the most serviceable essay in the
volume. ...- ‘Folk Lullabies’ is perhaps the most pleasant of the remaining
essays in the admirable volume, a volume remarkable for knowledge, sympathy,
ard good taste.”—Extracts from a page notice in the Saturday Review,
April 24, 1886.

“‘This is a very delightful book, full of information and thoughtful sugges-
tions. It deals principally with the Folk-songs of Southern peoples, Venetian,
Sicilian, Armenian, Provence, and Greek Songs of Calabria, but there are
several essays devoted to the general characteristics of Folk-Poetry, such as
the influence of Nature, the Inspiration of Death, the idea of fate, the nume-
rous songs connected with the rites of May, Folk-Lullabies, and Folk-Dirges.
There is also an interesting essay on what is called the White Paternoster and
Children’s Rhyming Prayers. This is one of the most valuable, and certain]
one of the most interesting, books which has been written on a subject whic
has of late years been exciting an ever-increasing attention, and which in-
volves many important problems connected with the early history of the
human race.””—Standard.

“*Folk-Songs,’ traditional popular ballads, are as tempting to me as
King Charles’s head to Mr. Dick. But interesting as the topic of the origin
and diffusion and literary merit of these poems may be—poems much the same
in all European countries—they are rather caviure to the general. The Countess
Martinengo-Cesaresco is, or should be, a well-known authority among special
students of this branch of literature, to whom I heartily commend her

Essays in the Study of Folk-Songs.’ The Countess is, perhaps, most
familiar with Southern volksleider, as of Greece, Italy, and Sicily. Her book
is a treasure house of Folk-lore of various kinds. and the matter is handled
with much poetic appreciation and a good deal of learning.”—Daily News.

“A kind of popular introduction to the study of Folk-lore.”—St. James’s

Gazette.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

24 MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS.

EBENEZER JONES'S POEMS

In post 8vo, cloth, old style. Price 5s.
Studies of Sensation and Event.

Poems by EBENEZER JonEs.

Edited, Prefaced, and Annotated by Richarp HernE SHEPHERD.

With Memorial Notices of the Author by Sumner JonEs
and W. J. Linton.

A new Edition. With Photographic Portrait of the Poet.

“This remarkable poet affords nearly the most striking instance of neglected
genius in our modern school of poetry. His poems are full of vivid disurderly
power.”—-D. G. Ross&rri.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

In demy 8vo, elegantly printed on Dutch hand-made paper, and
bound in parchment-paper cover. Price 1s.

The Scope and Charm of
Antiquarian Study.

JOHN BATTY, F.R.Hist.8.,

MEMBER OF THE YORKSHIRE ARCHROLOGICAL AND TOPOGRAPHICAL
ASSOCIATION.

“It forms a useful and entertaining guide to a beginner in historical
researches.”— Notes and Queries.

“The author has laid it before the public in a most inviting, intelligent,
and intelligible form, and offers every incentive to the age in every de
ment, including Ancient Records, Manorial Court-Rolls, Heraldry, Painted
Glasa, Mural Paintings, Pottery, Church Bells, Numismatics, Folk-Lore, &., to
each of which the attention of the student is directed. The pamphlet is printed
on a beautiful modern antique paper, appropriate to the subject of the work.” —
Brighton Examiner.

“Mr. Batty, who is one of those folks Mr. Dobson styles ‘ gleaners after
time,’ has clearly and concisely summed up, in the space of a few pages, all the
various objects which may legitimately be considered to come within the scope
of antiquarian study.”—Ac :

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS. 5

A few large paper coptes, with India proof portrait, in imperial 8vo,
parchment. Price 7s. 6d.

An

Essay on the Genius of George
Cruikshank.

BY

“THETA” (WILLIAM MAKEPEACE THACKERAY).

With all the Original Woodcut Illustrations, a New Portrait
of CrurksHaNnk, etched by PaittHorps, and a Prefatory Note
on THACKERAY as AN Art Critic, by W. E. Caunrcu, Secretary
of the Urban Club.

“‘Thackeray’s essay ‘On the Genius of George Cruikshank,’ reprinted from
the Westminster Review, is a piece of work well calculated to drive a critic of
these days to despair. How inimitable is its touch! At once familiar and
clegant, serious and humorous, enthusiastically appreciative, and yet just and
clear-sighted ; but above all, what the French call personnel. It is nét the
impersonnel reviewer who is going through his paces .... it is Thackeray
talking to us as few can talk—talking with apparent carelessness, even ram-
blingly, but never losing the thread of his discourse or saying a word too much,
nor ever missing a point which may help to elucidate his subject or enhance
the charm of his essay.....Mr. W. E. Church’s ata note on
‘Thackeray as an Art Critic’ is interesting and carefully compiled.”— West-
minster Review, Jan. 15th.

“As the original copy of the Westminster is now excessively rare, this
re-issue will, no doubt, be welcomed by collectors.”—Birmingham Daily
Mail.

‘Not only on account of the author, but of the object, we. must welcome
moet cordially this production. Every bookman knows Thackeray, and will
be glad to have this production of his which deals with art criticism—a subject
so peculiarly Thackeray’s own.” —The Antiquary.

“Tt was a pleasant and not untimely act to reprint this well-known delight-
ful essay . . . the artist could have found no other commentator so sympathetic
and discriminating. .... The new portrait of Cruikshank by F. W. Pailthorpe
is a clear, firm etching.’— The Artist.

——$—$—$——.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

" 96 MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS.

Edition limited to 500 copies, handsomely printed on anlhique paper
and tastefully bound. Price 7s. 6d.

THE ASTROLOGER’S GUIDE.
Anima Astrologiae;

OR, A
Guide for Astrologers.

Being the One Hundred and Forty-six Considerations of the

Astrologer, Gurpo Bonarvs, translated from the Latin by

Henry Coley, together with the choicest Aphorisms of the

Seven Segments of JERom Carpan, of Milan, edited by

William Lilly (1675); now first republished from the original
edition with Notes and Preface

BY
WILLIAM CHARLES ELDON SERJEANT.

“Mr. Serjeant deserves the thanks of all who are interested in astrology
for rescuing this important work from oblivion... .. The growing interest
in mystical science will lead to a revival of astrological study, and advanced
students will find this book an indispensable addition to their libraries. The
book is well got up and printed.” — Theosophist.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

In the Press.

Incidents in the Life of
Madame Blavatsky,

Compuey from Information supplied by her Relatives and
Friends,

AND EDITED BY
A. P. SINNETT.

With a Portrait reproduced from an Original Painting by
HERMANN SCHMIECHEN.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS. 27

To be published shortly, handsomely printed and bound in one vol.
Small demy 8vo, price 10s. 6d.

The Kabala Denudata

(Translated into English),
CONTAINING THE FOLLOWING BOOKS OF THE ZOHAR:—

1. The Book of Concealed Mystery.
2. The Greater Holy Assembly.
3. The Lesser Holy Assembly.

Collated with the original Hebrew and the Latin text of Knorr
de Rosenroth’s “ Kabala Denudata,”
BY

8. LIDDELL MACGREGOR MATHERS.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

Now ready. Price 1s.

Low Down:
Wayside Thoughts in Ballad and other Verse.

BY

TWO TRAMPS.

‘‘This is a collection of short pieces, most of which can fairly be con-
sidered poetry—no slight merit, as verses run just now. Some of the pieces
are singularly pathetic and mournful; others, though in serious guise, are
permeated by quaint humour ; and all of them are of considerable merit. From
the variety sd excellence of the contents of this bundle of poetical effusions,
it is likely to attract a great number of readers, and many passages in it are
particularly suitable for recitation.”—Army and Navy Gazette, Aug. 14, 1886.

“But ‘Low Down,’ as it is called, has the distinction of being multi-
coloured, each sheet of eight pages consisting of paper of a special hue. To
turn over the leaves is, in fact, to enjoy a sort of kaleidoscopic effect, a
glimpse of # literary rainbow. Moreover, to complete the peculiarity of the
thing, the various poems are printed, apparently at haphazard, in large or
small type, as the case may be. There are those, perhaps, who would take
such jokes too seriously, and bring them solemnly to the bar of taste, there
to be as solemnly condemned. But that is scarcely the right spirit in which
to regard them. There is room in life for the quaint and curious as well as for
the neat and elegant.” — The Globe.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

28 MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS.

In crown 8vo, cloth. Price 7s. 6d.
Theosophy, Religion, and

Occult Science.

BY

HENRY 8s. OLCOTT,

PRESIDENT OF THE THEOSOPHIOAL SOCIETY.

WITH GLOSSARY OF INDIAN TERMS AND INDEX.

“‘ This book, to which we can only allot an amount of space quite incom-
mensurate with its intrinsic interest, is one that will appeal to the prepared
student rather than to the general reader. To any one who has previously
made the acquaintance of such books as Mr. Sinnett’s ‘Occult World,’ and
‘Esoteric Buddhism,’ or has in other ways familiarised himself with the
doctrines of the so-called Theosophical Society or Brotherhood, these lectures
of Colonel Olcott’s will be rich in interest and suggestiveness. The American
officer is a person of undoubted social position and unblemished personal
reputation, and his main object is not to secure belief in the reality of any
* phenomena,’ not to win a barren reputation for himself as a thaumaturgist or
wonder-worker, but to win acceptance for one of the oldest philosophies of
nature and human life—a philosophy to which of late years the thinkers of the
West have been turning with noteworthy curiosity and interest. Of course,
should the genuineness of the phenomena in question be satisfactorily estab-
lished, there would undoubtedly be proof that the Eastern sages to whom
Colonel Olcott bears witness do possess a knowledge of the laws of tuc puysivas
universe far wider and more intimate than that which has been laboriously
acquired by the inductive science of the West; but the theosophy expounded
in this volume is at once a theology, a metaphysic, and a sociology, in which
mere marvels, as such, occupy a quite subordinate and unimportant position.
We cannot now discuss ite claims, and we will not pronounce any opinion apon
them ; we will only say that Colonel Olcott’s volume deserves and will repay
the study of all readers for whom the bye-ways of speculation have an
irresistible charm.” —Manchester Kraminer.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS. 29
Post free, price 3d.

The Literature of Occultism
and Archzology.

Being a Catalogue of Books ON SALE relating to

Ancient Worships.
Astrology.

Alchemy.

Animal Magnetism.
Anthropology.
Arabic.

Assassins.
Antiquities.

Ancient History.
Behmen and the Mystics.
Buddhism.
Clairvoyance.

Cabeiri.

China.

Coins.

Druids.

Dreams and Visions.
Divination.

Divining Rod.
Demonology.
Ethnology.

Egypt. _

Fascination.
Flagellants.
Freemasonry.
Folk-Lore.

Gnostics.

Gems.

Ghosts.

Hindus. [ Writing.
Hieroglyphics and Secret
Herbals.

Hermetic.

India and the Hindus.
Kabbala.

Koran.

Miracles.

Mirabilaries.

Magic and Magicians.
Mysteries.

Mithraic Worship.
Mesmerism.
Mythology.
Metaphysics.
Mysticism.
Neo-platonism.
Orientalia.

Obelisks.

Oraeles.

Occult Sciences.
Philology.

Persian.

Parsees.

Philosophy.
Physiognomy.
Palmistry and Handwriting.
Phrenology.
Psychoneurology.
Psychometry.

Prophets.

Rosicrucians.

Round Towers.
Rabbinical.

2 ipl nereat (and Quakers.
Skeptics, Jesuits, Christians,
Sibylis.

Symbolism.

Serpent Worship.
Secret Societies.
Somnambulism.
Travels.

Tombs.

Theosophical.

Theology and Criticism.
Witchcraft.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

30 MR. REDWAY'S PUBLICATIONS.
Quarterly, 1s. 6d. Annual subscription, 5s. .
Northamptonshire Notes and

Queries.

An illustrated quarterly journal devoted to the Antiquities,
Family History, Traditions, Parochial Records, Folk-
Lore, Ancient Customs, &c., of the County.

EDITED BY

The Rev. W. D. SWEETING, M.A.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

The Mysteries of Magic;

The Writings of Eliphas Levi.
WITH BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAY

BY
ARTHUR EDWARD WAITE.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

In demy 8vo, wrappered, uncut for binding, with Extra Portrait.
Price 5s.

‘ep hiz”’ (Hablot Knight Browne) :

A Memoir ; including a Selection from his Correspondence and
Notes on his Principal Works. By Frep. G. Kirton.

With a Portrait and numerous Illustrations.

Ge A few copies only remain.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS. 31

1 vol., crown 8vo, 400 pages, 6s.

A Regular Pickle:

How He Sowed his Wild Oats.
HENRY W. NESFIELD.

‘* Mr. Nesfield’s name as an author is established on such a pleasantly sound
foundation that it is a recognised fact that, in taking up a book written by him,
the reader is in for a delightful half-hour, during which his risible and humonur-
ous faculties will be pleasantly stimulated. The history of young Archibald
Highton Tregauntly, whose fortunes we follow from the cradle to when expe-
rience is just beginning to teach him a few wholesome lessons, is as smart and
brisk as it is possible to be.”— Whitehall Review.

“It will be matter for regret if the brisk and lively style of Mr. Nesfield,
who at times reminds us of LEveR, should blind nad to the downright
wickedness of such a perverted career as is here described.” Daily Chronicle,

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

In post 8v0, with numerous plates coloured by hand.
Price 7s. 6d.

Geometrical Psychology;
OR,
The Science of Representation.
Being the Theories and Diagrams of B. W. Berrs

EXPLAINED BY
LOUISA 8S. COOK.

‘“« His attempt (B. W. Betts’) seems to have taken a similar direction to
that of George Boole in logic, with the difference that, whereas Boole’s expres-
sion of the Laws of Thought is algebraic, Betts expresses mind-growth geome-
trically ; that is to say, his growth-formule are expressed in numerical series,
of which each can be pictured to the eye in a corresponding curve. When the
series are thus represented, they are found to resemble the forms of leaves and
flowers.”—Extract from “‘ Symbolic Methods of Study,” by Mary Boole.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

(= MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS. |
TW REAKISTIC NOVEL.
mdsomely bound. Price 6s.

Leicester:

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY.
BY
\ FRANCIS W.

L/ADAMS.

re would find it hard to beat Mr.
e grimly mninate narrative of Leicester’s
t to get a living when he is discarded

= Even M. Zola and Mr. George
Adams’s description of Rosy’ sdeathy
schoolboy roubles and of his atte

by his is, too, of such a cter as to make one regret that Mr.
Adams had Wot put to be use his undoubted, though undisciplined,
powers.” — The

er in ‘ Leicester.’ > — The A thenaum.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

In post 4to. Illustrated with Engravinge on Wood.
ASTROLOGY THEOLOGIZED.

The Spiritual a hae of

Astrology and Holy rit.
A Treatise upon the Influence of tht Stars on Man,
and on the Art of Ruling’them by the
Law of Grace.

, Reprivrep yrom THE ORIGINAL oF 1649.
ve With a Prefatory Essay on Bible Hermeneutics.

BY
ANNA KINGSFORD
(Doctor of Medicine of the Paris Faculty).

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS. 33

Small 4to, with Illustrations, bound in vegetable parchment.
Price 108. 6d.

The Virgin of the World.

HERMES MERCURIUS TRISMEGISTUS.

A Treatise on INITIATIONS, or ASCLEPIOS; the DEFI-
NITIONS of ASCLEPIOS; FRAGMENTS of the
WRITINGS OF HERMES.

TRANSLATED AND EDITED BY THE AUTHORS OF “THE PERFECT
WAY.”

With an introduction to “ The Virgin of the World” by A. K.,
and an Essay on “ The Hermetic Books” by E. M.

“It will be a most interesting study for every occultist to compare the
doctrines of the ancient Hermetic philosophy with the teaching of the Vedantic
and Buddhist systems of religious thought. The famous books of Hermes
seem to occupy, with reference to the Egyptian religion, the same position
which the Upanishads occupy in Aryan religious literature.” —The Theosophist,
November, 1885.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

The Path:

A magazine devoted to the Brotherhood of Humanity, Theosophy
in America, and the Study of Occult Science, Philosophy,
and Aryan literature.

EDITED BY
WILLIAM Q. JUDGE.

(Published under the auspices of The Aryan Theosophical
Society of New York.)

Monthly. Subscription, 10s. per annum.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

84 MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS.

In preparation. In large crown 8vo.

sea Songs and River Rhymes.

A Selection of English Verse, from Chaucer to Swinhurne.

EDITED BY
Mrs. DAVENPORT ADAMS.

With Etchings by Mackaness.

This is a Collection of Poems and Passages by English
Writers on the subject of the Sea and Rivers, and covers the
whole of the ground between Spenser and Tennyson. It includes
numerous copyright Poems, for the reproduction of which the
author and publishers have given their permission.

“Mrs. W. Davenport Adams, who has produced many charming volumes
of verse, has nearly ready ‘‘Sea Songs and River Rhymes.” Mrs. Adams is

sure to prepare an interesting work, for she displays considerable industry,
coupled with sound scholarship and a cultivated taste.— Wakaefleld Free Press.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

NEWLY-DISCOVERED POEM BY CHARLES LAMB.

Ee

Beauty and the Beast ;

A Rough Outside with a Gentle Heart.

By Cuaries Lams. Now first reprinted from the Original
Edition of 1811, with Preface and Notes

BY
RICHARD HERBNE SHEPHERD.
On ty 100 Corres PrinteEp.
Fcap. 8vo, printed on handsome paper at the Chiswick Press, and

bound in parchment by Burn to form a companion volume to
“ Tamerlane.” Price 10s. 6d.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS. 35

In emall 8v0, handsomely printed on antique paper, and tastefully
: bound. Price 2s. 6d.

Pope Joan

(THE FEMALE POPE).

A Historical Study. Translated from the Greek of Emmanuel
Rhoidis, with Preface by

CHARLES HASTENGS COLLETTS.

** When Dr. Déllinger wrote to the effect that ‘the subject of Pope Joan
has not yet lost interest,’ he said no more than the truth. The probability is
that the topic will always have ite attractions for the lovers of the curiosities
of history. Mr. Baring-Gould has declared that ‘the whole story of Pope
Joan is fabulous, and rests on not a single historical foundation ;’ but others
are not so firmly convinced in the matter, and at ull times there are those
who are anxious to investigate sin traditions. To the two latter classes
the little monograph on ‘Pope Joan,’ written by Emmanuel Rhoidis, edited
with a preface by Mr. C. H. Collette, and published by Mr. Redway, will be
very acceptable. The author discusses the topic with much learning and
ingenuity, and Mr. Collette’s introduction is full of information.”— Globe,

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN,

Sphinx:

Monateschrift fir die geschichtliche und experimentale Begrin-
dung der iibersinnlichen Weltanschauung auf monistischer
Grundlage herausgegeben von HussE SCHLEIDEN,

Dr. J. U.

le. 6d. monthly ; 128. per annum.

“We cordially recommend this magazine to all those of our readers who
are acquainted with the German language, as it promises to be ane of the best
extant periodicals treating of transcendental subjects.” —T4e Theosophist.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORE STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

36 MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS.

Transactions of the London
Lodge of the Theosophical
Society:

Nos. 1 and 2.—Out of print.

No. 3.—On the Higher Aspect of Theosophic Studies. By
Mou M. CHarresrsi.

No. 4.—A Synopsis of Baron Du Prel’s “Philosophie der
Mystik.” By Bertram KEIGHTLEY.

No. 5.—A Paper on Reincarnation. By Miss Arunpa.e.
And other Proceedings.

No. 6,—The Theosophical Movement. By A. P. Suvxerr.
No. 7.—The Higher Self. By A. P. Susnert.

No. 8.—The Theosophical Society and its Work. By Mourn
. CHATTERJI.

No. 9.—A Paper on Krishna. By Mourn: M. Cuartersi.
No. 10.—On Mesmerism. By A. P. Srxnert.

No. 11.—Theosophy in the Works of Richard Wagner. By
W. AsuTon ELLIS.
Nos. 3 to 11, and each succeeding number as issued, may be had,
price One Shilling.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

In the press.
MR. SWINBURNE’S NEW POEM.

A Word for the Navy.

ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE.
Edition limited to 250 copies, each numbered.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS. 37.

A few copies only remain of the following important work, by the
author of “‘ The Rosicrucians.”’

Phallicism:

Its connexion with the Rosicrucians and the Gnostics, and its
Foundation in Buddhism.
BY

HABGRAVE JENNINGS,
AUTHOR OF “THE ROSICRUCIANS.”

Demy 8x0, cloth.

“This book is written ad clerwm, and appeals to the scholar only, and not
to the multitude. It isa masterly and exhaustive account of that worship of
the creative powers of nature which, under various names, has prevailed among
all the nations of antiquity and of medieval times, alike in Egypt and India,
in Italy and Gaul, among the Israelites of old, and among the primitive
inhabitants of Great Britain and Ireland .. . . a most valuable auxiliary to
all who care to pursue such a subject of inquiry, a subject for which Mr,
Jennings is the better fitted on account of his long and intimate acquaintance
with the Rosicrucians, their tenots, and their practices.”—Astiquarian
Magazine and Bibliographer.

“* Unpleasant as this subject is, we are quite prepared to kgree that in it.
scientific aspect, as a form of human worship, it has considerable importance
-.... Mr. Jennings deals almost entirely with the subjective part of his
enquiry, and he has evidently made a considerable amount of research into the
literature of early religions. .... . He has produced something which is, at
all events, worth the attention of the student of comparative psychology.”—
Antiquary.

“This book . . . is profoundly learned, and gives evidence on each page
of deep thought, intense powers of research, clear and unmistakable reasoning,
and thorough mastership of the subject. The appendix also contains much
very curious matter which will interest those who desire to study the subject
under all its different aspects and bearings.” — Reliquary.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

38 MR. REDWAY’S PUBLICATIONS.

544 pages, crown 8vo, green cloth boards, price 7s. 6d. (Only 500
copies printed. ) |

Dickensiana.

A Bibliography of the Literature relating to Coartes Dickens
and his Writings.

Compiled by Frep. G. Krrron, author of “‘ Phiz’ (Hablét K.
Browne), a Memoir,” and “ John Leech, Artist and Humourist.”’
With a Portrait of “Boz,” from a Drawing by Samuen
LAURENCE.

“This book is honestly what it pretends to be, and nothing more. It is a
comprehensive catalogue of all the writings of Mr. Charles Dickens, and of a
pes quantity of books written about him. It also contains copious extracts
from reviews of his works and from sermons on his character. The criticisms
are so various, and some of them are so much at variance with others, thut the
reader of them can complain of nothing less than a lack of material on which
to form his judgment, if he has not formed it already, on the claim of Mr.
Dickens to occupy a front place in the rank of English classics. Assertions,
if not arguments, are multiplied on either side.”— Saturday Review. |

“Mr. Kitton’s task has obviously involved much labour and research, and
it has, on the whole, been very ably performed.”—Scotsman.

“The labour involved in the preparation of such a volume is, of course,
enormous, but all Dickens students and collectors will thank Mr. Kitton for
his work. The volume contains a finely-executed portrait of Dickens, from a
drawing by Samuel Laurence.”— Graphic.

“*It is a very full and delightful book ; for open it at any page, and you are
almost certain to come upon some interesting fact or fancy, the thought of a
man of genius, or an incident bearing on a memorable life and its work.”’—
St. James’s Gazette.

“‘ A great deal that relates in numberless ways to the best known and most
loved of English humourists will be found in this volume, certainly the most
comprehensive that has yet essayed to illustrate his popularity from every
personal and critical point of view.”"—-Datly Telegraph.

“ Mr. Fred. G. Kitton .. . . has done his work with remarkable thorough.
ness, and consequently with real success. It is a subject on which I may
fairly claim to speak, and I may say that all that 1 know, and a great deal I did
not know, about Dickens is to be found in Mr. Kitton’s work.” —*“ Atlas,” in

the World.
‘“* DICKENSIANA.”
“If, with your Dickens-lore you'd make

Considerable headway,

The way to be well-read ’s to take
This book brought out by REDWAY.

Tis clear, exhaustive, and compact,
Both well-arranged and written ;

A mine of anecdote and fact,
Compiled by F. G. KITTON.”—Punchk.

GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN,

INDEX.

PAGE
Astrology Theologised ... nee ae
Anatomy of Tobacco _ we S

Fs
SERBVREGK

‘Adama, Mrs. Davenport aes
Arundale, Miss... oe seu
Baughan, Rosa seo eee eee 8, 14,
Blavatsky, pS Oe eee ei. * wee AG

Burma eee eee eee eee
Batty, John ese eco eee eee
Bonatus

Browne, HabiittK. 2.
Betts, B. W. wis ase ae
Beauty and the Beast 1. se ane

Chir eee eee eee ees
Cosmo de’ M ict eee eee ese see
Curate’s Wife (The) sie wes “a
Colman’s

Confessions chan B Englsh Hachish wali

Church, WE. am

Ber SHERRRBESES SaSSEBRs

ty
ra
bs]
if
eh

had ng: Le » Major-General J. G. / ae

Foll’Songe Rua tee ab | (vase

Bk te

Gibb, EJ.W. ee a
Greville-Nugent, Hon. Mrs. bas -. 18

Hints to Collectors .. ais wo. 5, 8
Hubbe-Schleiden, J. ve ses ave 3S

Ingram, John ae . : 21
Incidents in Life. of H. P. Blavatsky | 26
6

Johnson,C.P.  ... shee Dy
Joues, Ebenezer ... Ses = wo. 24
= a i eure sie bes — coe «24
udge, W. Q. ae sae «92 eo. 83
Jennings, Roae sie sine we 37
ore dalge e Bi sek. eee “ee ee 3B
eee see e008 13, 30, 38
Kent "Charles Sie: 06 an a |
Kabala Denudata .. wie “sade, SBT
Kingsford, Mrs. Anna, M.D. as

Lamb.. ee eee oes ees eee see 34
Leech .. see eos aee eee 18
Linton, W. J. see ees eee eee 2A,

Toolince Siluriensis =. 2. oy

. Tamerlane ... aa

PAGR
Low Down
Literature of Occultism and Archaology
Leicester...

ee0 pee ee

29
32
Marchant, W.T.... «.. - 9
Martinengo- Cesaresco, Countess .. 2
Mathers, 8 “ae M. is, eee cee
Maitland, des wales, Une Sten 1D
Machen, E. see aes eee eve 10
Magic 10
Mountainecring Below the "‘Snow- Line... 1

Mysteries of Magic...  ... se sw. 30

eee eee eee eee 36
Necteld, H.W. ... -
Northamptonshire Notes and Quories «. wis

Occult World Phenomena bie -- 16
Oloott, H. s. eee eee
Occultiem and Archaology | eae aes

aia of Ale eee eee eee ese 9

30

Sea Songs and River Bh 34
ca Songs iver ymes

Shepherd, R. H. 34
Swinburne Bibliography of Mea hn,
Sithron is aes aes «. 12
Scott, J. G. woe 622
Studies Sensation ‘and Event . coe 24
Serjeant, W.C. Eldon... .. ... 36
28

8

21

27

pitta TB ake tad aatas Occult eens
Ld gacesentores ; (The) see eee

+3 eee eee eae
ito Tracie = fe
Transactions L. L. T. Ss. . woe . 36
Thackeray ... ie see oo. =, 6, 25

8

United see aes bie re

Valley of Sorek ..0  .. once
Virgin of the World ... 2 wun 3S

Walford’s Antiquarian ... coe ee 20
Lerisms a3
White, ri H. Evelyn ie. oats - 18

Waite, A. E. a ec 280
Word tor £ the Navy... .. .. 38

Digitized by Google

\ np
S|

Digitized by Google
