The Holy Kabbalah (A. E. Waite, 1929; public domain)
===============================================================================
Waite's massive historical study of the secret tradition in Israel — the standard English survey of Christian kabbalah in the early 20th century. Source: Internet Archive.

an

.

83

Sa

NAS x

EAinen Suis
yeh
SpA NSS

Su NSS

SRS :
x SERA ER
oes 0 ‘eS ah eS
sa) SE
SAN .

SS aR c

Na

SR SRE ON rae ‘ ; . 3 ets

of =
EA

me > SRE SSN ;
Ted " Seb >
SN aes ek 3 SS ; ANI
Nes X .
Sain : x
Stace
RoE
RAE
SS Soh BAN
SS . SS
~ Ss

Sea

ROS SON DRIGIS
SENOS SS “t : RIS ;

ve

Ns
Ae
aN ~

mine

aes

2h
DORA
‘ SSS SONS

WH
x

Sa

Soto
pears
Loy)

| <n OF PRINDE iy.

vv wy
JUN 26 1929
Leu batas SEW"

sft

i

Al
i)
4

pe beniios

4

THE HOLY KABBALAH

-

e

WORKS ON THE SECRET TRADITION

By ArtHUR EpwarpD WAITE

_ Tue Secret TRADITION IN ALCHEMY: its Development and Records.
Royal 8vo, pp. xxii + 415. Kegan Paul, Trench, Tribner & Co.,
Ltd.

THE BROTHERHOOD OF THE Rosy Cross, Being Records of the House of
the Holy Spirit in its Inward and Outward History. With 16 full-
page plates. Demy 8vo, pp. xxili +649. Rider & Co.

THe Secret DocrrRIneE IN Israzt. With Four Illustrations. Demy
8vo, pp. xvi + 330. Out of print and incorporated with the present
work.

THE SECRET TRADITION IN FREEMASONRY and an Analysis of the Inter-
Relation between the Craft and the High Grades in Respect of their
Term of Research. With full-page plates and many other illustra-
tions. Demy 4to, 2 vols., pp. xxxvi + 418 and viii + 447.
Out of print.

THE HippEN CuHuRCH OF THE Hoty GRAAL, its Legends and Symbolism,
considered in their Affinity with certain Mysteries of Initiation and
other Traces of a Secret Tradition in Christian Times. Demy 8vo,
pp. xix + 714. Out of print.

THE SECRET TRADITION IN GoETIA: The Book of Ceremonial Magic.
With numerous illustrations. Demy 4to, pp. xxxvi + 338. Out
of print.

StupiEs IN Mysticism and certain Aspects of the Secret Tradition in
Christian Times. Demy 8vo, pp. xii + 348. Out of print.

THE DocrrinE AND LITERATURE OF THE KasBALAH. Demy 8vo,
pp. xx + 508. Out of print and incorporated with the present work.

ae.
ae bh
hg

“ulli{\\\
aby \

WHITE : HEAD
JEHOVA a Ac ELOHIM

y

some
poo | seventy GEBURAH

ny) GLORY |HOD

MALKUTH

THE SACRED TREE OF THE SEPHIROTH

Frontts piece

“a
A. E. WAITE

THE HOLY KABBALAH

A Study of the Secret Tradition
in Israel
as unfolded by Sons of the Doctrine
for the Benefit and Consolation
of the Elect dispersed through
the Lands and Ages of
The Greater
Exile

He Pork
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

4929

PUBLISHED IN MCMXXIX
MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
BY THE WHITEFRIARS PRESS, LTD.
LONDON AND
TONBRIDGE

PREFACE

Few educated persons, and certainly none belonging to
the class of students for which this work is designed more
especially, will require to be told that the Kabbalah is a form
of Esoteric Philosophy, that it makes for itself a high claim,
ot that this claim has been admitted, from time to time, by
petsons who ate entitled to our consideration. Nor will it
be needful to state that the literature called Kabbalistic rose up
among the Jews during the Christian centuries which suc-
ceeded their dispersal and the destruction of their Holy City.
It offers a strong contrast to the sacred scriptures of Israel,
which ate dire&, beautiful and simple, while Kabbalism is
involved, obscure and even repellent occasionally, as regards
its outward form. The Bible is in focus with humanity ;
the Kabbalah is distorted out of all correspondence with the
simple senses, and we must grind our intellectual lenses with
exceeding care if we would bring it into perspective.

From whatever point of view it may be approached, the
Kabbalah is, however, of importance: it connects with other
literatures which are included like itself under the general
denomination of mystical, and there is a sense in which it has
been thought, in its highest development, to stand at the head
of all. It is part of the history of philosophy, and as such it
entered once into the thought of Europe. It is responsible
in its degeneration for all that strange tissue of symbolism and
procedure which made up the Ceremonial and Philosophical
Magic of the fourteenth to the seventeenth centuries; at
a comparatively late period it entered into the story of
Alchemy ; it tin@ured many of those conventional practices
and beliefs which are called superstitious in our loose fashion
of words, and the guise in which we know them is very often
a Kabbalistic guise. Were it possible to suppose for a moment
that behind Magic, behind Alchemy and Astrology there were
any mystery of real knowledge, then it would be entitled to
peculiar respect, at least by the hypothesis of some of its
defenders, because it is through this seemingly impassable

Vv

vi PREFACE

literature that—in their view—the road to the secret lies. It
is, however, on the theosophical side and as a contribution
to the thought of the past on problems of life and mind that
its appeal—if any—-will be found at the present day.

A comprehensive account of the Kabbalah, on the surface
expository and historical, but seeking to establish its con-
neGtions with other forms of alleged Secret Tradition, to
determine its influence and importance from more than one
standpoint, and to shew forth its contribution to the sacred
science of the soul, are the design of the present work, in
which regard has been paid also to the limitations and requite-
ments of English readers—in other words, of those un-
acquainted with the languages, dead and living, in which
Kabbalistic literature has been, with few exceptions, available
heretofore. The subje& has been classed as abstruse and
was presented by early expositors after a highly technical
fashion: in this case there is no antecedent knowledge
assumed in the reader. It is to be understood otherwise that
this work has been written by a Christian Mystic and chiefly
for the use of mystics; in offering materials for their judg-
ment, it indicates also the lines of those conclusions to which
the writer leans, and seeks to enforce some of them. It has
been preceded in England by only two books dealing dire@ly
with the subject; one is the slight but not inconsiderable
essay of Dr. Ginsburg,! which is critical rather than descrip-
tive, and is, on the whole, hostile in its tendency. The
second is by S. L. MacGregor Mathers, but is mainly trans-
lation and commentary from Latin sources, and, in addition
to other limitations, embraces only a minute portion of an
extensive literature. The present comprehensive account
fulfils a distiné&t purpose and,it is hoped,may be held to occupy
a vacant place from which there is a wide prospe@, by no
means deficient in consequence for those even who ate not
mystics, for the student of philosophy and history, and for the
cutious in paths of literature which the elder D7Israeli,
despite the bias of his birthright, forebore to enter.

1 Tue KaspataH. By C.D. Ginsburg. London, 1865.

2 THe KasspaLan UNVEILED, containing the following books of the Zohar: 1. THe
Book oF CONCEALED MysTEry; 2. THE GREATER Hoty AssEMBLY; 3. THE LESSER
Hoty AssEmBLy, Translated into English from the Latin version of Knorr von
Rosenroth, and collated with the original Chaldee and Hebrew Text. By S. L.
MacGregor Mathers, London, 1887. The Commentary is partly that of Rosenroth,
and partly the work of the translator. A new impression was published in 1926.
I believe also that the essay of Dr. ‘(Ginsburg has been reissued in America.

PREFACE vii

The rumour of a great literature which had subsisted—
ex hypothesi—from time immemorial in Jewry may not have
been heard of first through a signal piece of good fortune
which befell Picus de Mirandula in the fifteenth century, when
he purchased, from an unknown Israelite, certain strange
codices in manuscript; but nothing which came into his
hands and proved to be a treasure of the past was likely to lie
unnoticed on his own part; while this artist of the schools
was a trumpet of fame for anything announced by his voice
during the brilliant, too few years that he carried the quest of
learning and the proof of his attainments from place to place
in Europe. He was himself the pupil in Jewish Theosophy
of Elias del Medigo, who filled a chair at Padua and wrote
two treatises at the instance of Picus, one being on the In-
telle& and on Prophecy, in 1481-82, which seems to have
remained unprinted and was written in Hebrew, like its com-
panion Dz SussrantiA Oras, the work of 1485; but this
appeared at Basle in 1629. It was edited also with a com-
mentaty by Isaac Reggio and so republished at Vienna in
1833.

Picus de Mirandula was in some sense a critic of his day,
for he wrote upon the vanity of Astrology ; but it was by no
means a petiod which debated the authenticity of works
referred to antiquity either by repute or by the simple audacity
of claim, while it was still less concerned with polemics on
questions of authorship. I believe that I have mentioned
elsewhere how perilous it would have seemed then to have
entered such a field of research. To deny in the particular
case that, e.g., the ZoHAR—which is pre-eminently the chief
text of Kabbalism—embodies the actual discourses of Rabbi
Simeon ben Yohai might have beena prologue to impeaching
the authotship of the Pentateuch—by which I mean that it
would have opened such a vast speculative horizon that one
might have suggested the other.

There came a time, and it was not far away, when the
treasute of Picus was questioned, when people began to
distinguish between. a false and a true Zonar, the first as the
work of one Moses de Leon, belonging to the late 13th cen-
tury, and the second as something undemonstrable in respect
of age and value. The distinction remains at a high point in
the world of speculation, because no one has met with the
second ; and it might not be worth while to mention it in the

viii PREFACE

present place, but it gives an opportunity of stating that the
manuscripts purchased by Picus represented the identical
work which has been known for six centuries and over under
the name of SrpHER Ha Zowar. An index of the codices
acquired by him was published in 1651 by the French biblio-
erapher Gaffarel,1 and in the only full translation of the
ZOHAR into a living language * its instalments are appended
to the various sections. There are innumerable mistaken
teferences, but the index reflects the text ; what is missing in
items referred to one section may be found sometimes in
another ; and though the pains of Gaffarel can in no wise be
called representative as an attempted summary—it is not even
the shadow—thete is no question that the treasures of Picus
ate those which we know under the distinctive name of ZoHar.
There is no alternative text, and the differentiation given above
is a supposition which can deceive no one.®

The contribution of Picus de Mirandula to the knowledge
of the ZoHaAR in Europe does not exceed to any considerable
extent the simple fact of its existence. His Latin thesis on
the subject cannot be termed representative, nor can anything
else from his pen. It remains that he was the first Christian
into whose hands the work came in any guise whatsoever,
and it seems to have been that authoritative form which was
represented later on by the Cremona and Mantua editions.*
We may never know under what circumstances these were
produced at their several dates,® and so far as I and others
have been able to trace the bibliography of Kabbalism, it does

1 Jacobus Gaffarel: Copicum CABBALISTA EORUM MANUSCRIPTORUM QUIBUS EST
usus Joannes Picus, Comes Mirandulanus, INDEx, 1651.

2 SepHER Ha Zowar (Le Livre de la Splendeur) Dottrine Essotérique des Israéhites.
Traduit pour la premiére fous sur le texte chaldaique. . . . par Jean de Pauly, 6 vols., 1906-
1QII.

. Curiously enough, the report has reached us through Richard Simon, the well-
known author of Hist. CririquE DU Vizux TESTAMENT. See G.C. Sommer : SPECIMEN
THEOLOGIZ SoHARICA. It is of course within possibility that the Statement mentioned
above does not question the claims of the work published long after at Mantua and
Cremona, but indicates that there was a false ZoHaAR circulated by Moses de Leon and
presumably now unknown.

4 The edition of Mantua appeared in 1558 and that of Cremona almost coincidentally
—1558-G6o. ‘The latter is called bibliographically the GREAT ZOHAR because it contains
certain traéts and fragments which are not found in the Mantua edition, whence the
latter has been named the Lirrtz Zonar. Other editions are those of Dublin, 1623 ;
Amsterdam, 1714 and 1805; Constantinople, 1736; and Venice, with the date of
which I am unacquainted.

5 The Mantua edition appeared under the auspices of R. Meir ben Ephraim de
Patavio and R. Jacob ben Napthali de Gazulo. See Julius Bartolocci: MAGNA
BIBLIOTHECA RABBINICA, vol. iv, p. 416, col. 2, published at Rome in 1693. They
were, however, the printers merely. See Ib., p. 15, col. 2.

PREFACE ‘ ix

not appear that there is any earlier codex in manuscript. As
he was the first to see the volumes, so Picus was the first to
discern in the Zour that it incorporated various elements
which have been held capable of a Christian construction—
whatever its value.t I shall deal with them at the close of the
present study, when there will be something to say on the
fact that the Christian predisposition of which Mirandula may
be called the prototype became—almost without exception—
the predisposition, the dedication indeed, of the /teratz who
followed him, up to and including those who have translated
and edited the French text. Picus passed away in his youth ?
ot there are indications which lend colour to the possible
realisation of his great dream that the Latin Pontificate itself,
in the person of Pope Julius, might have lent an ear to his
eloquence and done something to approach Israel from the
standpoint of Christianity in Kabbalism.®

Well, it was after this manner that the work began to be
known in Europe, and there passed something like a century
away, after which the next name to our purpose is that of
William Postel. It was he who translated the SEPHER
YETZIRAH—or Book oF Formation—for the first time into
Latin, and thus introduced to the curious and learned of
Europe the root of all Kabbalism concerning the dorine of
the SEPHIROTH, the powers and virtues of the twenty-two
Hebrew letters and the mystery which resides in numbers. I
must not say that THe Boox or Formation is like that
legendaty grain of mustard which grows into a vast tree,
because the ZowaR is in no sense its development, except in
so far as letters and numerations are concerned ; but it ranks
as the primitive text of accepted Kabbalistic doétrine in
Israel, and the contribution of Postel to our knowledge—
minute as it is—seems much mote to our purpose than the
detached and almost sporadic CONCLUSIONES KABBALISTIC Of

1 See his Heprapium, a sevenfold exposition concerning the six days of Genesis.—
OPERA, 1572.

2 He died at Florence in 1492.

3 The points of correspondence observed by Picus de Mirandula led him to infer
that the Zowar contains : (1) The Do@rine of the Holy Trinity, (2) The Fall of the
Angels, (3) Original sin, understood as the Fall of Man, (4) The necessity of tedemp-
tion, (5) The Incarnation of the Divine Word. With certain reserves in respect of the
Trinity, and what is to be understood by redemption, these doétrines ate not only to
be found in the text, but are of continued recurrence therein, and yet the most sur-
prising thing about the work, having regard to its period of origin, is the comparatively
slight tin€ture that it has received from the Christianity in the midst of which it originated
and developed.

= PREFACE

Picus. Postel is credited by tradition with a translation of
the SrEpHER Ha Zonar which would be a rare treasure, had
it ever come into existence or been maintained therein. I
do not know how or with whom the attractive story arose,
but twenty years since it took a very strong hold on the mind
of French students and there was a great research after it,
terminating as might have been expected. ‘There is, however,
rather more basis for the quest than mere legend, as it is
impossible to read Postel’s most memorable work, called
Ciavis ABSCONDITORUM, without inferring that he must have
been acquainted with the text, and might therefore, by bare
possibility, have undertaken such a task.2 It speaks of the
Soul of the Mediator as the first creature of God and the Law,
the Reconciler of the universe, referred to the Szpuira Brnan,
which titles and which local habitation ate those of Shekinah,
accotding to the ZoHar.* This is by no means the only
direction in which Postel conne&s with the chief text of the
Secret Tradition in Israel, but it is sufficient at this point to
have established the fact without enlarging thereon.

Between the period of Mirandula and that of William
Postel there are, as we shall see, the names of Cornelius
Agrippa and Paracelsus ; but the first connects more especially
with the practical Kabbalah so called, with powers of Divine
Names, mysteries of numbers, doctrines of angels and demons,
drawn for the most part from sources other than the ZoHAR ;
while in respe& of the second his use of the word Kabbalah
has no connection with any monopoly of Jewry.

Contemporary with Postel there was John Reuchlin or
Cadmion, who dedicated his three books entitled DE ArTE
CaBALISTICA to Leo X. His work may be best described as a
Study of Messianic doétrine, the objeé&t of which was to shew
that He who was expected by Israel had already come. Iam
not aually certain, but I believe that he was the first to
affirm that the Hebrew name of Jesus was formed of the

1 Picus de Mirandula also is said to have caused the ZoHar to be ttanslated into
- Latin, or alternatively a Latin version was one of the manuscripts which came into his
possession by purchase from the unknown Jew. .

2 The legend of a Latin version is recurrent. A French gentleman of Lyons is
supposed to have putchased a copy in 1890, paying many thousands of francs, and a
translation is also ascribed to Gui de Viterbi. There is nothing improbable in the
notion that the text may have been so tendered, and.may be in hiding somewhete,
though I do not set much value on the Lyons story.

’ Later Kabbalism regarded ApAm Kapmon, the Lesser Countenance of Zoharic
symbolism, as the pre-existent soul of Messiah. It was also the Word in CHoxMan.

PREFACE: xi

consonants of Jehovah = min with the addition of the
sacred letter SHin = miwn'—z.e. Jeheshuah.1 He quotes a
large number of Zoharic writers on Kabbalism, but does not
mention the Zowar, at least by name.? Reuchlin wrote also
Dr Verso Mriririco. Belonging to the same period as
Reuchlin there was Petrus Galatinus, an Italian convert from
Jewry, the author of Dz Arcanis CaTHoLica& VERITATIS,®
drawn from the texts of Kabbalism into twelve great books
in the form of a debate between himself, a certain Hogostratin
—of whom I know nothing otherwise—and Reuchlin. It
is a work of much greater extent and more considerable
learning than the books of the last writer and it does mention
the Zouar, but without shewing much first-hand acquaint-
ance. ‘This also is a Study of Messianic dodtrine and is
masterly after its own kind.

A third name of importance is Paulus Ricctus who was
another Jewish convert to Christianity, but his work on
CELESTIAL AGRICULTURE * did not exercise any considerable
influence. He wrote also SrATERA PRUDENTUM on the Law
of Moses, Christ and the Gospel, but the work was con-
demned, and a number of other treatises, including one on
the doings of the Kabbalists, which appeared at Nuremberg
in 1523.

The purpose so far of these prefatory words has been to
indicate briefly the circumstances under which the chief text
of Kabbalism came to be known in Europe, and at a later

1 It should be observed that the Hebrew spelling is yyw».

2 There ate sevetal editions of both these works, and they are included in the
colleétion of Pistorius entitled, Artis CABALISTIC# SCRIPTORES, Tomus Primus, but
the second volume—if that was the limit intended—never appeared. This publication
belongs to the year 1587.

8 Petri Galatini: De Arcanis CarHoLtic# VeErtiratis, Lisrr XII, 1672. The
text in this edition is followed by Reuchlin: Dz Arre Casauistica. It is of course
a teprint, the work itself having been completed in 1516, according to its colophon.
An intermediate edition appeared in 1602. Those who can suffer its prolixity will not
be untepaid by its reading, even at this day. The analysis of contents in respeCt of
the twelve books is worth giving: (1) Treats of the Tatmup; (2) The Trinity of
Divine Persons ; (3) The Incarnation of the Son of God; (4) "The First Advent of
Messiah ; (5) The Jewish Argument that the Messiah has not come is confuted ;
(6) The Redemption of Mankind ; (7) The Blessed Virgin ; (8) MySteries concerning
the Messiah ; (9) Rejection of the Jews and Call of the Gentiles ; (10) The Institution
of the New Law; (11) The Passing of the Old Law; (12) The Second Advent.
Galatinus is supposed to have possessed a copy of the lost Tarcum of Jonathan Ben
Uzziel to the hagiographical books of the Old Testament—i.e. prophets, op. cét.,
Book L., c. 3

4 This is the first text given in the colleGtion of Pistorius: Artis CABALISTICA,
hoc est, Recondite Theologie et Philosophie Scriptorum Tomus I. Basle, 1587.
It is known usually as Artis CaBALISTICA SCRIPTORES.

xii PREFACE

stage the Christian students and exponents of the subje@ will
be considered in particular monographs. It is sufficient at
the moment to have established the fact that there was a
succession of Kabbalistic scholarship from the beginning,
outside Jewry, and that its early concern was to unfold the
Christian elements which it discovered in the Secret Do&rine
of Israel, above all in the ZoHar and in the Jewish literature
which arose therefrom.

To those who may apptoach the present work from
a philosophical and historical standpoint the presence of its
leading motive and its more especial appeal to a single class
of students will require some explanation. It was once, I
believe, suggested that since the first appearance of Dr.
Ginsbureg’s destructive criticism there has been no attention
paid among English scholars to the subject of the Kabbalah.
Within the region of research which has only a scholastic
horizon—whether metaphysical or historical—there was no
interest that calls for special mention at the period which
preceded that work immediately, and it is quite true that
there has been as little subsequently to its publication, but not
on account of Dr. Ginsburg’s criticism. There has been
always or, speaking exactly, since the days of Robert Fludd
and Thomas Vaughan, of Cudworth and the Cambridge
Platonists, a certain class of students for whom the claims
made by and on behalf of the Kabbalah have possessed
importance, and this class is possibly larger now than at any
date prior to 1865. It forms also intellectually a more con-
siderable body than the academical reader might be disposed
to imagine in the absence of particular acquaintance with the
literature by which it is represented. One is obliged to speak
of these students and thinkers under the designation of
theosophical or esoteric groups, though the phrase is inexa&
and has been used to describe persons who have little title to
consideration. A proscribed mode of thought is here, as in
other cases, identified with the lesser capacities that follow it,
and what was once an unpopular subject has been classed
according to the waste and drift which has collected about it.
But the class to which I have adverted does not in itself
desetve either ridicule or contempt: it is that which believes
in the perpetuation of a secret religious or more correétly
mystical Tradition from an early period of human history, and
this is not manifestly an absurd or unwarrantable consequence

PREFACE xiii

to draw from the study of religions undertaken in a compara-
tive sense. It is a question of evidence and should be left to
establish its values. Now, the Kabbalah is not only, as I have
said, the Secret Theosophy of Jewry, but it has been repre-
sented further to be the channel of such a Tradition as I have
just mentioned. It is therefore not merely reasonable to
suppose, but it is true as a fact, that to theosophists and
mystics, more than all, if not unto these exclusively, an
inquity like the present must appeal. Other interests are
accidental; their interest is vital. To determine the claims
of the Kabbalah as a department and perhaps inspiring centre
of Secret Dodrine is to determine that which is of most real
moment regarding it.

It is for this reason that I have been led to consider the
Kabbalah, not only as a mystic in the accepted sense, but from
the mystical standpoint, and to recur with a certain frequency
to the belief in a Secret Dodrine of Religion, as well as to
some other connected questions which need reconsideration
at the hands of those who hold them. If I have had in the
course of the inquiry to reduce various illusions to their
ptoper place in the realm of the fantastic, and have contracted
the sphere of what is called Mysticism within its proper
dimensions, I shall be justified, so far as regards my intention,
by those whom I have sought to disabuse. It remains to say
that from its nature the foundation of Mysticism cannot be
in so-called occult science or in occult philosophy, while it is
on the historical side alone that it connects with any traditions
of the past, popular or acroamatic.}

Now, it is to be understood above all that these volumes
ate not addressed to members of the Religion of Israel and—
at least in any primary sense—that they are not planned as a
contribution to scholarship, though it happens in the accident
of things that they are the first extended memorial of Kab-
balistic literature which has appeared in this country. They
ate patt of a scheme proposed long since to myself for an
exploration of the Secret Tradition in Christian Times and the
determination of that one question which matters about
Secret Tradition, as indeed about all other subjects of human

1 The reason is indicated by Schopenhauer, when he temarks on the astonishing
unanimity of mystics in all ages, unlike in everything except those principles which
constitute Mysticism, and yet not holding such principles as a seé clings to its tenets,
for they are not and can never be a se&.

xiv PREFACE

thought and inquiry. The question is whether on its surface
or somewhere down in its deeps, and even below the deeps,
there is any vestige of that great spiritual experiment which—
awaiting a more adequate or exact mode of definition—must
be called the Science of the Soul in God. Within historical
times it has been always in the world ; it is in the West as well
as in the East ; but it has been overlaid everywhere by heavy
veils of doétrine and practice which are particular to places
and times, to the psychological characteristics of different
races and peoples. It is of all things simple and single, which
notwithstanding it emerges everywhere in the mode of a
patticular complex on account of these accretions. Thus an
universal subje€t which does not belong to learning, in the
formal sense of this term, has become a matter of expert
teseatch on the one hand, while on the other it has been
represented as impossible of examination in a living and
plenary sense, except by ascetics, and, among these, usually by
those who are leading some kind of monastic or conventual
life, isolated from the world and its activities. ‘That which
has been planned and attempted in my several Studies of
Mysticism is a liberation of the subject from these old trammels,
while the variations of its outward forms have been con-
sidered in volumes devoted to the Secret Tradition, that
which is offered here to students of THEOsopHIA MAGNA
being a final revision and digest of my old books and mono-
graphs on MystrerruM Receprionis in the mind of Jewry.

It is delivered to the keeping of that scattered and
unincorporated brotherhood which is of my kindred in the
spirit, as a memorial of its understanding according to the
light of an individual Christian mystic and not that of Israel,
supposing that at this day of the world there were any teal
concern of Israel in these its records of the past, unless it be
in a few synagogues or ghettos of Croatia and Dalmatia. The
do&ttine of Tsure and the Mystery of Shekinah are the root
of my concern in Kabbalism. They are not of my con-
cern solely for that which they signified in a Theosophical
School of Jewry but for whatever may belong therein to the
life of Catholic Mysticism here and now. It is shewn that at
their best and highest the old Sons of the Do&rine were on a
quest which is also ours and that the experience which at
rate moments is felt in our deep of heart is no other than is
shadowed forth—sometimes a little dimly—in their obscure

PREFACE XV

records. ‘The part of us which abides in God and com-
municates the sense of the Eternal is that which in their own
vetidic dream belongs to ArziLuTH, the Supernal World, and
never leaves the Supernals. I think also that as some of
us, within our own measures, do now “know in part,”
awaiting “that which is perfect,” so also they—or some of
them—were not without an inward realisation of a great
reality which they expressed outwardly as the “Bond of
Union.”

It remains to say that while the age of the records is of large
consequence on the historical side and so has been considered
at length, the antiquity of Kabbalistic Tradition cannot be
an essence of the consideration, having regard to the purpose
set forth in these prefatory words. The implications of one’s
own standpoint must be acknowledged in the logic of things,
and the message of the texts at their highest is all in all for
me and not their date or authorship. The plays passing under
the name of Shakespeare would be no less immortal plays and
greatness of greatness in the world of literature, were it
proved beyond challenge to-morrow that they were written
by Bacon or a stableman of the Globe Tavern. So also if
SEPHER Ha ZoOHAR is not of time immemorial but belongs to
the 13th century, which almost certainly it does not in the
root-matter, my investigation is not Stultified. There remains
the question of values, the question of life and essence. If the
Tradition has warrants herein, seven hundred years will
suffice for its age at need. But if it has none, it can be a matter
of curious research only, supposing that it is seven thousand
years old. The myths of Babylon remain Babylonian myths
even if they are older than Genesis ; and if the strange Tale
of a Garden, with which Genesis opens, ‘holds something
within it which belongs to the spiritual deep, to the authentic
legends of the soul, it signifies little enough if the figurative
myth concerning the Fall of Man is a century or an age later
than the Boox orf THE DEAD.

A. E. WAITE.

ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS

PREFACE

The Kabbalah as Esoteric Philosophy—Origin in Christian Centuries—Importance
and Connections—Design of the present work—Its precursors in England—Kabbalistic
MSS. purchased by Picus de Mirandula—Their identity with the chief text of the
Secret Tradition in Israel—SzrHer Ha ZoHar—The Christian constru@tion which he
sought to place upon them—The SEPHER YETZIRAH and its translation by William
Postel—The Kabbalah and Cornelius Agrippa—John Reuchlin and Messianic Doétrine
in Kabbalism—Petrus Galatinus on the same subje€ét—Paulus Riccius on the Law of
Moses and the Law of Christ—How these writers sought to prove from Kabbalism
that the Christ had come—Motive of the study which follows—The students to whom
it appeals—The question of Secret Tradition—A Secret Do@rine of Religion—Vestiges
of a Great Spiritual Experiment—Records of a Theosophical School in Jewry—A
Preliminary Statement on the Age of the Records.

BOOK I
POST-CHRISTIAN LITERATURE OF THE JEWS

ARGUMENT

The literature of Kabbalism is mainly of historical interest for ordinary Students of
philosophy, while students of Scriptural exegesis will find therein a field of research
only into very curious extravagances of the human mind. It has a living interest only
for two classes, and firstly for those who believe (a) that a Secret Religious Tradition
has been perpetuated from the past; (b) that the literature in question has served as
one of its vehicles. It is customary to describe such persons as esoteric or occult
Students, because in most cases they are so denominated by themselves. One purpose
among others of this initial book is to shew that their equipment in respeét of textual
and other knowledge is not only insufficient to maintain the claim but is of a kind
which exposes it to ridicule in respet of the particular alleged vehicle in the sense
that their claim implies. Kabbalism, however, by its hypothesis is a Doétrine of
Religion transmitted in secret, though it does not contribute evidence for a Universal
Religious Tradition, and so far as it is concerned therefore the atuality or otherwise
of the latter remains an open question. The second class for whom Kabbalism
possesses a living interest is those who ate concerned, for what treason soever, with
the records of mystical experience in the union of the soul with God and believe that
the literature is a part of these records. The main obje& of the present inquiry is to
determine whether they are right.

PAGE

I; THe Hippen Cuyurcu oF IsRAEL . ; ; ‘ ° 3
II. Fouzres or Occuir ExeEGEsis é ; : : Pe eey
Ill. THe KaspBpaALAH AND THE TALMUD ; 7 : antag
ITV. Drvisions oF THE KABBALAH x 2 : ailing

HK, XVil b

jy xyul ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS

BOOK I

SOURCE AND AUTHORITY OF THE KABBALAH AND
THE AGE OF THE CHIEF TEXTS

1
ARGUMENT

The two chief cycles of Kabbalistic literature, in spite of destrutive criticism, ate
teferable to Talmudic-or early post-Talmudic times, as regards soutces and inspiration.
There seems indeed no reason why the Book or Formation should not derive from
~ R,. Akiba, as tradition affirms. ‘There is no real evidence in support of the theory that
R. Moses de Leon wrote the ZoHAR ort Book oF SPLENDOUR towatds the end of the
thirteenth century. At the same time the opinion of a few students, not too well
acctedited and not adequately equipped, that these works are of great antiquity or at
least pre-Christian must be set aside decisively. The attempts which refer the Kabbalah
in any dire€t manner to some prior theosophical system must be rejected also: it has
antecedents everywhete, but its analogies with other systems are explained mainly by
natural likeness between independent views on fundamental problems of being.
Antecedent Jewish influence through Aristobulus and Philo must not be overlooked,
but also it must not be exaggerated. The Kabbalah is sui geners. It has many accidental
connections, but fundamentally it is of and from within a school of thought in Jewry.
If there be any preponderance in a given direCtion, the records suggest that its wider
sphere of influence has been on Christian rather than on Jewish minds.

PAGE
I. DATE oF THE Book OF FORMATION P . ; Ch ba
IJ. MoprerNn CritTICIsM OF THE BOOK OF SPLENDOUR . Lng

II. THe Dare AND AUTHORSHIP OF THE BOOK OF SPLENDOUR . I

IV. THe Act or ZoHaric TRADITION : , : -) US
V. ALLEGED SOURCES OF KABBALiSTIC DOCTRINE j 5.) Cig
VI. Istamic CONNECTIONS OF THE KABBALAH : ‘ Hel TS
VII. INFLUENCE OF THE KABBALAH ON JEWRY . . #6 80

BOOK Il

THE WRITTEN WORD OF KABBALISM :
FIRST PERIOD

ARGUMENT

The subjeét-matters of Kabbalistic literature outside the SEPHER YETZIRAH, and ptior
to:the appearance of the Zona, are surveyed briefly, to indicate that there was a growth
of the Tradition and to corre& exaggerated notions concerning it. There ate various
old tra&ts which conne& with Kabbalism but are not regarded by some modern scholat-
ship as Kabbalistic in the technical sense. This is the case with the SEPHER YETZIRAH
itself; but there is no doubt that all such works laid claim upon oral knowledge
transmitted from the past, or that it was the elements of such Oral Tradition which
received developments subsequently from the commentators on SEPHER YETZIRAH,
as well as from the Zowar, and, at a much later period, from expositors of Zoharic
teaching. The attention of early Kabbalists was concentrated on the Boox oF ForMa-

ee ot ee

ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS xix

TION, and several elucidations of that work appeared between the eleventh and thirteenth
centuries, under notable names.

PAGE
J. Earty Kasparistic LITERATURE . . ‘ ‘ Hove?
IJ. THe Book oF ForRMATION . j : . ‘ expres
III. CoNNECTIONS AND DEPENDENCIES OF THE Book OF FORMA-
TION e e e ° e e e e e 103
BOOK IV

THE WRITTEN WORD OF KABBALISM :
SECOND PERIOD

ARGUMENT

The text-proper of the ZoHar and its numerous connections are examined in
successive sections, in order:to furnish a comprehensive notion of the materials incor-
porated by this composite work, prior to the study of its Doétrines at a later Stage in
detail. A certain prominence is given to their intimations from a mystical or theo-
sophical point of view.

PAGE

I. THe Boox or SPLENDOUR: ITS CONTENT AND DIvISIONS 115
Ii. THe Book oF CONCEALMENT . “ P : - 34
Il. THe Greatrer Hoty SyNop ; : : : ails se
IV. Tue Lesser Hoty Synop . ‘ ; ’ : - 146
V. THe Discours—E OF THE AGED MAN . : ’ . IAT
VI. THe Luminous Boox 4 : y 5 : 2 Te
VII. THe FarrHrut SHEPHERD . ‘ ; ‘ ‘ ESF
VUI. Hrppen THINGS oF THE Law . : ; . . 168
IX. THe Secret COMMENTARY . ‘ : : F - 167
X. Minor TRAcTS OF THE ZOHAR . ‘ : : wet t6G
A. The Omissions : ; : : ; rin tere

B. The Additions , , : . : ye RTO

C. Repetitions . ; : ; : : aia ye

D. The Secret of Secrets ; ‘ : : EAS £3

E. The Discourse of the Young Man . : Sth

F. The Mansions or Abodes ; : ; 2 AL ZS

G. The Commentary on Ruth k ‘ ; ee Sy |

XI. Tue ANcIENT AND LATER SUPPLEMENTS ° ° - 179

BOOK V

THE DOCTRINAL CONTENT OF THE KABBALAH IN
RESPECT OF GOD AND THE UNIVERSE

ARGUMENT
The Fundamental Dodtrines of the Kabbalah are shewn to be (1) A Philosophy of
the Absolute ; (2) The evolution of the universe in part by way of emanation and in
: b2

xx ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS

part by creative ats; (3) The distin@ion of the evolution into four worlds, the last
of which was brought into being by a process of making. The subsidiary Theosophies
conneéted with these subje&ts are (1) The contrast between God in Himself and God
as revealed to His people, that is, to finite intelligence ; (2) The sacramental nature of
the conventional symbols in which the human Logos is formulated ; (3) The way of
attainment in respect of human knowledge and wisdom in Divine Things.

PAGE

I. Tue Mayjzsty oF Gop IN KABBALISM . : ; ee
ITI. Tse TEN SEPHIROTH . 4 eae eae i hee a
QI. Tse Docrrine oF THE Four WorLps . ‘ : . 196
IV. THe Patus or WispomM AND GATES OF UNDERSTANDING. 213
V. THE Docrrinz oF CosMOLOGY  . ; : , 5 eee

BOOK VI
HIERARCHIES OF SPIRITUAL BEING

ARGUMENT

The Do@rine concerning the soul of man is of great importance in Kabbalism,
for man in reality is the centre about which the whole Tradition revolves. We mutt
have recourse to the great text of the Zonar for all vital intimations on the parts,
divisions or States of the human soul, its pre-existence and its destiny. ‘The develop-
ments thereof and the commentaries arising therefrom may be useful for occasional
tabulations, but they add nothing of living consequence. It is otherwise concerning
the Choirs of Angels and Kabbalistic Demonology: in the main they are of and
belonging to that Third Period of the Written Word which will be dealt with in
Book IX. The Zonar is casual and inchoate on these subjects, except regarding the
Fall of the Angels, which will be considered in a se€tion apart. The later Kabbalists
drew materials from the Tatmups to build up their formulated scheme of Celestial and
Infernal Hierarchies.

PAGE
I. Tue Sout InN KABBALISM " it y " " eas
II. ANGELS AND DEMONS . i : ‘ : : i Nat

BOOK VII
WAYS OF GOD WITH MAN

ARGUMENT

It is shewn that the Biblical Mythos concerning the Earthly Paradise is a Mystery of
Sex in the mind of the Secret Tradition. The Fall of the Angels connetts indire@ly
enough with this obscure subjeé, but it was responsible, ex hypothesi, for all uncleanness
subsequently on earth and in man. It comes about in this manner that the Fall of
Man belongs to the same Mystery, is developed as such at great length and with
numerous vatiations. The wickedness which was “ great upon the earth,” which
broke up “ the fountains of the great deep ” and opened “ the windows of heaven ”
in the Deluge Legend was an iniquity of sex aberration; and even the subsequent
sacrifice of Noah, “‘ a sweet savour ” to the Lord, was san¢tified and acceptable because
of its high intent respecting the Supreme MyStery. There is little need to dwell upon
the Covenant with Abraham in this conneG@ion; but the foundation of the whole
subje&t is said to abide therein. It is obvious also that the Law promulgated on Sinai
was not apart therefrom; but the history of Moses is itself a history of spiritual
espousals. When the time came for a House of the Lord to be built in Zion the Great
Mystery in its transcendence was illustrated by the presence of Shekinah in the Holy of
Holies, as a Bride in the abode of her Spouse. Finally, the Advent of Messiah, the
Divine Son of the Secret Tradition, the letter VAU in the Sacred Name of Four Letters,

ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS xxi

is to raise up her who is His Bride in exile and to prepare for the Sabbath of creation,

which is a period of true bridals. 4
PAGE

I. THe Myr or THe EARTHLY PARADISE 4 é oer

Il. THe SERPENT, SON OF THE MORNING, AND FALL OF THE
ANGEES 07/4 f : d : ‘ : a1 200
iI. THe Faty oF Man . : } : ‘ ‘ ray
IV. THe LEGEND OF THE DELUGE . ‘ : . sega
V. THE CovENANT WITH ABRAHAM : R : iGO
VI. Or Mossgs, THE MASTER OF THE LAW : , 4h yhO4
Vil. THe TEmMpLEs IN JERUSALEM ‘ : : ‘ ad y Bs
VIO. THE Cominc or MEssIAH . ‘ 4 / 4 226
IX. THE DocrrinE CONCERNING SHEOL . : ’ ait aed
X. CONCERNING RESURRECTION ’ : : , wiRg2

BOOK VII
THE HIGHER SECRET DOCTRINE
ARGUMENT

The Secret Do@tine of the Zowar concerning the Holy Shekinah is the Mystery
of Sex at its highest and she herself is the Mystery of the Oral Law. It is intimated
that behind this Mystery there appears to be an authentic doftrine of Knowledge,
based on experience. We are led on in this manner to a mote particular study of the
Mystery of Sex in the light of the Secret Tradition, and there is a sense in which it is
still a Study of Shekinah. It is suggested that there is or may be a Mystery of Human
oe ea behind it which has not been conceived by the heart of man in ordinary ways
of life.

PAGE
I. THe Mystery oF SHEKINAH . ‘ : ; ‘ SAV SAT
II. THe Mystery oF SEx . ‘ . ; ‘ : Bh 577

BOOK IX

THE WRITTEN WORD OF KABBALISM:
THIRD PERIOD

ARGUMENT

The growth of Kabbalistic literature is sketched in certain expository works or
commentaries on the ZoHarR and in some independent tra&ts which conne& with the
general Tradition. Two other works are chosen for separate consideration, being
one on the Mysteries of Love, because of its general diffusion, and one on the application
of Kabbalistic Apparatus to Alchemy, because of the credit which it has obtained in
the modern school of Hermetic students.

PAGE

I, Expostrors OF THE ZOHAR . ; , : ; - 409
A. Moses of Cordova. ; ; : q 2 EO

B.: Isaac: de Lotia. —: : ‘ : ‘ : ne

C. Napthali Hirtz . : : : ; ; eipy bie

D. Abraham Cohen Irira : , : : - 422

KE. Issachar ben Napthali . : : , . Tages

xxii ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS

PAGE

Il. THe Book or PuriryING Fire . ; ‘ ; eed

Il. Tue Mysrerres oF Love . ‘ : . : aoe

TV. Mrvnor LirERATURE OF KABBALISM ‘ . ‘ « PEtsz
BOOK X

SOME CHRISTIAN STUDENTS OF THE

KABBALAH
ARGUMENT

The opinion of certain modern writers—chiefly of Vi&torian days—that the Kabbalah
is a vehicle of a Secret Doétrine concerning Absolute Religion was never held in the
past, mote especially as it proves on examination not only to be utterly distin@ from
the claim of Israel in respe&t of its Secret Tradition but a spurious Liberal Religion or
qualified Natural Theology. Even those who ascribed the Kabbalah of old to a
Divine Source wete a€tuated chiefly by the notion that it was a disguised Christianity,
and in several cases their real concern was the conversion of Jewry by its presentation
from this standpoint. The chief Christian students of the subjeGts are reviewed in
succession to establish these fa€ts. Some minor misconceptions are corrected and some
extrinsic points of interest are developed in the course of the sketches.

PAGE

I. InrrRoDUCTORY , ; : is _ ; ee he

Ii. Raymunp Lutty . 4 ‘ ‘ ‘ . . 438
TiI. Picus DE MIRANDULA . : ; : ; Marge 3
IV. Cornetius AGRIPPA : : ; ; : ~ 452
V.. PARACELSUS: .. " ; ° " , SASS
VI. Joun REUCHLIN . : : A : : aye
VII. Wuii1am Poste, . : : : . ; a) (4G
VIII. THe Rosicructans . ‘ : , , ; « 465
IX. Roserr Fiupp | ; : : ; : sheila
X. Henry More é : ‘ : : : - 470
XI. THomAs VAUGHAN . ; : : : ‘ eh ATS
XII. KNorr VON ROSENROTH . : ‘ : : Les |:
XT. RatepH CupwortH : : : . : . 480
XIV. Tuomas Burnet. ; ‘ ; , ; Mee bod
XV. Satnt-MARTIN ‘ ; nn , ‘ ‘ . 486
XVI. Eurevas Livi A : ; : : ihe
XVII. Two AcCADEMICAL CRITICS i 2 : ; - 494
XVIII. THe Mopern ScHoot oF FRENCH KABBALISM . . 498
A. Papus : s ‘ ; : : . 500

B. Stanislas de Guait ; : , : wigs

C. Léon Meurin, S.J. : : : : VSS

XIX. THE KABBALAH AND EsoTERIC CHRISTIANITY . DESO?

XX. THE KasBBALAH AND MODERN THEOSOPHY. . . 510

ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS xxiii

BOOK XI

THE KABBALAH AND OTHER CHANNELS OF SECRET
TRADITION

ARGUMENT

Modern speculations on the part of believers have represented the alleged Secret
Sciences as vehicles of a Great Occult Tradition ; but the question lies beyond the
limits of the present inquity, which can estimate only the quality and extent of the
influence exetcised by Kabbalism on other departments of “‘ esoteric thought ”’ in the
West. It is found that this influence has been magnified. In the case of Ceremonial
Magic it has been unquestionably large, but very small in that of Alchemy and Astrology.
Freemasonry has been regarded also as a channel of Secret Tradition, but its connection
with Kabbalism is at once adventitious and slight. Among arts of divination, the
claims of certain picture-symbols, known as Tarot cards, have been presented as a Key
to. Kabbalistic Do&rine and Tradition; but they are dismissed for specific reasons.
As a conclusion to the subjeét of other Channels of Secret Tradition, the Do&rine of
Pute Mysticism is contrasted with that of Kabbalism, and the points reached by the
investigation are brought into a single focus.

PAGE

I. THe KaspaLaAn AND MaAGIc : 2 é : ake Bw
Il. THe KaspBpALAH AND ALCHEMY . ; . e534
Ill. THE KappaALAH AND ASTROLOGY . : : é ‘high ©
IV. THE KasBALAH AND FREEMASONRY , , ‘ Gy hs:
V. ‘THE KABBALAH AND THE TAROT . é : ‘ us 4
VI. THE KABBALAH AND MYSTICISM . ‘ : ; ee by)

BOOK XII
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS

ARGUMENT

A brief recurrence to developments of later Kabbalism introduces a study of recent
contributions to the scholarship of the whole subject and a word on its chief findings.
The question of Christian elements imbedded in the ZonHar as in a doétrinal system
is considered at some length and dismissed. There arises in fine the living question
whether and in what manner the Secret Doétrine of Israel can be held to affeét mystics
at the present day. It is surveyed in respect of that branch which deals with the
Mystery of Sex, but afterwards in that of the Do@rine that the soul comes forth from
God and that to God the soul returns. The conclusion is that Zoharic Kabbalism,
under the veils of its proper symbolism, offers a living message to those whom it
coficerns.

PAGE

I. DEVELOPMENTS OF LATER KABBALISM . : : ; ns 63

IJ. THe ALLEGED CHRISTIAN ELEMENTS . : ; ; Pov e:
III. ConcLuston ON JEWISH THEOSOPHY . : : : . 588

APPENDIX I

SEPHIROTIC DEVELOPMENTS . . ; : : . «| GO5

XXiV ANALYSIS OF CONTENTS

APPENDIX Ii

Tue Four Worips In LATER KABBALISM

APPENDIX Ill

Tue INSTRUMENTS OF CREATION

APPENDIX IV

DIVINE NAMES

APPENDIX V

PHASES OF THE SOUL .

INDEX

PAGE

617

619

ILLUSTRATIONS

PLATE I

THE SACRED TREE OF THE SEPHIROTH . ; Frontispiece

Shewing forth the emanation of the Divine Principles through the Four
Worlds of Kabbalism from their Hidden Source in Arn Sopu. This
diagram establishes a harmony between the text of the ZoHar proper,
the SEcRET Book, the GREAT AND Hoty AssEmMBLyY and the LrrrLtE Hoty
AssEMBLY. In its fundamental understanding, the full-length Human
Figure represents created or generated intelligence on the male side, from
which is produced the female side, originally latent therein, according to
the Legend of Paradise and the Zouar. ‘The female side is located in
Matxutn, because the Hz final of the Sacred Name, or Shekinah, came
down into manifestation on earth. She is the Path of Liberation for
those who ate born under the Written Law, and she symbolises that which
is within it, namely, the Traditional or Oral Law, through: which man
returns by realisation into Divine Union. In the State of the Restored
World Shekinah has ascended into TipHERETH.

FACING PAGE

PLATE Il

THE SEPHIROTIC SYSTEM ACCORDING TO LATER KABBALISM rg?

Reproduced from Athanasius Kircher: CEpreus Aicyrriacus, Tomus
Secundus, settion entitled CasaLa Hesra&orumM. It is described as
Iconismus totius Cabale summam continens.

PLATE WI

THE SEPHIROTH IN CIRCLES . : ; : : ; Se hee

Reproduced from Johannes Christophorus Steebius : Ca:tum SEPHIRO-
t1cuM, Mayence, 1679, and described as Schema antiquum Cali Sephirotici.

PLATE IV

SUMMARY OF THE CHRISTIAN KABBALAH : : . APoV S82

Reproduced from Heinrich Khunrath: AMPHITHEATRUM SAPIENTIA
ZETERN#, Hanover, 1609. It exhibits the Cosmic Christ encompassed
by the Ten SzpHrrotH and the Divine Names.

XKV

% 4 4 pW | od ae WT
CEN Oalhy ens

". ,
AP

"

COVER

BOOK I

POST-CHRISTIAN LITERATURE OF THE
JEWS, INCLUDING THE TALMUD

‘ ANY teh ES Sah Man Ms f f ay) f pete
ARO Se Ke ee ae aR
eee ria wi bes Ha OA ina os }

vo
By 8 i]

ieee lly Siglo iy piety
on Ee ‘= J ae ak vir
‘ he NS i) 4, Tha i

te)

3

Cay
it ‘i Be ta to
Aah i
J ; } ‘a

it
f

i
cS
ou
ith 1 Chae Fi

BOOK I

POST-CHRISTIAN LITERATURE OF
THE JEWS

I.—THE HIDDEN CHURCH OF ISRAEL

THE construction of the Exile placed by the “ Princes of
the Exile” upon the Sacred Oracles of ancient Israel cannot
be dismissed as unimportant. From the period of the dis-
persal of the Jews after the destruction of Jerusalem by
Vespasian down to our own times—the produ¢tive activities
of which lie far beyond the scope of this reference—Hebrew
literature has developed in many of the chief centres of
Europe ; but outside the scattered remnant of the Children
of the Covenant it has remained largely unknown. Many
petsons, not otherwise ill-informed, might be astonished to
discover that so far back as the end of the seventeenth century
there were nearly four thousand works! written in the
Hebrew tongue which were known individually and quoted
by one authority on rabbinical bibliography, namely, Julius
Bartolocci, of the Reformed Order of St. Bernard.2 Almost
every conceivable department of human learning and intel-
lectual activity is represented in this literature,? which, in
things secular as in things sacred, has the seal of the sanity
of Israel upon all its leaves. On the purely religious side, it
is otherwise an extremely cutious and in some respects a
profound literature, which translation has done little to make
known, which is represented incompletely enough even in

1 It is perhaps unnecessary to say that.they were for the most part in manuscript.

2 BrBLiorHECA MacnA RassinicA: De seriptoribus et scriptis rabbinicts, ordine
alphabetico Hebraice et Latine digeftis, aufiore D. Julio Bartoloccio de Cellerio, folio,
4 vols. Roma, 1678-1692. The work is paged from left to right, after the Hebrew
manner.

8 For one of the accessible colle@tions which give some idea of its variety, see the
CATALOGUE OF HEBRAICA AND JubDAIcA in the Library of the Corporation of the City
of London. With a Subje&t-Index by the Rev. A. Lowy. London, 1891.

3

4 THE HOLY KABBALAH

the great and authoritative text-books of Jewish history.
There is no need to add that its extent and its difficulties make
it a formidable subje€t of approach. It is, indeed, an un-
discovered countty, still awaiting its Columbus,! a land full of
wealth and mystery, of strange shrines and sanduaries shining
weitdly far away, through the darkness of our ignorance,
with a light which might recall the traditional radiance of

Shekinah, so foreign does it seem to that which enlightens
most men who ate born into the modern world.

_ Within this literature there is, so to speak, another and
Stranger literature included, the report of which has been
amongst us for several centuries, and in a certain way and
measure it must be admitted that it is known to some, but
chiefly because it has been made available by the fathers of
bibliographical erudition, the Latin-writing scholars of the
past. This storehouse of Hebrew Theosophy, for such it is,
has exercised a peculiar fascination on many gteat minds of
Christendom, and its Gentile students were at one time as
keen, if not as numerous as its Jewish disciples. It is called
the Kabbalah, of which term there has been more than one
explanation suggested in the credulous past by the makers of
ridiculous romance in etymology, and it seems worth while
to mention two of them in passing, as examples of the follies
which have encompassed the subject of research. The word
has been derived from the name of the Hindoo teacher
Kapila,? to whom a Philosophy of Numbers is ascribed,
seemingly on the slender ground that one branch of Kab-
balistic literature is connected with this subject. Another
fantastic suggestion makes the term an analogue of Cybele,?

1 The work-of Dr. Moritz Steinschneider, the German bibliographer-of rabbinical
literature, is the most important contribution to our knowledge which has been made
during comparatively recent years.

2‘C. W. Heckethorn made himself responsible for this view in an enlarged edition
of this very unequal and indeed negligible work on Szecrer SocrmriEs OF ALL AGES.
See vol. i. p. 83.

& The ia pbaaibiliey in this case rests with the late Edward Vaughan Kenealy, whose
anonymous Boox oF Gop and its sequels were quoted once upon a time by a certain
class of writers as if they carried seals of authority. Its philology is of the period of
Godfrey Higgins, of the author of Nrwrop and of Bryant’s ANcrENT MyrHo.oecy.
See Kenealy’s INrRoDUCTION TO THE APpocaALypsE OF ADAM-OANNES, p. 613. If
writers of this calibre, so-called occult “‘ authorities ” and old works belonging to the
field of research are mentioned here and there in these notes, the explanation is that I
know those whom I addtess. The student at large of things which are called mystical
may have sound titles to consideration in respect of sincerity and zeal, but he 1s like
the ViGorian student of secret arts and sciences, with a fatal tendency to accept bad
evidence and rely on exploded writers. It is desirable therefore to indicate, as occasion

THE HIDDEN CHURCH OF ISRAEL 5

the mythological Queen of Heaven, who is thus connected
with the Jewish personification of Wisdom under a female
aspect. As to the true derivation there is no room for un-
cettainty, and it possesses that simplicity which is so often a
warrant of truth in things of language as it has been said to
be in those of Nature and Art. The word comes from a
Hebrew root which signifies to receive. Kabbalah equals
reception.! The knowledge embodied in the literature which
passes under this title purports to have been transmitted orally
from generation to generation. The literature as it exists is
the Tradition put into writing, and in this form it has been
supposed by some other dreamers to be veiled—that is to say,
the meaning which appears on the surface is not the true
sense.”

The Kabbalah in any case claims to be the light of a Secret
Traditional Knowledge? preserved among the “chosen
people,” * and the subjects with which it is concerned, as might
be expected, are Sacred and Divine Subjects: they include the
most profound Mysteries of God and the Emanations of
Deity ; the celestial economy ; the process of creation; the
scheme of Providence in regard to man ; the communications
of God in revelation and to the just in his Church ; the offices
and ministries of good and evil angels; the nature and pre-
existence of the soul, its union with matter and its metem-
psychosis ; the mystery of sin and its penalties ; the Messiah,
His kingdom and His glory to be revealed; the state of the
soul after death and the resurrection of the dead, with occa-
sional, too rare but pregnant intimations on the union of the
soul and God. Hereof is the aspeét and this the part which
was conceived and unfolded sub specie eternitats. Here also,

arises, that such soutces ate wrong. Were my work addressed only to scholarship,
it is obvious that a different procedure would be followed herein.

1 In Hebrew it is nb9p. The ENcyctop@p1A PERTHENSIS obsetves that the word
is written also as Gabella, which is, of course, a nonsensical corruption, and would
not be worth noting if it were not true in fact that it occurs in this form among a few
old writers on Magic. See Encyc. Peru. iv. 543, 544.

2 ‘We shall see afterwards that this view is not so much to be received with caution
as to be rejefted utterly.

3 One of the titles ascribed to it was minnoi myon = Secret Wisdom; the
initials of these words gave another title, signifying Grace = jn. See Kitto:
eine ge oF Brexicat Lrrerature, s.v. Kabbalah. (Thitd edition, London,
1864.)

4 The recipients of this knowledge were termed MExxuxatim, a name which will
be familiar to the readers of the astrologer Gaffatel. On this point see the worthless
atticle, s.v. Kabbalah, in T. H. Blunt’s Dicrronary oF DocTRINAL AND HIsToRICAL
THEOLOGY. London, 1872. ;

6 THE HOLY KABBALAH

if anywhere, is the abiding part, rooted in everlasting values,
and the one voice among many voices of old Tradition which
bears a message from the past to the modern world.

It is needless to say that by a literature so considerable in its
capacity there are many other subjects embraced, but these
are the heads of an instruction, as 1 find them set forth in an
excerpt from a Latin epistle in the colleGtion of Baron von
Rosenroth.1 The Kabbalah, in a word, is the hidden thought
of Israel upon do&rines of Jewish Religion, which are in
many cases Christian do@rines, and upon the proper undet-
Standing of that Written Word which is referred to a Divine
Origin both in Christendom and Jewry. It is obvious there-
fore that in a general sense it might be expected to cast light
of a certain kind upon the problems of Christian faith; but
some of its expounders have held that it does this also in a
more special way ; that the New Testament and the writings
of the early Fathers of the Church did not only derive from
the inspired memorials of the First Covenant, but from the
construction placed on those memorials by this Esoteric
Tradition.

It may be said at once, and possibly for the relief of some
for whom this work is intended, that the question here out-
lined is not of my concern. There is no proposition to
elucidate official Christian do@rine, whether by the help of
Kabbalism or otherwise, nor to explore the Gospels and early
Patristic literature in the hope of discovering alleged vestiges
of Secret Jewish Theosophy. It has been suggested also that
Christ Himself testified to the existence of a Tradition * in
Israel and gave His judgment on its value; but if so—and

1 KaBBALA DENuDATA, seué Dottrina Hebreorum Transcendentalis e¢ Metaphysica, vol. i.
Apparatus in Librum Sohar, pars secunda, pp. 3-5. It should be said that the last clause
has been added by myself.

2 “Tt is apparent from the many similarities in this Kabbalistic philosophy to the
doétrines in the New Testament and early Patristic literature that both of the latter
most probably have had a common germ and origin in the esoteric teachings of the
Israelites, as well as in the more open and exoteric teachings of the Hebrew Holy
Writings.” Isaac Myer: THE PHILOSOPHICAL WRITINGS OF SOLOMON BEN YEHUDAH
IspN GeEBIROL, Philadelphia, 1888, 8vo, p. 7. This is cited as a point of view at its
value, for which no brief is held. The letter of St. Jerome to Marcella, which dwells
consecutively upon mysteries contained in the books of the Old and New Testaments,
has been regarded sometimes as a case in point. All that can be said, however, is
that it enumerates “‘ ten Names by which God is known among the Hebrews,” and
the sole Kabbalistic conneétion resides in the fact that ten Divine Names—not identical
throughout with those cited by St. Jerome—are allocated to the ten SepHtRoTH which
constitute the Tree of Life in Kabbalism.

3 “ Thus have ye made the commandment of God of none effeét by your tradition.” —
S. Matt., xv. 6.

THE HIDDEN CHURCH OF ISRAEL 7

for me it is more than doubtful—the purpose of the research
to come is by no means to determine whether the later
literature of Reception is to be included in the condemnation
of the Divine Rabbi. But these assurances lead up to the
point in view, and it is by this also that they are justified. A
Study of the Secret Dodtrine or of Theosophy in Israel, as it
is embodied in the Great Book of the Zowar and in other
texts of Kabbalism, might be made assuredly on one or other
of several plans; butas there can be no object in particularising
further those which it is not intended to adopt, it shall be
explained only that I have approached the subje& from that
point of view which is important to my own mind and in the
one way that is possible, having regard to the nature of the
work proposed. I have taken it as it is essentially, namely, a
Store-house of affirmed Secret Do@trine, and for the use of
Students of Secret Doctrine I design to present it, so to speak,
at first hand—in all its important aspects—for the purpose of
ascettaining—as already mentioned—whether it must remain
with us merely as an historical landmark, or whether it con-
veys an understanding of things which, when considered in
their true light, is of moment to us as mystics here and now.
To complete the circle of these preliminary remarks, I will
add that the plan thus outlined will be found in the outcome

to include all that is of importance in any alternative scheme,
for by the nature of the case there is no paramount do@rine
under the egis of the Old Covenant, no vital phase of Scrip-
tural Tradition and no large event in the history of Israel about
which we shall not learn in due course, and fully, the mind of
Kabbalistic Theosophy.

Thete is one thing more which it may seem well to make
clear as a point of fa@: it is not of my design to produce a
kind of prolegomenon which is intended to facilitate research
when readers have recourse to the texts themselves and their
developments. After due allowance has been made for the
prediletion and enthusiasms of a mystic who has taken the
business of the Secret Tradition into his heart of hearts, I shall
be glad if those whom I address will be content to believe on
my testimony that the ZoHAR—being the text in chief—is one
of the great books of the world, one also which stands alone
and is comparable to nothing save itself; but I have no
intention of recommending it to their particular and earnest
consideration at full length. In the French translation—

H.K. 4 Cc

8 THE HOLY KABBALAH

whatever the value thereof —it contains, roughly speaking,
about 1,250,000 words, distributed throughout six very large
volumes, and in the absence of a special dedication it will
prove frankly unreadable. I am embodying an account of its
essence on the great subjects of its concern—things which a
careful collation has lifted out of the mass of material. Beyond
these there is all the drift and scattermeal of rabbinical specu-
lations, like a vast waste beyond the garden of the wise, arid
as a field of quest, arbitrary beyond words as exegesis, out of
_ all reason as thesis and ridiculous at every turn and corner of
the streets of thought. I am confusing images or mixing
metaphors rather of set purpose, to produce the kind of effect
which is fitting to the kind of subject.. If the ZoHar may be
likened otherwise to a temple of learning, then for ordinaty
critical minds the words inscribed on its porch are: “‘ Aban-
don hope, all ye who enter here.”

In attempting to educe from the body-general of the
records that root-matter of Secret Doétrine which they claim
to embody, we are brought quickly to a pause by the fact not
merely of many inconsistencies characteristic of the text-major
at large in a variety of lesser respects, but of the obvious
manner in which the great ingarnering seems continually at
issue with itself over mattets of prime importance. It is easy
to allow for those cases—and they are comparatively few—in
which the doctors correct one another, whether or not they
reach an agreement subsequently in the course of their long
debates ; but we ate confronted with irtremediable variation
over cleat issues in the fontal source itself, while to establish
those which distinguish this source from its subsequent

1 Tt should be said that the value has been challenged and the translator himself
placed in a lurid light, from the standpoint of Israel, by certain Jewish critics. It will
be sufficient for most of my readers to consult the strictures and references of Dr.
Robert Eisler in THE QuEst quarterly review, vol. xxiv. ; but there may be mentioned
also the hostile judgment of Dr. Gerhard Scholem, who is reader in Talmudic and
Kabbalah at the Jewish University in Jerusalem. The translator of the ZoHar was
a Jew who turned Christian and the consequent bias may have coloured the rendering
of certain passages and exaggerated their Christian aspects ; but the question is whether
the version at large—all faults, wilful and otherwise, notwithstanding—is or is not
sufficiently representative of its original—if even by way of paraphtase—and that it is,
or appears to be, seems indicated by the faét that it is quoted at need even by those whose
voice has been tfaised against it, e.g., by Paul Vulliaud, La Kassate Jurve, 2 vols.,
1923. Like these, “ we must even be content with what we have,” until a better is
offered. The Zonar is a most obscure text, and no translation is likely to escape
ctiticism. For an historical example we may remember the animadvetsions of German
scholarship on Adolphe Franck’s rendering of certain Zoharic excerpts. In 1913 Dr.
Abelson said that De Pauly’s translation was indispensable, as the only complete one
yet attempted: JewisH Mysticism, p.179. ‘That is the exa& position.

THE HIDDEN CHURCH OF ISRAEL 9

developments in the mind of later Kabbalism would demand
the research of years. .[ mention these points only to indicate
my intention to find—-as we move forward—a middle way,
wherever possible, between statements that exclude one
another, even if in the last resource we must recognise that the
Secret Doétrine issues in a mystery in all directions because
there is no place at which it enters into expression fully, so
that the adequate materials are never in our hands. When
things appear mutually or commonly exclusive, it will be
little to our purpose if we decide that one of them seems to
have a preferential claim; but we may get to our term if we
can find a point of coincidence between the things which they
tend to intimate, though they are scarcely expressed by any.

According to the form of another school of symbolism, I
will proceed now to open the Lodge of Research by affirming
that I am approaching the Holy Kabbalah from a standpoint
heretofore unattempted in the history of all its criticism, so
that I am as usual without precedents, while I am also without
any specific intention of creating them.* The remark is in a
sense helpful, because those who are in favour of established
ways and notions can take their proper warning before they
go further. And again, in so far as it is possible, I should
wish to exclude from the auditorium those who understand
Scientia Kabbaliftica as an att of making, consecrating and using
talismans and amulets, as a magical mystery concerning the
power of Divine Names, or as source and authentication of
Gtimoires and Ceremonial Rituals of Evocation. I can tell
them at least that they will be saved from disappointment if
they go elsewhere for enlightenment : here is no guide to the
perplexed in the paths of occult arts. I mention this matter
because there is a debased Kabbalism, improperly so called,
which deals in these putative mysteries and clatms some roots
in the past, as if it belonged to the authentic Tradition of
proper everywhere condemns Astrology, but the FarrHFuL SHEPHERD, a tract inserted
at different points of the text, acknowledges one of its root principles ——Z., Pt. II,
fol. 42a; III, 191. It should be observed that throughout these notes the reference
which follows immediately on, the Part and Folio of the Zorar is always and only to
the French translation, its particular volume-and page. ‘The Zowar teference is also
to the codex used by the translator, De Pauly, unless stated otherwise.

2 J do not refer here to what is sometimes called the Pra&tical Kabbalah, in which
ate included the artificial methods of GematTria, NOTARIKON and TEMuRA, which ate
principles of exegetical interpretation. The teader may consult W. Wynn Westcott :
AN INTRODUCTION TO THE KaBBALAH, 1910. These methods are old: about the

Magical Kabbalah, the antiquity must be left unsettled ; regarding its folly and iniquity
there is no question. |

C2

. IO THE HOLY KABBALAH

Israel when it is not even a teflection. The mind of the
ZOHAR on the subject of pretended ,occult sciences will be
shewn towards the end of this study, so that there may be no
mistake hereon at the term of quest. I mention it at this
initial stage, so that there may be no mistake now.

I have termed the present chapter THE H1pDEN CHURCH OF
IsRAEL, but it is not in the sense of suggesting that there was
any formal incorporation, much less that there were Secret
Religious Rites and Ceremonies in use among a company of
adepts; it was an entirely inward, spiritual and mystic
Church, for all purposes of which the official forms of the
external Holy Assembly would have been held to be of
sufficient efficacy, had the Temple, during the period when
the records came into existence, Stood at Jerusalem, as it did
in the days of old. One reason is * that the Secret Doétrine
was judged to be inseparable from the literal or written word ;
it was developed to deepen its meaning and extend its office,
but never to make it void within its own measures or in the
place to which it belonged.2 Our first task is therefore to
ascertain what is established in the great texts concerning the
fa& of Secret Do&rine ; and at some later stage subsequently
we must take in succession the chief points of intimation on
dodrine and religion in Jewry, so as to elicit the sense of that
Tradition respeGting each and all. Lastly, we must find—if
this indeed be possible whether the Tradition has a central
root from which the great tree of the concealed knowledge
has grown up; whether also—as I have said—and how far
we are concerned or perhaps even ate integrated therein as

1 At the same time we do meet with a number of occasional instances, the suggestion
of which is almost as if the colleagues formed a College of Initiates. Sometimes it
even lcoks as if there were almost a ceremonial manner of imparting Mysteries. See,
for exerrple, Z., Pt. I, fol. 133a; II, 124. Again, it is said that the MySteries are
guarded secretly in the hearts of those who possess them and communicated secretly
toeach other. Ib., fol. 96b; I, 55c. For further allusions, see éb., fol. 133a; II, 124 ;
ib., fol. 155b; Il, 212, shewing that what was known by one of the adepts was not
always familiar to another ; #b., Pt. II, fol. 8b; III, 6b; 2b., 14a; IL, 61; 2b., fol. 168a ;
LV; 116); 7b, Pt. IIT, fol. '187a 3Vs 489;

2 Tn illustration of this, there is one similitude which says that the Written Doétrine
is the candle or lamp, while the flame is the Oral Law.—Z.., Pt. I, fol. 166a; IV, 112.

8 ‘The thesis was that the written word of Scripture, in every passage and syllable,
was the word of the Living God. The meanings, however, wete many, but they are
usually reduced to three: (1) the historical sense, which corresponds to the Court of
the Temple; (2) the moral sense, which answers to the Holy Place; and (3) the
mystical sense, which is in analogy with the Holy of Holies.

4 It is perhaps just to myself if I add in this place that, since I am not concerned with
compilations as such, there would have been no excuse for the present work if I had
not satisfied myself: (x) that such a root exists, and (2) that its nature can be set forth
clearly. This has been implied already in several places.

THE HIDDEN CHURCH OF ISRAEL II

mystics at this day. I should add that while the last point is
obviously the most important and vital, it can be reached only
by the mediation of the two others.

The question is therefore as to the fact of the Secret Doctrine
and under what terms it is mentioned in the records. It is of
course, broadly and generally, a method of interpreting Scrip-
ture,! but so far as this expression is to be understood in an
ordinary sense—as an actual and logical construction of the
letter—the interpretation, as I have indicated already, is of no
value—for the most part, at least. It is to be taken or left in
the sense of its own motive, which is to establish, at any and
all cost, a Secret Do&trine on the foundation of the Old
Testament ; and in the light of this it signified little that the
Doétrine, in respect of exegesis, was arbitrary to the last
degree: one would scarcely expect it to be otherwise, having
regatd to the Rabbinical mind. The point in chief for our-
selves is that the mills of those lesser gods who are called Sons
of the Do&rine produced and polished great things in their
processes—pute and precious jewels of the spirit—as well as
much dust and scoria from the matter which they passed
through their hands. It is only as if casually that the word
interpretation * can be held to apply in any solid sense: the
Secret Do@rine is rather the sense below the sense which is
found in the literal word—as if one Story were written on the
obverse side of the parchment and another on the reverse side.
This is not an exact comparison, but it gives my meaning
clearly enough for the purpose. There are hard things said
from time to time about the outward sense and they must not
be taken too seriously, for the letter was always precious, if
only as a vesture ; but the difference between that which was

1 The symbolism of the Secret Do€trine is extra&ted also from Scriptural words and
phrases which antecedently seem far from the mark. The word “ waters,” as it is
used sometimes in the TALMupD, is said to signify the Secret Do@trine, and when David

‘cried: “‘ Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me ”
(Ps. li, 10), he was praying for his heart to be opened by the study of Divine Mysteries.
So also it is said: “ Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together into one

place” (Gen. i, 9). The waters refer to the Secret Doétrine, and the one place desig-
nates Israel, whose soul depends from that region to which Scripture alludes in the
wotds: “Blessed be the glory of the Lord from His place” (Ezek. iii, 12). The
“* Glory of the Lord ” signifies the Shekinah below and “‘ from His place ” signifies the
Shekinah above. . From this point of view, Shekinah is the Do&trine itself personified.

2 The canon of interpretation is often exceedingly simple : for example, any reference
to vegetation coming up out of the ground is explicable by symbolical vegetation, the

-one and the other being confused together, and either taken to explain the other.
In Ps. Ixxxv, 11, it is said that “ truth shall spring out of the earth,” and literal grass
is held therefore to signify truth.

_ x2 THE HOLY KABBALAH

within and without is well illustrated 1 by a similitude which
says that those who interpret Scripture according to the
literal sense set the Sacred King and His Bride upon an ass,
while those who understand it according to the mystic sense
mount them nobly on a horse.? This notwithstanding, the
two belong to one another, because the Written Law is com-
pleted by that which is traditional,® and the latter issues from
the former as woman was brought forth from man: it can
_ exist only in union with the Written Law, and this it serves to
enlighten—by the hypothesis at least. We shall see at the
proper time that chief among the root-do@rines is that
Jehovah is one with Elohim in a sense which is very far from
the theological understanding of Scripture ; but it is held also
that the Written Law is the image of Jehovah, as the Oral
Law is of Elohim, meaning the Holy Shekinah, from which it
would follow that at heart they are two aspects of one and the
same Law. ‘That which is oral is called the voice of the
turtle,t and it comes from the side of mercy ; it is also the
green wood, while the literal Law is the dry,* coming from
the side of judgment. But as a further instance of the unity
in both it is laid down that there are three things which are at
once hidden and revealed —being God, the Law and Israel
itself. ‘The vulgar man sees only the material side, but the
initiate discerns also that which is imbedded within it. In
virtue of this bond of union, we meet with intimations occa-
sionally in which terms are applied to the one that seem
referable rather ® to the other. It is said, for example, that
the written Law is above and that which is oral below, as also
that the former penetrates and fructifies the latter.’ That
which is without seems, however, to be clearly a manifestation

1 The Zouar gives another illustration when it says that the Oral Law enlightens
the Written Law. Z., Pt. II, fol. 23a; V, 61.

2 Z.,.ets U1, 275b ;. V1, 47.

3 The Written Law is designated in another place under the name of heaven, while
the Oral Law is called earth. On the surface this appears somewhat against the more
obvious sense and intention, but what is signified may be an obscure counterchange in
virtue of cortespondences between things above and below, and this is a recurring
Zoharic do&trine.—Ib., Pt. I, fol. 247b; Hl, 578.

“ Zig Pti AL; fol. 4b 3. Ni9.

5 Ib., fol. 27b, and V, 76.

6 According to the rabbi in Longfellow’s GoLpEN LEGEND, all Bible lore is water
and MisHNA is a strong wine; but according to the Zonar, it is the Written Law
which is wine ; the Oral, however, is not water but milk. I conclude that the one is
the lesser, the other is the greater salvation, according to the voice of the Dodtrine.
See Z., Pt. I, fol. 240a; Il, 549.

7 Z., Pt. Il, fol. 200a ; IV, 200; also Z., Pt. II, fol. 206a and IV, 208.

THE HIDDEN CHURCH OF ISRAEL 13

of that which is within, though there is a sense also in which
the Law was regarded as written on high; but this I should
understand to signify that the Oral Law passes into expression
here and into realisation there. To conclude upon these
analogies : the manifested part bears no comparison with that
which is contained within; that which is essential is called
the Soul of Scripture ; the commandments are its body and
the tales are the garments thereof. ‘This is in the world
below, while in that which is above the Ancient of Days is
the Soul of soul in the Law ; the soul is that mystery which is
called the Beauty of Israel; the body is the Community of the
Eleét ; while the vesture is heaven and its region. Cursed be
he, says the text,! who pretends that the recitals of Scripture
have no other meaning than that which appears on the surface.
Scripture, if this were the case, would not be the Law of
Truth, the Holy Law and the Perfect Witness, mote precious
than gold and jewels. If it contained only simple stories and
such vulgar elements—as of Esau, Hagar, Laban and Balaam’s
ass—it might be possible to produce something better, apart
~ from all inspiration, after the manner of profane books ; but
the truth is that every word of Scripture enshrines a Supreme
Mystery, and is capable of sixty methods of interpretation.?
This is a charaCteristic extravagance, but every one who has
followed the quest of the mystic sense knows how manifold
it is, and for this reason no doubt it has been testified that the
otiginal ZoHAR was at least a camel’s load. ‘That is like St.
John saying: “I suppose that even the world itself could
not contain the books that should be written,” if all the acts
of Jesus were reduced into a complete memorial.2 Iam very
sure that the beloved disciple was guilty herein of no extrava-
gant utterance, because Christ has been always in the world ;
and I am not less certain that the extent of the Zonar has been
understated, for the variations of inward meanings ate
numberless as the Sons of the Doétrine, and all may be true
analogically, though some of them are brighter jewels, while
the pearls of greatest price may be few enough. Whatever

1 Z., Pt. TI, 149b; V,'386, 387. ;

2 [b., Pt. I, fol. 26a; I, 161. It is said otherwise that there ate sixty seCtions, which
ate the sixty queens of the SONG oF SOLOMON. ‘The “‘ young maids ” without number
are the HaLakuoru, otherwise, things belonging to the outward, ceremonial Law,

its customs and enaétments—Id., Pt. III, fol. 216a; V, 548. Another statement

concerns seventy modes of interpreting Scripture, all of which are true in their results.
Ib., Pt. I, fol. 54a; I, 310.
* St. Jobty xxi, 25.

14 THE HOLY KABBALAH

belongs to man at his highest belongs also to Christ: so too
the Divine Sayings are like the Divine Acts, and from the
first time of manifestation until that moment when God shall
be All in all, there is no end to either.

Now, it is said that the inner sense of the Law is not less
concealed than the world from which it emanates,1 wherefore
the Mysteries known to the Sons of the Do@trine are guarded
secretly in their hearts. Those who apply themselves to its
Study receive as their inheritance the World to Come, as well
as that of Jacob, for it is the path of the Life Beyond.2 He
who is so dedicated and so consecrated is accounted as if he’
had received its sweet and heavenly words on Mount Sinai
itself.2 It is the way of the Garden of the Sacred King and
the way of the King Himself.4 A certain price has to be paid
however, for it is said hyperbolically that the study of the Law
succeeds only in the case of him who kills himself for the Law,
meaning that it is a path of poverty and a poor man is con-
sidered as one who is dead.°

I have dealt so far with preliminaries, and if the next
question be how did the Secret Doétrine originate, the answer
seems that it was before the world was with God. The sense
of this must be that it was implied in Elohim, whose image it
is, as we have seen. Another explanation is that it is on the
side of metcy, and by mercy the world was made: it is the
beneplacitum termino carens. We find, moreover, that God
created the world by joining thereto the Secret Doétrine.

4) Zy4 ets fol. t56b'; iil, ans.

2 Ib., fol. 158a; II, 220. I should mention here that consecration to the Study of
the Secret Do@rine brings down what is called the Supplementary Soul which Zoharic
Kabbalism attributes frequently to all pious Children of Israel who observe the Sabbath
in the plenary sense. It remains with them during that day and returns thereafter
whence it came. But it would seem that true Sons of the Doétrine are in permanent
enjoyment of this added part. He who does not cultivate the mystic science is there-
fore in a State of deprivation. The Soul is brought down by the voice of him who
Studies the Secret Do@rine and it comes from the Land of the Living, making him
whom it overshadows equal to the angels. When it is said in Ps. ciii, 20, “‘ Bless the
Lord, ye His angels,” the reference is to those who Study the Doétrine and are called
God’s angels on earth. In the world to come they will have wings like those of the
eagle. .

3 Ib., Pt. Til, fol. 179b; V, 471.

4 Jb., 1, 224b; I, 485. .

5 Ib., Pt. Il, fol. 158b; IV, 95. But against this, he who is dedicated to the study
of the Law opens the 50 gates of Brnan, corresponding to the letter Yop multiplied
by the letter Hz.—Jb., III, fol. 216a; V, 548. Now, Yop is the Sign of the Covenant
and therefore of the male principle, while He—the letter of Shekinah—is that of the
female principle, which produces fruit to the male through intercourse; and the
multiplication here in question alludes to the generations of mind as the fruit of study—
that is to say, of Divine Research. The Study of the Doétrine is not a barren Study,
but brings forth “ the eternal brood of glory excellent.”

THE HIDDEN CHURCH OF ISRAEL 15

The world was founded thereon, and it is added that so long
as Israel is consecrated to its research, so long will the world
be stable. When the lovers of truth! rise for its study at
midnight ? the Holy One and all the just who are with Him
in the Garden of Eden listen to their voices.2 The versicle
appertaining hereto is: “ Thou that dwellest in the gardens,
the companions hearken to thy voice: come out to hear it.” 4
We may understand by this that those who work below are
really listening to the Voice which is above and that when
they hear it, it is the Mystery of Do&rine which they hear.
There is no need to add that the Voice is speaking in the
heart. The word BEREsHITH, with which Genesis opens and
which has been rendered sometimes “ in wisdom,” not “ in
the beginning,” is said to signify the Secret Doétrine and its
patt in the work of creation. The Scriptural allusion is:
‘*’The Lord possessed me in the beginning of His way, before
His works of old. I was set up from everlasting, from the
beginning, or ever the earth was.” > It will be observed that
this is personified Wisdom testifying on her own part, and
the application of the text by the Zowar in connection with
the beginning of things is, under the circumstances, rather
subtle. It goes on to affirm that this was the kind of begin-
ning in which God created the heaven and earth, the basis of
which is His Covenant. Hence it is said also: “If the
Covenant which I have made existed not, there would be
neither day nor night, neither heaven nor earth.” ® All
accepted renderings of this passage from the Vulgate down-
ward are quite different ; but the point to be remembered is
the allusion made to the Covenant in the particular con-
nection, for we shall find at a much later stage that it is the

Tae a te te TOL IID © 345 5

2 T may mention at its value that the annotator of the French version—M. Lafuma-
Giraud— distinguishes between that which the Zonar designates Mysteries of Do&rine
and that which it calls Mysteries of Tradition. The first is the spiritual sense of Scrip-
ture and the second that of Tradition.

3 The study of the Do€rine is held to call for adornment of body as well as attention
of mind. It was needful for the do&ors who rose at midnight to clothe themselves
for the purpose of study, out of respe&t to Shekinah, who accompanies Students of
the Doétrine. Moreover, the study calls for serenity of mind, and it was held difficult
to ensure this in a reclining posture.—Z.., Pt. I, fol. 72a; I, 426.

¢ SonG oF SOLOMON, viii, 13. Z., Pt. I, fol. 77b; I, 455.

© Prov. vitie2s, 23. Zip Pt: PY fol! aub sy Tors 32 ’

® This is Pauly’s rendering of the Zouar, but the Authorised Version reads: “ If
my covenant be not with day and night, and if I have not appointed the ordinances of
heaven and earth ; then I will cast away the seed of Jacob, and David my servant,” &c.
Jer. xxxiii, 25, 26. Compare the Vulgate: Si paltum meum inter diem et notiem, et leges
cali et terre non posut, equidem et semen Jacob et David, servi mei, projiciam, &c.

16 THE HOLY KABBALAH

sign manual or visible of one of the Divine Hypostases and it
is also one of the keys to the whole Mystery of the Zowar.
We are not, however, dealing with the question of creation at
this point of our debate, and it has been mentioned only to
indicate the seemingly eternal pre-existence of the Secret
Do@rine.t After what manner was it brought down to
eatth, so that it came to the knowledge of the elect? The
thesis of possession and successive custody depends from a
legend of Paradise, and this in its turn arises from the Scrip-
_tutal reference to a Book OF THE GENERATIONS OF ADAM.”
It is supposed by the Zonar to signify that there was a Secret
and Supreme Book, the source of all, including the Hebrew
letters ?—presumably in that form under which they are
manifested below. It expounded the Holy Myéstery of
Wisdom and the efficiency resident in the Divine Name of
seventy-two letters.4 It was sent down from heaven by the
hands of the angel Raziel > and Adam was entrusted therewith.
Raziel is said to be the angel of the secret regions and chief
of Supreme Mysteries. The gift placed Adam in a superior
position to that of any celestial being—possibly with the
exception of the messenger, though indeed he may have
carried that which he was not permitted to understand.
Adam was made acquainted in this manner with Supernal
Wisdom,® and the Celestial Choirs came down to be present
when he read the book. He was cautioned, however, to
conceal it, and he seems therefore to have studied it in silence,
with recollection of the heart. The book proved later on to

1 See Book V, § 5, passim.

2 Gen, -v, I.

3 Z., Pt. I, fol. 37a ef seq.’; 1, 231—233.

4 The Mysteries of this Name and the mode of its formation will be considered in
their proper place. There are said to be three books which are opened in heaven on
the first day of the year. The first is that which was transmitted to Adam, and this
is the book of the just who are perfe@t. The second has a part in heaven and a part on
earth, but it is not otherwise described. The third is the Written Law, which was
designed for the first man and was presumably known of the heart, for it is not said
that it was manifested at that time on earth.—Jb.

5 Z., Pt. I, fol. 55b; I, 319, 320. There is a legend of an old Mrprasu called the
Boox oF Raziei: it is said to have been developed by Eleazar of Worms and to have
been reproduced in various debased forms by late Kabbalism. There is also an
imposture of Ceremonial Magic which passes under the name. Compare E. V.
Kenealy’s notice of a Book of the Wisdom of Adam, received in an ecstasy and “ full
of mysteries and signs expressive of profound knowledge.” See THE Boox or Gop,
pp. 243 and also iid., pp. 273 e¢ seq., for a rabbinical account of a staff given to Adam
and supposed to signify the support of Secret Knowledge.

€ The Sacred Name of 72 letters was explained in the GznEsis oF Man by means of
the 670 mysteries which it contains. The Mystery of Cuokman discovered the 1500
keys which ate not entrusted to any celestial being. .

THE HIDDEN CHURCH OF ISRAEL 17

be like the Liner GraDALis or fundamental record concerning
the Holy Graal, for it took unto itself wings at need, when
Adam—his advantages notwithstanding—fell ultimately into
sin. It was clasped in his hands when he was driven out of
the Garden of Eden, but thereafter it vanished, and for long
and long he lamented the loss of his treasure. * Ultimately it
was given back to him in answer to his tears and prayers,’ by
the angel Raphael: he returned to its study and bequeathed
it to his son Seth, who entrusted it to later messengers, so that
the Secret Do&rine might be spread through the world.? It
became known as the Boox or ENocH after passing through
the hands of that patriarch,? and it is said that Abraham
penetrated the glory of his Master by means of its mysteries.
Moses, however, was the first man who attained perfection in
its fullness,* and perhaps on this account it is not suggested
that he derived his knowledge from a book, so that after
Abraham we hear nothing of the secret text : it was a treasure
of the patriarchal age. The External Law and the Secret
Doétrine were both revealed on Mount Sinai, and as Moses
transmitted the one to his nation at large so he communicated
the other to certain elders, by whom it was handed.on. But
there are two remarkable passages designed to shew that the
whole secret knowledge came down to the Zoharic period
under the darkening of successive clouds. It is said that at
the death of Moses the sun was eclipsed and that the Written
Law lost its splendour. At the hour of King David’s death

1 The variant account in fol. 55b says that he smote his forehead when the work
vanished and plunged up to his neck in the river GrHon, being the second river which
flowed out from the “ garden eastward in Eden.” Gen. ii, 13. The result was that
all his body was covered with wrinkles, so that he was no longer recognisable.

2 A genealogy of this kind will recall the fabulous origins once ascribed to institutions
like Freemasonty, the appeal made by alchemists to sages of antiquity and other fictions
which deserve to be classed as monstrous. We must beware, however, of fixing
wilful imposture on an archaic literature because its attribution is mythical: it should
be remembered that we are dealing by the hypothesis with a body of Secret Doétrine,
and an Oral Tradition is liable to the exaggeration of its antiquity : we must distin-
guish therefore between the possible fa& of its existence at a mote or less distant period
and the growth of legend about it.

3 There are several Enochian legends which offer curious points in themselves, but
seldom conne& with our subjeé&t. According to one account, Enoch became the great
atchangel Metatron ; according to another, he was exalted to the high heavens and
made guardian of their treasures, including the 45 keys to the combinations of graven
letters.—Z., Pt. I, fol. 56b:; I, 326. An apocalyptic Boox or Enocn, believed to be
a Hebrew text in its original state and belonging as such to the beginning of the Christian
eta, has been known in an Ethiopic translation since the year 1778, when a manuscript
copy was brought from Abyssinia by J. Bruce.

4 This is one of the theses, but we shall see that there was a certain Gate of Under-
Standing which he failed to open.

18 THE HOLY KABBALAH

the light of the moon diminished and the radiance of the Oral
Law was tarnished. The consequence was that discussions
and controversies began among the sages of the MisHNa, so
that joy in the study of the Law has ceased for all future
generations. It was pursued previously in clear and full
light, and there was that unanimity which comes from
cettitude among the Sons of the Do@rine ; but afterwards it
was followed from afar in a state of doubt and separation,
amidst wrangling of the schools, who saw only as in a glass
and darkly. This state of things is sometimes symbolised by
a division in the Divine Name, by the loss of the true method
of pronouncing the Tetragram in conformity with its proper
vowels, and so forth. Occasionally there are intimations of a
new breaking of light, as when it is said that Ezekiel was less
faithful than Moses, for he divulged all the measures of the
king 2; but apparently those measures were not displayed
before doctors who—whatever their, zeal and sincerity—were
unable to value them in understanding at their proper worth.
It was otherwise in the days of Rabbi Simeon, for the glory of
the mystic light was at its zenith in him, according to the
ZOHAR, which, considering that he was the revealer in chief
of its doctrines, exalts that master of wisdom above all the
Stars of heaven. It is added that from the day when Rabbi
Simeon came out of his cavern 3 the Mysteries were secrets no
longer for the colleagues, because the Hidden Doé@trine had
become no less familiar to them than it was to their precursors
when it was revealed on Mount Sinai. But the time came
for this great sun to set in the hour of the master’s death ; and
when afterwards his disciples and successors sought to
reproduce the words which they heard from his lips, the
attempt proved a failure.4 The withdrawal of the Secret
Do€&rine is mentioned also, but with a suggestion of vestiges
remaining over: these are to be consulted, notwithstanding

1 Z., Pt. H, fol. 156a, b-; IV, 88.

BID. PET, fol! §a¢ TTS ro:

3 The reference is to the Tracr. SABBATH, which contains the history of Rabbi
Simeon, the reasons which led him to find refuge in a cave for twelve yeats and the
circumstances under which he came out. See Michael Rodkinson: BasByLONIAN
TALMUD, Vol. i,c.2. I cite this translation, which was done in America, because it is
available to the English reader ; but its method of condensation has been a subject of
hostile criticism, and the unexcised German rendering of L. Goldschmidt, begun in
1898, is preferred reasonably by scholars.

4 This disposes of the ridiculous tradition that R. Simeon wrote anything in the
cavern where he found a refuge from Roman imperial persecution.

THE HIDDEN CHURCH OF ISRAEL 19

their incompleteness, because the Du@trine is incorruptible
gold, and even its shards are priceless.

The next point which calls for our consideration here is
whether the general references to the Secret Dodtrine as a
whole, apart from its various branches, offer any ground of
presumption concerning its radical nature. Now, it is said
that the Supreme Mystery is concealed in the Law,? that it is
the Secret of the Law, meaning the Secret of the King—
Sacramentum Regis quod abscondere bonum eft—tevealed only to
those who fear sin, and that as to its nature, this is bodied
forth by the Sacred Covenant concerning circumcision? In
other words, it is a Mystery of Sex. It was on account of
this that Rabbi Simeon consecrated to the study of the Secret
Do@trine the entire night in which the Heavenly Bride is
united to her Heavenly Spouse, being the night of that day
when the Law was revealed to the Israelites and the Covenant
contracted between God and His people. The reason was
that the Mystic Knowledge constitutes the jewels of the
Heavenly Bride. We can understand this only on the
hypothesis that the science in question is concerned at some
Stage or under some aspe& with a most holy Mystery of Sex,
as if some unknown path of splendour and path to the height
can and may open therefrom. It is said that “the King’s
Daughter is all glorious within,” and the Zowar explains that
there is glory and glory, a glory of the male and a glory of the
female principle.* It is said also, as if in connection with the
pursuit of this path, that whosoever follows in the train of the
Heavenly Bride on the night of union ® shall be preserved
from all evil for ever, in heaven and on earth—as if death and
the second death had no power. He will enjoy celestial peace
to the end of time. The counsel in this respe@t is: “ Taste
and see that the Lord is good.” 8

If the study of the doctrine adorns the Bride of Heaven with

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 216b, 217a; Il, 453-455. See also Id., fol. ga; I, 50, from which it
follows that the Secret Doftrine is the explanation and unfoldment of all. This is
founded on Ps. xix, 6: ‘‘ There is nothing hid from the heat thereof.” But this was
the Dodtrine in its fullness.

* los tolii2sGb's Ih. 533...)

3 Z., Pt. I, fol. 237; Il, 535. Cf. ante concerning a “ Sign manual,” p. 16.

4 This is based on Ps. xlv. 13: “‘ The King’s daughter is all glorious within,”
which the Zohar tenders: “‘ All the glory of the daughter of the King is within ’’’;
and the Vulgate: Ovni gloria ejus filia regis ab intus. ‘The words are held to designate
the Community of Israel.

ANS BSP RA LS

6 Ps, xxxiv, 8.

20 THE HOLY KABBALAH

‘jewels, as we have just seen, it seems that it adorns also the
souls of its students with all manner of graces and santtities.
When the Zonar affirms that their desert is far above any-
thing which follows on mere works, there is no doubt that it
gives expression to a great truth, though it may be one that is
reserved only for the understanding of the ele. But in the
ordinary sense the explanation is. that it enables good works
to be fulfilled with knowledge, under the operation of Divine
Will. Those who study the Dodrine are set free from fear,
whether of things in heaven or things on earth, whether of
evils which may overwhelm mankind, because such students
ate grafted on the Tree of Life and are taught daily thereby.
As tegards things in heaven, the meaning is that the fear of
God, which is the beginning of wisdom, has been absorbed
by the love of God, which is wisdom in realisation, and the
Divine Doétrine cannot be studied without imparting love for
the Divine. To walk in the path of the Dodrine is therefore
to follow the path of love: it is said otherwise to lead into
the way of truth, so that we learn how the soul may return to
its Master. It is not the work of a certain day or of a certain
hour, but one of the day and the night. We come to under-
Stand in this manner that the study is a question of life, of
living with the face towards Jerusalem, having the awareness
of God in the heart, and herein is the moyen de parvenir, the
counsel of real being. We shall understand also why it is
added that he who neglects or forsakes the study of the
Do@trine is not less guilty than if he separated himself from
the Tree of Life, for he is leading the life of separation.1

The last considerations follow, as it seems to me, the
otdinary course of thought in the direction to which they
belong ; but the extracts out of which they arise are a counsel
to those who would study the Secret Doctrine that there is
needed a conscious union by intention, contemplation and -
the art of finding in the heart, so that the heart and mind of
the student may concur in an ineffable union which is said to
be consummated above. As to its nature we know enough
to be certain that the night thereof is not of a festival below
but of the eternal oneness in that Divine Darkness which is
called otherwise in the records A1N-SopuH Aour, the limitless
and undifferentiated light. The festival of the Paschal Lamb

Faz tr dl, HOLTIa Ss P02.

THE HIDDEN CHURCH OF ISRAEL 21

in the Calendar of Jewry is only a specific memorial on earth,
so that what it is held to signify may be kept in the soul of
Israel ; and this is not really an act of unreason: on the con-
trary, the intention is so to proceed here as if that which is
remembered below is in particular remembrance above ; yet
the union there is in the still rest and the changeless simplicity,
being infinite and eternal therein. Lastly, the extracts out of
which these things arise would be wotse than idle words if
the quest concerning their meaning could be carried no
further.

It will be seen as we move forward on the strange path of
out research that the Sons of the Doctrine were only from
time to time, and as if by accident, concerned with reserving
any common, or indeed any merely remote and arbitrary
understanding of the Written Word in Israel; that in short
there was something, on the contrary, which—at least from
their point of view—imposed a reasonable and even a zealous
reserve, because it was pre-eminently one of those matters
which the unprepared and sensual mind would wrest to its
own destruction.

It has been necessary at this initial stage to establish the
root fact of an alleged Secret Doctrine, in order to justify the
long research which follows. An examination of the Dodrine
itself and of its message to us, if any, belongs to a much later
Stage. Between these vital matters and the simple point of
fact there intervenes all that belongs to the apparatus of the
texts, including their external and critical history.

II. FOLLIES OF OCCULT EXEGESIS !

As the Kabbalah claims to be a Tradition long received in
secret by one generation from another and reduced at length
into writing, so one of its legends informs us,? because of the
bad state of the affairs of Israel—that is to say, after the
destruction of Jerusalem—it is to be expected that its literary

1 When it was found by experience that the Kabbalah had no office for the propaga-
tion of the Christian Gospel in Jewry, the subje& at large fell almost unconditionally
into the hands of occult students and schools. It comes about in this manner that,
much against my own will, their views and pretensions will obtrude for consideration
Epes at different stages of my tesearch, so that they can be reduced to their proper
value.

2 It is an explanation offered by a commentator on the SEPHER YETZIRAH or Boox
OF FORMATION.

22 THE HOLY KABBALAH

methods will offer difficulties to the ordinary student.1 It has,
indeed, proved so unintelligible upon the surface in some of
its developments that, on the one hand, it has been considered
merely meaningless jargon, while a few—like the late Mac-
gregor Mathers—who claim that they have penetrated to its
real sense have, on the other, found pleasure in believing that
it is sealed to uninitiated persons, for whom it must ever
remain a matter of curious and unrewarded research, though
not perhaps wanting some gleams of unexpected suggestion.
The first view suggests that more patience and greater pains
were needed ; the second, that the faculty for painstaking is
a kind of peculiar election which is possible only to the few,
and this appears unwarranted. As a fact, it is a pretence
brought forward by expositors of Kabbalism belonging to
occult schools of the last century, and it carries no other
warrant than is characteristic of those schools.

Specialists in cryptography assure us, and we have even
higher warrant in the testimony of reason itself, that no
cipher writing devised by human ingenuity is incapable of
solution, also by human ingenuity; but the assumption, of
course, supposes good faith in the cipher: it must follow a
certain method and conceal a definite sense. There is further
no system of symbolism and no form of philosophical specu-
lation, however complex, which will not surrender its secrets
to the searchlight of analysis, provided always that the sym-
bolism is systematic and that the speculation is methodised,
however curious in its involutions. There are cryptic philo-
sophies and concealed metaphysics, even as there is cryptic
writing ; but if they possess a meaning, it cannot escape ulti-
mately the penetration of competent criticism, subject, how-
ever, to the distin@ion which must subsist of necessity between
the sense of a cipher—which is unmistakable from the moment
that it is disengaged—and the construction of a debate in
jargon which in its minor issues may be open always to
debate.?

There are, however, two considerations which arrest

1 Obscurities, complexities and confusions do not point, however, to the existence
of a double sense.

2 The best example of a really cryptic literature is that concerned with Alchemy,
and yet it is not cryptic in the sense of cipher-writing. It has a perfectly simple surface
meaning ; the concealment is the significance of certain conventional words and recipes.
This also is its great difficulty. While cryptography must disclose its secret to skill
and patience, it is nearly imposible to say what the word Vitriol, for example, may
reptesent to any writer, if it be not the ordinary substance passing under that name.

FOLLIES OF OCCULT EXEGESIS 23

attention on the surface of this debate. The first is whether
ctyptic philosophies ate not inherently unmeaning, and
unable therefore to disclose what, in fact, they do not possess ;
or alternately, in the case that they are methodised after some
manner, whether the mystery which they cover is not out of
all proportion to the intelle€tual cost of unravelling it. Of
these two points one at least must be determined according to
individual predilection. For my own part, after spending
many years among strange pathways of human ingenuity, I
know certainly that Kabbalistic Theosophy does constitute a
methodised system which is curiously inwrought, at least in
its later development, and since /a science eS une noblesse qui
oblige, I must bear testimony to this faét, which leaves the
question of values over, even though an imaginative reader
may transfigure the statement and interpret too liberally the
nattow concession which I have made here to sincerity.
About the second point it is extremely difficult to indicate
even a personal opinion on esoteric philosophies at large. So
far as knowledge is its own reward, I suppose that it may be
worth the cost; but if any department of research should be
tuled out of the sphere of operation possessed by this truism,
it is that of so-called occult science and philosophy. The
labour involved by their study can repay those who undertake
it only in a few cases. In the pursuit of its hidden “ know-
ledge” Campaspe is never finished. But it is precisely for
this reason that an inquiry like the present may be held to
deserve a welcome, because it offers all those who may be
disposed to concern themselves with one important depart-
ment of esoteric philosophy an intelligible statement of the
issues and their central point of value which will save such
persons the need of first-hand research. It is to be observed
further and finally as a clearance of all the issues that in so far
as the Secret Tradition of Israel, and in so far as the cryptic
metaphysics and Theosophies of other schools and nations,
offer grave difficulties, they are not those of a sense within the
sense, but of the one and only meaning which should and can
be attached to the chaos embrouillée of what I have termed their
jargon language. | .

The importance of the Written Tradition of Kabbalism can
be regarded only from two standpoints. There is that which
it may possess for the Sacred Scriptures of the Jewish and
Christian Religions and for the exoteric doftrines which more

H.K,. »

24 THE HOLY KABBALAH

ot less derive from these.1 Under this first head may be
included its significance, if any, for the science of Comparative
Theology and for the history of human thought.? Besides
such obvious and unquestioned grounds upon which it is
entitled to consideration, there is another warrant in the
interest which it possesses for a sincere and informed seeker
after the authentic vestiges—if any—of hidden knowledge in
the past. And hete it is necessary to determine what is meant
and involved by such knowledge, whether real or alleged.
The study of the large literature which incorporates the secret
pseudo-sciences and the occult philosophies is pursued by
many persons from many motives, but few of these can, in
the proper sense of the term, be regarded as esoteric and much
less as mystical students. Nor, indeed, does the attempted
practice of one or other of the “ secret sciences ” in any sense
constitute a claim to that title. In a very large number of
cases such occupations suggest titular distin@tions which are
not of a flattering kind. As I understand him, the true student
of THEOSOPHIA in its widest meaning is seeking evidence for
the existence of a knowledge—which in effe& is hidden
science—handed down from remote ages,? which knowledge

1 From the conventional occult standpoint this is of more consequence than from
that of ordinary exegesis. Adolphe Bertet, in his APOCALYPSE DU BIENHEUREUX
JEAN ... DEVOILEE (Paris, 1861, p. 51), gives the position very clearly in respe& of
its arbitrary assumptions. “‘ We find on every page of the five books of Moses
Kabbalistic expressions which proclaim that everything must be taken in a figurative
sense, yet in none of these books do we possess a complete treatise of initiation, whence
it follows that prior to Moses oral tradition was alone charged with transmitting the
secret of initiation.” Bertet owed his inspiration and frequently his language to
Eliphas Lévi. His dogmatic assertions are, moreover, of like value as those of his
master. The Kabbalistic sense of the Pentateuch had to be invented before it could be
found, and it happens that the “ oral tradition ” transmitted its “ secrets ” long ages
after the books supposed to contain it had been reduced to writing.

2 It is to be understood that this aspe& of the Secret Tradition in Israel is beyond
the field covered by my present undertaking, which is concerned with an examination
of the literature to ascertain its mystical value.

3 The chief aspeéts of this belief are, as might be expected, quite modern ; it cannot
be shewn to have existed prior to the end of the eighteenth century, and even then it
had taken no definite shape. One of its presentations was attempted by M. de Briére,
who in his Essai sUR LE SYMBOLISME ANTIQUE DE L’ORIENT, principalement sur le
symbolisme Eig yptien (Paris, 1847), maintained : (2) A common origin for all religions ;
(¥) The existence of sacerdotal sciences as an exclusive patrimony of the priesthood ;
(c) The existence among all eastern priests of a common idiom of high antiquity,
which passed as a theurgic, magical and efficacious language ; (d) The reprodution
of this language by hieroglyphics, which were also theurgic and magical; (¢) A dual
sacerdotal method of expressing the principles of priestly sciences, and chiefly of
Theology: (1) Imitation of words = hieroglyphs of the texts; (2) Imitation of
thoughts = images, idols, emblematic figures of gods; (/) The existence of the
sacred language and hieroglyphic writing among all peoples possessing sacerdotal
sciences, the Phoenicians and Chaldeans for example. This speculation may be called
suggestive ; but it has. come to pass that after all the phantoms and all the.oracles of
dream we have heard the voice of Egyptology.

FOLLIES OF OCCULT EXEGESIS 25

concerns, in Saint-Martin’s language, an exposition of the
relations between God, man and the universe, or the way of
union between man and God. It has, according to its legend,
assumed, for various reasons, the disguise of many veils; it
is not confined to one country or people, nor is it the interior
sense of any single religion or of any single cycle in literature
to the exclusion of all others. There are alleged traces of its
existence in far-off times, among many nations, through all the
chief religions : 1 it has been held even to lie behind the con-
ventional occultism of Magic and the transcendental physics
of Alchemy ; among Secret Traditions, Kabbalistic literature
has been regarded sometimes as one of its most important
vehicles.

From this standpoint the true message of the Kabbalah is
not exegetical or historical; it is not of systems, schools, or
interpretations ; it is of a living and spiritual kind. Here is,
indeed, the only vital point of view from which the subject
can be regarded, and it redeems the whole circle of my present
inquiry from the charge of vanity. It explains also why the
research has been undertaken and why its results are offered
at full length to those whom they concern.

Given this standpoint, Kabbalistic literature is indescribably
momentous; but so far, unfortunately, it has been main-
tained and unfolded, either on the warrant of alleged know-
ledge which cannot be made public,? and is therefore idle to
proclaim, or on that of evidence which is without much title
—if any—to consideration. If we take, for example, the
expository literature of Kabbalism which has been written
from the occult standpoint in any modern language, there is
not a single work which does not break down at once in the
hands of the most temperate criticism. Mathers, in England,
translated many years since a small portion of the ZoHar from
a printed Latin version, and prefixed an introduction which
takes the whole claim for granted, while he leaves on the
mind of his readers an indistinct impression that Dr. Ginsburg,
who errs on the side of hostility, is not only one of its sup-
porters, but gives credit to the most fabulous side of Kab-

1 As regards the Christian religion, see Eckartshausen concerning “‘ a more advanced
school,” or “ invisible celestial Church,” to which the “‘ deposition of all science has
been confided.” THE CLoup upon THE Sanctuary, Letter I. Translated by Isabel
de Steiger and introduced by myself. 3rd edition, 1919.

2 I refer to the pretensions of certain societies which worked under pledges of
secrecy, here and in Paris, towards the close of the nineteenth century.

D2

26 THE HOLY KABBALAH

balistic Legend.1 In America, Isaac Myer, whose learning—
undigested as it is—entitles him to respeét, is forced on crucial
points to assume many things that are required for his hypo-
thesis.2. In France the real questions at issue are scarcely
skirted in the tabulation attempted by Papus.? In Germany,
which exhausts everything, I do not know that in any true
sense of the term the position has found a single defender.
I propose on my own part to determine, by the testimony of
its texts themselves, whether there is ground for believing
that the Kabbalah has been a channel of old Tradition, and if
this view must be abandoned, to place those who are willing
to follow me in possession of a method of regarding it which
will make its existence at least intelligible without taking any-
thing for granted and without appealing to any source of
knowledge which is not fully in evidence—the latter for the
best of reasons, namely, that there is no such soutce.

III.—THE KABBALAH AND THE TALMUD

The post-Christian literature which is of authority in Israel
must be distinguished, of course, from the multifarious pro-
duétions of its scholars and /terati which it was the object of
rabbinical bibliographies, like those of Bartolocci and Wolf,*
to resume in brief. In order to understand the place occupied
by the Kabbalah it is necessary to say something of that great
and authoritative collection which is known to everyone as
the Tatmup. ‘The latter is a large as it is also an ancient
growth. Its starting-point has been placed by a moderate
criticism shortly before the birth of Christ,®> and, to use a

1 Tt is significant also that in THE KaBBALAH UNVEILED Mathers classes THE HousE
oF Gop or of the Elohim and THE Book oF THE REVOLUTIONS OF SouLS—which ate
late developments and commentaries—among the most important seftions of the
ZOHAR.

2 He assumes in faé& the existence, antiquity and general but concealed diffusion of a
Wisdom Religion, a term borrowed from Modern Theosophy, and one which, in the
last analysis, is not entirely satisfactory to the myStic.

3 La KasBaLe. Tradition SecrétedePOccident. Résumé Méthodique. Paris, 1892, 8vo.
There was a second edition, revised and enlarged, which I have not seen, the first being
conclusive as to the qualifications of the writer.

4 The work of Bartolocci has been cited and Wolf’s title is as follows : BrsLiorHECA
Hesraia, sive notitia tum autiorum Hebraicorum cujuscumque atatis, tum scriptorum, qua vel
Hebraice primum exarata, vel ab aliis conversa sunt, ad noStram etatem dedufla. 4 vols.,
Leipsic and Hamburg, 1715, 4to.

5 There ate writers outside esoteric circles who ascribe a similar antiquity to the
Kabbalah, as, for example, the author of the article s.v. Caba/e in the GRAND DicTIon-
NAIRE UNIVERSEL DU XIX® Sr&cLE (Pierre Larousse), t. iii. Paris, 1867. “ In reality

THE KABBALAH AND THE TALMUD 27

somewhat conventional phrase, its two canons were said to
have been less or more fixed in the fourth and sixth centuries,
A.D.,! at which periods, although there are certain traces of a
more esoteric doctrine, it cannot be shewn that Kabbalistic
literature, according to the restricted sense in which the term
is here applied, had as yet come into existence.? Put shortly,
the sources of the T’aLmup are said to be “ the customs and
regulations practised by the.authorities in their administration
of religious and civil affairs.” > It is claimed that this source
goes back to the period of Esdras, but the most that can be
admitted is that materials embodied in the literature are older
than their earliest colleted forms. These materials were
certain MISHNAYOTH, a term signifying repetitions—namely,
notes of academical teachings, which received many subse-
quent additions.4 Prior to the year 220, a.p., a considerable
propottion of these was engarnered by Rabbi Judah the
Prince,> by whom they were methodised carefully, short
comments of his own being also added occasionally.® It
follows that the collection received the impression of his
peculiar views, from which other authorities differed. He
endeavoured to destroy all rival MisHnayorH, but some of

the Kabbalah originated among the Jews five centuries before our eta. Formed of the
mixture of oriental ideas and Mosaism at the epoch of the captivity, it was elaborated
silently, and in the main among the seét of the Karaites, but did not attain its definite
development till the period of Philo and the schools of Alexandria.”’ The inspiration
here is Franck, but it must be added that the evidence is wanting. Philo, for example,
cannot be cited as an indubitable witness to a Secret Tradition in Jewry.

1 There may be mentioned, however, at its value a thesis in the JEw1sH MESSENGER,
July, 1837, according to which (1) the Ta_mup has never been declared closed, (2) the
MisHNA is an incomplete work, and (3) so also is the GEMARA.

2 It is indeed obvious that nothing had come into writing. Professor Schiller-
Szinessey testifies to a root-matter connefted with the name of Rabbi Simeon and
tegatded as his in its source, but he offers no view as to the epoch when it began to
assume a written form.

3 THE BABYLONIAN TaLMuD. English Translation. By Michael L. Rodkinson.
Vol. i. New York, 1896, 8vo, pp. xv., xvi.

4 In the Haraxor O1am it is said that Jewish teachers had little schedules or scrolls
of parchment, in which they set down all the traditions, sentences, Statutes, decisions
and so forth which they learned from their masters, and that these scrolls were called
the volumes of things secret. The work in question, #.¢., ony mison—see Habacuc
iii, 6—is an introduction to Talmudic diale€tic and formule. The author was R.
Jescivah ben Joseph Hallevi, a Castilian who flourished before and after 1467. It
was ptinted originally at Constantinople in 1510.

5 He was the third patriarch of the Western Jews, and a legend says that, having
converted the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, he compiled the MisHna at the command of
that Prince. See E. H. Palmer: History oF THE JEwisH Nation, London, 1883,
pp. 204, 205. He has been called “ redaétor of the MisHna.” His birth is referred to
circa 135, and he died in or near 220.

6 For an old account of this labour, see David Ganz: GrRMEN DavIpis, sive
Chronologia Sacra et Prophana. Leyden, 1644.

28 THE HOLY KABBALAH

them were preserved in secret and came to light after his
death. In this way we have—

(2) The MisHNna, or repetition, being the methodised
selection of Rabbi Judah.

(0) The TosErHrors, ot additions, calledalso BaratrHotH,!
outsiders, or secondary matter, terms applied by the followers
of Rabbi Judah to the tival MisuNayoru, by which the
otiginal collection is said in the course of time to have been
almost extinguished. ‘Their competitive claims were har-
monised ultimately by later rabbis, and thus arose

(c) The GemMara—z.e., conclusion or completion.’

The union of the GemARA and the Misuna forms the
TALMUD, of instrudtion—from a word signifying “ to teach ”
—of which there are two versions, the MisHna being the
same in each. The Gremara collected by Jerusalem rabbis,
representing the school of Tiberias and R. Johanon Ben
Eliezer—ob. A.D. 279—with the Misuwa, forms the JERUv-
SALEM T'ALMUD, and belongs to the end of the fourth century.
The Gemara colle&ed by Babylonian rabbis, and especially
by Rabina—ob. circa A.D. 420—R. Ashi—a.p. 353-427—and
R. José, with the Misuwna, forms the Tatmup oF BABYLON,
four times larger than that of Jerusalem.* It was begun in
the fifth and completed in the sixth century, but even subse-
quently to this period much additional material was gathered
into it. |

It is exceedingly important that we should understand the
position which is occupied by the great collections of the
‘TALMUD in respect of the literature which is termed technically
the Kabbalah. In the first place, this name, technical or con-
ventional, as I have said, has suggested many errors of com-
parison. By the hypothesis of both literatures the TALMuD is
Kabbalah even as the Zonar is Kabbalah, because both are
matters of reception by tradition.® But to say that the

1 And extravagances, in the sense of things extraneous.

2 Simeon ben Yohai is represented as asserting that the study of the GEMARA was
more meritorious than that of the MisHwa or the sacred Scriptures. But here a later
ptedile@tion has sheltered itself under an earlier name. It may be noted that the term
GEMARA cate into use also as a description of the Tatmup.

3 Stri€tly speaking, the term Tatmup applies only to the GemarA, but it has obtained
the wider application because the Gemara is always accompanied by the Misra, the
text being essential to the note.

4 The proportion of the Babylonian Grmara to the original MIsHNA is about eleven
to one.

5 “Tn older Jewish literature, the name (Kabbalah) is applied to the whole body of
received religious doftrine with the exception of the Pentateuch, thus including the

THE KABBALAH AND THE TALMUD 29

TatmupD is Kabbalistic in the sense of the ZOHAR is extremely
misleading. The cycles are distin and indeed divergent.
There is no question as to the age and great authority of the
one,! while some centuries of inquiry have not as yet deter-
mined the claims of the other. Moreover, could we assume
the equal antiquity of both, the nature of the Tradition would
be still generically different. The Taumup is not in any sense
of the term a Theosophical system: ? it is law and com-
mentaty ; it is the construction placed by authority on the
jurisprudence, ecclesiastical and political, of old Israel.? It is
sociology, not metaphysics, even if it has admitted meta-
physics and has accretions which might be termed mystical.4
To place it by the arbitrary use of a conventional term in the
same category as the literature which discusses the Mysteries
of the Supreme Crown, the evolution of withdrawn “ Divine
Subsistence,” so-called, into positive being, the emanation or
forthcoming of the SEPHIROTH and the origin, metem-
psychosis and destiny of souls, is to make a foolish and
deceiving classification. M. Isidore Loéb° offers us the
equivalent of an admirable distin@ion between the two
literatures in his observations upon the comparative position
of the French and Spanish Jews at the period of the
promulgation of the ZonHar. Talmudic Israel was, he tells
us, circumscribed by the circle of the Law : it had no horizon
and no future; it had no place in the life of philosophy.®

prophets and HacroGrapua, as well as the oral traditions ultimately embodied in the
MisHNA.”—AMERICAN ENCYCLOPADIA, iii., pp. 521, 522.

1 [ do not mean that there has never been a question, for the French ecclesiastic
Motrin, proceeding on the principle that the Jews cannot be believed in anything
relating to the age of their literature, endeavoured to refer the MIsHNA to the beginning
of the sixth century and the Gemaras to some two hundred years later.—Exercrra-
TIONES Brsxiic#, Paris, 1660.

2 Hence the conspicuous philosophical doétrines of the Kabbalah have no place
therein. For example, the Sephirotic system, with which we shall be concerned later .
on, and the theory of emanation which it may suggest, cannot be traced in the Tatmup.
Consult Edersheim: History oF THE JEwIsH Nation, third edition, p. 406.

8 It has. been described as “a corpus juris in which the law has not yet been
differentiated: from morality and religion.” See F. W. Farrar: Lire or Curisr;
illustrated edition, #.d., p. 758.

4 It is possible to institute a comparison between the Tatmup and the Kabbalah
as between Freemasonry and late Western Occultism. The Tatmup is not Mysticism,
but it became the asylum of some mystical traditions. Freemasonry is not an occult
teaching, but under the standard of the Craft all occult arts of the eighteenth century
found not only a refuge, but a field of work and of development... The way of entrance
in the one case was the Haggadic morality: in the other it was the High Grades.

5 La GRANDE ENCYCLOPEDIE, Paris, 4to, s.v. CABBALE, vol. viii.

§ “Tn the immense colleGtions which have come down to us from the fifth or sixth
centuries of the Christian era, in the Tatmup as in the allegorical interpretations of the
Bible, there is no trace of philosophical speculations. If we find reminiscences of the

30 THE HOLY KABBALAH

The Zouar gave to Israel the splendid impulsion of the ideal ;
it gave philosophy ; it created a wide horizon ; it brought the
exiled Jew into correspondence with the thought of the world :
it communicated the Eternal.

The first result of the confusion in question is to place a
wrong construction upon Talmudic literature, to suggest that,
as believed by some of the Kabbalah proper, it possesses a
double meaning, and that we are to look below its literal
sense. It has been pointed out appositely that it would be as
reasonable to admit a metaphysical construction in the Com-
mon Law of England, the deliberations of a Holy Synod in
the colleGtions of State Trials, and a theory of transmutation
in Conveyancing. Yet this is what has. been done a€tually in
the case of the Tatmup by the one Kabbalistic expositor
whose influence with certain groups of students in France and
England was once so paramount as to have been considered
almost beyond appeal. To Eliphas Lévi, who, as a faét, mis-
Stated so much and knew so little of post-Christian Jewish
literature, we owe a grandiose presentation of the ‘Talmudic
system which does grave outrage to fact. He lays down that
the first Tatmup, the only truly Kabbalistic one, was colle€ted
during the second century of the Christian era by “ Rabbi
Jehudah Hakadosh Hanassi—that is, Judah the most holy
and the prince ”—-who “ composed his book according to all

Kabbalah, they concern, so to speak, the exoteric portion, or angelology ; the existence
of the speculative part is shewn in these books solely by the reference to MySteries
contained in BrresHirH, ot the first chapter of Genesis, and in the MERCAVAH, or
Vision of Ezekiel.”—S. Munk: La PHrILosoPHIE CHEZ LES Jurrs, Paris, 1848, p. 8
The author was an informed and accomplished defender of the existence of Kabbalistic
Tradition in Talmudictimes. It should be added that the Talmudic references to the
Work of Creation and the Work of the Chariot would, if collated, do something to
excuse the opinion that such a Tradition was known as regards the fa& of its existence ;
but it was referred to only enigmatically, and its real nature does not transpire. While
the Tatmup records occasionally that there were conversations between the do&ors
of Israel thereon, it does not report the utterances.

1 Edersheim divides Talmudic traditionalism into two portions: HALAKHA = the
legislative ena€tments of the Fathers ; and HAGGADA = free interpretation.—HIsrory
OF THE JEWISH NATION, p. 136. Some of the Haggadic legends may possess an inner
meaning, that is, they may be allegorical stories : the history of the salting of Leviathan
is so absurd in its literal sense that one is driven out of mere generosity to suppose
that it meant something which does not appear on its surface. Compare IsRAEL
AMONG THE Nations, by Anatole Leroy-Beaulieu, p. 24. As HALAKHA is rule, norma,
so Haceapa is legend, saga, “‘a colleétion of miscellaneous utterances touching on
every possible subje&.” The Hataxuna alone is law.

2 La CLEF Des GraNps Mysrkres. Paris, 1861, 8vo, p. 351, e¢ seg. See also
Waite: Mysteries oF Macic. Second edition, London, 1897, 8vo, pp. 112-120.
It is to be noted that the Zowar describes the HALAKHA, MiIsHNA and GEMARA as
heavy and involved casuistry, the MisHwna in particular being likened to a hard rock.—
Part I., fol. 27b, and Part IIL, fol. 279.

THE KABBALAH AND THE TALMUD 31

the rules of supreme initiation.” He “ wrote it within and
‘without, as Ezekiel and St. John have it, and he indicated its
transcendental sense by the sacred letters and numbers corre-
sponding to the BerEsHiTH of the first six SEPHIROTH ” ! of
Kabbalistic Theosophy, the subject-general of which belongs
to a later stage. This asserted Sephirotic correspondence has
no place in reality. The MisHNA comprises six sections,? of
which the first concerns tithes, the beasts which it is unlawful
to pair, the seeds which must not be sown together in the
earth, the threads which must not be interwoven, the fruits
which must not be gathered till the trees have passed their
third year, and so forth. It is by no means chiefly, much less
exclusively, agricultural, as Lévi, who had obviously not read
it, represents. Nor has it any correspondence with KErHEr,
except on the fantastic ground that “in the notion of the
Supreme Crown is contained that of the fructifying principle
and of universal production.” Any attribution could be
accredited after this fashion.

The second book concerns the festivals of Israel, the meats
which are prohibited on these, the days of fasting and so forth.
Lévi makes no attempt to justify the attribution which con-
nects it with CHoxmaH. The third book deals with marriage
and divorce, or, in the words of Lévi, “‘ it is consecrated more
particularly to women and the fundamental basis of the
family.” It is allocated by Lévi to Brnau, the third Szpurra.
The fourth book embodies a consideration of civil contracts,
general jurisdiction, civil and criminal aétions, penalties, &c.
Eliphas Lévi says that it is superior to any code of the Middle
Ages and accounts for the preservation of Israel through all
its persecutions. According to the natural order of the
SEPHIROTH, it corresponds with CHEsED or Mercy; but as
it looks better under the attribution of Justice, the Sephirotic

' 1] should note that, long prior to Eliphas Lévi, Adtianus Relandus (ANALECTA
RABBINICA, 1702) and Galatinus (Dz ARcANIS CATHOLIC VERITATIS, 1656) supposed
a second sense in the Tatmup. It was not, however, metaphysical or myStical, but
was a concealment prompted by the necessities of a persecuting time. This supposition
is not less idle than the other, for the first thing which prudence would have suggested
would be to hide the real feelings of Talmudic Jews towards Christians, and these are
not dissembled in the Tatmup. It embodies a number of stories which must not be
construed literally, but, as in the case cited previously, they belong at most to the
domain of allegory.

2 The fifth section is missing from the PALESTINIAN TALMUD and it has fragments
only of the sixth. See THe JEwisH ENcycLopaptia, vol. xii, s.v. TALMUD, and also
for Mishnaic treatises which are wanting in the Babylonian colleétion.

32 THE HOLY KABBALAH

system is reversed accordingly, and it is attributed therefore
to GepuRAH. The fifth book, which is allotted to Mercy by
this transposition, is concerned, according to the French
transcendentalist, with consoling beliefs and things holy,
which creates a completely false impression concerning it.
As a matter of fact, it is dedicated to votive offerings. ‘The
sixth book treats of purifications, which Lévi terms “ the most
hidden secrets of life and the morality which direéts it.” 1 It
_ belongs by his hypothesis to the Szpuira called TipHERETH,
which signifies Beauty.

It is procedures of this kind which have made occult
criticism deservedly a byword among scholars.2. The Tatmup
has its correspondences with the Kabbalah, but they are of
method rather than material. It is highly desirable to
remember it in connection with the Zouar, but it is a con-
summate act of ignorance to confound and to regard them
as written upon the same principle and with the same
objects.

Another writer, who has been quoted previously and is
governed by different sentiments of scholarship, the late Isaac
Myer, makes an exceedingly proper distinction when he affirms
that the Kabbalah and the Zonar “allow a great margin to
speculative thought ”—meaning that they are purely specu-
lative, metaphysical and theosophical—while the Tatmup
“deals with everyday life and humanity under the Law; ”
that the one “starts from a spiritual point of view, con-
templating a spiritual finality as regards the Law and its
explanation,” but that the other is “eminently practical in
both its starting-point and end, having, in the face of igno-
tance, want of perception and natural waywardness of the

1 The exegesis thus inaugurated loses nothing in the hands of later occult writers,
For example, an occult opusculum observes that the key which alone will open the
revelations of the Christian Scriptures and manifest their interior sense, “‘ exists in a
book proscribed by the Christian Church—the JEwisH Tatmup.” See THe AstraL
Lieut, by Nizida. Second edition, London, 1892, pp. 50, 51. It is just to add that
this work was not regarded as of consequence by the circle to which it appealed.

2 Some criticism which is not the work of occultists deserves the same condemnation.
C. W. Heckethorn, author of the SECRET SoOcIETIES OF ALL AGES AND COUNTRIES
(new edition, 2 vols., 1897), presumed to treat the subjeét of the Kabbalah in the absence
of elementary knowledge. ‘Thus, he tells us that the literal Kabbalah is called the
Misuna (vol. 1. p. 85), which, as we have seen, is traditional commentary on the
legislative part of the Mosaic THorAH. So also Walton, in his eighth prolegomenon
to the PotyGiot Brstez, observes that the terms KasBpALAH and Massorau ate applied
to one science by the Jews. Richard Simon draws attention to this error, saying that
the MassoraH is the criticism of the Hebrew text.—HusrorrE CRITIQUE DU VIEUX
TESTAMENT, p. 498. Amsterdam, 1685.

DIVISIONS OF THE KABBALAH 33

masses, nothing but the strict observance of the Law in all its
details in view.” +

IV.—DIVISIONS OF THE KABBALAH

Before we can proceed with our subject it will be necessary
to remove some further false impressions which, unlike the
esoteric aspect attributed to the TaLmup, ate not errors which
characterise occult pretence and ignorance, and have conse-
quently a wider sphere of operation. They concern the
natute and applications of the Tradition which is supposed
to have been perpetuated in Israel. For most popular writers,
for most encyclopedias of the past which have not had
recourse to a specialist, the Kabbalistic Art is simply the use of
Sacred Names in the evocation of spirits,” or it 1s that at least
above all and more than all. We find it in sources of
reference like the great dictionary of Calmet,* while it obtains
to this day in many slipshod accounts which pass from book
to book, without any attempt at verification on the part of
those who reproduce them. It illustrates the importance
which is attributed everywhere to Magic, for in the last
analysis all pretended occult science and all its oral traditions
are resolved by the popular mind into a commerce with
supposed denizens of the unseen world. I have done full
justice elsewhere ® to the enormous influence exercised by the
belief in this commerce, so that the vulgar instin@ is not
entirely at fault. In a higher sense than that of Ceremonial
Magic the ends of all hidden science, as of all occult arts, are
assutedly in the unseen, and as to the processes of evocation
I have said already that they are largely Kabbalistic processes. ®

1 PHILosopHy OF IsN GEBIROL, p. 35. Compare W. B. Greene: THE BLAzING
STAR, 1872,1z2mo. “‘’The Massoran is in every respect the converse of the KABBALAH,
The Massorau is that which was openly delivered by the Rabbi; the KassBaLan is
that which was secretly and mysteriously received by the disciple,” p. 29. It will be
observed that this comparison appears to identify the Massorau and the TALMupD.

2 Compare Frinellan: Le TRipLe VocABULAIRE INFERNAL (Paris, n.d.), p. 30:
““ What is termed the Kabbalah is the art of commercing with elementary spirits.”

3 Sometimes, however, it is closely united with Astrology, and to speak of this
occult art is considered equivalent to speaking of Kabbalistic matters. Such, appa-
rently, was the notion of Démeunier, in L’Esprir pes UsaGgEs Er DES CouUTUMES DES
DIFFERENS PEUPLES, fom. ii. lib. xi. London, 1776.

4 DICTIONARY OF THE BrBLE. For convenience of reference, consult C, Taylot’s
translation, London, 1823, vol. i. s.v. Cabbala.

5 THe Boox oF CEREMONIAL Macic, 7.¢.. THE SECRET TRADITION IN GOETIA,
patti.c.i.p.3efseg. London, 1911,.4to. It must be admitted that the term Kabbalah
was. applied early in its history to some forms of medieval magical practice.

6 Refer to preface.

34 THE HOLY KABBALAH

They are, however, either late and corrupt derivatives which
are not the Esoteric Tradition, but applications, and hence
accidents thereof; or, if we must admit that there were
magical practices involving a conventional procedure and a
formal Ritual prevalent among the Hebrews at a remote
period, which also were handed down, and are therefore
entitled to be classed, in a sense, as Kabbalah, then that
reception must be distinguished very carefully from the
Kabbalah with which we are concerned here.? The Tradition
of the Book oF ForMatIoN and the Boox oF SPLENDOUR is
not of Magic but of Theosophy. It has been described with
enthusiasm by an almost unknown writer, in the following
terms: “The Kabbalah claims to be that spontaneous
philosophy which man, quoad man, naturally affirms now,
always has affirmed, and always will affirm as long as man is
man. ‘The worlds confessed by the Kabbalah are worlds
known to man, worlds upon which man has set the seal of his
own nature, worlds related to man and of which man is the
authentic form. ‘There is nothing in the Kabbalah which is
not found also in the nature of man.” 3

As we have proved it expedient to set aside the Kabbalah of
the TALMUD in order to clear the issues, so also, or at least till
a further stage of our inquiry, we must ignore the Kabbalah
of Magic. Weare dealing in part with an attempted explana-
tion of the universe, but above all of the origin, nature and
destiny of the human soul, which things are entirely distin&
from processes of evocation and the art of dealing with
spirits. ‘The theurgic and talismanic use of Divine Names
and the doétrine of efficacious words belong to a distin&
category, and are liable to be encountered everywhere in
Jewish Theosophy. As will be seen later on, there is no

1 It is to these ptaCtices that I suppose Richard Simon alludes, when he says that
“the ancient Jewish doétors brought many superstitious sciences from Chaldea,”
p. 93. This author can be hardly regarded as an authority on Kabbalistic questions ;
indeed, he seems to confess (0p. cit., pp. 116, 117) that he had not thought it worth
while to expend time over “ the ancient allegorical books of the Jews,” such as the
ZOHAR and the BAnrrR. j

2 The opposite is held by an American writer, T. K. Hosmer, who says: “‘ From
this source all Jewry was overrun with demonology, thaumaturgy, and other strange
fancies." —THE Jews tn ANCIENT, MEDLZVAL AND MODERN TiMEs, London, 1890,
pp. 222, 223. Speaking generally, it is most in consonance with the fatts to regard the
Magic which Europe received at Jewish hands as a debased application of Kabbalism.

3° W.B. Greene: THE Biazinc Srar, p. 57. I am not endorsing the statement ;
but it follows from the specific teaching of the chief storehouse of Kabbalism, the
ZOHAR, that apart from the human form, permanence and organisation are impossible
to finite existences, whence, also, it is the form in which God communicates Himself.

DIVISIONS OF THE KABBALAH 35

question as to the antiquity of these notions, but they do not
concern us now.

In virtue of another error the subject-matter of the Secret
Tradition is confused with certain exegetical methods by
which a scriptural authority is found for it. These methods
obtained very widely, and there is no doubt that many of their
most curious results contributed to swell the volume of
Tradition ; but the method which deals with material, and
occasionally may even supply it, must be held distin@ there-
from. They were, however, a matter of reception, and as
such ate Kabbalah ; but they are not the doétrinal Kabbalah,
and in the attempt to methodise our subje& these also must
be held as embodying things distin@.4

It follows from the above discriminations that there are,
broadly speaking, four separate groups or species of Tradition
in Israel which, by virtue of the meaning of words, are
entitled to rank as Kabbalah : ?

1. The Administrative Tradition of the Tatmup, the
authoritative regulations as to the laws, customs, ceremonies
and civil life of the Jewish nation. The literature of this
Tradition is of great historical value, but it has no place in
philosophy.

2. The Magical Tradition of the Hebrews, very important
to the soutces of occult arts, very obscure in its history, very
much exaggerated by those who write about it, possessing
-little literature prior to the fourteenth century of the Christian
eta, by which time some speculations affirm that it had lost
most of its antique elements.3 ‘

1 P. J. Hershon divides the Kabbalah into two parts, symbolical and real. The
first teaches the secret sense of Scripture and the thirteen rules by which the observance
of the Law is expounded Kabbalistically, #.e., GEMATRIA, NOTARICON, THEMURAH, &c.
The real Kabbalah he subdivides into theoretical and pra€tical: the one is concerned
with the Emanations and Worlds of Kabbalism, the Nature and Names of God, the
Celestial Hierarchy and its influence on the lower world, the MySteries of Creation
and so forth; the other deals with the mystical properties of Divine and Angelic
Names and the wonders performed with these—Tatmupic MisceLLany, London,
1880. The essence of Zoharic Theosophy escapes in this division.

_  # Wynn Westcott, in a work on Numbers, THEIR OccuttT PowER AND MystIc
VIRTUE, Obsetves (p. 11) that the word Kabbalah “‘ includes the Hebrew Do@trines of
Cosmogony and Theology as well as the Science of Numbers.”? The first he terms the
Dogmatic and the second the Literal Kabbalah. The Kabbalistic Science of numbers
is included in Gematria. There is, however, no such Science ; there is only a curious
and unprofitable art.

8 The indefedtible title of Magic to a place in Jewish Kabbalah is enforced by all
modern occultists, who have helped very much to confuse the issues in question. So
far back as the end of the seventeenth century the distin&tion between the magical
Tradition and the philosophical or doftrinal was recognised by R. Simon (Hisrorre

36 THE HOLY KABBALAH

3. Certain exegetical and other traditional methods by
which a secret sense was exttacted from the letter of Holy
Scripture. Very curious results were sometimes obtained by
these solemn follies, which appear so childish and ridiculous
at the present day.1 They comprise :

(2) GEMATRIA, a Ctyptographical system, by which the
letters of a wotd were converted into numbers, and the
arithmetical value was used to explain its internal sense.

(2) NorariKon, from Nofaricum, described as a system of
shorthand, by which each letter of a word was taken as the
initial of another word, or, conversely, the initial letters of an
entire sentence were combined to form a word, which word
was held to throw light on the sentence.

(c) THEMURAH or Exchange, that is, the transposition of
letters in a given word or sentence.

It is obvious that the field of these methods is not confined
to one language or one literature; their application to the
plays of Shakespeare might produce results which would
exceed even the pretensions of any GREAT CrYPTOGRAM. It
is a little humiliating to find an important subject and a
fascinating literature connected with such diversions ; but we
shall see later on that the peculiar views of the Hebrews upon
the divine character of their language invested them with a
certain speciousness, while, for the rest, our inquiry is fortu-
nately not concerned with them. These methods are some-
times termed the Artificial or Prattical Kabbalah.2 Their
antiquity, like that of the Hebrew vowel-points, is a debated
question. By some critics their traces have been discerned

CRITIQUE DU ViEUx TESTAMENT. Améterdam, 1685, 4to), who said: “ There is
another sort of Kabbalah which is more dangerous and forms part of that which is
commonly called Magic. It is mete illusion, the prepossession of certain persons who
believe that they can perform miracles by means of it.” (p. 374).

1 The Kabbalistic method of interpreting Scripture, “‘ which reduces the sense of
the sacred books to vain and ridiculous subtleties, the mysteries contained in letters, in
numbers, and in the dismemberment of certain words,” was supposed by Simon to
have passed from the school of Platonism to that of the Jews, chiefly in Europe.
There seems no ground for this view. He adds (op. cit., p. 374) that this “ speculative
Kabbalah ” was, in his own day, still highly esteemed by the Jews of the Levant.

2 They assumed sometimes the most extravagant forms. For example, the middle
letter of any sacred book was written in an unusual position or of an unusual size, and
was regarded as possessing a deep spiritual meaning. See THz Biste HANDBOOK, by
Joseph Angus, D.D., 1860, p. 499. ‘“‘ The modes by which the Kabbalah educes the
secret meaning veiled under the words of the Hebrew scriptures are manifold, extending
to every peculiarity of the text. Even in what we should regard as critical marks or
as errors or fancies of some transcriber, as when a letter is written too large or too small,
is inverted or in any way distinguished, an occult intent was presumed.” American
Encyclopedia, tii. 521, 522.

DIVISIONS OF THE KABBALAH 37

even in Holy Scripture.t One point, however, which should
be noted especially is that recourse to such devices is met with
comparatively seldom in the ZoHar.

4. The Philosophical Tradition, embodied in the SEPHER
YeErzirRAH and the ZoHAR cycles. To this only, in the
interests of clearness, should the conventional term Kabbalah
be applied, and it is this also which is signified by every
informed writer who uses it. It is divided by Kabbalists
themselves into

(2) The Dotrine of Creation,

(6) The Do&rine of the Throne or Chariot—v.e., the
Chariot of Ezekiel’s vision.”

_ These divisions are concerned respectively with the
natural and the metaphysical world, and are sometimes termed
collectively the Theoretical Kabbalah. There is a broad and
rough sense in which it may be said that SEPHER YETZIRAH
embodies the Doctrine of Creation, while that of the Chariot
is to be sought in SepHER Ha Zonwar. But we shall find that
the latter is full of creation myths, while, although it is our
chief source of Tradition on Chariot Theosophy, the doctrine
is only imbedded therein, its methodical extraction and
development being the task of later Kabbalists. The so-called
theoretical Kabbalah is that which gave to Israel—at least in
respect of opportunity—the intelleCtual horizon which was
impossible to the Talmudic Jew, and it is this also which gave
the Children of the Exile a place in western philosophy.
When we hear that the Kabbalah once fascinated some of the
great minds of Christendom, it is to this only that the statement
can be applied.? It is this, finally, which it is the purpose of
the present inquiry to elucidate. It should be added that

1 The Tarcum to the Prophets, called the official Tarcum, which passes traditionally
under the name of Jonathan ben Uzziel, a disciple of Hillel the Great, in the days of
King Herod, has recourse occasionally to a species of transliteration when dealing with
certain obscure scriptural names. It has been referred to the third century.

2 Both these divisions are mentioned in the MisHNA by name (CuHaciGa, xi. 2), and
ate said to be Secret Doétrine, but the MAASEH BERESHITH and the MAASEH MERKABAH
there referred to are not a written tradition, nor does that of the written Kabbalah
necessatily represent it. The Zonar identifies MERCABAH with the SEPHIROTH or
Ten Emanations, which will be examined at a further stage.

8 Drach distinguishes three uses of the term Kabbalah for which authority can be
cited : (1) It is applied frequently by the Tatmup to the books of the Old Testament,
outside the Pentateuch ; (2) The rabbins apply it to the Legal or Talmudic Tradition ;
(3) It signifies especially the ‘ “ mystic, esoteric, acroamatic portion of the Oral
Tradition.”—Ds ’HARMONIE ENTRE L’KGLISE ET LA SYNAGOGUE. Par /e Chevalier
P. L. B. Drach, 2 vols., Paris, 1844, Vol. IL., pp. xv—xxxvi.

4 Some readers may think it desirable to include the division of the Kabbalah
proposed by Papus in one of his publications, though it is, critically speaking, fantastic.

38 THE HOLY KABBALAH

- outside the cycle of the Zor there is a considerable Jewish
theosophical and mystical literature, of which the SEPHER
YETZIRAH is an instance. It was this which led up to the
ZOHAR, and was embraced thereby. But whether it was
Kabbalistic in the sense of the latter is one of the disputes of
scholarship. |

The Kabbalah, in his opinion, was attributable to Moses, and the written word of
Scripture is therefore naturally a part of the Tradition. Wehave thus: (2) The written
word; (b) The oral word; (¢) An intermediate portion, being rules insuring the
preservation of the text, #e. Massoran. ‘The last is the body of the Oral Tradition ;
the MisHna and Gemara ate its life; the S—EpHER YETziRAH and the Zowar are its
spirit. Unfortunately Papus did nothing to elucidate and nothing to justify his thesis,
and assumed, as he did too often, the most important points at issue. Moreover, the
Massoretic annotations are not comprehended by the explanation offered. See Trarré
ELEMENTAIRE DE SCIENCE OCCULTE, 5¢ édition, Paris, 1898.

HK.

BOOK II

SOURCE AND AUTHORITY OF THE
KABBALAH AND THE AGE OF
THE CHIEF TEXTS

Notte note A iu saath he ne is
ta = Ada eon nah. ; Ms Rin Peta A
Gee ae On i eet a by Ach Ae ae

ha ia #0) x STHOHT th ava, HonteS

ee

.

MO WDA: BIT CVA HIATAGE AGE 5:
2 Sea tins

BOOK. II

SOURCE AND AUTHORITY OF THE
KABBALAH

I—DATE OF THE BOOK OF FORMATION

HavING sought to distinguish the subjects proper of the
Secret Tradition in Israel from certain side issues and a mass
of overgrowth, we have to ascertain in the next place whether
and how far we are warranted by evidence in regarding the
texts which embody it as authentic memorials and its doctrines
as patt of a Tradition perpetuated in Israel from early times.+
For this purpose it will be convenient to accept the literature
as divisible into four classes—(1) The Boox oF FoRMATION ;
(2) The commentaries on that work which preceded the public
appearance of the ZonHar; (3) The Zowar itself; (4) The
writings subsequent thereto.’

The report of an Esoteric Tradition in Israel did not begin
to circulate through Christendom till the fourteenth century,
and this, as we shall see later on, is explained by the fac& that
the chief collection of its archives was unknown, at least
generally, in Jewry itself till about 1290, a.p. This collection
is that which is termed by Kabbalists the Work of the Chariot,
represented by the Zonar. The Work of Creation—to

1 It is pertinent to recall at this point what has been said in my prefatory words on
the question of antiquity. The subject is approached here with that reservation in
view, its determination being essential on what may be called the historical side. We
must know under what circumstances the Tradition comes before us, whatever the
final values.

2 Solomon Munk, who still ranks high among French authorities on Kabbalism,
tabulates the following classification in the D1IcTIONNAIRE DE LA CONVERSATION, S.v.
KasBBALE. (1) A symbolical portion, namely, mystical calculations, 7.e., THEMURAH,
GeEmMATRIA, NOTARICON, on which refer to Book I. § 4; (2) A dogmatic or positive
part, which is, in fa&t, concerned with the hypothesis of spiritual essences, 7.¢., angels,
demons, human souls and their transmigration ; (3) A speculative and metaphysical
part, namely, Sephirotic Do&trine and so forth. It is not an exhaustive classification,
but there is no need to criticise it here. The Secret Tradition on its Theosophical
side is not represented by a bare allusion to Sephirotic Do€trine.

41 E 2

42 THE HOLY KABBALAH

which the SepHER YETZIRAH?! corresponds—was known, as
we have some ground for believing, to at least one Christian
Student so far back as the middle of the ninth century, but
there was no consequence attached to it for Christendom.?
The SEPHER YETZIRAH is supposed to embody a Tradition
handed down from the time of Abraham, and there is no
doubt that the uncritical spirit of several centuries repre-
sented the patriarch as its author. This does not seem,
however, as some modern criticism has supposed loosely,® to
have been the view adopted universally by the Jewish learning
which accepted the document. That he received and he
transmitted it was held undoubtedly, but the work itself is not
pretended to have been reduced to writing till after the
destruction of Jerusalem, and tradition has ascribed its formal
authorship to Rabbi Akiba ben Joseph,’ the pupil of R. Joshua
ben Hananiah,® who was himself the successor, as he was also
once the opponent, of Rabban Gamaliel.6 There is nothing
flagrantly improbable in this attribution, though it reaches us
late in history. Akiba was a speculator with whose notions
the scheme of the SEPHER YETZIRAH was in complete accord-
ance, and he is the reputed author of another work dealing
with the mysteries of the Hebrew Alphabet.’ In his interpre-

1 See THE Book oF FORMATION (SEPHER YETZIRAH). ‘Translated from the Hebrew,
with Annotations, by Knut Stenring, 1923. ‘The bibliography of the text is treated at
some length in an introduétion prefixed by myself.

2 Maimonides explains in his GurpE OF THE PERPLEXED that MAASEH BERESHITH
corresponds to physical and MaasEH MERKABAH to metaphysical science. ‘They have
been termed otherwise the History of Creation and the History of the Divine Throne.

8 Dr. Edetsheim, Hisrory oF THE JEWISH NATION, observes that it is properly
*“a monologue on the part of Abraham, in which, by the contemplation of all that is
around him, he ultimately arrives at the conviction of the unity of God.” 3rd ed.
p. 407. So also Ginsburg says that it professes to be a monologue of the patriarch.
It does nothing of the sort; but the fifth chapter mentions “ Abraham our father.”
Of course, the legend of patriarchal derivation became stereotyped quickly. In the
twelfth century, R. Judah Ha Levi speaks of “‘ the Book of the Creation which belongs
to our father Abraham.”

4 He is said to have perished in the Bar Cochba rebellion, a.p. 120, but this is wrong,
and the evidence points to his martyrdom twelve years later for transgressing the edict
of Hadrian against the praCtice of the Jewish religion. He was born A.p. 50.

5 He was the leading Tanna of the period which followed immediately on the
destrution of the Temple. The Tanna was a Teacher of the Oral Law.

€ He was the head of Palestinian Jews at the close of the first century and in the
opening years of the second.

7 It is called the ArpHaser of R. Akiba, being the letters allegorically explained.
It was printed at Cracovia in 1597, with a Commentarius Prolixus. See Buxtorf’s
BrsLIOTHECA HesBr2A RABBINICA. Basilia, 1618-19, 4 vols. fol. An earlier edition
of the Alphabet appeared at Venice in 1546. See Bartolocci, iv.274. Karppe suggests
that it was originally a method of teaching children to read. Euprs sur LES ORIGINES
ET LA NATURE DU ZOHAR, pp. 108, 109. Compare the analogous proposition that
SEPHER YETZIRAH was meant to serve as a Hebrew Grammar.

DATE OF THE BOOK OF FORMATION 43

tation of Scripture he followed and exaggerated the principles
of Hillel the Great and Nahum of Giso.t He promulgated,
or at least gave the weight of his authority to the doctrine
that “every sentence, word and particle in the Bible has its
use and meaning.” ? His literary labours were also very
great, for to him is attributed the arrangement and redaction
of the HataxHa. Subsequent generations were so impressed
by his marvellous knowledge of divine things that he was
asserted to have discovered much of which even Moses was
ignorant, which, in the sense not intended, is indubitably true.
If we admit the existence of a Secret Tradition in Israel, we
shall not need to question that Akiba was initiated therein ;
if we admit the existence of the SEPHER YETzIRAH in the
second century, we can imagine no more probable author for
that work. Nor is the date essentially disagreeable to a
moderate criticism *; it is merely unestablished for want of

3

ovett evidence,> which begins only with the ninth century,
when there is barely tolerable reason to infer that it may have
been known by St. Agobard.® It is not possible from any
internal testimony to fix the work as belonging to the later
petiod, for obviously any book may be much older than the
date of its first quotation, while the fact, if established, that it
was known in France in or about the year 850 ’ would create a

1 Hillel was of high authority among the Scribes and Pharisees in the days of King
Herod, and is said to have been familiar with the whole Traditional Law. Nahum
was the instructor of Akiba.

2 Edersheim, History oF THE JEWISH NATION.

8 Curiously enough, M. Nicolas admits the date necessary but not the authorship it
suggests, on the ground that Akiba was a rigid and head-strong door of the Law and
not likely to indulge in speculative lucubrations. This estimate, with which it is
difficult to agree, has also the authority of Franck, on the ground that the Tatmup
reproaches Akiba for his incommensurate notions of God; but Franck is possibly
mote influenced by his belief in the earlier origin of the work.—La KaABBALE, p. 87 ef
seq. Whether Yetziratic notions of Deity are not inadequate also is another question.

4 It has been argued that the language of the SEPHER YETZIRAH is a Hebrew wholly
analogous to that of the MisHna.

5 Dr. Schiller-Szinessy says expressly that the book no doubt belongs to Akiba,
“ both in substance and form.””—ENcYCLop@DIA Brirannica, 9th ed., s.v. MIDRASHIM,
a term derived from a root signifying to seek out or to question. Munk also takes
this view in the article s.v. KABBALE, contributed to the ninth volume of the Dicrion-
NAIRE DB LA CONVERSATION ET DE LA LECTURE, Patis, 1833.

8 ‘The English reader may consult Taylor’s translation of Basnage’s History OF THE
Jews, p. 590 e¢ seg. London. 1708. Agobard was Archbishop of Lyons, and wrote
against trials by ordeal and other superstitions of his period. See the Abbé Migne:
DICTIONNAIRE DES SCIENCES OccuLTES, vol. i. col. 32. Despite this apparent en-
lightenment he figures among the persecutors of Jewry. See Basnage : HisrorrE DES
Juirs, t. v. pp. 1493, 1494.

7 The evidence falls far short of demonstration, and is confined to two short passages
in the Eprsrota S. AGOBARDI . . . DE JUDAICIS SuPERSTITIONIBUS. In the first, the
Jews are branded for their gross notions of the Deity, on the ground that they believe

a4 THE HOLY KABBALAH

presumption that it was in existence much earlier, since
literature travelled slowly in those days. We must remember
also that a SEPHER YETZIRAH is mentioned in both Tatmups,
in connection with the dorine that heaven and earth were
created by a mysterious combination of letters, and that
Franck characterises the attempt of some mbdern scholarship
to distinguish two works under an identical title as founded
in gross ignorance.! If, however, we do not place the work
in Talmudic times, we may concede that it came into existence
within a measurable distance of the stormy period in which
the great ‘Talmudic canons reached their term.

We have to distinguish in the next place between the date
which may be surmised for the treatise and that which must
pethaps be attributed to the notions embodied therein.
Have we any ground for believing that the doétrine of the
SEPHER YETZIRAH is older than the Egyptian captivity, as its
legend affirms? This question must be answered by an
emphatic negative. ‘The doétrine under notice gives pro-
minence to the sacred and divine character of the Hebrew
alphabet, and we have no warrant for supposing that the art
of writing was possessed by Abraham; every probability is
against it and every authority is agreed on this point. But
the SEPHER YETZIRAH contains, by implication at least, the
doctrine of an occult power and sanctity inherent in certain
Divine Names,? and we know that this belief is very old in
humanity, that it is found at an early period in Chaldea,
Akkadia and so forth. It is ridiculous for modern intelli-
gence, but it is of great antiquity, and as it belongs to those
countries with which Israel was in contact, there is reason to

Him to be possessed of a bodily form, having distin& members and lineaments, including
otgans of seeing, hearing, speaking and so forth ; also that they note only one difference
between the body of God and that of man who is in His image, namely, that the fingers
ate inflexible, because God effeéts nothing with his hands. It seems certain that St.
Agobard draws here from the DEscripTION OF THE Bopy oF Gop. In the second
passage it is said: ‘‘ Further, they believe the letters of their alphabet to have existed
from everlasting, and before the beginning of the world to have received diverse
offices, in virtue of which they should preside over created things.”—-S. AGoBarDI,
LuGpunEnsis Eptscor1, OpERA Omnia. Patrologie Cursus Completus . . . accurante
J. P. Migne. Paris, 1851, p. 78 e# seg. This appears to indicate an acquaintance with
SEPHER YETZIRAH, though obviously misconéstruing its meaning, or is alternatively a
reference to Akiba’s ALPHABET, the date of which in its two extant versions seems highly
conje@ural. The Tatmups arte also a possible source of the statement. Karppe
(op. cit., p. 129) affirms that St. Agobard quotes almost verbatim from the ALPHABET.

1 On this fact Franck insists very strongly, maintaining that these references demon-
Strate the existence of a work reserved to a few and that this work is identical with the
SEPHER YETZIRAH as we now have it.—La KassaLg, Paris, 1843, p. 75 ef seq.

2 See Appendix IV.

DATE OF THE BOOK OF FORMATION 45

think that it may have become part of the religious baggage
of the Hebtew people long before any Master in Israel
dreamed of the S—EPHER YETZIRAH, the ALPHABET of Akiba,
ot even the Misuna itself. Purveyors of occult reverie have
attached themselves naturally and inevitably to this doérine,1
and we must allow that the most ancient document of Kab-
balism 2 does embody in this subje&t something of Tradition
from the past, perhaps even from the period of the Babylonian
captivity, as the T'amup itself indicates. On the other hand,
we have no evidence to shew that the doétrine of the Instru-
ments of Creation is much prior to the date of the treatise
which develops it; it has no history previously, and can be
placed therefore at most in Talmudic—z.e., in post-Christian—
times. It should be added that the S—pHER YETZIRAH is part
of a considerable literature of an occult or cryptic complexion
covering the period between the Talmudic Age and the first
report of the ZOHAR.®

IIL—MODERN CRITICISM OF THE BOOK OF
SPLENDOUR

The commentaries on the SEPHER YETZIRAH which
preceded the publication of the Zohar make no claim on
antiquity, and may be reserved for consideration in their
ptoper place later on. The alleged traces of Kabbalism in
writers of known dates also prior to that event may be left in
like manner till we deal with the documents consecutively.
We can proceed therefore at once to the several problems
connected with the Book oF SPLENDOUR. Chief among these

1 And so also, it would seem, has one elementary form of modern Christian
Mysticism. See, for example, the colle€tion entitled Lerrers From A Mystic OF THE
PresENT Day, by an anonymous writer. Second edition, London, 1889, pp. 205-207.
** We seem to have to learn the various names of God before we can grasp she Name.
The Name grasps us, while the others are various outer courts through which we come
into the Sanétuary or Name of God ; in that name we find pasture wherever our outer
life may take us.” Compare Saint-Martin: L’Esprir pes Cxosszs, tom. ii. 65 ef seq.

2 I ought not, perhaps, to omit that Mayer Lambert, one of the French editors of
the SEPHER YETZIRAH, affirms that it has nothing in common with the Kabbalah, by
which he understands a mysterious explanation of the Bible drawn from the letters of
the text and a metaphysical theory which conneéts God with the world through a
series of emanations of Divinity. As regards its date, he agrees that it is one of the
numerous MrprasHim produced by the Talmudic period. It should be added that
this definition of Kabbalism does not answer to the ZoHAR in any adequate or tolerable
no ea

_ 3 See Phineas Mordell—in the JewisH QuaRTERLY REVIEW, 1913—on the tradition
that SEPHER YETZIRAH was wtitten by Joseph ben Uzziel towards the end of the fifth
centuty.

46 THE HOLY KABBALAH

are the questions: (1) Whether some modern criticism is
right in ascribing the Zour to the thirteenth century as its
petiod, and to R. Moses Shem Tob de Leon as its author.
(2) Whether we have evidence that part at least of its doctrine
was in existence at a much earlier period, or, as its legend
States, at the time of the Roman Emperor Antoninus.

We shall get very little help from the insight of contem-
porary Israel as to either point. The S—pHER YETZIRAH was
known and accepted before documentary criticism can be said
to have been conceived or born ; and so also when the ZOHAR
was promulgated it was among a mixed audience who either
took or rejected it on @ priori grounds. ‘Those who loathed
the yoke of Aristotle, which Abraham ben David Ha Levi (ob.
circa A.D. 1126), Abraham ben Meir Ibn Ezra (circa 1092-1167),
and Moses Maimonides (1131-1201) would have placed on
the neck of Jewry, accorded it a glad welcome.+ All that
great seCtion of Jewry which was addifted to Astrology and
Magic took it into their heart of hearts: it was neither Magic
nor Astrology, but it harmonised with their peculiar aspira-
tions. On the other hand, it was hated by the Aristotelians
because it did not consort with their methods.” It is not till
recent times that we have any intelligent defence on the part
of Jewish thinkers—Konitz in 1815, Franck in 1843, David
Luria in 1857,* Munk in 1859; or, on the other hand, a strong
and informed hostility, as that of Graetz ® in Germany, to
quote only one instance.

1 The contrariety of the two systems is best shewn by this fa&. Myer says: “ Its
opponents were almost universally Jewish Aristotelians, who opposed the ancient
secret learning of the Israelites because it was more in accord with the philosophy of
Plato and Pythagoras, and indeed most likely emanated from the same sources, the
Aryan and Chaldean esoteric dofrine.”—PuitosopHy OF Isn GEBIROL, p. 12. It is
the fa&t only which is of value : Myet’s explanation may be read in the light of Book ii.

§ 5. :

2 “* When the Saracens became the patrons of philosophy . . ., the attention paid
both by Arabians and Christians to the writings of Aristotle excited the emulation of
the Jews, who, notwithstanding the ancient curse pronounced on all Jews who should
ingtru@ their sons in the Grecian learning, . . . continued in their philosophical
course reading Aristotle in Hebrew translations made from the inaccurate Arabic, for
Greek was at this period little understood.”—-Gould: Hisrory oF FREEMASONRY,
London, 1885, ii. 66, 67 ; see also 69, 70.

3 See Isaac Myer, op. cit., pp. 20 et seq.

4 See his KADMooTH HA ZOHAR, which appeared at Johannesburg at or about the
date in question. It maintained that the completion of the ZoHAR was much prior to
that of the BABYLONIAN TALMupD and that some of its do&trines were cited by Babylonian
Geonim on the authority of a MiprAsH YERUSHALMI, which was in fact the ZOHAR.

5 Perhaps it is more Strong than it is well informed. I see no trace in Graetz of any
real acquaintance with the Kabbalah, about which he writes savagely and with the
indiscrimination which we conne& with a savage. Thus, he terms the ZouHar “a
notorious forgery,”’ whereas the chief notoriety concerning it is that after nearly seven

MODERN CRITICISM 47

In estimating the influence exercised by the Kabbalah upon
certain minds of Christendom, the SEpHER YETZIRAH must be
distinguished from the Zouar. The former has had no
influence ; it was indeed introduced to our knowledge by a
monk of exalted erudition and of eccentricity equally great,
but it was not till the sixteenth century, and it found no
sphere of operation. Some of its Sephirotic developments,
the commentaries of Rabbi Abraham and Rabbi Azriel, met
with a certain audience among a few men of learning; but
they can bear no comparison with the appeal made by the
larger cycle. For Christian students the Kabbalah was either
the Zour itself or it was developments therefrom, and, as
we shall see subsequently, the office attributed to it was almost
exclusively evangelical: that is to say, the discovery that
there had existed in Israel, from time immemorial, as it was
alleged, a Secret Doctrine which appeared to contain analogies
and even identities with fundamental dogmas of Christianity,
put the Jews so clearly in the wrong, by their own shewing,
that their conversion was deemed inevitable.! Thus, the
antiquity of the Tradition was not at that time challenged in
Christendom, and again it was not a period when documentary
cfiticism was pursued with any keenness. The fourteenth
century made the grave, but yet excusable, mistake of suppos-
ing that most people wrote the books attributed to them.
They accepted the claim of the Zonar for much the same
reason that they were persuaded of the antiquity of Homer.
In the existing state of scholarship to have challenged one
might have opened an abyss beneath the other, and could well
have included all ancient literature in a common uncertainty.
Of course, as time went on and the evangelical instrument
proved to be of no effedt, its validity began to be challenged,
but even then it was scarcely on critical grounds. So also
even at the inception of the enthusiasm, some sceptical voices

centuries of criticism scarcely two authorities can be found to agree in their estimate.
Throughout this part of his history we encounter things uncertain described in the
language of certitude, and things for which there is little evidence as if there were
overwhelming testimony.

1 “ Some Christians have ‘also esteemed them (é.e., the Kabbalistic books and their
’ conneétions) because they found them mote favourable to the Christian religion than
recent commentaries of the Rabbins. But they failed to consider that these same
allegorical books are filled with an infinitude of ridiculous fables, and that Jewish
superstition is much more clearly proved from them than are the Mysteries of our
Religion. William Postel has imposed on several theologians in this matter, having
pretended to find Christianity in the books of the Zouar.”—Richard Simon : HisTorrE
CRITIQUE DU VIEUX TESTAMENT, Pp. 371.

48 THE HOLY KABBALAH

‘were raised, but again from uncritical and predetermined
motives.t The Christians who rejected the Zohar were like
the Jews who rejected it—the latter because they were
Aristotelians, the former because they were Christians, who
saw no good in the Ghetto, and only the final impenitence of
the lost thief in the erudition of Toledo.?

The credulity, or at least the disability, of early students
has been atoned for amply in the spirit which has governed
later critics of the Kabbalah. I must confess that in some
cases they seem, after their own manner, to have prejudged
the question much as that laborious bibliographer Julius
Battolocci prejudged it in the seventeenth century. It was
offensive to the dignity of the Latin Church to suppose that
there was a rival Tradition, full of illumination and wisdom,
preserved unknown to the Church in the rejected House of
Israel. By a similar sentiment it has seemed intolerable to
modern notions that any cryptic literature should possess a
real claim on attention. It is therefore said out of hand that
the Kabbalah, represented by the Zonar, is a forgery of the
thirteenth century. We must endeavour to comprehend
precisely what is involved in this standpoint.

There ate some literary fabrications which do not need a
high degree of scholarship to expose them, for they may be
said to betray themselves, often at every point. In the
department of belles lettres it is sufficient to mention the so-
called Rowley poems. These, as everybody is aware, were
forgeries pure and simple, and their disguise is so entirely
spurious that it can be peeled off without any difficulty. It
is not necessary to add that they possessed their believers,
and not further back than the days of the Bell edition of
Chatterton, the race of Rowleyites had still a few survivals,
for we find the editor describing their characteristics in terms
which have a wider application than he was concerned with
at the moment. A true Rowleyite, he says, is not open to

1 Among wtiters who did not permit themselves to be deceived by the alleged
instrument of conversion, a high place must be accorded to Petrus Galatinus and his
Ds Arcanis CATHOLIC2 VERITATIS contra Judeorum perfidiam, first published in 1518.

2 The connection between Christianity and the ZoHar once found an occasional
expositor in French occult citcles. Consult Stanislas de Guaita: Essa1s prs SCIENCES
Maupirss. I. Au Seuil du Mystere. Nouvelle édition, corrigée. Paris. 1890. “ The
ZOHAR has wedded the Gospel ; the spirit has fructified the soul ; and immortal works
have been the fruits of this union. ‘The Kabbalah became Catholic in the school of
St. John,” &c. A romantic criticism, inspired by Eliphas Lévi and utterly devoid of
warrant.

MODERN CRITICISM 49

conviction, and the statement obtains in the case of all perti-
nacious defenders of spurious literary productions. The
position of the Rowley MSS. is fairly paralleled by that of
many occult documents, among which, as typical instances,
we may select the handboks of Ceremonial Magic. There
ate no wotks which betray themselves more transparently
and abundantly than certain versions of the Kry or SOLOMON
and its connections, or the SacrED Macic oF ABRAMELIN
THE Mace, and yet they possessed their believers in England
only some decades ago, enthusiasts for the good faith of their
claims to a high antiquity or a Hebrew origin, as the case
might be.

There ate again some fabrications which possess a certain
basis in fact, ovet which a mass of forgery has been arranged.
One ready instance in point is found in the poems of Ossian,
fot which there was indubitably a nucleus of floating Gaelic
tradition, and it was wrought into his production by MacPher-
son. The result may deceive for a moment even sound
scholarship, but its full exposure is only a matter of time. In
this case the epic of WALLACE was fatal to the possibility of
Fingal. The Latin alchemical writings attributed to Geber
might be regarded as typical instances in occult literature of
this form of fraud, if we could accept Berthelot’s view that
they have scarcely any resemblance to the Arabic originals,
for such originals exist.4

Finally, there are certain works which may or may not be
fabrications, but either they incorporate so much genuine
material belonging to the department of literature which they
pretend to represent, or else are constructed so skilfully that
the balance of probability is poised pretty equally concerning
them, and it is almost impossible to arrive, by impartial
methods, at the determination of their claims. Ido not know
whether there is any good instance in belles lettres of this kind
of alleged fabrication. Hoge’s Jaconrre ReLics oF Scor-
LAND is pethaps the nearest approach to a parallel. That
colleGion contains undoubtedly a large proportion of genuine
material, but it is suspected that the Ettrick Shepherd supplied
a proportion of the memorable garner by his own skill in

1 See my SecRET TRADITION IN ALCHEMY, 1926, p. 117, fot a note on Djaber texts
which have come to light since Berthelot wrote. Thete is ground for believing that
they—and not the texts edited by the French chemist—are the originals of the Latin
Geber.

50 THE HOLY KABBALAH

vetse-craft, and criticism, though it has not concerned itself
seriously, is perhaps divided fairly on the question. In so-
called occult literature we have several signal examples of
such suspected writing which has not been found out to the
satisfaction of the impartial mind. For example, a few of the
Hermetic books, which are classed by scholars as productions
of the Alexandrian period, and therefore as post-Christian,
ate held by others to represent traditions of considerable
antiquity, and I do not know that the case has been decided
for all time as regards one or two of these works. But the
most renowned of all the instances is that with which we are
here concerned—the Kabbalah itself. Destru@tive criticism
has maintained that its foremost work was forged by a single
writer, of indifferent claims to our intellectual consideration,
at the end of the thirteenth century. There is, as we shall
see, NO positive evidence on this point which is worth naming,
and the presumptive evidence is not at all Strong. There is
very good proof of late writing, but the theory of the fabrica-
tion of the ZoHar by Moses de Leon puts an almost im-
possible burden on the shoulders of that questionable per-
sonage, and is generally the work of writers who have not
paid sufhicient regard to the possible existence of much of the
traditional doctrine which is summarised in the ZoHAR at a
petiod preceding its appearance, perhaps even by some
centuries.

It must be recognised therefore that Kabbalistic literature
belongs to a suspected class, but how we are to regard its
impeachment is a different question. In respect of material
and usually as regards its motive, spurious literature belongs
to the most accountable class. It falls into line readily.
Where there are complex workings of the human mind, as in
the Zour, there sincerity is usually present. The Kabbalah
is much too singular in its mechanism, and far too piecemeal
in its numerous texts, to be referable to a solitary author. So
far as there is evidence on the subject, that evidence tends to
shew that it grew, and that in its final state it was neither
wholly old nor entirely new, but do&trine more ot less familiar
ot following from familiar dofrine.1 These facts are in

1 This is very neatly the position of Solomon Munk, who maintained that the
ZOHAR and its connections, that is, the various traéts and fragments which enter into
the compilation, are not the inventions of an impostor, but that ancient documents
were used by the editor, including MrprasHim which are not now extant.—MELANGES _
DE PrrLosopHiz, JuIVE Er ARABE. Paris. 1859, p. 275 ef seq. In spite of this,

- MODERN CRITICISM 51

course of open recognition in the academic circles which
tule general opinion. Of this Dr. Schiller-Szinessy offered
pethaps in his day the best evidence when he observed that
“* almost all that the latest critics have said concerning the age
of the various TarGumMiImM and Mriprasuim,” including the
ZOHAR, “ will have to be unsaid.” 1

Ill.—THE DATE AND AUTHORSHIP OF
THE BOOK OF SPLENDOUR

The theory which accounts for the ZoHar on the ground
that it was written by Moses de Leon in the latter half of the
thirteenth century does not depend merely on internal
evidence: it is not exclusively an inference made by modern
criticism from allusions to late events found here and there
in the work; it is not a presumption arising only from an
alleged fact that the Spanish Jew who is suspected of the
splendid imposture lived by transcribing copies of it; ? that
it had never been heard of previously ; or that the original
MS. from which R. Moses claimed to have drawn has never
come to light. It is based upon supposed evidence which
claims to be contemporary, or thereabouts, with the appear-
ance of the Zowar itself. It may be highly probable that in
the absence of such testimony, if it could pass muster, the
same point would have been reached independently ; but the
fact remains that, supposing the evidence has been construed
rightly, then the chief charge against the Zowar is not a
discovery of modern criticism at all; it transpired without
being sought for, and hence the case against the work is based
both on external and internal grounds. It is not therefore at

Munk did not consider that the ZoHar, at least in its present form, was anterior to the
seventh century, but rather that the Kabbalistic developments which it represents took
place in the thirteenth century, and were either influenced by Gebirol (1021-1070)
ot by sources common to both.—Ibid. pp. 276, 277.

1 See the article on MiprasHm™ in the ninth edition of ENcycLop2p1A BRITANNICA,
already cited.

2 It is accepted as such by all critics who depend on the account of the ZoHAR
given in the SepHER YUHASIN, but it seems to me that the statement has an air of fable.
The Zowar is a vety large work, and Moses de Leon must have employed a Staff of
copyists in order to transcribe it frequently. There is no evidence, however, that he
employed any one; but if he worked single-handed, he could not have “‘ made large
sums,”’ as alleged, by so slow a process. It has been suggested alternatively that he
profited much by the patronage of wealthy Jews, to whom he dedicated his books ;
but as to this there is no conclusive evidence. It is merely an inference from the faét
that he addressed several other works to co-religionists who were, ex hypothes?, his
patrons.

52 THE HOLY KABBALAH

first sight a weak case and must be sketched fully and frankly,
that I may not be accused of any bias in the matter. At the
same time it is my purpose to shew that the indi&ment breaks
down altogether.

Let us dispose first of all of the alleged external evidence.
In the year 1566 there appeared in Hebrew at Constantinople
a work entitled SEPHER YUHASIN, ot BooK oF GENEALOGIES,
by R. Moses Abraham ben Samuel Zakut, who belongs to the
second half of the fifteenth century.1 Its point of view with
_ regard to the Zowar is that the splendour of that work is
truly an illumination of the world; that it contains deep
secrets of the Law and of concealed Tradition in Israel; that
it is conformed to the truth as regards both Written and Oral
Law ; that it embodies the sayings of R. Simeon ben Yohai,
of the petiod of the Emperor Antoninus, under whose name
it appears, but is really the work of his disciples ; and that,
finally, it did not become public till after the death of Nah-
manides, namely, the second half of the thirteenth century.?
It is therefore obvious that R. Moses Abraham must not be
classed among those who opposed the Zowar, as some
modern critics have attempted to shew.

It will seem almost incredible that in this work, which so
defends the Zouwar, a narrative should be found which
appears to represent it as an imposture devised from met-
cenaty motives by Moses de Leon, otherwise, Moses ben
Shem-Tob; yet such at first sight is the case, and as such it
has been accepted by those who impeach the work. The
explanation is in reality simple; the narrative in question is
a fragment, and the proof that its missing conclusion is really
to the credit of the ZoHar, and exculpatory as to the tran-
sctiber of that work, resides in the fact that the person whose
adventures it relates became assured subsequently that the
ZOHAR was not a splendid forgery, seeing that he embodied
some of its principles in one of his own treatises. The most
biassed of modern critics, Dr. Graetz, admits the force of this

fact.

1 That is to say, to the reign of Ferdinand and Isabella. He was a Jew of Salamanca,
but he taught at Saragossa. When the edict of expulsion was published he retired:
into Portugal and was appointed Royal Historiographer by King Emanuel. The
YuHASIN embraces the entire period between the creation of the world and the year
1500 A.D. It was in great repute among Latin bibliographers of Kabbalism and is
cited continually by Bartolocci.

2 Moses ben Nahman Gerondi, the Spanish Talmudist of Gerona, called also
Ramban and Nahmanides, died in Palestine, circa 1270.

ANTIQUITY OF THE ZOHAR "153

The nartative is concerned with the adventures of Isaac
de Acco 1—a disciple of Nahmanides—who laid claim to the
performance of miracles by a transposition of Hebrew letters
according to a system which he pretended that he had learned
from the angels. It will be seen that he was therefore a
visionary, unless a rougher criticism be held to apply. In any
case, he was at Novara, in Italy, about 1293, when he heard
that a Spanish Rabbin was in possession of the original ZOHAR
MS., and, being very anxious to see it, he made a journey into
Spain. He learned there by report that the erudite Moses
Nahmanides was said to have transmitted the book to his
son in Catalonia from Palestine,? but that the ship which bore
it was driven by wind to Aragonia ? or to Catalonia, and the
ptecious volume came into the hands of Moses de Leon. At
Valladolid Isaac de Acco made the acquaintance of the latter,
who declared upon oath that he was in possession of the MS.
and that it was at his home in Avila, where he would exhibit
it to Isaac. They undertook a journey together with this
object, but Moses de Leon died at Arevolo on the way.* His
companion proceeded to Avila, and there prosecuted his
inquiries among the relatives of the deceased. By one of
these, namely, by David Rafon of Corfu, he was informed that
Moses de Leon had been a spendthrift who derived great
profit from his writings,°® but neglected his wife and daughter, ®
while as for the ZoHar he had made it up out of his own head.
How far Isaac was impressed by this testimony does not appear
explicitly ; but he next had recourse to a wealthy Rabbin of
Avila, named Joseph, who communicated with the widow
and daughter of Moses, offering for the maiden the hand of
his son and a substantial dowry if they would produce the
original MS. of the Zonar. The women had been left in
poor circumstances, and there was every reason to suppose
that they would comply gladly. They concurred, however,

1 J.e., Acre, besieged by the Sultan of Egypt in 1291. Isaac was one of the Jewish
refugees from that city, and seems to have suffered imprisonment for a time.

2 It is curious that the disciple should first learn that his master was in possession of
such a treasure by a floating rumour from a great distance.

3 The reference is probably to Alicante, as Arragon has no seaboard.

4 So far the account represents Moses de Leon as a&ting with sincerity in the matter.

5 It is obvious that the statement has no evidential charaéter.

6 There is evidence, on the contrary, (1) that when ele&ted Rabbi of the Synagogue
at Avila, his poverty was such that he could not defray the expenses of the journey,
and (2) that his emoluments in that position did not enable him to support his family.—
See SEPHARDIM, or the History of the Jews in Spain and Portugal, by JAMES FINN, 1841,

PP- 303, 304.

54 THE HOLY KABBALAH

in affirming that there was no such MS., that the dead man
had composed the work out of his own head and written it
with his own hand.! His quest having thus failed, Isaac de
Acco left Avila and proceeded to Talavera, where he met
with R. Joseph ben Todros, and Jacob, a pupil of Moses,
both of whom, in reply to his inquiries, affirmed that the
genuine ZOHAR was in the hands of Moses de Leon, as they
had proved conclusively. The nature of the proof does not
appear, and the account of Isaac breaks off abruptly in the
middle of a sentence describing some testimony which he
received at Toledo as to an ancient Rabbin, named Jacob, who
had “ testified by heaven and earth that the book Zonar, of
which R. Simeon ben Yohai is the author * * *,”

I have passed over purposely in this brief account several
minor details which have awakened suspicion as to the
honesty of the narrative, for it is unnecessary to confuse the
issues. ‘The point is that it closes with a solemn testimony to
the authenticity of the Zonar, and by the course which he
took subsequently Isaac de Acco must have concluded to
abide by this. Assuming that the narrative is authentic, the
evidence which was set aside as insufficient by the one person
who has recorded it cannot be accepted by impartial criticism
unenforced by other considerations. So far therefore as the
account in the SEPHER YUHASIN is concerned, it is not proved
that Moses de Leon wrote the ZoHar “ out of his own head.” 2
R. Moses Abraham himself mentions an opinion that he did
produce it under the guidance of the Writing Name, z¢., by
angelic revelation; but I do not conceive that it is necessary
to discuss this possibility.

The state of the case as it stands is confused, and most
petsons who have taken part in the controversy have been led
into more or less contradiction. ‘Those who have regarded

1 Hence he did not employ transcribers, and whatever price he may have obtained
for copies of the work he could not have multiplied many. If assiduous, he could
have had no time for squandering ; if idle, no money to spend. Moreover, he must
have had a copy of his invention from which to make his transcripts and there would
have been that at least in the house, to be shewn and seen.

2 Outside this document there is, moreover, no proof, so far as I am aware, that he
was even connected with it as transcriber. If, however, he did a& in this capacity,
and as its editor, codifier, or what not, it is desirable to point out that the antiquity
of the Zowar is not certified for this reason. Finally, speaking still under correétion,
the YuHASIN is the one authority by which we can fix so important a date as the death
of Moses de Leon. Who was the Rabbi of this name and place, for whom Samuel,
son of Isaac, transcribed a copy of the MoreH, anno 1452, which copy is still preserved
in the Giinglung Library, Paris? It is numbered 771, according to Friedlandet’s
pteface to the third volume of his version of Maimonides, p. xiv.

ANTIQUITY OF THE ZOHAR 55

Moses de Leon as nothing more than a transcriber have had
to reckon as they could with certain damaging references to
late events which are found in the Zonar, and their explana-
tions ate often quite worthless ; those who regard the tran-
sctiber as the concealed author have had to meet as they might
the extreme difficulty of supposing that such a collection was
the prodution of one individual, and that individual Moses
de Leon. Their explanations also are of little value and are
for the most part ingenious or other assumptions.

The internal evidence against the ZoHar may be reduced
under the following heads :

(1) It refers to the vowel points which are alleged to have
been invented in post-Talmudic times.t (2) It quotes or
borrows from a book entitled the DuTIEs OF THE HEART,
written by a Jew of Saragossa,? about the middle of the
eleventh century. (3) It mentions two kinds of Phylacteries,
ot Tephilin, which fac is supposed to prove the late origin
of the entire work.? (4) It quotes authorities posterior to its
alleged period. (5) It is written in Aramaic, whereas at the
period to which it is ascribed—meaning presumably that of
R. Simeon—Aramaic was the vernacular, while Hebrew was
made use of in religious writings.

These difficulties are met by defenders of the Zowar in the
following way :

(1) The vowel points are not the invention of times posterior
to the Tatmup ; the proof is that they are mentioned in the
Tatmup, and there is no question that this work is long
anterior to the thirteenth century, being the period of Moses
de Leon. In the T'aLmup they are said to have been a rule
given to Moses the Prophet on Mount Sinai.4 The pre-

1 Elias Levita, a German Jew of the sixteenth century, was one of the first to affirm
the late institution of the points, which he ascribed to the Jews of Tiberias about the
beginning of the sixth century. In reply to this it has been advanced that at the period
the schools of Judza had been closed, and that Jewish learning was then centred at
Babylon (see David Levi: Lincua Sacra, patti. c. iii. § 1, London, 1785). Ginsburg,
however, adopts the theory of Levita, subje€t to the modification that they were intro-
duced by the Karaite, R. Mocha, at the end of the sixth century. David Levi, on the
other hand, makes their reception by the Karaite Jews a proof of their antiquity,
because they were “‘ professed enemies to tradition and innovation.” Unfortunately,
there ate no pointed Hebrew MSS. prior to the tenth century.

2 R. Behai ben Joseph Ibn Bakoda.

8 For a general description of the Tepuiiin, see Basnage: HisrorrE DES JUIFS,
tom. ili. pp. 752 e¢ seg. Any di€tionary will tell the unversed reader that the Phylactery
was a Strip of parchment inscribed with certain passages from the Pentateuch. It was
worn on the forehead, otherwise on forehead and arm, during prayer.

4 Treatise NEDAREEM, also Bas. MEGILLAH, Bas. Berocoru, and Bas, Erusin.

H.Ke P

56 THE HOLY KABBALAH

. Christian existence of the point system, with the exception of
a very few cases occutting in the Pentateuch, which, mote-
Over, are not vowel-points, this is one thing, and must be left
to those who affirm it; its existence in early post-Talmudic
times 1 is another, and all that is required in the present case
to destroy the validity of this obje&ion to the reasonable
antiquity, as afirmed, of the ZOHAR.?

(2) The treatise on the Duties oF THE Heart is certainly
a wotk of the eleventh century, but it is advanced that its
author himself borrowed from the Zowar in an early form,
the existence of which is traceable, from Talmudic references,
under the name of Miprasu of Rabbi Simeon ben Yohai.?
It is said also that the author was a contemporary of Rabbi
Abraham, who wrote a commentary of repute upon the Boox
OF ForMaTION, but this personage, identified by some
dreamers as the pretended instructor of Nicholas Flamel in
the secrets of Alchemy, died at the close of the twelfth century.

We may choose as we please between the alternatives offered,
but the fact remains that the ZoHaR contains matter which is
found in a work belonging to the eleventh century.

(3) The existence of two kinds of Phylacteries arose through
a difference of rabbinical opinion as to the Scriptural passages
to be used on them. The question is whether this difference
of opinion occurred in the eleventh century and later, or
whether it originated in earlier Talmudic times. Certain state-
ments and inferences therefrom are set forth by defenders of
the ZoHaR in support of the second view ; but the use of two
kinds of Phylacteries before the tenth century has not been
demonstrated.
This at its value is, moreover, the testimony of the ZoHar, obviously reproducing
cutrent legend, or borrowing from the traditional storehouse of the TaLmup.

1 See David Levi, op. cit., who says that in several places of the BABYLONIAN TALMUD
mention is made of “ the distin@tion of the accents, and, in particular, of the accents
of the law, which might be shewn and pointed at by the hand, consequently they must
be visible marks or figures, and are to be understood both of the vowel points and
accents.” ‘Though belonging to an early period of the controversy, Levi’s defence

is still worth reading. Basnage, tom. ii. p. 763, refers the invention to the eleventh
century.

; The commentaty of St. Jerome on Jeremiah has been regarded as positive proof
that the vowel signs were not in existence at his day. A critical dissertation on their
antiquity will be found in MEmorrEs DE LITTERATURE DE L’ ACADEMIE DES INSCRIPTIONS
ET BELLES LETTRES, Tome xx., pp. 22 ef seg. It tends to prove that vowel-points existed
in the middle of the third century a.p.

3 According to Jellinek the great classic of the Kabbalah has passed under three
names: (a) MiprasH of Rabbi Simeon ben Yohai; (4) MiprasH: Let there be
Light! (¢) Zonar, 7.e., Splendour or Light, after Daniel xii. 3 Dre Kapaa, oder
die Religions philosophie der Hebraéi von Franck. Leipsic, 1844. The Mrprasn is a
symbolical narrative or account.

ANTIQUITY OF THE ZOHAR 57

(4) ‘The citation by the Zowar of late authorities belonging
to the Amoraim school is met by representing it in its extant
form as the growth of several centuries, which is true of
much early Hebrew literature, canonical or not. The indirect
Strength of this view is considerable; but it is weakened by
its supporters when they attempt to argue that had the ZOHAR
been forged by Moses de Leon he would have avoided the
citation of later authorities. The history of literary impostures
points wholly in the opposite direction, and the objection
demonstrates quite clearly that the work as we have it 1s later
than its latest authority. For it to be otherwise is impossible.
How the late authorities came to be included is a distinct
matter.

(5) When Isaac de Acco set out on his quest for the original
MS. of the Zouar, he is recorded to have said: “If it be
written in the Jerusalem idiom it is genuine, but if in Hebrew
it is not.” ‘The value of an objection to the ZoHar founded
on its use of Aramaic is here exhibited by the express Sstate-
ment of a Jewish witness referred to the thirteenth century.+
It is argued furthermore, by its defenders: (¢) That Aramaic
is the language of the Targums, which are mystical ; (0) That
the uncanonical language is used to increase the symbolism,
but this may be regarded as a subtlety ; (¢) That supposing the
antiquity of the Zowar, the scribe of R. Simeon ben Yohai
was undoubtedly the Rabbi Abbah whom it mentions, and
he as a Babylonian must have been thoroughly conversant
with Aramaic; (¢d) That supposing the Zowar to be a
forgery produced by Moses de Leon, he was mote likely to
have written it in Hebrew, which is the language of his other
books.

1 Compare the article s.. MrprRasHim in the ninth edition of the ENcycLopa#pIa
Britannica, by Dr. Schiller-Szinessy, Reader in Talmudic at Cambridge. “ The
ZOHAR was begun in Palestine late in the second or early in the third century, a.p.,
and finished at the latest in the sixth or the seventh century. It is impossible that it
should have been composed after that time and before the Renaissance, as both language
and contents clearly shew.”

2 There is no evidence for the editorship of R. Abbah, but if anything Zoharic was
committed to writing in the second century there might be ground for accepting the
express Statement of the Lesser Hoty Synop that the recorder was the son of R.
Simeon, obviously and of course in respe& only of that particular text.

5 On the entire question compare Munk: M&LANGES DE PHILOSOPHIE, JUIVE ET
ARABE, pp. 280, 281. “‘ The Aramean dialeét of the Zonar is not that of Daniel and
Ezra, of the Chaldaic Paraphrase of Onkelos and Jonathan, of the Targums, the
Talmuds, the Mrprasuim or the Gueonim, but an incorreé&t and most corrupt mixture
of all.” Munk also sees traces in the ZoHar of unfamiliarity with the language used.
By this a double and altogether intolerable burden seems placed on the shoulders of its
reputed forger. The question raised by Franck in 1843 remains still pertinent and still

P2

58 THE HOLY KABBALAH

From these objections and these answers the general
conclusion must be that the internal evidence for the late
origin of the bulk of the Zowar as it Stands is not of any real
force. ‘The two tabulations have by no means exhausted the
difficulties or the countet-evidence, as to which, even at the
present day, Franck is in many cases the best and certainly the
most lucid expositor.1_ Putting aside the alleged absence of
Christian influence, if not of all reference to Christianity, his
remarks on the absence of Aristotelian influence, and some
points of the argument from the diale& in which the work is
written, seem to possess as much force as they did originally
in 1843. But the strength of the case in favour of the ZoHAR
is also the strength of the chief objection against it. It does
quote later authorities, but this may exhibit that it grew like
the Talmudic writings and several of the canonical Hebrew
books. It has been well urged that if contemporary with the
TALMuD, the latter ought to have mentioned it, and it is
replied that it does, not, however, under the catchword of its
late name, but by the title of the Secret Learning, and by other
titles which have been mentioned in this se€tion. It would
exceed my province to pursue the subject further. The
minute considerations are of course highly technical, and
there are some on both sides which it is wise to abstain from
pressing. One of these is the argument that Moses de Leon
was an unlikely person to have written such a work as the
ZOHAR, because he was intellectually and morally unfit.2 I
have noted that he was unlikely, but possibilities of this kind
can only be determined by the event. Many great books
treat matters of the most elevated order in an idiom which the most distinguished
scholats had been for so long content merely to understand and which, on this
hypothesis, had not produced a single work capable of serving him as a model >—La
KABBALE, p. 104.

1 On the opposing side there is negative force at its value in one contention of
Karppe (0p. cit., pp. 307, 308). He cites Juda Hadessi and his Esaxox Haxkorsr,
written in 1148 and exhibiting vast knowledge of Jewish religious and philosophical
tendencies. It inveighs bitterly against the anthropomorphisms of the Talmudists
and cites everything of this nature in rabbinical literature, but it says no word about the
Zouar, the inference being that if this great and occasionally most anthropomorphic
collection had been in existence at his period Juda Hadessi must have known and could
not have failed to cite it. .

2 Dr. Schiller-Szinessy shews that he was proud of the authorship of his books, and
hence unlikely to conceal his hand in the composition of any; but this argument
also must not be pressed too far. The same writer terms him an inferior Kabbalist,
and it seems admitted on all sides that his original books are poor in quality. From
these works Jellinek has extratted passages which are parallel to others in the ZOHAR

and some critics have thence concluded an identity of authorship. In any other
branch of reseatch such parallels would be held to prove nothing.

ANTIQUITY OF THE ZOHAR $9

have been produced by those who were antecedently im-
probable, and after all, at the best, we know Moses de Leon
only through his other writings and the alleged testimony of a
hostile relative. There is no doubt that the ZoHAR was to
some extent sprung upon the Jewish people at the period of
its appearance. The manner of its reception was not un-
mixed; it received the kind of welcome which would be
given to a work which may have been old as regards its
materials, though unfamiliar—less or more—in its form, and
this is sufficient to account for any silence of previous authori-
ties, while in the shaping of those materials and the impressing
of that form the individual who is supposed to have multiplied
copies may have had a hand.

IV.—_THE AGE OF ZOHARIC TRADITION

It must not be supposed that the field of criticism is occupied
entirely by a hypothesis of unmixed fraud, or that this hypo-
thesis has fastened always upon the same person.2, The most
favoured delinquent is, of course, Moses de Leon, because he
is reported to have circulated the Zonar, but occasionally he
appears as the tool of other conspirators. Thus, Samuel
Cahen maintained that the Zoharic writings were composed
by a convocation of converted Rabbins, assembled for the
purpose in a Spanish monastery, employing Moses as their
publisher, and hence the Church itself might almost figure as

1 And by those who accept this view it is considered that he interfered only to
disfigure it. The view itself is not to be regarded as advanced altogether on my own
behalf, for I have done little more than summarise and deduce from intimations on the
part of apologetic writers, without feeling that it can be satisfaftory to either side.
A long debate is possible on the nature of alleged materials which were or might be
old ; while if admitted as of faé, it does not follow that they give evidence of a Secret
Tradition corresponding to that of the Zonar and perpetuated by reception from an
early period. Some things were obviously familiar, including Yetziratic notions, and
developments therefrom would have been welcome to certain rabbinical minds. It
may be noted that the Jewish ENcycLopapiA, s.v. ZOHAR, concludes that the text
otiginated among Persian Jews of the eighth and following centuries. But the same
epoch-marking work has a yet longer study, s.v. CABALA, from which it may be gathered
(x) that the testimony of Joseph ben Judah in the second half of the second century
seems to indicate the existence of an esoteric do€trine at that time in the world of Jewry
and its connection with the name of Johanan ben Zakkai, who lived before and after
the destruction of Jerusalem ;\ (2) that the apocalyptic literature ‘‘ belonging to the
second and first pre-Christian centuries contained the chief elements of the Kabbalah ” ;
(3) that one thousand years before the supposed date of SEpHER YETZIRAH the Book
OF JUBILEES Offers a cosmogony based like that on the letters of the Hebrew Alphabet.

2 Basnage is inclined to refer the original Zonar to the tenth century, and, following
Bartolocci (BIBLIOTHECA RABBINICA, t. iv. p. 82), represents Moses de Leon as in
possession of several exemplars, which he amplified —HusrorrE DEs JUIFS, t. ii. 781 ;

Cary 75510776.

60 THE HOLY KABBALAH

an accomplice.t Others, like M. H. Landauer,? argue that
the true author was Abraham ben Samuel Abulafia,? while the
voice of Graetz was raised in favour of the school of Abraham
ben David of Posquiére—who belonged to the twelfth
centuty.* Isaac the Blind of Narbonne °—ob, circa 1219—is
also a favoured name, and to him it seems indubitable, in any
case, that Kabbalism owed something of development and of
impulse. Meanwhile this extreme opinion in all its varieties
is balanced by counterviews which also denaturalise the
literature. It may be suspected therefore with reason that on
both sides there is an error of enthusiasm: there are the
children of intelligence who look to find the Secret Doéttine
of Judea a mere transcript from that of Egypt, or whatever
land is for them the well-spring of all truth and all truly
sacred knowledge. These remember, for example, that
Abraham was in Egypt, and, accepting at once the fairy-tale
attribution of the Book oF ForMarION to the patriarch, con-
clude that this document is older than the RrruaL OF THE
Drab. It is useless to reason with those whose confidence
is not shaken in the face of impossibilities, whose imagination
can bridge all gulfs in evidence by fantastic suppositions.
On the other hand, there is the crass criticism which rules off a
literature by a single stroke of the pen into the region of
forgery and imposture, as it rules off all psychical phenomena
into that of imposture or hallucination. It does not matter
that this criticism is always in disgrace. It proved Troy town
to be solar mythos till Troy town was excavated; it under-
mined, as it believed, the Book of Daniel till fresh archeo-

1 At the opposite extreme was Christianus Schcettgenius in his considerable work,
Hor# Hesraic# er Tatmupica: in Theologiam Judaorum Dogmaticam antiquam et
orthodoxam de Messia impensa, 2 vols., Dresden and Leipsic, 1733, 1742. See vol. ii.
Rabbinicorum Leétionum Liber Secundus, c. ii., docens R. Simeonem filium Jochai, auttorem
Libri Sohar, Religionem fuisse Christianam. ‘There are eight heads to the argument, the
most important being that the Zour contains the precise, orthodox doétrine concerning
the Messiah and His divine and human nature, and this not in one place or mysteriously,
but in many and openly. As regards Samuel Cahen, I know his fantastic story at
second hand only and have failed to trace its source, but it is buried somewhere in
what is called his “‘ Great French Bible.”

2 He maintained the apocryphal nature of the Isaac de Acco story and that the
Zouar did not come into general knowledge till a much later period. See Orrenr
Lir., vi, 710-713, 1845-46.

3 A ptophet and Messiah of his period, A.D. 1240-1291, who is said to have termed
his system “‘ a prophetical Kabbalah.”

4 He has been described as the chief Talmudic authority of his period in Southern
France, but most of his works are lost.

5 That is, Isaac ben Abraham, referred also to Posquiére. He has been termed
** father of the Kabbalah,” and is supposed to have conferred on the Ten SzrpHrroTH
those names by which they are known.

AGE OF ZOHARIC TRADITION 61

logical discoveries cast it into the pit which it had dug. It is
truly not less stupid, and it is far less engaging, than the
opposed excess.?

The antiquity of the Zohar does not depend so much upon
the date of its documents as on that which may belong to its
Tradition.? It is clear that the speculations, for example, of
medizval Rabbins, referred backward in virtue of a fabulous
claim to the dawn of the Christian era, are in a worse position
than the Hrerarcuiss of pseudo-Dionysius, and that their
importance, if any, will differ in kind rather than degree from
that which must attach to a Tradition which interlinks with
the far past.2 We are therefore more concerned in ascertain-
ing the state in which modern criticism has left the content of
the Zowar than the form in which it is presented tous. The
eatly students of the work, who accepted and defended its
antiquity, did not make this saving distinction, and in many
instances modern hostility does not make it either. Upon the
sutface of the history of Kabbalistic criticism the first pre-
sumption is, of course, unfavourable to any hypothesis of
antiquity, because this would seem to have been admitted in
days when scholarship was equipped insufficiently for the
determination of such a question. In the light of fuller
knowledge it will be thought that the claim has lapsed, or
remains only as a pious belief prevailing among an uncritical
minority, a few persons being always found whose mental
bias predisposes them to the defence of exploded views. It
happens, however, in the present case that an indiscriminate
rejection is not much less superficial than an overcredulous
acquiescence in a non-proven claim. Moreover, the history
of debated questions of this kind teaches another lesson, and
the closest approximation to truth is found usually in the mean
of extreme views. Now, in the history of Zoharic criticism
we find that the old students not only accepted the claim of the
Tradition to antiquity, and were disposed to understand the

1 In Kabbalistic criticism its typical representative is Graetz, and one can scarcely
conjeture by what principle he was guided in his estimate of Moses de Leon. It is
the height of exaggeration, the account in the YUHASIN transcendentalised till it almost
exceeds recognition.

2 According to Edersheim in his Jewiso Society at THE TIME oF Jesus Curist,
“there existed indubitably ” at this epoch “‘a mass of do&trines and speculations
which was concealed carefully from the multitude ” and even, he adds, from ordinary
scholats. He says also that it bore then, as it bears now, the name of Kabbalah.

3 It should be added, however, that their importance and validity might be so great
and unchallengable that the question of their date would pass into the background,

62 THE HOLY KABBALAH

genealogy more ot less literally, but that further they regarded
the books which contain both as belonging to certain dates
and produced by certain writers without much suspicion, on
the simple authority of the literature.1_ Later scholars, on the
other hand, having found something to countenance the
modern origin of the documents, have overlooked frequently
the possible antiquity of their Tradition. The question of
this antiquity as something which calls to be surveyed apart
from the date of publication will explain what I mean by
possible moderate and middle views in which the truth
should be sought. If we fail entirely here we may regard the
case as closed, it being understood that essential values in
respect of Theosophia MyStica remain over.

I believe that a careful and unbiassed’ comparison of all the
evidence will lead us to conclude that there are elements of
old doétrine in the ZoHar: their exact antiquity is, in part,
highly speculative, but it is quite sufficient to invest them
with considerable interest, from this point of view only. Like
the SEPHER YETZIRAH, some of it may be even referable to
a comparatively remote period. I refer here to Yetziratic
notions concerning the virtue of Divine Names, for this also
is found in the Zowar, as it is found abundantly in the
TALMUD: a tesiduum of its teaching concerning angels and
demons may be also an inheritance from Babylon. All this,
however, is the negligible part of the Zowar, as it is the
negligible, if curious, part of Talmudic literature. With
regard to the Scriptural exegesis which constitutes so large a
portion of it, we shall not offend possibility by supposing that
some of it may be an obscure transmission from Talmudic
times.2 If we take the hints and references found in the
Talmuds to the existence of a Mystical Tradition, and follow
them through the large mystical literature which intervened

1 Some modern ecclesiastical historians, for no solid reason, incline to this view.
Thus, we have in Dean Hook’s compilation, A Cuurcny Dicrionary (fourteenth
edition, London, 1887), the statement that the chief Kabbalistic author was Simeon
ben Yohai, and also that most of the heretics in the primitive Christian Church fell into
the vain conceits of the Kabbalah, particularly the Gnostics, Valentinians and Basilidians.
There is perhaps no mote warrant for the second than the first view, but it has been
advanced warmly, as readers of Matter’s Hisrorre pu GNostIcisME and of King’s
Gnostics will not need to be told. It is understood, however, that the day of these
works, in so far as the second can be said to have had a day, has some time ceased to be.

2 In other words, we may follow the learned author of the article on the MmpraAsHim
in the ENcycLop@pIA BRITANNICA, who says that the nucleus of the work is of Mishnic
times and that R. Simeon was its author in the same sense that R. Johanan was of the
PALESTINE TALMUD, namely, that he gave the first impulse to its composition.

AGE OF ZOHARIC TRADITION 63

between those works and the Zonar as we now have it, we
shall be led not to the conclusion of the mere occultist and
dreamer, that there was a great body of Secret Doétrine which
became revealed gradually, but that there was a kernel of
Tradition which was planted in the secret heart of Israel,
which many watered and fostered, till the growth at length
put forth, not without something of transformation and of
suddenness, the strange flower of the ZonHar. As regards
form its most.ancient part is probably the Boox or CoNcEAL-
MENT, but it is entirely improbable that any conspicuous
portion could have existed in writing till after the sixth century,
while the growth of most of it is probably much later and
subsequent to the latest date which can be ascribed to SEPHER
YETZIRAH.! It is advanced, as we have seen, by its defenders
that the Zowar is a subje€& of reference in several texts both
of the BABYLONIAN and JERUSALEM TALMUD under the name
of the MiprasH of Simeon ben Yohai, and the parallels
between Talmudic sayings attributed to this Rabbi have been
compared with the extant work in order to exhibit their
identity. The existence of a text entitled Mysrrerizs oF
SIMEON BEN YOuAI before the middle of the eleventh century
and possibly much earlier, is acknowledged by Dr. Graetz.
It is reasonable therefore to conclude that early written and
otal materials entered into the composition of the ZOHAR as
we now possess it.” This is the most that can be urged, and
this is sufficient to prove that no one person wrote it out of
his own head.?

It must be confessed, on the other hand, that the legend

1 I put forward this hypothesis because Dr. Schiller-Szinessy has not stated his
reasons why it is impossible that it should have been later than the seventh century,
and subjeé& to the conclusiveness of those reasons. We may speculate what Dr.
Szinessy would have thought of Israel Zangwill, had he read the epilogue to the
CHILDREN OF THE GHETTO, in which it is remarked casually that the ZoHAR was
“‘ forged by a Spanish Jew in the thirteenth century.”’ By the way, are copies of the
ZoHAR likely to be found in a small room, used as a synagogue, outside Jerusalem and
so poor that it is bare even of seats ?

* An interesting article by M. Nicolas in Lichtenberger’s ENCYCLOPEDIE DES
SCIENCES RELIGIEUSES, t. xi. s.v. CABALE (Paris, 1877), regards it as certain that the
philosophical speculations which compose the Kabbalah generally began to form
during the century which preceded the Christian era; but they were oral, imparted
to a few only, and under the seal of secrecy. Unfortunately, the article is not trust-
worthy, representing, as it does, the Amy Sorpy doétrine to be part of the SEPHER
YETZIRAH.

3 Compare Blunt’s Dictionary oF DocrrrNaAL AND HisroricAL THEOLOGY,
which argues that the variety of style and the disjointed charafter of its contents shew
that the ZoHAR is the growth of ages. But Blunt’s work indicates no real acquaintance
with the Kabbalah and its criticism.

64 THE HOLY KABBALAH

' which attributes its origin to R. Simeon ben Yohai seems to
have made an unfortunate choice, for this great authority of
the Tatmup tepresents a reaction against the tendencies
attributed—trightly or not—to R. Akiba, and there is some
evidence for believing that he did not investigate the hidden
meaning of Scripture, but rather its rational principles. He
is described by a modern writer as cold, exclusive and stoical.
At the same time, if we accept the existence of a genuine
Tradition which became incorporated in the Zouar, it is
difficult to reject its leading and central figure.1

If we turn now for a moment to the unequipped standpoint
of so-called modern occultism we shall see that so far we have
no wattant for conneding the chief cycle of Kabbalistic
literature with the high antiquity to which occultists incline.?
While we leave them once more in full possession of the
alleged virtue inherent in Divine Names, and perhaps with
some elements of legend concerning angels and demons, we
are forced to take all that remains a considerable distance into
the Christian era. But the Zowar, although it embodies the
entire content of Kabbalistic doétrine, is not the sole nor the
earliest Storehouse of that doctrine, and we have next to con-
sider whether the antiquity of the metaphysical Tradition is
to be inferred from its points of contact and correspondence
with other theosophical systems which have prevailed in the
past.

V.—ALLEGED SOURCES OF KABBALISTIC
DOCTRINE

On the basis of considerations so far enumerated, it would
appear that we are warranted in regarding some part at least»
of the materials incorporated by the Zowar as earlier than

1 The author of the article CaBaLta in Herzog’s Rea ENcycKiopApre takes a
middle view, namely, that the ZoHar is not the work of Moses de Leon, nor is it of
R. Simeon’s period, though its do&rines are referable to him. It was completed in
the eighth century. The evidence adduced for this view seems inconclusive, so far
as the article is concerned.

2 Take, for example, the following typical instance of the exaggerations which have
found currency on this subjeé&t. “‘ The origin of the Kabbalah is lost in the night of
of time. Is it of India or of Egypt? We do not know; but it is certain that to
Egyptians and Indians it was alike known. Pythagoras returned with it into Greece
after his travels in the East, then the region of the light. One asks vainly whether its
first revelation was divine or the produé of inspiration.” —Desbarrolles : Les MystERrxEs
DE LA Marin, 14me édition, Paris, n.d. Desbarrolles knew nothing of the Kabbalah, but
he refle&ted his friend Eliphas Lévi, who claimed knowledge but wrote frequently in
the same distracted Strain.

SOURCES OF KABBALISTIC DOCTRINE 65

the period of their promulgation. We cannot say whether
the SEPHER YETZIRAH is much anterior to the ninth century.}
But both works are in connection with Talmudic times and,
within the limits of the Christian centuries, there seems there-
fore to have been an esoteric tradition in Israel.2 Whether it
existed prior to Christianity itself is the next concern of our
inquity. At this point the difficulties begin to multiply,
because the range of research is exceedingly large, and it has
been covered in every direction by successive generations of
hatdy speculators. We must proceed step by step and shall
do well to begin first of all by a general survey of the subjed.

The do&trines of the Kabbalah have been referred for their
otigin to almost every philosophic and religious system of
antiquity, and its points of alleged correspondence with each
have been tabulated with some care. They have been derived
from Akkadia, from India, from China, from ancient Egypt,?
from Platonism and Neo-Platonism, from the categories of
Aristotle, from early Christian Gnosticism.4 The most
reasonable conclusion which can be drawn, I think, from all
this rival evidence—in so far as it can claim the term—is that
it is not derived from any one of these sources specifically and
exclusively, but rather that the human mind, when engaged
on certain fundamental and perhaps insoluble problems of the
universe, tends independently to reach conclusions that are
similar and may even wear sometimes an aspect of literal
identity ; that the Kabbalah is largely an outcome of such

1 But we can say that one of the most pronounced opponents of Jewish Theosophy
assigns it to early Gnostic times.—See Gratz: GESCHICHTE DER JUDEN, 11 vols.,
1853-1870.

2°One of the most credulous and also moégt pretentious exponents of the English
school of Kabbalism in a debased occult interest States that, according to Hebrew
Tradition, the do€trines of the oldest portions of the ZoHaR are antecedent to the
Second Temple—W. Wynn Westcott, SzpHER YETZIRAH. ‘Translated from the
Hebrew. Second edition. London, 1893. <A third edition has been published
recently, since the decease of the author.

8 This is the view which obtained most widely among French occultists. “ It is in
Egyptian science,” says Stanislas de Guaita, “ carried from Mitzraim by Moses at the
exodus of the Sons of Israel, that we must discern the source of that Sacred Tradition
transmitted among the Jews from generation to generation, by the oral way, down to
the disciples of Simeon ben Yohai, who wrote, at the di€tation of this master, about
the second century of the Christian era, the Great Book oF THE Licur (ZOHAR).”
—Au Seu pu Mystere, pp. 183, 184. The last statement is, of course, merely an
assumption of the vital point at issue, and the speculations of the French Marquis are
wotth as much and as little as the rest of the rubbish-heap which used to pass in Paris
for occult learning and criticism. It will be noted that R. Simeon is referred to the
second instead of the first century.

4 Even the so-called “‘ Symbols of Pythagoras ” have been approximated to Kab-

balistic teaching. See CoLLECTANEA HeERMETICA, edited by W. Wynn Westcott,
vol. v. éd eff, SomNiuM Scipionts, &c., London, 1894.

66 THE HOLY KABBALAH

unaided research; that its results are in the main sui generss,
but that they offer points of conta& with other attempts of
the kind in all ages and nations ; and that they owe something
to other traditions and memorials of the past, in part by
filtration therefrom, but in part also because they belong
thereto and were born among them. We must, of course,
distinguish the fundamental part of the Kabbalah from its
developments. Included in the first class are the doétrine of
the Ten Emanations, that of Ain Soru, of the MAcroprosopus
_and Microprosopus, some of which may go far back in the
history of post-Christian Jewish literature, indeed almost to
Talmudic times. They are mentioned of necessity here, but
must be unfolded and explained later. The subsequent
developments possess a complexion teflected from many
sources, not excluding the scholastic philosophy of Christian
Europe during the Middle Ages.t Arn Sopu is that final
concept of the Deity which is reached by all true metaphysics ;
it is not necessary to suppose that it was derived from Baby-
lonian initiations during the exile of seventy years, or from
Greek speculation at Alexandria: it may be regarded more
probably as a product of the unfinished exile of Christian
centuries, a fruit of first-hand reflection by the theosophical
mind of Jewry on problems present to the mind, but not
altogether untin@ured by the debates which encompassed it
at different centres of culture. It is the ultimate point of
theosophical speculation possible to the human mind, at
which the mind tends always to arrive. The doctrine of the
SEPHIROTH is, in its turn, an intelligible form of another wide-
spread device of old-world thought when it sought to bridge
the gulf between finite and infinite, between absolute purity
and that material world which, in one or other way, seems to
have been regarded always as unclean. The Macroprosorus
and Microprosopus, whether late or early in Jewish literature,
ate late at least in the history of human speculation. They are
an attempt to distinguish between God as He is in Himself
and in His relation with His children. As might be expected,
they are the most characteristic of Jewry and, as such, offer
the least conne@tion with any external system. Yet they have
some points of contact. As regards each and all, given the
times and the circumstances, the people and their places, they

1 I refer here to the Kabbalistic schools of Isaac de Loria and Moses of Cordova.

SOURCES OF KABBALISTIC DOCTRINE 67

ate the kind of speculative doGrine which one might have
expected @ priori. ‘The peculiar conventional forms under
which they are conveyed were characteristic of the rabbinical
mind, its own and no other’s throughout. We shall find that
some of them are crude and monstrous ; but it happens that
the Secret Tradition at its highest can be separated from its
extravagant and materialistic developments.

When we remember the persistence of Tradition which has
characterised the most persistent of all races, when we remem-
ber that the Jew of the Christian Dispensation may be said to
have lived in the remembrance of his glory passed away, we
can believe that he was encompassed by an atmosphere of
legend on which his fervid mind was at work continually, out
of which he never stepped, and it would be unreasonable to
suppose that all his literature, like all his thought, was not
tinctured profoundly by this his intelleQual environment. But
it is a wide and an unwarrantable step from the belief in such a
natural and inevitable operation to a belief that Jewish T'radi-
tion must or may be referred to one distinctive source in the past,
from which it was perpetuated by some conventional transmis-
sion, as occult writers suppose, and some others also who have
no such bias towards the mysterious to intervene in apology
for their opinion. We have no ground for affirming with
Basnage+ that old Egypt is the true nursery of the Kabbalah,
though it is quite possible that Israel brought something from
the Nile valley which does not appear in the Pentateuch. Nor
ate we justified in agreeing with a quondam Grand Master of
the Ancient and Accepted Rite of Freemasonry, United States
Southern Jurisdiction, when he suggests a direét communica-
tion of doctrine from the religion of Zoroaster ? to Kabbalism
which must be referred to the period of the exile. That the
Jews may have derived something from Babylon I have noted
already, and amidst their chequered experience under Persian
domination, after their final scattering, possibly the great body

To Ds, Ane). xiv.

2 For some tables indicating “‘ the harmony and identity of the Chaldean philosophy
with the Hebrew Kabbalah,” see CHALDEAN ORACLES OF ZOROASTER, edited by Sapere
Aude, London, 1895, pp. 8-11. The true value of such parallels is shewn by such
frenzied developments as Archbishop Meurin’s SyNAGOGUE DE SATAN, which will be
noticed in Book X.§ 18. Sapere Aude was a pseudonym adopted by Wynn Westcott
in some English occult circles.

8 Moras AND Docma, Charleston, A.M. 5641, pp. 266, 267, and elsewhere through-
out the compilation. Compare Matter: HisrorrE Critique pu GNOSTICISIME. It
tefers the Gnostic syStems to the ZENDAVESTA and Kabbalah.

68 THE HOLY KABBALAH

of Haggada may have received increment and colouring,
Mote fantastic theorists have imagined that not only is there
a Chinese Kabbalah, but that it is the source of that which was
in Israel. That the great unknown empire, in which all things
from Alchemy to the art of printing are said to have ger-
minated, possessed and still possesses a body of traditional
lore, of so-called secret teaching, is mere commonplace on
which there is no call to insist, and if some persons will be so
foolish as to term this Kabbalah, as if in the sense of Israel, it
is idle to dispute with them about the improper and confusing
use of a mere word. That the book called Y1-KinG,? or
MuraTION, contains an Esoteric Religious Tradition which
has, as it is affirmed, some analogies with Kabbalistic doétrine,
is neither surprising nor significant of anything except the
irresistible tendency of the human mind to reflect after much
the same manner, in all lands and times, upon mysteries that
ate everywhere the same, ever urgent, ever recurring. Such
analogies do not prove, as dreamers would have us believe,
the existence of a conventional Wisdom-Religion, unfolded
through ages of initiation. In the natural order, the truly
fundamental religion is the common ground of all, which
stands in need of no formal perpetuation, as it is inborn in
the heart and mind of humanity.? And yet the undoubted
existence of the Mongolian race in Mesopotamia almost at the
dawn of history may suggest that the Semite drew something
from Mongolian Chaldea even in the days of Abraham,* as
afterwards the Jew of Babylon may have had a certain contact
with Confucianism in its earliest form. We may admit,
readily and reasonably, that the Jew received everywhere and
always retained the reception, provided that we leave him

1 In conformity with which Bryant’s ANALysis of ANCIENT Myrnoxocy (vol. i.
p- 94) and Oliver’s Hisrory oF InrTIAaTION (pp. 79 e¢ seq.) would have us believe that
there were Mysteries in China “ similar to those of India,” which again were more or
less the same as those that flourished subsequently in Greece.

2 For some information concerning this work and its Kabbalistic analogies, see
L’Inrr1ATion, revue philosophique des Hautes Eiudes, tom. xxxvii. No. 3, Dec., 1897.
Paris. S.v. Yi-King, Tao-see, Tao-te-King et la Numeération, pp. 266 et seq. Also Eugéne
Nus: A La RECHERCHE DES Destinis. Paris, 1892. .

3 I refer here to sacramental and not to natural religion so-called.

4 “ The power of the Mongol rulers of Chaldea, about the time of Abraham, was far
mote extensive than that of the contemporary rulers of Thebes and of the Delta, and
the victories of the great eighteenth dynasty in Egypt, extending over some three
centuries at most, form only a passing episode in the story of Asiatic civilisation,
which dates back probably earlier than the time of the Pyramids, which was native
and original, and from which Egypt borrowed much in the days of its greatest rulers.””—
BABYLONIAN DiscoveERigs, EDINBURGH Review, April, 1898.

SOURCES OF KABBALISTIC DOCTRINE 69

evetywhere his own intellectual initiative, and bear in mind
that the process was everywhere natural and informal, not
arbitrary and conventional.

Passing over the regions of wild surmise in which Odin the
Norse God becomes identified with the Kabbalistic ABBA, the
Supernal Father; Frea with Arma, who is the Mother in
transcendence; Thor with Arik ANpIN, the Lesser Coun-
tenance; and the Supreme Being discerned behind the
notthern mythology with Ain SopH; passing over also
certain alleged Druidic correspondences into which it would
be folly to enter, we may take much the same view as before
regarding the alleged Gnostic connections of the Kabbalah.
We may concur with King when he argues that whatever the
date of the Zour in its present form, some of its traditions
ate similar to those taught in the schools of Babylon and
Tiberias.2. ‘They are the same and they are also different, and
the difference represents the growth of the intellectual thought
of Israel, its proper native development under the various
impulsions which it received between the period of Gnosticism
and the period of the promulgation of the Zonar. We may
acknowledge also that Marcus, as “‘a born Jew,”’ transmitted
something of his national heritage to the system which he
produced. Yet Gnosticism is not Kabbalism, though there
ate occasional analogies between them, and something of
common source may be attributable to both. M. Amélineau
is nearer the truth when he speaks of a coincident develop-
ment of the two systems.? There are analogies in nature and
appearance between glass and rock-crystal, but glass is glass
and a pebble is a pebble.

1 Pike, following his usual unacknowledged authority, affirms that the Druids
were true children of the Magi, whose initiation came from Egypt and Chaldea, “ that
is to say, from the true sources of the primitive Kabbalah.”—-Mora.s aNnD DoGMa,
p. 103. The inspiration is Eliphas Lévi, who uses substantially the same terms.

2 THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS. Second edition. London, 1897.

3 EssAI SUR LE GNOSTICISME EGypTIEN, ses développements et son origine Egyptienne.
Par M. E. Amélineau, published in Annales du Musée Guimet, tom. xiv. Paris, 1887, but
written so far back as 1882, the date affixed to the preface. Compare Edersheim, who
believed that “ Gnosticism, like later Jewish MySticism, sprang from the contaét of
Judaism with the religious speculations of the farther East.” Compare also the
Jewish Encyciopa@p1s, which is disposed to recognise in the ZoHAR an influence
referable to Vedanta Schools of Hindu Philosophy through Persian channels of
Mohammedan Mysticism in the eighth century and later.

4 The Pistrs SopHta has been considered the most valuable document for analogies
between Gnosticism and the Kabbalah, but it is easy to exaggerate its evidence. King
says that the doétrines are identical, and that it exhibits the leading principles of the
Kabbalah ; but he does not seem to speak with any first-hand knowledge of Jewish
Theosophy. The Gnostic text has been edited since his day by Mr. G. R. S. Mead,
who neither establishes nor alludes to the alleged correspondences.

7o THE HOLY KABBALAH

It is unphilosophical because unneedful to go far back and
far off when the explanation of given facts lies near in time and
place. “ That is best which lies the nearest,” says the poet,
and, artists or dreamers, makers of verse or Kabbalistic com-
mentators, we should shape our work of art or interpretation
without drawing needlessly from things remote. The proto-
type of Yetziratic and Zoharic Theosophy is close to our hand
in Jewry. The fusion of all systems which is a characteristic
of the present day, has its parallel in that epoch of the past
_ which witnessed the rise of Christianity. ‘“ At the time when
John the Baptist made his appearance in the desert, near the
shores of the Dead Sea, all the old philosophical and religious
systems were approximating toward each other. A general
lassitude inclined the minds of all toward the quietude of that
amalgamation of doctrines for which the expeditions of Alex-
ander and the more peaceful occurrences that followed, with
the establishment in Asia and Africa of many Grecian colonies,
had prepared the way. After the intermingling of different
nations, which resulted from the wars of Alexander in three-
quarters of the globe, the doctrines of Greece, of Egypt, of
Persia, and of India met and intermingled everywhere. Many
barriers that formerly had kept the nations apart were at last
thrown down; and while the people of the West readily
connected their faiths with those of the East, the latter hastened
to learn the traditions of Rome and Athens. . . . The Jews
and Egyptians, then the most exclusive of all peoples, yielded
to that eclecticism which prevailed among their masters, the
Greeks and Romans.”?! National ambition, however, rather
than eclecticism influenced the Jews, and though it was
impossible, having regard to their environment, that they
should not be tin@ured largely, it was their object to tinge
other systems and not to modify their own, to shew that the
ethnic philosophers owed everything to the Divine Dodtrine
of Palestine. Philo the Greek of Alexandria to some extent
Hellenised the Hebrew religion that he might the better
Judaise the philosophy of Hellas.2 From this fusion there
atose the nearest approach, if not in time and place at least in
form and subject, to Kabbalistic Theosophy as regards its
source in Jewry. There is no need in the present study, which

1 MorRALS AND DOGMA, p. 247.
2 For an illuminating study of Philo’s ecle&icism, in the higher sense of this term,
see H. A. A. Kennedy : Pxrio’s ConTRIBUTION TO RELIGION, 1919.

SOURCES OF KABBALISTIC DOCTRINE 7X

is intended to simplify and not to enlarge the issues, that I
should do more than cite Aristobulus, who a century before
had exercised a similar vocation. Philo, and the movement
and mode of thought which he represents, cannot have been
without an effect upon the literature of later ages in Jewry,
though the history of that influence and the mode of its trans-
mission cannot be traced conclusively. We must not fall,
however, into the error of supposing that the Kabbalah is
Platonism derived through Philo and the Jewish school of
Alexandria, or that it is Jewish Tradition modified by Philoism.
When we find in the SEpHER YETzIRAH the alphabetical
symbols of the Logos made use of by God in the formation
of the univertse, it is very easy to set it down to Greek influence,
but the fact remains that the Book or ForMaATION is essentially
and characteristically Hebrew, and this fact lifts it altogether
out of the category of Platonic succession. Yet we know
where to look for the explanation of certain points of contact.
As regards the doctrine developed by commentators on the
SEPHER YETZIRAH ptior to the appearance of the ZoHAR, as
regards the literature which makes contaét with these, and as
regards the Zonar itself, saying nothing of the later literature,
which had recourse consciously and openly to Greek soutces,
the case is much stronger.? Philo insists on the antithesis
between God and the material world, the infinite and the
finite ; so, let us say, does the Zonar, which may be taken to
Stand for the literature. Philo affirms the absolute trans-
cendency of God; so does Zoharic doétrine. Philo regards

1 I should observe here that Arthur Lillie, who once argued a process in the
Buddhistic origin of Christianity, discovered in the Zouar not only the Trinity of
Philo, but the Trinity of Buddhism, and he held that the Kabbalah ‘‘ was one of the
secret books of the Essenes.”—-Moprrn Mystics AND MopERN Macic, p. 14. He
testified also that it was “ written down from tradition by one Moses de Leon,” thus
shewing that he was not aware of the existence of Kabbalistic books outside the ZoHAR.
—Ibid., p.13. Finally, he affirmed that it is “ a book of Magic.” —MApAME BLAVATSKY
AND HER THEOSOPHY, p.194. After this we shall not be surprised to find that St. Paul
was a Kabbalist—Ibid. So also was Jacob Bohme, whose Three Principles, one of
which was the “ Kingdom of Hell,” have something to do with the three supernal
SEPHIROTH. For similar worthless speculations, see Lillie’s BuppHIsM IN CHRISTEN-
DOM.

2 For example, the Porra Ca:torum of R. Abraham Cohen Irira, which forms the
third part of Rosenroth’s Apparatus In Lrsrum SoHaAR, was written expressly to
exhibit the correspondences between Kabbalistic dogmas and the Platonic Philosophy.
Later on the same theme was taken up by Christian writers, some of whom conne&
the Kabbalah with Aristotle, and so we have works like Burgondo’s Popromus
SCIENTIARUM ARTIUMVE LIBERALIUM ad ipsos Peripatetica Schole et Kabbalistice dottrine
purissimos fontes revocatus, Venice, 1651. Soalso at an earlier period Thomas Campanella
in his Dz SzeNsu RErRuM ET Maara, Frankfort, 1620, joined Neoplatonism and Kab-
balism in his attempt to explain the universe.

H.K. G

72 THE HOLY KABBALAH

_ the Divine Nature as in Itself escaping definition and in Itself
without quality; Kabbalism denounces those who would
attempt to describe God as He is in Himself even by the
attributes which He manifests. Philo’s descriptions of God
ate all negative: compare the LATENS Derras of the Kab-
balah. Philo says that no name can be given Him; all
Kabbalism agrees,t though its unfolded reveries confer many
Names on the Deity and explain their powers and meanings
Philo regards the Scriptural God as anthropomorphic, and
_allegorises upon all the descriptions, attributions and mani-
festations of Deity in the Old Testament: compare the
doétrine of the Two Countenances, designed—as some have
supposed—to explain the same anthropomorphisms by their
exaggeration to a ue plus ultra degree. Philo regards the letter
of Scripture as a veil: so does the ZonHar. Philo interprets
it literally or mystically according to his purpose: so does
Kabbalistic exegesis. Philo regards the visible world as the
gate of the world unseen ; he believes in the possibility of an
immediate contemplation of God, in the existence of an
atchetypal world, and that things seen are a counterpart of
things unseen,” in all of which we are enumerating express
points of Kabbalistic dodrine.. These analogies are too
numerous, too close, too consecutive, to leave any room for
doubt that the heads of Kabbalistic teaching pre-existed in
Israel, and we have further the explicit testimony of Philo as
to the fact of a Jewish mystic doctrine. Spontaneity, initiation,
subsequent influences, all remain unimpeded and all are
necessaty to explain the existence of the ZoHaR and its con-
nections, but its source is not Philo of necessity, much less
Philo exclusively: it is that which produced Philo. And
more than all, it is hardy, independent speculation, wearing
tradition like a veil which does not conceal its essential
individuality, and much nearer to ourselves at times in its
spirit than we should ever suspect from its form. Yet we may
suspect it on philosophical grounds, for however concealed

1 It is to be understood also that the Zour affirms a Divine Mode, whetein God
was alone with His Name; but there was an antecedent and nameless state.

2 There is a twofold correspondence in Kabbalism between superior and inferior
things: one transcendental, being that of phenomena with their archetypes in the
noumenal world, and one natural in the narrower sense of the term, being that which
is summed up in the axiom: “ There is no herb on earth to which a certain star does
not cottespond in the heaven.” See Kircher: Munpus SuBTERRANEUS, ii. 401d.
The whole theory of Natural Magic is imbedded in this maxim. Compare ZoHar,
one might say, passim, for it isa recutring doctrine.

SOURCES OF KABBALISTIC DOCTRINE 73

behind the veil of symbolism, however distorted in strange
glasses of vision, the sentiments and aspirations of humanity
have ever 2 common toot, and through the vehicle of Kab-
balistic apparatus, under many covers and tin€tured by many
fantastic colourings of art and artifice, we see that our own
yearnings and longings find expression, after their own
manner, in this book of the words of the exile. We acknow-
ledge therefore with the poet how truly all the lore and the
legend is
** A part
Of the hunger and thirst of the heart,
The frenzy and fire of the brain,
Which yearns for the fruitage forbidden,
The golden pomegranates of Eden,
To quiet its fever and pain.”

When the FatrHruL SHEPHERD of the Zowar puts these
words into the mouth of the Father of universal Israel: “ In
this world my Name is written YHVH and read Aponat, but
in the world to come the same will be read as it is written, so
that Mercy shall be from all sides,” + we see that here and
now, at this point of the twentieth century, we might express
differently the longing, the hope, the faith, for which this
symbol stands, but the old symbolism stands in its own way
for that which we all desire to express, and, furthermore, I
do not know that our modern terms would represent it better.
Herein is the justification of the ways of God to man and
herein the pious conviction of the believing heart that in the
great day of the Lord there shall be no scandal to His children ;
that in spite of the darkness of our ways we have held rightly
that He is light; that though we write Mercy in our hearts
but read Law and its inflexible order in all around us, we shall
one day know that it is Mercy on every side, the highest
expression of the Law, or that Law is that order under which
Divine Love is manifested. It is in messages like this that the
abiding beauty and significance of the Kabbalah are con-
tained, not in the beard of Microprosopus or in the number
of worlds suspended from the hair on the cranium of ArRIKH
ANPIN. GEMATRIA and MEraTHEsIs may be pastimes fit only
for ultra-serious children, but the voice of the Rabbis of the
ZOHAR expressing the language of the heart of Israel needs

1 Cremona edition, part ii. fol. 1062.

74 THE HOLY KABBALAH

‘no TEMURAH to expound its meaning ; and it is by the ring
of such utterances that the true believer of to-day is made
conscious electrically that the Holy Synods were composed of
men who are our brethren.

As this view disposes implicitly of any claim on a divine
authorship, and places the theory of aboriginal Tradition
among fables, so also it forbids us to suppose that Kabbalistic
doérines are the work of a single mind.

One feels instinctively, without any necessity of evidence,
that these things are not and cannot be the unaided creation
of Moses de Leon. They are a growth and a result. As,
however, the ZOHAR assumed its present shape at a late period
admittedly, it may by possibility have taken part of it at the
hands of this Spanish Jew. That his other works are inferior
is no argument. Cervantes produced many worthless
romances before and after the sum of all chivalry. The
GALATEA did not make Don QurxoTE impossible. So also
Beroalde de Verville wrote books on Alchemy which are
despised even by alchemists, but he wrote also the MorEN
DE PaRVENIR. Every magnum opus is antecedently improbable,
and the intellectual distance betweenthe SorRows OF WERTHER
and the second part of Fausr is like the void between Arn
SopH and MatxuTu, which it was the purpose of the SEpHr-
ROTH to fill.

But if all masterpieces are antecedently improbable, it is
true also that they are impossible without antecedents. There
ate cettain dull old histories known to “terati which were
necessary to the plays of Shakespeare. So the formulation of
the ZoHAR must have been preceded by much raw material,
both oral and written, parts of which were no doubt incor-
porated without any change in their formulation. For
example, the Book or Occutration beats all the marks of
antiquity, no less considerable than that of the Boox or
FORMATION.

There is, of coutse, a point beyond which the reasonable
ctitic will not pass. So far as it goes we are on tolerably safe
ground with the meagre testimony of St. Agobard—supposing
that it is allocated correCtly ; with R. Simeon Ben Yohai we
ate on purely traditional ground, and it is not to be supposed
for a moment that more authenticity resides in the dramaztz:
persone of the Holy Synod than in those of the TurBa Puiio-
sopHoRUM. I do not mean that such names are entirely pre-

SOURCES OF KABBALISTIC DOCTRINE 15

texts, for they may possess an honest basis in legend, but they
are not literal or historical. They occupy a middle position
between the script of a shorthand reporter and imaginary
conversations like those of W. S. Landor.

VI.—ISLAMIC CONNECTIONS OF THE
KABBALAH

When the Jew of the Exile sought a consolation in Theo-
sophy, and thus produced the higher part of Kabbalism, com-
pounded of his traditions, his speculations, his external
receptions, his longings, the memories of his election and its
glory, we must bear in mind that all exotics adjust themselves
to their environment, not without certain changes even in the
most persistent types. Now, the Jew is an anthropological
exotic in all countries of the world, and just because his
persistence is so enormous that it is explained by a special law
of Providence, we find that in all countries he has been modi-
fied sufficiently to guarantee his survival. As in things
physical, as in matters of daily life, so in the intellectual order,
he lost nothing but he assumed much. The Jew of Salerno
differed from that of France, and the Jew of Spain offered
contrasts to both. Without attempting to add another
hypothesis to the scores extant as to the origin of Kabbalism,
J propose to indicate that this literature is naturally, if partially,
elucidated by the place in which it grew up, if it did not in
part ofiginate.

Having made a reasonable allowance for spontaneity in
Jewish thought, and having noted its observed connections
and correspondences in“distant times and places, it seems
fitting that we should look now to that which lay the nearest.
Without disputing or defending the opinion that Israel may
have possessed a ‘I'radition handed down by the oral way from
comparatively early times, of which there may be barely
sufficient evidence to warrant a presumption that it existed
but not enough to determine what it was, let us begin by con-
sidering where the Kabbalistic books first began to circulate.
That was in Spain. Now, what was the environment of Jews
in the Peninsula at the period in question—let us say, from
the ninth century and onward ? It differed considerably from
that which surrounded them in other countries of Western
Eutope. Spain was for Israel not indeed a Garden of Paradise,

76 THE HOLY KABBALAH

but a species of oasis in the great wilderness of the Exile, for
the simple reason that much of it was not then under Christian
tule.2 The Jew of Spain enjoyed comparative immunity ; he
possessed even political influence; he rose occasionally to
high political power. It is not surprising therefore that Spain
became a centre of Jewish literature and philosophy. Thence
Jewish treatises passed into France and Italy under the Arabian
equivalents of their authors’ names, and were accepted as
speculations or teachings of the learned among the Moslems.
Avicebron is a case in point. There can be no doubt whatever
that the learning of Mohammedanism exercised an influence
on the Rabbins,? who reacted in their turn on the Moslem
doétors.4 ‘The questions of priority and preponderance may
be passed over, because they are of no importance here.

We have concluded already that the Zonar presents the
theosophical thought of preceding centuries in Israel under a
certain aspect of transformation. The traditional knowledge,
of which we have evidence as to its existence in Talmudic
times, had received many developments from many sources
and under the influence of many minds. There is ground for
supposing that the nucleus in Christian times is first heard of
in Palestine, which indeed follows from its connection, once
admitted, with R. Simeon ben Yohai. But despite the legend
which represents the ZOHAR as sent from Palestine by Nah-
manides, everything points to Spain and the South of France
as the chief scenes in which the literature developed, and it is
not unreasonable to suppose that it has been affected by the
prevailing tone of mystical thought in one or both of these
places. There is evidence to shew that such influence was at
work outside the Zowar and prior perhaps to its existence in
the form that it now possesses. In post-Zoharic Mysticism,
and in the commentaries on the ZoHAR which are the work of
Spanish Jews, it may be traced more fully and plainly. In no
case does it justify the now exploded criticism which would

1 See Finn’s SepHarpi, already cited, c. xi., and especially pp. 142, 143.

2 So also the necessities of Christian princes in Spain till the thirteenth century led
them usually to prote& the Jews.

8 The translation of the Tatmup into Arabic by R. Joseph, disciple of Moses the
sack-clothed, during the reign of Al-Hakim, Caliph of Cordova, in the tenth century,
would be the best evidence which could be cited on this point, but the undertaking is
no longer extant, if indeed it came into being.

4 Islamic MySticism is almost coincident with the mission of the great Islamic
prophet. For example, the Ghoolat seét, famous for the “extravagance” of its
doétrines, is referred to the time of Ali. See SecREr SocreriEes OF THE MIDDLE AGEs,
London, 1846, pp. 29, 31.

ISLAMIC CONNECTIONS 77

make the ZoHAR metely a reprodu@tion or echo of Arabian
Theosophy, or would regard all Kabbalism as referable to
Islamic Mysticism for its sole source, p/ws the Greek influence
at work in Islam. This was the hypothesis of Tholuck. We
ate concerned only with a question of complexion and of
tincture, and have other criteria by which to judge the true
significance of the points of doétrinal resemblance between
Sufi and Kabbalist concerning the hidden state of Deity, the
operation of the Divine Will at the beginning of creation, the
emanation of the world, &c. The analogies are interesting
enough and the Orientalist who first specified them had every-
thing to justify him at his period.1 As it may not be uninterest-
ing to cite a few cases in point derived from other sources, let
us take a fact, one of many concerning which we possess
impregnable testimony. About the middle of the fifteenth
century, or, more exactly, from 1414 to 1492, there flourished
a Sufi poet named Nuruddin Abdurrahmann, known as Jami
of Herat, among whose wotks the SEVEN THRONES is most
famous. One of the poems in this collection is entitled
SALOMON AND ABSAL, a mystical story of earthly and heavenly
love. In the epilogue to this poem, where the author unfolds
his meaning, the following lines occur :

The Incomprehensible Creator, when this world
He did create, created first of all

The First Intelligence, First of a chain

Of Ten Intelligences, of which the last

Sole agent is in this our Universe,

Active Intelligence so called.

It may be admitted at once that if we are to accept the method
and admit the quality of evidence which has satisfied heretofore
the several authorities who have referred Kabbalism to definite
sources in philosophy and religion, we may feel at liberty to
infer from this passage that somewhere about the year 1450 a
Sufic poet, so far away from Spain as Herat, was adapting,
with slight variations of a verbal kind, the Sephirotic Doéttine
of the Kabbalah ? a century before the Book or ForMaATION
and the ZoHar came into circulation through the medium of
print. I have chosen this instance because it proves nothing
of itself on account of its lateness, but it gives a point of

1 See F. A. D. Tholuck: Surismus, sive THEosopHiA PersAruM PANTHEISTICA,
Berlin, 1831, c.v. passim, Also Dz Ortu CanpaLt@, Hamburg, 1837.
2 See Book V., § 2.

78 THE HOLY KABBALAH

departure backward for tracing a possible conne&tion between
the mystical setts of Mohammedanism and the mystical ses
of Israel.

With this let us compare for a moment the doétrine deve-
loped in the CeLestraL Dxsatir, which has been described as
“‘a very eatly attempt on the part of the ancient Persians to
form a cosmological theory.” + The Desarir, it should be
observed, is a revelation addressed to the great prophet Abad,
who has been identified incautiously with Abraham. ‘‘ The
nature of God cannot be known. Who can dare to know it
but He (Himself)? The entity and the oneness and the
personality are ‘ His very nature and nothing beside Him.’ ”
From this Being proceeded by free creation “‘ him whose name
is BAHNAM, called Prime Intellect and First Reason,” and
through him “ Asxam, the second intelle@,” who created in
turn the intelle&t of the next lower heaven named “ FamE-
sHAM.” From these proceeded the “ Intelleé& of the heaven
of Kanran,” or Saturn; of Harmuzp, or Jupiter; of
BAHRAM, of Mats; of KuursHap, ot the Sun; of Nanip,
or Venus; of Zir, or Mercury; and of Man, or the Moon.

Here, again, we have the production of ten primary intel-
ligencies, recalling the Sephirotic emanations, which them-
selves have planetary attributions.

Let us now take another step. At the beginning of the
twelfth century, or actually in the year 1100 a.p., Abi Bakr
Ibn Al-Tufail, a noted Arabian physician, poet, mathematician
and Sufi philosopher, was born at Guadix in Spain, and he
died at Morocco in 1186. His chief work is a species of

hilosophical romance called THE Lirz or Hart Espn YoKpDAN,
the self-taught Philosopher. In this curious narrative we find
Ibn Al-Tufail using a form of comparison which occurs
almost verbatim in the Kabbalistic books. ‘“‘ The Divine
Essence is like the rays of the material sun, which expand over
opaque bodies and appear to proceed from the eye, though
they ate only reflected from its surface.” We find also sub-
Stantially : (¢) The Arn Sor of the Kabbalists under the name
of that One True One; (%) the reflection of this Being,
dwelling “in the highest sphere, in and beyond which there
is no body, a Being free from matter, which was not the Being
of that One True One, nor the sphere itself, nor yet anything

1 My knowledge is confined to the translation by Mirza Mohamed Hadi which
appeared in successive issues of THE PLATONIST, vols. iii. and iv.

ISLAMIC CONNECTIONS 79

different from them both ; but was like the image of the sun
as it appears in a well-polished mirror, which is neither one
nor the other, and yet not distin@ from them”; (¢) the
immaterial essence of the sphere of the fixed stars; (@) the
sphere of Saturn—and so with the rest, in harmony with the
scheme of the Drsatir, ending at this world, which is subject
to generation and corruption, and comprehending all that is
contained within the sphere of the Moon. None of the
material essences were identical and yet none were different,
A ie as regards the rest or in comparison with the One True
re

The doéttrine of Divine Absorption is the very essence of
Sufism and Sufism is contemporary with Mohammedanism
itself. It is also mainly pantheistic,? as may be gathered from
its proposed object. Some refer it to India, others to a Gnostic
origin, but the question does not concern us, for the significant
fact is that this form of Islamic Mysticism was one of the
environments of the Kabbalistic Jews to whom we are
indebted for part at least of the ZonHar. The influence of
such environment was felt outside the Kabbalists, and was
confessed even by the most inflexible of the sects in Jewry—
that of the Kairites, or Literalists, who rejected all innovations
in the primeval doétrine of Israel, who set no store by Tradi-
tion, and were thus as much opposed to the TaLmupD as to
Zoharic writings. The proof is their analogies, indeed one
might say their fusion, with the Motozales, a sect of scholastic
Arabs.? A Kairite Jew of the period allows that his brethren
followed the doétrines of this sect, and they even assumed its
name.

The purpose of the present section should not be mis-
construed. Once mote, it is by no means designed to indicate
that the mystical sects of Mohammedanism are responsible
for the peculiar scheme of the Kabbalah, or that the Sufi drew
only from the rabbin. Such devices belong to a scheme of
Ctiticism which has passed fittingly away. If we know any-
thing concerning the early connections of Sufism it is that
they are Neoplatonic, and that the Gnostics of the early Shiite

1 See the Improvement of Human Reason exhibited in the Lire or Har Esn
YOKDHAN. “ Written in Arabick above 500 years ago, by Abu Jaafar Ebn Tophail.”
- « « Newly translated from the original Arabick by Simon Ockley, A.M. London, 1711.

2 See, on this subject and generally, Professor Reynold A. Nicholson’s SruDIEs IN
Istamic Mysticism, 1921, especially Chapter II.

® Munk: LA PHILOSOPHIE CHEZ LES JUIFS, p. Io.

80 THE HOLY KABBALAH

‘sects were attracted to it because of these connections. But
to name Neoplatonism and Gnosticism is to cite analogies of
Kabbalism, however remote. ‘To say that Sufism has been
referred to a woman who died at Jerusalem in the first century
of the Hegira is to say that Sufism began to live and move in
an atmosphere of Jewish Tradition. ‘To say that Spain was the
forcing-house of the Kabbalists is to say that the theosophical
doctors of Jewry brushed arms with those of Islam, and to
deny that there was any consequence of such contact is to

deny Nature. Sufism was pantheistic and emanationist ;
Kabbalistic emanationism was saved from pure pantheism by
the dodtrine of Divine Immanence, and their literatures have
no real likeness ; but between the metaphysics of Divine Love
and the mystical absorption of Islam, and between the Kab-
balistic return of the soul to God, or its union with the trans-
cendent principle which never departs from ArziturH, and
the theory of ecstasy in Islam, it seems possible to suppose
that there was not only the connecting link of analogy between
all mystics but a bond even in history.’

VIIL—INFLUENCE OF THE KABBALAH
ON JEWRY

There is perhaps no one at the present day, certainly no
Christian student of the subject, who is in a position to define
precisely what kind of profit accrued to the mind of Jewry
from the promulgation, let us say, of the ZoHAR—notwith-
Standing the statement, already cited, that it gave to Israel the
splendid propulsion of the ideal.

So far as it is possible to ascertain, the Kabbalah has
exercised only a very subsidiary influence upon the Children

1 On this point the reader may consult with advantage an admirable account of
Islamic MySticism in A YEAR AMONG THE PERsIANS, by E. G. Browne. London,
1893. Itmakes no references to Kabbalism, with which the author seems unacquainted,
but it may be gathered from what it tells us of Sufic commentaries on the Koran that
these, although pantheistic, have many points of contact with later Kabbalism. We
find not only the unmanifest state of Deity, but the attempt to explain why the con-
tingent world (compare Lrser DrusHm™) was evolved from “ the silent depths of the
non-existent,”’ the use of which term is so typical of Ain SopH doétrine. See p. 129
for Browne’s opinion that the early schools of Mohammedan philosophy in Petsia
wete adaptations either of Aristotle or Plato, and were also the scholasticism of Islam.

2 Dr. Abelson speaks of a comparatively recent theory—or newer at least. than
are theories of Neoplatonic and Gnostic sources—which “‘ finds echoes of Persian
Sufism in the Zour,” but unfortunately he gives no references.—JEWiIsH Mysticism,

p. I19.

INFLUENCE ON JEWRY 81

of the Exile—those excepted obviously for whom it was a
path of devotion, a path of life in sanctity for the attainment
of the Good and the One. We can point to certain enthusi-
asms for which it is partially responsible, among the crowd of
Ghetto believers who understood only its aberrations, and
they ate those precisely which did their best to wreck Jewry
and of which Jewry is now ashamed. The history of Abraham
Abulafia, of Sabbatai Zevi and the founder of the Hassidim,?
are typical cases in point which warrant us in saying that the
Kabbalah gave spurious Messiahs to Israel.? It was perhaps
the last instance of its open activity before it ceased to exercise
any powerful influence, and with this also it would have begun
if we cared to believe that Rabbi Akiba was the author of the
Book or ForMATION, and that he was connected with the
bogus or at least the frenzied mission of Bar Cochba. We
have seen that there is no truth in the story ; but this notwith-
Standing it has, I fear, to be admitted that if a literature may
be judged by its influence, that of the Kabbalah has been small
on the external side, while it has encouraged false enthusiasm,
and has been the warrant for dite& imposture.®

So far as its operation was intellectual, there is tolerable
eround for thinking that its field was the Christian rather than
the Jewish mind. And having established one useful point
there is an opportunity here of making another. Kabbalistic
influence on Christendom has been of two kinds, but it has

1 T.e., the new Order of the mysterious Baal Shem, which is said to have had its
tepresentatives even at the close of the nineteenth century in a number of Jewish
communities and to have held the Zorar in high esteem.—IsRAEL AMONG THE NATIONS,
pp. 61, 40, 345. The sect had its chief hold among Russian and Galician Jews: the
name signifies “‘ pious ones.”” In the time of Judas Maccabeeus, it meant the strié
patty among the Jews.—Edetsheim, Hisrory oF THE JEWISH NATION. Compate
Scaliger’s Order of Knights of the Temple, with which the sect has been identified.
Thete is a long contemplation by Paul Vulliaud on Sabbatai Zevi and the Hassidim in
La KasBA.ez Jurve, Vol. II, pp. 139 e¢ seq. The accounts of the original Hassrp1m are
full of mythical elements.

2 Zangwill in his DREAMERS OF THE GHETTO was pethaps the first who brought
this notion to the knowledge of the external and popular world.

3 It has given also a few obscure seéts to Jewry. A knowledge of Kabbalistic
Mysteries was alleged to have imparted superhuman power to Lébele, chief Rabbi of
Prague in his day ; to Jacob Franck, the Polish distiller, of whose followers the so-called
Christian Jews of Poland represented a small survival ; and to his contemporary, Israel
of Podolia, who established the New Saints and had a recipe for mitacles by means of
the name TETRAGRAMMATON.

4 Zangwill is not of this opinion. Referring to the period which antedated imme-
diately the mission of Sabbatai Zevi, he says : “* The ZoHaAr—the Book of Illumination,
composed in the thirteenth century—printed now for the first time, shed its dazzling
rays further and further over every ghetto.” But perhaps he follows here the principle
that he has borrowed from Spinoza, “ to see things sub specie eternitats.” I wish the
same ptinciple had inspired him to lay less stress on the exact date of the ZoHAR.

82 THE HOLY KABBALAH

been much mote of one kind than another. It has been an
influence exercised by a peculiar theosophical claim upon the
‘Students and the acceptors of such. But it has been much
mote the influence of possible missionary material on the
missionary enterprise of the Christian Church. To begin at
a late date—What gave the Kabbalah of the Zowar to the
Latin-reading scholars of Europe? The magnum opus of
Rosenroth—or more at least than all. What impelled Rosen-
rothe The “splendid spectrum” of the conversion of
Jewry en masse. And now, if we sweep backward to the very
beginning of the Christian interest 1n Kabbalism, almost
coincident, in fact, with the appearance of the Zowar, and
suppose that Raymund Lully was really, as it has been said
that he was, the first Christian student of the Kabbalah, what
was the life-long labour of that amazing seneschal of Majorca,
and for what did he renounce the world.? To wrest, as it has
been said, from relu€tant Nature the elusive Mastery of
Nature, the Great Palingenesis of Alchemy ? ‘The Hermetic
treatises ascribed to him may say Yes, but we know that they
ate ascribed falsely, and that this was by no means the ambition
of Raymund Lully. But was it the attainment of a religion
behind all religions? Nothing of the sort; that is modern
fantasy. The work of Raymund Lully was apostolical and
missionary, and it closed with martyrdom at Bugia, in a
feverish attempt to evangelise “ Mahound.” What prompted
the fiery energy of Picus de Mirandula, that he filled the Papal
Court with the rumour and the wonder of Secret Jewish
Tradition ? The fact that he also regarded it as a way, revealed
against all expectation and as if on the part of Divine Provi-
dence, by which the Princes of the Exile might be brought to
the gates of the Eternal City and the Ghetto might be trans-
formed into a Baptistry. Suppose, lastly, that Nicholas Flamel
was really initiated by the Book oF ABRAHAM THE JEw,”’ 1
so that Kabbalism connects integrally with Alchemy, what
prompted the unostentatious scrivener of old Paris to make
precious metals by occult arts when his wants were few and
his trade sufficient for a modest man? Why, he also had the
missionary spirit—witness his bequests, actual or fabulous,
for the conversion of the heathen. |

The inference is that the Kabbalah was imported out of

1 See my SECRET TRADITION IN ALCHEMY, C. x.

INFLUENCE ON JEWRY 83

Jewry to prove that Jewry might be Christianised if it were
handled wisely according to the lights given in the Holy
Synods.?

Now, I do not need to say that there are very few students
of cryptic literatures at this late day of the world who would
take any interest in the Kabbalah, regarded from this point of
view. They are not, as a class, inspired by missionary zeal
for any form of official religion, and their memorials, as they
stand, do not manifest more than a distant respect for the
great orthodoxies of Christendom. On the other hand, it is
only in virtue of some immense misapprehension that the
Esoteric Tradition of the Jews can be supposed to offer them
the religion behind all religions. What it does offer them on
the surface falls almost infinitely short. At its highest a bizarre
but strenuous attempt to unriddle the universe, the most
unaided of all metaphysics, the syema mundi excogitated in a
darkened synagogue with the praying-shawl drawn over the
eyes. What darkness to be felt in the void! What strange
lights flashing in the darkness! In such a state Spanish Jew
or Spanish Mystic of the Latin Church, Moses de Leon, if
you will, or St. John of the Cross, exile of Babylon or recluse
of the Thebaid, may enjoy a certain communication of the
Infinite. But to say more than this is frenzy. And at its
lowest, that is to say, on that side upon which it makes con-
taé&t no longer with the infinite, but with the occult as it was
understood by occultism at its zenith—let us say, in Victorian
days—finite of all things finite: what sombre trifling un-
redeemed by a saving sense of triviality ; the physiognomy of
the section YrrHROH, the astrology of the processes of Gaffarel,
the star messages of the Hebrew planisphere, the paper tubes
of Eliphas Lévi;? or, again, NOTARIKON, METATHESIS,
GEMATRIA,® the arcana of the Extended Name, the virtues of
Acta and Ararira for conjuring heaven and earth. It is

1 One writer in modern times has even gone so far as to maintain that “ Christian
do@rine, except the Trinity, which is Platonic, issues wholly, with all its details, from
the Tatmup. Christianity is son and brother of the Taumup.”’—Alexandre Weill :
Mo!sk, LE TALMUD ET L’EVANGILE, ii. 92. The Statement sounds perilous, but M.
Weill is not to be taken seriously. Compare ibid. ii. 91: “‘ The TaLmupn is itself the
most violent adversary of Moses,” é.e., the Moses of M. Weill. One paradox enables
us to judge another.

2 And the kind of Kabbalah which A. Leliévre undertook to defend in his Jusri-
FICATION DES SCIENCES DivinaTorrEs (Paris, 1847).

3 Observe also the developments which these subje&ts received in works like the
CaBALLA ANAGRAMMATICA of Ranutius Longelus, Placentia, 1654—ars mirabilsi ndeed,
as the author terms it.

84 THE HOLY KABBALAH

here that occultism illustrates how it teceives only what it can
give and how it comes to pass that the interest of the occultist
in the KaBpaLAH was less inspired by Zoharic Theosophy
than by the magic garters of the Key or Sotomon.! Hence
writers like Papus in France found it necessary to include in
their scheme of Kabbalism the sorry literature of the Gri-
moires.2, And they and he had nothing to tell us of the ZoHAR.
But we do not find the Grimoires in Picus de Mirandula, or
in Raymund Lully ; we do not find Mysteries of Magic in the
KaxspaLtaA DenupatTA. The Lexicon of Rosenroth does not
include the occult wonders of AGLA, nor does it tell us after
what manner the Extended Name is compounded, by a child-
craft of acrostics, out of three verses in Exodus. We do find
all these in Agrippa, who wrote as a young man of things that
he had heard and read, making a very dignified retractation of .
it all in his book of great excellence which unfolds their
solemn vanity.

There temains, of course, the mystical side of Kabbalism,
the return of the soul to God, and that path of ecstasy already
mentioned, by which it was conceived that the soul might
effect such reunion even in this life; but it is precisely this
side of which we see no effect whatsoever in Jewry, and it is
also this which has been neglected by later occultism. For
example, the present work is the first published in England
which has any reference to the highest principle of the human
soul in Kabbalism and the Instrument of Unification with the
Divine. But it is here and only here that we encounter what
gave to Israel “‘ the splendid propulsion of the ideal” ; and
it is here, as in all whatsoever of Zoharic Theosophy which
led up and belongs thereto, that a justification shall be sought
and found for an inquiry at large into a Secret Tradition in
Israel and into the do@rine of the Holy Kabbalah.

1 I am teferring here to the past of the nineteenth century. It happens at the
present time that the subject is dead in England and is almost extin& in France, not
that French occultism has improved, but that it has varied the fashion of its follies.

2 La KaABBALE, pp. 10, 16, 26, the last especially, where the reference to Molitor
makes the author of the PHrtosopHy oF TRADITION apparently responsible for the
identification of the c/avicule and “ magical MSS.” as a serious branch of Kabbalism.

BOOK III

THE WRITTEN WORD OF KABBALISM:
FIRST OR YETZIRATIC PERIOD

:

vi
:

BOOK. III

THE WRITTEN WORD OF KABBALISM:
FIRST PERIOD

I—EARLY KABBALISTIC LITERATURE

Ir seems beyond controversy that there was a not incon-
siderable mass of old theosophical speculation and doétrine
once extant in Jewry, of which vestiges are to be found in the
TaLmup, and that it is connected occasionally with brilliant
and even witha few great names. It is this somewhat nebulous
material which prepared a way for later developments, leading
up in fine to the Zonar, and should scholarship forbid us to
confer on its earlier stages the distin@tive denomination of
Kabbalism,! we must defer to scholarship, though with the
mental reservation that if the question be more than of words
it is at most one of stages of growth, for that which was of
Mysticism in Israel between the period of the Tatmup and
the period of the promulgation of the Zowar is that which in
the coutse of its evolution became—as just intimated—the
Kabbalah and Zowar.

The title of this section is obviously tentative or speculative,
but the modest conclusions of the previous book are a suffi-
cient warrant for supposing that there are evidences of
Kabbalism, outside the SEPHER YETZIRAH, ptior to the
promulgation of the Zouar, and possessing in fact certain
literary remains. It is indeed essential to the natural history
of the later work that it should have had its antecedents and
precursors in the world of texts. According to the most

1 There can be, I think, little doubt that the Kabbalah was the “ reception ” of the
BeresHiTH and MERKABAH MySteries mentioned in the Tatmup, or that this was the
view always taken by Kabbalistic Jews. My readers should be referred at this point
to an important study of the subje@ in THe Jewish Encyciopzptia, vol. iii, 5.0.
CaBALA, under the names of Dr. Kaufmann Kohler, Rabbi of Temple Beth-El, New
York, and of Dr. Louis Ginzberg, Professor of ‘Talmud at the Jewish Theological
Seminary of America, New York City.

H.Ke 87 H

88 THE HOLY KABBALAH

acceptable view these were various MrprasHim which, in
many cases, are no longer extant, and it is fair to suppose that
such memorials must have exercised some influence.

So also the SEPHER YETZIRAH, whatever the date ascribed
to it, was of high authority, and the respect in which it was
held was of the kind which creates literature. We must
bewate, however, of assuming that there was an unbroken
line of Kabbalists, maintaining and unfolding one and the
same Tradition, from the second to the twelfth century, as
some incautious writers have pretended. There was, however,
“the mystical literature of the Geonic period.” Whatever
the date ascribed to SEPHIR YETZIRAH in its present form, we
must regard as its prototype a work already mentioned under
the title of the ALPHABET OF AxrBA,! while the predecessor of
THE Book oF OccuLraTIoNn, one of the most challengeable
sections of the ZoHAR, must be sought in the anthropomorphic
Smiur Koman, 2¢., THE MEASURE OF THE HEIGHT, ofr
Measure OF BEING, in other words, the DESCRIPTION OF THE
Bopy oF Gop, a development of the various Scriptural places
in which divine members are mentioned. It survives only in
two fragments which are held to be not later than the eighth
centuty. The dates of both these works are, however, con-
jeCtural, but there can be no doubt, as indeed there is no
question, of their comparative antiquity, in respect of root-
matter. Connected with them are the GREATER and the
Lesser Patace, known also as DELINEATION OF THE
HEAVENLY TEMPLES,” which, in common with the others, is
not regarded by some modern critics as Kabbalistic, though
it is allowed that all were instrumental in calling the Kabbalah
into existence.?

In accordance with the exigencies of his standpoint, Dr.

1 There are two versions, of which A is considered older by Jellinek, while Graetz
takes the opposite view. A third Mrprasn, on the ornamentation of the letters, is
also referred to Akiba.

2 Not to be confused with a work mentioned by Bartolocci under the name of
R. Eliezer and dealing with the measurements of the earthly temple. The PirKe
Harkiutu, otherwise PrrkE MERKABAH, is an account of Seven Heavenly Temples
or Palaces which muét be visited in succession by the ele& before they can enter the
region of the Sacted Chariot. They would appear to represent Stages of rapture and
vision. Compare the Palaces of the Zonar.

3 “* By the difficulty,”’ says Ginsburg, “‘ in which they placed the Jews in the South
of France and in Catalonia, who believed in them almost as much as in the Bible, and
who were driven to contrive this system whereby they could explain the gross descrip-
tions of the Deity and of the plains of heaven, given in these Haggadic productions.”
It may be affirmed indeed that one spirit informed the chief works of Kabbalistic
complexion which preceded the Zor.

EARLY KABBALISTIC LITERATURE 89

Graetz, who may be taken to represent at his period all that
is most acrid and uncompromising in hostility to Jewish
Mysticism, fixes the origin of Kabbalism, as to its date, in the
tenth century, and thus by implication denies the claim of the
SEPHER YETZIRAH to be included in its literature. He is
followed, as we have seen, by Ginsburg,! but it is not open
to question that the work is indispensable to the Kabbalah on
its artificial and external side, though it contributes nothing
to the heights and deeps of the Hoty Zonar. The tenth
century is, however, an important period in Jewish history
and Jewish letters, for at this epoch the quickening of the
Arabian mind was followed by that of Israel* and was some-
times eclipsed thereby. There was for the moment a lull in
persecution ; the Academies in the East flourished, and in the
West the internecine struggle of Christians and Moslems in
Spain insured a breathing space to the Children of the Exile.
Prior to that period, from the sixth century and onward, there
was a hiatus in the literature of Israel. The canons of the
Talmud were closed to all intents by the terror and peril of
the time, and the history of Israel became one of bitter struggle
for existence. A certain hazardous shelter was found under
Petsian dominion, and ultimately the intellectual lamp of
Israel shone forth clearly and steadily during the Moslem
domination of Spain, which country—from that period till
the beginning of the thirteenth century—was like a second
Palestine to the Jew, and this land of refuge, under the tolerant
and enlightened sway of the Spanish Khalifs, became almost
as deat to his heart as the Land of Promise. Montpellier in
France and Salerno in Italy were famous for their Jewish
Schools, but that of Seville was, perhaps, more illustrious than
either. Spain also was a nursing-land of Kabbalistic literature,
and the traces of an Esoteric Tradition between the epoch
which produced the Boox oF ForMaTION ® and that of the
Book OF SPLENDOUR must be sought chiefly therein, though
in the twelfth century something may be gleaned from
Southern France and earlier still from Hay Gaon, who

1 Kitto’s CycLopzp1A, third edition, 1864, 5.7. KABBALAH.

2 Basnage, HisrorrE DEs Jurrs, livre vii. c. 4, tom. v. pp. 1503 ef seq.

3 Outside the dates and authorship ascribed by old Kabbalists to the SEPHER
YETzIRAH and the Zouwar there are other treatises attributed to the early days of the
Exile. Thus tradition regards Eliezer Hagabite, son of Jose, a contemporary of Simeon
ben Yohai, as a Kabbalistic doftor and the author of a treatise on the thirty-two
qualities of the Law.

H2

go THE HOLY KABBALAH

flourished in the eleventh century, a Babylonian, on the borders
of the Caspian Sea.

There is neither space nor occasion here to produce a
bibliographical list, and indeed the materials at our command
cannot be regarded as extensive, serving mainly to correc
false and highly coloured impressions regarding the claims of
Kabbalistic Tradition. The chief names of the period with
which we are concerned are : |

I. Rabbi Eliezer ben Hyrcanus, whose supposed mystical
system, as presented in his PrIRKE = Capitu/a, conneéts on the
one hand with SEPHER YETZIRAH, and on the other with
Zoharic teaching. We have, in the first place, God subsisting
ptior to the creation of the world, alone with his Ineffable
Name; next, the creation, prior to the visible world, of the
THorAH or Law, together with the Throne of Glory, the
Name of the Messiah, Paradise, Hell and the Temple of
Jerusalem, 7.e., the archetype of the earthly temple; subse-
quently, the creation of the world by means of ten words.
With this work may be connected the ancient Mrprasu
ConEN,? which represents the THorAH as the foundation of
the universe and the gage of its stability. It is a matter of con-
jeCture whether these works are slightly later or earlier than
the SEPHER YETZIRAH.

II. The Gaon R. Saadiah ben Joseph, nat. circa 892, ob. 942,
head of the Persian Academy of Sura, was the author of a
commentary on the SEPHER YETZIRAH: preserved in the
Bodleian Library and only printed recently in France, as we
shall see in the third section of this book.

III. R. Abn-Yussuf Chasdai, a Spanish physician who died
at Cordova between 970 and 990 A.D., was a Prince of the
Exile and temporal head of the Jews in that city. He was also
a political minister under two Khalifs. For the rest, he is said
to conneét the school of Hay Gaon with that of Gebirol ; but
the dates do not correspond.

IV. The Gaon R. Shereerah—otherwise Sherira b. Hanina—

2 Hay Gaon is said to have died a.p. 1038. Gaon was a title given to the heads of
two Jewish Academies at Babylon.

3 The first edition was printed at Venice in 1544, and a Latin version appeared at
Leyden precisely one hundred years later. The Pirkez is held to have been written
soon after A.D. 833.

2 MiprasH CoNEN = j13 wn = Expositio Stabiliens. See Prov. iii. 19. It was the
first treatise in a colleftion entitled ARzE LEVANON = Cedri Libani. See Ps. civ. 16.
It appeared at Venice in 1601.

EARLY KABBALISTIC LITERATURE 91

head of the Academy of Pherruts Schibbur 1 in the neighbour-
hood of Babylon, was perhaps more distinguished for the
violence with which he wrote against the Christians than for
his Kabbalistic knowledge. But Nahmanides ? has preserved
his critical observations on the DELINEATION OF THE
HEAVENLY TEMPLES,? or more corre€ly on the fragments
which it embodies under the title of the PRopoRTION OF THE
HerGurT, otherwise called the DEscriIpTION OF THE BODY OF
Gop, which shew the Kabbalistic leanings of Shereerah and
create that antithesis to the anthropomorphism of these early
works which has been mentioned already as a keynote of the
higher Kabbalism. ‘“‘ God forbid,” he exclaims, “that man
should speak of the Creator as if he had bodily members and
dimensions!” This Rabbi was despoiled of his wealth
and hanged by order of Cader, Khalif of the race of the
Abassides.

V. The Gaon R. Hay, son and successor of Shereerah
as the head of the Babylonian School of Schibbur, is also
credited with a commentary on the SEPHER YETZIRAH, which
will be dealt with in its proper place. The interpretation of
dreams was one of the daily occupations of Jewish Academies,
and the skill exhibited therein, or the credulity of the times,
often purchased toleration and respect for the Rabbis at the
hands of the Khalifs. To Rab Hay is attributed a treatise on
this art, which was printed at Venice.* Outside his alleged
commentary on the Book or Formation his voluminous
works have many Kabbalistic references, especially that
entitled THE Voice or Gop 1n1Ts Power. It will be sufficient
to mention among these the doétrine of correspondences, of
man as a microcosm and a peculiar theory of mystical con-
templation. He possessed enormous influence and became
subsequently the head of the Academy of Pumbaditha in the
neighbourhood of Bagdad. He died in 1038.

VI. Solomon ben Yehudah Ibn Gebirol, the scholastic
Avicebron and in all respeéts, Kabbalistic and otherwise, a
focus of intellectual and literary interest, was a contemporary
of the famous Nagrila.

2 Or of Pumbaditha according to some authorities, including Graetz. He is
supposed to have died at the age of one hundred years, circa A.D. 1000.

2 In his commentary on the THORAH.

3 Attributed to R. Ishmael, apparently the dofor of that name whose sentences are
sometimes quoted in the TALMup.

4 Bartolocci: BrsLIoTHECA RABBINICA, ti. 387.

92 ° THE HOLY KABBALAH

VII. R. Abraham ben David or Ben Dior Ha Levi, ob. circa
1180, the great orthodox apologist of the twelfth century, has
been included in the chain of Kabbalism. He is described
otherwise as a Spanish astronomer, historian and philosopher.

VIII. Moses Ibn Jacob ben Ezra, one of the greatest Jews
of his time, was of Granada, and flourished in the earlier part
of the twelfth century. His work entitled the GARDEN OF
Aromatics .shews traces of the do@trine of Gebirol, but it
appears by his CoMMENTARY ON IsartaH that he was in dis-
agreement with this doctor. Basnage says that he did not
reject the Kabbalah, though he knew its weakness, because he
did not wish to be embroiled with contemporary writers.”
He wrote upon the Divine Name and the mystical attributes
of numbers in connection therewith.

IX. The name of Juda Hallevi—ob. post 1140—who has
some references to the SEPHER YETZIRAH in his work entitled
Kusari, of Jacob Nazir—treferred to the second half of the
twelfth century—of Solomon Jarki, of R. Abraham ben
David, the younger, bring us to the thirteenth century and
to the period of (2) Maimonides, who is reported, chiefly on
the authority of R. Hayyim, to have turned Kabbalist at an
advanced age but in any case connects with the subject, and
was acquainted at least with the existence of the twofold
Mystical Tradition, distinguished as that of the Creation and
that of the Chariot; (¥) R. Azriel, of Valladolid, a famous
commentator on the SEpHER YETzIRAH; (¢) Shem Tob Ibn
Falaquera, a disciple of Maimonides, who conneéts with
Gebirol; (d) R. Abraham Abulafia,? who wrote on the
TETRAGRAMMATON, the mysticism of Letters and Numbers,
and the Mysteries of the Law, but his works have not been
published. He endeavoured to combine the theoretical and
practical schools, but he was a quixotic adventurer and a
Messianic enthusiast, whose opinions it is unnecessary to

1 See Essays ON THE WRITINGS OF IBN Ezra, in the TRANSACTIONS OF THE SOCIETY
OF HesrRew LITERATURE.

2 Basnage quotes Skinnetr’s letters and Usher in support of this view, but he and
they are in some confusion as to important dates in Kabbalistic history and literature.
Graetz has a good account of Ibn Ezra, but it is unnecessary to say that his analogies with
Kabbalism are not mentioned.

3 See Frankel: MonatsHrirr FUR GESCHICHTE UND WEISSENSCHAFT DES
JUDENTHUMS, vol. v. p. 27, Leipsic, 1856. Graetz has also a long account of Abulafia,
designed to ridicule the mental condition to which he refers the Kabbalah.

4 They include also THe Founr or Lrvinc Warers, of which there is a Latin
version in the Vatican. Graetz extends the number of his works to twenty ; Bartolocci
knew only of three.

EARLY KABBALISTIC LITERATURE 93

determine. It may be noted also that he exhibits some
Christian tendencies.

Those who maintain the authenticity of Kabbalistic
Tradition find something to their purpose in all these writers
and personalities ; but they often proceed on a misconception.
What, for example, is more likely to lead an unpractised
Student astray than the treatise of Abraham ben David Ha
Levi—ob. circa 115>—by the mere fad of its title? It is called
SEDER Ha KaBBaLAH, the Order of the Tradition.! As a faa,
it is the least mystical of all productions, and though I have
termed its author a great orthodox apologist, he had a strong
Aristotelian leaven. The occasion of his book was a Sad-
ducean heresy prevalent in Castile and Leon, and represented
by a work of Abu Alphrag, which maintained that the true
synagogue was to be found among the Sadducees. The SEDER
Ha Kaxpatau vindicates the authority of the orthodox claim
under the two heads of succession and universality, or com-
munity of doctrine among all the synagogues. It embraces
_ the entire history of the Jewish Church and the perpetuation
of Mosaic doctrine, which is the tradition named in the title.?
The work of Abraham ben David Ha Levi is perhaps greater
than was the occasion which called it forth. The Jews were
divided among themselves upon many questions, of which
Sadducean pretentions were certainly not the most important.
The great distinGion of the time for the purpose of our own
inquiry was between the Jews who had adopted Aristotelian
principles and the Jews who opposed the innovation. The
enlightenment and culture were incontrovertibly on the side
of the former; the fascination of bizarre thought, and its
occasional flashes of a great mystical light, in a word, all that
we connect with the ideal of rabbinical Israel, went, however,
into the opposite scale. There were important names on
both sides. For the rest, Rabbi Abraham and his SEPHER
exercised a large influence: his contemporary, Maimonides,
who sutvived him by almost a quarter of a century, was
described by the enthusiasts of his period as “ the elect of the
human race,”’ and by a play upon his name it was said of him

1 It was the prototype of several later produ€tions, such as that of Ghedalia on the
CHAIN OF THE KABBALAH, the YUHASIN of Zakut, famous in conneétion with the
Zouar, and finally Tsemacw Davin = Germen Davidis, already quoted. The last was
the work of R. David Ganz, a treatise on sacred and profane history from the beginning
of the world. ;

2 Battolocci: MAGNA BrsLIOTHECA RABBINICA, i. pp. 18 ef seq.

94 THE HOLY KABBALAH

that “from Moses to Moses there was no one like unto
Moses.”

The rival school was to some extent represented by Avice-
bron, and some of those who assert that the Zonar incor-
porated Traditions belonging to preceding centuries ate con-
tent to rest their case on the writings of this poet and philo-
sopher. The evidence, however, is in a very confused state.
On the one hand, the system of Avicebron has many Aristote-
lian traces; on the other hand, it has been asserted that
Maimonides has much to conneét him with Avicebron,
though he was not acquainted with his works, while, further,
the great masterpiece of the Talmudic Jew of Cordova,
entitled THe GuIDE OF THE PERPLEXED, offers many indica-
tions of his sympathy with doétrines which are no other than
those of the Speculative Kabbalah. In a general sense, how-
ever, those who wished to introduce Aristotelian principles
into Jewish philosophy belonged to that school which sub-
sequently opposed the Zowar,? as, for example, Joseph ben
Abraham Ibn Wakkar of Toledo, at the beginning of the
fourteenth century,? while those who accepted the ZoHAR
belonged to that school which connects with Avicebron,
among whom was Rabbi Abraham ben David of Posquiére,
to whom one section of modern criticism attributes the
invention of the Kabbalah, and Isaac the Blind—od. circa 1219
—with his disciples Azriel and Ezra, whose supposed alter-
native claim is favoured by Ginsburg.4 The Kabbalistic
interests of this school are outside all debate; it prized the
SEPHER YETZIRAH, and one of the most important com-
mentaties on that treatise was produced within it.

When we investigate the claim made with regard to Avice-

1 There does not seem, however, the slightest ground for supposing, with Isaac
Myer, that Maimonides was acquainted with the Zonar. On the contrary, there is
more perhaps to be said for the conjeCture of S. Munk that the Zouar quotes, or rather
borrows, from Maimonides. See MéLancxs, &c., p. 278. Among the Kabbalistic
correspondences of Maimonides are (1) His recognition of a secret sense in Scripture ;
(2) Of the inaccessible nature of God; (3) Of the universe as an organic whole.
The student should consult also an interesting Notice suk LA CABALE DES
Hésrevx, prefixed by the Chevalier Drach to the second volume of his work already
cited on the HARMONY BETWEEN THE CHURCH AND THE SYNAGOGUE. He establishes
(2) That where Buxtorf supposes the Tatmup (Tra Ros HasHANnaH) to allow the
same authority to the Kabbalah as to the text of Moses, the reference is really to the
spiritual power of the Synagogue ; and (4) that the alleged mention of the mystical
Kabbalah by Maimonides is a misconception (L’Harmonig, ii. xvi. xvii. xviii.). It is
certain, however, that Maimonides mentions a Lost Tradition.

2 In which, however, Munk traces Aristotelian influences.—MELANGES, pp. 278, 279.

3 See the English translation of Steinschneider’s JawrsH Lrrerarurg, p. 114.

4 Who follows Graetz literally.

EARLY KABBALISTIC LITERATURE 95.

bron, we must not be discouraged at finding that writers like
Isaac Myer have much enhanced the extent and kind of his
Kabbalisttic connections. We meet, it is true, the doctrines
of the Inaccessible God, of intermediaries between God and
the universe, of the emanation of the world and even of the
universal knowledge attributed to the pre-existent soul of
man by most Jewish Mysticism. But what we should like to
discover in a Theosophist of the eleventh century is some
distinct trace of typical Zoharic do€trine, let us say, that of
Shekinah, not mere Yetziratic references, Sephirotic corre-
spondences and so forth. The two latter are to be expected
at the period, and in this case the former is wanting. There
remains, however, sufficient to concern us, perhaps even to

wartant the inclusion of Gebirol among precursors of Zoharic
Kabbalism, and a short account of this author may be appended
as a conclusion to this section.

At that period when the influence of Arabian imagination
was infused into the romantic literature of Western Europe,
Scholastic Philosophy and Theology were imbued with the
tin@ure of Arabian thought; but as, on the one hand, this
tinGture was received sometimes without much consciousness
of its origin, so, on the other, influences were occasionally
credited to Arabian sources which were in reality referable
only to Spanish Jews living under the protection of the
Khalifate during the Moslem domination of the Peninsula.
A case in point was the once renowned Avicebron, whose
identity with Solomon ben Yehudah Ibn Gebirol, a Jew of
Cordova, was first demonstrated by Munk in the early part
of the nineteenth century.1 His chief treatise, entitled the
FouNTAIN OF Lire, became widely diffused in a Latin version
ascribed to the middle of the twelfth century. Albertus
Magnus, St. Thomas of Aquin and Duns Scotus, all cited it ;
and it is said to sum the philosophy of the thirteenth century.
According to Renan, Avicebron preceded the school of
Arabian philosophy which arose in Spain. He wrote philo-
sophy in Arabic and poetry in Hebrew ; the Jews valued his
poetry, but his speculations were not in repute among them ;
the Christian scholastics debated his metaphysical notions,
and knew nothing whatever of his verses. By both classes of

1 MELANGES DE PuiLosopHiz JurveE Er ARABE. The hostile school of Zoharic
criticism has not done sufficient credit to Munk for his discovery, but he was not a

persona grata among them on account of his theory that the ZonHar was founded on
genuine ancient Miprasuim. This school has almost passed away.

96 THE HOLY KABBALAH

admirers he was celebrated respectively as the greatest philo-
sopher and the greatest poet of his time. But the nominalists
denounced him; realists like Duns Scotus entailed on him
their own condemnation; while he is said to have exercised
an influence upon mystics of the Middle Ages, he was pro-
sctibed by the University of Paris at the period of the pub-
lication of the ZoHAR on the ground that he favoured Aristotle.
When the school of Avertroes arose he was unknown among
it; ata later period he was unknown to Maimonides ; he was
unknown also to the encyclopedic learning of Picus de
Mirandula; and on the threshold of the Reformation his
memoty may be said almost to have perished at the pyre of
Giordano Bruno. 7 :

Avicebron was born about the year 1021 at Malaga; he
was educated in the University of Saragossa, and he died at
Valencia in 1070. He was patronised by Nagdilah—z.e.,
Samuel-ha-Levi ben Josef Ibn Nagréla—a Prince of the
Exile, who was also Prime Minister of Spain under the
Khalifate of Habus. Nagdilah was the centre and mainspring
of Jewish learning in that country, and it has been proposed
that through him the Sacred Tradition of the Hebrews was
communicated to Avicebron at a period when the ZoHar and
its connections were still in course of formation. It seems
certain, in any case, that some of the conceptions and the
system incorporated in the literature may be found in his
writings, more especially in the Founrain or Lire and the
CROWN OF THE Kincpom. ‘The first is affirmed to be the
earliest known exhibition of “the secrets of the Speculative
Kabbalah.” 1 The second, composed towards the end of his
life, is a hymn “ celebrating the only one and true God, and
the marvels of His creation.”

The existence of Zoharic tradition previously to the time of
Moses de Leon, the reputed forger of the Zonar, has been
rested, among other supports, on the writings of this Spanish
Jew, and he seems to have been acquainted indubitably with
the Boox oF Formation. In the second book and twenty-
second section of the Founrain oF Lire this passage occuts :
““ Hence it hath been said that the construction of the world
was accomplished by the inscription of numbers and letters

1 There is some confusion here, as the SEPHER YETZIRAH is certainly speculative
if contrasted with the so-called Practical Kabbalah, which was mainly the working of
miracles by the use of Divine Names.

EARLY KABBALISTIC LITERATURE 97

in the airt,”’ which is in obvious analogy with a fundamental
notion of the Kabbalistic work in question. ‘The table of the
Thirty-Two Paths, which arises out of the Boox or Forma-
TION, was the theme of one of his poems. Whether the later
Kabbalists derived from Avicebron or both from a common
source cannot be determined conclusively, but having regard
to the Jewish indifference for his philosophical writings, and
to the probable existence of a vast mass of floating Esoteric
Tradition, there can be no doubt as to the dire@tion in which
probability points.?

The connection between Avicebron and the Kabbalah is
not sufficiently explicit upon the surface of the FOUNTAIN OF
Lire to have attracted the attention of scholars like Ernest
Renan: while Kabbalistic critics refer the system which it
develops to the ten SEPHIROTH, others suppose it to be based
on the ten categories of Aristotle, a pantheism analogous to
that of the early realists.2 “On the one hand,” says Renan,
“his application of Peripatetic principles to Mosaic doctrine
alarmed the theologians ; on the other hand, his concessions
to orthodoxy concerning the creation and the free will of the
Creator did not satisfy the extreme Peripatetic Jews.” Of his
alleged Kabbalistic connections Renan was either unaware, as
suggested already, or they were ignored by him.

An impartial examination of the FouNTAIN oF Lirz makes
the pantheism of Avicebron perhaps less apparent than his
Kabbalistic correspondences. So far from identifying the
universe with God, it establishes no uncertain contrast
between them. In order to bridge the abyss, and to make it
conceivable that one derived being from the other, he supposes
nine intermediaries, p/us the Divine Will, “ through which the
Absolutely Existing, Which is above number,” 1s “ attached
to Its corporeal universe.” The analogies that this concep-
tion offers to Sephirotic Dodtrine are self-evident and do not
need enforcing, even if an impartial judgment must pronounce
the philosophy of Avicebron to be of Greek rather than
Jewish complexion. It is clear at least that Fons Vira, which
is a dialogue after the manner of Plato, is tinétured deeply by
Hellenic thought.

1 Graetz takes the opposite view, saying that the Kabbalah borrowed many principles
from Ibn Gebirol. He offers, of course, no evidence on the subje€.

2 The nature and names of the SepHrrotu will be explained fully in Book V,
§§ 2and 3. At the present Stage, and in respect of a few further preliminary allusions,
the reader is referred to the first three plates which illustrate this volume.

98 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Modern scholatship has recognised three chief schools
which led up to Zoharic Kabbalism: (@) that of Isaac the
Blind, to which belongs Azriel, with his celebrated com-
mentary on the SEPHER YETzIRAH; (0) that of Eliezar of
Worms, which is largely of the theurgic order; and (¢) that
of Abulafia, which to some extent united the preceding two
and made use of theurgic formule combined with contempla-
tion to achieve union with God—that is to say, the exteriori-
sation of mental images for the attainment of an end which is
of all things inward and apart from the forms of mind.

I.—THE BOOK OF FORMATION

The attribution of SEPHER YETzIRAH to the patriarch
Abraham is imbedded in the text itself of that minute tra&
which is regarded by most scholars as the chief nucleus of all
Kabbalism. Depending from this there arose inevitably the
rabbinical legend which affirms that Abraham transmitted it
orally to his sons, by whom it was perpetuated in turn till
certain “ sages of Jerusalem ” committed it finally to writing,
so that the Tradition might not perish, even when the chosen
people seemed themselves on the eve of perishing. We are
acquainted already with this story and are in a position to
gauge its value, which lies indeed upon the surface. It is
the claim on a Secret Tradition ab origine Symbol, personified,
so to speak, and it is carried back further still by the Zowar.
It belongs to the mythos of successive custodians for the
transmission of that which was itself a myth, so far as the
claim on antiquity is concerned.

At the period when we hear first of the existence of such a
tract it may have been old already, and most old books have
fables designed to explain them. Those who take the fables
historically convert honest legend into something approaching
farce. We must be content therefore to say that the first
Christian reference to SEPHER YETZIRAH may belong to the
ninth century ; it has been held also that it is quoted in the
TALMuD ; but criticism has proposed an alternative text under
the same title and that the subje&t of Talmudic reference is
no longer extant. However this may be, there is no question

1 The treatise SANHEDRIM contains the following passage : “‘ By means of combining
the letters of the Ineffable Names as recorded in SPR ITsIRH ”—meaning the Sealing
Names enumerated in the first chapter, being permutations of IHV—“ Rava once created

THE BOOK OF FORMATION 99

that the Book oF FORMATION may have antedated its first
citation in literature by a generation, a century, oranage. It
should be realised that we do not know, and that those who
judge the question dogmatically on either side deserve to be
classed as intemperate.

Let us look now a little more closely at the work itself. It
is divided into six chapters, the first being concerned with the
office of the SEPHIROTH in creation and the remaining five
with what have been termed the Instruments—namely, the
letters of the Hebrew Alphabet. It was after the revelation
of these Mysteries to Abraham that he received the manifesta-
tion of God and that the Covenant was instituted. According
to the expression of the original, God “ bound the twenty-
two letters” on the tongue of the patriarch and discovered
to him His secret.?

There are two points which require to be noted at this
preliminary stage of the Yetziratic myth. One is the absolute
distinétness between God and the instruments of creation,?
whether numbers or letters,? which is established by this early
Kabbalistic work. Separated from all number and transcend-
ing all expression, He is represented as a Faithful King
sojourning in eternity and ruling the SepHirotu for ever from
His holy seat. The second point concerns the emanation of
the SEPHIROTH, to which, in preference to their creation, later
Kabbalism inclines. There is little on the face of the Boox
OF FoRMATION to countenance this view, though the latest

aman and sent him to Rav Zeira. The man being unable to reply when spoken to, the
Rabbi said to him, Thou art a creature of the company ”’—or those initiated in the
MySteries of Necromancy—* return to thy dust.” It seems idle to suggest that this
allusion is not to the traét which has been known for centuries and has been edited
on so many occasions. As a fa&, however, the reference is in reality to Hitxor
YETZIRAH, a magical work belonging to the Talmudic period.

1 SEPHER YETZIRAH, chap. vi.

2 Hence C. G. Harrison was in error when he implied that pantheism is involved
in the Sephirotic system, and when he proceeds to argue that “it takes no account
of the element of illusion which is necessarily implied in the theophanic do&rine.”—
See THE TRANSCENDENTAL UNIVERSE, London, 1894, pp. 86, 87. Cf. Alexander
Weill: Lois er MystEREs DE LA CREATION CONFORMES A LA SCIENCE LA PLUS ABSOLUE.
Paris, 1896. The writer refers to a work under a similar title which he issued forty
years previously, purporting to be the translation of a Hebrew MS. by a master of
Kabbalah. “ This writing is distinguished from all rabbinical and iphilewighical
treatises by proclaiming the identity of the Creator with His creatures, based on the
text of Genesis itself.”” Weill was a fantasiast who pretended to separate the frauds
and contradictions which Esdras and his assistants introduced into the Pentateuch
from the real work of Moses. Cf. the same author’s Moisz, LE TALMUD ET L’ EVANGILE.
Paris, 1875, tom. i.p.99. According to Franck, the last word of the system developed
by SEPHER YETZIRAH is the substitution of absolute unity for every species of dualism.—
La KAsBALE, p. 159.

a See Appendix iit,

100 THE HOLY KABBALAH
translation makes use of the word “ emanate ” in one place

only, i.e. Cap. I, v. 6. A literal rendering would be “ go
forth ”; for they appear as the instruments and servants of
the King of Ages, infotmed by Whose word they do actually
go forth “and returning, fall prostrate in adoration before
the Throne.” 1 It is said, however, that their end is bound
to their beginning, as the flame is bound to the firebrand, and
perhaps the principle of emanation is contained implicitly in
this statement. We have no reason for rejecting a con-
struction which has been adopted invariably, but it is just to
draw attention to the fact that the first work which mentions
the SEPHIROTH leaves this point in obscurity, while it depicts
God as the active Former, Artificer and: Maker, Who graved,
sculptured and builded. In Masonic terms, He became and
was the Great Architect of the Universe; and anthropo-
morphism is postulated therefore at the very root of being.

The first SEPHIRA—classified therefore as ONE—is described
as the Spirit of the Living Elohim, the Living God of Ages,
eternal and for ever. It is said otherwise that the Spirit of
the Holy One is Voice, Spirit and Word. ‘Two is the Breath-
ing of the Spirit, described otherwise as Air; the twenty-two
letters depend herefrom and each one of them is Spirit.
THREE is the moisture which comes from the Breath—other-
wise, Water from Air: herewith God sculptured and en-
eraved the first lifeless and void matter. He built Touu, the
line which circles snake-like about the world,? and Bonu, the
concealed rocks imbedded in the abyss whence the waters
issue. ‘This triad of the Spirit, the Breath and the Water
corresponds to the conception formed subsequently of the
Atzilutic or Archetypal World.? Four is the Fire which
comes forth from the Water: with this God sculptured the
Throne of Honour, the SERapHIM, the OpHANIM or Celestial
Wheels, the Holy Animals—z.e., the Four Living Creatures—
and other Ministering Spirits. Within their dominion He
established His habitation.

When this numeration is combined with those which
follow immediately, namely, Five and Srx, there is formed a
second triad, which comprises the conception of Brian, the

1 SEPHER YETZIRAH, Chap. i. See the Book oF Formation. ‘Translated from the
Hebrew, by Knut Stenring, already cited. arid’ pis

2 Compare the “ green line ”—/inea virids—which encircles the world in the Con-
CLUSIONES KABBALISTICA Of Picus de Mirandula: see p. 446 of the present work.

3 On the Four Worlds of Kabbalism, see Book V, § 3.

THE BOOK OF FORMATION IOI

atchangelic world of late Kabbalism. It should be remem-
beted, however, that the Book oF FORMATION is concerned
only with the sphere of operation tabulated subsequently as
the Third World of Kabbalism. As each SEPHIRA was
supposed at a later period to contain all the SEPHIROTH, so
there was a superincession of the Four Worlds, which were
all contained in each. The arrangement of the SEPHER
YETZIRAH does not conform with this and indeed excludes it ;
for the numerations from five to nine inclusive must be held
to represent the Yetziratic World, while the tenth and last
numeration corresponds to AsstAnH—otherwise, the World of
Action. Five is the seal with which God sealed the Height
when He contemplated it above Him. He sealed it with the
name IHV. Srx is the seal with which He sealed the depth
when He contemplated it beneath Him. He sealed it with
the name IVH. SevVEN is the seal with which He sealed the
East when He contemplated it before Him. He sealed it
with the name HIV. Ezeur is the seal with which He sealed
the West when He contemplated it behind Him. He sealed
it with the name HVI. Nunez is the seal with which He
sealed the North when He contemplated it on His right. He
sealed it with the name VIH. ‘TEN is the seal with which He
sealed the South when He contemplated it on His left. He
sealed it with the name VHI. The ten numerations are
classed finally together under the one title of “ Ineffable
Spirits of God.” The Sealing Names are combinations of
three letters, successively transposed, which enter into the
name TETRAGRAMMATON.

The SEPHER YETZIRAH was published at Mantua in 1592,
but the Latin translation of Postel had preceded it by ten
yeats.1 The Mantua edition was accompanied by five
commentaries.2, Another Latin version will be found in the
colle@tion of Pistorius; it is ascribed to Reuchlinus and
Riccius. In 1642 a further edition was published at Amster-
dam in Hebrew and Latin by Rittangelius. It was issued by

1 The full title of this curious little volume is ABRAHAMI PATRIARCH LIBER
Jeziran, sive Formationis Mundi, Patribus quidem Abrahami tempora precedentibus revelatus,
sed ab ipso etiam Abrahamo expositus Isaaco, et per Profetarum manus posteritati conservatus,
ipsis autem 72 Mosis auditoribus in secundo divine veritatis loco, hoc est in ratione, qua est posterior
authoritate, habitus. Vertebat ex Hebrew et commentaris illuftrabat 1551, ad Babylonis
ruinam et corrupti mundi finem, GULIELMUS PosTELLUs, ReStitutus. Parisi, 1552.

2 It contained also two recensions of the text, the differences between which are
regarded by some authorities as considerable and by others as unimportant variants.
Kartppe (op. cit., p. 138) terms them /rés divergents.

102 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Meyer at Leipsic in 1830, with a German translation and
notes, and at Frankfort, 1849, with a German translation and
commentary,! by L. Goldschmidt. In 1887 the Parisian
occultist Papus made a French translation, to which he added
the Thirty-two Paths of Wisdom and the Fifty Gates of
Intelligence. With laudable sincerity he admitted later on
that this was superseded by Mayer Lambert in 1891.?

There is a question at its value which remains over for
consideration, and this is how we are to account for the
importance attributed in certain circles to such a work as the
SEPHER YETZIRAH. Did its defenders believe that the com-
bination of ALEPH with all the other letters and all the rest
with ALEPH, BETH with all the others.and all the rest with
Beru, &c., &c., actually produced the universe? That is
an insupportable assumption for any class of persons except
possibly occult fantasiasts in the ecstasy of aberration which
seems to have been their normal mode during the second half
of the nineteenth century. Did they regard the letters as
symbols of forces and hold that SEpHER YETzIRAH teaches
that the universe originated in their orderly combination ?
That is tolerable speculation for the same class in its lucid
intervals, having regard to its equipment, though it does not
demand the apparatus of a Secret Tradition to secure its
transmission from Abraham to Eliphas Lévi and from Lévi
to Westcott and Mathers. But did they consider that the
letters represent occult powers of a fixed, determinable
character, and that initiation into the real meaning of Kab-
balistic Tradition would discover their nature, explaining thus
the secret behind the arbitrary doétrine of a virtue inherent in
words and letters? Having known most of the groups,
personally and otherwise, I have never met with any maker of
reveties who took such a view, or had anything to sub-
Stantiate it if he did. In the absence of light on this point
one can conclude only that it is the arbitrary doétrine in
question which accounts for the interest taken in the SEPHER
YETZIRAH, outside that which it represents for pure scholar-
ship, about which something has been said in an introdudtion

i The AMERICAN ENCYCLOPAEDIA, iii. 521, 522, mentions the Amsterdam edition of
1642, with a Latin translation, but does not conneét it with Rittangelius.

2 Other translations are those of (1) Isidor Kalisch, New York, 1877 ; (2) Edersheim
in an Appendix to his JEwisH MessiAn, 1886; (3) Wynn Westcott, 1887 and 1893,
which I have described as paraphrase; (4) Phineas Mordell, Philadelphia, 1914: it
reduces the genuine text to twenty-four paragraphs; and (5) Rabbi A. B. Joseph, 1923.

THE BOOK OF FORMATION 103

prefixed by myself to the most recent English translation,
being that of Mr. Knut Stenring, cited already in a note. I
do not propose to retrace this ground and hence refer thereto.
In conclusion, if the ZoHAR absorbed the SEPHER YETZIRAH
as to its essence, it must be added that the older text brought
nothing to the later which is part of its Theosophy at the
highest.

III.—CONNECTIONS AND DEPENDENCIES
OF THE BOOK OF FORMATION

Were there evidence to warrant us in believing that Moses
de Leon did adtually, as his hostile relative is reported to have
affirmed, write the Zonar bodily “out of his own head,”
there would be substantial evidence still that the Kabbalistic
system which it contains was not his invention at the root.
The existence of the SEPHER YETZIRAH is part of this evidence,
which appears, however, more fully and more strongly in the
commentaries and developments of that work. We have
seen already that when it came to be printed at Mantua, the
Book OF FORMATION was accompanied by five such con-
nections, which at the same time do not exhaust the list that
might be given in a complete bibliography. The best known
is unquestionably the SEpHER SEPHIROTH, or “‘ Commentary
on the Ten SEpHIRoTH by way of Questions and Answers,”
the work of R. Azriel ben Menahem ; that of Rabbi Abraham
has been regarded as the most important from an esoteric
standpoint, while the earliest in point of time is the work of
Saadya Gaon} in the tenth century. Another, which has
been attributed to Hay Gaon in the early part of the eleventh
century, would rank next in antiquity, but it has been rejected
usually as spurious in respect of date and attribution. Com-
mentaries ate ascribed also to R. Moses Botarel,? R. Moses ben
Nahmann,? R. Abraham ben David Ha Levi the younger and
R. Eleazar. Of these personalities the first and last are subse-

1 That is, Saadiah Ben Joseph, Gaon of Sura. The JEwisH ENcYCLOPADIA suggests
that Saadia is “an artificial: Hebrew equivalent ” of his Arabic name Sa’id. Gaon is
a title which distinguished the heads of the two Academies at Babylon, those of Sura
and Pumbedita, as we have seen. It arose late in the sixth century. The plural is
GEONIM,

2 He describes the Kabbalah as a most pure and holy philosophy, but exhibits no
acquaintance with the ZoHar. He belonged to the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries,
and was instructed in the Secret Tradition by Jacob Sefardi.

3 Bartolocci, iv. 267.

H.K. I

104 - THE HOLY KABBALAH

quent to the period when Moses de Leon is supposed to have
been at work on the ZoHAR, and the two others have been
cited to shew that the novelty of that work “ is of form rather
than material.”

The commentary of R. Saadya Gaon is one of those which
was published in Hebrew at Mantua, together with the
SEPHER YETZIRAH!; but it was written originally in Arabic,
and a copy is preserved in the Bodleian Library. After
remaining in MS. for over eight hundred years this Arabic
original was at length printed at Paris, together with a French
translation, in 1892. In the introdution prefixed to his
vetsion, M. Lambert observed that Saadya Gaon appears as a
Theosophist in his commentary, which is almost equivalent
to saying that the first expository treatise on the SEPHER
YETZIRAH possesses a Kabbalistic complexion, though the
author has been regarded as a purely rationalistic writer. It
must be confessed, however, that Saadya offers little con-
nection with Zoharic doétrine. We have noted that the
SEPHIROTH of the SEPHER YETZIRAH shew scarcely any trace
of an emanational system. For Saadya Gaon there is one
intermediary between God and the world, but this is the
physical air and not the transcendental numerations. In this
ait God is present everywhere, and it penetrates all bodies,
even the most compa&. Of the doctrine of Arn Sorx there
is also no teal trace. It is recognised however, on the one
hand, that we cannot have an adequate notion of the Divinity
ot His correspondences with the world, but, on the other,
that some approximate idea may be obtained as to the latter
and that they may be shewn forth by means of figures and
comparisons. One of these illustrations tells us that God is
the life of the world as the soul is the life of the body, and as
in man the soul is all-powerful, so God is omnipotent in the
world. He is also its Supreme Reason, and as in man the
rational faculty is the guide of life, so the Divine Power is
directed by the Divine Reason. Above this elementary form
of Natural Theology the commentary never soats, and we ate
warranted in saying that the work, as a whole, has little in-
herent interest, though it is valuable as a historical document.

Unlike the SzpHER YETZIRAH, which makes no reference
to pneumatology, Saadya Gaon devotes a certain space to the

1 See p. go.

DEPENDENCIES OF THE BOOK OF FORMATION 105

consideration of the soul in man; and here, in a sense, he
connects with Zoharic Kabbalism, though he rejects metem-
psychosis utterly, for he recognises the soul’s five aspects or
divisions and calls them by their conventional names, which
names, however, occut in the Talmud.!. They will be
tabulated at a later Stage. Unfortunately, his classification is
exceedingly clumsy, and he begins by following Plato in the
recognition of three faculties—reason, concupiscence and
anger. On account of reason the soul is called NEsHAMAH ;
on account of concupiscence it is called NEpHEsH ; and on
account of anger it is called Ruan. The two other names,
Haia (living) and YEHraH (unique), refer to the vitality
of the soul and to the fact that no other creature resembles it.
We shall see that the Zohar knows nothing of such material
attributions.

The do@rine concerning Divine and Angelic Names is also
a subject of some references which are important to our
inquity because they establish the fa& that Saadya Gaon did
not ascribe to them any thaumaturgic virtues. The names of
the angels vary according to the events which they are com-
missioned to accomplish, and in like manner those referred to
the Deity are descriptive of His operations. In the Work of
Creation He terms Himself Exonim; when ordaining the
Covenant of Circumcision He is called Ex SpHappar; He is
the I am in connection with the wonders of the ten plagues ;
and He is Jan when producing the great miracle of the Red
Sea.? As it is with the names of God and the angels, so is it
with those of the stars, which vary according to their qualities
—namely, their greater or lesser brilliance, their hot or cold
natures, &c.

When explaining that the SEpHER YETZIRAH is concerned
with created things and how they came into being, there is a

1 Despite his hostility to reincarnation, as understood by the Kabbalah, he accepts
the pre-existence of souls and teaches that the resurreCtion of the body will take place
when all souls destined for earthly life have passed through it. Here is one example
vi Zohatic doétrine, pure and simple, but it has been refleGted from the past into the

ater text. i

2 The Zowar teaches that the Divine Name AHIH, which signifies I AM, indicates
the unification and concealment of all things in such a manner that no distin@ion
can be established between them. The words ASHR AHIH, THAT I AM,
represent God on the point of manifesting all things, including His Supreme Name.
On the other hand the Name or Title AHIH ASHR AHIH, I AM THAT I AM,
tefers to the Deity, or is that Name assumed by Him, on the occasion of the
manifestation of the Cosmos, when God is called JeHovan.—Zohar iii. 65d,
Mantua. Compate the French translation, v. 179.

T2

106 THE HOLY KABBALAH

reference to the ten categories—namely, substance, quantity,
quality, relation, place, time, powers, position, activity,
passivity ; and if these are to be regarded as referring to the
numerations of the SEPHER YETZIRAH, it is clear that Saadya
Gaon understood the latter as an Aristotelian philosopher.
With these categories, the ten commandments are also forced
to cotrespond in an arbitrary manner. For example, that
against adultery answers to the category of position, for the
act itself is a position and a contaét.

Lastly, in his analysis of the Hebrew Alphabet, the com-
mentator seeks to account for its sequence. ALEPH is the
first sound pronounced—.e., it is vocalised at the back of the
tongue. SHIN is vocalised in the middle of the mouth and
Mem on the lips. Unfortunately for the analogy, MrEm
precedes SHIN in the alphabet, and indeed the design of the
speculation seems past conjecture.

About the commentary ascribed to Hay Gaon there is
considerable confusion, which Isaac Myer increases by
representing that it deals with the Book oF CONCEALMENT,
instead of that of Formation. ‘There are no historical notices
and no traces whatsoever of the former text before the
appearance of the Zonar, in which it was first made known.
The tract of Hay Gaon needs only to be mentioned in passing
on account of its disputed authenticity. Other works
attributed to him are not above suspicion, but it may be
admitted in a general way that he had more distin Kabbalistic.
connections than Saadya. The condemned commentary
deals largely with the Mysteries of TETRAGRAMMATON and
gives perhaps for the first time the curious quadrilateral
method of writing it by means of letters and circles, to which
so much importance has been attributed by modern occult
writets.! The commentary of Abraham ben David Ha Levi,?
the younger of that name and a contemporary of Maimonides,
whom he attacked bitterly, is included also in the Mantua
edition of the Boox or Formation, and was used largely by
Rittangelius in that of Amsterdam, 1642.3 The uttermost
merely fantastic (DoGME DE LA Haute Macaig, section dealing with the Kabbalah),
and elsewhere (LA ScreNcE bes Esprits) illustrates these additions by a Kabbalistic
document which I think also is one of his specimens of invention.

2 Bartolocci, i. 15. His birth is referred to circa 1110, and he is supposed to have
suffered the death of a martyr in or near 1180.

8 Lier JestrAw (Hebrew and Latin) qui Abrahamo patriarche adscribitur, una cum
commentario Rabbi Abraham F. D. (é.e., Ben Dior, i.e., Daur and also Rabad) super 32

DEPENDENCIES OF THE BOOK OF FORMATION 107

confusion prevails with regard to the personality of the
author, who, on the one hand, is frequently identified with
the writer of the SEpER Ha Kaspawan, and is, on the other,
the subje& of many contradictory myths prevailing in occult
citcles. Eliphas Lévi, who cites a passage from his treatise
as a proof of the authenticity and reality of his own “ dis-
covery ” of the Magnum Opus, makes a great deal of mystery
concerning it and its rarity, but he has used evidently the
edition of Rittangelius, which is perfe@ly well known and
attainable in almost any national library.

We have recognised that the commentary of Saadya Gaon
can scatcely be termed Kabbalistic; we have agreed to set
aside another which abounds in Kabbalistic material because
its date and attribution have been challenged ; in the work of
R. Abraham, however, there are Zoharic elements which
admit of no question, and it is indeed to the school which he
represents that Graetz and others have referred the authorship
of the Book oF SPLENDOUR. Thete is the peculiar distinétion
between upper and lower SEPHIROTH which is not only
characteristic of the Zoharic period, though it is not found in
the Zouar, but offers a connecting link between R. Abraham
and the late Kabbalism of Isaac de Loria.2 Moreover, there
is the doctrine of the Unknowable God, of “‘ the Cause of
Causes which is not apprehended by any one outside Itself,”
being void of all distinction and all mode of existence. The
doétrine has not assumed that final shape in which it is
presented by the Zouar, and its notion of the Divine Being
appears to be, if possible, more concealed and latent than the
conception of Ain SopH, the Non Ens, which Itself is dis-
tinguished by R. Abraham from Kerruer, the Crown of
Creation, on the remarkable ground that “ the accident is not

Semitas Sapientia ... Translatus et Notis illuftratus a Joanne Stephano Rittangelio .. .
Amftelodami, 1642. The thirty-two Paths referred to at the beginning of the SzEpHER
YETZIRAH ate given in Latin and Hebrew, each followed immediately by the com-
mentaty of R. Abraham, likewise in Latin and Hebrew. Then comes the explanation
of Rittangelius, which sometimes extends to many pages, quoting various authorities,
including the Zouar and its Supplements. After the Paths, we have the SEPHER
YETzIRAH itself, in Latin and Hebrew, with the editor’s commentary, also in both
languages. It should be added that the entire commentary of R. Abraham is not
given by Rittangelius, who is content with presenting that part only which is devoted
to the Paths of Wisdom.

1 RITUEL DE LA Haute MAGirm, c. 12, where the Hebrew passage cited is completely
unintelligible. It has been re@ified in my annotated translation, s.v. TRANSCENDENTAL
Macic. Cf. La Crier pes Granps MysTErgs, pp. 233, 234.

4 There is no doubt that the ten SepHIRoTH were an evolved system in the time of the
Yetziratic commentator.

1908 THE HOLY KABBALAH

made from the essence, nor the Res from the Non Rzs or
Non Ens,” thus occasioning an insoluble difficulty as to the
emanation of the manifest universe. This view offers a strong
contrast to Zoharic Theosophy. Otherwise, the Arn Sop of
our commentator is described in terms which ate almost
identical with Zohatic teaching. “ Neither unity nor plurality
can be attributed to It, because unity cannot be ascribed to
that which is incomprehensible in its essence,” the reason
being that number is an accident belonging to the world of
extension, place and time.

Among minor Zoharic contrasts, it may be noted that a
mote peculiar importance is attributed to the letter ALEPH
than to the Bers with which Genesis opens ; it is the form of
all the letters, and all the Paths of Wisdom are contained
therein, but after an universal mode. ‘There are traces also of
the peculiar angelical system which was destined to receive so
much elaborate extension from expositors of the Book oF
SPLENDOUR.

Before dismissing this commentary we may note the alleged
connection of its author with that Abraham the Jew ! who
belongs to the literature of Alchemy. ‘The testament of this
mysterious personage transformed the legendary Nicholas
Flamel from a simple scrivener into a seeker after the Great
Work—a seatch, moreover, which his story represents as
crowned with high success. The memorial in question was
addressed to the nation of Israel, dispersed by the wrath of
God in France, by one who styled himself “ Priest, Prince,
Levite, Astrologer and Philosopher.” The description which
constitutes out sole knowledge concerning it 1s given in
another testament, that of Nicholas Flamel, and I have shewn
elsewhere that this memorial cannot be regarded as authentic.?
Belonging as they do to Alchemy, there is no ground here to
discuss their respective claims ; but it is well to say that the
attempt made by Eliphas Lévi to identify the Abraham of
Flamel with the commentator on the SEPHER YETZIRAH not
only institutes a connection between Alchemy and Kabbalism
which is unwarrantable in itself but has no colourable evidence
to cite in its own support, as there is no trace whatever of any
alchemical meaning in the Hebrew commentator. Abraham

1 This title is used by Bartolocci in his bibliography to describe numerous writers
who cannot be identified more closely.
2 See my SECRET TRADITION IN ALCHEMY, 1926, C. X., pp. 137 ¢f seq.

DEPENDENCIES OF THE BOOK OF FORMATION 109

the Kabbalist belongs, moreover, to the twelfth century, while
Flamel was two hundred years later, and the book which he
mentions could scarcely have existed in Jewry, even on the
Lévi hypothesis, for such a space of time without something
transpiring concerning it.

As a literary and philosophical work the first place among
dependencies of the SEPHER YETZIRAH seems assigned cor-
rectly to the commentary of Azriel. Its author was born at
Valladolid in or about the year 1160 and died in 1238. Accord-
ing to some authorities he was a pupil of Isaac the Blind, but
others say that his teacher was R. Jehuda, son of Rabad. He
became in turn the instructor of R. Moses Nahmanides, who
also belongs to the chain of Yetziratic tradition.”

Azriel is said to have travelled much in search of Secret
Wisdom, but it was an age when men of learning were fre-
quently wanderers, and it was perhaps less recondite motives
which actuated him. He connetts with the Kabbalistic
system which was expounded by the school of Gerona, and
there are no real grounds for supposing that he acquired know-
ledge elsewhere, but he added the result of his own reflections.
Many works have been attributed to him, of which some are
lost and some have remained in MS. THE ExpLANATION OF
THE TEN SEPHIROTH by way of Questions and Answers must have
helped to shape the metaphysical speculations of the Kab-
balah and may well enough have originated more than it
derived.

The teachings of Azriel aroused the opposition of the
Aristotelian Jews, and it is thought by Isaac Myer that the
logical form of his commentary was a concession to this
school of thought. Whatever its motive, the fact, broadly
taken, is of importance to our inquiry: it shews that the
Sephirotic notion in its earliest development could not have
been that of the categories, since it had to be conformed to
the principles espoused by the disciples of Aristotle. The
Jewish Literati followed various schools, and the influence
attributed to the Stagirite has been perhaps exaggerated. The
votaries of the so-called Secret Wisdom were a small minority.
Platonism, as it is needless to say, was very little known in the

1 Was in evidence A.D. 1190 to circa 1210. He taught the do&rine of metem -
psychosis and a few fragments of his writings ate still extant.

2 And brought, as Graetz admits, the influence of his great reputation to bear upon
‘its fortunes.

110 THE HOLY KABBALAH

West at the period in question, though it appears in later
Kabbalism.

As regards both matter and form, Azriel’s commentary has
been the subject of high praise. It contains the do&trine of
An SopuH, which is not in the SEpHER YETZIRAH, and it has
express views on the emanation of the SEPHIROTH, which are
said to be contained in Ain SopH and of no effect when
separated. Their emanation was possible because it must be
within the omnipotence of Deity to assume a limit. The
essence and the real principle of all finite things is the Thought
of the Supreme Being ;} if that were withdrawn, they would
be left as empty shells, and this is true not only of the visible
world but of the intermediaries between God and the creation,
With his philosophical speculations the Kabbalist mingles
something from the fantastic region, attributing, for example,
to the SEPHIROTH ? certain symbolical colours. KETHER is
“like the Concealed Light,” or the light which is veiled in
darkness, the comparison intended being probably that of a
luminous mist. Brnau is sky-blue, because BinaH is the
great sea of Kabbalism. CHoxman is yellow, CHESED white
and GEBURAH fed; TIPHERETH is white, red, or pink, Nrr-
ZACH is whitish-red and Hop treddish-white. JEsop is a
combination of the previous triad, while Marxuru is like the
light which reflects all colours. Azriel countenances also the
Sephirotic division of the human body which is found in later
Kabbalism.

Moses ben Nahman, or Nahmanides, was born in 1194 at
Gironne. Before he made acquaintance with the Kabbalah
he is said to have had a prejudice against it, but he was after-
wards an enthusiastic student both of its speculative and
practical parts, and by his writings and influence contributed
much to its development. His Kabbalistic ExpLANATION OF
THE Law was completed in 1268, and among his many other
works that called the GARDEN oF DELIGHT, and another on
the SECRETS OF THE THORAH, ate full of theosophical specula-
tions. He left his native land to settle in Palestine, where he

1 Cf. Zonar, Pt. I. fol. 74a; I. 440.

2 According to the Zowar the colour attributions are as follows: Kerruer, black,
white, or colourless ; TrpHERETH, purple; Marxurn, clear sapphire.

3 His other works include an epistle on the use of matrimony in exercising the fear
of God—no humorous suggestion being intended; a work on the nature of man,
from the text of II. Samuel, vii. 19 ; a Book oF FarrH AND CONFIDENCE ; another on
Wars ; and yet another on the Pomegranate. These are not professedly Kabbalistic,

DEPENDENCIES OF THE BOOK OF FORMATION Ill

died, apparently at a great age, but at what precise time is not
known: it was circa 1270.

The commentary on the SEPHER YETZIRAH which passes
under the name of R. Eliezer of Worms seems to have been
the work of a German Jew of Germesheim,! one of the
greatest Kabbalists of his period. ‘That he was the instructor
of Moses Nahmanides, as some authorities have stated, is,
however, a mistake, as Basnage has indicated, for he belongs
to a later date. His works, which are wholly Kabbalistc,
are (1) THE VESTMENT OF THE Lorp, but this has never been
printed. (2) THe GurpE oF SINNERS, exhorting them to
repentance and amendment of life (Venice, 1543). (3) A
TREATISE ON THE SOUL, cited by Mirandula in his thesis
against astrologers. (4) An explanation of Psalm cxlv.
(5) A commentary on SEPHER YETZIRAH, appended to the
Mantua edition of that work. The author flourished before
and after the middle of the fourteenth century. Com-
mentaries on the S—PHER YETZIRAH are referable or ascribed
—as the case may be—to R. Aaron the Great,? under the
title of Book OF THE Pornts; R. Judas Ha Levi*; Sabbatai
Donolo4; Judah ben Barzillai®; and Isaac the Blind. The
Bodleian has a manuscript entitled Misunat, by Yosef ben
Uzziel, which has been classed as a commentary on SEPHER
YETZIRAH, but is said otherwise to be a supplement to the
text itself. See Jewish ENcycLopa@p1A, s.v. Joseph ben
Uzziel.

like the TREASURE OF LiFE, the TREASURE OF THE Lorpb, the GARDEN oF DELIGHT
(mentioned in the text above), or the mystical epistle on the thing desired. As regards
the pra€tical part of the Kabbalah, he treated it with grave consideration, including its
arts of necromancy, the evocation of evil spirits and the methods of their control.

1 Basnage : Hisrorre DEs JuIFs, c. vii. t. v.p.1859. See also Bartolocci, i, 186, 187.

2 Bartolocci, i. 15.

3 See his work entitled Kusarz.

4 Edited by M. Castelli. Florence, 1880. He was an Italian physician and
astrologer, who was born in 913 and died subsequently to 982. He is known otherwise
as Shabbethai b. Abraham b. Joel.

5 Edited by M. Halbertstamm. Berlin, 1885. The Judah in question was a Spanish
Talmudist of Barcelona, who flourished at the end of the eleventh and early in the
twelfth centuries.

fr Ry } e: 5 iL “hy ny , ls
( . Porth ae ieee
ie Ni ‘ag te
a, , " ‘Ns Wt 43 at
Ae us ‘ ae Pal f ie :
es ray / a t eh) Lier
‘

Paxbu
penn fabian, 4 roan & ehrbin Oo
2 auf f j “teatvebd dalton aie a
‘eal cre peer pte IO, ose : | wil

| 5 AA etl ita A asaaaaniadabiees

i fs 1, ; ah ‘ me
a at A: ies ah hs AGL. f ‘ ein iil je We
ns | aia iy Fe aS hay neg)
By hi uae ae hat i, My A ff ie . ,
“uP : ik “AAS ch A eae ne dew
- ‘i CVA Me ie ee ’ Pi Me ‘4 a
: iy ol) rind i” Hanes W,

BOOK IV

THE WRITTEN WORD OF KABBALISM:
SECOND OR ZOHARIC PERIOD

} aN
hy

Ray

Peete Ney
rah a
blgial bi ) it thes

Ae ah AW ye
(Pie:

BOOK IV

THE WRITTEN WORD OF KABBALISM:
SECOND PERIOD

I.—THE BOOK OF SPLENDOUR: ITS
CONTENT AND DIVISIONS

THE cycle of the S—pHER YETZIRAH lies within a small
compass ; the text is extant in several languages ; and its most
important dependencies will be found in Latin translations.!
It has been available therefore to students and inquirers at
large, even if they were unacquainted with Hebrew. The
SEPHER Ha Zour, on the other hand, is not only large in
itself but has considerable supplementary matter belonging
to a later period and an extensive connected literature.
Moreover, it is written—for the most part—in Aramaic,
“the Jerusalem idiom” of Isaac de Acco; and only three
short tracts imbedded in the general text are extant in Latin.
Between the thirteenth and twentieth centuries it was there-
fore a sealed book for the great majority of scholars, till a full-
length version appeared in French—as we have seen—within
recent years. Prior to this event great confusion had
obtained in regard, firstly, to the content of the work and,
secondly, to the comparative importance of its various
divisions.? Part of this must be attributed to the ambitious
design of Rosenroth’s historical colleftion. The KaBBaLa

1 The first printed edition appeared at Mantua in 1562 and contained two recensions,
the second being longer and embodying important additions.

2 The Italian reader may be referred also to an analysis of the Zohar by the Abbé
de Rossi, which appeared in his Dizionario sroricO DEGLI AurorI Esrer. The
writer follows Morin as to the late date of the work.

8 The case of Basnage may be mentioned as that of a well-informed writer, whose
history of the Jewish people from the time of Jesus Christ to his own date—the begin-
ning of the eighteenth century—is memorable in several respe€ts, yet whose knowledge
of the Zour does not even extend so far as it might have been taken by Rosenroth.
He terms (Livre iii. p. 775) the Book or CoNCEALMENT the first part of the work, and
seems to regard it as comprised simply in that and the two Synods. In a word, he had
not read the preface to KaspaLa Denupara, vol. ii.

115

116 THE HOLY KABBALAH

DeENupata, by attempting to cover much too wide a field,
gives no adequate idea of the work which it is meant to
elucidate. It attributes an exaggerated importance to three
tracts introduced into the body of the Zonwar and to late
commentary on these ; the apparatus in the form of a lexicon
which fills most of the first volume, though it has a methodical
appearance, is little more than a chaos, in which late and early
expositors ate bundled together after the uncritical manner
of the period; in a subsequent section undue prominence is
given to some personal discussions and correspondence
between the Editor and Henry More, the English Platonist ;
finally, the second volume includes an enormous treatise on
the doctrine of the Revolutions of Souls by a Kabbalist of the
seventeenth century. With all its defects the Kappaa
DENUDATA remains of ptime value, but it would have been
beyond all price had a clearer genius governed its arrange-
ment. As it is, the class of persons who have proved to be
most concerned with the subject have been content to follow
the lead of Rosenroth, by accepting a little tra@ called the
Book oF CONCEALMENT as the fundamental part of the whole
ZOHAR, and the developments of that tract as entitled to the
next highest consideration. Thete are, of course, several
soutces of information which might have correed this false
impression—the work of Franck in France and that of
Ginsburg in England, to name two only—but it has endured
notwithstanding, and a notable example to the point is found
in an enlarged edition of a compilation by Dr. Papus. There
a bibliographical appendix states that “the only complete
translation ” of the Zownar is the wotk of M. H. Chateau,!
whereas the enterprise in question is confined only to the
tracts rendered into Latin by Rosenroth, and these have been
available for years in the English version of Mathers. The
Boox oF OcCULTATION—or CONCEALMENT—and its Zohat-
istic commentaries ate only accidents of the Zowar, and they
furnish no notion of the scope of that vast Theosophical
Miscellany. I should add that from an esoteric standpoint
the ZoHAR itself is only an accident of the Kabbalah—an

1 Le Zouar, Traduttion francaise et Commentaire de M. H. Chateau. The biblio-
gtaphical annotation accredits the translator with minutieuse érudition and adds that he
has catefully collated the Hebrew texts, the Latin and the other versions. The work
is poorly produced, it bears no trace of the scholarship imputed to it and the commentary
is of no real value. Moreover, the title itself deserves to be called fraudulent.

THE BOOK OF SPLENDOUR 117

accident in the life of the alleged Tradition, much as, from
the standpoint of Latin Christianity, the New Testament is
not the exclusive foundation of the Church but an event in
her development.

The Zouar proper, as stated in my preface, purports to be a
commentary on the Pentateuch, and to indicate its scope,
prior to any presentation of my own, I will vary my general
tule of confining quotations from modern authors to foot-
notes and summarise an account of Ginsburg: “ The Zonar
does not (apparently) propound a regular Kabbalistic system,
but dilates upon the diverse doctrines of this Theosophy, as
indicated in the forms and ornaments of the Hebrew alphabet,
in the vowel points and accents, in the Divine Names and the
letters of which they are composed, in the narratives of the
Bible and in the traditional and national stories. The long
conversations between its author, R. Simeon ben Yohai, and
Moses, which it records; the short and pathetic prayers
inserted therein; the religious anecdotes; the attractive
spiritual explanation of Scripture passages, appealing to the
hearts and wants of men; the descriptions of the Deity and
the SrEpHrROTH under the tender forms of human relationship,
comprehensible to the finite mind, such as father, mother,
primeval man, matron, bride, white head, the great and small
face, the luminous mirror, the higher heaven, the higher
earth, &c., which it gives on every page, made the ZOHAR a
welcome text-book for the students of the Kabbalah, who, by
its vivid descriptions of Divine Love,' could lose themselves
in tapturous embraces with the Deity.”

We ate placed by this quotation in a position to understand,
firstly, after what manner the literature of Kabbalism affected
the fervid imagination of the rabbinical Jew and the kind of
influence which it had on him, well illustrated in one of its
aspects by the fascinating and terrible histories of Messianic
enthusiasm and illusion, as already noted, but in another
by Zoharic Theosophy at its highest development. We can
understand, secondly, how much there is to correct in the
pretence of a French speculation which once fixed upon the
ZOHAR as embodying traditional knowledge of a religion

1 It is in this respe& that the Zonar suggests analogies with Christian Mysticism
as well as Arabian Sufism. For the rest, my readers must be dissuaded from supposing
that Ginsburg’s summary is adequately representative of the work, for it contains no
reference to the Doétrine of Shekinah o or the Zohatic Mystery of Sex.

Lilith citi Deities ee SM See

118 THE HOLY KABBALAH

behind all religions.’ No system responds less readily to
what is involved in such a conception. No person would be
less disposed than the conventional occultist, present or past,
to accept Kabbalistic notions of religion, were he really
acquainted therewith, after due allowance has been made for
Zohatic and other reveries which connect with occult beliefs,
as these seem in their turn to connect magnetically with
everything unsound in faith and unreasonable in doé@tine.
That God is immanent in the material world is a much simpler
-and more rational hypothesis than to establish intermediaries
between finite and infinite, which create innumerable diffi-
culties without resolving any, while on another side of the
subject we have better means of excusing the anthropo-
morphisms of the Bible, than their reduitio ad absurdum, which
has been regarded as implied in the Kabbalistic Do&trine of
the Two Countenances.

The ZoHAR proper—apart, that is to say, from all supple-
ments and interpolations—is divided into five parts, corre-
sponding to the five Scriptural Texts on which it is supposed
to be a commentary, namely, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus,
Numbers and Deuteronomy. ‘The first two are complete to
all intents and purposes, the third and fourth have certain
missing portions, while of Deuteronomy there is little more
than fragments. ‘The extant work, as printed, is in three
patts only, of which the last comprises all that remains of the
Commentary on the three later books of the Pentateuch.
Each part is subdivided into various sections, separately
entitled, ¢.g., SEct1o BERESHITH, SEcTIO TotpoTH Noau, and
so forth. There is no call to enumerate them in this place.
There ate twelve sections of alleged interpretation in respect
of Genesis, ten on Exodus, nine each on Leviticus and Num-
bets, and five only on Deuteronomy, manifestly imperfect as
such. ‘The Commentary on Genesis is followed by certain
Appendices, being I, HasumaLorH = omissions ; II, Tosskr-
TOTH = ADDITIONS; and sab voce Appendix III, two important
Supplements, comprising extracts from MrprasH HA NEELAM
=: SECRET MiprasH, and SITHRE THORAH = SECRETS OF THE
Law. The following independent texts are introduced
between certain setions of the Commentary on Exodus and
sometimes within the sections themselves, namely: pof § I,

1 According to Eliphas Lévi, “ all religions have issued from the Kabbalah and all
return thereto.”

THE BOOK OF SPLENDOUR 119

MiprasH Ha NEELAM (continued); po § I], Raaran
MEHEMNAH = FAITHFUL SHEPHERD; post § V, SEPHER HA
Bauir = Luminous Book, and SirHre THoRAH (continued) ;
post § VI, FarrHruL SHEPHERD (continued), and IpRA DE
MAsSCHCANA = ASSEMBLY OF THE SANCTUARY; post § VII,
SrpHrA Di ZENiouUTHA = Book oF CONCEALMENT. The
Commentary on Exodus has also three Appendices, two
embodying AppiTIoNs and one containing an independent
tract on Pataces. ‘The sections of Exodus have, moreover,
certain MATHNITIN = REPETITIONS interpolated. Others
follow § I of the Commentary on Leviticus, while §§ VII,
VIII and IX are reinforced by further continuations of the
FAITHFUL SHEPHERD. The Commentary on Numbers has
the following independent texts introduced between its
seCtions: post § Il, FarrHrut SHEPHERD (continued), and
IprA Rapsa KapisHA = GREAT Hoty AssEMBLY; post § III,
FAITHFUL SHEPHERD (continued); po § VII, Farrurun
SHEPHERD (continued), and certain MiscELLANIES. Among
the fragments of Deuteronomy, § I is followed by a further
instalment of the FarrHruL SHEPHERD, while portions of this
work constitute the extant se€tions numbered III, V and VI.
To § X is appended Ipra Zoura KapisHa = LittLe Hoty
ASSEMBLY.

With this very simple and unpretentious collation there
may be compared the analytical scheme of Rosenroth, which
remains of bibliographical interest after the lapse of more than
two centuries. The Zouar is divided thereby into internal
and external parts, which are tabulated at length as follows.}

I. The internal parts are those which are collected together
in one edition.2 They are:

(2) The text of the Zonar, properly so called. Apart
from all its additions this is not of unmanageable
dimensions.

(0) Sipura Di ZENrIouTHA, or BoOK OF CONCEALMENT
—otherwise, that of MopEsTY.

(¢) The Ipra RaBpa, or GREATER SYNOD.

1 KABBALA DENUDATA, vol. ii. pp. 8 e# seq.

® So far as it is possible to estimate the intention of this statement there is no corre-
spondence with faét. The Book or CoNCEALMENT and Ipras are certainly not internal
parts of any Commentary on the Pentateuch, and in the Zowar they are not combined
with the text proper so as to form one scheme therewith. It may be said on the
contrary that all interpolations are casual, while the Appendices to the part of Exodus
might change places with those of Genesis, and so of the rest.

H.K. ?

120 THE HOLY KABBALAH

(d) 'The Ipra Zoura, or Lesser SYNOD.

(e) Sapan D1 MisHpaTiM, the Dacourse or Story of the
Ancient One in seition MisHpari.

(f) MrprasH RutH, or Commentary on the Scrip-
tural book of that name. ‘These are fragments only.

(g) SEPHER Ha Bantr, the RENOWNED or ILLUSTRIOUS
Book, sometimes called Book oF BRIGHTNESS.

(4) TossErtoTH = ADDENDA, ot ADDITIONS.

(4) RaatAn MEHEMNAH, of the FarrHFuL SHEPHERD.

(/) HAIkLUTH, 7.¢., PALACES, Manstons, of ABODES.

(&) Srrurart THorAB, or Mysteries of the THORAH, 7.¢.,
the Law.

(2) MiprasH Ha NEELAM, otf SECRET COMMENTARY.

(m) Raze DERAZIN, Of SECRET OF SECRETS.

From this account are omitted the following tracts and
fragments, because they do not appear in the Mantua edition
of circa 1558, known as the LirrLtE Zouar : }

(2) MiprasHh HaAzEETH, ot Commentary on the Song of
Solomon.

(2) PExoopaH, ot Explanation of the Thorah.

(c) YENOOKAH, ot the Ducourse of the Youth.

(7) MaaMar To Hazez, or the Dacourse beginning,
Come and See.

(¢) Hrspoorsn KapmaA, ot Primary Assembly.

(f) Marsnirin, ot Repetitions = = Traditional Recep-
tions, according to ‘Rosentoth.

The ground on which these portions ate set aside appears
insufficient, as the sections ¢, f, g, 7, and m in the first tabulation
ate also wanting in the Mantua edition. The Grear ZonAr,
the Cremona edition (1558-60), contains all the treatises
enumerated in both the above lists. J am not aware that any
superior authority resides in the Mantua Zonar.?

II. As understood by Rosenroth, the external parts are
those superadded to the earlier editions. ‘These are :

(2) TikkuNIM Ha ZoHAR, Of SUPPLEMENTS of the
Book oF SPLENDOUR, called also the ANCIENT SUPPLE-

1 The GreaTER ZOHAR being that of Cremona. Blunt’s Dictionary or DocrrINAL
AND HisroricAL THEOLOGY makes a ludicrous confusion over this point, representing
the GREATER ZOHAR as the Commentary on Genesis and the Lesser as the Book OF
CONCEALMENT.

2 A Hebrew translation in MS. by Barachiel ben Korba is preserved—it is said—
in the Public Library of Oppenheim.

THE BOOK OF SPLENDOUR I2i

MENTS, to distinguish them from further and later addi-
tions.

(6) ZonAR HapasH—the New ZoHAR, containing
matters omitted in the printed editions. This has four
parts.

(1) The text of the Zour itself, scattered through
which is the supplement of the tra¢t MrprasH Ha NEE-
LAM, patt of which appears in the original work.

(2) Tixxunim Hapasuim, ot New Supplements.

(3) ZoHAR Suir Ha Suirim, ot EXPOSITION OF THE
SONG OF SONGS, appertaining to the ZoHarR.

(4) ZoHAR AIKE, ot Exposition of Lamentations,
appertaining to the ZoHAR.

In the above tabulations are contained everything of the
ZOHAR that has come down to us.t It may be thought that
its authenticity did not increase with its bulk, but on this
subject no canon of criticism can be said to have emerged.

For the better comprehension of the cycle Rosenroth
recommends :

(a) SEPHER DEREK EmeEtH, that is, the Way of Truth,
being various readings in the ZoHAR arranged according
to the Mantua edition.

(6) Binau Imri, or Words of Understanding, being an
elucidation of difficulties in Zoharistic vocabulary.

(c) ZOHAR CHAMAH, Of SPLENDOUR OF THE SUN, 4
short commentary which follows the Mantua edition.

(7) PARDES RIMMONIM, Ot GARDEN OF POMEGRANATES,
by R. Moses of Cordova, an explanation of numerous
texts in the ZOHAR and TIKKUNIM.

(¢) MeQur CHoxMAH, ot Fount or Wispom, forming
a continuation or new part of the Way or TRUTH.

(f) Maran Kouen, or the VISION OF THE PRIEST, a
synoptic work, the greater part of which appears in
KappaLta DENUDATA, vol. ii. part i.

(g) ZER ZAHAB, Of a CROWN OF GOLD, used largely in
the apparatus of Rosenroth.

(4) Parnacu Arnim, ot GATE OF THE Eyss, for the
Biblical quotations in the ZoHAR and TIKKUNIM.

Rosenroth also recommends and reproduces largely the
manuscript treatises of Isaac de Loria, compiled by R. Hayyim

1 KaBBALA DENUDATA, ii. p. 9.

122 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Vital, and further acknowledges his indebtedness to two
other unprinted works, a Kabbalistic commentary on the
whole Law and a treatise entitled CHEsED ABRAHAM.

The Zonar proper, the conversations of Simeon ben
Yohai with the prophets by whom he was visited, with the
disciples by whom he was surrounded and of these, as we
have seen, with each other, is not a work that is to be judged
by the same standard as certain symbolical portions which
have been incorporated therewith, and to which Christian
Students of Kabbalism have given so much prominence.
There are extravagant speculations and wild exegesis, but it
is uncontaminated by monstrous symbolism; it has occa-
sionally a touch of Nature to indicate its kinship with humanity,
and condescends even at times to a Rabelaisian episode.
Finally, it does not betray any trace of that secret meaning,
otherwise double dodrine, that hypothetical sense withdrawn
far down below any primary inward sense, which has been
sometimes ascribed loosely to its entire content, by those who
would and do likewise discern a latent transcendental philo-
sophy in Pantagruelism.?

We have seen that in a certain manner—somewhat occa-
sional and informal—the Zouar is a commentaty on the
Pentateuch, and it is to be understood and passed over that as
such it is not only casual and occasional, that not only has it
nothing in harmony with the simple sense of Scripture, but
that for us in the western world and at this age of the world
it opens abysses where dark clouds hang out and fire of
madness flashes, more often than deeps of meaning which
resound with pregnant messages. It would serve no purpose
to enlarge upon this fact, which applies to so much of Kab-
balistic interpretation. ‘The governing principle affirmed is
the existence of several senses in the written word. These
are enumerated differently, and there seems no reason why
they should not be extended ; but they are reducible broadly
under three heads, which are compared by the Zouar to the
garment, the body which is within it and the soul which is
within the body.* ‘They are to be distinguished in all cases

1 Many rabbinical histories, fables and apologues are narrated in it, sometimes
elucidating a knotty point of Scripture, as, for example, whether the destru€tion of
animal life at the Deluge may indicate that the beasts also sinned, sometimes recounting
the death of a just man, sometimes describing visions and narrating tales of wonder.

2 Following the lead of Eliphas Lévi, especially in Lz Soncrer DE Meupon.

3 See ante, Book I, § 1, pp. 11-13. They do not emerge in the text.

THE BOOK OF SPLENDOUR 123

from those speculations on hidden significance to which
reference has been made above. ‘The design of Theosophy
in Israel was to magnify the election of Israel by exalting its
title-deeds, but that of the expositors in question was to
represent the Sons of the Doéttrine as the custodians of a
Liberal Theology which made all eleétion void.

“ There ate those unwise,” says the Zouar, “ who behold
how a man is vested in a comely garment, but see no farther,
and take the garment for the body, whereas there is some-
thing more precious [than either], namely, the soul. The
Law has also its body. Some of the commandments may be
called the body of the Law, and the ordinary recitals mingled
therein are the garments which clothe this body. Simple folk
observe only these garments, 7.¢., the narrations of the Law,
perceiving not that which they hide. Others more instructed
do not give heed to the vestment but to the body which it
covers. And there are the Wise, the servants of the Great
King, who dwell on the heights of Sinai and concern them-
selves only with the soul, which is the foundation of all and
the true Law. These shall be ready in the coming time to
contemplate the soul of that soul which breathes within the
Law.” ?

This passage illustrates what is meant by an added depth
and significance which the Kabbalah would read always into
the Bible,? and does, moreover, at least from time to time.
It offers, I think, also an instance of intelle&tual humility in
the great rabbins of the Exile, who confessed on occasion to a
sense in Scripture which exceeded their own loving penetra-
tion,® so that after all subtleties of exegesis, all the symposiums
of synods, the Word of God issued in a mystery, and the key
of this mystery was the reward of the just and wise man in the
world to come.

The necessity of the manifold sense follows from the
insufficiency of the letter. Simple recitals and common words
suggest only the human lawgiver; if these were the sum of
the THoRAH, it would be possible to equal, perhaps even to
excel it. Moreover, the sayings of Esau, Hagar, Laban, of

1 Zohar, part iii. fol. 1524, Mantua edition. De Pauly, v. 391.

2 I mean, of course, ex 4ypothesi. The extracted sense was too often a ridiculous
illusion.

3 Isaac Myer supposed that the higher soul of the THoran signifies God Himself,
but no doubt it is the Divine Sense of the Word which gives knowledge of the Word
Itself.

124 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Balaam and Balaam’s ass, cannot be “‘ the Law of Truth, the
Perfet Law, the faithful witness of God.’ 1 And hence
a hidden meaning, in which is the true Law, was supposed
to save Israel from scepticism, and it may have postponed
tationalistic criticism in Jewish circles for some centuries. It
led of course into extravagance ; the second sense became in
its tutn inadequate and one more concealed was inferred.
So also, besides a general latent meaning, there was that more
particular triple significance attributed to each several word.
As the possibilities suggested by such a method are boundless,
it is unnecessary to say that these senses were never methodised,
ot that the Zowar does not unfold in a consecutive form
either the allegorical or mystical meaning. It gives glimpses
only, and it may be for such reason that the original ZoHAR
is said to have been a camel’s load. ‘That original was a
latency in the minds of Kabbalistic rabbins, but it was never
written with pen.

As the Zowar establishes the necessity of the concealed
meaning on the insufficiency of the outward, and as the sense
of such insufficiency is indubitably a late event in the history
of sacred documents, we have full evidence for deciding the
value of that claim which it makes elsewhere to a high anti-
quity for its interpretation. Had the Jew never come in
conta& with culture outside Judea he would never have
conceived the “ Tradition,” and the kind of culture which
helped him to the sense of insufficiency is not to be looked
for in old Egypt or in Babylon, but in the Hellenised thought
of the late Roman Empire at the international clearing-house
of Alexandria.” |

As the do@trinal, theosophical and mystical content of the
ZOHAR will be the concern of several ensuing divisions of
this study, it is obvious that the reference is to these on all
important questions of subject-matter in the great text as well
as its additamenta. "That which remains over may be called
accidental and casual, in the spirit of which description we
may glance at the Commentaries in search of occasional side-
lights. Summary is out of the question here, and so is also
analysis : the office of these belongs to hypotheses on cosmo-

1 Mantua edition, Part III. fol. 149. De Pauly, V. 390. Compare ante, Book I,
§ 1, p. 13.

2 It does not follow that the Kabbalah is Platonism or Neoplatonism. It was the
consequence of a contaét, but the growth and increase were fostered in the mind of

Jewry.

THE BOOK OF SPLENDOUR 125

logy, to myths of Paradise, Creation and the Fall of Man—to
these and the sequence at large of those other matters which
ate to be treated at some length later on. The purpose of
the present survey is therefore to offer gleanings and illustra-
tive instances, drawn from there and here.

In the PRELIMINARIES attached to Genesis and the work of
exposition thereon, a tradition is cited which says that whenso-
ever just men undertake a journey together and discuss on
their way subjects belonging to the Secret Dorine they are
favoured by visits of Holy Ones who dwell in the world
beyond.t. When Rabbi Eleazar and Rabbi Abba were
travelling to call on Rabbi Yosse, they were accompanied by
an unknown porter who carried their baggage. But when
they began to commune one with another on things apper-
taining to the Mysteries of Law and Doéttrine, it came about
that he interposed between them, asking pregnant questions
and preferring points of debate. It did not take long to
discover that he was one endowed with knowledge; but
when he spoke of the Sabbath and its keeping, of the day and
the night thereof, of the Liturgy belonging to the Sabbath, of
Divine Hypostases and the Seventy Names of God, they saw
also that his science was greater than theirs. They came
down from their saddles to embrace him, and would have
mounted him on one of their horses, seeing that he rode upon
anass. He refused them, however, but resumed his discourse
otherwise, opening deeps and heights in the hidden themes of
Wisdom, explaining the secret influence exercised by names
on the lives of men, telling strange things and new concerning
the Temples at Jerusalem, but over and above all on the
mystical union between Moses and her who is called Shekinah
throughout the great record. It is said that they halted
again and again dismounted, but this time it was to fall on
their faces before him. When they looked up, however, it
was to find that he had vanished from their eyes. Who was
this Master in Israel and Keeper of Hidden Doétrine, to them
unknown and clothed in weeds of service? They had asked
many times, and he had answered nothing; but it was
inferred or assumed at the end that he was Rab Hammenouna
the Ancient, who had returned for their inspiration and
enlightenment from the world beyond.

1 Z.., Pt. fetols.74 5.1, 37.

126 THE HOLY KABBALAH

I have cited this gracious story to shew that thus early in
the Boox oF SPLENDOUR it is about the great things oi specu-
lation, as if faring through a land filled with wells of refresh-
ment and running with streams of light. I might indeed
have begun earlier, as the Zowar itself begins, and told how a
conference opens on page one of the mythos concerning the
Rose of Sharon, and after what manner the deeply-imbedded
meanings of the Song of Solomon are unfolded through its
length and breadth. The Rose is the Community of Israel ;
but the Rose is red and white, and in the first of these States
the ele&t people abide under the ministry of judgment, while
in the second they are encompassed by thirteen ways of
mercy.t For in another aspeét the Rose.is a Cup of Blessings,
as it is also a Chalice of Redemption. Great doctors of the
Christian Church have written many commentaries on the
immortal Song, and it has been expounded by notable
mystics down even to this day ; but the ZonHar on the Rose
and the Lily—flos campi et Lilium convallium—and the ZOHAR on
CANTICUM CANTICORUM has not been known to any, howso-
ever late or early. A most amiable clergyman of the Church
Catholic and Anglican has given us, not so long since, an
extended thesis on the Mysticat Way, and this is the Way of
the Song.? It is all for our delectation, and in his agreeable
company the path is travelled pleasantly ; but it is a path of
moonlight refreshed by draughts of water, while those who
walk with the Zonar go forward in sunlight and strong wine
is poured into their cups.

There is also a travellers’ tale as the last story of all on
matters appertaining to Genesis—after what manner must be
left to those who are concerned. It tells how two other
Masters were faring on the way to Cappadocia, intending to
visit Rabbi Simeon, and they refer as they go to a Sacred
Tradition by which man is directed to meditate on the glory
of God before he begins to pray. They had learned already,
it may be—as others before and since—that there is a prayer
in the silence which dispenses with the prayer of words and is
itself a contemplation in the heart. ‘They knew otherwise,
no doubt, that the study of the Secret Dorine and com-
muning one with another thereon constitute a prayer of

1 Zab tol foutas 4y3.
2 Via Mystica: A Devotional Treatise on the Life of Prayer. By the Rev. Jesse
Brett, 1925.

THE BOOK OF SPLENDOUR 127

works; and we have seen how it lifts ex Aypothesi the veil
between two worlds. That which they confessed to each
other was, however, of a diverse order, namely, that prayer
is in place of sacrifice, the obvious—though unexpressed—
reason being that true prayer is love. And seeing that it
opens the fountains above and below, with the well-springs
on every side, we find among the sayings of the time one
perfe& utterance at least. It affirms that the Holy One,
blessed be He, drove Israel into exile among the Gentiles for
the sole and only reason that the nations of mankind at large
might be gladdened by the presence of the Chosen People
which draws down blessings on the world below from that
World of Benedi€ions which is above.! It follows in the
radiant dream that Israel suffered crucifixion to aid in the
salvation of the world.

Very early in the Commentary on Exodus we are delving
again for treasurein the herb-sweet earth of the Song,? and that
which is brought to the surface belongs to the Mystery of
Union between the Voice and the Word. ‘There have been
intimations on the same subje& much earlier in the Zonar,
on thought as the origin of all things, on the inward con-
templation of the Holy One before He made the worlds, on
the uttering of the Voice, which brought forth or manifested
the thought, and on creation as the Word expressed. The
Commentary ends also on the Keynote of Thought in the
Holy One, the mysterious joy thereof and the light which
flows out therefrom. It drew together the forty-two letters
comprehended by one of the extended Sacred Names, and
out of the relation established in this manner it is affirmed
that the world came forth. They fared to some purpose in
those days, did the Doctors of Hidden Law, whether they
went on horses or whether an ass bore them, for in these
words, brief and plain as they are, is found at full length the
Dotrine of Divine Immanence, the Presence of the Father
Almighty—by and within the Word—in all that lives
and. is.

It is said in the first leaves of the Commentary on Leviticus
that faith completes the Sacred Name, and a little further on
that from the thought of the Holy One come forth those
ways and paths which lead to a knowledge of the Name and

1 Z.,1, 244a 3 IL, 566.
2 Song of Solomon, iv. 8.

128 THE HOLY KABBALAH

to perfection thereby and therein.! We are told also that it
were better for a man never to have been born than to live
without uniting the Sacred Name on earth.2 The secret of
such union belongs to the study of the Law,® which is the
work of men of faith, the reference being not to the Ex-
pounded Law delivered coram populo but to that of the Secret
Doétrine, which in another place is identified with and
affirmed indeed to constitute the Name of the Sacred King.4
But prayer and good works are said otherwise to promote
unity in the Name of God,°® and this is the intention which
should occupy the priest when he proceeds to the work of
sacrifice.6 We shall see later on that there has been a division
brought about between the four sacramental letters comprised
in the Hebrew Name which we are accustomed to render
Jehovah, and there is a very true sense in which it is the work
of man to make an end of this separation. On the surface,
however, the mythos develops its symbolism after a diverse
manner, while so far as the Commentary on Leviticus is con-
cerned, we are in the presense of another and highly figurative
Mystery. ‘The Complete Name is Jehovah Elohim, and the
work which devolves on all Sons of the Doétrine is to make
evident on earth that Jehovah is indeed Elohim, even as these
Divine Hypostases are One in Heaven. We shall see, also
later on, that the kind of union is that between male and
female.’ It is affirmed elsewhere that the Glory of the
Sacred Name must be the end of all our works °; but this is
the Glory of Union. A part in the Sacred Name is allotted
to those who possess the Hidden Law, the reason being that
they possess God therein. The meaning is that those who
live the Do@rine are those alone who possess it, and God is
the life of these. We shall realise therefore the sense in which
it is defined presently, and shall not fail to understand that the
Sacred Name is revealed by successive Sstages.? It is revealed
in proportion as it is lived and becomes alive within us—a

4) 2.5 Ll, 4b; Vi9, and IIL, sb, V..13.

2 Ib.,7a; V.18. Meaning of course by the mode and manner of life which is led
here below.

3 Ib., 12b; V. 37. Itis to be understood that those who study the Law to a real
purpose are those who live thereby.

4 Ib., 21a; V. 56.

8 Ib., 26a5.V-67«

81D. 82a SN 50-

7 1b, 4905 V. 129.

8 Ib., stb; V. 139.

* 1b.5 65b 3 V. 179.

THE BOOK OF SPLENDOUR 129

simple question of growth, but very deep withal. We shall
understand in like manner when it is affirmed further that the
Name is hidden and revealed at once,! because there is ever
““a deep below the deep and a height beyond the height ” of
its knowledge, while for ever they grow therein who study
and exemplify that Do&rine which is both the Nameand Law.?
It is added in fine that those who praétise charity do cry forth
the Sacred Name daily. The explanation is not only that
offices of love are channels of grace and power, which are also
modes and aspects of the Name of God, but that the work of
love is an uttering forth of the Name, and there is indeed no
other way given unto man by which he shall express it on
earth.

And now as to that veridic parable at large, the messages
of which have been drawn from so many pages. In part at
leas only implied—since the Secret Doétrine emerges in
_ sudden flashes through a mist of clouded light—but in part
at least shadowed forth, there is a correspondence established
in Zoharic Theosophy between the four letters of the Sacred
Name—nin—and certain diverse parts or aspects of the
soul in man about which we shall hear at full length at a
proper point in the sequel. The letter ‘= Yop is in
analogy with YEHIDAH, a spiritual state or mode in the
ascending scale of inward being, and with all that is postulated
above it, the human simgu/aritas, the Christian apex of the soul
and Divine Selfhood. The n= He primal answers to
NESHAMAH, the sovereign reason within us, above material
mind; the }=— Vau or Vav connects with Rua’H, which is
normal intelleGuality, the rational principle; and He final
with NepHesn, the side on which humanity is related to the
animal world. It is the lower vita/itas, and is not as such the
physical body, which is, however, its vehicle. When a man
lives in the light and law of his Higher Selfhood he has built
up the Divine Name within him and has become it within the
measures of his humanity. Here is theosophical symbolism
which may seem at its highest, but it does not enlighten that
of the Commentary on Leviticus, unless we are able to look
below the surface and realise that there is a marriage of male
and female proclaimed by the consonants which form the

1 Z., Ill, 65b; V. 179.
* Ib., 7s Wires.

130 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Sacred Name of Four Letters, min’, whence it follows that
whosoever affirms Jehovah does affirm Elohim also; that he
who completes the one within him completes the other, is a
witness in his own person that Jehovah is Elohim and makes
theit union perfect. As our Theosophia Magna unfolds, we
shall learn also that there is a supernal part of our nature
which does not come down to earth, but abides in Heaven
and God ; that it is possible to be united therewith according
to the Secret Doctrine ; while if this is accomplished it will
follow that what corresponds at the height of our being to the
Divine Hypostasis Jehovah has entered into bonds of marriage
with that which makes answer to the Divine Hypostasis
Elohim. In the light of this hypothesis and its symbolism
we shall understand what is meant by the Commentary on
Leviticus when it speaks of the Divine Name being complete
on earth as it is in Heaven and in Heaven also as on earth.
The completion is accomplished below by a true Son of the
Doétrine in his own being; but when it is fulfilled therein,
for himself and for those about him, before whom his light
shines forth, it is seen by the eyes of faith—as at a gate and
threshold of knowledge—that the Name is indeed perfect on
all planes of being.?

The Commentary on Numbers is full of occasional lights
on great subjects. We know that the Israelites in the desert
wete fed by manna which God sent down from heaven ; but
a time came when that stiff-necked generation loathed the
light food and cried for material fleshpots. The opportunity
offered to parable is not lost on the Zonar in its consideration
of Exodus ; but it is in the present place that we hear more
especially of a supersubstantial bread which on a day to come
shall feed the ele& and fill them.2, The mystery of this pany
vivus et vitals is hidden in the Tree of Life, which is said to be
above, while the Averse Mystery of the meat demanded by
Israel is contained in the Tree of Death, and this is said to be
below.

We hear more than once in the Zonar that the Archangel
Michael sacrifices the souls of the just on the Supernal Altar

1 It is said elsewhere in the Zonar that the Sacred Name is peace.—Z., III, 176b ;
V. 459. It is understood that peace is union.

2 Z., Ill, 156a; V. 399. Compare III, 208a; V. 530, which says that the manna
sprang from the dew above which came down from the Hiddenness of all the Hidden
Ones and was the food of higher angels.

3 [b,, III, 157a; V. 405. See also ante et post.

THE BOOK OF SPLENDOUR 131

of Burnt Offerings ; but once only in the text—and it happens
to be in this Commentary—is it said that some souls go up,
as of their free will and by their own high intent, to make a
holocaust of themselves, amidst rejoicing in the Supreme
Light which shines forth from the Holy King.! For us, at
least, it reads like a parable of the union in its last and highest
mode, when God becomes All in all for the individual soul.
It was revealed to certain Masters in Israel by one who was
unknown, who had asked and received water to quench his
thirst. After such manner is the reward of the just unfailing
and comes quickly, as a cloud of stories makes evident
throughout the radiant pages. So also he who gives bread
in God’s Name on asking may receive a star. Hereof is the
sweetness of the Law, about which it is declared a little later
that its works are holy, heavenly and mild withal.? It is life
and the blessing of life for those who are consecrated thereto,
as if each had received it himself on Mount Sinai. He has
indeed and certainly, because Sinai is also within. It is said
elsewhere that the Hidden Law is the Tree of Life and that
this Tree is Knowledge,* meaning that which is Science of
Unity, not of divorce and separation like the Tree of Death.
As there is a School of Doétrine on earth which cultivates
this Knowledge, so is there a Heavenly School above which
is in the state of science attained and 1s said therefore to be
nourished by the Tree of Life. Of those enrolled therein
we hear from time to time ; but the Commentary on Numbers
tells us that some children who die in tender years are admitted
to its teaching, in one or other of the classes—for example, a
son of R. Juda, whom two Pillars of the Doétrine brought
into that Sacred Conclave and into the presence of its Chief.
In the fragments on Deuteronomy we hear more of the
Heavenly Bread, which is Fruit of the Tree of Life, and learn
that it is not alone eaten by those in the Heavenly School but
by those of the School on earth,* meaning that Summa Scientia
is not beyond attainment here and now. At the end of all, in
the last of all the sections, we are brought back to that which
is the subje@t-matter of discourse in the first leaves. I refer
to the Mystical Rose and its connotations ab origine symboli.

LTS Ally BS yb si VW. 4o7:
4 10., TH; 179b; V.. 471.
PITAL Saas Ve 474.
4 Ib., TI, 260a; VI. 5.

132 THE HOLY KABBALAH

It is still the Community of Israel, which is likened to a Rose
composed of six Petals. There is, however, one new and
eloquent afirmation—that Israel is united with the Rose when
it is united with the Supreme King. It is another way of
saying that Jehovah is Elohim and that Jehovah Elohim is
the Complete and Perfect Name. But more than all it is the
proclamation of an unity possible on earth as it is a€tual and
eternal above. |

It will be understood that my extracts have been made
with the object of shewing that there are strange lights and
pregnant theses here and there in the Zonar proper, apart
from anything that it may prove qualified to communicate on
those subjects of formal doctrine which remain for our exami-
nation at a subsequent stage of this study. If it be said that
the miscellany has been made to appear at its best, an adequate
answer and one offered in sincerity would be that much mote
might have been quoted without invading the ground of
Jater themes. For the rest, I have called it a medley, and after
the manner of a medley the ZouHar combines with things
precious some others and many that are of little or no value,
and not a few which to us, and to Jewry itself at this day,
must appear indescribably foolish. They are in much the
same position as its modes of scriptural interpretation, and as
Stated already, it would be idle to suppose that these can have
the least exegetical importance. I speak of them obviously
as a whole, and do not mean that they hold up no lamps which
light up there and here some dark and doubtful path. It must
be understood, moreover, by those who are addressed
especially, that modes and scheme and purview ate essentially
Jewish, supposing the exclusive claim of Israel to Divine
Ele@tion and therefore the last source to which any one so
disposed could look for confirmation of the romantic notion
that a transcendental doétrine of absolute religion has been
handed down from the far past. ‘That which is transmitted
in the Zouar, but in fragments only, is a Secret Doétrine
peculiar to Israel, and it makes contact with the deep things
of universal religion, the religion behind religion of Max
Miller, in so far as it offers vestiges of inward experience on
the union of the soul and God, because the records of this
experience ate everywhere in the world, in all ages, in all the
great religions, and it counts its living witnesses among us at
this day.

THE BOOK OF SPLENDOUR 133

Understood as it actually is, a thesaurus of Jewish Theo-
sophy, Jewish visionary doétrines, Jewish yearning and
aspirations, which, because Jewry is part of humanity, is in
contact at a thousand points with the aspiration and yearning
of the whole heart of the world, it is a priceless memorial ;
but it loses all significance in the attempt to misplace it.
Because it is theosophical although Jewish, it has otherwise
its points of connection with other theosophical systems, and
not infrequently with matters which are beyond the range of
that which is usually understood by this word, with the things
of Mysticism, as, for example, in its transcendental specu-
lations on the identity of subje& and object in God and, as I
have intimated above, in the mystical experience of the soul.
It has other and obvious connections with past speculations
and the systems into which they have been drawn. It enters,
for example, into that strange doctrine of correspondences
which we meet everywhere in the domain embraced by the
higher understanding of the term Magia. It might be
described indeed as the extended mystery of correspondence.
““ Whatsoever is found on earth,” says the Zouar, “has its
spititual counterpart on high and is dependent on it. When
the inferior part is influenced, that which is set over it in the
upper world is affected also, because all are united.” From
this doétrine the art of Talismanic Magic must be called a
logical consequence, and so far as that which passes under the
denomination of occult philosophy is based on this postulated
law, so far it belongs to Kabbalism in the kinship of descent.
Elsewhere it is said: “ That which is above is in the likeness
of that which is below, and the likeness of that which is below
is in the sea”—meaning that the sea reflects the inferior
heaven—“ but all is one.” 1 This is, of course, identical with
the pseudo-Hermetic maxim: Ovuod superius ef sicut quod
inferius, et quod inferius est sicut quod superius, etc. Apart from its
context, this citation from the EMERALD TaBLe might have
been a Zohatic dogma. We know, however, that the law of
cotrespondences is in Zosimus the Panopolite as well as in
the Secret Tradition of Israel.

It may be added that the Zouar took the SEPHER YEr-
ZIRAH into its heart of hearts, dwelt upon it, extended, magni-
fied, almost transformed its symbolism. ‘The Hebrew letters

1 Zowar, Cremona, Part II, fol. 92. Cf. Part I, fol. 91a: “ As it is in all things
below, so is it above.”

134 THE HOLY KABBALAH

which figure in the earlier tra& as the instruments of creation
are for it the ciphers or vestures of the Written Law, the
expression of the THoran, and the THorAH is the archetype
of all the worlds. Whether or not we ate able to agree with
Franck that the SEPHER YETzIRAH ends where the ZoHAR
commences, and that they are exaét complements of each
other, it is certain that the instinct of those early students who
singled outthe Book or Formation from the rest of pre-Zoharic
MipRASHIM was not at fault in regarding it as the head and
source of Kabbalism.

But, in conclusion, as there was an occultism and Mysticism
in Israel prior to the SEpHER Razret and to the ZoHArR, so
both were incorporated in the latter; . both in the process
underwent a species of transmutation, and as I venture to
think the process, like that “ sea-change ” of the poet, pro-
duced something more strange and rich. There are, at least,
flishts of mystical thought and aspiration in this great book
of Theosophy which are unknown to Ibn Gebirol and Ibn
Ezra, and are more direct and strong in their appeal to the inner
consciousness of man at this epoch of the twentieth century
than anything in the famous commentary of Azriel or in the
School of Isaac the Blind. And to confess this is to confess
out of hand that the Zour has still a message for the mystic.
Perhaps all that is of value therein would be contained within
a few leaves ; but, as said of the choicest poems of Coleridge,
they should be bound in pure gold.

II.—THE BOOK OF CONCEALMENT

Passing now from the Commentaries on the Pentateuch to
the texts and fragments which are, so to speak, imbedded
therein, or thereunto added, it seems reasonable in the first
place to pass those in review which, owing to Latin trans-
lations, have represented the Zonwar at large for most readers
during a space of some two hundred and fifty years. They
differ generically from the corpus of the great text and from
the other additions or supplements because their subject-
matter is “‘ veiled in allegory and illustrated by symbols.”
For the time being, moreover, we have finished with things
belonging to discussion and debate, and are entering a realm
of revelation. The statement obtains throughout, though it
happens that two of the tracts in question are expository of

THE BOOK OF CONCEALMENT 135

the third, which ranks therefore first in the sequence. But he
who expounds is he also who reveals, that is to say, Rabbi
Simeon ben Yohai, while the office of his auditors is to learn,
mark and digest inwardly—not to question and dispute. I
refer to SipHRA Dr ZENIOUTHA, with its sequels, the IpRA
Rapa and Ipra Zoura. Their places have been indicated,
from which it follows that the Book or CONCEALMENT of of
Occu.rarTion,! to which so much prominence has been given
from the days of Rosenroth, is not as some have supposed,
the beginning of the great cycle entitled the Zowar, nor is it
the most important part, or perhaps any part that is vital, at
least from my own standpoint. In the Sulzbach edition,
produced by Rosenroth, it begins at fol. 1764 and ends at
fol. 1784 of the second volume. Several editions are either
paged in correspondence with one another or refer readers to
the pagination of previous codices. Among early printed
texts that of Lublinensis follows the Cremona edition, which,
though used by Rosenroth for his references, was regarded
by him as inferior to the simultaneous or slightly prior edition
of Mantua. The latter he terms invariably Codex corretius.
From the silence of certain writers on the subject of the ZoHAR
proper it might be judged that it was not regarded as of great
exegetical or indeed any other importance; but there is a
simpler explanation, which is not far to seek: it was known
to them only by excerpts prior to 1906-1911. The Boox oF
CONCEALMENT, on the contrary, though small in its dimen-
sions, was of the highest consequence, the presumed root and
foundation of the Zowar,? and also the most ancient portion
of that collection. ‘The last view is not, on the whole, un-
likely.2 It has been said further that it is a theogony com-
prised in a few pages, but with developments more numerous
than the Tatmup.* In a word, for occult dreamets of the
past in France and England, the Book or CONCEALMENT and
the Boox oF ForMATION are the fountain-heads of all Kab-
balism. ‘The Hebrew term which is rendered Mystery, Con-
cealment, or Modesty by Isaac Myer, is given as Concealed

1 A literal translation would be Book or Moprsry—of course in the sense of
concealment.

4 bam KasBALAH UNVEILED, p. 14. He was unfortunately not qualified to
speak.
PS Myets : QABBALAH, p. 118.

4 Bliphas Lévi: Le Livre prs SpLenpeurs, preface, p. ii.; Mysrerres or MAGIC,
2nd ed., p. 97. The comparison of one who was unacquainted with both cycles of
literature.

HeKe L

136 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Mystery by Mathers, without affirming that the version is
literal. For Sipura Di ZEentouTHA Rosenroth rendets LIBER |
OccutTaTIONIS.1 The work is concerned, however, with the
manifestation of the Divine Being, as the term of His conceal-
ment in the eternity which preceded manifestation. The first
chapter deals with the development of what is termed the
Vast Countenance, the image of the Father of all things, the
Macroprosorus, when equilibrium had been established in
the universe of unbalanced forces. ‘This Countenance, which
is teferred to KerrHer, ot the Crown—first of the ten
SEPHIROTH—is compated to the tongue of a balance,
lingula examin. When equilibrium obtained, the Coun-
tenance was manifested, the Ancient, of Days appeared,
God issued from His concealment.2 This symbolism of
the balance depicting the harmony of the universal order
is a key-note of the treatise, which, in its own words, is
the book describing “the libration of the balance.” The
balance is suspended in the place which is no place, that
is to say, in the abyss of Deity, and it is said to be the body of
-Macroprosorus, referring to the SEPHIROTH Wisdom and
Understanding,? which are the sides of the balance. ‘The
Countenance, of which no man knoweth, is secret in secret, and
the hair of the head is like fine wool hanging in the equili-
brium. ‘The eyes ate ever open, and the nostrils of the Ancient

1 Rabbi Loria says that it refers to things which are secret and should be kept
secretly, and compares Prov. xxv. 2, “‘ The Glory of God is to conceal the word.”
But he supposes also an allusion to the circumstances under which the work is reported
to have been composed—namely, during the concealment of R. Simeon for twelve
yeats in a cave.

2 See CoMMENTARIUS GENERALIS MeEtHopicus ... é¢ Libro Emek Hammelech in
KasspaLA DenupbaTa, vol. ii. pp. 47 e¢ seg. of the second part. For casual and mis-
cellaneous references to the Divine Head, see Z., Pt. I, fol. 65a; 1, 381. Ib., fol. 232a;
TI, 515. Jb. fol. 251b; Tl, 591, 592. Ib., Appendices, III, fol. 6a; II, 689. Ib.,
Pt. II, fol. 192b; IV, 79, quoted from a Book or Enocu. Ib., fol. 268b; IV, 302.
Ib., Pt. Ill, fol. 7b; V,21. Ib., fol. rob; V,30. Ib., fol. 48b; V,135. Ib., fol. 66b;
V, 183. Ib., fol. 119b; V, 306. For the Doétrine of Countenances, see Jb., Pt. I,
fol; ‘61b';) TH, 2712)" Ib., fol. 6423 Lil, 2834 ~ For ‘the’ Great* Adam): "see -183
Pt. I, fol. 134b; Tl, 132. Jb., Pt. Hi, fol. 48a; V, 132.

3 “ Ror Wisdom is on the right, upon the side of Benignity ; Understanding is on
the left, upon the side of Severity ; and the Crown is the tongue in the centre which
abideth above them.” —K. D., II, p. 48. The meaning of the symbolism is that an equili-
brium between Justice and Mercy must be assumed before the universe, having man
for its obje@, could become possible, and the source of this notion must be sought in
BERESHITH RABBAH—a Hageadic Commentary on Genesis, of historical and exegetical
importance. It is ascribed by tradition to the third century, but modern scholarship
is disposed to place it a little later than the Tatmup of Jerusalem, Compare also the
teaching of the pre-Zoharic MrprasH CoNnEN, according to which the Grace of God
ptevents the opposing forces out of which the world was created from mutual

destruction.

THE BOOK OF CONCEALMENT 127

One ate as two doots whence the Spirit goes forth over all
things. But the dignity of all dignities is the beard of the
Countenance, which also is the ornament of all. It covers
not only Macroprosorus as with a vestment, but the SEPHr-
ROTH Wisdom and Understanding, called here the Father and
the Mother,! descending even unto Mricroprosopus—of
whom we shall hear shortly—and it is divided into thirteen
portions, flowing down as far as the heart, but leaving the
lips free. Blessed is he, says the text, who receiveth their
kisses! From the thirteen portions there descend as man
drops of purest balm, and in the influence of all do all things
exist and all are concealed.

In addition to the manifestation of MAcroprosopus, the
Book OF CONCEALMENT shews how the Most Ancient One
expanded into Mrcroprosorus, to whom is referred the name
TTETRAGRAMMATON, whereas “‘I am” is that of the first
Ancient.2. The letter Yop, which is the first of TErra-
GRAMMATON, cottesponds to the SEPpHIRA Wisdom, the
supernal He to Understanding, and the union of these twain
brought forth Microprosopus, corresponding to the six
SEPHIROTH from Mercy to the Foundation inclusive, and
referred to the letter Vau.2 It follows, according to this
text, that the primal manifestation of Deity, which is con-
nected with the conception of the Crown, has no other name
than that which proclaims His self-existence, as if—according
to a French commentator—the Hebrew Jehovah were in
some sense a teflected God. Macroprosopus, although
manifesting in the Crown, is still regarded as ever hidden and
concealed, by way of antithesis in respect of MicroprRosorus,
who is both manifest and unmanifest. When the life-giving
influx rushes forth from the Ancient One, amid the intolerable
refulgence of that great light the likeness of a head appears.
The distinétion between the two Countenances is the distinc-
tion of the profile and the full face, for whereas the God Who
comes forth is revealed in so doing, the Great Countenance
is only declared partially, whence it is obviously inexact to
speak of Mrcroprosopus as a teflection*: He is rather a
second manifestation, taking place in the archetypal world.

1 J.e., ABBA and AIMA.

2 This is at issue on the sutface with what may be called the Zouar proper, for
which YAH =n‘ is the Divine Name of Kerner. ‘The fad is that allocations vary
in different texts of the medley.

3 The He final is referred to the tenth Szpurra, or MALKUTH.

4 This is a device of Eliphas Lévi and conneéts with his method of interpretation.

L 2

138 THE HOLY KABBALAH

From the sides of the Lesser Countenance depend black
locks, flowing down to the eats; the eyes have a three-fold
hue, resplendent with shining light; and a three-fold flame
issues from the nostrils. The beard, considered in itself, has
nine portions, but when that of Macroprosopus sheds down
its light and influence they are found to be thirteen. Though
the Ineffable Name is referred to the Vast Countenance, it is
said also that the manifestation of Mrcroprosopus is repre-
sented by the ordinary letters of the Tetragam, his occultation
by the transposition of the letters.

The Book oF CONCEALMENT is described in its closing
words as the withdrawn and involved Mystery of the King,
and as it is added that “ blessed is he who cometh and goeth
therein, knowing its paths and ways,” there is urgent need
for some explanation of its significance. This, as we shall see,
was unfolded in rabbinical commentaries, which are con-
fessedly posterior to the period of the public promulgation of
the Zonar. There are, moreover, two works possessing the
same authority as the Book oF CONCEALMENT, and they con-
stitute extensions at large of that work, being also exposi-
tory, though there is good reason to demand—like Byron,
referring to Southey—that their explanations should be
themselves explained. The first of these will be the subject
of some consideration in the next se€tion. |

The Sipura Dr ZENIOUTHA is preceded in the ZoHAR by a
fragment entitled 8$i5wo7 S758 = IpRA DE MASCHANA, 7.¢.,
ASSEMBLY OF THE SANCTUARY, introduced at an arbitrary
point + and followed by a brief colloquy between Rabbi
Eleazar and Rabbi Abba, who affirms (1) that he has recorded
its Mysteries by command of the Sacred Lamp, otherwise R.
Simeon, for the use of the Colleagues ; (2) that the Mysteries
will abide henceforth in concealment, the inference being
that the Light of the Oral Law has passed away ; (3) that R.
Simeon appeared to him in a dream and communicated
cettain secret teaching concerning the Divine Son or Vau,
begotten from the Father and the Mother, represented by the
letters Yop and HE, as we have seen otherwise. It will be seen
that the AssEMBLY OF THE SANCTUARY is misplaced obviously
in the Ipra sequence, being inserted prior to the text which the
ASSEMBLIES are designed to expound. In the fragment itself

1 Z., Pt. U, fols. r22b-123b; Tl, 471-477.

im

a

THE BOOK OF CONCEALMENT 139

there is nothing to shew that it forms part of a colloquy or of
any discourse whatever. It opens with a statement on the
authority of an instruction drawn from a supposed treatise
entitled Mystery oF Mysrrries and is concerned more
especially with the Face and Head of the Son, the Word which
comes from His mouth and the sound of His voice. The brief
colloquy by way of supplement may be the vestige of a third
IpRraA, not otherwise extant, and the AssEMBLY OF THE SANC-
TUARY may be part of a text after the manner of SrPHRA DI
ZENIOUTHA and dealing obviously with the same symbolism.

II.—THE GREATER HOLY SYNOD

The Book oF CONCEALMENT has been simplified to the
utmost in the preceding account. It must be added that it
Stands almost alone in the great body of texts, an anonymous
revelation, without antecedents or history; it quotes no
rabbinical writers and has no references by which a clue to its
date may be obtained. It has, however, two characteristics
which give it the appearance of a much older document than
those which follow it immediately, and are designed, as
intimated already—outside its monstrous symbolism—to
develop and expound it. These are its rudeness and the
multitude of its obscurities—even for a Zoharic document.
The first translator, Rosenroth, supplies explanations placed
within brackets, but even with these it is in an exceedingly
faulty state. The treatise now under consideration is in
several respects different. It possesses almost a literary aspect,
begins in nartative form, methodises the ensuing dialogues in
a manner which is perfe@ly explicit and stands in need of few
emendations. It exists, however, to unfold further the
barbarous allegories of the preceding book, and were it
possible to admit any alleged motive behind it as something
more than the subtlety of a later interpreter, it would still be
incumbent to recognise that it has no message for us at this
day rather than to describe it as repellent to modern taste, a
fact which has been noted by at least one sympathetic critic
who was himself a suggestive writer.1 The first point which
calls for notice otherwise is that the GREATER SACRED SYNOD
claims Rabbi Simeon Ben Yohai as the author of the Book oF
CONCEALMENT, and itself contains the discourses of this

1 Eliphas Lévi: La Curr pzs Granps MysTirEs.

140 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Maégter in Israel, delivered in a field beneath trees in the
presence of his disciples, namely, Rabbi Eleazar, his son;
Rabbi Abba; Rabbi Jehuda; Rabbi Jose, the son of Jacob ;
Rabbi Isaac; Rabbi Hiskiah, the son of Rav; Rabbi Hia;
Rabbi Jose; and Rabbi Jesse. Some of these are historical
names belonging to the period which succeeded the destruction
of Jerusalem.

For an account of Rabbi Simeon himself we must have
recourse to Tract SaspaTH of the Tatmup, Babylonian
recension, which contains a narrative that may be reproduced
here in substance :

“On a certain occasion R. Jehudah, R. Jose and R. Simeon
wete sitting together, and with them also was Jehudah, the
son of proselytes. R. Jehudah opened the conversation,
saying: ‘How beautiful are the works of this nation (the
Romans). ‘They have established markets; they have built
bridges ; they have opened bathing-houses.? Whereupon
R. Jose was silent. But R. Simeon ben Yohai answered,
saying: ‘ All these things have they instituted for their own
sake. Their markets are gathering-places for harlots; they
have built baths for their own enjoyment, and bridges to
colleé& tolls from those who cross them.’ Jehudah, the son
of proselytes, repeated this conversation, and it came to the
ears of Cesar, who proclaimed: ‘ Jehudah, who extols us,
shall be extolled; Jose, who said nothing, shall be exiled to
Saphoris (z.e., Cyprus) ; Simeon, who has disparaged us, shall
be put to death.” R. Simeon and his son then went out and
hid themselves in the leture-hall, but afterwards in a cave,
where a miracle took place, a date-tree and a spring of water
being raised up for them. They laid aside their garments and
sat covered with sand up to their necks, studying the whole
time, and assuming their vestures only at prayer-time, for
fear that the same might wear out. In this wise they spent
twelve years in the cave, when Elijah came to the opening,
and said: ‘ Who will inform the son of Yohai that Cesar is
dead and his decree is annulled?” Hereupon they left the
cave.” 1 The secret wisdom embodied in the Zonar is
supposed to have been the fruit of the long seclusion enforced
upon R. Simeon by the Roman dectee.

The Tatmup mentions expressly the learning obtained

1 Rodkinson : BABYLONIAN TALMUD, vol. i. pp. 57-59.

THE GREATER HOLY SYNOD 141

during this period, but without specifying its kind. According
to the tradition of Kabbalists, the Book or CONCEALMENT was
the first form in which it was reduced to writing. The dis-
coutses of the GREATER SACRED SYNOD were recorded by
Rabbi Abba and so also in the case of the Lesser SyNop.
When exposition was about to begin a voice heard in the air
revealed that the Supernal Assembly had gathered in heaven
to hearken, and the commentators add that not only the souls
of the just were marshalled round the speakers, coming from
their rest in Paradise, but that the Holy Shekinah of the
Divine Presence descended.

The explanations and developments concern the world in
its void state before the manifestation of the Supreme Coun-
tenance, the conformations of that Countenance, or MAcro-
PROSOPUS, as also of Mrcroprosopus, the Lesser Countenance,
and after what manner the inferior depends from the superior.
Tt must be said that the expounding and the extension neither
are nor assume to be explanatory in the sense that they unfold
any teal significance of the symbolism. As a fact, the treatise
ends, like all treatises concerned—shall I say, at a venture P—
with Mysteries of Initiation, by testifying that he is blessed
who has known and beheld the concealed words and does not
err therein. In an account like the present, which does not
even pretend to be synoptic, it is impossible to attempt a
tabulation of the typology with which the GrEATER SyNopD
is concerned, and it should be noted in this connection that
a few modern writers on Kabbalism who have claimed to
speak magisterially and as if from within a secret circle of
knowledge, may have shewn us glimpses in one or two tate
instances—and then according to their individual hypotheses
—of the system on which the symbolism is constructed, but
have done nothing to elucidate and therefore recommend it
to our understanding. It must be added that while the text is
hard to approach from the side of its literal sense, the alleged
esoteric aspects ate matters of curious speculation only.

The unbalanced forces of the universe, the world in its
void state, are considered under the symbolism of the kings
who reigned in Edom before a king was raised up to rule over
the children of Israel, that is to say, before the emanation of
Microprosorus.? At that time there was neither beginning

1 The Kabbalah represents the present universe as preceded by others which passed
away quickly. According to Basnage, this notion occurs also in the Tatmup, where

142 THE HOLY KABBALAH

nor end, and the Edomite kings were without subsistence.
According to Rosenroth this signifies the fall of creatures
partly into a state of rest, such as that of matter, and partly
into one of inordinate activity, such as that of the evil spirits,
in which case we are dealing not so much with cosmology as
with the legends of souls. So also when the GREATER SYNOD
represents the Ancient of Ancients creating and producing
the essence of light, the same interpreter, who speaks with
the authority of knowledge as regards the literature of Kab-
balism, observes that the reference is to the Law,1 in other
wotds, to the letters of the alphabet, by the transpositions of
which the Law was recorded subsequently. For the rest,
symbolism of this order is not simplified by its multiplication,
and the record of Rabbi Simeon’s discourses is only the Book
oF CONCEALMENT dilated in a glass of vision. Compare, for
example, the description of Macroprosorus with the indica-
tions on the same subject contained in the previous se¢tion.
““ White are His garments as snow, and His aspect is as a face
manifested. He is seated upon a throne of glittering bright-
ness, that He may subdue. The whiteness of his bald head is
extended into forty thousand worlds, and from the light of
the whiteness thereof shall the just receive four hundred worlds
in the world to come.” ‘The Vast Countenance itself is said
to extend into three hundred and seventy myriads of worlds.
The brain concealed within the skull is the Hidden Wisdom,
and the influence of this Wisdom passes through a channel
below and issues by two and thirty paths.? ‘The hair of Macro-
PROSOPUS tadiates into four hundred and ten worlds, which
ate known only to the Ancient One.? The parting of the hair
is described as a path shining into two hundred and seventy
worlds, and therefrom another path diffuses its light, and in
this shall the just shine in the world to come. When the

it is said, with characteristic crassness, that when God was alone, in order to kill time,
He diverted Himself by the formation of divers worlds which He destroyed forthwith.
These were successive attempts at creation, by which Deity became experienced and
at last produced the existing physical order.—HusrorreE DEs Jurrs, t. ii. p. 712. Com-
pare also the Prrxé of R. Eliezer, according to which the basis of the existing universe
is the repentance of God over His previous failures. We have seen that this work is
referred to an early period of the ninth century. For other Zoharic references to the
subje&t see ZOHAR ii. 20a, Mantua.

1 Understood as the essence of the light.

2 It is therefore the influx of KerHER descending through the Tree of Life even to
MALkuTH, understood as the Kingdom of this world.

3 An intimation of Divine Knowledge which is withdrawn in the hiddenness of
Divine Being.

THE GREATER HOLY SYNOD 143

forehead of Macrorrosopus, which is the benevolence of all
benevolence, is uncovered, the prayers of the Israelites are
received, and the time of its uncovering is at the offering of
evening prayer on the Sabbath. The forehead extends into
two hundred and seventy thousand lights of lights abiding in
the Supernal Eden. For there is an Eden which shines in
Eden: it is withdrawn in concealment, and is unknown to
all but the Ancient One. The eyes of the Vast Countenance
differ from other eyes, having neither lids nor brows, because
the Guardian of Supernal Israel knows no sleep. The two
eyes shine as a single eye, and were that eye to close even for
one moment the things which are could subsist no longer.1
Hence it is called the open eye, ever smiling, ever glad. In
the nose of Macroprosopus one of the nostrils is life and
the other is the life of life. With regard to the Beard of the
Vast Countenance, called otherwise the decoration of all
decorations, neither superiors nor inferiors, neither prophets
not saints, have beheld it, for it is the truth of all truths. Its
thirteen forms are represented as powerful to subdue and to
soften all stern decrees of the judgments. ‘Thirteen chapters
of the GREATER SYNOD are devoted to the consideration of
this subject, including the number of the locks in each portion,
the number of hairs in each lock and the number of worlds
attributed to them. This ends the discourse concerning
Macroprosopus, and the treatise proceeds thence to the con-
sideration of the Lesser Countenance. The conformations
of Microprosorus ate disposed from the forms of the Vast
Countenance, and His components are expanded on either
side under a human form. When the Lesser Countenance
gazes on the Greater, all inferiors are restored in order, and
the Lesser is vaster for the time being. There is an emanation
from the Greater towards the skull of the Lesser, and thence
to numberless lower skulls,.and all together refle& the bril-

1 Compare, in Southey’s CurszE or KEHAMA, Part X, the episode of Parvati placing
her hands on the eyes of Seeva.

“Thereat the heart of the universe Stood Still ;
The Elements ceas’d their influences ; the Hours
Stopt on the eternal round ; Motion and Breath,
Time, Change, and Life and Death,

In sudden trance opprest, forgot their powers,
A moment, and the dread eclipse was ended ;
But, at the thought of Nature thus suspended,

The sweat on Seeva’s forehead stood,

And Ganges thence upon the World descended,

The Holy River, the Redeeming Flood.”

144 THE HOLY KABBALAH

liance of the whiteness of this emanation towatds the Ancient
of Days. From the brain of Macroprosopus an influence
descends, from the hair an outpouring of splendour, from the
forehead a benevolence, from the eyes a radiance, from the
nostrils a spirit and the spirit of life, from the cheeks gladness,
and all these fall upon the Lesser Countenance. From the
brain of Microprosopus there ate emanations of wisdom,
emanations of understanding and emanations of knowledge ;
in each lock of the hair of Mrcroprosopus thete are a thousand
utterances ; his forehead is the inspection of inspe@tion, and .
when it is uncovered sinners are visited with judgment. For
the lesson of the GREATER SYNOD is that wrath may dwell
with Microprosopus, but not in the Ancient of Days. So
also the eyes of the Lesser Countenance possess lids: when
the lids are closed judgments subdue the Israelites and the
Gentiles have dominion over them. But the eyes, when they
are open, are beautiful as those of the dove, for they are then
illuminated by the good eye. With one of those pathetic
touches which soften occasionally for a moment the un-
yielding lines of Kabbalistic symbolism, it is said that two
tears dwell in the eyes of the Lesser Countenance, and the
Holy of Holies, when He wills to have mercy on the Israelites,
sends down these two teats to grow sweet in the great sea of
wisdom, and they issue therefrom in mercy upon the chosen
people. The special seat of severity in Microprosopus is the
nose, and judgment goes forth therefrom, unless the forehead
of the Vast Countenance is uncovered, when mercy is found
in all things.

As in the case of the Ancient of Ancients, the discourse
appertaining to the beard of Microprosorus fills many
chapters, full of strange scholia on various passages of Scrip-
tute, and details minutely the conformations of its nine
divisions, what it conceals of the Lesser Countenance, what it
permits to be manifested, with observations on the descent
of a holy and magnificent oil from the beard of Macropro-
sopus and a general description of the correspondences and
differences of the two adornments. |

It should be observed that the body of Microprosopus is
androgyne, and at this point the symbolism is concerned
largely with the sexual organs. “A modern symbologist has
said that Nature is not ashamed of her emblems,! and there is

1 Gerald Massey on phallic symbols, in a letter contributed to the SprrrruaLisrT.

THE GREATER HOLY SYNOD 145

no doubt that for the Kabbalist the body of man was peculiarly
sacred, whence for him there would be nothing repellent in
dealing exhaustively with its typology. But it will be un-
necessary in a descriptive summary to do more than allude to
this. The student who desires to pursue the subject may be
referred to the French version.

The sum of the whole treatise can be given in the words of
the original. “ ‘The Ancient of Ancients is in Microprosopus ;
all things are one; He was all things; He is all things; He
will be all things; He shall know no change; He knoweth
no change; He hath known no change.” + Thus God in
manifestation is not really separable from God in concealment,
and if the symbolism depict Him in the likeness of humanity,
it is by way of similitude and analogy.

At the conclusion of the GREATER SYNOD, we arte told that
three of the company died during the deliberations, and that
the survivors beheld their souls carried by angels behind the
“veil expanded above.”

Amidst all its obscurity and uncouthness there are sublime
touches in this treatise. The Kabbalah is perhaps the first of
all books which appeared in the western world reciting with
no uncertain voice that God is altogether without mutation
and vicissitude—that wrath and judgment are of man alone,
placing thus a new construction on the divine warning :
“* Judge not, lest ye be judged ” ; and shewing also the higher
significance of the not less divine promise: “I will repay.”
Never for the true Kabbalist could this mean that God would
repay the sinner in his own spirit, outrage for outrage, hate
for hate. The repayment of God is the compensation of
everlasting justice or the gift of everlasting bounty. In a
sense the writers of the ZoHAR anticipated some liberal con-
clusions of modern eschatology. Amidst the firebrands of
the Papal Church, it promulgated for the first time the real
meaning of the forgiveness of sins. It is in the sense of such
intimations and not in its body of extravagant symbolism that

1 Ipra Rass, seu Synodus Magna, settio xxxix. pat. 920, in KABBALA DENUDATA, t. ii.
Compare De Pauly’s translation, Vol. V; p. 365: “ The Ancient of Ancients and the
* Little Figure,’ these are one and the same ; it was and shall be all. It is not subject
to transformation ; it has never changed and will not change for ever ; it is the centre
of all perfection.”

2 Ibid., § xlv. par. 1138.

. % Franck summarises the position as follows :—Nothing is absolutely evil, nothing
is accursed for ever, not even the archangel of evil, for a time will come when his
name and angelic nature will be restored to him. La KasBALE, p. 217.

146 THE HOLY KABBALAH

the Holy Assembly of Rabbinical Israel may speak to us at
this day.

IV.—_THE LESSER HOLY SYNOD

Similar in its chief characteristics to the more extended dis-
course which precedes it, the Lesser Hoty Synop, or IpRA
ZouTA, is termed by Rosenroth the Swan’s Song of Simeon
ben Yohai, a supplement to the subjeéts not discussed
exhaustively in the Greater Assembly. As the master’s death
is recorded at the end of the treatise, the translator’s words
must be understood of the instruGion it contains and not of
its setting. The SyNnop consists of the survivors from the
former Conclave, with the addition of Rabbi Isaac. Simeon
begins by affirming that it is a time of grace: he is conscious
of his approaching end ; he desires to enter without confusion
into the world to come ; and he designs to reveal those sacred
things in the presence of Shekinah which have been kept
secret hitherto. Rabbi Abba is appointed as scribe, and
Simeon is the sole speaker. The discourse still concerns
Macroprosopus and Microprosorus, with the correspond-
ences between them; but it sketches only the subject of
Concealed Deity and deals at length with the manifestation
of the Lower Countenance. In both cases, as indeed would
be expected, it repeats, substantially and verbally, much of
the preceding Synod; but it gives some additional imagery,
as, for example, concerning the three heads of Macro-
prosopus, “‘ one within the other and the other above the
other,” and at a later stage a very considerable extension of
symbolism regarding the first manifestation of the Ancient
One under the form of male and female, which is, in fact, the
emanation or “ forming forth ” of the supernal SEpHIROTH—
CHOKMAH, ot Wisdom, and Brnan, or Understanding. So
also the instruction concerning Microprosoprus, when it is
not a close refle@tion of the GREATER SyNop, deals with His
androgyne nature and His union with the Bride, who cleaveth
to the side of the male until she is separated, ef accedat ut
copuletur cum eo, face to face. Out of this comes the Kabbalistic
doétrine of the sexes, so much in advance of its time, in what-
ever Christian century we may elec to place the literature,
namely, that male and female separated are but an incomplete
humanity, or, as the text expresses the idea, are but halfthe body;

THE LESSER HOLY SYNOD 147

that no blessing can rest on what is mutilated and defective ;
that no divided being can subsist for ever or receive an eternal
dowry, “for the beauty of the female is completed by the
beauty of the male.” 1 The conjunion of the supernal male
and female is said to be in the place called Zion and Jerusalem,
which further on are explained to signify Mercy and Justice.
“When the Bride is united to the King in the excellence of
the Sabbath, then are all things made one body.”? And then
the most Holy God sitteth on His throne, then all things enter
and are integrated in the One Undivided, Perfect and Holy
Name. “‘ When the Mother is united to the King, the worlds
receive a blessing and are found in the joy of the universe.” ?

About this point the discourse of Simeon ceases and Rabbi
Abba, the scribe, still in the at of writing and expecting that
mote should follow, heard nothing. But afterwards a voice
ctied: ‘‘Length of Days and Years of Life”; and yet
another: “‘ He seeketh Life from Thee.” A fire abode in the
house the whole day : when it burned no longer, Rabbi Abba
saw that the holy light, the holy of holy ones, had been
wtapped away from the world: he lay upon his right side
and a smile shone upon his face. Rabbi Eleazar, the son of
Simeon, rose up and taking his hands, kissed them. ‘‘ But I,”
says Abba, “ licked the dust under his feet.”’ It is added that
during his obsequies the bier of the deceased saint was raised
in the air, and fire shone about it, while a voice cried: “* Enter
in unto the nuptial joys of R. Simeon.”

It will be seen that in spite of a monstrous symbolism the
Kabbalistic narratives have at times the touch of Nature
which gives them kinship with this world of ours. Whether
it has pearls of great price to offer from the world within is
another question, as to which we are now only at the begin-
ning of our research.

V.—THE DISCOURSE OF THE AGED MAN

The prominence given by Rosenroth to the Boox oF Con- »
CEALMENT and its sequels was not without its warrant, as they
ate certainly the most arresting, I might almost say sensational,
of the tracts imbedded in the ZoHar. Those which remain

es

1 Ipra ZouTa, sea Synodus Minor, § viii. passim. ‘The foundation of this mysticism
concerning the nuptial state must be sought in Talmudic literature.
2 Ibid., § xxii. par. 746 ef seq.

148 THE HOLY KABBALAH

to be examined will be taken now in the order in which they
are placed in KappaLa DerNnupara, and their mote sober
interest will appear by the short analyses which will accompany
their tabulation. ‘The first to be enumerated is that contained
in Section Misnpatim (Hifloria de sene quodam in settione Misu-
PATIM). ‘The term SABAH signifies ancient man and MIsHPAT
is judgment, referring to Exodus, from the beginning of c. xxi.
—* Now these are the judgments ”—to the conclusion of
c. xxiv. The discourse occuts in the Cremona edition, pt. ii.
fol. 43; in the Mantua, vol. ii. fol. 94; in the Sulzbach,
vol. ii. 94¢.1 The Section MisHpatim opens with a conference
between Rabbi Simeon ben Yohai and a certain aged man,
not otherwise identified, on the subject of the ordeals and
metempsychosis of the soul, to which there are allusions at
some length in the BEREsHITH division of the ZoHAR—other-
wise the first part. It breaks off, however, abruptly, giving
place to another conference which takes place at an inn between
the same or a second aged man and two Sons of the Do@rine
who have met together by accident. It is described in a
colophon as a recital relative to Rabbi Yebba the Ancient,
who is moved to reveal at great length the Mystery of the
Soul, its nature, modes or parts and the law which governs
its transmigrations. It is the most important and elaborate
Study of these subjects in the extant text, and Isaac de Loria’s
yet more complex treatise on the REVOLUTIONS OF SOULS is a
development of the Se&tion Misupatim. But as there has
been occasion to note previously, the study of the soul in
Kabbalism belongs to a later Stage of our research, and it must
be sufficient to state here that in the discourse under con-
sideration the psychic nature of man is regarded under a
sevenfold aspect, whereas other theses reduce it to three and
by one it is extended to ten. The facts are worth stating at
the present point, not only as an illustration of the discourse
out of which they arise, but because they suggest a working
canon of criticism in the case of those writers in the past who
speak of a concealed sense in the ZoHar and other Kab-
baligtic texts. It is not to be supposed that when Rabbi
Yebba and other doctors divide and subdivide the soul they
mean anything else than to distinguish the successive states
and modes which are possible therein and may become actual.

1 In De Pauly’s translation see Vol. II, pp. 377-441.

THE DISCOURSE OF ELIAS 149

In a wotd, it means what it says, just as Modern Theosophy
does when it affirms that there are seven principles in man.
The concealed sense of the Zonwar, as indicated heretofore,
is the extraction of some method from its vast and confused
mass, which at first sight may appear inextricable. If and
when the discrepancy between the variously divided aspects
of the soul in man have been harmonised, we shall have reached
the concealed sense of the Commentary and its connections as
regards our inward nature. We may attain it in this case by
assuming that the involved discourse of Rabbi Yebba describes
the development of mystical experience and the ascent of the
soul in sanctity according to a tabulation of seven Stages,
ending—as it states literally—in the realisation of Divine
Union. ‘The text says that a flame of fire comes down from
the Supernal World and is joined to the Community of Israel,
“that union may be perfect.” +

At an early stage of the conference we hear of a Hidden
Palace which is called the Palace of Love, and it is affirmed
that the Heavenly King kisses the holy souls who arrive
therein.2 “And Jacob kissed Rachel”? is a text which
alludes hereto. Thereafter, the Holy One—blessed be He—
raises them into exalted realms and there rejoices with them,
as a father with his beloved daughter. It is obvious, how-
ever, that the Beatified Life of this Palace is not the life of
union, though it may be called a vestibule. It is a place of
beatitude in the Beloved Presence. The distin&ion is vital,
though its significance is likely to escape those who are in the
Court of the Mystical Temple but not in its Holy Place, who
have conceived the Vision but not the Ineffable Union. It
may be noted in this connection that, according to Rabbi
Yebba, the Most High has hidden in each word of Scripture
a Supreme Mystery which constitutes the soul of that word.
But the profane man sees only the external body of the word,
meaning the literal sense. On the other hand, for those who
have eyes the external word is an envelope through which
the soul is seen.* This is illustrated a little later on after another
manner, when the inward meaning is likened to a beautiful
virgin shut up in a palace, who contrives a little chink that

© Zeal, 142 3 dj a4o.
2 Ib., 97a; III, 389.

9 Reo xxik, EE,

4 Ze llyosb si, 397.

150 THE HOLY KABBALAH

her lover when he passes may have a glimpse of her beauty.
There are many who go to and fro, but he only who has the
eyes of love can see her. It is the same with Holy Scripture,
which reveals its hidden secrets only to those who love it:
the uninitiated go by on the other side and observe nothing.!

Outside these deeper aspects and the subjeét-general of the
text, there are occasional intimations which will carry their
simple messages as dire€tly at this day as when the ZonarR
first shed light on the greater exile of Jewry and all its thorny
paths. We are told, for example, that penitence cancels
everything, looses all that binds, annuls all decrees and breaks
all chains.” It is said also that man’s condu@ here below
forms a window in his brain, and if he lives in a state of grace
the glass of that window remains polished and diaphanous,
so that his intelligence is a faithful refleion of the Most Holy
Intelligence which is above. But the man of evil life clouds
his window.? Finally, as an example of notions that offer a
Strange contrast to all that obtained and was current about
Theosophical Jewry when the ZoHar emerged, there is that
which is said on the place of children in the world to come,
namely, that there is a sojourn reserved for them which is |
higher than that of the just made perfe&t.4 It is added that
children die young to become the defenders in heaven of
those who remain on earth.

VI—THE LUMINOUS BOOK

Excerpts of considerable length, purporting to come from
a work entitled SEPHER Ha Baunir, or LipER ILLustRIs, are
given in the Cremona edition of the Zonar at the places
which here follow. Part I., col. 76, 79, 82, 86, 88, 104, 110,
IZ 122) TAG eRe eo eT eR aos oa ao eG ima nton | ys
col. 145 and 259. Part III., col. 151, 176, 301 and 333. They
ate omitted in the so-called LirrtE ZoHar of Mantua, but
reappear in Rosenroth’s Sulzbach edition and in those of later
date which are based thereon. In 1651 these excerpts were
brought together into a volume and published at Amsterdam,
which was at that period a great stronghold of Jewry. A

pees aoe ae Se ST

1 Z., II, 99a; III, 399.

2 Jb., Il, 106a; III, 422.
8° Ib. TL) ti1ea"; (I, 433;
4 Ib., I, 113b; III, 439.

THE LUMINOUS BOOK 15

reprint of this volume appeared at Berlin in 1706.1 Some
interesting but complex questions are involved in the con-
sideration of this work, which is thus known to us only by
quotations. It is alleged on the one hand to be of higher
antiquity than any Kabbalistic book and hence of superior
importance to the SEPHER YETZIRAH itself; on the other it is
affirmed to be a manifest forgery, included in the condemnation
of the Zowar, and by implication also the fruit of the inventive
faculty of Moses de Leon. Between these extreme views there
is placed that which considers the extant extracts unauthentic
but believes in the existence of an old Kabbalistic treatise,
under the same title, which is now lost. An examination of
the ascertainable facts does not, I think, prompt and much less
impose agreement with any one of these opinions, and a more
modest, indeterminate conclusion will be the safest to form.
In other words, there is evidence that the SEPHER Ha BAHIR
was in existence prior to the promulgation of the Zowar,?
but there is no evidence that it preceded it by a considerable
period, and there are no means of knowing whether or not
the extracts which occur in the ZoHar represent the original
work. In the absence of evidence to the contrary it must be
assumed that they do.

It is to be regretted that most English and French students
have passed over the fragments of the SEpHER Ha BAHIR as
they have passed over the ZoHAR proper, and for the same
reason, namely, because they were not available by translation
until comparatively recent years. It would have been
interesting to know whether the Kabbalistic legend which
has gone abroad concerning it would have remained accept-
able, had such persons been in a position to improve their
equipment over certain points of fact. Of that legend one
aspect appears in the bibliography of their spokesman Papus.
It indicates, however, no first-hand research, reproducing
information of which Molitor is the avowed source. In his
METHODISED SUMMARY OF THE KaAsBBALAH the quondam
President of all Martinism ascribes the S—EpHER Ha Bautr,

1 See BrstiorHecA Hesr2za on Wolf, especially p. 906. It was a mere pamphlet
in quarto, the BAnrr occupying Io pp., followed by a traét on Wisdom which accounted
for a further three.

2 Because it was denounced as a forgery by Rabbi Meir ben Simon in the first half
of the thirteenth century, thus antedating the period at which hostile criticism places
the public appearance of the Zouar. Graetz ascribes the forgery to Rabbi Azriel,
on what grounds may be gathered from the general warrant of his Kabbalistic criticism.

HeKe M

1) 4 THE HOLY KABBALAH

which he tenders Lignr IN THE Darkness, to R. Nehunya
ben Ha-Kanah, the master of R. Ishmael ben Elisha, a high-
ptiest, who flourished during the half-century preceding the
bitth of Christ. Each, however, was a Tanna of the first
and second centuries.t Some notable sayings of his ate pre-
served in Talmudic collections, but it is quite certain that he
left nothing in writing. This notwithstanding, other works
ate also ascribed to him, namely :

(2) Letter on MySsteries or Secrets concerning the advent
of Messiah, His Divinity, Incarnation and Resurre@tion. This
epistle was addressed to his son, who is said to have embraced
Christianity. It betrays the hand of a Christian, and there can
be no question in any case that it is a late produ@ion. Paulus
de Heredia Hispanus translated it into Latin and dedicated it
to Henry of Mendoza, legate of the King of Spain.

(6) SEPHER Ha-Kanau, the Book of the Fragments of the
Temple, but this is attributed also to Ismael (Samuel) ben
Eliezer. It deals with the generation of Christ, embodying
apoctyphal narratives taken from the Talmud, and the real
author was Abigdor Kanah, who belongs to the fifteenth
century.

(c) A Kabbalistic Prayer, to be recited by pupils on entering
ot leaving the gymnasium.

(7) SEPHER Ha-Petran, which is also the work of Abigdor.

(¢) SEpHER Ha-Minuap, concerning the Mystery of the
Name of God, a work akin to the Banrr; but I have met
with no opinion as to its date or history.

An alternative aspe&t of Kabbalistic legend concerning the
Luminous Boox may be used to colour the pretension that
the Zoharistic quotations do not represent the original. It is
affirmed to be of such profound occult significance that it has
been preserved among the hidden treasures of Israel, 7 manus
Cabbaliftorum Germanorum, says Wolf,* quoting Shem Tob.
Buxtorf,? Bartolocci,4 and Buddzus® relate the same story,
and not one of them challenges the excerpts found in the
- Zouar, teceiving them explicitly as genuine, while all agree
likewise that the Banir was regatded by Kabbalists as their

1 Nehunya’s name occurs in one of the BAanrr fragments, where, however, he is
cited as an authority and by no means as responsible for the work itself.

2 BrptioTHECA HEBR2A.

3 BrsLioTHECA HEBRZZA RABBINICA.

4 BrstioTHECA MAGNA RABBINICA.

5 INTRODUCTIO AD HistorIAM PHrILosopHi14 HEBRAORUM,

—— we

So. ae

THE LUMINOUS BOOK 153

oldest document. The question of authenticity was renewed in
comparatively recent times by Simon, who, speaking of the
book printed in Holland, observes: “ It does not appear that
this is the ancient Banir of the Jews, which is much more
extended and has not yet been printed.” 1 Obviously this is
neither the language of criticism nor of knowledge ; we may
infer that Simon was unacquainted with the fact that the
Amsterdam publication did little more than collect the
Zoharic extracts, and that he might not have challenged the
extracts had he been aware of that circumstance. Bartolocci
mentions a general opinion that manuscript copies of the
Baur were to be found in many Continental libraries and
particularises one such codex as contained in the Vatican
colleGtion. Wolf bears witness to others, but as to their
claims and content it would seem that they await examination
to this day.

The impeachment of the Zoharic excerpts naturally became
part of the general charge against the ZowAr itself; the theory
which ascribed that work to Moses de Leon was exceedingly
comprehensive and made a clean sweep of everything included
therein. It finds an almost exact parallel in the consistent
application of those principles which are held to prove the
Baconian authorship of the Shakespeare plays: serving
equally well for Marlowe, Massinger and all Elizabethan
literature, that literature diretly or indirectly is attributed to
Bacon. Legend says as we have seen, that the complete
ZOHAR was ofiginally a camel’s load, and were the whole of
it now extant no doubt the Jew of Leon would still have been
its exclusive creator. Raymund Lully is credited with the
authorship of five hundred separate treatises: a list may be
seen in the first volume of an unfinished and impossible attempt
to colleé& them into a folio edition, the editor supplying not
only the precise years but the months in which they were
composed. What Raymund did, as they say, could not have
been impossible to R. Moses. But, as a fact, the doctor iumi-
natus wrote only a low percentage out of all that gorgeous
range, and reasonable criticism regards the alleged spendthrift
Israelite as a possible compiler and polisher who may have
played a little at “ writing out of his own head,” and that is
all, not, however, because it allocates the ZoHAR as the work

1 HisTOIRE CRITIQUE DU VIEUX TESTAMENT,

154 : THE HOLY KABBALAH

of Simeon ben Yohai, or even of R. Abba, but because it
regatds R. Moses as human. |

Graetz, the German historian of Jewty, whose distin@ive
views of Kabbalistic literature once obtained much vogue,
lays down a principle of criticism which ought to be written
in capitals at the head of most impeachments of the Zonar,
namely that it is not compulsory for a hostile critic to be more
careful in his arguments than those who plead in defence.
Without seeking to determine what is compulsory in criticism,
it may be observed that there is also no binding law to enforce
serious consideration for a scholar who adopts that principle.
What Graetz did openly has been done tacitly or uncon-
sciously by others. Taking the case now under notice, I do
not know of one instance in which the challenge of authen-
ticity has been accompanied by an assigned reason, beyond
the fact that it was heard of first in the thirteenth century: it
is part of the programme to get rid anyhow of anything which
goes to shew that the whole Zonar was not written at the
period of Moses de Leon. The reason is not far to seek: the
excerpts from the Ban, if genuine, involve the existence not
merely of purely Kabbalistic but of typically Zoharic teaching
prior to that date: as this proves too much for the imposture
theoty, they are set down as part of the imposture. One
ctitic who espouses the antiquity of the Zor has, however,
rejected the Banrr. He says: “The SepHer Ha Bani,
attributed to Nehunya ben Ha-Kanah, contemporary of Hillel
the Elder and Herod the Great, is often cited. Various frag-
ments, manifestly unauthentic, still pass for extracts from this
book.” 1 Perhaps so; but why, if so? It is for some deter-
minate and material reason that one looks and waits in vain,
failing which the identity of the ZoHar quotations with the
otiginal can be accepted as a tolerable hypothesis, because no
reason has been given to the contrary. It is quite another
thing to affirm that they are the work of Nehunya, or that
they are older than the SEPHER YErzIRAH. Placing this
cosmogony somewhere between the fourth and the ninth
century, as our personal feeling prompts; regarding the
ZOHAR itself as, at least, a gradual growth between the close
of that period and the date of its publication, the Baur can

1 Adolphe Franck: La KasBaxz, ou Ja Philosophie Religieuse des Hébreux. Paris
1843. If the unauthentic nature follows from the fa& that it is falsely attributed, then
the SEPHER YETZIRAH belongs to the same category.

THE LUMINOUS BOOK 155

be accepted as a produdtion of the formative age of the work
which is made to quote it until evidence to the contrary has
been produced. When the extras were inserted therein we
do not know; absent from the Mantua edition, which was
simultaneous with that of the Cremona codex which contains
them, it is possible that they were first added when the Zonar
was prepared for press under the supervision of R. Isaac De
Lattes, that unknown but “ highly learned Jew unsurpassable
in all the branches of knowledge required,” whom the pub-
lisher describes. In this case, they have no connetion with
Moses de Leon.

Thete is, of course, little unanimity in hostile or indeed any
Kabbalistic criticism. As, on the one hand, a defender of the
ZOHAR challenges the BAnir excerpts, so the latter have been
exalted as the prototype and a€tual inspirer of the former work.
This view, though in any case of little moment, involves at
least the existence of the BAnrr prior to the alleged period when
the ZoHAR was produced out of the head of Moses de Leon,
like Minerva out of the head of Jupiter, ready made and at one
leap. Morinus, who has left on the whole a sensible review
of the subject, founds his opinion that the BAnir was a produ&
of the thirteenth century, on the silence of writers prior to
that date, and especially of Moses Nahmanides, a Kabbalistic
Jew of Jerusalem, whose literary labours belong to the period
before and after 1250. Morinus, however, is wrong on the
point of faa, as the work is mentioned sub voce Midrash R.
Nehunya ben Ha-Kanah in the Commentary of Nahmanides
on the Pentateuch (Gen. 1.). See the JEwisH ENcYCLOPADIA,
§.v.Banir. According to Wolf the first reference to the BAHIR
is made by R. Shem Tob, who was a contemporary of Moses
de Leon, but belonging to a younger generation. This, how-
ever, is a mistake also, because R. Azriel, the author of a
distinguished treatise on the Sephirotic system, and born, as
we have seen, about 1160, in his commentary on the Song of
Songs which is ascribed sometimes to Nahmanides, quotes
the Banir, though not under its own name but under that of
YERUSHALMI. The proof is that the Italian Jew Recanati,
contemporary of Moses de Leon, used these quotations, and,
misled by the name, inferred that they were from the JERu-
SALEM T'ALMUD, but afterwards discovered them in the Bauir,
to which a Palestinian origin is ascribed. By how much the
lost treatise antedated Azriel we have no ground for con-

156 THE HOLY KABBALAH

jeGtuting ; but the position of Wolf and Morinus is destroyed
by the fact here recorded, which leaves the BAHIR whete we
should be disposed to place it, between the date when the
SEPHER YETZIRAH is first mentioned and the first report .of
the ZoHAR. |

The name Banir is referred to Job xxxvii. 21: “ And now
men see not the bright light which is in the clouds,” according
to the Authorised Version, or accotding to Dr. Durell’s
amended rendering, “ And now men see not the light which
is above (or within) the clouds, &c.” 1 The subje@-matter
of the book, which—like the great bulk of the ZoHar—is in
the form of a dialogue between certain illuminated doctors,
includes the mystery inherent in Divine Names, and it con-
tains a very full exposition of the celebrated SHEMAHAM-
PHORAS, of Expounded Name of Deity. Some of it therefore
at least must be relegated to the side of waste and scattermeal,
to which extent we can sympathise with the instinctive dislike
of Franck to accept the excerpts by which it is known among us.
Facts, however, must have precedence of predilections, and
though the later history of the dodtrine of Divine Names may
well make an admirer of the higher Kabbalism regret such a
connection, it is far older than that of the SEPHIROTH, not to
speak of the Two Countenances in the Book or CoNCEAL-
MENT and its dependencies. Setting aside certain references
to the parts or modes of the soul and the mythos of the Fall,
it must be confessed that the other fragments are involved as
theses and almost barren of suggestion; yet a few points
may be noted here and there. A tradition is cited concerning
a Sacred Palace in which are four Living Creatures who are
the holiest of all angels and also the most ancient: they are
in correspondence with the four letters of the Sacred Name
and constitute therefore its image.? They are also a con-
necting link between the world above and that which is below,
presumably because of their relation to the Divine Name,
which unifies height and deep. Elsewhere a comparison is
_ drawn between those Mysteries of Scripture which are con-
cealed from all but initiates and the Mysteries of God hidden
within His own being. We are assured on the authority

1 Compate the Vulgate version: At nunc non vident lucem; subito aer cogetur in nubes,
et ventus transiens fugabit eas.

3 Z., 1,,8ab, Il, 344.

3 Ib., Il, 83b; III, 346.

THE LUMINOUS BOOK / 157

of Rabbi Abba that three meals must be eaten on the Sabbath
Day, the first while it is yet night, and this is in honour of
Shekinah ; the second in honour of Him Who is the Ancient
of Days; the third to the glory of Him Who is begotten of
Wisdom and Understanding, according to the dodtrine of
the Ipras. By these meals are the people of Israel set apart
from the pagan nations, and those who negle& them shall
have no part in the Sacred Palace where dwell the Living
Creatures.! It is added hereto that the Sabbath is the Name of
the Holy One, which explains why the ele& who observe it
catty titles of admission to the presence of those angels who
are in its image and likeness. We shall discern also a certain
sequence of symbolism when it is said elsewhere that the
Sabbath is a day favourable to the study of the Hidden Law,
for that which belongs to the Name belongs also to the Law ?:
it is under such auspices that the seventy modes of inter-
preting Holy Writ are revealed to initiates. The last word on
the subject tells us that whosoever observes the Sabbath
fulfils the whole Law, from which point of view it might be
said that its yoke is easy and its burden light.

Tt remains to say, on the authority of Wolf at its value,
that William Postel is reported to have rendered the Banir
into Latin; but, if so, I can find no record that the version
was ever printed, nor is there any indication of its whereabouts
in manuscript form.

VIL—THE FAITHFUL SHEPHERD

The Zoharistic treatise bearing this title records con-
vetsations between Simeon ben Yohai and Moses, who
appeared to the great light of Kabbalism and gave him many
instrutions and revelations. Elijah took part in the con-
ference, and the witnesses included not only Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Aaron, David and Solomon, but God Himself. This
indicates that in spite of the exalted doctrine concerning Arn
SopH, the ZoHarR tecuts occasionally to the same anthro-
pomorphic conceptions that are found in the Talmud. Gins-
burg says: “ The chief object of this portion is to shew the
twofold and allegorical import of the Mosaic commandments

1 Z., Il, 88a, 88b; III, 360, 361.
2 “The Law is the Name of the Holy One.”—Ib., II, 90b ; IIT, 366.
3 Jb., Il, 89a; III, 362.

158. ' THE HOLY KABBALAH

and prohibitions, as well as of the Rabbinical injun€tions and
religious practices which obtained in the course of time.”
THE FAITHFUL SHEPHERD is longest by far of all the supple-
mentary texts which have been brought into the ZoHar
proper, and it has been shewn where and how the various
portions have been distributed in the codex followed by the
French translator. It may be added now that they are dis-
persed through the Cremona edition in the following order :
Patt T., ‘col. (98; toaf126) aby, arty orale iaog) ipas) sath
378, °483)3 Part\TL) ‘col.72) 100, 106) 165) 203128n, i328)
Part Il) coliai:26; 32) 42) 45,47; sO. 7p 9O) Om meeyesa.
144, :147,;371; 187; 209; 214, 213,'233, 235) 277, 1200, G20y332,
339, 343, 394, 400, 404, 408, 413, 422, 429, 430, 431, 432, 433,
434, 447, 451, 456, 457, 458, 459, 460, 461, 466, 468, 472, 519,
534. As regards their authenticity, Franck classes these
excerpts along with those of the Banmr, but, as in that instance
so in this, he gives no account of his suspicions, which may
be taken, however, to follow from a personal convition that
much of the Zowar is really attributable to the period of
Simeon ben Yohai and the disciples who came after him.
In either case, the DiscouRSE OF THE FAITHFUL SHEPHERD iS
important to our purpose in several respects. Its views on
vicatious atonement and on the Messiah to come will enable
us to appreciate its contribution—if any—to the profound
Salvation mythos ; some of its moral teachings will illustrate
its ethical position; its references to the Shekinah will cast
light on this Theosophia magna of Kabbalism ; while its specula-
tions on angels and demons might shew the Zoharistic founda-
tion for the later system of pneumatology which was developed
by Isaac de Loria. They are reserved, however, for con-
sideration at their place in later sections.

The discourse introduces two phases of vicarious atone-
ment, the first of which is effected through the sufferings of
just men in a general sense, or in the aggregate.

“When the righteous are afflicted by disease or other
sufferings in atonement for the sins of the world, it is so
otdered that all the sinners of their generation may obtain
redemption. How is this demonstrated ? By every member
of the physical body. When all these are suffering through
some evil disease, one of them is afflicted [z.¢., by the instru-
ment of the leech] so that the others may recover. Which
member? The arm. It is chastised by the blood being drawn

THE FAITHFUL SHEPHERD 159

from it, which ensures healing in all other members of the
body. It is in like manner with the children of the world ;
the members are in relation with each other even as those of
the body. When the Holy Blessed One willeth the health of
the world, He afflicts a just man therein with pain and sickness
and heals the rest through him. How is this shewn? It is
written: But He was wounded for our transgressions, He
was btuised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace
was upon Him, and with His stripes we are healed (Isa. liti. 5).
‘ By his stripes,’ as by the bruises [incisions] made in bleeding
the arm, are we healed, that is, recovery is insured to us as
members of one body.” 4

Here, it will be said, the Kabbalah recognises the great and
fruitful do€trine of the solidarity of humanity. We may
register full agreement: it is one of those instances wherein
Jewish Theosophy has forestalled some modern ideas. But
if we take the illustration which it gives, we shall see that it is
fantastic in character; the affliction of a diseased rabbi does
not as a fact benefit his neighbour physically, and only on the
most arbitrary hypothesis can we suppose that the patience
with which he may suffer will reflect credit on any one but
himself and on those in his immediate circle, who may profit
by a bright example. Let us glance, however, at a more
particular illustration which follows in the text immediately.

“This is also exemplified in the history of Job. For the
Holy Blessed One, seeing that the entire foundation was sinful,
and how Satan appeared to accuse them, said unto Him:
* Hast thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like
him in the earth’ (Job 1. 8), ‘to save his generation through
him?’ This may be illustrated by the parable of a shepherd
who beheld a wolf approaching to rend his sheep and destroy
them. What did this shepherd? Being wise, he gave unto
the wolf the strongest and stoutest bell-wether, even that
which the flock was accustomed to follow, and while the wolf
was bearing it away, the shepherd hurried with his sheep to a
place of safety, and then returning rescued the bell-wether
from the wolf. So does the Holy Blessed One deal with a
generation: He surrenders a righteous man into the power
of the accuser for the salvation of the generation through him.
But when such an one is strong like Jacob, it is said: A man

1 Zouar, Cremona ed., part iii. fol. rora.

160 THE HOLY KABBALAH

wrestled with him (Gen. xxxii. 24). But he (Satan) will be
unable to prevail, and in the end he will supplicate the
righteous man to release him (Ibid. 26), for the righteous man,
chosen by the Holy Blessed One, is too strong for the evil
one and bears the most cruel affliGtions willingly for the
redemption of his generation ; whence also he is held as their
saviour, and the Holy Blessed One constitutes him shepherd
overt all the flock, to feed them in this world and to rule over
them in the world to come.” }

The clumsy and inadequate parable which thus represents
the Almighty flying from Satan as the shepherd flies from a
wolf, and in accordance with which the just man is at first
compared to a bell-wether and afterwards to the shepherd of
a flock, is something more than a literary failure. Theo-
logians have, I believe, found some trouble in locating the
accuser of Job, and it is perhaps most accurate to say with the
poet that “‘ He, too, is God’s minister”? ; but the Zoharic
commentary on Job makes Satan in most respects a match
for the Almighty, Who must have recourse to a stratagem in
otder to save His people. The Kabbalah on the problem of
evil is therefore, in this place, neither illuminating nor
reassuting : it is, in fact, no better than childish. “ The
ancient pillars of the world [the intellectual luminaries of
Israel] differ,” says the same disquisition, as to the nationality
of Job. One affirms that he was a righteous Gentile who was
chastised for the atonement of the world. At a certain time
R. Hammarumnah met the prophet Elijah and said to him:
How is it to be understood that the righteous man suffers
while the wicked one has joy of his life? He answered,
saying: ‘The just man of few sins receives his punishment for
these in this world, and hence it is that he suffers here; but
the man whose sins are many, while his good deeds are few,
receives recompense for the latter in this world and hence
has the joy of life.” ?

In this instance the Kabbalah offers an explanation which,
however manifestly crude, is in close correspondence with
findings of Latin Theology. The latter goes even further, and
affirms that not only the sporadic good aétions of those who

1 7, Cremona ed., patt ii. fol. 100d.

2 Z., Cremona ed., part ii. fol. 106b. Compare the Mantua edition, I, 6, 8, where
it is said that the pure man is in himself a true sacrifice and that the just are the expiation
of the univetse.

THE FAITHFUL SHEPHERD 161

ate wicked habitually but all natural goodness can find their
reward only in this world. The Kabbalah is dishgured seldom
by methodised enormities of this kind. There are times also
in which it loses its grotesqueness for a moment, and by some
not unhappy reference to Scripture illustrates an elementary
spititual truth, as, for example, concerning the change
necessary to sinners.

“Those who are oppressed with sin need a change of place,
a change of name and a change in their actions, even as it was
said unto Abraham : Get thee out of thy country (Gen. xii. 1.)
Here is a change of place. And: Neither shall thy name any
mote be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham (Gen.
xvii. 5). Here is a change of name. A change of deeds: he
changed from his former evil actions to good aétions.” 4
The Christian Theosophist might develop the significance of
this quotation in connection with the new name of the
Apocalypse, the new name received in confirmation, ordina-
tion and the monastic and conventual life. But such analogies,
though suggestive, are of slender value; and the change
mentioned in the FarrHruL SHEPHERD offers no point of
. mystical importance: it concerns only an initial aspect of
spiritual life.

The Zoharistic speculations on Shekinah are a great
treasuty of mystical symbolism, but their study at full length
belongs to a much later stage. It is said in the FarrHrun
SHEPHERD that the relation of Shekinah to other lights of
creation is like that of the soul to the body, but she—for this
Divine Manifestation is presented under a feminine aspe@—
“stands to the Holy Blessed One as the body stands to the
soul.” The Shekinah is the vestment of the Almighty. But
the discourse of the Faithful Shepherd adds that all are one,
that is, God is one with His manifestation. ‘This may be
illustrated by the profound spiritual do@rine of the Christian
Eucharist: the bread is the vestment of Christ, the mode of
His manifestation in His Church; but Christ, by the hypo-
thesis of the doétrine, is one with the veil which He assumes.
It is otherwise in man, says the FarrHFuL SHEPHERD. “‘ His
body is earth, but the soul is called reason. The one is death,
the other is life.” The death, however, is obviously emble-
matic or figurative. It is to be understood as imprisonment,

1 Z., Cremona ed., patt ii. fol. 98d.

162 THE HOLY KABBALAH

the limitation of walls and fetters. ‘‘ But the Holy Blessed
One is life, and Shekinah also is life. Whence it is written :
She [meaning Shekinah, but the Scriptual reference is to
Wisdom] is a Tree of Life to them that lay hold upon her”
(Prov. iii. 18). The Shekinah of Kabbalism is not, however,
merely the visible splendour which shone in the Holy of
Holies. The Fatrnru, SHEPHERD affirms that the Holy
Blessed One is concealed in the Mysteries of the THorAH and
is known or manifested by the commandments, for these are
His Shekinah and this is His image. Herein are high in-
timations, and they do not need the gift of the mystic to under-
stand and appreciate. It is one of those instances in which
a depth is opened within or beneath the sacred tales of Jewry.
We may not at this day feel disposed to accept literally and,
so to speak, physically the alleged manifestation in the Temple;
here the Zohar helps us to something truer and profounder
than the letter of the legend, and we acknowledge gladly that
the little people of Palestine, encompassed by the idolatrous
nations, had truly something of the divine in the law which
was given them. The passage continues: “‘ As He is humble,
so is Shekinah humility; as He is benevolent, so is she
benevolence ; as He is strong, so is she the strength of all the
nations of the world; as He is the truth, so the truth is she ;
as He is the prophet, so is she the prophetess; as He is
righteous, so is she righteousness ; as He is King, so is she
Queen ; as He is wise, so is she wisdom ; as He is intelligent,
so is she His intelligence ; as He is the crown, so is she His
diadem, the diadem of glory. Therefore the masters have
decided that all those whose inward part is not like unto the
outward semblance shall have no admission to the House of
Doétrine. As the image of the Holy Blessed One, whose
interior He is, whose outward splendour is Shekinah; He,
His interior internally, she His exterior externally, so that no
difference subsists between her the outward and Him the
inward,! as she is an outflow from Him, and hence all differ-
ence is removed between external and internal, and as, further,
the inner nature of YHVH is concealed, therefore is He only
named with the name of Shekinah, that is to say, Adonai ;

1 It follows that She is He, She as God in manifestation and He the God in hidden-
ness ; She Who is attained and Known, He Who is unknown, except as we know in
Her. Cf. Z., Part ii, fol. 118b; III, 456.

THE FAITHFUL SHEPHERD 163

hence the Masters tell us on the part of the Holy One: Not
as I am written [YHVH] am I read.” }

The connection instituted between Shekinah and MaLkuTH,
in the light of the alleged unity of God and the vestment which
conceals Him, suggests the identity of the divine and the
universe; but it is only in the sense of immanence. The
Kabbalah, in its great moments, knows that all things are
One and even that the One is All; but at others it is in some
respects the very opposite of pantheism.

Our quotations must close with two references to angels and
demons in the FarrHruL SHEPHERD. ‘The first concerns the
great Presence-Angel Metatron, who—in this text—is the sole
occupant of the Briatic world, as the supernal Adam is of that of
ArzitutH. He isthe garment of Shaddai. According to some
his form is that of a boy, while others ascribe to this angel a
female aspect. This shews a connedtion with Shekinah, and
indeed Metatron, with the difference of an added letter,
signifies the cohabiting glory.2 There are secondly certain
reveries concerning Samael, or Satan, and his wife Lilith. The
first was once a servant of the Holy Blessed One and the second
a maid of Matroneetha.? Their ultimate destruction is hinted ;
but meanwhile Lilith is the devastation of the world and the
lash in the hands of the Holy Blessed One to strike the guilty.
So she, too, is God’s minister.

VIII.—HIDDEN THINGS OF THE LAW

The extant fragments of this tract were tabulated by Rosen-
roth as follows in the Cremona edition of the Zonar: Part L.,
col. 221, 258, 262, 370.4 Part II., col. 250. Dr. Ginsburg
discovered others in the Amésterdam codex, to which his
references are made. The words SrrHRE THorAuH signify
SECRET DocrtRINE, otherwise, Mysteries of the Law and its
Hidden Things. The title belongs, therefore, to the Tradition
at large rather than to a single text which claims to treat
thereof. The tract itself has no history outside the Zonar,
and it does not seem that a line of it is extant elsewhere. A
note of the French editors affirms it to be demonstrably

1 Z., Cremona ed., part ii. fol. 1062. Myer, PHttosopHy oF Inn GEBIROL, p. 341.
_ ® Zowar, part iii. fol. 106d.

3 Z., Cremona ed., part iii. fol. 134).

4 In the French paraphrase see II, 720-734 ; III, 328 ef seq., 367-373.

164 THE HOLY KABBALAH

impossible that it is earlier than the tenth century; but
whether it is much anterior to the Mantua and Cremona
codices is an alternative speculation which may not be devoid
of likelihood. The question is not of my concern and can be
left to stand at its value, nor is SrrHrE THORAH calculated to
detain us long, as I conceive it unnecessary to give examples
of its Scriptural exegesis, which is at once monstrous and
puerile. It has, however, some occasional lights, even if they
shine among clouds, and there is much on the evolution of
the SrpHrrotH, but it belongs to another se@tion. There is
one rather curious reverie which has been thought to dis-
tinguish certain stages of mystical vision. It is said that the
glory of the King is discovered in three colours.1_ The first is
above and so far away that no eye can perceive it in its clear-
ness ; but it is distinguished (dimly) by contraGting the range
of vision [7.e., by half opening the eye]. It is of this Divine
Manifestation that Scripture says: Jehovah appeared to me
far off.2. The second colour is seen when the eye is hardly
opened at all. ‘The clearness of the light could not be endured
otherwise. Of this it is written: What seest thour® The
third colour is that bright luminous flash which cannot be
suffered at all, except between the rolling of the eyes when
the lids are closed altogether and the eyes move in their
sockets. There can be seen then in that rolling the light as of
a luminous mirror; but the colour thereof can be compre-
hended only by him who beholds the shining with eyes shut,
and as if in recollection, whence it is written: The hand of
the Lord wasupon me*; and: Thehand of the Lord was upon
me in the evening.® It is added on the authority of another
sacred text that all prophets stood in need of an explanation
to make their visions intelligible, save Moses only, who could
look on highest Divinity. No doubt. the Kabbalists had
visions and means of inducing visions, as well as modes of
contemplation and occasional deeper states which pass under

1 Zs, Appendix MI; WH, 720; 721.

2 Jer. xxxi. 3. The Authorised Version teads: The Lord hath appeared of old
unto me. Compare, however, the Vulgate: Longe Dominus apparuit mihi.

3 Jer. i. 11. The prophet, however, did not see the will of God but a rod of an
almond-tree.

4 Ezek. xxxvii, 1.

5 Ezek, xxxiil, 22.

6 See Numbers xii. 7, 8, and especially: With him will I speak mouth to mouth,
even apparently, and not in dark speeches. But the Vulgate seems stronger, clearer,
and corresponds better with the mind of SrrHrE THoRAH: Ore enim ad os loquor ei,

et palam, et non per enigmata et figuras Dominum videt.

HIDDEN THINGS OF THE LAW 165

this name. So also had Béhme, St. John of the Cross and all
the seers and mystics ; but this delineation confuses cause and
effect, while it offers no intelligible result.

The discourse proceeds, however, to another illustration of
colour symbolism in the case of the three angels who appeared
to Abraham.

“Tt is written: And lo, three men stood by him.1 These
ate the three angelic emissaries, clothed in human forms, which
come down to this world, and shew themselves to the children
ofmen. They correspond to the three colours of the rainbow :
white, red and green. The white is Michael, because he is the
tight side; the red is Gabriel, because he is the left side ; and
the green is Raphael. And these three colours are those of
the rainbow, because it is never seen otherwise than with
them.? ... Thereby also was the Shekinah revealed to
Abraham. ... It is written also: And they that be wise
shall shine as the brightness of the firmament.? They shall
shine with a light which is enkindled by igniting a splendour.
That brilliant light which is hidden, the spark of all sparks,
of all lights, is therein invisible and hidden, concealed and
made known, seen and not beheld. This shining light came
out from the Supreme Fountain of enlightenment, which 1s
_shewn in the day and hidden at night. It illuminates the
otdinances of the Law and all colours are concealed therein.
. . . Those three colours which are beheld below are in the
likeness of colours that are above and are unseen by eyes of
flesh. The light is called by the Name YHVH.” 4

The account in Genesis, upon which this pretends to be a
commentary, is exceedingly perplexing, and to say that the
three men are three angels clothed in the light of Shekinah
scarcely removes the difficulties. The explanations of
Christian interpreters may not be satisfactory and may not
call for recital; but in this place the colour symbolism of
SITHRE T'HORAH leads only to a disquisition on Divine Names
and Titles, and this leads nowhere.®

1 Genesis xviii. 2.

2 This point should interest ethnologists,

* Daiiel xii.'3,

4 Z., Part I, Appendix III; Il, 722, 723. See also Isaac Myer, op. cit., pp. 427, 428,
for another form of paraphrase.

5 The fact remains, however, and is important for the whole Zoharic subject, that
when God manifests on earth He appears in the form of Shekinah. Latin theology
postulates a Christ form.

166 THE HOLY KABBALAH

For the rest, SITHRE THORAH delivets intimations there and
here not only in disquisitions but also in occasional short
passages and mete sentences, of which a few are worth noting.
We are taken back by one of them to that colour symbolism
which so far has profited little and are told that even as white
is the foundation of colours, while all return therein, so is
there a White Light of the Spirit, even a Light of Mercy,
from which other lights emanate—meaning sacred qualities
and virtues—that belong to the Divine Order. It is mysterious
and concealed, is perceived by no one who depends on bodily
vision and is reserved for the just alone.1_ Those who seek
to know it should meditate on the precepts of the Law by
day and by night.2, We are reminded of another passage in
the ZoHar, which affirms that the world was made by Mercy,
derived from the Supernal Loving Kindness abiding in the
wotld above. It is another way of saying not alone that
Mercy is greater than Judgment, but is that which moves
therein and rules in all. It seems to me that we shall
remember this and keep it in our hearts when we have
forgotten about the three angels which appeared to Abraham,
the colours to which they correspond, and that the words
ADONAI ELOHENU ADONAI ate composed of fourteen Hebrew
letters.®

We are told elsewhere that the Scriptural ordinance to
sanctify the Sabbath Day is not merely, as we have seen, the
synthesis of all other Scriptural commandments and earns the
same merit as the observance of all, but that it lifts up those
who do so into a realm of everlasting memory.* The explana-
tion is that forgetfulness is found only below, but in the world
above that which we ate is known, that which we were is
with us and the future stands revealed.

It is affirmed finally that the letter ALEPH calls upon us to
proclaim the unity of God, and this is clear at least, because
its numerical value is one. But the text goes on to tell us that
ALEPH is a letter of prohibition as well as of command, since
it forbids us to acknowledge the identity of the true God with
any pagan divinities. There is added, and the point may be
commended to “ occultists ” of all classes, that the same letter

A Zavihl, Feb Lid, 3283 320.

2 Joshua i. 8.

3 Z., Appendix III, Srrnre THoran ; II, 723.
#75) 0 ora {1s 4a,

HIDDEN THINGS OF THE LAW 167

forbids us to be seduced by Magic and the art of evoking the
dead.t In the absence of this information it is unlikely that I
should have cited the passage.

IX.—THE SECRET COMMENTARY

We know that Scott provided headings to many chapters
of his romances by pretended quotations from old plays which
existed only in his imagination, and it happened occasionally
that these mythical excerpts contained stronger lines than
some of his acknowledged versecraft. ‘Those who believe—
if indeed any are left at this day—that Moses de Leon wrote
the ZoHAR out of his own head may account in a similar
manner for certain fragments of unknown treatises which are
found only in that work. Of some of these it may be said also
that they are more curious here and there than is the ZoHAR
proper. As we have seen, the student world of Kabbalism
agreed in the past to exalt the Book oF CONCEALMENT over
other discourses attributed to Simeon ben Yohai; but for
the purposes of our present inquiry it must be confessed that
not a little interest attaches to the SECRET COMMENTARY. The
extant fragments of MiprasH Ha NEELAM are found in the
Cremona edition at the following places: Part I, col. 257,
260, 261, 264, 265, 268, 269, 272, 273, 276, 296, 370. The field
which they cover is chiefly that of the destiny of souls, future
punishments and rewards, the resurrection of the body, the
Paradise above and its relation to the Paradise below, and the
do&trine concerning angels and demons. But these subjects
are reserved for consideration in their proper places subse-
quently. It is possible, however, to offer here and now a few
of the intimations concerning the soul and its destiny, as they
will not detraé& from that which is designed to follow. At
the beginning of the Miprasu, or more properly at that point
which is cited first in the ZoHaAR,? we hear not alone of the
soul in glory, because it ascends thus into heaven, but that
this splendour is called a visit of the Holy One, meaning
therefore that the soul is encompassed by the Divine Presence.
But it is only a light which is refle@ted thereupon by an event
to come, for it is said presently that the Holy One comes to
the soul, accompanied by Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. There

1 Z., Il, 91a; III, 368, 369.
: Ib., Part I, "Appendix in: II, 675 e¢ seq.

H.Ke N

168 THE HOLY KABBALAH

is the authority of Rabbi Eleazar for an assurance that the
souls of the just desire after that moment when they will
leave the vanities of this world and enjoy the life to come ;
but the picture presented at this stage of the MrprasuH is more
than normally anthropomorphic; and even when it is said
a little later that the soul’s joy in heaven is in the contemplation
of the glory of God and in the nutriment of higher lights, it
does not rise definitely above this level or in any wise approach
the Thomist conception of the Beatific Vision, though it is
unchallengeable that in the last resource, and howsoever
transmuted, this also is the doctrine of separation impressed
with everlasting seals. It should be added that texts outside
the SECRET COMMENTARY present a diffefent view.

Meanwhile the suggestion that Light in the celestial world
becomes the nourishment of those who have been admitted
therein takes us back to a subject on which we have dwelt
previously, namely the Supersubstantial Bread, and it happens
to be unfolded for our further consideration in the SECRET
Mrprasu.! ‘The epoch under discussion by various Masters
in Israel is that which will follow the resurre€tion, a time when
the Holy One will be in union with His creatures, the just will
be conscious of His inward presence, and they shall know
Him as if they saw Him with their eyes—an intimation which
differs from all that so far has preceded. It has been handed
down that at this time He Who is Holy and Blessed will
prepare a Feast for the righteous, that is, a spiritual nourish-
ment, defined as the splendour of Shekinah between the
Cherubim on the Mercy-Seat. A later intimation says that it
will be a food of joy, experienced by contact with the Holy
One, otherwise, rejoicing in His joy. There is also a wine
reserved for the righteous from the creation of the world,
and it is said to signify Hidden and Immemorial Mysteries
which will be revealed in the age to come.

It will be seen that in this very suggestive passage the
MrprasH oOffets a gteat advance upon the monstrous Talmudic
allegory of the salted leviathan, even if it be objected that the
cream and marrow of the rabbinical discourse is summed up
in a single sentence which affirms that “it hath not entered
into the heart of man to conceive what God hath prepared

1 Loc. cit., § TotporH ; I, 713-715.
2 There is a reference at this point to Ps, xxxiv.

THE SECRET COMMENTARY 169

for those who love Him.”! Isaac Myer has sought to increase
the significance by an indication that the word “ wine ” refers
Kabbalistically to “the mysterious vitality and spiritual
energy of created things,” an opinion based on its investiga-
tion by Norarixon, for Wine = 7o = SOD, or secret.?
However this may be, there is a more pregnant explanation
on the part of the Miprasu itself, according to which the
leviathan of Isaiah and the Ttmup, the behemoth of Job and
analogous rabbinical legends are things written for the crowd,
which understands only material rewards and punishments.
We know, however, what is the faith of the just and whither
their aspirations tend, namely, “ to rejoice with God, with a
joy that shall be wholly spiritual.”

For the rest, what is evident in other texts is evident also
in the SECRET COMMENTARY: that the study of the Doétrine
and the Study of its Secret Law was the consolation in chief
which was sought by Sons of the Doétrine through the exile
of the Christian centuries. The Temple was destroyed, and
it was not possible to offer sacrifices; but always the Law
remained, and the reward of dedication thereto was that of
the world to come, understood as the Mountain of the Lord,
the Mountain of Delight and Felicity.

X.—MINOR TRACTS OF THE ZOHAR

We have now passed in review the more important Mrp-
RASHIM and fragments which have been incorporated with the
ZOHAR proper. It is far beyond the province of this analysis
to offer an account in full of all that remains over, of texts and
pieces particular to the Cremona edition, of the Ancient and
Later Supplements and the additional content of ZOHAR
Havasu. A few items only can be noticed briefly for the
sake of comparative completeness.

A.—THE OMISSIONS

We have seen that cettain miypwn = HAsHMATOTH =
OMISSIONS ate comprised in the first Appendix to Part I. of
the Zowar, being the Commentary on Genesis. Of these the
first cannot be identified and the rest—with one exception,

1 Ts. lxiv. 4; I. Corinthians ii. 9.
2 PHILOSOPHICAL. WRITINGS OF IBN GEBIROL, p. 358.
3 Z., Part I, Appendix III ; II, 680.

170 THE HOLY KABBALAH

about which something must be said later—form part of the
Hippen Law, the Luminous Boox and the Farrurur
SHEPHERD. ‘These texts, or their extant portions, having
been reviewed already, the present note has reference only to
a few leaves of Appendix I.1 The subjects of consideration
include: (1) The White Head in the Book or CoNCEALED
MystEry, to which the Divine Name jin = JEHOVAH is
allocated in place of m= Jan, according to the Holy
Assemblies. (2) The Glory of the Lord—that is to say,
Shekinah—which was revealed in the Tabernacle is identified
with what is termed the Sea of Wisdom in the Supernal
World, meaning the SEpHrRA CHoOKMAH = Wisdom; but
we shall find that the Shekinah in Transcendence is referable
to BINAH = the Sea of Understanding. (3) It is said that the
Sun and Moon are placed under the presidency of two power-
ful angels, otherwise Planetary Spirits of old magical lore ;
that Esau was under solar dominion, while Jacob was under
lunar influence ; and that for this reason the one would rule
overt nations here on earth, but the other in the world to
come. (4) It is affirmed yet once more that the true Sacrifice
of Expiation is the study of the Law, that is, the Secret
Doétrine.

B.—THE ADDITIONS

The vatious TossEFrotH = ADDITIONS ot ADJUNCTIONS,
which occupy the second Appendix of Part I., are in the same
position as the Omissions, being extracts from the same
MiprasHIM already enumerated, one only excepted.2 A
paragraph under the title of Apprrions is found also in
Appendix I., so that there are two left for our consideration
in this place. In one of them * the Great Sea is again identified
with Wisdom instead of Understanding; but it may be
remembered in this connection and recurring to my previous
note that the qualities and titles of Wisdom in the Old Testa-
ment ate referred to Shekinah throughout the Zonar, from
which it follows that Wisdom and Understanding, otherwise,
CHOKMAH and Brinan, the second and third SEPHIROTH in
the Tree of Life, are in a state of union, which is obvious by
the nature of things ; and it is shewn elsewhere in the ZOHAR

1 Z., Part I, fol. 251b-253a; II, 591-597.
2 [b., Part I, fol. 283b, 284a; II, 657, 658.
3 Ib., fol. 278a ; II, 646, 647.

MINOR TRACTS OF THE ZOHAR 17

that this union or marriage produces a Son, who in fact is
Divine Knowledge. By the second we learn that two spirits
ate provided for just men, one which animates them in this
world, and one in the world to come, both now in being and
presumably in joint activity. The affirmation is important,
because we shall see later, on other authority than a mere
gloss or annotation, that the highest part of the human soul
never leaves the Supernals.

There are also ApprTIONs which constitute the first and
third Appendices to the Commentary on Exodus. That of
Appendix I. is a conference of some length on the Celestial
Tabernacle, and in certain editions of the Zowar it is printed
as patt of the eleventh and last section into which the Com-
mentary itself is divided. The subject-matter claims to be
detived from a book entitled SupREmE Mysteries. The
Tabernacle above is built upon twelve thousand worlds, while
the Tabernacle below corresponds by its material images to
the Celestial Chariot; but it is in the likeness also of the
Tabernacle of Adonai, even as this is in analogy with the
higher Tabernacle of Jehovah. In this connection it is
afirmed that the Divine Name Jehovah designates the male
principle in Deity, while the Divine Name Adonai signifies
the female principle ; but it is added that these two are one,
a pregnant doétrinal point which may be noted for future
reference as regards the Mystery of Sex. It is affirmed at a
later Stage that the holocaust ascends to the Infinite, or to
That Which is without end or beginning, a Supreme Will,
more mysterious than all other Mysteries: its name is
Nothing. This also should be noted, awaiting that time when
we shall be called to consider the Majesty of God in Kab-
balism. As regards the recurring subject of the holocaust, it
is said that man was intended originally as an offering to the
Supreme Spirit, but man fell and animals were substituted in
consequence. The Apprtions of Appendix III. are drawn in
part from the SzepHER Ha Banrr and in part from ZOHAR
HapasH. Among subjects of consideration in those which
remain over it must be held sufficient to mention (1) express
prohibitions in respect of Magic, Sorcery, the Evocation of
the dead and the practice of Astrology ; (2) a discourse on
the creation of Paradise, the Pillar which is based thereon and

1 Z., Part II, fols. 235b-244b and 269b-296a ; IV, 261-273 and 307-318.

172 THE HOLY KABBALAH

goes up to the Throne of Glory, or the sapphire firmament
which is above and the splendour which fills the Blessed Place
when the Holy One comes down to visit the just therein ;
(3) a dogmatic affirmation that the tradition according to
which the Law delivered to Moses on Mount Sinai was by
him transmitted to Joshua and by the latter to certain Elders,
alludes to the Oral Law, whereas Deuteronomy xxxi. 9, con-
cerning transmission through the sons of Levi, refers to the
Written Law.

C.—REPETITIONS

There ate two only which call for notice here, and one of
these especially because it has reference to that Mystery of
Faith which is cited continually in the ZoHar, as we shall see
in due course, though its nature never emerges in clear
language. It is said in the first MATHNITIN = REPETITION 2
that those who would penetrate the Mystery must hearken
concerning the well by which Moses sat and helped the
daughters of Reuel to water their father’s sheep.2 On the
side of external things it is the well of Jacob,+ but on the
inward side it is Adonai, even Adonai Jehovah, the Lord
God,° and that Lord Who is Master of all the earth.® It is
certified that this figurative well conceals a sacred spring, the
Name of which is Jehovah Tsabaoth. The well in fine is the
Ark of the Covenant which belongs to the Lord of all.” It
may be thought that this is an involved way of affirming that
the Mystery of Faith is revealed only in God; but we shall
find in proceeding that Adonai is a name of Shekinah, that
Shekinah is described emblematically as a well and is also the
Ark of the Covenant. In this case Shekinah is the Mystery
of Faith.®

The second MaTHNITIN ® claims to describe a hierarchic

1 The additamenta or Accessions ate scattered as follows through the Cremona
codex: Part I, cols. 83, 87, 145, 176, 188, 189, 203, 222, 259, 265, 295, 303, 318, 367,
371, 487, 513; Part I, cols. 48, 107, 120, 163, 238, 358, 426; Part III, cols. 50, 82, 97,
98, 117, 149, 155, 163, 177, 184, 186, 191, 274, 331, 441.

2 Rendered Traditional Receptions by Knorr von Rosenroth,

3 Exodus ii. 15-19.

4 Genesis xxix. 2-10.

5 The reference cited is to Deuteronomy, iii. 24: O Lord God (Adonai Jehovah),
Thou hast begun to shew Thy servant Thy greatness, and Thy mighty hand.

6 The text quotes Daniel ix. 17: And cause Thy face to shine upon Thy sanétuary
that is desolate, for the Lord’s sake.

7 Exodus ii. 16.

8 7, U1. 12b, 13a; ILL, 56, 57.

® Jb., Ill, 73b, 74a; V, 200, 201.

THE SECRET OF SECRETS 173

otder in the empite of the Demon and would be remitted to
another section if its symbolical imagery could be made
intelligible. It is mentioned here because it introduces
Metatron, the Great Angel of the Presence, and because above
all he is said to bear a sword which changes every instant from
male to female and from female to male. So far as a sword is
concerned, the statement is mere nonsense ; but we shall find
that Metatron himself transforms in the same manner. He
belongs therefore to the Zoharic Mystery of Sex, and so also
does Shekinah, who is called Adonai. It is to be inferred,
therefore, that the two REpETITIONS—which reveal rather
than tepeat—are concerned with this subject, sub nomine
Mystery of Faith. The point may be noted at this stage in
view of future references.

D.—THE SECRET OF SECRETS

The single fragment which is extant of Razz DE RazIN is
found in Part II. of the Cremona edition, beginning at col.
134.1 It treats, firstly, of the connection between the soul and
the body ; and, secondly, of physiognomy, which must be a
subject of future reference in the final consideration of so-
called “occult science”? and the judgment of the ZoHaR
thereon. It may be worth while, however, to say in the
present connection that Kabbalistic physiognomy proves, as
might be expected, to have little connection with any accepted
principles to which this empirical subject may be supposed to
have attained, and is, indeed, purely arbitrary and conven-
tional. Lavater, the physiognomist in chief and reputed
inventor of the art, was something of a Theosophist, but he
borrowed nothing, as probably he knew nothing, of the
ZOBAR and its connections. Four general types of the human
countenance ate distinguished by the text in chief, and these
are referred to the faces of the Four Living Creatures in
Ezekiel’s vision.2, We have thus the leonine, the bovine and
the aquiline types, and another, less easy to characterise, but
cottesponding to the “living creature’ which “had the
likeness of a man.” ‘The approximation of any individual to
a given type depends upon his intellectual and moral rank.
Physiognomy, however, according to the SECRET OF SECRETS,

1 See also ZoHAR Hapasn, fol. 56a, in the Venice editions
2 Compare Z., Part II, 73b-75a, SeCtion JETHRO.

174 THE HOLY KABBALAH

“does not consist in the external lineaments, but in the
features which are drawn mysteriously within us. The
features of the face vary, following the form which is impressed
on the inward face of the spirit. The spirit only produces all
those physiognomical peculiarities which are known to the
wise, and it is through the spirit only that the features exhibit
meening. When spirits and souls pass out of Eden they
possess a certain form which is afterwards reflected in the
face.” M. Gabriel Delanne, in his day perhaps the most
interesting if not most persuasive writer on the French theory
of reincarnation, would say that the Zoharic fragment here
refers undoubtedly to the “ perisprit ”—of the Kardec school
of spiritism—which he holds to be the plan or type upon which
the body of the man is fashioned. The SECRET OF SECRETS
pretends also that every feature in a given countenance
indicates to those who can read therein whether it is possible
or not for the possessor to be initiated into Divine Mysteries.+
It is, perhaps, unnecessary to say that the fragment does not
disclose the rules which governed the sages in their discern-
ment, so that the Kabbalah is not likely to be of much praétical
use to the few persons who may be inclined to include
physiognomy within the charmed circle of any secret wisdom.

E.—TuHE DIscoursE OF THE YOUTH

The little history which has passed under this name will be
found in the Cremona edition of the Zouar, Part II., com-
ptised in a few columns, 91 e¢ seg., which follow shortly after
the Book oF CONCEALMENT.” It is the account of a rabbinical
prodigy, the son of R. Hammenouna, but living at the period
in question with his widowed mother in a certain village.
One day two disciples of R. Simeon ben Yohai, namely, R.
Isaac and R. Judah, passed through this village on a journey
and paid a visit to the widow. When her son returned from
school she wished to present him to the rabbis, to receive
their blessing, but he declined to approach them, after the
unamiable manner of prodigies. The reason assigned in the
narrative is that he discerned by the odour of their garments

1 In the writings of the Gaon R. Shereerah and other literature preceding the
appearance of the ZoHAR we meet with notions of physiognomy and chiromancy of a
parallel kind. They recur in the SuppLeMENTs of the ZoHAR.

2 See, however, the French translation, where it appears in Part III., se&. Bauac,
fols. 186a—191b.

THE DISCOURSE OF THE YOUTH 175

that they had not recited the requisite “‘ Hear, O Israel!” in
honour of the unity of God. He did not disdain, however,
to converse at the table, delivering sundry discourses (1) On
the symbolism of washing the hands, a function of some
mystery, because it is written: So they shall wash their hands
and their feet, that they die not (Ex. xxx. 21), that is, Aaron
and his sons, when entering the tabernacle of the congre-
gation; (2) On grace before meat; (3) On the Shekinah ;
(4) On the utterance of Jacob: “‘ The Angel which redeemed
me from all evil, bless the lads ” (Gen. xlviii. 16); and on
other matters. The cautious critic might not be prepared to
deny that the invention of this history was beyond the genius
of R. Moses de Leon. However, the discourses impressed
the disciples of Simeon ben Yohai, to whom they gave account
of the adventure and paid subsequently a second visit to the
lad, who unfolded to them further Secrets of the Law, con-
cerning the heave offering,! the Mystery of Bread and Wine,
and on grace after meat. When again the facts were reported
to the Lamp of Knowledge, he was of opinion that the lad
would not continue on earth, for the Holy One would call
him to Himself.

F.—TuHeE MANSIONS OR ABODES

We have made acquaintance with a work anterior to the
appearance of the ZoHAR in which there is a methodical
description of heaven. It must not be confused with the
equally methodical treatise which, under the above title,
termed in the original HIKLVTh = Palaces, gives account
of the structure of Paradise and the infernal region, as an
Appendix to the Commentary on Exodus. There will be
something to say of it in connection with the soul in Kab-
balism. We shall see also that many Palaces and several series
of Palaces will be found in the text and its supplements, for
example, in the Cremona edition, Part I., col. 116 e¢ seg. ;
Part II., col. 358 ef seg., and col. 438. According to one
tabulation the mansions are seven in number and were the
otiginal habitations of the earthly Adam. After the Fall of
man they were reconstituted and became the abode of the
saints. Rabbi Simeon testified otherwise to nine Celestial
Palaces which are of no definable form, being the Thought

1 Numbers xv. 19.

176 THE HOLY KABBALAH

of the Holy One. He should have said rather that they are
forms of Divine Thought.

The term which signifies Mansion, Temple or Palace, is
applied by later Kabbalism to Matxuts, in which TIpHERETH
is said to be concealed as in a palace. So also the name
Adonai [ADNI], Lord, is the Palace of TETRAGRAMMATON,
because it is the same number as HIKL = Paratium = 65.
This name is attributed to Binan, and in an especial manner
to KeTHErR, on the authority of the Zonar proper, for HIKL,
Palace, is the place in which HKL, that is, the All, is con-
tained, seeing that KrTrHeER includes the whole world of
ATZILUTH, because the Supernals are in unity. In another
sense the term is applied to the SzepHriroTH generally. In the
plural, HIKLVTh = Palaces are the branches of the SEp-
HIROTH in the inferior worlds. The Palace of the Holy of
Holies corresponds, says Rosenroth, to the Three Supernals.

The Zouar proper has also a good deal to tell us con-
cerning the seven heavens, one above the other, like the layers
of an onion. “ Each heaven trembles with fear of its Lord,
through Whom they all exist and all are taken away. Over
all, the Holy Blessed One holds all in His power.” There are
further seven earths below, arranged after the same manner.
“These earths are disposed according to their names, and
between them is the Garden of Eden and Gehenna.” ‘They
are inhabited by creatures of whom some have four faces,
some two, while others are single visaged, like humanity.
They are not the children of Adam; some of them are
clothed in skins and others in shells, “‘ like the worms which
ate found in the earth.” It would serve no purpose to
enlarge upon monstrous inventions of this kind. The con-
cealed meaning which some dreamers once supposed them to
possess is again evidently the plan upon which they are based,
and to understand them is to know the method by which
they can be calculated out, so to speak. For example, we
have just seen that ADNI is the mansion of YHVH; by
counting the numbers of these Names it appears why the
Kabbalists said this, but we do not discover that it served any
reasonable purpose until we find elsewhere in the medley that
ADNI is God in manifestation, while YHVH stands for
God in concealment. It emerges then at long last that the

1 Z., Part II, fol. 269a; IV, 302.

THE MANSIONS OR ABODES 177

Immanent and ‘Transcendent are One God; and as—
according to the ZoHAR—ADNI = ALHIM = SHEKINAH,
we enter into a deeper sense of the dodtrine that Jehovah is
Elohim, or that God and His Shekinah are One. And this
is THEOSOPHIA at the highest.

G.—THE COMMENTARY ON RuTH

It should be understood in the first place that the Zoharic
extracts ate drawn from MrprasH Ruts, which is to be
distinguished from RurH RazsBaH, otherwise MriprasH
Zouta. ‘They are found in SirHrA THORAH, SEPHER Ha
Bawir and MiprasH Ha Neriam; but expert knowledge
has been required to distinguish them from the text of those
tracts, which do not refer to their source. There ate, secondly,
views and notions expressed in the MATHNITIN of Appendix
III to the first part of the ZoHAR which depend from MrprasH
RutH, or, at least, are found therein. The subject-matter of
the extracts may be tabulated briefly thus: (1) The libations
of water made at the Feast of Tabernacles signify the grace
and favour which the Holy One will pout upon the world
when impurity has passed from earth.t (2) Wine is an
emblem of Severity or Fear, and Milk of Mercy.? (3) Their
point of meeting is Peace. (4) The world was created by
means of ten words, and among them are Lover and Beloved,
Joy and Mirth—one of the evet-recurring testimonies to the
irrepealable optimism of the Zouar, for which the s0Qd
things of the Lord are ever in the Land of the Living.4
(5) The word sacred belongs to all books of Scripture, but to
the Song of Solomon in a peculiar manner: it is also the
most beautiful book, even as the citron is fairest of all trees.®
(6) Its versicles are subjed to two hundred and sixteen inter-
pretations, and they were communicated on one occasion by
R. Eliezer to R. Abba.6 (7) There is a Paradise on earth as
well as a Paradise on high, and there is a celestial GEHENNON,
even as there isa GEHENNON below. The hell which is above
is the abode of Jews who have neither kept the Law nor

1 Z., Appendix I, fol. 265b ; II, p. 627.
2 ? bb 3 270s HH, 637, 638.
b

4 Ib., fol. 275a; I, 643.
% iby * fol. 282 ; TL, 653
6 Ib., ’ Appendix il, ft Il, 678.

178._ THE HOLY KABBALAH

repented of their sins; the earthly hell is the place of the
shadow of death, an eternal terror.

My analysis of the Zonar, regarded as a literary document,
has reached its utmost limit, and these specimens of extraneous
or interpolated texts—howsoever we may choose to term
them—must be held to serve for the whole. It should be
added that a few only are omitted. Though he regarded the
Mantua edition as Codex corretius, Rosentoth ingarnered all
the tracts and fragments embraced by that of Cremona when
he produced his own careful codex ; but it must be remem-
bered that the Zowar had in all probability grown under the
hands of transcribers and makers of glosses during the space,
approaching three centuries, which elapsed between its first
promulgation and the date when it was first printed. We
have no means of knowing how much of it was contained
actually in the alleged script of Moses de Leon. The suspicion
under which it has remained may be accounted for partly by
its frequent quotation of unknown works which have been
considered fictitious ; but the Zowar was edited prior to the
persecution of the Jews inaugurated by the atrocious edict of
Ferdinand and Isabella, and many documents existing in Spain
may have been destroyed during that fiery epoch. Again, it
is impossible to say that Continental libraries contain no
MSS. by which the excerpts of the Zonar might be justified.
The unprinted literature of Jewry has been catalogued by
various bibliographers, but no critical knowledge of its
contents is possible by recourse to bibliographies. Let us
take, for example, the passages from a commentary on the
Song of Solomon, which is peculiar, as we have seen, to the
Cremona editio princeps. ‘These excerpts have not, I believe,
been identified; but there is a manuscript in the Vatican
Library which is mentioned by Buxtorf under the very same
title, namely, Mrprasu HazEeru.? It is the work, as he tells
us, of an unknown author, but a uniform tradition assigns it
to a Tanaite commentator, circa A.D. 100. The existence of
such a work, of course, predicates nothing ; but why should
a commentary on the Song of Solomon be called MDRSh

1 Z., fol. 2b; II, 686, 687. It should be mentioned that Rosenroth specifies
passages drawn from Mrprasu Rurtu in the Cremona edition of the Zonar, Part III,
cols. 114, 124, 130, 174, 181, 184, 332, 530.

2 Among later MS. commentaries, also in the Vatican, Bartolocci mentions that of
R. Abraham ben Isaac Tze’mach Levi, the physician, and that of R. Immanuel ben
Solomon written towards the end of the fifteenth century.

THE COMMENTARY ON RUTH 179

ChDzITh, which is understood as a reference to Proverbs xxii.
29? I speak under correction, but I know of no ground
except in the idiosyncrasy of an author, and I am inclined to
infer therefore that the same catchword would not have been
used by two writers, but that the editor of the Zohar quoted
the alleged Tanaite treatise.

XI.—THE ANCIENT AND LATER
SUPPLEMENTS

The sudden appearance in public of a momentous work
which either has or purports to have remained in concealment
for several centuries may be expected to lead to the discovery
ot manufacture of continuations or connections thereof, and
thus we have two series of Zoharic writings subsequent to
the Book oF SPLENDOUR and distinguished as its Ancient and
Later Supplements. When productions of this kind multiply
their authenticity does not tend to assume a stronger guise,
and the documents with which we shall deal in this section
the reader will do well to regard as without determined
claims. I should add, however, that considerable importance
and authority have been ascribed always by Kabbalists to the
ANCIENT SUPPLEMENTS, and according to Franck they have
been known as long as the Zowar itself. They contain
explanations of the term BRAShITh by R. Simeon ben Yohai
after seventy different ways, and hence the work is divided
into seventy chapters, with eleven further chapters added at
the end. It was printed by Jacob ben Napthali at Mantua in
1557 under the editorship of Immanuele di Benevento, and
appeared again at Cracovia.

Among notable matters in these ANCIENT SUPPLEMENTS we
find the attribution of the members of the human body to the
SEPHIROTH, whence the practical Magic of the West may have
obtained later on its notion of Divine and Angelic Names
ruling those members.! The apex of the head and brain is
referred to Kerner, the brain as a whole to CHoxman, the
heart to Brnan, the back and breast are attributed to Trr-
HERETH, the arms to CHESED and GExBuRAH, the legs to
Nerzacu and Hop, the generative organs to JEsop, the feet
to Marxuru. Later Kabbalism recognises other corre-

1 According to the Zonar itself the ere&t figure of humanity exhibits the letters of
the TETRAGRAM superposed one upon the other. Part I, 42¢, Mantua.

180 THE HOLY KABBALAH

spondences, the arbitary nature of which is obscured some-
times by an appearance of methodical precision.

There are better things than this in the Supplements to the
Zoharic books, and it may be well supposed that some out of
all the seventy ways of interpreting the much-debated word
which is rendered “ beginning ” in Genesis should be sug-
gestive as well as curious. A single instance must, however,
suflice. “ “In the beginning God created.’ ‘This is the soul
when it emerges from the bosom of its mother and is taught
thereof. ‘And the earth was without form, and void, and
darkness was upon the face of the deep ’ (Gen. i. 2), because
the eyes of the soul were closed. Hath it opened its eyes ?
“And God said: Let there be light.’ . Hereafter man is
gathered in from this world, and this then is written about the
soul. ‘And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be
gathered unto one place, and let the dry land appear.’ When
the soul is removed from a man his body remains even as
“dry land.’ ”

That French school of occultism which was once beginning
to recognise in the plays of Shakespeare a veiled scheme of
initiation has, it must be admitted, an influential precedent in
the biblical exegesis of the Zowar, of which the above passage
seems to be a very neat instance, arbitrary beyond all words,
and yet not without a certain grace of notion.

One of the most celebrated quotations from the ANCIENT
SUPPLEMENTS is, however, the Prayer of Elijah, though it
belongs only to the prefatory part.?

“Lord of the universe, One alone art Thou, but not
according to number. ‘Thou art the most sublime of all that
is sublime, the most withdrawn of all things concealed, and
conception cannot attain Thee. Thou hast produced ten
forms which we call SepHirotH, and Thou guidest by means
of these the unknown and invisible as well as the visible
wotlds. In them Thou dost veil Thyself and, permeated by
Thy presence, their harmony knows not change. Whosoever
shall regard them as divided one from another, it shall be
accounted unto him as if he dismembered Thy unity.
These ten SEPHIROTH are developed in successive gradations,
so that one is long, another short and the third intermediate
between them; but Thou art He who ruleth them, and

———_—_—_

1 Namely, the beginning of the second preface.

ANCIENT AND LATER SUPPLEMENTS 181

whether from above or below art guided Thyself by none.
Thou hast provided the SEPHIROTH with garments which
serve human souls as intermediate phases ; Thou hast veiled
them with bodies, so-called in comparison with their en-
compassing vestures, and taken together they correspond to
the members of the human form. . . . Thou art the Lord of
worlds, Foundation of all foundations, the Cause of all
causes; Thou dost water the Tree from that source which
spreads life everywhere, as the soul spreads it through the
body. But Thou hast Thyself neither image nor form in all
that is within or without. Thou didst create heaven and
earth, that which is above and that which is below, with the
celestial and terrestial hosts. All this didst Thou do that the
wotlds might know Thee. ... Yet no one can conceive
Thee in Thy reality ; we confess only that apart from Thee,
whether above or below, there can be no unity, and that
Thou art Lord of all. Each Srpurra possesses its allotted
name, after which angels are also called, but none describes
Thyself, the One alone, Who dost all names inform, to all
impart their force and their reality. Didst Thou withdraw
therefrom, they would be left like bodies devoid of souls.
Thou art wise, yet not with positive wisdom; thou art
intelligent, but not with a definitive intelligence, nor hast
Thou a fixed place; though all these things are attributed to
Thee, so that man may conceive Thine omnipotence and may
be shewn how the universe is guided by means of severity
and mercy. If therefore a right or a left side or if any centre
be named, it is only to exhibit Thy government of the entire
universe by comparison with human actions, but not because
any attribute can be really imputed to Thee corresponding
either to mercy or severity.”

The distin@ion between God and His attributes, and hence
between God and the SEpHiRoTH, which in a manner are His
attributes emanated, is insisted on elsewhere in the Supple-
ments by the help of a striking illustration :

“Woe unto those whose hearts are so hardened, whose
eyes so blinded, that they regard God as the totality of His
attributes ; they are like unto a madman who should describe
the King as the totality of his insignia. Behold a king wears
his insignia only that he may be known through them, and
verily, the King of Kings, the Concealed of all the hidden,
the Cause of all causes, is disguised in a splendid garment so

182 THE HOLY KABBALAH

only that He may be known thereby, and thereby may impart to
the dwellers on this earth a conception of His sacred nature.” 1

This distinction has at first sight an appearance of con-
siderable profundity, but perhaps in the last analysis it is
rather childish than otherwise, for it is obvious that even in
our finite humanity there is a latent and unseen nature behind
all its manifested chara¢teristics. Man is not exhausted by
any description of his attributes, and to insist that this is true
also of God seems scarcely necessary.

From what has been quoted above it will be seen that the
ANCIENT SUPPLEMENTS ate identical in their teachings with
the Zour itself, as they are in resemblance throughout, from
a documentary and literary standpoint ; and some affirm that
the original work had existed from time immemorial at Fez
in Africa. We have no means of checking this statement,
nor is there any authority for supposing with Isaac Myer that
the tracts were brought thither by disciples of Rab Hay, the
Gaon of the Sages of Chirvan on the Caspian Sea.? ‘There is,
on the other hand, no need to say that hostile critics make use
of weak points in the ANCIENT SUPPLEMENTS as if there were
no distinction between these and the Zonar proper.

In the se€tion on the bibliographical content of the Boox
OF SPLENDOUR we have seen what is broadly embraced by the
New ZoHAR—ZOHAR Hapasu—namely, a sequel to the
HippEN COMMENTARY, certain additional Supplements, a
Commentary on the Song of Solomon, and another on the
Book of Lamentations. It was published at Cracow in 1703,
or subsequently to the KappaLa Denupata, by Isaac ben
Abraham of Neustadt. Its history seems entirely unknown.
It may be noted also that later still Isaac ben Moses of Satanow,
though otherwise of some literary repute, is said to have
produced a forged ZoHaR which may have deceived a few
persons, but it was unmasked speedily. It is difficult to
conceive what is meant by the denomination “forged” in
connection with a memorial which has been so described from
the beginning by hostile critics, and I have failed to find
particulars of the work.

1 SUPPLEMENT, 21.

2 Compare the statement which rests on the authority of the SuppLEMENTS, that the
revelation in full of the Zonar is reserved for the end of time. It will be the work of
Moses. ‘The predi€tion is utilised by Karppe (0p. cit., p. 323) to pi€ture Moses de
Leon, the alleged concealed author, as bringing forward himself and his work as a new

prophet bearing a new revelation.
3 PHILOSOPHY OF IBN GEBIROL, p. 47.

BOOK V

THE DOCTRINAL CONTENT OF THE
KABBALAH IN RESPECT OF GOD
AND THE UNIVERSE

HK. 183

ehh t

ay
‘

Fhe CARA IR i
Tae
Ap

gy %, Ry

ra 1 NR RLS OSES CUBS or hon
; i hy : i 5 we of 3 .) War af j a | Prag ett
4 re 5 “ a) - ue ' J y d ty = , cs

. 5 Pe ae ie AR
k Cy 4 yigvae i i ee ¥ ya a ? Re Da ase See
Pt tae eh a aa ey { 7 Pe byt Le ey ae “ a A { LA me mt
&. , “¥ ait a A ol Necks Lie er. =— ; be is

~ BOOK V

THE DOCTRINAL CONTENT OF THE
KABBALAH

I.—THE MAJESTY OF GOD IN KABBALISM

From a study of the documents at large, their age and
general nature, from the names, traditional and otherwise,
connected with these, but leaving over expositors of the
Secret Tradition in its later developments, the research passes
now to the Tradition itself, which is the subject-matter of the
next four Books. ‘The first will be dedicated to the Kabbalistic
idea of God and the evolution of the universe ; the second to
the soul in man and the hypothesis of extra-mundane spiritual
essences; the third to a consideration of the ways of God
with man, from Paradise to the resurrection state; and the
fourth to those deeper questions which are concerned with
the Holy Shekinah and the Mystery of Sex.

A conventional division of Kabbalistic do@tines into
metaphysical and physical has been proposed from time to
time, and it serves for purposes of tabulation; but it must
not be held to signify that there is a clear line of demarcation
in virtue of which the literature branches off into divergent
paths, much less that the Kabbalah offers a natural history of
the universe. Its physics, so far as it can be said to have any,
are transcendental physics. Admitting of no separation
between God, Man and Nature,! the science which explains
them is likewise one, and the best manner of studying it is to
follow its view as to the eternal order. It begins in that
Absolute which it is the purpose of all fundamental wisdom
to make known or communicate to man; it attempts to
exhibit the transition from the Absolute to the related, from
the noumenal to the phenomenal, and to establish a chain of

1 That is to say, the mystic communication is permanent, but the pantheistic doétrine
of identity is quite foreign to the real position of Kabbalism.}

185 02

186, THE HOLY KABBALAH

correspondence between the infinite and the finite. It is,
however, more than a philosophical attempt to bridge over
the gulf which separates the timeless from the temporal ;
that is the side on which it conneé&s with philosophy, as
understood commonly. ‘The intermediaries of the transition
are, moreover, the ladder of ascent by which man returns to
the Divine ; and hence it is more than an explanation of the
univetse : it is, speaking correctly, a sum of religion, and as ic
is founded, no matter how, on those Scriptures which Jew
and Christian have recognised equally as the peculiar revela-
tion of God, the text-book of true religion, we shall see
readily what depth and mystery are sought to be infused by
the Kabbalah into the Bible. We shall realise also that it is
described most adequately as a system of Theosophy, an
application of the wisdom of Israel to the Mystery of God,
beginning, as we might have expected, with a confession that
it is unsearchable, that beyond our highest conceptions of all
that is most divine, as beyond so many veridic illusions, there
is the unknown and unknowable God.!_ Even in the mystical
communication possible between the divine and man, which
is an old doétrine of Jewish Mysticism, long anterior to the
ZOHAR, at least in its present form, the essence escapes our
apprehension. We can indeed know God, but not as He is
in Himself, our knowledge being made possible—ex hypothesi
—through the manifestation of the Deity, and this takes place
after two manners—by the mediation of the Law of Nature,
that is to say, in the physical universe; and by the Law of
Grace, which is the manifestation of God in his relation with
the souls of his elect. It will be seen that both these methods
are sacramental, and the sacramental system is the outward
vesture or form of all Mysticism. For the Kabbalistic Jew
the Law and the Covenant were signs or mysteries capable of a
plurality of interpretations, while the whole outward world
was omen and metaphrasis. It is to be expected therefore
that in the written word we must look for another meaning
than is conveyed by the outward sense. It was also a part of
Jewish mental bias to look for an inward significance which

1 According to the Zorar, it is impossible to know that which there is in this
Principle, for it never Stoops to our ignorance and is above even wisdom. See THE
Lesser Hoty Synop, when treating, for example, of the Caput quod non eft caput . . .,
quod non comprehenditur Sapientia nec intelleflu. KaspaLa DENUDAT& Tomus SECUNDUS,
p. 528. Compare De Pauly’s version in SEpHER HA Zonar, Vol. VI, p. 83.

THE MAJESTY OF GOD IN KABBALISM 187

was opposed to the external, and strikes unfailingly the modern
obsetver as strained and unnatural.

In the eternity which preceded either of the manifestations
that have been mentioned, the Deity was withdrawn into
Himself and subsisted after a manner which transcends
entirely the conception of human faculties.1_ It is said that
the Glory of the Holy One is so sublime and so highly
exalted that it remains eternally secret : no man can penetrate
the deeps of Divine Wisdom. The place of its exaltation is
unknown to men and angels 2; and this is held to be intimated
by the prophet when he said: “ Blessed be the Glory of the
Lord from His place.” The Names which are ascribed to the
Deity in this abyssal condition are not Names which present
either the condition or the Divine Nature: they are con-
ventions of the philosophical hypothesis; they are terms
which serve to indicate that God, prior to manifestation, is
nameless, even as He is beyond reach.* He is the Ancient
One, and the most Ancient of all the Ancients, but this
describes only the eternity of His subsistence ; and He is the
Hidden of all the Hidden Ones, but this concerns only His
concealment. We are led in this manner to the Doétrine of
the Infinite, as it finds expression in the ZoHAR on the Mystery
of AINn Sopu, or the Divine Essence abiding in the simplicity
and undifferentiation of perfeét unity. The Latin equivalent
is fine carens,* that is to say, without end ; but it includes also
by the separate significance of the word AIN, an abstract
conception of nothingness, as a last attempt to register the
ineffable natute of an infinite mode.® Arn SopuH is undetr-

1 The tra&t entitled THe FarrHrut SHEPHERD, which forms part of the Zonar,
says, on the authority of R. Simeon ben Yohai, that before God created the archetypal
idea which underlies the form of the world, He was alone, without form or similitude,
and hence there could be no cognition of Him. See RAatiAH MEHEMNAH, in the Cremona
edition of the Zohar, pt. ii. col. 73. Compare De Pauly’s version, Vol. III, p. 192.
There was, of course, no intelligence to comprehend Him; but the idea behind the
confusion may be that the supposed period of God’s immemorial rest is now beyond
realisation by the human mind. We are unable to think of a state or period in which
the world was not, but God alone. It is to be understood, however, that the essence
of the subje& escapes not only in this attempt to simplify, but also in the Zoharic

position. God in the uttermost transcendence is eternally in this state which is postu-
lated here as prior to creation.

2 Zig Pt. 1; foljito3a\;: I, 18.) |See also Ezek. iti. 12.

3 The interrogative pronoun Who? is ascribed by the Zonar to this state of the
Supreme. Earlier Mysticism speaks of God being alone with his Name, 7.e., the
DivinE TETRAGRAM, which, according to Maimonides, preceded the whole creation.

4 Apparatus in Librum Sohar pars prima, KABBALA DENUDATA, Vol. i. p. 81.

5 Zoharic teaching affirms this point specifically. We have just seen, according to
the FarrHrut SHEPHERD, that prior to the creation of the world, God was alone,
formless and resembling nothing. It is added that in this state it is forbidden to

188 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Stood, moreover, as the limitless mystery of Divine Thought,
the centre of all and the secret of all secrets.1. The pregnant
references to this state of Deity are comparatively few in the
ZOHAR,” and we have seen that it is unknown to the Book oF
ForMATION which preceded it. The first developments are
in commentaries on that work and in the School of Isaac the
Blind.? 7
According to the Boox or CONCEALMENT, His dwelling is
the place which is not a place, or more literally, /ocus qui non eff.
We are here on familiar ground, with many echoes of the past
about us, and it may seem even for a moment that the ZoHAR
is translating pseudo-Dionysius into its own terms of sym-
bolism.4 The Non-Ens dwelling in the Non Est is a meta-
physical subtlety which seeks, by successively stripping off
every attribute pertaining to manifest existence, to attain some
idea of unmanifest, unconditioned, abstract being. It is the
Tract ON MysticaL THEOLOGY in another form of language,
but after all varied slightly, and behind this little book of the
supposed Areopagite lies all the field of Neoplatonic specula-
tion. But after the Zonar there came its commentatots,
with power to methodise and materialise all that came into
their hands, and among them is R. Moses of Cordova,>5 who
affirms that the Cause of Causes is called Arn Sor because
His excellence is without bound, and there is nothing which
can comprehend Him. ‘This is mete repetition ; but it must

represent Him by any image, even by His Holy Name, or by any letter or any point.—
ZOHAR, ii., 42b, Mantua.

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 21a; De Pauly, I, 129. Lrser Occutrarionts, sea Myfteriz, c. i.
§ 5. KasBaLa DEeNuDATA, vol. ti. p. 348. Compare, however, De Pauly’s rendering,
vol. iv. p. 137.

2 They are pregnant, however, because of TsurE, being the Supernal part of the
soul.

3 It is important to establish this point because of confusions created on the subje&
by several writers. In those portions of the ZoHaR which were translated into Latin
by Rosenroth he has added interlinear commentary which gives a false impression
as to the recurrence of the do@rine throughout the text. Franck (LA KasBatez,
Pp. 173-176) introduces the term Ar Sopu in the course of a Zoharic excerpt which
is by no means dire& translation. Lastly, Mathers (THE KappaLaH UNVEILED, 1887),
who failed to render even Rosenroth’s Latin corre&ly, produces the latter’s annotations
with additions of his own and increases the confusion further.

4 The antecedents of Zoharic doétrine in past theosophies are of necessity outside
my whole proposition, except where occasion offers a brief intimation from sources
ready to the hand. There are obvious limits to a Study of this kind. Such an under-
taking, moreover, would demand qualifications to which I make no claim, and it is
somewhat late on my part to serve another apprenticeship. Special proficiency is not
required, of course, to recognise in how many quarters the great vistas open.

5 ParpDES RimMONIM, 7.¢., Paradise of Pomegranates, Tra& iii. c. i. Moses of
Cordova belonged to the mote modern school of Kabbalists, and his treatise is
exegetical, not authoritative in Kabbalism.

THE MAJESTY OF GOD IN KABBALISM 189

be admitted that later Kabbalism has occasional developments
of consequence respecting AIN SorpH. It was located above
KeTHER in the Sephirotic Tree, and this first SEpHIRA—sphere
ot numeration—was regarded as the Throne of Ineffable
Deity. - It is added that Arn Sopy dwells in the hiddenness
thereof.t

It will be seen that the Kabbalistic conception is one which
is familiar to later forms of speculative philosophy under the
name of the Absolute, a term, in the last analysis, which is not
wanting in similar intelle€tual difficulties, or, rather, sym-
bolises our intellectual recognition of that which exceeds our
intelligence. In this Absolute resides the essence or potenti-
ality of all; it is not accurate to say that it is the Subsistent
Principle which underlies the objective state termed existence,
because existence is a condition of the finite and the created,
though there is a true and real sense in which God is held to
encompass and indwell the whole visible world.4 Arn SopH |
is the subsistent state of Deity itself,° whence it follows
that there is from the Kabbalistic standpoint a manifested
State of the Divine Nature, and this is certainly not the visible
world. How this manifestation occurs will be indicated in
the next section.

It will be obvious that all ordinary notions of a personal
God are transcended by this Noz-Ens or Non-Ego of the
Kabbalists. It is absolutely simple, unity without any
multiplication, above all number, above Wisdom, which, as
we shall see, is, however, one of its first emanations. It is
also without sex, and it is therefore, strictly speaking, in-
accurate to make use of the masculine pronouns in reference
thereto. According to Moses of Cordova, the angels are

1 See KasBaLta DENUDATA: Apparatus in Librum Sohar, Pars Prima, p. 81.

2 See, however, Dr. Noah Porter: THe Human INrELLEcT, London, 1868, who
argues that in its proper definition the Absolute becomes knowable. Our idea of
the Absolute belongs, nevertheless, to that region of our consciousness which Herbert
Spencer terms indefinite and escaping formulation.

3 Heene Wronski, whose mathematical transcendentalism was once at least of high
authority with French students of Kabbalism, affirms that the reality of the Absolute
is the first principle of reason, and in the absence thereof every assertion made by
reason would be valueless. On this principle, as on an indispensable condition, he
establishes “‘ absolute philosophy” in his work entitled ArpoprcT1QuE.

4 According to the Zouar, God is immanent in all that has been created or emanated,
and yet is transcendent to all.

5 It has been described absurdly by S. L. Macgregor Mathers as “ negative exist-
ence.” See THE KasBaLAH UNVEILED, which embodies a translation of three Zoharic
texts from the Latin of Rosenroth, as already noted. So far back as 1867 Herbert
Spencer established clearly in his Frrsr Princrpzes that “ the Unconditioned must be
represented as positive and not negative.”

190 THE HOLY KABBALAH

neither simple nor without multiplication in comparison with
it. The book entitled Farrnrut SHEPHERD! says: “ Woe
unto him who makes God to be like unto any mode or
attribute whatever, even if it be one of His own; but woe
Still more if he make Him like unto the sons of men, whose
elements are earthly, and so are consumed and perish! There
can be no conception attained of Him, except in so far as He
manifests Himself when exercising dominion by and through
some attribute. Abstracted from this there can be no
attribute, conception or ideal of Him. He is comparable only
to the sea, filling some great reservoir, as, for example, its
bed in the earth, wherein it fashions for itself a certain con-
cavity, so that thereby we may begin to compute the dimen-
sions of the sea itself.”’

To sum up now on the whole subject, the Zouar testifies
(1) that God is essentially without form,? but in His manifesta-
tion He is seen or discerned under different aspects, according
to a scale of degrees, which will be unfolded hereafter in a
Study of the Paths of Wisdom. (2) That the most secret of
all Mysteries is that which is called Nothing,® being the Most
Holy Ancient, from whom the Light flows forth.4 This
notwithstanding, it is affirmed (3) that in the essence of the
Infinite there are neither intentions nor lights, nor brightness,®
and the explanation is that although every light emanates
therefrom, they are not in that state of clear shining which
would enable man to grasp the nature of the Infinite: it is a
Supreme Will. (4) That, again this fact notwithstanding, the
holocaust, which has for its object an union effected with the
Holy of Holies, ascends to A1N Soprn, because all perfeGtion

1 Quoted in BrerH Exon, or the Housz oF tHE Gops, Désertatio i. c. i. See
KasppaLa DENuUDATA, vol. ii.; Parts Tertiea Trattatus i., t.e., Pneumatica Kabbalistica,
p. 187. But see De Pauly’s translation, Vol. III, p. 193. It is much shorter and
affirms that the forms under which God manifests are merely subjective.

2 Z., Pt. I, 275a; Ul, 644. The text derives its authority in the usual amazing
manner from the SONG oF SOLOMON, Vii. 11, 12: “ Come, my beloved, let us go forth
into the field; let us lodge in the villages. Let us get up early to the vineyards ; let
us see if the vine flourish.” ‘This is contrasted with a Talmudic story concerning the
son of Zoma, one of the four persons who penetrated into the Mysterious Garden ;
but he remained on the hither side of the vineyard, which is taken to mean that he did
not enter the Paths of Supreme Wisdom.

3 Tb., 64b; III, 283. It is founded on Ex. xvii. 7: “‘ They tempted the Lord,
saying, Is the Lord among us, or not ? ”—which is supposed to contain a distin&tion
between the Ancient and Jehovah, contrary of course to the unity of God, whether
manifest or unmanifest.

4 Ib., 43b; II, 194.

5 Tb., Pt. Uy230a'5 TV, 267.

THE MAJESTY OF GOD IN KABBALISM IgI

must tend to fusion with the Mysterious Unknown,! which is
the Object of all desires, though in Arn Sopn there are no
desires, even while they subsist only by reason thereof.
(5) That Arn Sopx is symbolised by the letter ALEPH.” It
seems to follow that later Kabbalism was well within the
measutes of the symbolism when it posited Arn SopH as a
Hidden Light above Kerner, at the head of the Sephirotic
Tree. ;

Il.—THE TEN SEPHIROTH

Having postulated the existence of the Absolute and the
Unconditioned, the next concern of the Kabbalah is the mode
of the manifestation of that withdrawn and inconceivable
natute. Having attained its ultimate and fundamental con-
ception of the Deity by the process of elimination to which
reference has been made already, it was inevitable that the
attribution of absolute reality to that which had been stripped
of all realism should have produced as a result something
which was outside intellectual comprehension, the fact
notwithstanding that its methodical and elaborated antithesis
of anthropomorphism was as much a convention of the human
mind as that which it sought to replace. The intellectual
difficulty became a ground for exaltation of the conception
at the expense of the human mind by which it had been
devised so laboriously.2 Now, the Jew was confronted by
at least two problems which called for the exercise of his
further ingenuity as regards the /atens Deitas of Arn Sopx.
He had to account for the bond of connection between this
abyss of the Godhead and the visible universe, having man
for its mouthpiece; but so far this is only the common
problem of all philosophy which begins and ends in the un-
conditioned. He had further a problem peculiar to his own
inheritance and election, and this was to establish another
bond of connection between the absolute transcendency of
Arn Soprw, apart from all limitation, outside all human
measurement, isolated from all relationship, and the anthropo-
morphic Lord of Israel, whose stature and measurements were
not beyond the ingenuity of rabbinical calculations, and most

A174, Pt tl) 26b 2°, 94. 75.

tess 25783) Vo. 597

3 The Zowar says that it is called Arn, not on the ground of nonentity, but, it
may be inferred, because that which is wholly outside our knowledge is for us as
nothingness.

192 THE HOLY KABBALAH

of whose membets are mentioned with sufficient fullness and
frequency in the sacred writings for any devout student to
possess a clear notion of the “‘ body of God,” and to describe
it, did he please, and we have seen already that he did, with
considerable minuteness, in a book dedicated to the question.
For the moment, however, we are concerned only with the
first problem, namely, the difficulty of conceiving why the
abyssal state in which God unmanifest had been sufficient
from eternity to Himself should at any period have had
another mode superadded to it. I say superadded by con-
vention based on the notion of sufficiency; it is not an
adequate term to make use of in such a relation, to which no
terminology is suitable. ‘The won ens dwelling in the non est
is like the cipher of the decimal system1; of itself it is
nothing, and its extension produces nothing; so also it is
not possible to add to it, but it gives power to all numbers.
The solution offered by Kabbalism does not differ materially
from that which has been given by other philosophies and
teligions which postulate a First Cause. It is, in a word, the
movement of the Divine Will. “In this,” says Myer, “ the
Unknown Absolute, above all number, manifested itself
through an emanation in which it was immanent, yet as to
which it was transcendental.” ? We are dealing here with a
system of speculative philosophy, and, traditional or other-
wise, it must not be supposed to be free from the disabilities
of other philosophies or from the crudities of its particular
period. The Kabbalistic hypothesis supposes an eternity
antecedent to this initial operation of the Divine Will, and in
the latent subsistence of Arn SopH it would appear an in-
consequenice to assume that there was either will? or conscious-
ness possible.t Both, however, by a common and almost
inevitable anachronism, ate attributed to Arn Sopu, despite
the warning of the Zonar already quoted: “ Woe unto him
who shall compare Him with any mode or attribute, even
with one of his own.” ® ‘The later commentators on the

2 PurLosopHy OF IsN GEBIROL, p. 266.

3 The Zonar, however, says expressly that “in the beginning was the will of the
King.”

Pass Exceeding comprehension it must be regarded as the son-Ego rather than the
Ego. All that is in man depends from it, but it transcends consciousness ; it transcends
what we conceive by the terms personal and individual.” Myer: PxiLosopHy oF
Inn GEBIROL.

5 Z., Pt. II, RAAtIAH MEHEMNA, col. 73, Cremona edition. See also Mantua edition,
Pro lh en:

: Sephiva

Ss s - "i "Summa toronk , a ie
2 SYSTEMA -SEPHIROTICVM
XX DIVINO

i

ee

a es
Prmcipesase [ ¢
weritate ovigt i og

i Fi

imem ducentes|

tee

: sericordia ont
[gimem ducentes |

Atcsbcoesaeye

tenn

ee Te

THE SEPHIROTIC SYSTEM, ACCORDING TO LATER
KABBALISM

Facing page 192

THE TEN SEPHIROTH 193

ZOHAR either do not recognise or are content to ignore the
difficulty. ‘Thus a treatise entitled THr Royat VALLEY, by
Rabbi Naphthali Hirtz, says: “ Blessed be His Holy Name!
Before anything was, He, by His simple will, proposed to
Himself to fashion the worlds. For the King is not given
without the people, as it is written in Proverbs xiv. 28: ‘In
the multitude of the people is the King’s honour.’ And it is
the nature of the supreme Goodness to dispense good. Now,
if the world were not, on whom could He bestow it?” 1
The exegetical literature, treatises like Gates oF LIGHT,
indicate that the exertion of Divine Will in the production of
the emanations is a path so secret that no creature, not even
Moses himself, can understand it.2 At the same time, that
will is beneplacitum, or good pleasure, and beneplacitum termino
carens, without end or limit. Hence the motive by which the
universe is accounted for is the same motive which com-
municates the mercy of God to them that fear Him, after
which it will be unnecessary to say that optimism is a funda-
mental characteristic of Kabbalism, or that, according to the
ZOHAR, this is, in some respects, the best of all possible
worlds, as affirmed by Robert Southey.

Seeing then that the transition of the Divine Being from
the state of the won ens was accomplished, like the conversion
of man from the condition of a merely material creature, by
an operation of the mystery of will, we have next to ascertain
something of the nature of such process, and we are brought
back in this manner to the word which I have had occasion to
cite already, namely, emanation.? The Kabbalah repudiates
implicitly the axiom ex mzbilo nihil fit, for the non ens dwelling in

1 KaBBALA DENUDATA, tom. ii., partis prime tratlatus secundus, § 1, De Mundo Infinito
primo, p. 1§2.
P 2 KaBBALA DENUDATA, tom. i., Apparatus in Librum Sohar pars prima, pp. 691,
92.

3 In which the idea of pantheism is almost always, but not, I think, of necessity,
involved. There is, of course, a certain sense in which that notion is not escaped
even on the hypothesis of creation, and further there is a higher sense of pantheism
from which no true Theosophist could wish to escape. But as tegards Jewish
Mysticism, while there is always some doubt in what way it made use of the term
emanation, there seems to me no question that its system does not answer to what is
commonly understood by pantheism, though it has often a pantheistic aspe@. God
was all for the Kabbalist, as he is for the Christian, and yet no Theosophical Jew, any
more than the orthodox Christian theologian, would admit that God was one with the
material world. When, therefore, Solomon Munk: DicrioNNAIRE DE LA CON-
VERSATION, says that the Kabbalah issued from the amalgamation of oriental pantheism
with the religion of the Hebrews, we can accept this only by supposing that the
pantheism in question had suffered a peculiar alteration.

194 THE HOLY KABBALAH

the unconditioned state, wherein is neither time nor place,? is
the fullness which contains the all. Ex plenitudine tsta omnia fiunt.
In this Divine Plenitude pre-existing eternally was the sub-
Stance of all the worlds, which therefore came forth from God.
Hence the Kabbalistic system is broadly one of emanation.?
When it is said that emanation is not its only foundation, for
it rests also on the identity of thought and existence,’ or other-
wise the doctrine of Divine Immanence, there is much in the
literature which combines to enforce this view, after due
allowance has been made for the confusion and obscurity of
the originals. But that which is more to our purpose and
rests on Zoharic authority is that the idea of emanation
belongs more especially to the Divine Nature unfolding from
within Itself, that it may be revealed ultimately to and within
an external universe, the relation of which to God is not that
of a symbolic globe held in a king’s hand, nor even a veil or a
vesture, but rather a cosmic sacrament, of which He is the
inwatd power and He the abiding grace. For the rest, at the
moment it is enough to say that after the World of Emanation
there is a Kabbalistic World of Creation.

The first consequence which followed the operation of
Divine Will was the manifestation or unfolding of the Divine
Attributes—in a word, the transition of Deity from the latent
to the active mode, so far as any of these terms can be used in
respect of a state where there was no universe in which mani-
festation could take place, no created intelligence to cognise
it, and no objective for action. As in the postulated state of
latency, God was above all number, so in the subsequent
activity He is held to have produced numbers, and the decade—
in the sense of the SEpHIROTH—is brought forth from Arn
SopH. We must not be so crude as to suppose that mere
arithmetical numerals are here intended: it was powers,
forces, vitalities, virtues, attributes, principles, which were
thus produced or unfolded, and these are the ten SEPHIROTH,

1 “ The No-Thing is not, however, an absolute negative or void, but some-Thing
unknown to man.” Myer: PHrLosopHy oF [spn GEBIROL, p. 378. It should be added
that Nahmanides was one of the few Kabbalists who maintained creation ex nihilo.

2 In Book III, § 2, we have seen that this statement is subject to a reservation regarding
the most ancient document of the Kabbalah, and it should be noted in this conneétion
that at least one capable writer has rejected the general view, and does not regard the
Kabbalah as a syStem of emanation. See Joel: PHmosopHiE RELIGIEUSE DU ZOHAR.

3 Isaac Myer: PxHrtosopHy oF [spn Gesiro1, p. 266.

4 That is to say, the terms emanation, creation, formation and such like, signifying
distin@ ideas, are used somewhat indiscriminately by the Kabbalists.

THE TEN SEPHIROTH 195

which are tabulated as follows with their curious conven-
tional titles ; 1

I, sn> = Keruer, the Supreme Crown.
Il. npon = CuHoxman, Wisdom.
III. nas = Bray, Intelligence or Understanding.
IV. son = CHesep, Mercy, otherwise 217) = GEDULAH,
Magnificence or Benignity and Greatness.
V. m2) = GEBURAH, Severity, Judgment, Awe, Power.
VI. nnspn = TIPHERETH, Beauty.
VII. ny3 = Nerzacu, Victory.
VUI. 115 = Hop, Glory.
IX. 110° = YeEsop, the Foundation.
X. i299 = Marxuts, the Kingdom.

The conjunction of CaoxMAu and Binau produced a quasi-
emanation called Daatu, knowledge, but it is not one of the
SEPHIROTH.”

To these ten emanations or numerations various profound
meanings are attached ; indeed, the study of the Kabbalistic
system of the SEPHIROTH * constitutes a research by itself, and
one which is full of complexity ; but we are not engaged here
in its exhaustive presentation or with more than its elementary
symbolism.? We are concerned, in a word, not with what it
may have been designed to conceal for the benefit of a pre-
sumed circle of initiates, which is the claim implied by the
ZOHAR, but with what it was intended to explain, and this
explanation may offer some warrant for concluding that
outside it there is only a wider province of fantasy.

Beyond a certain point it is not allowable to suppose a
double meaning in any literature; the theory of many-sided
allegories does credit chiefly to the ingenuity of the critic,

1 Azriel, in his work on the Song of Solomon, terms them “‘ measures and organs,”
and in the Zonwar itself they appear as divine emanated essences.

2 A term derived from a word signifying “‘ to number,” though late Kabbalists
offer other etymologies, as, for example, the Greek cgaipa. The singular is SzepHIRA.
The emanations are regarded as vessels, receptacles of the Divine Power and attributes
as they developed, and there is no doubt that these vessels were usually considered
spherical. See especially the treatise BerH ExLonim concerning KerrHer, in which
the idea of circularity is involved. The author of the Gates or Licur refers the term
to the Hebrew word signifying sapphire, which stone, on account of its brightness
and purity, is a symbol of the SrepHirorH. Other rabbinical authorities have
supported this view. See Jellinek: BrrrrAGE zur GESCHICHTE DER KABBALA.
Leipsic, 1851.

3 See Appendix I.

196 THE HOLY KABBALAH

and of its general value we have had a typical instance in
Talmudic exegesis.1

The initial purpose of the Sephirotic system was un-
doubtedly to provide intermediaries between the Deity and
the material world. It is that of all do&ttines of emanation.
But while we set aside conje€tures for which no warrant is
produced we must be careful not to fall into the opposite
error. To bridge the gulf between the finite and the infinite,
and to effect a correspondence by stages between the incon-
ceivable purity of the Divine Nature and the uncleanness
attributed to matter by all the old Theosophies, was not the
sole purpose of the Sephirotic system, a point which is some-
times missed by the merely academical critic.

It is affirmed by hostile writers, for example, by Dr. Gins-
burg,” that as the earliest Kabbalistic literature does not
contain the do&rine of Arn Sopu, so also it wants that of the
SEPHIROTH ; but it is above challenge that the germ of the
Sephirotic scheme must be sought in SEpHER YErzrRAH. The
ten numerations of that treatise are, in fat, SEPHIROTH, and
it seems quite impossible to maintain a contrary opinion.®

II.—THE DOCTRINE OF THE FOUR WORLDS

The Sephirotic system was concerned first of all, as I have
indicated, with the mystery of Divine Evolution. From that
unsearchable condition which is above consciousness, by a
mysterious operation, the Uncreated Will moved forthward,
and certain manifestations or relations of Deity became
established. By a kind of flowing forth or emanation, there
were produced Four Worlds in succession,* and as it happens
that the developments of these are chiefly in later Kabbalism,

1 After an exhaustive Study of modern esoteric literature, I doubt much whether
even French occultism of the late nineteenth century really concerned itself with the
discovery of a concealed sense in the Kabbalah. It is a sufficient exercise of patience
to codify and harmonise the outward sense, which is assuredly not removed. ‘Take,
for example, the conception of Ams Sori: even the fantasiast Eliphas Lévi does not
look for any notion more withdrawn than that of Divine Latency therein. The inner
meaning of the Kabbalah is its proper and single sense, which has been confused by an
obscurity of style and subjeét.

2 Mote especially in his article, s.r. Kabbalah, contributed to the third edition of
Kitto’s CycLop#p1A OF BrsiicaL LITERATURE.

8 William Postel, the first translator of SEPHER YETZIRAH, indubitably regarded the
Ten Numerations as identical with the SzpHirorH of mote evolved Kabbalism.

4 The earliest description of these Worlds is found in a TREATISE ON EMANATION—
MassEket ArziLutH—which belongs to the twelfth century and has been described
as the earliest literary produ& of the Speculative Kabbalah.

THE FOUR WORLDS 197

being very elaborate therein, it is desirable to see exactly what
is said upon the subjeé in the fountain text. The references
ate in summary form as follows: (1) There is a Sephirotic
degtee entitled Maikurn, and it seems clear that to what
world soever this name is allocated, one SEPHIRA alone is
signified, being that which is tenth in numeration and is
actually called Matxutu,! signifying the Kingdom. (2) It
is testified that Scripture makes use of the three expressions
“to create, to form and to make ” 2 in allusion to the three
wotlds which are below the World of Emanation.? It
follows that the Four Worlds are those of Emanation, Crea-
tion, Formation and Manifestation, otherwise Action, the
material universe, or as it is called by Rosenroth Mundus
Faétionsx.* ‘The Hebrew equivalents are ArziLuTH, BrRIAH,
YETZIRAH and AsstaH. (3) The union of God and His
Shekinah takes place as we shall see in ArzituTu,° the World
of Emanation, where there is no separateness; the angels of
Brian form the body of Shekinah,® when she descends
therein, and this World is called the region of the Throne. It
is said that the princes of Israel, the wise, the intelligent, the
zealous, heroes, men of truth, prophets, just men and kings
ate all from the World of Emanation, but there are others
from the World of Creation, whereof Shekinah is the sacrifice.
This is not to be taken literally, as there can be no call to say.
(4) There is also a reference to three Worlds of Divine
Hiddenness.’ ‘The first can be neither seen nor discerned
and is known only to Him Who is concealed therein; I
suppose that this alludes to Arn SopH. The second is
attached to the first and the Holy One is manifested therein :
it is presumably ArzizurtH. ‘The third is the beginning of
division, signifying created intelligence, and is the world of

1 Z., Pt. I, 18a; I, 112. MatxutH is supposed to be designated by the word
* bow,” when it is said: ‘‘ I do set my bow in the cloud.”—Gen. ix. 13.

2 Ib., Part I, fol. 179b; II, 298.

® I conceive that this must be understood in a dual sense. Divinity in the world of
ArzituTH is God in the Hiddenness and yet moving towards manifestation, because
this Deific mode not only can be but is conceived, however remotely, by the human
mind. Beyond is the unknowable mode of Arn Sopn, from which it emanates. But
there is a State of emanation in ArziLutu, although it is a World of Unity, for God and
His Shekinah in Kether are brought forth, so to speak, into CaokMAH and BinAH as
vneaer and Arma, the Father in Supernal Wisdom and the Mother in Supernal Under-
Standing.

4 KapBALA DENUDATA : Apparatus, Pars Prima, p. 12.

Bi Zu, Pt. Ll, fold took so NaagGs

6 Ib, ‘The Angel Mzeratron is called the vestute of Shekinah.

Pye. fol. 59a 53 V; 411,432:

- 198 THE HOLY KABBALAH

the superior angels: it is therefore Brian, according to later
Kabbalism.

For the Sons of the Do@rine the Four Worlds of their
conception were understood not only in their first or universal
sense but in a manner particular to themselves, from which
point of view the worlds in their synthesis are symbolised, in
later Kabbalism, by the Hebrew word p17» = Pardes,
signifying a Garden and understood as that of Paradise, the
‘consonants of which—as we have seen—ate the initial letters
of four words signifying (2) the literal sense of the word
of Scripture = nyiwe; (4) the symbolical sense = 104;
(c) the allegorical sense = wint; and.(@) the mystical or
Kabbalistic sense = tip.) It was a question of corre-
spondence and went to show in the eloquent manner of
symbolism that the Divine Word is truly Divine in all its
Stages and that its study is an ascent from the world of mani-
fested things to that of Deity. So also it was out of the literal
sense of Scripture that the doctors derived their exalted notion
of things unseen and of Him Who reigns not alone in the
world to come but in this which we see with our eyes, Who
fills them both and by Whom the soul is replenished on all the
planes of being.

Now it follows from the Kabbalism of every period that
these Four Worlds are subdivided into those ten spheres
which are called SEpHtROTH or Numerations, and have been
tabulated already in brief. Their further consideration will
follow, but we are concerned at the moment with the way in
which these spheres are allocated to the Worlds of Kabbalism.
Now the Zowar speaks of three Supernal Degrees or Divine
Hypostases, and the first of them 1s. called KerHer.? It is
said also that when the world of manifest things was in the
state of Touu, God revealed Himself therein under the
Hypostasis SHappar ; when it had proceeded to the condition
called Bonu He manifested as the Hypostasis TsaBAotH ; but
when the darkness had disappeared from the face of things
He appeared as Elohim. Hereto appertain the words:
** And the spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters,” 3
understood as.a reference to the sweet and harmonious voice

1 KABBALA DENUDATA: Apparatus Pars Prima, p. 12. The Sons of the Do@&rine
made up the worlds in their minds, and—for us at Jeast—this is the sense of their
claim that the story of creation is the history of the chosen people.

3 Zi. Pt G) tol, azb'3\1)'739%

* Gen, 42,

THE FOUR WORLDS 199

heard by Elijah and termed: “ The Voice of the Lord is upon
the waters.” 1 This signifies the completion of the Sacred
Name Jehovah. Hence in the vision of Elijah it is said that
“the Lord (Jehovah) was not in the earthquake”: it was
SHADDAI. Hewas not inthe fire: this was TsABBAOTH; but
He was in the still small voice, being that of the Spirit of
Elohim, and the Name of Jehovah was complete.? It is said
also that this Name is composed of four letters, the relation
of which to the Divine Essence is like that of the limbs to the
human body 4; but this notwithstanding, the Hypostases are
three only. Now, as Kerner is the first it is to be inferred
that CHOKMAH and BINAH constitute the other two, and the
world of ArzituTH or Emanation will be completed in these.
They are symbolised by the three bars of the Hebrew letter
Suin,® which also exhibits their essential unity. We may
regard the point as determined by one further statement,
accotding to which the First Light is symbolised by the
Crown and the Second Light or Hypostasis forms the second
SEPHIRA. ‘These lights appeared to Abraham,® and the
third, which was seen by Jacob,’ proceeds from the two first.®

It has been necessary to enter at some length into this
involved subject because later Kabbalism has complicated
almost inextricably the Worlds of the Zonar.® I proceed
now to establish the following Sephirotic division as that
which represents the mind of the original text. To the First
World of ArziturH ate referred KETHER, CHOKMAH and
BINAH ; to the Second World of Brrau are allocated CHESED,
GEBURAH and TIPHERETH ; YETZIRAH comprises NETZACH,
Hop and Yrsop; while AsstauH is MALKuTH, as I have said
earlier in this study. The ten SEPHIROTH are contained
therefore within the Four Worlds.

According to the Zonar, the SEPHIROTH are comparable
to chariots for the Degrees of the Divine Essence, and the
wotd Degrees, which is used very frequently in ‘the text,
illustrates after a simple manner the idea of gradations in the
nature of the Presence, as the spheres of manifestation proceed
further from the Head of the Tree. The Supernal World
contains the highest Degrees of which the human mind can

1 Ps. xxix. 3. 5.1.5 Pt. TEL, 19443, V, 1503.
: eee base se ie : Gen. Xviii. 1.
ol. 16a 97- en. Xxxii. 31.
4 Ib, 8 Z4i Pt. folk 21a)-b i L140, 137%

® See APPENDIX II,
H.E. P

200 THE HOLY KABBALAH

conceive by the intelleGtion of faith, and KerHEer, CHOKMAH,
Binaw form an unity therein. It will be seen from previous
extracts that Brian is the World of created intelligence,
though it would seem that its content flows over into YET-
zIRAH. ‘The Third and the Fourth World are not described,
though they are implied obviously, in the Zowar, and their
names indicate that as in Brian God created the forms of
consciousness to which He could manifest Himself by Divine
Modes, so in YErzirAH He produced the pattern, idea or
atchetype of the visible and material cosmos, teferred to
AsstAH. ‘The names allocated to the ten SEPHIROTH are on
their surface conventional and arbitrary—at least in certain
cases. We can recognise that MALKUTH is appropriate in
respect of the visible world, and that KerHeEr is the crown or
summit of the entire Sephirotic system. Mercy and severity
will be found to explain the reason why they are ascribed to
certain SEPHIROTH when arranged as what is called the Tree
of Life in Kabbalism. YEsop has a deep significance which
we shall come to understand later; but the names of NETZACH
and Hop = Victory and Glory are without interpretation,
even in later Kabbalism, which can be said to be of moment.
The source of Zoharic information respe&ting the ten
SEPHIROTH or Numberings is—as we have seen—in the
SEPHER YETZIRAH ot Book oF Formation. The sequence,
however, seems arbitrary to the last degree, and I have found
nothing in the ZoHar which can be held to connect there-
with. Itshould be observed that the names allocated to the
SEPHIROTH ate wanting in the early text, nor do I pretend to
say when or in what work they are met with for the first time.
Something will depend on the date to which we assign the
ZOHAR itself: if it is earlier than the earliest commentaries
on the SEPHER YETzIRAH—for example, that of Ha Levi—
it may have been—for all that I know to the contrary—the
authority for the ten names. We have met with a story
which refers their invention to Isaac the Blind, and this shall
Stand at its value, because it has been said also that the ZoHAR
itself was either his produét or that of his school at Posquiétres.
It should be remembered further that the SEPHIROTH are

1 The little text is mentioned twice in the Zonar. See Pt. II, fol. 187b, where it
is quoted to prove that the SzpHrroTH are not eleven but ten, and Ib., fol. 289a; IV,
315, where its authorship is referred to the patriarch Abraham, in accordance with
Tradition. ‘The English reader may consult the translation of Knut Stenring, s.v.
Tue Book oF FoRMATION ot SEPHER YETZIRAH, 1923.

THE FOUR WORLDS 201

represented as good and evil equally, which seems reasonable
in respect of that world of dimensions wherein both principles
manifest. The ZoHar has developments of its own on this
subje&t and something must be said of them later. The
diagrams which represent the SEPHIROTH in the form of the
Tree of Life are unknown to THE Book oF FORMATION, nor
can they be deduced therefrom. Here also the origin is
doubtful, but a certain form is met with in the ZoHar, or
perhaps it would be more accurate to say that it is implied
continually therein. Passing to this work, I will give the
indications suggesting the arrangement mentioned. ‘There is
firstly the Middle Pillar and there are the Right and Left sides,
cotresponding to Mercy and Severity. CHOKMAH is on the
tight of KerHeR and Binau on the left.1 CHEsED is the
right and Gepurau the left arm. Nrrzacu and Hop are the
right and left hips, for the Tree in this case has become a human
figute. The tight side is life and the left is death.2 The
Pillars of Mercy and Severity are thus completed, according
to the scheme of the Tree. The Middle Pillar is one of the
Hypostases in the Divine Essence, and it is called the Perfect
Pillar. The light of the right side, which is active, enters
therein, and so does the passive light of the left. The Word
— issues from this union, an allusion to the Divine Son, Who,
according to another text, is begotten by Appa and Arma, the
Holy Father and the Holy Mother in the World of the Super-
nals. Elohim forms the Middle Pillar and therein are the
union and fecundity of the waters above and below, meaning
Sephirotic degrees.4 Children, life and the means of existence
come therefrom °: it is “‘ mine eldest son, Israel.” ® It is to
be understood therefore that Israel is in the likeness of the
Highest. The four rivers of Eden seem to be CHESED,
Gepurau, Nerzacu and Hop.’ The Middle Pillar is the
Tree of Life, and perhaps the two other Pillars are together
the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil—but it is all specu-
lation and all is high convention, as well as a jumble of notions.
There is no evil when these are united with the Central Pillar,
which is called the seventh day,® the Sabbath and the tent of
peace.? The Central Pillar is Shekinah. It is the peace in

1. Z..5/Pt, fol. 26b 3) 1,164, 1 G5. 5 [b., fol. 24a; I, 149.
* Jb. Pil, Pol. sab 3.43 140: ‘Exodus iv, 22.

3 Ib., Pt. L, fol. 16b; I, 101. Wi faz Ole. 282 5.-b, 105.
4 Ib, fol. x7a 3, J; 703. 8 Ib., fol. 47b; I, 276.

®* Ib., fol..48a ; I, 279.

P 2

202 THE HOLY KABBALAH

particular between the light of the right side and that which in
another place is called the darkness of the left. The Tarmup
and the MisHNAH come from the Middle Pillar.2 There are
many alternative allocations, as for example, when the Middle
Pillar is called the Son of Yop but also the Hr, which is
BinAH.? The Middle Pillar is otherwise the Master of the
House.* It is said of the right arm that it draws the im-
mensity of space in love, like the arm of the male drawing the
female.® The law of faith is on the right side.6 The left arm
draws the immensity of space in rigour.’ ‘The serpent con-
stitutes the left arm and thence emanates the impure spirit. It
is the side of water and the side of sadness. ‘These engender
darkness and the way of escape is by the harmony which can
be instituted between the Mercy or Grace of CHESED and the
Severity of GrpurAH.® The left side is without pity in the
State of separation,® yet she who is Matrona according to
another allocation is the left side, as well as the Middle Pillar :
she is the latter apparently because she is the ground and
State of union, and it is known that she is the Mother of
Mercy.1® A day willcome when the left side shall disappear
and good will obtain only.14 It is said further that the Mercy
and Severity of CHEsED and GrEBuRAH are united in Tir-
HERETH.!* The Holy Degrees are declared to emanate from
the holy side and the impure degrees from the impure side.1%
It follows that the ZoHar bears out the thesis of SEPHER
YETZIRAH when this work describes the SEPHIROTH as the
abyss of good and evil. It gives no explanation which will
help us to understand this, though it speaks in one place of
the union between good and evil 14 as a secret or mystery and
indicates in another that there is a sense in which the left side
is onthe way of attainment. It was possibly the difficulties
atising from the allocation of evil to spheres in which God
was ptesent everywhere 1° that led some later Kabbalists to

*°Z., £01.:254a.5 Il, $99. OW. (Ol. 2550.5 AL, Gols

3 Tb., Pt. Il, fol. 115b ; III, 445. We shall see that from one point of view this is
supported by an independent text, one of the most ancient imbedded in the Zour ;
but the text-general presents a different aspe&.

“Ub STIL, 2728 SVE SF, 10 Jb., fol. 250a ; II; 584.

§ Ib., Pt. I, fol. 64a ;/I, 375. <1 Ip., Pt. Il, folNzooman Vas!
1p, Pt N fol. $245 ir, $42. 2910.) Pe. Til fol. 233); (Vv, see.

7 Jb.; Pt. 1; fol. 64a; I, 375. 18 7b.S Lo aoshis Tiaco-

8 Jb., Pt. Il, fol. 103b; I, 21. 14° Jb., Pt. U; fol. ‘aa 5° TVy 266;

® Jb., fol. 198b; Tl, 387. 18 Ib.,60b; IV, 268 ; and 114b; II, 443.

16 The mystery deepens when it is affirmed that there is no other God comprised
outside the ten SEPHIROTH, and that Shekinah, Who is a Divine Hypostasis, dwells in
each SzepuirA.—Z.,, Pt. III, fol. rogb; V, 276.

THE FOUR WORLDS 203

suppose that the ten SEPHIROTH were repeated in each of the
four worlds; but this development does not really deal with
the point at issue, and as there is no further light thereon we
must be content to pass it over, remembering that, almost in
the words of the text, the Middle Pillar draws the right and
left sides, the good and the evil together, in which union evil
dissolves as such and the good obtains entirely under the
name of Benignity—which is that of the Middle Pillar. It
is a question of transmutation.

The conventional Tree of Life conne&s the SEPHIROTH
together by means of lines which are called paths, being
twenty-two in number, and these in connection with the
SEPHIROTH themselves constitute the thirty-two paths of the
SEPHER YETZIRAH. As there are several forms of the Tree
accotding to different commentators, I have reproduced
those which are regarded as of authority. They do not seem
to represent the mind of the Zowar, and I have therefore
added one which seems to be more in consonance, especially
regatding the Supernals.1 Serving only to reconcile several
Statements to which no vital consequence attaches, I am of
opinion that the accepted forms are generally speaking pre-
fetable. We must remember that late Kabbalism arose to
account for the difficulties, omissions and discrepancies which
prevail in the fountain text, and though I have had occasion
to make various strictures, these are without prejudice to the
fact that the work as a whole was done with sincerity and zeal,
whence it is helpful in respedt of occasional conciliation and
from time to time as reasonable extension and inference.
There is one point, however, in which I believe that my
diagram is more within the logic of the symbolism than are
its alternatives in the printed text-books. It is a question of
the right and the left sides, which are always presented from
the observer’s standpoint, so that CHOKMAH is on the right
of him when he is looking at the figure, while GeBurAH is on
his left. On the contrary, what seems intended obviously in
the ZowHar is right and left in the order of procession on the
Tree, or on the path of descent into manifestation. ‘The dis-
tinétion may seem unimportant at first sight, but it has enabled
me to rectify the position of the consonants belonging to the
Sacred Name in respect of certain SEPHIROTH, so that it is

.2 The reference is to the plate which forms the Frontispiece.

. 204 THE HOLY KABBALAH

justified by a particular allocation, as well as by the reason of
things.

I will now summarise the correspondences of the ten
SEPHIROTH in succession. MKErHER is the crown or head of
the Tree. It is the first Hypostasis but not apparently the
First Cause of Cause of causes.2, The meaning seems to be
that the First Cause contains within itself two Hypostases,
understood as male and female.* Jehovah manifests with
‘Shekinah in the degree of KerHEr.* In contradiction hereto
it is said that the first.and third SEPHIROTH are united as male
and female.® It is said also that KerHER and CHOKMAH ate
never in separation. ‘This is true, however, of the whole
Supernal Triad, or First Three S—pHIROTH.

As regards CHOKMAH, it is by the sublime and impenetrable
mystery of this SEpHira that the world exists ’ and all other
mysteries depend therefrom.® It is the second SrpHira or
Hypostasis and is called Man °: otherwise, it is ABBA, the
Father. The house is built by Cooxman ; }° it was concealed
like. the Supreme Point before the creation,! and it is called
Yop.!2 It is Eternal Wisdom,!® and therein is concealed the
Eternal Thought, which is the Great Voice,!4 meaning the
Still small voice which is the House of Eternal Wisdom. In
contradiction to these indications it is said to be the Sister,
meaning thereby Shekinah. It is also Daughter and Mother.
It is the beginning of all.

BrnaH is intelligence or understanding,’ and its number is
said to be fifty because of the Gates of Understanding.1® It
is the concealed world,!® and motherhood is its image.?° It
is also penitence,*! the degree of the moon,** the mystery of
the Supreme World,”4 and the Community of Israel.24 The
letter HE is allocated to BINAH, and it is then described as the
only Daughter ** or alternatively AIMA, the Mother. It is.

A Diy Pte Ly cl Bes 14 Ih., fol.. sob ;, 1,293,

3 Tb: fol. 22b 2 1,138. #0 Te; fol. 11 1b, 1124; Tis, ¥1-

2 Tb., fol. 22b; I, 139. 16 [b., APPENDICES III, SECRETS OF THE
4 Ib., Pt. Ill, fol. 242b, 243a; V, 581. Law; I, 732. .

WTI, LOL, S105 dy 00. Fri; fol. Tia st 420,

& [b., Pt. Il, fol. rzb; III, 51. 18 Ib., fol. 106a; I, 34.

7 Ib., fol. 3b; I, 18. 29 1h. tatista. Leen.

Po, tl. 7 3. 1,58: 30 Ib., fol, 158a'; Ui; 220,

TD. folv sib (0 131. 21 Jb., APPENDICES II, SECRETS OF THE
10 Jh,, fol. 29a; I, 183. Law ; II, 662.

11 Ib., fol. 30a; I, 188. 22°70. Pt Mt, tol.rib } 11," st.

12 Th., fol. 31a; I, 194. 33 Ib,, fol.43b.; IIL-194,

18 [b., fol. 31b; I, 195. 24 Tb., fol. 85a; IL, 349. |

#5 '10., Pt, Tl, 6a, 27b ; | V, 76.

THE FOUR WORLDS 205

the Throne of Mercy and the celestial fire which descends, as
MaxxutH is the Throne of Justice and the fire which goes up.*
It is the sweetness of God ? and constitutes the mystery of
the Levirate.2 The House is built by Caoxman and is
established by Binan.*

CHESED is the male side® and the patriarch Abraham is
referred thereto.6 The Divine Name Jehovah is attributed to
Cusp ” and it is even called in one place the first degree of
the Divine Essence. It is merit, as demerit is GEBURAH.® It
is the place of revelations ° and it is the twin sister who came
into the world with Vau,!° but this allocation is contrary to
the general trend of the symbolism. The Vau is the son of
Yop and HE; it unites to the Hr, symbolising CHoKMAH,
and itself represents Brnan.14 What, however, it represents
really is the six lower SEPHIROTH.

GEBURAH ot PACHAD is sometimes used in a good and
sometimes in an evil sense 12; the world is based thereon—
in the sense that severity is indispensable—but it could not
subsist without Mercy. It is said also to be the repentance
of God ! and it seems even to connect with Samael. It
was by GesuraAH that Jerusalem was destroyed."

TIPHERETH is beauty ; 4? it is the heart of the Sephirotic
Tree and is called Heaven.1® It is also glory.19 Nrrzacu
and Hop come from the celestial river.2® Nerzacn is in
correspondence with the Covenant,?4 according to one
attribution. NerrzacH and Hop represent also the two
Messiahs 2? mentioned by the Tatmup. In the macrocosmic
human figure YEsop is the organ of generation, and it receives

1 Z., Pt. III, fol. 34a (FarrHFuL SHEPHERD); V, 89.

2 Ib., fol. 161b; V, 416.

3 Ib., fol. 215b (FAITHFUL SHEPHERD) ; V. 547.

Si be. 1s f0l.i 5 2b,;) 1, 203;

5 Ib., fol. 94a; II, 282.

© 1P.. 101.1320 5 11,123.

7 Ib., fol. 173b, 174a; II, 282.

* Ib., Pt. 8, Appendices I, fol. 265a (SECRETS OF THE Law); II, 626.

® Jb., Pt. II, fol. r19b; I, 460.

SOI Pcl il. tol. 776 3 Vs 280, 211.

11 Jb. fol. 247b (FAITHFUL SHEPHERD); V, 585. It must be remembered that the
FarrHFut SHEPHERD is a text imbedded in the Zonar and—as here—is not always in
harmony therewith, while it contradi€ts also other imbedded texts.

" % Hi: I, a a + 50,228. 18. Ib. fol.. 31a; I, 19$«

., fol. 180b; II, ; 19) Jy;,. Pt. If, fol: qob:;, TYE, ‘
14 Ib,, fol, Gas Il, ae 20 -[b., Pt. Hy, fol. 68a es 86.
2% Ib., fol. 36a ;.T, 223. 21, Ib., Pt. I, fol. 24b; I, 152.

' 8 Ib,, fol. t51a; II, 196. 22 Tb., Pt. I, fol. 243a, 243b (FAITHFUL
aPCdE,, LOL, 3440 ty ZIT. SHEPHERD); V, 581. ef)

206 THE HOLY KABBALAH

light from the supreme SEpHIROTH.! It is said to issue from
the right and left sides—meaning that it draws from both—
as MALKUTH issues from YEsopD. Matkutu is conneéted
with Israel, regarded as Son of the King.? It is the rainbow,
ot at least the arch thereof.? It is also the lower firmament.4

The following points may be drawn together in conclusion :
All Supreme Degrees and all SzpHrrorH are one, and God
embraces all the SepHtroTH. The law is CHEsEp. BmNan is
repentance,° and MALKUTH is confession. God and the ten
crowns ate one ®—a notable statement, which substitutes a
dodtrine of identity for that of mere emanation. To ascend
to the Paradise above, it is necessary that souls should cleave
to the Middle Pillar.’ There is an unity of the ten SEPHIROTH,
and ® there is joy in the world when order reigns among
them.® Finally, the Holy One manifests in the SEPHIROTH
for those who comprehend them.1°

The doétrine concerning the three Divine Hypostases is
obviously that of a Trinity in Kabbalism, and the heads of
this subject must be considered in the next place in view of
developments towards the end of my study, not to speak of
the Christian implicits suggested by the simple expression.
There. are three that bear testimony in ArziLuTH, and these
three are one.. They are described after many manners, as,
for example, when it is said that they are three lights, which
form a single light.44 But the chief symbolism is drawn from
the Sacred Name, being Yop, Hz, Vau, Hr, = Jehovah.
Yop is the Father, Hz is the Mother and Vau the begotten
Son.12 At the moment we will not affirm that these ineffable

Bi Zi, Ete dy SO) 30D Tro 3:

2 Ib., Pt. III, fol. 223a (FarrHruLt SHEPHERD) ; V, 563.

519. Pte tL fou reas 1, 112.

4 Ib., fol. 33b; I, 209.

5 Ib., fol. 286a (SECRETS OF THE Law) ; I, 662.

60. Pt, TU tol, oa 3. Ve G0.

7 Ib., Pt. TI) fol. arra’:' TV; 2109.

8 Ib., fol. 67a; III, 298. See also Pt. III, fol. 28a; V, 80.

® Jb., Pt. Il, fol. 78b ; III, 329.

10 Jb., Pt. I, fol. 241a; I, 554.

a2) Ib., I, fol. 17b; I, 103.

12 An important analogous intimation occurs eatly in the ZoHAr. The Scriptural
reference is ‘‘ Let there be light”? (Gen. i. 3), which in Hebrew is wx ‘mn, the first
word being the verb in the imperative. It should be, remembered here that Hebrew
is read from left to right. This word, Yoo, Hz, Yop, is regarded as a symbol of the
three Divine Hypostases occurring at the opening of Genesis and designed to shew
that the three are one. The first Yop is the Heavenly Father, the Hz is the Divine
Mother, while the third Hypostasis is indicated by the second Yop and proceeds from

the first two.—Z., I, 16b ; I, 99, 100.

THE FOUR WORLDS 207

personalities are referable to KerHER, CHOKMAH and BINAH
—as might seem probable—because later considerations will
intervene to correct this view. Let us remember only that
the Zoharic Trinity constitutes a Divine Family in the World
of Heaven. Like the Christian Trinity, the letters which are
their symbols are called one on account of the unity of God.

We ate now in a position to advance a step further. Yop
and Hx are the Supreme Mystery,! for ever impenettable.?
On the Yop are all things based,? and it is never in separation
from the Hz.4 As the prototypical male principle, it has
man for another symbol.® He is the female principle,® and
it has woman therefore as its emblem; it signifies many
mysteries,’ and its true name is Shekinah. Because the letter
HE is duplicated in the Sacred Name it is said to terminate
both the first and second parts thereof.§ The world was
created by the He,® or alternatively by the Yop and HE in
the perfection of their concurrence.1° The Vau is the “ free
Son,” 14 and it is this which diffuses all blessings.12. The Yop
unites with the Hz, as male with female, and gives birth to
the Vau as Son.8 The three dwell together in unity.44 Vau
is the Eternal World.

So far in respe& of three Divine Hypostases ; but there is
the He final which completes the Sacred Name, and this is
calledthe Daughter.® It is said of this Daughter 1” that the
He came down to earth.!® The first He is liberty above and

Poi Pent tol. -1§0a sl, 225. ® Ib., fol. 298a; VI, 125.

a de, tol 232b 9 10) 51-7. 20) Thi) Ptr Ty 22b:3 TTL 73.
24h. Pt. Ubi tol toby) V, 31. 1 Eccles.) x, 17%

“1h: tolc 270 5 Vi, $4. 4475 Ete) 32402 U1, OB.

5 Ib., fol. 34a; V, 89. 18°7b) Pel) 123b 3 TL, 472:
$.db. 14 Ib,, Pt. II, 92a; V, 245.
7 Ib., Pt. Il, fol. r80b; IV, 152. Wr 1D. tl. 252D)) Vi, $01.

8 Jb., Pt. III, 89b; V, 240. tO et. fol egos TFA,

17 Tb., fol. 354b; Il, 600. There is another symbolism as follows: When the letter
Yop is written at length in Hebrew it is composed of Yop, Vau and DaLerH. Yop
is the Father of all, Vau—as seen already—is the begotten Son, and DALETH is the
Daughter—that is, the Daughter of Matrona. The imagery is confused on the surface,
as this Daughter is said to proceed from the Father and the Son, whereas it is certain
in the sense of things and is plain from the text elsewhere that the Hz primal of the
Sacred Name produces in union with the Yop not only the Son, being Vau, but his
Sister, who is also her Daughter and in the natural succession of the Divine Name is
therefore the HE final.—Ib., Pt. II], rob; V, 31. It is not of much consequence to
the purpose in view whether it is possible or not to harmonise distin&t symbolisms
on this subje&: it is sufficient that they help to formulate the Kabbalistic notion of
the Trinity in the Supernal World. As a fact, however, the Daughter proceeds from
the Son in precisely the same sense as Eve proceeded from Adam, for the Daughter
otiginally abode within the Son, in a state of ineffable union, and was brought forth
afterwards from Him.

18 Th., Pt. I, 354b; I, 600.

208 THE HOLY KABBALAH

the second is liberty below.1 The High Priest depends from
the Hr which is above but the ordinary priest from that Hz
which is below.? It follows that two letters of the Name
belong to the male principle—namely, Yop and Vau—two
also to the female, being Hz primal and final. The engender-
ing of a whole world depends on these two principles.? The
second Hx will rise from the earth, meaning that it will be
united with the Divine Hypostases in the world of transcen-
dence.4 The Vau will be united to the He,® and when the
Vau is thus attached, as a bridegroom to the Bride, there will
be union everywhere—between the Yop and the HE above,
between the Vau and the He final.6

The abodes of these symbolic personalities is our next
question. Now, it is said that the Yop is CHoxman, while
the HE is Binan,’ this being repeated in another place, where
it is added that they sustain the Vau, but without intimating
the location of this letter or of the second Hr which is repre-
sented as in union therewith.§ For information on these
points we must transfer our attention from the ZoHAR proper
to some of the additional materials with which I have dealt
already in the previous book.

The tracts in question are THE ASSEMBLY OF THE SANC-
TUARY, THE SECRET Boox—otherwise, Book oF CONCEAL-
MENT—THE GREAT AND Hoty AsseMBLY and THE LEssER
Hoty AssEmMBiy.? We can pass over the first of these, as
Rosenroth was guided wisely in omitting it; it seems contra-
dictory and inextricable in its symbolism and is speaking
roughly a sort of summary appendix to much that has pre-
ceded in a better and fuller form. THE SEcREr Boox com-
prises a discourse concerning The White Head,?° the Ancient,

1 Zug Pt. ly, fol.. 4838/1. A Ve 109; § Ib., fol. 119a; II, 76.

2.Ep.,' Pt, LIL 8b... V."240. © Id.,, Pt. IM, 267b.; VL, 23.

& Ib, Pt. I; fol. a28a 7: IV, 250, 7 Ib., Pt. Tl, fol..123b; III, 478. .
4 Tb., Pt. I, 116b; II, 66. 8 Ib., Pt. Ill, fol. 153b; V, 394.

® THE ASSEMBLY OF THE SANCTUARY is inserted towards the end of Part II, § 6,
and occupies folios 122b to. 123b. THe Secret Book, called sometimes in translation
Tue Book oF ConcEALED Mysrery, follows Part II, § 7, and occupies folios 176b to
179a. THE GREAT AND Hoty AssEMBLy is placed at the end of THE COMMENTARY ON»
Numosers, § I, Z., Pt. III, folios 127b to 145a. THe Lrrrte Hory Assemsty follows
Tue COMMENTARY ON DEUTERONOMY, § 10, Z., Pt. III, folios 287b to 296b.

10 Z,, Pt. Il, fol. 128a; V, 334. The White Head is also without beginning and
without end before its reign was established and the Crown, that is, KETHER, was
assumed. The reference would seem therefore to Arn-SopH Aour, which pours
down into KETHER, and we shall see that the White Head is called Army. At this
point the Zouar and the mystical theology of pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite join
hands. It should be understood, however, that the White Head is not Arn-Sopn, but
the first procession therefrom.

THE FOUR WORLDS 209

ot the Great Countenance. The same subject is continued in
THE GREAT AND Hoty AssemBLy, and he who is symbolised
therein is the Master with the white mantle and resplendent
visage ; he is called also Holy of Holies.

Connected by means of a white thread 1 or bond of union
with the Great Countenance, there is that which is called the
Lesser Countenance, Little Form or Figure, which presents,
however, a complete aspect of humanity and is extended
through many symbolical worlds. The distin@tion between
the two heads is that in this case the hair and beard are black.?
The Lesser Countenance has eyelids, because it has periods of
sleep, a complete visage in manifestation, because severity is
one of its attributes; and a distin@ive name, being Lord,
whereas the Great Countenance is called Arn,* or Nothing,
because it draws or is emanated from A1n Soprn, though it is
located certainly in KrrHer. These points notwithstanding,
it is laid down (1) that the Lesser Countenance emanates from
the Greater,> (2) that the Greater metamorphoses into the
Lesser,® (3) that the latter is aCtually the former, as if seen
through.a curtain,‘ and more specifically that they are one and
the same.® The body of this Sacred Form is described fully
and is that of the male perfec in all its members.

Of this Form there is a counterpart of perfe€&t womanhood,
and these two were primordially side by side, till the Ancient
of Days put the Lesser Form to sleep and detached the female
principle, ® whose name is Matrona, Bride, Daughter, Betrothed
and Twin-Sister—for the Zoharic allegories institute strange
marriages in the world above. The objed& of separation was
that the Bride might come to the Bridegroom and, in the
eteat sacrament of matrimonial union, that they might
become one body and as if one flesh.4® All is mercy in this

t Z., fol:.128b 3 V, 335, 336.

2 Jb., Pt. Ill, fol. 132a; V, 346. The authorities are THE SonG or SoLomoNn, v. IL:
“* His locks are bushy, and black as a raven,” and Dan. vii. 9: “‘ The hair of his head
like the pure wool,” or as the Zowar gives it, “‘ whitest and purest wool.” It is ta-be
RL however, that when severity operates the hair of the White Head becomes

ck,

3 Ib., fol. 136b ;, V, 359.

4 Ib., fol. 129%, V, 337.

5 Ib., fol. 131b3; V, 345..

© Ib.,, fol, 23,524 3; V, 354.

70 Ibs, £01. £280. 7 Vs 34%:

8 Jb., Pt. I, fol. 141a ; V, 365. See also THe Lrrriz Hoy Assems ty, #b., fol. 288a ;
VI, 82, and fol. 292a; VI, 99. |

® Jb., Pt. Il, fol. r42b; V, 368.

10 Jb,, fol. 143b; V, 369.

210 THE HOLY KABBALAH

union ; } it constitutes the Law of the Sabbath ; and it is this
that God blessed and sanctified. The sacred organ of inter-
coutse is called YEsop ? on the male side, and it has access to
the concealed and mysterious region on the female side which
is called Z1on.* It is a holy place and all the holiness of the
male enters therein.®

The reference to YEsop shews that the Lesser Form is
extended through the Lower SzpHrrotH. It is the Begotten
Son or Vau,® whose place we have been seeking on the Tree ;
and as its name is DaatH * or Knowledge, being a semi-
SEPHIRA Which represents the junction point of the influences
flowing from CHokMAH and Binau, the inference is that the
Lesser Countenance or Head is located there, while the feet
are established on MaLxkurty, as later Kabbalism affirms. We
have learned also where the Daughter and Bride dwells, being
side by side or face to face in union with her Celestial Spouse.
But she is the Hk final of the Divine Name and we shall learn
at a later Stage that her present dwelling is in MALKUTH.

We are now in a position to establish the Do&trine con-
cerning the Tree with as much clearness as is possible con-
sidering the subje&t. According to the symbolism of the
Ipras, the Great Countenance is in ATZILUTH and it encom-
passes therefore the three Supreme SEPHIROTH, which are
KeTHER, CHOKMAH and Brnan. It is located, as I have said,
in KerHEr, where it is at once male and female, these principles
being brought forth subsequently, the male principle into
CHOoxKMAH and the female into Binan, who produced between
them Daatu, which is the Divine Son. We have therefore in
the Sephirotic Tree: (1) The first Divine Manifestation pro-
ceeding from Arn-Sorn and so interpenetrated thereby that
it bears sometimes the same name. In so far as it is postulated
in Keruer, it is not differentiated into male and female, but
these ate implied, and according to other testimony the
Shekinah is certainly there. (2) But when the Sacred Ancient
wished to establish all things, He constituted male and female

1 Z., fol. 143a; V, 368.

2 It is said that Matrona dwells in the Supernal San&tuary—that is to say, in BInAH—
and in the Jerusalem which is manifested on earth—that is to say, in MaLkuTH; and
it is because she is united to the male in the unseen world that she is joined in manifesta-
tion with man. ‘This is defined as the quintessence of all faith, for all faith is comprised
in this mystery.—Z., Pt. III, fol. 143b; V, 370.

3 Ib., fol. 296a; VI, 118. 5 Ib., fol. 296b ; VI, 119.

4 Ib., fol. 290b ; VI, 92. ea 6 Ib., fol. 291a; VI, 94.

?

THE FOUR WORLDS 211

in His supreme region,! namely, the Father and Mother,
owing to Whom all is made male and female. These are the
second Divine manifestation in CHokmMAH and Brinau.?
(3) The third is in the lower SEpHrirotTH, as Son and Daughter,
Brother and Sister, King and Queen. According to later
Kabbalism, the Great Countenance is MAcroprosopus, the
soul of the greater world, while the Lesser Countenance or
Figure is Mrcroprosoprus, the soul of the lesser world, and
ApAM Proropuastes, his Bride being the archetypal Eve.
They form together the abitaculum of all created intelligences,
the hierarchies of consciousness ; and we can therefore sum
up the whole subje& by saying that THE Book or Mystery
and the Ipras are a great allegory of man and his analogues
coming forth from God. Male and female they were implied
and conceived in Him; male and female He manifested
Himself on account of them; male and female they came
forth in Him and from Him; male and female they abide
above and below; male and female they return in fine to
Him, as we shall see fully and clearly in its proper place.

In conclusion, as to the Four Worlds, the consideration of
_ which and of the Ten SepHtroty belongs essentially to the
Majesty of God in Kabbalism, I must add that there is a
Zohatic Theosophy of the Word, but how the term should
be referred in respect of the Divine Hypostases is not easy to
determine. The name of Elohim is allocated thereto,? but
this is a title of Shekinah. Again, it is said that the Word was
manifested in the Sanctuary, because it was indispensable to
the existence of the latter on earth that the Divine should be
present therein ;4 but that which we know to have appeared
between the Kerubim on the Mercy Seat was the Presence in
the form of Shekinah. In the paraphrase of Onkelos the
term Merrmmra was substituted for Jehovah, Who is thus
identified with the Word; but in the Zour it is held that
the Word in Scripture is designated under the term BERE-
SHITH, because in order to fulfil the work of creation this
term was engraven “‘ under the form of a turnstile,” > repre-
senting the six great celestial dire€tions, being the four
cardinal points, together with height and depth. The Word
seems also to be specified under the name Sabbath; ® it had

© Z., Pt. I; fol 2goais"Vy.g0: 4 Ib., fol. 74a; I, 439.
2 Ib., Pt. Ii, fol. 290b ; VI, 92. Si by tol; 3b.>) J, 18.
*1D.,, Pt. 45 folv 16b $1; 99: OMe bto 1: £Ols, 32a): L. 199,

212 THE HOLY KABBALAH

birth by the union of the active and the passive light, the
latter being called darkness, and it discovers to us the Supreme
Mysteries.

The Supreme Principle and the Word are distinguished as
two, though at the root they harmonise as one.! It is said:
“While the King sitteth at his table, my spikenard sendeth
forth the smell thereof.” It is to be understood here that the
King means the Supreme Principle while the spikenard
signifies the Word, Who is king below and has formed the
wotld below on the model of the world above. Thought
and the Word are held to be of the same essence; seen
through the medium of one region, this essence appears as
Thought, but through another as the Word. The dodrine
of Israel is placed between two voices,? one of which con-
stitutes the Supreme Mystery, but the other is more accessible.
The first is the Great Voice, “ the voice out of the midst of
the darkness.” It is interior, imperceptible, without cessation
of interruption. Thence cometh the Secret Doétrine, which
—in its manifestation—is called the Voice of Jacob, and this
voice is heard. The Voice of Jacob is placed between the
interior, imperceptible voice and that Word which resounds
abroad and which I should identify with the Written Law.
The Great Voice is the House of Eternal Wisdom and is
female, as a house should always be. The Word is the House
of the Voice of Jacob, that being apparently the literal and
this the esoteric dodtrine. When the Song of Solomon
testifies that the voice of the turtle is heard in our land, the
reference is to that voice which emanates from Him Who is
the inwatd essence of all.2 It is the Voice that utters the
Word—as for example, the Word which ordained circum-
cision for Abraham, so that he might be made perfect. The
Voice is added or joined to the Word—meaning that what is
conceived in thought passes into expression, whether of
speech or action—and this is held to be indicated by the
appearance of the Lord to Abraham, when that tent before
' the door of which the patriarch was seated signified the
Supreme World, on the threshold of which he rested, to
receive the light thereof.*

ne ence meee

1 Z., fol.74a 3; ib., 439.

2 Jb. ftolssop ; 4, 292, 29 3.

3 Ib., fol..97b;'98a+ TGs.

4 Further intimations on the Word in Kabbalism will be found in the fifth seCtion
of the present Book.

THE FOUR WORLDS 213

In dismissing this section, the reader is asked to observe
that it offers, thus early in our subject, some vital intimations
on the root-matter of the Secret Doétrine, as this has been
enshrined in the Secret Tradition of Israel. As proposed
mote than once already, it is that which is embodied in the
distinction, relation and union of male and female; but—as
there should be no need to say—such root-matter is a meta-
physical foundation and far removed from anything that
belongs in public ways of life to the idea of sex.

IV.—THE PATHS OF WISDOM AND GATES OF
UNDERSTANDING

In the Latin colle&tion of Pistorius the marrow of philo-
sophical Kabbalism is presented in the form of certain terse
propositions or dogmas, according to one of which the ways
of eternity are thirty-two—V7e@ eternitati sunt triginta duo.”
These ate the Paths of the S—epHER YETZIRAH, namely, the ten
SEPHIROTH and the letters of the Hebrew alphabet. The
dod&rine concerning them is a dependency of this fundamental
treatise, but of much more recent date, and without even an
imputed authorship. It tabulates the special graces and
illuminations which may be communicated to man from above
by means of these channels, and is not unimportant, because
it shews that Kabbelism, even on its most speculative and
formal side, had a practical application to the human mind,
and was not a purely arbitrary system. It is outside the
province of this work to offer translations to the student, but
as in the present instance it would be difficult to summarise
the tabulation more briefly, I shall give it 27 extenso, premising
only that it has been translated more than once into English,
and is indeed available in a number of European languages,

I. The first path is called the Admirable Intelligence,® the
Supreme Crown. It is the light which imparts understanding

1 They are extremely interesting theses of Picus de Mirandola, which will be found
in Book VII.

2 They are referred to the S—pHrRAH CHOKMAH afd ate termed channels, at once
hidden and revealed. In the Farrurut SHEPHERD, CHoKMAH is called the highest
of all paths, embracing and including all that are beneath it, and the influx of all is
derived therefrom. The same treatise conneéts with CHoxman the words in
Job xxviii. 7: “ The bird hath not known the path, neither hath the eye of the vulture
beheld it.”—KassaLa DeNupaTA, Apparatus, i. 601, 602.

3 Stenting gives Mystical Intelligence, following the French version of Comtesse
Calomira de Cimata.

214 THE HOLY KABBALAH

of the beginning which is without beginning, and this also is
the First Splendour. No created being can attain to its
essence.

II. ‘The second path is called the Illuminating Intelligence.
It is the Crown of Creation and the splendour of the Supreme
Unity, to which it is most in proximity. It is exalted above
evety head and is distinguished by Kabbalists as the Second
Splendour. | |

III. The third path is called the San@tifying Intelligence
and is the foundation of Primordial Wisdom, termed the
Creation of Faith. Its roots are jox. It is the mother of
Faith, which indeed emanates therefrom.

IV. The fourth path is called the Arresting or Receiving 1
Intelligence because it arises like a boundary to receive the
emanations of the higher intelligences which are sent down
to it. Herefrom all spiritual virtues emanate by the way of
subtlety, which itself emanates from the Supreme Crown.?

V. The fifth path is called the Radical Intelligence, because
it is more akin than any other to the Supreme Unity and
emanates from the depths of the Primordial Wisdom.®

VI. The sixth Path is called the Intelligence of Mediating
Influence, because the flux of the emanations is multiplied
therein. It communicates this affluence to those blessed men
who are united with it.4

VII. The seventh path is called the Hidden Intelligence,
because it pours out a brilliant splendour on all intellectual
virtues which are beheld with the eyes of the spirit and by the
ecstasy of faith.

VIII. The eighth path is called the Perfect and Absolute
Intelligence. ‘The preparation of principles emanates there-
from.’ ‘The roots to which it adheres are in the depths of
the Sphere Magnificence, from the very substance of which it
emanates.

IX. The ninth path is called the Purified Intelligence. It

1 Receptacular is an awkward variant which has been used by more than one
translator.

2 WeStcott, following the text of Rittangelius, makes this rendering: “‘ The fourth
path is named Measuring, Cohesive, or Receptacular; and is so-called because it
contains all the holy powers, and from it emanate all the spiritual virtues with the most
exalted essences; they emanate one from the other by the power of the primordial
emanation,” #.e., KETHER.

3 Or, “‘ the primordial depths of CHoKMAH.”—Westcott, SEPHER YETZIRAH, p. 28.

4 According to Comtesse de Cimara, the sixth path is the Intelligence of Separated
Emanation.

5 According to Westcott “ it is the means of the primordial.”—Ibid., p. 29.

THE PATHS OF WISDOM 215

purifies the numerations, prevents and stays the fracture of
their images,1 for it establishes their unity, to preserve them
from destrution and division by their union with itself.”

X. The tenth path is called the Resplendent Intelligence,
because it is exalted above every head and has its seat in
BinaH: it enlightens the fire of all lights and emanates the
power of the principle of forms.®

XI. The eleventh path is called the Fiery Intelligence. It
is the veil placed before the dispositions and order of the
superior and inferior causes. Whosoever possesses this path
is in the enjoyment of great dignity ; to possess it is to be face
to face with the Cause of Causes.

XII. The twelfth path is called the Intelligence of Light,’
because it is the image of magnificence. It 1s said to be the
source of vision in those who behold apparitions.

XIII. The thirteenth path is called the Inductive Intelli-
gence of Unity. It is the substance of glory, and it manifests
truth to every spirit. ®

XIV. The fourteenth path is called the Iuminating Intelli-
gence.’ It is the institutor of arcana, the foundation of
holiness.

XV. The fifteenth path is called the Constituting Intelli-
gence, because it constitutes creation in the darkness of the
wotld.® According to the philosophers, it is itself that dark-
ness mentioned by Scripture (Job xxxviii. 9), cloud and the
envelope thereof.

XVI. The sixteenth path is called the Triumphant and
Eternal Intelligence, the delight of glory, the paradise of
pleasure prepared for the just.

XVII. The seventeenth path is called the Disposing Intelli-
gence. It disposes the devout to perseverance and thus
prepares them to receive the Holy Spirit.?

1 Or, “ proves and correéts the designing of their representations.” —Ibid.

* Or, “disposes their unity with which they are combined without diminution or
division.” —Ibid.
yi “* Causes a supply of influence to emanate from the Prince of Countenances.’’—

id.

4 WeStcott gives an entirely different version: “It is the essence of that curtain
which is placed close to the order of the disposition, and this is a special dignity given
to it that it may be able to stand before the face of the Cause of Causes.” —Ibid.

5 Or of Transparency, in the French version.

6 “It is the consummation of the truth of individual spiritual things.” —Westcott.

? Otherwise, Luminous Intelligence.—De Cimara.

8 “Tt constitutes the substance of creations in pure darkness.”’—WesStcott, p. 30.

® Stenring terms it ‘‘ the path of Life and Death.”

H.K. Q

216 THE HOLY KABBALAH
XVIII. The eighteenth path is called the Intelligence or

House of Influence,! and thence ate drawn the arcana and the
concealed meanings which repose in the shadow thereof.

XIX. The nineteenth path is called the Intelligence of the
Secret or of all spiritual ativities. The fullness which it
receives derives from the highest benediction and the supreme
glory.

XX. The twentieth path is called the Intelligence of Will.
It prepares all created beings, each individually, for the
demonstration of the existence of the primordial glory.

XXI. The twenty-first path is called the Rewarding Intelli-
gence of those who seek.? It receives the divine influence,
and it influences by its benediétion all existing things.

XXII. The twenty-second path is called the Faithful
Intelligence, because spiritual virtues are deposited and
augment therein, until they pass to those who dwell under
the shadow thereof.?

XXIII. The twenty-third path is called the Stable Intelli-
gence. It is the source of consistency in all the numerations.

XXIV. The twenty-fourth path is called the Imaginative
Intelligence. It is the ground of similarity in the likeness of
beings who are created to its agreement, after its aspects.

XXV. The twenty-fifth path is called the Intelligence of
Temptation or Trial, because it is the first temptation by
which God tests the devout.

XXVI. The twenty-sixth path is called the Renewing
Intelligence, for thereby God—blessed be He !—treneweth
all which is capable of renovation in the creation of the
world.

XXVII. The twenty-seventh path is called the Natural
Intelligence, whereby the nature of everything found in the
otb of the sun is completed and perfected.°

XXVIII. The twenty-eighth path is called the Active
Intelligence, for thence is created the spirit of every creature

1 Westcott adds: “‘ By the greatness of whose abundance the influx of good things
upon created beings is increased.”—Ibid.

2 Westcott gives “ the Conciliating Intelligence,” and De Cimara “ the Intelligence
of Desire.”

3 Westcott’s rendering reads: “ by it spiritual virtues ate increased, and all dwellers
on eatth are metely under its shadow.”—Ibid. The version lacks discernment.

4 “ All the changing things which are renewed by the creation of the world.” —Ibid.,
p- 31. But this seems nonsensical.

5 “ The twenty-seventh path is the Exciting Intelligence, and it is so called because
through it is consummated and perfefted the nature of every existent being under the
otb of the sun, in perfeGtion.”—Ibid. A redundant rendering.

THE PATHS OF WISDOM 217

of the supreme orb, and the activity, that is to say, the motion,
to which they are subject.t

XXIX. The twenty-ninth path is called the Corporeal
Intelligence ; it informs every body which is incorporated
under all orbs, and it is the growth thereof.

XXX. The thirtieth path is called the Colledtive Intelli-
gence, for thence astrologers, by the judgment of the stars
and the heavenly signs, derive their speculations and the
perfection of their science according to the motions of the
Stars.

XXXI. The thirty-first path is called the Perpetual Intelli-
gence. Why is it so called? Because it rules the move-
ment of the sun and the moon according to their constitution
and causes each to gtavitate in its respective orb.”

XXXII. The thirty-second path is called the Assisting
Intelligence, because it directs all the operation of the seven
planets, with their divisions, and concuts therein.

The comparatively modern accent of this tabulation will
occur to the reader, but its quotation was necessary to exhibit
the intellectual profit believed to follow from the study of
Kabbalism, and still more that it was in the last resource the
understanding of man methodised,? embracing, as such, the
entire citcle attributed to human knowledge.* After what
manner the Paths correspond to their various affirmed offices,
how they communicate the powers and graces which abide
therein, and for what treason they bear their distinctive titles,
must temain open questions. The thesis concerning them
constitutes a body of dogma, and is to be taken or left as
such. The Paths are those of the Tree and its SEPHIROTH.

1 This path is omitted both in the text of Rittangelius and in Westcott’s version.

2 According to Hliphas Lévi, this verse contains the secret of the Great Work of
Alchemy. The reason assigned is that path thirty-one corresponds to the Hebrew
letter Sun (Sh), which represents the magic lamp, or the light between the horns of
Baphomet. “ It is the Kabbalistic sign of God or the Astral Light, with its two poles
and equilibrated centre.’ The sun mentioned in the paragraph represents gold, the
moon silver, and the planets correspond to the other metals —La CLEF DEs GRAND
MYysrTErES, p. 234. It is needless to say that the SEPHER YETZIRAH and its develop-
ments have nothing to do with Alchemy. As regards the Great Work and Lévi’s
pretended discovery of its secret, see my annotated translation of his TRANSCENDENTAL
MAGIC, pp. 345-347. |
: 3“ Man w the Kabbalistic balance,’ according to W. B. Greene-—TuHE BLAzInG

TAR, p. §I.

4 However, it fell, as may be expected, into superstitious uses and became a kind of
theosophic divination, based on the first chapter of Genesis, wherein the name Elohim
is mentioned thirty-two times. The consultation of this chapter was accompanied by
ptayers extracted from the divine name in question, and, according to Kircher, by
suitable ceremonies,

Q2

218 THE HOLY KABBALAH

A word must be added concerning a still more arbitrary
Kabbalistic classification, entitled the Firry Ga’res or UNDER-
STANDING. It is referable to Binan, the third SEpurra, and
is an attempt—as developed—to sketch the outlines of
universal science, to embrace, as Eliphas Lévi observes, all
possible departments of knowledge and to represent the whole
encyclopedia. At the present day such fantastic experiments
have something more than a ghostly aspe@. There is, how-
ever, no intention to methodise human science after the
manner of Raymund Lully and his Ars Magna Sciendi. 1 infer
also that, in spite of the exalted themes which are included in
the scheme, it concerns only intellectual knowledge, acquited
by the external way, and thus constitutes a kind of scholastic
introduction to the Paths of Cuoxman or of Wisdom,! by
which the holy men of God may, as Kircher observes, after
long toil, long experience of divine things and long meditation
thereon, penetrate to the concealed centres.2. The principle
of the enumeration must be sought in the symbolism of the
Hebtew word 5> = Kott, which signifies All, and the con-
sonants of which are equivalent to the number fifty.

The Gates of Understanding, considered as an introduction
to the Paths of Wisdom, which diverge, as we have seen,
from CHOKMAH, ate essential ex hypothesi to the higher
knowledge approached by these. It would serve no
purpose to enumerate them all categorically ; they begin with
the first matter, the Hyle or Chaos, proceed through the
vatious elements of ancient science to the theory of composite
substances, thence to organic life and the physical, intelle@tual
and psychic nature of man, afterwards to the heaven of the
planets, that of the fixed stars and the primum mobile, then to
the nine orders of the angelic world, and, finally, to the super-
mundane and archetypal world, that of Ain Sopn, unseen by
mortal eye, transcending human intelligence. It is said that
Moses did not attain to this, the fiftieth, gate, and some stress
seems to be laid on the point, one would think a little super-
fluously, as it is obvious that what is beyond all finite capacity

1 According to Papus, the thirty-two paths are deduCtive like the SepHER YETZIRAH
itself, which starts from the notion of God and proceeds thence to natural phenomena,
while the fifty gates are established on the induttive principle, ascending from Nature
to Deity.—La KABBALE, p. 132.

2 Athanasius Kircher: CEpreus /Ecyrriacus, Rome, 1623, Pars Prima, p. 321.

8 They are called gates, because no one can attain to the paths unless he enters by
these.— Ibid.

THE PATHS OF WISDOM 219

must have been beyond the law-giver of Israel. We shall
meet however with a more particular and indeed curious
explanation at a later stage.

The scheme in full of the Gates of Understanding is late in
Kabbalism ; it is found in the treatise entitled THE GATES OF
Licut,! which is full of references to the mystery of the word
52 = Koz (All). All created things, it explains, have
come out of these gates, so that in a sense their knowledge
connects with the mystery of universal generation, in reference
to which it may be observed that the addition of the feminine
letter H = 5 to the word KL = 50 gives KLH = the Bride
of Microprosorus, the Lesser Countenance, whence follows
the whole mystery of spiritual generation in man, for KLH =
BripE, connects with noji> = KNST = Church, 7.¢., the
Church, Eccresra Israrz, and brings us back to that place
called mystically Zion and Jerusalem, in which the Divine is
communicated to man, as seen in an earlier section. It is by
living gleams of suggestion after this kind that the dull art of
Gematria is lighted up from time to time, or is refreshed and
fructified by the waters of Secret Do&rine. We seem to be
contemplating from a distance some greater subject than an
arid tabulation of sciences, more especially when it lies far
apart from any method of attainment; and it happens that
we shall come later on to the Gates of Understanding in the
light of another Mystery and shall enumerate the intimations
of the ZouHar apart from the formule of later Kabbalism.

V.—THE DOCTRINE OF COSMOLOGY

If the Four Worlds of Kabbalism are held in a very true
sense to correspond with a path in consciousness by which
the mind of the dedicated seeker after Divine things may
pass from the “‘ sacred and beautiful Kingdom ” of the literal
sense or the surface of the Word of God, and through world
on world of experience may attain at last that place or state of
realisation where all meanings are unified in the light of the
Eternal Word, we shall find no difficulty in understanding
those who devised this analogy when they go on to tell us
not only that Dews non pars eft sed totum—as Raymund Lully
expressed it—but that all whatsoever of the realms in which

1 By R. Joseph Gikatilla ben Abraham,

‘220 THE HOLY KABBALAH

He is immanent of is held to have revealed Himself are part
of that law of election in virtue of which those who are drawn
by God ate journeying in Him for ever. So is the spiritual
history of Israel the sole concern of Scripture, from the
moment when Elohim said “Let there be light,” that the
minds of the chosen might be enlightened. The same
motive manifests, as a fact, through all the story of creation,
not was there other reason needed for the Kabbalist to account
for God passing from the withdrawn state of Ain-SopH to
the manifestatian which begins in KerHEr and teaches its
limit in MALKUTH. :

The thesis of creation is as follows, but I should explain
that I am drawing from many quarters of Zoharic texts and
simplifying at every point, so that no remediable difficulties
may be left in respect of expression. We are not concerned
at the moment with the respective share in the work taken by
any or all of the three Divine Hypostases. It will be more
intelligible at this point to speak of the cosmos in a general
sense, as created by the Holy One, which is indeed a recurring
affirmation of the Zouar. When therefore the Holy One,
Who is the Mystery of all mysteries, willed to manifest Him-
self, He constituted in the first place a point of light, which
became the Divine Thought 1—that is to say, in its application
to the purpose then in view. Within this point he designed
and engraved all things, but especially that which is termed
the Sacred and Mysterious Lamp, being an image representing
the Most Holy Mystery.2. About the nature of this mystery,
situated—if one may so speak—at the heart of all the mani-
fested world, we may derive some light of speculation at a
later Stage. Here indeed is one of those allusions through
which a vista opens into the unwritten Secret Doctrine. It
follows in the meantime that the universe was created by and
from thought.2 The authority for this revelation is the
prophet Elijah, and the development is an excursus on the

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 2a; I, 8. See #., Tl, 98a; TI, 395, whete it is said that the words
“‘Lotd my God” (Ps. civ, 1) are the foundation of the mystery concerning the
unity and indivisibility of the world at the moment when it was conceived in the
Supreme Thought.

2 We shall see that this is identical with what is called so frequently the Mystery of
Faith, and it is to be distinguished therefore from what is called otherwise the Lamp of
God, being simply the general notion of merit.—Ib., II], 28b; V, 80.

3 It may be noted here—though the statement belongs to another part of the text—
that thought and the word by which it is formulated are of the same essence: seen
under one aspect, this essence appears as thought and under another as the word,

THE DOCTRINE OF COSMOLOGY 221

wotds: ‘‘ Behold Who hath created these things.” + In the
beginning, however, that is to say, in the point of Divine
Thought, the creation was only in the subject of the Divine
Mind, or—as the text says—it existed, yet existed not. In
other wotds, it was hidden in the Divine Name, and it would
seem to follow that this also was hidden. The symbolism of
the thesis is very curious and deep withal herein. The Sacred
Name of God presupposes those who can pronounce, or at
least conceive it.2 In this sense the Name exists for man and
as antecedent of necessity thereto are the letters which are
images of the Word. Now the world is said to have been
cteated by the help of the Hebrew letters,* whence it follows
that these were produced in the first place—or rather their
atchetypes. They are said to have emanated from one
another, presumably on account of the fac that it is possible
to teduce them to a few primitive simple forms. After their
emanation, the Sacred Letters, the Great Letters—the letters
that are above, of which those on earth are a reflection—
remained in concealment for a period which is specified as
2,000 years before the Holy One proceeded further in His
work. When He willed so to do the letters came succes-
sively before Him, to shew cause why each one of them should
be utilised as an instrument in the task. This is mere comedy
in the literal understanding and is one of the curiosities of
literature in its form of expression, as it is all easy to say ; but
let us mark what issues therefrom. The letter BErH was
chosen, but not because it is the initial of the word Bara,
meaning to create, nor yet because it is that of BERESHITH, of
“In the beginning,” with which the Boox or GENEsIS opens,
but because it is the initial letter of the word Baracu, which
signifies to bless.6 It serves therefore to illustrate the
ineradicable optimism of Jewish philosophical thought,
which maintains that in the root-sense all is “ right with the
wotld,” because for ever and ever God is “‘ in His heaven.”

which may really mean that, for the processes of the human mind, they are inseparable.—
Z., Pt. I, fol. 74a; I, 439. It is obviously, as we have seen, the transition from
conception to expression:

1 Tsaiah xl. 26.

2 In other words, it is recognised that manifestation can be only to consciousness.

o Zh GL tol eo4arn err:

*'lb-x fols 2a" Lo.

52Tb,, fol. ask, baer wea:

6 See the Talmudic treatise entitled HacuicHa, cap. II, which affirms that the
world was created by the letter BerH. But a counter-affirmation on the authority of
another rabbi substitutes the letter Hz.

a22 THE HOLY KABBALAH

It is indeed something more than optimism, which is often a
charaéteristic rather than a ground in reason ; it is something
mote than instinct; it is an apprehension in consciousness,
the beginning of a work in knowledge. It is so permeating
and so paramount that there are moments when the catholic
sense of goodness seems to cast down the last barrier, and one
or another rabbi thinks in his zeal that even the punishment
of the Gentile in the world to come shall be for this or that
period or season, but not world without end. It is in virtue
of beneplacitum termino carens that the letter Brru was used in
creation, and I care not by what devious or grotesque path of
thought such a truth is reached, so long as it emerges at last
on the Pisgah height with such a sun shining in the eyes.

The Zouwar is like the Hebrew Scriptures, canonical and
sub-canonical: it is sealed with sanctity. The writers had
passed that sacred initiatory degree in which the soul looks
for “ good things of the Lord in the land of the living ” : 1
they had come to see with their own eyes. Amidst the
sorrows and rogations of the Greater Exile, their hearts never
faltered nor failed over that faith which opens into sight, or
in that hope which begins already to realise itself in participa-
tion. The Zowar is therefore like Osiris: it is “true of
voice,” and is inspired on every page, not only with the sense
of immortality but with that of a conscious communion
subsisting ever and continually between the Holy Assembly
that is above and the Assembly which has attained holiness
below. There is hence a consolation throughout it which
seems—for the most part—to be implied only under veils by
the Law and the Prophets.

The Divine intention to make use of the letter Bern, for
the reason stated, does not concern further the mind of the
ZOHAR,” because it has done its work in delineating the
motive of the worlds, shewing that the instrument of creation
was the power to bless all things. The intention was further
to manifest the Divine Name therein as an Indwelling Presence
of the universe and as a glory standing above the four quarters
thereof. ‘The procedure is symbolised by reciting that the
Holy One engraved in the ineffable world those letters which

1 Ps, xxvii. 13.

2 I ought to say that there is one instance of recurrence to the general notion when
the Story of the letters and their pleading is mentioned, with variations respecting the
letters Reso and Tetu ; but they do not now concern us.—Z., Pt. I, fol. 204a; II, 411.

THE DOCTRINE OF COSMOLOGY 223

teptresent the Mystery of Faith, being Yop, Hr, Vau, Hk, the
synthesis of all worlds above and below.4 God represents
the central point and the cause of all things, concealed and
unknown for ever, being the Supreme Mystery of the Infinite.?
It is that point of Divine Thought which has been mentioned
previously, and from it there issues a slender thread of light
which is itself concealed but contains all lights, receiving
vibrations from Him Who does not vibrate and reflecting
light from Him Who does not diffuse light—that is, the
mysterious point, or God centralised in thought on the world
about to be produced. The slender light—/umen exile—
gives bitth to a world of light, which enlightens the other
worlds. It is affirmed that when the central point—the
thread of light and the light-world—are united, then is union
petfe@. This is the office of the Great Name shadowed forth
in part, but the primordial elements which were produced at
the beginning of creation were without feature—as it is said
that “ the earth was without form and void,” ? like “ the sign
drawn by a pen overcharged with ink,” and it was by the
grace of the Sacred Name of forty-two letters that the world
assumed shape. All forms emanate from these letters,
which—in a manner—are the crown of TETRAGRAMMATON—
that is to say, the Sacred Name of four letters already enume-
rated. By their combinations, their superposition, and by
the figures thus obtained above and below, the four cardinal
points had birth, with all other images. The letters of the
Sacred Name were the moulds of the work of formation, and
as such they wete arranged in a reverse order to that which
obtains here.

Many things, however, were united or drawn together in
the mind of the Holy One for the perfect purpose of His
providence in respe& of all that which was to come into being.
He contemplated in His foresight the Mystery of the Law,
and because it was impossible for the world to subsist without

1 The Mystery of Faith is once more the hidden doétrine that there is male and female
above, as there is male and female below. —

2 Z., Pt. U, fols..126b, 1eya; IV, 5, 6.

* Gren, 1. ;

4 Z., Pt. I, fols. 30a, 30b; I, 189. The name of forty-two letters is an expansion
of TETRAGRAMMATON, for if the consonants of that Name ate written at length thus—
Yop, Hz, Vau, HE = 7, 4, 4, 1, their sum in numbers is forty-two. After what
manner the letters themselves are extrafted to make up the expanded Name it is scarcely
wotth while to consider, being not only outside our subje& but of no consequence in
itself. Iwill refer, however, to Athanasius Kircher : GEpipus Ecyrriacus, Tomus III,
pp. 261 ef seq.

224 THE HOLY KABBALAH

it,1 He created that Law to rule in all things above and below,
and to sustain them. But because of the Law, in which the
possibility of transgression is implied, He created also repent-
ance* as a path of refuge in Himself, of return at need to
Him. But the Law is said to be contained in the Sacred
Name and to be summarised by the Decalogue, the ten
sections of which correspond to ten other Names. These
appear to be described alternatively as ten creative words,?
which are reducible to three, for it is said: “ With the Spirit
of God, in wisdom and in understanding.” 4 ‘The end in
view was that God might manifest Himself and be called by
His Divine Name.®

It is easy to say that all this is arbitraty in the extreme, and
certainly many developments, which I forbear to cite, repre-
sent the casuistry of words pushed into a region of distraction ;
yet one is inclined to think that almost any peg will serve to
support a discourse on Divine Things—though some devices
ate to be preferred before others—and if it be found to serve
the purpose it is then a good peg. Whether it so does
depends upon the quality of thought which is extracted in
such strange manners as these, and of course it has to be
realised that the peg is only a pretext—whether Jewish
Theosophy understood it as such or not. From the manner
in which the Secret Doctrine is externalised in the ZoHaR one
cannot help feeling that some of its authors knew this in their
day, and in no very different manner from that in which I
realise it now. ‘The changes are rung after many manners by
the great bells of tradition when they peal out the work of
cteation. ‘The truth which emerges from the far-spreading
tissue of reveries is the operating eflicacy of the Divine Will
in all the manifest universe, together with that which may be

1. Z.., fol..207a ; ‘TT, 4z9-

2 Ib., fol. 290a ; I, 670.

3 Ib., Pt. I, fol. 14b; III, 66, 67. It is said, however, elsewhere that the words
by the help of which the world was made were not established until it pleased God to
create man. ‘The intention was that he should be dedicated to the study of the Law,
by which the world subsists. In this study man is said to sustain creation.—Ib., Pt. II,
fol. 161a, b; IV, 101. In this manner the Zonar seems to Stultify itself intentionally,
establishing a contradi€tion in terms, as if to indicate that its concern was not with
cosmology per se but with a mode of regarding creation imposed on the elect. Alter-
natively it might be intimating that the mind creates its world.

4 Exodus xxxi. 3.

5 7, Pt. I, fol. 2a; I, 8. It is to be noted in this conneftion that this Name was not
revealed to the angels, which is one instance only of a recurring pretension that man
was in a position of superiority to all other hierarchies of being.—Ib., Pt. III, 78b;
V, 214," See also gr, Pt. I, ‘fol. 25ay uhins7:

ee

‘THit, DOCTRINE OF COSMOLOGY 225

held to be within the measures of the Do&trine of Cortre-
spondences, which obtains everywhere in the Secret Doétrine
—whatever the schools thereof—and has been reflected thence
into systems which cannot be included in the same category.
It would seem further to have been discovered at first hand
by a few seets—as, for example, Jacob Bohme ! and perhaps
Swedenborg. It is the erection of an inevitable anthropo-
morphism into a philosophical doétrine, though when I say
this I may be sanétifying the seeming limitation. It is at least
true that man is, for all concern of man, the measure of the
whole creation, and if the testimony of creation is true—as
Leibnitz would have held—then that which we discern
intelleCtually is in the likeness of the truth of things. But
this is the Do&rine of Correspondences.

Nature, according to the Zowar, is the garment of God ?;
it is that in which He appears and wherein He is veiled, so
that we can look upon Him and know Him in His vestured
aspect ; but it is not the body of God—which is more properly
Shekinah, at least in one of her aspects—and it is still less God
manifest. It is that which He took upon Himself for the
purpose of appearing. Prior to the period when the Divine
Name was formulated for the ends of creation He was apart
from the kind of definition implied therein and this non-
defined state is termed “ Who” by the Zonar, as in the
wotds: “‘ Behold Who hath created,” ? while the produ& of
creation is called “That”: “Behold Who hath created
That ”—or these things. The Hebrew words are respectively
Mi and Eran. The produé specified was not, however, for
the Zowar, that which we understand by creation but the
Elohim below,* who thus came into being when the letters
emanated from each other. The explanation is that by the
pairing of Eran and Mr the Sons of the Doétrine contrived

1 A comparison between Béhme’s MystER1um Macnum, which is a commentary
on Genesis, and the ZoHAR on the same text would bring out some extraordinary
parallels and would increase the zeal of speculation concerning the glass of vision into
which the German mystic looked. It was assuredly a glass which was common in
several respects to other seers besides himself. His intimations on the first estate of
man, on the making of woman, on Paradise and the Mystery of the Fall offer recurring
analogies with Jewish Theosophy.

Fs PCR TOL ZA Ste Oe

3 Isaiah xl. 26.

4 It is not difficult to follow the reverie, though it seems involved at first sight. In
the transcendence God and Elohim are inseparable, being male and female, and the
first movement towatds the produétion of a manifested universe was to send forth
their living images below. That which was of the nature of God became of the nature
of the Cosmos.

226 THE HOLY KABBALAH

to obtain the word Elohim, and out of this verbal juggle arise
the following conclusions: (1) Even as in creation M1, or
Who, the Unnamed, remains always attached to ELan = That,
so (2) in God these two descriptions are inseparable, and
(3) it is, thanks to this mystery, that the world exists. We
have here at the very inception of the Zowar that identifica-
tion of Jehovah and Elohim which we shall find of such
capital importance at a later stage of our research. At the
moment we have only to observe that what I have called the
juggle educes a doétrine of Divine Immanence in the cosmos
of manifested things. Apart from this there could be neither
the things themselves nor the harmony which produces the
music, the accord, the grace, the beauty of creation. It was
to make known this doétrine that Elijah once shewed himself
to Rabbi Simeon on the sea-shore, after which he took flight,
as the text says, and the Master of Kabbalism saw him no
more, leastwise at that time.

The passage of Isaiah which I have quoted twice already is
affirmed elsewhere to express the whole work of creation.
By “ Who ’”’ above and ‘‘ That” below has all been made.?
When we read in yet another place that Scripture was the
Archite@ under God,® the reference is also to Elohim, either
in the vesture of the Written Law or in that of the Secret
Tradition. But I have spoken of the word BEREsHITH and
how it is rendered sometimes “in Wisdom,” which is recog-
nised by the ZoHarR on the authority of the Chaldaic Para-
phrase of Onkelos. But Wisdom is regarded mote corre€tly
as the analogical interpretation of the Word,‘ and it is added
that the world exists owing to the “ sublime and impenetrable
mystery of CHoxmAH.” It follows that creation is a work of
wisdom, operating by means of benediG@ion. He Who is
ineffable, according to the Secret Doétrine, He Who is myste-
rious and unknown,* delineates Himself in vesture, as a priest
assuming pontifical clothing. He unfolds Himself in the
Voice of Blessing and passes continually from the unknown
into the range of apprehension by means of this Voice,
uttering the speech of wisdom.

But God said: “‘ Let there be light,” and it is afirmed that

Bt PE LA, LOL oee es Ot

2 Ib., fol. 29b, 30a; I, 186.

3 Jb., Pt. Il, fol. 161a, 161b ; IV, 100, ror:
sath {ve sg ote! Ws 0 a so Bae

THE DOCTRINE OF COSMOLOGY 227

all celestial legions and powers emanate therefrom. When
first manifested, its brilliance filled the world from end to
end; but when God foresaw the number of the guilty He
concealed and rendered it inaccessible.1 The sweet smell of
the spikenard in the Sone or SoLomon signifies the celestial
light,? while it is said elsewhere that it is designated by the
wotd goodness.? This is an illustration of the way in which
from many ingenuities of interpretation some appealing
lesson is educed. Again, it does not signify that the methods
ate artificial in their nature; Zoharic Theosophy is in a very
marked and particular sense an illustration beforehand of
Matthew Arnold’s idea that God has put “a heap of letters ”
into the hands of man and has bade him make with them
“what word he would.” The distin@ion between Arnold’s
hypothetical case and the one now under notice is that in
place of a painful consciousness on the part of humanity
through the ages that the true Word has never been formed
with the letters, the rabbinical masters believed that their
sacred ciphers produced true words invariably and could be
used in any manner which would extract a tefulgent and
Divine idea. BrREsHirH has served on more than a single
occasion in this manner, but its capacities are not exhausted,
and so also in respect of the first created light. If that word
signifies goodness, it means also Perfect Love,* the Grand
and Divine Love, that Love of man for God, the corre-
spondence of which is God’s Perfect Love for man. This
Love of the Divine in man is not grounded on the self-
questing hope of personal benefit, but is something constant
in affliction and in joy, rooted in the perfection of God.
Hereof is the ground of union between the Divine Creator
and the creature divinely fashioned by the hands of Him.°
And because of this union the word Light is said also to be
the symbol of Unity.® It is in the sense of all these con-
siderations that our world is held truly to form the centre of
that which is celestial and to be surrounded by doors which
open thereon.’ Like all the streets of thought, all paths and

4 2, Pte i folks 30); 1190; tot, » thy tolsya'} 3.) 4b.
2 Ib., fol. 30a; I, 188, 189. 4 Ib., fol. 11b; I, 66.
5 The authority is THE SONG oF SOLOMON, i. 2: “ Let him kiss me with the kisses

of his mouth” ; and these words are held to express the perfe&t and eternal joy which
all worlds shall experience in their union with the Supreme Spirit. The condition of
this union is said to be the prayer of man.—Z., Pt. I, fol. 44b; I, 262.

eld. fol, 72bi2405' 70, * Id. tol 1724.5) 1, 275.

228 THE HOLY KABBALAH

vistas of the cosmos, the pottals in their tens of thousands
open on God.

I must append hereto the symbolism of a certain myth
which connects with the primeval formulation of the Divine
Name and has its origin in the Tatmup.1 As developed in
the ZOHAR, it presents another aspect of that point of Divine
Thought about which we heard at the beginning of this
section. It concerns a mysterious stone called SCHETHLYA
which was originally in the Throne of God ?—that is to say,
it was a precious stone or jewel —and was cast by Him into
the abyss, so to form the basis of the world and give birth
thereto. One might say otherwise that it was like a cubical
Stone or altar, for its extremity was concealed in the depth,
while its surface or summit rose above the chaos. It was the
central point in the immensity of the world, the corner-stone,?
the tried stone, the sure foundation, but also that stone which
the builders rejected.4 The last allocation, however, passes
understanding, as by the hypothesis of the legend it was used
in the building from the beginning. Finally—but this is not
less inscrutable—it was that stone which served Jacob as a
pillow and thereafter for an altar.° It was the good stone,
the precious stone and the foundation of Zion. The Tables
of the Law were made from it,’ and it is destined for the
salvation of the world.® Jacob called it the House of the
Elohim,® meaning that the Hypostasis to which this name is
attributed transfers her residence from the world above to
that whichis below.?° It is like the /apu ext: of the German
Graal legend, and of Alchemy according to the Second
Raymund Lully, for it appears to be a slight stone; it is
supposed to have been carried by Aaron 4 when he entered
the Holy Place, and it was held in the hands of David when
he desired to contemplate close at hand the glory of his Master.”

1 See the tracts called Yoma and SANHEDRIN.
Je, Eto, Ol 222a 2220, SV, 24s.
3 Ib., Pt. I, fol. 231a; Il, 511. See also Job xxxviii. 6.
4 Ps, cxviii. 22. See also Z., Ill, 152b; V, 392.
i, Pt. 1ptOl. 720 2-48, AZO.
Bribe. £01.2310 > 5 L2.
Thi tol. 23ib% AL si:
Sp tol, 23a Te S12 s:
® Genesis xxvili. 22.
2007 Piet TOL 2312: 51 512,
11 Leviticus xvi. 3. The reference is merely to Aaron’s entty, and does not tolerate
the suggestion indicated.
12 Z,, Pt. I, fol. 72a; I, 427.

THE DOCTRINE OF COSMOLOGY 229

In a sense it fell from heaven, like the stone from the crown
of Lucifer, and again it was overturned by the iniquity of
man, until Jacob restored it to an upright position. Solomon
was also one of those who restored it, and thereon he built
the Sanatuary 1 We may nct know how to harmonise these
references which seem to exhaust all that is said of the stone
in the Old Testament, but its connection with othe: and less
fabulous elements belonging to the Zoharic myth of creation
resides in the fact that this stone was inscribed with the
Divine Name before it was cast into the abyss.2_ For the rest,
it seems patt of the inherent notion that the world was
created for Israel and that the story of its making is a part of
the story of election. So is it said in one place that the world
did not obtain stability until Israel received the Law on
Mount Sinai?; that God created the worlds after He had
delivered the Law; that He ended his work in the Levitical
Law, which is the basis of the world, and is therefore that
legendary stone with which we have been dealing, for the
Secret Doétrine is a Sabbath; and that Abraham is also the
foundation, the one just being on whom it rests, by whom it
is made permanent, and who nourishes all creatures.* It
would be not less idle work to tty and harmonise these
references than to shew that they are not to be taken blindly.
They ate things that stand by themselves, unrelated one to
another, and they serve their purpose as such, being loose
lines of thought turning the student’s attention in one direction.
If we look in this dire@tion and read with the heart therein, I
think that we may come to understand how the mystic stone
is the central point of the world and how at this point there
is the Holy of Holies.®

a Z., fol. 91b 31, 429:

Slt ede tt, £Ol, ots, 111. 370.

3 [b., Pt. I, fol. 89a; I, 511. Within the measures of the romantic hypothesis, it
is obvious that the world was created for the ele& of Israel, for it is the scene in which
their eleGtion finds its field of action. ‘The fantasy would obtain more widely in its
application to that greater Israel which is the elect of all ages and peoples.

4 Ib., Pt. Il, fol. 86b; I, 498.

5 Jb., Pt. J, fol. 231a; Il, 511.—There is also the stone “‘ cut out without hands ”
of Dan. ii. 34, and it is said in the ZoHar to represent Him Who is “ the shepherd,
the stone of Israel ” (Gen. xlix. 24), It is the Community of Israel—that which shall
be called the House of God (#b., xxviii. 22). The stone of Jacob is that stone which
forms the bond of union between the Divine Essences—blessed on the right, blessed
on the left, blessed above and below. According to THE FarrpruL, SHEPHERD, Z.,
Pt. II, fol. 279b, the stone of Daniel was engraved with the letters of TETRAGRAMMATON,
and it is not to be identified with the stone of Moses, being that rock which he smote
twice.—Num, xx, 8-11.

230 THE HOLY KABBALAH

I have spoken of the Word in its relation to the Divine
Transcendence. It is said that the six days were created
thereby, being lights emanating from the Word and illumi-
nating the world. It is also the Divine Seed from which
manifest things came forth. ‘The specific affirmation is,
however, that the world was created by the Word united to
the Spirit,1 that which operated being the sound of the Word
as a voice which spoke and it was done. For the dispensa-
tion of the light this Word was joined with the Father, the
light itself proceeding from the Father and being as such
incompatible with matter. In the union of the Father and
the Word it became accessible thereto, seeing that hence-
forward it proceeded from both. Before the manifestation
of the Word the light proceeding from the Father formed
seven letters, which—in some inscrutable sense—were with-
out body and for this reason were inaccessible to matter.
When the sacred, nebulous, clouded fire which is called
‘“‘ darkness upon the face of the deep”? appeared for the
transmutation of matter, seven other letters were formed,
also from pure light and hence inaccessible to matter, like the
first seven. When the Word manifested, the remaining eight
letters were formed, and then the whole alphabet was rendered
accessible by the casting down of that barrier which separated
matter from the celestial rays. It is for this reason that,
according to Scripture, Elohim said: “ Let there be light.” 4
The firmament was made likewise and the waters were
sepatated from the waters, or the light above from the light
below.® It was subje& to this separation that matter became
susceptible of light, and I infer that a spiritual mystery is here
indicated which might be comparable to the distinétion
between material light of reason and that of the higher mind.
Now, the Word is said to be designated by the name Elohim. ®

1 Tt is taught that the one is not without the other, and the authority is Ps. xxxiii, 6:
** By the word of the Lord were the heavens made and all the hosts of them by the
breath of his mouth.”—Z., Pt. I, fol. 156a ; II, 213, 214,

2 Z., Pt. I, fol. 16b; I, 98 e¢ seg.

PiGrenydsa,

Siddihy.13..

6 Zoekts Lix6b); 1; 100;

6 The greater light which God made to rule the day is a symbol of Jehovah, while
the lesser which rules the night is the Word, regarded as the end of thought.—Ib.,
fol. 20a; I, 123. Itis said elsewhere that if the world had been the work of the Divine
Essence called Jehovah, everything would have been everlasting therein, but being the
work of the Divine Essence called Elohim, it is all subje€&t to destru€tion. This curious
Statement arises from Ps, xlvi. 9, but it has been pointed out that in this Psalm the

THE DOCTRINE OF COSMOLOGY 231

The firmament constituted the line of division: thereunto
matter could ascend and thereunto could the light come
down; but while it is thus a limit in both directions, the
firmament is also a bond of union between the one and the
other, so that both are united thereby in Elohim. It is said
also that the Word assumed the form of the alphabetical
signs, presumably because it is in this form that thought
passes into written expression.! The six days of creation are
lights emanating from the Word for the illumination of the
world.? It is thanks, in fine, to the Word that the waters of
the celestial river flow for ever to irrigate the worlds that are
below.®

So far therefore concerning the work of God in creation
and the instruments appertaining thereto. But there are
certain final intimations which belong more especially to our
subject and lead therein. When the Holy One created the
world He engraved the Mystery of Faith in letters of sparkling
light ; He engraved it above and below, because it is the same
Mystery and because the world below is the mirror of that
which is above. By means of the Mystery of Faith He
created the worlds. Now, in another place it is asked:
What worlds? The answer is matrimonial unions.4 These
ate the worlds which God does not cease from creating. It
follows that creation, as the story is told, is a veil of the sex
mystery; it follows also that something is understood of
which physical union is the shadow as this is known here:
the intimations concern union as the result of a law, which
law is literal on the plane of expression and mystical on a
higher plane. Another Key is given in these words: The
union of the male and female principle engendered the
world 5—as indeed it was impossible that it should do other-
wise within the measures of Zoharic symbolism. So also in
the emanation of the letters, ALEPH and BETH are postulated,
from which two come forth the rest of the alphabet, and hence

Divine Name used is not Elohim but Jehovah. In the text itself a debate follows and
there is a divided view.—Ib., fol. 59b ; I, 337.

1 Z., Pt. 1, fol. 21a; ‘I, 129.

2 Tb., fol. 31b; I, 196. The Zowar is sometimes like scholastic philosophy in its
lighter moments, and seeing that the six days of creation are mentioned by Genesis but
not the six nights which are implied therein, it inquires what has become of the latter
and concludes that God holds them in concealment for some good purpose of His own.

*. Td... fol.:33b; 1,208.

4 Ib., fol. 89a; I, 511.

& Ib., Pt. II, fol. 228a; IV, 250.

H.K. R

232 THE HOLY KABBALAH

it is said that these two are male and female. Here is a
further reason why Bern was the instrument of creation, as
already explained. Another story intimates that God took
the “heap of letters”? in His hands and began to make
worlds therewith over and over, but they had no consistence,
the reason being that the Covenant had not yet been made.?
The world under the law of circumcision must be understood
as a specific dispensation within the manifest order, and the
destroyed worlds are previous dispensations which arose and
decayed unceasingly. ‘This is illustrated when it is said that
their destruction was because those who dwelt therein did not
accept the commandments of the Doétrine. It is not that
God undoes His works, but the works undo themselves by
refusing salvation. Why, it is asked, should God put an end
to those children whom, according to tradition, He created
by the Second Hypostasis, called Hz ? 3

It is only under the Law and the Dodtrine, or in virtue of
that Inward Covenant of which circumcision was once the
shadow, that man is hereby made male and female by the
Elohim, which is another manner of saying that the cosmic
harmony is established in him. We shall see in a later
division that he was created prototypically in the likeness of
the world below and in that of the world above. He was
also so made that he represents the Celestial Lover and
Beloved, Who ate symbolised by the letters Yop and Hg,
and ate united by Vau.* In another form of symbolism he
was designed to be the Spouse or Beloved of God who was
never to be separated from the Lover. So proceeds the
mystery with which we are concerned from stage to stage of
unfoldment ; but we are at present concerned only in seeing
how it belongs to all.

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 30a; I, 187. It is said elsewhere that the letters expressing the male
ptinciple are not susceptible of transformation, while those expressing the female
principle can be counterchanged by means of certain combinations.—Ib., Pt. II,
fol. 1342; IV, 29. Which letters are male and which are female, we are not told. A
note to the French version suggests that the uneven are masculine and the even feminine,
which is theoretically plausible but is not borne out in faét because it is certain that
Hk, the fifth letter, is female in the ZoHAR, while the sixth or Vau is masculine.

2p. 01.250 > 1.154.

3 Ib,

4 Z., Pt. I, fol. 26a; I, 161, 162.

BOOK VI
HIERARCHIES OF SPIRITUAL BEING

233

BOOK VI
HIERARCHIES OF SPIRITUAL BEING

I.— THE SOUL IN KABBALISM

WE have ascertained the heads of Kabbalistic instru@tion
as to the essential nature of God, the transition from the
Divine Unmanifest into the manifestation of Divinity, the
extension of the powers and attributes thus developed through
the archetypal, creative, formative and material worlds, the
Kabbalistic hypothesis of creation and the doétrine of trans-
cendental and natural science. It remains for us to present
in brief outline the doctrine of spiritual essences according to
Jewish Theosophy. This is one of the favoured and certainly
most recurring subjects found in the Zowar, as it is that also
which was destined to receive fuller development than any
other in the later literature of Kabbalism. ‘The history of its
growth is also worth noting. Pre-existence and the sub-
division of the spiritual nature in man ate found in the
TALMuD, but the SEPHER YETZIRAH has nothing to tell us on
the subject, and there is very little in the first commentators
on that treatise. It may be said, with considerable truth, that
the book and its connections were concerned rather with the
physical forces which produced the universe; but the com-
mentaries at least are sufficiently discursive to have included
it in their scheme if they had anything to say upon the subjed.
It remains therefore that the curious and involved speculations
with which we are dealing here are in the main a later growth.
The distin@ion between a holy intelligence and an animal soul
in man is found in the Book oF CONCEALMENT,! which, so far

1 “ When the inferior man descends (namely, into this world) there are found (in
him) two spirits, according to the supernal form. Man (therefore) is constituted from
the two sides, the right and the left. As from the right side he has a holy mind, as
from the left an animal soul.” The extension of the left side was the consequence of
the Fall—Boox oF CONCEALMENT, c. iv. par. 7-9. This is according to the Latin
version of Rosenroth, his expansions in brackets included. Compare, however, De
Pauly’s translation, Vol. IV, p. 143, as follows: “‘ When ‘ Adam ’ came here below the

235

236 THE HOLY KABBALAH

as can be judged from its form, is among the most ancient
portions of the ZonHar. The latter cycle may be regarded,
broadly speaking, as the chief source of metapsychical hypo-
theses in Kabbalism proper. The indications contained therein
became a vast and ponderous system in the schools of Isaac
de Loria and Moses of Cordova. This system has exercised
at all times a particular influence on writers who have ap-
proached Kabbalism from an occult standpoint, and—chiefly,
pethaps, because it has been made available in Latin by
Rosenroth—has superseded that of the Zowar itself. Franck
States that it is not Kabbalism proper, and affirms very truly
that it is full of distorted rabbinical reveries, but it cannot be
denied that the roots are in older texts. The later speculations
are in other words developed from the Zowar, and the
following slight sketch contains the general elements of the
subject.

Belief in the soul’s immortality, which is not found in the
Pentateuch or the prophets, was held by the Israel of later
times in connection with that of the resurrection of the body,
and appears freely in the Tartmups.! Makers of occult
speculations, who remember that Moses was learned in all
the wisdom of the Egyptians, conceive it to be impossible
that he should have known nothing of dofrines which were
known to all Egypt, and they hold accordingly that he com-
municated them secretly to a circle of initiation, by which
they were perpetuated in the oral way. Others incline to the
notion that they were acquired by the Jews in Babylon. In
the Greco-Egyptian period it was, of course, impossible that
the learned rabbins of Alexandria should not have been
acquainted with the great speculation of a future life. In one
way orf another it was inevitable that the Jews should have
acquired it, which they did accordingly, and the particular
date ot circumstances are a minor question, about which there
can be no certainty. The dottrine, as taught by the Tatmun,

Celestial Figure had two spirits, one on the right destined to man and the other on the
left destined to animals. But after the sin of Adam the left side was so extended that
it penetrated even to man.”

1 “ The immortality of the soul and the resurre¢tion of the body figure in the Tatmup
as tenets of the Synagogue. They form the thirteenth and last article in the profession
of faith of Maimonides.”—Leroy-Beaulieu, IsRAEL AMONG THE NATIONS, p. 17. This
is not quite accurate, as that article concerns the resurreGtion only. “I firmly believe
that there will be a resurreétion of the dead, at the time when it shall please the Creator,
blessed be His name! ”—M. Freidlander, Texr Book oF THE JEwIsH RELIGION.
4th ed. London. 1896.

THE SOUL IN KABBALISM 237

though recognising five divisions of the soul having names
familiar to Kabbalism, is comparatively of a simple kind: it
does not possess, for example, that philosophical aspe& which
we find in Philo, and even those who dwell upon Greek
influence in early Kabbalism must admit that its pneumatology,
after allowing for pre-existence, shews very little trace of
Platonism.*

It should be understood that the story of the soul in Kab-
balism is part of that central doctrine which the Zowar calls
the Mystery of Faith, or at least the one is in close connection
with the other and they arise together.” I shall proceed at
once to my subject and consider it under four heads, being
(1) Pre-existence, (2) The parts of the soul, (3) The soul in the
world to come, but here only in respect of the blessed State,
and (4) Reincarnation. The doctrine concerning Sheol will
call for separate treatment.

As regards pre-existence, I will establish first what may be
termed the general thesis, with that which belongs thereto,
and will then illustrate it by such distinGiions and variations
as may seem to deserve mention. When the Holy One willed
to create the universe, He formed *—and apparently in the
first instance—those souls which were intended subsequently
to dwell in human bodies.* The place of their tarrying is said
in more than one place to be the Paradise below, which is the
Earthly Paradise or the Lower Eden.° This is also an abode
of disincarnate souls who have entered that path which leads
to the blessed life; but it is not their final home.® Like the
Christ of Nazareth, the ZoHAR seems to know that there are

1 Fora good summary of Kabbalistic pneumatology the German Student may consult,
inter aliz, Leiningen’s LEELENLEHRE DER QABALAH. Leipsic. 1887.

2 It speaks at once for the genesis and term of the mystery: there is that which must
he done in heaven, brought down amongst the similitudes of earthly things and finally
restored to heaven.

also the foreknowledge of the soul.

4 Ib., fol. 96b; I, 387. “Each has its form like that of the body which it is
destined to animate.”

5 Z., Pt. I, fol. ra; ID, 48. It is also said poetically that souls are formed in
Paradise of the four winds which breathe therein, but the reference is really to that
psychic veSture which gives form to the soul.—Ib., fol. 13b ; IH, 59, 60.

6 Z., Pt. Il, fol. r1a; Il, 48. ,

238 THE HOLY KABBALAH

many mansions in the House of the Father. Before they left
the presence of the Maker, all souls—meaning those destined
to incarnate under the obedience and ele€tion of Israel—were
conjured to keep the precepts of the Law.!_ While they await
incarnation in Paradise they are clothed with bodies and have
countenances like those which they are destined to possess
hereafter, but these vestures are of course of a psychic or
spiritual kind.2- When the time artives for embodiment each
soul in its turn is called before the Holy One and is told which
physical envelope to inhabit. Paradise is a place of blessing,
and it may be that “ from the gold bar ” thereof it has leaned
out and seen no reason to descend of its own accord, or to
quit present happiness, as it is said, “for bondage and
temptation.” It 1s assured, however, that from the day of its
creation it had no other mission than to come into this world.4
It submits therefore and is stripped of the paradisaical body,
that it may be clothed with veils of earth. It takes the road
of earth sorrowing ° and proceeds into the exile of human life.

Souls descend in a pre-established order of succession,
though there are certain exceptions.® As in all the great events
of human life and the universe the precedence must be taken
by Palestine, it is held that descent to earth reaches its term
therein, and this invariably, after which the souls are thence

Fi, Ptat col. seed: It g20,\. see also Pt. TTS fol.n3as Vis8)'and Pre LL fou er ors
IV, to1, where the soul is pledged to the study of the Law and the attainment of the
Mystery of Faith.

2 Jb., Pt. II, fol. 150a; IV, 70. There is no real joy for the soul, save in the body of
Paradise ; in that of earth it is shut out from communication with the Supreme
Mysteries. See also Ib., Pt. I, fol. gob, 91a; Tl, 515, 516.

3 Ib., Pt. Il, fol. 96b ; III, 388.

4 Ib. Seeing that the Earthly Paradise is the house of pre-existing souls and the
place to which they return after death, it might seem that the Fall which took place
therein was in the prototypical humanity, or ApAm Proroptastes of later Kabbalism,
in whom all souls fell, as Recanati maintained. He speculated also that they are
detached from the parent body in succession for incarnation on earth. ‘This is not
Zoharic symbolism but individual reverie. There is a sense in which the man of the
Eden myth was ADAM ProTopLasTEs, as the first of human beings, but the proto-
typical ADAM Prorop.astTEs is the Divine Son, conceived in Daatu and so extended
through the Lower SzpHirorTH that He stands on MALKUTH.

5 It is even declared that all which is learned by man as a consequence of his habitation
here below was known previously by him in the world above, but this is apparently
the case—mote especially or only—with those who love the truth and are righteous
in earthly life. My authority is the ComMMeNTrsRy ON Leviticus, and it puts an end
to the question of freewill by adding that those who are wicked below have been
already set aside by God, their incarnation being delayed through frequent enforced
visits to the abyss. So also those who are headstrong here were headstrong prior to
their incarnation.—Z., Pt. III, fol. 6b; V, 169. This was said in the presence of
Rabbi Simeon and was suffered to pass unchallenged.

8 Jb., Pt. Il, fol. tora; III, 407.

THE SOUL IN KABBALISM 239

distributed to the whole world.1. What is much more
important is that all souls awaiting incarnation are arranged
in pairs; the one which is destined to animate a male is by
the side of one who is to animate a female, so that those who
are united below have been united previously above,? because,
according to Scripture, there is nothing new under the sun.
They descend also together, but they pass into the charge of
an angel who ptesides over the pregnancy of women and they
ate then separated.? Sometimes the male soul animates a man
first, sometimes the reverse.4 When the time of marriage
comes, the Holy One unites them as before and proclaims
their union. After the espousals, and apparently when inter-
course has taken place, they become—mystically speaking—
one body and one soul. If, this, however, is the law, we shall
see later on that it is illustrated chiefly by exceptions.® At the
moment I will mention only a variant of the last notion, which
says that, prior to their descent on earth, all souls form an
unity, and are part of the same mystery ; separation into male
and female takes place by reason of incarnation, but they are
again made one in matriage.® This recalls the Adamic legend
and would seem its application to the history of individuals
above and below.

I have now given the general thesis, supplemented by
counter-theses, but it should be realised that it is drawn from
sevetal places. Among questions which must be left open
when the text is collated at large there is that which locates
the soul prior to incarnation in the Paradise below, as I have
said. Other accounts substitute the superior Eden,’ and

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 205b; Il, 424. The exceptions correspond to the ideas of those
who ate born out of due time. It is said that male souls come from the Tree of Wisdom
and female souls from an Inferior Tree, but it is a sporadic suggestion which is at issue
with recurring notions.—Ib., Pt. Il, fol. rota; IL, 408. It is explained in another
place that just souls attached to the Sacred King by true love are longer than others
in coming to this earth—Ib., Pt. III, fol. 68a, b; V, 186.

2 This is the blessed union.—Ib., fol. 91b; I, 520. But it is to be understood
ast) unquestionably that the allusion, here and elsewhere, is always to the souls of
Israel.

* Ib:

4 It is not said that a mistake ever occurs, though this is recognised by one form of
occultism and is held to account for certain sex-aberrations. I have not found any
Kabbalistic warrant for the opinion. See Eliphas Lévi, in my translation of his
TRANSCENDENTAL Maaic, I¢s Doétrine and Ritual, 1923, pp. 109, 110.

5 As the Zoharic considerations on the subjeé of sister-souls who have been, so to
speak, mismatried bear ample witness.

6 Z., Pt. III, fol. 43b; V, 121. See also #b., Pt. I, fol. 85b; I, 493, 494, where it is
Stated that whether or not a man shall meet in this life with the soul predestined to
himself in union, even from the beginning, depends on his own desert.

7 Ib., Pt. Ill, fol. 43a; V, 120. Here it is said that when the soul is in the a&t of

240 THE HOLY KABBALAH

according to one of these the descent for a period into the
Earthly Garden takes place just prior to incarnation. The
time is thirty days.1 One of the alternatives has no explicit
concern with either Paradise but affirms that from an epoch
which preceded the creation of the world all souls have been
in the presence of the Holy One and there remain till they are
called to go down on earth.? According to tradition all
emanate from the same region and during their sojourn in
heaven they share in the government of things above and
below.? There are also certain souls which are kept in the
hiddenness and are guarded in a particular manner. When
these enter into earthly bodies they have power to reascend
into heaven without dying.+ Of such were Enoch and Elias.
Speaking for the majority of cases, there is some trouble in
effecting a harmonious junction between the soul and its
eatthly envelope®; it is not definitely established therein
until after thirty-three days, and for the first seven it goes in
and out continuously. One reason seems to be that circum-
cision does not take place till the thirtieth day and that for
three days thereafter the body is in a state of suffering.* These
reveries ate drawn out of two texts: “* She shall then continue
in the blood of her purifying three and thirty days,” * which
is of course a reference to the purification of women after
childbirth ; and: “It shall be seven days under the dam,” 8
which is a reference to the birth of animals—bullocks, sheep,
ot goats. The “ blood of her purification ” is in some obscure
way the blood of circumcision. ®

descending towards this world it visits the Earthly Paradise, where it sees the souls
of the just who have left this life. It goes also to SHEOL and sees the souls of the wicked.
These are objeét-lessons, and the inference is that they may aét as a guide in life. It is
said in another place that the Soul is from the San@uary on high.—Ib., Pt. I, fol. 205b ;
Il, 424. It is that Temple which is mentioned in Ex. xv. 17, as “ the San@uary, O
Lord, which Thy hands have established.” —Z., Pt. I, fol. 7; I, 38.

1 According to another account, they pay only a flying visit—also for purposes of
inspection.—Ib., Pt. III, fol. 13a, b; V, 39.

2 Tb., Pt. Il, fol. 282a; IV, 310. It was especially the union of male and female
souls which existed before creation. The time of intercourse corresponds to midnight
on earth. It is an union in the contemplation of God and the joy thereof brings
forth other souls, which are those of Gentiles who become converts to Jewry.

3 Ib., Pt. IL, fol. 68a; V, 186. !

4 Tb., fol. 68b; V, 186, 187. See also zb., fol. 182b, 183a; V, 475, 476.

5 It is said to be attached to the body by one end only. The soul and its envelope
develop simultaneously, meaning that their union becomes more perfe&, but care of
the soul is needed for this purpose, just as the body needs care. The soul, however,
is in the care of heaven.—Ib., Pt. I, fol. 197a ; II, 381.

Bn eae ek. els OV E27, 122,

? Leviticus xii. 4.

S Ex, Sxilsieo,

OTL ae Ie ter. AS, aaa s NV, L22:

THE SOUL IN KABBALISM 241

Hereof is the ZOHAR in one of its exceptional moods ;_ but
these things are weariness, and I will conclude therefore on
pte-existence with one further reference. It is said that the
souls of the patriarchs pre-existed in the thought of God before
the creation and wete connected in the other world, whence
they came forth in their due day. The text apposite hereto is :
“The flowers appear on the earth,” ? meaning that the souls
of the patriarchs appear in this world. One would say that
these souls were the thoughts of God dwelling in divine men,
but if we debated the subject, we should see, I think, that the
ZOHARIC hypothesis really comes to this; that the soul-
wotld is a world of thought in God; that the thought
ptecedes the Word, as it is shewn to have done in respect of
cteation generally; and that souls are uttered forth con-
tinually, passing ultimately into expression in flesh.

Though it is closely connected with pre-existence, the
mode followed in the generation or creation of souls is
hypothetically at least independent and there are important
reasons why it should be postponed for consideration till I
treat of the mystery of sex in Zoharic Theology. I proceed
therefore to the parts or divisions of the soul. It is taught in
a summary way that man is composed of three things$:
Life, or NEPHESH ; Spirit, which is Ruaw or HaiA; and Soul,
that is, NEsHamMaH. By these he becomes “a living spirit ”—
a term, however, which is applied more especially to NEsHa-
MAH. ‘They are called also three degrees, or vital spirit,
intelleQual spirit and soul proper. Nepuesu is the fallible
part, for sin is suggested neither by Ruan nor NesHamau.®
It is said elsewhere and more plainly that the vital spirit sins,
but not the soul. The three degrees are superposed one upon
another in the order already given, ® and NEsHAMAH is attached

U7, Ptd, fol: ras I, -§;

2 Song of Solomon ii. 12.

3 Z., Pt. 1, fol. 27a; I, 169. The “ living spirit ” is said to proceed from the mouth
of Shekinah, who is called “living soul.” Here is another aspeé& of souls being
uttered forth by the Divine, and seeing that this is the Shekinah in transcendence,
who is (a) the Third Hypostasis and (b)_ the Mother = Arma, in the Supernal Szpuira
Brnau, we shall understand the kind of union which subsists between her and the
Father, who is ABA in CHoxmAn. ‘There is the Divine Thought in Kerner : it is
formulated as if mentally in Cookman: and it is uttered in Binan, producing the
living intelligences, who are therefore begotten into the higher Paradise.

4 Ib., Pt. I, fol. 205b, 206a; II, 424. ~

5 [b., Pt. Ill, fol. 16a; V, 46. It is said, however, elsewhere that the defilement of
Nephesh defiles Ruah and Neshamah.—lIb., Pt. Il, fol. 182a ; IV, 155.

¢ Jb., Pt. U, fol. 206a ; Il, 425%

242 THE HOLY KABBALAH

toGod1; but all these are not the imprescriptible possession
of every person in life: the higher parts are earned by serving
the Master.”

Unfortunately, this thesis—which may seem intelligible
enough in itself—leads to very grave complications in respec
of that which pre-exigsted and that which constitutes man a
living being in manifestation. It is said that some persons
ate judged worthy to possess 2 NEsHAMAH, others a RuAH
only, while yet others have a NEpHEsH and nothing more.®
These last, by reason of their deficiency, are attached to the
impure spitit.* The Nepnesn alone is imprescriptible, or
necessaty to the man’s existence. If he comports himself
wotrthily with this gift another spirit is poured into him, which
is like a crown of NEpHEsu, and this is Ruaw. ‘The man is
then illuminated by light from a superior region and is in a
position to discern the laws of the Secret King. If he still
continues worthy he receives the crown of Ruan, the name
of which is NEsHAMAH; but it is called also Soul of God.
Now, it seems obvious that it is this only of which pre-
existence, patadisaical life and the Divine Vision can be pre-
dicated, and the point is therefore that—contrary to the very
clear do&trine concerning the descent of souls—NEsHAMAH
does not come down and incarnate at birth in any human
being.® It seems in this case to be mere fantasy with which
we have been dealing previously.

There is, however, an attempt elsewhere to harmonise
these disparities, for it is said that when the soul, meaning
NrEsHAMAH, leaves the celestial region and comes down

A (Ley bt. MLL, EOL. 254.3, V, 104.

210. Po fob 26a 5 I aon,

$ID. .f0L. 25884 Ve.OSs

4 We have to check this by other statements as follows: (a) Man is endowed with
a NEPHESH in the first place and it is given him as a preparation for leading a holy
life. —Ib., Pt. I, fol. 206a; I, 424. (b) The three degrees constitute one soul and are
attached one to another.—Ib., Pt. III, fol. 7ob; V, 191. But in further contra-
distin@tion hereto, another ruling suggests that the possession of NEPHEsH and RuaH
leaves man useless for the purposes of Shekinah in captivity and of Moses who abides
with her.—Ib., Pt. I, fol. 28a; I, 175, 176. But the reason seems to be that they are
unskilled in the Secret Dorine.

PZi04) tabby £011 7Ob': IV, 0197, Jkoes

6 Alternatively, the successive addition of higher parts of the soul must be understood
as gifts of grace, and there is authority for this view in the text, though I do not propose
to consider it, as the multiplication of aspe&ts beyond what is aétually needed must
tend only to the reader’s confusion. I have registered the fact for the use of those who
would carty their research further. When it is said elsewhere that NESHAMAH cannot
sin, the reference—from such point of view—is to a State of attained sanétity in which
lapse is—by this statement—impossible, meaning unlikely. It has become not less
difficult to sin than before it was to abstain from sin.

THE SOUL IN KABBALISM ' 243

towards earth it is joined to the intellectual spirit ; afterwards
both are joined to the spirit of light—that is, NepHrsH.t The
spirit of light and the intellectual spirit dwell together and
depend one upon the other; but the soul is independent of
both. Another thesis is that when man proposes to live in
purity, heaven comes to his aid, granting him the holy soul,
by which he is purified and san¢tified ; but if he be unworthy
and will not live in purity, he is animated only by NErHEsH
and Ruaw. It is obvious that this fails to concur with the
earlier Statement, which represents RuaH as a gift to be
eatned ; but we can tread between the lines of contradiction
and conclude that the real intention is to represent the
permanent part of man as descending and overshading the
personality, when this is born into the world; it draws
nearer with his growth and improvement ; and it may be, so
to speak, incorporated with him, or it may not. Understood
thus, the speculation will stand at its value: it is a primitive
ctudity of materialism, but the ZoHar sometimes exceeds
such notions and ascends into a clearer region.

Before giving two or three casual examples, I will cite
another classification because of the extraordinary conse-
quences which follow.? NrpHeEsH is the soul which forms
the body and presides over the propagation of beings ;
Rusu is the soul which causes NEPHESH to a¢t and determines
its kind of aétion®?; NrsHaMAu is the supreme force issuing
from the Tree of Life.t These three degrees separate after
death, each returning to the place from which it was brought.
NEPHESH is presumably of the earth earthy, for it is said to
remain in the tomb ®—but any statement seems to serve
which is made on the spur of the moment ;. Ruaw passes to

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 62a; I, 365. According to Adolphe Franck, NepHesn throughout
the Old Testament signifies the body of man, so long as it is alive —La KaBBALgE, p. 61.
It is identified with the PsrcHe by ADUMBRATIO KABBAL2 CHRISTIANA, which is one
of the rare supplements to Rosenroth’s KaBBALA DENuDATA. It is here regarded as
the vitality inherent in the natural and instrumental body, and it is vegetative
and sensitive in its nature. There seems to be no Zoharic authority for the other
definitions.

* Z., Pt. I, fol. 287b, Appendix II, containing Tosserra or AppitTions: I, 664.

3 Late Kabbalism sometimes termed Ruau the Spirit, meaning the human soul
itself. It was held to extend through the body, to be rational and self-subsisting, but
its mode of comprehension was by intermediaries and not direé&t. It was also the seat
of good and evil, and hence of the moral attributes.

4 NESHAMAH is understanding in late Kabbalism, the individual intelleét communi-
cated by the Catholic and Divine Intelle&.

5 Z., Pt: I, fol. 287b; I, 664, 665. This statement is subje& to considerable modi-
fication in other places.

244 THE HOLY KABBALAH

the Earthly Paradise, where the High Priest Michael offers it
as a holocaust to the Holy One and it remains in the joy of
Paradise!; NESHAMAH ascends on high.2 What purpose
has been attained by its experience below does not appear in
the text : it cannot sin, and it is not in search of merit. There
is no need to add that—here again—this version of the
tripartite personality, postulating independent survival in
three separate directions—for NEPHESH is alive in the tomb—
cannot be reconciled with the alternatives that have gone
before. I conclude that the Secret Do@trine in Israel was
unsettled on the subject of the soul and its divisions, that
there is no guide for the perplexed therein, and that we shall
come in the end to recognise only one truly and pregnant
Secret Doétrine in Jewry, which is the secret concerning sex.
Among several intimations which are better than formal
attempts to classify there is one which says that man acquires
the soul of soul by fear of the Lord and by wisdom. He
acquires the soul by penitence. Abraham represents the soul
of soul; Sarah is the soul; Isaac is the intellectual spirit ;
and Rebecca is the vital spirit. Another speculation desig-
nates NEPHESH as the soul in a state of sleep, and this definition
seems excellent. Ruan is the soul in a waking state, by which
I understand the earlier stages of becoming alive to things
above. It is said that these two do not differ in essence.
Above them is NesHAmMAH, which is the soul proper. These
grades of the spirit of man are the image of the Mystery of
Wisdom, and to fathom them is to discover that Wisdom.
When NzsHAMAH is pre-eminent in man he is called holy.
The parts of the spiritual personality are by no means
exhausted in any triadic enumeration,® for ascent in the

1 This also is qualified ; it remains in the Paradise for a period and then returns
whence it came, because the spirit—7.e., Ruan—goes back to God Who gave it.

2 It returns to the Tree of Life, because it came therefrom.

3 (Z.., Pt. 1, fol. 2644 ; IE, 622.

4 Ib., fol. 83a, b; I, 480, 481.

5 A mote simple extension than here follows is given in Pt. IJ, fol. 158b; IV, 95,
where it is said that the soul has five names, being NEpHEsSH, RuAH, NESHAMAH,
Haid and YEHIpDAH. ‘This is an extract from THE FAITHFUL SHEPHERD. But—as
we have seen—HaiA is sometimes a synonym for Ruan. Isaac Myer gives the
following definition: “‘ Yx’Hu-pAH, the only one, is the personality of man; Haid
is the life in man ; NrEsHAMAH the soul or intellect ; Ruan the spirit ; NepxHesu the
animal soul or vital dynamics, the anima.—PuHiLosopHy OF Isn GEBIROL, p. 397. Sucha
classification makes for confusion only as the distin€tions do not correspond to separable
aspe@ts of human nature. Late Kabbalism said that YEnrpaun is individuality—the
unity or correspondence by which man becomes like unto his First Cause. Haid
is a condition of unity between the particular and catholic intelle&, the union apparently

THE SOUL IN KABBALISM 245

grades of sanctity can provide additionally to these and in
succession: (1) a soul from the world of emanation on the
side of the Daughter of the King!; (2) a soul from the world
of emanation on the side of the Son of the King?; (3) asoul
from the side of the Father and the Mother?; and (4) a soul
which refle&s the four letters of the Sacred Name Jehovah.
This is one specimen extension, but there are others, some of
which I will omit and some are transferred to their proper
place elsewhere. I may add here, however, that there is a
casual supplementary soul® added to the Students of the
Doéitrine on the Sabbath Day, after which it returns whence
it came. It appears to be a sacred soul issuing from the Tree
of Life, and it is adapted to the works of the recipient. An
alternative account attaches it to all good Israelites who fulfil
the Law, whether they are students of the Doétrine in the
deeper mystical sense or not.

The state of the soul in the world to come is described in
several ways, as we should expect assuredly ; but those which
concern the blessed life of the departed can be harmonised,
or at least there is nothing of essential discrepancy. When
the good soul is preparing to leave this world, and while it is
suspended from the body only at the larynx, it beholds three
angels, to whom the dying man confesses his sins.6 These
spirits engarner the souls of the just and they accompany the
glorious Shekinah, for no man leaves this world without
seeing the Shekinah at the last moment of life.? The soul
prostrates itself before her and praises God.® It seems then
to enter a cavern wherein is a door leading to the Earthly
Patradise®; there it encounters Adam, the patriarchs and all
the just, who rejoice with her and she is admitted within the
Garden. Either then or previously, she has been furnished

of our life with that life which is Divine. Franck says that it is the vital spirit, that its
seat is in the heart, and that it is distin& from the principle of animal life—-La KaBBALE,

p. 235.

£2 Ptsil, fol: 94b's; HE: 379.

2 Ib., the authority being: “Ye are the children of the Lord your God.”—
Deut. xiv. 1.

3 Z., fol. 94b; IL, 379, 380. The versicle appertaining hereto is “‘ breathed into
his nostrils the breath of life ; and man became a living soul.”—Gen. ii. 7.

4 A man in possession of this soul is the image of the Heavenly Master. Of him
it is said: “‘ And have dominion over the fish of the sea.”—Gen. i. 28.

5 See Z., Pt. Il, fol. 88b ; Il], 361—among many other places.

6 Z., Pt. I, Appendix III, Secrer Miprass, fol. 3b; II, 677.

7 Ib

8 [b., fol. 2b ; II, 676.
® Jb., Pt. I, fol. 127a; II, 103. See also fol. 287b ; II, 664.

246 THE HOLY KABBALAH

with an envelope other than the fleshly body but still having
the form thereof.? It is said as to this that the days of life are
a vesture, and the days of man’s life on earth are his vesture
in the world to come, in so far as he has lived them worthily.?
The odours given forth daily in the Garden of Eden perfume
the precious vestments woven out of the days of man.? This
again is a Clear issue at its value, but it is superseded in other
accounts and it complicates its own position by adding that
there is one vesture * for NESHAMAH, another for Ruan, and
one finally of an external and scarcely perceptible kind for
NepHEsH °—all formed from the days of life. At the same
time the commandments of the Law are the vesture of
NESHAMAH.®

In this way we are taken to another point of spiritual pro-
gression which may be perhaps without prejudice to what
has gone before. When the soul of a man who has been con-
secrated to the study of the Law during life quits this worid,
it goes up by the roads and pathways of the Law,’ so that his
knowledge is a guide in attainment, while the souls of those
who have neglected such study go astray in the paths which
lead to the region of GEBURAH, where they suffer punishment. ®
In another manner of symbolism the Law goes before the
soul when it rises into the celestial regions, and it opens to
him all the doors. The Law remains with the soul till the
day of resurrection, when it will take up the defence of the
soul. This is again in reference to the Students of the Law,

ai ks A LO. O1A 0 5 0G,

2 See post, p. 285; and Z., Pt. I, fol. 224a,b; II, 482-484. It is said elsewhere that
the soul cannot have two vestures at one and the same time, even as the spirit of good
and the spirit of evil cannot dwell together. The heavenly envelope is assumed, or
the soul is clothed therewith, when that of earth is decomposed as well as laid aside.
It is a curious theory of vehicles, but it rests—ex Aypothesi—on the authority of Rabbi
Simeon. The objeé of Samael is to hinder man from receiving the garment of heaven,
and this he can do until the fleshly body has dissolved.—Ib., Pt. I, fol. 169b, 1704 ;
II, 441. But the reference is apparently to NepHesH. The Ruan is itself not at rest ;
it is only after the complete return of the earthly part to earth that it is drawn back to
the Holy Spirit Which gave it.

od Ue

4 It is admitted that the wise in doétrine have not reached a full agreement on the
subjeét, yet the number of vestures is three.—Ib., fol. 225a; I, 485.

5 Because, notwithstanding previous testimony, NEPHESH is bound up with the
body in its tomb for twelve months only, after which it goes wandering and enters
into communication with those who are Still incarnate, to inquire respeCting their
sufferings and to pray at need for them.—Ib., Pt. I, fol. r41b ; IV, 48.

6 Presumably NesHAMAH is so clothed with righteousness because it cannot sin.

7 Ib., fol. 175b ; Il, 290. See also fol. 27a; I, 170.

8 [b., Pt. I, fol. 175b; TI, 290.

9 Jb., fol. 1852; II, 329.

THE SOUL IN KABBALISM 247

and it is said that after their resurrection they will preserve
intaé all knowledge which they had during their antecedent
life.t Indeed such knowledge will be extended, so that they
will be able to penetrate mysteries which were concealed from
them previously.2 It would seem also that those who are
dedicated to the study of the Law on earth will be so occupied
also in the world to come, and this apparently apart from the
resurrection life.?

I will make an end of these economies by condensing one
more parable of the soul.4 There are Seven Palaces on high
containing the Myéstery of Faith, and I understand these as
seven stages of union, like a tower going up to God. In case
Tam correct herein, it is said that six of them are accessible to
the understanding of man, but the seventh is secret and forms
part of the Supreme Mysteries. The reason is the old reason,
namely, that “‘eye hath not seen”; and considering that in
this state the union is altogether ineffable, it may be worth
while saying that we have no title to term it absorption,
identity, or by any other word which is within the measures
of things expressible. There are also Seven Palaces below,
and among these one is superior to the rest, as it holds both
from heaven and earth. For the rest, they are postulated in
relation to certain grades of advancement in the world to
come. When the souls of the just leave material life they
enter the first Palace and are occupied with preparations for
the next stage of their experience, but there are no particulars.®
The second Palace * is the sojourn of those who have suffered

1 Z., fol. 185a ; I, 330.
2 Ib

8 Ib, When stripped of its conventions, the real meaning which issues from these
extracts is that the pursuit of the Law is the following of the will of God and that the
union hereafter therewith is a penetration of the Divine Mystery, in which the soul
progresses for ever.

2. foli 38a‘; T'235.

5 Ib.

©1271, Pt. 1) fol 38b 3b, 236:

? There are several systems of Palaces described by the Zonar ; there are those in
which speech prevails but in others thought or intention. The latter are more exalted
in order, presumably because silence is better than speech, seeing that it stands for
the contemplation of God in the heart. Ido not find for what reason per se or in what
manner, but the objeét of all the Palaces above is to preserve Shekinah in the world
below. The variant accounts are somewhat confusing, as it is not invariably too eas
to see whether the subje& of discourse is the Palaces which ate above or those whic
ate below. (See, for example, Z., Pt. I, fol. 38a; I, 236.) It is said (Ps. xxvii. 4):
“That I may dwell in the House of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the
beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in His Temple.” The beauty of the Lord is held
to designate the Palaces above, but the word “‘ beauty ” is rendered “‘ delights ” by the
Zouar. The Temple means the Palaces below. The seven superior Palaces are

H.K. Ss

248 THE HOLY KABBALAH

morally and physically in the present world, but have given
daily thanks to their master, this notwithstanding, and have
not neglected prayer.1 The Messiah descends into this abode
and thence he draws souls into the third Palace. It is the
place of those who have suffered extremely in earthly life as
the result of serious disease. It contains also the souls of
young children and of such as have shed tears over the
destruction of the Temple. They are consoled by Messiah,
who brings them into the fourth Palace, where are the souls
of all those who have shared the sorrow of Zion and those
also who have been slain by heathens. The fifth Palace is the
sojourn of true penitents, who have restored their souls to a
State of purity, and of those who have san@ified the Name of
their Master by going to meet death for His glory.2 There
also are the souls of those who have repented on their death-
beds, since the Doétots of Kabbalism insist no less on the
possibility of saving the situation of life thus at the last moment
than do the Doéors of the Latin Church: for the one and
the other the great fatality resides in final impenitence. The
sixth Palace is the sojourn of the souls of ZELATORES who
have proclaimed the Master’s unity, and have loved Him
with a true love.2 The seventh Palace is that which I have
called superior in respect of the rest; it is also more secret
and mysterious. It is not unlike that glimpse of the Beatific
Vision which according to Catholic Theology is seen for a
moment by souls on the threshold of purgatory, or it is like
the vision of Shekinah which is granted in articulo morts,
accotding to Kabbalism—as we have seen. The soul on its

(x) the basis and beginning of the Mystery of Faith ; (2) the abode of Faith; (3) the
place in which worthy souls are offered in sacrifice ; (4) the place of judgment, whether
ptopitious or otherwise; (5) the Palace of Love; (6) the Palace of Mercy; and
(7) the Holy of Holies and final end of souls—See Tract Pataces, being Appendix II.,
Z., Pt. Il, fol. 244b, 261a; IV, 277-294. There are also Seven Palaces of Prayer,
ptovided with doors by which the prayers of man ascend to the Great Master. The
first corresponds to the “ paved work of a sapphire stone.” —Ex. xxiv. 10. It leads to
the heaven of heavens. ‘The second is like “ the body of heaven in its clearness ” (zb.).
The third is a Palace of pure untinétured light, having a point of golden splendour.
The fourth is.a Palace of 70 lights, while the splendour of the fifth is like that of the
lightning and thunderbolt, combining purple with many colours. The sixth is the
Palace of Will, and it diffuses 12 lights ; its mystery is expressed by the words: “ Thy
lips ate like a thread of scarlet’? (SONG OF SOLOMON iv. 3). It is also the Palace of
Love. But the seventh Palace is devoid of all form; it constitutes the Mystery of
Myésteties ; and it is separated from the other habitations by a veil. Herein sojourns
the Infinite Will —Z., Pt. I, fol. 41b-45b ; I, 248-265.

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 38b; I, 237.

2 Ib., fol. 39a; I, 239.

8 Jb.,.I, 240.

THE SOUL IN KABBALISM 249

departure from earth enters this Palace fora moment—though
there seems no assignable reason and though it is not said to
see anything: it is then immediately relegated to that place
of sojourn which corresponds to its state at death. It will be
noted that the parable has no logical consistence—as it has
no concurrence with previous accounts: if those who have
suffered martyrdom for the glory of God have a particular
abode assigned them, it is obvious that others who have died
naturally, for example, have no title therein; and so of the
rest. Were it worth while to exercise one’s mind on the sub-
je@t, it might be suggested that souls which have reached a
certain grade in life do not pass through the Palaces below
that grade, while those who are below work upward and
attain that grade after a given period in the world to come.
But the Zour is really concerned only with enforcing the
idea of ascent in the scale hereafter, and the logic of its fi@iion
is of no consequence in comparison with the main object. It
is therefore idle to reCtify on our part; let us realise rather
that the Zowar is establishing another point of correspondence
between the lesser and greater world. We have seen how early
in the Christian centuries it forestalled the modern doétrine of
macrocosmic evolution, and this now is a story of evolution
in the microcosm, working on the basis of six periods corte-
sponding to those of creation ; and as the latter was followed
by a period of rest, so is the seventh Palace a place of secrecy
and mystery, suggesting a Sabbatic state. But above it there
is the other and ineffable order of Supernal Palaces, and beyond
the present epoch in created things there is the Messianic age
to come, in which the story of the world and man reaches its
end for Zoharic Theosophy, as it does in the Apocalypse for
Theosophy according to Christ.

The idea of reincarnation in Kabbalism has been the subje&
of much confusion in the modern occult schools, which have
depended, firstly, on the vague and incorrect vestige of
elucidation offered by Adolphe Franck 1 and, secondly, on the
obvious misstatements of Eliphas Lévi.? It is dismissed by

1 LA KABBALE, pp. 244-247. There is postulated in the first place the fa& of
metempsychosis in Kabbalism on the authority of Z., Pt. II, fol. 99b, and afterwards
the author gives a very imperfect account of the Zoharic do&rine concerning over-
ee impingement, or embryonic states of souls, with which I am proceeding
to deal.

2 See A. E. Waite: THe Mysteries or Macic: A Digest of the Writings of Eliphas
Lévi, second Edition, 1897, where it said that a multiplicity of incarnations has never
been recognised by Kabbalists of the first order.—pp. 131, 132.

$ 2

250 THE HOLY KABBALAH

the one in a few paragraphs and the other states that the
doétors of traditional science in Israel did not admit the
subject. On the contrary, there is a clear system of reincarna-
tion scattered throughout the Zonar, but it calls to be dis-
tinguished from those later developments with which I must
deal otherwise.

To some extent the doctrine hinges on questions of pater-
nity, for it is stated plainly that when a man has failed to have
children in this world, the Holy One will send him back, and
many times at need, to fulfil what has been negleéted, so that
he is compared to a plant which is removed continually from
the ground and located elsewhere—in the hope that it will
do better.! Reincarnation is not, however, an universal law,
ot at least it is contingent in other cases than the particular
case which has been just specified. Those who have accom-
plished their mission during a single sojourn on earth rest
near to the Holy One; those who return are those who have
not finished their work, whether it be that of parentage or
otherwise.? It is rather obvious that the perfect fulfilment of
the Law was a matter of great difficulty, and we know that
St. Paul regarded it as an intolerable burden ; we know also
that failure in certain points voided the entire fulfilment ; and
the inference would seem to be that reincarnation for the doing
of that which had been previously left undone and for the
undoing of that which was amiss formerly must, by the
hypothesis, have been the rule rather than the exception.
Hence it is said in one place that the words “ seeing that he
also is flesh ” 3 signify that the spirit of man, meaning his soul,
will be many times reclothed with flesh, until the time comes
when the soul shall be susceptible of receiving the spirit of
God. In order that the significance of the expression should
not temain doubtful, it is added that the Holy One will some
day ransom the world and will grant the spirit in question to
men generally, so that they may live eternally.4 This is said
to be shewn by the words: “ For as the days of a tree are the
days of my people,” > and also: “ He will swallow up death
in vitory: and the Lord God will wipe away all tears from

107... Pt, AL, fol.186b ; 11,337;

2 Jb., fol. 187b; Il, 341.

3 Gen. vi. 3.

4 An allusion apparently to the permanence of the resurretion State.
5 Is. Ixy.\'22.

THE SOUL IN KABBALISM 251

off all faces ; and the rebuke of His people shall He take away
from off all the earth: for the Lord hath spoken it.” }
Reincarnation or transmigration would seem also to be the
invariable fate of the Gentiles. The souls of Pagans who
deliver up their bodies in the Holy Land are not received in
heaven: they wander about in the universe, transmigrate
many times and finally return to the unclean place whence
they came.? The souls of Israel which leave the body outside
Palestine have also transmigrations and wanderings before
reaching the region assigned them.® If this is to be taken as
definite—and I do not think that the view is revised sub-
sequently—one side of the law of reincarnation depends upon
a merely external accident.* It will be useful to remark here
that the ZoHaR knows nothing concerning spaces of time
intervening between death and rebirth; the question does
not seem to have arisen within their consciousness; the
period elapsing may have been variable, as it is regarded in
Eastern doctrine; but the new event is sometimes at least
immediate. Seth, for example, was animated by the soul of
Abel, which thus returned to earth.2 At the birth of Ben-
jamin, however, his soul left the body of his mother, which it
had animated previously. At the death of Rachel, her soul
animated the son of Benjamin.’ It seems to follow that in
each case there were two souls at one time in the same body.
It is said further that Phineas received the soul of Nadab and
Abihu, who wete alive at the time.® Rabbi Simeon testifies
that this is a mystery, meaning that their soul did not find
refuge under the wings of Shekinah, because they left no
children and had thus diminished the figure of the King.

I have spoken already of the place—whatever it is, for it is
indeed described variously—in which souls are reserved,
awaiting the period of their primary embodiment in flesh ;
and I have mentioned the notion that at the Messianic period

4 Ig, xxv. 8.
* 2g btadl, 10l. 1414 : iv, 46.
3_ Tb,

* See post, p. 320, regarding final reincarnation, which must take place in Palestine.

5 Jb., Pt. I, fol. 55a; I, 315. Adam is said to have called his son Seth to mark the
end of a situation, the consonants of his name being the two last letters of the alphabet.

© 2 Ped aiola $50 gcils 22 0,

7

Ib,

8 Jb., Pt. Ti, fol. 216b; V, 550. The suggestion is difficult to follow and would
scatcely deserve the pains. It is added that when Phineas slew Zimri and Cozbi the
. tribe of Simeon were keen on avenging the death of their chief; the soul of Phineas
fled and the two wandering souls took possession of its vacant place.

252 THE HOLY KABBALAH

the fount of souls will be exhausted, leading to the creation
of entirely new cohorts.! But it is said also that there will
come a time when old souls, meaning souls in migration, will
be renewed for the renewal of the world.2 Each of these
souls who have been incarnated previously will be united to
a new cteated soul, as it is written: ‘‘ And it shall come to
pass that he that is left in Zion, and he that remaineth in Jeru-
salem, shall be called holy, even every one that is written
among the living in Jerusalem.” 3 We see by these extracts
that reincarnation according to Kabbalism is complicated by
several considerations and that the word impingement or
ovetshadowing would be a better description of that which
occutted in certain cases. The subjeé is not developed in the
text itself, and it came into the hands of later Kabbalists who
manufactured mighty systems thereon. The testimony of
Isaac de Loria in his Book OF THE REVOLUTIONS OF SOULS is
an instance of the lengths to which it could be carried and I
shall have to deal with it at a later stage.4

The question of resurrection in connection with reincarna-
tion created difficulties of its own. It was alleged that in the
case of souls who take flesh several times the body which shall
rise will be that in which the soul has succeeded in taking root,
meaning presumably that it has fulfilled the Law in perfection.
Those bodies in which the soul fails to reach its ends are like
dried up trees which fall to dust, and they will rise no more.
There is some subtlety in this as a way out of the difficulty
created by the idea of resurrection in connection with the idea
of rebirth. But it will be observed that nothing is said as to
those who have been rooted only in wickedness. I may add
that the Zoharic doétrine of the world to come and the
recompenses and punishments therein is quite independent of
any reincarnation hypothesis and cannot be adjusted thereto.
The two notions were developed almost certainly in complete
independence of each other. As regards resurrection, there
is a variant of the above view, according to which the soul
will return into the last body that was animated, but the pre-
vious bodies will tise also and will be animated with new
souls. “If these bodies have fulfilled meritorious works ”—
I give the literal words in this instance—“ they will continue,

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 28b; I, 179. ails, ae sge
2 Ib., Pt. I, fol. 1194; II, 76, 77. 4 See Book IX, § 1.
& 2... cil, holias wae) Tl, ate.

THE SOUL IN KABBALISM 253

but ifnot they will return again to dust,” and as no purpose will
have been setved, this reverie does not seem less than imbecile.!

Some incidental points may be summarised as follows. On
the basis of the words: “One generation passes away, and
another generation cometh,” ? it is said that the generation
which comes is that also which has passed.? Reincarnation is
sometimes despite the soul and sometimes apparently other-
wise.* In one place it is formulated in the terms of uttermost
simplicity by affirming that souls are sent for a second time
on earth, that they may repair faults committed on the first
occasion.» ‘They come back also through the workings of
Grace, as for example when husband and wife have been
Sterile through no fault of theirs in a previous lifetime®; on
the next occasion they will be enabled to fulfil the Law, though
it is not suggested that they will do so one with another. This
implies that the axiom once an Israelite always an Israelite
obtains automatically, and though I have not had occasion to
mention it previously, it may be said now that what may be
called the primordial generation of the chosen people insures
this—supposing that rebirth occurs. There is another point :
reincarnation is good because good reasons are, by the hypo-
thesis, behind it; but as it is not good in itself, it is well to
be spared therefrom. In conclusion, rebirth befalls those
who do not study the Law, the inference being that those who
do and who at the same time fulfil the other precepts do not
suffer transmigration. ’

II.—ANGELS AND DEMONS

We have seen that the world of Brian is that of Creation
so-called, that is, of the emanation of creative forces. These
forces ate Elohim, and in this sense Brian is therefore the
Elohistic world. It is called also the world of archangels, but

her A tata * Ad TI4s

2 Eccles. i. 4.

3 Z., Pt. I, fol. 268b. Luminous Boox or Book oF Bricutness ; II, 635.

an7,,, bts di, ele OD. Le 384, 388.

6 1b.) iPtsHy foly5.4a) T2444.

6 Ib., fol. toga; III, 429, 430.

7 Ib., Pt. Ill, fol. 178b, THe FarrnHrut SHEPHERD; V, 464. According to the
testimony in this text, incarnation may take place thrice, because of the words: ‘“‘ Lo,
all these things worketh God oftentimes with man.”—Job xxxiii. 29. The Zowar
tenders the passage: “‘ Behold what God doeth in respeét of each man, even to the
third time.”’ Compare the Vulgate: Ecce haec omnia operatur Deus tribus vicibus per
singulos.

254 THE HOLY KABBALAH

this is in later Kabbalism. It would not be exaét to say that
the archangels are ELonim, much less that Michael, Raphael,
Gabriel, Metatron and so forth are deities according to the
Kabbalah.t In a general way it may be affirmed perhaps that
the intelligent forces of the Briatic World, when assumed, so
to speak, by the Divine World, can be regarded as Eton,
in the speculations of later rabbinical minds. Thus, according
to Kabbalism, the three men who appeared to Abraham in
the vale of Mamre to announce the destru@tion impending
over the cities of the plain were three archangels, but they
were also Aponal, the Lord, for they were forms assumed by
Divinity. Even at the risk of forestalling some part of that
which is to come, it seems important to register at this stage
that Shekinah is Erouim as well as Aponar, according to
recurring testimony of the ZouHar, and that she under God
made the world by CuEsEp, which is the highest of Briatic
SEPHIROTH, and it is in this sense that Briau is the Elohistic
world.

Of the hierarchy of spiritual beings outside humanity we
meet with various classifications by different rabbinical writers,
and they are not to be regarded as mere inventions, for they
have their roots or vestiges in Talmudic times. As regards
the descending or demonological scale, later authorities do
not hesitate to contradi& Zoharic statements. It should be
understood that what follows depends from Zoharic expositors
and not from the Zouar itself. They are tabulated on the
Tree of Life and the Four Kabbalistic Worlds, which are
complicated, moreover, by assuming an evolution of the Ten
SEPHIROTH in each. The archangels of Brian, corresponding
to the extension in question through that world, are usually
enumerated as follows :

I. Meratron, Angel of the Presence, World-Prince,
corresponding to KETHER.?

IJ. Razer, the Herald of Deity, corresponding to
CHOKMAH.

1 Isidore Loéb, however, describes METATRON as a species of Demiourgos, following
presumably the heterodox opinions of the Talmudic R. Acher. Franck also regards
him as a Divine Hypostasis.

2 When written with a Jop (MITTRVN), the name Merarron signifies SHEKINAH ;
without that letter it signifies the angel who is “ legate of SHEKINAH,” also called
NGHR = Boy, and hence MeEratron has been said to be a boy-angel—KanBaLa
DENupDATA, Apparatus, i. 528. We shall see later that he has other and more pregnant
titles.

ANGELS AND DEMONS 255

Il. TsapHxret, Contemplation of God, corresponding to
BINAH.
IV. TsapkrEL, Justice of God, corresponding to CHESED.
V. SAMAEL, Severity of God, corresponding to GEBURAH.
VI. Micwart, Like unto God, corresponding to Tip-
HERETH.
VII. Hanrex, Grace of God, corresponding to NETZACH.
VIII. Rapwaez, Divine Physician, corresponding to Hop.
IX. Gasriet, Man-God, corresponding to YEsop.
X. SANDALPHON, Messias, the second phase of Metatron,
cotresponding to MALKUTH.

The world of Yerzrrau or Formation is said to be that of
the angels, who are divided into nine choirs, which are very
nearly identical with the hierarchy of pseudo-Dionysius,
whose scheme has become part of Christianity.1_ Those who
attribute a high antiquity to Kabbalistic Tradition say that
Dionysius drew from the oral doctrine of Israel; others
pretend that Dionysius and the Kabbalah both derive from
Neoplatonism ; but Greek and Hebrew thought had come to
know one another before the date of the Areopagite. Diony-
sius, perhaps, may be taken to represent the point of contact
between Hellenism and Jewry after modification by Chris-
tianity. The Kabbalah may represent, but at a much longer
distance, in the form of its extant literature, the point of con-
tact between Hellenism and Israel unmodified by Christianity.

According to the most usual attribution the choirs of
YETZIRAH are as follows :—

I, HayyorH HA Kaposn, the holy living creatures, or
animals of Ezekiel and the Apocalypse, corre-
sponding to KETHER and to the Christian Seraphim.

IJ. OpuHanim, ot Wheels, also mentioned in Ezekiel,
corresponding to CHoxmManu and the Cherubim.

III. Aratim, or Mighty Ones, corresponding to BINAH
and the Thrones.

ITV. HasumMatim, or Brilliant Ones, corresponding to
CHESED and the Dominations. .

V. SERAPHIM, or Flaming Serpents, corresponding to
GEBURAH and the Powers.

ZOHAR represents the divine messengers as altogether inferior to man and most certainly

to the souls of the just, which ascend higher and attain a superior rank, See the Mantua
edition, iii. 685.

256 THE HOLY KABBALAH

VI. MeLacuim, ot Kings, corresponding to TIrPpHERETH
and the Virtues.
VII. Exontm, or Gods, corresponding to Nerzacu and
the Principalities.
VIII. Bent-ELonim, ot Sons of God, corresponding to
Hop and the Archangels. |
IX. CHERusBIM, the Seat of the Sons, corresponding to
Jesop, the Foundation, and the Angels.

The tenth order required to complete the Sephirotic
attribution is found in the Isum, or beatified souls of just
men, corresponding to MALKuUTH and the great multitude of
the redeemed seen by St. John in the Apocalypse.

These orders are also summarised in the notion of a third
Adam, YETZIRAH, represented by the Marxury of the
Yetziratic world, man in the likeness of the angels—in a
word, the ApAm Microprosopus of the Ipras.

The world of Asstau, ot of matter, is that into which Adam
descended at the Fall, and beneath it is the abode of evil
spirits, the Shells, Envelopes and Corrticzs of the later
Kabbalah. It contains the orders of retrograde spirits
cottesponding by inversion to the angels of YErzrran and
the arch-fiends corresponding after the same manner to the
archangels of the Briatic world.* They are usually enumerated
as follows :

[.—THAUMIEL, the doubles of God, said to be two-headed
and so named, because they pretend to be equal to the Supreme
Crown. This is properly the title of the averse SEPHIRA
cottesponding to KerruEer. The cortex is CATHARIEL,
accotding to the Supplements of the ZoHar. Satan and
Moloch are said to be the arch-demons, but the attributions
ate hopelessly confused throughout, partly owing to the
obscure classifications of the ZoHar and the contradictions
of later Kabbalists.

II].—CHAIGIDIEL, a term connecting with the significance
of placenta, ot, according to other authorities, with that of
obstruction, in the sense of an impediment to the heavenly
influx. This averse SEPpHIRA corresponds to CHoxMAH. Its
cottices are the OGHIEL or GHOGIEL, which cleave to illusory

1 For some information on Kabbalistic demonology, see Diz Kassata: dzhre
Hauptlehren und ihr verhiltnus zu Chriftenthum. Innsbruch, 1885.

2 But there are also many material correspondences which are not of shells and
demons.

ANGELS AND DEMONS 257

ot material appearances in opposition to those of reality and
wisdom. ‘This explanation is, of course, very late. The arch-
demon is said to be ADAM BELIAL, and so again is Beelzebuth.
The Dukes of Esau are connected with this number.

Ill. SarHarrer, the concealment of God, meaning that
this averse SePHIRAH, unlike Brnau or Intelligence, hides the
face of mercy. In the Supplements of the Zovakr it is termed
SHEIREIL, from the hirsute body of Esau. The Dukes of
Esau ate teferred alternatively to this number, instead of to
the averse correspondence of CHOKMAH, by the same work.
LucIFUGE is said to be the arch-demon, but this is obviously
not a Kabbalisticterm : it is known, however, to the grimoires
and to some late demonologists of the Latin church.

IV. GamcuicotH, ot GoG SHEKLAH, disturber of all
things, the averse correspondence of CHESED. According to
the Zoharic Supplements the cortex seems to be AZARIEL.
The atch-demon is AsraroTH in late Kabbalism.

V. Goxas, or burning, in the sense of incendiarism. This
is the averse correspondence of GEBURAH and the antithesis
of the Seraphim or Fiery Serpents. The cortex is UsrzEt.
The arch-demon of late Kabbalism is AsmopEus.

VI. ToGarInI, wtanglers, because, according to Isaac de
Loria, this averse correspondence of TIPHERETH Strives with
the Supernal GepuraH. ‘The cortices are called ZomrieL and
the arch-demon is BELPHEGOR.

VII. Haraz SERAP, dispersing raven, referring to the idea
that this bird drives out its young, the averse correspondence
of Nerzacu. ‘The cortices are the THEUMIEL and the arch-
demon is BAAL CHANAN.

VIII. SamaEt, or embroilment, corresponding to Hop,
the supernal Victory. The cortices are THEUNIEL according
to the Supplements of the ZoHaAR, and ADRAMELEK is the name
assigned to the arch-demon by late writers.

IX. GAMALIEL, the obscene, in averse correspondence
with Jxsop, which signifies generation of the higher order.
OcIEL, which other classifications attribute to the averse
correspondence of CHESED, seems to be the cortex mentioned
in the Zoharic Supplements, and the arch-fiend is Liziru,
accotding to late Kabbalism.

X. Lizirn ! is, however, according to another tabulation,

1 According to the Zouar she is a stryge who slays infants.

258 THE HOLY KABBALAH

the averse correspondence of MaLtkutH, with whom later
Kabbalism conneéts NAnEMA,! the demon of imputity.

In Zoharistic doétrine, however, the chief personalities of
ASSIAH ate SAMAEL, who is to some extent the averse Adam
Kadmon, and his bride Lirirn. ‘The Sephirotic attributions
ate obscure and incomplete, but in a general way it is said
that as in the Holy Kingdom so is it in that of iniquity,? as in
the circumcision so also in the uncitcumcision. SAMAEL is
said to be the uncircumcised and his bride is the prepuce,
which, it adds significantly, is the serpent.®

I have given space to this portion of the psychical hypo-
theses of Kabbalism, most of which is post-Zoharic, not
because it is of inherent importance, or can be regarded other-
wise than as a disfigurement of the metapsychical doétrine,
but because we shall have later on to give account of the
connection between the Kabbalah and Ceremonial Magic,
and the doétrine of angels and demons is necessary to the
understanding of this connection. It should be added that
not only is a methodised do@rine of the Celestial and Infernal
Hierarchies not found in the Zonar, but there is no adequate
material for the construction of such a doétrine.

1 A succubus who brings forth spirits and demons after intercourse with men, says
the Zouar, which in various places develops this idea further,

2 Hence the true name of Satan is said to be that of YHVH reversed.— Pike, Moras
AND Docma, p. 102. He is reproducing Eliphas Lévi.

3 -R. Simeon ben Yohai in TixxKunrm, or Supplements, No. 18. See Bern Exronm,
by R. Abraham Cohen Irira, c. ii., KABBALA DENUDATA, ii., Part 3, Tra& 1, ée.,
PNEUMATICA KABBALISTICA, pp. 188 ef seq.

4 The Tatmups abound with legendary history and teaching on this subject, for they
are like a Storehouse of folk-lore as well as of jurisprudence. It has been even proposed
that the medieval notion of vampirism is to be traced to Talmudic fables concerning
Stryges. See A. Brierre de Boismont, Dzs Hatiucrnations, &c. Second ed.,
p. 395. Paris. 1852.

BOOK VII
WAYS OF GOD WITH MAN

259

a :

or P
AA Mia i

y ‘ ¥ i]
We PRE Bret ide ly 3, Sain ba
te mb > oy
4 ee: ee

wit

BOOK VII
WAYS OF GOD WITH MAN

I—THE MYTH OF THE EARTHLY PARADISE

In some previous chapters I have been content to lead up
as I could to certain intimations which have formed part of
each concerning that Mystery of Sex which is called Mystery
of Faith and Supreme Mystery in the Zonar; but in the
present consideration it will be with us even from the begin-
ning. It is a matter of some difficulty to disassociate the
subject from that Divine Personality—the Indwelling Glory—
which is the central figure of the Aramaic text and the full
discussion of which I have decided for good reasons to
postpone till much later in our Study. It must be remembered
in the first place that there ate two Gardens of Eden which
ate in communication one with another, while the one leads
to the other.1 The one is the Mystery of Sex as it was
established or rather formulated originally on this lower
eatth, by the hypothesis of the Secret Doétrine, but this
Garden was ravished ; the other is a Mystery in Transcend-
ence, as it subsists in the Eternal World, the World of the
Supernals. In the symbolism of the whole subject, the ward
of both is womanhood ; she is the Garden in transcendence
and she is also the Garden? below, or alternatively their

1 According to later Kabbalism, the Superior Paradise is referrable to BrrAH in
respect of souls and to YETzIRAH in respect of angels, but this is manifestly opposed
to Zoharic teaching, by which it is allocated to Bina and is therefore in the Supernal
World of ArzmurH. ‘The Inferior Paradise is in Asstan according to both forms of
Kabbalism. We have seen also that the Higher Eden is the abode of souls awaiting
incarnation and that the Lower Eden is, so to speak, the threshold of entrance into the
life of earth. So also on the return journey through the gate of death the Lower
Paradise is a tarrying-place for the souls of the just before they ascend higher, that is
to say, into the Supernal Eden, where perfe& liberation is enjoyed.—Z., Pt. TI, fol.
196b ; V, 506.

2 According to Franck, Paradise is always termed by the Kabbalists either pry 33 =
the Garden of Eden or san adiy = the World to Come and never nip = PARDES =
Garden, this being the word of the modern Kabbalists—La KaBBALE, p. 57. GAN

261

262 THE HOLY KABBALAH

mystery is she ; and their image amidst the exile and penitence
of this present order is also woman—woman in her betrothals,
woman in her espousals, woman as wife, mother, daughter
and sister. We shall see at a later stage that all these designa-
tions are titles of Shekinah—as the Divine Personality which
{ have mentioned—and she can be regarded from two points
of view, being (1) as woman in the archetype and (2) as the
Mystety of Sex. Speaking essentially, these two are reducible
to one. But the male is not without the female, nor is the
woman apart from man in respect of this mystery, which
includes all. It is that of God in His concealment—hbeing,
however, the concealment of KerHer and not that of AIN
SopH—of God also as He is manifested in the Secret Do€rine,
and of prototypical humanity. It is the mystery of the
Traditional Fall of man and of all the banishments which the
elect are postulated as having suffered ; but as it is owing to
this mystery that each one of us is incarnate here so is it also
through this that we return homeward into the refuge whose
name is Shekinah: it is with us at this day in the bondage of
our mortality, but it is also the law of our liberation. The
Zoharic Legend of the Earthly Paradise may be held to
formulate the mystery, but without expounding it. The
Paradise above is called “ the San@uary, O Lord, which Thy
hands have established.” 1 The Paradise below has the Holy
of Holies for its image and both are at the centre of the earth,
called Zion and Jerusalem—the place and house of peace.?
As regards the making of man we know that there are two
accounts in Genesis, one dovetailed into the other, a fact
which the Zoharic do&tors did not realise, and with the
difficulties which thus arose they dealt as they could. Accord-
ing to the Elohistic text man was made in the likeness of the
Elohim—that is to say, male and female, for which reason we
shall see that Shekinah—whose title is Elohim—is presented
as male on a few very tare occasions, but so invariably other-

EpEN is applied in the Zohar both to Brinan and Matrkutu as the Sephirotic locations
respectively of the Superior and Inferior Eden.

Pi Pe Pt LOL, ate yds) Bee

2 See note, p. 210. ‘The Palace or Paradise below is modelled on the pattern of that
which is above, for the Divine Presence in MaLkutu, as the Kingdom of this world,
does not differ from the Divine Hypostasis in Bryan, which is the World to Come.
The Lower Garden was formed and planted by the Holy One, that He might have joy
with the souls of the just who dwell therein ; but the Garden which is placed in the
transcendence, under the Wings of Shekinah, is the place of contemplation for souls
in the sweetness of the Lord, and herein is the Blessed Vision.—Z., Pt. II, fol. 1274;
IV, 8.

THE MYTH OF THE EARTHLY PARADISE 263

wise as female that the alternative has the aspect of a mere
blunder or a wilful confusion of issues. In so far as she
represents the Mystery of Sex, it might be said that she is of
both sexes, is male on the right side of the Tree of Life—
which is the masculine side—and female on the left side.
But the myth of the Earthly Paradise is a Jehovistic text, and
by its hypothesis Adam, being the male in distin@ion from
the female, or having the female latent within him, was made
in the first place. Now, it is said that when the Holy One
created Adam He exhorted him to walk in the way of good-
ness and revealed to him the Mystery of Wisdom, by aid of
which he could attain even to the Supreme Degree.1 He
gave him also the Law and taught him His ways.? This is
not, however, Adam in distin@tion from Eve but refers to
humanity in its two primordial forms: so also in respect of
what follows. Man was crowned with celestial crowns and
was so formed that he could rule over the six directions of
space ; he was perfect in all things and bore the seal of the
heights on his countenance. The angels encompassed him
and honoured him, revealing mysteries relating to the know-
ledge of their Master. But he on his part beheld all Supreme
Mysteries and all wisdom—exceeding, as we have seen a!ready,
the science of the angels—and he knew the glory ot God.
The intention was that he should remain united in heart and
mind to Him Who was his model, thus being preserved un-
changed, like God Who is the synthesis of all things and in
Whom all is unified.? If it be said that this is mere fantasy in
distraction, because man, by the hypothesis of the legend, did
not know good or evil and much less one from another, I can
point out only that authorised Christian do&rine on the same
subject is in the same case precisely, since it is obvious (a) that
in such state no person can be accountable for disobedience,
ot (9) if he be so accountable he is at least aware that obedience
is on the side of goodness and its opposite on that of evil:
but this spoils the postulate. The unreason is of course to
treat a pure myth as if it were literal history. By so much,
however, as we elect to exalt the state of man in Paradise, by

LZ, Pt. 1, fol) r40b)s TA.

e\Id., fol. 19943) 11, 338:

3 Z., Pt. I, fol. 321e, 221b; II, 470. It is said also that God encompassed Adam
with glory from on high (7b.), meaning the resplendent vesture or vehicle in which he
was manifested before he was clothed with skins as one consequence of his Fall,

H.K. T

264 THE HOLY KABBALAH

so much our construction crucifies further the story with
which it professes to deal.+

In respect of the Garden itself, we learn that the whole
world is watered by that mysterious river which went forth
out of Hden—meaning the Paradise that is above.2 It came
from a secret place on high, and brought life to things below.®
This place is symbolised by the letter Bern, when it appears
for the first time in Genesis. The meaning is that this letter
contains all letters in its womb, even as the river vivifies all
things else. ‘The secret place resembles a narrow path along
which it is difficult to travel, but there the treasures of the
world are hidden. The river brings sanétity from on high ;
and when the Kingdom of Heaven shall have come under
the form of first-fruits of the earth, the latter will be raised
and made equal with Heaven. One might call this a keynote
for the whole doétrine of cosmology, except that a keynote
of one or another kind seems to emerge everywhere. Holi-
ness is life, and the world subsists by holiness. If this, its
correspondences and analogues, were not the beginning,
middle and end of Zoharic Theosophy, I should have no
cause to wrtite about it, because it would not belong to the
Secret Do&rine of God, which is my concern in the old
literatures.

As regards the formation of Eve from the side of Adam,
we meet in the ZoHAR with another presentation of a tradition
which is found in many places of legend.4 Adam and Eve
were joined side by side originally. ‘The explanation—which
is given in one place only, or perhaps I should say rather that
there is no alternative—is after the most inscrutable manner
of the text—z.e., that they were not face to face because as yet

1 We ate told in Gen. ii. 15, that “‘ the Lord God took this man, and put him into
the Garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it.” With this it is interesting to contrast
the Zoharic ideas of those duties which fell to Adam in his original state of radiance.
He was set to offer sacrifices in the Garden, and for such purpose an altar is postulated
therein, which he profaned by his Fall, and so became a tiller of the ground.—Z., Pt. I,
fol. 57b; I, 331. It is said in another place that he was set to grow roses. ‘These
things occurred by the hypothesis before the institution of blood offerings ; we can
infer therefore that the sacrifices of Adam were offerings of aspiration, and I think that
what is indicated is part of the Mystery of Union. We shall see otherwise the kind of
altar that was profaned by the Fall; it is simply another aspect of the mystery of woman-
hood—that Garden which man was given to cultivate—Ib., Pt. II, fol. 1o9a; III, 430.
The roses were children of Shekinah, because she is.the Rose of the World, and under
another aspe¢t is herself the Garden.

2 Ip., fol. 20b 5.1, 192.

8 In other terms, it brought the celestial waters, and thus gave birth to the plants
and fruits which flourished in the Garden.—Ib., fol. 59b ; I, 348.

© Lip PEP A. B52 1, 2TU.

THE MYTH OF THE EARTHLY PARADISE 26°

“the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth.” 1
This is on the authority of Rabbi Simeon, who forgot, as one
might think, for a moment that the same verse adds: “ And
there was not a man to till the ground.” Too much attention
must not be given to inconsistencies of this kind—whether or
not some means of escape happens to be found subsequently—
as the purpose of the ZonHar is always to make known a point
of its Secret Doétrine which can be hooked on to a text, and
the context—for this purpose—is seldom held to signify.?
The point in this case is (2) that man being superior to all the
works of creation,® the union of man and woman must be
modelled on that of Nature—meaning, however, the Arch-
Nature that is above; but () their union face to face could
not be accomplished till after that of heaven and earth, which
was manifested by rain. It is obvious that a spiritual mystery
is indicated, and one that is part of the intercourse which
constitutes the transcendental unions. ‘The physical basis is
of course that the sex-union of humanity takes place in an
Opposite position to that of all the animals, which was certain
to suggest deep symbolism to Zonaric dodors, though they
do not formulate the contrast. Another intimation is that in
their original state not only was Adam made male and female
but so also was the woman attached to his side.4 I suppose
that this notion is the antechamber or threshold of that
““ Supreme Mystery ” which is believed to be expressed in the
words: “‘ Male and female created He them.’’® It is said
to constitute the glory of God and to be the object of faith.
In the toot-nature it is regarded as inaccessible to human
reason, perhaps in the sense that it has not entered into the
heart of man to understand what God has prepared for those
who love Him, or, from another standpoint, it is a matter of
experience and not of dissertation. By this mystery was man
created, as well as the heaven and the earth. It is inferred
that every figure which does not represent male and female

* Gen it ae .

2 As a matter of fact, the discrepancy is recognised speedily, and the same master of
doétrine explains that there was no man because Eve had not yet been created, and man
was as if non-existent, seeing that he was incomplete in her absence. The last point
is not a subtlety of the moment, but a doétrine which obtains everywhere regarding
our human nature.—Z., Pt. I, fol. 35a; I, 217.

3 Ib., fol. 34b ; I, .216.

* Z., pt. IT f0l 217930. V a see

eS Gren. i, 27:

tT 2

266 THE HOLY KABBALAH

has no likeness to the heavenly figure.t We shall see in due
course that the Holy One does not make His dwelling except
where male and female are united, and there only His bene-
dictions are disposed. ‘This is why Scripture says: And God
“blessed them and called their name Adam, on the day when
they were created.” ?

It is recognised by the Zowar in no uncertain manner that
the condition of side to side was one of imperfe€tion, because
it was not a true union in the likeness of heaven ; the latter is
eye to eye and beyond it there is another State, in which
heaven and earth pass away, like all the former things, since
the distin¢tions of THis and THAT are at an end. Eve was
joined to Adam until he was put to sleep,? and here the text
dwells especially on the fa& that the place of his entrancement
was that place where the Temple was built subsequently.4
As regards the formation of Eve, it is said that “‘ He took one
of his ribs,” and here the Zonar develops a great subtlety,
inferring that the second pronoun alludes, like the first, to
Jehovah Elohim. It says, further, that the plural “ribs ”
signify the virgins of MATRoNnA, meaning her maids of
honour, one of whom was taken to be the “‘ helpmeet ” for
Adam.® However this story is forgotten soon afterwards and
yet others are substituted; but I do not think that we need
attach importance to any.

When the time came for man and woman to be joined face
to face the text which here follows is applied to the inter-
course: “ They stand fast for ever and ever, and are done in
truth and uprightness.”® The reference is to the state of
true nuptials, ineffable in the holy transcendence, when
between the male and the female, as between the wings of
the two cherubim, the glory of Shekinah manifests, when
within and without are over and there is neither marrying nor
giving in marriage because those which were once in separa-
tion have entered into the heaven of union. The words

1 Meaning the Great Adam, the Cosmic Son, himself a reflection of what subsists
but is not explicated in the World of ArziLuTH.

hi Cro in eu

RUZ PRL OL S40 5 a 2e5

‘7b fol. sib. L275):

5 Jb., fol. 28a, b; I, 176-178. The reference is to Gen. ii. 21. It is even said that
““ bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh ’’ (Gen. ii. 23) are words that signify Shekinah,
so close is the conne&tion recognised between the Indwelling Glory who is the guide of
man on eatth and the womanhood which is part of him.

* PS iene.

THE MYTH OF THE EARTHLY PARADISE 267

“Stand fast”? are said to designate male and female, whose
union here below will subsist through all eternity in the
world that is above.1 It consists in a sacred union face to
face, for Zoharic similitudes seldom transcend this, though it
is only the court of the Temple, where the Lover and Beloved
ate still clothed in their vestments. The words: “ There
went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of
the ground ” ? signify the desire of the female for the male,
and here it is added cryptically that man was taken from his
place and transplanted, or changed about, that man and woman
might attain perfection. Now, it is claimed in one place that
the sleep of Adam signifies the captivity, so that it 1s another
episode in the long history of creation ; but it is to be ques-
tioned whether these scattered intimations can be drawn into a
true memorial.

A word must be added concerning the Trees of the Garden,
though I do not know that the Secret Dodrine offers lights
of the first magnitude on this subject. The Tree of Life is
identified with the Doétrine,® presumably in its inward form, or
that which is inculcated by the surface sense and by the sense
within: it is the Holy Law, which offers aspects of truth in
all its interpretations. The fruits of this Tree subsist for ever
and give life to all+; it gave life in particular to the twelve
tribes who issued therefrom.’ It covers those vessels which
are pure souls with its wings. It is Knowledge in the true
sense, which is supernal, the Knowledge that is above reason :
those who are attached thereto possess life in the world to
come as well as life in this world.®

The Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil is reputed
to have been a vine and the forbidden fruit was the grape,’
as to which it is added elsewhere that Scripture interdi€s
wine and fermented drink: but this is obviously untrue. It
is said also to be the female principle,® which, I suppose,
may mean when it is unsandtified and in the state of separa-

nein ead as Sg a) ae Re et IN iy

2 Gen. ii. 6.

9.20) Pte Li fol te6by) rozaiy Thy.36.))

4 Ib., Pt. Il, fol. 2a; Ill,3. They are sweeter than honey.—Ib., Pt. I, Appendix 3 ;
Ii, 730:
erat the end of time the purified Israel will depend from this Tree only.—Id., Pt. III,
fol. 124b 3; V, 322.

6 It is the centre of all life.—Z., Pt. II, fol. 11a; TI, 48.

707d. Pt. I, 1y8bi3°Vy410, fol 1292 3) Vy327:

8 Jb., Pt. I, fol. 36a; I, 223.

268 THE HOLY KABBALAH

tion.! Among the fables concerning it there is that which
relates how it invited many spirits to revolt before they were
furnished with bodies, meaning possibly in the state of pre-
existence about which we have heard previously. When so
furnished, these spirits conceived a plan to descend on earth
and assume possession thereof. God classed therefore the
spirits in two categories, the good being placed on the side
of the Tree of Life and the evil on that of mixed knowledge.
He provided the first with bodies, but when the time had
come to do likewise in respe& of the second, the Sabbath
interrupted the work of creation —otherwise there would
have been wreck and ruin from end to end of the world. By
this intervention the Holy One provided the remedy before
the evil, advancing—that is to say—the hour of the Sabbath,
so that evil spirits had the mortification of seeing good spirits
invested with desirable bodies, whilst they in their deprivation
were impotent. It would seem to follow that the desire of
the evil side is towards sex, but in the iniquity to which it may
be debased. ‘The infernal hosts are therefore in a state of
inhibition, arrestation and unsatisfied longing.

Generally as regards both Trees, the Secret Doérine looks
forward not only towards that time—and because of it is glad
in all its aspects—when the elect will depend no longer on the
Tree of Good and Evil, when they will not be subje& longer
to a Law which legislates on things permitted and forbidden,
on clean and unclean things? Our entire nature will be
drawn in that day from the Tree of Life and there will be no
further debates about the evil and impure, for concerning
this state to come it is written: “Iwillcause .. . the impure
spirit to pass out of the land.” 4 Herein is the rest which
remains for the people of God and the fruition is herein of
those good things of the Lord which are gathered into the
Land of the Living. Now, there is a strange thing said in
another place which seems to connect with the subject and to
issue therefrom in a mystery that seems yet like a path of light.

1 As a matter of fact, the passage referred to, which is curious in all respets, seems
to suggest that the Tree of Knowledge is that evil woman who is the wife of Samael
and intercourse with whom is incest, idolatry and murder. It is the averse side of the
Sex Mystery.

2 Z., Pt. t, fol. 14a; 1, 82.

£77 MPa iieaD; V3} 322,

4 Zechariah xiii. 2.

5 The Tree of Knowledge being the Tree of Death, in contrast to the Tree of Life.—
Ds Ete AES TOLATS 783405.

THE MYTH OF THE EARTHLY PARADISE 269

Between the spirit of good and the spirit of evil “ she must
stand who is called woman,” and they shall then abide in
harmony or in the turning of the evil to account on the part
of goodness. It is by the help of woman that the spirit of
good preponderates over that of evil. After this manner
does the Mystery of Faith proceed from more to more in the
law of its self-unfoldment.

In conclusion, I infer that the Tree of Life is over the
female principle in the state of sacramentum ineffabile, preserving
all who are attached to it from death for ever. My reason
is that when it is said of the other Tree that those who are
attached to it cleave also to death, the text quoted is: “ Her
feet go down to death; her steps take hold on hell.” ? As
this is woman on the side of the devil, so is the other woman-
hood also, but on the side of God.

II.— THE SERPENT, SON OF THE MORNING,
AND FALL OF THE ANGELS

An adequate study of Kabbalistic speculations on the
subject of angelology, the fall of the angels and the hierarchy
of demons which came about as a consequence would begin
in Talmudic literature and would be itself an undertaking of
no inconsiderable magnitude, for behind that literature lies
all oriental belief. I do not pretend to know what remains
to be said on the subjeét when I recall the vast histories which
have been written already, counting only from the days ot
Van Dale at the end of the seventeenth century.? It is
fortunate that such an inquiry does not belong to our subject
for there is very little in the Zohar or its expositors which is
important hereon from the standpoint of Secret Dodétrine
though there is a mass of curious speculation and ingarnering
of bizarre superstition. It would be arid and wearisome to
collec it without commentary of any kind, and as certain
tabulations have been made in a previous Book I shall confine

1 Here it is fair to mention that in one place the letter VaAu is said to be the Tree of
Life.—Ib., fol. 1212; V, 309. But the point is that Vau in the perfect state—which I
have called sacramentum ineffabile—is in union with the second HE of the Sacred Name,
as we have seen already.

2» Prow.cwig.

3 Antonio van Dale: DissERTATIONES DE ORIGINE ET PRoGRESSU IDOLATRIZ ...
et de Divinationibus Idolatricts Judeorum. Quarto, pp. 762. Amésterdam, 1696. It offers
a mass of information on angels and demons according to Jewish ideas, on false
Messiahs and on the magical side of Kabbalism.

270 THE HOLY KABBALAH

my temarks under a few general heads, to elucidate things
which led up to the Fall of Man and some which followed
therefrom. I suppose that in the first place a word must be
said upon the subject of evil and how it is regarded in the text.

It seems to follow expressly or by implication from several
statements—some of which have been cited previously—that
there is at least a sense in which God is the Author of evil.?
A system being given in which not only do all things come
from God but He is present immanently in all, it is not un-
natural to accept the dire&t consequences without debate or
refinements, and in this particular respe€&t no difficulty is
created thus in the Kabbalistic mind. The Pauline conscious-
ness that all Nature groaneth and travaileth, the sense of
suffering in all animate beings had never entered therein,
though there was avery keen sense of the burdens on election
in Israel. It is admitted quite freely, and indeed the notion is
implied in several places, that the Holy One has created both
the just and the unjust,? or still more plainly that He formed
man of a spirit of good and a spirit of evil. The exoneration
resides in the fact that evil is of service to good, because good
turns evil to account. Moreover, God created a certain
Tree, the eating of which meant that the full understanding
of the evil side of things entered into the life of humanity ;
but the saving clause is that it imparted also the knowledge
of good. ‘There can be no question—and we have seen
already—that from this point of view the Tree of the Trespass
is a synonym or image of the Written Law, for this is pro-
hibition above all things, which defines evil and separates that
which is so imputed from what is recognised as good. It is
understood, however, that the definition is on the formal side
and stands therein at its value, without reference to essentials.4

1 We have seen also that there is no difficulty in the SEpHER YETZIRAH on the
subje&, and it is this primitive text which is responsible for Sephirotic Theology
throughout the ZouHar proper. The evil which is created by God is to be distinguished,
however, from that which man works on his own part. It is woe to those who make
themselves wicked. ‘This is on the authority of Is. iii. 11. It is ruled, however, that
- “He hath made everything beautiful in His time ” (Eccles. iii, 11), because He is
glorified by the works of the just and the occasional good atts of the wicked.—Z.,
Peo TE folwinza 3s T1L 47.

ALI,

SIRE ts tol. 408.31, 293,

4 The exoneration in chief is, however, in a discourse of R. Simeon, who maintains
that merit and demerit would have been equally impossible for man if God had not
(1) created the Spirit of Good and the Spirit of Evil, and if He had not (2) composed
our nature of both.—Z., Pt. I, fol. 23a; I, 142. The Spirit of Good and the Spirit of
Evil are on the right and left of man. If the last lives in puri vy, the first acquires an

THE SERPENT AND FALL OF THE ANGELS 271

There is no tabulated account of the Hierarchy of the
Blessed Angels in the Zonar, but we hear generically of
great hosts and cohorts, battalions of guardians, usually for
purposes of honour—as when angels accompany Shekinah
on some of her missions }—and there are also clouds of
messengets. It is specified that MEraTron ts the leader of the
Invisible Host and that his place is immediately beneath the
throne of God?; but we are told nothing of legions like
those of the Nine Choirs of Dionystus,? though there are
divisions and subdivisions with correspondences of this kind
in late Kabbalism. As regards the Infernal Hierarchy there
ate various categories consisting of angels who kept not their
first estate and of demons generated in several ways.*

They are specified as comprising ten degrees or ten crowns
below > and corresponding as such to numerous hierarchic
erades,®* separated in appearance yet communicating one with
another, being ramifications of a single tree. There are ten
crowns to the right and ten also to the left,’ for there is a right
and there is a left side in the empire of the demons, this being
modelled throughout on that of God.§ There is even an
infernal triad in correspondence as such with the Sacred Triad
that is above, and the observance of the Paschal Lamb was
instituted to break its bonds.® There are averse Seraphim in
the form of serpents, emanating from the evil serpent.1°
There are finally seven averse Palaces corresponding, on the

ascendency over the second, so that both combine to proteét him in all his ways.—Ib.,
fol. 165b; Il, 250. The Spirit of Evil is in a state of incompleteness unless man
nourishes him by sin.—Ib., fol. 2o1a; II, 398. Apparently, those who thus nourish
their master are maintained in turn by him, whence the happiness and prosperity of the ©
Gentiles is a fruit of the union between Samael and his prostituted wife.—Ib., Pt. II, 11a ;
Ill, 47. It is admitted, on the other hand, that evil is Stronger than good.—Ib., Pt. III,
fol. 263b; VI, 24. But even the demon contains a particle of sanétity, without which
he could not exist.—Ib., Pt. II, fol. 203b ; IV, 205.

1 It is mentioned, for example, that 42 sacred angels, commissioned for her service,
came down with SHEKINAH when she accompanied Israel into Egypt. Each bore a
letter of the Divine Name of 42 letters.—Ib., fol. 4b ; III, 15.

2 Ib., fol. 294b; IV, 318. It is here that METATRON is said to be the name assumed
by Enoch when he was raised to heaven.

® It is just, however, to say that Picus de Mirandula, in his CoNcCLUSIONES
KABBALISTIC&, manages to extra nine hierarchies in the following order: KERUuBIM,
SERAPHIM, CHASMALIN, ARALIM, TARSISIM, OPHANIM, IsH1mM, MELACHIM and ELouIM,
but it is a purely arbitrary classification. See Book X, s.v. Picus.

4 Speaking generally, the Empire of the Demons is supposed to be under the
ptesidency of three chiefs or princes, who are described as three impure branches,
from which depend seventy minor branches, and these are the leaders or angels of the
seventy Gentile nations.—Z., Pt. III, fol. 194a; V, 503.

Pi ( Pedy fOLcto 7a gL ase. ® Je. Ptxlhi fol 37b 9111, 179.

© Zi Pty Ly 27 7a 51 Le 200. ® Jb., Pt. TH, fol. gob ; I, 189.

© T&, Pt, 1, fol, 20748" V,427, 50 IDR EOLV ATONE 281,

272 THE HOLY KABBALAH

one hand, to the Palaces that are above } and on the other to
the seven names which are attributed to the tempting spirit :
Satan, Impure, Enemy, Stumbling-block, the Uncircumcised,
Wicked, Crafty.?

What I may call the metaphysical account is as follows :

When the passive light, designated as darkness in Scripture,
was joined to the active light on the right side, following
the otdinary arrangement of the Sephirotic Tree, many
celestial legions—concluding that there was antagonism
between the modes—in place of harmony or equilibrium by
virtue of the Middle Pillar—declared themselves for the light
of the left side and made ready to revolt against the other.
When the Middle Pillar manifested the Perfe&t Unity of God,
the good legions renounced the struggle and submitted, but
those which were evil* persisted and gave birth as a conse-
quence to hell. In this manner discord was introduced into
the world on both sides, and the sense of the text seems to
suggest that its vibrations remained on that of the good
powers, though apart from any spirit of rebellion. The
Scriptural allusion is: “ And God made the firmament, and
divided the waters which were under the firmament from the
waters which were above the firmament,” © a text which does
duty on many sides of interpretation, and signifies, in this
sense, that He separated the discord which had its source in
the angels who kept not their first estate from that which was
introduced into the world by those who wete cast into the
abyss. Both disruptions had, however, their result below ;
but that which belonged to the first class redounded to the
glory of heaven, had this as its end in view and disappeared
apparently when the end in question was reached. This is so
far concerning one category of souls rejected from heaven
and enchained below. There was another class, the downfall
of which was consequent on the Holy One assembling several
legions of superior angels and advising them that He intended

1 Z., fol. 245a; IV, 278.

2 Tb., fol. 363a; IV, 295, 296.

3 1b., Pt. 1, fol. 17531, 109%

4 The inference seems to be that, belonging to the passive side, their potentiality for
evil was greater than that of the active side, though it subsisted also in this, or the
imputed conspiracy could not have been shared by the intelligences of both sides, as
the case was apparently. It is said also elsewhere that the “ Sons of God ”’ (Gen. vi. 2)
were angels of the evil side who were in a state of perversity from the beginning.—
Ib., fol. 270a; II, 638.

5 Gen. 1.73

THE SERPENT AND FALL OF THE ANGELS 273

to create man. They appear to have replied by quoting the
Psalmist when he said: “ Nevertheless man being in honour
abideth not: he is like the beasts that perish.” 2 Thereupon
the Holy One stretched forth a finger and burned these blessed
legions, after which He called others into His presence and
made the same statement, to which they answered on their
part: “‘ What is man that Thou art mindful of him and the
son of man that Thou visitest him.” ? The Lord explained
that man should be made in His image and would be superior
to those whom He addressed. It does not appear what
happened to these legions.4 There were, moreover, those
Sons of God who “ saw the daughters of men that they were
fair,” 5 and they included Aza and Azael, who entered into a
dispute with Shekinah on the advisability of creating Adam,
seeing that he would end by sinning with his wife, to which
Shekinah replied that before they could make accusations of
this kind it must be postulated that they would prove more
chaste in their own persons. This was the conclusion for
the moment; but the children of God had recourse to the
daughters of men and “took them wives of all that they
chose.” ? The result was that Shekinah stripped them of
their sanctity and of all part in eternal beatitude,* which had
been the case also with the rebellious angels belonging to the
first category : these are burnt eternally in Sheol.® According
to one version Aza and Azael became enamoured of the evil
daughters of Cain,1° but the text says also that the Sons of
Elohim or of God were actually Sons of Cain. We can take
out choice among alternatives over matters of no consequence.
Elsewhere it is affirmed that before the corruption of the

1 Z., Pt. II, fol. 207b, 208a; V, 529.

Biss xttk, 12.

* Ps. viii. 4.

“ It must be confessed that these ridiculous fables have neither an inward sense nor
an outward light. We know that Latin Christianity has a legend of the Fall of the
Angels which connects that event in some clouded manner with the scheme of human
redemption ; but it speaks with the tongue of seraphs in comparison with these
inventions, in which the superior sense of the hierarchies is punished by burning and
expulsion.

 Zy bial tol! 25a ETAT

6 Certain codices of the Zorar cause the Shekinah to intimate at this point that
Adam will indeed end by sinning with a single woman, but it will prove also with
her that he will be able to repair the fault, while the lost angels will sin with many
women and will be deprived of all reparation.

me Crety Ui a 2h

We Perl tole Zh sae hy Ts

wes. LO%s TI 3 ty TOR

10 Ib., fol. 37a; I, 230.

274 THE HOLY KABBALAH

world all men were called Sons of Elohim.!. When Aza and
Azael were cast down, they assumed bodies on earth and were
imprisoned therein.? It was subsequently—according to this
version—that they were seduced by women and are alive at
this day, still instructing men in the Art of Magic, which they
had begun to teach soon after their descent. They were
chained on certain black mountains, which Laban and Balaam
frequented for instruction in the forbidden art.2 ‘There were
in all five orders of intelligence which seem to have been cast
out of heaven, and some of them wete incarnated as men.4
These were the Giants of Genesis, the NEpuiurim, the descen-
dants of AMALEK, the Intruders of the Taumup, and so
forth. It is on record that they caused the destruction
of the Temple.

There is a distin@ion made in the ZoHar between the
serpent mentioned in Genesis and him who rode thereon.
It is said that the serpent was female and was she who is
called the Prostituted Woman.5 She was the wife of him
who tode upon her back,® and this was Samael the death-
angel. It comes about in this manner that there is male and
female on the evil, even as on the sacred side ’—though in a
rough and general sense the right side is sometimes said to be
masculine and the left feminine. Samael is the tempter-spirit
whose purpose is to put man to the test, and his other name

SZ k te Ae KeOn. Strats) LAs,

2 Ib., fol. 58a; 1,334. They belonged to that class who appeared under the form of
men, and it was possible therefore for them to exist on earth. They assumed bodies
to come down and because of their revolt they could not unclothe to reascend. B
their union with women they engendered giants, the “‘ mighty men of old,” and
“men of renown,” mentioned in Gen. vi. 4. Compare, however, the previous section,

. 268.

8 Z., Pt. III, fol. 208a; V, 530. According to another version Naamah, the sister of
Tubal Cain, was from the side of Cain the murderer ; she was a seducer of men and
spirits, including Aza and Azael, who again were of the children of God mentioned in
Genesis. She became the mother of demons and is still abroad in the world, exciting
the desires of men, mote especially in dreams of the night. She is associated with
Lilith, of whom we shall hear shortly in conneftion with the Fall of Adam. It is
testified by this tradition that demons are subje& to death in the same way as human
beings, but this must apply to the progeny and not to the first parents, as Samael,
Lilith and Naamah are Still in aG@tivity.—Z., Pt. III, fol. 55a; I, 317.

4 Jb., fol. 25a; I, 156. See also TarGcum of Jonathan to Gen. vi. 4.

5 Ib., APPENDICES, Pt. III, SEcRETs OF THE Law; II, 727. See also ADDITAMENTA
(TosseFra) ; Il, 734. It is she whose “ feet go down to death.” —Prov. v. 5.

® It is said also that the adulterous woman by whom the world is seduced is the sword
of the destroying angel.—Z., Pt. III, fol. 231b; V, 571.

7 Ib., Pt. 1, 153a; Il, 201. They are impurity taking shape as such ; and from their
union issue powerful spiritual leaders who are spread abroad in the world and defile it.
Samael mounted on the serpent’s back is a symbol of the evil side of sexual intercourse—
that is to say, after the manner of the beasts.

THE SERPENT AND FALL OF THE ANGELS 275

is the End of Darkness, which is equivalent to “the end of
all flesh.” 1 But when the Zonar speaks of the spirit of evil
generically, it affirms that this is an old and insensate thing 2—
much as European folk-lore was accustomed to represent
Satan as a poor and witless creature who is cheated easily in
the end. When the serpent was condemned to go upon her
belly this means that God took away those feet which are the
support of the body, and here the text affords one of its
profound intimations when it goes on to say: But Israel,
who would not be supported by the Law—which was built
up to encompass it, as the hills stand round Jerusalem—has
lent feet to the serpent for the support of her.

As there is a serpent below which is still at work in the
world, so there is a:sacred serpent above which watches over
mankind in all the roads and pathways and restrains the power
of the impure serpent. It is one of the adornments of the
heavenly throne. From the kind of union which is predicated
concerning Samael and the evil serpent, they seem to pass
easily one into another, and it is presumably in this way that
we hear of a great serpent—the dragon of later Kabbalism—
which was cast into the abyss with his legions when the
Sacred Name of forty-two letters was first graven upon the
seal of God. But the abyss subsequently gave up the demons
and the surface of the earth was covered with darkness till
celestial light illuminated the world.4 This spirit of evil has
chiefs and messengers under his orders, intervening in all
acts of man ; yet the serpent can only defile the soul by special
authorisation therefrom.® Hence Israel still suffers on account
of the impurities which came from the side of the first serpent ;
from the impurities of ill-doing spirits; and from those of
demons ; but especially from the impurities of that particular
teptile which is called “‘ the other god ” and is identified with
AMALEK.® He is said to be the cause of all uncleanliness in the
wotld, in all the degrees thereof. He is apparently on the
male side and as such is an assassin, while his wife is a mortal
poison, because she incites to idolatry. It is curious in this
connection that the name Samael—sy*»n—is held to signify

8) Zig POLL Oli rots L gor:

2 Ib., fol. 179a; Il, 307. The reference is to the “‘ old and foolish King ” of
Eccles. iv. 13. See also Z., Pt. Il, fol. 33b; III, 163, and Pt. Il, fol. 219a, THE
FAITHFUL SHEPHERD ; V, 553, from which it seems to follow that the demon is a fool.

eeZn, (Pthl, folsaasb iy sGas ® Ib: fol) r5ab,\ 1532 ; I, 200, 207:

‘4 Ib., fol. 30b ; I, 190. 6 Jb., fol. 28b, 29a; I, 181, 182.

276 ; THE HOLY KABBALAH

the “ venom of God.” He is also the Angel of Death, who
destroys men with a single drop of poison. AMALEK is
appatently his synonym. There are said, however, to be two
demons, sub voce AMALEK and the Divine malediction of the
first serpent applies to both.

For the rest, demons ate the excrement of the earth and are
designated by the word Touou, while Bowou signifies that
patt of the world which is free from demons.! It follows
that the first state is that of the infernal cohorts, so confused
with matter that they formed one body therewith. A separa-
tion was accomplished by the fire which is referred to under
the name of darkness, when it is said that “ darkness was upon
the face of the deep.” 2 But to make the clarification com-
plete, the Holy Spirit brooded upon the face of the waters.®
It is added that so long as the purification was unfinished, the
spirit of the demon still interposed between heaven and
matter, to deprive man of the pure vision of God 4—another
suggestion that the history of creation is one of states of the
soul. Unfortunately the ZonHar—amidst all its casual
information of this kind—does not furnish one per cent. of
the materials necessary to elucidate it at length, and the same
rematk applies to the general history of election of which it
is a part, so that this phase of the Secret Doétrine cannot be
developed.

We shall meet with the Serpent and Samael again in the
next chapter and shall ascertain after what manner they enter
into the Mystery of Sex. As a conclusion to this part, it
seems desitable to say that the Zoharic prince of demons is
nevet compared to the morning star or to any other luminary
inheaven. I donot remember that the word 55,=Day-Star=
Lucifer occuts anywhere in the text as a synonym of Satan.
Finally, the world will not be set free from the serpent until
the coming of Messiah the King, who will cast down death
for ever.5 As to what may happen thereafter, the mind of the
doétors is divided, which it seems to have been invariably

1 There is apparently a light of the world below which is in separation from the
world above, and this is said to generate demons without number.—Z., Pt. I, fol. 156b ;
Il, 214. As regards Tonou and Bouou, it may be useful to compare Book VI, § 2.

2 Sen iiie}

3 Tb.

4 Z., Pt. I, fol. 16a; I, 94-96.

5 Z., Pt. I, fol. 113b, 114a; II, 58, 59. The authority is Is. xxv. 8; Zech. xiii. 2.
The point is that Samael is the death-angel, and it is one of those places in the ZoHAR
where he and the serpent on which he rides are identified on account of their union.

THE SERFe¢NT AND FALL OF THE ANGELS 277

on all matters that concern eschatology. We shall have to
take back into our hearts every primitive form of thought
before we shall consent to believe that the Holy One, blessed
be He, created the tempter-spirit so that He might put man
to the test1; but this is one of the theses, as we have seen,
and it follows in course “that he is also God’s minister.”
Perhaps it is for this reason that there is a counsel not to
affront the demon, since in virtue of such an imposed office
he would be saved, like the executioner. Moreover, as the
infernal male and female principles symbolise the Sex Mystery
in the deeps of corruption, we have to remember that even
in these deeps it is a reflection of the Mystery that is on high,
and to say that it may not be without an inward element of
redemption seems to connect with the truth of things, working
towards a justification of the Divine Ways in all the quarters
of the universe.? Sz descendero ad infernum, ades. One of the
fragmentary texts incorporated with the Zonar affirms there-
fore that even the evil spirit will be restored at the end of
days. The inference is extracted with an all too common
perversity out of the words : “ He brought back all the goods,
and also brought again his brother Lot.”* The imputed
authority matters nothing and the idea which has begotten
the interpretation signifies everything. I have indicated that
the ZOHAR as exegesis was conceived and born in a house of
distraction.

IIl.—THE FALL OF MAN

Matthew Arnold was of opinion that it was impossible to
dispense with Christianity or to be satisfied with it in the
current and accepted forms. A similar impression has been
cteated through all the Christian centuries by the Myth of
Paradise, and especially that part of it which concerns the
Fall of Man®; but it will be understood that I am not

1 Z., Pt. I, Appendix TI, THe Secrer Mrprasu, fol. 2a; I, 686.

2 Between good and evil the mediating and reconciling principle is held to be woman-
hood, and hence it is said—in rather cryptic language—that the Spirit of Good and the
Spirit of Evil can only abide in harmony so far as the female is between them, she
having part in both. It is then only that the Spirit of Good, which constitutes pure
joy, attraéts the female and thus preponderates over the Spirit of Evil—Ib., fol. 49a ;
I, 284. Cf. ante, p. 269.

8 [b., StrHRE THorRAH, Pt. I, fol. 287b; Il, 664.

ACen) SIV

5 There is a feeling at the present day in certain schools of interpretation that the
idea of a genuine difference between man in the first estate of Paradise and in the exile
of the world beyond has no authority in Scripture and that it was adopted by the

278 THE HOLY KABBALAH

alluding to persons for whom it is folk-lore or fable. As to
these there is no difficulty: it is only among those who
regard it as in some sense a veil of man’s spiritual history that
the problems offered by this myth are of real consequence,
and it is these naturally who have expended their skill in
seeking to construct it rationally. Very few have done other-
wise than distort the materials placed in their hands, so that
if it is hard to be satisfied with the plain story, it is impossible
to accept the attempts by which the literal body has been
buried, so that it might be raised a spiritual body. The
resurrections are worse than the form which used to move
among us in some manner of the life of faith. I believe that
at this day the Latin Church imposes on its members an
acceptance of the simple story, exattly as it is given in Genesis,
so that it is a clear issue and deserving of our resped as such.
It is to be taken or left; those in the faith take it amidst
silence in the heaven of faith, though there may be many wry
faces turned to the wall for concealment ; the rest leave it no
doubt. I have spent many years among the mystics who have
made excursions into this subject and have produced their
vatious versions, “‘ to perplex the sages ” and others. The
versions stand at their value, and I do not know that there is
much to choose between them, from those of St. Augustine
to Saint-Martin. Readers who are acquainted with the theses
of Jacob Bohme on the Paradisaical state will remember that
Adam, in his system, began to degenerate before the specific
occasion of his Fall is supposed to have arisen and, as part of
his declension, that a state of inactivity supervened.* One
consequence was that Eve had to be removed from within
him and manifested in a mode of separation. I do not know
how this is harmonised with the Lord God’s statement that

Church early in the Christian centuries as a working hypothesis of do€trine. However
this may be, the Zonar has very plain instruction on the subject, and the present
seCtion of our research, taken in conneftion with that on the Myth of Paradise, will
show that a life of glory and divinity was followed by a life of shame. The word Fall
is of course technical and as such particular to Christian Theology, with all its cloud
of developments, but about that which is meant thereby no question will be found in
the ZOHAR.

1 Jt makes a clean sweep of the whole fantastic mass of private interpretation and
throws us back on the first principles of the story, forbidding us to exercise our personal
and putative wisdom above that which is written. While it is not possible to accept
the asylum offered, there is no desire to make salvage in respect of the baggage which
has been “‘ heaved over among the rubbish.”

2 It is said that the “ tin@ture”’ of Adam was quite wearied: THE THREE PRINCIPLES,
c.13. The reason is given at length in MysrEr1um MacGnoy, c. 18, being his hunger
to eat of good and evil, not indeed in the mouth but with the imagination.

THE FALL OF MAN 279

“it is not good that the man should be alone,” + nor does it
perhaps signify. In any case the provision of a helpmeet
did not save him, for in the obscure providence of the dealings
woman was the occasion of his literal fall. The Zonar also
recognises a gradual degeneration of Adam,” because appa-
rently the workings of the beast “more subtle than any”
were in process prior to the manifest temptation of Eve. |
do not know why a time-limit should be drawn about the
Story so closely, but it is stated more than once that Adam fell
on the very day of his creation,? the notion being drawn in
the usual inscrutable manner from this text of Isaiah: “In
the day shalt thou make thy plant to grow, and in the morning
shalt thou make thy seed to flourish,” * though the reading
differs in the ZoHar.

It appears that the original union of man, male and female,
was apatt from fleshly sensation, and it was therefore an
union in modesty. When Adam said: “ This is now bone
of my bones and flesh of my flesh”’® he was seeking to
dispose Eve in favour of such intercourse, because they were
one only. It was out of this that the temptation is represented
as having arisen, for immediately after these words of tender-
ness the spirit of evil awoke, to substitute carnal pleasures for
its own profit in place of pure affe@tion.’ The object was also
to sully the sanctity above by defiling man below in the first
place. As regards what Theology would call the matter of
the sin, there is no need to say that the apple is not understood
literally. It is called sometimes—as we have seen—the fruit
of the vine, that is to say, grapes; but this is a veil also and
is to be understood as the explanation of a certain Mystery of
Knowledge, which Knowledge belongs to the dominion of

1 Gen. ii. 18.

2 Z., Pt. Il, fol. 262b ; IV, 295.

3 Ib., Pt. I, fol. 35b;1, 219. According to Jacob Béhme, the period was forty days.
We shall see elsewhere that the First Sabbath followed the decree of expulsion.

* Is. xvii. 11. The Zoharic rendering is: “‘ The day that you have planted, your
seed shall produce only wild fruits.”

° There is an obscure suggestion that children were born to Adam in the Garden of
Eden, that is to say, souls, and if they had come with him out of the Garden, man
would have had eternal life. He was expelled, however, to engender children outside.
—Z., Pt. I, 60b, 61a ; I, 356.

§ Gen. ii. 23.

7 Z., Pt. I, fol. 49b; I, 287.

8 Ib., fol. 520 5.5 307;

® After the Fall of Man, it is said that the Tree of the Trespass was banished from
Paradise, which sounds fantastic; but the whole Tree is allegorical and moves with
man through the places of his exile. See the Cremona ed., Pt. I, fol. 126b.

H.K- U

280 THE HOLY KABBALAH

sex. ‘These are the fruits that are said elsewhere to be agree-
able, on the authority of Genesis, but they trouble the spirits
of those who make bad use of them, as Noah did in the case
of his own vine.1 He who rode upon the serpent, the
Tempter-Spirit or Samael,” who is said also to have descended
from heaven so mounted, as if he were an accredited messen-
ger, approached Eve and testified that the Holy One created
the world by help of the Tree of Knowledge ; ? that by eating
thereof and so only was He able to create the world; and
that if the woman ate of it, on her own part, she would attain
the same power.* In a work so multifarious as the ZoHAaR
and so free of all responsibility created by the precedents of
its own sections, it will be understood how there are alternative
accounts as to the kind of temptation. In another case it is
said that Eve was seduced by the peculiar atmosphere of the
demon which encompassed the mythical fruit, as if it lay in a
hot bed ;® but this is additional detail rather than alternative.
In a third there is exactly the kind of intimation which we
should expeé in relation to the mystery which the text reads
into the myth: it was a seduction arising from the bewray-
ment of love, which had not appeared in the world till Adam
and Eve wete set toward one another, face to face ;® it was
also an outcome of the blind turning towards conception and
genetation ; so that in this sense Eve was made victim as a
result of her own womanhood. By treason of one or another
cause, she decided to taste the fruit, which had the faculty of
opening the eyes, in those who approached it, meaning in
things concerning the Tree itself.’ The result was a division
between life and death,® as if the peace-insuring Middle Pillar
had been removed from the Sephirotic Tree and Shekinah
had ascended to Kerruer, leaving the SzepHira MALKuTH

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 192a; Il, 356. See also Deut. xxxii. 32: “‘ Their grapes ate grapes
of gall, their clusters are bitter.”” And see Z., Pt. I, fol. 36a; I, 225.

2 Ib., fol. 35b; I, 221. It is said that all creatures took fright when he appeared.

8 The allusion is to the Mystery of Faith and Sex; the universe was a work of
generation, and in this sense therefore the testimony of Samael was true, but that to
which it was a preface proved—by the hypothesis of the legend—a lying travesty of
the true practice.

Ment, fol. 73640 312k,

mr, Et, tL, 204b's EV i205,

6 Jb., fol. 231a; IV, 253. It is suggested again in this place that Adam and Eve
began to engender children from the moment that they were put face to face.

7 Ib. Ptea, 10k. 30a s I, 224.

8 Jb., fol. 36a; 1, 225. The threatened death seems always to have been understood
spiritually. It is said elsewhere that “the Serpent takes away the higher souls—
NeEsHAMOTH—Of all flesh.” —Z., Cremona ed., Pt. I, fol. 28a.

THE FALL OF MAN 281

without God in the world. There was division also between
the Voice and the Word, so that the Voice spoke yet the
Word was not uttered God was asleep therefore in the
heart of man. To speak of events like these in whatever
immemorial past is of course to remind the Sons of the
Secret Doétrine how it fares with them in the actual present ;
and so it is added that since Israel has been in captivity the
Voice has been divided from it, whence the Word is audible
no longer.2 The inference is that the Word remains in the
heart, but the lips which should speak are paralysed.

Recurring to the substitution of a mystical vine for the
apple-tree, another tradition certifies that Eve pressed grapes
and gave the juice to her husband. ‘The opening of their
eyes was to behold all the ills of the world.? I suppose that I
need not specify in what sense these grapes are to be undet-
Stood as a sex-symbol, and it follows that she shewed Adam
how they might be enjoyed. Obviously, according to this
vetsion—Traditum eft genitales partes ade existere, in some
sense, at that period, though neither he nor his wife had as
yet been clothed with skins, which are understood sometimes
as material bodies. They discerned also their nakedness,
and of this fact there are several explanations, the most
important of which must be cited. In the a& which consti-
tuted the trespass they lost that celestial lustre and decoration
of sacred letters which had covered them previously and they
clothed themselves with leaves of the same Tree of which
they had eaten—that is to say, with leaves of the vine or fig ! 4
They knew now all secrets of the lower world—ve/ infra
cingulum—and seeing that the leaves of the Tree were the most
pleasurable of that region, they sought to acquire force
therein by the means thereof.

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 36a; I, 225. It was the consequence of separating life from death, the
analogy of which is separation between man and woman by the chastisement of the
menses, SO that she is in hiding like the moon, which is taken away from the heaven of
Stars for a week from month to month. But I question whether the symbolism is
true in this case, for as the phenomenon concerned is a line of demarcation in sex
between woman and the world of animals, it is in the proper sense a dignity rather than
a punishment.

2 The suggestion comes from Ps. xxxix. 2: “‘ I was dumb with silence. I held my
peace, even from good.”

Zi, Ptv dp fol 36b p 1;'236:

4 ‘These leaves are said in more than one place to signify demons, meaning probably
the evil side of fleshly desires. It is difficult not to think that the Doétors of the Secret
Law who invented a cloud of parables to explain the parables of Scripture in its literal
sense had a meaning behind this grotesque woof of symbolism, and sometimes it
shines through the texture.

U2

282 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Another account renounces symbolism utterly, so that he
who runs may read. “ And when the woman saw that the
tree was good for food and pleasant to the eyes . . . she took
of the fruit thereof, and did eat.””»1 These words are held to
designate the first union of Adam and Eve.? “‘ She consented
otiginally to union as a result of her refleGtions on the values
of conjugal relations and by reason of that pure affe€tion and
tenderness which united her to Adam.” ? But the inter-
vention of the serpent had as its result that Eve “ gave also to
her husband with her,” which means that their conjugal
relations changed and that she filled him with carnal desires.*
Henceforth desire was first on the part of the woman, she
alluring the man. This evil notwithstanding, the aéts per-
formed between them subsequently were in correspondence
with those which obtain above, for the Spirit of Evil imitates
the Spirit of Good, and that which it occasions below in
malice the spirit of good fulfils in holiness above. ‘This
correspondence implies, however, “‘a sublime mystery,”
which is said to exceed the capacity of most men.® When
Adam and Eve had sinned the Holy One stripped off the
cuirass formed by the light of the sacred letters with which
they had been invested: it was then they saw that they were
naked.® Previously the cuirass had shielded them from all
attacks, whilst they were free therein. ‘“‘ And they sewed fig-
leaves together and made themselves aprons.” “ ‘This means
that they betook themselves to the delights of the lower and
material world, leaves of the Tree of Good and Evil, fleshly
pleasures and the consequences thereof.§ But it is to be
observed that the evil is not without the good in the Tree of
Knowledge: it was the profanation of a Great Mystery, but
the seeds of redemption remained. It is for this reason that

1 Gen. iii. 6.

2 Zig ete Ay FOL. OD clea.

3 I have put this sentence literally, to shew that the early Victorian accent existed
ptior to the congeries of motives and manners belonging to that period. This state-
ment is by allusion to that which remains after due allowance has been made for the
habit of paraphrase which beset the French translator De Pauly.

*'Z,, Pt. 1, fol. 49b; I, 287, 288.

5 Z., Pt. I, fol. 49b; I, 288. It is obvious ex Aypothesi that the correspondence
existed previously in the putative spiritual intercourse already mentioned, and the fac&
that the likeness remained in the alleged grosser union constituted its title to redemption.
That the Sons of the Doétrine pratised that which they regarded as the path of its
transmutation we shall see later.

© Tb., £01.;534,;) 1,307.

7 Gen. iii. 7.

s Z.,'Pt. 1 fol. 536; 1, 3076

THE FALL OF MAN 283

the Zowar discerns a promise of salvation hidden in the
words: ‘ And the Lord God commanded the man, saying,
Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat: but of
the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, thou shalt not
eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt
surely die.” 1 The interpretation itself is extracted against all
simple sense and reason; but the fact remains that the Sons
of the Do&ttine recognised a way of escape.”

A third version affirms that the forbidden fruit signifies
woman herself? and the versicle appertaining hereto 1s:
“ Her feet go down to death; her steps take hold on hell.” 4
But we know that the extract applies only to a “ strange
woman,” and the application must have reference to inter-
coutse in unredeemed bonds of the body of death, as if the
jicus religiosus of the Tree of Life had become the barren fig-
tree which Christ cursed, or as if the letter of the Law remained
without one vestige of its spirit. Woman is also signified by
the Garden,® when it is said: “‘ And a river went out of Eden
to water the Garden.” ® Prior to the trespass this river
penetrated into the woman and irrigated her waters. It is
added—obscurely enough—that when men are in such a
degree of sanctity there is perfect unity, and of this unity it is
said: “‘In that day there shall be one Lord, and His Name
one.” ? Subsequently to their sin the Holy One clothed
Adam and Eve with vestments belonging to flesh alone.8
The suggestion is that previously the flesh was glorified by

1 Gen. ii. 16, 17. This was prior to the creation of Eve, according to the literal
account in Genesis and therefore, as a technical point, it is to be noticed that he alone
was commanded and he alone forbidden.

a Ziel fobl.-35bgeLy age

3 Ib., fol. 35b; 1,220. The Tree is said, moreover, to signify man. Ib., fol. 35b;
I, 222. It must follow in the sense of things that, in this case, the forbidden fruit is an
a& common to man and woman. It is not less certain that in the logic of such
symbolism the Tree of Life is another postulated a&t performed by male and female
accotding to a law and life of perfection. I must add, after weighing all the counter-
symbolism, that we must be on our guard how we accept in all its literal bearings the
somewhat casual and certainly isolated suggestion that the forbidden fruit was woman.
It is true in a certain sense, but that sense postulates the kind of relations between the
woman and the serpent, between the man and Lilith, of which we hear otherwise, and
which is the recurring symbolism. I think, in conclusion as to this matter, that woman
was the forbidden fruit in the same way that she is said to be the Garden of Eden.
Hete again there is a sense in which the statement is true assuredly : she is the Garden
in the Kingdom of MatxuTH and she is meant to become the Garden in Brnan when
man has been redeemed in her and she in man ; but this is high mysticism and would
be nonsense according to the letter, if it were so taken.

& Prov.) Vins. 6 Gen. ii. 10.

Bain Pt Lefole 35 ps eae o Leche xiv ss9:

Ba Pt. 4, fol: 36b'315226,2227.

284 THE HOLY KABBALAH

light of the spirit; but what is stated otherwise is that they
had garments of light, thanks to which they were raised above
the higher angels—who had recourse to them in order to
enjoy light.1_ A non-Zoharic tradition declares that the
beauty of Adam was reflected from the glorious Throne,
while the beauty of Eve was such that no creature could look
on het. Even Adam could not do so till after the trespass,
when both lost their supernatural loveliness.”

According to yet another account, the sin of Eve was one
of separation, and this would no doubt have been endorsed
by the B6hme school of Christian Mysticism. Separation, on
the other hand, according to the Zouar, designates death.?
This is on the one side, and on the correlative it is said else-
where that when Adam ate of the Tree of Good and Evil he
ptovoked the separation of woman from man.4 On the day
of transgression both heaven and earth sought to flee away,
because they were established only on the covenant of God
with man, as it is written: “‘ If my covenant be not with day
and night, and if I have not appointed the ordinances of
heaven and earth,” > &c. When Adam forsook the way of
faith and the Tree which is the synthesis of all trees, he lapsed
from a region of stability into one susceptible of variation,
exchanging life for death. The Tree of Life preserves all
who ate attached to it from death for ever. Humanity was
made originally in the likeness of the Elohim, which likeness
was obscured by the Fall, so that the faces of men were
transformed, with the result that they began to fear the beasts
who had been afraid previously of them.’

I will put separately another intimation which is distin&

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 36b; I, 226, 227. Towards the close of the Zonar, Rabbi Eleazar,
in the course of a discussion with another doétor of the Secret Law, allows that Adam
and Eve were clothed with garments of skin before the Fall, but they were then glorious
vestments which became gross subsequently. He adds that their eyes were opened
by the trespass to the material form of this world, whereas previously they had beheld
in all things only the celestial side —Jb., Pt. Il], fol. 261b; VI, 11. .

2 Ib., Pt. Ill, fol. 83b; V, 227. The physical beauty was theirs afterwards and is
the subjeét of several allusions.

eth ePelyfolsaabs Tpgol yi.

4 Ib., fol. 53a; 1, 306. The intention may be to signify that the union of physical
intercourse is of times and seasons only, but above it there is a spiritual union, once
enjoyed by man, and this is unceasing, like that of Jehovah and Elohim. We have
seen that this union is postulated in a pre-natal State, and it may well be that the myth
of the Earthly Paradise is an allegory thereof, embodying a delineation of things which
led up to the life of earth.

bi IDV GOL. 50a. 1) 321, 422.0OJer. xxxill: 25.

¢ Jb., Pt. Ill, fol. 107a, b; V, 269, 270.

7 Tbe Posto. 7a 1419.

THE FALL OF MAN 285

from these and belongs to a variant order of symbolism,
though it seems to me a moral consideration rather than a
secret doétrine. It depends from the reverie that innumerable
pleasant odours are diffused for ever throughout the Garden
of Eden, to prepare the precious vestments of the soul which
ate formed from the good days spent by man on earth.t
“And they knew that they were naked.” This means,
according to tradition, that they were aware of being without
the precious vestures which ate formed of stainless days.?
As a result of the trespass, no such day was left to Adam, and
it is in this sense that he was naked.4. When he repented, the
Holy One clothed him with other garments, but they: were
not garments of days.® If, however, the garments of skin
ate on the whole to be understood as vehicles of manifestation,
material in place of spiritual bodies, the question of nakedness
remains in the absence of a covering belonging to the origin
of artifice. Alternatively, if the bodies were not already of
flesh, in what sense did the trespass open the eyes of Adam
and Eve to the fact that they were naked? ‘There are two
places in which the garments of skin are said to be robes of
glory with which they were clothed by God, in which they
left Paradise, in virtue of which they resembled those who are
on high, and wherein they were ultimately buried.®

There is one more point of view before I come to the
suggestion in chief of the story. It is said that when Adam
sinned the evil serpent cleaved to him and defiled him, as well
as all future generations.’ The serpent was able to penetrate

1 The Earthly Paradise is a place of sojourn for the departed on the return whence
they came.

a Gen. iliy-7:

8.7, Pt. Ipfol..224a, b 311, 4825) 483:

“ It is rather an unhappy similitude, for so long as he had not eaten of the Tree of
Knowledge, he was incapable of good days, and furthermore—according to another
myth—that which was stripped from him was a robe of glory, wherein he had no need
for the vesture of Stainless days.

By Z7 Pt. fol, 2244 2 IT, 483.

6 Jb., Pt. Il, fol. 39a, 39b; Il, 184, 185. They were permeated with the odouts of
Paradise. See also zb., Pt. IL, fol. 261b; VI, 11, already quoted.

7 Ib., Pt. I, fol. 53b; I, 309. As regards the serpent, it is said—Cremona ed.,
Pt. I, fol. 28a—that Samael descended with all his hosts, and he sought upon the earth a
companion like unto himself, but it had an appearance even as a camel. This curious
comparison is based on the faé& that the Hebrew G M L means camel when certain
vowel points are added to these consonants, and reward or recompense with others.
The significance of this is developed in the PEKuDE section of the ZoHar, commenting
on Gen. xxiv. 64: “‘ And Rebeccah lifted up her eyes, and when she saw Isaac, she
lighted off her camel.” ‘The camel is here said to signify the mystery of death, referred
to in Prov. xix. 17: “‘ That which he hath given will He pay him again.” The con-
necting idea is, firstly, that reward, in the sense of retribution, came into the world by

286 THE HOLY KABBALAH

secretly into man’s interior, and Adam submitted to this so
that he might know the mysteries of things below. The
serpent shewed him all the pleasures of the world '—pre-
sumably as Satan took Christ into a high mountain whence
He beheld all the Kingdoms. These intimations depend
from a thesis which tecurs many times in the Zouar. It is
testified by the colleagues that the Fall of man was one of sin
with a woman,? in the normal sense which attaches to this
expression. It is added almost immediately that sexual
desires have caused all evils, but a corre€tion or modification
follows in the course of debate—namely, that in themselves
they ate good or evil according to the spirit which inspires
them. Now, seeing that it is to Eve that sin of a sexual
otder was first imputed, the question is who instructed or
initiated her? The answer is that the serpent—meaning
Samael—had “‘ criminal relations ” with her and inje&ted his
defilement into her,? Adam not being affected until she com-
municated in turn to him.4 She cohabited with Samael, who
corrupted her and by him she became with child, bringing
forth Cain.® It is obvious that this is in clear contradiction
to the text of Scripture, which says: ‘“ And Adam knew his
wife Eve; and she conceived, and bare Cain.” ® But the
anomaly is so glaring that it must be assuredly of set purpose,
or, in other words, that to develop the sexual nature of the
Fall the history on which it is founded is ignored at need.
The Zowar is content equally to contradict itself, for it
the serpent, and, secondly, that the peculiar nature of the Fall is indicated by the alleged
hidden sense of the term camel, which represents the pudenda. Compare Cazotte’s
DrasLE AMouREUx, where the impure demon is revealed at last with the head of that
animal.

TZ Pte D fol saa: 1 gor,

2 [b., Pt. I, fol. 23a; I, 142. This transpires in the course of a conversation, already
mentioned, between Shekinah and the two fallen angels Aza and Azael. Some of the
codices add, as we have scen, that with woman man will repair his fault, which is a
vety important statement from the standpoint of the Mystery of Faith, and involves
the reintegration of nuptial union in the order of Divine things.

3 Ib., fol. 54a; I, 311.

4: 7b., fol..126a ; IE; 101:

5 Jb., fol. 37a; I, 230. The story of this cohabitation is of Talmudic origin and will
be found in the Tract SaBBatH, among other places. It is aiso of general rabbinical
authority otherwise, and is stated by R. Abraham de Seba in his commentary on the
Pentateuch. The Miprasu Rutu affirms that both Adam and Eve were defiled by
the serpent. Finally, it is mentioned categorically in the PaRAPHRASE of Jonathan ben
Uzziel (Gen. iv. 1) that when Adam knew Eve his wife she had conceived already of
the angel Samael. Apparently as a result of the dual intercourse, she brought forth
Cain, who is said to have resembled the beings who are above, not those who are below.
Eve is also recorded to have said: “‘ I have gotten a man, an angel of Jehovah,” and

not: “I have gotten a man from the Lord ” (Gen. iv. 1).
© Gen. avo,

THE FALL OF MAN 287

affirms in another place that Adam was defiled by the impure
spirit before his union with Eve, and the son whom he begot
in this state of impurity was from the left side: so was Cain
born. But when Adam repented he engendered a son from
the right side: so was Abel born.! It is of course arbitrary
to postulate such repentance between the two nativities,
rather than before or after. All that we know from the text
of Genesis is that at the birth of Cain, Eve was of opinion
that she had “‘ gotten a man from God.” 2. Another account,
on the authority of Rabbi Eleazar, recurs to the earlier thesis,
specifying that Cain was begotten from the serpent but that
after intercourse with Adam, Eve conceived again, and so
brought two sons into the world—one of the works of the
serpent and one of the works of Adam. The image of Abel
was from on high and that of Cain from below.®

We have not finished, however, with the complications of
this subje&t, for another story recites that the relations of
Samael continued for a long time with Eve, who bore him
many children—presumably after the expulsion from Paradise.4
They were not in human likeness. So also, after the death
of Abel,®> Adam separated from his wife and began to receive
visits from two female demons, with whom he had relations,
and engendered those evil spirits and demons which infest
the world.® It is pointed out that there is no need for
surptise at this, because every man in his dreams sees such
women occasionally, observes them smiling at him, and if

ED tly fol rs 4a:s Lott

2: Gen, iv. 3 .

8 Z.,ib. It will be seen that this is at issue with the PARAPHRASE of Jonathan. Accotrd-
ing to ZoHAR Havasu, § YiTHRO, the seduction of Adam by Lilith and of Eve by her
companion Samael caused our mortal condition. This is the sense in which death was
brought into the world, “and all our woe.” Ex hypothesi, the springs of generation
wete tainted.

S 7a ety 1, fol $385) L305). 316,

5 It is taught, much after the manner of Christian Theology, that if Adam had never
sinned man would never have taSted death as the condition of his entrance into the
world beyond. But Christian Theology does not encourage us to suppose that in
such case the union of Adam and Eve would have produced children—so far at least
as Jam aware. On the other hand, the separation of the sexes was primarily for this
purpose, according to Kabbalism.—See Z., Pt. II], 159b; V, 412. I should add
that in another place one of the doftors maintains that Adam and Eve would have
remained alone in the world in the unfallen state, but another answers him that they
would have engendered children emanating from the Holy Spirit.—Jb., Pt. I, fol. 61a ;
J, 356, 357. See also Pt. III, fol. 1892; V, 495, 496.

6 Z., Pt. I, fol. 54b; I, 314. The Talmudic story is different in this sense, that the
sin of Adam in eating of the forbidden fruit was punished by an excommunication
which lasted 130 years, and it was thereafter that he began to engender children in his
own image.

288 THE HOLY KABBALAH

they excite his concupiscence they conceive and bear demons.
I suppose that one of these demons was the black Lilith and
the other Naamah, who ate both mentioned in the Zonar,
though not actually in this conne@tion. We shall see shortly
that presumably another Lilith was the wife of Adam in
Paradise. Adam temained separated from his true wife for
one hundred and thirty years, continuing to engender, and so
long as he was defiled by the infection of the impute spirit,
he had no desire for union with Eve. It returned, however,
when he purified himself, and he begot “a son in his own
likeness, after his image ”—that is to say, Seth.1 Dwelling
still upon the mystery behind sex, the ZoHar generalises on
this matter, saying that so long as man follows the path which
leads to the left side, his desire is towards the impure only,
but the just who walk in the right way have children worthy
of themselves. The important point to fix in our minds is
that the Fall of man was not the result of human intercourse
taking place between Adam and Eve but of some aberration
in sex variously described, most accounts being exclusive one
of another. ‘There is an alternative not mentioned previously
which balances the copulation of Eve and Samaél by the
relations subsisting for a long period of time between Adam
and Lilith amidst all the splendours and perfections of Paradise,
ptior to the creation of the helpmeet. It was to substitute
human for impure pleasures that she was taken ultimately
from the side of Adam, and from this point of view we
discern another sense in which it was “‘ not good that the man
should be alone.”

© Doon td Os 58, pls BLO

2 Ib., fol. 34b; I, 216. There ate many scattered references to this female
demon, who—in one of her forms—appearts to have been of the Melusine and mermaid
type, for when it is said that “‘ God created great whales ”’ (Gen. i. 21), the reference
is to Leviathan and his wife Lilith.—ID., fol. 346; I, 213. She is a negotium perambulans
in tenebris, for she goes abroad in the night.—Ib., fol. 346; I, 214. She is the instigator
of punishments, clamouring daily for their inflidion.—Ib., fol. 106a; TI, 33. She is
said to preside over all fish who are charged with missions to this world—presumably
other amphibious demons, though the Zouar says that they are called “ the first-born
in the land of Egypt” (Ex. xii. 29). The sacred angels of the waters that are above
wete separated by God from the emissaries of Lilith in the waters below. It may be
noted here that she is distin from the “ adulterous woman ”’ who was the wife of
Samael, as the latter is to be distinguished from Leviathan.—Ib., Pt. II, fol. 35a, b;
Ill, 169, 170. She is termed “ servant” in one place, which is in opposition to that
servant who is Shekinah, ‘The latter is like the conjugal Venus and presides over the
birth of children, but Lilith devours them.—Ib., fol, 96a, b; III, 387. Also zb., fol.
111a, b; III, 435. She is the mother of demons.—lIDb., fol. 267b; IV, 301. She is
the most terrible of all evil spirits, but she took refuge in the deep when God created
and adorned Eve.—lIb., Pt. III, fol. 192; V, 51, 52. See also 2b, Pt. I, fol. 169b ;

THE FALL OF MAN 289

To illustrate further that, from the first page of Genesis to
the last of the prophets, the importance of Holy Writ is in its
adaptation to the history and election of Israel, it is said that
when the Tables of the Law were broken, it was then man
perceived that he was naked 1—as he was literally, according
to the account in Exodus. It is said further that the words :
“ They heard the voice of the Lord God,” is an allusion to
the voice of God on Mount Sinai. And finally: since the
Day when Adam fell the world was in a condition of poverty ?
until the arrival of Noah, who—having offered a sacrifice—
restored it to the normal state. Now, it is obvious that there
had been sacrifices previously—e.g., the acceptable offering of
Abel. ‘There must have been therefore something particular
about that of Noah—I mean, in the mind of the ZoHar—and
we shall see in the next chapter that there was something
particular also about his drunkenness, which was an explora-
tion of Divine Mysteries. We know the indignity which
befell him, and I shall shew presently the kind of sin which
led, ex hypothesi, to the Deluge. I believe that all these
allusions touch upon the same mystery.

The Zowar contains no suggestion of importance in
respect of the expulsion from Eden or the Flaming Sword.
Adam is said to have chanted the 92nd Psalm in his flight and
the Sabbath intervened to prote& him, so that he was not
entirely driven out until the end of that day. Ido not know
what purpose this version is supposed to serve; but the
Secret Lamp of Israel did not diffuse always the same light.
The way of the return to the Garden was barred, lest worse
evils might be brought upon the world.4. The “ Flaming
Sword which turned every way” ® signifies angels set over

I, 266.—Pt. I, fol. 114b; III, 442.—Pt. III, fol. 222b; V, 562. A Talmudic legend
relates that Lilith was created from the same earth as Adam and refused in the end to
setve him through pride respeCting her origin. I should mention that the word which
the Authorised Version renders “‘ screech-owl” in Is. xxxiv. 14, and the Vulgate Jamia
is Lilith in the original Hebrew, the root of which is a word signifying night. Rabbi
Elias recognised four mothers of demons, namely, Lilith, Naamah, Ogeret and
Mahalath. »

A ZaePee bifale2gb 344 188,

(db tols63his Tyagi.

3 A certain supposed confusion of pronouns in the Hebrew text of Gen. iii. 24.
enables the ZoHaR to suggest that it was not the Lord God who drove out Adam but
rather that the latter expelled the Divine Being, presumably from his own heart and
also, as a manifest Presence, from that world which man had ravaged by his trespass.—
ZapPts Fy fols3b yily 307.

£7. Pti Isfok 53h 3 4,408:

Gen. ii 25,

290 THE HOLY KABBALAH

the chastisement of man in this world.! Now, there is no
true grace herein and there is no mystery ; but if the tempta-
tion and the Fall signify an aberration of sex, a declension or a
materialisation therein, there is no question that the Tree of
Life is the perfect way of nuptials; and the ascent of the
Sephirotic Tree, which—according to the Secret Schools—is
a retutn into union, we shall find at the proper time to be a
journey in the graces and glories of the Sacred Shekinah, who
presides over the intercourse which, if begun on earth, is
completed in the World of the Supernals. For there is a
gerade of perfection attainable in these Mysteries which was
known to the Sons of the Doétrine, and in view of it they said
that a day shall come when the world will be avenged of the
serpent: ? this will be the day of the coming of the Tree of
Life, which will obtain the remission of sins and will enchain
the serpent. The male and female will be united in the
Garden of Eden as they were before the Fall. But now the
nakedness of the natural Adam is a nakedness of good works
and of obedience to the commandments of the Law—under-
Stood as that Secret Do&trine which is concerned with the
Mystery of Faith.?

IV.— THE LEGEND OF ‘THE DELUGE

THE way of human generation * had replaced the higher
intercourse which is outlined faintly, at a far distance and
amidst all confusion by the Secret Tradition, and so outlined
only in deference to the covenants expressed and implied,
because it is admittedly a mystery that cannot be“revealed to

1 It is said also to have symbolised the trials with which God overwhelms man,
that he may be restored to the way of goodness.—Z.., Pt. II, fol. 167a; IV, 114.

2 Z., Pt. I, fol. 145b; II, 173, 174. It is an exceedingly suggestive intimation, and
its seeming Christian implicits are plain, almost on the surface. ‘The world will remain
in the toils of the serpent until that day shall come when a woman who is comparable
to Eve and a man corresponding to Adam shall vanquish not only the serpent but the
angel of death and destruétion who rides thereon.

3 It is quite extrinsic to my subje& at this point, but as there will be occasion for a
subsequent reference, I may add here that Adam and Eve were interred together in a
cave having a door which opened on the Garden of Eden ; and there also some of the
patriarchs were buried.—Z., Pt. III, fol. 164a; V, 423. There are several other
references.

4 It should not be inferred that the way of human generation is ever reduced in its
importance or tampered with in its high symbolism. . This is why I have termed it
important to observe that the Fall of man was not a sin of natural intercourse with a
woman. Under certain prescribed conditions, that is rather the way of his return into
the true likeness of God—though not so much for what it is in itself as for that which
it intimates.

THE LEGEND OF THE DELUGE 291

the world. ‘The way of humanity had become a sacred way,
a sactament in virtue of its correspondence with things above,
in virtue also of its reflections from that which was the design
of Nature when it came forth resplendent at its first birth.
Had this been maintained there would have been no path of
regeneration, for men would have walked in union, as Enoch
walked with God. It is implied more especially that in the
birth of Seth? human generation was uplifted into the
sacramental world, and the path of nuptials was followed by
the saints of old in accordance with a pradtice of wisdom
which will be indicated hereafter—towards the end of the
present study. But it was not the way of the world, and we
have next to consider those stages of the downward path
which led up to the Deluge, as this is understood in Zoharic
Theosophy. It will be found that the mystery of sex belongs
thereto, but it is here on the averse side.

In the explanation of this cataclysm the text dwells naturally
on the wickedness of man and has the authority of Scripture
that it was very great over the whole world. ‘The particular
mystery of iniquity indicated by the Zowar is peculiar
thereto. The patience of God was extended until the evil
began to take that form which is described as the spilling of
blood vainly on the earth. The sex aberration here de-
signated will be understood by the expression used. It is the
crime attributed to Onan, and the Zoharic doctrine affirms
that no man who is sullied in this manner shall enter the
Heavenly Palace or behold the face of Shekinah.t The
Shekinah is driven away thereby, and because of its prevalence
the world fell into corruption, in part through the sin itself
and for the rest by the absence of Shekinah. It was as if the
principle of life had been withdrawn or that the loss of the
head caused the body to decay. The world had become like

1 The point is that the ZoHAR postulates a mystery of spiritual intercourse belonging
to the state of Paradise and in the body of our present life a natural intercourse which
can be raised into a sacrament of things Divine: between these was a sexual iniquity
described in the language of earthly lust and constituting the Fall of Man.

2 Because he only—according to the ZoHAR—was in the image and likeness of his
father, who was in the likeness and image of God.

a2. FG 2 SON s: 1338;

4 Ib., fol. 57a; I, 327. I believe that some Theologia Morals of the Latin Church
is not in agreement with the ZoHar respeCting the nature of the offence recorded in
Gen. xxxvili, 9, and offers a particular alternative which there is no need to specify. I
mention the matter because the alternative probably represents an old understanding
of the subje&. For the rest, it may be suggested that the specific enormity is possibly
the veil of a larger complex and would include aberrations connefted with the cities of
the plain and Lesbos.

292 THE HOLY KABBALAH

an unclean woman who has to hide in the presence of her
husband.! Yet this was not the last state, for.a time came
when corruption reached such a point that there was neither
shame nor concealment longer. The sin of Onan is held to
have corrupted the earth as well as man,? guia semen fundebat in
terram. Now, the waters above represent the male principle,
while the female principle answers to the waters below,
which is a very simple allegory of posture in the aé& of inter-
course. The sin postulated was concerned with the watets of
the male principle and it was necessary therefore that the
whole contaminated earth should be purified by those of the
Deluge.? But the waters above, which are spiritual, and
the spiritual waters below both concurred therein, for the
floodgates of heaven were opened and the fountains of the
great deep were broken up.

One explanation of the vicious state of the world is that at
the Deluge period it had as yet not been purified fully from
the infection of the serpent.4 The generation was also
without faith —more especially concerning the secret subject
matter of that which is called the Mystery of Faith. Men
were attached to the leaves of the Tree of Good and Evil,
meaning the spirit of the demon.

There is something very strange implied in the symbolism
of the Ark, and one is inclined to ask: What was this Ark, or
who? It is a symbol of the Ark of the Covenant, and Noah
had to be shut up in such a vessel here below because this
comes to pass also in respect of the Mystery which is on high.®
He could not be so inclosed until God had entered into a
covenant with him.6 He was then able to save the world,
and this corresponds with the Supreme Mystery. It is said
that Noah walked with Elohim, Who is the Covenant of Peace
in the world: he was predestined from the day of creation to
be shut up in the Ark. But it is unbecoming for a wife to

t Lu Pt, 1, fol. 612.5. 1535 9s.3008
2 Ib., fol. 61a, 61b; I, 359, 360. This, however, is qualified later on, when it is said
- that the earth is called corrupt when man is in a State of decadence.—Ib., fol. 62a;
I, 363.

3 Ib., fol. 62a; I, 363, 364.

4 Jb., fol. 63b; I, 371. The complete purification took place for a moment at the
foot of Mount Sinai.

5 It is obvious that the meaning of this passage is not on the surface. It will be
seen from what follows that the Noetic Ark was feminine, because it was a house for
those who were saved from the waters of the Deluge, and we know already that a
house is always feminine. :

6°Zi..' Et. dy 40 90s 1,349.

THE LEGEND OF THE DELUGE 293

receive any one as a guest at her house without the consent
of her husband, so when Noah proposed to enter the Ark, it
was necessaty that Jehovah, the Spouse or Master of the
House, should authorise his union therewith.t It was
therefore at the invitation of God that he so entered. The
reason is found in the words: “‘ For thee have I seen righteous
before me in this generation.” 2 But Elohim is the celestial
Bride, who is Shekinah, and it was by her permission, as
Bride, Wife and Mistress of the house, that he had a permit to
leave the Ark when the Deluge was over. It would seem
that in some mystical sense he had dwelt within her precincts.
After leaving those hospitable quarters, Noah made a present
to the lady of the house, but it reached her by the mediation
of her Spouse, because Scripture tells us that it was to Jehovah
and not to Elohim that Noah erected an altar and offered
sacrifice thereon. It was direct, however, from the lady of the
house that Noah received his reward, because it is said that
Elohim blessed Noah and his children, saying: “ Increase
and multiply and fill the earth.” ® It follows, as we shall see
otherwise, that Shekinah presides over the fruit of nuptials,
as well as over the nuptials themselves. In respect of the
altar itself, it may be remembered that the Zowar has occa-
sional references to an offering made by Adam and to that on
which he sacrificed. The Deluge either destroyed or over-
turned everything, and when the time came for Noah to
sactifice on his part he is supposed to have raised up for this
purpose the overthrown altar of Adam.* We see that his
sactifice is connected, though obscurely enough, with that
Mystery of Sex which is the subject of allusion throughout.
This would seem to be the case with every kind of burnt-
offering, and it is even said that Leviticus i. 17, should be
translated to signify that the holocaust is a woman and as
such an agreeable odour to God. The Authorised Version,
reads: “‘ A burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 67a ; I, 394; and zb., fol. 7ob, 71a; I, 418.

a GC aviiee sk: ;

8 Gen. ix. 1. The name which the Authorised Version and the Vulgate translate
** God ” is “‘ Elohim ” in the Hebrew. But the name in Gen. viii. 20, 21, which is
translated “‘ Lord ” in the Authorised Version and Vulgate is Jehovah in the original.

AP Zk te Ly fol. Gob. 70a 2) ae,

5 The translators point out that the Zorar in this passage alters the sense of Scripture
by substituting other vowel-points. But the question for us is whether it succeeds in
conveying its own designed intimation. We shall see in due course that Shekinah,

he Divine Woman, is termed more than once the Sacrifice of the Holy One.

294 THE HOLY KABBALAH

sweet savour unto the Lord.” It is admitted at the same
time that the victim of the holocaust is male, according to the
text, a male without blemish. It is admitted also that the word
translated “‘ burnt” is corret according to the literal sense ;
but if this were its true meaning it is argued that the ortho-
etaphy would have been different. The real purpose of the
holocaust was the union of the male and female principles, as
these should never be in separation. Noah offered a sacrifice
because he represented the male principle which the Holy One
united to the Ark, the latter representing the female principle.

There are two other points which may be mentioned for
the sake of completeness, and the first of these is that the Holy
Land was not covered by the waters of the Deluge. An
authority is found in the words: “ Thou art the land that is
not cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of indignation.” 3
The second is that the Deluge came to be called the waters of
Noah, because he prayed for himself only and not for the
world. I believe that this idea attaches to a Talmudic story,
for there is no indication in Genesis of especial prayer on the
part of Noah. The thesis is, however, that had he chosen he
could have prevailed with God to spare the whole creation.*

We know from Genesis that Noah planted a vineyard, and
accotding to one Zoharic opinion he transplanted the vine
which had grown in the Garden of Eden; but whether this
signifies the Tree of Knowledge does not transpire—except
by inference from the legends. According to another view,
he moved an ordinary vine of earth to a more favourable
place. The fact that Noah pressed the grapes—as Eve is
said also to have done—partook of the juice and so became
drunken, is affirmed to contain a mystery of wisdom. We
have seen that ex hypothesi the lady of all our race was making
an experiment of knowledge, and we shall understand further
that what followed was an intoxication after its own kind.
So also Noah was concerned with an experiment, having set
himself to fathom that sin which had caused the fall of the
first man. His intention was to find a cure for the world,

A ZAME LiL, LOL. On nL ATR,

PLE a ovals viV, ri92,

3 \Bizekiexil2as

4 Z., Pt. Ill, fol. 14b, 15a; V, 43. The manner in which he saved the world, as
we have seen that he was supposed to do, proved wanting therefore in the seals and
charaéters of perfection.

CZ, PeAPtONS 7 3a 5) 1,143 3.

THE LEGEND OF THE DELUGE 295

“in place of Eve and her poison ”’!; but he became drunken
by laying bare the Divine Essence without having the in-
tellectual strength to fathom it. This is why Scripture says
that he was drunken and was uncovered within his tent.
The meaning is that he raised a corner of the veil concerning
that breach of the world which ought always to remain
secret. The physical symbolism is obvious in this place.
Moreover, the tent of Noah was really the tent of the vine.

I do not pretend that the last sentences are intelligible from
any point of view, nor that the materials as a whole of this
section convey anything of especial importance beyond the
postulated experiment made by Noah for the purpose of
restoring the Mystery of Sex to its proper place in the spiritual
life of man. ‘The rest only continues the tale of lapse and
degradation from the perfect union signified by the state of
Paradise. I will add here a few vestiges of symbolism on the
subject of the confusion of tongues, which was the next event
of importance after the Deluge. The builders of Babel are
said to have found a book containing certain Mysteries of
Wisdom, which book had belonged to the generation destroyed
by the Deluge. The text is very loosely worded and it
might seem at first sight that it was the primeval memorial of
secret knowledge which, as we have seen, was transmitted to
Adam and thence to the chiefs of the people, leaders of
sanctity in the early generations. I do not think that this is
the case, but that it was rather a record of magical art as this
was attained by Enos, according to another Zoharic account.*
It is said that his knowledge and ability in occult science
exceeded that of his predecessors from Adam downward, and
this is the sense in which we are to understand the scriptural
Statement that he, Enos, began to “ call upon the name of the
Lord” °—that is to say, he used the Divine Name to compel

1 But not of course Eve apart from the serpent’s poison. I cannot help feeling
that it would have been a great relief to the Sons of the Doétrine and a material simpli-
fication of their system, if they had not been compelled to follow the legend of Genesis
which ascribes the Fall to the woman.

2 Z., Pt. I, fol. 73b; I, 434. The Ark was the means of transmitting the true
knowledge concerning the Mystery of Sex from one epoch of the world to the other.
Certain “literati” of the early nineteenth century, like Jacob Bryant, the Rev. G. S.
Faber, Godfrey Higgins and Edward Davies seem to have recognised that it conveyed
somehow certain profound Mysteries of Knowledge, but of what nature they had no
conception.

3 Ib., fol. 76a, b; I, 449, 450.

“)1b.,) fol. 0a.5).15)3 23.

5 Gen. iv, 26. The Authorised Version reads: ‘‘ Then began men to call upon the
Name of the Lord ”—apparently at the time of the birth of Enos, or soon after. The

H-K. x

296 THE HOLY KABBALAH

spirits in accordance with the recognised procedure of magical
operations. The progress of this science ended by assuming
such proportions that the wicked generation of the Deluge
expected to escape Divine chastisement by recourse thereto.
With the help of its mysteries they prepared even to make
wat on the Holy One, which was also the intention of those
who planned the tower of Babel.t Like their predecessors,
they had great trust in Magic: it was enough for them to
pronounce words and things were accomplished. But the
project had its source in a limited knowledge concerning the
Mystery of Ancient Wisdom,? and I conclude therefore that
there were two primeval books recognised in the legend —one
that of Adam and the other one of knowledge which was
either evil in itself or could be converted readily to evil.2 At
the dispersion which arrested the building those concerned
therein lost even their partial knowledge. The confusion of
tongues was of course a punishment adjudged*; but the
apocryphal prophecy of Sophonia assures us that at the end
of days the Lord will change the tongues of all the people into
a pute tongue, so that all may invoke His Name and all pass
under His yoke in one spirit.° This is quoted by the ZoHar
and is, I think, the only instance in which it cites a scriptural
text outside the greater canon.

V.—THE COVENANT WITH ABRAHAM

The considerations arising in the ZoHAR out of the history
of Abraham fall into two sections, the first of which is con-

Revised Version agrees, but the Vulgate translates the verse in the sense of the Zohar :
Iste—i.e., Enos—cepit invocare nomen Domini. should mention that the Zour always
recognises the claim of Magic as the art of a secret power, but, as we shall see more
fully, it is condemned in all its branches and all its modes.

1 Z., Pt. Il, fol. 75b e¢ seg. 3 1, 445; n.

2 Ib., fol. 76a; I, 447.

3 It must be admitted that this does not agree with a Statement in fol. 76a; I, 446,
whete it is said that the celestial book containing the Mystery of Wisdom was trans-
mitted by Adam to other men who penetrated this Mystery, and seem to have imitated
God thereby ; but this is not in agreement with the succession of the keepers of the
treasute, already enumerated. ;

4 The union between thought and the word already mentioned seems to have been
symbolised by the original existence of one language only. When men became
sepatated from God, unity was no longer possible among themselves. The plan of
Babel was elaborated with ingenious perversity, as the builders desired to quit the
celestial domain for that of Satan and so substitute a strange glory for the glory of God.

5 But the Vulgate rendering of the PRopHETIA SopHONI teads, Ouia tunc reddam
populis labium elettum, ut invocent omnes in nomine Domini, et serviant ei humero uno. ‘This is
rendered by the revised Douay version: “ Because then I will restore to the people a
chosen lip, that all may call on the name of the Lord, and may serve Him with one

shoulder.”

THE COVENANT WITH ABRAHAM 297

secutive, coherent in a certain sense and of great length, but
it is not of our especial concern, while the second, on account
of its content, is scattered throughout the text and is of prime
importance to the subject of this study. The first may be said
to open with an interpretation of the call that came to the
patriarch, in answer to which he left “ the land of his nativity,
in Ur of the Chaldees ”? 1 and entered into the land of Canaan.
The journey was literal no doubt for the doétors in Kabbalism
and stood as such at its value, but it was also a mystical
travelling, and in this respect it belongs to a higher currency.
Abraham had been endowed with a spirit of wisdom ? and
by the use of its talents had attained a knowledge of the
celestial chiefs* who govern the various divisions of the
habitable world.4 He had gone further also than this, having
discovered that Palestine was the centre of the earth, as well
as the point of departure in its creation. He had not as yet
ascertained by what chief it was ruled but concluded that such
a president must be head over all the cohort. The study of the
Holy Land was therefore the intent of his journey and he
drew for the purpose on all his stores of astrological know-
ledge, but still was unable to penetrate the essence and
importance of that Supreme Power which ruled the worlds
innumerable and was postulated in his mind as the Spiritual
Chief of Palestine. When at the end of his resources, however,
the Holy One manifested on His own part, counselling that
he should enter into himself, learn how to know himself and
forsake all the false occult sciences to which he had recourse
previously. This is another sense in which he was to come
out of his own country. The words: “ Go into a land that
I will shew thee ” > mean that Abraham was to be occupied
henceforth only by those things which God would make
known to him, though the essential nature of the Supreme
Power which rules the world could not be included in the
revelation, being above human understanding. It was there-

© Clete stg fa eV 7

Wd tet] [Oy 764, P45 7°

$ It is not quite certain whether this carries the implicit that he was additted to the
kind of Magic which is an art of dealing with spirits and is usually called ceremonial
because it follows a ritual and prescribed verbal formule. If so, the sequel shews that
he was held exonerated in virtue of his intention.

aiZig PUL fOle TOD see aye

5 Gen. xii. 1. The dire€tion to leave his country signified that he should abandon
his studies of the moral influences conneéted with different regions ; to leave his kindred
was to abandon the science of astrology ; to leave the house of his father was to cease
from the mannet of life observed therein.—Z., Pt. I, fol. 78b; I, 458.

x 2

298 THE HOLY KABBALAH

fore a journey in the Divine obedience rather than one of the
soul in God ; but this path of conformity is itself a ladder of
sanctity, by which man can be united to the Holy One, and is
indeed the one way of our ascent. Abraham went up this
ladder stage by stage 1 until he attained that point which was
designed in his case, as it is written : ““ And Abram journeyed,
going on still toward the South” 2—being the Holy Land,
wherein he was to reach the highest degree of holiness. But
it is said that there was famine therein, which means that the
country was not as yet consecrated, and he proceeded there-
fore to Egypt which is assimilated to the spiritual Garden of
the Lord,? for it is written: “ As the garden of the Lord, as
the land of Egypt.” 4 Abraham knew the mystery of this
Garden,® the degrees of which are in correspondence with
those that are below—that is to say, with Egypt, which is
therefore said to be assimilated. But the nearer that he drew
to Egypt the more did he cleave unto God. This notwith-
Standing, as the journey had not been authorised divinely, he
was destined to suffer therein in respect of Sarah.6 It is
stated in this connection that Abraham had lived so modestly
with his wife, and in such holiness, that he had never looked
upon her face previously. Only as they drew near to Egypt
did she raise a corner of her veil, and then he saw that she was
fair.” In Egypt he found a great centre of the occult arts
and again betook himself to their study, but this time he
penetrated the secret of evil without being led away thereby.
He returned thence to his own grade or degree, which is
indicated by the words §: “ And Abram went up out of Egypt
. . . into the South ” °—meaning the inward height of his

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 80a; I, 468.

2 Gen. xii. 9.

8 Z., Pt. I, fol. 81b; I, 469.

* Gen. xiii. 10.

5 The knowledge of Abraham was the consequence of his absolute faith in God.

6 Gen. xii. 14-20. It is said that the Holy one was seeking to prove Abraham and
for this reason allowed him to act on his own initiative in visiting Egypt.—Z., Pt. I,
fol. 82a; I, 474.

7 Sarah was under the proteétion of Shekinah and during the night that she passed
in the palace of Abimelech she was accompanied by angels belonging to the superior
degrees, who gave thanks to God.—Z.., Pt. I, fol. 82b: I, 476. See also zb., fol. 81b ;
I, 470, by which it appears that the beauty of Sarah was a reflection of the Divine
Presence. I may mention here that the verbal economy or subterfuge to which
Abraham had recourse in respect of his wife and sister occasions no comment in the
Zouar, although it enlarges on the account and adds miraculous elements. It is
affirmed that the description of Sarah as Abraham’s sister was a description of Shekinah,
who was with her.

8 Ib., fol. 83a; I, 478. ® Gen, xiil. 1

THE COVENANT WITH ABRAHAM 299

sanctity. From this time forward he knew the Mystery of
Supreme Wisdom and became the tight hand of the world.
This is indicated by the words: “ From the South even to
Beth-el,” 1 which is the integral stone—that stone of the
wotld and Jacob, about which we have heard already.
Abraham—in other words—had attained what the ZOHAR
understands by perfect faith. But he was yet to proceed
further, “ going on still toward the South,” * rising from grade
to grade, as one experiencing the infinite and winning his
auteole.2 So did the Holy One become his patrimony, and
after Abraham was patted from Lot he “ dwelled in the land
of Canaan,” * which is the place of faith.

When the time comes for the ZoHar to speak of Melchi-
zedek King of Salem it says that his offering of bread and
wine symbolised the world above and the world below.®
The sense in which he was “ priest of the Most High God ”
is that in the sanétification of himself he raised the world
below to the height of that which is above. For once, as it
seems to me, the Zouar has exceeded its own measures at
this point and has announced a spiritual truth, the full purport
of which it did not realise. Concerning the mission of the
priesthood it gives, however, a proper definition when it says
that this conjoins the world below to that which is above by
an indissoluble bond.*®

I believe that I have indicated sufficiently the qualities of
interpretation which appertain to the first section in the
history of Abraham ; but the second covers that period which
opens with the making of the Covenant between God and
the patriarch, or the whole of his later history. The subject
at this point passes from personal narration to the “token ”
or signing the Covenant and the mystery foreshewn
thereby.’

The characteristic physical sign of all Israel on the male

1 Gen. xiii. 3. * Zi, Pt. 2}, foli83b 3) E482.

® Gen, xii:)9. o hoett, ett. te:

kay Ahad 84 Nt i 61. 87a; I, 502. It seems to follow that according to another manner of
Zoharic symbolism bread and wine signify male and female. The bread and wine of
Melchizedek were also symbols of nutriment and blessings for the world.—Ib., fol. 87b ;

12305;

6 Ib., fol. 87a; I, 502.

7 I have called Abraham throughout by his name in its later form, but it is said
that the addition of the letter Hz, by which Abram was transformed, was not added
until he had suffered circumcision, and it was thereafter that the Shekinah became
attached to him.—Z., Pt. I, fol. 93a; I, 529. The letter Hz was added also to the
name of Sarah, as a symbol of the female principle —Jb., fol. 96a ; I, 546, 547.

300 THE HOLY KABBALAH

side has issued in the Zonar from the region of arbitrary
ordinance into that of most sacred symbolism. If at first it
was a hygienic observance or one that might act as an aid to
continence, it has become in the Secret Tradition a seal of
purity, and though it is not expressed it is implied indubitably
by the text that it had reference also to the purity of woman-
hood, because her protection was therein. The proof is that,
according to the Zonar, the male side of humanity in its
sepatation from the female had no true title to the name and
prerogative of man. There is little need to add that the
woman was not without the man, but this is not discussed in
the Zonar, for, with all its illuminations and its strong
tendencies towards the liberal side, it represents the last
development of a purely oriental religion.! It remains that
while the masculine shares in humanity, it is true man only
in union with womanhood.

When Abraham was circumcised? he separated himself
from the impure world and entered into the Sacred Covenant,
into that Covenant on which the world is based; and seeing
that he so entered, it follows that the world is founded on
him. Expanding this fantasy it is afirmed sometimes that
Genesis opens with the words: “ By Abraham God created,”
&c., and therefore the Covenant of circumcision is the origin
of heaven and earth. The He added to the name of Abram
after he had fulfilled the ordinance is said to symbolise the
five books of the Law, which are the records at length of the
Covenant. But that which begins on earth is raised gloriously
into heaven and prolonged through all the worlds. The
Sign of the Covenant constitutes the foundation of the Sacred
Name and of the Mystery of Faith—the root of the notion
being probably the shape of the letter Yop with which the
Name commences, or this at least is the material root. It is
said further that the Sacred Sign of the Covenant is fixed at
the base of the Throne, between the two thighs and the trunk 4
—a reference to the SEPHIRA YESOD, when this is placed on

—

1 It is said, however, that the Covenant implies the union of the two principles.—Z.,
Pt. Th fol. 26a ;) 101, 127.

2011p; Fol. ‘ot bss 1,59.

3. 7, Pt. I, fol. 93a; I, 529.

4 When it is said in Gen. xxi. i: “‘ And the Lord visited Sarah,” the Divine Name
used in the Hebrew is Jehovah, but according to the Zouar it was that Degree of the
Divine Essence which was symbolished by the Vau. It is added that all is contained
in the mystery of Vau, and thereby all is revealed.—Z., Pt. I, fol. 117b ; I, 69.

THE COVENANT WITH ABRAHAM 301

the Tree.t As the sun enlightens the world, so the Sacred
Sign enlightens the body ; as a buckler protects man, so does
this: no evil spirit can approach him who preserves it in
purity.2 By the fa& of circumcision man enters under the
wings of Shekinah.2 He who preserves the Sign as I have
just said, and fulfils the commandments of the Law, is righteous
from head to foot, and his life in continence is his title to a
part in the world to come.’ It is said also that so long as a
man is uncircumcised, he cannot unite himself to the Name of.
the Holy One ; but after circumcision, he enters that name and
is joined therewith. Those who do not preserve the sign in
purity make separation, in a manner, between Israel and the
Heavenly Father.6 All the forces of Nature centre in the
organ of the Covenant, and in the metaphysical principle of
the Covenant it is said ? that there was subsequently hidden
and enclosed that light created when God said: “ Let there
be light ” 8—the alleged reason being that it symbolises the
fructifying principle, gui semen injicit femine. It is this which
is called in Scripture “ the fruit of a tree yielding seed.” °

It is counselled: “Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy
flesh to sin,” 19 and the exhortation is understood as a restraint
placed upon speech lest this should generate evil thoughts,
calculated to soil the consecrated flesh which is marked with
the Seal of the Holy Covenant. When the Psalmist says :
** The firmament sheweth His handiwork,” 11 it is to the Mark
of the Covenant that reference is made—that is “ the work of
His hands.” So also those other words: “‘ Wherefore should
God be angry at thy voice and destroy the work of thine
hands ? ” 12are an allusion to those who keep the Seal in
purity. In yet other terms, the firmament publishes the names
of those holy men who have lived in chastity, and our part is
to plead for their intercession with God, Who hears them
always. Their names are written in the Book of God, which

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 149b; II, 190. It is very difficult to allocate sporadic symbolism
of this kind to its proper source elsewhete in the text, but the allusion is almost certainly
to the extension of the Divine Son through the lower SEPHIROTH, having the head in
Daatu, as explained in a previous seétion.

2 Ib., fol. 8a.se4jrasina6s

® Jbytali99a;3) dy $43;

4 Ib., fol. 162a; Il, 235. Thetextis: ‘‘ Blessings are upon the head of the just.” —
Prov. x.6. But the head of the just signifies the Sign of the Covenant.—Z., in loco cit.

5 [b., fol. 89a; I, 510. * Z21Rb Lo fol, za¢ 1,4:
6 [b., fol. 189b; U, 348. 10. Hecles,\v. 6.
#, 1b:; fol ra3*Th 4: 11 Ps, xix. 1,

Pr<zen. asia: : 12 Eccles. v. 6.

302 THE HOLY KABBALAH

is the great firmament of stars: they are the company which
follow the Heavenly Spouse.}

It is said otherwise concerning the Sign of the Covenant
that holy flesh is marked with the letter Yonp,? referring to
the obvious analogy between the “ organ of sanctity ” and
this letter, when circumcision has been performed upon the
first. The letter Yop symbolises also the configuration of the
celestial river which is the source of souls. ‘The words:
“* Sanctify unto me all the firstborn, whatsoever openeth the
womb among the children of Israel,” ? is a commentary on
the letter Yop, which is the first-born of all the heavenly
sanctities.4

Finally, there is a curious train of thought which requires
to be followed carefully.6 ‘Through wisdom is an house
builded.” ® This is termed an allusion to the mystery expressed
in those other words: “‘ And a river went forth from Eden
to water the garden.” 7 It is said further: “ Thy tabernacle
is holy,” § but our English rendering is not literally the same.
This tabernacle is termed the union of all. The verse in
question enumerates three enclosures, one within the other—
the Courts, House and Tabernacle—and the Zowar says,
unexpectedly enough on the surface, that whosoever subjects
his son to the holocaust of circumcision may be assured that
the Holy One will draw the child to Himself and make his
abode in the innermost of these enclosures, while the father
will earn no less merit than if he had offered all other sacrifices
in the world and had raised up the most perfect altar. The
explanation of these things can rest only, as I have said, in a
most profound understanding of the Mystery of Sex, and the
final place of that Mystery is indicated by the correspondence
alleged in another part between the Sign of the Covenant and
the Sacred Crown.?

Ai Zi Pt: 4, £0 8b 2 Ay h82 <i Zigbt. Ltal 13h 5° 1,779.
2 Tb., fol. 13a; I, 74. 8 Tb., fol. 94b sd S 20).
2 Bias xiii) 2: #) PLOY. XXIV." 3.

7 Gen. ii. Io.

8 See Ps. Ixv. 4: “ Even of Thy Holy Temple.” Compare, however, the corte-
sponding passage in the Vulgate, Ps. lxiv. 5 : Santium eft templum tuum.

® Z., Pt. I, fol. 95a; I, 542. The following points may be gathered from other
parts of the text: (1) The mark of the Covenant is imprinted above as well as on man
below ; but this is probably a reference to the mark on the Throne, already given.
(2) The Kingdom was removed for a period from David because he had not preserved
the sign in perfect purity. (3) He who so keeps it has nothing to fear from severity—
i.e., jadgment—being united thereby to the Name of the Holy One. (4) He who
defiles it cannot aspire to the mark of God, which is royalty and Jerusalem. (5) The

THE COVENANT WITH ABRAHAM 303

It was said at the beginning of this section that the history
of Abraham is for the Zowar the actual story concerning the
father of nations, and this obtains throughout; but for the
gteat theosophical commentary its living value lies in the way
of its understanding as an inward text of election, applicable
to every soul in Israel.

VI.—OF MOSES,.THE MASTER OF THE LAW

The Biblical story of Moses issues in a mystery, for he
“whom the Lord knew face to face,” + having died in the
Lord on Mount Nebo, was also by Him buried, and “ no man
knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day.” * But, according
to the Zonar, the story of Moses begins in a mystery also,
for he, about whom it is said that “‘ there arose not a prophet
since in Israel like unto Moses,” ? was not in his conception
after the manner of men who had preceded or of those who
came after him. The distinétion belongs more properly to
another part of my subject and will be found therein. I will
therefore say only that his parents—the “‘ man of the house
of Levi” 4 and she who was “a daughter of Levi” ®—had
their hearts. uplifted unto Her who is called Shekinah, second
of the Divine Hypostases—at the time of that union when it
is said that “‘ the woman conceived and bare a son.” ® ‘The
consequence of this was that Shekinah reposed on the nuptial
bed of his parents.? He was therefore born, “ not of blood,
not of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man” merely,
“but of God” 8; and even from the day of his birth the
Shekinah never quitted him.® He ascended into that region

sign is the gate of the body, to hold which in sanétity is to find the gate of heaven
always open.—Z., Pt. I, fol. 94a; I, 535, 536; and fol. r50b; II, 193. But that to
which all this applies is surely the idea which lies behind circumcision.

1 Deut. xxxiv. Io. 2 Ib., v. 6. 3 Jb. v. 10.

Lal o> ag he 5) 7D. STE Wis 2.

7 See Z., Pt. II, fol. rra—12a; III, 48-52. It is said in the most cryptic manner of
the text that the “‘ man of the house of Levi” was the angel Gabriel, who is called
“man,” as it is written: ‘‘ Even the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision at
the beginning ” (Dan. ix. 21). The house of Levi signifies the Community of Israel—
referring probably to the School of ‘San&ity above in the SEpHrirA Brnan. The
daughter of Levi is the soul. The meaning is that the parents of Moses stood for these
symbolically.

*. St. John 1. 13.

® The father of Moses is said to have been espoused to Shekinah—apparently in
the sense that she was attached to or overshadowed him. Otherwise he would have
been unworthy to beget the Lawgiver. But it is added that the daughter of Levi
whom he espoused was the Shekinah—perhaps in the sense of being her symbol
below.—Z., Pt. II, fol. 19a; III, 92.—Jb., Pt. I, fol. r20b ; II, 83.

304 THE HOLY KABBALAH

where she is said to extend her wings,! as it is written: “ He
did fly upon the wings of the wind.” ? The Lawgiver is
affirmed, moreover, to have been the first man who attained
perfection, even as Messiah will be the last?; but there are
good reasons—e.g., the Story of Abraham—from the stand-
point of Zoharic Kabbalism, why it was requisite to qualify
this statement, and so it is said elsewhere that he was not
perfect in all things, the reason being that he was separated
from his wife. There is no authority in the Pentateuch on
this subject, but there is that of Talmudic Tradition which
says that they ceased to cohabit. It is probably an arbitrary
inference from the fact that neither she nor his two sons,
Gershom and Eliezer, are mentioned in Exodus or elsewhere
after they were brought back to Moses, “‘ when he encamped
at the Mount of God ” in the wilderness of Sinai.® So it is
said otherwise that the Lawgiver attained the degree of
BinaH but not that of CHoKMAH®; in other words, he did
not open the soth Gate of Understanding which gives upon
the path of Daterts, leading from Binan to CHoxMaH in the
Sephirotic Tree.

It is difficult, however, to judge clearly as to the earthly
espousals of Moses, according to the Zowar, for we learn
elsewhere that he separated himself from Zipporah by the
otdinance of God, that he might be joined to the heavenly
light of Shekinah.? Hence it is intimated elsewhere, on the
authority of Rabbi Simeon, that to attribute children to him
was in some sense beneath his dignity, as he had entered into
spiritual espousals.§ It is a question of the Mystery of Faith
and a case of extraordinary exception from the prevailing
mind of the Zowar, which makes children according to the
flesh an indispensable title to union with the glory of that

a Z., etl LMor, 78b\s) LIT, 329.

Ps; xviii:

2Ze Pe) TIL fol.u260b 41 iy.

4 Ib., Pt. I, fol. 234b; Tl, 523. The explanation is that in order to perfection there
must be union not alone with that which is above but also with that which is below.
A Talmudic Tradition on the subje& will be found in the Tra& Sassatn, but this is at
issue with the Zouar as it reckons the fa&t of his separation among his titles of honour.

® ex Sevan, 5.

6022 Pitti tol. t223a : IV i564

7! ZioPtodH, €ol..180a 3 V, 472:

8 Jb., Pt. Il, fol. Gob; Ill, 308. The argument is purely casuistic, pretending that
Scripture attributes the children of Moses to the mother only, and afterwards—on the
authority of Rabbi Simeon, wresting Ex. xviii. 5—maintaining that Jethro brought
his own sons to Moses,

OF MOSES, THE MASTER OF THE LAW 305

Second Hypostasis which stands for the nuptials that are
above. It should be understood at this point that the Mystery
of Faith consists, according to the French translation of the
ZOHAR, “in the union of God with a Female whom He
fructifies, after the manner of the union of male and female.”
This is true assuredly, yet it is only a part of the Mystery, or
rather it is the doétrinal aspect, and arising therefrom is a
practical side about which we receive intimations at many
points of the text, though it enters into complete expression
nowhere. Its real nature is the sole end of our research. To
conclude as to the marriages of Moses, there was a moment
when God said to the Lawgiver: “ Let it suffice thee ”?;
but that which was sufficient, says the ZoHar,? was the
prophet’s union with Shekinah, to Whom he was nearer in
truth than hands and feet, for—as we have seen—they were
not in separation prior to his birth in this life. So also he
was under the guidance of no angel and no messenger from
heaven but under that of God Himself,? because God and
His Shekinah are one. He represented the male principle,*
though in virtue of his union with Shekinah he was the light
of the moon, the moon being his symbol, for albeit that she
and God are one—as I have said—she shines in the light of
the Eternal Sun of Justice, more especially in her manifestation
below, or in the work of her providence concerning the
children of men. It is by Moses that the men of this world
ate held to have found salvation, for he communicated the
vital spirit of the Tree of Life. If Israel had not sinned this
spirit would have been preserved for ever in Israel.5

There was no servant so faithful as he who is called in the
Secret Tradition the Faithful Shepherd. He knew all the
celestial degrees and was never tempted to join himself other-
wise than to the Highest.® His fidelity was greater than that
of Ezekiel, for the latter is said to have divulged all the
treasures of the King.’ This statement is not explained by
the Zowar,® but I suppose that it refers to what is called

1 Deut. iii. 26.

4 Z3bts uly folic6eb 35 Vi a7.

3 Ib., fol. 286b; VI, 72. This is held to follow from the words: ‘‘ And he said
unto Him, If Thy Presence go not with me, carry us not up hence.”-—Ex. xxxiii. 15.

Ze Rt. Uy fol. 37bll a8,

5 By virtue of the gracious Law contained in the First Tables.

© Z.,\Ptid; fol.izoa’-ndiiyagys

%db., Pt; I, fol... 9a 3, I Lo19;

8 Except indeed to say that if Ezekiel so ated he had authority from the Holy One.

306 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Kabbalistically the Work of the Chariot, being that of Ezekiel’s
vision, and it seems to me that in this respect the later prophet
may be held to deserve exoneration. The title of Moses was
that he kept the Secret Law secretly, transmitting it only to
the elect,t and that he made public the Exoteric Law, which
does not contain the Mystery of Faith. In this sense he is
called the elder son of Adam,? and the reason—which is not
readily translatable—is quia verenda patris sui operaverat. It is
the keeping of the Mystery.

I pass now to the promulgation of the Law, and it would
seem that Moses ascended Mount Sinai clothed in the vesture
of Shekinah, being that cloud which he entered and in virtue
of which it was possible for him to go up.? The intention of
the Law was to place man under the domination of the Tree
of Life,* which means that there would have been no mysteries,
the Law in this aspect being the Spouse of God, and therefore
it is Shekinah herself, or the Mystery of Faith expounded. It
is that Mystery which is beheld in contemplating the face of
Shekinah, in the state which is eye to eye.® If this intention
had been fulfilled, there would have been no distinction of an
Oral and Written Law, and the question is therefore as to
what intervened so that another order followed, contrary to
the design of Providence. Now, it is afirmed by the ZoHar
that a change took place in Israel at the foot of Mount Sinai,®
and this is insisted upon so frequently in terms which never
vaty as to the alleged fact that one cannot help feeling some
principle is involved, some unstated matter of Secret Do@rine.
It is testified that Israel was joined anew to the Tree of Life,
so that it beheld the heavenly splendours and realised their
lights ; it experienced the ineffable joy which fills the hearts
of those who desire to know and understand the Supreme
Mysteries. The nation was reclothed by the Holy One with
that cuitass formed from the letters of His Sacred Name which
was the protection of Adam and Eve before their fall. The
serpent could cleave no longer to Israel, and it is afirmed to

ArZ Pt. ty fol! a8b ¥ T1279. 3 Ib., Pt. II, fol. 99a ; III, 398.

a Tb, +:Z, Et, Llitol: 269b)2 Vigra:

5 Jb., Pt. II, fol. 4ob—THE FarrHrut SHEPHERD ; III, 189.

$ Ib., Pt. I, fol. 52a, b; I, 302, 303. See also éb., fol. 36b; I, 226. It may be that
an arbitrary mode of reasoning is all that lies behind this subje€t. In the view of the
Zoharic doétors, there was something so great and beyond all experience of fallen
human natute which it was designed to promulgate in the first Tables of the Law that
for them it was the Law of Paradise, and its proposed reception by Israel involved for
them a restitution of the paradisaical state.

OF MOSES, THE MASTER OF THE LAW 307

have disappeared from the world. We must understand all
this as a reflection rather of the Divine Intention in its union
with the covenant made by the people on their part: “ All
that the Lord hath spoken we will do.” 1 They were washed
also and sanctified. To go beyond this point is unreason,
and I know not how the Zowar, regarded as commentary,
can postulate such exaltations of Israel either on the basis of
the text or of that which followed.? For we must remember
that in the absence of Moses, and in the uncertainty as to
what had become of him, but—ex hypothesi—in the absence
otherwise of all temptation, Israel adored the golden calf;
the old evil order was thus reinstated, and I conclude that the
serpent returned. It is to be understood further that the riot
of the feast which followed the idol-worship signifies a sexual
otgy, so that she who presides over the Mystery of Sex in
sanctity was driven from the people, and her secret was taken
from them. When therefore Moses came down from the
mountain carrying the Tables of the Law he broke them in
the presence of the people, which, according to Scripture,
was because “‘ his anger waxed hot 3; but it is understood
otherwise in the Zonar. ‘The thesis is that the original
Tables constituted the liberation of all,* meaning the separa-
tion from that serpent who is called “the end of all flesh.” °
They were formed originally from a single block of sapphire,
but God breathed upon them and the precious stone was
divided into two parts.6 They were created prior to the world
by the coagulation of the sacred dew which is said to fall on
the Garden of Apples.’ They were written before and behind,
and were symbolised by the loaves of proposition.® It is

2 The canon of criticism seems to be reached by the contrast of two passages of
Scripture: “‘ And Israel saw that great work which the Lord did” (Ex. xiv. 31)—
which the French translation of the Zowar renders: “‘ And Israel saw the mighty
hand of the Lord,” following apparently the Vulgate (ef manum magnam quam exercuerat
Dominus contra eos)—this being reputed to mean that Israel was able to contemplate the
celestial splendour and enjoy the vision of the supernal lights. The other passage is
this: “‘ And when Aaron and all the children of Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin
of his face shone, and they were afraid to come nigh him ” (Ex. xxxiv. 30). As to the
value of the contrast, it is enough to point out that the first text belongs to the period
when the Red Sea had just been crossed and has nothing to do with the sojourn at the
foot of Mount Sinai, which was reached three months after (Ex. xix. 1).

3 Ex. xxxil. 19;

4 2ny Pte fon 63S bizare

5 Ib., Pt. I, fol. 63b; 1,371. Itis understood that one consequence of this separation
would have been that there should be no more death.

* ih Pts UG fol. S4ab: TMieay,

7 Tb., fol. 84b ; III, 348.
8 Ib., Pt. Il, fol. 271b; VI, 27, and fol. 273 ; VI, 39.

308 THE HOLY KABBALAH

noted in another place that the writing thereon was like black
fire on white fire,t while according to yet another it would
appear that the stones were transparent?: the writing in
front, or on the obverse side, was read from behind, and that
on the reverse, or behind, was read from in front.? It is an
allusion to the inter-connection of the written and oral Law.
The Tables were given to Moses on the Sabbath Day. It is
recorded by Scripture * that they were cast from the hands of
Moses and were broken, and here it is explained by the ZoHAR
that this was because the letters took flight '—a device
designed to point out that no writing remained upon them
which could possibly be seen by Israel in contemplating the
fragments. The Tables were broken because Israel was not
worthy to profit by them,® and that which was shattered is
said to have been not only the written but the inward and
otal Law.’ The meaning is that the higher order of liberation
and mercy which included these, the revelation of the secret
union, was taken henceforth into concealment. The male-
diction brought upon the world by the trespass, and removed
for a moment as the people passed under the shadow of
Mount Sinai,’ descended again upon them. The Tables
came out of that region from which all liberties issue and on
which they all depend.? Over the mystical mountain they
diffused a sweet odour, because the sanctities of the world
of sanctity inhered therein; but this passed away when the
golden calf was set up for the worship of the nation.?®

It is recognised by the ZoHar that the second Tables
embodied another record, which was the Law of oppor-
tunism, the Law of mine and thine—of prohibition and denial,
being that of bondage. It was sacred after its own manner,
because it was a shadow of the first intention, but it reflects
at a very far distance. I do not know whether it is affirmed

Lhe hulle LOLs A2ODE ALM eAg.

2 Ib., fol. 84b ; III, 348. See also fol. 84a; III, 347.

3_Ib.,.fol. 84a; I,,347.

4 Ex. xxxii. 19. According to the Zour, they fell of themselves from his hands.—
Comets Lis fol. LOS3,, bs LV 4188, .
5 Ib

601. Pt. 1, fol. .26b 5 ay. 167.

7 Ib., fol. 28b; I, 181. “‘ And the Lord said unto Moses, . . . I will give thee
tables of Stone, and a law, and commandments which I have written.—Ex. xxiv. 12.
Accotding to the Zonar, the word “law ”’ signifies that which is written, while the
word “ commandments ” refers to the Oral Law.—Ib., Pt. II, fol. 4ob; V, 109.

8 1b. tol, 26% 1; 22b:

S Tbe Pte fon Ob 3° V,117.

10. Ib., fol, 6rb ; -V,'170.

OF MOSES, THE MASTER OF THE LAW 309

literally that it is a work of the Tree of Knowledge, but this
must be held to follow from numerous impressive intimations.
And the Secret Doétrine, with all the Oral Law by which
that Do@rine is encompassed, is the Tree of Life; but the
att of its mastery is long, and of all the Sons thereof, of all the
heirs at law, I suppose that only Rabbi Simeon could have
been said to possess it in the fullness.1 We know that after
him the reign of certitudes was over and the great quest in
the hiddenness was pursued in the attitude of groping, not
erect as heretofore with the light of sure enlightenment
shining from a meridian sun on the heads of the initiates.
There is much mote that could be said upon this subject, but
I feel that my purpose is served. I would add only that
amidst the clouded splendours and substitutions of the surface
sense we can understand readily the great and pressing need
for that study of the inward meaning which is imposed evety-
whete in the ZoHarR on those who would enter into the real
heritage of the ele&. To sum up therefore: Moses gave other
Tables to Israel, and these were from the side of the Tree
of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, from which the Law
emanates. The other Tables emanated from the Tree of Life.

I should add that the Written Law seems to be represented
by the word Daartu, ot Knowing ?: it is completed by that
which is traditional. The Doé@rine is sometimes called
CHOKMAH, or Wisdom, and sometimes Brnan, or Under-
standing. The Traditional Law has come out of the Written
Law, as woman was brought forth from man, according to
the Mystery of the Garden—but this we have seen already.
It can exist only in unison with the Written Law ; but I think
that the Zoharic treatment of the latter shews that it was
regarded rather as a beast of burden—that ass of a certain
comparison—already cited—on which the King and Queen
of the Secret Mysteries must never be set to ride. There is,

1 T mean, of course, since the days of patriarchs and prophets. As regards the work
of this Tree of Knowledge, the Law—ftrom this point of view—was to preserve the
species of the chosen people according to the mode of human generation in the world
beyond the mystical Garden of Eden ; but the work of the Tree of Life, for those who
would dwell beneath it, was one of mystical generation and fruition. It is not suggested
that the Sons of the Doétrine attained the secret in its fullness: they taised a corner
of the veil.

2 OP ty de tO) ASD ake 26 oe

3 The reason given is that it has been formed by the “ Complete Name ”—2.e.,
Jehovah Elohim, being the Divine Male and Female.

4 It was like the mule in THE HicH History oF tHE Hoty Graat—“ a beast on

God’s side.”’

310 THE HOLY KABBALAH

however, one more memorable point concerning the Oral
Law, and this is that although it is a balm of life for the just,
for the unjust it is a mortal poison. I believe that as much
has been said concerning the Elixir of Alchemy. The
aphorism is not therefore vel santtum invenit, vel santtum facit,
yet I think that there is a heart of the Doétrine in which the
good must fill us entirely, as the student enters more deeply
into its understanding. But the sorrow of it is that after
eating of the Tree of Knowledge through the years and the
ages we are still untutored children, knowing little in the
essential manner either of good or evil.

I have reminded my readers already that Moses was interred
outside the Holy Land and that “no man knoweth of his
sepulchre unto this day.” 2 But this sepulchre, according to
the Zowar, signifies the Misuna.? The Secret Doétrine was
interned in the written word—that end of all revelations.
But the tradition says that the inner meaning—like the spirit
of Moses—remained with the elders and was handed on
secretly. The Scripture mentions that “ the children of Israel
wept for Moses in the plains of Moab thirty days.” ® They
might have mourned him, had they known, through the
triumphs and the exiles continued thenceforward, for they
lost the Secret Do&rine of which he was the personification.
It was withdrawn when he left, as if into a secret sanctuary,
and no voice issued therefrom until the days of Rabbi Simeon.
He was even as a Rose of Sharon which blossomed on the
ruins of Jerusalem in the days of Vespasian. I wonder not
that there was sorrow on occasions amidst the Sons of the
Doétrine, as with Marius over the ruins of Carthage. Moses
was the life of the Doétrine, and hence it is affirmed that when
he ascended to the height of Pisgah “ his eye was not dim,
not his natural force abated.” ® It is recorded also of his
ficure in its prime that this resembled the sun in its splendour ”
—so perfectly did his moon refleé& that glory.

One legend says, however, that he did not die,’ though the

1, Z., Pt. I, fol. 268a ; II, 633, 634.

2 Dent. xxxiv.'6.

BF uPt Agtole rb + Lares; F

4 The MisHNAH is the maid-servant who takes the place of the mistress.—Ib.,
folv2th = Eas:

5 Deut. xxxiv. 8.

6 Deut. xxxiv. 7.

"Zs Pe Leto a8a's 1,:377.

8 Jb., fol. 28a; I, 176, and zb., Pt. Il, fol. 174a ; IV, 129.

OF MOSES, THE MASTER OF THE LAW 311

text repeats it on an authority which ts not its own, and it adds
—rather in the manner of a casuist—that no man does who ts
etaced by faith. As a fact, the authority is the MiprasH
Rappa on Deut. xxxiv., and the ZoHarR quotes it again in
another place but in a less questioning mood. Perhaps there
is a deeper heart of meaning than transpires on the surface,
for if we accept the Secret Doctrine on the subjeét of Moses
and the Law there is an aspect of failure about the great
mission of the Lawgiver. His stiff-necked generation pre-
vailed against him to the extent that he could fulfil only the
shadow of that which he proposed. His intention was to
deliver the truth which makes men free, but they were fit
only for a substitute. Now, this is set forth very curiously in
a single passage of the text, where it is affirmed that Moses
sought to bring the Shekinah out of exile, but he failed.t The
Shekinah signifies here the Secret Doétrine and this implies
that the First Tables were written ad clerum, but the context
was destined to remain in exile so long as Israel was incor-
porated as a people in its own place and land, while there
is no suggestion that the debates of the Dodors brought
Shekinah into liberation.? It is said therefore, in yet another
place, that Moses will return on earth at the end of time to
complete his mission by revealing the True Name of Shekinah®
which is also in the hiddenness, and there is no pretence that
it was known to the Doctors. Those whom he brought out
of Egypt he will then lead into knowledge. This is why it is
exclaimed by Job: “ The Lord hath given and the Lord hath
taken away: Blessed is the name of the Lord.” * That will
take place which was to have been fulfilled at first: the ele&
will be set free from the death-angel by the true Tables of the
Law. Meanwhile Moses obtained the degree of BINAH—as
we have seen—but not that of Cuoxman. His death was
from what is called in the Zorar the other side, which means
the right side, the left being the side of the serpent.® It was
not caused by the sin of Adam but by the operation of a

aN Tay Pte d, telecast le 170,

2 On the contrary, so long as the Shekinah is in captivity, she is never left by
Moses.—Ib. ‘That which he did on earth was, however, to attra@t her to Israel.—Ib.,
fol. 68a; I, 400.
: y Ib., fol. 28b; I, 180. See also, for the return of Moses, #b., Pt. II, fol. 2554;

, 602.
AIO. 21,
Zs ti, fol $34. v1 g06,

H.R, ; xy

312 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Supreme Mystery. It is also recorded of Joshua that he did
not die through his own sinning, but through the serpent’s
counsel to Eve, and this is said to be expressed in the words :
“ His servant Joshua, the son of Nun, a young man, departed
not out of the Tabernacle.” 1 |

VIL—THE TEMPLES IN JERUSALEM

_ Looking back upon the chequered history of their nation
and on the purport of its life generally, the mystical doors
of Israel did not fail to discern the uplifting of strange portents
in their spiritual sky, the full significance of which was not
rightly to be recognised beforehand, supposing that they
wete real prognostics. It is only after the event that most of
us become wise in this manner. In tretrospe& the portents
wete everywhete; in retrospe& the world’s creation, the
gteat myth of the Garden, the judgment of the Flood, and
the rest of the Divine Providences were like tocsins and
trumpet voices concerning all that was to follow. Not alone
were the seeds therein, but it was Israel delineated throughout.
Abtaham might turn to the South and again he might turn
therefrom, but the reason in either case was of that or of this
to come in respect of the twelve tribes. Yet it was not only
to come ; already it was in a sense there, so that the stories of
old look weirdly in a light which suggests that they were
recorded before the events with which they are supposed to
deal. The occurrences of the past were also fateful in
respe@ of later things that were to come. For example,
when the Tables of the Law were broken by Moses, this is
said to have occasioned the ultimate destruction of the First
and Second Temples.?

Thete ate two aspects under which the Temples come
before us in Zoharic texts, and as happens so often, they do
not harmonise together, while it is impossible rather than
difficult to believe that an adjustment can be effected between
them. I will collate them under what may be called the
motives attaching to each. There is firstly that wherein
there is no shadow of vicissitude as to the glory and the
plenary grace which inhered in the design and execution of
Solomon’s Holy House. ‘The Inner Sanctuary constituted the

1 ix. xxxill, 11. 2 Z., Pt. I, fol. 26b; I, 167.

THE TEMPLES IN JERUSALEM 313

heart of the world;1 the Shekinah dwelt therein after the
manner of a virtuous and faithful wife who never leaves the
abode of her husband.? It was therefore well with Israel
during this period. The building plan was sketched by a
supernatural hand and was delivered—as we ate awate—to
David, by whom it was shewn to Solomon.? The Temple
was erected on seven pillars,* the craftsmen following the
design, point by point, until the work was finished.? ‘There
was a sense in which they followed blindly, but there was also
another sense in which the work was self-executed. This is
suggested by the silent nature of the building, about which
we hear in Scripture.6 The analogy is that of creation, for
the world evolved of itself, with God as the beginner of the
work.’ Hence David said: “‘ Except the Lord build the
house, they labour in vain that build it.” 8 The meaning is
that the Lord designed the Temple and the work went on of
itself. It is said also: “‘ Except the Lord watch the city, the
watchman waketh but in vain.” ® This is Jerusalem in its
building. The moon is symbolised as shining at the full
during the whole period.1° The Temple was built for the
union of the King and Matrona,44 God and His Church in
Israel. Of the struGure in its completeness we are told that
the earth inhabited by the Gentiles encompasses the Holy City,
which is the centre of the habitable world ; the town encircles
the Holy Mountain; the Mountain surrounds the session-
house of the Sanhedrin; this in its turn stands about the
Temple; and the Temple encompasses the Holy of Holies,
where dwells the Shekinah and where are the Propitiatory,
the Kerubim and the Ark of the Covenant.12 The Holy of
Holies itself was built on that foundation stone which, as we
know already, is held to form the central point of the world.
It is identified with the celestial throne of Ezekiel, and in

7 Lig Dt Lith add s).0, 487.
2 Ib :

Wipe. eto 1642 3° TV: 107.

4 Ib. It was guarded by the archangel MerarrRon.

SIRE tol Faas Is 4583

§ “* And the house, when it was in building, was built of Stone made ready before it
was brought thither: so that there was neither hammer nor axe nor any tool of iron
heatd in the house, while it was in building.” —1 Kings vi. 7.

Ti Ziy Pt TE) fol 226a"s IV, 247:

& PS. Cxxvite zs:

> Ib.

40 Z.,"Pt. I, fol.“r50a:;' Tl, "90.

41 [p., Pt TLL; fok74b 4 V3. 203.

12 [b,, fol. 161b; V, 416.

314 THE HOLY KABBALAH

appearance it was like a sapphire.t Solomon is said to have
united Matrona to the Supreme King by the building of the
Temple and there was joy everywhere, both above and below.?
The Temple itself is understood as the spiritual union of male
and female apart from any fleshly union.2 It symbolises
therefore the Mystery of Sex at its highest, and this is a point
to be memorised in respect of all these reveries.

Here is the first picture, but the alternative as follows is
drawn from the FarrHruL SHEPHERD and not the ZoHAR
itself. The First and Second Temples were transitory things
in their nature; they should have been the work of God
Himself, but because of Israel’s sin in the wilderness, the First
Temple was built by Solomon, and hence it did not subsist.4
Contrary to the former intimation, the Lord was not its
builder. So also at the epoch of Ezra, again on account of
sin, the Second Temple was erected by men and there was no
ground of subsistence. It follows that so far no holy house
has been built in reality at all,> nor has even the city of Jeru-
salem been as yet constructed. The world is still awaiting
that promise of the Lord: “TI, saith the Lord, will be unto
her a wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in the
midst of her.” ® There are suggestions however which go
much further than mere questions of substitution. It is said
that from the day when the Holy One raised the Supreme
Sanctuary the celestial favours were never manifested in the
terrestrial Temple, built of stones and mortar.’ I suppose
that here is the house not made with hands which is termed
elsewhere a place of spiritual nourishment which the kingdom
of heaven accords to those in need of it and that sanctuary
which brings all the poor under the shadow of Shekinah.®

The Temple of Solomon was a symbol of penitence as well
as a house of prayer, and its destruction signifies an impenitent
State.2 The cause of its destruction is said otherwise to have
been the separation of the Hz and Vau in the Divine Name

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 71b, 72a; I, 425. See Ezek. i. 26: ‘‘ And above the firmament that
was over their heads was the likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire
stone.” ‘This stone, according to the Zouar (éb.), signified the celestial throne, and
the throne of the vision signified the Traditional Law, while “‘ the appearance of a
man ” who sat thereon was the Written Law.

2 Tb., Pt. Il, fol. 74b; V, 203. 8 ZeCh.dh $2
3 Jb., Pt. Il, fol. 258b; IV, 292. 7 Z., Pt. Ul, fol, 1o8b + TI, 427,
«Jb. Pt 4 fol, 2214 3) 'V, $59; 8 JIb., Pt. I, fol. 208a; I, 434.

5 ZiiPE MIE fol: 22743) 539. ® Ib., Pt. Ul, fol. 75a. 3) Vi 204.

THE TEMPLES IN JERUSALEM 315

as the result of sin.! The people were sent into exile and the
Shekinah was driven out.?. The Vau went in search of the
Her, but she was in a distant place; it looked towards the
santuary, but it was burnt; it looked for the chosen people,
but they were in exile ; it turned towards the source of bene-
ditions, but this was dried up.? It is said otherwise that the
destruction of the First Temple dried up the sources of the
Shekinah above and that of the Second Temple those of the
Shekinah below.* All light was clouded, so that the saints
of this world were no longer enlightened. During the exile
in Babylon the wings of the Mother in Transcendence did not
covet her children;® there was therefore a separation
between the Yop and first He of the Divine Name. The
reference is of course to the spiritual state of Israel, and
behind it lies a strange spiritual understanding of the Fall of
man. During the present and greater exile the Divine Name
is divided now as it was divided then,’ albeit that which it
signifies is one eternally above. In another form of sym-
bolism the First Temple was destroyed because it wanted
light,’ which was absent also from the Second Temple, but
in a still greater degree, the Second Temple signifying the
fleshly union of male and female.® The priests of the First
Temple ascended on the walls of the Sanctuary, holding their
keys in their hands and said to God: Hereunto we have
been Thine administrators; henceforth take back Thy
possessions.1° The sun turned away from the moon and
enlightened it no longer; there was no day without male-
ditions and sufferings.14

These are the lamentations of the Zowar over its Holy
Places and Houses; but another day will come when the
moon shall resume its primal light.1? It will be that period

Prt. koh. T22as V0 320;
* Ih, fol? 75a'5' V;.204;
3 The reason was that the male was united no longer to the female.—Ib.
UP Pe TS tol.24$a 3) LE, Gor.
SIGS Peete tol. ob Til, aay
® Ib., fol. 9b; III, 39, 40.
* Ib.; fol. gb TEL 4r,.
8 Ib., fol. 179b; IV, 150. The obvious commentary hereon is that Shekinah, by
the hypothesis at least, was reigning on the Mercy Seat.
® 2. Pt. Tl, fol, 25 8b 3; TY y\292:.
10 Ib,, Pt. I, fol. 202b, 203a ; II, 406. This is “ the burden of the valley of visions.” —
Is. xxii. 1.
11 Jh,, fol. 181a, b; II, 315.
12 Jh,, fol. 181b; I, 316.

316 THE HOLY KABBALAH

mentioned in Scripture: “ Behold, My servant shall deal
prudently, he shall be exalted and extolled and be very high.” 1
The reference is to the Messianic epoch, when the world will
be restored, impurity will disappear therefrom, and death
shall be cast out for ever. The Holy One will remember His
people Israel and the Temple shall be rebuilt.2 Formerly it
was based on severity and wrath, but it will be restored in
charity and will be founded thereon. Meanwhile, since the
destruction of the San@uary here below, the Holy One swore
never to enter the Jerusalem above until Israel returned into
the Jerusalem below.* No blessings have gone forth, either
in the world above or in that which is below, for these worlds
depend on one another.6 The consolation of the ele& is
however that, in the absence of a place of sacrifice, devotion
to the study of the Law will bring the forgiveness of sin more
readily than the burnt-offerings of old.” ®

VIN.—THE COMING OF MESSIAH

There is no question that the Kabbalistic teaching con-
cerning a Deliverer to come should begin by a consideration
of Talmudic intimations on the subject; for these are many
and important within their own measures. There is un-
fortunately no space for such an extension of the materials
_ already in my hands, but there are several sources of informa-
tion which ate open to any reader, and indeed the whole
subject is available if he can have recourse to the French
rendering of the JERUSALEM TaLmMuD? and even to the
unscholarly English version of the BABYLONIAN TaLmup 8
which appeared some yeats since in America. Outside this
question of the past, the first thing for us to realise on our
own part is that there is not one line, and much less one page,

1°Z., Pt.'L, fol. 181b; 11,316; Is, ii.'13.° “See also Gen. xxiv. 2.
3 Tb., Pt. I) fol. es4a'; TE, 128;
Bild. Pt tol.’ 59a, bi;. TIL, 263, 264,
PN a Eo AE ee ee @
5 Ib., fol. 7ob ; I, 415.
6 Jb., APPENDICES IJ], Secret Miprasu, fol. 6a; I, 680.
7M. Schwab: Lr Tatmup DE JERUSALEM, I1 vols., Paris, 1871-1889, 8vo. See
also LE TALMUDE DE BABYLONE, ¢raduit par ? Abbé Chiarini, 2 vols., Leipsic, 1831.
It embodies a condensed account of both recensions and may serve some general
urpose.
ie New edition of the BAByLonrAN Tatmup: English Translation. Original Text
edited, formulated and pun€tuated by Michael L. Rodkinson, vol. I, TRacr SABBATH,
1896. In all 18 volumes, various years.

THE COMING OF MESSIAH 317

in the ZouHar which can be constructed according to its proper
sense on the assumption that a Messiah has appeared already
in Israel, while there is consequently nothing that can be
applied to a Second Advent of the Christ of Nazareth. These
things are dreams, and recent pleadings on the subject are if
possible of less consequence than those of the old scholars
who filled Europe with their debates in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries.1 The points of analogy between
Kabbalistic and Christian doétrine are many and eloquent in
their way, but they belong to another order. There is an
attractive hypothesis with which I shall attempt to deal later
on, and its whole design is to construct Zoharic Theosophy in
a direction opposite hereto, or not only ina Christian sense but
in one which would place the texts under the particular
obedience of Latin Theology ; and I who, of all things else,
would desite, were it possible, to look through such en-
chanted glasses, have concluded that there is no evidence, so I
would therefore warn others. It should be added in justice
to the interests at large that the Roman Church is much too
wise to lend countenance—ofncially or extra-officially—to the
interesting view, which is therefore the outcome of private
zeal only.

The first question which concerns us is that of Messianic
expectations in mystical Israel. The elet—and if these are
mote especially the Sons of the Doétrine it is in the sense that
the greater imitate the lesser, meaning the race of chosen
people—the elect must hope always for the coming of the
man of holiness,” for it is said: “I will wait upon the Lord,
that hideth His face from the house of Israel, and I will look
to Him.” ? He is the man in transcendence, the man who is
allocated in one place to the SzpHirA CHoxmau,’ but the
point is of great complexity and its elucidation belongs to a
subsequent part of our research. It is said further that He is
the “man more precious than fine gold ” who is mentioned

1 See Benediétus Poscantinus : DiaLtoGum DE Mgssta, Venice, 1548, and Antonius
Hulsius: IN THEoLoGIAM JUDAICAM DE MeEssta, Bremen, 1580. There isa Still
eatlier wotk, but I can only claim to know of a report concerning it: Eprsroia R.
Samuels Judai missam ad Isaac, Mantua, 1475. It claims to have been translated from
the Arabic by a Dominican, Alphonsus Bono-Homo, and is an argument from the
prophets that Jesus Christ was the Messiah expected by Jewry.

2 7.) Pt. Btok zoaay Teens;

AS Vili X7.

4 IT should mention that this reference depends on certain SupPLEMENTS, which are a
later addition to the Zowar.

318 THE HOLY KABBALAH

by Isaiah ;1 and it is on record also that He shall be raised
above all the inhabitants of the world, who will adore Him,
prostrated in His presence.” As a further witness respecting
His eternal generation, the Spirit of Elohim which brooded
over the face of the waters is sometimes regarded as the Spirit
of Messiah, who has washed His robes in heavenly wine from
the creation of the world.? He is also the sacred moon on
high, having no other light than that which it receives from
the sun above ;* but it is to be noted that the Shekinah is
also symbolised by the moon and this has led to a precarious
and indeed impossible identification of the Messiah as the
Shekinah incarnate. It might be said on the same evidence
that Solomon was an incarnation of Messiah and Moses also,
for both had the moon as a symbol.

According to MiprasH Tarricotx, the Messiah will bring
eternal peace, which of course was understood by the Israelites
as peace for Israel, p/ys that which may follow extermination
for all who did not enter by conversion into the House of
Jacob. It is said in the Zonar that, according to tradition,
wherever Solomon is mentioned in the Song of Solomon this
King of Peace is designated.2 Conversion at the Messianic
period will be apparently on a great scale, because all the
nations of the world will gather about the King Messiah when
He shall be manifested,® seeing that these words of the
Scripture must be fulfilled: 7 “ And in that day there shall
be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the
people; to it shall the Gentiles seek ; and his rest shall be
glorious.” It will be a time for the revelation of mysteries
which the will of God has concealed through the ages, but as
the day of the King approaches even little children shall know
the Mysteries of Wisdom.® It will be also a time of union,
for in the Sabbatic millenary the Holy One will accomplish
union between souls.? All the blessings of Israel will be
realised in Israel,1° which will form one people only on earth,
“and I will make them one nation in the Lord.” 4 The
meaning seems to be that all nations shall become one nation of
the Holy One; but the great war of the world will precede this.

a Kg. tit, re. $b. Pt. Oh, fol agate s: LV era
2 Z., Pt. I, fol. 107b ; II, 39. 4 Is. xi, 10.

3 Ib., fol. 240a ; I, 548. ; Zi, Pt. Y folsjr18a 5: Tsar.

4 Jb., Pt. I, fol. 238a; Il, 540. Ib., fol. 119a; Il, 77.

5 Ib fol. 298) sel t82,: 183. 18. Ib: oly va gb 341, 0728

11 Eyek, xxxvii. 22.

THE COMING OF MESSIAH 319

It is unfortunate that the annotations to the French ZoHAR
ate largely polemical in chara¢ter and elucidations which
would have been valuable on difficult points of faét are too
often wanting. It would seem at first sight that there are
sevetal Messiahs to come. ‘There is he who is to be the Son
of Ischai, said to be master of all, by whom the earth is
nourished.4 There is secondly the Son of Ephraim, of whom
it is testified that he will be driven back from Rome.? Three
petsonalities are mentioned, each of them once or twice only,
and it is suggested in the notes—but without offering a
reason—that the second is identified with the third Messiah,
who is the Son of Joseph. The fourth is the Son of David
and both are mentioned in the Tatmup;*4 but one of the
“Omissions ” given in the first appendix to the first part of
the Zouar afirms that the last two are one.® Certain
MIpDRASHIM ate said to agree, but the distinction for what it
is worth remains perfetly clear in the Talmudic references,
according to which the Son of Joseph will suffer a violent
death § and will be succeeded by the Son of David. Else-
whete in the Zour it is denied that the Son of Joseph will
be killed because he is compared to an ox and evil has no
hold over him.’ It is of this Messiah that it is said in Scrip-
tute: “‘He was wounded for our transgressions . . . and
with his stripes we are healed.” § On the contrary, the fact
that he will die is reaffirmed a few folios subsequently. It is
said also that one of these alternative deliverers is poor and
mounted on an ass, while the other is the first-born of a bull.®
They are the two Kerubim stationed before the Garden of
Eden; the Flaming Sword is MErAtTRON,?° but at this point
the symbolism passes into a wilderness of confusion where it

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 29b; I, 185, 186. Eternal life is possible through him only. The
authority cited is 1 Kings XX. 31, and a supposed statement therein that “‘ the son of
Ischai lives upon the earth,” but it is not to be found.

ty Zay bt. , fol, 1208: IIL, 461. See also Part III, fol. 153b; V, 394.

3 The Son of David is said to be the SzPHIRA NETZACH, while the Son of Ephraim
is Hop.—Ib., Pt. II, fol. 243a, b; V, 581.

4 Tra€ts ABODA- ZARA, SUCCA, Yepamor and SANHEDRIN.

5 Pig Ped, tok 2679p. 11, 633.

6 The ZoHAR agrees in one place, but adds that he will rise again —Jb., Pt. II,
fol. 203b; V, 520. See also Ib., Pt. I, fol. 267b; II, 633, from which it follows that
there is one Messiah and that he will suffer death. But this is contradi@ed in Pt. III,
fol. 2792; VI, 52, where a distin@tion is made between the Son of David and the Son
of Joseph, who will be slain.

* 1b. fol, 276b5 Vi as.

8 Is. liii. 5.

727. Pts ILL tOl 270N A VIS sees

i Te., Pt. 1, tole 2670, 2684. 623%

320 THE HOLY KABBALAH

is impossible and would serve no purpose to follow it. Ido
not know that we need come to any decision as to the number
of Messiahs ; it does not look in the Zonar as if they can
mean states of one personality, which is the opinion of the
editors, for in another place the text explains by an accident
what is meant by a previous identification : it is said that the
Messiah who is the Son of Joseph will be united—that is, in
his mission—to the Son of David but will be slain.t The one
is the conqueror of the great Rome and the other of the little
Rome *—whatever the distin@ion between these cities may
signify. ‘The number 60 is fixed for the manifestation of the
first and the number 6 for that of the second.? I do not
pretend to explain the mysticism of these numbers, but I note
that the number 6 is represented by Vau and the Son of
David is connected with this number.* It is obvious that it
is convenient for purposes of Christian interpretation to
identify the Son of David and Joseph, as Jesus of Nazareth
was both.® I should add in this conne@tion that the words :
“ Lowly and riding on an ass, and upon a colt the foal of an
ass,’ ® which ate referred to Messiah ate not understood
literally, for the ass represents that demon which shall be
cutbed by the King to come.’

The time of the coming of Messiah will be when all souls
who ate kept in the treasury of souls against the day of their
incarnation shall have a€ually come hither in flesh. There-
after it would seem that new souls will be incarnated in Israel.
Then shall the chosen people deserve to find—and shall not
fail herein—the beloved and sister-soul predestined to each
from the beginning of creation. It is in allusion to this that
the Scripture says: “ A new heart also will I give you, and a

£ 'Zu, Wit ALL, tl: 2030,4.V, $20,

2 Tb., fol. 252a; V, 589.

3 Ib., fol: 25242; V; $90.

4 Z., fol. 203b; V, 520. The letter VAau—as we have seen—is said to symbolise the
Eternal World.—Ib., fol. 252b; V, 591.

5 The Chevalier P. L. B. Drach concludes that the Tatmunp speaks of the suffering
Messiah as Son of Joseph and of the victorious Messiah as Son of David; but the
evidence which he quotes from the Tract Succa seems, on the whole, against him.—
Dr L’HARMONIE ENTRE L’HGLISE ET LA SYNAGOGUE, T. Tee, pp. 184, 185.

SZ Chal, 45.50,

7 Z., Pt. Ill, fol. 238a; V, 577. The explanation given is that the demon, who is
called the ass, can be made subjeét with the Sacred Name SHappai. This reference
and extraét belong to THE FarrHruL SHEPHERD. It follows that Messiah, who
conneéts with the Ox symbolically, will overcome the ass or demon, and hence it is
forbidden in Deut. xxii. 10, to yoke an ox and an ass together.—Z., Pt. III, fol. 2074 ;
V, 528.

8 Tbh Pivot. 26p; 1 179:

THE COMING OF MESSIAH 321

new spirit will I put within you.” + And again: “It shall
come to pass that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh ;
and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old
men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions.” 2
The Intruders * shall be exterminated at the time when this
shall be accomplished, which is said to be of old tradition.*
To this period there is referable also that text of Genesis which
says that Adam and Eve were “ naked and not ashamed,” ®
the treason being that the Intruders are the cause of luxury
and when they disappear all leaning towards incontinence will
vanish in like wise.6 Now all this is utterly stultifying
disquisition and mania of interpretation in the literal sense,
so far as it can be said to have any ; and yet through all one
feels that the Secret Doéttine is sealing and veiling the
simplicity which is of all grace in Nature and Mystical Art.
It is a change come over the dream of Israel, so that it shall
enter into its own on all the planes and in all the worlds by
the help of the “ right spirit’ renewed within them. ‘This
is the Spirit of Messiah,’ as it is written: “ Renew a right
spirit within me.” § And as we know that the Christ Who
is to come in each one of us, Who is of Nazareth and of all
the local habitations of the mastery, Who is son of David,
son of Joseph, Heir of the true legitimacy, stands ever at the
doot and knocks, that rectified period is the one when all
portals shall open, so that He shall be welcomed in all the
ways. Out of the heart and the mind shall the Intruders be
cast once and for all, and the soul shall find the Spouse. We
might come to a pause at this point on the subject of the
Messiah in Israel, according to the lights and shadows of the
Secret Doétrine. It is a forecast of that time when the
Mystery of Union which is now a Mystery of Faith shall have
entered into realisation in experience on this earth of outs:

2 Ezek. xxxvi..26.

= Woek it: (28:

3 The reference is primarily to the mixed crowd which followed Israel during the
Exodus from Egypt and were not afterwards separated from the chosen people.
There are recurring allusions, and in one place it is said that these aliens were souls in
transmigration from antecedent, destroyed worlds.—Z., Pt. I, fol. 25a; I, 155.

* See next section.

© Genii 25.

6 It will be seen therefore that the alien people ate understood spiritually as the
ptompters towards evil which are within us.

? It is also the Spirit of God which “‘ moved upon the face of the waters ” (Gen. i. 2).
It is to ae Spirit that David aspited.—2Z., Pt. I, fol. r92b ;II, 357, 358.

© Ps, li, 10.

322 THE HOLY KABBALAH

as in the world above there is no distin€&tion between Shekinah
and the Holy One, so in that which is below there will be
such a spiritual communion between the Lover and the
Beloved that the voice of the turtle, which is the Song of
Solomon, shall be heard everywhere, and of that time it may
be said: “‘ The male with the female, neither male nor
female.”

There ate, however, some further points which, being of
an external kind, are of the shadows rather than the lights,
though there is one which is a light of symbolism, so it shall
Stand first in the sequence.

In the time of the letter He 1—that is, when the HE shall
tise from the earth—God will fulfil that which is mentioned
in Isaiah. ‘The reference is to c. lx, at the end of verse 22,
and it reads in the Authorised Version: “I the Lord will
hasten it in his time”? ;? but the Zohar gives: “I am the
Lord; and it is I who will hasten these marvels when the
time thereof shall have come.” When Israel was driven
from its abode the letters of the Sacred Name were separated
one from another, if it be permissible so to speak; the HE
was separated from the Vau, and hence the Psalmist said :
“I am dumb with silence.” When the Vau is separated
from the Hr the Word is stilled. The day of the letter Hz
is the fifth millenary—the period of Israel in exile. When
the sixth millenary comes, the Vau shall raise up the Hz, and
Israel shall be lifted also from the dust.4 After six hundred
years of the sixth millenary the Gates of Supreme Wisdom
shall open, and the springs of Wisdom shall begin to pour
upon this world, which will make ready to enter worthily
into the seventh millenary, and this latter will constitute the
Sabbath of creation.

Assuming that we have a proper point of departure for
calculation, we have in another place ® the exact year of the

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 116b, 117a; II, 66-69.

2 The Vulgate agrees: Ego Dominus in tempore ejus subito faciam iftud..

7S. XEZIX, 2,

“ To understand this passage, it is necessary to remember that, according to more
than one Zoharic testimony, the second HE of the Divine Name nin’ = Jehovah, fell,
as I have mentioned in Book VI, § 3, with a promise to recur in the future, when we
pass to the consideration of Shekinah. We have seen also that the second HE is the
Daughter and that whereby she will be raised is the Vau, or Son. It is well to observe
here how remote these intimations are from the Christian scheme which is based on the
sesurreCtion of the Son.

57, Pt. Like tia"; LL, 75, 76.

THE COMING OF MESSIAH 323

Messiah’s advent. When sixty years shall have elapsed after
the sixth century of the sixth millenary, it is said that heaven
shall visit the daughter of Jacob. In the seventieth year the
King Messiah shall be revealed in the province of Galilee.
The pottents will be as follows: (1) The rainbow—which is
now tarnished, because it serves only as a memorial that the
wotld will be destroyed no more by a deluge—will shine with
very brilliant dyes, like a betrothed lady adorning herself to
enter into the presence of her spouse.4 (2) A star will rise
in the East and swallow up seven stars in the North.? (3) Pre-
sumably after a period, a fixed star will appear in the middle
of the firmament and will be visible for seventy days. It will
have seventy tays and will be surrounded by seventy other
Stars.3 (4) The city of Rome will fall to pieces *—an intima-
tion which should be of moment to the hot gospel of certain
protestant second-advent preachers, whose vestiges remain
among us. (5) A great King will rise up and will conquer
the world.6 ‘There will be war against Israel, but the chosen
people shall be delivered. According to one account, the
seventy celestial chiefs who rule the seventy nations of the
earth will marshal all the legions of the world to make war on
the sacred city of Jerusalem, but they will be exterminated by
the power of the Holy One.® It is written: “ And the house
of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, and
the house of Esau for stubble.” * As such stubble, by such
fire and flame shall the nations perish. ‘Thereafter the King
Messiah will cause Jerusalem to be rebuilt ; § the Holy One
will remember that Covenant which He has made with Israel ;
and in such day will David be also raised up.? The Messiah
will draw to him the whole world; it shall be so to the end
of the century; and then the Vau shall be united with the
Hx.?° It will be the period of true bridals ; the Messiah will
bring about union between the Palaces above and below, as
also between Ex and SHappar.44

The soul of Messiah is pre-existent in common with all
souls, and its present place, according to the prevailing
opinion, is in the Garden of Eden, but the testimony is not in

WZ, Peed, toh. 72D $b, Azer 4n0. * -Z., Pt. U, fol: §8b; Ill, 260, 261.
* Tb fol tEgas 1 96. 7 Obadiah, v. 18.

* Jos Pt. I, foly2t2big Vs 436: P Zity Je tol. 202b 9°V5 536:

* Ib. 2 DD Ptolls fol) y2b's1 1430.

Sb. fol) 21abi5oVi937: 10 Ib fol t194)3 It; 76).77.

11 Z., Pt. II, fol. 253a; IV, 286, 287.

324 THE HOLY KABBALAH

full accord and it must be left open as to whether this is the
Eden above or that which is below. Wheresoever it be,
there is a most secret place in the hiddenness which is called
the Bird’s Nest, and therein he abides.1_ In the Paradise there
is also a certain place which is called the Palace of the Sick ; 2
the Messiah enters therein and calls upon all the diseases,
sotrows and troubles of Israel in exile to assail himself, and
this comes to pass accordingly. Were it otherwise there is
no one who could suffer the penalty due to his misdeeds.
Hence it is said: “ Surely he hath borne our griefs, and
carried our sorrows.” ? So long as Israel dwelt in the Holy
Land, and sacrifices were offered therein, Israel was preserved
thereby from all maladies and penalties : now it is the Messiah
who beats them—as it is afirmed, for the whole world; but
I fear that this can be understood only as the world of Israel.4
I have left one statement till the last, that it may stand for
the present by itself, because we shall recur thereto at a point
which is still far away. It is said, almost at the beginning of
the ZoHar, and in that part which is called PRELIMINARIES,°®
that God created man with the obje&@ of preparing for the
advent of the Lesser Countenance—that Divine Son corte-
sponding to the letter Vau, about Whom we have heard in
several of the previous sections. It is obvious that this is
Messiah, and if the fac is not in undiversified agreement with
a few other intimations, about which we have heard also,
there will be an opportunity to contrast them in the proper
place, and perhaps also to reach a conclusion on the subjedt.

IX.—THE DOCTRINE CONCERNING SHEOL

If there be any subje@ on which it might seem reasonable
to expe& something like unanimity of opinion on the tradi-
tions of Kabbalism, I should have thought that it would have
been the question of rewards and punishments in the world
to come—the latter perhaps more especially. The very
contrary happens to be the case, and it is the more difficult
to account for as by no extension of language can the question

1 But he visits various Palaces and the School of Do€rine.
2 Z., Vol. fol. 212a; IV, 222.

3 Ts. liii. 4.

4&7, Pt. U1, fol. 2z2b3:IV, 222.

* 2, Pt. 1, tol reb ; © rap.

THE DOCTRINE CONCERNING SHEOL 325

of the temporal or eternal punishment reserved for dis-
incarnate souls be regarded as a real part of the Secret Dottrine.
It seems to me that the Dodtots testified very often with
unmeasured words of enthusiasm and that the emotion of the
moment gave the inward meaning to the written word much
more frequently than any abstruse law of interpretation. I
will speak first of that which is held to occur at the time of
death and then of punishment in SHEOL, with special reference
to its duration.

Many things which are hidden from the mind and heart of
man so long as the body is in health are beheld by the soul
when it is hovering between life and death.t_ Three messen-
gets descend who begin to count up the days that he has
lived, the sins that he has committed, and all the works which
he has accomplished here below. The dying man confesses
with his lips to the facts so related and signs the procés-verbal
with his own hand, psychic or not, as you please. Thereon
is he judged, for Zoharic Theology, like that of the Latin
Church, recognises a particular as well as a general judgment
at the end of time. On quitting this lower world the man
gives account to his Master on the basis of the record which
has been mentioned. Having crossed the threshold, he
recognises many persons whom he knew on earth. As we
have seen otherwise, he beholds also Adam seated before the
Garden of Eden, so that he may rejoice with those who have
observed the commands of their Master. Adam is ever
encompassed with a multitude of the just who have learned
how to avoid the path going down to hell and who have been
gathered into the abode of Paradise.?®

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 79a; I, 462. This is held to be the “ spiritual interpretation ” of
Job xxxvii. 7, which reads thus in the Authorised Version: “‘ He sealeth up the hand
of evety man; that all men may know His work.” In the Revised Version there is
the following variant of the last words: “‘ That all men whom He hath made may
know it.” Cf. the Vulgate: Oxi in manu omnium hominum signat, ut nesciunt singuli
opera sua, But the Zowar treads: “ He causes every man to sign with his own hand,
that each may know His aéts.”

2 The thesis is that sins are committed while spirit is united to body, and the account
must be taken therefore before their separation is completed.—Z., Pt. I, fol. 79a;
I, 463. Zoharic pneumatology is sometimes almost inextricable, but we may remember
that, according to one testimony, NESHAMAH cannot sin, whence it cannot be under
the judgment ; NrepHEsH remains with the body for twelve months, and it would seem
therefore that it is RuaH only which enters into reward or punishment as a result
of the particular judgment ; that in contrast hereto, we must remember further that
all parts of the inward personality are one, by another account, so that the Zowar,
like Latin doétrine, recognises fundamentally only (1) body and (2) soul. The
so-called parts ate therefore states of soul.

3 Ib., fol. 65b; I, 386.

326 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Another account says that when the soul leaves this world,
it is Stopped by a number of angels who preside over the
offices of severity, and is prevented from passing through
that door by which it would attain a place on high if the
person has left no pledge on earth, meaning no son.!_ Those
who would enjoy the inheritance of God and be united with
Him for ever in the land of life must have produced male
issue, so that the Divine Law may continue to have its servants
through all generations.?

It is said also elsewhere that the day of death is the day of
the Lord.? When the Holy One desires that the soul should
return to Him, it does so return if worthy.* In the case of
the just man his approach by the gate of death is proclaimed
in the Garden of Eden throughout the thirty days which go
immediately before the event. During these days the soul
is separated nightly from the body and ascends to heaven for
the purpose of inspecting the place reserved for it in the
world to come.® It follows also from a tradition mentioned
by the Zowar that at the actual hour of death man is allowed
to see his departed relations and friends, that he recognises
these and that they appear to him with the same countenances
which they wore here below.’ If the man is worthy, his
relations and friends salute him full of joy; in the contrary
case, he beholds only the guilty whom he has known and who
ate expiating their offencesin hell. They areall plunged in sad-
ness. Relations and friends accompany the soul into the other
world and shew him the place of his reward or punishment.

This is one side of the story,® but another is that when the

EU Zwet, 1, 101. Li90 5 as G8.

2 This is the higher side of the desite which prevailed in Israel towards the increase
and predominance of the people ; it was not alone that they might inherit the earth
but that the Law might prevail therein. The produétion of children was therefore
for the glory of God. It was a continuous building of houses not made with hands
which might become meet for His habitation. Here is one sense in which the Zoharic
MyStery of Sex was a Great Mystery of San@ity and a Divine Work in the world.

SZ bells £0k. 2997p 2 LAs.

4 There is firstly a purgation by fire according to fol. 217b; II, 457, for those who
ate imperfe& and yet not deserving of entire condemnation. The purgatorial state
of catholicism is therefore recognised.

TDG ett, FOL. 22 9D eck agg.

ae UP

7 Ib., fol. 218b; Tl, 463. The point is of interest in conneétion with death-bed
visions in Jewry at the period to which the text is referable. .

8 It is said also that the highest place in the world to come is kept in reservation for
those who have (a) penetrated the mysteries of their Master and (b) learned how to
cleave to Him during life. It follows that the illumination of mind by Divine Things
has a greater reward than works, but the works are necessary. —Ib., fol. 130b ; Il, 111.

THE DOCTRINE CONCERNING SHEOL 327

souls of those who have studied the Do@trine relinquish the
body which is composed of the four elements they ascend
into heaven—or into that part and region which is allocated
to the Four Living Creatures.1 The more general thesis 1s
that the spirit which man attracts during life will draw his
soul after death. Should it have been the Holy Spirit he will
be raised thereby into the higher realms, and there—in-
corporated in the legion of sacred angels—he will become a
servant of the Holy One.? He enjoys in the world above
that light which he has desired here on earth. It is called
“the splendour of light in reverberation,” 3 reflected by that
which is in the region above all regions. Souls are clothed
in what is characterised as the Mantle of the Master, in the
absence of which they would be incapable of approaching the
light and contemplating it.4 I suppose that this mantle is
that which is called vestments in another place. These are
said to be stored in a certain Palace, each being adapted to that
soul for which it is reserved.® All the good works which
have been performed by him or her are, so to speak, em-
broidered thereon. The soul is not clothed, however, until
the thirtieth day after death, because the sins committed on
eatth have to be expiated during this period, indifferently by
bad and good. It is an expiation by fire and a passage through
a tiver of fire.® There is, moreover, a punishment of the
body in the grave ’ for a period of twelve months,® during
which the so-called animal spirit—or NEPHESH—is attracted

Mian ts ty foly 27a) b pis yp:

2 Jb., fol. 100a; Ul, 8. The authority is: “I will give thee places to walk among
these that stand by.”—Zech. iii. 7. Cf. Vulgate: E+ dabo tibi ambulantes de his qui nunc
hie assiftunt. "The Zoharic version is: “I will give thee access among those who
Stand before me.”

$52, Et, Jy fol, 65b, 66a 3. 1, 387;

4 Ib., fol. 66a ; I, 388.

5 Z., Pt. Il, fol. 210a; IV, 217. The vestments seem to be different from that
which Latin theology terms “‘ the form of the soul ” and from that which occultism—
ot its derivatives—calls the astral and psychic body. They are rather the soul’s
clothing in its literal sense, corresponding in things above to that worn by the High
Priest in the ceremonies of the San@tuary. I note further that in the Earthly Paradise
souls are clothed with good works but.in the Paradise above they are clothed more
gloriously, namely, with purity of intention, rightness of heart and prayers.—Ib.,
fol. 210b ; IV, 218.

6 Ib., fol. 211b; IV, 221.—Pt. I, fol. zo1a; TH, 397.

3 1b. Ptulll; fol $3a3uVirtaa

8 Ib., Pt. I, fol. 225a; Il, 487. The NepHesx knows also the sufferings of survivors
but cannot go to their aid. After the twelve months it is clothed with that envelope
to which I have referred previously and passes on wings through the world, learning
from the Rusu the misfortunes which befall man and seeking to communicate with
these so that they may pray for the evil to be averted.

H.K,. Zz

328 THE HOLY KABBALAH

thereto and suffers therewith ; but the just are not subject to
this. As there does not seem to be any purgation in view the
intervention of this ordeal is idle.

And now with regard to those who go down into hell
I will endeavour to tabulate the distin€tions and counter-
distinctions under two heads, collating firstly those statements
which predicate the everlasting nature of their torments. It
is laid down that the Holy One forgives every man who
repents of his sins; but it is woe to those who will not and
who persist in their evil condu&. They will be precipitated
after death into hell and will not issue therefrom through all
eternity.1 The same idea is expressed analogically in another
place as follows. ‘The souls of those who defile their bodies,
and of the evil generally, go down into hell and never come
forth therefrom.? Of these it is said: “‘ As the cloud is con-
sumed and vanisheth away: so he that goeth down to the
grave shall come up no more.” 3 But the Zour here under-
Stands the grave—SHEOL—in the sense of hell, against the
obvious meaning of the verse. Again, to fall into the hands
of him who is called the Angel of Vindication is defined to be
death in eternity. These instances will suffice as to one
aspect of the subjedt, and it will be observed that they are
sufficiently unqualified.®

As much can be said of those in the opposite category,
though if possible they seem more salient. There are only
two extracts which need especially concern us ; the first is an
unqualified statement that the guilty are chastised in the fires
of hell, but that they are not damned for all eternity.® Indeed
the period has been fixed by tradition at twelve months, being
that of the sufferings of Job.’ This is the first Statement, and

A Ziyi t.|L, tol. 66a 51,1886.) 300.

2 Ib., fol. 77b; I, 455.

3 Job vii. 9.

4 Z., Pt. I, fol. 94a; I, 535. The Angel of Vindication is DoumA, and the Gentiles
seem to be his victims en masse (tb.), while that which is the proteftion of Israel against
him and his consequences is the Sign of the Covenant, on the understanding that it is
preserved in purity.

5 Respe€ting punishment in the other world, man was not considered to have
attained his majority—and therefore to be capable of punishment—till he had reached
the age of thirty years—Ib., fol. 118b ; II, 74.

6 Z., Pt. Il, fol. z2tb; III, 105. There is some undemonstrable way in which this

ssurance and its consolation are drawn from Is. xxxiii. 12 : “‘ And the people shall be
as the burnings of lime: as thorns cut up shall they be burned in the fire.” But the
Zonar gives “ thorn-bush ” and institutes a comparison with the burning but uncon-
sumed bush on Mount Sinai.

7 And also of NEPHESH with the body.—Z., Pt. I, fol. 130b; I, 111.

THE DOCTRINE CONCERNING SHEOL 329

the second is that at the end of time all the guilty will be
saved, with the single exception of Canaan.1 It is said that
this mystery is not unknown to those who are familiar with
the highroads and bypaths of the Secret Doétrine.2 We are
acquainted with the pre-Zoharic tradition respecting Caanan,
which is part of a sex-mystery. It belongs to the same realm
of reverie as the mystery which presided over the marriage of
Bathshebah and Uriah before she was espoused to David.?
It is added that those who know this mystery will be in a
position to see why the Holy Land was given as a patrimony
to Canaan before the coming of the Israelites.

The question is whether there is any middle term by which
we can reconcile the two series of conflicting testimonies, and
if it be granted beforehand that the Doétors of the Secret
Law, as they are reported in the Zonar, were frequently very
loose in their Statements, we may find what we seek almost
at the end of the great text.4 There, on the authority of yet
another tradition, it is afirmed that there are various compart-
ments in hell, one beneath another, and corresponding to the
different degrees of culpability found among men. The
lowest of all bears the name of ABADDON, and the man who is
cast therein is lost through all eternity, because it has no door
through which he can go out therefrom. It is about this
place that it is said: “‘ As the cloud is consumed and vanisheth
away: so he that goeth down to the grave—Surot—shall
come up no more.” ® This notwithstanding, says the ZoHAR,
we learn otherwise from Scripture that “‘ He sends down into
hell and again He brings forth therefrom.” ® The first of
these verses refers to the lowermost pit and the second to one
of those places from which escape is possible.’ Canaan is
not located and the darksome picture of the deep below the
deep is relieved by the unconscious grotesquerie which
testifies that the denizens of this region arte those who,

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 73b; I, 435. See also fol. 114b ; II, 60, 61, where it is argued that
all ae will be acquitted at the celestial judgment.

. :

8 Ib., fol. 73b; I, 436.

* Jb., Pt. Ill, fol. 285b, 286a; VI, 67.

5 Job vii. 9.

6 | Sam. ii. 6. The French translators follow the Vulgate, which says, Liber Primus
Samuelis, quem nos Primum Regum dicimus.

7 But as a travesty of the whole situation—as we shall see immediately—the abysmal
hell is reserved to punish atts of irreverence. I make a point of this because one is
inclined to speculate whether Rabbi Simeon—who is the supposed speaker—was not
sectetly insinuating the opposite of that which he expressed.

Z2

330 THE HOLY KABBALAH

prompted by disdain, have omitted the word AMEN which
completes the forms of prayer.

Two other points deserve to be mentioned in this con-
nection as they tend to shew that the ZoHar might have
furnished some useful material to the pious author of HELL
OPENED TO CHRISTIANS. It is said 1 that the impure soul
which is cast into SHEOL is sometimes drawn out therefrom
and carried through celestial realms, with this cry going
before it: “Such is the lot of those who transgress the
commandment of their Master.’ It is then returned to its
place. There may be some justice in adding that this moral
diversion is meted out in that part of the text which limits the
petiod of damnation to twelve months, after which the soul
is remitted to a suitable region. Here is the first point, and
the second is a brief picture 2 of souls located in Paradise
proceeding to view ceremonially the chastisement of the guilty.
So does eschatology reproduce itself independently in the
minds of its makers. I do not suggest that the ZoHarR in
this place is really a post-Thomist text or that St. Thomas
Aquinas was acquainted with the Zoharic COMMENTARY ON
Exopus, but I say that the same notion is found in both.

In conclusion as to the whole matter: (1) There are three
chiefs in hell, ating as overseers of those who are doomed
for murder, incest, and idolatry. If this is to be taken
literally, Barabbas would have left the premises without a
Stain upon his character; but the inference is doubtless that
greater crimes stand at the head of a long list in their respective
sequences. (2) The chastisement is by fire and ice,* but an
elucidation in another place ® explains that the waters which
fall from above are cold as ice, while the fire which comes up
from below is water which burns. (3) The souls of the
heathen will never come out of hell.® |

I suppose that things more ridiculous have never been said
on the subject of retribution, but there are gleams here and
there of a better sense. It is recorded for example that those
who have been guilty on earth but have been also punished

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 130b; II, 111.

2 Jb., Pt. Il, fol. 212a; IV, 221, 222. As regards both these points they constitute
solitary Statements in the text, but the second is on the authority of Rabbi Simeon, by
which I mean that it is imputed to him and occurs in one of his discourses.

3 Jb., Pt. Ill, fol. 237a, THE Farrnrut SHEPHERD; De Pauty, V, 576.

416, Pt te fol, 238b.5 IL, 542:

5 Ib., fol. 68b; I, 405.

6 Ib., fol. 4b of Appendix III, to Pt. I, #.¢., Secrer Mrprasu ; II, 687.

THE DOCTRINE CONCERNING SHEOL 331

on eatth will not suffer in eternity if they have shewn resigna-
tion here.1 And I observe rather frequently a disposition in
the doétors to lean towards human mercy and to forget very
often even their sentence on the heathen in general. There
is a feeling that all men will be acquitted at the general judg-
ment,? and there is one place from which it seems to follow
that Satan himself will become again an angel of light.2 So
is the “‘ broken circle”? made whole by fits and starts.

There are the following supplements and alternatives
which have suggestive points, and they serve, moreover, the
unintended purpose of proving that eschatology in the
ZOHAR is in a state of complete flux: all views were possible
and the alternatives of all views. The souls of those who die
impenitent go forth naked and find no envelope,* but it is set
forth pretty plainly elsewhere that some kind of vesture is
essential to personal existence. They suffer punishment in
hell, but many of them are saved at the end of time, being
those who intended to repent but did not get to the work.
They take up their task in Suro and its gates are opened
subsequently in their respect. There is nothing more agree-
able than this to the Sacred King, a view that is illustrated
amply in another place. It is laid down furthermore that
even those who are just and nearly approach perfection go
down into hell (1) because all have been guilty of some
offences at least; but (2) because it is theirs to bring forth
those very sinners who had proposed to repent in this life and
have succeeded only on the other side of the grave.> So and
continually does the Zowar lean towards mercy, as I have
said, though it holds out little hope for persons who have
planned no atonement : ® they remain in the place of perdition
for ever.’ This is the case especially with those who have
led a life of debauch; they do not have respite on the Sab-

Peewee tl. fols, roSa.:. 1], 42,

2 Ib,, fol. 114b, 115a; II, 60, 61.

3 It is even said that while we are to be on our guard against the attacks of the
demon we are not authorised to treat him with contempt.—lIb., Pt. II, fol. 237b;
IV, 265. See also Pt. III, fol. 265b; VI, 19.

STD, btohl fol, 1 S0a,s. LV i790,

5 Ib., Pt. III, fol. 220b; V, 558. We have seen already that intention is greater
than works and the uttermost sacredness is ascribed thereto. It may be said therefore
that the ZowAr is inclined to pave the way to God with good intentions rather than
the road to hell, as the old proverb puts it. But it is implied of course that such
intentions pass continually into work ; it is a question therefore rather of a permanently
right direCtion of heart and mind.

6

t See Pt. Il, fol1s0a, by IV, 70,91.

332 THE HOLY KABBALAH

bath—like the rest of the damned.1 However, another
thesis shows that the flames of hell are stilled of necessity on
that day.2 By these and all other considerations we are
justified in applying the most liberal sense to the vague
suggestions that all men—Jew and Gentile—will enter
ultimately into some kind of salvation and that hell will give
up all its prey at the end of days, whether demons and the
prince of demons or men, including Canaan.

One last word: the doors of the ZoHar countenanced
ptayets for the dead, one of them asking another to visit his
reir seven days following his burial, there to plead for

is soul.3

X.—CONCERNING RESURRECTION

Seeing that the doétrine of physical resurreftion remains
to out confusion as something of a blot on the ’scutcheon of
Catholic Theology—though it was almost inevitable for the
period in which it grew up—it may be reasonable to ascertain
that which is advanced on the subje@ by Zoharic Theosophy.
We shall find that it is pleased to be particular—I was about
to say—in no common degree; but my readers may judge
for themselves. It will be thought, and this naturally, that a
Secret Do&rine which offers no enlightenment on the subject
—in the sense that we should attach to this term—is scarcely
one that can appeal to the modern mind and much less that
of the mystic; but I trust that I have done nothing through-
out the present study to reduce the difficulties, or—if it
should be preferred—the impossible nature of much that has
been transmitted from this source. ‘To say otherwise would
be to pose as unserious. We are concerned, however, in
reality only with the root-matter of the Tradition and we have
yet to reach a decision thereon. If the central testimony
should prove of moment, it is of little importance—however
regrettable otherwise—that there should be a considerable
accretion of waste and drift from all sources encrusted over

4. Z., Pt. H, fol. r50b ; TV, 72.

2 J[b., Pt. I, fol. 14b; I, 84.

3 Ib., fol. 217b; II, 458. It is testified also that the faithful departed pray for
those who ate alive, without which the latter would be unable to subsist for a single
day, or even part of a day.—Ib., Pt. II, fol. 16b; ITI, 75. This is another side of a
very clear Christian refleCtion—the intercession of the just above for those who need
help below.

CONCERNING RESURRECTION 333

it.1 I believe that so far in our quest we have come across
much that is at least of a certain value, while the curiosities—
taken as such—are not in themselves idle. In respect of
physical resurreCtion we shall find, in the first place that it is
physical above all things, and as the Sons of the Doétrine
happen to be acquainted with the modus operandi of the whole
ptocess, we may have great expectations on the wonder-side,
and though we can scarcely look to be edified, the lessons in
other respects may not be without significance. |
I should record in the first place that it must be left as
an open question whether the Gentiles are included in the
scheme of resurrection.2 This is negatived categorically in
one place,’ while in another it is added by way of re-expression
that only the circumcised will subsist at that dreadful day.*
But even here there are reservations, for certain persons
belonging to the past of Israel—persons conspicuous for their
ill-doing—atre regarded as blotted out completely, so that for
them there is neither judgment nor rising. The restrictions
would be still greater if several casual statements were to be
construed literally—as when it is said, for example, that
resutrection is by the merit of chastity.6 The vesture of holy
days—about which we have heard—is a particular aid of the
just ;* but as it is certain that many of the wicked will also
come to judgment it is possible that evil days may serve in
their case, while making for their condemnation of course.®

1 The point is that the root-matter is not one of metaphysical speculation or dogmatic
teaching merely: it is a practice connetted with a theory, the latter on account of the
practice belonging to a category apart.

2 For example, when it is said without qualifying the statement that the guilty will
tise with the just, will do penance and will enjoy thereafter the light of God, there can
be no question that the reference is to Israel alone.—Z., Pt. 1, Appendix III, MATHNITIN ;
Ley,

3 The words are that God will command His Servant who is charged with the work
of resurrection not to restore their souls to the Gentile peoples.—Ib., fol. 181b; H, 317.
The servant is METATRON.

Sle. Pe. Ly fol: §7b + TIT, 256:

5 Ib., Pt. I, fol. 69a; I, 406. The allusion is especially to the sin of Onan, the
enormity of which is ever present to the mind of the Do&trine. See also fol. 66a ; I, 390.
- § Ib., fol. 220a; IV, 234. The remark should perhaps be taken in the sense of the
previous extrac.

7 Another account tells us that when a man has maintained his soul in its pristine
purity, on leaving this world many lights are poured upon him and he is preserved
against the day of resurrection in a hidden Palace of Love where the King of Heaven
kisses the holy souls.—Ib., Pt. II, fol. 97a ; III, 389. The Scriptural authority is Ex. xxi.
9, very curiously adapted: “ He shall deal with her after the manner of daughters.”
It follows that all souls in respe& of God are held to be female by the Zour, and the
kind of Divine Union here adumbrated is remarkably like that which we meet with in
many recognised aspects of Christian Mysticism.

® Z..; Pt], fol. 2244; b's I, 483, 482.

334 THE HOLY KABBALAH

The general thesis of the subje& is put very clearly as
follows: When citcumstances required it, a simple morsel of
wood—the reference is to Aaron’s rod—was transformed by
the Holy One into a thing having body and life. With how
much the more reason will He change into new creatures
those forms which possessed previously a vital spirit and a
holy soul, fulfilling the commandments of the Law, conse-
crated to its Study. It is the same bodies that have existed
heretofore which will be resuscitated, as it is written: “ Thy
dead men shall live ; ” 2 and they will be animated by the same
souls.3 There is a sense, however, in which they will be
formed anew, but they will have the aspects of old and will
be therefore recognisable.4 The new formation is more
especially a Divine aé& of healing, so that the lame and the
blind will be disqualified thus no longer.5 This will be
effected by the rays of that primitive sun ® which shone at the
beginning, embracing the whole world from one extremity
to the other.’ After God had beheld the generations of
Enoch, with those of the deluge and confusion of tongues,
He concealed this light, which had curative properties. Its
future restoration as stated signifies the restoration and
enlightenment of Israel. It is said that “in that day shall
there be one Lord, and His Name one.” 8

We should read between these lines to our destruction, did
we seek to spiritualise any of the statements made: there is
nothing so full as their literalness, and the details to which I
have alluded rise up here and there for our complete confusion.
The resurrection of the dead will take place in the order of
their interment : 9 if a wife was the first to be buried, it is she
who will rise first, and this rule seems to prevail through the

2 Z), Pte Uh, fol. :28b"s "11, 1351736,

3 Is. xxvi. 19.

OZ tw th. 1500 chk, eae,

*.Jb., Pt. Ill, fol: 91a; V, 1243.

5 Tb., see also Pt. I, fol. 203b; II, 410. The robes of glory, or psychic vestures
and vehicles with which the disembodied soul is clothed in the state of beatitude,
being psychic garments, would, by the hypothesis, serve in the transfiguration of the
risen physical body, though there would not be two envelopes one within the other,
this idea being set aside by the Zonar, as we have seen.

6 The Gentile nations will be consumed by its fire.—Ib., fol. 203b; II, 410.

7 Ib., fol. 203b; II, 410. The light of this concealed sun encompassed Moses as
an infant among the bulrushes; it surrounded him on Mount Sinai, whence the
children of Israel could not look upon his countenance ; and in some sense it remained
with him for the rest of his life—Jb., fol. 31b; I, 198.

8 Zech. ZIVe 9.

O Zig Ete due tole Load 5 V,:423.

CONCERNING RESURRECTION 335

ages, with an exception in favour of those who died in the
desert: the trumpet will sound for these sooner than for the
earliest of humanity. When the great day approaches it will
be the task of MeratRon to embellish or glorify the bodies in
the sepulchres and presumably to prepare them for rising ; ?
but when the hour sounds the Holy One will cause a dew to
fall, and it is thanks to this that the event itself will be accom-
plished. It will be a dew of light and it will emanate from
the Tree of Life? There is, however, a special dispensation
in respect of students of the Doétrine. Whether or not
without prejudice to those who died in the desert, it 1s those
who will be raised first,4 and they will bear witness in favour
of the rest. The instrument in their case will be a wind which
shall be the synthesis of all winds.

These things stand at their value, but there is a sort of
central fatt—ex hypothesi—which may be held to explain
everything : each man who is born into the world is provided
with an imperishable bone in his present physical body, and
it is from or on this that his organisation will be built up
anew at the time of the resurrection °—it is like the rib taken
from the side of Adam. The bone in question will be to the
risen body that which the leaven is to the dough. So is it
sown a natural body and raised miraculously enough, though
scarcely—on the evidence—spiritually. Now, it is said in
one place that by virtue of the dew of light, already men-
tioned, the resurrection of bodies will be as the upspringing
of flowers ; ® but this is the poetry of the subject, and there is
another side of the question. It was essential for the peace
of the doétors that such an event as resurrection should take
place only in Palestine, and it became necessary to devise a
particular scheme for the great majority of Israel dying out-
side the precincts of that sacred land. This was done by

Rieke let fol T68b 2) V, 437.

2 Ib., Pt. I, Appendix II, Maruniri, fol. 6a; II, 705. But it is MATRONA who
preserves souls until the resurreCtion.—Ib., Pt. III, fol. 222b; V, 561.

3 Z., Pt. I, fol. 130b, 131a; Il, 113. ‘It is said elsewhere that at the time of resurrec-
tion (1) the waters of that heavenly fountain which is represented by the letter Yop
will flow forth afresh ; (2) the 32 paths of communication between things above and
below will be open freely ; and (3) all letters of the Sacred Name will be complete,
which has not been the case in the world heretofore.—Ib., fol. 10a ; I, 42.

4 Ib., fol. 175b, 176a; Il, 290, 291. The risen bodies of these will subsist always,
because the Law will be their prote€tion.
fe ms Pt. I, fol. 69a; I, 406. See also Appendix III to Pt. I, Secrer Mrprasu ;

2 7i :

Big, fol. 130008 s Tac Ut Pts.

336 THE HOLY KABBALAH

postulating that, after their reconstitution, the bodies of such
petsons will be transported underground to the Holy Land,
and there only will they receive their souls.1 The complete
resurrection will begin in Galilee.2 Souls will come down
through the gates of heaven and rejoin their bodies. At
first it will be a day of severity, for the Holy One will demand
an account of all actions prior to the separation of soul and
body ; the books of record will be opened and the chiefs of
severity will stand ready to act.4 But Israel is a nation of the
elect ; the guilty who rise with the just will do penance and
thereafter will enjoy the Divine splendour.5 It is even
testified—as we have seen—that the tempter-spirit will be
transformed,® though whatever is understood by extermina-
tion is meted out to him in other passages.? The Holy One
will bless the bodies of the just and will render them like the
body of Adam in the state of Paradise. Such souls will bring
with them the higher lights which nourish them during their
sojourn in heaven, between the death and the rising, and
those lights will make their bodies radiant. Soul and body
in fine shall know their Master.? A great festival will follow ;
but in place of the salted leviathan promised to the elecé& by
the Tatmup the refection will be spiritual, because those who
are truly just have no need to eat or drink but are nourished
by the splendour of Shekinah.1°

I am no doubt exceeding the restriéted province which I
have chosen, but it seems to me difficult to deny that Zoharic
eschatology is tin¢tured by that of the Christian scheme, as
presented by the Latin Church. Subject to the distinétions—
not always maintained—on the question of the duration of
punishment, all souls at death go to the place prepared for
them and the judgment connected with the resurrection

a7. Pte ty folk aera see ers,

2 Jb., Pt. I, fol. 10a > ITE, 42.

3 [b,, Pt. I, Appendix III, Szecrer Miprasxs; HU, 712.

4 Ib., Pt. I, fol. 2orb; II, 401. It is said also that the “‘ Serpent will rise up to
bite and man shall tremble in all his members.” —Ib.

5 Ib., Pt. Il, Appendix II, Matuniti ; II, 711.

6 Jb., Appendix III, Secrer Miprasu ; II, 716. ‘The passage is a good example of
the ZOHAR in its most cryptic mood. “ The tempter spirit and his two daughters will
be transformed. Formerly he was called Lot, meaning maledi€tion, but hereafter he
will be called Laban, meaning white.”

? In one place it is said merely that he will disappear.—Ib., Pt. I, fol. 131a; II, 114.

8 Jb., Pt. I, Appendix III, Secrer Mrprasu; I, 696,

it Teh Se ee

10° Ibi, Diag is.

CONCERNING RESURRECTION 337

determines once and for all the state of humanity for ever.
There is neither change nor vicissitude thereafter. The just
in their risen bodies will behold the Divine, so that the earth
shall be filled with the knowledge of God.! In this world—
as it now is—they are in a state of imperfection, but after the
resurrection they will be perfect and will igi with She-
kinah.2 Their bodies will be like the splendour of the
firmament, or like silver that has no alloy.? So will the earth
be renewed.

1 Z., Pt. I, Appendix III, Secrer Miprasy; II, 713. Jb., p. 696. It is affirmed
also that those bodies shall be unto them as a .asting habitation.—Ib., Pt. I, fol. 80,
Cremona ed. Again—vzb., fol. 66—the body shall be made wholly, even as it was
formerly—meaning the body of Adam unfallen—that it may be like unto the holy
angels.

2 Ib., p. 698.

3 Ib., Pt. 1, Appendix III, Secrer Miprasu ; II, 699.

4 Ib., p. 697. I will mention in this conneftion for the students of numerical
mysticism that the number 40 seems to be a resurrection or renewing number.—Ib.,
Appendix III, Secrer Mrprasu ; II, 715, 716, where the recurrences of the number in
the Old Testament are tabulated. It will be remembered that the Ascension of Christ
occurted 40 days after the ResurreCtion.

BOOK. VIII
THE HIGHER SECRET DOCTRINE

339

1K Ps
ye ae

Wed rite a

- weinone. ‘pao oar ae .

ech
iy iy rf

BOOK VIII
THE HIGHER SECRET DOCTRINE

I—THE MYSTERY OF SHEKINAH

THERE is a vety true sense in which the Secret Do&rine of
the ZoHAR must be said to centre in that Mystery, whatsoever
it may be, which lies behind the wonder and glory of Shekinah
—a tecutting, and speaking literally, incessant subject of
reference in adoring honour throughout the great text.
There is a very true sense furthermore in which it may be
said that out of this Mystery all Kabbalism seems to issue and,
moreover, goes back therein. It would have been very
reasonable, if indeed it had been possible, to have opened my
Study of the Doétrine with this subject; but it would have
involved entering at once into its most recondite and difficult
part, one also which might have made the whole undertaking
insuperable for the general and not too critical reader. As
it is, I must proceed carefully, not only on account of the
difficulties but because the Keys of the Mystery open into a
region about which there are grave motives for speaking with
considerable reserve, when it is possible to speak at all. It is
here, if anywhere in our subject, that we shall find whether as
mystics we are coming into something which may be our own
in the matter of Jewish Theosophy or whether we must
relegate it to the curiosities of past speculation that are not of
our vital concern.

1 The old maxim of the mystical alchemist, Khunrath, seems to obtain in every
direction without variation or reduction: Sigillum Nature et Artis simplicitas, and I
quote it here, as I have quoted it on several occasions elsewhere, to indicate that it is
one which applies in a paramount manner to the root of the Secret Do€trine in Israel ;
for the vast body of cryptic writing and the pra€tice concealed behind it arose out of
that one verse in Scripture which says: “‘ So God ”—that is to say, Elohim—“‘ created
man in His own image, in the image of God created He him; male and female ”—
defining the nature of the image—‘“ created He them.”—Gen. i. 27. The difficulty
therefore to which I have alluded above is not in respec of the fa& wherein the Do&rine
centres but in the complications of its development and in the details of the pra€tical
part.

342

‘342 THE HOLY KABBALAH

“ The sole obje& with which the Holy One, blessed be He,
sends man into this world is to know that Jehovah is Elohim.”?!
Herein is also all true joy of heart.2. Now, it is in this manner
that I open the high conference respecting the Mystery of
Shekinah, which is a Mystery of man and God, of man in the
likeness of the Elohim, of the relation between things above
and things below, of intercourse for union upon earth per-
formed in the spirit of celestial union, and the transmutation
of one by the other for the work of God in the world. In
this union abides the Mystery of Faith, which is the synthesis
of the whole Law—Written and Oral Law—and of all that
exists whatsoever. But union is not identity,? whence it is
said further that Jehovah and Elohim are distiné&, not synony-
mous, though together they form an unity.4 It must be
remembered in the first place that Elohim is a title of Shekinah
and so also is Adonai,° in which sense—but presumably for
us in manifestation—she is called the Mirror of Jehovah.®
Like the First Matter of the Great Work in Alchemy, Shekinah
is almost myrionymous in respe& of her designations, but,
almost without exception, the ascriptions are feminine. She
is now the Daughter of the King ; she is now the Betrothed,
the Bride and the Mother, and again she is sister in relation
to the world of man at large.” There is a sense also in which
this Daughter of God is—or becomes—the Mother of man.
In respe&t of the manifest universe, she is the archite& of
worlds, acting in virtue of the Word uttered by God in
creation. In respect of the myth of Paradise, the Shekinah is
the Eden which is above, whence the river of life flows forth

1 Z., Pt. II, fol. 161b, 162a; IV, 101, 102. There is also a marriage of the two
names in Kabbalism, producing the Sacred Name of nine letters, the consonants
succeeding one another alternately, thus—onnibnx’: Yop, ALepH, Hr, Lamep,
Vau ,He, He, Yoo, Mem.—Ib., iv, 151. It is said also: ‘‘ And the Lord God formed
man” (Gen. ii. 7)—i.e., Jehovah Elohim, the male principle united to the female,
according to the ZoHAR. Man is said to be grafted on Elohim, as the latter is grafted
on Jehovah.—Ib., Pt. II, fol. 260a ; IV, 293.

2 Jb. Pe. i fo Spe Noa.

Sb! Pt; Wy 162a2 TV, 102.

4 Cf. Deut. iv. 35: “‘ Unto thee it was shewed, that thou mightest know that the
Lord He is God ”—or, as the ZoHaAR quotes it, that Jehovah is Elohim. It will be
observed that the Scriptural text does not tolerate the Zoharic dogma, though ex
hypothesi one of its sources.

677), Pted; fale rora ; IT, ‘ro.

6 Jb., Pt. I, fol. 124b'; II, 482.

7 Ib., Pt. I, fol. 81b; I, 470. See also Pt. II, fol. 297b; VI, 124, for Shekinah and
Matrona; Pt. I, 276a, SEpHER Ha Banrr, OTHERWISE, Luminous Boox or Book oF
BriGHINEsS ; II, 644, for Daughter of the King ; and Pt. I, fol. roob; III, 406, for
all the synonyms.

THE MYSTERY OF SHEKINAH 343

that waters the Garden below, and this is also Shekinah as she
is conceived in external things—or Bride, Daughter and
Sister in the world below. Considered in her Divine Woman-
hood, in the world of transcendence, she is the Beloved who
ascends towards the Heavenly Spouse, and she is Mattona
who unites with the King, for the perfection of the Divine
Male is in the Divine Female. Hence it is said that the
perfection of Jehovah is in Elohim.t She is a trinity in
respect of her title as Elohim, for there is an Elohim in
transcendence—concealed and mysterious—an Elohim that
judges above and one who judges below ; but these three are
one.? As such, the Oral Law is her image, while the image
of Jehovah is the Written Law?%—a distindtion at once
eloquent and pregnant, for the Inward Law is life, while the
Outer is the body of life. So also she is the waters that are
above the firmament in respect of her title of Elohim, but she
is the waters below the firmament when she manifests as
Adonai.4 As Elohim she is the Middle Pillar,® and all the
various aspects of the one thing that is needful from the stand-
point of the Secret Tradition are collocated, their seeming
exclusiveness notwithstanding, to shew that she abides in all,
is at once above and below, without even as within. She is
that Divine Presence which walked in the Garden of Eden in
the cool of the evening, which went before Israel in the
desert and protects the just man who has fulfilled the precepts,
dwelling in his house and going forth with him in his journeys.®
As Elohim, in fine, she is the middle degree of the Divine
Essence ? corresponding to the Pillar of Benignity in the Tree
of Life.

Now, in all the references cited up to this point the intention
of the ZoHar has been to shew in the most positive and un-
qualified way that the Shekinah—as affirmed already in the
present section—is female in essential aspect, whether as the
Bride of God in that transcendent state wherein there is no
distin@tion between her and the Holy One,’ or whether as the

a Zreg ita bate TOs Sais, Wa hie

Piva hts ke COLNE 722 LV," 200!

8 Ib., fol. 161b; IV, 102. Elsewhere the Zowar seems to say that the Kabbalah
is a€tually Shekinah and that the MisHna is its humble servant.—Pt. I], fol. 279b.

1b: Ptod fol. 1 7b, e8a: 5) ie 208;

5 Jb., fol. 278a, THE FAITHFUL SHEPHERD ; II, 647. See also fol. 241a; Ul, 552.

6 Ib., Pt. I, fol. 76a; I, 448.

7 Ib., fol. 150b; II, 194.

8 “She and God are one.” —Ib., Pt. II, fol. 118b ; II, 456.

H.K. AA

344 THE HOLY KABBALAH

tutelary guide of humanity.4. But in preparation for another
part of our subject it is necessary to glance at certain alterna-
tive allocations which appear in the Zonar. ‘The Shekinah
is the Liberating Angel who delivers the world in all ages,?
who is evet near to man and never separated from the just.3
Of her it is said: “‘ Behold, I send an angel before thee, to
keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I
have ptepated.” 4 But it is Stated that this Liberating Angel
manifests as male and female, being male when it dispenses
the celestial benedictions on the world below, because it then
resembles a male nourishing the female; but when charged
with offices of judgment it is called female, as a woman who
carries her child in the womb of her. It is said elsewhere
that those who understand these male and female attributions
know the great wisdom.® But the exposition as to this
wisdom is given much later on, when it is stated that MATRONA
is feminine in so far as she is not in union, but in that state she
is identified with the male principle, and this is how the
interchange of sex in divine things must be understood
throughout.’ So also Mezrarron, who is an aspect of
Shekinah, is indifferently male and female, changing inces-
santly according to the vibrations of the union.§ Now, it is
said that Shekinah is to MErATRON what the Sabbath is to the
weekdays.? In other words, she is rest and the rapture of
rest, yet it is that rest in which there is the intercourse of
spiritual union. The same vibrations which are mentioned
in the case of METATRON constitute the beatitude of the soul
in heaven.

There are two points which should be memorised on this
subje@. At the apex of the union between male and female—
which is to be understood only in a spiritual sense—the sex
distinG@tion has ceased: it can be only from this point of view

1 See Z., Pt. II, fol. 207a; IV, 210,

* IP Et stOl. 2280 stake Ob

8 Ib., fol. 230a.5 TI, 508...

£ Ex, S520.

5 Z., Pt. I, 232a; II, 516. The “ Flaming Sword which turned every way, to keep
the way of the Tree of Life ” (Gen. iii. 24) is a symbol of this Angel and of Shekinah
in the dual sex of both. Mercy is always counted as masculine and severity or judgment
as feminine.

6 Z., Pt. Il, fol. roob ; TI, 406.

7 Ib., Pt. IU, fol. 31a; V, 84. It is said distin@ly that, in this respe&, whether the
feminine or masculine form is used by Scripture, the same degree is always and only
designated.

8 Ib., fol. 73b; V, 201.

9 Ib., fol. 243b3 °V, 581.

THE MYSTERY OF SHEKINAH 345

that the Shekinah is mentioned sometimes as if she were on
the male side. Here is the first point, and the second is that
in charaGteristics and in mission, she is always typically
female; it is she who comprises all women in her mystery,
and this is why—as we shall see—she does not abide except
with him who is united to a woman.? In conclusion, so far
as there is a dual aspect on the sex side in the notion of
Shekinah, it may be noted that the Divine Name Adonai
would answer to the male aspect, Shekinah to the female and
Elohim to the combination of both. There is, however, no
Zoharic authority.

We have next to consider her relation to the letters of
Tetragrammaton. The He which is above, meaning the
first He of the Sacred Name, is the symbol of the Shekinah in
transcendence, while the He final represents the Shekinah
below, or in manifestation, connected with the idea of Mat-
KUTH 3—understood as the world of Asstan. According to
one account, she has been in manifestation so long as the
wotld was created.4 She is, however, above and below’ at
one and the same time—there encompassed by twelve sacred
legions and the supreme Hayorn, or Living Ones, here by
the twelve sacred tribes of Israel.6 The Yop and the He
constitute the Father and the Mother: these are Jehovah and
Elohim.* She is the Mother, Marrona, above and MAaTRONA
ot Mother below.’ From the constant and ardent love of
He for Yop there issues Vau, conceived and born of HE, who
also noutishes Vau. But Vau came into the world with a
twin sister bearing the name of Grace; the two took root on
eatth and constituted the HE final—a reference to the meta- .
physical conception of their affirmed union. Then and thus
was the Vau united to the Hr, meaning the second HE of the
Divine Name.® It follows that there is a descent of Vau into

Made Eh. dy tos 229D,;, Li, Sor.

2 Ib. The task of lighting the Sabbath candles devolved on the mattons, because
they are in the service of Marrona. The a& was regarded as an earnest (a) of long
life for the husbands and (b) of a holy posterity for both, as well as (c) great personal
rewards for themselves.—Ib., fol. 48b ; I, 281.

. Fs ye Pt. I, fol. 27b3 I, 174, whete it is said also that the Hx final is the child-of the
rst He.

4 Ib., fol. 85a; I, 489.

SIb.; foln rg9bis) M227,

8 Jb., fol. 28a; I, 177. Thatis to-say, in Cookman and Bran, as we have seen by
the evidence collected in Book V, § 5, especially p. 226.

7 ¥)., Pt. I, fol. rob 3 “V, 37.

Sib. fol. 77b.s Vj 210, 2535

AA 2

346 THE HOLY KABBALAH

manifestation, but there should be no need to add that this
notwithstanding the Vau has its place in the Supernal World
and so also has the final Hx, because it is obvious that the
Divine Name must be perfect above before it can manifest
below, and from this point of view, though there is no
Zoharic authority, and other allocations are patamount, the
place of the Hz final is with the Vau in Daatu.! As the Hz
in manifestation, the Shekinah is the repose of beings below
and in transcendence of beings above,? referring more
especially to souls who have attained beatitude, which is
defined as the vision of her.2 The Vau is the male child or
the Son.4. The Yop of the Sacred Name is ever united to
the primal Hz, and when the Vau is also joined thereto it
is union everywhere, including that which should obtain
between the Vau and the Hk final.® Owing to the present
State of the world, we shall see that this union has been broken.
In a withdrawn sense the Yop of the Sacred Name designates
the Supreme Thought, while the Hx designates Shekinah, as
the Heart of Love in that Thought.6 ‘To conclude as to the
Divine Name, its consonants bear the vowel points of the
‘Name Elohim,’ from which two things seem to follow:
(1) That the intimate union between Jehovah and Elohim is
here indicated by the silent eloquence of verbal symbolism,
and (2) that the degree or hypostasis, or that part of the
Divine Nature with which man is in communion on earth, is
that which the Secret Tradition understands as Shekinah. It
is she who enables the Name to be expressed on earth, or God
to be realised in the heart. I conclude that in the perfec
State, the manifestation of the Hz final on earth would be in
espousals with Vau, but there is separation in the present
otder until that which now hinders shall be taken out of the
way.8

The next point which is posed for our consideration is the

1 T have put this on record in respe& of the Sacred Name in the Supernals, but it
need not concern us further. In the scheme of Divine Names allocated to the ten
SEPHIROTH by late Kabbalism, JeHovan is referred to CHOKMAH.

2°72, Pt IU, fol, 108a,'b 5 9V;/274;

3 Jb., Pt. Il, fol. 4ob, THe FArrHFuL SHEPHERD ; III, 189, 190.

4 Jb., Pt. Ill, fol. 118b; V, 305.

5) Ib. tol, 267b's)V1;'23.

8 Jb., fol. 230a; V, 570.

7 Ib., Pt. I,fol. 90a; I, 511, 512. Otherwise this Divine Name has the pointing of
Adonai.

8 My reference is to the period, foretold in the ZoHar, when the Vau shall raise up
the He,

THE MYSTERY OF SHEKINAH 347

place of Shekinah in the Sephirotic Tree, and it will be well
to state at the inception that the attributions throughout
Kabbalism seem almost as many as the references, though
there is only one which is predominant. She is the Middle
Pillar—as we have seen—the Pillar of Benignity, extending
from KEeTHER to Matxurn,? and she takes up the SEPHIROTH
to God, or into the place which is no place, beyond the infinite
height and depth, the infinite of all directions embraced by
the Tree. This is the place of Arn SopH.? The Middle
Pillar is described otherwise as the trunk of the Tree, it being
understood that the root is in KETHER, so far as the genesis
and legend of the soul are concerned ; but it is in MALKUTH
in respect of the return journey to God, which is a journey
through the Shekinah, or under her glorious leading. She-
kinah is, in another form of symbolism, the body of the Tree ; #
and the elet—summarised as Israel—are the cloud of wit-
nesses forming the branches. But it is said also that she is
the crown of the Middle Pillar,> the synthesis of all the
SEPHIROTH and of every Sacred Name expressed or implied
in the wisdom of the Secret Doétrine. She is to God that
which the vowel point is to the letter—a thing not distin&
therefrom but the means of its utterance. She is further the
crown of the seven lower SEPHIROTH, and this would account
for the allocation of the semi-SEpHIRA Daatu or Supernal
Knowledge to the centre of the influence coming from
CHoOKMAH and Bina, as tabulated by later Kabbalism.®

1 This is likely to cause some mental confusion, for which the text is too often
tesponsible. We have seen that, according to the Ipras, the Son or Vau is extended
through the three worlds which are below the world of Arzrturu, and He is called
also the Middle Pillar ; but He is in union with the HE final, or Bride, therein. I have
spoken in the present tense, but this was during the perfeftion of the manifest world.
They are in separation now, for the Hk is fallen to earth—that is, to MaLKurH—and
has to be raised by the Vau. It is never said that the Vau also has fallen, but as the
method and terminology chosen to illustrate the notion are an adaptation of the Myth
of Paradise symbolism, the Vau is certainly involved, as Adam in the calamity of Eve.
The undoing of the evil rests also with her—as the Zonk itself intimates in one place.
The whole account is an allegory of man and woman involved by a fatal construétion
respecting the Mystery of Sex but intended to redeem the trespass, with the life
belonging thereto.

2 This is a matter of inference from one isolated statement, which says that Shekinah
in her ascent draws up the ten SEPHIROTH, and it is a matter of logic that thither where
she draws them is beyond Kerurer. Now, beyond KErHer is Ain Sopu by the
hypothesis of the Tree.—-See Z., Pt. I, fol. 24a; I, 149, where it is said that when she
rises towards God she causes all the ten SEPHIROTH to go up with her.

SMP PL tol Sana s a te Sa

# Ib., fol. 241b; I, 555.

IP. Pt. Uy, fol rs 8a (bv. oa:

8 This again leads to confusion, for we have seen that the head of the Son is in
Daatnu. I am not, however, attempting to harmonise the innumerable statements

348 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Now, we know that there is an appendix to the SEPHER
YETZIRAH concerning 50 Gates of Understanding—teferred
to Brnau, also by late Kabbalism; but this ascription is
countenanced by the ZoHAR when it is said that these Gates
are in the region of the Supreme Mother, who gives power
to the Mother below 1—a reference to the Shekinah in
transcendence and in manifestation. This determines abso-
lutely that the Shekinah is in Bryan and that the first HE of
the Divine Name is also therein. It is said further that the
side of severity emanates from her, though she is not herself
severity,” and we know that the Pillar of Severity is on the
left side of the Tree, at the head of which is Binan.2 “ She-
kinah emanates from the left side.’* The 50 Gates are
another symbolism concerning the return of man to the
heights by the operation of Shekinah, as by a journey through
the great distance, for the first gate is in matter and the last
is in God Himself; but this gate was not, according to
tradition, opened by Moses—presumably because another
tradition afitms—as we have seen—that he ceased to cohabit
with his wife on earth. It is to be observed that it is a Gate
in Brnaw, so that God is attained by man in and because of
Shekinah, for which reason her number is said to be 50,°
though from another point of view she is not contained in
number. There are, however, various allocations. Two
Supernals, namely Cookman and Brnau, ate disposed on the
right and the left, and these are said to be united in Shekinah.?
But the complete integration in her of all branches of the
Sephirotic Tree will not take place till He comes Who shall
be called Man, that is, Adam or Surton.® It follows that

and counter-statements. Our obje& is to. study the bent of the symbolism, and the
glaring discrepancies—seeing that they speak for themselves—must take care of their
own differences.

1 Z., Pt. Til, fol. 262a; VI, 12. As regards the number 50 which is allocated
otherwise to Shekinah, it should be noted that the jubilee year, occurring once after
evety 49 years, is allocated to the Divine Mother in Brnan, as the Sabbatic year—
occurting every 7 yeats—is referred to the Mother below—that is, the Shekinah in
manifestation, so that her number on earth is 7.—See 7b., fol. 108b, THe FAITHFUL
SHEPHERD ; V, 274. ;

Wp. tol. 2020. V1, tas

3 That is to say, in the ordinary diagrams of the Sephirotic Tree—left and right
referring to the observer.

4 Z., Pt. Ill, fol. 275b; VI, 44. But this is looking towards the observer—as, for
example, when he is faced by the two Countenances of the Ipras. See Bk. V, § 5.

5 7, Pt. Ill, fol. 1o8b, THe FarrHruL SHEPHERD ; V, 274.

6 Jp. Pt. 11, 20). 3164p 3 LV, ‘108.

? Ib., fol. 165a; IV, 109.

8 Td... Pt. I, fol. 256 ; I, 160.

THE MYSTERY OF SHEKINAH 349

there is a sense in which Shekinah is in CHoxman,! and it is
supposed to be of her that it is said: “‘ She openeth her
mouth in wisdom.” ? For the purpose of this attribution
wisdom is the letter He and all depends therefrom.3 The
Shekinah in this relation is called concealed and visible,
conciliating the mysteries above and the mysteries below.*
Her hiddenness is in respect of the Supreme Degree of the
Divine Essence, which exceeds understanding. She herself
is revealed in wisdom by the mode of the Law of Mercy, so
that she is Mercy on one side although Severity proceeds
from her on the other. As the mouth which is opened with
wisdom, she is the Hz final of the Sacred Name, and this is
the word which emanates from wisdom.® Again it is said
that Elohim is seated on the right side, suggesting that the
Shekinah is in Cookman—according to the familiar diagrams.
Moreover, wisdom is the glory of and is revealed in the
Tabernacle &—that is to say, by Shekinah. We must deal
with this as we can, seeing that in another place Elohim, who
is Shekinah, is said definitely to designate Brnan.’ Fortu-
nately the harmony between these statements is given else-
where in the Zouar itself, when it is said that the mother
below is sometimes called the Betrothed and sometimes
Sister. If she comes from the side of the Father she is called
CHoKMAH, but if from that of the mother she is Brnau.®
The truth is that Shekinah is on both sides of the Tree, and
the explanation is that she is the spirit of all the Holy Assem-

1 Because she is indubitably present in things that are united in her ; because, in so
far as she tepresents sex conceived transcendently, she is male and female; and
because—as we have seen—in the Supernals there is no distin@ion between her and
the Holy One.

2 Prov. xxxi. 26. The reference is to a vittuous woman—accentuating in this
manner the feminine aspect of Shekinah. We ought, I think, to remember in this
connection that, in the physical order, it is woman who conceives, contains and brings
forth both male and female—a point which must have been present assuredly to the
minds of Zoharic doors.

8 But the attribution is casual ot transient and as such fantastic. ‘There is no question
that in the natural allocations of the Tree it is the Yop that is in CHoOKMAH, and for
this—as we have seen—there is full evidence. Compare THE AssEMBLY OF THE
Sanctuary, Z., Pt. Il, fol. 123b; II, 478.

4) 1h, Pt. 1 fol. 1450: TE, a2. ;

3 Jb. Pt. I, fol14ya 3, Gy 272. .

6 Elsewhere the Tabernacle is said itself to be Shekinah.—IJb., Pt. III, fol. 114;

jr 285i,

7 Ib., Pt. I, fol. 263a, SEcRETS OF THE Law ; II, 620. It is all a very simple question
of transposing the diagram and bearing in mind what follows above.

8 Ib., Pt. Il, fol. 77b; V, 212. She is known by many names, as we are told in
another place—sometimes as an angel simply, sometimes as the angel of Jehovah and
sometimes even as Jehovah.—ID., Pt. I, fol. 113b; Hl, 58.

350 THE HOLY KABBALAH

blies above and below. It is in this sense and this only that
CHOKMAH is sometimes said to be female and is that Mother
who is allocated alternatively to Bryan, while she is Daughter,
Sister and Bride in the worlds below. There is also a question
of the unity which obtains throughout the Supernals. For
the same reason she is now located in her manifestation at the
foot of the Middle Pillar—that is to say, in the fallen world ;
but we have seen that she is also at the head and is therefore
in KeTHER—that is to say, as AIMA ELOHIM, covering the
Supernals with her wings. Hence it is mentioned that the
Holy One is covered by His Shekinah, both within and
without.? I conclude that there are the Father, the Mother
and the Begotten Son, being CHoxman, Bina and Daarn,
ovetshadowing the lower SEpHirotrH, though other alloca-
tions are made and stand at their value. These three are
symbolised by Yop, Hz and Vau in the Sacred Name, while
the Hz final, the Bride in manifestation, is in MALKUTH since
the legendary Fall, but so that the kingdom of this world may
become in the fullness of the Messianic day the Kingdom of
Heaven. Outside these there is KeruHER, and it should be
noted in this connection that Jehovah abides, in the deep
hiddenness, with Shekinah in that Supernal SzpHira.? The
seeming attribution of feminine descriptions to the Shekinah
in her threefold aspect, so far from leading to confusion, really
provides the key. She is the catholic nature of womanhood
in all degrees and grades. In so far as everything proceeds
from KETHER, it is in virtue of the union between God and
His Shekinah therein. That which was produced is male and
female also, being the Father and Mother in CHokMan and
Binau, but because of this twofold procession there is a sense
in which these two may be called Son or Word and Daughter.
They beget on their own part the King and the Queen below,
Lover and Beloved, the Son and Shekinah in manifestation.
But the Supernals are in unity, and this is why the Zouar is

a Pt, LLL.) fol, 103b 3) V, 2602:

2 1b. Pt. Il, fol. 159a, THe Farrurut SHrepHerD; IV,96. The Shekinah is
represented also by the initial letter of the word Sabbath, but this would be, I think,
the Shekinah below, because of the Sabbatic year already mentioned.

3 This is a most important point and is on the authority of THe FarrHru.
SHEPHERD.—Z., Pt. III, fol. 243a; V, 581. It determines affirmatively a suggestion
which I made in considering the symbolism of the White Head, as this is found in
Tue Boox or Mystery and the Ipras. There is no aspeét of the manifest Godhead
in which the Male is without the Female, but the distin@ion is lost in Arn Sopx, about
which nothing can be posited, except that it is shewn forth in KETHER.

THE MYSTERY OF SHEKINAH 351

so cateless seemingly in its allocation of Shekinah, so that it
is in CuHoxman or Binau as the one or the other mood
happens to prevail. There are moments even when it looks
as if Father, Word and Spirit abide in the SUPERNAL SEp-
HIROTH.! We must beware, however, of being misled by
apparent correspondences with Christian Trinitarian doctrine
and must remember in this connection that the Zoharic
hypotheses are never spoken of as proceeding eternally one
from another. The Word, for example, is strictly a time
concept, postulated in resped& of creation and preceded by the
indwelling thought of God.

Shekinah herself in the state of distin@ion which—as we
have seen—is affirmed concerning her, is either the first of
created things or may be such when she assumes the vesture
of Meratron.? In the state of ineffable union and in that
conception which lies behind her name, she can be only
eternal like the Holy One, save in so far as the Holy One,
postulated in KEruHER, is also a time conception in respec of
Arn Sopu, the Inaccessible God, compared with Whom even
the world of ArziLuTH is a conditioned state, and its condi-
tioning is in respect of manifestation. |

Ihave mentioned in another connection the work of Shekinah
in creation. In her office as architect of the world, the Word
was uttered to her, was by her conceived and brought or
begotten into execution. We have seen that Shekinah below
concurred with the archite& above and was also a builder—
in what sense does not signify, nor is it explained by the
ZOHAR.® In so far, however, as creation is the history of the
ele€t symbolised, it is obvious that the work remains un-
finished till the great day of restitution, and coincident there-
with is the history of Shekinah herself. On the manifest side
it begins in the Garden of Eden—in that Garden which is
she, according to another symbolism 4—and it continues for
the Theosophical Jew through the whole period of the

~

41Z.5 Pt Til, fol. robs: V\i31.

2 Ib, We have seen that Mrratron is the vesture of SHAppDAr, but this Divine
Name, with those of Adonai, Elohim and Shekinah herself, are evidently interchange-
able. See Z., Pt. III, fol. 2312; V, 571, in respe&t of Meratron, by which it appears
that they are so related because the numerical value of the one name is the same as that
of the other.

3 Ib., Pt. I, fol. 22a, b; I, 136-138. It is said, however, that she is the object of the
mysteries relative to the works of creation —Ib., Pt. III, fol. 231a;. V, 571.

4 The counterpoise to this is that Shekinah was the companion of human exile
when Adam and Eve were expelled from the Garden—as we shall see immediately.

352 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Greater Exile. J] have mentioned that it was Shekinah who
walked with Adam in Paradise under the title of Lord God,1
that is to say, of Jehovah Elohim, the union above com-
municating to the union below and prescribing the first law
of life. This is the Shekinah in manifestation. But we know
that the trespass followed and that our prototypical parent
was driven out of the Garden. This might appear to mean
that he was cast out from under the wings of Shekinah ; but
he was not deserted in his need, for she followed him into
the captivity of the senses. This is one side of the Zoharic
doctrine that Shekinah suffered with mankind,? but it is put
much more explicitly when it is said: “ Therefore the man
was driven out and the Mother was driven out with him.” 3
This was the primal captivity, and many captivities followed,
wherein Shekinah shared ; for it is said that she is the sacrifice
which God has placed on His right and on His left hand, and
about Him.* |
There was separation between the King and Matrona in
respect of the outer world and so came about a separation in
the Divine Name, for the final Hr was detached and came
down on earth, the source of graces coming with her.®
Though it is forbidden to separate the Heavenly Bride and
Bridegroom, even in thought, it is this which has come to
pass by reason of the sufferings of Israel,® with whom Shekinah
was destined—as we have seen—to endure even from the
beginning.” ‘* When Israel is in exile the Shekinah is also in
exile. It is for this reason that the Holy One will remember
Israel,” meaning that He remembers His covenant, “‘ which is
Shekinah.” § The symbolical position is summed up in the

117. Pts 3, fol. :76as. 1, 448.

2 Ib., fol. r2z0b; II, 84, 85.

3 Ib., fol. 22b; I, 137. The authority is: “ Behold, for your iniquities have ye
sold yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put away.”—Is. ], 1.

* Ib., fol. 256a ; Il, 603.—Ib., Pt. III, fol. 109a ; V, 275 ——IP., Pet, tok ‘24as Te Tae,
Sometimes it is a question of drawing i into the deeps and heights of Divine Union. Some-
times it is the same conception symbolised by the female offering all her members and all
the parts of her personality to the corresponding members and parts on the male side.

5 Z., Pt. I, fol. 254b; II, 600. The point is expressed in a very curious way—
namely, that the world could not exist until the Hx final detached itself from the other
three letters of the Divine Name and descended on eatth. The authority seems to
be: ‘‘ I have said, Mercy shall be built up for ever ” (Ps. Ixxxix, 2), which the ZoHAR
renders : “ The world shall be built by mercy.” Cf. Vulgate: In eternum musericordia
aedificabitur in cel.—Ps. |xxxviii. 3.

$, Z.,, Pt. Hl, foljga; b ; TIL, 39.

7 Ib., Pt. ¥, fol. 120b ; TE, 84.

8 Ib., Pt. I, fol. r20b; Il, 84. Compare Deut. xxx, 3: “ The Lord thy God will
turn thy captivity, and have compassion upon thee.”

THE MYSTERY OF SHEKINAH 353

statement that the second HE was obscured and fell,+ becoming
a symbol of penitence.? The meaning is that she is with the
elect, for better, for worse, for richer, for poorer ;? and as in
their attainments so is she with them in their sins, though not
after the same manner, for she is then on the wrath side.
Her shame is the defiled body of man.* Again, she is in
sepatation from the King owing to the wickedness of man,
and though she does not leave him the sin of Israel causes her
to turn away. To sum up on this subject, she was driven
out of the Garden of Eden with Adam, like a wife sent away
by her husband ; but it was for the salvation of the world.®
In glancing at the concurrent history of Israel and that of
Shekinah, considerable care is needed to distinguish between
the allusions to her who is enthroned in Brnan, never leaving
the Supernals, and the exiled servant of God,’ for there is a
Shekinah called servant and a Shekinah called Daughter of
the King.8 The one is above the angels, like her who in
Christian do@trine is called Regina Angelorum,® and in respect
of all other lights of creation is that which soul is to body,
though in relation to the Holy One she is as the body to the
soul, notwithstanding that she and God are one.1® She is the
Mistress of the Celestial School, called the Abode of the
Shepherds, and this is a school of MEratRON, understood as a
vestute ot form assumed by Shekinah.14 In another aspeé of
symbolism she is that great and wide sea mentioned in
Ps. civ. 25, and she embraces the whole world, which is
concentrated in her.12 She is the jubilee above—presumably
on account of joy.18 All this is in the world of procession or

ee

BrZe, Pe. H, 08 ob 37 HE, 40.

2 Ib., fol. 114b; IT, 442.

3 [b., Pt. Ill, fol. 74a; V, 202. She is weighed down by the sin of Istael.—lIb.,
fol. 28a; V, 79.

* Tb. fok! 75a 3 Ny 204.

Pat. £0P. 1558, b.5: V, 397.

6 Jb., Pt. I, fol. 237a; Tl, 535, 536. It is written: “‘O Lord our God (Jehovah
Elohim), other lords beside Thee have had dominion over us ; but by Thee only will
we make mention of Thy Name,” or—as the ZoHar has it—“ but, thanks to Thee,
we have remembered Thy Name only.’’—Is. xxvi. 13. This verse is held to contain
the Supreme Mystery of Faith. JEHovAH ELOHENOU is the source of highest mysteries,
and when Israel attains perfection it will make no distin&tion between Jehovah and
ELOHENOU. It is forbidden to separate these Names even in thought. Yet is there
separation now on account of the sufferings of Israel, and because it is apart from God.—
Ib., Pt. II, fol. 9a, b; Ill, 38-40.

? Z., Pt. Whifolieeszain V,)563, 11 Jb., Pt. IU, fol. 19742; V,, 508.
8 Ib., Pt. Hl, fol. 94b; III, 378. 12 Ib., Pt. I, fol. 236a.5 IL, $30, 941:
® Ib., fol. 116b; III, 450. 19 1D, fal) 25 2251s, $93.

10 Jb., fol. 118b ; III, 456.

354 THE HOLY KABBALAH

emanation—the hypostatic world, which is ArziturH.! But
Shekinah is said otherwise to receive a body in YErzrrau ?
and so is empowered to manifest in AsstAH, wherein—among
other titles—she is the Lady of Battles,? who also obtains
remission of the sins of Israel, after the manner of the Agnus
Dei qui tollit peccata mundi.*

The Shekinah is held to conneét in a particular sense with
the patriarchal age. It was after his circumcision that the
letter HE was added to the name of Abram and it was also
thereafter that he was united—as we have found—with
Shekinah.6 Most of the divine visions beheld by Abraham
were visions and manifestations of Shekinah,® who dwelt
constantly in the tent of Sarah, and this is why Abraham—as
we have seen—on appearing in the presence of Pharaoh,
described Sarah as his sister, not as his wife, his reference
being really to Shekinah, who bears this title in respect of
man and who accompanied Sarah.’ When he went to the
rescue of Lot,® on leaving his house, Abraham beheld Shekinah
lighting the way before him and encompassed by many
celestial legions. She was present when Isaac blessed
Jacob ; 1° it was she who conferred upon Jacob the name of
Israel,14 and she was with him when he set up the mystic stone
as a pillar.12 When seeking a wife it was with Shekinah that
Jacob united his intention, and hence it is said—in character-
istic Zoharic symbolism—that when he married Rachel he
united heaven and earth.4% Shekinah, however, did not
ignore or forget Leah but—as the Holy Spirit—inspired her,
so that she knew respecting her part in the bearing of the
twelve tribes. Rachel died when the progenitors of these
tribes were completed and her place was taken by Shekinah,
but after the death of Leah she removed to the house of Bala,
so that she might be near Jacob, though she could not dwell
in his house because—as we know—she resides only where

A Zi bt, LU, fol) to9ay VV; 276.
2 Ib

3 Ib., fol. 75b; V, 205. It is of course obvious that Shekinah as Daughter of the
King did not fall into sin and hence her exile is willing, or she is empowered, as this
text says. But that of which she is prototype—incarnate womanhood—did—ex
hypothesi—fall, and that son who is incarnate manhood fell with her.

ZI Pedy fol? rob 5 1, 353) 10 Jb,, fol. 144b; II, 168.
SIP POA OAe 2 A, 5 20% 11 Tb. fol eqs 1,283)
ee He Il, ih AN 10 Ry x en 148b ae 186,

“fol erib +} Th; $0. wp FOL, 1598859203.
8 Gen. xiv. 14. 14 Jb, fol. 157a; I, 216.

°° Z, Pts, OL t2b > Tl) 55;

THE MYSTERY OF SHEKINAH 355

the man is united to the woman.t When Jacob lost Joseph
he lost the Shekinah also, either because joy had left him, and
she dwells only with the glad heart, or because it is said that
he ceased to cohabit with his wife, as a mark of grief and
desolation.2. The part of joy returned to him after reunion
with his son and presumably also Shekinah, for she accom-
panied Jacob and his family into Egypt, and forty-two sacred
angels destined for her service came down with her, each
bearing a letter belonging to the Divine Name of forty-two
letters.2 So long as Joseph was with the Israelites the
Shekinah was with them also, and they were not enslaved by
the Egyptians; but when the day came for him to die, it is
said that she departed,* and we know how it was with the
people until the advent of Moses. It was he who attracted
again the Shekinah to Israel®; it is said that she never
quitted him from the day of his birth ®°; but more even than
this, one of the doctors affirms that the father of Moses was
espoused to Shekinah, or alternatively that both father and
mother aspired towards her in their hearts during the inter-
coutse which was followed by his conception.’ This is what
is meant by the statement, already cited, that the Shekinah
reposed upon the nuptial bed of the parents of Moses.®

The nature of the union which subsisted between Moses
and Shekinah is set out very curiously, for it is said that in a
manner she had three husbands, namely, Jacob, Joseph and
Moses. But the first abode with his wives on earth and was
only united with her after his death. The espousals were not
dissolved between her and Joseph until the bones of the
latter were interred in Palestine. It was for this reason that
Moses carried them out of Egypt, and they accompanied the
children of Israel during the wanderings in the desert. It
was somehow in virtue of their presence that Moses was
united to Shekinah, so that she cohabited with him, and in
connection with this it is observed that he detached himself
from his wife—a very strange intimation if the Indwelling
Glory abides only with man in so far as he is wedded in the
ordinary and lawful sense.? Indeed in another place the fa&

1 Z., Pt. I, fol.:175b';, 1,289. 5 Ib., fol. 67b, 68a ; I, 400.

2 Ib., fol. 197a, b; Il, 381, 382. 8 [b., fol. 12z0b ; II, 83.

* 1b., Pe. Th folab-stUEE Sis, 7 Ib., Pt: TT, fol; 19a ; IU, 92.
* Ib., I, fol 1842 331, 327: 8 Jb., fol. 11b ; III, 49.

9 Ib., Pt. I, fol. 2tb, 88a; I, 133-135. Iam only giving a very slight sketch of the
whole subject, which would seem to the general reader a record of utter unreason.

356 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Stated is not counted to Moses exaétly as righteousness.4
The whole point rests on that Talmudic tradition which we
have met with concerning the separation of Moses from
Zipporah.2. Another account, which is in opposition to
much that has preceded, says that the Holy One espoused
Matrona to Moses, and this was the first time that she made
contact with the world below.2 We may compare herewith
the remark on the Daughter of God in another place, where
it is said that until she became a Bride, no one spoke with God
face to face*: it is another reference to the espousals of
Moses, contradiGting her alleged union with Abraham and
. Jacob and her presence in the world before its creation. The
meaning is that Shekinah was united with Moses after a new
and mote intimate manner than had been the case previously,
just as God revealed Himself to the lawgiver in another way
and in a sense under a New Name. ‘The exodus brought
about by Moses occasioned, moreover, the manifestation of
Shekinah before the people of Israel, she being the pillar of
fire by night, as Jehovah was that of cloud by day.5 Accord-
ine to another account, she was also a cloud, and it was
through this cloud that Moses passed on his ascent of Mount
Sinai.é Finally, and most important of all, Moses caused
Shekinah to manifest in the Ark of the Covenant over the
Mercy-Seat, between the figures of the Kerubim. The
Tabernacle was erected to serve as her residence ; and at the
moment when it was set up by Moses, there was another
erected in the world above. What seems to have happened,
however, was that the Mosaic Tabernacle became the residence
of MEratRon, who connects so curiously with Shekinah.?
The latter was also that cloud which abode on the tent of the
to the ‘‘ celestial beings ’’: it was otherwise with those of Joseph, and he was Still
counted as belonging to the earth. The bones are symbols of the celestial legions,
and these only needed to be interred in Palestine. The Sons of the Dorine did not
know that a man in the position of Joseph would have been embalmed after his death.
A Still more inscrutable suggestion is worded literally as follows: ‘“‘ Moses cohabited
with Shekinah, who is symbolised by the moon, even while the spirit dwelt in his
body, and he subjeéted her to his desires.” —Ib., fol. 22a; I, 134. After his death he
ascended to the degtee of the Jubilee, which—as we have seen—is BinAH and the
Shekinah in transcendence therein. She who was the spouse of Moses was the
Shekinah in manifestation, and it is said that after his death she returned to Jacob.

With all this compare ante, Book VIII, § 6, whete it is said that Moses failed to open the
50th Gate of Understanding because he had ceased to live with his wife.

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 234b; Il, 523. 5 [b., Pt. II, fol. ro1b; V, 499.
2 See Tratt Sabbath. S Jb., Pt. I. fol. 176bi) 07, 203-
3 Jb., Pt. Il, fol. 14523 IV, 59. db. Pt. Il, fol. 1434; TV, 54.

4 Ib., fol. 22b; MII, 115.

THE MYSTERY OF SHEKINAH 357

saigeigigiiceab er while the glory of the Lord filled the Taber-
nacle.t Alternatively it was a cloud that rose up to veil her
presence, and dissolved when she went forth. It is called
smoke by the ZoHAR, which also gives the reason, according
to its own fantastic symbolism—namely, that Shekinah had
been drawn into this world by the fire which burns in the
hearts of the patriarchs.2 The male principle or Jehovah is
said further to have spoken from the Tabernacle by the
intermediation of Shekinah, who is the female principle.?
The Tabernacle itseli—as we have seen—is Shekinah under
another aspect,* much as the tent of Sarah is so called on
occasion, because she and the Divine Bride dwelt therein.®
The Shekinah considered as the Tabernacle is in pledge for
the sins of man.®

We know by the scriptural account that in the temple of
Solomon the Shekinah continued to repose between the
wings of the Kerubim.’? She is described as resident
throughout the Holy of Holies,§ yet is conneéted in an
especial manner with the western "wall of the temple.? The
Holy of Holies was guarded moreover by MErATRON ?° and
was built for the union of the King and Marrona. It is
wtitten: “Those of the country shall utter cries, and the
angels of peace shall weep bitterly.’ 14. This is the Zoharic
version of Isaiah xxxiii. 7. It refers to the weeping of the
angels when the Sanétuary was destroyed and the Shekinah
was exiled intoa foreign land.4* She underwent transforma-
tion and assumed another form than that which she had worn
pteviously. So also the Spouse of Shekinah—treferring to
the Vau of the Sacred Name, she in manifestation being the
second Hze—treduced that light which enlightens the world,#
as itis written: “ The sun at his rising shall be covered with
darkness, and the moon shall give no light.” #4

These are naturally the heads, and such only, of the history
of election in Israel and the glory of all in conne¢tion there-

1 He. xh 94, 5 Jb., Pt. I, fol. ro1b; Hi, 21.
wir fy 3 i oe 1, 76b ; Il, 294. © 1g. Bt. 1b. fol tiga Vo 285:
= Ib, fol. 239a ; Il, 545- _ ? Jb., Pt. Ul, fol. 16b; II, 76.
4 Ib. rt i, fol. 114a; V, 285. 8 Ib., Pt. IU, fol. 161b; V, 416.

. Ib. Pt. I, fol. 116a; Il, 447.

a8 Ib., fol. 1642 : IV, 107. Th. Pt. I, fol. 74b; V, 203.

re f. Vulgate : Ecce videntes clamabunt fores, angelt pacis amare flebunt. The Authorised
Version is : “ Behold, their valiant ones shall cry without: the ambassadors of peace
shall weep bitterly.” The Revised Version agrees.

12 Z., Pt. I, fol. 203a; I, 407.—Ib., fol. 182a ; II, 3109.

a Tb: 44 Is. xiii. 10.

358 THE HOLY KABBALAH

with. In the Second Temple the Shekinah had no part,!
though by the hypothesis of the subject she had followed her
people into the exile of Babylon and helped them to remember
Zion by its sad waters. Albeit the Sons of the Dodtrine had
their dark moments during that day of a thousand years or
overt which followed the destruction of Jerusalem, at some
period of which the Zowar entered into record, and though
some of their sayings in these moments haunt the heart with
their catholic sense of unavailingness, the mood and its clouds
lifted ever and unertingly. Deeper still in their own hearts
they knew that they had not been deserted, that on account
of the Betrothed of God Israel was not forsaken by Him.?
Were they not conscious also—I think in my soul, most
sutely—as by all the waters and in all the Babylons of the
greater exile, they made up their dream of Shekinah, that she
was mote vitally and efficaciously with them than she had
been with patriarchs of old; that she was married to them
not less closely than to Moses, prince of lawgivers ; and that
she was realised better as a presence than when she sat be-
tween the Kerubim? Ever in Brnau her celestial fire abode
on the Throne of Mercy for those who dwelt in her covenant,
and by her mediation an union was still possible, as indeed
actual, between the Holy One and the Community of Israel.4
This is one of the senses in which the souls of Israel are said
to be attached to Shekinah.® That is not true therefore guod
unus dottor dixit in excessu suo: “ Israel is dead for the Shekinah
which is above by the destruction of the First Temple ; it is
dead a second time for the Shekinah which is below by the
destru€tion of the Second Temple.” ® And again: ‘“ The
destruction of the two Temples dried up the sources of the
Shekinah above and below.” ? She and Israel are in exile
together, in sorrow and loss together,? and the path of
penitence trodden by the one is the path of emancipation for
both. Meanwhile, “‘ the earth is the Lord’s, and the fullness
thereof ; the world, and they that dwell therein” ; 9 but the
fullness thereof is a reference to Shekinah, as an ample moon
enlightened over its surface by the sun. She is full also of

1 The First Temple was destroyed, because light failed therein, but the Second
Temple seems never to have had the light.—Z., Pt. II, fol. 95b; IV, 150.

2 Jb., Pt. DL, fol. 115b; V, 297. © Ib, Pt.) 1) fol.’26a)+" 1, 264.
3 Jb., fol. 34a; V, 89. ? Ib., fol. 255a; Il, 6or.
4 Jh., fol. 37b 3 V, 102. 8: 1b.’ Pes Tl, fol a8ob :)\4AVe Ags

& Tig Peat fue sas) 1/254, 2 Psp tive,

THE MYSTERY OF SHEKINAH 359

celestial benefits, like a treasury ; and in her manifestation to
Israel she is a treasury which belongs to the Lord.t More-
over, the exile of Shekinah with Israel, and her residence
among other peoples, has its train of extrinsic consequences
in the peace and benefits which are enjoyed by the latter.”
This is the sense in which it is said that other nations have
attracted the Shekinah towards them.? Indeed her perfe&tion
is throughout the whole earth and her benedictions are over
all the world,* for Elohim is a Mystery of Life® and the
Source of all life. She never separated from man so long as
he observed the commandments of the Law;°® but in con-
nection with this we must take and qualify freely a number of
countet-statements: (1) Every sin committed in public
drives away Shekinah from the earth ; ‘ (2) the generation of
Noah sinned in the sight of the whole world, and the Shekinah
was far from the world ; ® (3) when owing to the wickedness
of the world the latter has been left by Shekinah it is deprived
of all defence, and the severity of justice reigns therein ; °
(4) after the guilty have been exterminated the Shekinah
returns.1° It is obvious that these statements do not obtain
genetically on the literal side ; the consequences, like the aéts,
are individual, or, in the case where they are collective, it is
only in a restricted way.

To sum up: the wounds of the world and the wounds of
the Church in the world may be wide and deep; but the
Church and the world go on, for ten persons in the House of
Prayer constitute the body of Shekinah ; 14 and there is a very
much truer sense than was ever conceived by ‘the ZoHar in
which those ten are never wanting: the ele&t are everywhere
the true Israel, and it is thanks to Israel that Shekinah resides
on earth, Israel being its bodyguard.!? In thousands and tens
of thousands of cases, all the wide world over, it is true and
glorious that man acknowledges the kingdom of heaven and
submits thereto; that the Shekinah rests upon his head,
assisting him in the quality of witness; that she testifies
before the Sacred King how this man proclaims the Divine
Unity—or, in other words, that Jehovah is Elohim—above

1 Z,, Pt. I, fol..67a3 I, 395,.396. 210; fObs sab: 2. 1, ;

2 Ib., fol. 84b; I, 488. WR | 8 Ib, x ie

ae LL ® Ib., fol. 68b; I, 406.

4\1b., Pt. I, fol.166a 31,252: 10 Jb,

Bib tole 227s TL aop AA ID. Pt, Th fol 1264; V,. 324.
*h., Pt. 1, fol).23ra.3, Ti g16, aa do. Pt. Ty fol. 64a 31,358.

HK. BB

360 THE HOLY KABBALAH

and below, twice every day ;1 that so far as these are con-
cerned the earth is perfect and all joy is found therein.2 Thus
is Jerusalem rebuilt for ever in the heart ; the Shekinah goes
up into the high mountain and announces its reconstruction
to the patriarchs.* In these also she herself is delivered,* and
they dwell together henceforward in the Holy Land.’ It isa
foretaste of that time when all peoples shall enter under the
wings of Shekinah,® as also of the day to come when evil
shall be exterminated entirely and there shall be the same
solemnity of festival as when the Holy One, blessed be He,
created heaven and earth.’ Let us therefore join our voice
to those of the doctors who say that the Covenant with
Shekinah will endure for ever.®

Before attempting to place a reasonable interpretation on
the materials that are now in our hands, it is necessary to
complete the colleGion by certain additional particulars
which to some extent stand by themselves.

The created Law is called the garment of Shekinah °—a
vesture, as MrratrON is also, being perhaps the same vesture.
It follows that she herself is something that dwells within it—
as, for example, the Traditional, Oral and Secret Law which
is not disclosed to the rank and file of believers because of the
wickedness of the world. When the Created or External
Law is broken below it is as if the sinner rent or removed the
vestments of Shekinah, while alternatively those who observe
the commandments have the same merit as if they clothed
the Shekinah with garments.1® Such is the work of sandtity
in the higher conventions, according to the reverie of Israel.
The Misuna is the servant of Shekinah “4 and is also that help-
meet for man which is promised in Scripture.4* Whether this
interpretation could be elucidated by explaining in what sense
the MisHNA—as part of the story of Israel—may be said to
have tempted men, understood as those who are elect or are
at least capable of election, and may have led them into the
exile of the Fall, is another question ; but the sour de force is
not attempted in the ZoHar. It might be affirmed truly that

Ali. Eee Al. LOOD. > 16, 00; * 1b., Pt. I, Appendix: Ii) Srcaer
o10;, Ft. 4, 10. Oa; L357. Miprash ; II, 714.
3 Jb., Pt. Ill, fol. 173b; V, 451. 8 Ib. Pt. Hi, fol. 257as'Vi 997.
4 Tb., Pt. Il, fol. 216b; IV, 229. ® 'Ib., Pt..J, fol@ega,b sida
5 Ib., fol..222a; DV; 242. 10 7},, Pt. I, fol. 23a,b; De Pavty,I,
6 Jb., fol. 69b; III, 308, 309.—Is. ii. 143.

ae 11 J)., fol. 27b3)1, 174:

12 Gen. ii. 18.

THE MYSTERY OF SHEKINAH 361

it took him further and further into the bondage of the letter.
The text itself says only that the MisHna was the spouse of
Israel during his adolescence,! spouse also during his exile,
though sometimes for and sometimes against him. The
marriage was imperfect at best. During the adolescent
period the MisHNA was pre-eminent over Matrona, so that
the King and Marrona wete separated from the Celestial
Spouse.? It was the servant who took the place of the
mistress. Perhaps the meaning is that the literal explanation
in its excessive development clouded the spiritual sense of
holy doétrine ; 3 but if it be this, it is also more. Who then
is the mistress? The answer, according to the Zowar, is
that the Oral Law is the image of Elohim, and this we know
to be Shekinah.#

There is one practical application of all this cloud of
doétrine, and it may be summarised in a few words. It is
prayer that attaches man to Shekinah, and as the Holy One is
united constantly to her, it follows that by prayer man is
attached to the Holy One.® All the angels open their wings
to receive the Shekinah by prayer, and those on earth who
wish their prayers to reach heaven should unite themselves
with the Shekinah.6 Whereas the gates of the palaces to
which prayers ascend commonly have numerous guardians,
those of the palace of Shekinah have none, and prayers enter
unhindered.” It will seem at first sight that she occupies in
Kabbalism the same position of intercessor which is ascribed
to the Blessed Virgin by the devotion of the Latin Church,
yet having regard to Shekinah’s incorporation with the
Divine Hypostases, I incline to think that the analogy is
misleading. In view of all that has been done to Christianise
Kabbalism by every good means, and by so many that are
bad intellectually, one has to be very careful about reading
Christian implicits into the text of the literature.®

ay Za, PRLS fol ois Ty 274. 3) Wd. fol._27b,- 28431, 175.

3 We have had one example previously to shew that the sense of darkness and
uncertainty alternated with the sense of light. The successors of Rabbi Simeon were
not like that doctor himself, who had apparently William Postel’s key of things kept
secret from the foundation of the world. They were rather like the second circle of
Brothers of the Rosy Cross, of whom it was said to be doubtful whether they were
admitted to all things. It is clear, by their own confession, that they did not understand

all things.
4 Z., Pt. I, fol. 161b; IV, roz. 5 Ib., Pt. 1, fol. 24a; I, 148, 149.
6 Tb., fol. 279b, 280a; II, 648. 7 Ib., fol. 24a; I, 148.

8 Undesigned Christian reflections are another matter, and I have mentioned a few
out of many possible examples. |
BB 2

362 THE HOLY KABBALAH

There is a question whether my next and last point of
analysis had better be taken here or in a later chapter; but
as I have mentioned Christian implicits, and as what I have to
say seems to connect with this subject, I will incorporate it
under that motive, though it has also other issues. We have
come across already in our quest many allusions to the Divine
Father, the Divine Son, being two of the Christian Hypo-
Stases, and as we know that the Shekinah in transcendence is
also the Divine Mother, the question arises naturally whether
this is the Holy Spirit, the Third Person of the Christian
Trinity. Those who ate acquainted with Theology will
know that the Third Person is not recognised as feminine,
though there has been a tendency in several modern depart-
ments of semi-Christian Transcendentalism to regard the
Holy Spirit in this light and thus complete the triad of the
Divine Family. They forget, however, that neither in the
East nor the West—under the egis of the Greek or Roman
Orthodoxy—is the Son held to proceed from the Father and
the Spirit, but on the contrary that the last is postulated as
proceeding from the Father and the Son. Albeit the Fr/ogue
clause of the Nicene Creed was a ground of division between
the two branches of the Church Catholic, as not of apostolical
authority, I have heard that it is not denied otherwise in the
Greek Rite. One alternative would be the co-equal and
co-eternal procession of the Son and the Spirit from the
Divine Father, and the symbol in this case would be a triangle
with the apex upward, not in the reverse position which
characterises Latin Theology. Now it cannot be said that
either dotrinal position represents the mind of Kabbalism.
We have seen that Jehovah Elohim, Spouse and Bride, Father
and Mother, God and His Shekinah are in KETHER in a state
of oneness, without separation and without distinction.
There are very few references to this state in the Zonar. I
have intimated indeed that there is only one which can be
quoted with complete certainty in the wording, but I am
justified thereby in saying that it is a state corresponding to
that of parentage. They reproduce themselves immediately
below as Appa and Arma, teferred to CHOKMAH and BINAH.

1 [ have said that it arises naturally, but I do not mean that we should do much in
this manner to complete the Christian Triad in Kabbalism. Readers who have followed
my study up to this point will find little ground for comparison between Those who
dwell in the Sephirotic Supernals and Father, Son and Holy Ghost in the Heaven of
St. Thomas Aquinas, or other of the Latin Do€ors.

THE MYSTERY OF SHEKINAH 363

But as in the Supernals the Divine Persons are not in a state
of separation, so the male and female in these SEPHIROTH are
one with those which are in Kerner. It follows that
Shekinah is on both sides of the Tree, as I have said elsewhere
in this section, and it is difficult to postulate in such a triad
either a time conception or passage from subject to object.
But the Trinity was working towards manifestation, and the
result was that ABBA and Arma begat the Son, who is Vau in
Daartu, from which His personality was extended through
six of the lower SEpHtRoTH. ‘They begat also the Daughter
and Bride, at first implied in the Son, but afterwards separated
and extended with him through the three worlds below
ArzitutH. Later Kabbalism locates the conception of Yop
in CHOKMAH, excogitated as King and Father; Hz in Binan,
as Queen and Mother; Vavu posited in the Six Briatic and
Yetziratic SEPHIROTH from CHESED to YEsSOD inclusive, but
enthroned especially as the Son in TrpHERETH ; while the HE
final is in Matxuru. So far as I have been able to see, the
patticular variations of arrangement are not destitute of
Zoharic authority. It must be recognised perhaps that there
ate two separate arrangements of the Tree of Life in the text.
There is that which I have followed, drawing largely from
THE Boox oF Mystery and the three Ipras, and there is its
alternative which can be extraéted—not without some con-
fusion—from other parts of the collection. According to
this the Father and Mother are in KreruEr, the Son Who is
the Word is in CHoxMAn, the Daughter and Bride is in Brnan.
Now the Divine Name attributed to KETHER is Jan, formed
of Jop and HE primal belonging to the TETRAGAM. It is said
to be the Unknown God for whom the Name in question is
that which the Propitiatory was for the Tabernacle—a sum-
mary of the male world above and the female world below.
It is the Name of the Ancient of Ancients ; it is the synthesis
of all things below and above. It follows in the arrangement
that the Vau is referable to Cookman and the HE final to
BINAH, who descended to Max.uru, as the Bride or Shekinah
in manifestation. Once more, Shekinah is really in every
part as well as on both sides of the Tree, being the Mistress of
the height and the deep, President over the four quarters of
the universe of created things and all that led up thereto.
Now the French editor and translator of the ZoHar have
an atrangement peculiar to themselves, by virtue of which

364 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Yop or the male principle, understood as the Father, is
allocated to KErHER; HE, understood as Shekinah, is in
CuHoxmaH ; while Vau in Binan is the Holy Spirit. The
Christian Trinity is thus complete, though the question of
procession is left to account for itself as it may. ‘The attribu-
tion is part of a scheme for decoding the mystery of Shekinah
along a particular line in conneCtion with Zoharic do€rine
respecting Messiah, and it will be considered in full later on.
The question which arises here is whether Shekinah, by us
allocated to Brnau, is or is not the Holy Spirit. The editor
and translator maintain that she is not, and the fact that two
opinions are possible on the subject implies that the ZoHaR
is either not at one with itself or utters an uncertain voice.
There are many references, and perhaps there is a mean
between them. It is manifest in the first place that the Holy
Spirit is personified in the ZoHar, and a preliminary point is
whether we can find authority for this in the Old Testament.
“Take not thy Holy Spirit from me,” + says David, and
according to Isaiah the people of Israel vexed God’s Holy
Spirit.2. He asks also: “‘ Where is He that put His Holy
Spirit within him ? ” ’—meaning Moses, adding that “ The
Spirit of the Lord” caused Moses to rest. I do not know
whether these can be called personifications, but they exhaust
the allusions in the Old Testament which are connected with
the distinctive qualification of “holy.” We know that “ the
Lord put his spirit upon them” ;* that “the spirit rested
upon them and they prophesied” ;° that Joshua was “a man
in whom is the spirit’ ;® that God hardened his spirit ” ; 7
that ‘“‘ the spirit came upon Amasai”;°® that David gave to
Solomon all the designs for the temple “that he had by the
spirit ” ; ° that by His spirit God “ garnished the heavens ” ; 1°
that God sends forth His spirit ; 14 that there is a spirit poured
from on high,!? and Isaiah also says that “ the Lord God and
His spirit hath sent me,” z.e., on the prophet ; #® that “ the
spirit of the Lord God is on me,” z.¢., Isaiah ; 4 that the spirit
took up Ezekiel ; and that according to Zechariah God sent
in His spirit by former prophets. ‘There is asheaf of other

aPso. Ti. 6 Jb., xxvi. 18. #4. PS, Cl¥p 30.
2 Ts. lxiii. 10. 7 Deut. ii. 30. 12° Ts. xxxii. 15.
3 Ts. lxiii. 14. 8 x Chron. xii. 18, 18 Ts, xlviii. 16.
4 Numbers xi. 29. 9 Ib., xxvili.'12. 14 Is. [xi. 1.

5 Tb., xi. 26. 10 Job xxvi. 13. 15 Ezek, iii, 12.

16 Zech, vii. 12.

THE MYSTERY OF SHEKINAH 365

allusions, but enough has been quoted for the purpose in
hand. They may be kept in mind by the reader in connection
with the Zoharic allusions which will follow hereon. He
shall decide for himself—as I have no wish to adjudicate—
whether there is more explicit personification in the Kab-
balistic text, and if so whether it is to be accounted for by
(1) natural development of ideas; (2) Jewish tendencies
ptior to the TaLmups, represented roughly by Philo and, as
such, a possible common source for Kabbalistic Jew and
Christian ; (3) Talmudic evidence ; or (4) the atmosphere of
Christian do@rine in which the Kabbalistic Jew lived and
moved for the most part and which he can have scarcely
failed to absorb in some degtee.

I will take first of all those references which are either
dubious or appear to suggest that the Holy Spirit is not
synonymous with Shekinah.

The Zouar asks: what is signified by the words: “ And
the Spirit returns to Elohim who gave it?” + The answer
is that one of the words designates Shekinah, that word being
ovos = Elohim, while another word designates the Holy
Spirit, ze, the word nin-= “spirit.” It might seem
therefore that the Holy Spirit is not Shekinah but is in close
connection therewith, like a breath that goes forth and
returns.? It does not signify for our purpose that the ZOHAR
is making a false interpretation—seeing that the spirit men-
tioned in Scripture is that of man. Again, it is said that
when man is circumcised he is joined to the sacred crown of
Shekinah and the Holy Spirit rests upon him.? In another
place three spirits are distinguished: (1) The Spirit below,
which is called the Holy Spirit ; (2) the Spirit of the Middle
Way, which is that of Wisdom and Understanding ; (3) the
Spirit which sounds the trumpet and unites the fire to the
water, this being the Superior, Concealed and Mysterious
Spirit, whereunto ate suspended all sacred spirits and all
luminous countenances.4 Now, it is stated, after the pre-
vailing manner of the Zonar, which cannot postulate a triad
apart from an inward unity, that these three are one and that

1 “ And the spirit shall return unto God who gave it.””—Eccles. xii. 7- Authorised
Version, for which the Revised Version substitutes : ‘‘ And the spirit returns.” Cf.
Vulgate: Ef spiritus redeat ad Deum, qui dedit illum.

2 Z., Pt. Il, fol. 97b ; III, 390. 3 Jb., Pt. II, fol. 14b; V, 42.

4 ‘lb., Pt. III, fol. 26a ; V, 73 74.

366 THE HOLY KABBALAH
they form a holocaust which is the Holy of Holies.1 This,

however, is explained elsewhere to be Shekinah, for—as we
have seen—she is the sacrifice which God has placed on His
right and His left hand, and about Him.? Again, “ she is the
sacrifice of the Holy One,” and prayer is the holocaust which
in turn is offered to her. Once more, it is said that when the
Shekinah resided in the Holy Land the impure spirit took
flight and found refuge in the abyss, while the Holy Spirit
was diffused throughout the world, so that the one would
seem to be associated closely with the other, if we can presume
that there is indeed distin€tion.4 In this conne¢tion the Holy
Spirit is spoken of as the cloud that covered the ‘Tabernacle ;
but the same cloud has been identified otherwise with She-
kinah and with Metatron. It will be seen so far that it would
be difficult to quote anything more indecisive. There is,
however, one memorable passage which I have reserved to
the last, and must cite almost iv extenso. “ A tradition tells
us that at the hour when Moses, the true prophet, was about
to be born into the world, the Holy One caused the Holy
Spirit to come forth from the Tabernacle ”—elsewhere that
which seems to be the abode of Shekinah in transcendence.
God entrusted all power thereto and innumerable keys of
power, together with five diadems, the splendour of which
enlightened a thousand worlds. ‘“‘ The Sacred King exalted
the Holy Spirit in His palace and set Him above all celestial
legions ”—even as Shekinah is placed above all angels.
“These were in great amazement, for they saw that the Holy
One was resolved to change the face of the world by the
intermediation of the Holy Spirit.” They began to inquire
concerning ‘‘ Him,” and were told to prostrate themselves,
because “‘ He” would descend one day among men, and the
Law—till then hidden—should be revealed. They did
homage accordingly, and thereafter the Holy Spirit ascended
towatds the King. ‘The three letters, Mem, SHin and Hg,
belonging to the name of Moses, offered their worship also ;
and then the Holy Spirit, in fulfilment of what had been fore-

477, ets REL tl. 2085) VeiaR, 7A:

2 Ib.,:Pt. I, fol..24a;-1, 149.

3 Ib., fol. 256a; II, 604.

4 Ib., Pt. Il, fol. 2692; IV, 303. I may add that when Joseph saw Benjamin with
the rest of his brethren, as related in Gen. xliii. 16, he is said by the ZoHAR to have
discerned by the Holy Spirit (a) that Benjamin would have part in the Holy Land,
and (b) that the Shekinah would reside therein. Whether this tends to identification
or to the opposite might be difficult to affirm.—See #d., Pt. I, fol. 202zb; II, 405.

THE MYSTERY OF SHEKINAH 367

told, came down to earth, bearing the arms necessary to smite
Pharaoh and his entire country. On reaching this world He
found the Shekinah already here, tadiant of aspect and
spreading light through all the house.t It will be observed
that the last sentence looks like an unqualified and conclusive
distinction, though in its absence and from what has preceded
in the extract one would have said that the Holy Spirit was
actually a synonym of Shekinah. We hear nothing more,
however, of any office in distin@tion, for that which hence-
forward abode with the Lawgiver was not the Holy Spirit but
the glory of his Spiritual Spouse, who had been with him from
his beginning on earth.

Let us now take the evidence in the contrary sense, pro-
ceeding in the same manner and remembering that there is
only one testimony at most on the negative side of the subject.

In the first place, it is said—as we have seen indeed already—
that the Holy Spirit inspired Leah concerning her work in
connection with the foundation of the twelve tribes ;? but
we know otherwise that it is Shekinah who presides over
birth, seeming to be in analogy with the chaste and conjugal
Venus. In connedion with the daughter of Jethro—who
was the father-in-law of Moses—the Holy Spirit is affirmed
to have been always with Moses,? which we may read in the
light of another statement—that the Shekinah was associated
with the orders which Moses gave to the experts charged with
building the Tabernacle, because such work could not be
accomplished properly without the inspiration of the Holy
Spirit.4 The association of Shekinah meant the enlighten-
ment of the Holy Spirit. Here again is at least the close
connection in virtue of which the one is not without the other,
and the kind of nearness is illustrated more clearly by another
passage which speaks of that day when God shall pour upon
us the Holy Spirit of His Shekinah.2 It would seem again to
be the breath of Shekinah. Once more it is said that the
Holy Spirit is called Zoru,® being the name which designates
the sign of the Sacred Covenant imprinted on man; 7 but we

Ma Pes Li tok ¢sbsis4a's Lib oat 242,

* Tb. Pt. Tatol!, r57a's 2363

* Tbs Pt Ue fol. Yb. hho Ge,

41d) Pt: Ei fol rob sc bV, 349; t$0.

>. Jb. Pt: TH, 'fol..219a3 V5 55+

® pyr = This, in its opposition to mbn or xin= That, understood as on the evil

side. The Zonar cites a number of Biblical passages.
4:Z., Pt: I, fol. 228a 3.11, 498.

368 THE HOLY KABBALAH

shall see that this sign is connected especially with Shekinah.
So also when Balaam lifted up his eyes,! he is supposed to
have beheld Shekinah resting with poised wings above the
twelve tribes of Israel, and to have questioned how he could
prevail against them, seeing that the Holy Spirit was thus
their Stay and their protection. There seems no doubt that
this is an equivalent of identification.? It is only at the end
of the Zour that we obtain a still mote decisive voice on the
afirmative side. ‘The question is one of alleged or suggested
criminal relations between Esther and Ahasuerus, which are
characterised as slander, the ZoHar adding that “she was
clothed with the Holy Spirit,” * as it is written: ‘‘ Esther put
on her royal apparel ’’—or, as the passage renders it, “‘ clothed
herself with royalty.” The interpretation follows immedi-
ately thus: “ ‘The Holy Spirit—this is the Shekinah with
which Esther clothed herself.” + It is an opportunity for a
favourite form of testimony, and the great text adds: “‘ Woe
to those who feed upon the husk of the Law, while the grain
of wheat is the mystical sense.” It will be observed that, if
words signify anything, this is not less than an unqualified
and conclusive identification. If anyone will read over with
care similar to my own the references which I have provided
now on both sides of the question, I believe that they will
conclude with me, as against the one definite statement on the
negative side, that there is a cumulative affirmative evidence
crowned by a most clear affirmation: “‘ The Holy Spirit—
this is the Shekinah.”

When therefore the editor and translator of the ZoHarR
allocate this Spirit to Brnan, it means that they are referring
the Shekinah thereto, as I have done also, even if their design
is in the opposite sense. But this Spirit is not the Third
Person in the Blessed Trinity of Christendom, though it is
impossible that it should not have aspects of likeness, in so
far as the root of both do@trines is in the Holy Scriptures of
Israel. I conclude on the authority of the text itself—which
for once I must repeat at this point—that “ from the constant
and ardent love of He” in Brnau “ for Yop ” in CHOKMAH
** there issues Vau ” in DAATH, conceived and born of HE,

i Num. xxiv. 2.

2 As a faét, it is a€tually more than a simple equivalent.
577.4 Pt. 111, fol. apshun Mila

4 Ib, See Esther v. 1.

THE MYSTERY OF SHEKINAH 369

by which also it is nourished.1 “ But Vau came into the
world with a twin-sister bearing the name of Grace,” which
is CHESED, because Grace is Mercy. “ The two took root
on earth and constituted the He final ’—that is to say, in
MarxutH—because the male is not without the female—as
we shall see—either above or below. “‘ Thus was the Vau
united tothe Hz” final. But in the completion, the perfection
and harmony of the Divine Name, letter by letter and letter
within letter, all these are one at the root: there would be
sepatation proclaimed in the Divine Nature if Yop, Hz, Vau,
He did not bear witness to His unity.”

The most important consideration which arises out of the
whole subject is after what manner we are to regard essentially
this Cohabiting or Indwelling Glory which is termed Shekinah
in Scripture and in the sacred texts of the ZoHaR. We know
that it dwelt between the Kerubim in the Tabernacle or Ark
of Moses, and the Kerubim are said to have been male and
female, types in the Sanctuary of Israel of things manifested
on earth as types in their turn of the union that is above.
When a mean is taken between all the cloud of references, it
calls for no gift of interpretation to discern what lies with
uttermost plainness on the surface; but we have explained
nothing which is vital if we say that Shekinah is the principle.
of Divine Motherhood—that is, the feminine side of Divinity,
implied in the logic of our symbolism when we speak of the
Fatherhood in God. It is a case of being true to our symbols,
and though this is of consequence intellectually, it remains
thereat. If we turn to the analogy which subsists in virtue
of the symbolism between womanhood above and that which
is found below, we shall not proceed much further if there is
brought home to us merely the notion that the office of the
mother on earth is made sacred in a sense that is above the
hallowed sense of Nature by the conception of its archetype
in heaven. It has been present to us through all the Christian
centuries in the popular and most catholic devotion to the
Queen of Heaven, which, like so many other popular interests,

4 Ay EP Ll fOl Wee Vs 2ity 2EL,

2 The passage is important to my purpose, but it must be admitted that it is exceed-
ingly confused. The meaning may be that in the extension of Vau through the worlds
below ArziLutTH, the head of the Son is in DAATH—as we have seen otherwise—while
that of his Bride and Sister is in CHEsED, which, however, is on the male side of the
Tree. I do not pretend to explain fully how the descent of the Son and Daughter
constituted the Hz final, for the Vau is distin€&t from the Hz. But this has been touched
upon in a previous note.

370 THE HOLY KABBALAH

but those more especially that are consecrated by the greatest
of all the Churches, adumbrates a vital truth in the spiritual
life and a first principle in the world of reality. It has been
a vety sincere and whole-hearted devotion in those who have
been drawn thereto ; but the particular doctrine of miraculous
and virgin birth, though eloquent and suggestive within its
own measures, creates a clear line of demarcation between
subject and objedct, so that there is a world-wide distin@ion
between the honour paid to her who is ever outside ourselves
and the adoration of Him Who is never understood essentially
until He is realised within. Now, there are no prayers to
Shekinah in the official liturgies of Jewish religion; but in
the Secret Church of Israel, frequented in spirit and in truth
by the Sons of the Doétrine, she is either the House of Prayer
or else abides therein, and we have seen that her doots are
open to prayers for ever. She was the great obje& of prayer,
though it is to be questioned whether it was by the way of
prescribed forms: it was rather by that prayer in the stillness
of unexpressed thought about which we hear in the ZoHAr.
The reason is ready to our hands, and the first light which
may be said to fall on our subjeé is that the Shekinah is an
Indwelling Glory. ‘The Latin Kabbalists made use of the
term cohabitans by an imperfect understanding on their own
part of the mystery involved—that is to say, by a considera-
tion of the external side which obtains in espousal-relations
on eatth. The proper word is iwhabitans, for it is said that
the Shekinah dwells in man,? being in the hearts of those who
seek after good works zealously.2 And more definitely :
Man is the House of Shekinah.2 The beginning of this
inhabitation is when man makes a firm effort towards self-
amendment, for by such turning the Shekinah is drawn
towards him,* and to this condition are applied the words :
“Tam my beloved’s and his desire is towards me.” ® Those
with whom she dwells are those who are humbled and even
broken by suffering.6 Yet does she reign only where there
is joy rather than sadness, an allusion to the support of trials
with resignation. The suffering is, however, more especially
that of which the root or cause is in love, being the state of
those who are consumed by the love of the Divine: these

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 166a ; II, 250. * Ib., Pt. I, fol. 88b; I, 509.
2 Jb., Pt. Il, fol. 128b; IV, 11. 5 Song of Solomon vii. 10.
® Ib. $ Z., Pt. 1, fol. tras Tigers:

THE MYSTERY OF SHEKINAH 371

ate the Brothers of Shekinah.t Again, it is said that the work
of Shekinah below is comparable to that which the soul
accomplishes in the body: more accurately still it is the same
work,? and this enables us to understand in what sense she is
termed the soul of the Tabernacle below,? which Tabernacle
is the sacred body of man.

I have called these intimations a first light, but I have not
intended to exaggerate their value as such. I speak as a
mystic ; we have heard for two thousand years that God is
within and His kingdom, yet the world remains comparable
tather to the wilderness without the Holy City than to the
blessed Zion; and if Shekinah is offered to us in the secret
literature of Jewry as that aspect of the Divine Nature or
Principle which is realisable by the heart of man, I do not see
that we have added anything to our subject. It is idle to
decode books of Secret Doétrine unless they have something
mote definite to tell us concerning the way, the truth and the
life. So also it is beautiful to hear that whosoever wrongs a
poor person is guilty of wrong to Shekinah, because she is
the protectress of the poor ;* but we know too well already
about things which erieve the Spirit. I might multiply these
quotations, and it would serve no greater purpose; the
question would remain then which remains now: the Secret
Do€rine of Israel either covers a mystery of knowledge
wherein there lies possible a mystery of certitude in experience
or it is a temple in a waste of thought, far from any city of
refuge and filled only with confused rumours or raving of
empty words. Now, I have performed many arid journeys
in my time and have returned with an empty wallet; but if
this had been one of them I should not have written its
itinerary in the present study of the ZonHar. ‘There have been
recurring intimations there and here in these pages concerning
a Mystery of Sex; it is imposed upon me now to affirm that
this is the Mystery of Shekinah; and the nature of such
Mystery corresponds—according to its veiled claim—with the
definition which I have just given concerning a knowledge
and an experience. The point and centre of the whole
subject is the Indwelling Glory ; it is declared everywhere,

AZ Ets ly Ol Ista s, Le aus,

2°10 Pt. Tol. t40bi5 TV, 45.

3. Th.

4 Z., Pt. II, fol. 86b ; III, 355. See also Is. Ivii. 15.

372 THE HOLY KABBALAH

but everywhere also it is concealed : one aspe& of its presenta-
tion—amidst great hiddenness of wording—suggests that the
entrance of the High Priest into the Holy of Holies belongs
to the Mystery of Sex*; but I do not propose to pursue this
intimation, as it seems to me like that fiftieth gate which was
not opened by Moses, and, moreover, the fitting time is not
yet. I will resume rather the conference by saying that,
according to the Zowar, the union of male and female is
Modesty,” and that the title to behold the face of Shekinah is
one of purity.2 It seems true therefore to say that she is the
Law of the Mystery, and the ZoHar quotes concerning her,
“When thou goest, it shall lead thee ; when thou sleepest, it
shall keep thee; and when thou awakest, it shall talk with
thee.” 4 ‘The study of this Law is life eternal.6 Considered
as a law, it implies a covenant, and of this covenant Joseph is
said to be the image, because of his continence in respect of
Potiphar’s wife.6 Having tabulated these premises and thus
secuted a point of departure, we have to approach again the
great text and see after what manner it will shed light on the
reseatch.

It is specified that Shekinah dwelt with Israel prior to the
captivity, meaning probably the captivity in Babylon, and
the sin which brought about this exile was equivalent to the
uncovering of the hidden physical centre of Shekinah. Iam
speaking here under great difficulty and am somewhat ex-
changing terms, for this Minerva and Diana of Israel is a
woman, like Isis, and her veil is not to be lifted. The French
translators finish the quotation under notice with the help of
the Latin tongue, and it reads: Tvaditum eff . . . genitales
partes Shekine exiftere.’ This also is a sacrament, but we can
understand the meaning by assuming that Shekinah in such a
connection signifies the Secret Dodrine in so far as it was a
mystery of sex, and the Zouwar goes on to particularise the
alleged sin as a crime of incest, by which we must understand
some illegal and reprobate application of the sex dodtrine. It
matters nothing to our subject if on the surface of Scripture
the accusation seems without warrant: to justify the herme-
neutics of the ZoHar would be a task as much beyond my

1 Z., Pt. Ill, fol. 66b; V, 182. The hour of entrance is when the Sacred King is
united to Ne uk ek

2 Jb., fol. 145b; B Zip Pt. 23 tol. 175 bs IL 200.

3 Ib., Pt. II, fol. Rae “i, 268, 269. © Ib., fol. r84a? UL, 927.

* Prov. vi. 22. wb. pSolxesbh!s Iya 733

THE MYSTERY OF SHEKINAH 373

province as beyond my powers of pleading.t But we begin
to see in this manner the kind of problem that has been taken
in hand.

It is said further that the Mystery of Shekinah comprises all
women, and this—as we have seen—is why she does not
abide except with him who is united to a woman.” She is
fixed definitely in the house of man when he marries, e¢ quum
faderts suum signum in locum ponit.® ‘This is why the He and
the Vau follow each other in the alphabet—Vau being the
symbol of the male and HE of the female principle. Husband
and wife are one, and a ray of celestial grace covers them ; it
descends from CHoKMAH, penetrates the male principle, and
the latter communicates it to the female.4 We can undetr-
Stand therefore in what sense her shame is the defiled body of
man,° and how she is weighted by the sin of Israel.6 The
reason is that she is a virgin betrothed to the Middle Pillar,’
and of her it was said by Adam in the great day of his per-
fection: “* This is now bone of my bones and flesh of my
flesh,” § which is to affirm that in one of her aspeéts she is the
type of stainless womanhood; but she passes ever into
espousals below—as she is ever in espousals above—for the
fulfilment of herself in humanity, and of all humanity in her.
The evidence is that when there is a just man on earth the
Shekinah cleaves to him and does not leave him henceforth.®

It will be observed that in order to gain the particular
point at a given moment the Zowar is valiantly careless of
that which goes before, as of that which may be designed to
come after. ‘The history of the Fall of man through the
intermediation of woman, acting under the virus of the
serpent, is by no means the history of Shekinah, unless under
a special aspect and as a remote reflection; but when it is
sought to shew that she is nearer to the elect than hands and

1 As a matter of faét, the idea is drawn from the Tatmup, which enumerates various
cases of the crime in question, but the reference in the ZoHar is to be understood
spiritually, as of an assault on Shekinah, who—as we have seen—is the sister of all men.
From all modern points of view and feeling, this kind of symbolism is unfortunate and
disconcerting enough; but I think that the Sons of the Doétrine, if they had been
challenged on the subject, would have replied with Gerald Massey that Nature is not
ashamed of her emblems.

* Z.., Pt. Latol:,228b,2: lLisog. 5 ih, Rt. Al tok 75a, b ;..V,5205.
S16, tl. O40 s420 5 308 8 Ib., fol. 28a; V, 79.
A105: fols 94a sy 12937. 7 10., Ped fols 20.3. 1.178.

8 Gen. ii.23. The interpretation of this text in this strange mannet is like an opening
into a great vista of the Secret Dorine.
*'Tb., fol. 66b ; I, 391.

374 THE HOLY KABBALAH

feet are near, it is difficult to find anything more complete in
its correspondence than such words as “ bone of my bones
and flesh of my flesh,” 1 and the use of the text—so long as
it is apart from the context—happens to be a true one, though
it is about as literal in its application as is the tale of the Garden
of Eden. So also when the Zonar wishes to apply that idea
of a “ field which the Lord hath blessed ” ? to the Mystery of
Sex, it is not above saying that the King who “tills the
field’? or is “served by the field” is the Shekinah, sex-
contradiction notwithstanding. The objed is to indicate that
the dwelling of Shekinah in the house of those who are
mattied is to bring about the descent .of souls to animate
children under her presidency.t But perhaps there was
never an instance so much to our purpose as the statement
that on the day when the Song of Solomon was revealed
below, the Shekinah descended '—as if for the first time,
though we know that she had been with man from the
beginning and had shared in the whole creation. The
object, however, is to shew that this glorious canticle is the
world’s history of her in man, the beginning and end of all
that belongs to the union, the Mystery of the Lover and the
Beloved throughout the ages of election. It is the summary
of Holy Scripture ; it is the work of creation, the mystery of
the patriarchs, the exile in Egypt, the exodus of Israel, the
Decalogue and manifestation on Sinai, the emblem of all
events during the sojourn in the desert, thence to the entrance
into the Holy Land and so forward to the building of the
Holy Temple. It is also a summary of the Mystery contained
in the Sacred and Supreme Name, of the dispersal of Israel
through the nations, of its deliverance to come, the resur-
rection of the dead and the events leading up to that day
which is called the Sabbath of the Lord. In a word, it
contains all that hath been, is and ever shall be, for it is the
Story of that Isis who is Shekinah, from the first verses

* Gen. i. 25,

exalt, 27.

8 Eccles. ve9. The Authorised Vetsion says: “‘ The King is served by the field.”
Cf. Vulgate: E# insuper universe terre rex imperat servienti, and the Douay tendering :
“Moreover there is the King that reigneth over all the land subjeé& to him.”—
Eccles. v. 8.

« 7... Pt. Ap fol, t22a';IE, or, 92:

5 Jb., Pt. Il, fol. 143b; IV, 55. The putative authority is I. Kings viii, 11: “‘ So
that the priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud ; for the glory of the
Lord had filled the house of the Lord.”

THE MYSTERY OF SHEKINAH 375

concerning the kisses of his mouth to the last rapture on the
mountain of spices.4

Now, it is said that there is desire on the part of man to be
united with the Mother in transcendence as well as with the
Mother below, to attain her by perfeétion and to be blessed
on account of her.2 We know that this is a desire for Divine
Union because Jehovah is Elohim, and in case such testimony.
should not be found full or sufficient, the Zouar adds else-
where that the memorable words: “1am that Iam ” signify
in their inward sense: “I, the Holy One, blessed be He, am
the Shekinah.” $ It is certain that the state of union is not
only deeper than the state of vision but differs generically
therefrom, and I cannot say that I have found plenary Zoharic
authority for the attainment of Divine Union in that proper
sense of the term which is to be desired by the heart of the
mystic. But the implicits are in many places, for we have
seen that Shekinah is within. It is more often vision which
is promised to the blessed in the world beyond, to gaze upon
the face of Shekinah,* as in a substituted state of union, and
the title must be earned in this life by the following of the
path of purity.5 It is affirmed in reference to this that those
only who quit the lower world in the grace of Shekinah are
judged worthy of eternal life.6 So also there are some who
do not die as men die commonly, but are ravished by the
attraction which Shekinah exercises on their souls.’ The
Mother in transcendence is, however, like the Mother below,
and spiritual communion with her is in so far as man has
become a house or abode by attaching himself to the female :
it is then that the Divine Mother pours down her blessings on
both.®

There is—in the true sense of this term—a spiritual union
below for the Sons of the Doétrine, so that they are encom-
passed by two females ®9—the wife who is on earth and
the Unseen Helpmate. After what manner her presence is

1 Z., Pt. II, fol. 1446; Dx Pauty, IV, 55, 56. It should be understood that while
I have not given an aétual translation of the passage I have kept faithfully to its sense.
My readers may recognise with myself at this stage that, with due regard to the logical
inviolability of distinét schools of symbolism, all Sufic imagery concerning the Lover
and Beloved belongs to Shekinah and might have come forth with all its adornments
from the Secret Tradition in Israel and its intimations on Marrona and TABOONAH.

2 It is a question of integration in the Zoharic law of correspondences.

2 1b., Pt. Lfoloaga \Ipingok 7 Ib., fol. 16b; II, 99.
4 Ib., Pt. Hl, fol. 4ob ; III, 189. 8 Ib., fol. 50a; I, 292.
5 Ib., fol. Gob ; Il, 268, 269. 9 Tb,

ele Pts l, fol Gzai Lo 4gs>

H.K. cc

376 THE HOLY KABBALAH

realised never transpires definitely in the text, but—as there
is no need to say—it is by spiritual apprehension only.
Curiously enough, this does not appear at its best in con-
nection with views on the nuptial state itself but in discourses
of the Sons of the Doétrine on the Traditional Law : they are
conscious then of the presence of Shekinah and testify respect-
ing it continually with no uncertain voice. It must be said
that the women of Israel are never present at the debates,}
but their place in the house insured that of the Divinity.
When, however, the master of the Law was going by himself
upon a journey, and when, technically speaking, the male was
to be apart from the female, he was not. for that reason in a
State of separation from Shekinah, supposing that he had
prayed to the Holy One before starting,? in order to maintain
the union between male and female abroad as well as at home.
Another condition was that he must watch over all his
actions in every phase of life: otherwise he might be
separated from his Spiritual Companion, putting a stop to the
union and rendering himself an incomplete being.

It is scarcely desirable at this stage to speak of anything so
obvious and familiar as the known characteristics of oriental
imagery, to recall for example the personifications of Wisdom
in the books ascribed to King Solomon; but the literary
vestures of these experienced two curious developments.
The titles and offices of the Hebrew CHoxmMan were raised
bodily from their setting and transferred to the Blessed Virgin
by the compilers of the Roman Breviary, while through
another channel they passed over to the Gnostic SopHra and
by a last transition into the Virgin Wisdom of Jacob Bohme
and the later mystics of his school. The correspondences
between Shekinah and the Christian Mother of God are rather
plausible on the surface and may be deceptive to that extent,
because shallow analogies still deceive many; but even the
unusual predispositions which led up to the French translation
of the ZoHar have not permitted its editors to postulate that
Shekinah is a veil of Mary. The correspondences between
the Indwelling Glory and the Virgin Sophia of BGhme are so
much closer that they cannot fail to create an impression that

1 I remember, however, that thete is a solitary exception in favour of an innkeeper’s
daughter, who was ptesent when her husband exhibited his knowledge of the Hidden
Law before a company of adepts.—Z., Pt, II., fol. 166a; IV, 111.

£74, .0t) Ioouaob : AL, 289. 3 Ib., fol. 50a; I, 289.

THE MYSTERY OF SHEKINAH 377

the German Theosophist owed something to this source.
There is nothing in his life to suggest that he was taught in
any sectet schools or was in communication with persons
who were acquainted with the Secret Doétrine in Israel,
though there were many Kabbalistic scholars at his period.
There is one possible alternative—that the root-matter of
Jewish tradition in the Scriptures of the Old Testament
developed in his own consciousness, to some extent after the
same manner as it did in that of the Sons of the Doétrine, so
that in his case, as in others without number, it proved that
true men and seers spoke the same language because they
belonged to the same region of thought. They saw also in
the same glass of vision. But the question, however in-
teresting, is not of our real concern.

We have now considered the Shekinah in the light of all
her attributes. I do not believe that I have omitted a single
reference of the least importance found in the text of the
ZouAR, while all have been regarded critically. The con-
clusion reached is that Shekinah, as the president of a Mystery
of Sex, is the direG@ion in which we must look if—as labourers
in this strange field—we are to obtain our wages. ‘The other
intimations are excellent and agreeable in their way, but that
which we seek, in what is for us an untrodden region of
thought, is some new message, which is not to be found in
the other offices, qualities and virtues that characterise the
Holy Guide of Jewry. I suppose that, here in conclusion, I
have no real need to say that the Secret Doétrine in Israel is
not one of sex only, though intimations concerning the latter
are found everywhere. Eschatology, for example, is not of
this order, nor are the parts of the soul in man, but with these
things and with several others that are like them I have dealt
at their value. |

Il.—THE MYSTERY OF SEX

I am entering in this division upon that part of my task
which is at once most important and difficult. It may be an
open question whether I should begin at the highest point of
the research and thence work downward or take the opposite
course and so—as the proverb counsels—proceed from small
beginnings to the greater end. That is best which seems the
simplest, and I have therefore chosen to work upwards from

Cc 2

378 THE HOLY KABBALAH

below. I will cite in the first place certain great axioms of
the whole subject—as these have been proclaimed on the
authority of the masters. It is testified that the union of the
male and female must be a perfe& union in the Mystery of
Faith.1 There is also another testimony, and this is that the
title to behold the face of Shekinah is one of purity,? the
scholium on which—though it lies far away in the text—is
that modesty is the union of the male and female ;2 and it
may be remembered in this connection that the most cryptic
of all texts in the ZoHaR—containing the mysteries of Divine
Personalities—is called THE Book oF CONCEALMENT OR OF
Mopgsty. ‘These things being so, we may consider in the
next place what is said on the subject of espousals, as these
are known on earth. There is one definition which is in
keeping with the Tradition at large, and this is that marriage
is the union of the Sacred Name here below 4—that is, its
completion in each person. ‘The thesis appertaining hereto
is that circumcision is the symbol of all purity in sexual
intercourse ;° that Israel is placed on this account in purity
as a starting-point and enters under the wings of Shekinah.®
This sacred sign of the Covenant constitutes the root-matter
of the Sacred Name and of the Mystery of Faith.? As the
sun enlightens the world, so the sacred sign enlightens the
body ; as a buckler protects man, so does this: no evil spirit
can approach him who preserves it in purity.8 But as the
advantage is greater with which the children of Israel begin
their earthly life, so is the responsibility greater if they make
the Covenant of no effect in their own persons.

Now, the Sacred Name is never attached to an incomplete
man, being one who is unmarried, or one who dies without
issue.? Such a person does not penetrate after death into the
vestibule of Paradise,!° on account of his incompleteness. He
is like a tree that is rooted up, and he must be planted anew—
that is to say, he must suffer rebirth, as we have seen, in order

aay, Pt. 1, fol: tor; dizi.

2 Jb., Pt. III, fol. 213a; V, 542; 2b., Pt. I, fol. Gob; II, 268, 269.

3 Jb., Pt. III, fol. 145b; V, 375. Man is perfe€&t only when he comprises male and
female ; it is then that he fears sin and then that the title of modest is conferred upon
him. But here is the sum of the whole subje& passing into expression at the highest.

«30. Pt. Uh fol 7a; 'V, 18.

5 Jb., Pt. I, Appendix III, Secrets oF THE Law ; II, 721, 722.

6 Ib., fol. 95a; I, 543. ® Ib., Pt. I, fol. 48a; I, 278.

7 1b. Pt. Ui, fol, 3b; LL, 10, 10 Ib., fol. 66a; I, 388; sb., fol. 48a; I, 278.

8 Ib.

THE MYSTERY OF SEX 379

that the Sacred Name may be completed in all dire¢tions.1
The command to increase and multiply, which means the
ptocreation and engendering of children, is to spread the
radiance of the Sacred Name in every direétion, by collecting
spitits and souls which constitute the glory of the Holy one—
above and below. Whosoever fails to apply himself to the
fulfilment of this command diminishes the figure of his Master
and prevents it descending here below.?. The last statement
refers of course to the making of man, male and female, in
the likeness of the Elohim. It is said also that the paucity in
the descent of souls is the reason why Shekinah does not
come down into this world,? with which is to be compared
the affirmed presence as the Indwelling Glory throughout the
whole creation. God blessed Adam because they were made
together male and female, and blessings are found only where
male and female are united for the fulfilment of the purpose
of creation,* which—according to the counsel of the Elohim—
was to increase, multiply and replenish the earth. It was not
good for man to be alone because this end was in a state of
frustration. It may be even that the Zoharic legend concern-
ing male and female being originally side by side is only a
veiled way of indicating that they were not in the marital
estate.© Afterwards they were face to face, signifying the
fulfilment of the precept. |

I have now dealt briefly with what may be called the
principles at issue, and we have next to see after what manner
those who exalted so highly the nuptial state gave instruction,
so to speak, on its practice here below. The doétrine was that
no mattiage is made on earth before it is proclaimed in
heaven, and that the Holy One accomplishes unions in the
world above before the descent of souls on earth.6 About

MIP Cus) Pte tol. G6as/ 1) 388s 2b. fol..asa's Tj 2780). Ibs fol ogeb 31h Gar.

3 Z., Pt. I, fol. 272b; Hl, 641. The reference is really to her manifestation and not
to her immanence. She stands at the door and knocks, but those who should welcome
her in keep fast their precin€ts and tyle their portals. This, however, is symbolism ;
it is more true to say that we fail to realise her presence in our consciences.

SUP ME itor bs a's) d eas

5 T have put this tentatively, as I wish to leave some conclusions in the hands of my
readers ; but there is no question that Zoharic teaching is clear on the point, not only
in what it implies but in what is expressed frequently. Whether there was ever such
an epoch in the history of the human soul is another question. We must remember
that the objeé of the soul’s legends is not the delineation of putative histories, but the
symbolical administration of possibilities inherent in the soul. That which is indicated
here is a transcendental union between the Lover and Beloved, of which the nuptial
union on earth is a type and to which it may be a path of approach.

© Ib., fol. 229a; Il, 503.

380 THE HOLY KABBALAH

the last point we shall see at a later stage. In practice the
Sons of the Doétrine were separated as far from the un-
initiated world of Israel as the chosen people at large were
separated ex hypothest by the fact of their circumcision.
There is a particular sense in which it is held that the union
here below between husband and wife is the work of the
Holy One, and herefrom, as from other considerations, arises
the sanctity and necessity of that act which is implied by the
word union. After what manner the Divine is said to
intervene therein, or perhaps I should say to overshadow it,
is indicated by the theory that man is formed below on the
model of that which is above.? It follows that he who, in
Zohatic terminology, suffers his fount to fail and produces
no fruits here—whether because he will not take a wife,
whether his wife is barren, or whether he abides with her in a
way that is against Nature—commits an irreparable crime.?
“Tt is vain... to sit up late” * are words that designate
those who do not marry till an advanced age, for it is woman
who constitutes the repose of man.®? Hereof, according to
the text, is the peace of espousals, and in further variation of
the testimony which recurs continually, it is added that man
shall participate in the world to come because he has entered
during this life into the joy of living honourably with his
wife. ‘The reason is that soul as well as body shares in the
gaudium inexprimabile by which children are engendered.
This is the eroticism which characterises the Zor, according
to commentators: but as the Doctors of the Law beheld the
Supreme Mystery in sex, it is obvious that whatever belongs
thereto is explained thereby.’

_ And now as tegards the practice, the thesis is that whoever

1 Z., Pt. & fol. 186b-; H,337.

2 Tb., fol. 186b; II, 338.

3 Tb.

4 Ps.;CxENil.,2.

5 Z., Pt. I, fol. 187a; Il, 340. See also Pt. III, fol. 108a; V, 274, whete it is said,
on the authority of Rabbi Eleazar, son of Rabbi Simeon, that the HE is the tepose of
beings above and below—above being the rest of the Shekinah in transcendence and
below of the Shekinah in manifestation.

6 Ib., Pt. I, fol. 90b; I, 515; «#b., Appendix TI, Secrer Miprasu, fol. 14b, 15a;
II, 694; 2b., fol. 187a; II, 340.

7 It is about the worst word that could be sele&ted by a scholar and a critic who is
alive to the issues of his subje&t. Coventry Patmore’s young lady thought that the
sacrament of matriage was rather a wicked sacrament, but the Zohar raises it into
realms of which Christian Churches have never dreamed, though I have met with
some rare aspects of Latin Theology which seem to indicate that a Redeemer may live
hidden therein.

THE MYSTERY OF SEX 381

sanctifies himself at the moment of intercourse shall have
children who will not fear the tempter-spirit. This is the
consequence tespecting the fruit of marriages, but there is
also a consequence within the measures of the union itself, so
that it is raised from the physical into a spiritual degree, from
the mode of Nature into the mode of Grace.! The fulfilment
of a particular precept is the condition attaching hereto and
this is the raising of the heart and mind on the part of the
Lover and Beloved, to the Most Holy Shekinah, the glory
which cohabits and indwells, during the external a&t.2, The
absconditus sponsus entets into the body of the woman and is
joined with the abscondita sponsa.> ‘This is true also on the
reverse side of the process, so that two spirits are melted
together and are interchanged constantly between body and
_ body. The sexes are then interchanged also in a sense, as

the sex of METATRON is said to be transformed momently
before the veil of palms and pomegranates on the threshold
of the Inmost Shrine in the Supernals.* In the indistinguish-
able state which arises it may be said almost that the male is
with the female neither male nor female: at least they are
both or either. So is man affirmed to be composed of the
wotld above, which is male, and of the female world below.®
The same is true of woman.

Now accotding to the Zounar those words in the Song of
Solomon: ‘“‘ Thy breasts are better than wine” ® refer to
that wine which provokes joy and desire ; and seeing that—
in an alternative manner of language—all things are formed
above according to a pattern which is reproduced faithfully
below, it is held to follow that when desire awakens beneath
it awakens also on high.” Herein lies the sandtity of espousals

1 It is added significantly that herein the Holy One exercises such providence over
man that he may not be lost in the world to come.

2 There are many references, but perhaps the most signal is Z., Pt. I, fol. 50a ; I, 290.

Sipeee i. fol. to1b ; 111. 410.

4 This intimates what, by the hypothesis, can be accomplished in nuptials, through
the purification of body and mind, towards the union of souls. The statement in the
ZOHAR On which my words ate based seems to contain the elements of the whole
mystery on the manifest side and after what manner that which is now only mutual in a
complete distin&ion may be unified by experience in consciousness, I am somewhat
veiling my meaning because it is not possible to speak ad clerum.

§ Zap Pte Ny fol. rsh cig £28:

§ In the majority of Scriptural quotations the translator of the Zohar has done his
best to conform his rendering to the Vulgate : it was of course unlikely that he would
follow any other version, and I am stating the fa& only to shew that he has seldom
translated de novo. Our Authorised Version of I, 2, reads: “‘ Thy love is better than
wine,” and the Vulgate: Oxia meliora sunt ubera tua vino,

RoZo Pt ET fol Joay bei §-

382 | THE HOLY KABBALAH

on earth and herefrom depends the need for exalting that
sanctity and all that belongs to espousals into the highest
grade. There are however two classes whose tespective
duties differ with the degrees of their eleGion; there are
those who are termed ordinary mortals, meaning the rank
and file of the chosen people, but there are also the Sons of
the Doétrine, chosen among the chosen out of thousands,
The counsel imposed on the first class is to sanétify their
conjugal relations in respect of the time thereof, which is
fixed at midnight, or forwatd from that hour, the reason
being that God descends then into Paradise and the offices of
sanctity are operating in the plenary sense. But this is the
time when the counsel to the Sons of the Doétrine is that they
should arise for the study of the Law, for union thereby with
the Community of Israel above and for the praise of the
Sacred Name of God.+

The Sons of the Doérine are described as reserving con-
jugal relations for the night of the Sabbath, being the moment
when the Holy One is united to the Community of Israel.?
The thesis is that God is One and as such it is agreeable to
Him that He should be concerned with a single people.
Out of this arises the question as to when man may be called
one, and the answer is that this comes about when the male
is united to the female in a holy purpose: it is then that man
is complete, is one and is without blemish.? It is of this that
the man and the woman must think at the moment of their
union ; it is in uniting bodies and souls that the two become
one; man in particular is termed one and perfect ; he draws
down the Holy Spirit upon him and is called the Son of the
Holy One, blessed be He.* According to Rabbi Simeon, the

1:Z., Pt. Tl, fol. 81a; V, 224.

*°7b., Pt. 1, fol. 14a) b 3.1 ,).82ie1b., Pts fol. 81a'$) V, 224.

3 Ib.

4 Ib., fol. 81b; V, 224. The intention here seems obvious, and it is to shew that
beyond that process indicated by Gen. ii. 24, when it is said that “ they shall be one
flesh,” there is another and higher process, in the fulfilment of which it is possible that
they shall be one soul. The one is not, however, without the other, and this is a point
to be marked because the contrary idea may be presented to some minds. The follow-
ing curious speculation should be noticed in this conneétion. It is affirmed that the
words: “In the beginning God created ” (Gen. i. 1) conceal the same mystery as
those other words: ‘“‘ And the rib which the Lord God had taken from man made
He a woman ” (Ib., ii. 22). In “‘ God created the heaven ” the two last words conceal
the same mystery as the words: “‘ And brought her unto the man ” (Ib., ii. 22). In
“* God created the heaven and the earth ” the three last words conceal the same mystery
as ‘‘ bone of my bones ” (#b., ii. 23). All designate “ the earth of life.’”—Z., Pt. I,
fol. sob; I, 293, 294. Butit is said also that the words “ the heaven ” signify Shekinah

THE MYSTERY OF SEX 383

relations of the patriarchs with their wives were actuated by a
Supreme Mystery.1 So long as Jacob was unmarried, God
did not manifest to him clearly, and this mystery is familiar to
those who are acquainted with the ways of the Law. After
marriage he arrived at the perfection which is above, as
distinguished from the perfection which is below, and God
manifested to him clearly.2. The explanation seems to be that
the Supreme Wisdom is a Mystery of Sex,® as intimated on
my own patt previously.

Out of these considerations there arose a very curious
question, of which I must speak at some length because—in
its way—it is a characteristic development on the practical
side and, within certain measures, it carries our subject
further. The principle is that the male must be always
attached to the female for the Shekinah ever to be with him.
All holiness might be practised, the Secret Do&trine might be
Studied by night and by day, and the illuminations thereof
might overflow the intelletual part; but failing fulfilment
of this radical counsel a man was not on the way which leads
into true life. He was in that condition in which “ it is not
good for man to be” &—alone, like Adam in the Garden.’
But those who had the precept at heart and were therefore
complete men, by their union with women on earth, remind
us in one particular of many Sons of Israel and Students of
Do@trine in the Middle Ages: they were travellers in search
of wisdom ; and they were also men of affairs, workers in the
vineyard of this world as well as in the Garden of God. The
ZOHAR is full of their little journeys and these, so far as
possible, were taken one with another, that the Secret Doétrine
might be studied on the way and that the presence of Shekinah
might be secured thus for their consolation, protection and
instruction as they fared forward. Great adventures befell
them in the sense of the Mysteries of Doétrine, for strange

above, while the words ‘‘ and the earth ’’ denote Shekinah below, whose union shall
be as perfe& on a glorious day to come as the union of the male and the female.—2Z.,

Pe: Ts tor fobs) T2905:
1 Jb., Pt. I, fol. 133b; II, 126. 2.5 Et. Dy fol. Tyob oI; 193;
® 1b. fol. 1300-1 U1; 192: * Ib., fol. 49b; I, 280.

5 There was otherwise a certain dispensation for the Sons of the Doétrine in respe&
of the fruit of intercourse. On the assumption that there was no issue they appear
to have been spared the penalty of return into incarnation.

6 Gen. ii. 18.

7 He was held to be in a State of sickness, and as such was to be isolated from the
offices of the altar. Only a man completed, and in this sense made perfeét, by union
with a woman, could offer sacrifice.—Z., Pt. III, fol. 5b; V, 12.

384 THE HOLY KABBALAH

people went about in those days carrying, unknown to one
another, the treasures of hidden knowledge. It was after all
an unincorporated fraternity, and though it looks differently
there and here, initiation was by a segregating principle, not
by communication from a common centre of knowledge.
The son of an instructed doctor might have advanced a great
distance unknown to others, while occasionally an isolated
student entered by his own refleGtions, and by grace descend-
ing into the heart, into the golden chain of tradition, so that
he was not less in an illuminated state than if he had sat at
the feet of Rabbi Simeon through the days and the years.
Now, journeys in search of wisdom or in the prosecution
of business—which, it may be mentioned, was often of a
humble kind—meant separation from the wife of the doctot’s
household, and this would seem at first sight to involve
separation from Shekinah.1 To remove this difficulty it was
held sufficient (2) that the doctor should pray to the Holy
One before starting, and (6) should watch over all his a€tions
during the period of absence from home.* He would not be
separated then from his spiritual companion, nor would he
put that stop to the union between male and female which
would render him an incomplete being. It was understood
further that the counsel which prevailed abroad must prevail
at home also, so that what was inculcated was really a precept
of life. I feel that this might have been almost taken for a
point of departure in respect of the Cohabiting Glory, if con-
siderations of a different kind had not intervened. It occurs
early in the ZonaR—as a fadt, in the first section—and con-
cerning the Great Presence it postulates the dwelling of
Shekinah with man. The word cohabiting seems to be the
correct word here, though it was obviously in an inward

1 The position is a little fantastic, because in such case the same danger might arise
from the isolation of a single hour: moreover, the notion discounts the whole value
of unions realised in spirit and in truth, appearing to make physical contiguity more
important than that nearness of heart which spatial considerations do not help or
hinder. But the question seems raised in reality because it is an opportunity to enforce
a ptatice of inward dedication after the best manner of the ZoHar. As usual, the
peg answers because it supports this lesson.

2 Z., Pt. I, fol. 49b; 50a; J, 289.

3 Tt is said elsewhere that Shekinah never separates from man so long as he observes
the commandments of the Law.—2Z., fol. 232a; II, 516. The authority is: ‘‘ Behold
I send an angel before thee, to keep thee in the way ” (Ex. xxiii. 20); and: “I will
send an angel before thee ” (#b., xxxiii. 2). This is held to be the Liberating Angel
to whom Jacob made allusion (Gen. xlviii. 16), who watches over man, who receives
blessings from above and distributes them below.—2Z., Pt. I, fol. 230a; II, 508; and
fol. 228b; I, 502.

THE MYSTERY OF SEX 385

sense only that the Shekinah accompanied the Sons of the
Do€trine in their recurring voyages and ventures. If not
indwelling, she was their overshadowing grace and power ;
but they seem to have been conscious of a certain marriage
State—spiritually realised—in their relation with her, though
it was of course collective and not personal. Alternatively,
there is a sense in which it was peculiar and catholic at one
time, and this is an important point of analogy between the
Holy Guide of the Sons of the Doétrine and that Christ Who
is the Spouse of the soul. That this, however, is per se an
insufficient ground for the identification of the two Divine
Principles we are likely to see at the end. I need not add
that the Shekinah appears throughout this section of the
symbolism as distintively feminine.

Recurring to the text, after having made these lawful
inferences therefrom, the ZoHAR—with Rabbi Simeon as the
mouthpiece of its teaching—is comprehensive and precise in
its justice after the manner which obtains throughout. It is
not in virtue of the man being side by side with the woman,
as the legend depicts him previously, that Shekinah abides
with man.! We have seen that this ancient mode was before
all things imperfect. The man and the woman must be face
to face, at once in the continuity and restrictions of the sacred
mystical a&. So also when, after days and weeks of travel,
the Son of Doé@trine returns to his home he must procure
nuptial gratification to the wife of his heart, seeing that he
has had the advantage of mystical union in his absence with
the Companion or Helpmate who is on high.?_ In the deepest
understanding of the subject, the one belongs to the other,
that which is without being Zoharically as that which is
within, and all the correspondences being aspects of one
thing seen and done upon different planes of being. The
external and expressed reason is, however, twofold: (1) be-

1 See, among other places, Z., Pt. I, fol. 49a; I, 284. I suppose that the reason is
obvious from the Zoharic standpoint: contiguity is not union. It is obvious also,
or should be, that we are not considering a Siamese-Twins symbolical legend. What
lies at the heart of the story, regarded as hypothetically something of the far past,
would be very difficult to decide if it were to be regarded as one of fact. It belongs
to “‘ the hunger and thirst of the heart ” after a way to the blessed life through earthly
espousals. Surely the Sons of the Doétrine must have found in their own marriages
pearls of great price which their heirs have lost now, and of which we have not even
dreamed. And yet we continue to hear rough things about the position of woman-
hood in Israel, sometimes even from converted Jews like that Chevalier Drach who
chaffered and trafficked in his conversion—as it seems to me, more than enough.

2° Z.; Pts 1; fol.50a, 3, 1g 200%

386 THE HOLY KABBALAH

cause there is Talmudic authority that conjugal relations on
returning from a joutney constitute a good work? and (2)
evety pleasure resulting from a good work is shared by
Shekinah.? Furthermore, it is in such pleasure that the
peace of the house is maintained, for the ZoHAR is much too
modest and inclined spiritually to have any shyness over the
physical and emotional fa&s of daily life. The Scriptural
authority, obtained after the usual manner, is contained in the
words: “ Thou shalt know that thy tabernacle shall be in
peace; and thou shalt visit thy habitation, and shalt not
sin.’ 3 To abstain from conjugal relations in such a case
would be indeed sinful, depreciating the work of the Com-
panion on high, who cleaves to the man, but thanks only to
his own union with his wife. If subsequently there be fruit
of this intercourse, the Heavenly Companion will provide a
holy soul for the new-born child, the Shekinah being that
Covenant which is termed : Covenant of the Holy One. The
tule on return from a journey must be fulfilled therefore with
the same zeal as the ordinance laid down by the wise regarding
the restriction of conjugal relations to the day of the Sabbath,
and it is apparently the only recognised exception thereto in
the matter of times and seasons, unless of course an exception
is made by Nature.

_ Finally, and this, which is assuredly a most strange, and
within my experience of the sacred literature, an unique
counsel, has been cited already: when man has in view the
Shekinah® at the moment of his conjugal relations the
pleasure which he experiences is a meritorious work. The
reason—which has been explained also—is that the union
below is an image of the union that is above. The mystery
of the whole subje& is the now familiar dogma that the
Mother in transcendence abides with the male only in so far
as he has constituted himself a house by his attachment to the
female: there must be a local habitation, an union below to
offer a point of contac with the union that is on high, and

1 See Talmud, Tra&t YEBAMOTH.

2 Z., Pt. I, fol. 50a; I, 290. She who suffers with Israel enters into joy with him.

3 Job v. 24.

£175 Pti1/tol.*s0a 1; 290.

5 It is part of the contemplation of the absent and higher beauty in union with that
beauty which, albeit lower, is present, manifest and is or may become sacramental.
It is a memorial also that the union which is of time has, or may attain, a part in the
union which is eternal, described in one place as the contemplation of the beauty of
Shekinah, already mentioned.—Ib., Pt. II, fol. 116a ; Ill, 448, 449.

THE MYSTERY OF SEX 387

then the Divine Mother pours down her blessings therefrom—

that is to say, on male and female in equal measures.’ So is
the male below said to be encompassed by two females, and
all the ways of blessing in the two worlds are open before
him.? He reads the Secret Do&rine in the womanhood on
earth, and it is read to him by her who sits between the Pillars
of the Eternal Temple with the Book of the Secret Law lying
open on her sacred knees.

Among its lesser objects the counsel concerning the
Sabbath Day and the telations therein offers proof to the
spirits of the evil side respeGting the superiority of those on
the side of goodness, meaning mankind, who being provided
with bodies can fulfil the duties of procreation.4 Whosoever
has intercoutse with his spouse, on what day soever, must
obtain her consent beforehand with words of affection and
tenderness ; failing consent, he should proceed no further,
for the a@ of union must be willing and not constrained.°
Nuptial intercourse is interdi¢ted during the day because of
the words: “‘ And he lighted upon a certain place, and
tarried there all night, because the sun was set.” ® Subject
to these and the rest of the provisions, some of which I have
omitted, because of their difficulties of expression,’ it is
affirmed that blessed are those who sanctify the Sabbath Day
by intercourse with their wives ; for the Sons of the Doétrine
it is a work consecrated to the Holy One, because the union
of Matrona with the heavenly King has for its object to send

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 50a; I, 291. It is said also that Shekinah does the will of the master
of the house.—Ib., fol. 236b ; II, 532. The reference on the surface is to Moses.

2 Ib., fol. 50a; I, 292.

8 It is important to note here what is involved by the illustration as a whole—
namely, that man in his union with woman becomes a house in which the Divine
Presence can dwell. Let us take another illustration, which is excellent and indeed
admirable in its symbolism. The eye of man is said to be an image of the world ;
the white of the eye is an image of the great ocean by which earth is encompassed,
and the latter is represented by the “ internal circle” of the eye. Within this there is
another circle, and it is called the image of Jerusalem, centre of the whole world.
Finally there is the pupil, which corresponds to Zion, and this is the abode of Shekinah.—
Ib., fol. 226a ; II, 490, 491. So also there are the parts of human personality—physical
and mental parts—and there is the conscious centre wherein is the Divine Presence,
awaiting realisation within us. The thesis is that marriage is a condition of realisation.

# Det tO, LAdy Do IeS 2s S40

S18... Tok. 403, bis), 236:

* Gentxxviny ri Z. Ptr tok-4ob'? I; 286.

7 In view of the sanétity which the Zohar attributes to the sex-act under the obedience
of purity—which is marriage—thetre was a prohibition respecting its performance in
nuditate personarum. ‘Those who ignore it are subje& to the visitation of demons and
will produce epileptic children obsessed by Lilith. This is the case more especially
if the light of a lamp is used. I do not know whether this has Talmudic authority,—
ee dy fal. t4b 3d 83.

388 THE HOLY KABBALAH

down holy souls into this world, and the colleagues on earth
seek to attract these sacred souls into their own children.1
The theory of conception is that the Holy One and His
Shekinah furnish the soul, while the father and mother
provide the body between them 2—heaven, earth and all the
stars of heaven being associated in the formation, together
with the angels. By the desire which the man experiences
for the woman and the woman for the man at the moment of
their intercourse, their seeds are interblended and produce a
child which is said to have two figures, one within the other.
The child in this way draws life from father and mother, and
this is why there should be some kind of sanétification for all
classes at the moment of conjugal union, so that the child
about to be born may be perfect and complete in figure.*
The Secret of Divine Generation is however a Secret of the
Doétrine and is reserved for the initiated therein; it is
apparently they alone who draw down the holy souls which
are the fruit of the union between God and His Shekinah.
But there are various kinds and generations of souls, some
being superior to others, and when the desire—apparently of
the ordinary man—provokes in an equal degree the desire of
the male soul for the female soul, the child born of this union
will have a soul superior to that of other men, since its bitth
has come about by desire of the Tree of Life.®

These things are clear issues at their value, and in looking
at them from the standpoint of Israel we must make allowance
for national exclusiveness in what is said about holy souls
which can only become incarnate in Jewry. We must make
allowance also for that which by inference from the teaching
might be supposed to befall the barren woman. In con-
clusion as to this part, it is affirmed that the Sons of the
Do@trine, knowing the Mysteries of the Doétrine, turned all
their thoughts to God, and their children were called Sons of
the King. But those whose marital relations were not

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 50a; I, 290. Ib., Pt. Tl, fol. 89b; TH, 363.
2 Ib., Pt. Ill, fol. 219b, THE FarrHrut SHEPHERD; V, 556.
3 Ib

+71). (Pt. 4, fol. gobs A, gi4, $15:

5 Ib., fol. 209a; II, 437. This also is important because of that which it implies.
The frigid, uninspired unions of pro forma marriages ate, by this hypothesis, useless
for the higher purposes: there must be mutual and equilibrated desire, upspringing
from love, and such desire must be transmuted by the tin€ture of Divine Aspirations.

6 Here then is the counsel of espousals: Mens sana in corpore sano et spiritus Deo
adherens ; but such cleaving is in vittue of love uplifted through all the worlds.—See
Dx BRL SOL ea ey 273%

THE MYSTERY OF SEX 389

encompassed with sanctity caused a breach in the world
above.

The religion of earthly espousals, if I may so term it, is the
part in manifestation of that which is called so frequently the
Mystery of Faith, and I will proceed next to the consideration
of what is intimated there and here on this subje@. In the
words “male and female created He them” ? there is ex-
pressed the Supreme Mystery which constitutes the glory of
God, is inaccessible to human intelligence and is the object
of faith. By this mystery was man created, as also the
heaven and the earth.? It is inferred that every figure which
does not represent male and female has no likeness to the
heavenly figure. This is why Scripture says that God
“blessed them and called their name Adam in the day when
they were created.”4 The Scriptural authority for the
affirmation that there is a Mystery of Faith is drawn from
several soutces, but without exception on the /wcus a non
lucendo principle, as it is impossible to conceive where it lies
in the texts or what it can be on the evidence of their surface
meaning. I will group a few of them together and let them
speak for themselves. (1) ‘““O Lord, Thou art my God; I
will exalt Thee. I will praise Thy Name; for Thou hast
done wonderful things ; Thy counsels of old are faithfulness
and truth:7 5, (2). “And. -his ,hand) took, hold .on ,,Esau’s
heel.” § (3) “ Thus the heavens and the earth were finished,
and all the host of them,” ’ e¢ seg. This is said to be the
Great Mystery. (4) “I will sing unto the Lord, for He hath
triumphed gloriously: the horse and his rider hath He
thrown into the sea,” § e¢ seg. Among the intimations which
rest upon the ZoHar there are many which seem designed
almost obviously to confuse the issues and misdirect research
thereon. The Mystery is said to consist in the examination
of good and evil and then in cleaving to the good.® It is

1 It is said also that woman is the image of the altar, from which it seems to follow
in the symbolism that man is the priest, and then of the oblations there should be no
need to speak. It is said further, in this connection, that divorce makes a breach in
the altar—in the altar below, because there is sepatation between male and female, and
in the altar above, by the Kabbalistic hypothesis of correspondence between things
above and below.—Z.., Pt. Il, fol. 1o2b, 103a; III,415. See also zb., Pt. IL, fol. 78a;

V, 213.
*Gen. 229% SGM ASEM 26. Zeer, bits, J, LOL, T9OR 5
5 Zu, Wt, ital $6 5,320: LH, 387.
SeGens. v.72. eas it, x.
B16.) SEW ich: 8 Ex) vl.

® Z., Pt. I, fol. 34a; Il, 166.

390 THE HOLY KABBALAH

said again to be contained in the fact that Zion constitutes the
foundation and beauty of the world and that the world draws
its nourishment therefrom.4' There is Zion, which is severity,
and there is Jerusalem, which is mercy ; but the two ate one.?
We may say in respect of both that goodness and mercy are
on the male side of the Sephirotic Tree, while evil and severity
are on the female side; that these two must be united by the
Middle Pillar: that this is entering under the wings of
Shekinah ; and that when they are thus joined, goodness,
joy and beauty are found everywhere. We shall speak in
this manner the characteristic language of the Zouar and
might deserve the blessing of Rabbi Simeon; but we shall
not have advanced our subject by one line or syllable belong-
ing to a line. We must therefore go further and test the
values of a few less obdurate extras. |

There are forty-nine gates of compassion which connect
with the mystery of the perfect man, composed of male and
female, and with the Mystery of Faith. These are the Gates
of Understanding referable to Bryau,* wherein dwells the
Spouse in Transcendence, who is Shekinah; but there is a
fiftieth Gate which Moses did not open, according to the
legend. This Gate is the Mystery of Espousals in the Divine

Bizet, Erbe 4, Ol. OOD. S| TL, a2 7,.) aes FOL SSA s EE e a 6:
2 Ib

®(1b,, Pt, I, tal. 1398's) EV; 41, 42.

4 It seems desirable at this point to colleé the references to these Gates which occur
throughout the text, so that there may be no misunderstanding on the subje&t. The
indications are these in summary: (1) It is through 50 openings of the mysterious
heavenly palaces that the Word of Yop—which, as we have seen, is in CHoKMAH—
penetrates to the He (in Brnan).—Z., Pt. I, fol. 13b; I, 79. (2) There is one Gate
which is the synthesis of all Gates and one Degree which is the synthesis of all Degrees ;
by this Gate and Degree do we enter into the glory of the Holy One.—ID., fol. 103b ;
II, 19. (3) This Gate is unknown because Israel is in exile, and the result is that all
the Gates ate shut.—Ib., fol. 103b; II, 20. (4) The 50 Gates of Understanding are
ot may become salvation for the whole world.—Ib., Appendix I, Omissrons ; fol. 260a ;
II, 611. (5) The Gates emanate from or are referable to the side of severity.—Ib.,
Appendix III, Szecrers or THE Law ; II, 723, 724. (6) It is owing to the evil Samael
that Moses could enter only 49 of the 50 Gates of Brinan.—lIb., Pt. II, fol. 1154;
Ill, 443. (7) The union of the Father and the Mother produced 5 lights, which gave
birth in their turn to the 50 Gates of Supreme Lights——Ib., AssEMBLY OF THE
Sanctuary, fol. 122b, 123a; III, 473. (8) The light of the Mother above reaches
us by 50 Gates.—Ib., fol. 137b; IV, 37. (9) He who devotes himself to the study
of the Law opens the 50 Gates of Binan, which correspond to the Yop multiplied by
the Hz.—Ib., Pt. Ill, fol. 216a; V, 548. (10) By such multiplication Moses attained
these Gates.—Ib., fol. 223b ; V, 565. (11) In the absence of these Gates Israel would
have remained always in the bondage of Egypt. ‘They are in the region called the
Supreme Mother, who gives power to the Mother below.—Ib., fol. 262a; VI, 12. It
will be seen that the subje@ is left at a loose end and does not emerge in fa&; but it
becomes clear at least that the Zoharic Gates of Compassion belong to another mode of
Understanding than was evolved by late Kabbalism, as summarised in Book V.

THE MYSTERY OF SEX 391

World. Another reference tells us that there are Seven
Degrees above which are superior to all others, and they
constitute the Mystery of Perfe&t Faith.1 The attachment of
Israel to the good side is attachment to the Supreme Mystery,
the Mystery of Faith, so that Israel is one therewith.” By the
hypothesis that the Mystery of Faith is a Sex Mystery, the
practice of perfection therein, on the terms already indicated,
should give a title to the knowledge of these Degrees and
thereby the Mystery of Faith would pass into a perfect Mystery
of Experience. Probably these Seven Degrees are identical
with the seven firmaments the purpose of which—as we are
told elsewhere—is to reveal the Mystery of Faith. They
ate called also Seven Palaces.4 There is a kingdom to come
after that which is termed symbolically the end of the world ;
it is a sacred region, and this also is said to constitute the
Mystery of Faith;® but we have heard otherwise that the
advent of Messiah means perfect conformity in the nuptial
State, above as well as below.

It has been necessary to make these citations ; but it will
be seen that the most which they tell us is (1) the fact that
there is a Mystery of Faith, and (2) that it is concerned with
the union of male and female. We may take the question one
Step further by the collation of some final references. The
priestly garment with fringes ® and the phylacteries on head
and arms ? designate the Supreme Mystery, because God is
found in that man who wears them.’ It is the Supreme
Mystery of Faith. A spring which flows unfailingly is
another image of the Myéstery,® and we shall remember in
this connection the sex-interpretation placed on the river
which came forth from Eden to water the Garden—in which
man was created male and female—and which was afterwards
patted and became into four heads. A well fed by a spring
also symbolises the Mystery of Faith, because it symbolises
the union of male and female,!° and here again we shall
remember (1) the “‘ fountain of gardens,” 44 (2) the “ garden
inclosed ”” which is “‘ my sister, my spouse,” 1% (3) the

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 204b; II, 414. 3 Jb., fol. 85b; I, 494.

2 1b. Pts fol: 2034 351-217: * Cf. Book IV, § 10, p. 176.

5 Z., Pt. II, fol. 134a, b; IV, 30. The Feast of the Paschal Lamb is said to contain
the Mystery of Faith.—Ib., fol. 135a ; IV, 32.

6 Numbers xv. 38. ® Ib., fol. 141b; Hl, rgr.
7 Deut. xi. 18. SINT FOS Fess VMAS oh BN, 1 5
S24 Pt: l fol.se4z1aiell, 250. 11 Song of Solomon iv, 15.

12 I[b., iv. 12.
H.K. DD

‘

302 THE HOLY KABBALAH

“ fountain sealed,” 4 and (4) the “well of living waters and
Streams from Lebanon.” * Whoever contemplates such a
well is said to contemplate the Mystery of Faith. The moon
is said finally to be another image, and we know that this
luminary is a symbol of Shekinah.4

I conclude on all the evidence that the doors of the
ZOHAR had no intention of communicating under the formula
which they used so often more than a broad and general
definition of what their convention symbolised.

Again therefore we must go further, and the key to the
matter before us will be found, under another form of sym-
bolism, by the collation of two passages which are separated
widely from each other. It is affirmed 5—as we have seen—
that when the Yop is united to the Hz they give birth to that
river concerning which it is said: “‘ And a river went forth
from Eden to water the Garden.” ® ‘The other extra& tells
us that from the union of the male and female—meaning, of
coutse, in the transcendence—come all souls which animate
men.’ ‘The inference is that the Eden-river is that of life, or

1 Song of Solomon iv. 12.

BID sits BS

Psu, Et. 1, Ol ALD 3 1k, US.2

4 Ib., fol. 142a, b; Il, 157. As I have by no means exhausted the teferences and
as so much seems to be implied in the formula, I will make a further sele€tion as follows :
(a) That the Supreme MyStery, which is synonymous with the Mystery of Faith, is
the law of the whole world is taught in the words : “‘ These are the three sons of Noah :
and of them was the whole earth overspread’”’ (Gen. ix. 19), as if the Zohar were
indicating that the event in question marked a new epoch in the mode of generation.—
Z., Pt. I, fol. 73a; I, 432. (b) The Mystery of Faith is represented by Jacob.—Ib.,
fol. 138b; Il, 143. (c) Every word in Scripture conceals the Supreme Mystery of
Faith, because all the works of the Holy One are based on equity and truth.—lIb.,
fol. 142a; II, 154. (d) The Supreme Wisdom is by implication the Mystery of Sex.—
Ib., fol. 150b; I, 193. (e) The Mystery of Faith and all celestial sanctities emanate
from the union of male and female principles—Ib., fol. 160a; II, 229. (f) One
Mystery of Supreme Wisdom is that the world’s salvation must issue from the union
of Juda and Thamar, as if there were a secret sanétuary somewhere in the world which
ovetwatched that true legitimacy belonging to the line of David.—lb., fol. 188b;
Il, 344. (g):The union of the worlds above and below is of the Mystery of Faith.—
Ib., fol. 206b; II, 426. (h) The Supreme Mystery concealed in the Law is the Secret
of the Lord, and this is a secret of the Holy Covenant.—Ib., fol. 236b ; II, 533. (i) The
Cup of Blessings comprises the Mystery of Faith, which Mystery embraces the four
quartets and the Sacred Throne.—Ib., fol. 250b; Il, 585. (k) The Sacred Reign to
come constitutes the Mystery of Faith—meaning union sanified everywhere.—lIb.,
Pt. II, fol. 134a; IV, 30. (1) The Mystery of Faith is to know that Jehovah is
Elohim.—Ib., fol. 1612; IV, too. As I have now omitted only references that are
trivial or obscure and calling for considerable explanation, the two colleCtions are in
all respe&ts adequate and it will be seen that they are quite clear as to the nature of the
Mystery, whether it is qualified as Supreme or charatterised as that of Faith. 4

* Z., Pt. 1, fol. o58 hy 545: Ae)

© Gen) i110,

7 Z., Pt. II, fol. 70a ; Ill, 310. Itissaid here that the creation of man in the likeness
of the Elohim is an allusion to the Mystery of the Male and Female Principles.

THE MYSTERY OF SEX 393

synonymously it is the river of souls, and in this case we
shall understand that the Higher Eden is the place of Divine
Nuptials, while the Garden which was watered by the river
was the place of nuptials below. We have found this
illustrated already by various speaking images—as, for
example, in the higher degree by the analogy instituted between
Shekinah and the Seed of Solomon,? the tent of grace,? and so
forth; but in the lower degree by the identification of the
Garden with womanhood.* We are not left, however, to
mete inferences on the subject, for it is said elsewhere that at
the moment of the union of the Spouse and Bride all souls
came forth from the celestial river.2 The one is “the
San@uary, O Lord, which Thy hands have established ” and
the other is the repose of man.

It is said elsewhere—and we have seen indeed already—
that souls ate produced by the union of male and female,®
whence it follows that they have a father and mother—ex
hypothesi in God—even as their bodies have when they enter
into incarnate life. We learn also that all souls emanate from
the celestial region called Janu, which is explained to be the
Unknown God.’ As seen already, this name is for God that
which the Propitiatory is for the Tabernacle—a summary of
the male world above and the female world below. We can
understand now in what sense the Shekinah is termed so often
the Supreme Mother; we can understand also why it is joy
of heart ® to know that Jehovah is Elohim and why the
attainment of such knowledge is the object with which the
Holy One sends man into this world.1® It is said—as we have
seen also—that this is the Mystery of Faith which is the
synthesis of the whole Law. It is said further that Eden is
regatded as the organ of the Covenant in the Supernal World—semen superinexprimabile.
Sometimes this idea is expressed almost literally.

Pia tbe, tol. Gb : LLL. 292.

3 Ib., Pt. I, fol. ro1b; Il, 11, where the tent of Sarah is understood as the tent of
Shekinah, or as Shekinah herself. There are other instances: The Jerusalem above
is said to be designated a tent in Is. xl. 22, and to signify Shekinah.—ZIb., Pt. I,
fol. 65b; III, 288.

4 It was also the Synod of Israel.—lIb., Pt. I, fol. 63a; I, 369.

5 [b., Pt. I, fol. 207b, 208a ; Il, 432. They came forth male and female, descending
confusedly. This intimation is of some importance in the legend of the soul.

® See Z., Pt. I, fol. 207b, 208a ; Il, 432, among other places.

7 Tb., Pt. Il, fol. 165b; IV, 111. The reference is to KETHER, where Jehovah is in
union with Elohim, or God and His Shekinah are one. We have seen that the letters
Yop and HE primal of the Divine Name are allocated to this SzpHiRa.

8 Jb. 9 Jt Pt. IL fla $bs:V, 23.
0-7... Pt. Ll, fol .16%b 3: LV, 10m.kos,

394 THE HOLY KABBALAH

the Mother above and the Garden which was watered by the
river coming forth out of Eden is the Shekinah or Mother
below, while the river itself is the Middle Pillar of the Sephi-
rotic Tree.1 It follows that descent into manifestation is by
the central path which communicates between KETHER and
MaukutH. It is the path of Shekinah, and when it is testified
that she was destined from the beginning to suffer with Israel 2
this means that the nuptial intercourse which was infinite and
holy in the world above, which was pure, spiritual and holy
for a period—ex hypothesi—in the world below, descended
through what is termed the Fall of man into the region of the
shells, or the order of animal things. The physical sign of the
Covenant is held to symbolise Shekinah * because it symbolises
the path of purification by which man may return into the
perfeGion of spiritual union.4

We have heard that the Supreme Mystery of Faith is the
union of Jehovah and Elohim, which union is the source of
all other Mysteries. We have heard also that when Israel
shall become perfeé, it will make no distin@ion between
Jehovah and Elohim—the male with the female being
neither male nor female. It follows that the Supreme
Mystery and the Mystery of Faith are one and are also the
Mystery of Union of Male and Female in the Divine Nature,
behind which I infer that there is a Mystery of Experience in
man.

Let us now take another legend of the soul which is not
quite in consonance with some things that have preceded, as
it postulates a continual generation as fruit of the eternal
union between the Father and Mother in transcendence ® in
place of a creation of souls once and for all, prior to the

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 26a, b; I, 164.

2 [b., fol. r20b; II, 84. It is said here that Shekinah is the first of all that is, which
is afirmed also of METATRON.

8 [b., fol. 278a, b, THE FarrHrut SHEPHERD ; II, 647. So also it is said, as we have

seen, that the Covenant with Shekinah will endure for ever—Ib., Pt. III, fol. 257;
V; 597-
e T ought to mention here that in one place only of the text it is said that in forming
the prototypical Eve and placing her face to face with man, it was intended that the
union between male and female should be accomplished after the same manner as that
of Jehovah with Elohim, or in the absence of any fleshly and impure sensation.—Z.,
Pt. II, fol. 258b; IV, 291, 292. This seems to me an allusion to a pre-natal State, for
things must be referred to their natures: the spiritual unions are one thing and have
their own end ; the physical union is another and Nature insures thereby the perpetua-
tion of species.

5 Hence it is said that man—understood as male and female—is the synthesis of
Jehovah and Elohim.—Z., Pt. III, fol. 48a; V, 134.

THE MYSTERY OF SEX 395

evolution of the created universe. That which follows is
mote in consonance with the Mystery of Faith, and is in fact
one of its aspects. It is said that at every birth new souls are
created and detached from the Celestial Tree.t Thanks to
these new souls, the legions of heaven ate increased,” for
which reason the Scripture says: “Let the waters bring
forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life,”
meaning the waters of the celestial river which has its source
in the Holy and Eternal Alliance.* It should be understood
that this Alliance, which is the union of Jehovah and Elohim,
has its correspondence below in the Covenant between God
and man on the basis of citcumcision—as symbolising the
eteat postulate concerning purity. The Scripture adds:
*“ And fowl that may fly above the earth,” > because at the
moment when the newly-created soul traverses the heavenly
region called “living ”’—meaning the Land of Life—it is
accompanied by many angels, who have followed it from the
time that it was detached from the Tree of Heaven. Those
who abstain from praising the precept “Increase and
multiply ” diminish—if it be permitted so to speak—the
Celestial Figure, centralisation of all figures: they arrest the
coutse of the celestial river and defile the Holy Alliance.’
We have seen that this is a sin against God Himself ; the soul
of such a man will never penetrate into the vestibule of
Paradise and shall be repulsed from the world above.® After
this manner does the Zowar indicate yet again that from the
beginning of the sacred text it is concerned with the history
of man tather than the external cosmos and, by inference,
with the history of Israel rather than of man at large. Weon
our patt are in a position to understand it in a higher sense as

1 It is repeated also that all souls issue from the celestial region called Jan, which
is the source of wisdom. This is called the Holy Spirit, and all souls are comprised
therein —Ib., Pt. II, 174a; IV, 129. According to another version, those souls
ba animate men issue or emanate from Him Who is called the Just.—Jb., fol. 70a ;

» 310.

2 Ib., Pt. Ill, fol. 168a ; V, 434, and elsewhere.

* Geno 20! |

* They are the waters of CHOKMAH and Brinaun, the Yop and the HE in their union,
or alternatively—according to another form of the symbolism—they are those waters
ne from KETHER under the ptesidency of the Divine Name Jan.

Cn 1.1201

8 This notion is expressed in one place only and seems only semi-poetical adornment.

7 Z., Pt. I, fol. 273a, a, Appendix I, Boox oF Bricutngsss ; II, 641.

8 Jb., fol. 48a; 1,278. The guilt of such abstinence is exaggerated in the prevailing
mannet of the ZonHar, and if we come to discriminate thereon we shall remember that
oe man returns—ex hypothesi—to this life in another body and has the chance to do

etter.

396 THE HOLY KABBALAH

the catholic history of souls; it is this on the inner side,
though it is cosmic history of course on the surface of the
outward sense. ‘This also is the construction of the Zouar,
which naturally does not deny that on the literal side the first
chapters of Genesis are the story of creation ; but the vital or
palmary interest rests in the internal sense—as if the one were a
question of accidents and the other of essence.

The souls of all Gentiles emanate from the demons under
circumstances which are not explained in the ZoHar.1 The
suggestion is sometimes that they are from the left side of the
Tree ; but the question is exceedingly obscure,? because God
and His Shekinah are everywhere in the Tree of the SEp-
HIROTH, and though there is a sense in which God is allowed
to have created evil, the position is by no means maintained
with any consistency throughout. It was left for late Kab-
balism to conttive its own way of escape from the difficulty,
for which purpose it conceived the idea of postulating ten
SEPHIROTH in each of the four worlds, as also in each SEPHIRA.
There is practically no warrant for this in the original text,
though there is a trace of some septenary repetition of
SEPHIROTH in the individual SepHirotH. ‘The case of those
who were converted from Paganism to Jewry and fulfilled the
whole law thereafter raises another question : it was necessary
that they should be reconciled on all the planes or it would
setve no purpose to receive them into the fold; and it was
therefore postulated that after undergoing circumcision they
entered under the wings of Shekinah and were separated from
the side of the Demons.? They did not participate, in the
wotld to come, in the full beatitude of the elect who were
such by their right of birth; they remained under the wings
of Shekinah, but the latter was like a chariot for Israel, in
which Israel passed higher, namely, into the Land of the
Living. The Gentiles had no part in the Heavenly Tree and
could not therefore return to it. The view is naturally at

1 It is affirmed elsewhere, on the contrary, that they come from the Divine World ;
but the question is negligible, as anything that is found in the ZoHaR on the subje& of
unbelievers is antecedently known to be worthless. The literal statement is that, all
differences notwithstanding, human souls come from heaven.—Z., Pt. I, fol. 13a;
L 77:

2 There is one place at least in which the right and the left side seem to be two paths
of coming out into manifestation apart from any Sephirotic notion.—Z., Pt. I, fol. 160a ;
II, 229.

3. E>., fol. 134134, 76.

4 The records ate obscure and contradictory, but I have suggested previously that
the Sephirotic Tree is really the Tree of Life, and there may be a sense intended in which

THE MYSTERY OF SEX 397

issue with much that has preceded ; but the question does not
concern us in any important way.

Returning to the generation of souls, it is said that there
ate three souls in the superior degrees;1 the first is the
Supreme Soul, which is unintelligible even to beings on high :
it is the Soul of all souls, it is concealed eternally and all
depends therefrom. The second soul is the female principle,
and by the union of these two Divine Works are manifested
to the whole world, even as all ats of the human soul are
manifested by the human body. The third soul is that of all
holy souls emanating from the Male and Female in the
transcendence.2 The multiplication of symbolical modes for
the expression of the same speculative doctrines is disconcert-
ing enough and sometimes tends to confusion, but the
meaning is in no sense remote, as it happens in the present
instance. We see in the first place the root-postulate belong-
ing to the Mystery of Faith—that the union of male and
female in the Ineffable Persons causes conception and birth
evetlastingly ; that what are born are souls; that these
descend, and that they are male and female. One account

the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil is also Sephirotic in its attributions, the
good being the right and the left the evil side. Zoharic Kabbalism recognised,
moreover, an averse Tree under the title of Inferior Crowns, in analogy with the
Crowns that are above, namely, the true SEpHrRoTH. The salient allusions are as
follows : (a) There were ten averse Crowns and they were in analogy with ten varieties
of Magic, all understood as infernal, for the ZoHarR very properly recognises no distinc-
tion between Black and White in the occult arts.—Z., Pt. I, fol. 167a; Il,257. (b) The
Inferior Crowns ate ramifications of one and the same Tree.—Ib., fol. 177a; II, 296.
(c) The Law of Correspondence obtains in these things, for—as we have seen—the
empire of the demon is modelled on that of God.—Ib., Pt. II, fol. 37b; III, 179.
(d) There is further a demoniacal triad in imitation of that Triad which is Supernal.—
Ib., fol. gob; II, 189. (e) There are also inferior palaces corresponding to the Palaces
that are above and—like these—they are seven in number.—Ib., fol. 245a; IV, 278.
(f) There are hierarchies of demons answering to the Hierarchies of Blessed Angels—
Seraphim to Seraphim, and so forth.—Ib., fol. 247b; IV, 281. (g) The titles of the
averse SEPHIROTH ate the same as those above—Wisdom and so forth, all the qualities
being illustrated by their opposites.—Id., Pt. III, fol. 70a; V, 190. (i) It is said finally,
and this is a further light on another subje&t which has been under consideration just
previously, that there are ten avetse SEPHIROTH on the right and ten upon the left,
even as in the Holy World. Here is another way of understanding the right and left
side in the Zonar. Ido not affirm that there is a single ruling idea throughout the
references, yet if there be, the modes of expression are not less obscure than they are
otherwise misleading.—Ib., Pt. III, fol. 207a; V, 527.

21h, Pt. Eton agar bE sad S77:

2 Though there has been no occasion to dwell upon it, seeing that I am not con-
cerned with the maintenance of orthodox theological views or their opposites, I think
that the reader has abundant proof in his hands by this time that the Zoharic system
as a whole is no mote emanationist than pantheistic. That which proceeds from Ain-
SopH into the complete concealment and yet comparative manifestation of the Three
Supernal SepHIROTH may be called an emanation from Ain-Sopn, but as it is a question
of Divine Essences, that is an orthodox view at its value. In the present instance the
symbol is one of begetting, which is not synonymous with emanation.

398 THE HOLY KABBALAH

says that at the moment of earthly marriage the souls must
sort themselves out, each male soul discovering the female
who was its companion before incarnation; but this is so
rough and crude that it is set aside tacitly, without, however,
establishing any general law in its place. The implicit is of
course that the male body contains a male soul and that the
soul of a woman is female, though there is an obscure sense
in which any soul is male to any material body but is female
to the degree which is above it.4_ Another implicit can be
recognised which is more to our purpose—that he who
abides in the true way will meet in marriage with the woman-
soul which was his pre-natal companion.” If he has deviated
it may happen that the woman predestined to him is espoused
to another; but in the event of his repentance a time will
come when the alien male will disappear, thus yielding the
woman to her true mate.? Ina scheme like this it is obvious
that there must be fatalities and mischances innumerable
when it comes to be worked out: among others there is that
in vittue of which a male soul will come into this world
without a sister-soul, and presumably vice versd. It is held
that such a person will not marry and cannot therefore have
children ; but in the event of his keeping the Law and proving
wotthy, he will find the means of rehabilitation in another
earthly life. In the alternative case, he will be judged un-
worthy of a new transmigration.4 It is part of the Divine
Plan for the salvation and felicity of man that a sister-soul is
not permitted to remain the wife of another.°

The considerations with which I have been dealing lead
up to other dreams that are significant of the concern of Israel
on another and higher side of the sex mystery. It is not to
be supposed, the union of humanity below according to the
manner of flesh being, at least in its consecration, a reflection
of the Divine Union, that there should not be an union of
souls in the world to come, so that in the beatitude of the true

1 Z., Pt. I, Appendix ITI, Marunirin ; II, 703.

2 See on the general subjeé& zb., Pt. Ill, fol. 283b, 284a; VI, 64, 65. Also, ib,
fol. 43b; V, 120, 121, and Pt. I, Appendix HI, Marsnririn ; II, 703.

3 See on the general question zb., Pt. III, fol. 283b; V, 64. And on this special
point, 2b., Pt. II, fol. 229a; UH, 503.

4 We have seen that reincarnation is not in itself desirable but that it is justified—ex
bypothesi—by adequate reasons. It follows from the above statement that there is a

less favourable alternative. That which is suggested or proposed is, however, only
a sporadic or casual notion, and it is quite out of harmony with much that goes before

and comes after.
5 This is discounted somewhat fully in other places of the text.

THE MYSTERY OF SEX 399

region of life they should not continue to reflec the Supernal
Work and its Mystery. This is why, as we shall see, the union
between God and the soul is so often in the sense of vision,
though there are indications of deeper stages. ‘That which is
substituted is the union in heaven of souls who have been
espoused on eatth—being those who were espoused pte-
viously before the world began.1 When it is said that the
Blessed Vision is the sight of Shekinah and the contemplation
of her Divine Face,? we are to understand apparently that the
union of sister-souls is under her eyes and in her presence.
It is said that in the heights of heaven there is yet another
union of two born of love and for ever inseparable.? —_—It is
contemplated by those who have part in the life to come.
The way which leads to the Tree of Life, the Tree which is
kept by the Kerubim and the Flaming Sword, are the Grand
Matrona herself. She is the way of the Sacred City, the way
of the Heavenly Jerusalem, the intermediary of communica-
tion between things above and below in both dire€tions: she
is the perfeét Mediatrix, to whom all the Divine Powers are
confided.4 ‘The intimation is vague, but as the contemplation

1 It is a recurring subject of reference and we see that the triad obtains here as other-
where. There are (a) Pre-natal union; (b) Union on earth and (c) Union in the risen
life of the spirit. Two things are to be observed, firstly, that we hear nothing con-
cerning matriage-life after the resurrection, or in that State wherein the perpetuation
of a physical envelope seems to pronounce separation for ever between God and man,
so far as all that is understood by MySticism respeGting the union is concerned ; but,
secondly, following all the analogies, there can be no doubt that the risen bodies will
enter into the life of intercourse, because they are complete bodies.

2 Z., Pt. Il, fol. 4ob, THE FarrHruL SHEPHERD ; III, 189, 190. But there are other
references.

Sy Ib. Pts TT, ‘folv sob); TIT, 229.

4 Ib., fol. 51a; Tl, 230. The same Divine Powers were said to be entrusted to
Enoch when he became MEraTrRON, concerning whom I will now colleé& the following
tefetences : (a) He is charged with the government of the earth.—Z., Pt. I, fol. 1434 ;
II, 161. (b) He sets all his legions in motion by the power of a single letter in his
name—presumably any letter, as none is specified.—Ib., Appendix II], MaTunirin ;
Il, 705. (c) He is the Serpent above.—Ib., Pt. II, fol. 28a; III, 134. (d) This is
explained by zb., Pt. I, fol. 27a; I, 171, which says that he is favourable to man when
he is transformed into a wand—e.g. that of Aaron or Moses—but as a serpent he is
against man. (d) The river which went out of Eden to water the Garden (Gen. ii. 10)
is Enoch, who is called otherwise METATRON ; but it is the Lower Eden and not that
in the Supernal World. It is the place called ParprEs, which name—according to
Franck—was never so used in the ZoHAR.—IDb., fol. 27a ; I, 168, 169. (e) He is to the
cohorts above apparently that which is Samael to the cohorts below.—Ib., Pt. II,
fol. 42a; Ill, 191. (£) Heis called Server and he embraces the six directions of space.—
Ib., fol. 94a; Il, 377. (g) It is said that souls proceed from the side of METATRON
and from the side of Shekinah, but it does not seem to be by the way of generation,
as between male and female.—Ib., fol. 94b; Il, 379. (h) He is also called “ Young
Man,” and it was he who dwelt in the Tabernacle of Moses.—Ib., Pt. II., fol. 1434 ;
IV, 54. (i) He helped to build the Tabernacle.—Ib., fol. 1592; IV, 96. (j) He
guatded the Temple of Solomon.—Ib., fol. 164a; IV, 107. (k) The School of

400 THE HOLY KABBALAH

of Matrona sanétified nuptials below, so is the path by which
the eleét enter into the higher nuptials as if they ascended that
Middle Pillar of the SEpHrRoTH which is so often said to be
she. We can proceed therefore to glance at another question
of those palaces for which the Zouar has a natural attraction,
while their number is most usually seven. When souls leave
the lower world they enter into a certain palace which is
above, if they carry the proper warrants, and therein those
which are male are again united to the female, in which union
they radiate light as in sparkles.1 This palace is said to be
the throne of Faith and, I infer, is the place of its mystery.
Yet another story of palaces tells us that there are four which
are exclusive to women, or at least to holy mothers, but it
is forbidden to reveal their nature.2 During the day the
females are separated from the males ; but the spouses are in
union at night, and in their mutual embrace the lights of both
dissolve into a single light. ‘The conclusion reached on this
subject is that blessed is the lot of the just, male as well as
female, for they shall enjoy all delights in the world to come.®

We are led on in this manner to the great mystery of the
subject, as to which there are several testimonies. It rests on
the witness of a testament bequeathed by Rabbi Eleazar the
Great * that when the Holy One comes down into Paradise

METATRON is the School of the Holy One.—Ib., Appendix III, fol. 287a; IV, 314.
(1) The curtain of the Tabernacle was his symbol.—Ib., fol. 293a; IV, 317. (m) He
is like Michael, for he offers the souls of the just to God.—Jb., Pt. I, THe Farrurun
SHEPHERD, fol. 29a, b; V, 81. (n) There is an obscure suggestion that he may be
the Angel of the Sun, and it is said also that he draws milk for his purification from his
mother, as if she were the Matrrona in Brnau and he wete the Begotten Son or Vau.—
Ib., fol. 64b; V, 177. (0) He has the Keys of Heaven.—Ib., fol. 171b; V, 445.
(p) During the exile, he has the government of the House ; he is the rainbow, and he
is called SHappa1.—Ib., fol. 215b; V, 547. (q) He is old and he is again young.—Ib.,
fol. 217a, b; V, 530. (r) He is the Man of the Lesser Countenance ; that is to say,
he is the tenth SepHrra, MaLkuTH; and here we must remember that there is a
sense in which the Vau came down to earth in union with the Hz final.—_Ib., fol. 223b ;
V, 565. (s) As otherwise noted, he is the vesture of SHappa1.—ID., fol. 231a ; V, 571.
(t) As noted also, he is to Shekinah that which are the week days to the Sabbath—as
if he were ativity and she rest—Ib., fol. 243b; V, 381. (u) He is poor in exile—
that is to say, in the exile of Israel, and his nourishment is prayer—Ib., fol. 278a ;
V, 51. Ihave omitted only a few minor allusions and one fantastic comparison which
would tend to confuse the issues. Apart from the stultifying intervention of the Enoch
motive, I think that these extraéts tend very clearly towards the identification of
METATRON with the Son who is extended through the worlds below ArzitutH, and
who is not exaétly in union with Shekinah and yet not apart from her during the fall
and exile of the ele&t. At times—perhaps generally—they are distin@ from one another ;
at times they are found together ; and their end is complete union.

1 Z., Pt. Uf, fol. 246a ; IV, 279.

2 Tb., Pt. I, fol. 167b; V, 434.

3 Ib.

4 It is not clear whether this means the son of Rabbi Simeon.

THE MYSTERY OF SEX 401

at midnight the male souls are united to the female ; fecunda-
tion follows from the joy which they experience in the
contemplation of God, and they bring forth other souls ?
which are destined to occupy the bodies of Gentiles who will
become converts to the Law of Israel.2_ In another place this
is explained after a different manner: the souls born of
celestial unions are reserved in a palace, and when a man is
converted one of them takes flight and comes under the
wings of Shekinah, who embraces her—because she is the
fruit of the just in their intercourse—and sends her into the
body of the convert where she—or he—remains, and from
that moment the convert acquires the title of just. This is
the mystery of those words in Scripture: “‘ The fruit of the
just is the Tree of Life.” 4 There is, however, by yet another
testimony, a general sense in which the Holy One affects the
union of twin-souls so that they may engender other souls,
themselves animated by those sacred forces which are above
them.°

The faé& that these passages are all less or more irreconcil-
able is of no consequence; the objec is to indicate the
natute of beatitude in the world above, and they are all
independent fables belonging to the motive, inspiration or
casual spur of the moment: ® no one would have been more
astonished possibly than a Son of the Do@rine, had he heard
that they were to be collated and harmonised, were that
possible.

There are a few minor points which may be mentioned at
this stage. It is said that all depends on thought and in-
tention ; holiness is attracted by good thought ; but he who
defiles himself by thought, and he who at the moment of
fulfilling the a& of intercourse with his wife thinks of another
woman changes the Degree above—the Degree of Holiness—
into one that is impure.’ We may compare the elective

1 [ must not omit to mention that this is contradi€ted in THE FAITHFUL SHEPHERD,
which says that in the world to come there is neither eating nor drinking, that there
are no conjugal relations, and that the beatitude of the just—as we have seen—is to
contemplate the beauty of Shekinah.—Z., Pt. II, fol. 116a ; III, 448, 449.

2 Ib., Pt. III, fol. 168a; V, 434. 4 Proverbs xi. 30.

3 Ib. BAP est. fol." 186b = 1, 337:

6 I must except, however, conditionally at least, one other quality of testimony
which seems to suggest that the way of the generation of souls has been always by
conception and birth, following intercourse.

7 Z., Pt. I, Appendices III, Secrets of tHE Law; II, 730. Yet it would seem
permissible on occasion to think of another, because in cohabiting with Leah, Jacob
thought of Rachel, though unintentionally, as it is said.—Ib., p. 731.

402 THE HOLY KABBALAH

affinities of Goethe, for the child born of such union is called
a substituted son: soul and body are held alike to be substi-
tuted. ‘The second point is that there are rare occasions when
conjugal relations seem forbidden, even on the Sabbath, and
periods of famine are a case in point :} the child born at such
a season will be from the side of the demon. Lastly, there is
the question of virginity—by which I mean among women.?
That such a condition on earth should be considered as
tolerable, much less as a title of san@tity, never entered into
heart or mind of any Son of the Do&rine. The only Zoharic
reference to virgins in an exalted state specifies that the third
among several legions is composed of celestial virgins who
ate in the service of Marrona and adorn her when she is
presented to the King: these are her maids of honour. It
is a vety simple transfer of an earthly image; but the legion
does not consist of human souls.

We are now at the end of our inquiry into the Mystery of
Sex, so far as the statements in the text are concerned, and
that which remains is to determine whether the path which
was followed by the early Kabbalists may have led them into
any expertience of a spiritual kind that is implied rather than
expressed in the records before us. I will suppose that they
followed the counsel on which those records insist, and as it
involved a distiné&t mode of procedure in conne@tion with an
important fact of life, the insistence, as it seems to me, must
indicate that in the experience of things the method had
proved of practical service. In other words, they had found
that there is a mystery of nuptials of which it has not entered
into the heart of man to conceive in the ordinary ways and
under the common motives of desire.4 There is one beautiful
point to observe in this conneétion—that their mystery lay
within the pure offices of Nature, under all the accepted
watrants. Those who conceived it had fulfilled already the
Law in respect of marriage; they sought no new way of the
physical kind; they were not lovers at white heat on the

1 Z., fol. 204a; II, 412, 413. The consequence threatened seems arbitrary, as
usual, but—according to Rabbi Simeon—a Supreme MyStery is involved, Ordina
sense would assume that the regulation was a question of doing penance. .

wD etek 13 ED. G\1 Vy 23.

#10. Fig ROL tsi: LV,.23.

4 We must remember that there is no lawful a& of life and no law of Nature which
cannot be raised above its own degree by the consecration of motive, or otherwise
that the will of man in all its authorised ways and places can be united to the Divine
Will.

THE MYSTERY OF SEX 403

quest of the ideal beloved ;1 they were not in search of an
excuse for setting aside old pledges and old bonds ; they were
content with that which they had; they made use of the
elements which had been given already into their hands, like
true craftsmen and masters. The genesis of their practice is
of course outside our knowledge: it may be that those who
sought to make all things holy in their life had sanétified by
intention of their own the fulfilment of that Law which told
them to “increase and multiply,” and that which they
experienced in its sanctification may have developed subse-
quently the sequence of theosophical speculations with which
I have been dealing ; alternatively, it may be that they had
come across teaching in unfrequented paths, something
handed down from the past. I know nothing of written
records on the subject outside the Zonar; but I do know
that there is some vestige of teaching in the East * which is
communicated on rate occasions, though I believe that it is
concerned with the aé itself rather than with the fruit thereof,
and it is not the kind of secret which the East keeps to itself
exclusively. Two things followed in respe@ of Kabbalistic
do&rine and practice. Marriage for the mystical Jew had
become a sacrament, and I care nothing if scholarship—
supposing that it were to take up the question—should
decide in its wisdom that the Zoharic notion of marriage owes
something to the sacramental system of the Catholic Church.
I reje&t the proposition in advance—for what my view is
worth—and I do not think that it will be put forward; but
it would signify nothing if it were true. There has been no
failure so great on the register of Latin orthodoxy as its
consecration of marriage; there has been nothing that is so
skin deep, nothing so reluctant and half-hearted. It never
did a wiser thing, a greater or a truer, than when it instituted
the seventh sacrament ; how it ever came to do it is another
question, having regard to all the conflict of interests, the so-
called counsels of perfedtion, the intolerable and melancholy
burden brought over from Theban deserts and everything
that has been collected into that strange edifice which is
termed the Paradise of Palladius.? The result has been that

1 More corre@ly, they had an inward, spiritual and godly ideal, on which they dwelt,
and by which they seem to have accomplished transmutations below.

2 It is precisely the same teaching as that of the ZoHar, though not of course in the
same terms.

3 Dr. E. A. Wallis Budge : THE PARADISE OR GARDEN OF THE Hoty FATHERS .. .

ps THE HOLY KABBALAH

after nearly two thousand yeats of so-called Sacramental
Rites there is nothing less consecrated either in the East or
West than are the offices of earthly marriage. On the other
hand, the ideal presented in the Zouar stands for true and
life-long consecration on the highest plane: it is not the
ceremonial of a moment which puts a kind of ecclesiastical
veneer over something that was less or more abhorted. Here
is the first point, and the second in all simplicity is added on
the hypothesis, at its value, that the ideal did more than exist
on paper and may represent the pradtice of a secret school.
We are told by the records that the fruit of the mystical inter-
course was the begetting of children from what is called the
Holy Side, as against the side of the demons, and I believe that
this was a Kabbalistic way of accounting for the literal fa@
that children born of such unions belonged to another category
than we are accustomed to meet with in the streets and byways
of daily life all the world over, or—for that matter—to be
familiar with in our own homes. They were Children of
Grace, tather than what we call Nature, though Grace is only
Nature better understood.

There is one word more: of the personal consequences
which befell the Sons of the Doétrine in their delineated life
of espousals we hear nothing directly, but the claim is that
they came to realise the Divine Presence in their hearts as the
general recompense of their consecrated lives. They were
not ascetics and they were not solitaries: truly they were a
company of scholars in the city and along the countryside,
in village and in wilderness. For them the world of Nature
was Grace externalised; the Presence was about them
therein, and they attained it after their own manner—which
was one of very life and testimony—each of them in his
proper heart and mind. I conclude that they had found the
true meaning of the words: “It is not good for man to be
alone.” 1 and that there is a very secret path in which
“the joy of living honourably with his wife”? may
bring the completed man—male and female—into the

Compiled by Athanasius Archbishop of Alexandria, Palladius Bishop of Helenopolis,
Saint Jerome and others. Translated out of the Syriac. 2 vols., 1907. Ido not wish
to be understood as making a sweeping condemnation ; I speak chiefly of processes
and atmosphere. There are other respeéts in which the text is worthy to rank with
THe GOLDEN LEGEND.

A Gren. 05s:

2 See page 380.

THE MYSTERY OF SEX 405
spiritual city of joy, great city of praise, wherein is the joy
of the Lord.?

So the souls go up male and female into the world beyond :
if they ate prepared souls, they find one another; and the
union that is everlasting begins in the light of God.

2 jer. xlix, 25. 2, Is. xxix, 19;

BOOK IX

THE WRITTEN WORD OF KABBALISM:
THIRD PERIOD

H-K. 407 EE

“) a fi AeA cre Fertate sy Be Lat i art
sw Seka W Sor tees |e _ Ae et Ae ee 8 it

BOOK IX

THE WRITTEN WORD OF KABBALISM:
THIRD PERIOD

I—EXPOSITORS OF THE ZOHAR

THE works—already cited—which are recommended by
Rosenroth as assisting to a better comprehension of the
ZOHAR fall under two heads—namely, those which are
designed to elucidate technical matters and those which may
claim to be original expository treatises. In the first are
included Worps OF UNDERSTANDING, which is actually a
Zoharic lexicon or vocabulary; the GaTE oF THE EYEs,
which is concerned with the Scriptural passages in the ZoHAR
and ANCIENT SUPPLEMENTS; and the ZeEr ZaHaB—by the
hypothesis, a Golden Crown, a wreath of gold, but it is not
otherwise described than the title itself indicates, the reason
being that the Apparatus of Rosenroth borrows various
extracts from its pages. The second section contains the
famous GARDEN OF POMEGRANATES, the Way oF TRUTH,
with its sequel the Founr or Wispom, and a digest of the
ZOHAR proper, entitled the VIsION OF THE PrigstT. Outside
these there are a few texts which may be regarded as extensions
ot developments of Zoharic dodtrine, but more especially of
that part which is concerned with spiritual essences. The
scope of this inquiry excludes the discussion of such technical
mattets as the claims of word-books and anthologies of
Biblical quotations: they will be found by those who are
concerned in the Apparatus of Rosenroth. ‘To mention them
in this place will be therefore sufficient, and we may proceed
to the consideration of those commentaries and developments
which arose out of the ZowHar and to the names, illustrious in
later Kabbalism, which are connected with these.

409 EE2

410 THE HOLY KABBALAH

A.—MoskEs OF CORDOVA

Assuming that the Zouar first became known in Spain
towatds the end of the thirteenth century, there was a lapse
of two hundred and fifty years, according to the dates fixed
by modern scholarship, before any literature followed
thereon. Hence this literature may be regarded largely as a
consequence of the Cremona and Mantua editions. Franck
says 1 that two Zoharic schools were founded about the same
time in Palestine, namely, the middle of the sixteenth century,
the first by Moses of Cordova and the second by Isaac de
Loria. On the other hand, Bartolocci ? and Basnage 3 agree
in assigning Moses of Cordova to the fourteenth century.
The earlier date would be of importance to the history of
Kabbalism, because certain side issues of documentary
criticism, untouched in this study, depend upon it ; but, as it
happens, there is no question that Moses ben Jacob, called .
Remak, was born in 1522 and died on June 25, 1570. He is
the first commentator on the Zonar, for Joseph ben Abraham
Gikatilla, called the divine Kabbalist and Thaumaturge, who
was of the time of Ferdinand and Isabella, was a writer on the
SEPHIROTH, and connects with the SEPHER YETZIRAH father
than Zoharic Theosophy, though he refers to the Kabbalistic
Work of the Chariot.*

As his name indicates, Moses of Cordova was a Spaniard,
but he travelled to Palestine, and it is conjectured that he was
instrumental in founding the Academy of Sapeth in Upper
Galilee, nine miles from Bethsaida. In either case he was one
of its teachers and helped to make it illustrious, for he was
regarded by his fellow theosophists as the greatest light of
Kabbalism since Simeon ben Yohai. Franck says that he
adhered to the real significance of the original monuments of
Kabbalism ; but, although this appears worthy of praise, the
French critic seems to complain that R. Moses was wanting in
originality. However this may be, the work by which he is
known is of high authority in Kabbalism. It is entitled the

1 La KABBALE, Pp. 4.

2 BrstioTHECA MAGNA RABBINICA, t. iv. p. 230.

3 HisrorrE DES Jurrs, livre vii. c. 24, t. V. p. 1942.

4 He was born in Old Castile anno 1248 and died at Pefiafiel circa 1305—-perhaps some-
what later. His views on the relation between the Divine Names JHvH and Elohim
shew that he was unacquainted with the doétrine of Shekinah, as this is found in the
ZOHAR.

EXPOSITORS OF THE ZOHAR AIL

GARDEN OF POMEGRANATES (Pardes Rimmonim), teferring to
the versicle in the Song of Solomon, iv. 13: “ Thy plants are
an orchard of pomegranates.” Basnage says that, after the
manner of Kabbalists, he discovers whatsoever he pleases in
that single sentence.t The pomegranate, with its innumer-
able seeds, is a favourite object for symbolism, and the
garden, orchard, or paradise has produced a wealth of imagery
for all Mysticism. Here, in a general sense, it is the treasury
of Scriptural meanings, and the Hebrew word by which it is
described having four consonants, these meanings are classified
as four: o11> = PRDS; the P signifies the literal sense,
R the mystic sense, D the enigmatic sense, and S the secret
and concealed sense.

Dwelling upon these involved meanings, as may be
imagined, the GARDEN OF POMEGRANATES ? is an obscure and
difficult treatise, and the attempt made by Rosenroth to
dismember it for the purpose of his AppaRATuS, while it gives
no idea of its contents, creates a lively image of its com-
plexity. The attribution of the letters of TETRAGRAMMATON
to the SEPHIROTH, the mystical meaning of words deprived
of their context, the names applied to SzpHrRotTH, the super-
incession of these and their union with AIN Sopu, the Mystery
of the Throne and of Shekinah, primeval Tonu and Bonu,
the unknown darkness—these are specimens here and there
of the subject-matter. But as the heart of the Kabbalist, in
opposition to the ascribed character of his nation, was fixed
with peculiar intentness on the eternal destinies of Israel and
not on temporal concerns, so his chief interest was the soul,
ever recutrent in his writings, as if it were impossible to atone
sufficiently for the silence of his sacred books. There is hence
no need to say that a special tract in the GARDEN OF POME-
GRANATES ? is dedicated to the subject of the soul, discussing
the region from which it emanates, its purpose in the world,
the profit of its creation, its union with matter, its superiority
over the angels, its chief divisions, their relation one with
another, the S—EpHrROTH to which they are referred, the places
to which they resort after death, the absence of one or both

1 HisrorreE DES Jurrs, |. vii. c. 24, vol. v. p. 1943.

2 It appeared at Cracow in 1591, and Samuel Gallico published an abridged version
under the title of Asts RimmMonim, which is cited often by Rosenroth, but I have failed
to trace its date.

3 Namely, Tra xxxi., translated in the Kanpata DeNupATA, Apparatus in Librum
Sohar pars secunda, i. 100 et seq.

412 THE HOLY KABBALAH

of the higher divisions in many individuals—following
Zoharic doétrine—and the good and evil angels accompanying
each human being. The tract devotes also a very curious
chapter to the s¢mulacrum which presides at generation, a
phantasmal image of humanity which descends on the male
head cum copula marital exercetur inferius. It is affirmed to be
sent from the Lord, and no procreation can take place without
its ptesence. It is not, of course, visible, yet might be seen
if licence were given to the eye. This phantom or imago is
prepared for each man before he enters the world, and he
grows in the likeness thereof. With the Israelites the
simulacrum is holy, and it comes to them from the Holy Place.
To those of another religion it descends from the side of
impurity, and hence the chosen people must not mingle their
seed with that of the Gentile.1

Another curious speculation is founded on that thesis of
the Zouar, according to which the good works performed
by a person in this world become for him vestments of price—
as we have seen—in the world to come. Here was a poetic
sentiment which had to be methodised and made literal
inevitably by a late Kabbalist. When a man who has per-
formed many good works falls away finally from righteous-
ness and is lost, what becomes of his earlier works ? Though
the sinner may perish, they, says R. Moses, remain, and if
there be a just man walking in the ways of the Supernal King,
yet wanting something in his vestments, God will supply the
deficiency from the good works of the impious one. The
preference is given to those who, taken in their youth, have
been unable to fulfil all the precepts of the Law.

B.—Isaac DE LOoRIA

Of this Kabbalist Bartolocci and Basnage have very little
to tell us, and it is not necessary to say that he is ignored by
writers like Graetz. He is referred by Basnage to the seven-
teenth century 2 and by Franck to that which preceded it.
As a fact, he was born at Jerusalem of German parentage in
1534, and he died at Sapheth or Safed in 1572, having pub-

1 This fantasy rests on the authority of the Zonar, which states that the simulacrum
is an emanation of the celestial form of each man, 7.¢., JECHIDAH.—Mantua edition,
ili, 107. he

2 Histoire DES Jurrs, |. vii. c. 31, p. 2089, vol. v. _He was a pupil of David ibn Abi
Zimri, and has been regarded as the greatest rabbinical doGor at his period in Germany.

EXPOSITORS OF THE ZOHAR 413

lished nothing himself except some Aramaic poems. The
substantial authenticity of the great body of his doctrines
collected by his disciple, R. Hayyim Vital, has not been chal-
lenged, however, and Franck bases thereon his hostile judg-
ment of Loria, on the ground, firstly, that he was, like Moses
of Cordova, not original; and, secondly, that he departed
from Zoharic Kabbalism to indulge in his own reveries, a
Criticism which stultifies itself. It is certain, however, that
Loria—otherwise Luria—did innovate or extend, and that
this is also his title to interest. He is not a mere echo or
refle@ion, and he makes good reading because he is a wild
fantasiast. Rosenroth terms him the eagle of the Kabbalists.
It is, of course, impossible to say how far his scribe and
disciple, R. Chaim, may have developed his developments and
elaborated his fantasies. Subject to one reservation, as will
appear shortly, the vast thesaurus which represents both made
its first printed appearance in KasBpaALA DENUDATA, where the
excerpts, embodying whole treatises, fill some three hundred
quatto pages.? They include :

I. The first tract, so called, of the Liner Drusuiy,? 2.¢.,
Book OF DissERTATIONS, forming the second volume of the
colleGtion. It occasioned a cutious correspondence between
Rosenroth and Henry More, who was surprised, as he ex-
presses it, by the unexpectedness of its doctrine, but found
much with which he could sympathise, as we shall learn later
on in the book devoted to Christian students of the Kabbalah.

II. A commentary on the Book or CoNCEALMENT,* form-
ing the second traé in the sixth volume of the collection. It
is not given in its absolute integrity—cujus maximam pariem
infra exhibemus, says Rosenroth.°

II. The Book oF THE REVOLUTIONS OF SouLs,® forming
the first tra@t in the fifth volume of the collection, which seems
to have been even larger than the Zonar itself—in fad,
almost the camel’s load of the legend. A portion of this tract
is said to have been printed in DE PERCUSSIONE SEPULCHRI, at
Venice in 1620, together with DE Precisus, recalling a further

1 The modern orthography is Luria and the full name Isaac ben Solomon Ashkenazi
Luria. I have followed that of Rosenroth for the convenience of those who may
have occasion to consult his great colle¢tion.

2 A printed edition in full appeared at Volkiev in 1772.

3 KasBALA DENUDATA, Apparatus . . . pars secunda, i. 28 et seq.

* Ibid. ii. pars secunda, trattatus quartus, pp. 3 et seq.

5 In the Prefatio ad Lettorem, p. 16, vol. ii.

6 Kas. DEN. ii., partis tertie trattatus secundus pneumaticus, pp. 234 et seq.

414 THE HOLY KABBALAH

subject treated in the colleGtion. I have been unable to trace
the volume or to find any particulars concerning it.1

The Liner Drusuim is a metaphysical introdu@tion to the
Kabbalah, which discusses a variety of subtle and abstruse
questions much after the manner of scholastic philosophy,
and there is no doubt that Isaac de Loria might have diffused
a gteat light of reasoning at Salamanca, had he been a Christian
Doétor instead of a Jewish Rabbi. His first point, as he tells
us, is one over which Kabbalists, late and early, had out-
wearied themselves already, namely, for what reason were the
worlds created and was their creation of necessity ? Assuredly
from the period of the Angel of the Schools, the halls of
Salamanca, of Padua, of Louvain and the other seats of
scholastic learning, had echoed with similar debate. Perhaps
the Kabbalists owed something to the Scholastics, perhaps
they drew both from one another. The Wisdom of the Exile
was encompassed on all sides by the great debate of Christian
speculation. It would be interesting to discriminate the
extent of interchange between them and to determine whether
the plummet of Kabbalism sounded lower depths than the
schoolmen ; but I doubt whether the dimensions of a volume
would suffice for this one excursion. Let me indicate there-
fore the answer of Isaac de Loria, and perhaps some student
at large among scholastic quartos will find illuminating
parallels in the Scholastics.2 The answer is that God cannot
fail of perfection in all the works and names of His magnifi-
cence, His excellence and His glory ; but unless those works
had been brought from potentiality into a& they could not
have been termed perfect, as regards either works or names.
The Name TETRAGRAMMATON signifies perpetual existence,
past, present and future, in the condition of creation before
the creation, and thereafter in the immutability of things.
But if the worlds had not been created, with all that is in
them, it could not have signified thus the continuity of
existences in every instant of time, and TETRAGRAMMATON
would have been an empty formula. How very curious is
the treachery of this reasoning, which ascribes to a Name of
the Deity an existence independent of the intelligent creatures
whose convention it is! But we should probably find many

1 This is the subjeét of my reservation on the previous page.
2 He must go further, however, than B. Hareau in his treatise DE LA PHILOSOPHIE
SCHOLASTIQUE. Paris. 1880.

EXPOSITORS OF THE ZOHAR 415

parallel treacheries among scholastic reasonets, were there
any one at hand to disinter them. So also the name of
ApoNAI, ot the Lord, involves the idea of ministers or ser-
vants, and if there were no ministers God could not be called
by this title. But after the creation of the worlds and the
production of the divine works from potentiality into accom-
plishment, God has fulfilled His perfection in every operation
of His powers, and in all His Names without any exception.

The next point discussed by Liner Drusuim is why the
world was created at the time and moment that it was, and
not at an earlier, or, for that matter, at a later epoch. The
answer is that the Supreme and Most Excellent Light is
infinite, exceeding comprehension and speculation, and that
its concealed foundation is far from all understanding. Before
anything was produced by emanation therefrom, there was
no time or beginning therein. This is the solution of the
difficulty which is offered by most official theology, and it
could have no aspeé of novelty at the late period of Isaac de
Loria. It may be affirmed in a general way that when
Kabbalists touch any common ground of speculation they
sutpass their epoch but seldom in profundity or subtlety, I
might add also in the adequacy of their views, though meta-
physical sufficiency was not, of course, to be expected on
any side.

But it is not often and it is not for long that works like
Liser Drusuim confine themselves to the common ground
of speculation, and the Kabbalist in this instance passes
speedily into the transcendental region of the SEPHIROTH,
including the manner of their emanation, another question,
as he tells us, which has involved all Kabbalists in controversy.
In so far as such speculations are of consequence to our
purpose, they belong to an earlier stage and have been noted
at least therein. Do they proceed from one another in the
simplicity of a successive series, or is their emanation in
columns? We have found that there is authority for both
views and also for a third, which represents them as a series
of concentric circles. These questions, says R. Isaac, are
hard and difficult to determine, but he offers a solution on the
ZOHAR, namely, that before the order of things was instituted,
they were disposed one over the other, but after that time in
three pillars, those of Mercy and Severity, with the central
column of which Kerner is the summit and MatxurtH the

416 THE HOLY KABBALAH

base. The hypothesis of circles adopted by a German
expositor in Ca:LuM SEPHIROTICUM is thus implicitly set
aside. |

In subsequent chapters the SEPHIROTH ate considered under
a dual aspect, namely, as regards the portion of Divine Light
contained in each and as regards the containing vessel, while
these again are distinguished into an ambient and an inward
Light, and an external and internal vessel. ‘The existence of
many worlds prior to the Sephirotic emanations is affirmed,
herein following, as we have seen, both Talmudic and
Zoharic tradition. Finally, several classifications of the
SEPHIROTH ate considered in the last chapter.

The study of Linzer DrusHim may be recommended to those
—if any remain among us—who have been taught to regard
the Kabbalah, on so-called “ occult ”’ authority, as a doctrine
of certitude, whereas it is largely empirical, its leading
theorems giving rise to as much disputation regarding their
proper meaning as the principles of any other speculative
philosophy.

The commentary on the Book oF CONCEALMENT, as might
be expected, is written undesignedly on the /acus a non lucendo
principle. It does not yield readily to an analysis of contents,
as it takes various paragraphs of the text and exposes their
meaning consecutively, with the help of the Ipra RasBa and
Ipra Zouta. The peculiar designation of the treatise is said
to arise out of Proverbs xxv. 2: “It is the glory of God to
conceal a thing,” land Ibid. xi.2: “ With the lowly is wisdom.”
The second reference explains why it is termed both the Boox
OF CONCEALMENT and that of Mopzsty. On the authority
of the Zohar, section PEKupDE, the balance symbol, which has
made this treatise so famous in Kabbalism, is affirmed to
represent the Male and Female principles, which indeed
follows from the developments of the Lesser Hoty Synop.
The male denotes Mercy, the right-hand Pillar of the Szp-
HIROTH, and the female Severity, the Pillar on the left hand.
These principles are termed the Father and the Mother, and
in the Hebrew Alphabet are referable to Jop and Hz. The
Father is perfect love and the Mother perfect severity. The
latter had seven sons, namely, the Edomite Kings, who had
no foundation in the Holy Ancient One.? These are empty

1 Or according to the Vulgate: Gloria Dei est celare verbum.
2 See Book IV, § 3, p. 141.

EXPOSITORS OF THE ZOHAR 417

lights dispelled by the source of lights concealed within the
Mother. Male and female are conformations of the Holy
Ancient One, corresponding to KrrHer, and represented
mySstically by three heads signifying: (a) the Unmanifested
Wisdom, which is so withdrawn that it is as though it were
not, in contradiction to that which is manifested in the thirty-
two paths; (%) the Supreme Crown, which is the Holy
Ancient One; and (¢) the Head which neither knows nor is
known, namely, Ain SopH. ‘Thus on the one side of KETHER
is CHoKMAH, ot Wisdom: this is the Father; while on the
other is Binau, the Mother or increment of Understanding ;
and above is the /atens Deitas.

These instances of Loria’s skill in developing and distorting
the Zoharic symbolism of the three supernal SEPHIROTH must
suffice as a specimen of the whole commentary, which, it may
be added, does not proceed—in this its Latin version, beyond
the first chapter of the Book oF CONCEALMENT. Loria
affirms, as the sum of the whole mystery, that man in his
ptayers should fix his mind upon the foundation of all founda-
tions, that he may derive to himself a certain influence and
benedi€tion from the depths of that source. In this manner
the obscurities of Kabbalism are redeemed at times by the
simplicity and depth of the lesson which is extracted from
them.

THE Book OF THE REVOLUTIONS OF SOULS is obviously of
more living consequence than an obscure exposition of so
obscure a work as SrpHra Di ZENIOUTHA ; but it is difficult
to give account of it in a small space because the system which
it develops is involved, even for a Kabbalistic work. The
greatest importance has been attached to it by speculators like
Eliphas Lévi, who made no distinG@tion between Zoharic and
later doctrine.

The basis of its scheme is the dodrine of the Book oF
CONCEALMENT and its expository synods concerning the
Seven Edomite Kings who emanated and passed away prior
to the production of the present universe. In these Kings
there was good as well as evil, and a separation therefore was
made, that which was good being used for the material of the
Four Kabbalistic Worlds as they are now constituted. Each
of these Worlds, according to Isaac de Loria, has its Macro-
pRrosopus, Supernal Father, Supernal Mother, Microprosopus
and Bride, all derived from the Seven Kings. A like origin

418 THE HOLY KABBALAH

is attributed to souls, and they are disposed similarly in the
Four Worlds, some corresponding to the Bride, some to
Microprosoprus, some to the Father Supernal, some to the
Supernal Mother and some again to Macroprosopus in the
World of Asstau. The totality of these souls constitutes
Psyche in AsstaH, which in reference to the Supernal Per-
sonalities of that World has therefore five parts: the Psyche
in the Psyche, or NEPHESH of AsstAH, the mundus fattivus ; the
medial spirit, or RuaH of the Psyche fattiva; the mens, ot
NEsHAMAH ; the vétalitas, or Hata; and the singularitas,
individuality, or YEHIDAH, all belonging to the Psyche fattiva,
or NepHesH of AssiaAH. ‘There is a similar distribution
through the Three Superior Worlds, Ruan and its five-fold
division being referred to YETzIRAH, NESHAMAH to BrIAH,
CuiaH to ATzILuTH, and JEcHIDA, possibly to the World of
Unmanifest Deity which is beyond ArzitutH ; but Lotia’s
system is not extended above the measures of the Tree of Life.
Each of the five divisions is again attributed as follows in the
Sephirotic scheme :

I. NepHesH to Marxuts, the Kingdom, 2.e., the Bride.
II. Ruaw to the SEPHIROTH of MICROPROSOPUS.
III. NesHAMAH to the Mother, 7.e., BINAH.
IV. Curau to the Father, z.e., CHOKMAH.
V. YEHIDAH to KETHER, 7.¢., the Crown.!

We ate now in a position to appreciate the standpoint of
Franck when he observed that Loria added his own reveties
to Zohatic teaching. The developments have at the same
time been considerably simplified in this digest.

All these souls were contained in the Archetypal or Proto-
plastic Adam at the time that he was formed, some corte-
sponding to the head, others to the eyes, and so with all the
members. But these souls are those of the Israelites, who
ate gens unica in terram. “We must look elsewhere for the
otigin of the nations of the world. The recrements, the evil
and rejected parts of the Edomite Kings are the cortices ot
shells which compose the averse Adam Belial, evolved by our
late expositor from rare Zoharic allusions to the SEPHIROTH

1 It follows that each of the Four Worlds has the Four Worlds within it, and the
Ten SEpH1ROTH tabulated in the authentic Tree of Life. Other Loria speculations
shew each SEPHIRA as containing all S—pHrrRorH. Compare Book VI, § 2, p. 254.
There is perhaps a certain vestige of this notion in the ZoHAR.

EXPOSITORS OF THE ZOHAR 419

of the shadow. ‘When the Adam and Eve of Genesis partook
of the forbidden fruit, their fall confounded the good with
the evil of the cortices, that of Adam with the male shells of
Samael or Adam Belial, and that of Eve with the evil of his
bride Lilith, the spurcities of the serpent ; for the serpent had
commerce with Eve according to Issac de Loria, which is a
recurring but not invariable doétrine of the ZouHar. It was
after this fall that the nations of the world were produced
from the shells. This is the doétrine which certain dreamers
of the late nineteenth century accepted by implication when
they spoke of the connedion between later Kabbalism and
the Secret Traditions on which their devotion was fixed. To
put the position tersely, the souls of the Israelites were
distributed in the members of the protoplastic Adam, regarded
in his mystical extension through the four worlds, and the
souls of the Gentiles in the members of Adam Belial, belonging
to the Avetse Tree. It is not seemingly affirmed that if man
had remained in perfection he would have procreated accord-
ing to the way of Nature and brought an Israel of super-
election into the world; but the Fall at least was responsible
for the souls of the nations taking flesh on earth. Liberation
from the foulness and venom of the serpent—as things are—
is by generation and death only, whereby the good is separated
from the evil, until all nations of the world shall have been
brought forth from the evil and the Israelites from the good
kind.

From the time when the good and evil were thus con-
founded two things have been necessary: (1) that the good
man should be separated from the evil; (2) that the portion
of the good should be restored. The first is accomplished by
observation of the prohibitive precepts of the Law, and the
second by that of the affirmative. Both classes must be
accomplished in all their number, and in thought, word
and deed, by every soul, whose revolutions therefore must
continue until the whole Law has been fulfilled. This Law
must be studied also in. each of its four senses, failing which
the revolutions of the deficient soul will further be prolonged.
This scheme seems to apply exclusively to the Israelites, as the
nations of the world can be destined only to return whence
they came, and Adam Belial is obviously not under the Law.
The scheme, however, is subject to a certain mitigation, as
revolution proper is sometimes replaced by Status embryonatus.

420 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Revolution is the entrance of a soul into the body of an
infant at birth, to experience the pain and trial prepared for
that body. ‘The alternative condition is the entrance of a
soul into the body of a grown man, who must be at least
thirty years old,1 z.e., when he is obliged to fulfil the precepts.
The status embryonatus is entered either (a) because the soul in
question has something to fulfil which was neglected in the
preceding revolution ; or (4) for the benefit of the man who
is impregnated, 7.¢., to justify and dire& him. Revolution
occurs (1) for the cleansing of sin; (z) for the fulfilment of a
neglected precept; (3) for the leading of others into the
right way, in which case the returning soul is perfe@ in justice ;
(4) to receive the true spouse, who was not deserved by the
soul in the prior revolution. Four souls may revolve in one
body, but not more, while the Satws embryonatus may associate
three alien souls with a single man, but again no more. The
object of all revolutions and all Kabbalistic embryology is the
return of the Israelites into the stature of the first Adam, all
having been involved in his fall since he included all.

The Kabbalistic doétrine of revolution according to Isaac
de Loria is not Zoharic doétrine—though it has a certain
ground therein—nor is it a scheme of reincarnation peculiar
to any other school of theosophy in the past or at the present
day. In so far as it differs from the Zonar, it would be un-
reasonable to regard it as a fuller light of any old Tradition ;
it is greatly curious, yet fitly described as a reverie, written by
R. Hayyim Vital out of the head of Isaac de Loria, and perhaps
owing something to the scribe.

C.—NaptHaut Hrrrz

This German Kabbalist, who is known otherwise as
Napthali Herz ben Jacob Elhanan, was born at Frankfort-on-
the-Main in the second half of the sixteenth century, but he is
said to have lived in Palestine and presumably died there at an
uncettain date, few biographical particulars being extant
concerning him. His work, entitled THE VALLEY OF THE
KiNG, was made great use of by Rosenroth, who gave, firstly,
a compendium of its content * in the form of one hundred and

1 The Jewish age of reason.
2 So far at least as the first part is concerned, being that which was printed at Amster-

dam, 1648, undet the title of Emzx Ha-Metex. ‘The second part, or GAn HA-MELEK,
has remained in manuscript.

EXPOSITORS OF THE ZOHAR 421

thirty Kassatistic THeEsEs,! arranged with considerable
petspicuity ; in the second place, the first six se€tions of the
treatise, designed as an introduction to the Zour for the
better comprehension thereof ; ? and, thirdly, all that part of
it which is concerned with the Book oF CONCEALMENT and
the two Synods as a commentary on these works.? A large
part of the Royat Vauuey is included therefore in KABBALA
DenupaTa, the excerpts extending over several hundred
pages. Its author belonged to the school of Isaac de Loria,
and he appears to have traversed a portion of the ground
coveted by the Lorian MSS. of R. Hayyim Vital. After the
same manner that these develop and exaggerate Zoharic
metapsychical teaching, so the Royat VALLEY extends Kab-
balistic cosmology, and classifies it in correspondence with the
parts or divisions of the human soul, as these are found in the
ZOHAR. The mundus prior of Kabbalism, 7.¢., the emanation
of the Seven Edomite Kings, is termed the world of NEPHEsH,
and it was destroyed with,the souls belonging to it because
evil prevailed therein. The a€tual world is that of Ruan, in
which good and evil are confused, but good comes out of the
evil and at last all shall be good. Then a new world shall
succeed, being that of NEsHAMAH, and this will be the Sabbath
of Grace. It follows therefore that the present order must
pass away, and this is symbolised by the death of the second
Hadad, the eighth Edomite King, as recorded in 1 Chron. i.
50, 51. In the day of this destruction the spirits of impurity,
namely, the shells, shall be burnt up entirely, God will
establish a new creation and will bring forth from His glorious
light the mystery of the NesHAMAH of His Great Name.
The dominion of this NesHamaH is the King who shall reign
overt Israel, and in that day the Lord shall be one, and His
Name one.

The hypothesis of the creation of the world begins with
the contraction of the Divine Presence, producing that space
which is termed primeval air. “‘ Before the emanations
issued forth and the things which are were created, the
Supreme Light was extended infinitely. When it came into
the Supreme Mind to will the fabrication of worlds, the issue
of emanations and the emission as light of the perfection of

1 KaBBALA DeNuDATA, Apparatus in Librum Sobar pars secunda, i. 150 et seq.
2 Thid. ti. 152 et seq.
3 Ibid. ii. partis secunde tratiatus quartus, pp. 47 et seq.

422 THE HOLY KABBALAH

His active powers, aspects and attributes, then that Light was
in some measure compressed, receding in every direction
from a particular central point, and thus a certain vacuum
was left in mid-infinite, wherein emanations might be mani- »
fested.”’

It is to this treatise that Kabbalism owes the curious
conception of the evolution of SEPHIROTH by a process of
explosion, through the excess of light which distended them.
From the fragments of the broken vessels originated the Four
Worlds, the shells both good and evil, and myriads of souls.
This notion is fundamentally similar to.that of Isaac de Loria,
and becomes identical in its developments. As it is im-
possible to compress the scheme of the treatise within the
limits that are here possible, I will add only that the Roya,
VALLEY tegatds KETHER as containing 7m potentia all the
remaining SEPHIROTH, so that originally they were not distin-
guishable therefrom. “ Precisely as in man there exist the
four elements in potence but undistinguishable specifically, so
in this Crown there were all the remaining numerations.” It
is added that in the Second World, called that of restoration,
KerTHER became the Cause of Causes and the Ancient of the
Ancients. We see therefore that, according to this late
school of Kabbalism, the first attempt at manifestation by the
jatens Deitas went utterly astray, and that the evil of the whole
world is the result of the failure of God—a peculiar reverie
which is found also in the Talmud.

D.—ABRAHAM COHEN [RIRA !

This Spanish Jew was another and late follower of the
school of de Loria, but tin€tured by Platonic philosophy,
which he sought to harmonise with Kabbalism in his GaTE
OF THE HEAVENS.? His other treatise is BErH ELouim, the
House oF Gop, containing three dissertations in exposition
of the do&rines of Loria, but founded upon and citing at
considerable length the metapsychical portions of the Farrn-
FUL SHEPHERD, the PEKUDE section in the ZoHAR, and the

1 The name is given in the form adopted by Rosenroth and as such familiar. It is
otherwise Abraham Cohen de Herrera and accurately Alonzo de Herrera, who was of
Spanish birth, but died at Amsterdam in 1631.

2 KABBALA DENUDATA, Apparatus ... pars tertia, t. 1.

\

]

THE SSEPHIRO taeINeGIRCLES

acing page 422

F,

ns .
a Le a ey Sin

1
ca

iw a ; ‘
; AP te be
gis a | Ss i oy ¥ wy ts “gx
: ‘ ; ,

LAG ‘Sabls sy
a i
Trae atl 7. VPs

LF <
ri i by a yw, 7 Fes q ax Nihon
i - a : iy. -

i }

24 tn ae
aA? i ;

a tat

EXPOSITORS OF THE ZOHAR 423

ANCIENT SUPPLEMENTS of that work.1 So much space has
been given already to Kabbalistic psychology that it will be
permissible to dismiss this writer in a few words. ‘The first
dissertation in the Housz or Gop rests chiefly on Zoharic
utterances attributed to R. Simeon ben Yohai, who is termed
the mouthpiece of holiness and the angel of the Lord; it
recites the emanation of the SEPHIROTH according to the
received doétrine, develops the system of the hierarchy of
evil spirits, who are termed cortices, or shells, and of the
ten sinister or impure Numerations—otherwise, the AvERSE
SEPHIROTH. It examines also in a special chapter the opinion
of R. Isaac de Loria concerning eleven classes of shells, and
of R. Moses of Cordova concerning the connection of the
angels with the celestial bodies, and concerning their physical
vestments. The second dissertation treats of the different
angelical orders and the seven heavens, while the third deals
with elementary spirits and the nature of the soul.

We have seen that the House or Gop has been included
unaccountably by some occult writers 2—who did not know
their subje@—among the books which constitute the ZoHAR,
but it is a commentary or development, of considerable
importance in its own sphere, yet neither possessing nor
claiming any pretension to antiquity. Both works were
written in Spanish and remained in manuscript till they had
been translated into Hebrew, in which form they appeared at
Amsterdam in 1665.

E.—IssACHAR BEN NAPTHALI

This expositor of Kabbalism seems to have been a contem-
porary of Loria, and, like him, was a German. His chief
work, the VISION OF THE PRIEST, was printed at Cracovia in
1559.° Itisasynopsis of the entire ZOHAR, of, more properly,
a methodised analysis of its contents, distributed under a
number of titles, each of which is sub-divided according to
the Mosaic books. It has been found almost impossible to
make use of it for the purposes of this study, and it is indeed
designed only for the assistance of the scholar who may

1 KABBALA DENUDATA, ii. parts tertia tratiaius I., pp. 188 et seq.

2 As, for example, S. L. MacGregor Mathers in the introduétion to his KABBALAH
UNVEILED.

3 Translated in the KanpaLA DenupaTA, ii. pars prima ejusque tratlatus primus, p. 1.
of seq.

H.K,. FF

424 THE HOLY KABBALAH

desire to consult the ZoHAR on a given subje&. The other
works of R. Issachar are of similar charaéter, and are, in fact,
those technical treatises mentioned at the beginning of the
present section as outside the scope of the present inquiry. I
find no particulars concerning him, even in the JEwIsH
ENCYCLOP&DIA, which fails to follow up a cross-reference s.v.
Napthali Herz ben Issachar.

IlL—THE BOOK OF PURIFYING FIRE

When a given order of mystical symbolism, possessing
distin@ objets and a sphere of application more or less
defined, is applied to the purposes of another order, we may
expect to derive some curious results from the analogy thus
instituted if we can get to understand the method, though, as I
have indicated, this superincession of typology tends to be
somewhat dazing in its results. The treatise entitled AisH
MEZzAREPH, which signifies Purifying Fire, is an instance of
the application of Kabbalistic apparatus to the purposes of
Alchemy, and is, so far as I am aware, the sole instance of its
kind. In this connection, however, we shall do well to
remember that Hermetic and Kabbalistic philosophy are
asctibed by some authorities on occultism to a common
soutce,t while the rabbinical influence on Alchemy is
illustrated by such inventions as that about Rabbi Abraham
and Flamel, not to speak of a work under the title of THE
PHILOSOPHICAL STONE, which is attributed idly to Saadiah by
Moses Bottrel, and is known only by a single quotation. A
few metallic allusions are to be found in the Zonar, which
recognises the existence of an archetypal gold, and regards the
metals generally as composite substances. But these refer-
ences ate almost less than incidental, and it is needless to say
that there is no cryptic chemistry whatever in the great
theosophical storehouse. |

The treatise on Purifying Fire is said to have been written
in Aramaic Chaldee. It was made use of so largely by
Rosenroth in his Lextcon that praétically the whole work is
affirmed to have been rendered into Latin in the pages of

1 Thus Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes), see Book X, § 11, affirms in his
Macria Apamica that the learning of the Jews, 7.e., their Kabbalah, was chemical, and
that Flamel’s Book oF ABRAHAM THE JEw is the best proof thereof. See A. E. Waite :
Tue Works oF THOMAS VAUGHAN, London, 1919, pp. 171, 172.

THE BOOK OF PURIFYING FIRE 425

Kappata Denupata.t It was reconstructed from this
soutce in the early part of the eighteenth century by an
Unknown Hermetic Student, styling himself a Lover of
Philalethes, and was by him put into an English vesture.2 In
the year 1894 this translation was included in a series of
Hermetic reprints under the editorship of Dr. Wynn Westcott.?
The preface and notes which accompany this edition appear
under the denomination of Sapere Aude, being one of his
pseudonyms, and have certain points of interest. No in-
formation is given, however—and of course none was to be
expected—as to the Chaldee original, either by the English
translator or his modern editor.

There is further no evidence available by which we can fix
with any degree of precision the period at which this treatise
was composed.* It is subsequent, of course, to the pro-
mulgation of the Zonar, which it quotes frequently. It is
subsequent to the GARDEN OF POMEGRANATES by R. Moses of
Cordova, a treatise belonging to the middle of the sixteenth
century, which it quotes also. It borrows processes from
R. Mordechai, a Kabbalistic alchemist, whose date I have
failed to discover,® and it refers to the Latin treatises of Geber.
We may conclude that it does not antedate Rosenroth by any
considerable period, and that it may be placed conjecturally at
the beginning of the seventeenth century, or a little earlier.
Finally, it contains expressions which are common to most
of the Latin alchemists, and were by them derived from the
Greeks, such as, “ He that is wise may correct natures.” It
does not possess the interest or importance which would
attach to a chemico-Kabbalistic treatise of the ZoHar period,

1 The authority—such as it is—is that of Dr. Westcott, but no one has seen the
original since Rosenroth, and the statement represents therefore not merely a personal
speculation, but one of a hazardous kind.

* /AsH MezarepuH, or Purifying Fire. A Chymico-Kabbalistic treatise colleted
from the KappaLa Denupata of Knorr von Rosenroth, London, 1714. Perhaps it
should be added that the translator’s pseudonym is an allusion to Eirenzus Philalethes,
a famous English adept of the seventeenth century, whose identity, like that of his
admirer, has never been discovered.

3 CoLLECTANEA Hermetica, vol. iv. London, 1894.

4 It is mentioned by Claverus in his OssERVATIONS ON THE Most UsEFuL THINGS
IN THE WORLD, 1706, pp. 72 e¢ seg. He gives an account of it designed to shew that the
Jews accommodated the Kabbalistic SEpHrrorH to CHrysopars, 7.e., the Art of
Alchemy. He States also that the Jews hold the isu Mzzarepu in such high esteem
that they consider no Christian worthy of reading it.

5 A number of writers, mostly Kabbalistic, are classed under this name in the biblio-
gtaphy of Bartolocci, but there is no alchemist among them, the statement obtaining
also for the Jew1sH ENCyCLOPD1IA, its cross-references included.

FF2Z

426 THE HOLY KABBALAH

and I have not been able to find any evidence on the authority
ascribed to it.?

In the supplement to his Key or THE Great MystTERIEs,
Eliphas Lévi gives, firstly, what he calls the fragments of the
/EsH MEZAREPH, tetming it one of the most important books
of Hermetic science ; secondly, the complements of its eight
chapters, being further fragments which he claims to have
discovered ; thirdly, a hypothetical restitution of the original.?
The methods of the brilliant French occultist are well illustrated
in each case. It should be observed that the fragments are
designed to exhibit the difficulties and the weariness which
his researches have spared to his readers, and to illustrate the
conscientious and serious nature of his studies. The first
section proves when examined not to be fragments of the
/isH MEZzAREPH, but a loose paraphrase which has a very
slender correspondence with the original. The second
section, which is similarly paraphrase, is substantially to be
found in Rosenroth and the English version. The hypo-
thetical reconstruction serves only to shew that Lévi, like
every one else, never saw the original which some have said
is Still extant, or he would not have so misplaced his ingenuity.
Lastly, he attributes the work to Rabbi Abraham of the
Flamel mythos, thus investing it with an antiquity which is
contradicted by its own references.? )

Before indicating, however briefly, the heads of its contents,
it is necessary to observe that A4sH MrEzaArzEpH must be for the
otdinary student only a curious memorial of the conneétions
instituted between two orders of cryptic symbolism. It is
described by its latest editor as “suggestive rather than
explanatory,” and he adds that its alchemical processes are not
set forth “in such a way that they could be carried out by a

1 Dr. Gerhard Scholem published an interesting and important study of ALCHEMY
AND THE KABBALAH in the MONATSCHRIFT FUR GESCHICHTE UND WISSENSCHAFT DES
JupENTUMS in 1925 and reprinted it subsequently as a pamphlet. He affirms that
after examining every Kabbalistic text which came within his reach, it is certain that
Alchemy and Kabbalism cannot be reconciled, if only because gold is the perfe& metal
for the one and silver for the other. As to AEsH MEZAREPH, it is concerned with
producing silver rather than gold, but it is not a treatise on actual processes of trans-
mutation. Its Kabbalistic parts may be circa sixteenth century. It should be noted
that, according to the Zonar, II, 147b; IV., 65, gold is superior to silver.

2 La CLEF DES GRANDS MysTERES. See RENSEIGNEMENTS sur /es grands mySfteres de la
philosophie hermétique, pp. 405 et seq.

8 Firstly, in the title, which reads, Fragments de L’ AsH Mézarepu du Juif Abraham ;
secondly, in the hypothetical recomposition of the treatise which conneés it with the
mystical book possessed by Flamel. The 4s Mezarepn is entirely anonymous, and
is included as such in the bibliography of Wolf, ii. 1265.

THE BOOK OF PURIFYING FIRE 427

neophyte ; any attempt to do so would discover that some-
thing vital was missing at one stage or other.” The fact is
so true of all alchemical literature that it does not need stating,
and the ZsH MEzareru has the common difficulties of purely
Hermetic books complicated further by the system of Gematria
and the Sephirotic correspondences of metals.

On the correspondences here indicated the treatise is based
mainly, and it is in this sense that the mysteries of alchemical
transmutation are said to “differ not from the superior
mysteries of the Kabbalah.” The SzpHrrotu of the material
world are identical with those of the archetypal, and they are
the same in the mineral kingdom. ‘The alchemical root of
the metals corresponds to KrerHer; all metals originate
therefrom, as the other SEPHIROTH are all emanations from
the Crown. ‘The metallic root is concealed, and so also is
the Crown. Lead is referred to Cookman, which proceeds
immediately from KErHER, as Saturn from the metallic root.
Tin has the place of Binau, Silver that of CHEsED, and these
three are the white metallic natures. Among the red, Gold is
is in correspondence with Grpuran, Iron with TreHERETH,
and the hermaphroditic Brass with Nrerzacny and Hop.
Quicksilver is referred to JEsop, and “ the true Medicine of
Metals ” to MatxutH. ‘The attribution will appear in some
cases a little conventional, and it depends upon a curious use
of Scriptural authority. However, the writer adds: “ If any
one hath placed these things in another order, I shall not
contend with him, inasmuch as all systems tend to the one
truth.” In illustration of this, he cites another attribution,
as follows :

“The three Supernals,” namely, KerHER, CHOKMAH and
Brnan, “are the three fountains of metallic things.’ “The
thick water,” that is, Mercury, “is KerHeEr, Salt is CHOKMAH
and Sulphur is Brnau.” These are the Three Principles of the
alchemists. This attribution, says the treatise, is “‘ for known
reasons.” CHESED, GEBURAH and TIPHERETH correspond as
before to Silver, Gold and Iron; Nerzacu is Tin, Hop is
Copper, JEsop is Lead, while Marxuru is the “ Metallic
Woman,” the “‘ Luna of the Wise” and the “ Field into
which the seeds of secret minerals ought to be cast, that is,
the Water of Gold.” ‘The attribution in either case has a
concealed sense which “no tongue may be permitted to
utter.” It seems to follow that superficial explanations

428 THE HOLY KABBALAH

offered at one and another point should not be taken literally,
as, for example, that Silver is referred to CHESED “‘ on account
of its whiteness, which denotes Mercy and Pity.” The
Kamea or Magical Squares of the planets are given in con-
nection with each of the seven metals, but not always correétly
in the printed copies.

The peculiar genius of the work is illustrated in the third
chapter, where Daniel’s vision of the beast with ten horns is
interpreted alchemically by the help of gematria.+

TIl—THE MYSTERIES OF LOVE

With the sole exception of Abraham Cohen Irira, the
succession of Kabbalistic writers whom we have thus passed
in review never descended to the use of a vulgar tongue. To
that exception we must now add the case of R. Juda, son of
Isaac Abravanel, better known under the designation of Leo
the Hebrew. His inclusion in an account of developments
which find their place in Kabbalism is to be justified only as
an example of the distance which was ttavelled at times.
Leo is, comparatively speaking, early, though I have placed
him later, for it is only at a far distance that he offers any link
with the ZoHar, which obviously he had never seen. He
was born in the kingdom of Castile shortly after the middle of
the fifteenth century, and it is even stated that he broke away
from all Jewish tradition by becoming a Christian. At the
same time there are two additional points by which he is
forced upon our notice: in the first place, he has been a
favourite subject of allusion with some modern esoteric
writers, and should not be overlooked therefore in a work
which is compelled to recognise the recurring fat of
occult interest in Kabbalism; in the second place, his dia-
logues on love have been more popular than any Kabbalistic
treatise—actual or imputed. According to the best opinion,
they were written originally in Italian: in any case, they
appeared in this language at Rome in the year 1535. They
were teprinted at Venice in 1541. Then they were translated
into Latin by Sarrazin, being published, according to Wolf,
in 1564 at Vienna. This version, which has been praised for
its elegance, was included by Pistorius in his famous Artis

1 For another excursus of my own on A’sH Mzzarepy the reader may consult
Tw Secret TRADITION IN ALCHEMY, Appendix II, pp. 377-394.

THE MYSTERIES OF LOVE 429

CABALISTICA SCRIPTORES, Basle, 1587. They were rendered
twice into Spanish, the first version, and the only one of my
acquaintance, being that of Juan Costa, in 1584. Lastly,
there have been at least three French translations, namely, by
Pontus de Thiard, 1580; the Seigneur du Parc Champerrois ;
and Alexander Weill, 1875.

Though he wrote, as it is said, in Italian, Abravanel was
Portuguese by bitth, but was removed by his father to Spain
and thence to Italy, through the edict of Ferdinand and
Isabella. ‘This was in 1492. His first refuge was Naples,
where he entered the king’s service; but the king died and
his realm fell into the hands of Charles VIII., after which the
“Spanish Jew” became once more a wanderer. Some say
that he retired to Sicily, afterwards to Corfu and Ponilles, and,
finally, to Venice, where he died in 1535. Others relate that
he fixed his abode at Genoa, and there practised medicine
with honour for a long period. As to the change, real or
pretended, in his religious opinions there is also serious con-
fusion. Basnage says that he was a man of a mild nature who
mixed familiarly with Christians, but inveighed against them
in his writings, especially against the priests and the Pope.?
Pistorius, on the other hand, represents him as a converted
Jew.? He is the subject of high praise, based on intimate
knowledge; in the bibliography of Bartolocci.?

The interest in Leo the Hebrew can be only of a mystical
kind, and it is on this basis presumably that he was included by
Pistorius in his ambitious and unfinished attempt to engarner
the signal treatises of Kabbalism. Even so, it is difficult to
see that such a text has any title to a place among records of
the Secret Tradition in Israel. We look in vain for the
essential doétrines of Jewish Theosophy, as these are en-
shrined in the ZoHar; we have in their place the elegant
sentimentalism which characterised Italian literature at the
petiod ; we are reminded now of Boccalini, and now of the
declamatory Latin, exercises of Palingenius. The machinery
of the dialogues, if they can be said to possess machinery,
belongs to classical mythology ; the allusions, the illustrations,

1 Hisr. DES Jurrs, 1. vii. t. v. pp. 1898, 1899.

2 So also does Drach in his notice of the Kabbalah in L7HARMONIE ENTRE L’EGLISE
ET LA SYNAGOGUE.

3 BIBLIOTHECA RABBINICA, iii. 86. There is no mention of his conversion in the
notice, but the original edition of the Dialogues describes their author as di natione
Hebreo et di poi faito Christiano. \There seems to be good evidence against the testimony.

430 THE HOLY KABBALAH

the images are echoes of Greek and Latin poets; when the
philosophical authority is not Aristotle, it is Plato; there is
only one direct reference to the Kabbalah in the whole three
hundred folio pages which the dialogues occupy in Pistorius,
and it is then a slender allusion to successive renewals of the
world, which suggests that the author had misconceived the
“ restoration ” of the Book oF CONCEALMENT. As against
this there is not one trace of characteristic Hebrew thought or
influence ; there is nothing which would lead us to suspect a
Jewish authorship, except such negative evidence as the
absence of any Christian reference. If the work can be said
to recall anything outside the belles seitres of the sixteenth
century in Italy, it is certain Sufic poets adapted to the under-
Standing of Venetian ladies in the days of the Doges. And
here, indeed, is the true secret of its popularity. It is not only
so pleasing, so educated according to the lights of its period,
so correct in its sentiment and breathing too often so little but
mere sentiment, so refined in its amorous passion and so much
above reproach, that it does not contain a single indelicacy
or a single recondite thought, until it passes towards the
heights of its subject, as the undertaking draws to a close.
One of its French translators has thought it worth while to
append a glossary of its difficult words, but it has no difficulties
and its words are simplicity itself. It has many passages
which even at the present day may be called delightful
reading, and it is redeemed from the commonplaces of senti-
ment by tender suggestions of shallow allegory. The Philo
and Sophia of the dialogue are enough by their mere names
to suggest transcendentalism to an occult Student, and more
than one criticism has supposed it to be concerned ab initio
and only with the love of God. As a fact it discerns in all
things the activity, the influence and the power of the master
passion, and another of the secrets of its popularity in the
warm-blooded world of the South is that however much love
is transcendentalised in the dialogues, it is always sexual, as it
is throughout the ZoHar. So also the philosophy of this
love is the do&rine of delectation and felicity. DeleCation is
union with the beloved, and the good and the beautiful are
identified in words that recall the light metaphysics of Cousin
and the blessed life of Fichte. |

The general definition of love is that it is a vivifying spirit
which permeates all the world, and a bond uniting the entire

THE MYSTERIES OF LOVE 431

universe. But the proper definition of the perfe& love of
man and woman is the concurrence of the loving with the
beloved to this end, that the beloved shall be transformed into
the lover. When such love is equal between the partakers it
is described as the conversion of the one into the other
being. Below such human love in apotheosis, there is not
only that which subsists among mere animals, but in things
insensible, in the hypothetical first matter, in the elements
and in the heavenly bodies, which are drawn one to the other
and move in regular order by the harmonious impulse and
interaction of a reciprocal affection.

Hereof is the form and the spirit, and—for the rest—
though I have spoken plainly, this Book of Love and its
Mysteries moves forward to deeper things, when the know-
ledge of God is presented, as regards language and images,
under a transcendentalised sexual aspe&t. God is loved in
proportion as He is known, and as He cannot be known
entirely by men, nor His wisdom by the human race, so He
cannot be loved as He deserves, for such an exalted sentiment
transcends the power of our will. The mind therefore must
be content to know God according to the measure of its
possibility and not that of His excellence. The knowledge
and love of God are both necessary to beatitude, for He is
the True Intelle€tual Agent with Whom consists felicity,
which is not to be found in the knowledge of all things, but
in the One alone Who is Himself all others. This felicity
does not consist in the cognoscitive a& of God, which leads
to love, nor in the love which succeeds such knowledge, but
in the copulation of the most interior and united Divine
Knowledge, for this is the sovereign perfection of the created
intellect, the last a&t and happy end in which it finds itself
rather divine than human. Such copulative felicity with God
cannot be continuous, however, during our present life,
because our intellect is here joined to the matter of our
fragile body. |

It may be added that Leo the Hebrew, like Raymund
Lully, accounts for the self-sufficiency of the Divine Nature
on the ground that the love, the lover and the beloved are all
one in God; that God alone is the end of all love in the
universe; and that His love towards His creatures is the
Stimulation of a desire of good for their sake and not for His
own. It may be inferred also that a mystical meaning is not

432 THE HOLY KABBALAH

imptobably contained in such speculations as that of the
sleep of love, of amorous contemplation, of the graving of
the image of the beloved in the thought of the lover, and of
the ravishment of this state. In other terms and in another
setting, it could be said that all this belongs to the root-
matter of highest Mysticism. It is here and there like a door
which opens on the Infinite; but it is to be feared that if
Abravanel had concetved something in the mind on these
great subjects, he had not conceived in the soul.

IV.—MINOR LITERATURE OF KABBALISM

We have now completed our study of the chief Kabbalistic
writings to which any currency has been given; but we have
by no means exhausted the literature either before or after
the appearance of the Zonar. It has been classified in
chronological order, but otherwise uncritically enough, in a
special list by Bartolocci at the beginning of his vast work,
and those who desire to pursue the subject further will there
see how impossible it is to deal with in this place. It is,
moreover, outside the purpose of our inquiry. A few
names, however, may be mentioned which are to some
extent typical of the minor literature of Kabbalism.

When the Zowar was on the verge of the historical horizon,
in the reign of Alphonso X., we find at Toledo Rabbi Mevi,
the son of Theodote, Prince of the Levites of Burgos. Though
a Kabbalist and a light of Kabbalism, he opposed Nah-
manides, thus shewing that at a comparatively early period
there was little unanimity among the doctors of Theosophy
and the voices of Tradition, on the subject of Tradition or
Theosophy. His book is entitled BErorE AND BEHIND,
which is supposed to indicate that he had approached the
Kabbalah from every point of view.?

Side by side with philosophical Kabbalism the spurious
practical part, the Ars KABBALISTICA, never wanted its pro-
fessors. As neither worse nor better than the rest we may
mention R. Chamai of Arragon, in the early part of the
fifteenth century. One of his praétical secrets was the
determination of the sex of an unborn child by placing the
nuptial couch from North to South, thus indicating respect

1 Bartolocci, BrstiorHECA MAGNA Rassinica, iv, 18; Basnage, HisroIRE DES
Jutrs, v, 1773. ,

MINOR LITERATURE OF KABBALISM 433

for the majesty of God, which resides between East and West,
and might suffer dishonour by marital intercourse taking
place in the same direétion. Such consideration, it was
deemed, would not go without its reward in the birth of male
children.}

In the reign of Ferdinand and Isabella, and a victim of
their edi& of expulsion, flourished Joseph Gikatilla, called the
divine Kabbalist and the Thaumaturge, who wrote on the
attributes of God, the Divine Names and the SEPHIROTH.?
He has been mentioned already.

At the period of Picus de Mirandula Kabbalists abounded
in Italy, many of whom were refugees from persecution in
Spain and Portugal. Picus in his ApoLocra affirms that his
demonstrations of Christian dogma in Jewish Theosophy
effected the conversion of a Kabbalist named Dattilius. As
it is one of few instances on record, the sincerity of the change
may be allowed to pass unchallenged. Long afterwards,
that is to say, in 1613, Samuel Nahunias, a Jew of Thessalonica,
but residing at Venice, also abjured Judaism and wrote the
PatH OF FarrH. So also, about 1672, Mordekai Kerkos
composed a treatise directed against the Kabbalah ; but it has
not been printed. Basnage hints that such an action at that
period seemed scarcely less subversive in Israel than to
embrace Christianity. On the other hand, Judas Azael,
about the same period, contributed to the literature of the
Tradition by his THRONES OF THE HousE oF Davin, a treatise
dealing with the Fifty Gates of Understanding, while in
Germany Nathan of Spire, better known, however, for a
treatise in praise of the Holy Land, produced a Kabbalistic
commentary on Deuteronomy ili. 13, under the title of
MeciLLAH HaMNEOTH. In Holland, a few years previously,
the famous Manasses composed his work on the resurrection
of the body, which connects with Jewish esoteric theology
Jurrs, v, 1895. .

2 Ibid. v, 1899.

$ In the sixteenth century Paul Elhananan became a convert to Christianity, and in
his MystEr1umM Novum sought to prove from the Kabbalah that Jesus of Nazareth
was the true Messiah. Petrus Galatinus also abjured Judaism; so did Johannes
Fortius, who wrote on the mystical meanings of the Hebrew Letters. Paul de Heredia
was a convert of the fifteenth century. Bartolocci (iv, 420) mentions Louis Carrct,
a Frenchman of the sixteenth century, who in his Vrstons or Gop defended the truth
of the Catholic faith by means of the Kabbalah. Later names are Aaron Margalita,
whose many works attempted to Christianise the Kabbalah. There are also

Rittangelius, the editor of the SEpHER YETZIRAH, who turned Protestant ; and Prosper
Ruggieri, the astrologer.

434 THE HOLY KABBALAH

by its defence of metempsychosis; and Isaac About, a
Brazilian settled in the Low Countries, translated the Porta
Ca:Lorum of Abraham Cohen Irira from the original Spanish
into Hebrew. |

These meagre memoranda, which do not pretend to
represent a serious study, may close with the name of Spinoza,
who connects also with Kabbalism, though it must be con-
fessed that the tin¢ture which he exhibits is little more than
the memory of early reading.

BOOK X

SOME CHRISTIAN STUDENTS OF
THE KABBALAH

435

\% HOOK

40 QEY CACY Le MAT " COE rE
| HA. TA AD aa

fe .

BOOK X

SOME CHRISTIAN STUDENTS OF
THE KABBALAH

1.—INTRODUCTORY

So far as out inquiry has proceeded no theosophical system
would seem less connected with what is known conventionally
as Magic than is the Kabbalah to all outward appearance.
That there was, however, an imputed connection, there can
be and is no doubt, for side by side with the Secret Tradition
in Israel, as understood and set forth here, there was a so-called
Practical and Thaumaturgical Kabbalah which not only
belongs to Magic but has helped to create its forbidden arts
in the West, as stated summarily in an early part of the present
wotk. We owe our medieval witchcraft chiefly to this
source; we owe also our medieval demonology; and the
Jew, hounded out of Spain by the iniquitous edict of Ferdi-
nand and Isabella, left to the Inquisition and its devildom
another pretext for extermination, more fuel for the burning—
in a word, the tremendous legacy of sorcery. The Jew was
avenged in the magician.

When enumerating the alleged branches of Esoteric
Tradition in Israel I endeavoured to distinguish that of Magic
from Theosophy. While the traces of Theosophical Tradi-
tion are met with nowhere in remote antiquity, those of
Magic abound: be it observed that the reference is to
rumout and vestige, not to records at large, since these are
mostly late. It was to be expected that the newer order of
ideas should become interfused with the older. But the
SEPHER YETZIRAH and the Zowar ate not Magic, and that
which drew the Christian students of the literature and made
them seek to fathom the Kabbalistic Mystery was assuredly its
Theosophical, transcendental indeed, but not its thaumaturgic
part.

437

438 THE HOLY KABBALAH

We are on the track here of another misconception which
prevails among that class of thinkers who have discovered
most treason to concern themselves with the claims of the
Kabbalah. It is useless for the expositors of occult views
and their too easy disciples to continue, as they have done in
the past, appealing to Christian authorities as to great names
supporting their notion of the subject. Those who accepted
and those who vindicated the authenticity of the Secret
Tradition had never dreamed of a religion behind all religions,
nor did they look to Sanétuaries of Egypt for any light but
that which perchance was carried into it by the descendants
of Abraham. Persons of the class referred to have fallen
into two major among many minor errors. In the first place,
they cite as Christian Kabbalists various alleged authorities,
within and without the mystical circle, who have no claim to
the title ; in the second place, they misconstrue entirely the
position of those whose title itself may be beyond any chal-
lenge. Over and above these points, many names, great and
otherwise, which it looks well to engross on the deeds of a
brief for the defence, bear witness only to prevailing ignorance.

The purpose of the brief studies which follow is to demon-
Strate these facts, which are not without importance and are
therefore an integral part of my scheme. They are not
biographical sketches, and they are not bibliographical notes.
They are designed to exhibit that among the names commonly
cited in connection with Kabbalism, some should be removed
from the list ; some belong to a Quixotic attempt at discover-
ing an erenicon for Christendom and Jewry; some are not
worth citing, because, despite their imputed authority, they
have nothing of moment to tellus; and some,abare residuum,
with a handful of recent writers, may be left on the otherwise
vacated benches.

Il.—RAYMUND LULLY

The name of Raymund Lully has been cited as that of a
considerable authority on the Kabbalah, as upon several other
departments of secret knowledge. It is time to affirm that
few asctiptions seem to possess less foundation in fact. It
must be said, first of all, that there is indubitable evidence for
distinguishing between two persons at least who bore this
name: otherwise it was assumed for a second time at a later

RAYMUND LULLY 439

date. The original Raymund Lully was that seneschal of
Majorca whose legend is narrated in a monograph on the
dottor illuminators which I wrote in recent years.1 He was
born during the first half of the thirteenth century.2 The
second Raymund Lully was an alchemist. His legend,
enshrined in the deceitful memorial of a so-called Abbot of
Westminster,* was unknown, so far as I can trace, till the
beginning of the seventeenth century,° but the works by
which he is distinguished from his prototype are certainly
much earlier, possibly by two centuries.6 There is a third
and modern legend, which bears all the marks of invention
on the part of its narrator, Eliphas Lévi, and this identifies the
two personages by prolonging the life of the first through the
instrumentality of the Great Elixir.’ It is described as a
popular legend, but Raymund Lully and his namesake were
never of enough importance to impress the imagination of the
people. ‘The first was known chiefly as a scholastic reformer
and a Christian evangelist, martyred for an ill-judged attempt
at the propagation of the faith among the Mussulmen of
matics. (Phe second | has been “described 'ag! ‘a Jewish
neophyte,” the denomination on its surface suggesting a
proselyte of the gate. ‘This is therefore the personality which
would connect naturally with Kabbalism. The second Ray-
mund Lully connedts, however, exclusively with Alchemy,
and his works are evidence that he did not renounce the
Christian faith.§ It is to him must be attributed those Keys,

1 Raymund Luuty, ILtumiInATED Docror, ALCHEMIST AND CHRISTIAN MysTIC,
1922,

"3 The dates attributed to some of his works, if accurate, would shew that he was
separated from his successor by more than a century, but they are in a sad State of
confusion, and all popular sources of information are misleading. See, for example,
Blackie’s Popular Encyclopedia, s.v. Alchymy.

3 See my SECRET TRADITION IN ALCHEMY, 1926, pp. 131, 132.

4 ‘TESTAMENTUM CREMERI, Abbatis Westmonasteriensis, Angli, Ordinis Benedittint.

5 It was published at Frankfort in 1618, by Michael Maier, being the third tra& of
Tripus Aureus, hoc est tres tratiatus chymici selettssimi. In 1678 it reappeared in Museum
HERMETICUM Reformatum et Amplificatum, and is known in English by a translation of
that colleGtion, edited by myself, 2 vols. London. 1893.

6 They contain a few personal metnoranda, but of a mythical order.

7 With material derived from Eliphas Lévi, and a pyrotechnic terminology from
M. Huysman, a bizarre work entitled Le SaranisME Er LA Macaig, by Jules Bois,
compresses all the legends into one small pellet of fable which, published in 1895, was,
I suppose, the last memorial on the subje& of Raymund Lully till the Catalan poet of
that name began to attraét attention from the students of early Spanish literature.

8 Witness the address to the Deity at the head of the TEsramMENtUM Magiftri Raymundi
Luli (Mangetus: BrstiotHEcA CHEMIcA CuriosA, i. 707, 708); the last words of its
theoretical division—Lawus honor et gloria Jesu (ibid. 762) ; the TESTAMENTUM Novissrmum,
addressed to King Charles: Ideo mi Carole diletie, te in filium sapientia diletissimum ut

H.K. GG

440 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Compendiums, Testaments and Codicils of Alchemy which are
found in all the great collections of Hermetic treatises. He
was so far imbued with the apostolic spirit of his predecessor
that his great ambition was to engage some Catholic monarch
in another barren crusade for the recovery of the Holy
Sepulchre. According to his legend he transmuted into gold
sufficient base metal for the minting of six million nobles, and
gave it to an Edward, King of England, on condition that the
latter assumed the Red Cross. ‘The king did not keep his
promise, and the adept escaped as he could from the extortion
of further projections. |

The confusion of the two Raymunds is perhaps mote
excusable among occultists than for ordinary biographers.
That Alchemy connects with Kabbalism, or that Kabbalism
became identified with Alchemy, the treatise on Purifying Fire
Stands forth to bear its witness; but the alchemist per se is
not, as we have seen, a Kabbalist, and there is no single word
of Kabbalism in the Hermetic treatises of Raymund Lully the
second. The doctor of Majorca does conneté artificially with
the esoteric tradition of the Jews, by the arbitrary use of
certain words and methods, though he was not a proselyte of
the gate; but his intellectual system is a mechanical intro-
dudion to the sciences, and has no title to the name, having
nothing to do with a tradition, exoteric or esoteric, Jewish or
Gentile. It has, moreover, no mystical foundation, and is
concerned wholly with an educational method. It is untrue
therefore to say that Raymund Lully was one of the grand and
sublime masters of transcendent science, as Eliphas Lévi
describes him. In the Ars MacGna Screnpr and the Ars
Norortra there is as much occult significance as in the scholastic
jest concerning chimera bombinans in vacuo. ‘The Norary Art
of Solomon, which Robert Turner first printed in English,
connects remotely with Kabbalism, and the Ars Nororia of
Raymund Lully has a verbal connection, and no more, with
this enchiridion of Jewry. It is the same with the treatise
entitled DE Aupitu Kapauistico, an opusculum Raymundinum,
ot particular application of the method of Lully, which has
been ignorantly included among his works. The name alone

fidei catholica ampliatorem eligam; and again: Accipe igitur in nomine santle Trinitatis et
aterna Unitatis, &c. (ibid. p. 790).

1 See my op. cit., caps. iv, v and vi. It contains a full discussion of the two
Raymunds.

RAYMUND LULLY 441

is occult, and its selection is beyond conje€ture.1 The work
proves on examination to be a late offshoot of the great
vacant pretentious system which enabled those who mastered
it to dispute on all subjects with success, though perhaps
without knowledge of any. Some great minds were capti-
vated by it, but such captivities are among the weaknesses of
eteat minds. The best that can be said for the Ars MaGna
is that it was discoursed upon by Cornelius Agrippa, that it
was tolerated by Picus de Mirandula, and that the encyclo-
pedic mind of Athanasius Kircher had embraced it sufficiently
to produce a summa magna on the subject in one of his vast
folios. And of these faéts, at the present day, not one
possesses a consequence. The chief philosophical mission
of the first Raymund Lully was to protest against the school
of Avettoes ;? his chief practical work was the exhortation.
of ptelates and princes to found schools for the study of
languages so as to facilitate the conversion of the heathen ;
but there were few who heard or heeded him. It was only
after his death that his system obtained for a time a certain
vogue. ‘The collapse of the process of his beatification is one
of the escapes of the Latin Church, because it would have
helped to accredit a system which began and ended in words.
It was not, as it has been described erroneously, an universal

1 Tt is fair to say that Franck takes the opposite view, but with what qualification
for judgment may be gathered from the fact that he accepts the attribution to Lully
of the work mentioned above. He says that Lully was the first to reveal the name and
existence of the Kabbalah to Christian Europe, for which there is no ground in faé ;
he thinks that it would be difficult to determine how far Lully was “‘ an initiate of this
mystical science”’ or the precise influence which it exercised on his do@rine. “I
tefrain from saying with a historian of philosophy (Tennemann) that he borrowed
thence his belief in the identity of God and Nature ” (I think that Tennemann has here
misconstrued his author), “‘ but it is certain that he had a very high idea of it, con-
sidering it a divine science, a veritable revelation addressed to the rational soul, and
it may perhaps be permissible to suppose that the artificial processes used by Kabbaliéts
to conneét their opinions with the words of Scripture, such as the substitution of
numbers or letters for ideas or words, may have contributed in no small degree to the
invention of the Great Art. Itis worthy of remark that more than two centuries and a
half before the existence of the rival schools of Loria and Cordova, at the very time
when some modern critics have sought to place the origin of the Kabbalah, Raymund
Lully makes already a distin€@tion between ancient and modern Kabbalists.” The
passage on which Franck seems to depend for his general view is as follows: Dicitur
hac dotirina Kabbala quod, idem est secundum ... Hebreos ut receptio veritatis cujuslibet
rei divinitus revelate anime rationali . . . . Est igitur Kabbala habitus anime rationals ex
relia ratione divinarum rerum cognitivus. Propter quod apparet quod eft de maximo etiam divino
consequutive divina scientia vocari debet, This extra&t is derived from the Opus Raymundinum
already mentioned.

2 I am speaking throughout here of him who was Lully of the schools, whether or
not he was also that Catalan poet, whose title to greatness has emerged of recent
years, under the auspices of scholars who are content so far to know nothing of Ars
MAGNA. ;

GG2

442 THE HOLY KABBALAH

science, or a synthesis of knowledge ; it was chaffer and noise ;
its egregious tabulations are a mockery for the modern under-
Standing. Even the martyrdom of this eccentric Spanish
enthusiast had a strain of the folly of suicide, if the martyro-
logists have told it truly. It had, however, its defenders, and
it had in time its miraculous legend. So also, and for the
space of some centuries, there was a quiet and intelligible
cultus of Raymund Lully in the Balearic Islands, which, like
other local sanétities, seems even at the present day to be some-
thing more than a memory.

I should add, in conclusion, that there are works by or
attributed to the original Raymund Lully+ which have no
connection with his Ars MaGNna ScIENDI, as they have none
with imputed occult science: they belong to a higher cate-
goty. When we turn over the vast, uncompleted collection
of his OpERA OMNIA, and dwell, as the devout student will do,
on certain passages concerning the eternal subsistence of the
lover and the beloved in God, concerning contemplation in
God—quomodo omnis nostra perfettio sit in perfettione nostri
Domini Dei—and the deep things of Divine Union, we begin
to discern the existence, so to speak, of a third Lully, who has
qualities which recommend him to our admiration that are
wanting in the Doétor idluminatus, though he invented Ars
Magna, and in the Dottor alchemisticus, even if he transmuted
metals.?

III.—PICUS DE MIRANDULA

Magical legend has availed itself of the name of Mirandula,
and on the warrant of his Kabbalistic enthusiasm has accredited
him with the possession of a familiar demon.3 His was the
demon of Socrates which a late Cardinal Archbishop brought
within the limits of natural and clerical orthodoxy.4 His
martvellous precocity furnished a thesis to the ingenuity of
the late Gabriel Delanne, for, as with the music of Mozart and
as with the mathematics of Pascal, it remains a ground of
speculation how this Italian Crichton acquired his enormous

1 The reference is here to the Catalan poet and the author of BLANQUERNA.

2 See my op. cit., c. vi. Some texts cited therein have been translated since into
English from their Catalan originals by Professor Peers, but apart from all reference
to Lully of the Ars Macna and the Hermetic Lully.

3 Migne’s DICTIONNAIRE DES SCIENCES OCCULTES, t. ii. col. 308.

4 See Manning’s brochure, s.v. THE Damon oF Socrates. London, 1874.

PICUS DE MIRANDULA 443

etudition. Delanne would assure us ! that he brought it with
him at his birth, that it was an inheritance from a previous life
and that Picus de Mirandula Kabbalised in a college of
Babylon. On the other hand, Catholic writers, for whom
his studies ate unsavoury, affirm that he was swindled by an
impostor who sold him sixty bogus MSS. on the assurance
that they had been composed by the order of Esdras. “ They
contained only ridiculous Kabbalistic reveries.”” These MSS.
have been enumerated and described by Gaffarel, and his
monograph on the subject will be found, among other places,
in the bibliography of Wolf.2 As Mirandula, who was born
on February 24th, 1463, and died mentally exhausted in 1494,
is the first true Christian student of the Kabbalah, it is im-
portant to know what he derived from his studies in this
respect. Now, unfortunately, we are met at the outset with
a difficulty only too common in such inquiries. Of the
Kabbalistic Conclusions arrived at by Picus de Mirandula, and
atually beating this name, there are two versions extant ;
there is that which we find in the collected editions of his
works, both late and early, reproduced in the garner of
Pistorius with a voluminous commentary by Archangelus de
Burgo Nuovo, and there is that which we find with another
commentary, though curiously by the same writer, in a little
volume, published at Bologna in 1564—prior to the colleGtion
of Pistorius which belongs to 1587—and again at Basle in
1600.3 ‘The evidence is in favour of the first version, but
nothing attaches to the question: it is that in any case which
came to be known and used, the Bologna codex being so
utterly obscure that I have not seen it mentioned. We may
accept either without prejudice to the point which it is here
designed to establish, and that is the nature of the enthusiasm
which prompted Picus de Mirandula. In the first place,
though he speaks of Magic in terms which may be held to
indicate that he possessed a tolerant and open mind as to some
of its claims and, like a learned man as he was, did not regard

1 See in particular Erupr sur Les Vries Successtves, Mémoire présenté au Congres
Spirite International de Londres (1898), par Gabriel Delanne, p. 61, where Mirandula is a
case in point.

2 Joh. Christophori Wolfii: Brstrorpeca Hesraa ... Accedit in calce Jacobi
Gaffarelli INDEX Copicum Caspauistic. MSS. quibus Jo. Picus, Mitandulanus
pee usus est. 1715. The Index in question is reprinted from the Paris edition
of 1651.

5 eeanahralah de Burgo Nuovo agri Placentini : APOLOGIA PRO DEFENSIONE DOCTRINZ
CaABAL&, &c. Ostensibly a reply to an impeachment of Mirandula by Peter Garzia.

444 THE HOLY KABBALAH

it from the standpoint of Grimoire Sorcery, he is not to be
considered as a disciple of any alleged Higher Magic.. The
only department of the putative Secret Arts which he has
treated at any length is Astrology, and to this he devoted a
long and undermining criticism, which in some of its salient
patts is as good reading as Agrippa’s VANITY OF THE SCIENCES,
and on its special subject takes much the same point of view.
We should not expect therefore that he betook himself to the
esoteric speculations of Jewry because he was attracted by
supposed supernormal powers ascribed to Divine Names,
because he intended to compose talismans, or because he
desired to evoke. I must not speak so confidently as to
possible fascinations in the dire€tion of GEMATRIA and
THEMURAH, for his was a subtle and curious intelligence
which found green spots or rather enchanted cities of mirage
in many deserts of the mind, and he might have discovered
mysteries in beheaded words and achroamatica in acrostics.
There is, however, no proof that he did. The bibliographical
legend which represents him purchasing MSS. on the assur-
ance that the prophet Esdras had a hand in their production
will disclose his probable views as to the antiquity of Kab-
balistic literature. He took it, we may suppose, at its word,
and the legend indicates also that he was persuaded easily :
it was a common weakness in men of learning and enthusiasm
at the period. On the other hand, it is more than certain
that he did not regard this antiquity as a presumption that the
Kabbalah was superior to Latin Christianity ; the wisdom
which he found therein was that of Christian dodrine : + when
he hung up his famous theses in Rome and offered to defray
the expenses of every scholar who would dispute with him,
those theses included his KaBpBaListic CONCLUSIONS, but that
which he sought to establish was a via media between Jewry
and Christendom. When he turned the head of Pope Julius
with Secret Mysteries of the THorsn, the enthusiasm which
was communicated for a moment to the Chair of Peter was,
like Lully’s, that of the evangelist. The servus servorum Dei
found other zeal for his ministry, and the comet of the schools
blazed itself out. The Kasparistic CoNciusrons alone
remain to tell that Rome had a strange dream in the evening

1 The existence of Christian elements, or at least of materials which might be held
to bear a Christian construction, is admitted by several Jewish writers of the post-
Zoharic period.

PICUS DE MIRANDULA 445

of the fifteenth century.1 They lie in a small compass and,
as I believe that it will be of interest to shew what Picus de
Mirandula extracted from his sixty MSS., I will translate them
here for the reader. It ought perhaps to be premised that
Eliphas Lévi rendered some of them in his own loose fashion
and published them with a suggestive commentary, in La
SCIENCE DES Esprits,” ascribing them to the collection of
Pistorius but without mentioning the name of Mirandula.
He gave also what purports to be the Latin originals, but these
he has polished and pointed. To do justice to his skill, they
ate occasionally much better than the quintessential Kab-
balism of Picus, but as they are neither Picus nor the Kabbalah,
I shall not have recourse to them for the purposes of the
following version, except by some references in footnotes.

Kabbalistic Conclusions

I.

As man and the priest of inferior things sacrifices to God
the souls of unreasoning animals, so Michael, the higher
ptiest, sacrifices the souls of rational animals.

II.

There are nine hierarchies, and their names are CHERUBIM,
SERAPHIM, CHASMALIM, ARALIM, TARSISIM, OPHANIM, IsHIM,
MaALAcuim, and ELouHim.

III.

Although the Ineffable Name is the quality of clemency, it
is not to be denied that it combines also the quality of judg-
ment.3

IV.

The sin of Adam was the separation of the kingdom from
the other branches.
v.

God created the world with the Tree of the Knowledge of
Good and Evil, whereby the first man sinned.*

1 They appeared originally at Rome in 1486, the volume being entitled: Con-
CLUSIONES PHILOSOPHIC#, CABALISTICH ET ‘THEOLOGIC. Picus wrote also
CABALISTARUM SELECTIONES, which seems to have been printed for the first time at
Venice in 1569.

2 Part I) c. iv. pp..147 e seq:

3 As Lévi puts it tersely : Schema musericordiam dicit sed et judicium. He utilises it to
denounce the do&rine of everlasting punishment.

4 Hence Lévi infers that the sin of Adam was educational,

446 THE HOLY KABBALAH

VI.

The great North Wind is the fountain of all souls simply,
as other days ate of some and not all.} ©

Vil.
When Solomon said in his prayer, as recorded in the Book
of Kings: “ Hear, O Heaven,” we must understand by
heaven the green line which encircles all things.”

VIII.

Souls descend from the third light to the fourth day, and
thence issuing, they enter the night of the body.

IX.

By the six days of Genesis we must understand the six
extremities of the building proceeding from Brashith as the
cedars come forth out of Lebanon.

X.

Paradise is more correctly said to be the whole building
than the tenth part. And in the centre thereof is placed the
Great Adam, who is TIPHERETH.

XI.

A tiver is said to flow out from Eden and to be parted into
four heads signifying that the third numeration proceeds from
the second, and is divided into the fourth, fifth, sixth, and

tenth.4
XII.

It is true that all things depend on fate, if we understand
thereby the Supreme Arbiter.®

1 T have given this literally without pretending that it has much meaning. Lévi
reduces it to Magnus aquilo fons eft animarum, explaining that souls enter this world to
escape idleness. Archangelus de Burgonuovo, in his Cabaliftarum Selettiora, Ob-
scurioraque DOGMATA affirms that Aquilo signifies GzBuRAH, the fifth SepHrra. SzrE
Pistorius : Artis CABALISTIC2 SCRIPTORES, 1587, Pp. 753.

2 Lévi renders this Calum est Kether, which does not, at first sight, seem to represent
it. See, however, CONCLUSION 48, and note thereto.

3 This is mangled by Lévi, who seems to have misunderstood its meaning. For
the night of the body he substitutes the night of death.

4 CONCLUSIONS 9, I0, II signify, according to Lévi, that the history of the earthly
paradise is an allegory of truth on earth.

6 Lévi gives, Failum fatum quia fatum verbum eft, an admirable specimen of polishing.

PICUS DE MIRANDULA 447

XIII.

He who shall know the Mystery of the Gates of Under-
Standing in the Kabbalah shall know also the Mystery of the

Great Jubilee.?
NIV:

He who shall know the meridional property in dextral
co-ordination shall know why every journey of Abraham was
always to the south.?

XV.

Unless the letter HE had been added to the name of Abram,
Abraham would not have begotten.?

XVI.

Before Moses all prophesied by the stag with one horn
(7.e., the unicorn).
XVII.

Wheresoever the love of male and female is mentioned in
Scripture, there is exhibited mystically the conjunction of
TIPHERETH and CHIENSET (of CHENECETH) IsrAxEL, or BETH

and TIPHERETH.®
XVIII.

Whosoever shall have intercourse with TIPHERETH in the
middle night shall flourish in every generation. ®

XIX.

The letters of the name of the evil demon who is the prince
of this world are the same as those of the name of God—
TETRAGRAMMATON—and he who knows how to effect their
transposition can extract one from the other.’

1 The significance evaporates in Lévi’s shortened recension, Porte jubileum sunt.
He explains the Jubilee as the joy of true knowledge.

2 Lévi’s explanation is feeble, namely, that the South is the rainy quarter, and that
“the do&rines of Abraham, 7.e., of the Kabbalah, are always fruitful.”

3 Per additionem He Abraham genuit, this being “ the feminine letter of the Tetragram.”’

4 I.e., says Lévi, they saw only one side of truth: Moses is represented bearing two
horns. Lévi adds that the unicorn is the ideal.

5 Lévi substitutes Mas et femina sunt TIPHERETH ET MALKuTH, and gives a senti-
mental explanation which has no conne&tion with Kabbalism. It is to be observed,
for the rest, that the fruitful union on the Tree of Life in Kabbalism is between
CHoKMAH and Brinau.

6 Lévi interprets by distinguishing the marriage of mere animals, human or otherwise,
from the true human and divine marriage of souls, spirits and bodies.

? Lévi substitutes Demon ef Deus inversus and argues with charateristic logic that
could the former be said to exist, then God as his opposite could certainly have no
existence.

448 THE HOLY KABBALAH

XX

When the light of the mirror which shines not shall be like
the light of the shining mirror, the day shall become as the
night, as David says.+

XSI,

Whosoever shall know the quality which is the secret of
darkness shall know why the evil demons are more hurtful in
the night than in the day.

XXII.

Granting that the co-ordination of the chariots is manifold,
nevertheless, in so far as concerns the mystery of the Pxuy-
LACTERIES, two chariots ate prepared, so that one chariot is
formed from the second, third, fourth, and fifth, and these
ate the four Phylacteries which Vau assumes ; and from the
sixth, seventh, eighth and ninth, a second chariot is made,
and these are the Phylacteries which He final assumes.?

XXIII.

More than the quality of penitence is not to be understood
(or applied) in the word (which signifies) “‘ He said.” 8

XXIV.

When Job said: “ Who maketh peace in his highest
places,”’ he signifies the austral water and boreal fire, and their
leader, concerning which things there must be nothing said
further.4

1 This apparently puzzled the commentator, so he invented a substitute which partly
teptoduces an apocryphal saying of Christ.

2 That is to say, CHOKMAH, BrnaH, CHESED and GrBuraH form the chariot, seat,
or throne of the third letter of the Tetragram ; while TrpHerReTH, NeETzacu, Hop and
JEsoD constitute the chariot of the fourth letter. This is the explanation of
Archangelus ; but it is not Sephirotic do&trine according to the Zonk, nor is it reflected
from Picus into later Kabbalism. Moreover, VAu is TIPHERETH, and TiIPpHERETH
cannot be used to build a chariot for He final, which is MatxutrH. The idea is that
the Phylaéteries were like chariot wheels on which the soul ascends in prayer ; but it is
tather nonsense symbolism.

8 This is the best rendering which I can offer of the obscute original—Supra pro-
prietatem panitentiea non est utendum verbo dixit, It is quite certain that its intention is
not represented by Lévi’s substituted aphorism Panitentia non est verbum, which he trans-
lates, “‘ To repent is not to a&.” According to Archangelus de Burgonuovo, the
meaning is that he who seeks the forgiveness of sins must not have recourse to the Son,
nor to the Holy Spirit. The proof offered is that the word rendered dixit belongs to
the Son, and that which stands for dicens to the Holy Ghost. ‘This refers to certain
sayings of Christ. Forgiveness is to be sought from the Father. The Kabbalah is
not, however, a commentary on the New Testament.

4 Lévi substitutes: excelsi sunt aqua australis et ignis septentrionals et prafetti eorum,
Stile.

PICUS DE MIRANDULA 449

XXV.

BERESHITH—7.¢., in the beginning He created, is the same
as if it were said: “ In Wisdom He created.” 4

XXVIL

When Onkelos the Chaldean said: BEcADMIN—/.¢., with
ot by the Eternals, he understood the Thirty-two Paths of
Wisdom.?

XXVIT.

As the first man is the congregation of the waters, so the
sea, to which all rivers run, is the Divinity.®

XXVIII.

By the flying thing which was created on the fifth day we
must understand angels of this world, which appear to men,
and not those which do not appear, save in the spirit.*

XXIX.

The name of God, composed of four letters, Mzm, TsADE,
Pz, and final TsapE, must be referred to the Kingdom of
David.®

Sax,
No angel with six wings is ever transformed.®

XXXI.

Circumcision was ordained for deliverance from the impure
powers wandering round about.

XXXIT.

Hence circumcision was performed on the eighth day,
because it is above the universal bride.

1 Pointed by Lévi, this appears as In principio, id eft in CHOKMAH.

2 This is given boldly by Lévi as Vie eternitatis sunt triginta duo.

3 Lévi sums the idea by writing Justi aque, Deus mare, and shews in his annotation
how God becomes man and man God after his familiar Voltairean fashion.

4 Lévi gives, Angeli apparentium sunt volatiles cali et animantia, which exceeds the
Kabbalistic idea. Ido not think it was intended to say that birds are angels of the outer
form, but that the flying things created on the fifth day are symbols of the angels who
have appeared to men, wearing the likeness of humanity, as to Abraham and to Lot,
not those seen in the interior state and in vision.

5 Lévi reads Daniel.

6 Meaning, says Lévi, that there is no change for the mind which is equilibrated
perfectly ; but this is mere ingenuity.

450 THE HOLY KABBALAH

XXXIII.
There are no letters in the entire Law which do not shew
forth the secrets of the ten numerations in their forms,
conjunctions and separations, in their curves and direCtion,
their deficiency and superfluity, in their comparative small-
ness and largeness, in their crowning, and their enclosed or
open form.
XXXIV.
He who comprehends why Moses hid his face and why
Ezekias turned his countenance to the wall, the same under-
stands the fitting attitude and posture of prayer.?

XXXV.

No spiritual things descending below can operate without a

garment.?
XXXVI.

The sin of Sodom was the separation of the final branch.

XXXVIT.

By the secret of the prayer before the daylight we must
understand the quality of piety.

XXXVI.

As fear is outwardly inferior to love, so love is inwardly
inferior to fear.
XXXIX.
From the preceding conclusion it may be understood why
Abraham was praised in Genesis for his fear, albeit we know
by the quality of piety that all things were made from love.

Sc,
Whensoever we ate ignorant of the quality whence the

influx comes down upon the petition which we put up, we
must have recourse to the House of Judgment.4

1 Litera sunt hieroglyphice in omnibus, according to the shorter recension of Lévi.

2 Absconde faciem tuam et ora, writes Lévi, conne€ting the praying shawl in his com-
ment with the veil of Isis |

3 Lesprit se révétent pour descendre et se dépouille pour monter, says Lévi elsewhete in his
writings. Here in his annotation he reasons that, as we cannot live under water, so
spirits without bodies are unable to exist in our atmosphere.

4 Literally, Domum Naris ; and hence Lévi’s abridgment is Nasus discernit proprietates,
which he defends from the Book or CONCEALMENT.

PICUS DE MIRANDULA 451

XLI.
Every good soul is a new soul coming from the East.*

XLII.

Therefore Joseph was buried in the bones only and not
in the body, because his bones were virtues and the hosts
of the Supernal Tree, called ZapirH, descending on the
Supernal Earth.

XLII.

Therefore also Moses knew no sepulchre, being taken up
into the Supernal Jubilee and setting his roots above the
Jubilee.

XLIV.

When the soul shall comprehend all that is within its
comprehension, and shall be joined with the Supernal Soul,
it shall put off from itself its earthly garment and shall be
rooted out from its place and united with Divinity.?

XLV.

When prophecy by the spirit ceased, the wise men of Israel
prophesied by the Daughter of the Voice.

XLVI.

A king of the earth is not manifested on the earth until the
heavenly host is humbled in heaven.

XLVII,

By the word ny = Aru, which occurs twice in the text:
“In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth,” I
believe that Moses signified the creation of the intellectual
and animal natures, which in the natural order preceded that
of the heaven and the earth.

1 The distinétion between new souls and old is developed at some length by Isaac
de Loria. Eliphas Lévi overlooks this point and has recourse to a sentimental explana-
tion. He takes occasion also to deny that reincarnation was taught by the best
Kabbalists ; but he is not quite corre& as to his faéts.

2 Lévi gives Anima plena superiori conjungitur, and understands this to mean that a
complete soul is united with a superior soul, whereas the reference is undoubtedly
to the Divine Soul.

8 The version of Lévi is an entirely different aphorism, namely, Post deos rex verus
regnabit super terran.

452 THE HOLY KABBALAH

XLVIII.

That which is said by Kabbalists, namely, that a green line
encircles the universe, may be cited appropriately as the final
conclusion which we draw from Porphyry.

XLIX.
Amen is the influence of numbers.2

We have seen that a rival series of Kabbalistic Conclusions
has been referred to Picus, and so also the number of the above
seties is occasionally extended to seventy. The collection of
Pistorius contains only those which have been cited, and they
ate possibly intended to conneé with the Fifty Gates of
Understanding, less the one gate which was not entered by
Moses. ‘To develop any system from these aphorisms would
appear almost impossible, and this difficulty has occurred to
earlier critics, despite the labours of their commentator,
Archangelus de Burgo-Nuovo, who was himself a Christian
Kabbalist, but disputatious, verbose, and with predetermined
theological motives.

IV.—_CORNELIUS AGRIPPA

The untimely death of Picus de Mirandula took place in the
eatly childhood of another Christian Kabbalist, Cornelius
Agrippa of Nettersheim, born at Cologne in 1486. It is to
him that we owe the first methodical description of the whole
Kabbalistic system, considered under the three heads of
Natural Philosophy, Mathematical Philosophy and Theology.
Agrippa is therefore of importance to our inquiry, and his
three books, entitled De Occutta PuiLosopuia, are practically
the starting-point of Kabbalistic knowledge among Latin-
reading scholars of Europe. It is needless to say that his
_ treatise enjoyed immense repute and authority. We must

remember, however, that it is professedly a magical work,
all the other SepHrrorH. Ido not know his authority, but Azriel, in his commentary
on the SEPHER YETZIRAH, says, as we have seen, that Keruer is the colour of light seen
through a mist. I assume that this is not green, though Zoharic observations on the
tainbow seem to indicate that some Kabbalists at least were colout-blind. It should
be noted that Nortrelius in his PHospHorus OrrTHODOx& FipEL, 4, Amsterdam, 1720,
translating from an elegy on R. Simeon ben Yohai, given in the SEpHER Imre Binan,
explains that the /inea viridis is the new moon.

2 An affirmation of the mind, an adhesion of the heart, a kind of mental signature,
says Lévi.

CORNELIUS AGRIPPA 453

by which I do not mean that it is a Ritual for the Evocation
of Spirits, but that it unfolds the philosophical principles
upon which all forms of Magic were supposed to proceed,
and this is so true that the forged FourrtH Boox, which was
added to it soon after the death of Agrippa, and does provide
a species of Magical Ritual, is so much in consonance with
the genuine work that it might have been almost by the same
hand. We must expect therefore that the magical side of
Kabbalism, that which deals with the properties and virtues
of Divine Names and so forth, is developed much mote fully
than the cosmology of SEPHER YETZIRAH or the Divine
Mysteries of the ZoHar. We have to remember also that,
albeit Agrippa was the first writer who elucidated the Kab-
balistic system, he was better acquainted with the philosophy
of Greece and Rome than with that of the later Hebrews.
He was in a position, however, to understand and expound
the Mysteries of Divine Names and the Noraricon connected
therewith. Of the literature itself he gives no information
from which we could infer his textual knowledge; he does
not mention the SEPHER YETZIRAH of the Zouar, both of
which were then only accessible in manuscript, and I am
inclined to think that his acquaintance with Kabbalistic
subjects was formed chiefly through the CoNCLUSIONEs
CaBAListic of Mirandula, which, as we have seen, appeared
at Rome in the year of Agrippa’s birth. It should be added
also that there are serious errors in his division of the Hebrew
alphabet which would not have been made by one who was
acquainted with any authoritative source of knowledge, as,
for example, the Book oF ForMATION, not to speak of mistakes
without number in the lettering of Divine Names, when the
time came for his work to be printed.

It is noticeable in this connection that the doétrines of
occult virtues residing in words and names is expounded on
the authority of the Platonists.1 It is only in the scales of
the twelve numbers, dealt with somewhat minutely in the
second book, that a Kabbalistic system is developed, but this
has remained a chief soutce of information among writers on
occult subjects up to this day.2 The most important gleanings

1 It should be noted, however, that he preceded the chief Hellenising schools of
later Kabbalism.

2 On the general question of Agrippa’s conneétion with Kabbalism, see Frederich
Barth: Die CaBBaLa des Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa von Nettersheim, Stattgart, 1855.

454 THE HOLY KABBALAH

ate, however, in the third book, devoted to Theology and the
doétrines, mainly Kabbalistic, concerning angels, demons and
the souls of men, but creating correspondences with classical
mythology wherever possible. Thus, Arn Sopu is identified
with the Night of Orpheus and the Kabbalistic Samael with
Typhon. The ten SrpHiRoru are described as vestments,
instruments or exemplars of the Archetype, having an
influence on all created things from high to low, following
a defined order.

It would serve no purpose here to attempt a summary
account of the instruction, while tables of commutations
shewing the extraction of angelical names would require
elaborate diagrams. My object is to note rather than illustrate
exhaustively the character of Agrippa’s exposition, which is
concerned largely with the so-called Practical Kabbalah, and
very slightly with the theosophical literature. It brought
him no satisfaCtion, and before his troubled life drew to its
disastrous close he recorded his opinion that the Kabbalistic
att, which he had “ diligently and laboriously sought after,”
was merely a “ rhapsody of superstition,” that its mysteries
were “wrested from the Holy Scriptures,” a play with
allegory proving nothing. As to the alleged miracles
wrought by its practical operations, he supposes that there
is no one so foolish as to believe in any such powers. Ina
word, “ the Kabbalah of the Jews is nothing but a pernicious
superstition by which at their pleasure they gather, divide and
transpose words, names and letters in Scripture; and by
making one thing out of another dissolve the connections of
the truth.” What was done by the Jews for the literature
of the Ancient Covenant was performed, he goes on to say,
for the Greek documents of Christianity by the Ophites,
Gnostics and Valentinians, who produced a Greek Kabbalah,
as Rabanus, the monk, later on attempted with the Latin
charactets.

I do not know that a modern writer could have put the
position mote clearly, but its chief value to ourselves lies in
its clear exhibition of the author’s limits in respect of Kab-
balistic knowledge. He was acquainted with its artificial
side and with that only. Agrippa adds another argument
which also, from its own standpoint, could not be expressed
better: “ If Kabbalistic Art proceed from God, as the Jews
boast, and if it produce to the perfection of life, the health

CORNELIUS AGRIPPA 455

of men and the worship of God, as also to the truth of under-
Standing, surely that Spirit of Truth which has left their
synagogue, and has come to teach us all truth, would not
have concealed it from His Church even until these last
times, and this the more, seeing that the Church knows all
things which are of God, while His Mysteries of Salvation
are revealed in every tongue, for every tongue has the same
power, if there be the same equal piety ; neither is there any
name, in heaven or on earth, by which we can be saved,
whereby we can work miracles, but the one Name Jesus,
wherein all things are recapitulated and contained.”

Of course, in the last analysis this argument proves too
much. ‘There is either a peculiar virtue in Divine Names
or there is not. If there be, the Christian cannot well deny
it to Jehovah; and if there be not, any thaumaturgic doc-
trine of the Great Name in Christianity is a subtlety no less
idle than the TETRAGRAMMATON or the SCHEMAHAMPHORASH.
We know, however, that, in so far as names represent ideas,
they are moving powers of the intellectual world; when
they are used without inspiration and without knowledge
they are dead and inert, like other empty vehicles. The
Kabbalistic Jews believed that they could disse& the name
without losing the vital essence which informs it, and they
erred therein. ‘The name of Jesus spells grace and salvation
to millions, but it spells nothing when lettered separately and
nothing when it is transposed. To say otherwise is to rave.

V.—PARACELSUS

Among the great names of occultism which are cited in
support of the influence exerted by the Kabbalah and the
authority which it possessed, that of Paracelsus is mentioned.
We are given to understand, for example, by Isaac Myer,
that it is to be traced distin@ly in the system of the great
German adept.t Statements like these are themselves a kind
of Kabbalah, which are received by one writer from another
without any inquiry or any attempt at verification. In this
way we obtain lists of authorities, references and testimonials
which seem at first sight to carry great weight, but they will
bear no examination and defeat their own purpose when they

1 PHILOSOPHY OF IBN GEBIROL, p. 171.

456 THE HOLY KABBALAH

come into the hands of a student who has sufficient patience
to investigate them. In the present instance we have to
remember that Paracelsus occupies an exceptional position
among occult philosophers ; he was not a man who respected
ot quoted authorities ; he owed very little to tradition, very
little to what is understood commonly by learning.1 If we
take his alchemical treatises and compare them with Hermetic
literature, we shall find that they are quite unlike it, and that
he was, in fact, his own alchemist. When he concerns
himself with Magic, he has few correspondences which will
enable him to be illustrated by other writers on this subject :
again, he was his own magician. And as regards the question
of the Kabbalah, if we discover, on examination, that he has
something to say concerning it, we should expect that it
would be quite unlike anything that went before him, and
quite foreign to the known lines of Kabbalism. Once more,
we should find that he would prove to be his own Kabbalist.
In every department of thought he illustrated his characteristic
maxim : Adferius non sit qui suus esse potest. It must be added
also that any contributions which he offers: are seldom
helpful. They do nothing to elucidate what is obscure in
previous authorities, and they constitute new departures
which are themselves in need of explanation.

Nearly two centuries elapsed between the death of Moses
de Leon, the first alleged publisher of the Zonar, and the
birth of Theophrastus of Hohenheim, and though no attempt
to print it took place till some forty years after his turbulent
life closed sadly at Strasburg, or wherever it occurred actually,
there can be no doubt that it was accessible in manuscript,
ot that Paracelsus, had he known Aramaic, could have made
himself acquainted with its contents. It seems certain,
however, that he never acquired the language from which
it had not been translated, and that his knowledge of the
Kabbalah would be limited to what he could gather from
authors who wrote in Latin or some current tongue; but
his own works shew that he was at very little pains of this
kind. As to this, it is only necessary to collect the few
references on the subject which they contain.

The Study of Magic and the Kabbalah is enjoined several
times on the physician, and old medical authorities are scouted

vale as, Oe a RR LR OE AR NEY DR TUN Sea | Geet?
1 He is said, indeed, to have boasted that his library would not amount to six folio
volumes.—Gould’s History oF FREEMASONRY, Vol. ii. p. 77.

PARACELSUS 457

on the ground that they were unacquainted with either.?
The “Cabala” is in one place identified with Magical
Astronomy,” which, I presume, refers to the Paracelsic theory
concerning stars in man and the stars of disease, and connects
with the contextual statement that all operations of the stars
in all animals centre at the heart. It is identified also with
Magic itself, of which it forms a part.? But from indications
given in another place, Kabbalistic Magic seems to have
signified some obscute operations with the faculties of the
astral body. Subsequently this point is exposed more
plainly, when the Kabbalistic Art is said to have been built
up on the basis of doctrines concerning the sacramental
body, which appears after the death of the corruptible, and
accounts for the phenomena of spectres, visions, apparitions
of a supernatural character, &c.° The art of judging what is
concealed by certain outward signs—in a word, the theory of
signatures—is said to be the Kabbalistic Art, “‘ once called
‘ caballa,’ afterwards ‘ caballia.?” It has also been termed
falsely Galamala, from its alleged author—of whom one has
heard nothing otherwise—and is of Ethnic origin, having
been transmitted to the Chaldeans and the Jews, by whom
it was corrupted, “‘for the Jews were exceedingly ignorant
in all ages.”® Finally, the use of certain prayers and signacula
—1.e., talismans in the cure of diseases is connected with the
Kabbalah.’

These meagre instances exhaust the three folio volumes
which constitute the Geneva collection of the works of
Paracelsus, and shew little relation even to the debased and
thaumaturgic side of the Secret Tradition in Israel. I should
add, however, that there is a short section entitled CaBALua,
which forms part of a treatise on the plague, but it is con-
cerned with the official elements of early science and with the
alchemical principles, Salt, Sulphur and Mercury. There is
a reference also in one place to some “ books of the Caballa,”
apparently the work of Paracelsus and in this case presumably
no longer extant. By the student of Paracelsus that loss may

1 De Causis EY OricGineE Luis Gatiica#, Lib. iv. c. 9, OpzRA Omnia, Geneva,
1658, vol. iii. p. 193, B. Also De Peste, Lib. ii., prefatio, ibid., vol. i. p. 408.

2 De Pestivirate, Tract. 1., 2b., 2b., p. 371, b.

3 De Pzstz, Lib. i., 2b., 2b. .p. 405, bs

4 DE Vira Lonea, Lib. i. c. 6, B. vol. ii. p. 56, 3.

5 Dr NaTurA RERUM, Lib. viii., ib. ib., p. tol, B,

6 PHILOSOPHIA SAGAX, Lib. i., ib., vol. ji. p. 565, b.

7 De VuLnerisus, Lib. v. in CotrrurGiA Maen, Pars. iii., #b., vol. iii., p. 91 B.

HH 2

458 THE HOLY KABBALAH

be regretted, but it is not of moment so far as the Kabbalah
proper is concerned, for it is evident that this term, like many
others, was made use of in a sense which either differs widely
from its wonted meaning, or is the lowest form of that
meaning. The Kabbalah for Paracelsus, when it is not
something quite fantastic and unimaginable, is a species of
Practical Magic, and here we shall do well to remember that
the adept of Hohenheim flourished at a period when the
spurious literature of Clavicles and Grimoires was abroad
already in the world.

It is very difficult to judge Paracelsus, and many false
Statements have been made concerning him by friends and
enemies. But it is well to know that he was not a Student
of the Kabbalah in any sense that we should care to associate
therewith.

VL—JOHN REUCHLIN

As these sketches are not constructed biographically, there
will be no difficulty in regarding the subje@ of the present
notice as the representative of a group, which group illustrates
most effectively the standpoint and purpose of our inquir
as regards the Christian students of the Kabbalah. They
have been mentioned already in my preface. The missionary
enthusiasm which may be said to have begun with Mirandula,
which, if Lully had been a Kabbalist, would have been
already at fever heat in the dottor iluminatus of Majorca,
which ceased only in the early part of the eighteenth century,
assumed almost the aspect of a movement between the period
of Reuchlin and that of Rosenroth. It was not a concerted
movement; it was not the activity of a theosophical society
ot a learned body ; it was not actuated by any occult interests,
and perhaps still less by those of an academic kind. The
shape which it assumed in its literature was that of a deliberate
and successive attempt to read Christian dogma into the
written word of Kabbalism. It does not appear so strenu-
ously in the work of Rosenroth as it does in the collection of
Pistorius,! because in the days of the KaspaLta DENUDATA
there was, perhaps, more reason to hinder such intellectual
excesses. Nor is it so strong in the writings of Reuchlin as
in those of Archangelus de Burgonuovo. It is impossible

1 Artis CABALISTICA, hoc eft, recondita theologie et philosophie Scriptorum, Tomus I.,
Basiliz, 1587.

JOHN REUCHLIN U 459

to sutvey the vast treatises, extending in some cases to
hundreds of folio pages, by which the enthusiasm is repre-
sented, and it is fortunately not necessary. We have only
to establish their proper connection with Kabbalism and to
shew that it has been so far misconceived by occultists of the
ast.
B We ate justified in regarding Eliphas Lévi as to some
extent a mouthpiece in his day of modern occult thought :
it is to him more than to any one that such thought owes its
impulse towards the Jewish Tradition as to a so-called absolute
of philosophy and religion, “the alliance of the universal
reason and the Divine Word.” 1! It was he who first pretended
that “all truly dogmatic religions have issued from the
Kabbalah and return therein,” that it has “the keys of the
past, the present and the future, etc.” ? In order to “ receive
initiation’ into this great tradition he has counselled us,
among other books, to have recourse to the “‘ Hebrew writers
in the recollection of Pistorius.” 3 Following this dire¢tion,
occultists have been taught to regard the famous Basle folio
as a Storehouse of genuine Jewish Tradition. No impression
could well be more erroneous. The works engarnered by
Pistorius are neither the Jewish tradition nor valid com-
mentary thereon. It is well also to add that they are not
the work of occultists or of persons who believed that
“ Catholic doétrine,” or Lutheran, is “ wholly derived ” from
the Kabbalah. The writers are of three types: I. The Jew
who had abjured Israel and directed his polemics against it.
He is represented by Riccius, and his presence is fatal to
Lévi’s standpoint. Lévi recommended the Christian to
become a Kabbalist; Ricctus thought it logical for the
Kabbalist to turn Christian.4 II. The born Christian, who
believed that the Jew was in the wrong for continuing in

2 DoGME DE LA Haute. MAaciE, p. 95, 2me édition, Paris, 1861 ; TRANSCENDENTAL
Macaic, p. 20; Mysrerres or Macic, second edition, p. 502.

2 See my translation of the DoGME ET R1ITuEL, s.v. TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC: its
Dottrine and Ritual, second edition, 1923, pp. 24, 25.

8 Ibid. Students who know the colle¢tion of Pistorius will be aware that a large
part of it is Christian in authorship, and that, with the exception of Porra Lucis and
a version of SEPHER YETZIRAH, none of its treatises was written originally in Hebrew.

4 After his conversion this German repaired to Padua, where he taught philosophy
with great credit. He was invited back to Germany by the Emperor Maximilian.
He belongs to the sixteenth century. His chief work treats of CELESTIAL AGRICULTURE.
It occupies nearly two hundred pages in the folio of Pistorius and offers very curious
reading to those who can tolerate it at this day ; but it is to be noted that the ZoHaRr
is not cited through all its length.

460 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Judaism when the Kabbalah taught—as it was argued—the
do&rine of the Trinity, the Divine Word and so forth. He
also is in opposition to Lévi, who thought that the Jew was
in the right because the germ of all dogmas could be found
in the traditions of Israel. This type is represented by
Reuchlin,! who is learned, laborious and moderate, but also
by Archangelus de Burgonuovo, who does frequent outrage
to good sense, and seems to regard the Kabbalah as a note-
book to the New ‘Testament. Reuchlin toyed with
Lutheranism ; Archangelus was a Catholic prelate. II. The
purely natural mystic, who might be either Jew or Gentile,
who has no Kabbalistic connections worth teciting, and to
whom Christianity does not seem even a name. He is
represented by a writer who, as a fact, was born a Jew and
seems to have been included by Pistorius because of his
supposed conversion. I refer to Abravanel, whose PHrto-
sopHY OF LovE is the subje& of special mention by Eliphas
Lévi as if it were a text-book of Kabbalism. The DraLoGuEs
have been dealt with already, and here it is enough to say that
their citation annihilates Lévi, because a student of the
Kabbalah might as well be referred to an “ Art”? of Ovid
Spiritualised.

As regards Pistorius himself, the only point at which he
makes contac with occult follies is in the fact that his enter-
prise was undertaken, among other reasons, as a counterblast
to the superstitions which the Kabbalah had promoted in
Christendom ; a reference, we may presume, to the juvenile
budget of Agrippa and to the increasing grimoire literature.
The Kabbalistic Studies of the editor began in his boyhood ;
but, so far from leading him to the boasted certitude of Lévi,
he passed under their escort into Protestantism, and there
was conferred upon him the august distinGtion of figuring as
one of the deputies charged to present the Lutheran Con-
fession of Faith to the Diet of Augsbourg. Having registered
the faé& itself as an illustration of the quality of his progress
towards the Absolute, it is of course permissible to regard

,his sympathies with the attempted purgation of the Church
in a spirit of clemency, perhaps even of interest, or to confess,
at least, that they were excusable on the ground of natural

1 A successful politician, diplomatist and man of the world. He also belongs to the
sixteenth century. Some account of his life will be found in Basnage, t. v. pp. 2059
et seq.

JOHN REUCHLIN 461

infirmity, seeing that he was for long subjected to persecution,
fostered by a monkish inquisitor, because he had saved the
books of Jewry from confiscation and burning throughout
all Germany. In place of them, as opportunity afforded,
they burnt De Verso Miririco and Dr ARTE CABBALISTICA,
contributions of Reuchlin to the right understanding of the
Secret Tradition in Israel.1 The treatises remain all the
same as witnesses of the standpoint of Christian students in
the sixteenth century, and they help to warrant us in afhrming
that the largest Latin collection of Kabbalistic writers, outside
KaBBALA DENUDATA, contains no evidence in support of any
occult hypothesis.

I must by no means leave this brief and confessedly
inadequate notice of Reuchlin and his connections without
a wotd of reference to his learned pupil, J. A. Widmanstadt,
whose collection of Hebrew manuscripts, for the most part
Kabbalistic, is one of the great treasures of the Library of
Munich. In the course of his life-long studies he gave
special attention to the ZoHar and to the theurgic side of
Jewish Tradition.

VIIL—WILLIAM POSTEL

A philosophical, or rather an occult legend has gathered
in an unaccountable manner round the name of William
Postel, and it is supplemented by a popular legend which has
depicted this peaceable, though perhaps somewhat puerile
monk in a vestment of thaumaturgic splendour. The philo-
sophical legend we owe almost exclusively to Eliphas Lévi,
and to a few later writers in France who have accepted his
leading and, with him, appear to be impressed honestly by
Postel’s well-intended but too often inane writings, among
which is included a Key or THincs Kept SECRET FROM THE
FOUNDATION OF THE WoRLD. Postel was the son of a poor
Normandy peasant: by his perseverance and self-denial he
contrived to obtain an education, and became, on the authority
of his chief admirer, the most learned man of his time. ‘* Ever
full of resignation and sweetness, he worked like a labouring
man to insure himself a crust of bread, and then returned to
his studies. Poverty accompanied him always, and want at
times compelled him to part with his books ; but he acquired

1 They will be found in the colle&tion of Pistorius.

462 THE HOLY KABBALAH

all the known languages and all the sciences of his day; he
discovered rare and valuable manuscripts, among others the
Apocryphal Gospels and the SEpHER YETzIRAH ; he initiated
himself into the mysteries of the transcendent Kabbalah, and
his frank admiration for this absolute truth, for this supreme
reason of all philosophies and all dogmas, tempted him to
make it known to the world.” 1

So far Eliphas Lévi, whose undeniable influence upon all
modern occultism has done more than anything to exaggerate
the true philosophical position of Jewish secret literature and
to place some of its supposed expositors in a false light. The
redeeming point of Postel is his exalted piety ; the points to
be regretted are his extravagance, his transcendental devotion
to a religious and homely nun of mature years, and his belief
that he underwent a process of physical regeneration ‘by the
infusion of her spiritual substance two years after her death.?
To the Council of Trent, convened for the condemnation of
heresies connected with the Reformation, he addressed a
benevolent but unprattical epistle, inviting it to bless the
whole world, which seems outside the purpose of a delibera-
tive assembly considering dorinal questions. ‘The result of
these errors of enthusiasm was that Postel was shut up in
some convent, a course dictated possibly as much by a feeling
of consideration, and even of mercy, towards a learned man
unfitted for conta& with the world, as by the sentiment of
intolerance. ‘The seclusion, in any case, offered him the kind
of advantages that he most needed, and he died in peace,
having retracted, it is said, everything that was disapproved
by his superiors.

As seen already, Postel conneéts with Kabbalism by the
ereat fact that he discovered and made known in the West
that celebrated Book oF ForMATION which contains some of
its fundamental doétrine.? He expounded also its principles
in a species of commentary to which I shall recur shortly.

1 HisrorrE DE LA Maare. Paris, 1860, liv. v. c. 4, p. 347. See also my annotated
translation, s.v. H1srory oF Macic, second edition, 1922, p. 336.

2 Tbid., p. 250.

3 “ Postel was the first, to my knowledge, who translated into Latin the most ancient
and, it must be confessed, the most obscure, monument of the Kabbalah ; I refer to the
Book oF Formation.” —A. V. Franck, LA Kappatz, p. 16. He adds: “ So faras Iam
in a position to judge of this translation, which at least equals the text in obscurity, it
appears faithful in a general way.”

4 We have seen that tradition refers also to him a Latin translation of the ZoHAR,
for which Franck sought vainly in the public libraries of Paris.

WILLIAM POSTEL 463

His own dodtrine has also some remote traces of analogy with
Zoharistic tradition, but its summary by Eliphas Lévi is loose
and inexa¢t, like all literary and historical studies undertaken
by this modern adept.

“ The Trinity,” his interpretation begins, “ made man in
Its image and after Its likeness. The human body is dual,
and its triadic unity is constituted by the union of its two
halves ; it is animus and anima; it is mind and tenderness ;
so also it has two sexes—the masculine situated in the head,
and the feminine in the heart. The fulfilment of redemption
must be dual therefore in humanity ; mind by its purity must
rectify the errors of the heart, and the heart by its generosity
must correct the egoistic barrenness of the head. Christianity
has been comprehended heretofore only by reasoning heads ;
it has not penetrated hearts. ‘The Word has indeed become
man, but not till the Word has become woman will the world
be saved. The maternal genius of religion must instruct
men in the sublime grandeurs of the spirit of charity ; then
will reason be conciliated with faith, because it will under-
Stand, explain and govern the sacred excesses of devotion.” 1

The particular fatuity of Postel was that he recognised the
incarnation of this maternal spirit in the person of the pious
nun before mentioned. Eliphas Lévi, who took no illumina-
tions and no enthusiasms seriously, terms this spiritual ardour
a lyrical puerility and a celestial hallucination, but there is no
lyrical element in the Latin of Postellus, and, whatever the
soutce of the hallucination, the lady died making no sign.
Into the question of their subsequent reunion after a manner
which recalls the status embryonnatus of Kabbalistic abnormal
psychology, it would be ridiculous here to enter. From the
petiod of its occurrence the mystic always termed himself
Postellus Restitutus ; it is reported that his white hair became
again black, the furrows disappeared from his brow, and his
cheeks reassumed the hues of youth. Derisive biographers
explain these marvels as derisive biographers might be
expected, as if, Lévi well observes, “it being insufficient to
represent him as a fool, it was necessary also to exhibit this
man, of a nature so noble and so generous, in the light of a
juggler and charlatan. ‘There is one thing more astounding
than the eloquent unreason of enthusiastic hearts, and that

1 Hist, DE LA MAGrE, liv. v. c. 4, p. 348.

464 THE HOLY KABBALAH

is the stupidity or bad faith of the frigid and sceptical minds
which presume to judge them.” 1

A less unsympathetic historian than those confounded by
Lévi reduces the doétrines of Postel under two heads,
(1) “ That the evangelical reign of Jesus Christ, established
by the apostles, could not be sustained among Christians or
propagated among infidels except by the lights of reason,”
which appears wholly plausible. (2) That a future King of
France was destined to universal monarchy, and “that his
way must be prepared by the conquest of hearts and the
convincing of minds, so that henceforth the world shall
hold but one belief and Jesus Christ shall reign there by one
King, one law and one faith.” Given universal monarchy
as a possibility of the future, no Frenchman who is true to his
traditions would assign it otherwise than to a King of France.
However, one or both of these propositions led the biographer
in question to infer that Postel was mad, and I cite this
conclusion less on account of its essential merit than because
it afforded Lévi the opportunity for a rejoinder of charateristic
suggestiveness. “Mad, for having dreamed that religion
should govern minds by the supreme reason of its doctrine,
and that the monarchy, to be strong and lasting, must bind
hearts by the conquests of the public prosperity of peace!
Mad, for having believed in the advent of His Kingdom, to
Whom we cry daily: Thy Kingdom come! Mad, because
he believed in reason and justice on earth! Alas, it is too
true, poor Postel was mad!” He wrote little books at
intervals which, I must admit frankly, are almost impossible
to read, and in the case of the SrpHER YErzirauH the printer
has done his best to make the difficulties of Postel’s translation
absolute; but as I have promised to speak of the com-
mentary which accompanies the version, I must say at least
that it should be described rather as a collection of separate
notes. Franck recommends no one to be guided by the views
which it expresses, but they scarcely suggest leading, as they
contain nothing of real importance, and some of them are
almost childish. Among the points which may be noted
ate :—(a) Defence of the lawfulness and necessity of the
concealment of sacred things; (4) A pertinent and useful
distinction between the terms creation, formation and making,

1 Hist. DE LA Mai, liv. v. c. 4, p. 348.

WILLIAM POSTEL 465

as used in the SEPHER YETZIRAH; (¢) The antiquity of the
belief in ten spheres of the heavens; (d) The recourse to
numerical mysticism, to shew why the SEPHIROTH afe, in
the wotds of SEPHER YETZIRAH, “ten and not nine,” the
necessity of the number ten being shown by the progression
from the unit to the quaternary, as follows :—1 +2+3 +
4 =10. And this, according to a mystical mode of calcula-
tion, brings us back to the unit, even as the external universe
brings back the soul to God; (e) The attribution of angelic
choirs to the SepHIRoTH, thus shewing that Postel’s Study of
the Kabbalah was not confined to the one document which he
is known to have translated.

Of Postel’s original writings, that entitled Dz RaTIoNrBus
Sprritus Sanctr Libri Duo, 1543, seems on the whole the
most soberly reasoned ; if, unfortunately, it has no connections
with the Kabbalah, it has at least some with good sense. It
is useful also for those—if any remain among us, except in
France—who are disposed to be influenced by Lévi, and
hence to regard Postel as an adept of their mysteries. While
it is quite true that he was mote than fanciful in his notions,
which are extravagant in the philological as well as the
conventional sense of that term, it is not at all true that he
had set aside or exceeded the accepted do€trinal views of his
period, nor does he appear to have possessed a specific light
on given points of teaching which can be regarded as con-
siderable for his period. He upheld, for example, the doétrine
of eternal damnation, and justifies it in such a manner that
no room is left for the conjecture that he was not saying what
he meant. For the rest, Postel was a good and single-
minded Christian, who, in spite of his CLavis ABSCONDITORUM
A CONSTITUTIONE Munpt1, and in spite of the panegyrics of
Eliphas Lévi, had no knowledge whatsoever of any so-called
Book oF THoTH, and had never dreamed of looking for a
doétrine of absolute religion beyond the Seat of Peter. ©

VII.—THE ROSICRUCIANS

Among many adventurous statements advanced concerning
this mystical Fraternity, we are not infrequently told that it
gave a gteat impetus to the study of the Kabbalah. The
assettion is so far from being founded on any accessible fad,
that one is tempted to rejoin that it gave no impetus to any-

466 THE HOLY KABBALAH

thing except a short-lived curiosity and a certain pleasant
fantasia in romantic fiction. The truth is that no statement
should be hazarded on either side. In the first place, the
historical evidence for the existence of the Order, though it
points to certain conclusions, is in a very unsatisfactory
State,” and were any knowledge of another kind conceivably
Still in existence it would be in the custody of those unlikely
to commit themselves. I have never met in literature with
an express statement designed to indicate knowledge and to
represent authority which could bear investigation. On the
contrary, I have found invariably that those which most
assumed the complexion of certitude were only the private
impressions of persons who had no title to convidtion, nor
even a sufficient warrant for an estimable opinion by their
acquaintance with the exoteric facts. I have therefore to.
say that there is no known student of the Kabbalah, with
one tentative and barely possible exception, who can be
cited on evidence as the member of a Rosicrucian Fraternity,
laying any claim to antiquity. It is of course well known
that there have been, as there still are, various corporate
societies, some semi-Masonic, as in England, some occult,
as in France, which have formulated their particular interests
and purposes by adopting the name. ‘There is no great
mischief in such adoption, provided the limits of the preten-
sion ate clear, and, with the exception of recent impostures
which have appeared there and here in America, this, I think,
has been the case.

The few great names of the past which connect with
Rosicrucianism and at the same time with Kabbalism. are
not to be identified with the Fraternity, except on a common
ground of sympathy. Such was Thomas Vaughan. Motre-

1 See, however, my BROTHERHOOD OF THE Rosy Cross, 1924, in which the history
and claims of the Order, more especially on their external side, are examined in an
exhaustive manner.

2 It is open therefore to numerous fantastic constructions, one of the most curious
being that placed on it by Mrs. Henry Pott, in FRANcIs BACON AND HIS SECRET SOCIETY,
London, 1891. See c. xii. especially, and compare Clifford Harrison, NoTEs ON THE
Marcins, London, 1897, p. 49: “ There is every good reason to suppose that the
founder of Inductive Philosophy was a Rosicrucian.”

8 The term is sometimes used loosely in conne@ion with the Rosicrucians, as if
meaning a tradition of any kind. Thus, Mr. W. F. C. Wigston speaks of “‘ German
philosophets and writers . . . who each and all held up Freemasonry as a branch of
their own Rosictucian Kabbalah.”—THeE Cotumsus oF LITERATURE, p. 203, Chicago,
1892. ‘The Rosicrucian Kabbalah, understood in this sense, was Divine Magia.

4 In a paper tread before the Quatuor Coronati Lodge, and published in its
transactions, Dr. Wynn Westcott, Supreme Magus of the English Rosicrucian Society,

THE ROSICRUCIANS 467

over, the memorials which we possess of it, especially those
belonging to the eighteenth century, indicate that it was
engrossed mainly by alchemical processes. The barely
possible exception mentioned, namely, the one case in which
a well-known student of the Kabbalah, or rather a well-known
expositor of Kabbalistic subjects, may have received initiation
into a Rosicrucian Order going back through the last century,
is Eliphas Lévi. It is not perhaps improbable that he received
initiation of some kind, though I must be disassociated with
all clearness from the pretence of a certain French occultist,
who claimed access to secret sources of information, namely,
that the scattered groups of Rosicrucian Societies were
reotganised by Eliphas Lévi, presumably about the year 1850.
But this solitary instance, supposing that it could be called
valid, does not save the situation, more especially as I shall
establish more fully later on that Eliphas Lévi, though he
obtained a reputation among occultists as a Kabbalist, was not
entitled to it by any tolerable acquaintance with the literature
which contains the Kabbalah. The point of faé& has been
noted, as the need arose, already in preceding pages.

IX.—ROBERT FLUDD

The name of Robert Fludd stands high among esoteric
philosophers and “ philosophers by fire” in England; he
was a man of wide learning, of intelleCtual ambition, of
exalted spiritual faith. He was also a theosophical writer in
the catholic sense of the term. If we add to this that he
is an accessible figure, not too remote in time, and that a
short pilgrimage in Kent will lead us to the site at least of
that house in which he lived and died, it will not be difficult
to understand the fascination which he has exercised on many
who, for the rest, have never dared to stir the dust from his
folios. I have had occasion already in more than one work
to account for this Kentish “ philosopher by fire,” and as
there is only a single mystery in his life, on which no one is
likely to give light, I shall not need here to retrace ground
that has been travelled.1 The one mystery is whether he
did ultimately enter the Fraternity of the Rose-Cross. It is
Neo-Platonic dofrines. At the beginning, middle and end, it happens to have been
nothing of the kind.

1 See HAUNTS OF THE ENGLISH Mystics, No. 1, in THE UNKNOWN WorLD, vol. i.
pp. 130 ef seg. Also THE BROTHERHOOD OF THE Rosy Cross, 1924, cap. x.

468 THE HOLY KABBALAH

clear from the first tracts which he wrote in defence of this
Order that he had not been then initiated into its mysteries.1
Perhaps so much energy and devotion earned its reward in
the end, as there is ground for supposing was the case with
his friend Michael Maier, who espoused the same cause in
Germany. But we do not know, and modern occult writers
who pretend that he was a Rosicrucian are either misled or
ate romancing.

His connection with Kabbalism is, however, the only
point with which we are concerned here, and as to this there
is no doubt of his proficiency along -certain lines, for he
occupied himself a great deal with vast cosmological
hypotheses, which were drawn to some extent from this
source. He was forty years of age when the Rosicrucian
controversy first gave opportunity to his pen, and the Com-
PENDIOUS APoLoGy, which he published in reply to Libavius,
a German hostile critic, exhibits his Kabbalistic studies. I
must add also that it gives evidence of his besetting intellectual
weakness, an inordinate passion for the marvellous, which
leads him to dwell unduly on the thaumaturgic side of Jewish
Secret Knowledge. Having given the usual Legend of the
Tradition, its reception by Moses from God and its oral
perpetuation till the time of Esdras, he divides the Kabbalah
into two parts. There is firstly that of Cosmology, dealing
with forces operating in created things, both sublunary and
celestial, and here he expounded also on philosophical grounds
the arcana of the written law. This division, he observes,
does not differ materially from the Natural Magic in which
Solomon is recorded to have excelled, and he adds that the
magical powers of natural things, concealed in their centre,
can be brought forth by this species of Kabbalah. The
second division is entitled Mercavan, which contemplates
things Divine, angelical powers, Sacred Names and signacula.
It is sub-divided into NoraricoN and ‘THEOMANTICA.
NorTARICON treats of angelical virtues and names, of
demoniacal natures and of human souls; 'THEOMANTICA
investigates the Mysteries of Divine Majesty, of Sacred
Names and pentacles. Those who ate proficient therein
ate invested with strange powerts, can foretell future things,

1 Perhaps the Valete Nostrique Memores efiote of the Epilogus Autoris ad Fratres de
Rosea Cruce may cteate a different impression in the minds of some readers. See
ApoLoGiA CoMpENDIARIA, Leyden, 1616.

ROBERT FLUDD 469

command entire Nature, compel angels and demons, and
perform miracles. By this art Moses worked his various
sions and wonders, Joshua caused the sun to stand still,
Elijah brought fire from heaven and raised the dead to life.
But it is a gift of God, through His Holy Spirit, which 1s
granted only to the elect.

It will be seen that this classification presents not the
exalted if bizarre traditions of the ZoHar, but the debased
and superstitious apparatus of SEPHER Raziex and of later
Kabbalism, ignored if not unknown by writers like Rosenroth.
In folios which followed the CompENpious Apotocy the
Kabbalistic connections of Fludd’s philosophy are implicit
and suggestive rather than patent and elaborated, and I think
ate positive proof that he had no acquaintance with the
ZOHAR. In his Cosmology of the Macrocosmos,! which
deals with its metaphysical and physical origin, he has recourse
chiefly to Platonic and Hermetic writings, and although many
other authotities are cited, nothing is borrowed from Kab-
balists, except indeed the TETRAGRAMMATON, which figures
within a triangle in one of the illustrations. The comple-
mentaty treatise on the Microcosm recalls Kabbalism in its
do&trine of angels and demons. Slight correspondences may
be traced in his other writings; but they indicate no real
knowledge. In discussing the properties of numbers ? (2.e.,
the SEPHIROTH) and the Divine Names attributed to these,
the diagram which accompanies the remarks shews that he
misconstrued totally the Kabbalistic scheme of emanation.
So also some later observations concerning METATRON and
the positive and negative sides of the Sephirotic Tree’
suggest no special knowledge. When replying to Father
Mersenne, Fludd defends what he terms his Kabbalah, but
the term is used loosely and has certainly very little to do
with the Kabbalah of Jewry. It may be observed, in
conclusion, that the Kentish mystic was pre-eminently a
Christian philosopher, and, like other subjects, that of the
Esoteric Tradition in Israel was approached by him from the
Christian standpoint.

1 Utriusque Cosmi Majoris scilicet et Minors Merapuysica, Puysica afque TECHNICA
Hisrort, 2 vols., Frankfort, 1617 and 1629.

2 PHILOSOPHIA SACRA ef vere Christiana, seu Meteorologica Cosmica, 1626.

3 Mepicina CatuHouica, sea Myfticum Artis Medicandi Sacrarium, 2 vols., Frankfort,
1629, 1631.

4 De SopHi® cuM Morta CerTAMINE, 1629.

470 THE HOLY KABBALAH

X.—HENRY MORE

The Cambridge Platonic philosopher is tegarded by
Basnage as a great Kabbalist and his contributions to KaABBALA
DENUDATA as in some sense discovering the sentiment and
spirit of Jewish Theosophy. Franck, on the contrary,
regrets their inclusion by Rosenroth on the ground that they
ate petsonal speculations which are not at all in harmony with
Kabbalistic teaching. While there can be no question that
the just view belongs to the later critic, More is thinly interest-
ing because of his enthusiasm and earnestness. His point of
view is also of importance to our inquiry, because his name
belongs undeniably to the literature of English Mysticism—
or at least its outskirts. Let us begin therefore by stating
that he approached the subject as a Christian who desired the
conversion of the Jews, who regarded the Kabbalah as a
fitting instrument to effect it, and not in the case of the Jews
only, but even of Pagans. He came therefore to its study
and elucidation not as an investigator of things esoteric, not
as a seeker for an absolute dodtrine of religion, nor even for
a higher sense of Christianity, but like Picus and Postel and
Reuchlin, or like his correspondent and editor Rosenroth, as
one imbued with an evangelical spirit.3

The introduction of More to the Kabbalah was brought
about, as it has been supposed, by means of Isaac de Loria’s
Liper Drusuim. ‘There is no reason to believe that he
could or did undertake an independent study of the Zonar,
and hence as his contributions to the subject are all prior to
the appearance of KasBpALA DerNupara, it follows that his
acquaintance was not exhaustive, nor was it altogether good
of its kind. At the same time, his study of Liner DrusHim
called forth a well-reasoned letter from his pen, addressed to
Rosenroth,* in which the description of the SEPHIROTH under
the form of spheres is condemned as a fiction of the later
rabbis and their relation to the denary is affirmed. The
ctitical position of the writer is established, however, by the
attribution of the Pythagorean denary to a Kabbalistic origin.

1 HiIsToIRE DES Jurrs, Livre iii. c. 10, tom. ii., p. 786.

2 Ad. Franck: La KABBALE, p. 22. "

3 And desiring the Ecclesia emolumentum, as the same cotrespondence shews.

4 EprsToLA AD COMPILATOREM, Apparatus in Librum Sohar, Pars secunda, pp. 52 et seq.
Kas. DEN, t. i.

HENRY MORE 471

This letter was accompanied by a number of questions and
considerations in development of the debated point and other
difficulties, all which are duly printed by Rosenroth, to whom
space seemed no object, together with his Amica REsponsiIo,
which cites the authority of the ZoHar in support of the
circular form of the SepHrrotH.t More replied with an
Uxrertor Disguisirio and an accompanying letter, in which
he announces his belief that he has hit upon the true Kabbalah
of the Jewish BerzsuirH. ‘This epistle is in English and
quaintly worded. The conclusion entreats Rosenroth to
intimate to his readers “ how beneficiall this may prove for
the preparing of the Jews to receive Christianity, the
difficultyes and obstacles being cleared and removed by the
right understanding of their own Cabbala.”

There is no need to follow this friendly discussion, which,
it must be confessed, becomes exceedingly tedious in the
ULrTerror Disgutsitio. More, however, contributed another
thesis in exposition of the Vision of Ezekiel, 7.¢., a Kab-
balistic Catechism and a refutation of the doétrine that the
material world is not the product of creation ex mzhilo, in
which last the Platonist seems scarcely to have understood
the Kabbalah.

Of all these the most interesting is the MERCAVa@ Exposirio,
which contains nineteen postulates, fifty-two questions arising
out of the text of Ezekiel and the replies thereto. It affirms,
(2) That all souls, angelical and human, that of Messiah
included, were created at the beginning of the world; ?
(6) That the material world in its first estate was diaphanous,
ot lucid; (¢) That it had two chief elements, the Spirit of
Nature and the vehicle of the Holy Spirit; (d) That it was
divided into four parts, which are the Four Worlds of the
Kabbalists; (¢) That all souls were at first enclosed in
ArzinutH, but were subje& to revolution in the other
Worlds; (f) That souls which the Divine decree has sent
into AsstaH, but are free from willing sin, are sustained by
Divine Virtue, and will assuredly return to ATZILUTH ;
(g) That in Arziiurs the souls and the angels are absotbed
wholly in the Beatific Vision, but that in Brran they have
a tendency to external things; (4) That the soul of Messiah
in ATzILUTH made such progress in the Divine Love that it

1 In Caput ii., Consideratio tertia, ibid., p. 91.
2 For this there is Talmudic as well as Zoharic authority.

H.K, II

472 THE HOLY KABBALAH

became united with the Eternal Word in a Hyper-Atzilutic
or Hypostatic manner, and was thus constituted Chief of all
souls and King of the Four Worlds, an event which took place
at the beginning of the Briatic World, the special heritage of
Messiah. At this point the Christian Kabbalist introduces
the compact of the cross and dissolves all connection with
the scheme of Jewish Theosophy.

_ The Mercav@ Exposirio contains numerous references
to another work of Mote, entitled ConjEcrurA CABBALISTICA,!
which preceded his correspondence with Rosenroth. It is a
presentation of the literal, philosophical and mystical, or
divinely moral sense of the three initial chapters of Genesis.
It was teceived, so the author assures us, neither from men
nor angels, and as a fact the “conjecture” illustrates the
criticism of Franck, for it has very little in common with any
ancient or modern Kabbalah ever received in Jewry. The
literal se€tion is a bald paraphrase of the scriptural account of
the creation and fall of man. The PHiLosopHic CaBBALA is
established on the denary after the following fantastic
manner :—

The Archetypal World = Monad, 1.

The First Matter = Duad, 2.

The Habitable Order = Triad, 3.

The Making of the Starry Heavens = Tetrad, 4.

The Making of Fish and Fowls, or Union of the Passive
and A€tive Principle = Pentad, 5.

The Making of Beasts and Cattle, but chiefly of Man =
Hexad, 6.

What becomes of the rest of the denary does not appear.
In his first estate Adam was wholly ethereal, and his soul was
the ground which was blessed by God, whereby it brought
forth every pleasant tree and every goodly growth of the
heavenly Father’s own planting. The Tree of Life in the
garden of man’s soul was the essential will of God, while the
Tree of Knowledge was the will of man himself. We have
here the keynote of the allegory, which is merely pleasing and
altogether unsubstantial. It may be noted, however, that
the sleep which fell upon Adam was a lassitude of Divine

1 A ConyecturAL Essay of interpreting the Mind of Moses according to a threefold Cabbala,
viz., Literal, Philosophical, MyStical, or Divinely Moral, London, 1662. The attempt
was dedicated to Cudworth.

HENRY MORE 473

Contemplation. The Moran CapsaLa fecognises two
principles in man, namely, spirit and flesh. It gives appa-
rently a synopsis of the work of regeneration, depicting,
firstly, the spiritual chaos, when man is under the dominion
of the flesh; next, the dawning of the heavenly principle,
corresponding to the Fiat Lux; but the analogy in most
instances seems at once weak and laboured. For example,
the fruit-bearing trees are good works, the manifestation of
the sun is the love of God and our neighbour, and so forth.
On the whole, it may be concluded that More’s connection
with the Kabbalah is an interesting episode in the life of an
amiable scholar, but it was without real increment to either.

XI—THOMAS VAUGHAN

With the questionings, difficulties and tentative expositions
of Henry More it will be useful to contrast what is said on the
subje& of Kabbalism by his contemporary Eugenius
Philalethes, otherwise Thomas Vaughan. It will not be
forgotten by Students of the byways of literature in the
seventeenth century that the two writers came into collision
in pamphlets. When Vaughan began his theosophical
labours by the publication of two tracts on the nature of
man and on the universal Spirit of Nature, More, who was
after all more Platonist than mystic and had scant tolerance
for mystical terminology, published some acrimonious
observations concerning them, to which the Welsh mystic
replied in satires with the polemical virulence of his period.
The dispute itself deserves nothing less than oblivion, but
Thomas Vaughan has been regarded, and not, I think, with
exaggeration, as the chief mystic, theosopher and alchemist,
with one exception in the last respect, produced at his period
in England; and as he died nearly twenty-five years before
the appearance of KasspaLta DeENuparTa, the source and
extent of his Kabbalistic knowledge will help us to fix the
State of scholarship in England on the subjeé& before the
formation of the group of Cambridge Platonists. Vaughan,
in his early works, confesses himself a disciple of Agrippa,

1 The exception is Eirenzus Philalethes, that truly “ Unknown Philosopher,” with
whom Eugenius has been so often identified, and from whom of late years he has been
so often and carefully distinguished by myself, that it is unnecessary in this conneGtion
to say anything concerning him, except that his numerous works have few points of
conta& with Kabbalism.

ii2

474 THE HOLY KABBALAH

and the THREE Books or OccuLtr Puitosopny } represent
the general measure of his knowledge concerning the Esoteric
Tradition of the Jews, while the opinion which he had
formed thereon must be referred to the Retra@tation of his
master, that admirable work on the VANrry OF THE SCIENCES
AND THE EXCELLENCE OF THE WorD OF Gop. I must not
say that he shews no independent reading ; he quotes on
one occasion a passage in Porta Lucts 2 which is not to be
found in Agrippa, and there are one or two other instances,?
but for the most part he is content to represent his model
and his first inspirer. If my readers accept this judgment,
they musi interpret his own statement that he spent some
years in the search and contemplation of the Kabbalah
reflectively and not bibliographically, which further will
assist them to see how the peculiar Mysticism of Thomas
Vaughan can offer distinct points of contact with the ZoHarR
without that text-book of Kabbalism, then untranslated,
having been read by the mystic, except in some Latin extracts.

In his discourse on the Antiquity of Magic we find him
alive, like the students who had preceded him, to the
distin@ion between a true and a false Kabbalah. ‘The
latter, described after the picturesque manner of his period,
as the invention of dispersed and wandering rabbis “‘ whose
brains had more of distraction than their fortunes,” consists
altogether “in alphabetical knacks, ends always in the letter
where it begins and the vanities of it are grown voluminous.”
But in respect of the “ more ancient and physical traditions
of the Kabbalah,” Thomas Vaughan tells us that he embraces
them for so many sacred truths.* He recognises also a
metaphysical tradition in which the greatest mystery is the
symbolism of Jacob’s Ladder. “‘ Here we find two extremes—
Jacob is one, at the foot of the ladder, and God is the other,
Who stands above it, emittens formas et influxus in Jacob, sive
subjetium hominem. ‘The rounds or steps in the ladder signify
the middle nature, by which Jacob is united to God.” ® With
this symbolism he contrasts the “ false grammatical Kabbala ”
which “ consists only in rotations of the alphabet and a

1 Translated into English one year after the appearance of Vaughan’s first treatises.

2 Concerning the restraint of superior influences occasioned by the sin of Adam.

3 Of which some are sufficiently erroneous, as, for example, in Macra ADAMICA,
when he states that MALKuTH is the invisible, archetypal moon.

4 Tur Works OF THOMAS VAUGHAN, edited by A. E. Waite, London, 1919, p. 167.

5 Ibid., pp. 169, 170.

THOMAS VAUGHAN 475

metathesis of letters in the text, by which means the scripture
hath suffered many racks and excoriations.’”’ The true
Kabbalah only uses letters for artifice, thas is, with a view to
concealment.t Of the physical side of the genuine Tradition
he gives an unfinished presentation in alchemical language,
which is transfigured, however, for Thomas Vaughan
regarded Alchemy as at once a spiritual end physical science,
having its operations in the infinite as well as in the mineral
kingdom. For him the SEpHiroTH ate ten secret principles,
of which the first is a spirit 7 retrecesso suo fontano, while the
second is the Voice of that Spirit, the third is another Spirit
which issues from the Spirit and the Voice, and the fourth is
“a certain water”? proceeding from the third Spirit, and
emanating Fire and Air.? It will be seen that the reflections
of the Welsh mystic on the apparatus of Kabbalism are not
elucidating, and while recording the Sephirotic attributions
of the SEpHER YETZIRAH are not fully in consonance there-
with.

We shall be inclined, on the whole, to confess that
Vaughan’s connection with Kabbalistic texts is like his
communications with the brethren of the Rosicrucian Order.
He knew nothing of the latter “as to their persons,” so he
tells us in his preface to a translation of the Fama and Con-
FESSIO Of the Fraternity, and it was mainly by report and
consideration on things heard at second hand that he was
awate of Mysticism in Jewry. As time went on and he
outgrew the simple leading-strings of Cornelius Agrippa, so
he strayed further from Kabbalistic interests, and though he
never lost the fascination betrayed in his earlier works, he
passed far away over fields of Spiritual Alchemy, where no
fEsH MezarepH could help him. When he published
EupHrates, or the Waters of the Easi, in 1655, he shews no
longer any trace of the Tradition in Israel. In LUMEN DE
LuMINE, which appeared some four years earlier, there are,
however, a few references to the subje€t, and one indeed
constitutes an adumbration of the Christian Kabbalah as
impressed on the curious mind of the mystical royalist. The
pretext by which it is introduced is a speculation concerning
the “ Fire-Soul,” or informing spirit of the earth, which is
described as an influence from the Almighty derived through

1 Works OF THOMAS VAUGHAN, Pp. I7I. 2 Ibid., p. 168.

476 THE HOLY KABBALAH

the mediation of ¢erra viventium. ‘The mediating being thus
described darkly, is said to be the Second Person, and that
which “the Kabbalists style the Supernatural East.” To
explain this symbolism Vaughan adds: “As the Natural
Light of the sun is first manifested to us in the East, so the
Supernatural Light was first manifested in the Second Person,
for He is Principium alterations, the Beginning of the ways of
God, or the First Manifestation of His Father’s Light in the
Supernatural Generation. From this Terra Viventium ot
Land of the Living comes all Life or Spirit.” 1 The
Kabbalistic warrant of this notion is the axiom: Owns
anima bona anima nova filia Orientz.2 ‘The East in question is
CHOKMAH, which is contrary to Kabbalistic statements, and
CHoxMAH is the Son of God. ‘This also is opposed to the
Sephirotic ascriptions with which we are familiar, but there
is some trace in early Kabbalistic writers of an attribution of
the Three Supernals to Father, Son, Bride, with which later
rabbins are said—a little egregiously—to have tampered so
as to elude its Christian inferences. In either case Vaughan
is interesting as a Strange light of Christian Mysticism rather
than as an expositor of the Kabbalah.

XII.—KNORR VON ROSENROTH

It is, perhaps, more interesting to ascertain the motives
which led the editor of KaspaLa DeNupaTA to the considera-
tion of Jewish Theosophy than those of any other student
of the subje&. ‘To Christian Knorr von Rosenroth the
occultist of Victorian days owed nearly all his knowledge of
the Zouar, for the bibliographical writers who preceded
him give only meagte notices of that Kabbalistic magnum
opus, and it is not even mentioned by, ¢.g., Cornelius Agrippa.
Now Rosenroth occupies a position which “ occult ” persons
like Mathers and Westcott, as well as their inspirer Lévi, have
failed to remark, because they seem to have known nothing
about their chief illuminator in the theosophy of Israel. I
propose to shew that he was actuated by the same missionary
enthusiasm which characterised all Christian expositors who

1 Lumen De Luming, London, 1651, pp. 80-82.

2 CoNCLUSIONES Kaparistic, No. xli. Vaughan also cites the obscure eighth
conclusion of Mirandula, and says that the third light is Bryan, the Holy Ghost.—
Ibid., p. 83.

KNORR VON ROSENROTH 477

preceded him, but I shall begin by enumerating one or two
points which indicate that he may have had one occult
connection. Born in the year 1636, a German noble bearing
the title of baron, he appears on the scene of history shortly
after public curiosity had almost died out on the subject of
the Rosicrucian mystery. Joachim Junge, Johann Valentin
Andreas and A2gidius Gutmann, three persons to whom rival
theories have attributed the invention of that Mystery,? were
still alive; Robert Fludd, the English apologist of the
Paternity, was on the threshold of death, but had not yet
passed away ; Thomas Vaughan was a schoolboy ; Eirenzus
Philalethes had just written his Inrrorrus APERTUS to shew
the adepts of Alchemy that he was their brother and their
peer;® Sendivogius had exhausted his projecting powder
and was living in seclusion, an aged man, on the frontiers of
Silesia ;4 John Baptist van Helmont, who long before had
testified that he had seen and touched the Philosophet’s
Stone—of a colour like saffron in powder, but heavy and
shining like pounded glass °—had christened his son Mer-
cutius ; and Mercurius van Helmont, the contemporary and
friend of Rosenroth, divided his laborious existence between
a tireless search after the secret of transmuting metals and
the study of the Kabbalah. Rosenroth, Kabbalist like
Helmont, was, like Helmont, probably a chemist—in the
sense of the seventeenth century—and on the crowded title-
page of his great work, we find it described as Scriptum
omnibus philology, philosophis, Theologes omnium religionum, atque
philochymicts quam utilssimum. ‘The justification is that the
Loci Communes Cabbalifici include a Compendium Libri Cabba-
listico-Chymici, AZscH MEZAREPH ditiz, de Lapide Philosophico.
I have had occasion in the sixth book to give some account of
this treatise.

We have reason therefore to suppose that Rosenroth was
infected—slightly or otherwise—with the alchemical zeal of

1 It was indeed, both before and after, the conventional rason d’ étre of almost every
work on the subject. See, for example, Beyers’ CaBBALIsmus JUDAICO-CHRISTIANUS
Detetius Breviterque Delineatus. Wittemberg, 1707.

2 Rea Hisrory OF THE RosicrucrAns, by A. E. Waite, c. viii., especially pp. 220-
222. Compare my later work on THE BROTHERHOOD OF THE Rosy Cross, consulting
the references to these names in the Index.

3 See Prafatio Authors, which appears in all editions of the Inrrorrus ArERTus ad
Occlusum Regis Palatium.

4 A. E. Waite: Tur Secrer TRADITION IN ALCHEMY, p. 295.

5 Tn his treatise Dz Vira ETERNA,

478 THE HOLY KABBALAH

his friend, the second generation of an alchemical family.
We may suspect, however, that he was more theosophist than
Hermetist ; we are told also that he loved meditating on the
Holy Scriptures and that he knew them by heart. Like his
countryman Khunrath, he was a Lutheran, and Eliphas Lévi
would have said of him, as of the author of AMPHITHEATRUM :
“ herein he was a German of his period rather than a mystical
citizen of the eternal kingdom.”’! In matters of religion his
peculiar bent is determined by the fact that he wrote an
EXPLANATION OF THE APOCALYPSE, about which I will
forbear from wearying my readers. More to our purpose is
a dialogue on evangelical history, in which a Kabbalistic
catechumen proposes questions on the four Gospels and a
Christian replies. With this also we may connect a treatise
entitled Mrsstas Purus, in which the life of Jesus Christ,
from his conception to his baptism, is explained according
to the doétrines of the Kabbalah. In a word, the motto of
his correspondent Henry More was that also of Rosenroth:
** May the glory of our God and His Christ be the end of all
out writings!” In conformity with this he begins his
enumeration of the reasons which justify the appearance of a
Latin version of the ZoHaR ? by affirming that at a period
when the divisions of Christendom are traceable to diversity
of philosophical opinions and metaphysical definitions it must
be important to investigate a philosophical system which
flourished during the age of Christ and his apostles, and from
which fountain the sacred oracles have themselves drawn
largely. In the preface to his translation of three texts of the
ZOHAR he founds his opinion that Kabbalistic dogmas may
be of Divine revelation on the ground of their sanity and
sublimity, as well as their great use in explaining the books
of the Old and New Testaments. He affirms also that, unlike
later Jewish writings, the ZoHaR does not contain a single
utterance against Christ. Finally, after enumerating twenty-
four reasons why the Jews should enjoy toleration at Christian
hands, he mentions the chief things which will assist their
conversion. ‘They include, of course, the ordinary common-
places of piety and the ordinary devices of proselytism, but
there is stress laid upon the promotion of the study of Hebrew

1 HisrorrE DE LA MAGIE, Introduétion, p. 33. Paris, 1860. See also my translation,
sv. THE History oF Maaic, second edition, 1922, p. 29.
2 APPARATUS IN LipruM SoHAR, Pars Secunda, pp. 3 et seq., Kas. DEN., Tom. i.

KNORR VON ROSENROTH ' 479

and Chaldaic, and on the translation of the New Testament
into those languages.t The disquisition is conventional
enough, but it 1s important because it indicates, firstly, the
project which was ever near to the heart of Rosenroth, and,
secondly, how little he dreamed either of an esoteric
Christianity or of a withdrawn Wisdom-Religion, how little
he looked to find in Kabbalistic doctrine a deeper sense of
Christian doctrines, or indeed anything but their consecration
in the eyes of Jewry, by demonstrating that they were to be
found in the Zonar. He did not wish the Christian to
become a Kabbalist, but he longed very much for the Kabba-
listic Jew to become a Lutheran. He ts said to have endured
great sacrifices, outside the vast labour involved, over the
publication of Kappata DeNuparTa, but there is no need to
add that it missed its aim entirely; it has enabled a few
Students to get a confused notion of the ZoHar, and it has in
this way done immense service to occultists by furnishing
material for their reveries: it is outside probability that it
ever brought a single Jew into the Church of Christ, and as
Rosenroth failed in his public aim, so at the close of his life
he had the misfortune to see his daughter depart from the
reformed teligion and embrace, under the influence of her
husband, the faith of the Catholic Church. ‘Taken altogether
the story of Christian Rosenroth has a touch of heroism and
tragedy, and seeing that with all its faults his gift to scholar-
ship is one of permanent value, so it is, I think, a useful task
to indicate the circumstances under which he gave it and the
motives by which he was prompted.?

1 With this description the reader may compare a little treatise which belongs to
KassaLA Denupara, though unfortunately it is met with very rarely in extant copies,
z.e., ADUMBRATIO KABBALZ CHRISTIANA, id eft Syncatabasis Hebraizans, sive Explicatio
ad dogmata Novi Foederis pertinens, pro formanda hypothesis, ad conversionem Judazorum
proficientis. It is an addendum to the second volume, separately paged, and is in the
form of a dialogue between a Kabbalist and a Christian philosopher. It has been
translated of recent years into French. Even at this day the little work seems to me
of singular interest, and it is written with limpid clearness. The disquisition on the
parts or grades of the soul in man may be noted in this conneétion as a case in point.

2 Ata later date the same motives inspited two small treatises—the work of other
writers—which are interesting in their way, and are worth mentioning for the benefit
of students who may wish to pursue the subje&. (1) PHospHorus OrTrHODOXx
Fiper Veterum Cabbalifiarum, seu TeStimonia de Sacro-Santta Trinitate et Messia Deo et
Homine, ex pervetusto Libro Sohar deprompta, qua nunc primum Latiné reddita, suisque et R.
Johannis Kemperi Judao-Chriftiani animadversionibus concinné explicata, Judas eque ac Christianis
specimints loco edidit Andreas Norrelius Suecus, qui item commentarios Kemperianos suis illuStravit
nots, m§telodami, 1720. This has been cited previously, but by name only. The
prolegomena ate concerned with the praise of R. Simeon ben Yohai, shewing the
authority of the ZoHAR and its superiority to the Talmud on the ground that its author

480 THE HOLY KABBALAH

I should add that over the antiquity of Kabbalistic do@rine
and literature he was by no means credulous for his period,
seeming indeed to admit that there may have been an admix-
ture of late material with the ancient fragments of the ZoHAR.
He regarded the Book oF CONCEALMENT as the oldest and
most important of its treatises, and this is the only one in
which he was inclined to recognise the dire& authorship of
R. Simeon ben Yohai. Of the rest, some may have been
the work of R. Abba and some of the school which succeeded
these masters.

XTI.—RALPH CUDWORTH

The honoured name of Ralph Cudworth, perhaps the
greatest theosophist of his age on the side of scholarship, is
still a memory in English theological literature of the higher
type, though, except among rare Students, the TRUE
INTELLECTUAL SYSTEM OF THE UNIVERSE is temembered
rather than read. It is a mine of Platonism, learning and
sapience, and more than this, it is a deeply reasoned treatise
of its period in opposition to the atheism of that period; its
points are established victoriously, and turning over the
leaves of the colossal folio one almost regrets that the diffi-
culties of the seventeenth century disturb us no longer and
that their solutions no longer help us. It must be confessed
that Cudworth connects but superficially with Kabbalism, and
the connection, such as it is, need not detain us long. ‘The
chief thesis of the INTELLECTUAL SysTEM is that behind all

flourished before Judah the Prince. The Talmud is quoted (p. 10), to prove that
R. Simeon studied the Kabbalah in the cave, and that he and his son wrote the ZoHAR
therein, ot that part of it which is in the Jerusalem diale&t. The Hebrew portions are
tefetred to other authorships (p. 16). The translated matter is chiefly from the
FAITHFUL SHEPHERD, and follows the Mantua edition of the ZoHar. (2) Lux mn
TENEBRIS, quam Zohar Antiquum Judeorum Monumentum, genti sue occoccate prebet, in
denissimis rerum divinarum tenebris, ad mySterium SS. Trinitats eo facilius apprahendendum, et
Majeftatem Christi Divinam non pertinaciter oppugnandam, et Honorem Spiritus Sanéti Recen-
tiorum more non fedandum ... Studio M. Nicolai Lutkens (without place or date, but
about the same period as the treatise of Norrelius). In the first two chapters there is
an attempt to prove that the Mystery of the Trinity is concealed in Leviticus xvi. 18,
and Deut. vi.5. The third chapter investigates Gen. xix. 24—-De Domino qui a Domino
pluit, in the same interest. The fourth chapter treats of the Lord God of Hosts,
Is. vi. 3 ; and the fifth of the Lotd God, ib. xlviii.16. The sixth chapter seeks to prove
that the three supernal SEPHIROTH were names and characters under which pre-Christian
Jews distinguished the Three Persons of the One Divine essence. (3) Compare
with these DrarrrBE PuHrtotocica de R. Simeone Filio Jochai auttore Libri Sohar, in qua
viri celeberrimi Christiani Schoettgeniz Dissertatio docens R. Simeonum Filium Jochai Religionum
fuisse Christianum modefte examinatur et contrarium potius evincitur, auttore Justo Martino
Glesenero, Hildesia, 1736. A pamphlet of twenty-two pages.

RALPH CUDWORTH 481

the tapestries and embroideries of pagan mythology there is
the do€rine of monotheism, and that civilised man in reality
has never worshipped but one God, whose threefold nature
was a “ Divine Cabbala ” or revelation, successively depraved
and adulterated till it almost disappears for Cudworth among
the “ particular unities ” of Proclus and the later Platonists.+
Among the cloud of witnesses who are convened in support
of this view are included the later Rabbinical writers, the
Haracoty of Maimonides, the OLat TAMID = PERPETUAL
OFFERING of Moses Albelda (sixteenth century), the IxKarIm
ot Principies of Joseph Albo (fifteenth century), the com-
mentaries of R. David Kimchi (1160-1235), and the book
NirzAcHon, references and extracts which at least serve to
shew that this Christian divine had attempted some curious
exploration in the world of Hebrew literature. His con-
clusion was “that the Hebrew Doétots and Rabbins have
been generally of this persuasion, that the Pagan Nations
anciently, at least the intelligent amongst them, acknowledged
One Supreme God of the whole world, and that all their
other Gods were but Creatures and Inferior Ministers, which
wete worshipped by them upon these two accounts, either
as thinking that the honour done to them redounded to the
Supreme, or else that they might be their Mediators and
Intercessors, Orators and Negotiators with Him, which
inferior Gods of the Pagans were supposed by these Hebrews
to be chiefly of two kinds, Angels and Stars or Spheres, the
latter of which the Jews as well as Pagans concluded to be
animated and intellectual.” ‘The question at the present day
is chiefly archaic or fantastic, but it has its interest, for it
setves to illustrate the Strange contrast which exists between
the Hebrew mind at the period of Maimonides and at that
far distant epoch when the song of the Psalmist described the
idols of the Gentiles as “silver and gold, the work of the
hands of men.”

In addition to the TRruz INTELLECTUAL SYSTEM OF THE
UNIVERSE Cudworth published some sermons and a discourse
on the TRuE Notion oF THE Lorp’s SuppEr,? afterwards
translated into Latin by Mosheim, with a confutation repre-
senting the consubstantial doétrine of Lutheran theology,?
INTELLECTUAL SYSTEM OF THE UNIVERSE, London, 1668.

2 London, 1676.
3 This translation appeared in 1733.

482 THE HOLY KABBALAH

and yet again enlarged upon by Edward Pelling in his Drs-
COURSE ON THE SACRAMENT. The drift of the thesis is
represented sufficiently by the summary of the first chapter :
“That it was a custom of the Jews and Heathens to feast
upon things sacrificed, and that the custom of the Christians
in pattaking of the Body and Blood of Christ once sacrificed
upon the Cross, in the Lord’s Supper, is analogous thereto.”
It is outside my province to pronounce upon this view, but
as a Christian Mystic who holds that sacramentalism is the
law of Nature and the law of Grace, it may be remarked in
passing that no theory which reduces the Eucharist to a
memorial or a religious banquet can be mystically acceptable.
Cudworth was by no means a mystic, and the most that his
subject afforded was an opportunity to give further evidence
of his unusual erudition, and it may be added of no incon-
siderable skill in its management. ‘The thesis is mentioned
here because it has recourse so frequently to the Rabbinical
writers, to the glosses of Nahmanides, the writings of Isaac
Abravanel, the Misuna, the commentary on that work by
Rabbi Obadiah, the scholiasts on Judges, rare MSS. of
Karaite Jews and so forth. The Zoharic writings are not
quoted, but it was because they contained nothing bearing
on the matter in hand: had occasion arisen, no doubt Ralph
Cudworth would have given evidence of passable familiarity
with that great cycle of Kabbalistic literature.

XIV.—THOMAS BURNET

With the Cambridge school of Platonists the name of
Thomas Burnet, some time master of the Charterhouse,
connects by association rather than the similarity of intellectual
pursuits. He entered Christ’s College in 1654, when Ralph
Cudworth was master, while Henry More was just in his
fortieth year. It was probably to the last-named divine that
he owed his slight knowledge of the subject which entitles
him to mention in this place. The amicable discussion
between More and the editor of Kaspata DENUDATA
appeared, as we have seen, in that work in the year 1677,
but the INTERPRETATION OF THE MInp oF Mosss had preceded
it by a number of years. When Burnet published his
TELLURIS THEORIA SACRA, he gave no evidence of interest
in Platonic or Kabbalistic subje&ts: it has been described

THOMAS BURNET 483

by Brewster as a beautiful geological romance. It is, of
course, concerned with tne Mosaic scheme of creation, and
the more important work which followed it, dealing as it
does with the ancient doétrine concerning the origin of
things, is really its extension or sequel.4 In this interesting
volume, written elegantly in Latin of the period, tout un
grand chapitre, as the bibliography of Papus describes it, is
devoted to the Kabbalah. As hinted already, it bears no
evidence of original research, or indeed of any first-hand
knowledge, but it is justifiable by our purpose to ascertain
how a literature which fascinated, though it did not con-
vince, the Cambridge Platonists, impressed the liberal mind
of a bold and not unlearned thinker belonging to the next
generation. We find, as might be anticipated, that Burnet
faises no question as to the wisdom of Moses, by which he
understood what all other Kabbalistic students have under-
Stood also, a knowledge of natural mysteries derived from
the Egyptian education of the Jewish lawgiver. He differs,
however, from Kabbalists by questioning seriously how much
of this wisdom came down to the Israelites. Assuming some
tradition of the kind, there could be no doubt that it was
depraved in the lapse of time.? In particular, the Kabbalah,
as we now possess it, abounds in figments of imagination
and in nugatory methods. From this statement of a general
position, which may be regarded as common ground of
ctiticism, he proceeds to a more detailed examination, and
reaches conclusions which are not likely to be challenged at
the present day. ‘The debased character of Jewish Tradition
in some of its developments must be recognised by those,
critical and otherwise, who maintain most earnestly its
mystical and theosophical importance.

If we attempt, says Burnet, to separate anything which
may femain uncorrupted in the Kabbalah, to divide the
genuine from the spurious, we must first of all purge away
that numerical, literal, grammatical part which seeks to
extract arcane meanings from the alphabet, the Divine
Names and the word-book of the Scriptures. The magical
and superstitious element must be also purged away. We
should bear further in mind, and this, I think, is the most

1 ArcHOLOGI2 PurLosopHics, sive Dottrina Antiqua de Rerum Originibus, Lrprt
DUO, editio secunda (the best), London, 1728. .
2 Fadisime licet a Neotericss corrupta et adulterata.

484 THE HOLY KABBALAH

sensible of several secondary points raised in the criticism,
that the enunciation of common notions in uncommon
language cannot be accepted as any true Kabbalah. The
warning which it implies was not less needed a mete genera-
tion ago than in the days of Thomas Burnet. The delight in
unintelligible language because it is unintelligible was as
characteristic of Victorian occult writers, even as of gloom-
wrapped Hades according to the Ritual of the Dead, and it
is a tendency which has an inscrutable foundation in the
entire subject. It would seem indeed that the sphinx who
ptopounds the arcana in terms as monstrous as herself needs
only a commonplace to overwhelm her, as in the case of
(Edipus.

In accordance with his intention Burnet proceeds to divide
the Kabbalah into the Nominal and Real. The first is that
which he has specified as worthless—GrmatTRIA, TEMURAH,
Noraricon, VOCABULA. Its devices, he says, are the diver-
sions of our children, and in truth it would seem hard to
decide whether intellectual superiority and philosophical
seriousness should be ascribed to rabbinical anagrams or to
the apparatus of “ Tit: Tat: To.” In any case, “they do
not belong to sane literature, much less to wisdom.”

So far we can accept readily the judgment of Burnet, but
there was no novelty in the line taken, even so far back as
the second half of the seventeenth century. When he
comes, however, to consider what he has agreed to regard
as the teal Kabbalah, his insufficiency is evident, and his
slender knowledge, drawn only from Kasspata DENupatTa,
when it does not arrest his judgment, leads him into manifest
error. Thus, he tells us that the real Kabbalah contains two
things which are important for our consideration, the doGtrine
of the SepHtRoTH and that of the Four Worlds, but he com-
plains that the conception which underlies the former does
not appear clearly. With the help of the Lexicon of Rosen-
roth he decides finally that they are emanations from God.+
He sets forth what he can glean from that source concerning
KeETHER and CHoKMAH, and then surrenders the inquiry in
the hope of finding more intelligible statements concerning
the Four Worlds.2, He concludes, however, that the con-

1 Elsewhere, he attempts to consider their significance in conneCtion with the
axiom—ex nihilo nibil fit.

2 He mentions in addition to the SepHtrorH and the Four Worlds, the thirty-two
Paths of Wisdom, from the SEPHER YETZIRAH and its commentary, and the Fifty Gates

THOMAS BURNET 485

demnation of all the pseudo-mystics of Kabbalism, Theosophy
and Hermeticism is that of the unbelievers who continued to
love the darkness rather than the light when the light was
come already into the world. He assumes, as might be
expected, that the Book or OccuLrarTIon is the most impor-
tant part of the Zonar and, glancing at the commentaries of
Isaac de Loria and of Hirtz on the trad in question and its
developments, confesses his inability to understand either
from text or interpreters what is meant by the symbolism
of the Vast and the Lesser Countenance. “ We are all of us
liable some time or other to be distracted by reasoning, but
it is a common complaint of the mind among Orientals to
be distracted by allegories.”

To sum his general position: We know from Maimonides
that the Hebrews once possessed many mysteries concerning
things divine, but that they have perished.? It is at the same
time scarcely possible that all foundation should be wanting
to the Kabbalah, yet if its doétrines were openly and clearly
set forth, it is hard to say whether they would move us to
laughter or astonishment.

Thomas Burnet has higher claims on our tolerance than
his ability as a critic of Kabbalism, and his mind was not of
that order which could be expected to understand or sym-
pathise with the aspirations embraced by Theosophy. He
was one of the rare precursors of liberal Theology, and he
is said to have closed the path of his promotion by venturing
to express an opinion that the story of the Garden of Eden
should not be understood literally. In a later treatise on
the Farru AND Duttzs oF CHRISTIANS,’ he is thought to have
excluded so much which seemed to him doubtful or unimpor-
tant in accepted doGrine that it is questionable whether even

ity remained. A posthumous work on eschatology
and the resurrection * maintained that the punishment of the
wicked would terminate ultimately in their salvation. I
should add that some pretended English versions of the
Archzological Philosophy do not represent the original, and
in particular omit altogether the Kabbalistic section.

of Providence “ through which Moses attained his marvellous science, and concealed
the same in the Pentateuch,” #.e., according to the Kabbalists.

1 John iii. 1921.

2 Tue GumDE oF THE PERPLEXED. Part i, c. 71.

* De Fine ET OFFiIcus CHRISTIANORUM.

# De Sratu Morruorum Et RESURGENTIUM.

486 THE HOLY KABBALAH

XV.—SAINT-MARTIN

The life and doétrine of Louis Claude de Saint-Martin, the
Unknown Philosopher, who at the end of the eighteenth
century and amidst the torch-lights of the Revolution diffused
in France the higher spirit of Mysticism, having been the
subject of my studies elsewhere, I shall refer to him here only
as the recipient of an Esoteric Tradition through Martines
de Pasqually, the genesis of which remains undetermined,
though it was termed Rosicrucian by his initiator, and has
been designated Swedenborgian subsequently by one of his
interpreters in France. It is a Tradition which differs from
other presentations of Theosophical Doétrine, and it has
little in common with what we know or may infer concerning
Rosicrucian teaching. In the REINTEGRATION DES ETREs of
Pasqually,* and in the Catechisms of the Masonic Rite propa-
gated by him, which are also most probably his work, the
Tradition is presented in a crude manner. It was developed
by Saint-Martin, who indeed brought to it a gift of genius
which was wanting in his instructor. Now, Saint-Martin was
a man who cared very little, and does not scruple to say so,
for purely traditional doétrines, at least as traditional, nor did
he shew much deference towards doétors of authority therein.
He considered books at best a makeshift method of instruction,
though he wrote many; he preferred learning at first hand
from God, Man and the Universe. ‘Till he came under the
influence of Jacob Bohme he neither quoted nor possessed
“authorities,” with the exception of the Scriptures. He
drew, of course, from the source of his initiation, but he
never mentions it in any clear manner, except in his corre-
spondence and his life-notes, both published posthumously.
There is nothing to indicate that he had read Kabbalistic
literature: there is every presumption that he did not. Some
of his lesser doétrines possess notwithstanding a certain
Kabbalistic complexion. There is that in particular con-
cerning the Great Name which I have developed at some
length in a study to which I have referred, but it has lost all

1 See A. E. Waite: THe Lire oF Lours CLAuDE DE SArnt-Martin, the Unknown
Philosopher, and the Substance of his Transcendental Dotirine, London, Philip Wellby, 1901.
See also my SAINT-MarTIN, the French MyStic, 1922.

2 It is right to say that Kenneth Mackenzie, in his CycLopaipIA OF FREEMASONRY,
attributes to him three published works which, so far as I am aware, are unknown.

SAINT-MARTIN 487

touch with Kabbalism in the hands of Saint-Martin. So also
he has a complex system of mystic numbers which might
suggest the Rabbinical Norarixon, but it is entirely out of
line with all anterior speculations on this subject, and makes
the question of its origin one of the problems in his history.?
I conclude that Pasqually, whom I take to have been a sincere
and perhaps even a saintly man, as his Masonic school was
almost a seminary of sanctity, derived from a source which
retained some filtrations of Kabbalism, and that they were
brought over by Saint-Martin without any historical associa-
tions whatever.?__ He has therefore little title to be included
among defenders and expounders of Kabbalistic dodtrine,
which would have come as a surprise to himself. This was
done, however, by French occult writers? belonging to
so-called Martinist and other groups of the late nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries, and by Dr. Papus especially,
who seemed anxious to annex anyone, from Shakespeare to
the author of SUPERNATURAL RELIGION.

XVI.—ELIPHAS LEVI

Between the period of Saint-Martin and that of Alphonse
Louis Constant, who is the subject of this notice, the French
literature of Kabbalism may be said to have been initiated
rather.than to have received a new impetus by the publication
of Adolphe Franck, to whose views on the subject of post-
Christian religious philosophy among the Jews, I have made
frequent reference already. I have indicated also that its
superficial value remains unimpaired after the lapse of eighty
yeats, and indeed modern criticism has in certain definite
respects reverted unawares to his standpoint, as regards not
only the antiquity of Zoharic Tradition but of much of the
body of the Zouar. Franck’s work has, of course, its
limitations, and it is known that his excerpts from Kabbalistic
books were subjected to severe strictures in Germany ; but
for an accomplished and luminous review of the whole

1 Jt is not impossible that it derives from his first school and therefore from Pasqually,
who was sole instructor therein.

2 That man is superior to the angels, and may even ingtru& them, is, I think, the
most convincing instance in Saint-Martin of such a filtration. This notion is found in
the Zouar, and developed by some of its commentators.

3 More especially in the case of the so-called facetious allegory LE Crocoprg, in
which it may be said safely that there is not a single trace of Kabbalism.

4 La KasBALE on /a Philosophie Religieuse des Hébreux. Par Ad. Franck, Paris, 1843.

H.K- KK

488 THE HOLY KABBALAH

subject nothing of later date can be said to have superseded
it. Its analyses of the S—EPHER YETZIRAH and of the Zonar,
together with its delineations of correspondences between
the philosophical school of Kabbalism and the schools of
Plato, of Alexandria, of Philo, created French knowledge
on the subject, and together with the researches of Munk,
published some few years subsequently, have been the main
soutce of that knowledge down to recent times, the part of
dream and reverie being provided by the writings of Bliphas
Lévi. As regatds both methods and motives, Franck and
Lévi are located at opposite poles. The first was an academic
writer having no occult interests; the second claimed not
only initiation but adeptship, not only the ordinary resources
of scholarship focussed on a literary and historical problem
but all advantages which could be derived from an exclusive
possession of its master key.

Among the lesser difficulties of recent Kabbalistic criticism
the proper allocation of Alphonse Louis Constant in the
throng of students and expositors was not without its gravity
till I sought on my own part to reflect some light thereon.
Whether in France or in England few had approached the
subject with sympathies in the direction of occult arts and
speculations who did not owe their introduction to Eliphas
Lévi. I speak, of course, of the period subsequent to 1850,!
and I may add that few persons thus initiated did anything
but read the interpretations of their first leader into the obscure
body of dogma which comprises the Esoteric Tradition of
the Jews. If it be necessary, therefore, to make void rather

1 Although the treatise of Franck had, as we have seen, preceded Lévi’s interpreta-
tions by several years. So far as I can recollect the professed adept never referred to
the sympathetic criticism and defence of the more academic writer. Prior to 1843
the most extraordinary ignorance must have prevailed upon the subjeét in France, since
it was possible for a distinguished philosopher to write as follows :—“ When Christian
philosophy made its appearance in the world it crushed Paganism and Theurgy, and in
the second century humanity was made subject to a severe régime, which set aside
Mysticism. It did not reappear till the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries in certain
schools of Italy and Germany. ‘This new Mysticism, called Kabbalah, from a name
known already in the schools of Alexandria, but since entirely disappeared, and signify- .
ing oral tradition, issued from the bosom of the scholastic, and acted with the instru-
ments of the scholastic, as formerly the neoplatonist Porphyry evoked with Platonic
words. The Kabbalah of the fifteenth century put in operation bizarre formule,
magic squares and circles, mysterious numbers, by the power of which the demons of
hell and the divinities of heaven were compelled, as it was pretended, to appear in
obedience to the wand. Hence the mystical ecstasies of Raymund Lully, who attra&ted
such zealous partisans and furious enemies, causing blood to flow ; hence the delirium
which brought Bruno to the stake.” Victor Cousin: Cours pE Purosopnie, Paris,
1836. It would seem impossible to record a greater number of inaccuracies, or to
display mote signal ignorance, within the dimensions of a paragraph.

ELIPHAS LEVI 489

than reduce largely the authority attributed to Eliphas Lévi,
I must expect even now to alienate the sympathy of his
remaining French admirers; but this is only a question of
the moment, and so far as it is possible to take a plain course |
in the matter there can be no need for hesitation.

I do not think that Lévi ever made an independent Sstate-
ment upon any historical fact in which the least confidence
could be reposed. He never presented the sense of an author
whom he was reviewing in a way which could be said to
reproduce that author faithfully. As in the one case he
embroidered history by the help of a decorative imagina-
tion, so it occurred frequently that he attributed to an old
author the kind of sense which it would be interesting to
find in old authors, but it is not met with except by the
mediation of a magician with the transmuting power of Abbé
Constant. He takes, for example, a perfectly worthless little
book by Abbot Trithemius, which does not reflect the
opinions of that learned Benedictine, but is simply a trifle
addressed to a German prince explaining how some persons
in antiquity distributed the government of the world among
certain planetary intelligences, ruling successively and
reassuming rule in rotation. He invests it with the import-
ance of a grand and sublime achievement of prophetic science,
wheteas it does not shew half the acumen of our empirical
friend Nostradamus, and is equalled in any year of grace by
the almanacks of Raphael and Zadkiel. Here is an instance
of what Lévi reads into an author. Nor do we need to
depart from this unhappy little treatise to test Lévi’s reliability
Over ati express matter of fact. He tells us that the forecast
of Trithemius closes with a proclamation of universal
monarchy in the year 1879. ‘Trithemius says nothing of the
kind, but modestly remarks that the gift of prophecy, so
generously attributed to him by his reviewer, would be
required to discern anything beyond that period. I mention
this matter, to which I have drawn attention long since,}
because it is necessary to exhibit the quality of mind which
was brought by Eliphas Lévi to the illumination of Kabba-
listic and occult literature. The deliberations of the Holy
Synods -will be found to have suffered many transfigurations
through the medium of their interpreter, and any matter of

revised edition, 1897.
KK2

490 THE HOLY KABBALAH

sharp fact in the hands of this unaccountable juggler is brought
over into the realm of myth.

I need not dwell upon the miserable plight of every Hebrew

quotation in those works which he may be supposed to have
passed for press. No ordinary carelessness would account for
such blundets, nor need they be explained by supposing that
he was utterly ignorant of their language. His acquaintance
must have been slender enough, but it is not necessary to be
proficient in Hebrew or indeed in Chinese to ensure the
accuracy of a few excerpts. The excerpts in Eliphas Lévi
“no one can speak and no one can spell.” But even in
simpler matters his blunders are incredible. He gives the
three mother-letters of the Hebrew alphabet inaccurately,}
which for an accredited student of SEPHER YETZIRAH is
almost as inexcusable as if an English author erred in enume-
rating the vowels of our own language.

The instance, however, which seems impressive and even
final, occurs in a posthumous work entitled the Boox oF
SPLENDOUR.” Of this the first part is intended as a com-
pressed translation of the GrEATER Hoty Synop. Now,
Lévi says that the deliberations of this Conclave ate contained
in a Hebrew treatise entitled Ipra Sura, and these words
appear accordingly at the head of his version. But the Ipra
SuTA, of more correctly Zoura, is the name of the LEssER
SyNnop, while IpRAH RasBa is that appertaining to the record
of the Greater Assembly. What should we think of the
qualifications of a commentator on the books of the Old
Testament who informed us that the word BERESHITH was
applied to Deuteronomy ?

That in spite of his slipshod criticism, his careless reading
and his malpractices in historical matters the writings of
Eliphas Lévi are not without a certain interest is true up to a
certain point. What seems to distinguish him from all other
occult writers is not his knowledge as occultist, but the
peculiar genius of interpretation which he applied to that
knowledge, the surprising results which he could obtain
from an old doétrine, even as from an old author. They
were not reliable results ; they were not in harmony with any
secret knowledge; they represented the standpoint of the

1 La CLEF DES GRANDS MysTERES, Paris, 1861, pp. 199, 200.

2 Lr Livre DEs SpLENDEURS, contenant le Soleil Judaique . . . Etudes sur les Origines
de la Kabbale, &c., Paris, 1894.

ELIPHAS LEVI 49%

agnostic rather than the transcendentalist ; and they afflicted
the transcendental standpoint in consequence, but they wore
the guise and they spoke the language of occultism, and it is
they which have fascinated his students, they which once
multiplied his admirers, they also which imparted at their
period a new impulse to the study of occult speculations.
This is equivalent to saying that the influence of Eliphas Lévi
does not make for a proper understanding of occult teveries,
and as concerns the Kabbalah that it reads a meaning into the
Esoteric Tradition of Israel which is not in harmony therewith.

Let us take, for example, his inverted text of the first
chapter of Genesis, for which he claims a Kabbalistic founda-
tion.t It is needless to say that it neither has nor could
have any rabbinical authority and that it first occurred to the
imaginative mind of a Frenchman in the second half of the
nineteenth century. As it exceeds quotation in this place
I must refer the reader to the work in which I have rendered
it at length.? It may be described shortly as replacing the
history of creation by God with that of God’s creation by
man. It is, if you prefer it, the evolution of the God-idea in
humanity. As an exercise of ingenuity it is notable and high
diversion, but the point at which the sober critic must diverge
from the interpreter is that “ this occult Genesis was thought
out by Moses before writing his own.”

Let us take another case which, though it brings us to the
same question, is more perhaps to our purpose, because it is a
constru€tion placed upon Zoharic symbolism. For Eliphas
Lévi the Macroprosopus or Great Countenance of the ZOHAR
is the evolution of the idea of God? from the shadow
divinities represented by the Kings of Edom. Mricroprosopus
is the grand night of faith. The one is the God of the wise,
the other the idol of the vulgar. The one is the great creative
hypothesis, the other the dark figure, the restricted hypothesis.
As it is to the Lesser Countenance that the name of TETRA-
GRAMMATON is attributed,’ it follows that the secret of the
ZOHAR is the alleged utterance of the adept to the recipiendary
of the Egyptian Mysteries : “‘ Osiris is a black god.” Mucro-

1 La CLEF DES GRANDS MysTEREs, pp. 334 ef seg. MysTrerres oF Maaic, second
edition, London, 1897, pp. 108 eé¢ seq.

2 j.e,: THE Mysteries oF Macic, first and second editions, London, 1886, 1897.

3 It follows that he was either unacquainted with the hypothesis of Arn SopH or
elected to ignore it.

4 The letter Vau and that only is referable to the Divine Son.

492 THE HOLY KABBALAH

PROSOPUS is, however, “‘ neither the Ahriman of the Persians
nor the evil principle of the Manichzans, but a more exalted
concept, a mediating shadow between the infinite light and
the feeble eyes of humanity ; a veil made in the likeness of
humanity with which God Himself deigns to cover His
glory ; a shadow which contains the reason of all mysteries,
explaining the terrible Deity of the prophets, who threatens
and inspires fear. It is the God of the priests, the God who
exacts sacrifices, the God who sleeps frequently and is
awakened by the trumpets of the temple, the God who
repents having made man, but, conquered by prayers and
offerings, is appeased when on the point of punishing.” 1

That this interpretation has attracted a few unversed
Students who did not have the texts before them may be no
cause for surprise. It was pleasant to make acquaintance
with a supposed esoteric tradition in which all theological
difficulties seem to dissolve together. While on the one
hand it might be little short of incredible that the Kabbalah
should conceal so reasonable and elegant a doétrine, the
putative symbolism was on the other so plausibly accounted
for that it encouraged an easy acceptance. When we come,
however, to the analysis of text and construction we find that
the one does not warrant the other and that the evolution of
the God-idea in humanity had no more occurred to the authors
of the Zonar than it would have occurred, ¢.g., to Grant Allen
to write a Book or OccutraTIon. It is not a case in which
it is necessary to tax space and patience by the exhaustive
demonstration of a negative. The validity of the construction
is seen by the text with which it is connected. We know
how much was tead by Fitzgerald into Omar Khayyam,
but his verses are literal and line upon line compared with
the high fantasy of Lévi’s Zoharistic analysis. Asan example
of this it is sufficient to refer the student who may desire
an express case for comparison to the forty-third section of
Ipra Rapza as it Stands in the Latin version of Rosenroth
and the excursus on Justice in the Book oF SPLENDOUR which
follows, says Eliphas Lévi, the text of Rabbi Simeon. It is
mere illusion and mockery.?

Another extreme instance is the fantastic inversion of the
SEPHIROTH which gives despotism an absolute power as the
dark side of the supreme power in KETrHER ; blind faith as

1 Le Livre DES SPLENDEURS, pp. 69, 70. 2 Ibid., pp. 86 ef seq.

ELIPHAS LEVI 493

the shadow of eternal wisdom in CHokMAH ; so called immu-
table dogma, which is at the same time inevitably progressive,
as the antithesis of active intelligence in BrinaH; blind faith
again as the inversion of spiritual beauty in TIPHERETH ;
divine vengeance as opposed to eternal justice in GEBURAH ;
willing sacrifice as the shadow of infinite mercy in CHESED ;
abnegation and voluntary renunciation as opposed to the
eternal victory of goodness in Nrerzacw; eternal hell as
opposed to the eternity of goodness, presumably in Hop;
celibacy and sterility as opposed to the fecundity of goodness,
presumably in Jesop ; while MaLxurn, corresponding to the
number of creation, is said to have no negative aspect,
because celibacy and sterility produce nothing.1 Without
dwelling on the carelessness of the arrangement, in part
sephirotic and in part transposing and abandoning the
sephirotic series, or on the failing ingenuity which repeats
the same contrasts, I may point out that advanced views on
the transfiguration of dogmas and on vicarious atonement
are not the findings of illuminated rabbins in the middle ages
or earlier but belong to the excursions of modern thought,
and that since arbitrary tabulations and artificial contrasts are
easy exercises, and can be varied to infinity—more especially
when the text itself is scouted—we may appreciate the
contrasts here created by the evidence which supports them
and that is simply the magisterial afirmation of the interpreter.

It remains to say that Eliphas Lévi represents the invention
of a new and gratuitous phase in the study of the Kabbalah,
undertaken neither as an object of research nor as a part of
the history of philosophy. The students whom we have
considered heretofore have been either Christian propa-
gandists or writers by the way whose connection with the
subject is unsubstantial; but the standpoint of Lévi is that
there is a religion behind all religions and that it is the veiled
mystery of Kabbalism, from which all have issued and into
which all return. Christian doctrine, in particular, is unin-
telligible, apart from the light cast on it by the deliberations
of the Holy Assemblies. Now it is precisely this standpoint,
its derivatives and conneétions, that created French occultism
in the generation which followed Lévi. In the past the
magician was content to evoke spirits, the alchemist to produce
gold when he could, the astrologer to spell the dubious

1 Le Livre DES SPLENDEURS, pp. 74 éf Seq.

494 THE HOLY KABBALAH

messages of the stars, the Kabbalist of sorts to be wise in
anagrams and word-puzzles, but these things were regarded
henceforward as parts of a greater mystery, and in a very true
sense Eliphas Lévi was the magus who opened before his
readers the wide field of this imaginary view. He had no
antecedents in scholarship but he drew suggestions from
there and here in the texts, and he wrote it all up and he
coloured it. The more he wrote and the mote he coloured
there is no need to say that his delineations diverged the
further from all likeness to his sources, and so of all claims
thereon. This is illustrated in a plenary sense by his post-
humous MystERES DE LA KABBALE, 1923, and by his letters
to Baron Spedalieri which have been printed through the
moons and the years in Le Vorze p’Ists of Paris.

XVI.—TWO ACADEMICAL CRITICS

Having regard to the fact that, as already stated, there has
been always in England a small number of persons who have
been interested, mostly through sympathy with subjects
called esoteric, in the study of the Kabbalah, it may appear
incredible that there are no memorials of their interest between
the period of Thomas Vaughan and the year 1865, a space of
two centuries. There is a similar hiatus in the merely
academical interest represented by Burnet. I do not say
that there have been nowhere any references to Kabbalism ;
they may have made up in number what they wanted in
learning and authority ; and a few curious gleanings might
be gathered from early editions of the larger encyclopzdias ;
but as there has been no mystical student who wrote anything
of moment concerning it, so there has been no scholar apart
from such interests who has treated the subject seriously.
The work of Dr. Ginsburg, once so well known that even
now it scarcely needs description, may be said to have marked
an epoch, because it was the first clear, simple and methodised
account of Kabbalistic doétrine and literature. It leaves
naturally much to be desired, as it arose in an informal
manner out of a meeting of some literary society in Liverpool,
and the nucleus of the short paper produced for the occasion
in question was afterwards expanded into a slender volume.
It is a meagre measure that is thus allotted to so large a sub-
jet, but it was as much as might be warranted by the existing

TWO ACADEMICAL CRITICS 495

interest, which is determined sharply by the fact that no
second edition was needed until quite recent years. There
is good reason to believe that it did not represent Dr. Gins-
burg’s knowledge at the period, yet it went much further
than encyclopedic or theological notices. Dr. Ginsburg is
entitled to a place among Christian students of the Kabbalah
because of his conversion in 1846, and I purpose in this brief
notice, which is concerned mainly with a standpoint, to
connect him with the name of a writer who belonged to his
petiodin France. Both were accomplished Hebrew scholars ;
both of Jewish origin. Dr. Ginsburg did much valuable
work in connection with the Trinitarian Bible Society, while
M. Isidore Loéb, so far as I am aware, remained in the faith
of Jewry, and it is therefore only by way of contrast with his
English prototype that I am warranted in referring to him
in this place. ‘There was a period of a quarter of a century
between the two writers, and as their point of view is in
general respects similar and indeed suggests that the French
ctitic may have profited by the English, it is interesting to
note the one matter over which they diverge, namely, the
authorship of the ZOHAR.

It has been objected against Dr. Ginsburg that he draws
chiefly from Continental writers, reflects their views and
shews little independent research. His quotations from the
ZOHAR ate, it is said, derived from Franck, and are open
therefore to the harsh criticisms passed on them many years
ago in Germany. These matters are perhaps of slight
importance to those who are in search of elementary know-
ledge, whose purpose is served well enough by the trans-
lations of Franck and for whom a digest of fairly informed
ctiticism is about the best text-book possible. The faét
itself made Dr. Ginsburg’s little treatise the English repre-
sentative of a particular school, being that of the hostile
judgment which refers the Zohar to the authorship, more or
less exclusive, of Moses de Leon. In England Dr. Schiller-
Szinessy’s article on the MipRAsHIM in the ninth edition of
the ENcycLopapi1A BRITANNICA, referring the nucleus of
the book to Mishnic times and regarding Simeon ben Yohai
as author in the same sense that R. Johanan was author of the
PALESTINE TALMuD, has helped to create another and more
qualified manner of regarding the Zounar. ‘The critical
objections of Dr. Ginsburg derived from the work itself have

496 THE HOLY KABBALAH

been disposed of in the majority of cases, and the few which
still remain can establish nothing conclusively. They have
been noticed briefly elsewhere in the present work. ‘The faé&
that M. Isidore Loéb, who so closely reproduced Dr. Gins-
burg, abandons the theory of unqualified impostute, signifies
that some progress was made with the subject towards the
end of the nineteenth century, and as it is one of the purposes
of the present study to place the evidence of this and analogous
facts before the English reader, I feel warranted in giving
space to the following synopsis of M. Isidore Loéb’s essay,
as it may not be accessible to some who are acquainted with
that of Dr. Ginsburg. There is a literary excellence in the
one which is fairly precluded by the circumstance that called
the other into being, and it is a matter of regret that the sole
contribution of M. Loéb towards the elucidation of Kabba-
listic literature occurs in LA GRANDE ENCyCLopEpIz. M.
Loéb was, however, for some time president of the publication
committee of the French Society of Jewish Studies. His
other literary work comprises a monograph on Jewish
chroniclers, a table of Jewish calendars, and some observations
on the situation of the Israelites at his period in Turkey,
Serbia and Roumania. In the essay with which we are
concerned he records the opinion that the term Kabbalah
may not be anterior to the tenth century and that the claim
to antiquity which it signifies is supported by no written
monument. It seems difficult in the nature of the case that
it should be so substantiated. M. Loéb, however, makes a
vety proper distinG@ion between the metaphysical or mystical
Kabbalah and the gross thaumaturgy connected with the
practical branch. To the original elements of the first he
ascribes, like all critics, a high antiquity, but not, as it need
scarcely be said, of a kind which would permit it to be
regatded as the perpetuation of an indigenous, much less
an uncotrupted Tradition. As we have had occasion to
see, this claim is no longer made by any competent student
of the subject. For M. Loéb the Kabbalah is a part of the
age-old reverie which seeks to explain the disparity between
an infinite God and a finite world by means of intermediate
creations through which the Divine Power descends, diminish-
ing in its spiritual qualities as it removes further from its
source, and becoming more imperfect and material. The
difficulty is removed by this anthropomorphic process much

TWO ACADEMICAL CRITICS 497

in the same manner as the difficulty of a serra firma for the
elephant which supports the universe is disposed of in
Indian cosmology by assuming the tortoise. In other words,
it is not removed at all. At the same time the explanation of
Emanationist Mysticism, which is not all Mysticism, as M.
Loéb seems to assume, is not in the last analysis open to
greater objection than any other speculative attempt to
bridge the gulf between finite and infinite. Passing from
this consideration the French critic discovers the foundation
of Kabbalistic Theosophy in the Scriptural personification of
Wisdom, and the chief elements of its symbolism in the
prophetical books, about which points there is no question
whatever, and they are matters of common knowledge. So
also he refers correctly the name or catchword of the ZoHaR
to Daniel xii. 3. He cites the number of the beast in the
Apocalypse, as every one has cited it before him, in illustration
of GEMATRIA; but he raises a less hackneyed point by
suggesting, on the authority of Munk, that TEmuRAH was
employed by Jeremiah. He does better service by reminding
us that the Essenians attached great importance to symbolical
angelology, and that each individual of that obscure fraternity
was tequired to remember accurately the names of the angels.
It is, however, among the Jews of Alexandria that, following
several previous authorities, he discovers the main germs of
Kabbalistic Mysticism ; but in this connection he cites only
the Platonic doctrine of the Logos, its influence on the Greek
Septuagint and on the Chaldee version of the Old Testament.

On the whole, I do not think that M. Loéb’s critical
faculty, or indeed his erudition, is at all comparable to his
graceful synthetic talent. To cite a crucial instance, he
dismisses one testimony to Kabbalistic Tradition by saying :
*“ Despite the contrary assertions of the TaLmup, we refuse
to believe that Johanan ben Zoccai (sic) or his contemporaries
devoted themselves to mystical doétrines or secret things.”
It is to the second century that he refers the “ ravages ” of
Gnosticism among the Jews of Palestine, and cites various
subtleties of the doétors which arose at that period. He
sketches the decline of the Palestine Schools and the rise of
those of Babylon, “ the traditional country of Magic.” He
cites from Rab, the Babylonian of the third century, that
passage which I have mentioned elsewhere, and confesses
that it is another germ of the medieval Kabbalah, that is,

498 THE HOLY KABBALAH

the doftrine of the SzErHiroTH. With a rapid pen he runs
ovet the great impetus given to Jewish literature under
Arabian influence from the middle of the seventh century.
He refers to the ninth century that all-important treatise
entitled THE MEASURES OF THE STATURE OF Gop, which is,
in fact, as we have seen, the first form of the Zoharistic
-Macroprosorus, and is mentioned apparently by Agobad.
He places the ALPHABET of Akiba, dealing with the symbolism
of the Hebrew letters, about the same period, together with
a crowd of apocalyptic treatises, including Pirxe of R.
Eliezer, which has an elaborate doctrine of Pneumatology.
Among all these he distinguishes the SEPHER YETZIRAH as
occupying a place and deserving a rank apart. He admits its
compatative antiquity, seeming to regard it as immediately
posterior to the Tatmup, which he affirms to have been
finished A.D. 499. He describes it as'a philosophy and a
gnosis, and supposes it to have been written in Palestine
under the direct influence of Christian and Pagan Gnosticism.
The opinion is interesting, but, of course, entirely conjectural,
and as the doctrine of emanation is not clear in the SEPHER
YETZIRAH, we should not accept hastily the theory of an
influence which assumes it. When he observes further
that its fountain-heads must be sought in Azriel’s Com-
mentary on the SEPHIROTH and in the Banrr, I fail to
understand the grounds on which he attributes a superior
antiquity to those works. He assigns to the Zowar itself
a Spanish origin, but does not press the authorship of Moses
de Leon. Among the fine points of his criticism is a picture
of the pure Talmudists of the period of Maimonides, especially
those of the Peninsula and the South of France, living under
the influence of Arabian philosophy, without philosophical
doétine, without perspective, having only the literature of
the Law, and the anthropomorphic Mysticism of the Jewish
Schools of Northern France, between which the Kabbalah
rose up as a mediator, “‘ completing Talmudism by philosophy,
correcting philosophy by Theosophy, and anthropomorphic
Mysticism by philosophic Mysticism.”

XVITI.—THE MODERN SCHOOL OF

FRENCH KABBALISM

Eliphas Lévi died in 1875, having founded, as it must be
admitted, a new school of occult philosophy, not in its way

MODERN SCHOOL OF FRENCH KABBALISM 499

without a certain brilliance but built on sands of dream.
For the ten years which preceded his death he had made no
outwatd sign. There are mendacious rumouts of the
initiations which were offered him and of the Rites which he
remodelled ; but all that is known certainly is that he colle&ed
around him a small group of private students who looked up
to him as their master, regarded his fantastic speculations
almost in the light of revelation and, following his leading,
accepted the Kabbalah as a great synthesis of religious belief.
It was not till another ten years, after his death, had elapsed
that any visible result of his influence became manifest.
During that period a marked change had come over specula-
tive thought there and here in Paris; many of the younger
generation broke away from the traditions of positivism and —
materialism, and, without returning to the Church, passed off
in the direction of occultism, and occultism moderated by
science became a characteristic of the succeeding epoch.
When about the year 1884 the Theosophical Society opened
a lodge in Paris and began the publication of a monthly
magazine, some few of the French occultists gathered round
it, and one of the most noticeable in the group was Gérard
Encausse, the young chef de /aboratoire of an eminent doctor
celebrated in connection with one of the schools of hypnotism.
His first contributions appeared in the pages of Le Lorus
and his first work, on the elements of occult science, so called,
was published under the auspices of the Society. A rupture
took place, however, and the seceding members, abandoning
for the moment their interest in /a métaphysique orientale,
established, so to speak, a school of western occultism, of
which Dr. Encausse became the moving spirit and Eliphas
Lévi the most immediate inspiration of the past. The
ostensible characteristics of this school were Neo-Martinism
and Neo-Rosicrucianism, but the conceptions associated with
these names suffered developments which effaced their
otiginal outlines. . So also. the admired masterpieces of
Eliphas Lévi became a point of departure quite as much
as a guide. It is, broadly speaking, nevertheless, the work
of Lévi which was continued, and along with other occult
interests the study of the Kabbalah was revived under the
reflected impulsion of his enthusiasm. It was in no sense
an exhaustive and still less a critical Study; it began by
taking too much for granted and its textual knowledge was

500 THE HOLY KABBALAH

negligible. There was, however, no writer of this group
who had not something to tell concerning Jewish Theosophy,
while its activity engendered consequences of much the same
kind outside its immediate circle.

‘The two names which most call for notice in this connection
ate Dr. Gérard Encausse and Stanislas de Guaita. The literary
and occult antecedents of the first writer are Saint Yves
d’Alveydre, Fabre d’Olivet, Eliphas Lévi and Adolphe Franck.
From the first he derived a systematic view of Jewish history,
from the second his notion of esoteric mysteries concealed
in the Hebrew language, from Lévi unfortunately a burden
of historical suppositions, and from Franck an academic
precedent for the modified antiquity of Kabbalistic literature.
On the other hand, Stanislas de Guaita belonged to a literary
school of occultism and as such he connects with Sar Péladan.
I propose to consider the position of both these writers in
short sub-se€tions and to conne& them with a third who is
governed by very different motives and principles.

A.—PaApus

The word Papus signifies physician, and according to a
commentary of Eliphas Lévi on the NucrEMERON of Apol-
lonius, it is the title of a genius belonging to the first hour of
that mystical period, understood, in Lévi’s words, as “ the
day of the night.” It is also the pseudonym adopted by
Gérard Encausse, head of the French Martinists and once
leader of occult a€tivity in Paris. Papus became a voluminous
writer, methodical and laborious, and some of his work had
value along its own lines. From the beginning of his literary
life he was occupied with Kabbalistic questions, and so far
back as the year 1887 he made the first French translation of
the SepHER YETZIRAH, which appeared in the theosophical
review Lotus. It is not a satisfactory version and was
superseded speedily by that of Meyer Lambert, as Papus
recognised himself. He appears to have depended on the
Latin text in the collection of Pistorius which renders through-
out the words “ineffable SEpHiroTH ” as SEPHIROTH prefer
ineffabile, thus making the Boox or Formation responsible
for the Theology of Arn Sopu, and it is a point of critical
importance that it is not to be found therein.

In 1892 Papus published a methodical summary of the

PAPUS 501

Kabbalah, together with a bibliography, which is again open
to criticism. The bibliography was constructed upon the
most debatable of all principles, viz., the increase of numerical
importance by adventitious elements which are not Kabba-
listic at all, and again by the inclusion of works which were
evidently unknown to the writer, with results that are
occasionally ludicrous. Thus, in the one case, among books
in the French language, we find Figuiet’s ALCHEMY AND THE
ALCHEMISTS, which contains no reference to the Kabbalah ;
Saint-Martin’s CRocopDILE, a clumsy satire open to the same
objection ; Eckartshausen’s CLouD ON THE SANCTUARY, also
non-Kabbalistic; and a number of esoteric romances which
have as much claim to insertion as Baudelaire’s translation of
Poe.! In the other case, Dr. Papus, who was only super-
ficially acquainted with English, classified among Kabbalistic
writings Massey’s translation of Du Prel’s PHiLosopHy oF
Mysticism, my own Lives or ALCHEMYSTICAL PHILOSOPHERS,
Dr. Hartmann’s WuirE AND Brack Macic, a catalogue of
second-hand books issued by George Redway, and, un-
fortunate above all other instances, the once celebrated
SUPERNATURAL RELIGION. ‘The bibliography of works in the
Latin language is better done, though it contains some useless
numbers. —

As regards the treatise itself, it is little more than a series
of tabulated quotations from Franck, Loéb, de Guaita,
Kircher and so forth, with a number of serviceable diagrams
derived from similar sources. It was passable at its period
as a French introduction to the subject for the use of French
occultists. But it made the mistake of attributing importance
to the debased Hebrew influences found in the literature of
Ceremonial Magic. Having appreciated in another section
the claim of the clavicles to recognition in Kabbalistic litera-
ture, it is here only necessary to say that in the work under
notice there is no attempt to justify their inclusion, which is
explained by the sympathies of the author, who in this connec-
tion owes something to the French version of Molitor.

Dr. Papus had also a bias common to the majority of French

? Another instance is Julien Lejay: La Scrence Occutre Appriquise 4 1 économie
politique, in a volume of composite authorship, entitled La Science Secréte. I may
observe, however, that this volume contains a paper on the Kabbalah by Papus,
subsequently embodied in his larger work. Outside this, the only reference to the
subject is in an essay by F. C. Barlet, which refers the origin of the Kabbalah to the
fourth century.

502 THE HOLY KABBALAH

and English occultists of Victorian days, and by this bias he
was led irresistibly to prefer the imperfect equipment of past
authority to the result of modern scholarship. In Egyptology
he knew no higher name than that of Court de Gebelin; in
problems of Hebrew philology his great master was Fabre
d’Olivet; and hence, on the one hand, we shall not be
surprised to find that he regarded P. Christian as a source
of serious information concerning Egyptian Mysteries of
Initiation, or, on the other, that he considered the Hebrew
of the Mosaic books to be identical with the idiom of ancient
Eegypt.t The position of writers who base their views on
language-Sstudies: undertaken at the beginning of the last
centuty is not more reasonable than would be that of a person
who should attempt now to defend the antiquity of the
Rowley poems. But it might be scarcely worth while to
speak of it were it not for the consequences that it involves,
at least in the case of Papus, as, for example, his views on
the descent of Esoteric Tradition from Moses and its identity
with the Mysteries of Egypt.

I have said sufficient to indicate that the historical aspect,
so far as it exists in Papus, is altogether unsatisfactory, and
there is indeed no need to reckon with it. As regards the
special motive of our own inquiry, the standpoint of Papus
is that the Kabbalah is the keystone of all the Western
‘Tradition of Transcendentalism; that the alchemists were
Kabbalists, and so also all mystical fraternities, whether
Templars, Rosicrucians, Martinists or Freemasons ; that the
soutce of the Kabbalah was Moses and that Moses drew from
Egypt, whence the Kabbalah is the most complete summary
in existence of Egyptian Mysteries. Why those mysteries

1 He was not alone among French writers of his day in taking a similar view.
M. Edouard Schuré, in Les Granps Iniriés, Esquase de Histoire Secréte des Réligions,
Paris, 1889, maintains that, “‘ owing to the education of Moses, there can be no doubt
that he wrote Genesis in Egyptian hieroglyphics, having three senses, and confided
their keys and oral explanations to his successors. In the time of Solomon it was
rendered into Pheenician charafers, and after the captivity of Babylon into Aramaic
Chaldean charafters by Esdras. The esoteric sense was lost more and mote, and the
Greek translators had a very slight acquaintance therewith.” In this case it may have
been the remnant of such knowledge which made the Jews so hostile to the Septuagint.
M. Schuré continues: “ Jerome, despite his serious intention and his. great mind,
penetrated only to the primitive sense when he made his Latin translation. The
secret sense does, however, remain buried in the Hebrew text, which plunges by its
roots into the sacred tongue of the temples,” and the writer affirms that it flashes forth
at times for the intuitive, that for seers it “‘ shines forth once more in the phonetic
Stru@ture of the words adopted or created by Moses,” and that by the study of this
phoneticism, by the keys which the Kabbalah furnishes, and by comparative esotericism,
“it is permitted us at this day to reconstruct the veritable Genesis.” Pp. 180, 181.

PAPUS 503

Should have an absorbing claim on our respect does not
appear from Papus, but the sub-surface understanding is
undoubtedly that a Tradition of Absolute Religion has been
perpetuated from antiquity, and with all his dissemblings and
palterings, with all the hindrance of his scepticism, that also
is Lévi’s standpoint, as we have seen in an earlier section.

B.—STANISLAS DE GUAITA

Associated with the literary work and much of the active
propaganda of Dr. Gérard Encausse, the name of the Marquis
Marie-Victor-Stanislas de Guaita, though scarcely known in
England, was valued in occult circles of Paris, and his death
at the early age of thirty-six years occasioned profound sorrow.

It will perhaps be unnecessary to state that he was a disciple
of Eliphas Lévi, whose works he regarded as constituting
“the most cohesive, absolute and unimpeachable synthesis
that can be dreamed by an occultist.” If we add to this that
De Guaita is described by Papus as occupying beyond
contradiction the first rank among the pupils of Lévi, we shall
have a fair knowledge of his position. He began his literary
life as a poet, and in that character connects with the school
of Baudelaire. His occult preoccupations appear, however,
in his verses, and he soon devoted himself exclusively to
occult subjects. His works entitled THz THRESHOLD OF
Mystery, THE SERPENT OF GENESIS and THE KEY OF BLACK
MaAcic were admired for their “ magisterial form,” which
recalls that of his master. He expounded Kabbalistic
Tradition and considered that in “‘ Neo-Mosaic Christianity,
explained by the Holy Kabbalah and Alexandrian Hermeticism
(under certain reserves), the absolute truth must be sought in
all knowledge.” 4

At an early period of his enthusiasm Stanislas de Guaita
founded a Kabbalistic Order of the Rose-Cross, compre-
hending three Grades, to which entrance could be obtained
only after successful examination, while the possession of the
three Grades of the Martinist Order—an invention of Papus—
was an indispensable preliminary condition. When the
numerical strength of the association had attained the limits

1 From a Lettre inédite quoted in L’IN1TIATION, tom. xxxviii., No. 4, Jan., 1898,
OPy12,)13.

H.Kg BL

504 THE HOLY KABBALAH

prescribed by its constitution, it was closed rigorously by
decision of the Grand Master. De Guaita is termed an
etudite orientalist by his friends, who mention also the
Hebrew folios which enriched his library.1 Finally, it is
recorded that he believed himself more thoroughly possessed
of the Kabbalah than all others. But if we may accept the
authority of Dr. Marc Haven he seems to have distinguished
two species of Kabbalah, the first a science which no one
could teach and no one could learn, except with the most
atduous toil and by years of sacrifice, for it is ““ more rugged
than Wronsky, more diffuse than Spanish Mysticism, more
complex than Gnostic analysis.” And after all it appears to
be only a pseudo-Kabbalah. The other is apparently the
Kabbalah as presented by William Postel, Nicholas Flamel,
Khunrath, Saint-Martin and so forth. I must confess that
this distinction is a puzzle. I know well enough that Saint-
Martin was not a Kabbalist, except in the most phantasmal
sense and by a most remote derivation. I know that Flamel
the alchemist, if he ever wrote anything, was concerned with
the transmutation of metals and not with the mysteries of AIN
SopH. It is, however, the Kabbalah of such Kabbalists that
is said to illuminate the pages of de Guaita and to have
inspired his active works.

Despite therefore his accredited erudition, the author of
the SERPENT OF GENEsIS has no message for the student of
Kabbalism: the Zowar has its difficulties, by which he was
clearly intimidated and the work had not been translated.
But the kind of distin€&tion which de Guaita sought to establish
offers at least one point of interest. Postel, Flamel, Khunrath,
Saint-Martin, are names which stand in his mind for Kabba-
listic Christianity, for that marriage of the Zohar and the
Gospel to which he refers expressly.2. He differs therefore
from his fellow propagandist Papus, who exhibits few
Christian sympathies and is attached more consistently to the
doétrine of Eliphas Lévi. But in de Guaita, as in Lévi, it is
not otthodox Christianity, as understood, on the one hand,
by Mirandula and Postel or, on the other, by Rosenroth, with

1 Op. cit., pp. 32 et seq.

2 “The Zonar has wedded the Gospel; the spirit has fruétified the soul; and
immortal works have been the fruits of this union. The Kabbalah became Catholic
in the school of St. John, the master of masters, incarnate in an admirable metaphysical
form .. . the absolute spirit of the science of justice and love which vivifies internally
the dead letter of all the orthodoxies.”—Lz SERPENT DE LA GENESE, p. 183.

STANISLAS DE GUAITA 505

which his Kabbalah is connected, but Christianity permeated
by Gnostic elements, and this is the special characteristic of
modern occult students who have taken any interest in the
light cast on the religion of Jesus by the post-Christian
developments of Jewish Theosophy. ‘hus, the missionary
enthusiasm of the early Christian Schools of Kabbalism, and
the Messianic dream constructed by Jewry out of the elements
of the Zor, have been exchanged for an attempt to go back
upon the path of do&rinal development and to discover in
analogies between the Kabbalah and the Gnostics a practicable
thoroughfare into debated regions of esoteric religion. As
disappointment waited on the mistaken ardour of the first
zealots, so it was equally in store for the revived zeal in
Kabbalism.

C.—Lron Meovrin, S.J.

Having to establish some points of accidental connection
between the Kabbalah and Freemasonty, it seems possible to
include among Kabbalistic students the most fantastic investi-
gator of this subject, once Archbishop of Port Louis. It is
true that his large treatise, FREEMASONRY THE SYNAGOGUE OF
SATAN, is a product of the troubled dream of the Papacy
concerning the Liberi Muratori and can be saved only—if
saved indeed at all—by the sincerity of its intention from a
place in bogus literature ; it is true also that it conneéts with
a squalid impostute long since unmasked; but it shews a
considerable acquaintance of the superficial order both with
Kabbalistic Doéttine and Masonic Symbolism; and it is
worth noticing how the Tradition of the Jews was appreciated
at the end of the nineteenth century by a Catholic critic who
was also an ecclesiastic of some eminence and a member of
the Society of Jesus.

It is unnecessary to say that it is an entirely hostile criticism.
““In place of the orthodox synagogue and the true do@trine
of Moses which God Himself inspired, modern Kabbalists
represent the paganism with which certain Jewish seAarians
became imbued during the captivity of Babylon. We have
only to study their doétrine and to compare it with those of
civilised nations in antiquity—Indians, Persians, Babylonians,
Assyrians, Egyptians, Greeks and so forth—to become
assured that the same pantheistic system of emanation is
inculcated by all. We find everywhere an eternal principle

LL2

506 THE HOLY KABBALAH

producing a primeval triad and thereafter the entire universe,
not by creation but by substantial emanation. Hence we
ate compelled to recognise a close connection between
Kabbalistic philosophy and ancient paganism which is difficult
to explain except by the inspiration of the same author, in
other words, the Lying Spirit who is the enemy of mankind.”

The entire treatise may be regarded as a development of this
paragraph, which, it must be confessed, is the view that would
be taken inevitably by the Latin Church. We have seen that
under the auspices of Christian Kabbalists, with Picus de
Mirandula as their mouthpiece, there was for one moment
a sign of rapprochement between the Church and Jewish
Tradition ; but it was impossible in the nature of both, and
the Church was saved then, as it has been saved occasionally
since, as if by some happy intuition which preceded any teal
knowledge of the interests at stake.

The general position being thus defined, Mer. Meurin
proceeds at a later stage to develop his impeachment by
exhibiting the fundamental error of all pantheism, that,
namely, which concerns the transition of the Infinite to the
Finite, which wears, he tells us, for any serious thinker, the
aspect of a fraudulent device. Basing his argument on the
well-known verse in Wispom: “ Thou hast ordered all
things in measure, and number, and weight,” he advances
that we must seek in these the distinction between the Infinite
and the Finite, for such categories do not exist in God, or
rather they are “elevated above themselves and lost in a
superior unity.” Creation out of nothing is the only rational
solution of the grand problem concerning the origin of a
world which is governed by number, weight and measure,
a doétrine which assumes no passage from Infinite to Finite,
since it does not derive the universe from the divine substance
by an emanation of any kind. “It is true that ex nihilo nibil
fiz. But in the creation there is not only the nzhilum ; there
is also the Omnipotens, and it is untrue to say that with nothing-
ness and the all-powerful, nothing can be made. Ex mibilo
nibil fit a Deo would be a false axiom.”

In a Study like the present it would be out of place to discuss
the points at issue between emanationists and creationists.
We have seen that the Kabbalah is by no means utterly and
only a system of emanation: it is a medley which tends
occasionally in that dire&tion; but it has also a world of

LEON MEURIN 507

creation and a creation myth. The dodtrine of orthodox
religion on a question of fundamental philosophy is in no
danger from a certain element of confusion in such reveries.
But the whole controversy concerns a res ardua et difficilis, as
Isaac de Loria would have termed it, which fortunately cannot
produce a single consequence of importance to the human
mind, though it is precisely to such arid speculations that
official orthodoxy has always attached an eternal consequence
for the soul.

Mer. Meutin remains, however, the consistent and correct
exponent of the Church which he represented, and so far as
this Chutch is concerned he has registered, as we must admit
fully, the non-Christian nature of Kabbalistic doétrine. We
may go further and allow that in other places he scores
occasionally a logical point against it. We have, for example,
such notions as the commencement of thought in Ain Sorx
which precedes the emanation of understanding in the Three
Divine Supernals, thus reversing the psychological order, as
the prelate observes, besides formulating an absurdity con-
cerning the one Being in whom there is no beginning. It
may well be that in the last analysis these things are to be
understood more profoundly than is suggested by their
surface meaning, but they are crude and misleading enough
in their outward sense.

XIX.—THE KABBALAH AND ESOTERIC
CHRISTIANITY

A discussion of points of contact between Christianity and
the Mystical Tradition of the Jews should not proceed without
some reference to a scheme of mystical Christianity which
obtained for a period a certain vogue in English esoteric
circles and met with especial commendation from certain
Kabbalistic students. I refer to the New Gospel of Inter-
pretation, founded on illuminations received, or believed to
have been received, by Anna Bonus Kingsford, and developed
since her decease, not always well and wisely, by her
collaborator and co-recipient, Edward Maitland, long since
also passed away. ‘The text-books of this movement were,
firstly, a small colle@ion containing the illuminations, and,
secondly a formal treatise which, under the title of THE
PERFECT Way, constituted a philosophical development and

508 THE HOLY KABBALAH

historical verification of the dotrines received by the seetess.
The late McGregor Mathers dedicated his pretentious and
inexact translation of certain Zoharistic books from the Latin
of Rosenroth to the authors of this treatise on the ground
that it was “one of the most deeply occult works that has
(sic) been written for centuries.” The dedication described
it also as an “ excellent and wonderful book,” touching much
on the doétrines of the Kabbalah and laying great value upon
its teachings. It was welcomed in terms of still higher
appreciation by Baron Spedalieri, of Marseilles, the disciple
of Eliphas Lévi, who regarded it as “ in complete accord with
all mystical traditions, and especially with the great mother
of these, the Kabbalah.” In conneétion with this appreciation
the respectable French occultist observed: (@) That Kabba-
listic Tradition as we now possess it is far from genuine, and
was much purer when it first emerged from the san€uaries.
(b) That when William Postel and his brother Hermetists
predicted that the literature containing the Secret Tradition
of the Jews would become known and understood at “ the
end of the era,” they meant that it would be made the basis of
“a new illumination,” reinstating that Tradition in its purity.
(¢) That this illumination and this restoration have been
accomplished in THE PrrFect Way. He adds: “In this
book we find all that there is of truth in the Kabbalah, supple-
mented by new intuitions, such as present a body of doétrines
at once complete, homogeneous, logical and inexpugnable.
Since the whole tradition thus finds itself recovered or
restored to its original purity, the prophecies of Postel and
his fellow Hermetists are accomplished ; and I consider that
from henceforth the study of the Kabbalah will be but an
obje&t of curiosity and erudition, like that of Hebrew
antiquities.”

If this be the case, the inquiry with which we have been
occupied at such considerable length is only prolegomenary
to the New Gospel of Interpretation, and our concluding
wotds should be simply to dire& the student who is in
seatch of the true meaning of Esoteric Tradition in Israel
to the do&rines contained in this last word of revelation.
Indeed, such a course would seem at first sight the only one
which could be followed. I must add, however, that the
opinion expressed by Baron Spedalieri produced no conse-
quence, that the Kabbalistic School of occultists in England

ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY 509

did not follow the lead thus indicated, and did not endorse
the opinion, while the New Gospel of Interpretation took no
permanent hold on the occult or any other prevailing thought
of the time. I infer also that Baron Spedalieri’s statement
as to the adulteration of the genuine Tradition in the Hebrew
Kabbalah was not traversed seriously, but for its recovery
occultists of the period were disposed to look backward
towards Egypt rather than to any form of supplementary
revelation.

I do not propose to recite here even the leading aspects of
the system of Esoteric Christianity developed in THE PERFECT
Way, for the work is well known and its substance has been
made accessible in many forms, thanks to the untiring devotion
of Edward Maitland. It does offer some points of contact
with the Tradition of the Kabbalah, especially as to the dual
nature of God, or the Divine-Feminine, and “ the multiplicity
of principles in the human system ”’ ; but it would be easy to
exaggerate their extent, as also, in some less conspicuous
cases, their importance. The traceable references are few
and superficial. We may find, for example, the Kabbalistic
doétrine of AIN SopH and His emanations in the statement
that “‘ God unmanifest and abstract is the Primordial Mind,
and the Kosmic universe is the ideation of that Mind,” but
it is not a far-reaching correspondence. So also the concep-
tion of Macroprosopus reflected in Microprosopus is sketched
thinly by the following passage. “In ‘ the Lord’ the Form-
less assumes a form, the Nameless a name, the Infinite the
Definite, and these human. But, although ‘ the Lord is God
manifested as a man’ in and to the souls of those to whom
the vision is vouchsafed, it is not as man in the exclusive
sense of the term and masculine only, but as man both
masculine and feminine ” (Mricroprosopus it will be remem-
bered is androgyne), “ at once man and woman, as is Humanity
itself.”’ I should add that the “‘ new Gospel ” maintained the
divinity of the Kabbalah on the ground of the purity of its
doctrine of correspondences, which shews that “‘ this famous
compendium belongs to a period prior to that destruction
by the priesthoods of the equilibrium of the sexes which
constituted in one sense the Fall.”” With this statement of its
Divine origin may be brought into contrast the interpretation
of the claim made by the Kabbalah as to the manner of its
delivery. “When it is said that these Scriptures were

510 THE HOLY KABBALAH

delivered by God first of all to Adam in Paradise, and then
to Moses on Sinai, it is meant that the doétrine contained in
them is that which man always discerns when he succeeds in
attaining to that inner and celestial region of his nature
where he is taught directly of his own Divine Spirit, and
knows even as he is known.” As THe Perrecrt Way and
its connections assume to be the outcome of a similar quality
of discernment, it follows, of course, that it is a recovery of
“the doétrine commonly called the Gwosis, and variously
entitled Hermetic and Kabbalistic.”

I should add that many thoughtful persons have found in
THE Perrect Way a “fountain of light, interpretative and
reconciliatory,” and that some of its interpretation indicates
a suggestive quality of genius; yet it was not free at the
beginning from the fantastic element, and it depends largely
on philological arguments which are more than fantastic.
Also at the close of Maitland’s life he wrote much which must
have been regretted by his friends, bringing his earlier work
into discredit by exaggerated claims concerning it. Taking
it as a whole, THE Perrecr Way can be regarded only as a
seties of suggestions and intuitive glimpses concerning the
postulated hidden sense of several sacred scriptures.

XX.—THE KABBALAH AND MODERN
THEOSOPHY

The attempt which was made in the year 1875, by the
foundation of the Theosophical Society, to extend and
centralise the Study of Oriental Occult Philosophy, has, in
spite of its chequered history, succeeded to a large extent in
that object. If we remove from consideration certain claims
advanced by the founders, and if we regard the Society rather
as it assumed once at least to regard itself, namely, as an
organisation designed to promote a neglected branch of
knowledge, we have only to survey its literature during the
past fifty years to see how large a field it has succeeded in
covering. No unbiassed student will be inclined to overlook
this faét, and as the Theosophical Society possesses at least
this aspect of importance, it will be useful to ascertain how
far the expositions of eastern philosophy which we owe to it
connect with the subject of our inquiry.

It may be said in a general manner that the correspondences

MODERN THEOSOPHY sui

which I have established already were recognised from the
beginning of the movement and, so to speak, at its fountain-
head. The cosmology and metapsychics of Jewish Esoteric
Tradition were regarded, roughly speaking, by Madame
Blavatsky as reflections or derivatives from an older know-
ledge and a higher teaching which has existed from time
immemorial in the farthest East.t Beyond or outside this
broad affirmation and representative point of view one does
not trace a sufficient warrant in knowledge for the expression
of patticular opinions. The author of Ists UNvEmED and
Tue Secret Doctring had an enormous budget of materials,
but not very carefully selected. On the one hand, she offers
information which we are not able to check because we do
not know her authorities ; on the other she makes statements
occasionally with which it is difficult to agree. Thus, she
distinguishes between the ordinary, or Judaistic, and the
universal, or Oriental Kabbalah. If little be known of the
one, there is nothing, at least nothing that is definite, known
of the other. “‘Its adepts are few; but these heirs elect of
the sages who first discovered ‘ the Starry truths which shone
on the great Shemaia of the Chaldzan lore’ have solved the
‘absolute’ and are now resting from their grand labour.” ?
That is a statement which, of course, we cannot check, and
for any critical study of the Jewish Kabbalah it can therefore
carry no weight. It may be taken to indicate a feeling at its
value among certain occultists that the Hebrew tradition has
been perverted.2 It may be accepted also as evidence that
because the term Kabbalah signifies an oral reception it has
come to be used in connection with almost any unwritten
knowledge. Such a course is very inexact and misleading ;
but the same abuse of words is found in Paracelsus and many
later writers. It serves, however, a purpose not intended

1 As might be expefted, some of her followers did not fail to go further, e.g., the late
W. Q. Judge, who was able to affirm categorically that Abraham, Moses and Solomon
were members of an ancient lodge of adepts from whom this high teaching has been
handed down. THE OcEAN oF THEOsOPHY, New York, 1893, c. 1. “‘ Echoes” of
this kind “‘ from the burnished and mysterious East,” to quote Judge terminology
(ECHOES FROM THE ORIENT, p. 5, New York, 1890), did not find response among
theosophical writers in England.

2 Ists UNVEILED, i., 17.

3 Another theosophical writer, however, maintains that “ the colle&tion of writings
known as the Bible constitutes but one of a number of records which are all derived
from and based upon one unifying system, known at times as the Ancient Wisdom
Religion, or Secret Doétrine.” W. Kingsland: THe Esorertc Basis oF
CuristIANITY, Part I., p. 15, London, 1891.

512 THE HOLY KABBALAH

py those who use it: it distinguishes between scholar and
sciolist. The statement which we cannot check is, however,
usually accompanied by the statement that we can. In the
present case we are told that the Book oF OccuLrTaTIoN is
“the most ancient Hebrew document on occult learning,” 1
and I doubt much whether this would be countenanced by
any student who was acquainted with the strong claims of
the Book oF ForMATION, to say nothing of the literature
which belongs to Talmudic times. It is added that SrpHra
Dr ZENrIouTHA was compiled from another and older work
which is not named, but it is stated that there is only one
“ original copy ” in existence, and that this is “so very old
that our modern antiquarians might ponder over its pages
an indefinite time, and still not quite agree as to the nature of
the fabric upon which it is written.”? Till antiquaries are
furnished with the opportunity they will be tempted to
ovetlook this claim. With both these classes of statement
we may contrast the affirmation that is not evident in itself
and is supported by doubtful reasoning. Thus we are told
of Oriental Kabbalists who assert that the traditions of their
science ate more than seventy thousand years old, concerning
which claim it is observed that modern science cannot prove
it to be false ; but the question is whether Kabbalists, oriental
ot otherwise, can produce evidence in support of its truth.
We may pass over the writer’s personal pretension to a first-
hand acquaintance with Kabbalistic books once indisputably
in existence, but now regarded as lost. Of such is the
Chaldean Book of Numbers,? which, according to another
authority, is a companion to the Aish Merzarepu,* but is
declared in Ists UNVEILED to be a part of the great Oriental
Kabbalah, namely, the patrimony of the persons previously
described as having “solved the absolute.”*? To the lesson
which is taught by observations of this kind we may add the
bottowed view which rests on bad criticism, as, for example,
that the Tatmup is “the darkest of enigmas even for most

1 Ists UNVEILED, i., I.

2 Ibid.

3 This work is said to be much supetiot to the ZoHar. SECRET DOCTRINE, i., 214.
It is, in fat, the only real Kabbalah, 2)., iii., 170. It appears to be now in possession
of certain Persian Sufis (#b.), an interesting statement which I have not, however, felt
authorised to make use of in Book II., § 6, of this Study.

4 This is WeSstcott’s opinion. Madame Blavatsky adds that the S—EpHER YETZIRAH
is also a portion of the Book of Numbers.

5 Op. cit., i, 579+

MODERN THEOSOPHY 513

Jews,” 1 thus attributing a mystical sense to the commentaries
on the exoteric laws of Israel, the value of which attribution
has been exhibited already.?

It would serve no purpose to enumerate any further
challengable assertions which rest mote or less exclusively
on the good authority of Madame Blavatsky. It will be
sufficient to refer to her views upon the authenticity of the
ZOHAR.? On the one hand the author is said to be R. Simeon
ben Yohai;* again, it was “edited for the first time”
between A.D. 70 and 110;° and yet again, it was written,
as it now stands, by R. Moses de Leon, the original being
lost, though at the same time its contents were “ scattered
through a number of minor MSS.” R. Moses had Syriac,
Chaldaic, and Christian Gnostics to help him. Such opinions
ate without any warrant for criticism.®

1 Tsts UNVEILED, i., 17.

2 The best test of Madame Blavatsky’s first-hand knowledge of the subjeé& is the fa&
that she calls the Lrszer DrusHm of Isaac de Loria a part of the Tatmup, and
thence proceeds to exhibit the Sephirotic doftrine as a characteristic of that collection.
SEcRET DocTRINE, i., 438. The symbolism of the Lesser Countenance is also referred
to the Tatmup. Ibid., i., 350.

8 It is not perhaps surprising that she should regard the Zowar as not sufficiently
esoteric. Ibid.

4 Ibid., iii., 92. She says also that it was on account of his possession of the “‘ secret
knowledge ” that R. Simeon was forced to take refuge in the cave. After this version
of a matter of fact we shall not be surprised to learn that St. Peter was a Kabbalist
(ib., iti., 125), that the Comte de St. Germain had access to unknown Vatican MSS.
on the Kabbalah, which MSS. contain information regarding the Central Sun (#b., ii.,
237), ot that the Zonar is “ called also the Midrash,” as if the last term were particular,
and not generic (¢b., iii., 167).

© Tbid., iti., 167.

SO bid. ief 114s. 250 5 1 167:

mir ay ;

1
iy

Ve el at
Br a 8) ;

Th

yo) Bie

rh

: , We
fae ay Na

\

r > whe
iY ee) CA
} oj hee hers!
a er a
. i AN

BOOK XI

THE KABBALAH AND OTHER CHANNELS
OF SECRET TRADITION

a ie ‘aa af
Say iay Bhs

(h i dy Ni

Aa)
> Ads
Waa

Fase

= Z
z 2 i >

4 ie a:
a?
"

BUIAMAHD SaBTO Cid H ATAGGA® f
; VOTTICGAAL THAT AO. .

‘

BOOK XI

THE KABBALAH AND OTHER CHANNELS
OF SECRET TRADITION

I—THE KABBALAH AND MAGIC

Ir was intimated at the outset of our inquiry that certain
speculations, belonging to the more immediate past, do not
consider any single system as the exclusive depository of
supposed hidden knowledge; a variety of channels are
recognised, and by the network of communications subsisting
between these channels the secret arts are methodised and
their identities and analogies exhibited. There is an enormous
divergence of opinion as to what may and may not constitute
a path of the postulated Secret Tradition, individual predilec-
tion exercising, as will be understood, no inconsiderable
influence. We may conclude in a general manner that the
Tradition being ubiquitous by the hypothesis is thought to
have assumed its forms everywhere and at all times. There
was, for example, no exoteric religion which did not possess
ex hypothest an esotetic interpretation! and there was no
esotefic interpretation which did not conned that religion
with all that is signified more especially here by secret teaching.
For this hypothesis an integral connection of Kabbalism with
other systems belonging to remote periods would be evidence
enough that it had its root in the Secret Tradition; but,
without denying altogether that there may be a cettain
watrant for a not dissimilar view, we have found that many
of the resemblances may be accounted for in a mote natural
and spontaneous manner. As, however, it was in the
western world that Kabbalism grew up and flourished,? it is

1 John Yarker : Nores ON THE SCIENTIFIC AND RELIGIOUS MysTERIES OF ANTIQUITY,

Pp. 5.

2 If the derivation of the ZoHArR from R. Simeon ben Yohai be admitted, Palestine
was, of course, the birthplace of that work. Dr. Schiller-Szinessy, who defended this
derivation, accepted also what follows therefrom.

517

518 THE HOLY KABBALAH

necessary to observe its connections—treal or supposed—
with other channels by whichan arcane knowledge is believed
to have been communicated to the West. These are Magic,
Alchemy, Astrology, the occult associations which culminated
in Freemasonry, and, finally, an obscure sheaf of hieroglyphs
known as Tarot cards. There is also a side question as to
_whether devotional Mysticism, apart from any formal initia-
tion, shews any trace of Kabbalism over and above that of
unconscious analogy. Like the several studies which have
preceded it, the object of this eleventh book is rather to
correct crude misconceptions than to: establish novel views.
Far too much stress has been laid upon the common basis of
occult arts and reveries, while those who look for their
enlightenment more especially to Kabbalistic apparatus have
been predisposed unduly to discern Kabbalism at the root of
all. We shall see that in most instances the connection was
accidental, a matter of adornment, late in its introduCtion, or
chiefly of the historical order. The paramount exception to
this statement is the first subject with which we have to deal
here. There is no doubt that Ceremonial Magic in the West 1
owes its typical processes and its peculiar complexion to
Kabbalism, though it would be folly to pretend that without
Kabbalism there would have been no Western Magic.?

I propose in the present section to restrict the use of the
term Magic within the narrow limits of its common accepta-
tion. To take it in its pretended higher sense,’ as equivalent
to Divine Wisdom, might make it seem almost superfluous
to inquire whether it connects with a Tradition which lays
claim to the same definition. The question as it is understood
here is rather historical than metaphysical, and is concerned
only with the western world. The White and Black Magic
of the Middle Ages constitutes a kind of spurious practical

1 “ The Kabbalah is the soutce of all the vain imaginations which form the basis of
Magic, and many Jews devoted to the Kabbalah are also addi¢ted thereto, abusing the
Names of God and the angels for the performance of things supernatural.” Moreri:
GRAND DiIcTIONNAIRE HisTorIQug, Tom. ii., s.v. Cabale. Amsterdam, 1740.

2 The strength of the conneétion is exhibited by the modern literature of occult
colportage in France. LA GRANDE ET VERITABLE SCIENCE CABALISTIQUE is Still /a
Sorcellerie dévoilée, and it is under such titles that mutilated reprints of the GREAT ALBERT,
the LrrrLe ALBERT and the Rep DrAGoN have appeated in obscure by-ways of Paris,
usually without place or date. Similar productions of the eighteenth century also
exhibit it: see the anonymous TELESCOPE DE ZoROASTRE on Clef de la Grande Cabale
divinatoire des Mages, s./., 1796.

3 It would be unwise to deny altogether that there is such a higher sense, but such
attempts to present it as Dr. Franz Hartmann’s Macic WHITE AND BLAck ate coloured
too highly to possess historical value.

THE KABBALAH AND MAGIC $19

Kabbalah which represents Jewish esoteric doGrine debased
to the purposes of the sorcerer, and it is necessary that we
should estimate it at its true worth, because it has been the
subjed of misconception not only among uninstructed persons
but even professed expositors.

A study of the Zoharistic writings, their developments and
commentaries will shew that the ends proposed by the
Speculative Kabbalah are very different from evocations of
spirits, the raising of ghosts, discovery of concealed treasures,
the bewitchments and other mummeries of Ceremonial Magic.
The Kabbalah does, however, countenance, as we have
seen, the doctrine of a power resident in Divine Names,}
and it is in faét one of the burdens of its inheritance. Of
the antiquity and diffusion of that doétrine there can be no
doubt; in one or other of its forms it has obtained almost
‘universally, and, like all universal beliefs, behind the insensate
character which it exhibits externally there may be—by mere
possibility—an inward reason which accounts for it. Without
attempting an inquiry in which we are not unlikely to be
baffled, it is sufficient to indicate here that at the sources to
which Kabbalistic Tradition is referred, namely, Akkadia,
Chaldza and Babylonia, this doctrine prevailed: it was no doubt
brought away from Babylon by the Jews, and they carried
it with them into the dispersion of the third exile. It inspired
a whole cycle of bizarre legends concerning Solomon. and
his marvels. More than this, it may be said to be connected
dire@tly with Kabbalistic symbolism concerning the divine
powers and qualities attaching to the Hebrew Alphabet.
The worlds were made, so to speak, by the instrument of a
single letter, and four letters are the living forces which
actuate them. There can be therefore no question that every
Kabbalist accepted, symbolically at least, the dodtrine of the
power of words. It must have passed very early into un-
fortunate applications?; Sacred Names were written on
amulets and talismans which were used to heal diseases, to

1 See the important chapter on the Name of God in J. Leusden’s PuHrtotocus
HeEBRAuS, 1672.

2 The SePpHER RazikEx, teferted falsely to Eleazer of Worms, and posing as an
angelic revelation to Adam and Noah, has been mentioned. With its long catalogues
of angelic names, its talismans and philtres, its double seal of Solomon, its mystical or
occult alphabetical symbols, its figures for the government of evil spirits, and its
conjurations by means of Divine Names, this work constitutes one of the storehouses
of Medieval Magic, besides being broadly representative of the Prattical Kabbalah at
large.

H.K MM

§20 THE HOLY KABBALAH

avett evil chances and so forth.! But it was a part also of the
Chaldean doétrine that a ceremonial utterance of the Divine
Name could, in some obscure way, influence the God to
whom it was attributed. Above all, the demons and evil
spirits became subservient to the power of such words.
Here is the germ of which the last development, or rather
the final corruption, is to be found in the French and Latin
Gtimoites of Black Magic.

It was, broadly speaking, somewhere about the fourteenth
century that a Latin literature rose up in Europe, passing
subsequently into the vernaculats of various countries, con-
taining processes for compelling spirits by means of Divine
Names which ate corruptions of Hebrew terms. The
processes pretend to be translated from the Hebrew, but, if
so, the originals are either not extant or have been altered out
of all knowledge. The chief of them is known as the Kry
oF SoLomMON, of which there are two. recensions, mote cotr-
retly regarded as distinét works under an identical title.*
Among the points which should be observed concerning
them is the fact that while they are concerned with all classes
of spirits, good and evil, for every variety of purpose, but
mostly illicit, they contain no formule for dealing with the
dead, and this, I think, indicates their Jewish origin, for the
Jews had very strong feelings as to the sacred nature of the
repose of the human soul. Out of these two works there was
developed subsequently a variety of processes, more distin@ly
spurious, which did enter into Necromantic Mysteries. They
begot also many variations adapted for the use of Christian
operators, and containing Sacred Words the efficacy of which
would not have been acknowledged by a Hebrew.

It is one thing to note the existence of this literature and to
confess its derivation; it is another to exalt collections like

1 So far as regards the early Christian centuries, the question is settled by a reference
in the thirty-third Sermon of Origen by way of commentary on St.. Matthew, wherein
allusion is made to a book of exotcisms or adjurations of demons passing under the
name of Solomon, which was no doubt the prototype of later Knys and GrimorrEs.

2 Jean Wier, a demonologist of the sixteenth century, in his H1srorres, DispuTEs
ET Discours des Illusions et Impostures des Diables, originally in Latin, gives a list of
magical works current at his period under great names of the past, and points out that
their art has depraved the most secret interpretation of the Divine Law, known as
Kabbalah among the Jews.—See the reprint of this work, Paris, 1885, 2 vols., i., 175.

3 A text passing under this name was condemned in a Decree of Pope Gelasius. See
Antonius van Dale: Dr OriGineE ET ProGressu IpoLaTRL#, Amsterdam, 1696, p. 558.
See also the Jewish Encyclopedia, Vol. XI, s.v. Sovomon, concerning MAFTEAH
SHELAMOH, a book of incantations, said to have been extant in Hebrew so late as 1697
and supposed to be the original of the Latin CLavicuLa SALOMONIS.

THE KABBALAH AND MAGIC 521

the Key or SOLOMON into embodiments of genuine Kabba-
listic Tradition. It is an insult to the rabbins of the Holy
Synod to suggest their connection with the puerilities and
imbecility of Ceremonial Magic. This, however, has been
done in England and was being done until recently in France.+
The professed Kabbalistic occultists of the latter country
have ascribed a superior importance and an additional aspect
of mystery to the worthless Ciavictes of Solomon, by
representing that they are the only written memorials of a
most secret oral branch of Prattical Kabbalism, instead of
the final debasement of a perfectly traceable, if not rationally
accountable, doctrine concerning Divine Names. Papus
observes: “ The practical part of the Kabbalah is barely
indicated in a few manuscripts scattered through our great
libraries. At Paris, the Bibliotheque Nationale possesses one
of the finest exemplars, of which the origin is attributed to
Solomon. These manuscripts, generally known under the
name of CLAVICLES, ate the basis of all the old Grimoires
which circulate in country places (the Great ALBERT and
LirrLteE ALBERT, RED DraGon and ENCHIRIDION) and of
those which once drove priests into mental alienation by
sotcery.”’ ‘The statement does not exhibit much acquaintance
with the works which it mentions; the ENCHIRIDION in its
earliest forms owes little to the Krys or SoLomon, and the
GRIMOIRE OF Honorius is not more concerned with sorcery
than are Rituals like the Rep Dracon. Finally, the intelleQual
and moral difference between the Clavicles and their deriva-
tives is so slight that it is scarcely worth labouring. As
regards theit scope and intention, the Clavicles are themselves
Grimoires. I have indicated the possibility that behind the
ancient doctrine of the virtue resident in certain theurgic
wotds and formule there may be concealed a Secret of Lower
and Averse Sanctuaries ; so also the apparatus of Ceremonial
Magic may be a ttavesty and disfigurement of practices
known also to Occult Sanctuaries ; but no one is on the track
of these mysteries who begins by mistaking signum for signatum
on the one hand or the mutilated refleGtion for the original
on the other.

1 There is some ground for supposing that the first express attempts to identify
Magic with Kabbalism must be referred to Germany. There are numerous earlier
examples, but Welling’s Opus Maco-Cappauisticum, Hamburg, 1765, is a good
instance, and it is also a work of some interest.

MM 2

522 THE HOLY KABBALAH

The general fact remains that it was by a perversion of the
Kabbalah that we have obtained Grimoires, and that the
Student of Jewish Tradition must tolerate this fact as best he
can.t

I should prefer to ignore altogether this so-called practical
part of the Kabbalah, but so much importance having been
attributed to it by modern occultists, it seems necessary for
the sake of completeness to say something briefly of its
materials and its method in their later developments. It
was concerned above all with the Names of God, firstly, as
they are found in Holy Scripture, and, secondly, as their
mysteries were unfolded by means of Kabbalistic processes.
It attributed certain names of power to the ten SEPHIROTH,
and these were regarded as analogous to the divine forces
and attributes associated with these.

The Divine Name connected with KerrHEeR was that
signifying the essence of the Deity, Enzren (AHIH). That
of CHOKMAH is Jop, JAH, or TETRAGRAMMATON, commonly
rendered Jehovah (JHVH), and susceptible of twelve per-
mutations, similar to the sealing names of IHV in the SEPHER
YETZIRAH. These permutations are called Banners by
Kabbalists. The title JEnovan Eronim (JHVH ALHIM) is
attributed to Brnau and signifies God of Gods. Ex (AL)
is referred to CHESED, and its meaning, according to Rosen-
roth, is God of Grace and Ruler of Mercy. GrsuRAH is in
cottespondence with Eronmm Grsor, the strong God Who
avenges the crimes of the wicked. ExLoan va DaatH is
the Divine Title of TrpHERETH (ALVH V DATh); Jenova
or ADONAI TzaBAoTH (ADNI TsBAV Th), the God or Lord
of Hosts, is connected with NerzacH ; Exouim Tzapaortu,
of similar meaning, belongs to Hop; SHappar Ex Car
(ShDI AL Chl), the omnipotent living God, is referable to
Jesop ; Aponat MeLtexu (ADNI MLK) to Matcuutn.

But the ten SepHIROTH ate connected with the ten numbers,

1 A work belonging to this class, but more elaborate and interesting than most of
them, goes to shew that a Jew in possession of the ““ Holy Traditions of the Kabbalah ”
and also of the secrets of practical Magic, bequeathed the first to his elder and the second
to his younger son. What happened when there were more than two sons does not
appear.—See the Boox oF THE SAcrED Macic, translated by S, L. MacGregor Mathers,
London, 1898. ‘The original is an MS. in the Arsénal Library, Paris, and belongs to
the 18th century, but it claims to have been written in Hebrew in the year 1458, which
claim, by the internal evidence, is manifestly imposture. Even its Jewish authorship
is unlikely. Mathers, who had a certain erudition but was devoid of critical judgment,
accepted every claim advanced by this work, as he accepted that of the Kry oF SOLOMON.

THE KABBALAH AND MAGIC 523

and hence there was an occult power resident in numerals
analogous to that which was inherent in Hebrew letters ; the
Divine Names belonging to the SEPHIROTH were those also
of the scale of the denary ; but over and above these there
were other names teferred to numbers based on the number
of the letters which gave expression to these names. Thus,
the number one was tepresented by the single letter Jon,
understood as a Divine Name, and not in its alphabetical
otder, in which it is equivalent to ten. The number two was
represented by JH and AL; the number three by ShDI =
Shaddai; the number four by JHVH and AHIH; five by
ALHIM, to which I presume that Christian Kabbalism added
JHShVH = Jeyesuuan or Jesus; six by ALVThIM and
AL GBVR; seven by ARARITA and AShRAHIH; eight
by ALVH V DATh and JHVH V DATh; nine by JHVH
TsBAVTh, ALHIM GBVR, and JHVH TsDQNV ; ten by
ALHIM TsBAVTh and by the extended TETRAGRAMMATON
JVD HE VAV HE. It may be added in this conne€tion that
accotding to Cornelius Agrippa simple numbers were used
to express divine things, numbers of ten were for celestial,
numbers of one hundred for earthly, and numbers of a
thousand for things to come. The Divine Names and their
qualifications were also tabulated in reference to the twenty-
two letters.

Of these Names the greatest power and virtue were attri-
buted to TETRAGRAMMATON, which was the root and founda-
tion of all and the ruling force of the world; its true pro-
nunciation, as already seen, was one of the secrets of the
Sanctuary and for Kabbalistic Magic was the master key of
all successful operation. With this was connet¢ted the name
of 72 letters obtained by the Kabbalistic computation of the
numbers of the letters of TETRAGRAMMATON after a con-
ventional manner, as follows :—

Jod'=' 10
q (ATG) oe Couns Nn Ane
Jod He Vau = 21 f~ /

Jod He Vau He = 26

After the Divine Names come those of the Orders of Angels
and chiefs of the hierarchy, concerning which something has
been said already in the seétion on ANGELS AND Demons.
It would serve no purpose to enumerate all the complicated

524 THE HOLY KABBALAH

apparatus developed in this connection. The ten archangels
and the ten angelic orders corresponded to the ten Divine
Names connected with the SzEpHrroTH and the Name of 72
letters had 72 other angels attributed thereto, whose names
were extracted by a conventional device from Exodus xiv. 19,
20, 21. There were angels of the cardinal points, rulers of
the four elements, angels of the planets, angels of the Divine
Presence, and in opposition to all these there were also evil
spirits, princes of Devils, held to be “ offensive in the
elements,” and so forth. This apparatus passed bodily over
to the Ceremonial Magic of the Middle Ages, which the
debased Kabbalah’ may be said to have constituted and ruled
throughout, and it is for this reason that Western conventional
Magic has so little connection with folk-lore.

It is to be understood that so far I have presented develop-
ments of later Kabbalism, the elements of which pre-existed,
however, in Israel, and this laid down we have finished with
one aspect of the occult subject in its relation to the Secret
Tradition of Israel. Beyond this, and much mote important
—that is to say, from a theosophical standpoint—there is the
fact that the voice of the Zowar testifies in no uncertain
manner as to the view concerning Magic, its connections and
derivations, held by all true Sons of the Doétrine and imposed by
inference on those who might seek to come after them, follow-
ing in their path. This notwithstanding, we may find here and
there in the long sequence of debate that the same standpoint
is not maintained invariably on specific details, and there are
certain Statements which might lend colour to an opinion
that the root-matter of one and another department of occult
experiment may be found therein. It is said, for example,
that there is a mystery known to the holy thaumaturgists
concerning the miraculous powers which inhete in the sacred
celestial letters and that if these are written inversely, after
a cettain manner, the extinction of the guilty can be brought
about thereby. Now it is to be observed that the so-called
celestial chara€ters are not those which are written with the
hand by human scribes, but are the Great Letters, alive and
givets of life, emblems of all intelligence and therefore
endowed with understanding. By the Zoharic hypothesis,
they existed before the creation and—as we have seen in its

© Z., Pt. I, fol: 67b § 1 398.

THE KABBALAH AND MAGIC 525

place—one of them was concerned therewith. The explana-
tion of this fable is that, for all the sages of Israel, thought
must pass into expression, because that which is done in
heaven must be done also on earth. The Sons of the Doctrine
must reflect therefore in their hearts on the Secret Doétrine,
as the Divine Thought was turned upon itself in the eternity
which preceded creation; but it must pass also into expression,
because at length the creation was formulated, and this
expression enters into record by means of letters. These
ate further the elements of that Law by which the world
was made, and the use of their reflections on earth was
another instance of accomplishing below that which is per-
formed on high. After what manner the holy thaumaturgists
brought down the celestial letters for the purpose under
consideration, or for any other, is not told in the story, and
I suppose that for sane persons there can be no question that
the intimation must be understood allegorically, though I am
not proposing to explain after what manner—as the unex-
pressed meaning exceeds my purpose. For the rest, I am
certain that the ZoHaR was unknown to the adepts of
magical workings; it reflects there and here some practices
which obtained in Jewry, and the Tatmups ate a source
of sporadic information to whose who would pursue the
subject.

The general thesis of the Zowar is that the art of Magic
came from the sages of the East,! and as it is said by the Scrip-
tures that the wisdom of Solomon surpassed that of the
Egyptians, as well as of all the East,? it seems to be understood
that he drew from some superior source, in respect of occult
“science.” The intention is not, however, either to
exonetate the science or to justify the king in this branch
of his learning. He seems to have pursued it when he fell
away from justice, but it was otherwise during the building
of the Temple ?: then he beheld wisdom face to face and
had no need of occult arts. That of the Egyptians is regarded

P43, ut... 10h 2244 ¢ IL, 478;

2 I Kings iv. 34. It is very difficult to understand the purpose of the Zowar in this
reference. Somehow Shekinah was his teacher, but it is not certain, and the question
is scarcely worth pursuing.—See Z., Pt. I, fol. 223a, b; II, 478-481.

3 Ib., fol. 150a; II, 190. ‘There is more on the subje& which need not be quoted
here. We have seen in our study of the Deluge-Myth that Magic is older than the
Deluge: it existed also during the patriarchal age. Laban was the greatest magician
in the world, and by the aid of his idols learned all that he wished to know.—Ib., Pt. I,
fol. 164b; I, 243.

526 THE HOLY KABBALAH

as the lowest of all,1 presumably because the subjugation of
Israel is said to have been its chief object, and it failed at the
end therein. It was not, however, mete trickery ; the wands
which changed into serpents became adtual serpents, not only
in dream or vision, and those of Aaron which devoured them
were actual in like manner.?, The Egyptian masters had
acquited ten degrees of Magic, corresponding to the averse
ot evil SEPHIROTH, the Inferior Crowns,? which rule in all
Magic. In virtue of his communications with the abyss,
Pharaoh himself was skilled more highly in occult practices
than any of the magicians he employed.4 Abraham seems
to have been drawn in this dire€tion, and when he first went
into Egypt it was for the profound study of Egyptian occult
att, though not as one who was seduced or one who became
attached thereto.2 He penetrated the secret of evil only to
reascend towards the good. As regards the later children of
the East and their wisdom, there is a sense in which Abraham
was himself a fountain of knowledge, for the presents made
by him to the children of his concubine seem to have been.
a medley of true knowledge and occult arts, which were
taken eastward and deteriorated in the course of the centuries.®
There is thus a vestige of truth in the eastern wisdom, but it
is combined with impure Magic. The source of all magical
power, howsoever it may be derived through individual
petsons, is the first serpent, who is the impure spirit, and the
theory is that in order to attract this spirit the magicians
must begin by defiling themselves, apparently by sex acts
against Nature.’ The workings are facilitated by the fact
that the impure spirit bestows himself for nothing, so that
the path to the abyss looks easier than the path to the heights.
The authority for this statement is not fortunately the Secret
Tradition in Israel but a Book of Magic said to have been
transmitted to Solomon by the demon Asmodeus.® It

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 223b; II, 481. “It is designated under the name of the maid-
servant seated behind the mill.”

Pip Pt LL, tol 280s Si ae,

3 Jb., fol. 30b; Ill, 145. Ib., fol. 35b; Il, 171. “ All the streets of Egypt were
oy ane magicians, and in each house were to be found articles belonging to the works
of Magic.”

AIG Pty tb 37), \Lil,.179. Also, fol. .$2b 3 (E11, 236.

5 Tb. Pia. 830: 1478.

6 Eliphas Lévi makes a great point of these “ presents.”” See my rendering of THE
History or Maaic, p. 48. See also Z., Pt. I, fol. 133b; II, 127.

WF peels TOW ee go aL, TOO,

8 Jb., Pt. Il, fol. 128a; IV, 10. The very opposite is taught in the Grimoires
concerning evil spirits, of whom it is said that this kind of creature gives nothing for

THE KABBALAH AND MAGIC 527

affirms also that the Holy Spirit demands a price, must be
bought and the cost is high. The Zouar explains that this
price is one of effort for the purification of heart and soul,
that the aspirant may be made worthy of serving in the
Tabernacle of the Spirit. The present state of the art is
defined at the end of the Zouar when it is said that Magic
has been abolished by the Holy One.? In other words that
has prevailed which is always above Magic, namely faith,
this being friendship with God, whereas Magic is friendship
with the demon.?

The term Magic is sufficiently general to answer for some
other arts and practices included in the department of pseudo-
occult science. Astrology stands to some extent apart, and
it is perhaps for this reason that it is a subject of distinct and
particular condemnation. ‘The thesis is that it is a lying
science, understood as the prediction of future events of the
human order by the constellation rising at nativity, and the
consequent pretension that the day, hour and minute of each
man’s birth exercises an influence on his future.2 When God
directed Abraham to look up to heaven, it was a counsel to
forsake Astrology, this having predicted apparently that he
would die without children, whereas God promised him a
posterity not less numerous than those stars which in this
matter seemed to have been in combination against him.*
The point is, and it appears fully elsewhere, that Abraham
had studied Astrology, presumably in Egypt; that he was
wrong in fact, was told to neglect the study and have faith
in the Divine Name, when a son would be given to him.5
When it was said in the Scriptures that Abraham believed in
God,® this means in contradistin@tion from the testimony of
Stars, and this faith was imputed to him for righteousness.
At the same time it is not denied that many things are indicated

nothing. Whatsoever is evoked, for example, must be satisfied on its own part; if
it be a question of obtaining some hidden treasure, a coin must be thrown to the fiend
who assists in secuting it.

1 “ The Holy One, blessed be He, has caused Magic to disappear from the world, in
order to prevent men, under the sedution thereof, from forsaking the fear of God.” —
Z., Pt. Il, fol. 299b; VI, 128. It is like a final message of the text. I observe that
Parisian occultism, after all its futilities, false-seeming and ignorant ascriptions respecting
Kabbalistic Magic, has preserved a discreet silence since the publication of the ZOHAR
in its own language.

* Ib., Pt. Il, fol. 52b; III, 237. It is said that Pharaoh was unacquainted with this
truth and had found no confirmation of the do&rine that the Divine Name Jehovah,
as formulated by Moses, had dominion over the whole earth.

3 Ib., Pt. I, fol. 78a; I, 458. BRED.

* Ib., fol. gob; I, 514. 6 Ib.

528 THE HOLY KABBALAH

by the course of the stars in heaven; but the Holy One
changes them according to His will.t Here is one aspect of
the admission in respect of the subje&; another says that,
according to an old book, there are times when the moon is
hollowed, and souls born at this period will be overwhelmed
with sufferings and poverty, without reference to their
personal deserts.2. On the other hand * those who come down
into incarnate life when the moon is full will enjoy all earthly
prosperity. The Zowar explains that in the first case the
souls are those whom the Holy One loves the most and allows
to suffer in this world, so that they may be purified from
Stain.4... This notwithstanding, the lunar intimation
remains correct and Astrology is justified by the hypothesis.
The subject of occult reverie suggests that of demonology,
as to which there is much information scattered throughout
the text, and it may be well to summarise the Zoharic doGrine
of evil spirits—apart from the Fall of the angels, already
dealt with, and outside the methodical developments of later
Kabbalism. Speaking generally, the evil spirit is a serpent,
and he who rides on the serpent is Samael. The wite of
Samael is that adulterous woman who seduces humanity at
large.6 It is suggested that demons existed prior to the
creation, but there came a time when in company with all
other maleficent and impure spirits, they were authorised to
go about the world and ravage therein.’ Their abodes are
in ruins, in great forests and in deserts. They are all emana-
tions from the serpent, and this is why the evil spirit reigns
in the world. These are apparently one class, and another
ate the scourges which Adam engendered during those years
when he was in separation from his wife.t A third class

2 1Z., fol. oobs Ty 574.

2 Ib., fol. 180b, 181a; II, 313, 314. When it is said that the moon is hollowed,
the meaning is that it is sometimes waxing and sometimes waning, through the wiles
of the old serpent.—Ib. ;

8 There is another point: the ancient and prevailing conne¢tion of angels and certain
Stats is admitted by the Zowar, which holds also that angel succeeds angel, and in
some manner that does not transpire this putative fact places human temperaments
under the ascendant of that constellation which happens to preside at birth. It will
be seen that the principles on which Astrology rests do not seem to be denied, and that
the “lying science ” is the attempt to calculate the influences and predi& thereby.
The authority in the present instance is THE FAITHFUL SHEPHERD.—2Z.,, Pt. II, fol. 42a;
Ill, 191, 192.

4 Ib

: 8 Ib,
© Ib,, FOL. BS pe 11221, 9 Ib.
6 See Book VII, § 3. 10 See Book VIL, §:3.

7 Ib., fol. 169b ; II, 265, 266.

THE KABBALAH AND MAGIC 529

atises from the fact that when the soul is apart from the body
during sleep the impure spirit may attach itself to the latter,
ot in other words, that female demons may cohabit there-
with. They conceive and bring forth children as a result of
the union. Such demons are in the likeness of man but
without hair on their heads.2 It would appear that holy
men, or people having holy souls, are not less liable than
others to be thus defiled in the body. I do not know whether
these three categories correspond to those of the Misuwa,
some of whom resemble angels while some are like men and
others are comparable to beasts. They are versed occasionally
in the oral law for the better misdireCtion of mankind.
Another account says that there are many hierarchic degrees
in the kingdom of the demons. Every three groups have at
their head a chief placed in charge of one or other nation of
the earth.2 These chiefs in their turn are overruled by
superiors entrusted with the direction of the stars, so that
each nation is indirectly under the influence of a certain star,
which, it will be seen, is another astrological intimation.
Hence the destiny of one nation is never like that of another.®
The reign of these chiefs will continue till the Holy One
shall Himself come down and govern here below.’ Most
curious of all is the intimation that if these degrees or groups
are disintegrated there will be found at the centre a sacred
kernel which draws all, even the impure side.®

Having regard to the consideration allotted to the inter-
pretation of dreams by the Old Testament, it would surpass
expectation if the Zowar rejected the possibility, more
especially with the authority of the Taumup to support the
affirmative view. It does something, however, to reduce the
rank of dreams. They are the gross form of that which the
soul sees when it is separated from the body. ‘The soul then
discerns things as they actually are, while the body perceives

* Z., Vt. 1, fol. 169b;;* 11)*266;, 267.
2 Tb.

* An exact description of the Infernal Hierarchies according to the Grimoires—not
that they are borrowing from the Zour but because the province of images is restrifted.

4 So also one of the demons in Goétic Theurgy is supposed to give true answers
respecting things human and divine.

& Zi, Pte ly folii77a sy Th 290:

®. Ide fol. 137b.- Ts 207.

7 Ib. This has been mentioned previously in other terms. It does not seem to
differ from the do@rine of Latin Theology.

§ The logical consequence is realised in another place, whete it is said that this
vestige or kernel can never be lost utterly.

530 THE HOLY KABBALAH

them only in a form corresponding to its own degrtee.}
Evety dream is regarded as an admixture of truth and false-
hood 2; but the most curious thesis of all is that a dream is
realised according to the interpretation placed upon it:
should this be favourable, favours will overwhelm the man,
but in the contrary case he will be weighed down by adversity.
The reason is that the word governs,‘ and it follows that no
dream must be disclosed to any one by whom the dreamer is
not loved. ‘There are in all three degrees—dream, vision
and prophecy: the greatest of these is prophecy.®

Now it so happens that the Doétrine of Signatures, of
which we seem to hear first in Paracelsus—so far as Latin-
writing Europe is concerned—and which was derived from
him into the theosophical system of Jacob Bohme, is a do€&rine
of Kabbalism, and though the Zoharic allusions are few and
far between in respect of actual definition, they enable us—
with the aid of their developments—to conclude that the
mental environment of Paracelsus included some reflections
from Zoharic sources. According to the sage of Hohenheim,
there are elements and signatures of elements ®; a science of
the signatures exists, and it teaches how heaven produces
man at his conception, how also he is constellated thereby.’
Stones, herbs, seeds, roots and all things whatsoever are
known by their signatures, that which lies within them being
discovered thereby.§ In respect of man, signature has three
species, which are chiromancy, physiognomy and proportion.®
The Zour has a good deal to tell us on the first two, while

1 'Z.; Pt. I, fol. 194a'; IL, 367.

® Ib., fol. 183a; Il, 322.

"1B, FO TESA Li, BZ:

4 Ib. I think that this is the only place in which a definite, over-ruling power is
attributed to the formulation of thought in speech, apart from those words which—
like Divine Names—are supposed to be essentially potent. The explanation is probably
that the dream-interpreter was in a kind of prophetic state; but this is to be distin-
guished from the ceremonial and magical use of words, as—for example—when it is
said of the pre-diluvian sorcerers that, with the aid of the mysteries contained in their
sectet book, it was enough for them to utter words and the desired things were accom-
plished.—-Ib., fol. 76a, b ; I, 449.

5 Jb., fol. 183a; Il, 323, 324.

6 PHILOSOPHL® AD ATHENIENSES Liser II, Textus x, p. 247.

7 Expricatio Totius AstRONOML# : Interpretatio Alia, p. 666.

8 Jb., IN SCIENTIAM SIGNATAM PROBATIO, p. 669.

® Ib.,s.v. De Massa ET Materia ex qua Homo fattus eft, p. 666.—See OpzERA OmnIA,
Vol. II, Geneva edition, 1658. See also my HERMETIC AND ALCHEMICAL WRITINGS
oF Paracetsus, Vol. II, pp. 268, 294, 295, 305. The 9th book De Narura RERUM
treats at considerable length de signatura rerum naturalium.

ee a ene are

co lar
ae Zo

THE KABBALAH AND MAGIC 531

it has a supplement, so to speak, concerning character and
hair.t I do not know how the findings would appeal to those
attists of our own day who deal in such subjects; but it is
desirable to point out that—within the consciousness of
Kabbalistic doétors—such things were no part of the decried
occult sciences; they were matters of observation arising
from that doctrine of correspondences which obtained in all
dire@tions. I append the following particulars, gleaned from
there and here, without pretending to know whether they
have points of concurrence with later readings of character
on the same bases, or whether they differ therefrom. I should
expect that the ZoHaRr would be found peculiar to itself—
here, as in more important matters.

There are seven considerations regarding hair and the
dispositions indicated thereby: (1) Hair which is crisp or
frizzy and inclined to stand up signifies a choleric temper ;
the heart is tortuous like the hair, and such a person should
be shunned. (2) Straight and silky hair is usually that of a
- good companion, one who succeeds in business—if not
undertaken alone. He is prudent respecting Supreme
Mysteries, but cannot hold his tongue about matters of daily
life. (3) Hair that is coarse and straight signifies one who
does not fear God, but works evil knowingly. He will become
better, however, if he reaches an advanced age. (4) A man
having black and glossy hair will succeed in material things,
but he must work alone. (5) The success of a black and dull-
haired man is rather of an intermittent kind, and he may
quarrel with his business associates; should he take to the
study of the Holy Law, he will make progress therein. (6) A
prematurely bald man will do well in business; but he will
be crafty, avaricious, hypocritical and one who makes a
pretence of religion. (7) A man who grows bald in the
natural course of years will undergo great changes otherwise ;
if he has been of good condué previously, he will now be
bad, but he will turn into paths of virtue if he has been so far
an evil liver. I dare not furnish particulars, but these ascrip-
tions are referable to mysteries belonging to certain Hebrew
letters. Since some of the conclusions are a little hard and
atbitrary—under the reserve of sacred letters—it shall be
added that certain alternative readings at a later stage do not

1 The general references are to Z., Pt. II, fol. 7ob to 78a; III, 311-328, and #b.,
fol. 284b to 288b; IV, 312-315.

532 THE HOLY KABBALAH

endorse them entitely; but from this secondary account it
will be sufficient to cite a ruling in respe& of auburn hair.
On the understanding that it is curly, the head which wears
it will fear sin, will feel compassion for all in misfortune and
will have the welfare of others as much at heart as his own.

Physiognomy is a larger subject, and being treated at some
- length, I shall be content with a few typical examples. The
man whose forehead is low and flat acts without thinking,
is fickle in notions, believes himself wise and understands
nothing. His tongue is like a biting serpent. The man who
has deep wrinkles on his forehead which are not in parallel
lines, and which are replaced when he speaks by parallel and
less deep wrinkles, is to be shunned under most circumstances,
as he seeks nothing but personal interests and will keep no
secrets. A large and full forehead denotes the best kind of
personality, capable of acquiring knowledge with the least
pains and successful in all search after spiritual felicity. In
money questions he may succeed at one time and fail at
another, but he is not solicitous regarding material things.
The man with blue eyes has a tender heart and one that is
free from wickedness, but he follows his own ends and is
cateless proportionally about wrong done to others. He
seeks pleasure but not of an unlawful kind, yet if he should
fall into evil ways, he would remain therein. A man with
green, shining eyes is touched with madness, believes himself
superior to others and lets them know it; he will not prevail
against enemies, and he is inapt for the Mysteries of the Law.
A man with clear but yellowish eyes is passionate, though
often sympathetic towards the sufferings of others; yet is
he cruel in his anger, and he also cannot keep secrets. A man
with dark grey eyes will succeed in the Mysteries of the Law,
and if he perseveres in its Study he will make steady progress
therein : he will also prevail over enemies.

The distin@tive marks of the countenance are modified by
conduct, and differ from general inherited types, which
cottespond broadly to the four living creatures of Ezekiel’s
vision. There are those which are distinGtively human,
those which are leonine, bovine and in aspect like that of the
eagle. There are also four types which are said to be im-
printed by the soul, being: (1) That of the virtuous man,
who is distinguished by a small horizontal vein on either
temple, the one on the left being bifurcated and crossed by

THE KABBALAH AND MAGIC 533

another small, vertical vein. (2) That ofa man who returns to
his Master after leading a bad life. He is repulsive at first, but
others are finally drawn towards him; he does not cate to be
looked straight in the face, because he thinks that his past may
be legible: he is alternately pale and yellow. He has one
vein descending from right temple to cheek, another under
the nose and this joins with two veins on the left cheek.
These last are united by another vein, but the last will dis-
appear when the man is habituated to a virtuous life. (3) That
of a petson who has fallen off completely from the good way.
He has three red pimples on either cheek and some faint red
veins beneath them: should he be converted the pimples
would remain but the veinlets vanish. (4) That of a man
who has been incarnated a second time, to repair the imper-
fections of his first sojourn on earth. He has a vertical line on
the right cheek, near the mouth, and two deep lines on the
left cheek, also vertical. His eyes are never bright, his health:
is poor, and the cutting of his hair and beard changes his
appearance completely. Thick lips are those of the evil
speaking. Ifa medium lower lip 1s cleft the person will be
of violent temper, but he will succeed in business. Un-
usually large ears are a sign of Stupidity and even of tendencies
to mania; persons with very small and well-shaped ears ate
awakened in mind and yearn for knowledge.

I need some indulgence for bringing in these details, and
I will forbear from dwelling on chiromancy, except to say
that the lines of the hand are believed to shew forth great
mysteries, including those of the fingers. On the contrary
I might not be forgiven by the few who know if I omitted
to certify that a man with two great hairs between the
shoulders is one who sweats without ceasing and to no
putpose. The presence of three such hairs is the sign of a
happy nature. To make an end of these fantasies, he who
has been guilty of adultery and has not done penance is
identifiable by an excrescence with two hairs, below the
navel. If he repents, the swelling will remain but the hairs
will fall off.

Hereof is the ZoHar when it makes an excursion into
by-ways beyond its province, and it is likely enough that
those who take palmistry and physiognomy seriously will
regard the indications as worthless, even from their stand-
point. Itis none of my own concern. The lesson in general

534 THE HOLY KABBALAH

concerning the occult arts is another matter, and it counts
to the text for righteousness ; it stands also much better in
its own context than can be made to appear herein. For the
rest, even when it says that they are lying, the Zonar does
not deny the arts ; they come from the pit and are deceptions
belonging to the pit, but they are not vagrant trickeries. There
is the greater reason to eschew them, and the work of con-
demnation has mote than prudence or scriptural ordinance
behind it: there is the sense mystical of the essence and truth
of things. The Book of the Secret Law in Israel puts forth
its arms to draw those for whom it was written, among the
Academies and Synagogues of the past, from the world of
pictures, wherein the images of mind are multiplied and
superposed one upon another, into the inward ways of
thought, into a true refuge, where—in processes of silent
prayer and contemplation—the mind is released from images
_and the Glory of the Indwelling Presence is seen and under-
stood in the heart.

II. THE KABBALAH AND ALCHEMY

Some teference has been made to the subject of Hermetic
Tradition when considering the Kabbalistic treatise entitled
PuriFYING Firz. We have seen that Hermetic and Kabba-
listic Philosophies are ascribed frequently to a common
soutce, and this has been the case with sympathetic as well as
hostile critics. ‘The question, however, is complicated, and
though I should hesitate to differ from a consensus of in-
formed authorities,! I am not less sure that as regards the
branch of Hermetic Philosophy which is known under the
name of Alchemy, we should be exceedingly careful about
making and accepting statements. We must begin first of
all by distinguishing the earlier books. ascribed to Hermes
Trismegistus, and not concerned with the transmutation of
metals,? from such late compositions, to make use of no

~_

1 In a pamphlet entitled THe ScreNcE oF ALcHYmy, by “ Sapere Aude,” Fra. R.R.
et A.C., the “sages of medieval Europe ” are said to have derived their knowledge
of this subjeét, (1) from the Arabs, (2) from the heirs of the traditional lore now
identified by the name “‘ Kabbalah,” (3) from ancient Egypt. Of these alleged soutces,
the first only is historically true in the sense that the Arabian alchemists derived from
Byzantium : the other notions belong to the slush of occult reverie.

2 Compare, however, the anonymous preface to the first English translation of the
Drviwe PomanpeER, that of Dr. John Everard, 1650. Here the possession of “ the
ereat Elixir of the Philosophers ” is ascribed to Hermes Termaximus. See also

~~ vcs i a
_ ee

a

THE KABBALAH AND ALCHEMY 535

Stronger term, as the Emeratp Tasie and the GOLDEN
TREATISE. When Isaac Myer affirms that many of the
doérines of the Kabbalah, more or less veiled, may be found
in the books attributed to Hermes Trismegistus,! the reference
obtains only, and can be intended only, to the Divine
POIMANDER, the AscLEPios and other tracts, the existence of
which can be traced about or prior to the fourth century,
A.D. We may search the Greek alchemists in vain for any
doétrinal connection with these works, though Hermes is
included among great names of antiquity which are associated
with the making of gold, and there are also other references
to this mystical personage. While we must discount altogether
such extreme opinions as that of Isaac Casaubon, who repre-
sents the earlier Hermetic treatises as the work of a Kabbalistic
adept who was probably a Jew of Alexandria,? we have
general reasons for admitting that there were points of
contaét between Neo-Platonism and the Kabbalah,® as seen
in an earlier section. The connection of Alchemy with Hermes
is not through the Hermetic books of the Neo-Platonic
petiod, and its Kabbalistic correspondences must also be
sought elsewhere. Among the writings of Zosimus the
‘Panopolite, which belong to the third century,* there is a
quotation from the TRuz Book oF SopHE THE EGYPTIAN
concerning the Divine Lord of the Hebrews and the powers
of Sabaoth, which affirms that there are two sciences and two

We&tcott’s observations prefixed to his verbatim reprint of Everard, CoLLECTANEA
HeERMETICA, vol. 2, London, 1894.

1 THE PuitosopHy oF Ipn GEBIROL, pp. 166, 167.

2M. Berthelot observes, however, that “‘ the ré/e attributed to the Jews in the
propagation of alchemical ideas recalls that which they enjoyed at Alexandria during
the contaét of Greek culture with the culture of Egypt and Chaldea. It is known that
the Jews exercised an influence of the first importance in this fusion of the religious
and scientific do&trines of the East and of Greece, which presided at the birth of
Chrstianity. The Alexandrian Jews were for one moment at the head of science and
philosophy.”—Lzs OrIGINEs DE L’ALCHIMIE, Paris, 1885.

3 Le Chevalier I. A. de Goulianov in his Essar sur tes HriroGiyeHes
pD’HoRAPOLLON, &c., Paris, 1827, conneéts Hermetic and Kabbalistic Tradition on
the fantastic ground that Enoch, who plays such an important part in the revelation,
of the Kabbalah, is identical with the Edris of the Orientals and with Hermes (p. 48).

* As Louis Figuier’s popular work, entitled L’ALcHimIz ET LES ALCHIMISTES, was
once quoted freely by occultists, and is still presumably in the hands of some of them,
it will be well to point out that he classes all Byzantine literature of Alchemy as apo-
ctyphal, and the work of monks belonging to the 8th, 9th, and roth centuries. There
was never much excuse for this opinion, and it is only necessary to add that since
the researches of Berthelot it has become impossible. I may add that, throughout,
Figuier’s work is most inaccurate as regards its faéts, and of no consequence as to its
opinions and inferences. Consult, on the point involved, the third edition, p. 6,
Paris, 1860.

H.K. NN

536 THE HOLY KABBALAH

wisdoms, that of the Egyptians and that of the Hebrews, the
second being rendered “more solid by Divine Justice.” 1
Both come from remote ages; they do not investigate
matetial and corruptible bodies; their generation operates
independently of any foreign action, sustained by prayer and
Divine Grace. Then comes the following significant passage,
_ which accounts for the philosophical work of Alchemy being
likened to that of God in the creation. ‘“ The symbol of
chemistry is drawn from creation (in the eyes of its adepts)
who save and purify the divine soul enchained in the elements,
and, above all, who separate the divine spirit confounded with
the flesh. As there is a sun, the flower of fire, a celestial sun,
the right eye of the world, so copper, if it become flower (that
is, if it assume the colour of gold) by purification, becomes
then a terrestrial sun, which is king on earth, as the sun is
king in the sky.” * There is no doubt that this is a very
important citation.? It shews why early Hermetic books
came to be regarded as alchemical in later times, and it
institutes a striking parallel between Egyptian and Jewish
science. But that the latter is the science of the Kabbalah
there is no evidence to cite. So also a reference to the
LABYRINTH OF SOLOMON which occurs among the remains of
still earlier Greek alchemists is a medieval interpolation.* In
short, the celebrated Byzantine collection, which is so far the
source of all Alchemy, shews no traces of acquaintance with
any Jewish Secret Tradition. The same observation applies
to the early Arabian and Syriac alchemists who drew from
Greek sources, though some extracts from Zosimus, with
analyses, in a Syriac MS. possessed by the University of
Cambridge, mention the talismans of Solomon, referred to
the seven planets, and the power which they exercise over
demons. When we add to this that in spite of such evidence
for the connection between Alchemy and the Kabbalah as is
offered by the late Aso Merzarepy there is nothing, as
already seen, to support it in the ZoHar,° it must be inferred

1 COLLECTION DES ANCIENS ALCHIMISTES GRECS, /ivraison ii., p. 206.

2 Ibid.

3 See, however, my SECRET TRADITION IN ALCHEMY, pp. 80, 81.

4 COLLECTION DES ANCIENS ALCHIMISTES GRECS, /ivraison ii., p. 206.

5 Dr. Gerhard Scholem, who has been cited in a previous note, gives an extract
from SEPHER Ha Bante, adding that it is used in the ZoHAr, but is garbled therein.
The extract says that gold is called sn} because it contains the three principles. They
ate not, however, those of Alchemy, the letter Zain cortesponding to a principle
called human, He to the soul and Bern to the balance between them. So also Dr.

THE KABBALAH AND ALCHEMY 537

that these two Esoteric Traditions grew up for a long period
in independence of one another. Furthermore, there is no
trace of any science of transmutation in ancient Egypt, and
it is worth noting that the claim of Alchemy rose into
prominence precisely at that period when certain Chinese
ports were first thrown open to western commerce. If it be
true, as it has been affirmed, that Alchemy flourished in China
from a remote period, that it possesses a literature, and that
the terminology of this literature offers analogies with that
which prevailed afterwards in the West, it may well be that
we must look to the furthest East for the cradle of what is
usually understood by Hermetic Science, namely, that of
transmutation.? The subjeé is far too large to enter on in this
place, but we shall do well to remember that the doctrine of
the Macrocosm and the Microcosm, the analogy between
spiritual and material, the Zoharistic symbolism of the
balance, have all been traced to the oldest sacted books of
the Chinese.? The analogies may not be so striking as the
petsons who have discovered them have thought ; as to this,
we have no real means of deciding; but they indicate at
least the possibility of a common source for both Esoteric
Traditions at a centre not as yet acknowledged and at a very
far epoch of the past.

Of course, as time went on, and as alchemical literature

Scholem cites Zowar I, 249b-250a ; II, 23b-24b; II, 147a, 148a; and II,17r. But
again they are not alchemical in the sense of alchemical symbolism, as this is known
among us by the witness of its western literature. We hear of the solar rays shining
Straight on mountain summits in the days of Solomon and turning earth to gold; of
gold, silver, copper and iron being made of the four elements; of gold under the
presidency of Gabriel and silver under that of Michael; of silver corresponding to
metcy and gold to severity ; of gold representing joy ; and of seven kinds of gold,
the seventh of which is celestial, illumines all and cannot be contemplated by the eye.
All this is not Alchemy, and I agree with Dr. Scholem when he says otherwise that the
Hermetic Quest was one thing and that of Kabbalism another.

1 It is fair, however, to state that the Leyden papyrus which contains the earliest
known process of alchemical sophistication forms part of a Gnostic and Theurgic
collection. On this point, see Berthelot’s CoLLECTION DES ANCIENS ALCHIMISTES
Grecs, /ivraison Ie., pp. 6 e¢ seq. Albert Poisson, whose THtorres Et SYMBOLES DES
ALCHIMISTES is a contribution of consequence to the elucidation of Hermetic Art,
observes that “ Alchemy among the Greeks was, by reason of its very origin, mixed
up with Magic and Theurgy. Later on, thanks to the philosophic Arabs, this science
became purified, and it was not till the fifteenth or sixteenth century that it allied itself
afresh with the occult sciences properly so called. Thenceforth a considerable number
of alchemists demanded the Key of the Great Work from the Kabbalah, Magic and
Alchemy.”—Op. cit., p. 27. Paris, 1891.

2 See THE CHINESE, by Dr. W. A. P. Martin, New York, 1881.

3 The most accessible work of reference is Isaac Myer’s Purtosopny OF IBN GEBIROL,
Appendix B. I mention this hypothesis so that it may be taken for what it is worth.
See Book II, § 5. But see also my Secrer TRADITION IN ALCHEMY, cap. V.

NN2

538 THE HOLY KABBALAH

developed in Europe, a conne&ion undoubtedly arose with
the Kabbalah.! The A#sH MEZAREPH is one of its evidences ;
some Kabbalists became alchemists ; a few alchemists studied
the Kabbalah. But itis still a slight and occasional connection,
which we must be careful not to exaggerate: there is also
very little trace of it prior to the seventeenth century,? when
writers like Fludd concerned themselves with both subjects,
and Khunrath ? introduced Kabbalistic symbolism into the
pictorial emblems of transmutation.*

The best proof of these statements is the literary history
of the ZsH MeEzArepH itself. Mathers in his pretentious
manner observes that it is “‘ known to few, and when known
is understood by still fewer.”> If this were its position in the
yeat 1887, it may be added that when Alchemy most flourished
in the West, the treatise had never been heard of, being first
mentioned by Rosenroth at the end of the seventeenth century.
Prior to that date there is no case within my knowledge of its
quotation by any alchemist, and although KaspaLa DENUDATA
was described on its title-page as Scriptum omnibus philologs,
philosophis, theologes omnium religionum, atque PHILOCHYMICIS
quam utilissimum, 1 believe that only one alchemical writer
concerned himself with it after the appearance of its frag-
ments among the Apparatus in Librum Sohar. This was the
“Lover of Philalethes,” already cited, who collected and
translated the fragments in 1714 and also published in the
same yeat A SHortT ENQuiry CONCERNING THE HERMETIC
Arrt,® which introduces certain citations from A‘sH

1 “ Alchemy, a science of observation, could not profit in any way by its alliance
with the Kabbalah, which was purely a speculative science.”—Poisson, THEORIES ET
SYMBOLES DES ALCHIMISTES, p. 28.

2 Poisson refers this confusion of one occult science with another mainly to
Paracelsus, but I have given proof already of the very slender conneétion between this
adept and the Esoteric Tradition of the Jews.

3 AMPHITHEATRUM SAPIENTL® ZETERN, with which compare the second tra&t of
the TrinuM CHEMIcUM, Strasbourg, 1700.

4 There is a treatise entitled THe AzorH OF THE PHILosoPpHERS which passes under
the name of Basil Valentine, and has suggested a conneCtion with Kabbalism to a few,
because the term AzorH is composed of the first and final letters of the Greek, Latin
and Hebrew alphabets. It has been called into requisition accordingly, but the founda-
tion is exceedingly slight. Moreover, the term is at least as old as pseudo-Geber,
while the treatise attributed to Basil Valentine is of doubtful authenticity, and was
excluded from the colleétion of Mangetus.

5 Tur KABBALAH UNVEILED, Introdu&tion, p. 15. He belonged to the second
class.

6 Reprinted in Wynn Westcott’s CoLLECTANEA Hermetic, vol. 3, London, 1894 ;
the preface, which is not by the editor, States that the SHorr Enquiry was “ written
with special reference ” to /isH Merzarepu, but there seems no foundation for this
view. The little tra&t is largely a colle&tion of opinions and quotations, not always

THE KABBALAH AND ALCHEMY 539

MEzAREPH and connects them with the symbolism of the
Doves of Diana first introduced into Alchemy by Eirenzus
Philalethes.

It follows, however, from what has been stated previously
that the literary connection between the Kabbalah and
Alchemy does not begin so late as the first quarter of the
eighteenth century +; and though AusH MEzaREPH seems to
have been cited methodically by only one writer, the influence
of KapspaLta DENuUDATA may be traced in Germany soon after
its publication by means of an anonymous tract which pretends
to treat of the Chemical Kabbalah ? (cabala chymica) and has
these words on its headline. This little work is incidentally
of importance in more than one respect. On p. 16 there is a
curious Figura Cabale, where the light from Es Entium falls
on a bearded figure holding the compass in the right and the
square in the left hand, thus giving two characteristic symbols
of Emblematic Masonry in connection with the secret arts
at a date when such a connection would scarcely be expected
on the Continent by modern scholarship. There are also
some observations worth noting on the subject of regeneration
which are useful for the mystical aspects of Alchemy.? Un-
fortunately the correspondences between the Kabbalah and
transmutation seem to be confined to the title which I have
quoted.

Some information on the subject might be expected—
among works of the past—in MHoefer’s History oF
CHEMISTRY,* which claims to include an exposition of
Kabbalistic doétrines concerning the Philosophical Stone ;

derived from the best sources, for its author appears to regard Edward Kelley and
Elias Ashmole as of equal authority with the acknowledged adepts of Alchemy.

1 T except such slender analogies as the correspondence traced by Sapere Aude
between the three worlds of Jean D’Espagnet and the four worlds of the Kabbalists.
See Hermetic ARCANUM, Colleftanea Chemica, vol. 1 (WeSstcott’s Edition), London,
1893.

tert VERIOR Descriptio: das ift, Brundliche Beschriebungund Enveisung aller
naturalischen und uber naturalischen Dingen boiedurch das Verbum Fiat das alles erschasun . .
Hamburg, 1680. There was a later edition, Frankfort, 1761.

* A work of similar pretensions is F. Kiern’s CaBALA CuyMICA : concordantia chymica,
Azoth Philosophicum Solificatum, Milhausen, 1606. Here the term Cabala is simply a
catchword derived from Paracelsus, and is used in this sense by a compiler belonging
to the group of Paracelsian exponents, of whom Benedi€tus Figulus and Alexander von
Suchten are the names now most remembered or least forgotten,

# Ferdinand Hoefer: Hisrorre DE LA Cure depuis les temps les plus reculés jusqu’a
notre époque ; comprenant une analyse detaillée des MSS. alchimiques dela Bibliothéque Royale de
Paris ; un exposé des dottrines cabaliftiques sur la Pierre Philosophale, etc., 2 vols., Paris,
1842, 1843. Mr. H. C. Bolton observes that this work is superseded so far as MSS.
ate concerned by the researches of Berthelot. See A Srrecr BIBLIOGRAPHY OF
CHEMISTRY, Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Washington, 1893, p. 119.

540 THE HOLY KABBALAH

but the term proves on examination to be used in the loose
sense of the period, and out of two very large volumes
there are only two pages devoted to the subje@ of the
Kabbalah. The authorship of the SEPHER YETZIRAH is
attributed to R. Akiba and that of the ZoHar to R. Simeon.
It is affirmed also that Jewish and Arabian alchemists possessed
an old knowledge of Kabbalistic books, and that they were
held by adepts in as much honour as those of Hermes T'risme-
gistus. The evidence is unfortunately wanting, and-as M.
Hoefer maintains also that the science of transmutation was
pursued in ancient Egypt, it would be unsafe to accept his
opinion unsupported by other authority.”

Before dismissing the’ Kabbalistic conneéctions of Alchemy,
a word must be said concerning two works which have been
supposed to be examples of that connection, and to which
some importance has been attached.? Both have the advan-
tage, which they share in common with Khunrath and his
AMPHITHEATRUM, of precedence over the publication of
Rosenroth’s KaspaLA DENUDATA, and one is prior to any
printed edition of the ZoHar. It will be needless to say that
neither shews an acquaintance with AisH MzEzaAREPH, nor do
I observe in their contents anything to connec them with the
Sephirotic attribution of metals which is characteristic of that
work. One is a treatise by Joannes Augustinus Pantheus, a
Venetian priest, entitled Ars Er THEORIA TRANSMUTATIONIS
METALLICE, cum Voarchadumia Proportionibus, muneris et
iconibus rei accomodis iWustrata. It was published at Venice in
April, 1530.4 Following the author himself, the Hermetic
Lexicons interpret Voarchadumia, (a) as “a liberal art gifted
with the virtues of occult science,”’ a definition which leaves
something to be desired; (4) as the Kabbalistic science of
metals. It is further a species of alchemical metallurgy,

1 T.i., pp. 242-244.

2 There is indeed one authority cited, namely, the Apparatus of Rosenroth, Kas.
Den., i., 441-443, and this is a quotation from the 7AsH MEZAREPH, c, 7.

3 There ate others naturally in the large literature of Alchemy, but they are not of
Hermetic value, and, as in all cases, the Kabbalistic conneétion is thin and elusive.
Such is the PortosopH1a SALomonis, or Secret Cabinet of Nature, a German anonymous
treatise published at Augsburg in 1753. Here the Royal Stone of Alchemy is con-
ne&ed with the art of King Solomon, but there is no Kabbalistic knowledge, and the
work is quite worthless. See also: Cabala: SpmmGEL DER Kunst uND Narur IN
Aucuymia, Augsburg, 1690, remarkable for its curious folding plates.

4 Rare in the original edition, but rendered accessible by the reprint in Lazarus
Zetner’s THEATRUM CHEMICUM, Argentorati, 1613, etc., second edition, 1659. See
vol. ii., pp. 459 e¢ seq. A Paris edition of the tract is mentioned also, date 1550.

THE KABBALAH AND ALCHEMY 541
concerning “auriferous metallic veins”; it explains “the

bd

intrinsic fixed form and the natural yellow colour of gold” ;
it distinguishes the heterogeneous, combustible, volatile parts,
and exhibits how the same may be condutted to the grade of
perfection. It defines, lastly, the Matter of the work as “a
heavy, corporeal, fixed, fusible, dudtile, tinged, rarefied and
arcane substance of Quicksilver or Mercury, and of an
incombustible Metallic Sulphur, educed and transmuted into
true gold by means of cementation.” + It will be seen from
this specimen of style that the work is very nearly unreadable,
even for an alchemical treatise, and it will be enough for the
present purpose to note the fact of its existence and to observe
that it seeks to throw light on the mysteries of transmutation
by calculations of GeMaTRIA. It exercised no influence, and
no importance can be ascribed to it.

The other work is much better known to fame and it offers
several interesting, and so far unsolved, problems to the
Student. ‘This is the Monas HrerociypHica of Dr. John
Dee, first published in 1564, and containing an analysis of
the planetary symbols attributed to the metals.2. Thus, the
symbol of Mercuty x is composed of the crescent ~, which
is the sign of silver, the circle ©, which is that of gold, and
the cross representing the four elements. Special alchemical
importance is attributed to their union in the sign which
represents the fundamental matter of the philosophers as well
as metallic quicksilver. It will be seen that this is not in any
sense information which helps to connec Alchemy with
Kabbalism, though it is important for the obscure question
of the symbolism and history of astronomical signs.®

I may observe in conclusion that there is one possible
connection between Alchemy and Kabbalism which would
appear to be overlooked by all those who have instituted a
comparison between them. It is supplied by the obscure but
subsisting analogies between the ancient document of Latin

1 See the anonymous English translation of Martinus Rulandus: Lexicon
ALCHEMLE, sive Dittionarium Alchemisticum, the edition of 1612. This translation,
without date or place, was restricted to six copies, and includes a large SupPLEMENT to
the Alchemical Lexicon of Martinus Rulandus. The explanation of Voarchadumia
occuts on p. 438.

2 For the astrological aspect of this analysis, see some curious speculations in Alan
Leo’s PracticaL ASTROLOGY, second edition, #.d.

3 For information and references see § xliv. of the EcLArRcIssEMENT ASTRONOMIQUE
appended to M. Bailly’s Hisrorrz DE L’ASTRONOMIE ANCIENNE, 2nd edition, Paris,
1781.

542 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Alchemy known as TursA PHitosopHoruM? and the two
Synods of the Zonar. I am not, of course, referring to the
accidental similarity of form, though, having regard to the
history of the Tursa, this accident is certainly a feature of
interest. ‘There are statements and allusions in this obscure
colloquy, more especially regarding the four elements of
ancient chemistry, which offer curious points of contact with
Kabbalism. When we add to this that some scholars—
including Berthelot—have referred the Tursa in the guise
that we at present possess it to a Hebrew original, now lost,
and that its date, so far as it can be assigned, is somewhere
between the promulgation of the Boox or FormMatTION and
the ZoHAR, enough has been said in indication of a possibility
upon which there is no need, as indeed there are few materials,
to insist further.

III.—THE KABBALAH AND ASTROLOGY

The Victorian schools of French and English Kabbalism
were inclined, as remarked already, to claim that all “ occult
sciences 7” are rooted in the Secret Tradition of Israel; but
it seems more correct to infer that the Kabbalah has been
engrafted on some of them, and in this manner we have

1 See TursA PuitosopHorum, ot Assembly of the Sages, called also the Book of
Truth in the Art, and the third Pythagorical Synod . . . Translated from the Latin .. .
By A. E. Waite, London, 1896. I must confess that I have no theory as to the two
previous Synods.

2 It is due to my readers, and to the subject, to confess that I have not made an
exhaustive examination of alchemical literature in reference to its conneftions with
Kabbalism. I have made myself acquainted with all sources which have been cited
by those who affirm them, but as their observations have not been based upon a wide
Study of the alchemists, it is possible that future researches may discover something
which has, so far, been overlooked on both sides. Ishould note also that, according to
M. Berthelot, ‘‘ the Kabbalah was bound up during the middle ages with Alchemy,
and the conneétion goes far back,” that is, to the Leyden Papyrus as well as to the
Greek alchemists. But I infer that this great authority has, so far as the medizval
period is concerned, received only a derived impression, or that at least his notion of
the Kabbalah has been obtained as such notions most commonly ate. All his instances
as to the earlier connetions must be rejected decisively. Some of them, such as the
LABYRINTH OF SOLOMON, have been dealt with already; others are mere names—
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and the word Tsabaoth “ in papyri of the same family as No. 75
of Reuvens.” It is further obvious that a reference by Zosimus to Solomon and his
wisdom establishes no Kabbalistic analogy. Finally, when the Greek alchemist traces
the revelation of the Sacred Art from the Egyptians to the Jews, “‘ who published it to
the rest of the world,” we must remember that this view belongs to a period which
referred all science and philosophy to the chosen people on the principle of Aristobulus
and Philo, so that this also proves nothing. Les Origines del’ Alchimie . . . Observe
that Watt’s BrsLIOTHECA BRITANNICA, ii., 179 7, gives a reference to a work by H. C.
van Byler, entitled, TRacratus CaBBALIstICcO—CHYMICO—PHILOSOPHICO—MAGICUS.
Cologne, 1729, but I am not acquainted with its contents.

a

THE KABBALAH AND ASTROLOGY 543

Kabbalistic Astrology, as we have also Kabbalistic Alchemy.
To determine the superior accuracy of either view we must
have recourse exclusively to history and literature. It is only
in the instance of Ceremonial Magic that the voice of both
is unanimously in favour of a Kabbalistic origin as regards
the western world. From a priori considerations we shall be
disposed to believe that the case of Astrology will prove
something like that of Alchemy, namely, that its history and
literature contain little to conned it essentially with Jewry,
outside the casual traditions and express condemnation of
the Zowar. It has the air of an exact science and seems to
suggest few possible analogies with the speculations of a
theosophical system. There are two facts, however, which
ate above challenge, firstly, that the Jews were much addicted
to Astrology,! and, secondly, that the prophetic science of
the stars, as it is known in the West, has derived something
from later Hebrews. Against these must be placed two other
facts, not of less significance, namely, that ancient Israel
contributed very little to the science of astronomy, that
Jewish astronomical writings belonging to the Christian
centuries draw chiefly from Arabia, and that as regards
Astrology in Jewry, during the Kabbalistic period, it was
imbedded in fantastic notions and puerile processes. We are
not called to deal here with the history of the art: we know
that Josephus traces it to Seth and assures us that he himself
had visited the two famous Pillars reported to have survived
the deluge, and on which all the rules of Astrology are said to
have been engraved. Josephus may have been deceived
easily, or he may have been tempted to claim for his nation
on the warrant of a fable the precedence in a study to which
the notion of learning was attached. Seth and the Pillars
set apatt, we know also that antique Chaldea was a great
centre of Astrology, that it flourished among the Babylonians,
that it was practised in Egypt; and it is natural to suppose
that the Jews must have had their share in the knowledge of
each of these peoples. There may have been even a Kabbalah

1 The question whether the art was condemned by the Law of Israel has been a
subject of some debate, and we have made acquaintance with Zoharic intimations on
the theosophical side of the subject. Perhaps the best opinion considered that it
was. See on this point the Concit1aror of Menasseh ben Israel sive de conventia
Locorum S. Scriptura que pugnare inter se videntur, Frankfort, 1633, p. 142. It was debated
also by Gaffarel, writing from the Christian standpoint. ‘ He contrived to defend the
att by distinguishing it into two branches.

544 THE HOLY KABBALAH

of astrological procedure communicated to Christian times.1
All this, however, is beside the real question; we ate not
_ justified in looking for the Zowar of its influence in Jewish
writings on mathematics or natural philosophy, for the
simple reason that the Zonar does not connect seriously with
these subjects. We are at liberty, however, to ask ourselves
one question. Astrology works upon data which are very
obscure in their history,? and there are do@rines conneCted
with it which even to the “occult student” may seem
insufhiciently grounded. It would be interesting to ascertain
whether they have any Kabbalistic cortespondences, notwith-
standing the condemnation of the ZoHar. As to the data, I
suppose that no one has attempted to institute a parallel, but
it has been thought that some astrological theorems may have
a connection with Kabbalistic apparatus. Let us see therefore
what is said upon this subject by its students.

The attribution of metals to the SEPHIROTH in /HsH
MEZAREPH suggests planetary attribution, and a tabulation
has been constructed by Papus,? following the authority of
Kircher :—

I, KeTHER cottesponds to the Empyrean.

2. CHOKMAH a 5,  Primum Mobile.
3. BINAH oy »» . Fitmament.

4. CHESED sf bald alana

5. GEBURAH iN POPUP Fi abr

6. TIPHERETH ,, » Mars.

7. NETZACH vi By Ais) se

8. Hop 4 ‘ed: NeeIES

9. JESOD a 55 Mercury.

10. MALKUTH 5 gn UNE OOT

It is possible, as AEs MEZzAREPH affirms, that “all systems
tend to the one truth,” but this scheme is not in accordance
with either of its own attributions. These are followed by

1 P. Christian affirms that there was, but he offers no evidence in support of his
assettion that the SpecuLum AsrroLoci1@ of Jun&in was a kind of synthesis of the
astrological labours of the “‘ Arabian and Hebrew Kabbalists.”—HisTorRE DE LA
Mac, l. vii., Clefs générales de L’ AStrologie, p. 579.

2 The history, moreover, has never been elucidated by any writer on the subject.
Mr. W. Gorn Old’s New Manuat, 1898, does not attempt to account for the grounds
on which the old judgments are based.

3 For Papus consult LA KAssBate, already cited frequently ; for Kircher Céprrus
(Ecyptracus. The synopsis of the Kabbalah in this rate work has been translated
recently into French.

THE KABBALAH AND ASTROLOGY 545

Rosenroth; but R. P. Esprit Sabathier, in that strange little
treatise on Kabbalism which once exercised so much fascina-
tion on French students of the subject, refers Mars to GEBURAH
and Mercury to Hop.! When there is no unanimity we must
infer that there is no point of importance involved and that
attributions and tabulations of this kind are less or more
conventional and can have little application to Astrology
itself. In modern times, however, all divinatory practices,
which in every case possess or suggest astrological connec-
tions,? have received some kind of Kabbalistic attribution.
Thus, the planetary correspondences of the figures used in
geomancy have been adjusted to the SEPHIROTH ; Kabbalistic
principles have been applied to chiromancy; physiognomy
alone, possibly because it has never had much attention at
the hands of professed occultists, seems an exception to this
rule, although, as we have seen previously, there is direct
warrant for it in the Zonar.®

The most accessible information on Astrology among the
Jews is in the Curtosrrizs of James Gaffarel, who based his
obsetvations on a direct knowledge of its chief rabbinical
exponents during the Christian centuries. To reduce. what
he says to a sentence, the Jewish astrologers read the heavens
like a book, they regarded it as a book, and, for the purposes
of methodising its contents with a view to its interpretation,
they colle&ted the stars into hieroglyphic charatters, which
were, in fact, the Hebrew alphabet. Their process was
therefore not an astrological process, but more correctly one
of divination, and as to its value, we have only to glance at
the Hebrew planisphere furnished by Gaffarel to see how
arbitrary was the nature of the arrangement. At the same
time it suggests a correspondence with the fundamental

1 See L’OmsreE IDEALE DE LA SAGESSE UNIVERSELLE, 1679. A reprint of this work
has appeared in Paris. The original is rate, and there is no copy in the British Museum ;
but the reader may consult the Table given by Papus at pp. 80, 81 of his treatise on the
Kabbalah, where the attribution in question will be found.

2 Thus, the PrincipLes oF AsTROLOGICAL GEOMANCY became the subje& of a special
treatise by Franz Hartmann, M.D. (London, 1899), while Rosa Baughan compiled a
ores medley of Chitomancy and Astrology under the title of THE INFLUENCE OF THE

TARS.

3 Physiognomy has been, of course, conneéted with Astrology, and an old work
published about the beginning of the seventeenth century under the title of Boox or
PALMISTRY, PHYSIOGNOMY AND NaTurAL Astrouoecy illustrates this connection. See
also A TREATISE ON ZODIACAL PHysioGNomy, by John Varley, London, 1828.

4 A summaty of Gaffarel’s information, with some pertinent criticisms, will be found
in Eliphas Lévi’s Rrrurt DE LA Haute Mare. See also TRANSCENDENTAL Macic,
part ii., and Mysrertes or Macic, pp. 248, 252, 253, 254. Second edition, 1897.

546 THE HOLY KABBALAH

notion of SEPHER YETZIRAH, though the fact has not been
observed by any previous writer. There could be nothing
more natural for those who believed that the heavens and
the earth were made by the inscription of letters in the air
than to discover these letters in the configurations, appa-
rently fortuitous, of the starry heavens. In place therefore
of the unmeaning mythological figures of pagan antiquity
they imagined the twenty-two elements of the divine word
manifested to the chosen people, and the imagination once
justified by the apparent delineation of the charatters, it
became part of the scheme of the universe.? To read the
sense of the heavens so that they could give the meaning
thereof was an operation no less sacred in its intention,
mysterious in its methods, and strange in its results? than
the application of Zoharistic processes to the disentangling
of the mystical meaning beneath the letter of the Scriptures.
This is the true Kabbalistic Astrology,* based on a Kabbalistic
Doé€trine which is its justification and of which it is in turn
the logical development. Outside the S—EPHER YETZIRAH, it
has the countenance of the Zowar itself. But it has little in
common with the science of the stars, as this has been pursued
in the western world; it can offer nothing in evidence of
its considerations, even as Astrology in the West has nothing
to tell us concerning the Kabbalistic Mystery of AN Sopx.
It is better therefore not to confuse further the complicated
issues of occult arts by the suggestion of fantastic influences
and unrealisable communications.®

It will be anticipated of course that a literature so large as

1 These ate the Celestial Letters mentioned previously, or at least their cosmic
counterparts.

2 This is the Zoharic notion, and it was claimed that by means of the signs and figures
in the heavens most profound secrets and mysteries could be discovered. So regarded,
the stars and constellations are a subje@t of contemplation and a source of mysterious
delight for the sage.—Zohar, ii., 76¢, Mantua.

3 Compare those other strange results in Symbolical Astrology of which Ruysbreeck
the MyStic speaks in the Book OF THE TWELVE BeGutngs, Latinised by Surius under
the title De Vera Contemplatione. Needless to say this Astrology is not judicial. The
late Mr. Hargrave Jennings has also some pleasing fantasies on the “‘ astronomy of the
mind ” in THE INDIAN RELIGIONS, pp. 207 e¢ seq., London, 1890.

4 Which Astrology, as Lévi observes rightly, must be distinguished from what is
commonly understood by Judicial Astrology. See Mysteries oF MAGIC, p. 247.

5 As an instance of the extraordinary lengths to which speculations of this kind
have been catried, outside astronomical conneftions, see Dr. J. Lamb’s Hresrew
CHARACTERS DERIVED FROM HiEeRoGLypHsS, London, 1835. ‘The hieroglyphics in
question are “* re-constituted,” and various do€trines, passages and words of the sacred
writings ate interpreted by recourse to them. But it happens unfortunately that
scholarship had yet to do its work in the light of the Rosetta Stone.

THE KABBALAH AND ASTROLOGY 547

that of the Jews and embracing, as we said at the inception
of our inquiry, so wide a range of subjects could not have
grown up without contributing anything to the knowledge
of the heavens. In the third century the Jews of Babylon
have been called famous as doctors and astronomers and,
partly for this reason, are said to have been in high credit at
the Persian Court during the reign of the usurper Artaxerxes.
Samuel Lunaticus, to whom astronomical tables are attributed,
the head of the Academy of Naharden, is an instance in point,
and R. Ada, also of Naharden, is another. Abba Aricha,
better known as the Babylonian Rav, founder of the Academy
of Sora, was an early student of astronomy, and names might
be multiplied easily. Side by side with medicine and the
interpretation of dreams, Astrology was pursued by eastern
Jews of the tenth and eleventh centuries. In 1150, or there-
abouts, R. Avi Joseph wrote a treatise on the intelligences
which move the heavens and concerning the judgment of the
Stars. Aben Ezra, about the same period, is a considerable
name among astronomers of Jewry as well as in doétrine and
philosophy. Abraham Chiia and Abraham Nasi are also
contemporary students of the same art. In the second half
of the thirteenth century, during the reign of Alphonso X.,
King of Castile, himself called the astrologer, the rabbins
were in estimation for their knowledge of the heavens, and
the Tables attributed to Alphonso were the work of a Jew
whom he employed. In the fifteenth century the family of
Alcadet produced two astronomers, and Abraham Zacut,
author of the SEPHER YUHASIN, was another student of the
subject in the days of Ferdinand and Isabella.

Meagte as ate these indications, having regard to the fact
that astronomy was pursued usually in connection with the
judgment of the stars, z.¢., with Judicial Astrology, they are
sufficient to establish that this occult practice is to be found
in Jewry during most of the Christian centuries.

The reader who desires to become acquainted with the
first principles and procedure of Jewish Astrology may con-
sult the Currosrtr1es of Gaffarel, whose information is drawn
from R. Moses, R. Aben Ezra, R. Jacob Kapol ben Samuel,
&c. This learned but pedantic writer rejected what is called
Kabbalistic Astrology, with its Sephirotic attributions +; but

1 So far as I am awate, no astrological work developing these conne¢tions has ever
been printed in any European language, but books like John Bishop’s MARROow oF

548 THE HOLY KABBALAH

the system which he develops is not less fantastic, and is that
indeed which I have described briefly in an earlier part of the
present section. It would be out of place to extend references,

for, as on the one hand Sephirotic Astrology is set aside even
by so determined a Kabbalist as Gaffarel, so, on the other,
the secrets of the Hebrew planisphere and the mysteries of
Stellar writing do not connec with the practice of the art in
the West.

It may be added that a contemporary writer, Mr. W. Gorn
Old, has published a Kabbalistic Astrology 1; but it is merely
a ptocess of divination, like that attributed to Cagliostro,
which was developed at great length and applied to the
science of the stars by P. Christian.? It is obvious that the
use of the term Kabbalistic in such a conneétion is merely a
jagon de parler, unfortunately in very common use. This
is made further evident by the parallel application of the term
Hermetic, not only as an analogue, but an actual equivalent.
Mr. Old’s process is affirmed to have been “in use among
the ancient Kabbalists,” but this is merely speculative and an
inference from certain alleged Tarot connettions.

IV.—THE KABBALAH AND FREEMASONRY

The researches and findings of Masonic scholarship not-
withstanding, occult reverie has not emerged altogether from
the old maze of fables concerning the origin of Speculative
Freemasonty. Even now, in France and England, it is
thought by uncritical writers to have a past extending behind
it into remote ages. In one or another sense it is still a survival
of the Ancient Mysteries ; but this term is used in a general
sense, not as signifying only the initiations of Egypt, of
Greece, ot of Rome, but rather the secret power and intelli-
gence which is thought to have been present behind the
philosophical associations of all ages and most civilised
countties. During the Christian period the knowledge
which would otherwise have perished was preserved ex

Astro.oGy, London, 1688, with its list of the governing angels of the signs and the
planets, suggest Kabbalistic conneétions through the vehicle of Ceremonial Magic.

1 Kasauistic AstroLocy, or Your Fortune in your Name, by Sepharial, London,
n.d. (? 1892). It has been mentioned in a previous note.

2 In his Hisrorre DE LA Macte, books ii., iii., and vi. Also in L7>Homme RouGEe
DES TUILERIES. Some account of Cagliostro’ s Method will be found in Grand Oalent: S
MANUAL OF CARTOMANCY, &c., of which several editions have appeared.

THE KABBALAH AND FREEMASONRY $49

hypothesi among successive occult fraternities, some known
to history, such as Templars and Rosicrucians, the rest
wotking in complete silence. Corporately or otherwise,
they were all affiliated with each other, and Symbolical Free-
masonry forms the last link in the western chain of trans-
mission.

As there is little need to say, no presentation of this
hypothesis has been able to survive analysis, and it is left
at most with a possible connection between Masonry and
Rosicrucianism, a little before and after the Grand Lodge
epoch of 1717. The evidence is, however, inconclusive, or
at least unextricated.1 This being the state of the case, and
the claim on antiquity which is made for Freemasonry by
some of its unwise votaries not having been urged by the
institution on its own behalf outside the Rituals, there is
nothing prima facie to accredit the idea that it has been ever
a channel of any Secret Tradition except its own, or to
watrant us in supposing a priori that it should have any
distinct analogies with Kabbalism. And as a fact its position
in this respect is much like that of Alchemy, seemingly
fortuitous, a question of subsequent introduction, as much
imputation as reality, a varnish rather than a permeating
tincture, and yet, like all such positions, interesting. To
establish my point, I must refer to the fact that since Masonry
appeated on the historical plane, occultists and even mystics
have tended towards it, that it has received them all amiably,
and that—now, of course, in the past—all have elaborated
the system in accordance with their particular notions.
During the prevalence of the passion for Rites we know
that alchemists, Swedenborgians,* Martinists, theurgists,
astrologers, all invented new Grades and new Orders, and
as at this period there were also Kabbalists, so in one or two
instances we hear of Kabbalistic Rites, especially of Rites
and Grades which exhibit Kabbalistic influences. As Free-
masonry is not Swedenborgianism, as it is not Alchemy, as
in spite of Ele& Cohenim, the Evocations and Rituals of
Pasqually, and the pretended marvels of Schrcepfer, it is not

1 See, howevet, my BROTHERHOOD OF THE Rosy Cross, cap. xvi, pp. 443-446; also
my EmBLEMATIC FREEMASONRY, II, pp. 21-45.

2 The history of the Swedenborgian Rite being exceedingly obscure, and yet
possessing considerable occult interest, it may be observed that some account of it
was published at New York in 1870 by Samuel Beswick. It is not to be trusted,
however, on the score of accuracy.

550 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Theurgy or Magic, nor—unless at its root—the Mysticism
of any of the true Mystics, so it is not Kabbalism, but it has
been put to use in Kabbalistic as in other interests.

It must be added that the few Kabbalistic Degrees which
have left any record behind them beyond their name, and the
uncommon swiftness with which they passed into extinction,
_ give no evidence of acquaintance with Jewish Esoteric
Tradition. They represent the Kabbalism of the period.
There is no need to speculate as to its quality in most cases ;
it has bequeathed its literary remains in Grimoires and Grand
Clavicles, in the spurious thaumaturgic processes of
Abramelin, and in amusing Kabbalistic correspondence with
the Seigneur Astaroth, the lees and lavations of rabbinical
conduits. As it will be well to enforce these statements by
means of documentary evidence, I will add an account of
one Kabbalistic Grade which may be taken to represent the
whole. It is otherwise among the best of its kind.

A degree of Knight of the Kabbalah once existed among
those innumerable developments of the Fraternity which
were termed high :by their disciples and spurious by some
who resented innovations, and especially those which led to
nothing. It has long since fallen into disuse. The obje& of
the Candidate, according to the Catechism of the Degtee,
was “ to know, by means of numbers, the admirable harmony
which subsists between Nature and Religion.” It defines the
Kabbalist as a man who has acquired the Sacerdotal Art and
the Royal Art by the communication of Tradition. The
device was Omnia in numerts sita sunt. The Master of the
Lodge in which the Degree was communicated seems to have
been called President of the Sanhedtim and Rabbi. The
mystical significance of numbers? was developed by the
Catechism in a somewhat curious manner, which it may be
worth while to summarise.

— in the moral order, a Word incarnate in the bosom
of a virgin, otherwise, Religion; in the physical order, a
spirit embodied in the virgin earth, or Nature. It is the

1 See D’Argens: Lerrres CABALISTIQUES, 04 Correspondance Philosophique . .
entre deux Cabalifies, &c., 7 vols., La Haye, 1754.

2 The numerical mysticism of the Kabbalah is based, of course, on the SEPHIROTH ;
most of its developments ate very late, and possess a magical complexion, for which
reasons they do not enter into the scheme of this Study. Those who are concerned
may consult an attempt to simplify chronology by Kabbalistic figures in Michael
Aitsinger’s PENrapLus REGNoRuM Munp1, Antwerp, 1579. On the general subject, —
see Petrus Bargus : Mystic.2 NUMERORUM SIGNIFICATIONIS LIBER, Bergomi, 1585.

THE KABBALAH AND FREEMASONRY 551

generative number in the order of Divinity—apparently a
false symbolism, because the monad neither generates nor is
generated, whence Eliphas Lévi says more correétly that the
monad supposes the duad, and thence, through the triad, all
numbers are evolved.

II = in the moral order, man and woman ; in the physical,
active and passive. It is the generative number in created
things.

IIIf = in the moral order, the three theological virtues ;
in the physical, the three principles of bodies. The reference
here is to Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, thus indicating the
Hermetic connections of this Grade. ‘Three also denotes the
triple Divine Essence.

IV =the four cardinal virtues, the four elementary
qualities—another Hermetic reference—and it is, moreover,
the most mysterious of numbers, because it contains all the
Mysteries of Nature.

V = the quintessence of religion, and the quintessence of
matter—which again is alchemical. It is also the most occult
number, “‘ because it is enclosed in the centre of the series.’
The precise meaning of this last statement does not appear,
but it may possibly refer to the pentagram as one of the
emblems of the Grade.

VI = the theological cube and the physical cube. It is
the most salutary number, “ because it contains the source
of our spiritual and corporeal happiness.” Is this a reference
to the symbolical adultery of the first man whereby the
coming of the Liberator was necessitated P

VII = the seven sacraments and the seven planets. It is
the most fortunate number, “ because it leads us to the decade,
the perfect number.”

VIII = the small number of the ele@, or the wise. It is
the most desirable number, “‘ because he who possesses it is
of the cohort of the Sages.” __

IX = the exaltation of religion and the exaltation of
matter. It is the most sublime number, because Religion and
Nature are both exalted thereby.

X = the ten commandments and the ten precepts of Nature.
It is the most perfect number, “‘ because it includes unity,
which created everything, and zero, symbol of matter and
chaos, whence everything emerged. In its figures it compre-
hends the created and uncreated, the beginning and end,

H.K. 00

552 THE HOLY KABBALAH

power and force, life and annihilation. By the study of this
number we find the relations of all things, the power of the
Creator, the faculties of the creature, the Alpha and Omega
of Divine Knowledge.

XI = the multiplication of Religion and the multiplication
of Nature. It is the most multiplying number, “ because
with the possession of two units, we arrive at the multiplica-
tion of things.”

XII = the twelve articles of faith; the twelve apostles,
foundation of the Holy City, who preached throughout the
whole world for our happiness and spiritual joy ; the twelve
operations of Nature; the twelve Signs of the Zodiac,
foundation of the Primum Mobile, extending it throughout
the universe for our temporal felicity. It is thus the most
solid number, being the basis of our spiritual and corporeal
happiness.

The numbets after twelve were left to the discernment of
the Candidate. The Catechism shews also that this putative
chivalry concerned itself with the Universal Spirit of Alchemy
and even with the quadrature of the circle. The history of
the Knights of the Kabbalah is unfortunately involved in
obscurity ; but it will be seen that it was Christian and
Catholic, which furnishes a resemblance to other and later
institutions professing similar purposes and having similar
religious sympathies.t

Had the Book or Occu.rTatTIon been made in the eighteenth.

century the theme of a Masonic Grade, had the Lodge repre-
sented the Tree, the Master in the East KETHER, and the
officers the remaining SrpHiroTH; had the Ritual been
consttucted from the Zouar and the Catechism from the
Apparatus of Rosenroth, all this would have proved nothing
as to the Kabbalistc connections of Masonry. Within
comparatively recent years a powerful Masonic Order
underwent a species of development in this direction through
the labours of Albert Pike, and it would almost seem that he
had a mind to transform the Ancient and Accepted Scottish
Rite into a seminary of occult study. There may be many
of its own brethren at the present time in whom this statement
will excite only incredulity ; but it is not the less certain that

1 Among the degtees collected by the French Mason Peuvret, there was that of
Macon CasBBALIsTIQUE. The Metropolitan Chapter of France specified the 8oth
Grade of its mammoth colle€tion on paper by the title of CazVALIER DE CABALE.

ae

THE KABBALAH AND FREEMASONRY 553

Albert Pike was more than an ardent admirer of occult
philosophies, or that he pursued the subject into regions of
which Masonry has no conception. He was seconded also
by numerous like-minded persons who occupied high dignities
in the United States’ Southern Jurisdiction.

The evidence of all these things is to be found (a) in his
transformation of the Rituals, (4) in the vast body of instru@ion
which he compiled, chiefly from sources in occult literature,
for all Grades of the Order. No person who is acquainted
with Morais AND Docma can fail to trace the hand of the
occultist therein, and it is to be observed that, passing from
Grade to Grade in the direction of the highest, this instruction
becomes more and mote Kabbalistic. It matters little that
the sources from which Pike drew were of the worst rather
than the best, or that, though a man of wide reading, he was
not a critic; for we are concerned only with a tendency and
its development. He accepted ex bloc, for example, the
construction placed on Kabbalism by the most unsafe of all
its expounders, Eliphas Lévi, from whom he translated
verbatim at great length, and, following his professed habit,
with no specific acknowledgment, while for the rest his only
source of further information was KAaBBALA DENUDATA, of
which, however, he shews no analytical knowledge, seeming
to regard Liser Drusuim as entitled to rank in authority
with SrpHra Di ZeNrouTHA. In spite of these limitations he
made available an amount of information on occult subjects
with which no previous scheme had ever provided Masonry.
Yet with all his strenuous efforts the seal of occultism was
not impressed effectually on the Ancient and Accepted
Scottish Rite, and it remains therefore that the Oriental Rite
of Memphis, Ancient and Primitive, and that of Misraim,?
with its long Kabbalistic Class or Series of Degrees, are the
only sections of high-grade Masonry which claim a distiné
purpose of an occult kind: it is not necessary to say that in
England, at least, they have failed in obtaining recognition

1 See Marconis et Moultet: L’HriropHante, développement complet des Mysteres
Magonniques, Patis, 1839. Le RAMEAU D’oR D’ELEusis, another work by Marconis,
is also interesting as the views of an amiable but somewhat moonstruck student upon
the Mysteries in conne&ion with Masonry.

2 A history of this institution, with all the fabulous and indeed mendacious elements
which might be expected, was written by Marc Bédarride and published in two volumes
at Paris, 1845, under the title, De L? ORDRE MAcCONNIQUE DE Misraim, depurs sa creation

jusqu a nos jours, &C.
002

554 THE HOLY KABBALAH

as acceptable developments of Masonry, and both have passed
into abeyance.+

We see therefore that Kabbalistic influence is confined to
so-called High Grades. It would be absurd to discuss the
possibility of its presence in the Blue Lodges or seek to
interpret the Legend of the Master Grade in connection with
Jewish Tradition, outside at least the allegory of the Lost
Word. The symbols, however, which are familiar to the
initiates of these Lodges do connect with Kabbalism, if not
with other forms of occult philosophy ; but the presence of
the Seal of Solomon among the heirlooms of the Brotherhood
being, so far, unaccountable, it is useless to insist on the
connection, because nothing logically follows from it. So
far as history is concerned, Kabbalism and Masonry once
joined hands in the sphere of the Higher Grades, and as a
historical fact this is interesting, but that it is otherwise
significant must be left to those who affirm it.

V.—THE KABBALAH AND THE TAROT

It is known to innumerable persons who are not occult
Students at the present day that the Tarot is a method of
divination by means of seventy-eight symbolical picture-
cards, to which great antiquity and high importance have
been attributed by several expositors. Their literary history
is also fairly well known. They were mentioned first by the
French archeologist Court de Gebelin at the close of the
eighteenth century, and were attributed by him to an Egyptian
origin. Much about the same time the subject was taken up
by a professed cartomancer, named Alliette, who wrote a
great deal about them in several illiterate tracts, and endea-
voured to trace their connection with Egypt through the
Jewish Kabbalah. The inquiry then fell into negledt, except
in so far as Continental fortune-tellers were concerned, until
the year 1855, when Eliphas Lévi made his first contribution
to occult subjects.

In 1857, J. A. Vaillant 2 endeavoured to prove their Chinese

1 The fourth Series of the Rite of Misraim is designated Kabbalistic.

2 HisrorRE VRAIE DES VRAIS BoHEMIENS. As a notice of the gipsies this work is
exceedingly good for its period ; its Tarot speculations are worthless, and its philo-
logical arguments absurd. MM. Vaillant described the Tarot as “the synthesis of
ancient faith, a deduction from the sidereal Book of Enoch” (412). Its origin he

affirms to be lost in the night of time (413). He mentions the Kabbalah only to establish
its conne@tion with Cabul ! (p. 54).

THE KABBALAH AND THE TAROT $55

otigin! and transmission by means of the gipsies; their
connection with these nomads was adopted subsequently by
Lévi, who gave great prominence to the Tarot in all his
writings up to the year 1865. The subject was taken in hand
also by P. Christian, who published a large History oF
Macic in 1870. He developed still further the Egyptian
hypothesis, but no statement which he makes can be accepted
with the least confidence. In the year 1887 I was the first
who introduced the claims of the Tarot to English readers
in a digest of the chief works of Eliphas Lévi. A contribution
to the inquiry was made shortly after by the French occultist
Papus, whose volume entitled the Tarot oF THE BOHEMIANS,
though.of no critical value on the historical side, remains an
elaborate summary of all the arguments which have been
produced from the standpoint of occult reverie and invention
in France.

The point which concerns us here is, of course, the alleged
Kabbalistic conneftions. Eliphas Lévi says that the Tarot
cards are a key to the Esoteric Tradition of the Jews, and
“the primitive source of Divine and human Tradition ” ;
he institutes an analogy between the symbols of its four suits
and the four letters of the Divine Name TETRAGRAMMATON,
and between the ten SEPHIROTH and the ten small cards
belonging to each sequence. He gives also the corte-
spondences between the twenty-two Trump Cards and the
letters of the Hebrew Alphabet, for which he quotes the
authority of “ divers Kabbalistic Jews,” the fact notwith-
Standing that there is no trace of any reference to the Tarot
by Kabbalistic writers of the past. It must be admitted, on
the other hand, although the historical evidences cannot be
said to exist, and have been supplied from treasures of
imagination, that the Tarot is actually, as it is claimed to be,
of considerable importance symbolically. I may be permitted
to register also my feeling that it has Kabbalistic conneCtions,
some of which were broadly outlined by Eliphas Lévi.

1 Occult writers mostly favour Egypt as the birthplace of the Tarot, and this is
consistent with their views on the origin of the Kabbalah. So Mons. Z. Lismon has
published a version of the cards under the title of Livre pE Tuor, Jeu des 78 Tarots
Eg yptiens, with explanatory booklet. Compare R. Falconnier: Les xxi. LAMEs
HERMETIQUES DU TAROT DIVINATOIRE, which pretend to be re-constituted exaély
according to “ the sacred texts and translation ” of the Magic of old Egypt! Of more
recent times the Masonic littérateur Oswald Wirth has produced two versions of the
Trumps Major, while in England a complete set, of symbolical and artistic value, has
appeated under my own auspices.

556 THE HOLY KABBALAH

There is, moreover, a Jewish Tarot of great rarity which
has never been published ; but it belongs to the worst side
of so-called Practical Magic. |

Unfortunately, the interpretations of Tarot symbolism
which have been attempted by various writers are worthless,
in the first place because they have proved themselves incap-
able of conducting an historical inquiry ; they have allowed
affirmation to take the place of evidence ; they have regarded
a hint as a sufficient ground of conviction; they have made
conjecture certitude. Setting aside Court de Gebelin, who
was merely an inquirer hampered by the limitations of his
petiod; setting aside Lévi, who seldom made an accurate
Statement about any matter of fac&t; observe how Papus
pursues his inquiry into the origin of the Tarot. It is by an
appeal to writers who preceded him, as if their authority
were final; to Court de Gebelin, who was a groper in the
dark during the childhood of archeological research; to
Vaillant, with his fascinating theory of gipsy transmission
which is about as conclusive as Godfrey Higgins on the
Cettic Drurps; to Lévi, whose “‘ marvellous learning ”’ is
so much and so unsafely insisted on by the whole French
school. Papus contributes nothing himself to the problem
on its historical side except an affirmation that “the game
called the Tarot, which the Gypsies possess, is the Bible of
Bibles.”

In the second place, the supposed Hebrew symbolism of
the Tarot, which, in justice to Papus, is laboriously elaborated
—though apart from all inspiration—becomes disorganised
if there is any doubt as to the attribution of its Trump Cards
to the Hebrew Alphabet. Now there is one card which bears
no number and is allocated therefore according to the dis-
cretion of the interpreter. It has been placed in all cases
wtongly, by the uninstruéted because they had nothing but
their private judgment to guide them, and by some who
claimed to know better because they desired to mislead. It
happens, however, that they also were at sea. I may go
further and say that the true nature of Tarot symbolism is
perhaps a secret in the hands of a very few persons, and out-
side that circle operators and writers may combine the cards
as they like and attribute them as they like, but they will
never find the right way. The symbolism is, however, so rich
that it will give meanings of a kind in whatever manner it

THE KABBALAH AND THE TAROT 557

may be disposed, and some of these may be suggestive,
though illusory none the less. The purpose of this short
paper is therefore to shew that published Tarots and the
methods of using them may be serviceable for divination,
fortune-telling and other trifles; but they are not the key of
the Kabbalah, and that the Royal Game of Goose may be
recommended with almost as much reason for the same
purpose. Papus was therefore misdirecting his many followers
when he advertised his involved readings as the “ Absolute
Key to Occult Science.”

VI—THE KABBALAH AND MYSTICISM

On the one hand the history of Kabbalism is so imbedded
in that of mere occultism, that it is scarcely known or admitted
in any distin@ connection. On the other hand, to the pure
mystic, there is so much in the Kabbalistic system which is
extrinsic to the subject of Mysticism, that there is a temptation
to underrate its influence, though herein is its test of value,
and it is a palmary purpose of the present long research to
produce the materials and in fine pronounce upon them. I
am offering at this point a few preliminary considerations
only, based on the fact that Western Mysticism was the channel
of a gteat Tradition in Christian Times.

It is to be observed here and now that the correspondence
and difference may perhaps be brought into harmony if it
be permissible to regard Mysticism in two ways—as a philo-
sophical dodtrine, or rather body of doctrine, that is to say, an
otdered metaphysics, held intellectually,1 but also as a mode
of conduct practised with a defined purpose, in a word, as
mystical doctrine and mystical life, it being understood that
the doctrine is rooted in first-hand experience derived from
the course of life. The practical mystic is the saint on the
path of his ascent into the mystery of Eternal Union, con-
cetning whom it is consonant with the purpose of our present
inquiry to speak at the moment only with great reservation,
seeing that the Mysteries of Divine Life do not fall within
the limits of historical research. I conceive that the sum of
Kabbalistic instruction is not without service to the disciple
example, the dottrine of ecstasy is assuredly found therein, but not in the same way

that we find it in Ruysbroeck or St. John of the Cross. It is more especially a
tationalised system of mystical thought.

558 THE HOLY KABBALAH

of this secret path, because of the Zoharic doctrine that a
science of Holy Unity, into which all things return as all
come forth therefrom, can be attained by man.1 Invenit
santium. Like all other studies, and perhaps not more so
than any other methodised Theosophy, it has, moreover, a
certain office in the santtum facit. For that far larger class to
whom the possibility of great sanctity is denied, who are in
search rather of a guide for thought upon questions of
fundamental philosophy, I conceive that the Kabbalah—but
obviously, like other metaphysics—has useful and reassuring
lights. It is a.source of intellectual consolation that one of the
most barren of all the ways pursued by the human mind has
its own strange flowers and fruit. It is also, as I have sought
to shew, something more than an inheritance from the past,
even an inheritance that has been transmitted from a period
far back in human history. The Zowar at least has the power
of stirring those depths in the human heart which are beyond
the “plummet of the sense”; it seems occasionally to
“ strike beyond all time, and backward sweep through all
intelligence,”’ and to say this, is to confess that it is of the
eternal soul speaking, here under the common influence of
right reason, there in ecstasy and vision, and again, as it would
seem in somnambulism or even in frenzy. Now, the speech
of the human soul, in what state soever, is not without a
message to the mystic, be it even in certain cases a word
of warning only. ‘There is no need to add that on its
Theosophical side the Kabbalah connects assuredly with
Mysticism.?

With occultism, of course, it is not without connection on
the theurgic side throughout all its history, as the doétrine of
Names and their power exhibits but too well. The difference
between occultism and Mysticism is much more than that of
a Latin equivalent for a Greek term, as might appear at first
sight. We are all acquainted with the distinction which is
made between the magnetic and hypnotic sleep. They have

1 Zohar, I., 51¢, Mantua.

2M. Anatole Leroy Beaulieu says that the Jew is not inclined to MySticism, and
seems never to have been so. ‘“‘ Judaism has always been a law, a religion of the
mind, an intelle€&tual creed, not favourable to mystic transports or divine languors.”
He denies also that Kabbalism was indigenous in Jewry. ‘‘ The mysteries of the
Kabbalah, and those of the Hassidim, the neo-Kabbalists, seem to have been a foreign
importation; according to the best judges, the Kabbalah itself is not rooted in
Judaism.”—IsRAEL AMONG THE Nations, translated by Francis Hillman, London,
1895, p. 292. This view shews little first-hand acquaintance with the subje@.

THE KABBALAH AND MYSTICISM 559

much in common, but they are pathologically separate, having
diverse characteristics and a divergent mode of induction.
Sleep, however, is obtained in both, and this is their super-
ficial and obvious point of union—so superficial and so
obvious that the ordinary observer would scarcely fail to
identify them, while they have been identified also on grounds
which are not precisely those of ordinary observation.
Between occult arts and mystical science there is the common
and rather banal point of union which is created by the
inherent notion of secrecy. Beneath this fantastic resemblance
there is the more important fac that they both profess to deal
with inner and otherwise uninvestigated capacities of the
human soul. In the case of occultism it is, however, for the
kind of end which we conne& with the notions of Magic.
For example, Talismanic Magic, so called, is ostensibly the art
of infusing a supposed recondite spiritual power into some
object composed artificially. This is an operation of occult
att because it deals with a power which is, by the hypothesis,
of a secret or generally unknown nature and applies it in
accordance with the formule of a concealed instruction. A
knowledge of the capacities which are latent in human nature
may suggest Mysticism, which is the development of such
capacities in the direction of Divine Union. There is usually,
however, no person less really mystic than the occultist
conventionally understood, while the mystic on the path of
attainment in the life of sanétity is exploring the world of
erace, not that of psychic power.

The end of Mysticism is the recovery or attainment of
consciousness in God, and there are two exotic Kabbalistic
do&rines which not only connect therewith but belong
thereto. The first is found—but once only—in the ZoHaR
and has been referred to in these pages: it is the do¢trine of
TsurE, of the supernal part of the soul, which does not
leave the Supernals, but from beginning without beginning
to endless end is rooted in God for ever. The second is
in later Kabbalism and is expressed tersely by Rosenroth in
one pregnant Latin sentence: Linea autem media ascendit usque
ad Aytn Sopw. The ascent of the soul to God is by the
Middle Path in the Tree of Life, and the soul is led thereby
not only to the World of the Supernals but to the deep
beyond the deep and the height beyond the height, which
is the abyss and height of Deity. So does the Holy Kabbalah

560 THE HOLY KABBALAH

join hands with the Mysticism of all the ages, and so is it part
of our inheritance.

[It should be added that ‘Tsurx, which signifies Proto-
type and corresponds to ArziLutH, is said to be connected
with NresHaman by “an invisible thread,” constituting a
bond of union which is also a path of ecstasy. NESHAMAH
ascends thereby and attains therein—namely, union with —
the supernal part.|

BOOK XII
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS

BOOK XII
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS

I.—DEVELOPMENTS OF LATER KABBALISM

THE circulation of the ZoHar by Rabbi Moses de Leon
at the end of the thirteenth century—he being its concealed
author, according to one section of opinion—proved un-
questionably as great a surprise to the community of Israel
as it was to the Christian scholars when they came to know
of it later. I speak here with a qualification because our
first information concerning Zoharic MSS. comes to us from
Picus de Mirandula towards the end of the fifteenth century,
and we have seen that his was the first voice which testified
to the presence of Christian elements therein. On the other
hand, the Jewish expositors belong to the sixteenth century
and later; but I speak of those who are of repute, and if any
one wishes to go farther into the matter there are the great
rabbinical bibliographers to tell of things unprinted which
are among the treasures of the Vatican and other libraries of
Europe. Speaking generally—as I have mentioned else-
where—the impetus of studies in both directions must be
sought in the Cremona and Mantua editions of the Zowar.
So far as the records are concerned, it must not be said that
there is a very large literature on either side; but a few sons
of Israel had recourse to the wonderful memorial with as
much zeal as Mirandula and his successors. To the better
Kabbalistic Jew it offered an illimitable field of development
and the indulgence of that particular sort of metaphysical
speculation which was dear to his heart at the period. ‘There

1 The most important of the older bibliographies are (1) Johannes Buxtorf:
BIBLIOTHECA RABBINICA novo ordine alphabetico diposita, 8vo, Basle, 1613. (2) Barto-
locci: BrstriorHecA Macna Rassinica: De Seriptoribus et Scriptis Rabbinicis, 4 vols.,
Folio, Rome, 1678-92. (3) Imbonatus: BrstiorHecA Latina-HEBRAICA (a sequel
to No. 2, by the editor of Bartolocci’s work, most of which was published post-
humously), Folio, Rome, 1694. (4) O. Christoph. Wolf: BrstiorHeca HeEBR@a,
4 vols., 4to, Leipzic, 1715.

563

564 THE HOLY KABBALAH

could be no greater opportunity, for I have indicated that
the ZoHArR assumes throughout a mote or less perfect fami-
liarity with the chief heads of its subjeét, and it is not therefore
concerned with presenting a formal system of the Secret
Doétrine. The later Kabbalists provided that which was
wanted there and here out of their own heads, with the help
of any flotsam and jetsam of theosophical reverie which was
passing from mouth to mouth in and about the Academies
from Sapeth to Beaucaite. We know that about the middle
of the eighteenth century two sects arose in Jewry, claiming
the Zowar as their authority in chief. One was the se& of
Pietists or New Hasrpim, which rejected the Tatmup,
together with external forms, and was zealous in the praétice
of Contemplative Prayer, as recommended by the ZoHar to
those who are in search of inward knowledge concerning
Divine Mysteries. It was incorporated for the quest of per-
fection along these lines.1 Solomon Maimon has left some
particulars concerning the vagaries of these enthusiasts, who
were followers of Israel Baal Shem?: it survived bitter
persecution on the part of orthodox Jewry and was still
active in Poland at the middle of the nineteenth century. It
is now, I believe, in dissolution rather than decline. The
second was the sect of Zoharists who belonged to the same
country and were also anti-Talmudic. It was established by
Jacob Frank, and it embraced Christianity. I mention these
matters, because they shew the kind of influence exercised by
the ZoHAR at one period in a particular locality. Of its
sectet influence on remote continental Jewry, in places like
Galicia above all, we shall probably never know, so that the
later developments of Kabbalism are without adequate
records.

1 J am teflecting curtent opinion of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, but
assuting my readers that there is no call for inquiry either as to the kind of perfe@tion
ot the particular practice of prayer. While it is true that the end of both was spiritual
communion with God, the anticipated fruits of this were the gift of prophecy and
powet to work miracles. Moreover, those who had attained the height of Hasidism
acted as mediators between God and the rest of humanity.

2 Israel ben Eliezer Ba’al Shem Tob, who acquited extraordinary repute as a teacher
and yet more as a healer in Podolia, circa 1740 and onward.

3 There is an excellent account of Frank in THe JewtsH ENcycLopp1iA, V, 475-478,
to which readers may be referred. He was born in Podolia about 1726 and died in
1791, the work being carried on by his beautiful daughter Eve, who became “ the holy
mistress ” and “‘ the leader of the Seét.” At the beginning its conversion to Christianity
was in view of a coming Messianic telizion. After the death of Eve in 1816, the
Frankists of Poland and Bohemia ate said to have been transformed gradually “‘ from

feigned to real Catholics, and their descendants merged into the surrounding Christian
population.”

DEVELOPMENTS OF LATER KABBALISM 565

It would setve little purpose to extend this study by
additional summaties of contributions made in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries to the understanding of the Zowar.
There were scholiasts and expositors outside those who have
been considered in the ninth book: some of them produced
lexicons dealing with obscute and “ foreign’ words found
in the text ; some wrote commentaries on particular sections ;
some analysed the Kabbalistic system presented in the ZOHAR.
In respect of one and all it may be said that for those—if any
should remain—who believe in a floating Tradition trans-
mitted from mouth to mouth among the later doctors of
Israel, it would be advisable that they should not regard the
memorials to which I refer as its representatives in written
form. As indicated already in respect of a few examples, that
which they did was to reproduce current speculation, to
which they added theit own. Had the debates at Salamanca
been reduced into what Fama FRATERNITATIS R. C. calls “a
true memorial,” the later Kabbalists—supposing their admis-
sion to the conclave—might have added their quota, and it
might have been according to the law and order respecting
- the tule of debate; but it would have remained within these
measutes, a sequence of excursions in theses, with an open
field in regard to counter-theses. All the contentious voice
of certitude notwithstanding, I have not found that the
additional literature of Zoharic Kabbalism possesses a higher
claim. It seems above all other things certain that on the
higher doctrines of the ZoHar, on Shekinah and the Mystery
of Sex, it offers nothing at all.

In comparatively recent days, we have been told by respon-
sible writers that the Zour itself made its own way among
the Jews rapidly; that “even representatives of Talmudic
Judaism began to regard it as a sacred book”; and that
““Zoharic elements . . . crept into the liturgy of the six-
teenth and seventeenth centuries.” 1 But again the higher
teaching did not unfold, or I at least have failed to trace its
development. There wete poets who arose in Jewry and
adopted there and here some elements of Zoharic symbolism ;
but it was that part which is called by the unhappy name of
erotic symbolism, the notion of the Lover and Beloved
brought down into terms of sense. Of the soul’s supernal

1 JewisH ENCYCLOPADIA, xii, 5.v. Zohar.

566 THE HOLY KABBALAH

patt, which does not leave the Supernals, the poets do not
speak, nor do those who were doétors in their day and called
Masters in Israel. Of Arn SopH as a mental proposition or a
do&rine of Transcendental Theology we hear from time to
time, and may become fairly well acquainted with it on the
historicity side ; but of experience of the soul in God beyond
the forms and images, beyond the names and attributes,
there is again nothing. The considerations belong to debate
and the expositions have their place in systems, unlike the
brief and pregnant sentences in some of the early texts, which
speak in comparison from the centre and the great vistas open.
They open, that is to say, for some of us, and for one at least
of these, confessing in humility, there is new realisation of
his own formulary, far in the past years, that the soul comes
forth from that centre, and the centre draws it back.

A word may be said in concluding this section on some
wotks of modern scholarship which are considerable and
important in their way. When my first study on the Secret
Tradition in Jewry was passing through the press, Dr. S.
Karppe published at Paris in 1901 his own elaborate ErupE
SUR LES ORIGINES ET LA NATURE DU ZOHAR, which approached
the subject from a standpoint very different to my own, but
was at the same time a valuable contribution to our knowledge
of Jewish Theosophy, and I noted with satisfaction that there
wete various debated points on which, working thus indepen-
dently, we had reached the same conclusion. Dr. Karppe’s
Study was designed for the scholar and the philosopher, while
my own, as explained, was intended, primarily at least, for
the theosophical student. The Jewish Mysticism which led
up to and preceded the Zowar was very fully presented: by
him, but of the influence exercised by that work and of its
after history he had nothing to tell us. On the other hand,
the scheme of my own treatise led me of necessity to pass
somewhat lightly over pre-Zoharic Theosophy, over Saadyah,
Ibn Gebirol, Judah Ha Levi, Aben Ezra, Maimonides, &c.,
because they did not affe& materially the mystical thought of
Europe, and give prominence to Kabbalistic literature in its
later phases, to the Christian students of the subject, and to its
influence upon other proposed channels of Secret Tradition
in Europe. Among the points of agreement between Dr.
Karppe and myself may be mentioned the common tecog-
nition of the heterogeneous nature of the ZoHar, which

DEVELOPMENTS OF LATER KABBALISM 567

justified me in terming it a medley ; of the specifically Jewish
character of Zoharic Mysticism, which justified me in denying
that it is referable exclusively to any one school of thought
outside Jewry; of the rapid deterioration of the Kabbalah,
subsequent to the appearance of the Zowar, into a thau-
maturgic system; of the undue prominence which has been
given to the commentaries on the Zowar and the false
impressions which-have been the result ; of the preconception
which governed the mind of most Christian students of the
literature, by which they were led to regard it as an unacknow-
ledged depository of Christian doctrine; of the absence in
the SEPHER YETZIRAH of any distinctive pantheism or emana-
tionism. There was also considerable similarity, both of
thought and treatment, in the development of the Kabbalistic
and typically Zoharic doétrines concerning God and the
universe, more especially concerning Arn SopH and creation
ex nihilo. It would be easy to multiply these instances, nor
less easy to furnish numerous points of divergence ; for, on
the other hand, Dr. Karppe laid too much Stress, as I think,
on his distinétion between the early Jewish Mysticism and
that of the Zoharic period, not because such a distindtion is
either non-existent ot unimportant in itself, but because I
cannot find that it has been challenged by any qualified
writer. And I must, of course, as a mystic, take exception to
the conception of Mysticism expressed or implied throughout
the whole work. Mysticism is not a double doctrine, whether
of monotheism for the initiate and of many deities for the
vulgar, or of any other such antithesis as priestcrafts may have
devised in the past; but it is outside possibility to do more
in the present place than refer to this point and register the
bare fact that the students to whom personally I appeal
would join issue with Dr. Karppe now, as they must have
done then, respecting all that follows from his conception,
whether it be a matter of simple definition, such as that
Mysticism is a reprisal of faith against science, or of historical
criticism, as for example when he observes that the Doétrine
of Ecstasy is almost unknown to Jewish Theosophy, a state-
ment, however, which the author himself abundantly, though
not explicitly, modifies at a later stage of his study. The
Student will notice also a tendency in certain instances to pass
over questions of criticism as if there had never been a dispute
regarding them: on the one hand the commentary of Hay

H.K. PP

568 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Gaon is made use of as if no scholar had challenged its
authenticity ; and, on the other, the late date of the BAHIR
is taken for granted. Criticism may not have said its last
word on either subject, but Dr. Karppe ignores the criticism.

The work has been long out of print and was tabooed
matter from the beginning for the occult circles of Paris,
which had eyes only for visions evoked on the subjeé& by
the wand of Eliphas Lévi. It was not until after two and
twenty years that the next exposition of importance appeared
in France, entitled La KapBate Jurve,} by M. Paul Vuillaud,
and was in a plenary sense of appeal and interest. I had
published my second work on Israel and its Secret Doétrine
so far back as 1914 and had turned from research thereon
into higher fields of Mysticism, when M. Vuillaud brought
me back for a season into the old paths of speculation,
reminding me of things innumerable and casting new lights
as I travelled. It must be said that he brought me also not
a little satisfaction which might be called malicious, as I
thought of /es écoles esotériques of Paris; of their devotion to
Eliphas Lévi, the grand Kabbalifie: of his egregious MysTERES
DE LA KABBALE; of the excellent Dr. Papus, who had brushed
those Mysteries also with the “extreme flounce” of Mrs.
Browning and her Aurora LercH; but last of all, Chateau,
who took off the Latin vesture of Rosenroth’s extracts and
having clothed them in French was held to have “ trans-
lated ” the whole ZouHar. To the confusion of all there was
one knocking now at their gates who carried titles of know-
ledge and had a mind to cast out traffickers in spurious wares
from the precincts of the Kabbalistic Temple. Les éoles sent
Karppe to Coventry, and I suppose that M. Vuillaud will have
watched with diversion that conspiracy of silence which
awaited him also in those directions.

It is impossible in a short notice to say anything adequate
or that can rank even as descriptive of so large a work: I
can note only here and there, but with difficulty even then,
for one tends to be drawn into side issues through pre-
dilection arising from old familiarity with the same paths.
An early chapter on Generalities of Jewish Mysticism is full
of such temptations, while another is the question of so-called
Kabbalistic precursors and the position among them, for

1 The sub-title is Histoire et Doétrine, 2 vols., 1923.

DEVELOPMENTS OF LATER KABBALISM 569

example, of Ibn Gebirol. I should like to compare at some
length what is said of him from this point of view with the
Study of Isaac Myer, long ago now in America. But my
readers must be at the pains for themselves, because Vuillaud’s
chapter on SEPHER YETZIRAH must set all these aside: it
proves representative enough, though there is little that can
be called new. ‘Those who are acquainted with Mr. Knut
Stenring’s version, introduced some time since by myself,
will find it very much to their purpose. M. Vuillaud’s
conclusion is that SEPHER YETZIRAH is not a “ preface” to
SEPHER Ha Zowar, but that the two works belong to one
and the same tradition, the first being more explicit than the
second and a summary of certain Kabbalistic themes, “ notably
that of Divine Revelation considered under the form of
symbolical writing, and of emanation and cosmic evolution,
contemplated from the mystical as well as the natural stand-
point and developed in the order of harmonious analogy.”
The possible authorship of Elisha ben Abuyah is passed
over—pace Dr. Robert Eisler—with a mocking reference, in
dismissing a hypothesis of Epstein which regards the tract as
designed for the instruction of youth.

The antiquity of the ZoHAR is considered in a long excursus
which embodies an acute analysis of salient points in hostile
 Cfiticism and seems to dispose of them effectually. They
ate taken in succession and examined in their different aspects,
vatiously put forward as their champions followed one
another, from the date of the vowel-points—which are
mentioned, as we have seen, in the ZoHAR—to the antiquity
of the first intimations on Ayn Sop and the SzpHrRoTH.
Thereafter follows the story of Isaac de Acco and the quest
which he attempted concerning the great text—as it has been
given on my own part, and with much the same results. M.
Vuillaud concludes, like some others, including Professor
Schiller-Szinessy, that the ZoHAr is not a forgery by R. Moses
de Leon; that it is a colleCtion of many texts referable to
vatious dates ; that the arguments against it are of anything
but irresistible force ; that it represents an ancient Tradition,
a school, and is the “ authentic expression ” of old Jewish
wisdom, notwithstanding “ interpolations, suppressions and
changes ” in the actual form, which things are an outcome of
successive developments. M. Vuillaud goes further, citing
unquestioned writings under the name of R. Moses, to the

BLP 2

570 THE HOLY KABBALAH

confusion of hostile critics. As regards De Pauly’s French
version of the ZOoHAR, he is aware of its omissions and
mentions one of them at least. This notwithstanding, his
“ critical essay ” is dedicated with lively affection and gratitude
to Emile Lafuma-Giraud, whose editorial labours gave us
the French Zowar, after the death of its translator. More-
over, one of his longest extracts ! from the text follows the
De Pauly version, though elsewhere he appears to translate on
his own part.

I have dealt with matters about which my readers are most
likely to desire the views of a recent expositor in the field.
For the rest, M. Vuillaud gives studies on Sephirotic Do€trine ;
on the relation of Kabbalah to Pantheism ; on Shekinah the -
Indwelling Glory and Metatron the Angel of the Presence ;
on Messianic Theosophy, more especially in the Zoharic
School, the seéts which have arisen therefrom, the Sabbatai
Zevi movement and the excesses of later "Hassidim. <A
chapter on the influence exercised by the Kabbalah on its
earlier Christian students recalls my own monographs,
though I miss a few names which are not without consequence
to myself: the folios which they brought into being are still
on my shelves. One of the most curious considerations,
developed at some length, deals with the Kabbalah and
Freemasonry. For Banamozaga and some few othets,
“Masonic Theology ”’—so dignified—is identical, we are
assured, with the Secret Tradition in Israel. Certain authors
of note and all the posse of zanies are quoted in this connec-
tion, not without rudimentary realisation at least of a distinc-
tion between the two classes and of the more important, if
obvious, fact that the said Theology is after all peu de chose.
M. Vuillaud has a good time, and offers as much to his readers
among all the follies and nonsense ; but he is apparently not
a Mason, has not been at work seriously and misses the root-
matter of the whole correspondence, such as it is, and such
as I have sought to develop it, here and elsewhere, in my own
case. He misses, moreover, a wider occasion for distraction,
being unacquainted with High Grades, their Rites and their
Orders, which claim derivation from Kabbalism.

The volumes are written in a curiously discursive style,
which does not mean that the author is diverging continually

1 Op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 272-274.

DEVELOPMENTS OF LATER KABBALISM $71

from his main issues, but he is very much at ease about them,
is never in haste to proceed and finds an opportunity always
to look at the various aspects. It may be said that the theme
throughout is one of Zoharic Kabbalism, while the impression
left on the reader is that which it is designed unquestionably
to convey, namely, that the best evidence for the age of the
Secret Tradition for which the word Kabbalism stands in
the language of Jewry is the milieu, the environment, the
atmosphere amidst which Christianity itself happened to be
born and in which it grew at the beginning. The cosmic
matter and nebula—so to speak—that are crystallised in the
main Kabbalistic text is the age-long story of the theosophical
mind of Israel, in Palestine, in Babylon, and at that great
meeting-place of life and thought, Alexandria.

It does not appear that M. Vuillaud is himself 2 Son of
Israel, and though he is well and sympathetically acquainted,
he is not exactly a Son of the Doétrine. He has described his
work exactly in the parenthesis beneath its title: it is a
critical essay, having apprehension as such ; but I do not find
evidence that he is aware anywise of a life and reality deep in
the heart of the Dodtrine. His contemplation of Shekinah—
as Our Lady of Israel comes before us in the ZoHAR—offers
proof of this: it is well enough done and is not apart from
sympathy ; but as it begins so also it remains, an enlightened
critical appreciation. Of Zoharic Sex-Doétrine he says little,
and that there is anything pregnant in its intimations he does
not dream. The work taken as a whole is a Study of that
which environed the central thing rather than of the thing
itself. This is why it is so informing externally, but why
also—as it seems to me—there is something deficient, and
that something belongs to the secret life of the subject.

As regards Germany it has been stated that there are
schemes in the making, including translations of the BAHiR
and SEPHER YETZIRAH, but I have not heard of any con-
siderable critical work on the literature at large or its chief
representative text. It remains to add that Jewish scholarship
in England has not been drawn especially towards the subject
of Kabbalism : so far back as fifteen years ago, Dr. J. Abelson
said that “‘ works in English are unfortunately very few,” and
the statement obtains to-day as it did at that time. There is,
however, his own extended study on the IMMANENCE OF GOD IN
RABBINICAL LITERATURE, which appeared in 1912 and should

572 THE HOLY KABBALAH

be consulted for the do&rine of Shekinah, the significance of
Memra and the Rabbinical Theosophy of the Word. It was
followed some twelve months later by a small volume on
JewisoH Mysticism, which has chapters on SEPHER YETZIRAH
—referred in all likelihood to the sixth century—the Zonar,
Ten SEPHIROTH and the soul in man. It is held incontestable
that the Zowar is considerably later than the second century
and that much of it is a development of doétrine “ embodied
in the Tatmup and MiprasHim”’ ; but “it could not possibly
be the production of a single author or a single period of
history.” |

I am brought in this manner to include among those final
considerations which mark the term of our research a summary
note on the present position of scholarship respecting its
broad subje&: there will be drawn thus into a focus the
occasional lights and beacons which have shone upon our path
in its travelling. They belong, however, only to the external
side. As regards the documents of Kabbalism, that which
was foretold by Dr. Schiller-Szinessy has substantially come
to pass, and all that was said once about Mrprasuim which
embody the Secret Tradition is in course of re-expression
from another and very different standpoint. The German
school of Dr. Graetz, whose English exponent was Ginsburg,
has passed utterly away, and the Zoharic writings are regarded
now as a gtowth of several centuries, not apart from a certain
root in Talmudic times. Their connection with R. Simeon
ben Yohai remains where we should have expected, in the
realm of legend and unlikely to emerge therefrom: it is not
flouted, but no hypothesis is pledged thereto. The final
shape assumed by the ZonHar—in a word, its reduction
according to the extant and only form—may not be much
anterior to the first reports concerning it. Some of the
increment and some or all of the redaction may be attributable
by a bare possibility to Moses de Leon; but I conclude that
evety statement concerning this personality must be taken
under all reservation, the account in SEPHER YUHASIN having
little, if any, evidential value.

The period of R. Akiba is not unwarrantable or repugnant
as a date of the SEPHER YETZIRAH, or some earlier form of
that document; but the extent to which it anteceded the
ninth century remains at present conjectural. And now in
respect of content, the SEPHER YETZIRAH and ZOHAR incor-

DEVELOPMENTS OF LATER KABBALISM 573

porate beliefs which in some form or other belong to all
occultism: they are part of the burden of Kabbalism, but
they go back through the ages and would or might have ‘been
acquired by the Jew in his early settlements and successive
captivities. Outside these, the corpus dotirinale of the ZouaR,
in so fat as it is fantastic commentary on Scripture has—
within my knowledge—invoked no special research and may
be in its procedure of no assignable date. Having no concern
in arbitrary systems or artifices apart from system, the inquiry
has not been pursued on my own part. In so far as the
corpus dottrinale consists of metaphysical subtleties, theo-
sophical reveries or great spiritual lights, they are regarded,
generally speaking, as post-Talmudic, but sometimes with
occasional roots in a further past. If I speak for myself and
look upon the Kabbalistic writings broadly, they appeal to
me in the first place as documents of humanity, but among
such as memorials of Israel and its peculiar genius, possessing
theit connections with other systems and other modes of
thought, but by correspondence, by affiliation, by filtration,
by causal identity, rather than by historical descent. The
ZOHAR in particular is one of the chief Theosophical Manuals
of the human mind, full of greatness and littleness, of sub-
limity and folly, but testifying continually in its higher
intimations to a doctrine of certitude, attained at first hand
by inward experience and not merely by a path of debate.
The interest which it aroused on its appearance has in some
measute sutvived all criticism, and the work itself has lived
down even the admiration of its believers. It is to be
accounted for naturally and historically as a genuine growth
of its age; but while it is not an “impostute” or a
“ forgery ’’—as it used to be called crassly in days that are
fortunately dead as well as beyond recall—so also it is not
a clavis absconditorum a conStitutione mundi ot the key of all
veridic secret knowledge, as old follies have termed it. In
particular it contains no vestiges of that Doétrine of Secret
Religion, belonging to time immemorial and behind all
Religion, which some of its expositors claimed once to find
therein. It is secret in the sense of Theosophical Doctrine
in Jewry, appealing to an ele& school among that elect people
and no further; it supposes and involves the whole claim of
Jewry. The existence of a Hidden Do@tine of Religion
perpetuated from antiquity lies plainly upon the surface of

574 | THE HOLY KABBALAH

the Zona, but it happens to be that of the immortal medley
and not that of the expositors to whom I refer and all or
sundry of their so-called esoteric schools. Nor is it the
Religion behind Religion of the late Professor Max Miller,
ot a highway or byway of Secret Doétrine according to
Madame Blavatsky. It 1s none of these things and none of
their shadows and reflections in the modern varieties of
occult belief. It belonged to the Sons of the Doérine who
kept the Written Law that they might come to know of the
Oral; and as to those who were denied for ever an entrance
to its Holy Temple, they were all the nations of the world,
the Gentiles outside the Covenant. The Doétrine stood, in
other words, behind one Religion, one and no other. That
which by the hypothesis lies therefore at the back of all
Religions cannot be proved by recourse to Kabbalistic
literature ; and had this notion been rested thereupon it
would be to that extent discounted. The question, however,
does not stand or fall by the Kabbalah. |

There is reached here and now one term of our research,
but another remains over and belongs to the last section of
this book, that is to say, whether—the Sons of Doétrine
notwithstanding and all their dream of special and exclusive
ele€tion—there is not something in the Secret Do@trine of
Israel at its highest which belongs to all Religion, at the highest
of that, and is therefore as much of our concern in this day
as it was of the Holy Assemblies in that of R. Simeon, accord-
ing to the Sacred Tradition.

Il.—THE ALLEGED CHRISTIAN ELEMENTS

I have made some occasional allusions, as required by the
matter of the moment, to those particular interests, circum-
stances and dedications in religion under which the Zonar
assumed the vestute of the French language.4 It has been

1 We have seen that the French translation was the work of Jean de Pauly, leaving
over the question whether this was an assumed name, as alleged by hostile criticism in
certain Jewish quarters. It was published posthumously by M. Emile Lafuma-Giraud,
who completed and corrected it, with the help of other Rabbinical scholars. As an
example of personal views, their titles and their warrants, it may be noted that in De
Pauly’s judgment the three IpRaAs—being the AssEMBLY OF THE SANCTUARY and the
GREATER and Lesser Hoty AssemBiy or Synop—are referable to the second or third
century before Christ. M. Lafuma-Giraud says justly that this is rejected by all critical
learning. His own conclusion is that the ZoHAR as a whole embodies very old
materials, combined with much that is of comparatively modern authorship.

THE ALLEGED CHRISTIAN ELEMENTS 575

owing to a group of Uierati, incorporated—so to speak—tfor
the purpose and actuated by an old and time-honoured zeal
fot its interpretation in a Christian sense 1 —at least as regards
the chief rece of the text. I have indicated also at need
the personal gratitude with which I should welcome a proof
in this direction. I believe in my heart that the mystery of the
Christ in Palestine is the Mystery of a Holy San@tuary, hidden
in the heart of the Providence which moves humanity forward ;
but it is not my intention to say anything on this subject
unless and until I shall have opened another path in the
mystic quest. It is one thing, however, to confess, under
every prudent qualification, to such a view, but it is another
to affirm that the Zowar, written long after the advent of
Christ, is a secret Storehouse of Christian Doctrine, confessing
under veils to the Divine Mission of the Master of Nazareth.
The bias of the translator in this direction was in several cases
so strong that some paraphrasings, in which Christian pre-
dile&tions obscured the true sense, have been excised and
redone by revisers. The supplementary task of annotation,
which is partly the work of De Pauly but in the main that of
his editor, is a Storehouse of debate on the whole subject, and
it goes even so far as to suggest that a considerable portion
of the text, or of its codification at a given period, was the
production of a Christian school which, in some undemon-
strable manner, lay hidden in Jewry. Under these circum-
Stances it is not surprising that the translation has been ©
challenged in Jewry.

It is not worth while to follow out a speculation of this
kind unless the canon of criticism on which it rests should
be found to speak with authority, and this is by no means the
case. But seeing that the Zowar does not correspond
internally to that which it would appear on the surface,
namely, verbatim reports of debates held in the first century
of the Christian era,? but is—on the contrary—a work of

1 The claim is not only the old claim but the expression is almost identical when it
is said that Christian Teaching is neither more nor less than a continuation of Jewish
Tradition, and that the ZoHar—as the refleCtion of that Tradition within certain
measutes—formulates plainly, amidst all its obscurities, the doftrine of the Trinity
and of the Man-God, Who came upon earth 2000 years ago. See EpiLoGue to the
French translation, fol. 6.

2 An occasional /apsus memoria determines the value of the implied claim in the
negative, as we should expe antecedently, when the unknown editor is found remind-
ing readers of that which has been written or said previously. The Zowar is a literary
document and bears the marks of its making.

576 THE HOLY KABBALAH

various petiods and multifarious authorships, having further
a cettain rough method and sequence preserved moderately
throughout, a certain unity of purpose, there is nothing
improbable in the idea that it was the work of an exegetical
school—if only for the very innocent and candid reason that
Kabbalism supposes Kabbalists. My reference is here to the
text itself, apart from the additional documents which are
brought in at various points. Speaking rather in a tentative
and fluidic sense than in one that is dogmatic and formal, I
believe personally that some of these 1 have their roots in a
further past than can be claimed fot Commentaries on the
Pentateuch, at least in their extant form. It is, however, no
part of my concern to insist on the question of antiquity,
either in respect of the fact or its importance. The existence
of a Secret Tradition in pre-Christian times is beyond my
province of research, ? as I do not happen to have taken all
knowledge for my subject. Herein, as in my other writings,
I am dealing only with an epoch of Christendom. If it could
be shewn that the Zonar did not antecede the twelfth or
thirteenth century in any part of the colleCtion, even this
substituted antiquity would be adequate for my purpose, if I
found that its intimations offered aspects of importance within
the measures of Secret Tradition.

There was assuredly a Secret School of Kabbalism, and
it is a subje@ of incessant reference in the ZoHAR under the
general title of Sons of the Doétrine. Whether it was an
incorporated school—as we should understand the expression
at this day—is another question. It is said in one place that
man is renewed or reborn by every new idea respecting the
Secret Do&rine 3—almost as if the latter constitutes a sequence
of principles, presupposed and wholly understood, out of
which many developments might issue. It was not conse-
quently always a matter of Tradition. Granting that there
was this common or general root, not only were fresh lights

1 On the other hand it is thought that some are later still, and one has been even
asctibed to the fourteenth century. If this be corre, it follows of course that they
were added by the editors of the first printed editions, and it is of common knowledge
that these varied in respect of their contents.

2 Having Stated this fact on the score of sincerity, it may be well to add that an
exhaustive study of the Kabbalah itself, whether or not as a branch of Secret Tradition,
would have to be made in connefion with that of comparative religion, again demand-
ing qualifications on which I can make no claim, not to speak of space for its develop-
ment which would be impossible, here at least.

B Lis Pha ay tO Se ee 25}

THE ALLEGED CHRISTIAN ELEMENTS 577

possible but their discovery became a source of joy—where
and whensoever it arose, with whomsoever it might be for a
mouthpiece.t The disciples of the Zouar held open minds,
giving ready—even rapturous—welcome to any new idea,
if it carried the proper warrants. But it is said further, and
not in full consonance with what I have just intimated, that
the message must be one of a master—meaning presumably
that he must either be known as such or must prove himself.?
It was a case, however, that by his own words ye shall know
him. A stranger in the course of some journey, a poor and
outwardly despised person, might so exhibit his titles, when
he was recognised and acclaimed on the spot.? It follows
that the masters, as such or otherwise, were not always known
to one another, so that if the Society of the Secret Doétrine
was after any manner incorporated, it must have been scattered
widely and propagated by a process of segregation—if I
may so call it—by instruction or communication from master
to disciple, from father also to son. As to the latter classes
the counsel was one of silence, because he who pronounces
sentences without having attained the grade of a master of
sentences would produce only misfortunes.4 Under the
guide of ordinary reason, one would say that this must be
interpreted intellectually, as of the misfortunes of ignorance,
mistakes and mental mischances, or confusions arising
therefrom. However, Rabbi Simeon ben Yohai cautioned
his auditors on one occasion never to pronounce a word
touching the Secret Doctrine without being entirely certain
as to its exactness.© To do otherwise might cause the death
of legions. This is an alleged consequence which calls to be
understood literally, and I mention it because—although it
can be nothing but a grotesque hyperbole of speech *&—it

1 For example, in the se€tion MrsHpatim, which contains the discourse of Rabbi
Yebba the Ancient, as we have seen, that master of Theosophy is treated at first with
derision, for he is unknown and appears anonymously, with some crooked questions
in his mouth ; but before he has finished the colleagues have thrown themselves more
than once at his feet, with tears in their eyes, protesting that had they come into the
world for no other purpose than to hear his words, their existence would not have been
useless.—Z., Pt. II, fol. 99a; Ill, 398. They were hearing new things.

as Ftc tone 52 S12 F

3 Ib.

4 Some of the incidents to which allusion is made here ate quite in the dramatic
manner; perhaps it is only to our modern minds that they betray the literary hand,
_ but this is how they impress at least one sympathetic mind. The seétion MisHpatm
is again a case in point, but there are several instances.

RaZ Pid; folks bs I5:a%

6 There are analogies on the other side of the scale, as, for example, when it is said

578 THE HOLY KABBALAH

looks for a moment as if the great teacher of Kabbalism
were quoting the penal clause of a pledge by which the
Sons of the Doctrine were bound together. It reads like the
vengeance threatened in the obligations of secret societies—
if their mysteries ate betrayed by recipients. Another
counsel was to examine the Secret Dodrine attentively before
it was given out or taught, so that all error might be avoided.

Being, ex hypothesz, originally oral doétrine which passed—
in so far as it did pass—at a much later period into writing,
it was obviously stored in memory, by the implicit of the
claim; and the glaring inconsistencies which are met with
ever and continually throughout the text of the ZoHarR are
really a rather strong presumptive testimony to this kind of
transmission. If Rabbi Moses de Leon had, as it used to be
suggested, conceived and begotten the whole colossus of
words out of his own head, he would not have fallen out with
himself in quite such an obvious manner—even if we grant
that forgeries have an ill-starred manner of betraying them-
selves there and here, so that they are for the most part a
miscarriage rather than a making. But while accepting under
all necessary reserves the general idea that the ZoHAR embodies
some ancient MrprasHIM * which are less or more complete
and is, for the rest, a late compilation made up from similar
sources, it must be recognised that it bears in an extraordinary
degree the marks of compilation—as I have said. In connec-
tion with my present point it would be possible to quote
several cases in which the imaginary ¢urba philosophorum seem
to have been making up the Secret Doétrine as they went
along at the moment. It is better to face these facts, but it
may be added that they and the late editing—otherwise so
transparent—leave untouched that which is necessary to my
purpose, being the existence of old material belonging to the
that the Holy One, blessed be He, comes down into three of the Heavenly Schools—
one of them being that of Rabbi Simeon—and listens to the expositions of the Secret
Law. Moreover, a new idea produced with authority concerning the Doétrine
ascends to the Ancient of Days and is ornamented with 370,000 crowns, after which
it becomes a heaven. Others are metamorphosed into lands of the living.—Z.,
Pte Te fol ub) sau A eayioge es.

t 1b. Pt, i toiesas De Paucy, 1, 28:

2 This was the opinion of S. Munk in M&LANGES DE PHILOSOPHIE JUIVE ET
Arasg, as fat back as 1859, but the work as a whole, “‘ in the form under which it
has been transmitted,”’ is not older than the thirteenth century, and its authors lived in
Spain. The last point seems to rest on the evidence of a single word, and, according
to the French edition of the Zohar, it fails thereon. Munk, however, recognised that

certain do&trines—as, for example, that of the microcosm—go back to the ninth
century.

THE ALLEGED CHRISTIAN ELEMENTS 579

Secret Do&rine. It may be of the tenth century and it may
be earlier ; some vestiges may even go back to pre-Christian
times, but this does not signify.+

The literature of Alchemy made a great and new beginning,
somewhere about that period, or when it assumed a Latin
garb: the literature of the Holy Graal was posterior by some
two centuries; the other written testimonies to a Secret
Doétrine under the egis of Christendom were produtts of a
still later period. What was the message of Theosophical
Jewry in compatison with the alternative messages? As a
purpose in literature, does it connect with the other and the
later purposes, as a school with some other schools in respect
of the end proposed—or is it of itself and no other? The
Mystery of the Graal is of the mystical body of Christ; the
Mystery of Alchemy is many-sided, but on one very late side
it is of the body of man in its transmutation ; the Mystery of
Rosicrucianism—at the highest—is one of Divine Union,
but here again there is more than a single aspect and one is
the body of resurrection ; the Mystery of Speculative Masonry
is of the building up of man into a spiritual house, meet for
the inhabitation of God. And the Secret Doérine of Israel
concerns a Mystery of Sex summarised as the mystical body
of Shekinah, while it includes the shadows and outlines of a
science of perfection, of union also therein, so that amidst all
vatiations of process, distinction in symbolism and diversity
as to root-ideas in doctrine, the question is answered by
saying that it is not only in analogy but in living concurrence
with other witnesses.

As such, it is to my own mind a matter of considerable conse-
quence that it is not a Christian witness, while acknowledging
that if it were it would be of consequence even greater,
though of another kind; and my task in the present chapter
is to shew that the case on the contrary side presented by
those who have put forward the French version of the
ZOHAR—whatever its value otherwise—is a case unproved.

Now, the points at issue between Israel and Christendom
on the subject of Messiah are obviously of a very simple

1 I mean that it does not matter so far as my purpose is concerned. As explained in
my preface, I have been trying for some years past to hold up a certain glass of vision
which tends to shew that the same term of research was sought everywhere in the secret
literary schools and in two Instituted Mysteries belonging to the Christian centuries.
It is not essential that Kabbalism, being a non-Christian system, should be linked into
the chain, but it is important if it does enter therein, whether late or early in its origin.

580 THE HOLY KABBALAH

kind, so far as the ground is concerned, for unless the Christ
of Nazareth—as His story appears in the records—had (1)
offered, or (2) had been represented as offering, at least some
considerable proportion of the marks and seals by which He
might be entitled to acknowledgment, the claim could not
have been (1) proffered on His own part, or (2) sustained on
that of His believers. Otherwise, the expeCtation of Jewry
was one thing and the event another, or there would have
been no colourable basis for His rejection in the natural
reason of things. I suppose that the time has gone past
when it was thought possible to afirm that Jesus, Son of Mary
and putative Son of the carpenter Joseph, was antecedently
likely ot tolerable as the Deliverer to come and that it was
owing to wilfully hardened hearts, to eyes that were blinded
wilfully, that He was not recognised as such. It is not less
true that any claimant was, in a sense, antecedently improbable,
because of the complete vagueness charatterising every
intimation by which He is supposed to be foreshadowed.
As it so happens—justly or unjustly—Israel expected a
Deliverer who would be a mighty warrior before the face
of the Lord Who sent him and before the faces of the nations
whom he was to scatter, who was to deliver the Gentiles into
the hands. of Jews, that the one might be sacrificed by the
other to that Samael who is the master of the Gentiles. In
other words, they expected a personality as much and as
little promised in prophetic literature as it was foretold that
He who was to come would be crucified between two thieves
who are the Written and Oral Laws, would rise up on the
third day and would ascend into Heaven. Jewry was entitled
to its dream in proportion to the sincerity of its expectation,
whether this was warranted or not; the little company of
disciples, whom the events of the crucifixion had scandalised,
were entitled no less to theirs, when after the resurrection
they received their Christ as the Lord of Glory, and so far
as the present consideration is concerned, the question on
either side is not of our business further.

The speculative thesis before us is that by the evidence,
expressed or implied, of SepHER Ha Zowar the Messiah has
come. So far as expression is concerned this thesis is mani-
festly untrue, while so far as implication goes I am very
cettain that the text is on the opposite side. It contains no
particle of real evidence concerning that imputed sect in

THE ALLEGED CHRISTIAN ELEMENTS 581

Jewry which—under the title of Sons of the Doctrine—had
confessed to the Christ of Nazareth and were putting forward
their views under veils. It is clear, in the first place, that if
such evidence exists it lies within the veils, as it is not suggested
that it is part of the surface sense, and hence the question
is reduced to its minimum so far as circumstances will permit.
In the second place, I have to shew that it is not contained in
the hidden sense.

Let me solicit my teaders at the outset to recall and recur
at need to all that which has been ingarnered and to the
conclusions reached in preceding chapters: (1) On the
Sephirotic allocations of the consonants comprised in the
Divine Name, but especially those of the Vu and final HE;
(2) On the feminine nature and offices, the betrothals and
espousals of Shekinah above and below, but on those in
particular which concern our Lady of Providence in her
manifestation here on earth, the companion and guide of our
exile; (3) on the relation of Shekinah to the Holy Spirit ;
and (4) on the coming of Messiah. We found that the Vau
is the begotten Son of the Yop and Hz, being Ansa and
Arma abiding in CHokMAH and Binau; that He is extended
through three Kabbalistic Worlds below the Supernals in
ATZILUTH ; that He came into the world with a twin-sister,
namely, the Hz final, who was also his predestined spouse ;
that she was at first latent within Him but was afterwards
drawn forth and put with Him in the nuptial state, that is to
say, face to face, like Adam and Eve; that she descended or
fell to earth, as Eve also fell, and is to be raised up by the Vau
hereafter; that the Shekinah and Holy Spirit are in a con-
dition of superincession ; and that the Messiah is he who has
been expected always, a warrior and king to come.

The counter-thesis requires very careful tabulation, for it is
scattered through a great many notes and is not presented
formally. I shall conne& it with two subsidiary points,
which will illustrate further the uncritical bias with which we
are called to deal.

‘In respe& of Shekinah and Messiah it is maintained that
the former designates the Second Degree of the Divine
Essence, otherwise the Second Person, in CHoxMAH—and is
also the Wotd. ‘The Shekinah in transcendence is the Word
before incarnation and below is the Word made flesh. It is
Stated in the ZonAr that Shekinah does become incarnate,

582 THE HOLY KABBALAH

and in so doing assumes the form of man. The incarnation
of Messiah is by operation of the Vau, and the ZoHar
indicates that there is unity between God and the Redeemer.
This incarnation of the Hz, or Word, is recognised by Rabbi
Simeon. The Messiah is METATRON, ot the body of Shekinah
—which is said to be the same thing. The Lesser Countenance
of the Ipras designates the Word incarnate on earth, and the
Greater Countenance is the Word prior to manifestation in
created things. One passage of the Zouar is declared to
have no meaning unless the incarnation is admitted, while it
is held that another announces the mystery in formal words.
Finally, it is believed that there is an allusion to Mary the
Mother of Messiah and to her son Jesus Christ when it is
affirmed—as we have seen otherwise—that “‘ the world will
remain under the domination of the serpent until the coming
of a woman like unto Eve and of a man like unto Adam, who
shall vanquish the evil serpent and him who rides thereon.”
As I have presented and collated these points, so that they
may catry their own message with all the force that is possible,
they would look rather plausible on the surface, if we knew
nothing of the state of things as the result of our research. I
feel that the whole question is determined already in a negative
sense by my readers as well as myself, but I will analyse the
vatious clauses, so that no false impression may be possible.
(1) We have seen that the Shekinah is on both sides of the
Tree; that it is in CHokMAH as well as Brnan, because the
Supetnals ate in unity; that it is in KETHER for the same
teason. (z) We have seen that the Holy One uttered forth —
the Word and that the Builder—who is Shekinah—aéted
thereon: there is thus a distinction between God, His Word
and the Architect, but again the Three are One, because all is
one in ArzinutH. ‘The affirmation that Shekinah in trans-
cendence is the Word before manifestation and below is the
incarnate Wotd is made on several occasions, but un-
fortunately in respect of extracts which carry no conviétion
because they do not convey the intended message. It is said,
for example, in the Zonar that the daily morning sactifice 2
is signified in the words of Isaiah which it tenders : © Aad
the Lord shall keep thee always in repose”; but this
MZ bt, gol asD, 140as LL e734.
2 Ib., Pt I, fol. t41a; Il, 151.

8 The Authorised Version reads: ‘‘ And the Lord shall guide thee continually,”—
Is, lviii, 11. Compare the Vulgate: E# requiem tibi dabit Dominus semper.

OF THE CHRISTIAN KABBALAH

SUMMARY

82

Facing page 5

By ay \
- Ve ,
i : tin) za | ' A a my

i < s it
) P i i,
‘
2 ose
é
j 1 . ?
A 4
i | s mahi
a}
wt ,
bd >
; ¥ 5
i i is }
t a: oad i» —
t
o ae
, f ;
f } uP |
J i
‘
af
,
i re a ye
a |
' “+4
| \ “2
»
ot
: i
i
+
i Le '
a a
we
’
'
1 v
-
: i
Lia
‘4 \y
=
=| :
3 -
I
s
‘4%
‘ *
. i #¢
th ny)
‘ 4 i
2 ‘
i 2
L gees
en '
‘ 4 ‘
ails, r=
y a
4
x
1"
_ f
t i
ue n
‘
’ \
j
?
5 —_
;
i
i ; i 4
ae Po
‘ i
1 *
{ ‘
‘ vr? f 4

THE ALLEGED CHRISTIAN ELEMENTS 583

sacrifice of the morning-tide is held by the French editors to
mean the Shekinah above, while the afternoon sacrifice
sionifies the Shekinah in manifestation. Now, if this is
cotrect—as it may be—there is no reference to the Word
and much less to the Word made flesh. We find further in
the Zouar a fantastic etymology of the word Sabbath,
accotding to which it is identified with that only begotten
Daughter who is Shekinah below. This is for our deleéta-
tion; but as an instance of their canon of criticism the
editors have recourse to the TatmMup, where they find that
the Sabbath came secretly into the world, unlike other gifts
of God to Israel, and thence they conclude that the only
Daughter is the only Son and was born secretly in flesh.
(3) It is never said in the Zonar that the Shekinah becomes
incarnate and much less that then it assumes the form of
man. ‘The passage referred to specifies that the letter Vau
is a symbol of the body of man in an erect position, and adds
ctyptically : 2 “ Hence God willed that Shekinah should be
present at the building of the Tabernacle”? by Moses. The
editors argue that if this does not mean what they postulate
there is no sense in the passage. ‘The second alternative is
preferable to the arbitrary construction. (4) The ZonHar
does not say that the incarnation of Messiah is operated by
the Vau. The passage in question is dealing with Gen. xix. 33,
concerning the first-born daughter of Lot: “ And he per-
ceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.” The
word which corresponds to “arose” in Hebrew “is aug-
mented by a Vau,” to shew that the child whom she conceived
was to constitute the stem of Messiah.? (5) The incarnation
of the He or Wotd is not recognised by Rabbi Simeon, who
is referring only to the descent of Shekinah into Egypt, *
accompanying Israel and guarded by 42 angels, as we have
seen elsewhere. (6) METATRON is not identified with
Messiah.® It is said in the place referred to that the “ eldest
servant ” ® of Abraham is the image of METrATRON, who is
the servant sent by his Master. (7) The reference to the
Lesser and Greater Countenances is purely arbitrary. The
passage out of which it arises says (a) that the Little Vau
shall awaken to unite and renew the souls in migration, and

3) Za tO, fOh. 28b 3) Ltda, 149, 4 1p. Pt, folab.; TL 35;
a Ibs, Peo Ui fal eta ylVoise: 153, > 1,, Pt,\l, fol, 181b ; Ul, 336.
3 i)., Pt. I, fol. r10b; I, 48. © Geos xxiv, 2.

H.Kes QR

584 THE HOLY KABBALAH

(4) that at the period in question God shall send down new
souls to eatth.1 The editors add that the Great Vau is the
Holy Spirit above and the Little Vau the Holy Spirit below—
after descent to earth—but I know of no place in which the
Vau is said to descend except in connection with the Hr
final and then what is stated is not in consonance with the
prevailing symbolism. The Vau must descend also to raise
up the Hz final. (8) Another passage which is affirmed to
have no meaning unless it relates to the incarnation of
Shekinah is as follows: “‘ A tradition tells us that when the
Holy One, blessed be He, regards the world and finds that
the works of men ate good here below, the Sacred Ancient
is revealed to the world in the form of the Lesser Countenance,
so that all men may see God and be blessed thereby.” 2
Whatever the meaning may be, the construction offered by
the editors is impossible, as the Lesser Countenance is the
Vau in its extension through the worlds, and this is not the
Shekinah. (9) Here also is the passage which is held to
announce the said incarnation formally: “I have found in
the book of King Solomon that ws = AsHER was born in
the Heavenly Palace of Delight from the embrace of two
other Supreme Degrees. . .. It is a prediction that mns=
EHEIH will engender asHER.”? The reference is to the
words: MAS Ws m8 = I am that I am, and the text itself
explains that it is dealing with the revelation of the Sacred
Name in successive degrees: (1) EHEIEH, (2) ASHER EHEIEH,
(3) JEHOvAH. The revelation was to Moses. (10) The
alleged allusion to Mary and her Son Jesus in the words
quoted above is negatived by the fact that the Blessed Virgin
was the mother of Christ, whereas Eve happens to have been
the wife of Adam.’ It is a pity to create analogies over things
which have no similitude.

I will mention only one thing more on this part of the
subject. ‘The HE final comes down to earth and has done so
from the beginning of things, according to the Zonar. If
we could suppose for a moment that there 1s authority in the

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 119a; II, 77. The period is that of Messiah the King in his triumph,
when the Vavu shall be united to the Hz, when the sons of Ishmael shall make war on
all other nations about the precinéts of Jerusalem. The reference to new souls shews
also that it is just before the great resurrection. As regards the Greater and Lesser
Vau, the ground and nature of the distin€@tion do not appear.

2 Ib., Pt. Il, fol. 15a; V, 44.

3 Jb., 116, fol. 65b; V, 179.

4 [b., Pt. J, fol. 145, 146a; II, 174.

So ee ee ee ”

’

THE ALLEGED CHRISTIAN ELEMENTS 585

text for an actual incarnation of the H—E—that is, of Shekinah—
she could appear only as a woman, or the whole symbolism
would be falsified. ‘There is indeed one passage in which the
Daughter of the King is said to have taken flesh 1 but Metatron
was her body, even as Shekinah herself is said in another
place to be the body of the Holy One. It is flesh of the Land
of Life and not of earth. If any personality symbolised by
any consonant of the Sacred Name is really. expected by
Kabbalism to assume the limitations of mortality in the bonds
of the body of earth, that consonant is Vau, and what is
meant can be only the incarnation of the Begotten Son, who
is assutedly the Lesser Countenance of the Ipras. At this
point I will remind my readers of that which was stated at
the end of Book VII, § 8, concerning the coming of Messiah.?
There on the authority of the ZoHAR we have seen that the
creation of man was designed to prepare a way for the advent
of that Divine Personality.? ‘The memorable passage is passed
ovet by the French editors without a word of comment,
owing no doubt to their unfortunate and impossible pre-
dilection for Shekinah as Christ. They could have done much
better with the alternative materials, so far as the logic of
symbolism is concerned. They would not of course have
made out a case in favour of Jesus of Nazareth as Messiah of
the Zowar, because it is obviously the intention of the text to
shew that its New Adam, the Deliverer to come, is not without
an Eve who is at once his sister and spouse, who has had an
office in creation through all ages. For this feminine per-
sonality there is no room in the Christian scheme, because,
although I regard Shekinah as practically identical with the
Blessed and Holy Spirit, the suggestion that this latter is in
the relation of wife to Messiah or belongs to the side of
womanhood means that Latin Trinitarian do&rine calls to
be revised and the French editors seem evidently under the
obedience of Rome in respect of official religion.

Having reached this point, we can deal shortly with their
views on the subject of the Holy Spirit, Which is identified
with the Vau of the Sacred Name and is located in Brnan.
There is one passage in the ZoHar where, in consonance

4 7 get tt Sols Gab = T2278. 'e40,

* Deep. 324.

3 Z., Pt. I, fol. rob; I, 119. Iam sorry to add that the subje& is conneéted with
the notion of an infernal “ shell ” or “mark ”—Lilith, or one of her type—said to be
the cause of epilepsy in children.

Q2Q2

586 . THE HOLY KABBALAH

with much that precedes and comes after, the Vau is said
to issue from the Hz in transcendence, while the second Hz
issues from the Vau.! ‘The first clause of this statement is
understood as the Holy Spirit proceeding from the Word
and the second as intimating that the Messiah or Christ takes
flesh by the operation of the Holy Spirit. The real intention
is that which recurs everywhere—namely, to indicate that
the union of Yop and HE primal causes the HE as Mother to
conceive and beget of Yop, the Father and Spouse, that
which is Son of both, namely, the Vau, who comes into being
carrying the second He latent within him ; but this is subse-
quently removed from him in a profound Adamic sleep and
they dwell as spouses in unity. As there is no need to say,
it would be difficult to find symbolism in more complete
opposition to Christian Trinitarian dorine or to the Christian
scheme of the Incarnation. By an accident of things, we are
reminded in another note that the Holy Spirit is compared
to the light of the moon; but we know that the moon is’
Shekinah, and the Holy Spirit is therefore the light of Shekinah
which seems to correspond with its office—otherwise but
analogically indicated when it is implied that the Spirit is the
breath of Shekinah. As regards that place in the ZOHAR
where the Indwelling Glory is plainly identified with the
Holy Spirit,? the difficulty is disposed of by saying that it is
a transcriber’s mistake; but to justify this, even in a pre-
liminary sense, the error would have to be characteristic of
one codex only, p/ws any edition or manuscript which may
have derived indubitably therefrom. Now we have seen that
the trend of all collated extraéts seems towards identification
rather than distin@ion, or to something so like it that the
two principles pass one into another and are interchanged
continually, while in respect of the single extract which makes
distin@&tion absolute, I should be not less or more in order—
perhaps even more—if I suggested, on the contrary, that the
copyist’s mistake is there. I do not adopt such devices ; the
ZOHAR is a contradi@ory colleftion; but I abide by the
consensus of intimations. —

If, however, we wish for even more typical specimens of
the true value attaching to the annotations on their polemical
side, we must have recourse to what is said about the Eucharist.

1 7,., Ptaid, tol.:193b.; 11.365:
2 See Book VIII, § 1, p. 366.

THE ALLEGED CHRISTIAN ELEMENTS 587

According to the Zowar, there is a wine which is the synthesis
of all joys,! an ancient and sacred wine which was known to
Jacob,? Joseph and David.? Merarron in the personality of
Enoch is said to have administered it to the patriarchs.* It
is not connected with the wine carried by Melchizedek, but—
accotding to the French editors—we have here an allusion
to the mystery of transubstantiation. So also the unleavened
bread, which is called bread of affliction in the Old Testament,
and is therefore the very antithesis of Eucharistic Bread, is
declared in the Zowar to represent the female in separation
from the male,> who would be presumably represented by
the yeast. Such separation means of course affliction for
Kabbalism. There is, however, some undemonstrable way
in which this understanding of unleavened bread is held to
mean the Eucharist—in which case it can be only that of the
Latin Rite, where the bread is in separation from the wine.
Thete is also a Zoharic reference to the offering of bread and
wine, the one representing joy and the right side, while the
other is the left and is therefore affliction, though it is not
specified in the text.6 This, say the editors, exposes clearly
the Mystery of the Blessed Sacrament. We are prepared in
such manner for the last suggestion which I feel called to
mention here. At the death of Rabbi Simeon, his son, Rabbi
Eleazar, overcome with grief, exclaims that “all the colleagues
should drink blood.” 7 This indicates the “ offering of the
Holy Sacrifice and proceeding to transubstantiation.”

Under all these considerations, not to speak of many others
of similar purport and intention, we can understand that the
Kabbalistic Community of Israel is identified with the Church
of God, in the sense of the Christian Church. When it is
said to be above, it is the Church Triumphant and Glorious
in Heaven; below it is the Church militant on earth; but
it is left to the reader’s discrimination whether it is centred at
Rome.

Bi Zany Pts d, fol, 142b +13, 157.

2 Gen. xxvii. 25.

3 Z., Pt. Il, fol. 189a; V, 496.

4 Ib. Seven firmaments, seven palaces, six dire€tions, and five pathways issue from
this wine,

SIP Pte lL fok asga : TL) 226))257.

6 Jb., Pt. II, fol. 29a; III, 139. I suppose that when any sacred text speaks of
bread and wine, our Christian pre-occupations on the subje& will look inevitably for
Eucharistic analogies. I was on the watch myself anxiously at the beginning of

my Zoharic Studies, but I suffered disappointment only.
? Ib., Pt. Ill, fol. 296b ; Ipra Zoura, VI, 120.

588 THE HOLY KABBALAH

I am sure that the work of annotation has been done by
the French editors with sincerity and even with zeal, but on
the side of their palmary concern it has not been done with
insight. There seems to me nothing mote unfortunate in
the long story of attempts to construe the Kabbalah in a
Christian sense than the presentation of Shekinah as Christ
and, as I have indicated, without dwelling thereon, another
way was possible—by no means satisfactory, but not at least
ridiculous. Our Blessed Saviour has been placed in many
anomalous positions by those who seek to glorify Him and
desire that His cause should prevail, but in none surely which
is quite so curious as this.

TT.—CONCLUSION ON JEWISH THEOSOPHY

As tegatds the message of the Secret Doétrine in Israel,
apart from the body of texts, those who seek in the ZoHAR
for a deeper knowledge—outside dogmatic affirmations,
already cited—concerning the term of mystical experience, as
it has reached expression in the great texts of mystical litera-
ture, will not find what they need in the plain and simple way
that they are likely to need it, though I believe that the
experience is there. It follows, however, a perilous path of
symbolism ; but there is this further to be said—that, perhaps
more than most others in the great schools, the Doctors of
the Hidden Law realised that it has not entered into the heart
of man to conceive what God has prepared for those who
love Him. They must have known at least how the experience
transcends expression, as the mournful failures of mystical
literature bear witness on every side. I take it that this is why
the union of male and female—which is their adopted form
of symbolism—the more it is raised into transcendence is the
deeper covered with veils. On the sanctification of the natural
act and the path therein, they speak with reasonable fullness,
all things perhaps considered. They are explicit also on the
correspondence between things above and below therein, but
without a word or part of a wotd which tells of the end
attained. ‘This is not to say that the term of Divine Union is
nevet indicated ; but we shall see by collating the allusions
that if they are spoken from the centre, at least in the wording
itself, the centre seems very far away. In the first place, as
to that path which may lead to the Mystery of Union: the

CONCLUSION ON JEWISH THEOSOPHY 589

thesis is that the just aspire to contemplate the delights of the
Lord and in Him their delights are found: } it is in the Lord
Himself, and so only, that they desire to rejoice. The counsel
in symbolism is that those who seek to contemplate the
Mystery of Sacred Union shall consider the flame which
springs from a lighted candle. Two colours will be per-
ceived, one being white and the other a kind of blue. The
one is above and the other is the pedestal of the first: they
ate united and yet distina.? Here is an analogy borrowed
from a material object and indicating something which is
postulated concerning the state of integration in God. The
path is one of holiness,? for it is by the ascent of this as by a
ladder that man is able to be joined with the Holy One.
Hence God said to Abraham: “Get thee out of thy
country.” 4 Here was a call from earthly into spiritual life.
The necessity of this call and the departure which follows
thereon resides in the fact that whatsoever is produced in this
world is in a state of separation; union exists only in the
world above, according to the words: “‘ From thence it was
parted and became into four heads.” ® This is held to be the
doctrine of distin@ion, diversity and inevitable separateness
in the way of manifestation. The path is followed in the faith
which precedes experience, and the postulate of this faith |
abides in the recognition of unity in heaven, on earth and in
all the worlds. ‘Those who can realise along this line are
counted among the just whose will is done by the Holy One.®
The Zowar in this place is either written more wisely than its
makers knew or we have a hint of Secret Do&rine and even
of experience which never passed fully into expression. The
essential of progress in the path is that man shall apply himself
to the study of the Law and shall cleave thereto, so that he
may be judged worthy of being united to the Tree of Life.’
This is another symbol of the union, for as a tree is composed
of leaves, branches and trunk, so are the souls which emanate
from the Tree of Life grafted in the Holy One.® But there
ate distinctions, states and stages, and for this reason some
souls may be compared to the leaves and some to the branches ;
yet a common faith unites them and makes of them one ttee.

1. Z., Pt. I, fol. 219a; II, 465. 5 Gen, ii. '10,

2 1b., fol. 51ag).1,/2903 $ Any Pts folto1b; UW, 355%
* Id., fol:.79b's.. 1,465. 7 Ib., fol. 193a, b; LU, 364.
* Gen, xily. 1. Sin

590 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Prayer is an aid on the path, and there are two kinds of prayer
held to be indicated by David when he speaks of the words of
his mouth and the secret meditation of his heart.1 The one
is the prayer of words and the other is the prayer of silence,
the state of the latter being very deep, according to the ZoHAR.
It is foretold that “ I will multiply thy race as the sands of the
sea, the multitude of which is innumerable,” 2 and this refers
to the state of silent, unexpressed and inexpressible prayer,
for which reason it is said to conceal the Mystery of Perfect
Union in the Divine Essence.3

While the intellectual idea of a final union between the soul
and God emerges with tolerable clearness in the sense that a
State is suggested which seems to exceed that understood by
the Blessed Vision of Theology, the evidence is as usual
rather out of harmony with itself and does not correspond
always with the two primary dogmas which belong to the
root-matter of the whole subject. It is said in the first place
that in their intercourse the Holy One and the Community
of Israel are called one,* as also that there is no separation in
the joy of heaven,® yet there are other modes of expression
which are less clear in their nature. That of integration in
the body of the heavenly King must be counted in this class,®
and again it is said that the Master is in the midst of those who
love Him,’ which corresponds more probably to the state of
eye to eye than to that of oneness.8 Perhaps the clearest
intimation is in a short commentary on the words, “ Let him
kiss me with the kisses of his mouth,” 9 which are held as
referring to the union of all spirits with the Supreme Spirit,
called otherwise the condition of grand, perfect and eternal

joy.t° Imperfed& spirits will enter into perfection by its means,

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 169a ; II, 264, 265.—Ps. xix. 14.

SKC, SKE, 2,

3 Z., Pt. I, fol. 1692; II, 265. It is said in another place that man must not
raise his voice in prayer higher than is necessary, or he is not likely to be heard. The
reason is that true prayer is made in silence. There is an obscure suggestion also that
the prayer of silence is spoken by the Divine Voice within us. So also the later
mystics say. that Christ prays in us.—Ib., fol. 2ogb, 210a ; II, 440.

4 Ib., Pt. Il, fol. 93b; V, 248.

Sb foliage Vou,

© Ib, Pt. I, fol. 87a; TH, 358.

7 Ib., Pt. Il, fol. 211a; IV, 220.

8 The words, “ to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in His Temple ”’
(Ps. xxvii. 4) are contrasted with, “‘ Then shalt thou delight thyself in the Lord ”
(Us. lviii. 14), to shew that the latter signifies a deeper State of union ; but those who
attain hereto are very few in number.—Ib., Pt. I, fol. 219a; II, 465.

® Song of Solomon, i. 2.

10 Z., Pt. I, fol. 44b; I, 262.

CONCLUSION ON JEWISH THEOSOPHY 591

and spirits that would be otherwise apart from life will diffuse
a great brilliance by its aid.1 This mystery is expressed also
in those other words of Scripture: ‘‘ And Jacob kissed
Rachel.” 2 It is obvious therefore that the analogy is one of
human union, and it is said cryptically that the perfect union
above is accomplished only in so far as seed shall be com-
municated by the Seventh Palace above to the Seventh Palace
below.® It is then perfect, and blessed is he who knows how
to effect it, for he is loved above and below: * he is the just
man who is the foundation of the world.® In the state of
perfect union all is concentrated in the Supreme Thought, the
forms and images disappear, and this Thought animates and
enlightens all.é

I have left until the present concluding section the sug-
gestions which it is my intention to offer on the Mystery of
Sex in Kabbalism, as it seemed desirable to isolate my own
views from the evidence or intimations of the text. It will be
observed that the Mystery in its unfolding comprises (1) the
dodttine concerning an union between male and female
principles postulated as inherent in Deity and illustrated as to
its nature by analogies in physical humanity, which analogies
have to be checked by (2) the doétrineé of the essential unity
between Jehovah and Elohim,.Who are the male and female
principles in question. The analogy breaks at this point and
is not restored by (3) the hypothesis that Adam and Eve were

1 Z., Pt. I, fol. 44b; I, 262. This union is said to depend entirely on the prayer
of man.

BGens xxix. TT,

MArPtM, fol.'45a,)b 5 1, 263.

* Tb. f0l.:45b, 51,263, 264.

OPEV ae 5 «

6 Z., Pt. I, fol. 45b; I, 264, 265. There are the following additional allusions on
the subject of union and its correlatives: (4) By following the ascending path of the
SEPHIROTH, there is reached that supreme place where all is united and all henceforth
is one.—Ib., fol. 18a; I, 111. (4) So long as severity rules this world there is no
union, the reason being that union is mercy, peace and the covenant. It is thought to
be proved by the words: “ And God remembeted Noah ” (Gen. viii. 1).—Z., Pt. I,
fol. 69b ; I, 409, 410. (¢) True unity depends on attachment to the Supreme King.
When the river which went forth out of Eden was divided into four heads, this signified
separation in manifest things ; but it was in union at the source itself—Ib., fol. 74b ;
I, 440, 441. (d) A sacred union is attained at times in prayer.—Ib., Pt. Il, fol. 57a ;
Ill, 254. (e) Those who dwell in the higher region are united in joy and never
separated.—Ib., Pt. Ill, fol. 4a; V, 7. (jf) Lastly, the union of God in Himself—
which is the ground of all other unions—is believed to be exhibited perfetly in the
wotds— JEHOVAH ELOHENOV JEHOVAH (Deut. vi. 4). ELoHENov is the root mentioned
in Is. xi. 1: ‘‘ And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch
shall grow out of his roots.” The final JEHovaH is the pathway here below; in
order to know the Mystery of Union it is indispensable to follow the pathway.—Z.,
Pet, fol) za Vy 20;

592 THE HOLY KABBALAH

originally side by side, which hypothesis is grounded on certain
monstrous births that occur from time to time in humanity
and are a yoking but not an unity. Nor is it restored by a
literal understanding of Genesis, according to which Eve was
dormant in Adam, not active and conscious within him, for
in the latter case he could not have been said to be alone.
There is finally no intention of maintaining the correspondence,
because (4) the original generation of souls was in separation
as male and female, and (5) this distin@tion will continue to be
maintained in the eternal world by the mode of simple reunion
in companionship, p/ws a transcendental intercourse the rapture
of which is increased by a visual contemplation therein of
God and His Shekinah, Who is also God. (6) But an important
content of the Mystery is the generation of souls as a result of
Divine Intercourse, and this is imitated on earth by incarnate
man, as it (7) will continue to be imitated in heaven, where the
union of created souls will produce fruit after their own kind.

We are not concerned with applying tests of value to the
metaphysical part of the dodtrine, for its collation with other
doétrines leads to insuperable difficulties, some of which have
been illustrated by the lights of later Kabbalism. There is,
however, the docttine of experience, and I wish to say that
if we accept Zoharic teaching on its own warrants, then the
imitation on eatth of that which is operated in the tran-
scendence, being done—if I may so express it—in the sense
of God’s ineffable union, did not unreasonably become, in
the eyes of those who not only held the doétrine but per-
formed the practice, a work of sanctification. Now, the
question is where it may have brought them. The Zowar is
silent hereon, except in so far as it testifies with no uncertain
voice to the presence of Shekinah in the houses of the Holy
Doétors of the Law. But this presence followed them in their
travels abroad, and there is one allusion at least to a State in
which it was tealised invariably as indwelling in the soul.}
It seems to me that these are three qualities of intimation as
to a Divine Realisation in consciousness resulting from
the manner of life laid down as indispensable thereto. In this
case the Sons of the Do@rine walked not only by faith but by
experience, and it follows that the mystery in its practice had
a consequence within themselves as well as in their children.

2 Z., Pt, I, fol. 166a; Il, 250:

CONCLUSION ON JEWISH THEOSOPHY 593

Mote than this cannot be said on the evidence which lies
before us, and of the issue which came of the unions thus
adumbrated it is obvious that we can say nothing. One of
the Instituted Mysteries tells us in its moving ritual that the
children of philosophers belong to philosophy, and we may
believe—if we can and will—that in the case under notice
they were worthy of their high calling and birthright.

In what manner does this Secret Doctrine of Israel affect us
as mystics in the twentieth century? There is firstly the
doGrinal side, and it will be seen that those among us who
belong to the Christian Tradition, more especially on the
otthodox side, must be conscious that they ate moving
through the great text as through a strange world of images—
vestiges of many pantheons, many systems of the past, and
legends of the soul in man. I have mentioned already that
the Theological Do&rine of the Trinity must complete its
own symbolism, if it is to be held as a produé of the logical
mind, and that therefore the Eternal Father is ex hypothesz the
Eternal Mother, or in the sense and reason of things there
could be no generation of an Eternal Son. The Zoharic male
and female in the Deity cannot be therefore repugnant to the
Trinitarian. Beyond this point the Kabbalistic system moves
farther and farther, as it proceeds, from the field of Christian
Theology. If it were not complicated by irreconcilable
elements in the medley of texts and testimonies, so that on
the one hand we have the creation of souls en masse, as if by
the conventional Frat, and on the other their unceasing
generation as the result of Divine Communion, to say nothing
of minor alternatives, there is much that is suggestive in the
second dream, and for those who feel able to accept any
definite hypothesis on the subject it may have an appealing
aspect. We know also that the tradition of souls being
created, generated or otherwise evolved in pairs is old and
far diffused. I am not sure that it does not belong to “ the
hunger and thirst of the heart ” after something like a timeless
sanction of human relations; but it is difficult to regard it
either as part of a secret doctrine or as convincing per se if it
wete.! The kind of reunion which constitutes the beatitude

1 A distinction on Secret Doctrine is desitable in this conneCtion, it being understood
that I am speaking ex hypothesi on both sides of the subje&. There is that which is
based on experience and is kept secret because the nature of the experience is regarded

as a thing to conceal from public knowledge. If an Order of Alchemists discovered a
very simple process of transmuting metals, they might keep it secret presumably for

594 THE HOLY KABBALAH

of the Elect who experience the rapture of intercourse—one
with another—in the sight of God is rather like an houri’s
paradise conducted on monogamic lines, and it looks a little
strange, moreover, in the face of its contrasts at other points
in the text.t I refer to the continued study of the do&rine by
the Elect in the Lower Paradise and by the Community of
Israel gathered into the transcendence of Brnau.? I do not
say that these ideas of a Paradise of espousals and a College
of transfigured adepts are absolutely exclusive, but I am
equally certain that they were never meant to dwell together
in unity. The nuptials of Rabbi Simeon at the close of the
Lesser Holy Assembly were, one feels, of another order ?
than most of the psychic marriages proclaimed in the ZoHar.
When, however, the scheme is detached to some extent from
its setting, it is worth while formulating its irreducible
minimum as follows: (1) The Communion of the Divine
Duality, Ineffable Male and Female, in the Supernal World,
generates human souls, male and female, in Its own likeness,
who assume flesh—according to a law of succession. (2) They
ate intended to find one another in earthly life and to enter
into marriage therein; but there are various interventions
which postpone and even seem to frustrate the general design :
yet it is accomplished unfailingly in the case of those who
keep the Law. (3) The souls return into the spiritual world
and are reunited for ever therein. (4) The keeping of the Sex
Law, which is part of the Secret Doétrine, insures the pro-
creation of those who may be called the Children of the
Doétrine, assuredly a “ peculiar people.”

It would not be worth while to place on record a personal
opinion if it were not one which I feel is likely to be shared—
in the detached manner that I design to put it forward. If
we draw together from all sources whatever the soul’s

their own benefit. If they discovered a simple way to compose an elixir of life which
would confer physical immortality, they might keep it secret out of mercy to mankind.
This is one side of the question, and the other is speculative doétrine, which there is no
true reason to reserve from others, more especially as it seldom differs essentially from
independent analogous forms and is usually not new at all.

1 Jt is beautiful and moving, however, within its own measures, and the heart goes
out to greet it.

2 This is a subject of continual reference and is a clear issue in respe& of departed
souls gathered into the Lower Paradise. Israel in the Supernal World offers points
of difficulty in most allusions. It is even described as a Degree of the Divine Essence
uniting all legions above.—Z.., Pt. III, fol. 197a ; V, 507. Presumably it is the history
of souls in perfe& union, almost in the state of absorption.

3 See Ipra ZourTA, #b., fol. 296b ; VI, 121, and Pt. I, fol. 218a ; II, 461.

CONCLUSION ON JEWISH THEOSOPHY 595

legends, her travels and metamorphoses, into a single store-
house of memorials, I question very much whether we
should find in our collection a more tolerable proposition at
its value, and I make this qualification because I am not
suggesting that either one or another is convincing. I do not
know of any light on the mystery of man’s beginning in his
inward state which carries the seals of mastery, for the litera-
ture of mystical attainment, the records of our precursors on
the path which leads to God, have nothing to testify thereon,
as it is not the concern of their experience. Each school
reproduces therefore the accepted teaching of its time and
place.t The Zonar shews in its own manner that the end
is like the beginning, and if it be only a tale of faérie, it is
one of grace as such. .

Having said what is possible on this part of the subject,
there arises in the next place that which must be called
indubitably the most important question of all, and though
it is one that is difficult to approach it would be quite im-
possible to pass over and not miss the whole point of the
present study. I have said at the beginning of this chapter
that the form of symbolism adopted in respect of Divine
attainment by the doctors of the Hidden Law is that of male
and female in their union; it begins here on earth and ‘it is
raised into all the heavens ; mutatis mutands, it is the same kind
of intercourse on all the planes,? and ail planes or worlds are
in communication one with another, not merely by the analogy
which obtains but in a manner which is represented by the
recutring image of the world above being married to the
world below. We have seen that he is called perfect and
blessed who knows how to effect such an union, and this so
far as the individual is concerned can be only bj fulfilling

1 The inference is obvious and is, I think, utterly true. If we take the Christian
records, that part of them which deserves to be called mystical is either a Study of
conditions, processes, practices leading to the term in God or it is concerned with
experience attained in the term. The first may depend from dogma—.g. the idea that
an ascetic path is of Divine counsel—but it does not explain the counsel or ordinance ;
the second is a realisation of the Divine in consciousness and has nothing to do with
vision, as when Dr. John Pordage seems to have seen the Trinity manifest in arbitrary
forms. The deep mystical state is imageless and is not a light on theological teaching.

2 IT hope that the qualification will be quite clear to my readers. The body of man
was the most sacred thing for Kabbalists and there is absolutely no question that it
was in perfect analogy with the body of heaven in its clearness: they were not afraid
of their symbolism and they accepted all its consequences. The result was what on
the surface is called gross physicalism ; but there is sufficient evidence that when they
happened to drop their symbolism, or to adopt another form, they realised that the
things of the spirit are understood spiritually.

596 THE HOLY KABBALAH

that which he is appointed to do under the provisions of the
Secret Law. My hypothesis is that in so doing he became
conscious of what—for want of a better expression—I must
term the cosmic union, in which the personal a& would be
merged, so that he shared in the loving intercourse which
obtains, acco.ding to Kabbalism, above and below. By
this also the worlds are bound together, God is united to
creation and the soul of man partakes within its proper
measutes—and under the reserves of all the veils by which
he is covered during the life of earth—of that universal and
divine communion. ;

I have said that there are intimations of this state in eastern
teaching, by which I mean India, but that—so far as I am
awate—they have not passed into writing. It was testified
also in the past—once at least—by a spiritual alchemist that
he was acquainted with the mystery of his art but had never
proceeded to the practice because he had not found a woman
who could help him in the work. So also when Thomas
Vaughan speaks of “‘ the conjugal mystery of heaven and
eatth ” I believe that he had some notion of these workings,
whether as the result of experience or merely in an intelleQual
way, by the study of concealed literatures.

It would be possible to carry these considerations much
further, but I do not feel that they are meant for presentation
at length in this place. ‘The suggestion is that, expressed in
very plain language, there is something to be fulfilled between
man and woman by a marriage of Nature and Grace of which
the sacramental aspect sometimes attributed to earthly
marriage is the merest shadow and vestige. We have seen
what Zoharic Theosophy adumbrates on this work; I have
found vestiges of the same testimony in the allegories of some
alchemical books,” and there are other traces of the experience
ot of notions concerning the experience in the Philadelphian

1 The question is whether this is the open door of the Hermetic MyStery—introitum
apertus ad occlusum regis palatium—in so far as the literature is apart from experiments in
the mineral kingdom. It was once suggested that the key was to be sought in some-
thing done between operator and subject, after the manner of the trance-state induced
by mesmerism. In The Hidden Church of the Holy Graal 1 have sought to establish
certain crude analogies between the spiritual work in Alchemy and that in the Eucharist ;
it obtains within its own measures, but everything depends on the true meaning of the
breaking of the Host into the Chalice.

2 The Lisrr Mutus, first published at Rupella in 1677, and reprinted in Mangetus,
Brs,iorHEcA CHEMICA Curios, is of some importance as a case in point, but the
allegories are in pi@tures only. I have called it elsewhere THE Boox oF THE SILENCE
OF HERMES.

CONCLUSION ON JEWISH THEOSOPHY 597

mystical school of the late seventeenth century in England.?
It is better—for the moment at least—that those who feel
drawn in this direction, with clean hearts and minds turned
towatds God, should follow out the needful researches for
themselves in the literatures to which I have alluded. They
may come to see that the analogy instituted by the Latin
Church between those who are joined in wedlock and the
union of Christ with His Church has a deeper meaning than
has been discerned in the public ways; that in certain grades
of consecration the spouse and the beloved on earth do stand
for Christ the Lover of the soul and for the soul in that
nuptial union which is called the mystical marriage in great
and holy texts; the absconditus sponsus may be under veils
of the living man, and the sponsa may realise in the person of
her own consciousness that the soul is indeed the bride.

I am the last person in the world to enforce practical
conclusions, but if those who are prepared thereto within
and without—and this not too late in lite—were to enter the
nuptial state and fulfil it consistently, as also with high
teverence, in the sense of the Zonar, I[ think that the world
might be changed and that a generation to come born of
such unions might be children of a risen life.

For the rest, in conclusion, it will be seen that I have not
put forward the Secret Doéitrine in Israel as one who regards
its part major as of great Theosophical and. high mystical
importance, though I hold its memorials not merely as of
living interest but as belonging to that kind which does not
die; for at the back of all its reverie, the Strange fantasia of
symbols and images, there is the pulsating heart of a dedicated
humanity, set in and out of season to justify the ways of God
to those who could see through its particular glass of vision.
I speak as one who has found God in many strange ways of
thought, and—what is perhaps more unusual—in very simple
and homely ways. I look to go further, for much that has
never been spoken or said, and so remains for expression, is
not indeed beyond it. But the Kabbalistic Jew, dreaming of
liberation and of union under the grievous yoke of his law,
giving it the wings of interpretation and rising himself thereon,

1 From this point of view and otherwise, all the writings belonging to the Phila-
delphian school demand consideration anew, including Robert Roach’s ImpERIAL
STANDARD OF MEssiAH TRIUMPHANT, THEOLOGIA Mystica of John Pordage, the works
of Jane Lead, and the rare PHILADELPHIAN TRANSACTIONS.

598 THE HOLY KABBALAH

is of my own lineage in the spirit, of my kinship in the heart
of quest. His Fall of man is no mere dream, because it is
highest symbolism. His myth of Paradise has a voice speaking
within it from a far home of the consciousness: though the
eyes of flesh may be dazzled and the longing of sense may sink
when the glories of our end are published, I know that, be
it ever so splendid, there is no place like home. The Jew’s
Covenant in the flesh is assuredly, in Zoharic understanding,
one of God’s most true Covenants; the Master Who seals
us within does often seal us without, whence peers and co-heirs
have always known one another in every place of the world,
and every sign-manual of heaven is honourable and worship-
ful, since it sets apart to His service. The outward and
inward Law is like the book of our life itself, zutus et fors
scriptus ; there is nothing so allusive in the whole world of
images ; it is illustrated in all our ways—without in the rule
of our conventions, without in the external veneer of our too
imperfect conformities, without in the age-long tale of our
schooling and self-schooling ; but within in our hungers and
raptures after the “‘ good things of the Lord in the Land of
the Living,” in the thirst after righteousness which we cannot
attain ourselves and can scarcely formulate, in the ineradicable
covetousness with which we would grasp at what God has
prepared for those who love Him. The beauty of the courts
of the Temple—Temple of Solomon and Zerubbabel—its
Holy Place and the Holy of Holies beyond, has eaten up our
hearts with desire. Do we not also expect the coming of
Messiah, while confessing to the Messiah Which has come,
Whose star we have seen in the East, nor yet in the East alone
but all the quarters of Heaven, through the ages and nations ?
Son of Issachar, Son of David, Son of Joseph, true legitimate
and true King for ever, do we not know that for us He has
never come without until He has come within? Domine,
non sum dignus ut intres sub tettum meum: yet are we His stable
in Bethlehem, yet is He born in us. Sed tantum dic verbo—O
Word of Words, speak it in the inward silence—et sanabitur
anima mea. And the legend of the soul in Kabbalism, at
however far a distance, flashes and reflects within us its
changing aspects of that long, strange journey of old taken
by those who came forth, and perchance are still coming,
taken by those who go back; God-speed them in both
respects, and give to those who seek it safe conduct and the

CONCLUSION ON JEWISH THEOSOPHY 599

blessed end. Yes, there is truth in Kabbalism, all its contra-
dictory messages notwithstanding ; the contradictions them-
selves are but turnings of the glass of mind, hither and thither,
to encompass all directions—opposites included, and included
the pairs of these. But the great message of all is the message
of the Indwelling Presence, though it comes to us who are
mystics under unwonted forms and in a peculiar radiance of
vesture. The Divine Fatherhood is one side of the shield of
faith and the other is Divine Motherhood. Whether we
regard it as doctrine handed down from an immemorial
past—few of us can so regard it—or whether we decide in
our excess that it was conceived by Moses de Leon and born
of his brain and pen, it is a wonderful heritage of mind which
has come into our hands, and perhaps at this day it has a
ereater message for us than it had ever for our brothers in
Jewry. I could almost wish that this Moses were the one
and very man, for I do not think that in the wide world there
would be the same kind of greatness as his. But taking things
as they are, and by what we know of his writings, there is
nothing so unlikely.

It follows that I have not put forward the Secret Doétrine
in Israel as one who believes that it is literally what it claims
to be in respect of antiquity, though I have made evident that
in my opinion the ZoHar incorporates old MrprasHim. It
makes no claim except as to Oral Tradition, and about this
I have no opinion. It follows also that I have not put it
forwatd as a sum total of wisdom, written or unwritten ;
but I do believe that in the expounded Mystery of Sex—so
far as it is indeed expounded—it suggests a great experiment
which—* once in time and somewhere in the world ”—may
have been practised in hidden sanctuaries that were homes of
man and woman. The doétrine of sex in the Zour is that
desideratum which I mentioned at the beginning, a Key
general to the House of Doétrine: all other teaching in the
great Theosophical Miscellany may be said to encompass it,
as the Divine Names and SepHirotH stand about the figure
of the Cosmic Christ in the eloquent diagram of Khunrath.
It is the central root which I have mentioned, and from this
root the Tree of Knowledge grows. As the Zowar intimates,
it becomes the Tree of Life. At this end of our travelling,
we have reached what was set before us when our quest was
undertaken first, namely, a zerminus ad quem, from which we

H.K. R.R

600 THE HOLY KABBALAH

can look over the strange path that we have followed, survey-
ing it under one light. Shekinah is the high light which
shines thereon. We have seen that this Lady of Mediation
is the President over that nuptial intercourse which I have
described as begun on eatth and completed in the World of
the Supernals. The return journey of the soul is performed
therefore under her light, in and by her grace, with the
sustenance of her mysterious power. For us at this day she
can be a Principle only, but it is Divine as such; and after
what manner—if indeed other than this—she was understood
by Sons of the Doétrine during earlier days of their exile
through the long centuries of Christendom, we must be
content to leave. It would be a satisfaction to find the
answer, but it is not of our vital concern : enough if we have
convinced ourselves—and this, I think, we have done—that
the central testimony signifies as authentic and true of voice.
It follows in fine therefore that SEpHER Ha Zonar, the Boox
oF SPLENDOUR, has something to tell us at this day which
calls to be heard by those who have ears. God preventing,
Ido not affirm that it offers an only way, since ways are many
to the height. From the beginning of things He has called
man and woman in all the states of life, in childhood and
virginity, in espousals and widowhood ; and He Who makes
all things one has called the Lover and Beloved, that they
may go up hand in hand and become one in Him. Hereunto
is that which can be said in the public places, and for all that
remains over—Sacramentum Regs abscondere bonum eS.

There ate things, however, which also remain overt outside
the Mystery of Sex, and they recall me to that question which
has been mentioned and left open, whether, namely, there is
something in the Secret Doétrine of Israel which belongs to
all Religion and is no man’s patrimony by virtue of official
belief or eletion as a peculiar people. The dodtrine that we
come fotth from the Centre and that the Centre draws us
back is formulated rarely in Kabbalism and never in clear
terms ; but it is implied or adumbrated continually, and it
belongs to the higher understanding of all Religion. ‘That
Centre is Ayin SopH according to the Zouar, and it is the
Font and Source of all. Whether it indicates that the soul
returns thereto arises for determination in the next place:
if so it can be only by virtue of something inherent and essen-
tial in the soul’s nature. The nature of that something is

CONCLUSION ON JEWISH THEOSOPHY cE Gor

defined in affirming that God is within and His Kingdom.
But this is common to all Religions understood at their
highest. It is formulated by the Zowar in the Doétrine of
Tsure, that most pregnant intimation concerning the proto-
typical soul in ArziturH, the supernal part of soul which
does not leave the Supernals. This is the inward Kingdom
of God and this the God Who is within. There is also a very
eloquent shewing forth of the return journey in the figurative
language of the Tree. We know that Arn Sopu is situated
in the Symbolism above the Tree, the head of which is the
Supernal SzeppHirotH. We have found also that the Central
Pillar in the Tree of Life is the line of the soul’s ascent, that
the Sons of the Dodtrine go up thereby on the way of return
to God, This means and can mean only the realisation of
TsuRE, ot the soul’s union with the soul’s Divine Part which
itself is in union always with the Divine in the universe. The
God Who is within is God. There is one thing more: the
Atziluthic state of the soul is not the end of its progression,
and an ineffable horizon expands from one dogmatic affirma-
tion which is formulated once and once only. On my own
part, I cite it for the second time, as it was met with in the
Latin of Rosenroth: Linea autem media ascendit usque ad AIN
SopH. It follows that the soul goes on, an eternal “ travelling
in the subject,” as I have called it elsewhere.

If it be said that these high things were conceived only in
the mind by Sons of the Dodrine, my appeal is to all records
of Mysticism, on the faith of which it is to be affirmed that
the proper part of man is to conceive in the mind if he seeks
to conceive in experience. The mode, moreover, is not
defined by the evidence: in other words, the records may
connote experience, as well as debate about it. However this
may be, that which confronts us in Kabbalistic Theosophia
Magna is a modality of soul in attainment which is second to
none in the whole of mystical testimony, and per contra it
exceeds all. It is the state beyond the summit of the Mount
of God, an ascension into the great silence beyond all modes
and forms.

After the rapture of Metatron, that great Angel of the
Presence, vibrating on the threshold of Godhood; after
Kerner, where Jehovah is united with Elohim; after
MySterium Shekinah, presiding over Sacred Births and Divine
Marttiages, there is set before us as the last estate of man and

RR2

602 THE HOLY KABBALAH

the last word concerning it, Ain SopxH, that which is con-
ceived in the mind and realised from far away in the heart
respecting unknowable darkness at the centrum concentratum
of light unknown, a state beyond all being, the soul at that
centre, and after all the warfare in manifold lives of quest, the
soul at rest therein. We have made a long journey, and there
is nothing now to follow: there is to be said only, in the

humility of certitude, that it has been worth all the toil. I
testify that the mind which conceives this end of being,
beyond all being, in the eternal nowhere and the ineffable
nought of nought is already there, in that unsearchable
inward part which does not leave the Supernals, even where
linea media contemplationis suae ascendit usque ad Ain SorH.

APPENDICES

AHO MTTA:

ately eel

x

APPENDIX I

SEPHIROTIC DEVELOPMENTS

Ir has been said that later Kabbalism complicated almost
inextticably the Four Worlds of the Zowar, one and the
chief reason being that it attempted to methodise the inchoate
and contradictory elements which are drawn into the fountain
text. It is not unlikely that a lively apprehension on the
subject may have been communicated to the general reader by
an exceedingly simplified summary of the Worlds and their
SEPHIROTH in the third section of my Fifth Book. For the
benefit of those who may feel concerned about subsequent
developments according to the mind of Kabbalism, I shall be
justified perhaps in devoting a few pages to the following
sketch, derived from various sources. We have seen that
Arn Sopu passed, by the hypothesis, from latency into
activity, still subsisting, however, in a state which is incon- |
ceivable humanly, being that of pure abstract thought. The
concentration of this thought is depicted in KeTHER, which is
also Divine Will in primordial manifestation. The Supreme
Crown ! is, symbolically speaking, the base or sphere of the
Divine Consciousness from which it would follow that self-
knowledge cannot be postulated in respect of AIN Sopu itself.
But this is contradicted explicitly in another text. By the
second manifestation abstract thought entered into or deve-
loped the relationship of time, so that it could be regarded as
that which was, which is and is to come. Lastly, it established
a telation with Nature—that is to say, its development pro-
duced the universe. |

By a slight extension of the symbolism KErTHER is regarded
also as the Throne of the Ancient of Days,? and as the Divine

1 In the treatise entitled Garrs or Licur it is said that the name of KeTHER is
applied to the first SepHirA because even as a crown encircles the head so does KETHER
encircle every SEPHIRA. It is the world of “ DireCtion,” which encompasses all things.
This statement involves the view that the SEPHIROTH were emanated as a series of
concentric circles.

2 The term Throne is applied to several of the S—EpHrrorH. Thus MALKUTH is the
Throne of Judgment, TipHERETH that of Mercy. Sometimes, however, BrnaAH is

605

606 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Consciousness is the veil of the subsistent state, AIN SopH is
represented further as the central point of KeTrHeEr, regarded
as a sphere, while the circumference is infinity, which is, as
it were, the Divine Vestment. The later Kabbalists explain
further that this is because KeTHER has no vessel or receptacle
wherein it may be contained.4 Hence also it is beyond all
cognition. The Book oF ForMaATION affirms, however,—as
we have seen—that the properties of all the SEPHIROTH ate
infinite.2 As the vessel of the Divine Consciousness, which
itself is contained by nothing,? KerHEer comprehends all
things: * it is the ege in which reposes the germ of the
univetse, to borrow the symbolism of another system, In
particular it encompasses the remaining SEPHIROTH, which
are the sum of all things. The Word of God circulates in all,
and KETHER is, in a special sense, the Spirit of the Living God.

The second Srpuira is Wisdom, which, however, is held
to be of a middle quality, for the highest of all, the truly
celestial Wisdom, can be referred only to KerHER. That of
CHOKMAH is, notwithstanding, so transcendent that no
creature can attain it. It was concealed from Moses, and the
Wisdom for which Solomon was magnified belongs to an
inferior order, which connects with the lowest of the SEp-
HIROTH. The SEPHIRA CHOKMAH Is described by the Boox
OF ForMATION as the Breath of the Spirit of God.

termed the Throne of Mercy, because it is as a seat under the supernal dile€tions.
‘TIPHERETH is called also the Throne of Glory when it receives the influence of the
Thirty-Two Paths of Wisdom. See Bk. V, § 4. The same name is applied to
MALkutTH, because it is the seat of TipHeRETH. The term Throne taken simply
signifies MALKUTH, and Brian, which is the seat of MALKUTH.—KABBALA DENUDATA,
Apparatus in Librum Sohar, s.v. Thronus, vol. i. p. 483, citing the GARDEN OF POME-
GRANATES, by R. Moses of Cordova. ‘These points ate cited only to shew the chameleon
character of the symbolism, at issue too often with the Tree of Life itself.

1 See Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, compiled by Albert
Pike, Grand Commander of the Southern Jurisdi€tion, U.S.A. The authority is not
Stated, but it is derived from THE RoyaL VALLEY, by R. Napthali Hirtz.

2 SEPHER YETZIRAH, C. I, par. 4.

. § This appears paradoxical, but just as Fichte and Carl du Prel have maintained that
the human ego is not wholly embraced in self-consciousness, so KETHER is presumably
the vessel of the Divine Consciousness in the sense that it receives an influx therefrom,
by a refleGtion from Arn SopH to its centre. Readers may remember the Universal
Solvent which yet could be contained in a phial, a diverting incident in one of the
TALEs OF THEGENI. According to THE Royat VALLEy, AIN Sopu had full conscious-
ness and appeciation, prior to their aCtual existence,of all the grades and impersonations
contained unmanifested within Itself.

4 There is hence, as Isaac de Acco observes in his treatise on THE ENLIGHTENMENT OF
THE Eyes, an unity of the ten SEPHIROTH in themselves, which unity is concentrated
always in Arn Sop. It must be admitted, perhaps, that this idea is contained
implicitly in the Zoharic Statement that Arn SopH is the beginning and end of all
degrees in the creation.

APPENDIX I 607

BrinAH, Intelligence or Understanding, is represented
symbolically by the same fundamental authority as the
moisture of the Breath of the Spirit. It is the highest SzpHIRA
with which man can establish correspondence, but it contains
at the same time one mystery which was also concealed from
Moses. The root of all roots and the foundation of all
foundations is communicated thereby to man, who could
otherwise have no knowledge of the antecedent states of the
Divine Nature.

Magnificence or Mercy, GEpuLAH or CHESED, the fourth
emanation, is the warmth or fire contained within the moisture
breathed forth by the Spirit of God. It expresses the Eternal
Love and Compassion, connecting with life and vitality. It
is the base of that beneplacitum termino carens which is ascribed
to CHOKMAH and supposes implicitly the free will of the
Divine Agent. It follows from this as a consequence that the
universe was made or emanated, not because anything was
wanting to the Divine completeness, but out of the fullness
of goodwill, though some of the later Kabbalists, especially
Isaac de Loria,” are not of one mind as regards the last point.
Symbolically speaking, CHEsED is therefore the SEPHIRA by
which God constituted the world, operating through the Holy
Shekinah.

The fifth SzpHira is GEBURAH, signifying Judgment,
Justice, Judicial Power, known also as Pacuap, or Fear. It
is the Supernal Tribunal, before which no creature can
subsist. The treatise entitled ScHAARE ZEDEK excepts,
however, those valiant heroes of the Lord who have ovet-
come their concupiscence.

‘TIPHERETH, of Beauty, the sixth SEpuira, is, in a sense, the
conjunction of Mercy and Judgment and summarises the
Divine goodness: it is the heart of the Pillar of Benignity.
It is to be noted that Vau, the letter which symbolises the
Divine Son extended on the Tree of Life as on a Great Cross

1 All things, according to the commentary of Isaac de Loria, in a certain and most
abstruse manner, consist and reside and are contained in Brnau, which projects them
and sends them downwards, species by species, into the several worlds of Creation,
Formation and Fabrication. Burnau is hence represented as a great reservoir or ocean ;
it is the source of prophetic inspiration, as CHoKMAH is that of revelation. We have
seen that it is more especially the Shekinah in transcendence, at once her essence and
abode. We have seen also that the world was made by Shekinah, and she made it in
the spirit of CHEsED, the fact notwithstanding that she belongs more especially to the
Severity side in the Tree of Life.

2 See Liner Drusum™, a metaphysical introdu@tion to the Kabbalah, KappaLa
DENUuDATA, Vol, i. pt. 2.

608 THE HOLY KABBALAH

of Manifestation, is denominated TIPHERETH, because it con-
tains all things, exercises dominion in all and is invested with
all Sacred Names.+ : |

But the Divine Benignity is manifested by the Victory
signified in NETzacu, the seventh Sepuira. There are three
rays diffused from the splendour of Providence—Benignity,
Beauty and Viétory. When they shine and are diffused over
the SzpHrrotH the whole world is filled with joy and per-
fection, for the Divine goodness itself looks forth upon all
creatures, and all the worlds are in fullness and completeness.?
This SzpHrRA is also termed Eternity.

The eighth SzepHira, Hop, signifies Glory, Adornment,
Splendour. In combination with Nerzacu it is called the
armies of Jehovah, and these two SEPHIROTH signify two hills
of Zion, on which the dew of Hermon falls. All the salu-
tations and praises contained in the Psalter of David belong
to this emanation. It is the place of praise, the place of wats
and victories, and of the treasury of benefits.?

JEsop, the Basis or Foundation, the ninth SEpHrra, is the
stotehouse of all forces, the seat of life and vitality, and the
noutishment of all the world.* |

_ Matxuts is the tenth Szepurra, signifying Dominion,
Royalty, Kingdom. In the Lesszr Hoty Synop it is termed
“the Mother of all the Living.” According to later Kab-
balism, it is the final manifestation, emanation or development
of the Divine Nature taking place in the Divine World, and
is therefore that point at which the more external orders make
contact with the supernal.® ‘This is unintelligible as it stands,
but it should be understood that the commentators and
interpreters represent the Sephirotic Decade as repeated

1 The authority is SCHAARE ORAH, § V.

2 Apparatus in Librum Sohar. KaspALA DENUDATA, S.v. Superatio, i.e. Netzach,
PP. 589 et seq., citing SCHAARE ORAH.

3 Ibid. s.v. Decus, Gloria, ic. Hop, pp. 268 e¢ seqg., deriving from the same work.
According to the ZonHar, NetzAcu and Hop correspond to extension, multiplication
and force, and thence issue all the forces of the universe, for which reason these
SEPHIROTH ate also termed the Armies of the Eternal. Zohar, iii., 296a, Mantua.

4 KappaLA Denupata, Apparatus, s.v. Fundamentum, ie., JESOD, pp. 439 ef seq.
The authority is PaRDEs RimmMonim. The key of the symbolism is given by Rosenroth
as follows, but without comment, as if it lay beyond his measures: In personis FUNDA-
MENTUM denotat membrum genitale utriusque sexus.

5 Hence it is said that the tenth Sepnrra is the SHEKINAH, that is, the place of the
manifestation of Deity. But this is the Lower Shekinah, represented by the final Hz
of the Divine Name. It should be added that when the text describes MALKUTH as a
final manifestation in the Divine World it follows that Arziturn, the World of Deity,
contains the whole Sephirotic Decade. It is the prototype and the witness above of
that which abides below.

APPENDIX I 609

through each of the Four Worlds, and the reference in this
place is therefore to MatxuTH in ArziturH, the World of
Deity. ‘To increase complications and confusions there is the
Decade in each SEPHIRA.

To this brief general description, which rests on the
authority and reproduces the words of the Kabbalists, I will
now add the heads of a modern interpretation, which is, of
course, conjectural and a personal point of view, but has a
reasonable aspect and illustrates, perhaps unawares, the office
of Divine Thought in the Zoharic evolution of the universe,
as well as embodying later intimations.

Am Sopy, the Unknowable and Absolute, manifests
through the efflux of the spiritual and material universe, using
the SEPHIROTH as its media. The first emanation symbolises
Abstract Thought, the Absolute assuming consciousness to
manifest outwardly. The second emanation represents the
association of abstract ideas in the intellect, which association
is Wisdom. ‘The third emanation is Mind receiving the
impression of the abstract ideas. These three constitute the
Spirit of the World. The second triad of SEpHiRoTH, Mercy,
Judgment and Beauty, includes the principles of construction
and symbolises the abstract dimensions of matter, length,
breadth, depth and their double polarity. CHEsED and
GEBURAH ate the centripetal and centrifugal energies between
the poles of the dimensions. In their junction with TIPHERETH
they represent all ethical life and perfection. They correspond
to the Soul of the World. The third triad is dynamic; its
SEPHIROTH signify the Deity as universal potentiality, energy
and productive principle. They answer to the idea of Nature,
the natura naturans, however, and not the natura naturata. ‘The
tenth SepHira, ot MALKurTH, represents the Concrete, and is
the energy and executive power of the Abstract Intellec.+

1 Summarised from Isaac Myet’s PHitosopHy oF Isn Gesrro., § xiii.

APPENDIX II

THE FOUR WORLDS IN LATER KABBALISM

Ir scholiasts and commentators have complicated the
Worlds of the Zowar, it must be granted that they had at
least the will to methodise, and it is possible therefore to
present a summary of their views in a brief conspectus. The
visible world was for them the last consequence in the
development of the attributes of God, while the S—pHIROTH
wete symbols of those attributes, and the manner of their
unfoldment is like a history of Divine Evolution. It is
affirmed, for example, that God called Himself Wisdom in
CHoKMAH and Intelligence in Bryan; that in CHEsEp He
assumed the character of Greatness and Benignity, in GEBURAH
of Severity, in TIPHERETH of Beauty, in Nerzacu of Victory,
in Hop of our Glorious Author, and in JEsop of our Support,
all worlds and vessels being maintained thereby ; while in
Matxuty He adopted the title of King. We must tecall
again, however, in this connection that the Sephirotic Decade
is in each of the Four Worlds, according to later Kabbalists,
and therefore that this enumeration belongs to ArziLuTH in
a ptimary sense, whereas in the realms below it obtains by
derivation only. From the World of Deity, the Archetypal
World and World of Emanation, the Divine Virtues were
projected downward and there was produced a Second World,
that of Brrau or Creation, regarded as the World of highest
finite intelligence, technically that of the archangels. There-
after the prolongation was continued into a Third World,
that of YErzirAH, or Formation, the abode of angelic choirs.
Though further removed from Supreme Perfection, there is
not a taint of the material in this place of incorporeal beings.
It is otherwise with Assran, the World of A@ion, the fourth
produ& of the tenfold emanation, for this is the region of
matter, the earth of man in particular, and also the dwelling
of those demons which are called shells or Cortices by the
later _Kabbalists. In common with many other systems of

610

APPENDIX Ii 611

unqualified or qualified emanation this material world is
regarded as the gross purgations of the upper regions. It
should be observed in such connection that the SEPHIROTH or
Virtues which permeate the four systems deteriorate as they
proceed further, and that the corruption of the infernal world,
the formless region and the seven hells of Kabbalism are
apparently the extreme limits of the outpouring which begins
in KerHer. Thus, in order to explain the imperfections
found in the world-craft of a perfect Author the degeneration
of His infinite energy is not disdained as a resource. It is easy
to criticise such a system, or to set it down as beneath criticism ;
but, again, the disability is common to the dreams of all
emanationists, even when they invoke creation at one point
or other of their reverie. It remains to say that we have the
authority of the Zour for regarding the demons as produéts
of the will of God and designed for a specific purpose.
Broadly speaking, the Four Worlds of the later Kabbalah
may be regarded as corresponding in the physical order :

(2) ArziLuTH, to the Primum Mobile.

(6) Brran, to the sphere of the Zodiac.

(c¢) YETZIRAH, to the planetary chain.

(d) AsstaH, to the world of the four elements.

Thus, astronomy is at the basis of the conception—or is at
least incorporated therein.

The doétrine of the Four Worlds originated between the
period of the SEPHER YETZIRAH and that of the promulgation
of the Zouar, and it received many increments from com-
mentators on the latter work. It is first met with in the Book
oF EMANATION, which is a product of the school of Isaac
the Blind. This treatise is ascribed, doubtfully enough, to
R. Jacob Nazir, who belonged to the second half of the
twelfth century. Its distribution of the Four Worlds differs
from the above tabulation, as, for example, by referring the
souls of the just to Brian, the archangelic world. It should
be added that the Zouar recognises also a distribution of the
SEPHIROTH into Three Worlds—(1) Intelligible, (2) Moral,
(3) Natural. .

1 We have already seen that, according to the Book oF Formation, the ten
SEPHIROTH are the infinite of evil as well as of good.

APPENDIX Til

THE INSTRUMENTS OF CREATION

THE doctrine of Amn SopH may be assigned a high place
among old theosophical dreams ; the Sephirotic system may
not suffer by comparison with other emanation teveries and
may even challenge all; the metaphysics of the Two Counte-
nances is ctude on the surface and in the texts from which it
depends is perhaps the most barbaric and unintelligible of all
symbolism ; but a considerable profundity of meaning may
be discerned within it: there have been attempts in this
direction. The cosmology of SEPHER YETZIRAH, with its
development in the ZonHar, belongs, however, to more
purely fantastic aspects of Kabbalistic dream, and yet in its
later form there lies something behind it which suggests—in
the language of Jacob BGhme—“ a deep searching ” of the
Divine Mind. I do not propose to add anything on this part
of the mythos; but the very curious and indeed bizarre
scheme of the SEPHER YETZIRAH in respect of the Hebrew
Letters may be tabulated by way of supplement to what has
been set forth previously.

We have seen that the World of Bria is that of Creation,
but whatever reservations may be inferred from later Kabba-
listic writers on the axiom ex nibilo nibil fit,. we have seen also
that their use of the term Creation does not at all correspond
to the sense of Christian cosmology, because chat which they
called Nothing evasively was the plenitude in which the All
lay latent. Further, the World of Brian was not that in
which anything material was formed, emanated, or otherwise
brought into actual being ; it was rather the Elohistic World,
that of Panurgic force and intelligence, which became forma-
tive in YErzirAH, but did not produce matter except in the
Fourth World. Now the materials used and shaped, or,
pethaps, more properly speaking, the instruments, the
mattices of the material world, were in all simplicity the
letters of the Hebrew alphabet, as explained previously.

1 According to Myer, the speculative or metaphysical Kabbalah is an attempt to
harmonise Hebrew monotheism with the “fundamental principle of ancient
pole te namely, the axiom quoted above. PHrmosopHy oF InN GEBIROL, p. 230.

This was also the design of Maimonides in his GumDE OF THE PERPLEXED.
612

APPENDIX III 613

According to SEPHER YETZIRAH, God imparted to them form
and weight by combining and transforming them in divers
mannets, ALEPH with all the rest and all the rest with ALEPH;
Bers with all and all with BErH ; and so of the rest. Some
hundreds of permutations were obtained in this manner,
which ex hypothesi are the origin not only of all languages but
of all creatures. As these permutations can also, by a later
hypothesis, be reduced to a single Name, that of TErra-
GRAMMATON, otherwise Jop, Hz, Vau, Hz = Jehovah or
Yahwe, it is said that the entire universe proceeds from this
Name.” ‘The reader will discern at once the nature of the
device, which may be methodised by a simple process :

The world came fotth from God:
But the name of God is min;
Therefore the world came forth from ;7in'.?

The fundamental letters of the Book oF ForRMATION are
not, however, those which compose the Divine Name: they
ate Aleph (8), Mem (1) and Shin (w), distinguished as the
Three Mothers and corresponding to Air, Water and Fire.
The heavens ate formed of Fire, the Earth is of Water, and
the Air of the Mediate Spirit.

Their correspondences are: in the year, the torrid, frigid
and temperate seasons ; in man, the head, belly and breast.

Besides the Three Mothers there are seven double letters—
Beth (2 = B), Ghimel (1 = G), Daleth (1 = D), Kaph(> = K),
Pe ®=—= 2), Reh. (9 =-R). and: tay (n= TF, Th)... These
seven signs stand in the Book of Formation for :—

Life | [ Death
Peace Strife
Knowledge Ignorance
Wealth and their opposites < Poverty
Grace Sin
Fruitfulness Sterility
Dominion } Ve | Slavery

1 SEPHER YETZIRAH, Cc. ii. par. 4. Cf. the Talmudic teaching that the present world
was created by God with the letter Hz and the world to come with the letter Jon.

2 And thus the Name in its realisation—understood in the heart and mind—gives
all knowledge according to the Kabbalists. Compate Eliphas Lévi, who reduces the
doétrine to an axiom: “ All knowledge is in a word, all power in a name ; the intelli-
gence of this name is the Science of Abraham and Solomon.” Cuiers Majgurgs,
Paris, 1895. ,

3 It will be unnecessary to point out that this is a logical non sequitur, but it must be
added that for the Kabbalistic Jew the True Name of God, as indeed of any existence,
was a manifestation of its essence and, as such, inseparable therefrom.

614 THE HOLY KABBALAH
Their correspondences in the universe ate :—

East Depth
West North
Height South

and the Holy Palace, fixed in the centre and sustaining all
things. When the seven double letters had been shaped by
the Deity, He combined and created therewith the planets
in the heaven; the days in the year—z.e., the seven days of
creation; and the gates in man—v.e., eyes, eats, nostrils and
mouth. |
There are, finally, twelve simple letters, having the follow-
ing correspondences in man and the world :—

HE = ets ata == NE,
VAD We ae itt Mea rina (Sse iebt:
Daan ty Zi Smell = Eiibleight
CHETH | ==n,\Ch == Speech’; |B. Depth
LETH 3), 0S Digestion: = NW,
NACOD, 4) ea RAL Dern ODOT Ori lee ie
LAMEp == 9, 1 = Acion = W. Height
NUN «== )3,' No Motion) = WW Depth
SAMEK = 0,5 = Wrath = 8S. Height
FUE hte OR ie eee Marth = S$. Depth
TsaDE = 3%, Ts = Meditation = N. Height
Ouorxe =='6, QO v= Sleep = N. Depth

By means of the twelve simples there were created the
Signs of the Zodiac, the twelve months and the twelve
directors of man—z.e., the two hands, the feet, the two kidneys,
the liver, the gall, the spleen, the colon, the bladder and the
arteries.

I must leave my readers to decide how this bizarre system
is to be interpreted. It has been regarded by one or two
ctitics who have neither mystical nor occult leanings as a
setious attempt to devise a philosophical cosmology ;? but
for myself I must confess that I do not see in what manner it
is superior to the familiar fable of the elephant and the tortoise.
There are those, of course, who discern in it a secret meaning,
who remember, for example, that the letters of the Hebrew
Alphabet stand also for numerals, and do not fail to cite the

Nation after the Deftruttion of Jerusalem. J have used the third, posthumous edition,
revised by the Rev. H. A. White, M.A. London. 1896. See p. 408.

APPENDIX III 615

scriptutal statement that God made everything by weight,
number and measure.

Indeed, the SEPHER YETZIRAH may be regarded as a com-
mentary on this declaration. As a rule, however, I think
that the Kabbalists, like other makers of systems, arcane and
otherwise, meant that which they said, and if they did
not say all that they meant the unexpressed residuum
was along the lines of the sense expressed. When they
affirmed therefore that the world was made by means of the
letters of the alphabet, they really meant what they stated ;
but if it be asked whether they understood by those letters
the symbols of hidden powers, it may be inferred that they
did, perhaps beyond question, having regard to the reason of
things. The letters are, in this case, more than mere symbols :
they are vessels or manifestations of concealed virtues. The
sense is therefore true ex bypothesi in a literal and transliteral
manner.

The warrant of the hypothesis must be sought in the
Talmudic system, which believed that the body of the sacred
text was divine like the sense which was its soul, which soul
had, even as man himself, an inner spirit, the highest of all,
namely, the concealed meaning. Now, the letters of the
alphabet were the materials of the textual body, to the care
and preservation of which the traditional science of the
Massorah was devoted. For the mystical Jew, who discerned
Strange abysses of mystery in the smallest peculiarities of the
THORAH, there was a weitd fascination in the fact that all
the wonders and sanétities of the Law and the Prophets
resulted from the diverse combinations of twenty-two
letters, and he came to regard this handful of conventional
hieroglyphs as so many sactaments or instruments by which
Divine Wisdom was communicated to man. In a word, for

1 The MassoraH was concerned with the body of the text, the rules as to reading
and writing the THorAH, and special considerations on the myStical sense of the sacred
characters. It belongs therefore to the criticism of the Hebrew text. It was also, as
already seen, that which was delivered openly by the rabbins in contradiction to that
which was supposed to have been communicated secretly. Thus it taught the true
reading of doubtful passages, the true pronunciation of uncertain words, the corre&
subdivisions of the books, and so forth. Buxtorf’s work entitled Trerras (Basiliz,
1620, 4to) deals with the MassoraH. Compate Molitor’s PHiLosopHy OF TRADITION.
Some French writers belonging to the occult school pretend that its exoteric formule
were designed to conceal every trace of a secret sense in the THoraH. See Mission
DES JuIFS, p. 646, by Saint-Yves d’Alveydre, who follows Fabre d’Olivet in La LANGUE
Hfsraigue ResrrrvEE. The MassoranH compiled from MSS., alphabetically and
lexically arranged, has been published by C.D. Ginsburg. 3 vols. London. 1880-85.

H.K, ss

616 THE HOLY KABBALAH

him they ceased to be conventions; a Divine Revelation
tequited a Divine Language to exptess it, and the alphabet of
that language was a derivation from the noumenal world,
vessels of singular election, instruments of Deity, from which
it was an easy transition to suppose that such channels of
spititual grace and life must have fulfilled some exalted office
in the shaping of the universe itself.

APPENDIX IV

DIVINE NAMES

Ir is not my intention to produce a monograph on the
Names and Titles of God in Kabbalistic and Rabbinical
literature: it would be unlikely to serve any purpose of
those whom I address. There is a sufficient study of the sub-
je@ in the JEwisH Encyciopapia, Vol. IX, pp. 160-165,
with the necessary references to other places in the collection.
The following bare indications are added to elucidate allusions
in my text. TETRAGRAMMATON, the so-called Ineffable or
Unpronounceable Name, is the Name of Four Letters, min? =
YHWH = YAHWEH or YAHAWEH, the Jehovah of our
incorrect rendering, which Hebrew scholarship has chara¢ter-
ised as philologically impossible. It is Nomen Ineffabile, that
is to say, inexpressible, because the vowels thereto belonging
are now unknown, having passed out of memory after the
destruction of the Temple in the year 70 a.p. There is an
explanatory Talmudic tradition that the utterance of the
Sacred Name was prohibited at the death of the High Priest
Simeon the Righteous. When it is said that the pointing of
Adonai or Elohim is substituted by Massoretic practice for
the lost vowels, this does not mean that there was an attempt
to pronounce the Name with their aid but that one of the
alternatives was to be used instead. It will be remembered
that God is made to say in the ZoHaR: My Name is written
YHVH but is read Adonai.

As regards the Sacred Name of Twelve Letters, which has
been mentioned once in my text, according to one explana-
tion it is formed as follows: sin JID wnipn = Santins
Beneditius Ile ; but another detives from the word jos =
Amen, in Isaiah, Ixv, the letters of which represent ex /ypo-
thesi OSX JN II8 = Dominus Rex Fidel. There has been
reference also to a Name of Forty-two Letters, which is
accounted for in various ways: (1) by inscribing other
Divine Names letter by letter at full length ; (2) by the fa@

617 $82

618 THE HOLY KABBALAH

that the first eight words in Genesis total forty-two letters ;
(3) by tabulating forty-two Divine Titles which do not rank
as Names, but are held to represent all the attributes of God,
and regarding their initials as composing the Extended Name.
I have made a selection only as it is obvious that there is no
end to devices of this kind. Finally, the Zowar refers on
more than one occasion to SHEM Ha MEpHorAsH, and this is
the Sacred Name of Seventy-two Letters. It happens that
Exodus xiv. 19-21, has this number of alphabetical symbols
in each of the three verses and thus can provide not only a
triple illustration of the Super-extended Name but the three
can produce when combined no less than seventy-two other
distin&t Names. It need not be said that there are other
methods of extraction, and Athanasius Kircher offers us the
benefit of all which he has met with or selected to throw light
on CEpreus Aicypriacus. There are printed works and
manuscripts which deal yet more fully with the subje@. All
the Hierarchies of pseudo-Dionysitus and all the pan-
Demonium of Magical Black Grimoires are taxed to extend
theit tabulations. I leave it therefore at this point and with it
the whole subjed, to those who are concerned.

APPENDIX V

PHASES OF THE SOUL

THE Kabbalistic division of the soul into five parts has
been given in Book VI, with the necessary elucidations. The
following variant occurs in the DiscouRSsE OF THE ANCIENT
Ong, and it is given here because of its importance as a point
of junction between Zoharic formulations on the subject and
those of subsequent expositors. The soul in its various
phases was distributed through all the worlds of Kabbalism,
and every phase was held to contain all the others. It will be
seen that this unmanageable complexity is justified by a text
imbedded in the Zowar itself.

“When the child of man is born into this world there is
appointed to him natural life (NEpHEsH) from the side of the
animals, the clean side, from the side of the Holy Wheels (the
AUPHANIM, a Kabbalistic order of angels, assigned by some
attributions to CHoKMAH). Should he deserve mote there is
appointed to him a rational spirit (RuAH) from the side of
the Holy Living Creatures (Hayrora Ha Kaposu, another
order of angels, commonly attributed to KrrHER by later
Kabbalism, which seems, however, inconsistent with this
tabulation). Should he deserve even more there is appointed
to hima higher spirit, Nes#aMAu, from the side of the Thrones
(z.¢., ARALIM, the order of angels ascribed to BINAH, whence
come the higher souls, according to the BEREsHITH section of
the Zowar proper). These three are the mother, the male
servant and the handmaid, even the Daughter of the King.
Should he deserve yet more there is appointed to him an
animal soul (NEPHESH) in the way of ArzILUTH (that is, the
lowest essence of the supernal portions of the soul, again in
late Kabbalism), from the side of the Daughter, YEHrDAH, the
only one (YEHIDAH is the quintessence, the highest nature of
the soul, under T'surE), and the same is called Daughter of
the King. If he still deserve more, there is appointed to him
the rational spirit (Ruan) of ArzituTH, from the side of the

619

620 THE HOLY KABBALAH

Central Pillar (that is, Benignity, the middle Pillar of the
Sephirotic Tree), and he is called the Son of the Holy Blessed
One, whence it is written: ‘ Ye are the children of the Lord
yout God (Deut. xiv. 1). And if he deserve even more there
is appointed to him a higher spirit (NEsHAMAH) from the side
of Ansa (the Supernal Father, attributed to CHokmAn in the
Atzilutic world) and of the Supernal Mother (Ama, attributed
to BrinaH in the same world), whence it is also written : ‘ And
He breathed into his nostrils the breath of life ’ (literally, souls
of life, Gen. ii. 7). What is life? Itis Jan (the Divine Name
attributed to KnrHer by another Zoharic text), whence we
have heard: ‘ Let everything that hath breath (z.e., life, z..,
all souls) praise the Lord’ (.e., Jan), Ps. cl. 6). And in it is
TETRAGRAMMATON (Z¢., J.D.V.D., 7¢, JHVH) perfected.
But if he deserve still more there is appointed to him JDVD,
in its plenary fullness, the letters of which are Jop, Hz, Vau,
He: Hen, Vau, Hen, Jop, which is man in the path of
ArzitutH, and he is then said to be in the likeness (séulacrum)
of his Lord, whence also it is said : ‘ And have dominion over
the fish of the sea’ (Gen. i. 28) ); that is, he shall rule over
all the heavens and over all the AUPHANIM and SERAPHIM,
over all the Hosts and Powers, above and below. When
therefore the child of man deserves the NEpHEsH from the
side of the Daughter YEHIDAH, this is to say: ‘ She shall not
go out as the men-servants do’ ”’ (meaning probably that he
shall serve God in His house for ever, Exod. xxi. 7).1

1 Zohar, ii. 94b, Brody ed.

INDEX

Aaron, Rod of, 334, 526.

Aaron the Great, his commentary on the
SEPHER YETZIRAH, III.

Abaddon, 329.

Assa and Arma, the Father in CHoKMAnH,
137, 146, 204, 206; Supreme Mother,
allocated to BrnaH, 137, 204 ; Mother
below, 342, 345; Father, 206; the
Supernal Father and Mother, 201,
211. See also 69, 137, 241, 362, 363,
416, 581.

Abbah, R., the traditional scribe of R.
Simeon, 57, 141 ; eulogy of R. Simeon,

147.

Abel, 251, 287.

Abelson, Dr., on Sufism in the Zonar,
80, 571-572.
braham, his call and its symbolism, 297 ;
Garden of the Lord, 298; meeting
with Melchizedek, 299; the Sacred
Covenant, 300; its Mystery of Sex, 302.

Abraham, R., his commentary on the
SEPHER YETZIRAH, 56, 106; _ its
Zoharic elements, 107 ; on Arn SopH,
107; alleged identity with the in-
Structor of Flamel, 108, ro.
Flamel.

Abraham Abulafia, suggested author of
the Zowar, 60, 81; his writings, 92 ;
his Messianic enthusiasm, 92, 93, 98.

Abraham ben David Ha Levi, his
Aristotelian tendency, 46; a great
orthodox apologist, 92 ; his ORDER OF
THE TRADITION, 93, 107; Abraham b.
David the younger, 92, 106, 108, 109.

Abraham de Seba, R., 286.

Abraham of Posquiére, suggested author
of the ZoHAR, 60, 94.

Abraham ben Samuel Zakut, his Book oF
GENEALOGIES, 52; his estimate of the
ZOHAR, ib.; his narrative concerning
Isaac de Acco, 53-55.

Abraham ben Meir ibn Ezra, 46.

Abraham ibn Wakhar, 94.

Abramelin, spurious work attributed to,
49, 522.

Abravanel, i.¢e., Leo the Hebrew, his
DrALoGuEs ON Love, 428; sketch of
the author, 429; singular mistakes in
regard to his work, 429, 430 ; summary
account of, 430-432.

Absolute, beginning of Kabbalistic philo-
sophy, 185; the essence of all, 189;
postulation of its existence by the
Kabbalah, 191.

Abu Alphrag on the alleged True

Synagogue, 93.

621

See also -

Academy of Sura, 90.

Adam, his Gift of Wisdom in Paradise,
163; its restoration after the Fall, 17 ;
Adam and the Glory of God, 263 ;
made male and female, 265; his
mystic sleep, 266; his gradual de-
generation, 279; his nakedness, 281 ;
fleshly vestments, 283 ; the expulsion,
289; the wives of Adam, 287.

Adam Kadmon, archetypal and pri-
motdial man, x; abode in ArziLurn,
266; a second Adam in Briau and
YETZIRAH, ib.; an Averse Adam, 419.

Adam Microprosopus, 256.

Adam Protoplastes, 211, 238, 418;
Adam of the Earthly Paradise: see
Book VIL., seétions 1, 3.

Aponal, substituted for the TETRAGRAM,
162, 163, 342, 343. See also 351, and,
generally, under Divine Names.

/EsH MEZAREPH, an application of
Kabbalism to Alchemy, 424; language
of, zb.; probable period, 425 ; Lévi’s
alleged reconstitution, 426; difficulties
of the treatise, 427 ; Sephirotic attribu-
tion of the metals, 427, 428 : for minor
tefetences see 440, 534, 536, 538-540.

Acta and ARARITA, 83, 84.

Agobad, St., probable reference to the
SEPHER YETZIRAH, 43, 44, 74.

Agrippa, Cornelius, sketch of, 452-455 ;
gives earliest methodical description of
the Kabbalah, 452 ; probable source of
his acquaintance, 453 ; summary of his
instruGtion, 453, 454; his subsequent
retraCtation, 454, 4553; influence of
Agrippa on Vaughan, 473, 474. See
also x, 441, 476.

Ahasuetus, 368.

AMA ELOHIM, 551.

Arn Sopnu, the Kabbalistic name of the
unmanifest Deity, 187; its meaning,
ib. ; the subsistent state of Deity, 189 ;
transcendency of, 189-191 ; problems
created for the Jew, 191; the decade
and Ain SopH, 194; passage from
latency to activity, 605; ArIN SopH as
the central point of KETHER, 209, 606 ;
the SEPHIROTH in union with Arn SopH,
411; manifestation, 220, 609 ; philoso-
phical claims of the doétrine, 612 ;
doétrine of, fundamental in the Kabba-
lah, 66; an ultimate concept of meta-
physics, 66; not described by Saadya
Gaon, 104; accotding to Azriel, 110 ;
the Supernal SEPHIROTH an emanation
from Arn SopH, 197; the inaccessible

622

God, 351; ascent of Shekinah, 347;
a World of Hiddenness, 197 ; Font and
Source of all, 600 ; Ain-Soph Aour, 20,
208. See also 566, 6o1, 602.

Aitsinger, M., 550.

Akiba, R., traditional author of the
SEPHER YETZIRAH, 42; Claims of the
attribution, 43; his mystical ten-
dencies, 64; his death, 42. See also

81, 540, 572.

Al (El). See Divine Names.

Albelda, M., 481.

Albo, J., 481.

Alchemy, rabbinical influence on, 424;
the Flamel legend, 108, 109, 424, 426 ;
alchemical allusions in the ZowHar,

536; Alchemy and the SEpHrRoTH,
427, 428; Alchemy and Paracelsus,
456; general connection with Kab-

balism, 534-542. See also v, 22, 579.
Alliance, Eternal. See Covenant.
Alphabet, MyéSteries of, 16. See also

SEPHER YETZIRAH and Instruments of

Creation.

Alphabet of Akiba, 42, 45, 88.

Altar, 264, 293, 294, 389.

Al Tufail, 78, 79.

Amalek, 274, 275, 276.

Amelineau, M. E., on the coincident
development of Gnosticism and Kab-
balism, 69.

Ancient, Ancient of Days, Ancient of
Ancients. See Vast Countenance.

Angels, the Hierarchies according to
Mirandula, 445 ; according to pseudo-
Dionysius, 271; according to later
Kabbalism, 254-256. See also 263, 269-
277, and s.v. Pneumatology.

Angus, Joseph, on exegetical methods, 36.

Apple, 279-283 ; Garden of Apples, 307.

Apron. See Vestures.

Aquinas, St. Thomas, 95, 330, 362.

Arabian Philosophy, 76.

Archangelus de Burgo Nuovo, Com-
mentary on Mirandula, 443 ; excerpts
from, 446, 448; his apparent view of
the Kabbalah, 460.

Archite&t, under God, Shekinah as, 342,
582. |

Arik ANpPIN. See Vast Countenance.

Aristobulus, 71.

Aristotle, yoke of, in Jewry, 46 ; influence
on Abraham b. David Ha Levi, 93 ;
alleged influence on Avicebron, 94, 97 ;
Saadya Gaon, an Aristotelian philo-
sopher, 106; Azriel opposed by the
Aristotelian party, 109.

Ark of the Covenant, 172, 292, 313, 356,
368.

Arnold, Matthew, 227, 277.

Asher, 584.

Asmodeus, 526,

Asstan, See Four Worlds.

INDEX

Astral Light, 32, 217.

Astrology, not essentially connected with
the Kabbalah, 542, 543 ; much studied
by the Jews, 543 ; Astronomy and the
SEPHIROTH, 544, 545; summary of
Jewish Astrology, 545-548; Jewish
Astronomy, 547 ; Sephirotic Astrology
accotding to Gaflarel and modern
occultists, 547, 548; Astrology con-
demned by Picus, vii; its condemna-
tion by the ZoHar, 9, 527, 528.

Atonement, 158.

ATZILUTH, XV, 197, 206.

Augustine, St., 278.

Averttoes,,96, 441.

Avicebron. See Gebirol.

Aza and Azael, 273, 274.

Azriel, R., on the SEPHIROTH, 98 ; on the
SEPHER YETZIRAH, 103, I09, 110. See
also 498.

BAAL-SHEM, Order of, 81, 564.

Babel, 295, 296.

Bailly on the Astronomical Signs, 541.

Bakoda, R. Behai ben Joseph ibn, his
treatise on the Durres oF THE HEART,
55, 56.

Balaam, 274, 368.

Balance, 136.

Bat Cochba, his Messianic mission, 42, 81.

Batth, F., on Kabbalism in Cornelius
Agrippa, 453. hg

Barttolocci, Julius, his rabbinical biblio-
graphy, 3, 26; his prejudgment of the
Kabbalah, 48 ; on Abraham ben David
Ha Levi, 93; on the Commentary of
R. Saadya Gaon, 103; on other com-
mentators of the SEPHER YETZIRAH,
III; on the commentators of the
Canticle of Canticles, 178; on Abra-
vanel, 429; on the minor literature of
Kabbalism, 178. See also 91, 103, 412,

452:

Barzillai, Judah ben, on the SEPHER
YETZIRAH, III.

Basnage, on the date of the original
ZOHAR, 59; importance of the tenth
century for Israel, 89 ; on R. Eliezer’s
Commentary on the SEPHER YETZIRAH,
111; his slight knowledge of the
ZOHAR, 115 ; on Talmudic references
to former creations, 141, 142; on the
date of Moses of Cordova, 410; on
that of Isaac de Loria, 412; on Henry
More, 470. See also 43, 55, 67, 92, 142,
410, 411, 429.

Ben Dior Ha Levi, 92.

Benjamin, 251.

BERESHITH RABBA, 136,

BeresuirH, Mystery of, 15; Zoharic
explanations of, 211, 221, 227; accord-
ing to Mirandula, 449; according to
Henry More, 471.

INDEX

Bertet, Adolphe, on Kabbalism in the
Pentateuch, 24.

Berthelot, on the spurious books of
Geber, 49; on Jewish influence upon
Alchemy, 535 ; on the Leyden papyrus,
537; on the Kabbalah and Alchemy,
542, 549.

Beswick, Samuel, on the Swedenborgian
Rite, 549.

BETH-EL, 299.

Bers ELouim, 190, 258.

Betrothed, 209, 358.

Beyers, on the Christian aspects of the
Kabbalah, 477.

Bryan. See SEPHIROTH.

BinAu IRI, 121, 409.

Blavatsky, H. P., on the Kabbalah and its
literature, 511, G EZ) 5 135' §'746

Blunt’s DicrioNary OF DocrriNAL AND
HistoricAL THEOLOGY, its worthless
atticle on the Kabbalah, 5; on the
language of the Zouar, 63; absurd
mistake as to the GREATER and LEssER
ZOHAR, 120.

Body of God, description of, 44, 88.

Béhme, Jacob, 225, 278, 279, 376, 530.

Bonu, 198.

Bois, Jules, on Raymond Lully, 439.

Boismont, Brierre de, on Vampires, 258.

Bono-Homo, Alphonsus, 317.

Book, SECRET, 16, 17; Boox oF Con-
CEALMENT OR MODESTY, 119 ef seq. ;
Boox oF Gop, 301; Book of Enoch,
17; Book oF MystTsri&s, 295 ; Book oF
Maaic, 526; Book oF BRIGHTNESS, 150
e# seq.; Boox oF SOPHE, 535 ; BooK OF
THE GENERATIONS OF ADAM, 16, 17.

Bread and Wine, 175, 299, 586, 587. See
Eucharist.

BrraH. See Four Worlds.

Bride and Bridegroom, 209, 211, 342,
352; Bride of Heaven, 19; Bride of
God, 344; Divine Bride, 357, 363.

Bride of Microprosorus, 146, 147, 209,
210, 211.

Briére, M. de, on the transmission of
Secret Knowledge, 24.

Browne, E. G., on Islamic Mysticism, 80.

Bryant, Jacob, on the MySteries, 295.
See also 68.

Buddzus on the Baurr, 152.

Burnet, Thomas, his criticism of - the
Kabbalah, 483 ; on the transmission of
the secret wisdom of Moses, 483 ; on
the Nominal and Real Kabbalah, 484 ;
errors and speculations, 484, 485 ; on
Oriental Allegories, 485.

Buxtorf on the Baurr, 152.

Byler, H. C. van, on Kabbalistic Alchemy,

542.

CanEN, Samuel, on the origin of the
ZOHAR, §9.

623

Cain, 273, 286, 287.

Calmet, 33.

Canaan, 299, 329, 332.

Casaubon, I., 535.

Celestial Chiefs, 297.

Chamai R., on the Kabbalistic Art, 432,

433.

Chasdai, R., conneGtion with Hay Gaon
and Gebirol, 90

Chateau, M. H., his alleged French version
of the Zowar, 116.

CHESED. See SEPHIROTH.

Chinese Kabbalah, 68.

Chiromancy, 530, 533.

CHokMAH. See SEPHIROTH.

Christ, 286, 317, 321.

Christian, P, alleged Astrological Kab-
balah, 548 : on ‘Cagliostro’ s process of

divination, 2b.

Christian Elements in the ZoHAR, 574-
588.

Christian Trinitarian Doétrine, 586.

Cimara, Comtesse de, 213, 214, 215, 216.

Circumcision, 212, 232, 299-302. See
Covenant.

Clavetrus, on the /EsH MEZAREPH, 425.

Closed Eye, The, 143.

Commentaty on Ruth, fragments in the
ZOHAR and possible authorship, 177-

179.

Community of Israel, 222, 229, 303, 313,
358, 382, ee 594.

Confucianism,

Converts from Kabbalism, 21,'433.

Cotrespondences, 72, 135, 225,
397.

Cortices, the demons of Kabbalism, 256 ;
attributed to AssIAH, 7b.; as tfecte-
ments of the Edomite Kings, 418.

Countenances. See Lesser and Vast
Countenances.

Coutt de Gebelin, as an authority on
Egyptology and ‘the Tarot, 554, 555-
Cousin, ViGor, his confusion on the

subjet of the Kabbalah, 488.

Covenant, 15, 19, 299-302 ; Sign of, 300,
301, 302, 303, 378, 394, 395 ; Inward
Covenant, 232.

Creation of man according to the Zonar,
232, 262, 265; creation ex-nibilo, 193,
194, 506 ; instruments of creation, 612—
616; creation the Garment of God,
225. See Doétrine of Cosmology.

Cremer, Abbot, forged alchemical testa-
ment attributed to, 439.

CROWN OF THE Kincpom, Sephirotic
poem of Avicebron, 96.

Cryptography and symbolism, 22, 23.

Cudworth, Ralph, a great theosophist,
480 ; his INTELLECTUAL SYSTEM, 480,
481; connection with Kabbalism, ib. ;
his appeal to rabbinical authorities, 481,
482.

#277,

”

624

Cuirass. See VeSstures.
Cybele, 4.

Daats. Sce SEPHIROTH.

Dale, Antonio van, his reference to the
Key OF SOLOMON, 520.

DA.eTtH, Path of, 304.

D’Alvedre, St. Yves, influence on French
occultism, 500 ; on the MAssoraH, 615.

D’Argens, his so-called Kabbalistic corre-
spondence, 550.

Daughter, 207, 208, 209, 210, 342, 350,
363, 369; Daughter of the King, 19,
ZU 245, 322) 6 Sh.

Daughters of Men, 273.

David, 17, 18, 228, 313, 590.

Davis, Edward, 295.

De Briére on Ancient Eastern Symbolism,

24.
Dee, Dr. John, his Monas HrkEro-
GLYPHICA, 541.
Delanne, Gabriel, his reference to Mitan-

dula, 442.

DELINEATION OF THE HEAVENLY TEM-
PLES, important pre-Kabbalistic treatise,
88, 90.

Deluge, 291, 292, 294, 312. See Book
VIL., § 4 passim.

Demonology, 256, 258, 528, 530. See
Infernal Hierarchy.

De Pauly, 574, 575 ; his translation of the
ZOHAR, 7, 8, 574, 575- See also 15.
DesATIR, CELESTIAL, its analogies with

Kabbalism, 78.

Dionysius, analogies with Kabbalism,
208, 271.

Discourse OF THE AGED Man, tract of
the ZOHAR, 120; excerpts from, 147-
150.

DiscourRsE OF THE YOUNG MAN, 120;
summary, 174, 175.

Dottrine; Secret, xiii, 7,8, 9, rol t #14,
17; 19, 20,)2%; 22,220, 229, 261,265,
310, 332, 341, 371, 386.

Donolo, Sabbatai, his commentary on the
SEPHER YETZIRAH, III.

Douma, Angel of Vindication, 328.

Drach, Chevalier, on the uses of the term
Kabbalah, 37; its authority, 94; on
Abrayanel, 429; on Talmudic Mes-
siahs, 320.

Dreams, 529, 530.

Dutizs OF THE HEART, treatise quoted by
the ZoHAR, 55, 56.

EARTHLY PARADISE, 15, 17, 261-269, 294,
343, 383, 485. See Eden.

East, Wisdom of, 525, 526.

Eckartshausen, on a mote advanced
School, 25.

Eden, Higher and Lower, 237, 238, 240,
245, 264, 279, 283, 285, 289, 290, 298,
312, 319, 325, 326, 342, 343, 351, 352,

INDEX

353, 374, 382, 392, 393, 394, 395, 401 ;
Rivers of Eden, 201, 264, 302, 342, 343.

Edersheim on emanationism and the
TALMUD, 29; Talmudic traditionalism,
29; cosmology of the SEPHER YET-
ZIRAH, 614; description of, 42; on
Akiba, 42; on the Hasidim, 86; on
the Kabbalah, 61. See also 43.

Edom, Kings of, in Zoharic symbolism,
141, 142, 416, 417, 418, 421.

Egypt, 67, 298, 311, 525, 526.

Egyptian Wisdom, 67, 298, 299, 525, 526.

EXEIEH, 584.

Birenezus Philalethes, eminence in Al-
chemy, 473.

Hisler, Robert, 8.

Bb 22.

Eleazar, R., 168 ; Eleazar the Great, 400.

Eleazar of Worms, his Kabbalistic school,
16,98; his commentary on the SEPHER
YETZIRAH, III.

Elias del Medigo, vii.

Eliezer Hagabite, Kabbalistic door, 89.

Eliezer, R., his mystic syStem, go.

Elijah, 199, 220, 226.

Elohim, a title of Shekinah, 342. See
Book VIUL., § 1, for recurring affirma-
tions and developments.

Emanation and the Kabbalah, 193;
emanation and Divine Immanence,
194; as the manifestation of the
Absolute, 2b.; the World of Emana-
tion, 7b. ; emanationism and pantheism,
193. See also 197, 199.

Embryonic Return, 249, 419, 420.

EMERALD TABLE, 133, 535.

Encausse, Gérard. See Papus.

EnocuH, Book OF, 17.

Enos, 295.

Eschatology, Book VII., § 9. See a/so 247,
248, 249, 336, 337, 377:

Essence, Divine, 186, 187, 189, 199.

Esther, 368.

Eucharist, 130, 131, 161, 169, 587.

Evangelical Design of Christian Kab-
balism, ix, 444, 458, 478.

Eve, her formation from the side of
Adam, 264-267; her original union
with Adam, 279; her seduction, 280
et seq.; Eve as the Forbidden Fruit,
283.3) sin of Hye, 2845 . ve) ame
Samuel, 286, 287.

Evil, 201, 202, 203, 270, 274, 282, 283.

Evolution, 249, 313.

Ezekiel, 305, 306.

Bara, 314.

Ezra, Moses ibn Jacob Ben, his Kab-
balistic conneGtions, 92; alleged in-
vention of the Kabbalah, 94.

Faser, G. S., Rev., 295.
FAITHFUL SHEPHERD, fragments in ZOHAR,
on vicatious atonement, 158, 159; on

INDEX 625

Job and the Accuser, 159, 160; on
the Holy Shekinah, 161, 162; on
METATRON, 163 ; analysis and excerpts,
157-163, 187, 190, 213, 253, 314, 320,
343, 346, 348, 350, 399, 401.

Falaquera, disciple of Maimonides, 92.

Fall of Man, as expounded in the ZOHAR
proper, Book VII., § 3 ; according to
the Bantr, 156; according to ZOHAR
HapasH, 287; according to the Con-
cuusions of Mirandula, 598.

FAMA FRATERNITATIS, 565.

Farrar, F. W., description of the TaLmup,

29.

Fichte, J. G., 430.

Figuier, Louis, as cited by Papus, sor ;
on Byzantine alchemical literature, 535 ;
on the alchemists, 7).

Fri10QuE clause, 362.

Finn’s SEPHARDIM, 53, 76.

Flamel, Nicholas, his instructor in
Alchemy, 82; alleged evangelical zeal,
82; misstatements of Eliphas Lévi,
426; opinion of Stanislas de Guaita,

504.

Flaming Sword, 289, 319, 399.

Fludd, Robert, place among English
occultists, 467; mystery of his life,
467, 468; his Kabbalistic studies, 2b. ;
on the praGtical Kabbalah, 468, 469 ;
not acquainted with the Zonar, 7b. ;
his use of the term Kabbalah, 469.

Fount of Wisdom, 409.

Fountain of Life, treatise of Avicebron,

5
Pour Worlds of Kabbalism, World of
Deity or ArzmLuTH, 199; its sole
occupant, 7b,; World of Creation or
BriaH, #b.; World of Formation or
YerziraH, ib.; World of A&ion or
AsstAn, ib. ; astronomical correspond-
ences, 611; eatliest traces of the
doétrine, 196: as regards ArzILUTH,
see XV, 197, 206; as regards Brian,
198, 253; as regards YETZIRAH, 200,
255, 256; as regards AssIAH, 200, 258.
Franck, Adolphe, on the SEPHER
YeErzirau, 44; his defence of the
Kabbalah, 145 ; on the language of the
ZOHAR, 57, 58; on the connection
between the SEPHER YETZIRAH and the
ZOHAR, 134; on Kabbalistic eschato-
logy, 145; on the Banrr, 154; on
Raymond Lully, 441; on William
Postel, 462; on the Kabbalism of
Henry More, 470; on Isaac de Loria,

418.

Frank, Jacob, 81, 564.

Freemasonry, its alleged mystic origin,
548; historical origin, 549; con-
neCtion with occultism, 72. ; Kabbalistic
Degrees, 549-553; occultism and the
Scottish Rite, 553; Masonic Rosi-

crucianism, 549; the Higher Grades
and Kabbalism, 552-554.

Freidlander, M., 236.

Frinellan, his VOCABULAIRE INFERNAL, 33.

GABRIEL, 303.

Gaffarel, his astrological processes, 83 ;
on the Kabbalistic MSS. of Mirandula,
viii; on Astrology and the Law of
Israel, 545.

Galatinus, Petrus, on the evangelical
value of the Kabbalah, 48; his study
of Messianic Do€rine, xi. See also 31.

Galicia, 564.

Galilee, 336.

Gamaliel, R., 42.

Ganz, David, on the compilation of the
MisHNA, 27; his treatise on. Sacred and
Profane History, 93.

GARDEN OF POMEGRANATES, on the name
Ain Sop, 188; authority of this
treatise among Kabbalists, 2b.; its
obscutities and difficulties, 411; on
Pneumatology, 7.; on good works,
412; quoted by Aish MEZAREPH,
425.

GATE OF THE HEAVENS, 422.

Gates oF Licut, on the Divine Will,
193; on the Gates of Understanding,

219.

Gates of UnderStanding, a sketch of
universal science, 218 ; late origin 219.
See 390.

Geber, Latin writings attributed to, 49;
quoted by 72sH MESAREPH, 425.

Gebirol, included’ among early Kab-
balists, 91, 94; his writings and their
evidence on the antiquity of the
ZOHAR, 96; the school with he con-
neéts, 94; his chief do&trines, 97 ;_ his
FounTAIN OF Liz, 95 ; sketch of his
life, zb.; reference to the SEPHER
YETZIRAH, 96, 97; his alleged pan-
theism, 97; Greek complexion of his
philosophy, 7b.

GEBURAH. See SEPHIROTH.

GEMARA, 28, 29.

GEMATRIA, exegetical method of, 36;
example of, 219; in AdsH MEZAREPH,
427, 428.

Gentiles, 333, 396, 401, 580.

Gikatilla, Joseph, 410, 433.
oF LIGHT.

Ginsburg, C. D., on early Kabbalistic
literature, vi, xii; on pre-Kabbalistic
literature, 88; on the SEPHER YET-
ZIRAH, 89 ; on the origin of the ZOHAR,
94; analysis of his work on the Kab-
balah, 495, 496. See a/so 25, 89, 117.

Gnosticism, 69, 497.

God and His attributes, 181, 182 ; corre-
spondences between God, Man and

See GATES

é

626

Nature, 185 ; Mystery of God, 186;
Unknown and Unknowable God, 186,
187; Majesty of God in Kabbalism,
185-191; God and the SEpHrroTH,
202. Sees.v. Absolute.

GOLDEN TREATISE, asctibed to Hermes,

$85:

Goldschmidt, L., his translation of the
SEPHER YETZIRAH, 102.

Good Works, Zoharic Doétrine of, 185.

Gould, R. F., on Aristotelian Influence
among the Jews, 46 ; on Paracelsus, 456.

Goulianoy, Chevalier de, on Hermetic
and Kabbalistic Tradition, 535.

Graal, Holy, 579.

Graetz, Dr., indiscriminate hostility of
his criticism, 61; on the origin of the
ZOHAR, 94; his estimate of Moses de
Leon, 61 ; on the Mysteries of Simeon
ben Yohai, 63; on the SEPHER
YETZIRAH, 65; on the writings of
Abulafia, 92; followed by Ginsburg,
89; on Gebirol, 97; definite rejection
of his views, 572.

Grapes, 279, 281, 294.

Great Adam, 446.

GREATER Hoty SyNop, 119; its literary
aspett, 139; on the authorship of the
Book oF CONCEALMENT, 139, 140;
content of the SyNop, 141; the tfe-
cotder of its discourses, 141 ; summary
account of its symbolism, 141-145, 208,

209.

Greek Church, 362.

Greene, W. B., on the Massoran, 33 ;
on the Worlds of the Kabbalah, 34 ;
on the Kabbalistic Balance, 217.

Grimoires of Magic, alleged place in the
scheme of Kabbalism, 84; close con-
ne€tion with the Magical Clavicles,
520)

Guaita, Stanislas de, on Christian Kab-

‘balism, 503; on the Egyptian origin
of Kabbalism, 65; his literary work,
503 ; his Rosicrucian Order, 503, 504 ;
his views on Kabbalism, 504, 505.

Gui de Viterbi, x.

HaiA, higher or fourth principle of the
soul, 105 ; according to Saadya Gaon,
ib.; the Heavenly HaiA, 418; also a
name of Ruau, 241 ; higher life in man,
244; in cotrespondence with AsBA,
418.

Harxziutn, Palaces, Abodes, 120.

Hair, character by, 531, 532.

HALAKHA, atrangement of, attributed to
R. Akiba, 42; distin@ion between
HALAKHA and HAGGADA, 30.

Ha Levi, Judah, R., on the
YETZIRAH, 42, 200.

Hauicnuor O1naM, 29.

SEPHER

INDEX

Hareau, B., on the Scholastic Philosophy’

414.

Harrison, Clifford, on Bacon as a Rosi-
ctucian, 466.

Harrison, C. G., on the Pantheism of the
Sephirotic System, 99.

Hartmann, Franz, on the higher sense of
Magic, 518 ; on Astrological Geomancy,
545.

HAsHMALOTH, or Omissions, 118, 170.

Hasipim, New, or Pietists, 564.

Haven, Marc, on the Kabbalism of
Stanislas de Guaita, 504.

Hay Gaon, and the Secret Tradition, 90,
91; on the interpretation of dreams,
91; alleged Commentary on the
SEPHER YETZIRAH, 106.

Hayyim, R., 413, 420.

He. See Sacred Name.

Hebrew literature, its extent and develop-
ment, 3 ; characteristics, 4.

Heckethorn, C. W., absurd explanation of
the term Kabbalah, 4; error as to the
literal Kabbalah, 32.

Hellenism, 255.

Helmont, Mercurius and J. B. van, their
alchemical researches, 477.

Hermetic Books, antiquity of their occult
traditions, 50; earlier and later series,
535.

Hermetic Maxim, Kabbalistic parallel, 133.

Hershon, P. J., on the divisions of the
Kabbalah, 35.

HrssooraH KapmaA, Primary Assembly
in the ZoHAR, 120.

rah CHURCH OF THE Hoty GRAAL,
599.

HippDEN THINGS OF THE LAw, extracts in
ZOHAR, 163, 164; value of its exegesis,
164; on the Stages of myStic vision,
164, 165 ; on the vision at Mamre, 165 ;
condemnation of Magic, 166, 167.

Hierarchy, Angelic, 254-256; Infernal,
257-259. See also 396, 397, concerning
the Evil Tree.

Higgins, Godfrey, 295.

Hillel the Great, 43.

Hirtz, R. Napthali, on the Divine Will,
193; analysis of his RoyaAL VALLEY,
420-422.

Hop. See SEPHIROTH. ~

Hoefer, F., on Kabbalism and Alchemy,
539,540.

Hogostratus, xi.

Holy of Holies, 372.

Holy Spirit, 362-369.

Hook, Dean, on Kabbalism and the early
heretics, 62.

Hosmer, T. K., on the Kabbalah and
Demonology, 34.

House oF Gop, 422, 423.

Hulsius, Antonius, 317.

Hypostases, Divine, 16.

INDEX

Ipra pE Mascucana, Assembly of the
San@tuaty, 119, 208, 349.

Idras, i.e., Texts of the Holy Assemblies,
119, 120. See GREATER AND LESSER
Hoty Synop.

Imbonatus, Jos., 563.

Immanence, Divine, 226; a foundation
of the Kabbalah, 192; in contrast to
pantheism, 194. Sve EMANATION.

Incarnation, 586.

sag th vara of Creation, scheme of, 612—

16,

Intermediaries, between Deity and matter,
191, 196.

Intruders, 321.

Irita, Abraham Cohen, his Porta
Ca&:LORUM, 71, 422 ; notice of his other
Zohatic Commentary, 423 ; his Platonic
leanings, 422.

Isaac ben Abraham, 60.

Isaac ben Moses, his forged Zowar, 182.

Isaac de Acco, his search for the MSS. of
the ZoHaR, 53; meeting with Moses
de Leon, ib.; failure of his quest, 54 ;
abrupt termination of his narrative, 2). ;
on the language of the ZOHAR, 57, II5.

Isaac the Blind, an alleged author of the
ZOHAR, 60 ; connection with Avicebron,

4; his school a precursor of Kab-

alism, 98; alleged teacher of Azriel,
109 ; his supposed Commentary on the
SEPHER YETZIRAH, III.

Isaiah, 226, 317, 318. -

Ishmael, R., suggested author of the
DELINEATION OF THE HEAVENLY
TEMPLES, 9I.

Isis, 372.

Israel of Podolia, 81.

Issachar ben Napthali, his synopsis of the
ZOHAR, 423, 424.

JACOB, 228, 353, 354, 355, 383, 401, 591.

Jah (Yah), 105, 137, 207, 208, 232, 393,
620.

Jami of Herat, his SEVEN THRONES, 77,

78.

Jeheshuah, connection with the TErrRa-
GRAM, xi.

Jehovah, symbolised by the Written Law,

343.

Jehovah and Elohim, 225, 230, 352.

Jehovah Elohenou, 353.

Jehovah is Elohim, 342, 359.

Jellinek, on the term SEPHIRA, 195; On
the names of the ZoHAr, 56; his cita-
tions from Moses de Leon, 58.

Jerusalem, 263.

Jesop. See SEPHIROTH.

Jesse, Root of, 318.

Jesus of Nazareth, 320, 584, 585.

Job, sufferings of, 159, 160, 328.

Joel, on emanationism and the Kabbalah,
194.

627

Joseph Gikatilla ben Abraham, 219.

Joseph, R., his Arabic translation of the
TALMUD, 76.

Joshua, 312.

Joshua ben Hananiah, the master of
Akiba, 42.

Judah ben Barzilli, iti.

Judah Hadessi, 58.

Judah Ha Levi, 111, 200,

Judah the Prince, 27.

Judas Azael, 438.

Judge, W. Q., on a Secret Lodge of
Adepts, 511.

Judgment, Last, 325.

KABBALAH, suggested derivations, 4;
true derivation of the term, 5 ; a secret
traditional knowledge, xii, xiii, 5 ; the
hidden thought of Israel, 6; difficulty
of its literary methods, 8, 21, 22; two
ways of regarding its importance, 23,
24; its real interest not exegetical or
historical, 25 ; failure of occult exposi-
tions, 7.; whether a channel of the
Secret Tradition, 7b. ; popular identifi-
cation with Magic, 33 ; four groups of
Hebrew Tradition, 35, 36; mystery
infused by the Kabbalah into the Bible,
186; Theoretical and Prattical Kab-
balah, 36, 37; Higher Secret Do€trine,
341-405 ; conclusion thereupon, 588-
602.

KaABBALAH DENUDATA of Rosenroth, 6 ;
motives which led to it, 478; con-
siderations of the preface, 7b.; sacri-
fices involved by the work, 479; its
critical standpoint, 480; its ambitious
design, 115, 116; excerpts and refer-
ences, 136, 186, 189, 409, 411, 413, 421,
422, 538.

Kabbalah, Praétical, 36.

Kabbalism, Secret School of, 576.

Kairites, 79.

Kapila, 4.

Karppe, Dr. S., 42, 44, 58, 182, 566-568.

Kenealy, E. V., on the term Kabbalah, 4;
on the wisdom of Adam, 16.

Kennedy, H. A., his Study of Philo, 70.

Kerubim, 319, 356, 357, 369, 399.

KETHER. See SEPHIROTH.

Kry oF SoLomon, a transparent forgery,
49 ; nonsensical processes, 84 ; in two
recensions, 520; as an embodiment of
Kabbalistic Tradition, 521.

Khunrath, reference by Eliphas Lévi, 478 ;
by Stanislas de Guaita, 504; his con-
neGtion with Kabbalism, 538. See a/so

341.
Kiern, F., his Kabbalah of Alchemy,

539-
King, Supreme, 314; Sacred King, 359,
590; King and Queen, 211, 313, 350.

628

King, C. W., on the Ancient Traditions of
the ZOHAR, 69; on the analogies
between Gnosticism and the Kabbalah,
id.

Kingsford, Anna, 507.

Kingsland, W., on the Ancient Wisdom
Religion, 511.

Kircher, Athanasius,
Understanding, 218;
correspondences, 72.

Konitz, a defendant of the Kabbalah, 46.

Kusari: its references to the SEPHER
YETZIRAH, 92.

on the Gates of
on Kabbalistic

LABAN, 274, §25.

LABYRINTH OF SOLOMON, 536.

Lafuma-Giraud, Emile, 15

pa Dr. J., on the Hehiah chara€tets,
546.

Lamb, Paschal, 271, 391.

Lamb of God, 354.

Lambert, Mayer, on the date and chara€ter
of SEPHER YETZIRAH, 45 ; on the Com-
mentary of Saadya Geon, 104.

Land of the Living, 395, 476.

Land, Holy, 238, 297, 298, 310, 324, 335,
360, 366, 374.

Landauer, M. H., on the authorship of
the Zour, 60.

Latin Church, 278, 291, 317, 3255 336, 362,
587, 597-

Lead, Jane, 597.

Leah, 354, 367, 401.

Leiningen, Carl, on Pneumatology, 237.

Lejay, Julien, sor.

Teliévre, A., on the divinatory sciences,
83.

Leroy-Beaulieu, A., on the HALAKHA and
HaccaDa, 30; on the Jew and
Mysticism, 558; on immortality and
resurrection in the TaLmup, 236.

Lesser Countenance, symbolism of, 137,
138, 141, 143-145, 146, 147, 209, 210,
211, 582, 583, 584.

LressER Hoty SyNop, 119, 120; as
described by Rosenroth, 146; design
of its revelations, 7b.; nature of the
discourse, 1b.; Kabbalistic do@rine of
the sexes, 146, 147; account of R.
Simeon’s death, 147.

Lerrers FROM A Mystic, Mysticism of the
Divine Name, 45.

Letters, Hebrew, their pre-existence and
emanation, 221, 231; Great Letters,
ib.; Beruas the instrument of creation,
222,235,292) its ‘matrices, 223.

Leusden, J., on the name of God, 519.

Levi, David, on the antiquity of the
Vowel- Points, 56.

Lévi, Bliphas, his misconstruion of the
TALMUD, 30, 31; on the Divine Name,
613; on the thirty-first Path of Wis-

INDEX

dom, 217; on the Boox or ConcEAL-
MENT, 135 ; OM MICROPROSOPUS, 491 ;
its symbolism, 492; on the ZEsH
MzzAREPH, 426; on Raymond Lully,
439 5 translation of Mirandula’s Con-
CLUSIONS, 445; variants from same,
445 ef seq.; on the Colleétion of
Pistorius, 459, 460; on William
Postel, 461, 462, 463, 464; sketch of
Lévi’s position as a Kabbalist, 487-
494; as judged by De Guaita, 503.

Leviathan, 288, 336.

Levirate, 205.

Levita, Elias, on the Vowel-Points, 55.

Libavius, Andrew, 468.

LrBer Drustim, excerpts in the collection
of Rosentroth, 4153; analysis of, 414-
416; influence on Henry More, 413.

Liberating Angel, 344.

Lrper Murus, 596.

Lilith, Kabbalistic bride of Samuel, 258,
288, 289, 419.

Lillie, Ass 9x\,

Lines Mepr1A, 601, 602.

Lismon, Z., on the Tarot, 555.

Loéb, Isidore de, on, French and Spanish
Jews in the thirteenth century, 29;
on Merratron, 254; Loeb’s study of
the Kabbalah, 496.

Longelus, Ranutius, 83.

Loria (Luria), Isaac de, on BINAH as
soutce, 607 ; on the Book OF CoNCEAL-
MENT, 136; his developments of
Zoharic Pneumatology, 418 ; his teach-
ing recommended by Rosenroth, 121,
122; his position and period, 412, 413 ;
his works, 412-420 ; summary of same,
ib.

Lot, 277, 299, 336.

Lover of Philalathes, 236.

Lover and Beloved, 232, 267, 322, 379.

Lowy, Rev. A., 3.

Lucifer, 229, 276.

Lully, Raymond, his true work, 82; his
conneétion with Kabbalism, 438 ; his
date and legend, 439; the Lully of
Alchemy, 228, 439, 440; errors of
Franck, 441; his scholastic system,
440.

Luminous Book. See SEPHER Ha Bani.

Luria, David, 46.

Liitkens, M. Nicolai, 480.

Lux In TENEBRIS, its observations on the
ZOHAR, 400.

Maamar To Hazez, Come and See Dis-
coutse in the ZOHAR, 120.

Macroprosopus, longanimity of, 143;
telation with MuIcROpROsOPUS, 137;
do@rine of, fundamental to the Kab-
balah, 66; late in the history of
speculation, #b.; symbolical develop.

INDEX 629

ment of, 136-145; evet hidden and
concealed, 137; Soul of the Greater
World, 211; according to Isaac de
Loria, 417.

MacKenzie, Kenneth, on the unknown

writings of Pasqually, 486.

Magic, Ceremonial and Philosophical,
vy; popular connefion with Kab-
balism, v; general considerations on
the connection, 437; influence of
Kabbalism on Western Magic, 521;
White and Black Magic, 518; power
of Divine Names, 519, 520; processes
of debased Kabbalism, 520; the Keys
of Solomon, 521 ; the Grimoites, 522 ;
summaty of the Doérine of Names,
522-524; ZOHAR on Magic, 517-527.
Maier, Michael, his Trrpus AUREUS, 439 ;
conneftion with Fludd, 468.
Maimonides, his Aristotelian tendency,
46; said to have turned a Kabbalist,
92; eulogy of, 93 ; unacquainted with
Avicebron, 94.

Maitland, Edward, 507.
Male and Female Principles, a Keynote,

357:
MarxurH. See SEPHIROTH.

Mangetus, 439.

Manning, Cardinal, on the Daimon of
Socrates, 442.

MANSIONS OR ABODES, excerpts in ZOHAR,

175 ; symbolism of, 175-177.
Marau Konegn, Vision of the Priest, 121,
409.

Marconis on Masonic Mysteries, 553.
Marcus, what he brought into Gnosticism,

69.
Marriage. See Mystery of Sex.

Marty the Virgin. See Queen of Heaven.
Masonty, 579. See Book XI., § 4.

Massey, Gerald, 144.

MassoRAH, 33, 615.

Martuers, S. L. MacGregor, his gratui-
tous assumption, 22; false impression
created by, 25; his translation of the
occultation series, vi; the importance
which he attributes to same, 135;
blunder concerning the treatise Beru
ELouim, 26; on the Perrecr Way,
508 ; devoid of critical judgment, 522 ;
assettion concerning AEsH MEZAREPH,
538.

MATHNITIN, Repetitions, 119, 120, 172,
173, 335, 336, 398, 399.

MATRONA, 202, 209, 210, 266, 313, 314,

335, 345, 352, 357, 361, 381, 400.
Matter, on Gnosticism and the Kabbalah,

62.
Mead, G. R. S., 69.
MEASURE OF THE HEIGHT, pre-Kabbalistic
treatise, 88.
Mediatrix, 399.

MEIMRA, 211.

Melchizedek, 299.

Memphis and Misraim, Rites of, 553.
MerQur CHOKMAH, 121, 409.

MercavaH. See WORK OF THE CHARIOT.
Mercy-Seat, 356, 357.

Messiah, according to the ZOHAR, 316-324.
METATHESIS, 83.

Meratron, the Angel of the Presence,

254, 313, 319, 333, 335, 344, 351, 353,
360, 366, 399, 469.

Metempsychosis, rejected by Saadya Gaon,
105 ; taught by Isaac the Blind, 109 ;
and by Manasses, 434.

Meurin, Léon, on the Synagogue of Satan,
67, 505; a troubled dream of the
Papacy, 503; on Freemasonry, the
Kabbalah and Pantheism, 505-507.

Mevi, R., 432.

Meyer, his edition of the SEPHER YET-
ZIRAH, IOI, 102.

Michael, as High Priest, 130, 131, 244.

Microprosopus, emanation of, 137;
telation to MACROPROSOPUS, 137; 2
fundamental doétrine of the Kabbalah,
66; late charatter of its speculation,
2b,; Sephirotic attribution, 211 ; mani-
feStation of, 137, 211; Soul of the
Lesser World, 211 ; androgyne nature,
144, 146, 211; symbolical develop-
ment, 137-146 ; according to De Loria,
417.

MrprasH CONEN, 90, 136.

MrprasH Ha NEELAM, SECRET Miprasu,
118, 120. See SECRET COMMENTARY.

MiprasH HAZEETH, 120.

MrprasH RapBA, 311.

MiprasH RutH, 120, 177-179, 277-

MrprasH TALPIGOTH, 318.

MrprasH of R. Simeon, an alleged name
of the Zouar, 56, 63.

Mrprasuim, Ancient, 578, 599.

MiprasHIM and TARGUMIM, 51, 56.

Mirandula, Picus de, his evangelical zeal,
ix; not a partisan of magic, 443, 444;
not acquainted with Avicebron, 96;
conversion effected by, 433; Lully
and Mirandula, 441; his Kabbalistic
MSS. vii, viii, 442; sketch of
Mirandula, 443 ; his KABBALISTIC Con-
CLUSIONS, ix, 445-452; his treatise on
Astrology, 444; Agrippa and Miran-
dula, 444, 452.

MisHNa, compiled by R. Judah, 27;
MIsHNA as patt of the Tatmup, 28;
date according to Morinus, 29 ; sections
of, 31, 32; error of Heckethorn, 32.
See also 343, 360, 361.

MisHNAYOTH, 27.

Moab, Plains of, 310.

Modesty, 378.

Molitor, as interpreted by Papus, 84, 151.

Moon, and Oral Law, 17, 18.

Mordechai, R., 425.

630

Mordell, Phineas, 45, 102.

More, Henry, his contributions to the
KABBALAH DENUDATA, 116, 470;
object of his Kabbalistic Studies, 470 ;
temarks on Isaac de Loria, 470, 471;
exposition of Ezekiel, 471; his Con-
JECTURA CABALISTICA, 472, 473.

Morerus on Magic, 518.

Morinus, 29.

Moses, 17, 303-312.

Moses Abraham ben Samuel Zakut, 52.

Moses de Leon, R., his alleged authorship
of the ZoHAR, vii, 46; an almost im-
possible theory, 50, 51; evidence
adduced for it, 51, 52; narrative in
the SEPHER YUHASIN, 53, 54; does not
prove the authorship of R. Moses, 54 ;
sketch of the internal evidence, §5 ;
how met by the defenders of the
ZOHAR, 55-57; points of weakness in
the defence, 58; further speculation
concerning R. Moses, 59.

Moses ibn Jacob ben Ezra, 92.

Moses of Cordova, his PARADISE OF
POMEGRANATES, I2I, 409, 410; on the
simplicity of Arn Sopu, 7b. ; his pneu-
matology, 411, 412; dateof R. Moses,
410; high authority of his treatise,
410; summary account of it, 410-412.

Mother of God. See Queen of Heaven.

Munk, Solomon, on the pantheism of the
Kabbalah, 193; on the TaLtmup and
Kabbalah, 29, 30; on the authorship
of SEPHER YETZIRAH, 43; on the
language of the Zowar, 57; on certain
similarities between Maimonides and
the ZoHAR, 94; on the fusion of the
Kairites and Motozales, 79 ; on Avice-
bron, 95 ; his classification of the Kab-
balah, 41. See also 46, 50.

Myer, Isaac, his erudition and his assump-
tions, 26; distinflion between the
Kabbalah and the TaLmupb, 32; on the
Kabbalah and the New Testament, 6 ;
on the Speculative Kabbalah, 612; on
the Aristotelian and Kabbalistic systems,
46 ; on the acquaintance of Maimonides
with the ZoHar, 94; on the Kab-
balistic conneétions of Avicebron, 95 ;
on Hay Gaon’s alleged Commentary on
the SEPHER YETZIRAH, 106; on the
higher soul of the THoRAH, 123; on
Hay Gaon and the ZoHar, 182; on
Paracelsus and the Kabbalah, 455 ; on
the Hermetic Books and the Kabbalah,
535 ; on a Chinese Kabbalah, 537.

Mysteries, Instituted, 593.

MysterigEs OF Love. See Abravanel.

Mystery of Faith, 220, 222, 231, 237, 247,
261, 269, 292, 304, 306, 378, 389, 390,
391, 392, 394, 397-

MyStery of Sex, Book VIIIL., § 2 passim.
Supplementary and minor references,

INDEX

19, 261, 263, 276, BERT S cien
371, 377-405, 591-597,

MySticism and the Kabbalah, Kabbalistic
history imbedded in that of occultism,
557; Old Jewish do&rine concerning
the mystic communication between
Divine and human, 186; analogies
between the MyStic "Marriage and the
Kabbalistic doétrine of the Prototype,
559, 560; the Kabbalah of service to
the pra@tical myStic, 557; a certain
message, 558; the points of contaét,

558, 559.

NAAMAH, 288, 289.

Nagrela, Joseph ibn, 96.

Nahmanides, 52; alleged transmission
of the ZoHar from Palestine, 53; a
pupil of Azriel, 109; his Kabbalistic
writings, I10, 111; opposed by R.
Mevi, 432.

Name, Divine (including its separate
consonants), its division, 18; loss of
its proper vowels, 18 ; creation hidden
in the Divine Name, 221 ; Immanence
of the Name in the universe, 222; the
Name as the MyStery of Faith, 223,
the Law comprised in the Name, 224 ;
partition of the Divine Name, 315, 322;
its restoration, 335. See also 345, 346,
349, 378, 379-

Name, Sacred, of 12 letters, 617.

Bere Sacred, of 42 letters, 223, 275, 617,

18.

Name, Sacred, of 72 letters, 16, 618.

Name of Shekinah, True, 311.

Names, Power of Divine, 44, 45, 105.

Napthali Hirtz, R., 193, 420-422.

Nazir, Jacob, his BooK OF EMANATION,
611.

Nebo, Mount, 303.

Nehunya, R. yalleged author of the Bauir,
E524 other attributed writings, ib.

Neoplatonism, 124.

NEPHESH, 105, 129, 241, 242, 243, 244,
246, 325, 327, 418, 421, 619, 620.

NEPHILIM, 274.

NESHAMAH, I05, 129, 241, 242, 243, 244,
246, 325, 418, 421, 619, 620.

NerzacH. See SEPHIROTH.

Nicholson, Reynold A., 79.

Nicolas, M., on the authorship of the
SEPHER YETZIRAH, 43; on the anti-
quity of the Kabbalah, 63.

Noah, 292, 293, 294, 295, 359, 591-

Nortelius, Andreas, on the Christian
aspects “of the ZOHAR, 479.

Norse Mythology, suggested analogies
with the Kabbalah, 69.

NOTARIKON, 2 Kabbalistic method of
exegesis, 9, 37> 41, 83.

Notary Art, its nee ee with Kab.
balism and with Lully, 440.

INDEX

=a

Nuctemeron, 500.

Numbers, M concerning,
decade as an emanation of Deity, 194;
numbers and the SEPHIROTH, 195 ;

the

Occur Pseupo-ScIENCcEs, 9, 10, 24, 83,
84, 171, 173, 174, 297, 517-534-

, Simon, his translation of the

InpROVEMENT OF HumMAN REASON, 79.

Old, W. G., his Manuva oF AsTROLOGY,

544; on Kabbalistic Astrology, 548.

Oliver, Rev. George, on the diffusion of

the MySteries, 68.
Onan, sin of, 291, 292, 333-
Onkelos, quoted by Mirandula, 449 ; his
Aramaic diale& not identical with that
of the Zowar, 57. See also 210, 226.
Oral Law, 10, 12, 13 ; image of Shekinah,
343, 360, 361.
Origen on Exorcisms, 520.
Osiris, 222.

PALACES, 119, 175-177, 247, 248, 3333

Palace of Delight, 247. See Mansions.
Palladius, ParaprsE of, 403, 404.
ere E. H., on R. ‘Judah the Prince,

egies a 193.
Pantheus, J. A., 540, 541.
Papus, 7.e., G. Encausse, his assumptions
concerning the Kabbalah, 26, 37, 38;
on the Paths of Wisdom, 218 ; trans-
lation of the SEPHER YETZIRAH, 102,
goo; on an alleged French translation
of the Zouar, 116; his conneétion
with the French occult movement, 499,
500 ; his occult antecedents, 500 ;
summary of the Kabbalah, 36, 37, 38,
yoo-—so3 ; on the Praétical Kabbalah,
82; on 4isH MEzaREPH, 544; on the
Tarot, 556.
Paracelsus, alleged traces of the Kabbalah
in his syStem, 455-458; value of his
ces, 457; nota ‘Student of the
Kabbalah, 458.
PARADISE Of Palladius, 403.
Parpses Rumronm, 121. See GARDEN OF
PoMEGRANATES. See also 198, 409.
Pasqually, Martines de, 486.
oe Arms, Gate of the Eyes, 121,

Paths. oe 203, 335-

Paths of Wisdom, doétrine concerning,
213; special nature of their interest,
ib. ; translation of the document which
embodies them, 213-217 ; their modern
accent, 217; according to Papus, 218 ;
Avicebron’s poem on the Paths, 97.

H.E.

LLL?CLLP?LPPLABLBLALLLL LLL LL LLL LLL LEON CC Ct CCC NCCT tte tt ttt tie tte tt tne eet tute mt ttt te me emt trar tte mm
— i oenienetiandedaaeiernataiteed aeemmmnamteneamcaniaememetemnmtantoeneeed

631

Patmore, Coventry, 380.

Paul, St., 250, 270.

PEKooDAH seétion of the ZOHAR, 120.

Pelling, Edward, 482.

Perrect Way, its Kabbalistic allusions,
509 ; Opinion of Baron Spedalieri, 508,
509 ; value of same, 509 ; Statement of
the allusions, 509, 510;
crac gee’ 510.

Pharaoh, 5

Pherruts ous, Jewish academy of, 91.

Philadelphian School, 596, 597-

Philo, his Pneumatology, 237; his
analogies with Kabbalism, 7o-72;
Jewish tendencies represented by Philo,

365.

PhylaAteries, difficulty in the ZoHar con-

cerning, 55 ; how met by its defenders,
6

56.

Physiognomy, as understood by the
ZOHAR, 173, 174, 532-534-

Pike, Albert, on the true name of Satan,
258; on Kabbalism and the religion
of Zoroaster, 67; on Kabbalism and
Northern Mythology, 69; his trans-
formation of the Scottish Rite, 552-
554s See alse 606.

Pillar of Benignity, Middle, 201, 202, 203,

272, 280, 347, 350; 373: 400 ; the image
of Sh as 343.

Pillar of Mercy, 201. See also SEPHI-
ROTH.

Pillar of Severity, 201. See also
SEPHIROTH.

Prrxe of R. Eliezer, 90, 498.

Pisgah, 310.

Prstis SopHta, 69.

Pistorius, his colle&tion of Kabbalistic
writers, xi, 459, 460; a te of same,
461. See alsa 101, 213, 42

Pneumatology, the Dobiine of the Soul

in Kabbalism, 235-253 ; according to
Saeko Gaon, 104, 105; a recurring
subject j in the ZoHAR, 235 ; according
to Moses de Cordova, 411, 412;
according to Isaac de Loria, 417-420 ;
according to A. Cohen Irira, 423.

PomtaNDER, Diving, 534, 535-

Poisson, A., on Alchemy, 537, 538.

Pordage, Dr. is, 595, 597-

Porter, Noah, 189.

Poscantius, Benedidtus, 317.

Postel, William, on the SEPHIROTH, 196 ;
his alleged translation of the Baum,
157; his legend, 461; notice of his
life, 461, 462; his connection with
Kabbalism, 462, 463 ; extravagance of
his views, 463 464; his translation of
the SEPHER hag ix, 464, 465;
other writings, 465; according to
Stanislas de Gua a, 504. See alsa 508.

Pott, Mrs. Henry on the Rosicrucians,
466.

anak

63 2

Prayer, 248, 361, 370; Prayer of Con-
templation, 564; House of Prayer, 359 ;
Prayer of Silence, 590.

Prayer of Elijah, 180, 181.

Pre-existence, found in the TaLmup, 235 ;
taught in the ZOHAR, 237-241;
accepted by Saadya Gaon, 105; pre-
existence of the soul of the Messiah,
323, 324.

Princes of the Exile, 3.

Principle, Supreme, 212.

Procreation, 280.

Propitiatory, 313, 393.

Pumbaditha, Pebeceeeyend of, 91.

Punishment, everlasting, 328; not ever-
lasting, 328, 329.

QuEEN of Heaven, 353, 369, 370, 376.

RaAtAH MEHEMNAH. See Faithful Shep-
herd, a/so 119, 120.

RaBANus, quoted by Agrippa, 454.

Rachel, 251, 354, 401, 591.

Raza De Razin. See Secret of Secrets,
120, 173, 174.

Raziel, 16, 134, 519.

Reggio, Isaac, vii.

Reincarnation, the idea in Kabbalism,
249-253; differs from Kabbalistic
Revolution, 250; rejected by Saadya
Gaon, 105. See MrrempsycHosis and
REVOLUTION.

Relandus, Adrianus, on a second sense in
the TALMUD, 31.

Renan, Ernest, 97.

Resurre€tion, a tenet of Tantmup and
Synagogue, 236; in the profession of
faith of Maimonides, #b.; as taught in
the ZOHAR, 332-337; office of Mera-
TRON, 3333 treatise of Manasses, 433,

434.

Reuchlinus, his translation of the SEPHER
YETZIRAH, 101; his group, 458, 459 ;
his Lutheran tendencies, 460; his
Kabbalistic writings, x, xi.

Revolution of Souls, as a root in the
ZOHAR 148; the treatise of Isaac de
Loria, 148, 252, 417-420.

Riccius, Paulus, his translation of the
SEPHER YETZIRAH, 101; his con-
version to Christianity, 459; his
CELESTIAL AGRICULTURE, Xi.

Rittangelius, his edition of SEPHER
YETZIRAH, 101, 106, 107.

Ritual of the Dead, 60.

Roach, Robert, 597.

Robe of Glory. See Vesture.

Rodkinson, Michael, his translation of
the BABYLONIAN TALMUD, 18, 27;
excerpt from, 140.

INDEX

Rome, 320, 323.

Rose Cross, Kabbalistic Order of, 503.

Rose of Sharon, 126, 131, 132, 310;
Roses, 264.

Rosenroth, C. Knorr von, his importance
to occultists, 476; his occult ~con-
nections, 477; characteristics, 477;
teligion, 482 ; views on the conversion
of the Jews, 409, 413; his sacrifices
and labours, 483; his critical stand-
point, 479. See also 6, 135, 409.

Rosicrucians, historical evidences of the
Order, 466; as Students of the Kab-
balah, 465; Masonry and _ Rosi-
crucianism, 466; Mystery of the Rosy
Cross, 579.

Rossi, Abbé de, his analysis of the
ZOHAR, II5.

Ruah, 105, 129, 241, 242, 243, 244, 246,
325, 418, 421, 619.

Rulandus, Martinus, on the terms of
Alchemy, 541.

Ruysbroeck on Symbolical Astrology,

546, 557.

SaapyA Gaon, his Commentary on
SEPHER YETZIRAH, 90, 104; written
in Arabic, 104 ; summary of, 104—106 ;
scatcely a Kabbalistic Commentary,
107.

Sabathier, R. P. Esprit, 545.

Sabbaoth (Tsabaoth), 198.

Sabbatai Zevi, his Messianic Mission, 81.

Sabbath, 268, 387.

Saint-Martin, his Esoteric Tradition, 486 ;
not a student of the Kabbalah, 7. ;
Kabbalistic complexion of his lesser
doétrines, 7b. ; error of French occul-
tists, 487.

SALOMON AND ABSAL, 77.

Samaél, averse correspondence of Hop,
257; according to the ZOHAR, 280-
286, 287.

Sapere Aude on the /ZsH Mezarepu and
Alchemy, 425, 426, 427; on the Kab-
balah and Chaldean philosophy, 67 ;
on the derivation of alchemical know-
ledge to the West, 534. See Westrott.

Sarah, 298, 300, 354, 357.

Satan, 275, 286, 331, 336.

Scaliger and the Knights of the Temple,
81.

ScuetHiyA. See Mystic Stone.

Schiller-Szinessy, on the authorship of the
SEPHER YETZIRAH, 43; On modern
criticism of the TarGumim and Mipra-
SHIM, 51; on the original writings of
Moses de Leon, 58; on the latest date
which can be ascribed to the ZoHAR,
557; on the Mishnic period of its
nucleus, 27, 62.

Scholem, G., 8, 426, 536.

INDEX

Scheetgenius, Christianus, on the
panes of R. Simeon ben Yohai,

Schuré, Edouard, on a triple sense in
Genesis, 502.

Science of the Soul in God, xiv.

Sealing Names, permutations of the
Tetragram in the SEPHER YETZIRAH,
Iol,

SECRET COMMENTARY, fragments extant
in the ZoHAR, 167 ; ascent of the Soul,
167, 168 ; the Blessed Vision, 167, 168 ;
Shekinah and Food of Light, 168, 169 ;
Resurrection, 335, 336, 337, 349. See
also 380, 401.

Secret Learning, an alleged early name of
the Zorar, 58.

Secret of Secrets, fragment quoted in

ZOHAR, 173; concerns Kabbalistic
physiognomy, 173, 174. See also
120.

Secret School, 10, 576.

SECRET SOCIETIES IN THE MIDDLE AGES—
Ghoolat Seét, 76.

Secret Tradition in Christian Times, xiii,
xiv.

SEDER Ha KABBALAH,
orthodox apology, 93.

Seed, Divine, 230.

Seed of Solomon, 393.

SEPHER DEREK EmetH, Way of Truth,
I2I, 409.

SEPHER Ha Banir, ot Luminous Book,
119, 120; its critical position, 150, 151 ;
imputed authorship, 151, 152; further
views on its authenticity, 152-156;
analysis and excerpts, 156, 157, 341.

SEPHER RAZIEL, not the earliest form of
occultism in Israel, 134; debased
apparatus of, 469; a storehouse of
medizval magic, 519.

SEPHER YETZIRAH, as a vehicle of the
Philosophic Tradition of Kabbalism,
ix; part of a large myStical literature,
38; contains the germ of the Sephirotic
scheme, 99; its description of the
SEPHIROTH, 7b. does not mention the
Four Worlds of later Kabbalism, ror ;
nor yet the doétrine of Arn SopH, 110 ;

an important

on the letters of the Hebrew alphabet,.

He 102 ; on the instruments of creation,
; the Paths of Wisdom as a depend-
a of the SEPHER YETZIRAH, 213 ;
contains no reference to Kabbalistic
Pneumatology, 104, 235; traditional
authorship, 42, 98 ; asctibed to Akiba,
42, 43; the reference to a SEPHER
YETZIRAH in the Talmuds, 44, 98; its
different influence on Christian minds
as compated with the Zowar, 47;
Commentary of R. Abraham, 103, 107-
109; latest possible date, 109 ; Com-
mentary of Saadya Gaon, 104-106 ;

633

Commentary attributed to Hay Gaon,
106, 107 ; Commentary of Azriel, 109 ;
general analysis, 110; its conneétions
and dependencies, 103-111; Com-
mentary of Nahmanides, 103; other
commentaries, 111 ; the SEPHER YET-
ziRAH said to end where the ZOHAR
begins, 134; not a magical work, 437 ;
speculative date, 65; high traditional
authority, 88.

SEPHER YUHASIN, 7.¢., Book of Genealo-
gies, 51; view of the ZOHAR, 523
nattative of Isaac de Acco, 53, 54.

SEPHIROTH, as emanations of the Deity,
192, 194; their names, 195, 200;
initial purpose of the system, 196 ;
first etl with in the SEPHER YETZIRAH,
ib., 200; tabulation of their qualities
and symbolism, 199, 204-206; an
occult explanation concerning them,
609; the SrpHiroTH in the Fout
Worlds, 199, 200; the SEPHIROTH and
the Two Countenances, 208, 209; the
SepHrRrotH and the Paths of Wisdom,
213-217 ; archangelic correspondences,
254, 2553; angelic correspondences,
255,256; averse correspondences, 256—
258; value of the doftrine, 258; Sufic
analogies, 77; Persian analogies, 78;
analogies in Avicebron, 95 ; according
to the SEPHER YETZIRAH, 99, 100, IOI ;
how understood by Saadya Gaon, 104,
106; Azriel on the colours of the
SEPHIROTH, 110; according to the
Supplements of the ZoHar, 181;
according to Isaac de Loria, 415, 416 ;
Synopsis of later Speculations, Go5—

609; the SEPHIROTH and Alchemy,
427, 428 ; concerning Daath, 195, 210,
347. See Appendix I.

Seraphim, 271.

Serpent, see Book VII., §§ 1, 2; minor
references, 202, 286, 287, 292, 307, 312,
528.

Seth, 251.

SHADDAI, 198, 323,

Shekinah, Book Vil ie passim. Supple-
mentary and minor references, xiv, 15,
165, 2O%,) 202) 247,.25.45.202) 297) 279%
298, 303, 304, 305, 306, 311, 313, 336,
384, 386, 392, 399, 411.

SHEOL, 324-332.

Shereera, Gaon R., 90, 91, 174.

SHILOH, 348.

SHIUR Koman, 88.

Signatures, Do@tine of, 31, 530, 531.

Simeon ben Yohai, R., his alleged author-
ship of the ZOHAR,. 52, 543 his scribe,
57; his MrprasH according to the
Tatmups, 63; the authorship metely
traditional, 74; his traditional author-
ship of the Boox oF CONCEALMENT,
139; Talmudic account of R. Simeon,

the ae)

634

140, 141; his Discoutse in the GREATER
SYNOD, 141-145 ; in the Lesser SyNop,
146, 147; account of his death, 147;
conversations with R. Yebba, 148-150;
in the Baurr, 156; in the FarrHFrun
SHPEHERD, 157. See a/so 18, 28, 261.

Simon, Richard, on an error of Walton,

32 ; ON superstitious sciences brought

y the Jews from Chaldea, 34; on
Magic and Kabbalism, 35, 36; on the
Christian aspe& of the Kabbalistic
books, 47.

Simon, R. Meir ben, 151.

Simulacrum, curious fantasy of the ZoHAR
and later Kabbalism, 412.

Sinai, Mount, 304, 306.

SipHrA Di ZENIOUTHA. 7.¢., Book of
Concealment, on Arn Sor, 188, 208 ;
on a holy intelligence and an animal
soul in man, 235 ; probably the oldest
part of the ZoHAR, 63, 236; its ante-
cedent, 88; place in the Zowar, 135 ;
summary of its contents, 134-139. See
also 119, 235, 378.

SirHRA THORAH, Secrets of the Law, 118, |

120. See SECRET COMMENTARY.

Solomon, 229, 314, 374, 525.

Sommer, G. C., viii.

Son, Begotten, 207, 209, 323, 324, 350,
362, 363, 585.

Sons of God, 272, 273.

Sons of the Do€rine, xiv, 13, 14, 169, 198,
295, 358, 376, 383, 388, 600.

Sophia, Gnostic, 376.

Sophia, Virgin, 376.

Sophonias, Prophecy of, 296.

Soul and Death, 245, 246, 325, 326, 327;
phases of the soul, 14, 619, 620;
creation of souls, 394-396; beatified
souls, 256. :

Spain and Jewry, 75, 76.

Sesdnices alin: on the Kabbalah and
the Perrecr Way, 508, 509.

Spencer, Herbert, on the positive tepre-
sentation of the Unconditioned, 189.
Spirit of God, Holy Spirit, 581, 585, 586.

Steiger, Isabel de, 25.

Steinschneider, 4, 94.

Stenring, Knut, 42, 100, 200, 213, 215.

Stone, Mystic, 228, 229.

Sufic Do@rine, hypothesis of Tholuck,
77; Kabbalistic analogies in Sufic
poetry, 77-79; the Dod&trine of Divine
Absorption, 79; Sufism and Jewish
Tradition, 80.

Sun and Written Law, 17, 18.

Supplements of the Zouar, two seties of,
179; notice of the Ancient Supple-
ments, 179-182; the Later Supple-
ments, 182.

Supplementary Soul, 14.

Supreme MySteries, 171, 265, 292.

Swedenborg, 225.

INDEX

TABERNACLE, 302, 356, 363, 366, 369, 371,

393.

Tables of the Law, 307, 308, 309, 311.

Talismanic Magic, 133.

TALMUD, Statting-point of, 26; its
sources, 7b. ; materials embodied there-
in, 27; by whom methodised, #b. ;
MIsHNAYOTH and rival MisHNAyoru,
27, 28; TosEPHTOTH, 28; the Gez-
MARA. ib.; Tatmups of Jerusalem and
Babylon, 7b.; connections of the
TALMupD and Kabbalah, zb., 87; errors
of comparison, 28, 29; the Tatmup
not Kabbalistic, 29; differences be-
tween the, Traditions, 29, 30; results
of their confusion, 30; ertors of
Eliphas Lévi, 30-32; Tarmup and
Pneumatology, 105, 235, 236; TALmup

‘and SEPHER YETZIRAH, 34, 35; TAL-
MuD and Tradition, 45 ; Tatmup and
MyStic Tradition, 29; Tatmup and
MySticism, 29 ; closing of the Talmudic
canons, 27; reference to Simeon Ben
Yohai, 140.

TALPIGOTH, MrprAsH, 318.

Tarcuom of Uzziel, 37.

TaRrGuM to the Prophets, 37.

TarGuMs, language of, 57.

Tarot, its antiquity and importance, 554 ;
first mentioned by Court de Gebelin,
#b.; views of Lévi and Vaillant, 554-
556; analogies with the Kabbalah,
5553 its history according to Papus,
556; true attribution of its trump
catds, 556, 557; wealth of its sym-
bolism, 2d.

TELESCOPE OF ZOROASTER, 518.

Temples, First and Second, Book VII.,
§ 7 passim. Minor references, 267, 274,
302,135 7,358) 525200 |

TEPHILIM. See Phylacteries.

TETRAGRAMMATON, in what manner the
universe proceeds from this name, 613 ;
its permutations in the SEPHER YET-
ZIRAH, I01;  ttansposition of, 447;
mentioned by Fludd, 469 ; its attribu-
tion to the Lesser Countenance, 491 ;
TETRAGRAMMATON and the Tarot, 555.

THEMURAH, 9, 36, 41.

Theory of Ecstasy, 80.

Theosophy, Modern, objeét of this
movement, 510; its success, 7b.; views
on the Kabbalah, 511; various State-
ments of H. P. Blavatsky, 511-513 ;
the movement in Paris, 499.

Tholuck, on the connection between the
Kabbalah and Sufism, 77.

THORAH, its abysses of mystery, 615 ; its
prte-existence, 90, 616; its symbolism
according to the ZoHAR, 123, 124; as
the archetype of the worlds, 134; con-
cealment of God in the THorAH, 162 ;
the Law and the World to Come, 169.

INDEX 635

TrkkuNImM Hapasuim, New Zoharic
Supplements, 121. See Supplements.
Tixxunim Ha Zowar, Ancient Supple-
ments, 120, I21. See Supplements.

TIPHERETH, See SEPHIROTH.

Touu, 198.

TOsEPHFTOTH, additional fragments in
ZOHAR, 118, 120, 409; where found,
170; excerpts from, 170-1723; in the
TALMUD, 28,

Transcendence, 230.

Transmigration, 148.

Transubstantiation, 587.

Tree of Knowledge, 267, 268, 269, 279,

283, 284, 294, 309, 599.
Tree of Life, 20, 201, 203, 267, 268, 269,

283, 306, 589, 599.

Tree of the SEPHIROTH, 179, 200, 203, 210,
272, 290, 347, 348, 394, 396, 397, 399;
400, 401.

Triad, Infernal, 271, 397.

Triad, Sacred, 271, 368.

Trithemius, as mispresented by Lévi, 489,
490.

TsuRE, spiritual principle of man in the
atchetypal world, xiv, 1, 188, 559, 560,
601, 619.

Tubal Cain, 274.

TurBA PHILOsOPHORUM, analogy with
the Zoharic synods, 542.

Union, Divine, 398, 579, 588.

Unity, 359.

UNIVERSE, TRUE INTELLECTUAL SYSTEM
OF, 480.

Unknown God, 363.

Unmanifest Deity. See Arn Sorx.

Uzziel, Yosef ben, 111.

Uzziel, Jonathan ben, his CHALDAIC
PARAPHRASE, 37.

VAILLANT, J. A., on the Bohemian Tarot,

554.

Valentine, Basil,
AZOTH, 538.
VALLEY, Roya, Valley of the King, late

Kabbalistic treatise, 420-422, 606.

Van Dale, Antonio, 269, 520.

Vast Countenance, Symbolism of, 136,
137, I4I, 142, 143, 146, 208, 209, 210,
2515.582,°583.

VAU, 137, 206, 232, 300, 314, 320, 322,
323, 324, 346, 347, 357, 3633; male
child or Son, 346; Quest of VAu, 315.

Vaughan, Thomas, his controversy with
Mote, 473; a disciple of Agrippa, 473,
474; his Kabbalistic reading, 7. ;
points of contact with the Zowar, 474;
on the true and false Kabbalah, ly kode
on the SrpnrrorH, 7b.; Christian
aspects of his Kabbalism, 475, 476 ; not
a teal Kabbalistic expositor, 7b. See
also 424, 466,

alleged treatise on

Vestures of the Soul, 331 ; Mantle of the
Master, 327; clothing of unfallen man,
282; vestments of good deeds, 285,
290, 412; vestute of holy days, 333;
robe of glory, 334.

Vision, Blessed, 263, 399, 590.

Vision, Mystic, 242.

VISION OF THE PRIEST, 409.

Vital, R. Hayyim (or Chaim), editor of
Isaac de Ghotig;a2t) 122, 409,

Viterbi, Gui de, “alleged translator of the
ZOHAR, X.

Voice, 281 ;
Voice, 590.

Voice oF Gop IN ITs Power, tteatise of
Hay Gaon, 91.

Vowel Points, question of their antiquity,

Great Voice, 212; Divine

$55 35.
Vulliaud, Paul, 8, 568-571.

Warre, A. E., 30, 33, 48, 249, 424, 439,
459, 467, 474, 477, 486, 489, 491, 537,

542.

Walton, on the terms Kabbalah and
Massorah, 32.

Way of Union, 2555 57,

Weill, Alexander, on Christianity and the
TALMUD, $3.5) ,on» Moses, 99'3; on
Pantheism and the Kabbalah, 2b.

Welling on Kabbalistic Magic, 521.

Westcott, Dr. Wynn, on the word Kab-
balah, 35; his translation of the
SEPHER YETZIRAH, 214 ef seqg.; anti-
quity of Zoharic doétrine, 65; his
COLLECTANEA HERMETICA, 65, 5393
on /EsH MEZAREPH, 425, 538; on the
Rosicrucians, 466, 467; on _ the
Chaldean Book or NuMBERS, 512; on
the OrACLEs of Zoroaster, 67.

White Head, 170, 208, 209. Compare
the Book oF CONCEALMENT and
Ipras,

Widmanstadt, J. A., his colleGtion of
Kabbalistic MSS., 461.

Wier, Jean, on magical books, 520.

Wigston, W. F. C., on the Rosicrucian
Kabbalah, 466.

Will of God, prior to the Creation, 192,
2203; Operating in creation, in the
production of the emanations, 193;
accotding to Avicebron, 97. See also
20, 224, 248, 402, 528.

Wisdom, 189, 204, 244, 263, 296, 299, 349.

Wisdom Religion, 68.

Witchcraft, Kabbalistic soutces of, 437.

Wolf, purpose of his rabbinical biblio-
gtaphy, 26; on the AisH MeEzarepu,
426; Kabbalistic MSS. of Mirandula,
443. See also 151.

Womanhood, 283, 345, 350, 387, 393.

Word, 198, 201, 21%, 212):219) 229, 2360.
23h 201.95 ty Sols SOR:

636

Work of the Chariot, 37, 42, 87, 92, 306,
410. See ZoHAR.

Work of Creation, 37, 42, 87, 92. See
SEPHER YETZIRAH.

Worlds, Four, 196-213, 219, 253, 254,
255, 256, 261, 345, 418; Worlds made
and destroyed, 141, 142, 232, 416; the
Worlds in later Kabbalism, 610, 611.

Writing Name, 54.

Written Law, 10, 12, 309, 343, 360.

Wronski, Hoene, on the Absolute, 189.

YARKER, John, on the Mysteries of
Antiquity, 517.

Yebba, R., 148-150, 577.

YEHIDAH, fifth principle of the Soul, 105,
129, 244, 620.

YENOOKAH seétion of the ZOHAR, 120.

YEsop (Jesod), 195, 199, 200, 205, 206,
210, 300, 363.

YETZIRAH, the third world of Kabbalism,
197, 255, 256, 261, 354, 363, 610, 611,

12

Y1-Kine, alleged conneétions with Kab-
balism, 68.
YOD, 202, 206, 207, 300, 302, 335.

ZANGWILL, Israel, on the ZOHAR, as a
forgery, 63, 81.
Zechariah, 364.

INDEX

ZER ZAHAB, I12, 121, 409.

Zettner, Lazarus, his THEATRUM CHEMI-
CUM, 540.

Zion, 210, 228, 248, 252, 262, 358, 371,
387, 390.

Zipporah, 304, 305, 356.

ZOHAR, its chief editions, viii; alleged
Christian elements and complexion,
ix; alleged Latin versions, x; its gift
to Israel, 30; Zowar as the WorK OF
THE CHARIOT, 41 ; welcome accorded
to the work, 46; impression on
Christian Students, 47, 48; the alleged
authorship of Moses de Leon, 46-54 ;
hostile criticism considered, 55-58 ;
other suggested authors, 59-61 ; anti-
quity of content apart from form, 61-
64; language of the ZoHAR, 115; a
Commentary on the Pentateuch, 117,
118; the text and accretions thereof,
118-121 ; texts of later development,
I2I, 122; notes on the text proper,
122-134; supplements and additions,
134-182.

ZOHAR AIKE, 121.

ZOHAR CHAMAH, 121, 409.

ZOHAR HADASH, 121, 182, 287.

ZOHAR SHIR Ha SHIRIM, 121.

ZOHARISTS, 564.

Zoroaster, teligion of, 67.

Zosimus, Greek alchemist, 133, 535.

ZOTH, 7.¢., Sign of Covenant, 367.

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY THE WHITEFRIARS PRESS, LTD.,
LONDON AND TONBRIDGE,

2

i" i]
a

ry

i

MM)
J

if

{

Av aS
ie eee

y
a
(ial

OT iL: Fath
Dyn ne

ivy

‘ ;
bs lbs ihe |
i a ai
me ; ania a
I ADR as

Ae peo *,
pee

¢
,
Pints

>

AE

Ey
&

tek
by

is
f}

. Date Due

ware
RS

|

:O

=

——$ —{ o>)
N

—

©

‘a* . : i. INS
ters : : : : . : SSNS

|
4

1

stay
oo,

SSO : SPT . a 7 - x 2 SS
aetaesctatae Ae Se Ds NESTS Sie 7 x Ae : LEV

ety

Sax
tak alee pat Seu
ete : Satetetale ss Rens S

RS :
» Ne stok

Hare ny NS : : : : SY S SRS Bs
: NSN
RO. Ss > . Shek \

See : . . : TOS

es : ;
>

stertat
eee ee,
atte

SS
<
SEER ee RD
